Promoting Emergence in Information Discovery by Representing Collections with Composition Andruid Kerne , Eunyee Koh , Steven M . Smith 2 , Hyun Choi 2 , Ross Graeber , Andrew Webb Interface Ecology Lab Computer Science Department 1 Psychology Department 2 Texas A & M University , College Station , TX 77843 , USA { andruid , eunyee } @ cs . tamu . edu , { stevesmith , rgraeber , hyun - choi , porosis } @ tamu . edu ABSTRACT While sometimes the task that motivates searching , browsing , and collecting information resources is finding a particular fact , humans often engage in intellectual and creative tasks , such as comparison , understanding , and discovery . Information discovery tasks involve not only finding relevant information , but also seeing relationships among collected information resources , and developing new ideas . Prior studies of search have focused on time and accuracy , metrics of limited value for measuring creativity . We develop new experimental methods to evaluate the efficacy of representational systems for information discovery by measuring the emergence of new ideas . We also measure the variety of web sites that participants visit when engaging in a creative task , and gather experience report data . We compare the efficacy of the typical format for collections , the textual list with a new format , the composition of image and text surrogates . We conduct an experiment that establishes that representing collections with composition of image and text surrogates promotes emergence in information discovery . Author Keywords visual representations , creative cognition , collections ACM Classification Keywords H5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION The creative intellectual tasks that humans perform with digital information resources must be supported and investigated . These tasks are critical to research , writing , learning , and invention on all levels . They are essential to business , education , and personal life . According to Morrison , Pirolli and Card’s analysis of the Georgia Tech Graphics , Visualization , and Usability Center web usage survey [ 27 ] , the reason people use the web in 69 % of cases is to understand or compare / choose . The method of humans in 71 % of cases is to collect , that is , to assemble information from multiple sources . Information discovery tasks involve assembling and connecting answers to open - ended questions . Performance of information discovery tasks requires finding elements of relevant information , collecting these elements , and developing understanding of the found elements and their relationships . When people see combinations of found elements in new ways , they may experience cognitive restructuring , in which mental models shift and extend , resulting in the emergence of new ideas . Emergence is the essence of creativity , and the crux of discovery . This research develops new methods for detecting and measuring emergence in the context of browsing collections of digital information resources . We compared the efficacy of representations for presenting collections to participants , and in tandem , the representations that they used for putting together answers to information discovery questions . We found that the composition of image and text surrogates promotes emergence in information discovery tasks . To investigate the contribution to emergence by representing collections of information resources with composition of image and text surrogates , and how it is supported by the creativity support tool , combinFormation [ 17 , 20 ] , we conducted an experiment . Undergraduate psychology students performed open - ended information discovery tasks , which involved applying principles of psychology to questions about life experience , and assembling multiple elements to form an answer . The apparatus included a curated source collection of psychology resources , and an interface for assembling answers to the information discovery questions . In one experimental condition , both the source collection and the answer interface utilized a typical linear text format . One aspect of this iterative design methodology is to handcraft representations of information in order to assess the direction for building systems that generate representations of collections automatically . Thus , in the other experimental condition , the source collection format was a set of hyperlinked image and text compositions , that was pre - assembled using combinFormation . The interface used by participants for forming answers was , likewise , a direct manipulation only version of combinFormation . This tool enables the novice user to easily put together a collection of information resources in the form of a composition of image and text surrogates . This paper begins with an interdisciplinary review of prior work , locating this research amidst domains such as creative cognition , information science , perception , visual design , and human computer interaction . We derive and extend measures of emergence from creative cognition research to comparatively evaluate the collections developed by participants in the linear text and composition of image and text surrogates conditions . We describe the experimental method . We present and analyze results of the experiment , and discuss implications . BACKGROUND Creative Ideation : Emergence and Combination Creativity has been a difficult concept to define precisely . In spite of the broad range of notions about creativity , a consensus has nonetheless developed among creative cognition researchers , that creative ideas and products must be novel in some way , and that they must have value [ 11 ] . The creative cognition approach to understanding creativity focuses on the cognitive processes that underlie the production of creative ideas , processes involved in activities such as memory retrieval , visualization , categorization , problem solving , and analogical transfer . Of primary interest are the cognitive operations involved in ideation , the process of generating new and sometimes creative ideas . The creative cognition approach states that there is a family of features that are shared by most creative ideas , qualities such as insightfulness , imaginativeness , and emergence [ 36 ] . In the present study , we focus on emergence in creative products , particularly as it relates to combinations of ideas drawn from digital information resources . Figure 1 : Biopsychology area source information resource collection : image - text composition and linear text formats . Emergence refers to qualities that come newly into existence as a result of novel combinations of elements [ 9 , 35 , 42 , 43 ] . Even when the elemental components , themselves , are not novel , new qualities that emerge from combinations comprise important creative discoveries in science , art , and business [ 31 , 37 ] . Emergent properties can be seen in many domains . In chemistry , compounds can have properties that do not exist in any of the component elements , in visual perception complex objects can have emergent properties , such as three - dimensionality , that are not found in the featural components , and in language , words can have meanings that are not qualities of the component phonemes or letters . In the course of creative ideation , novel ideas often emerge when component ideas are combined . Combining concepts has been important in theories that deal with creative thinking , such as problem solving , idea generation , and insight experiences [ 7 , 26 , 28 ] . A number of studies have shown that novel properties can emerge from conceptual combinations [ 10 , 11 , 16 , 38 , 41 ] . These studies have primarily examined the cognitive processes that are involved when people comprehend combinations of concepts ( such as computer dog ) , or when people imagine creative interpretations of ideas randomly combined by experimenters . The present study tests predictions and implications of these studies , examining the usefulness of a representational form that encourages and 2 enables development of unusual combinations of information resources , particularly , combinations that have emergent properties . Measures of Creative Ideation Creative cognition researchers have observed that the cognitive components of creative thinking are different than those engaged in deductive reasoning [ 11 , 36 ] . Thus , they have defined different tasks and measures to investigate ideation . Most prior research at the intersection of human computer interaction and information retrieval has addressed convergent thinking tasks , which involve closed - form questions that have a single correct answer . A problem is explicitly specified , and the criteria for the solution are very clear . The accuracy of the answer , and the latency , or time to form it , are appropriate measures of performance . To investigate creative ideation , divergent thinking tasks have been designed , in which one quests for many possible answers to open - ended questions [ 11 , 33 ] . Divergent thinking tasks are objectively assessed with ideation metrics [ 34 ] , such as fluency ( i . e . , quantity of ideas ) , flexibility ( number of different categories of ideas ) , originality ( i . e . , statistical infrequency of an idea ) , practicality / quality , and emergence [ 10 , 35 , 41 ] . In addition to these standard measures of divergent thinking , the products of the divergent tasks can also be assessed subjectively by participants , their peers , and by experts . Among the subjective measures we have developed are ratings for informative , communicative , and expressive . Information Discovery and its Precursors Creative cognition provides a perspective for considering related developments in information science and human computer interaction . The information discovery approach [ 20 ] builds on berrypicking [ 3 ] , anomalous states of knowledge ( ASK ) [ 4 ] , psychological relevance [ 15 ] , sensemaking [ 32 , 2 ] , information foraging [ 30 ] , information seeking [ 23 ] , and exploratory search [ 39 ] . Exploratory search , for example , addresses situations in which users “lack the knowledge or contextual awareness to formulate queries or navigate complex information spaces , ” or “the search task requires browsing and exploration” [ 39 ] . Like others [ 12 ] , exploratory search researchers have recognized that human information needs are not necessarily constant and convergent over the course of a search session . Figure 2 : Two answers to the information discovery question : What psychological factors can influence a person ' s experiences dating ? Left : composition of image and text surrogates format . Right : linear text surrogates format . Information discovery integrates concepts and methods from the prior investigations of human interaction with information with the creative cognition approach , to develop a human centered framework . For example , changes in information needs represent not side effects , but rather , an essential stage in creative ideation . Information needs may shift as information is found , gathered , and re - cognized . Needs can change during processes of searching and finding , as a result of the stimulus of information . Information discovery investigates creative ideation in the context of processes and practices of information finding . In an information discovery task , the human goal is to have ideas in some area . This is a divergent thinking task in which information finding supports the generation and development of ideas . The context may be an academic task , such as paper writing or thesis formulation , or a life task , such as designing a vacation or a career . Search , itself , is not the task . Rather , search is a technology that supports information discovery tasks . We need to understand and support more than simply how people find information . In information discovery , combining and understanding relevant information are as essential as finding . The human needs to find elements of relevant information , collect and combine them , and develop a sense of connections among them . Found information can stimulate seeing new perspectives and formulating new mental models . This sets the stage for the emergence of new ideas . Thus , to support information discovery , the present research develops the representation of individual information resources , and also the representation of the set of resources collected during an information discovery task . Representing Collections with Composition With the perspective of information discovery , we consider 3 how the concept of surrogates , findings about image - text representations , and the form of composition can be integrated to develop a new representation for collections . The composition format is supported by combinFormation . Surrogates A surrogate represents an information resource and enables access to that resource [ 5 ] . Hypermedia surrogates , which enable navigation , are formed systematically from metadata . One typical surrogate is the Google gist , an element of the result set returned by a search query . Another is the bookmark in a web browser . Surrogates play an important role in keeping found things found [ 18 ] . People make critical decisions based on these surrogates , such as choosing which documents to browse , and which to ignore . Image - Text Representations Promote Cognition In the working memory system , the visuospatial buffer ( which stores mental images ) and the rehearsal loop used for words are complementary subsystems [ 1 ] . They support each other in combined image - text knowledge representations . Glenberg has established that the combination of an image and descriptive text promotes the formation of mental models , and extends working memory capacity [ 13 , 14 ] . Moreno has found that dual coding strategies enhance cognition during educational experiences of digital media [ 6 , 25 ] . Text disambiguates images while engaging complementary cognitive subsystems . To make better use of cognitive resources , the benefits of image - text representations can be applied to the formation of surrogates . Marchionini’s group investigated the use of multimodal surrogates for video browsing [ 8 , 40 ] by comparing users’ performance and experience using different surrogate formats for digital videos . Combined surrogates lead to better comprehension and reduced human processing time . Woodruff et al investigated the efficacy of “enhanced thumbnails” as navigational surrogates for documents [ 44 ] . They start with a reduced screen shot of an entire web page . Each thumbnail is annotated with a larger textual “call out , ” which indicates the presence of a key phrase from a search result set . Users performed significantly better on convergent thinking search tasks with enhanced thumbnails , than they did with text summaries or plain thumbnails . Composition The list of textual surrogates is typically used to represent collections , such as search result sets and bookmarks . Composition is an alternative to lists ; literally , it means , “the act of putting together or combining … as parts or elements of a whole” [ 29 ] . Composition of image and text surrogates extends the organizing of information afforded by spatial hypertext [ 24 ] by emphasizing visual design and communication ( see example , Figure 1 , left ) . Composition uses visual design techniques that connect and layer elements [ 38 ] to form a coherent whole , including relative size relationships , colors , typefaces , text stroking , and image compositing . The present research addresses the processes through which collections are assembled , and how the resulting forms function as artifacts for communication and navigation , and stimuli for cognition . Previously , a method was developed for using images and text chunks clipped from documents as the visual form for individual surrogates , while maintaining referentiality to source and hyperlinked documents [ 19 ] . It was then shown that when they are combined to form a composition that represents a collection , participants experience image and text surrogates as easier to use for navigation . The present research extends this finding , by developing and invoking creative ideation metrics , such as emergence , and measuring the impact of the composition of image and surrogates not just as a source format for navigation , but as a format that participants utilize for developing answers to information discovery questions . combinFormation combinFormation [ 17 ] is a mixed - initiative system that enables humans to easily assemble collections of information resources as compositions of image and text surrogates [ 20 ] . The system facilitates manipulation of combinations of these surrogates , with the goal of supporting the emergence of new ideas . The participant and agents work collaboratively to develop the collection and its representation in a visual composition space . The system provides a set of direct manipulation facilities for forming , editing , organizing , and distributing collections as compositions . These include the ability to drag and drop clippings from information resources into the composition space . To assist humans in sifting through the vast expanse of potentially relevant information resources , the system also includes generative agents that can proactively gather information resources , form image and text surrogates , and compose them visually , enabling participants to see more possibilities . Prior research investigated the role of combinFormation in the performance of 182 students in an undergraduate course on invention , The Design Process [ 10 ] . In the course , interdisciplinary teams of undergraduate students create new inventions . The students’ work on two creative assignments , The Hybrid , and The Invention , was investigated . On each assignment , a different half of the class used the full , mixed - initiative version of combinFormation to collect relevant prior work . The other half used regular Google and Microsoft Word . The experimental conditions compared performance on the assignments , which were graded by teaching assistants , according to criteria of originality , novelty , practicality , broad impact , and commercial transfer ability . Students performed better on the Hybrid and Invention assignments when they used combinFormation to develop a supporting prior work collection in the composition of image and text surrogates format , than they did using regular Google and Word in the linear text format . Use of combinFormation was found to promote information discovery . 4 What made combinFormation effective ? We need to discover the role of different components of digital tools in supporting creativity . To focus the investigation , the present research investigates the role of the representational format . Future work can investigate the role of agent components . Thus , this study employed a reduced version of combinFormation , in which only the direct manipulation capabilities were available . By reducing the set of components of the tool that were available to participants in this stage of research , we created more controlled experimental conditions , isolating the representational format for developing answers to information discovery questions , without involving the factors introduced by the generative agents . EXPERIMENTAL METHODS Participants : Undergraduate Psychology Students Forty - three student volunteers participated in the experiment . Undergraduate members of the “psychology subjects pool” fulfilled a requirement of their introductory psychology course by participating . Concurrently offered sections of the course had a total enrollment of more than 1000 students . The experimenters were not personally familiar with the participants . 83 . 7 % of the participants reported that they use the internet daily . Psychology Resources Collections ( Source Format ) We designed the study tasks so that they would contribute to the education of the participants . We utilized a previously developed collection of information resources that represent six areas of the psychology curriculum : clinical psychology , consciousness , biopsychology , learning , developmental psychology , and perception [ 22 ] . For each area , there were six to ten information resources , each representing a subtopic . The collection featured approximately 50 information resources . Each resource consisted not simply of a single web page , but of a set of web pages , that is a web site or portion thereof , as hyperlinked by the original authors . Each web site provided in - depth information on its subtopic . These web sites were downloaded and cached on a local server in order to remove variables such as network latency and server accessibility . The collection was split into two mutually exclusive subcollections to isolate experimental conditions , and reduce the potential of carryover effects . Subcollection A included the clinical psychology , consciousness , and biopsychology areas , while Subcollection B consisted of learning , developmental , and perception . For each subcollection , navigation began with an overview consisting of one surrogate for each area . At the area level , the participant found six to ten surrogates , with each linked to an actual information resource ( see example , Figure 1 ) . Two representations of the surrogate collections were developed , each of which was employed in a separate experimental condition . In one representation , navigation at the top overview level and secondary area level were represented with a list of text surrogates ; the other representation utilized compositions of image - text surrogates at both levels . These versions of the psychology resources collection constitute the source format . Information Discovery Questions Each participant answered four information discovery questions : • What kinds of things can cause behavioral problems for children in school ? • What psychological factors can influence a person ' s career choices ? • What psychological factors can influence a person ' s experiences dating ? ( See example answers , Figure 2 . ) • What can cause obesity ? In order to answer each of these questions , each participant browsed the assigned subcollection . We logged their browsing activity , in order to collect navigation data for analysis across conditions . Since the subcollections were stored on our server , instead of using a proxy server , we were able to configure a Java Servlet to act as a router between the participant and the surrogate collections and information resources . This servlet logged navigation and integrated the navigation logs with answers to questions . Answer Format and Interface In each experimental condition , the subject used one of two interfaces to develop their answer in a particular format . Participants used the text form field of a web page to form the linear text answer format . They utilized the direct manipulation only version of combinFormation to form the composition of images and text format . In this format , information could be dragged from a source collection information resource document , and dropped into the composition space . Referentiality from the source web page was automatically maintained by combinFormation in such cases , so that the dragged - in material functions as a navigational surrogate . Participants used combinFormation to add their own ideas to the collected source elements , and engage in design and editing . Procedure At the beginning of the experiment , the experimenter introduced the direct manipulation only version of combinFormation . Participants practiced with the system for 10 - 15 minutes . The experimenter briefed participants to ensure they understood how to use the program . Then , the participants read the experiment instructions . Participants were asked to do initial research and provide answers for several imaginary psychology course group projects by navigating the psychology resources source material collection . To create their collections of ideas , participants were told to browse websites that might help them get possible answers to the questions , and gather elements of information from the websites . Because their imaginary professor maintained strict standards about plagiarism , they were also instructed to include the web address they 5 obtained each information element from . They were encouraged to create ideas by combining material from multiple websites , and to form connections between related ideas . Creative and unusual ideas were encouraged . Next , each participant completed a short pre - questionnaire . This was followed by the four information discovery questions . As each question was presented , it was preceded by a reiteration of the instructions : “Put together ideas to answer this question . Rather than just thinking off hand , use the information in the provided websites to help you get ideas . Get as many varied and unusual ideas as you can . ” Participants were given 11 minutes to answer each information discovery question , and encouraged to use the whole time in composing the answer . Participants could see the time remaining counting down on a digital clock . 60 seconds before the end , the numbers turned yellow . Twenty seconds before the end , they turned red . At the end of 11 minutes , if the participant had not clicked submit , the program automatically submitted what they had written . Right after the answer was submitted , participants answered Likert scale questions as to how challenging answering the previous question was , and how able they were to get where they wanted . Right after this , the next question was displayed . At the end of the experiment , participants answered post - experimental questions about their preference between the two navigational source formats , and also between the two answer formats ; they also reported the reasons for their choices . The whole procedure lasted approximately 60 minutes . Score Criteria 0 The subject pulled elements from the assigned subcollection to answer a given question , but recognizable relationships and new ideas are minimal . 1 Coherence between elements but not original or originality of elements but no coherence . 2 Original elements in a coherent group . Emergence 3 Original elements connected with found elements in a coherent group in a way that is clear and insightful . 0 Answer seems to have no relation to the question 1 Some relevance . Little or no explanation . 2 Multiple perspectives through elements . Some explanation . Quality 3 Brilliant – Wow , that was very interesting . Better explanation . Table 1 : Criteria for creative ideation measures . Experiment Design To streamline the experiment , source collection format and answer format were grouped together into a single independent variable , representation format . Thus , for the composition of image and text surrogates format condition , each participant encountered the psychology resources subcollection in the composition format and used the direct manipulation combinFormation to compose the answer with image and text surrogates . For the linear text surrogates condition , the participant encountered the subcollection as a list of text surrogates , and composed the answer using the text form field . A 2 X 2 within - subjects design was employed . The two independent variables were representation format ( image and text composition , linear text ) , and psychology subcollection ( A : clinical psychology , consciousness , biopsychology ; B : learning , perception , and developmental ) . Thus , the experimental design produced 4 different conditions over the formats and subcollections ; that is , linear text format with subcollection A , linear text format with subcollection B , image and text format with subcollection A , and image and text format with subcollection B . Each participant was randomly assigned to one of the four conditions of representation and subcollection . The question order was counterbalanced between subjects across these conditions . Applying Creative Ideation Measures As per the Background section , we utilized the following objective measures of creative ideation : emergence , quality , flexibility , quantity , and originality . To effectively apply these measures , we developed a contextualized method for determining them . The methodological goal is to define a procedure such that multiple raters can independently and consistently score each participant response to each information discovery question . This requires defining criteria with sufficient clarity to achieve a minimum of difference between ratings from question to question , reviewer to reviewer , and study to study . The process for specifying such criteria starts with discussion in context . All raters and experimental designers met to discuss the questions , and to define criteria in association with each rating . In a preliminary version of these criteria , emergence and quality were defined in a manner that was mutually dependent . Raters were initially seduced by the idea that emergent answers are of high quality . Yet , this did not meet the design goal of clear and separate criteria . Through an iterative process of rating example sets of answers , discussion , and criteria refinement , a consensus was reached on how to define the criteria independently ( see Table 1 ) . Once the criteria for emergence and quality were clear , each reviewer rated participants’ answers for the full set of questions . These results were then compared . The Pearson correlation between the two raters was 0 . 575 and it was statistically significant ( N = 170 , p < 0 . 001 ) . To ensure correct ratings , the reviewers then met to resolve differences . Since the results were already quite consistent , this process was simple ; a consensus data set of ratings for emergence and quality was quickly developed . Emergence Emergence refers to qualities that come newly into existence as a result of novel combinations of elements . To create clear and concise criteria for measuring emergence , 6 several possible attributes were discussed . One factor initially considered was the groupings of elements . This included the presence of groups and their coherence . This was not found to be a criterion that could be consistently applied . Instead , emergence was rated based on the presence of ideas not found within the psychology resources source material collection , as a result of the combination of source collection elements . The presence of novel ideas and the coherence of the answer were found to be significant . Evaluating emergence also required ensuring that participants were using the source materials as factors in the new ideas , as opposed to merely recalling information not contained in the collection without using it at all . A complete specification of the criteria and scores that were defined can be found in Table 1 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 1 . 8 emergence linear text image - text composition Figure 3 : The mean emergence measure ( scale 0 - 3 ) , as differentiated by the representation format condition . Flexibility – Navigational Variety and Efficiency Flexibility corresponds to the measure of variety in a participant’s answers . We correspond this with the diversity of the websites that they browsed . This was measured using the router logging mechanism described above . Other Measures Like emergence , quality was measured through criteria established through iterative discussion and investigation ( see Table 1 ) . Fluency ( quantity ) and originality were measured through the compilation of a master list of all ideas given by all experimental participants on each information discovery question . The frequency of each response was computed across all subjects . Thus , the master list was used to compute normative scores that established what constitutes a response , enabling the counting of quantity . Originality of a single answer is analogous to document frequency in information retrieval . It was derived by counting the subjects that gave an answer , and using this to form a ratio . Thus , if only one subject provided an answer , originality would be one , but if more provided it , the fraction would decrease . Originality for a subject , then , was calculated by averaging these fractional scores . DATA AND ANALYSIS Quantitative : Creative Ideation Measures Emergence was measured according to the criteria and method described above . The mean emergence measure was greater for the image - text composition format ( 1 . 570 ) than for the linear text format ( 1 . 011 ) . The results were statistically significant [ F ( 1 , 42 ) = - 4 . 734 , p < 0 . 001 ] ( Figure 3 ) . This representation format condition includes both the source collection and the interface with which the answer to an information discovery question was developed . Next , we examine the measure of flexibility , which is associated with navigational variety and efficiency ( Figure 4 ) . Participants used 8 . 172 minutes on average to complete the tasks using linear text and 8 . 417 minutes using composition . They used almost the same amount of time to answer questions in the two representation formats [ F ( 1 , 42 ) = 0 . 700 , p = 0 . 488 ] . During the same amount of time , participants were able to navigate and browse a greater number of information resource web pages when using the image and text composition format than when using linear text [ F ( 1 , 42 ) = 2 . 923 , p < 0 . 01 ] . There was no statistical difference in the number of overview and area surrogate collection pages they viewed , between the two representation formats [ F ( 1 , 42 ) = 0 . 297 , p = 0 . 768 ] . 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 # surrogate collection pages # information resource pages linear text image - text composition Figure 3 : Navigational Variety and Efficiency : Per participant avg . number of surrogate collection pages and avg . number of information resource pages by representational format . We also examined the study results for the other objective measures of creative ideation , and found there was no statistical difference between the two representation formats for these measures : quality [ F ( 1 , 42 ) = 0 . 976 , p = 0 . 335 ] , fluency [ F ( 1 , 42 ) = 0 . 429 , p = 0 . 67 ] , and originality [ F ( 1 , 42 ) = 0 . 912 , p = 0 . 367 ] . Quantitative : Participant Experience Measures In all subjective experience measures , participants preferred composition of image and text surrogates both for navigating the information resource collection surrogate pages ( source collection format ) and expressing their ideas ( answer format ) . Right after participants submitted each 7 answer , they were asked two additional questions : how challenging was it to answer the previous question , and how able were they to get where they wanted to go . Answers were quantified using a Likert scale , from 0 ( very low ) to 4 ( very high ) . Across representation formats , participants experienced a similar level of challenges while answering the information discovery questions [ F ( 1 , 42 ) = - . 643 , p = 0 . 523 ] . At the same time , the self - rating data shows that participants experienced a sense of being more able to get to where they wanted to go ( navigate ) while answering each information discovery question when using image and text composition representations [ F ( 1 , 42 ) = - 2 . 203 , p < 0 . 05 ] . We acquired subjective measures of participant experience separately for the source information resource collection formats and the answer formats . For the source collection formats , participants found the composition of image and text surrogates to be more helpful [ Χ 2 ( 1 ) = 6 . 4 , p < 0 . 02 ] and they liked them better [ Χ 2 ( 1 ) = 10 . 256 , p < 0 . 01 ] , compared to the linear text . For the format of the answers they created , participants liked composing image and text surrogates with combinFormation better than assembling textual surrogates in the linear format [ Χ 2 ( 1 ) = 6 . 721 , p < 0 . 01 ] . They also preferred developing answers with image and text composition to linear text for expressing their ideas [ Χ 2 ( 1 ) = 19 . 558 , p < 0 . 01 ] . The last quantitative participant experience question asked whether they had problems using each answer interface ( 0 - 2 scale ) . The result showed that participants had more problems creating the image and text composition format with combinFormation than they did creating the linear text format in the browser [ F ( 1 , 42 ) = 3 . 277 , p < 0 . 01 ] . However the averages of both ratings are lower than 0 . 6 , indicating a fairly low overall level of problems in both formats . Qualitative : Participant Experience Reports We collected qualitative participant experience report data through open - ended questions that accompanied the Likert - scale questions about subjective experience . The qualitative data adds dimension to our findings in conjunction with the strong quantitative results supporting the effectiveness of the composition of images and text format . One question asked about participants’ preference for the two psychology resources collection source formats . Participants said that the image and text composition gave an idea about what to click , while the linear text provided just a guess as to what the link would be about . The pictures helped inform them about which link was associated with which topic . Colors and images highlight and explain each topic , while the linear text format experience is boring . A few said that it was easier to see and understand what the linear text was offering without the distraction that the composition of image and text presented . However , they found that the blended images and text were more appealing to the eye . P431 : “I liked the blended images better because they created a visual for the topic I needed . The linear text simply listed the word . I guess the picture and the word in the blended images better helped me determine the topic that I needed . ” P432 : “I liked the blended format more because it was less dull and almost prompted you mentally . When I was answering questions in this format , when I was thinking of possible answers for the questions , I was prompted mentally before I even clicked the icon . The other , the pure text format is ordinary and un - interesting . ” One question we asked was how they would compare the experience of working with composition of images and text with other formats of information resources that they had worked with ( e . g . text book , other web sites… ) . In the answer data , we again encounter participants’ fondness for the compositional format . P11 : “Composition with images makes it easier with picture - word association . Textbooks sometimes use this with a picture to explain what they are discussing within a chapter . It’s the same basic idea that helps people like me , who remember pictures better than words on a page . ” P22 : “While obviously text is the most important part to understanding a topic , it is easier for me to make an educated guess as to what I am supposed to gain from the information if there is a picture to accompany the information . ” Most participants preferred the composition of images and text answer format to the linear text answer format . We asked them to describe their reasons . Participants liked using combinFormation to assemble answers because it provides freedom to put together their ideas in best possible ways and more creatively ; meanwhile , they said the linear text format is harder to combine information with . They reported finding combinFormation to be more fun to work with , more stimulating of interest , and more aesthetically pleasing . Also , they found it useful that combinFormation automatically brings the URL and metadata information to the answer when they drag and drop elements . P321 : “I liked how combinFormation used a color code so we could know what was taken from the website and what was our own text . Also how the website address was automatically saved when text or pictures were moved” P431 : “I liked the combinFormation better than the plain text form . While I am most familiar with the plain text form , I feel I can be more creative with combinFormation . ” P435 : “The linear text format restricted my ideas from being expressed . ” The participants’ subjective rating also showed that the composition of image and text format was better for expressing ideas . They said that ideas are better expressed with both images and text because visual aid supports their ideas . Also , different colors helped them express connections between ideas and improve presentation . CONCLUSION The creative intellectual information discovery tasks that humans perform with digital information resources are critical to research , writing , learning , and invention . We 8 have built on the extensive base of prior creative cognition research to develop methods for investigating information discovery tasks in the laboratory , including reusable objective measures for evaluating their creative products . Noteworthy among these is an emergence measure , which indicates the discovery of new ideas with a basis in found information . Other measures include flexibility , fluency , and originality . While the process for applying these measures is time consuming , it is an essential component of evaluation in research that develops tools to support and promote creative processes involving digital information . combinFormation , a mixed - initiative system for representing collections as compositions of image and text surrogates , is a complex program , in which direct manipulation components and generative agent components are interconnected . Rather than investigate the efficacy of the program as a whole , on this occasion we isolated the variable of collection representation , in the context of the performance of information discovery tasks . This componentization of inquiry enabled us to address research questions focused on representation format and interface . The results of applying the creative cognition measures to the performance of study participants on information discovery tasks provide strong statistical findings : the composition of image and text format promotes emergence and flexibility . We develop a hybrid picture that reinforces these findings through participant experience measures and reports . They experienced the composition of image and text surrogates format as better for expressing their ideas and more helpful , and they liked it better . They reported that they were more able to get where they needed to go , that is , to navigate , using composition . This corresponds directly with the empirical evidence of their navigational flexibility and efficiency , that they browsed a greater variety of information resources with the composition format . Participant experience reports further corroborate this picture . There is always a concern when introducing a new tool for representation and interaction : that novices will find it hard to use , due to lack of familiarity . In fact , participants did report more problems using combinFormation to develop answers to information discovery questions as compositions , than they did using the more familiar browser form field to develop linear text . This could contribute to the lack of benefits measured with regard to the fluency and quality measures . Participants become excited about the process of arranging , organizing , and composing collected answer elements . In the time - limited experimental conditions , spending time arranging elements may become an alternative to spending time collecting elements . In a naturalistic information discovery process , a person can take sufficient time , as necessary , to engage in both of these phases of research . The role of tools and familiarity with them , as well as of representational format , on fluency and quality measures is worthy of future research . Over time , the evaluation of creativity support tools needs to employ and integrate diverse modalities of investigation , including laboratory experiments , ethnographies , field studies , and longitudinal case studies . Each of these modalities makes different contributions . The laboratory experiment findings developed in this paper are reinforced by the ecologically valid field study of undergraduate students in The Design Process course on invention . The composition of image and text surrogates promotes emergence , expression , flexibility , navigation , and an overall sense of creative experience in information discovery . Future work will utilize different modalities of investigation , and will also develop laboratory investigations of other components of creative ideation . These modes of evaluation will be developed in tandem with new methods for creativity support . REFERENCES 1 . Baddeley , A . D . , Is working memory working ? , Quarterly Journal of Exp Psych , 44A , 1 - 31 , 1992 . 2 . Baldonado , M . , Winograd , T . , SenseMaker : an information - exploration interface supporting the contextual evolution of a user ' s interests , Proc CHI 1997 , 11 - 18 . 3 . Bates , M . The design of browsing and berry picking techniques for the online search interface . Online Review , 13 : 5 , 407 - 431 , 1989 . 4 . Belkin , N . , ASK for Information Retrieval : Part I . Background and Theory , Journal of Documentation , Vol 38 , Num 2 , 1982 . 5 . Burke , M . , Organization of Multimedia Resources , Hampshire , UK : Gower , 1999 . 6 . Carney , R . M . , Levin , J . R . , Pictorial Illustrations Still Improve Students’ Learning From Text , Educational Psychology Review , Vol . 14 , No . 1 , March 2002 . 7 . Costello , F . J . , & Keane , M . T . ( 2000 ) . Efficient creativity : Constraint guided conceptual combination . Cognitive Science , 24 , 299 – 349 . 8 . Ding , W . , Marchionini , G . , Soergel , D . , Multimodal Surrogates for Video Browsing , Proc DL 1999 , 85 - 93 . 9 . Estes , Z . , & Glucksberg , S . ( 2000 ) . Interactive property attribution in concept combination . Memory & Cognition , 28 , 28 – 34 . 10 . Estes , Z . & Ward , T . B . ( 2002 ) . The emergence of novel attributes in concept modification . Creativity Research Journal , 14 , 149 - 156 . 11 . Finke , R . , Ward , T . , Smith , S . M . Creative Cognition , Cambridge , MA , MIT Press , 1992 . 12 . Fisher , K . E . , Erdelez , S . , McKechnie , L . , eds . , Theories of Information Behavior ( ASSIST Monograph ) , Information Today , 2005 . 13 . Glenberg , A . M . , Langston , W . E . , Comprehension of illustrated text : Pictures help to build mental models , 9 Journal of Memory & Language , 31 ( 2 ) : 129 - 151 , April 1992 . 14 . Glenberg , A . M . , The Indexical hypothesis : meaning from language , world , and image , in N . Allen , ed , Words and Images : Working Together - Working Differently , Albex , 2002 . 15 . Harter , S . P . , Psychological Relevance and Information Science , Journal of the American Society for Version : 1 . 0 Information Science , 43 ( 9 ) : 602 - 615 , 1992 . 16 . Hampton , J . A . ( 1997 ) . Emergent attributes in combined concepts . In T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , & J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Creative thought : An investigation of conceptual structures and processes . ( pp . 83 – 110 ) . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . 17 . Interface Ecology Lab , combinFormation , http : / / ecologylab . cs . tamu . edu / combinFormation / 18 . Jones , W . , Dumais , S . , Bruce , H . , Once found , what then ? : a study of ‘keeping’ behaviors in personal use of Web information . Proc ASIST 2002 , November 18 - 21 , 2002 , 391 - 402 . 19 . Kerne , A . , CollageMachine : An Interactive Agent of Web Recombination , Leonardo 33 : 5 , 2000 . 20 . Kerne , A . , Koh , E . , Dworaczyk , B . , Mistrot , M . J . , Choi , H . , Smith , S . M . , Graeber , R , Caruso , D . , Webb , A . , Hill , R . , Albea , J . , combinFormation : A Mixed - Initiative System for Representing Collections as Compositions of Image and Text Surrogates , Proc JCDL 2006 , 11 - 20 . 21 . Kerne , A . , Smith , S . , The Information Discovery Framework , Proc DIS 2004 , 357 - 360 . 22 . Kerne , A . , Smith , S . M . , Choi , H . , Graeber , R . , Caruso , D . , Evaluating Navigational Surrogate Formats with Divergent Browsing Tasks , Proc CHI 2005 Extended , 1537 - 40 . 23 . Marchionini , G . , Information Seeking in Electronic Environments , Cambridge Univ Press , 1997 . 24 . Marshall , C . C . , Shipman , F . M . , VIKI : Spatial hypertext supporting emergent structure , Proc ECHT 94 , 13 - 23 . 25 . Mayer , R . E . , Moreno , R . , Animation as an Aid to Multimedia Learning , Educational Psychology Review 14 : 1 , March 2002 . 26 . Mobley , M . I . , Doares , L . M . , & Mumford , M . D . ( 1992 ) . Process analytic models of creative capacities : Evidence for the combination and reorganization process . Creativity Research Journal , 5 , 125 – 155 . 27 . Morrison , J . B . , Pirolli , P . , Card , S . K . , A Taxonomic Analysis of What World Wide Web Activities Significantly Impact People ' s Decisions and Actions , Proc CHI 2001 Extended . 28 . Mumford , M . D . , Baughman , W . A . , Maher , M . A . , Costanza , D . P . , & Supinski , E . P . ( 1997 ) . Process - based measures of creative problem - solving skills : IV . Category combination . Creativity Research Rips , L . J . ( 1995 ) . The current status of research on concept combination . Mind and Language , 10 , 72 – 104 . 29 . Oxford English Dictionary on Compact Disk , 2nd Edition . Oxford : Oxford University Press , 1992 . 30 . Pirolli , P . , Card , S . K . , Information Foraging , Psychological Review , 106 : 4 , Oct 1999 , 643 - 675 . 31 . Rothenberg , A . ( 1979 ) . The emerging goddess . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . 32 . Russell , D . M . , Stefik , M . J . , Pirolli , P . , Card , S . K . , The cost structure of sensemaking , Proc of the INTERCHI 93 , pp . 269 - 276 . 33 . Shah , J . J . , Smith , S . M . , Vargas - Hernandez , N . Metrics for measuring ideation effectiveness . Design Studies , 24 , 2003 , 111 - 134 . 34 . Shah , J . J . , Smith , S . M . , Vargas - Hernandez , N . , Gerkens , R . , & Wulan , M . , Empirical studies of design ideation : Alignment of design experiments with laboratory experiments , Proc Am Soc Mechanical Engineering , 2003 . 35 . Smith , E . E . , Osherson , D . N . , Rips , L . J . , & Keane , M . ( 1988 ) . Combining prototypes : A selective modification model . Cognitive Science , 12 , 485 – 527 . 36 . Smith , S . M . , Ward , T . B . , & Finke , R . A . ( 1995 ) . The creative cognition approach . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . 37 . Thagard , P . ( 1984 ) . Conceptual combination and scientific discovery . In P . Asquith & P . Kitcher ( Eds . ) , PSA , 1 ( pp . 3 – 12 ) . East Lansing , MI : Philosophy of Science Association . 38 . Tufte , E . , Envisioning Information , Cheshire , CT : Graphics Press , 1990 . 39 . White , R . W . , Kules , B . , Drucker , S . M . , schraefel , m . c . , Supporting Exploratory Search , CACM , 49 : 4 , April 2006 , 36 - 39 . 40 . Wildemuth , B . , Marchionini , G . , Yang , M . , Geisler , G . , et al . , How Fast Is Too Fast ? Evaluating Fast Forward Surrogates for Digital Video , Proc JCDL 2003 , 221 - 230 . 41 . Wilkenfeld , M . J . , & Ward , T . B . ( 2001 ) . Similarity and emergence in conceptual combination . Journal of Memory and Language , 45 , 21 – 38 . 42 . Wisniewski , E . J . ( 1996 ) . Construal and similarity in conceptual combination . Journal of Memory and Language , 35 , 434 – 453 . 43 . Wisniewski , E . J . ( 1997 ) . When concepts combine . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 4 , 167 – 183 . 44 . Woodruff , A . Rosenholtz R . , Morrison , J . , Faulring , A . , Pirolli , P . , A Comparison of the Use of Text Summaries , Plain Thumbnails , and Enhanced Thumbnails for Web Search Tasks , JASIST 53 ( 2 ) : 172 - 185 , 2002 . 10