JAMIA Focus on U . S . Health IT Adoption Viewpoint (cid:1) Building a National Health IT System from the Middle Out E NRICO C OIERA , MBBS , P H D (cid:1) J Am Med Inform Assoc . 2009 ; 16 : 271 – 273 . DOI 10 . 1197 / jamia . M3183 . The top - down approach of many national programs for healthcare information technology ( IT ) may be at the heart of their current problems . The medical - industrial complex loves a big procurement , and the contracts do not get much bigger than for building nation - scale health information systems ( NHIS ) . But do we really need government embedded in the process of IT implementation , something it so clearly and routinely strug - gles with ? Or is it better for government to simply set the policy rules of the game , given that it is policy in which they are expert ? As the new United States Administration has recently signalled a massive injection of funds into building a National Health Information infrastructure via the Amer - ican Recovery and Reinvestment Act ( ARRA ) , what lessons can be learned from the past , and what strategic shape should the Federal intervention take ? The English National Health System ( NHS ) National Pro - gram for IT ( NPfIT ) in many ways serves as an international beacon for healthcare reform , because of its clear message that major restructuring of health services is not possible without a pervasive information infrastructure . The NPfIT is rolling out working systems and delivering tangible beneﬁts to patients and caregivers . Yet no one could deny that there have been plenty of setbacks , misgivings , clinical unrest , delays , cost overruns , and paring back of promised func - tionality , culminating in demands from some political quar - ters to shut down the program . 1 The NPfIT was bound to experience some difﬁculties purely on the basis of its scale and complexity . 2 However , it is becoming apparent that there may be another , more foundational , cause of NPfIT’s problems . The NHS remains one of the few nation - scale , single - payer health systems in the world . It thus has nation - scale man - agement and governance structures to match , and these inevitably encourage a top - down system architecture , stan - dards compliance , and procurement process . Such an ap - proach is impossible in many other countries , and the United States , with its highly fragmented and decentralized health system , sits at the other extreme . To deal with its health reform challenges , the United States has embarked on a totally different , bottom - up , approach to designing health information infrastructure . Service providers have formed regional coalitions to interconnect their existing systems as best they can into health information exchanges ( HIE ) . The expectation is that Regional HIEs will eventually aggregate into a nation - scale system . 3 , 4 What we have in the United States and England are thus two parallel natural experiments , testing diametrically opposing approaches to building a NHIS . Both hope to arrive at the same broad goal—that elements of a patient’s health record are accessible across different regions and to all authorized providers , with the ability to send messages ( like reports and discharge summaries ) across the system securely . The NPfIT aims to create a single shared electronic record ( SSEHR ) , stored centrally , through which all healthcare providers can add or read information from others . The Health Informa - tion Exchange ( HIE ) approach , in contrast , does not create a single record , but intends to allow virtual views of records , as abstracted or aggregated from regional systems . Both approaches have undesirable consequences . For the English NHS , there is no easy migration plan for its existing systems . With the top - down approach , existing systems that do not comply with national standards will typically be shut down and replaced by compliant ones . The new compliant systems may often not ﬁt local needs as well as the systems they replace , which were often site - speciﬁc acquisitions . There is also the additional cost of staff retraining and workﬂow adjustment , with the risk of introducing unex - pected errors into the care process . 5 While a single - speciﬁ - cation NHIS can be upgraded as technology changes , the time needed to get a return on investment makes it unlikely there will be radical overhauls in the short to medium term . This makes any top - down system relatively brittle to meet - ing emerging service needs . 6 For example , many assump - tions about NHS service models are “hard - wired” into NPfIT plans . It is , for example , assumed that each patient is registered with one General Practitioner ( GP ) . How would the system cope if , in a few years , the NHS moved to a system of free choice , where patients could elect to go to any Afﬁliation of the author : Centre for Health Informatics , Institute for Health Innovation , University of New South Wales , Sydney , Aus - tralia . Correspondence : Enrico Coiera , PhD , Centre for Health Informatics , Institute for Health Innovation , University of New South Wales , Sydney , Australia ; e - mail : (cid:1) e . coiera @ unsw . edu . au (cid:2) . Received for review : 03 / 12 / 09 ; accepted for publication : 03 / 19 / 09 . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association Volume 16 Number 3 May / June 2009 271 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / j a m i a / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 16 / 3 / 271 / 856095 b y gue s t on 24 J anua r y 2019 GP they chose ? How would it cope with multiple GPs entering records into the same system and the conﬂicts brought to the summary record because GPs had different views about a patient ? Because of its scale and inertia , a top - down NHIS will have a limited capacity to adapt quickly to the signiﬁcant health service delivery challenges we face in the next 20 years . Over time , top - down designs thus become increasingly out of step with service needs , and local clinical providers will have to build work - arounds to make the aging system meet emerging needs . Work - arounds are probably ﬁne in the short - term , but will inevitably add unmanageable local variations to what was intended to be singular national design . Bottom - up approaches like HIEs , in contrast , preserve exist - ing systems that are often crafted to meet local needs , avoiding the cost of ripping them out , procuring new sys - tems and retraining staff . The HIE approach is also more resilient in the face of large changes , since new technologies or system designs can be adopted locally where there is need and capacity , as long as they too connect up to the HIE . 6 Resilience comes at a price however , as one cannot predict how expensive or feasible it will be for any given local system to participate in an HIE . Nor is it known how much information HIEs can actually make available to other providers . Incompatible data models may make reconciling the same information across different systems arbitrarily complex . The price for preservation of local systems is a weaker national system , which may have data holes , and data quality problems . The presence of interoperability standards will minimize some of these risks , but at its extreme , a bottom - up strategy sees standards development and compliance as a largely voluntary affair , and govern - ment largely disinterested in it . Government’s disinterest also means that bottom - up systems are unlikely to be closely aligned with national policy goals . In large and mature technology sectors like telecommunications , industry - funded standards development is well resourced . In an emerging and still fragmented industry like health IT , standards development is unlikely to attract a similar level of resource . However , much of this analysis is predicated on the assump - tion that we actually need a single shared national record . Here , “the great may be the enemy of the good” , since much clinical beneﬁt can be obtained by simply accessing clinical records from different sources in their native format , with - out the technical convulsions needed to integrate multiple records into a unitary view . While patients do change locations or travel , just how often do they ? If most people are treated within their region , what is the return on investment for building supra - regional systems that meet the needs of a smaller transient population ? That might be a question that generates some heat , but should help to calibrate the level of investment directed towards coherent national shared records versus making all records available nationally to be viewed in their native form . Furthermore , it is clear from the United Kingdom experience that building a single national electronic record system is a large , complex , and high - risk project that will bear fruit only in the medium to long term . An “EHR ﬁrst” or “EHR in the center” strategy therefore is likely to miss many of the easy wins needed to demonstrate success , keep political momen - tum , preserve end - user buy - in , and build public conﬁdence . What are these easy wins ? The answer will vary depending on the level of IT maturity and health priorities of a nation . They might include Web - based knowledge services , deci - sion support ( e . g . , electronic prescribing ) , improved infor - mation exchange between institutions and regions ( e . g . , sharing discharge summaries between hospitals and pri - mary care , or prescriptions between primary care and phar - macies ) , and of course , consumer – owned and maintained personal health records . 7 At the heart of this conundrum is the vast gap between the needs of local institutions and national governments . It seems that there will always be a mismatch between targets that are set centrally and what is needed and feasible locally . There is also usually a discon - nect between the costs of meeting government plans—borne often by clinicians , and the beneﬁts—typically accruing to industry , administrators , politicians , and ideally patients . The closer we can bring these worlds together , the more we can minimize the mismatch in their goals . There is a third way , which might be termed the middle - out approach , which goes some distance toward bringing closer the needs of health providers , the IT industry , and govern - ment , by creating a common set of technical goals and underpinning standards that can sit between them . This development of shared goals , standards development , and sometimes support for standards implementation , must be well resourced . Government can speciﬁcally take a lead role when industry is weak or the national interest strong . For example , countries like Australia have directed their initial public e - health investments into developing nation - scale standards , well before contemplating any actual systems being built . The singular purpose for an organization like Australia’s national E - health transition authority ( NEHTA ) is to deﬁne the interoperability standards that will be used to specify any future NHIS . 8 In the United States , the health information technology standards panel ( HITSP ) , the Na - tional eHealth Collaborative ( NeHC ) and the Certiﬁcation Commission for Healthcare Information Technology ( CCHIT ) together ﬁll a similar niche , but there may be real advantages to tasking and fully resourcing a single joint entity with the role . The middle - out approach acknowledges that government and providers all have different starting points , goals , and resources . Government does not mandate immediate stan - dards compliance , but helps fund the development process . When the public interest is strong , government also has a key role to provide incentives and support that encourage clinical providers to acquire systems that are technically or functionally compliant , and to pursue innovations that keep their systems compliant over time . It allows local health care institutions and service providers to gradually make their information systems meet national standards , and to inter - operate with the emerging National Health Information grid . Where existing systems are in place , customized inter - faces are built to standard . Where new purchases are made , they are speciﬁed as close as is pragmatically possible to standard . The cost for integration is probably the same as it would be for a bottom - up HIE , but the end product has a much richer , and higher quality , capability for information sharing . There also seems to be less opportunity for system design and implementation to be captured by the medical - industrial complex , which is otherwise likely to tie - down 272 Coiera , Building a National Health IT System D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / j a m i a / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 16 / 3 / 271 / 856095 b y gue s t on 24 J anua r y 2019 and own everything from system design to implementation . Middle - out also allows government to more effectively pursue health policy goals at a national level , but constrains them to expressing those goals against the standards laid out in the middle . Government can try to meet its central goals either by careful orchestration of local elements already in existence , or by supporting the development of new public infrastructure elements that interoperate with them . With some core public interest exceptions , especially around safety , privacy , and consent legislation , the pact that government makes with local institutions is that , beyond its commitment to common goals and standards , it will try not to shape what is done locally . However , standards are not static . They evolve in constant response to new technologies and new health care needs . Therefore , the longer a clinical IT system is in operation the less standards compliant it becomes , until at some point it has aged enough to attain “legacy” status . By deﬁnition , there is thus always a lag between standards as published and as implemented on the ground . We therefore need to see standards as targets , and moving ones at that , that guide the long - term convergence of local systems into an integrated but evolving NHIS . Implementation never stops . What is so compelling about the middle - out approach , apart from its technical robustness , cost - effectiveness and ﬂexibil - ity , is that countries currently pursuing top - down or bot - tom - up strategies can migrate to the middle whenever they wish . The NHS , via middle - out , would not be locked into its current architecture , but could with time shift its strategic goals to deﬁning how local systems interoperate , rather than deﬁning the local systems themselves . One might even contemplate a future where the SSEHR becomes a virtual rather than an actual record . With middle - out , HIEs can converge on common standards over time . A time will soon also come when nation - states will want to integrate their individual NHIS into one or more international system ( s ) ; the middle - out approach seems the only rational way to do so . We must understand , therefore , that building national scale health IT infrastructure is a problem entirely different from that of simply replicating a clinical system across may different institutions ( in the manner , for example , that the Veterans Administration did in the United States ) . Building national healthcare IT systems involves deﬁning a policy and standards framework that can shape the convergence of public and private , local and central systems into a functional national system . It is also about governments doing those things that only governments can do well , like supporting public sector institutions to join the NHIS , providing incen - tives for the private sector where the private business case for change is weak but the national interest is strong , supporting the development of public goods such as the skilled health informatics workforce essential to the success of any NHIS , and crucially , developing the legislative in - struments needed to protect the privacy and legitimate interests of citizens . And government should avoid doing what it is not good at , like designing , buying , or running IT . References y 1 . Cross M . Problems with computerising patients’ records are “as serious as ever” , say MPS . BMJ 2009 ; 338 ( Jan 28 – 1 ) : b337 . 2 . Coiera E . Lessons from the NHS National Programme for IT . Med J Aust 2007 ; 186 ( 1 ) : 3 – 4 . 3 . Yasnoff WA , Humphreys BL , Overhage JM , et al . A consensus action agenda for achieving the National Health Information infrastructure . J Am Med Inform Assoc 2004 ; 11 ( 4 ) : 332 – 8 . 4 . Goroll AH , Simon SR , Tripathi M , Ascenzo C , Bates DW . Community - wide implementation of health information technol - ogy : The Massachusetts eHealth collaborative experience . J Am Med Inform Assoc 2009 ; 16 ( 1 ) : 132 – 9 . 5 . Ash JS , Berg M , Coiera E . Some unintended consequences of information technology in health care : The nature of patient care information system - related errors . J Am Med Inform Assoc 2004 ; 11 : 104 – 12 . 6 . Stead WW , Lin HS , ( editors ) . Computational Technology for Effective Health Care : Immediate Steps and Strategic Directions , National Academies , 2009 . 7 . Mandl KD , Kohane IS . Tectonic shifts in the health information economy . N Engl J Med 2008 ; 358 ( 16 ) : 1732 – 7 . 8 . National E - Health Transition Authority . Available at : http : / / www . nehta . gov . au / . Accessed : 3 / 31 / 09 . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association Volume 16 Number 3 May / June 2009 273 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / j a m i a / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 16 / 3 / 271 / 856095 b y gue s t on 24 J anua r y 2019