Computing Curriculum in Middle Schools - An Experience Report ABSTRACT This paper explores the results of a piloting and field - testing of Alice in the Middle East ( Alice ME ) , a computing curriculum for students in Middle Schools in Qatar . Alice ME is a project aimed at designing and delivering a Qatari context appropriate computing curriculum using Alice software . Curricular materials and professional development were created to help participating teachers deliver the course . An evaluation of the effectiveness of the implementation was carried out during all stages of the project . Results show that students who studied computing through Alice ME showed an improvement in their critical thinking and problem solving skills . Moreover , students and teachers became more motivated to learn programing as a result . This paper suggests best practices in teacher training and CS teaching in K - 12 schools in Qatar in addition to sharing lessons learned from the process . CCS Concepts • Social and professional topics ~ K - 12 education Keywords Alice ; Curriculum Evaluation ; K - 12 ; Computational Thinking . 1 . INTRODUCTION Rapid advancement in technology , including big data and data analytics , has caused a major shift in industry . Uber for example , is one of the biggest taxi companies but yet do not own a single taxicab . It makes millions of drives per day while functioning on a completely digital business model [ 1 ] . Due to this trend , business opportunities is becoming extremely reliable on the feasibility of digitizing services . In order to fulfil the technical expertise requirement , some countries started strengthening their education system in the area of computing education . In the US for instance , the National Science Foundation started the CS 10K program aimed at training 10 thousand high school teachers to teach CS . Moreover , various school systems around the world are shifting their curriculum from Information and Communication Technology ( ICT ) applications to computing . In England for example , they recently reintroduced CS as a mandatory subject at the secondary school level whilst the Singaporean government also directed their Ministry of Education to create CS curriculum for schools . In addition , research groups had put some effort in CS education , like ISSEP conference , ACM CSTA work , Koli group , etc . Until very recently , the focus on preparing a computer science educated generation has been largely for tertiary education , while computing education in K - 12 was limited . Hence , we know very little on teaching methods , curriculum , and teacher training required to teach the subject to a general student population . Qatar is a single - state nation having a ministry of education and higher education ( MOE & HE ) that manages the educational system of the entire country . In an effort to promote computing education in younger generations , we needed to work with the ministry to provide us with the opportunity to influence CS educational standards at a national level . The Qatari government recognized the importance of computing “know - how” and aims to become a leader in educational innovation in the Middle East . Qatar’s vision for a knowledge - based society was the driver that brought this project to life . In this project , we created a computing curriculum for middle school students in Qatari schools that was focused on introducing computing , logic and communication skills in the context of animations and games using Alice which is a 3D programming environment [ 2 ] . Alice showed promising results with novice programmers in the middle school level , especially females [ 3 ] . Our curriculum was piloted in one private school where English was the medium of instruction , as well as two public schools that used Arabic . A successful piloting resulted in our project proceeding to the field testing stage on a wider scale to include eleven different schools . Two years of successful implementation of this curriculum has resulted in MOE & HE adapting Alice based computing curriculum as the standard ICT curriculum in public schools . For the next academic year , MOE & HE will implement the curriculum in all of its 40 high schools as an elective . It is expected that 4000 students will be signing up to study this curriculum . We also extended the curriculum allowing the use of textual programming after learning the fundamental concepts using Alice . Our initial results indicated a successful transition to textual programming for middle school students . We refer the readers to our earlier papers for details about the curriculum [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] . A large part of our previous work included an effort to localize the Alice tool to better fit the Middle Eastern context . Adaptation efforts were focused on making the tool culturally suitable and more conservative in nature [ 6 ] . Incorporating Middle Eastern adaptations in the tool yielded positive results during the earlier pilot studies . This paper presents our experience in implementing the Alice - based computing curriculum in local schools in Qatar . In an effort to make the learning experience more comprehensive , we trained ICT teachers on the new curriculum and created instructional materials . We discuss the challenges faced in teacher training . We also present our findings outlining our overall experience in the project . As computing education is taking root all over the world , we hope that researchers and educational specialists looking for means to implement a curriculum suitable for their local environment can learn from our experience . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . ITiCSE ' 17 , July 03 - 05 , 2017 , Bologna , Italy © 2017 ACM . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4704 - 4 / 17 / 07… $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3059009 . 3059012 Samah Al Sabbagh Computer Science Carnegie Mellon University Doha , Qatar ssabbagh @ cmu . edu Huda Gedawy Computer Science Carnegie Mellon University Doha , Qatar hgedawy @ cmu . edu Hanan Alshikhabobakr Computer Science Carnegie Mellon University Doha , Qatar halshikh @ cmu . edu Saquib Razak Computer Science Carnegie Mellon University Doha , Qatar srazak @ cmu . edu Session 5B : K - 12 Computing Education II ITiCSE ' 17 , July 3 - 5 , 2017 , Bologna , Italy 230 2 . TEACHER TRAINING While the goal of all education reforms should be student improvement , a successful reform initiative must begin with recognizing the importance of teachers in raising student performance [ 7 ] . Thus there is a global consensus that an effective professional development is one that focuses on developing the essential traits of an effective teacher [ 8 ] . A pre - requisite to running a successful professional development is the administration and teachers’ belief that this particular professional development will make a difference in their practice . Harwell called this step the ‘buy - in’ , which refers to believing in the successful outcomes of the professional development offered [ 9 ] . In essence professional development coupled with strong administrative buy - in , aims at enhancing teachers’ understanding of the content area they teach . It should provide teachers with a range of strategies that enables them to deliver knowledge to their students . In our study we needed to guarantee buy - in from the MOE & HE and so to begin our process we approached them with strong evidence about the advantages of running the Alice ME program . We wanted to gain access to schools as well as ensure that our participating teachers are properly equipped with the skills and knowledge in the content area of computer programming . 2 . 1 What Research Says Research show that a good professional development is one that provides teachers with the skills necessary to teach and assess students’ deeper understanding and develop them in a particular area of study . Although developing student skills is important , it is not sufficient to run an effective professional development program . There are factors that are consistent amongst most research studies contributing to conducting an effective professional development program . The most important factors as summarized by Darling - Hammond and her colleagues dictate that there are three aspects to running a successful professional development [ 8 ] . The first is that professional development should be intensive , ongoing , and connected to practice . This means that professional development that entails applications of knowledge to teachers’ planning and instruction is a strong influencer of teaching practices and will lead to better student learning . The second indicates that professional development should focus on student learning and address the teaching of specific curriculum . In many ways research shows that concentrating on addressing the concrete , everyday challenges involved in teaching and learning , is more important than focusing on teaching methods taken out of context . The final aspect that needs to be considered is building strong working relationships among teachers . They stressed that professional learning can have a powerful effect on teacher skills and knowledge and will in turn have a positive effect on student learning if it is sustained over time , focused on important content , and embedded in the work of professional learning communities [ 8 ] . Higgens also described what needs to be considered when delivering any professional development . He identifies factors contributing to the success of any training session and explained that successful facilitators are ones who [ 10 ] : 1 ) introduce new knowledge and skills , 2 ) help participants access the theory and evidence underlying the relevant pedagogy , 3 ) help participants believe better outcomes are possible , 4 ) make the link between professional learning and pupil learning explicit through discussion of pupil progress , 5 ) support teachers through modelling , 6 ) providing observation and feedback and coaching . Many professional development trainings around the world are conducted in the form of workshops . This traditional way of training has proven to be least successful in delivering trainings . Courses , and conferences are other traditional forms of professional development that share many of the features of workshops . They take place outside of the teacher’s school and involve a leader with special expertise and participants attending at scheduled times [ 11 ] . 2 . 2 Our Experience In our initial evaluation of teachers , we found that most ICT teachers in Qatar in both public and private schools are trained ICT professionals who were mostly teaching computer applications . We found that although teachers did not have experience in teaching programming , they had to have studied most of the programming topics in the past . Teachers whom we worked with have never taught fundamental programming concepts to their students and therefore were not given the opportunity to develop this knowledge further in their field of work . We needed to refresh participating teachers’ programming knowledge and help them understand how to use it in Alice . For example , we covered topics such as variables and loops in which teachers were familiar with but needed to access it through their prior knowledge and see the relevance of its application using Alice . Subsequently we perceived a need for professional development workshops aimed at preparing teachers to deliver programming knowledge and skills to students . In an effort to carry out an effective professional development , we conducted several workshops to prepare teachers for using Alice during the pilot phase of the study . We offered 45 teachers from 15 different schools two workshops ( three days in length each ) to equip them with the necessary skills to be able to use the tool and deliver the curriculum . The first workshop was an introduction to Alice tool and the textbook . After the first training participating teachers were given a period of two months to get more familiar with using Alice and to learn more about its features and capabilities . Same teachers were then offered a second workshop at the start of the implementation phase to discuss topics and techniques that allowed them to understand how to teach computing and problem solving strategies to students using Alice . 2 . 3 Accomplishments The first phase in implementing a highly effective professional development training in our case was achieving buy - in from the MOE & HE since it has a direct authority over public schools in Qatar . As described by research mentioned earlier , the process of “buy - in” is an important first step [ 9 ] . We presented the MOE & HE with a study done at the university level showcasing an increase in student performance by two grade levels after studying computing through Alice . The MOE & HE selected two schools for piloting the program . The success of the program in these two schools resulted in us getting access to more schools in the following academic year . Although we resorted to the workshop model of training , we were successful in covering many of the factors contributing to successful professional development . If we measure our professional development training against Higgens’ measures of successful facilitators , we find that although our training focused mainly on the first three conditions , it also covered most of the measures to some extent . For example , introducing new knowledge underpinned by theory , strong evidence and clear rational was accomplished through carrying out teacher discussions on the importance of computing education during our training sessions . Some teachers emphasized how they were only teaching students computer application skills and recognized that this does not provoke critical thinking among students . Our training led teachers Session 5B : K - 12 Computing Education II ITiCSE ' 17 , July 3 - 5 , 2017 , Bologna , Italy 231 to the realization that they need to unpack some of those programming skills learned in college and teaching them to students . Another success indicator we covered to some extent was building strong relationships between participating teachers which Darling - Hammond and his colleagues believe to be an important aspect of running an effective training . Although we didn’t completely fulfil their definition of building strong relationships we did however , help build some sense of working relationships among participants . A good working relationship was evident from the level of teacher interaction and engagement with one another during the training as well as after the training . The fact that teachers were communicating with one another even after the training to provide each other with support and exchange experiences was a very good indication of a good working relationship amongst them . Bringing teachers from different schools together for the workshop also allowed them the opportunity to meet peers from the same profession . In addition , we provided teachers with lunch and a comfortable environment where they were able to sit , chat and share their ideas and experiences . We believe that this helped built a professional relationship among participants . It is important to point out that the working environment in Qatar in general does not support collaborative work among same discipline teachers in the different schools and this is perhaps related to work load and lack of time to meet . Hence setting up a professional network amongst ICT teachers in difference schools is considered a difficult task . Throughout the training we identified the importance of introducing and building students’ computing knowledge earlier in their lives ( middle to high school ) . This allowed teachers to give students the opportunity to explore this field of study early enough to help shape their intention for further study at the college level . 2 . 4 Suggestions Comparing the summary of research done with the method we used to administer professional development for our teachers , we found that there are some factors that could have paved the way to a more sustainable improvement in our professional development training . Factors such as , ongoing training based on teacher feedback and classroom practices , motivating teachers to learn , as well as creating a platform for teachers are what we need to consider in order to ensure a more effective professional development training is in place . The following are some suggested consideration to be taken into account when administering this professional development again in the future . 2 . 4 . 1 Intensive Ongoing Training Intensifying the duration of our training to ensure longer ongoing professional development is definitely an important consideration for future work . Teachers in general believed that simple training was not sufficient , what they really needed is classroom support to help overcome potential problems faced while teaching . This ongoing training will provide teachers with the opportunity to teach the course work and come back to reflect and discuss their classroom experiences . A stronger method of training to be considered is the lesson study approach . This approach will assist teachers in preparing lesson plans and developing a deeper understanding of how students will learn the lesson . The idea is to form a group of teachers and allow them the time to meet regularly to plan , design , implement , evaluate and consider modifications to refine a lesson . After the planning and designing phases are accomplished , a member of the team will teach the lesson while other members observe . The team should then meet to discuss their observations and reflect on the lesson and proper modifications are considered when teaching this lesson again . The idea is to promote a process whereby teachers experience gradual professional growth through developing a lesson in collaboration with peers [ 12 ] . This process will need to take place using collaboration among a team of teachers with the support and supervision of the trainer . 2 . 4 . 2 Motivating Teachers This aspect is an imperative part of carrying out a successful professional development because lack of motivation on the teacher’s part will result in limited learning of the concepts and objectives of the training taking place . Teachers recruited for the training were skeptical at the start and complained about the load of work and recommended not to introduce new topics because students are already struggling with the tools currently being used . What we would suggest doing is invite a teacher from the pilot stage who undergone the implementation stage to share his / her engagement in teaching the curriculum and report on own experiences with the training . Teachers have seen a major improvement in student perception and we need to use their positive attitude to train new teachers . This will illustrate the benefits of the training and help other teachers see the implications that this training will have on student achievement in computing . 2 . 4 . 3 Creating a Platform for Teachers In general , collaboration is central to having not only a successful professional development but also better student achievements . “Research shows that when schools are strategic in creating time and productive working relationships within academic departments or grade levels , across them , or among teachers school wide , the benefits can include greater consistency in instruction , more willingness to share practices and try new ways of teaching , and more success in solving problems of practice” [ 8 ] . Teachers receiving training requested providing them with a means to share their experiences and help them exchange ideas and resources . Thus , we believe that an effective professional development is one that creates a support system for teachers that will result in an ongoing collaboration , which will consequently foster positive professional learning communities . Creating groups whether online or face - to - face is crucial in sustaining collaboration over time . 3 . CURRICULUM IMPLEMENTATION We began by making Alice a good fit for the Middle Eastern culture . We created 3D models of creatures , objects , vehicles , buildings and tools based on the local culture . Those models helped make students’ learning experience more customized and enabled them to bridge what they learned in the schools’ settings with their home culture . We then initiated the process by developing an Alice based computing curriculum that supported the delivery of the computing education required while preserving the local traditions . The curriculum materials focused on imperative concepts of programming , analytic , logical thinking , and problem solving skills in the context of creating animations as well as enabling creativity and innovation . The curriculum was designed to build a computing foundation for students and therefore upon completion of the course students were expected to understand and develop algorithms . Students were also expected to develop programs using different building blocks like sequence , selection , repetition and Boolean expressions , use decomposition and create modular programs and model physical systems . 3 . 1 Pilot Stage In the academic year 2014 / 15 , we collaborated with three schools , two of which were public ( assigned by MOE & HE ) and one private Session 5B : K - 12 Computing Education II ITiCSE ' 17 , July 3 - 5 , 2017 , Bologna , Italy 232 school in an effort to teach computing using Alice . More than 320 grade 8 students ( 13 - 14 years old ) were taking Alice throughout the whole academic year . At this stage , teachers were provided with instructional materials such as year and term plans , lecture notes , lesson plans , class activities , short quizzes and assessments . These materials were used as a guidance for the teachers on how to teach and use Alice effectively . Students were taught the program in 2 terms each 15 weeks in length . Classes usually met twice a week for 45 minutes . The lecture notes included explanation of the new concept , example for students to work out with teachers and an individual activity to be implemented using Alice . The lesson plans were developed for teachers to direct them on how the structure , management and flow of the lesson should be as well as how to address students’ outcomes during the lessons . In order to evaluate the effectiveness of this phase , we administered pre - and post - tests with targeted students for the purpose of assessing progress . Furthermore , we asked teachers and students for their feedback on the general experience , the tool , and the curriculum materials . During the evaluation of the pilot stage , we conducted some general visits to schools to get first - hand impressions of the progress . We attended classes to understand students’ overall attainment in a classroom setting and to learn the extent of the usability of the support materials provided to teachers . School visits also involved support for students as well as providing continuous support to teachers , throughout the academic year . 3 . 2 Field Study Stage Following the successful piloting of Alice and the curriculum materials in the three schools , the MOE & HE assigned six public schools for us to work with , in the next Academic year 2015 / 16 . In addition to those , we reached out to five private schools to join this phase . More than 800 students in grades 8 and 11 ( 16 - 17 years old ) were benefiting from the new curriculum . In this phase , we designed and developed textbooks in Arabic and English for students to use . Teachers , on the other hand , were provided with more training and were supported with more instructional materials and teaching resources . The feedback and data collected from teachers and students during the evaluation of the pilot stage helped in assessing the quality and appropriateness of the curriculum and therefore helped in modifying the curriculum as required . Officials in the MOE & HE and teachers in Qatar indicated a real need to provide students with learning resources that they can take home and study . The intention was to support and facilitate students’ learning and enable them to have a more successful experience . The tailored textbooks were developed because of the lack of resources available in the medium of instruction at schools . There was also a lack of availability of computing materials that suited our target learners . When developing the textbooks , we had to consider many factors , such as : culture , vocabulary selection , and age appropriate restrictions . Please refer to our earlier papers for details about the curriculum [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] . 3 . 3 Analysis of Field Testing During the implementation of the two phases of the program , we were able to collect data to help us measure the effectiveness of the tool and the curriculum from the teachers’ and students’ perspectives . The local 3D environment of Alice also gained acceptance in the local classrooms and students displayed interest in programming using it . Alice allowed students the opportunity to discover their abilities and improve their skills by using their imaginations while programming . Teachers also succeeded in teaching computing for the first time to middle school students . This achievement was evident from the improvement in students’ assessment results . This implied a development in teachers’ knowledge and experience in teaching computing and programming through Alice , the first 3D visual programming language taught in Qatar . We present our findings in the results and discussion sections below . 4 . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION To confirm the success of the project we evaluated its effectiveness and the impact it had on participating schools . The result will always be higher student achievement in computing and this is what we looked at measuring . We collected data to assist us in examining the quality and appropriateness of their general experience , teacher training , curriculum materials , and Alice tool from the perspectives of teachers and students . Data collected from teachers were in the form of focus group interviews ( approximately one hour per school ) and anonymous surveys collected from individual teachers reporting on their experience in teaching Alice . We felt it was important to hear from each teacher individually as to illuminate factors such as group pressure encountered during focus groups interviews . A major stakeholder considered to be the primary beneficiary of the program is the student . Students completed surveys illustrating their opinion about their overall experience with the program in addition to completing assessments in the form of diagnostic tests . Two groups of randomly selected students were assessed : 1 ) An experimental group , students who took Alice , 2 ) A control group , students who took MOE & HE’s pre - existing curriculum ( Introductory Robotics and / or French ) . Student assessment comparisons were done on two levels . The first was a comparison between the pre and post assessments administered on the experimental group to measure the growth in student levels . The second was a comparison between the experimental and control groups to measure the contribution Alice made on the experimental group compared to the control group . Data collected ( except for student assessments ) was compiled , analyzed and coded by three of the research team members to ensure consistency and reliability . The team examined data collected from teachers’ and students’ feedback about their general experience , Alice tool and workshop . We used the following coding in order to classify and use the qualitative data collected and report on it :  Positive : A general positive comment about any aspect of the program of study ( e . g . Alice is useful )  Negative : A shortcoming on the part of the program that can be avoided in the future ( e . g . Tutorials were more advanced than students’ level )  Challenge : A shortcoming that is beyond the scope of the program ( e . g . when working with Alice , it takes students time to setup the scene ) 4 . 1 Focus Groups Feedback In the focus group interviews , we asked teachers from each school about their overall experience with teaching Alice as well as their perceived students’ experience with the course in general . After analyzing the data , we found that 50 % of their comments about Alice were positive while 35 % of them were negative . Negative comments were mostly related to students’ abilities , for example : “When introduced to advanced topics and heavy programming they were taking two or three lectures to finish one exercise . ” To evaluate the tool , we asked questions like ; what worked well and what didn’t work well , how would you compare it to other tools , and how engaged were students in their classes . The majority Session 5B : K - 12 Computing Education II ITiCSE ' 17 , July 3 - 5 , 2017 , Bologna , Italy 233 of teachers ( 67 % ) had positive impressions . On average 11 % of the comments reflected challenges while 22 % of them were categorized as negative impressions , for example : “ It was targeting students in higher grades , so it was more positive for higher ability students and challenging for average students ” . Another key part in completing our evaluation process was assessing the usefulness of the teachers’ training sessions . Half of the focus groups ( 50 % ) had positive while the others had negative impressions about the training . We had more negative comments about the second workshop that took place three months after the first . The main complaint about the second workshop was the redundancy of the materials being presented . We then redesigned workshops to include more reflective exercises , so teachers can reflect on methodologies being used in the curriculum . 4 . 2 Students’ Feedback A total of 167 students completed surveys about their overall experience with the program . Answers were then coded and classified into two categories ; positive ( very satisfied and satisfied ) and negative ( not satisfied and not satisfied at all ) . Survey questions focused on looking at students’ satisfaction with the program . Only 97 students answered this question and 85 % of their answers on their overall experience with Alice were positive while 15 % were negative . An example of a positive experience was “ Alice was interesting and easy for me , I only faced few difficulties ” , another student stated that “ Alice was fun ” . We also collected data on their experience with Alice tool by using answers from the survey question asking students to list other challenges they faced in the program . Only 52 % of the students answered this question out of which 18 % identified the English language as a barrier to learning . Figure 1 : Focus Groups’ Versus Students’ Ratings of their experience with the overall program . 4 . 3 Teachers’ Feedback Survey questions focused on the teachers’ individual perspectives about the program . We asked each teacher to rate their experience with respects to indicators such as overall program , perceived students’ experience , Alice tool , Alice compared to other tools , using the book , appropriateness of the topics , suitability of exercises and questions , students’ ability to produce projects , students’ motivation etc . Teachers were given two rating scales ranging from 1 - 4 ( 1 = poor / not at all , 2 = good / somewhat , 3 = very good / mostly , and 4 = excellent / very much ) . We categorized anything above 2 as positive . All teachers gave a rating of above 2 when asked about their experience with Alice . For example , some teachers rated their overall experience with teaching Alice as excellent and felt that students were mostly able to produce projects independently . 4 . 4 Students’ Assessments In order to show the effect Alice had on students’ skills , we compared two sets of data , one within the experimental group by comparing students’ pre and post assessments and the other with the control group by comparing them to the experimental group . The assessment administered consisted of 15 - 20 multiple - choice questions that required thinking but no previous knowledge . Students were asked to use computational thinking concepts and skills to solve a list of problems they might encounter in their everyday lives . Some questions required students to analyze situations , think logically in sequence and / or algorithmic and drive conclusions . Other questions asked students to use their creative thinking and imagination abilities . Both assessments were done to help us measure the improvement in students’ computational thinking and problem solving skills after taking Alice . 4 . 4 . 1 Pre vs . post Alice students’ performance We administered two student assessments with the experimental group . A pre - assessment was completed before starting the program to measure students’ current critical thinking and problem solving abilities . We then required students to do another post assessment to measure improvements in their skills and knowledge after completing Alice . We had more students’ responses in post Alice than we did in pre Alice . Figure 2 : Pre - assessments Versus Post - Assessment Results among students who have completed the program . In general , there was a 6 . 1 % improvement between pre and post Alice which is considered an improvement taken into consideration that this increase was after only four months’ exposure to the program which is normally not sufficient to see real improvements . It would have been useful if we were able to measure the progress of the same students over time by administering the pre and post - assessments to the same students . Due to confidentiality issues and restrictions on the research part , we were not able to that . 4 . 4 . 2 Alice vs . non - Alice students’ performance When we collected data to compare Alice to non - Alice , we only had 65 non - Alice students who completed the assessment while 122 Alice students completed the same assessment . In an effort to make meaningful comparisons between the two groups of students we decided to select a random sample of 65 students out of the 122 students who studied Alice to use in our data analysis . We found that Alice students scored 7 . 5 % higher on average than non - Alice students . It is important also to emphasize that two Alice students scored above 70 % on this assessment while no students from the control group scored above 60 % . Throughout our pre and post student assessments , we were able to display improvement in students’ results and an incline in experimental students’ scores suggesting that Alice students acquired more skills and knowledge in computing , critical thinking , and problem solving than the control group . 0 % 20 % 40 % 60 % 80 % 100 % Focus Groups ' Impressions about the Program Focus Groups ' Impressions about Alice Tool Focus Groups ' Impressions about the Workshops Students ' Impressions about the Program Students ' Impressions about Alice Tool Positive Negative Challenge 0 % 20 % 40 % 60 % 80 % 100 % 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 Pre‐Alice Post‐Alice Session 5B : K - 12 Computing Education II ITiCSE ' 17 , July 3 - 5 , 2017 , Bologna , Italy 234 Figure 3 : Assessment scores comparing results of students who studied Alice against Student who did not study Alice . 4 . 5 Alice Competition After the successful implementation of Alice curriculum and using the newly Alice skilled students , we decided to carry out a national competition to motivate more students and highlight some of the work done . We hosted an Alice programming competition where 36 teams consisting of 148 students competed in presenting their Alice animations . Each group got a chance to present their project to a team of judges from different sectors in Qatar . This was a great chance for the students as it increased their confidence in their abilities and their newly learned skills . Students were asked to create and present their own Alice animations and games . Projects were scored based on criteria such as creativity of the idea , oral presentation , visual and smooth motion , etc . In addition to allowing students the opportunity to demonstrate their innovations , we also attracted more schools as the event was hosted in a prestigious university and was well covered in the media . By the end of the event , students were already asking about the next Alice competition . Motivating teachers was also critical to ensure success ; hence , this competition was a good reward as they were honored by attending officials from MOE & HE , local universities and research centers . Teachers emailed us expressing their gratitude for hosting this competition . One of the teachers wrote : “ Thank you so much for the Alice Competition it was a great success” . 5 . CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK In this paper , we presented our experience in bringing Alice ME to schools in Qatar . The results highlighted the positive impact the program had on students’ knowledge , skills and performance as well as the positive impact it had on teachers using Alice . We found that the 3D animation nature of Alice facilitated students’ learning in fundamental programming concepts . This made Alice ME a more attractive and fun experience for students . In addition to its contribution to students’ learning experience , Alice also enabled teachers to have a better approach to teaching computing in a more learners’ motivated driven environment . To improve the implementation of Alice ME in the future and to ensure better teachers’ experience and students’ results , we plan to provide more intensive training that fosters a culture of sharing and reflective practices as well as using more rigorous evaluation tools to help make more meaningful comparisons . We also plan to develop a 3 - years computing curriculum that includes a textual - based programming language ( e . g . python ) to enrich the computing knowledge and experience of students in middle schools . 6 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This paper was made possible by NPRP grant # 5 - 1070 - 2 - 451 from the Qatar National Research Fund ( a member of Qatar Foundation ) . The statements made herein are solely the responsibility of the authors . 7 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] R . M . Goldman , " Future Predictions , " Linkedin , 4 June 2016 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . linkedin . com / pulse / future - predictions - robert - m - goldman - md - phd - do - faasp - len - eagles - pgce . [ Accessed 29 June 2016 ] . [ 2 ] S . Cooper , W . Dann and R . Pausch , " Alice : a 3 - D tool for introductory programming concepts , " Journal of Computing Sciences in Colleges , vol . 15 , no . 5 , pp . 107 - 116 , 2000 . [ 3 ] J . C . Adams , " Alice , middle schoolers & the imaginary worlds camps , " in ACM SIGCSE , Covington , 2007 . [ 4 ] S . Razak , H . Gedawy , N . Tabet , W . Dann and D . Slater , " Alice in UK An Alice Based Implementation of UK National Computing Curriculum , " in International Conference on Computer Science Education Innovation & Technology ( CSEIT ) , Singapore , 2015 . [ 5 ] N . Tabet , H . Gedawy , H . Alshikhabobakr and S . Razak , " From Alice to Python . Introducing Text - based Programming in Middle Schools , " in Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Innovation and Technology in Computer Science Education ( ITICSE ) , 2016 . [ 6 ] S . Razak , H . Gedawy , W . P . Dann and D . J . Slater , " Alice in the Middle East : An Experience Report from the Formative Phase , " in In Proceedings of the 47th ACM Technical Symposium on Computing Science Education ( SIGCSE ) , 2016 . [ 7 ] E . Armour - Thomas , C . Clay , R . Domanico , K . Bruno and B . Allen , " An outlier study of elementary and middle schools in New York City : Final report , " in New York city board of education , New York , 1989 . [ 8 ] L . Darling - Hammond , C . Wei Ruth , A . Andree , N . Richardson and S . Orphanos , " Professional Learning in the Learning Profession : A Status Report on Teacher Development in the United States and Abroad , " National Staff Development Council , California , 2009 . [ 9 ] S . H . Harwell , " Teacher Professional Development : It’s Not an Event , It’s a Process , " CORD , Texas , 2003 . [ 10 ] S . Higgins , P . Cordingley , T . Greany and R . Coe , " Developing Great Teaching : Lessons from the international reveiws into effective professional development , " The Teacher Development Trust , London , 2015 . [ 11 ] M . S . Garet , A . C . Porter , L . Desimone , B . F . Birman and K . S . Yoon , " What Makes Professional Development Effictive ? Results From a National Sample of Teachers , " American Educational Research Journal , vol . 38 , no . 4 , pp . 915 - 945 , 2001 . [ 12 ] " Professional Learning in Effective Schools : The Seven Principles of Highly Effective Professional Learning , " Leadership and Teacher Development Branch , Melbourne , 2005 . 0 % 20 % 40 % 60 % 80 % 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 Non‐Alice Students Alice Students Session 5B : K - 12 Computing Education II ITiCSE ' 17 , July 3 - 5 , 2017 , Bologna , Italy 235