Cell , Vol . 106 , 117 – 126 , July 13 , 2001 , Copyright  2001 by Cell Press Folate Receptor - (cid:1) Is a Cofactor for Cellular Entry by Marburg and Ebola Viruses exist . First , due to pretranslational processing of EBO GP but not MBG GP , an additional EBO GP product , sGP , is produced along with the longer membrane - bound form ( Volchkov et al . , 1995 ; Sanchez et al . , 1996 ) . Second , membrane - bound GP expressed by EBO , but Stephen Y . Chan , 1 , 2 Cyril J . Empig , 1 Frank J . Welte , 1 Roberto F . Speck , 1 Alan Schmaljohn , 3 Jason F . Kreisberg , 1 and Mark A . Goldsmith , 1 , 2 , 4 1 Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology San Francisco , California 94141 2 School of Medicine not MBG , induces cellular dysregulation that may affect endothelial cells and contribute to hemorrhage ob - University of California , San Francisco San Francisco , California 94141 served after infections ( Yang et al . , 2000 ; Chan et al . , 2000a ) . Third , preventionofN - glycosylationoftargetcell 3 Virology Division United States Army Medical Research Institute proteins specifically inhibits entry of virions mediated by EBO GP but not MBG GP ( Takada et al . , 1997 ; Chan et for Infectious Diseases Fort Detrick al . , 2000b ) . Littleisknownabouttheidentityofcellularfactorsthat Frederick , Maryland 21702 mediate entry of filoviruses . Previously , it was proposed that the asialoglycoprotein receptor ( ASGP - R ) may facil - itate MBG infection of liver cells ( Becker et al . , 1995 ) . Summary However , since both MBG and EBO viruses infect an extensive range of mammalian cell types ( Yang et al . , Human infections by Marburg ( MBG ) and Ebola ( EBO ) viruses result in lethal hemorrhagic fever . To identify 1998 ; Wool - Lewis and Bates , 1998 ; Chan et al . , 2000b ) that do not express ASGP - R , other relevant cellular fac - cellular entry factors employed by MBG virus , nonin - fectible cells transduced with an expression library tors must exist that likely are widely expressed and highly conserved . were challenged with a selectable pseudotype virus packaged by MBG glycoproteins ( GP ) . A cDNA encod - Previous studies using pseudotype viruses packaged by MBG or EBO GP demonstrated that T cells are non - ing the folate receptor - (cid:1) ( FR - (cid:1) ) was recovered from cells exhibiting reconstitution of viral entry . A FR - (cid:1) permissive for entry ( Wool - Lewis and Bates , 1998 ; Yang et al . , 1998 ; Chan et al . , 2000b ) . We utilized this informa - cDNA was recovered in a similar strategy employing EBO pseudotypes . FR - (cid:1) expression in Jurkat cells fa - tion to design a genetic complementation protocol to identify cellular factors mediating entry by MBG or EBO cilitated MBG or EBO entry , and FR - blocking reagents inhibited infection by MBG or EBO . Finally , FR - (cid:1) bound viruses . From functionallyreconstituted cellspermissive for infection by MBG and the Zaire subtype of EBO cells expressing MBG or EBO GP and mediated syncy - tia formation triggered by MBG GP . Thus , FR - (cid:1) is a ( EBO - Z ) , we identified the folate receptor - (cid:1) ( FR - (cid:1) ) as a mediatorof entryutilizedby bothviruses . Thisidentifica - significant cofactor for cellular entry for MBG and EBO viruses . tion offers direct evidence that MBG and EBO viruses share a common pathway for infection and may provide a basis for developing new antiviral strategies directed Introduction against these lethal pathogens . Marburg ( MBG ) and Ebola ( EBO ) filoviruses cause fatal hemorrhagic fevers characterized by widespread tissue Results infection and destruction ( Peters et al . , 1996 ) . They are filamentous RNA viruses , packaged by lipid membrane Genetic Reconstitution of Entry into Target Cells envelopes . Despiteprimary sequencevariation , allfilovi - by MBG Virus ruses have substantial similarity in genomic and virion To develop a quantitative , single - cycle infection system structure ( Peters et al . , 1996 ) and infect an extensive for studyingMBG virusentry , MBGGP wasincorporated and comparable range of mammalian cell types and into pseudotype viruses carrying an HIV - 1 genome lack - species ( Yang et al . , 1998 ; Wool - Lewis and Bates , 1998 ; ing env but containing a luciferase reporter gene ( pNL - Chan et al . , 2000b ) . Luc - E (cid:2) R (cid:2) ) as previously described ( Chan et al . , 2000b ) . Filovirus entry into target cells is mediated by the The vesicular stomatitis virus - G ( VSV ) GP was packaged binding of transmembrane virus envelope glycoproteins into similar pseudovirions . Challenge of human HeLa ( GP ) to an unknown cell surface factor ( s ) ( Peters et al . , cells with either pseudotype resulted in significant virus 1996 ) . Both MBG GP ( Volchkov et al . , 2000 ) and EBO entry ( Figure 1A ) . In contrast , while permissive for VSV GP ( Volchkov et al . , 1998 ) are expressed as precursor entry , human Jurkat T cells were not susceptible to MBG polyproteins that are cleaved intracellularly into an ex - entry . Therefore , HeLacells , butnotJurkatcells , express tracellular protein ( GP1 ) and amembrane - anchored pro - significant levels of a relevant cellular factor ( s ) that con - tein ( GP2 ) . GP1 presumably initiates infection by binding trols entry mediated by MBG GP . the target cell surface . While MBG and EBO viruses To construct a system of genetic complementation have common features in GP structure , tropism , and ( Figure1B ) , aretroviralcDNAlibrary ( pLIB - HeLa ) derived pathogenesis , significant differences among them also from HeLa was incorporated into pseudotype virions . As target cells for this study , we used a highly transducible derivative of Jurkat cells , Jurkat - EctR , which stably ex - 4 Correspondence : mgoldsmith @ gladstone . ucsf . edu Cell118 Figure 1 . A Genetic Complementation Strat - egy Based on Jurkat Cells and a Retroviral Expression Library ( A ) HeLa cells , but not Jurkat cells , are per - missiveforentrymediatedbyMBGGP . Pseu - dotype virus infection was quantitated by measuring luciferase activity . Data represent the means derived from three separate infec - tions ( (cid:3) SEM ) . ( B ) SelectionstrategytorecovercDNAinserts encoding cellular factors that reconstitute permissivity for MBG virus entry in Jurkat cells expressing the ecotropic murine leuke - mia virus receptor ( EctR ) . press the ecotropic murine leukemia virus ( MLV ) recep - permeability that might nonspecifically increase entry of diverse viruses . tor yetare nonpermissivefor entryby MBGpseudotypes ( data not shown ) . Jurkat - EctR cells were transduced with the retroviral library or with pseudovirions carrying Folate Receptor - (cid:1) Reconstitutes Permissivity for MBG Pseudotype Entry a GFP reporter gene ( pLIB - GFP ) to allow for monitoring of transduction efficiency ( 30 % – 40 % ) . Library - trans - To identify the relevant library cDNA insert , PCR amplifi - cationofDNAfromreconstitutedcells ( bulkculture2 - 23 ) duced cells were then challengedwith a selectable MBG pseudotype virus ( MBG - blasti ) in which MBG GP was was performed using primers based on sequences flank - ing the cDNA inserts . Four inserts were found to contain used to package an env - negative HIV - 1 provirus ( pHIV - blasti ) containing the blasticidin S deaminase gene . Se - small open reading frames ( ORF ) . One carried perfect identitywiththe3 (cid:4) two - thirdsoftheknown cDNAsequence lection in blasticidin S was begun 2 days later . After selection , cell viability was quantitated by Trypan Blue encoding for the human folate receptor - (cid:1) ( FR - (cid:1) ) , begin - ning with an in - frame internal methionine codon ( Met - exclusion . In cultures of parental Jurkat - EctR cells chal - lenged with no pseudovirions , library - transduced cells # 92 ) and carrying an intact signal sequence for attach - ment of the membrane anchor . Flow cytometry verified challenged with no pseudovirions , or parental cells chal - lenged with MBG - blasti pseudotypes , all cells died expression of FR - (cid:1) on HeLa cells ( Figure 2B ) , on the F10 subclone derived from reconstituted Jurkat - EctR within 8 days , and no viable cells were recovered over a 3 - week interval . In contrast , in the library - transduced culture 2 - 23 ( Figure 2C ) , and on other permissive cell types such as Vero E6 ( Figure 2D ) , typically used to pas - samples challenged with MBG - blasti , viable cells were readily detected after 8 days of selection and were ex - sagefiloviruses in cell culture ( Peters et al . , 1996 ) . North - ern blot analysis confirmed FR expression in these as panded . well as additional permissive cell types such as human ( HOS ) and dog osteosarcoma cells ( data not shown ) . Verification of Permissivity for MBG Virus Entry in Selected Jurkat - EctR Cells To seek independent confirmation that FR - (cid:1) reconsti - tutes permissivity , equivalent numbers of Jurkat - EctR To confirm that these viable cells were permissive for MBG virusentry , theywere rechallenged withMBG lucif - cells expressing either FR - (cid:1) or GFP were challenged with blasti pseudotypes , selected in blasticidin S , and erase virus . Unlike untransduced parental Jurkat - EctR cellsthat yieldednegligible luciferasesignals , allblastic - monitored for viability . Cells expressing either GFP or FR - (cid:1) were equally permissive for entry by VSV - blasti idin - selected bulk cultures ( such as 2 - 11 , 2 - 14 , 2 - 23 , 2 - 24 ) allowed for significant MBG infection ( Figure 2A ) . pseudotypes , as demonstrated by comparable growth of viable cells after 3 days of selection ( Figure 3A ) . A Importantly , these recovered cells remained nonpermis - sive for entry by a negative control pseudotype pack - small but detectable number of cells was periodically amplified under selection in the FR - (cid:1) - negative control aged by the HIV - 1 JR - FL envelope GP ( data not shown ) . Therefore , MBG entry was not facilitated by a factor sample after challenge with MBG - blasti pseudotypes , perhaps due to the high sensitivity of the viral entry specific for HIV components expressed in the pseu - dotype viruses , nor was it the result of increases in assay . Nonetheless , after 15 days of selection , the cul - ture expressing FR - (cid:1) exhibited a more than 8 - fold greater endocytic activity or general alterations in cell surface Folate Receptor - (cid:1) Mediates Filovirus Entry 119 Figure 2 . Reconstitution of Permissivity for MBG Entry by Library Transduction Corre - lates with FR - (cid:1) Expression ( A ) Library - transduced Jurkat - EctR cells chal - lengedwithMBG - blastivirusandselectedfor survival ( bulk cultures 2 - 11 , 2 - 14 , 2 - 23 , and 2 - 23 ) arepermissiveforentrybyMBGlucifer - ase virus . Displayed values represent the meansderivedfromthreeseparateinfections ( (cid:3) SEM ) . ( B ) Flow cytometry confirms that HeLa cells express FR - (cid:1) . Cells were stained with mono - clonal antibody raised against soluble bovine FR - (cid:1) ( filled curve ) or isotype control ( outlined curve ) . ( C ) Anti - bovine FR - (cid:1) staining reveals FR - (cid:1) expression on Jurkat - EctR F10 cells ( filled curve ) , but not parental cells ( outlined curve ) . ( D ) VeroE6cellsexpress FR - (cid:1) . Todetectepi - topes onsimian FR - (cid:1) , cells werestained with anti - humanFR - (cid:1) ( filledcurve ) orisotypecon - trol ( outlined curve ) . amplification of viable cells after challenge with MBG - To determine if more specific FR - blocking reagents could inhibit MBG entry , Jurkat - EctR F10 cells were blasti virus compared to the low levels of background permissivity in cells expressing GFP . In contrast , inde - treated with a monoclonal anti - human FR - (cid:1) antibody ( Franklin et al . , 1994 ) . MBG infection was specifically pendent expression of other recovered library inserts encoding a start codon and an ORF did not allow for resto - and potently reduced by anti - FR - (cid:1) ( Figure 4C ) . Similarly , the natural ligand of FR - (cid:1) , folic acid , was tested as ration of permissivity ( data not shown ) . Therefore , these results provide direct genetic evidence that FR - (cid:1) can a specific inhibitor of MBG entry . Naturally permissive human osteosarcoma ( HOS ) cells were preincubated serve as a specific mediator for infection by MBG virus . To verify reconstitution of infectibility for wild - type in folic acid - containing media followed by pseudotype virus challenge . HOS cells were chosen as target cells MBG virus in FR - (cid:1) - positive cells , F10 cells were chal - lenged with wild - type MBG virus , stained with anti - MBG since they are more highly permissive for pseudotype filovirus entry than F10 , HeLa , or Vero E6 cells ( Chan et antisera , and visualized by immunofluorescence . Al - though high levels of reconstitution were not observed , al . , 2000b ) and thus could be challenged with smaller viral inocula . While VSV entry was minimally inhibited , positive staining was nonetheless detected in F10 cells , but not parental cells , after MBG inoculation ( Figures MBG entry was significantly reduced in a dose - depen - dent manner ( Figure 4D ) . Additionally , a cleaved , soluble 3B and 3C ) . Taken together with the fact that FR - (cid:1) can directly reconstitute MBG pseudotype entry , these data form of bovine FR - (cid:1) ( folate binding protein , FBP ) was used to compete for the binding of MBG GP expressed indicate that expression of FR - (cid:1) successfully comple - mented a key step in cellular entry important for both on the virion envelope . Luciferase viruses were preincu - bated with FBP . HOS cells were then inoculated with pseudotype and wild - type MBG viruses . these mixtures , and infection level was compared with that of uncomplexed virus . MBG entry was specifically FR - (cid:1) - Specific Antagonists Inhibit MBG Entry FR - (cid:1) is a glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol - linked ( GPI - inhibited by more than 50 % by FBP ( Figure 4E ) . There - fore , specificinhibition byanti - FR - (cid:1) , folic acid , and solu - linked ) protein that binds folic acid for transport into the cytoplasm ( Antony , 1996 ) . GPI - linked proteins are ble FBP indicates not only that FR - (cid:1) facilitates MBG virus entry in both genetically reconstituted cells and sensitive to cleavage by phospholipase C ( PLC ) . Be - cause HeLa cells tolerate the cytotoxic effects of PLC naturally permissive cells , but also that this function likely relies on it directly binding MBG virions . well ( data not shown ) , these cells were pretreated with PLC followed by challenge with pseudotype luciferase viruses . MBG pseudotypeinfection decreased markedly FR - (cid:1) Mediates Membrane Fusion Triggered by MBG GP and in a dose - dependent manner under these condi - tions , unlike amphotropic ( Ampho ) MLV pseudotype vi - The role of FR - (cid:1) in cell - cell fusion driven by MBG GP was also assessed . 293T cells overexpressing MBG GP rus ( Figure 4A ) . A specific , dose - dependent effect on MBG entry was also seen upon treatment of F10 cells were cocultivated with cells overexpressing either CD4 or FR - (cid:1) . Because fusion mediated by MBG GP may be ( Figure 4B ) at noncytotoxic doses confirmed to cleave FR - (cid:1) from the surface of FR - (cid:1) - positive Jurkat cells ( data pH - dependent ( Chan et al . , 2000b ) , syncytia formation ( (cid:5) 3 nuclei ) was quantitated after pulsing cells at pH 5 or not shown ) . Specific inhibition in two different target cell types provides further support for a role for a GPI - linked pH 7 and allowing for recovery . As described previously ( Vey et al . , 1992 ) , expression of the influenza hemagluti - protein such as FR - (cid:1) in MBG entry . Cell120 Figure 4 . Inhibition of MBG Pseudotype Entry with FR - Specific Figure 3 . FR - (cid:1) Reconstitutes Permissivity for MBG Entry in Jurkat - Blocking Reagents EctR Cells Pretreatment of ( A ) HeLa cells or ( B ) F10 cells with phospholipase ( A ) Jurkat - EctR cells expressing FR - (cid:1) are permissive for entry by C ( PLC ) specifically abrogates MBG pseudotype entry in a dose - MBG - blasti virus . GFP - or FR - (cid:1) - positive cells were inoculated with dependent manner . ( C ) Entry by MBG luciferase virus into F10 cells blasti viruses , selected in blasticidin S , and monitored for cell viabil - is specifically abrogated by anti - human FR - (cid:1) IgG1 compared with ity . Displayed values are representative of two separate reconstitu - that seen with isotype control ( anti - HIV p24 IgG1 ) . ( D ) Dose - depen - tion procedures . dent inhibition of MBG pseudotype entry into human osteosarcoma ( B ) FR - (cid:1) - positive F10 cells are infectible ( white arrow ) by wild - type ( HOS ) cells by folic acid . ( E ) MBG pseudotype infection of HOS MBG virus . F10 cells were challenged with MBG virus and stained cells specifically decreases in the presence of soluble bovine FBP . using anti - MBG antisera for indirect immunofluorescence analysis Displayed values in ( A ) – ( E ) are the means derived from three sepa - ( IFA ) . rate infections ( (cid:3) SEM ) . ( C ) F10 cells , but not parental cells , are infectible by wild - type MBG virus . Vero E6 , Jurkat - EctR parental , and F10 cells were challenged withwild - typeMBGvirusatincreasingmultiplicityofinfection ( MOI ) , EBO - Z entry ( Yang et al . , 1998 ; Chan et al . , 2000b ) . and infected cells were quantitated by IFA . Therefore , after HeLa library delivery , transduced Jur - kat - EctR cells were challenged with a pseudotype virus packaged by EBO - Z GP ( EBO - Z - blasti ) and selected in nin protein ( HA ) allowed for robust formation of syncytia ( (cid:6) 100 per well ) when exposed to pH 5 but not pH 7 blasticidin S . Only library - transduced , but not parental , cultures that had been challenged by EBO - Z - blasti virus ( Figure 5A ) . No significant fusion was detected at either pH in cultures expressing MBG GP with CD4 ( Figure yielded viable cells after selection . Individual cell clones surviving selection , such as A7 - 1 , were indeed infectible 5B ) , MBG GP alone , FR - (cid:1) alone , or ecotropic MLV GP together with FR - (cid:1) ( data not shown ) . In contrast , exclu - by EBO - Z luciferase virus ( Figure 6A ) but not by the negative control HIV - 1 JR - FL pseudotype ( data not sivelyafterpH5exposure , arangeof1to6unambiguous syncytia per well was consistently observed in cocul - shown ) . Strikingly , A7 - 1 was also permissive for MBG entry , suggesting that a common factor ( s ) may comple - tures expressing MBG GP with FR - (cid:1) ( Figure 5C ) . While less robust than that seen with HA , this reproducible ment deficiencies of permissivity for both MBG and EBO - Z virus entry . Correspondingly , A7 - 1 cells were level of MBG GP - induced syncytia formation facilitated by FR - (cid:1) provides independent evidence that FR - (cid:1) inter - found by PCR amplification to carry a library insert en - coding for full - length FR - (cid:1) . By Northern blot analysis , acts with MBG GP for subsequent fusion . 7otherrecoveredcellclonesselectedforEBO - Zpermis - sivity were positive for FR - (cid:1) - specific message . More - FR - (cid:1) Mediates Entry by EBO - Z Virus Thegeneticcomplementationprotocoldescribedearlier over , FR - (cid:1) - positive F10 cells that had been selected for MBG permissivity were infectible by both MBG and was employed to identify factors that mediate entry by EBO - Z virus . HeLa , but not Jurkat , are permissive for EBO - Z luciferase viruses ( Figure 6B ) . Thus , in two inde - Folate Receptor - (cid:1) Mediates Filovirus Entry 121 Figure 5 . Syncytia Formation in 293T Cells by MBG GP Is Facilitated by FR - (cid:1) ( A ) Syncytium production ( (cid:6) 100 syncytia / well , white arrow ) in 293T cells expressing influenza hemaglutinin ( HA ) after pH 5 ex - posure . ( B ) No detectable syncytia in cocultures ex - pressing MBG GP with CD4 after pH 5 ex - posure . ( C ) Syncytium production in cocultures ex - pressing MBG GP with FR - (cid:1) after pH 5 expo - sure ( 1 to 6 syncytia / well , black arrows ) . pendent procedures designed to reconstitute permis - surface of cells expressing either MBG GP or EBO - Z sivity for filovirus entry—one approach utilizing MBG GP ( Figure 7 ) . FR - (cid:1) - negative CHO - K1 cells ( Weitman et pseudotypes and the other utilizing EBO - Z pseudo - al . , 1992a ) , expressing either Ampho , MBG , or EBO - Z types—recovered cells were found to be FR - (cid:1) - positive GP , were incubated with bovine FBP and a polyclonal and concurrently permissive for both MBG and EBO - Z anti - bovine FBP antibody that was nonneutralizing for infection . These results provide genetic evidence dem - MBG or EBO - Z entry ( data not shown ) . Samples were onstrating that FR - (cid:1) mediates infection by EBO - Z as then fixed and stained with a fluorescein - conjugated well as by MBG virus . secondary antibody in order to highlight selectively To obtain direct genetic proof that FR - (cid:1) reconstitutes those cells with FBP bound to their surface . Transfected permissivity for EBO - Z entry , Jurkat - EctR cells express - cellsexposed toanti - FBPandsecondary antibodyinthe ing either GFP or FR - (cid:1) were challenged with blasti pseu - absence of FBP yielded negligible staining . Additionally , dotypes , selected in blasticidin S , and monitored for cell cells transfected with Ampho GP exhibited only a low viability . Comparable susceptibility to VSV - blasti entry level of background staining in the presence of FBP . In was observed in GFP - positive and FR - (cid:1) - positive cells contrast , cells expressing MBG GP or EBO - Z GP that after 3 days of selection ( Figure 6C ) . In contrast , cells were incubated with FBP displayed ring - like cell surface expressing FR - (cid:1) , but not GFP , were permissive for staining . This significant and specific staining pattern EBO - Z pseudotype entry and allowed for detectable cell indicates that MBG GP or EBO - Z GP can bind FR - (cid:1) . growth after 35 days of selection . Therefore , similar to Taken together with the recovery of FR - (cid:1) in separate the MBG studies , these independent genetic data dem - library transductions challenged with either MBG - or onstrate that FR - (cid:1) mediates cellular entry by EBO - Z EBO - Z - blasti viruses , various FR - (cid:1) - specific inhibition virus . assays , the MBG GP - driven induction of cell - cell fusion Subsequently , FR - (cid:1) - specific inhibition strategies were byFR - (cid:1) , andthefunctionalreconstitutionofpermissivity pursued . HeLa cell pretreatment with phospholipase C with FR - (cid:1) expression constructs , we conclude that FR - abolished entry by EBO - Z pseudotypes but did not af - (cid:1) is a cell surface factor that facilitates cellular entry of fect control virus entry ( data not shown ) . Infection of F10 MBG and EBO - Z viruses . cells by EBO - Z pseudotypes decreased significantly in the presence of monoclonal anti - human FR - (cid:1) antibody Discussion ( Figure 6D ) . Furthermore , when FR - (cid:1) - positive , monkey Vero E6 cells , which are commonly used to propagate In this study , a genetic strategy combining selectable filoviruses in cell culture ( Peters et al . , 1996 ) , were pseudotype viruses packaged by filovirus GP with a treated with a polyclonal antisera raised against bovine retroviral expression library was implemented to select FBP , EBO - Z entry specifically decreased by nearly 60 % for reconstituted cells permissive for filovirus entry . ( Figure 6E ) . Thus , EBO - Z entry was specifically inhibited Pseudotype viruses have been used extensively for in the presence of separate anti - FR - (cid:1) antibodies in ge - studying entry by native filoviruses ( Takada et al . , 1997 ; netically reconstituted human cells and in untransduced Wool - Lewis and Bates , 1998 ; Yang et al . , 1998 ; Chan et monkey cells , further defining FR - (cid:1) as a conserved me - al . , 2000b ) . Furthermore , a comparison of entry require - diator of EBO - Z virus entry in different cell types and ments of pseudotype ( Figure 2A ) and wild - type ( Figures mammalian species . Finally , while soluble FR - (cid:1) ( FBP ) 3B and 3C ) filoviruses confirmed their dependence on the minimally affected VSV entry , it induced a substantial same cellular pathway and validated this experimental dose - dependent inhibition of EBO - Z infection ( Figure approach . Based on this strategy , genetically reconsti - 6F ) . Therefore , mirroring the MBG inhibition profiles , tuted Jurkat cells were successfully selected for permis - EBO - Z pseudotype entry was specifically abrogated by sivity for either MBG or EBO - Z entry . In both popula - agents disrupting the interaction between virion GP tions , surviving cells were found to be permissive for and FR - (cid:1) . entrybybothMBGandEBO - Zviruses . Correspondingly , FR - (cid:1) cDNA inserts were recovered from both popula - FR - (cid:1) Binds to Cells Expressing MBG GP tions , demonstrating genetically that FR - (cid:1) reconstitutes or EBO - Z GP deficiencies for entry by both types of filoviruses . To determine if FR - (cid:1) binds MBG or EBO - Z GP , immuno - fluorescence was used to detect FBP attached to the To establish directly this role in filovirus entry , several Cell122 tity in amino acid sequence ( Maziarz et al . , 1999 ) and differ in their size , tissue distribution ( Ross et al . , 1994 ) , or ligand binding sites ( Maziarz et al . , 1999 ) . Only the FR - (cid:1) isoform has been detected in normal , nonhemato - poietic tissue other than placenta ( Ross et al . , 1999 ) . Upon binding folic acid , FR - (cid:1) is endocytosed in vesicles that have been characterized as caveolae via a pathway implicated in the uptake of other GPI - linked proteins ( as reviewed by Anderson et al . , 1992 ) . However , the exact mechanism of endocytosis ( Mayor et al . , 1994 ) and type of vesicle ( Rijnboutt et al . , 1996 ) used for this uptake is controversial . After endocytosis , folic acid is released viaa decreaseinintravesicular pH , followed byrecycling of FR - (cid:1) to the cell surface ( Kamen et al . , 1988 ; Lee et al . , 1996 ) . The identification of FR - (cid:1) as a cofactor for MBG and EBO - Z entry is plausible in the biologic context of filovi - ruses . The pH - dependence both of filovirus entry into target cells ( Takada et al . , 1997 ; Wool - Lewis and Bates , 1998 ; Chan et al . , 2000b ) and of membrane fusion medi - ated by MBG GP ( Figure 5C ) correlates with the pathway of endocytosis and acidification exploited by FR - (cid:1) for folicacid uptake . Inaddition , pretreatmentof targetcells with caveolae inhibitors specifically abrogated entry by MBG and EBO - Z pseudotype viruses , arguing that the caveolar pathway thought to be associated with endo - cytosis of FR - (cid:1) also mediates filovirus infection ( C . J . E . and M . A . G . , unpublished observations ) . Future charac - terization of the endocytic pathway downstream of the initial interaction with the virion GP will be important for understanding the filovirus life cycle and defining the exact composition of the vesicles used by FR - (cid:1) and other GPI - linked receptors for ligand uptake . Much , but perhaps not all , of the pathology of filovirus infection also correlates with the range of FR - (cid:1) expres - sion . The fact that FR - (cid:1) is highly conserved in a number Figure 6 . FR - (cid:1) Mediates EBO - Z Virus Entry of mammalian species ( Antony , 1996 ) corresponds with ( A ) FR - (cid:1) - positive A7 - 1 cells selected for EBO - Z permissivity and ( B ) the wide tropism of filoviruses in cell culture ( Chan et FR - (cid:1) - positive F10 cells selected for MBG permissivity are infectible al . , 2000b ) and animal models ( Geisbert and Jaax , 1998 ; by both MBG and EBO - Z luciferase viruses . ( C ) Jurkat - EctR cells Bray et al . , 1999 ; Connolly et al . , 1999 ) . Furthermore , expressing FR - (cid:1) are permissive for entry by EBO - Z - blasti virus . Cells expressing GFP or FR - (cid:1) were inoculated with blasti viruses , FR - (cid:1) is significantly expressed in a variety of epithelial selected in blasticidin S , and monitored for cell viability . Displayed andparenchymalcellsinthelung , gonads , gastrointesti - valuesarerepresentativeoftwoseparatereconstitutionprocedures . nal ( GI ) tract , genitourinary ( GU ) tract ( Antony , 1996 ) , ( D ) EBO - Z pseudotype entry into F10 cells is abrogated in the pres - pancreas , thyroid ( Weitman et al . , 1992b ) , and arteries ence of anti - human FR - (cid:1) IgG1 . ( E ) EBO - Z pseudotype entry into ( Weitman et al . , 1992a ) , but not in lymphocytes ( Franklin Vero E6 cells is inhibited by polyclonal anti - bovine FBP . ( F ) Dose - et al . , 1994 ) . Concordantly , in humans and in animal dependentdecreaseofEBO - ZinfectionofHOScellsinthepresence models , filoviruses have been documented to replicate of soluble bovine FBP . Displayed values in ( A ) , ( B ) , and ( D ) – ( F ) are the means derived from three separate infections ( (cid:3) SEM ) . in parenchymal cells of the lung ( Johnson et al . , 1995 ) , gonads , GI tract , thyroid ( Connolly et al . , 1999 ) , and pancreas ( Geisbert and Jaax , 1998 ) , as well as in epithe - experimental avenues were implemented . These in - lial cells of the GU tract ( Baskerville et al . , 1985 ; Connolly cluded reconstitution of permissivity for filovirus entry et al . , 1999 ) , but not in lymphocytes ( Geisbert et al . , through FR - (cid:1) expression , inhibitionof infection by blocking 2000 ) . In addition , major targets of direct infection by association of filovirus GP with FR - (cid:1) , generation of MBG filoviruses include macrophages / monocytes and fibro - GP - triggered membrane fusion by FR - (cid:1) , and demon - blasts , which are present in numerous susceptible tis - stration of purified soluble FR - (cid:1) specifically bound to sues , as well as hepatocytes and endothelial cells ( Zaki cells expressing either MBG or EBO - Z GP . These inde - and Goldsmith , 1999 ) . Importantly , significant expres - pendent genetic and biochemical studies converge sion of FR - (cid:1) has been documented in both macro - upon thesame conclusionthat FR - (cid:1) acts asa significant phages ( Franklin et al . , 1994 ) and fibroblasts ( Antony , cofactor that mediates infection by MBG or EBO - Z virus . 1996 ) . Furthermore , we found that naturally permissive FR - (cid:1) is a widely expressed 38 – 39 kDa GPI - linked cell HOS cells , derived from fibroblast - like sarcoma cells , surface protein that binds extracellular folic acid for cel - and Vero E6 cells , derived from fibroblast - like kidney lular uptake ( Antony , 1996 ) . It is one of four receptor cells , both express folate receptor that is active in medi - ating filovirus entry ( Figures 4D and 6E ) . Although high isoforms ( (cid:1) , (cid:7) , and (cid:8) , and (cid:8)(cid:4) ) that carry 68 % – 79 % iden - Folate Receptor - (cid:1) Mediates Filovirus Entry 123 Figure 7 . Soluble FR - (cid:1) ( FBP ) Binds Specifi - callytoCellsExpressingMBGGPorEBO - ZGP CHO - K1 cells expressing Ampho , MBG , or EBO - Z GP were incubated with bovine FBP and polyclonal anti - FBP ( (cid:9) FBP ) . Control wells were incubated in the presence of only polyclonalanti - FBP ( Phaseand (cid:2) FBP ) . Cells were then stained with a fluorescein - conju - gated secondary antibody and analyzed by immunofluorescence ( (cid:9) FBP and (cid:2) FBP ) . Correspondingphasemicroscopyofthecon - trol wells is displayed for reference ( Phase ) . levels of FR - (cid:1) have not been reported in hepatocytes While FR - (cid:1) was successfully recovered as a cofactor for filovirus entry in this approach , use of Jurkat cells and endothelial cells , FR protein was detected in pig hepatocytes ( Villanueva et al . , 1998 ) as well as in rat provided an imperfect cellular context to reconstitute high levels of MBG or EBO - Z entry with either pseu - liver tissue ( da Costa et al . , 2000 ) , while FR - (cid:1) mRNA was detected by RT - PCR in human liver ( Ross et al . , dotype or wild - type ( Figure 3C ) viruses . T cells were selected for this study since lymphocytes represent the 1994 ) . It is possible that these low levels of FR - (cid:1) are sufficient to facilitate filovirus entry into hepatocytes or onlymammaliancelltypetestedthatconsistentlyresistsrobustinfectionbyfilovirusesincellculture ( Yang et al . , that further expression is induced in vivo ( Antony , 1996 ) . It currently remains unclear if endothelial cells also ex - 1998 ; Wool - Lewis and Bates , 1998 ; Chan et al . , 2000b ) and in animal models ( Geisbert et al . , 2000 ) . However , press low yet functional receptor levels . Nonetheless , the otherwise vast range of permissive cells with signifi - not only do Jurkat cells express little to no FR - (cid:1) , but also they are typically deficient in certain endocytic pro - cant FR - (cid:1) expression largely matches known features of the filovirus life cycle and strengthens our conclusion cesses such as caveolae formation ( Fra et al . , 1994 ) proposed to be instrumental for FR - (cid:1) - mediated folic that FR - (cid:1) plays a role in propagating the spread of filovi - rus infection in relevant cell types . acid uptake . Therefore , it is probable that Jurkat T cells do not support robust infection because they carry mul - The fact that FR - (cid:1) mediates entry by either MBG or EBO - Z virus also reinforces the hypothesis that these tiple impediments to filovirus entry . Consequently , addi - tional cellular factors beyond FR - (cid:1) may be necessary viruses exploit fundamentally similar cellular pathways to infect cells . However , we previously described bio - to reconstitute permissivity to high levels observed in nonmanipulated , infectible cells . Nonetheless , in combi - chemical differences in target cell entry mediated by EBO - Z GP compared with that by MBG GP ( Chan et nation with the high sensitivity of the genetic comple - mentation protocol , the use of Jurkat T cells was suc - al . , 2000b ) . Therefore , although both MBG and EBO - Z viruses similarly utilize FR - (cid:1) for initiation of entry , it will cessful in recovering FR - (cid:1) for characterization as a mediatoroffilovirusentrybyotherindependentstrategies . be important to determine how their entry processes diverge . ItispossiblethattheirenvelopeGPmayinteract Delivery of cDNA libraries derived from FR - (cid:1) - negative permissive cells into Jurkat cells may allow for recovery differentially with other unknown cellular factors . In sup - port of this hypothesis , we discovered that not all cell of other host factors that play a role independently or in combination with FR - (cid:1) in the filovirus entry process . types that are naturally permissive for MBG or EBO - Z entry express FR - (cid:1) ( data not shown ) . Therefore , al - Finally , the identification of FR - (cid:1) as a cofactor that mediates filovirus entry may offer a novel therapeutic though FR - (cid:1) mediates MBG and EBO - Z virus entry in certain cell types , at least one alternate factor must avenue for effectively treating the hemorrhagic fevers caused by infection . The observation that soluble FBP , share this function in other cellular contexts . Similar to other viruses that can interact with one of various anti - FR - (cid:1) antisera , and folic acid can inhibit entry by filoviruses may provide a basis for establishing treat - receptors to enter cells such as HIV ( as reviewed by Berger et al . , 1999 ) , we hypothesize that filoviruses can ment regimens designed to block FR - (cid:1) from associating with extracellular filoviruses . However , as indicated ear - utilize a family of receptors to facilitate their life cycle in a broad range of cell types . lier , FR - (cid:1) may not facilitate virus entry into all cell types . Cell124 parallel batch , Jurkat - EctR cells were transduced with pseudoviri - Nonetheless , the characterization of FR - (cid:1) as a cofactor ons carrying pLIB - GFP . By quantitating GFP - positive Jurkat - EctR that mediates filovirus entry is an important first step cells two days after transduction , library infection was optimized to both in gaining a molecular understanding of how filovi - achieve a reproducible 30 % – 40 % transduction efficiency . Se - ruses associate with cells and in designing therapeutic lectable MBG - blasti or VSV - blasti virus was harvested and used to measures to intervene in these key events . challenge parental cells or cells transduced with the library 48 hr earlier , followed by transfer into medium containing blasticidin S ( ICN Pharmaceuticals , Inc . , 40 (cid:10) g / ml ) . During selection for 2 – 3 Experimental Procedures weeks , cells were monitored for viability by Trypan Blue exclusion . Selected cells were expanded and subjected to limiting dilution to Cell Lines obtain monoclonal cell populations . To select for cells permissive Jurkat T cells stably expressing the ecotropic murine leukemia virus for EBO - Z virus entry , similar procedures were performed using ( MLV ) receptor ( Jurkat - EctR , also known as Jurkat . ecoR ) were pro - EBO - Z - blasti virus . vided by Dr . G . Nolan ( Stanford University ) . PT67 packaging cells were culturedas described ( Clontech ) . Humanosteosarcoma ( HOS ) cells carrying a human green fluorescent protein reporter gene Challenge of Cells with Pseudotype and Wild - Type Filoviruses driven by an HIV - 2 Tat - dependent LTR were provided by Dr . D . To determine permissivity for entry by pseudotype luciferase vi - Littman ( Skirball Institute ) . Other cell types were cultured as recom - ruses , targetcellswereincubatedwithvirusfor48 – 72hr , andlucifer - mended by the American Type Culture Collection ( ATCC ) . ase expression was quantitated as previously described ( Chan et al . , 2000b ) . Alternatively , VeroE6 , parental , andreconstitutedJurkat - EctR cells were inoculated with wild - type MBG virus . Immunostain - Plasmids and cDNA Library Amplification ingwasperformedaspreviouslydescribed ( Schmaljohnetal . , 1995 ) . The env - negative , HIV - 1proviruscarryingaluciferasereportergene , pNL - Luc - E (cid:2) R (cid:2) ( Connor et al . , 1995 ) , was provided by Dr . N . Landau ( SalkInstitute ) . The env - negative , HIV - 1proviruscarryingtheblastic - PCR Recovery of cDNA Library Inserts from Transduced idin S deaminase gene , pHIV - blasti , was provided by Dr . R . Sutton Jurkat - EctR Cells ( BaylorUniversity ) . Expressionplasmid pVSV - Gencoding thevesic - Genomic DNA was extracted from Jurkat - EctR cells selected for ular stomatitis virus - G ( VSV ) protein was provided by Dr . J . Burns permissivity for MBG entry using the “Easy DNA” kit ( Invitrogen ) . ( University of California , San Diego ) , and pMULV - A encoding the ExtractedDNA wasusedas atemplatefor PCR - basedamplification amphotropic ( Ampho ) MLV env wasprovidedbyDr . K . Page ( Univer - using the Expand PCR kit ( Roche Molecular Biochemicals ) and oli - sity of California , San Francisco ) . The cDNA clones encoding MBG gonucleotide primers derived from sequences flanking the library GP and EBO - Z GP were provided by Dr . A . Sanchez ( Centers for inserts . Specific DNA bands amplified in experimental samples , but Disease Control and Prevention ) and cloned into the pCMV4neo not control samples , were used for TA cloning ( Invitrogen ) . Insert expression vector ( Chan et al . , 2000b ) . The full - length library cDNA sequenceswerecomparedtoknowngenomicandcDNAsequences and truncated cDNA encoding FR - (cid:1) were recovered by PCR as using Entrez BLAST software . described below . For reconstitution studies , pBabe - FR - (cid:1) was con - To recover cDNA inserts from cells selected for permissivity for structed by subcloning the full - length FR - (cid:1) gene into the MLV ret - EBO - Zentry , RT - PCRwasusedforgreaterefficiencyoflibraryinsert roviral vector pBabeMN , provided by Dr . G . Nolan ( Stanford Univer - retrieval . Total RNA was extracted from cells by the RNA STAT 60 sity ) , and the MLV retroviral vector encoding GFP , pMSCV2 . 2 - IRES - method ( Tel - Test , Inc . ) . Using total RNA as a template , RT - PCR was GFP , wasprovidedbyDr . W . Sha ( UniversityofCalifornia , Berkeley ) . performed using the First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit for RT - PCR The expression vector encoding the influenza hemaglutinin protein ( RocheMolecularBiochemicals ) , followedbyPCRofresultingprod - ( HA ) was provided by Dr . W . F . Anderson ( University of Southern ucts , TA cloning , and sequencing . California ) . DNA from the MLV retroviral HeLa cDNA library ( pLIB - HeLa , 2 (cid:11) Reconstitution of Permissivity for MBG and EBO - Z Entry 10 6 independent clones ) was amplified as described by Clontech . by Expression of FR - (cid:1) The plasmid pLIB - GFP encoding GFP in the MLV backbone was Retroviral expression vectors encoding either FR - (cid:1) or GFP were used for quantitating transduction efficiency . transducedintoJurkat - EctRcellsas aboveforHeLalibrarydelivery . Equal numbers of transduced cells were inoculated ( 48 hr , 37 (cid:12) C ) Antibodies with blasti viruses with polybrene ( 5 (cid:10) g / ml ) followed by transfer into Fordetection ofwild - typeMBG virusinfection , guinea piganti - MBG medium containing blasticidin S ( ICN , 40 (cid:10) g / ml ) . During selection antisera were used ( Hevey et al . , 1997 ) . For inhibition of pseudotype for 2 – 5 weeks , cells were monitored for viability by Trypan Blue virus entry , a monoclonal mouse anti - human FR - (cid:1) ( IgG1 ) ascites exclusion and counted on a hemacytometer . Growth of cultures ( No . 458 ) , provided by Dr . W . Franklin ( University of Colorado Health challenged with VSV - blasti virus was quantitated after 3 days of SciencesCenter ) ( Franklinetal . , 1994 ) , andmonoclonal mouseanti - selection . Growth of cells challenged with MBG - blasti virus or EBO - HIV - 1 p24 Gag ( IgG1 ) ascites were compared . Similarly , polyclonal Z - blasti virus was quantitated 3 days following the initial visualiza - antisera raised against bovine folate binding protein ( FBP , Biogene - tion of viable cells in the transduced cultures . Alternatively , Jurkat - sis ) were compared with normal rabbit sera . A mouse monoclonal EctR cells were transfected with the relevant expression vectors anti - soluble bovine FR - (cid:1) ( IgG1 clone 42 / 033 , Biogenesis ) or IgG1 and challenged with luciferase viruses as described above . isotype control was used for flow cytometry of human cells . To detect simian FR - (cid:1) on Vero E6 cells more efficiently , the mouse Inhibition of Pseudotype Virus Entry by FR - (cid:1) - Specific Blockers anti - human FR - (cid:1) ( IgG1 ) was used . To detect cell surface binding of HeLa cells or reconstituted Jurkat - EctR F10 cells were treated with FBP , goat anti - bovine FBP ( Rockland ) and fluorescein - conjugated phospholipase C ( ICN ) for 2 hr at 37 (cid:12) C , washed , and challenged rabbit anti - goat IgG F ( c ) ( Rockland ) were used . with luciferase viruses for 4 hr at 37 (cid:12) C . Luciferase expression was assessed after 72 hr . F10 cells were preincubated with anti - human FR - (cid:1) ( IgG1 ) or anti - HIV p24 Gag ( IgG1 ) for 15 min at 4 (cid:12) C . Cells were Pseudotype Virus Preparation and Genetic Reconstitution of Permissivity for Filovirus Entry challengedwithluciferasevirusinthepresenceofantisera , followed byassessment ofluciferase expression . Vero E6cells werepreincu - To prepare HIV - 1 pseudotype virus packaged by viral GP , an HIV - 1 proviral construct was cotransfected with a GP expression vector bated with medium containing polyclonal anti - FBP ( with 0 . 1 % so - dium azide ) or normal rabbit sera ( with 0 . 1 % sodium azide ) for 15 in 293T cells as previously described ( Chan et al . , 2000b ) . To recon - stitute permissivity for MBG entry , library DNA ( 3 (cid:10) g / well of 6 - well min at 4 (cid:12) C , followed by virus challenge as above . HOS cells were preincubated at 4 (cid:12) C for 30 min with media ( pH 8 . 3 ) containing folic plate ) or pLIB - GFP ( 3 (cid:10) g / well ) was packaged into pseudovirions by transfectingPT67 cellsandharvestingculture supernatants . Jurkat - acid ( ICN ) added from a 220 mM stock ( 1 M NaOH ) . Cells were challenged withluciferase viruses in thepresence of folicacid . After EctR cells ( 8 . 0 (cid:11) 10 7 ) were then divided into 10 separate batches and transduced with library - containing viral supernatants with poly - 12 hr , culture medium was replaced , and luciferase expression was assessed after 48 hr . Finally , pseudotype virus produced in the brene ( 5 (cid:10) g / ml ) via spin infection ( 2 . 5 (cid:11) 10 3 RPM , 32 (cid:12) C , 2 hr ) . In a Folate Receptor - (cid:1) Mediates Filovirus Entry 125 absence of serum or folic acid was preincubated with soluble FR - (cid:1) duction of cellular detachment by envelope glycoproteins of Mar - burg and Ebola ( Zaire ) viruses . J . Gen . Virol . 81 , 2155 – 2159 . ( FBP ; Svendsen et al . , 1982 ) derived from bovine milk ( Sigma ) for 15 min at 4 (cid:12) C . HOS cells were challenged with virus supernatants Chan , S . Y . , Speck , R . F . , Ma , M . C . , and Goldsmith , M . A . ( 2000b ) . alone or with virus mixtures containing FBP for 4 hr at 37 (cid:12) C . Cells Distinct mechanisms of entry byenvelope glycoproteins of Marburg werethenwashed , mediumwasreplaced , andluciferaseexpression and Ebola ( Zaire ) viruses . J . Virol . 74 , 4933 – 4937 . was assessed after 72 hr . Connolly , B . M . , Steele , K . E . , Davis , K . J . , Geisbert , T . W . , Kell , W . M . , Jaax , N . K . , and Jahrling , P . B . ( 1999 ) . Pathogenesis of experimental Quantitation of Cell - Cell Fusion Generated by MBG GP Ebola virus infection in guinea pigs . J . Infect . Dis . 179 ( Suppl 1 ) , 293T cells were transfected with envelope GP ( MBG GP or HA ) or S203 – S217 . receptor expression vector ( CD4 or FR - (cid:1) ) as previously described Connor , R . I . , Chen , B . K . , Choe , S . , and Landau , N . R . ( 1995 ) . Vpr is ( Chan et al . , 2000b ) . After 24 hr , cells were detached using enzyme - required for efficient replication of human immunodeficiency virus free Cell Dissociation Buffer ( Life Technologies ) . The appropriately type - 1 in mononuclear phagocytes . Virology 206 , 935 – 944 . transfected cells were mixed ( 1 : 1 ratio ) , cultured on poly - L - lysine - coated ( Sigma ) 24 - well plates as previously described ( Allan , 2000 ) , da Costa , M . , Rothenberg , S . P . , Sadasivan , E . , Regec , A . , and Qian , and incubated at 37 (cid:12) C for 48 hr . To trigger syncytia ( (cid:5) 3 nuclei ) , cells L . ( 2000 ) . FolatedeficiencyreducestheGPI - anchoredfolate - binding were incubated in either 75 mM MES / 10 mM HEPES buffer ( pH 5 ) protein in rat renal tubules . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 278 , C812 – or 10 mM HEPES buffer ( pH 7 ) for 10 min at 37 (cid:12) C as previously C821 . described ( Vey et al . , 1992 ) . The buffer was then replaced with Fra , A . M . , Williamson , E . , Simons , K . , andParton , R . G . ( 1994 ) . Deter - medium . Syncytia were scored after 24 hr . gent - insoluble glycolipid microdomains in lymphocytes in the ab - sence of caveolae . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 30745 – 30748 . Binding of Cells Expressing MBG GP or EBO - Z GP with FBP Franklin , W . A . , Waintrub , M . , Edwards , D . , Christensen , K . , Prende - CHO - K1 cells were plated in chamber slides coated with poly - L - grast , P . , Woods , J . , Bunn , P . A . , andKolhouse , J . F . ( 1994 ) . Newanti - lysine and transfected with MBG GP , EBO - Z GP , or Ampho GP lung - cancer antibody cluster 12 reacts with human folate receptors expression vectors using LipofectAMINE ( Life Technologies , Inc . ) . present on adenocarcinoma . Int . J . Cancer Suppl . 8 , 89 – 95 . After 48 hr , bovine FBP ( 33 (cid:10) g / ml ) was incubated in the presence of nonneutralizing polyclonal goat anti - bovine FBP ( 250 (cid:10) g / ml ) for Geisbert , T . W . , and Jaax , N . K . ( 1998 ) . Marburg hemorrhagic fever : 15 min at 4 (cid:12) C in RPMI 1640 devoid of folic acid . Cells were then report of a case studied by immunohistochemistry and electron incubated in the presence of the FBP / anti - FBP mixture or in the microscopy . Ultrastruct . Pathol . 22 , 3 – 17 . presence of anti - FBP alone for 30 min at 4 (cid:12) C . Cells were washed Geisbert , T . W . , Hensley , L . E . , Gibb , T . R . , Steele , K . E . , Jaax , N . K . , ( 3 (cid:11) ice cold PBS ) , fixed in 2 % paraformaldehyde , washed , and and Jahrling , P . B . ( 2000 ) . Apoptosis induced in vitro and in vivo incubated with fluorescein - conjugated secondary antibody ( 4 (cid:10) g / during infection by Ebola and Marburg viruses . Lab . Invest . 80 , ml ) for 45 min at 25 (cid:12) C in the dark . Slides were washed , mounted , 171 – 186 . and analyzed by fluorescence microscopy . Hevey , M . , Negley , D . , Geisbert , J . , Jahrling , P . , and Schmaljohn , A . ( 1997 ) . AntigenicityandvaccinepotentialofMarburgvirusglycopro - Acknowledgments teinexpressedbybaculovirusrecombinants . Virology 239 , 206 – 216 . Johnson , E . , Jaax , N . , White , J . , andJahrling , P . ( 1995 ) . Lethalexperi - WethankW . F . Anderson , J . Burns , R . Finnell , W . Franklin , N . Landau , mental infections of rhesus monkeys by aerosolized Ebola virus . Int . D . Littman , G . Nolan , K . Page , A . Sanchez , W . Sha , and R . Sutton J . Exp . Pathol . 76 , 227 – 236 . for reagents , J . Carroll for figure preparations , and H . Gravois for administrative assistance . We apologize in advance for omitting Kamen , B . A . , Wang , M . T . , Streckfuss , A . J . , Peryea , X . , and Ander - references for reagents due to space limitations . We also thank D . son , R . G . ( 1988 ) . Delivery of folates to the cytoplasm of MA104 cells Negley for performing infections with wild - type MBG virus and S . K . is mediated by a surface membrane receptor that recycles . J . Biol . Chan , N . Abraham , S . Gaffen , A . Lin , M . Ma , O . Keppler , andJ . Snow Chem . 263 , 13602 – 13609 . for scientific advice . Lee , R . J . , Wang , S . , and Low , P . S . ( 1996 ) . Measurement of endo - This work was supported by the J . David Gladstone Institutes some pH following folate receptor - mediated endocytosis . Biochim . ( M . A . G . ) . S . Y . C . was supported by the NIH MSTP at UCSF and the Biophys . Acta 1312 , 237 – 242 . UCSF BMS Program . Mayor , S . , Rothberg , K . G . , and Maxfield , F . R . ( 1994 ) . Sequestration of GPI - anchored proteins in caveolae triggered by cross - linking . Received January 18 , 2001 ; revised May 30 , 2001 . Science 264 , 1948 – 1951 . References Maziarz , K . M . , Monaco , H . L . , Shen , F . , andRatnam , M . ( 1999 ) . Com - plete mapping of divergent amino acids responsible for differential Allan , V . J . ( 2000 ) . BasicImmunofluorescence . InProteinLocalization ligand binding of folate receptors alpha and beta . J . Biol . Chem . by Fluorescence Microscopy : A Practical Approach , V . J . Allan , ed . 274 , 11086 – 11091 . ( Oxford : Oxford University Press ) , pp . 1 – 26 . Peters , C . J . , Sanchez , A . , Rollin , P . E . , Ksiazek , T . G . , and Murphy , Anderson , R . G . , Kamen , B . A . , Rothberg , K . G . , and Lacey , S . W . F . A . ( 1996 ) . Filoviridae : Marburg and Ebola Viruses . In Fields Virol - ( 1992 ) . Potocytosis : sequestration and transport of small molecules ogy , B . N . Fields , D . M . Knipe , P . M . Howley , R . M . Chanock , J . L . Mel - by caveolae . Science 255 , 410 – 411 . nick , T . P . Monath , B . Roizman , and S . E . Straus , eds . ( Philadelphia : Lippincott - Raven ) , pp . 1161 – 1176 . Antony , A . C . ( 1996 ) . Folate receptors . Annu . Rev . Nutr . 16 , 501 – 521 . Baskerville , A . , Fisher - Hoch , S . P . , Neild , G . H . , and Dowsett , A . B . Rijnboutt , S . , Jansen , G . , Posthuma , G . , Hynes , J . B . , Schornagel , ( 1985 ) . Ultrastructural pathology of experimental Ebola haemo - J . H . , and Strous , G . J . ( 1996 ) . Endocytosis of GPI - linked membrane rrhagic fever virus infection . J . Pathol . 147 , 199 – 209 . folate receptor - alpha . J . Cell Biol . 132 , 35 – 47 . Becker , S . , Spiess , M . , and Klenk , H . D . ( 1995 ) . The asialoglycopro - Ross , J . F . , Chaudhuri , P . K . , andRatnam , M . ( 1994 ) . Differentialregu - tein receptor is a potential liver - specific receptor for Marburg virus . lation of folate receptor isoforms in normal and malignant tissues J . Gen . Virol . 76 , 393 – 399 . in vivo and in established cell lines . Physiologic and clinical implica - tions . Cancer 73 , 2432 – 2443 . Berger , E . A . , Murphy , P . M . , and Farber , J . M . ( 1999 ) . Chemokine receptors as HIV - 1 coreceptors : roles in viral entry , tropism , and Ross , J . F . , Wang , H . , Behm , F . G . , Mathew , P . , Wu , M . , Booth , R . , disease . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 17 , 657 – 700 . and Ratnam , M . ( 1999 ) . Folate receptor type beta is a neutrophilic lineage marker and is differentially expressed in myeloid leukemia . Bray , M . , Davis , K . , Geisbert , T . , Schmaljohn , C . , and Huggins , J . Cancer 85 , 348 – 357 . ( 1999 ) . A mouse model for evaluation of prophylaxis and therapy of Ebola hemorrhagic fever . J . Infect . Dis . 179 , S248 – S258 . Sanchez , A . , Trappier , S . G . , Mahy , B . W . , Peters , C . J . , and Nichol , S . T . ( 1996 ) . The virion glycoproteins of Ebola viruses are encoded Chan , S . Y . , Ma , M . C . , and Goldsmith , M . A . ( 2000a ) . Differential in - Cell126 in two reading frames and are expressed through transcriptional editing . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 3602 – 3607 . Schmaljohn , A . L . , Li , D . , Negley , D . L . , Bressler , D . S . , Turell , M . J . , Korch , G . W . , Ascher , M . S . , and Schmaljohn , C . S . ( 1995 ) . Isolation andinitialcharacterizationofanewfoundhantavirusfromCalifornia . Virology 206 , 963 – 972 . Svendsen , I . , Hansen , S . I . , Holm , J . , and Lyngbye , J . ( 1982 ) . Amino - acidsequencehomologybetweenhumanandbovinelowmolecularweightfolatebindingproteinisolatedfrommilk . Carlsberg Res . Commun . 47 , 371 – 376 . Takada , A . , Robison , C . , Goto , H . , Sanchez , A . , Murti , K . G . , Whitt , M . A . , and Kawaoka , Y . ( 1997 ) . A system for functional analysis of Ebola virus glycoprotein . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 14764 – 14769 . Vey , M . , Orlich , M . , Adler , S . , Klenk , H . D . , Rott , R . , and Garten , W . ( 1992 ) . Hemagglutinin activation of pathogenic avian influenza viruses of serotype H7 requires the protease recognition motif R - X - K / R - R . Virology 188 , 408 – 413 . Villanueva , J . , Ling , E . H . , Chandler , C . J . , and Halsted , C . H . ( 1998 ) . Membrane and tissue distribution of folate binding protein in pig . Am . J . Physiol . 275 , R1503 – R1510 . Volchkov , V . E . , Becker , S . , Volchkova , V . A . , Ternovoj , V . A . , Kotov , A . N . , Netesov , S . V . , and Klenk , H . D . ( 1995 ) . GP mRNA of Ebola virus is edited by the Ebola virus polymerase and by T7 and vaccinia virus polymerases . Virology 214 , 421 – 430 . Volchkov , V . E . , Feldmann , H . , Volchkova , V . A . , and Klenk , H . D . ( 1998 ) . Processing of the Ebola virus glycoprotein by the proprotein convertase furin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 5762 – 5767 . Volchkov , V . E . , Volchkova , V . A . , Stroher , U . , Becker , S . , Dolnik , O . , Cieplik , M . , Garten , W . , Klenk , H . D . , andFeldmann , H . ( 2000 ) . Proteo - lytic processing of Marburg virus glycoprotein . Virology 268 , 1 – 6 . Weitman , S . D . , Lark , R . H . , Coney , L . R . , Fort , D . W . , Frasca , V . , Zuraw - ski , V . R . , andKamen , B . A . ( 1992a ) . Distributionofthefolatereceptor GP38 in normal and malignant cell lines and tissues . Cancer Res . 52 , 3396 – 3401 . Weitman , S . D . , Weinberg , A . G . , Coney , L . R . , Zurawski , V . R . , Jen - nings , D . S . , and Kamen , B . A . ( 1992b ) . Cellular localization of the folate receptor : potential role in drug toxicity and folate homeosta - sis . Cancer Res . 52 , 6708 – 6711 . Wool - Lewis , R . J . , and Bates , P . ( 1998 ) . Characterization of Ebola virus entry by using pseudotyped viruses : identification of receptor - deficient cell lines . J . Virol . 72 , 3155 – 3160 . Yang , Z . , Delgado , R . , Xu , L . , Todd , R . F . , Nabel , E . G . , Sanchez , A . , and Nabel , G . J . ( 1998 ) . Distinct cellular interactions of secreted and transmembraneEbola virusglycoproteins . Science 279 , 1034 – 1037 . Yang , Z . , Duckers , H . J . , Sullivan , N . J . , Sanchez , A . , Nabel , E . G . , and Nabel , G . J . ( 2000 ) . Identification of the ebola virus glycoprotein as the main viral determinant of vascular cell cytotoxicity and injury . Nat . Med . 6 , 886 – 889 . Zaki , S . R . , and Goldsmith , C . S . ( 1999 ) . Pathologic features of filovi - rus infections in humans . Curr . Top . Microbiol . Immunol . 235 , 97 – 116 .