Intersectional HCI : Engaging Identity through Gender , Race , and Class Ari Schlesinger , W . Keith Edwards , Rebecca E . Grinter School of Interactive Computing and GVU Center Atlanta , GA USA a . schlesinger @ gatech . edu , keith @ cc . gatech . edu , beki @ cc . gatech . edu ABSTRACT Understanding users becomes increasingly complicated when we grapple with various overlapping attributes of an individual’s identity . In this paper we introduce intersectionality as a framework for engaging with the complexity of users’—and authors’—identities , and situating these identities in relation to their contextual surroundings . We conducted a meta - review of identity representation in the CHI proceedings , collecting a corpus of 140 manuscripts on gender , ethnicity , race , class , and sexuality published between 1982 - 2016 . Drawing on this corpus , we analyze how identity is constructed and represented in CHI research to examine intersectionality in a human - computer interaction ( HCI ) context . We find that previous identity - focused research tends to analyze one facet of identity at a time . Further , research on ethnicity and race lags behind research on gender and socio - economic class . We conclude this paper with recommendations for incorporating intersectionality in HCI research broadly , encouraging clear reporting of context and demographic information , inclusion of author disclosures , and deeper engagement with identity complexities . Author Keywords Intersectional HCI ; gender ; ethnicity ; race ; class , socio - economic status ; intersectionality ; identity ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information Interfaces and Presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous INTRODUCTION “A pervasive , fundamental and highly visible feature of HCI discourse has been its representation of the user…” – Cooper & Bowers [ 21 ] Studies of people and the technology they use have expanded dramatically in the last decade of HCI research . HCI’s third wave ( or paradigm ) [ 14 , 51 ] and HCI4D [ 29 ] contribute to an increasingly complicated representation of the user . As a term , the user now represents an expanding , diverse set of people . A number of publications that are critical of the ( mis ) use of this term have called upon the HCI community to update our language and practices . For instance , Dourish and Mainwaring argue that the term user should be abandoned because it essentializes people [ 34 ] . Taylor cautions practitioners against only researching “out there” in the quest to expand HCI’s reach [ 92 ] . But questioning how HCI represents the user is not exclusive to HCI’s third wave . In their seminal 1995 essay , Cooper and Bowers examine how representations of the user motivated the development of second wave HCI [ 21 ] . They track how the user acts primarily as a “rhetorical cipher , ” motivating research directions for the field instead of depicting distinct individuals with complex feelings , motivations , and identities . Nevertheless , representing the user as a nuanced individual , rather than as a “rhetorical cipher” or an essentialized stock character , can help us make visible the ways identity intersects with technology . In this paper , we ask who the user is by investigating how the identity of the user is represented . To answer this question , we surveyed a corpus of manuscripts published in CHI , the leading HCI conference , using intersectionality to guide our analysis . Like previous call to action papers , such as “Does Technology Have Race” [ 50 ] , and “Feminist HCI” [ 11 ] , we use a specific framework to analyze the impact of identity . We chose intersectionality , a framework that focuses on how various dimensions of identity ( e . g . , gender , race , and class ) coalesce inseparably and relate to the conditions of one’s surroundings , because it supports efforts to situate the relationship between technology and social systems . In situating these relationships , we believe this work can help HCI’s broader agenda to do the right thing , within and outside third wave research . Our goal is to provide HCI researchers with empirical insight into current identity representation practices in CHI as well as to develop principled insights and recommendations for advancing the representation of identity in HCI . INTERSECTIONALITY Intersectionality was first introduced in 1989 by Kimberlé Crenshaw in research highlighting the ramifications of treating gender and race as discrete categories in anti - discrimination legislation—the consequence being that Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CHI 2017 , May 06 - 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4655 - 9 / 17 / 05… $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025766 black women’s experiences were erased [ 22 ] . Since then , intersectionality has been applied in various fields , often to highlight how oppression and discrimination impact people differentially based on the intersections of gender , race , and class . It has also been used in fields related to HCI such as Management and Information Systems [ 62 , 91 , 95 ] and Information and Communication Technologies for Development ( ICTD ) [ 53 ] . In “The Complexity of Intersectionality , ” Leslie McCall describes three methodological approaches to intersectional research : anticategorical complexity , intercategorical complexity , and intracategorical complexity [ 66 ] . Anticategorical methods use discourse analysis to deconstruct analytical categories ; this application draws attention to how identity categories are flawed , incomplete , and unable to capture the complexity of the things a category describes . An example of anticategorical research in HCI is Dourish and Mainwaring’s call to abandon the word user because of the essentializing simplifications that occur when categorizing individuals with this term [ 34 ] . Intercategorical methods use identity categories “provisionally” to document and compare relationships between social groups along multiple identity category dimensions . An example of work that adopts this approach is McCall’s statistical analysis of income inequality within - groups in various U . S . labor markets focusing on gender , race , and class intersections ( e . g . , in 1989 income inequality in Miami was higher between women of different classes and lower between genders , while in St . Louis income inequality was lower between women of different classes but higher between genders [ 66 ] ) . Within HCI - related research , Ames et al . ' s work on social class and technology practices shares qualities with the intercategorical approach—provisionally and carefully constructing categories while acknowledging identity differences within them—because it enables them to characterize social groups quantitatively as well as qualitatively [ 4 ] . Intracategorical methods often identify a single set of identity categories , like indigenous women , and then analyze other dimensions of identity within the target community to demonstrate heterogeneity within the group . This method falls between the other two as it focuses on an identity category for multiplicative categorical analysis while deconstructing a priori assumptions and understandings of that category . In their work with homeless young people in Seattle , published at CHI , Woelfer & Hendry write portraits of their participants , dedicating around 500 words each to detailing differences in participants’ lives [ 99 ] . The authors explain their use of this reporting mechanism as follows : “We did this to emphasize the individual as a whole , and to work with a reporting style that allowed us to bring forward something of the ambiguity , nuance , and tensions that arise through the use of social network sites by this population of users . ” Irrespective of methodology employed , the central goal of intersectionality is to better capture complex identities and relate them to their surrounding context . We believe that intersectionality has wide ranging applications in HCI , like strengthening reporting on the relationship between people , technology , and their surrounding context . METHODOLOGY To understand how user identity is represented in the field , we used a survey approach for evaluating HCI literature . For scope , we narrowed our data to CHI publications exclusively . We surveyed the CHI proceedings between 1982—the CHI conference’s first year—and 2016 to empirically evaluate the way identity is represented , discussed , and researched within this community . Methodologically , this process involved developing a set of keywords to search for papers , gathering the manuscripts captured by those terms from the ACM Digital Library , pruning the corpus of manuscripts to remove non - paper artifacts ( like posters , keynotes , and workshops ) , and then analyzing final manuscripts across a rubric of qualitative and quantitative questions . Our methods were informed by prior meta - reviews of the HCI community [ 19 , 29 , 33 , 56 ] . In total , we analyzed a final corpus of 140 CHI manuscripts retrieved using a set of more than 50 keywords related to identity categories . This approach allowed us to generate descriptive statistics about how identity is portrayed in CHI and qualitative insights into identity representation . Developing the Identity Keyword Set We began constructing a set of identity keyword search terms by using common foci of intersectional analysis , namely , the umbrella categories of gender , race , and class . Our next step was to produce specific terms within each umbrella group . To generate these terms , we consulted the U . S . census categories [ 107 , 109 ] , looked at the demographics reported in prior HCI research , reviewed literature in gender and ethnic studies , and referred to intersectional research . Additionally , we wanted to ensure coverage of various gender identities , moving beyond the binary and cisgender understanding of man or woman . We assured inclusion of transgender and gender fluid identities by incorporating LGBTQIA and similar terms . The final keyword list included terms that describe gender , ethnicity , race , sexuality , or class such as transgender , boys , women , black , white , Native American , Asian , homeless , middle class , poverty . Lexical variations of gendered ethnicity categorizations ( e . g . , Chicano , Chicana , Chican @ , Chicanx , etc . ) were included and counted under one gender grouping ( e . g . , Chicanx ) . 1 After the initial list was constructed , the research team communicated regularly to discuss the set of keywords , uncover gaps , and pursue saturation of terms within the 1 We are happy to make our keywords available on request . broad category clusters . The keyword set was updated as needed throughout the data collection and analysis process . Collecting and Culling Manuscripts We searched the CHI proceedings database in the ACM Digital Library using our keyword set . Manuscripts were gathered based on keyword search matches . The CHI proceedings had 13 , 972 publications at the start of our search and 13 , 999 by the end [ 108 ] . Keywords with confounding factors like black and race required additional review to ensure that off - topic content like black boxing , or race conditions was not included in the corpus . We limited the final corpus to papers , notes , and alt . chi publications . All other manuscripts ( e . g . , poster sessions , student events , plenary sessions , etc . ) were removed . Manuscripts within the CHI collection on the Digital Library that were associated with affiliate conferences , like CHI PLAY , were also removed from the corpus . 140 manuscripts remained in the final corpus , representing scholarship published between 1983 and 2016 . See Table 1 for a breakdown of changes in corpus size after cleaning the data . Sets of Publications Number of Publications Percent of All CHI Publications Initial Identity Set 309 2 . 21 % Final Identity Set 140 1 . 00 % All CHI Publications 13 , 999 100 . 00 % Table 1 . Overview of corpus relative to all Digital Library CHI publications published between 1981 - 2016 ( as of 2016 ) . Analysis of the Corpus After gathering our corpus , we developed a rubric for analyzing the manuscripts . This rubric included criteria grounded in prior work on the representation of users [ 21 ] , and intersectionality [ 23 , 28 , 66 ] , and contained qualitative and quantitative criteria . Qualitative criteria include : 1 ) Who is the subject / user ? 2 ) How and why are the subjects / users represented ? 3 ) How is difference ( intersectionality ) included or excluded—implicitly or explicitly ? 4 ) How do authors represent their own identity ? 5 ) What are the manuscript’s identity - related goals ? Additionally , we tracked a number of procedural elements such as the location of a study , the type of study , and the institutions of the authors . Additional rubric areas included notes for capturing analytical information gathered from close readings—a critical discourse analysis strategy [ 36 ] , not unlike the strategy described by Kannabiran et al . [ 56 ] —of each manuscript , and thematic observations for incremental analysis of corpus - wide trends . After the completion of qualitative analysis , we met and discussed three areas for quantitative analysis . For each of the three areas ( A , B , and C , described next ) , we marked each manuscript 1 for inclusion and 0 for exclusion . Area A focused on demographic and contextual data that the publications explicitly reported . We looked for reporting of nation / nationality information , regional description , gender , ethnicity / race , socio - economic class markers ( homeless , low - income , low - SES , etc . ) , and age . Area B tracked explicit identity - related analysis . We called this classification focus . A paper was classified as focusing on a topic within an umbrella identity category if it explicitly provided analysis on a topic within that category . For focus classification , we coded three distinct areas : 1 ) gender focus , 2 ) ethnicity / race focus , and 3 ) socio - economic class focus . We describe focus for each umbrella identity category in the findings section of this paper . We note that not all publications that match a keyword search in the Digital Library focus on the relevant umbrella category . For example , “Of Moles and Men : The Design of Foot Controls for Workstations” focuses on foot control designs and not on the gender representation one might infer from the title [ 73 ] . This did not happen frequently . Our third area , C , tracked whether a manuscript did one or more of the following : 1 ) discussed identity in related work , 2 ) called on identity - differences to be the focus of future work , or 3 ) gave a reason for using identity - difference for analysis . We called this acknowledgement . In the remainder of this paper , we refer to the manuscripts collected through keyword search matching as a priori . We refer to publications that we manually coded in areas A , B , and C as a posteriori . We use these phrases to clarify the difference between a priori keyword matching a posteriori manual coding . Limitations Conducting research on previous CHI publications focused on identity and intersectionality incurs a number of methodological limitations . One such limitation is our ability to speak to implicitly intersectional publications . Intersectionality can be infused into research through an abundance of potentially subtle actions . While we elaborate on implicitly intersectional work in the sections Intersectional HCI and Intersectional Analysis within the Corpus , the methodology employed in this work may not capture all implicitly intersectional work in the corpus . Particularly , this research misses work focused on intersectionality and identity outside of our main categories ( e . g . , disability - or age - related keywords , a good fit for intersectional analysis , were beyond this paper’s scope ) . Another limitation is the keyword set used to construct the corpus . Our dataset is limited by a focus on U . S . - centric identity - keywords . Focusing on the U . S . census and keywords reported in previous literature exacerbated a pre - existing focus on the United States in this field . This problem appeared in our dataset , and we speak to mitigating implicit U . S . - centrism in the recommendations section . This limitation is further compounded by the complex relationship between ethnicity , race , and nationality—an entanglement beyond the scope of this work . Moreover , it is not feasible to create a keyword list that covers all possible identity category descriptors . Yet , through iteration , we constructed a thorough keyword list that provided breadth and depth for this research . We believe this list provides a representative sample of relevant CHI publications . For instance , the keyword Hispanic only produced two initial matches in the CHI proceedings database , and zero publications in the final corpus . This is despite the fact that between 2000 and 2007 , Hispanic individuals accounted for the largest growing population in the U . S . [ 58 ] . These gaps encourage us to believe that our sample is representative of the umbrella identity categories . Lastly , the use of the ACM Digital Library presents some additional limitations . There were a number of key motivations for using this search engine , including the capacity to search CHI publications directly , the exportation of keyword search results , and the precedence of using this tool in prior meta - reviews [ e . g . , 34 ] . However , this engine is not without its faults . In particular , there was some uncertainty regarding text matching within the body of a manuscript . While searches always match title , abstract , and author keywords , the extent to which search terms match other paper fields varies . For instance , [ 26 ] matched to keywords in the class umbrella category , but did not match keywords in the gender umbrella category , despite the use of the word women in the paper’s text . Our analysis mitigates this limitation by manually coding category focus for each paper in the corpus . Additionally , we interpret identity keyword matches in the title , abstract , or author keywords as a signal for the significance of the search term in that paper . Thus , these papers are explicitly indicating the importance of an identity category to the paper itself . FINDINGS In the following section , we describe how the umbrella categories of gender , race , and class are represented in the CHI Proceedings . For each umbrella category , we describe how user identity is represented in the corpus using an a posteriori , qualitative analysis . Next , we discuss overall attributes of the corpus through an intersectional lens , followed by data on context disclosure and author disclosure within the corpus . Finally , we discuss gaps within the Digital Library relative to the identity keyword set we developed . In each section we provide exemplar references that represent a sampling of related papers from the final corpus , rather than an exhaustive list . Mapping out the Corpus : Gender , Race , and Class Publications in our corpus were not evenly distributed across time or a priori and a posteriori classifications . Historically , publications skewed heavily towards the 2000s—two publications during the 1980s ( 83 - 86 ) , two during the 1990s ( 94 - 97 ) , 33 during the 2000s ( 02 - 09 ) , and 93 during 2010 - 2016 . Table 2 summarizes descriptive statistics of umbrella category distribution . Additionally , Umbrella Categories Keyword , a priori Focus , a posteriori Gender 62 . 86 % 70 . 00 % Race 12 . 86 % 12 . 14 % Class 22 . 86 % 30 . 00 % Table 2 . Percent of publications out of all corpus manuscripts that match to umbrella identity categories . 2 Table 3 outlines example content from the corpus across a number of a priori keywords to contextualize our findings . Gender More than half of the corpus matched to an a priori keyword in the gender umbrella category . Further analysis showed that an even larger number of manuscripts included an a posteriori focus on gender . Analytical focus on gender in a paper manifested in one or more of the following ways : 1 ) differentiating subjects for statistical analysis based on gender [ 57 , 67 , 105 ] , 2 ) restricting the population of study to subjects of one or more specific gender groups [ 20 , 32 , 54 ] , or 3 ) focus on HCI interventions or innovations around a gendered issue ( e . g . , pregnancy , gender identity and expression transitions , stereotype bias , etc . ) [ 2 , 3 , 9 ] . Gender focus manuscripts cover the wide - array of interests and methods represented across the CHI community . These papers use qualitative , quantitative , and mixed methods for data collection and analysis . Publications encompass using cultural probes [ 20 ] , developing a statistical test for analyzing agreement between groups [ 97 ] and harnessing gender - identity and social media for information propagation [ 106 ] . There are more than 10 experimental studies in the corpus that compared participants based on a binary male / female gender difference . Papers outside the a priori umbrella category that focus on gender a posteriori compare groups statistically by gender [ 67 , 80 ] , detail gender’s relationship to knowledge and social roles [ 8 , 45 ] , talk about gender as it relates to sexual expression and experience [ 10 , 43 ] , or discuss gender as it relates to sexual harassment and violence [ 1 , 5 , 84 ] . Additionally , a handful of manuscripts in the a priori and a posteriori umbrella category were influenced by Feminist HCI [ 11 ] . These manuscripts were particularly concerned with social justice through research in gender - focused areas using Bardzell’s framework : for instance , representing gendered labor on Wikipedia [ 69 ] , understanding feminist crowd - science [ 81 ] , and documenting web - design completed primarily by women [ 39 ] . There was one manuscript working with Feminist HCI that did not focus 2 Keywords are not mutually exclusive and included LGBTQIA terms for saturation ( not shown in table ) . See Limitations for more information regarding differences between keyword matches and focus . on gender [ 50 ] . This is noteworthy because , although Feminist HCI often focuses on gender , the application of this framework is not predicated on gender focus . Rather Feminist HCI involves methods and ethics centered around equity - oriented values and qualities [ 11 ] . Race Manuscripts about race and ethnicity accounted for a small number of publications in the corpus . Further , the number of papers that matched race keywords a priori was nearly the same number of papers that were coded for focus on race a posteriori . Focus on race was comprised of one or more of the following : 1 ) selecting participants from specific sets of racial or ethnic groups [ 15 , 75 , 104 ] , 2 ) developing or evaluating HCI interventions aimed at helping individuals from a particular racial or ethnic group [ 46 , 76 , 89 ] , or 3 ) detailing the ways race or ethnicity impact technology use , appropriation , or creation [ 8 , 50 , 102 ] . This set of papers was the smallest within the corpus . Thematic clusters in this umbrella category were very closely linked to a priori search keywords . Most of the race publications were diligent in handling identity , providing detailed information about the identity - related terminology in their research . Many of the ethnicity / race keywords did not return results ; we will discuss this in further detail in the section on demographic inclusion and omission . Class Nearly a quarter of the manuscripts in the corpus matched to a keyword in the class umbrella category a priori , with an even larger number of publications including a focus on class a posteriori . Focus on class included one or more of the following : 1 ) recruiting participants from distinct socio - economic classes [ 60 , 65 , 79 ] , 2 ) investigating HCI interventions for communities of a specific socio - economic class [ 76 , 86 , 100 ] , 3 ) reporting the ways certain class groups operate differentially from one another [ 25 , 64 , 90 ] . Within the final corpus , class is frequently described using the language Socio - Economic Status or SES . These papers included work with homeless populations ( matched a priori ) and ICTD research . Authors across the homeless keyword cluster engage in participatory activities Sample Keywords Umbrella Category Sample Content # of Papers Additional Examples women gender Developed and implemented a mobile - phone broadcasting system for sex workers in urban India [ 82 ] . 37 [ 18 , 41 , 63 ] transgender gender Reported results from an online survey investigating how trans individuals manage sharing or obscuring information on Facebook during gender - identity / expression transitions [ 48 ] . 3 [ 13 , 47 ] men gender Analyzed support seeking practices of sexual assault survivors / victims on Reddit ; findings reveal men are more likely to use a throwaway account when seeking this support [ 6 ] . 22 [ 24 , 32 , 49 ] ethnicity race Inspected open - text profile information of U . S . based users on Scratch , a DIY programming language / community , to understand how users represent and discuss self - disclosed ethnicity / race information [ 78 ] . 6 [ 40 , 45 , 75 ] indigenous race Explored reciprocity and decolonized methodologies for working with indigenous communities , specifically in remote Australia , in an HCI context [ 15 ] . 3 [ 8 , 87 ] African American race Reported on development and impacts of a culturally - targeted , job training initiative that encouraged young , low - SES African American men to increase technical skills [ 32 ] . 3 [ 76 , 102 ] poverty class Proposed a fast , low - cost statistical method for measuring socio - economic status across a country with high - granularity by leveraging existing data [ 88 ] . 8 [ 16 , 67 , 90 ] homeless class Provided insights on the relationship homeless individuals in a southern U . S . city have to technology , challenging common assumptions about homelessness and technology use [ 25 ] . 12 [ 80 , 84 , 98 ] socio - economics class Investigated mechanisms for building social capital in an economically struggling community and suggested ICT design opportunities for helping economically distressed communities [ 30 ] . 11 [ 31 , 64 , 96 ] Table 3 . Sample descriptions of publications included in the final corpus . Number of papers refers to a priori keyword matches . to better understand what designs would most help their participant population [ 26 , 60 , 90 , 100 ] . ICTD publications concentrated both on reporting technology use [ 30 , 38 ] and developing HCI interventions [ 42 , 68 , 86 ] in specific , low - SES contexts . These HCI interventions typically centered around addressing technology needs of people in rural , low - resource , majority - world areas . ICTD studies comprised most of the papers that focus on class a posteriori outside of the a priori umbrella category [ 15 , 74 , 82 ] . Like race , there were a number of a priori keywords with no matches— lower class , middle class , and working class . Intersectional Analysis within the Corpus Within the corpus , only a few manuscripts investigated more than one umbrella identity category . Of 140 , only 24 papers included focus on more than one of the gender , race , and class umbrella categories , see Table 4 . Of these , only three included focus on all three categories [ 32 , 85 , 99 ] . By the nature of this study , this metric only captures work that explicitly provides intersectional analysis . However , within these publications , there are clear oversights in research focus areas . Using the number of papers coded for focus , there are more than five times as many papers that concentrate on gender than there are papers that concentrate on race . Likewise , there are more than two times as many papers that concentrate on gender than there are papers that concentrate on class . We explore opportunities for future work in Intersectional HCI in the discussion . Identity Focus Intersections Number of Papers Percent of Total Examples Gender & Race 5 3 . 57 % [ 8 , 17 , 55 ] Gender & Class 11 7 . 86 % [ 61 , 82 , 86 ] Race & Class 5 3 . 57 % [ 75 , 87 , 102 ] Gender , Race , & Class 3 2 . 14 % [ 32 , 85 , 99 ] Table 4 . CHI papers in our 140 paper corpus with intersectional foci . Context Disclosure Manuscripts were not consistent in providing contextual information about the environment and participants involved in a study ( see Table 5 ) . Further , this absence of disclosure took place within a corpus of papers carried out in a global context . One marker of contextual variety is the number of countries that the authors come from , which may not reflect all the countries studies occurred in . Despite the range of author institute locations , barely half of corpus manuscripts reported nation or nationality information and less than half reported regional information about the users . In spite of an implicit , normal context , there were many instances where we had difficulty making contextual inferences about a study location . For example , one study had us guessing whether research took place in Germany or Florida , until learning on page four that the authors used a German translation of a questionnaire [ 83 ] . Context Category Category Disclosed Nation / Nationality 50 . 71 % Region 47 . 86 % Gender 85 . 00 % Ethnicity / Race 21 . 43 % Socio - Economic Class 33 . 57 % Age 64 . 29 % Table 5 . Percent of all corpus papers that explicitly report context and demographic information . While participant demographic information was reported more frequently , the type of information provided varied greatly . Of all demographic categories tracked , gender was the most consistently reported , followed by age . In contrast , race and class were reported much less consistently . Of the six context categories discussed in Table 5 , the average manuscript reported on three of these categories . Author Self - Disclosure When examining the ways research participants are constructed , it is also important to reflexively consider how authors represent themselves . While CHI authors commonly refer to themselves throughout a publication as we , it is not always clear what information is to be understood from this pronoun . One mechanism authors use to address this is to disclose additional information about themselves . Author self - disclosures appeared in a variety of implicit and explicit forms in the corpus . Outside of methodological disclosures , additional author information ranged from revealing identity - category information [ 49 , 75 ] to declaring how their identities might impact their interpretation of data [ 39 ] . Though explicit self - disclosures were infrequent , we focus on reporting these instances as they illustrate transparent choices about what the reader should know as it relates to the publication . We note that there are barriers that prevent or discourage reflexivity , which we attend to in the recommendations section . Explicit author self - disclosures were often embedded in the methodology section [ 8 , 49 , 59 ] or in marked sub - sections . These subsections had a variety of titles , like “Self Disclosure” [ 39 ] , “Researcher Stance” [ 100 , 103 ] , “Research Values” [ 82 ] , and “Ethical Considerations” [ 6 ] . Additionally , there were a number of papers [ 2 , 11 , 39 , 75 ] with statements on the importance of self - disclosures . The substance of the disclosers varied greatly . They were about previous relationships with participants [ 17 , 40 , 100 , 103 ] , building relationships with participants [ 20 , 71 ] , values statements [ 6 , 82 ] , or author - subject power dynamics [ 8 , 25 ] . Demographic Inclusion and Omission Some keywords did not return any results , within the entire CHI proceedings or our final corpus of 140 manuscripts . Terms with no matches within the entire CHI proceedings include genderqueer , gender fluid , LGBTQIA , sexual identity , queer , Asian American , Chicanx and Latinx ( for all lexical variations ) , First Nations , Alaskan Native , Pacific Islander , and lower class . There were other keywords that returned matches initially , but those manuscripts did not make the final corpus ( e . g . , they were posters , works - in - progress , and so forth ) . Additional terms with no matches in the final corpus include Middle Eastern , Native American , American Indian , Hispanic , working class , and middle class . Race had the largest number of keywords that ultimately produced no results in the final corpus . DISCUSSION Previously , we described how users’ identities are handled in CHI research ; in this section we discuss shortcomings and opportunities . Specifically , we take a deeper look into the implications of our findings ; highlighting the weaknesses of category - dependent research ; and setting a foundation for intersectional practices by investigating the current , segmented state of identity representation in CHI . We begin by providing information about the research team , to set context for our analysis and discussion . Researcher Self - Disclosure Our research team is comprised of three white , cisgendered , middle - upper class individuals with national backgrounds from multiple Western countries . Two of us have completed LGBTQIA safe space training . We all advocate for equity and justice , and are committed to the study and practice of social change . Talking about gender , ethnicity , race , and class is difficult . When discussing these topics , it is vital to amplify the voices of people with identities different than our own . This is something we take very seriously and is reflected in our analysis and representation of this data . We acknowledge that by using an intersectional framework , we build on the scholarship and labor of women of color from a variety socio - economic backgrounds ; and we are indebted to them . We believe everyone , especially those with structural privilege , must work towards creating a more equitable world . Focus , Acknowledgement , and Gender In our close reading , we found papers that included focus on a particular umbrella category without including acknowledgement for that same category ( see Table 6 ) . Although we observed this across all umbrella categories , it was especially noticeable in the gender category where papers either 1 ) included participants of a singular gender identity but didn’t explain why only that group was included , or 2 ) reported descriptive statistics across distinct gender groups without explaining the underlying reason for stratifying participants across gender . Papers in the first group often focused on women exclusively , whether they were homeless mothers [ 27 ] or hospitalized women with severe mental illnesses [ 94 ] . We note that although these papers may have been enriched by explicit statements to motivate research into single gender - identity communities , work like this is important for diversifying the individuals we study—especially when addressing the needs of underserved communities . In contrast , there are potential negative consequences that come from not providing clear motivation in the second group . In this group , it was common for otherwise well motivated studies to report significance between the ways men and women used a computational artifact without a reason for the gendered analysis . Previous work finds that the culture of “publish or perish” in the U . S . has increased the pressure to report statistically significant results [ 37 ] . We worry that reporting statistically significant results based on gender differences alone is pursuing easily attainable results at the expense of a more reasoned analysis . When using identity categories for quantitative analysis , we must ask what our motivations and reasons are for stratifying our participants in particular ways . Why gender , rather than race , class , or a combination of the three ? Incorporating intersectionality in statistical analysis by investigating more identity variables at a time may mean it is more difficult to get significant results . However , this also means we are developing fine - grain , well - reasoned statistical inferences about our surrounding contexts . While statistically significant results will be harder to come by , we should embrace this challenge as it allows us to interpret the world in more nuanced and accurate ways . Researchers in Psychology are having similar conversations regarding the over - reliance on undergraduate subject pools and their lack of diversity [ 52 ] . Umbrella Categories Percent of Focus with Acknowledgement Examples Gender 79 . 59 % | 78 / 98 [ 13 , 57 , 72 ] Race 88 . 24 % | 15 / 17 [ 15 , 46 , 78 ] Class 97 . 62 % | 41 / 42 [ 60 , 64 , 93 ] Table 6 . Percentage of papers that motivate their identity - category based analysis through acknowledgement . Although most papers coded for focus but not acknowledgement were about gender , we also found examples within race and class . Most of these papers failed to justify why the research was restricted to a specific identity - category group . For example , one manuscript conflated ethnicity with being a non - native English speaker and did not explain why they used an exclusively Asian participant pool [ 104 ] . A paper in the class category ( that was difficult to code for acknowledgement ) , suggested their target participants of a single class group , the very wealthy , were " extreme” without providing any further justification for studying a single socio - economic population [ 65 ] . There were also papers that acknowledged an umbrella identity category they did not focus on . These papers were coded for including acknowledgement if they included one of the following relative to a specific umbrella category : 1 ) citing prior research [ 1 ] , 2 ) acknowledging limitations that prevents identity - category focus [ 101 ] , or 3 ) recommending future work [ 77 ] . These papers demonstrate thoughtful , low - cost opportunities to engage in a conversation about identity representation , even when focus on a particular identity group is not a part of the study design or findings . Gender The papers on gender , including those that both focused on or acknowledged it , often used a relatively simple representation of a rather complex identity category . Many papers used binary , cisgender categories , speaking exclusively about men or women . A side effect of this simplified representation of gender identities is the erasure of trans identities—excluding the few papers focused exclusively on trans individuals ( three papers matched transgender and none matched genderqueer or gender fluid ) . An example of this erasure occurred in the cluster of papers on women’s health , none of which mentioned trans women or the term cisgender . A risk is that health - research ( and beyond ) in HCI may marginalize trans women while normalizing cis women in designing health technologies . Generally , research focused on gender was tied to research focused on women . When men were a focus of a paper , they were rarely the only group studied . This is illustrated by the fact that of the 22 papers matched to the a priori keyword men , 9 . 09 % of them had the word women in the title and 54 . 55 % had women in the abstract . In contrast , of the 37 papers matched to the a priori keyword women , zero papers had the word men in the title and 40 . 54 % had men in the abstract . This gives the impression that gender matters for women and women alone , which warrants reflection . We want to reiterate that we strongly support research focusing on groups who have historically been discriminated against , like women . What we want to draw attention to here is as follows : 1 ) people get excluded when we collapse complex categories into simple binaries and 2 ) the way we currently handle representing participant identity is not equitable . Considering prior work by [ 19 ] , we know that CHI - study populations skew male , so why aren’t there more papers featuring male keywords ? Questioning how identities are represented , what power - dynamics are at play , and how researched communities will benefit from our work can help ensure that we are researching and designing in an equity - forward way . Categories : Language , Boundaries , & Impact Our research relied on identity - category labels for analysis . In order to speak coherently about gender , ethnicity , race , and class , we provisionally used categories to investigate how identity is represented within the CHI community—an application of the intercategorical methodology described earlier . However , when using categories , there is friction associated with the ways terms flatten a heterogeneous group into a single word . This flattening function runs the risk of simplifying diverse social groups into stereotypes and reductive caricatures . The anticategorical and intracategorical intersectional methodologies work directly against this reductive capacity of category descriptions . In this paper , our aim is to contingently use categories to draw attention to identity representation in CHI . Through this methodological approach , we sacrificed some of our ability to produce complicated , boundary - pushing representations of gender , race , ethnicity , and class . Others , including Ames et al . [ 4 ] , have confronted similar concerns . We believe this trade - off was worth the cost because it increased our ability to draw attention to larger themes in identity - related CHI research . We hope that our analysis encourages more work in Intersectional HCI , including anticategorical and intracategorical research . Intersectional HCI Intersectionality asks us to look into the complexity of experience , phenomenologically and materially , as it is impacted by multiple overlapping identity characteristics . This type of research works to promote equity within HCI by explicitly and intricately investigating complexities in use , design , evaluation , language , etc . relative to entangled identities and larger social systems . While at times intersectionality is implicit in research ( in part due to the complications of positionality and self - disclosure ) , it is important that intersectional analysis focus on complexity of identity and the impact ( explicitly or implicitly ) that identity has on context and design in HCI [ e . g . , 33 , 51 ] . While most manuscripts in this corpus focus on just one identity category at a time . there were a few publications in the corpus that tackled multiple identity categories at once ( see Table 4 ) . Within the framework of intersectional methodologies , many of these papers fall under an intracategorical approach by focusing analysis on a specific group of individuals with overlapping identity categories , like homeless mothers [ 27 ] . However , some manuscripts with multiple foci reported information on each identity category separately , like sharing results about gender followed by sharing results about race [ 85 ] . There were also a small handful of papers that incorporated complex and overlapping identity categories into the design of computational artifacts . These papers build off of third - wave HCI concepts [ 14 ] and develop tools that are responsive to intersectional identity - related experiences . Two noteworthy papers are [ 7 ] , which explores low - SES elderly individuals needing ways to assess the wellbeing of their peers because they cannot afford assistive care , and [ 64 ] , which explores how two different low - SES regions of rural China with distinct traditional social structures developed different models for technology acceptance . Identity - Related Scholarship in CHI Out of all CHI publications in the Digital Library , our corpus contains a startlingly small percentage of papers ( see Table 1 ) . How is it that so few papers matched our search criteria ? Given the nearly 14 , 000 publications we are pulling from , and HCI’s foundational reliance on the user , it is remarkable that so few papers prominently feature keywords from common demographic identity categories . It invites the question , how is the identity of the user represented if not with these common keywords ? CHI is a large and intellectually diverse community . While there is a significant amount of research within our community that does not involve human subjects , we believe the overall body of CHI research contains a larger percentage of publications featuring users than the set of manuscripts in our corpus . We suspect there are many manuscripts within the CHI proceedings that rely on the user but do not include representations of their users’ identities . These users are people whose experiences— which are research relevant—are impacted by overlapping identity attributes , like gender , race , class , age , and ability , even when identity information for them is not provided . It is clear that the CHI community is thinking more about the user’s identity than ever before . The temporal distribution of corpus publications speaks to this point , with only four out of 140 papers published before 2000 . We encourage researchers to be more explicit about the identity of the people included as research subjects , and to be aware of the extent ( if any ) with which different gender , race , and class groups are included . Intersectional HCI provides a framework to help researchers incorporate and handle complex identities as a regular part of the research process . RECOMMENDATIONS In this paper , our goal has been to map the way CHI represents the complexities of identity . As a community , we are already thinking about ways to make a positive impact on the world with HCI . The 2016 CHI proceedings focused on # CHI4GOOD , including programming “to help the under - served , under - resourced , and under - represented” [ 35 ] . Combining our analysis with this investment in social good , we have developed five recommendations for using Intersectional HCI to better handle users’ identities . 1 . Consistently Report Context Manuscripts were highly inconsistent about providing cultural context for their research . And yet , providing that contextual information matters given the cultural diversity of users [ 52 ] . Our corpus includes papers that highlight how differences in culture result in variations in technology use [ 64 ] , underling how important context is . We recommend all publications provide rich contextual details such as national and regional information as well as common social attributes and practices in those locations . Perhaps unsurprisingly , many ICTD research papers—often documenting non - Western contexts—already disclose detailed context information . This likely reflects assumptions that many readers are not familiar with the local contexts in sub - Saharan Africa or in other majority world locations . All cultures are worthy of explication [ 92 ] , and a global research community means we cannot assume any one context is “normal . ” Including context in all settings makes HCI research more accessible to a global , interdisciplinary audience . In recent years , CHI and the ACM have set out to make HCI a more globally inclusive community . The success of this initiative requires making our research contexts , and the implications therein , accessible to our expanding community . Location matters . Studies taking place on the south side of Chicago in the U . S . , in the urban Oud - West neighborhood in Amsterdam in the Netherlands , or the Shimane prefecture of Japan come with differing cultural practices and assumptions . We believe that consistent reporting of where studies take place and the contexts of participants will help the interpretability of research results . 2 . Consistently Report Demographics Who we study matters . In order to know if CHI is covering a representative sample of people , studies need to provide demographic information about participants . Knowing our participants’ gender identity , ethnicity , racial identity , nationality , socio - economic class , and age will help the CHI community track which populations a study may generalize to and the demographics that need further attention . We list consistently reporting context before reporting demographics because obtaining demographic information is not always feasible . Not all data types ( e . g . , tweets or images ) lend themselves to demographic reporting . Additionally , it can be difficult , unreasonable , or impossible to provide exact and quantifiable demographic information . For instance , asking participants about their SES may not be feasible because participants may not know how to answer that question or it may bias their answers . In these situations , detailed reporting of contextual information can provide the necessary frame of reference for readers . Richly describing the context in which your study took place—be it an online site like Twitter , a community of activists living in cooperative housing , or British college students—will increase understanding and interpretability of results . 3 . Acknowledge Limitations Regarding Identity It is not always possible to study multiple , overlapping identity categories . There may be a variety of obstacles preventing broader participation—like studying an online community that only collects metadata on race and not gender , or a field site that is not accessible to middle - class individuals . In these scenarios , explicitly reporting the study’s limitations in terms of identity categories improves the understandability and transparency of research results . One example of reporting identity limitations comes from Wyche et al . [ 101 ] when they discussed their lack of participation by women , explaining how this was a result of cultural disadvantages reified in their field site that disproportionally affect women in Nairobi . Drawing attention to oppression , limitations , and obstacles of social groups relevant to a study promotes ongoing work on representation , and discrimination in HCI research . 4 . Provide an Author Disclosure The presence of multiple self - disclosures , both implicit and explicit across this corpus , speaks to how information about authors matters . It is important for authors to consider why there may be a need for a dedicated section disclosing information about themselves in a given project . Likewise , it is crucial for our community to acknowledge that disclosing information may not be in the best interest of the research or the author . Authors with marginalized identities face discrimination on social , professional , and economic levels . Research has shown that the mere presence of names that belong to non - white ethnic groups [ 12 ] and white women [ 70 ] has resulted in discriminatory treatment of otherwise identical job application material . Further , in 2016 less than half of the states in the U . S . had laws protecting LGBTQIA employees from discrimination [ 110 ] . We note that an author should not need to disclose information that could place themselves at risk . One of the benefits of using blind peer - review is to prevent discrimination like implicit bias [ 44 ] . We hope to encourage authors in less marginalized positions to adopt reflexive disclosure practices in an effort to normalize this convention and reduce the harmful ( often implicit ) bias faced by marginalized authors who self - disclose . However , we note that this is not enough to solve these problems . Mitigating implicit bias and reflexive disclosure warrant continuing and extensive action from the HCI community . Nonetheless , there are informative disclosures that aid in interpretability and do not put the author at risk . We recommend researchers consider if there is information that would help the community better interpret a publication , like a privilege , ethics , or values disclosure . Providing ethical considerations or including information about the author’s cultural context helps clarify who the we each paper mentions is and how that influences the research . 5 . Embrace Complexity of Identity Lastly , when analyzing and writing up results about users , authors should include as much identity - complexity as is feasible . For instance , when performing quantitative analysis , running descriptive statistics that group participants across more than one identity factor increases the granularity of identity representation . When a study reports statistics about white users versus black users and female users versus male users , the intersection between race and gender is lost in the analysis . Similarly , when performing qualitative research targeting under - represented , under - supported groups within HCI , critically investigating identity - reductive assumptions across multiple identity categories advances our understanding of who users are . For example , studies about the impact of requiring race information when signing up for a particular online service would enrich our community’s understanding of how identity impacts and conflicts with design in HCI . We recommend researchers identify a number of identity categories to track—or deconstruct—in a given study . By intentionally building more complex identity representation into HCI research , our field will produce new facts and inferences about user identity and HCI . It is necessary to be mindful of scoping research such that the complexity does not become unmanageable . Consequentially , out of scope complexities can be reported under limitations , which can help direct the design of future research . Future Work These recommendations are a starting point for integrating intersectionality and HCI . We note that CHI is not HCI ; however , the recommendations in this paper provide a foundation for Intersectional HCI broadly . In developing recommendations based on our analysis , we introduce mechanisms and opportunities to engage with intersectionality within and beyond CHI . Of these recommendations , the first four call on our community to make small changes to the ways we collect and report data . How we as a field ought to embrace the complexity of identity is an open question with no one answer . CONCLUSION We opened this paper with a quote from Cooper and Bowers [ 21 ] discussing how HCI discourse is organized around the user as a central rhetorical cipher . In this paper , we’re inviting the CHI community to unpack this cipher and to reflect on our own practices when representing the identity of the user . Through our intersectional investigation , we uncovered striking segmentations , imbalances , obstacles , and omissions regarding identity representation in CHI . Significantly , we found an absence of research regarding a wide - array of race keywords , a pattern of singular focus on identity categories , and a simplified presentation of complex identity categories . We also found that focus on identity is increasing within the CHI community , with many authors working to describe the user as more than an abstraction . These representations of identity present detailed characterizations about who the user is , elevating the depth and context of CHI research . Our analysis suggests that , although we have produced excellent research with respect to identity and HCI , there is much more to do . One way we can improve as a community is to be more descriptive about who our users actually are , using a richer body of language to explain identity and its context . Additionally , we can increase our attention to the ways multiple facets of identity interact with one another when framing users lived experiences . In offering intersectionality as a framework , we hope to engage the HCI community in discussions about identity , its surrounding context , and our capacity as a field to thoughtfully and inclusively champion just HCI research . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This material is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No . DGE - 1148903 . REFERENCES 1 . Nova Ahmed . 2016 . Discussing About Sexual Harassment ( Breaking Silence ) : The Role of Technology . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 459 – 472 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2892567 2 . Shamir Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed , Steven J Jackson , Nova Ahmed , et al . 2014 . Protibadi : A Platform for Fighting Sexual Harassment in Urban Bangladesh . Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 2695 – 2704 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557376 3 . Teresa Almeida , Rob Comber , Gavin Wood , et al . 2016 . On Looking at the Vagina Through Labella . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 1810 – 1821 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858119 4 . Morgan G Ames , Janet Go , Joseph “Jofish” Kaye , and Mirjana Spasojevic . 2011 . Understanding Technology Choices and Values Through Social Class . Proceedings of the ACM 2011 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , ACM , 55 – 64 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1958824 . 1958834 5 . Tawfiq Ammari , Priya Kumar , Cliff Lampe , and Sarita Schoenebeck . 2015 . Managing Children’s Online Identities : How Parents Decide What to Disclose About Their Children Online . Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 1895 – 1904 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702325 6 . Nazanin Andalibi , Oliver L Haimson , Munmun De Choudhury , and Andrea Forte . 2016 . Understanding Social Media Disclosures of Sexual Abuse Through the Lenses of Support Seeking and Anonymity . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 3906 – 3918 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858096 7 . Ingrid Arreola , Zan Morris , Matthew Francisco , Kay Connelly , Kelly Caine , and Ginger White . 2014 . From Checking on to Checking in : Designing for Low Socio - economic Status Older Adults . Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 1933 – 1936 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557084 8 . Kagonya Awori , Frank Vetere , and Wally Smith . 2015 . Transnationalism , Indigenous Knowledge and Technology : Insights from the Kenyan Diaspora . Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 3759 – 3768 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702488 9 . Madeline Balaam , Rob Comber , Ed Jenkins , Selina Sutton , and Andrew Garbett . 2015 . FeedFinder : A Location - Mapping Mobile Application for Breastfeeding Women . Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 1709 – 1718 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702328 10 . Jeffrey Bardzell , Shaowen Bardzell , Guo Zhang , and Tyler Pace . 2014 . The Lonely Raccoon at the Ball : Designing for Intimacy , Sociability , and Selfhood . Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 3943 – 3952 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557127 11 . Shaowen Bardzell . 2010 . Feminist HCI : Taking Stock and Outlining an Agenda for Design . Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 1301 – 1310 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753521 12 . Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan . 2004 . Are Emily and Greg More Employable than Lakisha and Jama l ? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination . The American Economic Review 94 , 4 : 991 – 1013 . 13 . Lindsay Blackwell , Jean Hardy , Tawfiq Ammari , Tiffany Veinot , Cliff Lampe , and Sarita Schoenebeck . 2016 . LGBT Parents and Social Media : Advocacy , Privacy , and Disclosure During Shifting Social Movements . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 610 – 622 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858342 14 . Susanne Bødker . 2006 . When Second Wave HCI Meets Third Wave Challenges . Proceedings of the 4th Nordic Conference on Human - computer Interaction : Changing Roles , ACM , 1 – 8 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1182475 . 1182476 15 . Margot Brereton , Paul Roe , Ronald Schroeter , and Anita Lee Hong . 2014 . Beyond Ethnography : Engagement and Reciprocity As Foundations for Design Research out Here . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 1183 – 1186 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557374 16 . Phil Brooker , John Vines , Selina Sutton , Julie Barnett , Tom Feltwell , and Shaun Lawson . 2015 . Debating Poverty Porn on Twitter : Social Media As a Place for Everyday Socio - Political Talk . Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 3177 – 3186 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702291 17 . Deana Brown , Victoria Ayo , and Rebecca E Grinter . 2014 . Reflection Through Design : Immigrant Women’s Self - reflection on Managing Health and Wellness . Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 1605 – 1614 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557119 18 . Deana Brown and Rebecca E Grinter . 2016 . Designing for Transient Use : A Human - in - the - loop Translation Platform for Refugees . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 321 – 330 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858230 19 . Kelly Caine . 2016 . Local Standards for Sample Size at CHI . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 981 – 992 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858498 20 . Rachel Clarke , Peter Wright , Madeline Balaam , and John McCarthy . 2013 . Digital Portraits : Photo - sharing After Domestic Violence . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 2517 – 2526 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2481348 21 . Geoff Cooper and John Bowers . 1995 . Representing the User : Notes on the Disciplinary Rhetoric of HCI . In Social and Interactional Dimensions of Human - Computer Interfaces , Peter J Thomas ( ed . ) . Cambridge University Press , New York , NY , USA , 48 – 66 . 22 . Kimberle Crenshaw . 1989 . Demarginalizing the intersection of race and sex : A black feminist critique of antidiscrimination doctrine , feminist theory and antiracist politics . U . Chi . Legal F . : 139 . 23 . Kimberle Crenshaw . 1991 . Mapping the Margins : Intersetionality , Identity Politics , and Violence Against Women of Color . Stanford Law Review 43 , 6 : 1241 – 1299 . 24 . Mary Czerwinski , Desney S Tan , and George G Robertson . 2002 . Women Take a Wider View . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 195 – 202 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 503376 . 503412 25 . Chris Le Dantec and W . Keith Edwards . 2008 . Designs on dignity . Proceeding of the twenty - sixth annual CHI conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’08 , ACM Press , 627 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1357054 . 1357155 26 . Christopher A Le Dantec , Robert G Farrell , Jim E Christensen , et al . 2011 . Publics in Practice : Ubiquitous Computing at a Shelter for Homeless Mothers . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 1687 – 1696 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979189 27 . Christopher Le Dantec . 2012 . Participation and Publics : Supporting Community Engagement . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 1351 – 1360 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208593 28 . Angela Davis . 1981 . Women , Race , and Class . Random House , New York . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / CBO9781107415324 . 004 29 . Nicola Dell and Neha Kumar . 2016 . The Ins and Outs of HCI for Development . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 2220 – 2232 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858081 30 . Tawanna R Dillahunt . 2014 . Fostering Social Capital in Economically Distressed Communities . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 531 – 540 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557123 31 . Betsy DiSalvo , Parisa Khanipour Roshan , and Briana Morrison . 2016 . Information Seeking Practices of Parents : Exploring Skills , Face Threats and Social Networks . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 623 – 634 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858586 32 . Betsy DiSalvo , Sarita Yardi , Mark Guzdial , et al . 2011 . African American Men Constructing Computing Identity . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 2967 – 2970 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979381 33 . Carl Disalvo , Phoebe Sengers , and Hrönn Brynjarsdóttir . 2010 . Mapping the Landscape of Sustainable HCI . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 1975 – 1984 . 34 . Paul Dourish and Scott D Mainwaring . 2012 . Ubicomp’s Colonial Impulse . Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on Ubiquitous Computing , ACM , 133 – 142 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2370216 . 2370238 35 . Allison Druin and Jofish Kaye . 2015 . CHI 2016 : CHI4GOOD . ACM SIGCHI . Retrieved September 14 , 2016 from https : / / chi2016 . acm . org / wp / 36 . Andrew DuBois . 2003 . Close Readinger : An Introduction . In Close Reading : The Reader , Frank Lentricchia and Andrew DuBois ( eds . ) . Duke University Press , Durham , 1 – 40 . 37 . Daniele Fanelli . 2010 . Do Pressures to Publish Increase Scientists’ Bias ? An Empirical Support from US States Data . PLoS ONE 5 , 4 : 1 – 7 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0010271 38 . Pedro Ferreira and Kristina Höök . 2012 . Appreciating Plei - plei Around Mobiles : Playfulness in Rah Island . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 2015 – 2024 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208348 39 . Casey Fiesler , Shannon Morrison , and Amy S Bruckman . 2016 . An Archive of Their Own : A Case Study of Feminist HCI and Values in Design . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 2574 – 2585 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858409 40 . Guo Freeman , Jeffrey Bardzell , and Shaowen Bardzell . 2016 . Revisiting Computer - Mediated Intimacy : In - Game Marriage and Dyadic Gameplay in Audition . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 4325 – 4336 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858484 41 . Eric Gilbert , Karrie Karahalios , and Christian Sandvig . 2008 . The Network in the Garden : An Empirical Analysis of Social Media in Rural Life . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 1603 – 1612 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1357054 . 1357304 42 . Shikoh Gitau , Gary Marsden , and Jonathan Donner . 2010 . After Access : Challenges Facing Mobile - only Internet Users in the Developing World . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 2603 – 2606 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753720 43 . Elizabeth Goodman and Janet Vertesi . 2012 . Design for X ? : Distribution Choices and Ethical Design . CHI ’12 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 81 – 90 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2212776 . 2212786 44 . Anthony G Greenwald and Linda Hamilton Krieger . 2006 . Implicit Bias : Scientific Foundations . California Law Review 94 , 4 : 945 – 967 . 45 . Andrea Grimes and Richard Harper . 2008 . Celebratory Technology : New Directions for Food Research in HCI . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 467 – 476 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1357054 . 1357130 46 . Shathel Haddad , Joanna McGrenere , and Claudia Jacova . 2014 . Interface Design for Older Adults with Varying Cultural Attitudes Toward Uncertainty . Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 1913 – 1922 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557124 47 . Oliver L Haimson , Jed R Brubaker , Lynn Dombrowski , and Gillian R Hayes . 2015 . Disclosure , Stress , and Support During Gender Transition on Facebook . Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & # 38 ; Social Computing , ACM , 1176 – 1190 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675152 48 . Oliver L Haimson , Jed R Brubaker , Lynn Dombrowski , and Gillian R Hayes . 2016 . Digital Footprints and Changing Networks During Online Identity Transitions . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 2895 – 2907 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858136 49 . Oliver L Haimson , Jed R Brubaker , and Gillian R Hayes . 2014 . DDFSeeks Same : Sexual Health - related Language in Online Personal Ads for Men Who Have Sex with Men . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 1615 – 1624 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557077 50 . David Hankerson , Andrea R Marshall , Jennifer Booker , Houda El Mimouni , Imani Walker , and Jennifer A Rode . 2016 . Does Technology Have Race ? Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 473 – 486 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2892578 51 . Steve Harrison , Deborah Tatar , and Phoebe Sengers . 2007 . The Three Paradigms of HCI . Alt . Chi . Session at the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems San Jose , California , USA , 1 – 18 . 52 . Joseph Henrich , Steven J Heine , and Ara Norenzayan . 2010 . Most people are not WEIRD . Nature 466 , 7302 : 29 . 53 . Nguyen Thi Hoan , Arul Chib , and Ram Mahalingham . 2016 . Mobile Phones and Gender Empowerment : Enactment of “Restricted Agency . ” Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development , ACM , 5 : 1 - - 5 : 10 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2909609 . 2909671 54 . Kori Inkpen , Honglu Du , Asta Roseway , Aaron Hoff , and Paul Johns . 2012 . Video Kids : Augmenting Close Friendships with Asynchronous Video Conversations in Videopal . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 2387 – 2396 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208400 55 . Clarissa Ishak , Carman Neustaedter , Dan Hawkins , Jason Procyk , and Michael Massimi . 2016 . Human Proxies for Remote University Classroom Attendance . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 931 – 943 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858184 56 . Gopinaath Kannabiran , Jeffrey Bardzell , and Shaowen Bardzell . 2011 . How HCI Talks About Sexuality : Discursive Strategies , Blind Spots , and Opportunities for Future Research . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 695 – 704 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979043 57 . Idin Karuei , Karon E MacLean , Zoltan Foley - Fisher , Russell MacKenzie , Sebastian Koch , and Mohamed El - Zohairy . 2011 . Detecting Vibrations Across the Body in Mobile Contexts . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 3267 – 3276 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979426 58 . Jens Manuel Krogstad . 2016 . Key facts about how the U . S . Hispanic population is changing . Pew Research Center . Retrieved September 13 , 2016 from http : / / www . pewresearch . org / fact - tank / 2016 / 09 / 08 / key - facts - about - how - the - u - s - hispanic - population - is - changing / 59 . Neha Kumar and Richard J Anderson . 2015 . Mobile Phones for Maternal Health in Rural India . Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 427 – 436 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702258 60 . Stacey Kuznetsov , George Davis , Jian Cheung , and Eric Paulos . 2011 . Ceci N’Est Pas Une Pipe Bombe : Authoring Urban Landscapes with Air Quality Sensors . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 2375 – 2384 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979290 61 . Stacey Kuznetsov , Laura C Trutoiu , Casey Kute , Iris Howley , Eric Paulos , and Dan Siewiorek . 2011 . Breaking Boundaries : Strategies for Mentoring Through Textile Computing Workshops . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 2957 – 2966 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979380 62 . Lynette Kvasny . 2003 . Triple Jeopardy : Race , Gender and Class Politics of Women in Technology . Proceedings of the 2003 SIGMIS Conference on Computer Personnel Research : Freedom in Philadelphia - - leveraging Differences and Diversity in the IT Workforce , ACM , 112 – 116 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 761849 . 761868 63 . Lorenzo De Leon , William G Harris , and Martha Evens . 1983 . Is There Really Trouble with UNIX ? Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 125 – 129 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 800045 . 801595 64 . Jun Liu , Ying Liu , Pei - Luen Patrick Rau , Hui Li , Xia Wang , and Dingjun Li . 2010 . How Socio - economic Structure Influences Rural Users’ Acceptance of Mobile Entertainment . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 2203 – 2212 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753659 65 . Aviaja Borup Lynggaard , Marianne Graves Petersen , and Sam Hepworth . 2012 . “I Had a Dream and I Built It” : Power and Self - staging in Ubiquitous High - end Homes . CHI ’12 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 201 – 210 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2212776 . 2212798 66 . Leslie McCall . 2005 . The Complexity of Intersectionality . Signs 30 , 3 : 1771 – 1800 . 67 . Indrani Medhi , S N Nagasena Gautama , and Kentaro Toyama . 2009 . A Comparison of Mobile Money - transfer UIs for Non - literate and Semi - literate Users . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 1741 – 1750 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518970 68 . Indrani Medhi , Meera Lakshmanan , Kentaro Toyama , and Edward Cutrell . 2013 . Some Evidence for the Impact of Limited Education on Hierarchical User Interface Navigation . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 2813 – 2822 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2481390 69 . Amanda Menking and Ingrid Erickson . 2015 . The Heart Work of Wikipedia : Gendered , Emotional Labor in the World’s Largest Online Encyclopedia . Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 207 – 210 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702514 70 . C . A . Moss - Racusin , J . F . Dovidio , V . L . Brescoll , M . J . Graham , and J . Handelsman . 2012 . Science faculty’s subtle gender biases favor male students . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 , 41 : 16474 – 16479 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1211286109 71 . Preeti Mudliar and Nimmi Rangaswamy . 2015 . Offline Strangers , Online Friends : Bridging Classroom Gender Segregation with WhatsApp . Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 3799 – 3808 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702533 72 . Jahna Otterbacher . 2015 . Crowdsourcing Stereotypes : Linguistic Bias in Metadata Generated via GWAP . Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 1955 – 1964 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702151 73 . Glenn Pearson and Mark Weiser . 1986 . Of Moles and Men : The Design of Foot Controls for Workstations . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 333 – 339 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 22339 . 22392 74 . Trevor Perrier , Nicola Dell , Brian DeRenzi , et al . 2015 . Engaging Pregnant Women in Kenya with a Hybrid Computer - Human SMS Communication System . Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 1429 – 1438 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702124 75 . Gary W Pritchard and John Vines . 2013 . Digital Apartheid : An Ethnographic Account of Racialised Hci in Cape Town Hip - hop . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 2537 – 2546 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2481350 76 . Emilee Rader , Margaret Echelbarger , and Justine Cassell . 2011 . Brick by Brick : Iterating Interventions to Bridge the Achievement Gap with Virtual Peers . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 2971 – 2974 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979382 77 . Mark Rice , Hong Huei Tay , Jamie Ng , and Ranieri Koh . 2015 . Communication in the Changing Dyadic Interaction of Diverse Players . Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 613 – 623 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702613 . 2732502 78 . Gabriela T Richard and Yasmin B Kafai . 2016 . Blind Spots in Youth DIY Programming : Examining Diversity in Creators , Content , and Comments Within the Scratch Online Community . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 1473 – 1485 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858590 79 . Tom A Rodden , Joel E Fischer , Nadia Pantidi , Khaled Bachour , and Stuart Moran . 2013 . At Home with Agents : Exploring Attitudes Towards Future Smart Energy Infrastructures . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 1173 – 1182 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2466152 80 . Dana N Ruggiero . 2014 . Spent : Changing Students’ Affective Learning Toward Homelessness Through Persuasive Video Game Play . Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 3423 – 3432 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557390 81 . Cosima Rughiniş , Razvan Rughiniş , and Bogdana Humă . 2016 . Impromptu Crowd Science and the Mystery of the Bechdel - Wallace Test Movement . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 487 – 500 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2892580 82 . Nithya Sambasivan , Julie Weber , and Edward Cutrell . 2011 . Designing a Phone Broadcasting System for Urban Sex Workers in India . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 267 – 276 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1978980 83 . Jonas Schild , Joseph LaViola , and Maic Masuch . 2012 . Understanding User Experience in Stereoscopic 3D Games . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 89 – 98 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2207690 84 . Bryan C Semaan , Lauren M Britton , and Bryan Dosono . 2016 . Transition Resilience with ICTs : “Identity Awareness” in Veteran Re - Integration . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 2882 – 2894 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858109 85 . Steve Sheng , Mandy Holbrook , Ponnurangam Kumaraguru , Lorrie Faith Cranor , and Julie Downs . 2010 . Who Falls for Phish ? : A Demographic Analysis of Phishing Susceptibility and Effectiveness of Interventions . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 373 – 382 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753383 86 . Geeta Shroff and Matthew Kam . 2011 . Towards a Design Model for Women’s Empowerment in the Developing World . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 2867 – 2876 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979368 87 . Supriya Singh , Anuja Cabraal , Catherine Demosthenous , Gunela Astbrink , and Michele Furlong . 2007 . Password Sharing : Implications for Security Design Based on Social Practice . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 895 – 904 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1240624 . 1240759 88 . Christopher Smith - Clarke , Afra Mashhadi , and Licia Capra . 2014 . Poverty on the Cheap : Estimating Poverty Maps Using Aggregated Mobile Communication Networks . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 511 – 520 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557358 89 . Oliviero Stock , Massimo Zancanaro , Chaya Koren , et al . 2008 . A Co - located Interface for Narration to Support Reconciliation in a Conflict : Initial Results from Jewish and Palestinian Youth . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 1583 – 1592 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1357054 . 1357302 90 . Angelika Strohmayer , Rob Comber , and Madeline Balaam . 2015 . Exploring Learning Ecologies Among People Experiencing Homelessness . Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 2275 – 2284 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702157 91 . Andrea H Tapia and Lynette Kvasny . 2004 . Recruitment is Never Enough : Retention of Women and Minorities in the IT Workplace . Proceedings of the 2004 SIGMIS conference on Computer personnel research : Careers , culture , and ethics in a networked environment , ACM , 84 – 91 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 982372 . 982392 92 . Alex S Taylor . 2011 . Out There . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 685 – 694 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979042 93 . Emeline Therias , Jon Bird , and Paul Marshall . 2015 . Más Tecnologia , Más Cambio ? : Investigating an Educational Technology Project in Rural Peru . Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 447 – 456 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702595 94 . Anja Thieme , Jayne Wallace , Paula Johnson , et al . 2013 . Design to Promote Mindfulness Practice and Sense of Self for Vulnerable Women in Secure Hospital Services . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 2647 – 2656 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2481366 95 . Eileen M Trauth , Curtis C Cain , K D Joshi , Lynette Kvasny , and Kayla Booth . 2012 . Embracing Intersectionality in Gender and IT Career Choice Research . Proceedings of the 50th Annual Conference on Computers and People Research , ACM , 199 – 212 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2214091 . 2214141 96 . Elba del Carmen Valderrama Bahamondez , Christian Winkler , and Albrecht Schmidt . 2011 . Utilizing Multimedia Capabilities of Mobile Phones to Support Teaching in Schools in Rural Panama . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 935 – 944 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979081 97 . Radu - Daniel Vatavu and Jacob O Wobbrock . 2016 . Between - Subjects Elicitation Studies : Formalization and Tool Support . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 3390 – 3402 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858228 98 . Jill Palzkill Woelfer and David G Hendry . 2011 . Homeless Young People and Living with Personal Digital Artifacts . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 1697 – 1706 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979190 99 . Jill Palzkill Woelfer and David G Hendry . 2012 . Homeless Young People on Social Network Sites . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 2825 – 2834 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208686 100 . Jill Palzkill Woelfer , Amy Iverson , David G Hendry , Batya Friedman , and Brian T Gill . 2011 . Improving the Safety of Homeless Young People with Mobile Phones : Values , Form and Function . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 1707 – 1716 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979191 101 . Susan P Wyche , Andrea Forte , and Sarita Yardi Schoenebeck . 2013 . Hustling Online : Understanding Consolidated Facebook Use in an Informal Settlement in Nairobi . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 2823 – 2832 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2481391 102 . Sarita Yardi and Amy Bruckman . 2012 . Income , Race , and Class : Exploring Socioeconomic Differences in Family Technology Use . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 3041 – 3050 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208716 103 . Daisy Yoo , Alina Huldtgren , Jill Palzkill Woelfer , David G Hendry , and Batya Friedman . 2013 . A Value Sensitive Action - reflection Model : Evolving a Co - design Space with Stakeholder and Designer Prompts . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 419 – 428 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2470715 104 . Chen - Hsiang Yu and Robert C Miller . 2010 . Enhancing Web Page Readability for Non - native Readers . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 2523 – 2532 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753709 105 . Catherine Zanbaka , Paula Goolkasian , and Larry Hodges . 2006 . Can a Virtual Cat Persuade You ? : The Role of Gender and Realism in Speaker Persuasiveness . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 1153 – 1162 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1124772 . 1124945 106 . Amy X Zhang and Scott Counts . 2016 . Gender and Ideology in the Spread of Anti - Abortion Policy . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 3378 – 3389 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858423 107 . Population . The United States Census Bureau . Retrieved August 25 , 2016 from http : / / www . census . gov / topics / population . html 108 . CHI : Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM Digital Library . Retrieved August 26 , 2016 from http : / / dl . acm . org / event . cfm ? id = RE151 109 . 2015 . What Census Calls Us : A Historical Timeline . Pew Research Center . Retrieved August 25 , 2016 from http : / / www . pewsocialtrends . org / interactives / multiracia l - timeline / 110 . 2016 . LGBT Nondiscrimination and Anti - LGBT Bills Across the Country . American Civil Liberties Union . Retrieved September 7 , 2016 from https : / / www . aclu . org / lgbt - nondiscrimination - and - anti - lgbt - bills - across - country