there is Azoulay ' s translation of Cajal ' s textbook the His - tologie d u * t h e Nm ~ eux and the translations of Cajal ' s original reports on the cerebral cortex recently pub - lished by DeFelipe and Jones . For the new students in - terested in the origins of neuroscience and Cajal ' s contribution to it , there is Cajal ' s autobiography , Recuer - dos de mi vidu ( Recollections of My Life ) which has now been reprinted from an earlier English translation . The autobiography gives a popular and easy to read outline of Cajal ' s work in relation to the events of his life . Rut anything Cajal wrote is worth reading . The book is an introduction to the great breadth of Cajal ' s studies and it has some of his beautiful drawings of the structure of the brain and spinal cord , along with his clear and suc - cinct descriptions of the cell types and their intercon - nections . The translation is most useful to our appreciation of Cajal ' s great contribution to modern neural science . Reprint requests should be sent to Dr . M . Glickstein , Depart - ment of Anatomy and Developmental Rioloa , University Col - lege London , Cower Street , London WC1 , England . Unified Theories of Cognition m e n Newel1 Harvard University Press , 1991 , 549 pp . , $ 39 . 95 Review by Richard Granger University of California , Irvine The past three decades has witnessed the development of interdisciplinary research encompassing cognitive psy - chology and artificial intelligence ( AI ) , with the goal of identifying formal computational hypotheses of mind . Allen Newell has been one of the leaders of this research from its inception , and publication of his new book UniJied Theories of Cognition , based on the author ' s William James lectures at Harvard University , represents the amassed results of a major research effort in this field . It will be reviewed for its content and clarity in many forums ; here instead a brief attempt will be made to address the book , and the line of research it repre - sents , from the perspective of cognitive neuroscience . To this end , the main question that will be raised is how can we identify what functional psychological operations are primary or fundamental , i . e . , those that combine to produce complex cognitive phenomena ? This is a shared quest of cognitive psychology , artificial intelligence , and cognitive neuroscience ; Newell ' s book offers an oppor - tunity for evaluation of successes and prospects in these fields . Newell dedicates his book to a specific task : " to urge on psychology unified theories of cognition . . . theories that gain their power by positing a single system of mechanisms that operate together to produce the full range of human cognition " ( p . 1 ) . Newell indeed assumes both the existence of a single set of mechanisms and the ability in principle to identify that set . Most of the book is devoted to the presentation of a proposed example of such a theory , consisting of a rich set of coherent hy - potheses that purports to explain a wide range of some - times disparate psychological phenomena , together with a computer system implementing these hypotheses . This computer system , called SOAR , is an artificial intelligence computer program , based on a " production system " ar - chitecture , i . e . , a set of " If - Then " rules for behavior . This fact raises some immediate controversy : the very archi - tecture of the system contends that all of memory is uniformly composed of these productions or rules . Moreover , it is proposed that this uniform architecture accounts for psychological phenomena ranging from the power law of speedup with practice , to solving " crypt - arithmetic " problems : finding appropriate numbers to solve an algebraic addition . Newell is quick to admit that this proposal of unification via a production system is disconcerting in light of the many findings of neuro - psychological dissociations and other evidence for mul - tiple forms of memory , but he offers little in the way of amelioration , and does not consider modifying the uni - fied theory to account for such dichotomies . Rather , New - ell intends the very unification of his theories to amend what he sees as excessive dichotomizing in psychology : serial versus parallel processing , massed versus distrib - uted practice , procedural versus declarative memory . For Newell , the demonstration of apparent modularities in cognition ( being able to point to a thing but not to name it , being able to remember what happened four minutes ago but not ten , being able to learn to read in a mirror but be entirely unaware that any such learning has oc - curred ) does not remove the necessity of " a theory that . . . explains the role of the [ modules ] and why they exist " ( p 18 ) . When the object of study is an artifact , understanding it can be aided by prior " top - down " information about its intended operation ; thus the performance of David Marr ' s cash register ( Vision , 1982 ) can be addressed with respect to its intended operation : adherence to the Peano axioms of arithmetic [ adding something and then taking it away should result in zero ( law of inverses ) , adding two things individually or as a group gives the same result ( associativity ) , and so on ] . Cognitive psychology attempts to apply such means to the behavior of natural systems ; the complex meanders of Herbert Simon ' s hy - pothetical ant on the beach ( 7Be Sciences of the Artzjiciinl , 1969 ) can be greatly simplified by reference to the in - teractions of two factors : the ant ' s intended ( internal ) target and the ( external ) obstacles in its path . Attribution to the ant of a specified set of intentions enables a com - putational - level analysis of its activity . In the absence of knowing the " intentions " of the object , we can know only measured behaviors ( as in the standard " behaviorist " argument ) , including , of course , measured neural re - Book Reuiavs 301 sponses . We nonetheless wish to know what mental , psychological , cognitive , operations are occurring : we wish to study thinking , not only behavior per se . In the absence of powerful neurobiological data to bring to bear on these points , psychology has proceeded to at - tempt the identification of mental operations predomi - nantly from psychological experimentation . Newel1 suggests a number of constraints , with particular atten - tion to timing and latency , that arise from the character - istics of neurons and networks ( see especially Chapter 3 ) , and incorporates them into the theoretical framework of SOAR . Horn - ever , he also suggests that more theory , rather than more data , is what is most needed : " My bet is that enough constraining regularities already exist in the literature to identify the architecture to all intents and purposes . We could stop doing experiments entirely and , just from what now exists , discover what the archi - tecture is " ( p . 244 ) . In this regard , psychology is unique among the sciences for arguing that the details of the physical object of study , in this case , the brain , may not be centrally needed in furthering the goals of the science . It has in fact been argued that there are many questions that cannot in principle be answered using psychological and behavioral experiments alone , such as whether a process is serial or parallel , or what type of representa - tion is used in any given cognitive task ( Townsend , 1974 ; Anderson , 1978 ) . John Anderson , professor of psychology at Newell ' s own institution , Carnegie - Mellon University , has been another primary purveyor of the type of unified theory advocated by Newell ; Anderson is author of , among many other works , The Architecture of Cognition ( 1983 ) , and the ACT system , which shares many goals with Newell ' s SOAR system . Anderson has stated that in light of the identifiability problem , all proposed models of cognitive mechanisms must be regarded merely as notations , without deeper explanatory power ( Anderson , 1989 ) . Newell dismisses these views as " misplaced , " and proposes that " the way to solve the identifiability prob - lem is by bringing to bear large , diverse collections of quasi - independent sources of knowledge - structural , behavioral , functional - that finally allow the system to be pinned down " ( p . 22 ) . Newell hypothesizes a single set of underlying mechanisms unifying the diverse do - mains , but let us for the moment assume an alternative that we might term the " dissociation " hypothesis : many distinct brain circuits exist , each operating relatively in - dependently of the others , and each giving rise to distinct portions of the vast range of psychological and behavioral data that Newell hopes to unify . If brain organization turns out to have this nonunified character , it will be difficult to argue that mental organization does not share it . Newel1 argues that unified psychological theories are now possible , but that does not mean that they will be desirable . This brings us back to the question raised at the outset : how can we identify fundamental psychological opera - tions and their interactions ? Cognitive neuroscience ad - dresses this issue by studying specific anatomically defined brain areas in an attempt to identify their emer - gent functionality . Arguably , functions that arise directly from the normal operation of primary brain circuits will be fundamental : they are the " building block operations from which other operations are constructed . Newell objects to arguments based on purely Popperian falsifi - ability of theories , yet biologically identified operations will be fundamental not just in terms of falsifiability , but also in terms of predictive power and , perhaps most importantly , explanatory power : by showing us what is primary and what composite , what is fundamental and what derived , such findings may help inform us why we do what we do ; how it is that we are the way we are . It is by success at answering these central questions about our mental lives that cognitive psychology and cognitive neuroscience ultimately will be measured . Allen Newel1 has never shied away from attacking these deep ques - tions , and Unijied Theories of Cognition represents one of the largest coordinated efforts ever undertaken in cognitive psychology in pursuit of this goal ; it is an im - portant landmark , and an exceedingly rich and provoc - ative one . Reprint requests should be sent to Dr . Richard Granger , Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory , Bonney Center , University of California , Irvine , CA 92717 REFERENCES Anderson , J . R . ( 1978 ) . Argument concerning representations for mental imagery . Psychological Reviw , 85 , 249 - 277 . Anderson , J . R . ( 1983 ) . The Architecture of Cognition . Carn - bridge , Mass : Harvard Univ . Press . Anderson , J . R . ( 1990 ) . The place of cognitive architectures in a rational analysis . In : Architectures for Intelligence ( K . VanLehn , Ed . ) , Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Marr , David ( 1982 ) . Vision : a computational investigation into the human representation and processing of visual infor - mation . San Francisco : W . H . Freeman . Simon , H . A . ( 1969 ) . The Sciences of the Artificial . Cambridge , Mass : MIT Press . Townsend , J . T . ( 1974 ) . Issues and models concerning the processing of a finite number of inputs . In : Human Infor - mation Processing : Tutorials in Performance and Cognition ( B . H . Kantowitz , Ed . ) , Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . 302 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience Volume 3 , Number 3