Nonlinear Osmotic Properties of the Cell Nucleus J OHN D . F INAN , 1 , 2 K EVIN J . C HALUT , 2 A DAM W AX , 2 and F ARSHID G UILAK 1 , 2 1 Department of Surgery , Duke University Medical Center , 375 MSRB , Box 3093 , Durham , NC 27710 , USA ; and 2 Department of Biomedical Engineering , Duke University , Durham , NC 27708 , USA ( Received 25 April 2008 ; accepted 3 December 2008 ; published online 24 December 2008 ) Abstract — In the absence of active volume regulation pro - cesses , cell volume is inversely proportional to osmolarity , as predicted by the Boyle Van’t Hoff relation . In this study , we tested the hypothesis that nuclear volume has a similar relationship with extracellular osmolarity in articular chon - drocytes , cells that are exposed to changes in the osmotic environment in vivo . Furthermore , we explored the mecha - nism of the relationships between osmolarity and nuclear size and shape . Nuclear size was quantiﬁed using two indepen - dent techniques , confocal laser scanning microscopy and angle - resolved low coherence interferometry . Nuclear vol - ume was osmotically sensitive but this relationship was not linear , showing a decline in the osmotic sensitivity in the hypo - osmotic range . Nuclear shape was also inﬂuenced by extracellular osmolarity , becoming smoother as the osmo - larity decreased . The osmotically induced changes in nuclear size paralleled the changes in nuclear shape , suggesting that shape and volume are interdependent . The osmotic sensitiv - ity of shape and volume persisted after disruption of the actin cytoskeleton . Isolated nuclei contracted in response to physiologic changes in macromolecule concentration but not in response to physiologic changes in ion concentration , suggesting solute size has an important inﬂuence on the osmotic pressurization of the nucleus . This ﬁnding in turn implies that the diffusion barrier that causes osmotic effects is not a semi - permeable membrane , but rather due to size constraints that prevent large solute molecules from entering small spaces in the nucleus . As nuclear morphology has been associated previously with cell phenotype , these ﬁndings may provide new insight into the role of mechanical and osmotic signals in regulating cell physiology . Keywords — Cell mechanics , Chromatin , Cartilage , Osteo - arthritis , DNA , Progeria . INTRODUCTION The ability to perceive and respond to biophysical factors , such as mechanical or osmotic stresses , is critical for normal cell behavior . For example , many cell types exhibit biological responses to physical stimuli such as mechanical deformation , hydrostatic pressure , ﬂuid shear stress , or osmotic stresses . These physical parameters are often coupled to one another in tis - sues that possess a charged , hydrated , extracellular matrix , such as articular cartilage . 40 , 44 , 48 , 49 , 52 – 54 , 66 , 72 Such stresses may alter cell behavior by initiating traditional cell signaling processes involving the acti - vation of ion channels 32 , 36 , 46 , 64 or other membrane - bound receptors . 17 , 19 It has also been hypothesized that physical stresses propagate through the cell and act directly on the nucleus and other intracellular organ - elles , exerting a biological inﬂuence at a subcellular level . 16 In this respect , the physical conformation of the nucleus is associated with many important bio - logical phenomena . For example , the nuclei of epi - thelial cells enlarge dramatically when they become cancerous . 5 Chromatin condensation is one of the ﬁrst changes to occur in apoptosis . 42 Nuclear lamins A / C accumulate as stem cells differentiate 7 , 18 , 62 and the stiffness of the lamina network increases as a result . 58 Interestingly , lamin B1 , the only sub - type that does not affect the stiffness of the lamina network , 45 is unchanged during differentiation . The signiﬁcance , if any , of these physical changes can be better interpreted through more detailed knowledge of the biophysical properties of the cell nucleus . It is now apparent that extracellular matrix interacts with the cytoplasm and other intracellular organelles such as the nucleus via a solid - state connection to the cytoskeleton . 29 , 41 , 47 , 74 There has been considerable speculation that this connection provides a mechanism by which extracellular stresses can be transmitted intracellularly in a manner that can alter cell signaling directly at the level of the nucleus . 37 , 47 Osmotic stress , on the other hand , does not depend on solid connec - tions , but rather is ‘‘transmitted’’ by the diffusion of ions and water through ﬂuid compartments and is modulated by local ﬁxed charge density . Since the cell membrane is permeable to water , osmotic stress is rapidly propagated to the interior of the cell in the presence or absence of solid structures in the cyto - plasm . However , the physical effects of extracellular Address correspondence to Farshid Guilak , Department of Surgery , Duke University Medical Center , 375 MSRB , Box 3093 , Durham , NC 27710 , USA . Electronic mail : guilak @ duke . edu Annals of Biomedical Engineering , Vol . 37 , No . 3 , March 2009 ( (cid:1) 2008 ) pp . 477 – 491 DOI : 10 . 1007 / s10439 - 008 - 9618 - 5 0090 - 6964 / 09 / 0300 - 0477 / 0 (cid:1) 2008 Biomedical Engineering Society 477 osmotic stress on the cell nucleus , as well as the intrinsic physicochemical properties of the nucleus , are not well understood . A few previous studies have examined the physical and biomechanical properties of the cell nucleus . The nucleus is stiﬀer and more viscous than the cyto - plasm , 23 , 25 , 35 potentially contributing to the stiffness of the cell as a structure . 12 Furthermore , defective nuclear mechanics due to genetic alterations in nuclear cytoskeletal proteins compromise the mechanical integrity of the whole cell . 8 The nuclear envelope is supported by a network of intermediate ﬁlaments called lamins and ﬁlled with chromatin . 30 The stiffest part of the nucleus is the lamin network , while the most viscous part is the chromatin . Both appear to show power law dynamics after the application of a step load . 20 Computational studies have shown that the mechanical response of the whole nucleus is highly sensitive to the stiffness of the nuclear lamina . 73 Chromatin contains many charged groups that limit its compaction by repelling one another and cause it to condense or expand in response to changes in ion concentration . 67 – 69 Small molecules and ions diffuse freely into and out of the nucleus through the nuclear pore complexes that populate the nuclear envelope . 57 In charged hydrated tissues such as cartilage , bulk compression of the tissue changes the shape and volume of the chondrocyte and its nucleus in a coor - dinated manner . 10 , 33 , 43 However , if the F - actin cyto - skeleton is disrupted with cytochalasin D , the effects of tissue compression on nuclear shape disappear , but the effects on volume remain . 33 Osmotic loading aﬀects a range of biological pro - cesses in articular chondrocytes including calcium signaling , 26 protein synthesis , 6 gene expression , 39 and cytoskeletal reorganization . 15 , 27 , 34 The physical response that accompanies these biological responses is well - understood at the whole - cell level . When active responses are suppressed , the reciprocal of osmolarity exhibits a linear relationship with cell volume , as pre - dicted by the Boyle Van’t Hoff relation . 55 Many mammalian cells obey the Boyle Van’t Hoff relation , including chondrocytes , 11 , 34 neutrophils , 70 and human islet cells . 22 Changes in the extracellular osmotic environment cause intracellular changes such as alter - ations in genome architecture 1 due to an increase of macromolecular crowding in the cytoplasm that causes histone aggregation through an excluded volume effect . 61 The volume of the chondrocyte nucleus changes with changes in osmolarity 56 but it is not known if the osmotic response of the nucleus shares the linear character of the cell response . We hypothe - sized that the nucleus , similar to the cell , would behave as an ideal osmometer , following the Boyle Van’t Hoff relation . The goal of this study was to examine this hypothesis by systematically quantifying the dynamic and equilibrium morphologic response of the cell nu - cleus to changes in extracellular osmolarity using two independent methods , confocal microscopy and angle - resolved low coherence interferometry ( a / LCI ) . Fur - ther experiments examined the mechanisms of the observed behavior . MATERIALS AND METHODS Mathematical Model The equilibrium volume response of the nuclei was modeled using an extension of an existing model of the swelling of porous gels 2 to estimate the stiffness of the nuclear lamina . The original model describes a spherical gel without a surface membrane . The per - meation of the solute molecule into the pore ﬂuid is limited by steric exclusion . This is quanitiﬁed using the partition coefﬁcient , j , which establishes the fol - lowing relationship ( Eq . 19 in Albro et al . 2 ) between the concentration within the gel at equilibrium , c eq , and the concentration in the surrounding bath at equilibrium , c (cid:1) eq . c eq ¼ j c (cid:1) eq ð 1 Þ The partition coeﬃcient is determined by the pore size distribution in the gel and the size of solute mol - ecule . The partition coeﬃcient only departs from unity in the case of large solute molecules for which steric exclusion eﬀects are non - negligible . In the case of the cell nucleus , the surrounding bath is the cytoplasm and it contains many solute species , each of which has a diﬀerent partition coeﬃcient between the cytoplasm and the nucleoplasm so it is necessary to deﬁne an apparent partition coeﬃcient , j a , such that c nuc = j a c cyt where c nuc is the concentration in the nucleo - plasm and c cyt is the concentration in the cytoplasm . Note that : c cyt ¼ c (cid:1) eq ð 2 Þ for a cell that behaves as a perfect osmometer so that : c nuc ¼ j a c (cid:1) eq ð 3 Þ The apparent partition coeﬃcient of the chondro - cyte nucleus can be determined from the hyperosmotic contraction using Eq . ( 15 ) in Albro et al . H a @ u @ r (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) r ¼ a þ 2 m 1 (cid:2) m u ð a ; t Þ a (cid:2) (cid:3) ¼ (cid:2) R h 1 (cid:2) j a ð Þ c (cid:1) ð t Þ ð 4 Þ where H a is aggregate modulus , u is solid matrix dis - placement , r is the radial coordinate , a is the radius in a zero osmolarity bath , m is the Poisson’s ratio , t is time , F INAN et al . 478 R is the universal gas constant , and h is the absolute temperature . Albro et al . show that the displacement solution for this system has the form u r ; t ! 1 ð Þ ¼ n r where u is the radial displacement , r is the radial coordinate , t is time and n is a constant determined by the boundary conditions . Since the model is one - dimensional , all other deformation terms can be deduced from this constant n . The bulk modulus K is related to the aggregate modulus by the following expression K ¼ H a 1 þ m ð Þ = 3 1 (cid:2) m ð Þ . Substituting this expression and the displacement solution into Eq . ( 4 ) yields the following relation : 3 K n ¼ (cid:2) R h 1 (cid:2) j a ð Þ c (cid:1) eq ð 5 Þ Writing volume in terms of n and neglecting higher order terms because this is a small strain analysis leads to the following expression ( 20 in Albro et al . ) relating the normalized volume to the extracellular osmolarity . V eq V r ¼ 1 (cid:2) R h 1 (cid:2) j a ð Þ c (cid:1) eq . K 1 (cid:2) R h 1 (cid:2) j a ð Þ c (cid:1) r (cid:4) K ð 6 Þ where subscript r refers to the reference condition , 380 mOsm in this experiment . This allows determina - tion of j a from the hyper - osmotic response if K is speciﬁed . Most of the mechanical models of the cell nucleus in the literature model it as an incompressible material and therefore that data cannot be used to determine K . However , one investigator reported large volumetric strains under pressure in micropipette experiments . 63 While the data was not presented in a form that allows exact determination of K , the range of pressures applied and strains measured suggests that a value of 10 kPa is accurate to within one order of magnitude . More accurate measurements of this property in the future would increase the utility of this model . In this analysis , a single data point corre - sponding to an extracellular osmolarity of 482 mOsm was used to evaluate j a on the grounds that the model was originally developed using small strain assump - tions violated at higher osmolarities . The strain at 482 mOsm is the only hyper - osmotic strain that is within the range for which the model was originally validated . The value of j a determined by this approach was 0 . 9956 . The hypo - osmotic response of this model with respect to inverse normalized osmolarity is non - linear . However , the non - linearity is not strong enough to ﬁt the trend in the observed data . This , combined with the observed changes in shape during hypo - osmotic expansion , supports the introduction of a membrane stress term . Equation ( 4 ) is a relation between volu - metric strain and pressure . The membrane tension is represented by adding a pressure term to Eq . ( 4 ) using the Law of Laplace 4 to create the following equation : 3 K n ¼ (cid:2) R h 1 (cid:2) j a ð Þ c (cid:1) eq (cid:2) 2 T q ð 7 Þ where T ¼ 0 ; A < A crit K A AA crit (cid:2) 1 (cid:5) (cid:6) ; A > A crit ( ð 8 Þ where T is membrane tension , q is the radius , K A is the dilatational modulus of the membrane , A is the membrane area , and A crit is the critical area at which the membrane is drawn taut . Fitting the governing Eqs . ( 7 ) and ( 8 ) to the data presented in Fig . 1a allows determination of the mechanical properties of the nuclear lamina , speciﬁcally the K A and c crit , the osmolarity at which the nuclear membrane begins to resist further osmotic expansion ( the critical value of the osmolarity is determined from the corresponding value of n using Eqs . 9 and 4 ) . To solve these equa - tions , the area must be written in terms of n as follows : A ¼ 4 p q 2 ¼ 4 p a 2 1 þ n ð Þ 2 (cid:3) 4 p a 2 1 þ 2 n ð Þ A crit (cid:3) 4 p a 2 1 þ 2 n crit ð Þ ð 9 Þ and substituted into Eq . ( 7 ) . For A < A crit , n is related to c * by Eq . ( 5 ) . For A > A crit , the resulting form of Eq . ( 7 ) was solved in Mathematica ( Wolfram Research Inc . , Champaign , IL ) to yield an analytical expression for n . Albro et al . ’s Eq . ( 17 ) can be used to give the normalized volume in terms of n as follows V eq V r ¼ 1 þ 3 n 1 (cid:2) R h 1 (cid:2) j a ð Þ c (cid:1) r = K ð 10 Þ This model was coded in Matlab and ﬁt to the hypoosmotic volume data numerically . Ponder’s plots for various values of the model properties are presented in Fig . 2 . Cell Isolation and Culture Chondrocytes were isolated from articular cartilage of the lateral femoral condyle of 2 - to 3 - year - old skeletally mature female pigs obtained from a local abbatoir . Cells were isolated by sequential digestion in pronase and collagenase solution and seeded on glass coverslips in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle medium con - taining 10 % fetal bovine serum , 1 . 5 % HEPES and 1 % non - essential amino acids ( all cell culture reagents were supplied by Gibco , Grand Island , NY ) . The medium was adjusted to pH 7 . 4 , and its osmolarity was increased to 380 mOsm with sucrose and veriﬁed with a freezing point osmometer ( Precision Systems Inc . , Nucleus Response to Osmotic Loading 479 Natick , MA ) . About 380 mOsm is an approximate value for the extracellular osmolarity experienced by chondrocytes in situ . 71 For confocal microscopy experiments , 0 . 2 mL of media containing approxi - mately 2 9 10 5 cells was spread on the center of a 42 mm diameter coverslip that was placed in a 60 mm diameter culture dish . Cells were incubated for 1 h to allow attachment to the coverslip , and 5 mL of media was added to each dish before incubation was contin - ued . For angle resolved low coherence interferometry ( a / LCI ) experiments , chondrocytes were seeded at a density of 7 9 10 5 / cm 2 in chambered coverglasses . Cells were incubated at 37 (cid:2) C in a humidiﬁed atmo - sphere of 95 % air and 5 % CO 2 for 18 h . As a result , the chondrocytes were attached to the glass but maintained their rounded morphology at the time of the experiments . 26 Microscopic Imaging Each coverslip was incubated in 380 mOsm saline with 10 l M acridine orange ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) , a ﬂuorescent label of nucleic acids , for 20 min to label the nuclei . The cells and their nuclei were visualized using confocal laser scanning micros - copy ( LSM 510 , Carl Zeiss , Thornwood NY ) . Images were obtained through an inverted ﬂuorescent micro - scope ( Axiovert 100M , Carl Zeiss ) with a C - Apo - chromat , 63 9 , water immersion , 1 . 2 - NA objective lens . Acridine orange ﬂuorescence was excited by an argon - ion laser ( 488 nm ) at 2 % power and the stimu - lated emission was collected through a 505 – 550 nm ﬁlter on an 8 - bit intensity scale . For DIC images , the sample was also illuminated with a helium - neon laser at 80 % power . Images of 1024 9 1024 pixels were recorded with a scale length of 0 . 12 microns per pixel . FIGURE 1 . ( a ) The Ponder’s relation ( inverse osmolarity vs . normalized volume ) was found to be linear for the cell but nonlinear for the nucleus . The non - linearity of the response of the nucleus was independent of the techniques used to measure nuclear size ( i . e . , ﬂuorescent microscopy or angle resolved low coherence interferometry ( a / LCI ) ) . For nucleus by a / LCI , n 5 11 . For cell and nucleus by microscopy mea - surements , n is as per Table 1 . Error bars represent one standard error . V / V iso 5 volume / iso - osmotic volume , C iso / C 5 iso - osmotic osmolarity / osmolarity . ( b ) Values of the slope of the Ponder’s plot calculated for the cell and the nucleus ( as measured by ﬂuorescence microscopy ) in the hyper - and hypo - osmotic range ( error bars denote the 95 % conﬁdence interval ) . Bars with different letters are signiﬁ - cantly different . The observed differences are protected by a two way ANCOVA , which returns a signiﬁcant main effect of structure ( cell vs . nucleus ) , no signiﬁcant main effect of osmotic range ( hyper - osmotic vs . hypo - osmotic ) and a sig - niﬁcant interaction between structure and osmotic range . Slopes were considered different to statistically signiﬁcant degree if the 95 % conﬁdence intervals of the slopes do not overlap . Bars labeled with different letters are statistically signiﬁcantly different to one another . FIGURE 2 . ( a ) Ponder’s plots predicted by the mathematical model when K = 10 kPa , c crit = 300 mOsm and K A varies between 0 N / m and 0 . 1 N / m . ( b ) Ponder’s plot predicted by the mathematical model when K = 10 kPa , K = 0 . 1 N / m and c crit varies between 350 and 230 mOsm . F INAN et al . 480 The confocal pinhole was fully open , creating an optical slice thickness in excess of 7 . 5 l m . For three - dimensional imaging of isolated nuclei , the step size between images was 0 . 5 l m and samples were incu - bated with Syto 13 ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) for 30 min to ﬂuorescently label nuclei acids . Other settings were identical to those used for two - dimen - sional imaging . Angle Resolved Low Coherence Interferometry ( a / LCI ) Experiments A / LCI is a non - perturbative optical technique that measures the average nuclear size of cells in a biolog - ical sample , such as tissues or , in the case of the present study , on isolated cells . A / LCI combines the capabili - ties of low coherence interferometry with light scat - tering techniques to determine nuclear morphology with subwavelength accuracy . 13 , 14 Low coherence interferometry uses a wide bandwidth source for the purposes of achieving high depth resolution and rejecting multiply scattered light in a signal , as in optical coherence tomography . 38 This permits the ability to make sensitive measurements of light scat - tered from a single cell monolayer . Inverse light scat - tering analysis ( ILSA ) is predicated on the fact that elastically scattered light from an object yields a unique signature that is a function of the shape , size , and electromagnetic properties of the object . In the case of a / LCI , the angular light scattering distribution of a population of cells is processed to isolate the nuclear scattering contribution and compared to an appropri - ate model . 59 Upon statistical comparison to the model , the characteristics of the scattering objects , in this case nuclear size , can be discerned . The nuclear size of a monolayer of chondrocytes cultured in a chambered coverglass was measured after equilibration to saline at a range of different osmolarities . Equilibrium Eﬀects of Osmolarity on Cell and Nuclear Morphology The coverslip was loaded into a perfusion chamber ( PeCon GmbH , Kornhalde , Germany ) and washed three times with saline at 380 mOsm . The chamber was mounted on the microscope stage and 9 consecutive sequences of images were recorded , each consisting of 25 DIC images at 5 s intervals followed by a single ﬂuorescent image . At the beginning of each of these sequences , the saline in the chamber was withdrawn and replaced with saline at a diﬀerent osmolarity , starting with the highest value and proceeding to the lowest . The osmolarities used are listed in Table 1 . Transient Eﬀects of Osmolarity on Cell and Nuclear Morphology Samples were washed and mounted in the perfusion chamber on the microscope stage as described above . A single scan , including DIC and ﬂuorescent images , was recorded . The saline in the chamber was then exchanged and 9 further scans were taken over the next 140 s at irregular time intervals so that imaging would be most frequent during the most dynamic portion of the response . The saline was exchanged with saline at 280 mOsm for hypo - osmotic transients and 480 mOsm for hyper - osmotic transients . In the transient experi - ments , size is quantiﬁed using cross - sectional area . Calculation of Time Constants of Cross - sectional Area Change The following equation : A ð t Þ ¼ 1 þ K 1 (cid:2) e ð(cid:2) t = s Þ (cid:5) (cid:6) ð 11 Þ was ﬁt to aggregated data points from multiple experiments using non - linear regression to calculate the time constant of the response . In this expression , A ( t ) is the normalized cross - sectional area , K is the amplitude of the response , t is time , and s is the time constant . Non - linear regression was performed using Matlab to determine values and 95 % conﬁdence intervals for the amplitude and time constant . Values are reported to be signiﬁcantly different if the conﬁ - dence intervals do not overlap . Osmotic Loading of Cytochalasin D - treated Chondrocytes Chondrocytes were isolated and seeded on glass coverslips as described above . Cytochalasin D - treated chondrocytes were incubated with 2 l M cytochalasin D in DMEM with 10 % FBS for 3 h before testing TABLE 1 . Number of samples used in equilibrium experi - ments . Osmolarity ( C ) Inverse normalized osmolarity ( C iso / C ) Number of cells Number of nuclei 906 0 . 419 69 17 717 0 . 530 69 26 586 0 . 649 69 36 482 0 . 788 69 39 378 1 . 005 69 52 280 1 . 357 64 44 237 1 . 603 58 38 215 1 . 767 39 26 200 1 . 900 27 24 C iso refers to the iso - osmotic osmolarity , 380 mOsm . Nucleus Response to Osmotic Loading 481 while untreated chondrocytes were not . Both sets of chondrocytes were stained for 30 min with 0 . 5 l M Syto 13 ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) before testing to ﬂuorescently stain the nuclei . For testing , the cov - erslip was mounted in the perfusion chamber , washed three times in 380 mOsm media and mounted on the microscope stage . A single two - dimensional ﬂuorescent image was taken before any ﬂuid exchange to serve as a reference . Then , the 380 mOsm media in the chamber was exchanged with fresh 380 mOsm media and a second image was taken to serve as an iso - osmotic control . Finally , the 380 mOsm media was exchanged with 580 mOsm media and a third image was taken . Two minutes was allowed for equilibration after each exchange before an image was taken . Response of Isolated Nuclei to Elevated Concentrations of Macromolecules and Ions Nuclei were chemically isolated from freshly iso - lated chondrocytes as described previously . 35 Brieﬂy , 10 million freshly isolated porcine chondrocytes were suspended in 0 . 1 % IGEPAL CA - 630 for 8 min at 4 (cid:2) C . The suspension was diluted 10 : 1 with 0 . 75 % BSA in HBSS ( both from Gibco , Grand Island , NY ) and centrifuged at 500 g for 20 min at 4 (cid:2) C . The pellet was resuspended in 0 . 75 % BSA in HBSS and 100 l L droplets were spread on 42 mm coverslips and allowed to seed for 1 h . Then , the coverslips were covered in iso - osmotic testing buffer and incubated overnight before testing . The iso - osmotic testing buffer was 15 mM HEPES , 10 mM NaCl , 140 mM KCl , 500 l M MgCl 2 , and 100 nM CaCl 2 . These ion concentrations are typical of those in a mammalian cell at equilib - rium . 9 For testing , the coverslips were mounted in the perfusion chamber , washed three times in iso - osmotic testing buffer and mounted on the microscope stage . To simulate the crowded environment of the cyto - plasm , the buffer was exchanged for a 25 % solution of 10 kDa dextran ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) in iso - osmotic testing buffer , allowed to equilibrate for 2 min and imaged in three dimensions using the confocal microscope . For the control condition , the ﬂuid was then withdrawn from the chamber and replaced with an identical solution . For the high macromolecule condition , the ﬂuid in the chamber was exchanged with a 34 % dextran solution in iso - osmotic testing buffer . This condition models the increase in macromolecular crowding that would arise from an abrupt 26 % decrease in the cell volume , as is typical of chondro - cytes subjected to 380 mOsm—580 mOsm hyper - osmotic step change ( see ‘‘Results’’ ) . In the high ion condition , the ﬂuid was exchanged with a 25 % dextran solution in a high ion buffer consisting of 15 mM HEPES , 13 . 5 mM NaCl , 189 mM KCl , 676 l M MgCl 2 , and 135 nM CaCl 2 . These ion concentrations model the increase in ion concentration that would arise from an abrupt 26 % decrease in the cell volume . Image Analysis Chondrocyte volume was determined using an edge detection algorithm applied to the DIC images as described previously . 3 Brieﬂy , the focal plane of the microscope was manipulated during the experiment to create a diffraction pattern in the form of white ring marking the edge of the cell ( Fig . 5 ) . A custom - written application in PV - WAVE software ( Visual Numerics , Inc . , Houston , TX ) was used to deﬁne an annular region around the cell containing the ring and apply Sobel edge detection and optimization algorithms to calculate a closed curve representing the edge of the cell . This allowed direct measurement of the cross - sectional area from which volume was inferred by assuming the cell to be spherical . The cross - sectional area , perimeter length and contour ratio of the nucleus were determined from the ﬂuorescent images using Otsu segmentation and the Image Analysis Toolbox in Matlab ( The MathWorks , Inc . , Natick , MA ) . The contour ratio of a shape is deﬁned as 4 p 9 area / perimeter . 2 , 31 , 45 The nucleus volume was also deter - mined from the cross - sectional area by approximating the shape to be a sphere . For isolated nuclei , raw stacked images were deconvolved using commerical deconvolution software Huygens ( Scientiﬁc Volume Imaging , Amsterdam , the Netherlands ) . The decon - volved image was exported to Matlab and thresholded using the Iterative Self Organizing Data algorithm to determine the volume . RESULTS Cell volume was found to be linearly related to inverse normalized osmolarity throughout the domain tested , indicating that chondrocytes obey the Boyle Van’t Hoﬀ relation for the volumetric response of an ideal osmometer . The osmotically active volume frac - tion of the chondrocyte was determined from a linear ﬁt to be 67 % ( R 2 = 0 . 97 ) . Nucleus volume was also sensitive to osmolarity but in a non - linear manner . The nucleus volume increased linearly with inverse normalized osmolarity in the hyper - osmotic range . In the hypo - osmotic range , the slope of the relationship decreased continuously , sug - gesting an upper limit to nuclear expansion . The key features of the relationship between nucleus volume and osmolarity were found to be the same regardless of whether it was measured using ﬂuorescent microscopy F INAN et al . 482 or a / LCI ( Fig . 1a ) . For the sake of comparison , the Ponder’s plot data was separated into four cases rep - resenting the two different structures , the cell and the nucleus ( as measured by ﬂuorescence microscopy ) , and two different ranges , hyper - osmotic and hypo - osmotic . In each case , the data was ﬁt to a straight line to allow comparisons of the osmotic sensitivity to be made ( Fig . 1b ) . A two factor ANCOVA revealed a main effect of structure ( cell vs . nucleus ) , no main effect of osmotic range and a signiﬁcant interaction between structure and osmotic range . The osmotic sensitivity of the cell did not change signiﬁcantly between the hyper - and hypo - osmotic ranges but the sensitivity of the nucleus did change . The nucleus was more sensitive than the cell in the hyper - osmotic range and less so in the hypo - osmotic range . The nucleus volume response in the hyper - osmotic range was highly linear ( R 2 = 0 . 992 ) and the y - intercept of the linear ﬁt was 0 . 204 . This ﬁnding implies that the solid volume frac - tion of the nucleus is 20 . 4 % . An existing mathematical model describing osmotic swelling of gels 2 was modiﬁed to introduce a mem - brane representing the nuclear lamina ( see ‘‘Materials and Methods’’ ) . This model was ﬁt to the hypoosmotic volume data as measured by confocal microscopy to estimate the properties of the nuclear membrane . The optimal ﬁt was obtained when the dilational modulus of the nuclear envelope was 0 . 023 N / m and the nuclear envelope became taut at an extracellular osmolarity of 321 mOsm ( see Fig . 3 ) . The r 2 value of the ﬁt was 0 . 9998 . The model was optimized from a range of initial values to ensure the uniqueness of the reported optimal result . The optimization was repeated for several values of the K , the bulk modulus of the nucleus . It was found that the optimal value of the membrane stiffness scaled with the bulk modulus over four orders of magnitude from 100 Pa to 1 MPa . However , the optimal value of the osmolarity at which the nuclear membrane became taut remained the same across this range . Extracellular osmolarity inﬂuenced nucleus shape ( Fig . 4 ) . The contour ratio increased linearly with inverse normalized osmolarity in the hyper - osmotic range , indicating that the shape was becoming smoother . The slope of the relationship decreased in the hypo - osmotic range , appearing to approach a limit . This behavior was similar to the behavior of the rela - tionship between nucleus volume and inverse normal - ized osmolarity . The relationship of shape and size to osmolarity was also apparent qualitatively ( Fig . 5 ) . Cell shape was approximately circular ( i . e . , spherical ) at every osmo - larity , except for small distortions at the peak value . The size of the cell increased continuously with decreasing osmolarity throughout the range shown . The irregular shape of the nucleus at elevated osmo - larity became approximately circular and the nucleus expanded as the osmolarity decreased . The transient changes in the cross - sectional area of the cell and nucleus changed monotonically with time , showing negligible evidence of volume recovery ( Fig . 6 ) , as evidenced by the fact that an exponential expression with a single time constant ﬁt the data well . FIGURE 3 . Observed nuclear volume data from 480 to 200 mOsm along with the model for the same osmotic range with best - ﬁt membrane properties and bulk modulus of 10 kPa . FIGURE 4 . In the nucleus , the relationship between osmo - larity and contour ratio followed a similar trend to the rela - tionship between osmolarity and volme at equilibrium . Error bars represent one standard error . Nucleus Response to Osmotic Loading 483 In the cell , the time constant for volume decrease in response to hyper - osmotic stress was lower than that for volume increase with hypo - osmotic stress . Other differences between time constants were not signiﬁcant at 95 % conﬁdence ( Table 2 ) . The rate of change in nucleus shape was lower than that of nucleus size . The transient of the contour ratio required 120 s to reach its peak value . As a result , the perimeter length of the nucleus initially increases rap - idly under hypo - osmotic loading to a peak at about 15 s before decaying steadily for the rest of the experiment ( Fig . 7 ) as the shape evolves to accommo - date the constant cross sectional area within a shorter perimeter . The morphological response of the nucleus to hyper - osmotic loading was not inﬂuenced by cytochalasin D treatment . Upon transition from 380 mOsm media to 580 mOsm media , nuclear volume decreased by approximately 27 % , regardless of whether they had been pretreated with cytochalasin D ( Fig . 8a ) . A two - way factorial ANOVA revealed a main effect of osmo - larity but no main effect of cytochalasin D treatment and no interaction between osmolarity and cytochalasin D treatment . The reduction of volume at high osmo - larity was highly signiﬁcant ( p < 0 . 001 ) . Similarly , the contour ratio decreased by 5 % , regardless of treatment . Two - way factorial ANOVA showed a main effect of osmolarity but no main effect of treatment and no interaction between treatment and osmolarity . The reduction in the contour ratio at high osmolarity was also highly signiﬁcant ( p < 0 . 001 ) ( Fig . 8b ) . Isolated nuclei contracted in response to increased macromolecule concentration but not in response to increased ion concentration . A highly signiﬁcant ( p < 0 . 001 ) reduction of 9 % in the volume of isolated nuclei occurred when they were subjected to an increase in macromolecule concentration consistent with observed hyper - osmotic shrinkage of the cell . FIGURE 5 . Typical images of a single cell ( top ) and its nucleus ( bottom ) during equilibrium experiments at a range of osmolar - ities . The number above the each image pair indicates the osmolarity in mOsm . The number below each pair of images indicates the inverse normalized osmolarity . TABLE 2 . Time constants in seconds along with 95 % conﬁ - dence intervals for best ﬁts to transient responses . Hypo - osmotic Hyper - osmotic Cell 9 . 838 ± 1 . 013 ( n = 46 ) 5 . 670 ± 0 . 939 ( n = 45 ) Nucleus 7 . 800 ± 3 . 924 ( n = 39 ) 7 . 245 ± 1 . 788 ( n = 39 ) FIGURE 6 . Cell and nucleus cross - sectional area transients showed rapid ﬁrst order dynamics with no evidence of recovery . ( a ) The means and standard errors of the cell tran - sient response along with the best ﬁt of Eq . ( 11 ) and the 95 % conﬁdence interval ( n 5 46 and 45 for hypo - osmotic and hyper - osmotic tests , respectively ) . ( b ) The means and stan - dard errors of the nucleus transient response along with the best ﬁt of Eq . ( 11 ) and the 95 % conﬁdence interval ( n 5 39 for both the hyper - osmotic and the hypo - osmotic tests ) . Note that means are presented for illustrative purposes only and the actual ﬁt was to the whole population of data points rather than to their means . F INAN et al . 484 However , a similar increase in ion concentration caused no detectable change in the volume of the iso - lated nuclei ( Fig . 9 ) . The macromolecules used were 10 kDa dextrans , which are several orders of magni - tude larger than ions but still small enough to pass through the pores in the nuclear envelope . This was conﬁrmed with rhodamine - labeled dextrans ( Fig . 10 ) . DISCUSSION The ﬁndings of our study indicate that the equilib - rium osmotic response of chondrocytes matches that of an ideal osmometer , as described by the Boyle Van’t Hoﬀ relationship , and the transient results show neg - ligible recovery over time . Therefore , the equilibrium and transient responses of the cells suggest that they behave in a passive manner under these experimental conditions . The transient changes in cross - sectional area of the nucleus also showed negligible recovery . However , under these same conditions , the equilibrium volumetric response of the nucleus to changes in osmolarity , as measured by two independent methods , was found to be highly non - linear . The mechanisms involved in this non - linear physicochemical behavior are not completely understood , but changes in the shape of the nucleus were found to parallel changes in the size of the nucleus under equilibrium conditions , suggesting that the two are interdependent . By con - trast , shape change lagged size change in transient experiments . Further experiments suggest that the mechanism of nuclear morphology change is not cytoskeletal force transmission or concentration of intracellular ions but concentration of intracellular macromolecules . In a previous study of nuclear size in chondrocytes subjected to a single step change of 200 mOsm , nuclei changed less than cells in the hypo - osmotic case but the changes were not signﬁcantly diﬀerent in the hyper - osmotic case . 56 These ﬁndings are in agreement with the results of the present study , where we found that the slope of the Ponder’s plot ( i . e . , the volume response ) was only 0 . 24 for the nuclei while it was 0 . 66 for the cells in the hypo - osmotic range . However , in contrast to the previous results , we found a difference between the cell and nucleus in the hyper - osmotic range , where the slope of the Ponder’s plot was 0 . 67 for the cells and 0 . 8 for the nuclei . The difference between the cell and nucleus responses was greater in the hypo - osmotic range than in the hyper - osmotic range ( see Fig . 1b ) , supporting the asymmetry seen in the previ - ous study . 56 FIGURE 7 . The shape changed more slowly than the size . To accommodate this , the perimeter was extended at early time points before recovering as the shape evolved into a smoother proﬁle . Error bars represent one standard error ( n 5 39 ) . FIGURE 8 . The morphological effect of hyper - osmotic load - ing is not inﬂuenced by cytochalasin D treatment . ( a ) The nuclear volume is reduced by approximately 26 % in both the untreated and cytochalasin D - treated case . ( b ) The nuclear contour ratio is increased by approximately 5 % in both the untreated and the cytochalasin D - treated case , n 5 34 nuclei per group , error bars represent 1 SD , * indicates statistically signiﬁcant difference . Nucleus Response to Osmotic Loading 485 The hyper - osmotic response of the nucleus on a Ponder’s plot was found to be linear with a y - intercept of 20 . 4 % , suggesting that this is the solid volume fraction of the nucleus . This agrees with the ﬁndings of Rowat et al . , who reported that micropipette aspira - tion of nuclei reduced their volume but it was difﬁcult to reduce the nuclear volume by more than 70 % . 63 Despite the linearity of the response , the nucleus does not have the semi - permeable membrane characteristic of an ideal osmometer . The nuclear envelope is punc - tuated by pores that render it permeable to small ions . 57 There was a signiﬁcant reduction in the volume of isolated nuclei loaded with increased concentrations of macromolecules but no signiﬁcant change in the volume of isolated nuclei loaded with increased con - centrations of ions ( Fig . 9 ) . This suggests that the nucleus dilates because the macromolecular concen - tration in the cytoplasm changes when the cell volume changes . These ﬁndings are consistent with other reports in the literature . Albiez et al . reported that nuclear architecture was altered by hyper - osmotic loading with saline but that the effect was abolished by permeabilization of the cell membrane . 1 Richter et al . reported that changes in ion concentration did not inﬂuence the nuclei of permeabilized cells but changes in macromolecule concentration did . 61 Macromolecules may exert an osmotic stress even on systems such as the nucleus that are not surrounded by a semi - permeable membrane . Size exclusion of large molecules from small tortuous spaces in a gel creates dilute regions that are osmotically pressurized . The size exclusion eﬀect is quantiﬁed by the partition coeﬃ - cient , the ratio between solute concentrations inside and outside the gel . If the partition coeﬃcient is less than one , the gel is osmotically pressurized . Experi - mental evidence for this phenomenon in alginate beads along with a theoretical analysis was provided by Albro et al . 2 They found that the partition coefﬁcient of a solute molecule is a function of its size , since larger molecules are excluded from a larger fraction of the pores in the gel . Monovalent ions are small enough to enter even the smallest pores so that no osmotic response is expected for osmotic loading with saline in this model . On the other hand , large molecules such as 10 kDa dextrans are expected to have a partition coefﬁcient substantially less than unity and exert sub - stantial osmotic pressure . This is indeed the case for isolated chondrocyte nuclei ( Fig . 9 ) . The increase in macromolecular concentration was intended to model the change in the cytoplasm of a cell subject to an extracellular osmolarity of 580 mOsm . However , the reduction in the volume of the isolated nuclei was only 9 % whereas the reduction of volume for nuclei inside cells subjected to 580 mOsm was 28 % . This may be because the solution used to load isolated nuclei con - tained only macromolecules of 10 kDa . The cytoplasm contains larger molecules that may have smaller par - tition coefﬁcients with the nucleoplasm and hence exert a larger osmotic load . Also , the cytoplasm contains molecules too large to pass through the nuclear pores that exert a conventional osmotic pressure on the nucleus . Hence , it is unsurprising that the volume reduction in isolated nuclei is less than for nuclei in situ . The model presented by Albro et al . 2 predicts a linear relationship between osmolarity and volumetric strain so the Ponder’s plot of the model output has a continuously declining slope . However , the decline in the slope is not sharp enough to ﬁt the abrupt plateau in the observed volume data in the present study . This characteristic , combined with the observed correlation between shape and volume , motivated a modiﬁcation of the model to include a membrane tension term to model the mechanical integrity of the nuclear lamina ( see ‘‘Materials and Methods’’ ) . This model allowed estimation of the stiffness of the nuclear lamina along with the osmolarity at which the nuclear lamina becomes taut . The value determined for the stiffness of the nuclear lamina depends heavily on the value used for the bulk modulus of the nucleus , a property that can only be estimated from the available literature . A more accurate value for this property would increase the power of this approach to non - invasively determine the mechanical properties of the nuclear membrane . FIGURE 9 . Isolated nuclei contracted in response to increased macromolecule concentration but not in response to increased ion concentration , n 5 100 – 126 , error bars rep - resent 1 SD , * indicates statistically signiﬁcant difference . ‘‘Hyper ions’’ denotes elevated ion concentration . ‘‘Hyper macro’’ denotes elevated macro molecule concentration ( see ‘‘Materials and Methods’’ for details ) . F INAN et al . 486 The osmolarity at which the nuclear lamina becomes taut , 321 mOsm , is not sensitive to the value of the bulk modulus . It is signiﬁcant that this value lies below the osmolarity experienced by chondrocytes ( 380 mOsm ) , suggesting that physiologic changes in cartilage osmolarity ( secondary to mechanical loading ) would result in changes in nucleus size in situ . Nucleus shape changed more slowly than the nucleus size under hypo - osmotic load ( Fig . 7 ) . The mechanism of this behavior is unknown but may result from inhomogeneity in the viscoelasticity of the nucleus . Previous studies suggest that the nucleoplasm creeps more rapidly than the lamina , 20 so it is possible that nuclear morphology is determined initially by the nucleoplasm but thereafter is increasingly inﬂuenced by the lamina as the stiffness of the nucleoplasm decays . Since the lamina acts mechanically as a mem - brane , its inﬂuence is to move the nucleus towards a smoother shape that minimizes surface area and the length of the perimeter of the cross - section . The changing geometry of the nucleus may reﬂect the redistribution of strain between these two structures according to their changing stiffnesses . Further work is necessary to fully understand this phenomenon . FIGURE 10 . ( a ) Merged DIC and rhodamine ﬂuorescence image of isolated nuclei incubated with rhodamine - labeled 10 kDa dextrans at room temperature . ( b ) Plot of intensities of DIC image and rhodamine ﬂuorescence along in the green line in ( a ) . There is almost no difference in the intensity of rhodamine staining inside and outside the isolated nuclei . Nucleus Response to Osmotic Loading 487 The transient response of the cell cross - sectional area was signiﬁcantly slower in the hypo - osmotic condition than in the hyper - osmotic condition ( see Table 2 ) . While an equivalent change in osmolarity was applied in both conditions ( 100 mOsm ) , it is important to note that the volume change predicted by the Boyle Van’t Hoff relation is related to the reciprocal of osmolarity . In this case , the hypo - osmotic condition is a 35 % increase in the reciprocal of osmolarity while the hyper - osmotic condition is a 21 % decrease . The hypo - osmotic response may equilibrate more slowly because it represents a larger effective change . Also , artiﬁcial disruption of the F - actin cyto - skeleton has been shown to slow volume change in both hypo - and hyper - osmotically loaded chondro - cytes . 56 Hypo - osmotic loading disrupts the F - actin cytoskeleton in untreated chondrocytes but hyper - osmotic loading does not . 27 , 34 Thus , cytoskeletal dis - ruption and remodeling may also play a role in the observed difference in the time constants . This study relies on measurement of volume inferred from the cross - sectional area of a cell or nucleus in a two dimensional image for the transient and equilib - rium experiments on nuclei within intact cells . There - fore , an important assumption in the interpretation of this data is that the cell or nucleus in question is a sphere . In this study , chondrocytes are observed to be quite spherical , but nuclei are often spheroidal and may even have more complicated shapes as indicated in the discussion of evolving contour ratios . For this reason , measured values were normalized to the iso - osmotic condition rather than presented as absolute values . Exact knowledge of the three - dimensional shape is required to relate cross - sectional area to absolute volume but the relationship between area dilatation and volume dilatation is less sensitive . The ratio of the reference and deformed volume for an isotropic deformation ﬁeld is equal to the ratio of the reference and deformed cross - sectional areas raised to the power of 1 . 5 , regardless of geometry . Isotropic deformations were assumed for the cell and nucleus in these experiments . To validate this approach , three - dimensional confocal images were taken of stained nuclei in intact chondrocytes at three diﬀerent osmo - larities and used to calculate volume . Then , the three dimensional images were projected on to a two - dimensional plane and volumes were estimated from the projected area . As expected , the absolute volumes deduced from the two methods were diﬀerent but the normalized results were identical ( data not shown ) . This procedure allowed us to take multiple measure - ments of the same nucleus using two - dimensional imaging without the photobleaching associated with repeated three - dimensional imaging . In contrast to nuclei inside intact cells , isolated nuclei sit directly on the glass coverslip so they are constrained on one side . In this case , it was considered appropriate to image the volume directly using stacked confocal imaging and design the experiment to rely on only one pair of stacked images . The physiological implications of changes in nuclear morphology are not fully understood , but they are observed in association with a number of important biological phenomena . Genome organization inﬂu - ences a host of fundamental biological processes 50 , 51 and is presumably altered by changes in nucleus mor - phology . There is evidence that changes in nuclear shape and volume may alter nucleo - cytoplasmic transport . For example , nuclear permeability is increased in ﬂattened cells as compared to rounded cells , and increased tension in the nuclear envelope is one mechanism that has been proposed for this phe - nomenon . 28 A rough nuclear perimeter is observed in cases where lamin is defective due to a genetic disease such as Hutchinson - Gilford progeria syndrome ( HGPS ) , 31 supporting the idea that lamin - dependent membrane mechanics in the nuclear cortex maintain the conventional smooth shape of the eukaryotic nucleus . Despite the devastating consequences of the disease , the nuclei of HGPS cells are not more fragile than those of healthy cells but they do exhibit reduced lamin mobility and altered lamin organization . 21 This ﬁnding suggests that the nuclear lamina is much more than a passive structural element and that reorgani - zation of the lamina under load is a sensitive and important mechanotransduction process . The smoothness of the nuclear perimeter also deteriorates in normal aging , 65 increasing the relevance of these changes to degenerative diseases such as osteoarthritis . While both normal aging and HGPS reduce the capacity of the nucleus to repair DNA , it is not known what connection , if any , the physical changes associ - ated with these conditions have to DNA repair . However , it is worth noting that exposure to a hyper - osmotic environment , which is shown here to produce a rough nuclear perimeter , also inhibits DNA repair . 24 The role of cause and effect may be interchangeable between biological and physical phenomena in some cases . For example , cell shrinkage and chromatin condensation are traditionally viewed as effects of apoptosis but hyper - osmotic shrinkage sensitizes hepatocytes towards CD95 ligand - induced apoptosis . 60 In summary , the ﬁndings of this study show that nucleus morphology is osmotically sensitive and the relationship between morphology and osmolarity is signiﬁcantly non - linear , in contrast to the behavior of the cell . The nuclear response does not depend on integrity of the actin cytoskeleton . Isolated nuclei contract in respond to physiologic changes in macro - molecule concentration but not in response to similar F INAN et al . 488 changes in the concentration of common intracellular ions , suggesting that osmotic pressure arises from size exclusion of large solute molecules rather than mem - brane conﬁnement of ions . These results on passive cells also oﬀer a valuable baseline for studies that seek to interpret physical changes that occur during active cell processes . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Supported by NIH Grants AR50245 , AR48182 , AG15768 , and AR48852 . We thank Dr . Mansoor Haider for many important discussions . REFERENCES 1 Albiez , H . , M . Cremer , C . Tiberi , L . Vecchio , L . Scherm - elleh , S . Dittrich , K . Kupper , B . Joffe , T . Thormeyer , J . von Hase , S . Yang , K . Rohr , H . Leonhardt , I . Solovei , C . Cremer , S . Fakan , and T . Cremer . Chromatin domains and the interchromatin compartment form structurally deﬁned and functionally interacting nuclear networks . Chromosome Res . 14 ( 7 ) : 707 – 733 , 2006 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10577 - 006 - 1086 - x . 2 Albro , M . B . , N . O . Chahine , M . Caligaris , V . I . Wei , M . Likhitpanichkul , K . W . Ng , C . T . Hung , and G . A . Ateshian . Osmotic loading of spherical gels : a biomimetic study of hindered transport in the cell protoplasm . J . Bio - mech . Eng . 129 ( 4 ) : 503 – 510 , 2007 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 2746371 . 3 Alexopoulos , L . G . , G . R . Erickson , and F . Guilak . A method for quantifying cell size from differential inter - ference contrast images : validation and application to osmotically stressed chondrocytes . J . Microsc . 205 ( Pt 2 ) : 125 – 135 , 2002 . doi : 10 . 1046 / j . 0022 - 2720 . 2001 . 00976 . x . 4 Ateshian , G . A . , M . Likhitpanichicul , and C . T . Hung . A mixture theory analysis for passive transport in osmotic loading of cells . J . Biomech . 39 ( 3 ) : 464 – 475 , 2006 . 5 Backman , V . , M . B . Wallace , L . T . Perelman , J . T . Arendt , R . Gurjar , M . G . Muller , Q . Zhang , G . Zonios , E . Kline , J . A . McGilligan , S . Shapshay , T . Valdez , K . Badizadegan , J . M . Crawford , M . Fitzmaurice , S . Kabani , H . S . Levin , M . Seiler , R . R . Dasari , I . Itzkan , J . Van Dam , and M . S . Feld . Detection of preinvasive cancer cells . Nature 406 ( 6791 ) : 35 – 36 , 2000 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 35017638 . 6 Borghetti , P . , L . Della Salda , E . De Angelis , M . C . Maltarello , P . G . Petronini , E . Cabassi , P . S . Marcato , N . M . Maraldi , and A . F . Borghetti . Adaptive cellular response to osmotic stress in pig articular chondrocytes . Tissue Cell 27 ( 2 ) : 173 – 183 , 1995 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0040 - 8166 ( 95 ) 80020 - 4 . 7 Broers , J . L . , B . M . Machiels , H . J . Kuijpers , F . Smedts , R . van den Kieboom , Y . Raymond , and F . C . Ramaekers . A - and B - type lamins are differentially expressed in normal human tissues . Histochem . Cell Biol . 107 ( 6 ) : 505 – 517 , 1997 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s004180050138 . 8 Broers , J . L . , E . A . Peeters , H . J . Kuijpers , J . Endert , C . V . Bouten , C . W . Oomens , F . P . Baaijens , and F . C . Ramaekers . Decreased mechanical stiffness in LMNA - / - cells is caused by defective nucleo - cytoskeletal integrity : implications for the development of laminopa - thies . Hum . Mol . Genet . 13 ( 21 ) : 2567 – 2580 , 2004 . doi : 10 . 1093 / hmg / ddh295 . 9 Bruce , A . , and A . J . M . K . P . Johnson Lewis Raff Roberts Walter . Molecular Biology of the Cell . 4th ed . New York : Garland Science , 2002 . 10 Buschmann , M . D . , E . B . Hunziker , Y . J . Kim , and A . J . Grodzinsky . Altered aggrecan synthesis correlates with cell and nucleus structure in statically compressed cartilage . J . Cell Sci . 109 : 499 – 508 , 1996 . 11 Bush , P . G . , and A . C . Hall . The osmotic sensitivity of isolated and in situ bovine articular chondrocytes . J . Ort - hop . Res . 19 ( 5 ) : 768 – 778 , 2001 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0736 - 0266 ( 01 ) 00013 - 4 . 12 Caille , N . , O . Thoumine , Y . Tardy , and J . J . Meister . Contribution of the nucleus to the mechanical properties of endothelial cells . J . Biomech . 35 ( 2 ) : 177 – 187 , 2002 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0021 - 9290 ( 01 ) 00201 - 9 . 13 Chalut , K . , S . Chen , J . Finan , M . Giacomelli , F . Guilak , K . Leong , and A . Wax . Label - free , high - throughput mea - surements of dynamic changes in cell nuclei using angle - resolved low coherence interferometry . Biophys . J . 94 ( 12 ) : 4948 – 4956 , 2008 . doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 107 . 124107 . 14 Chalut , K . J . , L . A . Kresty , J . W . Pyhtila , R . Nines , M . Baird , V . E . Steele , and A . Wax . In situ assessment of intraepithelial neoplasia in hamster trachea epithelium using angle - resolved low - coherence interferometry . Cancer Epi - demiol . Biomarkers Prev . 16 ( 2 ) : 223 – 227 , 2007 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 1055 - 9965 . EPI - 06 - 0418 . 15 Chao , P . H . , A . C . West , and C . T . Hung . Chondrocyte intracellular calcium , cytoskeletal organization , and gene expression responses to dynamic osmotic loading . Am . J . Physiol . Cell . Physiol . 291 ( 4 ) : C718 – C725 , 2006 . doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00127 . 2005 . 16 Chen , C . S . , and D . E . Ingber . Tensegrity and mecha - noregulation : from skeleton to cytoskeleton . Osteoarthr . Cartil . 7 ( 1 ) : 81 – 94 , 1999 . doi : 10 . 1053 / joca . 1998 . 0164 . 17 Chen , K . D . , Y . S . Li , M . Kim , S . Li , S . Yuan , S . Chien , and J . Y . J . Shyy . Mechanotransduction in response to shear stress—roles of receptor tyrosine kinases , integrins , and Shc . J . Biol . Chem . 274 ( 26 ) : 18393 – 18400 , 1999 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . 274 . 26 . 18393 . 18 Constantinescu , D . , H . L . Gray , P . J . Sammak , G . P . Schatten , and A . B . Csoka . Lamin A / C expression is a marker of mouse and human embryonic stem cell differ - entiation . Stem Cells 24 ( 1 ) : 177 – 185 , 2006 . doi : 10 . 1634 / stemcells . 2004 - 0159 . 19 Correa - Meyer , E . , L . Pesce , C . Guerrero , and J . I . Sznaj - der . Cyclic stretch activates ERK1 / 2 via G proteins and EGFR in alveolar epithelial cells . Am . J . Physiol . Lung Cell . Mol . Physiol . 282 ( 5 ) : L883 – L891 , 2002 . doi : 10 . 1152 / ajplung . 00203 . 2001 . 20 Dahl , K . N . , A . J . Engler , J . D . Pajerowski , and D . E . Discher . Power - law rheology of isolated nuclei with deformation mapping of nuclear substructures . Bio - phys . J . 89 ( 4 ) : 2855 – 2864 , 2005 . doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 105 . 062554 . 21 Dahl , K . N . , P . Scafﬁdi , M . F . Islam , A . G . Yodh , K . L . Wilson , and T . Misteli . Distinct structural and mechanical properties of the nuclear lamina in Hutchinson - Gilford progeria syndrome . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 ( 27 ) : 10271 – 10276 , 2006 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0601058103 . 22 de Freitas , R . C . , K . R . Diller , J . R . Lakey , and R . V . Rajotte . Osmotic behavior and transport properties of Nucleus Response to Osmotic Loading 489 human islets in a dimethyl sulfoxide solution . Cryobiology 35 ( 3 ) : 230 – 239 , 1997 . doi : 10 . 1006 / cryo . 1997 . 2045 . 23 de Vries , A . H . , B . E . Krenn , R . van Driel , V . Subraman - iam , and J . S . Kanger . Direct observation of nanome - chanical properties of chromatin in living cells . Nano . Lett . 7 ( 5 ) : 1424 – 1427 , 2007 . doi : 10 . 1021 / nl070603 + . 24 Dmitrieva , N . I . , Q . Cai , and M . B . Burg . Cells adapted to high NaCl have many DNA breaks and impaired DNA repair both in cell culture and in vivo . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 ( 8 ) : 2317 – 2322 , 2004 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0308 463100 . 25 Dong , C . , R . Skalak , and K . L . Sung . Cytoplasmic rheol - ogy of passive neutrophils . Biorheology 28 ( 6 ) : 557 – 567 , 1991 . 26 Erickson , G . R . , L . G . Alexopoulos , and F . Guilak . Hyper - osmotic stress induces volume change and calcium tran - sients in chondrocytes by transmembrane , phospholipid , and G - protein pathways . J . Biomech . 34 ( 12 ) : 1527 – 1535 , 2001 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0021 - 9290 ( 01 ) 00156 - 7 . 27 Erickson , G . R . , D . L . Northrup , and F . Guilak . Hypo - osmotic stress induces calcium - dependent actin reorgani - zation in articular chondrocytes . Osteoarthr . Cartil . 11 ( 3 ) : 187 – 197 , 2003 . doi : 10 . 1053 / S1063 - 4584 ( 02 ) 00347 - 3 . 28 Feldherr , C . M . , and D . Akin . Regulation of nuclear transport in proliferating and quiescent cells . Exp . Cell . Res . 205 ( 1 ) : 179 – 186 , 1993 . doi : 10 . 1006 / excr . 1993 . 1073 . 29 Gieni , R . S . , and M . J . Hendzel . Mechanotransduction from the ECM to the genome : are the pieces now in place ? J . Cell . Biochem . 104 ( 6 ) : 1964 – 1987 , 2008 . 30 Goldman , R . D . , Y . Gruenbaum , R . D . Moir , D . K . Shumaker , and T . P . Spann . Nuclear lamins : building blocks of nuclear architecture . Genes Dev . 16 ( 5 ) : 533 – 547 , 2002 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 960502 . 31 Goldman , R . D . , D . K . Shumaker , M . R . Erdos , M . Eriksson , A . E . Goldman , L . B . Gordon , Y . Gruenbaum , S . Khuon , M . Mendez , R . Varga , and F . S . Collins . Accumulation of mutant lamin A causes progressive changes in nuclear architecture in Hutchinson - Gilford progeria syndrome . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 ( 24 ) : 8963 – 8968 , 2004 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0402943101 . 32 Guharay , F . , and F . Sachs . Stretch - activated single ion channel currents in tissue - cultured embryonic chick skeletal muscle . J . Physiol . 352 : 685 – 701 , 1984 . 33 Guilak , F . Compression - induced changes in the shape and volume of the chondrocyte nucleus . J . Biomech . 28 ( 12 ) : 1529 – 1541 , 1995 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0021 - 9290 ( 95 ) 00100 - X . 34 Guilak , F . , G . R . Erickson , and H . P . Ting - Beall . The effects of osmotic stress on the viscoelastic and physical properties of articular chondrocytes . Biophys . J . 82 ( 2 ) : 720 – 727 , 2002 . 35 Guilak , F . , J . R . Tedrow , and R . Burgkart . Viscoelastic properties of the cell nucleus . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Com - mun . 269 ( 3 ) : 781 – 786 , 2000 . doi : 10 . 1006 / bbrc . 2000 . 2360 . 36 Hamill , O . P . , and B . Martinac . Molecular basis of mech - anotransduction in living cells . Physiol . Rev . 81 ( 2 ) : 685 – 740 , 2001 . 37 Hu , S . , J . Chen , J . P . Butler , and N . Wang . Prestress mediates force propagation into the nucleus . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 329 ( 2 ) : 423 – 428 , 2005 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2005 . 02 . 026 . 38 Huang , D . , E . A . Swanson , C . P . Lin , J . S . Schuman , W . G . Stinson , W . Chang , M . R . Hee , T . Flotte , K . Gregory , C . A . Puliaﬁto , and J . G . Fujimoto . Optical coherence tomography . Science 254 ( 5035 ) : 1178 – 1181 , 1991 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1957169 . 39 Hung , C . T . , M . A . LeRoux , G . D . Palmer , P . H . G . Chao , S . Lo , and W . B . Valhmu . Disparate aggrecan gene expression in chondrocytes subjected to hypotonic and hypertonic loading in 2D and 3D culture . Biorheology 40 ( 1 – 3 ) : 61 – 72 , 2003 . 40 Huyghe , J . M . , and J . D . Janssen . Quadriphasic mechanics of swelling incompressible porous media . Int . J . Eng . Sci . 35 ( 8 ) : 793 – 802 , 1997 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0020 - 7225 ( 96 ) 00119 - X . 41 Ji , J . Y . , R . T . Lee , L . Vergnes , L . G . Fong , C . L . Stewart , K . Reue , S . G . Young , Q . Zhang , C . M . Shanahan , and J . Lammerding . Cell nuclei spin in the absence of lamin b1 . J . Biol . Chem . 282 ( 27 ) : 20015 – 20026 , 2007 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M611094200 . 42 Kerr , J . F . , A . H . Wyllie , and A . R . Currie . Apoptosis : a basic biological phenomenon with wide - ranging implica - tions in tissue kinetics . Br . J . Cancer 26 ( 4 ) : 239 – 257 , 1972 . 43 Knight , M . M . , J . V . D . B . Bravenboer , D . A . Lee , G . J . V . M . van Osch , H . Weinans , and D . L . Bader . Cell and nu - cleus deformation in compressed chondrocyte - alginate constructs : temporal changes and calculation of cell mod - ulus . BBA - Gen Subjects 1570 ( 1 ) : 1 – 8 , 2002 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0304 - 4165 ( 02 ) 00144 - 7 . 44 Lai , W . M . , J . S . Hou , and V . C . Mow . A triphasic theory for the swelling and deformation behaviors of articular car - tilage . J . Biomech . Eng . 113 ( 3 ) : 245 – 258 , 1991 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 2894880 . 45 Lammerding , J . , L . G . Fong , J . Y . Ji , K . Reue , C . L . Stewart , S . G . Young , and R . T . Lee . Lamins A and C but not lamin B1 regulate nuclear mechanics . J . Biol . Chem . 281 ( 35 ) : 25768 – 25780 , 2006 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M513511200 . 46 Lansman , J . B . , T . J . Hallam , and T . J . Rink . Single stretch - activated ion channels in vascular endothelial cells as mechanotransducers ? Nature 325 ( 6107 ) : 811 – 813 , 1987 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 325811a0 . 47 Maniotis , A . J . , C . S . Chen , and D . E . Ingber . Demon - stration of mechanical connections between integrins , cytoskeletal ﬁlaments , and nucleoplasm that stabilize nu - clear structure . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 ( 3 ) : 849 – 854 , 1997 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 94 . 3 . 849 . 48 Maroudas , A . , and C . Bannon . Measurement of swelling pressure in cartilage and comparison with the osmotic pressure of constituent proteoglycans . Biorheology 18 ( 3 – 6 ) : 619 – 632 , 1981 . 49 Maroudas , A . I . Balance between swelling pressure and collagen tension in normal and degenerate cartilage . Nature 260 ( 5554 ) : 808 – 809 , 1976 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 260808a0 . 50 Misteli , T . Spatial positioning ; a new dimension in genome function . Cell 119 ( 2 ) : 153 – 156 , 2004 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2004 . 09 . 035 . 51 Misteli , T . Beyond the sequence : cellular organization of genome function . Cell 128 ( 4 ) : 787 – 800 , 2007 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2007 . 01 . 028 . 52 Mow , V . C . , G . A . Ateshian , W . M . Lai , and W . Y . Gu . Effects of ﬁxed charges on the stress - relaxation behavior of hydrated soft tissues in a conﬁned compression problem . Int . J . Solids Struct . 35 ( 34 – 35 ) : 4945 – 4962 , 1998 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0020 - 7683 ( 98 ) 00103 - 6 . 53 Mow , V . C . , S . C . Kuei , W . M . Lai , and C . G . Armstrong . Biphasic creep and stress relaxation of articular cartilage in compression ? Theory and experiments J . Biomech . Eng . 102 ( 1 ) : 73 – 84 , 1980 . 54 Mow , V . C . , C . C . Wang , and C . T . Hung . The extracel - lular matrix , interstitial ﬂuid and ions as a mechanical signal transducer in articular cartilage . Osteoarthr . Cartil . 7 ( 1 ) : 41 – 58 , 1999 . doi : 10 . 1053 / joca . 1998 . 0161 . F INAN et al . 490 55 Nobel , P . S . Boyle - Vant Hoff relation . J . Theor . Biol . 23 ( 3 ) : 375 – 379 , 1969 . 56 Oswald , E . S . , P . G . Chao , J . C . Bulinski , G . A . Ateshian , and C . T . Hung . Chondrocyte nuclear response to osmotic loading . Conf . Proc . IEEE Eng . Med . Biol . Soc . 1 : 3659 – 3661 , 2006 . 57 Paine , P . L . , L . C . Moore , and S . B . Horowitz . Nuclear envelope permeability . Nature 254 ( 5496 ) : 109 – 114 , 1975 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 254109a0 . 58 Pajerowski , J . D . , K . N . Dahl , F . L . Zhong , P . J . Sammak , and D . E . Discher . Physical plasticity of the nucleus in stem cell differentiation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 ( 40 ) : 15619 – 15624 , 2007 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0702576104 . 59 Pyhtila , J . W . , and A . Wax . Rapid , depth - resolved light scattering measurements using Fourier domain , angle - resolved low coherence interferometry . Opt . Express 12 ( 25 ) : 6178 – 6183 , 2004 . doi : 10 . 1364 / OPEX . 12 . 006178 . 60 Reinehr , R . , and D . Haussinger . Hyperosmotic activation of the CD95 death receptor system . Acta Physiol . ( Oxf ) 187 ( 1 – 2 ) : 199 – 203 , 2006 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1748 - 1716 . 2006 . 01 541 . x . 61 Richter , K . , M . Nessling , and P . Lichter . Experimental evidence for the inﬂuence of molecular crowding on nuclear architecture . J . Cell Sci . 120 ( Pt 9 ) : 1673 – 1680 , 2007 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 03440 . 62 Rober , R . A . , K . Weber , and M . Osborn . Differential timing of nuclear lamin A / C expression in the various organs of the mouse embryo and the young animal : a developmental study . Development 105 ( 2 ) : 365 – 378 , 1989 . 63 Rowat , A . C . , J . Lammerding , and J . H . Ipsen . Mechanical properties of the cell nucleus and the effect of emerin deﬁciency . Biophys . J . 91 ( 12 ) : 4649 – 4664 , 2006 . doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 106 . 086454 . 64 Sackin , H . Mechanosensitive channels . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 57 : 333 – 353 , 1995 . 65 Scafﬁdi , P . , and T . Misteli . Lamin A - dependent nuclear defects in human aging . Science 312 ( 5776 ) : 1059 – 1063 , 2006 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1127168 . 66 Sun , D . D . , X . E . Guo , M . Likhitpanichkul , W . M . Lai , and V . C . Mow . The inﬂuence of the ﬁxed negative charges on mechanical and electrical behaviors of articular cartilage under unconﬁned compression . J . Biomech . Eng . Trans . ASME 126 ( 1 ) : 6 – 16 , 2004 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 1644562 . 67 Thoma , F . , and T . Koller . Inﬂuence of histone - H1 on chromatin structure . Cell 12 ( 1 ) : 101 – 107 , 1977 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 77 ) 90188 - X . 68 Thoma , F . , and T . Koller . Unravelled nucleosomes , nucle - osome beads and higher - order structures of chroma - tin—inﬂuence of non - histone components and histone H - 1 . J . Mol . Biol . 149 ( 4 ) : 709 – 733 , 1981 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0022 - 2836 ( 81 ) 90354 - 5 . 69 Thoma , F . , T . Koller , and A . Klug . Involvement of histone H1 in the organization of the nucleosome and of the salt - dependent superstructures of chromatin . J . Cell . Biol . 83 ( 2 Pt 1 ) : 403 – 427 , 1979 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 83 . 2 . 403 . 70 Ting - Beall , H . P . , D . Needham , and R . M . Hochmuth . Volume and osmotic properties of human neutrophils . Blood 81 ( 10 ) : 2774 – 2780 , 1993 . 71 Urban , J . P . , A . C . Hall , and K . A . Gehl . Regulation of matrix synthesis rates by the ionic and osmotic environ - ment of articular chondrocytes . J . Cell Physiol . 154 ( 2 ) : 262 – 270 , 1993 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcp . 1041540208 . 72 Urban , J . P . , A . Maroudas , M . T . Bayliss , and J . Dillon . Swelling pressures of proteoglycans at the concentrations found in cartilaginous tissues . Biorheology 16 ( 6 ) : 447 – 464 , 1979 . 73 Vaziri , A . , and M . R . Mofrad . Mechanics and deformation of the nucleus in micropipette aspiration experiment . J . Biomech . 40 ( 9 ) : 2053 – 2062 , 2007 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jbiomech . 2006 . 09 . 023 . 74 Wang , N . , J . P . Butler , and D . E . Ingber . Mechanotrans - duction across the cell surface and through the cytoskeleton . Science 260 ( 5111 ) : 1124 – 1127 , 1993 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 7684161 . Nucleus Response to Osmotic Loading 491