MOT1410 The production of new technology , TU Delft Latour / Woolgar – Laboratory Life Abstract 19 - 02 - 2009 Page 1 of 2 Laboratory Life – The Construction of Scientific Facts Authors : Bruno Latour and Steve Woolgar Chapter 4 – The microprocessing of facts The topic of this book , is how science is practiced and conducted . Through Latour’s studies of the researchers of a neuroendocrinological laboratory in California , the authors attempts to discern how science is conducted , and what this means for scientific facts . In chapter four , which is the focus of this abstract , Latour and Woolgar ( L & W ) investigates how scientific facts are microprocessed in the laboratory . This microprocessing is exemplified through excerpts of conversations between scientists , where scientific facts are discussed and assessed . Through these examples , it is shown how the construction of scientific facts is a process of negotiations between scientists , where heterogeneous elements , that are not all scientific , interact . In the course of relatively brief conversations , scientific facts are created or destroyed . One example of these non - scientific elements in the process of construction , is the status of a certain scientist in scientific circles : Here , one scientist reports certain findings regarding a substance , but because of a prior incident , where the scientist misinterpreted the result of an experiment , the fact is disregarded by the other scientists . Seemingly , the person who made the statement , is as important as the statement itself . Another example is excerpts from a conversation , where two scientists discuss what amount of a certain substance , can be said to sufficient evidence , to falsify a theory . The amount of the substance necessary for it to be accepted as evidence , is negotiated between the scientists , rather than being established objectively . Several other examples are presented , including one where the time that a scientific statement has been accepted as a fact , determines whether or not the statement is accepted by the scientists . As such , the above examples point to scientific reasoning as not being dissimilar to common sense reasoning . Whether evidence is accepted as such , depend on factors that are not necessarily scientific . Thereby , the scientists are not discussing objective truths , but rather negotiating . They are constructing and deconstructing statements , and thereby determining whether or not these statements can be stabilised as scientific facts . It is only through stabilisation , that a statement becomes a scientific fact . Interestingly , in this process of negotiation , the social elements of the statement are slowly removed , until only the scientific fact remains visible . Thus , analogical reasoning such as “A is similar to B” , “A could be B” , which are frequently used in the daily work of the scientists , are changed to logical connections , where other scientific facts are brought in to stabilise the statement . Similarly , complex local circumstances that led to the scientist thinking of the possible connection , are changed to flashes of intuition , where the scientist understands the problem in a new way . In this process of making the statement non - social , the distinction between reality and the local circumstances are created , whereby the statement further stabilises into a fact . This happens in a process of splitting and inversion . First , the statement is presented . This statement is then mirrored into a real and a theoretical part , through splitting , in the laboratory work that scientists perform . Through the negotiations described above , where heterogeneous elements are included and excluded from the network surrounding the statement , it is stabilised into a fact . This happens in a process of inversion , where the original statement , having no component in reality , becomes the fact , and thereby establishing it as objective . When this has happened , no traces remain of the theoretical statement , and only the real element of the statement remains . Thereby , the objective MOT1410 The production of new technology , TU Delft Latour / Woolgar – Laboratory Life Abstract 19 - 02 - 2009 Page 2 of 2 nature of scientific facts have been constructed , and the distinction between fact and local circumstances are manifested . The point that is being made , is that it is not possible to make a clear distinction between the work of science and its socio - technical components . The traditional view of scientists engaged in scientific discussions , using objective facts and proven arguments , does not hold . Instead , scientists use common sense arguments in assessing what they see . They enter into a process of negotiation , where heterogeneous elements of both social and technical nature , play a part . Through this negotiation , statements are constructed and deconstructed , until the statement is stabilised in the network . Thereby , scientific facts can not be said to be objective truths , dislodged from their surroundings . The scientific facts are the product of science , and only through the process of science , do they show themselves as such . Peter Andreas Jørgensen Reference : Bruno Latour and Steve Woolgar ( 1986 ) : Laboratory Life – The Construction of Scientific Facts , Princeton University Press , 2 nd edition