articles NATURE CELL BIOLOGY | VOL 1 | MAY 1999 | cellbio . nature . com 1 Spatial control of coated - pit dynamics in living cells Ibragim Gaidarov * † , Francesca Santini * † , Robin A . Warren * † and James H . Keen * ‡ * Kimmel Cancer Institute and the Departments of Microbiology and Immunology and of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology , Thomas Jefferson University , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania 19107 , USA †These authors contributed equally to this work ‡e - mail : Jim . Keen @ mail . tju . edu Here we visualize new aspects of the dynamics of endocytotic clathrin - coated pits and vesicles in mammalian cells by using a fusion protein consisting of green fluorescent protein and clathrin light chain a . Clathrin - coated pits invaginating from the plasma membrane show definite , but highly limited , mobility within the membrane that is relaxed upon treatment with latrunculin B , an inhibitor of actin assembly , indicating that an actin - based framework may be involved in the mobility of these pits . Transient , motile coated vesicles that originate from coated pits can be detected , with multiple vesicles occasionally appearing to emanate from a single pit . Despite their seemingly random distribution , coated pits tend to form repeatedly at defined sites while excluding other regions . This spatial regulation of coated - pit assembly and function is attributable to the attachment of the coated pits to the membrane skeleton . ndocytotic coated pits are specialized sites on the plasma membrane of eukaryotic cells that are responsible for the internalization of many cell - surface receptors and other mem - brane proteins . These coated pits contain two major structural pro - teins , clathrin and the adaptor protein AP - 2 , as well as several other peripheral - and integral - membrane proteins with which these pro - teins may interact ( reviewed in ref . 1 ) . Coated - pit assembly is thought to be initiated by the binding of AP - 2 molecules to a dock - ing site or receptor in the plasma membrane , followed by the recruitment of clathrin 2 – 4 . Results of ultrastructural and biochemi - cal studies have indicated that , after invagination and detachment of the coated pit and cargo , the endocytotic coated vesicle under - goes rapid uncoating ( reviewed in refs 1 , 5 , 6 ) . The released coat components 7 are thought to constitute a cytosolic reservoir for sub - sequent coated - pit formation , occurring at random sites on the plasma membrane . However , these steps have never actually been E Figure 1 A fusion protein consisting of GFP and clathrin light chain a is incorporated into structurally and functionally active clathrin trimers and coated pits in cells . a , The fusion protein containing GFP and clathrin light chain a ( GFP - CL - LCa ) but not GFP alone is associated with clathrin heavy chains upon expression in COS - 1 cells . Lysates from cells transfected with GFP alone ( lanes 1 , 3 ) or with GFP - CL - LCa ( lanes 2 , 4 ) were analysed directly ( lysate ) or were immunoprecipitated with an antibody against the clathrin heavy chain antibody ( IP ) . Aliquots were fractionated by SDS – gel electrophoresis and electrophoretically transferred to nitrocellulose , and appropriate regions were immunoblotted with antibody against the clathrin heavy chain ( CL - HC ) or against GFP to detect GFP - CL - LCa and GFP . In addition to full - length GFP - CL - LCa , a minor degradation product was also observed in the clathrin - heavy - chain immunoprecipitate . b , GFP - CL - LCa expressed in cells is incorporated into clathrin triskelia . Cell lysate was fractionated on a Superose - 6 HR 10 / 30 column and fractions ( as indicated ) were analysed by electrophoresis and immunoblotting with antibodies against the clathrin heavy chain and GFP as above . c , GFP – clathrin co - localizes with endogenous clathrin and AP - 2 in coated pits . GFP – clathrin was detected directly in transiently transfected and fixed COS - 1 cells while total cellular clathrin and AP - 2 were detected in the same fields by immunofluorescence microscopy . The insets show twofold magnified images of the regions directly above them . Scale bar represents 10 m m . d , Endocytosis of Texas - Red - labelled transferrin in GFP – clathrin - expressing and non - expressing cells . Scale bar represents 10 m m . a b c d Lysate IP 1 2 3 4 CL - HC GFP - CL - LCa GFP 20 22 24 26 CL - HC GFP - CL - LCa GFP - clathrin GFP - clathrin Clathrin AP - 2 Transferrin © 1999 Macmillan Magazines Ltd articles 2 NATURE CELL BIOLOGY | VOL 1 | MAY 1999 | cellbio . nature . com observed in living cells and the actual dynamics of coated mem - brane structures have remained uncertain . Green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) , produced by the jellyfish Aequorea victoria , is remarkable in possessing intrinsic fluorescence that generally survives coupling to other proteins , thereby provid - ing a useful tool with which to study the behaviour of target pro - teins in intact cells 8 , 9 . To gain more detailed information about the in vivo dynamics of endocytotic coated pits in intact cells , we decided to use a GFP – clathrin chimaera . The clathrin molecule is a triskelion - shaped molecule that in most tissues is composed of three identical heavy chains and three light chains ; the latter ran - domly comprise either of two distinct gene products , denoted light chains a and b 1 . We have therefore constructed a plasmid coding for enhanced GFP coupled to the amino terminus of clathrin light chain a ( GFP – clathrin ) . The properties of the GFP - labelled coated pits and vesicles visualized in cells reveal several important and unexpected attributes of the endocytotic pathway . Results Functional integrity of GFP – clathrin . To investigate the behaviour of clathrin in living cells , we constructed a plasmid encoding enhanced GFP attached to the N terminus of mouse placental clath - rin light chain a ( LCa ) and expressed the protein in COS - 1 cells using established procedures ( see Methods ) . We used several approaches to assess the structural and functional integrity of GFP - tagged clathrin expressed in COS - 1 cells . First , clathrin light chains are known to become stably associated with the heavy chain shortly after synthesis 10 . The expressed GFP – clathrin - light - chain conju - gate , but not GFP alone , was immunoprecipitated by challenge of transfected cell lysates with antibodies against the clathrin heavy chain ( Fig . 1a ) . Second , expressed GFP – clathrin - LCa was incorpo - rated into triskelia , the functional trimeric - clathrin assembly unit , as revealed by Superose - 6 gel filtration of transfected cell lysates and immunoblotting with anti - GFP antibodies ( Fig . 1b ) . Thus we use the term GFP – clathrin for this conjugate . GFP – clathrin expressed in cells exhibited a similar distribution to that of endogenous clathrin . Cellular clathrin is found in an assembled form on the cytoplasmic surface of the plasma mem - brane in coated pits that are active in endocytosis 11 , in the trans - Golgi network region 12 , on some endosomal structures 13 , and in a soluble pool in the cytoplasm 7 . In cells expressing low to moderate levels of GFP – clathrin , strong fluorescence was observed in the perinuclear region corresponding to the trans - Golgi network , as well as in fine dots spread throughout the periphery of the cell ( Fig . 1c , left panel ) . These patterns coincided almost completely with the distribution of endogenous clathrin visualized by immunofluores - cence microscopy with a polyclonal antibody to bovine trimers ( Fig . 1c , middle panel and insets ) and with a monoclonal antibody to the bovine clathrin heavy chain ( data not shown ) . The GFP – clathrin spots seen in the peripheral plasma membrane were nearly identical in size and relative fluorescence intensity to coated pits vis - ualized with the anti - clathrin antibodies . Most of these spots were no more than 3 – 4 pixels in diameter , consistent with the size of an individual coated pit ( ‡ 0 . 1 – 0 . 3 m m ) 11 which is at or below the prac - tical limit of optical resolution with this system . A few larger spots , generally detectable by both GFP – clathrin and antibody fluores - cence , were also observed occasionally ; these probably reflect neigh - bouring or clustered coated pits ( see below ) . Finally , almost all AP2 - positive spots detected with anti - a - adaptin antibody , which define plasma - membrane clathrin - coated pits 14 , also contained GFP – clathrin signal ( Fig . 1c , right panel and insets ) , and no detect - able differences in the overall distribution of clathrin or AP - 2 were Figure 2 Dynamics of coated pits and vesicles containing GFP – clathrin in live cells . a , Images at 0 . 9 - min intervals show marked changes in the patterns of GFP – clathrin - coated pits . b , Selected images at the indicated times show that individual GFP – clathrin - coated pits exhibit dynamic behaviour . Changes in individual coated - pit spots throughout this series of images are summarized in the diagram at the left , in which persistent ( filled circles ) , disappearing ( open circles ) and appearing ( asterisks ) spots are indicated . An example of reappearance of a labelled coated pit ( at 24 . 0 s ) at , or very near to , a locus from which signal had previously disappeared ( at 0 – 3 s ) is also shown ( circled asterisk ) . c , GFP – clathrin - coated pits and vesicles resolved at 1 . 5 - s intervals . Some coated pits decrease in fluorescence intensity ( arrows ) , giving rise in subsequent frames to highly motile spots ( arrowheads ) , which then rapidly vanish . Other coated - pit spots are diminished or disappear , often between two successive images ( curved arrows ) , without giving rise to detectable vesicles . See also Supplementary Information . In all panels , each image box corresponds to a field of area 8 . 6 m m · 8 . 6 m m . a b c 0 min 0 . 9 min 1 . 8 min 2 . 7 min 3 . 6 min 4 . 5 min 0 s 0 s 1 . 5 s 3 . 0 s 4 . 5 s 6 . 0 s 7 . 5 s 10 . 5 s 0 s 3 . 0 s 4 . 5 s 6 . 0 s 7 . 5 s 9 . 0 s 13 . 5 s 3 . 0 s 7 . 5 s 12 . 0 s 24 . 0 s Figure 3 Coated pits exhibit limited mobility on cell surfaces that is sensitive to treatment with latrunculin B . Image stacks of coated pits at 1 . 4 - s intervals were analysed with a tracking program to obtain trajectories of individual coated pits that persisted for at least 28 s ( see Methods ) . Each panel shows multiple traces taken from one representative cell , followed by a circle representing the average range of movement ( with diameter – s . d . indicated in parentheses below ) . a , Lower ( adherent ) surface ( 0 . 57 – 0 . 17 m m ) ; b , upper surface ( 0 . 78 – 0 . 23 m m ) ; c , lower surface of cell pretreated with latrunculin B ( 0 . 5 m g ml - 1 ) for 50 min ( 1 . 46 – 0 . 54 m m ) ; d , lower surface of cell following removal ( for 50 min ) of latrunculin B ( 0 . 87 – 0 . 68 m m ) ; e , as a control for measurement error , stage drift and other instrumental limitations , similar analysis of spots on the lower surface of fixed cells revealed smaller extents of apparent movement ( 0 . 30 – 0 . 02 m m ) . a b c d e Lower surface Upper surface LatrunculinLower surface RecoveryLower surface Fixed © 1999 Macmillan Magazines Ltd articles NATURE CELL BIOLOGY | VOL 1 | MAY 1999 | cellbio . nature . com 3 observed between expressing and non - expressing cells ( data not shown ) . Cells expressing GFP – clathrin were active in receptor - mediated endocytosis , as they were indistinguishable from non - expressing counterparts in their uptake of fluorescently labelled transferrin over short times ( Fig . 1d ) , a sensitive assay for the initial steps in this process 5 . Cells expressing very high levels of GFP – clathrin , present as a strong diffuse signal , also readily accumulated transferrin ( data not shown ) , indicating that the presence of excess GFP – clathrin - LCa did not block the endocytotic pathway . Together , these obser - vations show that expressed GFP – clathrin - LCa is incorporated into structurally and functionally active clathrin trimers and coated pits in cells and is an effective reporter for study of these cells . Visualization of coated pits and vesicles in live cells . We focused our initial study on the behaviour of GFP – clathrin - containing coated pits on the plasma membranes of cells in culture . We describe only the results that we obtained with COS - 1 cells , although qualitatively similar findings were obtained with CHO , HEK293 , NIH3T3 and RBL - 2H3 cells . Study of fields comprising ~ 8 . 6 - m m square regions of the cell periphery at 0 . 9 - min intervals indicated that coated pits are highly dynamic structures in live cells ( Fig . 2a ) . We observed substantial variability in the overall pattern of GFP – clathrin spots over this 4 . 5 - min time span , with several spots persisting throughout the sequence , but most either appear - ing or disappearing in sequential frames . These pronounced changes could reflect coated - pit disappearance and reformation events ; alternatively , they could result from large - scale coated - pit movements in the plane of the plasma membrane . Fig . 2b shows selected images from a sequence obtained at 1 . 5 - s intervals over 24s that argue against the latter possibility . Many spots remained in the same relative locations . However , roughly one - third of the spots present at first disappeared or were greatly diminished in subsequent images , whereas a similar proportion of spots appeared only after the first frame . Analysis of many image sequences revealed both abrupt and gradual changes in coated - pit intensity ( data not shown ) . We also observed variation in the char - acteristics of relatively stable coated - pit spots in different cell lines , with lifetimes of 20 – 80 s in COS - 1 cells being generally observed . Figure 4 Coated pits repeatedly form at discrete sites . a , Two sets of sequential images at indicated times ( in seconds ) reveal specific sites at which coated pits disappear and subsequently reappear . For example , in the upper panel , of the four coated pits detected at the beginning of the sequence , coated pit 1 disappears within the first 10 s and a new coated pit appears over a minute later at nearly the same location . Coated pit 4 disappears between 10 and 13 s but fluorescence reappears gradually at the same locus between 30 and 45 s . The fluorescence at coated pit 2 intensifies for about the first half minute , then almost completely disappears ; a new coated pit appears about 10 s later in very close proximity . Finally , coated pit 3 disappears and reappears twice during this time sequence . Coated pits behave similarly in the lower panel . Scale bars represent 1 m m . See also Supplementary Information . b , An initial image ( frame 1 , left panel ) was collected and the maximum signal at each pixel locus present in 30 sequential images of the same field , collected at 18 - s intervals , was calculated ( centre panel ) . The maximum pixel image contains the cumulative positions of all coated pits appearing during this time period , which corresponds to about 12 coated - pit lifetimes . The overlay of the two images ( right panel ) shows extensive overlap and relatively few new spots ( in green ) , which are often clustered near pre - existing pits , compared with the number of coated - pit lifetimes , showing that pits tend to re - occur at defined loci . Frame - by - frame analysis confirmed that nearly all of the coated pits in these fields were active and exhibited dynamic behaviour over the time course of data collection . Scale bar represents 2 m m . a b 0 10 . 5 13 . 5 27 . 0 34 . 5 45 . 0 46 . 5 66 . 0 79 . 5 0 3 . 0 9 . 0 24 . 0 39 . 0 43 . 5 66 . 0 Frame 1 Maximum pixel image Composite © 1999 Macmillan Magazines Ltd articles 4 NATURE CELL BIOLOGY | VOL 1 | MAY 1999 | cellbio . nature . com This direct measurement is consistent with previous estimates deduced from measurements made in biochemical ( uptake ) , mor - phometric and microinjection studies 15 – 18 . We occasionally detected distinct images of motile GFP – clathrin spots when studying samples at brief intervals ( Fig . 2c ) . During the time span presented ( corresponding to a small fraction of the life - time of a coated pit ) , most spots persisted at specific loci , although some became diminished or disappeared abruptly ( Fig . 2c , curved arrows ) . Occasionally , individual ( Fig . 2c and Supplementary Information ) or multiple ( Supplementary Information ) spots emerged from discrete sites ( Fig . 2c , arrows ) and travelled short dis - tances before quickly vanishing ( Fig . 2c , arrowheads ) . The coated pits that appeared to be the source of these motile spots usually exhibited a corresponding decrease in , or disappearance of , fluores - cence ( Fig . 2c , arrows ) . Compared with the number of coated - pit spots that disappear or diminish substantially in intensity , such highly motile clathrin - coated vesicles are infrequently observed . We propose that partial or complete uncoating of nascent coated vesicles generally occurs in the immediate vicinity of the coated pit . Trajectories of coated pits on the cell surface . Images of coated pits observed at short intervals ( Fig . 2c ) indicated that most coated pits may remain relatively stationary during their lifetimes . To evaluate this possibility in more depth , we used an automated tracking program 19 to study coated - pit positions in sequential images col - lected at 1 . 4 - s intervals and to calculate trajectories ( Fig . 3 ) . Com - pared with coated pits in fixed cells , used as a control ( Fig . 3e ) , coated pits on the lower surface of living cells showed a measurable but highly restricted range of movement within an area of , on aver - age , about 0 . 6 µm in diameter ( Fig . 3a ) . Analyses of coated - pit tra - jectories on the upper surface of cells ( Fig . 3b ) revealed only slightly larger extents of movement ( ~ 0 . 8 m m diameter ) , showing that the restricted mobility is not primarily a consequence of attachment to the substrate . A role for actin in receptor - mediated endocytosis has been pro - posed in several cell systems 20 – 22 and actin might be expected to affect properties of the coated pit in the plasma membrane . The ability to observe coated - pit behaviour directly in live cells provides a unique opportunity to study this possibility . High concentrations of latrunculin B ( 25 m g ml - 1 ) , an inhibitor of actin assembly 23 , par - tially block receptor - mediated endocytosis in intact cells 22 . A much lower concentration of latrunculin B ( 0 . 3 m g ml - 1 ) , which did not detectably affect endocytosis of fluorescently labelled transferrin in our cells ( data not shown ) , nonetheless increased the area of move - ment of plasma - membrane coated pits roughly sevenfold ( Fig . 3c ) . This increase in coated - pit mobility was almost entirely reversible ( Fig . 3d ) . Thus , an actin - based framework is involved in mainte - nance of the structural organization of clathrin - coated pits at the cell surface , but is not essential for continued operation of the receptor - mediated endocytosis pathway . Coated pits appear at defined sites . In contrast to the apparently random distribution of coated pits on the cell surface that has been widely noted ( see , for example , ref . 24 ) , the behaviour of GFP – clathrin in live cells gave the impression that disappearance of coated pits was often followed by reappearance of signal at , or very near , the same locus ( Fig . 2b , circled asterisk ) . In other cases in which mobile coated vesicles emanated from coated pits , the latter appeared to persist in the same place , although their fluorescence intensity transiently decreased ( Fig . 2c , arrows ) . When we analysed images of coated pits collected at 1 . 5 - s intervals over 60 – 90 s , we saw many examples of specific sites at which coated pits disap - peared and , at varying intervals , subsequently reappeared . Two such image sequences are shown in Fig . 4a and Supplementary Information . To analyse this phenomenon more extensively , we collected sequential images at 18 - s intervals over 9 min , a period that corre - sponds to about 12 coated - pit lifetimes . We retained the maximum signal at each pixel locus from the time series ( Fig . 4b , centre panel ) , thus revealing the cumulative positions of all coated pits appearing during this time period . Compared with the initial image ( Fig . 4b , left panel ) , the maximum signal image showed considerable over - lap , as seen in the composite image ( Fig . 4b , right panel ) . Consider - ing the number of elapsed coated - pit lifetimes spanned in this image series , there was a relatively small proportion of new spots ( in green ) . Furthermore , these new coated pits were often clustered close to those present in the first frame ( most apparent in the juxta - position of green and red spots in Fig . 4b , right panel ) . Both the maximum pixel image in Fig . 4b and the individual sequences shown in Fig . 4a also indicate that there are comparatively large regions of the cell surface that are not involved in coated - pit forma - tion . Over the extended time period studied , this approach will tend to substantially underestimate reappearance of coated pits at dis - tinct sites , as it is influenced by overall motion of the cell and its membrane , local coated - pit movements ( Fig . 3 ) , and the possible movement of an underlying membrane skeleton which we propose to contain coated - pit - nucleating sites ( see below ) . In view of these characteristics , the data in Fig . 4 provide strong evidence that coated pits tend to form at defined sites on the plasma membrane . Figure 5 Coated pits are attached to an interconnected , detergent - resistant membrane skeleton . a , b , The distribution of GFP – clathrin in a cell before ( a ) and 94 s after ( b ) addition of Triton - X100 shows that most of the plasma - membrane coated pits are retained over this time period . Some diffuse background signal is lost , as well as most of the Golgi - associated clathrin . Scale bar represents 10 m m . c , Overlay of images of the distribution of GFP – clathrin in the cell periphery immediately before ( red ) and 44 s after ( green ) extraction with Triton - X100 . The translations of individual coated pits monitored throughout sequential images during this time period ( white lines ) reveal coordinated movements as the cell retracts during extraction . The clathrin signal in the perinuclear Golgi region has been attenuated . Scale bar represents 5 m m . See also Supplementary Information . a b c © 1999 Macmillan Magazines Ltd articles NATURE CELL BIOLOGY | VOL 1 | MAY 1999 | cellbio . nature . com 5 Coated pits attach to a detergent - resistant membrane skeleton . The repeated appearance of coated pits at defined sites on the cell surface indicated that their formation and localization may not be driven by initiation sites that are free to diffuse in the lipid bilayer . Coated pits are often retained in unfixed , detergent - extracted cells 25 , indicating that they may be attached to the cytoskeleton . However , the physiological relevance of this observation has been uncertain because of the possibility of post - lysis protein redistribu - tion . The ability to observe GFP – clathrin - labelled coated pits directly during lysis and extraction afforded an extra tool for evalu - ation of this phenomenon . Upon treatment with Triton - X100 , nearly all of the plasma - membrane clathrin - coated pits were retained in extracted cells , although the marked clathrin staining associated with the Golgi region was lost ( Fig . 5a , b ) . Sequential images taken during the extraction process revealed little gross redistribution of coated - pit spots ( data not shown ) . The shapes of some cells changed substan - tially in the period immediately following detergent addition . Most remarkable in these cases were the spatially coordinated move - ments of coated pits around the periphery of the cell during this time ( Fig . 5c , white lines , and Supplementary Information ) , indi - cating attachment to an underlying lattice . These coated - pit move - ments often spanned distances of 1 – 2 m m , corresponding to 10 – 20 coated - pit diameters . Finally , detergent extraction of latrunculin - B - treated cells also revealed almost complete retention of coated pits in place ( data not shown ) . These results indicate that plasma - membrane coated pits in intact cells are directly or indirectly attached to an interconnected structure in close apposition to the plasma membrane , that is , the membrane skeleton . Discussion A widely accepted model for the initial steps of the endocytotic pathway proposes that coated - pit formation occurs more or less randomly on the plasma membrane of cells through the gradual association of individual coat subunits . The growing or completed pit accumulates receptors and other membrane components that are destined for internalization , and progressively invaginates . Detachment follows , leading to formation of a discrete but tran - sient coated vesicle . After rapid uncoating the dissociated coat sub - units are proposed to recycle to new sites of coated - pit assembly on the plasma membrane . Our results are the first direct visual evi - dence from live cells in support of certain aspects of this model , but also reveal new and unexpected facets of the internalization process . Plasma - membrane coated pits labelled with GFP – clathrin fre - quently exhibit a ‘blinking’ phenotype : they appear gradually , per - sist for a comparatively long time and disappear rather abruptly , usually without detectable formation of a discrete clathrin - coated vesicle . These characteristics are generally consistent with the model described above . However , gradual decreases in coated - pit fluorescence intensities over time are also often observed , showing that the cell has mechanisms to remove individual or small groups of subunits from established coated pits . This ‘non - catastrophic’ loss of coated - pit fluorescence may be indicative of the loss of GFP – clathrin that accompanies conversion of lattice hexagons to penta - gons , a process thought to be required to transform flat clathrin coats to budding structures 26 , 27 . Coated - pit fluorescence also frequently persists following the emergence of one or multiple coated vesicles . Thus , coated vesicles may derive from only a part of a lattice , leaving behind a substantial region to serve as a nucleating site for coat reformation . A theoret - ical model for such a process has been suggested 28 , and large coated pits with multiple budding domains have been observed 29 . It is also possible that coated - pit formation and detachment often occur at adjacent sites that are not easily resolved by light microscopy . Such clustered coated pits have been detected by electron microscopy 29 , 30 , and we have recently observed increases in such sites in agonist - treated cells ( F . S , I . G . and J . H . K . , manuscript in preparation ) . Our sequential images of GFP – clathrin in living cells are uniquely effective at revealing clathrin - coated vesicles , which can be easily distinguished from coated pits by their marked mobility ( ‡ 1 m m s - 1 ) . It seems likely that many or all of these vesicles are endocytotic structures , although this has not yet been confirmed . These clathrin - coated vesicles appear to have short lifetimes and to undergo rapid uncoating , as they disappear within seconds . This inference is supported particularly by observations of the periph - eral cytoplasm , in which the entire cell volume can be adequately imaged and loss of signal cannot be ascribed readily to vesicle exit from the focal plane . The properties and behaviour of these vesicles will be described in more detail elsewhere ( R . A . W . , I . G . , F . S . and J . H . K . , manuscript in preparation ) . The movements of coated pits , typically restricted to regions of about 0 . 5 – 0 . 8 m m in diameter , are quite similar in nature and mag - nitude to those of several cell - surface receptors that have been stud - ied by single - particle tracking 31 – 33 . Several paradigms have been put forward in explanation of these phenomena , including the exist - ence of membrane fences , tethers to local regions of an underlying membrane skeleton , and structural mosaicism in the membrane ( reviewed in refs 34 , 35 ) . The increased mobility of coated pits in COS - 1 cells following treatment with latrunculin B indicates that an actin framework near the plasma membrane may contribute to the restricted mobility of coated pits . The effect of latrunculin B may be direct ; for example , it may relax discrete boundaries of a hypothet - ical membrane fence or allow increased flexibility in an underlying membrane skeleton to which the coated pit is attached ( see below ) . Alternatively , latrunculin B may act indirectly by removing mem - brane - bound actin meshworks that physically block the movement of coated pits . The striking , coordinated movements of coated pits that we have seen on detergent extraction of living cells , and the retention of the coated pits despite pretreatment of cells with cytochalasin B or colchicine 25 , provide compelling evidence that nearly all plasma - membrane coated pits in intact cells are intimately associated with an interconnected membrane skeleton directly underlying the plasma - membrane bilayer . The loss of Golgi clathrin under similar conditions highlights what may be fundamental mechanistic differ - ences in the formation of coated pits and vesicles in the two compartments 4 , 36 . Ultrastructural studies have previously detected membrane - skeletal components nearby or in contact with plasma - membrane coated pits , but technical limitations of the procedures have made it difficult to assess the physiological relevance of the observations independently 27 , 37 , 38 . Although treatment with latrun - culin B relaxes the membrane restrictions on coated - pit mobility , it neither releases ( untethers ) coated pits from the membrane skele - ton nor , perhaps as a consequence , blocks their operation in the receptor - mediated endocytosis pathway . The functional associa - tion of coated pits with the membrane skeleton provides an extra level of compartmentalization at the plasma membrane , as has been suggested for hormone - responsive signalling systems 39 . Our results show that preferential sites of coated - pit formation exist ; a complementary observation is that other regions of the plasma membrane remain free of coated pits for periods corre - sponding to many internalization cycles . These findings are difficult to reconcile with the conventional view of coated - pit initiation , in which diffusible transmembrane receptors or membrane docking sites ( whose identities have been elusive ) initiate coated - pit forma - tion at the plasma membrane by recruiting AP - 2 and other coat components . We suggest instead that coated - pit formation is initi - ated by the membrane skeleton , through the action of multidomain scaffold proteins that are present at specific and limited loci . This model accounts for the observations that coated pits are not redistributed to localized cell surfaces containing high concentra - tions of activated receptors awaiting internalization 40 , and that overexpression of receptors or chimaeric proteins containing func - tional internalization motifs does not generally induce massive coated - pit formation 4 , 41 . The model also provides a generalized © 1999 Macmillan Magazines Ltd articles 6 NATURE CELL BIOLOGY | VOL 1 | MAY 1999 | cellbio . nature . com explanation for the existence of fixed endocytotic ‘hot spots’ in stimulated nerve terminals , inferred on the basis of localized and persistent concentrations of dynamin 42 , AP - 2 ( ref . 43 ) and a candi - date scaffold protein 44 in Drosophila presynaptic nerve terminals . Initiation of coated - pit formation by limited protein factor ( s ) on the membrane skeleton would also provide the specificity and reg - ulation of coat formation that is seemingly lacking in in vitro exper - iments in which a combination of coat proteins with pure lipids results in the production of coated buds 45 , 46 . In showing that coated - pit dynamics in live cells are under both spatial and temporal con - trol , our results reveal a new , higher - order level of organization of the plasma membrane . h Methods Materials . Latrunculin B was purchased from Calbiochem ; LipofectAMINE was from Gibco ; Texas - Red - labelled transferrin and Slow - Fade were from Molecular Probes ; and the enhanced chemiluminescence ( ECL ) detection kit was from Amersham . The expression vector pEGFP - C1 and monoclonal anti - GFP antibody were from Clontech . Monoclonal antibodies against the clathrin heavy chain ( X - 22 and TD - 1 ) and AP - 2 a subunit ( AP . 6 ) were obtained from American Type Cell Culture ( Rockville , MD ) . Rabbit serum number 27004 , used to detect clathrin heavy and light chains , has been described 12 . Construction and expression of GFP – clathrin - LCa . A mouse placental clone with homology to clathrin LCa complementary DNA was identified in the expressed - sequence - tag database and obtained from American Type Cell Culture , sequenced and found to encode full - length clathrin LCa . The open reading frame was amplified and cloned into the expression vector pEGFP - C1 in - frame with the GFP cDNA , yielding pEGFP - LCa . A construct coding for expression of EGFP fused to the carboxy terminus of LCa was also functional ( data not shown ) . COS - 1 cells at ~ 90 % confluence were transiently transfected with 2 – 3 m g pEGFP - LCa using LipofectAMINE according to the manufacturer’s recommendations ( Gibco ) and cells were used 48 h later . In cells transfected with pEGFP - LCa and probed with antibody against GFP or the clathrin light chain , a new band of relative molecular mass ~ 66 , 000 ( M r 66K ) was observed , larger than the M r value of the chimaeric protein ( 51 , 479 ) but consistent with the anomalously low electrophoretic mobility expected of clathrin light chains 47 . Imaging of GFP – clathrin in living cells . For live imaging , cells were grown in Lab - Tek chambered coverglasses ( Nalge Nunc International ) and transferred into medium buffered with 25 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 4 , before observation . Cells expressing the lowest levels of GFP signal compatible with detection were imaged using a Zeiss Axiovert S100TV micro - scope with Zeiss Plan - Neofluar ( 1 . 25 NA ) or Plan - Apo ( 1 . 40 NA ) · 63 objectives and a Quantix , cooled , charge - coupled - device camera containing a Kodak 1400 chip ( Photometrics ) , yielding a pixel size of 0 . 108 µm in all images . Temperatures ( 37 (cid:176) C ) of the microscope stage , objective and sample were con - trolled using a heating fan and YSI Precision 4000A thermometer ( Yellow Springs , OH ) . A 100 - W mer - cury lamp was used as a light source attenuated by 3 % , 10 % or 32 % transmission neutral - density filters ( Edmund Scientific ) . GFP fluorescence was visualized with 1 . 0 - s exposures using excitation filters at 450 – 490 nm and emission filters at 500 – 550 nm with a 495LP dichroic filter ( Chroma Technology , Brattle - boro , VT ) . IPlab Scientific Imaging Software ( Scanalytics , Fairfax , VA ) was used for image acquisition and analysis together with Adobe Photoshop . In all cases , cumulative fluorescence - intensity decreases during observation were £ 40 % . For observation of detergent - extracted cells , 0 . 05 volumes of Triton - X100 ( 20 % , v / v ) were added to cells at frame 10 of continuous time - lapse recording ( 1 . 4 s per frame ) and observation was continued for at least 1 min . Tracking of coated - pit movement . To generate traces of coated - pit motion , we processed image data with a tracking program ( TRACK – DRBIO / Cornell ; http : / / www . englib . cornell . edu / drbio / track . html ) that was modified to recognize IPLab ( Scanalytics ) animation files . Each particle trajectory generated by the program was screened to include only those that survived 20 – 60 frames ( 1 . 4 s per frame ) without disappearing , and did not move further than 1 m m between successive frames . To calculate the maximum range of any given trajectory , we used the distance of the median ( x , y ) of the data set to the furthest point to define the radius of a circle that would encompass every data point . Cell lysis and gel filtration . Cells expressing GFP or GFP – clathrin - LCa were lysed , immunoprecipitated with antibody X - 22 against the clathrin heavy chain as described 10 , and immunoblotted with antibody TD - 1 against the clathrin heavy chain or with anti - GFP monoclonal antibody , using ECL detection . For gel - filtration experiments , cells expressing GFP alone or GFP – clathrin - LCa were hypotonically lysed at 0 (cid:176) C in 5 mM Tris - HCl ( pH 7 . 0 ) with protease inhibitors . An equal volume of 1 . 0 M Tris - HCl ( pH 7 . 0 ) was then added to dissociate assembled clathrin structures 48 . After centrifugation at 100 , 000 r . p . m . in a TLA . 100 rotor ( Beckman ) for 20 min at 4 (cid:176) C , extracts were fractionated on a Superose - 6 HR 10 / 30 column ( Pharmacia ) equilibrated in 0 . 5 M Tris - HCl ( pH 7 . 0 ) at a flow rate of 0 . 3 ml min - 1 . Frac - tions ( 0 . 3 ml ) were analysed as described above to detect the elution profile of GFP – clathrin - light - chain and clathrin heavy chain . Indirect immunofluorescence and uptake of fluorescently labelled transferrin . Transiently transfected COS - 1 cells grown on coverslips were fixed in 3 . 7 % formaldehyde and total cel - lular clathrin and AP - 2 were detected by immunofluorescence microscopy as described 40 . Endocytosis of transferrin was monitored by incubating cells with Texas - Red - labelled transferrin ( 20 m g ml - 1 ) for 15 min at 37 (cid:176) C in HEPES - supplemented medium . After washing twice with phosphate - buffered saline , cells were fixed in 3 . 7 % formaldehyde and mounted for analysis . RECEIVED 29 JANUARY 1999 ; REVISED 1 MARCH 1999 ; ACCEPTED 2 MARCH 1999 ; PUBLISHED MAY 1999 . 1 . Schmid , S . L . Clathrin - coated vesicle formation and protein sorting : an integrated process . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 66 , 511 – 548 ( 1997 ) . 2 . Anderson , R . G . W . Dissecting clathrin - coated pits . Trends Cell Biol . 3 , 177 – 179 ( 1993 ) . 3 . Robinson , M . S . The role of clathrin , adaptors and dynamin in endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 6 , 538 – 544 ( 1994 ) . 4 . Santini , F . , Marks , M . S . & Keen , J . H . Endocytic clathrin - coated pit formation is independent of receptor internalization signal levels . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 1177 – 1194 ( 1998 ) . 5 . Mukherjee , S . , Ghosh , R . N . & Maxfield , F . R . Endocytosis . Physiol . Rev . 77 , 759 – 803 ( 1997 ) . 6 . Riezman , H . , Woodman , P . G . , van Meer , G . & Marsh , M . Molecular mechanisms of endocytosis . Cell 91 , 731 – 738 ( 1997 ) . 7 . Goud , B . , Huet , C . & Louvard , D . Assembled and unassembled pools of clathrin : a quantitative study using an enzyme immunoassay . J . Cell Biol . 100 , 521 – 527 ( 1985 ) . 8 . Lippincott - Schwartz , J . , Cole , N . & Presley , J . Unravelling Golgi membrane traffic with green fluorescent protein chimeras . Trends Cell Biol . 8 , 16 – 20 ( 1998 ) . 9 . Ludin , B . & Matus , A . GFP illuminates the cytoskeleton . Trends Cell Biol . 8 , 72 – 77 ( 1998 ) . 10 . Brodsky , F . Clathrin structure characterized with monoclonal antibodies . J . Cell Biol . 101 , 2055 – 2062 ( 1985 ) . 11 . Anderson , R . G . , Vasile , E . , Mello , R . J . , Brown , M . S . & Goldstein , J . L . Immunocytochemical visualization of coated pits and vesicles in human fibroblasts : relation to low density lipoprotein receptor distribution . Cell 15 , 919 – 933 ( 1978 ) . 12 . Keen , J . H . , Willingham , M . C . & Pastan , I . Clathrin and coated vesicle proteins . J . Cell Biol . 256 , 2538 – 2544 ( 1981 ) . 13 . Stoorvogel , W . , Oorschot , V . & Geuze , H . J . A novel class of clathrin - coated vesicles budding from endosomes . J . Cell Biol . 132 , 21 – 33 ( 1996 ) . 14 . Ahle , S . , Mann , A . , Eichelsbacher , U . & Ungewickell , E . Structural relationships between clathrin assembly proteins from the Golgi and the plasma membrane . EMBO J . 7 , 919 – 929 ( 1988 ) . 15 . Marsh , M . & Helenius , A . Adsorptive endocytosis of Semliki Forest virus . J . Mol . Biol . 142 , 439 – 454 ( 1980 ) . 16 . Griffiths , G . , Back , R . & Marsh , M . A quantitative analysis of the endocytic pathway in baby hamster kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 2703 – 2720 ( 1989 ) . 17 . Miller , K . , Shipman , M . , Trowbridge , I . S . & Hopkins , C . R . Transferrin receptors promote the formation of clathrin lattices . Cell 65 , 621 – 632 ( 1991 ) . 18 . Davoust , J . & Cosson , P . in Endocytosis ( ed . Courtoy , P . J . ) 385 – 407 ( Springer , Heidelberg , 1990 ) . 19 . Ghosh , R . N . & Webb , W . W . Automated detection and tracking of individual and clustered cell surface low density lipoprotein receptor molecules . Biophys . J . 66 , 1301 – 1318 ( 1994 ) . 20 . Salisbury , J . L . , Condeelis , J . S . & Satir , P . Role of coated vesicles , microfilaments , and calmodulin in receptor - mediated endocytosis by cultured B lymphoblastoid cells . J . Cell Biol . 87 , 132 – 141 ( 1980 ) . 21 . Gottlieb , T . A . , Ivanov , I . E . , Adesnik , M . & Sabatini , D . D . Actin microfilaments play a critical role in endocytosis at the apical but not the basolateral surface of polarized epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 695 – 710 ( 1993 ) . 22 . Lamaze , C . , Fujimoto , L . M . , Yin , H . L . & Schmid , S . L . The actin cytoskeleton is required for receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 20332 – 20335 ( 1997 ) . 23 . Spector , I . , Shochet , N . R . , Blasberger , D . & Kashman , Y . Latrunculins—novel marine macrolides that disrupt microfilament organization and affect cell growth : I . Comparison with cytochalasin D . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 13 , 127 – 144 ( 1989 ) . 24 . Bretscher , M . S . & Aguado - Velasco , C . Membrane traffic during cell locomotion . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 , 537 – 541 ( 1998 ) . 25 . Pleasure , I . T . Clathrin Interactions With hsc70 and Valosin - Containing Protein . Thesis , Thomas Jefferson Univ . , Philadelphia ( 1994 ) . 26 . Kanaseki , T . & Kadota , K . The " vesicle in a basket " . A morphological study of the coated vesicle isolated from the nerve endings of the guinea pig brain , with special reference to the mechanism of membrane movements . J . Cell Biol . 42 , 202 – 220 ( 1969 ) . 27 . Heuser , J . Three - dimensional visualization of coated vesicle formation in fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 84 , 560 – 583 ( 1980 ) . 28 . Jin , A . J . & Nossal , R . Topological mechanisms involved in the formation of clathrin - coated vesicles . Biophys . J . 65 , 1523 – 1537 ( 1993 ) . 29 . Heuser , J . E . & Anderson , R . G . Hypertonic media inhibit receptor - mediated endocytosis by blocking clathrin - coated pit formation . J . Cell Biol . 108 , 389 – 400 ( 1989 ) . 30 . Hu , Y . , Barzilai , A . , Chen , M . , Bailey , C . H . & Kandel , E . R . 5 - HT and cAMP induce the formation of coated pits and vesicles and increase the expression of clathrin light chain in sensory neurons of aplysia . Neuron 10 , 921 – 929 ( 1993 ) . 31 . Kusumi , A . , Sako , Y . & Yamamoto , M . Confined lateral diffusion of membrane receptors as studied by single particle tracking ( nanovid microscopy ) . Effects of calcium - induced differentiation in cultured epithelial cells . Biophys . J . 65 , 2021 – 2040 ( 1993 ) . 32 . Anderson , C . M . , Georgiou , G . N . , Morrison , I . E . , Stevenson , G . V . & Cherry , R . J . Tracking of cell surface receptors by fluorescence digital imaging microscopy using a charge - coupled device camera . Low - density lipoprotein and influenza virus receptor mobility at 4 degrees C . J . Cell Sci . 101 , 415 – 425 ( 1992 ) . 33 . Sako , Y . & Kusumi , A . Compartmentalized structure of the plasma membrane for receptor movements as revealed by a nanometer - level motion analysis . J . Cell Biol . 125 , 1251 – 1264 ( 1994 ) . 34 . Kusumi , A . & Sako , Y . Cell surface organization by the membrane skeleton . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 8 , 566 – 574 ( 1996 ) . 35 . Saxton , M . J . & Jacobson , K . Single - particle tracking : applications to membrane dynamics . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 26 , 373 – 399 ( 1997 ) . 36 . West , M . A . , Bright , N . A . & Robinson , M . S . The role of ADP - ribosylation factor and phospholipase D in adaptor recruitment . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 1239 – 1254 ( 1997 ) . 37 . Maupin , P . & Pollard , T . D . Improved preservation and staining of HeLa cell actin filaments , clathrin - coated membranes , and other cytoplasmic structures by tannic acid - glutaraldehyde - saponin fixation . © 1999 Macmillan Ma gazines Ltd articles NATURE CELL BIOLOGY | VOL 1 | MAY 1999 | cellbio . nature . com 7 J . Cell Biol . 96 , 51 – 62 ( 1983 ) . 38 . Nicol , A . et al . Labeling of structural elements at the ventral plasma membrane of fibroblasts with the immunogold technique . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 35 , 499 – 506 ( 1987 ) . 39 . Clark , S . F . , Martin , S . , Carozzi , A . J . , Hill , M . M . & James , D . E . Intracellular localization of phosphatidylinositide 3 - kinase and insulin receptor substrate - 1 in adipocytes : potential involvement of a membrane skeleton . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 1211 – 1225 ( 1998 ) . 40 . Santini , F . & Keen , J . H . Endocytosis of activated receptors and clathrin - coated pit formation— deciphering the chicken or egg relationship . J . Cell Biol . 132 , 1025 – 1036 ( 1996 ) . 41 . Warren , R . A . , Green , F . A . & Enns , C . A . Saturation of the endocytic pathway for the transferrin receptor does not affect the endocytosis of the epidermal growth factor receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 2116 – 2121 ( 1997 ) . 42 . Estes , P . S . et al . Traffic of dynamin within individual Drosophila synaptic boutons relative to compartment - specific markers . J . Neurosci . 16 , 5443 – 5456 ( 1996 ) . 43 . Gonzalez - Gaitan , M . & Jackle , H . Role of Drosophila alpha - adaptin in presynaptic vesicle recycling . Cell 88 , 767 – 776 ( 1997 ) . 44 . Roos , J . & Kelly , R . B . Dap160 , a neural - specific Eps15 homology and multiple SH3 domain - containing protein that interacts with Drosophila dynamin . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 19108 – 19119 ( 1998 ) . 45 . Matsuoka , K . et al . COPII - coated vesicle formation reconstituted with purified coat proteins and chemically defined liposomes . Cell 93 , 263 – 275 ( 1998 ) . 46 . Takei , K . et al . Generation of coated intermediates of clathrin - mediated endocytosis on protein - free liposomes . Cell 94 , 131 – 141 ( 1998 ) . 47 . Jackson , A . P . , Seow , H . F . , Holmes , N . , Drickamer , K . & Parham , P . Clathrin light chains contain brain - specific insertion sequences and a region of homology with intermediate filaments . Nature 326 , 154 – 159 ( 1987 ) . 48 . Keen , J . H . Clathrin assembly proteins : affinity purification and a model for coat assembly . J . Cell Biol . 105 , 1989 – 1998 ( 1987 ) . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank M . Birnbaum and M . Marks for their critical review of the manuscript , and P . Hingorani for help with production of the figures . This work was supported by an NIH grant ( to J . H . K . ) . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J . H . K . Supplementary Information is available on Nature Cell Biology ’s World - Wide Web site ( http : / / www . cellbio . nature . com ) . © 1999 Macmillan Magazines Ltd articles 8 NATURE CELL BIOLOGY | VOL 1 | MAY 1999 | cellbio . nature . com © 1999 Macmillan Magazines Ltd