Evidence of a large - scale mechanosensing mechanism for cellular adaptation to substrate stiffness Léa Trichet a , 1 , Jimmy Le Digabel a , 1 , Rhoda J . Hawkins b , c , Sri Ram Krishna Vedula d , Mukund Gupta d , Claire Ribrault a , Pascal Hersen a , d , Raphaël Voituriez b , and Benoît Ladoux a , d , 2 a Laboratoire Matière et Systèmes Complexes , Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche , 7057 , Université Paris Diderot , 75205 Paris Cedex 13 , France ; b Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche , 7600 , Université Pierre et Marie Curie , 75252 Paris Cedex 05 , France ; c Department of Physics and Astronomy , University of Sheffield , Sheffield S3 7RH , United Kingdom ; and d Mechanobiology Institute , National University of Singapore , Singapore 117411 Edited by T . C . Lubensky , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA , and approved March 6 , 2012 ( received for review October 28 , 2011 ) Cell migration plays a major role in many fundamental biological processes , such as morphogenesis , tumor metastasis , and wound healing . As they anchor and pull on their surroundings , adhering cells actively probe the stiffness of their environment . Current understanding is that traction forces exerted by cells arise mainly at mechanotransduction sites , called focal adhesions , whose size seems to be correlated to the force exerted by cells on their under - lying substrate , at least during their initial stages . In fact , our data show by direct measurements that the buildup of traction forces is faster for larger substrate stiffness , and that the stress measured at adhesion sites depends on substrate rigidity . Our results , backed by a phenomenological model based on active gel theory , suggest that rigidity - sensing is mediated by a large - scale mechanism origi - nating in the cytoskeleton instead of a local one . We show that large - scale mechanosensing leads to an adaptative response of cell migration to stiffness gradients . In response to a step boundary in rigidity , we observe not only that cells migrate preferentially toward stiffer substrates , but also that this response is optimal in a narrow range of rigidities . Taken together , these findings lead to unique insights into the regulation of cell response to external mechanical cues and provide evidence for a cytoskeleton - based rigidity - sensing mechanism . actin cytoskeleton ∣ microfabrication ∣ mechanobiology ∣ cell mechanics C ell migration is not only sensitive to the biochemical compo - sition of the environment , but also to its mechanical proper - ties . Cells directly probe the physical properties of their environment , such as substrate stiffness , by pulling on it . Increas - ing evidence show that matrix or tissue elasticity has a key role in regulating numerous cell functions , such as adhesion ( 1 ) , migra - tion ( 2 ) and differentiation ( 3 ) . Such functions are affected by cell - generated actomyosin forces that depend on substrate stiffness through a feedback mechanism ( 4 ) . The sensitivity of cells to mechanical properties of the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) arises from the mechanosensitive nature of cell adhesion . Numer - ous plausible candidates for the transduction of mechanochem - ical signals have been tested ( 5 ) . Among them , focal adhesions ( FAs ) appear to be the most prominent , as shown by the reported correlation between their area and sustained force exhibiting a constant stress ( 6 – 9 ) . This mechanosensitivity is usually ac - counted for by a generic local mechanism in which a force applied to an FA induces an elastic deformation of the contact that trig - gers conformational and organizational changes of some of its constitutive proteins , which in turn can enhance binding with new proteins enabling growth of the contact ( 10 – 12 ) . However , how this local mechanosensitivity can result in the ability of cells to sense and respond to the rigidity of their surroundings ( 2 , 3 , 13 , 14 ) at a large scale remains largely unknown ( 5 , 15 ) . Much conflicting evidence has emerged from a variety of studies , lead - ing to important questions . Not only FAs but also the opening of calcium ion channels ( 2 , 16 , 17 ) could participate in the build - up of cell tension in response to mechanical cues . Moreover , recent modeling ( 18 ) as well as indirect observations ( 19 , 20 ) suggest that the contractile actomyosin apparatus can act as a global rigidity sensor ( 21 ) . From a physical point of view , the deforma - tion of the surrounding matrix in response to cell contractility is poorly understood ; plausible mechanisms of cell mechanosensi - tivity imply that the regulation could be either mediated by the stress exerted by cells , or by the strain in the ECM ( 7 , 22 – 24 ) . These intriguing questions are currently intensively debated , be - cause the detailed mechanisms of force transduction in response to ECM might explain the observed discrepancies in adhesion ( 1 , 25 ) , migration ( 2 , 26 ) , and differentiation ( 3 , 27 ) of cells in environments of different rigidities and over different time scales . Results and Discussion Dynamics of Focal Adhesions and Traction Force Measurements on Substrates of Various Stiffnesses . Here we report real - time mea - surements of explicit correlations between traction forces and the formation of FAs as a function of substrate stiffness . We used microforce sensor arrays ( μ FSA ) ( 28 ) together with epifluores - cence microscopy of REF52 fibroblast cells expressing a fluores - cently tagged FA protein ( YFP - paxillin ) ( Fig . 1 A and B ) . We seeded REF52 cells stably expressing YFP - paxillin on μ FSA with pillars of various diameters and heights coated with fibronectin ( 13 , 29 , 30 ) . These different - shaped pillars result in substrates with various spring constants , k , from 3 to 80 nN ∕ μ m ( Fig . 1 C , Movie S1 ) without altering the molecular scale properties of its surface . After allowing cells to adhere on the substrate for at least approximately 5 h , cells developed traction forces oriented toward their center that caused a deflection of the micropillars ( Fig . 1 B ) . We simultaneously analyzed the dynamics of the trac - tion forces and FA patches over time . As a control experiment , we compared the size distributions of FAs on μ FSA of different rigidities to those on a flat polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) surface ( Fig . S1 ) . As expected from previous studies ( 23 , 25 , 31 ) , these distributions were skewed toward larger values for substrates of increased stiffness . The topography of 2 - μ m pillar substrates did not significantly affect the size of FAs , as shown by the similar size distributions of FAs on μ FAS and flat PDMS substrates ( Fig . S1 ) . We analyzed traction forces in the proximity of the cell edge where the highest forces as well as the largest FAs were observed . In most cases , force generation and FA assembly over time were Authorcontributions : R . V . andB . L . designedresearch ; L . T . , J . L . D . , R . J . H . , S . R . K . V . , C . R . , R . V . , and B . L . performed research ; L . T . , J . L . D . , R . J . H . , S . R . K . V . , M . G . , C . R . , P . H . , R . V . , and B . L . contributed new reagents / analytic tools ; L . T . , J . L . D . , R . J . H . , M . G . , P . H . , R . V . , and B . L . analyzed data ; and L . T . , R . V . , and B . L . wrote the paper . The authors declare no conflict of interest . This article is a PNAS Direct Submission . 1 L . T . and J . L . D contributed equally to this work . 2 To whom correspondence should be addressed . Email : benoit . ladoux @ univ - paris - diderot . fr . This article contains supporting information online at www . pnas . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1117810109 / - / DCSupplemental . www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1117810109 PNAS Early Edition ∣ 1 of 6 A PP L I E D P H Y S I C A L S C I E N C E S B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y tightly correlated ( Fig . 1 D and E ) : An increase of both forces and FA sizes followed by a saturation phase occurred within a time - scale of minutes ( see an example on a substrate of 34 nN ∕ μ m , Fig . 1 E ) . To characterize the dependence of such dynamics on substrate stiffness , we performed the measurements over a broad range of rigidities ( from around 4 to 80 nN ∕ μ m ) . For each time point , we averaged the force , F , over different FAs present at the cell edge of different cells ( n ≥ 5 ) . Average forces , h F k i , exerted at paxillin sites , grew more rapidly and reached higher saturation values on substrates with higher rigidities ( Fig . 2 A ) . In contrast to the force , the dependency of FA growth ( area ) was less obvious although the saturation size depended on the stiffness of the pil - lars ( Fig . 2 B ) . In addition , the saturation force F p was found to be propor - tional to the stiffness of the substrate within our range of rigidities ( Fig . 2 C ) . This result implied that saturation forces correspond to a constant deformation of the substrate of around 0 . 84 (cid:1) 0 . 03 μ m , in agreement with previous studies on other cell types ( 13 , 23 ) . Interestingly , the initial rate of force increase over time , dF ∕ dt , also varied linearly with substrate rigidity , giving a speed of micro - pillar displacement equal to 1 . 3 nm / s independent of the stiffness . All together , these data suggest the existence of a mechanosensi - tivity mechanism that is regulated by substrate deformation . Relationship Between Focal Adhesion Area , Force , and Stress . To further assess the nature of force transmission , we investigated the relationship between force and focal adhesion area as a func - tion of substrate stiffness . The relationship between force and area for all focal adhesions at all time points is plotted in Fig . 3 A for substrate rigidities from 4 to 80 nN ∕ μ m ( each point repre - sents an average over at least 15 FAs of approximately equal area ) . This range of stiffnesses corresponds to an equivalent Young ’ s modulus , E eff , of the micropillar substrate varying from 2 . 8 up to 60 kPa ( 13 ) . We clearly obtained a linear dependence between traction force and FA area at a given rigidity . This dependence , however , is not the same for each stiffness ; surpris - ingly , it appears that different force values could be reached for the same FA area . For instance , an FA area of approximately 2 μ m 2 leads to forces that vary from 3 up to 42 nN within a stiff - ness range from 4 . 7 up to 80 nN ∕ μ m ( Fig . 3 A ) . The fact that FAs of similar areas can sustain different forces , illustrated in Fig . 3 C and D , is compatible with the results of ref . 24 where a variability of the stress between FAs at different positions was found , but only for a given substrate rigidity . These results overall contrast with the commonly accepted understanding of FA mechano - sensitivity by a local force - dependent mechanism , which usually assumes a constant stress ( 6 – 8 ) . Interestingly , the extrapolation of this linear dependence to zero gave rise to nonzero forces . This Fig . 1 . Cell adhesion and traction forces developed by REF52 fibroblasts expressing YFP - paxillin on micropillar substrates . ( A ) Scanning electron micrograph image of a typical REF52 cell on a micropillar substrate . ( Scale bar , 15 μ m . ) ( B ) Epifluorescent image of a single cell deforming the micropillar substrate ( here of spring constant k ¼ 34 nN ∕ μ m ) . Micropillars are labeled by Cy3 - fibronectin ( red ) , and YFP - paxillin - rich patches are in green . ( Scale bar , 15 μ m . ) ( C ) Sequential images of the insert area of B showing the dynamics of FA growth and micropillar displacements . ( Scale bar , 10 μ m . ) ( D ) Schematic representation of the experimental setup showing the formation of FAs on the top of a PDMS micropillar . ( E ) Typical example of the formation of an FA area ( red ) and the buildup of force ( blue ) as a function of time ( on a substrate of 34 nN ∕ μ m ) . Fig . 2 . Traction forces and focal adhesion dynamics . ( A ) Average traction forces as a function of time for different substrate stiffnesses . Data were pooled from n ≥ 5 different cells and n ≥ 15 different pillars . Each curve ex - hibits an initial regime of fast force increase followed by a saturation regime . ( B ) Average focal adhesion area for differentstiffnesses as afunction of time . ( C ) Saturation force as a function of substrate stiffness . A linear relationship was observed between the maximal force and the substrate stiffness up to 80 nN ∕ μ m , showing that cells maintained a constant deformation . The fit corresponds to the theoretical model based on the active stress exerted by cytoskeleton remodeling ( see SI Text ) . ( D ) Rate of increase of force with time , dF ∕ dt , as a function of stiffness ; dF ∕ dt was obtained by fitting the slope of the initial linear regime of the force curve as a function of time ( A ) . The rate of force with time , dF ∕ dt , was proportional to the stiffness in the range of stiffnesses used in our study ( up to 80 nN ∕ μ m ) . 2 of 6 ∣ www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1117810109 Trichet et al . observation could be explained by invoking a second regime of tension for FAs smaller than 0 . 3 μ m 2 . This residual area of 0 . 3 μ m 2 is similar to the typical size of focal complexes , which are able to sustain large traction forces that do not correlate with adhesion size ( 6 , 32 ) . We then computed the stress , σ , defined as the force divided by the area of paxillin - rich patches . The stress corresponds to the slopes of the different curves representing the force as a function of FA area in Fig . 3 A . By plotting the stress as a function of the rigidity ( Fig . 3 B ) , we discovered that the stress did not remain constant , but instead was an increasing function of the stiffness . Such an influence of substrate rigidity on the active cell response is consistent with original reports by Pelham and Wang ( 31 ) . More precisely , we observed an initial regime corresponding to a fast increase of stress up to a value of 7 nN ∕ μ m 2 ( 1 nN ∕ μ m 2 ¼ 1 kPa ) below a stiffness of 34 nN ∕ μ m and was followed by a sa - turation phase for higher stiffnesses . In a previous study , Balaban et al . ( 7 ) concluded that the mechanical regulation of cell adhe - sion was governed by a constant stress , but their experiments were performed at a single stiffness . We indeed found that their result was well correlated to our stress - stiffness relationship according to the substrate stiffness used in their study ( Fig . 3 B ) . Taken to - gether , our data indicate that the mechanosensitivity effect that we report in this study is not due to the previously reported me - chanism mediated by FAs ( 6 , 7 , 33 , 34 ) , but requires a larger - scale mechanism . Modeling of a Large - Scale Mechanosensing Process . The mechanism usually invoked to account for a local mechanosensitivity is that a force applied to an FA induces an elastic deformation of the contact at the molecular scale that triggers conformational and organizational changes ( such as unfolding ) of some of its consti - tutive proteins , which in turn can enhance binding of new pro - teins enabling growth of the contact ( 11 ) . Such a mechanism should therefore depend on the local stiffness of the adhesive substrate at the submicrometer scale ( 33 ) which corresponds to the surface of the top of the micropillar in our case , character - ized by the elasticity of the PDMS , i . e . , its Young ’ s modulus , E s ( SI Text for more details on our phenomenological model ) . Consequently , if the mechanical feedback was mediated by the FA itself , then the stress applied by FAs would depend on E s only and not on k , which can be varied independently of E s in our set - up through the geometrical parameters of the pillars ( SI Text ) . However , we show here that the stress , σ , depends on the spring constant of the pillars k ( for the same E s ) . Such a dependency provides direct evidence that an extra feedback in - volving structures other than FAs must be involved . We suggest that this feedback could be mediated on a larger scale by the cytoskeleton , and in particular by the stress fibers pulling on FAs . We argue that a deformation of the cytoskeleton , such as a short - ening , x , of the length of a stress fiber , has an impact on the active stress exerted by the cytoskeleton . Generally , this mechanical ac - tivation can be justified within the framework of the theory of viscoelastic active gels ( 35 , 36 ) . This phenomenological theory states that in nematic ( or polar ) media driven out of equilibrium such as the cytoskeleton , there exists an active stress σ aij ( here due to actin / myosin contractility ) proportional to the nematic order parameter tensor Q ij ¼ h n i n j i - δ ij ∕ 3 where the vector n denotes the local orientation of actin filaments . The coupling of Q ij to the strain U ij , which is standard in nematic gels ( 37 ) , then implies that the stress σ aij depends on U ij and therefore on the deforma - tion x . In other words , a deformation x induces a strain U ij in the cytoskeleton and therefore a reorganization of the orientation Q ij of the filaments , which in turn yields an active stress . For this coupling of Q ij to the strain U ij to be valid , the relaxa - tion time of Q ij has to be long , implying an elastic like rheology of the cytoskeleton . In fact , the rheology of the cytoskeleton is very complex and fluidization has been observed , but only in response to a transient stretch ( 38 , 39 ) . Our case is more like that of a sus - tained constraint , in which strain stiffening and long relaxation times have been reported ( 40 – 42 ) , justifying our assumption . Actin Organization Depends on Substrate Stiffness . To evaluate Q ij for substrates of various stiffnesses , we performed experiments to image actin stress fibers on fixed cells spread on soft and stiff μ FSAs . The polarization of the cell was then quantified by the scalar order parameter S defined by S ¼ Q n 0 n 0 , where n 0 is the average direction of stress fibers . We found that in a soft case ( ≈ 4 nN ∕ μ m ) , the stress fibers were fully disordered , leading to h S i ¼ 0 . 19 (cid:1) 0 . 13 , whereas they appeared fully polarized in a stiff case ( ≈ 100 nN ∕ μ m ) leading to h S i ¼ 0 . 80 (cid:1) 0 . 09 ( SI Text ) . At intermediate stiffness ( ≈ 40 nN ∕ μ m ) , we obtained h S i ¼ 0 . 56 (cid:1) 0 . 21 . This result shows a relationship between force gen - eration by cells and actin stress fiber alignment , yielding a semi - quantitative support of the coupling between Q ij and U ij ( Fig . 4 ) . This active stress is a deformation - dependent ( and therefore stiffness - dependent ) contribution , enhancing the stress exerted by the FA . The existence of such coupling shows that actomyosin forces are sufficient to explain the cellular response to matrix rigidity according to a stress - dependent relationship to substrate stiffness , as recently shown for the response of stem cells to ma - trix stiffness ( 43 ) . By assuming a linear coupling between Q ij and U ij , the model could be made explicit for the case of a single stress fiber , for which the stress , σ aij at each extremity was given by the deformation of the corresponding pillar and the adhesion area , S FA . Based on this assumption , we made explicit the depen - dence of the stress , therefore the force , on the pillar rigidity and showed that this theoretical prediction , compatible with ref . 43 ( SI Text ) , was in good agreement with our experimental data Fig . 3 . Relationship between stress and focal adhesion area . ( A ) Correlation between forces for different stiffnesses of the pillars and FA areas obtained by averaging data at all time points . Different forces are reached for the same size of FA on substrates of different stiffnesses . ( B ) Relationship between stress ( σ ¼ F ∕ S FA ) and substrate stiffness . An initial regime of fast increase of stress was observed for stiffness values below 34 nN ∕ μ m followed by a slow increase up to 80 nN ∕ μ m . The gray circle corresponds to the stress value obtained on soft continuous PDMS substrate with a Young ’ s modulus of 12 kPa by Balaban et al . ( 7 ) . The equivalent rigidity of the micropillar sub - strate , E eff , was computed according to our modeling ( 13 ) . The stress ( σ ) - stiff - ness ( k ) relationship is fitted according to our model ( see SI Text ) . ( C and D ) Typical examples of an REF52 cell spread on a soft substrate ( 12 nN ∕ μ m ) and onastiffersubstrate ( 54 nN ∕ μ m ) . Micropillarsareinredand paxillinstainings in green . ( Scale bar , 8 μ m . ) Focal adhesions of similar sizes ( ≈ 2 . 8 μ m 2 ) on both conditions give rise to different forces of around 41 nN on the stiff μ FSA and 16 nN on the soft one ( see SI Text ) . ( Force bar , 10 nN . ) Trichet et al . PNAS Early Edition ∣ 3 of 6 A PP L I E D P H Y S I C A L S C I E N C E S B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y ( Fig . 2 C , Fig . 3 B ) . Additionally , this large - scale mechanosensitive regulation by the contractility of actin - myosin fibers could also explain the linear relationship that we obtained between the sa - turation force and stiffness ( Fig . 2 C ) : The constant deformation of around 840 nm could be attributed to the simultaneous short - ening of several micron - sized sarcomeric substructures within actomyosin stress fibers that , according to previous studies ( 44 , 45 ) , can sustain contractions of 10 – 25 % . Substrate Stiffness Governs the Directionality of Cell Movements . Such a large - scale mechanism driven by cell cytoskeleton polariza - tion could also provide a plausible explanation for cell durotaxis . The combination of our observations — a faster force increase and higher saturated force values on stiffer substrates and an increasing stress with respect to substrate stiffness — led us naturally to the following prediction : polarized cells coming from a softer substrate will suddenly exert large traction forces as they touch the stiff side , and thus rotate to migrate perpendicularly to the stiff substrate . On the other hand , cells coming from the stiff side will stay along the boundary . These predictions guided the design of a durotaxis assay ( 2 ) : Areas of different stiffnesses on which cells can freely move from soft to stiff and vice versa were created within the same micropillar substrate . Such substrates were composed of consecu - tive arrays of micropillars of diameters 1 and 2 μ m ( creating soft , k s , and stiff , K S , substrates , respectively ) inducing a stiffness ratio of around ten between both sides ( K S ∕ k s ≈ 10 ) while the surface density of the micropillars was kept constant ( Fig . 5 A ) . Cells com - ing from the soft part or from the stiff part were considered inde - pendently . As shown in Fig . 5 D and in Movie S2 for k s ¼ 3 nN ∕ μ m and K s ¼ 34 nN ∕ μ m , cells indeed move toward the stiff part of the substrate aligning perpendicularly to the boundary . We then used this assay to analyze the migration paths of in - dividual cells on micropillar substrates of different stiffnesses . Our durotaxis analysis was performed by counting the preferen - tial orientation of the cells after they touched the border between the two different parts of the substrate . We measured the number of events that corresponded to cells coming from the soft sub - strates and arriving at the boundary ( 40 < n cells < 80 , where n cells is the total number of cells analyzed ) . By changing the rigidity of the soft micropillars from 3 – 134 nN ∕ μ m , we obtained an optimal durotaxis efficiency for stiffness values around 3 – 10 nN ∕ μ m with around 70 % of cells moving toward the stiffer side ( Fig . 5 B ) . For k ≫ 10 nN ∕ μ m , no preferential direction was observed ( only 35 – 50 % of cells migrate toward the stiffer sub - strate ) . On the contrary , most of the cells located on the stiffer side did not migrate toward the soft one within the tested range of stiffnesses represented by the rigidity of the stiff pillars ( His - togram , Fig . 5 C , Movie S3 ) . In addition , as a control experiment to test whether cells were actually reacting to the substrate rigidity and not the adhesion geometry , we fabricated adhesive surfaces with the same geometry on glass coverslips coated with fluores - cently labeled fibronectin ( SI Text , Fig . S2 ) . To limit cell adhesion to the transferred pattern , the substrates were then treated with polyethyleneglycol to passivate the rest of the surface ( 26 ) , ren - dering it nonstick . In these conditions , we obtained an array of fibronectin patches printed on glass with the same adhesive surface and sizes as the tops of the pillars . On such surfaces presenting the same geometry but no rigidity dependency , we ob - served that geometry could not explain our previous results on pillar substrates . Indeed , only 37 % of the cells migrated from the area of 1 μ m patches to the area of 2 μ m ones and 53 % in the opposite direction when first placed on the 2 μ m patches area . When both sides of the substrate presented a stiffness larger than around 50 nN ∕ μ m , we observed that the migration of cells toward the stiffer part was reduced , as if cells could not sense any difference between sides ( Fig . 5 B ) . In other words , an optimal response to a step difference in matrix stiffness appeared within a narrow range of rigidities . These results could be related to the ability of cells to adapt their own stiffness to that of the substrate ( 27 , 43 , 46 ) . Moreover , the range of stiffness that promoted migration toward the stiffer side was correlated to that of the in - itial regime of the stress - stiffness relationship ( that of fast stress increase before reaching saturation , see Fig . 3 B ) . By analyzing crossing events with the deformation of micropillars at the boundary between soft and stiff substrates ( Fig . 5 ) , we showed that as a cell coming from the soft part was probing the interface , the force quickly increased up to 30 nN ( Fig . 5 F ) and peaked in the direction n normal to the border , leading to the migration of the cell body toward the stiffest region ( Fig . 5 E , Movie S4 ) . In agreement with our previous observations , this behavior can be attributed to cell polarization along this axis , which in turn favored the migration from soft to stiff . It appears that migration toward the stiffer part was enhanced when the step in stiffness corresponded to a large increase in stress between both sides of the substrate . According to Fig . 3 B , the range of rigidities between 1 and 50 nN ∕ μ m corresponds to the regime of the highest cell sensitivity to substrate rigidity . However , if both sides of the substrate corresponded to similar values of stress exerted by the adherent cell , cells did not migrate from one side to the other , no matter what the rigidity step between them . Consequently , the stress - stiffness relationship that we established appeared as an interesting indicator for the dur - otactic behavior . As cells sense the stiff side , they exert larger forces which in turn could induce a polarization of the actin cytoskeleton toward the stiff side and thus promote durotaxis . Interestingly , qualitatively similar behavior has been observed for the durotaxis of vascular cells on defined stiffness gradients within a range of rigidities up to 80 kPa ( 47 ) . The study observed a higher polarized behavior on gradient gels than on uniform substrates and a durotactic behavior enhanced by increasing the magnitude of gradients . However , they did detect an upper limit of stiffness that a cell is capable of sensing . Here we show that such a limit could be determined by the relative variations of the stress that the cell could exert on both sides . C A B D Fig . 4 . Coupling between the organization of stress fibers and the stiffness of the substrate . ( A – C ) Schematic representations and actin organization on substrates with various rigidities . Typical examples of actin staining and stress fibers organization ( green ) on a soft substrate ( ∼ 4 nN ∕ μ m ) ( A ) , on a substrate with an intermediate stiffness ( ∼ 40 nN ∕ μ m ) ( B ) , and on a stiffer substrate ( ∼ 100 nN ∕ μ m ) ( C ) . The scalar order parameter , S , is given here by S ¼ h cos 2 ð θ - θ 0 Þi , where θ denotes the angle of a stress fiber with a refer - ence axis and θ 0 its average . Cells on stiffer substrate exhibit a more pro - nounced polarization of the actin stress fibers leading to an increase of S with the rigidity : S ≈ 0 . 1 , 0 . 47 , and 0 . 95 , respectively . ( Scale bar , 15 μ m . ) ( D ) Average order parameter for cells plated on substrates of three different stiffnessesas afunction ofthepillar springconstantand theeffectiverigidity , E eff , of the substrate . Data were pooled from n ≥ 15 cells . 4 of 6 ∣ www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1117810109 Trichet et al . Conclusion We present here strong evidence that the rigidity - sensing mechan - ism in cell migration is not only locally driven by focal adhesion growth : The same size of FA area can lead to different forces depending on the substrate stiffness . Our results indicate clear con - straints on the possible mechanisms that regulate cell mechanosen - sitivity . A nonconstant stress as a function of stiffness requires a large - scale mechanical feedback that involves the reorganization of actin stress fibers instead of a purely local mechanism based on FA mechanosensitivity . In our model , stress fibers may act as a force sensor that transmits a mechanical tension to FAs . Tension mediated through the actin cytoskeleton induces a polarization of actin fibers that orient along the direction of the applied force in response to substrate stiffness . Signaling pathways will help to regulate this tension by stabilizing FAs ( 48 ) . We also demonstrate that durotaxis is optimal within a given range of rigidities that can be explained by our stress - rigidity relationship . The integrative mechanism we have presented here could be relevant to under - standing the matrix stiffness dependence of stem cell differentia - tion ( 3 , 43 ) and also tumor formation in vivo ( 49 ) in terms of actin reorganization and cell contractility . Materials and Methods Cell Culture . REF52 cells were maintained at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5 % CO 2 and 95 % air in DMEM containing 10 % bovine calf serum , 100 U ∕ mL penicillin , 100 μ g ∕ mL streptomycin , and 100 μ g ∕ mL glutamine . The cells were deposited on μ FSA 3 to 6 h before microscopy experiments ( SI Text for details ) . Preparation and Calibration of Microstructured PDMS Substrates . PDMS micro - pillar arrays were prepared and calibrated according to du Roure et al . ( 28 ) . The SI Text provides additional details on the experimental methods . Image Analysis . To calculate the order parameter , the images were analyzed using ImageJ software . First the images were convolved and thresholded . A D E F B C ( i ) ( ii ) ( iii ) ( iv ) Fig . 5 . Durotaxis revisited with micropillar substrates . ( A ) Scanning electron micrograph of a cell spread between two micropillar surfaces exhibiting different stiffnesses . Thediameterofthepillarsvarybetween1 μ m ( topregion ) and2 μ m ( bottomregion ) , butthesurfacedensityofthemicropillarsubstrate ( fractionof surface are covered by pillars ) has been kept constant . ( Scale bar , 10 μ m . ) ( B ) Statistics of cells migrating from the soft substrate toward the stiff one as a function of the spring constant of the soft pillars . The spring constant , k , of the pillar was varied between 3 and 134 nN ∕ μ m . A high percentage of migration events toward the stiff substrate was observed for values between 3 and 11 nN ∕ μ m , in correlation with the range of stiffnesses where a high increase of the stress isobserved . For largervaluesof k , nopreferential directionwas observed . Inred , percentage ofcells that comefromthesoft partandcrosstheboundary . In blue , percentage of cells that do not migrate . In gray , cells with undefined movement . ( C ) Statistics of cells migrating from the stiff part of the substrate as a function of the spring constant of the stiff pillars . Cells prefer to stay on the stiffer substrate over a wide - range of rigidity . In red , percentage of cells that come fromthestiffpartandprefertostayonitinsteadofcrossingtheboundary . Inblue , percentageofcells thatmigratetowardthesoftsubstrate . Ingray , cellswith undefined movement . ( D ) Brightfield images of the movement of REF52 cell at the border between stiff ( K s ¼ 34 nN ∕ μ m ) and soft ( k s ¼ 3 nN ∕ μ m ) substrates . The dashed line represents the cell boundary . Time ¼ 0 is here taken arbitrarily . ( Scale bar , 20 μ m . ) ( E ) Force distribution during a typical crossing event of an REF52 cell from soft to stiff substrate . Micropillars are labeled by Cy3 - fibronectin ( red ) and the cell appears in green . ( Scale bar , 5 μ m . ) Cell spread at the boundary between soft and stiff substrates ( 1 - μ m pillars versus 2 - μ m pillars ) exhibits a roughly homogeneous distribution of the forces on the soft part ( k s ¼ 3 nN ∕ μ m and K s ¼ 34 nN ∕ μ m ) . As the cell is probing a stiff pillar , a large deformation ( i . e . , high force ) is peaked in the direction n , normal to the border inducing a polarized shape of the cell in this direction . ( F ) Variation of the force on the stiff pillar ( designated by an asterisk in E , i ) as a function of time . Trichet et al . PNAS Early Edition ∣ 5 of 6 A PP L I E D P H Y S I C A L S C I E N C E S B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y Then we used the Analyze Particle tool to detect the actin filaments . Each filament was fitted with an ellipse . We then calculated the medium orienta - tion of the filaments and the order parameter along this angle S ¼ h cos ½ 2 ð θ - h θ iÞ(cid:2)i , where the average weighting was given by the length of the filaments ( SI Text ) . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . We thank N . Biais , A . Buguin , J . Devillers , A . Nicolas , J . Prost , M . P . Sheetz , P . Silberzan , and the members of the Mechanobiology Institute ( National University Singapore ) for fruitful discussions and A . Richert for cell culture protocols . We thank A . Bershadsky for generously providing a stably transfected YFP - paxillin cell line . Financial support from the Association pour la Recherche sur le Cancer ( ARC ) , the C ’ Nano Ile - de - France , the Ligue Contre le Cancer ( Comité Ile - de - France ) , the Association Française contre la Myopathie ( AFM ) , and the Agence Nationale de la Recherche [ Programme Blanc 2010 ( MECANOCAD ) ANR 2010 BLAN 1515 and ANR Blanc International ( MNVASC ) ] is gratefully acknowledged . The research was conducted in the scope of the International Associated Labora - tory Cell Adhesion France Singapore ( CAFS ) . L . T . acknowledges the Agence Nationale de la Recherche Programme National en Nanosciences et Nano - technologies for a postdoctoral fellowship . 1 . Giannone G , et al . ( 2004 ) Periodic lamellipodial contractions correlate with rearward actin waves . Cell 116 : 431 – 443 . 2 . Lo CM , Wang HB , Dembo M , Wang YL ( 2000 ) Cell movement is guided by the rigidity of the substrate . Biophys J 79 : 144 – 152 . 3 . Engler AJ , Sen S , Sweeney HL , Discher DE ( 2006 ) Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage specification . Cell 126 : 677 – 689 . 4 . Discher DE , Janmey P , Wang YL ( 2005 ) Tissue cells feel and respond to the stiffness of their substrate . Science 310 : 1139 – 1143 . 5 . Parsons JT , Horwitz AR , Schwartz MA ( 2010 ) Cell adhesion : Integrating cytoskeletal dynamics and cellular tension . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 : 633 – 643 . 6 . Tan JL , et al . ( 2003 ) Cells lying on a bed of microneedles : An approach to isolate mechanical force . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100 : 1484 – 1489 . 7 . Balaban NQ , et al . ( 2001 ) Force and focal adhesion assembly : A close relationship studied using elastic micropatterned substrates . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 466 – 472 . 8 . Riveline D , et al . ( 2001 ) Focal contacts as mechanosensors : Externally applied local mechanical force induces growth of focal contacts by an mDia1 - dependent and ROCK - independent mechanism . J Cell Biol 153 : 1175 – 1185 . 9 . Shemesh T , Geiger B , Bershadsky AD , Kozlov MM ( 2005 ) Focal adhesions as mechan - osensors : A physical mechanism . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102 : 12383 – 12388 . 10 . del Rio A , et al . ( 2009 ) Stretching single talin rod moleculesactivatesvinculin binding . Science 323 : 638 – 641 . 11 . Nicolas A , Geiger B , Safran SA ( 2004 ) Cell mechanosensitivity controls the anisotropy of focal adhesions . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101 : 12520 – 12525 and correction ( 2005 ) 102 : 2260 . 12 . KanchanawongP , etal . ( 2010 ) Nanoscalearchitectureofintegrin - basedcelladhesions . Nature 468 : 580 – 584 . 13 . Ghibaudo M , et al . ( 2008 ) Traction forces and rigidity sensing regulate cell functions . Soft Matter 4 : 1836 – 1843 . 14 . Kasza KE , et al . ( 2009 ) Filamin A is essential for active cell stiffening but not passive stiffening under external force . Biophys J 96 : 4326 – 4335 . 15 . Keren K , et al . ( 2008 ) Mechanism of shape determination in motile cells . Nature 453 : 475 – 480 . 16 . Glogauer M , et al . ( 1997 ) Calcium ions and tyrosine phosphorylation interact coordinately with actin to regulate cytoprotective responses to stretching . J Cell Sci 110 : 11 – 21 . 17 . HayakawaK , TatsumiH , SokabeM ( 2008 ) Actinstressfiberstransmitandfocusforceto activate mechanosensitive channels . J Cell Sci 121 : 496 – 503 . 18 . Walcott S , Sun SX ( 2010 ) A mechanical model of actin stress fiber formation and substrate elasticity sensing in adherent cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 : 7757 – 7762 . 19 . MitrossilisD , etal . ( 2009 ) Single - cellresponsetostiffnessexhibitsmuscle - likebehavior . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 : 18243 – 18248 . 20 . Lam WA , et al . ( 2011 ) Mechanics and contraction dynamics of single platelets and implications for clot stiffening . Nat Mater 10 : 61 – 66 . 21 . Kobayashi T , Sokabe M ( 2010 ) Sensing substrate rigidity by mechanosensitive ion channels with stress fibers and focal adhesions . Curr Opin Cell Biol 22 : 669 – 676 . 22 . DeR , ZemelA , SafranSA ( 2008 ) Docellssensestressorstrain ? Measurementofcellular orientation can provide a clue . Biophys J 94 : L29 – L31 . 23 . Saez A , Buguin A , Silberzan P , Ladoux B ( 2005 ) Is the mechanical activity of epithelial cells controlled by deformations or forces ? Biophys J 89 : L52 – L54 . 24 . StrickerJ , Aratyn - SchausY , OakesPW , GardelML ( 2011 ) Spatiotemporalconstraintson the force - dependent growth of focal adhesions . Biophys J 100 : 2883 – 2893 . 25 . Yeung T , et al . ( 2005 ) Effects of substrate stiffness on cell morphology , cytoskeletal structure , and adhesion . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 60 : 24 – 34 . 26 . Saez A , Ghibaudo M , Buguin A , Silberzan P , Ladoux B ( 2007 ) Rigidity - driven growth and migration of epithelial cells on microstructured anisotropic substrates . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 : 8281 – 8286 . 27 . Engler AJ , et al . ( 2004 ) Myotubes differentiate optimally on substrates with tissue - like stiffness : Pathological implications for soft or stiff microenvironments . J Cell Biol 166 : 877 – 887 . 28 . duRoureO , etal . ( 2005 ) Forcemappinginepithelialcellmigration . ProcNatlAcadSci USA 102 : 2390 – 2395 . 29 . LadouxB , etal . ( 2010 ) Strengthdependenceofcadherin - mediatedadhesions . Biophys J 98 : 534 – 542 . 30 . Fu JP , et al . ( 2010 ) Mechanical regulation of cell function with geometrically modu - lated elastomeric substrates . Nat Methods 7 : 733 – 736 . 31 . Pelham RJ , Wang YL ( 1997 ) Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by substrate flexibility . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94 : 13661 – 13665 . 32 . Beningo KA , Dembo M , Kaverina I , Small JV , Wang YL ( 2001 ) Nascent focal adhesions areresponsibleforthegenerationofstrongpropulsiveforcesinmigratingfibroblasts . J Cell Biol 153 : 881 – 887 . 33 . Nicolas A , Safran SA ( 2006 ) Limitation of cell adhesion by the elasticity of the extra - cellular matrix . Biophys J 91 : 61 – 73 . 34 . Nicolas A , Besser A , Safran SA ( 2008 ) Dynamics of cellular focal adhesions on deform - able substrates : Consequences for cell force microscopy . Biophys J 95 : 527 – 539 . 35 . KruseK , JoannyJF , JulicherF , ProstJ , SekimotoK ( 2005 ) Generictheoryofactivepolar gels : A paradigm for cytoskeletal dynamics . Eur Phys J E 16 : 5 – 16 . 36 . Voituriez R , JoannyJF , Prost J ( 2006 ) Genericphase diagram of active polar films . Phys Rev Lett 96 : 028102 . 37 . Warner M , Terentjev EM ( 2003 ) Liquid Crystal Elastomers ( Oxford Univ Press , Oxford ) . 38 . Trepat X , et al . ( 2007 ) Universal physical responses to stretch in the living cell . Nature 447 : 592 – 595 . 39 . Krishnan R , et al . ( 2009 ) Reinforcement versus fluidization in cytoskeletal mechanor - esponsiveness . PLoS One 4 : e5486 . 40 . ThoumineO , OttA ( 1997 ) Timescaledependentviscoelasticandcontractileregimesin fibroblasts probed by microplate manipulation . J Cell Sci 110 : 2109 – 2116 . 41 . Trepat X , et al . ( 2004 ) Viscoelasticity of human alveolar epithelial cells subjected to stretch . Am J Physiol 287 : L1025 – L1034 . 42 . DespratN , RichertA , SimeonJ , AsnaciosA ( 2005 ) Creepfunctionofasinglelivingcell . Biophys J 88 : 2224 – 2233 . 43 . Zemel A , Rehfeldt F , Brown AEX , Discher DE , Safran SA ( 2010 ) Optimal matrix rigidity for stress - fibre polarization in stem cells . Nat Phys 6 : 468 – 473 . 44 . Kreis TE , Birchmeier W ( 1980 ) Stress fiber sarcomeres of fibroblasts are contractile . Cell 22 : 555 – 561 . 45 . Russell RJ , Xia SL , Dickinson RB , Lele TP ( 2009 ) Sarcomere mechanics in capillary endothelial cells . Biophys J 97 : 1578 – 1585 . 46 . Solon J , Levental I , Sengupta K , Georges PC , Janmey PA ( 2007 ) Fibroblast adaptation and stiffness matching to soft elastic substrates . Biophys J 93 : 4453 – 4461 . 47 . IsenbergBC , DiMillaPA , WalkerM , KimS , WongJY ( 2009 ) Vascularsmoothmusclecell durotaxis depends on substrate stiffness gradient strength . Biophys J 97 : 1313 – 1322 . 48 . Grashoff C , et al . ( 2010 ) Measuring mechanical tension across vinculin reveals regula - tion of focal adhesion dynamics . Nature 466 : 263 – 266 . 49 . Paszek MJ , et al . ( 2005 ) Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell 8 : 241 – 254 . 6 of 6 ∣ www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1117810109 Trichet et al .