R . Winter , J . L . Zhao , and S . Aier ( Eds . ) : DESRIST 2010 , LNCS 6105 , pp . 270 – 285 , 2010 . © Springer - Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 Dynamically Generating Context - Relevant Sub - Webs Art Vandenberg 1 , Vijay K . Vaishnavi 2 , Saravanaraj Duraisamy 2 , and Tianjie Deng 2 1 Georgia State University , Information Systems & Technology , P . O . Box 3994 , Atlanta Georgia , 30302 - 3994 , U . S . A . 2 Georgia State University , Computer Information Systems Department , P . O . Box 4015 , Atlanta Georgia , 30302 - 4015 , U . S . A . { avandenberg , vvaishna } @ gsu . edu , { sduraisamy1 , tdeng1 } @ student . gsu . edu Abstract . There is unprecedented growth of Web information but challenges on mining this vast information resource remain . This paper addresses designing an effective prototype tool that dynamically generates sub - webs of information from a web - based resource ( World Wide Web or a subset ) . Sub - webs present context - relevant results to individuals or groups . Given that the prototype tool is technically implemented from multiple components , each of which has efficacy , there still remains the challenge of devising an appropriate evaluation of the complete model . This is difficult when the search scope is the entire World Wide Web and a vast number of result pages are technically good on Recall but low on Precision . This paper describes an iterative approach to finding an effec - tive technical prototype using an evaluation method that can a ) reasonably model the search environment of the World Wide Web and b ) provide convinc - ing metrics for evaluating efficacy of solutions . Keywords : Context , Sub - Web , Web Mining , Evaluation , Metrics . 1 Introduction There is unprecedented growth of information available on the Web in all fields of human endeavor but challenges on mining this vast digital information remain . This paper addresses the goal of a research prototype tool that can generate sub - webs of information dynamically from a web - based resource ( the entire World Wide Web or a subset thereof such as the NSF or NIH portal ) – where sub - webs will present context - relevant results to users ( individuals or groups ) . Researchers in all fields of human endeavor , including science and engineering , recognize the potential and the challenges of exponential growth of information in the World Wide Web [ 1 ] , [ 2 ] , [ 3 ] and [ 4 ] . Taming the Web has spurred considerable research and commercial activity , such as [ 5 ] , [ 6 ] , [ 7 ] and [ 8 ] . The available ap - proaches can be broadly grouped into search engines [ 5 ] and [ 9 ] , directories [ 10 ] , [ 11 ] and [ 12 ] or web user adaptation and personalization systems [ 4 ] , [ 13 ] , [ 14 ] , [ 15 ] , [ 16 ] , [ 17 ] and [ 18 ] . Simple keyword searches may return hundreds ( even thousands ) of individual web pages but often with two deficiencies : ( 1 ) keywords may not explicitly reflect the Dynamically Generating Context - Relevant Sub - Webs 271 relevant context of a user’s requirements and ( 2 ) the results may not provide context - relevant , thematic interest , the ( cognitive ) perspective – such as “protein secretion” or “financial econometrics” – for a user’s point of view . Yet , could we improve the process by providing web resources representing user interest , then applying social network based ontologies ( such as Open Directory Project ( ODP ) [ 12 ] or WordNet [ 19 ] ) and search engines to dynamically generate context - relevant sub - webs ? A practical , scalable , dynamic web mining solution is envisioned to help the user process existing web - based resources to generate specific , sub - webs of information content . This is especially important for researcher communities where data deployed on the World Wide Web are characterized by autonomous , dynamically evolving , and conceptually diverse information sources as described by [ 20 ] , [ 21 ] and [ 22 ] . Our goal is a prototype artifact but we focus here on evaluation strategy and testbed . 1 . 1 Real World Scenario , Problem Relevance The following real - world scenario forms the motivation as well as one of the applica - tion domains for the research . Campuses have extensive web - based information sources comprising faculty web pages , research missions , key focus areas , or univer - sity research administration guidance about funding opportunities and successful awards . Further , national and other funding agencies make readily available digital information on core programs , strategic areas of investigation and abstracts of awarded research . Such digital resources are part of “a huge ecosystem of services and tools [ that ] will emerge around data mesh instances . Such tools and services will allow us to move beyond current practice of information management by incorporat - ing more automation” [ 23 ] . As motivation , consider that Vice Presidents for Research seek to improve research funding success by encouraging interdisciplinary research collaborations that combine individual researcher skills around a university’s strategic areas of strength . Identifying research teams helps universities appropriately target research proposals to funding agencies , focusing university resources on research programs relevant for researchers and the university . Indeed , a prototype tool is envi - sioned that may be used by : 1 ) Researchers to identify potential teams of research collaborators ; 2 ) Research teams to identify potential funding opportunities relevant to their research interests . 1 . 2 Definitions of Terms User Context – Information ( sets of related URLs , documents , etc . ) Sub - Web – A representation of web - based content with pages presented as a pruned web structure retaining only context - relevant result pages . Context - Relevant – Results closely related to user interest , not required to be exact ( as with keywords ) but having thematically matching interest . 2 Related Work , Context of Prototype and Its Implementation We are cognizant of a rich body of related work and note some areas of interest . Information Retrieval – Research leveraging context . A special browser is described that uses ODP to categorize results and disambiguate queries through interaction with