Hybrid foraging search : Searching for multiple instances of multiple types of target Jeremy M . Wolfe a , b , ⇑ , Avigael M . Aizenman a , Sage E . P . Boettcher c , Matthew S . Cain a , d a Visual Attention Laboratory , Brigham and Women’s Hospital , Cambridge , MA , United States b Depts . of Radiology and Ophthalmology , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA , United States c Psychology Dept . , Goethe Universität Frankfurt , Germany d U . S . Army Natick Soldier Research , Development and Engineering Center , Natick , MA , United States a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 17 November 2015 Received in revised form 16 December 2015 Accepted 20 December 2015 Available online 20 January 2016 Keywords : Hybrid foraging Multiple targets Hybrid search Visual search Human search Attention a b s t r a c t This paper introduces the ‘‘hybrid foraging” paradigm . In typical visual search tasks , observers search for one instance of one target among distractors . In hybrid search , observers search through visual displays for one instance of any of several types of target held in memory . In foraging search , observers collect multiple instances of a single target type from visual displays . Combining these paradigms , in hybrid for - aging tasks observers search visual displays for multiple instances of any of several types of target ( as might be the case in searching the kitchen for dinner ingredients or an X - ray for different pathologies ) . In the present experiment , observers held 8 – 64 target objects in memory . They viewed displays of 60 – 105 randomly moving photographs of objects and used the computer mouse to collect multiple targets before choosing to move to the next display . Rather than selecting at random among available targets , observers tended to collect items in runs of one target type . Reaction time ( RT ) data indicate searching again for the same item is more efﬁcient than searching for any other targets , held in memory . Observers were trying to maximize collection rate . As a result , and consistent with optimal foraging the - ory , they tended to leave 25 – 33 % of targets uncollected when moving to the next screen / patch . The pat - tern of RTs shows that while observers were collecting a target item , they had already begun searching memory and the visual display for additional targets , making the hybrid foraging task a useful way to investigate the interaction of visual and memory search . (cid:1) 2015 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction We spend our days looking for pens lying on the desk , socks hiding in the laundry , pedestrians crossing the street , and so forth . In the lab , this diversity of visual search tasks is generally reduced to a search for a single target that may or may not be present amidst some number of distractor items ( Wolfe , 1998 , 2015 ) . There has been much less exploration of search tasks with multiple types of possible targets or with multiple instances of targets in the same search scene . Search for any of several target types is characteristic of many real world search tasks . Search for the four items on your shopping list for dinner would be an example . If the set of possible targets is held in memory , then these are tasks that have both a memory search component and a visual search component . Schneider and Shiffrin ( 1977 ) named these ‘‘hybrid searches” . Schneider and Shiffrin studied hybrid searches with small numbers ( 1 – 4 ) of alphanumeric items in both the visual set and the memory set . Wolfe ( 2012 ) took advantage of the ability of human observers to memorize large numbers of objects ( Standing , Conezio , & Haber , 1970 ; Brady , Konkle , Alvarez , & Oliva , 2008 ) in order to study hybrid search with much larger memory set sizes . Experiment 2 of Wolfe ( 2012 ) had observers searching for any of 100 possible targets and Wolfe , Boettcher , Josephs , Cunningham , and Drew ( 2015 ) extended this to over 500 items . Results of these experiments have a characteristic form over many replications and variations . As is typical in visual search experiments , response times ( RTs ) are a linear function of the visual set size . However , RTs do not rise linearly with memory set size . Instead , RT is a linear function of the log of the memory set size . This logarithmic relationship may be the result of proper - ties of a diffusion process of target identiﬁcation ( Leite & Ratcliff , 2010 ) . In diffusion accounts of search , information about a partic - ular item is accumulated and the item is identiﬁed when the infor - mation reaches a decision boundary . Since accumulation is noisy , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . visres . 2015 . 12 . 006 0042 - 6989 / (cid:1) 2015 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . ⇑ Corresponding author at : Visual Attention Lab , 64 Sidney Street , Suite 170 , Cambridge , MA 02139 , United States . E - mail address : jwolfe @ partners . org ( J . M . Wolfe ) . Vision Research 119 ( 2016 ) 50 – 59 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Vision Research journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / visres there is the possibility of a false positive response if the boundary is set too low . If there are multiple possible targets and , thus , mul - tiple accumulators , thresholds must be set higher because of the increased chance that one boundary will be incorrectly crossed . The higher position of the boundary produces a longer RT and this increase is logarithmic if error rates are held constant . This pattern of linear RT (cid:1) visual set size functions and log - linear RT (cid:1) memory set size functions is seen for sets of unique objects ( Wolfe , 2012 ) , categories of objects ( e . g . , are there any animals , coins , plants , or ﬂags ? ) ( Cunningham & Wolfe , 2014 ) , and lists of words ( Boettcher & Wolfe , 2015 ) . If we turn from multiple types of targets held in memory to multiple instances of one target type present in the visual world , we enter the realm of foraging tasks . Foraging tasks have been studied most extensively in animals ( Stephens & Krebs , 1986 ) but there are many human search tasks in which the number of targets is unknown and potentially large . Such tasks might include searching a medical image for signs of cancer or picking berries off of a succession of raspberry bushes . Collecting information from the internet has been described as a foraging task ( Pirolli , 2007 ) as have tasks like searching memory for speciﬁc concepts or words ( e . g . , name as many animals as you can in 30 s ) ( Hills , Jones , & Todd , 2012 ) . Indeed , foraging seems to be a ubiquitous aspect of our cognitive architecture ( Hills & Dukas , 2012 ) . The primary metric of interest in foraging studies is the ‘‘patch leaving time” . Targets are found at some rate and collecting those targets makes them scarcer . Therefore , the rate of target acquisi - tion slows down . Eventually , it is not worth continuing to collect targets from the current patch and you should move to the next patch . Moving comes at a cost since you cannot collect more tar - gets until you reach the next patch , so it behooves you to adjust the time spent in each patch so as to maximize your overall target collection rate . The most inﬂuential model of average patch leaving behavior is the Marginal Value Theorem ( MVT ) ( Charnov , 1976 ) . MVT holds that the forager should leave the current patch when the rate of return for the patch drops below the average rate of return for the task . Wolfe ( 2013 ) looked at the behavior of human observers collecting red ‘berries’ on a computer screen . Observers’ data was consistent with MVT for simple situations such as an end - less collection of essentially identical patches . Behavior systemati - cally deviated from MVT predictions when the world became more complicated , for example , when patch quality varied dramatically from patch to patch . Hutchinson , Wilke , and Todd ( 2008 ) , among , others have also reported systematic deviations from optimality in human foraging behavior . In their experiment , for instance , observers were ‘‘ﬁshing” on the computer in a succession of ﬁshing holes for ﬁsh that could not be seen on screen . The time at which they left one patch for the next was overly dependent on the time of the most recent capture of a ﬁsh . Even when it is a good approximation of the average data , MVT is often unlikely to be a description of what a forager is actually doing on a trial - by - trial basis . Foragers probably do not have par - ticularly accurate estimates of the average rate of return , and their current rate of return can drop to zero while searching for the next target without prompting an immediate departure for the next patch . ‘‘Potential value theory” deals with these problems by pre - dicting quitting time using the forager’s assessment of what remains in the patch based on an initial estimate of the number of targets present ( McNamara & Houston , 1985 ) . Such a model can incorporate a Bayesian updating component that allows the initial estimate of the number of targets to evolve during a trial . Thus , an initially high estimate might be lowered if , for example , it took a surprisingly long time to ﬁnd the second target ( Cain , Vul , Clark , & Mitroff , 2012 ) . Now consider another search task , illustrated in Fig . 1 and familiar to children and parents in many lands . Preparing for the battle of the Lego (cid:3) alligators and the astronauts requires search for all of the instances of each of the targets , shown at the top of the ﬁgure . Of course , all of the Lego (cid:3) building bricks are jumbled into a big box . This is a hybrid search with a memory set size of four and a large visual set size . It is also a foraging task since you are looking for an unknown number of targets in this patch . Such ‘‘hybrid for - aging” tasks are the subject of this paper . It is also characteristic of a range of real - world tasks beyond the Lego box . Many tasks , from surﬁng the internet to searching medical images for multiple instances of multiple types of pathologies , can be characterized as ‘‘hybrid foraging” . How do the rules of hybrid search and of for - aging combine in a hybrid foraging task ? Much as in a typical for - aging task ( search for many possible instances of one possible target ) , in hybrid foraging the data will show that MVT is a good match to the average patch - switching data . Having many possible target types held in memory gives us another kind of switch to think about . Within the overall patch ( i . e . , the visual display ) , we can examine when an observer decides to leave a ‘‘run” of selec - tions of one particular type of target for another target type . For example , if you have been selecting alligators , when will you switch to the astronaut or some other target type ? Do you switch when the current rate of alligator acquisition drops below the aver - age rate ? Interestingly , data from these sub - foraging tasks seem to deviate from MVT . As discussed previously , in hybrid search for one possible instance of many possible targets held in memory , RT is a linear function of the log of memory set size ( Wolfe , 2012 ) . In hybrid foraging , RT (cid:1) memory set size functions continue to be logarithmic . However , there are separate functions for selec - tions where the current selection is different from the last selection ( e . g . , astronaut followed by alligator ) as compared to the case where the present selection is the same as the previous ( e . g . , alligator – alligator ) . 2 . Methods In this hybrid foraging experiment , observers searched for mul - tiple instances of multiple targets . The primary measures of inter - est were the identity of items collected , the rate of collection , the order in which they were collected , and the point at which obser - vers chose to leave one patch for the next . We will refer to each visual display of items as a ‘‘patch” by analogy to the foraging lit - erature and we will refer to each click on a target in a patch as an act of ‘‘collection” . In this study , observers held 8 , 16 , 32 , or 64 pos - sible target objects in memory . They then searched for multiple instances of these targets in a succession of patches : large displays of between 60 and 105 items , where 20 – 30 % of all items were targets . 2 . 1 . Stimuli and apparatus The stimuli were presented on a 24 00 screen on an iMac , model A1225 ( EMC 2211 ) . The experiment was programmed in Matlab 7 . 10 . 0 using the Psychtoolbox , version 3 . 0 . 9 ( Brainard , 1997 ; Pelli , 1997 ) . Target and distractor items were drawn from 1314 of the photographs of objects used in the picture memory experi - ments of Brady et al . ( 2008 ) . Items were up to 75 (cid:1) 75 pixels , sub - tending a maximum of approximately 1 . 8 (cid:1) 1 . 8 degrees of visual angle at average viewing distance of 24 00 . 2 . 2 . Procedure There were four experimental sections , each with a different memory set size , 8 , 16 , 32 , or 64 items . In the ﬁrst phase of each section , observers memorized the set of target items , viewing each J . M . Wolfe et al . / Vision Research 119 ( 2016 ) 50 – 59 51 image individually for three seconds . This memorization period was followed by a recognition memory test in which observers were presented with images one at a time and made a forced - choice decision about whether the object was or was not part of the memorized set ( 50 % target prevalence ) . Accuracy of 90 % was required to continue to the hybrid foraging portion of the experi - ment . If an observer failed to reach that level , the image stream and memorization test were repeated , though that was rare . The visual search task used patches with 60 , 75 , 90 , and 105 total items . In pilot experiments , we found that with large , dense arrays of static items many observers adopted a ‘‘reading” strategy in which they started searching at the upper left and moved sys - tematically through the patch to the lower right . This is a reason - able strategy for exhaustive search , but , given our interest in non - exhaustive foraging behavior and patch leaving times , it masks the very behavior that we want to examine . Accordingly , in the actual experiment , all stimuli moved continuously at a rate of 1 . 25 (cid:4) / s . Based on a multiple - object tracking algorithm , items independently moved toward randomly selected goal locations , with their trajectories repulsed by the edges of the patch , the cen - ter of the patch , and other items , though items could overlap . The appearance was something like a fairly stately anthill , with all items moving seemingly at random but with few abrupt changes in direction and at speeds that did not interfere with the ability of observers to localize and click on targets ( see Fig . 2 ) . Observers were instructed to collect targets as efﬁciently as possible with the goal of collecting 100 points in the practice block and 1000 in the experimental block of each section ( 2 points for targets , (cid:3) 1 point for non - targets ) . Clicking on an item removed it from the patch . Observers were free to pick targets in the current patch for as long as they liked and to click on the ‘‘next” button in the center of the screen whenever they wanted a new patch to search . There was a 2 - s ‘‘travel time” added between patches . However , the total travel time from the last item collected in a patch to the appearance of the next patch took longer than these 2 s and the effective travel time was approximately 5 s . During practice , observers received feedback at the end of each patch , showing them the targets that they had left behind when they pressed the ‘‘next” button . Obser - vers did not receive this miss feedback in the experimental block . At the start of each patch , 20 – 30 % of the items were targets . The precise number was uniformly distributed within that interval . Regardless of the number of items in the memory set , 2 – 5 of the target types were represented in the search display . The total num - ber of targets in the patch was initially divided evenly across the 3 , 4 , or 5 target types in the patch . A 25 - step random walk was used to redistribute the actual number of each target to be presented in a single display . Imagine that a display of 90 items is originally designed to contain 27 ( 30 % ) targets , divided evenly among four target types ( i . e . , seven instances of three types and six of the fourth ) . Each step involved randomly changing one type of target to another type . A target type could end up with no remaining instances in a display . After 25 steps , this process produced 1 % of displays with two types of targets , 16 % with three types , 55 % with four types , and 27 % with ﬁve types . The goal of this procedure was to have enough variability to thwart explicit counting rules ( ‘‘I have found ﬁve instances of this target , so I should look for some - thing else , ” or , ‘‘I have only seen three target types ; there must be a fourth . ” ) . The number of distractor items on each trial was chosen such that target and distractor item types had similar counts . 2 . 3 . Participants Twelve observers were tested , 11 of whom were female . Ages ranged from 18 to 55 years ( mean 27 . 08 ) . All had normal or corrected - to - normal visual acuity and all passed the Ishihara Color Test ( Ishihara , 1980 ) . Observers gave informed consent and were paid $ 10 / h for their time . The Partners Healthcare Corporation Institutional Review Board approved all experimental procedures . 3 . Results and discussion 3 . 1 . Basic foraging behavior Unlike standard search tasks , in foraging tasks we expect signif - icant numbers of targets to remain on screen when observers move to the next patch . Observers are asked to keep their rate of target collection as high as possible , and that usually means leaving a patch before all of the possible targets have been collected . Fig . 1 . Hybrid foraging : How would one go about ﬁnding multiple instances of each of the four targets at the top of the ﬁgure ? 52 J . M . Wolfe et al . / Vision Research 119 ( 2016 ) 50 – 59 These abandoned targets would normally be considered ‘‘miss” or ‘‘false negative” errors , but in a task where the goal is to maximize the rate of collection , these omissions are likely more strategic than careless . Nevertheless , in keeping with the standard search literature , we will refer to these as ‘misses’ . Fig . 3 shows average miss rates ( i . e . , proportions of total targets left uncollected ) as a function of memory set size and visual set size . As Fig . 3 shows , there were main effects of memory set size and visual set size . Miss rates rose as a function of memory set size ( ANOVA : F ( 3 , 33 ) = 10 . 5 , p < 0 . 0001 , g 2 g = 0 . 08 ) . Unusually , miss rates fell as visual set size rises ( ANOVA : F ( 3 , 33 ) = 4 . 2 , p = 0 . 013 , g 2 g = 0 . 02 ) , as it is more typical for miss rates in search tasks to rise with visual set size ( e . g . , Wolfe , Palmer , & Horowitz , 2010 ) . There was no reliable interaction of memory and visual set sizes ( F ( 9 , 99 ) = 1 . 2 , p = 0 . 31 ) . There are at least two reasons that observers might fail to col - lect items from the patch . Firstly , as foraging progresses in a patch , target prevalence drops , and therefore , targets will become harder to ﬁnd . The instantaneous acquisition rate will fall and , once that rate falls below the average rate for the task , MVT would predict that the observer would move to the next patch , leaving some items uncollected . Additionally , some types of targets might slip from memory during search and thus be mistaken for distractors , resulting in no instances of those target types being collected from a patch . We can estimate how often these memory slips happen by plotting the average number of target types that are left uncol - lected from a patch . That is , if there were initially six alligators in the patch , there were still six alligators when the observer left the patch . This is shown in Fig . 4 . On average , there were four different target types in each patch and Fig . 4 shows that observers failed to collect any examples of one of those target types . The chance that a target type was uncol - lected rose with the memory set size ( F ( 3 , 33 ) = 8 . 8 , p = 0 . 0002 , g 2 g = 0 . 12 ) . This seems reasonable : the more items that are held in memory , the more likely it is that one of those will be com - pletely overlooked in visual search . This value decreased as visual set size increased ( F ( 3 , 33 ) = 8 . 7 , p = 0 . 0002 , g 2 g = 0 . 07 ) . There was no interaction between memory set size and visual set size effects ( F ( 9 , 99 ) = 0 . 8 , p = 0 . 66 ) . Unsurprisingly , observers tended to miss all of the examples of targets that were less common . On average , there were ﬁve instances of each target type , however , there was an average of only 3 . 1 instances for totally missed target types . Did observers simply miss all of the instances of a target by chance ? After all , observers left about 35 % of all targets uncol - lected . However , if the chance of missing a target is 35 % , the chance Fig . 2 . An example of a hybrid foraging display used in this experiment . This example is a still screen shot from what otherwise would be a moving display . Fig . 3 . Miss rates as a function of memory set size and visual set size . Error bars show ±1 SEM . Fig . 4 . Average number of target types where no instances of that target were selected in the patch . Error bars show ±1 SEM . J . M . Wolfe et al . / Vision Research 119 ( 2016 ) 50 – 59 53 of missing all three targets of one type is only 4 % . Observers missed entire target types at a much higher rate , which suggests that they are forgetting the entire type on that patch , even though they may remember it the next time it appears . In foraging experiments , observers are presumably trying ( con - sciously or unconsciously ) to adjust their miss rates to produce the best average rate of acquiring targets . If we look at the relationship between these two rates , we see a positive correlation between them . Observers with higher miss rates had higher target acquisi - tion rates as well . This can be seen for each memory set size in Fig . 5 where the average target acquisition rate in a block is plotted against the miss rate for that block for each observer . All R 2 values were greater than 0 . 3 and all p < 0 . 06 . These data are somewhat noisy but this suggests a situation where the usual speed / accuracy tradeoff serves less diligent observers well : obser - vers who were quick to leave a patch , abandoning more items , had better performance overall in this task , as measured by the average rate with which they collect targets . Put another way , the more patches that an observer visited , the faster that observer ﬁnished the task , despite the 2 - s ‘‘travel time” between patches . Note that smaller memory set sizes produce higher target - acquisition rates than larger memory set sizes . This reﬂects the different amounts of time that the memory searches require . As discussed in more detail below , more items held in memory produces slower memory searches , leading to slower RTs and , thus , lower rates of target collection . Given these average rates , the prediction of the Marginal Value Theorem ( MVT ) is that , on average , observers will leave the current patch when the rate of return from that patch drops below the average rate of return for the task . This prediction was borne out in these hybrid foraging data , as illustrated in Figs . 6 and 7 . Fig . 6 shows the instantaneous rate of return as a function of ‘‘Reverse Click” position . Reverse Click 1 is the ﬁnal click on an item in the patch . The next click will be on the ‘‘next” button that sum - mons a new patch . Reverse Click 2 is the penultimate click and so forth , back in time . The instantaneous rate is computed as the reciprocal of the average RT ( i . e . , the time between one click and the next ) multiplied by the probability that the item clicked is a target ( i . e . , 1 – false alarm rate = . 97 ) . It can be seen that the rate starts relatively high and then falls as the targets are depleted . MVT predicts that observers should leave the current patch when the rate drops below the average rate . This is seen more clearly in Fig . 7 . Fig . 7 shows instantaneous rate plotted against average rate for each observer in each memory set size block for the last three clicks in the patch . As can be seen , at the third reverse click , the instantaneous rate is above the average ( for all memory set sizes , t ( 11 ) > 2 . 8 , all p < 0 . 01 ) . At the second reverse click , the points lie closer to the point of equality . The average is above the line for all four memory set sizes but the difference is signiﬁcant only at set sizes 16 ( t ( 11 ) = 2 . 4 , p = 0 . 016 ) and 64 ( t ( 11 ) = 2 . 6 , p = 0 . 012 ) . By the ﬁnal click , the instantaneous rate has dropped below the average rate at all set sizes , though the difference is signiﬁcant only at set size 16 ( t ( 11 ) = 4 . 4 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Thus , the results broadly adhere to the predictions of MVT . However , the interesting ques - tions for this hybrid foraging task concern not only the patch leav - ing time , but also what happens within a patch . To be sure , as shown in Fig . 5 , on average , the rates of return fall more - or - less monotonically as foraging progresses ; but observers are switching between target types while foraging . Should the collection of each different target type be thought of as a little foraging epoch within the larger epoch of foraging in a patch ? If so , observers in the Lego example might collect alligators until the rate of alligator collec - tion drops to some level , then switch to collecting red bricks , and so forth . Alternatively , observers might simply pick targets at ran - dom from the set of possible targets . We assess these options in the next section . 3 . 2 . Analysis of runs within a patch Evidence for within - patch foraging would come in the form of ‘‘runs” , repeated collections of one type of target . Of course , obser - vers might collect the same type of target twice ( or more ) in a row by chance . In order to determine if the data reveal a larger - than - expected number of runs , we need to determine the expected number . This is made somewhat more complex in this experiment because each patch contains a variable number of instances of a variable number ( 2 – 5 ) of target types . For example , a patch might contain 1 instance of Target Type 1 , 9 of Target Type 2 , 5 of Target 3 , and 11 of Target 4 for a total of 26 targets . Moreover , the obser - ver of that patch might collect only 21 of the 26 . The next patch would contain a different mix of target types . The prediction for random selection was simulated by taking the actual distribution Fig . 5 . Average rate of acquiring targets ( targets / s ) as a function of proportion of items left on the screen ( miss rate ) . Lines are best - ﬁt linear regressions . 1 3 5 7 9 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 . 0 1 . 1 1 . 2 1 . 3 Reverse Click R a t e ( i t e m s / sec ) 8 16 32 64 MemorySet Size Fig . 6 . Instantaneous ( data points ) and average ( horizontal lines ) rates of return for each of four memory set sizes . Note that the x - axis is ‘‘Reverse Click” Clicks are aligned to the end of the trial , such that Reverse Click 0 is the click on the ‘‘next” button . Click 1 is the last item collected , and so on , backwards in time . 54 J . M . Wolfe et al . / Vision Research 119 ( 2016 ) 50 – 59 of targets for each patch that was shown in the experiment and drawing N samples , without replacement , from that distribution , where N equals the number of targets actually collected by the observer from that patch . This generates predictions for each observer at each memory set size and the resulting distribution of run lengths can be compared to the empirical distributions . These results are shown in Fig . 8 . Fig . 8 plots empirical ( purple lines , ﬁlled symbols ) and simu - lated ( green lines , outlined symbols ) data for each memory set size , but the memory set variable made no difference here and those curves overlap . The empirical and simulated data differ signiﬁ - cantly , with the empirical data showing more long runs than would be predicted by random collection from the set of all targets . This is manifested as a reduction in runs of length 1 and an increase in runs of lengths 3 – 5 ( all t ( 11 ) > 3 . 2 , all p < 0 . 004 ) . Even at the longer run lengths where there is very little data , runs of length 6 – 8 were signiﬁcantly over - represented in the empirical data ( all t ( 11 ) > 1 . 9 , all p < 0 . 04 ) . If we assume that observers made an implicit or explicit deci - sion to collect one type of target in a run , then each of these runs can be thought of as a small - scale foraging episode within more extended foraging within the patch . Does this behavior follow the rules of optimal foraging theory ? If so , observers might be pick - ing all of Target Type A in a portion of a patch . As those targets are depleted , it would take longer to acquire Target Type A and obser - vers would reach a threshold at which time it would become sen - sible to stop collecting Target Type A and to start collecting targets of Type B . Fig . 9 shows the actual behavior within runs . Each curve represents RTs for runs of length 1 – 8 , averaged across memory set sizes and observers . The horizontal line is the average RT within a patch ( rate would be almost exactly the inverse of these values since observers collect a target on 97 % of clicks ) . It is clear that the ﬁrst target in a run is expensive . Its RTs were markedly slower than all the other RTs in a run . 1 In foraging terms , this can be con - sidered to reﬂect the ‘‘travel” time from picking one type of target to picking another . In the cognitive literature , this might be considered a task - switching cost ( Arrington & Logan , 2004 ) . In the present con - text , as will be discussed below , the added cost for the ﬁrst item in a run probably reﬂects the more demanding memory search required for the ﬁrst item in a run ( i . e . , deciding if an item is a member of the current memory set ) , in contrast to the less demanding memory 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 I n s t a n t a n e ou s R a t e Reverse Click 3 MemSet8 MemSet16 MemSet32 MemSet64 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 Average Rate Reverse Click 2 MemSet8 MemSet16 MemSet32 MemSet64 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 Reverse Click 1 MemSet8 MemSet16 MemSet32 MemSet64 Fig . 7 . Instantaneous rate plotted against average rate for every observer at each memory set size for the ﬁnal click on the image ( Reverse Click 1 ) and the two preceding clicks . The diagonal line indicates equality between the instantaneous rate and average rate . Fig . 8 . Distributions of ‘runs’ where the same target is picked repeatedly . Purple ( ﬁlled symbols ) are empirical data . Green ( outlined symbols ) are simulated data , based on an assumption of random sampling among targets . Each line is a different memory set size , but they overlap extensively . Error bars , where visible , are ±1 SEM . Arrows indicate run lengths with a signiﬁcant difference between observed and simulated data , with the arrow indicating direction of the deviation from random sampling . ( For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend , the reader is referred to the web version of this article . ) Fig . 9 . RT as a function of position in a run of selections of the same target type . Each curve represents the average RT for runs of a different length ( 1 – 8 ) . Horizontal line is the average RT over all conditions . Data are averaged over memory set size and observers . Error bars are ±1 SEM . 1 Note : Position 1 includes RTs for the ﬁrst target selected in a patch . These RTs were especially long , but the pattern of results is the same even if those trials are removed . J . M . Wolfe et al . / Vision Research 119 ( 2016 ) 50 – 59 55 search within a run ( i . e . , deciding if an item is the currently priori - tized or primed item in the current memory set ) . After the ﬁrst selection in a run , searches are faster . They become gradually slower over the run , presumably reﬂecting the local depletion of the current preferred item . On average , runs ended at a similar RT regardless of the run length and , on average , that RT was lower than the overall average RT . For runs of length 2 – 6 , the average quitting RT was signiﬁcantly shorter than the mean RT ( all t ( 11 ) > 3 . 5 , all p < 0 . 0025 ) . For runs of length 7 or 8 , the data were sparser and the effect , while in the same direction , was weaker ( Run length 7 : t ( 11 ) = 1 . 70 , p = 0 . 058 , Run length 8 : t ( 11 ) = 1 . 59 , p = 0 . 074 ) . This pattern of results is similar for all mem - ory set sizes , but the results are noisier when the data are subdivided . Why did observers leave runs when the current RT was lower than the average RT ( and , thus , when the rate of return was higher ) ? The difference between a run in hybrid foraging and a simple foraging situation is that there are multiple choices about what to pick . We hypothesize that observers were leaving a run earlier than would be optimal because they sometimes take advan - tage of what could be called ‘‘targets of opportunity” ; moments when they interrupt a run to collect a conveniently placed member of another target type . We can test this hypothesis by further cat - egorizing the varieties of collection in hybrid foraging . Suppose an observer has been picking Target Type A . If they pick another A , that is a ‘‘Run” collection . If they switch to Type B , we can deﬁne two types of collection . There are true ‘‘Switch” collections where the observer switches to a run of target B or moves on to a third target Type , C . Alternatively , there are the targets of opportunity , where the observer temporarily switches to B but goes back imme - diately to A on the next collection . We will call those ‘‘Temp” ( tem - porary ) collections . The next collection where the observer returns to a run can be unimaginatively referred to as a ‘‘Return” collection . For this analysis , we restrict ourselves to the collection numbers 2 – 15 in a patch because , toward the end of the approximately 25 col - lections in a patch , targets become scarce and switches may be mandated simply because all of the items of one target type have been collected . The ﬁrst collection in each patch is omitted because those collections are much slower than other collections and , for present purposes , the ﬁrst collection cannot be either a Switch or a Temp . Overall , 23 % of collections were Switches , 59 % Runs , 8 % Temps , and 6 % Returns . The remaining 4 % were various unclassiﬁable col - lections ( e . g . , errors or the collection after an error ) . Returns did not equal Temps because of the possibility of sequences like AABA - BAA , which were coded as several Temps in a row . The item col - lected in a Switch was , on average , 356 pixels away from the previous item . The item collected in a Run was 324 pixels away . The Temp items were just 309 pixels away from the previous item . The difference between Switch and Temp distances was signiﬁcant ( t ( 11 ) = 5 . 4 , p = 0 . 0002 ) . The difference between Run and Temp was merely suggestive ( t ( 11 ) = 1 . 9 , p = 0 . 087 ) . Run collection RTs were clearly faster than all other types ( all t ( 11 ) > 5 , all p < 0 . 0003 ) . Temp RTs were over 300 ms faster than Switch RTs ( t ( 11 ) = 7 . 2 , p < 0 . 0001 ) and 150 ms faster than Return collections ( t ( 11 ) = 5 . 2 , p = 0 . 0003 ) . Taken together , the distance and RT results suggest that that Temp collections occurred when an item of Type B hap - pened to be near the previously collected item of Type A and hap - pened to be conﬁrmed as a target before some more remote item of Type A could be conﬁrmed to continue the run , unbroken . These targets of opportunity may account for the apparently early depar - ture from a run , seen in Fig . 9 . This analysis also gives us hints about how search proceeds in hybrid foraging , more generally . In the approximately 1 s that it takes to collect an item in this task , observers would have plenty of time to examine other items in the neighborhood . Many of those will be distractors . Some items , attended as part of the visual search , will be repeats of the most recently selected item . Since those appear to be primed , a repeat will often be cued up to be the next item collected . Other types of target items will also be encountered in the visual search . They will race with the repeat items to be the next collection . These other targets will be at a dis - advantage because they are not primed so they will take longer to identify . However , if they are encountered earlier , perhaps because they are near to the most recently selected item , they might win the race . Note that this suggests observers are already searching for the next target while executing the motor act of clicking on the current target . In a different experiment , to thwart this behav - ior , we repositioned all items after each click . The resulting changes in foraging behavior are reported in Cain et al . ( in prepa - ration ) , as is a more explicit , computational model of how items are collected in hybrid foraging tasks . 3 . 3 . Analysis of RT (cid:1) memory set size functions The differences between types of collection are quite dramatic , as shown in Fig . 10 . The ﬁgure plots mean RT as a function of the memory set size . Data are plotted on a logarithmic scale , because of our earlier ﬁnding that hybrid search RTs are linear functions of the log of the memory set size ( Wolfe , 2012 ) . Five types of target collection events are plotted in the ﬁgure . As above , on Switch events the item collected this time is different than the previous item collected . Temp events are also collections of a different item but on the collection after that , the observer returned to the ﬁrst target type ( an ABA pattern ) . Return events are those third events in an ABA sequence . The item collected this time is different from the previous item but it is the same as the one before that . Finally , the First collection in each patch is plotted separately . As noted above , these RTs prove to be much longer than any of the other RTs at each memory set size ( all paired - t tests : t ( 11 ) > 7 . 0 , all p < 0 . 0001 ) . Excluding the First events , the other four types of collection events also clearly differed from each other ( ANOVA : main effect of Trial Type : F ( 3 , 33 ) = 55 . 5 , p < 0 . 0001 , g 2 g = 0 . 38 ) . There was also a main effect of memory set size ( F ( 3 , 33 ) = 14 . 4 , p < 0 . 0001 , g 2 g = 0 . 14 ) and an interaction of those factors , reﬂecting the differ - ent slopes for each event type ( F ( 9 , 99 ) = 4 . 0 , p = 0 . 0002 , g 2 g = 0 . 04 ) . In the Wolfe ( 2012 ) study of hybrid search , RTs rose with the log of the memory set size . To test if that logarithmic relationship is seen in hybrid foraging , regression lines were ﬁt to the three smal - ler memory set sizes ( 8 , 16 , and 32 ) for the data in Fig . 9 and used to predict the data for the largest memory set size ( 64 ) . The open symbols show the linear prediction . Filled outline symbols and the plotted regression lines show the log prediction . Plotted data are the averages over the 12 observers for the actual and predicted RTs . The RTs are well described as linear functions of log ( memory set size ) . Log - linear functions based on set sizes 8 – 32 are good pre - dictors of the RT at memory set size 64 as the predicted and actual RTs do not reliably differ ( all t ( 11 ) < 1 . 5 , all p > 0 . 15 ) . The linear ﬁts are not as good as the log - linear ﬁts and the predicted value for memory set size 64 differs signiﬁcantly from the data for First events ( t ( 11 ) = 4 . 9 , p = 0 . 0005 ) and Switch events ( t ( 11 ) = 3 . 7 , p = 0 . 032 ) . As the effect of memory set size gets smaller , for the Temp , Return , and Run collection types , it is no longer possible to distinguish between the log and linear predictions . 3 . 4 . Analysis of RT (cid:1) effective visual set size functions The substantial differences between RTs and slopes for Run and Switch events falsify a simple model that might propose that observers select one item after another from the visual display 56 J . M . Wolfe et al . / Vision Research 119 ( 2016 ) 50 – 59 and perform the same memory search on each of these . Clearly , for the current selection , the memory search is much faster if the cur - rent selection is the same as the preceding selection . It could be that all of the difference between Run and Switch events is explained by faster memory searches for the Run events . However , this hypothesis is contradicted by the ﬁnding that the visual search also appears to be more efﬁcient for Run events . To assess whether the visual search was , in fact , more efﬁcient , we need a way to measure the efﬁciency of search in a situation where there are multiple targets in a single display ( Ward & McClelland , 1989 ) . Rather than using the usual RT (cid:1) visual set size slope as a metric of search efﬁciency in hybrid foraging , Fig . 11 shows RT plotted as a function of the ‘‘effective set size” . The effective visual set size is the current visual set size , divided by the number of targets pre - sent . Thus , if there are 100 items on the screen and 25 of them are targets , the effective visual set size is 4 . Data are shown for effec - tive visual set sizes 4 – 10 because those cells each contain at least 80 trials ( pooled across all observers ) . As was obvious from Fig . 10 , RTs were faster for collections made in runs . Of more interest here is that runs appear to involve more efﬁcient visual search than switches . An ANOVA on the slopes , shown in Fig . 10 , with memory set size and run / switch as factors reveals main effects of the run / switch factor ( F ( 1 , 11 ) = 6 . 8 , p = 0 . 02 , g 2 g = 0 . 08 ; note that this analysis removes the Temp , First , and Return collection types ) . There was also a main effect of memory set size on slope ( F ( 3 , 33 ) = 3 . 3 , p < 0 . 03 , g 2 g = 0 . 10 ) . The interaction was not signiﬁcant for size ( F ( 3 , 33 ) = 9 . 9 , p = 0 . . 38 , g 2 g = 0 . 03 ) . The weakness of the statistical tests , in this case , reﬂects the unstable nature of slope data ; with relatively few trials going into the slopes for each observer , the slopes for those observers show considerable variability . These results argue against a model of this task in which targets are selected at random from all target types in the display . If items were selected at random from the set of target items , then the slope of the RT (cid:1) effective visual set size functions should not dif - fer between run events and switch events . In such a model , run RTs might be faster overall ( an intercept difference ) , because the deci - sion that this was the same target as last time might be faster than the decision that this is a different type of target , but a target , nonetheless . An intercept difference would reﬂect a difference in the memory search aspect of the hybrid search . The apparent dif - ference in search efﬁciency as measured by RT (cid:1) effective set size functions , suggests that the visual search is guided toward the previously viewed item . For example , ﬁnding the Lego alligator on one selection seems to prime observers to direct attention and subsequent selection to other objects with alligator - like fea - tures ( e . g . , ‘‘green” ) . This is akin to the ‘‘priming of popout” effects in the search literature ( Maljkovic & Nakayama , 1994 ) where observers are faster to respond to a second target of the same color than to a pop - out target of another color . Wolfe , Butcher , Lee , and Hyle ( 2003 ) extended this result and argued that , not only do the targets on the previous trials act to prime the target on the current trial , but that this priming is an implicit form of top - down guid - ance . That is , seeing a red target is like being told , or telling your - self , to look for a red target . Wolfe , Horowitz , Kenner , Hyle , and Vasan ( 2004 ) showed that actually seeing a target ( including com - plex objects like those shown here ) produced more top - down guid - ance than merely specifying the target with words . While this earlier work shows these priming effects in a succession of discrete trials , the present results show the effect in the context of a single , extended foraging task . More purely bottom - up forms of guidance also occur in human foraging tasks . For example , Longstaffe , Hood , and Gilchrist ( 2014 ) had observers searching for a target location by moving around a room and tapping on lights in the ﬂoor . All lighted locations were equally likely to be targets but Os tended to favor ﬂickering locations , presumably because of their bottom - up salience . In our experiments , it is the act of selecting one type of target that increases its effective salience . In the context of a hybrid foraging task , it appears that this priming by prior selection has two components . First , ﬁnding one target biases subsequent visual search toward other items with features of that target ( e . g . , ﬁnding one alligator biases search toward other green Lego ) . This produces the shallower RT (cid:1) effec - tive visual set size slopes . Second , identifying a target primes memory to more quickly identify subsequent instances of that tar - get ( e . g . , it is faster to decide that another Lego is an alligator ) . This produces the shallower RT (cid:1) log ( memory set size ) slopes . A more extended model of priming in hybrid foraging is found in Cain et al . ( in preparation ) . The priming of the next selection on the basis of the contents of the prior selection can have real conse - quences in the real world where the presence of common targets might cause a searcher to overlook less common targets . This has been seen in blue jays who will pass over less common prey while foraging for the more common ( Bond & Kamil , 2002 ) . Similar effects are seen in search when one target type is rarer than another ( Godwin et al . , 2015 ; Hout , Walenchok , Goldinger , & Wolfe , 2015 ) . Fig . 10 . RT as a function of log2 of the memory set size for four types of collection events . See text for details . Regression lines are ﬁt to the 3 lower memory set sizes and used to predict the RT value for set size 64 . Open symbols show linear predictions . Outlined shaded symbols show log predictions . For graphing purposes , we actually plot predicted data points for a hypothetical memory set size of 73 . 5 to offset them from the actual data . Fig . 11 . RT (cid:1) effective visual set size ( total items / current targets ) as a function of memory set size ( MSS ) and type of collection event ( Run or Switch ) . Error bars are ±1 SEM . Filled , green symbols show data from Runs . Black - outlined symbols show Switch events . ( For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend , the reader is referred to the web version of this article . ) J . M . Wolfe et al . / Vision Research 119 ( 2016 ) 50 – 59 57 4 . General discussion In hybrid foraging , observers hold a set of target items in mind and collect instances of those targets from a succession of visual ‘‘patches” . The results presented here suggest that when a new patch appears observers select an item and perform a memory search to determine if that item is one of the target types for the current task . As shown in Fig . 10 , these First collections are mark - edly slower than other selections in this task , suggesting that the initial selection is not strongly guided . If the item is a target , it is selected . While the motor act of clicking on that target is in pro - gress , the observer is probably at work on the search for the next item . The next selection of an item is made by a guided visual search . Attention is guided to items with features like those of the item just selected . This makes it more likely than would be pre - dicted by chance that the next target will be of the same type as the previous one . Not only is the visual search biased toward the previous target type , but , in addition , memory has been reconﬁg - ured in a manner that will make it faster to conﬁrm a repeated tar - get type than a new target type . Thus , ‘‘Run” events have more efﬁcient RT (cid:1) effective visual set size functions and more efﬁcient RT (cid:1) memory set size functions . A run of one type of target ends , on average , while the rate of collection is still somewhat higher than the average rate . We argue that this could be explained by the ‘‘Temp” collections . These are breaks in a run , perhaps caused when a nearby target of Type B breaks into a run of Type A . Without those opportunistic breaks in runs , runs might end , as predicted by foraging theory , when the time to ﬁnd another item of Type A gets too long . Howsoever the targets are selected , over time they become less frequent in the patch . At some point , the observer decides to move to a new patch . On average , those leaving times correspond to the predictions of the Marginal Value Theorem . Observers leave a patch when the rate of return from the patch drops below the aver - age rate of return for the task . In this task , observers can maintain a higher target collection rate by leaving earlier . Picking the prover - bial low - hanging fruit is a good strategy here . Future experiments can examine how hard it would be to get observers to switch to a strategy of minimizing the number of targets left in the display . It is worth noting that the tendency to pick targets in runs in our visual hybrid foraging is similar to the ‘patchiness’ of more cog - nitive foraging tasks . In the introduction , we mentioned the Hills et al . ( 2012 ) task in which observers are asked to name as many animals as possible . When observers ‘forage’ through their minds for animal names , the names tend to come in runs as well . Selec - tion of one ﬁsh tends to ‘prime’ subsequent selection of other ﬁshes until that ‘patch’ is exhausted and you move on to pets or tropical birds or some other patch . In the foraging literature , this can be seen as the tradeoff between ‘exploration’ ( pick one of several tar - get types ) and exploitation ( collecting a number of instances of that type ) ( Hills , Todd , & Goldstone , 2010 ) . It is interesting that we see this pattern of foraging even when all the target types are concurrently visible in the same display—as do blue jays ( Dukas & Kamil , 2001 ) . This leads to the question of why we should be interested in hybrid foraging tasks . From the vantage point of basic research in visual attention , the hybrid foraging method proves to be an inter - esting new tool for describing the interaction of memory and attention in visual search . Moreover , tasks of this sort represent an important step in our attempt to use laboratory experiments to understand real world search . To be sure , we have learned a great deal from the visual search literature of the past several dec - ades . However , the standard lab paradigm involves a large set of short , discrete , independent ( or , at least , semi - independent ) trials . Some real world search is of this form ( e . g . , airport security screen - ing ) but a more ‘‘extended search” is typical of many other tasks like the Lego task described at the beginning of this paper . If we want to understand human search behavior , from parents search - ing a toy chest for alligators , to students searching websites for information , to radiologists searching medical images for abnor - malities , we need to understand these tasks that may have multi - ple , interacting components . Of course , hybrid foraging , as assessed here , is not a real world search task but it captures aspects of real world search that have not been captured by classic visual search experiments . In daily life , we often have multiple search goals active at more or less the same time . Driving down the street , you are searching ( or , per - haps , we should say ‘‘monitoring” ) for trafﬁc signs , obstacles , and the road margins , while , unfortunately , being distracted by the cell phone . Of course , these targets are not arranged into a homoge - neous memory set in the manner of the targets in our hybrid for - aging task . Still , multiple goals in your mind do compete to shape your interaction with the world . If you are rate - maximizing in some fashion , how many ‘targets’ are you leaving behind ? If your current search is shaped by what you just found , what are you likely to miss ? The hybrid foraging paradigm is well - suited to investigate some of the complications of the real world . In the driving example above , one presumes that a child in the road is a ‘target’ of much higher value than an interesting hawk in the tree even if you like to engage in bird watching while driving down the highway . The items in a memory set can be given different values and we can determine how the valuable items are prioritized . Indeed , in the real world of the playroom , the Lego search is probably an example of hybrid foraging with items of different values . Each alligator is more special than a mere red brick . They are also less common , introducing another real world variable that can be studied in hybrid search . How does prevalence interact with value in shaping foraging behavior ? We know that low prevalence items are missed more often in standard search tasks ( Wolfe , Horowitz , & Kenner , 2005 ) . This effect persists when there are multiple target types , some more likely to appear as the target on the current trial than others ( Experiments 3 and 4 of Wolfe et al . , 2007 ) . There is every reason to assume that this would continue to hold in a hybrid for - aging task—that rare targets will probably be missed . And there is every reason to imagine that this could be a problem when , for example , a radiologist is ‘foraging’ through many images in the examination of a patient . What would it take to reduce the chance that a radiologist , looking for many possible targets , will not miss the rare and / or unusual one , as is known to happen ( Drew , Vo , & Wolfe , 2013 ; Lum , Fairbanks , Pennington , & Zwemer , 2005 ; Potchen , 2006 ) ? In summary , the hybrid foraging task is a step closer to the real world from the world of independent trial searches . It is comfort - ing that principles established with the classic trial structure experiments continue to apply in hybrid foraging . This increases the conﬁdence that those principles also govern our behavior in the world . The hybrid foraging paradigm opens up new ways to bridge the gap between what we want to know about real world behavior and what we can plausibly accomplish in the lab . Acknowledgments This research was supported by ONR MURI Grant No . N000141010278 , NIH - NEI Grant No . EY017001 , CELEST Grant No . NSF SBE - 0354378 ) and NGA Grant No . HM0177 - 13 - 1 - 0001 _ P00001 . 58 J . M . Wolfe et al . / Vision Research 119 ( 2016 ) 50 – 59 References Arrington , C . M . , & Logan , G . D . ( 2004 ) . The cost of a voluntary task switch . Psychological Science , 15 ( 9 ) , 610 – 615 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 0956 - 7976 . 2004 . 00728 . x . Boettcher , S . , & Wolfe , J . M . ( 2015 ) . Searching for the right word : Hybrid visual and memory search for words . Attention , Perception , & Psychophysics , 77 ( 4 ) , 1132 – 1142 . Bond , A . B . , & Kamil , A . C . ( 2002 ) . Visual predators select for crypticity and polymorphism in virtual prey . Nature , 415 ( 6872 ) , 609 – 613 . Brady , T . F . , Konkle , T . , Alvarez , G . A . , & Oliva , A . ( 2008 ) . Visual long - term memory has a massive storage capacity for object details . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 105 ( 38 ) , 14325 – 14329 . Brainard , D . H . ( 1997 ) . The psychophysics toolbox . Spatial Vision , 10 , 433 – 436 . Cain , M . S . , Vul , E . , Clark , K . , & Mitroff , S . R . ( 2012 ) . A Bayesian optimal foraging model of human visual search . Psychological Science , 23 , 1047 – 1054 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0956797612440460 . Charnov , E . L . ( 1976 ) . Optimal foraging , the marginal value theorem . Theoretical Population Biology , 9 ( 2 ) , 129 – 136 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0040 - 5809 ( 76 ) 90040 - X . Cunningham , C . A . , & Wolfe , J . M . ( 2014 ) . The role of object categories in hybrid visual and memory search . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 143 ( 4 ) , 1585 – 1599 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0036313 . Drew , T . , Vo , M . L . - H . , & Wolfe , J . M . ( 2013 ) . The invisible gorilla strikes again : Sustained in attentional blindness in expert observers . Psychological Science , 24 ( 9 ) , 1848 – 1853 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0956797613479386 . Dukas , R . , & Kamil , A . ( 2001 ) . Limited attention : The constraint underlining search image . Behavioral Ecology , 12 , 192 – 199 . Godwin , H . J . , Menneer , T . , Riggs , C . A . , Taunton , D . , Cave , K . R . , & Donnel , N . ( 2015 ) . Understanding the contribution of target repetition and target expectation to the emergence of the prevalence effect in visual search . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3758 / s13423 - 015 - 0970 - 9 . Hills , T . T . , & Dukas , R . ( 2012 ) . The evolution of cognitive search . In P . M . Todd , T . T . Hills , & T . W . Robbins ( Eds . ) , Cognitive search : Evolution , algorithms , and the brain ( pp . 11 – 24 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Hills , T . T . , Jones , M . N . , & Todd , P . M . ( 2012 ) . Optimal foraging in semantic memory . Psychological Review , 119 ( 2 ) , 431 – 440 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0027373 . Hills , T . T . , Todd , P . M . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2010 ) . The central executive as a search process : Priming exploration and exploitation across domains . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 139 ( 4 ) , 590 – 609 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0020666 . Hout , M . , Walenchok , S . , Goldinger , S . D . , & Wolfe , J . M . ( 2015 ) . Failures of perception in the low - prevalence effect : Evidence from active and passive visual search . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , 41 ( 4 ) , 977 – 994 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / xhp0000053 . Hutchinson , J . M . C . , Wilke , A . , & Todd , P . M . ( 2008 ) . Patch leaving in humans : Can a generalist adapt its rules to dispersal of items across patches ? Animal Behaviour , 75 , 1331 – 1349 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . anbehav . 2007 . 09 . 006 . Ishihara , I . ( 1980 ) . Ishihara’s tests for color - blindness : Concise edition . Tokyo : Kanehara & Co . , Ltd . . Leite , F . P . , & Ratcliff , R . ( 2010 ) . Modeling reaction time and accuracy of multiple - alternative decisions . Attention , Perception , & Psychophysics , 72 ( 1 ) , 246 – 273 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3758 / APP . 72 . 1 . 246 . Longstaffe , K . A . , Hood , B . M . , & Gilchrist , I . D . ( 2014 ) . The inﬂuence of cognitive load on spatial search performance . Attention , Perception , & Psychophysics , 76 ( 1 ) , 49 – 63 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3758 / s13414 - 013 - 0575 - 1 . Lum , T . E . , Fairbanks , R . J . , Pennington , E . C . , & Zwemer , F . L . ( 2005 ) . Proﬁles in patient safety : Misplaced femoral line guidewire and multiple failures to detect the foreign body on chest radiography . Academic Emergency Medicine , 12 ( 7 ) , 658 – 662 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1197 / j . aem . 2005 . 02 . 014 . Maljkovic , V . , & Nakayama , K . ( 1994 ) . Priming of popout : I . Role of features . Memory & Cognition , 22 ( 6 ) , 657 – 672 . McNamara , J . , & Houston , A . ( 1985 ) . A simple model of information use in the exploitation of patchily distributed food . Animal Behaviour , 33 , 553 – 560 . Pelli , D . G . ( 1997 ) . The VideoToolbox software for visual psychophysics : Transforming numbers into movies . Spatial Vision , 10 ( 4 ) , 437 – 442 . Pirolli , P . ( 2007 ) . Information foraging theory . New York : Oxford U Press . Potchen , E . J . ( 2006 ) . Measuring observer performance in chest radiology : Some experiences . Journal of the American College of Radiology , 3 ( 6 ) , 423 – 432 . Schneider , W . , & Shiffrin , R . M . ( 1977 ) . Controlled and automatic human information processing : I . Detection , search , and attention . Psychological Review , 84 , 1 – 66 . Standing , L . , Conezio , J . , & Haber , R . N . ( 1970 ) . Perception and memory for pictures : Single trial learning of 2500 visual stimuli . Psychonomic Science , 19 , 73 – 74 . Stephens , D . W . , & Krebs , J . R . ( 1986 ) . Foraging theory . Princeton , NJ : Princeton U . Press . Ward , R . , & McClelland , J . L . ( 1989 ) . Conjunctive search for one and two identical targets . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , 15 ( 4 ) , 664 – 672 . Wolfe , J . M . ( 1998 ) . What do 1 , 000 , 000 trials tell us about visual search ? Psychological Science , 9 ( 1 ) , 33 – 39 . Wolfe , J . M . ( 2012 ) . Saved by a log : How do humans perform hybrid visual and memory search ? Psychological Science , 23 ( 7 ) , 698 – 703 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0956797612443968 . Wolfe , J . M . ( 2013 ) . When is it time to move to the next raspberry bush ? Foraging rules in human visual search . Journal of Vision , 13 ( 3 ) . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1167 / 13 . 3 . 10 [ article 10 ] . Wolfe , J . M . ( 2015 ) . Visual search . In J . Fawcett , E . Risko , & A . Kingstone ( Eds . ) , The Handbook of Attention ( pp . 27 – 56 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Wolfe , J . M . , Boettcher , S . E . P . , Josephs , E . L . , Cunningham , C . A . , & Drew , T . ( 2015 ) . You look familiar , but I don’t care : Lure rejection in hybrid visual and memory search is not based on familiarity . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , 41 ( 6 ) , 1576 – 1587 . Wolfe , J . M . , Butcher , S . J . , Lee , C . , & Hyle , M . ( 2003 ) . Changing your mind : On the contributions of top - down and bottom - up guidance in visual search for feature singletons . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , 29 ( 2 ) , 483 – 502 . Wolfe , J . M . , Horowitz , T . S . , & Kenner , N . M . ( 2005 ) . Rare targets are often missed in visual search . Nature , 435 ( 7041 ) , 439 – 440 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 435439a . Wolfe , J . , Horowitz , T . , Kenner , N . M . , Hyle , M . , & Vasan , N . ( 2004 ) . How fast can you change your mind ? The speed of top - down guidance in visual search . Vision Research , 44 ( 12 ) , 1411 – 1426 . Wolfe , J . M . , Horowitz , T . S . , VanWert , M . J . , Kenner , N . M . , Place , S . S . , & Kibbi , N . ( 2007 ) . Low target prevalence is a stubborn source of errors in visual search tasks . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 136 ( 4 ) , 623 – 638 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0096 - 3445 . 136 . 4 . 623 . Wolfe , J . M . , Palmer , E . M . , & Horowitz , T . S . ( 2010 ) . Reaction time distributions constrain models of visual search . Vision Research , 50 , 1304 – 1311 . J . M . Wolfe et al . / Vision Research 119 ( 2016 ) 50 – 59 59