Research Article When Development and Learning Decrease Memory Evidence Against Category - Based Induction in Children Vladimir M . Sloutsky and Anna V . Fisher The Ohio State University ABSTRACT— Inductive inference is crucial for learning : If one learns that a cat has a particular biological property , one could expand this knowledge to other cats . We argue that young children perform induction on the basis of similarity of com - pared entities , whereas adults may induce on the basis of cat - egory information . If different processes underlie induction at different points in development , young children and adults would form different memory traces during induction , and would subsequently have different memory accuracy . Experi - ment 1 demonstrates that after performing an induction task , 5 - year - olds exhibit more accurate memory than adults . Experi - ment 2 indicates that after 5 - year - olds are trained to perform induction in an adultlike manner , their memory accuracy drops to the level of adults . These results , indicating that sometimes 5 - year - olds exhibit better memory than adults , support the claim that , unlike adults , young children perform similarity - based rather than category - based induction . The ability to make inductive generalizations is crucial for learning : If one learns that a cat has a particular unobserved biological property , one could extend this knowledge to other cats , and possibly to other mammals . Furthermore , by some accounts , ‘‘inductive inference is the only process . . . by which new knowledge comes into the world’’ ( Fisher , 1935 / 1951 , p . 7 ) . There is much evidence that even infants and young children can perform simple inductions ( Baldwin , Markman , & Melartin , 1993 ; Gelman & Markman , 1986 ; Sloutsky , Lo , & Fisher , 2001 ; Welder & Graham , 2001 ) . However , the representations and processes under - lying this ability remain unclear . According to one view , people , including young children , hold several conceptual assumptions that drive their induction ( see Keil , Smith , Simons , & Levin , 1998 , and Murphy , 2002 , for reviews of these assumptions ) . In particular , people hold a category assumption —they assume that each individual entity is a member of a class or category , that count nouns refer to categories , and that members of the same category share many unobserved properties . Conceptual assumptions are a priori—they are not learned , but are rather a precondition of learning , and are present early in development ( Gelman & Hirschfeld , 1999 ; Keil et al . , 1998 ) . In the course of induction , people ﬁrst identify presented entities as members of categories and then perform inductive inferences on the basis of categorization ( Gelman , 1988 ; Gelman & Markman , 1986 ) . Therefore , when presented with a rabbit and told that it has hollow bones inside its body , a child is more likely to generalize this property to another rabbit than to a dog because the child ( presumably ) understands that both rabbits belong to the same category , and members of the same category share many properties . It has been argued that this tendency to perform induction on the basis of categorization , or category - based induction , is especially pro - nounced when entities are members of familiar categories ( Davidson & Gelman , 1990 ) . In short , according to this view , induction is a function of categorization , whereas categorization is a function of a priori conceptual assumptions . According to another view , young children perform induction ( as well as categorization ) by detecting multiple correspondences , or similarities , among presented entities ( e . g . , see Jones & Smith , 2002 ; McClelland & Rogers , 2003 ; Sloutsky , 2003 ; Sloutsky et al . , 2001 ) . Because members of a category often happen to be more similar to each other than they are to nonmembers , young children are more likely to induce unobserved properties to members of the category than to nonmembers . According to this view , induction and categorization in young children are variants of the same process , which is driven by the detection of multiple correspondences rather than by a priori con - ceptual assumptions . Furthermore , conceptual knowledge often found in adults ( e . g . , knowledge that entities are members of categories ) is not a priori , but is a product of learning and cognitive development . Learning accounts of conceptual knowledge support this position , while weakening the claims that conceptual knowledge is a priori . For example , it has been claimed that young children’s tendency to use similar shape as a reliable categorization cue is a product of a priori conceptual knowledge ( Diesendruck & Bloom , 2003 ; Soja , Carey , & Spelke , 1991 ) , whereas a convincing learning account of this shape bias ( Smith , Jones , Landau , Gershkoff - Stowe , & Samuelson , 2002 ) has weakened the a priori claims by rendering them unnecessary . Address correspondence to Vladimir M . Sloutsky , Center for Cogni - tive Science , 208C Ohio Stadium East , 1961 Tuttle Park Place , The Ohio State University , Columbus , OH 43210 ; e - mail : sloutsky . 1 @ osu . edu . PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE Volume 15—Number 8 553 Copyright r 2004 American Psychological Society Overall , the two positions have several fundamental differences . According to the former position , when entities are members of fa - miliar categories , induction is a function of categorization , and cate - gorization is a function of conceptual knowledge . Therefore , induction is a function of conceptual knowledge . In addition , conceptual knowledge is a priori rather than learned . According to the latter position , early in development induction and categorization are a function of perceptual similarity among entities , whereas conceptual knowledge is a product of learning and development . Thus , the two positions assume different kinds of processing underlying induction and different developmental courses of induction and categorization . One way of contrasting these theoretical positions is to compare pre - dictions derived from them . For example , there is evidence in memory research that spontaneous categorization of items may lead to memory distortions , such as false recognition of critical lures , or nonpresented items that belong to the same category as previously presented items ( Koutstaal & Schacter , 1997 ) . These distortions may occur because participants form category - level or gist representations , whereas de - tails of each individual item are not encoded or are encoded poorly ( Brainerd , Reyna , & Forrest , 2002 ; Koutstaal & Schacter , 1997 ) . When participants are required to focus on perceptual properties of items , they amply encode individual items , thus exhibiting accurate memory ( Marks , 1991 ; McDaniel , Friedman , & Bourne , 1978 ) . Thus , similarity - based induction and category - based induction may result in differential remembering of information presented during an induction task : Whereas similarity - based induction may lead to accu - rate memories for perceptually distinct individual items , category - based induction may result in memory distortions , such as poor discrimination of presented items and critical lures . Therefore , if an induction task precedes a memory test , the memory test would reveal processing un - derlying induction . If people perform category - based induction and form category - level memory traces , their ability to discriminate items seen during the induction task from critical lures should be poor ( compared with their performance on a baseline no - induction task ) . However , if they perform similarity - based induction , they should amply encode perceptual information , forming item - specific memory traces , and their discrimination should be as high as the baseline level . It has been argued that when entities are members of familiar categories , adults may perform induction in a category - based manner ( Osherson , Smith , Wilkie , Lopez , & Shaﬁr , 1990 ) , in which case an induction task should attenuate their recognition memory compared with the baseline . In contrast , if young children perform induction in a similarity - based manner , they should exhibit high accuracy in both baseline and induction conditions . Thus , following an induction task , young children may exhibit greater memory accuracy than adults . The prediction is nontrivial because typically adults’ memory is markedly more accurate than that of young children ( see Schneider & Bjork - lund , 1998 , for a review ) . If adults’ induction with familiar categories is indeed category based , whereas young children’s induction is similarity based , how does this category - based induction develop ? The category - based po - sition argues that conceptual knowledge ( e . g . , the category assump - tion ) is a priori rather than learned ( Gelman & Hirschfeld , 1999 ; Keil et al . , 1998 ) . However , providing a learning account of category - based induction weakens this position by rendering the a priori nature of conceptual knowledge unnecessary . To test the target prediction , we conducted Experiment 1 , in which we compared the effects of an induction task on recognition memory of 5 - year - olds and adults . In Experiment 2 , we trained 5 - year - olds to perform category - based induction and examined the effects of training on their recognition memory . EXPERIMENT 1 Method Participants Participants were 77 young children ( M age 5 5 . 43 years , SD 5 0 . 28 years ) and 71 introductory psychology students ( M age 5 19 . 3 years , SD 5 1 . 33 ) . Materials , Design , and Procedure Materials were 44 color photographs of animals presented against a white background ( see Fig . 1 for examples of the stimuli ) . During the study phase , participants were presented with 30 pictures , 1 picture at a time , from three categories ( 10 cats , 10 bears , and 10 birds ) . During the recognition phase , they were presented with 28 pictures , 1 picture at a time , and were asked whether they had seen each exact picture during the study phase . Half of the recognition pictures had been presented during the study phase , and the other half were new pic - tures . These recognition pictures also represented three categories : cats ( 7 old and 7 new ) , bears ( all 7 old ) , and squirrels ( all 7 new ) . To ascertain that all of these animals were well familiar to children , we pretested them with 5 - year - olds in an earlier naming study . Only those pictures that were consistently named by a basic - level name ( i . e . , ‘‘cat , ’’ ‘‘bear , ’’ ‘‘bird , ’’ or ‘‘squirrel’’ ) by more than 85 % of the children were selected for the present study . The experiment included three between - subjects conditions : baseline , induction , and blocked categorization , with each condition consisting of a study phase and a recognition phase . The recognition phase was identical in all three conditions , whereas the study phase differed across the conditions . Participants were randomly assigned to Fig . 1 . Examples of stimuli used in the study and recognition phases ( copied from the Corel Draw database ) . 554 Volume 15—Number 8 Induction and Memory one of the three conditions . There were 27 children and 29 adults in the induction condition , 24 children and 23 adults in the blocked - categori - zation condition , and 26 children and 19 adults in the baseline condition . In the study phase of the baseline condition , participants were presented with 30 pictures of animals , and their task was to remember these pictures for a subsequent recognition test . In the study phase of the induction condition , participants were ﬁrst presented with a picture of a cat and informed that it had ‘‘beta cells inside its body . ’’ Participants were then presented with 30 pictures of animals ( identical to those presented in the baseline condition ) and were asked whether each of the presented animals also had beta cells . After responding , the participants were provided with yes / no feedback indicating that only cats , but not bears or birds , had beta cells . The fact that 5 - year - olds do not know what beta cells are was of no concern because young children easily induce unfamiliar properties or blank predicates , and as we show in the Results and Discussion section , they had no difﬁculty inducing this property . The recognition test was not mentioned in the study phase of this condition . In the study phase of the blocked - categorization condition , par - ticipants were ﬁrst presented with a picture of a cat and informed that it was young . Participants then were presented with 30 pictures of animals ( identical to those presented in the baseline and induction conditions ) and asked whether each of the presented animals was young or mature . Participants were provided with random yes / no feedback . The purpose of this random feedback was to block infer - ences based on the animal - kind information and to force participants to focus on perceptual features of individual items . As in the induction condition , the recognition test was not mentioned in the study phase . The recognition phase was presented immediately after the study phase . At recognition , participants were presented with 28 pictures and were asked to determine whether each was ‘‘old’’ ( i . e . , exactly the one presented during the study phase ) or ‘‘new . ’’ No feedback was provided during the recognition phase . The young children were tested individually in their day - care centers by female experimenters blind to the hypotheses . The undergraduate students were tested in - dividually in a laboratory on campus . For all participants , stimuli were presented on a computer screen in a self - paced manner , and stimulus presentation was controlled by SuperLab Pro 2 ( 1999 ) software . Results and Discussion Recall that young children were expected to perform induction by comparing each animal with the target animal and thus to remember study - phase animals well , accurately accepting old animals and re - jecting new ones . At the same time , it was expected that adults would spontaneously categorize animals as cats , bears , and birds when performing induction , and thus they would form gist or category - level memory traces . As a result , it was expected that they would remember category information , but not item - specific information , and thus fail to discriminate between old items and critical lures ( i . e . , new mem - bers of a studied category ) . Also , recall that the blocked - categoriza - tion condition was identical to the induction condition , except that the categorization of animals as cats , bears , and birds was blocked . Be - cause categorization was blocked , it was expected that memory ac - curacy for both children and adults in this condition would be comparable to accuracy in the baseline condition . After several trials , the majority of 5 - year - olds and adults realized that the property of having beta cells should be induced to cats , but not to bears or birds , and they accurately performed this induction : The average rate of correct induction was over 75 % of trials for both children and adults . Also , in the recognition phase , both children and adults exhibited above 92 % accuracy across conditions in rejecting distractors from an unstudied category ( i . e . , squirrels ) . Therefore , participants took the task seriously and paid attention to stimuli during the study phase . Recall that we were interested in participants’ discrimination of old items and critical lures across conditions . Percentages of hits ( i . e . , correct recognitions ) and false alarms on critical lures by age group and condition are presented in Table 1 . Data in the table indicate that whereas children exhibited equivalent accuracy ( i . e . , hits (cid:1) false alarms ) across the baseline , induction , and blocked - categorization con - ditions , F ( 2 , 76 ) < 1 , adults’ accuracy was dramatically lower in the induction condition than in the other two conditions , F ( 2 , 68 ) 5 11 . 5 , p < . 0001 , Z p 2 5 . 252 , both p s < . 01 in post hoc Tukey tests . To further examine the ability to discriminate old items from critical lures , we computed memory sensitivity A 0 scores . A 0 is a nonpara - metric analogue of the signal detection statistic d 0 ( Snodgrass & Corwin , 1988 ; Wickens , 2002 ) . If participants do not discriminate old items from critical lures , A 0 is at or below . 5 . The greater the dis - crimination accuracy , the closer A 0 is to 1 . A 0 scores are presented in Figure 2 . As predicted , 5 - year - olds discriminated old items from critical lures well across the three conditions ( in all conditions , A 0 s > . 5 , one - sample t s > 3 , p s < . 005 ) . Adults were accurate in the baseline and blocked - categorization conditions ( both A 0 s > . 5 , one sample t s > 7 , p s < . 001 ) , whereas they were not accurate in the induction condition : Unlike the A 0 s of the young children , adults’ A 0 s in this condition were not different from . 5 , t < 1 , indicating the adults did not discriminate between old items and critical lures . A 0 values were submitted to a two - way ( Age (cid:2) Experimental Con - dition ) analysis of variance . The analysis conﬁrmed a significant age - by - condition interaction , F ( 2 , 142 ) 5 4 . 64 , p 5 . 001 , Z p 2 5 . 06 . Whereas 5 - year - olds exhibited no differences in accuracy across the conditions , all p s > . 87 , A 0 s in adults were markedly lower in the TABLE 1 Mean Proportions of Hits and False Alarms ( FA ) and Mean Accuracy in Experiment 1 Condition Children Adults Hits FA Accuracy ( hits (cid:1) FA ) Hits FA Accuracy ( hits (cid:1) FA ) Baseline . 77 ( . 19 ) . 50 ( . 32 ) . 27 . 89 ( . 10 ) . 47 ( . 31 ) . 42 Induction . 72 ( . 24 ) . 41 ( . 34 ) . 31 . 83 ( . 20 ) . 76 ( . 25 ) . 07 Blocked categorization . 78 ( . 13 ) . 51 ( . 20 ) . 27 . 80 ( . 18 ) . 50 ( . 24 ) . 30 Note . Standard deviations are in parentheses . Volume 15—Number 8 555 Vladimir M . Sloutsky and Anna V . Fisher induction condition than in the other two conditions , F ( 2 , 68 ) 5 13 . 5 , p < . 001 , Z p 2 5 . 29 , post hoc Tukey test p s < . 001 . Furthermore , as predicted , in the induction condition , 5 - year - olds exhibited greater accuracy than adults , one - tailed t ( 54 ) 5 2 . 36 , p 5 . 011 . In short , the induction task markedly attenuated adults’ recognition accuracy , whereas young children remained accurate . These results suggest that whereas adults performed category - based induction , young children performed similarity - based induction . It could be argued , however , that the children were accurate be - cause of extraneous factors . For example , the children could have been more interested in the pictures than the adults , or the children could have forgotten gist information faster than item - specific infor - mation , whereas the adults could have forgotten item - specific infor - mation faster than gist information . The goal of Experiment 2 was to eliminate these explanations by training children to perform category - based induction . If our hypothesis is correct , such training should differentially affect young children’s memory across conditions : Although their accuracy should drop in the induction condition ( analogous to the drop for adults in Experiment 1 ) , it should not drop in the baseline condition . In addition to providing controls , Experi - ment 2 ( if successful ) would provide a learning account of category - based induction found in adults , thus weakening the claim that cat - egory - based induction is based on a priori conceptual knowledge . EXPERIMENT 2 Method Participants Participants were 42 young children ( M age 5 5 . 25 years , SD 5 0 . 21 years ) , with 26 participating in the baseline condition and 16 par - ticipating in the induction condition . Materials , Design , and Procedure Materials in both conditions were identical to those in Experiment 1 . There were two between - subjects conditions , induction and baseline , and participants were randomly assigned to one of the two conditions . The procedure of Experiment 2 differed from that of Experiment 1 in that prior to the recognition phase , the 5 - year - olds were presented with training in which they were taught to perform category - based induction . They were ﬁrst taught that animals that have the same name belong to the same category—‘‘they are the same kind of animal . ’’ They were then given three boxes , with each box identiﬁed by a black outline of a lion , a rabbit , or a dog , and were presented with pictures of lions , rabbits , and dogs ( none of these categories was presented during the main experiment ) . They were told that animals that have the same name are the same kind of animal and could be placed in the same box . The children were asked to place the pictures in the boxes face down . All presented pictures had been pretested in a prior naming study that revealed that each of the depicted animals could be reliably named by 5 - year - olds . The children were presented with six catego - rization trials , and yes / no feedback was given after each trial . Both types of feedback were accompanied by an explanation that animals that have the same name belong to the same kind and should be placed in the same box . The categorization training was followed by induction training . Participants were ﬁrst reminded that animals that have the same name are the same kind of animal . They were then told that animals of the same kind have ‘‘the same stuff inside . ’’ Then participants were given six induction trials , each accompanied with yes / no feedback . On each trial , they were shown a picture and told that the animal had a par - ticular biological property ( e . g . , ‘‘this dog has thick blood inside its body’’ ) , and asked to place the picture in an appropriate box . Feed - back was followed by an explanation that animals of the same kind have the same name and same stuff inside . All children completed training successfully , giving either ﬁve correct answers out of six or four correct answers in a row in the induction training task . At the conclusion of the training session , they were reminded that ‘‘animals that have the same name are the same kind of animal , and these animals have the same stuff inside . ’’ They were then presented with the main experiment , which was identical to Experiment 1 . Results and Discussion Hits , false alarms , and recognition accuracy ( hits (cid:1) false alarms ) across the conditions are presented in Table 2 . Data in the table point to a marked difference between 5 - year - olds’ high accuracy in the baseline condition and low accuracy in the induction condition , F ( 1 , 40 ) 5 12 . 18 , p < . 005 , Z p 2 5 . 24 . Although accuracy in the baseline condition remained as high as in Experiment 1 , accuracy in the in - duction condition dropped dramatically to the level of adults in the induction condition of Experiment 1 . Children’s A 0 scores across the two experiments are presented in Figure 3 . As shown in the ﬁgure , children’s accuracy in the induction condition of Experiment 2 dropped compared with their accuracy in the baseline condition of Experiment 2 , one - tailed independent - samples t ( 40 ) 5 3 . 4 , p < . 005 , as well as compared with their accu - racy in the induction condition of Experiment 1 , one - tailed inde - pendent - samples t ( 41 ) 5 1 . 7 , p < . 05 . Furthermore , after training , their accuracy in the induction condition did not differ significantly from . 5 , or from that of adults in Experiment 1 , both p s > . 28 , thus Fig . 2 . Memory sensitivity scores ( A 0 ) of children and adults across the three experimental conditions in Experiment 1 . The dashed line repre - sents the point of no sensitivity . Error bars represent the standard errors of the mean . 556 Volume 15—Number 8 Induction and Memory indicating that like adults in Experiment 1 , 5 - year - olds who had re - ceived training in category - based induction failed to discriminate between old items and critical lures . At the same time , their accuracy remained high in the baseline condition ( A 0 > . 5 ) , one - sample t ( 25 ) 5 7 . 7 , p < . 0001 . In short , training to perform category - based induction attenuated memory accuracy of 5 - year - olds in the induction , but not the baseline , condition . These ﬁndings suggest that the high recognition accuracy exhibited by 5 - year - olds in Experiment 1 did not stem from extra - neous factors , but rather stemmed from similarity - based induction leading to accurate representation of item - specific information . These ﬁndings also provide a learning account of category - based induction . GENERAL DISCUSSION In the present study , ( a ) the induction task decreased recognition accuracy of adults , whereas young children exhibited high recognition accuracy , and ( b ) training to perform category - based induction de - creased recognition accuracy of young children in the induction , but not in the baseline , condition . Recall that similarity - based induction is expected to result in item - specific representations , whereas category - based induction is ex - pected to result in category - level representations . Therefore , category - based , but not similarity - based , induction may lead to errors in rec - ognition memory . Hence , ﬁnding that young children ( unlike adults ) exhibit high recognition accuracy after an induction task suggests that young children do not spontaneously perform category - based induc - tion , but rather perform similarity - based induction . This ﬁnding is new evidence challenging the idea that when categories are familiar , in - duction in young children is driven by the category assumption . There is mounting evidence challenging the claim that young children hold a priori conceptual assumptions ; however , much of this evidence challenges the centrality assumption —the idea that young children assume rather than learn differential importance of different properties . It was shown that participation in a learning task in which allegedly central features ( i . e . , matching labels ) were poor predictors of biological properties , whereas allegedly peripheral features ( i . e . , similar appearances ) were good predictors , resulted in young chil - dren’s ignoring labels in favor of appearances in an induction task presented 3 months later in a different context by a different exper - imenter ( Sloutsky & Spino , in press ) . In addition , children’s reliance on linguistic labels ( which are allegedly more central than perceptual similarities ) in an induction task is more pronounced for line - drawing pictures than for real three - dimensional objects ( Deak & Bauer , 1996 ) . Furthermore , perceptual similarity could be more important for induction than are matching labels : Young children are more likely to rely on similarity of motion than on a matching linguistic label ( Mak & Vera , 1999 ) . This evidence seriously undermines the idea of an a priori centrality assumption because properties of ‘‘peripheral’’ in - formation should not affect the centrality of ‘‘essential’’ information . Unlike previous research , the current research challenges the cate - gory assumption : There is little evidence that young children spon - taneously perform induction in a category - based manner . Finding that training to perform induction in a category - based manner reduced memory accuracy of young children to the level of adults supports a learning account of category - based induction , sug - gesting that it is unnecessary to posit that conceptual knowledge is a priori . Recall that in Experiment 2 , participants were taught that ( a ) animals that have the same name belong to the same kind , ( b ) animals that belong to the same kind have the same stuff inside , and ( c ) animals that have the same name have the same stuff inside . It is possible that the ﬁrst two points are taught in school , whereas the third is a direct consequence of the ﬁrst two . Therefore , the results of Experiment 2 may explain the transition from the similarity - based induction exhibited by children to the category - based induction ex - hibited by adults , suggesting that category - based induction and req - uisite conceptual knowledge could be a product of feedback - based learning . These ﬁndings are consistent with previous research indi - cating that smart behaviors do not have to be a priori—they can de - velop from simpler representations and processes ( e . g . , Jones & Smith , 2002 ; Smith , Jones , & Landau , 1996 ; Smith et al . , 2002 ) . Could the reported results stem from extraneous factors , such as differential forgetting of gist and item - specific information or differ - ential interest in pictures in children and adults ? Although these factors could account for the results of Experiment 1 , it is unclear how they can account for the results of both experiments . Recall that training to perform category - based induction attenuated recognition memory of 5 - year - olds in the induction but not the baseline condition . TABLE 2 Mean Proportions of Hits and False Alarms ( FA ) and Mean Accuracy in Experiment 2 Condition Hits FA Accuracy ( hits (cid:1) FA ) Baseline . 74 ( . 16 ) . 42 ( . 28 ) . 32 Induction . 85 ( . 21 ) . 77 ( . 29 ) . 08 Note . Standard deviations are in parentheses . Fig . 3 . Young children’s memory sensitivity scores ( A 0 ) in the induction and baseline conditions in Experiments 1 and 2 . The dashed line rep - resents the point of no sensitivity . Error bars represent the standard errors of the mean . Volume 15—Number 8 557 Vladimir M . Sloutsky and Anna V . Fisher It seems very difﬁcult to come up with a plausible differential - for - getting or differential - interest account that would explain why learn - ing to perform category - based induction would differentially affect recognition in the two conditions . The reported results reﬂect effects of induction on encoding of information : Whereas categorization - based induction results in cate - gory - level representations leading to memory distortions , similarity - based induction results in item - specific representations leading to accurate recognition . These results suggest that young children per - form induction in a similarity - based manner , thus challenging the position that young children’s induction is category based . Acknowledgments— This research was supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation ( BCS 0078945 ) to V . M . S . We thank Patricia Bauer , James Cutting , James Hampton , Valerie Kuhlmeier , Ed Wasserman , Aaron Yarlas , and an anonymous reviewer for their helpful comments . REFERENCES Baldwin , D . A . , Markman , E . M . , & Melartin , R . L . ( 1993 ) . Infants’ ability to draw inferences about nonobvious object properties : Evidence from exploratory play . Child Development , 64 , 711 – 728 . Brainerd , C . J . , Reyna , V . F . , & Forrest , T . J . ( 2002 ) . Are young children suscep - tible to the false - memory illusion ? Child Development , 73 , 1363 – 1377 . Davidson , N . S . , & Gelman , S . A . ( 1990 ) . Inductions from novel categories : The role of language and conceptual structure . Cognitive Development , 5 , 151 – 176 . Deak , G . O . , & Bauer , P . J . ( 1996 ) . The dynamics of preschoolers’ categorization choices . Child Development , 67 , 740 – 767 . Diesendruck , G . , & Bloom , P . ( 2003 ) . How specific is the shape bias ? Child Development , 74 , 168 – 178 . Fisher , R . ( 1951 ) . The design of experiments . New York : Hafner . ( Original work published 1935 ) Gelman , S . A . ( 1988 ) . The development of induction within natural kind and artifact categories . Cognitive Psychology , 20 , 65 – 95 . Gelman , S . A . , & Hirschfeld , L . A . ( 1999 ) . How biological is essentialism ? In S . Atran & D . Medin ( Eds . ) , Folkbiology ( pp . 403 – 446 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Gelman , S . A . , & Markman , E . ( 1986 ) . Categories and induction in young children . Cognition , 23 , 183 – 209 . Jones , S . S . , & Smith , L . B . ( 2002 ) . How children know the relevant properties for generalizing object names . Developmental Science , 5 , 219 – 232 . Keil , F . C . , Smith , W . C . , Simons , D . J . , & Levin , D . T . ( 1998 ) . Two dogmas of conceptual empiricism : Implications for hybrid models of the structure of knowledge . Cognition , 65 , 103 – 135 . Koutstaal , W . , & Schacter , D . L . ( 1997 ) . Gist - based false recognition of pic - tures in older and younger adults . Journal of Memory and Language , 37 , 555 – 583 . Mak , B . S . K . , & Vera , A . H . ( 1999 ) . The role of motion in children’s categori - zation of objects . Cognition , 71 , B11 – B21 . Marks , W . ( 1991 ) . Effects of encoding the perceptual features of pictures on memory . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 17 , 566 – 577 . McClelland , J . L . , & Rogers , T . T . ( 2003 ) . The parallel distributed processing approach to semantic cognition . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 4 , 310 – 322 . McDaniel , M . A . , Friedman , A . , & Bourne , L . ( 1978 ) . Remembering the level of information in words . Memory & Cognition , 6 , 156 – 164 . Murphy , G . L . ( 2002 ) . The big book of concepts . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Osherson , D . N . , Smith , E . E . , Wilkie , O . , Lopez , A . , & Shaﬁr , E . ( 1990 ) . Cat - egory - based induction . Psychological Review , 97 , 185 – 200 . Schneider , W . , & Bjorklund , D . F . ( 1998 ) . Memory . In R . Siegler & D . Kuhn ( Eds . ) , Handbook of child psychology : Vol . 2 . Cognition , perception , and language ( 5th ed . , pp . 467 – 521 ) . New York : John Wiley . Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2003 ) . The role of similarity in the development of categori - zation . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 7 , 246 – 251 . Sloutsky , V . M . , Lo , Y . - F . , & Fisher , A . V . ( 2001 ) . How much does a shared name make things similar ? Linguistic labels and the development of inductive inference . Child Development , 72 , 1695 – 1709 . Sloutsky , V . M . , & Spino , M . A . ( in press ) . Naı¨ve theory and transfer of learning : When less is more and more is less . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review . Smith , L . B . , Jones , S . S . , & Landau , B . ( 1996 ) . Naming in young children : A dumb attentional mechanism ? Cognition , 60 , 143 – 171 . Smith , L . B . , Jones , S . S . , Landau , B . , Gershkoff - Stowe , L . , & Samuelson , L . ( 2002 ) . Object name learning provides on - the - job training for attention . Psychological Science , 13 , 13 – 19 . Snodgrass , J . G . , & Corwin , J . ( 1988 ) . Pragmatics of measuring recognition memory : Applications to dementia and amnesia . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 117 , 34 – 50 . Soja , N . N . , Carey , S . , & Spelke , E . S . ( 1991 ) . Ontological categories guide young children’s inductions of word meaning : Object terms and substance terms . Cognition , 38 , 179 – 211 . SuperLab Pro ( Version 2 . 0 ) [ Computer software ] . ( 1999 ) . San Pedro , CA : Ce - drus . Welder , A . N . , & Graham , S . A . ( 2001 ) . The inﬂuences of shape similarity and shared labels on infants’ inductive inferences about nonobvious object properties . Child Development , 72 , 1653 – 1673 . Wickens , T . ( 2002 ) . Elementary signal detection theory . New York : Oxford University Press . ( R ECEIVED 5 / 21 / 03 ; R EVISION ACCEPTED 9 / 5 / 03 ) 558 Volume 15—Number 8 Induction and Memory