ORIGINAL PAPER Coordinate - based colocalization analysis of single - molecule localization microscopy data Sebastian Malkusch • Ulrike Endesfelder • Justine Mondry • Ma´rton Gelle´ri • Peter J . Verveer • Mike Heilemann Accepted : 19 October 2011 / Published online : 16 November 2011 (cid:2) Springer - Verlag 2011 Abstract Colocalization of differently labeled biomole - cules is a valuable tool in ﬂuorescence microscopy and can provide information on biomolecular interactions . With the advent of super - resolution microscopy , colocalization analysis is getting closer to molecular resolution , bridging the gap to other technologies such as ﬂuorescence reso - nance energy transfer . Among these novel microscopic techniques , single - molecule localization - based super - reso - lution methods offer the advantage of providing single - molecule coordinates that , rather than intensity informa - tion , can be used for colocalization analysis . This requires adapting the existing mathematical algorithms for locali - zation microscopy data . Here , we introduce an algorithm for coordinate - based colocalization analysis which is suited for single - molecule super - resolution data . In addition , we present an experimental conﬁguration for simultaneous dual - color imaging together with a robust approach to correct for optical aberrations with an accuracy of a few nanometers . We demonstrate the potential of our approach for cellular structures and for two proteins binding actin ﬁlaments . Keywords Colocalization (cid:2) Super - resolution microscopy (cid:2) Single - molecule ﬂuorescence microscopy (cid:2) Cellular structures Introduction Fluorescence microscopy is a valuable tool to unravel biomolecular interactions . By applying differently colored labels to biomolecules , interactions can be studied sys - tematically ranging from conventional colocalization down to the 2 – 10 nm length scale achieved by ﬂuorescence resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) ( Grecco and Verveer 2011 ) . FRET is an excellent choice to study intermolecular interactions on a very short length scale , but requires that two biomolecules come together closely . On a longer length scale , spatial colocalization of the ﬂuorescence signal in different color channels is a standard approach ( Bolte and Cordelieres 2006 ; French et al . 2008 ; Zinchuk and Zinchuk 2008 ) . However , colocalization of conven - tional ﬂuorescence microscopy images suffers from a limited spatial resolution of about half the wavelength used and from chromatic errors ( Ronneberger et al . 2008 ) , which limits the extractable information and thus inter - pretation of the data . Here , super - resolution ﬂuorescence microscopy techniques can help , as these methods can reach a spatial resolution down to tens of nanometers ( Heilemann 2010 ; Schermelleh et al . 2010 ) . Colocalization analysis has been applied for instance to stimulated - emis - sion depletion ( STED ) microscopy ( McClatchey and Fehon 2009 ) and structured illumination microscopy ( SIM ) ( Schermelleh et al . 2008 ) images . Localization - based super - resolution techniques are somehow different in this context as these are based on coordinates of single - mole - cules ( Betzig et al . 2006 ; Heilemann et al . 2008 ; Rust et al . S . Malkusch and U . Endesfelder contributed equally . S . Malkusch (cid:2) U . Endesfelder (cid:2) M . Heilemann ( & ) Biotechnology and Biophysics , Julius - Maximilians - University Wu¨rzburg , Am Hubland , 97074 Wu¨rzburg , Germany e - mail : m . heilemann @ uni - wuerzburg . de J . Mondry (cid:2) M . Gelle´ri (cid:2) P . J . Verveer Department of Systemic Cell Biology , Max Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology , Otto - Hahn - Strasse 11 , 44227 Dortmund , Germany 123 Histochem Cell Biol ( 2012 ) 137 : 1 – 10 DOI 10 . 1007 / s00418 - 011 - 0880 - 5 2006 ) . Super - resolution images are obtained by histo - gramming or blurring all localizations . These intensity - like images can then be processed by common image - based colocalization algorithms ( Bolte and Cordelieres 2006 ; French et al . 2008 ; Zinchuk and Zinchuk 2008 ) . Therefore , they depend on processing parameters chosen for the reconstruction of super - resolution images . Our novel approach starts from the set of single - molecule coordinates of two different species that are derived from a localization microscopy experiment , and applies coordinate - based algorithms to calculate colocalization parameters . In addi - tion , our approach is able to provide information on the environment of each species separately , distinguishing between the questions how a biomolecule of species A is surrounded by a biomolecule of species B , and vice versa . In the present work , we demonstrate a robust approach for coordinate - based colocalization analysis of dual - color super - resolution imaging based on photoswitching of ﬂuorescent probes independent of speciﬁc ﬂuorophores . We introduce an experimental conﬁguration for simulta - neous dual - color imaging that overcomes the dynamic range of the camera and is not sensitive to cross talk . We introduce a routine to correct for aberrations with nano - meter accuracy , and we developed a coordinate - based colocalization ( CBC ) analysis method . Methods Calibration phantom For calibrating the dual - color setup a calibration phantom has been prepared . The glass surface of a LabTek 8 - welled chamber ( Nunc , Germany ) was etched with 0 . 05 % HF and then incubated with 0 . 1 % poly - L - lysine ( Sigma - Aldrich , USA ) for 10 min . The surface was incubated with multi - color labeled polystyrene beads ( TetraSpeck , Invitrogen , USA ) dissolved 1 : 1 , 000 in PBS ( Sigma - Aldrich , USA ) for 15 min . The beads were imaged on both channels by irradiation with 647 nm and with 568 nm . For the cali - bration several images of different surface areas were taken and the ﬁducial coordinates were obtained with the rapid - STORM algorithm ( Wolter et al . 2011 ) . A correction matrix was generated and used for alignment of the two - color super - resolution data using MatLab ( Mathworks , USA ) . Molecular biology Merlin - EGFP was prepared by polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) ampliﬁcation using a sense primer ( CGCGCTAGC ATGGCCGGAGCCATCGC ) and an anti - sense primer ( GCGGTCGACCGGAGCTCTTCAAAGAAGG ) , which contain the restriction sites Nhe I and Sal I , respectively . The synthesized strand was cloned into the Clontech EGFP - N1 vector . Ezrin - EGFP was prepared by PCR using a sense primer ( GCCCAAGCTTATGGATACAAGGATGAC ) and an anti - sense primer ( CGGACTCAGATCTCGAGCTCA AGCTTCGATGCCCAAGCC ) which were cloned into the EGFP - N1 Clontech vector . Here , the restriction sites Hin dIII and Sal I were used which were also included in the primers . To generate the mEos2 variants of merlin and ezrin , a ﬂuorophore exchange was performed via the restriction sites Age I and Not I . mEos2 was ampliﬁed with the primers CGCACCGGTCGCCACCATGAGTGCGATT AAGC ( sense ) and GCGGCGGCCGCTTTACGTCTGG CATTGTCAG ( anti - sense ) while EGFP was cut out of the vectors EGFP - N1 - merlin and EGFP - N1 - ezrin . The DNA - fragments were ligated to maintain the constructs mEos2 – merlin and mEos2 – ezrin . Sample preparation of cells expressing mEos2 – actin HeLa cells were taken from cell culture ﬂasks , seeded out in LabTek 8 - welled chambers ( Nunc , Germany ) and incubated at 37 (cid:3) C and 5 % CO 2 until they were 80 % conﬂuent . The cells were transiently transfected with mEos2 – actin using Turbofect ( Fermentas , Germany ) . After overnight expres - sion at 37 (cid:3) C , the cells were ﬁxed for 10 min in 4 % para - formaldehyde ( PFA , Sigma , USA ) and stored in PBS at 4 (cid:3) C . Prior to imaging , the actin skeleton of the cells was labeled by incubation with Alexa Fluor 647 - phalloidin ( Invitrogen , USA ) for 10 min . Tubulin - stained HeLa cells were prepared using standard immunocytochemistry pro - tocols by a primary rabbit anti - b - tubulin antibody ( Abcam , UK ) . The secondary antibody was a goat F ( ab 0 ) 2 anti rabbit labeled with Alexa Fluor 647 ( Invitrogen , USA ) . Sample preparation of cells expressing mEos2 – merlin or mEos2 – ezrin COS - 7 cells were seeded in LabTek 8 - well chambers ( Nunc , Germany ) and grown in DMEM ? 10 % fetal calf serum ( FCS ) ? 1 % L - glutamin ? 1 % non - essential amino acids ( NEAA ) . The cells were maintained in culture at 37 (cid:3) C and 5 % CO 2 . After cell attachment , transient trans - fection of mEos2 – merlin or mEos2 – ezrin was carried out using the transfection reagent Effectene ( Qiagen , Ger - many ) according to the protocol of the manufacturer . The transfected cells were incubated 12 – 15 h at 37 (cid:3) C and 5 % CO 2 . Cells were washed two times with PBS , ﬁxed with 4 % PFA ( paraformaldehyde ) for 15 min at room temper - ature , permeabilized with 0 . 5 % Triton - X 100 for 10 min and incubated with 3 % BSA ( bovine serum albumin ) for 30 min . Finally the cells were stained with 1 unit Alexa 2 Histochem Cell Biol ( 2012 ) 137 : 1 – 10 123 Fluor 647 phalloidin ( Invitrogen , USA ) in 1 % BSA solu - tion for 20 min , and rinsed 3 times with PBS . Microscopic conﬁguration A multi - line argon – krypton laser ( Innova70C , Coherent , USA ) was coupled into an inverted microscope ( IX71 , Olympus , Japan ) equipped with a 60 9 oil immersion objective ( PlanApo 60x , Na 1 . 45 , Olympus , Japan ) suitable for total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence ( TIRF ) imaging . The excitation and ﬂuorescence light were separated using a dichroic mirror [ HC576 / 661 ( AHF , Germany ) ] . Spectral discrimination of the two different ﬂuorescent probes was achieved by splitting the ﬂuorescence emission in the detection path ( custom - modiﬁed 650 DCXR , AHF , Ger - many ) . Two parallel light paths both containing a Galilei telescope project the ﬂuorescence emission onto two sep - arate regions of the chip of an EMCCD camera ( EMCCD , Andor Ixon DU897 , Ireland ) ( Fig . 1 ) . In order to correct for chromatic aberrations in the focal plane of the objec - tive , the length of the Galilei telescope in one beam path was adjusted . Additional ﬁlters were placed in the two spectral channels [ 633SP and 610 / 75 in the mEos2 channel ; 664LP and 700 / 75 in the Alexa Fluor 647 channel ( AHF , Germany ) ] . An additional longpass ﬁlter ( 568 LP ; AHF , Germany ) was used for both spectral channels . Super - resolution imaging Combined PALM and dSTORM imaging was performed using an alternating laser excitation scheme . The sample was prepared in an imaging buffer suitable for both dSTORM and PALM as described elsewhere ( Endesfelder et al . 2011 ; Heilemann et al . 2008 ) . Brieﬂy , the cells were imaged in oxygen - depleted hydrocarbonate with pH 8 and 100 mM MEA added . mEos2 was photoactivated by irra - diation with 378 nm and read out by irradiation with 568 nm . Alexa Fluor 647 was reversibly photoswitched by irradiation with 488 nm and read out by irradiation with 647 nm . The alternation of all light sources was triggered by the EMCCD and controlled by a pulse generator ( Stan - ford Research Systems , USA ) . For each pair of super - resolved images a series of 3 , 000 frames , 1 , 500 frames per ﬂuorescent probe in alternation , were recorded with an irradiation time of 99 ms and an acquisition time of 100 ms . Dual - color image acquisition The recorded image stack contains both dSTORM ( Alexa Fluor 647 ) and PALM data ( mEos2 ) in alternating frames and was separated into two individual image stacks ( Fig . 1 ) . Single - molecule localizations in both datasets were calculated using the rapidSTORM algorithm ( Wolter et al . 2011 ) . This scheme of alternating excitation and read - out allowed imaging the different ﬂuorophores in separate spectral channels and signiﬁcantly reduced cross talk . Image alignment was performed by translating single - molecule localizations in the mEos2 channel onto the Alexa Fluor 647 channel . Afterwards , the single - molecule localizations of the mEos2 channel were corrected using the local weighted mean calculated from the calibration phantom ( Fig . 2 ) . This procedure generates two super - resolved images that are corrected for optical and chro - matic aberrations . Coordinate - based colocalization of single - molecule localization data The coordinate - based colocalization ( CBC ) value is cal - culated from single - molecule localization data of two species ( A , B ) . A CBC value is assigned to each single localization of each species . To calculate the CBC value for a speciﬁc localization A i from species A , the distribution of localizations from both species A and B around A i is calculated as : Fig . 1 Experimental setup for parallel two - color localization - based super - resolution microscopy with alternating laser excitation . The trigger signal of the camera is processed by a frequency generator and used to modulate the different laser lines . In an alternating fashion , the sample was irradiated by either 647 and 488 nm , or by 568 and 378 nm . The ﬂuorescence emission was spectrally separated on the camera Histochem Cell Biol ( 2012 ) 137 : 1 – 10 3 123 D A i ; A ð r Þ ¼ N A i ; A ð r Þ p r 2 (cid:2) p R 2max N A i ; A ð R max Þ ¼ N A i ; A ð r Þ N A i ; A ð R max Þ (cid:2) R 2max r 2 D A i ; B ð r Þ ¼ N A i ; B ð r Þ N A i ; B ð R max Þ (cid:2) R 2max r 2 Here , N A i ; A ð r Þ is the number of localizations of species A within the distance r around A i and N A i ; B ð r Þ is the number of localizations of species B within the distance r around A i . These distributions are corrected for the area ( p r 2 ) , normalized by the number of localizations within the largest observed distance R max and divided by the largest observed area for species A N A i ; A R max ð Þ = p R 2max (cid:2) (cid:3) and B N A i ; B R max ð Þ = p R 2max (cid:2) (cid:3) . A uniform distribution would give an expected value of D ð r Þ ¼ 1 for all r . From these two distributions , we calculated the rank correlation coefﬁcient ( Spearman ) using a function avail - able in Matlab ( Mathworks , Natick , MA ) S A i ¼ P R max r j ¼ 0 O D Ai ; A ð r j Þ (cid:3) (cid:2) O D Ai ; A (cid:4) (cid:5) O D Ai ; B ð r j Þ (cid:3) (cid:2) O D Ai ; B (cid:4) (cid:5) ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃP R max r j ¼ 0 O D Ai ; A ð r j Þ (cid:3) (cid:2) O D Ai ; A (cid:4) (cid:5) 2 r ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃP R max r j ¼ 0 O D Ai ; B ð r j Þ (cid:3) (cid:2) O D Ai ; B (cid:4) (cid:5) 2 r Here , O D Ai ; A r ð Þ is the rank of O D Ai ; A r ð Þ calculated after Spearman , and O D Ai ; A is the arithmetic average of O D Ai ; A r ð Þ . The colocalization value , C A i , is calculated as C A i ¼ S A i (cid:2) e ð(cid:3) EAi ; B R max Þ , with E A i ; B as the distance from A i to the nearest neighbor from species B . C A i is calculated for every single - molecule localization and can adapt values from - 1 to 1 . Results and discussion Conventional colocalization algorithms generate an over - lay coefﬁcient for each pixel of an image calculated from the ﬂuorescence signal recorded for two different and ﬂuorophore - labeled biomolecules . This approach has two drawbacks : ﬁrst , it depends on prior image processing such as thresholding and deconvolution ; second , a false positive colocalization value is yielded if one of the biomolecules is distributed randomly . These issues have been addressed in intensity correlation analysis ( ICA ) ( Li et al . 2004a ) by also taking into account the spatial distribution of the biomolecules analyzed . Different from conventional ﬂuorescence microscopy , super - resolution localization microscopy provides coordi - nates of biomolecules with single - molecule resolution . These coordinates can be used for colocalization analysis without the need of image processing steps . The simplest approach is a nearest - neighbor distance analysis , however , this approach would also yield false positive colocalization in the case of one species being randomly distributed . Therefore , we developed a coordinate - based colocalization ( CBC ) algorithm that takes into account the spatial distri - bution of biomolecules and provides a colocalization value for each single - molecule localization of each species separately . Dual - color localization microscopy with subdiffraction resolution Colocalization analysis of single - molecule localization microscopy data ﬁrst requires a solid approach for simul - taneous imaging of two different photoswitchable ﬂuoro - phores . In our experiments , we have chosen a combination of the monomeric photoactivatable ﬂuorescent protein mEos2 ( McKinney et al . 2009 ) with the photoswitchable carbocyanine ﬂuorophore Alexa Fluor 647 ( Heilemann et al . 2005 ) , which both can be photoswitched reliably under identical buffer conditions ( Endesfelder et al . 2011 ) . We have applied an alternating scheme which in a ﬁrst cycle reads out the ﬂuorescence signal of mEos2 applying 378 nm for photoactivation and 568 nm for excitation , and in a second cycle reads out the ﬂuorescence signal of Alexa Fig . 2 Aberration correction for two - color localization - based super - resolution microscopy . a A poly - L - lysine coated surface was loaded with Tetraspeck multispectral beads ( 100 nm diameter , Invitrogen , USA ) . The emission spectrum was split onto two separate regions of the EMCCD camera . b The spectrally separated single - molecule localizations were overlaid and c a local weighted - mean matrix for aberration correction was calculated . d The nearest neighbor distri - bution of paired single - molecule localizations after aberration correction has a maximum at 7 . 8 nm , representing the correction level that can be reached with this calibration approach 4 Histochem Cell Biol ( 2012 ) 137 : 1 – 10 123 Fluor 647 applying 488 nm for photoactivation and 647 nm for excitation . Both signals are recorded on the same detector that is spectrally split on two channels ( Fig . 1 ) . Cross - activation of Alexa Fluor 647 by 378 nm will only occur to a low extent because of the comparably low irradiation intensity , but can be neglected as cross talk can be sorted out by the spectral and temporal separation of the ﬂuorescence signal ( Endesfelder et al . 2011 ) . Notably , both ﬂuorophores exhibit reversible photoswitching ( Hei - lemann et al . 2005 ; Radenovic et al . 2010 ) . Superposition of multi - channel single - molecule localization data Extracting reliable information on molecular proximity from single - molecule localization microscopy data with subdiffraction spatial resolution requires a robust correc - tion for aberration errors at the nanometer level . Several protocols have been developed for this purpose ( Church - man et al . 2005 ; Koyama - Honda et al . 2005 ) . Sub - 1 nm chromatic correction has been reported recently ( Pertsini - dis et al . 2010 ) . Here , we account for chromatic aberrations as well as for nonlinear aberrations in the microscope which arise due to imperfect optical elements . We selected the approach of using multicolor ﬂuorescent beads to record a dense matrix of points on both channels ( Fig . 2a ) ( Churchman et al . 2005 ) . The images were processed such that all points were allocated to pairs ( Fig . 2b ) , and a correction matrix was calculated ( Fig . 2c ) . From this data , we can routinely demonstrate a residual localization error below 10 nm ( Fig . 2d ) . Colocalization based on coordinates of individual molecules As a next step , we have implemented an algorithm for colocalization which is based on single - molecule coordi - nates , and which reports on the neighborhood of two species separately . The easiest way to characterize the colocalization of pairs of coordinates would be a simple nearest neighbor analysis where each localization of the observed protein population A is attributed by an individ - ual colocalization value based on the distance to the nearest localization of a protein from population B ( Koyama - Honda et al . 2005 ) . However , this method is not reliable for single - molecule localization microscopy , as photoswitch - ing of ﬂuorophores often is reversible and would introduce artifacts ( Endesfelder et al . 2011 ; Heilemann et al . 2005 ; Radenovic et al . 2010 ) . Our approach corrects for multiple switching cycles of single ﬂuorophores ( and thus for multiple detection events ) by comparing the spatial distri - bution of surrounding localizations from both species . For each molecule of a species A , the average number of molecules of a species B in a given distance is calculated ( Fig . 3 ) . Each localization of the observed protein popu - lation is attributed an individual colocalization value cal - culated as Spearman’s correlation coefﬁcient between the linearized distribution functions of both protein popula - tions in the neighborhood of the very localization . How - ever , this method alone results in false positive colocalization information for localizations where the nearest neighbor is far away . To overcome this limitation , we weighted the colocalization by the distance to the nearest neighbor ( see ‘‘Methods’’ section ) . As a result and similar to the Spearman correlation coefﬁcient , our colocalization parameter can reach values from - 1 for anti - correlated [ which are difﬁcult to interpret also in image - based colocalization methods ( Adler and Parmryd 2010 ; Zinchuk and Zinchuk 2008 ) ] , through 0 for non - correlated distributions ( indicating a low probability of colocalization ) , to ? 1 for perfectly correlated distributions ( indicating a high probability of colocalization ) . Note that this analysis provides colocalization information for each species separately and with single - molecule resolution . In a ﬁrst robust test of this approach , we simulated two identical distributions of two species with a different alignment with respect to each other achieved by rotation ( Fig . 3a , e ) . For this exemplary pattern , we would expect a strong colocalization only in the region where both distri - butions cross each other . One molecule is chosen from the red population to calculate the linearized distribution function of the neighboring localizations from the red population ( Fig . 3b ) and the linearized distribution func - tion of the neighboring localizations from the green pop - ulation ( Fig . 3c ) . Afterwards , the correlation coefﬁcient for the two distribution functions is calculated , weighted by the nearest neighbor distribution from the green population and attributed to the chosen localization . The procedure is repeated for all localizations from the red population ( Fig . 3d ) . This way , we are able to allocate a speciﬁc colocalization factor to each localization . The same pro - cedure can be repeated for localizations from the green population with respect to the red population ( Fig . 3e – h ) . We then applied our approach to cellular structures that can serve as a positive control , in order to evaluate our colocalization algorithm and to compare it to the intensity correlation analysis ( ICA ) ( Li et al . 2004b ) , which is an image - based colocalization approach that also depends on protein distributions . In a ﬁrst example , we recorded a super - resolution image of the microtubulin skeleton of a ﬁxed HeLa cell labeled with Alexa Fluor 647 by antibody staining . From this dataset , we generated artiﬁcial images by overlaying two identical images with different transla - tional shifts of 0 , 10 , 50 and 100 nm ( Fig . 4 ) . This way , we have the advantage of using experimentally derived distri - butions of single - molecule localizations instead of Monte Histochem Cell Biol ( 2012 ) 137 : 1 – 10 5 123 Carlo simulations , where the natural protein distributions would have to be assumed . As expected , the colocalization values for the non - translated image exhibits a perfect colocalization ( C A i = ? 1 ) throughout , whereas the values start to decrease with increasing distance . Similar to ICA , our method indicates a colocalization for 0 \ C A i \ 1 and segregated but near localizations for - 1 \ C A i \ 0 . A coefﬁcient of C A i = 0 indicates no colocalization at all . In a second example , we prepared HeLa cells with dual - labeled actin by both genetic labeling with mEos2 ( McKinney et al . 2009 ) as well as chemical labeling with phalloidin - Alexa Fluor 647 . We recorded two - color images and applied coordinate - based colocalization analysis to the single - molecule localization data ( Fig . 5 ) . The super - reso - lution image ( Fig . 5a , b , g , l ) shows unquestionably that both labels target the actin structure , but at the same time , the images reveal that the structure is labeled in different regions by the different ﬂuorophores . This effect is most likely a combination of experimental parameters , such as differences in the labeling molecule and mechanism as well Fig . 3 a , e Coordinate - based colocalization ( CBC ) for a simulated distribution of single - molecule localizations of two different molec - ular species , represented as green and red dots ( scale bar 100 nm ) . b , f In a ﬁrst step , for each single - molecule localization of either species ( green or red ) , the distribution function of the neighboring localizations from the same species is calculated . c , g In a second step , the distribution function of the neighboring localizations from the other population is calculated . d , h From the individual distribution functions , a correlation coefﬁcient is calculated and weighted by the distance distribution . As a result , each single - molecule localization of each species is attributed an individual colocalization value , which reports on the local environment of a particular red or green molecule , separately Fig . 4 Coordinate - based colocalization ( CBC ) of a single - stained microtubulin structure recorded with single - molecule super - resolution imaging in ﬁxed HeLa cells ( scale bar 200 nm ) . a – d For CBC analysis , the microtubulin structure was doubled , translated in one direction by 0 nm ( a ) , 10 nm ( b ) , 50 nm ( c ) or 100 nm ( d ) , and overlaid with itself ( green and red , intensity colocalization in yellow ) . e – h Corresponding coordinate - based colocalization images of the microtubulin structures . i – l The histograms show the single - molecule distributions of the colocalization parameter , C A 6 Histochem Cell Biol ( 2012 ) 137 : 1 – 10 123 as spatial constraints . A strong colocalization signal ( Fig . 5c , h , m ) is evident for the inner regions of the actin ﬁlaments , whereas the outer regions of the ﬁlaments show predominant negative values thus pointing to segregated localization distributions . This data indicate that at a near - molecular level , our colocalization method is highly sen - sitive to the strategy of labeling , especially when the same structure is labeled in two different ways that also might interfere with each other . For comparison , we also ana - lyzed the data with conventional intensity - based colocal - ization algorithms in three different ways ( Fig . 5d – f , i – k , n – p ) . First , we calculate the ICA for the raw super - reso - lution images generated by binning single - molecule localizations into sub - pixels of 11 nm ( Fig . 5d , I , n ) . These images show nearly no correlation , as very few single - molecule localizations of the two different species colo - calize in one sub - pixel . This demonstrates that this approach is based on the sub - pixel size chosen for binning , and thus biased and inappropriate . A common strategy to convert raw super - resolution localization images into intensity - like images is to blur each single - molecule localization by a Gaussian function , with the width of the Gaussian function accounting for the localization accuracy ( Betzig et al . 2006 ; Smith et al . 2010 ) . These images were generated and intensity - based colocalization analysis ( Fig . 5e , j , o ) shows regions with high colocalization of both biomolecules . The results obtained here are similar to the results obtained by coordinate - based analysis ( Fig . 5b , g , l ) , however , the colocalization parameter cannot be given for each species separately . In a ﬁnal approach , we calculated artiﬁcial images with confocal resolution from the localization microscopy data by Gaussian blurring , to demonstrate the results that would have been achieved with confocal microscopy ( Fig . 5f , k , p ) . Large regions with strong colocalization values and much less structural information are observed , which is due to the lower spatial resolution . Colocalization of the actin - binding proteins merlin and ezrin on a molecular level In a second approach , we tested our experimental setup and quantitative analysis on two actin - binding cellular proteins , merlin and ezrin . Both merlin and ezrin are playing an Fig . 5 Coordinate - based colocalization ( CBC ) of a dual - stained actin structure recorded with single - molecule super - resolution imaging in ﬁxed HeLa cells . a Dual - color super - resolution image of dual - stained actin ( green mEos2 – actin , red actin labeled with phalloidin - Alexa Fluor 647 ; scale 1 l m ) . b , g , l Magniﬁed view of three selected regions from the super - resolution images ( scale bar 200 nm ) which were analyzed for single - molecule colocalization with the CBC algorithm ( c , h , m ) . The results are compared to conventional intensity - based colocalization with three image representations of the super - resolution data used : d , i , n displays the intensity - based colocalization of our raw localization data given in a 10 - nm grid ; e , j , o displays the intensity - based colocalization of Gaussian - blurred localization data ; f , k , p displays the intensity - based colocalization of the same regions but blurred mathematically to confocal resolution Histochem Cell Biol ( 2012 ) 137 : 1 – 10 7 123 important role in membrane – cytoskeletal interactions . Ezrin and merlin are closely related and exhibit large portions of similar conserved sequences like the FERM N - terminal domain , but the binding speciﬁcity of the two proteins towards actin is different . Ezrin exhibits a C - ter - minal ERM - association domain ( C - ERMAD ) that binds F - actin . The access to this domain is regulated by head - to - tail folding of ezrin from a dormant closed conformation to an active open conformation by phosphorylation and phospholipid binding . Merlin lacks this C - terminal actin - binding domain , but recent studies in mammalian cells suggest that the N - terminal 18 amino acids of merlin mediate actin binding ( McClatchey and Fehon 2009 ) . Both proteins were tagged with the photoswitchable ﬂuorescent protein mEos2 ( McKinney et al . 2009 ) and transiently transfected into COS - 7 cells . The actin cyto - skeleton was labeled with phalloidin - Alexa Fluor 647 . Dual - color super - resolution images that were recorded and corrected for aberrations are shown in Figs . 6 and 7 . From this data , we could identify major differences in the structural organization of ezrin and merlin : while ezrin is organized in large tube - like structures similar to actin ( Fig . 6a ) , merlin is typically found in small clusters ( Fig . 7a ) . As expected , both protein organization units are found close to actin ﬁlaments . While the actin skeleton is partly enclosed by the small merlin clusters ( Fig . 7a , b , d , f ) , ezrin and actin ﬁlaments coil up to a helical structure ( Fig . 6a , b , d , f ) . Due to the fact that ezrin structures appear denser than merlin cluster , the density distribution of C A for ezrin ( Fig . 8a ) looks quite different to the one for merlin ( Fig . 8b ) . Both distributions show a clear maximum in the negative range ( - 0 . 45 for ezrin and - 0 . 55 for merlin ) . Contrary to merlin , only ezrin also shows a clear maximum on the positive side ( 0 . 25 ) , which corroborates that ezrin has a higher binding afﬁnity to actin than merlin which is attributed to the C - ERMAD of ezrin ( Fehon et al . 2010 ) . Fig . 6 Coordinate - based colocalization ( CBC ) of single - molecule super - resolution data of actin and the actin - binding protein ezrin in ﬁxed COS - 7 cells . a Dual - color super - resolution image of ezrin - mEos2 ( green ) and actin labeled with phalloidin - Alexa Fluor 647 ( red ) ( scale bar 1 l m ) . b , d , f Selected regions ( scale bar 200 nm ) were analyzed by CBC . ( c , e , g ) The colocalization of ezrin with respect to actin is shown , reporting for the proximity of single - molecule localizations of actin around single ezrin molecules Fig . 7 Coordinate - based colocalization ( CBC ) of single - molecule super - resolution data of actin and the actin - binding protein merlin in ﬁxed COS - 7 cells . a Dual - color super - resolution image of merlin - mEos2 ( green ) and actin labeled with phalloidin - Alexa Fluor 647 ( red ) ( scale bar 1 l m ) . b , d , f Selected regions ( scale bar 200 nm ) were analyzed by CBC ( c , e , g ) . The colocalization of merlin with respect to actin is shown , reporting for the proximity of single - molecule localizations of actin around single merlin molecules 8 Histochem Cell Biol ( 2012 ) 137 : 1 – 10 123 Conclusions We report a robust and straightforward solution to derive colocalization information from single - molecule localiza - tion microscopy data . We presented a microscopic con - ﬁguration for alternated - excitation imaging of two spectral channels and therefore overcome dynamic range problems of the EMCCD camera . We introduced a solid correction approach for chromatic errors that reaches on average less than 10 nm errors over a whole ﬁeld of view . We presented different positive controls using simulations , a cellular structure with exact identical protein distributions and a dual - labeled cellular structure . We applied the method to two proteins that interact differently with the actin cyto - skeleton and conﬁrmed the different binding afﬁnity . As several inorganic dyes can be operated as photoswitches in a live cell ( Wombacher et al . 2010 ) together with the wealth of available photoactivatable ﬂuorescent proteins , it is possible to use this approach for live cell imaging . Finally , the CBC approach can be extended to a third dimension in a straightforward way . Acknowledgments M . H . is grateful for funding by the German Ministry of Education and Research ( BMBF ; FORSYS initiative , grant nr . 0315262 ) and the German Science Foundation ( DFG , grant nr . HE 6166 / 2 - 1 ) . P . J . V is grateful for funding by the German Min - istry of Education and Research ( BMBF ; FORSYS initiative , grant nr . 0315257 ) and by the German Science Foundation , as part of the NanoSci - ERA consortium ( grant nr . VE 579 / 1 - 1 ) . References Adler J , Parmryd I ( 2010 ) Quantifying colocalization by correlation : the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient is superior to the Mander’s overlap coefﬁcient . Cytom A 77 : 733 – 742 Betzig E , Patterson GH , Sougrat R , Lindwasser OW , Olenych S , Bonifacino JS , Davidson MW , Lippincott - Schwartz J , Hess HF ( 2006 ) Imaging intracellular ﬂuorescent proteins at nanometer resolution . Science 313 : 1642 – 1645 Bolte S , Cordelieres FP ( 2006 ) A guided tour into subcellular colocalization analysis in light microscopy . J Microsc Oxf 224 : 213 – 232 Churchman LS , Okten Z , Rock RS , Dawson JF , Spudich JA ( 2005 ) Single molecule high - resolution colocalization of Cy3 and Cy5 attached to macromolecules measures intramolecular distances through time . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102 : 1419 – 1423 Endesfelder U , Malkusch S , Flottmann B , Mondry J , Liguzinski P , Verveer PJ , Heilemann M ( 2011 ) Chemically induced photos - witching of ﬂuorescent probes—a general concept for super - resolution microscopy . Molecules 16 : 3106 – 3118 Fehon RG , McClatchey AI , Bretscher A ( 2010 ) Organizing the cell cortex : the role of ERM proteins . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 : 276 – 287 French AP , Mills S , Swarup R , Bennett MJ , Pridmore TP ( 2008 ) Colocalization of ﬂuorescent markers in confocal microscope images of plant cells . Nat Protoc 3 : 619 – 628 Grecco HE , Verveer PJ ( 2011 ) FRET in cell biology : still shining in the age of super - resolution ? Chemphyschem 12 : 484 – 490 Heilemann M ( 2010 ) Fluorescence microscopy beyond the diffraction limit . J Biotechnol 149 : 243 – 251 Heilemann M , Margeat E , Kasper R , Sauer M , Tinnefeld P ( 2005 ) Carbocyanine dyes as efﬁcient reversible single - molecule optical switch . J Am Chem Soc 127 : 3801 – 3806 Heilemann M , van de Linde S , Schuttpelz M , Kasper R , Seefeldt B , Mukherjee A , Tinnefeld P , Sauer M ( 2008 ) Subdiffraction - resolution ﬂuorescence imaging with conventional ﬂuorescent probes . Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 47 : 6172 – 6176 Koyama - Honda I , Ritchie K , Fujiwara T , Iino R , Murakoshi H , Kasai RS , Kusumi A ( 2005 ) Fluorescence imaging for monitoring the colocalization of two single molecules in living cells . Biophys J 88 : 2126 – 2136 Li Q , Lau A , Morris TJ , Guo L , Fordyce CB , Stanley EF ( 2004a ) A syntaxin 1 , Galpha ( o ) , and N - type calcium channel complex at a presynaptic nerve terminal : analysis by quantitative immuno - colocalization . J Neurosci 24 : 4070 – 4081 Li Q , Lau A , Morris TJ , Guo L , Fordyce CB , Stanley EF ( 2004b ) A syntaxin 1 , Galpha ( o ) , and N - type calcium channel complex at a presynaptic nerve terminal : analysis by quantitative immuno - colocalization . J Neurosci 24 : 4070 – 4081 McClatchey AI , Fehon RG ( 2009 ) Merlin and the ERM proteins— regulators of receptor distribution and signaling at the cell cortex . Trends Cell Biol 19 : 198 – 206 McKinney SA , Murphy CS , Hazelwood KL , Davidson MW , Looger LL ( 2009 ) A bright and photostable photoconvertible ﬂuorescent protein . Nat Methods 6 : 131 – 133 Fig . 8 Distribution of the colocalization parameter C A for the actin - binding proteins ezrin and merlin with respect to actin ( calculated from the data shown in Figs . 6 and 7 ) . The distributions were derived from single - molecule localization data that were analyzed by CBC . a The colocalization analysis for ezrin reveals two maxima , one for negative C A ( m - = - 0 . 45 ) and one for positive C A ( m ? = 0 . 25 ) . b The colocalization analysis for merlin exhibits a broad distribution with a maximum at m - = - 0 . 55 Histochem Cell Biol ( 2012 ) 137 : 1 – 10 9 123 Pertsinidis A , Zhang Y , Chu S ( 2010 ) Subnanometre single - molecule localization , registration and distance measurements . Nature 466 : 647 – 651 Radenovic A , Annibale P , Scarselli M , Kodiyan A ( 2010 ) Photoac - tivatable ﬂuorescent protein mEos2 displays repeated photoac - tivation after a long - lived dark state in the red photoconverted form . J Phys Chem Lett 1 : 1506 – 1510 Ronneberger O , Baddeley D , Scheipl F , Verveer PJ , Burkhardt H , Cremer C , Fahrmeir L , Cremer T , Joffe B ( 2008 ) Spatial quantitative analysis of ﬂuorescently labeled nuclear structures : problems , methods , pitfalls . Chromosome Res 16 : 523 – 562 Rust MJ , Bates M , Zhuang X ( 2006 ) Sub - diffraction - limit imaging by stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( STORM ) . Nat Methods 3 : 793 – 795 Schermelleh L , Carlton PM , Haase S , Shao L , Winoto L , Kner P , Burke B , Cardoso MC , Agard DA , Gustafsson MG , Leonhardt H , Sedat JW ( 2008 ) Subdiffraction multicolor imaging of the nuclear periphery with 3D structured illumination microscopy . Science 320 : 1332 – 1336 Schermelleh L , Heintzmann R , Leonhardt H ( 2010 ) A guide to super - resolution ﬂuorescence microscopy . J Cell Biol 190 : 165 – 175 Smith CS , Joseph N , Rieger B , Lidke KA ( 2010 ) Fast , single - molecule localization that achieves theoretically minimum uncertainty . Nat Methods 7 : 373 – 375 Wolter S , Endesfelder U , van de Linde S , Heilemann M , Sauer M ( 2011 ) Measuring localization performance of super - resolution algorithms on very active samples . Optics Express 19 : 7020 – 7033 Wombacher R , Heidbreder M , van de Linde S , Sheetz MP , Heilemann M , Cornish VW , Sauer M ( 2010 ) Live - cell super - resolution imaging with trimethoprim conjugates . Nat Methods 7 : 717 – 719 Zinchuk V , Zinchuk O ( 2008 ) Quantitative colocalization analysis of confocal ﬂuorescence microscopy images . Curr Protoc Cell Biol Chapter 4 : 4 – 19 10 Histochem Cell Biol ( 2012 ) 137 : 1 – 10 123