31 i n t e r a c t i o n s . . . m a y + j u n e 1 9 9 8 a r t i c l e Special Section on Collaboratories Sara Bly Collaboratories . . . [ a ] center without walls in which the nation’s researchers can perform research without regard to geographical location—interacting with colleagues , accessing instrumentation , sharing data and computational resources , and accessing information from digital libraries . from “National Collaboratories - Applying Information Technology for Scientific Research , ” National Academy Press , Washington , D . C . , 1993 In this report from the National Research Council , a collaboratory is defined as a system which combines the interests of the scientific community at large with those of the computer science and engineering community to create integrated , tool - oriented computing and communication systems to support scientific collaboration . In the five years since 1993 , significant progress has occurred in making collaboratories a reality . This issue of interactions presents many examples of these collaboratories along with their challenges for the CHI commu - nity at large . In collaboratory environments , increasingly sophisticated and expensive instruments are in use by teams of scientists pulled together from the nation’s universities , national laboratories , and industry . Problems of geo - graphic separation are especially present : the time and cost of travel , the difficulties of close colleague contacts , the control of experimental apparatus , the distribution of information and results , the large numbers of par - ticipants . Thus collaboratory system design involves information navigation , analysis tools , distributed storage , and security along with advanced collaborative multimedia environments . Four articles offer an in - depth look at collaboratories : telescope observations from a distance , the running of magnetic fusion experiments , remote participation in upper atmospheric research , and distributed tools for environmental molecular sciences . A fifth article presents an overview of an additional eight collaboratories . Finally , the Business Column takes a look at the commercial perspective of the co - evolution of new collabora - tion technologies and changing work practice . In reading these articles , pay particular attention to the challenges and solutions in creating systems and interfaces for enabling communications—both the sharing of data and results and the person - to - person inter - actions . Note the differences in ways in which collaboration is framed and the varying difficulties in creating collaborations versus maintaining ongoing collaborations . There are challenges , innovations , and emerging understandings that relate to many aspects of CHI research and development today .