A User - Centric Model to Semantically Annotate and Retrieve Scientiﬁc Documents Hélène de Ribaupierre ICLE - Knowledge Engineering and Space Logics , CUI , University of Geneva Battelle , Bat A , 7 rte de Drize 1227 Carouge , Switerland helene . deribaupierre @ unige . ch Gilles Falquet ICLE - Knowledge Engineering and Space Logics , CUI , University of Geneva Battelle , Bat A , 7 rte de Drize 1227 Carouge , Switerland gilles . falquet @ unige . ch ABSTRACT When scientists are looking for information in document col - lections , they generally have a precise objective in mind : They want to ﬁnd all the deﬁnitions of a concept , all the results for a particular problem , or to compare the scien - tiﬁc conclusions of multiples articles . In this research , we have developed a user - centric annotation model based on discourse elements . The model has been formally deﬁned as an OWL ontology and used to annotate a corpus of scientiﬁc articles in gender studies . We show how complex queries , proposed by scientists , can be expressed in this model and solved by a description logic reasoner . Categories and Subject Descriptors H . 3 . 1 [ Content Analysis and Indexing ] : Indexing meth - ods ; H . 3 . 3 [ Information Search and Retrieval ] : Re - trieval models ; H . 3 . 7 [ Digital Libraries ] : User issues Keywords Ontologies ; Academic publishing ; users model 1 . INTRODUCTION It is a well known fact that scientists have more and more literature to skim or scan to ﬁnd speciﬁc information . If their information need can be speciﬁed by attribute values ( author name , words in the title , publication date , etc . ) or by a set of keywords then current databases and information retrieval systems ( search engines ) are eﬃcient enough and provide relevant documents . However , this approach , based on document selection and document relevance evaluation , cannot handle ( at least ) two types of information needs : 1 . when the sought information is made of small infor - mation pieces found in diﬀerent documents . For instance “collect all the deﬁnitions of term X in a given domain or school of thought” ( note that a tool like Google’s “ define : ” Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantageand that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit ispermitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspeciﬁcpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . ESAIR’13 , October 28 , 2013 , San Francisco , CA , USA . Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 2413 - 7 / 13 / 10 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2513204 . 2513213 . . . $ 15 . 00 . is not suﬃcient here because it looks for deﬁnitions in known glossaries or encyclopedias but not in usual documents ) 2 . when the expression of the information need is complex and cannot be expressed by a list of keywords . For instance , “ﬁnd documents where author X disagree with author Y about using methodology Z ” . In both cases , the usual document indexing schemes are ineﬃcient because 1 ) they represent each document as a whole and do not take their subparts into account 2 ) they fail to represent knowledge about the semantic or rhetorical role of document elements . One way to circumvent these limitations is semantically enrich the documents by anno - tating their content with meta - information . In other words , to provide meta information not only at the document level but at ﬁner levels such as sections , paragraphs , sentences , or words . Diﬀerent annotation models for scientiﬁc writing have been suggested . Some authors propose to use rhetorical struc - ture or discursive categories to manually or automatically annotate scientiﬁc writings to improve summarization of in - formation retrieval systems [ 5 ] , [ 8 ] , [ 6 ] . These works focus mainly on the ”hard” sciences like biology where there is relatively little variation in describing the results , hypoth - esis , conclusions , etc . In [ 8 ] , authors use rhetorical status ( Background , other , own , aim , textual ) to annotate doc - uments for classifying purpose of citations and improving summarization . In [ 3 ] , authors propose an approach to ex - tract claims and hypothesis from scientiﬁc papers in biology . For a more complete survey of the literature , see [ 1 ] . In [ 4 ] , the authors use patterns to automatically annotate discur - sive categories that allow the user to search for deﬁnitions , quotations , causality etc . Each of those models covers some parts of the problems , but none of them are suﬃcient for answering the complex needs of scientists . 2 . A USER - CENTRIC ANNOTATION MODEL We developed an annotation model that should ﬁt with the user ( scientists ) needs and their way of thinking and not necessarily with the linguist or computer scientist view of document content . Thus the components of the model have been derived from the answers to interviews and a to a survey [ 2 ] . The resulting model ( see Figure 1 ) has four main dimen - sions : discourse elements : A document is decomposed into structural fragments ( usually paragraphs ) and each frag - ment is made of elements , generally one or a few sentences , 21 Figure 1 : User - Centric Annotation Model belongs _ to refers _ to uses cito : cites text Discourse Element Methodology RelatedWork Findings Deﬁnition deﬁnes _ term Hypothesis creatortitlesourceyear . . . Document part _ of term Domain Concept text Fragment Scientiﬁc object uses contains cito : cites that have speciﬁc roles in the scientiﬁc discourse . The dis - course element types are : ﬁndings , deﬁnition , methodology , hypothesis and related work . They correspond to the types that were most often mentionned by the users . It is im - portant to note that these element types may be found in almost any part of a document . One may ﬁnd a method - ological fragment , or a hypothesis or even a ﬁnding in the introduction of an article . In addition , these types are not exclusive . If a sentence summarises a result presented in another article , this sentence is a ﬁnding and a related work . domain concepts : These are concepts belonging to a domain ontology for a particular research area . Domain con - cepts are used to describe the semantic content of a discourse element . scientiﬁc objects : Discourse elements , in particular methodology and ﬁndings elements , often refer to abstract or concrete objects that scientists use in their research ( models , statistical methods , data sets , technologies , etc . ) interlinking : Elements may be interconnected either through citations or through references ( e . g . a ﬁnding may refer to a hypothesis and a deﬁnition ) . For the citation re - lations , we use the CITO ontology 1 [ 7 ] of citation types . Using ontology as CiTO allow also to make inference be - tween those element or those element / document that was not made by the authors , like , if author A agrees with au - thor B and author B agrees with author D and all those elements are deﬁnition , it can be interesting to link A to D . 3 . EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS For this research , we are annotating diﬀerent gender stud - ies documents . We chose this research area because the doc - uments are really heterogeneous , ranging from very empir - ical studies to more ”philosophical” documents . We have implemented our model in the form of an OWL annotation ontology . This ontology contains 69 classes , 137 objects properties and 13 data properties ( counting the imported CITO ontology ) . 1 http : / / purl . org / spar / cito To simplify automatic annotation , we have restricted each discourse element to one sentence and each fragment to one paragraph . We have automatically annotated 50 articles , obtaining 3022 fragments : 747 deﬁnitions , 2183 ﬁndings , 666 hypotheses , 1235 methodologies , 616 related work . We used GATE 2 , Annie 3 , JAPE rules and ontologies modules to detect the diﬀerent kind of discourse element in docu - ments . We used the OWL API to export the obtained anno - tations in the form of individuals that were inserted into the OWL annotation ontology . We also created and imported our own ontology of the gender studies domain ( since none was available and general - purpose knowledge base such as DBpedia and Wordnet cover only a very limited part of this domain . ) This ontology currently contains 611 classes , 10 objects properties , 4 data properties , and 609 individuals . With these models it becomes possible to answer very pre - cise user requests . Here are some sample queries expressed in natural language and in the OWL description logic query language 1 . ﬁnd all the deﬁnitions of the term ’gender’ in a collec - tion of articles that cite an article by author X . Definition and defines _ term value " gender " and cites some ( Document and author value X ) 2 . ﬁnd all the articles using a methodology based on di - rect interviews and having ﬁndings about career path . Documentandhas _ element some ( Methodology and ( uses value direct _ interview ) ) and has _ element some ( Findings and ( uses value career _ path ) ) Here direct _ interview is a member of the class Methodological _ Technique , a subclass of Scientific _ Object 3 . ﬁnd all the documents having the deﬁnition of the term ’social construction’ among their ﬁndings ? Document and has _ element some ( Findings and ( Definition and defines _ term value " social construction " ) ) We have tested the annotation model on other queries proposed by scientists during their interviews . It appeared that most of them where representable as OWL queries over the model’s vocabulary . To compare this annotation and query model with usual keyword - based search , we will 1 ) index a corpus of arti - cles with the Lucene indexing engine , 2 ) ask experts to ﬁnd the best sets of keywords to represent each query , and 3 ) compare the results obtained with keyword searches on the Lucene and results obtained with the description logic queries over the annotation model . Since scientists are not all experts in description logic or other formal query languages ( such as SPARQL ) we will propose an adaptative - faceted search interface based on the annotation model ( see ﬁgure 2 ) . This interface will also be tested against keyword - based search . 2 http : / / gate . ac . uk / 3 http : / / gate . ac . uk / ie / annie . html 22 Figure 2 : faceted search visual interface 4 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work is supported by the Swiss National Fund ( 200020 138252 ) 5 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] S . Buckingham Shum , T . Clark , A . de Waard , T . Groza , S . Handschuh , and A . Sandor . Scientiﬁc discourse on the semantic web : A survey of models and enabling technologies . Semantic Web Journal : Interoperability , Usability , Applicability , 2010 . [ 2 ] H . de Ribaupierre and G . Falquet . New trends for reading scientiﬁc documents . In Proceedings of the 4th ACM workshop on Online books , complementary social media and crowdsourcing , BooksOnline ’11 , pages 19 – 24 , New York , NY , USA , 2011 . ACM . [ 3 ] A . de Waard , S . B . Shum , A . Carusi , J . Park , M . Samwald , and ´A . S´andor . Hypotheses , evidence and relationships : The hyper approach for representing scientiﬁc knowledge claims . In Proceedings 8th International Semantic Web Conference , Workshop on Semantic Web Applications in Scientiﬁc Discourse . Lecture Notes in Computer Science , Springer Verlag : Berlin , October ? Autumn 2009 . [ 4 ] B . Djioua and J . Descles . Indexing documents by discourse and semantic contents from automatic annotations of texts . 2007 . [ 5 ] F . Harmsze . A modular structure for scientiﬁc articles in an electronic environment . PhD thesis , Jan . 2000 . [ 6 ] F . Ibekwe - Sanjuan , F . Silvia , S . Eric , and C . Eric . Annotation of Scientiﬁc Summaries for Information Retrieval . In O . A . . H . Zaragoza , editor , ECIR’08 Workshop on : Exploiting Semantic Annotations for Information Retrieval , pages 70 – 83 , Glasgow , Royaume - Uni , Mar . 2008 . [ 7 ] D . Shotton . Cito , the citation typing ontology , and its use for annotation of reference lists and visualization of citation networks . The 12th Annual BioOntologies Meeting , pages 1 – 4 , 2009 . [ 8 ] S . Teufel and M . Moens . Summarizing scientiﬁc articles : experiments with relevance and rhetorical status . Computational linguistics 28 , 4 : 409 – 445 , 2002 . 23