Model of inverse bleb growth explains giant vacuole dynamics during cell mechanoadaptation Andrea Cairoli , ∗ Alice Spenlehauer , Darryl R Overby , and Chiu Fan Lee † Department of Bioengineering , Imperial College London , London SW7 2AZ , UK Cells can withstand hostile environmental conditions manifest as large mechanical forces such as pressure gradients and / or shear stresses by dynamically changing their shape . Such conditions are realized in the Schlemm’s canal of the eye where endothelial cells that cover the inner vessel wall are subjected to the hydrodynamic pressure gradients exerted by the aqueous humor outﬂow . These cells form ﬂuid - ﬁlled dynamic outpouchings of their basal membrane called giant vacuoles . The inverse of giant vacuoles are reminiscent of cellular blebs , extracellular cytoplasmic protrusions triggered by local temporary disruption of the contractile actomyosin cortex . Inverse blebbing has been ﬁrst observed experimentally during sprouting angiogenesis , but its underlying physical mechanisms are poorly understood . Here , we identify giant vacuole formation as inverse blebbing and formulate a biophysical model of this process . Our model elucidates how cell membrane mechanical properties aﬀect the morphology and dynamics of giant vacuoles and predicts coarsening akin to Ostwald ripening between multiple invaginating vacuoles . Our results are in qualitative agreement with observations from the formation of giant vacuoles during perfusion experiments . Our model not only elucidates the biophysical mechanisms driving inverse blebbing and giant vacuole dynamics , but also identiﬁes universal features of the cellular response to pressure loads that are relevant to many experimental contexts . SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Human Schlemm’s canal endothelial cells in physiologi - cal conditions are subjected to a pressure gradient caused by the ﬂow of aqueous humor in the basal - to - apical di - rection across the endothelium leading to the formation of cellular outpouchings called giant vacuoles . The phys - ical mechanisms regulating giant vacuole formation are unknown . By describing giant vacuoles as inward blebs , we formulate a model of their growth and collapse that captures the characteristic features observed experimen - tally . Our theory reveals that the abrupt increase in sur - face tension caused by membrane stretching , which is required to accommodate the large areal strains locally induced by inward blebbing , limits giant vacuole growth . The model also predicts a competition between multi - ple invaginating vacuoles in which big vacuoles win over small vacuoles . INTRODUCTION Morphological regulation is crucial for the survival of eukaryotic cells in physiological conditions [ 1 ] . Shape changes are involved in a broad spectrum of cellular func - tions , such as motility and division [ 2 , 3 ] , and repre - sent the main cellular response to large mechanical or osmotic pressure gradients and shear stresses [ 4 ] . Ex - emplary forces of this type are found especially in the Schlemm’s canal ( SC ) of the human eye . SC belongs to the conventional outﬂow pathway of aqueous humor [ 5 ] , a transparent ﬂuid that bathes the lens and other tissues of the eye and is the major determinant of intraocular pressure . As elevated intraocular pressure is a risk fac - tor for glaucoma [ 6 ] , its regulation is a key physiological process , primarily realized by draining aqueous humor through the inner wall endothelium of SC [ 7 ] . This is a continuous monolayer of spindle - shaped endothelial cells ( ECs ) , that are attached between one another by tight junctions and adhere to a discontinuous basement mem - brane [ 8 ] . These cells are subjected to the hydrodynamic pressure exerted by the aqueous humor outﬂow ( typically about 1 mmHg in healthy human eyes [ 9 ] ) , which corre - sponds to a signiﬁcant force ( in cellular terms ) in the basal - to - apical direction ( about 60 nN [ 10 ] ) . Under these conditions , SC ECs form large dome - like ﬂuid - ﬁlled outpouchings , called giant vacuoles ( GVs ) [ 11 – 13 ] , by locally invaginating the basal aspect of the cell surface into the cellular body . These structures are typi - cally oriented along the cell axis and are entirely bounded by a smooth unit membrane , i . e . , their inner cavity re - mains extracellular at all times . They thus exhibit a ”signet ring” shape : The cell appears as a thin , continu - ous lining around the GV cavity with the nucleus bulging to one side . Interestingly , these structures are not unique to SC ECs but can also be found in other cell types [ 14 – 17 ] . GVs have been studied experimentally both in vivo and in vitro ( see reviews [ 10 , 18 ] ) . All these exper - iments revealed several characteristic features of GVs , here brieﬂy summarized . ( i ) The formation of GVs depends on the pressure drop ∆ p across the inner wall endothelium that drives the growth process of GVs [ 19 – 22 ] . When a positive ∆ p is established , GVs formed within circa 15 min [ 23 ] ; upon removal of the pressure drop , they shrink within a timescale of the order of minutes [ 24 , 25 ] ( survival time ) . a r X i v : 2 2 06 . 13670v1 [ phy s i c s . b i o - ph ] 2 8 J un 2022 2 ( ii ) GVs typically induce large increase of the net sur - face area of SC cells ( by threefold to fourfold per vacuole when the intraocular pressure is increased from 15 mmHg to 30 mmHg according to the data in [ 22 ] ; see details in [ 10 ] ) . ( iii ) Their morphology depends on the cell surface ten - sion : reduction of the cortical tension through im - pairment of cellular actomyosin contractility leads to larger GVs [ 26 ] . Despite the abundance of experimental studies , how - ever , the biophysical mechanisms underlying GV forma - tion have not yet been fully understood . To accommo - date the large shape deformations associated with GVs , cells regulate their surface area through a complex dy - namical process , which involves remodeling of the cell membrane and reorganization of the actomyosin cortex , orchestrated by the surface tension [ 27 – 32 ] . This process promotes the formation of many diﬀerent cellular protru - sions , such as blebs [ 33 – 35 ] , microvescicles [ 36 ] and either tubular or spherical membrane invaginations ( reminis - cent of GVs ) [ 27 , 37 , 38 ] . For the underlying dynamical picture , a natural timescale of the order of minutes has been reported [ 39 ] : At shorter times the protrusions are rapidly formed via a local passive mechanical process ; on longer times they are reabsorbed via active actin - and temperature - dependent contractile processes . In the context of angiogenesis , a similar process also occurs and has been termed inverse blebbing [ 40 ] . Specif - ically , Ref . [ 40 ] proposed a qualitative picture in which the hydrodynamic pressure gradient exerted by the blood ﬂow on the apical aspect of an EC , promoted by local weakening of the cell actomyosin cortex , drives the nu - cleation of a spherical membrane invagination within the cell body . This protrusion is then mechanically inﬂated , while simultaneously F - actin polymerization is initiated on site and myosins - II motors are recruited from the cytoplasm to build a contractile actin cortex that fully envelopes and stabilizes the invaginated structure , thus promoting lumen expansion . This mechanism not only is reminiscent of cell blebbing with an inverted polarity ( ordinary blebs are extracellular spherical protrusions of the cytoplasm [ 33 ] ) , but also bears similarities with the formation of GVs in SC ECs ( which are however typically ellipsoidal ) . Inspired by these analogies , here we formulate a quan - titative model of GV formation that can reproduce all the qualitative features ( i ) – ( iii ) . Our model shows that cell membrane is central to the mechanics of GV forma - tion , in particular by enabling cells to limit the growth of the vacuoles , thus conﬁrming previous similar conjectures [ 10 ] . The model also predicts coarsening eﬀects between multiple invaginating GVs , akin to Ostwald - ripening in phase separation [ 41 – 44 ] , which are induced by their local competition for membrane stretching . The characteristic features ( i ) – ( iii ) and our own model predictions ( see Discussion ) can be relevant also in other experimental contexts where cells respond to large pressure gradients through inverse blebbing [ 45 ] . SINGLE - CELL PERFUSION MODEL Initial Setup and Cell Mechanical Model . We consider an EC that adheres to a ﬁlter immersed in a ﬂuid environment at the controlled pressure P e ( Fig . 1 A ) . At ﬁrst approximation , the cell at equilibrium as - sumes a hemispherical shape with radius R 0 due to its eﬀective surface tension [ 2 ] . The ﬁlter pores have width 2 a , which is consistent with the characteristic diameter of the meshwork pores of GVs [ 11 , 46 ] . To describe the cell , we consider the following mechan - ical model ( Fig . 1 A ) : The cell is coated by a lipid mem - brane with in - plane surface tension σ m and area expan - sion modulus K m [ 2 ] . While the former is due to purely entropic eﬀects , the latter determines the elastic response of the membrane to mechanical stretch and is much larger in value ( Table II ) . Lying beneath the membrane and anchored to it , the cell possesses a contractile actin cortex , a dense cross - linked meshwork of actin ﬁlaments , myosin motors and actin - binding proteins [ 47 , 48 ] . An in - plane tension σ c is generated in the cortical network primarily by myosin - II motors [ 49 , 50 ] . Prior to perfusion , the membrane is ﬂoppy and only the entropic surface tension contributes . We thus set the overall cell surface tension to be σ 0 = σ m + σ c [ 49 ] . The cell interior is ﬁlled with cytosolic ﬂuid at the pressure P 0 ≥ P e . Diﬀerently from previous models of ordinary cell blebbing [ 35 ] , other internal elastic contri - butions , such as cytoskeletal components and cellular or - ganelles , are neglected . In the present context , these only exert resistance to inverse bleb inﬂation , an eﬀect that we will capture at a coarse - grained level ( see below ) . The equilibrium conﬁguration of the cell is determined by the Laplace law P 0 − P e = 2 σ 0 / R 0 . Inverse Blebbing and Perfused Conﬁguration . We can now perfuse the model cell by increasing the pressure of the ambient ﬂuid inside the ﬁlter to p ≥ P e . We consider only constant pressure , but any time depen - dent protocol p ( t ) can be studied using the same method . This condition leads to the formation of an invagina - tion of the cell basal aspect within the cellular body through inverse blebbing [ 40 ] ( Fig . 2 ) : The hydrody - namic pressure drop p − P 0 across the cell basal surface together with a local disruption of the actomyosin cor - tex drives the nucleation of an intracellular membrane protrusion [ 51 ] . Both this inverse bleb and the cell then 3 FIG . 1 . ( A ) Schematic of the cell mechanical model . A cell adheres to a ﬁlter that is immersed in a ﬂuid at the pressure P e . The cell is composed by the plasma membrane with tension σ m , the actomyosin cortex with tension σ c and the cytosolic ﬂuid at the pressure P 0 ≥ P e . The cell surface tension ( membrane plus cortex ) is σ 0 . ( B ) Time dependent inverse bleb conﬁguration . The inverse bleb is a spherical cap with radius r and opening angle θ . Its overall surface tension is Σ . The cell maintains hemispherical shape with radius R , internal pressure P and surface tension σ . ( C ) Stationary conﬁguration after perfusion at constant pressure drop . For suﬃciently long times ( up to a few tens of minutes ; comparable with the typical lifetime of giant vacuoles ) the inverse bleb is enveloped by a contractile actomyosin cortex . The surface tensions of the cell and the inverse bleb , denoted as σ and Σ respectively , are equilibrated locally . start inﬂating . Here we make the simplifying assumption that the cell inﬂates while keeping ﬁxed its hemispher - ical shape . This implies that the cell adds new focal complexes instantaneously to cover its expanding basal surface ( this is compatible with previous observations on spreading cells , see ref . [ 52 ] ) . Simultaneously , actin polymerization and myosin - II motors recruitment are initiated on the inverse bleb sur - face , such that a contractile actin shell , akin to the cell cortex , is formed around the inverse bleb . With time the shell grows to the same thickness of the cell cortex , such that its surface tension becomes equal to the cor - tical tension . For suﬃciently long times the system can reach mechanical equilibrium , where the surface tensions of both the contractile shell and the plasma membrane balance the pressure force exerted at the cell - bleb inter - face . This mechanism is reminiscent of ordinary cellular blebbing [ 33 ] . The crucial diﬀerence is that inverse blebs have opposite polarity , in that they inﬂate inside the cel - lular body . In addition , while blebs are self - sustained through the cytoplasmic pressure , inverse blebs require an external pressure drop . We assume that the inverse bleb has spherical cap shape with radius r and opening angle θ ( π / 2 ≥ θ ≥ π ) [ 53 ] , which are related by the geometrical condition r sin ( θ ) = a . The instantaneous surface tension of the inverse bleb is denoted by Σ . Likewise , the cell main - tains its initial hemispherical shape but with radius R , internal pressure P and surface tension σ ( Fig . 1 B ) . We remark that at nucleation Σ = σ m , because cortical dis - ruption ( see above ) causes a local reduction of the surface tension . Modeling Inverse Bleb Growth . To enable the inﬂation of the inverse bleb within the cellular body , the pressure inside the inverse bleb p must be larger than the intracellular pressure P [ 54 ] . The membrane mechanical behavior is typically described in terms of the ﬂuid - mosaic model [ 55 ] . This model pre - scribes that the membrane can be regarded to all eﬀects and purposes as a viscous ﬂuid . This implies that the membrane tensions of the cell and the inverse bleb should be able to equilibrate globally even at short times ( e . g . , a few seconds ) . Considering that actin cortical dynamic is also fast ( see Table II ) for both the cell and the inverse bleb , their surface tensions all together ( membrane plus cortex contribution ) should also be able to equilibrate globally even at short times . This expectation , however , has been refuted by recent experiments of membrane tethering . These experiments have demonstrated that the surface tension of the inverse bleb and the cell can only equilibrate locally for short to intermediate timescales ( up to about ten minutes ) [ 56 ] . This counterintuitive eﬀect is caused by the impediment to tensional ﬂow exerted by cytoskeleton - bound trans - membrane proteins [ 57 ] . As a result , for timescales up to a few tens of minutes , the surface tensions of the cell and of the inverse bleb can be diﬀerent . Over these timescales , the inverse bleb tension equilibrates within a membrane patch of radius d ≈ 10 µm ( see Table 2 ) . For longer timescales , the inverse bleb and the cell interact through the slow lipid ﬂow that is driven by the tensional gradient established at their boundary [ 56 ] . This enables equilibration of surface tension throughout the entire system at long times . However , because the characteristic lifetime of GVs is of the order of a few tens of minutes , we ignore the eventual equilibration and 4 FIG . 2 . Schematic of inverse blebbing . See ref . [ 40 ] for details . consider their tension separately ( Fig . 1 C ) . INVERSE BLEB RADIUS DYNAMIC : THE RAYLEIGH - PLESSET EQUATION Given the above discussion , we now formulate a dy - namical model for GVs . The key ingredients are : 1 . the inverse bleb growth dynamic is overdamped [ 58 ] and is driven by the mechanical pressure , viscous resistance and surface tension forces that are ex - erted uniformly at the cell - bleb interface . 2 . The intracellular pressure P is fast equilibrating , i . e . , its rate of change is negligible compared to the corresponding rates of the tensions and the radii . 3 . Finally , there is no leakage of intracellular mate - rial to the extracellular environment during inverse blebbing . This condition is experimentally sup - ported [ 14 ] and prescribes volume conservation at all times . Consequently , the cell radius can be spec - iﬁed by the geometrical relation R 3 = R 30 + 2 r 3 ( 2 + cos θ ) (cid:2) sin ( θ 2 ) (cid:3) 4 . The volumetric contribution of the basal pore can be neglected ( SI Appendix Sec . I ) . Taken all altogether , the above assumptions led us to model the dynamic of the radius of the inverse bleb in terms of the Rayleigh - Plesset equation without the iner - tial terms [ 59 – 61 ] : d r ( t ) d t = r ( t ) 4 ν (cid:20) p − P ( t ) − 2Σ ( t ) r ( t ) (cid:21) , ( 1 ) where the eﬀective viscosity ν describes the resistance to inverse bleb growth exerted by the inner cell body . This equation expresses balance of the mechanical force due to the bleb surface tension , and of the mechanical pres - sure and viscous forces exerted by the inner cell body at the cell - bleb interface . The intracellular pressure is set by the mechanical equilibrium prescribed by the Laplace law for the cell P ( t ) − P e = 2 σ ( t ) / R ( t ) ( Fig . 1 B ) . The surface tensions Σ and σ are functions of the relative sur - face area strains of the inverse bleb and cell respectively ( see below ) . As such , they are functions of the respective radii , r and R . In turn , these specify their time depen - dence . Complemented by volume conservation , which relates the variables R and r , and by the geometrical relation between θ and r , these equations only depend on the independent variables ( r , Σ , σ ) and can be solved numerically for ﬁxed pressure drop ∆ p = p − P e . In particular , the steady - state solutions of these equa - tions ( Fig . 1 C ) are determined by ∆ p = 2Σ ( r ) r + 2 σ ( r ) R ( 2 ) We stress that this limit describes the system conﬁgu - rations for timescales close to the characteristic lifetime of GVs , but small enough that the lipid ﬂow established at the inverse bleb - cell interface can be neglected . The equation is closed and can be solved for r in terms of ∆ p . We note also that correction terms due to mem - brane bending rigidity are expected to be negligible ( SI Appendix Sec . II ) . SURFACE TENSION DYNAMIC : DEPENDENCE ON THE RELATIVE AREA STRAIN The surface tensions of both the inverse bleb and the cell ( considered separately ; see above ) follow a relaxation dynamic toward their value at steady - state , Σ and σ re - spectively . In our context , both this target tension and the characteristic timescale of relaxation are determined dynamically during the growth process through a depen - dence on the relative area strains , (cid:15) B for the bleb and (cid:15) C for the cell . We deﬁne (cid:15) C as (cid:15) C ( t ) = [ A ( t ) − A 0 ] / A 0 with A 0 = 3 πR 20 − πd 2 and A = 3 πR 2 − πd 2 ; (cid:15) B as (cid:15) B ( t ) = [ S ( t ) − S 0 ] / S 0 with S 0 = πd 2 and S = 2 πr 2 ( 1 − cos θ ) + π ( d 2 − a 2 ) . We assume two mechan - ical regimes as a function of these relative area strains . 5 Cortex - dominated regime The plasma membrane can adapt to possibly large relative area strains at constant surface tension ( up to (cid:15) ∗ = 100 at cellular level [ 62 ] ; see [ 63 ] ) . Diﬀerent path - ways have been identiﬁed that enable cells to buﬀer the surface area required [ 64 ] . The membrane possesses dif - ferent types of lipid reservoirs , e . g . , caveolae [ 65 , 66 ] , membrane wrinkles and invaginations [ 67 , 68 ] , microvilli and other membrane protrusions [ 69 , 70 ] , that can be ﬂattened out . Additional membrane can also be supplied by active exocytic processes within timescales of seconds to minutes [ 39 ] , thus comparable with the typical life - time of GVs ( see above ) . The dominant contribution to the steady - state tension in this regime is provided by the actomyosin cortex for the cell and by the actin con - tractile shell for the inverse bleb . As such , Σ = σ 0 and σ = σ 0 . The cell cortex is already initialized at its steady - state value . Therefore , as long as the cell remains in this regime , its surface tension does not change in time , i . e . , σ ( t ) = σ = σ 0 . The contractile shell enveloping the inverse bleb must be rebuilt instead following the local disruption of the cortex occurring at nucleation . Corre - spondingly , tensional dynamic is governed by the char - acteristic timescale τ c of actin turnover and myosin re - cruitment [ 48 ] . Assuming exponential relaxation , we can write dΣ ( t ) ) d t = 1 τ c [ σ 0 − Σ ( t ) ] . ( 3 ) Membrane - dominated regime Once the membrane reservoirs are depleted , which cor - responds to the threshold relative area strain (cid:15) ∗ , no ad - ditional lipids can be added to the plasma membrane , such that further increase in the surface area must be ob - tained by mechanically stretching the membrane . This mechanical process induces abrupt increase of the sur - face tension due to the large area expansion modulus of the membrane [ 2 ] . Therefore , the dominant contri - bution to the surface tension in this regime is given by the taut membrane . Furthermore , in these conditions the membrane is in the two - dimensional liquid - like state [ 55 ] , such that its equilibration can be regarded as an in - stantaneous process . In our context , this regime is only relevant for the inverse bleb . In fact , when only one GV is formed , the area strain of the cell never reaches the threshold (cid:15) ∗ ( up to at least 30 mmHg ) . There - fore , we set Σ ( t ) = Σ ( t ) = σ 0 + K m e [ ( S ( t ) − S ∗ ) / S ∗ ) ] with S ∗ = S 0 ( 1 + (cid:15) ∗ ) . Parameter Description Units P e Ambient pressure mmHg R Cell radius µ m 2 a Pore diameter µ m σ Cell surface tension pN µ m K m Area expansion modulus Nm p Pressure inside the ﬁlter mmHg r Inverse bleb radius µ m θ Inverse bleb opening angle adim Σ Inverse bleb surface tension pN µ m P Intracellular pressure mmHg ∆ p Perfusion pressure drop mmHg (cid:15) Relative area strain adim A Cell surface area µ m 2 S Inverse bleb surface area µ m 2 τ Characteristic timescale s ν Eﬀective cellular viscosity pN · s / µ m 2 TABLE I . Notation used in the model . We further use sub - scripts “0” to denote quantities corresponding to the initial cellular conﬁguration , “m” and “c” to denote quantities cor - responding to the membrane or the actomyosin cortex respec - tively , “B” and “C” to denote quantities corresponding to the inverse bleb or the cell respectively . The superscript “ * ” de - notes thresholds . RESULTS Inverse blebs dynamics Numerical analysis of the model equations enables us to investigate the dynamical features of inverse blebbing . We adopt the following protocol : The pressure drop ∆ p is established at the initial time t = 0 and kept constant throughout the growth process . The inverse bleb is ini - tially invaginated with Σ = σ m . This condition replicates the local disruption of the actomyosin cortex observed during inverse bleb nucleation [ 40 ] . We observe three distinct qualitative scenarios : For suﬃciently small ∆ p , the inverse bleb immediately de - ﬂates independently on its radius at nucleation ( not shown ) . By construction , our model can only predict the deﬂation dynamic of the inverse bleb until r = a . This result suggests the existence of a threshold pressure for GV formation , ∆ p ∗ . For large ( and rather non phys - iological ) pressure drops the inverse bleb grows toward a target conﬁguration within a characteristic timescale of the order of minutes . Then , growth stops ( Fig . 3 A ) . This target conﬁguration corresponds to the steady - state GV described by Eq . ( 2 ) . The growth process in this case is again independent on the inverse bleb ra - dius at nucleation . For intermediate pressure drops , the dynamic of the inverse bleb becomes sensitive on the nu - cleation radius . For suﬃciently small radii , inverse blebs shrink ; conversely , for large enough radii , inverse blebs grow ( Fig . 3 B ) . This result suggests the existence of a threshold nucleation radius for GV growth at ﬁxed phys - 6 FIG . 3 . Dynamics of inverse blebs . Model parameters are cho - sen according to Table 2 , in particular R 0 = 10 µ m , d = 10 µ m and (cid:15) ∗ = 0 . 5 . The pressure drop is kept constant for all times . Blurred regions correspond to trajectories obtained by allowing for up to 20 % variability in the dynamical pa - rameters τ c and ν . ( A ) Large pressure drops . We set here ∆ p = 30 mmHg . The giant vacuole is initially nucleated with r = a and Σ = σ m . At this pressure , the inverse bleb in - ﬂates until it reaches the target giant vacuole conﬁguration in the membrane - dominated regime ( within about 2 min ) . Then growth stops . ( B ) Physiological pressure drops . We set here ∆ p = 7 mmHg . The dynamic become sensitive on the nucle - ation conditions . Diﬀerent nucleation radii can lead to either inverse bleb shrinkage or growth . ( C ) Giant vacuole collapse . The giant vacuole is initially set in its steady - state conﬁgura - tion ( at ∆ p = 30 mmHg ) . At time t = 0 + the pressure drop is removed . The giant vacuole slowly deﬂates ( within about 5 min ) . iological pressure drops . We can also study GV collapse ( Fig . 3 C ) . The GV is initialized at its steady - state conﬁguration for pressures ∆ p > ∆ p † ( here ∆ p = 30 mmHg ) . At time t = 0 + the pressure drop is removed and the GV let evolve according to Eqs . ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) . The model predicts shrinkage of the GV within a larger timescale than the corresponding timescale for growth at the same pressure ( here about 4 - 6 min ) . Moreover , we observe an even longer timescales for GV collapse , if the cortical tension is reduced ( SI Appendix Fig . S3 ) . Inverse blebs steady - state conﬁgurations Numerical analysis of the steady - state equation ( 2 ) conﬁrms the previous results ( Fig . 4 B ) . For large enough pressures ( ∆ p ≥ ∆ p † ) only one steady - state conﬁgu - ration exists . This explains why inverse blebs grow to this GV conﬁguration independently on the nucle - ation radii at these pressures . For intermediate pres - sures ( ∆ p ∗ ≤ ∆ p ≤ ∆ p † ) two steady - state conﬁgurations exist with Σ either in the cortex - or in the membrane - dominated regime . Using linear stability analysis , we can study how steady - state inverse blebs respond to small perturba - tions of their shape . We ﬁnd that inverse blebs in the membrane - dominated regime are stable , while those in the cortex - dominated regime are unstable ( SI Ap - pendix Sec . III ) . The dynamical picture becomes clear : If the inverse bleb is nucleated with a radius smaller than the radius of the steady - state conﬁguration in the cortex - dominated regime , it will shrink . Conversely , if it is nucleated with a larger radius , it will grow toward the steady - state GV conﬁguration in the membrane - dominated regime . The threshold nucleation radius for GV growth at ﬁxed intermediate pressures is therefore of the order of the radius of the steady - state conﬁguration in the cortex - dominated regime . We remark that cells can ensure stability of the GVs in the cortex - dominated regime by enveloping them in additional contractile ac - tomyosin structures ( like actin rings ) that respond elas - tically ( at short times ) to the perturbation [ 35 ] ( SI Ap - pendix Sec . III ) . These considerations also yield an estimate of the GV nucleation pressure , ∆ p ∗ ≈ 2 σ 0 ( R + r ) Rr , where R , r are both (cid:15) ∗ - dependent . This function decreases monotoni - cally as r increases ( due to volume conservation ) indepen - dently of the speciﬁc geometry of the perfused system . As such , ∆ p ∗ only depends on the membrane reservoir size through the parameter (cid:15) ∗ and on the initial cell surface tension σ 0 ( linearly ) . All these results are qualitatively robust against phys - iological tissue variability . This is conﬁrmed by numer - ically solving equation ( 2 ) while allowing for up to 20 % change in the model parameters ( chosen randomly ) . All stationary conﬁgurations obtained do not diﬀer qualita - tively between themselves and from the reference case ( Fig . 4 C ) . We remark that the robustness of our model results against variability of the parameter 2 a ( the pore 7 FIG . 4 . Steady - state conﬁgurations of giant vacuoles . ( A ) Dependence of the surface tension of the vacuole at steady - state Σ on its area strain (cid:15) B . The two mechanical regimes are highlighted with diﬀerent colors ( green / black respectively ) . We assume the same functional form for the cell . ( B ) Vacuole volume vs . perfusion pressure drop ∆ p . Examples of vacuole conﬁgurations are plotted to illustrate the dependence of the geometrical shape on the pressure drop . Characteristic pa - rameters in panels A and B are chosen according to Table 2 . For ∆ p large , the surface tension can reach lytic values ( here corresponding to area strains 5 % (cid:15) ∗ ) , when rupture of the plasma membrane occurs ( dot - dashed line ) . ( C ) Stationary conﬁgurations obtained by allowing for up to 20 % variabil - ity in the characteristic parameters of the model . We plot simulation results for 500 diﬀerent sets of parameters chosen randomly . These results indicate that single - cell predictions are qualitatively robust against physiological tissue variabil - ity . diameter ) is especially relevant , because in physiologi - cal tissues SC ECs adhere to a discontinuous basement membrane possessing a broad distribution of pore sizes . Coarsening of Multiple Giant Vacuoles through Ostwald Ripening In physiological conditions multiple GVs typically in - vaginate simultaneously . As a proxy of this general situ - ation , we study the case of two growing GVs . Neglecting steric interactions between the blebs and contact - driven shape deformations , Eqs . ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) are formally valid for both the cell and each inverse bleb . However , the vol - ume conservation must now account for the contribution of all blebs ; therefore , the relation determining the cell radius becomes R 3 = R 30 + 2 (cid:80) i r 3 i ( 2 + cos θ i ) [ sin ( θ i / 2 ) ] 4 ( i = 1 , 2 ) . We can now distinguish two diﬀerent qualitative sce - narios : First , the GVs can be nucleated at a distance larger than the characteristic length - scale d ( see above ) , such that they grow by increasing the surface area of two diﬀerent membrane patches ( Fig . 5 A ) . These vacuoles are therefore fully independent , and their steady - state and dynamical properties are the same as those of a sin - gle GV . Second , the GVs can be nucleated at a distance smaller than d , meaning that they grow by sharing the same membrane patch ( Fig . 5 B ) . The two vacuoles are therefore no longer independent : Their surface ten - sions converge to the same target tension Σ dependent on the relative area strain (cid:15) B with S = (cid:80) i r 2 i ( 2 + cos θ i ) [ sin ( θ i / 2 ) ] 4 + π ( d 2 − 2 a 2 ) . The stationary conﬁg - urations predicted by the model do not change qualita - tively from the single - inverse bleb picture : The second bleb only reduces the amount of stored membrane lo - cally available for each inverse bleb . Consequently , the threshold pressure for GV nucleation ∆ p ∗ increases and the maximal size of each vacuole decreases . When we consider the dynamics of the vacuoles , we ob - serve a coarsening mechanism akin to Ostwald - ripening . This is demonstrated by the contour plot of d r 1 / d t as a function of r 1 and r 2 ( Fig . 5 C ) at steady - state ( i . e . , Σ 1 = Σ 2 = Σ and σ = σ ) . The structure of the contours is similar to the standard drop coarsening picture as in the Ostwald ripening scheme . In particular , focusing on the equal size conﬁguration ( r 1 = r 2 ) at the zero - contour line ( indicated by a red square ) , ﬂuctuations ( e . g . , in - creasing r 1 while decreasing r 2 ) around that point can generate an instability that leads to the growth of the bigger GV and the shrinking of the smaller one . The dynamic of the coarsening process can also be characterized ( Fig . 5 D ) : The two GVs , nucleated with diﬀerent sizes , grow until their surface tensions reach the membrane - dominated regime . In this condition , two sce - narios can occur : If the two vacuoles are small , the cell can fully buﬀer the area increase required through its membrane reservoirs . The two vacuoles therefore grow independently on one another . Conversely , if the two vac - uoles are large enough to exhaust the cellular membrane reservoirs , they start competing between one another in 8 order to stretch locally the lipid membrane and thus in - crease their own surface area . For long times symmetry breaking occurs : Only one GV succeeds in expanding its surface area and reaching the stationary conﬁguration , whereas the other vacuole shrinks . In physiological condi - tions such symmetry breaking can be triggered by either diﬀerent nucleation conditions among the vacuoles or by shape ﬂuctuations that can be due , among others , to nat - ural inhomogeneities of the inverse bleb growth dynamics ( these eﬀects are however neglected in our model ) . DISCUSSION In summary , by identifying GV formation as inverse blebbing , we formulated a biophysical model of this pro - cess that can recapitulate all the characteristic morpho - logical and dynamical features of GVs ( i ) – ( iii ) . The model thus elucidates the mechanisms underlying the dy - namics of GVs at coarse - grained level : Upon nucleation , both the GV and the cell adjust their conﬁgurations to reach mechanical equilibrium locally . Vacuole and cell surface tensions are modulated on their relative areal strains according to the following qualitative picture ( Fig . 4 A ) : For relative strains smaller than the thresh - old (cid:15) ∗ ( corresponding to the size of the local membrane reservoir ) , the surface tension is in the cortex - dominated regime where all area increase is buﬀered by membrane reservoirs at constant tension . As shape changes are ac - commodated by active remodeling of the cell and bleb actomyosin cortices , tensional dynamic in this regime is governed by the characteristic timescale of actin turnover and myosin - II recruitment [ 48 ] . Conversely , when these reservoirs are depleted , the surface tension enters the membrane - dominated regime where the area increase is buﬀered by the local mechanical stretch of the membrane . This mechanism induces an abrupt increase of the sur - face tension . Tension dynamic in this regime is governed by the characteristic timescale of membrane stretching , which is assumed to be a fast process . To all eﬀects and purposes , we can consider it as instantaneous . For the case of a single GV , the picture simpliﬁes . The cell in fact never enters the membrane - dominated regime ( we veri - ﬁed this numerically up to pressures about 30 mmHg ) . Its surface tension is thus equal to σ 0 at all times during the lifetime of the GV . Our results elucidate the multiscale complexity under - lying the GV growth process : In response to externally applied macroscopic stresses ( in the context of Schlemm’s canal , the hydrodynamic pressure ) , several microscopic , active and passive , cellular processes are activated , in - cluding actin turnover , myosin - mediated contractile force generation and unfolding of membrane reservoirs , which drive the mechanical shape change that the cell under - goes . In turn , these processes are self - regulated at the macroscale by the surface tension . In this respect , our results particularly highlight the role played by the mem - brane in determining the existence and stability of GVs at physiological pressures . Our analysis also shows that the characteristic timescale induced by the viscous resis - tance exerted by the cell body on the inverse bleb is much larger than the characteristic timescale of actin turnover . While the latter is important to determine the growth characteristics at short times after nucleation , the for - mer speciﬁes the long time behavior . In the context of glaucoma , our results challenge the established idea that cellular stiﬀness is the main determinant of GV forma - tion , thus conﬁrming previous phenomenological sugges - tions [ 10 ] . Our model further reveals that GVs are stabilized by the elastic response of the actomyosin cortex enveloping them upon reaching the steady state . This result indi - rectly speciﬁes the possible pathways for GV collapse : GVs can shrink either if an apical pore is formed thus constituting , together with the meshwork pore , a tran - scellular channel through which aqueous humor can ﬂow ; or if an active contractile force is exerted on the vacuole by actin contractile structures additional to the cortical shell ; or through coarsening ( see below ) . We remark that in our simulations we accounted for membrane reservoir sizes up to 100 % as recently observed in experiments on doming three - dimensional epithelia [ 63 ] . However , these same experiments have discovered examples of ECs with values of relative areal strain up to 300 % ( thus much larger than those currently accounted for in our work ) . These extreme deformations have been interpreted as manifestations of super - stretched cellular states . Our coarse - grained dynamical model holds for - mally also in this case , but the target tensions Σ and σ must account for the strain softening induced by cortical dilution at high - strains underlying active super - elasticity [ 63 ] . We neglected this mechanism here as it is irrelevant for GV formation . MODEL PREDICTIONS The model provides the following novel predictions on GV dynamics : I . There exists a threshold pressure ∆ p ∗ for GV for - mation . This pressure depends only on (cid:15) ∗ and on the cortical tension σ c ( through the cell initial sur - face tension σ 0 ) and is independent of GV geom - etry . In details , ∆ p ∗ decreases either if σ c is re - duced or if (cid:15) ∗ is increased . Conversely , if σ c is increased or (cid:15) ∗ decreased , ∆ p ∗ increases . More - over , an inverse relation between ∆ p ∗ and the vac - uole sizes is shown : Decreasing ∆ p ∗ induces larger GVs in the membrane - dominated regime . These predictions suggest a number of possible validating experiments : ECs could be treated with myosin - 9 FIG . 5 . Coarsening process between multiple invaginating giant vacuoles . ( A ) Two vacuoles invaginate simultaneously at a distance larger than d . Because they do not share the same equilibrating membrane patch , they grow independently . ( B ) Two vacuoles invaginate simultaneously at a distance smaller than d . The vacuoles share the same equilibrating membrane patch . Their growth processes are no longer independent . ( C ) Contour plot of d r 1 / d t vs . ( r 1 , r 2 ) at steady - state . The pressure drop is set at physiological values , here ∆ p = 7mmHg . Other model parameters are set according to Table 2 , in particular R 0 = 10 µ m , d = 10 µ m and (cid:15) ∗ = 0 . 5 . The structure of contours is similar to the standard drop coarsening picture as in the Ostwald ripening scheme . ( D ) Time series of the volume of two giant vacuoles illustrating the coarsening dynamic . Model parameters are chosen as in panel C . The two giant vacuoles are initialized simultaneously at time t = 0 with diﬀerent , randomly chosen , initial sizes close to their steady - state conﬁguration in the cortex - dominated regime , here r 1 ≈ 1 . 1238 and r 2 ≈ 1 . 1241 , and Σ i = σ m . impairing drugs ( such as Blebbistatin ) to reduce the contractility of the cortex and thus σ c ; alterna - tively , lipids could be added ad hoc to increase the membrane reservoir pool . In both cases , our model predicts increased GV sizes , a result that could be assessed via experimental measurements . II . At physiological pressure drops , there exists a threshold nucleation radius for GV growth of the order a few microns ( about 1 µ m at 7 mmHg ) . III . The timescale required for GV collapse , upon re - moval of the pressure drop , is larger than the cor - responding timescale for GV growth at the same pressure conditions . Moreover , the model predicts that the characteristic timescale for GV collapse be - comes longer if the cortical tension σ c is reduced . Experimental evidence validating this prediction has been recently found ( cit . and / or private com - munication ) . IV . There exists a coarsening mechanism between mul - tiple GVs inﬂating within the same cell , which is driven by the competition between these vacuoles for locally stretching the membrane . This gener - ates Ostwald ripening : For long times symmetry breaking occurs and only one vacuole can grow to - wards the stationary conﬁguration at the expense of all the other ones that instead shrink . As this eﬀect is strictly related to the inter - bleb compe - tition for membrane , its experimental veriﬁcation could be used as a proxy to test the role of the cell membrane during GV formation . MODEL LIMITATIONS We formulated here a coarse - grained biophysical model of GV formation as inverse blebbing . By its own nature , our model can only capture the macroscopic eﬀects in - duced by the microscopic cellular processes involved in GV formation . This approximation captures the long - time morphological and dynamical features of GVs , but it fails to capture the characteristic processes occurring on short timescales . In this respect , our model does not contain any explicit elastic response contribution of the cell body on the inverse bleb ( in fact , this term can also be shown to be negligible with respect to the eﬀective viscous response ) . These short - time processes are rel - evant , particularly , to analyze the initial nucleation of GVs , which , at the level of the current discussion , only enters the theoretical description as a boundary condi - tion . However , we believe the current regime of focus is most relevant experimentally . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS A . C . beneﬁted from a Science Research Fellowship granted by the Royal Commission for the Exhibi - tion of 1851 . A . S . was supported by the BBSRC Doctoral Training Partnership programme ( Grant No . BB / M011178 / 1 ) . 10 Parameter Value Units Reference R 0 9 − 11 † µ m [ 8 ] 2 a 0 . 5 ♠ µ m [ 46 ] σ m 40 pN / µ m [ 35 ] σ c 374 pN / µ m [ 35 ] K m 10 5 pN / µ m [ 2 ] d 5 − 12 ♣ µ m [ 56 ] (cid:15) ∗ 0 % − 100 % adim [ 63 ] τ c 1 s [ 48 ] ν 2 . 5 · 10 4 pN · s / µ m 2 † Human Schlemm’s canal cells are spindle - shaped with length , width and height , respectively , 100 µ m , 4 − 8 µ m and 5 µ m [ 8 ] . Assuming elliptic shape , their surface area is 900 − 1110 µ m 2 . Setting it equal to 3 πR 20 yields the given estimate for R 0 . ♠ The estimate reported was measured in ref . [ 46 ] at physiological intraocular pressure , 15 mmHg . This corresponds to a pressure drop about 7 mmHg . In general , the meshwork pore width is shown to be dependent on the imposed pressure drop . ♣ Membrane tension was shown in ref . [ 56 ] to propagate diﬀusively with diﬀusion coeﬃcient D = 0 . 024 µ m 2 / s . The characteristic lifetime of GVs is of the order of a few tens of minutes , say t ≈ 10 − 50 min . The estimate for the radius of the membrane patch where tension equilibrates is given by √ 2 Dt . TABLE II . Summary of the model parameters . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS A . C . , A . S . , D . R . O . , and C . F . L . designed research ; A . C . performed research ; A . C . , and C . F . L . wrote the pa - per ; A . C . , A . S . , D . R . O . , and C . F . L . reviewed the ﬁnal manuscript . ∗ andrea . cairoli @ crick . ac . uk ; Current author’s aﬃliation : The Francis Crick Institute , 1 Midland Road , London NW1 1AT , United Kingdom † c . lee @ imperial . ac . uk [ 1 ] B . Alberts , D . Bray , J . Lewis , M . Raﬀ , K . Roberts , and J . Watson , Molecular Biology of the Cell , 5th ed . ( Gar - land , 2002 ) . [ 2 ] D . Boal and D . H . Boal , Mechanics of the Cell ( Cam - bridge University Press , 2012 ) . [ 3 ] H . Huang , R . Y . Kwon , and C . Jacobs , Introduction to cell mechanics and mechanobiology ( Garland Science , 2012 ) . [ 4 ] V . Vogel and M . Sheetz , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 265 ( 2006 ) . [ 5 ] M . Johnson and K . Erickson , “Principles and practice of ophthalmology , ” ( W B Saunders Company , 2000 ) Chap . Mechanisms and routes of aqueous humor drainage , pp . 2577 – 2595 . [ 6 ] W . M . GRANT , AMA archives of ophthalmology 46 , 113 ( 1951 ) . [ 7 ] H . Gong , R . C . Tripathi , and B . J . Tripathi , Microsc . Res . Tech . 33 , 336 ( 1996 ) . [ 8 ] A . BILL and B . SVEDBERGH , Acta ophthalmologica 50 , 295 ( 1972 ) . [ 9 ] C . R . Ethier , A . T . Read , and D . Chan , Biophysical journal 87 , 2828 ( 2004 ) . [ 10 ] D . Overby , Mechanobiology Handbook , 367 ( 2011 ) . [ 11 ] A . HOLMBERG , AMA Archives of Ophthalmology 62 , 956 ( 1959 ) . [ 12 ] L . Garron , M . Feeney , M . Hogan , and W . McEwen , American journal of ophthalmology 46 , 27 ( 1958 ) . [ 13 ] J . Speakman , The British journal of ophthalmology 43 , 129 ( 1959 ) . [ 14 ] R . M . Pedrigi , D . Simon , A . Reed , W . D . Stamer , and D . R . Overby , Exp . Eye Res . 92 , 57 ( 2011 ) . [ 15 ] R . C . Tripathi , Experimental eye research 25 , 65 ( 1977 ) . [ 16 ] R . Tripathi , The Lancet 302 , 8 ( 1973 ) . [ 17 ] D . M . Grzybowski , D . W . Holman , S . E . Katz , and M . Lubow , Investigative ophthalmology & visual science 47 , 3664 ( 2006 ) . [ 18 ] C . R . Ethier , Exp . Eye Res . 74 , 161 ( 2002 ) . [ 19 ] R . C . Tripathi , Experimental eye research 11 , 116 ( 1971 ) . [ 20 ] H . Inomata , A . Bill , and G . K . Smelser , American jour - nal of ophthalmology 73 , 760 ( 1972 ) . [ 21 ] R . Tripathi , The eye 5 , 163 ( 1974 ) . [ 22 ] I . Grierson and W . R . Lee , American journal of ophthal - mology 84 , 234 ( 1977 ) . [ 23 ] J . Ainsworth and W . Lee , Investigative ophthalmology & visual science 31 , 745 ( 1990 ) . [ 24 ] E . M . Vanbuskirk and W . M . Grant , American journal of ophthalmology 77 , 565 ( 1974 ) . [ 25 ] H . S . Brilakis and D . H . Johnson , Journal of glaucoma 10 , 277 ( 2001 ) . [ 26 ] I . Sabanay , T . G . B’Ann , B . Tian , P . L . Kaufman , and B . Geiger , Archives of Ophthalmology 118 , 955 ( 2000 ) . [ 27 ] C . Morris and U . Homann , J . Membr . Biol . 179 , 79 ( 2001 ) . [ 28 ] K . Keren , Z . Pincus , G . M . Allen , E . L . Barnhart , G . Marriott , A . Mogilner , and J . A . Theriot , Nature 453 , 475 ( 2008 ) . [ 29 ] E . L . Batchelder , G . Hollopeter , C . Campillo , X . Mezanges , E . M . Jorgensen , P . Nassoy , P . Sens , and J . Plastino , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 108 , 11429 ( 2011 ) . [ 30 ] S . Boulant , C . Kural , J . - C . Zeeh , F . Ubelmann , and T . Kirchhausen , Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 1124 ( 2011 ) . [ 31 ] A . R . Houk , A . Jilkine , C . O . Mejean , R . Boltyanskiy , E . R . Dufresne , S . B . Angenent , S . J . Altschuler , L . F . Wu , and O . D . Weiner , Cell 148 , 175 ( 2012 ) . [ 32 ] A . Diz - Mu˜noz , D . A . Fletcher , and O . D . Weiner , Trends Cell Biol . 23 , 47 ( 2013 ) . [ 33 ] C . C . Cunningham , The Journal of Cell Biology 129 , 1589 ( 1995 ) . [ 34 ] G . Charras and E . Paluch , Nature reviews Molecular cell biology 9 , 730 ( 2008 ) . [ 35 ] J . - Y . Tinevez , U . Schulze , G . Salbreux , J . Roensch , J . - F . Joanny , and E . Paluch , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 106 , 18581 ( 2009 ) . [ 36 ] P . Sens and N . Gov , Physical review letters 98 , 018102 ( 2007 ) . [ 37 ] C . Morris , J . Wang , and V . Markin , Biophysical journal 85 , 223 ( 2003 ) . [ 38 ] M . Staykova , M . Arroyo , M . Rahimi , and H . A . Stone , Phys . Rev . Lett . 110 , 028101 ( 2013 ) . 11 [ 39 ] A . J . Kosmalska , L . Casares , A . Elosegui - Artola , J . J . Thottacherry , R . Moreno - Vicente , V . Gonz´alez - Tarrag´o , M . ´A . Del Pozo , S . Mayor , M . Arroyo , D . Navajas , et al . , Nature communications 6 , 1 ( 2015 ) . [ 40 ] V . Gebala , R . Collins , I . Geudens , L . - K . Phng , and H . Gerhardt , Nat . Cell Biol . 18 , 443 ( 2016 ) . [ 41 ] I . M . Lifshitz and V . V . Slyozov , Journal of physics and chemistry of solids 19 , 35 ( 1961 ) . [ 42 ] P . W . Voorhees , Journal of Statistical Physics 38 , 231 ( 1985 ) . [ 43 ] C . Wagner , Zeitschrift f¨ur Elektrochemie , Berichte der Bunsengesellschaft f¨ur physikalische Chemie 65 , 581 ( 1961 ) . [ 44 ] C . A . Weber , D . Zwicker , F . J¨ulicher , and C . F . Lee , Reports on Progress in Physics 82 , 064601 ( 2019 ) . [ 45 ] J . G . Dumortier , M . Le Verge - Serandour , A . - F . Tor - torelli , A . Mielke , L . de Plater , H . Turlier , and J . - L . Maˆıtre , BioRxiv , 537985 ( 2019 ) . [ 46 ] I . Grierson and W . Lee , Acta ophthalmologica 56 , 935 ( 1978 ) . [ 47 ] N . Morone , T . Fujiwara , K . Murase , R . S . Kasai , H . Ike , S . Yuasa , J . Usukura , and A . Kusumi , J Cell Biol 174 , 851 ( 2006 ) . [ 48 ] G . T . Charras , C . - K . Hu , M . Coughlin , and T . J . Mitchi - son , The Journal of cell biology 175 , 477 ( 2006 ) . [ 49 ] A . G . Clark and E . Paluch , in Cell cycle in development ( Springer , 2011 ) pp . 31 – 73 . [ 50 ] G . Salbreux , G . Charras , and E . Paluch , Trends in cell biology 22 , 536 ( 2012 ) . [ 51 ] In ref . [ 40 ] it is shown that inﬂating inverse blebs do not express any F - actin or myosin II markers , thus demon - strating local cortex disruption at nucleation sites of in - verse blebs . [ 52 ] C . K . Choi , M . Vicente - Manzanares , J . Zareno , L . A . Whitmore , A . Mogilner , and A . R . Horwitz , Nature cell biology 10 , 1039 ( 2008 ) . [ 53 ] For inverse blebs with 0 < θ < π / 2 , the total volume is (cid:47) ( 2 πa 3 ) / 3 ≈ 0 . 03 µ m 3 . This estimate is obtained by using the value of a reported in Table II . This was measured in ref . [ 46 ] at the physiological pressure drop ∆ p = 7 mmHg . The argument holds also at larger pres - sures ; e . g . , at ∆ p = 14 mmHg Grierson and Lee measured 2 a ≈ 0 . 9 µ m [ 46 ] , such that ( 2 πa 3 ) / 3 ≈ 0 . 19 µ m 3 . At these pressures , they measured GVs with volume about 36 . 45 µ m 3 . Given their much smaller size compared to true GVs ( e . g . GV volume = 15 . 67 µm 3 at ∆ p = 7 mmHg according to the data from ref . [ 22 ] ) , we neglect these solutions . [ 54 ] S . Safran , Statistical thermodynamics of surfaces , inter - faces , and membranes ( CRC Press , 2018 ) . [ 55 ] S . J . Singer and G . L . Nicolson , Science 175 , 720 ( 1972 ) . [ 56 ] Z . Shi , Z . T . Graber , T . Baumgart , H . A . Stone , and A . E . Cohen , Cell 175 , 1769 ( 2018 ) . [ 57 ] In ref . [ 56 ] the relaxation dynamics of membrane tension was studied by pulling tethers at ﬁxed distance between one another and by monitoring their ﬂuorescence , as a measure of surface tension , in response to a perturbation of one of the two tethers . These experiments demonstrate that in intact cells , for tethers as close as 5 µ m , no corre - lation between the ﬂuorescence signals are observed over up to 500 s . The two tethers are thus eﬀectively indepen - dent at this timescale . Conversely , when measurements are repeated in cellular blebs , the signals are strongly cor - related ( lag time < 1 s ) . In this case , the tension almost instantaneously equilibrates in the tethers , in agreement with the ﬂuid - mosaic model [ 55 ] . [ 58 ] Assuming cytoplasmic density ρ ≈ 1 g / cm 3 [ 71 ] and vis - cosity µ ≈ 0 . 2 − 0 . 3 Pa · s [ 72 ] , characteristic GV length L ≈ 5 − 100 µ m [ 14 ] and bleb growth rate U = L / ( 60 s ) ≈ ( 0 . 08 − 2 ) µ m / s , we obtain the estimate for the Reynolds number Re = ρUL / µ (cid:47) 10 − 6 . Characteristic length and velocity of GVs are estimated according to the data in vitro from ref . [ 14 ] . As these vacuoles are typically much larger than those observed in vivo [ 22 ] , this calculation overestimates the Reynolds number . Therefore , we ex - pect this assumption to hold also in physiological condi - tions . [ 59 ] L . Rayleigh , The London , Edinburgh , and Dublin Philo - sophical Magazine and Journal of Science 34 , 94 ( 1917 ) . [ 60 ] M . S . Plesset , ( 1949 ) . [ 61 ] M . S . Plesset and A . Prosperetti , Annual review of ﬂuid mechanics 9 , 145 ( 1977 ) . [ 62 ] Larger cellular strains ( up to 1000 % ) have also been ob - served in the experiments of doming endothelial monolay - ers of ref . [ 63 ] . However , cellular strains larger than about 100 % are a manifestation of a super - elastic response [ 73 ] , which we neglect in the present context . [ 63 ] E . Latorre , S . Kale , L . Casares , M . G´omez - Gonz´alez , M . Uroz , L . Valon , R . V . Nair , E . Garreta , N . Montser - rat , A . del Campo , et al . , Nature 563 , 203 ( 2018 ) . [ 64 ] N . C . Gauthier , T . A . Masters , and M . P . Sheetz , Trends in cell biology 22 , 527 ( 2012 ) . [ 65 ] B . Sinha , D . K¨oster , R . Ruez , P . Gonnord , M . Bastiani , D . Abankwa , R . V . Stan , G . Butler - Browne , B . Vedie , L . Johannes , et al . , Cell 144 , 402 ( 2011 ) . [ 66 ] L . Figard , M . Wang , L . Zheng , I . Golding , and A . M . Sokac , Dev . Cell 37 , 267 ( 2016 ) . [ 67 ] M . B . Hallett and S . Dewitt , Trends Cell Biol . 17 , 209 ( 2007 ) . [ 68 ] M . Goudarzi , K . Tarbashevich , K . Mildner , I . Begemann , J . Garcia , A . Paksa , M . Reichman - Fried , H . Mahabalesh - war , H . Blaser , J . Hartwig , et al . , Dev . Cell 43 , 577 ( 2017 ) . [ 69 ] L . Figard , H . Xu , H . G . Garcia , I . Golding , and A . M . Sokac , Dev . Cell 27 , 648 ( 2013 ) . [ 70 ] L . Figard and A . M . Sokac , Bioarchitecture 4 , 39 ( 2014 ) . [ 71 ] U . Moran , R . Phillips , and R . Milo , Cell 141 , 1262 ( 2010 ) . [ 72 ] P . Chugh , A . G . Clark , M . B . Smith , D . A . Cassani , K . Dierkes , A . Ragab , P . P . Roux , G . Charras , G . Sal - breux , and E . K . Paluch , Nature cell biology 19 , 689 ( 2017 ) . [ 73 ] C . M . Wayman and K . ¯Otsuka , Shape memory materials ( Cambridge University Press , 1998 ) .