INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON ENGINEERING DESIGN ICED 99 MUNICH , AUGUST 24 - 26 , 1999 COGNITIVE FOUNDATIONS FOR INTERACTIVE GENERATIVE SYSTEMS IN EARLY DESIGN Claudia Eckert , Ian Kelly & Martin Stacey Keywords : generative systems , evolutionary systems , automatic design , HCI , CAD , design psychology , conceptual design . 1 Introduction Generative systems for automatic design have great potential for enhancing human creativity . Human designers can exploit the ability of AI systems to handle large sets of numerical and symbolic constraints , to explore the design space and create complex technically correct designs that they could not produce on their own . Automatic design systems can use human designers’ perceptual skills to evaluate and select designs . But effective use of generative systems for supporting human designers requires an understanding of the design problem : the intrinsic structure of the task , the cognitive capabilities and limitations of human designers , and the cultural influences and social organisation of the design process . 2 Characteristics of Generative Systems The term generative systems can cover a wide range of different automatic design tools . Genetic algorithms , shape grammars and other evolutionary methods share the characteristic that they create a large number of designs , which are pruned using a fitness function . Case based reasoning systems and mathematical models create a small number of partial or complete designs in a single iteration . Although independent generative design systems have achieved spectacular successes , notably the shape grammars for Palladian villas and Frank Lloyd Wright houses [ see Knight 1994 ] , they are complex and difficult to build , and each is a single designer working in a single style . Such systems exploit very strong biases to reach a very small part of the space of possible designs . In order to be more widely applicable to underconstrained design tasks with large design spaces , generative systems need weaker built - in biases , and an external source of guidance : a human user . 3 Characteristics of Designers and Designing Visual Perception . Experienced designers develop powerful skills for perceiving the characteristics of a design or partial design that they see or imagine . They can perceptually recognise its features and properties ( Schön [ 1983 ] terms this appreciating its characteristics ) . Moreover they can perceptually evaluate its quality , along both technical and aesthetic dimensions , and recognise partial resemblances to what they want . Designers’ powers of perceptual evaluation are precisely tuned to the needs of any particular task . As Todd and Latham [ 1992 ] have argued in the context of computer art , human perceptual skills can be exploited to evaluate and select computer - generated designs . The Design Cycle . Designing is characterised by an iterative loop of problem formulation , holistic solution synthesis and solution evaluation . As designers change the solution they change the problem . This is a mental strategy very different from linear problem solving . ( Of course , designing complex products involves problem decomposition and episodes of linear problem solving , as well as many nested reformulation - synthesis - evaluation loops for different aspects of the design . ) Professional designers are accustomed to evaluating and modifying others’ designs . A system taking over some or all of the synthesis part of the cycle could perform computations that humans find difficult , and generate a wider range of alternatives . Design Visualisation . Many designers have very good visualisation skills . They can imagine what a design would look like or how a mechanism would work , but the concepts they use cut across conceptual categories . On the other hand their design ideas can often be vague – without precision or detail ; or incomplete - only embodying decisions about parts of the design ; or inconsistent - embodying unresolved contradictions . Graphic displays push the designers towards considering the emergent rather than the structural properties of their ideas . An interactive generative system can eliminate vagueness and impose consistency and completeness within the limits of its representation , while displaying emergent characteristics . 4 Some Problems in Conceptual Design Exploration of the Design Space . Premature commitment to a concept before the alternatives have been considered is a major problem in some branches of engineering . Designers often only try to find satisfactory solutions rather than good or optimal ones ; often exploration is limited by time pressure or by lack of imagination . A major purpose of prescriptive design methodologies is encouraging systematic exploration . A generative system can quickly explore well - defined design spaces , combining all qualitative options and sampling parameter values . Order of Decision - Making . Many design are strongly influenced by the order in which issues are considered and decisions are made . ( Colour schemes are a good example ; see section 5 . 3 ) . Inappropriate decision orderings can have very harmful effects , especially when imposed by design tools [ see Stacey and Eckert 1999 ] . A generative system can create designs independently of decision order , or by systematically exploring different orderings . Notation . The notations that designers use can influence designs , because they make particular aspects of designs explicit and obscure others , so affecting which aspects of the design are considered . This is true of automatically generated solutions ; however a visual display can show emergent properties , which are lost in many functional and structural notations , so designers can concentrate on them . Communication . Communicating design ideas is often extremely difficult , when designers have vague ideas , or cannot express their ideas easily in any precise notation . Many design notations , especially free sketches , give rise to misinterpretations , because the scope for interpreting their ambiguities is not clear [ see Stacey et al 1999 ] . This is a significant factor in knitwear design [ Eckert 1997 ; Eckert et al in press ] . Computer generated designs can be constrained to be consistent , and are either exact or have a well defined degree of uncertainty . 5 Examples of Generative Approaches We are developing interactive generative design systems that are tailored to human cognitive abilities , and to human designers’ conceptual terms , representations and working patterns . 5 . 1 Shapes of Knitted Garments Eckert has developed a prototype garment shape design system that completes the partial specifications of designs customarily generated by professional knitwear designers [ Eckert 1997 ; Eckert et al 1999 ; Eckert et al in press ] . It translates between the three representations used by knitwear designers : sets of measurements , two - dimensional garment outlines , and cutting patterns . It employs default reasoning and novel mathematical methods to construct garment shapes from measurements . We plan to develop the system to include case based reasoning for more finely tuned design completion , as well as graphical shape editing . 5 . 2 Cable Patterns for Knitted Garments A wide range of traditional cable and Arran patterns are used in knitwear design . But creating new ones is difficult , because they are hard to visualise and sketch . A cable generation system could take the role now taken by books or human experts in providing suggestions for possible patterns , while widening the range of available designs . A small number of rules govern the formation of cables and Arran patterns . Eckert and Hall [ 1998 ] specify this rule set and propose the use of a rewrite rule grammar to generate patterns , using numerical constraints and symmetry rules to prune the search tree and meet designers’ requirements . 5 . 3 Colour Schemes Kelly [ 1999 ; Eckert et al 1999 ] has developed a suite of prototype programs based on Todd and Latham’s [ 1992 ] and Sims’ [ 1991 ] Darwinian metaphor to support the selection of colour combinations . At each stage the user selects one of 25 randomly generated colour combinations , which is used as the seed for generating the next set of alternatives , with ever smaller variations until a satisfactory design is found . The user programs a bias for this search . Each program discards or modifies the colour combinations , to ensure conformity with constraints that correspond to desirable perceptual characteristics , such as degree of contrast , or shared hue or chroma . This approach overcomes the problem of decision - ordering bias . 6 Conclusion Interactive generative systems can serve as a powerful tool for designers , by taking over some or all of the design synthesis part of the design creation cycle , while the designers contribute their skills in evaluating designs and formulating problems . But such systems need to fit the designers’ needs and their conceptions of design problems . Generative systems can overcome a major problem in conceptual design : premature commitment to decisions and concepts , before all the relevant factors and alternatives have been considered . They can also enable designers to communicate more effectively by specifying their designs more accurately and completely . Our analysis and research is presented more fully in Eckert et al [ 1999 ] . Acknowledgements Claudia Eckert’s research was supported by grant GR / J40331 from the SERC / ACME , grant L12730100173 from the ESRC , and grant 717 from the Open University Research Development Fund . Ian Kelly’s research was supported by an EPSRC research studentship at the Open University Computing Department . References [ 1 ] Eckert , C . M . , “Intelligent Support for Knitwear Design” , PhD Thesis , Department of Design and Innovation , The Open University , Milton Keynes UK , 1997 . [ 2 ] Eckert , C . M . , Cross , N . G . & Johnson , J . H . , “Overcoming the Communication Bottleneck through Automatic Design” , Design Studies , in press , Vol . 21 , 2000 . [ 3 ] Eckert , C . M . & Hall , J . G . , “A Cable Grammar for Knitwear Design” , AID’98 Workshop on Generative Design , Lisbon Portugal , 1998 . [ 4 ] Eckert , C . M . , Kelly , I . & Stacey , M . K . , “Interactive Generative Systems for Conceptual Design : An Empirical Perspective” , Artificial Intelligence in Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing , Vol . 13 No . 4 , 1999 . [ 5 ] Kelly , I . “An Evolutionary Interaction Approach to Computer - Aided Colour Design” , PhD Thesis , Department of Computing , The Open University , Milton Keynes UK , 1999 . [ 6 ] Knight , T . W . , “Transformations in Design : a Formal Approach to Stylistic Change and Innovation in the Visual Arts” , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK , 1994 . [ 7 ] Schön , D . A . , “The Reflective Practitioner : How Professionals Think in Action” , Basic Books , New York NY , 1983 . [ 8 ] Sims , K . “Artificial evolution for computer graphics” , ACM Transactions on Computer Graphics , Vol . 25 , pp 319 - 328 . [ 9 ] Stacey , M . K . & Eckert , C . M . “CAD System Bias in Engineering Design” , Proceedings of ICED 99 , Munich Germany , 1999 . [ 10 ] Stacey , M . K . , Eckert , C . M . & McFadzean , J . “Sketch Interpretation in Design Communication” , Proceedings of ICED 99 , Munich Germany , 1999 . [ 11 ] Todd , S . & Latham , W . , “Evolutionary Art and Computers” , Academic Press , London UK , 1992 . Claudia Eckert Ian Kelly Martin Stacey Engineering Design Centre Department of Computing Department of Computer Department of Engineering The Open University and Information Sciences University of Cambridge Walton Hall De Montfort University Trumpington Street Milton Keynes MK7 6AA , UK Hammerwood Gate Cambridge CB2 1PZ , UK Milton Keynes MK7 6HP , UK Phone : + 44 1223 332673 Phon e : + 44 1908 834936 Fax : + 44 1223 332662 Fax : + 44 1908 834948 cme26 @ eng . cam . ac . uk mstacey @ dmu . ac . uk www . eng . cam . ac . uk / ~ cme26 www . mk . dmu . ac . uk / ~ mstacey