Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy Relates Rafts in Model and Native Membranes Kirsten Bacia , * y Dag Scherfeld , y Nicoletta Kahya , * and Petra Schwille * y * Dresden University of Technology , Department of Biophysics , c / o Max - Planck - Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics , 01307 Dresden , Germany ; and y Experimental Biophysics Group , Max - Planck - Institute for Biophysical Chemistry , 37077 Goettingen , Germany ABSTRACT The lipid raft model has evoked a new perspective on membrane biology . Understanding the structure and dynamics of lipid domains could be a key to many crucial membrane - associated processes in cells . However , one shortcoming in the ﬁeld is the lack of routinely applicable techniques to measure raft association without perturbation by detergents . We show that both in cell and in domain - exhibiting model membranes , ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy ( FCS ) can easily distinguish a raft marker ( cholera toxin B subunit bound to ganglioside ( GM1 ) and a nonraft marker ( dialkylcarbocyanine dye diI ) ) by their decidedly different diffusional mobilities . In contrast , these markers exhibit only slightly different mobilities in a homogeneous artiﬁcial membrane . Performing cholesterol depletion with methyl - b - cyclodextrin , which disrupts raft organization , we ﬁnd an analogous effect of reduced mobility for the nonraft marker in domain - exhibiting artiﬁcial membranes and in cell membranes . In contrast , cholesterol depletion has differential effects on the raft marker , cholera toxin B subunit - GM1 , rendering it more mobile in artiﬁcial domain - exhibiting membranes but leaving it immobile in cell membranes , where cytoskeleton disruption is required to achieve higher mobility . Thus , ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy promises to be a valuable tool to elucidate lipid raft associations in native cells and to gain deeper insight into the correspondence between model and natural membranes . INTRODUCTION Simons and Ikonen introduced the concept of lipid rafts , in which clusters enriched in cholesterol , sphingolipid , and certain proteins were hypothesized to serve as sorting platforms based on lipid interaction ( Simons and Ikonen , 1997 ; Simons and van Meer , 1988 ) . Such rafts were sug - gested to give rise to experimentally isolated entities ( deter - gent resistant membranes ( DRMs ) ) . This operational raft deﬁnition has been applied in a wide range of cell bio - logical studies concerning , e . g . , endocytosis , exocytosis , cell signaling , and immunology . Rafts are thought to result from a distinct lipid phase ( liquid - ordered , L o , as opposed to liquid - disordered , L d ) , which is formed in model membranes by long saturated acyl chain lipids together with cholesterol and which is resistant to detergent extraction ( Schroeder et al . , 1994 ; Brown and London , 1998 ) . However , DRMs cannot be equated with native rafts , since temperature changes and detergent application can signiﬁcantly alter phase behavior ( Heerklotz , 2002 ) and since DRMs from different detergents vary in composition ( Schuck et al . , 2003 ; Drevot et al . , 2002 ; Braccia et al . , 2003 ) . Some markers may associate with or dissociate from rafts , and rafts may coalesce upon detergent treatment ( Giocondi et al . , 2000 ) . Nevertheless , detergent resistance has become practically the only routine assay for membrane rafts . Since the correspondence between rafts and DRMs and even raft existence are still under debate ( Munro , 2003 ) , it is imperative to ﬁnd new methods that could provide evidence for rafts and raft associations in vivo . Sensitivity to cholesterol depletion , used as a functional criterion for raft association , can also have undesired effects , since cells may respond to the disruption of lipid com - positional balance with structural and metabolic changes . As pointed out by Edidin ( 2003 ) , actin cytoskeleton may be affected , possibly reducing lateral mobility of membrane proteins . Therefore , a loss of function upon cholesterol depletion cannot pinpoint raft association . Since native rafts are postulated to be dynamic and fragile structures prone to preparation artifacts , optical methods causing little perturbation provide a promising approach . The high speciﬁcity needed for live cell applications is achieved through ﬂuorescent labeling with a small dye or protein ( ﬂuorescence resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) , single dye tracing , and ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy ( FCS ) ) or through antibody - mediated coupling to a larger bead ( pho - tonic force microscopy and single particle tracking ) . Whereas the risk of labeling artifacts is lower in single dye tracing ( Schu¨tz et al . , 2000 ) than in single particle tracking , the disadvantages are lower signal / noise ratios and shorter observable trajectories due to photodamage ( Schu¨tz and Hinterdorfer , 2002 ) . It is important to note that none of these methods provides a priori information about structure , but all thesemethodstestpredictionsderivedfromastructuralmodel . In ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy , temporal ﬂuo - rescence ﬂuctuations from the diffusion of single ﬂuorescent molecules through a small , only optically delimited detection volume are monitored ( reviewed by Bacia and Schwille , 2003 ) . Excitation and detection are commonly performed Submitted January 21 , 2004 , and accepted for publication April 29 , 2004 . Address reprint requests to Petra Schwille , Dept . of Biophysics , Dresden University of Technology , Tatzberg 47 - 51 , 01307 Dresden , Germany . Tel . : 49 - 351 - 463 - 40328 ; Fax : 49 - 351 - 463 - 40342 ; E - mail : pschwil @ gwdg . de . (cid:2) 2004 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 04 / 08 / 1034 / 10 $ 2 . 00 doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 104 . 040519 1034 Biophysical Journal Volume 87 August 2004 1034 – 1043 using a similar laser - illuminated confocal setup as in scanning microscopy . Fluctuations are processed online to yield an autocorrelation curve from which the particle mobility ( diffusion coefﬁcient ) is derived . FCS works from the single molecule regime up to hundreds of molecules in the focus ( from 10 - nM to 1 - m M concentration range ) . In contrast to a more elaborate analysis of individual molecule time traces or trajectories ( Ha , 2001a , b ; Schu¨tz et al . , 2000 ; Schu¨tz and Hinterdorfer , 2002 ) , correlation analysis yields limited insight into the diversity of single molecule behavior . On the other hand , the intrinsic averaging of transition events in FCS provides immediate experimental readout without time - consuming ofﬂine analysis and offers high statistical conﬁdence within a short acquisition time . Online readout is especially advantageous for live cell applications , since experimental problems ( like a shift of the cell membrane ) are easily recognized during data acquisition . Furthermore , in contrast to ﬂuorescence photobleaching recovery / ﬂuores - cence recovery after photobleaching ( FPR / FRAP ) as an in - stance of a true ensemble method , FCS requires much lower laser powers and only minute , potentially less perturbing ﬂuorophore concentrations . Although FCS is more commonly applied to three - dimensional probe diffusion , early work already analyzed two - dimensional diffusion in artiﬁcial , supported lipid bilayers ( Fahey et al . , 1977 ) . Later , FCS was applied to native cell membranes ( Schwille et al . , 1999 ) and to freestanding artiﬁcial lipid bilayers ( giant unilamellar vesicles ( GUVs ) ) demonstrat - ing the technique’s sensitivity to phase separation ( Korlach et al . , 1999 ) . We have recently utilized this approach to generate a dynamic phase diagram of the ‘‘canonical lipid raft mixture’’ of model membrane studies ( unsaturated phospha - tidylcholine , cholesterol , and sphingomyelin ( SM ) ) using electroformated GUVs and 1 , 1 # - dioctadecyl - 3 , 3 , 3 # , 3 # - tetra - methylindocarbocyanine perchlorate ( diIC 18 ) as a marker ( Kahya et al . , 2003 , 2004 ) . GUVs are advantageous , since they can be made truly unilamellar , are not prone to support artifacts , and have sizes and curvatures like the cell plasma membrane . Despite a great number of FCS studies in recent years , only a few applications have been concerned with mem - branes , and the technique has not yet been used to study raft phenomena in live cells . Here , we have identiﬁed markers for the L o and L d phase that are suitable for FCS and have studied their mobilities in GUVs and live cell plasma membranes in a comparative manner . Our results support the existence of rafts in live cells and suggest the use of FCS as a tool to study raft association of membrane constituents in native membranes . MATERIALS AND METHODS Chemicals 2 - Dioleoyl - sn - Glycero - 3 - phosphocholine ( DOPC ) , N - stearoyl - D - erythros - phingosylphosphorylcholine ( SM ) , 1 , 2 - Dilauroyl - sn - Glycero - 3 - phospho - choline ( DLPC ) , and cholesterol were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids ( Alabaster , AL ) . Monoganglioside - 1 ( GM1 ) was from Calbiochem ( Merck ) , ( Darmstadt , Germany ) . Lipids were stored under nitrogen . GUVs were produced either from a 1 : 1 : 1 molar mixture of DOPC , SM , and cholesterol ( raft mixture ) or from pure DOPC , dissolved at 5 mM total concentration in chloroform / methanol ( 2 : 1 ) . GM1wasaddedat0 . 1mol % andtheappropriate lipidanalogmarkerat0 . 1mol % forconfocalimagingorat0 . 001 – 0 . 01mol % for FCS . Lipid analogs diIC 18 , 1 , 1 # - dihexadecyl - 3 , 3 , 3 # , 3 # - tetramethylindocarbo - cyanine perchlorate ( diIC 16 ) , 3 , 3 # - dioctadecyloxacarbocyanine perchlorate ( diO ) , and 1 , 1 # - dioctadecyl - 3 , 3 , 3 # , 3 # - tetramethylindodicarbocyanine per - chlorate ( diD ) , as well as Alexa - 488 labeled cholera toxin B subunit ( ctxB - 488 ) were obtained from Molecular Probes ( Invitrogen ) , ( Carlsbad , CA ) . For controls , cholera toxin B subunit ( from Calbiochem ) was labeled with Cy5 monoreactive N - hydroxysuccinimide ( NHS ) - ester ( Amersham Bio - sciences , Piscataway , NJ ) and puriﬁed on a gel - ﬁltration column ( 10 DG , Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) . Methyl - b - cyclodextrin ( M b CD ; Sigma , St . Louis , OH ) was dissolved in serum - free minimal essential medium ( MEM ) for cells or water for GUVs . Cholesterol - recovery complex was prepared as described previously ( Pike and Miller , 1998 ; Klein et al . , 1995 ) . A solution of 200 mg M b CD in 2 . 2 ml water was stirred in an 80 (cid:3) C water bath , and small aliquots of a solution of 6 mg cholesterol in 80 m l isopropanol were added slowly . The resulting clear solution was diluted to 12 mM ( with respect to M b CD ) in serum - free MEM for cell treatment or water for GUV treatment . Cell culture Rat basophilic leukemia cells ( RBL ) - 2H3 and human embryonic kidney ( HEK ) 293 cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection ( CRL - 2256 and CRL - 1573 ; Rockville , MD ) . RBL cells were maintained in MEM ( Gibco ( Invitrogen ) ) , 15 % Mycoplex fetal calf serum ( PAA Laboratories , Pasching , Austria ) , nonessential aminoacids , 2 mMglutamine , and1mMsodiumpyruvate ( allobtainedfromGibco ) inahumidiﬁed5 % CO 2 incubatorat 37 (cid:3) C . HEKcellswere cultivatedin Dulbecco’smodiﬁedEagle’s medium ( DMEM ; Gibco ) supplementedwith10 % Mycoplexfetalcalfserum ( PAALaboratories ) , 2mMglutamine , 100units / mlpenicillin , and100 m g / ml streptomycin ( all from Gibco ) under the same incubation conditions . Cell treatments and labeling Cells were seeded onto 25 - mm round coverslips in phenol - red free media and used 24 – 72 h after plating . Coverslips were mounted in a custom - made chamber at room temperature ( 22 (cid:3) C ) in the media described below . For cholesterol depletion treatment , RBL cells were washed with phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) and placed in the incubator for 20 – 60 min with 16 mg / ml M b CD in serum - free MEM media . No differences were observed for the different incubation times . For cholesterol recovery complex treatment , previously depleted RBL cells were washed again and incubated for 40 – 90 min with recovery complex in MEM . To achieve natural cholesterol recovery , previously depleted cells were washed with PBS and incubated with serum - containing media overnight . To disrupt actin cytoskeleton , 5 m M Latrunculin A ( Biomol , Plymouth Meeting , PA ) was added from a 1000 3 dimethyl sulfoxid ( DMSO ) stock to serum - containing media for overnight incubation . For measurements , respective media were supplemented with 10 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 2 , to avoid alkalinization , and with the appropriate concentrations of M b CD , recovery complex , or Latrunculin A to avoid reversal of the treatment . In the case of M b CD and recovery complex supplementation , serum - free media were used . For hypo - osmotic swelling , an equal amount of water was added directly to the measurement media , and swelling was observed under the microscope . Lipid analog solutions for cell labeling were prepared immediately before use from 1 . 5 - mM lipid analog stocks by ; 1000 - fold dilution into a 1 - mg / ml bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) / PBS solution , which had been preheated to 37 (cid:3) C . Cells were washed three times with PBS , incubated with lipid analog Relating Model and Native Rafts by FCS 1035 Biophysical Journal 87 ( 2 ) 1034 – 1043 for up to 1 min , washed again , and mounted . In the case of M b CD , recovery complex , or Latrunculin A treatments , cells were ﬁrst treated and then labeled . Lipid analog concentrations and incubation times for labeling were adjusted as needed to obtain the desired intensities for confocal imaging or FCS . CtxB - 488 was added in media until the desired degree of labeling was achieved and excess toxin washed away . Giant unilamellar vesicles Giant unilamellar vesicles were produced by a modiﬁed electroformation method as described previously ( Kahya et al . , 2003 ) using a custom - made closed perfusion chamber heated to 65 (cid:3) C and indium - tin - oxide ( ITO ) coated coverslips as electrodes . Brieﬂy 5 m l lipid mixture was deposited on indium - tin - oxide - coated coverslips . After evaporation of the solvent , the chamber was assembled and ﬁlled with 12 mM sucrose solution . A voltage of 1 . 1 V at 10 Hz was applied . Sucrose solution was employed instead of water to minimize osmotic pressure differences between the interior and the exterior of the GUVs upon addition of M b CD ( 16 mg / ml , equivalent to 12 mM ) or cholesterol recovery complex ( same M b CD concentration ) . Where applicable , ctxB - 488 was added to the ﬂow chamber after GUV formation . CtxB - 488 was not added for FCS measurements of diI to avoid artifacts from spectral cross talk . Confocal imaging and FCS Confocal imaging and FCS measurements were performed on a commercial ConfoCor2 system ( Carl Zeiss , Jena , Germany ) using standard conﬁg - urations . Minimal laser powers were chosen to avoid photobleaching ( 543 nm HeNe Laser : 4 m W ; 488 nm Ar - Ion Line : 25 m W and 2 . 5 m W , achieved by inserting an additional neutral density ﬁlter ) . A 40 3 NA 1 . 2 C - Apochromat water immersion objective was used , pinhole sizes set to 90 m m , and pinholes adjusted at least daily . The detection volume was calibrated by measuring the diffusion of a standard dye ( tetramethylrhod - amine ) . Calibration was veriﬁed by comparing the relation between two - and three - dimensional diffusion ( tetramethylrhodamine in water and diI in DLPC GUVs ) obtained on the ConfoCor2 and on two different home - built setups . The 1 / e 2 radius of the detection volume for the 543 - nm line was determined to be v o ¼ ( 0 . 17 6 0 . 01 ) m m . The dependence of FCS measurements on the accuracy of focus x - y - z positioning on the membrane was tested . During measurements , the count rate was monitored . Measure - ments with a visible drop in count rate that was reversible upon refocusing were excluded to avoid an artifactual bias toward longer diffusion times from shifting membranes . Curves were ﬁtted using a nonlinear least squares algorithm to the model equation commonly used in FCS for two - dimensional , free Brownian diffusion : G ð t Þ ¼ N (cid:2) 1 eff ð 1 1 t = t D Þ (cid:2) 1 1 c ; ( 1 ) where N eff denotes the number of ﬂuorescent molecules in the effective detection volume , c a constant offset due to slow ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuations , and , most importantly , t D the diffusion time . In consideration of a blinking phenomenon observed in cyanine dyes , an exponential decay term was also included in the equation ( Widengren and Schwille , 2000 ) . In the case of ctxB - GM1 diffusion , an additional diffusion term , weighted with F free , was incorporated to account for a fraction of fast - diffusing , unbound ctxB . t diff , free was determined in a separate measurement . G ð t Þ ¼ N (cid:2) 1 eff ð F free ð 1 1 t = t diff ; free Þ (cid:2) 1 1 ð 1 (cid:2) F free Þð 1 1 t = t D Þ (cid:2) 1 Þ 1 c : ( 2 ) Diffusion coefﬁcients in Table 1 were evaluated according to D ¼ v 2o = ð 4 t D Þ : To facilitate the comparison between GUVs and native membranes , the same model was used for all diI curves . However , curves obtained on native membranes are better described as slightly anomalous ( Schwille et al . , 1999 ) . Standard deviations of t D were calculated from measurements compromising upper and lower membranes of multiple GUVs or cells . Errors may also be estimated from the inspection of single measurements displayed in Fig . 2 . TABLE 1 Probe mobilities in GUVs and cell plasma membranes Fig . Marker System Treatment * Domain t D 3 ms D 3 cm 2 / s 2 E diIC 18 DOPC GUVs – Homogeneous ( L d ) 1 . 03 6 0 . 05 ( 7 . 0 6 1 . 2 ) 3 10 (cid:2) 8 2 E diOC 18 DOPC GUVs – Homogeneous ( L d ) 0 . 8 6 0 . 1 ( 7 . 0 6 1 . 2 ) 3 10 (cid:2) 8 2 E ctxB - 488 GM1 DOPC GUVs – Homogeneous ( L d ) 1 . 5 6 0 . 2 ( 3 . 6 6 1 . 4 ) 3 10 (cid:2) 8 2 A diIC 18 Raftmix GUVs – Bright - red ( L d ) 1 . 51 6 0 . 09 ( 4 . 8 6 0 . 9 ) 3 10 (cid:2) 8 2 A diIC 18 Raftmix GUVs M b CD Homogeneous ( L d ) 3 . 7 6 0 . 6 ( 2 . 0 6 1 . 0 ) 3 10 (cid:2) 8 2 F ctxB - 488 GM1 Raftmix GUVs – Bright - green ( L o ) 12 . 0 6 0 . 6 ( 4 . 5 6 1 . 4 ) 3 10 (cid:2) 9 2 F ctxB - 488 GM1 Raftmix GUVs M b CD Homogeneous ( L d ) 3 . 2 6 1 . 0 ( 1 . 7 6 1 . 0 ) 3 10 (cid:2) 8 2 B diIC 18 RBL – Nonraft ? 8 . 7 6 0 . 8 ( 8 . 3 6 1 . 7 ) 3 10 (cid:2) 9 2 B diIC 18 RBL M b CD Nonraft ? 18 . 7 6 1 . 5 ( 3 . 9 6 0 . 8 ) 3 10 (cid:2) 9 2 B diIC 18 RBL 1 . M b CD , 2 . Chol . Nonraft ? 12 . 4 6 3 . 0 ( 5 . 8 6 2 . 1 ) 3 10 (cid:2) 9 2 C diIC 18 HEK 293 – Nonraft ? 5 . 0 6 0 . 5 ( 1 . 4 6 0 . 3 ) 3 10 (cid:2) 8 2 C diIC 18 HEK 293 M b CD Nonraft ? 7 . 9 6 0 . 9 ( 9 . 2 6 2 . 2 ) 3 10 (cid:2) 9 2 D diIC 16 RBL – Nonraft ? 8 . 1 6 0 . 9 ( 8 . 9 6 2 . 1 ) 3 10 (cid:2) 9 2 D diIC 16 RBL Different day Nonraft ? 8 . 2 6 1 . 6 ( 8 . 8 6 2 . 8 ) 3 10 (cid:2) 9 2 D diIC 16 RBL M b CD Nonraft ? 12 . 1 6 2 . 1 ( 6 . 0 6 1 . 8 ) 3 10 (cid:2) 9 2 D diIC 16 RBL 1 . M b CD , 2 . serum Nonraft ? 7 . 5 6 1 . 6 ( 9 . 6 6 3 . 2 ) 3 10 (cid:2) 9 2 D diIC 16 RBL Hypo - osmotic Nonraft ? 7 . 8 6 1 . 2 ( 9 . 3 6 2 . 5 ) 3 10 (cid:2) 9 3 C ctxB - 488 GM1 RBL – Raft ? Immobile Immobile 3 C ctxB - 488 GM1 RBL M b CD Raft ? Immobile Immobile 3 C ctxB - 488 GM1 RBL Latr . A Raft ? (cid:3) 60 (cid:3) 1 3 10 (cid:2) 9 * Methyl - b - cyclodextrin ( M b CD ) reduces membrane cholesterol ; soluble , M b CD - complexed cholesterol ( Chol . ) increases membrane cholesterol ; and Latrunculin A ( Latr . A ) disrupts actin cytoskeleton . 1036 Bacia et al . Biophysical Journal 87 ( 2 ) 1034 – 1043 RESULTS In situ change of cholesterol content in GUVs GUVs were prepared from a ternary lipid mixture of DOPC / SM / cholesterol ¼ 1 : 1 : 1 plus 0 . 1 % GM1 ( raft mixture ) . These vesicles exhibit an L d - L o phase separation ( Dietrich et al . , 2001 ) , which can be visualized by ﬂuorescent markers ( Fig . 1 A ) . As we have recently shown by FCS analysis of diIC 18 mobility ( Kahya et al . , 2003 ) , the red marker becomes enriched in the less ordered ( L d ) phase ( D ¼ 5 3 10 (cid:2) 8 cm 2 / s ) and is present at low concentration in the more ordered L o domains ( D ¼ 0 . 8 3 10 (cid:2) 8 cm 2 / s , i . e . , (cid:3) sixfold slower ) . This was rather unexpected , since in the case of the coexistence of L d and gel phase , the long - chain diIs , such as diIC 18 , prefer the more ordered ( i . e . , the gel ) state ( Klausner and Wolf , 1980 ; Spink et al . , 1990 ) . Our conclusion that diIC 18 preferentially labels the L d phase is conﬁrmed through counterstaining of the L o phase by binding Alexa - 488 labeled cholera toxin B subunit to the ganglioside GM1 ( Fig . 1 A ) . Analogous results are obtained ( data not shown ) if diIC 18 is substituted by diIC 16 , by diO ( C 18 carbon chain , green ﬂuorescence ) , or by diD ( C 18 , far red ﬂuorescence ) , and if Alexa - 488 labeled cholera toxin B subunit is substituted by Cy5 labeled cholera toxin B subunit ( far red ﬂuorescence ) . Cholesterol depletion from membranes by the addition of M b CD , an important tool in cell biological raft studies , is expected to suppress L o phase formation . Here we observe the effect of M b CD on GUVs from a simple ternary lipid mixture in situ by confocal laser scanning . With M b CD addition , the clearly visible domain separation ( Fig . 1 B ) disappears , starting under our experimental conditions at the phase borders ( Fig . 1 F ) , and leaves behind GUVs that appear uniformly labeled with both probes on the scale of optical resolution ( Fig . 1 C ) . This process is reversible . Phase separation is restored when a cholesterol - loaded M b CD complex is added to previously cholesterol - depleted GUVs ( Fig . 1 , D and E ) . Many small domains emerge that apparently increase in size and fuse to give rise to large domains ( Fig . 1 G ) . FCS is sensitive to phase and composition dependent viscosity The diffusion time t D is a measure of the average time it takes the ﬂuorescent marker to move through the focus . t D is easily derived from the FCS curves as the half - value decay time ( or more accurately obtained from the numerical ﬁts ) and allows for precise calculation of the diffusion coefﬁcient D . All diffusion times and diffusion coefﬁcients obtained from numerical ﬁtting are summarized in Table 1 . The diffusion properties of the marker diI , indicated by the red curves in Fig . 2 A , reﬂect the mobility of this marker in raft mixture GUVs in the brightly labeled L d phase ( t d ¼ 1 . 5 ms ) . As the domains are dissolved by in situ cholesterol depletion , diffusion slows down to t D ¼ 3 . 7 ms in the resulting uniform phase . The same qualitative effect is observed for the far more complex system of live cell plasma membranes . Fig . 2 B compares the diffusion of a diIC 18 marker in the plasma membrane of untreated RBL cells ( red curves ) with diIC 18 on cells treated with M b CD . Analogous to the simple artiﬁcial system , diI diffusion is slower after cholesterol depletion . Fig . 2 C shows the results from the same experiment performed on a different cell line ( HEK 293 ) . Again , the diffusion of the presumable nonraft marker is slowed down when rafts are supposedly broken up by FIGURE 1 GUVs exhibit phase separation into L d ( red ) and L o ( green ) domains that is reversibly removed by in situ cholesterol extraction . All scale bars ¼ 10 m m . Fig . 1 A shows a three - dimensional reconstruction of giant unilamellar vesicles from confocal slices . GUVs were prepared from DOPC / SM / choles - terol ¼ 1 : 1 : 1 with the addition of diIC 18 and GM1 in trace amounts . CtxB - 488 , which binds to GM1 , has been added after the preparation . DiIC 18 ﬂuorescence is depicted in red and ctxB - 488 ﬂuorescence in green . As the vesicles , which were produced above the melting temperature of the lipid mixture , approach room temperature , domains grow large . Spherical domain borders conﬁrm the coexistence of two liquid phases ( L o and L d ) . Fig . 1 , B and C , represents confocal slice images ( insets : three - dimensional reconstructions ) of GUVs prepared from the same composition , before and after addition of M b CD , a cholesterol - sequestering agent . Cholesterol depletion results in GUVs that are uniformly labeled with both probes ( red : diI ; green : GM1 - ctxB - 488 ; and yellow : overlay ) . The slightly stronger red ﬂuorescence on the right and left sides of GUVs in the confocal sections ( Fig . 1 , B – E ) is due to the polarization of the laser light and the orientations of the diI chromophores in the membrane . It does not indicate an uneven distribution of diI in Fig . 1 , C and D . During the time course of cholesterol depletion ( Fig . 1 F ) , dissolution appears to be initiated at the borderline between domains . The ‘‘lifesaver’’ - like appearance of this GUV ( diameter (cid:3) 10 m m ) stems from the confocal imaging of a slice below the top of the vesicle . Previously depleted GUVs ( Fig . 1 D ) are treated with cholesterol - loaded M b CD complex , resulting in a reappearance of domains ( Fig . 1 E ) . Smaller domains emerge ﬁrst and then coalesce ( Fig . 1 G ; GUV diameter (cid:3) 15 m m ) . The tendency of whole GUVs to attach to each other and fuse is probably due to osmotic effects or changes in lipid molecule numbers in the membrane . Relating Model and Native Rafts by FCS 1037 Biophysical Journal 87 ( 2 ) 1034 – 1043 cholesterol depletion . However , absolute mobilities differ between GUVs and cells and also between the different cell lines . The mobilities are reproducible within each cell line and for the GUVs . ( See for instance the two superimposing red curves in Fig . 2 D that represent average diIC 16 mobility in RBL cells recorded on different days . ) Their dependency on cell type can be explained by cell - type speciﬁc membrane lipid composition . The analogy in the mobility shift seen in GUVs , HEK , and RBL cells indicates that cholesterol depletion plays a unique role , inducing the same qualitative effect in all investigated systems . To test for the reversibility of cholesterol depletion , cholesterol - recovery complex was added to previously depleted cells . This treatment succeeded to partially restore diI mobility in the cell membrane ( Fig . 2 B ) . However , presumed raft disintegration was completely reversible when cells were allowed to recover from depletion in media supplemented with serum ( natural recovery , Fig . 2 D ) . FIGURE 2 In situ cholesterol depletion reduces the mobility of the nonraft marker diI both in GUVs and in native membranes . The red curves in Fig . 2 A represent diIC 18 diffusion in the bright phase of raft mixture GUVs . After in situ cholesterol depletion , diffusion in the resulting homogeneous phase is slower ( blue curves ; see also summary of all data in Table 1 ) . The blow - up displays curves taken on the same vesicle in a distinct color : Even the slight differences in mobility between single vesicles due to variations in lipid composition are detected demonstrating the high sensitivity achievable by FCS analysis . Fig . 2 B show the diffusion of the same marker , diIC 18 , measured on live RBL cell plasma membranes ( red curves ) . Absolute marker mobility is distinct from the one observed in GUVs . When cholesterol is depleted by M b CD treatment , marker diffusion becomes slower . The addition of complexed cholesterol to previously depleted cells causes diI to become more mobile again , but mobility is still lower than in cells with natural cholesterol content . Fig . 2 C depicts the cholesterol depletion experiment performed on a different cell line ( HEK 293 ) . Again , diIC 18 diffusion is slower after cholesterol depletion , which agrees with the ﬁndings on the RBL cells . Fig . 2 D shows the effect of cholesterol depletion on the diffusion of diIC 16 in RBL cell plasma membranes ( both red lines : untreated cells ; blue line : M b CD treated cells ) . This experiment demonstrates that diIC 16 , which was assumed to be a raft marker by Hao et al . ( 2001 ) , behaves qualitatively the same as diIC 18 . Fig . 2 D also contains three more control experiments . For clarity , only average curves are depicted . 1 ) , Mobility for a given cell line is very reproducible , as the averages of two sets of measurements recorded on two different days ( red lines ) show . 2 ) , DiI marker mobility in previously cholesterol depleted cells was found to be completely restored when cells were allowed to recover naturally in serum - supplemented media ( green line ) . 3 ) , Hypo - osmotic swelling ( gray line ) had no signiﬁcant effect on diI mobility in comparison with untreated cells . Fig . 2 E demonstrates that the diffusion of ctxB - 488 that binds to a maximum of ﬁve GM1 molecules is only twofold slower in a homogeneous artiﬁcial membrane ( DOPC ) than the diffusion of diIC 18 or diOC 18 . ( See also summary of all data in Table 1 . ) The markers diIC 18 and diOC 18 , which are structurally similar but have different ﬂuorescent spectra , are assumed to possess the same mobility ( D ¼ 7 3 10 (cid:2) 8 cm 2 / s ) . However , diI is observed to bear a longer diffusion time ( red lines ) than diO ( left green lines ) , which is due to the wavelength dependence of the focal area . Therefore , when comparing ctxB - GM1 mobility to diI mobility in FCS curves by eye , the relation of diI and diO curves needs to be borne in mind . This complication does not arise in the comparison of diffusion coefﬁcients , where the calibration of the detection volume has already been accounted for ( Table 1 ) . To allow direct visual comparison of diffusion decays in the case of membrane - bound ctxB , where an additional contribution of unbound ctxB is observed in the curves , normalization has been carried out with respect to the slow - diffusing component . The contributions were quantitated using a two - component ﬁt , in which the diffusion time of the fast component was known from a separate measurement ( gray line : t D ¼ 110 m s and D ¼ 5 . 0 3 10 (cid:2) 7 cm 2 / s ) . The relative amplitude of free ctxB , which appears as a shoulder in the ctxB - curves at shorter times , depends on the concentration of ctxB added to the GUVs in the particular experiment . It was F free ¼ ( 7 . 9 6 1 . 1 ) % in Fig . 2 E and F free ¼ ( 9 . 6 6 0 . 8 ) % in Fig . 2 F . Fig . 2 F shows that ctxB - GM1 has a considerably lower mobility in the L o domains of raft mixture GUVs ( dark green curves ) than in the homogeneous DOPC membrane ( Fig . 2 E ) . When domain separation is abolished by cholesterol depletion , mobility greatly increases ( bright green curves ) . For comparison , the FCS curves showing the decrease in mobility of diI in its phase of enrichment ( L d , red curves ) versus the homogeneous phase after depletion ( orange curves ) are shown again , the same as in Fig . 2 A . Fig . 2 G shows a FRAP experiment performed on the bottom membrane of an HEK 293 cell , double - labeled with diIC 18 and ctxB - 488 . Both markers were bleached simultaneously in a rectangular area . The recovery of diI is obviously faster than that of ctxB - 488 as seen in the representative images and in the ﬂuorescence quantitation from the bleached region of interest ( ﬂuorescence was set relative to a control region , bleach depth was scaled to 100 % , and the scale bar ¼ 10 m m ) . 1038 Bacia et al . Biophysical Journal 87 ( 2 ) 1034 – 1043 Furthermore , the marker diIC 16 , which was used by Hao et al . ( 2001 ) , shows the same qualitative behavior upon depletion as diIC 18 ( Fig . 2 D ) . Since cholesterol depletion by M b CD is observed to change cell morphology toward more rounded cells ( compare Fig . 3 , A and B , middle columns ) , it was also tested whether the observed diffusion is sensitive to membrane topology . Although surface deformations appear more pronounced on upper than on lower membranes ( compare Fig . 3 A , right and left columns ) , no mobility differences were found between diI measurements carried out on upper and lower cell membranes . ( All data includes measurements on both sides of the cells ; distinction is not marked . ) Furthermore , since cholesterol depletion appeared to somewhat reduce surface deformations , hypo - osmotic swelling was performed but was found to have no signiﬁcant effect ( Fig . 2 D ) . Cholera toxin B subunit bound to GM1 in the L o domain is far less mobile than diI in the L d domain Before interpreting the original FCS data and diffusion times ( t D ) of ctxB - 488 and diI , it is important to recall the wavelength dependence of the size of the focal area . For instance , diI ( red ) and diO ( green , spectrally similar to ctxB - 488 ) should have the same diffusion coefﬁcients , but the red marker shows a longer diffusion time than the green marker ( Fig . 2 E and Table 1 ) . The diffusion of GM1 - bound ctxB - 488 in a homogeneous DOPC GUV membrane is only ; twofold slower than that of diI ( Fig . 2 E and Table 1 ) . However , in raft mixture GUVs , GM1 - bound ctxB - 488 diffuses about one order of magnitude ( (cid:3) 11 - fold ) slower in its preferred phase than diI in its respective phase of enrichment ( Fig . 2 F ) . If phase separation is reversed by cholesterol depletion , ctxB - 488 GM1 and diI exhibit similar diffusion behavior ( Fig . 2 F ) , with some variations among GUVs . Phase domains are clearly distinguishable in GUVs allowing FCS measurements to be carried out in only one domain ( either diI - enriched or ctxB - GM1 enriched ) , whereas no complementary staining on a microscopically visible scale is observed in native membranes ( Fig . 3 A ) . On the contrary , colocalized staining patterns of diI and ctxB - 488 are observed on the upper membrane of RBL cells ( Fig . 3 A , right column ) . This imaging result is misleading . The effect most likely results from surface topology and must not be interpreted as a colocalization of the two markers in rafts , since the mobility of ctxB - GM1 ( green ) and diI ( red ) are actually extremely different from each other . Whereas diI mobility is well accessible by FCS ( Fig . 2 B ) , cholera toxin diffusion is so slow that it is photobleached on its way through the focus , which corrupts the autocorrelation curve ( Fig . 3 C , upper graphs ) . This observation of the very different mobilities of diI and ctxB is conﬁrmed by FRAP on double - labeled HEK cells ( Fig . 2 G ) . Clearly , diI recovers FIGURE 3 Confocal scanning microscopy does not show phase separation in native cell membranes ; FCS reveals low , cytoskeleton - dependent mobility of cholera toxin in native membranes . ( A ) Images of a live RBL cell immediately after double labeling with diIC 18 ( red ) and ctxB - 488 ( green ) in the native cholesterol state were taken at the bottom membrane near the coverslip ( left column ) , at the equatorial plane ( middle column ) , and at the top membrane ( right column ) . Scale bar ¼ 10 m m . The same kind of confocal sections were obtained of a cell in the cholesterol - depleted state ( B ) . Evidently , diI and ctxB do not become enriched in microscopically visible , counterstained domains , as seen from the overlays in the bottom rows of A and B . However , at the upper side of the cell ( right bottom images ) , there is colocalized staining , probably arising from membrane topology . Note that cell morphology changes upon cholesterol depletion ( middle columns ) . Similarly , cells became more rounded under conditions of hypo - osmotic swelling ( not shown ) . The upper left graph in Fig . 3 C shows the ﬂuorescence count - rate trace of an attempted FCS measurement on the membrane of an RBL cell . There is strong photobleaching even at low laser powers , conﬁrming very low ctxB - GM1 mobility ( t D . 70 ms and D , 1 3 10 (cid:2) 9 cm 2 / s ) . The loss in ﬂuorescence leads to an artifactual decay in the correlation curve ( upper right graph ) that cannot be interpreted by standard FCS models . The middle graphs of C depict a representative attempt to measure the mobility of ctxB on an RBL cell after cholesterol depletion with M b CD . Despite this treatment , which is assumed to disrupt raft integrity , the low mobility of ctxB - GM1 clearly remains . In contrast , when actin cytoskeleton was disrupted by Latrunculin A treatment , ctxB - GM1 tended to be more mobile : The bottom graphs in C show a count rate that does not decay and an FCS curve that is not corrupted by bleaching . Relating Model and Native Rafts by FCS 1039 Biophysical Journal 87 ( 2 ) 1034 – 1043 faster than ctxB - 488 . Unfortunately , this type of area - bleach FRAP experiment is experimentally difﬁcult to control due to cellular movements and endocytosis during longer recovery acquisition times . Since FCS depends on the mobility of molecules , in the case of low mobility of raft components , photobleaching arises that corrupts the autocorrelation curves ( Fig . 3 C , upper graphs ) . Also , an apparent mobile fraction remaining after bleaching can be an artifact generated by ctxB that has already been endocytosed into small vesicles ( Bacia et al . , 2002 ) . Further reduction of laser power was impracticable , since it diminished the signal ( particle brightness ) to such extent that correlation curves could no longer be obtained . It is noteworthy though that ctxB mobility is even slower than expected from the experiments on domain - exhibiting GUVs . If the diffusion time of ctxB in the native membrane was by the same factor slower than that of diI as in GUVs , it would be in the range of 40 ms ( HEK ) or 70 ms ( RBL ) . In this case , we would still expect it to be accessible by FCS at low laser powers and with the highly efﬁcient setup used here , but this was generally not the case . Curiously however , ctxB often did fall into the mobility range accessible by FCS when it was measured on rounded , dividing cells or on membrane patches , produced by sonication ( Avery et al . , 2000 ) before ctxB labeling ( data not shown ) . Since these observations point to a role of the actin cytoskeleton in GM1 or raft mobility , cells were treated overnight with Latrunculin A . This kind of actin cytoskeleton disruption was able to render ctxB quite mobile and accessible by FCS ( Fig . 3 C , bottom ) . The ﬂuorescence count rate after Latrunculin A treatment was usually more stable , and the correlation curve obtained a result from true ctxB diffusion and not a bleaching artifact . These observations jointly point to a role of actin cytoskeleton in GM1 or raft mobility . In contrast , cholesterol depletion with M b CD did not render ctxB - 488 mobile on native membranes , as indicated by photobleaching ( Fig . 3 C , middle ) . DISCUSSION FCS analysis of domain - exhibiting GUVs By confocal imaging and FCS , enrichment and diffusional mobilities of two ﬂuorescent markers ( diI and ctxB - 488 - GM1 ) were analyzed in a GUV model membrane system . The probes have opposite phase preference and are well suited for FCS . In raft mixture GUVs , ctxB - GM1 is an L o ( raft ) phase marker and diI an L d ( nonraft ) phase marker . The markers exhibit a large ( 11 - fold ) diffusional mobility dif - ference in their respective phases , whereas there is only a small ( twofold ) difference between their mobilities when they are located in the single phase of homogeneous DOPC GUVs . Thus , the restrictive effect of lipid order ( L o phase ) on the diffusion coefﬁcient is much larger than the effect of the size of the ctxB - GM1 complex versus the diI molecule . As evident from the images , the large L o and L d domains in raft mixture GUVs allow for the FCS focus to be positioned within such a domain . From FCS measurements , there is no indication for an extra , subresolution micro domain structure within these visible domains , since FCS curves on GUVs ﬁt well to a normal diffusion model . Effect of M b CD on L o domains Our dynamic phase diagram for the raft mixture lipids in GUVs ( Kahya et al . , 2003 ) predicts a loss of phase separation , a decrease of the L d phase marker mobility , and an increase of the L o marker mobility , if enough cholesterol is extracted . We found that cholesterol depletion by M b CD , a reagent that is commonly used on native membranes with the purpose of disrupting rafts , abolishes the L o domains in GUVs and produces the predicted effects on diffusional mobilities . FCS analysis on cell membranes Judging from the high mobility of diI in contrast to ctxB in cell membranes , diI shows the same partitioning as in the artiﬁcial membranes , i . e . , enrichment in the nonraft phase , and diI diffusion takes place in a phase that is continuous over the dimensions of the focus . Nevertheless , subresolution rafts that are poor in diI may act as obstacles to diI diffusion in the nonraft phase and lead to shallow FCS decays , describable by an anomalous diffusion model ( Saxton , 1994 ) . Indeed , the shape of diI FCS curves in native membranes is better described by introducing the anomaly parameter ( a ¼ 0 . 8 for RBL ; compare with Schwille et al . , 1999 ) , supporting a subresolution structure of small rafts dispersed in a contin - uous , diI - enriched nonraft phase . For the raft - marker ctxB - 488 , there should be no resolvable ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuations from diffusion within rafts that are smaller than the focus , and the marker will be bleached if it is unable to leave the focus ( Fig . 3 C , upper and middle ) . The extremely low mobility observed for ctxB - GM1 in compar - ison with diI therefore suggests its restriction to structures like rafts or cross - linked raft assemblies . The susceptibility of ctxB mobility to actin cytoskeleton disruption ( Fig . 3 C , bottom ) supports that these rafts are associated with cytoskeleton , which is in agreement with previously reported evidence ( Seveau et al . , 2001 ; Caroni , 2001 ; Yoon et al . , 2003 ) . As the lipid moiety of GM1 cannot directly interact with the cytoskeleton ( Craig and Cuatrecasas , 1975 ) , the association with other lipids and / or proteins in rafts provides an explanation for the observed cytoskeleton dependence . Since cholera toxin greatly increases the detergent resistance of GM1 ( Hagmann and Fishman , 1982 ) , it will now be of interest to investigate the mobilities of membrane proteins that are raft and nonraft markers according to their DRM associations , to be able to further discriminate the roles of raft 1040 Bacia et al . Biophysical Journal 87 ( 2 ) 1034 – 1043 association and raft cross - linking and to test the DRM hypothesis . If no bleaching occurs and an FCS curve as in the bottom of Fig . 3 C is obtained , this may be due to either association - dissociation kinetics of ctxB - 488 to and from the raft or to movement of the whole raft through the focus , where the latter is more likely to be dominant , as mobility is modulated by actin cytoskeleton disruption . We do not attempt to calculate a raft diameter from the diffusion coefﬁcient ( Pralle et al . , 2000 ) , since it remains unclear if there is still impairment of raft mobility on the measurement scale . Nevertheless , the observation of rafts diffusing through the focus would open up the possibility of analyzing raft marker colocalization using a dynamic dual - color cross correlation approach as demonstrated for endocytic vesicles ( Bacia et al . , 2002 ) . This technique could prove superior to scanning or image cross correlation , since static techniques inevitably pick up correlated brightness patterns due to morphology ( Fig . 3 , A and B ) . Effect of M b CD on native rafts In the GUV model system , M b CD subverts the L o state , assimilating nonraft ( diI ) and raft - marker ( ctxB - GM1 ) mobilities . Using the common procedure of M b CD application to native membranes to disrupt rafts , we ﬁnd in analogy to the GUVs that diI mobility is decreased . Given that in the coexistence regime of ternary raft mixture GUVs , diI mobility in the L d phase is virtually independent of cholesterol concentration ( Kahya et al . , 2003 ) and in a binary DOPC / cholesterol mixture , diI mobility increases with decreasing cholesterol concentration ( Kahya et al . , 2004 ) , cholesterol - rich rafts provide a good explanation for the decrease in diI mobility observed upon M b CD application . Thus the effect of M b CD seen on diI mobility supports that native rafts exist and are at least partially destructed by cholesterol depletion . However , surprisingly , the raft marker ctxB is not rendered mobile ( Fig . 3 C , middle ) by M b CD application . Possibly , cholesterol depletion starts at the more vulnerable boundary zones , leaving behind core rafts that remain cytoskeleton attached and still contain strong raft markers , like GM1 - ctxB . Interestingly , Schuck et al . ( 2003 ) reported that M b CD treatment on intact MDCK cells did not reduce DRM association , but only M b CD treatment on already homogenized cells effectively displaced raft marker proteins from the DRM to the soluble fraction . Again , this indicates the involvement of cellular structures in ensuring raft stability that are susceptible to homogenization , like cytoskeleton association or membrane morphology and undoubtedly raises questions about how M b CD really affects rafts when used in functional raft studies on live cells . The partial reversal of diI mobility observed upon application of the cholesterol recovery complex may be due to excessive cholesterol restoration or cellular changes in response to M b CD . Oversaturation with cholesterol has been seen to slow down diI mobility and remove phase separation in raft mixture GUVs ( Kahya et al . , 2003 ) . In contrast , when cells recover naturally , reduction in diI mobility is com - pletely reversible . Selection of ﬂuorescent probes In contrast to the exclusive use of diI in our previous GUV studies , two markers with opposite phase preference were required in the case of native cells . The rationale is that in GUVs domains are on the order of several micrometers , and the focus is easily positioned within a domain , but in cells with submicron domains both phases are simultaneously present in the focus , and only the enriched marker con - tributes to the ﬂuorescence signal . Even long - chain diIs act as nonraft markers Despite their preference for the more ordered phase in gel - L d coexistence , we ﬁnd both in artiﬁcial and in native membranes that long - chain diIs ( diIC 16 and diIC 18 ) prefer the less ordered phase in the L o - L d coexistence , contradicting earlier assumptions ( Hao et al . , 2001 ) . DiI in our experiments was always completely mobile as shown , it never reached the 10 (cid:2) 10 cm 2 / s or bleaching regime typical of gel phase . Thus there appears to be no extended gel phase in the native , unperturbed membrane . Along this line , it seems conceivable that the colocalization of diI with raft - derived patches of Fc e RI ( Thomas et al . , 1994 ) after cross - linking for 2 h at 4 (cid:3) C was due to the formation of gel phase domains under these nonphysiological conditions . Advantages of ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy This study demonstrates that FCS accurately and reproduc - ibly determines even small differences in lateral mobility in live cell membranes within short acquisition times and using a commercially available setup . FCS may thus prove useful for investigating raft phenomena in native membranes , offering the following advantages over FRAP . First , the small ﬂuorophore concentration used in FCS is biochemi - cally less perturbing than the strong labeling used in FRAP . Second , in the spot bleaching variant of FRAP , a short , very strong bleach pulse with a laser intensity on the order of 100 - fold higher than in our FCS measurements is needed . In combination with the higher ﬂuorophore concentration , this makes serious heating artifacts much more likely than in FCS ( compare with the calculation by Axelrod , 1977 ) . Other FRAP protocols employ lower laser power but large bleach regions and long recovery times , making them sensitive to interference from live cell movements . Long observation times ( longer than in Fig . 2 G ) are however necessary to derive meaningful diffusion coefﬁcients in the case of Relating Model and Native Rafts by FCS 1041 Biophysical Journal 87 ( 2 ) 1034 – 1043 multiple recovery kinetics or at least to quantitate a so - called immobile fraction . In contrast , due to the short acquisition time , FCS is less susceptible to movements , and the occurrence of such artifacts is easier to recognize , since the count rate in unperturbed FCS measurements is constant on long timescales . Third , signal / noise decreases in FRAP due to continuous bleaching , and ﬁnally , depending on the geometry , special mathematical modeling may be needed to ﬁt the photobleaching recovery curve ( Siggia et al . , 2000 ) . The limitation of FCS lies in determining diffusion coefﬁcients of slowly moving membrane components . To quantitatively assess the mobility of , e . g . , ctxB - GM1 in native membranes , the dynamic range of FCS will need to be extended , either by devising setups with smaller detection volumes or by designing novel , more stable ﬂuorescent markers . Complexity of native membranes in comparison to the model system Despite the analogy observed in this study , membrane structure in cells is by far not as simple as the L d and L o phase separation in the artiﬁcial system . Possible complications include associations in membranes that are not extended enough to be called phases ( that might be better viewed as cholesterol complexes ; McConnell and Vrljic , 2003 , re - view ) , effects of border regions between phases , and con - sequences of asymmetric lipid distributions . In addition , live cell membranes are not in thermodynamic equilibrium , but some associations are regulated by directed , energy - consuming processes . Also , the complex lipid composition causes a broad thermal transition with the physiological temperature falling into this range ( Yeagle , 1991 ) , which may be the reason for the small size of the postulated in vivo domains ( Marsh et al . , 1976 ) . A similar effect could be exerted by proteins acting as impurities in real membranes . Furthermore , there might be an interplay between membrane curvatures and domain size ( Marsh et al . , 1977 ) . We have observed a morphological tolerance at the phase borders in GUVs ( data not shown ) , as seen by Baumgart et al . ( 2003 ) . Conversely , morphology imposed by the cytoskeleton could limit favorable domain size in native membranes . The role of temperature In a eukaryotic cell , a broad thermal transition has the advantage that cellular functions are only gradually reduced in a low temperature environment . For example , membrane internalization still occurred at room temperature but at a much slower rate than at 37 (cid:3) C . We preferred working at room temperature due to signiﬁcant experimental advan - tages . We have observed a loss in FCS signal ( molecular brightness ) at higher temperatures , and internalized diI starts to perturb the measurements much sooner . Nevertheless , investigations of marker mobilities at different temperatures would be of interest . Under different experimental conditions ( different cell type and different depletion method ) and using a different technique ( FRAP ) , Thompson and Axelrod ( 1980 ) found that diI mobilities in nondepleted and depleted membranes became more similar with increasing ambient temperature . However , they used a 100 - fold stronger laser intensity that may have critically elevated local temperature ( see discussion by Axelrod , 1977 ) . To summarize , we have shown that ﬂuorescence correla - tion data on membranes can be obtained with a very good signal and excellent reproducibility , allowing analysis of marker mobility in live cell membranes . We have taken advantage of the applicability of FCS to both artiﬁcial and natural membranes for comparative analysis . The observa - tion of both similarities and differences gives insight into the qualities of artiﬁcial membranes as a model for native cell membrane organization . FCS is demonstrated to be a prom - ising technique for distinguishing raft - associated and nonraft membrane components based on lateral mobility under natural conditions , without the use of detergents . We thank Kai Simons and Sebastian Schuck , other interested scientists , and group members for discussions and comments . Karin Birkenfeld assisted with cell culture . Sally Kim is acknowledged for useful discussions and help with this manuscript . The study was carried out in collaboration with Carl Zeiss , Jena . Financial support was provided by the Volkswagen Foundation and the German Ministry of Education and Research ( grants 0311845 and 16SV1257 ) . REFERENCES Avery , J . , D . J . Ellis , T . Lang , P . Holyroyd , D . Riedel , R . M . Henderson , J . M . Edwardson , and R . Jahn . 2000 . A cell - free system for regu - lated exocytosis in PC12 cells . J . Cell Biol . 148 : 317 – 324 . Axelrod , D . 1977 . Cell surface heating during ﬂuorescence photobleaching recovery experiments . Biophys . J . 18 : 130 – 131 . Bacia , K . , I . V . Majoul , and P . Schwille . 2002 . Probing the endocytic pathway in live cells using dual - color ﬂuorescence cross - correlation analysis . Biophys . J . 83 : 1184 – 1193 . Bacia , K . , and P . Schwille . 2003 . A dynamic view of cellular processes by in vivo ﬂuorescence auto - and cross - correlation spectroscopy . Methods . 29 : 74 – 85 . Braccia , A . , M . Villani , L . Immerdahl , L . L . Niels - Christiansen , B . T . Nystrom , G . H . Hansen , and E . M . Danielsen . 2003 . Microvillar membrane microdomains exist at physiological temperature . Role of galectin - 4 as lipid raft stabilizer revealed by ‘‘superrafts’’ . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 15679 – 15684 . Brown , D . A . , and E . London . 1998 . Functions of lipid rafts in biological membranes . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 14 : 111 – 136 . Baumgart , T . , S . T . Hess , and W . W . Webb . 2003 . Imaging coexisting ﬂuid domains in biomembrane models coupling curvature and line tension . Nature . 425 : 821 – 824 . Caroni , P . 2001 . Actin cytoskeleton regulation through modulation of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 rafts . EMBO J . 20 : 4332 – 4336 . Craig , S . W . , and P . Cuatrecasas . 1975 . Mobility of cholera toxin receptors on rat lymphocyte membranes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 72 : 3844 – 3848 . 1042 Bacia et al . Biophysical Journal 87 ( 2 ) 1034 – 1043 Dietrich , C . , L . A . Bagatolli , Z . N . Volovyk , N . L . Thompson , M . Levi , K . Jacobsen , and E . Gratton . 2001 . Lipid rafts reconstituted in model membranes . Biophys . J . 80 : 1417 – 1428 . Drevot , P . , C . Langlet , X . J . Guo , A . M . Bernard , O . Colard , J . P . Chauvin , R . Lasserre , and H . T . He . 2002 . TCR signal initiation machinery is pre - assembled and activated in a subset of membrane rafts . EMBO J . 21 : 1899 – 1908 . Edidin , M . 2003 . The state of lipid rafts : from model membranes to cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 32 : 257 – 283 . Fahey , P . F . , D . E . Koppel , L . S . Barak , D . E . Wolf , E . L . Elson , and W . W . Webb . 1977 . Lateral diffusion in planar lipid bilayers . Science . 195 : 305 – 306 . Giocondi , M . C . , V . Vie , E . Lesniewska , J . P . Goudonnet , and G . Le Grimellec . 2000 . In situ imaging of detergent - resistant membranes by atomic force microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 131 : 38 – 43 . Ha , T . 2001a . Single - molecule ﬂuorescence methods for the study of nucleic acids . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 11 : 287 – 292 . Ha , T . 2001b . Single - molecule ﬂuorescence resonance energy transfer . Methods . 25 : 78 – 86 . Hagmann , J . , and P . H . Fishman . 1982 . Detergent extraction of cholera toxin and gangliosides from cultured cells and isolated membranes . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 720 : 181 – 187 . Hao , M . , S . Mukherjee , and F . R . Maxﬁeld . 2001 . Cholesterol depletion induces large scale domain segregation in living cell membranes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 98 : 13072 – 13077 . Heerklotz , H . 2002 . Triton promotes domain formation in lipid raft mixtures . Biophys . J . 83 : 2693 – 2701 . Kahya , N . , D . Scherfeld , K . Bacia , B . Poolman , and P . Schwille . 2003 . Probing lipid mobility of raft - exhibiting model membranes by ﬂuores - cence correlation spectroscopy . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 28109 – 28115 . Kahya , N . , D . Scherfeld . K . Bacia , and P . Schwille . K . Scherfeld . K . Bacia , and P . Schwille . 2004 . Lipid domain formation and dynamics in giant unilamellar vesicles explored by ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 147 : 77 – 89 . Klausner , R . D . , and D . E . Wolf . 1980 . Selectivity of ﬂuorescent lipid analogues for lipid domains . Biochemistry . 19 : 6199 – 6203 . Klein , U . , G . Gimpl , and F . Fahrenholz . 1995 . Alteration of the myometrial plasma membrane cholesterol content with b - cyclodextrin modulates the binding afﬁnity of the oxytocin receptor . Biochemistry . 34 : 13784 – 13793 . Korlach , J . , P . Schwille , W . W . Webb , and G . W . Feigenson . 1999 . Characterization of lipid bilayer phases by confocal microscopy and ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 96 : 8461 – 8466 . Marsh , D . , A . Watts , and P . F . Knowles . 1976 . Evidence for phase boundary lipid . Permeability of tempo - choline into dimyristoylphospha - tidylcholine vesicles at the phase transition . Biochemistry . 15 : 3570 – 3578 . Marsh , D . , A . Watts , and P . F . Knowles . 1977 . Cooperativity of the phase transition in single - and multibilayer lipid vesicles . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 465 : 500 – 514 . McConnell , H . M . , and M . Vrljic . 2003 . Liquid - liquid immiscibility in membranes . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 32 : 469 – 492 . Munro , S . 2003 . Lipid rafts : elusive or illusive ? Cell . 115 : 377 – 388 . Pike , L . J . , and J . M . Miller . 1998 . Cholesterol depletion delocalizes phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate and inhibits hormone - stimulated phosphatidylinositol turnover . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 22298 – 22304 . Pralle , A . , P . Keller , E . L . Florin , K . Simons , and J . K . Horber . 2000 . Sphingolipid - cholesterol rafts diffuse as small entities in the plasma membrane of mammalian cells . J . Cell Biol . 148 : 997 – 1008 . Saxton , M . J . 1994 . Anomalous diffusion due to obstacles : a Monte Carlo study . Biophys . J . 66 : 394 – 401 . Schroeder , R . , E . London , and D . Brown . 1994 . Interactions between saturated acyl - chains confer detergent resistance on lipids and glyco - sylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored proteins : GPI - anchored proteins in liposomes and cells show similar behavior . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 91 : 12130 – 12134 . Schuck , S . , M . Honsho , K . Ekroos , A . Shevchenko , and K . Simons . 2003 . Resistance of cell membranes to different detergents . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 100 : 5795 – 5800 . Schu¨tz , G . J . , and P . Hinterdorfer . 2002 . Single molecule ﬂuorescence and force microscopy . Exp . Gerontol . 37 : 1493 – 1509 . Schu¨tz , G . J . , G . Kada , V . P . Pastushenko , and H . Schindler . 2000 . Properties of lipid microdomains in a muscle cell membrane visualized by single molecule microscopy . EMBO J . 19 : 892 – 901 . Schwille , P . , J . Korlach , and W . W . Webb . 1999 . Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy with single - molecule sensitivity on cell and model membranes . Cytometry . 36 : 176 – 182 . Seveau , S . , R . J . Eddy , F . R . Maxﬁeld , and L . M . Pierini . 2001 . Cytoskeleton - dependent membrane domain segregation during neutro - phil polarization . Mol . Biol . Cell . 12 : 3550 – 3562 . Siggia , E . D . , J . Lippincott - Schwartz , and S . Bekiranov . 2000 . Diffusion in inhomogeneous media : theory and simulations applied to whole cell photobleach recovery . Biophys . J . 79 : 1761 – 1770 . Simons , K . , and E . Ikonen . 1997 . Functional rafts in cell membranes . Nature . 387 : 569 – 572 . Simons , K . , and G . van Meer . 1988 . Lipid sorting in epithelial cells . Biochemistry . 27 : 6197 – 6202 . Spink , C . H . , M . D . Yeager , and G . W . Feigenson . 1990 . Partitioning behavior of indocarbocyanine probes between coexisting gel and ﬂuid phases in model membranes . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1023 : 25 – 33 . Thomas , J . L . , D . Holowka , B . Baird , and W . W . Webb . 1994 . Large - scale co - aggregation of ﬂuorescent lipid probes with cell surface proteins . J . Cell Biol . 125 : 795 – 802 . Thompson , N . L . , and D . Axelrod . 1980 . Reduced lateral mobility of a ﬂuorescent lipid probe in cholesterol - depleted erythrocyte membrane . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 597 : 155 – 165 . Widengren , J . , and P . Schwille . 2000 . Characterization of photoinduced isomerization and back - isomerization of the cyanine dye cy5 by ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy . J . Phys . Chem . A . 104 : 6416 – 6428 . Yeagle , P . L . 1991 . The Structure of Biological Membranes . CRC Press , Boca Raton , FL . Yoon , S . S . , K . I . Jung , Y . L . Choi , E . Y . Choi , I . S . Lee , S . H . Park , and T . J . Kim . 2003 . Engagement of CD99 triggers the exocytic transport of ganglioside GM1 and the reorganization of actin cytoskeleton . FEBS Lett . 540 : 217 – 222 . Relating Model and Native Rafts by FCS 1043 Biophysical Journal 87 ( 2 ) 1034 – 1043