REVIEW SUMMARY ◥ CELLULAR BIOPHYSICS Liquid phase condensation in cell physiology and disease Yongdae Shin and Clifford P . Brangwynne * BACKGROUND : Living cells contain distinct subcompartments to facilitate spatiotemporal regulation of biological reactions . In addition tocanonicalmembrane - boundorganellessuch assecretoryvesiclesandendoplasmicreticulum , there are many organelles that do not have an enclosingmembraneyetremaincoherentstruc - turesthatcancompartmentalizeandconcentratespecificsetsofmolecules . Examplesincludeassem - bliesinthenucleussuchasthenucleolus , Cajal bodies , andnuclearspecklesandalsocytoplasmic structuressuchasstressgranules , P - bodies , and germgranules . Thesestructuresplaydiverseroles invariousbiologicalprocessesandarealsoincreas - inglyimplicatedinproteinaggregationdiseases . ADVANCES : A number of studies have shown thatmembrane - lessassembliesexhibitremark - able liquid - like features . As with conventional liquids , theytypicallyadoptroundmorphologies andcoalesceintoasingledropletuponcontactwithoneanotherandalsowetintracellularsur - faces such as the nuclear envelope . Moreover , componentmoleculesexhibitdynamicexchange with the surrounding nucleoplasm and cyto - plasm . Thesefindingstogethersuggestthatthese structuresrepresentliquid - phasecondensates , which form via a biologically regulated ( liquid - liquid ) phase separation process . Liquid phase condensation increasingly appears to be a fun - damental mechanism for organizing intra - cellularspace . Consistentwiththisconcept , several membrane - less organelles have been shown to exhibitaconcentrationthresholdforassembly , a hallmark of phase separation . At the molecular level , weak , transient interactions between mole - cules with multivalent domains or intrinsically disorderedregions ( IDRs ) areadrivingforcefor phaseseparation . Incells , condensationofliquid - phase assemblies can be regulated by active processes , including transcription and various posttranslational modifications . The simplest physical picture of a ho - mogeneousliquidphaseisoftennotenoughtocapturethefullcomplexityofintra - cellularcondensates , which frequently exhibit hetero - geneousmultilayeredstruc - tures with partiallysolid - likecharacters . However , recentstudieshaveshownthatmultiple distinct liquid phases can coexist and give rise to richly structured droplet architectures determined by the relative liquid surface tensions . Moreover , solid - like phases can emerge from metastable liquid condensates via multiple routes of poten - tially both kinetic and thermodynamic origins , which has important implications for the role of intracellular liquids in protein aggregation pathologies . OUTLOOK : The list of intracellular assemblies driven by liquid phase condensation is growing rapidly , butourunderstandingoftheirsequence - encodedbiologicalfunctionanddysfunctionlagsbehind . Moreover , unlikeequilibriumphasesof nonliving matter , living cells are far from equi - librium , with intracellular condensates sub - ject to various posttranslational regulation and other adenosine triphosphate – dependent bio - logical activity . Efforts using in vitro reconsti - tution , combinedwith traditional cell biology approaches and quantitative biophysical tools , are required to elucidate how such nonequili - briumfeaturesoflivingcellscontrolintracellularphasebehavior . The functional consequences of forming liquid condensates are likely mul - tifaceted and may include facilitated reaction , sequestration of specific factors , and organiza - tion of associated intracellular structures . Liquid phase condensation is particularly interesting in the nucleus , given the growing interest in the impact of nuclear phase behavior on the flow of genetic information ; nuclear conden - satesrangefrommicrometer - sizedbodiessuch as the nucleolus to submicrometer structures such astranscriptional assemblies , allofwhich directlyinteractwithandregulatethegenome . Deepening our understanding of these intra - cellular states ofmatter not onlywillshed light onthebasicbiologyofcellularorganizationbutalsomayenabletherapeuticinterventioninpro - tein aggregation disease by targeting intra - cellular phase behavior . ▪ RESEARCH Shin et al . , Science 357 , 1253 ( 2017 ) 22 September 2017 1 of 1 Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ , USA . * Corresponding author . Email : cbrangwy @ princeton . edu Cite this article as Y . Shin , C . P . Brangwynne , Science 357 , eaaf4382 ( 2017 ) . DOI : 10 . 1126 / science . aaf4382 Liquid phase condensation : An emerging paradigm of cellular organization . Living cells contain various types of condensed liquid - like structures enriched with a distinct set of biomolecules that assemble through regulated phase separation . Sequence - encoded physi - cochemical properties lead to rich intracellular phase behaviors , including multiphase structuring and emergence of solid - like states from metastable liquids . Liquid condensates affect the flow of information in the cell , often through affecting RNA transcription and protein translation . ON OUR WEBSITE ◥ Read the full article at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . aaf4382 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . REVIEW ◥ CELLULAR BIOPHYSICS Liquid phase condensation in cell physiology and disease Yongdae Shin and Clifford P . Brangwynne * Phase transitions are ubiquitous in nonliving matter , and recent discoveries have shown that they also play a key role within living cells . Intracellular liquid - liquid phase separation is thought to drive the formation of condensed liquid - like droplets of protein , RNA , and other biomolecules , which form in the absence of a delimiting membrane . Recent studies have elucidated many aspects of the molecular interactions underlying the formation of these remarkable and ubiquitous droplets and the way in which such interactions dictate their material properties , composition , and phase behavior . Here , we review these exciting developments and highlight key remaining challenges , particularly the ability of liquid condensates to both facilitate and respond to biological function and how their metastability may underlie devastating protein aggregation diseases . A central aspect of biological organization is thecompartmentalizationofbiologicalsys - tems . Cellsarefacedwiththedauntingtask of spatiotemporally organizing thousands ofsimultaneousmolecularreactions , which must be coordinated for proper function . To achieve this , the cellular interior is subdivided intodozensofdifferenttypesofmembrane - bound organelles , from the sequestering of genetic ma - terial into the nucleus to the more richly shaped Golgiapparatusandendoplasmicreticulum . These and other vesicle - like organelles provide our text - bookunderstandingofintracellularorganization , arising from the amphiphilic nature of phospho - lipids that define their membrane boundaries . Indeed , the term “ organelle ” is often mistaken as being synonymous with phospholipid - defined compartments . Liquid droplets in the cell Despite the dominance of this view of intra - cellularcompartmentalizationthroughcanonicalvesicle - like organelles , some of the first organ - elles to be discovered are actually outside of this paradigm . These include the nucleolus ( 1 ) and Cajal bodies ( 2 ) , both of which we now under - stand are not membrane - delimited structures but rather represent “ open ” macromolecular assemblies . These organelles , held together via weak interactions between components , are not structurally defined macromolecular complexes , such as the ribosome . Instead , they reflect col - lectionsofthousandsofmoleculeswhoserelative organizationistypicallyhighlydynamic . Advances in modern cell biology and microscopy have re - vealed a plethora of such intracellular conden - sates . Inmanycases , thesestructuresarecomposed ofbothproteinandRNAmoleculesandareknown asribonucleoprotein ( RNP ) bodies / granules ( Box1 ) ( 3 – 5 ) . These include nuclear bodies such as Cajal bodies , nucleoli , and nuclear speckles and also manycytoplasmicstructures , includingPgranules , stressgranules , andprocessingbodies ( P - bodies ) . Other membraneless bodies are involved in cell signaling — for example , cytoplasmic Dvl clusters seen in Wnt signaling ( 6 , 7 ) as well as signaling clusters in T cell activation ( 8 ) . Despite their dy - namic nature , many of these condensates can maintain their overall size and shape for minutes or hours while exchanging their components with the surrounding cytoplasm or nucleoplasm on time scales of seconds ( 9 – 11 ) . As we discuss below , studies on germline P granules in Caenorhabditis elegans have shown that these structures behave as liquid droplets , in that they are round and , upon contact with one another , coalesce into a single larger spherical assembly ( Fig . 1 ) ( 12 ) . Moreover , they can exhibit apparent “ wetting ” behavior when in contact with surfaces such as the nuclear en - velope , resembling water droplets beading up on a hydrophobic surface such as a freshly waxed car . Nucleoli exhibit similar liquid - like behavior ( Fig . 1 ) ( 13 ) , and such dynamic fluid properties have been increasingly observed for both native intracellular condensates ( 14 , 15 ) and synthetic ones ( 16 – 18 ) , with some important variations , as we discuss below . Although precise measurement of their biophysical properties is challenging because of the small size scales of these intra - cellular structures ( typically ~ 1 m m diameter ) , combined in vitro and in vivo studies using a variety of techniques have revealed quantitative signatures of macromolecular liquids , including viscous stress relaxation and low surface tensions . These findings all indicate that many of these structures represent condensed liquid - like states of intracellular matter ( Fig . 1 ) . Phase transitions These diverse liquid - like droplets of biomole - cules , whichself - assemblewithinanotherliquid — the cytoplasm or nucleoplasm — are increasingly recognized as arising from a physicochemical process known as liquid - liquid phase separation , sometimesalsocalledcoacervation . Phase - separated liquidsarefamiliarfromeverydayexperiencewithimmisciblefluidssuchaswaterandoil , whichwill always “ demix ” and phase separate , no matter howvigorouslyshaken . Alsocommonlyobserved are phase transitions of water itself , which can exist in solid , liquid , or gas phases . For exam - ple , high concentrations of gaseous water ( high humidity ) and low temperatures can promote condensation into water droplets , such as the dewdrops seen condensing on blades of grass . The liquid state is similar to the gaseous state , in that molecules are unorganized and very mo - bile , but in the liquid state , they are in a highly condensed droplet form . Upon further lowering the temperature , water molecules can snap into register , forming solid crystalline ice . In each of these three states , the water molecules them - selves are chemically the same , but their higher - order organization is completely different , with dramatic consequences that are readily visible on the macroscale . Phase transitions are not restricted to small molecules such as water , and it has long been recognized that biomolecules can undergo sim - ilar transitions . For example , protein solutions are known to form crystalline assemblies under RESEARCH Shin et al . , Science 357 , eaaf4382 ( 2017 ) 22 September 2017 1 of 11 Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ , USA . * Corresponding author . Email : cbrangwy @ princeton . edu Box 1 . Nomenclature . A wide variety of names have been used for the structures we consider here . When they are RNA - and protein - rich , they are variously referred to as “ RNA granules ” ( 4 ) , “ RNP bodies ” ( 163 ) , or “ RNP droplets ” ( 47 ) . When referring to nuclear structures , these are typically referred to as “ nuclear bodies ” ( 3 ) . Moreover , membraneless assemblies associated with signaling are often referred to as “ signaling clusters ” ( 164 ) . In oral presentations , the general term “ phases ” is increasingly used , which is potentially confusing given its use in relation to phases of the cell cycle . Many other names have also been used , including “ assemblages ” ( 165 ) , “ pleiomorphic ensembles ” ( 166 ) , and “ membraneless organelles ” ( 167 , 168 ) . This nomenclature expansion is summarized by the famous quip “ scientists would rather use each other ’ s toothbrushes than each other ’ s terminology ” ( 169 ) . Given an ever increasing number of studies suggesting that these structures arise from a form of liquid phase condensation , as well as historical ( 23 ) and more recent ( 170 ) uses , we will use the term “ condensate ” as a simple and general term for any membraneless intracellular assembly . different buffer conditions , and coaxing pro - teins to crystallize is an essential step in solv - ing the structure of folded proteins with x - ray crystallography ( 19 , 20 ) . In crystallizing into a solid state , protein solutions can also form con - densed liquid droplets and are often observed before the appearance of crystals ( 21 , 22 ) . Protein liquids have also been of interest owing to sev - eral lines of evidence that suggest liquid phase condensation of proteins within the lens of the eye underlies cataract formation ( 23 ) . Despite the long - standing interest in protein phase behavior among structural biologists , only recently has it become clear that phase transi - tions play a ubiquitous role in organizing the contents of living cells ( Box 2 ) . These types of phase transitions typically occur above a satu - ration concentration , the concentration threshold above which two distinct phases demix , result - ing in one phase highly concentrated in a given set of molecules and one phase relatively more dilute . Consistent with this model , several con - densates , including nucleoli ( 24 ) and stress gran - ules ( 15 ) , have been shown to assemble only above a concentration threshold . Moreover , the over - expression of key protein components is suffi - cient to drive stress granule assembly , even in the absence of any stress ( 25 – 27 ) . The molecular features underlying concentration - dependent intracellular phase transitions are only beginning to be understood . Proteins driving phase separation Phase transitions represent thermodynamic pro - cesses in which a system tends to go toward the lowest - energy state , which is determined by a combination of entropic as well as enthalpic contributions ( 28 , 29 ) ( Box 3 ) . In general , entropy tends to keep a system well mixed ; entropy should counteract phase separation because there are more ways to configure a well - mixed system . This is why increasing temperature causes water droplets to dissolve . Thus , the system is usually required to have some attractive interactions be - tween molecules to drive them to phase - separate into a condensed state . As we discuss below , in living cells these interactions are mediated large - ly by the cell ’ s biopolymers , particularly protein , RNA , and DNA . From decades of theoretical and experimental work on phase transitions in non - living polymeric systems , it is known that one must also take into account the configurational entropy of the individual chain , which effective - ly lowers the energetic contribution from mixing entropy because of connectivity of individual subunits ( 28 , 30 ) . In practice , this means that polymeric solutions are more prone to undergo phase separation , which has important biological implications . Multivalency A key molecular driving force underlying the assembly of liquid condensates is multivalent protein - protein ( and protein - RNA ) interactions ( Fig . 2 ) . Indeed , many proteins exhibit several repeats of the same type of domain , or different types of modular interaction domains ( 31 , 32 ) . Shin et al . , Science 357 , eaaf4382 ( 2017 ) 22 September 2017 2 of 11 a 0 s 20 µ m 510 s 1135 s 2565 s 20 µ m 0 s 10 µm 45 s 67 s 91 s 116 s Time Bleached Liquid droplet 0s 21s 32s 36s 46s N 5 µ m 100 Time 200 300 0 F l uo r e sc en c e 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 Recovery Bleaching Fig . 1 . Liquid phase behaviors of various droplet condensates . ( A ) P granules flow , coalesce , and drip off the surface of a nucleus in response to shear ( 12 ) . ( B ) Spherical nucleoli from Xenopus laevis germinal vesicles coalesce into a larger sphere ( 13 ) . ( C ) Liquid - like nuclear bodies induced to nucleate and grow in the nucleus of a Drosophila oocyte ( 160 ) . ( D ) Molecules within a liquid phase exhibit dynamic reorganization , which can be probed with FRAP . SH2 SH3 PRM hnRNPA1 S H 3 4 + P R M 4 hn RN P A 1 Disordered Proteins Multivalent Proteins Grb2 Sos1 RNA RRM RRM 20 µm Fig . 2 . Molecular features driving intracellular phase separation . ( A ) Weak transient interactions between multivalent proteins drive liquid - liquid phase separation . Regulatory proteins in many signal transduction pathways often contain a set of protein - interaction domains , including SH3 and PRM , as shown here . Proteins harboring IDRs are also key for driving liquid - liquid phase separation . Many RNA - binding proteins have modular architectures in which different sequences of IDRs are appended to various RNA - binding domains , including RRM , RGG repeats , and enzymatic domains . IDRs alone can drive phase separation , but RNA can further promote this process by interacting through RNA - binding domains . ( B ) ( Top ) A mixture of two model proteins , repeats of SH3 and PRM , undergoes liquid - liquid phase separation in vitro ( 17 ) . ( Bottom ) The purified hnRNPA1 , an RNA - binding protein with a C - terminal IDR , also forms liquid droplets ( 15 ) . RESEARCH | REVIEW Among others , these include repeats of the SH3 domain , which binds to proline - rich motifs ( PRMs ) , both of which are found in many proteins , often forming repetitive modules that are thought to be important for signaling complexes . The im - portance of these repetitive domains in driving phase separation has been elucidated by using synthetic repeats of the SH3 / PRM system ( 17 ) . It was found that by making protein constructs that consist of repeats of three or more SH3 domains , ( SH3 ) n , and mixing with similarly repeating PRM domains , ( PRM ) n , liquid droplets form . This was particularly true for high - valency constructs ( n ≥ 3 ) , and the module concentration at which droplets are observed decreases with higher valency . More - over , when such complementary pairs of constructs are expressed within living cells , they are observed to form liquid - like condensates , apparently under - going phase separation . Given the ability of a small subset of proteins to drive phase separation , how might these pro - teins recruit other molecules into the droplet ? Important insights have come from recent work using repetitive domains of the binding part - ners small ubiquitin - like modifier ( SUMO ) and the SUMO interacting motif ( SIM ) ( 33 ) , com - monly found in various condensates , including nuclear promyelocytic leukemia ( PML ) bodies ( 34 ) . Like the SH3 / PRM system , when higher - valency constructs are mixed in vitro , they un - dergo liquid - liquid phase separation , forming a droplet comprising a concentrated ( SUMO ) n and ( SIM ) m “ scaffold . ” When “ client ” species of either monomeric SUMO or monomeric SIM are introduced , in some cases the client species partition into droplets , whereas sometimes they do not . If n > m , then there is a higher concen - tration of SUMO scaffolds with unbound free sites within droplets , resulting in strong recruit - ment of SIM client molecules . Conversely , when n < m , SUMO client molecules are strongly re - cruited . Important challenges remain to extend the results of this simple model system so as to understand the full complexity of physiologi - cal condensates . But these results show that the relative stoichiometry and valency of interacting molecules can play key roles in compositional control . Intrinsically disordered protein regions Many intracellular condensates , particularly RNP bodies , are highly enriched in proteins that con - tain stretches of low sequence complexity , which often exhibit conformational heterogeneity ( Fig . 2 ) ( 35 – 38 ) . These so - called intrinsically disordered proteins / regions ( IDPs / IDRs ) are typically enriched in particular polar and charged amino acids , in - cluding glycine ( G ) , serine ( S ) , glutamine ( Q ) , pro - line ( P ) , glutamic acid ( E ) , lysine ( K ) , and arginine ( R ) ( 39 , 40 ) . Although IDRs generally lack hydro - phobic residues that drive high - order folding , the sequences found in condensates are nonetheless often interspersed with aromatic residues , partic - ularly tyrosine ( Y ) and phenylalanine ( F ) . These residues pattern the polypeptide backbone to en - able charge - charge , charge - p , and p - p stacking in - teractions ( 30 ) . One well - studied example is the germ granule protein DDX4 , a RNA helicase with IDRs at both its N and C terminus ( 16 ) . When expressed and purified in vitro , the N - terminal IDR alone is sufficient for phase - separating into liquid droplets , whose formation is promoted by low temperatures and low salt concentrations . Moreover , when a yellow fluorescent protein – tagged DDX4 IDR construct is expressed in cells , it forms droplets within the cell nucleus . Remark - ably , as with in vitro droplets , these intracellular DDX4 condensates are highly sensitive to temper - ature changes , dissolving at high temperatures and recondensing at lower temperatures . The closely related RNA helicase LAF - 1 forms similar droplets in vitro and contributes to P granule assembly ( 41 ) . Moreover , LAF - 1 droplets also dissolve at high salt concentration , underscor - ing the role of charge - mediated interactions . The IDRs within DDX4 and LAF - 1 are polyampholytic ; they contain a mix of positively and negatively charged amino acids . The way charges pattern , not just the presence of charges , has been shown to be important in promoting phase separation ( 16 , 42 ) . However , the mechanism underlying charge pattern – driven phase separation is still poorly understood . Atomic simulations suggest that the conformational properties , which are determined by the balance of intrachain electro - static interactions versus chain - solvent inter - actions , are highly dependent on the degree of charge segregation along the chain ( 43 – 45 ) . More - over , LAF - 1 IDR simulations reveal particularly large conformational fluctuations , with a large volume sampled by the chain , which in turn en - ables formation of liquid droplets with a high permeability and low protein density ( 46 ) ; in - deed , many intracellular RNP condensates appear to exhibit low density ( 47 , 48 ) . Thus , informa - tion encoded in the protein sequence appears to affect conformational fluctuations and asso - ciated intermolecular interactions , which in turn dictates the biophysical properties of the emer - gent phases . Recent efforts have begun to sys - tematically evaluate the link between varied protein sequences and phase behavior ( 49 ) , but more work is needed . A variety of other IDR sequences have recently been shown to drive liquid - liquid phase separation in vitro , including the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( ALS ) – related and stress granule – associated pro - teins hnRNPA1 , FUS , and TDP43 ( 14 , 15 , 50 – 52 ) ; the mitotic spindle protein BuGZ ( 53 ) ; and the Q - rich cell - cycle regulatory protein Whi3 ( 54 ) . But in some cases , their phase separation may involve distinct physicochemical driving forces . For example , FUS , in contrast to DDX4 and LAF - 1 , harbors mostly polar and aromatic residues but lacks charged residues , and FUS IDR exhibits liquid - liquid phase separation preferentially at higher salt concentrations ( 50 ) ; additional studies on Hofmeister salts may help elucidate these effects ( 55 ) . Mutational studies further support the role of aromatic residues in driving phase separation , in particular through p - p stacking ( 53 , 56 , 57 ) . Hydrophobic interactions , an impor - tant and related physicochemical driving force , may also play a role in intracellular condensation . Although typical condensed phases dissolve upon increasing temperature , which is associated with an upper critical solution temperature ( UCST ) , hydrophobic interactions can manifest in lower critical solution temperature ( LCST ) — phase sep - aration upon increasing temperature , as observed in vitro with several protein and model polypeptide systems ( 49 , 53 , 58 , 59 ) . Although in many cases the homotypic inter - actions among different IDRs drive phase sepa - ration , heterotypic interactions are also important . Both specific RNA / protein interactions and non - specific interactions — for example , those associated with charged residues — are likely to play key roles , as we discuss further below . In synthetic systems , it has long been recognized that two types of op - positely charged polymers or colloids can first form complexes , which then undergo phase sep - aration at high enough concentrations in a pro - cess referred to as complex coacervation ( 60 ) . Evidence for this has recently been shown for the disordered intracellular domain of nephrin ( NICD ) , whose net charge of – 21 facilitates com - plex coacervation in vitro in the presence of pos - itively supercharged green fluorescent proteins , Shin et al . , Science 357 , eaaf4382 ( 2017 ) 22 September 2017 3 of 11 Box 2 . A brief history of cytoplasmic liquid phases . Studies on the physical nature of the cytoplasm have a long history . In the early 1900s , interdisciplinary biologists including Edmund B . Wilson , Ernest E . Just , and Frank Lillie viewed the cytoplasm as a special type of active fluid . In 1899 , Wilson published an article in Science on the “ Structure of protoplasm , ” in which he asserted that “ The living protoplasm . . . is a liquid , or rather a mixture of liquids , in the form of a fine emulsion consisting of a continuous substance in which are suspended drops . . . of different chemical nature ” ( 171 ) . Over the intervening decades , phase transitions have been proposed to play a role in various aspects of cell organization , most notably in the lipid raft model , which views the two - dimensional ( 2D ) organization of lipid membranes as arising from liquid - liquid phase separation of cholesterol , lipid , and various membrane - associated proteins ( 172 ) . Many researchers had also speculated that phase separation may be similarly relevant within the 3D cell interior ( 173 – 175 ) and could potentially underlie various “ protein condensation diseases ” ( 23 ) . Recent discoveries on the liquid phase nature of P granules ( 12 ) , nucleoli ( 13 , 64 , 65 ) , and dozens of other such fluid condensates have revealed that phase transitions are key for organizing the contents of living cells . Together with a rapidly advancing understanding of the molecular driving forces underlying intracellular liquid - liquid phase separation , this work has ushered in an exciting new era in the long history of physicochemical studies of cytoplasm . RESEARCH | REVIEW resulting in the formation of liquid - like droplets ( 42 ) . Moreover , when overexpressed in HeLa cells , NICD forms liquid condensates within the nu - cleus . Consistent with complex coacervation but not with simple coacervation , the concentration outside of NICD condensates is not constant as the expression level increases . NICD presumably undergoes complex coacervation together with positively charged proteins in the nucleus to neu - tralize its charge for phase separation . Highly multicomponent systems The work described above has begun to shed light on the molecular - level rules important for the assembly of liquid - like organelles . But such con - densates exhibit remarkably diverse composi - tion ; for example , there are dozens of proteins found in P granules ( 61 ) and stress granules ( 62 ) , and mass spectrometry of purified nucleoli has identified many hundreds of enriched proteins ( 63 ) . In all of these cases , only a small subset of proteins are necessary to promote in vitro liquid droplet formation ( 41 , 64 – 68 ) , but the larger set of components appear to act in concert to control phase separation in living cells . Moreover , RNP bodies typically contain not only proteins but also numerous RNAs and clearly represent highly multicomponent systems . How the droplet com - position , biophysical properties , and protein phase behavior would be altered as the system incor - porates more components is an outstanding ques - tion , which is only beginning to be addressed ( Box 3 ) . The role of RNA Recent work has begun to uncover a multitude of different effects of RNA on intracellular phase transitions . In many cases , RNA appears to pro - mote phase separation . For example , polypyrimi - dine tract - binding protein ( PTB ) , an RNA - binding protein with four RNA recognition motif ( RRM ) domains , undergoes liquid - liquid phase separa - tion in the presence of RNA , independent of any IDRs involved ( 17 ) , and the N - terminal fragment of hnRNPA1 containing two RRMs also shows similar behaviors ( 15 ) . Moreover , the nucleolar pro - tein nucleophosmin ( NPM1 / B23 ) assembles into a pentamer , which requires ribosomal RNA ( rRNA ) to form multivalent interactions that drive phase separation ( 64 ) . In many cases , these proteins con - tain both RNA - binding motifs and IDRs ( Fig . 2B ) ( 35 ) , and interactions with RNA promote liquid - liquid phase separation synergistically with IDR - IDR interactions . This manifests as a lowering of the saturation concentration for phase separation in the presence of RNA , an effect now seen with numerous proteins ( 15 , 54 , 66 , 69 , 70 ) . RNA can have other effects on the phase be - havior of intracellular condensates . The saturat - ing concentration of the P granule protein LAF - 1 was found to be insensitive to the presence of short [ 50 nucleotide ( nt ) ] polyadenylate [ poly ( A ) ] RNA , even while the physical properties of the droplets such as the internal viscosity are strongly affected ( 41 ) . This arises from the way in which RNA selectively skews the right arm of the bi - nodal ( definition provided in Fig . 3 ) , causing the protein concentration within droplets to markedly decrease , with an associated decrease in droplet viscosity ( 46 ) . These effects of added RNA arise in part from RNA ’ s impact on protein interaction strength , which is typically quanti - fied through the dissociation constant or closely related second virial coefficient ( 71 ) . Entangle - ment may also be relevant because longer poly ( A ) RNA ( 3000 nt ) can have the opposite effect , in - creasing LAF - 1 droplet viscosity ( 46 ) ; entangle - ment could also explain the finding that long RNA increases the viscosity of Whi3 droplets Shin et al . , Science 357 , eaaf4382 ( 2017 ) 22 September 2017 4 of 11 Fig . 3 . Thermodynamic basis of phase separa - tion . ( A ) Phase separation is a thermodynamic pro - cess in which a uniformly mixed system can lower its free energy by dividing into two or more phases with distinct composi - tions : for binary mixtures , C sat and C in . ( B ) The free - energy construction at different temperatures can give rise to a full phase diagram showing conditions under which phase separation occurs . The sharp phase boundary dividing single - phase and two - phase regions is called the binodal ; the left arm of the binodal dictates C sat , and the right arm dictates C in . ( C ) In the binary mixture , phase separation leads to the formation of regions enriched with one component in equilibrium , with a surrounding region enriched with the other component . ( D ) In a ternary system , the shape of phase diagrams can differ depending on interactions between components . One possibility is a three - phase region , as well as distinct two - phase regions in the phase space . In the three - phase region , two distinct types of liquid droplets can coexist . Box 3 . Theoretical considerations in multicomponent phase separation . An important theoretical framework for understanding phase separation is the regular solution model [ or the closely related Flory Huggins model for polymers ( 30 ) ] . This model considers molecules interacting on a lattice . The number of possible distinct ways of placing the molecules on the lattice dictates the entropy of mixing . The enthalpic contribution to the free energy arises from assigning pairwise interaction energies between neighboring molecules on the lattice and approximating their contribution by statistically averaging the effect of all such interactions into a much simpler “ mean - field ” term . This approximation dramatically reduces the complexity of the problem while still capturing key behaviors of phase - separating systems . The regular solution as well as more advanced theoretical frameworks — for example , considering charge patterning effects — have been used to model RNA / protein phase behavior ( 16 , 70 , 176 ) . The regular solution model can be extended to larger numbers of components — for example , in the so - called ternary solution , which includes additional terms for entropy and interaction energies . The ternary regular solution model has been successful in describing P granule dynamics ( 66 , 133 ) and the dynamics of engineered IDP constructs ( 96 ) . The ternary regular solution model provides useful insights in understanding the complex phase behaviors possible in multicomponent systems ( 177 , 178 ) . The exact shape of the phase diagram , including the presence of coexisting phases , is determined by intermolecular interactions between constituting components . In general , the system can have two - phase regions along each composition axis . Under a case in which these two - phase regions from each component are large enough to meet in the middle of a phase diagram , there can be two distinct possibilities for the phase coexistence . Again , depending on the relative magnitudes of intermolecular interaction strengths , the system can have either a three - phase coexistence region or a single interconnected two - phase region ( Fig . 3 ) . Theoretical approaches for expanding our understanding of phase behavior in the highly complex intracellular environment have begun ( 179 , 180 ) , but more work is needed . RESEARCH | REVIEW ( 54 ) . However , in the latter case , CLN3 and BNI1 RNA exhibit specific Whi3 - binding sequences as well as secondary structure . As we discuss further below , the nature of these RNA / protein inter - actions has important biological implications — for example , in the patterning of developing embryos and in nucleating various nuclear con - densates ( 72 ) . Moreover , recent work supports the idea that the phase behavior of RNA itself is important and could play a role in neurodegen - erative diseases associated with trinucleotide RNA repeats ( 73 ) . Multiphase immiscibility The concept that many intracellular condensates represent phase - separated liquid states of RNA and protein may seem at odds with the fact that these structures do not always appear to be ho - mogeneous spherical droplets . Instead , they can assume nonspherical shapes and exhibit inhomog - eneities over “ mesoscopic ” length scales , much larger than characteristic molecular dimensions . One of the most well - known examples is the nu - cleolus , the largest nuclear body , which exhibits a core - shell architecture thought to be impor - tant for sequential processing of nascent rRNA transcripts ( 74 ) . A similar core - shell structure is observed in stress granules ( 62 ) , and RNP bodies such as processing bodies and P granules have been reported to exhibit some degree of inter - nal structuring ( 75 – 77 ) . Recent work has provided evidence that the core - shell architecture of nucleoli self - assembles through the immiscibility ( nonmixing ) of multiple liquid phases ( Fig . 4 ) ( 65 ) . Key components found in nucleolar subcompartments exhibit rapid mo - lecular dynamics as seen in fluorescence recov - ery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) . Moreover , a number of these proteins are capable of phase separating in vitro . As discussed above , the nu - cleolar “ shell ” protein NPM1 forms liquid drop - lets in the presence of rRNA ( 64 ) , whereas the “ core ” protein fibrillarin also undergoes liquid - liquid phase separation in vitro , which is also sensitive to rRNA ( 70 ) . Remarkably , when these two different types of purified protein droplets are combined , they do not fuse with one another but remain as distinct , immiscible phases ( 65 ) . Moreover , fibrillarin - rich droplets are engulfed by NPM1 - rich droplets , similar to the core - shell organization of the nucleolus in vivo . Although the molecular determinants of protein phase im - miscibility are still poorly understood , system - atic efforts are under way ( 78 ) . Multiphase coexistence is well known in non - living systems and can be demonstrated with simple mixtures of organic solvents ( 79 ) . Depend - ing on relative droplet surface tension , this can give rise to structured droplets ( 80 ) ; for exam - ple , droplets with a high surface tension will be engulfed by the lower surface tension droplet ( Fig . 4A ) . This is analogous to the burying of en - ergetically costly hydrophobic residues within a folded protein to minimize its interaction with water . A similar principle has been suggested to explain the internalization of nonmixing tissues ( 81 ) . These findings could help explain the core - shell structures observed in several intracellular condensates , including paraspeckles ( 82 ) , PML bodies ( 83 ) , and stress granules ( 62 ) , although in the latter case , an ordered assembly model has been proposed ( 84 ) . Beyond such core - shell architectures , these findings have broader implications for other struc - tures . For example , high interdroplet surface tensions likely explain why some neighboring condensates do not interact at all but instead remain as physically separate droplets ( Fig . 4A , case iii ) . However , in other cases the surface ten - sions can be such that two distinct phases are able to partially interact , but without full engulfment ( Fig . 4A , case iv ) . This may underlie observations of partial interaction among P - bodies and stress granules ( 85 ) , as well as Cajal bodies / HLBs and snurposomes ( Fig . 4D ) ( 86 ) . Moreover , the nucle - olus develops lobulated perinucleolar caps upon ribosomal DNA ( rDNA ) transcriptional inhibi - tion ( Fig . 4C ) ( 87 ) , which may reflect changes in the relative surface tensions . Proteins have been identified that localize to condensate surfaces ( 13 , 88 ) and could serve to modulate surface ten - sion , which is consistent with a recent study showing that the charged protein Ki - 67 functions as a chromosome surfactant ( 89 ) . Liquid metastability and cell pathology As discussed above , the condensed liquid states of proteins are well known in purified protein solutions , and so too are other , more complex phase behaviors . Structural biologists have long observed that protein droplets will sometimes exhibit “ metastability ” ; they only exist as stable droplets for some time before nucleating pro - tein crystals ( 90 , 91 ) . Hemoglobin solutions have also been observed to form phase - separated liquid droplets that are similarly metastable , which could be important for sickle cell anemia ( 92 ) . A number of experimental and theoretical studies have provided key insights , particular - ly highlighting the role of molecular interac - tion length scale in dictating the stability of the liquid - liquid coexistence region of the phase diagram ( 93 , 94 ) . Several lines of evidence indicate that con - densates exhibit liquid metastability . First , FUS , hnRNPA1 , and other ALS - associated RNP body proteins can form hydrogels composed of amyloid - like fibers in vitro at high concentrations and / or aged samples ( 37 , 51 , 95 ) . It is now clear that FUS , hnRNPA1 , Whi3 , fibrillarin , and other pu - rified IDR - containing protein solutions will ini - tially undergo liquid - liquid phase separation , but over time the resulting droplets exhibit more solid - like features ( Fig . 5 ) ( 14 , 15 , 54 , 57 , 65 , 69 ) . FUS , in particular , forms spikelike fibers that emerge from droplets that have been sitting on a coverslip for several hours ( Fig . 5B ) ( 14 ) ; fibrous structures are also seen to nucleate within other ALS - associated protein droplets ( 15 , 51 , 52 , 69 ) . Shin et al . , Science 357 , eaaf4382 ( 2017 ) 22 September 2017 5 of 11 Fig . 4 . Surface tension and multiphase droplet architecture . ( A ) The relative surface tensions among the different possible interfaces ( g ij ) dictate the droplet architecture . Minimizing the free energy of the system requires minimizing energetically costly interfaces . For example , in case i the costly 1 – 3 interface ( g 13 large ) is avoided by phase 2 enveloping phase 3 , whereas case ii achieves the opposite . For case iii , the interface between the two droplets is costly ( high g 23 ) , and thus , droplets do not contact one another . When relative energetic costs are comparable , all three phases can have shared interfaces , as shown in case iv . Surface tensions from three interfaces are balanced , forming Neumann ’ s triangle ( 161 ) . ( B ) The multiphase nucleolus after actin disruption in X . laevis ( 65 ) . ( C ) Transcription inhibition leads to reorganization of nucleolar architecture , forming perinucleolar caps bound to nucleolar bodies ( 87 ) . ( D ) Electron micrograph showing X . laevis Cajal body with attached B - snurposomes ( 86 ) . RESEARCH | REVIEW It is noteworthy that similar “ sea urchin ” mor - phologies are also seen in solutions of lysozyme , a well - folded globular protein , ( 21 ) , although the transitions within the IDP droplets appear to correlate with sequence features associated with pathology in patients . However , disease - related mutations do not necessarily alter liquid - liquid phase separation , suggesting that although phase separation and amyloid formation may be linked , they can be distinct processes ( 15 , 69 ) . The majority of these studies have been per - formed with purified proteins , but the situation in living cells is less clear . One recent study has probed phase transitions in living cells by using optogenetic protein constructs fused to various IDRs , including FUS , DDX4 , and hnRNPA1 ( 96 ) . Upon blue light activation , the constructs clus - ter into cytoplasmic and nuclear “ optoDroplets , ” but only above a saturating threshold concen - tration , which is consistent with their assembly representing light - activated phase separation . When the system is only moderately super - saturated above this threshold , FUS optoDroplets are spherical and exhibit liquid - like behaviors , including coalescence and full FRAP recovery , similar to endogenous liquid condensates . How - ever , when light is used to drive the system deeper into the two - phase region , the resulting clusters become more solid - like , with irregular morphology and incomplete FRAP recovery . These solid - like assemblies appear as the phase separation pro - ceeds , which is distinct from amyloid - containing hydrogels requiring a long incubation at high protein concentration ( 37 ) . These findings echo previous work in model protein and colloidal systems , in which deep with - in the two - phase region there is often a “ glass ” or “ gel ” boundary at which strongly interacting particles can no longer sample different config - urations ( 21 , 97 – 99 ) ; at the molecular level , such glassy states are relatively unstructured and in - distinguishable from conventional liquids , even while their fluid dynamics are entirely arrested ( 100 , 101 ) . The concept of dynamically arrested condensates would be consistent with micro - rheology studies that have shown that in vitro droplets of Whi3 and LAF - 1 have malleable and composition - dependent material properties ( 41 , 54 ) . Whether native condensates exhibit liquid - like properties , versus more solid - like properties , thus likely depends on the degree to which the cell is supersaturated — how deeply the system is driven into the two - phase region ( Fig . 5 ) . A key question concerns the reversibility of these condensed states , which is relevant for biological function and the diseases associated with many of the component proteins . A num - ber of studies found that in vitro droplets as - sembled from purified IDP constructs can be initially disassembled upon changes in tem - perature or the concentration of protein or salt ( 16 , 69 ) . However , over time their reversibility is compromised , and small fibrous deposits often remain ( 54 , 69 ) . For example , upon cycling the ALS - related proteins hnRNPA1 and FUS through multiple rounds of droplet assembly and dis - assembly , they begin to show increasing resist - ance to disassembly ( 15 , 51 ) . However , the situation within living cells may be different ; whereas assembly of liquid - like FUS optoDroplets is fully reversible even after five or more activation cycles , the more deeply supersaturated solid - like struc - tures begin to resist disassembly after several cycles , resulting in aggregates that persist in cells for hours ( 96 ) . Thus , within living cells , it is unclear whether the liquid states are inherently prone to pathological conversions or whether it is an unstructured solid - like state — associated with particularly high concentrations of dynam - ically arrested IDRs — that slowly nucleates irre - versible amyloid fibers . Given the link between material properties and pathological conditions , cells have likely evolved mechanisms to monitor and control the fluidity of these structures . This is particularly interesting when considering condensates that exhibit more solid - like material properties ( non - spherical , nonfusing , and little FRAP recovery ) . The solid - like condensates may assemble either through arrested liquid - liquid phase separation , leading to the glass / gel state , or formation of amyloid - like fibers . For example , the Balbiani body is a solid - like structure held together by a matrix of amyloid - like fibers ( 102 ) . Yeast stress granules also exhibit solid - like features , yet pos - sibly without involving amyloid - like assembly ( 103 ) , and mammalian stress granules contain solid - like cores , surrounded by a more liquid - like phase ( 62 , 84 ) . These solid - like material states are likely affected by protein and RNA quality control machinery , including molecular chaper - ones , adenosine 5 ′ - triphosphate ( ATP ) – dependent RNA helicases , and other adenosine triphospha - tases ( ATPases ) ( 62 , 104 – 109 ) . Many RNP bodies are enriched in RNA helicases , as well as protein chaperones , including HSP104 in yeast and the HSP40 / 70 system in metazoa ( 62 , 110 , 111 ) . Con - sistent with this , the viscoelasticity of nucleoli , particularly the fibrillarin - rich nucleolar sub - compartment , exhibits a strong ATP dependence ( 13 , 65 ) , whereas stress granule component dy - namics decrease upon ATP depletion ( 62 ) . The detailed molecular mechanisms by which these Shin et al . , Science 357 , eaaf4382 ( 2017 ) 22 September 2017 6 of 11 optoFUS Htt - 94Q Stress granule FUS hnRNPA1 PTB - Lsm4 IDR In vitro In vivo Protein concentration I n t e r a c t i on s t r eng t h High Low One - phase liquid droplets Fibers glassy solid fibers Liquid droplet Glassy solid Amyloid fibers ? ? ? ( dynamic , reversible ) ( arrested , reversible ) ( arrested , irreversible ) 2 µm 5 µm 10 µm 2 µm Fig . 5 . Liquid phase metastability is linked to solid - like condensed states . ( A ) Depending on conditions , a protein can condense into different high - order structures such as liquids , glassy solids , or amyloid fibers . Molecular dynamics , internal organization , and reversibility of these condensed phases are distinct . ( B ) In vitro liquid droplets that formed from several IDPs , especially those with prion - like domains , often undergo a liquid - to - solid transition to form fibrous structures ( 14 , 15 , 69 ) . ( C ) ( Top ) In cells , native RNP bodies often exhibit solid - like characters ( 62 ) . ( Middle ) The glassy solid state can be induced in living cells by using optogenetic approaches ( 96 ) . ( Bottom ) The expression of disease - inducing mutant proteins often leads to aggregate formation , as shown for the Huntingtin protein fragment with poly ( Q ) expansion ( 162 ) . ( D ) Depending on where the cell is located in this schematic phase diagram , intracellular condensates with distinct material properties can be assembled . Deep within the two - phase region , dynamically arrested glassy solids appear to form . Liquid and / or glassy solids may mature into the fiber state . RESEARCH | REVIEW ATPases regulate condensates is still largely un - clear but may involve localized internal forces that control fluidity , analogous to the tunability of concentrated actin solutions by myosin motor activity ( 112 ) . However , global ATP depletion in - fluences material states of the entire cytoplasm ( 113 , 114 ) , potentially through its functions as a solubilizing intracellular hydrotrope ( 115 ) , fur - ther underscoring the multifaceted role of ATP in intracellular fluidization . Combined efforts with targeted RNA interference or mutations specifically abrogating ATPase activity can help elucidate how material states are monitored and controlled and may suggest disease intervention strategies based on modulating condensate phase behavior . Controlling condensation through biological activity The apparent metastability of liquid condensates underscores the fact that living cells are far from thermodynamic equilibrium , and in many cases these structures likely do not represent equilib - rium thermodynamic phases . In addition to the increasing number of studies reporting ATP - dependent properties , it is also clear that many other dynamic reactions control the phase be - havior of condensates . The nucleolus presents one interesting case : As discussed above , in vitro droplets formed from nucleolar RNA - binding proteins exhibit a thermodynamic preference for RNA , causing droplets to preferentially grow at transcriptionally active rDNA loci ( 70 , 116 ) . Moreover , inhibiting transcription after nucleolar assembly causes dramatic changes in composi - tion and structure ( 87 ) . Thus , nucleolar assembly may occur largely through thermodynamic driv - ing forces , but these are modulated by localized RNA transcription and likely other nonequili - brium features intrinsic to living cells . Indeed , measurements of the temperature dependence of nucleolar assembly in vivo suggest that although some nucleolar proteins condense at lower tem - peratures , others show the opposite behavior ( 117 ) . Although interpretation may be complicated by the possibility of both UCST and LCST behavior , as well as caveats associated with phase separa - tion versus molecular partitioning , taken together these studies underscore the additional layers of active biological control , beyond equilibrium ther - modynamic driving forces . The findings of RNA promoting nucleolar con - densation are consistent with previous work show - ing that concentrating RNA locally or ectopic transcription of RNA leads to spontaneous for - mation of related nuclear bodies , including para - speckles , Histone locus bodies , Cajal bodies , and nuclear stress bodies ( 118 , 119 ) . These examples suggest that there are powerful mechanisms that can serve as a feedback for condensation , creating “ on - demand ” droplets promoted by the presence of unprocessed transcripts . On - demand assembly may also take place with stress granules and DNA damage foci , which respond to the presence of environmental stress ( 4 , 120 ) . Reaction - controlled assembly also appears to play a role in the centro - some , where cycles of reactivity associated with localized kinase activity drive centrosomal proteins to condense around a single centriole , preventing the formation of multiple centrosomes that could promote mitotic defects ( 121 , 122 ) . Given the important role of intermolecular interactions in the phase behavior as discussed above , dynamic posttranslational modifications ( PTMs ) of polypeptide chains are likely to be a key regulatory mechanism that cells use to con - trol compositions , dynamics , and stability of condensates . For example , arginine methylation leads to a 10 - fold increase in the concentration required for in vitro DDX4 liquid droplet for - mation because of perturbed cation - p interac - tions ( 16 ) . Phosphorylation similarly affects the assembly of in vitro peptide - RNA liquid droplets ( 123 ) . Inside cells , altered interaction strengths of phosphorylated proteins can manifest in several distinct ways , including increased internal dy - namics ( 124 ) , release from condensates ( 125 , 126 ) , and dissolution of the entire condensate struc - ture ( 25 , 76 , 127 , 128 ) . Phosphorylation can con - versely stimulate phase separation when specific protein - protein interactions are involved , as exem - plified by phosphorylated tyrosine - SH2 binding ( 17 ) . PTMs can also act in seeding condensation , as shown in a highly negatively charged poly ( adenosine 5 ′ - diphosphate – ribose ) ( PAR ) ( 120 ) , likely in a manner similar to that by which RNA nucleates liquid condensates . Historically , the power of systems of reacting and diffusing molecules was first highlighted in 1952 by Alan Turing , who introduced a mathe - matical framework explaining how coupled reaction diffusion equations can explain the spon - taneous generation of patterns of biomolecules ( 129 ) ; this basic mechanism is now understood to occur in systems as diverse as bacterial Min proteins , skin pigmentation , and embryonic pat - terning ( 130 , 131 ) . Theoretical frameworks for reaction - diffusion have been linked to phase separation dynamics to describe nonliving sys - tems ( 132 ) . However , with only a few exceptions ( 66 , 70 , 96 , 133 ) , little work has been done combin - ing experimental and theoretical investigations of reaction - controlled intracellular condensation . In the one - cell C . elegans embryo , a reaction - diffusion network of interactions involving polarity proteins , particularly the kinase PAR - 1 , results in a polarized embryo cortex and cytoplasm ( Fig . 6 ) . Localized kinase activity in turn establishes a MEX - 5 gra - dient across the embryo ( 134 ) . Because of differ - ences in affinity of polarity proteins for mRNA , the MEX - 5 gradient gives rise to localized phase separation at the posterior side of the embryo , providing a fascinating example of the interplay between a reaction - diffusion patterning system and RNA - facilitated phase separation ( Fig . 6 ) ( 12 , 66 , 67 , 133 ) . Functional importance of intracellular phase separation A key question concerns the functional conse - quences of liquid states in healthy cells . Concep - tually , three categories can be distinguished as being important for cellular physiology ( Fig . 7 ) ; yet it should be noted that these categories are not mutually exclusive , and single droplets could Shin et al . , Science 357 , eaaf4382 ( 2017 ) 22 September 2017 7 of 11 Fig . 6 . P granules exem - plify phase separation coupled to a reaction - diffusion system . ( A ) In the single - cell stage of C . elegans embryos , liquid - phase P granules undergo spatial segregation to the posterior side of the cell through controlled dissolu - tion and condensation ( 12 ) . ( B ) The localization control of P granule segregation involves a set of interlinked reaction - diffusion systems that pattern the embryo cytoplasm , initiated by the asymmetric distribution of PAR - 1 and other polarity proteins . The MEX - 5 gradient , formed by localized activity of PAR - 1 , appears to drive the accumulation of free RNA in the posterior side . This in turn facilitates preferential posterior liquid - liquid phase separation of P granule components . ( C ) A molecular - level schematic of how the MEX - 5 gradient patterns P granule distributions via an RNA competition mechanism ( 66 ) . MEX - 5 P granuleProteins RNA A d i ss o l u t i on P d i ss o l u t i on c onden s a t i on 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 T i m e [ m i n ] 10 µm PAR - 1 MEX - 5 UnbbUnbUnbUnbUnbounounounounounound R d R d R d R d R d RNNNNNAAAAA P granules RESEARCH | REVIEW exhibit all three functions with varying degrees . At present , our understanding of condensate function lags behind the rapidly developing elu - cidation of molecular assembly mechanisms , underscoring the need for future work . Reaction crucible Chemical reaction rates depend on concentra - tions of reactants . Concentrating a specific set of molecules into the condensed state may facili - tate efficient cellular reactions between weak - ly interacting molecules ( Fig . 7 ) . Moreover , the liquid - like nature of many condensates allows for dynamic exchange of reactants and products , as exemplified by FRAP experiments that dem - onstrate typically rapid fluorescence recovery . The functional link between phase separation and increased reaction rates has been high - lighted in the multivalent SH3 / PRM system . The actin nucleation promoting factor neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) contains six PRMs , which can bind SH3 domains of NCK and induce phase separation . Multivalent SH3 / PRM interactions promote phase separa - tion , concentrating actin nucleation factors and resulting in local actin polymerization within droplets ( 17 , 135 ) . Recent work shows that these SH3 / PRM – driven phase transitions can also promote signaling outputs both in an in vitro reconstituted system and in living cells ( 136 ) . During T cell receptor ( TCR ) signaling , signal - ing components become activated by a series of phosphorylation reactions , leading to the for - mation of micrometer - or submicrometer - sized clusters ( 137 ) . In the reconstituted system , linker for activation of T cells ( LAT ) , a critical adaptor protein for TCR signaling , undergoes liquid - liquid phase separation that is highly depen - dent on the level of available multivalency . Higher multivalency also leads to stronger acti - vation of mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) signaling in Jurkat T cells , supporting the idea of condensate - enhanced signaling . RNP bodies may similarly function to con - centrate reactants and thereby enhance reaction rates , as has been suggested for nucleoli , Cajal bodies , and splicing speckles . It has also long been speculated that such phase - separated drop - lets may have served as protocellular reaction crucibles ( 138 , 139 ) ; recent theoretical work sug - gests that phase - separated droplets may have even been able to grow and divide through re - action cycles ( 140 ) . The possibility for such drop - let protocells to concentrate RNA is particularly interesting , given the likely central role of RNA in early life . A model experimental system used phase separation of polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) and dextran , which forms droplets that are able to concentrate ribozymes , RNA enzymes similar to those that may have been key for the origin of life . PEG / dextran droplets were able to speed up ribozyme reaction rates by nearly two orders of magnitude ( 141 ) . Sequestration Molecular condensation may function to seques - ter factors not required for cellular needs and thereby prevent any off - target effects ( Fig . 7 ) . The nucleolus functions in part as a reaction crucible for rRNA biogenesis , but it has long been thought to have additional functional roles , particularly in the cell cycle and stress - dependent sequestration of key signaling molecules ( 74 ) . Cytoplasmic stress granules provide another rich example of sequestration , functioning as micro - compartments for concentrating stalled transla - tion complexes under cellular stress conditions . Among numerous factors enriched in stress gran - ules are components of signaling pathways , in - cluding target of rapamycin complex 1 ( TORC1 ) ( 110 ) . Sequestration of TORC1 into the stress granule represses TORC1 signaling ( 124 , 142 ) , highlighting a link between the cytoplasmic com - partmentalization and cellular signaling . The kinase DYRK3 localizes to stress granules and regulates their dissolution ( 124 ) . Transient ex - pression of DYRK3 in HeLa cells leads to liquid - liquid phase separation to form a condensed liquid phase of DYRK3 in the cytoplasm . A kinase - deficient version of DYRK3 , instead , forms more solid - like aggregates , indicating that the kinase activity of DYRK3 can affect the material prop - erties of stress granules . The material properties of such condensates are intimately linked to their molecular dynamics , which in turn can af - fect their ability to sequester relevant factors . Future work will be necessary to quantify the extent of sequestration and to shed more light on the coupling between the tunable material properties of condensates and their multifaceted biological functions . Organizational hub Liquid - liquid phase separation and the resulting condensates also appear to be exploited by cells to organize their internal space . One interesting recent example suggests that liquid phase con - densation may play an important role in or - ganizing spindle assembly . BuGZ is a Xenopus microtubule - binding protein that is predicted to be mostly disordered and was found to undergo liquid - liquid phase separation in vitro . The re - sulting droplets are capable of bundling and concentrating tubulin and may play an analo - gous role in organizing the spindle in living cells ( 53 ) . Another recent study suggests that the forces arising from the surface tension of membrane - associated condensates contribute to endocytosis by promoting membrane invagination ( 143 ) , echo - ing the paradigm of multiphase droplet struc - turing through surface tension effects . Liquid phase condensation appears to play similar organization roles within the nucleus , whose internal organization is entirely achieved in the absence of membrane - bound subcom - partments ( Fig . 7 ) ( 3 ) . It has become abundantly clear over the past decade that chromosomes and associated nuclear bodies are not randomly distributed in the nucleus ( 144 ) , and nuclear ar - chitecture is intimately associated with dynamic gene regulation ( 144 , 145 ) . Repressed genes often cluster into large compact states known as hetero - chromatin , and recent work demonstrates that heterochromatin in early Drosophila embryos , observed with heterochromatin protein 1a ( HP1a ) , exhibits signatures of liquid droplets including fusion and dynamic molecular exchange ( 146 ) . Shin et al . , Science 357 , eaaf4382 ( 2017 ) 22 September 2017 8 of 11 Organizational hub Reaction crucible Sequestration Signalingactivity Fig . 7 . Functional roles of intracellular phase transition . Three functional categories are shown by which intracellular condensates play a role in cell physiology . ( Left ) Concentrating a specific set of molecules can enhance biological reactions , which is further facilitated by the dynamic molecular nature of liquid phases . ( Right ) Sequestration of key signaling complexes into condensates can coordinate response to environmental stress and cell signaling . ( Bottom ) Condensates can also function as an organizational hub . For example , the localization of nuclear bodies and chromosome organization are often coupled . RESEARCH | REVIEW Closely related in vitro work with human HP1 a provides additional molecular - level insights into the role of liquid - phase protein / DNA conden - sates in gene silencing ( 147 ) . This work is remi - niscent of studies of mitotic chromatin mechanics , in which partial restriction enzyme digestion causes the rounding of chromatin droplets ( 148 ) . In all of these cases , forces associated with drop - let surface tension likely play a key structuring role ; however , more fundamental biophysical studies on the impact of condensates on DNA sequestration and organization are needed ( 149 ) . The nucleolus is the largest nuclear body and presents another interesting example of a con - densate strongly affecting genome organization , with ~ 4 % of the mammalian genome in nucleolus - associated chromatin domains ( NADs ) ( 150 ) . Moreover , several genomic loci for small nuclear RNA ( snRNA ) or small nucleolar RNA ( snoRNA ) have been shown to associate with Cajal bodies , and disassembly of Cajal bodies leads to dis - ruption of these gene clusters and suppressed expression of related genes ( 151 ) . Although their material states and assembly are still poorly un - derstood , transcription factories as well as repres - sive polycomb group ( PcG ) bodies also seem to harbor multiple genomic loci for coregulation of several related genes , which is crucial for proper developmental processes ( 152 , 153 ) . How highly localized phase separation coupled to local active processes , such as transcription ( 154 ) , may serve to structure nuclear contents on 10 - to 100 - nm spatial scales represents a major open question ; finite size effects on phase transitions will become increasingly important on these scales ( 29 ) but must be carefully considered in this rich biolog - ical context . Conclusions Concentrated states of RNA , protein , and DNA are a central aspect of intracellular organization . It has become increasingly clear that a large va - riety of these condensates form via liquid - liquid phase separation , resulting in liquid - like states of intracellular matter . The list of condensates thought to assemble through liquid - liquid phase separation now includes many RNP bodies such as P granules ( 12 ) , nucleoli ( 13 ) , various signaling clusters ( 17 , 136 ) , and numerous other related structures . Liquid - liquid phase separation may also play a key role in a more diverse set of struc - tures , including postsynaptic density ( 155 ) , the synaptonemal complex ( 156 ) , and the mitotic spindle ( 53 ) . Thus , condensation of intracellular liquids can drive assembly of structures far richer than homogeneous droplets , ranging from multi - layered structures such as the nucleolus and stress granules to liquid - crystalline assemblies such as the spindle ( 157 , 158 ) and actin conden - sates ( 159 ) . It will be important to understand how sequence - encoded information can drive complex multiphase coexistence and the physico - chemical properties of these diverse and richly structured condensates . Of particular biomed - ical importance is the need to understand how metastable transitions of liquid condensates into more solid - like states could underlie devastating protein aggregation diseases . More work is also needed to uncover regulatory mechanisms used by cells to control biomolecular phase behavior , orchestrate the assembly of various physiological structures , and prevent pathological conversions . In all cases , the molecular components of these structures appear to interface closely with the inherently nonequilibrium features of the cell . Understanding this interplay between equilib - rium thermodynamic driving forces and non - equilibrium activity is a central challenge and will be critical for elucidating how condensed liquid states of intracellular matter contribute to both cell physiology and disease . REFERENCES AND NOTES 1 . T . Pederson , The nucleolus . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 , a000638 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a000638 pmid : 21106648 2 . J . G . Gall , ThecentennialoftheCajalbody . Nat . Rev . Mol . CellBiol . 4 , 975 – 980 ( 2003 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm1262 ; pmid : 14685175 3 . Y . S . Mao , B . Zhang , D . L . Spector , Biogenesis and function of nuclear bodies . Trends Genet . 27 , 295 – 306 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tig . 2011 . 05 . 006 ; pmid : 21680045 4 . P . Anderson , N . Kedersha , RNA granules : Post - transcriptional and epigenetic modulators of gene expression . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 430 – 436 ( 2009 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2694 ; pmid : 19461665 5 . K . E . Handwerger , J . G . Gall , Subnuclear organelles : New insights into form and function . Trends Cell Biol . 16 , 19 – 26 ( 2006 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2005 . 11 . 005 ; pmid : 16325406 6 . T . Schwarz - Romond , C . Merrifield , B . J . Nichols , M . Bienz , The Wnt signalling effector Dishevelled forms dynamic protein assemblies rather than stable associations with cytoplasmic vesicles . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 5269 – 5277 ( 2005 ) . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 02646 ; pmid : 16263762 7 . J . R . Miller et al . , Establishment of the dorsal - ventral axis in Xenopus embryos coincides with the dorsal enrichment of dishevelled that is dependent on cortical rotation . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 427 – 437 ( 1999 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 146 . 2 . 427 ; pmid : 10427095 8 . A . Grakoui et al . , The immunological synapse : A molecular machine controlling T cell activation . Science 285 , 221 – 227 ( 1999 ) . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 285 . 5425 . 221 ; pmid : 10398592 9 . R . D . Phair , T . Misteli , High mobility of proteins in the mammalian cell nucleus . Nature 404 , 604 – 609 ( 2000 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / 35007077 ; pmid : 10766243 10 . S . Snaar , K . Wiesmeijer , A . G . Jochemsen , H . J . Tanke , R . W . Dirks , Mutational analysis of fibrillarin and its mobility in living human cells . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 653 – 662 ( 2000 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 151 . 3 . 653 ; pmid : 11062265 11 . N . Kedersha et al . , Dynamic shuttling of TIA - 1 accompanies the recruitment of mRNA to mammalian stress granules . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 1257 – 1268 ( 2000 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 151 . 6 . 1257 ; pmid : 11121440 12 . C . P . Brangwynne et al . , Germline P granules are liquid droplets that localize by controlled dissolution / condensation . Science 324 , 1729 – 1732 ( 2009 ) . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1172046 ; pmid : 19460965 13 . C . P . Brangwynne , T . J . Mitchison , A . A . Hyman , Activeliquid - like behavior ofnucleoli determines theirsize andshapein Xenopus laevis oocytes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 4334 – 4339 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1017150108 ; pmid : 21368180 14 . A . Patel etal . , Aliquid - to - solidphasetransitionoftheALSprotein FUS accelerated by disease mutation . Cell 162 , 1066 – 1077 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 07 . 047 ; pmid : 26317470 15 . A . Molliex et al . , Phase separation by low complexity domains promotes stress granule assembly and drives pathological fibrillization . Cell 163 , 123 – 133 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 09 . 015 ; pmid : 26406374 16 . T . J . Nott et al . , Phase transition of a disordered nuage protein generates environmentally responsive membraneless organelles . Mol . Cell 57 , 936 – 947 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2015 . 01 . 013 ; pmid : 25747659 17 . P . Li et al . , Phase transitions in the assembly of multivalent signalling proteins . Nature 483 , 336 – 340 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature10879 ; pmid : 22398450 18 . H . B . Schmidt , R . Rohatgi , In vivo formation of vacuolated multi - phase compartments lacking membranes . Cell Reports 16 , 1228 – 1236 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2016 . 06 . 088 ; pmid : 27452472 19 . S . D . Durbin , G . Feher , Protein crystallization . Annu . Rev . Phys . Chem . 47 , 171 – 204 ( 1996 ) . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . physchem . 47 . 1 . 171 ; pmid : 8983237 20 . J . Jancarik , S . - H . Kim , Sparse matrix sampling : A screening method for crystallization of proteins . J . Appl . Cryst . 24 , 409 – 411 ( 1991 ) . doi : 10 . 1107 / S0021889891004430 21 . M . Muschol , F . Rosenberger , Liquid - liquid phase separation in supersaturated lysozyme solutions and associated precipitate formation / crystallization . J . Chem . Phys . 107 , 1953 – 1962 ( 1997 ) . doi : 10 . 1063 / 1 . 474547 22 . P . G . Vekilov , Phase transitions of folded proteins . Soft Matter 6 , 5254 ( 2010 ) . doi : 10 . 1039 / c0sm00215a 23 . G . B . Benedek , Cataract as a protein condensation disease : The Proctor lecture . Invest . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 38 , 1911 – 1921 ( 1997 ) . pmid : 9331254 24 . S . C . Weber , C . P . Brangwynne , Inverse size scaling of the nucleolus by a concentration - dependent phase transition . Curr . Biol . 25 , 641 – 646 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2015 . 01 . 012 ; pmid : 25702583 25 . H . Tourrière et al . , The RasGAP - associated endoribonuclease G3BP assembles stress granules . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 823 – 831 ( 2003 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200212128 ; pmid : 12642610 26 . A . Wilczynska , C . Aigueperse , M . Kress , F . Dautry , D . Weil , The translational regulator CPEB1 provides a link between dcp1 bodies and stress granules . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 981 – 992 ( 2005 ) . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 01692 ; pmid : 15731006 27 . N . Gilks et al . , Stress granule assembly is mediated by prion - like aggregation of TIA - 1 . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 5383 – 5398 ( 2004 ) . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 - 08 - 0715 ; pmid : 15371533 28 . M . Rubinstein , R . H . Colby , Polymer Physics ( Oxford Univ . Press , 2003 ) . 29 . N . Goldenfeld , Lectures on Phase Transitions and the Renormalization Group ( Addison - Wesley , 1992 ) . 30 . C . P . Brangwynne , P . Tompa , R . V . Pappu , Polymer physics of intracellular phase transitions . Nat . Phys . 11 , 899 – 904 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nphys3532 31 . T . Pawson , P . Nash , Assembly of cell regulatory systems through protein interaction domains . Science 300 , 445 – 452 ( 2003 ) . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1083653 ; pmid : 12702867 32 . G . B . Cohen , R . Ren , D . Baltimore , Modular binding domains in signal transduction proteins . Cell 80 , 237 – 248 ( 1995 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 95 ) 90406 - 9 ; pmid : 7834743 33 . S . F . Banani et al . , Compositional control of phase - separated cellular bodies . Cell 166 , 651 – 663 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 06 . 010 ; pmid : 27374333 34 . R . Bernardi , P . P . Pandolfi , Structure , dynamics and functions of promyelocytic leukaemia nuclear bodies . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 1006 – 1016 ( 2007 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2277 ; pmid : 17928811 35 . A . Castello et al . , Insights into RNA biology from an atlas of mammalian mRNA - binding proteins . Cell 149 , 1393 – 1406 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 04 . 031 ; pmid : 22658674 36 . P . Tompa , Intrinsically disordered proteins : A 10 - year recap . Trends Biochem . Sci . 37 , 509 – 516 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tibs . 2012 . 08 . 004 ; pmid : 22989858 37 . M . Kato et al . , Cell - free formation of RNA granules : Low complexity sequence domains form dynamic fibers within hydrogels . Cell 149 , 753 – 767 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 04 . 017 ; pmid : 22579281 38 . V . N . Uversky , Intrinsically disordered proteins in overcrowded milieu : Membrane - lessorganelles , phaseseparation , andintrinsic disorder . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 44 , 18 – 30 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . sbi . 2016 . 10 . 015 ; pmid : 27838525 39 . P . Romero et al . , Sequence complexity of disordered protein . Proteins 42 , 38 – 48 ( 2001 ) . doi : 10 . 1002 / 1097 - 0134 ( 20010101 ) 42 : 1 < 38 : : AID - PROT50 > 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - 3 ; pmid : 11093259 40 . S . Vucetic , C . J . Brown , A . K . Dunker , Z . Obradovic , Flavors of protein disorder . Proteins 52 , 573 – 584 ( 2003 ) . doi : 10 . 1002 / prot . 10437 ; pmid : 12910457 41 . S . Elbaum - Garfinkle et al . , The disordered P granule protein LAF - 1 drives phase separation into droplets with tunable viscosity and dynamics . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 112 , 7189 – 7194 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1504822112 ; pmid : 26015579 42 . C . W . Pak et al . , Sequence determinants of intracellular phase separation by complex coacervation of a disordered protein . Mol . Cell 63 , 72 – 85 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2016 . 05 . 042 ; pmid : 27392146 43 . R . K . Das , R . V . Pappu , Conformations of intrinsically disordered proteins are influenced by linear sequence distributions of oppositely charged residues . Proc . Natl . Acad . Shin et al . , Science 357 , eaaf4382 ( 2017 ) 22 September 2017 9 of 11 RESEARCH | REVIEW Sci . U . S . A . 110 , 13392 – 13397 ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1304749110 ; pmid : 23901099 44 . A . S . Holehouse , R . K . Das , J . N . Ahad , M . O . G . Richardson , R . V . Pappu , CIDER : Resources to analyze sequence - ensemble relationships of intrinsically disordered proteins . Biophys . J . 112 , 16 – 21 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2016 . 11 . 3200 ; pmid : 28076807 45 . R . K . Das , K . M . Ruff , R . V . Pappu , Relating sequence encoded information to form and function of intrinsically disordered proteins . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 32 , 102 – 112 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . sbi . 2015 . 03 . 008 ; pmid : 25863585 46 . M . - T . Wei et al . , Phase behaviour of disordered proteins underlying low density and high permeability of liquid organelles . Nat . Chem . ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nchem . 2803 47 . M . Feric , C . P . Brangwynne , A nuclear F - actin scaffold stabilizes ribonucleoprotein droplets against gravity in large cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 , 1253 – 1259 ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2830 ; pmid : 23995731 48 . K . E . Handwerger , J . A . Cordero , J . G . Gall , Cajal bodies , nucleoli , and speckles in the Xenopus oocyte nucleus have a low - density , sponge - like structure . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 202 – 211 ( 2005 ) . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 - 08 - 0742 ; pmid : 15509651 49 . F . G . Quiroz , A . Chilkoti , Sequence heuristics to encode phase behaviour in intrinsically disordered protein polymers . Nat . Mater . 14 , 1164 – 1171 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmat4418 ; pmid : 26390327 50 . K . A . Burke , A . M . Janke , C . L . Rhine , N . L . Fawzi , Residue - by - residue view ofinvitro FUS granules that bindthe C - terminal domainof RNA polymerase II . Mol . Cell 60 , 231 – 241 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2015 . 09 . 006 ; pmid : 26455390 51 . T . Murakami et al . , ALS / FTD mutation - induced phase transition of fus liquid droplets and reversible hydrogels into irreversible hydrogels impairs RNP granule function . Neuron 88 , 678 – 690 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2015 . 10 . 030 ; pmid : 26526393 52 . A . E . Conicella , G . H . Zerze , J . Mittal , N . L . Fawzi , ALS mutations disrupt phase separation mediated by a - helical structure in the TDP - 43 low - complexity C - terminal domain . Structure 24 , 1537 – 1549 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . str . 2016 . 07 . 007 ; pmid : 27545621 53 . H . Jiang et al . , Phase transition of spindle - associated protein regulate spindle apparatus assembly . Cell 163 , 108 – 122 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 08 . 010 ; pmid : 26388440 54 . H . Zhang et al . , RNA controls polyQ protein phase transitions . Mol . Cell 60 , 220 – 230 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2015 . 09 . 017 ; pmid : 26474065 55 . M . G . Cacace , E . M . Landau , J . J . Ramsden , The Hofmeister series : Salt and solvent effects on interfacial phenomena . Q . Rev . Biophys . 30 , 241 – 277 ( 1997 ) . doi : 10 . 1017 / S0033583597003363 ; pmid : 9394422 56 . I . Kwon et al . , Phosphorylation - regulated binding of RNA polymerase II to fibrous polymers of low - complexity domains . Cell 155 , 1049 – 1060 ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 10 . 033 ; pmid : 24267890 57 . S . Xiang et al . , The LC domain of hnRNPA2 adopts similar conformations in hydrogel polymers , liquid - like droplets , and nuclei . Cell 163 , 829 – 839 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 10 . 040 ; pmid : 26544936 58 . D . W . Urry et al . , Hydrophobicity scale for proteins based on inverse temperature transitions . Biopolymers 32 , 1243 – 1250 ( 1992 ) . doi : 10 . 1002 / bip . 360320913 ; pmid : 1420991 59 . S . E . Reichheld , L . D . Muiznieks , F . W . Keeley , S . Sharpe , Direct observation of structure and dynamics during phase separation of an elastomeric protein . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 114 , E4408 – E4415 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1701877114 ; pmid : 28507126 60 . C . G . de Kruif , F . Weinbreck , R . De Vries , Complex coacervation of proteins and anionic polysaccharides . Curr . Opin . Colloid Interface Sci . 9 , 340 – 349 ( 2004 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cocis . 2004 . 09 . 006 61 . D . Updike , S . Strome , P granule assembly and function in Caenorhabditis elegans germ cells . J . Androl . 31 , 53 – 60 ( 2010 ) . doi : 10 . 2164 / jandrol . 109 . 008292 ; pmid : 19875490 62 . S . Jain et al . , ATPase - modulated stress granules contain a diverse proteome and substructure . Cell 164 , 487 – 498 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 12 . 038 ; pmid : 26777405 63 . J . S . Andersen et al . , Nucleolar proteome dynamics . Nature 433 , 77 – 83 ( 2005 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature03207 ; pmid : 15635413 64 . D . M . Mitrea et al . , Nucleophosmin integrates within the nucleolus via multi - modal interactions with proteins displaying R - rich linear motifs and rRNA . eLife 5 , e13571 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 13571 ; pmid : 26836305 65 . M . Feric et al . , Coexisting liquid phases underlie nucleolar subcompartments . Cell 165 , 1686 – 1697 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 04 . 047 ; pmid : 27212236 66 . S . Saha et al . , Polar positioning of phase - separated liquid compartments in cells regulated by an mRNA competition mechanism . Cell 166 , 1572 – 1584 . e16 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 08 . 006 ; pmid : 27594427 67 . J . Smith et al . , Spatial patterning of P granules by RNA - induced phase separation of the intrinsically - disordered protein MEG - 3 . eLife 5 , e21337 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 21337 ; pmid : 27914198 68 . J . A . Riback et al . , Stress - triggered phaseseparationis an adaptive , evolutionarilytunedresponse . Cell 168 , 1028 – 1040 . e19 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2017 . 02 . 027 ; pmid : 28283059 69 . Y . Lin , D . S . W . Protter , M . K . Rosen , R . Parker , Formation and maturation of phase - separated liquid droplets by RNA - binding proteins . Mol . Cell 60 , 208 – 219 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2015 . 08 . 018 ; pmid : 26412307 70 . J . Berry , S . C . Weber , N . Vaidya , M . Haataja , C . P . Brangwynne , RNA transcription modulates phase transition - driven nuclear body assembly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 112 , E5237 – E5245 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1509317112 ; pmid : 26351690 71 . R . Sear , Interactionsinproteinsolutions . Curr . Opin . Colloid InterfaceSci . 11 , 35 – 39 ( 2006 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cocis . 2005 . 09 . 003 72 . J . M . Engreitz , N . Ollikainen , M . Guttman , Long non - coding RNAs : Spatial amplifiers that control nuclear structure and gene expression . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 17 , 756 – 770 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm . 2016 . 126 ; pmid : 27780979 73 . A . Jain , R . D . Vale , RNA phase transitions in repeat expansion disorders . Nature 546 , 243 – 247 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature22386 ; pmid : 28562589 74 . F . - M . Boisvert , S . van Koningsbruggen , J . Navascués , A . I . Lamond , Themultifunctional nucleolus . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 574 – 585 ( 2007 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2184 ; pmid : 17519961 75 . A . Hubstenberger , S . L . Noble , C . Cameron , T . C . Evans , Translation repressors , an RNA helicase , and developmental cues control RNP phase transitions during early development . Dev . Cell 27 , 161 – 173 ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2013 . 09 . 024 ; pmid : 24176641 76 . J . T . Wang et al . , Regulation of RNA granule dynamics by phosphorylation of serine - rich , intrinsically disordered proteins in C . elegans . eLife 3 , e04591 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 04591 ; pmid : 25535836 77 . U . Sheth , J . Pitt , S . Dennis , J . R . Priess , Perinuclear P granules are the principal sites of mRNA export in adult C . elegans germ cells . Development 137 , 1305 – 1314 ( 2010 ) . doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 044255 ; pmid : 20223759 78 . J . R . Simon , N . J . Carroll , M . Rubinstein , A . Chilkoti , G . P . López , Programming molecular self - assembly of intrinsically disordered proteins containing sequences of low complexity . Nat . Chem . 9 , 509 – 515 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nchem . 2715 ; pmid : 28537592 79 . J . Eckelmann , U . Luning , Mixing liquids - mission impossible ? A colorful demonstration on immiscible systems . J . Chem . Educ . 90 , 224 – 227 ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1021 / ed2008262 80 . L . D . Zarzar et al . , Dynamically reconfigurable complex emulsions via tunable interfacial tensions . Nature 518 , 520 – 524 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature14168 ; pmid : 25719669 81 . R . A . Foty , M . S . Steinberg , The differential adhesion hypothesis : A direct evaluation . Dev . Biol . 278 , 255 – 263 ( 2005 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ydbio . 2004 . 11 . 012 ; pmid : 15649477 82 . J . A . West et al . , Structural , super - resolution microscopy analysis of paraspeckle nuclear body organization . J . Cell Biol . 214 , 817 – 830 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201601071 ; pmid : 27646274 83 . M . Lang et al . , Three - dimensional organization of promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 392 – 400 ( 2010 ) . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 053496 ; pmid : 20130140 84 . J . R . Wheeler , T . Matheny , S . Jain , R . Abrisch , R . Parker , Distinct stages in stress granule assembly and disassembly . eLife 5 , e18413 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 18413 ; pmid : 27602576 85 . N . Kedersha et al . , Stress granules and processing bodies are dynamically linked sites of mRNP remodeling . J . Cell Biol . 169 , 871 – 884 ( 2005 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200502088 ; pmid : 15967811 86 . J . G . Gall , M . Bellini , Z . Wu , C . Murphy , Assemblyofthenuclear transcription and processing machinery : Cajal bodies ( coiled bodies ) andtranscriptosomes . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 4385 – 4402 ( 1999 ) . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . 10 . 12 . 4385 ; pmid : 10588665 87 . Y . Shav - Tal et al . , Dynamic sorting of nuclear components into distinct nucleolar caps during transcriptional inhibition . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 2395 – 2413 ( 2005 ) . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 - 11 - 0992 ; pmid : 15758027 88 . S . Kneissel et al . , A novel karyoskeletal protein : Characterization of protein NO145 , the major component of nucleolar cortical skeleton in Xenopus oocytes . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 3904 – 3918 ( 2001 ) . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . 12 . 12 . 3904 ; pmid : 11739789 89 . S . Cuylen et al . , Ki - 67 acts as a biological surfactant to disperse mitotic chromosomes . Nature 535 , 308 – 312 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature18610 ; pmid : 27362226 90 . P . G . Debenedetti , Metastable Liquids : Concepts and Principles ( Princeton Univ . Press , 1996 ) . 91 . C . Haas , J . Drenth , Understanding protein crystallization on the basis of the phase diagram . J . Cryst . Growth 196 , 388 – 394 ( 1999 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0022 - 0248 ( 98 ) 00831 - 8 92 . O . Galkin , K . Chen , R . L . Nagel , R . E . Hirsch , P . G . Vekilov , Liquid - liquid separation in solutions of normal and sickle cell hemoglobin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 99 , 8479 – 8483 ( 2002 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 122055299 ; pmid : 12070342 93 . S . M . Ilett , A . Orrock , W . C . K . Poon , P . N . Pusey , Phasebehavior of a model colloid - polymer mixture . Phys . Rev . E Stat . Phys . Plasmas FluidsRelat . Interdiscip . Topics 51 , 1344 – 1352 ( 1995 ) . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 51 . 1344 ; pmid : 9962777 94 . P . R . ten Wolde , D . Frenkel , Enhancement of protein crystal nucleation by critical density fluctuations . Science 277 , 1975 – 1978 ( 1997 ) . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 277 . 5334 . 1975 ; pmid : 9302288 95 . S . C . Weber , C . P . Brangwynne , Getting RNA and protein in phase . Cell 149 , 1188 – 1191 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 05 . 022 ; pmid : 22682242 96 . Y . Shin et al . , Spatiotemporal control of intracellular phase transitions using light - activated optoDroplets . Cell 168 , 159 – 171 . e14 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 11 . 054 ; pmid : 28041848 97 . P . J . Lu et al . , Gelation of particles with short - range attraction . Nature 453 , 499 – 503 ( 2008 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature06931 ; pmid : 18497820 98 . E . Zaccarelli , Colloidal Gels : Equilibrium and non - equilibrium routes . J . Phys . Condens . Matter 19 , 323101 ( 2007 ) . doi : 10 . 1088 / 0953 - 8984 / 19 / 32 / 323101 99 . F . Cardinaux , T . Gibaud , A . Stradner , P . Schurtenberger , Interplay between spinodal decomposition and glass formation in proteins exhibiting short - range attractions . Phys . Rev . Lett . 99 , 118301 ( 2007 ) . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 99 . 118301 ; pmid : 17930475 100 . P . G . Debenedetti , F . H . Stillinger , Supercooled liquids and the glass transition . Nature 410 , 259 – 267 ( 2001 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / 35065704 ; pmid : 11258381 101 . R . Halfmann , A glass menagerie of low complexity sequences . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 38 , 18 – 25 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . sbi . 2016 . 05 . 002 ; pmid : 27258703 102 . E . Boke et al . , Amyloid - like self - assembly of a cellular compartment . Cell 166 , 637 – 650 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 06 . 051 ; pmid : 27471966 103 . S . Kroschwald et al . , Promiscuous interactions and protein disaggregases determine the material state of stress - inducible RNP granules . eLife 4 , e06807 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 06807 ; pmid : 26238190 104 . D . Balchin , M . Hayer - Hartl , F . U . Hartl , In vivo aspects of protein folding and quality control . Science 353 , aac4354 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aac4354 ; pmid : 27365453 105 . C . F . Mugler et al . , ATPase activity of the DEAD - box protein Dhh1 controls processing body formation . eLife 5 , e18746 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 18746 ; pmid : 27692063 106 . M . Ganassi et al . , A surveillance function of the HSPB8 - BAG3 - HSP70 chaperone complex ensures stress granule integrity and dynamism . Mol . Cell 63 , 796 – 810 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2016 . 07 . 021 ; pmid : 27570075 107 . J . R . Buchan , R . M . Kolaitis , J . P . Taylor , R . Parker , Eukaryotic stress granules are cleared by autophagy and Cdc48 / VCP function . Cell 153 , 1461 – 1474 ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 05 . 037 ; pmid : 23791177 108 . J . Shorter , The mammalian disaggregase machinery : Hsp110 synergizes with Hsp70 and Hsp40 to catalyze protein disaggregation and reactivation in a cell - free system . PLOS ONE 6 , e26319 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0026319 ; pmid : 22022600 109 . H . Rampelt et al . , Metazoan Hsp70 machines use Hsp110 to power protein disaggregation . EMBO J . 31 , 4221 – 4235 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2012 . 264 ; pmid : 22990239 110 . D . S . W . Protter , R . Parker , Principles and properties of stress granules . Trends Cell Biol . 26 , 668 – 679 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2016 . 05 . 004 ; pmid : 27289443 Shin et al . , Science 357 , eaaf4382 ( 2017 ) 22 September 2017 10 of 11 RESEARCH | REVIEW 111 . V . Cherkasov et al . , Coordination of translational control and protein homeostasis during severe heat stress . Curr . Biol . 23 , 2452 – 2462 ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 09 . 058 ; pmid : 24291094 112 . D . Humphrey , C . Duggan , D . Saha , D . Smith , J . Käs , Active fluidizationofpolymernetworksthroughmolecularmotors . Nature 416 , 413 – 416 ( 2002 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / 416413a ; pmid : 11919627 113 . B . R . Parry et al . , The bacterial cytoplasm has glass - like properties and is fluidized by metabolic activity . Cell 156 , 183 – 194 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 11 . 028 ; pmid : 24361104 114 . M . C . Munder etal . , ApH - driventransitionofthecytoplasmfrom afluid - toasolid - likestatepromotesentryintodormancy . eLife 5 , e09347 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 09347 ; pmid : 27003292 115 . A . Patel et al . , ATP as a biological hydrotrope . Science 356 , 753 – 756 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aaf6846 ; pmid : 28522535 116 . H . Falahati , B . Pelham - Webb , S . Blythe , E . Wieschaus , Nucleation by rRNA dictates the precision of nucleolus assembly . Curr . Biol . 26 , 277 – 285 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2015 . 11 . 065 ; pmid : 26776729 117 . H . Falahati , E . Wieschaus , Independent active and thermodynamic processes govern the nucleolus assembly in vivo . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 114 , 1335 – 1340 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1615395114 ; pmid : 28115706 118 . Y . S . Mao , H . Sunwoo , B . Zhang , D . L . Spector , Direct visualization of the co - transcriptional assembly of a nuclear body by noncoding RNAs . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 95 – 101 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2140 ; pmid : 21170033 119 . S . P . Shevtsov , M . Dundr , Nucleation of nuclear bodies by RNA . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 167 – 173 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2157 ; pmid : 21240286 120 . M . Altmeyer et al . , Liquid demixing of intrinsically disordered proteins is seeded by poly ( ADP - ribose ) . Nat . Commun . 6 , 8088 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms9088 ; pmid : 26286827 121 . D . Zwicker , M . Decker , S . Jaensch , A . A . Hyman , F . Jülicher , Centrosomes are autocatalytic droplets of pericentriolar material organized by centrioles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 111 , E2636 – E2645 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1404855111 ; pmid : 24979791 122 . J . B . Woodruff et al . , The centrosome is a selective condensate that nucleates microtubules by concentrating tubulin . Cell 169 , 1066 – 1077 . e10 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2017 . 05 . 028 ; pmid : 28575670 123 . W . M . AumillerJr . , C . D . Keating , Phosphorylation - mediatedRNA / peptidecomplex coacervation as a model forintracellular liquid organelles . Nat . Chem . 8 , 129 – 137 ( 2016 ) . pmid : 26791895 124 . F . Wippich et al . , Dual specificity kinase DYRK3 couples stress granule condensation / dissolution to mTORC1 signaling . Cell 152 , 791 – 805 ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 01 . 033 ; pmid : 23415227 125 . T . Misteli et al . , Serine phosphorylation of SR proteins is required for their recruitment to sites of transcription in vivo . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 297 – 307 ( 1998 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 143 . 2 . 297 ; pmid : 9786943 126 . S . Petri , M . Grimmler , S . Over , U . Fischer , O . J . Gruss , Dephosphorylation of survival motor neurons ( SMN ) by PPM1G / PP2C g governs Cajal body localization and stability of the SMN complex . J . Cell Biol . 179 , 451 – 465 ( 2007 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200704163 ; pmid : 17984321 127 . J . Guillén - Boixet , V . Buzon , X . Salvatella , R . Méndez , CPEB4 is regulated during cellcycle byERK2 / Cdk1 - mediated phosphorylationanditsassemblyintoliquid - likedroplets . eLife 5 , e19298 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 19298 ; pmid : 27802129 128 . S . M . Hearst et al . , Cajal - body formation correlates with differential coilin phosphorylation in primary and transformed cell lines . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 1872 – 1881 ( 2009 ) . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 044040 ; pmid : 19435804 129 . A . M . Turing , The chemical basis of morphogenesis . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Ser . B Biol . Sci . 237 , 37 – 72 ( 1952 ) . doi : 10 . 1098 / rstb . 1952 . 0012 130 . M . Loose , E . Fischer - Friedrich , J . Ries , K . Kruse , P . Schwille , Spatial regulators for bacterial cell division self - organize into surface waves in vitro . Science 320 , 789 – 792 ( 2008 ) . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1154413 ; pmid : 18467587 131 . S . Kondo , T . Miura , Reaction - diffusion model as a framework for understanding biological pattern formation . Science 329 , 1616 – 1620 ( 2010 ) . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1179047 ; pmid : 20929839 132 . S . C . Glotzer , E . A . Di Marzio , M . Muthukumar , Reaction - controlled morphology of phase - separating mixtures . Phys . Rev . Lett . 74 , 2034 – 2037 ( 1995 ) . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 74 . 2034 ; pmid : 10057825 133 . C . F . Lee , C . P . Brangwynne , J . Gharakhani , A . A . Hyman , F . Jülicher , Spatial organization of the cell cytoplasm by position - dependent phase separation . Phys . Rev . Lett . 111 , 088101 ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 111 . 088101 ; pmid : 24010479 134 . E . E . Griffin , D . J . Odde , G . Seydoux , Regulation of the MEX - 5 gradient by a spatially segregated kinase / phosphatase cycle . Cell 146 , 955 – 968 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 08 . 012 ; pmid : 21925318 135 . S . Banjade , M . K . Rosen , Phase transitions of multivalent proteins can promote clustering of membrane receptors . eLife 3 , e04123 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 04123 ; pmid : 25321392 136 . X . Su et al . , Phase separation of signaling molecules promotes T cell receptor signal transduction . Science 352 , 595 – 599 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aad9964 ; pmid : 27056844 137 . S . C . Bunnell et al . , T cell receptor ligation induces the formation of dynamically regulated signaling assemblies . J . Cell Biol . 158 , 1263 – 1275 ( 2002 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200203043 ; pmid : 12356870 138 . C . P . Brangwynne , A . A . Hyman , In retrospect : The origin of life . Nature 491 , 524 – 525 ( 2012 ) . 139 . S . Koga , D . S . Williams , A . W . Perriman , S . Mann , Peptide - nucleotide microdroplets as a step towards a membrane - free protocell model . Nat . Chem . 3 , 720 – 724 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nchem . 1110 ; pmid : 21860462 140 . D . Zwicker , R . Seyboldt , C . A . Weber , A . A . Hyman , F . Jülicher , Growthand divisionofactive dropletsprovidesamodelfor protocells . Nat . Phys . 13 , 408 – 413 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nphys3984 141 . C . A . Strulson , R . C . Molden , C . D . Keating , P . C . Bevilacqua , RNA catalysis through compartmentalization . Nat . Chem . 4 , 941 – 946 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nchem . 1466 ; pmid : 23089870 142 . T . Takahara , T . Maeda , Transient sequestration of TORC1 into stress granules during heat stress . Mol . Cell 47 , 242 – 252 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2012 . 05 . 019 ; pmid : 22727621 143 . L . - P . Bergeron - Sandoval et al . , Endocytosis caused by liquid - liquid phase separation of proteins . bioRxiv ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1101 / 145664 144 . A . Pombo , N . Dillon , Three - dimensional genome architecture : Players and mechanisms . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 16 , 245 – 257 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3965 ; pmid : 25757416 145 . T . Fukaya , B . Lim , M . Levine , Enhancer control of transcriptional bursting . Cell 166 , 358 – 368 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 05 . 025 ; pmid : 27293191 146 . A . R . Strom et al . , Nature 10 . 1038 / nature22989 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature22989 147 . A . G . Larson et al . , Nature 10 . 1038 / nature22822 ( 2017 ) . 148 . J . F . Marko , in Genome Organization and Function in the Cell Nucleus ( Wiley - VCH Verlag GmbH , 2012 ) , pp . 449 – 485 . 149 . T . J . Nott , T . D . Craggs , A . J . Baldwin , Membraneless organelles can melt nucleic acid duplexes and act as biomolecular filters . Nat . Chem . 8 , 569 – 575 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nchem . 2519 ; pmid : 27219701 150 . A . Németh , G . Längst , Genome organization in and around the nucleolus . Trends Genet . 27 , 149 – 156 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tig . 2011 . 01 . 002 ; pmid : 21295884 151 . Q . Wang et al . , Cajal bodies are linked to genome conformation . Nat . Commun . 7 , 10966 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms10966 ; pmid : 26997247 152 . C . S . Osborne et al . , Active genes dynamically colocalize to shared sites of ongoing transcription . Nat . Genet . 36 , 1065 – 1071 ( 2004 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / ng1423 ; pmid : 15361872 153 . S . Schoenfelder et al . , Polycomb repressive complex PRC1 spatially constrains the mouse embryonic stem cell genome . Nat . Genet . 47 , 1179 – 1186 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / ng . 3393 ; pmid : 26323060 154 . D . Hnisz , K . Shrinivas , R . A . Young , A . K . Chakraborty , P . A . Sharp , A phase separation model for transcriptional control . Cell 169 , 13 – 23 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2017 . 02 . 007 ; pmid : 28340338 155 . M . Zeng et al . , Phase transition in postsynaptic densities underlies formation of synaptic complexes and synaptic plasticity . Cell 166 , 1163 – 1175 . e12 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 07 . 008 ; pmid : 27565345 156 . O . Rog , S . Köhler , A . F . Dernburg , The synaptonemal complex has liquid crystalline properties and spatially regulates meiotic recombination factors . eLife 6 , e21455 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 21455 ; pmid : 28045371 157 . S . B . Reber et al . , XMAP215 activity sets spindle length by controlling the total mass of spindle microtubules . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 , 1116 – 1122 ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2834 ; pmid : 23974040 158 . J . Brugués , D . Needleman , Physical basis of spindle self - organization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 111 , 18496 – 18500 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1409404111 ; pmid : 25468965 159 . K . L . Weirich et al . , Liquid behavior of cross - linked actin bundles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 114 , 2131 – 2136 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1616133114 ; pmid : 28202730 160 . A . B . Singer , J . G . Gall , An inducible nuclear body in the Drosophila germinal vesicle . Nucleus 2 , 403 – 409 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 4161 / nucl . 2 . 5 . 17250 ; pmid : 21941118 161 . G . Lester , Contact angles of liquids at deformable solid surfaces . J . Colloid Sci . 16 , 315 – 326 ( 1961 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0095 - 8522 ( 61 ) 90032 - 0 162 . L . Li et al . , Real - time imaging of Huntingtin aggregates diverting target search and gene transcription . eLife 5 , e17056 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 17056 ; pmid : 27484239 163 . J . J . Moser , M . J . Fritzler , Cytoplasmic ribonucleoprotein ( RNP ) bodies and their relationship to GW / P bodies . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 42 , 828 – 843 ( 2010 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . biocel . 2009 . 11 . 018 ; pmid : 19944184 164 . N . C . Hartman , J . T . Groves , Signaling clusters in the cell membrane . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 23 , 370 – 376 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2011 . 05 . 003 ; pmid : 21665455 165 . J . A . Toretsky , P . E . Wright , Assemblages : Functional units formed by cellular phase separation . J . Cell Biol . 206 , 579 – 588 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201404124 ; pmid : 25179628 166 . B . J . Mayer , M . L . Blinov , L . M . Loew , Molecular machines or pleiomorphic ensembles : Signaling complexes revisited . J . Biol . 8 , 81 ( 2009 ) . doi : 10 . 1186 / jbiol185 ; pmid : 19835637 167 . T . Mélèse , Z . Xue , The nucleolus : An organelle formed by the act of building a ribosome . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 7 , 319 – 324 ( 1995 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0955 - 0674 ( 95 ) 80085 - 9 ; pmid : 7662360 168 . H . B . Schmidt , D . Görlich , Transport selectivity of nuclear pores , phase separation , and membraneless organelles . Trends Biochem . Sci . 41 , 46 – 61 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tibs . 2015 . 11 . 001 ; pmid : 26705895 169 . J . Heuser , Whatever happened to the ‘ microtrabecular concept ’ ? Biol . Cell 94 , 561 – 596 ( 2002 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0248 - 4900 ( 02 ) 00013 - 8 ; pmid : 12732437 170 . S . F . Banani , H . O . Lee , A . A . Hyman , M . K . Rosen , Biomolecular condensates : Organizers of cellular biochemistry . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 18 , 285 – 298 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm . 2017 . 7 ; pmid : 28225081 171 . E . B . Wilson , The structure of protoplasm . Science 10 , 33 – 45 ( 1899 ) . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 10 . 237 . 33 ; pmid : 17829686 172 . K . Simons , E . Ikonen , Functionalraftsincellmembranes . Nature 387 , 569 – 572 ( 1997 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / 42408 ; pmid : 9177342 173 . J . Runnström , Sperm - induced protrusions in sea urchin oocytes : A study of phase separation and mixing in living cvtoplasm . Dev . Biol . 6 , 38 – 50 ( 1963 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0012 - 1606 ( 63 ) 90105 - 2 ; pmid : 13975551 174 . H . Walter , D . E . Brooks , Phase separation in cytoplasm , due to macromolecular crowding , is the basis for microcompartmentation . FEBS Lett . 361 , 135 – 139 ( 1995 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0014 - 5793 ( 95 ) 00159 - 7 ; pmid : 7698310 175 . F . J . Iborra , Can visco - elastic phase separation , macromolecular crowding and colloidal physics explain nuclear organisation ? Theor . Biol . Med . Model . 4 , 15 ( 2007 ) . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1742 - 4682 - 4 - 15 ; pmid : 17430588 176 . Y . H . Lin , J . D . Forman - Kay , H . S . Chan , Sequence - specific polyampholyte phase separation in membraneless organelles . Phys . Rev . Lett . 117 , 178101 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 117 . 178101 ; pmid : 27824447 177 . R . E . Treybal , Liquid Extraction ( McGraw - Hill , 1963 ) , vol . 359 . 178 . J . L . Meijering , Segregation in regular ternary solutions . Philips Res . Rep . 5 , 335 – 356 ( 1950 ) . 179 . R . P . Sear , J . A . Cuesta , Instabilities in complex mixtures with a large number of components . Phys . Rev . Lett . 91 , 245701 ( 2003 ) . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 91 . 245701 ; pmid : 14683134 180 . W . M . Jacobs , D . Frenkel , Phasetransitionsinbiologicalsystems with many components . Biophys . J . 112 , 683 – 691 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2016 . 10 . 043 ; pmid : 28256228 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank R . Pappu , J . P . Taylor , J . Berry , and members of the C . P . B . laboratory for helpful comments on the manuscript . We also thank R . Pappu , A . Hyman , M . Rosen , and M . Haataja for helpful discussions leading to convergence on the term “ condensate . ” We acknowledge support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute – Simons Faculty Scholar program , the NIH 4D Nucleome Program ( grant U01 DA040601 ) , the NSF ( grant 1253035 ) , and NIH ( grant 1DP2GM105437 - 01 ) . 10 . 1126 / science . aaf4382 Shin et al . , Science 357 , eaaf4382 ( 2017 ) 22 September 2017 11 of 11 RESEARCH | REVIEW