FLUORESCENT ANTIBODY LOCALIZATION OF MYOSIN IN THE CYTOPLASM , CLEAVAGE FURROW , AND MITOTIC SPINDLE OF HUMAN CELLS KEIGI FUJIWARA and THOMAS D . POLLARD From the Department of Anatomy , Harvard Medical School , Boston , Massachusetts 02115 ABSTRACT We have studied the distribution of myosin molecules in human cells using myosin - specific antibody coupled with fluorescent dyes . Rabbits were immunized with platelet myosin or myosin rod . They produced antisera which precipitated only myosin among all the components in crude platelet extracts . From these antisera we isolated immunoglobulin - G ( IgG ) 1 and conjugated it with tetra - methylrhodamine or fluorescein . We separated IgG with 2 - 5 fiuorochromes per molecule from both under - and over - conjugated IgG by ion exchange chromatog - raphy and used it to stain acetone - treated cells . The following controls established the specificity of the staining patterns : ( a ) staining with labeled preimmune IgG ; ( b ) staining with labeled immune IgG adsorbed with purified myosin ; ( c ) staining with labeled immune IgG mixed with either unlabeled preimmune or immune serum ; and ( d ) staining with labeled antibody purified by affinity chromatogra - phy . In blood smears , only the cytoplasm of platelets and leukocytes stained . In spread Enson and HeLa cells , stress fibers stained strongly in closely spaced 0 . 5 / ~ m spots . The cytoplasm stained uniformly in those cells presumed to be motile before acetone treatment . In dividing HeLa cells there was a high concentration of myosin - spe . cific staining in the vicinity of the contractile ring and in the mitotic spindle , especially the region between the chromosomes and the poles . We detected no staining of erythrocytes , or nuclei of leukocytes and cultured cells , or the surface of platelets and cultured cells . To understand how a machine works , one must find the motor and determine how it is attached to the various cables , gears , and brakes . The same reasoning led us to study the distribution of myosin molecules inside cells as one way of learn - ing how they move . We are particularly interested in myosin , because it is the energy transducing 1 Abbreviations used in this paper : IgG , immunoglobulin - G ; Na - pp , sodium pyrophosphate ; PBS , phosphate buffered saline . enzyme in those cellular contractile systems using actin filaments and it should be located at the sites of motile force production . Previous efforts to localize myosin in vertebrate cells utilized electron microscopy of thin sections or staining with antibodies coupled to fluorescent dyes or electron - dense markers . Neither method has been completely successful . The usefulness of conventional electron micros - copy has been limited by difficulty in identifying the small aggregates characteristically formed by 848 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY ' VOLUME 71 , 1976 . pages 848 - 875 vertebrate cytoplasmic myosins ( 1 , 11 , 47 , 64 ) . Four groups have described 2 - 10 nm - wide fila - ments in glycerinated cells ( 2 , 6 , 44 , 62 ) . These filaments could be myosin , since they are associ - ated with actin and do not bind heavy mero - myosin . Schroeder ' s ( 62 ) observations are particu - larly intriguing , because he found these presump - tive myosin filaments along with actin in the con - tractile ring . In none of these studies were the filaments positively identified as myosin . Antibody techniques have the potential advan - tages of specificity and high sensitivity . There have been a number of localization studies using anti - bodies against myosins ( 5 , 7 , 29 , 45 , 49 , 72 , 73 , 74 ) . We felt that additional antimyosin work was necessary , because antigen preparations were grossly impure in some cases , because antigens and antibodies were incompletely characterized in some cases , because there was evidence for non - specific staining in some studies , and because there were conflicting results . The objectives of the present work were to establish the immunological specificity of antibod - ies against platelet myosin , to couple these anti - bodies with fluorochromes in a way that avoids nonspecific staining , and to use the fluorescent antimyosin to localize myosin at the light micro - scope level in platelets , leukocytes , HeLa cells , and Enson cells . We have paid particular attention to the myosin distribution in the cytoplasm of stationary and motile cultured cells and in the cleavage furrow and mitotic spindle of dividing cells . In other reports , we used the antibodies to study platelet activation ( 53 ) , serological relation - ships among cytoplasmic and muscle myosins ( 54 ) , and the relationship between tubulin and myosin during cell division ( 22 ) . Preliminary ac - counts of some of the present work were pre - sented at the September 1975 Cold Spring Harbor Meeting on Cell Motility ( 54 ) and the November 1975 Meeting of the American Society for Cell Biology ( 21 ) . MATERIALS AND METHODS Preparation of Immunizing Agents We purified myosin and the rod portion of the myosin molecule from human platelets by the KI - gel filtration method of Pollard et al . ( 52 ) . The purity of the prepara - tions was assessed by electrophoresis in 7 . 5 % polyacryl - amide gels with 0 . 1 % sodium dodecyl sulfate and a tris - glycine buffer ( 63 ) . The gels were stained with Coomas - sie brilliant blue ( 18 ) and scanned at 550 nm with a Gilford spectrophotometer ( Gilford Instrument Labora - tories , Inc . , Oberlin , Ohio ) . Protein concentrations were estimated by the method of Hartree ( 30 ) with the use of bovine serum albumin as the standard , or by absorbance at 280 rim , with 14 . 0 as the extinction coefficient for 1 % immunoglobulin - G ( 75 ) and 5 . 9 as the extinction coeffi - cient for a 1 % platelet myosin solution ( 52 ) . Immunization We used eight male white New Zealand rabbits ( 5 - 7 kg ) to obtain antisera against human platelet myosin . We collected about 30 ml of preimmune serum from each rabbit to serve as controls for our experiments . Four rabbits were immunized with purified platelet myosin containing less than 5 % of the myosin rod fragment ( Fig . 2a , Table I ) . Another two were immunized with purified platelet myosin partially degraded into rod and head fragments ( Fig . 2b , Table I ) . The remaining two rabbits were immunized with homogeneous platelet myosin rod ( Fig . 2c , Table I ) . In all three cases , about 250 / . ~ g of protein emulsified in complete Freund ' s adjuvant ( Difco Laboratories , Detroit , Mich . ) was injected subcutane - ously at each of about 25 sites including a panel along the back , the foot pads , and the toe pads . A single boost consisting of the same amount of the original antigen in incomplete Freund ' s adjuvant ( Difco Laboratories ) was given subcutaneously at multiple sites during the 5th or 6th week after the initial injection ( Table I ) . We bled the rabbits from ear veins three times during the 2nd wk after the boost , obtaining about 50 ml of blood each time . The blood was allowed to clot at 37 ~ for 1 h and further incubated at 4 ~ overnight . The serum was col - lected and freed of erythrocytes by centrifugation at 10 , 000 rpm for 30 rain in a Beckman JA - 20 rotor ( Beckman Instruments , Inc . , Spinco Div . , Palo Alto , Calif . ) at 4 ~ The antisera were divided into 2 ml vials and stored at - 20 ~ Evaluation of Antisera We screened all eight antisera using double immuno - diffusion and immunoelectrophoresis to estimate the strength and specificity of their reaction with platelet myosin . The test antigens were crude platelet extract and purified platelet myosin . From these we selected three antisera for more detailed evaluation and for staining . TEST ANTIGENS PURIFIED ANTIGENS FROM HUMAN PLATE - LETS : We obtained the following purified antigens di - rectly from the KI - gel filtration column : myosin , myosin rod , myosin head mixed with some actin and tropomyo - sin , and actin . CRUDE EXTRACTS : In addition to the purified an - tigens , we used crude extracts of platelets and HeLa cells to test the antisera . We prepared the cell extracts in 20 mM Na - pyrophosphate ( Na - pp ) buffer at pH 8 . 6 , be - cause ( a ) myosin is soluble in it at relatively low ionic strength , ( b ) it dissociates actin and myosin , and ( c ) it KErn1 FUJIWARA AND THOMAS D . POLLAgD Localization of Myosin in Cells 849 appears to have no effect on immunological reactions . The platelet extract was made by hand - homogenizing 500 mg of frozen human platelets with a Teflon glass homogenizer in 0 . 5 ml 40 mM Na - pp buffer at pH 8 . 6 . The homogenate was cleared by centrifuging for 30 min at 4 ~ in a Beckman JA - 20 rotor at 14 , 000 rpm ( 23 , 700 g maximum force ) . This yielded an extract of soluble proteins in 20 mM Na - pp . We divided the crude platelet extract into small test tubes and stored them at - 20 ~ until use . Whenever a platelet extract was needed , one tube was thawed , used once , and discarded . We pre - pared a crude extract of HeLa cells in a similar manner . The cells were harvested by treating the culture with Ca + + - Mg + + - free Hanks ' solution ( Grand Island Biologi - cal Co . , Grand Island , N . Y . ) containing 1 mM EDTA at 37 ~ for 10 min . The cells were collected by low speed centrifugation and washed once in Hanks ' solution ( Grand Island Biological Company ) . The volume of the packed cells was estimated and an equal volume of 40 mM Na - pp buffer added . After suspending the cells in the buffer , we froze them at - 20oc for 10 min . The suspension was thawed and left on ice for 1 h to extract soluble components . The extract was clarified by centrif - ugation at the maximum speed of a clinical centrifuge for 5 min . DOUBLE IMMUNODIFFUSION ANALYSIS For the two dimensional double immunodiffusion ( 48 ) , we used 1 % agarose ( Induboise A 45 , L ' Industrie Biologique Francaise 5 . A . Gennevilliers , France ) con - taining 0 . 01 % Merthiolate ( Eli Lilly and Co . , Indianalx ~ - lis , Ind . ) and 20 mM Na - pp buffer at pH 8 . 6 . The immunodiffusion plates were incubated in a moist cham - ber at either room temperature or 4 ~ for 2 - 4 days . With dark - field illumination most precipitin lines could be seen and recorded photographically , but we routinely stained the plates with Coomassie brilliant blue to detect faint precipitin bands . Before staining , the plates were washed first in 20 mM Na - pp buffer overnight with one change of buffer and then in distilled water for 2 h with one change . They were air - dried with filter paper on top . The dried plates were stained for 30 min with 0 . 25 % Coomassie brilliant blue in a 5 : 1 : 4 mixture of methanol , acetic acid , and water . Destaining was done in the same solution without the dye . IMMUNOELECTROPHORESIS For immunoelectrophoresis ( 48 ) we prepared agarose plates using 2 inch x 3 inch glass slide and 11 ml of 1 % agarose in 20 mM Na - pp buffer at pH 9 . 0 . 10 - 20 / zl of antigen solution were subjected to electrophoresis for 1 h at 15 mA per plate using the Na - pp buffer as the tank buffer . After electrophoresis , the antiserum was applied to troughs and the plate was incubated for 2 - 5 clays in a moist chamber at room temperature . The precipitin bands were recorded photographically with or without staining by Coomassie brilliant blue . CROSSED IMMUNOELECTROPHORESIS We modified the crossed immunoelectrophoresis tech - nique , described in the manual edited by Axelsen et a ! . ( 3 , 37 ) , to make it applicable for myosin . The condition for the first electrophoresis was identical with the im - munoelectrophoresis , except that the pH of the Na - pp buffer was adjusted to 8 . 6 . A strip of agarose containing electrophoretically distributed components of the anti - gen solution was cut out and placed at one edge of a sec - ond 2 inch x 3 inch microscope slide . We mixed 0 . 01 vol of antiserum with 1 % agarose in Na - pp buffer at 50 ~ and poured it onto the remaining part of the second microscope slide . After this agarose layer had solidified , the second electrophoresis was performed perpendicular to the first at 1 . 5 mA per plate for 24 h at room temperature . The agarose plate was washed first in the Na - pp buffer overnight , then in distilled water for several hours before air - drying and staining with Coomassie brilliant blue . To identify unknown precipitin bands , we used tandem crossed immunoelectrophoresis ( 37 ) . Two antigen wells were made on the first electrophoresis plate in such a way that one well was slightly closer to the anode . This anodic well was also off the electrophoretic passage of the cathodic sample . Purified platelet myosin was applied to the anodic well and the platelet extract to the cathodic well . All the other conditions for the tan - dem crossed immunoelectrophoresis were identical with the conventional crossed immunoelectrophoresis de - scribed above . Preparation of Fluorescent Reagents for Antibody Staining FLUORESCENT PREIMMUNE AND IMMUNE IgG Immunoglohulin G ( IgG ) from one preimmune serum and three different batches of antisera were labeled with either fluorescein isothiocyanate or tetramethylrhoda - mine isothiocyanate ( Table I ) . Each of the three antisera was against different antigen preparations of platelet myosin ( Table I and Fig . 2 ) . Fig . 1 illustrates the proto - col for preparing fluorescent antibodies , which is a minor modification of the procedure of Cebra and Goldstein ( 13 ) . Frozen serum was thawed and its volume measured . From this point on , all steps were carried out at 0 - 4 ~ IgG was fractianated from the serum with 37 % saturated ammonium sulfate . After 1 h with stirring , precipitated IgG was collected by centrifugation in a JA - 20 rotor at 12 , 000 rpm ( maximum force 17 , 600 g ) for 15 min . The white pellet was resuspended into the original volume of phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) containing 0 . 85 % NaC1 in 15 mM phosphate buffer at pH 7 . 4 , and the ammo - nium sulfate fractionation step was repeated once more . The pellet was redissolved in one - half volume of PBS , and dialyzed against several changes of 500 ml 0 . 01 M phosphate buffer at pH 7 . 5 for 24 h . At the end of the dialysis the small amount of white precipitate which 850 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY ' VOLUME 71 , 1976 Purified m y o s i n ~ ~ or rod B o o s t lX FIGURE I _ ~ _ _ ~ , . - serum with antibody ( NH4 ) 2S04 1 ZgG DEAE cellulose Tg ~ G with similar isoelectric points q * TMRITC or FITC G - 25 Sephadex ZQG - TMR ~ free TMR T ~ G - TMR ~ free TMR I Ds cellulose ~ o ~ mrcoupk ~ d z ~ Q g - ( TMR ' J2 _ 4 L undercoupled platelet myosin ~ ' ~ affinity column ~ . adsorbed ZgG - TMR Pur I fled antI - PM - ( TMR ) 2 . 4 The protocol for preparing the reagents used in fluorescent antibody staining . This method of Cebra and Goldstein ( 3 ) was adopted with a slight modification . The following abbreviations are used : IgG ( immunoglobulin G ) , TMRITC ( tetramethylrhodmine isothiocyanate ) , FITC ( fluorescein isothiocyanate ) , TMR ( tetramethylrhodamine ) , and PM ( platelet myosin ) . formed was removed by centrifugation at 17 , 600 g for 15 rain . This IgG in phosphate buffer was fractionated on DEAE cellulose ( DE 52 , Whatman ) to obtain two pools of IgG , each having a limited distribution of charges . The two pools were IgG which passed directly through the anion exchanger column in 0 . 01 M phosphate buffer ( Pool I ) and IgG which was eluted with 0 . 05 M NaCl in the phosphate buffer ( Pool II ) . From this point on , the two pools were handled separately , although they were treated in exactly the same way . Each pool of IgG was precipitated with 40 or 50 % ammonium sulfate , and the pellet dissolved in a small amount of PBS to make the IgG concentration roughly 10 mg / ml . To remove ammo - nium sulfate , the IgG solutions were dialyzed against PBS for 1 day with several changes . At the end of dialysis , the protein concentration in each solution was determined by absorption at 280 rim . For conjugation with the fluorochromes , dry fluores - cein isothiocyanate ( FITC , BBL , Cockeysville , Md . , lot K4EAGM11 - 76 ) or tetramethylrhodamine isothiocya - hate ( TMRITC , BBL , lot K3EAGL ) was measured into a small conjugation vial . The amounts of FITC and TMRITC per milligram of IgG were 20 / zg and 40 / zg respectively . The IgG solution , whose pH was adjusted to 9 . 5 with 0 . 1 N NaOH at 0 ~ was then added slowly with constant stirring to the reaction vial on ice . During the 1st h of the conjugation reaction , the pH was kept between 9 . 3 and 9 . 5 with 0 . 1 N NaOH . Then the reac - tion vial was covered with aluminum foil and left at 4 ~ with stirring . After 12 - 18 h of conjugation , the reaction mixture was passed through a Sephadex G - 25 column ( Pharmacia Fine Chemicals , Inc . , Piscataway , N . J . ) equilibrated with 0 . 01 M phosphate buffer at pH 7 . 5 to separate most of the unconjugated fluorochrome from the conjugated IgG , to change the pH of the solution , and to remove the salt . Then the IgG in 0 . 01 M phos - phate buffer was chromatographed on a DEAE cellulose column equilibrated with the same buffer to remove under - and over - conjugated IgG . For pool I the conju - gated IgG was eluted sequentially with 0 . 01 M phos - phate buffer containing 0 M , 0 . 04 M , and 0 . 1 M NaCI . For pool II , the steps were 0 M , 0 . 04 M , 0 . 06 M , 0 . 1 M , and 1 M NaCI in the buffer . The ratio of dye to protein in each fraction was determined by measuring the absorb - ance of rhodamine at 515 nm or fluorescein at 495 and IgG at 280 nm . We used 0 . 13 ( 1 / . ~ g / ml ) as the extinction coefficient for rhodamine ( 43 ) and 0 . 20 ( 1 / ~ g / ml ) for fluorescein ( 32 ) , and the correction factors for fluoro - chrome absorbance at 280 nm ( 0 . 56 , 0 . 35 ) ( 8 ) . As recommended , those fractions having dye to protein ratios of 2 to 5 were used to stain cells ( 13 ) . All the labeled IgG was stored in phosphate buffer with 0 . 02 % Na - azide at 4 ~ LABELED PURIFIED ANTIBODY AND ADSO ~ ED IgG Part of the labeled IgG was further purified for spe - cific antibodies against platelet myosin by affinity chro - KEIGI FUJIWARA AND THOMAS D . POLLARD Localization of Myosin in Cells 851 matography . Purified human platelet myosin was cova - lently bound to polyacrylamide beads by the method of Ternynck and Avrameas ( 71 ) , except that we substi - tuted Na - pp for phosphate buffer to keep the myosin in solution . The labeled IgG in PBS was run into the myosin - polyacrylamide column and the fraction which passed directly through the column was used as adsorbed IgG . The column was washed with PBS until no more protein eluted from it . The antibody that bound to the beads was then eluted with 0 . 2 M glycine - HCl buffer at pH 2 . 8 . As each 20 drop fraction containing protein was collected , the pH was raised at once to 6 . 9 with 3 drops of 1 M sodium phosphate at pH 7 . 5 . The purified anti - body was dialyzed against PBS with 0 . 02 % Na - azide and stored in solution at 4 ~ We also prepared adsorbed immune IgG by mixing 50 # l of labeled IgG solution containing 16 p . g of protein with either the myosin bound to beads or with purified platelet myosin in PBS containing 6 - 45 / ~ g protein . The mixture was incubated at room temperature for 30 min and 4 ~ for 10 h . Then it was centrifuged for 45 rain in Sorvall SS - 34 rotor ( Ivan Sorvall , Inc . , Norwalk , Conn . ) at 10 , 000 rpm and the supernatant was used as adsorbed IgG . Staining Cells with Fluorescent Antimyosin HUMAN BLOOD SMEAR We tested the immunocytochemical specificity of our fluorescent reagents on human blood smears . A small drop of human blood was smeared between two 18 (cid:141) 18 rnm coverslips , which were then submerged into acetone at - 20 ~ for 5 min with or without brief air - drying beforehand . We found that air - drying the smear briefly before the acetone treatment enhances the adhesion of erythrocytes to the coverslip . Acetone - treated smears were air - dried at room temperature . To examine surface staining , we fixed blood smears in 3 % formalin ( Mal - linckrodt , St . Louis , Mo . ) in PBS at room temperature for 30 min and washed in PBS for 10 min . Blood smears were then stained by inverting the coverslips onto 50 - 100 / zl of labeled antibody solution ( 2 . 5 - 320 p . g / ml IgG ) for 30 to 45 min at room tempera - ture in a moist chamber . The stained coverslips were washed by submersion in several changes of 30 ml PBS over a period of 1 - 2 h and finally mounted in 90 % glycerol in PBS . The coverslips were sealed to the slide with nail polish . HUMAN TISSUE CULTURE CELLS Human cell lines , HeLa and Enson ( CRL 1139 ; skin fibroblast ) , were grown on 18 x 18 mm microscope coverslips using Eagle ' s basic medium with 10 % fetal calf serum . The cells on the cover glass were briefly washed in PBS at 37 ~ then treated in acetone at - 20 ~ for 5 rain , and air dried at room temperature . For surface staining , the cells were fixed in 3 % formalin as described above for blood smears . Fixed tissue culture ceils were stained with the labeled antibody , washed in PBS , and mounted exactly as the blood smears . CONTROLS FOR IMMUNOFLUORESCENCE To examine the specificity of the staining patterns , we carried out the following controls : ( a ) staining with la - beled IgG from preimmune serum , ( b ) staining with labeled IgG adsorbed with purified myosin , ( c ) staining with labeled antibody in the presence of an excess amount of unlabeled specific antiserum , ( d ) staining in the presence of preimmune serum , and ( e ) staining with labeled purified antibody . For controls ( c ) and ( d ) , cells were stained with a mixture of 20 ~ . l fluorescent lgG containing antimyosin antibodies and 80 # l either im - mune or preimmune serum , Fluorescence Microscopy and Photomicroscopy We observed cells stained with fluorescent antibody with a Leitz Orthoplan microscope stand equipped with a Ploem vertical illuminator using a Xenon lamp ( Xenon Corp . , Watertown , Mass . ) ( XBO - 150 ) as the light source . The entire filter set - up is described in the order through which the illuminating light passes . For fluores - cein the set - up was 3 mm BG - 38 ( red suppression filter ) , KP - 500 ( excitation interference filter ) , TK - 510 / 515 ( built - in dichroic mirror and barrier filter ) , and K - 530 ( barrier filter ) ; and for tetramethylrhodamine , 3 mm BG - 38 , KP - 560 ( excitation interference filter ) , 2 mm BG - 36 ( exciter filter ) , TK - 580 / K - 580 ( built - in dichroic mirror and barrier filter ) , and K - 580 ( barrier filter ) . Objective lenses with high NA were used to obtain both an efficient illumination and high resolution . They included x 100 ( Leitz , NA 1 . 3 , oil ) , (cid:141) 63 ( Zeiss , Planapo phase NA 1 . 4 , oil ) , x 63 ( Zeiss , Planapo , NA 1 . 4 , oil ) . For phase contrast observation , both x 63 ( Zeiss , Planapo phase NA 1 . 4 , oil ) and x 40 ( Leitz , Planapo phase NA 1 . 0 , oil ) were used with Leitz phase contrast condenser modified to match the phase ring of the Zeiss lens . Kodak 35 mm Tri - X negative film was used to record the fluorescent image . The exposure time varied depend - ing upon the preparation as well as the fluorochrome used . Average exposure times were I - 2 min for fluores - cein and 15 - 30 s for tetramethylrhodamine . The film was developed in Acufine ( Acuflne Inc . , Chicago , 111 . ) which gave an effective ASA of 1200 . The photographic prints are an accurate representation of the fluorescence contrast in the original specimens , but different prints cannot be compared with respect to their intensity be - cause we had to adjust the intensity to bring out the contrast . RESULTS Purity of Immunizing Agents We used electrophoresis in sodium dodecyl sul - fate on polyacrylamide gels to assess the purity of 852 ThE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 71 , 1976 FmURE 2 Electrophoretic analysis of immunizing agents . The polyacrylamide gels are stained with Coo - massie blue and scanned at 550 nm . The following sym - the three immunizing agents : purified platelet myosin , purified platelet myosin partially de - graded into rod and head fragments , and purified platelet myosin rod ( Fig . 2 ) . Densitometer scans of stained gels indicated that the purified myosin ( Fig . 2a ) and purified myosin rod ( Fig . 2c ) were contaminated with 1 - 2 % unidentified polypep - tides . Thus we injected about 2 - 5 / ~ g of unidenti - fied polypeptide along with each dose of antigen . The partially degraded myosin ( Fig . 2b ) contains 16 % unidentified polypeptides , but we believe that they are mostly aggregated myosin and prote - olytic fragments of myosin . Specificity of the Antisera We screened immune sera from eight rabbits for antibodies against human platelet myosin using double immunodiffusion and immunoelectropho - resis . In both tests , all of the immune sera formed a single precipitin line when reacted with either purified platelet myosin or a crude platelet extract . For fluorescent antibody studies , we selected three antisera which reacted strongly with myosin and subjected these three sera to more rigorous immu - nological tests . These tests showed that each of these antisera reacts with the rod portion of the platelet myosin molecule . Reaction with other platelet components was not detected . These anti - sera also reacted with a component in HeLa cells which is immunologically identical with platelet myosin and is presumably HeLa myosin . Exam - ples of these tests are presented in the following sections and all of the data are summarized in Table I . These methods detect only precipitating antibodies . Nonprecipitating antibodies against bols are used to identify the polypeptides : myosin heavy chain ( M ) , myosin light chains ( L - 1 and L - 2 ) , myosin rod fragment ( R ) , myosin head frgment ( H ) , and var - ious unidentified polypeptides ( w , x , y , and z ) . ( a ) : Purified platelet myosin . This preparation consists of 94 % myosin ( M + L - 1 + L - 2 ) , 4 % myosin rod , a trace of myosin head , and 1 . 6 % unidentified material ( w ) . ( b ) : Partially degraded platelet myosin . This material consists of 73 % myosin ( M + L - 1 + L - 2 ) , 10 % myosin rod , 1 % myosin head , and 16 % unidentified polypep - tides ( x and y ) . Since the amounts of the heavy chain ( M ) and the light chains ( L - 1 + L - 2 ) are 60 % and 13 % , respectively , there is not enough heavy chain to account for the excess amount of the light chains . Therefore we suspect that bands x and y must be aggregates and fragments of intact myosin . ( c ) : Purified myosin rod . This preparation contains 1 % myosin ( M ) , 98 % myosin rod , and 1 % unidentified polypeptide ( z ) . KEIGI FUJIWARA AND THOMAS D . POLLARD Localization of Myosin in Cells 853 TABLE I Evaluation of Antisera Rabbit sera Preimmune 1 2 3 3 4 5 6 8 9 Partially degraded Immuni ~ ng agents isolated from human platelets Myosin myosin Myosin Myosin rod No . of injections 0 2 2 2 5 2 2 2 2 2 Double immuno - Platelet extract + + + + ( + ) + + + + + diffusion " myosin + + + + + + + + + " myosin rod + + + + + + + + " myosin head . . . . . " at ' tin - - - HeLa extract + + + lmmunoelectrophoresis Plateiet extract + + + + + + + + " myosin + + + + + + + " myosin rod + + + + + + " myosin head - - - " actin - - - Crossed immunoelec - Platelet extract + + + trophoresis " myosin + + + Fluorochromes F R F R + , one precipitin line ; + + , two precipitin lines ; + ( + ) , two precipitin lines , but sometimes one ; - , no precipitin line , F , fluorescein isothiocyanate ; R , tetramet hylrhodamine isothiocyanate . myosin or contaminating antigens would escape detection . DOUBLE IMraONOmFFOSION The antiserum against purified platelet myosin reacted with purified myosin , myosin rod , and the crude extracts of platelets and HeLa cells to form a single precipitin line ( Fig . 3 ) . The fusion of the precipitin lines shows that the four reactions are immunologically " identical . " The antiserum did not react with the head region of platelet myosin or with platelet actin ( Fig . 3 ) . The other two antisera used for staining work gave identical re - sults ( Table I ) . Elsewhere we report that none of the antisera against platelet myosin reacted with myosins from human skeletal and cardiac muscles , but that some of them reacted weakly with ex - tracts of human uterus ( 54 ) . IMMUNOELECTROPHORESIS Immunoelectrophoresis is a useful adjunct to double immunodiffusion for assessing the specific - ity of antisera , because the antigens are separated according to their electrophoretic mobility before reaction with the antiserum . This test confirmed the results of immunodiffusion : the three antisera chosen for staining reacted with platelet myosin , myosin rod , and a single component in crude platelet extracts ( Fig . 4 ; Table I ) . The antigen in the crude platelet extract had the same electro - FmUR ~ 3 Double immunodiffusion analysis of antise - rum against human # ontelet myosin . The antiserum ( rab - bit 4 , single boost ) is in the center well and test antigens are placed in the six outer wells . The antiserum forms a single precipitin line with purified human # ontelet myosin ( M ) , purified human platelet myosin rod ( R ) , a crude extract of human platelets ( P ) and a crude extract of HeLa cells ( HL ) . It does not react with human plntelet myosin head ( H ) or human plntelet actin ( A ) . Stained . phoretic mobility as myosin . The antisera did not react with platelet myosin head or actin . The experiment shown in Fig . 4 also illustrates the danger of repeated immunization and the ne - cessity of using crude antigen mixtures when eval - uating antisera . An antiserum obtained after four boosts with purified myosin formed precipitin lines with two components in the crude platelet extract g54 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 71 , 1976 FIGURE 4 [ mmunoelectrophoretic analysis of the anti - sera obtained after one boost ( Asl ) and four boosts ( As4 ) of rabbit 3 . Purified antigens , human platelet myosin ( M ) , and human platelet myosin rod ( R ) , form a single precipitin line with both antisera . A crude extract of human platelets ( P ) forms a single precipitin line with Asl and two precipitin lines with As4 . Unstained . and only one precipitin line against purified plate - let myosin rod . The lines formed by reaction with the crude extract did not fuse , indicating that they are serologically different . From their electropho - retic mobility , it is clear that the anodic precipitin line represents myosin . The identity of the con - taminating antibody is unknown ; however it must be against a minor component contaminating the myosin preparation used to immunize the rabbit . The concentration of this contaminating compo - nent in the purified antigen was so low that the second precipitin line was undetectable when the antiserum from the hyperimmunized rabbit re - acted with the purified test antigens . However , the concentration of the contaminant was high enough in the crude extract to form a precipitin line and reveal the presence of the second antibody . This experiment also shows that a high resolution test such as immunoelectrophoresis is essential in eval - uating antisera because this hyperimmune serum sometimes forms a single precipitin line on double immunodiffusion against the crude extract . CROSSED IMMUNOELECTROPHORESIS By conventional crossed immunoelectropho - resis we showed that the antisera against platelet myosin reacted with a single component in the crude platelet extract ( 54 ) . By tandem crossed immunoelectrophoresis we identified this compo - nent as myosin ( Fig . 5 ) . This technique is very sensitive , being capable of detecting less than 0 . 1 / zg of myosin . In addition , it can be used for quantitative analysis . For example , from the ratio of the crude extract and myosin peak heights in Fig . 5 , we estimated that the myosin content of the extract was about 1 . 5 % . This figure is close to estimates of the myosin content in human platelets made by other methods ( 52 ) . Preparation of Fluorescent Antibody We used the Cebra and Goldstein ( 13 ) proce - dure to obtain fluorescent IgG giving bright spe - cific staining and minimal nonspecific staining . During the fractionation more than 80 % of the IgG was lost , but this sacrifice was necessary to obtain reliable staining reagents . Fixation and Staining Conditions To stain the cytoplasm with fluorescent anti - body , it was necessary to fix cellular components in place and to give the large immunoglobulin - fluorochrome conjugate access to the cell interior . For localizing myosin , we used cold acetone to immobilize the myosin and lyse the cell mem - brane . This treatment preserved general cell mor - phology and gave the brightest anti - myosin stain - ing . We usually used acetone at - 20 ~ but tem - peratures between - 70 ~ and room temperature gave similar results . Acetone treatment followed by fixation with 1 - 1 . 5 % formalin in PBS ( 61 ) preserved the life - like morphology of cells and gave staining patterns identical with acetone treat - ment alone . With cells fixed in 10 % formalin in PBS and then treated with acetone , we obtained similar antimyosin staining patterns but the inten - sity was less than with acetone alone . FIOUR ~ 5 Analysis of an antiserum ( rabbit 6 ) against human platelet myosin by tandem crossed immunoelec - trophoresis . The two precipitin peaks formed by a crude human platelet extract ( P ) and purified human platelet myosin ( M ) fuse completely . The two long arrows indi - cate the directions of the two electrophoretic fields . Stained . KEIGI FUJtWARA AND THOMAS D . POLLARD Localization of Myosin in Cells 855 Inverting small coverslips onto drops of fluores - cent antibody allowed us to use as little as 50 p . l of reagent per coverslip . We used 2 . 5 - 320 p . g / ml of fluorescent immune IgG and 1 - 32 p . g / ml of flu - orescent purified antimyosin for staining . The flu - orescence intensity of platelets , measured with a microscope photometer , was roughly proportional to the concentration of fluorescent antibody used for staining . All concentrations gave similar stain - ing patterns . We have confirmed the observations of Cebra and Goldstein ( 13 ) on the staining properties of lgG coupled with different amounts of fluoro - chrome . Specific staining was achieved with conju - gates having 2 - 4 fluorochrome molecules per IgG . The staining intensity was low with conjugates having less than 1 fluorochrome per IgG . IgG coupled with more than 4 fluorochromes per IgG stained cells nonspecifically in locations like the nucleus . Staining of the Human Blood Smear Of the formed elements in the blood , only the platelets and the cytoplasm of leukocytes stained with fluorescent antimyosin IgG ( Fig . 6b ) . Occa - sionally there was a very faint staining of erythro - cytes , but it was so weak that it was difficult to record photographically . There was no staining of platelets or leukocytes with fluorescent preim - mune IgG ( Fig . 6d ) or with fluorescent immune IgG adsorbed with platelet myosin ( Fig . 6f ) . The specific fluorescence was greatly reduced or com - pletely blocked when the smear was stained with fluorescent immune IgG mixed with an excess of unlabeled antiserum ( Fig . 6h ) , but a bright spe - cific fluorescence was seen when the smear was stained with labeled immune IgG mixed with the same concentration of preimmune serum ( Fig . 6j ) . There was no detectable staining of erythro - cytes in the presence of preimmune IgG . Staining of Human Tissue Culture Cells during lnterphase We used fluorescent antibodies against human platelet myosin to localize myosin in two human tissue culture cell lines , Enson and HeLa . This was reasonable because the antisera reacted with a single component in HeLa cells which was serolog - ically identical with platelet myosin . ENSON CELLS Enson cells are very large , flat epithelial cells whose morphology suggests that they are not ac - tively motile . Their cytoplasm is laced with phase - dense straight fibers , known as stress fibers . These stress fibers survived cold acetone treatment ( Figs . 7a and 7c ) and were the only structure in these cells which stained strongly with fluorescent im - mune IgG or purified fluorescent antibody against platelet myosin ( Figs . 7b and 7d ) . Individual stress fibers were about 0 . 5 - 2 p . m wide and up to several hundred micrometers long . The thicker fibers appeared to be formed by the lateral fusion of thin fibers . The long stress fibers tended to be arranged parallel to each other , but short fibers often ran obliquely across the cell . The ends of some of these fibers converged at focal points forming pine needle - like patterns . The edge of some fibers was close to the margin of the cell , but the antimyosin staining at the ends of the stress fibers usually terminated several micrometers away from the edge of the cell . As established by electron microscopy ( 10 , 27 , 41 ) most of the stress fibers were parallel to the substrate and close to the plasma membrane at the base of the cell . In some parts of these cells , dense parallel arrays of very fine fibers formed a sheet across the base of the cell . A few fibers arched over the nucleus . We have confirmed the earlier report ( 73 ) , that the antimyosin staining of stress fibers is discontin - uous . HELA CELLS The pattern of antimyosin staining in HeLa cells depended on the stage of the cell cycle and the culture conditions . During interphase three pat - terns were found : concentration in phase - dense stress fibers , concentration in fibers invisible by phase contrast optics , and general distribution throughout the cytoplasm . Some HeLa ceils had phase - dense fibers , espe - cially if the culture medium was not changed for a week or longer ( Figs . 8a and 8c ) . In these cells , the staining with antimyosin was confined to these stress fibers ( Figs . 8b and 8d ) . Morphologically , the fluorescent staining pattern was similar to the staining pattern of Enson cells , although the HeLa cells were much smaller . At high magnification the discontinuous nature of the staining was clear ( Fig . 9 ) . Each unit of staining appeared as a spot about 0 . 5 p . m in diameter . Detection of asymmetry in these spots was beyond the resolution of the light microscope . The fluorescent spots were arranged in lines along the stress fibers like beads on a string . They were separated from each other by unstained spaces of about 0 . 5 p . m . The spots on 856 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 71 , 1976 FI6UaE 6 Human blood smears treated with acetone and then stained with various fluorescent reagents . These experiments represent the minimum controls necessary to interpret the significance of the staining . Each fluorescence micrograph is accompanied on its left by a phase - contrast image of the same field . ( a ) and ( b ) 60 / zg / ml of immune IgG from rabbit 8 labeled with 2 rhodamines per molecule . The platelets and the cytoplasm of the leukocyte are brightly stained . ( c ) and ( d ) 90 / zg / ml of preimmune IgG from rabbit 6 labeled with 3 . 5 fluoresceins per molecule . None of the platelets or leukocytes stain . ( e ) and ( f ) 56 / xg / ml of immune IgG from rabbit 8 labeled with 1 . 8 rhodamines per molecule and adsorbed with purified human platelet myosin coupled to polacryalmide beads . No staining is observed . ( g ) and ( h ) 60 / zg / ml of immune IgG from rabbit 8 labeled with 2 rhodamines per molecule mixed with 80 % immune serum from rabbit 8 . No staining is observed . ( i ) and ( j ) 60 / zg / ml of immune IgG h ' om rabbit 8 labeled with 2 rhodamines per molecule mixed with 80 % preimmune serum from rabbit 8 . The platelets and leukocytes ( not shown ) stain brightly , but not the erythrocytes . Scale : 1 division = 10 / ~ m . KEIGI FUJIWARA AND THOMAS D . POLLARD Localization of Myosin in Cells 857 FI6URE 7 Enson cells stained with labeled immune IgG ( rabbit 8 , 72 / . tg / ml IgG with 2 rhodamines per molecule ) . Stress fibers which are detectable with phase - contrast microscopy ( a and c ) stain strongly with the labeled immune IgG ( b and d ) . In short stress fibers branching is easily recognized . There is no nuclear staining . The arrow indicates some debris which stains nonspecifically ( a and b ) . Scale : 1 division = 10 p . m . adjacent fibers were usually not in register . When several of these fine fibers merged to form a thicker fiber , the staining appeared continuous . This is probably due to the periodicity of the spots on adjacent subfibers being out of register with their neighbors and obscuring the dark intervals between the spots . We speculate that the spots stained with fluorescent antimyosin may represent individual myosin filaments , because the spots are about the same size as the cytoplasmic myosin aggregates formed in vitro ( 1 , 10 , 47 , 64 ) . Most HeLa cells did not have phase - dense stress fibers either before or after fixation ( Figs . 10a , 11a and 11 c ) . In some of these cells the anti - 858 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY (cid:12)9 VOLUME 71 , 1976 F16traE 8 HeLa cells stained with labeled immune IgG ( rabbit 8 , 72 p . g / ml IgG with 2 rhodamines per molecule ) . The phase - contrast micrographs ( a and c ) show stress fibers , which stain brightly ( b and d ) . There is no nuclear staining . Scale : 1 division = 10 p . m . myosin staining was concentrated in fibers that closely resemble stress fibers ( Fig . 10b ) , but which were undetectable by phase contrast micros - copy . These cells were usually found in confluent parts of the cultures . Given their spread morphol - ogy , we suspect that they are not actively motile . In other cells , without phase - dense stress fibers , the antimyosin staining was spread throughout the cytoplasm ( Figs . 11 b and 11 d ) . Typically , these cells were found in nonconfluent cultures or at the edge of cell colonies . Judging from their morphol - ogy , it is our impression that they are actively motile . Most nuclei did not stain with fluorescent im - mune IgG , although there was some nuclear and nucleolar staining in isolated regions of the prepa - KEIGI FUJIWARA AND THOMAS D . POLLARD Localization of Myosin in Cells 859 FIGURE 9 HeLa stress fibers stained with labeled immune IgG ( rabbit 8 , 60 p . g / ml IgG with 2 rhodamines per molecule ) . These high magnification fluorescence micrographs show the staining pattern within stress fibers in detail . Many stress fibers are made up of linearly arranged discrete fluorescent spots . These spots have a diameter of about 0 . 5 / tin . Branching is seen in many fibers . Scale : 1 division = 10 / . ~ m . FIGURE 10 HeLa cells stained with labeled purified antibody ( rabbit 8 , 22 / ~ g / ml IgG with 2 rhodamines per molecule ) . The phase - contrast image ( a ) reveals no stress fibers , but the fluorescent image ( b ) shows many cytoplasmic fibers which are morphologically identical to the stress fibers shown in Figs . 8 and 9 . There is no nuclear staining . Scale : 1 division = 10 p . m . Fioul ~ 11 HeLa cells stained with labeled purified antibody ( rabbit 8 , 22 / . ~ g / ml IgG with 2 rhodamines per molecule ) . These cells are less spread and show no stress fibers in their cytoplasm ( a and c ) . The antimyosin staining is found throughout the cytoplasm ( b and d ) . Judging from their morphology , we believe that these cells are actively motile , The staining seen in the nuclear region is outside the nuclei . Scale : 1 division = 10 p , m . rations . Because this staining was rarely found with purified fluorescent antimyosin , we believe that it is artifactual . This conclusion is supported by the control experiments described in the fol - lowing paragraphs . CONTROLS Various control experiments showed that all of the staining patterns described above were specific for myosin . When cells were stained with fluores - cent IgG from preimmune serum ( Fig . 12b ) or with fluorescent IgG adsorbed with purified myosin ( Fig . 12d ) , there was no detectable stain - ing of stress fibers , myosin - containing cytoplasmic fibers , and general cytoplasm ; however occasional nuclear staining could be seen ( Figs . 13b and 13c ) . The myosin - specific fluorescence was greatly reduced and usually completely blocked by staining cells with a myosin - specific fluorescent reagent mixed with an excess amount of unlabeled antiserum against myosin ( Fig . 14b ) . However , the presence of preimmune serum did not block the myosin - specific staining ( Fig . 15 ) . In these preparations , the cytoplasmic fibers were some - what thinner and their staining discontinuity was clearer . There was no nuclear fluorescence in ceils KEIGI FU . I ' IWARA AND THOMAS D . POLLARD Localization of Myosin in Cells 861 FmuR ~ 12 HeLa cells stained with labeled preimmune IgG ( rabbit 6 , 90 / ~ g / mi IgG with 3 . 5 fluoresceins per molecule ) and labeled adsorbed immune IgG ( rabbit 6 , 40 / xg / ml IgG with 4 fluoresceins per molecule ) . ( b ) cells stained with preimmune IgG . ( d ) cells stained with adsorbed immune IgG . There is very weak or no fluorescence detectable in these preparations . The phase - contrast micrographs of the same field ( a and c ) are shown on the left of the fluorescent micrographs . The bright fluorescent spot in ( d ) is cell debris ( c ; arrow ) which stains nonspecifically . Scale : 1 division = 10 / zm . stained in the presence of preimmune serum , which blocked nonspecific interactions of IgG with the cell . Labeled purified antibody gave staining patterns identical with labeled immune IgG ( Figs . 10 and 11 ) . There was strong , nonspecific staining of cell debris and decomposing cells with labeled preim - mune IgG , labeled immune IgG , purified anti - body , and adsorbed immune IgG ( Figs . 12c and 12d ) . This intense staining was not blocked by unlabeled immune or preimmune serum . Its cause is not known . Surface Staining We were unable to detect any myosin on the outside of platelets or HeLa cells by staining intact cells with fluorescent antimyosin ( Figs . 16b and 16d ) . Elsewhere , we have reported physiological evidence that none of our eight antiplatelet myosin sera bind to the surface of human platelets ( 53 ) . Staining of HeLa Cells during Division STAINING WITH FLUORESCENT IMMUNE IgG Antimyosin staining patterns during mitosis and cytokinesis are illustrated in Figs . 17 and 18 . Dur - ing these important events most of the antimyosin staining was spread evenly through the cytoplasm but staining was concentrated in the spindle during mitosis and in the cleavage furrow during cytoki - nesis . When flat interphase cells rounded up in pro - phase , the entire cytoplasm stained uniformly with fluorescent immune IgG . The nucleus containing the condensing chromosomes was unstained . After the nuclear membrane broke down , the 862 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 71 , 1976 FIGURE 13 Staining with labeled immune IgG adsorbed with purified myosin ( b ) and labeled preim - mune IgG ( c ) . The staining reagents are described in the legends for Fig . 12 . This illustrates an occasional nuclear , especially nucleolar , staining with these fluorescent reagents . ( a ) phase contrast , and ( b ) and ( c ) fluorescence . Scale : 1 division = 10 p . m . FIGURE 14 HeLa cells stained with labeled purified antibody mixed with unlabeled immune serum ( rabbit 8 , 22 / ~ g / ml IgG with 2 rhodamines per molecule mixed with 80 % immune serum from rabbit 8 ) . The myosin - specific staining is completely blocked . ( a ) phase - contrast image of the field shown in ( b ) . Scale : 1 division = 10 / . tm . unstained chromosomes were outlined by bright antimyosin fluorescence ( Figs . 17b and 17g ) . In metaphase and early anaphase , staining was found throughout the cytoplasm , but was more intense in the mitotic spindle than in other regions ( Figs . 17d and 17h ) . The low fluorescence contrast of the mitotic spindle , relative to the brightly stained surrounding cytoplasm usually made it difficult to photograph the spindle fluorescence . Neverthe - less , the fluorescence of a spindle was easily per - ceived at the microscope by focusing through the spindle region . In metaphase and anaphase , stain - ing was most intense from the chromosomes to the poles , but we were unable to resolve clearly KEIGI FUJIWARA AND THOMAS D . POLLARD Localization of Myosin in Cells 863 FIGURE 15 HeLa cells stained with labeled immune IgG mixed with unlabeled preimmune serum ( rabbit 8 , 60 / xg / ml IgG with 2 rhodamines per molecule mixed with 80 % preimmune serum fi - om rabbit 8 ) . The specific staining of the stress fibers is not blocked by the preimmune serum . There is no nuclear staining . Scale : 1 division = 10 / zm . FIGURE 16 Absence of surface staining in human platelets ( b ) and HeLa cells ( d ) with labeled immune IgG ( rabbit 4 , 52 p , g / ml IgG with 2 . 5 rhodamines per molecule ) . ( a ) and ( c ) : phase - contrast images of the field shown in ( b ) and ( d ) . any fluorescent fibrous structure comparable to a spindle fiber . The fiber - like staining patterns seen in some metaphase spindles ( Figs . 17d and 17h ) represent spaces between chromosomes and should not be mistaken for spindle fibers . In late anaphase the staining was most intense in the polar regions ( Fig . 17f ) . The region between the separated chromosomes was also stained , but much of this intensity is attributable to the cleav - age furrow surrounding this part of the ceil . Throughout cytokinesis , antimyosin staining was strongest in the cleavage furrow ( Fig . 18 ) . In late anaphase , before the cleavage furrow had formed , a bright fluorescent ring was found around the equator , midway between the sepa - rated chromosomes ( Fig . 18b ) . By focusing 864 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY (cid:12)9 VOLUME 71 , 1976 FIGURE 17 Staining of HeLa cells during mitosis with labeled immune IgG ( 72 p . g / ml IgG with 2 rhodamines per molecule ) . ( a , c , and e ) phase - contrast images of the cells in ( b , d , and J0 . Myosin - specific staining in the mitotic HeLa cells occurs throughout the cytoplasm except the region occupied by the chromosomes . In prophase cells , the fluorescence is found throughout the cell except the chromosomes ( b and g ) . During metaphase stronger staining is detectable in the mitotic spindle ( d and h ) especially from chromosomes toward the poles . In late anaphase the two polar regions stain intensely ( f ) . The fluorescence at the cell equator is due to the staining of the cleavage furrow . Scale : 1 division = 10 ~ m . KEIGI FUJIWARA AND THOMAS D . POLLARD Localization of Myosin in Cells 865 FIGURE 18 Staining of HeLa cells during cytokinesis with myosin - specific fluorescent reagents . ( b , g , and h ) stained with 72 / zg / ml IgG ( rabbit 8 ) with 2 rhodamines per molecule . ( d ) stained with 60 ~ g / ml IgG ( rabbit 8 ) with 2 rhodamines per molecule . ( f ) stained with 22 / xg / ml purified antibody ( rabbit 8 ) with 1 . 8 rhodamine per molecule . ( i and ] ) stained with 70 / zg / ml IgG ( rabbit 6 ) with 3 . 5 fluoresceins per molecule . ( a , c , and e ) phase - contrast images of ( b , d , and f ) . High concentration of myosin - specific staining is associated with the cleavage furrow , presumably the contractile ring , throughout cytokinesis ( d , f , g , h , and i ) . The formation of the cleavage furrow ( b ) is detected in late anaphase ( a ) . After the completion of the cytokinesis process , myosin staining is generalized ( . / ) . Note that the stem body does not stain ( i and j ) . Scale : 1 division = 10 / zm . 866 TIIE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 71 , 1976 through the cell , it was possible to follow the band of intense staining all the way around the equator . When the center of a cell was in focus , the ring appeared as two bright spots on either side at the equator due to the tangential view ( Figs . 18b and 18d ) . This fluorescent ring marked the site where furrowing begins ( Fig . 18d ) . At later stages of cytokinesis this fluorescent ring was found in the cleavage furrow ( Figs . 18f , 18g , 18h and 18i ) . At the completion of cytokinesis , the fluorescent ring disappeared and the staining pattern was identical with that of a motile interphase cell ( Fig . 18j ) . The stembody was completely free of any staining . STAINING WITH PURIFIED FLUORESCENT ANTIMYOSIN Purified fluorescent antimyosin stained the cleavage furrow exactly like fluorescent immune IgG ( Fig . 18 ) ; however , we found that purified antibody stained the spindle with the same inten - sity as the rest of the cytoplasm ( Figs . 19b and 19 d ) . In some cases the intensity of staining in the spindle region was slightly greater than in other regions , but the contrast was not nearly as striking as in cells stained with immune IgG . CONTROLS Neither the mitotic spindle nor the cleavage furrow stained with fluorescent preimmune IgG or with fluorescent immune IgG adsorbed with puri - fied myosin ( Figs . 20b and 20d ) . The staining of the mitotic spindle and the cleavage furrow with fluorescent immune IgG was blocked by unlabeled immune serum but not by unlabeled preimmune serum . An additional control was provided by our un - successful attempts to stain the mitotic spindle and cleavage furrow of cells from some nonhuman species . There was no staining of these structures or other regions of the cytoplasm in dividing rat kangaroo PtK - 2 cells or salamander lung cells . Thus , staining of the mitotic spindle and cleavage furrow in human cells with antimyosin is the result of a specific immunological reaction and is not due to nonspeciflc binding . DISCUSSION In the past decade , a number of investigators have used Coons ' powerful fluorescent antibody tech - nique ( 14 , 15 ) to localize motility - related proteins in nonmuscle cells ( 4 , 5 , 7 , 9 , 12 , 16 , 17 , 24 , 25 , 35 , 38 , 39 , 40 , 45 , 46 , 49 , 72 , 73 , 74 ) . The FIGURE 19 Mitotic HeLa ceils stained with labeled purified antibody ( rabbit 8 , 22 ~ g / ml IgG with 1 . 8 rhodamine per molecule ) . The metaphase spindle is clearly visible in the phase - contrast micrographs ( a and c ) , but the corresponding fluorescent image reveals only slight fluorescent contrast between the spindle and the cytoplasm ( b and d ) . Scale : 1 division = 10 txm . aesthetic beauty of the resulting micrographs makes the work so appealing that one may be inclined to accept uncritically the staining patterns as the actual distribution of a specific protein in the cell . Interpretation of the fluorescent staining patterns is straightforward if the localization of the stained antigen can be established by an independ - ent technique like electron microscopy . This is the case with microtubules in the mitotic spindle ( 9 , 16 , 46 , 61 ) and actin filaments in stress fibers ( 40 ) . On the other hand , if fluorescent antibodies provide the only information on the localization of a protein , the reliability of the data depends heav - ily on control experiments . Myosin , tropomyosin , and a - actinin are cytoplasmic motility proteins who ~ e localization is unknown , uncertain , and / or difficult to demonstrate by other means . In these cases , it is essential to establish that the staining obtained is specific for a single protein and that the antigen remains in place during fixation , staining , KEIG ! FUJIWARA AND THOMAS D . POLLARD Localization of Myosin in Cells 867 FXGURE 20 HeLa cells in metaphase ( a ) and in cytokinesis ( c ) stained with adsorbed labeled immune lgG ( rabbit 8 , 90 ~ g / ml IgG with 2 rhodamines per molecule ) . There is no staining of the spindle ( b ) and the contractile ring ( d ) . Scale : 1 division = 10 ~ m . and washing . In the first four sections of the dis - cussion , we consider the extent to which the meth - ods we employed in the present study meet these criteria . In the two concluding sections of the discussion , we present an interpretation of our results and some thoughts on their biological sig - nificance . Antibody Production and Evaluation To capitalize on the potential sensitivity and specificity of the fluorescent antibody method , the antibodies must be directed against a single cellu - lar component . To make such antibodies , it is desirable to immunize animals with a homogene - ous antigen , but , realistically , most protein prepa - rations isolated from cells contain at least low levels of contaminants . Depending on the concen - tration and the antigenicity of these contaminants , they may give rise to unwanted antibodies . To minimize the possibility of unwanted anti - bodies in our antimyosin sera , we purified the myosin antigens as carefully as possible , measured the extent of contamination , immunized rabbits with care , and tested the sera for antibodies against myosin and other platelet components . The extent of unidentified polypeptide contamina - tion was about 1 to 2 % in our best myosin and myosin rod preparations . Faced with the unavoid - able presence of these contaminants , we chose to elicit antibodies with a minimal immunization pro - cedure in which we injected small amounts of antigen in adjuvant at multiple sites . With each dose of 250 ~ g of myosin or myosin rod , we injected 2 to 5 / ~ g of unidentified polypeptide . After a single boost , we detected antibody against myosin alone . Multiple boosts gave rise to addi - tional precipitating antibodies against contami - nants . To detect the presence of these unwanted antibodies in the hyperimmune sera , we had to use immunoelectrophoresis of crude cellular extracts 868 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGy ' VOLUME 71 , 1976 containing high concentrations of both the specific antigen and all possible contaminants . Using the high resolution and sensitivity of crossed immu - noelectrophoresis together with crude antigen preparations , we detected only myosin antibodies in the sera used for the fluorescent antibody stain - ing work . Differences in antigen composition may ex - plain , in part , why our results differ in some ways from previous antimyosin work . Some early work ( 5 , 29 , 45 ) used as antigen crude actomyosin prep - arations , now known to contain many components besides myosin ( 52 ) . Some myosin preparations were shown to contain other polypeptides ( 5 , 7 ) . In other cases ( 72 , 74 ) , polyacrylamide gels of purified myosin were underloaded to the extent that the light chains were not visible . Since each light chain comprises more than 6 % of the mass of the myosin , fairly high concentrations of contami - nants could have gone undetected . Contamination by antigens which are not detected by polyacryl - amide gel electrophoresis and staining with pro - tein dyes are a more serious problem . For exam - ple , there are small membrane vesicles which are difficult to remove from platelet actomyosin by cycles of low ionic strength precipitation . These vesicles are cleanly separated from myosin by gel filtration on 4 % agarose ( 52 ) . The vesicles elute in the void volume on these columns where they can be detected by their turbidity , by phase contrast microscopy or by electron microscopy , but their presence is not obvious from protein determina - tion or by gel electrophoresis ( see Fig . 2 in refer - ence 52 ) . The presence of these vesicles in platelet myosin prepared by other methods may elicit anti - bodies against membrane components . Fluorescent Reagents We stained cells directly with antibody coupled to tetramethylrhodamine and fractionated by the method of Cebra and Goldstein ( 13 ) . An alterna - tive is to use " indirect " staining methods employ - ing unlabeled specific antibody followed by an anti - immunoglobulin coupled to a fluorescent dye . This " indirect " approach is more convenient for screening many batches of antiserum since it re - quires only a single fluorescent reagent which can be purchased from commercial sources . It may also amplify the fluorescent image . Nonetheless , we believe that direct staining is superior because ( a ) there is but one antigen - antibody reaction to be controlled , ( b ) the immunological nature of the staining can be demonstrated by blocking the staining with unlabeled antibody , and ( c ) one can stain simultaneously with two antibodies labeled with contrasting fluorochromes , as we have done with antimyosin and antitubulin ( 22 ) . As a fluorochrome , rhodamine is superior to fluorescein , because it resists bleaching in the ex - citing beam of the microscope . Its negligible bleaching makes it easier to observe and photo - graph the stained ceils and is a prerequisite for quantitative studies by fluorometry . It is essential to separate over - conjugated and under - conjugated fluorochrome - IgG from the op - timal conjugates , because IgG with either insuffi - cient or excess fluorochrome causes staining arti - facts . As reported by Cebra and Goldstein ( 13 ) and confirmed here , under - conjugated IgG gives very dull staining , while over - conjugated IgG stains cells nonspecifically . Controls for Staining While the specificity of fluorescent antibody staining ultimately depends on the quality of the antibody , control experiments can eliminate likely causes of staining artifacts . The occurrence of non - immunological binding of fluorescent - IgG to the cell by the attached fluorochrome , or by regions of the antibody molecule outside the antigen combin - ing site , is eliminated by the absence of staining with adsorbed fluorescent immune IgG or fluores - cent preimmune IgG and the presence of staining with fluorescent immune IgG mixed with preim - mune serum . The possibility that some of the staining is due to the presence of naturally occur - ring antibodies is eliminated by the absence of staining with fluorescent preimmune IgG and ad - sorbed fluorescent immune IgG , and the presence of staining with fluorescent purified antibody . That some of the staining is due to a low titer of nonprecipitating antibody against a minor contam - inant of the myosin cannot be ruled out , because the control reactions could follow the myosin spe - cific pattern exactly . This hypothetical contami - nating antibody would be adsorbed out along with the antimyosin by the small amount of contami - nating antigen in the myosin preparation . In the same way , such a contaminating antibody might be purified along with the antimyosin by affinity chromatography . On the other hand , these same controls do eliminate the possibility that the stain - ing is due to a high titer of antibody against one or more contaminants . There would not be enough KEIOI FUJIWARA AND THOMAS D . POLLARD Localization of Myosin in Cells 869 of any contaminant present at the 1 % level in the myosin preparation to adsorb out all of a high concentration of contaminating antibody . Thus , those structures listed in Table I which stain with fluorescent immune IgG , fluorescent purified anti - body and fluorescent immune IgG mixed with preimmune serum , and which do not stain with fluorescent preimmune IgG , adsorbed fluorescent immune IgG and fluorescent immune IgG mixed with immune serum most likely contain myosin . Preservation of Natural Antibody Distribution Even the best fluorescent antibody reagents would be useless if applied to cells whose antigen is extracted , whose antigen molecules have moved from their natural sites , or whose structure has been seriously distorted . Unfortunately there is presently no assurance that any fixation method avoids all of these problems while simultaneously opening the plasma membrane to provide access to the fluorescent antibody to the cytoplasm . We prepared the cells for fluorescent anti - myosin staining by treatment with cold acetone because the natural cellular morphology was gen - erally preserved and there was minimal evidence for nonspecific staining . With formalin fixation followed by acetone treatment , the distribution of specific antimyosin staining was identical but less intense . In addition , there was definite nonspe - cific staining . It is reasonable to use acetone treat - ment as a " fixation " of myosin , because acetone is known to render myosin insoluble in dilute aqueous buffers . In fact , work in progress indi - cates that little or no myosin is extracted from acetone - treated HeLa cells by our washing proce - dures . On the other hand , some other proteins remain soluble after acetone dehydration and can be extracted during staining and washing . Whether or not the myosin retains its natural distribution in the cytoplasm during preparation for staining is not known , although it is our un - proven impression that the acetone treatment is a freeze substitution process which might immobi - lize the myosin in situ . When coverslips are plunged into the - 20 ~ acetone , the thin film of buffer over the cells appears to freeze . Subse - quently the ice appears to dissolve in the cold acetone , dehydrating and " fixing " the frozen cells . Two additional observations are consistent with the natural distribution of myosin being main - tained inside the freeze - dried cells : ( a ) the specific staining patterns are the same with and without prior formalin fixation and ( b ) double staining the cells with a second fluorescent antibody shows that myosin and tubulin are located in different parts of the same cell ( 22 ) , showing that there is morpho - logical specificity to the distribution of myosin in the fixed cell . Interpretation of Observations Using all of the criteria for specificity discussed in the previous sections , we conclude that myosin is located in the general cytoplasm of platelets , leukocytes , and motile cultured cells and that myosin is concentrated in the cleavage furrow dur - ing cytokinesis ( Table 1I ) . Although unproven by light microscopic observations , it seems likely that the fluorescent antibody in the region of the cleav - age furrow is bound to myosin in the contractile ring . We confirm an earlier report ( 73 ) that myosin is concentrated at intervals along the stress fibers of cultured cells . Using these same criteria for specificity , we con - clude that there is no detectable myosin on the outer surface of platelets , erythrocytes or cultured cells , inside erythrocytes , in cell organelles , in the nucleus , or in chromosomes . Our observations fail to confirm earlier reports of myosin staining on the outer surface of platelets ( 45 , 55 ) and cultured cells ( 25 , 74 ) . The question of myosin in the mitotic spindle presents a special problem . By all criteria , myosin is present throughout the cytoplasm of dividing cells , including the spindle . By most criteria , myosin is concentrated in the mitotic spindle dur - ing metaphase and anaphase , especially between the chromosomes and the poles . The uncertainty regarding the concentration of myosin in the spin - dle arises because labeled purified antimyosin does not stain the spindle much more intensely than the rest of the cytoplasm . One interpretation may be that high affinity antibodies , which are lost during antibody purification , are necessary to stain part of the myosin in the spindle . This fraction of myosin could be aggregated differently or associ - ated with different molecules than the bulk of the cell ' s myosin which , in contrast , stains the same with labeled immune IgG and labeled purified antibody . It is clear that the antibody which stains the spindle intensely is actually lost or destroyed during antibody purification , because it is present in the sample applied to the affinity column and is absent from both the adsorbed material which passes directly through the column and the puri - 870 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY (cid:12)9 VOLUME 71 , 1976 TABLE II Summary of Fluorescent Antibody Staining Fluorescent reagents Purified anti - body against Immune IgG myosin Preiramune lgG Immune IgO or Immune IgG or antibody mixed antibody mixed with unlabeled Adsorbed im - with unlabeled preimmune se - mune IgG immune serum rum Cytoplasm Human blood smear Leukocyte + + Platelet + + Erythrocyte - ( + ) - ( + ) Enson stress fiber + + HeLa Stress fiber + + Cytoplasmic fiber + + Cytoplasm + + - ( + ) - ( + ) - _ w Nucleus - ( + ) - ( + ) - ( + ) - ( + ) - - Mitotic spindle ( HeLa ) + + ? - - - + Cleavage furrow ( HeLa ) + + - - - + Cell surface Blood smear HeLa Cell debris and dead cells * + + + + + + + , strong staining ; - , no staining ; - ( + ) , generally no staining , but occasional staining ; + ( ? ) , the spindle and the surrounding cytoplasm stain with equal intensity ; * , cell debris and dead cells stain non - specifically with all the fluorescent reagents . lied antibody eluted with acid . Thus we believe that myosin is concentrated in the mitotic spindle , but feel that this point needs further investigation . Biological Significance of the Results The broadest conclusion of the work is that myosin molecules change their cytoplasmic distri - bution in a predictable way as the cell passes through the cell cycle . The patterns of myosin distribution are similar to those previously estab - lished for actin by electron microscopy ( 20 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 31 , 33 , 34 , 41 , 44 , 50 , 62 ) , fluorescent heavy meromyosin staining ( 58 , 59 , 60 ) , and flu - orescent antiactin staining ( 38 , 40 ) . Thus , there is a mechanism to control the spatial and temporal distribution of both actin and myosin to meet particular needs of the cell at each stage in its life cycle . The myosin may simply be following the actin around the cell , although its localization could be controlled independently . Myosin is a gregarious contractile protein . Its constant association with actin inside cells means that myosin localization studies can be used to predict sites of potential force generating capacity . We emphasize that this is only potential force generating capacity , because it is likely that the actual utilization of this potential is controlled by local variations in calcium ion concentration ( 67 , 68 , 69 ) or other factors . There are now two good examples of the coex - istence of actin and myosin within cells : the con - tractile ring and stress fibers . It was previously established that the cleavage furrow develops the force for cytokinesis ( 56 ) and that the contractile ring which is located in the cleavage furrow con - tains actin filaments ( 50 , 62 ) . Our demonstration that myosin is concentrated in the cleavage furrow provides further evidence that actomyosin may be responsible for generating the force for cytokine - sis . It is also well established that stress fibers contain both actin ( 27 , 28 , 40 ) and myosin ( 72 , 73 , present study ) . Although there is little evi - dence relating stress fibers to cell motility , Isen - berg et al . ( 33 ) showed that isolated stress fibers KEIGI FUJIWARA AND THOMAS D . POLLARD Localization of Myosin in Cells 871 can contract . Now ultrastructural studies are nec - essary to determine how the myosin and actin relate to each other in these organized actomyosin bundles . These two examples encourage us to think that other sites where actin and myosin are found to - gether are also sites of motile force generation . In the following paragraphs we consider mitosis and cell locomotion . In neither case is there any direct proof for the involvement of actomyosin , though in both cases our studies on myosin localization provide some clues about mechanisms . The localization of both actin ( 12 , 20 , 26 , 31 , 42 , 59 ) and myosin in the mitotic spindle forces one to consider seriously a contractile mechanism for chromosome movements . If actin were present in the spindle without myosin , it might be attrib - uted an exclusively structural role . However , the coexistence of actin and myosin between the chro - mosomes and the poles means that these contrac - tile proteins could develop the force to move the chromosomes . Theoretical calculations show that very few myosin filaments would be needed to develop the force to pull a chromosome to the pole ( 54 ) . As discussed by others ( 19 , 57 , 59 ) , contractile proteins might interact with spindle microtubules in two ways : ( a ) the microtubules may be the attachment sites for the actin or myosin filaments , linking them indirectly to the chromosomes and the poles ; and ( b ) the kineto - chore microtubules are likely to resist the action of the contractile proteins so that their depolymeriza - tion rate could determine the rate of chromosome movement ( 23 ) . Further physiological and mor - phological data will be needed to confirm the role of actomyosin in mitosis and to refine the present sketchy ideas about mitotic mechanisms . It is our impression that the most motile cells such as leukocytes , have myosin and probably actin ( see Fig . 2a in ref . 38 ) distributed fairly uniformly throughout their cytoplasm . This sug - gests that all parts of the cytoplasmic matrix are potentially contractile . Taylor has reached the same conclusion from microinjection studies on giant amoebae ( 67 ) . This suggests that locomotion could be generated by the concerted contractile activity of various regions of the cytoplasmic ma - trix . There is now evidence that the contractile proteins form a gel in the cytoplasmic matrix ( 36 , 51 , 65 , 66 , 70 ) , so that contractile force generated at any site could be transmitted through the matrix to the cell surface and the substrate . Although this sort of mechanism is not well understood , it seems to differ from the situation in the contractile ring where force is generated locally and constricts a limited region of the cell surface . We would like to thank Dr . John Cebra for the advice on the preparation of fluorescent antibodies , Carol Mc - Kinley for maintaining cell cultures , and Chantal Fuji - wara , Linda Griffith , Mark Mooseker , and Tom Schroe - der for their critical comments on the manuscript . We are indebted to Dr . Robert Goldman for supplying En - son cells , Dr , Raymond Baker and Dr . Harold Amos for supplying HeLa cells , and to Diane Woodrum for draw - ing Fig . 1 . We also thank Peter Ley for his suggestions on photography . This work was supported by NIH Research Grant GM - 19654 , a Research Career Development Award GM - 70755 , a Milton Fund Grant from Harvard Medical School to T . D . P . , and Postdoctoral Fellowship from the Muscular Dystrophy Association , Inc . to K . F . Received for publication 1 June 1976 , and in revised form 27 August 1976 . REFERENCES 1 . ADELSTEIN , R . S . , M . A . CONTL G . S . JOHNSON , I . PASTAN , and T . D . POLLARD . 1972 . Isolation and characterization of myosin from cloned mouse fibroblasts . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 69 : 3693 - 3697 . 2 . ALLERA , g . , R . BECK , and K , E . WOHLFARTH - BOTrERMAN . 1971 . Extensive fibrillar protoplasmic differentiations and their significance for proto - plasmic streaming . VII . Identification of plasma fil - aments in Physarum polycephalum as F - actin by in situ binding of heavy meromyosin . Cytobiologie . 3 : 437 . 3 . AXELSEN , N . H . , J . KROLL , and B . WEEKE , editors . 1973 . A manual of quantitative immunoelectropho - resis . Methods and Applications . Scand . J . Immu - nol . 2 ( suppl . 1 ) . 4 . BECKER , C . G . , and G . E . MuRray . 1969 . Demon - stration of contractile proteins in endothelium and cells of the heart valves , endocardium , intima , arter - iosclerotic plaques and Aschoff bodies of rheumatic heart disease . Am . J . Pathol . 55 : 1 . 5 . BECKER , C . G . , and R . L . NACHMAN . 1973 . Con - tractile proteins of endothelial cells , platelets and smooth muscle . Am . J . Pathol . 71 : 1 - 22 . 6 . BEHNKE , O . , B . I . KRISTENSEN , and L . E . NIEL - SEtq . 1971 . Electron miroscopical observations on actinoid and myosinoid filaments in blood platelets . J . Ultrastruct . Res . 37 : 351 . 7 . BOOYSE , F . M . , L . A . STERNBERGER , D . ZSCHOCKE , and M . E . RmELSON . 1971 . UItrastruc - tural localization of contractile protein ( thrombos - 872 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY ' VOLUME 71 , 1976 thenin ) in human platelets using an unlabeled anti - body peroxidase staining technique . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 19 : 540 - 550 . 8 . BRANDTZAE6 , P . 1975 . Rhodamine conjugates : specific and nonspecific binding properties in immu - nohistochemistry . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 254 : 35 - 54 . 9 . BRINKLEY , B . R . , G . M . FULLER , and D . P . I - ~ GH - FIELD . 1976 . Tubulin antibodies as probes for mi - crotubules in dividing and non - dividing mammalian cells . In Cell Motility , R . D . Goldman , T . Pollard , and J . Rosenbaum , editors . Cold Spring Harbor , N . Y . In press . 10 . BUCKLEY , I . K . , and K . R . PORTER . 1967 . Cyto - plasmic fibrils in living cultured cells . A light and electron microscope study . Protoplasma . 64 : 349 - 380 . 11 . BURmD ~ E , K . , and D . BRAY . 1975 . Purification and structural analysis of myosins from brain and other non - muscle tissues . J . Mol . Biol . 99 : 1 - 14 . 12 . CANDE , W . Z . , E . LAZARIDES , and J . R . Mc - Ircrosn . 1975 . Visualization of actin in functional lysed mitotic cell preparations . J . Cell Biol . 67 : 54a . 13 . CLARA , J . J . , and G . GOLDSTEIN . 1965 . Chromato - graphic purification of tetramethylrhodamine - im - mune globulin conjugates and their use in the cellu - lar localization of rabbit " ? - globulin polypeptide chains . J . Immunol . 95 : 230 - 245 . 14 . Coons , A . H . , H . J . CREECH , and R . N . JONES . 1941 . Immunological properties of an antibody con - taining a fluorescent group . Proc . Soc . Exp . Biol . Med . 47 " 200 . 15 . CooNs , A . H . , and M . H . KAPLAN . 1950 . Localiza - tion of antigen in tissue cells . II . Improvements in a method for the detection of antigen by means of fluorescent antibody . J . Exp . Med . 91 : 1 . 16 . DALES , S . 1972 . Concerning the universality of a microtubule antigen in animal ceils . J . Cell Biol . 52 : 748 - 754 . 17 . FAGRAEUS , A . , K . Laor ~ d ~ , and R . NORBERG . 1975 . Indirect immunofluorescence staining of con - tractile proteins in smeared cells by smooth muscle antibodies . The influence of chelating agents . Clin . Exp . Immunol . 20 : 469 - 477 . 18 . FAIRBANKS , G . T . , L . STECK , and D . F . H . WAL - LACH . 1971 . Electrophoretic analysis of the major polypeptides of the human erythrocytes membrane . Biochemistry . 10 : 2606 - 2617 . 19 . FORER , A . 1974 . Possible roles of microtubules and actin - like filaments during cell division . In Cell Cy - cle Controls . G . M . Padilla . I . L . Cameron , and A . M . Zimmerman , editors . Academic Press , New York , 319 - 336 . 20 . FOREa , A . , and O . BEnNKE . 1972 . An actin - like component in spermatocytes of a crane fly ( Nepliro - toma suturalis Loew ) . I . The spindle . Chromosoma ( Berl . ) . 39 : 145 - 173 . 21 . FunwA ~ , K . , and T . D . POLLARD . 1975 . Staining of cells with fluorescent antibody against myosin . J . Cell Biol . 67 : 125a . 22 . Foztwnr , n , K . , and T . D . POLLARD . 1976 . Simulta - neous intracellular localization of myosin and tubu - lin during cell cycle by direct double immunofluo - reseence . J . Cell Biol . 70 ( Pt . 2 ) : 181a . ( Abstr . ) 23 . FUSELER , J . W . 1975 . Temperature dependence of anaphase chromosome velocity and microtubule de - polymerization . J . Cell Biol . 67 : 789 - 800 . 24 . GABBIANI , G . , G . B . RYAN , J . LAMELIN , P . VAS - SALI , G . MAJNO , C . A . BotrcmR , A . CaUCHAUO , and E . F . LUSCHEa . 1973 . Human smooth muscle autoantibody . Its identification as antiactin and a study of its binding to " nonmuscular " cells . Am . J . Pathol . 72 : 473 - 487 . 25 . GAm ~ E ' rr , H . , U . GRtSCHEL - STEwAIrr , B . M . JONES , and R . B . KEMP . 1973 . Immunofluorescent detection of a myosin - type protein at the surface of trypsin - dissociated embryonic chick cells . Cytobios . 7 : 163 - 169 . 26 . GAWADI , N . 1974 . Characterization and distribu - tion of microfilaments in dividing locust testis cells . Cytobios . 10 : 17 - 35 . 27 . GOLDMAN , R . D . 1975 . The use of heavy mero - myosin binding as an ultrastructural cytochemical method for localizing and determining the possible functions of actin - like microfilaments in nonmuscle cells . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 23 : 529 - 542 . 28 . GOLDMAN , R . D . , J . SCHLO $ S , and J . STARGER . 1976 . Structure and possible physiological functions of actin - like microfilaments . In Cell Motility . R . Goldman , T . Pollard and J . Rosenbaum , editors . Cold Spring Harbor , N . Y . In press . 29 . GROSCHEL - STEWART , U . , B . JONES , and R . KEMp . 1970 . Detection of actomyosin - type protein at the surface of dissociated embryonic chick cells . Nature ( Lond . ) . 227 : 280 . 30 . HARTREE , E . F . 1972 . Determination of protein . A modification of the Lowry method that gives a linear photometric response . Anal . Biochem . 48 : 422 - 427 . 31 . HINKLEY , R . , and A . TELSER . 1974 . Heavy mero - myosin binding filaments in the mitotic apparatus of mammalian cells . Exp . Cell Res . 86 : 161 . 32 . HOLBOROW , E . J . , and G . D . JOHNSON . 1967 . Im - munofluorescence . In Handbook of Experimental Immunology . D . M . Weir , editor . Blackwell Scien - tific Publications , Ltd . Oxford . 571 - 596 . 33 . ISENBERG , G . , P . C . RATHKE , N . HULSMANN , W . W . FRANKE , and K . E . WOHLFARTH - Bo ' rrERMAN . 1976 . Cytoplasmic actomyosin fibrils in tissue cub ture cells - direct proof of contractility by visualiza - tion of ATP - induced contraction in fibrils isolated by laser microbeam dissection . Cell Tissue Res . 166 : 427 - 443 . 34 . ISmKAWA , H . , R . BlSCHOFF , and H . HOLTZER . 1969 . Formation of arrowhead complexes with KEIGI FUIIWARA AND THOMAS D . POLLARD Localization of Myosin in Cells 873 heavy meromyosin in a variety of cell types . J . Cell Biol . 43 : 312 . 35 . JORGENSEN , A . O . , L . SUnRAH ~ AtCtAN , and V . I . KALmNS . 1975 . Localization of tropomyosin in mouse embryo fibroblasts . Am . J . Anat . 142 : 519 - 525 . 36 . KANE , R . E . 1975 . Preparation and purification of polymerized actin from sea - urchin egg extracts . J . Cell Biol . 66 : 305 - 315 . 37 . KROLL , J . 1973 . Tandem - crossed immunoelectro - phoresis . In A Manual of Quantitative Immunoelec - trophoresis . N . H . Axelsen , J . Kroll , and B . Weeke , editors . Universitetsforlaget , Oslo . 57 - 59 . 38 . LAZAmDES , E . 1975 . Tropomyosin antibody - spe - cific localization of tropomyosin in nonmuscle cells . J . Cell Biol . 65 : 549 - 561 . 39 . LAZAmDES , E . 1976 . Actin , alpha - actinin and tro - pomyosin interaction in structural organization of actin - filaments in non - muscle cells . J . Cell Biol . 68 : 202 - 219 . 40 . LAZAmD ~ , E . , and K . WEBER . 1974 . Actin anti - body : the specific visualization of actin filaments in non - muscle cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U , S . A . 71 : 2268 - 2272 . 41 . LUOUENA , M . A . , and N . K . WESSELS . 1973 . Cell locomotion , nerve elongation and microfilaments . Dev . Biol . 30 : 427 - 440 . 42 . MclwrosH , J . R . , W . Z . CANt ) E , J . A . SrCVDER , E . LAZARIDES , and K . McDONALD . 1976 . Studies on the formation and function of the mammalian mi - totic spindle . In Cell Motility . R . Goldman , T . Pol - lard , and J . Rosenbaum , editors . Cold Spring Har - bor , N . Y . In press . 43 . McKaNNEY , R . M . , and J . T . SPmLANE . 1975 . An approach to quantitation in rhodamine isothiocya - nate labeling . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 254 : 55 - 64 . 44 . MOOSEKER , M . S . , and L . G . TILNEY . 1975 . Orga - nization of an actin filament - membrane complex . Filament polarity and membrane attachment in mi - croviUi of intestinal epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 67 : 725 - 743 . 45 . NACHMAN , R . L . , A . J . MARCUS , and L . B . SAF - IER . 1967 . Platelet thrombosthenin : subcellular lo - calization and function . J . Clln . Invest . 46 : 1380 - 1389 . 46 . NA6AVAMA , A . , and S . DALES . 1970 . Rapid purifi - cation and the immunological specificity of mamma - lian microtubular paracrystals possessing an ATPase activity . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 66 : 464 - 471 . 47 . NIEDERMAN , R . , and T . D . POLLARD . 1975 . Human platelet myosin . II . In vitro assembly and structure of myosin filaments . J . Cell Biol . 67 : 72 - 92 . 48 . OucmxgLOre / , O . 1968 . Handbook of Immunodif - fusion and Immunoelectrophoresis . Ann Arbor Publ . , Ann Arbor , Michigan . 215 pp . 49 . PAIrClXR , R . G . , M . SHEETZ , and S . J . SINER . 1975 . Detection and ultrastructural localization of human smooth muscle myosin - like molecules in human noumuscle cell by specific antibodies . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 72 : 1359 - 1363 . 50 . PEgar M . M . , H . A . JOHN , and N . S . T . THOMAS . 1971 . Actin - like filaments in the cleavage furrow of newt egg . Exp . Cell Res . 65 : 249 - 252 . 51 . POLLARD , T . D . 1976 . The role of actin in the temperature dependent gelation and contraction of extracts of Acanthamoeba . J . Cell Biol . 68 : 579 - 601 . 52 . POLLARD , T . D . , S . M . THOMAS , and R . NmDER - MAN . 1974 . Human platelet myosin . I . Purification by a rapid method applicable to other nonmuscle cells . Anal . Biochem . 60 : 258 - 266 . 53 . POLLARD , T . D . , K . POJtWAV . A , R . HANmN , and G . WEISS . 1976 . Contractile proteins in platelet activa - tion and contraction . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . In press . 54 . POLLARD , T . D . , K . FUJIWARA , R . NIEDERMAN , and P . MAUPN - SZAMIER . 1976 . The importance of cytoplasmic actin and myosin for cellular structure and motility . In Cell Motility . R . Goldman , T . Pol - lard , and J . Rosenbanm , editors . Cold Spring Har - bor , N . Y . In press . 55 . PUSZK ~ , E . G . , M . B . ZUCHER , and T . H . SPAET . 1975 . Effect of antibody to platelet rod myosin on platelet function . Blood . 46 : 1031a . 56 . RAPPAVog ' r , R . 1967 . Cell division : direct measure - ment of maximum tension exerted by furrow of echinoderm eggs . Science ( Wash . D . C . ) . 156 : 1241 - 1243 . 57 . PdCKARDS , G . K . 1975 . Prophase chromosome movements in riving house cricket spermatocytes and their relationship to prometaphase , anaphase , and granule movements . Chromosoma ( Bed . ) . 49 : 407 - 455 . 58 . S ~ GER , J . W . 1975 . Changing patterns of actin localization during cell division . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 72 : 1913 - 1916 . 59 . SANGER , J . W . 1975 . Presence of actin during chro - mosomal movement . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 72 : 2451 - 2455 . 60 . SANGER , J . W . 1975 . Intracellular localization of actin with fluorescently labeled heavy meromyosin . Cell Tissue Res . 161 : 431 - 444 . 61 . SATO , H . , Y . OnNuia , and K . FUJtWAV , A . 1976 . Immunofluorescent anti - tubulin staining of spindle microtubules and critique for the technique . In Cell Motility . R . Goldman , T . Pollard , and J . Rosen - baum , editors . Cold Spring Harbor , N . Y . In press . 62 . SCHROEDER , T . 1973 . Actin in dividing cells . Con - tractile ring filaments bind heavy meromyosin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 70 : 1688 . 63 . STEPrtENS , R . E . 1975 . High resolution preparative SDS - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis : fluorescent visualization and electrophoretic elution - concentra - tion of protein bands . Anal . Biochem . 65 : 369 - 379 . 874 THE JOURNAL or CELL BIOLOGY ' VOLUME 71 , 1976 64 . STOSSEL , T . P . , and T . D . POLLARD . 1973 . Myosin in polymorphonuclear leukocytes . J . Biol . Chem . 248 : 8288 - 8294 . 65 . SrOSSEL , T . P . , and J . H . HAaTWm . 1975 . Interac - tions between actin , myosin and an actin - binding protein from rabbit alveolar macrophages . Alveolar macrophage myosin Mg + + ATPase requires a cofac - tor for activation by actin . J . Biol . Chem . 250 : 5706 - 5712 . 66 . STOSSEL , T . P . , and J . H . HAarwIo . 1976 . Interac - tions of actin , myosin and a new actin - binding pro - tein of rabbit pulmonary macrophages . II . Role in cytoplasmic movement and phagocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 68 : 602 - 619 . 67 . TAYLOR , D . L . 1974 . In vivo contractility of amoeba cytoplasm . Biol . Bull . ( Woods Hole ) . 147 : 501 . 68 . TAYLOR , D . L . 1976 . Motile models of amoeboid movement . In Cell Motility . R . Goldman , T . Pol - lard , and J . Rosenbaam , editors . Cold Spring Har - bor , N . Y . In press . 69 . TAYLOR , D . L . , J . S . CONDEELIS , P . L . MOOR ~ , and R . D . ALLEN . 1973 . The contractile basis of amoe - boid movement . I . The chemical control of motility in isolated cytoplasm . J . Cell Biol . 59 : 378 - 394 . 70 . TAYLOR , D . L . , J . A . RHODES and S . A , ~ ? aOND . 1976 . The contractile bais of amoeboid movement . II . Structure and contractility of motile extracts and plasmalemma - ectoplasm ghosts . J . Cell Biol . 70 : 123 - 143 . 71 . TERNVNCK , T . , and S . AVRAMEAS . 1972 . Poly - acrylamide - protein immunoadsorbents prepared with glutaraldehyde . FEBS ( Fed . Eur . Biochem . Soc . ) Lett . 23 ( 1 ) : 24 - 28 . 72 . WANO , K . , J . F . ASH , and S . J . SINGER . 1975 . Filamin , a new high - molecular weight protein found in smooth muscle and non - muscle cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 72 : 4483 - 4486 . 73 . WEBER , K . , and U . GRISESCHEL - STEWART . 1974 . Antibody to myosin : the specific visualization of myosin - containing filaments in nonmuscle cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 71 : 4561 - 4564 . 74 . WXLLrNGrlA ~ t , M . C . , R . E . OSTLUND , and I . PAS - TAr ~ . 1974 . Myosin is a component of the cell sur - face of cultured cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 71 : 4144 - 4148 . 75 . WOOD , B . T . , S . H . THOMPSON , and G . GOLDSTF . IN . 1965 . Fluorescent antibody staining . III . Prepara - tion of fluorescein - isothiocyanate - labeled antibod - ies . J . Immunol . 95 : 225 - 229 . KEIGI FUJIWARA AND TrIOMAS D . POLLARD Localization of Myosin in Cells 875