CELL BIOLOGY Clustering of phosphatase RPTPα promotes Src signaling and the arthritogenic action of synovial fibroblasts Sho Sendo 1 † , William B . Kiosses 1 , 2 † , Shen Yang 1 , Dennis J . Wu 1 , Daniel W . K . Lee 1 , Lin Liu 1 , Yael Aschner 4 , Allison J . Vela 1 , Gregory P . Downey 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , Eugenio Santelli 1 , Nunzio Bottini 1 , 8 * Receptor - type protein phosphatase α ( RPTPα ) promotes fibroblast - dependent arthritis and fibrosis , in part , by enhancing the activation of the kinase SRC . Synovial fibroblasts lining joint tissue mediate inflammation and tissue damage , and their infiltration into adjacent tissues promotes disease progression . RPTPα includes an ec - todomain and two intracellular catalytic domains ( D1 and D2 ) and , in cancer cells , undergoes inhibitory homo - dimerization , which is dependent on a D1 wedge motif . Through single - molecule localization and labeled molecule interaction microscopy of migrating synovial fibroblasts , we investigated the role of RPTPα dimeriza - tion in the activation of SRC , the migration of synovial fibroblasts , and joint damage in a mouse model of ar - thritis . RPTPα clustered with other RPTPα and with SRC molecules in the context of actin - rich structures . A known dimerization - impairing mutation in the wedge motif ( P210L / P211L ) and the deletion of the D2 domain reduced RPTPα - RPTPα clustering ; however , it also unexpectedly reduced RPTPα - SRC association . The same mutations also reduced recruitment of RPTPα to actin - rich structures and inhibited SRC activation and cellular migration . An antibody against the RPTPα ectodomain that prevented the clustering of RPTPα also in - hibited RPTPα - SRC association and SRC activation and attenuated fibroblast migration and joint damage in ar - thritic mice . A catalytically inactivating RPTPα - C469S mutation protected mice from arthritis and reduced SRC activation in synovial fibroblasts . We conclude that RPTPα clustering retains it to actin - rich structures to promote SRC - mediated fibroblast migration and can be modulated through the extracellular domain . Copyright © 2023 The Authors , some rights reserved ; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science . No claim to original U . S . Government Works INTRODUCTION Protein tyrosine phosphatases ( PTPs ) promote or inhibit a multi - tude of signal transduction processes by counterbalancing the action of protein tyrosine kinases . The human genome encodes 22 putative transmembrane PTPs , classified in eight subtypes ( 1 ) . The R4 subtype receptor - type protein phosphatase α ( RPTPα ) is an example of a transmembrane PTP with two intracellular catalytic domains . The membrane - proximal domain , termed D1 , is active in substrate dephosphorylation , whereas the membrane - distal domain called D2 displays very limited catalytic activity in vitro ( 2 , 3 ) but is involved in functional regulation of the D1 domain ( 3 – 7 ) . A key function of RPTPα is to activate the SRC tyrosine kinase . RPTPα is known to be enriched in focal adhesions ( FAs ) ( 8 ) , and it is believed that the formation of an RPTPα - SRC complex is neces - sary to enable RPTPα - mediated dephosphorylation of SRC - Tyr 530 ( 9 , 10 ) , which , in turn , promotes autophosphorylation of SRC on Tyr 419 . The interaction between the SRC homology 2 ( SH2 ) domain of SRC and a phosphorylation Tyr 789 ( Tyr 825 in the isoform used in this work ) residue in the D2 domain of RPTPα reportedly promotes formation of such a complex ( 10 ) , although it remains to be clarified whether this is the only mechanism ( 11 ) . RPTPα is overexpressed in several cancers and is considered a ther - apeutic target to reduce activation of SRC and cancer cell growth ( 12 , 13 ) . RPTPα also plays an important role in the pathogenic action of fibroblast populations . In fibroblasts , RPTPα , but not its Y789F mutant , is enriched in FA ( 8 ) , and RPTPα deletion or Y789F mutation impairs FA function and cell migration through a pathway that involves Ras - related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 1 ( RAC1 ) ( 14 , 15 ) . RPTPα enhances transforming growth factor – β – mediated myofibroblast formation and collagen deposition , and genetic dele - tion of RPTPα ameliorates disease severity in preclinical models of pulmonary fibrosis ( 16 , 17 ) . In inflammatory arthritis , RPTPα is highly expressed in a local joint - lining fibroblast population called synovial fibroblasts ( SFs ) and promotes SF migration and pathogen - ic action ( 18 ) . Accordingly , genetic deletion of RPTPα protects mice from arthritis in the SF - dependent K / BxN serum transfer – induced arthritis ( STIA ) mouse model ( 18 ) . PTPs can be therapeutically targeted through allosteric inhibi - tors ( 19 – 21 ) ; however , a deep understanding of the regulation mechanisms of a PTP of interest is needed to design appropriate targeting strategies . The isolated D1 domain of RPTPα can form a symmetric dimer through an interaction between a juxtamembrane wedge motif ( encompassing amino acids 206 to 238 ) of one monomer and the active site of the other monomer ( 22 ) . Another report shows that a disulfide - inducing P137C mutation of the trans - membrane domain of RPTPα leads to reduced SRC activation in embryonic mouse cells , which could be rescued by a P210L / P211L mutation ( 23 ) . Immunoprecipitation studies in human em - bryonic kidney ( HEK ) 293 cells confirm the de - dimerizing effect of 1 Department of Medicine , University of California San Diego , La Jolla , CA , USA . 2 La Jolla Institute for Immunology , La Jolla , CA , USA . 3 Division of Pulmonary , Critical Care , and Sleep Medicine , Department of Medicine , National Jewish Health , Denver , CO , USA . 4 Division of Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care Medicine , De - partment of Medicine , University of Colorado , Aurora , CO , USA . 5 Department of Biomedical Research , National Jewish Health , Denver , CO , USA . 6 Department of Im - munology and Microbiology , University of Colorado , Aurora , CO , USA . 7 Department of Pediatrics , National Jewish Health , Denver , CO , USA . 8 Department of Medicine , Kao Autoimmunity Institute , Cedars Sinai Medical Center , Los Angeles , CA , USA . * Corresponding author . Email : nunzio . bottini @ cshs . org † These authors contributed equally to this work . S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Sendo et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabn8668 ( 2023 ) 4 July 2023 1 of 19 the P210L / P211L mutation and suggest that the D2 domain pro - motes , whereas the extracellular domain is dispensable for RPTPα dimerization ( 24 ) . These reports and similar studies of other trans - membrane PTPs ( 25 , 26 ) point to dimerization through the wedge motif , a potential shared mechanism of inhibition of transmem - brane PTPs . However , according to Jiang et al . ( 23 ) , other structural and cellular studies suggest that regulation of RPTPs by the wedge motif depends on cellular contexts and / or might not apply to all RPTPs ( 7 , 27 – 32 ) . For example , RPTPα clusters can be detected by Förster resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) microscopy in SK - N - MC neuroepithelial tumor cells expressing truncations of RPTPα in fusion with fluorescent proteins ; however , the wedge motif is dispensable for RPTPα clustering in these cells ( 33 ) . Here , we revisited RPTPα dimerization by focusing on the mi - gration of primary SFs . We combined single - molecule resolution [ using the stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( STORM ) technique ] and labeled molecule interaction ( using FRET ) micros - copy methodologies with functional assays in SFs expressing dime - rization - impairing RPTPα mutants or treated with a declustering anti - RPTPα antibody ( Ab ) . We also leveraged newly generated mice carrying a catalytically inactivating C469S mutation of RPTPα . Our data supported the idea that RPTPα undergoes sub - stantial and wedge motif – dependent polarized clustering on the surface of migrating SFs . However , they also suggested that in mi - grating SFs , RPTPα clustering promotes its recruitment to actin - rich structures and phosphatase activity – dependent activation of SRC . RESULTS Clustering of RPTPα and association of RPTPα with SRC occurs in actin - rich compartments of migrating SFs To begin to address the role of RPTPα dimerization on SRC signal - ing , we focused on cytoskeletal actin projections of migrating SFs using total internal resolution microscopy ( TIRF ) and used single - molecule resolution microscopy ( using STORM ) to accurate - ly spatially localize RPTPα and SRC . SFs from PTPRA - KO ( knock - out ) mice ( αKO SFs ) were transfected with plasmids expressing FLAG - tagged wild - type ( WT ) RPTPα or the dimerization - impair - ing P210L / P211L ( P210 ) wedge mutant of RPTPα ( 23 ) . Tagging of RPTPα did not affect its ability to coprecipitate with SRC ( fig . S1 ) . Monolayers of transfected SFs were subjected to scratch - wound assays followed by fixation and staining with Alexa Fluor 647 ( AF647 ) – conjugated anti - FLAG Abs , AF568 - conjugated anti - SRC Ab ( Fig . 1A , left upper scheme ) , and phalloidin fluorescein isothio - cyanate ( FITC ) reagent ( to stain F - actin ) , and cells were imaged by TIRF - STORM . Cells at the wound edge with a classical migrating phenotype characterized by protruding ruffles , filopodia , and la - mellipodia in the direction of the wound were captured using TIRF microscopy labeled for phalloidin [ green in Fig . 1A ( I ) ] , RPTPα [ red in Fig . 1A ( I ) ] , and SRC [ yellow in Fig . 1A ( I ) ] before STORM imaging . From STORM data , SRC - SRC , RPTPα - RPTPα , and SRC - RPTPα colocalization maps ( 34 ) were constructed ( Fig . 1A , II ) where RPTPα or SRC fluorescent signals were repre - sented as spheres . The sphere diameter represents the localization accuracy , whereas the centroid is used to compare distances between same or different paired molecules ( Fig . 1A , III ) . The RPTPα - SRC colocalization map was overlaid with TIRF images to define cellular polarity and demonstrate the association of RPTPα , SRC , and their clusters with polarized actin - rich structures , includ - ing basal stress fibers ( BSTRESS ) , aligned in the direction of migra - tion , and leading edge actin - rich structures ( lamellipodia , ruffles , and filopodia ; LEDGE ) ( Fig . 1A , left lower scheme and III to V ) . We adopted 65 nm as the cutoff distance separation to infer the closest realistic colocalization ( pointing to in - cell molecule - mole - cule clustering or dimerization ) between RPTPα and other RPTPα molecules [ red spheres in Fig . 1A ( III to V ) ] . This distance was inferred from molecular modeling of RPTPα dimers bound to their respective fluorophore - tagged Ab based on multiple crystal structures of the RPTPα intracellular domain ( 7 , 22 ) and a full - length mouse immunoglobulin G1 ( IgG1 ) Ab ( 1IGT ) ( 35 ) . Our model assumed that helices α1 0 and α2 0 from at least one of the D2 domains detach from the core PTP domain to allow dimeriza - tion of D1 and suggested a maximum theoretical distance between fluorophores of 55 to 70 nm , leading us to conclude that any dis - tance > 65 nm is unlikely because of RPTPα clustering / dimerization ( fig . S2A , I ) . Structural information about RPTPα - SRC association is limited ( 36 , 37 ) ; however , similar modeling of the RPTPα - SRC association ( fig . S2A , II ) suggested a maximum theoretical distance between RPTPα and SRC fluorophores between 25 and 45 nm . Thus , we concluded that the > 65 nm cutoff is also very likely to exclude non - functionally relevant colocalization while capturing all in - cell protein - protein interaction between SRC and RPTPα [ white spheres in Fig . 1A ( III and IV ) ] . Similarly , head - to - toe dime - rization of SRC has been reported ( 38 ) , which might be important to promote the activity of SRC and the phosphorylation of down - stream effectors . Although the structure of SRC dimers has not been resolved , modeling of SRC in complex with anti - SRC Ab ( fig . S2B ) suggests that the > 65 - nm cutoff is similarly very likely to exclude non - functionally relevant clustering between SRC and other SRC molecules [ yellow spheres in Fig . 1A ( III to V ) ] . Our microscopy assessment showed that the LEDGE and BSTRESS areas were strongly enriched with clustered RPTPα - RPTPα [ Fig . 1A ( III to V ) , quantified in Fig . 1B ] and SRC - SRC mol - ecules ( < 65 nm , red and yellow spheres , respectively ) . On the other hand , nonclustered RPTPα molecules ( > 65 nm ) appeared to be ran - domly distributed across cellular compartments outside the actin - rich labeled zones [ blue spheres in Fig . 1A ( V ) ] . We next analyzed clustering between RPTPα and SRC molecules . The association ( < 65 nm ) between RPTPα molecules and SRC was also enriched in the LEDGE and BSTRESS areas [ white spheres in Fig . 1A ( III and IV ) and quantification in Fig . 1C ] . These results are consistent with the reported evidence that a considerable proportion of RPTPα molecules on the cell surface is dimerized and that RPTPα and , pre - sumably , RPTPα - SRC complexes are enriched in FA ( 24 , 33 ) . However , the localization of RPTPα clusters to actin - rich structures , where also RPTPα - SRC and SRC - SRC clusters are enriched , is less consistent with the proposed inhibitory effect of dimerization on the function of RPTPα . Declustering mutations of RPTPα decrease its association with SRC in the LEDGE of migrating SFs We next compared , in the same TIRF - STORM assays , the pheno - type of migrating αKO SFs expressing WT - RPTPα or the known de - dimerizing P210L / P211L mutation of RPTPα ( Fig . 1D , left scheme ) ( 24 ) . Consistent with previous reports about the effect of the P210L / P211L mutation on RPTPα dimerization ( 23 ) , colocali - zation of RPTPα was significantly reduced by the P210L / P211L S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Sendo et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabn8668 ( 2023 ) 4 July 2023 2 of 19 mutation [ representative TIRF alone in Fig . 1D ( I and II ) and rep - resentative merged TIRF - STORM in Fig . 1D ( III and IV ) ; quantifi - cation in Fig . 1E ] . The mutation also mostly eliminated the enrichment of RPTPα clusters at LEDGE and BSTRESS ( fig . S3A ) and reduced the colocalization of RPTPα with SRC at LEDGE and BSTRESS [ quantified in Fig . 1F and fig . S3 ( B and C ) ] , suggesting that RPTPα clustering might promote the recruitment or retention of RPTPα to SRC - enriched actin - rich structures of migrating SFs and its association with SRC . To further investigate RPTPα clustering and RPTPα - SRC asso - ciation in migrating SFs , we used multiple established FRET micros - copy – based analytical methods using Ab labeled with donor ( AF488 ) or acceptor ( AF568 ) fluorophores ( FRET pairs ; Fig . 2A ) . These techniques are based on the occurrence of FRET when the donor and acceptor fluorophores are very close to each other ( within 10 nm ) ( 39 ) . For technical reasons ( see below ) , in these assays , we mainly focused on LEDGE rather than BSTRESS . Fig . 1 . Superresolution microscopy of migrating SFs suggests that RPTPα clusters interact with SRC along actin stress fibers . ( A ) Left : Drawn schematic of our experimental targets and reagent labeling strategy ( top left ) and a diagram of cellular compartments for migrating cell with leading lamellipodium showing leading edge ( LEDGE ) and polarized basal stress fibers ( BSTRESS ; bottom left ) . Right : TIRF micrograph ( I ) , STORM localization map ( II ) , and low ( III ) versus high ( IV and V ) magnification of leading lamellipodial edge rendering of overlap TIRF - STORM images of WT RPTPα - ex - pressing SFs , with localization map of clustered ( red spheres ; distance , < 65 nm ) versus nonclustered ( blue spheres ; distance , > 65 nm ) RPTPα , clustered ( yellow spheres ; distance , < 65 nm ) SRC , and colocalized RPTPα - SRC ( white spheres ; distance , < 65 nm ) overlaid on the F - actin TIRF image ( green ) . Scale bars in I and IV , 5 μm and 500 nm . ( B and C ) Density of clustered versus nonclustered RPTPα ( B ) or colocalized versus non - colocalized RPTPα - SRC ( C ) in LEDGE ( left ) or BSTRESS ( right ) of WT RPTPα - expressing SFs . ( D ) Left : Drawn schematic of our experimental targets , reagents and labeling strategy . Right : Representative TIRF ( I and II ) and low - ( III ) versus high - ( IV ) magnification overlap TIRF - STORM images of SFs ex - pressing WT RPTPα - FLAG ( WT ; top ) compared with SFs expressing P210L / P211L RPTPα - FLAG ( P210 ; bottom ) with localization map coded as in [ ( A ) , III and IV ] . Scale bars ( I and IV ) , 3 μm and 1 μm . Relative density of clustered RPTPα ( E ) or colocalized RPTPα - SRC ( F ) in LEDGE and BSTRESS of WT and P210 cells . ( B to F ) Each point represents a transfected cell . n = 10 cells per construct across four experiments using four αKO lines for WT , n = 9 cells per construct across three experiments using three αKO lines for P210 . Data are means ± SEM . * * * * P ≤ 0 . 0001 , * * * P ≤ 0 . 001 , * * P ≤ 0 . 01 , and * P ≤ 0 . 05 by Mann - Whitney . S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Sendo et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabn8668 ( 2023 ) 4 July 2023 3 of 19 Fig . 2 . SEcFRET assessment of migrating SFs suggests that clus - tering of RPTPα correlates with association with SRC . ( A ) Top : Drawn schematic of our experi - mental targets and reagent labeling strategy . Bottom : ( I ) Low - resolution 10× multitiled stitched representa - tive scratch wound in a monolayer of SFs labeled with anti – FLAG - AF568 ( red ) , anti – HA - AF488 ( green ) , and Hoechst ( blue ) for SEcFRET analysis of migrating SF LEDGE ( scale bar , 1 mm ) . ( II to V ) Method for analyzing FRET - positive regions : Each cell is quadrisected [ ( II ) , color code is as in ( I ) ; scale bar , 5 μm ] . FRET zones were auto - outlined ( III ) . ( IV ) SEcFRET density map image , magnified in ( V ) ( scale bar , 500 nm ) . ( B ) Left : Drawn schematic of our experimental targets and reagent labeling strategy . Right : Represen - tative FLAG - and HA - RPTPα staining ( top ; scale bar , 10 μm ) and LEDGE SEcFRET localization in WT - WT , P210 - P210 , and dD2 - dD2 SFs ( middle ) and highlighted in magnified box insets ( bottom ; scale bar , 2 μm ) . ( C ) SEcFRET signal ( top graph ) and calculated % FRET efficiency ( bottom graph ) of RPTPα homodimer in the quadrant corre - sponding to the LEDGE . ( D ) Left : Schematic of our experimental targets and reagent labeling strat - egy . Right : Representative RPTPα - FLAG and SRC staining ( top ; scale bar , 10 μm ) and LEDGE SEcFRET lo - calization in WT - SRC , P210 - SRC , and dD2 - SRC SFs ( middle ) and high - lighted in magnified box insets ( bottom ; scale bar , 2 μm ) . ( E ) SEcFRET signal ( top graph ) and cal - culated % FRET efficiency ( bottom graph ) of RPTPα - SRC association in the quadrant corresponding to the LEDGE . Each point in ( C and E ) rep - resents a transfected cell . n = 40 to 60 cells per construct across two experiments using two αKO lines for the RPTPα homodimer ; n = 65 to 130 cells per construct across three experiments using three αKO lines for RPTPα - SRC association . Data are means ± SEM . * * * * P ≤ 0 . 0001 and * P ≤ 0 . 05 by Kruskal - Wallis with corrected Dunn ’ s test . S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Sendo et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabn8668 ( 2023 ) 4 July 2023 4 of 19 FRET images of SFs migrating at the edge of a scratch wound ( Fig . 2A , I ) were processed on the basis of previously established methods ( 40 , 41 ) to show signal hot spots of molecule clustering . Each SF was separated into four compartments : leading edge , trail - ing edge , and two lateral compartments ( Fig . 2A , II and III ) , and the total area of FRET - positive regions of interest [ ROIs ; Fig . 2A ( IV ) , magnified in Fig . 2A ( V ) ] was automatically outlined . For the as - sessment of RPTPα clustering , αKO SFs were transfected with plas - mids expressing FLAG - tagged and hemagglutinin ( HA ) – tagged WT RPTPα or its P210L / P211L ( P210 ) mutant or a C - terminal de - letion between amino acids 560 and 818 that removes the D2 domain ( dD2 ) . The latter construct preserves the putative SRC - re - cruiting Tyr 789 ( 10 ) residue . The cells were stained with AF488 - labeled anti - HA Ab and indirectly AF568 - labeled anti - FLAG Ab ( Fig . 2A , left upper scheme ) . For the assessment of RPTPα - SRC as - sociation , αKO SFs were transfected with plasmids expressing FLAG - tagged WT RPTPα or its P210L / P211L mutants or dD2 de - letion and stained with AF488 - labeled anti - SRC Ab and AF568 - labeled anti - FLAG Ab ( Fig . 2A , left lower scheme ) . As shown in Fig . 2 ( B and C ) , HA - FLAG FRET occurred significantly at LEDGE of WT RPTPα - expressing cells ( WT - WT ) ; however , the P210L / P211L mutations ( P210 - P210 cells ) and the dD2 deletion ( dD2 - dD2 cells ) significantly reduced the area of the FRET - positive region at LEDGE . Percent SE FRET efficiency [ calculated using the precise FRET ( pFRET ) method ( 42 – 44 ) ] at LEDGE was also signifi - cantly reduced in P210 - P210 and dD2 - dD2 cells when compared with WT - WT cells ( Fig . 2C ) . These data are in agreement with pub - lished literature and further consolidate the notion that the RPTPα P210L / P211L and dD2 mutations significantly reduce clustering of RPTPα at the LEDGE of a primary cell model . We next investigated the effect of the two mutations on RPTPα - SRC association using SEcFRET ( Fig . 2D ) . The area of FRET signal and % FRET efficiency ( using pFRET ) in LEDGE was substantially reduced in cells express - ing the P210L / P211L or the dD2 mutants of RPTPα ( P210 - SRC and dD2 - SRC cells , respectively ) when compared with cells expressing WT RPTPα ( WT - SRC cells ; Fig . 2E ) . To circumvent some of the known shortcomings of SE FRET ( 39 ) , we next applied spectral - based acceptor photobleaching FRET ( apFRET ) and fluorescence lifetime imaging FRET ( FLIM - FRET ) to the study of RPTPα clustering and RPTPα - SRC associa - tion in migrating SFs . Spectral - based FRET ( 42 ) efficiently removes the contribution of donor spectral bleed - through to the FRET signal . Only cells with truly FRET - positive LEDGE at SEcFRET were selected ( Fig . 3A , I ) . FRET efficiency using apFRET was as - sessed by measuring the difference between the quenched donor signal in the presence of the acceptor and the dequenched donor signal after the acceptor has been bleached ( 42 , 45 , 46 ) . Two ROIs were marked within each cell , one to bleach and another serving as an unbleached control , so that that each cell served as its own control ( Fig . 3A , II to IV ) , and an area devoid of cells was selected , serving as a background control ( fig . S4 , I ) . For accurate detection of LEDGE fluorescence intensity , we defined the LEDGE region within each ROI through smaller subdivisions of the ROIs to strin - gently outline the cell lamellipodium and exclude noncellular area [ see example in fig . S4 ( II and III ) ] . The mean change in LEDGE fluorescence intensity ( Fig . 3A , V ) was used to calculate the % FRET efficiency ( 42 , 45 , 46 ) . Experiments were performed on SF lines transfected with constructs to express WT RPTPα ( WT - WT ) , the P210L / P211L mutant ( P210 - P210 cells ) , or the dD2 deletion ( dD2 - dD2 cells ; Fig . 3B ) . As shown in Fig . 3C , significantly higher anti - HA donor fluorescence recovery after acceptor photo - bleaching and consequent % RPTPα - RPTPα FRET efficiency were observed at LEDGE of WT RPTPα - expressing cells ( WT - WT ) than in SFs expressing the P210L / P211L mutant ( P210 - P210 cells ) or the dD2 deletion ( dD2 - dD2 cells ) . Figure 3 ( D and E ) shows that significantly higher anti - SRC donor fluorescence recovery after ac - ceptor photobleaching and consequent % RPTPα - SRC FRET effi - ciency were observed at LEDGE of WT RPTPα - expressing cells ( WT - SRC cells ) than in SFs expressing the P210L / P211L mutant ( P210 - SRC cells ) or the dD2 deletion ( dD2 - SRC cells ) mutants of RPTPα . FLIM can be used to detect changes in donor lifetime that ac - company energy transfer to the acceptor during FRET ( 47 , 48 ) . In the phasor representation , the analysis of FLIM data is done by ob - serving the clustering of pixel values in specific regions of the phasor plot and localizing donor populations within FRET loops ( Fig . 3F ) ( 47 – 49 ) . Unquenched donors residing in photobleached areas in FRET pair WT - RPTPα samples [ yellow boxes in Fig . 3F ( I and II ) ] or donor - alone samples ( control in Fig . 3G ) yielded a no - FRET population [ N - FRET ; red pseudocolor in Fig . 3F ( II ) , red circles in Fig . 3F ( III ) , and in Fig . 3G ( bottom ) ] , which was dis - tinct from low - and high - FRET populations expressing quenched donor [ L - and H - FRET ; yellow and white areas and circles in Fig . 3F ( II and III ) and Fig . 3G ] . In these experiments , unquenched donor lifetimes were around t = 2 . 4 ns , whereas successfully quenched populations , exhibiting H - FRET , had lifetimes around 1 . 2 ns ( Fig . 3F ) . Experiments were performed on SF lines transfect - ed with constructs to express WT RPTPα ( WT - WT ) , the P210L / P211L mutant ( P210 - P210 cells ) , or the dD2 deletion ( dD2 - dD2 cells ) . Consistent with the earlier described data obtained through STORM , SEcFRET , and apFRET , the FLIM study ( Fig . 3G ) showed that % FRET efficiency of clustered RPTPα was significantly higher in WT - WT ( H - FRET in Fig . 3G ) compared with either P210 - P210 or dD2 - dD2 SFs ( L - FRET in Fig . 3G ) . Together , the data collected with various FRET - microscopy approaches are consistent with the superresolution microscopy data and suggest that RPTPα clustering significantly occurs at the LEDGE and correlates with the associa - tion between RPTPα and SRC in these structures . Clustering - dependent recruitment of RPTPα to LEDGE facilitates SRC activation and actin fiber formation Because association of RPTPα with SRC activates SRC and RPTPα is necessary for the correct functioning of FA in fibroblasts ( 8 , 15 ) , we next assessed the effect of clustering - impairing mutants of RPTPα on formation of the SRC - dependent actin - enriched LEDGE . Cortactin is a key substrate of SRC and a marker for polar - ized LEDGE formation ( 50 , 51 ) . Once phosphorylated , it is recruit - ed to the actin cytoskeleton , where it contributes to stress fiber stabilization ( 51 ) . RPTPα is reportedly necessary for appropriate phosphorylation of cortactin in Caco - 2 cells ( 52 ) . Staining of mi - grating SFs with anti - cortactin Ab showed that cortactin was less expressed in the LEDGE of SF - expressing RPTPα clustering - im - pairing mutants , correlating with a reduced recruitment of RPTPα and SRC to the same region ( Fig . 4 , A and B ) . Cortactin co - localized ( using Manders overlap coefficients ) with areas of RPTPα - SRC FRET ( Fig . 4A ) , and RPTPα - cortactin and SRC - cortactin co - localization was also decreased in the LEDGE of SFs expressing one or both clustering - impaired mutants of RPTPα ( Fig . 4C and fig . S5 ) . S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Sendo et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabn8668 ( 2023 ) 4 July 2023 5 of 19 Previous studies have suggested that SRC can promote RPTPα func - tions in cell migration in a positive feedback mechanism ( 14 , 53 ) . In line with those findings , inhibition of SRC activity , which reduced its recruitment to the actin cytoskeleton , also strongly reduced RPTPα - SRC colocalization ( Fig . 4 , D and E ) . These results suggest a model in which SRC activation during migration facili - tates RPTPα recruitment to and clustering at the LEDGE . Associa - tion of clustered RPTPα with SRC , in turn , leads to further activation of SRC , which promotes recruitment of cortactin and further formation of the LEDGE . RPTPα clustering – deficient mutations behave as loss of function in migrating SFs Because SRC - dependent promotion of F - actin assembly is a key enabler of fibroblast migration , and RPTPα is known to promote RAC activation in fibroblasts , the above - mentioned model predicts Fig . 3 . ApFRET and FLIM assessment of migrating SFs suggests that clustering of RPTPα correlates with association with SRC . ( A ) Typical apFRET images . The whole cell [ box in ( I ) ] was imaged at t = 0 with donor and acceptor merged ( I ) ( scale bar , 5 μm ) and then magnified in ( II ) ( scale bar , 5 μm ) to highlight bleached ROI [ box in ( II ) ] and then postbleached at t = 182 s , showing bleached ( III ) and unbleached ( IV ) portions of the lamellipodium . ( V ) Representative post – photobleaching apFRET analysis : the relative fluorescence versus time graphs of photobleached anti – FLAG - AF568 acceptor ( red ) and un - quenched anti – HA - AF488 donor ( green ) are shown for photobleached ROIs from ( III ) , together with graphs for donor ( black ) and acceptor ( yellow ) for the control nonbleached ROI from ( IV ) . ( B and D ) Summary of experimental setting for ( C and E ) . ( C and E ) Postbleaching fluor - escence intensity ( left graph ) and % FRET efficiency ( right graph ) of donor in apFRET of RPTPα clustering in WT - WT , P210 - P210 , and dD2 - dD2 SFs ( C ) and of RPTPα - SRC association in WT - SRC , P210 - SRC , and dD2 - SRC SFs ( E ) . Each point in ( C and E ) represents an ROI that stringently outlines the cell lamellipodium . n = 7 to 11 cells for ( C ) and n = 9 to 14 cells for ( E ) per construct across two experiments using two αKO lines . ( F ) Representative FALCON FLIM acquisition and phasor plot analysis of RPTPα clustering . ( I ) Postbleached acceptor signal ( bleached area in yellow box ROI ) . ( II ) FLIM - acquired image highlighting the donor un - quenching in bleached area ( N - FRET ; red pseudocolor in yellow box ROI ) contrast - ing with the highly quenched ( > 50 % efficiency ) FRET ( H - FRET ) – positive regions in white . ( III ) Location of N - FRET ( red circle ) versus H - FRET ( white circle ) versus < 35 % FRET efficiency ( L - FRET ) pixels in the phasor loop . Scale bar , 10 μm . ( G ) Representative FLIM images of RPTPα clustering in WT - WT , P210 - P210 , and dD2 - dD2 SFs ( left ) ( scale bar , 10 μm ) and quantification of % FLIM - FRET efficiency ( right ) . Fluorescent images in top panels are RPTPα donor fluorescent signal . Middle : FLIM images displaying H - FRET versus L - FRET pseudocolored in white and yellow , respectively . Lifetimes are shown in lower panels . Donor - only control lifetimes cluster in red circles in phasor loops . Each point represents a transfected cell . n = 10 to 33 cells per construct across two experiments using two αKO lines . Data are means ± SEM . * * * * P ≤ 0 . 0001 , * * * P ≤ 0 . 001 , and * * P ≤ 0 . 01 , by Kruskal - Wallis with corrected Dunn ’ s test for ( C ) and ( E ) right panels or ordinary one - way ANOVA calculated on AUC ( Dunnett ’ s multiple comparison test ) for ( C ) and ( E ) , left panels . S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Sendo et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabn8668 ( 2023 ) 4 July 2023 6 of 19 Fig . 4 . RPTPα clustering corre - lates with cortactin recruitment to the LEDGE of migrating SFs and its colocalization with RPTPα and SRC . ( A ) Representa - tive images of wound edge mi - grating SFs transfected with WT PTPRA - FLAG ( WT ) , P210L / P211L PTPRA - FLAG ( P210 ) , or dD2 PTPRA - FLAG ( dD2 ) expression constructs . Top : staining with anti – FLAG - AF568 ( red ) , anti – SRC - AF488 ( green ) , anti – cortactin - AF647 ( magenta ) , and Hoechst ( blue ) ( scale bar , 10 μm ) . The second - from - top panels display cortactin only ( magenta ) . The third - from - top and the bottom panels show the SEcFRET images of these representative cells and a zoomed - in panel series ( scale bar , 10 μm ) . ( B ) Quantification of RPTPα , SRC , and cortactin - positive area in the LEDGE of transfected migrating SFs . ( C ) Quantification of colocalized RPTPα - cortactin and SRC - cortactin in the LEDGE of transfected migrating SFs . Each point in ( B and C ) represents a transfected cell . n = 5 αKO lines across five experiments . ( D ) Rep - resentative images of migrating αKO SFs transfected with WT PTPRA - HA ( WT ) expression con - structs treated with DMSO ( control ) ( top ) or SU6656 ( SRC in - hibitor ) ( bottom ) ( scale bar , 10 μm ) . ( I ) Staining with anti – HA - AF488 ( green ) , anti – SRC - AF568 ( magenta ) , phalloidin - AF647 ( red ) , and Hoechst ( blue ) . ( II and III ) SRC – F - actin colocalization signal ( gray ) on cell outline with ( II ) or without ( III ) phalloidin ( red ) . ( IV ) RPTPα - SRC and ( V ) SRC – F - actin colocalization signal ( gray ) on cell outline . ( E ) Quantification of colo - calized SRC – F - actin ( left ) , RPTPα - SRC ( top right ) , and RPTPα – F - actin ( bottom right ) in transfected mi - grating SFs . Each point represents a transfected cell . n = 43 to 54 cells per group across two experiments using two αKO lines . Data are means ± SEM . * * * * P ≤ 0 . 0001 and * * * P ≤ 0 . 001 , by Kruskal - Wallis with corrected Dunn ’ s test ( B and C ) or Mann - Whitney ( E ) . S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Sendo et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabn8668 ( 2023 ) 4 July 2023 7 of 19 that clustering - deficient mutants of RPTPα inhibit activation of SRC and RAC and migration of SFs . We tested this prediction by assessing SRC activation and migration in SF lines transfected with either empty vector or constructs to express WT RPTPα , the P210L / P211L , or the dD2 deletion mutants ( Fig . 5A ) . Consistent with our model , expression of WT RPTPα but not the P210L / P211L mutant or the dD2 deletion promoted migration of SFs in two different assays ( Fig . 5 , B to E ) . The same mutants failed to promote phosphorylation of SRC on Tyr 419 and downstream phospho - RAC induction in migrating SFs in microscopy assays of transfected cells . ( Fig . 5 , F and G , and fig . S6 , A and B ) . RPTPα - blocking Ab ( 2F8 ) inhibits RPTPα clustering and association with SRC in migrating SFs To further support our model , we sought to acutely alter clustering of RPTPα through nongenetic interventions looking in parallel for FRET microscopy phenotypes and changes in SF migration assays . It remains an open question whether RPTPα dimerization can be modulated through the extracellular domain . Thus , using αKO SFs transfected with plasmids expressing FLAG - tagged with or without HA - tagged WT RPTPα ( named WT - WT and WT - SRC as in Fig . 2A ) , we first assessed the effect of a known monoclonal Ab raised against the extracellular domain of RPTPα ( clone 2F8 ; fig . S7 , A to C ) ( 54 ) on the clustering of RPTPα and its association with SRC in migrating SFs ( Fig . 6A ) . Incubation of migrating WT - WT and WT - SRC SFs with 2F8 Ab , but not with isotype control Ab or without 2F8 Ab , led to significant declustering of RPTPα ( Fig . 6 , B and C , and fig . S8 , A and B ) in SEcFRET and apFRET assays , reduced association of RPTPα with SRC ( Fig . 6D and fig . S8C ) in SEcFRET assays , and SRC activation in wound edge SFs ( Fig . 6E ) . Next , we assessed whether incubation with 2F8 Ab had any signifi - cant effect on unmanipulated SF migration . Incubation of SFs with 2F8 Ab led to a significant reduction of migration of WT but not αKO SFs in two independent assays ( Fig . 6 , F and G , and fig . S9 , A and B ) . When intra - articularly administered to mice with STIA , a model where SF migration is known to promote structural damage ( 55 ) , 2F8 also protected mice from cartilage damage and bone ero - sions ( Fig . 6 , H and I ) . Thus , interfering with the extracellular domain of RPTPα with an Ab enables rapid declustering of endog - enous RPTPα that correlates with an RPTPα loss of function phe - notype in migrating SFs . RPTPα inactivation reduces arthritis severity in mice and removes the inhibitory effect of 2F8 Ab on SF migration Next , we attempted to reconcile our observation that clustering of RPTPα promotes the phosphatase function in fibroblasts with the current wedge - mediated inactivation model of RPTPα dimeriza - tion . The vast majority of RPTPα phosphatase activity resides in the D1 domain with negligible contribution from the D2 ( 7 ) . To assess whether the phosphatase activity of RPTPα contributes to its proinflammatory action in arthritis , we generated a knock - in mouse model carrying an inactivating C469S mutation of the cata - lytic Cys of the D1 domain ( Fig . 7A ) . Homozygous RPTPα C469S ( CS / CS ) mice were born at Mendelian frequencies and displayed no clinically evident abnormalities or reduced lifespan or fertility . We then subjected CS / CS and littermate WT mice to STIA as in ( 18 ) . Consistent with the phenotype of the RPTPα KO in the same model ( 18 ) , C469S mutation of RPTPα protected mice from STIA , al - though the phenotype was milder compared with the RPTPα KO ( Fig . 7B ) ( 18 ) . We next generated SF lines from CS / CS mice and subjected them to migration assays in the presence of the 2F8 Ab and confirmed that the expression of RPTPα was similar between WT SFs and CS / CS SFs ( Fig . 7C ) . The C469S mutation reduced SRC activation in migratory SFs and removed the inhibitory effect of 2F8 Ab on SF migration ( Fig . 7 , D and E ) . From these experi - ments , we conclude that activation of SRC after RPTPα cluster - ing – dependent recruitment in SFs is , at least in part , dependent on RPTPα phosphatase activity , as diagrammatically shown in Fig . 8 , together with the rest of the model suggested by this study . DISCUSSION Several studies have addressed the potential effect of dimerization on the function of RPTPα and other transmembrane PTPs ( 22 , 23 ) . The role of the wedge motif in allosteric regulation of PTP ac - tivity has been supported by many but not all studies ( 7 , 25 – 30 , 32 , 33 , 56 , 57 ) . Our study addressed several gaps in the regulation of RPTPα by dimerization and how RPTPα promotes the pathogenesis of inflammatory arthritis and likely also fibrosis by modulating SRC activation during fibroblasts migration ( 12 , 13 , 16 – 18 ) . Our results also provide support for the therapeutic targeting of RPTPα through allosteric inhibition ( 19 – 21 , 58 – 60 ) . SFs are pivotal in the pathobiology of inflammatory arthritis leading to cartilage and bone damage that is observed in RA . Several reports correlate SF migration and invasion with promotion of arthritis severity in vivo ( 18 , 61 , 62 ) . However , despite the growing importance of SFs as players and potential therapeutic targets for rheumatoid arthritis ( RA ) , their mechanism of invasion remains incompletely understood , and there is a paucity of studies focused on the dynamic aspects of migration of SFs related to RA disease pathogenesis . Here , we have applied superresolution TIRF - STORM and FRET approaches to unveil the molecular clustering of RPTPα and its recruitment mechanism at the leading edge of SF migration , combined with the study of RPTPα declustering muta - tions and Ab and of SFs carrying a phosphatase - inactivating muta - tion of RPTPα . Our working model is depicted in Fig . 8 . We found that SF migration leads to extensive enrichment of clustered RPTPα in actin - and cortactin - rich LEDGE and BSTRESS . The clustering of RPTPα and its enrichment at the LEDGE are promoted by SRC ac - tivation and inhibited by a known de - dimerizing RPTPα wedge mu - tation . Clustering of RPTPα strongly correlated with its association with SRC and further promoted SRC activation , formation of F - actin – rich structures , and cell migration . The intracellular colocalization between SRC and RPTPα and the positive regulation of RPTPα recruitment to LEDGE by SRC were consistent with previous findings in the RPTPα literature . RPTPα is enriched in fibroblast actin - rich structures and also copre - cipitates with SRC and other FA proteins ( 8 , 10 , 53 ) . A complex between SRC and RPTPα exists on the basis of an unbiased kinase - phosphatase interactome study ( 63 ) . SRC - mediated positive regulation of RPTPα recruitment to FA , which , in turn , promotes cell migration , has also been reported ( 14 , 53 ) . The exact mecha - nism of SRC - mediated recruitment of RPTPα to the LEDGE and how clustering of RPTPα contributes to this process remains to be clarified . However , it is tempting to speculate that phosphoryla - tion of RPTPα - Tyr 789 by SRC plays a role because this residue is a potential SRC phosphorylation site ( 64 ) and necessary for recruit - ment of RPTPα to FA and RPTPα - mediated promotion of cell S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Sendo et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabn8668 ( 2023 ) 4 July 2023 8 of 19 Fig . 5 . Clustering - impaired RPTPα mutations impair SF migration and phosphorylation of SRC and RAC . ( A ) Summary of experimental setting for the experiment outlined in ( B to G ) . Representative images ( B ) and migration rate ( C ) of empty vector ( EV ) , WT , P210 , or dD2 SFs , normalized by EV . Representative images of scratched wound ( D ) and wound area reduction ( E ) in monolayers of EV , WT , P210 , or dD2 SFs . Graph shows ratio between the area at 24 hours versus time 0 normalized by the area change of EV . Scale bar in ( B and D ) , 200 μm . Each point ( C and E ) represents a different transfected cell line ( n = 4 ) across four experiments . Representative heat maps ( F ) , with scale bar ( 100 μm ) and mean fluorescence intensity ( G ) of images of pSRC ( Tyr 419 ) , pRAC ( Ser 71 ) in monolayers of migrating WT , P210 , or dD2 SFs . Each point represents the intensity level in a selected microscopy field . n = 4 fields per construct across two experiments using two αKO lines . Data are means ± SEM . * * * * P ≤ 0 . 0001 , * * * P ≤ 0 . 001 , * * P ≤ 0 . 01 , and * P ≤ 0 . 05 by ordinary one - way ANOVA ( Dunnett ’ s multiple comparison test ) . a . u . , arbitrary units . S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Sendo et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabn8668 ( 2023 ) 4 July 2023 9 of 19 migration ( 8 , 14 , 53 ) . Given the enrichment of SRC - SRC clusters observed in actin - rich regions and because SRC dimerization is im - portant to promote its downstream signaling ( 38 ) , dimerization of SRC in actin - rich regions might also participate in the mechanism of RPTPα recruitment . Our working model is consistent with the proposed role of the wedge motif in RPTPα dimerization . However , clustering - mediated promotion of RPTPα function needs to be reconciled with the “ ca - nonical model ” of wedge - mediated inhibition of RPTPα , which postulates reciprocal occlusion of monomer active sites by wedge motifs ( 22 ) . One explanation , supported by the milder phenotype induced by the C469S mutation compared with complete deletion of RPTPα , is that clustering promotes RPTPα functions , in part , through activity - independent mechanisms . On the other hand , it Fig . 6 . RPTPα - blocking Ab reduces RPTPα clustering and association with SRC at the LEDGE of migrating SFs . ( A ) Drawn schematic of our ex - perimental targets and reagent label - ing strategy for the experiment outlined in ( B to D ) . SFs were trans - fected with WT PTPRA - FLAG with ( B and C ) ( WT - WT ) or without ( D ) ( WT - SRC ) WT PTPRA - HA and incubated with isotype Ab or anti - RPTPα block - ing Ab ( 2F8 ) . ( B and D ) Left : Repre - sentative SEcFRET image ( scale bar , 20 μm ) . Right : Quantified total SEcFRET signal areas at the LEDGE . Each point represents a transfected cell . n = 65 to 76 cells for ( B ) ; n = 37 to 75 cells for ( D ) across three experiments using three αKO lines . ( C ) Postbleaching time - re - solved average fluorescence intensity profile of dequenched donor signal of RPTPα clustering using the apFRET method . n = 12 or 13 cells per group across two experiments using two αKO lines . ( E ) Representative heat - maps ( left ) and mean fluorescence intensity ( right ) of images of pSRC ( Tyr 419 ) in monolayers of WT SFs in - cubated with or without anti - RPTPα blocking Ab ( 2F8 ) . Scale bar , 100 μm . Each point represents the intensity level in a microscopy field . n = 9 to 12 fields and two cell lines across two experiments . ( F and G ) Representative images ( F ) and migration rate ( G ) of WT ( n = 4 lines ) or αKO ( n = 4 lines ) SFs , normalized by migration of SFs incu - bated with isotype control Ab . Scale bar in ( F ) , 200 μm . Each point repre - sents a different cell line across four experiments . ( H and I ) Schematic of experiment ( H ) and histological scores ( I ) ( left : synovial inflammation ; right : bone erosion ) for STIA in female BALB / c mice subjected to injection with anti - RPTPα blocking Ab ( 2F8 ) or PBS ( 2F8 Ab : n = 9 ; PBS : n = 10 ) . Each point represents the score ratio of 2F8Ab or saline - injected joint versus contralat - eral noninjected joint of a mouse . Graphs in ( E , G , and I ) show means and SEMs . * * * * P ≤ 0 . 0001 , * * P ≤ 0 . 01 , and * P ≤ 0 . 05 by Mann - Whitney ( B , D , E , and I ) , unpaired t test calculated on AUC ( C ) or paired t test ( G ) . S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Sendo et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabn8668 ( 2023 ) 4 July 2023 10 of 19 is possible that , at least in migrating SFs , the wedge motif promotes RPTPα dimerization and / or a different type of molecular clustering through a mechanism different from the canonical model . For example , the wedge mutations can disrupt clustering in an indirect fashion by affecting the transmembrane domain of RPTPα , which was previously shown to be a more potent inducer of dimerization than the wedge motif ( 24 ) . In addition to wedge mutations , deletion of D2 also significantly reduced RPTPα clustering and RPTPα - SRC association and behaved as a loss of function mutant in migrating SFs . These data were consistent with reports that the D2 domain is a potential in - teractor of the wedge domain ( 4 ) and promotes RPTPα dimeriza - tion and function ( 5 , 6 , 65 ) . Fig . 7 . RPTPα inactivation reduced arthritis severity in mice and removed the inhibitory effect of 2F8 on ex vivo SF migration . ( A ) Drawn schematic for the experiments in ( B to E ) . ( B ) Clinical score ( left ) and ankle thickness ( right ) for STIA in female WT ( n = 11 ) and homozygous RPTPα C469S ( CS / CS ; n = 12 ) littermate mice . ( C ) RPTPα versus glyceraldehyde - 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase ( GAPDH ) expression in lysates of SFs derived from WT or CS / CS mice . Data are representative of n = 2 independent experiments . ( D ) Representative heatmaps ( left ) and mean fluorescence intensity ( right ) of images of pSRC ( Tyr 419 ) and pRAC ( Ser 71 ) in monolayers of WT , CS / CS SFs . Each point represents intensity level in a selected field . n = 3 WT and 3 CS lines across three experiments ( E ) Representative images ( left ) and migration rate of CS / CS SFs ( n = 4 lines ) ( right ) , incubated with 2F8 Ab or isotype control Ab , normalized by isotype control Ab . Scale bar , 200 μm . Each point represents a different SF line across four experiments . Data are means ± SEM . * * P ≤ 0 . 01 and * P ≤ 0 . 05 by unpaired t test calculated on AUC ( B ) , Mann - Whitney ( D ) , or paired t test ( E ) . S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Sendo et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabn8668 ( 2023 ) 4 July 2023 11 of 19 The extensive clustering of RPTPα observed in SFs was in agree - ment with another study showing dimerization of RPTPα in SK - N - MC cells ( 33 ) ; however , the previous study could not detect strong inhibition of dimerization by the P210L / P211L mutation or the D2 deletion . Such a discrepancy could be due to biochemical differenc - es between transformed neuroepithelial cells and primary fibro - blasts . However , the approaches used in the two studies are also different , and each has their own limitations . Our study used tagged protein stained with Ab , whereas previous work relied on expression of truncations with fusion to fluorescent proteins ( 33 ) . Unfortunately , despite testing multiple anti - RPTPα Ab , we could not find one that would provide a sufficiently specific signal in fluo - rescence microscopy of mouse cells ( when KO cells were used as controls ) to enable the use of untagged protein . However , our assays using the 2F8 Ab on unmanipulated SFs supported the idea that our findings on transfected αKO SFs were representative of the regulation of endogenous RPTPα in SFs . Multiple lines of evidence in models of disease , together with the finding that RPTPα KO mice have a benign phenotype , have vali - dated RPTPα as a potential target for cancer , fibrosis , and RA . We showed here that the role of RPTPα in arthritis is , at least in part , dependent on its phosphatase activity , suggesting that inhibitors of RPTPα D1 activity might have therapeutic relevance in arthritis . We also showed that RPTPα functions can be modulated by an Ab tar - geted to the extracellular domain with an inverse correlation between phosphatase clustering and inhibition of cell migration by the 2F8 Ab . Further studies of the 2F8 Ab and application of our clustering assays to drug screening might help identify declus - tering biologic or small - molecule agents with translational potential . In conclusion , we have demonstrated compartmentalized and precise spatial intracellular localization of RPTPα clustering in a primary fibroblast subset where RPTPα is known to play an impor - tant role as a SRC activator . Our data lent further support to the role Fig . 8 . Working model for relationship between clustering of RPTPα and SRC activation at the LEDGE of migrating SFs . Drawn schematic of our proposal working model . Activation of SRC induces LEDGE formation also through downstream Rac activation and promotes recruitment and clustering of RPTPα at the LEDGE , which , in turn , amplifies SRC activation and LEDGE assembly . Declustering RPTPα mutations ( P210 and dD2 ) or Ab ( 2F8 ) impair RPTPα recruitment and clustering at the LEDGE and impair this amplification mechanism . S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Sendo et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabn8668 ( 2023 ) 4 July 2023 12 of 19 of PTPRA in FA and actin cytoskeleton organization in migrating cells . We also confirmed that the wedge motif plays a role in the reg - ulation of RPTPα clustering and function . However , we suggest that the model of dimerization - induced phosphatase activity inhibition might need to be reconsidered , at least in certain physiological con - ditions . Because regulation of PTPs might vary depending on cell type , context , and function considered , we believe that studies cor - relating protein clustering with function should be performed in the relevant cell types and contexts and before planning pharmacologic approaches to modulate transmembrane PTPs . MATERIALS AND METHODS Mouse models and STIA protocol All mouse work was carried out in accordance with the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee ( IACUC ) guidelines and ap - proved by the UCSD IACUC ( protocol # S16098 ) . C57BL / 6 and BALB / c mice were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory . RPTPα KO ( αKO ) mice on C57BL / 6 background ( 54 , 66 ) were shared by J . den Hertog ( Hubrecht Institute ) and bred to obtain lit - termate WT or αKO mice . RPTPα C469S were generated using the CRISPR knock - in approach at the National Taiwan University knockout mouse core . Heterozygous WT / CS mice were backcrossed onto the C57BL / 6 background for six generations and then inter - bred to obtain littermate WT or CS / CS mice . KRN mice were a gift from C . Benoist ( Harvard University ) and crossed with nonob - ese diabetic mice to obtain offspring ( K / BxN ) that developed disease at around 6 to 7 weeks of age . Serum from arthritic K / BxN mice was pooled for use in the STIA model ( 18 ) . To elicit STIA , 8 - to 12 - week - old mice were injected retro - orbitally with 200 μl of K / BxN serum . Arthritis was assessed by clinical scoring and measurement of ankle swelling every other day as described in ( 18 ) , starting on the day of serum injection . Intra - articular injection of 2F8 in STIA mice Mice were randomized to two groups . K / BxN serum was intraper - itoneally injected to BALB / c mice on day 0 and 2F8 Ab ( 40 μg / 10 μl ; n = 9 mice ) , or phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ; n = 10 mice ) was intra - articularly injected in left hind paws of mice 3 days a week from days 0 to 14 . After mouse sacrifice on day 14 , hind paws were fixed in 10 % neutral buffered formalin , decalcified , and em - bedded in paraffin . Sections were prepared from the tissue blocks and stained with hematoxylin & eosin and Toluidine blue ( Inotiv ) . Histopathologic scoring was performed as previously de - scribed ( 67 ) in a blinded manner by two independent operators . The score of the injected side was normalized by the score of the noninjected side to correct for mouse - to - mouse variability in ar - thritis severity and structural damage . Antibodies Mouse anti - FLAG Ab ( F3165 , AB _ 259529 ) was from Sigma - Aldrich . Rabbit anti - FLAG AF647 conjugate Ab ( 3916S , AB _ 1658175 ) , mouse anti - HA AF488 conjugate Ab ( 2350S , AB _ 491023 ) , rabbit anti - SRC Ab ( 2108S , AB _ 331137 ) , rabbit anti – phospho - Rac1 / cdc42 ( Ser 71 ) Ab ( 2461S , AB _ 2300703 ) , and rabbit anti – phospho - p44 / 42 MAPK ( Erk1 / 2 ) ( Thr 202 / Tyr 204 ) Ab ( 4370S , AB _ 2315112 ) were from Cell Signaling Technology . Goat anti - mouse IgG AF568 conjugate Ab ( A11004 , AB _ 2534072 ; A11031 , AB _ 144696 ) and goat anti - rabbit IgG AF488 conjugate Ab ( A11008 , AB _ 143165 ) and rabbit anti – phospho - SRC ( Tyr 419 ) AF488 conjugate Ab ( 44 - 660A1 , AB _ 2533713 ) were from Invitro - gen . Rabbit anti - cortactin AF647 conjugate Ab ( ab202650 ) and mouse anti - HA Ab ( ab18181 , AB _ 444303 ) were from Abcam . Rabbit anti - RPTPα Ab ( 13079 – 01 - AP , AB _ 2269055 ) was from Pro - teintech . Anti - rabbit anti - SRC AF568 conjugate Ab was conjugated in - house from 100 μl ( 6 . 7 μg ) of anti - SRC Ab ( Cell Signaling Tech - nology , 2108 , AB _ 331137 ) with CF568 dye ( Biotium , 92275 ) . Anti - mouse IgG , horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) – conjugated Ab ( from sheep ) ( NA931 , AB _ 772210 ) and anti - rabbit IgG , HRP - conjugated Ab ( from donkey ) ( NA934 , AB _ 772206 ) were from Cytiva . Rabbit anti - Armenian hamster IgG , HRP - conjugated Ab ( ab5745 , AB _ 955407 ) was from Abcam . Isotype IgG from Armenian hamster ( 400902 ) was from BioLegend . The hamster anti - mouse RPTPα hybridoma # 2F8 was generated by M . Thomas ( Washington University ) and provided by J . Sap ( University of Paris ) ( 54 ) . Hybridoma culture and Ab purification from supernatants The 2F8 hybridoma was cultured in Iscove ’ s modified Dulbecco ’ s medium ( IMDM ; Gibco 12440 - 053 ) with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ; Omega Scientific ) , 2 mM L - glutamine , 2 mM sodium pyru - vate , penicillin ( 100 U / ml ) , streptomycin ( 100 g / ml ) and gentami - cin ( 50 μg / ml ; Life Technologies ) at 37°C in a humidified 5 % CO 2 atmosphere . Cells were collected into 50 - ml tubes and centrifuged and then resuspended with IMDM with 1 % FBS and cultured for 7 days . The supernatant was collected and stocked until reaching more than 1000 ml . Two milliliters of Protein G Sepharose ( Cytiva , 17 - 0618 - 01 ) was packed into a 20 - ml column , and the column was equilibrated and washed twice with 10 ml of binding buffer ( Thermo Scientific , 21001 ) . The supernatant was added into the column and incubated for 24 hours at 4°C . The column was washed four times with 10 ml of binding buffer ; then , 1 ml of elution buffer ( Thermo Scientific , 21004 ) was added to the column and incubated for 5 min at room temperature , and then the protein was eluted into 15 - ml tubes with 0 . 2 ml of neutralizing buffer ( 1 M tris - HCl , pH 9 . 0 ) . The elution process was repeated at least four times . The concentration of Ab was measured using a NanoDrop One ( Thermo Scientific ) , and the Ab was assessed by protein gel staining and Western blotting ( fig . S7 ) . Plasmids All cloning and mutagenesis work was contracted out to GenScript . WT PTPRA ( NM _ 008980 . 2 ) , P201L / P211L PTPRA , and Delta - D2 ( 560 - 818 ) PTPRA were cloned into the pcDNA3 . 1 ( + ) backbone between the Afl II and Xho I restriction sites in - frame with or without either C - terminal FLAG or HA tags . Green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) was cloned into the pmaxCloning Vector backbone . SF / HEK 293T cells culture and transfection SF lines were isolated from knee and ankle joints of female 8 - week - old WT , RPTPα KO , or RPTPα C469S mice as described ( 62 ) . SFs were cultured in Dulbecco ’ s modified Eagle ’ s medium ( DMEM ; Fisher Scientific 10 - 017 ) with 10 % FBS ( Omega Scientific ) , 2 mM L - glutamine , penicillin ( 100 U / ml ) and streptomycin ( 100 g / ml ) ( Pen / St ) , and gentamicin ( 50 μg / ml ; Life Technologies ) at 37°C in a humidified 5 % CO 2 atmosphere . For all experiments , SFs were used between passages 3 and 10 and subjected to overnight starva - tion in 0 . 1 % FBS ( serum starvation medium ) before functional assays . For microscopy experiments , fibronectin from bovine S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Sendo et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabn8668 ( 2023 ) 4 July 2023 13 of 19 plasma in PBS was added to the wells of 24 - well plates , and round coverslips were added a day before cell seeding . After removing the fibronectin from each well , 1 × 10 5 SFs in 1 ml of 10 % FBS DMEM were seeded in each well . Transfection with each plasmid ( 0 . 77 μg per well ) was performed using Lipofectamine 3000 ( Invitrogen , L3000015 ) in DMEM with no additional additives once the mono - layer reached approximately 90 % confluency . The transfection medium was replaced with normal SF medium ( 10 % FBS DMEM ) 3 hours after transfection . For assays , 36 or 48 hours after transfection , SFs were starved for 12 hours in 0 . 1 % FBS DMEM . HEK 293T cells ( 1 . 5 × 10 5 ; American Type Culture Collec - tion , CRL1573 ) were seeded in each well of a six - well plate 1 day before transfection . Plasmids encoding WT RPTPα - HA or un - tagged RPTPα ( 3 μg per well ) were incubated with 9 μg of linear polyethylenimine ( PEI ) in 100 μl of Opti - MEM ( Gibco ) for 15 min . The DNA / PEI admixture was added to the HEK 293T cells in 500 μl of Opti - MEM and incubated for 4 hours , followed by ad - dition of 2 ml of 10 % FBS HEK 293T medium ( DMEM with 10 % FBS , 5 % Pen / St , 5 % HEPES , and 5 % sodium pyruvate ) and incuba - tion for 48 hours . Molecular modeling of RPTPα dimers and RPTPα - SRC complexes The RPTPα dimer model was assembled using the structures of an RPTPα D2 dimer [ Protein Data Bank ( PDB ) code 1YFO ] ( 22 ) , RPTPα D1 + D2 ( 6UZT ) ( 7 ) , and a full - length mouse IgG1 Ab ( 1IGT ) ( 35 ) with simple manual rebuilding and geometry regular - ization of RPTPα D2 using coot ( 68 ) . The RPTPα - SRC complex model was assembled using the structures of non – Tyr 527 - phosphor - ylated SRC ( PDB code 1Y57 ) ( 37 ) , SRC SH2 bound to an RPTPα phosphopeptide ( 1P13 ) ( 36 ) , and a full - length mouse IgG1 Ab ( 1IGT ) ( 35 ) with simple manual rebuilding and geometry regular - ization of RPTPα D2 using coot ( 68 ) . Immunofluorescence staining Transfected SFs layered on round coverslips were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) for 20 min and washed three times with PBS . The cells were permeabilized for 10 min with 1 % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) , 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 in PBS , and washed three times with PBS containing 0 . 0001 % Triton X - 100 . Samples were blocked with 2 % BSA or 2 % normal goat serum ( Life Technol - ogies , PCN5000 ) blocking buffer for 1 hour , incubated with primary Ab for 2 hours , and then incubated with fluorescence - con - jugated secondary Ab for 1 hour . In some experiments , samples were incubated with anti - cortactin AF648 Ab for 2 hours . For superresolution microscopy experiments , samples were stained with phalloidin FITC reagent ( Abcam , ab235137 ) for 20 min . For staining with phospho - SRC , phospho - RAC , and phospho - extracel - lular signal – regulated kinase Ab , samples were stained with AF647 phalloidin ( Invitrogen A22287 ) for 2 hours . All samples were stained with Hoechst 33342 ( Life Technologies , H3570 ) for 10 min and washed twice with PBS containing 0 . 0001 % Triton X - 100 . Then , the coverslips were mounted onto glass slides . Nikon N - STORM and TIRF imaging and Imaris analysis PTPRA KO mouse SFs were directly plated onto μ - Slide 8 Well ( Ibidi ) coverslips and allowed to grow to confluence in a 24 - well plate . Cells were transfected once they had reached 90 % confluency and starved for 12 to 36 hours after transfection as described above . After starvation , a scratch wound was induced as described above . The wound was allowed to close for 12 hours in high serum medium ( 20 % FBS ) before cell fixation with 4 % PFA . The cells were then per - meabilized by 0 . 2 % Triton - X - 100 and stained with AF647 conjugate anti - FLAG Ab , AF568 conjugate anti - SRC Ab , and phalloidin FITC reagent ( for F - actin ) . The coverslips were then mounted onto slides with molecular probe gold reagent . As outlined in ( 34 ) , cells were imaged using 100× [ 1 . 49 numerical aperture ( NA ) ] Apo TIRF ob - jective with TIRF illumination on a Nikon Ti superresolution mi - croscope . Images were collected on an ANDOR IXON3 Ultra DU897 electron multiplying charge - coupled device ( EMCCD ) camera using the multicolor sequential mode setting in the NIS - El - ements AR software ( Nikon Instruments Inc . , NY ) . The power on the 488 - , 561 - , and 647 - nm lasers was adjusted to 50 % to enable collection of between 100 and 300 molecules per 256 × 256 camera pixel frame in the center of the field at appropriate threshold settings for each channel . Collection was set to 20 , 000 frames , yield - ing 1 million to 2 million molecules , and the superresolution images were reconstructed with the Nikon STORM software . The position of individual molecules was localized with high accuracy by switch - ing them on and off sequentially using the 488 - , 561 - , and 647 - nm lasers at appropriate power settings . The position determined from multiple switching cycles can show a substantial drift over the du - ration of the acquisition . This error was reduced by correcting for sample drift over the course of the experiment by an autocorrelation method based on correlating STORM images reconstructed from 200 to 1000 frames to that from the beginning of the acquisition ( 69 ) . The number of frames used in a set was based on the number of molecules identified , and by default , it was set to 10 , 000 molecules . Displacement was corrected by translational dis - placement in the X - Y direction for two - dimensional ( 2D ) STORM . Axial drift over the course of the acquisition was minimized by en - gaging the Nikon Perfect Focus System . Calibration of chromatic shift ( warp correction ) was carried out using multicolored 100 - nm TetraSpeck beads using minimum density per field of over 100 beads and using the 2D warp calibration feature of the Nikon STORM software . Briefly , a total of 201 images were collected for each of the color channels ( 488 , 561 , and 647 nm ) paired with phal - loidin for F - actin ( AF488 ) , SRC ( AF568 ) , and RPTPα ( AF647 ) , re - spectively , without the cylindrical lens in place . Frames 1 to 20 and frames 182 to 201 were collected at the focal position . Frames 21 to 181 were collected across a range of 1 . 6 μm in 10 - nm steps in the Z ( covering 800 nm above and 800 nm below the focal plane ) . The calibration files generated from this macro ( software feature ) were applied during analysis for the correction of the STORM images . All fixed and stained samples were incubated in the following blinking solution ( STORM buffer ( 69 ) : 50 mM tris ( pH 8 . 0 ) , 10 mM NaCl , 10 % glucose , 0 . 1 M mercaptoethanolamine ( MEA ) , glucose oxidase ( 56 U / ml ) , and catalase ( 340 U / ml ) . The STORM buffer was pre - pared by adding 100 μl of MEA solution and 10 μl of GLOX sample [ 14 mg of glucose oxidase ( from Aspergillus niger - type VII ; Sigma - Aldrich , catalog no . G2133 ) and 1 mg of catalase ( from bovine liver ; Sigma - Aldrich , catalog no . C40 ) dissolved in 250 μl of 10 mM tris and 50 mM NaCl ( pH 8 . 0 ) ] to 890 μl of buffer B [ 50 mM tris , 10 mM NaCl , and 10 % glucose ( pH 8 . 0 ) ] just before imaging . Blinking events were followed for successive frames to ensure single - molecule isolation by filtering out molecules with traces longer than five frames during analysis . Moreover , individual S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Sendo et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabn8668 ( 2023 ) 4 July 2023 14 of 19 molecules were localized using point spread function width filters of 200 to 400 nm based on a 100× ( 1 . 49 NA ) objective , and restrictions were placed on photon count signals associated with camera noise of the ANDOR EMCCD camera ( estimated at 100 intensity units above 0 ) . The data were further filtered on the basis of empirical observation of photon count signals ( peak height when converted to an intensity value ) found in cells versus background staining on the glass slide surface ( generally values above 300 to 700 intensity units above camera noise ) . The precision of the localization during a switching cycle is calculated from these multiple parameters and from photon counts using molecules that are ultimately well sepa - rated in the sample itself ( 70 ) . TIRF microscopy experiments were performed on the same multi - adapted N - STORM system using a 100× ( 1 . 45 NA ) TIRF ob - jective ( Nikon Instruments , Melville , NY ) on a Nikon TE2000U mi - croscope custom - modified with a TIRF illumination module as described ( 69 ) . Images were acquired on a 14 - bit , cooled CCD camera ( Hamamatsu ) controlled through NIS - Elements software . After placing the cells on the stage , the position of the individual laser beams was adjusted with the TIRF illuminator to impinge on the coverslip at an angle to yield a calculated evanescent field depth of 70 to 100 nm for TIRF microscopy modes , staying as close to the lamellipodia to glass surface as possible and maintained for subsequent N - STORM data collection . Cells only at the wound edge with a distinct and characteristic classical migrating phenotype with a ruffling and protruding lamellipodium in the direction of the wound were captured for phalloidin ( green ) , RPTPα ( far red ) , and SRC ( yellow ) before N - STORM imaging to be used in image pro - cessing as references of large biological compartments , like basal stress fibers , ruffles , and leading edges . Images obtained on the N - STORM system were exported as pointillism or localization coordinate map text files , which repre - sent positions of individual blinks that have been localized with high accuracy by switching them on and off using the 488 - , 561 - , and 647 - nm lasers . The localization coordinates were imported into the Imaris software ( Bitplane Inc . ) , where each blink was recon - structed as a sphere ( spot ) on an image grid , its centroid was the central coordinate position in 3D space , and the diameter of the sphere ( spot ) was the localization accuracy error . The wide - field TIRF images were also imported into Imaris as separate channels , aligned , and fitted to overlay with the N - STORM image . This is used to define cellular polarity , compartments , and structures using the lesser resolved original fluorescent signals . Once imported into Imaris , all spots were filtered for a minimum localization accu - racy ( diameter , 0 to 100 nm ) and whether they , between the same population ( RPTPα or SRC ) , are clustered in pairs of three , six , or nine molecules to filter single or lone stray molecules . However , all localizations are considered in calculations to ensure consistency between experiments . Furthermore , all spots created were analyzed using the colocalized spots module in Imaris to mark and score paired spots between separately labeled populations of RPTPα to RPTPα or RPTPα to SRC that lie within a defined distance from each other in 3D space based on their centroid . Fluorescent ( or Förster ) resonance energy transfer methods Cells were plated , transfected , and fixed as described above , fol - lowed by staining with primary , secondary , and direct conjugate Abs . We focused our FRET studies on LEDGE because the growing lamellipodial edge has a limited depth around the cell pe - riphery at approximately 110 to 160 nm ( 71 – 73 ) . Moving inward from the cell edge to the nucleus , where BSTRESS are enriched on different cell planes , the cell thickness in SF cells increases con - siderably ( depending on the cell up to 2000 nm or more ) . The con - focal FRET and FLIM imaging equipment available to us enabled enhanced resolution ( 120 to 140 nm ) on the x - y but not the z plane and thus was only suited to robust assessment of the LEDGE . SEcFRET and pFRET All images were acquired with a Zeiss laser scanning confocal mi - croscope ( LSM ) 880 Airyscan using a 63× ( 1 . 46 NA ) and a 63× ( 1 . 4 NA ) objective using the 32 - channel GaAsP photomultiplier tube ( PMT ) area detector . In the Zen software , the capture method was designed to sequentially capture the donor channel [ 488 exci - tation , 488 and emission , 508 to 535 ( 27 lambda ) ] , raw FRET channel ( excitation , 488 and emission , 588 to 624 ) and acceptor channel ( excitation , 568 and emission , 588 to 624 ) . All 12 - bit images were acquired with Nyquist resolution parameters using optimal pinhole sizes ( pixel size , 0 . 060 × 0 . 060 μm ) and an optimal frame size of 2644 × 2644 . All 12 - bit images were acquired using the full dynamic intensity range ( 0 to 4096 ) that was deter - mined with the population of WT cells having the moderate to brightest signal expression of RPTPα and or SRC . For cFRET imaging , the system consisted of a 45 - mW argon laser ( 458 , 488 , and 514 nm ) , a 10 - mW diode solid - state laser ( 561 nm ) , and a 633 - nm He - Ne laser . System settings were set as constants and defined on the basis of the WT constructs : 1 % laser power for ac - ceptor and 3 % for both raw FRET channel and donor channels ; de - tector signal amplification ( digital gain ) was set to 900 V for all acquisitions , donor , raw FRET , and acceptor . Both donor - acceptor samples and donor - alone as well as acceptor - alone controls were captured for every experiment , and three images were obtained : image 1 , donor excitation to donor emission ; image 2 , acceptor ex - citation to acceptor emission ; and image 3 , donor excitation to ac - ceptor emission , to later incorporate background subtraction and spectral bleed - through correction factors into the raw FRET samples using established automated algorithm methods of analy - sis . Algorithms to remove spectral bleed - through / cross - talk and correct for spectral variations in donor and acceptor channels , au - tofluorescence , background fluorescence , detector , and optical noise are all established components of cFRET methodologies . Using ImageJ , we have automated and scripted our cFRET method developed earlier in both wide - field and confocal platforms ( 40 , 41 , 74 , 75 ) . In addition , all images were also processed to cal - culate FRET efficiencies of all cells at the leading edge using the method of pFRET that was developed and scripted by A . Periasamy ’ s group and incorporated into a complete data pro - cessing software package of ImageJ plugins written in Java ( 42 – 44 , 76 ) . Cells for FRET analysis were selected among the ones expressing relatively equal expression ( intensity range , 700 to 4095 ) of FLAG and HA based on their overall average acquisition mean fluores - cence intensities . All acquisition settings , including laser power , de - tector gain , and laser scan speed and averaging ( pixel dwell time , 1 . 26 μs ) , were the same for all variants and experiments . Final processed cFRET images were further analyzed in Image Pro Premier 10 ( IPP10 ) to define area and polarity of FRET - positive ROIs at the leading edge cell periphery . To automate and define dis - tinct and broad FRET - positive zone groupings for this assay , as was S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Sendo et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabn8668 ( 2023 ) 4 July 2023 15 of 19 previously done ( 40 , 41 ) , images were converted to 8 - bit grayscale , and the FRET - positive zones were auto - outlined using Image Pro Premier software tools ( wand ) . Using this technique , the dynamic range of relevant FRET - positive signal ( compared between FRET methods ) was between 85 and 256 for all samples and was used to outline FRET - positive ROIs that were scored for each quadrant and charted in Excel . The same original raw data were also further pro - cessed in the pFRET software , and % FRET efficiencies were ob - tained for each cFRET sample postprocessed for FRET - positive zone area analysis . apFRET All images were acquired with a Zeiss LSM 880 Airyscan using a 63× ( 1 . 46 NA ) or a 63× ( 1 . 4 NA ) objective and the 32 - channel GaAsP PMT area detector . Using the spectral detector , as outlined in ( 42 ) , donor - alone and acceptor - alone samples were acquired using the 32 - channel spectral detector to establish emission curves that are then incorporated into the inherent online fingerprinting mode to autocorrect for spectral bleed - through . The LSM 880 is designed with acousto - optic tunable filters that can be used to obtain images at a series of discrete 10 - nm wavelength bands , generating lambda stacks . The spectral signatures for the individual 488 and 568 fluo - rophores and background signals were obtained from these lambda stacks , and linear unmixing was used within the Zen software to segregate mixed ( overlapping ) fluorescent signals to obtain the spatial contribution for each fluorophore known as emission online fingerprinting . FRET efficiency using apFRET was calculated by measuring the difference between the quenched donor signal in the presence of the acceptor and the dequenched donor signal after the acceptor has been bleached ( 42 , 45 , 46 , 77 , 78 ) . FRET efficiency was defined over a time regimen of 30 cycles ( roughly 300 s ) after bleaching , after four unbleached scans were acquired to establish a stable base - line and stable fluorescence at each ROI selected . The Software module in Zen automatically tracked the mean changes in fluores - cence intensity within the ROIs and was thus used to calculate the % FRET efficiency as outlined previously by others . Briefly , this was mathematically based on the percentage of donor fluorescence re - covered between t = 0 ( the average of four unbleached scans ) and the plateau peak of donor fluorescent recovery at approximately t = 15 m later ( 42 , 45 , 46 , 77 , 78 ) . Regions far away from the leading edge that may dilute the overall FRET efficiency at the leading edge were omitted . FLIM - FRET All the time - domain FLIM images were acquired with a Leica time - correlated single - photon counting ( TCSPC ) SP8X Fast Lifetime Contrast ( FALCON ) system from Leica Microsystems ( Mannheim , Germany ) . This integrated TCSPC - FLIM system uses a confocal scan head with field - programmable gated array electronics , pulsed laser excitation , and fast , spectral single - photon counting detectors . The signals of both laser pulses and photon arrival pulses from each detector were digitized at very high speed with a temporal resolution of 97 ps . These direct measurements from the differences in arrival times between detection and excitation pulses were rendered di - rectly online as “ fast FLIM ” images , in a time - resolved manner . Donor alone was imaged from SFs labeled with anti - HA ( AF488 ; control ) , whereas donor and acceptor were imaged from SFs labeled with anti - HA ( AF488 ) and anti - FLAG ( AF568 ; FRET pair ) . Pro - longed gold - mounted samples were imaged under a 100× ( 1 . 4 NA ) oil immersion objective . Donor excitation was achieved using a white light pulsed laser ( laser power at 50 % ; 1 . 5 to 2 mW per line ) tuned at 40 MHz coupled with single - photon counting electronics and subsequently detected by highly sensitive hybrid in - ternal detectors in photon counting mode . Collection parameters included the following : acquiring 8 - bit ( all converted internally to 16 - bit final image ) images pixel by pixel ( frame size , 512 × 512 ) with an emission collection detection range of 498 to 584 nm , a detector gain set at 100 , and scan speed at 400 Hz . Frame acquisition aver - aging was 100 to accumulate enough photons at the cell periphery and at lamellipodia ruffling edges . As described in detail in ( 79 , 80 ) , to remove artifacts caused by noise or photobleaching and insuffi - cient signal - to - noise ratio , cells with negligible amounts of bleach - ing and at least 200 to 1000 photons per pixel were only allowed in the analysis . The acquired fluorescence decay of each pixel was de - convoluted with the instrument response function ( IRF ) and then postprocessed by being fitted with two - exponential theoretical models using Leica Application Suite X from Leica Microsystems . Using the Leica Application suite , 2D phasor plot analysis loops were used to segregate single donor populations from FLIM - FRET populations ( 47 , 49 , 81 ) . Manders overlap coefficient analysis Correlation coefficients for spatial overlap were generated using the Zen Pro ( Zeiss ) and / or IPP10 ( media Cybernetics ) software coloc - alization modules . Briefly , as described in detail in ( 82 ) , cells were auto - outlined , and thresholds of real signal above autofluorescence and background signals were defined by secondary Abs alone on separate samples . For all 12 - bit images obtained at Nyquist resolu - tion ( frame size , 2644 × 2644 ) , previously defined minimum fluo - rescent thresholds were input into Zen or IPP10 ; two fluorescent channels signals were selected , and the software automatically cal - culated pixel intensity spatial overlap coefficients between them ( both Manders and Pearson were scored ) . SRC inhibitor treatment The SRC inhibitor SU6656 ( S7774 ) was purchased from Selleck - chem . com . After the scratch wound , αKO SFs transfected with a plasmid encoding WT RPTPα - HA were cultured in 20 % FBS DMEM for 12 hours and incubated with 5 μM of SU6656 or di - methyl sulfoxide ( DMSO ) for additional 30 min and then fixed with 4 % PFA . Transwell migration assay Confluent SFs after transfection were harvested by light trypsin di - gestion and seeded at 1 × 10 4 to 2 . 5 × 10 4 cells in 100 μl of serum - free DMEM containing 0 . 5 % BSA in the upper chamber of a 6 . 5 - mm - diameter Transwell polycarbonate culture insert ( Costar ) with a pore size of 8 μm . Inserts were placed in 24 - well plates with 600 μl of DMEM containing 5 % FBS . The assay plates were incubated for 4 hours , after which the Transwell inserts were removed , and the upper chamber was gently wiped with a cotton swab to remove nonmigrating cells . Transwell membranes were fixed for 10 min in prechilled ( − 80°C ) methanol and stained for 10 min in 0 . 5 % crystal violet in 25 % methanol . Cells were then rinsed and imaged using a Motic AE2000 microscope at 10× mag - nification . Cell migration was quantified by counting four random fields . S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Sendo et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabn8668 ( 2023 ) 4 July 2023 16 of 19 Wound healing assay αKO SFs were plated into six - well plates and allowed to grow to 90 % confluency before transfection as described above . Thirty - six hours after transfection , cells were starved for 12 hours , and a scratch wound was induced by drawing a micropipette tip through the middle of the coverslip . Pictures of the wound were acquired , and the distance between the scratch margins was marked to constitute the 0 - hour time point . The wound was allowed to heal for 24 hours in high serum ( 20 % FBS ) medium before acquiring another set of pictures of the same wound for the 24 - hour time point . Slides were then fixed and stained with crystal violet as described above , and cells were visualized using a Motic AE2000 microscope at 4× mag - nification . Each scratch wound was scored at four separate locations by ImageJ distance quantification . SF treatment with 2F8 Ab For FRET microscopy experiments , 500 nM Ab isolated from 2F8 hybridoma supernatant in 1 % FBS DMEM was added to the wells after removing 20 % FBS DMEM and incubated for 2 hours before fixation . As a control , isotype IgG from Armenian hamster ( BioL - egend , 400902 ) or no Ab was used . For Transwell migration assay and wound healing assay , 500 to 1000 nM Ab was added 24 hours before analysis . Quantitative real - time polymerase chain reaction Total RNA was extracted by RNeasy Plus Mini Kit ( QIAGEN , 74136 ) according to the manufacturer ’ s protocol . Mouse primers were obtained from QIAGEN : PTPRA ( PPM34001A ) and GAPDH ( PPM02946E ) . Quantitative real - time polymerase chain reaction was performed on cDNA synthesized with 2720 Thermal Cycler ( Applied Biosystems ) and evaluated on the Bio - Rad CFX384 Real - Time System . Reactions were measured in duplicate , and data were normalized to the expression levels of the housekeeping gene GapdhGAPDH . Western blotting and protein gel staining Cells were lysed in radioimmunoprecipitation assay ( RIPA ) buffer ( Cell Signaling Technology , 9806S ) containing protease and phos - phatase inhibitor ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , A32961 ) , and lysates were sonicated and centrifuged ( 13 , 200 rpm at 4°C for 20 min ) . The samples were resuspended in SDS denaturing buffer ( 1× Laemmli sample buffer , 5 % β - mercaptoethanol , and 2 . 05 % SDS ) and loaded onto SDS – polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis gels . The separated proteins in the gel were transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes at 40 V at 60°C for 1 . 5 hours . The membrane was blocked with 5 % nonfat milk in tris - buffered saline solution for 1 hour . Primary Ab was diluted 1 : 1000 and incubated overnight , and secondary Ab was diluted 1 : 3000 or 1 : 5000 and incubated for 1 hour . Luminescence detection was performed by enhanced chemiluminescence ( Immobilon Crescendo Western HRP Sub - strate ; Millipore , WBLUR0500 ) on a Syngene image analyzer ( G : BOX ) . For protein gel staining , protein - containing SDS - PAGE gels were stained with Coomassie Protein Assay Reagent ( Thermo Scientific , 1856209 ) . Coimmunoprecipitation HEK 293T cells transfected with plasmids encoding WT RPTPα - HA or untagged RPTPα were lysed in RIPA buffer to get the lysate . Lysates were subjected to immunoprecipitation performed with anti - SRC Ab and followed by Western blotting with anti - RPTPα Ab . Twenty microliters of the lysate was used as an input control . Statistical analysis All statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 9 software . Normality of data distribution was assessed using the Shapiro - Wilk test . Statistical comparisons between two groups were performed using Mann - Whitney or the t test . For multiple comparisons , the Kruskal - Wallis test followed by corrected Dunn ’ s test was used except for comparisons of spectral FRET data ( normally distributed data ) where ordinary one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) followed by Dunnett ’ s multiple comparison test calculated on the area under curve ( AUC ) was used . For FRET comparisons between two groups , we used t test . P values less than 0 . 05 were considered significant . Supplementary Materials This PDF file includes : Figs . S1 to S9 Other Supplementary Material for this manuscript includes the following : MDAR Reproducibility Checklist View / request a protocol for this paper from Bio - protocol . REFERENCES AND NOTES 1 . A . Alonso , J . Sasin , N . Bottini , I . Friedberg , I . Friedberg , A . Osterman , A . Godzik , T . Hunter , J . Dixon , T . Mustelin , Protein tyrosine phosphatases in the human genome . Cell 117 , 699 – 711 ( 2004 ) . 2 . Y . Wang , C . J . Pallen , The receptor - like protein tyrosine phosphatase HPTP alpha has two active catalytic domains with distinct substrate specificities . EMBO J . 10 , 3231 – 3237 ( 1991 ) . 3 . K . L . Lim , D . S . Lai , M . B . Kalousek , Y . Wang , C . J . Pallen , Kinetic analysis of two closely related receptor - like protein - tyrosine - phosphatases , PTP alpha and PTP epsilon . Eur . J . Biochem . 245 , 693 – 700 ( 1997 ) . 4 . C . Blanchetot , J . den Hertog , Multiple interactions between receptor protein - tyrosine phosphatase ( RPTP ) alpha and membrane - distal protein - tyrosine phosphatase domains of various RPTPs . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 12446 – 12452 ( 2000 ) . 5 . C . Blanchetot , L . G . Tertoolen , J . den Hertog , Regulation of receptor protein - tyrosine phosphatase alpha by oxidative stress . EMBO J . 21 , 493 – 503 ( 2002 ) . 6 . J . Yang , A . Groen , S . Lemeer , A . Jans , M . Slijper , S . M . Roe , J . den Hertog , D . Barford , Re - versible oxidation of the membrane distal domain of receptor PTPalpha is mediated by a cyclic sulfenamide . Biochemistry 46 , 709 – 719 ( 2007 ) . 7 . Y . Wen , S . Yang , K . Wakabayashi , M . N . D . Svensson , S . M . Stanford , E . Santelli , N . Bottini , RPTPα phosphatase activity is allosterically regulated by the membrane - distal catalytic domain . J . Biol . Chem . 295 , 4923 – 4936 ( 2020 ) . 8 . R . Lammers , M . M . Lerch , A . Ullrich , The carboxyl - terminal tyrosine residue of protein - ty - rosine phosphatase alpha mediates association with focal adhesion plaques . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 3391 – 3396 ( 2000 ) . 9 . J . den Hertog , C . E . Pals , M . P . Peppelenbosch , L . G . Tertoolen , S . W . de Laat , W . Kruijer , Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase alpha activates pp60c - src and is involved in neu - ronal differentiation . EMBO J . 12 , 3789 – 3798 ( 1993 ) . 10 . X . M . Zheng , R . J . Resnick , D . Shalloway , A phosphotyrosine displacement mechanism for activation of Src by PTPalpha . EMBO J . 19 , 964 – 978 ( 2000 ) . 11 . A . M . Vacaru , J . den Hertog , Serine dephosphorylation of receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase alpha in mitosis induces Src binding and activation . Mol . Cell . Biol . 30 , 2850 – 2861 ( 2010 ) . 12 . A . Elson , Stepping out of the shadows : Oncogenic and tumor - promoting protein tyrosine phosphatases . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 96 , 135 – 147 ( 2018 ) . S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Sendo et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabn8668 ( 2023 ) 4 July 2023 17 of 19 13 . C . Lin , S . Xin , X . Huang , F . Zhang , PTPRA facilitates cancer growth and migration via the TNF - alpha - mediated PTPRA - NF - kappaB pathway in MCF - 7 breast cancer cells . Oncol . Lett . 20 , 131 ( 2020 ) . 14 . M . Chen , S . C . Chen , C . J . Pallen , Integrin - induced tyrosine phosphorylation of protein - tyrosine phosphatase - alpha is required for cytoskeletal reorganization and cell migration . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 11972 – 11980 ( 2006 ) . 15 . M . T . Herrera Abreu , P . Castellanos Penton , V . Kwok , E . Vachon , D . Shalloway , L . Vidali , W . Lee , C . A . McCulloch , G . P . Downey , Tyrosine phosphatase PTPalpha regulates focal adhesion remodeling through Rac1 activation . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 294 , C931 – C944 ( 2008 ) . 16 . Y . Aschner , A . P . Khalifah , N . Briones , C . Yamashita , L . Dolgonos , S . K . Young , M . N . Campbell , D . W . H . Riches , E . F . Redente , W . J . Janssen , P . M . Henson , J . Sap , N . Vacaresse , A . Kapus , C . A . G . McCulloch , R . L . Zemans , G . P . Downey , Protein tyrosine phosphatase α mediates profibrotic signaling in lung fibroblasts through TGF - β responsiveness . Am . J . Pathol . 184 , 1489 – 1502 ( 2014 ) . 17 . Y . Aschner , M . Nelson , M . Brenner , H . Roybal , K . Beke , C . Meador , D . Foster , K . A . Correll , P . R . Reynolds , K . Anderson , E . F . Redente , J . Matsuda , D . W . H . Riches , S . D . Groshong , A . Pozzi , J . Sap , Q . Wang , D . Rajshankar , C . A . G . McCulloch , R . L . Zemans , G . P . Downey , Protein tyrosine phosphatase - α amplifies transforming growth factor - β - dependent profi - brotic signaling in lung fibroblasts . Am . J . Physiol . Lung Cell . Mol . Physiol . 319 , L294 – L311 ( 2020 ) . 18 . S . M . Stanford , M . N . D . Svensson , C . Sacchetti , C . A . Pilo , D . J . Wu , W . B . Kiosses , A . Hellvard , B . Bergum , G . R . A . Muench , C . Elly , Y . C . Liu , J . den Hertog , A . Elson , J . Sap , P . Mydel , D . L . Boyle , M . Corr , G . S . Firestein , N . Bottini , Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase α - mediated enhancement of rheumatoid synovial fibroblast signaling and promotion of arthritis in mice . Arthritis Rheumatol . 68 , 359 – 369 ( 2016 ) . 19 . N . Krishnan , D . Koveal , D . H . Miller , B . Xue , S . D . Akshinthala , J . Kragelj , M . R . Jensen , C . M . Gauss , R . Page , M . Blackledge , S . K . Muthuswamy , W . Peti , N . K . Tonks , Targeting the disordered C terminus of PTP1B with an allosteric inhibitor . Nat . Chem . Biol . 10 , 558 – 566 ( 2014 ) . 20 . Y . - N . P . Chen , M . J . La Marche , H . M . Chan , P . Fekkes , J . Garcia - Fortanet , M . G . Acker , B . Antonakos , C . H . - T . Chen , Z . Chen , V . G . Cooke , J . R . Dobson , Z . Deng , F . Fei , B . Firestone , M . Fodor , C . Fridrich , H . Gao , D . Grunenfelder , H . - X . Hao , J . Jacob , S . Ho , K . Hsiao , Z . B . Kang , R . Karki , M . Kato , J . Larrow , L . R . La Bonte , F . Lenoir , G . Liu , S . Liu , D . Majumdar , M . J . Meyer , M . Palermo , L . Perez , M . Pu , E . Price , C . Quinn , S . Shakya , M . D . Shultz , J . Slisz , K . Venkatesan , P . Wang , M . Warmuth , S . Williams , G . Yang , J . Yuan , J . - H . Zhang , P . Zhu , T . Ramsey , N . J . Keen , W . R . Sellers , T . Stams , P . D . Fortin , Allosteric inhibition of SHP2 phosphatase inhibits cancers driven by receptor tyrosine kinases . Nature 535 , 148 – 152 ( 2016 ) . 21 . S . M . Stanford , N . Bottini , Targeting tyrosine phosphatases : Time to end the stigma . Trends Pharmacol . Sci . 38 , 524 – 540 ( 2017 ) . 22 . A . M . Bilwes , J . den Hertog , T . Hunter , J . P . Noel , Structural basis for inhibition of receptor protein - tyrosine phosphatase - alpha by dimerization . Nature 382 , 555 – 559 ( 1996 ) . 23 . G . Jiang , J . den Hertog , J . Su , J . Noel , J . Sap , T . Hunter , Dimerization inhibits the activity of receptor - like protein - tyrosine phosphatase - alpha . Nature 401 , 606 – 610 ( 1999 ) . 24 . G . Jiang , J . den Hertog , T . Hunter , Receptor - like protein tyrosine phosphatase alpha ho - modimerizes on the cell surface . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 , 5917 – 5929 ( 2000 ) . 25 . R . Majeti , A . M . Bilwes , J . P . Noel , T . Hunter , A . Weiss , Dimerization - induced inhibition of receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase function through an inhibitory wedge . Science 279 , 88 – 91 ( 1998 ) . 26 . Z . Xu , A . Weiss , Negative regulation of CD45 by differential homodimerization of the al - ternatively spliced isoforms . Nat . Immunol . 3 , 764 – 771 ( 2002 ) . 27 . H . J . Nam , F . Poy , N . X . Krueger , H . Saito , C . A . Frederick , Crystal structure of the tandem phosphatase domains of RPTP LAR . Cell 97 , 449 – 457 ( 1999 ) . 28 . H . J . Nam , F . Poy , H . Saito , C . A . Frederick , Structural basis for the function and regulation of the receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase CD45 . J . Exp . Med . 201 , 441 – 452 ( 2005 ) . 29 . S . C . Almo , J . B . Bonanno , J . M . Sauder , S . Emtage , T . P . Dilorenzo , V . Malashkevich , S . R . Wasserman , S . Swaminathan , S . Eswaramoorthy , R . Agarwal , D . Kumaran , M . Madegowda , S . Ragumani , Y . Patskovsky , J . Alvarado , U . A . Ramagopal , J . Faber - Barata , M . R . Chance , A . Sali , A . Fiser , Z . Y . Zhang , D . S . Lawrence , S . K . Burley , Structural genomics of protein phosphatases . J . Struct . Funct . Genomics 8 , 121 – 140 ( 2007 ) . 30 . A . J . Barr , E . Ugochukwu , W . H . Lee , O . N . F . King , P . Filippakopoulos , I . Alfano , P . Savitsky , N . A . Burgess - Brown , S . Müller , S . Knapp , Large - scale structural analysis of the classical human protein tyrosine phosphatome . Cell 136 , 352 – 363 ( 2009 ) . 31 . M . L . Hermiston , J . Zikherman , A . L . Tan , V . C . Lam , N . M . Cresalia , N . Oksenberg , N . Goren , D . Brassat , J . R . Oksenberg , A . Weiss , Differential impact of the CD45 juxtamembrane wedge on central and peripheral T cell receptor responses . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 106 , 546 – 551 ( 2009 ) . 32 . A . Fujikawa , H . Sugawara , N . Tanga , K . Ishii , K . Kuboyama , S . Uchiyama , R . Suzuki , M . Noda , A head - to - toe dimerization has physiological relevance for ligand - induced inactivation of protein tyrosine receptor type Z . J . Biol . Chem . 294 , 14953 – 14965 ( 2019 ) . 33 . L . G . Tertoolen , C . Blanchetot , G . Jiang , J . Overvoorde , T . W . Gadella Jr . , T . Hunter , J . den Hertog , Dimerization of receptor protein - tyrosine phosphatase alpha in living cells . BMC Cell Biol . 2 , 8 ( 2001 ) . 34 . Z . Fan , W . B . Kiosses , H . Sun , M . Orecchioni , Y . Ghosheh , D . M . Zajonc , M . A . Arnaout , E . Gutierrez , A . Groisman , M . H . Ginsberg , K . Ley , High - affinity bent β2 - integrin molecules in arresting neutrophils face each other through binding to ICAMs in cis . Cell Rep . 26 , 119 – 130 . e5 ( 2019 ) . 35 . L . J . Harris , S . B . Larson , K . W . Hasel , A . McPherson , Refined structure of an intact IgG2a monoclonal antibody . Biochemistry 36 , 1581 – 1597 ( 1997 ) . 36 . E . D . Sonnenburg , A . Bilwes , T . Hunter , J . P . Noel , The structure of the membrane distal phosphatase domain of RPTPalpha reveals interdomain flexibility and an SH2 domain in - teraction region . Biochemistry 42 , 7904 – 7914 ( 2003 ) . 37 . S . W . Cowan - Jacob , G . Fendrich , P . W . Manley , W . Jahnke , D . Fabbro , J . Liebetanz , T . Meyer , The crystal structure of a c - Src complex in an active conformation suggests possible steps in c - Src activation . Structure 13 , 861 – 871 ( 2005 ) . 38 . D . S . Spassov , A . Ruiz - Saenz , A . Piple , M . M . Moasser , A dimerization function in the in - trinsically disordered N - terminal region of Src . Cell Rep . 25 , 449 – 463 . e4 ( 2018 ) . 39 . D . Shrestha , A . Jenei , P . Nagy , G . Vereb , J . Szollosi , Understanding FRET as a research tool for cellular studies . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 16 , 6718 – 6756 ( 2015 ) . 40 . M . A . Del Pozo , W . B . Kiosses , N . B . Alderson , N . Meller , K . M . Hahn , M . A . Schwartz , Integrins regulate GTP - Rac localized effector interactions through dissociation of Rho - GDI . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 232 – 239 ( 2002 ) . 41 . E . Tzima , M . del Pozo , W . B . Kiosses , S . A . Mohamed , S . Li , S . Chien , M . A . Schwartz , Acti - vation of Rac1 by shear stress in endothelial cells mediates both cytoskeletal reorganiza - tion and effects on gene expression . EMBO J . 21 , 6791 – 6800 ( 2002 ) . 42 . Y . Chen , J . P . Mauldin , R . N . Day , A . Periasamy , Characterization of spectral FRET imaging microscopy for monitoring nuclear protein interactions . J . Microsc . 228 , 139 – 152 ( 2007 ) . 43 . A . Periasamy , H . Wallrabe , Y . Chen , M . Barroso , Chapter 22 : Quantitation of protein - protein interactions : confocal FRET microscopy . Methods Cell Biol . 89 , 569 – 598 ( 2008 ) . 44 . Y . Sun , C . Rombola , V . Jyothikumar , A . Periasamy , Förster resonance energy transfer mi - croscopy and spectroscopy for localizing protein - protein interactions in living cells . Cy - tometry A 83 , 780 – 793 ( 2013 ) . 45 . P . I . Bastiaens , T . M . Jovin , Microspectroscopic imaging tracks the intracellular processing of a signal transduction protein : Fluorescent - labeled protein kinase C beta I . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 93 , 8407 – 8412 ( 1996 ) . 46 . T . Zal , N . R . Gascoigne , Photobleaching - corrected FRET efficiency imaging of live cells . Biophys . J . 86 , 3923 – 3939 ( 2004 ) . 47 . M . A . Digman , V . R . Caiolfa , M . Zamai , E . Gratton , The phasor approach to fluorescence lifetime imaging analysis . Biophys . J . 94 , L14 – L16 ( 2008 ) . 48 . R . N . Day , Measuring protein interactions using Förster resonance energy transfer and fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy . Methods 66 , 200 – 207 ( 2014 ) . 49 . S . Ranjit , L . Malacrida , D . M . Jameson , E . Gratton , Fit - free analysis of fluorescence lifetime imaging data using the phasor approach . Nat . Protoc . 13 , 1979 – 2004 ( 2018 ) . 50 . S . Tehrani , N . Tomasevic , S . Weed , R . Sakowicz , J . A . Cooper , Src phosphorylation of cor - tactin enhances actin assembly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 104 , 11933 – 11938 ( 2007 ) . 51 . Y . He , Y . Ren , B . Wu , B . Decourt , A . C . Lee , A . Taylor , D . M . Suter , Src and cortactin promote lamellipodia protrusion and filopodia formation and stability in growth cones . Mol . Biol . Cell 26 , 3229 – 3244 ( 2015 ) . 52 . M . Truffi , V . Dubreuil , X . Liang , N . Vacaresse , F . Nigon , S . P . Han , A . S . Yap , G . A . Gomez , J . Sap , RPTPα controls epithelial adherens junctions , linking E - cadherin engagement to c - Src - mediated phosphorylation of cortactin . J . Cell Sci . 127 , 2420 – 2432 ( 2014 ) . 53 . S . Y . Cheng , G . Sun , D . D . Schlaepfer , C . J . Pallen , Grb2 promotes integrin - induced focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) autophosphorylation and directs the phosphorylation of protein tyrosine phosphatase α by the Src - FAK kinase complex . Mol . Cell . Biol . 34 , 348 – 361 ( 2014 ) . 54 . J . Su , M . Muranjan , J . Sap , Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase alpha activates Src - family kinases and controls integrin - mediated responses in fibroblasts . Curr . Biol . 9 , 505 – 511 ( 1999 ) . 55 . K . M . Doody , S . M . Stanford , C . Sacchetti , M . N . D . Svensson , C . H . Coles , N . Mitakidis , W . B . Kiosses , B . Bartok , C . Fos , E . Cory , R . L . Sah , R . Liu - Bryan , D . L . Boyle , H . A . Arnett , T . Mustelin , M . Corr , J . D . Esko , M . L . Tremblay , G . S . Firestein , A . R . Aricescu , N . Bottini , Targeting phosphatase - dependent proteoglycan switch for rheumatoid arthritis therapy . Sci . Transl . Med . 7 , 288ra276 ( 2015 ) . 56 . Y . Xie , S . M . Massa , S . E . Ensslen - Craig , D . L . Major , T . Yang , M . A . Tisi , V . D . Derevyanny , W . O . Runge , B . P . Mehta , L . A . Moore , S . M . Brady - Kalnay , F . M . Longo , Protein - tyrosine phosphatase ( PTP ) wedge domain peptides : A novel approach for inhibition of PTP func - tion and augmentation of protein - tyrosine kinase function . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 16482 – 16492 ( 2006 ) . S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Sendo et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabn8668 ( 2023 ) 4 July 2023 18 of 19 57 . H . C . Matozo , M . A . M . Santos , M . de Oliveira Neto , L . Bleicher , L . M . T . R . Lima , R . Iuliano , A . Fusco , I . Polikarpov , Low - resolution structure and fluorescence anisotropy analysis of protein tyrosine phosphatase eta catalytic domain . Biophys . J . 92 , 4424 – 4432 ( 2007 ) . 58 . H . Ran , R . Tsutsumi , T . Araki , B . G . Neel , Sticking it to cancer with molecular glue for SHP2 . Cancer Cell 30 , 194 – 196 ( 2016 ) . 59 . N . Krishnan , K . F . Konidaris , G . Gasser , N . K . Tonks , A potent , selective , and orally bioa - vailable inhibitor of the protein - tyrosine phosphatase PTP1B improves insulin and leptin signaling in animal models . J . Biol . Chem . 293 , 1517 – 1525 ( 2018 ) . 60 . Y . Zhang , M . Roos , H . Himburg , C . M . Termini , M . Quarmyne , M . Li , L . Zhao , J . Kan , T . Fang , X . Yan , K . Pohl , E . Diers , H . Jin Gim , R . Damoiseaux , J . Whitelegge , W . McBride , M . E . Jung , J . P . Chute , PTPσ inhibitors promote hematopoietic stem cell regeneration . Nat . Commun . 10 , 3667 ( 2019 ) . 61 . N . Bottini , G . S . Firestein , Duality of fibroblast - like synoviocytes in RA : Passive responders and imprinted aggressors . Nat . Rev . Rheumatol . 9 , 24 – 33 ( 2013 ) . 62 . M . N . D . Svensson , M . Zoccheddu , S . Yang , G . Nygaard , C . Secchi , K . M . Doody , K . Slowikowski , F . Mizoguchi , F . Humby , R . Hands , E . Santelli , C . Sacchetti , K . Wakabayashi , D . J . Wu , C . Barback , R . Ai , W . Wang , G . P . Sims , P . Mydel , T . Kasama , D . L . Boyle , F . Galimi , D . Vera , M . L . Tremblay , S . Raychaudhuri , M . B . Brenner , G . S . Firestein , C . Pitzalis , A . K . H . Ekwall , S . M . Stanford , N . Bottini , Synoviocyte - targeted therapy synergizes with TNF inhibition in arthritis reversal . Sci . Adv . 6 , eaba4353 ( 2020 ) . 63 . Z . Yao , I . Stagljar , Multiple functions of protein phosphatases in receptor tyrosine kinase signaling revealed by interactome analysis . Mol . Cell . Oncol . 4 , e1297101 ( 2017 ) . 64 . J . den Hertog , S . Tracy , T . Hunter , Phosphorylation of receptor protein - tyrosine phos - phatase alpha on Tyr789 , a binding site for the SH3 - SH2 - SH3 adaptor protein GRB - 2 in vivo . EMBO J . 13 , 3020 – 3032 ( 1994 ) . 65 . A . M . Vacaru , J . den Hertog , Catalytically active membrane - distal phosphatase domain of receptor protein - tyrosine phosphatase alpha is required for Src activation . FEBS J . 277 , 1562 – 1570 ( 2010 ) . 66 . Y . Cohen - Sharir , Y . Kuperman , D . Apelblat , J . D . Hertog , I . Spiegel , H . Knobler , A . Elson , Protein tyrosine phosphatase alpha inhibits hypothalamic leptin receptor signaling and regulates body weight in vivo . FASEB J . 33 , 5101 – 5111 ( 2019 ) . 67 . M . Guma , L . Ronacher , R . Liu - Bryan , S . Takai , M . Karin , M . Corr , Caspase 1 - independent activation of interleukin - 1beta in neutrophil - predominant inflammation . Arthritis Rheum . 60 , 3642 – 3650 ( 2009 ) . 68 . P . Emsley , B . Lohkamp , W . G . Scott , K . Cowtan , Features and development of Coot . Acta Crystallogr . D Biol . Crystallogr . 66 , 486 – 501 ( 2010 ) . 69 . J . L . Johnson , K . Pestonjamasp , W . B . Kiosses , S . D . Catz , Super - resolution microscopy and particle - tracking approaches for the study of vesicular trafficking in primary neutrophils . Methods Mol . Biol . 2233 , 193 – 202 ( 2021 ) . 70 . A . Marki , K . Buscher , C . Lorenzini , M . Meyer , R . Saigusa , Z . Fan , Y . T . Yeh , N . Hartmann , J . M . Dan , W . B . Kiosses , G . J . Golden , R . Ganesan , H . Winkels , M . Orecchioni , S . McArdle , Z . Mikulski , Y . Altman , J . Bui , M . Kronenberg , S . Chien , J . D . Esko , V . Nizet , D . Smalley , J . Roth , K . Ley , Elongated neutrophil - derived structures are blood - borne microparticles formed by rolling neutrophils during sepsis . J . Exp . Med . 218 , e20200551 ( 2021 ) . 71 . M . Abercrombie , J . E . Heaysman , S . M . Pegrum , The locomotion of fibroblasts in culture . IV . Electron microscopy of the leading lamella . Exp . Cell Res . 67 , 359 – 367 ( 1971 ) . 72 . V . C . Abraham , V . Krishnamurthi , D . L . Taylor , F . Lanni , The actin - based nanomachine at the leading edge of migrating cells . Biophys . J . 77 , 1721 – 1732 ( 1999 ) . 73 . E . Atilgan , D . Wirtz , S . X . Sun , Morphology of the lamellipodium and organization of actin filaments at the leading edge of crawling cells . Biophys . J . 89 , 3589 – 3602 ( 2005 ) . 74 . V . S . Kraynov , C . Chamberlain , G . M . Bokoch , M . A . Schwartz , S . Slabaugh , K . M . Hahn , Lo - calized Rac activation dynamics visualized in living cells . Science 290 , 333 – 337 ( 2000 ) . 75 . C . E . Chamberlain , V . S . Kraynov , K . M . Hahn , Imaging spatiotemporal dynamics of Rac activation in vivo with FLAIR . Methods Enzymol . 325 , 389 – 400 ( 2000 ) . 76 . M . Elangovan , H . Wallrabe , Y . Chen , R . N . Day , M . Barroso , A . Periasamy , Characterization of one - and two - photon excitation fluorescence resonance energy transfer microscopy . Methods 29 , 58 – 73 ( 2003 ) . 77 . F . S . Wouters , P . I . Bastiaens , K . W . Wirtz , T . M . Jovin , FRET microscopy demonstrates mo - lecular association of non - specific lipid transfer protein ( nsL - TP ) with fatty acid oxidation enzymes in peroxisomes . EMBO J . 17 , 7179 – 7189 ( 1998 ) . 78 . R . N . Day , A . Periasamy , F . Schaufele , Fluorescence resonance energy transfer microscopy of localized protein interactions in the living cell nucleus . Methods 25 , 4 – 18 ( 2001 ) . 79 . I . Carlon - Andres , S . Padilla - Parra , Quantitative FRET - FLIM - BlaM to assess the extent of HIV - 1 fusion in live cells . Viruses 12 , 206 ( 2020 ) . 80 . C . A . Coomer , I . Carlon - Andres , M . Iliopoulou , M . L . Dustin , E . B . Compeer , A . A . Compton , S . Padilla - Parra , Single - cell glycolytic activity regulates membrane tension and HIV - 1 fusion . PLOS Pathog . 16 , e1008359 ( 2020 ) . 81 . Y . Sun , R . N . Day , A . Periasamy , Investigating protein - protein interactions in living cells using fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy . Nat . Protoc . 6 , 1324 – 1340 ( 2011 ) . 82 . M . A . Benkahla , S . Sabouri , W . B . Kiosses , S . Rajendran , E . Quesada - Masachs , M . G . von Herrath , HLA class I hyper - expression unmasks beta cells but not alpha cells to the immune system in pre - diabetes . J . Autoimmun . 119 , 102628 ( 2021 ) . Acknowledgments : We wish to thank K . Pestonjamasp , K . Wang , and M . Lee for expert technical assistance . Funding : This study was supported by NIH grant AR066053 and a grant from Roche ( to N . B . ) . D . J . W . was supported by NIH Training Grant T32 AR064194 . We wish to acknowledge support from the NIAMS MARC Center at UCSD through grant P30AR073761 and grant S10OD021831 to La Jolla Institute for Immunology Imaging core facility . Author contributions : S . S . , W . B . K . , D . J . W . , D . W . K . L . , and A . J . V . contributed to acquisition and analysis of data . L . L . led the statistical analysis . S . Y . , G . P . D . , and E . S . helped with design , performance , and analysis of experiments . Y . A . and G . P . D . provided a critical reagent . S . S . , W . B . K . , D . J . W . , and N . B . contributed to study conception and design . S . S . , W . B . K . , and N . B contributed to interpretation of data and wrote the manuscript . All authors reviewed and provided input on the final version of the manuscript . Competing interests : N . B . is listed as an inventor on U . S . patent 10 , 604 , 585 ( assigned to the La Jolla Institute for Immunology ) and on patent application PCT / US2022 / 074340 ( assigned to the University of California San Diego ) , which are related to the findings of this study . N . B . has equity interests in Knoubis Bio , a company that may potentially benefit from the research results . The terms of this arrangement have been reviewed and approved by the University of California San Diego in accordance with its conflict of interest policies . The other authors have no known conflict of interest related to the studies described in this manuscript . Data and materials availability : All data supporting the findings of this study are found within the paper and its Supplementary Materials . The original data related to the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request . Submitted 25 December 2021 Resubmitted 16 October 2022 Accepted 15 June 2023 Published 4 July 2023 10 . 1126 / scisignal . abn8668 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Sendo et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabn8668 ( 2023 ) 4 July 2023 19 of 19