Mechanics of the brain : perspectives , challenges , and opportunities Citation for published version ( APA ) : Goriely , A . , Geers , M . G . D . , Holzapfel , G . A . , Jayamohan , J . , Jerusalem , A . , Sivaloganathan , S . , . . . Kuhl , E . ( 2015 ) . Mechanics of the brain : perspectives , challenges , and opportunities . Biomechanics and Modeling in Mechanobiology , 14 ( 5 ) , 931 - 965 . DOI : 10 . 1007 / s10237 - 015 - 0662 - 4 DOI : 10 . 1007 / s10237 - 015 - 0662 - 4 Document status and date : Published : 01 / 01 / 2015 Document Version : Publisher’s PDF , also known as Version of Record ( includes final page , issue and volume numbers ) Please check the document version of this publication : • A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer - review . There can be important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record . People interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication , or visit the DOI to the publisher ' s website . • The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review . • The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume , issue and page numbers . Link to publication General rights Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights . • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research . • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit - making activity or commercial gain • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal . If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act , indicated by the “Taverne” license above , please follow below link for the End User Agreement : www . tue . nl / taverne Take down policy If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at : openaccess @ tue . nl providing details and we will investigate your claim . Download date : 01 . Aug . 2019 Biomech Model Mechanobiol ( 2015 ) 14 : 931 – 965 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10237 - 015 - 0662 - 4 REVIEW ARTICLE Mechanics of the brain : perspectives , challenges , and opportunities Alain Goriely · Marc G . D . Geers · Gerhard A . Holzapfel · Jayaratnam Jayamohan · Antoine Jérusalem · Sivabal Sivaloganathan · Waney Squier · Johannes A . W . van Dommelen · Sarah Waters · Ellen Kuhl Received : 11 January 2015 / Accepted : 14 February 2015 / Published online : 26 February 2015 © The Author ( s ) 2015 . This article is published with open access at Springerlink . com Abstract The human brain is the continuous subject of extensive investigation aimed at understanding its behavior and function . Despite a clear evidence that mechanical fac - tors play an important role in regulating brain activity , current research efforts focus mainly on the biochemical or electro - I’ll say that again , E = 2 r . All about the brain . John Cleese . A . Goriely ( B ) · S . Waters Mathematical Institute , University of Oxford , Oxford OX2 6GG , UKe - mail : Alain . Goriely @ maths . ox . ac . uk M . G . D . Geers · J . A . W . van Dommelen Materials Technology Institute , Eindhoven University of Technology , 5600 MB Eindhoven , The Netherlands G . A . Holzapfel Institute of Biomechanics , Graz University of Technology , 8010 Graz , Austria J . Jayamohan Department of Pediatric Neurosurgery , John Radcliffe Hospital , Oxford OX3 9DU , UK A . Jérusalem Department of Engineering Science , University of Oxford , Oxford OX1 3JP , UK S . Sivaloganathan Department of Applied Mathematics , University of Waterloo , Waterloo , ON N2L3G1 , Canada W . Squier Department of Neuropathology , John Radcliffe Hospital , Oxford OX3 9DU , UK E . Kuhl Departments of Mechanical Engineering and Bioengineering , Stanford University , Stanford , CA 94305 , USA physiological activity of the brain . Here , we show that clas - sical mechanical concepts including deformations , stretch , strain , strain rate , pressure , and stress play a crucial role in modulating both brain form and brain function . This opin - ion piece synthesizes expertise in applied mathematics , solid and ﬂuid mechanics , biomechanics , experimentation , mate - rial sciences , neuropathology , and neurosurgery to address today’s open questions at the forefront of neuromechan - ics . We critically review the current literature and discuss challenges related to neurodevelopment , cerebral edema , lissencephaly , polymicrogyria , hydrocephaly , craniectomy , spinal cord injury , tumor growth , traumatic brain injury , and shaken baby syndrome . The multi - disciplinary analysis of these various phenomena and pathologies presents new opportunities and suggests that mechanical modeling is a central tool to bridge the scales by synthesizing information from the molecular via the cellular and tissue all the way to the organ level . Keywords Brain · Solid mechanics · Fluid mechanics · Electrochemistry · Electromechanics · Traumatic brain injury 1 Motivation The human brain is an organ of extreme complexity , the object of ultimate intellectual egocentrism , and a source of endless scientiﬁc challenges . At the basic functional level , the goal of many scientiﬁc inquiries is to understand the functions that result from the interaction of about 86billion neurons with 100trillion connections . From this perspec - tive , the problem consists of connecting the biochemical and 123 932 A . Goriely et al . electrophysiological behavior of brain cells with the overall behavior of networks of connected cells . The ultimate goal is to translate the resulting macroscopic electrophysiological behavior into the functional dimension where direct relations can be established with neuronal response and , ultimately , behavior . Despite an overwhelming interest and major research ini - tiatives on how our brain operates , comparatively little is known about how the brain functions at the mechanical level . Recent ﬁndings have directly linked major brain develop - ment , mechanisms , and diseases to the mechanical response of the brain both at the cellular and tissue levels . Various factors contribute to this poor state of knowledge . First , the brain is a fully enclosed organ that is particularly difﬁcult to probe physically . Second , viewed as a solid , it is extremely soft and its mechanical response is heavily inﬂuenced by a ﬂuid phase and multiple charged molecules found in its cells and in the extracellular matrix . A holistic mechanical analysis requires a fully coupled multi - ﬁeld theory , which needs to be calibrated and validated experimentally . Fur - ther , most brain pathologies depend on many different fac - tors and their physical manifestation may be conveniently ignored by focusing on genetics and cellular function as the primary driver . This apparent lack of interest from both the brain and mechanics communities is also in clear dis - tinction with other major organs such as the heart , arteries , lungs , or bones for which there exist well - established theo - ries and large scientiﬁc communities . Nonetheless , the last decade has seen fundamental advances in different areas of brain mechanics and has revealed that one of the reasons that brain mechanics is particularly exciting is that it involves extreme scales : the extremely soft scale associated with neu - rosurgery ; the extremely hard scale associated with the skull ; the extremely slow scale associated with brain development ; and the extremely fast scale associated with traumatic brain injury . The objective of this contribution is not to give an exten - sive , comprehensive review of brain mechanics . Rather , it is both a primer into the basic physical principles underlying brain function and a window into a number of problems and challenges that the authors found to be of current interest . In the ﬁrst part of this manuscript , we present the current understanding of the fundamental mechanics of the brain by reviewing its solid , ﬂuid , electrochemical , and electro - mechanical components . In the second part , we discuss a number of situations and pathologies where mechanics play a key role and where modeling can improve our understand - ing and predicting capabilities . These include brain devel - opment , brain tumors , brain surgery , traumatic brain injury , and shaken baby syndrome . Our aim is to motivate further research in this area and to argue for a global approach of brain mechanics linking molecular , cellular , tissue , and organ scales . 2 Solid mechanics We begin our overview by discussing the solid mechanics of the brain . Human brain tissue is a porous , ﬂuid - saturated , nonlinearsolidwithverysmallvolumetricdrainedcompress - ibility and negatively charged molecules , capable of perma - nent deformations . It is a multi - component material with vis - cous contributions to its solid phase deformation . Several overview articles illustrate the simulation with the above - mentioned model assumptions ( Kyriacou et al . 2002 ) , and the development and validation of brain mechanics models ( Bayly et al . 2012 ) . 2 . 1 Biomechanics and mechanobiology The biomechanical characterization of human brain tissue is a challenging task because of its multiphasic nature , its compliant mechanical response , its multiple modes of load - ing , and its regional variation of mechanical properties . Another equally important challenge is understanding the brain’s mechanobiology , the reaction of its cells in response to changes in the mechanical environment . In the brain , neu - ronal signaling is mediated by force - generating proteins . However , the link between endogenous mechanical energy and cellular function has received little attention ; yet , a law that summarizes the mechanical consequences of cellular activity would allow us to better understand the relationship between brain structure and brain function ( Tyler 2012 ) . 2 . 2 Literature review The ﬁrst dynamical properties of human and Rhesus monkey brain tissues were identiﬁed by focusing on the small defor - mation range ( Fallenstein et al . 1969 ; Galford and McEl - haney 1969 ) . In these initial studies , brain parenchyma was viewed as a single - phasic , incompressible , and viscoelastic material . The ﬁrst large deformation tests on human and Rhe - sus monkey brain tissues with up to 270 % stretch revealed a nonlinear response with concave upward stress - strain curves ( Estes and McElhaney 1970 ) . Subsequent experimental studies , mainly on porcine and bovine specimens , investigated the large deformation regime in more detail . They observed a strong dependence on the strain rate and a considerable tension - compression asymme - try ( Miller and Chinzei 1997 , 2002 ) . Further studies revealed a nonlinear viscoelastic behavior ( Donnelly and Medige 1997 ; Hrapko et al . 2006 ) , failure strains under shear defor - mation ( Bilston et al . 2001 ) , shear and compression behavior in the 50 – 160 % stretch regime ( Prange and Margulies 2002 ) , and marked differences between the in vivo and in vitro responses ( Gefen and Margulies 2004 ; Miller et al . 2000 ) . This might—at least in part—be attributed to the consider - 123 Mechanics of the brain 933 Fig . 1 Representative nominal stress versus uniaxial stretch response of tension - compression test below the damage threshold performed on prismaticspecimensofhumanwhitematter . Arrows indicatetheloading direction , adapted from ( Franceschini et al . 2006 ) able amount of residual stress that has been observed in brain tissue in vivo ( Xu et al . 2009 , 2010 ) . The systematic study by Franceschini et al . Franceschini et al . ( 2006 ) documented in vitro experiments of human brain focusing on white matter tissue . In particular , uniaxial , quasi - static , cyclic tension - compression experiments with a speed of 5mm / min were performed on 86 cylindrical and pris - matic specimens from different orientations and locations within the brain . Figure 1 illustrates the characteristic stress – stretch response of white matter tissue : a peculiar nonlinear mechanical behavior , a typical “S - shaped” curve—similar to materials with ﬁlled elastomers—followed by a hystere - sis with different stiffnesses in tension and compression and during loading and unloading , and permanent deformations . These typical features of the nominal stress versus uniax - ial stretch response were found for all samples . A perfect ﬁt was obtained with a phenomenological model for rubber - like materials , including the Mullins effect and permanent set ( Dorfmann and Ogden 2004 ) . When loaded up to failure , softening due to local failure occurred and the shape of the stress - strain curve changed qualitatively ( Franceschini et al . 2006 ) . Another study which focused on aging and regional vari - ations suggested that the adult brain is 3 – 4 times stiffer than the young brain and that the brain stem is approx - imately 2 – 3 times stiffer than gray and white matter tis - sue ( Chatelin et al . 2012 ) . A recent study based on uniax - ial tension , compression , and shear tests of human brain samples revealed a pronounced strain rate dependency for all three loading modes ( Jin et al . 2013 ) . White matter was stiffer than gray matter in compression and shear , and direc - tional dependency was observed in white matter under shear . Indentation tests of bovine brain tissue revealed that white Fig . 2 Representative force versus depth response of indentation test performed on coronal slices of bovine white and gray matter . White matter is approximately one - third stiffer than gray matter , adapted from ( Budday et al . 2015b ) matter is about one - third stiffer than gray matter ( Budday et al . 2015b ; Dommelen et al . 2010 ) as illustrated in Fig . 2 . White matter also showed a pronounced anisotropy ( Feng et al . 2013 ; Hrapko et al . 2008 ; Prange and Margulies 2002 ; Velardi et al . 2006 ) , displayed larger regional variations than gray matter ( Dommelen et al . 2010 ) , appeared to be more viscous , and responded less rapidly to mechanical loading ( Budday et al . 2015b ) . Recent mechanical characterizations of porcine brain tis - sue in unconﬁned compression , simple shear , and tension at dynamic strain rates have motivated constitutive models for brain as a single - phase material to capture these effects ( Hrapko et al . 2006 ; Prevost et al . 2011 ; Rashid et al . 2012 , 2013 , 2014 ) . Alternatively , more advanced approaches consider brain tissue as a poroelastic biphasic material composed of a poroelastic solid phase and a ﬂuid phase , the interstitial ﬂuid . Several physiological instances including volumetric shrink - ing of brain tissue upon hyperosmotic drug administration point to such a mixed approach ( Schrot and Muizelaar 2002 ) as discussed in Sect . 4 . The ﬁrst data supporting a biphasic theory for brain parenchyma focused on brain tissue mechan - ics during hydrocephalus ( Hakim et al . 1955 ) . Oedometer or consolidometer tests on human brain parenchyma with free drainage at the top and bottom surfaces have shown that brain tissue obeys the consolidation theory with low volumet - ric compressibility ( Franceschini et al . 2006 ) . Experiments under controlled drainage have also revealed the ﬁrst direct evidence of a poroelastic behavior , similar to ﬁne soils . The temporal evolution of the average consolidation ratio can be modeled using the Terzaghi theory ( Terzaghi 1943 ) , a sim - pler version of the Biot consolidation theory . However , to perfectly capture the consolidation curve in Fig . 3 , viscous deformations were included in the model ( Franceschini et al . 2006 ) . Conﬁned compression tests on rat brain tissue focused 123 934 A . Goriely et al . Fig . 3 Experimental data obtained from an oedometer test performed on cylindrical specimen of human parietal lobe with free drainage at the top and bottom surface and continuous load steps . The solid and dashed curves show model results according to the Terzaghi theory and the Gibson and Lo theory , respectively , adapted from ( Franceschini et al . 2006 ) on the inﬂuence of the ﬂuid content on the uniaxial com - pressive deformation . The results suggest that increases in hydrostatic pressure of the extracellular ﬂuid may contribute to brain tissue damage ( Haslach et al . 2014 ) . A powerful approach to capture this multi - constituent response can thus be developed on the basis of the theory of porous media ( Ehlers and Wagner 2015 ) . Recent approaches suggest to consider brain tissue as a poroelastic or poroviscoelastic material with negatively charged molecules ﬁxed within cells inducing ion concen - tration gradients and leading to changes in the intracranial pressure . Triphasic modeling seems reasonable to capture the coupled edematous swelling and mechanical response . In Sect . 4 , we will discuss the electrochemistry of brain tis - sue and its modeling in more detail . 2 . 3 Open questions and challenges Despite signiﬁcant progress , there is a general agreement that a more detailed understanding of brain tissue mechanics is required to develop and improve constitutive models . The mechanical properties of brain tissue , mainly white matter , under speciﬁc loading and boundary conditions , have been studied extensively . However , a constitutive model derived under one loading - boundary mode does not necessarily pre - dict the material response under another loading - boundary condition . In addition to unconﬁned and conﬁned compres - sion , extension , and simple shear tests , supplemental multi - axial tests are required to provide more accurate data toward the material characterization of brain tissue . In particular , triaxial shear tests in addition to biaxial extension tests— performed on the same specimen—would be highly valuable . The design of these experiments should follow the guidelines for independent tests toward reliable tissue characterization ( Holzapfel and Ogden 2009 ) . In addition , the investigation of the underlying microstructure of brain tissue is a criti - cal step for future research . This knowledge would allow a more holistic understanding of brain tissue as a single - phasic material . Brain tissue as a biphasic and triphasic material has received less attention in the biomechanics literature . More data are needed on the negatively charged molecules , their charge interactions , and their expression patterns to better characterize phenomena such as brain tissue swelling . A promising novel approach to characterize the mechan - ical properties of living brain tissue is magnetic resonance elastography ( Kruse et al . 2008 ; Sack et al . 2008 ) . Magnetic resonance elastography is a noninvasive medical imaging technique to quantify the in vivo shear modulus by applying shear waves to the tissue , imaging the propagating waves , and extracting information using computational algorithms ( Hamhaber et al . 2010 ; Johnson et al . 2013 ) . Restricted to the smalldeformationregime , withstrainssmallerthan0 . 1 % and frequencies larger than 30 Hz , magnetic resonance elastogra - phy probes different material characteristics than classical ex vivo tests ( Romano et al . 2012 ) . While this technology is still in its infancy , there is hope that it will soon deliver valuable insight into the regional and temporal variation of brain tissue properties during development , aging , and disease progres - sion ( Sack et al . 2011 ) . Magnetic resonance elastography has the potential to become a powerful diagnostic tool for var - ious pathologies including multiple sclerosis ( Streitberger et al . 2012 ) . 3 Fluid mechanics We now review the ﬂuid mechanics of the brain . The three ﬂuid networks of our brain are the vasculature , the cere - brospinal ﬂuid , and the interstitial ﬂuid . We begin by brieﬂy discussing each of these in turn . The Vasculature . Our brain has very high metabolic demands . A fully functioning cerebral circulation is critical to ensure that blood supply is efﬁcient and that ischemia is avoided . Blood supply to the brain is maintained by a network of collateral vessels and a precise system of autoregulation involving vasodilation and vasoconstriction ( Alastruey et al . 2007 ) . The circle of Willis is a ring - like arterial structure located at the base of the brain . The afferent arteries sup - ply blood to the circle , while the efferent arteries transport blood away from the circle . Anastomosing arteries connect the afferent arteries , thus enabling the blood supply to be rerouted to maintain blood ﬂow to the brain , should any affer - ent blood supply become reduced . Having entered the brain via the circle of Willis , blood then circulates through the microvasculature , where the local exchange of nutrients and oxygen between the blood and surrounding tissue occurs , 123 Mechanics of the brain 935 before leaving through the venous system . To ensure ade - quate oxygen delivery to the highly metabolically active neu - rons , the capillary network of the brain is dense . The key distinguishing feature of the brain microvasculature is the presence of tight junctions between the adjacent endothelial cells lining the capillaries . This endothelial layer , referred to as the blood brain barrier , acts as a protective layer separat - ing the blood from the tissue . As the tight junctions prevent transport of substances such as ions and proteins across the blood brain barrier , the endothelial cells actively control the transport of substances crossing the blood brain barrier via ion pumps in their membranes , which enables the compo - sition of the interstitial ﬂuid surrounding the neurons to be well controlled , despite ﬂuctuations in the concentrations of substances in the blood ( Abbott et al . 2006 ) . The Cerebrospinal Fluid . The cerebrospinal ﬂuid is a clear plasma - like ﬂuid produced mainly by the choroid plexus . It ﬂows through the ventricular system to the subarachnoid space , where it is absorbed into the blood stream via the sagittal sinus . The cerebrospinal ﬂuid serves many functions , including providing mechanical support for the brain , provid - ing a medium for the transport of humoral messages between regions of the brain , and acting as the waste disposal system for the brain . With these functions , it plays a role similar to the lymphatic system in other tissues ( Oreskovic and Klarica 2010 ) . The movement of cerebrospinal ﬂuid through the ven - tricular system is propelled by the pulsation of the cerebral arteries ( Siyahhan et al . 2014 ) . The Interstitial Fluid . The interstitial ﬂuid is an extracel - lular ﬂuid similar in composition to blood plasma . It ﬁlls the interstices of the brain tissue , bathing the neurons . In the healthy brain , only a relatively small amount of ﬂuid is able to leak from the blood brain barrier into the interstitial ﬂuid , due to the low permeability of the blood brain bar - rier ( Abbott et al . 2006 ) . However , if the blood brain barrier is damaged , it can become more permeable to ﬂuid . Addi - tional ﬂuid can cross the blood brain barrier leading to ﬂuid accumulation and swelling in a process known as vasogenic edema . The interstitial ﬂuid undergoes bulk ﬂow , which has several signiﬁcant implications : non - synaptic cell – cell com - munication , drug delivery , distribution and clearance , brain ionic homeostasis , immune function of the brain , clearance of β - amyloid deposits , and cell migration ( Abbot 2004 ) . 3 . 1 Biomechanics and mechanobiology The brain motivates a wealth of exciting problems to study from a physiological ﬂuid mechanics standpoint . Figure 4 illustrates a key feature of intracranial ﬂuid dynamics : the Fig . 4 Relationship between the three ﬂuid networks in the brain : the vasculature ( pink ) , the cerebrospinal ﬂuid ( blue ) , and the interstitial ﬂuid ( green ) , adapted with permission from ( Lang 2014 ) Blood reservoir in rest of the body Arteries Capillaries Veins Interstitial space Ventricules Sub arachnoid space Spinal cord Flow through pial - glial lining Flow across ependymal lining Leakage across BBB Production at choroid plexus Reabsorption Flow through ventricle network BRAIN Flow 123 936 A . Goriely et al . interplay and ﬂuid exchange between the vasculature , cere - brospinal ﬂuid , and interstitial ﬂuid compartments . Oneapproachtomodelingintracranial ﬂuiddynamics is to use lumped - parameter or compartment models , which con - sider separate compartments for , e . g . , the brain parenchyma , vasculature , and ventricles through which ﬂuid is exchanged ( Kellie 1824 ; Ursino and Lodi 1997 ; Linninger et al . 2009 ; Jung et al . 2005 ; Sharan and Popel 2002 ) . While compart - ment models enable the effect of the system parameters on the ﬂuid ﬂow within the brain to be investigated , they do not allow for consideration of the spatial variation of , e . g . , ﬂuid velocity and pressure within an individual compart - ment . One - dimensional , reduced pulse wave modeling is a good approach accounting for spatial variations when a global assessment of cerebral blood ﬂow is required ( Alas - truey et al . 2007 ) . This approach can be used to simulate the changes in blood pressure and ﬂow in time and along the axial direction of large vessels . These changes propagate in the form of pulse waves , and carry valuable information about the morphology and functionality of the cerebral vas - cular system . When detailed two - or three - dimensional spa - tial information about the nature of the ﬂow is required , an alternative approach is to describe the ﬂow in the vascular and cerebrospinal ﬂuid compartments by the continuity and Navier – Stokes equations for a single - phase Newtonian vis - cous ﬂuid ( Kurtcuoglu et al . 2005 ; Sweetman et al . 2011 ; Siyahhan et al . 2014 ; Kurtcuoglu 2011 ) . These ﬂows can then be coupled to the interstitial ﬂows through the brain parenchyma . The brain parenchyma is a complex compos - ite biological tissue , comprising a wide variety of interacting constituents , including different cell types , their associated extracellular matrix , and interstitial ﬂuid . Multiphase models provide a natural continuum framework to investigate such tissues ( Garcia and Smith 2009 ; Smillie et al . 2005 ; Levine 1999 ; Wirth and Sobey 2006 ; Shahim et al . 2012 ; Tully and Ventikos 2011 ; Wilkie et al . 2012 ; Wirth and Sobey 2009 ; Stoverud et al . 2012 ; Linninger et al . 2008 ; Drapaca et al . 2006 ) . Intracranial ﬂow problems may therefore require the single - phase ﬂow equations for the blood and cerebrospinal ﬂuid domains to be coupled to multiphase ﬂow equations describing interstitial ﬂuid ﬂow in the brain parenchyma via the speciﬁcation of appropriate boundary conditions between the single - phase and multiphase ﬂow domains . An addi - tional complexity is that the boundaries of the ﬂow domains may be compliant , leading to novel ﬂuid - structure interac - tion problems where the ﬂuid ﬂows and wall motion are dynamically coupled ( Alastruey et al . 2007 ; Elliott et al . 2013 , 2011 ) . Such an approach requires an accurate deﬁ - nition of the vessel wall geometry and the wall structural properties . What is clear from the above discussion is that model - ing ﬂows in the brain leads to exciting physiological ﬂow problems , which can potentially involve the coupling of unsteady , three - dimensional , single - phase and multiphase ﬂows in complex geometries , where the interaction between the ﬂow , the vessel walls , and the tissue leads to novel ﬂuid - structure interaction phenomena . In the following section , we brieﬂy review modeling approaches to understand ﬂows under physiological conditions , as well as those that are encountered as the result of various pathologies , e . g . , hydro - cephalus and syringomyelia , or clinical interventions , e . g . , infusions . 3 . 2 Literature review We ﬁrst summarize models for the vasculature and the cere - brospinalﬂuidsystemsinisolation , beforeintroducingglobal intracranial ﬂuid dynamical models . The Vasculature . A number of studies have focused on the hemodynamics in the circle of Willis ( David and Moore 2008 ; Sforza et al . 2009 ) . A common simpliﬁcation is to consider rigid vessel walls ( Alnaes et al . 2007 ; Cassot et al . 2000 ; Cebral et al . 2003 ; Ferrandez et al . 2001 ) . To determine the inﬂuence of vessel geometry on the resulting ﬂow and wall shear stress distributions , computational ﬂuid dynam - ics methods have been employed to solve the continuity and Navier – Stokes equations where the complex circle of Willis vessel geometry is either idealized ( Alnaes et al . 2007 ; Fer - randez et al . 2001 ) or imaging techniques are exploited to provide patient - speciﬁc geometries ( Cebral et al . 2003 ) . An alternative analytical approach is to represent the circle of Willis as an anastomotic network of multiple segments and adopt a simple linear relationship between the mean blood ﬂow in a segment and the pressure difference across a seg - ment to determine the inﬂuence of obstructive lesions on the resulting ﬂow ( Cassot et al . 2000 ) . A particular challenge whendevelopingcircleof Willis ﬂow models is toaccount for cerebral autoregulation , the vasoconstriction and vasodila - tion of the small arteries in response to physiological control mechanisms to maintain a relatively constant cerebral blood ﬂow ( Paulson et al . 1990 ; David and Moore 2008 ) . The vessel wall compliance of the circle of Willis has also been mod - eled exploiting the one - dimensional equations of pressure and ﬂow wave propagation in compliant vessels ( Alastruey et al . 2007 ) . Using physiological data , the authors were able to capture the main features of pulse wave propagation along the aorta , at the brachiocephalic bifurcation , and throughout the cerebral arteries . Cerebral aneurysms are pathological dilations of the arte - rial walls , driven by a complex interaction of biological and hemodynamic factors . Rupture of cerebral aneurysms can lead to intracranial hemorrhage . The mechanisms of aneurysm formation and evolution , with a focus on the role of hemodynamics , have been extensively discussed ( Sforza et al . 2009 ) . It is widely accepted that the wall shear stress exerted by the ﬂowing blood on the endothelial cells lin - 123 Mechanics of the brain 937 ing the arteries plays a pivotal role in the development of aneurysms , motivating computational frameworks coupling the evolution of a cerebral aneurysm to the hemodynamic stimuli acting on the endothelial cells ( Watton et al . 2009 ) . Cerebrospinal Fluid Flow . Comprehensive reviews of computational ﬂuid dynamics approaches for the cere - brospinal ﬂuid ﬂow are provided in the literature ( Kurtcuoglu 2011 ) . A simpliﬁed approach is to consider an idealized geometry of the brain ventricles ( Kurtcuoglu et al . 2005 ) . In this initial approach , the domain boundaries were assumed to be rigid , and the ﬂow was driven by the prescribed sinu - soidal motion of the third ventricle lateral walls . The model was used to analyze pressure propagation through the sys - tem and the inﬂuence of a stenosed aqueduct . As an alterna - tive to idealized ﬂow domains , magnetic resonance imaging data have been used to reconstruct patient - speciﬁc geome - tries and physiological boundary conditions ( Sweetman et al . 2011 ) . The authors also relaxed the rigid boundary assump - tion in parts of the domain , considering deformation of the lateral ventricle wall to account for ﬂuid - structure interac - tion . The model predicted complex cerebrospinal ﬂuid ﬂow patterns and pressures in the ventricular system and sub - arachnoid space of a normal subject , and the predictions were shown to be in excellent agreement with the subject - speciﬁc ﬂow data . Another interesting study used compu - tational ﬂuid dynamics to elucidate the interplay between macroscale and cilia - induced cerebrospinal ﬂuid ﬂows , and their relative impact on near - wall dynamics ( Siyahhan et al . 2014 ) . Subject - speciﬁc anatomy , wall motion , and choroid plexus pulsations were derived from magnetic resonance imaging data . Intracranial Fluid Dynamics . The above studies focused on the vasculature or cerebrospinal ﬂuid ﬂows in isolation , and provided fundamental insights into the ﬂow conditions in these systems . In many situations , however , it is necessary to consider models of the entire intracranial ﬂuid dynamical system , and we now discuss such models here . The earliest compartment model for cerebral ﬂow con - sidered three compartments representing arteries , veins , and brain tissue ( Kellie 1824 ) . Since this early work , studies have considered an increasing number of compartments , in addition to considering physiological mechanisms such as autoregulation ( Jung et al . 2005 ) . The governing equations are derived via conservation of mass and momentum in each compartment , and the ﬂuid ﬂuxes between compartments are driven by hydrostatic and osmotic pressure differences . A recent seven compartment model accounts for arteries , capillaries , veins , brain tissue , cerebrospinal ﬂuid , the sagit - tal sinus and an artiﬁcial compartment for brain swelling and takes into account an autoregulation mechanism , cere - brospinal ﬂuid production , and venous compression ( Jung et al . 2005 ) . The model was coupled to a Krogh cylinder model to describe the oxygen supply process . The authors were able to reproduce the experimentally well - established connectionbetweenarterial bloodpressureandcerebrospinal ﬂuid production . Similar compartment modeling approaches have also been used to consider oxygen transport in the brain microcirculation ( Sharan and Popel 2002 ) , and to investigate pathologies such as the onset of edema , hypertension , and hydrocephalus ( Linninger et al . 2009 ) . Alternative approaches , accounting for spatial variations have also been adopted , especially when considering various pathologies , e . g . , hydrocephalus and syringomyelia , or clin - ical interventions , e . g . , infusion tests . Such approaches are brieﬂy outlined below . In hydrocephalus , cerebrospinal ﬂuid accumulates in the brain , causing expansion of the ventricles and tissue deformation . The mechanisms leading to hydrocephalus include blockage of the aqueduct of Sylvius , excessive cere - brospinal ﬂuid production , or inhibited cerebrospinal ﬂuid absorption ( Clarke and Meyer 2007 ) . Models of hydro - cephalus typically couple cerebrospinal ﬂuid ﬂow to the deformation of the surrounding tissue ( Wilkie et al . 2012 ; Drapaca et al . 2006 ) . Poroelastic models for the brain parenchyma , coupled to ﬂuid ﬂow models for the cere - brospinal ﬂuid , have been considered in idealized geome - tries and time - dependent models characterize the onset , development , and treatment of hydrocephalus ( Smillie et al . 2005 ) . The role of absorption of cerebrospinal ﬂuid by the brain parenchyma was also studied ( Levine 1999 ) . Both axisymmetric and fully three - dimensional poroelastic mod - els were employed to study the evolution of hydrocephalus ( Wirth and Sobey 2006 ) . Healthy and normal pressure hydro - cephalus brains were compared in detail ( Shahim et al . 2012 ) . Water transport in the cerebral environment was investigated using a multiple - network poroelastic theory in a simpliﬁed spherically symmetric geometry ( Tully and Ventikos 2011 ) as shown in Fig . 5 . The latter framework allowed detailed investigation of spatiotemporal transport of ﬂuid between the vasculature , cerebrospinal ﬂuid and brain parenchyma , and exploration of hypotheses deﬁn - ing the initiation and progression of acute and chronic hydrocephalus . A number of studies of hydrocephalus have consid - ered alternatives to poroelasticity . A poroviscoelastic model for brain tissue was adopted to model hydrocephalus and shunting surgery used in its treatment ( Mehrabian and Abousleiman 2011 ) . An idealized spherically symmetric brain geometry was used , where the ventricles were assumed tobeahollowconcentricspaceﬁlledwithcerebrospinalﬂuid . A viscoelastic model for the brain parenchyma was used to investigate hydrocephalus , again using an idealized cylindri - cal geometry ( Wilkie et al . 2012 ) . An alternative approach considered a quasi - linear viscoelastic constitutive equation for the brain , again employing an idealized cylindrical geom - etry , and used the model to determine the decompression and 123 938 A . Goriely et al . Capillary transfer ( see inset ) Subarachnoidspace Choroidplexus Arterialblood ( a ) Cerebralaqueduct Arteriole / capillary blood ( c ) S ca S ce S e v S ac S ce S e v S c v S v c ArachnoidVilli Sagittalsinus Ventriclespace CSF - filled tissue ( e ) Venous blood ( v ) Controlvolume ( skull ) Q out Q in Q p Q o Fig . 5 A diagram illustrating cerebral water transport in a multiple - network poroelastic model , reproduced from Tully and Ventikos ( 2011 ) resultant ventricle shrinking due to shunt insertion ( Drapaca et al . 2006 ) . Another pathology of the brain , which involves a ﬂuid - structure interaction problem is syringomyelia ( Elliott et al . 2013 , 2011 ) . In this condition , one or more ﬂuid - ﬁlled cav - ities , called syrinxes , initiate and develop within the spinal cord . The expansion of the syrinxes causes compression of the surrounding nerve ﬁbers and blood vessels , resulting in neurological damage . Lumped - parameter models of the closed cerebrospinal system were solved numerically to sim - ulate disease conditions and treatment options ( Elliott et al . 2011 ) . Infusion is a procedure during which ﬂuid is injected into the brain , either to administer drugs , which cannot enter from the vasculature as they are unable to cross the blood brain barrier , or to investigate cerebral compliance of the brain . To determine the spatiotemporal distribution of cere - brospinal ﬂuid pressure and brain tissue displacement during an infusion test , a spherically symmetric , three - component poroelastic model of the brain was developed ( Wirth and Sobey 2009 ) . A computational ﬂuid dynamics approach was adopted to determine the transport of infused therapeu - tic agents within the brain ( Linninger et al . 2008 ) . Three - dimensional brain anatomy was reconstructed from subject - speciﬁc medical images , and tissue anisotropy and hetero - geneity quantiﬁed using diffusion tensor imaging . Model - ing the brain parenchyma as a rigid porous medium , the authors determined the inﬂuence of catheter types and posi - tioning on drug dispersion . To determine the concentration of the infused drug and tissue deformation during convection - enhanced drug delivery to brain tissue , patient - speciﬁc para - meters and geometries from diffusion tensor imaging were combined with a poroelastic model for the brain parenchyma ( Stoverud et al . 2012 ) . A biphasic hyperelastic model for the mechanical behavior of brain tissue in a spherically symmet - ric geometry was used to determine ﬂuid and mass trans - port , as well as the associated tissue deformation , during convection - enhanceddeliveryofaninfusedtherapeuticagent ( Garcia and Smith 2009 ) . 3 . 3 Concluding remarks It is clear that the brain has motivated a wealth of fascinating pathophysiological ﬂuid dynamical problems ; yet , a number of challenges remain . While many of the models consider idealized geometries and are able to provide insights into the underlying mechanisms , it is essential to place such mod - els in an anatomically realistic setting , which necessitates an interdisciplinaryapproachcombiningtheﬁelds of mathemat - ical modeling , scientiﬁc computation , and medical imaging . Furthermore , as advances continue to be made in our study - ing of the underlying physiology and pathology , an additional challengeistoincorporatesuchbiologicalunderstandinginto the modeling framework , and include , e . g . , electrochemical effects within multiphase ﬂow modeling . What is clear is that mathematical modeling of intracranial ﬂuid dynamics is a powerful tool to advance our understanding of the mechan - ics of the brain . 4 Electrochemistry 4 . 1 Biomechanics and mechanobiology Electrochemistry plays an important role in many physio - logical processes and in particular in the mechanics of brain tissues . In most soft tissues , there is a balance between the hydrostatic pressure generated by the microvasculature and the oncotic forces generated by differences in the chemical potentials due to the large molecules such as albumin in the blood plasma . The hydrostatic pressure of the blood ves - sels is in the range of 1 – 30mmHg , whereas the balancing oncotic pressure driving ﬂuid into the circulatory system is in the range of 1 – 25mmHg . In comparison , osmotic forces generated by concentration differences of charged particles can be in the range of 1 – 300mmHg . In peripheral organs , the small ions are free to move and only a small osmotic pres - sure is generated by small concentrations of large colloid molecules . The slight imbalance between hydrostatic pres - 123 Mechanics of the brain 939 Fig . 6 The multiple coupled mechanisms resulting in cytotoxic and vasogenic cerebral edemas . BBB stands for blood brain barrier . The inset shows the possible motion of charges in the capillaries , cells , and tissues , adapted with permission from Lang ( 2014 ) Tissue Damage e . g . stroke , impact , . . . Cell membrane dysregulation Abnormal cell metabolism Increased BBB permeability Abnormal osmotic balance Cellular swelling ( cytotoxic edema ) Tissue swelling ( vasogenic edema ) Disruption of cell membrane pumps Cell response to injury Disruption of BBB by damage or endothelial cell injury Disruption of cell membrane pumps Influx of water into cell from interstitum Influx of water into tissue from capillaries Cells produce osmotically active products Proteins leak into tissue sure against osmotic and oncotic pressures drives ﬂuid from the capillary bed into the tissue . This extra interstitial ﬂuid is then removed by the lymphatics . In the brain , however , the osmotic and hydrostatic bal - ance is completely different . In contrast to most soft tissues , brain tissues are extremely soft . By comparison , a pressure of 30mmHg corresponds to about 4kPa which is larger than the typical Young’s modulus for the brain . With a typical leaky capillary bed , as found in the periphery organs , and in the absence of a regular lymphatic system , the ﬂuid pres - sure would quickly create a very large ﬂuid uptake . This situation , however , does not happen as the capillaries in the brain have tight junctions between endothelial cells called the blood brain barrier , and that is mostly impermeable to ions . Only a small ﬂux of water , of the order of 1 μ l / min , leaks from the capillaries into the brain tissue and is removed through the ventricles and the subarachnoid space ( Redzic et al . 2005 ) . Therefore , overall osmotic effects quantiﬁed by osmolality are the dominant forces acting on the ﬂuid and solid phases in our brain . Osmolality is a measure of the concentration of solutes that contribute to osmotic pressure per mass of solvent . It is expressed in Osm / kg , that is , the number of moles of solutes contributing to osmotic pressure per kilogram of solvent . Blood plasma has a typical range of 280 – 290mOsm / kg , of which only about 1mOsm / kg is due to oncotic solutes . Since the blood brain barrier acts as a semi - permeable membrane , the existence of large osmotic gradient will dominate oncotic effects . BrainEdemaandTissueSwelling . Theimportanceofelec - trochemistry in brain mechanics becomes apparent during brain swelling . Brain edema is the accumulation of water in the interstitium from the capillaries . It is a complex process that can be caused by a number of factors including traumatic brain injury , concussion , ischemic strokes , hemorrhages , infection , tumor growth or even high altitude ( Papadopoulos et al . 2004 ) . Brain edemas are usually classiﬁed into three cat - egories : interstitial , cytotoxic , andvasogenic ( Unterbergetal . 2004 ) . The movement of water in brain tissue depends partly on the hydrostatic and oncotic pressures , the permeability of the capillaries , and the ability of the ventricular network to drain extra ﬂuid ; yet , it is primarily regulated by changes in ions and proteins concentration in the tissue . Interstitial or hydrocephalic edema results from either the oversecretion of cerebrospinal ﬂuid or its compromised absorption ( Unter - berg et al . 2004 ) . Therefore , it is mostly the result of an imbalance between inﬂow and outﬂow that can lead to acute hydrocephalus , as detailed in Sect . 3 . We will therefore focus on ischemia - induced swelling . During swelling , the ﬂuid enters the tissue from the cere - bral capillaries . As shown in Fig . 6 , there are several possi - ble mechanisms creating this inﬂux of water . During impact injury , the integrity of the blood vessels can be compro - 123 940 A . Goriely et al . mised and blood can directly enter the tissue . After an ischemic stroke , however , it is the ionic imbalance that cre - ates swelling . In a healthy brain tissue , both the composition of the intracellular ﬂuid and the cell volume are actively con - trolled by ion pumps in the cell membrane . During ischemia , due to a lack of oxygen , the cells cannot properly control the active pumping across the cell membrane , and the osmotic equilibrium is perturbed . As a result , there is a net ﬂux of ions into the cell following electrochemical potential gradi - ents and , accordingly , an uptake of water from the extracel - lular space into the cell . This cell swelling does not , however , produce tissue swelling as it only trades ﬂuid with the inter - stitium ( Liang et al . 2007 ) . Nevertheless , cytotoxic swelling can have a profound effect on the tissue as it changes ion and protein concentrations of the interstitial ﬂuid . This imbal - ance can provide a driving force for vasogenic edema and lead to bulk swelling ( Kawamata et al . 2007 ) . Further , highly swollen cells may burst , causing their contents to become merged with the interstitium . In particular , cells can release negativelychargedmacromoleculessuchasglycosaminogly - cans and proteoglycans ( Syková and Nicholson 2008 ) . Due to their large size , these molecules contribute to the over - all ﬁxed charge density , that is , the overall negative immo - bile charges attached to the tissue . The presence of these immobile charges induces an ionic concentration difference between the tissue and the capillary bed , and drives water movement into the tissue through the Donnan effect ( Donnan 1924 ) . Under these conditions , the tight endothelial junctions of the blood brain barrier are disrupted and the water inﬂux causes vasogenic edema , an overall penetration of ﬂuid in the tissue due to the disruption of the blood brain barrier . Treatment and Damage Propagation . The primary nonin - vasive treatment for cerebral edema and increase in intracra - nial pressure is osmotherapy where osmotically active sub - stances such as mannitol or hypertonic salines are admin - istered intravenously to increase serum osmolality ( Fink 2012 ) . This change in osmolality creates an osmotic gradi - ent between blood and brain tissue that moves ﬂuids from the interstitium into the intravascular compartment . It is believed that an increase in serum osmolality up to 320mOsm / l is safe and can reduce brain water content by up to 90ml ( Bhardwaj 2007 ) . In some situations , however , the effect of osmother - apy is limited . For instance , cytotoxic edema that creates an imbalance at the cellular level is resistant to all known treat - ments ( Raslan and Bhardwaj 2007 ) . Similarly , if the integrity of the blood brain barrier is compromised , osmotically active agents will penetrate the tissue and will not be able to cre - ate an osmotic gradient . While osmotherapy has an effect in decreasing acute intracranial pressure in many situations , its long - term use and overall beneﬁt is still subject to contro - versy ( Grände and Romner 2012 ) . During swelling or increased intracranial pressure , blood vessels can be further impaired due to compression of the sur - Fig . 7 Brain swelling resulting from a middle cerebral artery occlu - sion . A healthy brain would be symmetric with respect to the white line . The midline shift demonstrates extensive swelling of the right hemisphere , reproduced from Simard et al . ( 2007 ) rounding tissue . This load restricts blood ﬂow and , without regulation , increases the ischemic zone and further damages the brain tissue ( Walberer et al . 2008 ) . Without treatment , damage can propagate through the brain through the feed - back between swelling and ischemia as , for instance , in the middle cerebral artery occlusion shown in Fig . 7 . Decom - pressive craniectomy is used to prevent further swelling and to decrease intracranial pressure . This drastic invasive pro - cedure consists in removing part of the skull to allow the brain to swell ( Soustiel et al . 2010 ) . The massive outward swelling creates zones of high stretch which , in turn , can cre - ate long - term axonal damage with decreased long - term func - tional outcome ( Cooper et al . 2011 ) . Indeed , axonal stretches as low as 3 – 5 % have been shown to create internal axonal damage ( Chung et al . 2005 ) . 4 . 2 Literature review Electrochemical effects at the cellular level are known to play a crucial role in the function and integrity of cells , and kinetic models are used to determine cellular ionic balance . Cytotoxic edema resulting from strokes has been investigated by combining kinetic models with compartment models for the ﬂuid components ( Dronne et al . 2006 ) . In these models , both passive and active phenomena , such as cell membrane pumps , aretakenintoaccounttocomputetheﬂuxofions . The resulting osmotic pressure gradients drive the ﬂuid between the intracellular and extracellular ﬂuid compartments and explain the mechanism of cell swelling . The coupling between electrochemical effects , ﬂuid trans - port , and elastic deformation is particularly difﬁcult and is only little understood , speciﬁcally in the brain . A possible modeling approach to take into account these coupled effects is to use the theory of mixtures . The fundamental idea from 123 Mechanics of the brain 941 mixture theory , based on the early work of Truesdell and Bowen Bowen ( 1967 ) , is that each phase has its own identity and velocity but both phases coexist at any spatial point and contribute to the overall physical properties of the system such as density and stress . However , it is the overall macro - scopic quantities that must satisfy the physical laws such as the conservation of mass or the balance of stress given by Cauchy equation so that individual phases can exchange density and linear momentum in a pointwise fashion . Electrochemical effects are particularly important for the modeling of articular cartilage , for which there is a large body of literature ( Lai et al . 1991 ; Huyghe and Janssen 1997 ; Ateshian et al . 2006 ) . In this approach , a tissue is modeled as a mixture of three or more phases : a solid phase representing the elastic contribution of the extracellular matrix and cells , a ﬂuid phase representing the interstitial ﬂuid , and phases to include the solute and ion species in solution . Fixed charge densities can be easily modeled by assigning a net charge to the solid phase and the thermodynamic balance coupled to the mechanical balance in these systems naturally explains osmotic behaviors such as the Donnan effect . One of the main issues in these triphasic or quadriphasic models is to provide reasonable constitutive laws for the drag between phases . For instance , the solid - ﬂuid interaction can be modeled by Darcy’s law and the ﬂuid - solute interaction can be modeled by Fick’s law . The drag between solid and solute phases is more subtle and a law must be chosen to model effects related to reduced diffusion of large solutes passing through a soft solid phase as observed in brain tissue ( Nicholson 2001 ) . To study brain tissue and demonstrate the importance of ﬁxed charge density during damage , the ﬁrst quadriphasic model combined theory and experiments of healthy and dam - age brain slices in different solute concentrations ( Elkin et al . 2010 ) . Figure 8 shows experimental data of the free - swelling volume change of dead rat brain tissue as a function of bath ionic osmolarity . These experimental results were reinterpreted within a quadriphasic theory , suggesting that the observed swelling cannot be explained by the Donnan effect itself as it would imply unrealistically low tissue stiffness or unrealistically high ﬁxed charge density ( Lang et al . 2014 ) . However , the observed swelling can be fully explained by taking into account the presence of non - permeating solutes . Non - permeating solutes are large uncharged solutes , which can - not travel through the mixture due to mechanical and geo - metric restrictions , but contribute to the overall osmotic pressure difference . The solid curve in Fig . 8 indicates the best ﬁt model using a quadriphasic mixture theory including non - permeating solutes for ﬁxed charge density and an elastic material parameter independently ﬁtted . This enhancement provides a satisfying agreement with exper - imental data ( Elkin et al . 2010 ) . A quadriphasic theory was also used to model hydrocephalus by driving tissue Fig . 8 Experimental swelling data of tissue slice as a function of bath ionic concentration [ data from ( Elkin et al . 2010 ) ] and curve ﬁt of the volume change of dead rat brain tissue as a function of bath osmolarity . The error bars allude to the minimum and maximum range based upon the standard error of the mean , adapted from Lang et al . ( 2014 ) swelling through an ionic change in the cerebrospinal ﬂuid ( Drapaca and Fritz 2012 ) . Surprisingly , there has been little work on damage propa - gation and deformation of the brain caused by craniectomy . A ﬁrst theoretical model in spherical geometry couples the diffusion ﬁeld with cell death , release of ﬁxed charge density , and swelling ( Lang et al . 2015 ) . The model revealed that for a large enough initial damage zone , this feedback causes dam - age to propagate through the entire brain in a closed skull . However , damage can be halted by decompressive surgery at the expense of axonal stretching . Biomechanical issues related to tissue deformation during decompressive craniec - tomy have also been addressed experimentally and compu - tationally by ﬁnite element modeling ( Gao and Ang 2009 ; Fletcher et al . 2014 ) . 4 . 3 Open questions and challenges Brain deformation and stress are tightly regulated by ﬂuid , solid , and electrochemical effects . Therefore , mathematical models of brain tissue swelling must include these different components to address a number of key phenomena such as the nonlinear elastic response of brain tissue , its porous behavior , water accumulation , Donnan effects , hydrosta - tic and osmotic pressure - driven deformation , deformation - dependent permeability , and diffusion restricted by the solid phase . In principle , quadriphasic theories are able to include all these effects and therefore provide an accurate model of the macroscopic mechanical environment in the brain . How - ever , these models are inherently complex , built on shaky fundamental principles , and their constitutive laws are not yet properly validated or justiﬁed from ﬁrst principles . At a the - 123 942 A . Goriely et al . oretical level , the development of homogenization methods for coupled ﬁelds in large deformations may offer a system - atic way to justify these models . Independently , quadripha - sic models offer a general modeling framework suitable for a combined phenomenological and computational approach . These models need to be combined with realistic geometries and realistic ﬁber orientations , e . g . , from diffusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging . Quadriphasic models only describe the macroscopic behavior of the tissue—they must somehow be related to the microscopic behavior at the molecular or cellular lev - els . Therefore , a multi - scale approach will be necessary to bottom - up inform macroscopic phenomenological models from the microstructure , but also to top - down extract infor - mation from the continuum level to predict behavior at the neuron level such as axonal damage . The combination of these methods could create a unique platform to address key scientiﬁc and clinical issues related to brain swelling , trauma , and surgery . 4 . 4 Concluding remarks A number of questions related to the mechanics in the healthy brain can be addressed from a plain solid or ﬂuid perspective as discussed in Sects . 2 and 3 . However , when trauma occurs due to brain injury , strokes , or other processes , charged mole - cules and ions are in imbalance and cannot be neglected . In these circumstances , electrochemical effects play a crucial role in the overall balance of stresses , the intake of ﬂuids , and tissue deformation . Moving forward , an understanding of brain mechanics must combine these multiple phases and must be informed by subcellular and cellular phenomena at the neuron level . 5 Electromechanics 5 . 1 Biomechanics and mechanobiology Neurons , along with glial cells , e . g . , astrocytes and oligo - dendrocytes are the major cell types in the brain . The Greek word glia , γ λ ια , literally means glue . Glial cells do not conduct electrical signals , and their role in the brain was originally thought to be restricted to structural support and mechanical protection for neurons . However , they are now known to participate actively in the growth , migration , regu - lation , and healing of neurons through various mechanisms including synaptic connection regulation and protein synthe - sis ( Pfrieger 2010 ) . This initial misconception highlights the need to study conjointly electrophysiology , biophysics , and mechanics when tackling problems such as brain develop - ment , damage , and healing . 5 . 2 Literature review Many current research activities aim at understanding brain functionfromtheproteintothefunctionalscaleswiththegoal to establish direct relationships with well - known diseases . However , today’s major research campaigns focus primarily on the electrophysiological nature of this problem and almost entirely neglect the role of mechanical effects . Yet , in paral - lel to these efforts , recent ﬁndings suggest that major brain development mechanisms and diseases are directly linked to the mechanical response of the brain . Traumatic brain injury , spinal cord injury , Alzheimer’s disease , and cancer have all shown to be dependent on the mechanical behavior of neu - rons and glial cells ( Suresh 2007 ; Ouyang et al . 2010 ; Gold - stein et al . 2012 ) . The long time scale involved in the evolution of demen - tia and cancer implies that the coupling between biochemi - cal and mechanical properties of cells is extremely complex to establish either experimentally or numerically . Neverthe - less , it has now been establish that traumatic brain injuries ( and especially repeated injuries ) play a role in the long - term evolution of diseases through post - traumatic epilepsy ( Kharatishvili et al . 2009 ) or tauopathies ( Goldstein et al . 2012 ) . Short - term events such as traumatic brain injury and spinal cord injury , however , provide quasi - immediate alterations of both mechanical and biochemical properties of the injured cells . Additionally , after a long tradition of researchfocusedexclusivelyonmechanicalcriteria , mechan - ical injuries are now the subject of new research efforts , both experimentally and numerically , with the goal to evaluate the resulting electrophysiological alterations . In this section , we present these advances by focusing primarily on traumatic brain injury and spinal cord injury and their effects on indi - vidual neurons . From mechanical insult to electrophysiological deﬁcit . Dur - ing the propagation of a pressure wave in the cranium cav - ity , e . g . , from blast or head impact or the sudden stretch or compression of the spinal cord , neuronal cells are sub - jected to either an intense overpressure that occurs within microseconds or a large strain followed by immediate relax - ation . Studies of cellular response after blast and strain events provide evidence of degenerative processes in the neuron itself ( Leung et al . 2008 ; Duncan et al . 2011 ) . However , most of the experimental efforts to study this phenomenon at the cellular level generally overlook its chemical and elec - trical properties crucial to fulﬁll its basic mission . Again , the neuronal electrical properties are inherently relying on the structural cell components—in this case , the membrane’s ability to exchange ions with the extracellular matrix ( Koch 1999 ) . The functional evaluation of cell injury as caused by strain or pressure gradients , either temporal or spatial , thus 123 Mechanics of the brain 943 intrinsicallydependsonthemembraneandthecytoskeleton’s mechanical cohesion . Experimental efforts . Neuropathological and neurological traumatic brain injuries and spinal cord injuries ranging from simple edema or axonal injury to cognitive deﬁcits or post - traumatic stress disorders have been widely stud - ied in both animal models and humans ( Hicks et al . 2010 ; Duncan et al . 2011 ; Goldstein et al . 2012 ) . At the cellular level , these injuries have been more speciﬁcally linked to cytoskeleton alterations , neurotransmitter deﬁcits , disruption of calcium homeostasis , increase in synaptic calcium inﬂux , mitochondrial disturbances , loss in membrane permeabil - ity , blood brain barrier dysfunction , demyelination , axonal swelling , diffuse axonal injury , and even altered gene expres - sion ( Smith et al . 2003 ; Cernak and Noble - Haeusslein 2010 ; Ouyang et al . 2010 ; Alford et al . 2011 ; Peter and Mofrad 2012 ; Spaethling and Meaney 2012 ; Hue et al . 2013 ) . Some purely mechanistic damage criteria have been pro - posed ( Smith et al . 1999 ) , but it is only recently that a link has been made between mechanical properties and function . A ﬁrst study evaluated visual evoked potentials in guinea pig optic nerves before and after stretch ( Bain and Meaney 2000 ) . In guinea pig spinal cord white matter , the injury level was quantiﬁed by measuring membrane integrity and com - pound action potential propagation under ex vivo electrical stimuli after tensile ( Shi and Whitebone 2006 ) , compressive ( Ouyang et al . 2008 ) and blast loading ( Connell et al . 2011 ) . At the protein scale , leaky voltage - gated sodium ion channels were observed after trauma . The degree of trauma of these Nav1 . 6 ion channels was quantiﬁed by the shift in the condi - tioning potential necessary to recover the pre - trauma current characteristics ( Wang et al . 2009 ) . However , this left - shift potential was not directly related to mechanical parameters , but rather based on a direct modiﬁcation of electrophysio - logical properties . Numericalefforts . Neuronalelectrochemicalinteractionprop - erties , especially at the membrane level , are relatively well describedthankstothepioneeringworkofHodgkinandHux - ley Hodgkin and Huxley ( 1952 ) . This model and its deriva - tives involve the consideration of currents and ion concentra - tions through and along the neuronal membrane ( Koch 1999 ; Shepherd 2004 ) . Computational simulations making use of ﬁnite element schemes allow us to identify stress extrema and stress proﬁles during traumatic brain injury at the cel - lular level ( Jérusalem and Dao 2012 ) and at the tissue level ( Moore et al . 2009 ; Nyein et al . 2010 ; Cloots et al . 2013 ; Gupta and Przekwas 2013 ; Jean et al . 2014 ) . However , these efforts generally only provide a set of mechanical criteria for the observed damage , and a direct link between mechanical quantities and functional alterations is missing . To this end , a model for the hyperpolarization / left shifts of the ion channel current was proposed ( Boucher et al . 2012 ) to capture the experimentally observed effects ( Wang et al . 2009 ) . This model successfully reproduces the effect of trauma - induced blebbing on the electrophysiological prop - erties of a membrane patch . Building on the same left - shift mechanism , a similar study indicated a marked difference in the behavior of potentials in subthreshold , < 14mV of poten - tial shift , and supra - threshold , > 14mV , traumas ( Volman and Ng 2013 ) . Other approaches focusing on demyelination , a classical hallmark of multiple sclerosis , and its geomet - ric effect on the additional exposition of the membrane to the surrounding medium date back to the 1970s ( Waxman and Brill 1978 ) and have been extended to explore the effect of drug treatment on the conduction in the damaged region ( Babbs and Shi 2013 ) . Despite a growing interest in link - ing trauma and electrophysiological alterations , the intrinsic relation between mechanogeometrical phenomena including stress , strain , and strain rates , and electrophysiological alter - ations including potentials and currents has not been included in these models . Recently , a model that directly links macroscopic strain and strain rate to functional deﬁcits in guinea pig white matter spinal cord during stretch loading was proposed ( Jérusalem et al . 2014 ; García - Grajales et al . 2014 ) . This model con - sists of three components : a mechanical model to scale down any macroscopic strain to the microscopic membrane level , an electrophysiological model to describe the electri - cal propagation within the axon , and a coupling model to link the microscopic strain by deﬁning two types of alter - ations : geometric , i . e . , due to geometric changes during stretch , and damaging , i . e . , due to an excess of strain at the membrane level leading to membrane and ion channels fail - ure . 5 . 3 Concluding remarks While it is now appreciated that mechanics can dramat - ically alter the electrophysiological response of neurons in the short and long terms , the simultaneous measure - ment of electrophysiological and mechanical properties of the mammalian brain remains an extremely challenging problem . However , mathematical and computational mod - els can be used as support tools to characterize the electro - mechanical features of the brain across multiple scales of observation to gain a global insight into brain function in health and disease . This will eventually allow us to estab - lish a link between cellular damage at the microscale , func - tions at the mesoscale , and behavioral alteration at the macroscale . 123 944 A . Goriely et al . mc1 mc1 mc1 mc1 mc1 mc1 peehs peehs gip gip woc woc Fig . 9 Surface morphology of the mammalian brain . Larger mammals have larger and more folded brains : The bovine brain ( bottom ) is larger andmorefoldedthantheporcinebrain ( middle ) whichislargerandmore folded than the ovine brain ( top ) . The cortical thickness is relatively similar in all mammals 6 Brain development 6 . 1 Biomechanics and mechanobiology For a long time , the development of the mammalian brain was viewed as a purely morphogenetic process , independent of forces , stress , stretch , or strain . There is now increasing evi - dencethatmechanicalfactorssuchasthickness , stiffness , and growth play a signiﬁcant role in regulating gyriﬁcation , the process of brain folding . A better understanding of the mech - anisms that drive brain folding may have direct implications on the diagnostics—and possibly treatment - of neurological disorders such as schizophrenia or autism . 6 . 2 Literature review For more than a century , the unique surface morphology of the mammalian brain has fascinated scientists of all disci - plines alike ( Welker 1990 ) . Recent developments in medical imaging reveal that the folding pattern of our brain is not only associated with intelligence , but is also closely correlated with neurological dysfunction ( Raybaud and Widjaja 2011 ) . Figure 9 illustrates the characteristic surface morphology of the mammalian brain . The photographs of bovine , porcine , and ovine brains reveal two important characteristics : Larger mammals tend to have larger brains and larger brains tend to be more folded than smaller brains ( Zilles et al . 2013 ) . With a volume of 1200cm 3 , a surface area of 1800cm 2 , and a cor - tical thickness of thicknesses of 2 . 5mm , the human brain is one of the largest and most folded brains . The ratio between brain surface area and volume , and with it the degree of gyri - ﬁcation , varies signiﬁcantly between species ( Welker 1990 ) . Yet , as the frontal coronal sections in Fig . 9 indicate , the thickness of the outer layer remains remarkably well pre - served : It varies by less than an order of magnitude across all species . The mammalian brain possesses an outer cortical layer of gray matter , which contains primarily cell bodies , and an inner subcortical core of white matter , which contains the axons that connect them . The development of this distinct microstructural architecture takes place in two stages , which are crucial for cortical folding ( Roth and Dicke 2005 ) : First , progenitor cells located around the ventricles divide sym - metrically into two new progenitor cells to increase the total number of cells in the brain ; second , these newly created cells divide asymmetrically into a progenitor cell and a neuron ( Sun and Hevner 2014 ) . All neurons of the same progeni - tor cell migrate outwards and form a cortical column ( Hatten 1999 ) . Accordingly , symmetric division is closely related to a growth in surface area , while asymmetric division is closely related to a growth in cortical thickness ( Roth and Dicke 2005 ) . During later stages of development , tangential expan - sion is associated with the maturation of the neocortex caused by an increase of neurons in size , the formation of cortico - cortical connections , and the addition of intracortical glial cells ( Welker 1990 ) . Pathological cell division or cell migration can cause abnormalities in surface area or thickness ( Hatten 1999 ) . Prominent examples are polymicrogyria , associated with a large number of short and small folds that can increase sur - face area , and lissencephaly , associated with an increased cortical thickness and a small number of long and shal - low folds ( Raybaud and Widjaja 2011 ) . Severe malforma - tions are often correlated with developmental delay , epilepsy , schizophrenia , and autism . The ﬁrst mechanical model that explains brain develop - ment dates back almost four decades ( Richman et al . 1975 ) . It attributes cortical folding to differential growth , a mech - anism to release growth - induced residual stresses by sur - face buckling . While the model predictions agree well with stress distributions from dissection experiments , they rely on an unrealistically large stiffness ratio between the cor - tical and subcortical layers ( Bayly et al . 2014 ) . To address these shortcomings , an alternative model was proposed more than two decades later ( Essen 1997 ) . It attributes cortical folding to axonal tension , a mechanism that brings function - ally related units topographically closer together . While this second model explains folding irrespective of the stiffness ratio , it disagrees with the stress distributions from dissec - tion experiments ( Xu et al . 2010 ) . The controversies around these two models have raised the question whether mechan - 123 Mechanics of the brain 945 c E s t c 0 6 12 18 24 λ & & 0 1 2 3 4 0 2 4 6 8 E 0 1 2 3 4 0 1 2 3 4 G c G s t c 0 6 12 18 24 λ Fig . 10 Analytical estimates of the brain surface morphology . The gyral wavelength λ increases with increasing cortical thickness t c ( from blue to red ) , increasing stiffness ratio between cortex and subcortex E c / E s ( left ) and decreasing growth ratio between cortex and subcortex G c / G s ( right ) ics is suitable at all to explain the mechanisms of cortical folding . Recent progress in extreme mechanics of growing mat - ter holds promise to provide new insight into the developing brain . An emerging trend is to combine both approaches to account for differential growth between cortex and subcortex in combination with chronic axon elongation in the subcor - tex ( Bayly et al . 2013 ) . Using the nonlinear ﬁeld theories of mechanics supplemented by the theory of ﬁnite growth , the latest brain models characterize the developing brain as a morphogenetically growing outer layer on a mechanically growing inner core ( Budday et al . 2014 ) . To establish analytical estimates for the critical folding pressure and the critical wavelength , we can interpret cor - tical folding as the instability problem of a conﬁned , lay - ered medium subjected to growth - induced compression ( Biot 1957 ) . The classical Föppl – von Kármán theory then allows us to characterize cortical deﬂection through a fourth order plate equation ( Bayly et al . 2013 ) . With a sinusoidal ansatz for the cortical deﬂection and a Maxwell - type viscoelastic ansatz for the subcortical transverse force , we can relate the gyral wavelength to the cortical thickness , stiffness , and growth rate ( Budday et al . 2015a ) . Since the absolute corti - cal stiffness and growth rate are poorly characterized , it has become common practice to explore the role of the relative cortical stiffness and growth rate with respect to the subcor - tical properties . Figure 10 shows analytical estimates for the brain sur - face morphology for varying cortical thicknesses , and vary - ing stiffness and growth ratios between cortex and subcortex ( Budday et al . 2014 ) . The graphs reveal that the gyral wave - length , the distance between two neighboring gyri , is directly proportional to the cortical thickness , to the third root of the stiffness ratio between cortex and subcortex , and to the sub - cortical growth rate . For the two extreme cases of slow and fast subcortical growth , the subcortex behaves either solid - or ﬂuid - like . While a solid - like subcortex has no affect on r : t c = 10 r : t c = 20 r : t c = 30 r : t c = 40 t 1 t 2 t 3 t 4 t 1 t 2 t 3 t 4 t 1 t 2 t 3 t 4 t 1 t 2 t 3 t 4 Fig . 11 Computational modeling of brain surface morphology . Keep - ing the thickness of the cortical layer constant , we observe that larger brains tend to be more folded . Indeed , as the radius - to - thickness ratio increases from r : t c = 10 , top , to r : t c = 40 , bottom , the brain surface becomes more convoluted as time evolves from t 1 to t 4 the gyral wavelength , a ﬂuid - like subcortex can signiﬁcantly increase the gyral wavelength . To explore the progression of gyriﬁcation beyond the onset of folding , we can adopt the continuum theory of ﬁnite growth ( Ambrosi et al . 2011 ) . This theory consists of a set of ﬁve equations , which deﬁne the kinematics , the constitutive behavior , themechanical equilibrium , thegrowthkinematics , and the growth kinetics ( Menzel and Kuhl 2012 ) . Kinemati - cally , the key ingredient is the multiplicative decomposition of the deformation gradient into an elastic and a growth part . Constitutively , only the elastic part of the deformation gra - dient enters the formulation of the hyperelastic free energy , which we introduce to deﬁne the stresses . Dynamically , these stresses enter the mechanical equilibrium equations . In addi - tion to these standard continuum equations , we need to deﬁne the kinematics and kinetics of growth ( Papastavrou et al . 2013 ) . Kinematically , it is common to assume that growth is either isotropic or anisotropic with a preferred direction . In either case , we can parameterize growth in terms of a single , scalar - valued growth multiplier . Kinetically , it seems reason - able to model cortical growth as purely morphogenetic and subcortical growth as either stress driven ( Bayly et al . 2013 ) or strain driven ( Budday et al . 2014 ) . Figure 11 illustrates a computational simulation of gyri - ﬁcation for varying radius - to - thickness ratios . The idealized ellipsoidal brain model predicts the gradual formation of gyri 123 946 A . Goriely et al . and sulci . Folding is initiated ﬁrst along the long axis of the ellipsoid where the curvature of the ellipsoid is lowest ( Bud - day et al . 2015c ) . As time evolves , folding gradually propa - gates outward . Once the folding pattern has formed , gyri and sulci grow deeper until they begin to form contact . Compu - tational modeling not only conﬁrms our analytical estimates , but also predicts the formation of complex surface morpholo - gies with asymmetric patterns and secondary folds . The sim - ulation explains the observation that larger brains are more folded than smaller brains : As the brain size increases , the surface becomes more convoluted . The model also explains why lissencephalic brains with an increased cortical thick - ness have a smooth surface with a small number of large folds and why polymicrogyric brains with an increased sur - face area have a large number of small folds . Thickening of the leptomeninges overlying the malformed cortex is seen in 80 % of cases . This may impose physical constraints on the developing cortex , forcing it to undergo increased folding in order to be accommodated in an area where expansion is lim - ited by the rigidity of the overlying leptomeninges ( Squier and Jansen 2014 ) . 6 . 3 Open questions and challenges Recent developments have shown that mechanical model - ing can explain cortical folding during brain development ( Budday et al . 2014 ) . Both analytical and computational models support the hypothesis that mechanical features such as the cortical thickness , stiffness , and growth are impor - tant regulators of gyriﬁcation ( Bayly et al . 2013 ) . This rela - tionship is clinically important since modern imaging tech - niques reveal a close correlation between brain form and function ( Raybaud and Widjaja 2011 ) . In severe neurolog - ical disorders such as schizophrenia and autism , speciﬁc regions of the brain display signiﬁcant microstructural alter - ations correlated with pathological morphologies . Remark - ably , either pharmacological treatment or behavior therapy can alter—and possibly revert—these malformations over time . Mechanical modeling could serve as a valuable tool to systematically characterize healthy brain surface mor - phologies , identify pathological alterations , and , ultimately , guide the design of treatment strategies for neurological dis - orders . Analytical modeling provides a quick ﬁrst insight into the critical conditions at the onset of folding ; yet , it fails to pre - dict the evolution of complex instability patterns in the post - critical regime ( Ben Amar and Goriely 2005 ) . Computational modeling allows us to predict realistic three - dimensional sur - facemorphologiesattheonsetoffoldingandbeyond ( Menzel and Kuhl 2012 ) . However , the calibration and validation of analytical and computational models remain a major chal - lenge . In humans , cortical folding takes place in utero during 24 and 32 weeks of gestation . In preterm infants , cortical folding is incomplete at birth , which allows us to explore the evolution of folding patterns using magnetic resonance imag - ing ( Raybaud et al . 2013 ) . Recent trends in clinical imaging indicate that we may soon be able to image cortical fold - ing noninvasively in utero . Mechanics could play a central role in translating these images into quantitative diagnostic predictors of brain function . To increase conﬁdence in mechanical modeling , in addi - tion to a thorough , systematic mechanical characterization ( Budday et al . 2015b ) , we would need longitudinal sequences given by multiple images of the same brain in time . In the fer - ret , where folding takes place postnatally , longitudinal imag - ing studies have been performed to inform model design and model calibration ( Knutsen et al . 2010 , 2013 ) . In humans , where folding is almost completed upon birth , longitudinal information is mainly based on brain atlases , merged images from a large number of scans of preterm infants ( Raybaud et al . 2013 ) . While those averaged images provide excellent insight into the common overall features of the human brain , they smooth out local perturbations such as secondary and tertiary folds , which are typical indicators of some neurolog - ical disorders ( Raybaud and Widjaja 2011 ) . Multiple scans of a single individual at different time points throughout the gyriﬁcation process would be critical to interpret local varia - tions in cortical folding and identify mechanisms of malfor - mation . Computational modeling is an ideal tool—if not the only one—to bridge the scales and correlate subcellular and cel - lular events such as axonal migration and axonal elonga - tion with clinically relevant characteristics such as cortical thickness , surface area , and gyriﬁcation indices . Yet , most existing growth models are still purely phenomenological as they characterize growth through a single growth multiplier without a clear microstructural interpretation ( Menzel and Kuhl 2012 ) . By incorporating the underlying biology and biochemistry , plain mechanical models could be made more mechanistic ( Budday et al . 2014 ) . For gray matter , we could correlate surface growth to symmetric progenitor cell divi - sionandthicknessgrowthtoasymmetriccelldivision ( Hatten 1999 ) . This effect suggests a modiﬁcation in the kinematics and kinetics of growth : First , the growth tensor should not be considered as isotropic , but rather as transversely isotropic with independent surface and thickness contributions ; sec - ond , these two mechanisms could be modeled independently intimeandbedrivenbydifferent biochemical cues . For white matter , we could correlate growth to chronic axon elonga - tion ( Bray 1984 ) . This would suggest a regionally varying anisotropic growth tensor to allow for growth along the prin - cipal axon orientation and a growth multiplier that could be tied to chronic axon elongation experiments ( Holland et al . 2014 ) . 123 Mechanics of the brain 947 Fig . 12 Schematic of modeling approaches to brain tumor growth and control at microscopic and macroscopic levels Brain Tumors Biomechanics : (cid:129) Macroscopic models Models : Mechanobiology : (cid:129) Cellular models (cid:129) Mechanical (cid:129) Phenomenological (cid:129) Diffusion type (cid:129) Continuum (cid:129) Sequencing Therapies (cid:129) Nano drug delivery (cid:129) Optimization of therapies (cid:129) Cell function (cid:129) Gene expression (cid:129) Proliferation (cid:129) Cell motility Multi - scale models : Changes in Cell Deformability : (cid:129) Angiogenesis (cid:129) Vascular growth (cid:129) Drug delivery (cid:129) Cell motility (cid:129) Structural changes at cellular level (cid:129) Changes in cell size / shape Biochemical effects : (cid:129) Extrinsic effects (cid:129) Intrinsic effects Macroscopic Microscopic Modeling Consequences 6 . 4 Concluding remarks Mechanical factors are increasingly recognized as important regulators of brain morphology . Recent studies indicate that analytical and computational modeling can explain physio - logical gyrogenesis and pathological malformations . Under - standing the process of cortical folding in the mammalian brain has direct implications on the diagnostics—and pos - sibly treatment—of neurological disorders including severe retardation , epilepsy , schizophrenia , and autism . 7 Brain tumors The past two decades have witnessed a signiﬁcant growth in research on how the mechanical and biophysical proper - ties of cells and subcellular structures inﬂuence the growth and progression of cancers . In recent years , the application of continuum mechanics to biology and the biomedical sci - ences has provided a broad framework that has led to invalu - able insights and advances in many areas of the biomed - ical sciences . As a result , researchers have started to apply these methods and approaches to study the biomechanics and mechanobiology of cancer ( Suresh 2007 ) . Cancer is a disease that arises from dysfunction of cells , resulting in uncontrolled proliferation , leading to disruption of tissue and organ function . In particular , brain tumors are atypical , aberrant aggregates of abnormal cells that form in thebrainparenchymaofthecentralnervoussystem . Themost aggressive of the tumors , clinically classiﬁed as gliomas , is the Grade IV glioblastoma multiforme . Glioblastoma mul - tiforme appear to have a peak occurrence in the 45 – 60year old demographic and present radiologically as a grossly het - erogeneous mass , with ring enhancement around a necrotic core . This zone is often surrounded by vasogenic edema , and accompanied by signs of hemorrhage . The multi - scale heterogeneity—from the molecular via cellular to tissue - level manifestation of glioblastoma multiforme—may lie at the heart of why this type of cancer is so resistant to ther - apeutic interventions . Almost a century ago , radical inter - ventions such as surgical hemispherectomy proved ineffec - tive . Even after a century of dramatic advances in neuro - surgery , chemotherapies , and radiotherapies , the prognosis for glioblastoma multiforme remains unchanged and dismal , with a median survival time at diagnosis of 8 – 12 months . 7 . 1 Biomechanics and mechanobiology Although the study of the structure and function of biological systems through the methods of mechanics is encompassed by the ﬁeld of biomechanics , research in the biomechanics of tumors has focused at the macroscopic level on the determi - nation of the mechanical properties of tissue - tumor systems , as summarized in Fig . 12 . In contrast , the emerging ﬁeld of mechanobiology , which lies at the interface of biology , engi - neering , and mechanics , has focused more on the manner in which physical forces act at the microscopic level . Thus , a central challenge in the mechanobiology of tumors is under - standing the effects of mechanotransduction at the cellular level . There has been an implicit assumption in medicine that the genesis and evolution of brain tumors—and cancers in general—have a genetic basis ; however , progress in mechanobiology suggests that changes in cell mechanics , 123 948 A . Goriely et al . alterations in the microstructure of brain tissue , and cellular mechanotransduction may play an equally signiﬁcant role in the development and progression of brain tumors . Brain tumors are phenotypically and genotypically heterogeneous and their complex interaction with the brain parenchyma is the major complication in existing therapies and in the devel - opment of appropriate new treatment strategies . Their diffu - sive , inﬁltrativenaturemakesbraintumorsquitedistinctfrom other solid tumors . In addition , the blood brain barrier is a major impediment to the effective delivery of chemothera - peutic agents . There is a real need to unravel and understand the cellular and molecular biology of glioblastoma multi - forme , and these advances have to go hand in hand with both mathematical models and experimental progress . Although current medical imaging methods have become more sensi - tive and accurate in delineating anatomical features of the brain , they have not produced an effective early detection methodology . There has been signiﬁcant progress on the biological front in identifying the molecular mechanisms of neoplasms in the brain , which has led to rapid identiﬁca - tion of relevant molecular targets . The genomics and pro - teomics explosions suggest possibilities of developing high throughput approaches to determine gene function and thus suggest targets and pathways that form crucial components of brain tumor biology and function . However , advances in clinical oncology , neuroscience , cancer biology , and math - ematical oncology make the present a propitious time for a multipronged attack on brain tumors . A collective , multi - disciplinary approach toward addressing many of the chal - lenges of glioblastoma multiforme promises to deliver new diagnostic and therapeutic techniques that may hopefully lead to a cure for this deadly disease . 7 . 2 Literature review Radiotherapy is one of the primary therapeutic modalities for many primary and metastatic brain tumors . The gold standard to treat glioblastoma multiformes and other primary astro - cytomas , still appears to be optimal surgical resection fol - lowed by radiotherapy . Despite signiﬁcant progress , nearly all glioblastoma multiforme patients see tumor recurrence within the volume of tissue treated with high dose radiation and have a median survival time of approximately 12 months . Figure 13 shows the results of a computational simulation of glioblastoma multiforme growth and progression at diag - nosis , left column , and at patient death , right column , and illustrates the potential of mathematical and computational modeling to assist therapeutic intervention . The seminal contribution in modeling the effects of chemotherapy on glioblastoma multiforme was made by Murray and coworkers ( Tracqui et al . 1995 ) , who used a reaction - diffusion equation to model tumor growth and includedatermmodelingthecellkillkineticsofachemother - Fig . 13 Simulation of glioblastoma multiforme at diagnosis and patient death , left and right columns . The black contour denotes the detectable tumor margin by computer tomography or magnetic res - onance imaging . Colors indicate the gradient of malignant cell den - sity with highest values at the center of the tumor and decreasing val - ues toward the surrounding normal brain tissue , simulations by Gibin Powathil , University of Dundee apeuticagent . Insubsequent work ( Swansonet al . 2003 ) , they quantiﬁed glioma growth and invasion and showed that these types of models could indeed be used as predictive tools in clinical oncology . Later work modeled tumor growth using a Fisher - typeequation , incorporatedtheeffectsofradiotherapy through the linear quadratic model , and studied combination therapies of surgery , chemo - and radiotherapies ( Powathil et al . 2007 ; Rockne et al . 2009 ) . Tumor growth has also been studied through the use of discrete cellular automata models ( Kansal et al . 2000 ) . Cell metabolism can also be incorpo - rated into these models through additional coupled partial differential equations , and the growth of the tumor at any par - ticular location would be determined by the local availability of nutrients . These types of models have also been used to study the Warburg effect , the shift from aerobic respiration to glycolysis in cancer cells . The role of glycolysis in glioma progression and invasion has been studied using evolutionary game theory ( Basanta et al . 2008 ) . Studying the evolution of three different phenotypes under different microenvironmen - tal conditions revealed that the invasive phenotype is selected preferentially under the glycolytic metabolism . Evolutionary models have also been used to study gene expressionandpredictthesequenceofsomaticgeneticevents in the progression to cancer ( Attolini et al . 2010 ) . Pharma - cokinetic and pharmacodynamic methods—particularly lin - ear system analysis—have been used to predict the distrib - 123 Mechanics of the brain 949 ution of the drug temozolomide in tumors and normal tis - sue with particular reference to glioma patients ( Rosso et al . 2009 ) . The effects of radiotherapy on glioblastomas were investigated by assuming the existence of two cell popula - tions : cancer stem cells and normal cells ( Leder et al . 2014 ) . Under the assumption that the cell kill rate differs for these two cell types and that radiation may induce normal cells to dedifferentiate into cancer stem cells , a linear quadratic model is used to study the effects of radiation on these cell types and the results are compared with the experimental data . Finally , one of the more novel therapies for the treat - ment of gliomas is the use of alloreactive cytotoxic T lym - phocytes in treating gliomas ( Kronik et al . 2008 ) . Interest - ingly , celllinesderivedfromhumanglioblastomamultiforme do not exhibit any signiﬁcant radioresistance and it appears that the central nervous system environment and the tumor microenvironment play crucial roles in the radioresistance of glioblastoma multiforme . The ﬁeld of radiation therapy has progressed signiﬁcantly driven by technological advances together with new development in three - dimensional image - guided delivery systems . However , there is little encouraging sign that radiotherapy alone—even with dose escalation— has any greater impact on these intrinsically radioresistant cells . A morepromisingdirectionis thetheoretical andexper - imental investigation of pharmacological agents that interact with radiotherapy synergistically . 7 . 3 Open questions and challenges The interactions between biomechanics , mechanobiology , and cancer biology , in particular cancers of the central ner - vous system , has recently given rise to a research area that has started to attract considerable interest across many disci - plines , and it is a ﬁeld that will undoubtedly gain increas - ing prominence in the coming years . Some of the major broad , open questions in the ﬁeld , in which we can expect progress , include : What are the genetic pathways and muta - tions associated with oncogenesis that result in heterogene - ity of brain tumors , and how can these be carefully exam - ined and probed both experimentally and mathematically ? How does the actual anatomical location of a tumor , together with its genetic proﬁle , inﬂuence tumor heterogeneity and therapeutic efﬁcacy ? Which pathways , e . g . , signaling , apop - tosis , cell cycle , and migration , actively participate in brain tumor response to intracellular and extracellular stimuli , e . g . , growth factors or redox changes ? Other questions relate to the modeling of the interaction between biological , biochemical processes , and the tumor microenvironment , and how these contribute to changes in the molecular structure of the cancer cell membrane and its cytoskeleton . It will be key to determine how the deformation characteristics and structural changes at the cellular level can be linked to the elastic and viscoelastic deformation charac - teristics at the macroscopic level . As a clearer understanding of the response of single cells to loading , as well as their mechanical properties emerges , how can these be general - ized to a clonal mass through appropriate multi - scale mod - eling ? In broader terms , how do the mechanical properties of tumor cells , alterations in their cell shape , and resultant variations in cell adhesion , affect the genesis and evolution of brain tumors . Finally , as the blood brain barrier of the central nervous system represents a major obstacle to drug delivery , how can biomechanical and mechanobiological models be used to study new treatment modalities ? 7 . 4 Concluding remarks There is a critical need to develop appropriate models that will approximately replicate the biological complexity of our brain . These models can then be used to examine and probe interactions between brain tumor cells , cellular pathways , and constituents of normal brain function . At the same time , the models can be used to assess and appraise novel thera - pies that target precise genes and pathways . In these efforts , resources would be necessary to build up chemical and com - binatorial libraries to investigate molecular targets and path - ways . There is currently a dearth of mathematical models of immune system function in the central nervous system compartment . These types of models , coupled with current understanding of the cancer biology of the central nervous system , will be necessary to understand how brain tumors and the immune system interact in the central nervous sys - tem , especially when developing immunotherapies to treat glioblastoma multiforme and other types of brain tumors . 8 Brain surgery and intracranial pressure The intracranial pressure is the pressure inside the skull and is a function of the volume and compliance of each part of the various intracranial contents . 8 . 1 Biomechanics and mechanobiology In the normal homeostatic state , intracranial pressure is con - trolled closely by the body through a variety of mecha - nisms . However , this state can become impossible to main - tain in pathological conditions . The intracranial pressure can decrease , or more frequently increase , with a consequent impact on brain function . Control of intracranial pressure is a vital aspect of treatment of patients with neurosurgical conditions and an understanding of intracranial pressure is important to allow us to understand the issues when think - ing about modeling such a complex situation ( Woods et al . 2009 ) . 123 950 A . Goriely et al . 8 . 2 Literature review The most commonly used method of describing the inter - play between intracranial components is the Monro – Kellie hypothesis proposed by a Scottish surgeon and his student in thelate18thcentury ( Kellie1824 ; Monro1783 ) . Thismethod assumes a non - expansile ﬁxed - volume skull ( Mokri 2001 ) . Therefore , the three main components within the skull – brain , cerebrospinal ﬂuid , and blood—must exist in a state of vol - ume equilibrium . This division in components implies that if one increases in volume , there needs to be a compensatory reduction in the other components . If this compensation does not occur , the intracranial pressure will rise . As an example , assume there is a rise in the volume of tissue , e . g . , a swollen traumatized brain . The cerebrospinal ﬂuid is ﬁrst to exit the skull in compensation , followed by a reduction in volume of venous blood , and ﬁnally a restriction of arterial inﬂow . If the rise is caused by an increase in cerebrospinal ﬂuid volume , a reduction in volume of venous blood will occur ( Jeevan et al . 2008 ) ; yet , there is also compression of the brain tissue itself . Of course , the skull is not a complete sphere and there is an exit hole through the foramen magnum through which the spinal cord exits , as well as various holes through which cranial nerves and vessels enter and exit the brain . Increasing the intracranial pressure leads to compression of important brain regions , and a risk of herniation syndromes , whereby certain regions may become pushed through these holes , stretched or compressed , which critically affects their function . In particular at the foramen magnum , dysfunction of the brainstem can lead to decreased consciousness , abnor - mal breathing , altered blood pressure and heart rate , coma , and ﬁnally death . In a vicious cycle , some of these early symptoms can cause a further rise in intracranial pressure , in particular if breathing and oxygenation or removal of carbon dioxide from the blood are affected . Emergency neurosurgical treatment is designed around controlling and treating raised intracranial pressure and minimizing the effect of herniation syndromes on the function of the brain . Reducing raised intracranial pressure allows maintenance of cerebral perfusion . The cerebral perfusion pressure is the difference between the mean arterial pressure and the intracranial pressure . Cerebral perfusion pressure is main - tained by a mechanism of autoregulation wherein the brain’s arteries and arterioles are able to vary their overall diam - eter to maintain cerebral perfusion pressure when mean arterial pressure is between approximately 65mmHg and 150mmHg . Outside of these limits , however , autoregula - tion fails , with often disastrous consequences for the patient . A drop in systemic blood pressure , e . g . , directly leads to a decrease in perfusion of the brain . Intracranial pressure varies according to position and age . Pressure is higher when recumbent than when upright . When lying down , the pressure will also rise when the patient is asleep , in particular due to retention of carbon dioxide during sleep . The positional aspect is in particular related to venous drainage and cerebrospinal ﬂuid ﬂow into the spinal column being assisted by gravity . The intracranial pressure will also vary according to age with newborns having an intracranial pressure of roughly 0mmHg . Babies have an intracranial pressure of between 5 and 10mmHg , children have a supine intracranial pressure of approximately 12mmHg , and adults have an intracranial pressure up to approximately 10mmHg ( Morritt et al . 2010 ) . When measuring the intracranial pressure , the seminal work by Lundberg in the 1960s showed three waveform patterns , A - waves , B - waves , and C - waves ( Lundberg et al . 1965 ; Risberg et al . 1969 ) . C - waves are the normal varia - tion in intracranial pressure with the cardiac cycle . B - waves occur during periods of moderate intracranial pressure ele - vation up to 20 - 40mmHg , lasting between 5 and 10 minutes , which then return back to their normal baseline . They can be seen in particular during the sleep without any patho - logical importance . Three B - waves within a 24 - hour period can be accepted as within normal limits ( Wall et al . 2014 ) . A - waves , which are also called plateaus , are very abnormal waveforms where the pressure will suddenly rise to often above 50mmHg and last 30 minutes or more ; once the wave - form starts to return to normal , it often does not fully return back to the original baseline . A - waves are indicative of a loss of compliance of brain tissue and autoregulation of cere - bral blood ﬂow . They occur in the acute phase of impending catastrophic intracranial pressure waves with herniation and are a very poor prognostic sign . When looking at the complex brain in the young , there are some additional difﬁculties . A baby’s skull is not a ﬁxed volume . The sutures , which allow for growth between the different plates of the skull also allow for some expansion of skull volume as compensation for raised intracranial volume . In particular chronic conditions , slow rises may be accom - modated by an expansion of the head size , rather than by an increase in intracranial pressure . For instance , patients with craniosynostosis , an early fusion of the skull plates illustrated in Fig . 14 , show raised intracranial pressure ( Jeevan et al . 2008 ) . Strip craniectomy , a surgical operation that removes part of the skull to allow for further expansion , reduces the intracranial pressure , but may lead to bulging ( Marucci et al . 2008 ) as illustrated in Fig . 15 . Further monitoring of the intracranial pressure is critical to ensure normal development ( Eley et al . 2012 ) . 8 . 3 Open questions and challenges The complex relationship between skull volume and pres - sure implies that the Monro – Kellie hypothesis does not apply under pathological conditions . Also , in young populations , 123 Mechanics of the brain 951 Fig . 14 Preoperative appearance of children with unicoronal cran - iosynostosis , anearlyfusionoftheskullplates . Craniosynostosiscauses an increase in intracranial pressure and requires intracranial pressure monitoring , adapted from Eley et al . ( 2012 ) Fig . 15 Clinicalphotographandcomputedtomographicscanofapedi - atric patient a year after modiﬁed strip craniectomy for sagittal synosto - sis , demonstrating vertex bulge and bicoronal synostosis ( Marucci et al . 2008 ) the precise importance of levels of intracranial pressure and cerebral perfusion pressure are not fully understood . A cere - bral perfusion pressure of 60 or 65mmHg will often be taken by intensivists and neurosurgeons as the aim of any treat - ment . However , there is no really strong evidence to sup - port this value as an absolute target . Since treatment may involve drugs , which have signiﬁcant effects on blood pres - sure throughout the body and other side effects , the need to chase a number on a screen must always be balanced by potential side effects of such treatment . Sometimes a lower cerebral perfusion pressure may be preferred over the side effects that can occur with targeted therapy . Clinically trying to examine the outcome of patients who have raised intracranial pressure is often difﬁcult . Rarely do these patients have solely a raised intracranial pressure with - out , e . g . , traumatic injuries to the brain or developmental abnormalities such as neonatal hydrocephalus . Being able to extricate those long - term issues caused purely by the raised intracranial pressure , rather than by these parallel conditions , Fig . 16 The length scales involved with traumatic brain injury ranging from decimeters at the head level to micrometers at the cellular level , reproduced from Cloots et al . ( 2012 ) becomesdifﬁcult . Todate , thereisaseverelackofsufﬁciently large patient population data to make ﬁrm statements about outcomes with reliable statistical strength . 8 . 4 Concluding remarks Intracranial pressure and its assessment are important tools to understand both brain modeling and clinical issues when deciding treatment algorithms for individual patients . For modeling to be successful we will need a signiﬁcant increase in our level of understanding of the inﬂuence of intracranial pressure on brain function , and equally , the potential for brain function to affect intracranial pressure . In particular , the con - stant changes of intracranial pressure and autoregulation will be difﬁcult to model , especially since we do not fully under - stand all the mechanisms that control intracranial pressure in bothchildrenandadults . Itisonlybyacollaborativeapproach between clinician scientists and mathematical modelers that we will move closer to understanding this intricate situation . 9 Traumatic brain injury 9 . 1 Biomechanics and mechanobiology Traumatic brain injury causes high rates of mortality and dis - ability ( Brooks et al . 1997 ; Waxweiler et al . 1995 ) and results from a mechanical insult on the head , often due to trafﬁc acci - dents but also due to sports accidents and falls ( Jennett 1996 ) . As discussed in Sects . 4 and 5 , the mechanical impact on the head is translated into deformation of the brain tissue , which sets in motion an extended neurochemical cascade on the cel - lular level ( Gennarelli 1993 ; Morrison et al . 1998 ) . Thereby , the mechanism of traumatic brain injury involves the biome - chanics and mechanobiology at various length scales ( Cloots et al . 2011 , 2013 ; Meaney et al . 2014 ) , see Fig . 16 . 9 . 2 Literature review The most commonly used brain injury criterion in the auto - motive industry is the Head Injury Criterion , a scalar function 123 952 A . Goriely et al . of the translational acceleration pulse of the head ( NHTSA 1972 ) , which is used for safety assessments based on the interpretation of crash tests and virtual experiments . The Head Injury Criterion is quantiﬁed using experimental data , in which only anterior – posterior contact loading has been applied to human cadavers . One of the major points of criti - cismoftheHeadInjuryCriterionisthatitdoesnotaccountfor angular accelerations , which have been shown to play a sig - niﬁcant role during brain motion in vivo ( Ibrahim et al . 2010 ; Sabet et al . 2008 ) . Furthermore , the Head Injury Criterion does not distinguish between different injury mechanisms . For a better understanding of the relation between a mechan - ical load and traumatic brain injury , more advanced methods have been developed in which the internal head response is considered . These methods include the usage of physical and numerical models of the head and the brain ( Margulies et al . 1998 ; Ivarsson et al . 2000 ) . Numerical models to predict head injury were initially developed in the 1970s and early 1980s , but more recent numerical head models were not developed until the early 1990s ( Goldsmith 2001 ) . Since then , numerical head mod - els were continuously reﬁned to include more details of the anatomy and the mechanical behavior of the head and brain . In the past decade , three - dimensional numerical head models have been developed , containing viscoelastic mate - rial behavior and internal geometries that account for the main anatomical substructures including the ventricles and the falces ( Kleiven 2007 ; Hrapko et al . 2009 ) , see Fig . 17 . Validation of head models often relies on the results of a number of cadaver experiments ( Nahum et al . 1977 ; Hardy et al . 2001 ) . The morphological heterogeneities of the cere - bral cortex in the form of gyri and sulci are important for the deformation that is experienced by the tissue ( Cloots et al . 2008 ) . In the latest head models , more and more of these het - erogeneities are incorporated . For example , the most recent three - dimensionalheadmodelsevencontainthedetailedsub - structures of the cerebral cortex ( Ho and Kleiven 2009 ; Chen and Ostoja - Starzewski 2010 ) . Besidesadetaileddescriptionofanatomicalstructures , the interaction between the various components inside the skull plays a crucial role . In particular , the cerebrospinal ﬂuid is considered to have a protective function for the brain during mechanical loading , making it an important constituent of the head with respect to traumatic brain injury . The cerebrospinal ﬂuid and the meningeal layers are often modeled either as a solid layer with a low shear modulus or as a sliding interface In both in vivo and in vitro experimental studies , the com - plex deformation of the brain during an impact load has been measured . Forexample , braindeformationduringmildaccel - eration of the head of volunteers has been quantiﬁed using magnetic resonance imaging ( Bayly et al . 2005 ; Feng et al . 2010 ) , helping to elucidate the role of the skull – brain inter - face and the mechanisms leading to traumatic brain injury . Fig . 17 FiniteelementheadmodelofKleiven2007andpredictedmax - imum principal strain in a sports accident , reproduced from Cloots et al . ( 2013 ) In another study ( Lauret et al . 2009 ) , full - ﬁeld deformation data were obtained from digital image correlation on slices of porcine brain tissue subjected to higher accelerations , show - ing the complexity of the deformation ﬁeld and the role of the substructure of the brain , see Fig . 18 . These experimen - tal investigations , where full - ﬁeld deformation with a high spatial resolution is obtained , may enable a further , more detailed , validation of numerical head models ( Ibrahim et al . 2010 ; Sabet et al . 2008 ) . For reliable prediction of the mechanical response of the brain with numerical head models , an accurate description of the constitutive behavior of its constituents is required . Var - ious approaches to characterize and model the viscoelastic response of brain tissue exist ( Van Dommelen et al . 2011 ) . A constitutive law for a numerical head model should accu - rately describe the mechanical response of brain tissue for large deformations , complex loading histories , high strain rates—the loading typically changes within milliseconds— and deformation modes that occur during an impact to the head . Although some accurate nonlinear constitutive mod - els have been proposed ( Hrapko et al . 2006 ; Bilston et al . 2001 ) , most head models are still based on a linear viscoelas - tic description ( Hrapko et al . 2009 ) . As discussed in Sect . 2 , methods to characterize the mechanical properties of brain tissue include rheological 123 Mechanics of the brain 953 Fig . 18 Local displacement ﬁeld in an accelerated porcine brain slice and corresponding equivalent von Mises strain ﬁeld , reproduced from Lauret et al . ( 2009 ) approaches based on shear or compressive loading . With these methods , the viscoelastic properties of brain tissue have been characterized , leading to a wide variety of data , how - ever , with also a large variation between studies ( Hrapko et al . 2008 ) . Several recent studies have employed indenta - tion techniques to investigate local variations in mechanical properties of brain tissue ( Budday et al . 2015b ; Dommelen et al . 2010 ; Elkin et al . 2011 ) , which is required as numeri - cal models of the head become more and more detailed . In particular , a difference between the properties of white and gray matter has been demonstrated . A potentially powerful technique that has seen much progress recently is magnetic resonance elastography ( Sack et al . 2008 ; Hamhaber et al . 2010 ; Sack et al . 2011 ; Romano et al . 2012 ) , a method that enables in vivo measurements of the local tissue stiffness at small strains with a high spatial resolution ( Green et al . 2008 ; Vappou et al . 2007 ) . As mechanical properties of brain tissue are becoming more accurately characterized , the pronounced anisotropy of brain tissue becomes more apparent ( Prange and Margulies 2002 ; Hrapko et al . 2008 ) ; especially , white matter has been observed to be anisotropic due to its oriented axonal tracts , both in tension and shear ( Feng et al . 2013 ; Velardi et al . 2006 ) . A ﬁber - based constitutive model for brain tissue was used in ( Cloots et al . 2011 ) in a tissue - level numerical analy - sis of traumatic brain injury and in ( Cloots et al . 2013 ) in a multi - scale analysis . In recent studies , anisotropy of brain tissue was incorporated in full - scale numerical head mod - els for traumatic brain injury to demonstrate the importance of orientation - dependent mechanical properties of the tissue ( Giordano et al . 2014 ; Wright et al . 2013 ) . In these stud - ies , diffusion tensor imaging was used to identify spatially resolved axonal directions and the degree of axonal orienta - tion . Numerical head models form a bridge from a macroscopic load on the head toward the ﬁne scale loads at the tissue level . While the classical Heard Injury Criterion provides a crite - rionforinjuryataglobalkinematiclevel , theuseofnumerical head models necessitates novel injury criteria at the level of the brain tissue , which are often based on equivalent stress , strain , or pressure . Quantitative criteria for injury of brain tissue have been obtained through accident reconstructions ( Kleiven 2007 ; Deck and Willinger 2008 ) , where predictions of tissue - level mechanical ﬁelds for real - world accidents are matched to the actual clinical outcome of these accidents and via in vitro models ( Morrison et al . 2006 ) , where organotypic brain slice cultures stretched on a membrane were used . In addition to anisotropic constitutive properties , the oriented axonal structure of white matter can also be expected to lead to an orientation - dependent sensitivity of brain tissue to mechanical loads with respect to injury . Injury thresh - olds at the axonal level have been established using the optic nerve of the guinea pig ( Bain et al . 2001 ) . Based on axonal strain , an anisotropic tissue - level injury criterion was devel - oped , where the orientation dependence is based on the local underlying axonal directions ( Cloots et al . 2012 ) . This cri - terion was recently evaluated using multi - scale simulations ( Cloots et al . 2013 ) . 9 . 3 Open questions and challenges There remains a critical need for an accurate injury predic - tor that is applicable for all loading conditions and is able to distinguish between different injury mechanisms , but at the same time is also robust and efﬁcient . To convert numeri - cal head models into reliable and accurate injury predictors , a sufﬁciently geometrically detailed description of the var - ious anatomical structures is required , as well as a precise characterization of their interactions such as the skull – brain interface . The constitutive model used for the various struc - tures should be sufﬁciently accurate , in particular capturing the high strain rate behavior and possible nonlinearity of the tissue . The main challenge in modeling and characterizing the tissue response is to determine the regional variation and local anisotropy of the tissue . Since these aspects are directly related to the cellular structure of the tissue and vari - ations thereof , a constitutive description based on the cellular morphology appears to be a physically realistic and feasible 123 954 A . Goriely et al . approach . In that case , spatial variations in properties are described in terms of morphological variations . On the one hand , numerical head models may become more detailed . On the other hand , the accuracy of their vali - dation procedures should be improved strongly . Most current validations rely on spatially coarse measurements of local mechanical quantities such as pressure or displacement . For more reliable validations , high resolution in vivo or in situ strain measurements should be used , although the general acceptance of such detailed datasets for this purpose remains a concern . By addressing these challenges , the predictions of mechanical ﬁelds such as stress or strain should become more reliable and therefore more predictive . In order to extent these predictive capabilities toward injury , spatially varying , truly local and orientation - dependent injury criteria are required . Since the sensitivity of the brain tissue to mechanical loads dependsonthecellularmorphologyaswell , localinjurycrite - ria should also rely on the underlying microstructure of that local tissue . More speciﬁcally , if reliable mechanical pre - dictions can be achieved at the level of axonal stretching , a threshold for injury can be speciﬁed at this level . This knowl - edge will allow us to establish truly mechanistic , local tissue - levelinjurycriteria . Besidesthesemechanicalaspectsoftrau - matic brain injury , many studies have focused on the physio - logical processes of neurological injury . To fully understand the process of injury development in the brain at all length scales involved , these ﬁelds should be brought together . By incorporating these subject - speciﬁc geometric and morphological details , numerical head models become increasingly more complex and computationally demand - ing . At the same time , these models should remain robust and computationally efﬁcient , which is an obvious contradiction . Therefore , the development of a computationally efﬁcient numerical model with high predictive capabilities remains a major challenge . Finally , to beneﬁt from these develop - ments , novel injury assessment methods based on numerical simulations will have to be acknowledged by the regulatory agencies and incorporated into injury regulations . 9 . 4 Concluding remarks Computational multi - scale head models form a potentially powerful next generation of injury assessment tools . They involve the mechanics of brain tissue speciﬁcally in the high strain rate regime . In a multi - scale approach , they can address the various length scales involved in traumatic brain injury . The morphologic dependence of mechanical proper - ties extends to applications in lower strain rate regimes , e . g . , during medical interventions and development of neurolog - ical disorders . To a lesser extent , this approach also may hold for structure - based injury criteria . Although originally developed to assess brain injury , numerical head models may serve other purposes leading to further understanding of the mechanics and functionality of the brain . 10 Shaken baby syndrome Closely related to traumatic brain injuries , shaken baby syn - drome is widely accepted as a form of child abuse , deﬁned by a triad of intracranial ﬁndings : retinal bleeding , subdural bleeding , and encephalopathy . Many of the syndromes and pathologies also apply to the previous section . However , due to the speciﬁc and unique features of young brains , the following section is dedicated to their cause and effect in babies . The notion of shaken baby syndrome arose from earlydescriptionsofsubduralhemorrhageinassociationwith multiple skeletal injuries and bruises in babies thought to have been abused ( Caffey 1972 ) . Whiplash during shaking was hypothesized to cause the characteristic bilateral thin ﬁlm subdural hemorrhage ( Guthkelch 1971 ) . This hypoth - esis rapidly gained popular support , was incorporated into mainstream pediatrics , and is now applied to infants with the triad even if they have no other evidence or history of trauma . Alternative names such as abusive head trauma and lethal craniocerebral trauma have been suggested ( Christian and Block 2009 ) , but are inappropriate because they imply intent such as abuse , or a mechanism such as trauma , which is not the only cause of the ﬁndings . Instead , the focus should be shifted to the objective pathology underlying these three fea - tures and the term retinodural hemorrhage of infancy is sug - gested as a more accurate description of the ﬁndings . Here , we discuss the pathology of each of the features and review their mechanical origin . 10 . 1 Biomechanics and mechanobiology Several biomechanical concepts have been incorporated into the shaken baby hypothesis . Rotational acceleration has long been recognized as the main cause of diffuse traumatic injury in the brain . The concept that shaking causes subdural bleed - ing by the mechanism of bridging vein rupture was intro - duced in the early 1970s ( Guthkelch 1971 ) . However , exper - iments on infant models showed that the angular acceleration andvelocityproducedbyshakingfallfarbelowthecalculated injury range , and were smaller by a factor of 50 than those generated by impact ( Duhaime et al . 1987 ) . Nonetheless , pro - ponents of the shaken baby hypothesis continue to maintain that “The application of rotational acceleration and deceler - ation forces to the infant’s head causes the brain to rotate in the skull . Abrupt deceleration allows continuing brain rota - tion until bridging veins are stretched and ruptured , causing a thin layer of subdural hemorrhage on the surface of the brain” ( Harding et al . 2004 ) . 123 Mechanics of the brain 955 10 . 2 General description The pathophysiology of human traumatic brain injury is highly complex ; the most important ﬁrst principle is the recognition that primary mechanical damage may be fol - lowed by secondary brain changes in response to trauma . Trauma causes primary mechanical deformation of the brain , followed by a complex secondary cascade of events includ - ing brain swelling , changes in brain perfusion , hemorrhage , release of neurotransmitters , neurogenic inﬂammation , and cortical spreading depression ( Lauritzen et al . 2011 ) . The importance of recognizing this principle is threefold : Firstly , the secondary mechanisms need to be understood as some may be amenable to therapy ; secondly , the clinical manifes - tations of head trauma may not be seen immediately , but may develop only as the secondary cascade evolves , and these patients may suffer a lucid interval , that is , have a period after trauma with no symptoms or mild , nonspeciﬁc , symp - toms before developing severe symptoms related to the sec - ondary cascade ; thirdly , the secondary cascade effects are not unique to trauma , and therefore , the identiﬁcation of nonspe - ciﬁc signs of brain dysfunction such as seizures or edema cannot automatically lead to the assumption that trauma has taken place . The three features of the triad are closely interre - lated responses to alteration of intracranial homeostasis and have many causes . RetinalBleeding . Retinalhemorrhageshavebeenregarded as an important indicator of inﬂicted injury , but there are many other causes of retinal bleeding in infants , includ - ing normal birth , raised intracranial pressure , and intracra - nial hemorrhage ( Bhardwaj et al . 2010 ) . Two main mecha - nisms are proposed : The ﬁrst is venous outﬂow obstruction in raised intracranial or intravascular pressure ; the second is mechanical , commonly referred to as vitreo - retinal trac - tion ( Wygnanski - Jaffe et al . 2009 ) . Pathological studies indi - cate that venous stasis and leakage from retinal vessels are a more likely cause of retinal bleeding than vitreo - retinal trac - tion ( Emerson et al . 2007 ) . The compromised venous outﬂow hypothesis is also supported by the observation that , when asymmetric , retinal hemorrhages predominate on the side of greater brain injury ( Gilles et al . 2003 ) . Further , there is a statistically signiﬁcant relationship between retinal and optic nerve sheath hemorrhage and reperfusion , cardiopulmonary resuscitation , and cerebral edema ( Matshes 2010 ) . Dural Bleeding . The typical pattern of subdural hemor - rhage in babies with the triad is of a bilateral thin ﬁlm over the cerebral convexities and in the posterior interhemispheric ﬁssure ( Duhaime et al . 1998 ) , a distribution seen also in a proportion of healthy newborn infants and corresponding to the most extensively vascularized areas of the dura ( Tubbs et al . 2007 ) . Because in vivo dura is adherent to the under - lying arachnoid membrane ( Haines et al . 1993 ) , all dural bleeding is , by deﬁnition , intradural . When dural bleeding is Fig . 19 Dural bleeding . Collagen ﬁbers of the dura are stained pink ; blood cells are stained red . Arrows indicate hemorrhage around the venous sinus ( S ) , between the ﬁbers of the dura , and extending onto the deep surface sufﬁciently extensive , it cleaves the deepest dural cell layers , creating a subdural compartment . At autopsy , the clot will be observed within and beneath the native dura and above the arachnoid membrane , see Fig . 19 . Radiologically , however , it may be impossible to deter - mine whether or not a small dural collection is entirely intradural or has cleaved the dural border layer and become subdural ( Squier 2011 ) . The original shaking hypothesis sug - gested that shaking ruptures the bridging veins , which carry blood from the cortex of the brain into the venous sinuses within the dura . These veins carry large volumes of blood , which would produce large volume , space - occupying clots rather than the thin ﬁlm bleeds typical of shaken baby syn - drome . The explanation for extensive , thin dural bleeds in infants may be found in the age - speciﬁc pathophysiology of the dural vasculature in infants . Intradural and subdural bleeding is almost universal in neonates ; even in those who lack evidence of either trauma or overt hypoxia ( Gilles and Nelson 2012 ) . Dural venous congestion and bleeding may represent a normal phenomenon and protect the brain during birth . The dural venous plexuses , which are the likely source of this bleeding , are larger and more complex at birth than at any time in later life ( Mack et al . 2009 ) , see Fig . 20 . Venous blood ﬂows from the dural sinuses via valveless neck veins to return to the heart . Studies in newborns have shown that pressure on the head , altered head position , obstruction of the jugular veins and mechanical positive pressure ventila - tion can all increase the pressure within the dural sinuses . The pressures exerted on the infant during labor and delivery may similarly compromise venous return to the heart and increase dural venous pressure . Were these pressures to be transmit - ted to veins in the brain they would bleed , but sphincters 123 956 A . Goriely et al . Fig . 20 Dural bleeding . Fresh bleeding into the falx . White arrows indicate blood adjacent to the superior sagittal sinus and in the posterior falx ( P ) at the outﬂow cuffs of the bridging veins may prevent such back pressure ( Chen et al . 2012 ) . Since there are no sphinc - ters on the small dural vessels ( Squier et al . 2009 ) , increased pressure in the dural sinuses may lead to reﬂux with venous congestion and bleeding into the dura which , if extensive , can leak into the subdural compartment and appear as subdural bleeding . The large venous lakes in the immature dura lesions have been assumed to represent reservoirs , additional protec - tion against reﬂux of venous blood into the brain during the considerable pressure ﬂuxes to which it is exposed at birth . Encephalopathy . Encephalopathy is a vague concept in the context of infant brain injury and may represent any kind of brain malfunction from lethargy and vomiting to severe fulminating brain swelling . Originally , it was thought to be due to diffuse traumatic axonal injury but this pathology was shown to be rare ; most babies thought to have suffered non - accidental head injury had global hypoxic - ischemic injuries ( Geddes et al . 2001 ) . As radiologically identiﬁed lesions may represent traumatic axonal injury and imply the causes and mechanisms of head injury ( Hymel et al . 2010 ) , a close exam - ination of what is known about axonal damage in infant head trauma is warranted . Axonal Injury . Axonal injury can only be identiﬁed by microscopy and is demonstrated using the β - APP stain , which highlights swellings and varicosities in damaged nerve ﬁbers , see Fig . 21 . These swellings do not represent damaged ends of severed axons , but rather reﬂect healing changes in response to disrupted axonal transport . While they may result from mechanical axonal damage , they can also result from many other etiologies , including deprived blood or oxy - gen supply and metabolic disturbance . Stretch injury leads to ultrastructural changes within the axon , both proximal and distal to the injury site , which may evolve for days after injury . While some changes are reversible , some may lead to permanent secondary axotomy ( Maxwell et al . 2003 ) . Fig . 21 Axonalstainingwithbeta - amyloidprecursorprotein ( β - APP ) . At low power , a wavy pattern of staining seen in ischemic areas ( left ) ; at higher power , rounded proﬁles stain brown , these represent individual swollen axons ( right ) In the adult brain , diffuse axonal injury may be associated with focal lesions , typically seen in the deep white matter structures . These are usually , but not inevitably , hemorrhagic but are characteristically surrounded by axonal swelling and large amounts of β - APP ( Graham et al . 2000 ) . The pathology ofaxonalinjuryininfantsisquitedistinctandthepatternsdif - fer from those in adults ( Reichard et al . 2003 ) . In a study of 18 infants assumed to have been shaken , identiﬁcation of focal axonal injury was not reliable after a certain survival time and discrimination between traumatic and ischemic axonal injury was not possible in every case , because the phenom - ena appeared to be of combined origin ( Oehmichen et al . 2008 ) . The axonal injury in another study was in a very spe - ciﬁc distribution : It was not associated with hemorrhage sug - gesting that localized traumatic axonal injury at the cranio - cervical junction was due to non - disruptive stretch injury to the neuraxis ( Geddes et al . 2001 ) . This hypothesis rests on the assumption that axons are more sensitive to mechanical stretching than their associated small blood vessels . Radio - logically identiﬁed hemorrhage is not a surrogate for axonal injury . An animal model of rotational head injury revealed that increasing rotational acceleration leads to greater axonal injury , but there was also more post - injury apnea and more ischemic damage ( Ibrahim and Margulies 2010 ) . This ques - tions the reliability of axonal damage as identiﬁed by β - APP in the infant brain as a marker of trauma . Changes may be due to ischemia or secondary phenomena and , while axonal injury may follow trauma , it is neither speciﬁc for , nor diag - nostic of , mechanical damage . Subcortical Contusions . Contusions of the mature brain are superﬁcial , involving the cortex . They are hemorrhagic , later developing into shrunken brown scars . The term con - tusion , usually used as synonymous with bruising , implies mechanical tissue damage and includes bleeding from small blood vessels . Surface contusion is extremely rare in the infant brain . A quite distinct pathology , typically seen in infants in the ﬁrst 5 months of life has been labeled sub - cortical contusion , a term which has led to a great deal of 123 Mechanics of the brain 957 confusion . The original report of subcortical contusions in infants who were under 5 months of age and thought to have been abused , described little or no necrosis and no axonal swellings around the clefts ( Lindenberg and Freytag 1969 ) . All of the babies who died shortly after injury had markedly swollen brains the pathology of their cysts was the same as that described in circulatory disorders in infants . Similar lesions were found in another study , but , again no axonal swellings were seen , nor any associated hemorrhage ; an importantdistinctionfromadultdiffuseaxonalinjury ( Calder et al . 1984 ) . These pathological studies suggest that subcor - tical contusions are not speciﬁc to trauma and may result from ischemia and brain swelling ( Squier 2011 ) . There is no pathological support for the hypothesis that subcortical contusions are the result of the cortex sliding over the white matter during shaking ( Jaspan et al . 1992 ) . The Secondary Cascade . The secondary cascade of events in infant brain trauma remains poorly understood and demands further study in view of the potential for inter - vention and therapy . Brain swelling and altered perfusion may be mediated by autonomic and trigeminal neurovascular responses and modiﬁed by neurogenic inﬂammation and cor - tical spreading depression ( Lauritzen et al . 2011 ) . Trigemi - novascular responses may be sensitized by prior episodes of trauma , subdural bleeding , or inﬂammation . This effect could augment cerebrovascular responses , explaining phenomena such as the big black brain and second impact syndrome , typ - ical seen in young patients with subdural bleeding ( Squier et al . 2012 ) . 10 . 3 Concluding remarks In the four decades since the shaken baby syndrome hypothe - sis was ﬁrst proposed , clinical , pathological , and biomechan - ical studies have failed to reveal a scientiﬁc basis for it . There is mounting evidence that retinodural bleeding in infancy is not speciﬁc to trauma , but is rather the result of age - related vulnerabilities of the infant brain and dura . Mechanical mod - eling holds the potential to provide a better understanding of the underlying mechanisms of injury with the ultimate goal to classifyanddiagnosetheconditionswhichleadtoretinodural bleeding in infants 11 Conclusions The brain , the center of the nervous system , lives in a phys - ical world and must abide by physical laws dictated by its composition and environment . In particular , mechanics and geometry play a central role in brain development as well as in normal and abnormal brain physiology . In this review , we analyzed the individual contributions of the solid , the ﬂuid , the electromechanical , and the electrochemical phases sepa - rately . However , it should be clear that all these contributions conspire for a robust but very tight control of the shape , con - nection , and function of the brain . From a simple mechanical point of view , the brain offers formidable challenges emanat - ing from the fact that its protective embedding is a hard skull , its tissue is extremely soft , interlaced with axons ﬁbers and a ﬂuid and blood network , and very sensitive to changes in its osmotic environment . The ﬁrst challenge is to obtain a reliable global model , or rather classes of models for the brain that allow to reliably predict deformation , strain , stress , and circulation . These models need to be properly validated and should be supple - mented by a realistic geometry and appropriate loading and boundary conditions . For the particular phenomenon of trau - maticbraininjury , theﬁeldofmechanicalmodelingisalready very advanced—for many other applications , the ﬁeld is wide open . Ideally , a valuable mechanical model combines as many of the mechanical phases described in this review as necessary to fully characterize the underlying phenomena . In addition , it should include the coupling between the indi - vidual phases . This approach is crucial to model multi - ﬁeld phenomena including edema formation , tumor growth , and brain surgery . The second major challenge is to connect the multiple scales , which interact in our brain . A multi - scale framework that integrates biomechanics and mechanobiology is the key to link mechanics and function as well as geometry and con - nections . Ideally , our models should be designed such that the smaller molecular and cellular scales inform the larger tissue and organ scales . In this setup , global metrics of form and function follow naturally once the model is calibrated cor - rectly . Bottom - up models allow us to draw conclusions about how mechanical events affect or disrupt cell level processes and organ level function and about how the brain organizes itself during development . The ultimate challenge of the nascent ﬁeld of brain mechanics is to connect mechanics to cognitive processes by integrating the latest development of neurosciences includ - ing geometric and topological methods from network the - ory with a ﬁne description of the geometry and mechanics of the brain . This long - term goal would provide a rational basis to address fundamental mental disorders related to the geometry of folding and the topology of connections such as epilepsy and schizophrenia and to understand long - term psychological problems associated with brain injury , cancer , or dementia . Successful modeling requires concerted efforts between mathematicians , biologists , physicists , engineers , physiol - ogists , histologists , neuroscientists , neurologists , neurosur - geons , and psychologists . Finding a common language between disciplines is often a critical road block in such an endeavor , which we have tried to address here . We hope that this review will spark discussion and stimulate research in 123 958 A . Goriely et al . brain mechanics with the goal of providing a holistic under - standing of the physiology and pathophysiology of our most complex but least understood organ . Acknowledgments A . G . is a Wolfson / Royal Society Merit Award Holder and acknowledges support from a Reintegration Grant under EC Framework VII . A . J . acknowledges funding from the European Unions Seventh Framework Programme , FP7 2007 – 2013 , ERC Grant Agreement306587 . S . S . acknowledgessupportthroughanNSERCDis - covery Grant . W . S . thanks the parents who have given consent to study the brains of the babies they have lost and Dr . Julie Mack for discussion and help in preparation of the manuscript . E . K . acknowledges support through the NSF CAREER award CMMI 0952021 and the NIH Grant U01 HL119578 . OpenAccess ThisarticleisdistributedunderthetermsoftheCreative Commons Attribution License which permits any use , distribution , and reproduction in any medium , provided the original author ( s ) and the source are credited . 12 Glossary of biological terms Axons Long slender projection of neurons , that transmit information in the form of electrical signals to other neurons and cells in the body Aqueduct of Sylvius A canal that contains CSF and con - nects the third and fourth ventricle Astrocytes A type of glial cell cells that support the function of the brain . They per - form many roles , such as providing nutrients to the neurons , maintaining the extracellular ion balance and par - ticipating in the blood brain barrier Blood brain barrier ( BBB ) Interface separating the blood and brain tissue . This barrier is highly selective , allowing control of the com - position of the ISF Brain parenchyma The functional part of the brain com - posed of neurons and glial cells Cerebral cortex The brain’s outer gray matter layer , consisting primarily of cell bodies , playing an important role e . g . in atten - tion , awareness , thought , language , and consciousness , and initiation of motor functions Cerebrospinal ﬂuid ( CSF ) Fluid that bathes the brain and spinal cord . It is located in the ventricles and subarachnoid space of the brain Choroid plexus Tuft of highly vascular specialised epithelium located in the ventricles of the brain and responsible for produc - ing CSF Circle of Willis The ring of arterial vessels located at the base of the brain and responsi - ble for connecting the main arterial trunks . Acts as a safeguard to arter - ial supply to the brain in the event of a vascular occlusion Contusion A bruise caused when capillaries are damaged , allowing blood to seep into the tissue Craniectomy Neurosurgical procedure , in which a section of the skull is removed to help relieve increased intracranial pressure Craniosynostosis Birth defect in which one or more ﬁbrous sutures of the infant skull fuse prematurely , changing the growth pat - tern of the skull Cytotoxic edema Swelling of individual cells . It is caused when cellular metabolism is disrupted , whichpreventsthecellfrom maintaining an osmotic equilibrium with the interstitial ﬂuid , and allows water to accumulate in the cell Diffuse axonal injury ( DAI ) Brain damage in the form of exten - sive lesions in nerve ﬁbres in the white matter . Seen in a number of condi - tions including deprivation of oxygen or blood supply and one of the most devastating results of brain trauma Donnan effect Where immobile ﬁxed charge density induces a greater osmotic pressure in the tissue than its surroundings Edema Swelling of soft tissue due to excess ﬂuid accumulation Fixed charge density ( FCD ) A ( usually negative ) charge on the solid components ( e . g . , extracellular and intracellular matrix ) of biological tissue Forament magnum A large opening at the base of the skull tthrough which the spinal cord passes into the cranial cavity Glial cells Non - neuronal cells in the brain that support functions not directly related to electrical signal propagation Glioblastoma multiforme Highly malignant , fast growing type of brain cancer arising from astrocytes Gyriﬁcation Process and extent of folding of the cerebral cortex as a consequence of brain growth during embryonic and early postnatal development Gyriﬁcation index Ratio between total contour surface of the brain and its convex hull Head injury criterion ( HIC ) Measure of likelihood of head injury causedbyimpact , usedtoassesssafety of vehicles , protective gear , and sport equipment 123 Mechanics of the brain 959 Hydrocephalus Abnormal accumulation of CSF in the ventricles ( causing ventricle expan - sion and tissue deformation ) Infarction Regional of tissue death , caused by lack of blood supply ( ischaemia ) and oxygen ( hypoxia ) Interstitial ﬂuid ( ISF ) Solution that bathes and surrounds brain cells Ischemia Inadequate blood supply to a local area due to blockage of blood vessels ( leading to lack of oxygen ) Lissencephaly Developmental malformation of the human brain caused by defective cor - tical development resulting in inade - quate gyration and a partly or wholly smooth brain surface Monro Kellie hypothesis Constant sum of venous volume , arte - rial volume , brain volume , and cere - brospinal ﬂuid volume Morphogenesis Biological process that causes an organism to develop its shape Neurons Electrically excitable cells that trans - mit information through the brain , via electrical and chemical signals Polymicrogyria Developmental malformation of the human brain characterized by focal replacement of the cortex by an exces - sive number of of small convolutions Sagittal sinuses One of the large venous channels ( sinuses ) foundintheduraandrespon - sible for draining all venous blood out of the brain and into the veins of the neck Subarachnoid space ( SAS ) Space between the membrane layers on the outer surface of the brain , con - taining CSF Traumatic brain injury ( TBI ) Intracranial injury caused by an exter - nal force that traumatically injures the brain , major cause of death and dis - ability worldwide Vasogenic edema Brain swelling caused by a breakdown of the BBB Ventricles CommunicatingnetworkofCSF - ﬁlled cavities , located within the brain References AbbotNJ ( 2004 ) Evidenceforbulkﬂowofbraininterstitialﬂuid : signif - icance for physiology and pathology . Neurochem Int 45 : 545 – 552 Abbott NJ , Ronnback L , Hansson E ( 2006 ) Astrocyte - endothelial inter - actions at the blood - brain barrier . Nat Rev Neurosci 7 : 41 – 53 AlastrueyJ , ParkerKH , PeiroJ , ByrdSM , SherwinSJ ( 2007 ) Modelling the circle of Willis to assess the effects of anatomical variations and occlusions on cerebral ﬂows . J Biomech 40 : 1794 – 1805 Al - Bsharat AS , Hardy WN , Yang KH , Khalil TB , Tashman S , King AI ( 1999 ) Brain / skull relative displacement magnitude due to blunt head impact : new experimental data and model . Proceedings of 43rd Stapp Car Crash Conference , 101 – 160 Alford PW , Dabiri BE , Goss JA , Hemphill MA , Brigham MD , Parker KK ( 2011 ) Blast - induced phenotypic switching in cerebral vasospasm . Proc Natl Acad Sci 108 : 12705 – 12710 Alnaes MS , Isaksen J , Mardal KA , Romner B , Morgan MK , Ingebrigt - sen T ( 2007 ) Computation of hemodynamics in the circle of willis . Stroke 38 : 2500 – 2505 AmbrosiD , AteshianGA , ArrudaEM , CowinSC , DumaisJ , GorielyA , HolzapfelGA , HumphreyJD , KemkemerR , KuhlE , OlberdingJE , Taber LA , Garikipati K ( 2011 ) Perspectives on biological growth and remodeling . J Mech Phys Solids 59 : 863 – 883 Ateshian GA , Likhitpanichkul M , Hung CT ( 2006 ) A mixture theory analysis for passive transport in osmotic loading of cells . J Bio - mech 39 : 464 – 475 Attolini CSO , Cheng Y - K , Beroukhim R , Getz G , Abdel - Wahab O , Levine RL , Mellinghoff IK , Michor F ( 2010 ) A mathematical framework to determine the temporal sequence of somatic genetic events in cancer . Proc Natl Acad Sci 107 : 17604 – 17609 Babbs CF , Shi R ( 2013 ) Subtle paranodal injury slows impulse con - duction in a mathematical model of myelinated axons . PLoS ONE 8 : e67767 Bain AC , Meaney DF ( 2000 ) Tissue - level thresholds for axonal damage in an experimental model of central nervous system white matter injury . J Biomech Eng 122 : 615 – 622 Bain AC , Raghupathi R , Meaney DF ( 2001 ) Dynamic stretch corre - latestobothmorphologicalabnormalitiesandelectrophysiologicalimpairmentinamodeloftraumaticalaxonalinjury . JNeurotrauma 18 : 499 – 511 Basanta D , Simon M , Hatzikirou H , Deutsch A ( 2008 ) Evolutionary gametheoryelucidatestheroleofglycolysisingliomaprogressionandinvasion . Cell Prolif 41 : 980 – 987 Bayly PV , Cohen TS , Leister EP , Ajo D , Leuthardt EC , Genin GM ( 2005 ) Deformation of the human brain induced by mild acceler - ation . J Neurotrauma 22 : 845 – 856 BaylyPV , ClaytonEH , GeninGM ( 2012 ) Quantitativeimagingmethods for the development and validation of brain biomechanics models . Annu Rev Biomed Eng 14 : 369 – 396 Bayly PV , Okamoto R , Xu G , Shi Y , Taber LA ( 2013 ) A cortical fold - ing model incorporating stress - dependent growth explains gyral wavelengths and stress patterns in the developing brain . Phys Biol 10 : 016005 Bayly PV , Taber LA , Kroenke CD ( 2014 ) Mechanical forces in cerebral cortical folding : a review of measurements and models . J Mech Behav Biomed Mater 29 : 568 – 581 BenAmarM , GorielyA ( 2005 ) Growthandinstabilityinelastictissues . J Mech Phys Solids 53 : 2284 – 2319 Bhardwaj A ( 2007 ) Osmotherapy in neurocritical care . Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 7 : 513 – 521 Bhardwaj G , Chowdhury V , Jacobs MB , Moran KT , Martin FJ , Coro - neo MT ( 2010 ) A systematic review of the diagnostic accuracy of ocular signs in pediatric abusive head trauma . Ophthalmology 117 : 983 – 992 Biot MA ( 1957 ) Folding instability of a layered viscoelastic medium under compression . Proc R Soc Lond A 242 : 444 – 454 Bilston LE , Liu Z , Phan - Thien N ( 2001 ) Large strain behavior of brain tissueinshear : someexperimentaldataanddifferentialconstitutive model . Biorheology 38 : 335 – 345 123 960 A . Goriely et al . Bowen RM ( 1967 ) Toward a thermodynamics and mechanics of mix - tures . Arch Ration Mech Anal 24 : 370 – 403 Boucher PA , Joós B , Morris CE ( 2012 ) Coupled left - shift of Nav chan - nels : modeling the Na + - loading and dysfunctional excitability of damaged axons . J Comput Neurosci 33 : 301 – 319 Bray D ( 1984 ) Axonal growth in response to experimentally applied mechanical tension . Dev Biol 102 : 379 – 389 Brooks D , Gabella B , Hoffman R , Sosin D , Whiteneck G ( 1997 ) Trau - matic brain injury : designing and implementing a population - based follow - up system . Arch Phys Med Rehabil 78 : S26 – S30 Budday S , Raybaud C , Kuhl E ( 2014 ) A mechanical model predicts morphological abnormalities in the developing human brain . Sci Rep 4 : 5644 Budday S , Steinmann P , Kuhl E ( 2014 ) The role of mechanics during brain development . J Mech Phys Solids 72 : 75 – 92 BuddayS , KuhlE , HutchinsonJW ( 2015a ) Period - doublingandperiod - tripling in growing bilayered systems . Phil Mag doi : 10 . 1080 / 14786435 . 2015 . 1014443 Budday S , Nay R , de Rooij R , Steinmann P , Wyrobek T , Ovaert TC , Kuhl E ( 2015b ) Mechanical properties of gray and white matter braintissuebyindentation . JMechBehavBiomedMater ( inpress ) Budday S , Steinmann P , Goriely A , Kuhl E ( 2015c ) Morphogenesis and pattern formation of the mammalian brain ( submitted ) Caffey J ( 1972 ) On the theory and practice of shaking infants . Its poten - tial residual effects of permanent brain damage and mental retar - dation . Am J Dis Child 124 : 161 – 169 Calder IM , Hill I , Scholtz CL ( 1984 ) Primary brain trauma in non - accidental injury . J Clin Pathol 37 : 1095 – 1100 Cassot F , Zagzoule M , Marc - Vergnes JP ( 2000 ) Hemodynamic role of the circle of Willis in stenoses of internal carotid arteries : an analytical solution of a linear model . J Eng Math 47 : 395 – 405 Cebral JR , Castro MA , Soto O , Lohner R , Alperin N ( 2003 ) Blood - ﬂow models of the circle of Willis from magnetic resonance data . J Biomech 33 : 369 – 386 Cernak I , Noble - Haeusslein LJ ( 2010 ) Traumatic brain injury : an overview of pathobiology with emphasis on military populations . J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 30 : 255 – 266 ChatelinS , VappouJ , RothS , RaulJS , WillingerR ( 2012 ) Towardschild versus adult brain mechanical properties . J Mech Behav Biomed Mater 6 : 166 – 173 Chen Y , Ostoja - Starzewski M ( 2010 ) MRI - based ﬁnite element model - ing of head trauma : spherically focusing shear waves . Acta Mech 213 : 155 – 167 Chen J , Wang XM , Luan LM , Chao BT , Pang B , Song H , Pang Q ( 2012 ) Biological characteristics of the cerebral venous system and its hemodynamic response to intracranial hypertension . Chin Med J 125 : 1303 – 1309 Christian CW , Block R ( 2009 ) Abusive head trauma in infants and children . Pediatrics 123 : 1409 – 1411 Chung RS , Staal JA , McCormack GH , Dickson TC , Cozens MA , ChuckowreeJA , QuiltyMC , VickersJC ( 2005 ) Mildaxonalstretch injury in vitro induces a progressive series of neuroﬁlament alter - ations ultimately leading to delayed axotomy . J Neurotrauma 22 : 1081 – 1091 Clarke MJ , Meyer FB ( 2007 ) The history of mathematical modeling in hydrocephalus . Neurosurg Focus 22 : 1 – 5 Cloots RJH , Gervaise HMT , Van Dommelen JAW , Geers MGD ( 2008 ) Biomechanics of traumatic brain injury : inﬂuences of the mor - phologic heterogeneities of the cerebral cortex . Ann Biomed Eng 36 : 1203 – 1215 Cloots RJH , Van Dommelen JAW , Nyberg T , Kleiven S , Geers MGD ( 2011 ) Micromechanics of diffuse axonal injury : inﬂuence of axonal orientation and anisotropy . Biomech Model Mechanbiol 10 : 413 – 422 Cloots RJH , Van Dommelen JAW , Geers MGD ( 2012 ) A tissue - level anisotropic criterion for brain injury based on microstructural axonal deformation . J Mech Behav Biomed 5 : 41 – 52 ClootsRJH , vanDommelenJAW , KleivenS , GeersMGD ( 2013 ) Multi - scalemechanicsoftraumaticbraininjury : predictingaxonalstrains from head loads . Biomech Model Mechanobiol 12 : 137 – 150 Connell S , Gao J , Chen J , Shi R ( 2011 ) Novel model to investigate blast injury in the central nervous system . J Neurotrauma 28 : 1229 – 1236 Cooper DJ , Rosenfeld JV , Murray L , Arabi YM , Davies AR , D’Urso P , Kossmann T , Ponsford J , Seppelt I , Reilly P , Wolfe R ( 2011 ) Decompressive craniectomy in diffuse traumatic brain injury . N Engl J Med 364 : 1493 – 1502 David T , Moore S ( 2008 ) Modelling perfusion in the cerebral vascula - ture . Med Eng Phys 30 : 1227 – 1245 Deck C , Willinger R ( 2008 ) Improved head injury criteria based on head FE model . Int J Crashworthiness 13 : 667 – 678 Donnan FG ( 1924 ) The theory of membrane equilibria . Chem Rev 1 : 73 – 90 Donnelly BR , Medige J ( 1997 ) Shear properties of human brain tissue . J Biomech Eng 119 : 423 – 432 Dorfmann A , Ogden RW ( 2004 ) A constitutive model for the mullins effect with permanent set in particle - reinforced rubber . Int J Solids Struct 41 : 1855 – 1878 Drapaca CS , Tenti G , Rohlf K , Sivaloganathan S ( 2006 ) A quasi - linear viscoelastic constitutive equation for the brain : applications to hydrocephalus . J Elast 85 : 65 – 83 DrapacaCS , FritzJS ( 2012 ) Amechano - electrochemicalmodelofbrain neuro - mechanics : application to normal pressure hydrocephalus . Int J Numer Anal Model Ser B 1 : 82 – 93 Dronne MA , Boissel JP , Grenier E ( 2006 ) A mathematical model of ion movements in grey matter during a stroke . J Theor Biol 240 : 599 – 615 Duhaime AC , Gennarelli TA , Thibault LE , Bruce DA , Margulies SS , Wiser R ( 1987 ) The shaken baby syndrome . A clinical , patholog - ical , and biomechanical study . J Neurosurg 66 : 409 – 415 DuhaimeAC , ChristianCW , RorkeLB , ZimmermanRA ( 1998 ) Nonac - cidental head injury in infants—the “Shaken - Baby Syndrome” . N Engl J Med 338 : 1822 – 1829 Duncan CC , Summers AC , Perla EJ , Coburn KL , Mirsky AF ( 2011 ) Evaluation of traumatic brain injury : brain potentials in diagnosis , function , and prognosis . Int J Psychophysiol 82 : 24 – 40 EhlersW , WagnerA ( 2015 ) Multi - componentmodellingofhumanbrain tissue : acontributiontotheconstitutiveandcomputationaldescrip - tion of deformation , ﬂow and diffusion processes with application to the invasive drug - delivery problem . Comput Methods Biomech Biomed Eng 18 : 861 – 879 Eley KA , Johnson D , Wilkie AO , Jayamohan J , Richards P , Wall SA ( 2012 ) Raised intracranial pressure is frequent in untreated non - syndromicunicoronalsynostosisanddoesnotcorrelatewithsever - ity of phenotypic features . Plast Reconstr Surg 130 : 690e – 697e Elkin BS , Shaik MA , Morrison B III ( 2010 ) Fixed negative charge and the Donnan effect : a description of the driving forces associ - ated with brain tissue swelling and oedema . Philos Trans R Soc A 368 : 585 – 603 Elkin BS , Ilankova A , Morrison B III ( 2011 ) Dynamic , regional mechanicalpropertiesoftheporcinebrain : indentationinthecoro - nal plane . J Biomech Eng ASME 133 : 071009 Elliott NSJ , Bertram CD , Martin BA , Brodbelt AR ( 2013 ) Syring - omyelia : a review of the biomechanics . J Fluids Struct 40 : 1 – 24 Elliott NSJ , Lockerby DA , Brodbelt AR ( 2011 ) A lumped - parameter model of the cerebrospinal system for investigating arterial - driven ﬂow in post traumatic syringomyelia . Med Eng Phys 33 : 874 – 882 123 Mechanics of the brain 961 Emerson MV , Jakobs E , Green WR ( 2007 ) Ocular autopsy and histopathologicfeaturesofchildabuse . Ophthalmology114 : 1384 – 1394 Estes MS , McElhaney JH ( 1970 ) Response of brain tissue of compres - sive loading . ASME 13 : 1 – 4 Fallenstein GT , Hulce VD , Melvin JW ( 1969 ) Dynamic mechanical properties of human brain tissue . J Biomech 2 : 217 – 226 Feng Y , Abney TM , Okamoto RJ , Pless RB , Genin GM , Bayly PV ( 2010 ) Relative brain displacement and deformation during con - strained mild frontal head impact . J Roy Soc Interface 7 : 1677 – 1688 FengY , OkamotoRJ , NamaniR , GeninGM , BaylyPV ( 2013 ) Measure - ments of mechanical anisotropy in brain tissue and implications for transversely isotropic material models of white matter . J Mech Behav Biomed Mater 23 : 117 – 132 Ferrandez A , David T , Bamford J , Scott J , Guthrie A ( 2001 ) Com - putational models of blood ﬂow in the circle of Willis . Comput Methods Biomech Biomed Eng 4 : 1 – 26 Fink ME ( 2012 ) Osmotherapy for intracranial hypertension : mannitol versus hypertonic saline . Contin Lifelong Learn Neurol Crit Care Neurol 18 ( 3 ) : 640 – 654 Fletcher TL , Kolias AG , Hutchinson PJA , Sutcliffe MPF ( 2014 ) Devel - opment of a ﬁnite element model of decompressive craniectomy . PLoS ONE 9 : 10213 FranceschiniG , BigoniD , RegitnigP , HolzapfelGA ( 2006 ) Braintissue deforms similarly to ﬁlled elastomers and follows consolidation theory . J Mech Phys Solids 54 : 2592 – 2620 GalfordJE , McElhaneyJH ( 1969 ) Someviscoelasticpropertiesofscalp , brain and dura . ASME 69 - BHF 7 : 1 – 8 Gao CP , Ang BT ( 2008 ) Biomechanical modeling of decompres - sive craniectomy in traumatic brain injury . Acta Neurochir Suppl102 : 279 – 282 Garcia JJ , Smith JH ( 2009 ) A biphasic hyperelastic model for the analy - sis of ﬂuid and mass transport in brain tissue . Ann Biomed Eng 37 : 375 – 386 García - GrajalesJA , RucabadoG , García - DopicoA , PeñaJM , Jérusalem A ( 2014 ) Neurite , a ﬁnite difference large scale parallel program for the simulation of electricalsignal propagation in neurites under mechanical loading . PLoS One 10 ( 2 ) : e0116532 Geddes JF , Vowles GH , Hackshaw AK , Nickols CD , Scott IS , Whitwell HL ( 2001 ) Neuropathology of inﬂicted head injury in children . II . Microscopic brain injury in infants . Brain 124 : 1299 – 1306 Gefen A , Margulies SS ( 2004 ) Are in vivo and in situ brain tissues mechanically similar ? J Biomech 37 : 1339 – 1352 Gennarelli T ( 1993 ) Mechanisms of brain injury . J Emerg Med 11 : 5 – 11 Gilles EE , McGregor ML , Levy - Clarke G ( 2003 ) Retinal hemorrhage asymmetry in inﬂicted head injury : a clue to pathogenesis ? J Pedi - atr 143 : 494 – 499 Gilles F , Nelson M ( 2012 ) The developing human brain : growth and adversities . Mac Keith Press , London Giordano C , Cloots RJH , Van Dommelen JAW , Kleiven S ( 2014 ) The inﬂuence of anisotropy in a computational head model for brain injury prediction . J Biomech 47 : 1052 – 1059 Goldsmith W ( 2001 ) The state of head injury biomechanics : past , present , and future : part 1 . Crit Rev Biomed Eng 29 : 441 – 600 Goldstein LE , Fisher AM , Tagge CA , Zhang XL , Velisek L , Sullivan JA , UpretiC , KrachtJM , EricssonM , WojnarowiczMW , Goletiani CJ , Maglakelidze GM , Casey N , Moncaster JA , Minaeva O , Moir RD , Nowinski CJ , Stern RA , Cantu RC , Geiling J , Blusztajn JK , Wolozin BL , Ikezu T , Stein TD , Budson AE , Kowall NW , Chargin D , SharonA , SamanS , HallGF , MossWC , ClevelandRO , TanziE , Stanton PK , McKee AC ( 2012 ) Chronic traumatic encephalopathy in blast - exposed military veterans and a blast neurotrauma mouse model . Sci Transl Med 4 : 134ra60 : 1 – 134ra60 : 16 Graham DI , Raghupathi R , Saatman KE , Meaney D , McIntosh TK ( 2000 ) Tissue tears in the white matter after lateral ﬂuid percus - sion brain injury in the rat : relevance to human brain injury . Acta Neuropathol 99 ( 2 ) : 117 – 124 Grände P , Romner B ( 2012 ) Osmotherapy in brain edema : a question - able therapy . J Neurosurg Anest 24 : 407 – 412 Green MA , Bilston LE , Sinkus R ( 2008 ) In vivo brain viscoelastic properties measured by magnetic resonance elastography . NMR Biomed 21 : 755 – 764 Gupta RK , Przekwas A ( 2013 ) Mathematical models of blast - induced TBI : current status , challenges , and prospects . Front Neurol 4 : 1 – 21 GuthkelchAN ( 1971 ) Infantilesubduralhaematomaanditsrelationship to whiplash injuries . Br Med J 2 : 430 – 431 Haines DE , Harkey HL , al Mefty O ( 1993 ) The “subdural” space : a new look at an outdated concept . Neurosurgery 32 : 111 – 120 HakimS , JimenezA , RosasF ( 1955 ) Drainageofthecerebrospinalﬂuid into the spinal epidural space : a new technique for the treatment of hydrocephalus . Acta Neurochir 4 : 224 – 227 Hamhaber U , Klatt D , Papazoglou S , Hollmann M , Stadler J , Sack I , Bernarding J , Braun J ( 2010 ) In vivo magnetic resonance elastog - raphy of human brain at 7 T and 1 . 5 T . J Magn Reson Imaging 32 : 577 – 583 Harding B , Risdon RA , Krous HF ( 2004 ) Shaken baby syndrome . Br Med J 328 : 720 – 721 Hardy WN , Foster CD , Mason MJ , Yang KH , King AI , Tashman S ( 2001 ) Investigation of head injury mechanisms using neutral den - sity technology and high - speed biplanar X - ray . Stapp Car Crash J 45 : 337 – 368 HaslachHWJr , LeahyLN , RileyP , GullapalliR , XuS , HsiehAH ( 2014 ) Solid - extracellular ﬂuid interaction and damage in the mechanical response of rat brain tissue under conﬁned compression . J Mech Behav Biomed Mater 29 : 138 – 150 Hatten ME ( 1999 ) Central nervous system neuronal migration . Annu Rev Neurosci 22 : 511 – 539 Hicks RR , Fertig SJ , Desrocher RE , Koroshetz WJ , Pancrazio JJ ( 2010 ) Neurological effects of blast injury . J Trauma Inj Infect Crit Care 68 : 1257 – 1263 HoJ , KleivenS ( 2009 ) Cansulciprotectthebrainfromtraumaticinjury ? J Biomech 42 : 2074 – 2080 Hodgkin AL , Huxley AF ( 1952 ) A quantitative description of mem - brane current and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve . J Physiol 117 : 500 – 544 Holland MA , Miller KE , Kuhl E ( 2014 ) Emerging brain morphologies from axonal elongation ( submitted ) HolzapfelGA , OgdenRW ( 2009 ) Onplanarbiaxialtestsforanisotropic nonlinearly elastic solids . A continuum mechanical framework . Math Mech Solids 14 : 474 – 489 Hrapko M , Van Dommelen JAW , Peters GWM , Wismans JSHM ( 2006 ) The mechanical behaviour of brain tissue : large strain response and constitutive modelling . Biorheology 43 : 623 – 636 Hrapko M , Van Dommelen JAW , Peters GWM , Wismans JSHM ( 2008 ) The inﬂuence of test conditions on characterisation of the mechan - ical properties of brain tissue . J Biomech Eng ASME 130 : 1 – 10 Hrapko M , Van Dommelen JAW , Peters GWM , Wismans JSHM ( 2009 ) On the consequences of non linear constitutive modelling of brain tissue for injury prediction with numerical head models . Int J Crashworthiness 14 : 245 – 257 Hue CD , Cao S , Haider SF , Vo KV , Effgen GB , Vogel E , Panzer MB , Bass CRD , Meaney DF , Morrison B ( 2013 ) Blood - brain barrier dysfunction after primary blast injury in vitro . J Neurotrauma 30 : 1652 – 1663 Huyghe JM , Janssen JD ( 1997 ) Quadriphasic mechanics of swelling incompressible porous media . Int J Eng Sci 35 : 793 – 802 123 962 A . Goriely et al . Hymel KP , Stoiko MA , Herman BE , Combs A , Harper NS , Lowen D , Deye KP , Homa K , Blackman JA ( 2010 ) Head injury depth as an indicator of causes and mechanisms . Pediatrics 125 : 712 – 720 Ibrahim NG , Margulies SS ( 2010 ) Biomechanics of the toddler head during low - height falls : an anthropomorphic dummy analysis . J Neurosurg Pediatr 6 : 57 – 68 Ibrahim NG , Natesh R , Szczesny SE , Ryall K , Eucker SA , Coats B , Margulies SS ( 2010 ) In situ deformations in the immature brain during rapid rotations . J Biomech Eng 132 : 044501 Ivarsson J , Viano DC , Lövsund P , Aldman B ( 2000 ) Strain relief from the cerebral ventricles during head impact : experimental studies on natural protection of the brain . J Biomech 33 : 181 – 189 Jaspan T , Narborough G , Punt JA , Lowe J ( 1992 ) Cerebral contusional tears as a marker of child abuse - detection by cranial sonography . Pediatr Radiol 22 : 237 – 245 JeanA , NyeinMK , ZhengJQ , MooreDF , JoannopoulosJD , Radovitzky RA ( 2014 ) Ananimal - to - humanscalinglawforblast - inducedtrau - matic brain injury risk assessment . Proc Natl Acad Sci . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1415743111 JeevanDS , AnlsowP , JayamohanJ ( 2008 ) Abnormalvenousdrainagein syndromic craniosynostosis and the role of CT venography . Childs Nerv Syst 24 : 1413 – 1420 Jennett B ( 1996 ) Epidemiology of head injury . J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 60 : 362 – 369 JérusalemA , DaoM ( 2012 ) Continuummodelingofneuronalcellunder blast loading . Acta Biomater 8 : 3360 – 3371 Jérusalem A , García - Grajales JA , Merchán - Perez A , Peña JM ( 2014 ) A computational model coupling mechanics and electrophysi - ology in spinal cord injury . Biomech Model Mechanobiol 13 : 883 – 896 Jin X , Zhu F , Mao H , Shen M , Yang KH ( 2013 ) A comprehensive experimental study on material properties of human brain tissue . J Biomech 46 : 2795 – 2801 Johnson CL , McGarry MDJ , Gharibans AA , Weaver JB , Paulsen KD , Wang H , Olivero WC , Sutton BP , Georgiadis JG ( 2013 ) Local mechanical properties of white matter structures in the human brain . Neuroimage 79 : 145 – 152 Jung A , Falterneier R , Rothoerl R , Brawanski A ( 2005 ) A mathemat - ical model of cerebral circulation and oxygen supply . Math Biol 51 : 491 – 507 Kansal AR , Torquato S , Harsh GR , Chiocca EA , Deisboeck TS ( 2000 ) Simulatedbraintumorgrowthdynamicsusingathree - dimensional cellular automaton . J Theor Biol 203 : 367 – 382 Kawamata T , Mori T , Sato S , Katayama Y ( 2007 ) Tissue hyperosmo - lality and brain edema in cerebral contusion . Neurosurg Focus 22 : 1 – 8 Kellie G ( 1824 ) Appearances observed in the dissection of two individ - uals ; death from cold and congestion of the brain . Trans Med Chir Soc Edinb I : 84 – 169 Kharatishvili I , Sierra A , Immonen RJ , Gröhn OHJ , Pitkänen A ( 2009 ) QuantitativeT2mappingasapotentialmarkerfortheinitialassess - ment of the severity of damage after traumatic brain injury in rat . Exp Neurol 217 : 154 – 164 Kleiven S ( 2007 ) Predictors for traumatic brain injuries evaluated through accident reconstruction . Stapp Car Crash J 51 : 81 – 114 Knutsen AK , Chang YV , Grimm CM , Phan L , Taber LA , Bayly PV ( 2010 ) Anewmethodtomeasurecorticalgrowthinthedeveloping brain . J Biomech Eng 132 : 101004 KnutsenAK , KroenkeCD , ChangYV , TaberLA , BaylyPV ( 2013 ) Spa - tial and temporal variations of cortical growth during gyrogenesis in the developing ferret brain . Cereb Cortex 23 : 488 – 498 Koch C ( 1999 ) Biophysics of computation . Oxford University Press , New York Kruse SA , Rose GH , Glaser KJ , Manduca A , Felmlee JP , Rack CR , Ehman RL ( 2008 ) Magnetic resonance elastography of the brain . Neuroimage 39 : 231 – 237 Kronik N , Kogan Y , Vainstein V , Agur Z ( 2008 ) Improving alloreactive CTL immunotherapy for malignant gliomas using a simulation modeloftheirinteractivedynamics . CancerImmunol Immunother 57 : 425 – 439 Kurtcuoglu V , Poulikakos D , Ventikos Y ( 2005 ) Computational model - ing of the mechanical behaviour of the cerebrospinal ﬂuid system . ASME J Biomech Eng 127 : 264 – 269 Kurtcuoglu V ( 2011 ) Computational ﬂuid dynamics and its assessment of cerebrospinal ﬂuid ﬂow and its coupling with cerebral blood ﬂow . In : Miller K ( ed ) Biomechanics of the brain . Springer , New York , pp 169 – 188 Kyriacou SK , Mohamed A , Miller K , Neff S ( 2002 ) Brain mechanics for neurosurgery : modeling issues . Biomech Model Mechanobiol 1 : 151 – 164 Lai WM , Hou JS , Mow VC ( 1991 ) A triphasic theory for the swelling and deformation behavior of articular cartilage . J Biomech Eng 113 : 245 – 258 Lang GE ( 2014 ) Mechanics of swelling and damage in brain tissue : a theoretical approach DPhil Thesis , University of Oxford LangG , StewartPS , VellaD , WatersSL , GorielyA ( 2014 ) IstheDonnan effect sufﬁcient to explain swelling in brain tissue slices ? J R Soc Interface 11 : 20140123 Lang G , Vella D , Waters SL , Goriely A ( 2015 ) . Propagation of dam - age in brain tissue : coupling the mechanics of edema and oxygen delivery . submitted for publication Lauret C , Hrapko M , Van Dommelen JAW , Peters GWM , Wismans JSHM ( 2009 ) Optical characterization of acceleration - induced strainﬁeldsininhomogeneousbrainslices . MedEngPhys31 : 392 – 399 Lauritzen M , Dreier JP , Fabricius M , Hartings JA , Graf R , Strong AJ ( 2011 ) Clinical relevance of cortical spreading depression in neu - rological disorders : migraine , malignant stroke , subarachnoid and intracranial hemorrhage , and traumatic brain injury . J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 31 : 17 – 35 Leder K , Pitter K , LaPlant Q , Hambardzumyan D , Ross BD , Chan TA , Holland EC , Michor F ( 2014 ) Mathematical modeling of PDGF - driven glioblastoma reveals optimized radiation dosing schedules . Cell 156 : 603 – 616 Liang D , Bhatta S , Gerzanich V , Simard JM ( 2007 ) Cytotoxic edema : mechanisms of pathological cell swelling . Neurosurg Focus 22 : E2 Leung LY , VandeVord PJ , Dal Cengio AL , Bir C , Yang KH , King AI ( 2008 ) Blast related neurotrauma : a review of cellular injury . Mol Cell Biomech 5 : 155 – 168 Levine D ( 1999 ) The pathogenesis of normal pressure hydrocephalus : a theoretical analysis . Bull Math Biol 61 : 875 – 916 LindenbergR , FreytagE ( 1969 ) Morphologyofbrainlesionsfromblunt trauma in early infancy . Arch Pathol 87 : 298 – 305 Linninger AA , Somayaji MR , Erickson T , Guo X , Penn RD ( 2008 ) Computational methods for predicting drug transport in anisotropic and heterogeneous brain tissue . J Biomech 41 : 2176 – 2187 Linninger AA , Xenos M , Sweetman B , Ponkshe S , Guo X , Penn R ( 2009 ) A mathematical model of blood , cerebrospinal ﬂuid and brain dynamics . Math Biol 59 : 729 – 759 Lundberg N , Troupp H , Lorin H ( 1965 ) Continuous recording of the ventricular - ﬂuid pressure in patients with severe acute traumatic brain injury . A preliminary report . J Neurosurg 22 : 581 – 590 Mack J , Squier W , Eastman JT ( 2009 ) Anatomy and development of the meninges : implications for subdural collections and CSF cir - culation . Pediatr Radiol 39 : 200 – 210 Margulies SS , Thibault LE , Gennarelli TA ( 1998 ) Physical model sim - ulations of brain injury in the primate . J Biomech 17 : 162 – 170 MarucciDD , JohnstonCP , AnslowP , JayamohanJ , RichardsPG , Wilkie AO , WallSA ( 2008 ) Implicationsofavertexbulgefollowingmod - iﬁed strip craniectomy for sagittal synostosis . Plast Reconstr Surg 122 : 217 – 224 123 Mechanics of the brain 963 Matshes E ( 2010 ) Retinal and optic nerve sheath haemorrhages are not pathognomonic of abusive head injury . American Academy of Forensic Sciences , Colorado Springs Maxwell WL , Domleo A , McColl G , Jafari SS , Graham DI ( 2003 ) Post - acute alterations in the axonal cytoskeleton after traumatic axonal injury . J Neurotrauma 20 : 151 – 168 Meaney DF , Morrison B , Bass CD ( 2014 ) The mechanics of traumatic brain injury : a review of what we know and what we need to know for reducing its societal burden . J Biomech Eng ASME 136 : 021008 Mehrabian A , Abousleiman Y ( 2011 ) General solutions to porovis - coelastic model of hydrocephalic human brain tissue . J Theor Biol 291 : 105 – 118 Menzel A , Kuhl E ( 2012 ) Frontiers in growth and remodeling . Mech Res Commun 42 : 1 – 14 Miller K , Chinzei K ( 1997 ) Constitutive modelling of brain tissue : experiment and theory . J Biomech 30 : 1115 – 1121 Miller K , Chinzei K ( 2002 ) Mechanical properties of brain tissue in tension . J Biomech 35 : 483 – 490 Miller K , Chinzei K , Orssengo G , Bednarz P ( 2000 ) Mechanical prop - erties of brain tissue in vivo : experiment and computer simulation . J Biomech 33 : 1369 – 1376 Mokri B ( 2001 ) The Monro – Kellie hypothesis : applications in CSF volume depletion . Neurology 56 : 1746 – 1748 Monro A ( 1783 ) Observations on structure and functions of the nervous system . Creech and Johnson , Edinburgh Moore DF , Jérusalem A , Nyein M , Noels L , Jaffee MS , Radovitzky RA ( 2009 ) Computational biology—modeling of primary blast effects on the central nervous system . NeuroImage 47 : T10 – T20 Morrison B III , Saatman K , Meaney D , McIntosh T ( 1998 ) In vitro central nervous system models of mechanically induced trauma : a review . J Neurotrauma 15 : 911 – 928 Morrison B III , Cater HL , Benham CD , Sundstrom LE ( 2006 ) An in vitro model of traumatic brain injury utilising two - dimensional stretch of organotypic hippocampal slice cultures . J Neurosci Methods 150 : 192 – 201 Morritt DG , Yeh FJ , Wall SA , Richards PG , Jayamohan J , Johnson D ( 2010 ) Management of isolated sagittal synostosis in the absence of scaphocephaly : a series of eight cases . Plast Reconstr Surg 126 : 572 – 580 Nahum AM , Smith R , Ward CC ( 1977 ) Intracranial pressure dynamics during head impact . Proceedings of 21th Stapp Car Crash Confer - ence , 339 – 366 NHTSA ( 1972 ) Occupant crash protection—head injury criterion , S6 . 2 of FMVSS 571 . 208 . NHTSA , Washington NicholsonC ( 2001 ) Diffusionandrelatedtransportmechanismsinbrain tissue . Rep Prog Phys 64 : 815 – 884 Nyein M , Jason AM , Yu L , Pita CM , Joannopoulos JD , Moore DF , Radovitzky RA ( 2010 ) In silico investigation of intracranial blast mitigation with relevance to military traumatic brain injury . Proc Natl Acad Sci 107 : 20703 – 20708 Oehmichen M , Schleiss D , Pedal I , Saternus KS , Gerling I , Meissner C ( 2008 ) Shaken baby syndrome : re - examination of diffuse axonal injury as cause of death . Acta Neuropathol 116 : 317 – 329 Oreskovic D , Klarica M ( 2010 ) The formation of cerebrospinal ﬂuid : nearly a hundred years of interpretations and misinterpretations . Brain Res Rev 64 : 241 – 262 Ouyang H , Galle B , Li J , Nauman E , Shi R ( 2008 ) Biomechanics of spinal cord injury : a multimodal investigation using ex vivo guinea pig spinal cord white matter . J Neurotrauma 25 : 19 – 29 Ouyang H , Sun W , Fu Y , Li J , Cheng J , Nauman E , Shi R ( 2010 ) Compression induces acute demyelination and potassium channel exposure in spinal cord . J Neurotrauma 27 : 1109 – 1120 Papadopoulos M , Saadoun S , Binder D , Manley G , Krishna S , Verkman A ( 2004 ) Molecular mechanisms of brain tumor edema . Neuro - science 129 : 1009 – 1018 Papastavrou A , Steinmann P , Kuhl E ( 2013 ) On the mechanics of con - tinua with boundary energies and growing surfaces . J Mech Phys Solids 61 : 1446 – 1463 Paulson OB , Strandgaard R , Edvinsson L ( 1990 ) Cerebral autoregula - tion . Cerebrovasc Brain Metab Rev 2 : 161 – 192 Peter SJ , Mofrad MRK ( 2012 ) Computational modeling of axonal microtubule bundles under tension . Biophys J 102 : 749 – 757 Pfrieger FW ( 2010 ) Role of glial cells in the formation and maintenance of synapses . Brain Res Rev 63 : 39 – 46 PowathilG , KohandelM , SivaloganathanS , OzaA , MilosevicM ( 2007 ) Mathematical modeling of brain tumors : effects of radiotherapy and chemotherapy . Phys Med Biol 52 : 3291 – 3306 Prange MT , Margulies SS ( 2002 ) Regional , directional , and age - dependent properties of the brain undergoing large deformation . J Biomech Eng 124 : 244 – 252 Prevost TP , Balakrishnan A , Suresh S , Socrate S ( 2011 ) Biomechanics of brain tissue . Acta Biomater 7 : 83 – 95 Raslan A , Bhardwaj A ( 2007 ) Medical management of cerebral edema . Neurosurg Focus 22 : E12 Rashid B , Destrade M , Gilchrist MD ( 2012 ) Mechanical characteriza - tion of brain tissue in compression at dynamic strain rates . J Mech Behav Biomed Mater 10 : 23 – 38 Rashid B , Destrade M , Gilchrist MD ( 2013 ) Mechanical characteriza - tion of brain tissue in simple shear at dynamic strain rates . J Mech Behav Biomed Mater 28 : 71 – 85 Rashid B , Destrade M , Gilchrist MD ( 2014 ) Mechanical characteriza - tionofbraintissueintensionatdynamicstrainrates . JMechBehav Biomed Mater 33 : 43 – 54 Raybaud C , Widjaja E ( 2011 ) Development and dysgenesis of the cere - bralcortex : malformationsofcorticaldevelopment . Neuroimaging Clin N Am 21 : 483 – 543 Raybaud C , Ahmad T , Rastegar N , Shroff M , Al Nassar M ( 2013 ) The premature brain : developmental and lesional anatomy . Neuroradi - ology 55 : S23 – S40 Redzic ZB , Preston JE , Duncan JA , Chodobski A , Szmydynger - Chodobska J ( 2005 ) The choroid plexus - cerebrospinal ﬂuid sys - tem : from development to aging . Curr Top Dev Biol 71 : 1 – 52 Reichard RR , White CL 3rd , Hladik CL , Dolinak D ( 2003 ) Beta - amyloid precursor protein staining of nonaccidental central ner - vous system injury in pediatric autopsies . J Neurotrauma 20 : 347 – 355 Richman DP , Stewart RM , Hutchinson JW , Caviness VS ( 1975 ) Mechanical model of brain convolutional development . Science 189 : 18 – 21 Risberg J , Lundberg N , Ingvar DH ( 1969 ) Regional cerebral blood volume during acute transient rises of the intracranial pressure ( plateau waves ) . J Neurosurg 31 : 303 – 310 Rockne R , Alvord EC Jr , Rockhill JK , Swanson KR ( 2009 ) A math - ematical model for brain tumor response to radiation therapy . J Math Biol 58 : 561 – 578 Romano A , Scheel M , Hirsch S , Braun J , Sack I ( 2012 ) In vivo waveguide elastography of white matter tracts in the human brain . Magn Reson Med 68 : 1410 – 1422 Rosso L , Brock CS , Gallo JM , Saleem A , Price PM , Turkheimer FE , Aboagye EO ( 2009 ) A new model for prediction of drug distribu - tion in tumor and normal tissues : pharmacokinetics of temozolo - mide in glioma patients . Cancer Res 69 : 120 – 127 Roth G , Dicke U ( 2005 ) Evolution of the brain and intelligence . Trends Cogn Sci 9 : 250 – 257 SabetAA , ChristoforouE , ZatlinB , GeninGM , BaylyPV ( 2008 ) Defor - mation of the human brain induced by mild angular head acceler - ation . J Biomech 41 : 307 – 315 SackI , BeierbachB , HamhaberU , KlattD , BraunJ ( 2008 ) Non - invasive measurement of brain viscoelasticity using magnetic resonance elastography . NMR Biomed 21 : 265 – 271 123 964 A . Goriely et al . SackI , StreitbergerKJ , KreftingD , PaulF , BraunJ ( 2011 ) Theinﬂuence of physiological aging and atrophy on brain viscoelastic properties in humans . PLoS One 6 : e23451 SchrotRJ , MuizelaarJP ( 2002 ) Mannitolinacutetraumaticbraininjury . Lancet 9318 : 1633 – 1634 Shahim K , Drezet JM , Martin BA , Momjian S ( 2012 ) Ventricle equilib - riumpositioninhealthyandnormalpressurehydrocephalusbrainsusingananalyticalmodel . ASME J Biomech Eng 134 : 729 – 759 Sharan M , Popel AS ( 2002 ) A compartment model for oxygen transport in brain microcirculation in the presence of blood substitutes . J Theor Biol 216 : 479 – 500 Shepherd GM ( 2004 ) The synaptic organization of the brain . Oxford University Press , New York Shi R , Whitebone J ( 2006 ) Conduction deﬁcits and membrane disrup - tion of spinal cord axons as a function of magnitude and rate of strain . J Neurophys 95 : 3384 – 3390 Siyahhan B , Knobloch V , de Zelicourt D , Asgari M , Schmid Daners M , Poulikakos D , Kurtcuoglu V ( 2014 ) Flow induced by ependy - mal cilia dominates near - wall cerebrospinal ﬂuid dynamics in the lateral ventricles . J R Soc Interface 11 : 20131189 Sforza DM , Putman CM , Cebral JR ( 2009 ) Hemodynamics of cerebral aneurysms . Ann Rev Fluid Mech 41 : 91 – 107 Simard J , Kent T , Chen M , Tarasov KV , Gerzanich V ( 2007 ) Brain oedema in focal ischaemia : molecular pathophysiology and theo - retical implications . Lancet Neurol 6 : 258 – 268 Soustiel JF , Sviri GE , Mahamid E , Shik V , Abeshaus S , Zaaroor M ( 2010 ) Cerebral blood ﬂow and metabolism following decompres - sive craniectomy for control of increased intracranial pressure . Neurosurgery 67 : 65 – 72 Smillie A , Sobey I , Molnar Z ( 2005 ) A hydroelastic model of hydro - cephalus . J Fluid Mech 539 : 417 – 443 Smith DH , Wolf JA , Lusardi RA , Lee VMY , Meaney DF ( 1999 ) High tolerance and delayed elastic response of cultured axons to dynamic stretch injury . J Neurosci 19 : 4263 – 4269 Smith DH , Meaney DF , Shull WH ( 2003 ) Diffuse axonal injury in head trauma . J Head Trauma Rehabil 18 : 307 – 316 Spaethling J , Meaney DF ( 2012 ) NMDA receptor mediated phosphory - lation of GluR1 subunits contributes to the appearance of calcium - permeable AMPA receptors after mechanical stretch injury . Neu - robiol Dis 46 : 646 – 654 Squier W , Lindberg E , Mack J , Darby S ( 2009 ) Demonstration of ﬂuid channels in human dura and their relationship to age and intradural bleeding . Childs Nerv Syst 25 : 925 – 931 Squier W ( 2011 ) The “Shaken Baby” syndrome : pathology and mech - anisms . Acta Neuropathol 122 : 519 – 542 Squier W , Jansen A ( 2014 ) Polymicrogyria : pathology , fetal origins and mechanisms . Acta Neuropathol Commun 2 : 80 Squier W , Mack J , Green A , Aziz T ( 2012 ) The pathophysiology of brain swelling associated with subdural hemorrhage : the role of the trigeminovascular system . Childs Nerv Syst 28 : 2005 – 2015 Stoverud KH , Darcis M , Helmig R , Majid Hassanizadeh S ( 2012 ) Modelling concentration distribution and deformation during convection - enhanced drug delivery into brain tissue . Transp Porous Med 92 : 119 – 143 Streitberger KJ , Sack I , Krefting D , Pfüller C , Braun J , Paul F , Wuer - fel J ( 2012 ) Brain viscoelasticity alteration in chronic - progressive multiple sclerosis . PLoS ONE 7 : e29888 Sun T , Hevner RF ( 2014 ) Growth and folding of the mammalian cere - bral cortex : from molecules to malformations . Nat Rev Neurosci 15 : 217 – 232 Suresh S ( 2007 ) Biomechanics and biophysics of cancer cells . Acta Biomater 3 : 413 – 438 Swanson KR , Bridge C , Murray JD , Alvord EC Jr ( 2003 ) Virtual and realbraintumors : usingmathematicalmodelingtoquantifyglioma growth and invasion . J Neurol Sci 216 : 1 – 10 Sweetman B , Xenos M , Zitella L , Linninger AA ( 2011 ) Three - dimensional computational prediction of cerebrospinal ﬂuid ﬂow in the human brain . Comput Biol Med 41 : 67 – 75 Syková E , Nicholson C ( 2008 ) Diffusion in brain extracellular space . Physiol Rev 88 : 1277 – 1340 Terzaghi K ( 1943 ) Theoretical soil mechanics . Wiley , New York Tracqui P , Cruywagen GC , Woodward DE , Bartoo GT , Murray JD , Alvord EC ( 1995 ) A mathematical model of glioma growth : the effect of chemotherapy on spatio - temporal growth . Cell Prolif 28 : 17 – 31 Tubbs RS , Loukas M , Louis RG Jr , Shoja MM , Acakpo - Satchivi L , Blount JP , Salter EG , Oakes WJ , Wellons JC 3rd ( 2007 ) Anatomy of the falcine venous plexus . J Neurosurg 107 : 155 – 157 Tully B , Ventikos Y ( 2011 ) Cerebral water transport using multiple - network poroelastic theory : application to normal pressure hydro - cephalus . J Fluid Mech 667 : 188 – 215 Tyler WJ ( 2012 ) The mechanobiology of brain function . Nat Rev Neu - rosci 13 : 867 – 878 Unterberg A , Stover J , Kress B , Kiening K ( 2004 ) Edema and brain trauma . Neuroscience 129 : 1019 – 1027 Ursino M , Lodi CA ( 1997 ) A simple mathematical model of the inter - action between intracranial pressure and cerebral hemodynamics . J Appl Physiol 82 : 1256 – 1269 Van Dommelen JAW , Van der Sande TPJ , Hrapko M , Peters GWM ( 2010 ) Mechanical properties of brain tissue by indentation : inter - regional variation . J Mech Behav Biomed Mater 3 : 158 – 166 VanDommelenJAW , HrapkoM , PetersGWM ( 2011 ) Constitutivemod - elling of brain tissue for prediction of traumatic brain injury . In : Neural Tissue Mechanics , Series : Studies inMechanobiology , Tis - sue Engineering and Biomaterials , Editor : Bilston LE , Series Edi - tor : Gefen A , Springer - Verlag Van Essen DC ( 1997 ) A tension - based theory of morphogenesis and compact wiring in the central nervous system . Nature 385 : 313 – 318 VappouJ , BretonE , ChoquetP , GoetzC , WillingerR , ConstantinescoA ( 2007 ) Magneticresonanceelastographycomparedwithrotational rheometry for in vitro brain tissue viscoelasticity measurement . Magn Reson Mater Phys 20 : 273 – 278 Velardi F , Fraternali F , Angelillo M ( 2006 ) Anisotropic constitutive equations and experimental tensile behavior of brain tissue . Bio - mech Model Mechanobiol 5 : 53 – 61 Volman V , Ng LG ( 2013 ) Computer modeling of mild axonal injury : implications for axonal signal transmission . Neural Comput 25 : 1 – 36 WallSA , ThomasGP , JohnsonD , ByrenJC , JayamohanJ , MagdumSA , McAuley DJ , Richards PG ( 2014 ) The preoperative incidence of raised intracranial pressure in nonsyndromic sagittal craniosynos - tosisisunderestimatedintheliterature . JNeurosurgPediatr26 : 1 – 8 Wang JA , Lin W , Morris T , Banderali U , Juranka PF , Morris CE ( 2009 ) Membrane trauma and Na + leak from Nav1 . 6 channels . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 297 : C823 – C834 Walberer M , Ritschel N , Nedelmann M , Volk K , Mueller C , Tscher - natsch M , Stolz E , Blaes F , Bachmann G , Gerriets T ( 2008 ) Aggra - vation of infarct formation by brain swelling in a large territorial stroke : a target for neuroprotection ? J Neurosurg 109 : 287 – 293 Watton PN , Raberger NB , Holzapfel GA , Ventikos Y ( 2009 ) Cou - pling the hemodynamic environment to the evolution of cerebral aneurysms : computational framework and numerical examples . J Biomech Eng 131 : 101003 Waxman SG , Brill MH ( 1978 ) Conduction through demyelinated plaques in multiple sclerosis : computer simulations of facilitation by short internodes . J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 41 : 408 – 416 Waxweiler R , Thurman D , Sniezek H , Sosin D , ONeil J ( 1995 ) Moni - toring the impact of traumatic brain injury : a review and update . J Neurotrauma 12 : 509 – 516 123 Mechanics of the brain 965 Welker W ( 1990 ) Why does cerebral cortex ﬁssure and fold ? A review of determinants of gyri and sulci . In : Jones EG , Peters A ( eds ) Cereb Cortex , vol 8B . Springer , New York WilkieKP , DrapacaCS , SivaloganathanS ( 2012 ) Agingimpactonbrain biomechanics with applications to hydrocephalus . Math Med Biol 29 : 145 – 161 Wirth B , Sobey I ( 2006 ) An axisymmetric and fully 3d poroelastic model for the evolution of hydrocephalus . Math Med Biol 23 : 363 – 388 Wirth B , Sobey I ( 2009 ) Analytic solution during an infusion test of the linear unsteady poroelastic equations in a spherically symmetric model of the brain . Math Med Biol 26 : 25 – 61 Woods RH , Ul - Haq E , Wilkie AO , Jayamohan J , Richards PG , Johnson D , LesterT , Wall SA ( 2009 ) Reoperation for intracranialhyperten - sion in TWIST1 - conﬁrmed Saethre - Chotzen syndrome : a 15 - year review . Plast Reconstr Surg 123 : 1801 – 1810 Wright RM , Post A , Hoshizaki B , Ramesh KT ( 2013 ) A multiscale computational approach to estimating axonal damage under iner - tial loading of the head . J Neurotrauma 30 : 102 – 118 Wygnanski - Jaffe T , Morad Y , Levin AV ( 2009 ) Pathology of retinal hemorrhage in abusive head trauma . Forensic Sci Med Pathol 5 : 291 – 297 Xu G , Bayly PV , Taber LA ( 2009 ) Residual stress in the adult mouse brain . Biomech Model Mechanobiol 8 : 253 – 262 Xu G , Knutsen AK , Dikranian K , Kroenke CD , Bayly PV , Taber LA ( 2010 ) Axons pull on the brain , but tension does not drive cortical folding . J Biomech Eng 132 : 071013 Zilles K , Palomero - Gallagher N , Amunts K ( 2013 ) Development of cortical folding during evolution and ontogeny . Trends Neurosci 36 : 275 – 284 123