Molecular Cell 21 , 737 – 748 , March 17 , 2006 ª 2006 Elsevier Inc . DOI 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2006 . 02 . 018 Differential Regulation of EGF Receptor Internalization and Degradation by Multiubiquitination within the Kinase Domain Fangtian Huang , 1 , 3 Donald Kirkpatrick , 2 , 3 Xuejun Jiang , 1 Steven Gygi , 2 and Alexander Sorkin 1 , * 1 Department of Pharmacology University of Colorado Health Sciences Center Aurora , Colorado 80045 2 Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston , Massachusetts 02115 Summary Ubiquitination of the EGF receptor ( EGFR ) is believed to play a critical role in regulating both its localization and its stability . To elucidate the role of EGFR ubiqui - tination , tandem mass spectrometry was used to iden - tify six distinct lysine residues within the kinase domain of the EGFR , which can be conjugated to ubiq - uitin following growth factor stimulation . Substitution of these lysine residues with arginines resulted in a dramatic decrease in overall ubiquitination but pre - served normal tyrosine phosphorylation of EGFR . Ubiquitination - deﬁcient EGFR mutants displayed a se - vere defect in their turnover rates but were internalized at rates comparable to those of wild - type receptors . Fi - nally , quantitative mass spectrometry demonstrated that more than 50 % of all EGFR bound ubiquitin was in the form of polyubiquitin chains , primarily linked through Lys63 . Taken together , these data provide di - rect evidence for the role of EGFR ubiquitination in re - ceptor targeting to the lysosome and implicate Lys63 - linked polyubiquitin chains in this sorting process . Introduction The intensity , duration , and speciﬁcity of signal trans - duction through receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTK ) are reg - ulated by ligand - mediated endocytosis and postendo - cytic trafﬁcking of activated receptors . Internalization of activated RTK and subsequent targeting to degrada - tive organelles result in downregulation of RTK activity and function as a negative feedback on downstream signaling processes ( Dikic and Giordano , 2003 ) . Inter - nalized RTK can form signaling complexes in endo - somes , which may trigger qualitatively different signals than receptors located at the plasma membrane ( Miac - zynska et al . , 2004 ; Sorkin and Von Zastrow , 2002 ) . De - spite the important role of endocytosis in the biological activities of RTK , the molecular mechanisms controlling this process remain poorly understood . Epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor ( EGFR ) has been the primary experimental model used to study the mechanisms of endocytosis . Ligand binding to EGFR at the cell surface leads to rapid internalization of ligand - receptor complexes through clathrin - coated pits ( Gorden et al . , 1978 ) . When enough activated EGFR accumulates at the cell surface to saturate the clathrin - dependent pathway , the resulting pool of acti - vated receptors is instead internalized through slow , clathrin - independent pathways ( Sigismund et al . , 2005 ; Wiley , 1988 ) . In either case , internalized ligand - receptor complexes are transferred to early endosomes and sub - sequently recycled back to the plasma membrane ( Hop - kins et al . , 1985 ; Sorkin et al . , 1991 ) . After each round of internalization , a signiﬁcant fraction of internalized re - ceptors are sorted from early endosomes to multivesic - ular bodies ( MVBs ) , where , instead of being recycled , re - ceptors can be targeted to lysosomes for degradation ( Miller et al . , 1986 ) . Ubiquitination of EGFR has been implicated in both li - gand - mediated endocytosis and endosomal sorting . Following EGF binding , EGFR is ubiquitinated by the RING domain E3 ubiquitin ( Ub ) ligase , Cbl ( Levkowitz et al . , 1998 ) . The binding of Cbl to EGFR occurs directly via phosphorylated Tyr1045 of EGFR , as well as indi - rectly through Grb2 . Whereas both interaction modes are necessary for efﬁcient ubiquitination of the receptor , binding of Cbl to EGFR through a direct interaction with Tyr1045 is dispensable for clathrin - dependent internali - zation of EGFR ( Huang and Sorkin , 2005 ; Jiang and Sor - kin , 2003 ; Waterman et al . , 2002 ) . Ubiquitination refers to the conjugation of Ub to the 3 - amino group of a lysine residue within a substrate . Monoubiquitination has previously been shown to be necessary for ligand - mediated endocytosis of the a fac - tor receptor in yeast ( Hicke and Dunn , 2003 ) . Previous reports suggested that EGFR is exclusively modiﬁed by monoubiquitin , consistent with the importance of this modiﬁcation in receptor sorting at the plasma mem - brane and endosomes ( Haglund et al . , 2003 ; Mosesson et al . , 2003 ) . While some substrates are modiﬁed only by mono - Ub , poly - Ub chains can form through each of the seven lysine residues within Ub itself ( Peng et al . , 2003 ) . Lys48 - linked poly - Ub chains are generally be - lieved to target proteins to the proteasome for degrada - tion , while Lys63 linkages have been shown to regulate processes such as DNA repair and kinase activation through proteasome independent mechanisms . Despite a wide array of experimental approaches , ev - idence supporting the importance of EGFR ubiquitina - tion in receptor trafﬁcking remains indirect . Although studies utilizing Tyr1045 mutation have shown this resi - due to play a critical role in EGFR ubiquitination and trafﬁcking ( Levkowitz et al . , 1999 ) , its effects can alter - natively be attributed to impaired phosphorylation of neighboring serine residues ( Oksvold et al . , 2003 ) . Fur - thermore , a series of endosomal proteins including Hrs and ESCRT complexes I , II , and III , each containing a Ub binding domain ( s ) , are thought to participate in trapping EGFR within internal vesicles of MVBs , al - though the sequence of protein - protein interactions be - tween ubiquitinated EGFR and ESCRT proteins during this process has not been experimentally elucidated . It is possible to inhibit EGFR degradation by RNAi knock - down of Hrs and ESCRT proteins in human cells or ge - netic knockout in mice ( Babst et al . , 2000 ; Bache et al . , 2003 , 2004 ; Bishop et al . , 2002 ) . Since the Ub ligation * Correspondence : alexander . sorkin @ uchsc . edu 3 These authors contributed equally to this work . and binding proteins used in this process are shared by many related pathways , knockdown strategies that eliminate these components would also be expected to produce multiple direct and indirect effects . Similarly , it cannot be ruled out that the effects seen with Cbl mu - tants on endocytosis result from deﬁcient ubiquitination of proteins besides EGFR ( Jiang and Sorkin , 2003 ; Thien et al . , 2001 ) . As such , direct identiﬁcation of the ubiqui - tination sites on EGFR is necessary , since speciﬁc muta - tion of these residues provides an opportunity to isolate and directly test the functional signiﬁcance of EGFR ubiquitination in receptor internalization and trafﬁcking . In the current study , we have used tandem mass spectrometry ( LC - MS / MS ) to identify speciﬁc lysine res - idues within EGFR that are modiﬁed by Ub . Using the Ub - AQUA technique , it was further possible to examine the forms of Ub bound to the substrate . Surprisingly , we found that EGFR is markedly polyubiquitinated , with poly - Ub chains linked primarily through Lys63 of Ub . Based upon data from LC - MS / MS analysis , it was pos - sible to develop a series of EGFR mutants that were deﬁcient in growth - factor - stimulated ubiquitination . In these mutants , Ub - mediated receptor internalization was uncoupled from lysosomal degradation , revealing distinct Ub - dependent mechanisms for these two pro - cesses . Results and Discussion Ubiquitin Conjugation Sites Are Located in the Kinase Domain of EGFR To identify ubiquitination sites on the EGFR , large amounts of receptors were puriﬁed from porcine aortic endothelial ( PAE ) cells stably expressing wild - type ( wt ) human EGFR . Cells were untreated or treated with EGF for 2 min at 37ºC to stimulate maximum EGFR ubiq - uitination . EGFR was immunoprecipitated using an anti - body to the extracellular domain of the receptor and stringently washed to minimize coprecipitation of other proteins . Immunopuriﬁed EGFR was separated by SDS - PAGE and visualized by Coomassie blue or silver staining ( Figure 1A ) . In order to analyze ubiquitinated EGFR by mass spectrometry , the gel region containing Ub - modiﬁed protein was excised , digested with trypsin , and analyzed by LC - MS / MS using a hybrid - linear ion trap Fourier transform mass spectrometer . This instru - ment made it possible to collect a high accuracy precur - sor ion measurement ( < 10 ppm ) and an MS / MS spectra for each peptide ion . Database searching of these MS / MS spectra revealed that EGFR was the predominant protein identiﬁed in these samples . Numerous reports have demonstrated that trypsin di - gestion of a ubiquitinated protein produces unique 2 GG signature peptides , which can be analyzed by standard LC - MS / MS techniques and used to identify substrate ubiquitination sites ( Kirkpatrick et al . , 2005 ) . These sig - nature peptides can be identiﬁed in database searches by modifying search parameters to allow for an addi - tional mass of 114 . 0429 Da ( corresponding to the 2 GG Ub remnant ) on lysine residues . Using this approach , we identiﬁed six distinct ubiquitination sites on EGFR . MS / MS spectra obtained during this analysis matched 2 GGsignaturepeptidescorrespondingtoubiquitination of EGFR at lysines 2 692 , 2 713 , 2 730 , 2 843 , 2 905 , and 2 946 ( Figure 1B , see Figure S1 in the Supplemental Data available with this article online ) . Representative spectra are shown that demonstrate ubiquitination at lysine 843 ( Figure 1C ) and lysine 905 ( Figure 1D ) . In the case of the six 2 GG signature peptides identiﬁed , the mass devia - tion between the observed and expected precursor ions was found to be between 2 and 10 ppm . In each case , manual validation independently conﬁrmed the ubiquitination site assignment . Sequence analysis revealed that each of the ubiquiti - nation sites identiﬁed map to the kinase domain of EGFR . Using a previously reported structure of the EGFR kinase domain ( Stamos et al . , 2002 ) , we found that these six lysines are distributed throughout the sur - face of the domain ( Figure 2A ) . Although Western blot - ting revealed that the total amount of Ub conjugated to the stably expressed Y1045F mutant EGFR was approx - imately an order of magnitude lower than in wt EGFR ( Figure 1A ) , LC - MS / MS analysis revealed that at least two of these sites , Lys713 and Lys843 , could still be ubiquitinated in the Y1045R mutant . In contrast , no 2 GG signature peptides were identiﬁed in samples con - taining unstimulated wt EGFR . To investigate the effects of EGFR ubiquitination on receptor function , lysine residues corresponding to spe - ciﬁc EGFR ubiquitination sites were mutated to argi - nines . Single and multiple site - point mutants ( nKR ) of ﬁve , six , or nine lysines ( Figure 2B ) were generated and transiently expressed in PAE cells . In the 9KR mu - tant , besides the six lysines found to be modiﬁed by Ub , three additional lysines ( Lys689 , Lys690 , and Lys733 ) situated in close proximity to conﬁrmed ubiqui - tination sites were also substituted with arginines ( Fig - ure 2B ) . Western blot analysis revealed that single muta - tions of all individual sites and various combinations of two or three mutations did not result in a signiﬁcant de - crease in the ubiquitination of EGFR ( data not shown ) . However , ubiquitination of 5KR , 6KR , and 9KR mutants was reduced by w 70 % – 80 % as compared to wtEGFR ( Figure 2B ) . Similarly , cells stably expressing 5KR or Y1045F mutant forms of the receptor displayed weak ubiquitination ( about 20 % compared to wtEGFR ) ( Figure 2C ) . In all of the mutants , residual ubiquitination was observed following EGF stimulation . Despite multiple Lys / Arg mutations within the ki - nase domain , the extent of tyrosine phosphorylation for KR mutants was essentially similar to that of wt re - ceptors ( Figures 2B and 2C ) . All nKR mutants stably ex - pressed in PAE cells were capable of activating MAPK / ERK1 / 2 , its upstream kinase ( MEK1 / 2 ) , and Akt kinase to a comparable extent as in cells expressing wt EGFR ( data not shown , see also Figure 5 below ) . These data suggest that multiple lysine - to - arginine substitutions within the kinase domain had a direct effect on ubiquiti - nation but did not affect the tyrosine kinase activity of EGFR or its signaling capacity . EGFR Is Polyubiquitinated It has been previously reported that EGFR ubiquitination occurs exclusively in the form of mono - Ub ( Haglund et al . , 2003 ; Mosesson et al . , 2003 ) . As a part of LC - MS / MS analysis of ubiquitinated EGFR samples , we ob - served a series of peptides corresponding to K48 - , K63 - , and K11 - linked poly - Ub chains . To quantify the various Molecular Cell 738 forms of Ub bound to EGFR , samples were analyzed us - ing the newly developed Ub - AQUA method ( D . K . and S . G . , unpublished data ) . This method utilizes a series of isotope - labeled internal standard peptides and se - lected reaction monitoring ( SRM ) experiments to quan - tify each poly - Ub chain linkage as well as mono - Ub . Analysis of samples from unstimulated cells revealed a low background level of Ub . Following EGF stimula - tion , 2 . 91 pmol total Ub was measured in the gel region immediately above EGFR ( > 170 kDa ) , equating to an in - crease of more than 20 - fold over unstimulated receptor ( Figures 3A and 3B ) . Contrary to published reports , more than half of all EGFR - associated Ub was found not as mono - Ub but rather in the form of poly - Ub chains . Poly - Ub chains linked through K63 were more abundant than all other linkages combined , making up 41 . 8 % of the total Ub . In addition to 1 . 22 pmol K63 branched pep - tide , 0 . 20 pmol K48 , 0 . 12 pmol K11 , and 0 . 03 pmol K29 chains were also detected ( Figure 3B ) . Because of weak ubiquitination of 5KR and Y1045F mutants , Ub - AQUA analysis required higher amounts of starting material than corresponding analysis of wt EGFR . Despite less efﬁcient overall ubiquitination , the linkage proﬁle for Ub bound to mutant forms of EGFR was strikingly similar to what was seen in wt EGFR ( Figure 3C ) . The detection of EGFR polyubiquitination was sur - prising in light of published data showing that EGFR is exclusively monoubiquitinated ( Haglund et al . , 2003 ; Mosesson et al . , 2003 ) . It is difﬁcult to reconcile our re - sults with the latter reports , which based their conclu - sions on the inability of FK1 / 2 antibodies to recognize both mono - Ub and ubiquitinated EGFR and on the use of Ub mutants deﬁcient in polyubiquitination . This result may indicate that FK1 / 2 antibodies do not efﬁciently rec - ognize K63 - linked Ub chains . Alternatively , since trans - fection of mutant Ub does not eliminate the abundant pools of endogenous Ub , it is likely that mutant Ub Figure 1 . Identiﬁcation of Multiple Ubiquitination Sites in the Kinase Domain of the EGFR by LC - MS / MS ( A ) PAE cells stably expressing wtEGFR or Y1045F mutant were untreated or treated with 20 ng / ml EGF for 2 min at 37ºC , and EGFR was immu - noprecipitated . Representative gels analyzed by LC - MS / MS for the identiﬁcation of EGFR ubiquitination sites are shown . Western blots against Ub , run in parallel with Coomassie - or silver - stained gels , were used as guides while cutting gel regions containing Ub - EGFR . ( B ) Six ubiquitination sites were identiﬁed from within the kinase domain of EGFR . Each peptide was characterized by a 2 GG modiﬁed lysine , bearing an additional mass of 114 . 0429 Da . Peptides matching MS / MS spectra were only accepted if they varied by less than 10 ppm from the expected monoisotopic mass of the parent ion . ( CandD ) RepresentativeMS / MSspectraofpeptidesdemonstratingubiquitinationat ( C ) lysine843and ( D ) lysine905oftheEGFR . Peaksmatch - ing expected singly and doubly charged ( + + ) b and y ions are labeled . EGF Receptor Ubiquitination and Endocytosis 739 acts as an endcap on polyubiquitin chains formed with endogenous Ub . Regardless of the nature of the dis - crepancy , mass spectrometry analysis of immuno - puriﬁed EGFR unequivocally demonstrated K63 - linked polyubiquitination of EGFR that was proportionally re - duced in two distinct EGFR mutants ( Figures 2C and 3C ) . K63 - linked polyubiquitin chains are proposed to function in DNA repair , I k B kinase activation , transla - tional regulation , and endocytosis in yeast , although their mechanistic role in these processes is still unclear ( Deng et al . , 2000 ; Galan and Haguenauer - Tsapis , 1997 ; Hofmann and Pickart , 1999 ; Spence et al . , 2000 ) . Thus , predominant K63 polyubiquitination is consistent with the nonproteosomal function of EGFR ubiquitination . Ubiquitination Sites Are Essential for EGFR Degradation EGFR ubiquitination has been implicated in the regula - tion of EGFR trafﬁcking . To directly test this hypothesis , wt and nKR mutant forms of EGFR were transiently expressed in PAE cells and used to measure growth - factor - stimulated EGFR turnover rates . Treatment of cells with EGF led to degradation of wt EGFR with a half - life of 1 . 5 – 2 . 0 hr ( Figures 4A and 4B ) . In contrast , the levels of 5KR , 6KR , and 9KR forms of the receptor re - mained virtually unchanged after 4 hr incubation of cells with EGF . Similarly , EGF - induced degradation of the 5KR mutant receptor was much slower than that of the wt receptor in two separate stable cell lines ( Figures 4C and 4D ) . Moreover , measurements of the number of 125 I - EGF binding sites at the cell surface upon EGF treatment revealed a very low rate of downregulation of 5KR mutant ( Figure 4E ) . Increased stability of mutant EGFRs in cells stimu - lated with EGF suggests that signaling by these EGFR mutants can be prolonged . The time course of EGFR ac - tivation ( phosphorylation of the one of the major EGFR sites , Tyr1086 ) and MEK1 / 2 was comparable in cells ex - pressing wt and 5KR receptors ( Figure 5A ) . Probing EGFR with antibodies to pTyr1068 and pTyr1148 pro - duced essentially similar results ( data not shown ) . Sig - niﬁcant differences in the stability of activated EGFR were observed only in the presence of EGF concentra - tions that cause downregulation of the total EGFR pro - tein ( R 20 ng / ml ) . Under these conditions , the amount of active wt EGFR dramatically decreased after 2 hr in - cubation with EGF , whereas the level of activity of 5KR mutants remained unchanged ( Figure 5B ) . However , de - spite different stability of activated wt and mutant recep - tors , the extent of MEK1 / 2 activation by both receptors was similar ( Figure 5B ) . Interestingly , after comparable initial activation ( 5 min of EGF stimulation ) , the amount of activated 5KR receptors decayed more slowly than that for wt EGFR ( Figure 5C ) . Dephosphorylation of MEK1 / 2 after removal of EGF from the medium was fol - lowed by a new ‘‘late’’ wave of MEK1 / 2 activation . The amplitude of late MEK1 / 2 activation was higher in cells expressing 5KR mutant than in wt EGFR - expressing cells . It is possible that an elevated , late MEK1 / 2 activity is due to slow degradation and increased recycling of activated 5KR receptors . Nevertheless , the data in Fig - ure 5 suggest that , under physiological conditions of the continuous presence of EGF , elimination of receptor ubiquitination does not lead to increased MEK / ERK Figure 2 . Mutations ofUbiquitinationSitesinthe EGFRResult inIm - paired Ubiquitination but Normal Tyrosine Phosphorylation of the Receptor ( A ) Ub - modiﬁed lysines were mapped on a previously reported structure ( 1M14 ) of the EGFR kinase domain . Underlined are ubiqui - tination sites identiﬁed in both wtEGFR and Y1045F mutant . ( B ) Lysinesdepictedin ( A ) weremutatedtoarginines ( 5KRand6KR ) . Besides the six sites identiﬁed by LC - MS / MS , three structurally ad - jacent lysines ( K689 / K690 / K733 ) from the kinase domain were also mutated ( 9KR ) . Wtandmutant receptors weretransientlyexpressed in PAE cells , and EGFR immunoprecipitates were probed with Ub , phosphotyrosine , and EGFR antibodies . The mean amount of Ub and phosphotyrosine normalized to total EGFR ( 6 SD ) from four ex - periments is presented on the graphs . ( C ) EGFR wasimmunoprecipitated from PAEcellsstablyexpressing wtEGFR ( clone B2 ) , 5KR ( clone # 1 ) , and Y1045F mutants ( clone # 1 ) , and the extent of ubiquitination and phosphorylation was deter - mined in three experiments as in ( B ) . The mean amount of Ub and phosphotyrosine normalized to total EGFR ( 6 SD ) from four experi - ments is presented on the graphs . Molecular Cell 740 signaling in PAE cells . Presumably , the extent of MAPK activation is limited by saturable factors and processes downstream of EGFR . The inhibition of EGF - induced degradation of nKR mutants observed in Figures 4 and 5 could be due to slow internalization or impaired lysosomal degradation of EGF - receptor complexes . Our previous results have suggested that transient transfection leads to overex - pression of the receptor in the majority of cells so that the pathway responsible for rapid internalization be - comes saturated ( Carter and Sorkin , 1998 ) . Likewise , in - ternalization of 125 I - EGF in cells transiently expressing wt or nKR mutant EGFRs was similarly slow as com - pared with the maximum high rates measured for clathrin - dependent EGFR internalization in PAE cells ( Figure 6A ) . As in the case of transient transfections , treatment of cells stably expressing EGFR with saturat - ing EGF concentrations results in receptor internaliza - tion primarily through a slow , clathrin - independent pathway . No difference was observed between the re - ceptor internalization rate for wt versus mutant - express - ing cell lines under these conditions ( Figure 6A ) . There - fore , the defect in the turnover of nKR mutants is likely due to the blockade of lysosomal targeting rather than the internalization step of EGFR trafﬁcking . To further explore the nature of the delayed downreg - ulation of ubiquitination - deﬁcient receptor mutants , the localization of EGF - occupied 5KR mutant was ana - lyzed . After 10 min of cell stimulation with EGF conju - gated with rhodamine ( EGF - Rh ) or ﬂuorescein ( EGF - FC ) , both wt EGFR and 5KR mutant were well colocal - ized with the marker of early endosomes , EEA . 1 ( Figures 7A and 7B ) . At the same time , very little , if any , localiza - tion of both receptors in late endosomes and Figure 3 . Polyubiquitinaiton of EGFR Re - vealed by Ub - AQUA Analysis ( A ) PAE / EGFR cells were untreated or treated with 20 ng / ml EGF for 2 min at 37ºC , and EGFR was immunoprecipitated . Representa - tive gel analyzed by LC - MS / MS for the quan - tiﬁcation of EGFR ubiquitination and corre - spondingWesternblotagainstUbareshown . ( B ) Absolute amounts ( fmol ) of total Ub and each poly - Ub chain linkage measured in the analysis ofthe gel region containing multiubi - quitinated EGFR ( Ub n - EGFR ) and lower re - gion containing mainly unmodiﬁed EGFR ( free EGFR ) . ( C ) PAE cell stably expressing wt , Y1045F , and 5KR mutants of EGFR were treated with EGF as in ( A ) , and EGFRs were immunopre - cipitated . The results of ubiqutin - AQUA anal - ysis are presented for each poly - Ub chain linkage and mono - Ub / endcaps as a percent - age of total EGFR - associated Ub . EGF Receptor Ubiquitination and Endocytosis 741 lysosomes , marked by LysoTrackerRed , was observed ( Figures 7C and 7D ) . After 3 hr of continuous incubation of cells expressing wt EGFR with labeled EGF , about 70 % of EGF - FC was accumulated in late endosomes / lysosomes ( Figures 7C and 7D ) while very little , if any , EGF - Rh could be detected in early endosomes ( Figures 7A and 7B ) . In contrast , a signiﬁcant pool of 5KR mutant remained in EEA . 1 - positive compartments ( Figures 7A and 7B ) , and only a small amount of the mutant receptor reached late endosomes / lysosomes ( Figures 7C and 7D ) . Together with the poor downregulation of the sur - face 5KR mutant ( Figure 4E ) , the data in Figure 7 suggest that 5KR mutant is not efﬁciently sorted to the late endo - some / lysosome pathway and instead accumulated in early endosomal compartments where it is extensively recycled to the plasma membrane . The establishment of the role of EGFR ubiquitination in the lysosomal targeting and degradation of the recep - tor and the detection of marked EGFR K63 polyubiquiti - nation raise the question of what role Ub chains play in EGFR trafﬁcking . Structural studies of K63 - linked diubi - qutin have revealed that each of the two ubiquitins can bind the Ub binding domain in the same mode as does monoubiquitin ( Varadan et al . , 2004 ) . It can , therefore , be suggested that K63 chains allow for multivalent inter - actions of the receptor with Ub binding proteins in endo - somes , such as Hrs and TSG101 , which may be neces - sary to allow an efﬁcient sorting of the ubiquitinated receptors to internal vesicles of MVBs . A recent study using mutant Ub lacking Lys63 has proposed that poly - ubiquitination through this residue can mediate endocy - tosis of TrkA RTK ( Geetha et al . , 2005 ) . Although an E3 Figure 4 . Mutations of Ubiquitination Sites Inhibit EGFR Downregulation ( A ) wtEGFR , 5KR , 6KR , or 9KR mutants were transiently expressed in PAE cells . The cells were serum starved and incubated with EGF ( 100 ng / ml ) for indicated times before lysis intheabsenceofOVandNEM . EGFRwasde - tected with antibodies 2913 . ( B ) The amount of EGFR immunoreactivity was quantitated from three experiments , and the mean values ( 6 SD ) were plotted against time . ( C ) Cells stably expressing wt or 5KR mutant ( clones # 1 and # 4 ) were incubated with EGF asin ( A ) forindicatedtimes . EGFRwasimmu - nodetected as in ( A ) . ( D ) The amount of EGFR immunoreactivity was quantitated from three experiments per - formed as in ( C ) , and the mean values ( 6 SD ) were plotted against time . ( E ) Cells stably expressing wt or 5KR mutant ( clone # 1 ) were incubated with EGF as in ( A ) for indicated times . The cells were then acid washed to remove unlabeled EGF from sur - face receptors , and the number of surface EGF binding sites was measured using incu - bation with 125 I - EGF ( 50 ng / ml ) at 4ºC for 1 hr . Each data point represents a value averaged from three experiments ( 6 SD ) . Molecular Cell 742 ligase and other regulators of TrkA ubiquitination are dif - ferent than those controlling EGFR ubiquitination , the hypothesis can be put forward that K63 - linked Ub chains could be a common signal in RTK trafﬁcking . Major Ubiquitination Sites Are Not Essential for EGFR Internalization To compare rates of internalization of wt and mutant EGFR through the clathrin - dependent pathway , cell Figure 5 . Signaling by 5KR Mutant ( A ) PAEcellsstablyexpressingwtEGFRor5KR ( clone # 1 ) wereserumstarved , treatedwith10ng / mlEGFforindicatedtimesat37ºC , andlysedin the presence of OV and NEM . The cell lysates were probed for active EGFR ( antibody pY1086 ) , total EGFR ( Ab2913 ) , phosphorylated MEK1 / 2 , and total MEK . The experiment is representative of three independent experiments . ( B ) Serum - starvedcellsweretreatedwith1ng / ml ( w 0 . 8 3 10 6 cells / lane ) or5 , 10 , or20ng / ml ( w 0 . 25 3 10 6 cells / lane ) for0 , 10 , or120minat37ºC . Active EGFR and MEK1 / 2 were detected as in ( A ) . All steps of the experiment were performed identically for wt EGFR and mutant - expressing cells . The experiment is representative of three independent experiments . EGF - induced downregulation of EGFR was accompanied by the ap - pearance of a low molecular mass EGFR form ( w 160 kDa ) , a product of partial proteolysis of EGFR that is not detected by antibodies to active EGFR ( A and B ) . Note that Ab2913 recognized the EGF - activated full - length EGFR ( w 175 kDa ) with a lesser efﬁciency than the truncated EGFR species . ( C ) Serum - starvedcellsweretreatedwith10ng / mlEGFfor5minat37ºC , washed , andfurtherincubatedforindicatedtimes ( ChaseTime ) without EGF . Active EGFR and MEK1 / 2 were detected in cell lysates as in ( A ) . The mean amounts of active EGFR and MEK1 / 2 normalized to total EGFR and MEK1 / 2 , respectively , from three experiments ( 6 SD ) plotted against chase time are presented on the graphs at the right . EGF Receptor Ubiquitination and Endocytosis 743 lines stably expressing these mutants were used . In these cell lines , it is possible to measure the rates of EGFR internalization via rapid , physiological pathway of endocytosis by using low concentrations of EGF . Be - cause of different expression levels of receptors in var - ious cell lines , the pathway of clathrin - mediated endocy - tosis can be saturated at different occupancies of surface EGFR . Therefore , 125 I - EGF internalization rates of wt and mutant EGFR were measured using a range of EGF concentrations to compare maximum high inter - nalization rates . Figure 6A shows that , although there was signiﬁcant variation in the maximal rates of internal - ization , all nKR cell lines internalized 125 I - EGF within the range of the internalization rates of EGFR reported in various types of cells ( > 0 . 2 / min ) ( Jiang et al . , 2003 ; Huang et al . , 2004 ; Wiley , 1988 ) . 125 I - EGF internalization rate constants in nKR - expressing cells were also com - parable with these constants measured for the transfer - rin receptor , a cargo that is constitutively internalized via clathrin coated pits ( Huang et al . , 2004 ) . These data sug - gested that complete EGFR ubiquitination is not essen - tial for clathrin - dependent internalization of EGFR . Internalization of Lysine Mutants of the EGFR Is Mediated by Grb2 and Cbl If internalization of nKR mutant EGFR does not require efﬁcient ubiquitination , is it regulated by the same mechanisms as the internalization of wt receptors ? Using a combination of siRNA and dominant - negative overexpression approaches , we previously demon - strated that clathrin - dependent endocytosis requires Grb2 and its interaction with Cbl proteins in PAE and other cells ( Huang and Sorkin , 2005 ; Jiang et al . , 2003 ; Jiang and Sorkin , 2003 ) . Using this same Grb2 siRNA ap - proach , we found that Grb2 is necessary for clathrin - dependent 125 I - EGF internalization by 5KR and 9KR re - ceptors ( Figure 6B ) . To test for the importance of Cbl proteins in EGFR internalization , siRNA duplexes targeted to c - Cbl and Cbl - b were generated . When transfected together , Figure 6 . Internalization of EGFR Is Grb2 and Cbl Dependent but Is Not Affected by Muta - tions of Ubiquitination Sites ( A ) On the left , internalization rate constants ( k e ) of 125 I - EGF ( 1 ng / ml ) were measured in cells transiently expressing wt , 5KR , 6KR , or 9KR receptors . On the right , k e values were measured in cells stably expressing wtEGFR ( clones B2 and B11 ) or various nKR mutants treated with 0 . 5 – 40 ng / ml 125 I - EGF and plot - ted against the number of EGFR occupied by 125 I - EGF at the cell surface after 5 min in - cubation at 37ºC ( acid - wash - sensitive pool ) . ( B ) Internalization rates ofwtEGFR andstably expressed 5KR and 9KR mutants were mea - sured using 1 ng / ml 125 I - EGF in cells trans - fected with control siRNA ( mock ) , Grb2 siRNA , or c - Cbl / Cbl - b siRNAs . The extents of c - Cbl / Cbl - b protein depletion are shown by Western blotting ( on the right ) . ( C ) 5KR cells were transfected with wt c - Cbl - YFP or 70Z - Cbl - YFP . The cells were incu - bated with 2 ng / ml EGF - Rh for 5 min at 37ºC andﬁxed . Z stacks of images of YFP andrho - damine ﬂuorescence were acquired through FITC and Cy3 ﬁlter channels , respectively . Optical sections through the middle of the cell are shown . Insets represent high - magni - ﬁcation and high - intensity images of EGF - Rh in the periphery of 70Z - Cbl - expressing cells that show localization of EGF - Rh in small clusters at the cellsurface under condi - tions of inhibited endocytosis . Scale bars , 10 m m . ( D ) Quantiﬁcation of the amount of EGF - Rh in nonexpressing ( non - exp ) , c - Cbl - YFP , and 70Z - Cbl expressing cells from experiments performed as in ( C ) ( 5KR # 1 ) and Figure S2 ( 9KR # 1 ) . Each data point represents a value averaged from ten to 20 cells ( 6 SD ) . Cells containing more than 2 3 10 8 a . l . u . f . i . ( arbi - trary linear units of ﬂuorescence intensity ) of YFP were used for quantiﬁcation . Molecular Cell 744 these siRNAs caused signiﬁcant depletion of both Cbl proteins and a substantial inhibition of 125 I - EGF internal - ization in cells expressing wt , 5KR , or 9KR mutant EGFR ( Figure 6B ) . Together with the observation of essentially similar kinetics of internalization compared to wt EGFR , the RNA interference experiments suggested that 5KR Figure 7 . Trafﬁcking of 5KR Mutant Is Delayed in Early Endosomes ( A ) CellsstablyexpressingwtEGFRand5KRmutantwerepreincubatedwithleupeptineandincubatedwithEGF - Rh ( 100ng / ml ) for10minor3hr . Afterﬁxation , thecellswerestainedwithantibodytoEEA . 1 . AZstackofimageswasacquiredthroughCy3 ( EGF - Rh ) andFITC ( EEA . 1 ) ﬁlterchan - nels and deconvoluted . Optical sections through the middle of the cell are shown . Arrows indicate examples of colocalization of EGF - Rh and EEA . 1 . Scale bars , 10 m m . ( B ) The relative amount of EGF - Rh in EEA . 1 - containing endosomes was calculated from two experiments performed as in ( A ) . Each data point represents value averaged from ten cells ( 6 SD ) . ( C ) Cellswere preincubatedwithleupeptineandthenincubated withEGF - FC ( 100 ng / ml ) asin ( A ) . The cellswereincubatedwithLysoTracker for 30minat37ºCsothattheendoftheincubationwasatthetimeofendofincubationwithEGF - FCandbeginningofﬁxation . Afterﬁxation , aZstack ofimageswasacquiredthroughCy3 ( LysoTrackerRed ) andFITC ( EGF - FC ) ﬁlterchannelsanddeconvoluted . Opticalsectionsthroughthemiddle of the tail are shown . Arrows indicated on the examples of colocalization of EGF - FC and LysoTracker . Scale bars , 10 m m . ( D ) The relative amount of EGF - FC in vesicles containing LysoTrackerRed was calculated from two experiments performed as in ( C ) . Each data point represents value averaged from ten cells ( 6 SD ) . EGF Receptor Ubiquitination and Endocytosis 745 and 9KR mutant receptors are internalized using the mechanisms normally operating during rapid internali - zation of the wt EGFR . These experiments also directly demonstrated that Cbl is required for clathrin - depen - dent EGFR internalization . The data obtained using siRNA Cbl depletion are consistent with the previous re - ports of dominant - negative effects of Cbl mutants on EGF internalization ( Jiang and Sorkin , 2003 ) and the abil - ity of Cbl - Grb2 chimera to rescue EGFR endocytosis in Grb2 - depleted cells ( Huang and Sorkin , 2005 ) . However , the same data are inconsistent with the observation of normal endocytosis in mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts with targeted knockout of c - Cbl ( Duan et al . , 2003 ) . One possible explanation for this discrepancy is the presence of Cbl - b in c - Cbl knockout cells . In fact , in sev - eral types of cells , only highly efﬁcient knockdown of both c - Cbl and Cbl - b allowed the demonstration of Cbl requirement for EGFR internalization ( data not shown ) . We and others have previously demonstrated that the intact Cbl RING domain is necessary for EGFR internal - ization ( Huang and Sorkin , 2005 ; Jiang and Sorkin , 2003 ; Thien et al . , 2001 ) . To conﬁrm that this domain is also re - quired for internalization of ubiquitination - deﬁcient EGFR mutants , a naturally occurring c - Cbl mutant lack - ing RING domain activity , 70Z - Cbl , was overexpressed to examine its effects on EGFR internalization . Because the efﬁciency of transient transfection of PAE cells is not sufﬁcient for biochemical endocytosis assays , single - cell internalization assays were performed using EGF - Rh . As shown in Figure 6C , accumulation of EGF - Rh in peripheral and perinuclear endosomes of PAE / 5KR cells was not affected by overexpression of wt c - Cbl . However , endocytosis was impaired in PAE / 5KR and PAE / 9KR cells overexpressing 70Z - Cbl mu - tant , as revealed by very few endosomes containing EGF - Rh ( Figure 6C and Figure S2 ) and signiﬁcant reduc - tionofthetotalamountofEGF - Rhinthecells ( Figure6D ) . As in our previous studies using PAE cells expressing wtEGFR ( Jiang and Sorkin , 2003 ) , EGF - Rh in PAE / 5KR cells overexpressing 70Z - Cbl was localized in small dots , previously identiﬁed as clathrin - coated pits , and also diffusely distributed throughout the plasma mem - brane ( see insets in Figure 6C and Figure S2 ) . Thus , despite its ubiquitination defect , internalization of the 5KR and 9KR mutants still required an intact RING do - main of Cbl . Two models can be proposed to explain the require - ment of Cbl and its RING domain but not efﬁcient EGFR ubiquitination in this process . One possibility is that Cbl RING domain is necessary to recruit proteins besides EGFR to the pit . In this model , recruitment of EGFR - associated proteins may or may not be Ub de - pendent ( requiring the RING activity ) . In fact , it has been proposed that ubiquitination of a component of endocy - tosis apparatus is required for endocytosis of a factor receptor in yeast ( Dunn and Hicke , 2001 ) and growth hormone receptor in mammalian cells ( Govers et al . , 1999 ) . While the participation of other ubiquitination tar - gets of Cbl may be the case , we believe that our results point toward a multiple threshold model in which each step in the internalization and trafﬁcking of EGFR re - quires more extensive ubiquitination . In this case , resid - ual ubiquitination of the receptor in the absence of major ubiquitination sites , as was seen here , would be pre - dicted to be sufﬁcient for receptor internalization but not further postendocytic trafﬁcking . This model as - sumes that the strength of the interaction of weakly ubiquitinated EGFR with Ub binding proteins in clathrin - coated pits is higher than in endosomes , since the same residual ubiquitination is not sufﬁcient for EGFR trafﬁcking to MVBs or its lysosomal degradation . Thus , we propose that the density of Ub modiﬁcations on EGFR sets regulatory thresholds allowing internalization and endosomal sorting steps of EGFR trafﬁcking to be uncoupled . Experimental Procedures Reagents EGF - Rh , EGF - FC , and LysoTrackerRed were purchased from Mo - lecular Probes ( Eugene , Oregon ) . Monoclonal antibodies to c - Cbl , phosphotyrosine ( PY20 ) , and EEA . 1 were from BD Transduction Laboratories ( San Diego , California ) and monoclonal antibody to EGFR ( Ab528 ) from American Type Culture Collection ( Manassas , Virginia ) . MonoclonalantibodytoUb ( P4D1 ) andpolyclonalantibody to Cbl - b were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology ( Santa Cruz , Califor - nia ) . Polyclonal antibody to phosphorylated MEK1 / 2 , monoclonal antibody to total MEK1 / 2 , and polyclonal antibody to EGFR phos - photyrosine 1086 ( pY1086 ) were from Cell Signaling Technology ( Beverly , Massachustts ) . Rabbit serum Ab2913 to the intracellular domain of EGFR was kindly provided by Dr . L . Beguinot ( DIBIT Ra - faele , Milan , Italy ) and polyclonal antibody to actin was from Sigma ( St . Louis , Missouri ) . Plasmids and Mutations The c - Cbl - YFP ( wt and 70Z ) and EGFR ( wt and Y1045F mutant ) con - structs were described previously ( Jiang et al . , 2003 ; Jiang and Sor - kin , 2003 ) . Point mutations were generated using the QuikChange Site - Directed Mutagenesis Kit according to the manufacture proto - col ( Stratagene Cloning Systems , La Jolla , California ) . All point mu - tations were veriﬁed by automated dideoxynucleotide sequencing . Cell Culture and Transfections PAE cells were grown and transiently DNA transfected as described ( Jiang et al . , 2003 ) . Transfected cells were split 1 day after transfec - tion and used for experiments on the second day . PAE cell lines sta - bly expressing various mutated EGFRs were generated as previ - ously described ( Jiang et al . , 2003 ) . In siRNA knockdown experiments , Grb2 siRNA duplex ( Jiang et al . , 2003 ) or c - Cbl ( 967 – 985 , target sequence 5 0 - CCTCTCTTCC AAGCACTGA - 3 0 ) and Cbl - b ( 414 – 432 , target sequence 5 0 - GGACAG ACGAAATCTCACA - 3 0 ) siRNA duplexes together were resuspended in 1 3 siRNA universal buffer ( Dharmacon , Inc . , Lafayette , Colorado ) to 20 m M prior to transfection . PAE / EGFR cell lines grown in 6 - well plates ( 50 % – 60 % conﬂuency ) were transfected with 10 m l Grb2 siRNA3 duplex or a mixture of 5 m l c - Cbl siRNA and 5 m l Cbl - b siRNA duplexes in 5 m l DharmaFECT I reagent ( Dharmacon ) for 3 days . For mock transfections , control cyclophilin siRNA ( Dharmacon ) wasused . Cellswere replatedto12 - welldishes 24hrpriortoexperi - ments . LC - MS / MS Analysis of EGFR Ubiquitination For mass spectrometry analysis , PAE cells stably expressing wt or mutant EGFR were grown in 150 mm dishes . Cells were untreated or treated with 20 ng / ml EGF , washed with Ca 2 + , Mg 2 + - free phos - phate buffered saline ( CMF - PBS ) , and lysed in Triton X - 100 / glyc - erol / HEPES solubilization buffer ( TGH ) ( Huang et al . , 2004 ) contain - ing 1 % sodium deoxycholate and 10 mM N - ethyl - maleimide ( NEM ) . Lysates were cleared by centrifugation ( 10 min , 14 , 000 3 g ) . EGFR was immunoprecipitated with antibody Ab528 . The precipitates were washed three times with TGH / DOC containing , sequentially , 500 mM , 100 mM , and no NaCl and resolved by SDS - PAGE . Gel regions containing Ub - EGFRwere excised , destained , anddi - gested using 15 ng / m l trypsin . Following extraction , digested pep - tides were analyzed on an LTQ - FT hybrid linear ion trap Fourier transform mass spectrometer equipped with a Famos Autosampler Molecular Cell 746 ( LC Packings , San Francisco , California ) and an Agilent 1100 Series HPLC pump ( Agilent Technologies , Palo Alto , California ) . Peptides were ﬁrst loaded onto fused silica microcapillary column packed with reversed phase C18 material ( Magic C18AQ , Michrom Biore - sources , Auburn , California ) . Peptideswereelutedusingalineargra - dient of 5 % – 40 % buffer B ( 97 . 5 % acetonitrile / 0 . 15 % formic acid ) in buffer A ( 2 . 5 % acetonitrile / 0 . 15 % formic acid ) . The LTQ - FT was op - erated in data - dependent top ten mode as has been described ( Haas et al . , 2006 ) . To obtain maximum sensitivity , automatic gain control ( AGC ) settings of 3 3 10 6 for MS ( in the FT - MS ) and 2 3 10 4 for MS / MS ( in the linear ion trap - MS ) were employed . Protein identiﬁcations were made by database searching an indexed ver - sion of the nonredundant database available from NCBI . To identify EGFRubiquitinationsites , searchesweremodiﬁedtoallowforlysine modiﬁcation with a mass of 114 . 0429 Da in a simpliﬁed form of the human database containing protein sequences for EGFR , ubiquitin , and known contaminants . Immunoprecipitations and Western Blotting To examine ubiquitination and tyrosine phosphorylation of EGFR by Western blotting , PAE cells stably expressing EGFR or transiently transfected with EGFR constructs in 60 mm dishes for 2 days were pretreated with 20 ng / ml EGF for 2 min at 37ºC and washed with CMF - PBS . The cells were lysed in TGH / NEM , and EGFR was immu - noprecipitatedasdescribedabove . InexperimentsexaminingEGFR degradation , the cells stably or transiently expressing EGFR were serum starved overnight and incubated with EGF ( 100 ng / ml ) for in - dicatedtimes . ThecellswerelysedinTGHasabove , withtheexcep - tion that orthovanadate ( OV ) and NEM were omitted from the lysis buffer . This was necessary to provide equal efﬁciency of Western blot detection of inactive and activated EGFR by Ab2319 . To probe for active EGFR and MEK1 / 2 , cells in 12 - or 6 - well plates wereserumstarvedovernight , treatedwithEGFat37ºCforindicated times , and lysed in TGH buffer containing 1 mM sodium OV and 10 mM NEM . Western blotting of cell lysates and EGFR immunoprecipitates wasperformed asdescribed ( Huang etal . , 2004 ) . SeveralX - ray ﬁlms were analyzed to determine the linear range of the chemilumines - cence signals , and the quantiﬁcations were performed using densi - tometry . 125 I - EGF Internalization Mouse receptor - grade EGF ( Collaborative Research Inc . , Bedford , Massachusetts ) was iodinated as described previously ( Jiang et al . , 2003 ) . 125 I - EGF internalization was measured using 0 . 5 – 40 ng / ml 125 I - EGF , and the speciﬁc rate constant for internalization k e was calculated as described previously ( Jiang et al . , 2003 ) . EGFR Downregulation The number of surface EGFR before and after EGF treatment was measured using 125 I - EGF binding assay as previously described ( Carter and Sorkin , 1998 ) . Fluorescence Microscopy PAE / EGFR cells grown on glass coverslips were transiently trans - fected with Cbl - YFP . The cells were treated with 2 ng / ml EGF - Rh at 37ºC for 5 min , washed with ice - cold phosphate buffer saline , and ﬁxed with freshly prepared 4 % paraformaldehyde ( Electron Microscopy Sciences , Ft . Washington , Pennsylvania ) . A Z stack of images was acquired and deconvoluted using a Marianas imaging workstation and SlideBook 4 . 1 software ( Intelligent Imaging Innova - tion , Inc , Denver , Colorado ) as described previously ( Huang and Sorkin , 2005 ) . The amount of EGF - Rh in individual cells that do not express or express Cbl constructs was calculated as described ( Huang and Sorkin , 2005 ) . To determine the extent of colocalization of EGFR with EEA . 1 , the cells were preincubated with leupeptine ( 21 m M ) for 1 hr at 37ºC to block lysosomal degradation and then incubated with 100 ng / ml EGF - Rh in the same medium at 37ºC for indicated times . The cells were then ﬁxed as above and stained with EEA . 1 antibody followed by secondary antibody conjugated with ﬂuorescein , all incubations in the presence of 0 . 02 % saponin . To determine the extent of coloc - alization of EGFR and LysoTrackerRed , the experiments were per - formed as above , with the exception that EGF - FC was used instead of EGF - Rh , and the cells were ﬁxed and imaged without permeabi - lization . The cells were incubated with LysoTracker ( 50 nM ) for 30 min at 37ºC . The experiments were designed so that the 30 min incubation ended at the end of cell incubation with EGF - FC . In both types of experiments , a Z stack of two - dimensional images was acquired through FITC and Cy3 ﬁlter channels and deconvo - luted using constrained iterative algorithm . The method of quantiﬁ - cation of the relative amount of EGF - Rh or EGF - FC colocalized withEEA . 1 or LysoTrackerRed , respectively , isdescribed inSupple - mental Data . Supplemental Data Supplemental Data include Supplemental Experimental Procedures and two ﬁgures and can be found with this article online at http : / / www . molecule . org / cgi / content / full / 21 / 6 / 737 / DC1 / . Acknowledgments WethankDr . T . Kutateladze ( UCHSC ) forhelpwiththeanalysisofthe structure of the EGFR kinase and Drs . W . Haas and S . Gerber for ad - vice on using high - accuracy precursor scans to validate spectral identiﬁcations . This work was supported by APRC and CA089151 grants from NCI . Received : December 5 , 2005 Revised : January 23 , 2006 Accepted : February 16 , 2006 Published : March 16 , 2006 References Babst , M . , Odorizzi , G . , Estepa , E . J . , and Emr , S . D . ( 2000 ) . Mamma - lian tumor susceptibility gene 101 ( TSG101 ) and the yeast homo - logue , Vps23p , both function in late endosomal trafﬁcking . Trafﬁc 1 , 248 – 258 . Bache , K . G . , Raiborg , C . , Mehlum , A . , and Stenmark , H . ( 2003 ) . STAM and Hrs are subunits of a multivalent ubiquitin - binding com - plex on early endosomes . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 12513 – 12521 . Bache , K . G . , Slagsvold , T . , Cabezas , A . , Rosendal , K . R . , Raiborg , C . , and Stenmark , H . ( 2004 ) . The growth - regulatory protein HCRP1 / hVps37A is asubunit of mammalian ESCRT - Iandmediatesreceptor down - regulation . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 4337 – 4346 . Bishop , N . , Horman , A . , and Woodman , P . ( 2002 ) . Mammalian class E vps proteins recognize ubiquitin and actin the removal of endoso - mal protein - ubiquitin conjugates . J . Cell Biol . 157 , 91 – 102 . Carter , R . E . , and Sorkin , A . ( 1998 ) . Endocytosis of functional epider - mal growth factor receptor - green ﬂuorescent protein chimera . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 35000 – 35007 . Deng , L . , Wang , C . , Spencer , E . , Yang , L . , Braun , A . , You , J . , Slaugh - ter , C . , Pickart , C . , and Chen , Z . J . ( 2000 ) . Activation of the IkappaB kinase complex by TRAF6 requires a dimeric ubiquitin - conjugating enzyme complex and a unique polyubiquitin chain . Cell 103 , 351 – 361 . Dikic , I . , and Giordano , S . ( 2003 ) . Negative receptor signalling . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 128 – 135 . Duan , L . , Miura , Y . , Dimri , M . , Majumder , B . , Dodge , I . L . , Reddi , A . L . , Ghosh , A . , Fernandes , N . , Zhou , P . , Mullane - Robinson , K . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Cbl - mediated ubiquitinylation is required for lysosomal sort - ing of epidermal growth factor receptor but is dispensable for endo - cytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 28950 – 28960 . Dunn , R . , and Hicke , L . ( 2001 ) . Multiple roles for Rsp5p - dependent ubiquitination at the internalization step of endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 25974 – 25981 . Galan , J . M . , and Haguenauer - Tsapis , R . ( 1997 ) . Ubiquitin lys63 is in - volved inubiquitinationof ayeast plasma membrane protein . EMBO J . 16 , 5847 – 5854 . Geetha , T . , Jiang , J . , andWooten , M . W . ( 2005 ) . Lysine63polyubiqui - tination of the nerve growth factor receptor TrkA directs internaliza - tion and signaling . Mol . Cell 20 , 301 – 312 . Gorden , P . , Carpentier , J . - L . , Cohen , S . , and Orci , L . ( 1978 ) . Epider - mal growth factor : morphological demonstration of binding EGF Receptor Ubiquitination and Endocytosis 747 internalization and lydosomal association in human ﬁbroblasts . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 75 , 5025 – 5029 . Govers , R . , ten Broeke , T . , van Kerkhof , P . , Schwartz , A . L . , and Strous , G . J . ( 1999 ) . Identiﬁcation of a novel ubiquitin conjugation motif , required for ligand - induced internalization of the growth hor - mone receptor . EMBO J . 18 , 28 – 36 . Haas , W . , Faherty , B . K . , Gerber , S . A . , Elias , J . E . , Beausoleil , S . A . , Bakalarski , C . E . , Li , X . , Ville´n , J . , and Gygi , S . P . ( 2006 ) . Optimization and use of peptide mass measurement accuracy in shotgun proteo - mics . Mol . Cell . Proteomics , in press . Haglund , K . , Sigismund , S . , Polo , S . , Szymkiewicz , I . , Di Fiore , P . P . , andDikic , I . ( 2003 ) . Multiplemonoubiquitination ofRTKs is sufﬁcient for their endocytosis and degradation . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 461 – 466 . Hicke , L . , and Dunn , R . ( 2003 ) . Regulation of membrane protein transport by ubiquitin and ubiquitin - binding proteins . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 , 141 – 172 . Hofmann , R . M . , and Pickart , C . M . ( 1999 ) . Noncanonical MMS2 - en - coded ubiquitin - conjugating enzyme functions in assembly of novel polyubiquitin chains for DNA repair . Cell 96 , 645 – 653 . Hopkins , C . R . , Miller , K . , and Beardmore , J . M . ( 1985 ) . Receptor - mediated endocytosis of transferrin and epidermal growth factor receptors : a comparison of constitutive and ligand - induced uptake . J . Cell Sci . Suppl . 3 , 173 – 186 . Huang , F . , and Sorkin , A . ( 2005 ) . Growth factor receptor binding protein2 - mediatedrecruitmentoftheRINGdomainofCbltotheepi - dermal growth factor receptor is essential and sufﬁcient to support receptor endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 1268 – 1281 . Huang , F . , Khvorova , A . , Marshall , W . , andSorkin , A . ( 2004 ) . Analysis of clathrin - mediated endocytosis of epidermal growth factor recep - tor by RNA interference . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 16657 – 16661 . Jiang , X . , and Sorkin , A . ( 2003 ) . Epidermal growth factor receptor in - ternalization through clathrin - coated pits requires Cbl RING ﬁnger andproline - rich domains but not receptor polyubiquitylation . Trafﬁc 4 , 529 – 543 . Jiang , X . , Huang , F . , Marusyk , A . , and Sorkin , A . ( 2003 ) . Grb2 regu - lates internalization of EGF receptors through clathrin - coated pits . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 858 – 870 . Kirkpatrick , D . S . , Denison , C . , and Gygi , S . P . ( 2005 ) . Weighing in on ubiquitin : the expanding role of mass - spectrometry - based proteo - mics . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 750 – 757 . Levkowitz , G . , Waterman , H . , Zamir , E . , Kam , Z . , Oved , S . , Langdon , W . Y . , Beguinot , L . , Geiger , B . , andYarden , Y . ( 1998 ) . c - Cbl / Sli - 1 reg - ulates endocytic sorting and ubiquitination of the epidermal growth factor receptor . Genes Dev . 12 , 3663 – 3674 . Levkowitz , G . , Waterman , H . , Ettenberg , S . A . , Katz , M . , Tsygankov , A . Y . , Alroy , I . , Lavi , S . , Iwai , K . , Reiss , Y . , Ciechanover , A . , et al . ( 1999 ) . Ubiquitin ligase activity and tyrosine phosphorylation under - lie suppression of growth factor signaling by c - Cbl / Sli - 1 . Mol . Cell 4 , 1029 – 1040 . Miaczynska , M . , Pelkmans , L . , and Zerial , M . ( 2004 ) . Not just a sink : endosomes in control of signal transduction . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 , 400 – 406 . Miller , K . , Beardmore , J . , Kanety , H . , Schlessinger , J . , and Hopkins , C . R . ( 1986 ) . Localization of epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor within the endosome of EGF - stimulated epidermoid carcinoma ( A431 ) cells . J . Cell Biol . 102 , 500 – 509 . Mosesson , Y . , Shtiegman , K . , Katz , M . , Zwang , Y . , Vereb , G . , Szollosi , J . , and Yarden , Y . ( 2003 ) . Endocytosis of receptor tyrosine kinases is driven by monoubiquitylation , not polyubiquitylation . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 21323 – 21326 . Oksvold , M . P . , Thien , C . B . , Widerberg , J . , Chantry , A . , Huitfeldt , H . S . , and Langdon , W . Y . ( 2003 ) . Serine mutations that abrogate ligand - induced ubiquitination and internalization of the EGF recep - tor do not affect c - Cbl association with the receptor . Oncogene 22 , 8509 – 8518 . Peng , J . , Schwartz , D . , Elias , J . E . , Thoreen , C . C . , Cheng , D . , Marsischky , G . , Roelofs , J . , Finley , D . , and Gygi , S . P . ( 2003 ) . A pro - teomics approach to understanding protein ubiquitination . Nat . Biotechnol . 21 , 921 – 926 . Sigismund , S . , Woelk , T . , Puri , C . , Maspero , E . , Tacchetti , C . , Transi - dico , P . , Di Fiore , P . P . , and Polo , S . ( 2005 ) . From the cover : clathrin - independent endocytosis of ubiquitinated cargos . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 2760 – 2765 . Sorkin , A . , and Von Zastrow , M . ( 2002 ) . Signal transduction and en - docytosis : close encounters of many kinds . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 600 – 614 . Sorkin , A . , Krolenko , S . , Kudrjavtceva , N . , Lazebnik , J . , Teslensko , L . , Soderquist , A . M . , andNikolsky , N . ( 1991 ) . Recycling of epidermal growth factor - receptor complexes in A431 cells : identiﬁcation of dual pathways . J . Cell Biol . 112 , 55 – 63 . Spence , J . , Gali , R . R . , Dittmar , G . , Sherman , F . , Karin , M . , andFinley , D . ( 2000 ) . Cellcycle - regulatedmodiﬁcationoftheribosomebyavar - iant multiubiquitin chain . Cell 102 , 67 – 76 . Stamos , J . , Sliwkowski , M . X . , and Eigenbrot , C . ( 2002 ) . Structure of the epidermal growth factor receptor kinase domain alone and in complex with a 4 - anilinoquinazoline inhibitor . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 46265 – 46272 . Thien , C . B . , Walker , F . , and Langdon , W . Y . ( 2001 ) . RING ﬁnger mu - tations that abolish c - Cbl - directed polyubiquitination and downreg - ulation of the EGF receptor are insufﬁcient for cell transformation . Mol . Cell 7 , 355 – 365 . Varadan , R . , Assfalg , M . , Haririnia , A . , Raasi , S . , Pickart , C . , and Fushman , D . ( 2004 ) . Solution conformation of Lys63 - linked di - ubi - quitin chain provides clues to functional diversity of polyubiquitin signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 7055 – 7063 . Waterman , H . , Katz , M . , Rubin , C . , Shtiegman , K . , Lavi , S . , Elson , A . , Jovin , T . , and Yarden , Y . ( 2002 ) . A mutant EGF - receptor defective in ubiquitylation and endocytosis unveils a role for Grb2 in negative signaling . EMBO J . 21 , 303 – 313 . Wiley , H . S . ( 1988 ) . Anomalous binding of epidermal growth factor to A431 cells is due to the effect of high receptor densities and a satu - rable endocytic system . J . Cell Biol . 107 , 801 – 810 . Molecular Cell 748