49 Research at the Margin : Participatory Design and Community Based Participatory Research Robert Racadio 1 , Emma J . Rose 2 , Beth E . Kolko 1 1 Dept . of Human Centered Design & Engineering University of Washington Seattle , WA USA 98195 { racadio , bkolko } @ uw . edu 2 Interdisciplinary Arts and Sciences University of Washington Tacoma , WA USA 98402 ejrose @ uw . edu ABSTRACT Participatory Design ( PD ) is increasingly applied in marginalized and low - resource communities . This paper looks at how Community Based Participatory Research ( CBPR ) can inform future PD work in these politically contested spaces . We distinguish between these approaches through two participatory photo visual methods : photo elicitation and photovoice . We conclude with suggestions for integrating principles from CBPR into PD to lead to more impactful work with marginalized and low - resource communities . Author Keywords participatory design , community based participatory research , marginalized communities , photo elicitation , photovoice , participatory visual methods ACM Classification Keywords H5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION Historically , Participatory Design ( PD ) is rooted in Marxist ideals . PD was developed as a response to top - down workplace decisions that impacted workers . PD projects recognized and privileged the expertise that workers had , giving them an active role in the shaping the working conditions that impacted their work and material lives . These projects were undertaken in collaboration with labor unions to champion the rights of workers . It was within this politically charged context that PD developed its methods and practices for supporting the worker ' s stance and empowering them to be decision makers in the construction of their working conditions . Recently , PD has become a more formalized practice while , at the same time , de - emphasizing the political motives that were characteristic of early projects . This is in part due to the fact that PD has been successful in working through some of the structural workplace power imbalances that it was originally developed to address . PD has established frameworks of participation that promote individual voice and representation rather than revealing and restructuring the sociopolitical environment . This has enabled PD to better situate itself with other design approaches while still underscoring democracy in the design process . Meanwhile , PD has expanded beyond the Scandinavian office and into domains such as health , education , and community engagement , meaning the opportunity for participation has been expanded to users more broadly , not just users in the workplace So while the political agenda of PD projects has become more subtle , the context and settings of PD have become more diverse , including a growing interest in low resource settings and marginalized communities . But as PD practices become more widely adopted , there is a risk that its founding political values will become taken for granted , ignored , or overlooked ; and that PDs ability to promote a critical response to power structures may diminish . Projects have been implemented in Namibia ( Winschiers , 2006 ) and post - typhoon Japan ( Yasuoka & Sakurai , 2012 ) . This work has provided guidance on how PD can be practically adapted for these contexts , but stops short of rearticulating the political commitments of PD and understanding how those values can support communities within these contexts . Given the politically contested space of low - resource and marginalized communities , this is problematic . These communities are notable for the considerable structural imbalances of power that leave them disempowered . The traditional research activities that have taken place in these communities strain relationships between community members and researchers . Low resource and marginalized communities often possess limited technical expertise and lack the material means to successfully implement the projects . As the interest in using PD practice in these contexts continues , it is valuable for PD researchers and practitioners to be more critical of the ways that current methods meet PD ' s original theoretical commitments to empowerment , democracy , and equality within these contexts where implicit support for these values cannot be taken for granted . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . PDC ' 14 Companion , October 06 - 10 2014 , Windhoek , Namibia Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 3214 - 9 / 14 / 10 … $ 15 . 00 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2662155 . 2662188 50 COMMUNITY BASED PARTICIPATORY RESEARCH To look for inspiration in rejuvenating PD’s engagement with the politics of these contested spaces , we look to another participatory research tradition – community - based participatory research ( CBPR ) . Both CBPR and PD have an ideological stance that privileges the perspective of the participant and both have their origins in Action Research . Action Research can be divided theoretically into Northern and Southern traditions . The Northern tradition , which includes Europe and North America , emphasizes “utilization - focused research with practical goals for system improvement” and draws on Kurt Lewin’s problem - solving research model of planning , action , and investigating the results of those actions ( Minkler & Wallerstein , 2003 ) . The Northern tradition emphasizes co - participation of workers , management , and researchers in organizational settings , such as work sites and schools , to collaboratively solve challenges at the small group and system level , under the premise that through human agency borne from reflexive - inquiry people can influence the circumstances in which they live ( Wallerstein & Duran , 2003 ) . PD is a solution - oriented practice ; it is conducted when a problem space has been identified and a need for a solution has been articulated , but the solution has not yet been designed or implemented . Users are brought in to the process to help clarify and design the solution . The Southern tradition , from which CBPR emerges , developed under different circumstances . Influenced by the critical pedagogy of Brazilian philosopher Pablo Freire and Colombian sociologist Orlando Fals - Borda , Southern tradition participatory research approaches arose from Latin America , Asia , and Africa to address development challenges in communities vulnerable to the excessive influences of globalization ( Wallerstein & Duran , 2003 ) . Researchers and practitioners work in communities of shared and collective identity , rather than at organizational sites . This distinction is important because the boundaries that define relationships between individuals within communities , as opposed to organizational sites , can be manifold and complex . Researchers from the Southern tradition believe that their role could support and educate the community , but transformative change had to come from the community itself . Consequently , CBPR emphasizes capacity building of all partners involved in research and leverages the existing strengths and resources in the community ( Israel & Schulz , 2008 ) . CBPR is also scoped more broadly than PD and includes participation earlier , during more exploratory stages of research , such as issues and discovery , as well as later stages , such as implementation and transfer of project ownership . This exploratory quality of CBPR is well suited in situations in which the roots of the challenges being addressed are ill defined , poorly understood , socially complex and where an ecological perspective can help bring clarity to developing solutions . CBPR projects in the United States , for example , have centered on addressing health disparities and enabling social change in marginalized and low - resource communities ( Minkler & Wallerstein , 2003 ) . In short , CBPR aims to empower communities to articulate , investigate , and address the problems that they face ; and to have ownership and oversight in the research project . PARTICIPATORY VISUAL METHODS We compare PD and CBPR by looking at two participatory visual methods : photo elicitation in PD and photovoice in CBPR . These methods share the premise that having participants take photographs re - asserts their power in a research project by allowing them another means of sharing their view of the world . The visual artifacts “present multiple ways of knowing – through perceptions , signs , and symbols… thus , it does not offer some single lens of authority but affords multiple perspectives and interpretations ( Parker , 2009 ) . ” Photo Elicitation Photo elicitation is a method for mediating interaction between researchers and participants in order to develop a shared understanding of the phenomena of interest . The photographs used in photo elicitation may be taken by the participant , collected by the participant , or selected by the researcher . The photograph acts as a shared object of analysis for the researcher and the participant . The participant and researcher then conduct an interview to discuss the images . The images themselves aren’t the end goal of photo elicitation , but rather the participant’s interpretation around the photograph . Photo elicitation can be used for a variety of purposes throughout the PD process , such as to collect data about the experience of participants in a specific context ( Patton , 2000 ) ; to derive design inspiration from participants ( Hall , Jones , Hall , Richardson , & Hodgson , 2007 ) ; or to reflect on concepts and values ( Le Dantec , 2009 ; Fleron & Pedersen , 2010 ) . A related method in human centered design is the practice of using cultural probes to help develop designs for unfamiliar groups ( Gaver , Dunne , & Pacenti , 1999 ) . Cultural probes can include a variety of media , such as pictures and postcards , and often include cameras for participants to take pictures of their lives . Prabhu and Frohlich used cultural probes for a study that aimed to look at future technology needs in developing countries ( Prabhu & Frohlich , 2005 ) . Photovoice Photovoice is a method pioneered by Wang and Burris ( 1997 ) . It is a method with roots in Participatory Action Research and grounded in feminist theory . Participants are given cameras and asked to document their lives , sometimes with minimal prompting . The direction can be broad or narrow , longitudinal or a snapshot of time . Photovoice has been deployed extensively in health research ( Oliffe & Bottorff , 2007 ; C . Wang & Burris , 1997 ; Caroline C Wang & Pies , 2004 ) It has also been used in other social science research , such as studies of identity and immigration with Latino youth ( Streng & Rhodes , 2004 ) . Similar to other photo elicitation methods , images in photovoice are used for storytelling , probing and data collection . However , photovoice differs from other photo elicitation techniques in some key ways . 51 First , photovoice casts participants in the role of researchers , which disrupts the traditional power relationship between researcher and participant . Participants choose which images to collect and do so from their standpoint in a way that captures their daily lives . Second , the goal of photovoice is to share the images not only in a research context , but also in a way that shapes and informs public conversation to bring about action change . The photos act as a starting point for a larger conversation with community members and then further with policy makers . These images are sometimes shared with community at public exhibitions where researchers and participants can bring people in positions of power , such as community leaders , elected officials , and the media , into contact with the stories and experiences that community participants convey . DISCUSSION Examining how photo elicitation in PD and photovoice in CBPR are deployed reveals the differences between the two research approaches . We identify three dichotomies in these methods , revealing opportunities for conducting PD in low resource contexts and with marginalized populations . 1 . Foci of inquiry : abstract vs . concrete One difference between photo elicitation and photovoice is the way in which the activity is constructed and articulated meaningfully to the participant . Photo elicitation in PD can sometimes be abstract , such as when participants are asked to reflect on evocative photos provided by the researcher , given vague prompts , or asked to reflect on concepts when viewing a photo . Using abstract approaches can be especially limiting in low - resource and marginalized communities as participants often struggle to understand the expectations of the activity and articulate their ideas ( Gorman , Rose , Yaaqoubi , Bayor , & Kolko , 2011 ; Hussain , 2012 ; Winschiers , 2006 ) . For photovoice projects in CBPR , participants always generate the images . Participants are given concrete prompts to document moments from their day - to - day lives and accompany them with their personal narratives . In this way , participants interpret the prompt in ways that are meaningful for them and capture images grounded in their lived experiences . Participants also take on an active , rather than passive role in the research project that can yield better outcomes for both them as individuals but also for the project as a whole . In the design of information and communication technologies , photovoice can help expose design opportunities . In past studies , we have used a variant of photovoice to capture unmet needs ( Rose & Racadio , 2011 ) . Participants were asked to take photos that demonstrate difficulties in their lives . The examples they collected help to articulate both design opportunities where ICT systems can be developed or modified , but also , and perhaps more importantly , they capture this information in a way that privileges local knowledge and conceptualizes the problem within its context . When the participant shares the photos , the dialog they generate strengthens the relationship between researcher and participants and builds a collective understanding for imagining design solutions . 2 . Purpose of participation : Data collection vs . intervention For photo elicitation projects in PD , the photographs are a boundary artifact for the researcher , the participant and , at times , other stakeholders such as management or technology designers . Photographs act as a probe to help participants articulate concerns and insights that can help develop a shared understanding . During elicitation , findings can arise that may be overlooked or neglected in a more direct interview . However , the research relationship in photo elicitation is focused on data collection for research purposes . The stories and understanding developed from the photo elicitation primarily serve the design team to be applied to a design intervention . While the method is dialogic , conversations are structured between the researcher / designer and the participant ( s ) , but not necessarily between participants or broader communities . Photo elicitation helps give the researcher insight into individual’s perspectives , but doesn’t explicitly build trust or create shared community knowledge . In photovoice , photographs are not only used as a method for data collection , but also as an intervention for change itself . As a data collection method , participant - driven photo collection invites a more democratic and participatory setting by allowing the participants to focus their gaze on what matters most to them . This can create or strengthen trust between the researcher and the participant , which can strengthen participation and promote the future success of the collaboration . Additionally , photovoice research in CBPR is interested in the process of collecting photos for participants in order to understand how the act of taking photos can provide insight on the dynamics of the community . As an intervention , the photographs are also a starting point for a broader conversation with the community and those in positions of power within and outside of the community in order to bring about change . 3 . Impact : Narrow vs . Broad One of PDs outcomes is a design intervention to address a specific problem . Photo elicitation is thus used to inform the design an appropriate solution for a problem or situation at hand . However , the problem , and consequently the solution , is often tightly scoped , potentially limiting the design space and precluding more impactful , appropriate , or sustainable solutions for the community . For photovoice projects in CBPR , the potential impact of the project is to broaden , not narrow , the scope of the problem . CBPR recognizes that problems are complex , structural and political . The outcome in a CBPR project is to create a deep and shared understanding of the problem at hand and to encourage conversations about the multiple ways problems can be framed and the possible interventions to address them : technical , infrastructural , political , and so on . 52 INTEGRATING CBPR INTO PD Distinguishing between photo elicitation and photovoice highlights how the commitments of PD and CBPR are enacted . These distinctions aren’t unique to participatory visual methods , but upon reflection they can generate general guidelines that can help enhance PD method when working with low resource and marginalized communities . Some factors to consider when integrating some CBPR perspectives into PD include the following :  Develop photovoice prompts that address the context of the design problem while providing insight into the daily lived experience of participants  Integrate the findings of photovoice activities , such as participants’ values and value tensions , into the decision - making processes of the design project  Reflect with participants on the ways that research activities are probing and reconfiguring the power dynamics within the community  Understand the community as the unit of analysis and look for the ways in which existing skills can be used to address the problem  Consider the ways in which methods can be a means of data collection as well as an opportunity for capacity and skill building in the community CONCLUSION While PD’s philosophical and historical roots foreground a political commitment to democracy and design that privileges participation and co - creation , these values have become less explicit over time . It is a testament to this early vision that PD continues to move beyond workplace settings and highly resourced contexts . However , as PD moves into new territories , it is an opportune moment to reflect and resurrect the more explicit political agenda of the approach . Looking to philosophically congruent approaches such as CBPR can be beneficial for PD practitioners . CBPR reminds PD that the possible interventions are themselves political and that oftentimes the methods can provide a critical perspective both on the present but also on future design interventions . REFERENCES Fleron , B . R . , & Pedersen , C . ( 2010 ) . Exploring the roles in a photo elicitation dialogue . In Proceedings of the 11th Participatory Design Conference ( p . 175 ) . Gaver , B . , Dunne , T . , & Pacenti , E . ( 1999 ) . Design : Cultural probes . Interactions , 6 ( 1 ) , 21 – 29 . Gorman , T . , Rose , E . , Yaaqoubi , J . , Bayor , A . , & Kolko , B . ( 2011 ) . Adapting usability testing for oral , rural users . In Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing systems ( pp . 1437 – 1440 ) . Hall , L . , Jones , S . , Hall , M . , Richardson , J . , & Hodgson , J . ( 2007 ) . Inspiring design : the use of photo elicitation and Lomography in gaining the child’s perspective , 227 – 236 . Hussain , S . ( 2012 ) . Participatory Design with Marginalized People in Developing Countries : Challenges and Opportunities Experienced in a Field Study in Cambodia . International Journal of Design , 6 ( 2 ) , 91 - 109 . Israel , B . , & Schulz , A . ( 2003 ) . Critical issues in developing and following CBPR principles . In M . Minkler & N . Wallerstein ( Eds . ) , Community - Based Participatory Research for Health . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass . Le Dantec , C . ( 2009 ) . Values as lived experience : evolving value sensitive design in support of value discovery . Proceedings of the 27th Conference on Human Computer Interaction . Minkler , M . , & Wallerstein , N . ( 2003 ) . Introduction to Community Based Participatory Research . In M . Minkler & N . Wallerstein ( Eds . ) , Community - Based Participatory Research for Health . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass . Oliffe , J . L . , & Bottorff , J . L . ( 2007 ) . Further than the eye can see ? Photo elicitation and research with men . Qualitative Health Research , 17 ( 6 ) , 850 – 8 . Parker , L . ( 2009 ) . Photo - elicitation : an ethno - historical accounting and management research prospect . Accounting , Auditing & Accountability Journal . Patton , J . W . ( 2000 ) . Picturing Commutes : Informant Photography and Urban Design . In PDC 2000 ( pp . 318 – 320 ) . Prabhu , G . , & Frohlich , D . ( 2005 ) . Innovating for emerging markets : Confluence of user , design , business and technology research . In Proc . Human Computer Interaction , 22 - 27 . Rose , E . J . , & Racadio , R . ( 2011 ) . Shining a light on agency : Examining responses to resource constraints to uncover opportunities for design . In Proc . Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Conference . Streng , J . , & Rhodes , S . ( 2004 ) . Realidad Latina : Latino adolescents , their school , and a university use photovoice to examine and address the influence of immigration . Journal of interprofessional care , 18 ( 4 ) , 403 - 415 . Wallerstein , N . , & Duran , B . ( 2003 ) . The Conceptual , Historical , and Practice Roots of Community Based Participatory Research and Related Participatory Traditions . In M . Minkler & N . Wallerstein ( Eds . ) , Community - Based Participatory Research for Health . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass . Wang , C . , & Burris , M . ( 1997 ) . Photovoice : Concept , methodology , and use for participatory needs assessment . Health Education & Behavior . Wang , C . C . , & Pies , C . A . ( 2004 ) . Family , maternal , and child health through photovoice . Maternal and Child Health Journal , 8 ( 2 ) , 95 – 102 . Winschiers , H . ( 2006 ) . The Challenges of Participatory Design in a Intercultural Context : Designing for Usability in Namibia . In PDC - 06 Proceedings of the Participatory Design Conference ( pp . 73 – 76 ) . Yasuoka , M . , & Sakurai , R . ( 2012 ) . Out of Scandinavia to Asia . In Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Conference ( p . 21 ) .