- 1 - CreEx : A Framework for Creativity in Cooperative Problem Solving Adriana S . Vivacqua 1 and Jano M . de Souza 1 , 2 1 Computer Science Department , Graduate School of Engineering ( COPPE ) 2 Computer Science Department , Institute of Mathematics ( DCC / IM ) UFRJ - Federal University of Rio de Janeiro Rio de Janeiro , BRAZIL { avivacqua , jano } @ cos . ufrj . br Abstract . Creativity has become an important factor in recent years , as compa - nies need to be able to quickly adapt to take advantage of new opportunities and handle fast paced changes in their environment . Creativity theorists have pro - posed models to explain creative thought that go beyond the individual to en - compass social aspects of creativity . However , most existing research concerns an individual and doesn’t address group aspects of creativity : interactions be - tween team members that lead to innovative solutions for problems and new ideas . We are interested in computer support for collaborative creativity in problem solving . In this paper , we present CreEx , a framework to foster group creativity . By creating appropriate environments for the exploration of prob - lems and discussion of ideas , we hope to enable users not only to generate novel solutions and capture decisions made , but also to learn about each other’s domains and think differently . 1 Introduction In recent years , fast paced changes have created a volatile environment , in which companies must function . Technological , political and economical changes have gen - erated a need for flexibility , and companies must be able to adapt to survive . The problems companies must face have also become more complex , and can often only be handled by groups of individuals . These groups are frequently interdisciplinary in nature , which often means communication problems , since individuals will have dif - ferent views of the problem at hand and different opinions on how to go about solving it . In an attempt to address these problems , companies have started to look for creative individuals and to create environments conducive to creativity . Even though much research has been undertaken in creativity theory , most of it deals with individual creativity : how individuals interact with society , knowledge domains and experts on the field to produce a creative piece of work . We are inter - ested in another aspect , one that hasn’t been as explored thus far : group creativity and the in - group interactions that lead to creative results . Nowadays , much significant work is no longer undertaken by a lone creator , but by groups of individuals cooperat - ing on a problem . The result of their interactions is a creative piece of work , and sev - - 2 - eral members contribute to the construction of this shared artifact . While it may be the case that one member had a “creative breakthrough” and practically solved the prob - lem by him or herself , this breakthrough occurred in a group context , possibly as a result of previous interactions between group members . These interactions , the timing and knowledge involved , group dynamics and char - acteristics of individual members are the focus of our research . Supporting the col - laborative creative process is our overall goal . In this paper , we present CreEx , a framework for creativity in cooperative problem solving . In the next section , we intro - duce some background work , followed by our framework in section 3 and in section 4 we wrap up with a discussion . 2 Background In this section , we present some theories upon which we have based our work , a selec - tion of the work most relevant to ours . It is important to note that we are most con - cerned with creative problem solving , for it has some constraining goals and objec - tives and more often involves groups of people than artistic expression ( which also interests us , but isn’t the focus of our research ) . 2 . 1 Creativity Theories Although several different definitions exist , many authors define creativity as the process that leads to the production of an artifact that is both innovative and useful [ 1 , 2 ] . This definition involves a product ( the artifact ) and an assessment ( of its useful - ness ) , two important elements in problem solving . Several theories that attempt to explain the creative process exist , but we are especially interested in the ones that deal with the social aspects of creativity . According to Csikszentmihalyi [ 3 ] , creativity is produced by a system of three in - teracting elements : the individual , the domain and the field . The domain establishes shared symbols and rules ; the individuals work within a domain to create something new and the field is a set of experts that judges these contributions to determine whether or not they are creative and deserve to be incorporated in the domain ( effec - tively changing it ) . This is a cyclic process , through which knowledge is continually built on previous knowledge , with the best ideas being absorbed into the domain and the bad ones being discarded , in a process similar to the evolutionary . Inspired by Csikszentmihalyi’s system model of creativity , Shneiderman [ 4 ] pro - posed GENEX , a framework for the generation of excellence . According to him , the creative process is a four stage cycle : collect ( gathering information from diverse sources ) ; relate ( consulting with individuals who may be able to furnish useful in - sights ) ; create ( experimenting with possibilities , trying to generate new solutions ) ; donate ( disseminating results to the community ) . A person can move from one stage to another as needed . This process should be supported by creativity support systems . - 3 - 2 . 2 Problem Solving Most problems faced by companies nowadays aren’t easily tractable and demand unique , innovative solutions . These problems are often poorly defined and open - ended , having more that one possible solution and no clear stopping point . Therefore , the problem solving process stops when the group runs out of resources . Solving these so - called wicked problems is an iterative and exploratory process , where designers experiment with different paths [ 5 ] , learning about the problem while devising a solu - tion . The process is one of defining the problem as well as solving it . Some problems are naturally interdisciplinary and require teams of experts from different domains to address it . The introduction of other individuals increases the potential for confusion and miscommunication , especially when these come from different backgrounds and disciplines . The number and diversity of individuals in - volved in the problem solving process is an additional complication , since it can make communication harder and fragment the group [ 6 ] . However , many complex problems can only be handled by pooling together re - sources from a number of different disciplines . Nissani [ 7 ] argues that forming inter - disciplinary groups to handle complex problems leads to more creative solutions , as outsiders bring fresh insight and methodology to the problem at hand . Along similar lines , Fischer [ 8 ] suggests that , in interdisciplinary teams , the ignorance of one person in relation to another’s field of expertise stimulated creativity . This “symmetry of ignorance” leads to discussions and explanations of concepts and points of view , which in turn leads to the generation of new ideas . This is in general agreement with creativity research that points towards external stimuli as a factor for creativity . Santanen and colleagues [ 9 ] have proposed a model to explain how individuals reach creative solutions : knowledge is mapped in a per - son’s mind as a network of concept frames , and creativity stems from the combination of unrelated ( or distant ) frames . Their model maps causal relations between certain factors such as cognitive load or external stimuli and the production of creative solu - tions to problems . Their experiments have ascertained that external stimuli contribute to more creative solutions : bringing up different concepts led to the generation of novel ideas and links between frames . 3 CreEx Framework Creative work involves a certain amount of pre - existing domain knowledge and its transformation into new knowledge [ 11 ] . The combination of concepts from different domains allows problem - solvers to think in non - conventional ways . There are two levels of interaction that should be addressed by a system attempting to support cooperative creative problem solving : extra - group and intra - group . Most creativity research has concerned itself with individual creativity and the relations of the individual with the external world ( knowledge and experts ) . When studying a group of individuals , their in - group interactions ( with shared knowledge and each other ) are as important as those with the external world . - 4 - 3 . 1 Handling the Problem Many researchers recognize that , in problem solving , creativity stems from the way one looks at the problem , and that defining the problem is as important as finding its solution [ 3 ] . This is especially true of wicked problems , which are ill defined and open to interpretation . When studying their methods , Cross [ 10 ] noted that designers not only work with domain rules , keeping track of basic principles that govern the domain and the appli - cation ( such as physical laws and functionality ) , but also tend to introduce new con - straints or characteristics they believe the solution should have , effectively reducing their search space while looking for a solution . This , in fact is a common way of deal - ing with poorly defined problems : one makes assumptions or introduces new charac - teristics or constraints , in an attempt to make the problem tractable . Through this process , the problem evolves into a solution . On the other hand , there is also a danger to lose oneself on speculation , never reaching a solution , or to lose track of the new characteristics introduced and the consequences of their introduction . With this in mind , we are changing our working paradigm from solving a problem to exploring a problem , redefining and shaping its solution in the process . We believe it is important for a team to work with a shared representation to help guide the proc - ess and make sure all participants are on level ground regarding assumptions about the problem space and characteristics the solution should / must have . Our problem model was created so that a team of individuals can explore and de - fine the problem space as they work , keeping track of assumptions , constraints and features . This problem model has a set of basic interrelated elements : • Problem : initial problem description , serves as root for graphs that repre - sent the problem space . Includes a description of the problem and goals . • Sub - problems : breakdowns of the bigger problem , are also problems and include goals , characteristics , etc . • Characteristics : features the solution should have . May be determined by the client ( a requirement ) , group ( a feature the group has agreed upon ) , individual ( a suggestion an individual has made ) or domain ( a constraint inherent to the domain , for instance the laws of gravity ) . They may be mandatory ( must be addressed for the problem to be solved ) or optional . • Assumptions : assumptions individuals base their work on when designing a solution . These may lead to certain characteristics or constraints that will have to be addressed . • Questions : questions may be raised by an individual when working alone or by the group , and they may be resolved with the client or by the group . These sometimes lead to decisions or new characteristics or constraints . • Decisions : decisions made regarding the solution , usually generated after an evaluation process ( formal or informal ) . These are defining elements of the solution statement , and may have implications that translate into new characteristics the solution will need to have . - 5 - Fig . 1 . Problem Model Problem solvers work on this model ( shown in Figure 1 ) , adding new constraints or features and expanding it as they go . They may attach additional resources to the model , such as explanation nodes , files or contacts that may help the understanding of the problem and its evolution . This model can also serve as a basis for discussion with other stakeholders ( such as clients or external consultants ) , who can use it as a basis for understanding what is being discussed and more quickly establish common ground with team members . It is important to note that a user can also work alone . Each indi - vidual can work privately on the representation , exploring alternatives and them pre - sent them to the group for discussion . 3 . 2 Mapping Interactions Problem solvers should be able to map their discussion and decision making process , generating a history of interaction . Dialog mapping [ 5 ] is an interesting approach , for it allows individuals to interact by mapping their thoughts , questions and responses , generating a graph that helps them visualize the argumentative process leading to decisions . We are inclined to use such an approach as well : any of the elements de - scribed above could serve as a root for a new discussion thread , which would explain and capture the decision making process , possibly leading to the introduction of new elements in the problem model . In our framework , the team works together refining and exploring the problem as they move towards a solution . Discussion elements originate in the problem model , and may also cause the generation of new characteristics for the problem . This shared representation guides the group in their solution attempts , and the mapped dialogs serve as basis for reflection and explanation of previous decisions 3 . 3 Managing Knowledge A lot of knowledge is involved in creative work . From shared domain knowledge to individual , extraneous knowledge that can generate insights , it should be managed and saved as it becomes relevant to the problem - solving context . Thus , part of our work involves capitalizing on individual differences to generate more creative ideas . This means selecting individuals with distinct backgrounds and having them utilize this knowledge when working on the problem . We created a simple user model that maps a user to his or her interests and resources ( which may be files or contacts ) . The fol - - 6 - lowing elements are involved : the user , resources ( may be files or contacts ) and knowledge areas the users are interested in and resources refer to . User models are initially built through text mining of individual’s documents , emails and contact lists and clustering these into specific knowledge areas . Based on this information , it becomes possible to select appropriate individuals to serve as ex - ternal consultants in the project and breaking an individual’s frame of mind through the presentation of external information ( which could potentially lead to new insights ) . The selection of these individuals is based not only on the domain knowledge they possess , but also on their range of external knowledge . As mentioned before , creative sparks come from the introduction of external knowledge into the problem domain [ 9 ] . This could be achieved by displaying docu - ments from different domains , to have the user switch context for a brief period of time and look at the problem under a different light . This is what we call context bridging : searching for relations in other contexts and bringing them into focus , thus forcing a different outlook on the problem . Initially , this will be accomplished through the use of WordNet , looking for words applicable in more than one domain the user knows and following links between words to get to external information that is some - how linked to the domain . To manage this knowledge we have envisioned shared and private knowledge bases , containing the group’s and each individual’s knowledge . Agents are used for information retrieval , looking for relevant information as members work on the prob - lem . So as not to breach privacy , these agents work only within the limits of the knowledge bases : agents mining private knowledge bases can only present their sug - gestions to the owner of the knowledge base , never to the group . It is then up to the user to decide whether this information should be shared with the group or not . It is important to note that it is the users , who have an understanding of the knowledge and its relation the problem , who introduce new knowledge into the process . It is also likely that group members will need to engage in an explanatory process , so all under - stand the relevance of a piece of knowledge to the problem . This externalization proc - ess helps others understand a different point of view and each individual better struc - ture his or her thoughts . During the creative process , especially when it is constrained by having to produce a solution in a timely manner , there are two very distinct moments : there is a moment of divergence , opening up new alleys and experimenting new solutions ; and there is a moment of convergence , closing down on the best solutions , making decisions , criti - cizing and choosing options . Initially , it is important not to discard every idea , but to keep an open mind , allowing the exploration of new ideas . However , as time goes on ( and deadlines approach ) , it becomes important to focus and decide on one particular path , generating a solution to the problem . This means that available resources ( such as time , money or individual availability ) must be managed carefully . These resources should be determined at the beginning of a project and the system watches them as the process goes on . The system should warn the group of approaching deadlines so that members can focus on evaluating options and finding a solution . Additionally , the system could suggest a line of thought ( based , for instance , on how much work has gone into it ) for the problem solvers to work with . It can also remind the group which - 7 - constraints of the problem have been met and which haven’t , so that problem solvers can focus on open ends . 5 Discussion and Further Work We have envisioned an environment to support creativity , with support for the follow - ing activities : idea generation and management , branching from one idea to the next or generating new ideas and saving alternatives ; exploration , discussion , extension and study of each idea ; evaluation , analysis and critique of ideas and proposed solutions ; decision - making on the final solution . This environment should not be too restrictive , but should keep tabs on deadlines and prerequisites , to help ensure that the project will come to an end . In such a system , it is important to keep knowledge bases of the problem domain and of external do - mains ( these belong to team members , mapping their knowledge and interests ) , plus a shared problem representation . Our system framework is composed of individual and shared knowledge bases , plus sets of agents ( assistants ) to retrieve relevant informa - tion as the problem solving process evolves . Users should also be able to work syn - chronously or asynchronously . We believe supporting creative work to be an important issue . With our framework , we expect not only to support and foster creative work , but also to study creative dy - namics and interactions . We are trying to determine which interactions lead to creative results and what requirements a collective creativity support system should have . The system is undergoing initial implementation of user profiles for tests with rules for the introduction of external consultants and knowledge . There is much work to be done , models need to be perfected and validated ; and is - sues such as motivation ( a key issue for creativity ) , conflict management and negotia - tion ( to ensure convergence ) still haven’t been addressed in our framework . Privacy ( especially when introducing external information ) and authorship will also need to be addressed . Situations such as a person becoming too close to the problem and not being able to objectively evaluate the results should also be addressed . Determining the timing of the system , so that it will foster creativity is important and we have been studying group behaviors to address these different situations . A few systems have been proposed to support creativity : [ 11 ] and [ 12 ] present sys - tems that introduce external knowledge into the process , both working at an individual level . Brainstorm [ 13 ] enables anonymous submission and criticism of ideas by a group . EDC [ 8 ] is an enhanced physical environment for group problem solving , tar - geted at urban design . In an inspiring parallel with Jazz music , Kao [ 14 ] highlights the interaction be - tween individuals and the need for an appropriate environment for creativity . He points out that , in jazz ( as in many other disciplines ) , there is a balance between coop - eration and competition , as musicians try to outdo each other without losing the agreed - upon theme . He points out that there are rules that must be followed and a common language they all speak in order to be able to produce something coherent . The interplay between individual and group efforts creates a new experience each - 8 - time , with each person contributing to the whole according to his or her own prefer - ences and style . These interactions , where individuals have the freedom to create and add to the group creation , are at the heart of improvisational jazz music and are a source of some great cooperative endeavors . We believe this sort of creative coopera - tion to be important not only in jazz ( or other arts related disciplines ) , but also in business and educational environments . Acknowledgements This work was partially supported by CAPES and CNPq . References 1 . Bonnardel , N . ; Creativity in Design Activities : the Role of Analogies in a Constrained Cog - nitive Environment ; Proceedings of Creativity & Cognition , 1999 2 . Burleson , W . & Selker , T . ; Creativity and Interface ; Communications of the ACM , vol 45 , n . 10 ; October 2002 3 . Csikszentmihalyi , M . Implications of a Systems Perspective for the Study of Creativity . In Handbook of Creativity , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK , 1999 4 . Shneiderman , B . Creating Creativity : User Interfaces for Supporting Innovation ; In ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , vol 7 n . 1 , March 2000 5 . Buckingham Shum , S . , MacLean , A . , Bellotti , V . and Hammond , N . Graphical Argumenta - tion and Design Cognition . KMI - TR - 25 , Knowledge Media Institute , UK , 1997 . 6 . Conklin , J . Wicked Problems and Social Complexity . In Dialogue Mapping : Defragmenting Projects through Shared Understanding . Forthcoming . CogNexus Institute , 2003 . 7 . Nissani , M . Ten Cheers for Interdisciplinarity : A Case for Interdisciplinary Knowledge and Research . Social Science Journal 34 ( 2 ) , pg . 201 - 216 , 1997 8 . Fischer , G . Symmetry of Ignorance , Social Creativity , and Meta - Design . In Proceedings of Creativity and Cognition , 1999 9 . Santanen , E . L . , Briggs , R . O . & de Vreede , G . The Impact of Stimulus Diversity on Creative Solution Generation : An Evaluation of the Cognitive Network Model of Creativity . 36 th Hawaii International Conf . Systems Sciences ( HICSS’03 ) . IEEE Computing , 2003 10 . Cross , N . Creative Cognition in Design : Processes of Exceptional Designers . Proc . of Crea - tivity & Cognition 4 , Loughborough , UK , 2002 . 11 . Nakakoji , K . , Yamamoto , Y . & Ohira , M . A Framework that Supports Collective Creativity in Design using Visual Images . In Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Creativity and Cognition ( C & C’99 ) , Loughborough , UK 1999 . 12 . Shibata , H . & Hori , K . A System to Support Long - term Creative Thinking in Daily Life and its Evaluation ; In Proceedings of the 4th Conference on Creativity and Cognition ( C & C’02 ) , Loughborough , UK , 2002 . 13 . Stenmark , D . Klang , M . & Olsson , S . A Critical Look at Knowledge Creation . In Proceed - ings of IRIS22 , Jyvaskyla , Finaland , 1999 . 14 . Kao , J . Jamming : the Art and Discipline of Business Creativity . Harper Collins Publishers , New York , 1997