© 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 6 NO . 7 | 2011 | 991 IntroDuctIon The availability of efficient fluorescent probes and labeling methods has made fluorescence microscopy one of the most successful tech - niques for noninvasive three - dimensional biological and medical imaging . However , diffraction poses a historic limit on the reso - lution power of fluorescence microscopy and limits the minimal distance at which two objects can be unequivocally distinguished to about half of the wavelength of light 1 . For visible light in the far field , the spatial resolution is around 200 – 300 nm in the imag - ing plane 2 and , therefore , does not provide insight into cellular structures and multiprotein complexes with a size of a few tens of nanometers . After the introduction of the first concept for fluorescence imag - ing beyond the resolution limit 3 – 5 , several methods have emerged that enable super - resolution imaging with optical resolution approach - ing molecular scale 6 . Among them are stimulated emission depletion using a nonlinear saturation process for the controlled de - excitation of fluorophores 5 , 6 and structured illumination microscopy 7 , 8 , in which a finely structured excitation pattern is used to demodulate high spatial frequencies that encode structural information beyond the diffrac - tion limit . In parallel , alternative super - resolution imaging methods emerged that use precise position determination ( localization ) of indi - vidual fluorophores by evaluating their diffraction patterns in the imag - ing plane and , thus , are heavily dependent on the number of detected photons 9 – 16 . Ultimately , temporal separation of fluorophore emission 17 paved the way for single - molecule – based localization microscopy by stochastic photoswitching as in photoactivated localization microscopy ( PALM ) 18 , fluorescence PALM ( FPALM ) 19 , stochastic optical recon - struction microscopy ( STORM ) 20 , direct STORM ( d STORM ) 21 , 22 , spectral precision distance microscopy 23 – 25 , ground - state deple - tion microscopy followed by individual molecule return 26 , blink microscopy 27 , 28 , super - resolution optical fluctuation imaging 29 , 30 and related methods 31 , 32 . Microscopic methods that use single - molecule localization ran - domly read out the emission of individual fluorophores . This is achieved by transferring the majority of fluorophores to a reversible OFF state and by stochastic activation of individual fluorophores , for example , upon irradiation with light of appropriate wavelength and intensity and subsequent single - molecule fluorescence detec - tion using a wide - field fluorescence microscope equipped with a sensitive CCD camera . If the probability of activation is sufficiently low , then the majority of activated fluorophores residing in their ON state are spaced further apart than the resolution limit and their positions can be precisely determined ( localized ) by fitting a point spread function ( PSF ) to the measured photon distributions 9 , 14 , 15 . This cycle of photoactivation and readout is repeated to record an image stack of thousands of images . A prerequisite to minimize arti - facts in data analysis is that only a single fluorophore is emitting at any time within a diffraction - limited area . A super - resolution image is finally reconstructed from all single - molecule localizations ( typi - cally several ten thousands to millions of localizations ; Fig . 1 ) . Common to all single - molecule – based localization microscopy methods is a need for fluorophores that can be photoactivated or reversibly photoswitched by irradiation with light . Such fluoro - phores have a fluorescent ON state , a nonfluorescent OFF state and a transition between these states . The most prominent vari - ants are photoactivatable or photoconvertible fluorescent proteins ( PA - FPs ) 33 – 35 , as used in PALM and FPALM ; standard organic fluor - ophores ( d STORM ) 21 , 22 ; or pairs of organic fluorophores , that is , combinations of activator and reporter fluorophores ( STORM ) 20 . Even though all concepts are very similar and excellent reviews have already been published highlighting the strengths and limitations of the different methods 6 , 34 – 38 , d STORM with standard fluorescent probes warrants special attention because it differs from PALM and FPALM on several important points . Direct stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy with standard fluorescent probes Sebastian van de Linde , Anna Löschberger , Teresa Klein , Meike Heidbreder , Steve Wolter , Mike Heilemann & Markus Sauer Department of Biotechnology & Biophysics , Julius - Maximilians - University Würzburg , Würzburg , Germany . Correspondence should be addressed to M . S . ( m . sauer @ uni - wuerzburg . de ) . Published online 16 June 2011 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2011 . 336 Direct stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( d storM ) uses conventional fluorescent probes such as labeled antibodies or chemical tags for subdiffraction resolution fluorescence imaging with a lateral resolution of ~ 20 nm . In contrast to photoactivated localization microscopy ( palM ) with photoactivatable fluorescent proteins , d storM experiments start with bright fluorescent samples in which the fluorophores have to be transferred to a stable and reversible oFF state . the oFF state has a lifetime in the range of 100 milliseconds to several seconds after irradiation with light intensities low enough to ensure minimal photodestruction . either spontaneously or photoinduced on irradiation with a second laser wavelength , a sparse subset of fluorophores is reactivated and their positions are precisely determined . repetitive activation , localization and deactivation allow a temporal separation of spatially unresolved structures in a reconstructed image . Here we present a step - by - step protocol for d storM imaging in fixed and living cells on a wide - field fluorescence microscope , with standard fluorescent probes focusing especially on the photoinduced fine adjustment of the ratio of fluorophores residing in the on and oFF states . Furthermore , we discuss labeling strategies , acquisition parameters , and temporal and spatial resolution . the ultimate step of data acquisition and data processing can be performed in seconds to minutes . © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . protocol 992 | VOL . 6 NO . 7 | 2011 | nature protocols ( 1 ) PA - FPs 18 , 19 , 39 – 41 are genetically fused to target proteins and endo - genously expressed in cells and organelles . Moreover , stable cell lines can be prepared that achieve protein - labeling effici - ency of nearly 100 % , a level impossible to achieve by chemical staining with synthetic fluorophores . ( 2 ) Furthermore , fluorescent proteins are smaller ( a barrel with dimensions 2 . 4 nm × 4 . 2 nm ) 42 than fluorophore - labeled anti - bodies , which are typically used in d STORM and STORM applications ( the size of an IgG antibody is ~ 7 – 8 nm ) . Therefore , the density of fluorophores tagging a structure is generally lower compared with endogenously expressed PA - FPs . Whereas the smallest resolvable distance between two fluorophores determines the optical resolution , the structural interpretation of localization microscopy data is determined by the labeling density . According to information theory , the required density of fluorescent probes for super - resolution imaging has to be sufficiently high to satisfy the Nyquist - Shannon sampling theorem 43 . In essence , it states that the mean distance between neighboring localized fluorophores ( the sampling interval ) must be at least twice as fine as the desired resolution . For example , to resolve 20 nm structural features in one dimension , a fluorophore must be localized at least every 10 nm . Extended to a two - dimensional structure , this corresponds to a labeling density of ~ 10 4 fluorophores per µ m 2 and translates to 600 fluorophores present within a diffraction - limited area with a diameter of ~ 250 nm . Only one of these 600 fluorophores should reside in its fluorescent state at any time of the experiment , thus implying that the lifetime of the OFF state has to be at least 600 times longer than the lifetime of the fluorescent ON state . Here it must be pointed out that , in practice , the density of fluorescent spots should be substantially lower to enable reliable spot finding and fitting . ( 3 ) On the contrary , PA - FPs as used in PALM show a lower photo - stability and brightness than standard organic fluorophores 44 . The number of detectable photons of PA - FPs is typically a few hundred photons before they bleach , whereas synthetic fluorophores can emit more than 1 , 000 photons per cycle 22 , 45 . This has a direct consequence on the localization precision : for negligible background fluorescence and detector noise , the localization precision depends only on the number of collected photons N and on the standard deviation of the PSF ( σ ) , and can be approximated by σ / N 14 , 15 . Another issue is that PA - FPs need to be photobleached before a next subset can be activated . To maximize the number of detected photons from each PA - FP , the frame rate should be adjusted to the average photobleaching time under the applied experimental conditions . Typical frame rates used for PA - FP in PALM and FPALM experiments are 10 – 25 Hz 33 , 34 , 40 , 41 . From this point of view , d STORM is advantageous because small organic fluorophores survive moderate excitation conditions for longer time periods ( i . e . , they have a higher photostability ) , emit thousands of photons and their photoswitching rates can be controlled by external means 21 , 22 . Thus , the time the fluoro - phores reside in the ON and OFF states can be sensitively adjusted . Furthermore , a large number of commercially available fluorescent probes spanning the entire visible spectral range 22 can be directly used as photoswitches in aqueous solvents simply by adding milli - molar concentrations of reducing thiols . Therefore , d STORM has been used successfully to study the number , distribution and den - sity of cellular or membrane proteins in fixed cells 46 – 50 and the in vitro dynamics of molecular motor proteins 51 . Appropriate reducing conditions inside a living cell ( all cells contain reduc - ing agents such as glutathione ( GSH ) ) enable live - cell d STORM , which has been used to study the distribution and dynamics of core histone proteins 52 , 53 applying real - time data analysis 54 . This opens the potential to combine d STORM with ( F ) PALM to per - form multicolor super - resolution imaging experiments in living cells , profiting from orthogonal labeling strategies . In summary , the tunability of photoswitching allows frame rates of 10 – 1 , 000 Hz at excitation intensities between 0 . 5 and 50 kW cm − 2 such that data acquisition takes only seconds to a few minutes . d STORM is not restricted to biological samples ; it could , in principle , also be used to study , for example , polymers or other nonbiological , optically transparent samples that can be labeled with fluorescent probes and measured in aqueous solvents in the presence of thiols . Even though ( F ) PALM and d STORM experiments using PA - FPs and standard fluorescent probes , respectively , can be performed under similar experimental conditions , for example , in the presence of millimolar concentrations of reducing GSH in living cells , the ini - tial situation of a super - resolution imaging experiment is completely different . PA - FPs are essentially nonfluorescent at the beginning of the experiment , allowing the number of fluorescent molecules , i . e . , the density of fluorescent molecules , to be tightly controlled by the irradiation intensity of a 405 nm laser . In contrast , one of the key steps of single - molecule – based localization microscopy with synthetic organic fluorophores is the efficient transfer of the fluorophores Figure 1 | The d STORM concept . The target molecule of interest is labeled with photoswitchable fluorophores . The top image on the right side shows labeled microtubules in a mammalian cell . At the beginning of the experiment , all fluorophores are transferred to the nonfluorescent OFF state upon irradiation with light of appropriate wavelength and intensity . Either spontaneously or photoinduced upon irradiation with a second laser wavelength , a sparse subset of fluorophores is reactivated . If the probability of activation is sufficiently low , then the activated fluorophores residing in their ON state are statistically spaced further apart than the resolution limit and their positions can be precisely determined . Repetitive activation , localization and deactivation allow a temporal separation of spatially unresolved structures in a reconstructed image ( image below ) . Scale bar , 2 µ m . © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 6 NO . 7 | 2011 | 993 to a reversible , relatively stable OFF state at the beginning of the experiment 20 – 28 . In other words , a bright fluorescent sample has to be turned ‘dim’ by increasing the irradiation intensity in a way that ensures that only a sparse subset of fluorophores remains fluores - cent . The challenge of the procedure is twofold because damage of the sample and photobleaching of the fluorophores must be avoided . These considerations show that the photoswitching mechanism is of central importance for d STORM . The photoswitching mechanism d STORM takes advantage of the fact that standard fluorophores ( most Alexa Fluor and ATTO dyes ) belong to the class of rho damine and oxazine dyes , and are photoreduced in the presence of potent electron donors such as aromatic amines ( e . g . , guanosine or tryp - tophan ) 55 – 57 . In other words , the electronically excited fluorophore is reduced upon collision or contact with guanosine or tryptophan . Thiols such as β - mercaptoethylamine ( MEA ) or GSH are generally weaker electron donors than aromatic amines 58 , 59 . Their reduction efficiency increases up to pH ~ 9 because the thiolate anion ( RS − ) is the reducing species 60 , 61 . Nevertheless , quenching of the first excited singlet state ( fluorescence quenching ) of rhodamine and oxazine dyes with a lifetime of a few nanoseconds by thiols is neg - ligible . The triplet state , however , is energetically stabilized and has a lifetime of several microseconds in air - equilibrated aqueous solu - tions . Therefore , the triplet state is also quenched by millimolar concentrations of MEA or GSH ( Fig . 2 ) . As a result , the triplet state of commercially available ATTO and Alexa Fluor dyes is reduced on irradiation in the presence of millimolar quantities of thiols in aqueous solvents , and the corresponding dye radical anion and thiyl radical is formed 62 . Whereas thiyl radicals efficiently react with molecular oxygen by the formation of superoxide radicals and hydrogen peroxide 58 , 59 , rhodamine radical anions are more stable to oxidation and survive for several hundred milliseconds to seconds in the presence of molec - ular oxygen ( naturally present at concentrations of 200 – 250 µ M in aqueous solutions at room temperature ( 20 °C ) ) 22 , 28 , 47 , 49 . On removal of oxygen , rhodamine dyes can be easily trapped in their radical anion state for several hours 62 . On the other hand , thiazine and oxazine dyes such as methylene blue and ATTO 655 or ATTO 680 show a higher electron affinity 56 . Hence , the semireduced fluorophore radicals ( F ● ) are intermediary reaction products that accept a second electron in the presence of thiols , forming the corresponding fully reduced leuco dye ( FH ; Fig . 2a ) 62 – 65 . The fundamental mechanism of d STORM , that is , photoinduced formation of intermediate radical anions for most Alexa Fluor and ATTO dyes in aqueous solvents in the presence of millimolar con - centrations of thiols , can be easily shown by ensemble absorption and electron paramagnetic resonance experiments 62 . To close the photoswitching cycle , the fluorescent state of the fluorophores is recovered upon oxidation by molecular oxygen ( Fig . 2 ) . Both pro - cesses , reduction of the triplet state by thiols and oxidation of the intermediate reduced state by oxygen , are facilitated on irradiation . Excitation of the fluorescent form pumps the fluorophore into the triplet state , which is reduced by the thiolate , and direct excita - tion of the radical anion ( all radical anions show a pronounced absorbance at ~ 400 nm ) 62 at 405 nm facilitates recovery of the fluorescent form ( Table 1 ) . As animal cells contain oxygen as well as millimolar concentrations of GSH 66 , d STORM can also be performed in living cells 52 , 53 . In this respect , it is interesting to relate the mechanistic con - siderations of rhodamine and oxazine photoswitching to the first class of fluorophores used for d STORM imaging , i . e . , carbocyanine fluorophores . Photoswitching of carbocyanines such as Cy5 , Cy5 . 5 , Cy7 or Alexa Fluor 647 , 680 and 700 is performed under identi - cal conditions for all of these fluorophores , but the reversibility of photoswitching is dramatically improved when the oxygen concen - tration is reduced by application of an enzymatic oxygen scaveng - ing system 67 , 68 . The reason for this is that cyanine fluorophores are far more easily oxidized than rhodamine or oxazine derivatives 56 . In addition , oxygen removal increases the stability or lifetime of the generated semireduced radical anions absorbing at ~ 500 nm 69 . The recently observed formation of a thiol adduct in cyanine dyes 70 might well be explained by a follow - up reaction , similar to the photoinduced formation of stable leuco dyes in the case of thiazine and oxazine dyes 62 . Table 1 summarizes all standard fluorophores used successfully so far in reversible ensemble and single - molecule photoswitching experiments according to the d STORM concept . Most of the fluorophores listed show remarkably stable nonfluores - cent OFF states that absorb at shorter wavelengths , in the range of 350 – 550 nm , and survive the entire photocycle several times with only minimal photobleaching . For d STORM experiments in fixed cells ( Table 1 ) , the sample is embedded in aqueous buffer ( e . g . , PBS ( pH 7 . 4 ) ) in the presence of 10 – 200 mM thiol ( MEA ) . For cyanine fluorophores , the application of an oxygen scavenging system significantly improves photoswitch - ing . After proper sample alignment by fluorescence imaging under Figure 2 | Reversible photoswitching of Alexa Fluor and ATTO dyes in the presence of thiols . ( a ) The fluorophore is either cycled between its singlet ground and excited state emitting fluorescence photons or can undergo intersystem crossing with rate k isc upon irradiation . The triplet state ( 3 F ) can react with molecular oxygen to recover the singlet ground state and produce singlet oxygen or react with the thiolate with rate k red to form the radical anion of the fluorophore ( F • ) and the corresponding thiyl radical . The radical anion can be oxidized by oxygen with rate k ox to recover the singlet ground state . Because radical anions of most rhodamine and oxazine derivatives show pronounced absorption at ~ 400 nm irradiation , for example , at 405 nm promotes recovery of the fluorescent form ( i . e . , OFF - and ON - switching are photoinduced ) . Whereas the thiyl radicals formed react efficiently with molecular oxygen to produce superoxide radicals and hydrogen peroxides , the fluorophore radical anion is very unreactive and survives for up to several seconds even in the presence of molecular oxygen . Fluorophores such as ATTO 655 and ATTO 680 accept a second electron to the fully reduced leuco - form ( FH ) . Oxidation of FH with oxygen also recovers the ON state . ( b ) Absorption spectra of Alexa Fluor 488 in PBS ( pH 9 . 3 ) in the presence of 100 mM MEA . After irradiation at 488 nm ( light blue ) , the absorption at 488 nm decreases and the radical anion absorbing maximally around 400 nm appears . The fluorescent state is recovered spontaneously or by direct excitation of the radical anion at ~ 400 nm ( dark blue ) . The stability ( lifetime ) of the radical anion is mainly determined by the oxygen concentration and can easily exceed several hours 62 . 1 F 1 1 F 0 3 F k fl k exc FH A b s o r ban c e 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 300 Wavelength ( nm ) 500 400 0 . 3 0 . 4 F • a b k ox ( O 2 ) 1 k ox ( O 2 ) 2 ′ k isc ( O 2 ) k isc k red ( RSH / RS – ) 1 k red ( RSH / RS – ) 2 © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . protocol 994 | VOL . 6 NO . 7 | 2011 | nature protocols table 1 | Standard organic fluorophores and experimental conditions for d STORM . Fluorophore on state l abs / l em ( nm ) oFF state l abs 350 – 550 nm experimental conditions reference Alexa Fluor 488 491 / 517 √ 100 mM MEA , pH 7 . 4 , < 1 kW cm − 2 at 488 nm 22 100 mW MEA , pH 8 . 0 , 5 kW cm − 2 at 488 nm 62 Dy 505 500 / 525 √ 100 mM MEA , pH 9 . 3 , < 1 W cm − 2 at 488 nm a 62 Rhodamine 123 500 / 518 √ 100 mM MEA , pH 9 . 3 , < 1 W cm − 2 at 488 nm a 62 ATTO 488 501 / 523 √ 100 mM MEA , pH 9 . 3 , < 1 W cm − 2 at 488 nm a 62 SNAP - Cell 505 504 / 532 √ 0 . 5 – 2 kW cm − 2 b Used for live - cell d STORM 53 Rhodamine 6G 526 / 556 √ 200 mM MEA , pH 10 . 2 , < 1 W cm − 2 at 514 nm a 62 ATTO 520 516 / 538 — c 100 mM MEA , pH 7 . 4 , 3 kW cm − 2 at 514 nm 22 100 mM MEA , pH 7 . 4 , 1 – 2 kW cm − 2 at 514 nm 49 1 . 5 kW cm − 2 b Used for live - cell d STORM 22 Dy 530 535 / 556 √ 100 mM MEA , pH 9 . 3 , < 1 W cm − 2 at 514 nm a 62 ATTO 532 532 / 553 √ 100 mM MEA , pH 9 . 3 , < 1 W cm − 2 at 514 nm a 62 Alexa Fluor 532 532 / 552 √ 200 mM MEA , pH 10 . 2 , < 1 W cm − 2 at 514 nm a 62 100 mM MEA , pH 7 . 4 , 1 . 5 kW cm − 2 at 514 nm 22 SNAP - Cell TMR - Star 554 / 580 √ 0 . 5 – 2 kW cm − 2 b Used for live - cell d STORM 53 ATTO 565 563 / 592 √ 200 mM MEA , pH 12 . 1 , 1 W cm − 2 at 568 nm a 62 100 mM MEA , pH 7 . 4 , 1 – 2 kW cm − 2 at 568 nm 22 , 49 Alexa Fluor 568 572 / 600 √ 200 mM MEA , pH 10 . 2 , < 1 W cm − 2 at 568 nm a 62 100 mM MEA , pH 7 . 4 , 1 . 5 kW cm − 2 at 568 nm 22 ATTO 590 594 / 624 — c 200 mM MEA , pH 7 . 4 , 4 kW cm − 2 at 568 nm 22 Alexa Fluor 647 649 / 670 √ e 50 mM MEA , pH 7 . 4 , 1 – 2 kW cm − 2 at 647 nm d 21 , 46 50 mM MEA , pH 7 . 4 , 35 – 50 kW cm − 2 at 647 nm d 54 Cy5 649 / 670 √ e 50 mM MEA , pH 7 . 4 , 1 – 2 kW cm − 2 at 647 nm d 21 ATTO 655 663 / 684 √ e 10 mM GSH / MEA , pH 7 . 4 , 2 – 3 kW cm − 2 at 647 nm 47 10 – 100 mM MEA , pH 7 . 4 , 1 – 2 kW cm − 2 at 647 nm 49 TMP - ATTO 655 1 . 5 kW cm − 2 b Used for live - cell d STORM 22 5 kW cm − 2 b Used for live - cell d STORM 52 ATTO 680 680 / 700 — c 10 mM GSH / MEA , pH 7 . 4 , 2 – 3 kW cm − 2 at 647 nm 47 10 – 100 mM MEA , pH 7 . 4 , 1 – 2 kW cm − 2 at 647 nm 49 1 . 5 kW cm − 2 b Used for live - cell d STORM 22 ATTO 700 700 / 719 — c 10 – 100 mM MEA , pH 7 . 4 , 1 – 2 kW cm − 2 at 647 nm 49 1 . 5 kW cm − 2 b Used for live - cell d STORM 22 a Determined in ensemble experiments . b Used for live - cell d STORM . c Not determined . d Oxygen is removed by an enzymatic oxygen scavenging system . e The fluorescent state can be recovered upon excitation at 350 – 550 nm . The radical anion absorption spectrum has not been determined in bulk experiments . © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 6 NO . 7 | 2011 | 995 low excitation conditions ( < 0 . 1 kW cm − 2 ) , the excitation intensity is increased to 5 – 30 kW cm − 2 until the majority of fluorophores are switched off to enable precise single - molecule localization ( Fig . 3 ) . This step requires typically only a few seconds . As the triplet yield and subsequent photoinduced formation of nonfluorescent reduced fluorophore intermediates depends linearly on the excitation intensity , the thiol concentration and the pH of the solvent 21 , 22 , 62 are available as parameters to optimize the transfer of the majority of fluorophores to their nonfluorescent stable OFF state . For subsequent data acquisition , the excitation intensity is tuned to ensure that the lifetime of the ON state equals one to four times the acquisition time of the electron - multiplying charged - coupled device ( EMCCD ) camera . For live - cell d STORM , the excitation intensity has to be lowered to ≤ 5 kW cm − 2 to avoid cellular damage . At higher intensities , photoinduced fluorophore and thiyl radical formation and subsequent production of reactive oxygen species is enhanced 62 . However , for fixed cells or other samples , the excitation intensity can be kept high ( up to 50 kW cm − 2 ) to reduce the lifetime of the fluorescent ON state to a few milliseconds , enabling frame rates of up to 1 kHz ( ref . 54 ) . Without another irradiation wavelength for direct excitation of the reduced intermediates , the lifetime or stability of the OFF state is only controlled by the redox property of the fluorophore itself and the oxygen concentration . Independent of the laser excita - tion intensity , typically between 500 and 5 , 000 photons are detected from the ON state of all fluorophores listed in Table 1 , corresponding to an expected localization precision of < 10 nm ( ref . 14 ) . Alternatively , “push - pull fluorophores” 71 , 72 and rhodamine amides 73 , 74 can be used for single - molecule – based localization microscopy . Photochromic rhodamine amides can be photoacti - vated by irradiation with light in the UV at ~ 375 nm or by two - photon excitation at ~ 750 nm . Adjustment of photoswitching rates The formation of stable OFF states and tunable transition rates are the key requirements in super - resolution imaging , and they have a direct influence on the achievable optical resolution 40 , 75 – 77 . In d STORM , photoswitchable organic fluorophores have to be converted ( reduction of the triplet state by thiols ) at a rate k OFF to a nonfluorescent OFF state ( stable radical anions ) at the begin - ning of the experiment to ensure single - molecule localization . The fluorescent state is repopulated on oxidation at a rate k ON . These photoswitching rates , i . e . , the inverse of the lifetimes of the ON state τ ON , and OFF state τ OFF , directly control the density of fluorescent probes and thus have a critical influence on the quality of a super - resolution image ( Fig . 4 ) . Snapshot d STORMimage Fluorescence single - molecule images a 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 0 10 , 000 20 , 000 – 20 , 500 20 , 000 – 22 , 000 20 , 000 – 25 , 000 60 , 000 – 80 , 000 20 , 000 30 , 000 40 , 000 50 , 000 60 , 000 70 , 000 80 , 000 90 , 000 0 5 15 20 25 Frame number 0 – 20 , 000 Frames Time ( s ) Lo c a li z a t i on s La s e r i n t en s i t y ( a . u . ) 10 Σ = 2 , 686 Σ = 28 , 920 Σ = 517 , 742 0 – 90 , 000 TIRF d STORM Σ = 11 , 796 b c 641 nm Σ = 119 , 868 Σ = 170 , 732 488 nm Figure 3 | d STORM acquisition procedure exemplified for Alexa Fluor 647 – labeled β - tubulin in a COS - 7 cell . ( a , b ) A fluorescence image of the structure is measured at low excitation intensity ( a ) ( < 0 . 1 kW cm − 2 see red line in b ) . In the next step , higher irradiation intensity is applied to transfer the majority of fluorophores into a nonfluorescent OFF state until a sufficiently low spot density is reached . Finally , a super - resolved image is reconstructed from all localizations . ( b ) Number of localizations per image frame ( approximately ten , corresponding to ~ 0 . 1 spots per µ m 2 ) plotted against the frame number and time , respectively . The images were acquired with a frame rate of 885 Hz at an excitation intensity of 30 kW cm − 2 at 641 nm and additional irradiation at 488 nm ( blue line ) with 0 – 0 . 5 kW cm − 2 . Direct excitation of the OFF state at 488 nm increases the number of fluorophores residing in the ON state and has to be carefully controlled . ( c ) Image reconstruction showing that a highly resolved image can already be reconstructed from 20 , 000 images corresponding to a total acquisition time of ~ 20 s . The structure cannot be fully resolved after analysis of < 2 , 000 frames . Σ , the number of localizations used to reconstruct the d STORM image . Scale bars , 1 µ m . © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . protocol 996 | VOL . 6 NO . 7 | 2011 | nature protocols For a more detailed discussion , we introduce the ratio of switch - ing rates as r = k OFF / k ON = τ OFF / τ ON . High values of r assure a low number of fluorophores in the ON state and , therefore , that single fluorophores are localized as individuals . OFF state lifetimes of photoswitchable synthetic fluorophores have been reported to vary from 10 to 100 ms 26 – 28 , 77 to several seconds 22 , 28 , 47 , 49 , 52 , 62 , 77 . For metastable OFF states with short τ OFF , high irradiation intensities should be applied to reduce τ ON and to generate a sufficiently high ratio r . For very stable OFF states with long lifetimes of several seconds , a sufficient high ratio r can be achieved applying only a low irradiation intensity , which is an important prerequisite for live - cell applications . For fixed cells , however , τ ON can be further shortened by applying higher irradiation intensities to increase r and the imaging speed ( i . e . , the frame rate ) . Currently , only small areas of a sample can be imaged on a 128 × 128 pixel chip with the highest possible imaging speed of an EMCCD camera of ~ 1 kHz , that is , the chip readout time currently limits the acquisition speed for investigation of larger areas or whole cells . d STORM offers several possibilities to vary r through fine adjustment of τ ON and τ OFF , enabling super - resolved imaging of cellular structures with different complexity and fluorophore den - sities in fixed and living cells 22 , 52 , 53 , 62 . The first - order rate constants for OFF - and ON - switching ( k OFF and k ON , respectively ) follow a linear dependence on the excitation intensities . Whereas k OFF is controlled by the singlet - state excitation intensity , the intersystem crossing yield and the concentration of thiolate , k ON is deter - mined by the radical excitation intensity and the concentration of molecular oxygen 22 , 62 . Using a laser with a maximum power of ~ 100 mW , k OFF can be easily controlled over one order of magnitude . The concentration of the reducing thiolate ( RS¯ ) can be increased by both the concentration of thiol added and the pH ( between pH 6 and 9 ) of the solvent and enables the adjustment of k OFF over approximately two orders of magnitude 22 . On the contrary , k ON can be increased ( at least one order of magnitude ) by direct excitation of the radi - cal anions at , for example , 405 nm , whereas k ON can be reduced by several orders of magnitude by depleting oxygen from the buffer by an oxygen scavenging system ( on efficient removal of oxygen , the lifetime of the radical anions can approach several hours in ensemble experiments ) 62 . Tuning both rates k OFF and k ON allows arbitrary control of the photoswitching ratio r over several orders of magnitude . Thus , r can be adjusted to match the required condi - tions for super - resolution imaging of different cellular structures . A suitable r is determined by the complexity of the structure but should be ( as a rule of thumb ) adjusted such that ~ 0 . 1 – 1 . 0 fluoro - phores are simultaneously active per µ m 2 to ensure the localization of single emitters . For live - cell d STORM , manipulating k OFF and k ON is limited to the laser intensities for both the fluorescence readout and the radical anion , respectively , whereas the excitation inten - sities should be kept low to avoid cellular damage . Here it should be pointed out that the optical resolution is mainly determined by the full width at half maximum ( FWHM ) of the PSF and photon statis - tics and not by the photoswitching rates . The photoswitching rate determines the fluorophore density required to extract meaning - ful structural information in single - molecule – based localization microscopy experiments . Experimental design Fluorescence microscope setup . To determine the position of single fluorophores , the fluorescence signal ( given by the number of fluorescence photons detected ) should be very high , whereas the background ( background fluorescence and detector noise ) should be as low as possible 14 . Optimal results can be achieved by single - molecule fluorescence imaging with high signal - to - background ratio using an inverted fluorescence microscope equipped with an oil - immersion objective , with a high numerical aperture ( NA ≥ 1 . 45 ) operated in objective - type total inter - nal reflection fluorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy mode ( Fig . 5 ) . TIRF microscopy limits fluorophore excitation to a thin eva - nescent field ( 100 – 200 nm ) and minimizes background light . Three - dimensional or whole - cell imaging can be realized using a wide - field configuration , at the expense of a lower signal - to - background ratio and a lower precision in single - molecule localization . An interesting approach is the illumination by a highly inclined and thin beam that allows axial sectioning ( highly inclined and laminated optical sheet , HILO ) 78 . Figure 4 | Simulated data demonstrating the influence of the ratio of photoswitching rates , r , on different complexities . With increasing complexity of the imaged structure , the number of fluorophores present per area increases . The photoswitching ratio is mainly determined by the stability of the OFF state . ( a – h ) Images shown in a , c , e and g are snapshots from the localization microscopy stacks from which the reconstructed super - resolution images b , d , f and h were generated . Panels b and f show pairs of lines separated by 300 and 50 nm with a fluorophore attached every 8 . 5 nm , whereas d and h show a lattice with 40 nm spacing . ( a – d ) Images were simulated with r = 250 . ( e – h ) Images were simulated with r = 3 , 000 . It becomes clear that the necessary photoswitching ratio depends strongly on the structure imaged ; when the photoswitching ratio is too low ( c , d ) more than one fluorophore may fluoresce per diffraction - limited area and subsequent fitting of the PSF can result in false localizations and image artifacts 75 . On the contrary , high photoswitching ratios result in a small number of localizations per image and thus prolong the acquisition time unnecessarily . Note that the density of fluorescence emissions is roughly the same for the images shown in a and g , even though they are simulated for different values of r . Scale bars , 1 µ m for e ( valid for all images ) ; 100 nm for insets in b and f ; and 200 nm for insets in d and h . a b f h d e c g Complexity of structure P ho t o s w i t c h i ng r a t i o ( k o ff / k on ) © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 6 NO . 7 | 2011 | 997 Multiline excitation can experimentally be realized in two princi - pal ways ( Fig . 5a ) : ( excitation option I ) a multiline argon - krypton gas ion laser ( for example , Coherent’s Innova 70C ) , emitting at 488 , 514 , 568 and 647 nm in combination with a 405 nm diode laser ( for example , the Cube diode laser 405 – 100C ( Coherent ) ) ; or ( excita - tion option II ) single - line semiconductor lasers emitting at 405 , 488 , 532 , 568 , 640 and 660 nm ( for example , sapphire 488LP with an output power of 100 mW ( Coherent ) ) . Laser lines are combined by suitable dichroic mirrors ( from Chroma , Semrock , or AHF ana - lysentechnik ) and / or selected by an acousto - optical tunable filter ( e . g . , acousto - optical tunable filter ( AOTF ) from AAOptics ) and coupled into the microscope objective using an appropriate poly - chromatic mirror . Laser beams might be spatially filtered using a high - power single - mode fiber . A lens or a pair of lenses ( L1 and L2 ) is introduced in the excitation path to focus the laser on the back focal aperture of the high - numerical oil - immersion objective ( e . g . , PlanApo 60× , NA 1 . 45 ; Olympus ) to ensure homogeneous excita - tion of a 50 × 50 µ m 2 area . The focal length of the lenses can be changed to adjust the size of the illuminated area and the excitation intensity . A mirror ( M1 ) mounted on a lateral translation stage is needed for TIRF applications ( Fig . 5a ) . As shown exemplarily in Table 1 , excitation intensities in the range of 1 – 5 kW cm − 2 have to be applied for readout and pho - toswitching at frame rates of 10 – 100 Hz . For excitation of the inter - mediate radical anions at 405 nm , excitation intensities well below 1 kW cm − 2 ( e . g . , < 0 . 1 kW cm − 2 ) 53 , 62 are sufficient . Irradiation of cells with 405 nm might increase autofluorescence . Furthermore , irradiation of already excited fluorophores at 405 nm promotes photobleaching of organic fluorophores . Both problems can be faced by alternating the excitation for readout and photoswitching , triggering the AOTF or the semiconductor lasers directly . The fluorescence light in the detection path is filtered using suitable bandpass filters ( Chroma , Semrock or AHF analysen - technik ) and imaged with an EMCCD ( e . g . , Andor Ixon DU897 ) with quantum yields of 80 – 90 % in the visible range . The CCD chip collects the incoming photons in pixels with a typical size in the range of 16 µ m × 16 µ m to 24 µ m × 24 µ m . To preserve most of the position information in the fluorescence signal data , a pixel size of ~ 2 . 3× smaller than the Abbe resolution limit of the optical system is generally used . Thus , for visible light , the fluorescence signal should be imaged ensuring a pixel size of 80 – 160 nm ( typically ~ 100 nm ) using appropriate additional EMCCD PCM Fiber FC L1 L2 M1 COL OBJ Excitation light Fluorescence LP / BP Focalplane 405 nm M AOTFdriver D / P generator 405 nm 488 nm 532 nm 568 nm 641 nm DC1 - 4 DC1 M M M M M M Excitation option I Detection path Excitation option II Ar - Kr - laser AOTF Time I n t en s i t y Time I n t en s i t y Time I n t en s i t y 1 2 3 4 b 1 2 3 c 1 d Readout Activation t int Trigger pulse TL Irradiation type EMCCD OBJ PCM TL L3 L4 a 1 OBJ Epi TIR HILO Figure 5 | Scheme of experimental setup for single - molecule based localization microscopy with standard synthetic fluorophores . ( a ) The laser setup can consist of an Ar - Kr - laser providing laser lines at 488 , 514 , 568 and 647 nm and a 405 nm diode laser ( excitation option I ) or different semiconductor lasers sequentially combined by suitable dichroic mirrors ( DC1 - 4 ; excitation option II ) . Irradiation wavelengths are selected by an AOTF , coupled into a single - mode fiber using standard fiber couplers , and focused on the back focal aperture of a high numerical aperture oil - immersion objective by a polychromatic mirror ( PCM ) using a lens or a pair of appropriate lenses ( e . g . , L1 with f = 25 mm and L2 with f = 120 mm ) located near the back port of the microscope . A movable mirror ( M1 ) can be introduced in order to achieve TIRF or inclined illumination ( HILO ) 78 ( scheme is not to scale ) . Fluorescence light is collected by the same objective , spectrally filtered by long - pass and / or bandpass filters ( LP / BP ) and imaged on an EMCCD camera . Additional lenses are arranged ( tubus lens ( TL ) , L3 and L4 ) in the detection path to ensure a pixel size of ~ 100 nm . A potential lens configuration for the detection path is depicted . A delay and pulse generator ( D / P generator ) triggered by the camera is used to control alternating irradiation through the AOTF . ( b ) Course of irradiation intensity ( red ) used for fluorescence readout and photoswitching of fluorophores . ( c ) To control the number of ‘active’ fluorophores residing in the ON state , additional irradiation at 405 nm ( blue ) can be applied to directly excite the radical anions and ensure photoinduced recovery of the fluorescent ON state . Dashed lines show alternative irradiation schemes . ( d ) Alternating excitation scheme ( integration time , t int ) to minimize photobleaching in two - color experiments . © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . protocol 998 | VOL . 6 NO . 7 | 2011 | nature protocols lenses . Finally , a video sequence containing several thousands of images is recorded . To minimize stage drift of the microscope setup , the excitation intensities of the two lasers should be adjusted to enable d STORM experiments with acquisition times as short as possible . However , especially in live - cell experiments , light - induced cellular damage must be minimized , thus requiring that the experiments are per - formed using lower excitation intensity . Therefore , acquisition times of a few minutes must be accepted for complex structures . To check for lateral drift , fluorescent beads or semiconductor nanocrystals that do not photobleach during the experiment can be immobilized at low density and their positions can be determined as a function of time . By generating histograms of the x and y position of single beads or nanocrystals , and by determining the standard deviation of the distributions in x and y , lateral drift can be monitored . Axial drift is directly reflected by blurring of the PSFs of individual beads . Whereas lateral drift can be corrected during post - processing of the images , axial drift has to be corrected online during acquisition with an active feedback loop . Alternatively , a nosepiece stage ( e . g . , IX2 - NPS , Olympus ) can be used to minimize the distance change between the specimen and the objective . d STORM can be expanded to three dimensions by applying various experimental concepts . The generation of a double - helical PSF 79 , interferometric approaches 80 and virtual volume super - resolution microscopy 45 have achieved impressive axial resolutions , but these can be challenging to set up for nonexperts . The 3D super - resolution imaging based on introducing defocusing , i . e . , dual - or multifocal - plane imaging or astigmatism , is easier to implement but achieves a comparable lower axial resolution of ~ 50 – 80 nm ( refs . 81 , 82 ) . Alternatively , an axial resolution of ~ 50 nm has been achieved , combining spatial - modulated illumination with single - molecule localization microscopy 23 . Aside from the considerations of microscopic configurations , 3D imaging has consequences for the density of fluorophores emitting concurrently . The excitation volume is considerably larger than in 2D imaging , but the informa - tion is still recorded with a 2D detector . Large and asymmetrical photon distributions are recorded , which complicate PSF fitting and result in a lower localization precision . This reduces the number of simultaneously recordable single molecules in one imaging frame , and requires longer image stacks to achieve the same localization statistics . In addition , achieving a high 3D fluorophore labeling density remains challenging , especially for live - cell applications . Data analysis . Data processing described in this protocol uses the recently introduced open access software ( rapi d STORM ) for single - molecule – based localization microscopy 54 . The original fluores - cence images are compressed to a single super - resolved image in three stages : first , probable locations of fluorophore emissions are extracted from each fluorescence image . Second , a small area around each probable location is cut out from the image and the pixels within are fitted with a model of the PSF to localize fluorophore emission . Third , all localizations are combined into a single , super - resolution image . For the first step , the input image is usu - ally smoothed to find the pixels with the highest intensity values . Several algorithms have been suggested for smoothing 54 , and the use of a simple average mask ( moving average ) with a diameter of roughly one FWHM ( full width at half maximum ) of the PSF has been proven to be very fast and robust . In the smoothed image , pixels with the highest values correspond to pixels in which most photons were detected in the PSF - sized neighborhood . Extraction of pixels with the highest values using a local maximum filter algo - rithm ( the Neubeck algorithm is suited especially for 16 - bit data ) 83 delivers the most probable fluorophore position . In the second stage , a small local window ( diameter roughly two FWHM of the PSF ) is fitted with a PSF model , most com - monly a 2D Gaussian function with a fixed covariance matrix plus constant background . Thus , four free parameters have to be fitted to the data : amplitude , center in X , center in Y and background . The two center coordinates give the high - precision estimate of the fluorophore’s position ( localization ) . The amplitude gives an estimate of the number of photons and is used to discrimi - nate between background noise and real fluorescence emissions . A reasonable value that can be used here is 15 times the back - ground noise standard deviation . When implementing the fit - ting procedure , computational care should be taken to optimize for speed . Most importantly , the partial derivatives of the model function needed by most fitting procedures should be computed analytically . Here the GNU Scientific Library 84 provides a suitable fitting procedure . All single - molecule coordinates that were determined by fitting PSF in all source images are combined to a super - resolved image . Experience has shown that simply binning or linearly interpolat - ing the resulting localizations and then running a weighted histo - gram normalization 85 with a power of 0 . 3 results in good images . However , the super - resolution image produced by the algorithm outlined above is not always the best choice for further analysis , that is , often it is beneficial to use the set of localizations gained in the second step for further analysis . Examples include super - resolution tracking 41 , 86 , clustering 50 , 87 and precision estimation in super - resolution imaging 38 , 46 . Furthermore , it has to be considered that two or more fluoro - phores can be fluorescent at the same time within a diffraction - limited area with a diameter of ~ 250 nm . To avoid these so - called multifluorophore localizations , a photon threshold can be applied and the geometry of the PSF can be taken into account , as overlap - ping PSFs of multiple emitters produce an unsymmetrical signal distribution . However , as fluorescence intensity is a poor parameter for the quantification of individual fluorophores , false localizations are always present in super - resolved images . The number of arti - ficial or false localizations depends on the labeling density and the sample structure , but it can be kept low with appropriate control of the number of fluorophores residing in the fluorescent state and becomes higher when the photoswitching rates are set inappropri - ately , i . e . , for low r values ( Fig . 4 ) 75 . Furthermore , it is important to mention an advantage of con - cepts such as d STORM ( that use reversible photoswitches ) over concepts that use PA - FPs that can be localized only once . Using d STORM , structural information is not lost when a two - or multi - fluorophore event is recognized and discarded from further analysis because it is likely that the same fluorophore is localized again indi - vidually . In addition , even for inappropriately set photoswitching rates , a structure can be resolved as long as every fluorophore is localized individually at least once and the error - rate for discard - ing multi - fluorophore events ( which increases with decreasing r values ) is kept low . When using PA - FPs , two - spot events can occur stochastically ; alternatively , if the irradiation intensity for activation is set too high , then the localization information is irretrievably lost or a false localization is made . © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 6 NO . 7 | 2011 | 999 Fluorescence labeling . The study of cellular structure and func - tion in vivo and in vitro with super - resolution microscopy requires efficient labeling strategies to introduce suitable fluorescent probes . The most elegant way to specifically label proteins in cells is the coexpression of a fusion protein that can be photoactivated . Fusion proteins are very successfully used to study localization of proteins , dynamic processes and protein - protein interactions in cells 88 – 90 . Photoswitchable synthetic fluorophores are much smaller than fusion proteins but require a chemical labeling procedure . Reliable and commonly used procedures to specifically label target biomolecules in fixed cells with organic fluorophores are labeled antibodies , DNA oligonucleotides or small specifically binding peptides such as phalloidin and Lifeact 91 . In this protocol , the examples used are : ( i ) labeling of micro - tubules with antibodies , in which the fluorescent label is on the secondary antibody ( Fig . 6a – d ) ; and ( ii ) labeling of actin with fluo - rescently labeled phalloidin . In particular , for immunofluorescence staining , a wealth of probes labeled with Alexa Fluor and ATTO fluorophores are com - mercially available . Whereas DNA oligonucleotides and peptides are stoichiometrically labeled with fluorophores , commercially available antibodies often carry more than one , i . e . , typically two to six fluorophores , rendering appropriate photoswitching more difficult . To increase specificity , proteins are usually labeled indi - rectly , that is , with a first primary antibody against the antigen and a second antibody directed against the first antibody . Compared with standard IgG antibodies with a size of ≥ 7 nm , F ( ab ′ ) 2 fragments are slightly smaller and more specific ( in this protocol both , F ( ab ′ ) 2 fragments and IgG antibodies have been used ) . Because the label size affects the achievable labeling density and resolution , smaller fluorescent probes are recommended . Furthermore , it must be con - sidered that the resolution of d STORM easily approaches ~ 20 nm in lateral direction , i . e . , the size of fluorescent probes used to label the target structure ( for example , antibodies ) influences the meas - ured size . For example , microtubules have a diameter of ~ 25 nm , as determined by electron microscopy , whereas d STORM experi - ments with indirectly stained microtubules measured a diameter of 40 – 50 nm ( ref . 21 ) . For start - up experiments , we recommend Alexa Fluor 647 or Cy5 , and Alexa Fluor 488 for fixed cells . Alexa Fluor 647 or Cy5 should be used for single - color d STORM . Photoswitching can be performed at very high excitation intensities , allowing d STORM acquisition times of only a few seconds , which is especially interesting to study dynamics under in vitro conditions 51 . Reactivation of fluorophores by irradiation of the OFF state at 488 , 514 or 532 nm does not induce strong damage or photobleaching and can be applied simul - taneously with the readout wavelength at 641 or 647 nm . Oxygen removal increases the reliability of photoswitching . Various fluo - rescently labeled secondary antibodies and other probes such as phalloidin are commercially available ( see MATERIALS ) . Alexa Fluor 488 can also be purchased as antibody or phalloidin conjugate . Radical anions absorb at around 400 nm , enabling reac - tivation of the fluorescent state by irradiation with a 405 - nm laser diode . In contrast to Cy5 or Alexa Fluor 647 , photoreactivation at 405 nm increases autofluorescence and promotes photobleaching . Therefore , an alternating excitation scheme with short reactivation pulses is recommended . In addition , the d STORM method enables live - cell super - resolution imaging , profiting from the intracellular redox system ( including GSH at mM concentrations ) and oxygen to operate sev - eral organic fluorophores as photoswitches inside a living cell . For in vivo labeling of cells , the target protein needs to be modi - fied ( tagged ) so that an appropriate fluorescent molecule—one that permeates cell membranes—can bind to it with high specificity . The tetracysteine tag reacts with arsenical fluorophores to form stable and highly fluorescent complexes 92 . Alternative approaches include the SNAP - tag that allows labeling of fusion proteins of human O 6 - alkylguanine - DNA alkyltransferase with O 6 - benzylguanine derivatives 93 , 94 or the HALO - tag 95 . The trimethoprim ( TMP ) - tag 96 – 98 is based on the high - affinity noncovalent interaction between Escherichia coli dihydrofolate reductase ( eDHFR ) and TMP . Recently , it has been shown that the TMP - tag method can be used successfully for live - cell d STORM with ATTO dyes achieving a reso - lution of ~ 20 nm 52 . On the other hand , commercial SNAP - tag kits also use reversibly photoswitchable rhodamine fluorophores , such as tetramethylrhodamine ( TMR ) , as O 6 - benzylguanine conjugates and can therefore also be used for live - cell d STORM 53 . Because cells naturally contain the ‘redox cocktail’ , thiol ( GSH ) and oxygen , at appropriate concentrations , the d STORM method is widely appli - cable for in vivo multicolor super - resolution imaging experiments also in combination with PA - FPs . For live - cell experiments , cells are usually stained with pho - toswitchable fluorophores according to the protocol of the chemical tag used ( typically for 30 min , applying 0 . 1 – 2 µ mol l − 1 concentra - tions of fluorescent substrates ) at ~ 1 d after transfection with the vector of interest . However , for the successful application of chemi - cal tags for d STORM in living cells , several facts have to be care - fully considered . First , the transfection and labeling efficiency with chemical tags varies strongly , depending on the cell type used 53 . Therefore , the optimal substrate concentration has to be identified experimentally . Second , nonspecific adsorption of fluorescent sub - strates to glass surfaces , cellular membranes and structures , respec - tively , can strongly increase the background signal , especially when applied at high concentrations ( ≥ 1 µ M ) . Low transfection efficiencies result in a high concentration of unbound fluorophore conjugates and increased nonspecific label - ing because unbound fluorophore conjugates can diffuse out of cells . Nonspecific adsorption might be of minor importance , espe - cially for low fluorophore concentrations in ensemble standard fluorescence imaging experiments , but seriously deteriorates the identification and appropriate localization of individual fluoro - phores at the single - molecule level . This is due to the fact that non - specifically adsorbed fluorophores produce a higher background signal because they stay fluorescent ( in the absence of thiols outside of cells ) , whereas the majority of specifically bound fluorophores is transferred to the stable OFF state upon irradiation . To minimize nonspecific adsorption effects , the cell density can be increased to effectively reduce the interspace between cells before labeling . Alternatively , and much more efficiently , cells can be trypsinized and transferred into a new chamber well after labeling 52 or the surface can be blocked efficiently by treating the surface with the amino acid glycine before the experiment ( see PROCEDURE for more details ; Fig . 6e , f ) 53 . For live - cell d STORM , SNAP - Cell TMR - Star , SNAP - Cell 505 and TMP - ATTO 655 work reliably . If applied appropriately , d STORM enables the observation of dynamic processes in living cells that move with velocities of up to several nm s − 1 ( ref . 52 ) . In general , the achievable resolution in d STORM movie sequences of dynamic processes is , besides other © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . protocol 1000 | VOL . 6 NO . 7 | 2011 | nature protocols parameters , mainly determined by the movement velocity of the flu - orescent signals . In reference 52 , nucleosome and chromatin move - ment has been studied by d STORM in living cells , with a camera frame rate of 50 Hz , and super - resolution images have been recon - structed from 500 frames , respectively , corresponding to a temporal resolution of 10 s . As the velocity is only a few nanometers per sec - ond , a super - resolution image can be reconstructed every 10 s . Whether or not a dynamic process can be temporally resolved is mainly controlled by two parameters : the complexity of the struc - ture and its labeling density , and the photoswitching rates control - led by the irradiation intensity . In the cellular environment , ON state lifetimes of a few tens of milliseconds ( typically 10 – 50 ms ) require imaging frame rates of 20 – 100 Hz . The lifetime of the OFF state varies from several hundred milliseconds to a few seconds ( 0 . 5 – 10 s ) , corresponding to r = 50 – 1 , 000 . For low labeling den - sities , as in studies of the dynamics of filaments or protein com - plexes , with only 10 – 50 fluorophores per diffraction - limited area , d STORM imaging with a speed only determined by the irradia - tion intensity is possible . Under these conditions , super - resolution imaging at spatial resolutions of ~ 20 nm and temporal resolutions of 0 . 1 – 1 s is possible 51 . On the other hand , the temporal resolution decreases for more complex structures , with high labeling densi - ties of ≥ 300 fluorophores per diffraction - limited area , unless the excitation intensity is dramatically increased . To compare d STORM and ( F ) PALM , a protein genetically labeled with PA - FPs can be additionally labeled in fixed cells using standard fluorescent probes ( e . g . , antibodies ) . b c d a g h f e Figure 6 | d STORM images of fixed COS - 7 and living HeLa cells . ( a – d ) Microtubules were stained with Alexa Fluor 647 antibodies , ( experimental conditions : 20 – 30 kW cm − 2 at 641 nm , 0 – 0 . 5 kW cm − 2 at 532 nm , frame rate : 0 . 4 – 1 kHz , 15 , 000 – 20 , 000 frames ) . ( a , b ) Tubulin structures are not continuously resolved ( especially in b ) . Possible reasons are a low antibody concentration that has been applied in immunocytochemistry staining or fixation artifacts . ( c ) The super - resolved microtubule structure is background dominated . The background stems either from unspecific binding of antibodies , fixation artifacts or from tubulin monomers in the cell . ( d ) A typical d STORM image of a cellular structure with good contrast and negligible unspecific binding of antibodies . Standard fluorescence images are shown for comparison in the upper left or right corner . ( e – h ) Human histone protein H2B of a living HeLa cell stained with SNAP - Cell 505 . ( g , h ) Standard wide - field fluorescence image ( g ) and d STORM image ( h ) of H2B core histones with high contrast measured using the following experimental parameters : irradiation at 488 nm with 2 kW cm − 2 ; frame rate , 31 . 5 Hz ; 4 , 000 frames . ( e ) A single - molecule image showing nonspecific background signals outside of the nucleus that can be dramatically reduced ( f ) by glycine coating of the Lab - Tek chambers . Scale bars , 2 µ m for a – d ; 5 µ m for e – h . MaterIals REAGENTS Specific primary antibodies ( e . g . , mouse anti - β - tubulin antibody ; Sigma , Invitrogen ) Secondary antibodies ( e . g . , goat anti - mouse Alexa Fluor 647 antibody ; Invitrogen , cat . no . A - 21237 ) Specific drug molecules ( e . g . , Alexa Fluor 647 phalloidin ; Invitrogen , cat . no . A22287 ) , Alexa Fluor 488 phalloidin ( Invitrogen , cat . no . A12379 ) ) ATTO and Alexa Fluor fluorophores for labeling of antibodies ( e . g . , ATTO 655 NHS ) Growth medium RPMI 1640 , ( GIBCO , cat . no . 31870 - 025 ) supplemented with 10 % ( vol / vol ) FCS , 2 mM l - glutamine , 100 u ml – 1 penicillin and 100 µ g ml – 1 streptomycin Phenol red – free growth medium ( e . g . , RPMI 1640 , GIBCO , cat . no . 32404 - 014 ) supplemented with 10 % ( vol / vol ) FCS , 2 mM L - glutamine , 100 u ml – 1 penicillin and 100 µ g ml – 1 streptomycin • • • • • • Glycine ( 2 M in ddH2O ; Roth , cat . no . 2002722 ) PBS ( PAA , cat . no . H15 - 002 ) Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen , cat . no . 11668 - 019 ) Trypsin - EDTA ( PAA , cat . no . L - 11 - 004 ) pSNAP - H2B control plasmid ( NEB , cat . no . N9179S ) SNAP - Cell TMR - Star ( NEB , cat . no . S9105S ) SNAP - Cell 505 ( NEB , cat . no S9103S ) Mammalian expression vector of H2B - eDHFR and corresponding TMP - ATTO655 tag Amaxa Nucleofector System ( Lonza ) HeLa ( DSMZ , cat . no . ACC 75 ) Lab - Tek II chambered cover glass ( Nunc , cat . no . 155409 ) Paraformaldehyde in PBS ( 4 % ( wt / vol ) , PFA ; USB , cat . no . 19943 ) ! cautIon It is poisonous . Wear appropriate protective equipment and avoid contact with skin or eyes . •••••••• •••• © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 6 NO . 7 | 2011 | 1001 Triton X - 100 ( Sigma ) Tween - 20 ( Sigma ) Sytox Blue or Hoechst dyes for DNA labeling in double staining experimentsQuantum dots for calibration and drift control ( QD525 , QD655 ; Invitrogen Q10141MP resp . Q10121MP ) BSA ( Sigma ) Normal goat serum ( NGS , Sigma ) Immersion oil ( Carl Zeiss ) Antibodies ( F ( ab ′ ) 2 fragments for labeling ; Sigma , Invitrogen ) NAP - 5 column for purification of labeled antibodies and fragments ( Sephadex G25 DNA grade ; GE Healthcare ) Mercaptoethylamine ( MEA ; Sigma ) ; MEA can be purchased as hydrochloride ( MEA - HCl ; slightly acidic , has to be adjusted with KOH ) or pure ( alkaline , adjustment with HCl ) ! cautIon HCl / NaOH is corrosive , wear appropriate protective equipment and avoid contact with skin or eyes . Glutathione ( GSH ; Sigma ) Oxygen scavenger system ( It consists of 0 . 5 mg ml − 1 glucose oxidase ( Sigma ) , 40 µ g ml − 1 catalase ( Roche Applied Science ) , 10 % ( wt / vol ) glucose in phosphate buffer ( pH 7 . 4 ) . ) DMSO EQUIPMENT Optical table , vibration isolated ( Linos / Qioptiq ) Inverted fluorescence microscope ( IX - 71 , Olympus ) Oil - immersion objective ( 60× , PlanApo 1 . 45 NA , Olympus ) Objective for alignment ( ×10 ; Carl Zeiss , Olympus ) Irradiation lasers ( see EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN ) 641 nm ( Cube 640 - 100C , Coherent ) 643 nm ( iBeam smart , Toptica ) 405 nm ( Cube 405 - 100C , Coherent ) 532 nm ( Nano250 ; Linos / Qioptiq ) 488 nm ( Sapphire 488 LP , Coherent ) 568 nm ( Sapphire 568 LP , Coherent ) Argon - krypton laser ( Innova 70C , Coherent ) Acousto - optical tunable filter ( AOTF , AAOptics ) for laser line selection Delay and pulse generator ( Stanford Research Systems ) Neutral density filter to adjust laser intensity ( Edmund Optics ) Single - mode fiber ( Linos ) Fiber coupler ( Linos ) Lenses ( Linos , Thorlabs , Edmund Optics ) Polychromatic mirror ( Semrock , Chroma , AHF Analysentechnik ) HC 410 / 504 / 582 / 669 , Semrock HC 560 / 659 , Semrock Dichroic mirrors for laser coupling ( Semrock , Chroma , AHF Analysentechnik ) LaserMUX ( Semrock / AHF Analysentechnik ) LaserMUX 375 - 405R LaserMUX 473 - 491R , 1064R LaserMUX 514 - 543R LaserMUX 561 - 594R LaserMUX 633 - 647R Band - pass / long - pass filters to spectrally separate fluorescence signal ( Semrock , Chroma , AHF Analysentechnik ) HQ 535 / 50 HC 582 / 75 ET700 / 75 RazorEdge 647 Long - pass filter Laser clean - up filter ( Semrock , Chroma , AHF Analysentechnik ) Laser clean - up filter z 640 / 10 Laser clean - up filter z 488 / 10 Laser clean - up filter z 405 / 10 Electron multiplying , back - illuminated , cooled , charged - coupled device camera ( Ixon ; Andor ) with high quantum yield and low readout and background noise Large Chip ( Ixon DU897 , 512 × 512 pixels with 16 µ m pixel size , Andor ) Ultrafast acquisition speed ( Ixon DU860 ; 128 × 128 pixels with 24 µ m pixel size , Andor ) Reticle for calibration and validation of final magnification ( Carl Zeiss ) Software to control camera ( Andor Solis , Andor ) Software for image analysis 54 Cover slips ••• • ••••• • •• • ••••• ••••••• ••••••• •• • •••••• • •••• • ••• • •• •••• REAGENT SETUP Sample for calibration and drift control Semiconductor nanocrystals ( so - called quantum dots ( QDs ) ) can be dried on a bare cover slip at single - molecule concentration . This calibration sample is used to verify that the microscope setup is properly aligned and enables the detection of single molecules with high signal - to - background ratio . The use of QD655 is advantageous because they are efficiently excited by the various irradiation lasers used in d STORM , i . e . , 405 , 488 , 532 , 568 and 641 nm ( ref . 99 ) . Cell culture Any cell type is compatible with d STORM . Adherent cells such as HeLa or fibroblast cells offer the additional advantage that movement of the sample is minimized . Grow cells at 37 °C and 5 % CO 2 in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10 % ( vol / vol ) FCS and split every other day . Fluorescence labeling of antibodies ATTO or Alexa Fluor fluorophores can be purchased as NHS derivatives and labeled to IgG antibodies or F ( ab ′ ) 2 fragments according to standard coupling protocols given by the supplier . Conjugates are purified on a gel filtration column ( e . g . , NAP - 5 , Sephadex G - 25 DNA Grade , GE Healthcare ) . The degree of labeling of antibodies or F ( ab ′ ) 2 fragments is determined by absorption spectroscopy using the extinc - tion coefficient of fluorophore and protein ( absorption of the fluorophore at 280 nm has to be considered ; determine correction factor at 280 nm ( CF 280 ) ) . To facilitate photoswitching of the ‘antibody’ as fluorescent probe , the degree of labeling should be kept at one or two fluorophores per antibody . Immunocytochemistry For in vitro immunofluorescence labeling , cells must be fixed with PFA , formaldehyde , methanol or glutaraldehyde and permeabilized . Various fixation protocols can be used for the preparation of samples used for d STORM imaging . However , different fixatives do influence the spatial organization of cellular structures 100 . This is becoming more apparent in methods with superior resolution , and should be taken into account in data interpretation . If adherent cells are to be investigated , they are grown according to standard culture procedures in chambered cover glasses with a thickness of 130 µ m ( e . g . , Lab - Teks , Nunc ) . Furthermore , chambered cover glasses are advantageous because the volume for any labeling or washing step is predetermined by the chamber dimensions ( 1 ml maximum ) . Ideally , the cellular structure is well conserved because of the crosslinking of proteins by the fixative . However , one should be aware that the concentration of fixative , the incubation time and the permeabilization reagent ( e . g . , Triton X - 100 , a nonionic surfactant ) can influence the sample and should thus carefully be selected and applied . Finally , after fixation and permeabilization , a blocking buffer such as BSA in PBS or NGS is used to reduce unspecific binding and background signals . After fixation , permeabilization and blocking , cells are sequentially stained with primary and secondary antibodies . Owing to their high specificity , staining is often accomplished in only 30 min . For proteins with high cellular density , we recommend using different antibody dilutions . Chambered cover glasses ( e . g . , Lab - Tek II chambered cover glass , Nunc ) with eight wells are excellently suited to probe different concentrations of antibodies . After each staining step , washing steps are indispensable to remove unbound antibodies . Washing should be applied by purging and keeping the cells in PBS contain - ing a surfactant such as Tween - 20 . Stained cells can be stored in PBS ( pH 7 . 4 ) at 4 °C protected from light for several days until imaging . A postfixation step can be helpful to enable longer storage but is not mandatory . A complete label protocol for fixation and staining of mammalian cells is described in the PROCEDURE . The protocol given can be modified on demand according to different requirements of labels and target proteins ( see manufacturer’s instructions ) , but it works properly for the staining of cellular microtubules or actin filaments . Live - cell labeling with chemical protein tags Grow cells in Lab - Tek II chambered cover glass . To avoid nonspecific adsorption of fluorophores on the cover glass , it is recommended to coat it with glycine ( 2 M glycine solution for 30 – 60 min ) before use . Transfect ~ 2 × 10 6 cells , with the tag - vector coding the protein of interest ( e . g . , pSNAP - H2B control plasmid ) according to the protocol of the supplier using , for example , electroporation with the Amaxa Nucleofestor System . Incubate cells overnight to allow expression of the fusion protein . Prepare stock solutions of the tagged substrates TMP - ATTO 655 , SNAP - Cell TMR - Star or SNAP - Cell 505 ( benzyl guanine Rhodamine Green ) in DMSO . Dilute the stock solutions in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10 % ( vol / vol ) FCS without phenol red to final concentrations of 0 . 1 – 2 µ mol l − 1 . Fluorescence labeling of cells is © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . protocol 1002 | VOL . 6 NO . 7 | 2011 | nature protocols performed—after removal of medium and one optional washing step ( PBS or medium ) —by adding medium containing the tag substrates at various concentrations . After incubation for typically 20 – 30 min , followed by several washing steps to remove unreacted substrate , cells are imaged in phenol red – free medium or PBS . For further background reduction , labeled cells can be detached from the glass surface by trypsinization ( 0 . 25 % ) at 37 °C and transferred into cleaned , new Lab - Tek II wells . Allow cells to reattach for 1 – 3 h before imaging . To prove that cells do not show apparent ill defects af - ter imaging ( i . e . , they have normal growth and cell division ) , let them grow at 37 °C and 5 % CO 2 in medium overnight and check the condition of cells . Co - staining to verify specific labeling For nuclear co - staining , cells must be fixed with PFA or formaldehyde and permeabilized with Triton X - 100 . Hoechst 33258 or Sytox Blue is used to label DNA . When Sytox Blue is used , incubate with RNase before staining to reduce background . After washing , image cells on a standard laser - scanning microscope ( LSM ) . EQUIPMENT SETUP Construction of d STORM microscope To minimize sample drift , the d STORM setup should be mounted on a vibration - isolated optical table . The lasers should be arranged as depicted in Figure 5a , allowing their super - position by suited dichroic mirrors . Passing an acousto - optical tunable filter ( AOTF ) for wavelength selection , the laser beams can be coupled into a single - mode fiber to optimize superposition . In case of diode lasers , AOTF and fiber coupling are optional . The laser beams are focused on the back focal aperture of the oil - immersion objective using lenses L1 ( e . g . , f 1 = 25 mm ) and L2 ( e . g . , f 2 = 120 mm ; Fig . 5a ) . Take care that the laser beams are per - fectly aligned with the optical axis . This can be achieved using irises and steering mirrors in the beam path , so that the beam has two independent points of adjustment to enable control of the position and angel of the beam . Use a movable mirror to attain TIRF or inclined excitation of the sample . The fluorescence light collected by the same objective is spectrally filtered using appropriate bandpass filters and projected on an EMCCD camera mounted outside the side or base port of the microscope . In standard inverted microscopes , a tubus lens is introduced by the manufacturer enabling direct attachment of the EMCCD camera . To generate an effective pixel size of ~ 100 nm , additional lenses ( e . g . , L3 and L4 ) can be inserted into the detection path . Controlling the photoswitching ratio The lifetime of the ON state can be decreased to match the frame rate of the camera by increasing the irradiation intensity , thiol concentration ( 1 – 200 mM ) and the pH value of the solvent ( pH ~ 6 . 0 – 9 . 0 ) . The lifetime of the OFF state can be shortened by direct irradiation of the radical anions at ~ 400 nm ( ref . 62 ) or addition of oxidizing agents 101 , whereas the prolongation of the lifetime of the OFF state succeeds by oxygen removal ( e . g . , purging with nitrogen or application of an oxygen scavenging system ) 67 , 68 . As shown in Figure 5b ( numbers correspond to figure labels ) , at step one of the experiment ( 1 ) the irradiation intensity for fluo - rescence readout is kept low ( ~ 0 . 1 kW cm − 2 ) to select an appropriate sample area for d STORM , and a standard wide - field fluorescence image is recorded for later comparison . In the next step ( 2 ) the majority of fluorophores has to be switched to the OFF state applying a relatively high irradiation intensity of 5 – 30 kW cm − 2 for a few seconds . Once the desired density of fluorescence signals is achieved , the irradiation intensity is again decreased to typically 1 – 5 kW cm − 2 ( 3 ) to match the camera frame rate . Dependent on the sample , additional direct excitation of the radical anions is not necessary and the irradiation intensity of the readout laser can be kept constant throughout the experiment ( 4 ) . For other samples , additional irradiation at 405 nm is required to activate enough fluorophores ( Fig . 5c ) . Here the intensity of the activation laser can be increased slowly with proceeding acquisition time ( 1 – 3 ) to ensure a constant number of fluorophores residing in the ON state ( see also Fig . 3 ) . As simultaneous irradiation with the readout and the activation laser induces photobleaching in some fluorophores , we recommend alternating laser pulses ( Fig . 5d ) . For example , the trigger signal of the EMCCD camera ( a repetitive signal generated for every new frame ) is used to generate a pulse scheme for readout and activation using a delay and pulse generator . At the beginning of a frame , a short activation pulse ( 1 ) reactivates a subset of fluorophores residing in their nonfluorescent OFF state . The length of the activation pulse and intensity determine the number of reactivated molecules . After the activation pulse , the readout laser line is triggered for fluorescence readout and photoswitching of activated fluorophores until the next frame starts . proceDureFluorescence labeling ● tIMInG 2 – 3 d 1 | At 2 – 3 d before experiments , transfer cells into Lab - Tek II chambered cover glass . For fixed cells and antibody labeling , follow the steps in option A ( the labeling of microtubules with antibodies is used as an example ) . For labeling of actin filaments with phalloidin , see option B . For live - cell experiments , follow the steps in option C . ( a ) Fixed cells ( i ) Wash cells with PBS , add PFA to a final concentration of 4 % ( wt / vol ) and incubate for 10 min at room temperature ( 20 °C ) . ! cautIon Wear appropriate protective equipment and avoid contact with skin or eyes . After two washing steps with PBS ( incubate in each case for 5 min ) , remove PBS and add 200 µ l Triton X - 100 at a concentration of 0 . 5 % ( vol / vol ) in PBS to each chamber and incubate again for 10 min . Wash twice with PBS . ( ii ) Prepare the blocking buffer . Use NGS as blocking buffer if secondary antibody stems from goat . Dilute NGS in PBS to a final concentration of 5 % ( vol / vol ) . Alternatively , use BSA in PBS at a final concentration of 5 % ( wt / vol ) as blocking buffer . ( iii ) Remove the fixing solution and add blocking buffer ( e . g . , 150 µ l ) to each chamber and incubate for 30 min at room temperature ( 20 °C ) . ( iv ) Dissolve antibody in blocking buffer at different concentrations , e . g . , dilute mouse anti - β - tubulin antibody ( 2 mg ml − 1 ) 1 : 100 , 1 : 200 , 1 : 500 and 1 : 1 , 000 . Add different concentrations to different chambers after removing the former solution and incubate for 30 – 60 min at room temperature ( 20 °C ) . ( v ) Exchange the antibody solution in each chamber with 0 . 1 % ( vol / vol ) Tween - 20 in PBS and incubate for 5 min at room temperature ( 20 °C ) . Repeat this step twice . ( vi ) Add secondary fluorescently labeled antibody dissolved in blocking buffer ( 200 µ l ) to each sample at different concentrations and incubate for 30 – 60 min in the dark at room temperature ( 20 °C ) . For example , dilute goat anti - mouse Alexa Fluor 647 F ( ab ′ ) 2 antibody ( 2 mg ml − 1 ) 1 : 100 , 1 : 200 , 1 : 500 and 1 : 1 , 000 ( final concentration ) and add the different concentrations to similarly diluted primary antibody ( Step 4 ) . ? troublesHootInG © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 6 NO . 7 | 2011 | 1003 ( vii ) For optional nuclear co - staining for LSM experiments , add 20 µ l of a 10 µ g ml − 1 Hoechst 33258 solution ( in PBS ) during the last 10 min of incubation with secondary antibody . ( viii ) Exchange the antibody solution in each chamber with 0 . 1 % ( vol / vol ) Tween - 20 in PBS and incubate for 5 min at room temperature ( 20 °C ) . Repeat this step twice . ( ix ) ( optional ) For postfixation , fix cells for 5 min using 4 % ( wt / vol ) PFA in PBS and wash three times with PBS . Store cells in PBS at 4 °C . ( x ) Before imaging , add MEA to achieve a final thiol concentration of 10 – 200 mM ( table 1 ) . When working with cyanine fluorophores ( Cy5 , Cy5 . 5 , Cy7 and Alexa Fluor 647 , 680 , 700 ) additional removal of oxygen by application of an oxygen scavenging system ( 0 . 5 mg ml − 1 glucose oxidase , 40 µ g ml − 1 catalase , 10 % ( wt / vol ) glucose ) is recommended . If such a system is used , seal the chamber with a cover slip or a thin silicon sheet ( press - to - seal ) . ? troublesHootInG ( b ) labeling actin with phalloidin in fixed cells ( i ) Wash cells with PBS , add PFA to a final concentration of 4 % ( wt / vol ) and incubate for 10 min at room temperature ( 20 °C ) . ! cautIon Wear appropriate protective equipment and avoid contact with skin or eyes . After two washing steps with PBS ( incubate in each case for 5 min ) , remove PBS and add 200 µ l Triton X - 100 at a concentration of 0 . 5 % ( vol / vol ) in PBS to each chamber and incubate again for 10 min . Wash twice with PBS . ( ii ) Prepare the blocking buffer . Use BSA in PBS at a final concentration of 5 % ( wt / vol ) as blocking buffer . ( iii ) Remove the fixing solution and add blocking buffer ( e . g . , 150 µ l ) to each chamber and incubate for 30 min at room temperature ( 20 °C ) . ( iv ) After blocking the fixed and permeabilized cells , label actin filaments by adding Alexa Fluor 488 – phalloidin or Alexa Fluor 647 – phalloidin ( stock solution 1 µ mol l − 1 ) , diluted in PBS to a volume of 10 − 7 to 10 − 9 mol per liter ( typically , 10 − 8 mol per liter ) . Incubate for 30 – 60 min in the dark at room temperature ( 20 °C ) . ? troublesHootInG ( v ) Exchange phalloidin solution by 0 . 1 % ( vol / vol ) Tween - 20 in PBS in each chamber and incubate for 5 min at room temperature ( 20 °C ) . Repeat this step twice . Store cells in PBS at 4 °C . ( vi ) ( optional ) For postfixation , fix cells for 5 min using 4 % ( vol / vol ) PFA in PBS and wash three times with PBS . Store cells in PBS at 4 °C . ( vii ) Before imaging , add MEA to achieve a final thiol concentration of 10 – 200 mM ( table 1 ) . When working with cyanine fluorophores ( Cy5 , Cy5 . 5 , Cy7 and Alexa Fluor 647 , 680 , 700 ) , additional removal of oxygen by application of an oxygen scavenging system ( 0 . 5 mg ml − 1 glucose oxidase , 40 µ g ml − 1 catalase , 10 % ( wt / vol ) glucose ) is recommended . If such a system is used , seal the chamber with a cover slip or a thin silicon sheet ( press - to - seal ) . ? troublesHootInG ( c ) live cells ( i ) Block the surface of the cover glass with 2 M glycine for 30 – 60 min . ( ii ) Transfer cells into Lab - Tek II chambered cover glass . ( iii ) At 1 d after transfer , transfect cells with a tag - vector encoding the protein of interest according to the protocol given by the supplier . For example , to label the core protein H2B with TMP - ATTO 655 , transfect cells with the H2B - eDHFR plasmid by electroporation and incubate cells overnight in growth medium 52 . ( iv ) Dilute stock solution of fluorescent substrates ( e . g . , TMP - ATTO 655 , SNAP - Cell TMR - Star and SNAP - Cell 505 ) in phenol red – free growth medium to 0 . 1 – 2 µ mol per liter . ( v ) Wash cells once with PBS or medium at room temperature ( 20 °C ) before adding different concentrations of fluorescent substrates ( e . g . , 0 . 2 , 0 . 5 , 1 and 2 µ mol per liter ) . Incubate at 37 °C and 5 % CO 2 for 20 – 30 min . ( vi ) Wash cells three times with 0 . 1 % ( vol / vol ) Tween - 20 in PBS or with medium without phenol red . Add phenol red – free medium or PBS before imaging at room temperature ( 20 °C ) . For optional nuclear co - staining experiments by LSM go to Step 1C ( vii ) . ( vii ) Repeat Step 1B ( i ) if cells are not fixed . For nuclear co - staining use Hoechst 33258 or Sytox Blue . If Sytox Blue is used , incubate in PBS containing 10 mg RNase for 30 – 60 min at 37 °C . After a washing step , add Sytox Blue to a final concentration of 500 nM and incubate for 30 min before washing with PBS . Hoechst 33258 is added without blocking at a concentration of 2 – 5 µ g ml − 1 in PBS for 10 min . Wash three times with PBS before imaging on a LSM . Microscope setup ● tIMInG 0 . 5 – 1 h 2 | Turn on lasers , adjust to a low laser power ( 1 – 2 mW ) and block beams using appropriate shutters in the excitation path . Allow gas lasers to warm up for 20 min . © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . protocol 1004 | VOL . 6 NO . 7 | 2011 | nature protocols 3 | Measure laser power in focus after the polychromic mirror before entering the objective . Determine homogeneously irradiated area imaging the fluorescence signal of a fluorophore or QD solution ( ~ 10 − 8 M ) on the EMCCD camera to calculate the irradiation intensity in kW cm − 2 . ! cautIon Always exercise laser safety precautions when aligning lasers . 4 | Use appropriate dichroic mirrors and bandpass filter to select the desired irradiation wavelength and block stray light . ! cautIon To avoid eye damage , never look through the oculars without having confirmed that filter combinations are compatible with the lasers in use . 5 | Align the camera using the ×10 objective and a reticle by centering the image on the display and bringing it into focus applying a low lamp intensity . Change to an imaging oil - immersion objective and determine pixel size using a micrometer scale . 6 | Use the oil - immersion objective and overlay laser beams using the calibration sample ( QDs ) to verify that single molecules can be imaged with the setup . Single QDs can be easily identified by their size ( resulting in a diffraction - limited PSF ) and their irradiation intensity - dependent blinking . 7 | To control the irradiation profile of the different lasers , use the oil - immersion objective and excite a concentrated QD655 solution or a densely coated QD655 surface . The emission profile recorded on the EMCCD camera should be independent of the irradiation laser used . Use the camera software to obtain a snapshot of the different irradiation profiles to calculate the excitation intensity . If necessary , adjust laser alignment using steering mirrors in the irradiation path . ? troublesHootInG 8 | Move mirror M1 ( Fig . 5a ) to achieve TIRF using a QD calibration sample ( i . e . , QDs adsorbed on a bare cover slip ) . If TIRF or HILO ( highly inclined and laminated optical sheet ) is accomplished , the signal - to - background ratio increases substantially . ! cautIon Lower the gain of the camera to prevent damage of the chip when moving from epi - illumination to TIRF because the irradiation intensity increases strongly . 9 | To find the optimal conditions for imaging , move the beam completely out of the sample , then move slowly back into TIRF until the fluorescence intensity and signal - to - background ratio achieve their maximum values . If necessary , adjust the focus so that the sample is in the focal plane again . 10 | To achieve inclined illumination 78 , image the fluorescently labeled sample ( i . e . , a cell ) by epi - illumination . While moving the mirror toward TIRF geometry at a certain point , the incident laser beam is highly inclined by a large refraction and is laminated as a thin optical sheet at the specimen side . Inclined illumination is optimal when fluorescence signals inside the nucleus of a living cell can be imaged with a high signal - to - background ratio . ? troublesHootInG Data acquisition ● tIMInG 0 . 1 – 10 min 11 | Select a cell by the oculars using transmitted light and find the focal plane . Switch to camera and fluorescence mode , remove the shutter from the laser to be used or select appropriate wavelength by the AOTF . After proper sample alignment by fluorescence imaging under low excitation conditions ( < 0 . 1 kW cm − 2 ) , reduce the area of the camera chip by software ( binning ) to accelerate data acquisition and reduce data volume . ? troublesHootInG 12 | Prepare the camera software to take a kinetic series of 4 , 000 – 100 , 000 frames dependent on the labeling density and complexity of the structure . We recommend starting with 5 , 000 – 10 , 000 frames and optimize the number by inspection of the quality of reconstructed d STORM images . 13 | Increase irradiation intensity to 5 – 30 kW cm − 2 for a few seconds to transfer the majority of fluorophores to the OFF state so that only a sparse subset of fluorophores resides in the ON state in each image ( Fig . 3 ) . For super - resolution imaging in living cells , use irradiation intensities of 0 . 5 – 5 kW cm − 2 . For fixed cells , higher irradiation intensities can be applied ( e . g . , up to 50 kW cm − 2 ) to increase photoswitching rates and frame rates up to 1 kHz . © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 6 NO . 7 | 2011 | 1005 14 | Reduce integration time so that one fluorophore is visible only for about one to four frames at a time . If necessary , adjust the focus to ensure that the spots show a symmetric PSF , indicating that they are in the focal plane . The camera gain can also be adjusted to yield a better signal - to - background ratio . 15 | Ensure an optimal fluorophore density ( i . e . , 0 . 05 – 1 fluorophore per µ m 2 ) ( Fig 3a ) . If fluorophore density is too low , use additional direct excitation of intermediate radical ions at 405 nm to activate fluorophores ( typically , use 0 . 01 – 0 . 1 kW cm − 2 at 405 nm ) . For cyanine fluorophores 488 , 514 or 532 nm light can be used alternatively for activation . Sometimes the intensity of the activation laser has to be increased with proceeding acquisition time to activate a constant number of fluorophores ( Fig . 5c ) . Ideally , the activation laser is used only in short pulses of a length of a few micro - to milliseconds to reduce autofluorescence , cell damage and photobleaching of fluorophores ( Fig . 5d ) . ? troublesHootInG 16 | Start data acquisition with a frame rate of 10 – 100 Hz . Data analysis ● tIMInG 0 . 1 – 10 min 17 | Estimate an amplitude threshold and a PSF covariance matrix from your data . A good estimate for the threshold is 15 times the background noise s . d . The covariance matrix can be estimated by fitting Gaussian functions to a number of visually well - separated spots and averaging their covariance matrices . ? troublesHootInG 18 | To generate a super - resolved image bin localization , select a pixel size to determine the distance of bins and an intensity transfer function to determine the intensity assigned to a given number of localizations . A pixel size of 10 – 20 nm and a histogram normalization with a weight of 0 . 3 usually gives good results . ? troublesHootInG ? troublesHootInG Troubleshooting advice can be found in table 2 . table 2 | Troubleshooting table . step problem possible reason solution 1A ( vi ) , 1B ( iv ) High background fluorescence Blocking missed / failed Modify blocking protocol , always use fresh serum ( e . g . , BSA , NGS ) High background in reconstructed images Antibody or probe degraded Use new freshly prepared antibodies or probes Fixation artifacts Permeabilization is too strong Blocking missed / failed Modify fixation protocol Modify permeabilization protocol Modify blocking protocol , always use fresh serum ( e . g . , BSA , NGS ) Low fluorescence intensity pH is incompatible with antibody - antigen or probe binding Check pH ; pH should be in the range of 6 – 9 Apply postfixation Step 6 1A ( x ) , 1B ( vii ) Cyanine fluorophores do not show reversible photoswitching pH of buffer is too low Check pH and increase to pH 7 – 9 MEA concentration is too low Increase MEA concentration up to 100 mM Oxygen was not efficiently removed Use fresh oxygen scavenging system 7 , 10 Lateral or axial drift Immersion oil is contaminated Remove immersion oil , clean objective and replace with fresh , clean immersion oil Dry all slices and Lab - Teks before imaging Discard or seal leaky Lab - Teks Spots appear dim Integration time does not match τ on Increase integration time ( continued ) © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . protocol 1006 | VOL . 6 NO . 7 | 2011 | nature protocols table 2 | Troubleshooting table ( continued ) . step problem possible reason solution Apply higher irradiation intensity Change to highly inclined illumination Electron multiplying is set too low Increase electron multiplying gain Singlet state quenching by reducing agent Decrease amount of reducing agent Decrease pH of the solvent Spots appear elliptical Lenses are misaligned Align optical components 11 Transfected cells are hard to find Low transfection efficiency Use a different cell line that guarantees higher transfection rates Use a different transfection reagent or use stable transfected cells High background signal in live - cell experiments Nonspecific adsorption of fluorophore substrates on cover glass Block surface by coating with glycine or trypsinize and transfer cells to new cover glass Low density of cells Increase cell density High concentration of unbound substrate due to low transfection efficiency Improve transfection efficiency and use lower substrate concentration Leakage of substrate due to necrotic cells Image cells immediately after last washing step , reduce exposure time under nonphysi - ological conditions ( e . g . , room temperature ) ; work quickly Cellular structures appear blurred Lateral or axial sample drift Verify sample drift using the calibration sample and realign focal plane Change immersion oil Movement of target molecules in living cells Increase irradiation intensity as much as possible to shorten total acquisition time and increase temporal resolution High background from other image planes Dense , three - dimensional structure Check TIRF or highly inclined illumination 15 Fluorophores do not recover Fluorophores are switched off very efficiently Use activation laser ( 405 nm for rhodamine dye radicals , 488 / 514 / 532 nm for cyanines ) Reduce intensity of readout laser Fluorophores are photobleached Apply oxygen scavenger system Reduce excitation intensity Alternate activation and readout laser Enzymes in oxygen scavenger system are degraded Use freshly prepared enzyme solution or frozen working aliquots Reducing agent is degraded Always use freshly prepared MEA solution or frozen working aliquots pH of the solvent is too low / high Check pH ; pH should be in the range of 6 – 9 Probes are degraded Use new antibodies / fluorophores Fluorescent probes , e . g . , antibodies , have a high degree of labeling ( DOL ) Purchase antibodies with low DOL ( ~ 1 ) Label antibodies with lower DOL ( ~ 1 ) High fluorophore density during d STORM acquisition Too many fluorophores reside in their fluorescent ON state Increase irradiation intensity ( continued ) © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 6 NO . 7 | 2011 | 1007 ● tIMInG Step 1 , Fluorescence labeling : starting with cell growth , transfection or fixation , approximately 2 – 3 d Steps 2 – 10 , Microscope setup : for experts , only a few minutes ( but with less experience , it takes up to 1 h ) Steps 11 – 16 , Data acquisition : 0 . 1 – 10 min , depending on the labeling density / complexity of the structure and photoswitching ratio ( i . e . , the applied irradiation intensity ) Steps 17 and 18 , Data analysis : can theoretically be run in parallel on a standard PC . However , finding an optimal threshold can sometimes take a few minutes ( 0 . 1 – 10 min ) antIcIpateD results Figure 3 shows results anticipated when imaging β - tubulin in fixed cells with fluorescently labeled antibodies . The data presented underscore the importance of additional excitation of the radical anions at shorter wavelengths in order to control the number of fluorophores residing in the ON state and demonstrate exemplarily the influence of the number of localizations or frames used on the quality of the reconstructed d STORM image . Live - cell d STORM images of the core histone protein H2B in eukaryotic cell lines can be performed with TMP - tags 52 and SNAP - tags 53 , and some anticipated results are shown in Figure 6 . The results demonstrate the importance of the efficient reduction of nonspecific binding of fluorophores to cellular structures and to the cover slip . Whereas the two SNAP - tags tested so far ( SNAP - Cell 505 and SNAP - Cell TMR - Star ) can be used successfully for d STORM in HeLa and COS - 7 cells , other cell lines , such as mouse 3T3 and mouse C2C12 cells , show different behavior ( i . e . , specific labeling of nuclear structures is influenced by the fluoro - phore used ) 53 . table 2 | Troubleshooting table ( continued ) . step problem possible reason solution Stop activation of fluorophores Use antibodies with lower DOL The camera integration time is too long Reduce camera integration time to match τ on Fluorophore density too low during d STORM acquisition Label density is too low Increase label density Activate more fluorophores by increasing the irradiation intensity at 405 nm ( rhodamines ) or 488 / 514 / 532 nm ( cyanines ) 17 , 18 Randomly scattered localizations all over the image Threshold level is too low Increase threshold stepwise by 10 % Noncontinuous structures in recon - structed images in fixed cells Acquired image stack is too short Increase the number of frames Antibody is degraded Use freshly prepared antibodies Fixation artifacts Repeat or modify fixation protocol Number of localizations is too small Initial threshold is set too high Reduce initial threshold Acquired frames do not contain enough fluorescent spots Increase activation irradiation intensity Label density of structures is too low Repeat experiment with higher label density Structures in reconstructed image are biased or blurred , especially in crossing areas Inappropriate thresholds Increase asymmetry threshold Increase lower photon threshold and set / decrease upper photon threshold d STORM imaging was done with inappropriate photoswitching rates Perform imaging with enhanced photoswitch - ing rates by tuning excitation and activation intensity and / or pH and reducing agent concentration Reduce label density © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . protocol 1008 | VOL . 6 NO . 7 | 2011 | nature protocols acknowleDGMents We gratefully acknowledge support from G . Wiebusch , B . Vogel , U . Endesfelder , T . Holm and S . Proppert . We thank V . W . Cornish and R . Wombacher for providing the TMP substrates and the H2B - eDHFR plasmid . This work was supported by the Biophotonics and the Systems Biology Initiative ( FORSYS ) of the German Ministry of Research and Education ( BMBF ) . autHor contrIbutIons S . v . d . L . , A . L . , T . K . , M . Heidbreder , S . W . , M . Heilemann and M . S . conceived and designed the experiments ; S . v . d . L . , A . L . , T . K . , M . Heidbreder and S . W . performed the experiments ; M . Heilemann and M . S . supervised the project ; and M . Heilemann , S . v . d . L . and M . S . wrote the paper . coMpetInG FInancIal Interests The authors declare no competing financial interests . Published online at http : / / www . natureprotocols . com / . Reprints and permissions information is available online at http : / / www . nature . com / reprints / index . html . 1 . Abbe , E . Beiträge zur Theorie des Mikroskops und der mikroskopischen Wahrnehmung . Arch . Mikrosk . Anat . 9 , 413 – 487 ( 1873 ) . 2 . Born , M . & Wolf , E . Principles of Optics : Electromagnetic Theory of Propagation , Interference and Diffraction of Light ( Cambridge University Press , 1997 ) . 3 . Betzig , E . & Trautman , J . K . Near - field optics : microscopy , spectroscopy , and surface modification beyond the diffraction limit . Science 257 , 189 – 195 ( 1992 ) . 4 . Hell , S . & Stelzer , E . H . K . Fundamental improvement of resolution with a 4Pi - confocal fluorescence microscope using two - photon excitation . Opt . Commun . 93 , 277 – 282 ( 1992 ) . 5 . Hell , S . W . & Wichmann , J . Breaking the diffraction resolution limit by stimulated emission : stimulated - emission - depletion fluorescence microscopy . Opt . Lett . 19 , 780 – 782 ( 1994 ) . 6 . Hell , SW . Far - field optical nanoscopy . Science 316 , 1153 – 1158 ( 2007 ) . 7 . Gustafsson , M . G . Surpassing the lateral resolution limit by a factor of two using structured illumination microscopy . J . Microsc . 198 , 82 – 87 ( 2000 ) . 8 . Kner , P . , Chhun , B . B . , Griffis , E . R . , Winoto , L . & Gustafsson , M . G . Super - resolution video microscopy of live cells by structured illumination . Nat . Methods 6 , 339 – 342 ( 2009 ) . 9 . Bobroff , N . Position measurement with a resolution and noise limited instrument . Rev . Sci . Instrum . 57 , 1152 – 1157 ( 1986 ) . 10 . Betzig , E . Proposed method for molecular optical imaging . Opt . Lett . 20 , 237 – 239 ( 1995 ) . 11 . Bornfleth , H . , Sätzler , K . , Eils , R . & Cremer , C . High - precision distance measurements and volume - conserving segmentation of objects near and below the resolution limit in three - dimensional confocal fluorescence microscopy . J . Microsc . 189 , 118 – 136 ( 1998 ) . 12 . Lacoste , Th . D . et al . Ultrahigh - resolution multicolour colocalization of single fluorescent probes . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 9461 – 9466 ( 2000 ) . 13 . Heilemann , M . et al . High - resolution colocalization of single dye molecules by fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy . Anal . Chem . 74 , 3511 – 3517 ( 2002 ) . 14 . Thompson , R . E . , Larson , D . R . & Webb , W . W . Precise nanometer localization analysis for individual fluorescent probes . Biophys . J . 82 , 2775 – 2783 ( 2002 ) . 15 . Yildiz , A . et al . Myosin V walks hand - over - hand : single fluorophore imaging with 1 . 5 - nm localization . Science 300 , 2061 – 2065 ( 2003 ) . 16 . Qu , X . , Wu , D . , Mets , L . & Scherer , N . F . Nanometer - localized multiple single - molecule fluorescene microscopy . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 11298 – 11303 ( 2004 ) . 17 . Lidke , K . A . , Rieger , B . , Jovin , T . M . & Heintzmann , R . Superresolution by localization of quantum dots using blinking statistics . Opt . Exp . 13 , 7052 – 7062 ( 2005 ) . 18 . Betzig , E . et al . Imaging intracellular fluorescent proteins at nanometer resolution . Science 313 , 1642 – 1645 ( 2006 ) . 19 . Hess , S . T . , Girirajan , T . P . & Mason , M . D . Ultra - high resolution imaging by fluorescence photoactivation localization microscopy . Biophys . J . 91 , 4258 – 4272 ( 2006 ) . 20 . Rust , M . J . , Bates , B . & Zhuang , X . Sub - diffraction - limit imaging by stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( STORM ) . Nat . Methods 3 , 793 – 795 ( 2006 ) . 21 . Heilemann , M . et al . Subdiffraction - resolution fluorescence imaging with conventional fluorescent probes . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 47 , 6172 – 6176 ( 2008 ) . 22 . Heilemann , M . , van de Linde , S . , Mukherjee , A . & Sauer , M . Super - resolution imaging with small organic fluorophores . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 48 , 6903 – 6908 ( 2009 ) . 23 . Lemmer , P . et al . SPDM : light microscopy with single - molecule resolution at the nanoscale . Appl . Phys . B 93 , 1 – 12 ( 2008 ) . 24 . Baddeley , D . et al . Light - induced dark states of organic fluochromes enable 30 nm resolution imaging in standard media . Biophys . J . 96 , L22 – L24 ( 2009 ) . 25 . Gunkel , M . et al . Dual color localization microscopy of cellular nanostructures . Biotechnol . J . 4 , 927 – 938 ( 2009 ) . 26 . Fölling , J . et al . Fluorescence nanoscopy by ground - state depletion and single - molecule return . Nat . Methods 5 , 943 – 945 ( 2008 ) . 27 . Steinhauer , C . , Forthmann , C . , Vogelsang , J . & Tinnefeld , P . Superresolution microscopy on the basis of engineered dark states . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 130 , 16840 – 16841 ( 2008 ) . 28 . Vogelsang , J . , Cordes , T . , Forthmann , C . , Steinhauer , C . & Tinnefeld , P . Controlling the fluorescence of ordinary oxazine dyes for single - molecule switching and superresolution microscopy . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 8107 – 8112 ( 2009 ) . 29 . Dertinger , T . , Colyer , R . , Iyer , G . , Weiss , S . & Enderlein , J . Fast background - free 3D superresolution optical fluctuation imaging ( SOFI ) . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 22287 – 22292 ( 2009 ) . 30 . Dertinger , T . , Heilemann , M . , Vogel , R . , Sauer , M . & Weiss , S . Super - resolution optical fluctuation imaging with organic dyes . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 49 , 9441 – 9443 ( 2010 ) . 31 . Flors , C . et al . A stroboscopic approach for fast photoactivation - localization microscopy with dronpa mutants . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 129 , 13970 – 13977 ( 2007 ) . 32 . Flors , C . , Ravarani , C . N . & Dryden , D . T . Super - resolution imaging of DNA labeled with intercalating dyes . Chemphyschem 10 , 2201 – 2204 ( 2009 ) . 33 . Gould , T . J . , Verkhusha , V . V . & Hess , S . T . Imaging biological structures with fluorescence photoactivation localization microscopy . Nat . Protoc . 4 , 291 – 308 ( 2009 ) . 34 . Shroff , H . , White , H . & Betzig , E . Photoactivation localization microscopy ( PALM ) of adhesion complexes . Curr . Protoc . Cell Biol . 41 , 4 . 21 . 1 – 4 . 21 . 27 ( 2008 ) . 35 . Ji , N . , Shroff , H . , Zhong , H & Betzig , E . Advances in the speed and resolution of light microscopy . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 18 , 605 – 616 ( 2008 ) . 36 . Hell , S . W . Microscopy and its focal switch . Nat . Methods 6 , 24 – 32 ( 2009 ) . 37 . Huang , B . , Bates , M . & Zhuang , X . Super - resolution fluorescence microscopy . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 78 , 993 – 1016 ( 2009 ) . 38 . Heilemann , M . Fluorescence microscopy beyond the diffraction limit . J . Biotechnol . 149 , 243 – 251 ( 2010 ) . 39 . Lippincott - Schwartz , J . & Patterson , G . H . Fluorescent proteins : a cell biologist’s user guide . Methods Cell Biol . 85 , 45 – 61 ( 2008 ) . 40 . Shroff , H . , Galbraith , C . G . , Galbraith , J . A . & Betzig , E . Live - cell photoactivated localization microscopy of nanoscale adhesion dynamics . Nat . Methods 5 , 417 – 423 ( 2008 ) . 41 . Manley , S . et al . High - density mapping of single - molecule trajectories with photoactivated localization microscopy . Nat . Methods 5 , 155 – 157 ( 2008 ) . 42 . Ormo , M . et al . Crystal structure of the Aequorea Victoria green fluorescent protein . Science 273 , 1392 – 1395 ( 1996 ) . 43 . Shannon , C . E . Communication in the presence of noise . Proc . Inst . Radio Eng . 37 , 10 – 21 ( 1949 ) . 44 . Shaner , N . C . Improving the photostability of bright monomeric orange and red fluorescent proteins . Nat . Methods 5 , 545 – 551 ( 2008 ) . 45 . Tang , J . , Akerboom , J . , Vaziri , A . , Looger , L . L . & Shank , S . V . Near - isotropic 3D optical nanoscopy with photon - limited chromophores . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 10068 – 10073 ( 2010 ) . 46 . van de Linde , S . , Sauer , M . & Heilemann , M . Subdiffraction - resolution fluorescence imaging of proteins in the inner mitochondrial membrane with photoswitchable fluorophores . J . Struct . Biol . 164 , 250 – 254 ( 2008 ) . 47 . van de Linde , S . , Kasper , R . , Heilemann , M . & Sauer , M . Photoswitching microscopy with standard fluorophores . Appl . Phys . B . 93 , 725 – 731 ( 2008 ) . 48 . Heilemann , M . , Dedecker , P . , Hofkens , J . & Sauer , M . Photoswitches : key molecules for subdiffraction - resolution fluorescecne imaging and molecular quantification . Laser Photon . Rev . 3 , 180 – 202 ( 2009 ) . 49 . van de Linde , S . et al . Multicolor photoswitching microscopy for subdiffraction - resolution fluorescence imaging . Photochem . Photobiol . Sci . 8 , 465 – 469 ( 2009 ) . 50 . Owen , D . M . et al . PALM imaging and cluster analysis of protein heterogeneity at the cell surface . J . Biophotonics 3 , 446 – 454 ( 2009 ) . 51 . Endesfelder , U . , van de Linde , S . , Wolter , S . , Sauer , M . & Heilemann , M . Subdiffraction - resolution fluorescence microscopy of myosin - actin motility . Chemphyschem 11 , 836 – 840 ( 2010 ) . 52 . Wombacher , R . et al . Live cell super - resolution imaging with trimethoprim conjugates . Nat . Methods 7 , 717 – 719 ( 2010 ) . 53 . Klein , T . et al . Live - cell d STORM with SNAP - tag fusion proteins . Nat . Methods 8 , 7 – 9 ( 2011 ) . © 2011 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 6 NO . 7 | 2011 | 1009 54 . Wolter , S . et al . Real - time computation of subdiffraction - resolution fluorescence images , . J . Microsc . 237 , 12 – 22 ( 2010 ) . 55 . Beaumont , P . C . , Johnson , D . G . & Parsons , B . J . Excited state and free radical properties of rhodamine dyes in aqueous solution : a laser flash photolysis and pulse radiolysis study . J . Photochem . Photobiol . 107 , 175 – 183 ( 1997 ) . 56 . Doose , S . , Neuweiler , H . & Sauer , M . Fluorescence quenching by photoinduced electron transfer : a reporter for conformational dynamics of macromolecules . Chemphyschem 10 , 1389 – 1398 ( 2009 ) . 57 . Görner , H . Oxygen uptake induced by electron transfer from donors to the triplet state of methylene blue and xanthene dyes in air - saturated aqueous solution . Photochem . Photobiol . Sci . 7 , 371 – 376 ( 2008 ) . 58 . Burner , U . , Jantschko , W . & Obinger , C . Kinetics of oxidation of aliphatic and aromatic thiols by myeloperoxidase compounds I and II . FEBS Lett . 443 , 290 – 296 ( 1999 ) . 59 . Burner , U . & Obinger , C . Transient - state and steady - state kinetics of the oxidation of aliphatic and aromatic thiols by horseradish peroxidase . FEBS Lett . 411 , 269 – 274 ( 1997 ) . 60 . Madej , E . & Wardman , P . The oxidizing power of the glutathione thiyl radical as measured by its electrode potential at physiological pH . Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 462 , 94 – 102 ( 2007 ) . 61 . Wardmann , P . Reduction potentials of one - electron couples involving free radicals in aqueous solution . J . Phys . Chem . Ref . Data 18 , 1637 – 1755 ( 1989 ) . 62 . van de Linde , S . et al . Photoinduced formation of reversible dye radicals and their impact on super - resolution imaging . Photochem . Photobiol . Sci . 10 , 499 – 506 ( 2011 ) . 63 . Michaelis , L . , Schubert , M . P . & Granick , S . Semiquinone radicals of thiazines . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 62 , 204 – 211 ( 1940 ) . 64 . Heineken , F . W . , Bruin , M . & Bruin , F . ESR investigation of some thiazine and oxazine dye radicals . J . Chem Phys . 37 , 1479 – 1482 ( 1962 ) . 65 . Kottke , T . , van de Linde , S . , Sauer , M . , Kakorin , S . & Heilemann , M . Identification of the product of photoswitching of an oxazine fluorophore using FT - IR difference spectroscopy . J . Phys . Chem . Lett . 1 , 3156 – 3159 ( 2010 ) . 66 . Sies , H . Glutathione and its role in cellular functions . Free Radic . Biol . Med . 27 , 916 – 921 ( 1999 ) . 67 . Benesch , R . E . & Benesch , R . Enzymatic removal of oxygen for polarography and related methods . Science 118 , 447 – 448 ( 1953 ) . 68 . Rasnik , I . , McKinney , S . A . & Ha , T . Nonblinking and long - lasting single - molecule fluorescence imaging . Nat . Methods 3 , 891 – 893 ( 2006 ) . 69 . Lenhard , J . R . & Cameron , A . D . Electrochemistry and electronic spectra of cyanine dye radicals in acetonitrile . J . Phys . Chem . 97 , 4916 – 4925 ( 1993 ) . 70 . Dempsey , G . T . et al . Photoswitching mechanism of cyanine dyes . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 131 , 18192 – 18193 ( 2009 ) . 71 . Lord , S . J . et al . A photoactivatable push - pull fluorophore for single - molecule imaging in live cells . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 130 , 9204 – 9205 ( 2008 ) . 72 . Lee , H . D . et al . Superresolution imaging of targeted proteins in fixed and living cells using photoactivatable organic fluorophores . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 132 , 15099 – 15101 ( 2010 ) . 73 . Fölling , J . et al . Photochromic rhodamines provide nanoscopy with optical sectioning . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 46 , 6266 – 6270 ( 2007 ) . 74 . Bossi , M . et al . Multicolor far - field fluorescence nanoscopy through isolated detection of distinct molecular species . Nano Lett . 8 , 2463 – 2468 ( 2008 ) . 75 . van de Linde , S . , Wolter , S . , Heilemann , M . & Sauer , M . The effect of photoswitching kinetics and labeling densities on super - resolution fluorescence imaging . J . Biotechnol . 149 , 260 – 266 ( 2010 ) . 76 . Cordes , T . et al . Resolving single - molecule assembled patterns with superresolution blink - microscopy . Nano Lett . 10 , 645 – 651 ( 2010 ) . 77 . Vogelsang , J . et al . Make them blink : probes for super - resolution microscopy . Chemphyschem 11 , 2475 – 2490 ( 2010 ) . 78 . Tokunaga , M . , Imamoto , N . & Sakata - Sogawa , K . Highly inclined thin illumination enables clear single - molecule imaging in cells . Nat . Methods 5 , 159 – 161 ( 2008 ) . 79 . Pavani , S . R . et al . Three - dimensional , single - molecule fluorescence imaging beyond the diffraction limit by using a double - helix point spread function . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 2995 – 2999 ( 2009 ) . 80 . Shtengel , G . et al . Interferometric fluorescent super - resolution microscopy resolves 3D cellular ultrastructure . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 3125 – 3130 ( 2009 ) . 81 . Juette , M . F . et al . Three - dimensional sub - 100 nm resolution fluorescecne microscopy of thick samples . Nat . Methods 5 , 527 – 529 ( 2008 ) . 82 . Huang , B . , Wang , W . Q . , Bates , M . & Zhuang , X . W . Three - dimensional super - resolution imaging by stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy . Science 319 , 810 – 813 ( 2008 ) . 83 . Neubeck , A . & van Gool , L . Efficient non - maximum suppression . in ICPR ’06 : Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Pattern Recognition . Hong Kong , pp 850 – 855 ( IEEE Computer Society , 2006 ) . 84 . Galassi , M . et al . Gnu Scientific Library : Reference Manual ( Network Theory , 2003 ) . 85 . Yaroslavsky , L . P . Digital Picture Processing . ( Springer , 1985 ) . 86 . Thomann , D . , Dorn , J . , Sorger , P . K . & Danuser , G . Automatic fluorescent tag localization II : improvement in super - resolution by relative tracking . J . Microsc . 211 , 230 – 248 ( 2003 ) . 87 . Hess , S . T . et al . Dynamic clustered distribution of hemaglutinin resolved at 40 nm in living cell membranes discriminates between raft theories . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 17370 – 17375 ( 2007 ) . 88 . Zhang , J . , Campbell , R . E . , Ting , A . Y . & Tsien , R . Y . Creating new fluorescent probes for cell biology . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 906 – 918 ( 2002 ) . 89 . Lippincott - Schwartz , J . & Patterson , G . H . Development and use of fluorescent protein markers in living cells . Science 300 , 87 – 91 ( 2003 ) . 90 . Miyawaki , A . , Sawano , A . & Kogure , T . Lighting up cells : labelling proteins with fluorophores . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , S1 – S7 ( 2003 ) . 91 . Riedl , J . et al . Lifeact : a versatile marker to visualize F - actin . Nat . Methods 5 , 605 – 607 ( 2008 ) . 92 . Griffin , B . A . , Adams , S . R . & Tsien , R . Y . Specific covalent labeling of recombinant protein molecules inside live cells . Science 281 , 269 – 272 ( 1998 ) . 93 . Keppler , A . et al . A general method for the covalent labeling of fusion proteins with small molecules in vivo . Nat . Biotechnol . 21 , 86 – 89 ( 2003 ) . 94 . Keppler , A . , Pick , H . , Arrivoli , C . , Vogel , H . & Johnsson , K . Labelling of fusion proteins with synthetic fluorophores in live cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 9955 – 9959 ( 2004 ) . 95 . Los , G . V . et al . HaloTag : a novel protein labeling technology for cell imaging and protein analysis . ACS Chem . Biol . 3 , 373 – 382 ( 2008 ) . 96 . Miller , L . W . & Cornish , V . W . Selective chemical labeling of proteins in living cells . Curr . Opin . Chem . Biol . 9 , 56 – 61 ( 2005 ) . 97 . Miller , L . W . , Cai , Y . , Sheetz , M . P . & Cornish , V . W . In vivo protein labelling with trimethoprim conjugates : a flexible chemical tag . Nat . Methods 2 , 255 – 257 ( 2005 ) . 98 . Gallagher , S . et al . An in vivo covalent TMP - tag based on proximity - induced reactivity . ACS Chem . Biol . 7 , 547 – 556 ( 2009 ) . 99 . Michalet , X . et al . Quantum dots for live cells , in vivo imaging , and diagnostics . Science 307 , 538 – 544 ( 2005 ) . 100 . Robinson , R . W . & Snyder , J . A . An innovative fixative for cytoskeletal components allows high resolution in colocalization studies using immunofluorescence techniques . Histochem . Cell . Biol . 122 , 1 – 5 ( 2004 ) . 101 . Vogelsang , J . et al . A reducing and oxidizing system minimizes photobleaching and blinking of fluorescent dyes . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 47 , 5465 – 5469 ( 2008 ) .