The Show Must Go On : A Conceptual Model of Conducting Synchronous Participatory Design With Children Online Kung Jin Lee Information School , University of Washington , Seattle , Washington , United States kjl26 @ uw . edu Harkiran Kaur Saluja Information School , University of Washington harkisa9 @ uw . edu Yilin Zeng Human Centered Design & Engineering , University of Washington yilinz8 @ uw . edu Wendy Roldan Human Centered Design & Engineering , University Of Washington wr4 @ uw . edu Sungmin Na Department of Sociology , University of Washington sn815 @ uw . edu Jin Ha Lee Information School , University of Washington jinhalee @ uw . edu Tian Qi Zhu Human Centered Design & Engineering , University Of Washington azhu98 @ uw . edu Britnie Chin Human Centered Design & Engineering , University of Washington chinb8 @ uw . edu Jason Yip Information School , University of Washington jcyip @ uw . edu ABSTRACT Co - designing with children in an online environment is increasingly important due to external factors , such as the COVID - 19 pandemic , and the diversifcation and inclusion of youth participants . Many prior studies about co - design with youth focus on co - located or asynchronous online sessions . However , conducting synchronous online co - design sessions adds layers of complexity and uncertainty to collaboration . This paper introduces a model explicating factors to consider when co - designing with children synchronously in an online space . We examined ten consecutive intergenerational par - ticipatory design sessions online where children ( ages 7 - 11 ) and adults designed new technologies . Along with highlighting unex - pected moments and interactions , we use theories of improvisation to guide our understanding of dynamic situations that are out of the control of researchers . This work contributes to improving the - oretical understanding of improvisation as a method of inquiry for co - designing with youth , and ofers practical suggestions for suitable online co - design techniques and implementation . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing ; • Human computer interac - tion ( HCI ) ; • HCI theory , concepts and models ; Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan © 2021 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 8096 - 6 / 21 / 05 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445715 KEYWORDS Participatory design , Improvisation , Children , Design methods ACM Reference Format : Kung Jin Lee , Wendy Roldan , Tian Qi Zhu , Harkiran Kaur Saluja , Sungmin Na , Britnie Chin , Yilin Zeng , Jin Ha Lee , and Jason Yip . 2021 . The Show Must Go On : : A Conceptual Model of Conducting Synchronous Participa - tory Design With Children Online . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’21 ) , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 16 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445715 1 INTRODUCTION In HCI , children are important participants in co - designing future technologies for other children . Only today’s children can refect on the current time of what it is like to be a child , and propose which technologies they want to use . Most studies for co - design with children have been developed for co - located in - person ses - sions [ 34 , 37 , 48 , 51 , 67 ] . Yet there are many situations when one must co - design online synchronously , not just as an alternative . In extreme cases , online could be the only mode of interaction that is possible for some groups of children . For instance , children partici - pants could have health issues , transportation limitations , and time constraints of adult caregivers , which could limit their participation in co - located sessions [ 45 ] . Participating in co - located participatory design ( PD ) sessions can be seen as a privilege for families who have fexible schedules and easier transportation options . Some scholars have recognized this limitation and attempted to create PD workshops in neighborhood community centers , which are often more accessible places for some local participants [ 44 , 65 ] . However , for some families , having to be in a fxed place at a specifc time for a workshop can present other challenges , as it can overlap with work hours or it can be hard to access if they live in remote and rural areas [ 11 , 59 ] . Therefore , in this work , we aim to explore co - designing synchronously online which afords us to accommodate CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Kung Jin Lee et al . more families and situations when online interaction is the only option . For many people in the world , the COVID - 19 pandemic in Spring 2020 was one of these constraining situations . Our team typically co - designs with children ( ages 7 - 11 ) in - person , and we were forced to conduct synchronous participatory design sessions online . Going online synchronously introduced many complexities and ambigu - ity , particularly when co - designing with children . Many of the methods and techniques we used to interact with children were ini - tially designed for co - located sessions . Therefore , we had to quickly modify existing techniques , and learn how to design , communi - cate , and collaborate on diferent online platforms and tools . While prior literature investigates distributed co - design [ 11 , 35 , 55 , 56 , 59 ] , many studies discuss asynchronous ( occurring at diferent time ) [ 11 , 35 , 55 ] and hybrid models ( mix of synchronous and asynchro - nous session ) [ 56 , 59 ] to accommodate time diferences . There are limitations of co - designing in an asynchronous model as young children have to be assisted in the absence of the facilitator and the child has to understand how to use and co - design with the platform ( e . g . Facebook , Minecraft ) [ 35 , 55 , 56 ] . Synchronous video chat , on the other hand , supports in - the - moment interactions with the help of facilitators . Studies have shown the value of presence and relationship building that arise from synchronous video chats within group of teenagers and family members [ 2 , 6 ] . However , synchronous online sessions can also be disrupted by numerous external and internal factors because sessions occur in real - time . Because fewer co - design sessions on synchronous platforms have been studied , we have found little knowledge in HCI research to help understand how to navigate this complex space to co - design with children design partners . Given that the COVID - 19 pandemic may isolate children longer , there is an imperative need to support the child - computer interaction community through new knowledge of how to efectively co - design through synchronous online means . In this paper , we identify and discuss the new considerations we need to take when moving to a synchronous online space . We examined ten consecutive intergenerational participatory online design sessions of an intergenerational co—design team ( called KidsTeam UW ) , where children ( ages 7 - 11 ) and adults co - designed new technologies together through video chat . Our design team participated in online co - design sessions using Cooperative Inquiry , a PD method focused on children and adults as equal and equitable design partners [ 14 , 15 , 21 , 64 ] . We conducted and video recorded a total of ten PD sessions with ten children during the months of April to July 2020 . We interviewed all ten children to learn about their experiences in the session . We triangulated across our data to analyze co - design session videos , interviews , and artifacts to address three research questions : RQ1 : What are project logistics considerations when co - designing in a synchronous online space ? RQ2 : What are online factors considerations when co - designing in a synchronous online space ? RQ3 : What kinds of participant interactions do we need to consider when co - designing in a synchronous online space ? Through our investigation , we learned we could not create a ‘how to’ model of doing PD synchronously online with chil - dren , because there are many unexpected moments and interrup - tions that are out of the control of the facilitators . Therefore , we turned to literature on improvisation [ 27 , 30 , 40 ] for inspiration to make sense of our data as disruptions occurred , and people frequently needed to modify session plans . Improvisational the - ories also focus on the collaborative and emerging nature of the environment and assist in understanding what roles a facilitator can play in emerging situations , as well as how they can incor - porate ideas from participants [ 3 , 19 ] . Talented artists , comedians , and skilled architects often embrace disorder to make the most of any situation [ 40 ] . In our work , we had to be agile and swift when running our co - design sessions online , where unexpected situations arose frequently . With more uncertainties , we had to be willing to diverge from planned techniques in the session and leverage ad - hoc approaches to continue to engage with children to co - design . Drawing on improvisation theories , we developed a concep - tual model and explicating factors to consider when co - designing with children synchronously in an online space . Our model con - sists of three themes of consideration for improvisation during online co - design sessions : Project Logistics , People and Seting , and People’s Co - design Interactions . We contribute a model that ofers researchers a lens to scafold and refect on synchronous PD sessions and supports them in identifying factors to improve for their future design sessions . Overall , we make three contributions to the HCI community : 1 . Empirically , we uncover the implicit and nuanced complexi - ties of engaging in synchronous online co - design sessions with children and adults . 2 . Theoretically , we extend Kang et al . ’s [ 30 ] HCI improvisation features to consider improvisation as a way to balance the tensions in the known and unknown factors for synchronous online co - design . 3 . We provide design recommendations and ethical implica - tions for engaging in online co - design through improvisa - tion . 2 RELATED WORK 2 . 1 Children as Design Partners Participatory design ( PD ) focuses on the democratic means to en - gage end - users in the collaborative work processes to increase the utility of designs [ 28 ] . PD projects have roots in the spirit of de - mocratizing the workforce , which trace back to the 1970’s when researchers included trade union members in designing new tech - nologies [ 42 ] . Inclusion of users in the design process does not only develop viable designs [ 53 ] but also support the empower - ment of users in shaping the direction of innovating technologies [ 38 ] . While there are multiple methods of involving the end - user to varying degrees in the design process [ 31 ] , we specifcally focus on working with children as co - design partners using the method of Cooperative Inquiry [ 14 , 15 ] . Druin [ 14 , 15 ] developed Cooperative Inquiry to allow idea elab - oration between both adults and children by equally valuing the voices of children and adults alike . In this PD method , children The Show Must Go On : CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan are considered designer partners who hold expertise in being a child . In order to be design partners , it takes time and efort to build and sustain relationships . Therefore , researchers work with a small number of children , as opposed to a large group , primarily work with children ages 7 - 11 as they can articulate their ideas . Yip et al . [ 64 ] adds how the partnership between children and adults is not static , but rather a combination of dynamic interactions over time . Many scholars have worked on creating new techniques to generate a more balanced relationship between adults and children [ 13 , 20 , 22 , 41 , 58 , 61 ] . To engage in PD , designers can use design techniques to com - municate and co - design with children . Walsh et al . [ 60 ] created a framework to help researchers select , create , and modify design techniques based on the understanding that each context difers . When selecting a technique , facilitators must consider their project goals , the context of their participants , and the limitations and advantages of the technique . When considering the project goals , techniques can be chosen based on the design stage that the project is in : from early stages of the design process ( asking children how they perceive a topic ) , to later stages ( asking to evaluate a higher - fdelity prototype ) . Techniques can difer by how much expertise a child has in designing with adults , and the kinds of accommodations a child may need to use the technique . Other aspects to consider when selecting a design technique include the cost of using the technique ( i . e . , materials ) , the portability of the technique to other contexts ( i . e . , feld vs . controlled lab setting ) , and the amount of required physical interactions of the participants . Although extensive work in children and PD exists , most of these studies only focus on designing together in co - located physical spaces . Some of these spaces are university labs [ 67 ] , schools [ 13 , 46 ] , libraries [ 66 ] , community centers [ 44 , 65 ] and refugee camps [ 1 , 16 , 62 ] . Only a handful of studies have examined children’s co - design in non - physical locations through distributed co - design [ 57 , 59 ] . 2 . 2 The Space of Distributed Co - design and Play For distributed PD , researchers highlight three key distinctions : syn - chronous ( occurring at the same time ) , asynchronous ( occurring at diferent times ) , or hybrid ( a mix of synchronous and asynchronous ) [ 47 , 51 ] . For asynchronous sessions , scholars have explored PD with adults on social media sites ( e . g . , Facebook ) [ 35 ] or on researchers’ own online platforms [ 57 ] . For instance , Walsh et al . created DisCo [ 57 ] a co - design tool for asynchronous distributed co - design . DisCo is a desktop - based tool that allows children from multiple locations to draw , make audio clips , and layer ideas on top of other chil - dren’s ideas . In a hybrid model , researchers have investigated how children co - design in a three - dimensional gaming space ( Kidscraft , a modifcation of Minecraft ) [ 55 , 56 ] . Despite the importance of the sense of presence and relationship building in co - designing with children , many current studies focus on the asynchronous mode . The asynchronous design sessions , however , lack the ability to support in - the - moment idea sharing . Additionally , asynchro - nous design sessions require multiple reminders for participation , as young children often struggle to participate [ 55 ] . In particu - lar , distributed co - design ( whether synchronous or asynchronous ) requires an extra level of facilitation that is taken for granted in co - located contexts [ 57 ] . Multiple scholars have stated how synchronized platforms , in the form of video chats , can provide a sense of presence and connected - ness [ 6 ] . For instance , Yarosh et al . [ 63 ] created ShareTable , a system that provides video chat and shared tabletop space for children to engage with their parents from faraway . Inkpen’s numerous work in play and video conferencing functions have demonstrated that there are opportunities and challenges for using multiple cameras and hands - free devices for telepresence , such as playing with multi - ple mice setups [ 25 , 26 ] . However , both Yarosh , Inkpen , and others have only created conceptual ideas and prototypes , which are not yet mainstream consumer devices . Few , if any , studies have looked at the role of video chat and online synchronous co - design for an entire intergenerational team . This calls forward the need for an investigation into the construction and facilitation of meaningful synchronous remote co - design sessions with children as design partners . Our study focused on synchronous sessions , which required more in - the - moment decisions . For researchers who have studied distributed co - design , the motivation was to overcome diferent time zones . In our case , the children were all co - located in the same time zone and we focused more on emphasizing relation - ship building in synchronous sessions , which supported partici - pants’ sense of presence . However , because numerous unknown and unpredictable factors exist in synchronous online co - design ( e . g . , technology infrastructure disruptions , people’s lack of engage - ment ) , we needed a theoretical model that allowed us to be fexible , but still provided guidance and structure . Therefore , we turned to improvisation in HCI as a theoretical concept to help guide our investigation . 2 . 3 Theoretical Framing We explore how improvisation in the arts could help us in under - standing the unexpectedness of working with children in an online space . There are multiple ways to interpret improvisation based on its context . In music , improvisation is ‘playing extemporaneously’ or without written music [ 43 ] . In health education , improvisation are judgement calls , which are made in - the - moment in crisis situa - tions [ 24 ] . To improvise is also to draw upon one’s own knowledge and focus on the very moment to make the best of the given situa - tion [ 40 ] . As improvisation emerges when we are forced to deviate from pre - determined plans , the underlying implication is that there was a ‘right’ plan to be followed . Therefore , improvisation is of - ten associated with being inferior as it is seen as a substitute of a pre - established rule . In other words , improvisation is a back - up plan when the original plan is impossible [ 32 ] . However , it is im - portant to note that while it is true that improvisation emerges as a response to unanticipated situations , it also can emerge voluntarily [ 27 ] . Artists , musicians and designers have valued improvisation for creative practices . While improvisation emerges from a response to a breakdown or glitches , it also emerges to accommodate creative practices . For example , artists and musicians sometimes purposely deviate from their original plans for creative purposes , such as jazz musicians adding a ‘blue note’ to discover new musical phrases [ 23 ] . CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Kung Jin Lee et al . Scholars also defned diferent levels of improvisation [ 29 ] . In the frst level , modest adjustments are made to the pre - existing structure . For example , a jazz musician starts to diverge after play - ing their standard familiar notes to people . At the second level , the music starts with hardly any similarities to the pre - planned structure . However , there are moments it imitates the pre - planned structure . In the most extreme level , the improviser discards the whole activity and starts to compose new patterns . When the activ - ity is discarded , the time used is not considered wasted but a time to discover new ideas based on previous knowledge by interacting with the old activity . Some artists deliberately make detours and accidental interactions to reveal creative ideas from the changed circumstances [ 49 ] . We see an opportunity to introduce a model of improvisation for working with users in PD methods , given that co - designing with children is full of noise and disorder . Moving to the online space adds even more complexity , as there are technical glitches and breakdowns that can occur . For our analysis , we rely on Kang et al . ’s [ 30 ] fve key features in HCI improvisation . The fve features illustrate diferent manifes - tations of how improvisation emerges in practices . • Refexivity states that improvisation is not purely random , but that there is constant trial and error for constructing creativity . • Transgression states that improvisation is not always a pas - sive learning mode as practitioners actively encourage un - foreseen factors in order to promote discovery . • Tension states that when a practitioner strives for both free - dom and structure , improvisation emerges . • Listening is essential in order to be aware of the changing factors of a situation . Listening in design closely parallels listening in improvisation . • Interdependence discusses how improvisation is co - constructed with other relationships and environments . 3 METHOD 3 . 1 Context and Changes Our investigation is part of a larger project of an intergenerational co - design group where adults and children design new technology for children , with children . Before COVID - 19 , KidsTeam UW team members met twice - a - week afterschool for 90 minutes . During the in - person 90 - minute sessions , children and adults gathered to frst share snacks provided by the researcher ( snack time ) , afterward the researcher prompted the children to begin thinking within a design oriented mindset by asking the question of the day ( circle time ) , the team had a design session for around 45 minutes ( design time ) and the session ended with group discussion and refection . The team has worked on multiple design projects with other faculty members , students , industry partners , and librarians . In March 2020 , due to the COVID - 19 , our university was closed to the public and families had to stay quarantined . From March to April 2020 , we spent one month reconfguring KidsTeam UW to transition the group to only synchronous online . The lead princi - pal investigator opened up the possibility of still being connected through a video chat platform . Families of the children allowed this option , which gave us the opportunity to explore how to co - design with children during this difcult time . A number of changes needed to be made to make synchronous online co - design more viable . First , based on the attention span of young children , the session time was reduced from 90 minutes to 75 minutes . We also changed from meeting twice - a - week to once - a - week to ease children into the new process . Although the new session format had no initial snack time , we followed the rest of the previous session format with reduced time . For example , we included questions of the day to prep and prime the participants to engage ( 10 minutes ) , design sessions to engage together ( 25 – 35 minutes ) , and discussion time to summarize and refect on the session ( 15 minutes ) . 3 . 2 Participants The team consisted of adults from the university ( researchers and undergraduate students ) and child participants ages 7 – 11 ( n = 10 ) . With the exception of one new child , who had not participated in any of the previous in - person co - design sessions , the nine children were all existing members of the co - design team . Their previous participation in KidsTeam UW ranged from six months to four years ( Table 1 ) . The one new child ( Suga ) was recruited because she showed interest in the past but her caregiver could not drive her to in - person sessions . While adult participants were situated across four diferent time zones ( Korean Standard , Pacifc Standard , Central Standard and Eastern Standard ) , all the children were in the same time zone ( Pacifc Standard ) . 3 . 3 Design Sessions We held a total of ten design sessions from April to June 2020 on Zoom ( a video / audio chat streaming platform ) . We recorded audio and video of the design sessions using Zoom’s in - cloud recording feature . We collected all data following the procedure approved by the University of Washington’s Institutional Review Board . In Table 2 , we present the diferent activities that occurred during each session and the technologies used . For each session , we also saved the generated artifacts and the frst author wrote feld notes both before and after the session for planning , refection , and analysis . 3 . 4 Interviews To understand how children experienced the online synchronous co - design sessions , we conducted semi - structured interviews with all ten children in July 2020 . We began by asking questions about what their environment looked like when they came online and what other activities ( e . g . , school ) they had online during COVID - 19 . Second , we asked questions regarding their experiences engaging with the diferent co - design techniques we used in the online space . Third , we asked about the diferent tools in Zoom , such as chat and breakout rooms . Finally , we asked how they compared the online sessions with the in - person sessions ( with the exception of the child who only participated in online sessions ) . The interviews lasted for approximately 25 minutes and were transcribed for analysis . 3 . 5 Data Analysis We frst used an inductive and grounded method to understand the emerging themes of moving to an online space [ 6 , 7 ] . Five co - authors observed and annotated the 10 session videos . Primary The Show Must Go On : CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Table 1 : Participants demographics ( pseudonyms ) Child Pseudonym Age Gender Ethnicity Years in KidsTeam UW Alan 11 Boy Hispanic 4 Ethan 8 Boy Hispanic 2 Hope 10 Girl Asian / White 2 Jack 8 Boy Asian / White 2 Marcus 10 Boy White 2 Mia 8 Girl Asian / White 2 Ryan 11 Boy Asian / White 4 Sarah 7 Girl Asian / White 3 Suga 10 Girl Asian / White 0 Tae 10 Boy Asian / White 3 and secondary observers / reviewers open - coded the data after an - notating the videos . We used Miro Board , an online collaborative whiteboard platform , to share parts / quotes from videos . Based on the quotes that were found in the videos , the researchers analyzed overall patterns and started to develop themes . Afterwards , we deductively compared our themes to the FACIT PD model [ 60 ] , which takes into consideration the co - design participants’ needs and experiences , the design goals of a session , and the characteris - tics of design techniques . We then followed a deductive approach by mapping the FACIT PD model and applying Bronfenbrenner’s ecological theory of human development and socialization [ 5 ] for a holistic view of the data . While coding the data and attempting to create a framework inclusive of diferent considerations , we priori - tized extracting the theme that would be 1 ) unique themes specifc to the synchronous online space . We chose these themes because there is already an extensive body of work that supports in - person interactions ; and 2 ) that other PD researchers could fnd these broad themes helpful for conducting their own sessions . During the analy - sis , the researchers noticed that there were many factors out of the researchers’ control in the online space . This prompted the group to turn to theories of improvisation in order to make sense of these uncertain situations . Finally , to analyze the clustered themes of our data we used Kang et al . ’s [ 30 ] fve features of improvisation . Kang et al . outline the practices that emerge when engaging in improvi - sation , which include : refexivity , tension , listening , transgression , and interdependence . We triangulated our fndings with themes that also emerged from the children’s interviews . 4 FINDINGS We frst introduce the conceptual model of improvisation in syn - chronous online co - design ( Figure 1 ) . In Sections 4 . 2 – 4 . 4 , we describe each theme from the conceptual model , their subthemes , and provide example vignettes with analysis . As we describe our data , we indicate facilitators with superscript F ( Name F ) , children with superscript C ( Name C ) and adults , who are not facilitators , with superscript A ( Name A ) . 4 . 1 Introducing the Conceptual Model Based on an in - depth analysis of the ten recorded synchronous online co - design sessions , children’s interviews , and artifacts , we developed a conceptual model ( Figure 1 ) for consideration when conducting PD with children online . After conducting multiple rounds of inductive and deductive processes , we created our con - ceptual model . Our model is informed by Walsh et al . ’s framework on how to design PD techniques [ 60 ] and Bronfenbrenner’s ecologi - cal systems theory [ 5 ] for a holistic view of the data . Our conceptual model consists of three themes : 1 ) Project Logistics ; 2 ) People and Settings ; and 3 ) People’s Co - design Interactions . Project Logistics are the properties of the co - design session that infuence which design techniques and digital tools are used for synchronous online sessions . The theme of Project Logistics is based on portions of the FACIT model [ 60 ] , which concern the important features of a co - design technique ( deductive ) . People and Settings refers to the ex - ternal factors that exist in the multiple locations of the participants ( e . g . , technology infrastructure , location changes , spectators ) . This theme stemmed from the unique characteristics of a synchronous online space where outside factors , such as technology and infras - tructure , infuenced the online design sessions ( inductive ) . People’s Co - design Interactions emphasize the specifc engagements that occur when adults and children meet synchronously online . This theme stemmed from our observations from co - design sessions . Interestingly , this theme also connects to Makhaeva et al . ’s work on the important balance between freedom and structure for creativity in design [ 36 ] . All three themes in our conceptual model infuence each other with diferent limitations and unexpected surprises throughout the sessions . For example , an unexpected Internet outage in a facili - tator’s location ( People and Settings ) can infuence how a design technique may need to change ( Project Logistics ) , and how the adults and children react to disruptions of the online co - design ( People’s Co - Design Interaction ) . The core concept is the Online Improvisation engagement of participants that needs to occur in order to mitigate tensions , either as micro moment - to - moment or macroscale shifts . These improvisations tie back to Kang et al . ’s [ 30 ] fve improvisations in HCI : listening , transgression , tension , inter - dependence , and refexivity . We use video vignettes to illustrate moments from the PD sessions , as well as quotes from children’s interview transcripts , to highlight their refections on the sessions . We employed the comparative case study method [ 10 ] , which al - lowed us to closely examine the expected and unexpected moments that occurred in online co - design sessions with adults and chil - dren over time . We organize our fndings section by frst describing CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Kung Jin Lee et al . Table 2 : Design Sessions Sessions Design Questions / Project Goals Design Stage Design Technique and Digital Tools 1 2 What is the future of KidsTeam UW online ? Our goal was to understand how children wanted to communicate online . What do children think about the SunSmart technology ideas ( Session 1 ) ? Our goal was to understand children’s initial feedback on prototypes for sun protection . SunSmart is an application to teach children about sun protection . Early ideas Mid Pro - totype Bags of Stuf technique : Children used their own arts and crafts materials found at home . The camera in Zoom was used to share their design . Line Judging technique : We shared the mid - prototype through a storyboard , which had some initial sketches that would be included in the mobile application . Children shared their preference of the prototypes by voting by color . PowerPoint and the Screen capture tool was used to capture their vote . Zoom was used for discussion . 3 4 How can we design for refugee children ? Our goal was to understand how refugee children can also co - design using SMS texting , radio , and loudspeakers . What can librarians do to help kids online ? Our goal was to understand what online library sessions would look like . Early ideas Early ideas Bags of Stuf technique : The researchers sent children the same arts and craft materials ( colored paper , popsicle sticks , and pipe cleaners ) . The camera in Zoom was used to share their design . Comicboarding technique : Children flled in blank slides in PowerPoint of what a fun library session would look like . For children who drew on a physical piece of paper , the adults took a screen shot . Zoom was used for discussion . 5 What do children think about the SunSmart technology ideas ? ( Session 2 ) Mid Pro - totype Big Paper technique : Children designed on their piece of paper using pencil to improve prototypes . The adults shared the prototype ideas in PowerPoint . Zoom was used for discussion . 6 What do children think about online safety ? Our goal was to understand what children regarded as online safety issues and solutions . Early ideas Comicboarding technique : Children flled in a blank slide about what made them upset when they were online and possible solutions . We used PowerPoint to design . Zoom was used for discussion . 7 8 How would positive ‘Would You Rather’ ( WYR ) questions infuence children’s’ responses ? Our goal was to understand children’s priorities and values in decision making . Would You Rather is a game for understanding people’s preferences [ 47 ] . What would children want to do if they can control computers with physical objects ? Our goal was to understand children’s use of an AR device that Early Late eval - uation Line Judging technique : Children voted on WYR questions . PowerPoint and the Screen capture tool were used to share the questions and to capture their choices . Zoom was used for discussion . Wizard of Oz technique : Adults gave a simulation of a new technology based on children’s interaction . PowerPoint was used to write and sketch ideas . Zoom 9 10 detects physical objects and movement . How would children create Would You Rather questions regarding Slither . io ? Slitheri . io is an online game the children liked playing . How would children still have fun with their friends during quarantine ? Our goal was to understand what ‘distant play’ would look like for children . Early ideas Early ideas was used for discussion . Line Judging : Children played each other’s WYR game by voting with their hands up and low . PowerPoint was used to share questions and Zoom was used for discussion . Comicboarding : Children flled in a blank slide of how they can have fun with their friends while they are apart . PowerPoint was used to add in ideas and Zoom was used for discussion . the emergent sub - themes . Afterwards , we provide examples from videos , artifacts , and interview data to illustrate the range of partic - ipants’ synchronous online co - design experiences , and then outline connections to improvisation theory . Our model does not present a ‘how to’ approach for doing PD with children online because every PD session , including its envi - ronment , participants , and context , is unique . Rather , our model provides researchers information about diferent factors and corre - sponding scenarios to use for reference before entering the session . Prior work states how people are able to improvise better when they have a known structure in mind [ 50 ] . Applying frameworks from theories of improvisation , we were able to refect on the various uncontrollable situations during our sessions in depth and embrace these moments as opposed to avoiding them . The Show Must Go On : CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Figure 1 : A conceptual model of conducting synchronous online participatory design with children . 4 . 2 Project Logistics Every co - located design session with children has its own logistics to be managed , such as booking a location , fnding time to meet with participants , and handling transportation . Additionally , plan - ning co - design sessions with children requires determining what techniques can be used for communication between children and adults [ 60 ] . When considering the logistics of an online synchro - nous session , we compared issues from physical locations to those from online spaces . Project Logistics focuses on the characteristics of a session that pertain to how the session might be planned and implemented . For our conceptual model , we outline two subthemes of Project Logistics : 1 ) the Techniques needed to run a synchronous online co - design session ; and 2 ) the Digital Tools that make online synchronous co - design possible . 4 . 2 . 1 Creating or Modifying Techniques for Online Synchronous Co - design . Techniques for co - design have mainly been studied in physical co - located sessions . When we consider Walsh et al . ’s [ 60 ] dimensions for choosing , creating , and modifying techniques for co - design , there is no direct distinction between demarcating tech - niques for physical spaces or online spaces . Our conceptual model notes that when implementing synchronous online for co - design with children , previous co - located techniques can be modifed for online interactions using Walsh et al . ’s [ 60 ] dimensions as a guide ( Table 3 ) . As techniques for online synchronous co - design are in - tractably tied to meeting and collaborating online , we note that the rest of the seven dimensions of Walsh et al . ’s [ 60 ] framework all must be considered through a technology lens . 4 . 2 . 2 Digital Tools for Meeting and Designing . The shift from phys - ical to synchronous online co - design requires consideration of the technological tools for remote access : including software , hardware , and physical materials . Tools enable participants to communicate with each other . In physical co - located sessions , tools such as white - boards , arts and crafts materials , and tables can be shared among participants while situated in a common space . Our data suggests that for synchronous online sessions , diferent digital tools are needed to support the following online interactions : • Meeting : How do the participants gather together to com - municate in online space ? • Design : How do the participants create new artifacts together in online space ? • Sharing : How do the participants present their ideas and artifacts together in online space ? • Collaboration : How do the participants work together in online space ? A single digital tool does not always address all four factors ; therefore , a combination of tools might be needed to support a session . We consider the software and hardware used to execute a technique as a tool , including : access to shared documents , virtual backgrounds , breakout rooms , and the mute button which were new tools to our PD sessions . 4 . 2 . 3 Two Examples of Technique Modifications . In this section , we detail how we modifed two existing co - design techniques for an online space : Comicboarding , which is used during ideation and scenario design ; and Line Judging , which is used to evalu - ate multiple ideas . During in - person PD sessions , children could interact physically with design partners and had access to shared materials . In this new synchronous online context , accommodations to the techniques were necessary , given the limitations of being completely reliant on the technology to engage in the session . Description of Comicboarding . Comicboarding [ 41 ] is a tech - nique used to scafold children’s brainstorming process . When used in co - located settings , facilitators give children a piece of paper with three scenario panels : the frst panel contains the context of CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Kung Jin Lee et al . Table 3 : Walsh et al . ’s [ 60 ] Dimensions for Online Co - design Dimensions Description Technology lens Partner experience Need for accommodation Design space Maturity of design Cost Portability Physical interaction How much co - design experience is needed to participate ? What is the age and cognitive ability of the participant ? Does the participant need accommodation to design ? How specifcally is the problem defned ? How far along is the current design in the design process ? What is the fnancial price of materials for required techniques ? What is the physical mobility of the artifact generated from the technique ? What is the degree of participant movement ? ( low : children sit and draw , high : children move between rooms ) How much experience do children have with the digital tools for online ? Does the participant need help with the online technology ? Can the problem defnition be translated to an online space ? Is the idea and / or prototype ready to be explored online ? What is the cost of the technology for co - designing online ( e . g . , time , money ) Can the technology properly record , view , document the technique online ? How much does the participant need to interact with the digital tools ? the design problem and the last panel has the ending to the design problem . In the middle panel , children describe their ideas for how to arrive at a solution while a volunteer artist ( i . e . , an adult ) sketches their ideas and designs out . Modifcations of Comicboarding Online . Our new meeting space , hosted on the video chat software Zoom , meant we had to modify Comicboarding by transferring the comic strip to a digital platform that still allowed for collaboration . For our design and sharing space , we aimed for a simpler solution and used a familiar digital tool , Microsoft PowerPoint . We created slide decks so that designers could easily import pictures and share them with others on their design team . We utilized Zoom’s Breakout Rooms feature for collaborative small group discussions . We created copies of a PowerPoint slide for each group of adults and children , as well as illustrated the design problem at the beginning of the slide deck and the story’s conclusion at the end of the slide deck . We left blank slides in the middle of the PowerPoint , and asked the children how they would fll the design story inside . Like Comicboarding in - person , the children directed the adults to draw the images around the slide , asking them to fnd visuals online ( e . g . , Google Images ) , and writing in the textboxes themselves . The level of accommo - dation online was higher than in - person sessions because we had to consider how children voiced their ideas together and support volunteers in illustrating the children’s concepts . The physical inter - action was low , as the children were still in front of their computer while directing the adults . The cost of executing the technique was high , in that each small group needed an adult facilitator to take time to draw out their ideas . Example Comicboarding Online Vignette . During Session 4 , we used our modifed Comicboarding technique to get children’s ideas on how librarians can help other children remotely . Ethan C asked Kim F to fnd images of Yoda ( a character from Star Wars ) . After the adults found the images online , Alan C and Tae C discussed Suga C decided to draw directly on a white paper , and then held her picture up to the camera . Tifany A took a picture ( Figure 2 ) and imported the photo into the slide deck . At the end of this session , a researcher noted that one limitation to the technique was that “only the vocal kids [ were ] able to participate . ” Connections to Improvisation for Comicboarding . In im - provisation , ‘listening’ highlights the importance of being aware of how people interact with the environment and with each other [ 30 ] . In this example , we were interacting diferently than how we would interact in - person : the adult facilitator only heard children’s voices , rather than seeing social cues in - person ( like what Ethan C was drawing or what Alan C ’s movement was ) . The adults and chil - dren could only see one comic board frame at a time . For example , in the online space , children could only see one slide at a time while adults may have multiple screens to view many slides at once . When trying to design what should be on the next slide , sometimes both children and adults forgot what was in the previous slide . We noticed it was especially difcult for children to focus on sharing their ideas when they could only see one part of the comic board . We needed to provide frequent reminders to the children about what was on the previous slide . One afordance in modifying this technique for an online space was that the children did not spend too much time drawing images , and utilized the Internet to search for a range of images instead . Description of Line Judging . Line Judging [ 60 ] is a technique used to support children in evaluating multiple designs in an engag - ing way . In - person , facilitators draw a line on the foor or wall and the children start by standing in the middle of the line . Facilitators share each design idea , and the children indicate their preference of the idea by positioning themselves along the line ( positive on one side , negative on the other , unsure in the middle ) . Once everyone is in their position a facilitator takes a photograph . Afterwards , facilitators ask the children why they are standing in that particular which one was the best . They all agreed upon a “Baby Yoda” that place . This technique allows children to vote on a spectrum using was drinking soup . Tae C then stated that “In the library you can’t their bodies . eat , maybe we can eat with the librarian online” . In another group , The Show Must Go On : CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Figure 2 : An example of Comicboarding technique in a shared PowerPoint . Slides 4 and 5 were the empty slides for the children to fll in . Modifcation of Line Judging Online . In the online space , the children could no longer move around the room to indicate their preferences . We needed to fnd an engaging way for them to express their vote preferences on a spectrum . We frst considered which digital tools children would most likely to have access to , and how we could capture everyone’s vote for a larger discussion . While we were aware of the built - in Zoom features for voting , such as the thumbs up reaction , we had to make necessary adjustments because : 1 ) some children were using phones , which made it difcult for them to navigate desktop features ; and 2 ) some families did not have the latest Zoom software updates . We chose to vote with bright colors because video chat aforded visualization of voting preferences , and we knew color was something children could diferentiate between . We asked children to fnd three objects in their home : one red , one yellow , and one green . To capture everyone’s vote for a larger discussion , we decided to use the screen capture tool so that the adults could see everyone’s vote on a single screen in a slide deck , which , in turn , supported sharing . The facilitator then shared the screenshot with everyone to view the results and discuss . Example Line Judging Online Vignette : During Session 2 , we used our modifed Line Judging technique to get children’s eval - uations of diferent sun protection technologies . To vote , adults used objects from their desk ( e . g . markers ) . However , we observed that the children took a more creative approach . Ryan C , for in - stance , voted with a new stufed animal every time . Children said they liked seeing what their friends had at home ( Figure 3 ) . For Session 7 , we modifed the Line Judging technique once more to have children vote with their hands in vertical positions ( Figure 3 ) . After showing a design idea a facilitator said , “If you like the frst idea , put your hands above your nose , If you like the second idea better , put your hand below your nose . ” During the session Marcus C said , “My hands are getting tired . Can I put my hands down ? ” . Unfortunately , the two facilitators did not respond to his comment because they were busy ( one was giving instructions and the other was taking the screenshot ) . We did not realize this CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Kung Jin Lee et al . Figure 3 : Screenshot of the result of voting by color and hand until we analyzed the video data . In his interview , Jack C made a similar comment to Marcus C , “It would be too close to the screen and it really hurts your arm . Or , if you just hold up a color , when you just want to do that for everything , it can kind of make your arm sore . ” Despite some of the physical discomfort , our technique allowed for the inclusion of all the children’s voices because they were able to express their opinions without relying on verbal processes . Connections to Improvisation for Line Judging . In impro - visation , ‘ refexivity’ describes how artists , through multiple and iterative attempts , need to try diferent directions , make sense of multiple interactions , and continuously reconstruct their meaning in new contexts to arrive at a satisfactory point in their process [ 30 ] . A common misconception is that creativity comes from ran - domness . In reality , artists must go through trial and error before arriving at their fnal composition . In our process , after we tried to modify the Line Judging technique by using colors , then by using hands , we were iteratively trying diferent approaches . Through an improvisation lens , we did not engage in the session in a linear model of learning , such as how to use one specifc technology at a time . Rather , we took a trial and error approach that enabled refexivity throughout the process . 4 . 3 People and Their Settings In this theme , we highlight factors within participants’ settings that directly afected their interactions during the synchronous online co - design sessions including : 1 ) Location and Technology Infrastructure ; and 2 ) Location and Spectators . 4 . 3 . 1 Location and Technology Infrastructure . Location refers to the specifc places from which children were joining our sessions . While adult volunteers tended to be fxed in their locations ( e . g . , single room with webcam ) , many of the children’s locations shifted between sessions or even during sessions . At a micro - level , loca - tions changed when a child moved around in their room , thus changing the view of the video . At a larger scale , children also moved to diferent rooms in their home , to diferent homes ( e . g . , their home and another family’s home ) and , a couple of times , child participants even called in from a moving car . Overall , there was constant variance in how much a child moved depending on their location . Based on their location , the technology infrastructure changed . Technology infrastructure refers to the basic structures and facilities needed for participating in synchronous online co - design sessions . This includes children’s access to high - speed broadband , bandwidth , software , and hardware at the moment of co - design . Children’s access to technology infrastructure is not static , rather shifting at any given moment depending on their location . Examples of changing location and technology infrastruc - tures . For Session 7 , we had a combination of technology infras - tructure breakdowns when Raymon F was facilitating . For context , Ethan C and Alan C are brothers who joined our sessions through one shared computer . Jack C was moving from a room to a car in the vignette below . Raymon F : “Umm , Ethan C and Alan C , why did you pick no cavities over gaming ? I thought you’d pick gaming instead of no cavities . Let’s see , Ethan C and Alan C ! Are you guys frozen ? ? Oh no , they’re frozen ! ” Ethan C and Alan C : ( Their online video chat got disconnected ) / Alan C and Ethan C did not shift in their location but their technology infrastructure was not stable . Raymon F : ( Quickly moves on to ask Jack C ) “ Umm , Jack C what did you pick ? ” ( Facilitator notices that Jack C was no longer in his room ) Jack C : ( moving in a car ) Raymon F : ( Surprised ) “What did you pick ? I can’t tell when you’re inside the car . Oh sorry , you’re muted . Let me unmute you . Let’s see . . . you’re muted . Jack C can you unmute ? ” Jack C : “What were the options ? I couldn’t hear you . You sounded like robots . ” This instance shows how Ethan C and Alan C ’s challenges with their broadband in their location and Jack C ’s movement across physical locations came together to bring the design discussion to a halt . There was only so much Raymon F could do to continue the The Show Must Go On : CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan conversation given that going online meant every child could be in any setting , which might interfere with their engagement and interactions during the session . Connection to Improvisation . This vignette highlights how the design researcher was not able to execute the session because there were unforeseen disturbances as a result of the technology infrastructure and the location of each child . While one would typ - ically want to avoid such situations , this moment can be explained by the concept of ‘tensions’ , where an external structure disrupts the original plan [ 30 ] . This disruption is a motivation for artists who improvise to engage in the ‘curiosity’ of the unknown [ 30 ] , wherein their interest in new contexts leads to a larger realization . In this particular case , after the session , all the researchers could have engaged in dialogues about whether this disturbance was a larger structural problem , thus questioning our method and not the participants’ actions and engagement . We might ask ourselves , how is our engagement dependent on bandwidth ? How do we shift the responsibility onto us as researchers to explore alternative ways and methods for participants to be included regardless of their bandwidth capacity or shifting of locations ? While we have not yet found answers for this session , we have identifed the need to alter existing techniques for when there is a sudden disconnect . 4 . 3 . 2 Location and Spectators . Not only does location infuence technology , but spectators , who are a part of the location , infuence technology as well . Spectators refers to the people other than the participant designers in a session . Children , at a young age , are rarely alone . As researchers we were often exposed to the children’s shared spaces , which included other family members , siblings , par - ents , friends , and even their pets . Below , we give two examples of parents as spectators . Example Vignettes . In Session 6 , the facilitator of the session gave instructions for the children to draw their ideas for two min - utes . While the children were all engaged in drawing , Jack C stated it would be better for them to just go in the breakout room . In the background , we heard Jack C’ s mother correcting him saying that he should be drawing right now . In his interview , Jack C refected on how it was difcult to be himself with the disturbance of his parents and siblings in the room commenting on his engagement in co - design . He tried to fnd a closed space to have privacy . Jack C ’s mom sometimes answered the question for him , and was part of the session . In contrast , during Session 4 when we did a design on the topic of the future of libraries for children during COVID - 19 , Suga C ’s mother Jimin A was next to Suga C in the video chat . Raymon F : “Oh wait , Jimin A , and let’s hear what she says , what she knows about libraries . ” Jimin A : “Alright , I’m actually multitasking . It looks like I’m here but I’m actually working . ” Raymon F : “Oh I’m sorry . I thought you were here . ” Jimin A : “My computer is here . I apologize . Give me the question I will answer . ” Connections to Improvisation . In improvisation , ‘interde - pendence’ refers to how one’s behavior is co - constructed and in relation to other actors and the environment . In our session , our im - provisation was not only dependent on the children designers , but also on the co - constructed relationship with their family members in the room [ 30 ] . In the two examples given above , the spectators’ involvement changes . While we invited pets , parents , and siblings to the session , we learned that someone being in the video chat frame did not mean that they were truly part of the session . By asking a question to the parent ( Suga C ’s mother ) , we also engaged in the process of improvising . More specifcally , we utilized the improvisational feature of ‘ transgression ’ , where we purposely deviate to learn something we did not know . Transgression is the process by which an artist purposefully invites unforeseen and unexpected factors into their process for discovery [ 30 ] . 4 . 4 People’s Co - design Interactions This third theme examines the in - the - moment people engagements that happen during synchronous online co - design . We present two sub - themes that emerged regarding the individual’s experience during the online co - design session : 1 ) Online Interpretation of Children’s Reactions ; and 2 ) Autonomy and Freedom . 4 . 4 . 1 Online Interpretation of Children’s Reactions . This sub - theme encompasses the ways in which facilitators interpret a child’s in - terest , motivations , and feelings that infuence their interactions online . In the online space , we had fewer visual cues to interpret children’s emotions and experiences , given we could only see what appeared on the screen . Audio can also be limiting . Furthermore , if a child’s camera was of , we had even fewer cues to draw on as co - designers . Understanding children’s reactions is crucial be - cause children express themselves using diferent facial expressions ( e . g . confusion or boredom ) . Being online makes it more difcult to detect and interpret these cues . In Zoom video chat , we had to juggle between 10 – 15 faces in a grid on a single screen . Below we share two examples where children were highly engaged and two example activities that children disliked . Example Vignettes . Children expressed in interviews they were the most engaged during Session 3 when they were designing ideas for remote co - design for refugee children . They also noted Session 9 was their favorite because they worked on improving the game Slither . io . In Session 3 , Alice F asked the children : “What do you know about children and refugees ? ” Then , she gave details about the project and asked , “What are the similarities between refugee children and regular children ? ” Afterward , Raymon F played a one - minute video from UNICEF about children at the Shamlapur Refugee camp in Bangladesh . Hope C recalled this being her favorite session because it challenged her to think out of the box . Suga C stated that she liked the session she “like [ d ] helping my commu - nity” . In Session 9 , we asked children to design ‘Would You Rather’ questions based on their favorite game ‘Slither . io’ . In the interview , Marcus C and Ryan C stated how they liked that they were able to create questions on a game they were used to playing . Some children had strong negative opinions about Session 5 when they worked on the Sun Smart project designing new tech - nologies to teach other children about skin cancer and sun exposure . Tae C stated it was the worst session because they were being asked to work on a topic that seemed “so obvious . ” Some children also did not enjoy Session 1 , where we asked them to design the future of online co - design sessions with adults . Alan C stated that he saw no point in designing for the future of co - designing online as there was no future for it . CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Kung Jin Lee et al . Connections to Improvisation . Improv actors , especially who engage in comedy , need to ‘ listen’ [ 30 ] to their audience . They of - ten use techniques such as prompting the audience with a question and , based on how the audience is answering the question , they will make jokes or certain actions diverging from the original plan . In our sessions , we also were improvising by reacting to how the chil - dren were answering the questions and helping them fnd personal connections to the projects . As a result of moving to the online space , interpretating interest and motivation is more difcult as we have fewer cues of what is occurring on - screen or behind the camera . In person , we were more aware of how the child was in - teracting with the group , which ultimately infuences the group dynamics . A big diference between children’s favorite and least favorite sessions was how facilitators prompted the children to connect their interest to the activity . In Session 3 and 9 , the facilitator was able to scafold their interests into the design context and fnd cues for connections between the design challenge and the children’s lives . However , in Sessions 1 and 5 , the facilitator went directly into the session with minimum context to the problem and lim - ited connections to the children’s experiences . In contrast to the ofine space , children could not work side by side with the adults and adults could not give them additional information when it seemed like the child did not understand the concept or the point of design . 4 . 4 . 2 Autonomy and Freedom . In the online space , children had more autonomy to do what they wanted . For instance , because we are a public university , children had to ask for permission to go the restroom because we are a public university . When they met us online , they could leave the session even without letting an adult know . Autonomy and freedom thus refers to how each child had more control of their actions while in the synchronous online space . Makhaeva et al . ( 2016 ) states how , in the design process , it is crucial to fnd the appropriate balance between freedom and structure for creativity [ 36 ] . In the online space , if a child is not interested , motivated or do not understand the session , it is easier for them to disengage by simply turning of their camera and microphone [ 33 ] . Example Vignettes . In multiple sessions , there were instances when a facilitator would ask a question to the children and there would be no response back . In Session 10 , Raymon F asked the whole group , “What sounds do you like to hear as an alarm ? ” . Children shared their answers after Raymon F called out their names . Raymon F moved on to Ryan C to ask what he liked to hear . There was no response . Kim F said that he might be muted . In his interview , Ryan C shared that during the online session he would leave the session to get snacks when he was hungry . While adults thought there were limitations in technical infrastructure , children in their interview shared how they intentionally chose which activities to engage in . Ethan C said he went on mute because there was noise from the dishwasher . Hope C said she often needed to step out to check on her lizard . In Session 9 , we used a modifed Comicboarding [ 41 ] technique , where the children shared their preference on ‘Would You Rather’ questions and the adult took a screen shot for conversation . How - ever , during the session many children had their camera of which made it difcult to capture their preferences . Connections to Improvisation . In improvisation , ‘ tension ’ refers to instances when a participant tries to diverge from the structure [ 30 ] . While our technique had structure for what activi - ties the child had to engage , the online environment ofered more autonomy to the child to simply log of or turn of their camera and engage in a diferent activity . It was also difcult to do behavior management in the chatting space . However , for the children , it was important for them to have freedom over structure . We learned that for the children , this freedom was a way for them to get breaks . By using the private chat feature , they were building friendships even when they were not responding to the facilitator . 5 DISCUSSION 5 . 1 Revealing the Structure and Freedom in Synchronous Online Co - design Prior work on children’s co - design focuses mostly on co - located physical contexts [ 37 , 51 , 67 ] . Other children’s co - design research in online settings has looked into opportunities for asynchronous online settings or using avatars in online game worlds [ 55 , 56 ] . However , the COVID - 19 pandemic has forced both children and adult researchers into quarantine for a long duration of time . As such , for many user - experience researchers and designers , working with children in synchronous online settings may become more nor - malized than in pre - COVID - 19 times . In this study , we found that online co - design sessions hold similar considerations for design - ing with children as in - person do , while nonetheless introducing unanticipated and unscripted considerations . By considering syn - chronous online co - design as an opportunity for HCI improvisation , we reveal the tensions between structure and freedom , planning and destruction , and the clarity and fogginess that surface when implementing synchronous online co - design . Much of the research on design techniques mitigate unantic - ipated dynamics with physical co - located sessions [ 37 , 51 , 67 ] . Through our conceptual model ( Figure 1 ) , we introduce diferent factors that could contribute to the engagement of children in an synchronous online session : Project Logistics , People and Settings , and People’s Co - design Interactions . By adapting theories of impro - visation , and leveraging features of the improvisation process , we provide a lens to support facilitators / designers to better anticipate and address disruptions that will be caused by a number of diferent factors . We take inspiration from musicians , artists , and actors who embrace improvisation as a form of creativity , as opposed to noise , in viewing the unanticipated factors that emerge . However , as re - searchers in HCI note , improvisation in HCI is only possible from a deep examination of prior experiences and accumulated knowledge [ 30 , 32 ] . In our research , we have engaged in years of investigation into physical co - located co - design with children and adults . Like others in the world , COVID - 19 shifted our balance to an unfamiliar space to learn what new rules and knowledge exist to make syn - chronous online co - design possible . In this sense , our model ofers a way to systematically consider the factors , which could improve and reexamine prior traditional techniques and interactions , for co - design in a virtual space . At the same time , our conceptual model for synchronous online co - design is not a recipe for success nor a rigid , pre - determined plan . Nor is the model meant to allow researchers and designers The Show Must Go On : CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan to just “make stuf up” at the time of co - designing with children online . Improvisation is about managing and embracing risk and structure to allow new ideas , techniques , and interactions to fow . Whether online or ofine , when doing co - design with children there is always unclarity , noise , and disorder . As we have shown in our fndings , synchronous online co - design has diferent pitfalls and challenges that are not present in co - located physical contexts . Our model informs designers of what deviations to consider , supports the use of moderate adjustments , and encourages discarding an activity in the name of creativity . By suggesting an improvisational model for co - designing online , we further Kang et al . ’s [ 30 ] fve key features of improvisation in HCI towards designing together with children and adults in online synchronous situations : • Refexivity : Engaging in synchronous online co - design is meant to invite further exploration of new ways to creatively work with children and adults together . • Transgression : Not everything in synchronous online co - design is meant to be planned out . Instead , we invite re - searchers and designers to deliberately add unplanned ele - ments of disruption into the situations . • Tension : Synchronous online co - design is all about balancing opposing forces . It can embrace both the physical and online engagement , the fxed locations and changing settings , and the talkers and quieter personalities . • Listening : Participants in synchronous online co - design lis - ten together at all the things going on , including the chang - ing situation , the context and technologies , and what hap - pens between children - to - children , children - to - adults , and adults - to - adults . • Interdependence : Interactions do not just happen between participants in synchronous online co - design , but between child - adults and technologies , the techniques , and the set - tings . 5 . 2 On Timing and Scalability of Improvisation As prior literature suggests in improvisation theories [ 3 , 19 , 30 ] , improvisation does not simply occur during an online co - design ses - sion but could be understood before , during , and after the session . Going online was unexpected for all of us , including adults and chil - dren . Before each session we had to brainstorm what techniques we could use and how they should be modifed to a new design space . When we entered each session , there were unexpected factors such as the children’s location and the technological infrastructure . Dur - ing the session , we improvised how to react dynamically to these unexpected factors . Finally , improvisation in synchronous online co - design meant refecting on and looking back closely at what we did , what shifted , and what decisions we made . With respect to scalability , large eforts had to happen in our frst meetings as we brainstormed how to go online . Small but more frequent moments of improvisation occurred when we managed micro moments , such as when we deviated from a session plan due to the interactions that occurred during a session ( e . g . a child being tired of raising colors for voting ) . In these situations , we had to do the macro - planning , which refers to coming into the situation with a general idea of what to do . We also had to do the micro - planning , that is , the frequent and smaller scale moment - to - moment shifts and decisions in response to dynamic changes of people , technology , and information . Disorder does not simply lead to creativity ; in disorder there is constant efort that needs to be followed by organizing , dis - organizing and reorganizing . Similar to our principles when work - ing with children in physical settings , we were not looking for consensus . Rather , we see co - design with children as an active and constant iterative process . In this sense , our approach to design - ing with children is similar to Picasso’s or other artists , in that it does not follow a linear progression . Rather , our interactions with children continuously change based on unknown technologies and contexts in an online space . 5 . 3 Ethical Considerations and Challenges While an artist can , at some level , be creative to experiment and engage with the properties that emerge in the process of design , researchers working with children have limits and ethical responsi - bilities regarding children’s wellbeing . Researchers must adhere to highest ethical standards for children , which could limit the level of spontaneity allowed . We extend the improvisation literature to consider the implications of doing improv with children by taking into consideration important ethical standards , such as technology policies ( e . g . , USA – The Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act ; Europe – General Data Protection Regulation ) . In addition , future work may need to be intentional about children’s screen time dur - ing online sessions , privacy issues of opening their homes to video cameras , and equity issues in technology and participation ( e . g . , how to include children with a certain level of Internet bandwidth for participation or diferent abilities in online spaces ) . We suggest three opportunities for future work : • Screen time : Researchers might consider how their activi - ties allow children to ensure their well - being ( e . g . , constant family check - ins , some physical movement for exercise ) . • Privacy : Researchers might add a consideration of the nec - essary relationship building that needs to occur between researchers and families to understand and navigate privacy needs collaboratively . • Technology and participation : Children with low - bandwidth were struggling with online technologies . We invite more researchers to brainstorm creative ways to co - design with lower - bandwidth and ( a ) synchronous hybrids . When exploring new design techniques in an online space , or considering quick improvisation decisions that need to be made , we always adhered to online safety protocols such as limiting chil - dren’s free exploration on the Internet . While we could have found new ways of interaction from purposely inviting unforeseen cir - cumstances and uncertainty for discovery ( through transgression ) , we also needed to be intentional and responsible for the outcome given our commitments to working with people from vulnerable populations . 5 . 4 Design Implications In modifying the ofine techniques for the online space , we learned that being dependent on mediating technology , such as the video chat and other tools , introduced more constraints . We also needed to understand how our participants would react to the changed mode CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Kung Jin Lee et al . of communication ( i . e . , using PowerPoint to draw and voting with colors and hands ) . There were multiple factors we considered when going online , including technical infrastructure and the mental model of understanding . Each technique we tried did not always accommodate each child’s diferent needs , and possibly excluded some children during the session . While we acknowledge that there are difculties in fnding a perfect technique , we argue that there is a need of constant negotiation with the participants between the diferent tensions that arise during ( and after ) the session , as opposed to just going with the fow . Among Kang et al’s [ 30 ] fve features of improvisation , interde - pendence highlights how improvisation is not a solo act ; rather it is dependent on the ‘others , ’ activities and surrounding material environment . We build the concept of interdependence to an on - line environment . Through the analogy of a show , we argue that children were not merely the audience of the show that we strived to continue , but they were also active actors that altered the scene and directed how the session would go . Through the lens of impro - visation , the diferent factors that emerged were not factors that solely adult facilitators troubleshot and intervened in . Conversely , these factors provided possibilities for children to showcase their capabilities ( such as a child pressing mute when his mom had the dish washer on or suggesting an adult prop their laptop to get a better camera angle ) for the show to go on . We believe our insights can help design practitioners prepare for improvisation . Practitioners need to know the larger system - atic structures ( e . g . , infrastructures , contexts ) and the potential interactions of people that govern how co - design sessions occur online before conducting sessions online . Our model provides 1 ) researchers / practitioners information about diferent factors , and 2 ) gives designers a lens to preemptively develop solutions ( before ) , implement ( during ) , and refect ( after ) on the online co - design ses - sions . Moreover , our model creates generalizable knowledge for others to use in diferent contexts [ 39 ] . 6 LIMITATIONS We acknowledge that not all researchers have the infrastructure to do multiple co - design sessions as our team did . In many cases , researchers may only have one or two sessions with the families and children where it is difcult to deviate from the planned session . However , we argue that , in a synchronous session , regardless of how well and prepared the researcher is ( such as sending prior surveys of understanding technological infrastructure ) , there are moments for improvisation . Yet , improvisation requires in - depth accumulated knowledge . Therefore , we encourage our framework and research to be used in adding more references to the unexpectedness ( e . g . , when a child joins a session from a moving car ) to be ready for improvisation . Importantly , we highlight that the children in this study already had an established rapport with the adults prior to us going on - line . In addition , multiple sessions aforded researchers extensive opportunities to understand each child’s context . For instance , in the session where we asked children to fnd materials within their home , we knew each child’s mobility needs and how they would impact their participation . Not all researchers are able to build a rapport in a short period of time or meet as consistently with their co - design partners . In some cases , researchers will meet the chil - dren online for the frst time , and continue to meet them online , without any prior interactions with them in an ofine setting . In those cases , we suggest that these researchers intentionally focus on children’s cues and constantly monitor how the child is feeling . As children interaction researchers , there may be moments where additional considerations should be made before experimenting with uncertainties in consideration of the ethics that are central to our approach . 7 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK The COVID - 19 pandemic has given us an opportunity to investi - gate doing co - design with children synchronously online . Beyond designing activities ( the techniques ) , facilitators need a conceptual model to comprehensively think through creating a synchronous co - design session where each child feels like they are a part of the design team , regardless of the diferent contexts that infuences the session . Our work provides a model of the diferent factors a researcher can take into consideration when moving co - design to an online space . Our model is built upon prior theories in improvi - sation , which concern a holistic view of the child , technology , and the technique . As we move forward , and more research papers propose difer - ent software , diferent tools , and diferent plug - ins , we argue that our conceptual model processes center our users’ interactions and moves beyond the dependence of technology . For instance , new ideas and theories about hybrid models of physically co - located children working in - tandem with children in synchronous / asyn - chronous online situations can lead to more ways to become more inclusive of children in co - design . These new ways of co - designing will also require conceptual models of improvising and co - design . Similarly , synchronous online co - design may become more preva - lent in the PD context . This addresses the population of participants who cannot meet locally with designers , but demonstrate a need for a sense of presence in the interaction . Such PD interactions could include chronically ill medical patients [ 9 ] , teachers [ 7 ] senior citi - zens [ 4 ] people with accessibility issues [ 52 ] , neurodiverse children [ 17 , 18 ] , and other vulnerable stakeholders . Ultimately , in our work , we care about creating a synchronous environment in which children feel like they are on the same play - ing felds as adults to create and design . We made modifcations that always centered the experiences of the diferent children while en - abling us to reach our design goals . We have noticed the value and possibilities of improvisation in our work , as there are more unex - pected situations in the synchronous sessions , which required us to deviate from the plan . As opposed to perceiving the unexpected as something to be avoided , we have attempted to re - examine the na - ture of change and free space as a learning process for new inquiry to emerge . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank the children and the student volunteers who participated in the study . We also thank parents and families for helping the children participate online . We also thank all CHI reviewers for their thoughtful suggestions in improving the paper . This study was The Show Must Go On : CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan also supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Re - search Fellowship Program ( NSF GRFP ) and the Jacobs Foundation Research Fellowship Program . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Dima Albadra , Zeinab Elamin , Kemi Adeyeye , Eleni Polychronaki , D . A . Coley , J . Holley , and Alexander Copping . 2020 . Participatory design in refugee camps : comparison of diferent methods and visualization tools . Building Research & Information , 1 - 17 [ 2 ] Morgan G . Ames , Janet Go , Jofsh Kaye , and Mirjana Spasojevic . 2010 . Making love in the network closet : the benefts and work of family videochat . In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work , 145 - 154 . [ 3 ] John Bowers . 2002 . Improvising machines : Ethnographically informed design for improvised electro - acoustic music . ARiADATexts , 4 . [ 4 ] Eva Brandt , Thomas Binder , Lone Malmborg , and Tomas Sokoler . 2010 . Commu - nities of everyday practice and situated elderliness as an approach to codesign for senior interaction . In Proceedings of the 22nd Conference of the Computer - Human Interaction Special Interest Group of Australia on ComputerHuman Interaction , 400 – 403 . [ 5 ] Urie Bronfenbrenner . 1992 . Ecological systems theory . In Six theories of child development : Revised formulations and current issues , ( pp , Ross Vasta ( ed . ) . Jessica Kingsley Publishers , London , England , 187 – 249 . [ 6 ] Tatiana Buhler , Carman Neustaedter , and Serena Hillman . 2013 . How and why teenagers use video chat . In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer supported cooperative work - CSCW ’13 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2441776 . 2441861 [ 7 ] John M . Carroll , George Chin , Mary Beth Rosson , and Dennis C . Neale . 2000 . The development of cooperation : Five years of participatory design in the virtual school . In Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Designing Interactive Systems : Processes , Practices , Methods , and Techniques ( DIS ’00 ) , 239 – 251 . [ 8 ] Kathy Charmaz and Liska Belgrave . 2012 . Qualitative interviewing and grounded theory analysis . The SAGE handbook of interview research : The complexity of the craft , 2 , 347 – 365 . [ 9 ] Jane Clemensen , Simon B . Larsen , Morten Kyng , and Marit Kirkevold . 2007 . Par - ticipatory design in health sciences : Using cooperative experimental methods in developing health services and computer technology . Qualitative Health Research 17 , 1 : 122 – 130 . [ 10 ] John W . Creswell and Cheryl N . Poth . 2016 . Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design : Choosing Among Five Approaches . SAGE Publications . [ 11 ] Karin Danielsson , Amir M . Naghsh , Dorina Gumm , and Andrew Warr . 2008 . Dis - tributed participatory design . In CHI ’08 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’08 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 3953 – 3956 . [ 12 ] Jelle Van Dijk , Niels Hendriks , Christopher Frauenberger , et al . 2016 . Empow - ering people with impairments : How participatory methods can inform the design of empowering artifacts . In Proceedings of the 14th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Interactive Exhibitions , Workshops , 2 : 121 – 122 . [ 13 ] Christian Dindler , Eva Eriksson , Ole Sejer Iversen , Andreas Lykke - Olesen , and Martin Ludvigsen . 2005 . Mission from Mars : a method for exploring user require - ments for children in a narrative space . In Proceedings of the 2005 conference on Interaction design and children , 40 – 47 . [ 14 ] Allison Druin . 1999 . Cooperative inquiry : developing new technologies for chil - dren with children . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 592 – 599 . [ 15 ] Allison Druin . 2002 . The role of children in the design of new technology . Behavior & Information Technology 21 , 1 , 1 – 25 . [ 16 ] Karen E . Fisher , Katya Yefmova , and Eiad Yaf . 2016 . Future’s butterfies : Co - designing ICT wayfaring technology with refugee Syrian youth . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , 25 - 36 . 2016 . [ 17 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Judith Good , and Wendy Keay - Bright . 2011 . Designing technology for children with special needs - Bridging perspectives through participatory design . CoDesign : International Journal of CoCreation in Design and the Arts 7 , 1 , 1 – 28 . [ 18 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Julia Makhaeva , and Katharina Spiel . 2016 . Designing smart objects with autistic children : Four design exposès . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) , 130 – 139 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858050 [ 19 ] Elizabeth Gerber . Improvisation principles and techniques for design . 2007 . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , 1069 - 1072 . [ 20 ] Elisa Giaccardi , Pedro Paredes , Paloma Díaz , and Diego Alvarado . 2012 . Embodied narratives : a performative co - design technique . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference , 1 - 10 [ 21 ] Mona Leigh Guha„ Allison Druin , Gene Chipman , Jerry Alan Fails , Sante Simms , and Allison Farber . 2005 . Working with young children as technology design partners . Communications of the ACM 48 , 1 , 39 - 42 . [ 22 ] Mona Leigh Guha , Allison Druin , Gene Chipman , Jerry Alan Fails , Sante Simms , and Allison Farber . 2004 . Mixing ideas : a new technique for working with young children as design partners . In Proceedings of the 2004 conference on Interaction design and children : building a community , 35 – 42 . [ 23 ] Andy Hamilton . 2002 . The art of improvisation and the aesthetics of imperfection . In Teaching music in secondary schools : a reader , 227 . [ 24 ] Richard Heeks . 2006 . Health information systems : Failure , success and improvi - sation . International journal of medical informatics 75 , 2 , 125 - 137 . [ 25 ] Kori Inkpen . 2018 . Capturing the everyday magic of play . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children , 3 - 4 . [ 26 ] Kori Inkpen , Wai - ling Ho - Ching , Oliver Kuederle , Stacey D . Scott , and Garth BD Shoemaker . 1999 . This is fun ! We’re all best friends and we’re all playing ! : Supporting Children’s Synchronous Collaboration . [ 27 ] Keith Johnstone . 2012 . Impro : Improvisation and the Theatre . Routledge . [ 28 ] Finn Kensing and Jeanette Blomberg . 1998 . Participatory Design : Issues and Concerns . Comput . Support . Coop . Work 7 , 3 ( September 1998 ) , 167 – 185 . [ 29 ] John Kratus . 1991 . Growing with improvisation . Music Educators Journal 78 , 4 ( December 1991 ) , 36 – 40 . [ 30 ] Laewoo ( Leo ) Kang , Steven J . Jackson , and Phoebe Sengers . 2018 . Intermodulation : Improvisation and Collaborative Art Practice for HCI . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . [ 31 ] Andrew Large , Valerie Nesset , Jamshid Beheshti , and Leanne Bowler . 2006 . “Bonded design” : A novel approach to intergenerational information technology design . Libr . Inf . Sci . Res . 28 , 1 ( March 2006 ) , 64 – 82 . [ 32 ] Steve Leybourne , Gary Lynn , and Morten Thanning Vendelø . 2014 . Forms , metaphors , and themes : an introduction to the special issue on organizational improvisation . Creativity and Innovation Management 23 , 4 ( 2014 ) , 353 – 358 . [ 33 ] Li - Fen Liao . 2006 . A fow theory perspective on learner motivation and behavior in distance education . " Distance Education 27 , no . 1 ( 2006 ) : 45 - 62 . [ 34 ] Nick Logler , Caroline Pitt , Xin Gao , Allison Marie Hishikawa , Jason Yip , and Batya Friedman . 2020 . I Feel Like This is a Bad Thing : Investigating Disassembly in Action for Novices . " In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 14 . [ 35 ] Haley MacLeod , Ben Jelen , Annu Prabhakar , Lora Oehlberg , Katie A . Siek , and Kay Connelly . 2016 . Asynchronous remote communities ( ARC ) for researching distributed populations . In PervasiveHealth , 1 – 8 . [ 36 ] Julia Makhaeva„ Christopher Frauenberger , and Katta Spiel . 2016 . Creating cre - ative spaces for co - designing with autistic children : the concept of a . In Pro - ceedings of the 14th Participatory Design Conference : Full papers - Volume 1 , 51 - 60 . [ 37 ] Brenna McNally , Priya Kumar , Chelsea Hordatt , Matthew Louis Mauriello , Shal - mali Naik , Leyla Norooz , Alazandra Shorter , Evan Golub , and Allison Druin . 2018 . Co - designing mobile online safety applications with children . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 9 . [ 38 ] Brenna McNally , Matthew Louis Mauriello , Mona Leigh Guha , and Allison Druin . 2017 . Gains from participatory design team membership as perceived by child alumni and their parents . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 5730 - 5741 . [ 39 ] Daniel L . Moody . Theoretical and practical issues in evaluating the quality of conceptual models : current state and future directions . Data & Knowledge Engi - neering 55 , 3 , 243 - 276 . [ 40 ] Alfonso Montuori . 2003 . The Complexity of Improvisation and the Improvisation of Complexity : Social Science , Art and Creativity . Hum . Relat . 56 , 2 ( February 2003 ) , 237 – 255 . [ 41 ] Neema Moraveji , Jason Li , Jiarong Ding , Patrick O’Kelley , and Suze Woolf . 2007 . Comicboarding : using comics as proxies for participatory design with children . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , 1371 – 1374 . [ 42 ] Michael J . Muller and Sarah Kuhn . 1993 . Participatory design . Communications of the ACM 36 , 6 , 24 – 28 . [ 43 ] Mercédès Pavlicevic . 2000 . Improvisation in music therapy : Human communica - tion in sound . Journal of music therapy 37 , 4 , 269 - 285 . [ 44 ] Nichole Pinkard , Sheena Erete , Caitlin K . Martin , and Maxine McKinney de Royston . 2017 . Digital youth divas : Exploring narrative - driven curriculum to spark middle school girls’ interest in computational activities . Journal of the Learning Sciences 26 , 3 , 477 – 516 . [ 45 ] Annu Sible Prabhakar , Lucia Guerra - Reyes , Vanessa M . Kleinschmidt , Ben Jelen , Haley MacLeod , Kay Connelly , and Katie A . Siek . 2017 . Investigating the suit - ability of the asynchronous , remote , community - based method for pregnant and new mothers . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 4924 - 4934 . [ 46 ] Janet C . Read , Peggy Gregory , Stuart MacFarlane , Barbara McManus , Peter Gray , and Raj Patel . 2002 . An investigation of participatory design with children - informant , balanced and facilitated design . In Interaction design and children . Shaker Publishing , Eindhoven , Netherlands , 53 – 64 . CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan [ 47 ] Tom Rodden and Gordon Blair . 1991 . CSCW and Distributed Systems : The Prob - lem of Control . In Proceedings of the Second European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ECSCW ’91 , Liam Bannon , Mike Robinson and Kjeld Schmidt ( eds . ) . Springer Netherlands , Dordrecht , 49 – 64 . [ 48 ] Wendy Roldan , Xin Gao , Allison Marie Hishikawa , Tifany Ku , Ziyue Li , Echo Zhang , Jon E . Froehlich , and Jason Yip . 2020 . Opportunities and Challenges in Involving Users in Project - Based HCI Education . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 15 . [ 49 ] Keith R Sawyer . 2000 . Improvisation and the creative process : Dewey , Colling - wood , and the aesthetics of spontaneity . The journal of aesthetics and art criticism 58 , 2 , 149 - 161 . [ 50 ] Keith R Sawyer . 2011 . What makes good teachers great ? The artful balance of structure and improvisation . In R . K . Sawyer ( Ed . ) , Structure and improvisation in creative teaching . Cambridge University Press , New York , NY , 1 – 24 . [ 51 ] Laurianne Sitbon . 2018 . Engaging IT students in co - design with people with intellectual disability . In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 6 . [ 52 ] Karin Slegers , Pieter Duysburgh , Helma van Rijn , and Niels Hendriks . 2012 . Par - ticipatory design for users with impairments afecting cognitive functions and communication skills . In Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Confer - ence : Exploratory Papers , Workshop Descriptions , Industry Cases - Volume 2 , 141 – 142 . [ 53 ] Clay Spinuzzi . 2005 . The methodology of participatory design . Technical com - munication 52 , 2 , 163 - 174 . [ 54 ] Yi Tay , Donovan Ong , Jie Fu , Alvin Chan , Nancy Chen , Anh Tuan Luu , and Christopher Pal . 2020 . Would you Rather ? A New Benchmark for Learning Machine Alignment with Cultural Values and Social Preferences . In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 5369 - 5373 . [ 55 ] Greg Walsh , Craig Donahue , and Zachary Pease . 2016 . Inclusive co - design within a three - dimensional game environment . In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , 1 - 10 . [ 56 ] Greg Walsh , Craig Donahue , and Emily E . Rhodes . . 2015 . KidCraft : Co - design within a game environment . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1205 - 1210 . [ 57 ] Greg Walsh , Allison Druin , Mona Leigh Guha , Elizabeth Bonsignore , Elizabeth Foss , Jason C . Yip , Evan Golub et al . 2012 . DisCo : a co - design online tool for asynchronous distributed child and adult design partners . In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , 11 - 19 . Kung Jin Lee et al . [ 58 ] Greg Walsh , Alison Druin , Mona Leigh Guha , Elizabeth Foss , Evan Golub , Leshell Hatley , Elizabeth Bonsignore , and Sonia Franckel . 2010 . Layered elaboration : a new technique for co - design with children . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1237 - 1240 . [ 59 ] Greg Walsh . 2011 . Distributed participatory design . In CHI ’11 Extended Ab - stracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’11 ) , Association for Computing Machinery ( ACM ) , New York , NY , 1061 – 1064 . [ 60 ] Greg Walsh , Elizabeth Foss , Jason Yip , and Allison Druin . 2013 . FACIT PD : A Framework for Analysis and Creation of Intergenerational Techniques for Par - ticipatory Design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) , Association for Computing Machinery ( ACM ) , New York , NY , USA , 2893 – 2902 . [ 61 ] Cara Wilson , Margot Brereton , Bernd Ploderer , and Laurianne Sitbon . 2019 . Co - Design Beyond Words . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300251 [ 62 ] Ying Xu , Carleen Maitland , and Brian Tomaszewski . 2015 . Promoting partic - ipatory community building in refugee camps with mapping technology . In Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information and Com - munication Technologies and Development , 1 - 4 . [ 63 ] Svetlana Yarosh , Stephen Cuzzort , Hendrik Müller , and Gregory D . Abowd . 2009 . Developing a media space for remote synchronous parent - child interaction . Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , 97 - 105 . [ 64 ] Jason C . Yip , Kiley Sobel , Caroline Pitt , Kung Jin Lee , Sijin Chen , Kari Nasu , and Laura R . Pina . 2017 . Examining Adult - Child Interactions in Intergenerational Participatory Design . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) , Association for Computing Machinery ( ACM ) , New York , NY , 5742 – 5754 . [ 65 ] Jason C . Yip , Tamara Clegg , June Ahn , Judith Odili Uchidiuno , Elizabeth Bon - signore , Austin Beck , Daniel Pauw , and Kelly Mills . 2016 . The evolution of en - gagements and social bonds during child - parent co - design . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 3607 - 3619 . [ 66 ] Jason C . Yip , and Kung Jin Lee . 2018 . The design of digital learning activities for libraries through participatory design . Reconceptualizing libraries : Perspectives from the information and the learning sciences . Routledge , New York , NY . [ 67 ] Jason C . Yip , Kiley Sobel , Xin Gao , Allison Marie Hishikawa , Alexis Lim , Laura Meng , Romaine Flor Ofana , Justin Park , and Alexis Hiniker . 2019 . Laughing is Scary , but Farting is Cute : A Conceptual Model of Children’s Perspectives of Creepy Technologies . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 15 .