Why do Academic Scientists Engage in Interdisciplinary Research ? φ Nicolas Carayol ϕ ∗ and Thuc Uyen Nguyen Thi ϕ ϕ BETA ( UMR CNRS 7522 ) , Department of Economics , Université Louis Pasteur , Strasbourg 1 September 2004 Abstract : This article provides a ﬁ rst empirical study of the determinants of the propensity to which academic scholars tend to perform interdisciplinarity research . For that purpose we intro - duce a measure of interdisciplinarity as the diversity of their re - search production across scienti ﬁ c domains . Our dataset concerns more than nine hundred permanent researchers employed by a large French university which is ranked ﬁ rst among French uni - versities in terms of Impact . As expected we ﬁ nd that the tradi - tional academic career incentives do not stimulate interdiscipli - nary research while having connections with industry does . The context of work in the laboratory ( size , colleagues’ status , age and a ﬃ liations ) strongly a ﬀ ects the propensity to undertake in - terdisciplinary research . Key words : Economics of science , Academic incentives , Inter - disciplinary research , Laboratory , University . JEL classi ﬁ cation : L31 , 031 , 032 , 034 , 038 . ∗ Corresponding author . BETA , PEGE - ULP , 61 , avenue de la Forêt Noire , F - 67085 , Strasbourg Cedex ; tel : + 33 - 390242104 ; fax : + 33 - 390242071 ; email : < carayol @ cournot . u - strasbg . fr > . φ We are grateful to P . Llerena , M . Matt , S . Wol ﬀ who contributed to the constitution of the ULP - BETA database in a context of collective work . L . Ba - ch’s and R . Larue de Tournemine’s comments helped us to improve the paper . Acknowledgements extend to the administrative departments and the Technology Transfer O ﬃ ce at ULP , and to the CNRS Industrial Liaison O ﬃ ce in Strasbourg . 1 1 Introduction As emphasized by Gibbons et al . ( 1994 ) the production of interdiscipli - nary knowledge is one major issue to be dealt with in the “knowledge - based society” . Two main reasons came up to claim social interest in such kind of research as compared to more standard disciplinary research . First , it has been argued that research performed in an interdisciplinary context is likely to be more creative : Mixing people with di ﬀ erent backgrounds and / or ideas from di ﬀ erent ﬁ elds would be likely to generate “breakthrough” research re - sults . Secondly , interdisciplinary research has been emphasized as being more likely to lead to applicable results ( Schmoch et al . , 1994 ) , because it is more friendly to problem - solving approaches ( Foray and Gibbons , 1996 ) . Why in - terdisciplinary research becomes a real subject of interest for science policy is because anecdotal evidence highlights that some institutional barriers may unduly limit its performing . More generally it seems that the academic impli - cit reward system in the ‘open science’ does not provide su ﬃ cient incentives for performing interdisciplinary research as regard to its social value . There - fore , the interest in interdisciplinary research is now broadly widened among scholars and policy makers . It increasingly becomes an important criterion taken into account in public funding processes both in the EU framework and NSF funding programs . Although an abundant literature substantially improved our understan - ding of interdisciplinary research ( Morreale and Howery , 2002 ; Ziman , 1997 ; Qin et al . , 1997 ; Schmoch et al . , 1994 ; Sanz - Menéndez et al , 2001 ; Tomov and Mutafov , 1996 ; Morillo et al . , 2001 ) , it remains a di ﬃ cult and quite fuzzy concept ( Klein , 1990 and Acutt et al . , 2000 ) . For the purpose of this study , we propose and make use of two new measures . The ﬁ rst one is la - belled the degree of multidisciplinarity of a research unit . It measures the diversity of disciplinary professional a ﬃ liation of permanent researchers of academic laboratories . The second one is the degree of interdisciplinarity of an academic researcher publication production : It accounts for the diversity of a researcher’s publications over scienti ﬁ c domains . The main originality of our contribution is that we speci ﬁ cally developed a methodology that allows us to study the determinants of interdisciplinary research performing by academic researchers ( i . e . the degree of interdiscipli - narity ) . Despite the acknowledged importance of interdisciplinary research , there has been no systematic analysis of the determinants of interdiscipli - nary research . Only a few monographs dealt speci ﬁ cally with such an issue 2 ( Grupp , 1994 ; Laudel and Gläser , 1998 and Morreale and Howery , 2002 ) . That is unfortunate because scholars as well as science policy makers and managers still wonder about the incentives and the factors that in ﬂ uence the setting of academics’ research agendas , particularly those that lead academic researchers to undertake interdisciplinary research . Porter and Chubin ( 1985 ) argued that it is the absence of appropriate data which constitutes a barrier to the systematic study of this phenomenon . We have been able to overcome such a di ﬃ culty thanks to an original dataset that precisely informs about the research behaviors of more than nine hundred academic scientists over the period 1995 - 2000 during which they were employed by a large French University , namely the Université Louis Pasteur ( ULP ) in Strasbourg . This university is ranked ﬁ rst among French universities ( in terms of impact ) by the European Report on Science and Technology ( 2003 ) . These data allow us to take into account both individual researchers characteristics ( age , status , publications impact and strategy ) and the characteristics of the laboratories to which the researchers are a ﬃ liated including colleagues’ age , status , the presence of non - permanent researchers , the multidisciplinarity of the lab , the funding structure ( public and private support ) . Two series of determinants of interdisciplinary research will be conside - red . On the one hand , we will study whether the academic reward structure ( accomplishment and reputation based career paths ) do provide incentives or distract scholars from performing interdisciplinary work . There are strong expectations that the generalized peer - review evaluation system in science which is mainly based on disciplinary a ﬃ liations , might lead to strong incen - tives toward disciplinary research as suggested by Ziman ( 1997 ) and Sanz - Menéndez et al . ( 2001 ) . On the other hand , we wonder whether the orga - nizational design and the funding structure of the research units ( and cha - racteristics of colleagues in laboratories ) a ﬀ ects the propensity to undertake interdisciplinary research as suggested by Ziman ( 1994 , 1997 ) . If interdisciplinary research performing is acknowledged as a socially va - luable task , providing evidence that may contribute to understand the insti - tutional factors and the incentives which sustain or impeach such behavior becomes thus a relevant policy issue that is addressed in this paper . It is orga - nized as follows . The next section reviews and discusses the various measures of interdisciplinarity and multidisciplinarity . It provides the de ﬁ nitions that will be further used in the study . The third section describes the dataset , the 3 variables and the methodology employed . The results are presented in the fourth section . 2 Measuring interdisciplinarity Numerous notions and concepts have been introduced and discussed in the philosophy and sociology of science literatures so far ( Piaget , 1972 ; Gibbons et al . , 1994 ; Ziman , 1994 ) . Reviewing all these works extends far beyond the purpose of this study . We here restrict our attention to the indicators that have been proposed in the literature to assess the degree to which research is interdisciplinary . These indexes are reviewed in a ﬁ rst subsection , while the second subsection presents the measures that will be further used in the paper . 2 . 1 Literature review As suggested by Sanz - Menéndez et al . ( 2001 ) a simple and useful manner to categorize the various measures of interdisciplinarity is to separate the ones applied to research groups based on team composition from the ones applied to the research outcomes . The former are from now on labeled as measures of multidisciplinarity while the latter will be referred to as measures of interdisciplinarity . Multidisciplinarity Multidisciplinarity is a notion that refers to research patterns of a given team , community or institution and is observed through the a ﬃ liation of researchers to di ﬀ erent disciplines . Sanz - Menéndez et al . ( 2001 ) interviewed researchers in order to assess the disciplinary diversity of team members and to give a qualitative appreciation of the degree of multidisciplinarity of their team . More precisely , the interviewed researchers were requested to assess the “disciplinary diversity” of their research team in a four items intensity scale . Moreover , the interviewees were asked to give a qualitative appreciation of the interdisciplinarity of their research teams by listing up to ﬁ ve colleagues ( mentioning their disciplines and specializations ) employed in the research team with whom they are currently working . Nguyen Thi and Lahatte ( 2003 ) proposed two indicators of multidisci - plinarity of university laboratories , which are the ratio of the number of ﬁ elds ( subdisciplines ) to which researchers a ﬃ liated to the lab are associa - ted over the average number of ﬁ elds in university labs . Carayol and Matt 4 ( 2004 ) ﬁ rst introduced a measure of team multidisciplinarity as the diver - sity of researchers a ﬃ liations into subdisciplines . It makes use of Shannon’s entropy measure which accounts for the relative weights of subdisciplines in the lab . For example , if one thinks of a laboratory the researchers of which are a ﬃ liated to two di ﬀ erent disciplines , it is clearly not the same to have all researchers but one a ﬃ liated to one subdiscipline or to have half resear - chers a ﬃ liated to each subdiscipline . The latter situation is likely to be more multidisciplinary . The entropy measure accounts for that di ﬀ erence being at its maximum when the population ( here researchers in the lab ) is uniformly allocated into the various categories identi ﬁ ed ex ante ( the ﬁ elds ) . Interdisciplinarity Interdisciplinarity measures go beyond the simple observation of the pre - sence of research personnel from di ﬀ erent disciplinary backgrounds in com - mon institutions , but characterizes the research outcomes directly . One can identify two main approaches for measuring such interdisciplinarity . The ﬁ rst approach makes use of the journals classi ﬁ cation according to subject categories provided in the Journal Citation Report ( JCR ) produced by the Institute for Scienti ﬁ c Information ( ISI ) . This method relies on the co - assignation of journals into the di ﬀ erent research domains as de ﬁ ned in the JCR . Empirical studies have explored the interdisciplinary structure of research programs or scienti ﬁ c disciplines . For instance , Rinia et al . ( 2001 ) used publication data that resulted from research programs in physics . The interdisciplinarity of the programs was measured by the percentage of papers published in non - physics journals . Moreover , knowing that journals can be associated to several categories , Morillo et al . ( 2001 ) measured the degree of interdisciplinarity of a scienti ﬁ c discipline as the share of its mutli - assigned journals . The second approach goes down to the articles as the subject of analysis . It makes use of information provided in the Science Citation Index ( SCI ) also produced by the ISI . Interdisciplinarity is measured through the co - occurences of items , such as authors’ a ﬃ liations , citations or references . The more frequent the co - occurences of di ﬀ erent ﬁ elds or disciplines in authors’ a ﬃ liations , in the citations received or in the references mentioned , the more intensive the relationships or the exchanges between disciplines . The authors’ a ﬃ liation - based analysis identi ﬁ es the institutions of au - thors and associate them to disciplines . Qiu ( 1992 ) de ﬁ ned an annual degree of interdisciplinarity of journals as the share of interdisciplinary co - authored 5 papers . Such articles are identi ﬁ ed as the ones written by researchers asso - ciated to di ﬀ erent disciplines . The author also used a similar indicator for studying the evolution of interdisciplinarity of one single discipline ( Informa - tion and Library Sciences ) over a 20 - year period . Schummer ( 2003 ) proposed to measure interdisciplinarity in the domain of Nanoscience and Nanotech - nology as the “number of disciplines involved by authorship in at least 5 % of the total number of papers” . The citation and reference analyses are the most frequently used method among studies of the second approach . They measure ﬂ ows of information between papers ( Qin et al , 1997 ) , journals ( Porter and Chubin , 1985 ; Morillo et al . , 2001 ) , or disciplines ( Qin et al , 1997 ) . For instance , Tomov and Mu - tafov ( 1996 ) have proposed an interdisciplinary index of journals using both references and citations . Moreover , Sanz - Menéndez et al . ( 2001 ) measured interdisciplinarity of researchers through interviews asking them to indicate the ﬁ ve journals that are their main reference journals 1 . 2 . 2 Interdisplinarity and Multidisciplinarity : De ﬁ nitions In this subsection we propose two measures which make us of the entropy notion introduced by Shannon . It is a simple function of a discrete distri - bution which is maximal when the population is uniformly distributed and minimal when the all elements of the population are in the same state . As in Carayol and Matt ( 2004 ) , we propose to measure the degree of mul - tidisciplinarity of a laboratory as the entropy of the distribution of permanent researchers over the set of subdisciplines . It is computed as follows : Lab . multidis i = − X i ∈ L i n ij n i log µ n ij n i ¶ ( 1 ) with n i the number of permanent researchers in i ’s laboratory and n ij the number of researchers in i ’s laboratory that are a ﬃ liated to subdiscipline j . It corresponds to the lowest disciplinary level of aggregation as reported by the OST classi ﬁ cation applicable in France ( cf . OST , 1996 ) 2 . According to that classi ﬁ cation , there are 73 subdisciplines . 1 We should also mention that Morillo et al . ( 2001 ) proposed to use the Chemical Abstracts database to build indicators . The degree of interdisciplinary of a given ﬁ eld is then the percentage of the multi - assigned documents over the 80 sections classi ﬁ cation de ﬁ ned in the Chemical Abstracts . 2 There are several institutional classi ﬁ cations in the French system each one being de - signed for peer evaluation purposes in di ﬀ erent research institutions . Three of them have 6 We propose a measure for the extent to which an agent i ’s research pro - duction is interdisciplinary . It is the diversity of i ’s publication occurrences over the scienti ﬁ c domains . It is computed as follows : Interdisc i = − X j p ij log ( p ij ) ( 2 ) with p ij the share of i ’s publications in the domain j . It is computed as follows : p ij = 1 # P i X a ∈ P i φ ( j , r a ) ( 3 ) where P i is the set of i ’s publications , # P i is its cardinal and r a is the journal in which article a ∈ P i has been published . The function φ ( · , · ) is de ﬁ ned as follows : φ ( j , r a ) = 1 { j ∈ d ( r a ) } / # d ( r a ) with 1 { · } the indicator function and d ( r a ) the set of domains to which r a is associated by JCR journal - domains classi ﬁ cation . The cardinal of this set , # d ( r a ) is thus the number of di ﬀ erent domains to which the journal r a is associated . d ( r a ) is itself a subset of the set of all domains D , the cardinal of which # D is equal to 170 in the JCR classi ﬁ cation scheme . It should be noticed that this de ﬁ nition allows us to take into account the internal interdisciplinarity of journals as evidenced by their multi - assignation to domains . 3 The dataset and methodology In a ﬁ rst step we present our data collection and our dataset . The second subsection presents the model . 3 . 1 Data set The data concern the research activity between 1993 and 2000 of a single university : the University Louis Pasteur ( ULP ) located in the Strasbourg area ( France ) . ULP has an old tradition of fundamental research and a long - term standing of scienti ﬁ c excellence . its researchers have received numerous to be considered for our study ; The ﬁ rst one is the CNU ( the National Council of Univer - sities ) classi ﬁ cation according to which university scholars are associated . The CNRS and the INSERM classi ﬁ cations allow us to characterize fulltime researchers who are associated to these institutions and who are working in our laboratories . At the most disaggregated level , the three di ﬀ erent classi ﬁ cations do not perfectly match . Therefore , a standardi - zation work was carried out for the purpose of our study . The detailed classi ﬁ cation we realized can be produced upon request to the corresponding author . 7 national and international scienti ﬁ c prizes , including Nobel Prizes . Overall , ULP is one of the largest French universities in terms of research . The Third European Report on Science & Technology Indicators 2003 ranks ULP ﬁ rst among French universities and 11th among European universities in terms of impact . Active researchers count one Nobel laureate , eleven members of the Institut Universitaire de France and eleven members of the French National Academy of Science . The university research capacities are reinforced by a close - knit with the major national research bodies such as the National Center for Scienti ﬁ c Research ( CNRS ) and the National Institute for Health and Medical Research ( INSERM ) present in the Strasbourg area . Research and teaching activities cover a wide range of subjects : Medical Sciences , Mathematics , Computer Science , Physics , Chemistry , Life Sciences , Geology , Geophysics , Astronomy , Engineering Sciences . Human and social sciences are also present with Economics , Management , Geography , Psychology and Educational Sciences . We collected the variables from administrative reports completed for the 1996 contractual a ﬃ liation round 3 . 1 , 460 permanent researchers were repor - ted in these documents : They were all present in 1996 . A similar document exists for the 2001 - 2004 period . Thus we had information about which perma - nent researchers were still present in the university in 2000 . We then excluded all permanents that were not on that list . Thereby we ensure that none of the permanent researchers moved to another university or retired . At the end of the process , 1 , 134 permanents remained among whom 908 were fully informed on the variables of interest . According to the classi ﬁ cation of per - manent researchers disciplinary a ﬃ liations , we found 52 ( out of 73 ) di ﬀ erent subdisciplines . The published articles of each permanent researcher in our database were also collected using SCI , SSCI and Arts and Humanities ISI databases . More than 26 , 000 publication occurrences were recorded over the 1993 - 2000 per - 3 Such a round occurs every four years . All laboratories ( and also Faculties and Insti - tutes ) have to produce a standardized document , which is usually divided into two distinct parts : A précis of the past four years and a project for the next four ones . The data cover the period from 1993 to 2000 , which may be separated into two four - year sub - periods : 1993 - 1996 and 1997 - 2000 , which represent respectively what was achieved during the four - year periods before and after 1996 ( i . e . the new a ﬃ liation contract ) . These documents are evaluated through standard peer review procedures conducted by both the Ministry of Research and Education and funding agencies such as the CNRS and INSERM whose support is expected . 8 iod . We matched this table with our restricted list of permanent researchers and kept only the occurrences that were published over the period 1995 - 2000 for which we are sure they were employed by the university 4 . This amount includes some double counting as ULP researchers frequently co - authored papers . By dividing each occurrence by the number of co - authors we obtain the e ﬀ ective ( normalized ) scienti ﬁ c contribution of each author considered ( an author is necessarily a permanent researcher ) . In addition each publi - cation item was associated to the impact factor of the reviews in which it was published . That information was obtained for the 5 , 750 reviews reported in the ISI - Journal Citation Report ( JCR ) . It gives us thus the opportunity to correct for impact publication performance . This dataset also reporting the domains , i . e . each journal is attached to one or more of 170 scienti ﬁ c domains . Moreover we have information on all the laboratories to which these per - manent researchers were a ﬃ liated ( laboratories variables ) . We recorded 79 distinct laboratories in 1996 for which we have complete and reliable infor - mation . We are thus able to attach to each individual scientist the variables characterizing their laboratories or colleagues ( other permanent researchers ) in labs . The number of permanent researchers in the lab is the single variable which accounts for the size of the lab . All other variables are proportions . When the variables characterizing the labs were computed from informa - tion on permanent researchers , we always excluded the researcher who is analyzed ( the average age of colleagues , their positions , their scienti ﬁ c pro - ductivity ) . Some additional information on the labs were collected in the 1996 research reports . We were thus also able to introduce more variables on labs . We include data on types of personnel which are often not included in empirical analyses : Some 1 , 230 Ph . D . students , 710 post - docs and 1 , 120 non - researchers ( administrative sta ﬀ and technicians ) were reported in year 1996 . Lastly we were able to collect precise information about funding of the laboratories ( excluding wages ) . We have data on regular public funding for the period 1996 - 2000 . We collected information about the contractual fun - ding over the whole 1993 - 2000 period . The latter was broken up by source of funding : Public funding at the European , national and local levels , and private ones . 3 . 2 The model 4 Or by the national research institutes ( CNRS and INSERM ) but working within the university laoratories . 9 Let us now turn to our econometric model which aims at explaining the individual interdisciplinarity entropy ( Interdisc i ) for our population of 908 permanent scholars and researchers for whom we have complete information . A closer look of the data informs us that a non - negligible share of this va - riable variables is null : 90 zero ( 818 are strictly positive ) . A null degree of interdisciplinarity arises when the research occurs in one single ﬁ eld . The research is then strictly disciplinary . Kernel density estimates displayed in Figure 1 show the speci ﬁ c density we have . In order to account for the qua - litative change between being strictly mono - disciplinary and publishing in more than one ﬁ eld of research , we perform a ( left censored ) Tobit model with a known cuto ﬀ due to Amemiya ( 1973 ) which is of the form : y ∗ i = x 0 i β + ε i ( 4 ) where x i is the vector of independent variables , β the vector of its associa - ted coe ﬃ cients , ε i is the error term 5 . y ∗ i is assumed to be the unobserved level of commitment to interdisciplinary research , from which the interdis - ciplinary entropy measure which is the really observed dependent variable ( y i = Interdisc i ) is obtained as follows : ½ y i = y ∗ i if y ∗ i > 0 y i = 0 if y ∗ i ≤ 0 ( 5 ) This speci ﬁ cation gives the opportunity to model that below a certain level of commitment no publication item is recorded outside the main research area . Such a threshold may be due to dedicated work that is implied by coping with publishing and passing peer review processes in scienti ﬁ c journals of di ﬀ erent ﬁ elds . The log - likelihood which will be maximized is the following : L = 1 2 X i ∈ S ln · y i − x 0 i β σ + ln 2 πσ 2 ¸ + X i / ∈ S ln Φ µ − x 0 i β σ ¶ ( 6 ) with S the set of individuals i which are uncensored ( have a non null de - pendent variable y i > 0 ) and Φ ( · ) the normal cumulative density function . The set of independent variables is given by the following vector : x i = ( Impact i , Age i , junior i , fulltime i , Inter i , Indus i , Lab . Pub i , Lab . Imp i , 5 The error terms are assumed to be independent N ( 0 , σ 2 ) . 10 Lab . perm i , Lab . age i , Lab . fulltime i , Lab . junior i , Lab . phd i , Lab . postdocN i , Lab . postdocF i , Lab . nonres i , Lab . multidisc i , Lab . funding i , Lab . contractualPub i , Lab . contractualPriv i ) . Precise de ﬁ nitions of the variables are to be found in Appendix . Descrip - tive statistics on these variables are presented in Table 1 . 4 Results The estimation results are presented in Table 2 . Below we ﬁ rst present and discuss the e ﬀ ects of individual variables and then those of the collective variables . 4 . 1 Individual factors We ﬁ nd that Age is not signi ﬁ cant . Several con ﬁ gurations ( introducing cohorts of age , age square . . . ) were tested but the results remained the same . We expected a positive e ﬀ ect of age because of two simultaneous e ﬀ ects . First , younger researchers might dislike interdisciplinary research agendas because they are likely to be more risky and their reputational rewards are likely to be delayed ( even if they may be spread over a longer period of time ) . Secondly , experience vehicled through age might be an important factor for having acquired the broad view which is required for spreading research over several ﬁ elds . The absence of a such positive e ﬀ ect of age may be due to a si - multaneous counterbalancing cohort e ﬀ ect 6 : researchers of the latest cohorts would tend to be more disciplinary oriented . Nevertheless , we found no evi - dence ( even anecdotal ) of such cohort e ﬀ ect in the literature to support this statement . It should be noticed that it is only when the promotion - related va - riable Junior was removed that Age became ( weakly ) signi ﬁ cant . This shows , as suggested in Knorr et al . ( 1979 ) and Carayol and Matt ( 2004 ) for publica - tion performance , that when one controls for position related variables , the age tends to become non signi ﬁ cant . Junior has a negative and signi ﬁ cant coe ﬃ cient : Since this dummy va - riable means not yet promoted , we ﬁ nd , on the one hand , that it is once they have been promoted that researchers tend to engage more strongly in interdisciplinary research . Before promotion researchers tend to concentrate 6 See Stephan ( 1996 ) for a discussion of the importance of cohort e ﬀ ects in academic publication productivity . 11 their research agendas within well delineated ﬁ elds . This may be due to ca - reer concerns . The evaluation of researchers is mostly done within scienti ﬁ c domains . Thus disciplinary works which generate easily identi ﬁ able scienti - ﬁ c accomplishments tend to be better rewarded . Consequently , researchers expecting to increase their probability of being promoted may be likely to select well speci ﬁ ed topics and methods in their main research areas and de - lay publications in other ﬁ elds . Moreover , interdisciplinary research may be more risky and require longer term research ( Schmoch et al . , 1994 ) . Thus researchers may prefer to wait until the promotion is awarded to undertake such research , when they are less pressured by academic career constraints . Fulltime is strongly signi ﬁ cant and exhibits a positive coe ﬃ cient : Re - searchers that occupy full - time research positions undertake more interdis - ciplinary research . This may be explained as follows . Full - time researchers do bene ﬁ t from a larger amount of time to be devoted to research . In the meantime interdisciplinary research might require a stronger commitment in research because it is likely to occur in larger projects whereas in more dis - ciplinary research , tackling the “next problem at hand” strategy might be sustainable . Full - time researchers are not subject to the same time constraints as scholars that face teaching duties as well as research ones , and therefore they are more likely to perform interdisciplinary research . The average impact factor is not signi ﬁ cant . This means that people who publish in di ﬀ erent ﬁ elds do not signi ﬁ cantly di ﬀ er in terms of average impact of their publications . If one assumes that impact proxies quality , then there are no e ﬀ ects of the researchers abilities on his or her propensity to undertake interdisciplinary research . On the contrary , having published at least one paper with a researcher em - ployed in industry makes a major di ﬀ erence for undertaking interdisciplinary research : The dummy Indus is strongly signi ﬁ cant and positive . This tends to corroborate the idea suggested by Foray and Gibbons ( 1996 ) that interdis - ciplinary research agendas and sensitivity to applications through problem solving approaches are strongly connected . The results also show that interdisciplinary research is discipline - speci ﬁ c ( most discipline dummies are signi ﬁ cant ) . This might be explained by the large di ﬀ erences in the scope of disciplines , the abilities of agents to move between domains and to master them . Interdisciplinary research is not uni - formly encouraged , facilitated and feasible among all scienti ﬁ c disciplines ( Ziman , 1997 ) . Moreover , the density of the SCI domains classi ﬁ cation co - 12 verage is also not uniform across disciplines . An obvious illustration of that is for instance the extreme di ﬀ erence in the number of subdivisions in Ma - thematics and in the Medical Sciences ( Qin et al . , 1997 ) . Consequently , the coe ﬃ cients of discipline dummies should rather be understood as controls for such measurement biases . 4 . 2 Laboratories variables About the e ﬀ ect of the context of work , we ﬁ nd that the size of the lab plays negatively on interdisciplinarity . It is within smaller labs that resear - chers tend to visit a higher number of distinct research areas . Researchers in larger labs tend to focus on fewer research areas . Smaller labs thus seems to provide a more favorable context of work for performing interdiscipinary re - search . In larger labs , disciplinary specialization tend to prevail and scholars tend to concentrate their work in given ﬁ elds . Colleagues’ age plays positively on interdisciplinarity . Researchers tend to bene ﬁ t from colleagues’ experience in undertaking diverse research purposes . This result highlights that colleagues interact in the selection process of re - search agendas . This statement is strongly reinforced by the following results . Researchers undertake more interdisciplinary research when their colleagues are less promoted and older . This might indicate that researchers bene ﬁ t from more ‘open minded’ interactions with older and unpromoted colleagues who stimulate them to engage in more varied research domains . We have also found that interdisciplinary research is less likely in labs which have a high ratio of Ph . D . students per permanent researchers . Ph . D . students seem to be more attracted by labs having a strong disciplinary orientation . One important e ﬀ ect concerns the distribution of colleagues between va - rious domains ( degree of multidisciplinarity of the lab ) , i . e . having distinct reference ( and evaluation ) communities . Ziman ( 1997 ) argued that interdisci - plinary research is hindered by institutional frontiers that usually correspond to disciplinary ones . We indeed ﬁ nd that the integration of researchers having di ﬀ erent disciplinary backgrounds inside a common research unit stimulates the diversity of individual research production . The funding structure of the lab also a ﬀ ects the propensity to perform interdisciplinary research . We ﬁ nd that recurrent public funding has no im - pact while contractual funding , both from private and public sources , has signi ﬁ cant and positive e ﬀ ects . When their lab attracts larger amounts of non recurrent funding , researchers tend to perform more interdisciplinary 13 research . Funding agencies as well as private ﬁ rms tend to be more interes - ted in problem - solving approaches . Scholars in labs having built channels to such sources of funding are more likely to engage in applications oriented and problem solving approaches and thus in interdisciplinary research . 5 Discussion and conclusion Interdisciplinary research has received much attention in the literature in recent years . However , there has been no systematic analysis of the determi - nants of interdisciplinary research performing . In this paper , we propose two measures : the degree of multidisciplinarity of a laboratory as the diversity of researchers’ institutional a ﬃ liations and the degree of interdisciplinarity of a researcher’s scienti ﬁ c production as the diversity of his / her articles in terms of the domains in which they have been published . Secondly , we study the factors that in ﬂ uence the propensity to undertake interdisciplinary research . This study bears on a population of more than nine hundred academic re - searchers who were employed by the university Louis Pasteur in Strabourg over the period 1993 - 2000 . We ﬁ nd some speci ﬁ c evidence of no or negative incentives provided by the academic reward systems toward performing interdisciplinary research . Young ( and non - promoted ) researchers who are more inclined to respond to academic incentives ( because they are likely to be delayed in their career paths ) do not speci ﬁ cally engage in ( tend to dislike undertaking ) interdiscipli - nary work . This tends to indicate that the tension between problem - driven interdisciplinary work and discipline - based academic career structure per - sists . The norms of originality and the necessity to publish in the advisable disciplinary journals , on which the main criteria for enrolment or promotion of researchers are based , encourage disciplinary work having narrow topics and methods and discourage the acquisition of knowledge and more generally the openness to and the collaboration with scholars from other ﬁ elds or dis - ciplines . The rewarding mechanisms tend to favor narrowly drawn projects with speci ﬁ c goals that have to be achieved within short periods . The lack of time and the high risk of such projects while young researchers need some success create an entry barrier for young researchers into interdisciplinary programmes . This is consistent with the ﬁ nding that full - time researchers are more likely to have interdiciplinary research production : Relaxing the time constraint stimulate the extension of the scope of research . Therefore , it 14 is rather a strong commitment to research which stimulates interdisciplinary research . We also ﬁ nd that a multidisciplinary research environment strongly stimu - lates individual interdisciplinarity . Even if having multiple disciplines working side - by - side in research units does not always bring out interdisciplinary re - search , we nevertheless ﬁ nd that it facilitates interdisciplinary research . Our result also shows that researchers tend to bene ﬁ t from colleagues’ experiences ( through colleagues’ ages ) for undertaking diversi ﬁ ed research purposes . The disciplinary diversity of research members and the density of the communi - cation are thus some keys to interdisciplinary research ( Gibbons et al . , 1994 ) . The size of the lab also appears as an interesting factor for interdisciplinary research : small size favors individual interdisciplinarity while bigger size fa - vors specialization . Connections with industry , both by co - authoring or by receiving private funds is strongly correlated with interdisciplinary research . This tends to corroborate the idea suggested by Foray and Gibbons ( 1996 ) that interdis - ciplinary research agendas and sensitivity to applications through problem solving approaches are strongly connected . The estimations also reveal that contractual funding whether received from private or public sources stimu - lates interdisciplinary research while recurrent one is not signi ﬁ cant . This result con ﬁ rms the in ﬂ uence of the funding structures of the lab on the propensity to perform interdisciplinary research as strongly highlighted in the literature ( Ziman , 1994 ; Caswill , 1997 ; Schild et al . , 2002 ) . Contractual funding thus tends to widen the scope of academic research purposes . The societal needs vehicled through such contractual funding tend to favor the ﬂ exibility of researchers in the choice of research methodology as well as in the allocation of their attention . These results o ﬀ er some ﬁ rst clues for policy makers to favor interdiscipli - nary . Nevertheless it should still be taken cautiously at this stage and some more investigations should be further provided on this dataset and on some other ones . 6 References Acutt , N . , Ali , A . , Boyd , E . , Hartmann , A . , Kim , J . A . , Lorenzoni , I . , Martell , M . , Pyhala et Winkels , A . , 2000 . An interdisciplinary framework for research on global environmental issues . CSERGE Working Paper GEC , 23 . 15 Amemiya , T . , 1973 . Regression analysis when the dependent variable is truncated normal . Econometrica 41 , 997 - 1016 . Carayol , N . , Matt , M . , 2004 . Individual and collective determinants of academic scientists’ productivity . Mimeo , BETA . Caswill , C . , 1997 . Inspiration and issues : a re ﬂ ection on the debate on interdisciplinarity from a policy perspective . European Commission , Cam - bridge 24 - 26 September 1997 . Foray , D . , Gibbons M . , 1996 . Discovery in the context of application . Technological Forecasting and Social Change 53 , 263 - 277 . Gibbons , M . , Limoges , C . , Novotny , H . , Schwartzman , S . , Scoot , P . and Trow , M . , 1994 . The New Production of Knowledge . Sage , London . Grupp , H . , 1994 . The dynamics of science - based innovation reconsidered : cognitive models and statistical ﬁ ndings . In O . Granstrand ( ed . ) , Economics of Technology . Elsevier , Amsterdam . Klein , J . T . , 1996 . Crossing Boundaries : Knowledge , Disciplinarities , and Interdisciplinarities . University Press of Virginia , Charlottesville and London . Knorr , K . D . , Mittermeier R . , Aichholzer G . , Waller G . , 1979 . Individual publication productivity as a social position e ﬀ ect in academic and industrial research units . In : F . Andrews ( ed . ) , The E ﬀ ectiveness of Research Groups in Six Countries . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , 55 - 94 . Laudel , G . , Gläser , J . , 1998 . What are institutional boundaries and how can they be overcome ? Germany’s collaborative research centres as boundary - spanning networks . Lisbon EU Conference , 1—3 October 1998 . Morillo , F . , Bordons , M . , Gomez , I . , 2001 . An approach to interdiscipli - narity through bibliometric indicators . Scientometrics 51 , 203 - 222 . Morreale , S . P . , Howery , C . B . , 2002 . Interdisciplinary collaboration : down with the silos and up with engagement . Mimeo , http : / / www . aahe . org / interdisciplinary . pdf . Nguyen Thi , T . U . , Lahatte , A . , 2003 . Measuring and assessing relative disciplinary openness in university research units . Research Evaluation 12 ( 1 ) , 29 - 37 . Nguyen Thi , T . U . , 2003 . Interdisciplinary aspects in university patents . The case of the University Louis Pasteur . Mimeo . BETA . OST ( Observatoire des Sciences et Techniques ) , 1996 . Science & Techno - logie Indicateurs . Economica , Paris . Piaget , J . , 1972 . L’épistémologie des relations interdisciplinaires . In : OCDE , L’interdisciplinarité problèmes d’enseignement et de recherche dans les universités . 16 Porter , A . L . and Chubin , D . E . , 1985 . An indicator of cross - disciplinary research . Scientometrics 8 ( 3 - 4 ) , 161 - 176 . Qin , J . , Lancaster , F . W . , Allen , B . , 1997 . Types and levels of collabo - ration in interdisciplinary research in the sciences . Journal of the American Society for information Science 48 ( 10 ) , 893 - 916 . Qiu , L . , 1992 . A study of interdisciplinary research collaboration . Re - search Evaluation , 2 ( 3 ) , 169 - 175 . Rinia , E . J . , van Leeuwen , T . N . , van Raan , A . F . J . , van Vuren , H . G . , 2001 . In ﬂ uence of interdisciplinarity on peer - review and bibliometric evalua - tions in physics research . Research Policy 30 , 357 - 361 . Sanz - Menéndez , L . , Bordons , M . , Zulueta , M . A . , 2001 . Interdisciplinarity as a multidimensional concept : measure in three di ﬀ erent research areas . Research Evaluation 10 ( 1 ) , 47 - 58 . Schild , I . , Sörlin , S . , Sigfridsson , C . , 2002 . The policy and practice of interdisciplinarity in the Swedish University research system . Working paper - 18 , Institutet för studier av utbildning och forskning . Schmoch , U . , Breiner , S . , Cuhls , K . , Hinze , S . , Münt , G . , 1994 . Inter - disciplinary Co - operation of Research Teams in Science Intensive Areas of Technology . Final Report to the Commission of the European Union , Fraun - hofer Institute for Systems and Innovation Research , Karlsruhe , Germany . Schummer , J . , 2003 . Multidisciplinarity , Interdisciplinarity , and Research Collaboration in Nanoscience and Nanotechnology . Mimeo . Stephan , P . E . , 1996 . The economics of science . Journal of Economic Li - terature 34 , 1199 - 1235 . Tomov , D . T . , Mutafov , H . G . , 1996 . Comparative indicators of interdis - ciplinarity in modern science . Scientometrics 37 ( 2 ) , 267 - 278 . Ziman , J . , 1994 . Prometheus bound : Science in a dynamic steady state . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . Ziman , J . , 1997 . Disciplinarity and interdisciplinarity in research . Euro - pean Commission , Cambridge 24 - 26 September 1997 . Appendix : The variables · Interdisc i : is the dependent variable y i and is given in equations ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) . · Age i : i ’s age in year 1996 . 17 · Fulltime i : dummy variable equal to one if the permanent researcher has a full - time research position in year 1996 and zero if he occupies a teach - & - research position . · Junior i : dummy variable equal to one if the permanent researchers remained ‘un - promoted’ ( as Assistant Professors or Researchers ) in year 1996 and zero otherwise ( Professors or Director of Research ) · Imp i : average impact of i ’s publication occurrences over 1995 - 2000 window ( Impact Factor of the journals ) . · Inter i : share of i ’s publications that were co - authored with at least one author which mentioned an address outside France . · Indus i : dummy variable being equal to one , if at least one of i ’s publica - tions were co - authored with at least one author which mentioned a company as a professional a ﬃ liation . · Lab . perm i : the number of permanent researchers of the laboratory to which i belongs . It embodies our single laboratory size variable . All other quantities relating to the lab will be given in shares if directly connected to permanent researchers , and per permanent researcher otherwise . · Lab . age i : the average age of colleagues in the lab ( other permanent researchers ) . · Lab . fulltime i : share of full - time researchers among colleagues . · Lab . junior i : share of un - promoted among colleagues in the lab . · Lab . Pub i : productivity of colleagues over the larger 1993 - 2000 period , which corresponds to the average publication performance of colleagues , cor - rected for coauthorship . · Lab . Imp i : average impact factor of colleagues’ publication . · Lab . phd i : average number of PhD students per permanent of the lab . · Lab . postdocN i : is the average number of National post - docs per perma - nent of the lab . · Lab . postdocF i : is the average number of Foreign post - docs per perma - nent of the lab . · Lab . nonres i : stands for the number of non - researchers per permanent researchers in the lab . · Lab . multidisc i : is the degree of multidisciplinarity of i’s laboratory and is given in equation ( 1 ) . · Lab . funding i : gives the amount ( in thousand Euros ) of public recurrent funding per permanent researcher per year over the period 1996 - 2000 . · Lab . contractualPub i : corresponds to the amount ( in thousand Euros ) of contractual public support per permanent over the largest period 1993 - 2000 . 18 · Lab . contractualPriv i : stands for to the amount ( in thousand Euros ) of contractual received from private sources per permanent over the largest period 1993 - 2000 . · Discipline1 i : dummy variable equal to one if the scienti ﬁ c discipline to which the agent is a ﬃ liated is Mathematics , Discipline2 i stands for Physics , Discipline3 i stands for Chemistry , Discipline4 i is for Earth Sciences , Disci - pline5 i is for Engineering Sciences , Discipline6 i is for Biology , Discipline7 i is for Medicine and Discipline8 i stands for Social Sciences and Humanities . 19 Table 1 . Descriptive statistics on the variables Mean Std . Err . Min Max . Interdisc 1 . 273 0 . 633 0 2 . 618 Imp 3 . 204 2 . 349 0 16 . 016 Age 44 . 872 9 . 102 26 74 Junior 0 . 562 0 1 Fulltime 0 . 504 0 1 Inter 0 . 303 0 . 303 0 1 Indus 0 . 277 0 . 448 0 1 Lab . pub 3 . 186 1 . 834 0 9 . 328 Lab . imp 3 . 223 2 . 072 0 . 363 12 . 718 Lab . perm 36 . 454 26 . 433 2 79 Lab . age 51 . 794 3 . 481 41 . 625 66 Lab . fulltime 0 . 468 0 . 258 0 0 . 937 Lab . junior 0 . 576 0 . 135 0 1 Lab . phd 0 . 841 0 . 470 0 . 118 3 Lab . postdocN 0 . 108 0 . 192 0 1 Lab . postdocF 0 . 400 0 . 632 0 5 . 125 Lab . nonres 0 . 797 0 . 839 0 6 . 35 Lab . multidisc 0 . 806 0 . 404 0 1 . 845 Lab . funding 59 . 170 41 . 331 5 . 417 189 . 375 Lab . contractualPub 441 . 505 425 . 699 0 5265 . 644 Lab . contractualPriv 398 . 002 599 . 401 0 2267 . 652 Discipline1 0 . 056 0 1 Discipline2 0 . 120 0 1 Discipline3 0 . 154 0 1 Discipline4 0 . 072 0 1 Discipline5 0 . 067 0 1 Discipline6 0 . 361 0 1 Discipline7 0 . 091 0 1 Discipline8 0 . 078 0 1 20 Table 2 . Estimations for the Tobit model given in ( 4 ) and ( 5 ) : With 90 zero observations and 818 non - zero observations . Dep var : Interdisc Coef . Std . Err . Age - 0 . 000 0 . 003 Junior - 0 . 146 * * * 0 . 0458 Fulltime 0 . 187 * * * 0 . 0456 Impact 0 . 003 0 . 0138 Inter 0 . 127 0 . 078 Indus 0 . 048 * * * 0 . 011 Lab . perm - 0 . 003 * * 0 . 001 Lab . age 0 . 033 * * * 0 . 009 Lab . fulltime 0 . 132 0 . 132 Lab . junior 0 . 742 * * * 0 . 158 Lab . pub 0 . 005 0 . 016 Lab . imp - 0 . 000 0 . 028 Lab . phd - 0 . 172 * * * 0 . 065 Lab . postdocN 0 . 093 0 . 136 Lab . postdocF - 0 . 085 0 . 058 Lab . nonres - 0 . 056 0 . 052 Lab . multidisc 0 . 299 * * * 0 . 078 Lab . funding 0 . 0002 0 . 002 Lab . contractualPub 0 . 0002 * * * 0 . 0001 Lab . contractualPriv 0 . 0002 * * * 0 . 0001 Discipline2 0 . 590 * * * 0 . 154 Discipline3 0 . 520 * * * 0 . 138 Discipline4 0 . 374 * * 0 . 150 Discipline5 0 . 0579 0 . 133 Discipline6 0 . 5509 * * * 0 . 142 Discipline7 0 . 9123 * * * 0 . 152 Discipline8 0 . 1125 0 . 177 Constant - 1 . 721 0 . 567 Sigma 0 . 5706 0 . 014 * * and * * * indicate that coe ﬃ cients are statistically signi ﬁ cant at the 0 . 05 and 0 . 01 levels respectively . Concerning Disciplines variables , coe ﬃ cient should be understood as compared with Discipline1 which is taken as a reference . 21 Figure 1 . Distributions of Interdisc scores among researchers . 0 . 2 . 4 . 6 D en s i t y 0 1 2 3 Interdisc Figure 2 . Two way plot of Interdisc × Perf ( Publication Performance ) 0 10 20 30 40 P ub li c a t i on s 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 Interdisc 22