Coupling Computer - Supported Co - operative Work - and Hypermedia Technol - ogy for Distance Education Solutions Andreas Auinger , Wolfgang Karrer , Chris Stary Department of Business Information Systems , Communications Engineering University of Linz , A - 4040 Linz , Austria { andreas . auinger , wolfgang . karrer , christian . stary } @ ce . uni - linz . ac . at Abstract Searching for highly interactive and cooperative tech - nologies in the field of distance learning has led to the development of a novel solution . It overcomes existing deficiencies with respect to context - sensitive and indi - vidualized interaction in shared learning spaces among learners and teachers . In this contribution we present the results and benefits of integrating computer - supported - cooperative - work - and hypermedia technology at the methodological and conceptual layer , and , based on that , at the implementation level . The application of concepts , such as profiling , has led to several positive effects in practice . We also report on the problems when providing the proper technology support . However , first results from evaluation indicate an increase in usability with respect to the acceptance of electronic media for interac - tive learning support in distributed environments . 1 . Introduction Distance Learning / Teaching is based on the idea that learners participate in a self - managed way in knowledge transfer processes . Thereby , learners and teachers do not have to be available continuously and at a single location when interacting . However , the process of knowledge transfer is subject to ( course ) planning and organization , including the collaboration and interaction between learners and teachers , e . g . [ 8 ] . Traditionally , distance education is based on novel I & CT ( Information and Communication Technologies ) and services , such as hypermedia available via the web , and electronic support of collaboration and individual knowledge management , e . g . , chats and multi - media annotations [ 7 ] . Unfortu - nately , the acceptance of these approaches is rather lim - ited , as recent empricial findings reveal [ 16 ] , and the National School Network Testbed initiative ( http : / / nsn . bbn . com ) has shown : • Mentoring and supervision via tele media have not been accepted by learners . • Existing I & CT as Internet - or web - based tools do neither support knowledge transfer nor group work effectively and efficiently . • The production of material is time - consuming and lack operational support . • The participants could not experience any added value due to the electronic availability and com - puter - supported features compared to conventional settings in education . The problems / deficiencies listed above have been experi - enced , although the Internet and its services , such as the web , have turned out to be easy to handle for teachers and learners . It can be concluded that organizational hindrances or / and the utilization of I & CT for material preparation , transfer of knowledge including mentoring , interaction and collaboration has not been put on a sound conceptual basis . Recent studies on that issue , e . g . [ 3 ] , have concluded that task - oriented and interpersonal in - teraction are the most crucial factors for the success of distance learning environments . These issues have also been addressed through principles for design and evalua - tion : sociability , connectivity , immersion , presence , and engagement [ 17 ] . As a consequence , in the course of the SCHOLION ( SCaleable tecHnOLIOgies for teleteach - iNg / learning ) project ( http : / / instserv0 . ce . uni - linz . ac . at / scholion ) we had to develop a conceptually sound integration of features for collaboration and inter - action based on hypermedia for education . This project should lead to higher user acceptance through increased usability than previous approaches . In the following sections we review related work with respect to the integration of hypermedia I & CT and col - laboration support ( section 2 ) . We then revisit the 0 - 7695 - 0981 - 9 / 01 $ 10 . 00 ( c ) 2001 IEEE 1 SCHOLION project from a methodological and concep - tual perspective ( section 3 ) . In section 4 we sketch the implementation of the proposed concepts . Section 5 evaluates the achievements against standardized princi - ples for designing virtual educational applications . In the conclusion we summarize the objectives and results of our work , and list further research activities . 2 . Related Work Analyzing benchmark and evaluation studies , e . g . [ 11 ] , it turned out that a sound migration of hypermedia concepts with features for collaboration or vice versa has not been performed so far . However , there exists a variety of approaches toward the extensive use of hypermedia for distance education : In the TeleTeaching project Mann - heim - Heidelberg ( http : / / www . informatik . uni - mannheim . de / informatik / pi4 / projects / teleteaching ) mul - timedia learning material has been enriched with tele - communication features for human - computer interaction in distance education . Students might learn at home syn - chronously and asynchronously . So far , no features have yet been developed to support social needs in the course of knowledge transfer , such as publicly available annota - tions . The „Authoring - on - the - fly“ ( AOF ) - concept [ 2 ] also focuses on hypermedia course material rather than on collaboration support . The same statement holds for other development , such as Socratenon [ 14 ] , and the IRI ( Inter - active Remote Instruction ) System developed at the Old Domino University ( http : / / www . cs . odu . edu / ODUCS / brochure / rcnr . html # irit ) . The latter targets toward dis - tributed hypermedia course material through the provi - sion of high speed networking , television , and computer technologies over the Internet . In a virtual classroom learners experience identical learning situations at geo - graphically dispersed colleges . I - CARE ( Cyberspace Assisted Responsive Education ) ( http : / / wwwpride - i2 . poly . edu / I - CARE / icarefl . html ) has been developed at PRIDE ( Polytechnic Research Institute for Development & Enterprise ) . The project does not only target toward the provision of hypermedia course material but also toward sociability , namely responsive - ness to learner needs , albeit exploiting the Internet as a medium and source of support tools . I - CARE subsumes ( i ) tools for communication , such as e - mail , telnet , ftp and chat , ( ii ) tools for group work , e . g . , group calendar , bulletin board , appointment books , ( iii ) tools for informa - tion ( search engines , on - line databases and dictionary ) , and ( iv ) further Internet resources like reference docu - ments , FAQ - files and links . WebCT ( http : / / www . homebrew1 . cs . ubc . ca / webct ) enables the development of educational web - pages and corresponding environments . Besides a set of tools that can be applied to any course development , it provides administrative tools that assist the educator in the task of course administration . Tools for communication comprise video conferencing , chat and e - mail . There are no dedi - cated tools for collaboration . Evaluation tools capture on - line self - testing , automatically marked quizzes , and con - tent - related multiple choice questions . Additionally , a searchable image archive , a course calendar tool , a link - able glossary database , collaboration and presentation areas , content annotation , course navigation , indexing and searching tools , as well as account administration tools are available . Besides the technology - driven development of hy - permedia for distance education ( resulting in systems as listed above ) , in the field of Computer - Supported Co - operative Work the early recognized need for socially adaptive technologies , e . g . [ 4 ] , has led to an established tradition of empirical and conceptual investigations . It has been found out that the lack of socially responsive devel - opments can be caused by isolated use of tools [ 10 ] . These results require revisiting of technology with respect to the dual role of technology [ 15 ] , and identifying con - crete design requirements , as e . g . done by Kristoffersen et al . [ 9 ] for the management of collaborative sessions . Unfortunately , up to now , collaborative hypermedia envi - ronments for distance education have not incorporated conceptual and empirical findings to an extent that teach - ers and learners could have experienced an added value when using these technologies . 3 . Methodological and Conceptual Design The SCHOLION developments emphasize the inter - twining of hypermedia and collaboration technology in a distributed educational setting . Thus , it should overcome the limitations of existing approaches of distance learning through the provision of the following features [ 6 ] : • to allow learners to individualize and annotate multi - and hypermedia course material in a way similar to the way they use to make notes in traditional course material • to provide situation - and context - sensitive interaction between learners and teachers • to support browsing and navigation through the ma - terial according to individual annotations , • to be open to existing data formats and solutions • to provide an organizational model for teaching , including the preparation of presentations . The required software systems seem simple in function , but become complex in operation , since users cannot only be supported in an idiosyncratic , personally customized way , e . g . , through individualized learning material ( figure 1 , arrow 1 ) . Teachers and learners have also to be supported through shared knowledge spaces , equipped with sophis - ticated features for interaction to enable socially accept - able interactivity . Collaborative hypermedia environ - ments replace conventional education material and knowledge transfer processes . Hence , they require that they can be used simultaneously for both personal use and social coordination . These dual function of collaborative hypermedia introduce new challenges and opportunities for interpersonal communication ( figure 1 , arrow 2 ) . Additionally , collaborative hypermedia might publicly display the use of course material and the features for annotation and manipulation . This enrichment has impli - cations for both individual users and the function of the software system in the organization more broadly . In the effort to make knowledge transfer and collaboration more effective and efficient , distributed collaborative hyperme - dia indirectly affect much more fundamental issues of knowledge sharing and temporal coordination . In this critical position , the social environment and technology co - evolve and co - adapt ( figure 1 , arrow 3 ) . SOCIO - ORGANIZATIONAL ENVIRONMENT 2 . Interpersonal 3 . Socio - technical Communication Evolution Development of Distributed Collaborative Hypermedia Systems INDIVIDUAL USER TECHNOLOGY 1 . Single - User Education Material Figure 1 . Convergent Perspectives on Distributed Collaborative Hypermedia Systems Windows NT Windows95 / 98 UNIX FEATURES TO BE SUPPORTED Stability Yes Yes Yes Networking - ability Supports TCP / IP Supports TCP / IP Supports TCP / IP Graphical User Interface Yes Yes Yes Data types . html , . htm Yes Yes Yes . txt , . doc , . rtf . txt , . doc , . rtf . txt , . doc , . rtf . txt , . rtf . gif , . jpg , . tif , . xbm . gif , . jpg , . tif , . xbm . gif , . jpg , . tif , . xbm . gif , . jpg , . tif , . xbm . wav , . mpg . wav , . mpg . wav , . mpg . mpg . mov , . avi . mov , . avi . class . class . class . class . css . css . css . css . aam , . aas . aam , . aas . aam , . aas . dir , . dcr , . dxr . dir , . dcr , . dxr . dir , . dcr , . dxr Other Functions Yes Yes Yes Table 1 . Analyzing conventional platforms Principles to be Supported Openness Platform inde - pendence Support of plugins Interface specifi - cation Status with Respect to Requirements Need to have Nice to have Need to have Need to have CBIquick Authoring System N / A N / A N / A N / A HyperGASP Yes , import and export HTML Mac No No CourseBuilder No Mac No No StorySpace Export text and html , but not com - pletely Mac , Windows 3 . 1 , 95 , 98 N / A No Table 2 . Assessing authoring tools Table 1 shows some results of the platform analysis that has been performed to meet the objective for openness . Table 2 shows part of the assessment of existing author - ing systems . The principles applied in that analysis have also been selected and rated with respect to the require - ments listed above . As SCHOLION targets towards a non - profit use , additional constraints had to be met with respect to the last mile : low - bandwidth PC - connections without perma - nent online connection should suffice for communication . Knowledge consumers should not have to provide broad - band communication or video equipment to interact with SCHOLION . Public domain software should be used whenever possible for presentation . The starting point of the design phase of the SCHOLION software system has been the specification of a process model . The entire organization of a course has been captured through specifying user roles , organ - izational constraints , data , activities including their tem - poral relationships to complete certain tasks . The second major activity in the design phase was the development of a flexible hypermedia scheme for the representation of course material , i . e . a linked structure of slides or text pages , including graphics , animation , spoken text , and video . It is supposed that a course material can be pro - vided by several authors ( i . e . teachers , knowledge pro - viders , trainers etc . ) or by institutions ( i . e . schools , uni - versities , companies etc . ) . The course material itself has to be a hypermedia document . This hypermedia docu - ment may comprise hyperlinks to graphics , animation ( for example programmed in Java ) , spoken text or vid - eos . Conceptually , a SCHOLION course material con - sists of various slides ( similar to HTML pages in the WWW ) , in order to provide an easy to grasp and flexible structure of the course material . Figure 2 shows a part of the SCHOLION data model , capturing the structure of course material and the profile concept . In the following table names are starting with capital letters written in italics . Attributes are also written in italics . Once a learner opens a CourseMaterial , he / she invariably opens a Profile of a certain CourseMaterial . Changes or adaptations ( e . g . Markups ) are always created within this Profile and never in the CourseMaterial itself . Each user keeps several Profiles for a certain CourseMa - terial . The Profile ' s attributes are a profileNr ( which is generated by the system ( primary key ) ) , a title and a date ( creationdate ) when the Profile has been stored for the first time . A Profile may be global ( isGlobal ) if the user wants to make a specific Profile available to other users . The underlying structure of the feature to add notes and Markups to a CourseMaterial is the Markup object . It is the parent element to the following child elements : • Annotation : additional note of a learner • Link : additional link to any object ( within SCHOLION to a link target or to a WWW Site ) • Question : special kind of note which refers to an entry in a Discussion • Layout : a layout change of an offset within the CourseMaterial ( highlight or underline ) . Figure 2 . Part of the SCHOLION data model ( profiling ) An Annotation is a Markup used for adding notes to a CourseMaterial . Notes can be text , pictures or even vid - eos , audio ' s or exe - files . For textual notes a facility has been provided to show the note on the screen perma - nently , or to hide ( hidden ) it by adding an icon . The latter leads to a GUI - dialog containing the actual text of the note when clicking on it . A Layout is a Markup used to emphasize parts of a CourseMaterial . The user has the possibility to underline or to highlight ( style ) a certain range , beginning at the slideoffset position , stored in the Markup according to the length . A Question is a Markup representing a link referring from a specified position in a Slide ( slideoffset ) to a Comment or a Discussion . Struc - turing the data this way enables the straightforward im - plementation of the above mentioned features for indi - vidualization of multimedia course material and collabo - rative knowledge transfer . Figure 3 shows a browser - window with the different kinds of annotations available in SCHOLION . A profile can be explained best with a metaphor . It can be com - pared to a transparency that is laid over a course material . All annotations are part of that transparency . Users might also use empty ones and start a new series of annotations . They might also remove them , move it to a public place to be used by other users , or copy a public one for private use and append own annotations ( see figure 4 ) . A sym - bolic description of copying and publishing profiles is given in figure 5 . Figure 3 . Annotation types in SCHOLION The profile concept enables traditional as well as novel ways of learning based on digital content : a text marker for marking important passages , a pencil for making annotations in the text and for making references to addi - tional content information in other documents or knowl - edge spaces . Figure 4 . The profile dialog in SCHOLION For collaboration cascaded profiling is considered to be the key concept . Profiles can be set public . Public pro - files are available for each user : A user can open a mate - rial applying views ( annotations , considerations ) of an - other user . Thus , users might learn from each other . If a user selects a public profile , he / she can copy it to the private ones and append individual annotations ( see fig - ure 5 – set public , copy to private ) . Figure 5 . Cascaded profiling The profile concept is also crucial for achieving accept - able performance . It reduces the amount of data to be transferred in the course of learning and collaborating : When opening a course material , the user selects his / her currently preferred profile ( see figure 4 : private and public profiles in the list ) . After a course material has been loaded to the client , only the currently chosen pro - file will be transferred to the client computer . This way , merely user - and session - specific information instead of content has to be transferred . The resulting increase in performance is higher the larger materials are . The requirement for the support of collaborative content handling is met through two features of the pro - file concept : ( i ) User groups may work within identical profiles . Hence , group members might not only have an individual account , but also an account that is assigned to a group exclusively ( with actually identical content linked to a profile ) . However , annotations , internal and external links , links to the discussion board and markings can be handled by each group member ; ( ii ) Virtual teams can also communicate through the discussion board . They can create their own discussion forum for handling specific topics or a common project . SCHOLION´s pro - file concept allows to set links directly from the course material into the discussion board ( see figure 3 - link to discussion ) . These links are visualized through discussion symbols . If the user clicks on this symbol , not the discus - sion board itself , but the contributions ( question , answer , remark ) linked to the content item are displayed in the discussion - browser window . This way , different com - ments can be linked to content items in a context - sensitive way . As already mentioned , a profile can be set public as well . Each user is allowed to make private profiles pub - lic . If a user , e . g . a teacher , wants to control the deploy - ment process of content , e . g . , the progress of the stu - dents / trainees in learning , he / she can view the public profiles and the annotations to receive feedback this way ( see also figure 5 ) . 4 . Implementation SCHOLION is a client / server system . It is based on a ORACLE 8 database - server capturing all data ( including all media files and slides stored in BLOBs ) . In figure 6 the general architecture of the SCHOLION system is shown . The main components are the SCHOLION Browser , the SCHOLION Editor , the SCHOLION Dis - cussion Manager ( discussion board ) , the SCHOLION Server Application and the database system . The SCHOLION Editor provides the functionality to design course materials and enables the import of . html , . htm , . rtf and . txt or other text files . The course material is stored in the ORACLE database system . The SCHOLION Server manages the database administration . The SCHOLION Browser enables the display of content . Media files are displayed or played by external applica - tions such as the MS - Windows Media Player [ 13 ] . Browser ( plugin ) - dependent files , such as macromedia [ 12 ] files , are opened using a www - browser with the corresponding plugin . Pdf - files are opened with Acrobat [ 1 ] . The connection between the client application and the database server is established via a TCP / IP connect through JDBC data access . Figure 6 . General architecture of SCHOLION Testing has been performed with respect to correct func - tioning and task completeness . The latter has been facili - tated through the process definitions ( already mentioned in section 3 ) , since those provide the basis for task - driven test cases . In addition , in SCHOLION each process cor - responds to a GUI dialog . Each sub - process corresponds to an entry to a new ( cascaded ) dialog ( e . g . , a menu entry that opens a new dialog for adding an annotation ) . 5 . Evaluation and User Experiences The SCHOLION developments have been evaluated according to the following procedure : • Functional testing according to the test cases derived from the process definitions ( see previous section ) • Usability Testing . This part has been split into checking the environment against the state - of - the - art principles in web engineering , and an explorative field trial in a course on information systems . Checking against principles . SCHOLION has been evaluated according to the 24 state - of - the - art principles given in [ 17 ] ( p . 63 ) , ranging from sociability and con - nectivity to the size of virtual learning environments . With respect to the effectiveness and efficiency of indi - vidualization features and corresponding collaboration support the following principles have been checked : • sociability and connecitivity addressing the multi - user capability of the software • veridicality describing the degree of accuracy with respect to mapping the reality of the learning envi - ronment to the artefact • engagement denoting the depth of user involvement when interacting • reconfigurability concerning the modifiability of an environment • responsiveness capturing performance data in terms of minimizing the time between user input and sys - tem output • robustness also addressing performance , this time in terms of functioning under different conditions • viewpoint meaning the usage of content under multi - ple user perspectives • representation of the user requiring the visual ( re ) presentation of users in the environment • input / output bandwidth concerning the amount of information that can be transmitted from / to the user within the environment • multisensory requirements bringing in the diversity of channels involved in human - computer interaction • interactivity comprising the entire spectrum of fea - tures for selection , modality - switching , and naviga - tion for control and content manipulation • autonomy denoting the modularity of the software system • locus of control targeting an organizational issue , namely who is in charge of creating and controlling the virtual learning environment • choice of representation questioning the separation of content and presentation , namely , in how far con - tent can be ( re ) presented through different media and forms • calibration and customization focusing on the capa - bilities of adapting the environment to the individual needs of learners and teachers . Since not all of the listed principles could be measured in a straightforward way we had to find items and parame - ters for concrete evaluation . The required parameters and items have been found in web - engineering frameworks and related usability - engineering techniques , such as [ 5 ] . The items found have been assigned to one or more cate - gories listed above . In addition , the concerned roles have been identified for structured evaluation , as shown for interactivity in the table below . Interactivity - Navigation Instance of interactivity TTS should provide several possibilities to navigate through a course material . The learner should be able to select from possible paths through proper instructions . The finally selected path should correspond to the learner ' s preferences and level of experience . Concerned role Learner Instance of interactivity On each page in a course material it should be possible to go to the main page , the start page and to select the way of navigating through a course material . This way , learners determine their own path through the course material and / or through the program . Concerned role Learner Instance of interactivity In TTS the user should be able to exit the program at any time . Concerned role Learner , knowledge producer , domain expert , tutor , teacher After the operational definitions have been found , the items have been applied according to the scenarios of use ( role models ) . Four usability experts checked the SCHOLION environment . Then the data have been analyzed . It turned out that the following criteria have been met successfully : • sociability and connectivity - users can communi - cate and interact at any time anywhere they have Internet access ; • engagement due to the context - sensitivity of the items for collaboration ; • reconfigurability due to the openness ; • responsiveness - the required data transfer has been minimized according to the profile concept ; • viewpoint - profiling supports different perspectives on course materials ; • input / output bandwidth and multisensory require - ments due to the variety of codalities of information and media for presentation • interactivity for selection and navigation • autonomy due to the modular software structure • locus of control – a specific organizational model has been developed ; • calibration and customization through annotations and profiling . Some of the other principles have not been implemented so far : representation of the user , choice of representa - tion . The remaining principles ( together with the ones already checked conceptually ) have been checked in the field trial . User Experiences . SCHOLION has been tested in the field . 6 teachers and 35 students participated in the trial . One of the teachers had extensive experience in teaching ( over 10 years ) , one about 4 years , and the others about one year . The test setting was a 2 - hours / week course on information systems within the business informatics curriculum at the University of Linz . The course is held in the first year of studies , mainly for beginners in business information systems . The course is composed of a theoretical , lecture - style part , and a practical part with student projects . The teachers had their original materials either in MS - Word - or html format . Their first task was to import the mate - rial into the SCHOLION editor . Their second task was to enhance the imported material with multimedia con - tent . Finally , the organization of the course had to be handled in SCHOLION , namely to allow interactive access to the material in a certain period of time ( usually 6 months ) through a certain set of students . Then , dur - ing that period ( in our test case from February – July 2000 ) the teacher were on ‘online’ - duty coaching the students , giving lectures and evaluating projects . It has to be noted that for each course a discussion board is generated . This board is publicly available for all stu - dents and has to be edited by the teacher . Since in SCHOLION a three - layer architecture for discussions has been implemented ( question - answer - remark ) editing by teachers means linking items that refer to each other or are in mutual relationship from the content point of view . Editing also means to answer questions and to refer to items in the course material that are relevant , either to understand a problem fully or to illustrate an answer or a comment . The experiences of the teachers were as follows : First of all , generating electronic course material re - quires to revisit the structure of the original course ma - terial . In most of the cases , the logical structure of documents has to be redesigned in terms of the SCHOLION data model , based on slides and the con - cepts for active knowledge transfer . The experiences show that SCHOLION can be used both , for lecture - style teaching over the Internet , and for providing course material for remote studying . Secondly , the en - richment of course materials with multimedia elements requires planning and media competence . The embodi - ment of different media has to follow didactic guide - lines . 4 out of the 6 teachers needed assistance , since it was their first time tuning text , images , and video . From the technical perspective , it turned out , that the import of existing documents into SCHOLION might be cum - bersome , since a html parser has to scan the data for elements , such as nested tables used for the layout of pages , that cannot be processed in the course of collabo - ration . Overall , a total amount of 3 hours ( on an aver - age ) per slide has to be calculated to make contents available in SCHOLION . The experiences of the students confirmed the data from the conceptual analysis described previously . We followed the recommendations for recording the Qual - ity - of - Service parameters as given in [ 16 ] . SCHOLION performed outstanding with respect to responsiveness and input / output bandwidth even under high workload ( high network traffic , amount of data to be transmitted , complex database transactions ) . Hence , we could also give proof of concept for robustness . With respect to veridicality students experienced troubles in mapping their realities to the features of the artefact . In particu - lar , it took some time for learners to actually use the features for collaboration , since they have been skepti - cally in the beginning that the context of interaction is actually being kept by the software system . Once the context - sensitivity of discussions has been experienced , learners became confident and relied on the electronic version of the course material for collaborative learning . Lessons Learnt . The results from the conceptual analysis ( first step of usability tests ) have been con - firmed in the field trial . However , due to the novel cou - pling of content to interaction and collaboration fea - tures , a novel culture of coaching in the course of active knowledge transfer will evolve in long term use of such environments . 6 . Conclusion Collaborative distance learning / teaching hypermedia systems should support learners to participate actively in the transfer of knowledge in a self - managed way , but still in the ambiente of a learning community . SCHOLION has been developed to overcome existing deficiencies to that respect through the provision of novel features for • Mentoring and supervision via tele media • Effective and efficient knowledge transfer • Effective and comfortable operational support for producing electronic hypermedia - course material . The achievements indicate that learners can experience added value in terms of enlarging their individual learn - ing / knowledge space in a reliable and satisfying way . The crucial concept of SCHOLION is the profile con - cept which integrates the view concept known from database theory with flexible link management . Beside functional improvements performance improvements have been achieved , since the required amount of data to be transmitted in the course of knowledge transfer has been reduced to a minimum . Future work will focus on individual feedback loops through self testing , and monitoring features to detect hot spots in materials that might need further explana - tions and guidance . Finally , the SCHOLION systems will be re - implemented to develop a web - application in terms of Java - applets or browser plug - ins . References [ 1 ] Adobe : http : / / www . adobe . com , 1999 . [ 2 ] Ch . Bacher , R . Müller et al . : Authoring on the Fly . A New Way of Integrating Telerepresentation and Courseware Pro - duction , in : Proceedings ICCE’97 , 1997 . [ 3 ] Z . L . Berge : Interaction in Post - Secondary Web - based Learning , in : Education Technology , Vol . 31 , pp . 263 - 300 , 1999 . [ 4 ] S . F . Ehrlich : Strategies for Encouraging Successful Adoption of Office Communication Tools , in : ACM Transcations on Office Information Systems , Vol . 5 , No . 4 , pp . 340 - 357 , 1987 . [ 5 ] ElLearn : Electronic Learning : Criteria and Standards Used in Evaluating Web - Based Instruction and Delivery Guide - lines , http : / / www . electroniclearning . edu / certification / checklist . html , 08 . 03 . 2000 . [ 6 ] B . Froschauer , W . Ortner et al . : SCHOLION - Scaleable Technologies for Telelearning , in : Proceedings Symposium in Applied Computing , ACM , pp . 141 - 146 , 2000 . [ 7 ] L . Harasim : A Framework for Online Learning : The Vir - tual University , in : IEEE Computer , Vol . 32 , No . 9 , p . 44 - 49 , 1999 . [ 8 ] P . A . M . Kommers , D . H . Jonasson et al . ( eds ) : Cognitive Tools for Learning , Springer , Berlin , 1992 . [ 9 ] St . Kristoffersen , F . Ljungberg : An Empirical Study of How People Establish Interaction : Implications for CSCW Session Management Models , in : Proceedings CHI’99 , ACM , pp . 1 - 8 , 1999 . [ 10 ] M . L . Markus , T . Connolly : Why CSCW - Applications Fail : Problems in the Adoption of Interdependent Work Tools , in : ACM Proceedings CSCW’90 , pp . 371 - 380 , 1990 . [ 11 ] Marshal University : Comparison of Online Course Deliv - ery Software Products , Center for Instructional Technology , http : / / multimedia . marshal . edu / cit / webct / compare / comparison . html , 2000 . [ 12 ] Macromedia : http : / / www . macro - media . com , 1999 . [ 13 ] Microsoft : http : / / www . microsoft . com , 1999 . [ 14 ] N . V . Nikolic , M . V . Trajkovic et al . : Socratenon – a Web - based Training System with an Intellect , in : Proceedings 33 rd Hawaii Int . Conference on System Sciences , IEEE , 2000 . [ 15 ] W . Orlikowski : The Duality of Technology : Rethinking the Role of Technology in Organizations , in : Organization Science , Vol . 3 , No . 3 , pp . 398 - 427 , 1992 . [ 16 ] A . Sears , J . A . Jacko : Understanding the Relation between Network Quality of Service and the Usability of Distributed Multimedia Documents , in : Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 15 , No . 1 , pp . 43 - 68 , 2000 . [ 17 ] R . Stuart : The Design of Virtual Environments , McGraw - Hill , New York , 1996 .