M . F . Costabile et al . ( Eds . ) : IS - EUD 2011 , LNCS 6654 , pp . 139 – 154 , 2011 . © Springer - Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011 Infrastructuring When You Don’t – End - User Development and Organizational Infrastructure Johan Bolmsten 1 , 2 and Yvonne Dittrich 1 1 IT University of Copenhagen , Rued Langaards Vej 7 , 2300 Copenhagen S , Denmark 2 World Maritime University , Citadellsvägen 29 , 21118 Malmö , Sweden { jb , ydi } @ itu . dk Abstract . Technologies promoting End - User Development enable domain experts to adjust and develop tools to fit with their specific work practice and thus to be efficient with respect to their professional tasks . In today’s organiza - tions , however , single applications become part of organizational infrastruc - tures . Such infrastructures enable integration between different applications and tasks but , at the same time , introduce constraints to ensure interoperability . How can the advantages of End - User Development be kept without jeopardiz - ing the integration between different applications ? The article presents an em - pirical study on End - User Development in the context of the development of an organizational IT infrastructure . Based on the analysis of the empirical material we discuss the challenges the infrastructure context provides for End - User Development . Keywords : End - User Development , IT Infrastructure Development . 1 Introduction End user development ( EUD ) allows users to develop and evolve their computer based working tools to support their specific tasks in an efficient way thus enabling users to be more effective . EUD possibilities furthermore allow innovations of proc - esses and work practices to be mapped easily into the supportive technology . In today’s organizations , single applications become more and more part of joint technical infrastructure supporting the cross - organizational and sometimes inter - organizational cooperation . The necessary standardization can be expected to con - strain the freedom for specific adaptation and development on a local level . [ 1 ] The majority of the contribution to the End - User Development ( EUD ) discourse focuses on the tailoring and development of specific applications – like spreadsheet systems [ 2 ] , or CAD systems [ 3 ] – or individual parts of infrastructures – like search tools [ 4 ] . Few contributions address the appropriation of common communication and cooperation infrastructures . ( See [ 5 ] as an exception . ) Based on an empirical study of End - User Development the article explores two re - lated questions : What are the challenges End - User Developers face when developing ( parts of ) an IT infrastructure ? How do they tackle them ? What can be done to keep the advantage of EUD and when integrating applications to an IT infrastructure ? 140 J . Bolmsten and Y . Dittrich The study is set at the World Maritime University ( WMU ) in Malmö , Sweden . . Under the auspices of the of the International Maritime Organization ( U . N ) , WMU is an international university that provide Master degree educations in the maritime area for around 250 students predominately from developing countries each year . The research presented here is part of a more comprehensive study on Participatory Design ( PD ) as basis for infrastructure development in an intercultural organization . During the research , WMU has been moving towards a more integrated technical and organizational infrastructure to consolidate the university’s IT systems . EUD has been part of the organizational ICT development practice from the very beginning . As the innovative potential of EUD and the contribution of domain experts to the design of common infrastructure has early been recognized , the subject of this article is an im - portant contribution to the development of an organizational IT strategy . The cases subject to this article have been selected because the End User develop - ers have both been active for more than 20 years . Their development activities have been acknowledged as important for the organization . As the scope , technical sophis - tication , and size and character of the user community differ significantly , the cases together provide a consolidated picture of EUD at WMU . The remainder of the article is structured as follows : Section 2 summarizes the relevant literature on organizational End - User Development and infrastructure devel - opment in order to provide a conceptual framework for the article . Thereafter we introduce the research methods . The empirical section presents the two cases . In the following , the analysis is presented and discussed . The challenges of EUD in infra - structure settings are developed with respect to five aspects . The central and main dimension is the fragility of EUD practices in an organizational context . This fragility also influences cooperation with developers and users . The informal character of EUD practices makes it difficult to coordinate with professional development . And finally the technical platform and its development provide a challenge for EU developers . 2 End User Development , Organizations , and Infrastructures Early research in EUD mainly focused on development and tailoring of individual performance tools in single user work environments like e . g . computer aided design [ 3 , 6 ] , excel sheets [ 3 ] . However , already then the cooperation between End User Developers ( EU developers ) and other users became visible as an important theme . [ 3 ] Organizational support for the development and maintenance of common cus - tomizations has been addressed as well . Only a few articles address EUD in the con - text of infrastructure development . Empirical research on infrastructure development , though , indicates the importance of bottom up , participatory approaches to keep the infrastructure in line with developing organizational requirements . 2 . 1 Tailoring of Common Tools Already one of the first articles on tailoring [ 7 ] reports on EU - Developers exchanging self developed features and add - ons with other users . As early as 1992 , Gantt and Nardi describe patterns of cooperation between EU - Developers and other users of