Alpha - Granule Membrane Mirrors the Platelet Plasma Membrane and Contains the Glycoproteins Ib , IX , and V By Gaetan Berger , Jean - Marc Mass & and Elisabeth M . Cramer We have recently shown that several components from the platelet plasma membrane were also present at different rates in the alpha - granule membrane . This is the case for the glycoprotein ( GP ) Ilb - llla ( CD41 ) . CD36 , CD9 , PECAMI , and Rap1 b . while the GPb - IX - V complex was considered to escape the rule . In this investigation , we studied the subcel - lular localization of GPlb , GPIX , and GPV in the resting plate - lets of normal subjects , patients with Bernard - Soulier syn - drome , patients with Gray platelet syndrome , and human cultured megakaryocytes . Ultra - thin sections of the cells were labeled with antibodies directed against glycocalicin , GPIb , GPIX , and GPV . We have shown that a significant and reproducible labeling for the three GPs was associated with the alpha - granule membrane , accounting for approximately 10 % of the total labeling . Furthermore , GPlb labeling appears colocalized with its alpha - granule - associated ligand , von Willebrand factor ( vWF ) . After thrombin activation , vWF re - mained close to the limiting membrane of the open canalicu - LATELET alpha - granules represent a secretory com - partment that releases its content after appropriate stim - ulation . They contain a wide variety of coagulation and adhe - sive proteins involved in hemostatic mechanisms . * They are formed during megakaryocyte maturation , ’ where they arise by a double mechanism : endogenous synthesis and endocy - tosis of plasmatic proteins . ”6 Furthermore , in recent studies , we have demonstrated that several plasma membrane recep - tors are also present in the alpha - granule limiting membrane . These receptors include glycoprotein ( GP ) IIb - IIIa , the fi - brinogen receptor’ ; CD36 , the thrombospondin and collagen receptor * ; CD9 ; PECAM19 ; and Raplb , a guanosine triphos - phate ( GTP ) - binding protein . ’” Therefore , most of the stud - ied proteins seemed to follow the rule , except the GPIb - IX - V complex , which was considered until now to be restricted to the plasma membrane , possibly because of its cytoskeletal association . ” In this study , we have tried to document this statement using an immunoelectron microscopic approach performed on normal and pathologic platelets and megakary - ocytes . We have been able to demonstrate that small amounts of GPIb , GPIX , and GPV are associated with the alpha - granule membrane . The presence of numerous plasma mem - brane receptors on the alpha - granule membrane suggests that the endocytic process that directs plasmatic proteins into the alpha - granule also affects a large pattern of plasma mem - brane receptors , although to a different extent . P MATERIALS AND METHODS Cells Platelet samples were taken from normal healthy volunteers , from a patient with Bernard - Soulier syndrome , ’ * and from a patient with Gray platelet syndrome . ” Blood samples were harvested by veni - puncture into plastic tubes containing ACD - C buffer ( 6 . 8 mmol / L citric acid , 11 . 2 mmoVL trisodium citrate , 24 mmoVL glucose , pH 4 . 2 ) . The platelet - rich plasma ( Pm ) was obtained by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 180g and 22°C . The isolated platelets were obtained by centrifugation of PRP for IO minutes at 1 , 100g and 22°C and washed three times with Tyrode buffer ( 36 mmol / L citric acid , 5 mmol / L KCI , 2 mmol / L CaC12 , 1 mmol / L MgC12 , 103 mmol / L Blood , Vol 87 , No 4 ( February 15 ) . 1996 : pp 1385 - 1395 lar system ( OCS ) , suggesting an early association of both receptor and ligand . Plasma membrane and alpha - granule labeling was virtually absent from the Bernard - Soulier plate - lets ( characterized by a GPlb deficiency ) , thus proving the specificity of the reaction . In Gray platelets ( storage granule deficiency syndrome ) , the small residual alpha - granules were also occasionally labeled for GPlb , GPIX , and GPV . Cul - tured megakaryocytes that displayed the classical GPlb dis - tribution , eg , demarcation and plasma membranes , exhib - ited also a discrete labeling associated to the alpha - granules . In conclusion , this study shows that , evenly for these three GPs , the alpha - granule membrane mirrors the plasma mem - brane composition . This might occur through an endocytotic process affecting each plasma membrane protein to a differ - ent extent and could have a physiologic relevance in further presentation of a receptor bound to its alpha - granule ligand to the platelet surface . 0 1996 by The American Society of Hematology . NaCl , 5 mmoVL glucose , pH 7 . 4 ) containing 3 . 5 mg / mL bovine serum albumin ( Sigma Chemical CO , St Louis , MO ) . The washed platelets were resuspended and fixed with 1 % glutaraldehyde ( Ladd Research Inc , Burlington , UK ) in 0 . 1 mom phosphate buffer . Megakaryocytes used in the electron microscopic study were grown in liquid culture from bone marrow precursors obtained from normal adult graft donors , as previously described ? Antibodies Different antibodies against glycocalicin , GPIb , GPIX , and GPV were used for immunoelectron microscopy study . An anti - human GPIb monoclonal mouse antibody purchased from Dakopatts ( Glostmp , Denmark ) was used at 11100 dilution . An anti - human glycocalicin and GPV polyclonal rabbit antibodies , provided by Dr Michael Berndt , Prahran , A ~ stralia , ’ ~ . ’ ~ were used , respectively , at 10 p g h L and 30 & mL . An anti - human GPIX , provided by Dr Kenneth Clemetson , Bern , Switzerland , was used at 30 pg / mL . An anti - human GPIX monoclonal antibody , provided by Dr Michael Berndt , 16 was used at 30 pg / mL . For double immunolabeling , an anti - human P - selectin , ” provided by Dr Michael Berndt , and an anti - human von Willebrand factor ( vWF ) purchased from Cappel Laboratory ( Downington , PA ) were used , respectively , at 30 pg / mL and 1 / 50 dilution . Gold - conjugated ( 10 and 15 nm ) protein A purchased from the Department of Cell Biology , University of Utrecht ( Utrecht , The Netherlands ) were used , respectively , at 1 / 80 and 1 / 35 dilutions . Characterization of the Poiyclonal Antibodies The specificities of the polyclonal antibodies were assayed by West - ern blotting of platelet lysate . Briefly , washed PRP was solubilized by From INSERM ( 191 , Hdpital Henri Mondor , Crkteil , France . Submitted March 20 , 1995 ; accepted September 15 , 1995 . Supported in part by I’Association pour la Recherche contre le Cancer ( ARC ) and la Fondation pour la Recherche Medicab ( FRM ) . Address reprint requests to Dr Elisabeth M . Cramer , INSERM U91 , Hapita1 Henri Mondor . 94010 Crkteil , France . The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page charge payment . This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U . S . C . section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . 0 1996 by The American Society of Hematology . 0006 - 4971 / 96 / 8704 - 0004 $ 3 . 00 / 0 1385 For personal use only . on October 22 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From ' * . . . Fig 2 . Biochemical characterization of the poly - clonal antibodies used in this study by Western blot - ting of platelet lysates . ( A ) The anti - glycocalicin anti - body recognizes a unique protein of approximately 145 kD molecular weight . ( B ) The anti - GPV antibody recognizes a protein of approximately 80 kD molecu - lar weight , and ( C ) the anti - GPIX antibody recognizes a major protein of approximately 22 kD molecular weight . n U 45 koa BERGER , MAS & , AND CRAMER Fig 1 . ( A and B ) lmmunogold localization of GPlb with a monoclonal antibody on thin fro - zen sections of resting platelets . lmmunolabeling is found to be associated with the plasma membrane ( pm ) and open cana - licular system ( ocs ) . Some gold particles are also associated with the alpha - granule ( a ) mem - brane . while mitochondria ( m ) are devoid of labeling . Bars , 250 nm . 80 kDa 22 kDa For personal use only . on October 22 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From GPh , IX , V IN PLATELET ALPHA - GRANULES 1387 . . Fig 3 . ( A ) lmmunogold localization of GPlb on thin frozen sections of resting platelets with the polyclonal anti - glycocalicin antibody . A strong labeling is observed to be associated with the plasma membrane ( pm ) and alpha - granules ( al . ( B ) Double immunolabeling using different sizes of gold particles ( for P - selectin : 15 nm , arrows ; glycocalicin : 10 nm , arrowheads ) allows identification of labeled granules fa ) as alpha - granules , while mitochondria ( m ) are devoid of labeling . ( inset ) The same results are obtained with a double immunolabeling using anti - vWF ( 15 nm , arrows ) and anti - glycocalicin ( 10 nm , arrowheads ) . Bars , 250 nm . the addition of 2 % sodium dodecyl sulfate ( SDS ) and 1 mmoVL EDTA and separated on SDS - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( PAGE ) with or without a reducing condition with 5 % 2 - p - mercaptoethanol . using a 7 % resolving gel and 3 % stacking gel . Gels were electroblotted on niwcellulose filter membrane by semidry transfer . The nonspecific binding was blocked in 5 % low fat powder milk , and membranes were probed with polyclonal antibodies for 1 hour at m m temperature . The labeled proteins were revealed after incubation with sheep anti - rabbit immunoglobulins bound to peroxidase . Electron Microscopy Normal platelets and megakaryocytes were prepared for immuno - electron microscopy as follows : they were fixed in 1 % glutaralde - hyde in 0 . 1 mol / L phosphate buffer , pH 7 . 4 , for 1 hour at 22°C . washed three times with the same buffer , embedded in sucrose , and freezed in liquid nitrogen . ' * Pathologic platelets were also embedded in glycol methacrylate according to the method described by Leduc and Bernhard ' " ; this technique permitted a more lasting storage for precious samples . Then , the immunochemical reactions were per - formed on thin sections collected on copper grids according to the method of Slot et al . ' x Briefly , the sections were labeled by a first incubation with the antibodies diluted in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) containing I % bovine serum albumin ( Sigma ) for 20 minutes at 22°C . washed , and then incubated with protein A - gold ( IO nm ) for 20 minutes at room temperature . The sections were counter - stained with 2 % uranyl acetate , pH 7 , and methyl cellulose uranyl . For personal use only . on October 22 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 1388 BERGER , MAS & , AND CRAMER Fig 4 . lmmunolocalization of GPIX ( A ) and GPV ( B ) with polyclonal antibodies on thin frozen sections of resting platelets . As expected for these GPlb - associated proteins , immunolabeling is found to be associated with the plasma membrane ( pm ) , the open canalicular system ( ocs ) membrane , and also the alpha - granule membrane ( a ) , while mitochondria ( m ) are devoid of labeling . For GPIX , the same results are obtained using a monoclonal anti - GPIX instead of the polyclonal antibody ( A , inset ) . Bars , 250 nm . For personal use only . on October 22 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From GPIB , IX , V IN PLATELET ALPHA - GRANULES 1389 For double immunolabeling , a short time fixation with 1 % glutaral - dehyde in phospate buffer was realized after the incubation with the gold conjugate , and a second round of labeling with the second antibody was realized using a different size of gold particle protein A conjugate . Samples were observed on a Philips 450 CM 10 electron microscope . Quantitative Estimation Membrane labeling intensity was evaluated by counting the gold particles per micrometer of membrane . The alpha - granule pool was quantified by counting the gold beads associated with the alpha - granule membrane on one hand and the plasma membrane on the other : the ratio of intracellular versus plasma membrane pool per equatorial platelet section was calculated . RESULTS Resting Platelets Immunolocalization of GPIb . To ensure the specificity of the observed immunolabeling reaction , a monoclonal anti - body against GPIb was used as a first instance . Immunolabel - ing on thin sections allows marking of plasma membrane proteins as well as intracellular proteins . In this experiment , labeling for GPIb antigen with a monoclonal antibody was detected on the plasma membrane , and at the luminal face of the open canalicular system ( OCS ) . Careful examination led to the observation that some gold particles were also bound on alpha - granule membranes , while other structures such as mitochondria were devoid of labeling ( Fig 1A and B ) . Using a monospecific polyclonal antibody ( Fig 2A ) raised against purified glycocalicin , we obtained a stronger labeling on the same structures ; eg , plasma membrane , OCS ; and alpha - granule membrane ( Fig 3A ) . Due to their high number , large size , and dark nucleoids , alpha - granules could be identified . In addition to morpho - logic criteria , double immunolabeling with both anti - glyco - calicin and an anti - P - selectin polyclonal antibody ( Fig 3B ) or an anti - vWF polyclonal antibody ( Fig 3B , inset ) as alpha - granule markers confirmed that the labeled granules were , indeed , alpha - granules because of the codistribution of the proteins . Immunolocalization of GPIX and GPV . GPIb has been described to form a noncovalent complex in the platelet membrane with GPIX and GPV ? ’ We have investigated the localization of both proteins in normal resting platelets and found that their distributions were similar to GPIb ( eg , plasma membrane , OCS ) and that a small proportion of gold probes were also present on the alpha - granule membrane ( Fig 4A and B ) . The characterization of the polyclonal antibody anti - GPIX is shown in Fig 2C ; we have also confirmed our results using a monoclonal antibody and have obtained a weaker labeling but an identical distribution ( Fig 4A , inset ) . Pathologic Platelets Gray platelet syndrome is a rare congenital bleeding disor - de ? ’ in which the platelets are markedly deficient in morpho - logically recognizable alpha - granules . ” The cause of the ab - normality affecting the alpha - granules is unknown , but it appears that the alpha - granule membrane is normally consti - tuted because its proteic components , such as P - selectin , 23 GPIIb - IIIa , ’ and CD36 , * are present . On such platelets , im - munolabeling for GPIb was found on the plasma membrane and also on abnormal alpha - granule - like structures ( small residual alpha - granules and small or large vacuoles identified as empty pathologic alpha - granules ; Fig 5A ) . Similar local - ization was also obtained for both GPIb - associated glycopro - teins , GPIX and GPV ( Fig 5C and E ) . These results suggest that this pool storage deficiency is not due to an alpha - granule membrane composition defect . Bernard - Soulier syndrome is an inherited bleeding disor - der characterized by a deficiency in the GPIb - IX - V com - p l e ~ . ~ ~ . ~ ~ These platelets , embedded in glycol methacrylate or in sucrose , displayed a severely decreased immunolabel - ing for GPIb including the alpha - granule labeling . The same results were obtained for GPIX and GPV and attested for the specificity of the labeling observed on normal platelets ( Figs 5B , D , and F and 6A ) . Colocalization Between GPIb and vWF To assess that alpha - granule GPIb could be associated with vWF , we performed a double immunolabeling for GPIb and vWF combined with quantitative estimations of associ - ated labeling . We found that more than 80 % of double - labeled alpha - granules showed an apparent association be - tween GPIb and vWF labeling ( Fig 3B , inset ; Fig 6B , inset ) , whereas less than 10 % presented this characteristic when P - selectin was used as the alpha - granule marker ( Fig 3B ) . Moreover , less than 20 % of such an association between vWF and the other alpha - granule membrane - associated re - ceptors , CD9 and PECAM1 , was found ( Table l ) . After thrombin activation , most vWF labeling was located along the OCS membrane and was codistributed with GPIb label - ing ( Fig 6B ) . Megakaryocytes We further investigated the localization of GPIb in the platelet precursors , the megakaryocytes . Mature human cul - tured megakaryocytes displayed the classical membrane dis - tribution for GPIb ( eg , plasma and demarcation membranes ) , but also some alpha - granules showed immunolabeling for this glycoprotein ( Fig 7 ) . Similar results were found for GPIX and GPV ( not shown ) . Control When the primary antibody was either replaced by a non - relevant polyclonal antibody or omitted from the immunola - beling , staining was completely negative . Quantitative Estimation When quantitative measurements of the GPIb labeling were realized on normal platelets , they showed an associa - tion of approximatly 10 % of total labeling with the alpha - granule membrane ( Fig 8 ) . On Bernard - Soulier platelets , a decrease of 90 % of total normal platelet labeling was ob - served . In these semiquantitative estimations , immunolabel - ing on glycol methacrylate - embedded Bernard - Soulier plate - For personal use only . on October 22 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From For personal use only . on October 22 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From GPIE , IX , V IN PLATELET ALPHA - GRANULES 1391 Fig 5 . lmmunolocalization of GPlb , GPIX , and GPV in glycol methacrylate - embedded pathologic platelets . In the Gray platelets , GPlb ( A ) , GPlX ( B ) , and GPV ( C ) are present and localized on the same structures , eg , plasma membrane tpm ) , small residual granules ( a ) , and also vacuolar structure ( a ' ) , usually considered as empty granules . In the Bernard - Soulier platelets , which do not express the GPlb - IX - V complex , the immunolabeling for GPlb ( D ) , GPlX ( E ) , and GPV ( F ) is seriously decreased . This finding also attests for the specificity of the reaction . Bar , 250 nm . Fig 6 . Sucrose - embedded Bernard - Soulier platelets immu - nolabeled for GPlb : As in glycol methacrylate - embedded cells , membrane labeling for GPlb is virtually absent , close to the background staining . ( B ) Double immunolabeling for GPlb , 10 nm gold particles ( arrowheads ) , and vWf , 15 nm gold particles ( arrows ) . On resting platelets , double - labeled alpha - granules tinset , A ) show frequently a close association of both label - ing . After thrombin activation , most of the vWf labeling appears to be associated with the open canalicular system ( OCS ) mem - brane and codistributed with GPlb . Bar , 250 nm . A . For personal use only . on October 22 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 1392 BERGER , MASSE , AND CRAMER Table 1 . Colocalization of GPlb and vWF Double Labeling GPlbIvWF 82 ( 20 ) GPlbP - selectin 9 ( 15 ) CD9IvWF 19 ( 15 ) PECAMlIvWF 14 ( 20 ) % of Alpha - Granules Showing Colocaliration of Both Markers ( n ) On normal platelets , 82 % of double - labeled alpha - granules show a colocalization of GPlb and vWF . When P - selectin is used as an alpha - granule marker , only 9 % of double - labeled granules present such a colocalization . As a control , double labeling between vWF and two alpha - granule receptors , CD9 and PECAM1 , show , respectively , 19 % and 14 % of marker association . These data suggest that GPlb and vWF are specifically associated . lets was compared with glycol methacrylate - embedded control platelets . In the same way , immunolabeling for GPIb on cryosectioned control and Bernard - Soulier platelets were compared ( Fig 9 ) . DISCUSSION The ultrastructural localization of membrane receptors in cell organization may reflect the dynamic feature of these mem - branes within secretory and endocytotic pathways . The alpha - granules are the main secretory organelles of platelets and meg - akaryocytes . They arise from a dual mechanism : endogenous synthesis occumng in megakaryocytes and endocytosis from the surrounding extracellular medium . ' 26 The first mechanism involves many hemostatic factors , such as thrombospondin , beta - thromboglobulin , and vWF , whose corresponding mRNAs are present in megakaryocytes . ' The second pathway is the route of several plasmatic proteins such as immunoglobulins , albumin , and fibrinogen , which are acquired exclusively by endocytosis ? ' Fibrinogen endocytosis appears to be a receptor - mediated process , under the control of GPIIbIIIaz8 This fibrin - ogen endocytosis takes place at the end of megakaryocyte matu - ration " and continues during platelet life ? 9 The proteins of the alpha - granule membrane can also be categorized in two groups . On the one hand , some receptors Fig 7 . lmmunogold localization of GPlb with a polyclonal anti - glycocalicin antibody on cultured megakaryocytes embedded in glycol methacrylate . In these cells , the GPlb labeling is widely present on demarcation membranes ( dm ) , and some alpha - granules ( a1 are positive . Bar , 250 nm . For personal use only . on October 22 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From GPIB , IX , V IN PLATELET ALPHA - GRANULES are restricted to the alpha - granule limiting membrane and are absent from the plasma membrane , such as P - ~ electin , ~ ' osteonectin , 31 and GMP33 ? * On the other hand , further studies have shown that some proteins that are normal com - ponents of the plasma membrane are also present on the alpha - granule membrane at different rates ; eg , GPIIbIIIa , with approximately 50 % of the total platelet pool of GPIIbI - IIa present in the alpha - granule membranes ' ; CD36 , with 35 % ' ; CD9 and PECAM1 , with 25 % 9 ; and the small GTP - binding protein RapIb , with 15 % . 1° Until now , GPIb , which is the platelet receptor that mediates the adhesion of unstimu - lated platelets to v W F , ~ ~ was considered to be restricted to the plasma membrane of resting platelets , probably because of its cytoskeletal association . * ' In the present report , we show that even for this membrane - associated protein , a con - sistent amount of GPIb , and also associated glycoproteins IX and V , is present in the platelet alpha - granule membrane . In previous report ^ , ' ^ , ^ ^ we proposed that GPIb was absent from the alpha - granule membrane because the observed scat - tered labeling associated with this structure was considered as background staining . Technical improvements - first , in the marked decrease of background staining using glycin as the saturation agent and phosphate buffer rather than Tris buffer , and second , using protein - A - gold instead of goat anti - rabbit gold - have increased technical sensitivity and per - mitted to demonstrate the observed labeling for GPIb associated with the alpha - granule membrane as a specific 0 Alpha - granule associated labeling plasma membrane and ocs associated labeling 0 labeled mitochondria : background staining . Fig 8 . Distribution of the GPlb labeling on normal platelets ( n = 25 ) . On normal platelets , approximately 109 ' 0 of total labeling is associated with the alpha - granules . Mitochondria represent the back - ground staining . Sucrose embedded cells ~ o m d platelets Bernard - Soulier n = 10 platelets n = 10 Fig 9 . Comparison of GPlb labeling on normal and Bernard - Soulier platelets . On Bernard - Souliar platelets , the total labeling appears se - riously decreased . association . Moreover , this result has been definitely con - firmed using a monoclonal antibody . Labeling for the three glycoproteins Ib , IX , and V was dramatically decreased on platelets from a patient with Ber - nard - Soulier syndrome , attesting for the specificity of the reaction . On platelets from a patient with the storage disease Gray platelet syndrome , in which platelets lack normal alpha - granules , the residual pathologic granules were labeled for these three associated glycoproteins ( Ib , IX , and V ) . This finding shows that GPIb - IX - V localization is unaltered in For personal use only . on October 22 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 1394 BERGER , MASSE , AND CRAMER these patients and confirms and supplements previous obser - vations describing this pathology as soluble protein storage deficiency in which the alpha - granule membrane is normal . Relative to previous findings in fibrinogen endocytosis that implicate GPIIb - IIIa ~ * and also to the presence in the alpha - granule membrane of numerous plasma membrane re - ceptors , these results raise the question of a protein alpha - granule targeting signal . A cDNA P - selectin transfection study in a pituitary cell line has led to the description of a 23 - amino acid cytoplasmic domain of P - selectin responsible for its direct transport to secretory g r a n ~ l e s . ~ ~ . ~ ~ However , concerning proteins like GPIIb - IIIa , CD36 , or GPIb , which display a double localization in platelets and megakaryo - cytes , it appears more delicate to consider the existence of a specific signal leading the protein in two different compart - ments . On the other hand , the hypothesis of plasma mem - brane targeting followed by a specific and regulated endocy - tosis to the alpha - granules , as it has been proposed as targeting mechanism of a lysosomal pr ~ tein , ~ ’ could appear more suitable . Numerous receptors , included some 8 - inte - grins , have been shown to contain in their cytoplamic domain a specific endocytotic motif , NPXY . 38 . 39 Other specific sig - nals , such as the di - leucin motif and tyrosine - based motif , or secondary structures in the cytoplasmic tail of membrane receptors are also commonly proposed as endocytotic and targeting signal ^ . ^ ' . ^ ' The description of such a specific signal governing a differential rate of endocytosis from the platelet plasma membrane to the alpha - granules , perhaps through differential coated pits affinity , could explain our results but remains to be determined . Such a process has been described for the transferrin and for the low density lipo - protein receptor . 43 Furthermore , a preliminary study of GPLIb - IIIa expression during megakaryocyte maturation shows the appearance of the first protein expression on the plasma membrane , on demarcation membranes , and then on the alpha - granule membrane . These observations hinge on the hypothesis of an indirect targeting , implicating first a plasma membrane expression . Concerning the physiologic relevance of the presence of GPIb on the alpha - granule membrane , the observation of an apparent codistribution of GPIb and its ligand vWF on rest - ing and thrombin - activated platelets raises the possibility for a specific role of GPIb in the redistribution and the presenta - tion of functional adhesive complex ( GPIb - vWF ) during platelet activation . Such a phenomenon has already been proposed for GPIIb - IIIa and f i b r i n ~ g e n ~ . ~ ~ and might be gen - eralized to other alpha - granule receptors . In conclusion , this report documents the original composi - tion of the limiting membrane of alpha - granules , the platelet secretory organelles , which qualitatively mimicks the plasma membrane , and proposes a functional interpretation for this composition . ACKNOWLEDGMENT We thank Valerie Arqanuthurry for biochemical characterization of the polyclonal antibodies and Josette Guichard and Tayebeh Yous - sefian for helpful comments . REFERENCES 1 . Harrison P , Cramer EM : Platelet a - granules . Blood Review 7 : 52 , 1993 2 . Kieffer N , Guichard J , Farcet JP , Vainchenker W , Breton - Gorius J : Biosynthesis of major platelet proteins in human blood platelets . Eur J Biochem 164 : 189 , 1987 3 . Cramer EM , Debili N , Martin JF , Galdwin AM , Breton - Gorius J , Harrison P , Savidge GF , Vainchenker W : Uncoordinated expres - sion of fibrinogen compared with thrombospondin and von Wille - brand factor in maturing human megakaryocytes . Blood 73 : 1123 , 1989 4 . George JN , Saucerman S , Levine SP , Knieriem LK , Bainton DF : Immunoglobulin G is a platelet alpha granule - secreted protein . J Clin Invest 76 : 2020 , 1985 5 . Louache F , Debili N , Cramer EM , Breton - Conus J , Vain - chenker W : Fibrinogen is not synthesized by human megakaryo - cytes . Blood 77 : 311 , 1991 6 . Harrison P , Wilbourn B , Debili N , Vainchenker W , Lawrie AS , Breton - Gorius J , Masse JM , Savidge GF , Cramer EM : Uptake of plasma fibrinogen into the alpha - granules of human megakaryo - cytes and platelets . J Clin Invest 84 : 1320 , 1989 7 . Cramer EM , Savidge GF , Vainchenker W , Berndt MC , Pidard D , Caen JP , Masse JM , Breton - Gorius J : Alpha - granule pool of GPIIb - IIIa in normal and pathologic platelets and megakaryocytes . Blood 75 : 1220 , 1990 8 . Berger G , Caen JP , Berndt MC , Cramer EM : Ultrastructural demonstration of CD36 in the alpha - granule membrane of human platelets and megakaryocytes . Blood 823034 , 1993 9 . Cramer EM , Berger G , Berndt MC : Platelet alpha - granule and plasma membrane share two new components : CD9 and PECAMl . Blood 84 : 1722 , 1994 10 . Berger G , Quarck R , Tenza D , Levy - Toledano S , deGunzburg J , Cramer EM : Ultrastructural localization of the small GTP - binding protein Rap1 in human platelets and megakaryocytes . Br J Haematol 88 : 372 , 1994 11 . Fox JEB : The platelet cytoskeleton . Thromb Haemost 70 : 884 , 1993 12 . Cramer EM , Meyer D , le Menn R , Breton - Gorius J : Eccentric localization of von Willebrand factor in an internal structure of platelet alpha - granule resembling that of Weibel - Palade bodies . Blood 66 : 710 , 1985 13 . Cramer EM , Vainchenker W , Vinci G , Guichard J , Breton - Gorius J : Gray platelet syndrome : Immunoelectron microscopic lo - calization of fibrinogen and von Willebrand factor in platelets and megakaryocytes . Blood 66 : 1309 , 1985 14 . Cramer EM , Lu H , Caen JP , Soria C , Berndt MC , Tenza D : Differential redistribution of platelet glycoproteins Ib and IIb - IIIa after plasmin stimulation . Blood 77 : 694 , 1991 15 . Berndt MC , Phillips DR : Purification and preliminary physi - cochemical characterization of human platelet membrane glycopro - tein V . J Biol Chem 25659 , 1981 16 . Berndt MC , Gregory C , Chong BH , Zola H , Castaldi PA : Additional glycoprotein defect in Bernard - Soulier syndrome : Con - firmation of genetic basis by paretal analysis . Blood 62 : 800 , 1983 17 . Gamble JR , Skinner MP , Berndt MC , Vadas MA : Prevention of activated neutrophil adhesion to endothelium by soluble adhesion protein GMP140 . Science 249 : 414 , 1990 18 . Slot JW , Geuze JJ , Weerkamp AJ : Localization of Macromo - lecular Components by Application of the Irnmunogold Technique on Cryosectioned Bacteria . New York , NY , Academic , 1988 19 . Leduc EH , Bernhard W : Recent modification of the glycol methacrylate embedding procedure . J Ultrastruct Res 10 : 196 , 1967 20 . Modderman PW , Admiraal LC , Sonnenberg A , von der Borne AEGKr : Glycoproteins V and Ib - IX form a noncovalent complex in the platelet membrane . J Biol Chem 267 : 364 , 1992 For personal use only . on October 22 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From GPIE , IX , V IN PLATELET ALPHA - GRANULES 1395 21 . Raccuglia G Gray platelet syndrome . A variety of qualitative platelet disorder . Am J Med 51 : 818 , 1971 22 . White JG : Ultrastructural studies of Gray platelet syndrome . Am J Path01 95445 , 1979 23 . Rosa JP , George JN , Bainton DF , Nurden AT , Caen JP , McEver RP : Gray platelet syndrome . Demonstration of alpha granule membranes that can fuse with the cell surface . J Clin Invest 801 138 , 1987 24 . Bernard J , Soulier JP : Sur une nouvelle vari6t6 de distrophie thrombocytaire htmorragipare cong6nitale . Semin H6p Paris 24 : 3217 , 1948 25 . Clemetson KJ , McGregor JL , James E : Characterization of platelet membrane glycoprotein abnormalities in Bernard - Soulier syndrome and comparison with normal by surface - labeling tech - niques and high - resolution two dimensional gel electrophoresis . J Clin Invest 70 : 304 , 1982 26 . George JN : Immunoglobulin G : Its significance for the evalu - ation of thrombocytopenia and for understanding the origin of alpha - granule proteins . Blood 76859 , 1990 27 . Handagama PJ , Shuman MA , Bainton D F Incorporation of intravenously injected albumin , IgG and fibrinogen in guinea pig megakaryocyte granules . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 84 : 861 - 865 . 84 : 861 , 1989 28 . Handagama PJ , Scarborough RM , Shuman MA , Bainton DF : Endocytosis of fibrinogen into megakaryocyte and platelet alpha - granules is mediated by aIIb - p3 ( glycoprotein IIb - IIIa ) . Blood 82 : 135 , 1993 29 . Heilmann E , Hynes LA , Friese P , George JN , Burstein SA , Dale GL : Dog platelets accumulate intracellular fibrinogen as they age . J Cell Physiol 161 : 23 , 1994 30 . McEver RP : Properties of GMP140 , an inducible granule membrane protein of platelets and endothelium . Blood Cells 1673 , 1990 31 . Metzelaar MJ , Heijnen HFG , Sixma JJ , Nieuwenhuis HK . Identification of a 33 - Kd protein associated with the alpha - granule membrane ( GMP - 33 ) that is expressed on the surface of activated platelets . Blood 79 : 372 , 1992 32 . Breton - Gorius J , Clezardin P , Guichard J , Debili N , Mamaval L , Vainchenker W , Cramer EM , Delmas P Localization of platelet osteonectin at the internal face of the alpha - granule membrane in platelets and megakaryocytes . Blood 79 : 936 , 1992 33 . George JN , Torres MM : Thrombin decrease von Willebrand factor binding to platelet glycoprotein b . Blood 71 : 1253 , 1988 34 . Lu H , Menashi S , Garcia I , Cramer EM , Li H , Tenza D , de Romeuf C , Soria J , Soria C : Reversibility of thrombin - induced decrease in platelet glycoprotein Ib function . Br J Haematol 85 : 116 , 1993 35 . Koedam JA , Cramer EM , Briend E , Furie B , Furie BC , Wagner DD : P - selectin , alpha granule membrane protein of platelets and endothelial cells , follows the regulatory secretory pathway in AtT - 20 cells . J Cell Biol 3 : 617 , 1992 36 . Disdier M , Morrissey JH , Fugate RD , Bainton DF , McEver R P Cytoplasmic domain of P - selectin ( CD62 ) contains the signal for sorting into the regulated secretory pathway . Mol Biol Cell 3 : 309 , 1992 37 . Braun M , Waheed A , von Figura K Lysosomal acid phospha - tase is transported to lysosomes via the cell surface . EMBO J 8 : 3633 , 1989 38 . Trowbridge IS : Endocytosis and signals for internalization . Curr @ in Cell Biol 3 : 634 , 1991 39 . Vignoud L , Usson Y , Balzac F , Tarone G , Block MR Inter - nalization of the alpha 5 beta 1 integrin does not depend on “NPXY” signals . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 199 : 603 , 1994 40 . Letoumeur F , Klausner RD : A novel di - leucin motif and a tyrosine - based motif independently mediate lysosomal targeting and endocytosis of CD3 chains . Cell 69 : 1143 , 1992 41 . Collawn JF , Lai A , Doming0 D , Fitch M , Hatton S , Trow - bridge IS : YTRF is the conserved internalization signal of the trans - ferrin receptor , and a second YTRF signal at position 3 1 - 34 enhances endocytosis . J Biol Chem 268 : 21686 , 1993 42 . Collawn JF , Stangel M , Kuhn LA , Esekogwu V , Jing S , Trow - bridge IS , Tainer JA : Transferrin receptor internalization sequence YXRF implicates a tight turn as the structural recognition motif for endocytosis . Cell 63 : 1060 , 1990 43 . Chen WJ , Goldstein JL , Brown MS : NPXY , a sequence often found in cytoplasmic tails , is required for coated pit - mediated inter - nalization of low density lipoprotein receptor . J Cell Biol 265 : 3116 , 1990 44 . Suzuki H , Baba I , Tanoue K , Yamazaki H : A possible role of a - granule GPIIb - IIIa as a carrier of intragranular fibrinogen during release reaction . Thromb Haemost 65 : 698 , 1991 ( abstr ) 45 . Nurden P , Humbert M , Bihour C , Piotrowicz R , Kunicki TJ , Nurden AT : A MAb ( AP6 ) recognizing the sequence 209 - 222 of GPIIIa shows an activation - dependent binding to the surface mem - brane of platelets yet binds to alpha - granule membranes of unstimu - lated platelets . Thromb Haemost 73 : 1194 , 1995 ( abstr ) For personal use only . on October 22 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 1996 87 : 1385 - 1395 G Berger , JM Masse and EM Cramer contains the glycoproteins Ib , IX , and V Alpha - granule membrane mirrors the platelet plasma membrane and http : / / www . bloodjournal . org / content / 87 / 4 / 1385 . full . html Updated information and services can be found at : Articles on similar topics can be found in the following Blood collections http : / / www . bloodjournal . org / site / misc / rights . xhtml # repub _ requests Information about reproducing this article in parts or in its entirety may be found online at : http : / / www . bloodjournal . org / site / misc / rights . xhtml # reprints Information about ordering reprints may be found online at : http : / / www . bloodjournal . org / site / subscriptions / index . xhtml Information about subscriptions and ASH membership may be found online at : Copyright 2011 by The American Society of Hematology ; all rights reserved . Society of Hematology , 2021 L St , NW , Suite 900 , Washington DC 20036 . Blood ( print ISSN 0006 - 4971 , online ISSN 1528 - 0020 ) , is published weekly by the American For personal use only . on October 22 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From