Concurrency measures in the era of temporal network epidemiology : A review Naoki Masuda , 1 , 2 Joel C . Miller , 3 and Petter Holme 4 1 Department of Mathematics , State University of New York at Buﬀalo , USA ∗ 2 Computational and Data - Enabled Science and Engineering Program , State University of New York at Buﬀalo , USA 3 School of Engineering and Mathematical Sciences , La Trobe University , Australia 4 Tokyo Tech World Research Hub Initiative ( WRHI ) , Institute of Innovative Research , Tokyo Institute of Technology , Yokohama 226 - 8503 , Japan ( Dated : June 7 , 2021 ) Diseases spread over temporal networks of interaction events between individuals . Structures of these temporal networks hold the keys to understanding epidemic propagation . One early concept of the literature to aid in discussing these structures is concurrency—quantifying individuals’ tendency to form time - overlapping “partnerships” . Although conﬂicting evaluations and an overabundance of operational deﬁnitions have marred the history of concurrency , it remains important , especially in the area of sexually transmitted infections . Today , much of theoretical epidemiology uses more direct models of contact patterns , and there is an emerging body of literature trying to connect methods to the concurrency literature . In this review , we will cover the development of the concept of concurrency and these new approaches . I . INTRODUCTION A . Temporal network epidemiology , partnership , and concurrency The networks over which sexually transmitted infec - tions spread can , to a high accuracy , be described as a sequence of sexual events ( sometimes known as “inter - actions” , “contacts” , or “encounters” ) between pairs of individuals . These interactions are the atoms of time - resolved sexual networks , in that it is not meaningful to divide them into sub - events from an epidemiologi - cal point of view . Furthermore , the duration of these events have little impact on disease spreading , so a con - cise mathematical representation of the sexual contact patterns of a population is as a sequence of events ( i , j , t ) , where i and j are the individuals involved and t is the time of the event . We will call such a sequence of events a temporal network [ 53 , 57 – 59 , 93 ] . Temporal network epi - demiology [ 90 , 91 ] connects the traditional compartmen - tal models of theoretical epidemiology [ 3 , 6 , 45 ] to tem - poral networks that we deﬁned above or related classes of time - varying networks , which both represent time - varying contact patterns between individuals . We will primarily focus on sexually transmitted infec - tions for the remainder of this review . Like static net - work epidemiology [ 14 , 64 , 66 , 69 , 118 ] , temporal net - work modeling becomes particularly useful for sexually transmitted infections . The reason is that for this case , interaction events are relatively well deﬁned [ 85 ] . This case contrasts to respiratory infections , where the net - works are harder to observe and cross - sectionally denser such that mass - action ( i . e . , well - mixed population ) mod - els incorporating some heterogeneity across individuals may be a better approach . However , our discussion can ∗ naokimas @ buﬀalo . edu be generalized to other infectious diseases and their as - sociated temporal networks if interaction events between individuals are reasonably well - deﬁned . Many factors determine the likelihood of whether or not one event spreads the disease from one individual to another—the nature of the interaction , the health sta - tus of those involved , etc . —but one can say for sure that sexual transmissions can only occur at the times of the events , and between the people involved . The structure of a temporal network determines many aspects of the spread of infections [ 5 , 35 , 52 , 54 , 135 ] . Periodic pat - terns ( circadian rhythms , seasonal variations , etc . ) are examples of purely temporal structures that can inﬂu - ence spreading . Heterogeneities in the number of net - work neighbors are a more network - related , yet inﬂuen - tial structure . Some properties of temporal networks inherently de - pend on both time and network structure . A funda - mental notion of temporal networks is a time - respecting path—whether a path exists from one individual to an - other through a sequence of events increasing in time . Note that infections can only propagate along time - respecting paths . Suppose that individual 1 is connected to 2 and 2 to 3 . If all events between 1 and 2 hap - pen before the events between 2 and 3 , there is no time - respecting path from 3 to 1 via 2 ( see Fig . 1 ( a ) ) . If , on the other hand , the events between 1 and 2 are in - terspersed with events between 2 and 3 , then there are time - respecting paths both from 1 to 3 and from 3 to 1 ( Fig . 1 ( b ) ) . In the latter case , it is harder to contain an outbreak . The partnerships between 1 and 2 and between 1 and 3 are concurrent in the second scenario ( Fig . 1 ( b ) ) but not in the ﬁrst scenario ( Fig . 1 ( a ) ) . Early network studies of disease spreading over sexual events were , in many ways , pioneering . One can argue that Kretschzmar and Morris’s Ref . [ 107 ] was the ﬁrst work of modern computational network science , in the sense that they tuned the network structure and studied the response of a dynamic system on the network . How - a r X i v : 2 0 12 . 13317v2 [ phy s i c s . s o c - ph ] 3 J un 2021 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 time ( a ) ( b ) FIG . 1 . Schematic of temporal networks with three nodes that are diﬀerent in the degree of concurrency . ( a ) Serial monogamy . ( b ) Concurrent partnerships . A vertical bar rep - resents a time - stamped interaction event between a pair of nodes , neglecting the duration of the event . The thicker , shaded lines are examples of time - respecting paths from 1 to 3 and , only in ( b ) , from 3 to 1 . This ﬁgure is inspired by Fig . 1 of Ref . [ 97 ] . ever , these early studies did not consider the temporal network of events as described above . They used a more coarse - grained network of partnerships . From a modeling point of view , a partnership is a time window , associated with a pair of individuals , within which a disease can spread between them . One typically assumes the likelihood of contagion per unit of time to be constant during a partnership and that partnerships do not take a break and start over again . These early articles rarely state how one could hypothetically reduce the full information of a temporal network of sexual interactions to a network of partnerships—should one casual , non - recurring interaction count as a partnership ? Further - more , papers state a multitude of quantitative deﬁnitions of concurrency [ 41 , 73 , 78 , 79 , 83 , 88 , 101 , 104 , 107 , 132 ] , and several studies point out the diﬃculty of studying an issue without an agreed deﬁnition [ 7 , 71 , 79 , 87 ] . Some of the existing confusion and controversy probably stems from the vagueness of the partnership concept . However , concurrency is by now so fundamentally rooted in the theory of sexually transmitted infections that one cannot just ignore it and start anew . Accordingly , a valuable line of research is to connect the temporal network structure to the theory of concurrent partnerships , which is this review’s topic . This review will cover the theory of concurrency in the mathematical literature . In particular , we will try to connect the older literature based on the notion of part - nerships with the newer temporal - network - oriented pa - pers . We ﬁrst describe how concurrency can allow for in - creased degrees and increased degree heterogeneity , both known to increase disease spread in standard network epidemiology ignoring the dynamic structure . Then , we investigate the impacts of concurrency that cannot be explained without understanding the dynamic structure . We next touch upon the controversy of whether or not high levels of concurrency drive the HIV epidemics in sub - Saharan Africa . However , we do not make a full re - view of this controversial subject . Finally , we discuss the outlook of temporal network epidemiology and its appli - cation to understanding the impact of concurrency . We stress that our contribution is to formulate concepts and models of concurrency and serve as a tutorial and pointer towards possible future directions , but not as a review of the empirical literature . We only refer to the empirical literature where appropriate to support the conceptual and mathematical frameworks . B . Notes on terminology In network science , the terminology is often ambigu - ous . Network epidemiology is no exception . In this sec - tion , we state operational deﬁnitions for the terms that we use . These are chosen to conform to the literature on both temporal networks and concurrency . 1 . Event An event refers to an interaction ( u , v , t ) between two individuals u and v at time t . In general , it is also com - mon to consider the duration of each event in tempo - ral network studies . However , the duration of a single event has no practical meaning for epidemic modeling . For sexually transmitted infections , an event represents a potentially infectious sexual interaction between two individuals . Typically , one models transmission at an event be - tween an infectious individual u and a susceptible v as a random event with a ﬁxed probability . If one has meta - data such as the gender of the individuals or information on condom usage , the probability of infection may de - pend on them . The time between two events between u and v is the interevent time [ 63 ] . 2 . Temporal network In this review , we will reserve temporal network for a sequence of events ( u , v , t ) and the set of individuals involved . Diﬀerent events may simultaneously occur be - tween diﬀerent node pairs in a temporal network . 3 . Partnership Given a temporal network , a partnership is a set of events between a pair of individuals such that the events are suﬃciently evenly distributed . Throughout a part - nership , disease could spread from one individual to the other individual at an equal rate . Mathematically we typically represent a partnership by the two individuals involved and its start and end times , which we often as - sume to be the times of the ﬁrst and last events between 3 the two individuals , respectively ( see Fig . 2 for an exam - ple ) . 4 . Dynamic partnership network Sometimes , we let the edges of a partnership network appear and disappear over time to generate a dynamic partnership network [ 5 , 24 ] . 5 . Momentary network We refer to the network at a certain time as the mo - mentary network . Speciﬁcally , for dynamic partnership networks , the partnerships existing at time t deﬁne the momentary network . For temporal networks , a node pair i and j forms an edge in the momentary network at time t if and only if there is an event between i and j before t and another event between the same node pair after t . These two deﬁnitions are identical if we construct a partnership network from the temporal network as we described above , i . e . , such that a partnership lasts from the ﬁrst to the last event between the two individuals . If events are not suﬃciently evenly distributed over time during the partnership , the momentary network may not represent the original temporal network data well . In other words , the presence of an edge in a momentary net - work at time t does not mean that there are events along the edge around t . Note that this information would typically be lost when representing sexual contacts by a dynamic partnership network . 6 . Aggregate network Finally , we often want to compare epidemic spreading in time - varying networks with that in the counterpart static networks . For a fair comparison , it is necessary to ensure that the diﬀerent networks under comparison have the same overall number of events . To this end , we use the aggregate network , which is deﬁned as the static network in which the weight of each edge is the same as the fraction of time for which the partnership exists in the given dynamic partnership network . For example , if the observation time window is t ∈ [ 0 , 100 ] and u and v are a partnership for t ∈ [ 10 , 50 ] only , then the weight of edge ( u , v ) in the aggregate network , which is static and exists for t ∈ [ 0 , 100 ] , is equal to 0 . 4 . II . CONCURRENCY AS A LARGE MEAN DEGREE OF THE NETWORK In network epidemiology in general , higher degrees ( more neighbors ) in a contact network signals an easier spread of disease . This is true both for individuals and for entire networks . If an individual has a high degree , it has a higher chance of getting infected and more oppor - tunities to spread the infection than a low - degree indi - vidual [ 40 ] . If the average degree of a network is higher , an epidemic outbreak would happen more easily and be more severe than on a sparser network [ 64 ] . The average degree is also a typical control parameter in studies of component size distributions [ 102 , 112 ] ; if a component of the network is large , then an infectious disease may spread on a large scale within it . The reasoning above applies to a scenario where the network is constant throughout the epidemic scenario in consideration . If the network changes over a similar time scale to the epidemics , what static network is most rel - evant is a challenging question [ 51 ] . Traditionally , the concurrency literature has assumed momentary networks and disease spreading faster than the partnership dynam - ics [ 70 , 107 ] . However , this approximation fails to capture a full temporal network picture and thus some outbreak scenarios . We start by analyzing an early model of concurrent re - lationships in which increasing concurrency increases the typical degree . We assume undirected networks although contagion is asymmetric for some sexually transmitted infections ( e . g . , HIV spreads easier from men to women than vice versa [ 120 ] ) . This assumption is for simplicity and facilitates model comparison . In the context of HIV / AIDS , Watts and May car - ried out a mathematical analysis of a mean - ﬁeld - type ordinary diﬀerential equation ( ODE ) model of epidemic spreading in their seminal 1992 study [ 137 ] . This pa - per is one of the earliest mathematical papers to discuss the concept of concurrency ; see Ref . [ 26 ] for an earlier mathematical modeling that focused on monogamy and pair formation and dissolution ( i . e . , no concurrency ) as opposed to well - mixed populations ( i . e . , concurrency ) . Their model is a variant of the susceptible - exposed - infectious - recovered / removed ( SEIR ) model and explic - itly incorporates a time delay between a sexual encounter causing transmission and the eventual transition to being infectious as well as the probability that an edge formed continues to exist for a given time . They set the rate at which a susceptible individual is infected , denoted by π ( t ) , where t is the time , to 4 π ( t ) = cβ (cid:34) I ( t ) S ( t ) + E ( t ) + I ( t ) + π ( t − T ) S ( t − T ) (cid:90) t −∞ e − ( t − t (cid:48) ) / τ S ( t (cid:48) ) + E ( t (cid:48) ) + I ( t (cid:48) ) d t (cid:48) (cid:35) , ( 1 ) where c is the rate of acquiring new sexual partners , β is the probability that a susceptible individual is infected by an infectious partner over the duration of the rela - tionship , S ( t ) is the fraction of susceptible individuals at time t , E ( t ) is the fraction of exposed ( infected but not yet infectious ) individuals , I ( t ) is the fraction of in - fected and infectious , T represents the ( ﬁxed ) duration of the exposed period , and τ is the average duration of partnership . Equation ( 1 ) is based on the following explicit and implicit assumptions . First , those who have developed AIDS , corresponding to the recovered / removed ( R ) state in the SEIR model , are not sexually active . Note that S ( t ) + E ( t ) + I ( t ) is not generally equal to one . In the ﬁrst term on the right - hand side of Eq . ( 1 ) , the fraction I ( t ) / [ S ( t ) + E ( t ) + I ( t ) ] is equal to the probability that a new partner is infectious . This term represents the rate of acquiring infection from new sexual partners be - ing formed at time t . The second term on the right - hand side represents the rate of acquiring infection from an ex - isting partner who acquired infection at time t − T and thus becomes infectious at time t . Second , the ﬁrst term implicitly assumes that if a newly formed partnership between a susceptible and an infectious individual will eventually transmit , it does so as soon as the partnership forms . The second term im - plicitly assumes that if a partner transitions to infectious during a partnership , and a transmission would occur , it does so as soon as the partner transitions to infectious . That is , if infection eventually occurs in the partnership , the transmission is assumed to happen as soon as the partnerhsip begins or the partner becomes infectious . Third , the dissolution of partnership obeys a Poisson process . Equivalently , e − ( t − t (cid:48) ) / τ in Eq . ( 1 ) represents the probability that the partnership that formed at time t (cid:48) remains at time t . Fourth , although partnerships are assumed to have ex - ponentially distributed duration , the infection probabil - ity is the same for all partnerships , independently of the age of the partnership . Suppose that the exposed period T is short compared to the typical partnership duration τ . If a partner v of the focal susceptible individual u is incubating infection ( has status E ) , then because T is small compared to τ it is likely that v is still in contact with whoever transmit - ted to v . Thus , the second term on the right - hand side as a whole represents the infection of u due to a concurrent partnership of v . The authors of Ref . [ 137 ] essentially varied τ in their analysis to show that a larger τ , cor - responding to stronger concurrency , enhances epidemic spreading . However , Eq . ( 1 ) indicates that π ( t ) monotonically in - creases with τ , given that β and c , which are parame - ters that control the infection rate per partnership and the rate of pair formation , respectively , are held con - stant . An increase in τ implies that a partnership lasts longer , which contributes to the increase in the degree of the individual ( i . e . , the number of edges , or equivalently , neighbors , that the individual has ) averaged over time . The authors also state that cτ is equal to the number of partners of an average individual [ 137 ] , i . e . , the mean degree over the nodes in the network . Because a larger mean degree is well known to enhance epidemic spreading with other things being equal , their result that epidemic spreading is enhanced by an increase in τ can be parsi - moniously understood as an eﬀect of an increased mean degree [ 17 ] . Many modeling studies that investigate the eﬀect of concurrency , by extending the Watts - May model [ 44 ] or otherwise [ 21 , 27 , 31 , 80 ] , fall in the same class ; enhanced epidemic spreading in those models can be construed as a consequence of the heightened mean degree of the net - work . III . CONCURRENCY AS HETEROGENEITY IN THE MOMENTARY DEGREE DISTRIBUTION In static partnership networks , it is known that in - creasing the heterogeneity in degree can signiﬁcantly in - crease the early growth of an epidemic . This is be - cause the ﬁrst nodes to become infected tend to be those nodes with a higher degree than typical nodes . These nodes then cause more infections than typical nodes . We now explore some models and concepts of concurrency in which the concurrency allows for increased heterogeneity . Many early investigations into concurrency held the mean degree ﬁxed and examined the eﬀect of diﬀerent de - gree distributions on the epidemic spread . Kretzschmar and Morris pioneered concurrency measures that went beyond the dependence on the mean degree [ 73 , 107 ] . Their analysis applies to the momentary network , i . e . , those pairs who , at a given time , had events before and would have events again ( see Sect . I B for momentary networks ) . They studied epidemic process models on top of dynamic network models in which pairs form and dis - solve across time and measured the relationship between the epidemic dynamics ( such as the fraction of infected nodes and the speed at which infection spreads ) and the concurrency measures . They proposed that , when edges share a node , i . e . , if a node has degree k larger than one , then concurrency is present . Otherwise , if k = 0 , with which the node is isolated , or k = 1 , with which the node is in a non - concurrent relationship with one other node , concurrency is absent , at least around the focal node . Let the number 5 of nodes be N , and denote the degree distribution of the network by { p ( k ) : k = 0 , 1 , 2 , . . . } ; a fraction p ( k ) of the nodes has degree k . The mean degree of the network , de - noted by (cid:104) k (cid:105) , is given by (cid:104) k (cid:105) = (cid:80) ∞ k = 0 kp ( k ) . Their ﬁrst measure of concurrency , denoted by κ 1 , is the mean de - gree , where the mean is taken over the nodes with degree at least one [ 107 ] ( the same authors deﬁned the recipro - cal of this quantity as κ 1 in their second paper on the topic , Ref . [ 73 ] ) . One obtains κ 1 = (cid:104) k (cid:105) 1 − p ( 0 ) . ( 2 ) Note that p ( 0 ) is the fraction of the isolated nodes . A larger κ 1 means more concurrency . If edges are concen - trated in a small fraction of nodes , which leads to a small value of 1 − p ( 0 ) , the concurrency is large . The so - called concurrency index , denoted by κ I , proposed later [ 83 ] , is equal to κ 1 − 1 if we identify the degree distributions used in the diﬀerent studies . For ﬁeld measurements , UNAIDS Reference Group on Estimates , Modelling and Projections , Working Group on Measuring Concurrent Sexual Partnerships recom - mended using the fraction of the population that is neither isolated nor in just a single relationship as a concurrency measure [ 132 ] . This measure is equal to (cid:80) k ≥ 2 p ( k ) = 1 − p ( 0 ) − p ( 1 ) . This measure also enumer - ates the nodes with concurrent relationships ( i . e . , k ≥ 2 ) . Kretzschmar and Morris also deﬁned a second mea - sure of concurrency , denoted by κ 3 , which they mainly used in their papers ( rather than κ 1 ) [ 73 ] . Although they also deﬁned another measure κ 2 [ 73 , 107 ] , it is a rescaled version of κ 3 , so we do not discuss it here . Suppose that node v has degree k , and denote its neigh - bors by u 1 , u 2 , . . . , u k . Then , each pair of edges , ( v , u i ) and ( v , u j ) , where 1 ≤ i (cid:54) = j ≤ k , are concurrent with each other , increasing the risk of epidemic spreading be - tween u i and u j through v . There are k ( k − 1 ) / 2 such concurrent edge pairs associated with node v . The con - currency measure is deﬁned by the sum of the concurrent edge pairs , over all nodes , i . e . , N (cid:104) k ( k − 1 ) / 2 (cid:105) , divided by the number of edges in the network , i . e . , N (cid:104) k (cid:105) / 2 , where (cid:104)·(cid:105) represents the average over nodes . Therefore , one ob - tains κ 3 = (cid:104) k 2 (cid:105) (cid:104) k (cid:105) − 1 . ( 3 ) A large κ 3 implies a high level of concurrency . A later de - ﬁned so - called partnership - based concurrency index , de - noted by κ P [ 83 ] , is equal to κ 3 − 1 . An example of κ 1 and κ 3 for a temporal network is shown in Fig . 2 . Another interpretation of κ 3 goes as follows . If we se - lect a partnership ( u i , v ) uniformly at random , the prob - ability that v has degree k is not equal to p ( k ) but rather equals kp ( k ) / (cid:104) k (cid:105) due to the friendship paradox [ 36 ] . If v has degree k , the number of other nodes u j ( j (cid:54) = i ) that are adjacent to v is k − 1 . Therefore , the expectation of the number of partners that v has other than u i is given 1 2 3 4 5 first contact last contact κ1 1 2 1 0 0 time κ3 κ 1 κ 3 FIG . 2 . An illustration of the time course of the measures κ 1 and κ 3 ( shown in the bottom panel ) in a temporal network ( shown by a timeline plot of the events in the top panel ) . Here we assume that the ﬁrst event of a pair of nodes is the beginning of a “partnership” and that the last event is the end of it , i . e . , we consider the momentary network at the given time . by ∞ (cid:88) k = 1 kp ( k ) (cid:104) k (cid:105) ( k − 1 ) = κ 3 . ( 4 ) Under this interpretation , κ 3 quantiﬁes the rate at which u i is at risk of being infected due to v being infected by other neighbors . An alternative interpretation of κ 3 is that it is ( up to a constant factor ) the average degree of the line graph of the original graph [ 33 ] . By deﬁnition , the nodes of the line graph represent the edges of the original graph ( i . e . , network ) , and two line - graph nodes are connected if they share a node of the original graph ( see Fig . 3 for an example ) . Numerical simulations of epidemic processes on a tem - poral network model suggested that the epidemic spread is faster for larger κ 3 , supporting that concurrency con - tributes to epidemic spreading [ 73 ] . This is also the case if (cid:104) k (cid:105) is kept constant κ 3 is varied [ 83 , 108 , 109 ] . The concurrency measure κ 3 and the numerical re - sults obtained in the aforementioned studies are , in fact , consistent with the mean - ﬁeld theory for epidemic pro - cesses on static heterogeneous networks , where hetero - geneity refers to that in the node’s degree . According to the modiﬁed degree - based mean - ﬁeld theory , which takes into account heterogeneity in the node’s degree in a network and that a node v cannot infect the neighbor that originally infected v , the epidemic threshold for the susceptible - infectious - recovered ( SIR ) model in terms of the infection rate , where the recovery rate is set to unity without loss of generality , is given in Refs . [ 19 , 30 , 118 ] as follows : β c = (cid:104) k (cid:105) (cid:104) k 2 (cid:105) − (cid:104) k (cid:105) = 1 κ 3 . ( 5 ) 6 1 2 3 ( a ) 4 5 6 1 2 3 4 5 6 ( b ) ( 1 , 3 ) ( 2 , 3 ) ( c ) ( 3 , 5 ) ( 3 , 6 ) ( 1 , 3 ) ( 1 , 2 ) ( 3 , 5 ) ( 5 , 6 ) ( d ) FIG . 3 . A motivating example for the concurrency measure κ 3 ( adapted from Ref . [ 107 ] ) . Panels ( a ) and ( b ) show two networks of currently active partnerships . From a disease spreading point of view , the situation in ( a ) is worse than the one in ( b ) . This is more evident if one considers the corre - sponding line graphs in panels ( c ) and ( d ) . The concurrency measure κ 1 —basically the average degree of the networks—is the same between ( a ) and ( b ) . However , the concurrency mea - sure κ 3 —basically the average degree of the line graphs shown in ( c ) and ( d ) , which correspond to ( a ) and ( b ) , respectively— correctly identiﬁes the ﬁrst situation as being more densely connected ( and thus worse ) . If β > β c , the ﬁnal epidemic size is large with a positive probability . Equation ( 5 ) indicates that a large κ 3 implies that epidemic spread is facilitated in the SIR model on networks . The eﬀect of κ 3 on epidemic spread can be under - stood in terms of concurrency allowing for more het - erogeneous degree distributions which impacts epidemic spread rather than in terms of how partnerships overlap across time . Note that κ 3 was proposed and at least nu - merically investigated in the mid 1990s [ 73 ] , preceding seminal studies of epidemic processes in networks with heterogeneous degree distributions ( e . g . , [ 19 , 103 , 119 ] ) . However , the eﬀects of such heterogeneities were known in the ﬁeld at the time . One example of an early way of dealing with degree heterogeneities is to multiply the basic reproductive number by the following correction factor due to Anderson and May [ 3 , 85 ] : 1 + (cid:104) k 2 (cid:105) − (cid:104) k (cid:105) 2 (cid:104) k (cid:105) . ( 6 ) The authors of Refs . [ 73 , 107 ] also acknowledge that κ 3 is similar to the so - called eﬀective contact number / rate , which uses (cid:104) k 2 (cid:105) / (cid:104) k (cid:105) to quantify the eﬀect of hetero - geneous contact rates in a population on spreading of HIV / AIDS [ 4 , 94 , 95 ] ( see Ref . [ 46 , 115 ] for qualitatively the same results for gonorrhea transmission modeled by the susceptible - infectious - susceptible ( SIS ) model ) . Other scenarios such as the fraction of isolated individu - als ( as investigated through varying κ 1 , thus controlling the frequency of polygamous partnerships ) and assorta - tive mixing , with which high - degree nodes tend to con - nect to each other , were also investigated in the same study [ 73 ] . These factors can also be mapped to the structure of static networks ; for example , the degree as - sortativity [ 111 , 113 , 140 ] . Other studies investigated the eﬀect of concurrency in similar manners . In other words , they simulated or mathematically analyzed epidemic process models in which node pairs form and dissolve over time accord - ing to some rules . Then , by keeping the mean degree , (cid:104) k (cid:105) , ﬁxed , either precisely or statistically , they varied model parameters , which changed the degree distribution and hence the value of the concurrency measure used , to see how the extent of epidemic spreading changed [ 28 , 32 , 41 , 42 , 62 , 68 , 70 , 74 , 82 , 84 , 110 ] ( also , Fig . 1 in [ 38 ] is a succinct example to contrast networks with the same N and the mean degree , while the level of con - currency is diﬀerent ) . Overall , most of these studies sug - gest that an increased concurrency , as measured by κ 3 or otherwise , causes an increase in the size of epidemic spreading . For example , Bauch & Rand considered an SIS model in which partners form and dissolve dynami - cally [ 17 ] . In the model , two isolated individuals form a partnership at rate ρ / N , and two individuals form a part - nership at rate ρθ / N if either of the individuals already has a diﬀerent partner . Parameter θ ( 0 ≤ θ ≤ 1 ) controls the level of concurrency ; if θ = 0 , all the partnerships are monogamous , i . e . , no node has a degree above one . If θ is larger , larger degrees are allowed . Finally , any partnership is assumed to break up at rate σ . They an - alytically calculated the degree distribution in the equi - librium , which is a Poisson distribution when θ = 1 and has a thinner tail when θ < 1 . The derived degree dis - tributions led to κ 3 = ρθ / σ [ 17 ] . They also calculated the mean degree , which we do not show here because the expression is complicated . They then investigated the ef - fect of κ 3 on the ﬁnal epidemic size and time evolution of the fraction of infected nodes , by keeping the mean de - gree constant . They showed that the ﬁnal epidemic size increases with κ 3 in most cases . IV . CONCURRENCY AS A TEMPORAL PROPERTY OF NETWORKS Most of the numerical and analytical results , including those reviewed in the previous sections , employed dy - namic network models to investigate the eﬀect of con - currency on epidemic spreading . This is valid because concurrency is a temporal notion . However , the eﬀects of concurrency claimed by many of these papers are already expected from our understanding of static network epi - demiology ( i . e . , how the structure of the static network varies as a concurrency parameter varies , which then af - fects how infections spread in the static network ) . Specif - ically , various previous results stated in terms of κ 1 , κ 3 , or similar measures are eﬀectively restatements of the 7 foundational results of mathematical epidemiology and network science without referring to concurrency , i . e . , a large mean degree or a high heterogeneity in the degree distribution given the mean degree yields an increased level of epidemic spreading in networks . This raises the question of whether concurrency on its own can aﬀect how infection spreads or whether it only acts indirectly by aﬀecting node degrees . More recent analyses that at - tempt to single out the eﬀect of concurrency from that of static network structure say that it has an important role . A consensus is that k ≥ 2 for a node implies the presence of concurrency and k ≤ 1 implies its absence . A majority of concurrency studies using mathemati - cal / computational models explicitly or implicitly assume that the degree distribution is measured at a certain point of time , i . e . , for the momentary network ( section I B ) . Edges in a momentary network at time t thus represent pairs of nodes that had an event in the past and will have one again in the future , so that the partnership is ongo - ing at time t . Therefore , the momentary degree larger than one can be used as evidence of concurrency [ 110 ] , and one can quantify this using , for example , κ 1 or κ 3 . Asking whether the momentary degree is larger than one is also used in survey studies [ 106 ] . Then , studies using a dynamical network model would involve a parameter to control the level of concurrency ( e . g . , the propensity that nodes are polygamous , i . e . , k ≥ 2 at any given point of time ) and examine how epidemic spreading changes as one varies the control parameter . The degree dis - tribution in the equilibrium or averaged over time has mostly been used for quantifying the level of concurrency . However , there are diﬀerent sequences of momentary net - works that , when aggregated across time , produce the same static network . These diﬀerent sequences can vary dramatically in how concurrency appears , and the static network structure cannot explain the resulting changes in how epidemics spread . These are fundamentally due to concurrency and not merely because concurrency fa - cilitates other eﬀects . To make this point clearer , in the following sections , we survey some recent results that explicitly aimed to single out the eﬀect of concurrency without being confounded by diﬀerences in aggregate networks . A . Overlap of time windows of edge activation Lagarde et al . deﬁned a concurrency measure for each node , called the individual index of concurrency ( IIC ) , as follows [ 76 ] . Consider two edges incident to node v , denoted by e 1 and e 2 . By considering HIV / AIDS , which their study is based on , we assume that a sexual partnership is formed on e 1 and e 2 during a time win - dow [ t start1 , t end1 ] and [ t start2 , t end2 ] , respectively . Note that the following deﬁnition can be easily generalized to the case in which e 1 or e 2 is activated in multiple time win - dows . Then , we denote the overlap of [ t start1 , t end1 ] and [ t start2 , t end2 ] by d . Speciﬁcally , d is the length of time for which both edges are activated , thus concurrent . Be - cause the two time windows of edge activation may over - lap even if they occur at random times , they calculated the expected size of the overlap when the two time win - dows are independently and uniformly randomly located in terms of the time , which we denote by (cid:15) . If d / (cid:15) = 1 , there is no excess concurrency between e 1 and e 2 relative to the uniformly random case . If d / (cid:15) > 1 , there is concur - rency beyond randomness . Because 0 ≤ d / (cid:15) < ∞ , they deﬁned r = ( d / (cid:15) − 1 ) / ( d / (cid:15) + 1 ) such that − 1 ≤ r < 1 ; the uniformly random overlap corresponds to r = 0 ; higher overlap yields r > 0 ; and lower overlap yields r < 0 . They summed r over all edge pairs incident to node v to deﬁne v ’s concurrency , i . e . , IIC . They performed an interview study in ﬁve cities in Africa with an observa - tion time window of one year . They found no correlation between the IIC value and whether or not the sampled people are HIV - infected . Assuming that the event time and its duration are randomly generated and independent for diﬀerent edges , diﬀerent authors deﬁned the temporal coherency as the probability that the time windows of activation on two edges overlap [ 78 , 101 ] . For empirical data of tempo - ral networks , the same quantity can be measured as the fraction of edge pairs that have overlapping active time , where the edge may be optionally assumed to be active all the time between its ﬁrst and last event times [ 79 ] . The temporal coherency is similar to a normalized variant of d . Note that one can consider both IIC and temporal coherency for individual nodes or the entire network ( as the average of the quantity over all the nodes or all the edge pairs in the network ) . An important quantity for interpreting how concur - rency impacts disease spread is the reachability of a net - work . The reachability is deﬁned for a temporal network as the expected fraction of node pairs i and j with a time - respecting path from i to j starting at a random time between the beginning and end of the data [ 50 , 81 , 100 ] ( also see [ 8 ] for a mathematical analysis ) . The reacha - bility of the temporal network generally increases as the temporal coherency increases [ 78 , 79 , 101 , 110 ] . Con - currency implies that two edges sharing a node simul - taneously exist . For example , if edge ( 1 , 2 ) and ( 2 , 3 ) are simultaneously active , then during this period 3 is reachable from 1 and vice versa . If the two edges are activated in non - overlapping times , then either 3 is not reachable from 1 or vice versa . This is why reachabil - ity is expected to increase as the temporal concurrency increases . By deﬁnition , the reachability ignores infec - tivity and therefore does not directly translate into ob - served epidemics . However , since high average reachabil - ity is positively correlated with the ﬁnal outbreak size , the results in Refs . [ 78 , 79 , 101 , 110 ] are consistent with the common claim that the concurrency positively con - tributes to the severity of outbreaks . 8 B . Epidemic model with a careful control of concurrency Related to the reachability argument , let us again con - sider two edges that share a node , ( 1 , 2 ) and ( 2 , 3 ) . In Ref . [ 97 ] , the authors pointed out that indirect trans - mission of infection between 1 to 3 through 2 is possi - ble if events on the two edges occur concurrently . Fig - ure 1 ( b ) shows such a case . In this ﬁgure , although the exact timings of the events generally diﬀer on the two edges , the events on them are concurrently occurring on a coarser time scale of the entire observation time win - dow shown in the ﬁgure . In contrast , if events on the two edges are not concurrent , the indirect disease trans - mission may happen in one direction ( e . g . , from 1 to 3 ) but not in the opposite direction , at least within a time window of interest ( see Fig . 1 ( a ) ) . Furthermore , disease transmission can go faster in the concurrent case than the non - concurrent case . With reference to Fig . 1 , this is be - cause the pathogen that has transmitted from 1 to 2 can almost immediately travel to 3 in the concurrent case , but it must wait in the non - concurrent case [ 97 ] . Cru - cially , this discussion compares scenarios that are diﬀer - ent in terms of concurrency ( no matter how one measures it ) but share the static network structure including the weight ( i . e . , number of events ) of each edge ; compare the two temporal networks shown in Fig . 1 . The networks shown in Fig . 1 are small and for expository purposes . However , the claim that concurrency mitigates limita - tions on transmission pathways and therefore enhances the epidemic size and speed has a general value because the same argument holds for larger networks . In the same study [ 97 ] , the authors examined a susceptible - infectious ( SI ) model with births and deaths in discrete time . They preserved the structure of the ag - gregate static network and the weight of each edge in the aggregate network ( and hence the degree of each node ) and varied the amount of concurrency . Speciﬁcally , they assumed a population in which each node had its own degree , and whenever a partnership ended a replacement partner was immediately found so that its degree re - mained ﬁxed . To investigate concurrency , the authors of [ 97 ] looked at regular random graphs , where each node has the same degree , k tp , at each point of time . In the serial monogamy case , k tp = 1 . To make a fair comparison with polygamy cases , they imposed that each node has degree k in the static network obtained by the aggregation over a time window . This implies that if k tp is small , the nodes have to switch the partners rapidly to collect k partners over time . Note that the concurrency is entirely absent in this case . If k tp is large , then the concurrency is present , and the nodes do not rapidly switch the partners . They also carefully controlled the infection rate parameter so that the comparison across diﬀerent k tp values is fair , i . e . , the weighted aggregate network does not depend on the k tp value . They carried out numerical simulations with k tp var - ied . They found that concurrency typically enhanced the early growth of an epidemic , but it typically had a small impact on the ultimate equilibrium number infected . C . Network ﬂuctuations In empirical data of temporal networks , events between nodes are often bursty [ 12 , 63 ] , such that there tends to be a burst of events in some periods and quiescence in others , in a manner not captured by Poisson processes or ODE models [ 53 , 57 , 90 ] . Therefore , individual momen - tary networks may carry large ﬂuctuations so that their time average or ensemble average does not represent the original temporal network of dynamic partnership net - work well . Figure 4 compares three dynamic partner - ship networks in discrete time that share the same time - averaged aggregate network . Note that we allow part - nerships to form and dissolve several times for our dis - cussion . Then , the dynamic partnership network shown in Fig . 4 ( a ) completely lacks concurrency because each node is either isolated ( k = 0 ) or in a non - concurrent relationship ( k = 1 ) at any discrete time . By contrast , the dynamic partnership network shown in Fig . 4 ( b ) has some amount of concurrency . At two out of the ﬁve times , each node is involved in concurrent partnerships . At the other three discrete times , the network in Fig . 4 ( b ) is empty . This is to make the dynamic partnership net - works shown in Figs . 4 ( a ) and 4 ( b ) to have the same amount of partnership averaged over time for each edge . In fact , the partnership is present between each node pair one out of the ﬁve times in both networks . The aggre - gate network for both dynamic partnership networks is the static complete graph shown in Fig . 4 ( c ) . If we calcu - late a concurrency measure such as κ 1 or κ 3 for the time average of the two dynamic partnership networks , the value will be the same . We set the weight of each edge to be 1 / 5 in Fig . 4 ( c ) . Then , all the three networks shown in Fig . 4 have the same time - averaged ( or equivalently , aggregate ) network , which is the complete graph with edge weight 1 / 5 ( i . e . , any of the ﬁve time - independent networks shown in Fig . 4 ( c ) ) . For the network at each discrete time shown in Fig . 4 ( a ) , we obtain κ 3 = 0 because (cid:104) k (cid:105) = (cid:104) k 2 (cid:105) = 4 / 5 . Therefore , the time average of κ 3 = 0 . For the non - empty networks in Fig . 4 ( b ) , we obtain κ 3 = 1 , which follows from (cid:104) k (cid:105) = 2 and (cid:104) k 2 (cid:105) = 4 . For the empty network in Fig . 4 ( b ) , κ 3 is ill - deﬁned since (cid:104) k (cid:105) = 0 . However , it makes no sense to assign any value other than κ 3 = 0 in this situation . Then the time average of κ 3 for the dynamic partnership network shown in Fig . 4 ( b ) is 2 / 5 , which is larger than that for the dynamic partnership net - work shown in Fig . 4 ( a ) . This result is consistent with our claim above that the dynamic partnership network shown in Fig . 4 ( b ) is more concurrent than that shown in Fig . 4 ( a ) . We emphasize that the calculation of κ 3 in this case is possible only when we examine dynamic part - nership networks individually at diﬀerent discrete times , 9 ( a ) Non - concurrent ( serial monogamous ) ( b ) Concurrent ( polygamous ) and quiescent , alternating ( c ) Concurrent ( polygamous ) and static time FIG . 4 . Three partnership networks that have the same ag - gregate network . ( a ) Dynamic partnership network without concurrency . Each node is either isolated ( k = 0 ) or involved in a non - concurrent relationship ( k = 1 ) at each time . ( b ) Dynamic partnership network with concurrency . At two out of ﬁve times , a cycle graph is formed such that all nodes have degree 2 . To compensate for a relatively large mean degree at these times , the network at the other three discrete times are the empty network , where every node is isolated . ( c ) Static partnership network with concurrency . The complete graph is presented . The weight of each edge is 1 / 5 of that of the edge shown in ( a ) and ( b ) . The time - averaged network of the dynamic partnership networks shown in ( a ) and ( b ) is the complete network shown in ( c ) . which is diﬀerent from calculating κ 3 of the aggregate static partnership network . Furthermore , because κ 3 is deﬁned for unweighted net - works , strictly speaking , one cannot calculate it for the time - averaged network shown in Fig . 4 ( c ) . However , it is hard to imagine any other generalization of Eq . ( 3 ) to weighted networks than replacing the degree by the node’s strength ( i . e . , the sum of the weights of a node’s incident edges ) . Nevertheless , this straightforward gen - eralization produces a negative value of the concurrency for the static weighted network shown in Fig . 4 ( c ) , i . e . , κ 3 = − 4 / 5 , because (cid:104) k (cid:105) = 1 / 5 and (cid:104) k 2 (cid:105) = 1 / 25 . In Refs . [ 116 , 117 ] , the SIS model in continuous time is analyzed on dynamic partnership networks that switch from one to another at regular intervals , which we refer to as switching networks . Let us now consider Fig . 4 as representing network dynamics in continuous time . In switching networks with concurrency , schematically shown in Fig . 4 ( b ) , the epidemic threshold is smaller ( therefore , infection is more likely at least near the epi - demic threshold ) than in switching networks without con - currency , schematically shown in Fig . 4 ( a ) , even though the aggregate network is the same in the two cases . Al - though it is only illustrative , Figs . 4 ( a ) and 4 ( b ) represent the situations in which ﬂuctuations around the mean of the networks at diﬀerent times are large , such that it is not helpful to approximate the degree distribution of the network at each time by the time average . For the same reason , it may be invalid to average a static network of the daytime with one of the nighttime and analyze the concurrency of the time - averaged network . D . Time average of concurrency vs concurrency of the time - averaged network The amount of concurrency may vary over time . For example , if one looks at the overlap of the time windows of edge activation , the two edges are concurrent when both edges are activated . They are not concurrent if either edge is not active . The latter sounds trivial , but comparison with randomized cases often requires that the original data or model have some periods for which the edges are not active . As another example , in Fig . 4 ( b ) , the concurrency is high when the time - independent net - work contains a cycle . At other times , the network is empty , and concurrency is absent . Some concurrency measures including κ 1 and κ 3 are functions of the degree distribution of the network , { p ( k ) : k = 0 , 1 , . . . } . A convenient method to calculate such a concurrency measure for a dynamic partnership network model may be to calculate it for the degree dis - tribution in the equilibrium . However , crucially , what we obtain in the equilibrium is not a single degree distribu - tion , but a distribution of the degree distribution . For example , for the network shown in Fig . 4 ( b ) , the equilib - rium is characterized by a two - peak distribution of the degree distribution , i . e . , p ( 0 ) = 1 and p ( k ) = 0 for k ≥ 1 with probability 3 / 5 , and p ( 2 ) = 1 and p ( k ) = 0 for k (cid:54) = 2 with probability 2 / 5 . The two degree distributions yield diﬀerent levels of concurrency , e . g . , the κ 3 value , and time aggregation of the concurrency measure , such as a simple time average , tells us how concurrent the en - tire dynamic partnership network is . It is incorrect to consider the time ( or ensemble ) average of the degree distribution ﬁrst ( which yields p ( 0 ) = 3 / 5 , p ( 2 ) = 2 / 5 , and p ( k ) = 0 for k / ∈ { 0 , 2 } ) and then calculate the con - currency measure , or consider the time average of the network ﬁrst ( which yields the weighted network shown in Fig . 4 ( c ) ) and then calculate the concurrency mea - sure . The same caveat applies to IIC . One calculates the overlap of the time windows of edge activation observed at each point of time , which one sums over the entire observation time window to obtain IIC after further ma - nipulations . We emphasize that the time aggregation of a concurrency measure and the concurrency measure for the time or ensemble average of an evolving network are generally diﬀerent from each other . For assessing the ef - fect of concurrency on epidemic spreading , the former is relevant but not the latter , because the time or ensemble average of networks is not the object on which epidemic processes occur . 10 V . OTHER TEMPORAL NETWORKS ANALYSES RELATED TO CONCURRENCY In this section , we will discuss some further methods to analyze temporal networks inspired by concurrency . A . Start and end times of edges A central assumption in the traditional concurrency literature is that a partnership is a meaningful low - level representation of interactions transmitting disease . This assumption has some support in the temporal network literature . Reference [ 55 ] concludes that it is a more rel - evant simpliﬁcation of a temporal network to reduce it to a weighted partnership network than to a static net - work with events generated with the same interevent time statistics as in the original data . In the wake of Ref . [ 12 ] , a line of research seemed to take for granted that time - stamped event data is well - described as a static network with interevent times sampled from a fat - tailed distri - bution [ 98 , 134 ] . Reference [ 55 ] contrasts this “ongoing link picture” with a “link turnover picture” that rather resembles the pair - formation models of the concurrency literature [ 2 , 18 , 72 , 107 ] . A temporal network simpliﬁed by the link turnover picture contains information about the ﬁrst and last events between two nodes and the to - tal number of events , but nothing about the interevent times . For disease spreading on empirical temporal net - works , it turns out that numerical results for the link turnover picture closely match simulations on the empir - ical data . The ongoing link picture , on the other hand , tends to overestimate the ﬁnal outbreak sizes . B . Reducing temporal networks to networks of concurrent partnerships The typical way to reduce a temporal network to a static network is to connect any node pair by an edge when the two nodes have one or more events within a particular time window [ 53 , 75 , 127 ] . In other words , two nodes u and v form an edge ( u , v ) , active from t 0 to t 1 , if there is an event within the interval [ t 0 , t 1 ] . An alternative way to project out the time from the tempo - ral network is to place edges between pairs of nodes if they have events both before and after the interval . This construction gives concurrent partnerships over the en - tire interval [ t 0 , t 1 ] . If t 0 = t 1 , we obtain the momentary network . Reference [ 49 ] observed that the degree distri - butions of momentary networks are closer to power - law distributions than those of aggregate networks . More pertinent to this review , however , is that the network of concurrent partnerships is a worse way to project a temporal network to a static network in the sense that it preserves the ranking of important nodes worse than a standard time - windowed network [ 51 ] ( see Fig . 5 ) . 1 2 3 time ( a ) ( b ) 4 5 t 0 t 1 ( c ) 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 FIG . 5 . Two ways of projecting time out of a temporal network . Panel ( a ) shows a temporal network . Panel ( b ) shows the network of nodes that have an event within the time window [ t 0 , t 1 ] . Panel ( c ) shows a network of concurrent partnerships—pairs of nodes that have an event before and after [ t 0 , t 1 ] . VI . THE DEBATE ABOUT THE CONCURRENCY HYPOTHESIS The role of concurrency in the HIV epidemics of sub - Saharan Africa has been a highly contentious subject . Some regions of this area have had a hundred - fold higher HIV prevalence than the world average [ 67 ] . When the severity of the epidemics in sub - Saharan Africa became apparent in the 1990s , researchers immediately sought explanations within this area’s sexual patterns and prac - tices . Concurrency was one such explanation ; promiscu - ity and polygamy were others , along with the belief that sex with virgins could cure HIV [ 60 ] . Around the turn of the millennium , a host of studies of sexual behaviors were published that seemed to suggest that , eﬀectively , gen - eral sexual risk behavior was not higher in sub - Saharan Africa than in the rest of the world—see , e . g . , Ref . [ 138 ] and further references therein . These new empirical data did not change all theorists’ minds , which set oﬀ an ac - rimonious debate that we will attempt to give a ﬂavor of in this section . One side of this polemics asserts that : First , a higher concurrency characterizes sub - Saharan Africa’s sexual act patterns than in the West and elsewhere in the world . Second , simulation studies seem to show that concur - rency is an essential factor for HIV dynamics . Because of these two reasons , concurrency is the key driver of the HIV epidemics in these countries [ 88 ] . The other side claims that concurrency does not matter much , and more likely explanations of the higher prevalence are co - infections increasing the susceptibility or non - sexual transmission pathways [ 121 , 125 ] . One seminal paper arguing against the concurrency hy - pothesis was Ref . [ 76 ] by Lagarde and coauthors . This was the ﬁrst survey to record both concurrencies—using their metric , IIC , that we discussed above—and HIV sta - tus . The authors interviewed 9 , 643 persons in ﬁve re - gions of sub - Saharan Africa . They found no correlation 11 between their concurrency metric and whether or not a person was HIV positive . This study was subsequently criticized , mostly due to alleged methodological ﬂaws . Reference [ 121 ] notes that Ref . [ 76 ] measures current concurrency only , but HIV positive must have been infected earlier . Reference [ 106 ] argues that “the predicted empirical signature of con - currency’s eﬀect on the transmission is not a correlation between index case concurrency and their own HIV sta - tus , but a correlation between index case concurrency and their partner’s HIV status” . To illustrate this argument , consider the scenario of an individual u having partners v and w in a time period in which v and w have no other partners . The risk to u depends on the number of events with v and w , but the ordering of those events has no eﬀect . However , the probability that u serves as a conduit of infection be - tween v and w increases if these events are interspersed . This eﬀect is magniﬁed if we account for the fact that u would have the highest viral load in the acute phase shortly after infection [ 48 ] . So even though there is a correlation between the infection statuses of partners in almost any compartmental model on networks [ 20 ] , one person’s concurrency and his / her HIV status could still be uncorrelated according to Ref . [ 106 ] . A decade later , another major survey—this time lon - gitudinal , geolocated , and accounting for the possibility that current concurrency may aﬀect future HIV status— did not ﬁnd an association between concurrency levels in communities and HIV acquisition among women [ 131 ] . The pattern repeated with papers from both sides ac - cusing the other of withholding information , misin - terpreting results , and committing methodological er - rors [ 34 , 87 , 105 , 124 ] . A potential explanation of some of these observations is found in Ref . [ 97 ] , which showed that in many cases concurrency can play a large part in the early growth of an epidemic even while it plays little role in the eventual equilibrium reached . So the apparent observation from some models that the growth of the epidemic can only be reproduced by incorporating concurrency may still be consistent with measurements taken in long - established epidemics which measure a similar incidence of infection in populations with diﬀerent levels of concurrency . There are plenty of further twists and turns in this debate about the “concurrency hypothesis” that we will not dwell on further . We will not call a winner of this debate . VII . OUTLOOK Temporal networks do not capture the full truth about how contact patterns aﬀect epidemics . They do not typ - ically , for example , record the type of interaction event ( e . g . , condom use ) or the biological characteristics of the individuals that may aﬀect the transmission probability . However , all simplifying assumptions in temporal net - works are also used in the concurrency literature , so pre - dictions based on concurrency cannot be more accurate than those made by temporal network epidemiology . From a theoretical point of view , the largest conceptual simpliﬁcation in the traditional concurrency literature is probably to use “partnership” as the unit transmitting the disease . Partnerships , as mentioned , are assumed to be capable of contagion throughout their duration . There is typically nothing in either questionnaires or theoreti - cal papers that explicitly prevent a couple from resum - ing a partnership after they quit it [ 2 , 18 , 107 ] . With - out allowing partnerships to resume , the assumption that the transmission rate between a couple is time - invariant is probably a very coarse simpliﬁcation of the data de - scribed by a temporal network . On the other hand , allow - ing partnerships to resume means that serial monogamy is no longer forcing time - respecting paths to be unidi - rectional ( cf . Fig . 1 ) . Furthermore , isolated sexual en - counters ( i . e . , those occurring between two individuals just once ) are typically excluded from questionnaires and mathematical / computational modeling for a few reasons . The ﬁrst reason is that it may be too hard to remember the accurate timing of these encounters [ 88 ] . However , the reason why omitting an isolated sexual encounter would give more accurate results than to include it at the wrong time is unclear to us . The second reason is that these events would be negligible from the viewpoint of disease dynamics [ 34 ] . Reference [ 34 ] states that “When the duration of concurrency is short , the connectivity of the networks is more transient , and less conducive to rapid spread . ” Notwithstanding , other papers argue oc - casional encounters [ 37 , 124 ] and commercial sex [ 60 ] are essential for the epidemics . Gathering information about peoples’ partnerships might be more feasible than registering their sexual en - counters individually for any meaningful period . That is the only argument we can envision for building a the - ory on a concept as nebulous as “partnership” . Still , there are data sets gathering individual encounters [ 47 ] . If the community had explained the patterns of such data sets , there might not have been a decade - long theoreti - cal dispute . It seems necessary to agree on deﬁnition of how to construct a partnership edge from a temporal net - work composed of time - stamped events [ 51 ] . Although it would not aﬀect medical epidemiology , it is expected to pave the way to standardize the too imprecise language of theorists . While we can , and should , move forward with temporal network epidemiology , we are not arguing that we should forget the traditional concurrency theory . On the con - trary , both the data gathered and the theoretical work done are so valuable that our job is to link them with temporal network theory . Furthermore , many people in the ﬁeld are now so accustomed to discussing sexual con - tact patterns in terms of partnerships that it would be nearly impossible to erase their mental pictures , and ab - stracting a problem at diﬀerent levels can often reveal diﬀerent insights . Concurrency is not the only idea that lingers in the sci - 12 entiﬁc discourse despite newer concepts being more pre - cise and informative . The “basic reproductive number” R 0 is another example from theoretical epidemiology that is both notoriously hard to estimate [ 25 ] and ill - suited to parametrize theoretical models [ 56 , 65 ] . Another analo - gous situation is the idea that ecological networks tend to be “nested” [ 89 ] , for which recent studies have pointed out that it might be more fruitful to think of nestedness as the consequence of more fundamental network struc - tures [ 128 ] . We believe that other concepts will eventu - ally supersede concurrency , R 0 , and nestedness , but there is no need to hurry that development . How should we use and deepen the concept of concur - rency ? Is concurrency useful for analyzing and predicting real epidemic processes ? Based on the discussion above and in the previous sections , we propose the following issues as something we should have in mind and under - stand better to harness the concept of concurrency . Measures like κ 3 and its variants are , by construc - tion , static . Of course , if one projects a temporal net - work to a static network at a time t , for example by constructing the momentary network , these measures will be functions of t ( cf . Fig . 2 ) . Nonetheless , by be - ing a static measure , we can analyze it by static net - work theory [ 13 , 114 , 133 ] . This ﬁeld has developed tremendously since the publication of the still most authoritative theoretical concurrency papers . Now we know that disease spreading depends not only on the node’s degree [ 1 , 3 , 6 , 14 , 22 , 23 , 43 , 85 , 119 ] and the concurrency but also on , e . g . , mesoscopic structures of networks [ 129 , 139 ] and the densities of short cy - cles [ 9 , 11 , 136 ] . To properly evaluate concurrency by measures like κ 1 and κ 3 , we need to integrate them in the broader theory of spreading phenomena on networks . Furthermore , it is not only the case that other network structures than concurrency aﬀect epidemics , but they also aﬀect concurrency itself . In simple pair - formation models , such as the ones in Refs . [ 2 , 18 , 72 , 107 ] , higher activity ( i . e . , node’s degree ) means more concurrency . Even though concurrency is a readily understandable concept and hence appropriate to communicate to the general public , the average number of events is even better . Although theoretical epidemiology was also the ﬁrst ﬁeld to study other network structures such as de - gree assortativity [ 43 ] or heterogeneous degree distribu - tions [ 4 , 99 ] , strangely , the relationship between these structures is still not fully charted . Our understanding of how temporal structures are related to concurrency is even more limited [ 51 , 54 , 55 , 79 , 80 , 97 , 101 ] . One such example is the statistics of the interevent times [ 55 , 61 , 63 , 90 , 92 ] . One way of understanding tempo - ral eﬀects on concurrency measures , so far missing in the literature , would be to use randomized data sets as null models [ 39 , 50 ] . A diﬀerent feature of networks that impacts concur - rency is higher - order interactions . Hypergraphs and sim - plicial complexes , in particular , enable us to represent in - teraction among more than two nodes , such as group con - versations , in uniﬁed mathematical frameworks [ 16 , 77 ] . Simultaneous interaction involving at least three nodes implies concurrency . Quantifying concurrency for hyper - graphs and simplicial complexes as well as to use epi - demic process models on these structures to study con - currency may be promising research directions . Empirical studies of concurrency have almost exclu - sively focused on sexually transmitted diseases [ 7 , 37 , 71 , 87 , 123 ] . Since sexual acts are clearly deﬁned events , these diseases are appropriate to network epidemiology in general . Other infections such as inﬂuenza [ 96 , 122 ] or COVID - 19 [ 15 ] also spread over networks , and con - currency should aﬀect these as much as sexually trans - mitted ones . For these diseases , it is common to use other types of networks than those of individuals to rep - resent contact structures . A node can represent a loca - tion ( like a city , hospital ward ) , group of people , and so forth , which is an example of higher - order representa - tions . Also in these models it may be fruitful to consider concurrency [ 29 , 86 , 130 ] . Assuming that a pathogen can linger at a location , it would be worse if two persons , A and B , visited it repeatedly and alternately ( i . e . , the lo - cation having high concurrency ) , than if A’s last visit to the location preceded B’s ﬁrst visit . In the last decade , our understanding of the structure of the networks on which infectious diseases spread im - proved tremendously [ 53 , 57 , 63 ] . Unlike sexual networks , it is the mobility of people [ 10 , 126 ] that drives prox - imity networks . The term “partnership” is even more misleading for such mobility - induced networks , but the mechanism of concurrency as an accelerator of epidemics is probably still valid . Whether concurrency is a useful target for mitigating disease spread is unclear , and may depend on the phase of the epidemic [ 97 ] . Decreasing concurrency without changing the total number of events would require that one proactively changes events’ timing to reduce concur - rent events that nodes experience . Such concurrency - based interventions are underexplored . To summarize , there is much work left to unify the theory of concurrency with temporal network science . We need to agree on operational deﬁnitions of concepts like “partnership” and measures for both individual and system - wide concurrency . We also need to carry out more extensive studies to clarify whether concurrency is a siz - able contributor to epidemic dynamics on networks com - pared to other static and temporal network properties . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS N . M . acknowledges support from AFOSR Euro - pean Oﬃce ( under Grant No . FA9550 – 19 – 1 – 7024 ) , the Nakatani Foundation , and the Sumitomo Foundation . J . C . M . acknowledges the support of La Trobe University . P . H . was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP 21H04595 . 13 [ 1 ] J . Abate and W . Whitt . Numerical inversion of Laplace transforms of probability distributions . ORSA J . Com - put . , 7 : 36 – 43 , 1995 . [ 2 ] M . Altmann . Susceptible - infected - removed epidemic models with dynamic partnerships . J . Math . Biol . , 33 : 661 – 675 , 1995 . [ 3 ] R . M . Anderson and R . M . May . Infectious Diseases of Humans . Oxford University Press , Oxford , UK , 1991 . [ 4 ] R . M . Anderson , G . F . Medley , R . M . May , and A . M . Johnson . A preliminary study of the transmission dy - namics of the human immunodeﬁciency virus ( HIV ) , the causative agent of AIDS . IMA J . Math . Appl . Med . Biol . , 3 : 229 – 263 , 1986 . [ 5 ] H . Andersson . Epidemic models and social networks . Mathematical Scientist , 24 : 128 – 147 , 1999 . [ 6 ] H . Andersson and T . Britton . Stochastic Epidemic Mod - els and their Statistical Analysis . Springer , Berlin , 2000 . [ 7 ] S . O . Aral . Partner concurrency and the STD / HIV epi - demic . Curr . Infect . Dis . Rep . , 12 : 134 – 139 , 2010 . [ 8 ] B . Armbruster , L . Wang , and M . Morris . Forward reach - able sets : Analytically derived properties of connected components for dynamic networks . Netw . Sci . , 5 : 328 – 354 , 2017 . [ 9 ] J . Badham and R . Stocker . The impact of network clus - tering and assortativity on epidemic behaviour . Theor . Popul . Biol . , 77 : 71 – 75 , 2010 . [ 10 ] D . Balcan , V . Colizza , B . Gon¸calves , H . Hu , J . J . Ram - asco , and A . Vespignani . Multiscale mobility networks and the spatial spreading of infectious diseases . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 106 : 21484 – 21489 , 2009 . [ 11 ] F . Ball , T . Britton , and D . Sirl . A network with tunable clustering , degree correlation and degree distribution , and an epidemic thereon . J . Math . Biol . , 66 : 979 – 1019 , 2013 . [ 12 ] A . - L . Barab´asi . The origin of bursts and heavy tails in human dynamics . Nature , 435 : 207 – 211 , 2005 . [ 13 ] A . - L . Barab´asi . Network Science . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK , 2016 . [ 14 ] A . Barrat , M . Barth´elemy , and A . Vespignani . Dynam - ical Processes on Complex Networks . Cambridge Uni - versity Press , Cambridge , UK , 2008 . [ 15 ] A . Barrat , C . Cattuto , M . Kivel¨a , S . Lehmann , and J . Saram¨aki . Eﬀect of manual and digital contact trac - ing on COVID - 19 outbreaks : A study on empirical con - tact data . J . R . Soc . Interface , 18 : 20201000 , 2021 . [ 16 ] F . Battiston , G . Cencetti , I . Iacopini , V . Latora , M . Lu - cas , A . Patania , J . G . Young , and G . Petri . Networks beyond pairwise interactions : Structure and dynamics . Phys . Rep . , 874 : 1 – 92 , 2020 . [ 17 ] C . Bauch and D . A . Rand . A moment closure model for sexually transmitted disease transmission through a concurrent partnership network . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B , 267 : 2019 – 2027 , 2000 . [ 18 ] P . Blanchard , G . F . Bolz , and T . Kr¨uger . Modelling AIDS - epidemics or any venereal disease on random graphs . In J . - P . Gabriel , C . Lef ` evre , and P . Picard , editors , Stochastic Processes in Epidemic Theory , pages 104 – 117 . Springer , Berlin , 1990 . [ 19 ] M . Bogu˜n´a , R . Pastor - Satorras , and A . Vespignani . Epi - demic spreading in complex networks with degree corre - lations . In R . Pastor - Satorras , J . M . Rub´ı , and A . Diaz - Guilera , editors , Statistical Mechanics of Complex Net - works , pages 127 – 147 . Springer - Verlag , Berlin , 2003 . [ 20 ] C . - R . Cai , Z . - X . Wu , M . Z . Q . Chen , P . Holme , and J . - Y . Guan . Solving the dynamic correlation problem of the susceptible - infected - susceptible model on networks . Phys . Rev . Lett . , 116 : 258301 , 2016 . [ 21 ] S . E . Chick , A . L . Adams , and J . S . Koopman . Anal - ysis and simulation of a stochastic , discrete - individual model of STD transmission with partnership concur - rency . Math . Biosci . , 166 : 45 – 68 , 2000 . [ 22 ] Z . Dezs˝o and A . - L . Barab´asi . Halting viruses in scale - free networks . Phys . Rev . E , 65 : 055103 ( R ) , 2002 . [ 23 ] O . Diekmann and J . A . P . Heesterbeek . Mathemati - cal Epidemiology of Infectious Diseases . John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . , Chichester , UK , 2000 . [ 24 ] K . Dietz . On the transmission dynamics of HIV . Math . Biosci . , 90 : 397 – 414 , 1988 . [ 25 ] K . Dietz . The estimation of the basic reproduction num - ber for infectious diseases . Stat . Methods Med . Res . , 2 : 23 – 41 , 1993 . [ 26 ] K . Dietz and K . P . Hadeler . Epidemiological models for sexually transmitted diseases . J . Math . Biol . , 26 : 1 – 25 , 1988 . [ 27 ] K . Dietz and D . Tudor . Triangles in heterosexual HIV transmission . In N . P . Jewell , K . Dietz , and V . T . Farewell , editors , AIDS Epidemiology , pages 143 – 155 . Birkh¨auser , Boston , MA , 1992 . [ 28 ] I . A . Doherty , S . Shiboski , J . M . Ellen , A . A . Adimora , and N . S . Padian . Sexual bridging socially and over time : A simulation model exploring the relative eﬀects of mixing and concurrency on viral sexually transmitted infection transmission . Sex . Trans . Dis . , 33 : 368 – 373 , 2006 . [ 29 ] T . Donker , J . Wallinga , and H . Grundmann . Patient referral patterns and the spread of hospital - acquired in - fections through national health care networks . PLoS Comp . Biol . , 6 : e1000715 , 2010 . [ 30 ] S . N . Dorogovtsev , A . V . Goltsev , and J . F . F . Mendes . Critical phenomena in complex networks . Rev . Mod . Phys . , 80 : 1275 – 1335 , 2008 . [ 31 ] K . T . D . Eames and M . J . Keeling . Monogamous net - works and the spread of sexually transmitted diseases . Math . Biosci . , 189 : 115 – 130 , 2004 . [ 32 ] J . W . Eaton , T . B . Hallett , and G . P . Garnett . Concur - rent sexual partnerships and primary HIV infection : A critical interaction . AIDS Behav . , 15 : 687 – 692 , 2011 . [ 33 ] J . Enright and R . R . Kao . Epidemics on dynamic net - works . Epidemics , 24 : 88 – 97 , 2018 . [ 34 ] H . Epstein and M . Morris . Concurrent partnerships and HIV : An inconvenient truth . J . Int . AIDS Soc . , 14 : 13 , 2011 . [ 35 ] N . H . Feﬀerman and K . L . Ng . How disease models in static networks can fail to approximate disease in dynamic networks . Phys . Rev . E , 76 : 031919 , 2007 . [ 36 ] S . L . Feld . Why your friends have more friends than you do . Am . J . Sociol . , 96 : 1464 – 1477 , 1991 . [ 37 ] B . Foxman , M . Newman , B . Percha , K . K . Holmes , and S . O . Aral . Measures of sexual partnerships : Lengths , gaps , overlaps , and sexually transmitted infection . Sex - ually Transmitted Diseases , 33 : 209 – 214 , 2006 . 14 [ 38 ] G . P . Garnett and A . M . Johnson . Coining a new term in epidemiology : Concurrency and HIV . AIDS , 11 : 681 – 683 , 1997 . [ 39 ] L . Gauvin , M . G´enois , M . Karsai , M . Kivel¨a , T . Tak - aguchi , E . Valdano , and C . L . Vestergaard . Ran - domized reference models for temporal networks . arXiv : 1806 . 04032v3 , 2020 . [ 40 ] A . C . Ghani and G . P . Garnett . Measuring sexual part - ner networks for transmission of sexually transmitted diseases . J . R . Statist . Soc . A , 161 : 227 – 238 , 1998 . [ 41 ] A . C . Ghani and G . P . Garnett . Risks of acquiring and transmitting sexually transmitted diseases in sexual partner networks . Sex . Trans . Dis . , 27 : 579 – 587 , 2000 . [ 42 ] S . M . Goodreau , S . Cassels , D . Kasprzyk , D . E . Monta˜no , A . Greek , and M . Morris . Concurrent part - nerships , acute Infection and HIV epidemic dynam - ics among young adults in Zimbabwe . AIDS Behav . , 16 : 312 – 322 , 2012 . [ 43 ] S . Gupta , R . M . Anderson , and R . M . May . Networks of sexual contacts : Implications for the pattern of spread of HIV . AIDS , 3 : 807 – 818 , 1989 . [ 44 ] K . F . Gurski and K . A . Hoﬀman . Inﬂuence of concur - rency , partner choice , and viral suppression on racial disparity in the prevalence of HIV infected women . Math . Biosci . , 282 : 91 – 108 , 2016 . [ 45 ] H . W . Hethcote . The mathematics of infectious diseases . SIAM Rev . , 42 : 599 – 653 , 2000 . [ 46 ] H . W . Hethcote and J . A . Yorke . Gonorrhea transmis - sion dynamics and control . Lecture Notes in Biomathe - matics , 56 : 1 – 105 , 1984 . [ 47 ] T . Hoang , P . Coletti , A . Melegaro , J . Wallinga , C . G . Grijalva , J . W . Edmunds , P . Beutels , and N . Hens . A systematic review of social contact surveys to inform transmission models of close - contact infections . Epi - demiology , 30 : 723 – 736 , 2019 . [ 48 ] T . D . Hollingsworth , R . M . Anderson , and C . Fraser . HIV - 1 transmission , by stage of infection . J . Infect . Dis . , 198 : 687 – 693 , 2008 . [ 49 ] P . Holme . Network dynamics of ongoing social relation - ships . Europhys . Lett . , 64 : 427 – 433 , 2003 . [ 50 ] P . Holme . Network reachability of real - world contact sequences . Phys . Rev . E , 71 : 046119 , 2005 . [ 51 ] P . Holme . Epidemiologically optimal static networks from temporal network data . PLOS Comput . Biol . , 9 : e1003142 , 2013 . [ 52 ] P . Holme . Information content of contact - pattern rep - resentations and predictability of epidemic outbreaks . Sci . Rep . , 5 : 14462 , 2015 . [ 53 ] P . Holme . Modern temporal network theory : A collo - quium . Eur . Phys . J . B , 88 : 234 , 2015 . [ 54 ] P . Holme . Temporal network structures controlling dis - ease spreading . Phys . Rev . E , 94 : 022305 , 2016 . [ 55 ] P . Holme and F . Liljeros . Birth and death of links control disease spreading in empirical contact networks . Sci . Rep . , 4 : 4999 , 2014 . [ 56 ] P . Holme and N . Masuda . The basic reproduction num - ber as a predictor for epidemic outbreaks in temporal networks . PLOS One , 10 : e0120567 , 2015 . [ 57 ] P . Holme and J . Saram¨aki . Temporal networks . Phys . Rep . , 519 : 97 – 125 , 2012 . [ 58 ] P . Holme and J . Saram¨aki . Temporal Networks . Springer - Verlag , Berlin , 2013 . [ 59 ] P . Holme and J . Saram¨aki . Temporal Network Theory . Springer , Cham , Switzerland , 2019 . [ 60 ] J . Inungu and S . Karl . Understanding the scourge of HIV / AIDS in sub - Saharan Africa . J . Int . AIDS Soc . , 8 ( 30 ) : 30 , 2006 . [ 61 ] H . - H . Jo , J . I . Perotti , K . Kaski , and J . Kert´esz . Analyt - ically solvable model of spreading dynamics with non - Poissonian processes . Phys . Rev . X , 4 : 011041 , 2014 . [ 62 ] C . Kamp . Untangling the interplay between epidemic spread and transmission network dynamics . PLOS Comput . Biol . , 6 : e1000984 , 2010 . [ 63 ] M . Karsai , H . - H . Jo , and K . Kaski . Bursty Human Dy - namics . Springer , Cham , Switzerland , 2018 . [ 64 ] M . J . Keeling and K . T . D . Eames . Networks and epi - demic models . J . R . Soc . Interface , 2 : 295 – 307 , 2005 . [ 65 ] M . J . Keeling and B . T . Grenfell . Individual - based per - spectives on R 0 . J . Theor . Biol . , 203 : 51 – 61 , 2000 . [ 66 ] M . J . Keeling and P . Rohani . Modeling Infectious Dis - eases in Humans and Animals . Princeton University Press , Princeton , NJ , 2008 . [ 67 ] A . B . M . Kharsany and Q . A . Karim . HIV infection and AIDS in sub - Saharan Africa : Current status , challenges and opportunities . Open AIDS J . , 10 : 34 – 48 , 2016 . [ 68 ] J . - H . Kim , R . L . Riolo , and J . S . Koopman . HIV trans - mission by stage of infection and pattern of sexual part - nerships . Epidemiology , 21 : 676 – 684 , 2010 . [ 69 ] I . Z . Kiss , J . C . Miller , and P . L . Simon . Mathematics of Epidemics on Networks . Springer , Cham , Switzerland , 2017 . [ 70 ] M . Kretzschmar . Deterministic and stochastic pair for - mation models for the spread of sexually transmitted diseases . J . Biol . Syst . , 3 : 789 – 801 , 1995 . [ 71 ] M . Kretzschmar and M . Cara¨el . Is concurrency driving HIV transmission in sub - Saharan African sexual net - works ? The signiﬁcance of sexual partnership typology . AIDS Behav . , 16 : 1746 – 1752 , 2012 . [ 72 ] M . Kretzschmar and K . Dietz . The eﬀect of pair forma - tion and variable infectivity on the spread of an infection without recovery . Math . Biosci . , 148 : 83 – 113 , 1998 . [ 73 ] M . Kretzschmar and M . Morris . Measures of concur - rency in networks and the spread of infectious disease . Math . Biosci . , 133 : 165 – 195 , 1996 . [ 74 ] M . Kretzschmar , D . P . Reinking , H . Brouwers , G . van Zessen , and J . C . Jager . Nework models , from paradigm to mathematical tool . In E . H . Kaplan and M . L . Bran - deau , editors , Modelling the AIDS Epidemic : Planning , Policy and Prediction , pages 561 – 583 . Raven Press , NY , 1994 . [ 75 ] G . Krings , M . Karsai , S . Bernhardsson , V . D . Blondel , and J . Saram¨aki . Eﬀects of time window size and place - ment on the structure of an aggregated communication network . EPJ Data Sci . , 1 : 4 , 2012 . [ 76 ] E . Lagarde , B . Auvert , M . Cara¨el , M . Laourou , B . Ferry , E . Akam , T . Sukwa , L . Morison , B . Maury , J . Chege , I . N’Doye , A . Buv´e , and the Study Group on Hetero - geneity of HIV epidemics in African cities . Concurrent sexual partnerships and HIV prevalence in ﬁve urban communities of sub - Saharan Africa . AIDS , 15 : 877 – 884 , 2001 . [ 77 ] R . Lambiotte , M . Rosvall , and I . Scholtes . From net - works to optimal higher - order models of complex sys - tems . Nat . Phys . , 15 : 313 – 320 , 2019 . [ 78 ] E . Lee , S . Emmons , R . Gibson , J . Moody , and P . J . Mucha . Concurrency and reachability in treelike tem - poral networks . Phys . Rev . E , 100 : 062305 , 2019 . 15 [ 79 ] E . Lee , J . Moody , and P . J . Mucha . Exploring concur - rency and reachability in the presence of high temporal resolution . In Temporal Network Theory , pages 129 – 145 . Springer , Cham , Switzerland , 2019 . [ 80 ] T . Leng and M . J . Keeling . Concurrency of partner - ships , consistency with data , and control of sexually transmitted infections . Epidemics , 25 : 35 – 46 , 2018 . [ 81 ] H . H . K . Lentz , T . Selhorst , and I . M . Sokolov . Un - folding accessibility provides a macroscopic approach to temporal networks . Phys . Rev . Lett . , 110 : 118701 , 2013 . [ 82 ] K . Y . Leung and M . Kretzschmar . Concurrency can drive an HIV epidemic by moving R 0 across the epi - demic threshold . AIDS , 29 : 1097 – 1103 , 2015 . [ 83 ] K . Y . Leung , M . E . E . Kretzschmar , and O . Diekmann . Dynamic concurrent partnership networks incorporat - ing demography . Theor . Popul . Biol . , 82 : 229 – 239 , 2012 . [ 84 ] K . Y . Leung , K . A . Powers , and M . Kretzschmar . Gen - der asymmetry in concurrent partnerships and HIV prevalence . Epidemics , 19 : 53 – 60 , 2017 . [ 85 ] F . Liljeros , C . R . Edling , and L . A . N . Amaral . Sexual networks : Implications for the transmission of sexually transmitted infections . Microb . Infect . , 5 : 189 – 196 , 2003 . [ 86 ] F . Liljeros , J . Giesecke , and P . Holme . The contact network of inpatients in a regional healthcare system . A longitudinal case study . Math . Popul . Stud . , 14 : 269 – 284 , 2007 . [ 87 ] M . N . Lurie and S . Rosenthal . Concurrent partnerships as a driver of the HIV epidemic in sub - Saharan Africa ? The evidence is limited . AIDS Behav . , 14 : 17 – 24 , 2010 . [ 88 ] T . L . Mah and D . T . Halperin . Concurrent sexual part - nerships and the HIV epidemics in Africa : Evidence to move forward . AIDS Behav . , 14 : 11 – 16 , 2010 . [ 89 ] M . S . Mariani , Z . - M . Ren , J . Bascompte , and C . J . Tes - sone . Nestedness in complex networks : Observation , emergence , and implications . Physics Reports , 813 : 1 – 90 , 2019 . [ 90 ] N . Masuda and P . Holme . Predicting and controlling infectious disease epidemics using temporal networks . F1000Prime Reports , 5 : 6 , 2013 . [ 91 ] N . Masuda and P . Holme , editors . Temporal Network Epidemiology . Springer , Berlin , 2017 . [ 92 ] N . Masuda and P . Holme . Small inter - event times gov - ern epidemic spreading on networks . Phys . Rev . Re - search , 2 : 023163 , 2020 . [ 93 ] N . Masuda and R . Lambiotte . A Guide to Temporal Networks . World Scientiﬁc , Singapore , second edition , 2020 . [ 94 ] R . M . May and R . M . Anderson . Transmission dynamics of HIV infection . Nature , 326 : 137 – 142 , 1987 . [ 95 ] R . M . May and R . M . Anderson . The transmission dy - namics of human immunodeﬁciency virus ( HIV ) . Phil . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B , 321 : 565 – 607 , 1988 . [ 96 ] L . A . Meyers , B . Pourbohloul , M . E . J . Newman , D . M . Skowronski , and R . C . Brunham . Network theory and SARS : Predicting outbreak diversity . J . Theor . Biol . , 232 : 71 – 81 , 2005 . [ 97 ] J . C . Miller and A . C . Slim . Saturation eﬀects and the concurrency hypothesis : Insights from an analytic model . PLOS One , 12 : e0187938 , 2017 . [ 98 ] B . Min , K . - I . Goh , and A . Vazquez . Spreading dynamics following bursty human activity patterns . Phys . Rev . E , 83 : 036102 , 2011 . [ 99 ] D . Mollison , V . Isham , and B . Grenfell . Epidemics : Models and data . J . R . Statist . Soc . A , 157 : 115 – 149 , 1994 . [ 100 ] J . Moody . The importance of relationship timing for diﬀusion . Soc . Forces , 81 : 25 – 56 , 2002 . [ 101 ] J . Moody and R . A . Benton . Interdependent eﬀects of cohesion and concurrency for epidemic potential . Ann . Epid . , 26 : 241 – 248 , 2016 . [ 102 ] C . Moore and M . E . J . Newman . Exact solution of site and bond percolation on small - world networks . Phys . Rev . E , 62 : 7059 – 7064 , 2000 . [ 103 ] Y . Moreno , R . Pastor - Satorras , and A . Vespignani . Epi - demic outbreaks in complex heterogeneous networks . Eur . Phys . J . B , 26 : 521 – 529 , 2002 . [ 104 ] M . Morris . Barking up the wrong evidence tree . Com - ment on Lurie & Rosenthal , “Concurrent partnerships as a driver of the HIV epidemic in sub - Saharan Africa ? The evidence is limited” . AIDS Behav . , 14 : 31 – 33 , 2010 . [ 105 ] M . Morris and H . Epstein . Role of concurrency in gen - eralised HIV epidemics . Lancet , 378 : 1843 – 1844 , 2011 . [ 106 ] M . Morris , H . Epstein , and M . Wawer . Timing is every - thing : International variations in historical sexual part - nership concurrency and HIV prevalence . PLOS One , 5 : e14092 , 2010 . [ 107 ] M . Morris and M . Kretzschmar . Concurrent partner - ships and transmission dynamics in networks . Soc . Netw . , 17 : 299 – 318 , 1995 . [ 108 ] M . Morris and M . Kretzschmar . Concurrent partner - ships and the spread of HIV . AIDS , 11 : 641 – 648 , 1997 . [ 109 ] M . Morris and M . Kretzschmar . A microsimulation study of the eﬀect of concurrent partnerships on the spread of HIV in Uganda . Math . Popul . Stud . , 8 : 109 – 133 , 2000 . [ 110 ] M . Morris , A . E . Kurth , D . T . Hamilton , J . Moody , and S . Wakeﬁeld . Concurrent partnerships and HIV prevalence disparities by race : Linking science and pub - lic health practice . Am . J . Publ . Health , 99 : 1023 – 1031 , 2009 . [ 111 ] M . E . J . Newman . Assortative mixing in networks . Phys . Rev . Lett . , 89 : 208701 , 2002 . [ 112 ] M . E . J . Newman . Spread of epidemic disease on net - works . Phys . Rev . E , 66 : 016128 , 2002 . [ 113 ] M . E . J . Newman . Mixing patterns in networks . Phys . Rev . E , 67 : 026126 , 2003 . [ 114 ] M . E . J . Newman . Networks . Oxford University Press , Oxford , second edition , 2018 . [ 115 ] A . Nold . Heterogeneity in disease - transmission model - ing . Math . Biosci . , 52 : 227 – 240 , 1980 . [ 116 ] T . Onaga , J . P . Gleeson , and N . Masuda . Concurrency - induced transitions in epidemic dynamics on temporal networks . Phys . Rev . Lett . , 119 : 108301 , 2017 . [ 117 ] T . Onaga , J . P . Gleeson , and N . Masuda . The eﬀect of concurrency on epidemic threshold in time - varying networks . In Temporal Network Theory , pages 253 – 267 . Springer , Cham , Switzerland , 2019 . [ 118 ] R . Pastor - Satorras , C . Castellano , P . Van Mieghem , and A . Vespignani . Epidemic processes in complex networks . Rev . Mod . Phys . , 87 : 925 – 979 , 2015 . [ 119 ] R . Pastor - Satorras and A . Vespignani . Epidemic spread - ing in scale - free networks . Phys . Rev . Lett . , 86 : 3200 – 3203 , 2001 . [ 120 ] P . Patel , C . B . Borkowf , J . T . Brooks , A . Lasry , A . Lan - sky , and J . Mermin . Estimating per - act HIV transmis - sion risk : A systematic review . AIDS , 28 : 1509 – 1519 , 2014 . 16 [ 121 ] R . Rothenberg , J . Potterat , and D . Gisselquist . Con - currency and sexual transmission . AIDS , 16 : 678 – 679 , 2002 . [ 122 ] M . Salath´e , M . Kazandjieva , J . W . Lee , P . Levis , M . W . Feldman , and J . H . Jones . A high - resolution human con - tact network for infectious disease transmission . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 107 : 22020 – 22025 , 2010 . [ 123 ] L . Sawers . Measuring and modelling concurrency . J . Int . AIDS Soc . , 16 : 17431 , 2013 . [ 124 ] L . Sawers and A . Isaac . Partnership duration , concur - rency , and HIV in sub - Saharan Africa . Afr . J . AIDS Res . , 16 : 155 – 164 , 2017 . [ 125 ] L . Sawers and E . Stillwaggon . Concurrent sexual part - nerships do not explain the HIV epidemics in Africa : A systematic review of the evidence . J . Int . AIDS Soc . , 13 : 34 , 2010 . [ 126 ] F . Schlosser , B . F . Maier , O . Jack , D . Hinrichs , A . Zachariae , and D . Brockmann . COVID - 19 lockdown induces disease - mitigating structural changes in mobil - ity networks . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 117 : 32883 – 32890 , 2020 . [ 127 ] V . Sekara , A . Stopczynski , and S . Lehmann . Fundamen - tal structures of dynamic social networks . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 113 : 9977 – 9982 , 2016 . [ 128 ] P . P . A . Staniczenko , J . C . Kopp , and S . Allesina . The ghost of nestedness in ecological networks . Nat . Com - mun . , 4 : 1391 , 2013 . [ 129 ] C . Stegehuis , R . van der Hofstad , and J . S . H . van Leeuwaarden . Epidemic spreading on complex networks with community structures . Sci . Rep . , 6 : 29748 , 2016 . [ 130 ] A . Stopczynski , A . S . Pentland , and S . Lehmann . Physi - cal proximity and spreading in dynamic social networks . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1509 . 06530 , 2015 . [ 131 ] F . Tanser , T . B¨arnighausen , L . Hund , G . P . Garnett , N . McGrath , and M . - L . Newell . Eﬀect of concurrent sexual partnerships on rate of new HIV infections in a high - prevalence , rural South African population : A cohort study . Lancet , 378 : 247 – 255 , 2011 . [ 132 ] UNAIDS Reference Group on Estimates , Modelling , and Projections : Working Group on Measuring Con - current Sexual Partnerships . HIV : Consensus indicators are needed for concurrency . Lancet , 375 : 621 – 622 , 2010 . [ 133 ] R . van der Hofstad . Random Graphs and Complex Net - works . Cambridge University Press , UK , Cambridge , 2017 . [ 134 ] A . Vazquez , B . R´acz , A . Luk´acs , and A . - L . Barab´asi . Impact of non - Poissonian activity patterns on spreading processes . Phys . Rev . Lett . , 98 : 158702 , 2007 . [ 135 ] E . Volz and L . A . Meyers . Epidemic thresholds in dy - namic contact networks . J . R . Soc . Interface , 6 : 233 – 241 , 2009 . [ 136 ] E . M . Volz , J . C . Miller , A . Galvani , and L . A . Meyers . Eﬀects of heterogeneous and clustered contact patterns on infectious disease dynamics . PLOS Comput . Biol . , 7 : e1002042 , 2011 . [ 137 ] C . H . Watts and R . M . May . The inﬂuence of concur - rent partnerships on the dynamics of HIV / AIDS . Math . Biosci . , 108 : 89 – 104 , 1992 . [ 138 ] K . Wellings , M . Collumbien , E . Slaymaker , S . Singh , Z . Hodges , D . Patel , and N . Bajos . Sexual behaviour in context : A global perspective . Lancet , 368 : 1706 – 1728 , 2006 . [ 139 ] X . Wu and Z . Liu . How community structure inﬂuences epidemic spread in social networks . Physica A , 387 : 623 – 630 , 2008 . [ 140 ] J . L . Wylie and A . Jolly . Patterns of chlamydia and gonorrhea infection in sexual networks in Manitoba , Canada . Sex . Transm . Dis . , 28 : 14 – 24 , 2001 .