The diversity of participatory design research practice at PDC 2002 – 2012 $ Kim Halskov n , Nicolai Brodersen Hansen CAVI & PIT , Aarhus University , Aarhus , Denmark a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 31 August 2013 Received in revised form 29 August 2014 Accepted 15 September 2014 Communicated by E . Motta Available online 23 September 2014 Keywords : Participation Cooperative design Design process Methods Context a b s t r a c t We investigate the diversity of participatory design research practice , based on a review of ten years of participatory design research published as full research papers at the Participatory Design Conferences ( PDC ) 2002 – 2012 , and relate this body of research to ﬁ ve fundamental aspects of PD from classic participatory design literature . We identify ﬁ ve main categories of research contributions : Participatory Design in new domains , Participatory Design methods , Participatory Design and new technology , Theoretical contributions to Participatory Design , and Basic concepts in Participatory Design . Moreover , we identify how participation is de ﬁ ned , and how participation is conducted in experimental design cases , with a particular focus on interpretation , planning , and decision - making in the design process . & 2014 The Authors . Published by Elsevier Ltd . This is an open access article under the CC BY - NC - ND license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - nd / 3 . 0 / ) . 1 . Introduction Participatory design ( PD ) emerged about 25 years ago as a distinct set of design and research practices rooted in a Scandina - vian approach to systems design , commonly classed under the label of ‘ cooperative design ’ , which emphasized designers and users actively working together in a process aimed at improving the quality of working life . As Human Computer Interaction ( HCI ) expands its borders ( Rogers , 2012 ) , participation has become of crucial interest to HCI research in general ; and participatory design , in particular , has stimulated increased interest beyond the participatory design community established around the Parti - cipatory Design Conference ( PDC ) series . At the same time , as members of that community , we have also experienced and been motivated by our own need to come to grips with the way in which contemporary PD is understood and practised within this community . Moreover , the term ‘ participation ’ is commonly used within a wide range of academic disciplines and public policy areas , including participatory art , participatory action research , participatory democracy , participatory culture , and participatory journalism , which motivated us to further uncover what is meant by ‘ participation ’ in participatory design . As noted above , research into participation in general has recently attracted increasing interest , for example , as re ﬂ ected by discussions in the CHI 2012 - invited SIG , ‘ Participation and HCI : Why Involve People in Design ? ’ In the summary report , Vines et al . ( 2012 ) identify ﬁ ve key issues that urgently need to be addressed : mapping de ﬁ ni - tions of participation ; identifying aspects of best practice across contexts ; re ﬂ ection on participant experience and researcher self - re ﬂ ection ; intellectual ownership in participatory design / art / com - munity informatics ; transparency of reasons for choosing users . We address two of the foregoing issues identi ﬁ ed by Vines et al . ( 2012 ) : mapping de ﬁ nitions of participation , and clarifying the role of users in participatory projects . First , regarding the chal - lenge of mapping de ﬁ nitions of participation , our work highlights key contributions and de ﬁ nitions used in participatory design research , as presented over the past decade at the PDC series . Second , we provide a critical survey of the role of users , emphasiz - ing the way in which users are involved in various phases of the design process , thus addressing Vines et al . ( 2012 , 2013 ) ’ s calls for clarifying how users are involved , why they are chosen , and what their contributions are . Speci ﬁ cally , we investigate how themes and understandings of PD research practice have been discussed in recent years at PDC , in order to provide a comprehensive resource for participatory design research , and HCI research in general . In a publication based on the PDC 2006 papers ( N ¼ 15 ) , Bergvall - Kåreborn and Ståhlbrost ( 2008 ) examined the concept of par - ticipation with respect to the rationale for participation , type of Contents lists available at ScienceDirect journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / ijhcs Int . J . Human - Computer Studies http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2014 . 09 . 003 1071 - 5819 / & 2014 The Authors . Published by Elsevier Ltd . This is an open access article under the CC BY - NC - ND license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - nd / 3 . 0 / ) . ☆ This paper has been recommended for acceptance by E . Motta . n Corresponding author at : Helsingsforsgade 14 8200 , Aarhus N , Denmark . Tel . : þ 45 2899 2251 . E - mail addresses : halskov @ cavi . au . dk ( K . Halskov ) , nbhansen @ cavi . au . dk ( N . B . Hansen ) . Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 74 ( 2015 ) 81 – 92 participation , and level of participation . Their ﬁ ndings point to a broadness in the de ﬁ nitions and aims of PD , with the aim of pointing forwards to new issues , as well as pointing out the waning interest in explicitly political issues . Our paper has a broader scope , and is based on a longer period of PD research . Thus , this paper serves the two - fold purpose of providing a critical overview of the ﬁ eld , and providing a platform for both core PD researchers and HCI researchers in general , enabling them to position and discuss their research in relation to participatory design . The core of this paper comprises a literature review of the last ten years of PDC conferences ( 2002 to 2012 ) , outlining different categories of research published within the ﬁ eld , and a more comprehensive overview of how participation is conducted and de ﬁ ned in the research papers . A prominent driver of our research is the desire to examine what is meant by ‘ participation ’ in the PD community , and how the way people de ﬁ ne ‘ participation ’ relates to the way participa - tion actually unfolds in researchers ’ own experimental research projects . This research is then contrasted with an account of fundamental aspects of PD as identi ﬁ ed by core PD literature , allowing us to discuss and contrast classic and contemporary issues . By outlining and discussing the diverse de ﬁ nitions and practices within the PD community , this paper provides a platform for further participatory research , highlighting which themes and issues may be drawn from PD research . The paper is organized in the following way . First , we present our research method , followed by the identi ﬁ cation of ﬁ ve categories of research contributions addressed between 2002 and 2012 : Participatory Design in new domains , Participatory Design methods , Participatory Design and new technology , Theoretical con - tributions to Participatory Design , and Basic concepts in Participatory Design . Then , we critically examine how participation is de ﬁ ned , and how participation is conducted in experimental design cases . Last we provide an overview of the history of participatory design , going back to the ﬁ rst PDC conference , which we use as a platform for discussing our ﬁ ndings from the review of the contemporary PDC research . 2 . Research method and material In this section , we present our research method and material , and discuss the strengths and limitations of our study . The material examined comprises all 102 PDC research papers published from 2002 to 2012 . Our initial research question was ‘ What has character - ized participatory design research in the last ten years ? ’ With this in mind , we focused on the research contributions as presented by the authors , as well as on the de ﬁ nition and practice of participation . We started from the thesis that all research papers at the PDC contribute to PD research based on a particular de ﬁ nition and / or implementa - tion of ‘ participation ’ . Furthermore , we initially worked with the premise that the use of methods , technology , users , and domain would be important characteristics of the individual research pro - jects . In addition to these speci ﬁ c areas of interest , we also wanted our reading to be open to emergent issues and key themes . In this way , we conducted a thematic analysis ( Flick , 2009 ; Guest et al . , 2011 ) guided by the initial research question , remaining open to emergent connections and other themes . Hence , our initial framing and reading took seven areas of interest as points of departure : research contribution , de ﬁ nition of participation , methods , technol - ogy , users , domain , and key themes . At a practical level , we downloaded all the papers in PDF format from the ACM Digital Library and from a website host - ing PDC proceedings through the years ( Participatory Design Fig . 1 . Sente software , with an example of an annotated paper . K . Halskov , N . B . Hansen / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 74 ( 2015 ) 81 – 92 82 Proceedings — Welcome Page , 2013 ) , and entered the papers into the Sente ( Sente Academic Reference Manager for Mac OS , 2014 ) bibliography software , which allowed us to track standard meta - data for reference work . Sente also allowed us to highlight text in the PDF ﬁ les , and to associate the highlighted passages with keywords corresponding to the seven areas of interest outlined above ( Fig . 1 ) . This made it possible to annotate the digital versions of the papers by highlighting examples , facilitating a repository of key passages for easy reference during the writing of this paper . In this way , we established links among the seven areas of interest ( research contribution , de ﬁ nition of participation , methods , tech - nology , users , domain , and key themes ) and the individual papers . Sente saves PDF ﬁ les , metadata , and annotations in the About SQLite ( 2013 ) database format , providing a smooth way to extract speci ﬁ c points of interest . For example , we could extract all annotations with the key term ‘ research contribution ’ , grouped by author and year of publication . Understandably , our study has a speci ﬁ c focus , with respect to scope and time frame . With regard to the scope of our study , we focus on the research papers from the PDCs . Within the ﬁ eld of participatory design , PDC is the most prestigious and oldest , and a highly - ranked conference according to the Danish national pub - lication ranking system . As the prominent participatory design conferences , we consider PDCs to be appropriately selected as the starting point for discussing what constitutes participatory design . We limited our study to research papers . Workshop and short papers present valuable research , but by focusing on research papers , our analysis covers those works that present the most signi ﬁ cant contributions to the PDC discourse , and are subject to the most rigorous review by the PDC programme committee . Workshop and short papers might challenge points made in this paper . However , according to the ACM library , all ten PDC papers with the greatest impact are research papers , which suggests that the full - length papers represent the most in ﬂ uential research of the PDC community . With regard to time frame , we recognize the value of examin - ing the entire 1990 to 2012 period of the conference series , but have chosen to make a detailed study of a shorter time period , instead of a longer study that pays less detail to each paper . The period encompasses the general transition to ‘ third - wave HCI ’ ( also re ﬂ ected in the many new domains introduced in the papers ) , and apart from Muller and Druin ( 2012 ) ’ s more general discussion of PD in HCI , there has been limited review work covering this time period . Also , we are mainly interested in contemporary framings of PD , as opposed to providing a more longitudinal account , hence the focus on the last six conferences . It might also be interesting to consider the categories of papers and domains that are unrepresented at the PDCs . The PDC series does not represent the entire range of PD research , and one way to advance the work started here would be to do comparative studies involving other disciplines , such as HCI , the CHI or DIS conference series , or speci ﬁ c journals , such as Journal of CoDesign . Doing so would supplement the work started here , and contribute to the ongoing discussion of the nature and concerns of PD research . However , the advantages of focusing on the PDC series are manifold . Primarily , it offers a comparable and consistent body of research . For instance , all the papers examined are roughly the same length , and judged by a consistent and international panel of reviewers , making it feasible to compare themes and issues across the entire body of work . With our focus on a speci ﬁ c time frame and the scope of publications established , we consider our chosen dataset a strong and consistent body of research that allows themes and issues to be applied for the purpose of shedding light on the diversity of contemporary PD research . This means that our analysis and discussion , below , are valuable in establishing the way in which issues of participation are addressed and discussed in contemporary PD research . As we will return to later , there exists a rich body of work covering the early days of the PD movement , but there is a need for offering an overview of contemporary PD research . Our analysis of the papers is a theory - informed approach , in that we had a preconceived understanding of the PD research ﬁ elds , and used this knowledge to guide our analysis . Through our analysis , it became clear that , individually , the seven areas of interest comprising our initial framework would not lend them - selves well to analysis , as separate themes . In almost all the papers , two or more of the areas are interrelated , for instance , the use of a speci ﬁ c method in a speci ﬁ c new domain . In other words , isolating and reporting on methods used in research cases would convey a simpli ﬁ ed picture of contemporary PD research . Instead , in the following , we focus on research contributions and participation as de ﬁ ned and practised , informed by the ﬁ ve other areas of interest . 3 . Contemporary participatory design research In the following we ﬁ rst address research contributions and then turn to participation as de ﬁ ned and practised . 3 . 1 . Research contributions Investigating the kinds of contributions made at the PDCs between 2002 and 2012 enables us to offer an overview of the participatory design research ﬁ eld . After completing the ground - work of collecting , reading , and annotating the papers , we were able to group the different categories of contributions by identify - ing similarities and differences leading us to categorize the contributions submitted at PDCs with respect to : participatory design in new domains ; participatory design methods ; participa - tory design and new technology ; Theoretical contributions to participatory design ; and Basic concepts in participatory design . Table 1 provides an overview of the material organized by year and area of contribution . We next present a qualitative investigation of the papers , illuminating the broader issues addressed at the PDCs . We identify each category of contribution , then offer examples of how we arrived at these particular groupings , giving examples of clear candidates for each grouping . 3 . 1 . 1 . Participatory design in new domains The original tenets of PD were applied in a workplace context , but over the years , PD has expanded into new domains and contexts , partly owing to technological developments . Similar to the development of HCI ( Rogers , 2012 ) , PD is expanding its borders , extending to new domains of application and use . The largest category in our literature review consists of the contributions that discuss how PD is used in a domain that is Table 1 The ﬁ ve categories of contribution . 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 Total Participatory Design in new domains 2 10 4 5 5 6 32 Participatory Design methods 7 8 4 2 1 3 25 Participatory Design and new technology 3 2 1 2 1 9 Theoretical contributions to Participatory Design 4 1 2 3 4 14 Basic concepts in Participatory Design 5 2 3 4 3 4 21 K . Halskov , N . B . Hansen / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 74 ( 2015 ) 81 – 92 83 new or very uncommon to PD , thus contributing to the ﬁ eld by implementing PD techniques , or questioning prevailing assumptions . Such contributions seem to be technologically and organizationally tied to societal developments . Indeed , many contributions address speci ﬁ c challenges met by PD when ventur - ing into new areas , where conditions differ from previous ones . A good example of this is Mainsah and Morrison ( 2012 ) discussion of how social media may be used for civic engagement with youths , raising questions about technology ( social media ) , society ( civic engagement ) and users ( youths ) . Similarly , Taxén ( 2004 ) discusses how a set of participatory methodologies was introduced to , and adapted for museum exhibition design . In the category of PD in new domains , the healthcare sector is another prominent domain , where Kelly and Matthews ( 2010 ) provide a discussion of involving ‘ pre - users ’ of medical technology in the design process , as a way of preparing them for their use of necessary insulin injectors , for instance . Also in the ﬁ eld of healthcare , Björgvinsson and Hillgren ( 2004 ) elaborate on the combination of ethnography and ‘ on the spot experiments ’ that facilitate learning for hospital personnel and patients . This category of PD in new domains also has a strong focus on the challenges of and potential for using PD outside the original geographical focus on the Western world . For instance , Braa et al . ( 2004 ) report on experiences of applying PD in hospitals in Cuba , and the challenges of designing within these highly hierarchical settings . Elovaara et al . ( 2006 ) conducted a comparative study of implementing PD in Tanzania and Sweden , and discuss how concepts and ideas of PD are adopted in such domains ( Table 2 ) . Examples such as the foregoing are instructive ; they emphasize the challenges PD researchers face when going beyond the work - place to wider areas of use . The papers presented at the PDCs demonstrate that PD is also changing cultures of use , which generates new areas of research . This is consistent with Muller and Druin ( 2012 ) ’ s work , which foregrounds healthcare , develop - ing countries , and designing for children , as new , burgeoning areas for PD . In the papers examined , we did not ﬁ nd many speci ﬁ cally concerned with designing for children — however , we attribute this to the success of the IDC conference , which also has a strong focus on issues of empowerment and ethics . Going through the many papers concerning different domains in PD throughout the years , it is interesting to note how new issues and technologies evolve and are tackled over time . In some of the earlier papers , we ﬁ nd examples such as that of Hepsø and Botnevik ( 2002 ) , who report on the use of telecommunications in the Norwegian crane indus - try , whereas some of the later papers address social media and strategies for long - term user involvement ( Johnson and Hyysalo , 2012 ) . Thus , although later categories of contributions on issues in PD generally question the nature of participation , these types of contributions often address more pragmatic issues ( Greenbaum and Madsen , 1993 ) . 3 . 1 . 2 . Participatory design methods A second kind of PD paper investigates speci ﬁ c methods : how well - established methods translate into new contexts , how they are modi ﬁ ed to ﬁ t speci ﬁ c purposes by changing , applying , or creating a new method . We identi ﬁ ed 25 papers as explicitly concerned with methods , and it is important to note that , although almost all the papers from the PDCs mention methods , this category comprises those in which the role , form , or use of methods is their primary focus . Examples of this include : Hemmings et al . ( 2002 ) , who conducted a comparative study of probes used for information and inspiration ; Isomursu et al . ( 2004 ) , who discuss the Experience clip technique , an approach to evaluating mobile concepts through user participation ; and Bødker et al . ( 2012 ) , who provide a discussion of research - based personas in user participation from an eGov project , to investigate how personas help designers engage with users ( Table 3 ) . Included in this category is also papers which reveal a concern for the interplay between method and enactment of methods , for instance , by Sarkkinen ( 2004 ) , who addresses how the theoretical concept of ‘ frames ’ may be applied as a control strategy , and uses this to analyse how an IT manager uses a white board to control the planning phases of an IT project . Similarly Light and Akama ( 2012 ) discuss their study of agency and practitioner roles in relation to methods , as they are enacted . Such approaches seem to be valued within the PDC community as they argue for relatedness between method and practitioner , thus emphasizing how PD may be considered an interplay between a method and its enactment . 3 . 1 . 3 . Participatory design and new technology This category of paper examines PD research with respect to new technology , speci ﬁ cally , the challenges participatory design encounters in light of technological developments , establishing new Table 2 Examples of the Participatory Design in new domains category . First Author Year Contribution Mainsah 2012 How social media may be used for civic engagement with youths , raising questions about technology ( social media ) , society ( civic engagement ) and users ( youths ) Johnson 2012 PD with social media and strategies for long - term user involvement Kelly 2010 Involving ‘ pre - users ’ of medical technology in the design process , preparing them for the experience of needing insulin injectors . Elovaara 2006 Comparative study of doing PD in Tanzania and Sweden , highlighting differences and similarities Taxén 2004 How participatory methodologies have been introduced to and adopted for museum exhibition design . Björgvinsson 2004 Combines ethnography with ‘ on the spot experiments ’ to facilitate learning for hospital personnel and patients Braa 2004 Investigates PD in hospitals in Cuba , and the challenges of designing within such highly hierarchical settings Hepsø 2002 In - depth study of implementing telecommunication in the crane industry in Norway Table 3 Examples of the Participatory Design methods category . First Author Year Contribution Hemmings 2002 Comparative study of probes as used for information and inspiration Isomursu 2004 Experience clip technique , an approach to evaluating mobile concepts through user participation Bødker 2012 How research - based personas can help designers engage with users . Light 2012 Agency and practitioner role in relation to the enactment of methods Sarkkinen 2004 Analysis of how an IT manager uses the control of a whiteboard to control ideation and planning K . Halskov , N . B . Hansen / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 74 ( 2015 ) 81 – 92 84 domains and settings . There is a subtle difference between these papers and the previous category on PD in new domains , in that these papers are more speci ﬁ cally focused on the technology as such , rather than the speci ﬁ c questions of domain . A typical example is that of Kolko et al . ( 2012 ) , who report on the Hackademia project , which aims to provide students without technical education with the ability to communicate with those who do have these skills . By so doing , Kolko et al . ( ibid ) note that the skills gained by students during the Hackademia project facilitate a greater degree of multi - disciplinarity and collaboration on technical issues , leading to crea - tive solutions and innovation . Here , the role of technology is actually the core of the problems investigated : For example , how do we enable students without technical skills to achieve a level of expertise in programming that enables them to collaborate with computer scientists and engineers ? ( Table 4 ) . Hornecker et al . ( 2006 ) provide another strong example by examining challenges for PD when engaging with and mediating stakeholder values , trust , and partnerships , in an ‘ opportunity space ’ created by ubiquitous computing . Last , we mention Fischer ( 2004 ) , who contributes a discussion of a long series of projects for overcoming barriers to social creativity , by creating socio - technical environments that turn barriers into opportunities for enhancing the social creativity of design communities . Examples include a social network for caregivers sharing experiences , and a software system for discussing architectural design rationales . 3 . 1 . 4 . Theoretical contributions to participatory design This category includes papers that explicitly introduce or establish theoretical approaches , models , or concepts . We identi - ﬁ ed 14 papers for this category , and it is important to note that although theory is applied and developed in some form through - out the entire body of PDC proceedings from 2002 to 2012 , these papers differ in being explicitly concerned with advancing a theoretical concept , model , or framework ( Table 5 ) . A prominent example is Hertzum and Simonsen ( 2010 ) ’ s introduction of the concept of ‘ Effects - Driven IT development , ’ which sets out to better evaluate the results of design work , by frequently evaluating the effects obtained by using mature proto - types implemented and tested in real settings . Based on their case study , they introduce a model and conceptualization that advances the PD ﬁ eld by helping others to understand their own work through this model and its conceptualization . Another strong example of a contribution of theoretical concepts in PD is the work of Iversen and Dindler ( 2008 ) , who introduce the concept of ‘ Aesthetic Inquiry ’ as a way of understanding their method , ‘ Fictional Inquiry , ’ an approach for , in their own words , “ tipping the scales towards transcendence . ” From the earliest part of the period we examine , we ﬁ nd an effort to create Pattern Languages for design ( Dearden et al . , 2002 ; Schuler , 2002 ) , and ( Hansen , 2006 ) introduces a theory for exploring design as a series of socio - technical experiments . Han - sen ( ibid ) draws on Latour ' s philosophy , to create a set of concepts for understanding and working with three speci ﬁ c challenges ( socio - technical , multidisciplinary , and translation challenges ) . 3 . 1 . 5 . Basic concepts in participatory design The contributions under this heading consist of papers that speci ﬁ cally discuss the general nature of participatory design , Participation , or related concepts , in order to illuminate these issues within the ﬁ eld . The contributions in this category speci ﬁ - cally set out to identify core aspects of participatory design in various ways , rather than address a speci ﬁ c method , new domain or technology , or speci ﬁ cally advance a theoretical concept or framework . For example , Iversen et al . ( 2010 ) discuss the way in which values may be seen as the main driver of the PD process ; Ehn ( 2008 ) offers a discussion of the PD process as Latourian ‘ things ’ ; Bossen ( 2006 ) discusses the relation between PD methods and emancipatory aims from a critical perspective ; and Ehn and Badham ( 2002 ) consider PD as a post - utopian approach . These papers primarily explore what PD and participation are , in contrast to the other four categories ( Table 6 ) . We also include comparisons of related ﬁ elds : for example , Dearden and Rizvi ( 2008 ) compare the similar domains of partici - patory interactive systems design and participatory approaches to international development . Likewise , Pekkola et al . ( 2006 ) and Rittenbruch et al . ( 2002 ) contribute discussions of different systems development methods , and how these may be informed by PD , or vice versa . Last , we include discussions of speci ﬁ c concepts within participatory design ( a good example being Kanstrup , 2012 ’ s article , which discusses who the designer and the user are , in participatory design ) and issues of power relations in PD ( Bratteteig and Wagner , 2012 ; Büscher et al . , 2002 ) . Such contributions explore and question issues of politics in participatory design . Having provided an overview of the main areas of research contributions , we now turn to how participation is de ﬁ ned and practised . 3 . 2 . Participation as de ﬁ ned and practised Unsurprisingly , PDC papers use the term ‘ participation ’ fre - quently , but exactly how users were involved , and what is meant Table 5 Examples of the Theoretical contributions to Participatory Design category . First Author Year Contribution Hertzum 2010 ‘ Effects - Driven IT development ’ , evaluating results by using mature prototypes implemented and tested in real use Iversen 2008 ‘ Aesthetic Inquiry ’ a way of understanding ﬁ ction in design Schuler 2002 Pattern Languages for design Hansen 2006 A model of design as a series of socio - technical experiments Table 4 Examples of the Participatory design and new technology category . First Author Year Contribution Kolko 2012 Hackademia project , aimed at providing students without technical skills with the ability to ‘ hack ’ and communicate with those that do have these skills Hornecker 2006 Challenges for PD in an opportunity space created by ubiquitous computing Fischer 2004 Websites as socio - technical environments creating opportunities for the social creativity of design communities K . Halskov , N . B . Hansen / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 74 ( 2015 ) 81 – 92 85 by ‘ participation ’ differs from paper to paper . It is important to note , that our mission or goal is not promote a speci ﬁ c PD standard ; rather , we are interested in providing insight into how the PDC research community understands the concept of ‘ partici - pation ’ , which we will subsequently use as the basis for a more critical examination of the relationship between what is de ﬁ ned as participation , and the practical way in which participation unfolds in speci ﬁ c PD research cases . 3 . 2 . 1 . De ﬁ nitions of participation Our literature review reveals diverse de ﬁ nitions of ‘ participa - tion ’ , ranging from the goal of ‘ involving users ’ , without further quali ﬁ cation , to more elaborate discussions of the idea of participation as a core aspect of PD . We have identi ﬁ ed three general de ﬁ nitions — based on an understanding of participation as ( 1 ) implicit , ( 2 ) users ’ points of view , and ( 3 ) mutual learning — which we address below . A few of the papers state that users were part of the design process , but leave the exact conception of participation unclear ( e . g . Clement et al . , 2008 ; Herrmann et al . , 2004 ; Pekkola et al . , 2006 ) . For instance , Pekkola et al . ( 2006 ) report on blending PD and an iterative systems development approach in an attempt to have the two inform one another , but it is unclear how ‘ participa - tion ’ is de ﬁ ned . Failing to de ﬁ ne precisely how one understands participation is problematic ; however , PD is a well - established ﬁ eld of research in which the concept of participation might be taken for granted , possibly making discussions of what is meant by ‘ participation ’ seem super ﬂ uous . For example , Johannessen and Ellingsen ( 2008 ) discuss concrete aspects of particular PD methods in the speci ﬁ c organizational context of the implementation of large - scale health systems , without addressing what is meant by participation . It is also worth noting that many papers may not explicitly discuss their conceptions of participation , but actually do cite some of the key publications in the ﬁ eld , for instance Design at Work : Cooperative Design of Computer Systems ( Greenbaum and Kyng , 1991a ) , underscoring the previous point about taking the de ﬁ nition of ‘ participation ’ for granted . Explicitly de ﬁ ning participation as concerned with the users ’ points of view is another approach , indicated , for instance , by terms or statements such as ‘ user - driven process ’ ( Dalsgaard , 2010 ) , ‘ people as experts in their own lives ’ ( Campbell , 2004 ; Guest et al . , 2011 ) , or formulations such as ‘ maintain the power of the artists to express a certain vision of the work , but equally to ensure the power of the audience to create their own experience of it ’ ( ( Robertson et al . , 2006 ) p . 39 ) . Describing participation in such ways re ﬂ ects a concern for the user ' s point of view , which is clearly a major concern that goes beyond merely involving them in the design process . Furthermore , this concern for the user ’ s point of view is extended to include what users know to be important , and also suggests that they are best equipped to make decisions based on this knowledge . A clear example of this is offered by Hornecker et al . ( 2006 ) , who address the use of different PD techniques as a way of engaging with the ‘ opportunity space ’ created by the use of ubiquitous computing technology , when designing for visitor experiences at a historic country estate in England . Here , the aim of participation is explicitly expressed from the different stakeholders ’ points of view , and the core of the paper addresses how these different points of view were recon - ciled through a series of workshops with the designers . Thus , the paper is concerned with a speci ﬁ c aspect of participation , namely , reconciling stakeholder perspectives . The last approach emphasizes ‘ mutual learning ’ ( e . g . Björgvinsson and Hillgren , 2004 ; Cederman - Haysom and Brereton , 2006 ; Dearden et al . , 2006 ; Winschiers - Theophilus et al . , 2010 ) ) . One might argue that most participatory design processes involve mutual learning , and such a de ﬁ nition of participation does recognize the value of the user ' s point of view . One might call this a sort of a ‘ middle ground ’ , in that it is unclear from the de ﬁ nition alone whether the purpose of PD is the transfer of knowledge among users and designers , or whether it also implies that the users are best equipped to make decisions for themselves . In Björgvinsson and Hillgren ( 2004 ) ’ s article , the importance of mutual learning is demonstrated through the creation of small videos of work situations , which are made available to other workers for their education on , and rapid implementation of various hospital artefacts . This means that mutual learning occurs at two levels , both between designers and users , and among users , through the video clips . However , the de ﬁ nition of participation provided leaves the extent to which users in ﬂ uenced the design process unclear . We must emphasize that we are not stating that papers that do not explicitly de ﬁ ne participation fail to value user perspectives , but that we often ﬁ nd it dif ﬁ cult to determine whether this is the case . When the authors did not de ﬁ ne what they meant by ‘ participation ’ , we had to investigate whether anything that the authors did indicated a concern for what participation is , and its contributions . Similarly , in the cases where the papers de ﬁ ned participation as ‘ mutual learning ’ , we had to investigate how this mutual learning actually took place . Summing up , the many papers from a decade of PDCs reveal a plethora of de ﬁ nitions of ‘ participation ’ . This is hardly surprising , given that the PDCs address a wide range of subjects and ways of approaching participatory design . Thus , another question relates to how participation actually unfolds , which we address in the next section . 3 . 2 . 2 . Participation as practised In most of the material examined , the authors report on how they conducted the explorative design projects on which their research is based , enabling us to examine how the many Table 6 Examples of the Basic concepts in Participatory Design category . First Author Year Contribution Kanstrup 2012 End user design in a PD project exploring user - driven innovation as a perspective and method for PD Bratteteig 2012 Analysis of the complexity of design decisions through an urban planning case Iversen 2010 Values as main driver in PD Ehn 2008 PD as a Latourian ‘ Thing ’ Dearden 2008 Comparison of PD and participatory approaches to international development Bossen 2006 Relationship between PD methods and emancipatory aims from a critical perspective Pekkola 2006 Compares and combines information systems development methods with PD Ehn 2002 PD as a post - utopian approach Rittenbruch 2002 Integration of extreme programming and participatory design Büscher 2002 Analysis of strategies to navigate settings — PD as ameliorating differences to a degree K . Halskov , N . B . Hansen / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 74 ( 2015 ) 81 – 92 86 de ﬁ nitions of participation develop in speci ﬁ c cases . We do this to highlight the diversity of ways participation is practised , diversity that in many ways re ﬂ ects the multiple de ﬁ nitions of participation discussed above . Commonly , different design techniques are used in different stages of the design process . For instance , ethnographic methods are usually used in the early stages of the design process , whereas various kinds of prototyping are used later in the process , although each design process involves speci ﬁ c conditions : for instance , ethnography may be required late in the process , or perhaps not at all . When the design process moves from one activity to another , one activity – for instance , creating a mock - up ( Ehn and Kyng , 1991 ) – does not pick up precisely where the previous activity – for instance , ethnographic studies – left off . An act of interpreta - tion is always involved , the selection of what may be relevantly carried over from one activity to the next . Furthermore , every design event involves planning , when the next design activity is scheduled , and materials for it are prepared . Finally , decisions are made between design events , often regarding what kind of design activity should follow the previous one , or what to carry over from the previous activity . With an understanding of PD processes as a sequence of activities based on different PD techniques , connected by interpretation , planning , and decision - making , we are ready to discuss typical instances of participatory design in the research papers we examined . Examples of this foregoing structure occur throughout the examined material , and PD in general . One example is the use of ethnographic studies as a way of collecting insights about users ( e . g . Cederman - Haysom and Brereton , 2006 ; Hemmings et al . , 2002 ; Kanstrup and Bertelsen , 2006 ; Sefyrin , 2010 ) . From these we can identify several different approaches to reporting on how participation was conducted , each with individual strengths and weaknesses . Some of the papers report design processes consisting of a succession of activities ( Buur et al . , 2000 ; Cederman - Haysom and Brereton , 2006 ; Dalsgaard , 2010 ; Robertson et al . , 2006 ; Sarkkinen , 2004 ) . One approach is to report on individual design activities , while leaving unclear exactly what happened between these activities . An example is Cederman - Haysom and Brereton ( 2006 ) ’ s research into a participatory design case contextualized in a dental practice . First , the authors make a valuable contribution to PD research , in what was at that time the emergent ﬁ eld of ubiquitous computing , and provide deep and vital insights into the challenges of bringing participatory design to a project span - ning technical research interests and commercial objectives , at the same time making demands on the time of skilled professionals . They report on how they used ethnographic methods at both a dental school and a dental practice , which ‘ provided contrasting insights into work practice , terminology and our understanding of the practitioner ’ s requirements ’ ( ibid p . 12 ) . In turn , they used these insights as springboards for creating low - ﬁ delity prototypes , ultimately experimenting with speech recognition as a way of allowing multimodal interaction . However , from a participatory design research perspective , one could argue that this generally rich and insightful paper leaves open how the researchers bridged the gap between the ethnographic studies and prototyping ses - sions , including information about who interpreted the results of the ethnography . The authors state that ‘ all design activities were situated at the practitioner ’ s domain ’ ( ibid p . 12 ) , which supports our previous point about one design activity not picking up precisely where the preceding one left off . Indeed , it seems the researchers did at least some planning and decision - making between each design activity , in order to involve users in the main design activities , for instance , through the use of low - ﬁ delity prototypes . Buur et al . ( 2000 ) exemplify a different approach , addressing who does what in a PD process more directly , in a project concerning the design of pumps for wastewater plants . Here they conducted a number of design events ( ethnography , ideation , mock - ups ) , using videotaped material as a way of involving users in the project . Buur et al . ( ibid ) describe how they involved the users in both the collection of data and the interpretation of the ﬁ eld studies , through the use of a speci ﬁ c video - card game . In other examples , Buur et al . ( ibid ) discuss how they used video footage as a tool for interpreting the results of a mock - up test . In this case many of the design activities involved were explici - tly designed to support user involvement in interpretation or decision - making . Simonsen and Hertzum ( 2008 ) ’ s paper on the process of designing an Electronic Patient Record ( EPR ) module for managing the prescription and use of drugs at a hospital ’ s stroke unit is another example that presents the activities between design events quite speci ﬁ cally . Here , the researchers used a functional prototype in real practice , for an extended period of time ( a whole week ) , in order to test it extensively and learn , by establishing a familiarity with the system . We ﬁ nd their approach valuable , as it clari ﬁ es the interplay between the prototype and the interpretation of the use of the system . The way users provided input during this process of working with the prototype is described in detail , and was clearly an important part of the design process . An understanding of the variation in how participation is practised is re ﬂ ected by Bossen et al . ( 2010 ) , who , in their discussion of user gain from PD processes , highlight how others have scrutinized the idea of ‘ participation ’ , yielding several dis - tinctions with regard to the kinds of people who participate , the type of participation , the degree of participation , the duration of participation , and the arena of participation . This complexity of the term ‘ participation ’ is amply re ﬂ ected in the material examined , as we have discussed above . To summarize , our analysis of how participation is de ﬁ ned and conducted reveals several salient points . First , there exists a rather wide range of de ﬁ nitions of what is actually meant by ‘ participa - tion ’ , and sometimes the intended meaning is unclear . Second , we have investigated how participation takes place as described in the individual project . . We have highlighted how PD unfolds through a series of design events , strung together by decisions , interpreta - tion , and planning . Then , through a range of examples , we have demonstrated that there is signi ﬁ cant diversity in the practice of participation . 4 . A brief overview of the history of participatory design Our review of the last recent ten years period of PDC confer - ences has documented a diverse set of research practices and understanding of what constitute PD . New domains , methods , theoretical concepts and technologies have been explored all positioned within the ﬁ eld of PD . This begs the question of how this body of work published from 2002 to 2012 relates to the historical roots of participatory design . In this section we therefore present a brief historical overview of the history of PD , which we subsequently will use as a starting point for comparison and discussion of our ﬁ ndings in the ﬁ nal section . In our overview we include fundamental aspects of participa - tory design as presented at the ﬁ rst PDC proceeding ( Namioka and Schuler , 1990 ) , and by the three major participatory design anthologies ( Greenbaum and Kyng , 1991a ; Schuler and Namioka , 1993 ; Simonsen and Robertson , 2012 ) . We also include a survey by Clement and van den Besselaar ( 1993 ) . Among the precursors to the Participatory Design Conference series were the 1975 and 1985 Aarhus conferences . Bjerknes et al . ( 1987 ) edited an anthology K . Halskov , N . B . Hansen / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 74 ( 2015 ) 81 – 92 87 based on material from the 1985 conference , Computers and Democracy , which comprised a collection of articles about practical and theoretical developments in computing in the context of democratizing work . At that time , ‘ participatory design ’ was not a well - established term , but an emerging ﬁ eld of research and practice revolving around core values , such as democracy and quality of work life ( ibid p . 2 ) , workers acquiring control of computer systems and their use at work , and designing computer support for skilled workers ( ibid p . 6 ) . The core values of the early Scandinavian projects were con - sistently echoed in the landmark 1991 anthology , Design at Work : Cooperative Design of Computer Systems ( Greenbaum and Kyng , 1991a ) , which brought together Scandinavian and US cooperative design researchers . According to the introduction ( ( Greenbaum and Kyng , 1991b ) p . 1 – 2 ) they share a set of ideals , namely : the need to design with full user participation ; the goal of enhancing workplace skills ; seeing computer systems as tools ; seeing com - puter systems as means of improving quality of work ; considering the design process as a political process with con ﬂ icts ; and seeing the use situation as the fundamental starting point for the design process . Whereas ‘ cooperative design ’ and the ‘ Scandinavian approach ’ to systems design were the original descriptors for design activ - ities , emphasizing designers and users actively working together , ‘ participatory design ’ became the label for such activities , as cooperative design became widespread in North America and other parts of the world . The ﬁ rst PDC established participatory design as a de ﬁ ned ﬁ eld of research . PDC 1990 was held in Seattle , Washington , and was sponsored by the Computers in the Workplace Project of Compu - ter Professionals for Social Responsibility ( CPSR ) . The conference was the ﬁ rst major venue where researchers and practitioners joined forces to address concerns regarding “ systems that are dif ﬁ cult for workers to master , poorly suited for their tasks , and perceived by them as job - threatening or job - degrading . ” The 1990 proceedings stated that participatory design ( PD ) represented a new approach , emphasizing ( Namioka and Schuler , 1990 ) : provid - ing workers with better tools to support their work ; users as experts at improving their own work and work life ; regarding users ’ perceptions of technology as important to success ; and the importance of viewing computer - based applications in context . Using PDC 1990 as their basis , Schuler and Namioka ( 1993 ) emphasize that PD differs from traditional systems design , in considering users as experts in their work lives , by viewing user perceptions of technology as important , and lastly by viewing computer - based applications in context . Moreover , Schuler and Namioka emphasize the fundamental idea of democracy – “ People who are affected by a decision or event should have an opportu - nity to in ﬂ uence it ” ( ibid p . xii ) – and that participation is essential to good design . Clement and van den Besselaar ( 1993 ) presented one of the early reviews of the PD ﬁ eld in 1993 , based on their study of an overview of PD projects presented in 1983 at The IFIP WG 9 . 1 conference , Systems Design For , With and By the User ( Briefs et al . , 1983 ) . Starting from a broad de ﬁ nition of PD , they identi ﬁ ed 25 projects , 16 of which were supplemented by additional insights via a question - naire . Among the projects , we ﬁ nd those conducted at the Norwe - gian Computing Centre in the 1970s , the DUE ( Demokrati , Udvikling og EDB , Eng . Democracy , Development , and Computers ) ( Sandberg , 1979 ) project , the UTOPIA project ( Bødker et al . , 1987 ; Ehn , 1988 ) , and the Florence project ( Bjerknes and Bratteteig , 1987 ) . Several of the projects were conducted in industrial settings , and almost invariably , on the initiative of researchers , but in close collaboration with trade unions . Clement and van den Besselaar ( 1993 ) identify ﬁ ve elements crucial to a PD project : access to relevant information ; having an independent voice in decision - making ; user - controlled development resources ; appropriate development methods ; and lastly organizational / technical ﬂ exibility meaning room for alter - natives . According to Clement and van den Besselaar the over - arching , core element of PD is identi ﬁ ed as “ the empowerment of workers so that they can codetermine the development of informa - tion systems and their workplace ” ( Clement and van den Besselaar , 1993 ) p . 29 . A recent handbook on participatory design , edited by Simonsen and Robertson ( 2012 ) and based on a PDC 2010 workshop , provides an introduction and a reference to core areas of partici - patory design . In the initial section of the introductory chapter , the authors state that at the heart of participatory design is the idea that those who use information technology play a critical role in its design , and that PD is de ﬁ ned by mutual learning through collective ‘ re ﬂ ection in action ’ . Moreover , a fundamental aspect of PD concerns giving users a voice in design , through interaction with prototypes and such . Last , Simonsen and Robertson brie ﬂ y mention that PD is a political process . The remainder of their introduction is dedicated to a historical overview of PD , organized around basic concepts such as ‘ practice ’ , which further elaborate on the foregoing core aspects of PD . For ease of reference we have summarized the ﬁ ndings from this section in Table 7 , which provides an overview of the ﬁ ve fundamental aspects ( politics , user , methods , context and product ) are – with few exceptions , indicated by empty entries in Table 7 – recurrent in the core literature included in the brief historical overview of this section . 5 . Discussion We opened this article by examining contemporary PD research through a detailed study of the research papers published at the PDC between 2002 and 2012 . We identi ﬁ ed ﬁ ve categories of contributions , and discussed how participation was de ﬁ ned and practised as described in the publications . We then presented a brief historical overview of PD research , focusing on the early years of the ﬁ eld ' s development based on a study of core PD literature ( see Table 7 : Fundamental aspects of PD ) . The latter was done for two reasons : to situate our review of contemporary PD properly within the larger discourse of participatory design ; and because much of the work done in contemporary PD draws on these core PD works . Based on our analysis and synthesis of the PDC and historical PD literature , we suggest a reformulation of the fundamental aspects of PD ( Table 8 ) . Below , we go into each of these aspects , discussing both the original point of departure and the nuances and developments we have drawn from our own study of contemporary PD . After that , we take up the issue of ‘ participa - tion ’ , which permeates all ﬁ ve aspects of PD presented below . 5 . 1 . Politics Going through the 2002 – 2012 PDC proceedings , a focus on politics is challenged in new contexts and constellations of users , which differs from the classic division into workers as users and employees . The political aspect has become subtler , and in Muller and Druin ’ s formulation , more focused on a polyvoiced perspective , rather than a con ﬂ ict perspective ( Muller and Druin , 2012 ) . Much of the research presented at the recent PDCs focuses on engaging users in design , with either pragmatic or political aims ( Greenbaum and Madsen , 1993 ) , and often in domains with complex constellations of user and other kinds of participants : civic engagement , healthcare , or outside of classic Western contexts . In the case of healthcare , we often see PD involving either patients , aimed squarely at improving their quality of life , or healthcare personnel . The latter is a typical K . Halskov , N . B . Hansen / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 74 ( 2015 ) 81 – 92 88 example of politics at play , in that , although aimed at designing with healthcare personnel , to improve the quality of their work life , it is also focused on providing bene ﬁ ts for the recipient of their work : the patient . In the case of designing outside the Western world , we see much work on different standards for participation and political aims : in other historical and cultural norms , such examples serve to question the existing Western political assumptions in PD . Although these nuances mean that what is meant by ‘ politics ’ is expanded , we still ﬁ nd politics to be a core issue of PD , although it may be questioned whether this is politics in the sense that Beck ( 2002 ) describes . Returning to our investigation of participation as prac - tised , we also identify the importance of the interplay between different activities in the design process , and the political stance : When may a user really be said to have been involved ? How much is it feasible to involve a user ? Such questions serve to move the issue of participation beyond simplistic de ﬁ nitions of whether or not users were part of the process , towards questioning how , why , and when users were involved in speci ﬁ c parts of the project . 5 . 2 . People As brie ﬂ y touched upon above , PD has gone from being concerned with involving users , to involving people in the design process . In our study of contemporary PD , much research focused on complex and dynamic use situations . Projects aimed at social media , on engaging temporary users , on fostering civic engagement and FabLabs , metadesign , and other new developments , challenge the idea of the ‘ user ’ by intentionally blurring the distinctions between designers and users . Such examples illustrate one of the important developments of contemporary PD , which is that it has advanced by considering new groups of users , who may not speci ﬁ cally consider themselves users , but merely people . However , this development also presents researchers and designers with new questions , such as whom to involve in a project if the ‘ users ’ are not a clearly de ﬁ ned group . 5 . 3 . Context The use situation remains the fundamental point of departure for PD , but what characterizes use situations is multifarious . The fact that participatory design has entered new domains may be the most signi ﬁ cant development in participatory design research , and also has implications for several of the other four fundamental aspects presented in Table 8 . But we have also seen several projects that address participatory design in its original domain of workplace contexts , for instance , in the healthcare sector . Furthermore , whereas early PD projects played out in Europe and North America , in the last decade PD has propagated to other parts of the world , with different organizational structures and politics . Moreover , in new domains , users comprise a much less well - de ﬁ ned groups , and instead encompass multiple cohorts of stakeholders with only partially shared interests , which challenges the PD axiom that those affected by a system should have a say in decisions related to it — indeed , what constitutes a use situation , and therefore the context of a system , becomes much harder to de ﬁ ne . The general development of technology during the period under consideration is quite evident in the pool of papers considered , for example , as re ﬂ ected by ubiquitous computing being a key area of interest , which is connected to research into PD in new domains and contexts . A few papers present the emergent interest in hacker spaces and maker communities , which further challenges the blurred boundaries between design and use , and positions the politics of user - controlled development on the research agenda . To us , this is interesting , as it places the power of de ﬁ ning and reshaping use situations in the hands of the users , Table 8 Fundamental aspects of participatory design . Politics People who are affected by a decision should have an opportunity to in ﬂ uence it People People playcritical roles in design by being experts in their own lives Context The use situation is the fundamental starting point for the design process Methods Methods are means for users to gain in ﬂ uence in design processes Product The goal of participation is to design alternatives , improving quality of life Table 7 Fundamental aspects of PD , as identi ﬁ ed in core PD literature . Namioka and Schuler ( 1990 ) Greenbaum and Kyng ( 1991a ) Clement and van den Besselaar ( 1993 ) Schuler and Namioka ( 1993 ) Simonsen and Robertson ( 2012 ) Politics The design process as a political process with con ﬂ icts Access to relevant information People who are affected by a decision or event should have an opportunity to in ﬂ uence it Participatory design is a political process ( p . 3 ) User - controlled development resources User Users as experts in how to improve their own work and work life An independent voice in decision - making Considering users experts in their work life Users play a critical role in design ( p . 2 top ) Users learn about technological means to achieve their aims Methods Viewing users ’ perceptions of technology as important to success The need for designing with full user participation Appropriate development methods Viewing users ’ perception of technology as important Mutual learning through collective re ﬂ ection in action Prototypes etc . enable users to have a voice in design Context The importance of viewing computer - based applications in context The use situation as the fundamental starting point for the design process Viewing computer - based applications in context Designers strive to learn about the users ’ situation Product Providing workers with better tools to support their work The goal of enhancing workplace skills Organizational / technical ﬂ exibility ( i . e . room for alternatives ) Participation can improve quality ( p . xii ) Designing to respond to human need ( p . xix ) Computer systems as tools Computer systems as means to improve quality K . Halskov , N . B . Hansen / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 74 ( 2015 ) 81 – 92 89 allowing them to transform their own lives , which was originally , and remains , one of the key aims of PD . 5 . 4 . Methods The extent to which various methods are speci ﬁ cally PD methods has been discussed frequently , as has whether ‘ methods ’ is an important area of PD research . Our survey clearly demon - strates that PD researchers remain preoccupied with methods , and our thesis is that research into methods is particularly relevant in relation to the other fundamental aspects of PD ( see Table 8 ) , for example , the way in which a certain method enables loosely de ﬁ ned con ﬁ gurations of stakeholders or users to have a say in decision - making in a civic context . However , the development of the aspects in Table 8 also challenges existing methods , since methods are often developed with speci ﬁ c aims and contexts in mind . When the distinction between ‘ users ’ and other kinds of ‘ people ’ become blurred and ‘ context ’ may be temporary or distributed new methods may be required . Our discussion of participation as practised also suggest that methods remains an area that deserves considerable attention in PD research . Ques - tions such as how a speci ﬁ c method translates into a new domain , how it may be used with speci ﬁ c constellations of people , or which methods are challenged by new technological develop - ments , remain valid . 5 . 5 . Product One of the original aims of PD was the improvement of the quality of life of workers or users through the design of new products or technologies . However , when analysing through the PDC papers , it is notable that the overt focus on the product has become more subtle . In fact , PD has become concerned about improving quality of life in a broad sense . Thus , it is not so much the product of the design process itself that is in focus , but the role it plays within a speci ﬁ c domain . Examples include pleasurable experiences , cultural heritage , designing for healthcare , and civic engagement . However , one might question whether the results of well - intentioned participation actually imply an improved quality of life . We recognize that PD outcomes are not always products only — they may also be a change in mindset among participants , resulting in an improved focus on further collaborative work and projects . 5 . 6 . Participation The analysis of PDC literature reveals the diversity of ‘ participa - tion ’ within the ﬁ eld of PD , and ranges from an implicit under - standing to explicit statements about users driving the process forward . We have seen how the issue of participation has been de ﬁ ned variously , and in some instances only loosely or not at all , and have identi ﬁ ed three approaches : participation as implicitly de ﬁ ned , discussing the users as full participants in the design process , and the value of mutual learning between users and designer . Returning to the fundamental aspects of PD ( Table 8 ) , this diversity may be seen as both a strength and a weakness . Some variety is not surprising , since the original de ﬁ nition of ‘ participa - tion ’ as a democratic and political ideal , although still valid , is being challenged by the multiplicity of new contexts in which PD is currently practised . Thus , the ﬂ exibility of PD as an approach , a method , and a political ideal re ﬂ ects the diversi ﬁ cation of domains and technology . However , such ﬂ exibility also presents a danger , as highlighted by the multiple meanings of the term ‘ participation ’ . By encompassing a broader understanding of participation , or by de ﬁ ning only loosely what it means by the term , the ﬁ eld of PD research risks blurring its borders with other ﬁ elds , such as User Centred Design and Interaction Design . Although all these ﬁ elds may contribute to the broader agenda of involving users , this blurring makes it more dif ﬁ cult to re ﬂ ect on and critique partici - patory research contributions ; in an unbounded ﬁ eld , anything may be called ‘ participation ’ . We are also concerned about the lack of clarity regarding the way in which authors de ﬁ ne participatory design , and how it is practised in speci ﬁ c design projects . Although users were undoubtedly involved in all the design projects presented , it was sometimes dif ﬁ cult to gauge either the motivation or the approach , and we argue that it is crucial that researchers be more precise about users ’ roles when planning design events , selecting methods , interpreting design materials , and making decisions . Questions about who drives the process between sessions , with regard to interpretation , planning , and decision - making in the design process , raise a more general discussion of the structure of most papers , which tend to either report on single design activities , or focus squarely on a select few . In the cases of a paper addressing more than one design activity , it is often unclear how users are involved during the periods between the events dis - cussed . There seems to be untapped potential for analysing how design ideas are transformed over time , and the transitions from one event to another . This leads us to question where , when , and how users were involved . At our research laboratory , over the past year , we have devel - oped and tested a tool , the Process Re ﬂ ection Tool ( PRT ) , for documenting and re ﬂ ecting on design processes . The tool allows project participants to continuously document actions and re ﬂ ec - tions related to a particular design project , and addresses the need to focus more consciously on documenting the design process ( Dalsgaard and Halskov , 2012 ) . We see this as an opportunity to re ﬂ ect on one ’ s own practice , as well as an opportunity to generate research questions regarding the unfolding of participation in practice . 6 . Conclusion This paper was born from an interest in unravelling the character of contemporary participatory design . We have done so , based on a review of the last decade of PDC literature , of which we discussed all full papers through a thematic analysis . We found that PD is changing and diversifying as it incorporates new methods , people , domains and technologies . At the same time , other ﬁ elds , such as HCI , are taking note , importing , transforming , and rethinking what participation may be and mean in their other related ﬁ elds . Based on the study of core PD literature as well as and the contemporary PDC proceedings we examined , we suggest a con - densed and revised version of the ﬁ ve fundamental aspects of PD ( see Table 8 ) as a resource for future research . Re ﬂ ecting the fact that PD has become concerned with more than a single , well - de ﬁ ned group of users , we have relabelled ‘ users ’ as ‘ people ’ . Another revision concerns the ‘ product ’ of PD , which emphasizes alternatives that improve the quality of life in a broad sense . All ﬁ ve fundamental aspects of PD in Table 8 , with the possible exception of Politics , are addressed by most approaches to design - ing with users ( e . g . Human Computer Interaction , User Centred Design , and Interaction Design ) , and we would argue that addres - sing a combination of two or more aspects constitutes a promising avenue of investigation for PD researchers . Although many of the papers examined present valuable research with respect to one aspect ( e . g . Context ) , one way of advancing PD research is to critically examine one ' s own work , by explicitly addressing the relationship between the fundamental aspects of PD . For instance , K . Halskov , N . B . Hansen / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 74 ( 2015 ) 81 – 92 90 papers in the ‘ Participatory Design in new contexts ’ and ‘ Methods in Participatory Design ’ categories addressed the shift from the workplace to new contexts , including social media , and discussed the implementation of these methods to ﬁ t various kinds of contexts using new technologies . We see signi ﬁ cant potential for addressing the relationship among fundamental aspects of PD throughout an entire design process , explicitly addressing one or more of these aspects . We suggest that being clearer and more explicit about the relationship and coupling of design research projects and these fundamental aspects of PD would help PD researchers to be precise about the nature of participation , when contrasting PD with other design disciplines . The second part of our analysis of PD research highlighted the diversity of ‘ participation ’ within the ﬁ eld of PD , ranging from an implicit understanding , to explicit statements about users driving the process forward . We have seen how the issue of participation has been de ﬁ ned variously , and in some instances , only loosely or not at all , and have identi ﬁ ed three approaches : implicit , users as full participants in the design process , and mutual learning between users and designer . As mentioned previously , our aim here is to provide insight into how the PDC research community understands the concept of ‘ participation ’ , rather than promoting a speci ﬁ c and rigorous PD standard , thereby providing PD researchers and other researchers with a platform for positioning their own research in relation to the PD ﬁ eld . As such , our discussion highlights three areas for advancing research into participation . First , we address the need for greater clarity in positioning PD research , with regard to the de ﬁ nitions and speci ﬁ c aims of participation . Second , we suggest a more careful examination of the relationships among the ﬁ ve fundamental aspects of PD outlined in the introduction . Finally , we call for more careful longitudinal studies of participatory design processes , in order to illuminate the interplay among different activities and phases of a design process . Acknowledgments We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers as well as John Vines and Peter Wright ( editors of the special issue ) for insightful comments and excellent constructive criticism , which helped shape the core contributions of this paper . We would also like to thank Liam Bannon for feedback on an early version of the paper . This research has been funded by Aarhus University ’ s interdisciplinary research centre for Participatory Information Technology , PIT . References About SQLite : 〈 http : / / www . sqlite . org / about . html 〉 Accessed : 2013 . Beck , E . E . , 2002 . P for political : participation is not enough . Scand . J . Inf . Syst . 14 . Bergvall - Kåreborn , B . , Ståhlbrost , A . , 2008 . Participatory design : one step back or two steps forward ? In : Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design , 102 – 111 . Bjerknes , G . , Bratteteig , T . , 1987 . Florence in Wonderland : systems development with nurses . In : Ehn , P . , Kyng , M . ( Eds . ) , Computers and Democracy . Avebury , Farnham , pp . 279 – 296 . Bjerknes , G . , Ehn , P . , Kyng , M . , 1987 . Computers and Democracy — A Scandinavian Challenge . Avebury , Farnham . Björgvinsson , E . , Hillgren , P . A . , 2004 . On the spotexperiments within healthcare . In : Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Participatory Design : Artful Integra - tion : Interweaving Media , Materials and Practices 1 , 93 – 101 . Bossen , C . , 2006 . Participation , power , critique : constructing a standard for electronic patient records . In : Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on Partici - patory Design : Expanding Boundaries in Design 1 , 95 – 104 . Bossen , C . , Dindler , C . , Iversen , O . S . , 2010 . User gains and PD aims : assessment from a participatory design project . In : Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference , 141 – 150 . Braa , J . , Titlestad , O . H . , Sæbø , J . , 2004 . Participatory health information systems developmentinCuba : the challenge ofaddressingmultiple levels ina centralized setting . In : Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Participatory Design : Artful Integration : Interweaving Media , Materials and Practices 1 , 53 – 64 . Bratteteig , T . , Wagner , I . , 2012 . Disentangling power and decision - making in participatory design . In : Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Con - ference : Research Papers 1 , 41 – 50 . Briefs , U . , Ciborra , C . U . , Schneider , L . , 1983 . In : Systems Design For , With , and by the Users : Proceedings of the I ﬁ p Wg 9 . 1 Working Conference on Systems Design For , With , and by the Users , Riva Del Sole , Italy , 20 – 24 September 1982 . North Holland . Buur , J . , Binder , T . , Brandt , E . , 2000 . Taking video beyond hard data in user centred design . In : Participatory Design Conference , 21 – 29 . Bødker , S . , Ehn , P . , Kammersgaard , J . , Kyng , M . , Sundblad , Y . , 1987 . A UTOPIAN experience : on design of powerful computer - based tools for skilled graphic workers . Comput . Democracy — Scand . Challenge , 251 – 278 . Bødker , S . , Christiansen , E . , Nyvang , T . , Zander , P . - O . , 2012 . Personas , people and participation : challenges from the trenches of local government . In : Proceed - ings of the 12th Participatory Design Conference : Research Papers 1 , 91 – 100 . Büscher , M . , Shapiro , D . , Hartswood , M . , Procter , R . , Slack , R . , Voß , A . , Mogensen , P . , 2002 . Promises , premises and risks : sharing responsibilities , working up trust and sustaining commitment in participatory design projects . In : Proceedings of the Seventh Biennial Participatory Design Conference , 183 – 192 . Campbell , N . , 2004 . Making sense of imbrication : popular technology and inside - out methodologies . In : Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Participatory Design : Artful Integration : Interweaving Media , Materials and Practices 1 , 65 – 73 . Cederman - Haysom , T . , Brereton , M . , 2006 . A participatory design agenda for ubiquitous computing and multimodal interaction : a case study of dental practice . In : Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on Participatory Design : Expanding Boundaries in Design 1 , 11 – 20 . Clement , A . , van den Besselaar , P . A . A . , 1993 . A retrospective look at PD projects . Commun . ACM 36 , 29 – 37 . Clement , A . , Costantino , T . , Kurtz , D . , Tissenbaum , M . , 2008 . Participatory design and web 2 . 0 : the case of PIPWatch , the collaborative privacy toolbar . In : Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 , 51 – 60 . Dalsgaard , P . , 2010 . Challenges of participation in large - scale public projects . In : Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference , 21 – 30 . Dalsgaard , P . , Halskov , K . 2012 . Re ﬂ ective design documentation . In : Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference , 428 – 437 . Dearden , A . , Rizvi , H . , 2008 . Participatory IT design and participatory development : a comparative review . In : Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 , 81 – 91 . Dearden , A . , Lauener , A . , Slack , F . , Roast , C . , Cassidy , S . , 2006 . Make it so ! Jean - Luc Picard , Bart Simpson and the design of e - public services . In : Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on Participatory Design : Expanding Boundaries in Design 1 , 67 – 76 . Dearden , A . M . , Finlay , J . , Allgar , E . , McManus , B . , 2002 . Using pattern languages in participatory design . In : Proceedings of the Seventh Biennial Participatory Design Conference , 104 – 113 . Ehn , P . , 1988 . Work - oriented Design of Computer Artifacts . Arbetslivcentrum , Stockholm , and Lawrence Erlbaum . Ehn , P . , 2008 . Participation in design things . In : Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design , 92 – 101 . Ehn , P . , Badham , R . , 2002 . Participatory design and the collective designer . In : Proceedings of the Seventh Biennial Participatory Design Conference , 1 – 10 . Ehn , P . , Kyng , M . , 1991 . Cardboard Computers : Mocking - it - up or Hands - on the Future . Design at Work : Cooperative Design of Computer Systems , 169 – 195 . Elovaara , P . , Igira , F . T . , Mörtberg , C . , 2006 . Whose participation ? Whose knowl - edge ? : Exploring PD in Tanzania - Zanzibar and Sweden . In : Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on Participatory Design : Expanding Boundaries in Design 1 ( 2006 ) , 105 – 114 . Fischer , G . , 2004 . Social creativity : turning barriers into opportunities for collabora - tive design . In : Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Participatory Design : Artful Integration : Interweaving Media , Materials and Practices 1 , 152 – 161 . Flick , U . , 2009 . An Introduction to Qualitative Research . Sage , Thousand Oaks . Greenbaum , J . , Kyng , M . , 1991a . Design at Work : Cooperative Design of Computer Systems . L . Erlbaum Associates Inc . Greenbaum J . Kyng M . " Introduction : situated design " in Design at Work : Cooperative Design of Computer Systems 1991b L . Erlbaum Associates Inc , 1 – 24 . Greenbaum , J . , Madsen , K . H . , 1993 . PD a personal statement . Commun . ACM 36 ( 6 ) , 47 ( Jun . 1993 ) . Guest , G . , MacQueen , K . M . , Namey , E . E . , 2011 . Applied Thematic Analysis . Sage , Thousand Oaks . Hansen , T . R . , 2006 . Strings of experiments : looking at the design process as a set of socio - technical experiments . In : Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on Participatory Design : Expanding Boundaries in Design 1 , 1 – 10 . Hemmings , T . , Crabtree , A . , Rodden , T . , Clarke , K . , Rounce ﬁ eld , M . , 2002 . Probing the probes . In : Proceedings of the Seventh Biennial Participatory Design Confer - ence , 42 – 50 . Hepsø , V . , Botnevik , R . , 2002 . Improved crane operations and competence devel - opment in a community of practice . In : Proceedings of the Seventh Biennial Participatory Design Conference , 63 – 73 . Herrmann , T . , Kunau , G . , Loser , K . U . , Menold , N . , 2004 . Socio - technical walk - through : designing technology along work processes . In : Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Participatory Design : Artful Integration : Interweaving Media , Materials and Practices 1 , 132 – 141 . K . Halskov , N . B . Hansen / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 74 ( 2015 ) 81 – 92 91 Hertzum , M . , Simonsen , J . , 2010 . Effects - driven IT development : an instrument for supporting sustained participatory design . In : Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference , 61 – 70 . Hornecker , E . , Halloran , J . , Fitzpatrick , G . , Weal , M . , Millard , D . , Michaelides , D . , Cruickshank , D . , De Roure , D . , 2006 . UbiComp in opportunity spaces : challenges for participatory design . In : Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on Participa - tory Design : Expanding Boundaries in Design 1 , 47 – 56 . Isomursu , M . , Kuutti , K . , Väinämö , S . , 2004 . Experience clip : method for user participa - tion and evaluation of mobile concepts . In : Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on ParticipatoryDesign : ArtfulIntegration : InterweavingMedia , MaterialsandPractices 1 , 83 – 92 . Iversen , O . S . , Dindler , C . , 2008 . Pursuing aesthetic inquiry in participatory design . In : Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 , 138 – 145 . Iversen , O . S . , Halskov , K . , Leong , T . W . , 2010 . Rekindling values inparticipatory design . In : Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference , 91 – 100 . Johannessen , L . K . , Ellingsen , G . , 2008 . Lightweight methods in heavyweight organi - zations . In : Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 , 11 – 20 . Johnson , M . , Hyysalo , S . , 2012 . Lessons for participatory designers of social media : long - term user involvement strategies in industry . In : Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Conference : Research Papers 1 , 71 – 80 . Kanstrup , A . M . , 2012 . A small matter of design : an analysis of end users as designers . In : Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Conference : Research Papers 1 , 109 – 118 . Kanstrup , A . M . , Bertelsen , P . , 2006 . Participatory IT - support . In : Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on Participatory Design : Expanding Boundaries in Design 1 , 87 – 94 . Kelly , J . , Matthews , B . , 2010 . Taking transition into account : designing with pre - users of medical devices . In : Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference , 71 – 80 . Kolko , B . , Hope , A . , Sattler , B . , MacCorkle , K . , Sirjani , B . , 2012 . Hackademia : building functional rather than accredited engineers . In : Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Conference : Research Papers 1 , 129 – 138 . Light , A . , Akama , Y . , 2012 . The human touch : participatory practice and the role of facilitation in designing with communities . In : Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Conference : Research Papers 1 , 61 – 70 . Mainsah , H . , Morrison , A . , 2012 . Social media , design and civic engagement by youth : a cultural view . In : Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Conference : Research Papers 1 , 1 – 9 . Muller , M . , Druin , A . , 2012 . Participatory design : the third space in human – computer interaction . In : Jacko , J . ( Ed . ) , Human - Computer Interaction Handbook : Funda - mentals , Evolving Technologies , and Emerging Applications , Third Edition ( Human Factors and Ergonomics . CRC Press , Boca Raton , FL , pp . 1125 – 1154 . Namioka , A . , Schuler , D . , 1990 . Participatory Design Conference Proceeding . CPSR , Seattle , Washington ( 1990 ) . Participatory Design Proceedings — Welcome Page : 〈 http : / / pdcproceedings . org / 〉 Accessed : 2013 . Pekkola , S . , Kaarilahti , N . , Pohjola , P . , 2006 . Towards formalised end - user participa - tion in information systems development process : bridging the gap between participatory design and ISD methodologies . In : Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on Participatory Design : Expanding Boundaries in Design 1 , 21 – 30 . Rittenbruch , M . , McEwan , G . , Ward , N . , Mans ﬁ eld , T . , Bartenstein , D . , 2002 . Extreme participation — moving extreme programming towards participatory design . In : Proceedings of the Seventh Biennial Participatory Design Conference , 29 – 41 . Robertson , T . , Mans ﬁ eld , T . , Loke , L . , 2006 . Designing an immersive environment for public use . In : Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on Participatory Design : Expanding Boundaries in Design 1 , 31 – 40 . Rogers , Y . , 2012 . HCI theory : classical , modern , and contemporary . Synth . Lect . Hum . Centered Inf . 5 , 1 – 129 . Sandberg , 1979 . Computers Dividing man and Work : Recent Scandinavian Research on Planning and Computers from a Trade Union Perspective . Arbetslivcentrum , Stockholm . Sarkkinen , J . , 2004 . Examining a planning discourse : how a manager represents issues within a planning frame and how the others could do the same . In : Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Participatory Design : Artful Integra - tion : Interweaving Media , Materials and Practices 1 , 74 – 82 . Schuler , D . , 2002 . A pattern language for living communication . In : Proceedings of the Seventh Biennial Participatory Design Conference . Schuler , D . , Namioka , A . , 1993 . Participatory design : Principles and practices . Routledge , London . Sefyrin , J . , 2010 . Entanglements of participation , gender , power and knowledge in IT design . In : Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference , 111 – 120 . Sente Academic Reference Manager for Mac OS , 2014 . 〈 http : / / www . thirdstreetsoft ware . com 〉 . Simonsen , J . , Hertzum , M . , 2008 . Participative design and the challenges of large - scale systems : Extending the iterative PD approach . In : Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 , 1 – 10 . Simonsen , J . , Robertson , T . , 2012 . Routledge Handbook of Participatory Design . Routledge , London . Taxén , G . , 2004 . Introducing participatory design in museums . In : Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Participatory Design : Artful Integration : Interweaving Media , Materials and Practices 1 , 204 – 213 . Vines , J . , Clarke , R . , Leong , T . , McCarthy , J . , Iversen , O . S . , Wright , P . , Olivier , P . , 2012 . Invited SIG — participation and HCI : why involve people in design ? In : Proceed - ings of the 2012 ACM Annual Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts , 1217 – 1220 . Vines , J . , Clarke , R . , Wright , P . , McCarthy , J . , Olivier , P . , 2013 . Con ﬁ guring participa - tion : on how we involve people in design . In : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 429 – 438 . Winschiers - Theophilus , H . , Chivuno - Kuria , S . , Kapuire , G . K . , Bidwell , N . J . , Blake , E . , 2010 . Being participated : a community approach . In : Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference , 1 – 10 . K . Halskov , N . B . Hansen / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 74 ( 2015 ) 81 – 92 92