Analogical Processing : A Simulation ad Empirical Corroboration’ Janice Skorstad Brian Falkenhainer Qualitative Reasoning Group Qualitative Reasoning Group Department of Computer Science Department of Computer Science Dedre Gentner Department of Psychology University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign 1304 W . Springfield Avenue , Urbana , Illinois 61801 Abstract This paper compares the performance of the Structure - Mapping En - gzne ( SME ) , a cognitive simulation of analogy , with two aspects of hu - man performance . Gentner’s Structure - Mappzng theory predicts that soundness is highest for relational matches , while accessibility is high - est for surface matches . These predictions have been borne out in psy - chological studies , and here we demonstrate that SME replicates these results . In particular , we ran SME on the same stories used in the psy - chological studies with two different kinds of match rules . In analogy mode , SME closely captures the human soundness ordering . In mere - appearance mode , SME captures the accessibility ordering . We briefly review the psychological studies , describe our computational experi - ments , and discuss the utility of SME as a cognitive modeling tool . 1 Introd . uction Analogy is a complex process . Given a current context , it con - sists of being reminded of a “similar” experience or concept , es - tablishing the proper correspondences between this knowledge and the current situation , judging the match for soundness and appropriateness , and then using these correspondences . As with any complex process , it is essential to form the right decomposi - tion and strive to understand the subtleties of each component of the process . This work examines the variables that determine the acces - sibility of a similarity match and its inferential power or sound - ness . To test our hypotheses , we start with a theoretical model , Gentner’s Structure - Mappping theory of analogy , and use a com - putational simulation to show how the predictions of the model compare with independent , empirical data . By embedding a the - ory in a computational model which is used for prediction , we can see whether the predictions follow logically from the imple - mented form of the theory ( see Anderson , 1983 ; Van Lehn , 1983 ) . This constrains the interpretation of observations . Cognitive simulation studies can offer important insights for understanding the human mind . They serve to verify psycholog - ical theories and force one to pin down aspects which might oth - erwise be left unspecified . They also offer unique opportunities to construct idealized subjects , whose prior knowledge and set of available processes is completely known to the experimenter . Unfortunately , cognitive simulation programs tend to be special - purpose and / or computationally expensive . In this paper we discuss our use’of the Structure - Mapping Engine ( SME ) as an aid in research on a general theory of analogy . SME is a computer sim - ulation of analogical processing based upon Gentner’s Structure - Mapping theory . It avoids the difficulties typically found in cog - ‘This research was supported by the Office of Naval Research , Contract No . NOOOI . 4 ~ 85 - K - 0559 . The first two authors were supported in this work by Univ . of Illinois Cognitive Science / Artificial Intelligence Fellowships . nitive simulation programs by being both flexible and efficient . SME provides a “tool - kit” for constructing matchers consistent with Gentner’s theory . This enables us to generate and explore a space of plausible algorithms for analogical processing and com - pare these against subjects’ performance . In this paper , we aim to show the utility of SME’s tool - kit approach , its viability as a cognitive model , and demonstrate the validity of its theoretical foundation , the structure - mapping theory . 2 The Structure - Mapping Theory The theoretical framework for our studies is Gentner’s Structure - Mapping theory of analogy ( Gentner , 1980 , 1983 , 1987 ) ) which outlines the implicit rules by which people interpret and reason with analogy and similarity . The underlying hypothesis of the Structure - Mapping theory is that an analogy is a device for im - porting the relational structure of one domain ( the base , source of knowledge ) to another , less familiar domain ( the target ) . It pro - vides rules for analogical mapping and demonstrates how map - ping may be used to make inferences about the new domain . These rules state that information is mapped from the base to the target in the following manner : 1 . Discard object descriptions not involved in higher - order re - lations . 2 . Attempt to preserve relations between objects . 3 . Use systematicity to determine which higher - order relations are mapped . This rule is important for deciding what in - ferences to make and how be believed . strongly these inferences should The systematicity principle is central to analogy . It maintains that analogy conveys a system of connected knowledge , rather than a mere assortment of independent facts . The systematicity principle is a structural expression of our tacit preference for coherence and deductive power in analogy ( Gentner , 1987 ) . An important feature of Gentner’s theory is that it is struc - tural . The rules depend only on the structural properties of the knowledge representation and are independent of specific domain content . In addition to articulating the rules for analogical mapping , the structure - mapping theory functions as a core theory for a broader treatment of the processes of analogy and similarity . Identification of these processes , as defined by Gentner ( 1987 ) , enable us to decompose analogical processing into three distinct , yet interdependent , stages . First , a suitable base domain must be accessed from memory . Once base and target representa - tions appear in working memory , the mapping stage establishes 322 Cognitive Modeling From : AAAI - 87 Proceedings . Copyright ©1987 , AAAI ( www . aaai . org ) . All rights reserved . Table 1 : Similarity Classes ( Gentner , 1987 ) . 1 # shared 1 # shared I Type attributes 1 relations EXAMPLE I J Literal Similarity Many Many 1 Milk is like water . Analogy ’ Abstraction Few I Many Heat is like water . ! Few Many Heat flow is a through - ’ variable . Anomaly Few Few Coffee is like the solar system . Mere Appearance Many Few The glass tabletop was blue as water the proper analogical correspondences between the two domains . Finally , the mapping is examined to determine soundness , and when appropriate , applicability and consistency with the task at hand . This work examines the variables that affect the accessi - bility of a similarity match and it inferential power or soundness . 2 . 1 Similarity Types Gentner’s theory is unique in that it breaks down the often vague terms of “analogy” and “similarity” into a continuum of similarity categories . These categories are characterized accord - ing to the distribution of relational and attributional predicates that are mapped during the analogical process ( see Table 1 ) . Analogy and literal similarity lie on a continuum of degree - of - attribute - overlap . Likewise , there is a continuum between analo - gies and abstractions . Both involve overlap in relational struc - ture , but vary in the degree of concreteness of the base domain . We use these classifications below to analyze the factors influ - encing accessibility and soundness . 3 The Structure - Mapping Engine matches . In our experiments using SME , we currently use three types of rule sets , depending on the phenomenon being inves - tigated . One set of rules focuses on object descriptions and is called the “mere - appearance” rules . In contrast , the “true anal - ogy” rule set prefers relations , while the “literal similarity” rules match both relations and object descriptions . In this study , we used the mere - appearance ( MA ) and true analogy ( TA ) rules . The mere - appearance rules serve to measure the degree of superficial , descriptive similarity between the two domains . The match constructor rules for the MA set only allow matches between lower - order predicates - object attributes and first - order relations - not between higher - order relations . The evidence rules for the MA set give a weight of 0 . 5 for each match between descriptive attributes and a weight of 0 . 4 for matches between first - order relations . The true analogy rules measure the degree of relational overlap between two domains . The TA match constructor rules allow matches between relational pred - icates having the same name and discriminate against attribu - tional matches , only allowing them if the attributes play a role in some higher - order relation . The evidence rules provide evidence for a match if the predicates matched have the same name , if they are of similar order , ’ and if their arguments may potentially match . 3 all in the 0 . 2 to 0 . 5 range . One important evidence rule is the systematicity rule , which causes the weight of a match between two items to increase in proportion to the amount of higher - order structure matching above them . Proper understanding of the evaluation scores is important for correct interpretation of these studies . The scores are unnor - malized . A score of 20 may be high for one analogy , while low for a different analogy . The evidence weights provide an ordering between alternate interpretations within a single mapping task . They only measure the relative merits of different targets and the merits of different interpretations for a single target . One of our current research goals is the construction of a structural eval - uator that would produce scores corresponding to a single , fixed scale . With the evaluator , SME would then be able to rate two completely different similarity matches as being equally good , re - gardless of how different their domain descriptions were in size . To date , over 40 analogies have been run on SME . These ex - amples serve to provide evidence for the Structure - Mapping ap - preach to the theory of analogical processing . SME rapidly pro - duces intuitively plausible results . For details , see ( Falkenhainer , et . al , 1986 ) . 4 Comparing Simulation with Human Performance The Structure - Mapping Engine ( SME ) ( Falkenhainer , Forbus , & Gentner , 1986 ) is a computational tool for studying analogi - cal processing which simulates the structure - mapping process . Given representations of a base and target , SME constructs all consistent interpretations of the given analogy , providing a nu - merical evaluation score for each . SME has significant advantages over programs based on traditional matching algorithms . Like the Structure - Mapping theory , SME is domain independent . Be - cause it produces all consistent interpretations of an analogy , one can easily see structurally consistent alternatives to the best match . At the same time , SME’s algorithm is very efficient - it does not backtrack . Most importantly , SME provides a flexible “tool - kit” for constructing matchers consistent with the differ - ent kinds of comparisons sanctioned by Gentner’s theory . This enables us to quickly test , refine , and compare a large space of different conjectures about analogical processing . The psychological results we are modeling concern the natural processes of spontaneous reasoning by analogy and similarity : that is , the process whereby a person who is thinking about some current situation is reminded of some prior similar situa - tion which he may decide to use in reasoning about the current situation . In this research we asked ( I ) what governs sponta - neous access to analogy and similarity , and ( 2 ) once an analogy has been processed , how do we judge its inferential soundness ( ie . , whether it is rigorous enough to have predictive utility ) ? The construction of interpretations is guided by match rules that specify which facts and entities might match and estimate the believability of each possible component of a match . To build a new matcher one simply loads a new set of match rules . These rules are the key to SME’s flexibility . Match constructor rules guide what individual predicates and entities are allowed to map between the two domains . As with the match construc - tor rules , match evaluation is programmable : the quality of each match is found by running match evidence rules and combining their results . Using one set of rules , SME may be configured to perform analogical matches . Using other rule sets , SME can be made to perform mere - appearance matches or literal similarity To analyze the factors affecting accessibility and soundness in ‘We define the order of an item in a representation as follows : Objects and constants are order 0 . The order of a predicate is one plus the maximum of the IJrder * of its arguments . 3The arqurnents of two predicates m ry potentially match if corresponding arguments Are syntactically compatible ( e . g . , both are entities ) . Skorstad , Falkenhainer , and Centner 323 Proportion of base sto - ( 4 Es7 Rating Of ‘Ound - ( b ) ries recalled given differ - . ent kinds of matches . Figure 1 : Results of the Rattermann and Gentner Study . analogical processing , we start with recent empirical findings and discuss how these fit within the structure - mapping framework . We then use the implementation to simulate the same process in the hope that a rigorous simulation of the theory correctly parallels the empirical results . 4 . 1 Empirical Findings Recent studies by Gentner & Landers ( 1985 ) and Rattermann & Gentner ( 1987 ) ask what governs spontaneous access to anal - bgy and similarity and what governs the subjective soundness of analogy and similarity . According to Structure - Mapping the - ory , systematicity should play a key role in the determination of soundness ; no predictions are made for accessibility . The method was designed to resemble a natural memory situation . Subjects were given 32 short stories to read and remember . Of these 32 , 18 were key stories ; the remaining 14 were fillers , designed to add more difficulty to the task . After a week , the subjects re - turned and performed two tasks : ( 1 ) a reminding task , and ( 2 ) a soundness rating task . The reminding task consisted of reading a new set of 18 stories which matched the original 18 in various ways : mere - appearance matches , which match in object descriptions and first - order relations , true analogies , which match in first - order and higher - order relations , and false analogies or anomalies , which matched only in first - order relations . Each subject received only one matching target story for each of the 18 original key stories . Subjects were told that if the new story reminded them of any of the original stories , they should write out that original story in as much detail as possible . After completing the reminding task , subjects went on to the soundness task . Subjects were given pairs of stories and asked to judge each of the story pairs for the inferential soundness of the match . The explanation for soundness was given as : “ . . . when two situations match well enough to make a strong argument” ( Gentner , 1987 ) . They were told to rate each pair on a scale of 1 to 5 , with 5 being “sound” and 1 being ( ‘spurious” . The results of the study are presented in Figure 1 . As pre - dicted by structure - mapping theory , a strong preference for true analogies was found in the soundness - rating task . These results suggest that relational structure is important in determining the subjective “goodness” of an analogy . However , as evidenced by the higher score for TA’s than FA’s , it is not just shared re - lati . ons but shared higher - order relations that are important in determining inferential power . The study provided surprising results for access . Although subjects rated true analogies as being most sound , they tended to not retrieve true analogies during the reminding task Instead they were most likely to access superficial , mere - appearance matcl Base Story Karla , an old Hawk , lived at the top of a tall oak tree . One afternoon , she saw a hunter on the ground with a bow and some crude arrows that had no feathers . The hunter took aim and shot at the hawk but missed . Karla knew that hunter wanted her feathers so she glided down to the hunter and offered to give him a few . The hunter was so grateful that he pledged never to shoot at a hawk again . He went off and shot deer instead . Target Story - True Analogy Once there was a small country called Zerdia that learned to make the world’s smartest computer . One day Zerdia was attacked by its warlike neighbor , Gagrach . But the missiles were badly aimed and the attack failed . The Zerdian government realized that Gagrach wanted Zerdian computers so it offered to sell some of its computers to the country . The government of Gagrach was very pleased . It promised never to attack Zerdia again . Target Story - Mere - Appearance Once there was an eagle named Zerdia who donated a few of her tail - feathers to a sportsman so he would promise never to attack eagles . One day Zerdia was nesting high on a rocky cliff when she saw the sportsman coming with a crossbow . Zerdia flew down to meet the man , but he attacked and felled her with a single bolt . As she fluttered to the ground Zerdia realized that the bolt had her own tailfeathers on it . Figure 2 : Story Set Number 5 . These results suggest that superficial similarities , including ob - ject descriptions , play an important role in access . However , higher - order relational similarities do promote some access , as indicated by the fact that true analogies were retrieved more often that false analogies . Our conclusion is that access and inference are governed by a very different set of rules . 4 . 2 Computational Simulation Human performance in the Rattermann & Gentner study was compared to SME’s performance on similar tasks . For five of the story sets that were used in their study , the base stories . true analogy targets and mere - appearance targets , ” were encoded and presented to SME ( a total of 15 stories , making 10 matches ) . The encoder had no knowledge of the results of human perfornlance when writing the representations . Different rule sets were used . corresponding to the similarity types of mere - appearance and true analogy . One of these stories will be discussed in detail . showing how SME was used to simulate a test subject . Story set number 5 , shown in Figure 2 , revolves around a story about a hawk named Karla . Two similar , target stories were used as potential analogies for the Karla narration . One was designed to be truly analogous and describes a small coun - try named Zerdia ( TA5 ) . The other was designed to be only superficially similar and describes an eagle named Zerdia ( MA5 ) . To test the relative accessibility of the base story for the two target stories , we ran SME using the mere - appearance match rules . This measured their degree of superficial overlap and thus , according to our prediction , the relative likelihood of their ac - cessibility . The output of SME for the MA task is given in Fig - ure 3 , which shows that the eagle story ( evaluation = i 7 ) has a higher mere - appearance match rating than the country story ( evaluation = 6 . 4 ) . Thus . If the surface - accessibility hypothesis is correct , the MA target - Zerdia the eagle” should have demon - strated a higher accessibility rating for the human subjects than ‘The false nnnlngies were nl . r 331 ~ ! ‘11 Lted . sine ? they provided little tnsl < ilt beyond that given by the TA lnd MA result9 324 Cognitive Modeling Analogical Match from Karla to Zerdia the country ( TA5 ) . Analogical Match from Karfa to Zerdia the country ( TA5 ) . Rule File . appearance - match . rules Sumber of Match Hypotheses 12 Yumber of GMaps . 1 Gmap # l . ( HAPPINESS - HUNTER HAPPnms - GAGMcH ) ( ATTACK - HUNTER ATTACK - GAGRACH ) ( WARLIKE - HUNTER wARLIKE - kmAcH ) ( DESIRE - FEATHERS DESIRE - SUPERCOMPUTER ) ( HAS - FEATHERS USE - SuPERcaWPuTER ) ( OFFER - FEATHERS oFFER - ~ ~ PER ~ ~ ~ JTER ) ( TAKE - FEATHERS BW - SUPERCOMPUTER ) ( WEAPON - BOW WEAPON - BOW ) Emaps ( KARLAl ZERDIA12 ) ( FEATHERS3 SUPERCOPIPUTERlJ ) ( CROSS - BOW4 MISSILESlS ) ( HUNTER2 GAGRACH13 ) Weight . 6 . 411672 Analogical Match from Karla to Zerdin the eagle ( MA5 ) . Rule File . appearance - match rules Number of Match Hypotheses : 14 Number of GMaps : 1 Gmap # l . ( OFFER - FEATHERS OFFER - FEATHERS ) ( BIRD - KARLA BIRD - ZERDIA ) ( ATTACK - HUNTER ATTACK - sP0RTs1 ~ tiN ) ( SEE - KARLA SEE - zERDIA ) ( HAS - FEATHERS HAS - FEATHERS ) ( TAKE - FEATHERS TAKE - FEATHERS ) ( DESIRE - FEATHERS DESIRE - FEATHERS ) ( WEAPOIJ - BOW WEAPON - BOV / ) WARLIKE - HUNTER WARLIKE - s ~ oRTshuN ) ( PERSON - HUNTER PERSON - SPORT ~ AN ) Emaps ( FEATHERS3 FEATHERSS ) ( CROSS - BOW4 CROSS - BOWlO ) ( HUNTER2 SPORTSElAN8 ) ( KARLAl ZERDIA ' Z ) Sleight 7 . 703668 Figure 3 : SME’s Analysis of Story Set 5 , Using the MA Rules . the TA target “Zerdia the country” . To obtain soundness ratings for story set 5 , we again ran SME on the above stories , this time using the true - analogy ( TA ) match rules . The output of SME for the TA task is given in Fig - ure 4 . Notice that “Zerdia the country” ( evaluation = 22 . 4 ) was found to be a better analogical match to the original Karla story than “Zerdia the eagle” ( evaluation = 16 . 8 ) . Thus , according to Gentner’s systematicity principle , it should be judged more sound by human subjects . 4 . 3 Observation versus Prediction Tables 2 and 3 show the empirical as well as computational re - sults for the five stories used in our simulation . Table 2 provides soundness ratings along with SME’s evaluation scores when TA match rules were used . The f’s in the columns labeled “TA > MA ? ” indicate a higher evaluation score for the true analogy than for the mere - appearance match , by our subjects ( column 4 ) or by SME ( column 7 ) . Here , as in Table 3 , the results from SME should be read only to establish the direction of the difference : whether TA or MA receives a higher evaluation score within the same story set . j For example , we cannot say that story 9 is rated as being a more sound analogy than story 18 simply because SME gives story 9 a higher score . Comparing columns 4 and 7 , we see that , using analogy rules , SME was able to qualitatively match - - - 5Recnll that the evidence score used here cnn anly be used to compare m . ltchea that have the same base & * main Therefure it is rne : LningfuI to . cr . mplre scores acrops the rows , but not down the columns . Rule File : true - analogy rules Number of Match Hypotheses . 6J # umber of GMaps . 1 Gmap # l : ( CAUSE - PROMISE CAUSE - PROMISE ) ( SUCCESS - ATTACK SUCCESS - ATTACK ) ( HAPPINESS - HUNTER HAPPINESS - GAGRACH ) ( HAPPY - HUNTER HAPPY - GAGRACH ) ( REALIZE - DESIRE REALIZE - DESIRE ) ( DESIRE - FEATHERS DESIRE - SUPERCOI ~ TER ) ( CAUSE - TAKE CAUSE - BW ) ( OFFER - FEATHERS OFFER - ~ ~ PER ~ ~ EIP ~ TER ) ( NOT - ATTACK NOT - ATTACK ) ( FAILED - ATTACK FAILED - ATTACK ) ( ATTACK - HUNTER ATTACK - GAGRACH ) ( TAKE - FEATHERS BW - SUPERCO ~ ~ IPUTER ) ( PROMISE - HUNTER PROMISE ) ( CAUSE - OFFER CAUSE - OFFER ) ( FOLLOW - REALIZE F ~ LL ~ W - RF . ALIZE ) ( NOT - HAS - FEATHERS NOT - USE - sUPERC ~ MPUTER ) ( CAUSE - HAPPY CAUSE - HAPPY ) ( HAS - FEATHERS USE - SUPERCOMPUTER ) ( CAUSE - FAILED - ATTACK CAUSE - FAILED - ATTACK ) Emaps . ( HIGH23 HIGH17 ) ( FEATHERS20 SUPERCOIIlPUTERld ) ( CROSS - BOW21 I ~ IISSILESlS ) ( HUNTER19 GAGRACH13 ) ( KARLA ZERDIA12 ) ( FAILED22 FAILED16 ) Vlelght 22 362718 Analogical Match from Karla to Zerdia the eagle ( MA5 ) . Rule File true - analogy rules Number of Match Hypotheses 47 Number of GMaps 1 Gmap # l . ( PROMISE - HUNTER PROMISE ) ( DESIRE - FEATHERS DESIRE - FEATHERS ) ( TAKE - FEATHERS TAKE - FEATHERS ) ( CAUSE - OFFER CAUSE - OFFER ) ( OFFER - FEATHERS OFFER - FEATHERS ) ( HAS - FEATHERS HAS - FEATHERS ) ( REALIZE - DESIRE REALIZE - DESIRE ) ( SUCCESS - ATTACK SUCCESS - ATTACK ) ( GOT - ATTACK : IoT - ATTACK ) ( FoLLOV / - SEE - ATTACK FOLLOW - SEE ) ( SEE - KARLA SEE - ZERDIA ) ( FAILED - ATTACK SUCCESSFUL - ATTACK ) ( CAUSE - TAKE CAUSE - TAKE ) ( ATTACK - HUNTER ATTACK - SPORTSEIAN ) Emaps ( FAILED22 TRUEll ) ( KARLAl ZERDIA7 ) ( HUNTER19 SPORTSMAN8 ) ( FEATHERS20 FEXTHERSS ) ( CROSS - BOW21 CROSS - BO ' ! / lO ) Weight 16 816630 Figure 4 : SME’s Analysis of Story Set 5 , Using the ‘I’ . \ Rules human soundness preferences quite well . Table 3 shows the results from the human subjects’ recall task , along with SME’s evaluation scores using MA match rules . Again , SME was able to duplicate human performance as indi - cated by the f’s in the “MA > TA ? ” columns . Note that in Table 2 SME gives its highest evaluation to the true analogy in every case but one : in story 21 the MA match wins over the TA match . SME’s performance on story 21 under true analogy rules concerned us , since we had expected the TA match to win over the MA match in every case . However , when we looked more closely at the human data , we discovered that the human subjects also broke their usual pattern : when rating this story set they failed to show their usual preference for anal - ogy over mere appearance in soundness . As Table 2 shows , the difference between TA and MA is significant for the other four story sets . but nonsignificant for story set 21 . Examination of the stories revealed that we had erred in constructing this set : the “true analogy” target required a many - to - one object mapping with the base . Both our human subjects and our simulation had reacted to this inconsistency by giving the TA match a much lower than average score . Skorstad , Falkenhainer , and Gentner 325 Table 2 : SME Run as a True Analogy Matcher . A “t” indicates the difference is significant and “ ? ” indicates the difference is non - significant , as determined by a t - test . Recall that the differences between SME’s evaluation scores are only useful as < 0 or > O ; they cannot be compared across rows . STORY # 5 Karla , hawk 17 piom 21 Acme . IRS lllJMAN suBJEcrs’ SMBRUNASA’IRUE SOUND ~ S RATlNGS ANALOGY MATCHER TA MA Table 3 : SME Run as a Mere Appearance Matcher . STORY # I I HUMAN SuBlEcTs PRO ~ RTION OF BASE SMERUNASAMBRB AFTBAUNCEMATCHER S - WRY RECALLED I I I I 1 I 5 Karla , hawk 17 t - pionen 44 . 11 33 + A4 . 22 12 + 1 11 . 00 I 7 . 59 I + ( 3 . 41 ) 1 . 78 I . 11 I m I + 7 . 75 6 . 71 1 + ( 1 . 04 ) 5 Discussion The results of comparing SME with human performance are promis - ing . First , psychological evidence indicates that people use sys - tematicity and consistency to rate the soundness of a match . SME replicates this pattern in analogy mode . Second , access in people is governed by surface properties . As predicted , SME repli - cates human access patterns whet1 in mere - appearance mode . In fact , we have tried SME on over 40 different analogies ( including those cited here ) , and it rapidly produced humanly plausible re - sults on all of them . The results of SME qua “ideal subject” on these analogical tasks provides strong convergent evidence for the Structure - Mapping theory . SME is extremely representation - sensitive . We believe that this is psychologically plausible , in that human analogical pro - cessing is limited by their representations . Unfortunately , it raises the spectre of tailoring the representations to get desirable results . We have tried to reduce tailorability by several routes . First , we have tested SME with representations produced by AI reasoning programs which were not designed for analogical rea - soning ( Falkenhainer , et . al , 1986 ) . Second , when hand - coding is necessary ( as in these studies ) , we used several cross - checks . First , representation conventions were defined in advance . Sec - ond , we sometimes used several independent encoders and com - pared results . Third , we told the encoders nothing about the human results . The results of story set 21 suggests we were somewhat successful . At first it appeared that SME’s low evalua - tion of the TA match was a bug . Only later , when examining the human data , did we discover that the same pattern held there . Although several AI analogy programs exist ( e . g . , Winston , Carbonell , Kedar - Cabelli ) , few are intended as cognitive simu - lations ( exceptions include Burstein 1983 , Pirolli & Anderson , 1985 ) . To our knowledge , no simulation has been successfully compared as extensively with human performance as SME . More - over , we know of no other general - purpose matcher which suc - cessfully simulates two distinct kinds of human similarity . Our results suggest that the principles of Structure - Mapping can pro - vide a detailed account of human analogical processing . Using these principles , it appears that SME’s architecture provides con - siderable leverage for cognitive modeling . Acknowledgements The authors wish to thank Mary Jo Rattermann for providing the results of her psychological studies . Ken Forbus and Gordon Skorstad provided valuable help on prior drafts of this paper . References Anderson , J . , The Architecture of C’ognztion , Harvard University Press , Cambridge , Mass , 1983 . Burstein , M . H . , “Concept formation by incremental analogical reason - ing and debugging” , Proceedings of the 1983 International Ma - chine Learnzng Workshop , Monticello , IL , June 1983 . Carbonell , J . G . , “Learning by Analogy : Formulating and Generalizing Plans From Past Experience , ” in Machine Learnzng : An Artzfi - ma1 Intelligence Approach , R . S . Michalski , J . G . Carbonell . and T . M . Mitchell ( Eds . ) , Morgan Kaufman , 1983a . Falkenhainer , B . , K . D . Forbus , D . Gentner , ‘The Structure - Mapping En - gine , ” Proceedings AAAI , August : 1986 . Gentner , D . , “The Structure of Analogical Models in Science” , BBN Tech . Report No . 4451 , Cambridge , MA . , Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc . , 1980 . Gentner , D . , “Structure - Mapping : . 4 Theoretical Framework for Anal - ogy” , Cognztive Science 7 ( 2 ) , 1983 . Gentner , D . , “Analogical Inference and Analogical Access” to appear in A . Preiditis ( Ed . ) Analogica : Proceedzngs of the First Workshop on Analogical Reasoning , Pitman Publishing Co . , 1987 ( in press ) . Gentner , D . , & R . Landers , “Analogical Reminding : A Good Match is Hard to Find” . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Systems , Man and Cybernetacs . Tucson , Arizona , 1985 . Kedar - Cabelli , S . , “Purpose - directed analogy” , Proceedings of the Sev - enth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Sczence Socaety , 1985 . Pirolli , P . L . , . ‘ & Anderson , J . R . , “The role of learning from examples in the acquisition of recursive programming skills” , Canadian Journal of Psychology 39 , 240 - 272 , 1985 . Rattermann , M . J . & D . Gentner , ‘Analogical Reminding” , submitted to the Ninth Annual Conference of the Cognative Sczence So - ciety , July , 1987 . Van Lehn , K . , “Felicity Conditions for Human Skill Acquisition : Vali - dating an AI - based Theory” , Xerox Palo Alto Research Center Technical Report CIS - 21 , 1983 . Winston , P . H . , “Learning and reasoning by analogy” CACM 23 ( 12 ) , 1980 . Winston , P . H . , “Learning new principles from precedents and exer - cises” . Artzjiczal Intellzgence 19 , 321 - 350 . 1982 . 326 Cognitive Modeling