When Corrections Fail : The persistence of political misperceptions Brendan Nyhan Duke University brendan . nyhan @ duke . edu Jason Reifler Georgia State University poljar @ langate . gsu . edu February 2 , 2008 Abstract An extensive literature addresses citizen ignorance , but very little research focuses on misperceptions . Can these false or unsubstantiated beliefs about politics be corrected ? Previous studies have not tested the efficacy of corrections in a realistic format . We conducted four experiments in which subjects read mock news articles that included either a misleading claim from a politician , or a misleading claim and a correction . Results indicate that corrections frequently fail to reduce misperceptions among the targeted ideological group . We also document several instances of a “backfire” effect in which corrections actually increase misperceptions among the group in question . 1 “It ain’t what you don’t know that gets you into trouble . It’s what you know for sure that just ain’t so . ” - Mark Twain A substantial amount of scholarship in political science has sought to determine whether citizens can participate meaningfully in politics . Recent work has shown that most citizens appear to lack factual knowledge about political matters ( see , e . g . , Delli Carpini and Keeter 1996 ) and that this deficit affects the issue opinions that they express ( Althaus 1998 , Kuklinski et al 2000 , Gilens 2001 ) . Some scholars respond that citizens can successfully use heuristics , or information shortcuts , as a substitute for detailed factual information in some circumstances ( Popkin 1991 ; Sniderman , Brody and Tetlock 1991 , Lupia 1994 ; Lupia and McCubbins 1998 ) . 1 However , as Kuklinski et al point out ( 2000 : 792 ) , there is an important distinction between being un informed and being mis informed . Advocates of heuristics typically assume that voters know they are uninformed and respond accordingly . But many citizens may base their policy preferences on false , misleading , or unsubstantiated information that they believe to be true ( see , eg , Kuklinski et al 2000 : 798 ) . Frequently , such misinformation is related to one’s political preferences . For instance , after the U . S . invasion of Iraq , the belief that Iraq had weapons of mass destruction before the invasion was closely associated with support for President Bush ( Kull , Ramsay , and Lewis 2003 ) . From a normative perspective , it is especially important to determine whether misperceptions , which distort public opinion and political debate , can be corrected . Previous research in political science has found that it is possible to change issue opinions by directly providing relevant facts to subjects ( Kuklinski et al 2000 , Gilens 1 Kuklinski and Quirk ( 2000 ) and Lau and Redlawsk ( 2001 ) make a compelling argument that citizens are likely to fail to use heuristics correctly in even modestly complex situations . 2 2001 ) . However , such authoritative statements of fact ( such as those provided by survey interviewer to a subject ) are not reflective of how citizens typically receive and process information . Instead , people typically receive corrective information within “objective” news reports pitting two sides of an argument against each other , which is significantly more ambiguous than receiving a correct answer from an omniscient source . In such cases , citizens are likely to resist or reject arguments and evidence contradicting their opinions – a view that is consistent with a wide array of research ( e . g . Lord , Ross , and Lepper 1979 ; Edwards and Smith 1996 ; Redlawsk 2002 ; Taber and Lodge 2006 ) . In this paper , we report the results of two rounds of experiments investigating the extent to which corrective information embedded in realistic news reports succeeds in reducing prominent misperceptions about contemporary politics . In each of the four experiments , which were conducted in fall 2005 and spring 2006 , ideological subgroups failed to update their beliefs when presented with corrective information that runs counter to their predispositions . Indeed , in several cases , we find that corrections actually strengthened misperceptions among the most strongly committed subjects . D EFINING MISPERCEPTIONS To date , the study of citizens’ knowledge of politics has tended to focus on questions like veto override requirements for which answers are clearly true or false ( e . g . Delli Carpini and Keeter 1996 ) . As such , studies have typically contrasted voters who lack factual knowledge ( i . e . the “ignorant” ) with voters who possess it ( e . g . Gilens 2001 ) . But as Kuklinski et al ( 2000 ) note , some voters may unknowingly hold incorrect beliefs , 3 especially on contemporary policy issues on which politicians and other political elites may have an incentive to misrepresent factual information . In addition , the factual matters that are the subject of contemporary political debate are rarely as black and white as standard political knowledge questions . As Gaines et al write , “Very often such factual representations [ about public policy ] are not prior to or independent of the political process but arise within it . Consequently , very few factual claims are beyond challenge ; if a fact is worth thinking about in making a policy choice , it is probably worth disputing” ( 1998 : 148 ) . We must therefore rely on a less stringent standard in evaluating people’s factual knowledge about politics in a contemporary context . One such measure is the extent to which beliefs about controversial factual matters square with the best available evidence and expert opinion . Accordingly , we define misperceptions as cases in which people’s beliefs about factual matters are not supported by clear evidence and expert opinion – a definition that includes both false and unsubstantiated beliefs about the world . To illustrate the point , it is useful to compare our definition with Gaines et al ( 2007 ) , an observational study that analyzed how students update their beliefs about the war in Iraq over time . They define the relevant fact concerning Iraqi WMD as knowing that weapons were not found and describe the ( unsupported ) belief that Iraq hid or moved its WMD before the U . S . invasion as an “interpretation” of that fact . Our approach is different . Based on the evidence presented in the Duelfer Report , which was not directly disputed by the Bush administration , we define the belief that Saddam moved or hid WMD before the invasion as a misperception . 4 P REVIOUS RESEARCH ON CORRECTIONS Surprisingly , only two major studies in political science consider the effects of attempts to correct factual ignorance or misperceptions . First , Kuklinski et al ( 2000 ) conducted two experiments attempting to counter misperceptions about federal welfare programs . In the first , which was part of a telephone survey of Illinois residents , randomly selected treatment groups were given either a set of relevant facts about welfare or a multiple - choice quiz about the same set of facts . These groups and a control group were then asked for their opinions about two welfare policy issues . Kuklinski and his colleagues found that respondents had highly inaccurate beliefs about welfare generally ; that the least informed people expressed the highest confidence in their answers ; and that providing the relevant facts to respondents had no effect on their issue opinions ( nor did it in an unreported experiment about health care ) . In a later experiment conducted on college students , they asked subjects how much of the national budget is spent on welfare and how much should be spent . Immediately afterward , the experimental group was provided with the correct answer to the first question . Unlike the first experiment , this more blunt treatment did change their opinions about welfare policy . Gilens ( 2001 ) also conducted an experiment in which survey interviewers provided relevant facts to subjects before asking about their opinions on topical issues ( crime and foreign aid ) . Like the second Kuklinski et al experiment ( but unlike the first one ) , he found that this manipulation significantly changed respondents’ issue opinions . ( His study focused on factual ignorance and did not investigate misinformation as such . ) While both studies make significant contributions to our understanding of the effect of factual corrections on issue opinions , neither considers the effectiveness of 5 corrective information in causing subjects to revise their factual beliefs . In addition , the corrective information in both studies was presented directly to subjects as truth . Under normal circumstances , however , citizens are rarely provided with such definitive corrections . Instead , they typically receive corrective information in news reports that are less authoritative and direct . As a result , we believe it is imperative to study the effectiveness of corrections in news reports , particularly given the increasing demands from press critics for a more aggressive approach to fact - checking ( e . g . Cunningham 2003 ) . While it is important to establish that preference change can happen after an authoritative correction , we seek to investigate a more fundamental question – do citizens revise their factual beliefs after receiving corrective information in a realistic format ? T HEORETICAL EXPECTATIONS A wide array of research indicates that the way citizens process information frequently varies depending on their previous beliefs . In particular , information that is perceived to be incongruent with subjects’ views is likely to be resisted . For instance , numerous studies in psychology have shown that people display biases in evaluating arguments and evidence , favoring those that reinforce their existing views and disparaging those that contradict their existing views ( see , e . g . , Lord , Ross , and Lepper 1979 ; Edwards and Smith 1996 ) . Similarly , subjects with high levels of belief in a just world ( the belief that people get what they deserve ) are more likely to see innocent victims as responsible for bad outcomes ( see Furnham 2003 for a review ) . Communications research on the “hostile media effect” shows that people routinely see news reports as biased against their own point of view ( Arpan and Raney 2003 ; Schmitt , Gunther and Liebhart 2004 ; Gunther and 6 Schmitt 2004 ; Tsfati and Cohen 2005 ) . Finally , in political science , Taber and Lodge ( 2006 ) found that subjects tended to rate attitudinally congruent arguments as stronger than incongruent ones and spent more time counter - arguing incongruent arguments . In addition , numerous studies show that subjects who are exposed to information that runs counter to their political preferences frequently come to support their original opinion even more strongly – a “backlash” effect . For instance , in a dynamic process tracing experiment , Redlawsk ( 2002 ) finds that subjects who were not given a memory - based processing prime came to view their preferred candidate even more positively after being exposed to negative information about the candidate . Peffley and Hurwitz ( 2007 ) find that when whites are told that the death penalty is applied in a discriminatory faction against blacks , they actually become more supportive of it . Finally , Howell and Kriner ( n . d . ) find that hearing a Democrat argue against using military force in some cases causes Republicans to become more supportive of doing so . We expect that such a backlash will take place on some questions of fact as well . In other words , citizens who received a correction that conflicts with their political views may actually shift their factual beliefs in the wrong direction in response . 2 We thus have three hypotheses about the effect of corrections on misperceptions : Hypothesis 1 : Motivated reasoning The effect of corrections on misperceptions will be moderated by ideology . 2 It may be noted that our theory appears to correspond in some respects to that of Zaller ( 1992 ) , who proposed the Receive - Accept - Sample model of the survey response . In particular , our discussion of resistance to contradictory evidence is analogous to his discussion of whether subjects accept a frame . However , his model does not predict the potential backlash effect we describe above . The inclusion of a correction after a misleading statement corresponds to what Zaller describes as a shift from a one - sided to a two - sided information flow , but his model would predict that new information should decrease misperceptions among the group that is ideologically favorable to the correction , not cause a backlash among those who dislike it for ideological reasons ( 185 - 215 ) . 7 Hypothesis 2a : Resistance to corrections Corrections will fail to reduce misperceptions among the ideological subgroup that is likely to hold the misperception . Hypothesis 2b : Correction backfire In some cases , the interaction between corrections and ideology will be so strong that misperceptions will increase for the ideological subgroup in question . To fix ideas , define our dependent variable Y as a measure of misperceptions ( in practice , a five - point Likert scale in which higher values indicate greater levels of agreement with a statement of the misperception ) . We wish to estimate the effect of a correction treatment to see if it will reduce agreement with the misperception . However , we expect that the marginal effect of the correction will vary with ideology , which we define as the relevant measure of predispositions in a general political context ( in practice , a a seven - point Likert scale from “very liberal” to “very conservative” ) . Thus , we must include an interaction between ideology and the correction in our specification . Finally , we include a control variable for political knowledge , which is likely to be negatively correlated with misperceptions , to improve the efficiency of our statistical estimation . We therefore estimate the following equation : Y = ! 0 + ! 1 * Correction + ! 2 * Ideology + ! 3 * Correction * Ideology + ! 4 * Knowledge ( 1 ) 8 Using Equation 1 , we can formalize the three hypotheses presented above . Hypothesis 1 , which predicts that the effect of the correction will be moderated by ideology , implies that the coefficient for the interaction between correction and ideology will not equal zero ( ! 3 " 0 ) . 3 Hypothesis 2a , which predicts that the correction will fail to reduce misperceptions among the ideological subgroup that is likely to hold the misperception , implies that the marginal effect of the correction will not be statistically distinguishable from zero for the subgroup ( ! 1 + ! 3 * Ideology = 0 for liberals or conservatives ) . Alternatively , Hypothesis 2b predicts that the correction will sometimes increase misperceptions for the ideological subgroup in question , implying that the marginal effect will be greater than zero for the subgroup ( B 1 + B 3 * Ideology > 0 ) . 4 All of these hypotheses are problematic from the perspective of democratic theory , but the prospect that corrections can backfire is especially troubling . As shown below , this threat is very real when salient issues and realistic stimuli are employed . R ESEARCH DESIGN To evaluate the effects of corrective information , we conducted four experiments in which subjects read mock newspaper articles containing a statement from a political figure that reinforces a widespread misperception . Participants were randomly assigned to read articles that either included or did not include corrective information immediately after a false or misleading statement ( see appendix for the full text of all four articles ) . They were then asked to answer a series of factual and opinion questions . 3 The signs of the coefficients will vary in practice depending on whether misperceptions are more likely among liberals or conservatives . 4 Specifically , we expect that the 95 % confidence interval for the marginal effect will not include zero . Its standard error is var ( ! 1 " ) + Ideology 2 # var ( ! 3 " ) + 2 # Ideology # cov ( ! " 1 ! 3 " ) ( Brambor , Clark , and Golder 2006 ) . 9 Because so little is known about the effectiveness of corrective information in contemporary politics , we designed the experiments to maximize external validity . First , we focus on controversial political issues from contemporary American politics ( the war in Iraq , tax cuts , and stem cell research ) rather than the hypothetical stories commonly found in psychology research ( e . g . Johnson and Seifert 1994 ) . As a result , our experiments seek to correct pre - existing misperceptions rather than constructing them within the experiment . While this choice is likely to make misperceptions more difficult to change , it increases our ability to address the motivating concern of this research – correcting misperceptions in the real world . In addition , we test the effectiveness of corrective information in the context of news reports , one of the primary mechanisms by which citizens acquire information . In order to maximize realism , we constructed the mock news articles using text from actual articles whenever possible . Given our focus on pre - existing misperceptions , it is crucial to use experiments , which allow us to escape the endogeneity between factual beliefs and opinion that plagues survey research on real - world misperceptions ( e . g . Kull , Ramsay , and Lewis 2003 ) . For instance , rather than simply noting that misperceptions about Iraqi WMD are high among conservatives , we can randomize subjects across conditions ( avoiding estimation problems due to pre - existing individual differences in knowledge , ideology , etc . ) and test the effectiveness of corrections for that group and for subjects as a whole . A final research design choice was to use a between - subjects design in which we compared misperceptions across otherwise identical subjects who were randomly assigned to different experimental conditions . This decision was made to maximize the effect of the corrections . A within - subjects design in which we compared beliefs in 10 misperceptions before and after a correction would anchor subjects’ responses on their initial response , weakening the potential for an effective correction or a backlash . The experiments we present in this paper were all conducted in the Viewsflash online survey environment with undergraduates at a Catholic university in the Midwest . 5 Study 1 , conducted in the Fall 2005 semester , tests the effect of a correction on the misperception that Iraq had WMD immediately before the war in Iraq . Study 2 , which was conducted in the Spring 2006 semester , includes a second version of the Iraq WMD experiment as well as experiments attempting to correct misperceptions about the effect of tax cuts on revenue and federal policy toward stem cell research . As noted above , we define misperceptions to include both false and unsubstantiated beliefs about the world . We therefore consider two issues ( the existence of Iraqi WMD and the effect of tax cuts on revenue ) in which misperceptions are contradicted by the best available evidence , plus a third case ( the belief that President Bush “banned” stem cell research ) in which the misperception is demonstrably incorrect . S TUDY 1 : F ALL 2005 The first experiment we conducted , which took place in fall 2005 , tested the effect of a correction embedded in a news report on beliefs that Iraq had weapons of mass destruction immediately before the U . S . invasion . One of the primary rationales for war 5 Participants , who received course credit for participation , signed up via an online subject pool management system for students in psychology courses and were provided with a link that randomly assigned them to treatment conditions . Standard caveats about generalizing from a convenience sample apply . In terms of external validity , college students are more educated than average and may thus be more able to resist corrections ( Zaller 1992 ) . However , college students are also known to have relatively weak self - definition , poorly formed attitudes , and to be relatively easily influenced ( Sears 1986 ) – all characteristics that would seem to reduce the likelihood of resistance and backfire effects . In addition , as Druckman and Nelson note ( 2003 : 733 ) , the related literatures on framing , priming and agenda - setting have found causal processes that operate consistently in student and non - student samples ( Kühberger 1998 : 36 , Miller and Krosnick 2000 : 313 ) . 11 offered by the Bush administration was Iraq’s alleged possession of biological and chemical weapons . Perhaps as a result , many Americans failed to accept or did not find out that WMD were never found inside the country . This misperception , which persisted long after the evidence against it had become overwhelming , was closely linked to support for President Bush ( Kull , Ramsay , and Lewis 2003 ) . 6 One possible explanation for the prevalence of the WMD misperception is that journalists failed to adequately fact - check Bush administration statements suggesting the U . S . had found WMD in Iraq ( e . g . Allen 2003 ) . As such , we test a correction condition ( described below ) in which a news report on a statement by President Bush that could be interpreted to suggest that Iraq did have WMD is followed by a clarification that WMD had not been found . Another plausible explanation for why Americans were failing to update their beliefs about Iraqi WMD is fear of death in the wake of September 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks . To test this possibility , we drew on terror management theory ( TMT ) , which researchers have suggested may help explain responses to 9 / 11 ( Pyszczynski , Solomon , and Greenberg 2003 ) . TMT research shows that reminders of death create existential anxiety that subjects manage by becoming more defensive of their cultural worldview and hostile toward outsiders . Previous studies have found that increasing the salience of subjects’ mortality increased support for President Bush and for U . S . military interventions abroad among conservatives ( Cohen et al 2005 , Landau et al 2004 , Pyszczynski et al 2006 ) and created increased aggressiveness toward people with differing political views ( McGregor et al 1998 ) , but the effect of mortality salience on both support for misperceptions about Iraq and the correction of them has not been tested . 6 Evidence on WMD did not change appreciably after the October 2004 release of the Duelfer Report . No other relevant developments took place until June 2006 , when two members of Congress promoted the discovery of inactive chemical shells from the Iran - Iraq War as evidence of WMD ( see footnote 2 ) . 12 We therefore employed a mortality salience manipulation to see if it increased WMD misperceptions or reduced the effectiveness of the correction treatment . Method 130 participants 7 were randomly assigned to one of four treatments in a 2 ( correction condition ) x 2 ( mortality salience ) design . 8 The appendix provides the full text of the article that was used in the experiment . Subjects in the mortality salience condition are asked to “Please briefly describe the emotions that the thought of your own death arouses in you” and to “Jot down , as specifically as you can , what you think will happen to you as you physically die and once you are physically dead . ” ( Controls were asked versions of the same questions in which watching television is substituted for death . ) After a distracter task , subjects were then asked to read a mock news article attributed to the Associated Press that reports on a Bush campaign stop in Wilkes - Barre , PA during October 2004 . The article describes Bush’s remarks as “a rousing , no - retreat defense of the Iraq war” and quotes a line from the speech he actually gave in Wilkes - Barre on the day the Duelfer Report was released ( Priest and Pincus 2004 ) : “There was a risk , a real risk , that Saddam Hussein would pass weapons or materials or information to terrorist networks , and in the world after September the 11th , that was a risk we could not afford to take . ” Such wording may falsely suggest to listeners that Saddam Hussein did have WMD that he could have passed to terrorists after September 11 , 2001 . In the 7 68 percent of respondents in Study 1 were female ; 62 percent were white ; 56 percent were Catholic . For a convenience sample , respondents were reasonably balanced on both ideology ( 48 percent left of center , 27 percent centrist , 25 percent right of center ) and partisanship ( 27 percent Republican or lean Republican , 25 percent independent , 48 percent Democrat or lean Democrat ) . 8 The experiment was technically a 3 x 2 design with two types of corrections , but we omit the alternative correction condition here for ease of exposition . Future research will present the “causal” correction approach we have developed based on Johnson and Seifert ( 1994 , 1998 ) . Excluding these data does not substantively affect the key results presented in this paper . 13 correction condition , the story then discusses the release of the Duelfer Report , which documents the lack of Iraqi WMD stockpiles or an active production program immediately prior to the US invasion . 9 After reading the article , subjects were asked to state whether they agreed with this statement : “Immediately before the U . S . invasion , Iraq had an active weapons of mass destruction program , the ability to produce these weapons , and large stockpiles of WMD , but Saddam Hussein was able to hide or destroy these weapons right before U . S . forces arrived . ” Responses were measured on a five - point Likert scale ranging from “strongly disagree” ( 1 ) to “strongly agree” ( 5 ) . Results The results from Study 1 largely support the backfire hypothesis , as shown by two ordered probit models that are presented in Table 1 . [ Table 1 ] Model 1 estimates the effect of the correction treatment ; a centered seven - point ideology scale ranging from strongly liberal ( - 3 ) to strongly conservative ( 3 ) ; an additive five - question scale measuring political knowledge using conventional factual questions ( Delli Carpini and Keeter 1996 ) ; and the mortality salience manipulation . As expected , more knowledgeable subjects were less likely to agree that Iraq had WMD ( p < . 01 ) and conservatives were more likely to agree with the statement ( p < . 01 ) . We also find that 9 While President Bush argued that the report showed that Saddam “retained the knowledge , the materials , the means and the intent to produce” WMD , he and his administration did not dispute its conclusion that Iraq did not have WMD or an active weapons program at the time of the U . S . invasion ( Balz 2004 ) . 14 correction treatment did not reduce overall misperceptions and the mortality salience manipulation was statistically insignificant . 10 In Model 2 , we test whether the effect of the correction is moderated by subjects’ political views by including an interaction between ideology and the treatment condition . As stated earlier , our hypothesis is that the correction will be increasingly ineffective as subjects become more conservative ( and thus more sympathetic to the claim that Iraq had WMD ) . When we estimate the model , the interaction term is significant ( p < . 01 ) , suggesting that the effect of the correction does vary by ideology . Because interaction terms are often difficult to interpret , we follow Brambor , Clark , and Golder ( 2006 ) and plot the estimated marginal effect of the correction and the 95 % confidence interval over the range of ideology in Figure 1 . [ Figure 1 ] For very liberal subjects , the correction worked as expected , making them more likely to disagree with the statement that Iraq had WMD compared with controls . The correction did not have a statistically significant effect on individuals who described themselves as liberal , somewhat left of center , or centrist . But most importantly , the effect of the correction for individuals who placed themselves to the right of center ideologically is statistically significant and positive . In other words , the correction backfired – conservatives who received a correction telling them that Iraq did not have WMD were more likely to believe that Iraq had WMD than those in the control condition . ( The interpretation of other variables does not change in Model 2 . ) 10 In addition , interactions between mortality salience and the correction condition were not statistically significant ( results available upon request ) . As such , we do not discuss it further . 15 To illustrate the substantive effects of the correction / ideology interaction , Figure 2 plots predicted response probabilities across the dependent variable for four groups : self - identified liberals ( ideology = - 2 ) and conservatives ( ideology = 2 ) who received the correction and those that do not . 11 [ Figure 2 ] It is clear that responses to the correction differed dramatically by ideology . For liberals , the correction increased the predicted probability that subjects would “strongly disagree” that Saddam had WMD from . 46 to . 67 ( p < . 10 ) . By contrast , the predicted probability that conservatives would “somewhat agree” with the misperception increased from . 30 to . 52 ( p < . 01 ) and the predicted probability that they would “somewhat disagree” decreased from . 22 to . 08 ( p < . 01 ) . S TUDY 2 : S PRING 2006 In spring 2006 , we conducted a series of additional experiments designed to extend our findings and test the generality of the backfire effect found in Study 1 . We sought to assess whether it generalizes to other issues as well as other ideological subgroups ( namely , liberals ) . The latter question is especially important for the debate over whether conservatism is uniquely characterized by dogmatism and rigidity ( Greenberg and Jonas 2003 ; Jost et al 2003a , 2003b ) . Another goal was to test whether the backfire effect was the result of perceived hostility on the part of the news source . Though we chose the Associated Press as the 11 Subjects are assumed to have mean knowledge levels and to not have received the mortality salience manipulation . All predicted probabilities are calculated using S - Post ( Long 1997 ) . Confidence intervals on changes in predicted probabilities are estimated using the delta method in S - Post ( Xu and Long 2005 ) . 16 source for Study 1 due to its perceived neutrality , it is possible that conservatives felt that the correction was a reflection of media bias . There is an extensive literature showing that partisans and ideologues tend to view identical content as biased against them ( Arpan and Raney 2003 ; Christen , Kannaovakun and Gunther 2002 ; Gunther and Chia 2001 ; Gunther and Schmitt 2004 ; Gussin and Baum 2004 , 2005 ; Lee 2005 ; Vallone , Ross , and Lepper 1985 ) . Perceptions of liberal media bias are especially widespread in the U . S . , where 50 percent of the public recently described the media as liberal ( Pew 2005 ) . As such , we manipulated the news source as described below . In Study 2 , we used a 2 ( correction ) x 2 ( media source ) design to test corrections of three possible misperceptions : the beliefs that Iraq had WMD when the U . S . invaded , that tax cuts increase government revenue , and that President Bush banned on stem cell research . ( The appendix presents the wording of all three experiments . ) By design , the first two tested misperceptions held predominantly by conservatives and the third tested a possible liberal misperception . 12 In addition , we varied the source of the news articles , attributing them to either the New York Times ( a source many conservatives perceive as biased ) or FoxNews . com ( a source many conservatives perceive as favorable ) . 196 respondents participated in Study 2 . 13 12 We also conducted an experiment correcting a claim made by Michael Moore in the movie “Fahrenheit 9 / 11” that the war in Afghanistan was motivated by Unocal’s desire to build an natural gas pipeline through the country . All results of substantive importance to this paper were insignificant . The full wording and results of this experiment are available upon request . 13 62 percent of respondents to Study 2 were women ; 59 percent were Catholic ; and 65 percent were white . The sample was again reasonably balanced for a convenience sample on both ideology ( 52 percent left of center , 17 percent centrist , 31 percent right of center ) and partisanship ( 46 percent Democrat or lean Democrat , 20 percent independent , 33 percent Republican or lean Republican ) . 17 Method – Iraq WMD In our second round of data collection , we conducted a modified version of the experiment from Study 1 to verify and extend our previous results . For the sake of clarity , we simplified the stimulus and manipulation for the Iraq WMD article , changed the context from a 2004 campaign speech to a 2005 statement about Iraq , and used a simpler question as the dependent variable ( see appendix for exact wording ) . Results – Iraq WMD Ordered probit analyses for the second version of the Iraq WMD experiment , which are presented in Table 2 , differ substantially from the previous iteration . [ Table 2 ] Interestingly , we could not reject the null hypothesis that the news source did not change the effect of the correction in this or the two following experiments ( results available upon request ) . As such , it is excluded from all reported results . 14 Model 1 indicates that the WMD correction again fails to reduce overall misperceptions . However , we again add an interaction between the correction and ideology in Model 2 and find a statistically significant result . This time , however , the interaction term is negative – the opposite of the result from Study 1 . Figure 3 plots the marginal effect of the correction over the range of ideology . [ Figure 3 ] 14 Three - way interactions between news source , the correction , and ideology were also insignificant ( results available upon request ) . 18 Unlike the previous experiment , the marginal effect of the correction is negative for individuals who placed themselves to the right of center , meaning that the correction made conservatives more likely to believe that Iraq did not have WMD . 15 It is unclear why the correction was effective for conservatives in this experiment . One possibility is that conservatives may have shifted their grounds for supporting the war in tandem with the Bush administration , which sought to distance itself over time from the WMD rationale for war . The correlation between belief that George Bush “did the right thing” in invading Iraq and belief in Iraqi WMD among conservatives declined from . 68 in Study 1 to . 35 in Study 2 . This was driven by the reaction to the correction ; the correlation increased in Study 1 from . 41 among controls to . 72 in the correction condition , whereas in Study 2 it decreased from . 54 to . 10 . 16 The second possibility is that the shift in the context of the article from the 2004 campaign to a 2005 statement by Bush ( which are reflected in the wording of the manipulation ) made ideology less salient in answering the question about Iraqi WMD . Finally , it is possible that the simpler wording of the dependent variable reduced ambiguity that previously allowed for counter - arguing . Even though a backfire effect did not take place among conservatives , we conducted a post hoc analysis to see if conservatives who are the most intensely committed to Iraq would still persist in resisting the correction . Model 3 therefore includes a dummy variable for those respondents who rated Iraq as the most important problem facing the country today as well as the associated two - and three - way interactions with ideology and the correction condition . This model pushes the data to the 15 Figure 3 suggests that the correction slightly increased misperceptions among individuals who rated themselves as very liberal , but this appears to be an anomaly – all four “very liberal” subjects who received the correction strongly disagreed with the claim that Iraq had WMD before the invasion . 16 65 subjects from Study 1 were asked this question , which was added to the instrument partway through its administration . 19 limit since only 34 respondents rated Iraq the most important issue ( including eight who placed themselves to the right of center ideologically ) . However , the results are consistent with our expectations – there is a positive , statistically significant interaction between ideology , the correction , and issue importance ( p < . 02 ) , indicating that the correction failed for conservatives who viewed Iraq as most important . Thus , even an effective correction may be resisted by highly committed subgroups . Figure 4 illustrates this finding using predicted response probabilities from model 3 for liberals and conservatives with mean knowledge levels . [ Figure 4 ] The predicted probability that conservatives who chose other issues as most important would “somewhat agree” with the misperception that Iraq had WMD before the invasion decreased from . 46 to . 25 ( p < . 05 ) . However , the predicted probabilities of responding “somewhat agree” among those who viewed Iraq as most important increased from . 25 to . 47 ( p < . 01 ) – another backfire effect . Thus , while the correction was more effective than in Study 1 , its effects were reversed for the most strongly committed subjects . Method – Tax cuts The second experiment in Study 2 tests subjects’ responses to the claim that cutting taxes stimulates so much economic growth that it actually has the effect of increasing government revenue over what it would otherwise be . The claim , which originates in supply - side economics and is frequently made by Bush administration officials , Republican members of Congress , and conservative elites , implies that tax cuts literally pay for themselves . However , the overwhelming consensus among professional 20 economists – including current and former Bush administration officials – is that this claim is implausible in the U . S . context ( Hill 2006 , Mankiw 2003 , Milbank 2003 ) . Subjects read an article on the tax cute debate attributed to either the New York Times or FoxNews . com ( see appendix for text ) . In all conditions , it included a passage in which President Bush said “The tax relief stimulated economic vitality and growth and it has helped increase revenues to the Treasury . ” As in Study 1 , this quote – which implies that tax cuts increase revenue over what would have otherwise been received – is taken from an actual Bush speech . Subjects in the correction condition received an additional paragraph clarifying that tax revenues declined sharply as a proportion of GDP between 2001 and 2005 ( Bush passed major tax cuts in 2001 and 2003 ) . The dependent variable is agreement with the claim that “President Bush ' s tax cuts have increased government revenue” on a Likert scale ranging from strongly disagree ( 1 ) to strongly agree ( 5 ) . Results – tax cuts The two ordered probit models in Table 3 indicate that the tax cut correction generated another backfire effect . [ Table 3 ] In Model 1 , we find ( as expected ) that conservatives are more likely to believe that tax cuts increase government revenue ( p < . 01 ) and more knowledgeable subjects are less likely to do so ( p < . 05 ) . More importantly , the correction again fails to cause a statistically significant decline in overall misperceptions . As before , we again estimate an interaction between the treatment and ideology in Model 2 . The effect is positive and statistically significant ( p < . 05 ) , indicating that conservatives who received the treatment 21 were significantly more likely to agree with the statement that tax cuts increased revenue than conservatives in the non - correction condition . Figure 5 displays how the marginal effect of the correction varies by ideology . [ Figure 5 ] As in the first Iraq experiment , the correction increases misperceptions among conservatives , with a positive and statistically significant marginal effect for self - described conservative and very conservative subjects ( p < . 05 ) . Figure 6 illustrates this effect by plotting the predicted response probabilities for liberals and conservatives with mean knowledge levels . [ Figure 6 ] The predicted probabilities are virtually identical for liberals across the control and correction conditions , while the predicted probability that conservatives will “somewhat agree” that tax cuts increase revenue increasing from . 35 to . 48 ( p < . 01 ) . This finding provides additional evidence that efforts to correct misperceptions can backfire . Conservatives presented with evidence that tax cuts do not increase government revenues ended up believing this claim more fervently than those who did not receive a correction . Method – Stem cell research While previous experiments considered issues on which conservatives are more likely to be misinformed , our expectation was that many liberals hold a misperception about the existence of a “ban” on stem cell research , a claim that both Senator John Kerry and Senator John Edwards made during the 2004 presidential campaign ( Weiss and 22 Fitzgerald 2004 ) . In fact , while federal funding of stem cell research is limited to stem cell lines that had been created before August 2001 , no limitations have been placed on privately funded research ( Fournier 2004 ) . In the experiment , subjects read a mock news article attributed to either the New York Times or FoxNews . com that reported statements by Edwards and Kerry suggesting the existence of a stem cell research “ban . ” In the treatment condition , a corrective paragraph was added to the end of the news story explaining that Bush’s policy does not limit privately funded stem cell research . The dependent variable is agreement that “President Bush has banned stem cell research in the United States” on a scale ranging from “strongly disagree” ( 1 ) to “strongly agree” ( 5 ) . ( See appendix for wording . ) Results – Stem cell research Table 4 reports results from two ordered probit models that offer support for the resistance hypothesis . [ Table 4 ] In Model 1 , we find a negative overall correction effect ( p < . 07 ) , indicating that subjects who received the correction were less likely to believe that Bush banned stem cell research . We also find that subjects with more political knowledge were less likely to agree that a ban existed ( p < . 07 ) . In Model 2 , we again interact the correction treatment with ideology . The interaction is in the expected direction ( negative ) but just misses statistical significance ( p < . 16 ) . However , as Brambor , Clark , and Golder point out ( 2006 : 74 ) , it is not sufficient to consider the significance of an interaction term on its own . The marginal effects of the relevant independent variable need to be calculated for 23 substantively meaningful values of the modifying variable in an interaction . Thus , as before , we estimate the marginal effect of the correction by ideology in Figure 7 . [ Figure 7 ] The figure shows that the stem cell correction has a negative and statistically significant marginal effect on misperceptions among centrists and individuals to the right of center , but fails to significantly reduce misperceptions among those to the left of center . Thus , the correction works for conservatives and moderates , but not for liberals . In addition , we plot the substantive effects of the correction in Figure 8 , which plots the predicted responses for liberals and conservatives with mean knowledge levels . [ Figure 8 ] We find that the predicted probability that subjects “strongly disagree” with the stem cell misperception increases from . 09 to . 23 for conservatives ( p < . 05 ) , but predicted responses do not change appreciably for liberals . While in this case we do not find a backfire effect , the effect of the correction is again neutralized for the relevant ideological subgroup . This finding provides additional evidence that the effect of corrections is likely to be conditional on one’s political predispositions . Conclusion The experiments reported in this paper help us understand why factual misperceptions about politics are so persistent . We find that responses to corrections in mock news articles differ significantly according to subjects’ ideological views . As a result , the corrections fail to reduce misperceptions for the most committed participants . Even 24 worse , they actually strengthen misperceptions among ideological subgroups in several cases . Additional results indicate that these conclusions are not specific to the Iraq war ; not related to the salience of death ; and not a reaction to the source of the correction . Our results thus contribute to the literature on correcting misperceptions in three important respects . First , we provide the first direct test of corrections on factual beliefs about politics . Second , we show that corrective information in news reports may fail to reduce misperceptions and can sometimes even increase them . Finally , we establish these findings in the context of contemporary political issues that are salient to ordinary voters . These findings seem to provide further support for the growing literature showing that citizens engage in motivated reasoning . While our experiments focused on assessing the effectiveness of corrections , the results show that ideological commitments can override direct factual contradictions – an empirical finding with important theoretical implications . Previous research on motivated reasoning has largely focused on the evaluation and usage of factual evidence in constructing opinions and evaluating arguments ( e . g . Taber and Lodge 2006 ) . By contrast , our research – the first to directly measure the effectiveness of corrections in a realistic context – suggests that it would be valuable to directly study the cognitive and affective processes that take place when subjects are confronted with discordant factual information . Gaines et al ( 2007 ) take an important first step in this direction by highlighting the construction of interpretations of relevant facts , including those that may be otherwise discomforting , as a coping strategy . It would also be helpful to test additional corrections of liberal misperceptions . Currently , all of our backfire results come from conservatives – a finding that may provide support for the hypothesis that conservatives are especially dogmatic ( Greenberg 25 and Jonas 2003 ; Jost et al 2003a , 2003b ) . However , without conducting more studies , it is impossible to determine if the results we observe are systematic or the result of the specific misperceptions tested . In addition , it would be valuable to replicate these findings with non - college students or a representative sample of the general population . Testing the effectiveness of corrections using a within - subjects design would also be worthwhile , though achieving meaningful results may be difficult for reasons described above . In either case , researchers must be wary of changing political conditions . Unlike other research topics , contemporary misperceptions about politics are a moving target that can change quickly ( as the difference between the Iraq WMD experiments in Study 1 and Study 2 suggests ) . Most importantly , however , future work should seek to distinguish the conditions under which corrections reduce misperceptions from those under which they fail or backfire . Many citizens seem or unwilling to revise their beliefs in the face of corrective information , and attempts to correct those mistaken beliefs may only make matters worse . Determining the best way to provide corrective information will advance understanding of how citizens process information and help to strengthen democratic debate and public understanding of the political process . 26 Works cited Allen , Mike . 2003 . “Bush : ' We Found ' Banned Weapons . ” Washington Post . May 31 , 2003 . Page A1 . Althaus , Scott L . 1998 . “Information Effects in Collective Preferences . ” American Political Science Review , 92 ( 3 ) : 545 - 558 . Arpan , Laura M . , and Arthur A . Raney . 2003 . “An experimental investigation of news source and the Hostile Media Effect . ” Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly , 80 ( 2 ) : 265 - 281 . Balz , Dan . “Candidates Use Arms Report to Make Case . ” Washington Post , October 8 , 2004 . Brambor , Thomas , William Roberts Clark , and Matt Golder . 2006 . “Understanding Interaction Models : Improving Empirical Analyses . ” Political Analysis , 14 : 63 - 82 . Christen , Cindy T . , Prathana Kannaovakun , and Albert C . Gunther . 2002 . “Hostile Media Perceptions : Partisan Assessments of Press and Public during the 1997 United Parcel Service Strike . ” Political Communication , 19 ( 4 ) : 423 - 436 . Cohen , Florette , Daniel M . Ogilvie , Sheldon Solomon , Jeff Greenberg , and Tom Pyszczynski . 2005 . “American Roulette : The Effect of Reminders of Death on Support for George W . Bush in the 2004 . ” Analyses of Social Issues and Public Policy , 5 ( 1 ) : 177 - 187 . Cunningham , Brent . 2003 . “Re - thinking objectivity . ” Columbia Journalism Review , July / August 2003 , 24 - 32 . Delli Carpini , Michael X . and Scott Keeter . 1996 . What Americans Know about Politics and Why It Matters . New Haven : Yale University Press . Druckman , James N . and Kjersten R Nelson . 2003 . “Framing and Deliberation : How Citizens ' Conversations Limit Elite Influence . ” American Journal of Political Science , 47 ( 4 ) : 729 – 745 . Edwards , Kari , and Edward E . Smith . 1996 . “A Disconfirmation Bias in the Evaluation of Arguments . ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 71 ( 1 ) : 5 - 24 . Fournier , Ron . 2004 . “First Lady Bashes Kerry Stem Cell Stance . ” Associated Press , August 9 , 2004 . Furnham , Adrian . 2003 . “Belief in a just world : research progress over the past decade . ” Personality and Individual Differences , 34 ( 5 ) : 795 - 817 . Gaines , Brian J . , James H . Kuklinski , Paul J . Quirk , Buddy Peyton and Jay Verkuilen . 2007 . “Interpreting Iraq : Partisanship and the Meaning of Facts . ” Journal of Politics , 69 ( 4 ) : 957 - 974 . Gilens , Martin . 2001 . “Political Ignorance and Collective Policy Preferences . ” American Political Science Review , 95 ( 2 ) : 379 - 396 . Greenberg , Jeff , and Eva Jonas . 2003 . “Psychological Motives and Political Orientation – The Left , the Right , and the Rigid : Comment on Jost et al . ( 2003 ) . ” Psychological Bulletin , 129 ( 3 ) : 376 - 382 . Gunther , Albert C . and Stella Chih - Yun Chia . 2001 . “Predicting Pluralistic Ignorance : 27 The Hostile Media Perception and Its Consequences . ” Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly , 78 ( 4 ) : 688 - 701 . Gunther , Albert C . and Kathleen Schmitt . 2004 . “Mapping Boundaries of the Hostile Media Effect . ” Journal of Communication , 54 ( 1 ) : 55 - 70 . Gussin , Phil and Matthew A . Baum . 2004 “In the Eye of the Beholder : An Experimental Investigation into the Foundations of the Hostile Media Phenomenon . ” Paper presented at 2004 Meeting of the American Political Science Association , Chicago , IL . Gussin , Phil and Matthew A . Baum . “Issue Bias : How Issue Coverage and Media Bias Affect Voter Perceptions of Elections . ” Paper presented at 2005 Meeting of the American Political Science Association , Washington D . C . Harris Poll . 2006 . “Belief that Iraq Had Weapons of Mass Destruction Has Increased Substantially . ” Poll conducted July 5 - 11 and released July 21 , 2006 . Downloaded June 12 , 2007 from http : / / www . harrisinteractive . com / harris _ poll / index . asp ? PID = 684 Hill , Patrice . 2006 . “House or Senate shake - up likely to end tax cuts . ” Washington Times , October 5 , 2006 . Howell , William and Douglas Kriner . N . d . “Political Elites and Public Support for War . ” Unpublished manuscript . Johnson , Holly M . and Colleen M . Seifert . 1994 . “Sources of the Continued Influence Effect : When Misinformation in Memory Affects Later Inferences . ” Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 20 ( 6 ) : 1420 - 1436 . Johnson , Holly M . and Colleen M . Seifert . 1998 . “Updating Accounts Following a Correction of Misinformation . ” Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 24 ( 6 ) : 1483 - 1494 . Jost , John T . , Jack Glaser , Arie W . Kruglanski , and Frank J . Sulloway . 2003a . “Political conservatism as motivated social cognition . ” Psychological Bulletin , 129 ( 3 ) : 339 - 375 . Jost , John T . , Jack Glaser , Arie W . Kruglanski , and Frank J . Sulloway . 2003b . “Exceptions That Prove the Rule - Using a Theory of Motivated Social Cognition to Account for Ideological Incongruities and Political Anomalies : Reply to Greenberg and Jonas ( 2003 ) . ” Psychological Bulletin , 129 ( 3 ) : 383 - 393 . Koriat , Asher , Morris Goldsmith , and Ainat Pansky . 2000 . “Toward a Psychology of Memory Accuracy . ” Annual Review of Psychology , 51 : 481 - 537 . Kühberger , Anton . 1998 . “The Influence of Framing on Risky Decisions : A Meta - analysis . ” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 75 ( 1 ) : 23 - 55 . Kuklinski , James H . and Paul J . Quirk . 2000 . “Reconsidering the rational public : cognition , heuristics , and mass opinion . ” In Arthur Lupia , Mathew D . McCubbins , and Samuel L . Popkin , eds . , Elements of Reason : Understanding and Expanding the Limits of Political Rationality . London : Cambridge University Press . Kuklinski , James H . , Paul J . Quirk , David Schweider , and Robert F . Rich . 1998 . “‘Just the Facts , Ma ' am’ : Political Facts and Public Opinion . ” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science , 560 : 143—154 . Kuklinski , James H . , Paul J . Quirk , Jennifer Jerit , David Schweider , and Robert F . Rich . 28 2000 . “Misinformation and the Currency of Democratic Citizenship . ” The Journal of Politics , 62 ( 3 ) : 790 - 816 . Kull , Steven , Clay Ramsay , and Evan Lewis . 2003 . “Misperceptions , the Media , and the Iraq War . ” Political Science Quarterly , 118 ( 4 ) : 569 - 598 . Landau , Mark J . , Sheldon Solomon , Jeff Greenberg , Florette Cohen , Tom Pyszczynski , Jamie Arndt , Claude H . Miller , Daniel M . Ogilvie and Alison Cook . “Deliver Us From Evil : The Effects of Mortality Salience and Reminders of 9 / 11 on Support for President George W . Bush . ” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 30 ( 9 ) : 1136 - 1150 . Lau , Richard R . and David Redlawsk . 2001 . “Advantages and Disadvantages of Cognitive Heuristics in Political Decision Making . ” American Journal of Political Science . 45 ( 4 ) : 951 - 971 . Lee , Tien - Tsung . 2005 . “The Liberal Media Myth Revisited : An Examination of Factors Influencing Perceptions of Media Bias . ” Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media , 49 ( 1 ) : 43 - 64 . Lodge , Milton , and Charles S . Taber . 2000 . “Three Steps Toward a Theory of Motivated Political Reasoning . ” In Arthur Lupia , Mathew D . McCubbins , and Samuel L . Popkin , eds . , Elements of Reason : Understanding and Expanding the Limits of Political Rationality . London : Cambridge University Press . Lodge , Milton , and Charles S . Taber . 2005 . “The Automaticity of Affect for Political Leaders , Groups , and Issues : An Experimental Test of the Hot Cognition Hypothesis . ” Political Psychology , 26 ( 3 ) : 455 - 482 . Long , J . Scott . 1997 . Regression Models for Categorical and Limited Dependent Variables . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications . Lord , Charles G . , Lee Ross , and Mark R . Lepper . 1979 . “Biased Assimilation and Attitude Polarization : The Effects of Prior Theories on Subsequently Considered Evidence . ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 37 ( 11 ) : 2098 - 2109 . Lupia , Arthur . 1994 . “Shortcuts Versus Encyclopedias : Information and Voting Behavior in California Insurance Reform Elections . ” American Political Science Review , 88 ( 1 ) , 63 - 76 . Lupia , Arthur and Matthew D . McCubbins . 1998 . The Democratic Dilemma : Can Citizens Learn What They Need to Know ? New York : Cambridge University Press . Mankiw , Greg . 2003 . Testimony before the U . S . Senate Committee on Banking , Housing , and Urban Affairs . May 13 , 2003 . Mayo , Ruth , Yaacov Schul and Eugene Burnstein . 2004 . “‘I am not guilty’ vs ‘I am innocent’ : Successful negation may depend on the schema used for its encoding . ” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 40 ( 4 ) : 433 - 449 . McGregor , Holly A . , Joel D . Lieberman , Jeff Greenberg , Sheldon Solomon , Jamie Arndt , Linda Simon , and Tom Pyszczynski . 1998 . “Terror Management and Aggression : Evidence That Mortality Salience Motivates Aggression Against Worldview - Threatening Others . ” Journal of Personality & Social Psychology . 74 ( 3 ) : 590 - 605 , Milbank , Dana . 2003 . “For Bush Tax Plan , A Little Inner Dissent . ” Washington Post , 29 February 16 , 2003 . Page A4 . Miller , Joanne M . and Jon A . Krosnick . 2000 . “News Media Impact on the Ingredients of Presidential Evaluations : Politically Knowledgeable Citizens Are Guided by a Trusted Source . ” American Journal of Political Science , 44 ( 2 ) : 301 - 315 . Peffley , Mark and Jon Hurwitz . 2007 . “Persuasion and Resistance : Race and the Death Penalty in America . ” American Journal of Political Science , 51 ( 4 ) : 996 - 1012 . Pew Research Center for the People & the Press . 2005 . “Public More Critical of Press , But Goodwill Persists : Online Newspaper Readership Countering Print Losses . ” Poll conducted June 8 - 12 , 2005 and released June 26 , 2005 . Results downloaded June 8 , 2007 from http : / / people - press . org / reports / print . php3 ? PageID = 972 Popkin , Samuel . 1991 . The Reasoning Voter . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Priest , Dana and Walter Pincus . “U . S . ' Almost All Wrong ' on Weapons . ” Washington Post , October 7 , 2004 . Pyszczynski , Tom , Abdolhossein Abdollahi , Sheldon Solomon , Jeff Greenberg , Florette Cohen , and David Weise . 2006 . “Mortality Salience , Martyrdom , and Military Might : The Great Satan Versus the Axis of Evil . ” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 32 ( 4 ) : 525 - 537 . Pyszczynski , Tom , Sheldon Solomon , and Jeff Greenberg . 2003 . In the Wake of 9 / 11 : The Psychology of Terror . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . Redlawsk , David . 2002 . “Hot Cognition or Cool Consideration ? Testing the Effects of Motivated Reasoning on Political Decision Making . ” Journal of Politics , 64 ( 4 ) : 1021 - 1044 . Schacter , Daniel L . 1999 . “The Seven Sins of Memory : Insights From Psychology and Cognitive Neuroscience . ” American Psychologist , 54 ( 3 ) : 182 - 203 . Schmitt , Kathleen M . , Albert C . Gunther , and Janice L . Liebhart . 2004 . “Why Partisans See Mass Media as Biased . ” Communication Research , 31 ( 6 ) : 623 - 641 . Sears , David O . 1986 . “College sophomores in the laboratory : In  uences of a narrow data base on social psychology’s view of human nature . ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 51 ( 3 ) : 515 - 30 . Sniderman , Paul M . , Richard A . Brody , and Philip E . Tetlock . 1991 . Reasoning and Choice : Explorations in Political Psychology . New York : Cambridge University Press . Taber , Charles , Milton Lodge , and Jill Glather . 2001 . “The Motivated Construction of Political Judgments . ” In James H . Kuklinski , ed . , Citizens and Politics : Perspectives from Political Psychology . New York : Cambridge University Press . Taber , Charles S . and Milton Lodge . 2006 . “Motivated Skepticism in the Evaluation of Political Beliefs . ” American Journal of Political Science , 50 ( 3 ) : 755 - 769 . Task Force on Campaign Reform . 1998 . “Campaign Reform : Insights and Evidence . ” Tsfati , Yariv and Jonathan Cohen . 2005 . “Democratic Consequences of Hostile Media Perceptions : The Case of Gaza Settlers . ” The Harvard International Journal of Press / Politics , 10 ( 4 ) : 28 - 51 . Vallone , Robert P . , Lee Ross , and Mark R . Lepper . 1985 . “The Hostile Media 30 Phenomenon : Biased Perception and Perceptions of Media Bias in Coverage of the ‘Beirut Massacre . ’” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 49 ( 3 ) : 577 - 585 . Weiss , Rick , and Mary Fitzgerald . 2004 . “Edwards , First Lady at Odds on Stem Cells . ” Washington Post , August 10 , 2004 . Wilkes , A . L . , and M . Leatherbarrow . 1988 . “Editing episodic memory following the identification of error . ” Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Experimental Psychology . 40 ( A ) : 361 - 387 . Wilkes , A . L . and D . J . Reynolds . 1999 . “On Certain Limitations Accompanying Readers’ Interpretations of Corrections in Episodic Text . ” Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Experimental Psychology , 52A ( 1 ) : 165 - 183 . Xu , Jun and J . Scott Long . 2005 . “Confidence Intervals for Predicted Outcomes in Regression Models for Categorical Outcomes . ” The Stata Journal , 5 ( 4 ) : 537 - 559 . Zaller , John R . 1992 . The Nature and Origins of Mass Opinion . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Appendix Study 1 ( WMD ) : News text Wilkes - Barre , PA , October 7 , 2004 ( AP ) - - President Bush delivered a hard - hitting speech here today that made his strategy for the remainder of the campaign crystal clear : a rousing , no - retreat defense of the Iraq war . Bush maintained Wednesday that the war in Iraq was the right thing to do and that Iraq stood out as a place where terrorists might get weapons of mass destruction . “There was a risk , a real risk , that Saddam Hussein would pass weapons or materials or information to terrorist networks , and in the world after September the 11th , that was a risk we could not afford to take , ” Bush said . [ Correction ] While Bush was making campaign stops in Pennsylvania , the Central Intelligence Agency released a report that concludes that Saddam Hussein did not possess stockpiles of illicit weapons at the time of the U . S . invasion in March 2003 , nor was any program to produce them under way at the time . The report , authored by Charles Duelfer , who advises the director of central intelligence on Iraqi weapons , says Saddam made a decision sometime in the 1990s to destroy known stockpiles of chemical weapons . Duelfer also said that inspectors destroyed the nuclear program sometime after 1991 . [ All subjects ] The President travels to Ohio tomorrow for more campaign stops . Study 1 ( WMD ) : Dependent variable Immediately before the U . S . invasion , Iraq had an active weapons of mass destruction program , the ability to produce these weapons , and large stockpiles of WMD , but Saddam Hussein was able to hide or destroy these weapons right before U . S . forces arrived . - Strongly disagree [ 1 ] - Somewhat disagree [ 2 ] - Neither agree nor disagree [ 3 ] - Somewhat agree [ 4 ] - Strongly agree [ 5 ] Study 2 , Experiment 1 ( WMD ) : News text [ New York Times / FoxNews . com ] December 14 , 2005 During a speech in Washington , DC on Wednesday , President Bush maintained that the war in Iraq was the right thing to do and that Iraq stood out as a place where terrorists might get weapons of mass destruction . “There was a risk , a real risk , that Saddam Hussein would pass weapons or materials or information to terrorist networks , and in the world after September the 11th , that was a risk we could not afford to take , ” Bush said . [ Correction ] In 2004 , the Central Intelligence Agency released a report that concludes that Saddam Hussein did not possess stockpiles of illicit weapons at the time of the U . S . invasion in March 2003 , nor was any program to produce them under way at the time . [ All subjects ] The President travels to Ohio tomorrow to give another speech about Iraq . Study 2 , Experiment 1 ( WMD ) : Dependent variable Immediately before the U . S . invasion , Iraq had an active weapons of mass destruction program and large stockpiles of WMD . - Strongly disagree [ 1 ] - Somewhat disagree [ 2 ] - Neither agree nor disagree [ 3 ] - Somewhat agree [ 4 ] - Strongly agree [ 5 ] Study 2 , Experiment 2 ( Tax cuts ) : News text [ New York Times / FoxNews . com ] August 6 , 2005 President George W . Bush urged Congress to make permanent the tax cuts enacted during his first term and draft legislation to bolster the Social Security program , after the lawmakers return from their August break . “The tax relief stimulated economic vitality and growth and it has helped increase revenues to the Treasury , ” Bush said in his weekly radio address . “The increased revenues and our spending restraint have led to good progress in reducing the federal deficit . ” The expanding economy is helping reduce the amount of money the U . S . government plans to borrow from July through September , the Treasury Department said on Wednesday . The government will borrow a net $ 59 billion in the current quarter , $ 44 billion less than it originally predicted , as a surge in tax revenue cut the forecast for the federal budget deficit . The White House’s Office of Management and Budget last month forecast a $ 333 billion budget gap for the fiscal year that ends Sept . 30 , down from a record $ 412 billion last year . [ Correction ] However , even with the recent increases , revenues in 2005 will remain well below previous projections from the Congressional Budget Office . The major tax cut of 2001 and further cuts in each of the last three years were followed by an unprecedented three - year decline in nominal tax revenues , from $ 2 trillion in 2000 to $ 1 . 8 trillion in 2003 . Last year , revenues rebounded slightly to $ 1 . 9 trillion . But at 16 . 3 percent of the gross domestic product , last year’s revenue total , measured against the size of the economy , was the lowest level since 1959 . Study 2 , Experiment 2 ( Tax cuts ) : Dependent variable President Bush’s tax cuts have increased government revenue . - Strongly disagree [ 1 ] - Somewhat disagree [ 2 ] - Neither agree nor disagree [ 3 ] - Somewhat agree [ 4 ] - Strongly agree [ 5 ] Study 2 , Experiment 3 ( Stem cell research ) : News text [ New York Times / FoxNews . com ] August 10 , 2004 Sen . John Edwards ( D - N . C . ) yesterday slammed President Bush and promised that a Kerry administration would support the promising young field of embryonic stem cell research . The vice presidential contender ' s comments came on the third anniversary of President Bush ' s televised address to the nation announcing a funding policy for the controversial research , which relies on human embryos as a source of cells . The much - debated but still experimental field of study has become an unanticipated wedge issue in this fall’s election . Edwards’s running mate on the Democratic ticket , Sen . John F . Kerry ( Mass . ) , mentioned the topic in a number of speeches last week . Kerry also devoted a large chunk of the Democrats’ weekly radio address Saturday to it , saying that science should not be sacrificed for ideology . “We’re going to lift the ban on stem cell research , ” Kerry said . “We’re going to listen to our scientists and stand up for science . We’re going to say yes to knowledge , yes to discovery and yes to a new era of hope for all Americans . ” [ Correction ] However , experts pointed out that Bush ' s action does not limit private funding of stem cell research . He is actually the first president to allow the use of federal funds to study human embryonic stem cells , but his policy limits federal support of such research to colonies derived from embryos already destroyed by August 2001 . Study 2 , Experiment 3 ( Stem cell research ) : Dependent variable President Bush has banned stem cell research in the United States . - Strongly disagree [ 1 ] - Somewhat disagree [ 2 ] - Neither agree nor disagree [ 3 ] - Somewhat agree [ 4 ] - Strongly agree [ 5 ] Figure 1 − 2 − 1 0 1 2 O r de r ed p r ob i t c oe ff i c i en t Very liberal Centrist Very conservative WMD correction 95 % confidence interval Estimated marginal effect by ideology : Fall 2005 Effect of correction on WMD misperception Figure 2 0 . 1 . 2 . 3 . 4 . 5 . 6 . 7 P r ed i c t ed r e s pon s e p r obab ili t y Strongly disagree Strongly agree No correction Correction Liberal 0 . 1 . 2 . 3 . 4 . 5 . 6 . 7 Strongly disagree Strongly agree No correction Correction Conservative Predicted opinion : Fall 2005 Did Iraq have WMD ? Figure 3 − 2 − 1 0 1 2 O r de r ed p r ob i t c oe ff i c i en t Very liberal Centrist Very conservative WMD correction 95 % confidence interval Estimated marginal effect by ideology : Spring 2006 Effect of correction on WMD misperception Figure 4 0 . 25 . 5 . 75 Strongly disagree Strongly agree No correction Correction Liberal , Iraq not most important issue 0 . 25 . 5 . 75 Strongly disagree Strongly agree No correction Correction Liberal , Iraq most important issue 0 . 25 . 5 . 75 Strongly disagree Strongly agree No correction Correction Conservative , Iraq not most important issue 0 . 25 . 5 . 75 Strongly disagree Strongly agree No correction Correction Conservative , Iraq most important issue P r ed i c t ed r e s pon s e p r obab ili t y Predicted opinion : Spring 2006 Did Iraq have WMD ? Figure 5 − 1 − . 5 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 O r de r ed p r ob i t c oe ff i c i en t Very liberal Centrist Very conservative Tax / revenue correction 95 % confidence interval Estimated marginal effect by ideology : Spring 2006 Effect of correction on tax / revenue misperception Figure 6 0 . 1 . 2 . 3 . 4 . 5 P r ed i c t ed r e s pon s e p r obab ili t y Strongly disagree Strongly agree No correction Correction Liberal 0 . 1 . 2 . 3 . 4 . 5 Strongly disagree Strongly agree No correction Correction Conservative Predicted opinion : Spring 2006 Do tax cuts increase revenue ? Figure 7 − 1 . 5 − 1 − . 5 0 . 5 O r de r ed p r ob i t c oe ff i c i en t Very liberal Centrist Very conservative Stem cell correction 95 % confidence interval Estimated marginal effect by ideology : Spring 2006 Effect of correction on stem cell ban misperception Figure 8 0 . 1 . 2 . 3 . 4 P r ed i c t ed r e s pon s e p r obab ili t y Strongly disagree Strongly agree No correction Correction Liberal 0 . 1 . 2 . 3 . 4 Strongly disagree Strongly agree No correction Correction Conservative Predicted opinion : Spring 2006 Is stem cell research banned ? Table 1 – Ordered probit models of WMD misperception ( fall 2005 ) * p < . 10 , * * p < . 05 , * * * p < . 01 ( two - sided ) Model 1 Model 2 Correction 0 . 050 0 . 199 ( 0 . 193 ) ( 0 . 201 ) Ideology 0 . 358 * * * 0 . 221 * * * ( 0 . 068 ) ( 0 . 084 ) Political knowledge - 1 . 138 * * * - 1 . 122 * * * ( 0 . 376 ) ( 0 . 377 ) Mortality salience 0 . 278 0 . 275 ( 0 . 194 ) ( 0 . 195 ) Correction * ideology 0 . 367 * * * ( 0 . 136 ) ( Cutpoint 1 ) - 1 . 392 * * * - 1 . 373 * * * ( 0 . 346 ) ( 0 . 347 ) ( Cutpoint 2 ) - 0 . 739 * * - 0 . 699 * * ( 0 . 336 ) ( 0 . 338 ) ( Cutpoint 3 ) - 0 . 029 0 . 048 ( 0 . 334 ) ( 0 . 337 ) ( Cutpoint 4 ) 1 . 377 * * * 1 . 509 * * * ( 0 . 386 ) ( 0 . 393 ) Log - likelihood - 172 . 24 - 168 . 59 N 130 130 Table 2 – Ordered probit models of WMD misperception ( spring 2006 ) * p < . 10 , * * p < . 05 , * * * p < . 01 ( two - sided ) Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Correction - 0 . 069 - 0 . 141 - 0 . 159 ( 0 . 159 ) ( 0 . 162 ) ( 0 . 177 ) Ideology 0 . 356 * * * 0 . 487 * * * 0 . 525 * * * ( 0 . 053 ) ( 0 . 074 ) ( 0 . 078 ) Political knowledge - 1 . 287 * * * - 1 . 247 * * * - 1 . 290 * * * ( 0 . 325 ) ( 0 . 327 ) ( 0 . 335 ) Correction * ideology - 0 . 270 * * * - 0 . 389 * * * ( 0 . 104 ) ( 0 . 112 ) Iraq most important - 0 . 346 ( 0 . 324 ) Correction * most important 0 . 405 ( 0 . 455 ) Ideology * most important - 0 . 304 ( 0 . 237 ) Correction * ideology * most important 0 . 797 * * ( 0 . 321 ) ( Cutpoint 1 ) - 1 . 628 * * * - 1 . 659 * * * - 1 . 767 * * * ( 0 . 296 ) ( 0 . 297 ) ( 0 . 318 ) ( Cutpoint 2 ) - 0 . 961 * * * - 0 . 985 * * * - 1 . 074 * * * ( 0 . 285 ) ( 0 . 286 ) ( 0 . 307 ) ( Cutpoint 3 ) - 0 . 269 - 0 . 278 - 0 . 344 ( 0 . 280 ) ( 0 . 281 ) ( 0 . 301 ) ( Cutpoint 4 ) 0 . 910 * * * 0 . 973 * * * 0 . 935 * * * ( 0 . 306 ) ( 0 . 311 ) ( 0 . 327 ) Log - likelihood - 255 . 59 - 252 . 17 - 248 . 06 N 195 195 195 Table 3 – Ordered probit models of tax cut / revenue misperception ( spring 2006 ) * p < . 10 , * * p < . 05 , * * * p < . 01 ( two - sided ) Model 1 Model 2 Correction 0 . 096 0 . 176 ( 0 . 152 ) ( 0 . 157 ) Ideology 0 . 180 * * * 0 . 070 ( 0 . 049 ) ( 0 . 071 ) Political knowledge - 0 . 634 * * - 0 . 596 * ( 0 . 317 ) ( 0 . 318 ) Correction * ideology 0 . 210 * * ( 0 . 097 ) ( Cutpoint 1 ) - 1 . 959 * * * - 1 . 919 * * * ( 0 . 305 ) ( 0 . 306 ) ( Cutpoint 2 ) - 1 . 128 * * * - 1 . 076 * * * ( 0 . 288 ) ( 0 . 290 ) ( Cutpoint 3 ) - 0 . 141 - 0 . 071 ( 0 . 282 ) ( 0 . 284 ) ( Cutpoint 4 ) 1 . 230 * * * 1 . 312 * * * ( 0 . 299 ) ( 0 . 301 ) Log - likelihood - 265 . 5 - 263 . 18 N 195 195 Table 4 – Ordered probit models of stem cell ban misperception ( spring 2006 ) * p < . 10 , * * p < . 05 , * * * p < . 01 ( two - sided ) Model 1 Model 2 Correction - 0 . 276 * - 0 . 329 * * ( 0 . 151 ) ( 0 . 156 ) Ideology 0 . 027 0 . 091 ( 0 . 048 ) ( 0 . 066 ) Political knowledge - 0 . 578 * - 0 . 555 * ( 0 . 311 ) ( 0 . 312 ) - 0 . 138 ( 0 . 096 ) ( Cutpoint 1 ) - 1 . 590 * * * - 1 . 607 * * * ( 0 . 288 ) ( 0 . 288 ) ( Cutpoint 2 ) - 0 . 712 * * * - 0 . 728 * * * ( 0 . 275 ) ( 0 . 275 ) ( Cutpoint 3 ) - 0 . 112 - 0 . 123 ( 0 . 272 ) ( 0 . 272 ) ( Cutpoint 4 ) 0 . 810 * * * 0 . 809 * * * ( 0 . 282 ) ( 0 . 282 ) Log - likelihood - 296 . 65 - 295 . 62 N 195 195 Correction * ideology