Accepted Manuscript Full length article Intracellular co - delivery of Sr ion and phenamil drug through mesoporous bio - glass nanocarriers synergizes BMP signaling and tissue mineralization Jung - Hwan Lee , Nandin Mandakhbayar , Ahmed El - Fiqi , Haw - Won Kim PII : S1742 - 7061 ( 17 ) 30458 - 0 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . actbio . 2017 . 07 . 021 Reference : ACTBIO 4988 To appear in : Acta Biomaterialia Received Date : 25 February 2017 Revised Date : 9 July 2017 Accepted Date : 12 July 2017 Please cite this article as : Lee , J - H . , Mandakhbayar , N . , El - Fiqi , A . , Kim , H - W . , Intracellular co - delivery of Sr ion and phenamil drug through mesoporous bioglass nanocarriers synergizes BMP signaling and tissue mineralization , Acta Biomaterialia ( 2017 ) , doi : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . actbio . 2017 . 07 . 021 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication . As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript . The manuscript will undergo copyediting , typesetting , and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form . Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content , and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain . Intracellular co - delivery of Sr ion and phenamil drug through mesoporous bioglass nanocarriers synergizes BMP signaling and tissue mineralization Jung - Hwan Lee 1 , , Nandin Mandakhbayar 1 , 2 , Ahmed El - Fiqi 1 , 2 and Haw - Won Kim 1 , 2 , 3 , * 1 Institute of Tissue Regeneration Engineering ( ITREN ) , Dankook University , Cheonan 330 - 714 , South Korea 2 Department of Nanobiomedical Science and BK21 PLUS NBM Global Research Center for Regenerative Medicine , Dankook University , Cheonan 330 - 714 , South Korea 3 Department of Biomaterials Science , School of Dentistry , Dankook University , Cheonan 330 - 714 , South Korea - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - * Corresponding Author Hae - Won Kim , PhD , Professor , Institute of Tissue Regeneration Engineering ( ITREN ) , Dankook University , Cheonan 330 - 714 , Republic of Korea , Tel ) + 82 41 550 3081 ; Fax ) + 82 41 550 3085 ; E - mail ) kimhw @ dku . edu For : Acta biomaterialia Acta biomaterialia 1 Abstract : Inducing differentiation and maturation of resident multipotent stem cells ( MSCs ) is an important strategy to regenerate hard tissues in mal - calcification conditions . Here we explore a co - delivery approach of therapeutic molecules comprised of ion and drug through a mesoporous bioglass nanoparticle ( MBN ) for this purpose . Recently , MBN has offered unique potential as a nanocarrier for hard tissues , in terms of high mesoporosity , bone bioactivity ( and possibly degradability ) , tunable delivery of biomolecules , and ionic modification . Herein Sr ion is structurally doped to MBN while drug Phenamil is externally loaded as a small molecule activator of BMP signaling , for the stimulation of osteo / odontogenesis and mineralization of human MSCs derived from dental pulp . The Sr - doped MBN ( 85Si : 10Ca : 5Sr ) sol - gel processed presents a high mesoporosity with a pore size of ~ 6 nm . In particular , Sr ion is released slowly at a daily rate of ~ 3 ppm per mg nanoparticles for up to 7 days , a level therapeutically effective for cellular stimulation . The Sr - MBN is internalized to most MSCs via an ATP dependent macropinocytosis within hours , increasing the intracellular levels of Sr , Ca and Si ions . Phenamil is loaded maximally ~ 30 % into Sr - MBN and then released slowly for up to 7 days . The co - delivered molecules ( Sr ion and Phenamil drug ) have profound effects on the differentiation and maturation of cells , i . e . , significantly enhancing expression of osteo / odontogenic genes , alkaline phosphatase activity , and mineralization of cells . Of note , the stimulation is a result of a synergism of Sr and Phenamil , through a Trb3 - dependent BMP signaling pathway . This biological synergism is further evidenced in vivo in a mal - calcification condition involving an extracted tooth implantation in dorsal subcutaneous tissues of rats . Six weeks post operation evidences the osseous - dentinal hard tissue formation , which is significantly stimulated by the Sr / Phenamil delivery , based on histomorphometric and micro - computed tomographic analyses . The bioactive nanoparticles releasing both Sr ion and Phenamil drug are considered to be a promising therapeutic nanocarrier platform for hard tissue regeneration . Furthermore , this novel ion / drug co - delivery concept through nanoparticles can be extensively used for other tissues that require different therapeutic treatment . Keywords : Co - delivery ; therapeutic ion ; BMP signaling activator ; bioglass nanocarrier ; multipotent stem cells ; hard tissue regeneration Acta biomaterialia 2 1 . Introduction Bioactive glasses ( BGs ) , clinically proven over the last 40 years , are one of the most impactful biomaterials [ 1 - 5 ] . The applications are primarily hard tissues such as bone , dentin and cementum , but also extend many surrounding soft tissues including ligament , tendon , muscle and skin [ 6 - 10 ] . BGs are basically silica - based containing CaO , P 2 O 5 , and other oxide ( s ) , although silica - free borate - containing glasses with bioactivity have also been reported [ 11 ] . One of the most recent intriguing research inputs on this is the development of nano - scaled BGs , either in the form of nanofibers , nanotubes or nanoparticulates [ 12 - 15 ] . Among them , BG nanoparticles with mesoporosity combine several key assets in nano - bio domain , such as i ) loading and delivery of biomolecules , ii ) bioactive composition , and iii ) nanoscale morphology , providing nanotopological matrix cues for cellular anchorage or delivering therapeutics within cellular compartments . Even with their infancy , recent studies on BG nanoparticles have shown some promising outcomes . For example , BG nanoparticles treated to dental tissue ( carious dentin ) were effective in repairing dentin - pulp complex tissue [ 14 , 16 ] . Furthermore , when added to polymer scaffolds or inorganic cements , BG nanoparticles played an essential role in cellular stimulation to an osteogenesis [ 17 , 18 ] . The loading and delivery capacity of BG nanoparticles has also been highlighted ; through control over the mesopore size and surface chemistry , different types of biomolecules ( from small drug to large plasmid DNA ) could be effectively loaded and sustainably released to exhibit therapeutic functions [ 19 , 20 ] . In fact , those features of BG nanoparticles are benefited mostly from the conventional mesoporous silica nanoparticles ( MSNs ) , such as mesoporosity and surface chemistry [ 21 - 25 ] . However , BG nanoparticles incorporate additional ions , primarily Ca ( and possibly phosphate ) within silica glass network , and this defines unique physico - chemical and biological properties of BG nanoparticles , significantly different from MSNs . For example , the added Ca ions loosen the silica network , making the nanomaterials water - degradable , a prime asset of safe nanocarrier ; and the released Ca ions accelerate the deposition of calcium phosphate bone mineral - like phase ; and even further , such an ionic release can stimulate cellular functions . A promising aspect is that various ions ( Sr 2 + , Zn 2 + , Mg 2 + , Co 2 + and Ag + ) can be doped to the BG nanoparticle structure at proper doses , to target therapeutic functions , such as stimulating cell proliferation , osteogenesis , and angiogenesis , or relieving inflammation and bacterial effect [ 15 , 26 - 28 ] . Among the ions , Sr 2 + has been implicated to have profound effects on hard tissue repair processes , such as the stimulation of osteo / odontoblastic functions , the induction of osteo / odontogenesis of progenitor / stem cells , and the inhibition of osteoclastic activities [ 29 , 30 ] . For this reason , Sr 2 + has been used clinically in the form of strontium ranelate to treat osteoporosis [ 31 - 33 ] . When Sr 2 + is internalized into cells , it can interact with intracellular signaling molecules to improve and synergize the target biological functions [ 34 ] . The stimulating role of Sr 2 + in hard tissue repair process is known to be through the bone morphogenetic protein 2 ( BMP2 ) / Smad signaling pathway ; therefore , the co - administrative approach of Sr 2 + with BMP2 - activating molecules is envisaged to synergize therapeutic effects . Phenamil , known as an irreversible inhibitor of sodium channel , has recently been highlighted as a potent small molecule BMP signaling activator [ 35 ] . When phenamil was treated to osteoblasts or odontoblasts , the cellular activity , secretion of ECM molecules and calcification were significantly enhanced through BMP2 / Smad signaling pathway [ 36 ] . The small molecule activator is relatively stable in physiological conditions , cost - effective , less tumorigenic , Acta biomaterialia 3 and has reduced side effects related with overdoses when compared to biological therapeutic molecules such as growth factors [ 37 - 41 ] . Here we aim to co - deliver those BMP signaling molecules , phenamil and Sr 2 + , through the BG nanoparticle carrier . While Sr 2 + constitutes ‘intrinsically’ the BG nanoparticle chemistry , phenamil is ‘extrinsically’ loaded onto the mesopores of the nanoparticles . These two molecules are internalized to cells to synergize the osteo / odontogenic stimulating BMP pathway . Human MSCs derived from dental pulp are used as a model cell to examine the co - delivery effects on the odonto / osteogenic differentiation of stem cells and the possible hard tissue matrix production through BMP signaling . The effects are also proven in the in vivo mal - calcification condition involving a subcutaneous implantation of extracted tooth defects . This study is the first to utilize ‘ion’ with ‘drug’ as the therapeutic molecules in nanocarriers for tissue regeneration , thus will provide informative idea for the design and development of future nano - therapeutic systems . 2 . Materials and methods 2 . 1 . Materials Tetraethyl orthosilicate ( TEOS , C 8 H 20 O 4 Si ) , strontium nitrate , ( Sr ( NO 3 ) 2 ) , calcium nitrate tetrahydrate ( Ca ( NO 3 ) 2 ·4H 2 O ) , poly ( ethylene glycol ) ( PEG , ( C 2 H 4 ) n H 2 O ) , ammonium hydroxide ( NH 4 OH ) , anhydrous methanol ( CH 3 OH ) , tris - hydroxymethylaminomethane ( Tris – buffer , NH 2 C ( CH 2 OH ) 3 ) , 1 N hydrochloric acid ( IN HCl ) , nitric acid ( HNO 3 ) , phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ) tablets and highly pure chemicals of simulated body fluid ( SBF ) were all purchased from Sigma - Aldrich . Phenamil ( in methanesulfonate salt form , C 12 H 12 ClN 7 O · CH 3 SO 3 H ) as a small molecular BMP activator was also purchased from Sigma - Aldrich . Ultrapure deionized water ( DW , 18 . 2 MΩ . cm , Millipore Direct - Q system ) was used in all experiments . 2 . 2 . Synthesis of Sr - doped mesoporous BG nanoparticles Mesoporous BG nanoparticles doped with Sr ions ( coded as ‘Sr - MBN’ ) are based on 85SiO 2 – ( 15 - x ) CaO – xSrO glass composition ( x = 5 wt % ) . Mesoporous BG nanoparticles without Sr ions ( x = 0 wt % , coded as ‘MBN’ ) are used as a comparison group . The Sr - MBN and MBN were prepared by the ultrasound - assisted sol - gel method ( alkali - mediated ) using PEG as a structural template [ 12 ] . Briefly , 5 g of PEG and 0 . 189 g of Ca ( NO 3 ) 2 ·4H 2 O ( for MBN ) or 5 g of PEG , 0 . 126 g of Ca ( NO 3 ) 2 ·4H 2 O and 0 . 031 g of Sr ( NO 3 ) 2 ( for Sr - MBN ) were dissolved in 150 ml of alkaline methanol ( around pH 12 . 5 ) . In parallel , another solution of TEOS was prepared by diluting 0 . 884 g of TEOS in 30 ml of anhydrous methanol . The TEOS solution was added drop - wise to the first - prepared solution under vigorous stirring and the simultaneous application of ultrasound as described previously [ 20 , 42 ] . The white precipitate obtained after 24 h of stirring was separated and washed with DW / ethanol using 3 cycles of centrifugation / redispersion at 5000 rpm for 5 min and then the collected precipitate was dried at 70°C overnight . The organic template , PEG , was removed by calcination of the dried powder at 600°C for 5 h in air . Finally , the calcined powder was stored under vacuum for further uses . Acta biomaterialia 4 2 . 3 . Characterizations of nanoparticles All data / images were shown as the representative ones from independent triplicate experiments using nanoparticles from different batches . The phase of the nanoparticles was investigated with X - ray diffractometer ( XRD , Rigaku , Ultima IV , Japan ) with CuKα radiation ( λ = 1 . 5418 °A ) . X - ray was generated ( 40 mA and 40 kV ) to obtain diffraction angles ( 2ϴ ) from 4 to 70 o with a step size of 0 . 02 o . The morphology and microstructure of the nanoparticles were observed with transmission electron microscope ( HR - TEM , JEM - 3010 , JEOL , Japan ) . Specific surface area , pore volume and pore size were analyzed from N 2 adsorption - desorption measurements ( Quadrasorb SI , Quantachrom instruments Ltd . , USA ) . The specific surface area was calculated according to the basis of Brunauer - Emmett - Teller ( BET ) method while pore size and pore volume were determined with the Non - Local Density Functional Theory method . The composition of the nanoparticles was examined by X - ray photoelectron spectroscopy ( XPS , ESCA 2000 , V . G . Microtech , UK ) with a monochromatic Al Kα source ( 1486 . 6 eV ) operating at a vacuum pressure of ~ 10 - 10 torr . The surface charge of nanoparticles was investigated with zeta ( ζ ) potential analyzer ( Zetasizer Nano ZS , Malvern Instruments , UK ) at pH 7 . 4 . The ζ - potential was measured in distilled water at 25°C with an applied field strength ( 20 V / cm ) for five measurements ( each measurement is the average of 40 runs ) . The in vitro apatite forming ability of the nanoparticles was tested in simulated body fluid ( SBF ) at 37°C . The SBF was prepared following the previous protocols [ 43 ] . The samples were immersed in 10 ml of SBF for up to 21 days . The phase of the nanoparticles after immersion in SBF was analyzed with XRD using the same conditions mentioned above . The hydroxyapatite growth on nanoparticles was also observed by HR - TEM . Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy with attenuated total reflectance mode ( ATR - FTIR ; Varian 640 - IR , Australia ) was also used to identify the chemical bonds . The spectra were obtained in the range 2000 – 400 cm - 1 with a resolution of 4 cm - 1 using diamond crystal accessory ( GladiATR , PIKE Technologies , USA ) . 2 . 4 . In vitro acellular ionic release measurement The cumulative release of Si , Ca , and Sr ions from the nanoparticles was measured for up to 28 days . 50 mg of nanoparticles was immersed in 10 ml Tris - HCl buffered solution with pH 7 . 4 and then transferred to an incubator shaker operated at 120 rpm and 37°C . At predetermined time points ( 0 . 5 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 7 , 12 , 21 , and 28 days ) , samples were centrifuged ( 15000 rpm ) for 10 min and the supernatants were collected for the determination of ions released with inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry ( ICP - AES ; OPTIMA 4300 DV , Perkin - Elmer , USA ) [ 12 ] . Three replicate samples were evaluated and the average and standard deviation ( SD ) value were recorded . 2 . 5 . Primary culture of MSCs from human dental pulp The MSCs were obtained from human dental pulp and used at passages below 10 throughout the experiments . All the primary cell cultures were approved by the institutional review board of Dankook University Dental Hospital ( IRB No . H - 1407 / 009 / 004 ) . After pulp tissues were extracted from noncarious third molars ( 21 years old , male , Asian , healthy candidate with no systematic or genetic disorders ) , they were added to a phosphate balanced solution ( PBS ) ( Tech and innovation , Korea ) containing 1 % Acta biomaterialia 5 penicillin / streptomycin ( Gibco ) . After the addition collagenase type I ( 0 . 08 % , Worthington Biochemical , Lakewood , NJ , USA ) , it was incubated for 30 min , with tapping every 10 min . Following an enzymatic digestion , the hDPSCs were gathered by centrifugation ( 1 , 500 rpm ) for 3 min . The cells were maintained in a normal growth medium which consists of α - MEM ( LM 008 - 01 , Welgene , Korea ) supplemented with 10 % of fetal bovine serum ( Gibco ) , 2 mM of GlutaMAX ( Gibco ) , 0 . 1 mM of L - ascorbic acid ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , and 1 % penicillin / streptomycin ( Invitrogen ) in a humidified atmosphere at 37°C with 5 % CO 2 . To induce osteo / odontogenesis of MSCs , the cells were cultured in an osteo / odontogenic supplemental medium ( OM ) that contains 10 mM of β - glycerophosphate , 50 µ g / ml of ascorbic acid , and 100 nM of dexamethasone in addition to normal growth medium [ 44 ] . 2 . 6 . Cell viability assay Cells ( 3 . 2 x 10 4 cells / ml ) were plated onto each well of 96 - well plates ( SPL Life Sciences , Korea ) , and after 24 h , the nanoparticle samples prepared at various concentrations of up to up to 320 μg / ml were added and incubated additional 24 h in OM . The cell viability ( n = 6 ) was assessed by means of a water - soluble tetrazolium salt ( WST ) assay . After washing the cells , 10 % WST salt ( EA - Cytox , Daeil Lab , Korea ) was added and incubated for 1 h , and the absorbance at 450 nm was read using a microplate reader ( SpectraMax M2e , Molecular Devices , Sunnyvale , CA , USA ) . The cell viability of the experimental groups ( n = 6 ) was presented with respect to the control group ( cell only without nanoparticles ) . Live ( green ) and dead ( red ) assay using calcein AM ( 0 . 5 (cid:1) M ) and ethidium homodimer - 1 ( 4 (cid:1) M ) ( Molecular Probes , Eugene ) were performed with a confocal laser microscope ( LSM 700 , Carl Zeiss ) after washing with PBS to confirm the cytotoxicity results . All analyses were independently performed in triplicate , and the representative means ± SDs or images were shown . 2 . 7 . Analyses of nanoparticle internalization to cells To visualize the internalization of nanoparticles ( MBN and Sr - MBN ) into MSCs , rhodamine123 ( Sigma ) - conjugated nanoparticles were prepared . Rhodamine123 and nanoparticles were mixed at an equivalent amount into dimethylformamide at 0 . 1 % w / v and then incubated overnight . The reacted nanoparticles were re - dispersed in DW and then washed with ethanol three times with centrifugation ( 10 , 000 rpm , 3 min each ) . The rhodamine123 - conjugated nanoparticles prepared at various concentrations ( 5 , 40 , 80 , and 160 μg / ml ) were incubated with MSCs ( 3 . 2 x 10 4 ) in each well of 24 - well plates . After pre - determined period of time ( 4 h ) , cells were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde ( Tech and innovation , Korea ) . All below analyses were independently performed in triplicate , and the representative means ± SDs or images were shown . The cell image was visualized with confocal laser scanning microscope ( LSM 510 , Zeiss , Switzerland ) . For this , the cultured cells were subjected to previous immunocytochemical procedures using phalloidin ( 1 : 40 , Alexa Fluor 555 Phalloidin , Invitrogen , NY , USA ) for cytoskeletal F - actin staining and 4′ , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ( DAPI ) ( 1 : 200 , 000 , Invitrogen ) for counterstaining the nucleus [ 16 ] . As a result , the rhodamine123 - conjugated nanoparticles , F - actin , and nuclei were visualized in green , red , and blue , respectively . To investigate the cellular internalization pathway , the MSCs ( 3 . 2 x 10 4 ) plated in each well of 6 - well plates were pre - incubated with amantadine hydrochloride ( 1 mM , A1260 , Sigma , St . Louis , MO , USA ) , genistein Acta biomaterialia 6 ( 100 mM , G6649 , Sigma ) , or 5 - ( N - ethyl - N - isopropyl ) amiloride ( 2 . 5 mM , A3085 , Sigma ) for 1 h , and then nanoparticles ( concentrations up to 160 μg / mL ) were treated for 4 h . To determine whether the ATP - dependent endocytosis was involved , the cells were incubated at 4°C for 4 h with the nanoparticles or were pre - treated with sodium azide ( 100 mM ) for 1 h before the nanoparticle treatment . The cells were trypsinized and centrifuged ( 10 , 000 rpm ) for 5 min , and the pellets were fixed with 4 ° C PBS . Subsequently , binding buffer ( 400 μl ) was added to each tube for analysis with a flow cytometer ( FACS Calibur , BD Biosciences , San Jose , CA , USA ) . Data for 10 , 000 cells in each sample ( n = 3 ) were analyzed using the software ( CellQuest Pro , v . 5 . 1 BD Biosciences ) . TEM was used to observe the ultrastructural image of cells and nanoparticles internalized . After 4 h of treatment of nanoparticles ( 160 μg / ml ) , the cells were fixed in 2 % glutaraldehyde ( Merck , Kenilworth , NJ , USA ) for 12 h and 2 % paraformaldehyde ( Tech and innovation ) in PBS , post - fixed , dehydrated and infiltrated with propylene oxide [ 16 ] . Samples were embedded using Embedding Kit ( Poly / Bed 812 , Polysciences , Warrington , PA , USA ) . Sections of 200 to 250 nm thickness were firstly stained with toluidinee blue ( Sigma ) for light microscope observation [ 16 ] . Sections ( 70 nm thickness ) were double - stained with uranyl acetate ( 6 % , Electron Microscopy Sciences , Hatfield , PA , USA ) for 20 min and lead citrate ( Fisher , Carlsbad , CA , USA ) for 10 min . Stained sections were cut with a diamond knife ( Diatome ) attached to Leica EM UC7 ( Leica Microsystems , Vienna , Austria ) , transferred onto copper and nickel grids , and then observed on TEM ( JEM - 1011 , JEOL ) at 80 kV . 2 . 8 . Detection of intracellular and extracellular ionic levels ( Sr , Ca , and Si ) The presence of Sr , Ca and Si ions in the cells and the media was detected . The cells ( 3 . 2 x 10 4 ) were cultured in 3 mL differentiation medium within each well of 6 - well plates with or without the treatment of 160 μg / ml nanoparticles . After 4 , 12 , 24 , 48 or 72 h , the cultured media and cell pellets ( n = 3 ) were gathered separately to analyze the ionic contents using inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry ( ICP - AES , Optima 4300 DV , PerkinElmer ) . The cultured media were centrifuged ( 12 , 000 rpm ) for 10 min and supernatant was gently obtained to exclude any remaining nanoparticles . For detecting the ions within cells , the cells were washed , trypsinized , and centrifuged ( 2 , 000 rpm for 3 min ) to remove non - internalized nanoparticles . After removing supernatant and drying , the cell pellets were incubated with nitric acid ( 70 % , Sigma ) . The mixtures were incubated for 3 h on a hot plate ( 180°C ) and then cooled to RT , and a final volume was set at 1 . 5 ml , same as the cultured media , to directly compare the ion levels present in the cells and in the media . ICP - AES was used to detect the concentrations of various ions ( Sr , Ca and Si ) with argon plasma ( 6000 K ) with the detection limit ( 0 . 1 ppm ) . Total ion concentrations were normalized with total cell numbers at the determined period . All analyses were independently performed in triplicate , and the representative means ± SDs were shown . 2 . 9 . Osteo / odontogenesis assay by mRNA expression The MSCs were cultured with the nanoparticles ( MBN or Sr - MBN ) at various concentrations ( 80 or 160 μg / ml ) in each well of 24 – well plates for 3 , 7 , 14 , and 21 days with or without OM . Total RNA was extracted from the MSCs using Ribospin ( GeneAll , Seoul , Korea ) , and 1 μg of RNA was reverse - transcribed to cDNA with oligo - dT ( Venlo , Netherlands , Qiagen ) , a pre - mixture ( AccuPower RT PreMix , Bioneer , Korea ) , and a Acta biomaterialia 7 2720 Thermal Cycler ( Applied Biosystems , Foster City , CA , USA ) . Quantitative mRNA expression level was measured using quantitative real - time PCR experiments with a SYBR Green ( Applied Biosystems ) and StepOnePlus machine ( Applied Biosystems ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . Real - time PCR was performed using the following primer sequences : Glyceraldehyde 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase ( GAPDH ) , forward 5′ - ACATCAAGAAGGTGGTGAAG - 3′ & reverse 5′ - AAATGAGCTTGACAAAGTGG - 3′ ; collagen type 1 alpha ( COL1A ) , forward 5′ - AAGTCTTCTGCAACATGGAG - 3′ & reverse 5′ - TACTCGAACTGGAATCCATC - 3′ ; dentin matrix protein 1 ( DMP1 ) , forward 5′ - CCCTTGGAGAGCAGTGAGTC - 3′ & reverse 5′ - CTCCTTTTCCTGTGCTCCTG - 3′ ; dentin sialophosphoprotein ( DSPP ) , forward 5′ - GAAGATGCTGGCCTGGATAA - 3′ & reverse 5′ - TCTTCTTTCCCATGGTCCTG - 3′ ; and osteocalcin ( OCN ) , forward 5′ - AGCAAAGGTGCAGCCTTTGT - 3′ & reverse 5′ - GCGCCTGGGTCTCTTCACT - 3′ . After confirming qPCR efficiency from controls ( no template , positive ( OM treatment ) and no amplification controls ) , the mRNA expression levels were normalized to GAPDH , and the relative fold change was calculated , based on the 2 - ΔΔCt value with respect to undifferentiated MSCs by StepOne software v2 . 3 . Four replicate samples ( n = 4 ) were used for each condition . All analyses were independently performed in triplicate , and the representative means ± SDs were shown . 2 . 10 . Osteo / odontogenesis assay by alkaline phosphatase activity The MSCs were cultured with the nanoparticles ( MBN or Sr - MBN ) at various concentrations ( 80 or 160 μg / ml ) in each well of 24 – well plates for 14 and 21 days with or without OM . 1 mL of Triton X - 100 ( 0 . 2 % , Sigma ) was added to each well to obtain cell lysates . After three freeze – thaw cycles ( −70°C and RT , 45 min each ) to rupture the cell membranes as well as extract the proteins and DNA , they were then centrifuged ( 13 , 000 g ) for 20 min at 4°C . Alkaline phosphatase ( ALP ) activity ( n = 5 ) was detected using 3 . 3 mM of p - nitrophenyl phosphate as the substrate in 2 - aminomethyl - 1 - propanol ( pH 10 . 3 , 0 . 25 M ) and MgCl 2 ( 0 . 16 mM ) using the supernatant . Absorbance at a wavelength of 405 nm was measured using a microplate reader to quantify ALP activity and was normalized to the total dsDNA quantity analyzed by the PicoGreen assay using Quant - iT PicoGreen Kit ( Invitrogen ) following standard protocols . Briefly , each cell lysate solution ( 100 μL ) of was added to same amount of PicoGreen reagent and incubated that mixtures in the dark at RT for 5 min . The absorbance at an excitation / emission of 480 / 520 nm was read using the microplate reader . Five replicate samples ( n = 5 ) were used for each condition . All analyses were independently performed in triplicate , and the representative means ± SDs were shown . 2 . 11 . Cellular mineralization assay by Alizarin red S staining The MSCs were cultured with the nanoparticles ( MBN or Sr - MBN ) at various concentrations ( 80 or 160 μg / ml ) in each well of 12 well plates for 21 and 28 days with or without OM ( n = 5 ) . After the cells were fixed in formaldehyde ( 10 % ) for 30 min , cells were washed with distilled water and stained with alizarin red S ( ARS ; pH 4 . 2 and 40 mM ) for 30 min , with gentle agitation . The level of ARS staining was observed under a light microscope . For quantification , 10 % cetylpyridinium chloride ( Sigma ) in sodium phosphate ( pH 7 . 0 and 10 mM ) was added to the culture dish to elute the stains for 30 min at RT . The optical density of the eluted products was determined at 562 nm using a microplate reader . All experiments were performed in triplicate . 2 . 12 . Loading and release of phenamil Acta biomaterialia 8 Phenamil was loaded onto the nanoparticles ( MBN or Sr - MBN ) as the small molecular activator of BMP signaling . To load the drug molecules , the phenamil solutions were prepared in DMSO at varying concentrations ( 0 - 15 mg / ml ) . The nanoparticles were then dispersed in the solution at 10 mg / ml , and then stored at 37 o C for 2 h . The amounts of phenamil loaded onto the nanoparticles ( n = 3 ) were determined by the depletion method using UV - VIS spectral measurements at λ max = 362 nm . A calibration curve of phenamil , A 362 = 0 . 0478 C + 0 . 0562 ( R 2 = 0 . 997 ) , was obtained from standard phenamil solutions ranged 0 - 50 μg / ml , where A is absorbance at 362 nm ( λ max ) and C is the concentration ( μg / ml ) . For the phenamil release test , the nanoparticles of 5 mg loaded with 1 . 12 mg of phenamil , which was from the highest loading amounts ( 290 μg of phenamil per Sr - MBN ) in previous loading test , were dispersed in 31 . 25 ml ( 160 μg / ml ) of PBS and then incubated at 37 o C . At pre - determined time points , the release medium was collected by centrifugation at 15000 rpm for 10 min and a fresh 31 . 25 ml of PBS was added for further drug release analysis , and so forth . The collected media ( n = 3 ) were analyzed at λ max = 362 nm to determine the released amount of phenamil . All analyses were independently performed in triplicate , and the representative means ± SDs were shown . 2 . 12 . Cellular effects of the phenamil loaded nanoparticles The effects on osteo / odontoblastic differentiation of MSCs by the release of phenamil from nanoparticles were evaluated by means of mRNA expression of osteo / odontogenic genes ( n = 4 ) and ARS staining assay ( n = 5 ) , following the same methods described in section 2 . 9 and 2 . 10 , respectively . The phenamil loaded within the Sr - MBN was determined to be 290 µg per mg of Sr - MBN , which is considered to be effective for the cellular stimulation . Furthermore , phenamil only group ( without the help of nanoparticles ) was also used ; 36 . 0 µg / ml of phenamil , the same concentration when loaded onto 160 µg / ml phenamil loaded Sr - MBN . 2 . 13 . Identification of BMP signaling pathways by protein expression The molecular mechanism of the osteo / odontogenesis by the ions and phenamil released from the nanoparticles was examined by the Ttrb3 - dependent BMP signaling pathway . MSCs were cultured with the treatment of the nanoparticles either loading phenamil or not , onto each well of a 6 well plates for 3 days with OM . 100ng / ml of BMP was also used as a positive control . Immunoblot assay was performed to observe the protein expression , as described previously [ 45 ] . Cell lysates were collected using PRO - PREP ( Intron biotechnology , KOREA ) and Nuclear / cytosolic fractionation Kit ( Cell biolabs , San Diego , Cam USA ) for the extraction of total and nucleus protein , respectively , according to the manufacturer’s protocol . After total protein concentration was determined in each cell lysate by the Bradford protein assay ( Biorad , Hercules , CA ) , 10 μg of cell lysates was supplemented with lithium dodecyl sulfate sample buffer and reducing agent and filled in each well of precast polyacrylamide gels ( Bolt 4 - 12 % Bis - Tris Plus Gels ) . 200 V was set for 22 min in Mini Gel tank for electrophoresis . iBlot 2 gel transfer machine ( 25V , 7 min ) was used to transfer protein into PVDF membrane ( iBlot® 2 Transfer Stacks ) . For the blocking and the conjugation of primary or secondary antibody on target protein , iBind Flex Western Device was used . All the chemicals related were from ThermoFisher Scientific ( Waltham , MA , USA ) . The primary antibodies used were Trb3 ( sc - 67121 , Santa Cruz ) , Smurf1 ( # 2174 , Cell Signaling Technology ) , β - actin ( # 4970 , Cell Signaling Technology ) , Acta biomaterialia 9 SMAD 1 / 5 / 8 ( sc - 6031 , Santa Cruz ) , and PCNA ( sc - 7907 , Santa Cruz ) . For secondary antibody , anti - rabbit IgG , HRP - linked Antibody ( # 7074 , Cell Signaling Technology ) was used . The protein signals were visualized by enhanced chemiluminescence ( Lumi - pico solution , Korea ) with exposure to ImageQuant LAS 500 ( GE Healthcare , USA ) and the band intensities were quantified using ImageQuant software ( ver . 7 . 0 , GE Healthcare ) . The immunoblot experiments ( n = 3 ) were independently performed in triplicate , and the representative means ± SDs or images were shown . 2 . 14 . In vivo study The protocol of the animal housing , care and experimental protocols were approved by Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee ( No . 12 – 027 , Dankook University ) . A total of 13 , 5 weeks old , 350 – 400 g healthy male SD rats were included in this study . Animals were anesthetized by an injection of 80 mg / kg Zoletil® and 10 mg / kg Rompun® . A mal - calcification in vivo model was made using extracted tooth where a defect was generated and then implanted in ectopic conditions ( autologous tooth implantation in dorsal subcutaneous tissue ) after slight modification of previously reported in vivo model [ 46 ] . In detail , extracted upper first molar tooth from left and right side , defect was generated by a round shaped diamond bur ( ϕ = 1 . 35 mm ) equipped with a high speed hand piece ( Sirona , Germany ) until the roof of a pulp chamber was removed . Randomly , five teeth were filled with 1 mg of MBN , Sr - MBN , or phenamil loaded Sr - MBN in the drilled defect . As a counterpart for comparison , 22 μg of phenamil ( the same amount as used in the 1 mg of phenamil - loaded Sr - MBN ) was administered into the defect with cotton rolls ; an aliquot of 22 μl of phenamil dissolved in distilled water ( 1 mg / ml ) was used . Blank cotton rolls was also used as a negative control . For implantation in subcutaneous soft tissues , the dorsal skin of the rat was shaved and a skin incision was made for left and right small subcutaneous pockets from the spine of each rat . Following recovery from anesthesia , the rats were housed individually and standard pellet food and water were provided adlibitum for another 6 weeks . After scarification , micro - computed tomography ( μCT ) imaging was taken ( Skyscan 1176 , Skyscan , Aartselaar , Belgium ) with X - ray at 65 kV and 385 μA , with an exposure time of 279 ms for each section ( µm ) and new hard tissue formation was analyzed according to previous report [ 47 ] . Briefly , images reconstructed from scanned ones were used to analyze the hard tissue formation over the region of interest in the aforementioned defect area ( drilled area ) using CTAn Skyscan software ( ver . 1 . 16 . 4 . 1 ) ; new hard tissue volume ( % ) , hard tissue surface ( mm 2 ) , and hard tissue surface density ( 1 / mm ) in defect area . Three - dimensional ( 3D ) images were created and visualized by CTvol Skyscan software ( ver . 2 . 3 . 2 . 0 ) . After μCT scanning , harvested samples were decalcified with RapidCal ( BBC Biochemical Co . , Stanwood , WA , USA ) to remove calcified tissue ( enamel and mineral in dentin and cementum ) , and dehydrated with a graded series of increasing ethanol dilutions ( from 70 % to 100 % ) for histological analysis . The bisected samples were embedded in paraffin , and then serially cut into a 5 - μm thickness ( RM2245 , Leica , Germany ) . Vertical sections with respect to an anatomical position were first made on one representative sample ( from five samples ) for each experimental group to confirm the drilling portion . Then , a special care was taken to preserve the cutting direction horizontally to achieve more representative images of dentin regeneration . The sections on slide glass were stained with hematoxylin - eosin ( HE ) using standard protocols to examine dentin regeneration . Under a light microscope ( IX71 , Olympus , Tokyo , Japan ) , digital images were photographed using Meta - Morph . Semi - quantification analysis was made using image J ( ver . 1 . 50b , NIH , Acta biomaterialia 10 USA ) to determine the osteodentin - like tissue area proportion ( with respect to pulp chamber area ) and the thickness of tertiary dentin layer based on the histological images . 2 . 15 . Statistical analysis All data are reported as the mean ± one SD from at least triplicate experimental sets . Statistical analysis was performed using one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) with a Tukey’s post hoc test , at a significance level p < 0 . 05 . 3 . Result and discussion 3 . 1 . Characteristics of nanoparticles Both nanoparticles ( MBN or Sr - MBN ) were sol - gel synthesized to have sizes of approximately 60 nm with a spherical morphology as shown in TEM images ( Fig . 1A ) . A higher magnification in inset revealed a mesoporous structure with a worm - like pattern , and there was no significant difference in the pore morphology between MBN and Sr - MBN . The TEM - EDS shown in inset revealed the Si : Ca : Sr weight ratio of around 85 : 10 : 5 ( exactly 85 . 1±2 . 1 : 10 . 1±0 . 7 : 4 . 8±0 . 3 by weight ) for Sr - MBN , confirming the compositions of the nanoparticles matched well those initially designed . Si : Ca ratio of MBN was around 85 : 15 ( exactly 85 . 1 ± 2 . 8 : 14 . 9 ± 1 . 4 by weight ) . The mesoporosity of the nanoparticles , as examined by N 2 adsorption - desorption isotherm and BET method , was shown in Fig . S1 and Table 1 . A surface area of 44 . 7 m 2 / g , a pore volume of 0 . 084 cm 3 / g , and an average pore size of 7 . 5 nm were recorded for MBN , and Sr - MBN showed a bit higher surface area ( 66 . 5 m 2 / g ) and pore volume ( 0 . 12 cm 3 / g ) and a slightly smaller average pore size ( 6 . 9 nm ) . The pore sizes of both nanoparticles were distributed mainly around 3 - 10 nm , and also 11 - 17 nm with small fractions ( shown in Fig . S1 ) . The average pore sizes were measured to be 7 . 5 ± 0 . 23 nm ( MBN ) and 6 . 9 0 . 92 ( Sr - MB ) . The XRD patterns ( supplementary file , Fig . S2A ) exhibited a broad amorphous peak at 2ϴ = 15 ~ 35 o , being characteristic of silica glasses . The XPS spectra on a wide scan ( Fig . 1B ) revealed peaks around 104 , 155 , 347 , 450 , 135 , 530 , and 285 eV , which attributed to Si2 p , Si2 s , Ca2 p , Ca2 s , O1 s and C1 s , respectively , for MBN [ 48 , 49 ] , and additional peak around 135 eV was observed which assigned to Sr3 d , confirming the incorporation of Sr ions within a Ca - Si glass structure . A narrow scan of the Sr3 d peak and its deconvolution analysis shown in inset clarified the status of strontium ions in the structure . The surface charge property of the nanoparticles , as measured by ζ - potential , was negative ( - 11 . 7 mV for MBN and - 14 . 6 mV for Sr - MBN ) . The apatite forming ability of the nanoparticles in SBF was also examined as this has often been used to measure the in vitro acellular bone - bioactivity of the biomaterials developed for hard tissue repair [ 50 ] . The XRD patterns ( supplementary file , Fig . S2B ) showed the development of a poorly crystallized apatite phase as early as at day 3 of the immersion , and the peak intensities increased with immersion time . The FT - IR spectra also supported the apatite formation during the SBF immersion , showing characteristic bands of phosphates ( supplementary file , Fig . S2C ) . This apatite forming behavior of Sr - MBN was similar to that observed in MBN , as reported in our previous works [ 13 , 51 ] , suggesting the Sr - MBN holds excellent acellular bone - bioactivity , a level comparable to that of MBN . Acta biomaterialia 11 Next , the ionic release behavior of the nanoparticles was examined . After immersion of the nanoparticles ( MBN or Sr - MBN ) in Tris - buffer while gentle shaking , the ionic elutes were gathered for up to 28 days and then analyzed by ICP - AES . The Si , Ca and Sr release profiles expressed in ppm and mM unit are shown in Fig . 1C , at different time scales . In general , all ions were released quickly initially ( ~ up to 3 days ) and then showed a slow - down in the release rate . The Si ion was released at similar levels for both nanoparticles while the Ca ion release was higher in MBN than in Sr - MBN , reflecting the different Ca concentrations in both glass structures . The Sr ion was released solely from Sr - MBN . On a closer examination of the initial release up to 1 day , the release of all ions was almost linear . After all , the Si and Ca ions released from MBN over 4 weeks were ~ 250 ppm ( 7 mM ) and ~ 450 ppm ( 11 . 7 mM ) , respectively ; whereas , from Sr - MBN , the released Si , Ca and Sr ions were ~ 250 ppm ( 7 mM ) , 265 ppm ( 7 . 4 mM ) , and ~ 80 ppm ( 1 . 7 mM ) , respectively . 3 . 2 . Cell viability and internalization of nanoparticles The interaction of the developed nanoparticles with MSCs from human dental pulp was first examined by the cell viability . MBN or Sr - MBN prepared at various concentrations were treated to the cells for 1 , 2 and 3 days in an odontogenic medium ( OM ) , and the viability was measured by WST assay ( Fig . 2A ) . The cell viability gradually increased with increasing nanoparticle concentration up to 320 µg / ml ( for MBN ) and up to 160 µg / ml ( for Sr - MBN ) . The cell viability was well preserved up to the test period without showing any significant cytotoxicity ( P > 0 . 05 ) . In particular , at certain concentrations of nanoparticles ( primarily at 80 and 160 µg / mL ) , the cell viability was significantly higher than the control without nanoparticle treatment ( P < 0 . 05 ) . The live / dead cell stain images ( supplementary file , Fig . S3 ) reflected well the cell viability data . The results confirmed that MSCs were highly viable in response to both MBN and Sr - MBN up to relatively high concentrations ( except 320 µg / ml of Sr - MBN ) and were even stimulated in the viability at certain concentrations , which might be the released ionic effects [ 16 ] . The cellular uptake of nanoparticles was further visualized through the Rhodamine123 which was labelled ( green color ) to the nanoparticles . Four hours after the nanoparticle treatment at various concentrations , the MSCs were imaged by confocal microscopy ( supplementary file , Fig . S4 ) . The Rhodamine123 - labelled nanoparticles were detected well in the cytosol , overlapped with F - actin in red , even at low concentration ( 5 µg / ml ) . When treated with a higher concentration of nanoparticles more cells were positive for green signals . The green signals resulted mainly from the internalized nanoparticles , not from those adhered to cell surface receptors , as confirmed by the z - stack images ( Fig . 2B ) . The cells positive for Rhodamine123 were quantified by a flow cytometry , to evaluate the nanoparticle uptake efficiency by cells . As the nanoparticle concentration increased , the green - positive cells increased gradually , reaching up to ~ 95 % when 160 µg / ml nanoparticles ( for both MBN and Sr - MBN ) were treated ( while bars in Fig . 2C ) , confirming a high internalization efficiency of the nanoparticles to cells . We next sought to find the intracellular penetration pathway of the nanoparticles . Nanoparticles transport into cells through several different pathways , such as nonspecific internalization ( diffusion ) or ATP - dependent endocytosis ( uptake ) , which includes the process of membrane structural change to envelop or absorb materials [ 52 ] . The engagement of ATP - dependent endocytosis was confirmed through experiments Acta biomaterialia 12 i ) when the cells treated with nanoparticles ( 160 µg / ml ) were cultured at 4°C for 4 h ( ‘4°C’ ) , or ii ) when they were pretreated with sodium azide ( 100 mM ) for 1 h before the nanoparticle treatment ( ‘SA’ ) . Under either of these conditions , the cellular uptake of nanoparticles significantly decreased ( P < 0 . 05 , gray bars in Fig . 2C ) , confirming the cellular uptake of MBN and Sr - MBN was through ATP - dependent endocytosis . It is known that the ATP - dependent endocytosis is categorized into either macropinocytosis , receptor - mediated endocytosis ( clathrin - mediated or caveolae - mediated ) , or phagocytosis ( mostly occurred in macrophages ) . To investigate which pathway might be dominant , various pretreatments were made by 1 h pre - incubation of hDPSCs with either 5 - ( N - ethyl - N - isopropyl ) amiloride ( ‘AL’ ) , genistein ( ‘GE’ ) , or amantadine - HCl ( ‘AT’ ) , which acts as an inhibitor of macropinocytosis , clathrin - mediated , and caveolae - mediated endocytosis , respectively [ 53 ] . This pretreatment with inhibitors to block specific endocytosis has been generally used to determine the major endocytosis pathway [ 53 - 56 ] . The treatment with ‘AL’ , among others , decreased the uptake efficiency most significantly for both types of nanoparticles ( P < 0 . 05 , from 95 % down to 65 % ) . Based on this inhibitory assay , macropinocytosis is considered as a major endocytotic pathway among the tested pathways . This macropinocytosis has been recognized as the major nonspecific endocytosis ( fluid - phase uptake ) in a number of cell types [ 54 ] , and the uptake of silica - based nanoparticles such as pure silica nanoparticles in native ( 80 ~ 500 nm ) or aminated form ( ~ 300 nm ) , and calcium - added silica nanoparticles ( 215 nm ) [ 16 , 53 , 57 , 58 ] . However , other ATP - dependent pathways such as subtypes of clathrin - independent endocytosis or other endocytosis pathways that are not revealed by the current inhibitory drug sets can also be involved , and the clarification has been challenging [ 59 - 62 ] . The TEM images ( Fig . 2D ) confirmed again the internalization of nanoparticles to MSCs . Some of the nanoparticles visualized at high electron intensity were distributed in endosomes ( ‘asterisks’ ) and some were at the border of membrane and extracellular fluid with a number of membrane ruffles developed ( ‘arrowed’ ) , a sign of engulfment process . This is a typical characteristic of macropinocytosis , reflecting the result of inhibitor assay . 3 . 3 . Intracellular and extracellular ionic levels The fact that the nanoparticles were endocytosed effectively illuminates the possible intracellular role of them . Our interest was triggered to investigate the ionic levels in cells as the calcium , silicate , and strontium ions released from the Sr - MBN should play an important role in the osteo / odontogenic differentiation [ 14 , 63 - 65 ] . During culturing of the cells with 160 µg / ml of MBN or Sr - MBN in an osteo / odontogenic medium , the intracellular and extracellular ionic levels were monitored up to 72 h by an ICP - AES quantification , as shown in Fig . 3 . The Ca ions were accumulated in cells quickly at 4 h ( ~ 15 ppm ) , which substantially dropped down at 12 h ( ~ 5 ppm ) , and then gradually decreased until 72 h , down to a level ( ~ 3 - 4 . 5 ppm ) comparable to or slightly higher than that in control cell medium ( nanoparticle - free ) . The extracellular Ca ions increased to a level ( ~ 60 - 65 ppm ) slightly higher than that in control medium ( ~ 55 ppm ) through the test period . For the case of Si ions , the intracellular level also increased initially and then decreased slowly thereafter ; but the initial ( 4 h ) rapid increase was not as high as the case observed in Ca level . Interestingly , the intracellular silicate ion in control medium continued to decrease ; as a result , the difference in silicate ion levels at 72 h between nanoparticle group ( MBN or Sr - MBN ) and control group was remarkable ( 8 . 5 - 9 ppm vs . 5 ppm ) ; much higher than the case in Ca ions . The extracellular silicate ion level increased rapidly and continued to increase to the test period , reaching a level ~ 50 ppm , in striking contrast to the medium control . The Acta biomaterialia 13 observed intracellular and extracellular levels of calcium and silicate ions similarly changed with culture time for both MBN and Sr - MBN . However , the Sr ions were only released from Sr - MBN . The intracellular level of Sr ions changed in a similar manner to that of Ca ions , i . e . , a rapid increase at 4 h followed by a slow decrease up to 72 h . Furthermore , the extracellular Sr level showed a slow but continual increase with time , and reached ~ 5 ppm at 72 h . The results demonstrated that the intracellular ionic level increased very rapidly ( within hours ) and then decreased slowly with time , simultaneously with an increase in the extracellular ionic level . It is possible that the reduced intracellular ions ( or increased extracellular ions ) with time result from cellular pumping out of ‘ions’ or ‘nanoparticles’ . While the former is a result of cellular equilibrium of ions between intra and extra environment through ion channels , the latter is known as exocytosis of the nanoparticles . In fact , many synthetic nanoparticles including silica nanoparticles are known to exocytose considerably and progressively , which is often concerned to decrease the intracellular delivery efficiency [ 66 ] . More in - depth investigation into this remains further intriguing study . The saturation of ionic levels with increasing culture time reflects the cellular equilibrium of ions between intra and extra environment [ 67 ] . Because the ions present extracellularly are refreshed mostly every 2 - 3 days in an in vitro culture , the ionic concentrations assayed herein can be precisely correlated with the cellular data in the initial a few days . The cellular phenomena at prolonged cultures ( over 3 days ) but need to be interpreted based on the possible slowly releasing ions from the internalized nanoparticles in cells . One notable finding is that the Sr ion release is robust through the test period both intracellularly and extracellularly to the levels of a few ppm ( ≈ tens of µ M ) – an ionic range that can exert therapeutic effects of stimulating various cellular responses [ 68 , 69 ] . 3 . 4 . Ionic effects on osteo / odontogenesis of MSCs After confirming the cellular internalization of nanoparticles through ATP - dependent pathway and the intracellular level of released ions , we next examined the osteo / odontoblastic differentiation of MSCs . The cells treated with 80 or 160 µg / ml of MBN or Sr - MBN in an osteo / odontogenic medium and the differentiation behaviors were investigated in terms of gene expression , ALP activity , and mineralization . As shown in Fig . 4A , the mRNA expression of osteo / odontogenic markers ( COL1A , DMP - 1 , DSPP and OCN ) at 7 , 14 and 21 days were significantly enhanced when treated with the nanoparticles ( both MBN and Sr - MBN ) with respect to control ( P < 0 . 05 ) , and the stimulating effect was more significant in the cells treated with Sr - MBN and at higher concentration ( P < 0 . 05 ) . The COL1A gene was stimulated relatively earlier , whereas the DMP - 1 , DSPP , and OCN genes were stimulated at much later periods . Of note was the remarkable increase in DMP - 1 and DSPP genes , those dentin specific markers , after 14 days . The ALP activity measured at 14 and 21 days was significantly enhanced by the nanoparticle treatment , particularly with Sr - MBN at higher concentration , i . e . , MBN 80 µg / ml < MBN 160 µg / ml ∼ Sr - MBN 80 µg / ml < MBN 160 µg / ml ( P < 0 . 05 , Fig . 4B ) . The cellular mineralization , a last stage in osteo / odontogenesis of MSCs , was then analyzed at 28 days by means of ARS method ( Fig . 4C & D ) . The ARS - stain images revealed Acta biomaterialia 14 red - colored mineralized nodules . Compared to the cells treated with MBN , those with Sr - MBN ( at both concentrations of 80 and 160 µg / ml ) showed the mineralized nodules more concentrated and larger in size , highlighting the significant role of Sr in the cellular mineralization . The series of results , i . e . , stimulating effects of Sr - BG on the osteo / odontogenic differentiation and mineralization of hDPSCs , confirmed the key therapeutic role played by the Sr ions released . Some of the studies on Sr - incorporating biomaterials like hydroxyapatite and bioactive glass granules have also witnessed the positive effects of Sr ions on the osteo / odontogenesis of progenitor / stem cells [ 70 - 72 ] . 3 . 5 . Loading and release behaviors of phenamil drug To synergize the osteo / odontogenesis of cells through Sr - MBN , we loaded phenamil , a small molecule BMP activator , onto the nanoparticles . The loading behavior of phenamil was examined ( Fig . 5A ) . The loaded amount increased gradually with increasing phenamil concentration up to 15 mg / ml , and then plateaued , which fitted well to the Langmuir isotherm theory [ 73 ] . The maximum amount of phenamil that could be loaded was about 290 ( ± 25 ) μg per mg of Sr - MBN , which corresponding to a loading efficiency as high as 29 % ; this high loading capacity of the Sr - MBN was due to the high mesoporosity of the nanoparticles , moreover , the characteristics of the drug , i . e . , positive - charged and small molecular volume ( 0 . 249 nm 3 ) , might enhance the electro - affinity of drug to pore wall and ease the penetration of drug through pore channels ( ~ 6 . 9 nm ) . The loading of phenamil onto Sr - MBN was also confirmed by ATR - FTIR analysis ( Fig . 5B ) . The IR bands at 1612 and 1526 and 731 cm - 1 , assigned to N - H bonds , are related with the phenamil molecular structure . The release of phenamil from Sr - MBN was then investigated ( Fig . 5C & D ) . The release was rapid initially and then slowed down with time . About 53 % of phenamil was released within the first 6 h and then up to ~ 80 % until 30 h ( as deduced from inset graph ) . The incremental release % explained the phenamil release in more detail ; except 22 % burst at 1 h , phenamil release was ~ 10 - 15 % every 6 h up to 30 h , and then was a few % every day up to 10 days , when a total ~ 90 % of phenamil was released . These percentages were then converted to the amounts of phenamil released . Considering the phenamil amount loaded initially onto Sr - MBN ( 290 μg per mg of Sr - MBN ≈ 46 . 4 μg per 160 μg of Sr - MBN ≈ 36 . 0 μg per 160 μg of phenamil loaded Sr - MBN ) , the released phenamil was ~ 4 - 6 μg every 6 h up to 30 h , and ~ 0 . 4 - 1 . 5 μg every day up to 10 days ; this range of phenamil has previously been shown to be effective in activating BMP signaling in osteoblasts [ 74 ] . 3 . 6 . Co - delivery effects on osteo / odontogenesis via BMP2 / Smad signaling pathway The effects of phenamil and Sr ions co - released from the Sr - MBN on the osteo / odontogenesis of cells were then examined . At days 14 and 21 , the mRNA expression of DMP - 1 and DSPP , two representative odontogenic markers , was significantly enhanced when treated with Sr - MBN and even further when treated with phenamil - loaded Sr - MBN ( P < 0 . 05 , Fig . 6A ) . With phenamil only ( free form w / o nanoparticles ) , the Acta biomaterialia 15 osteo / odontogenic stimulatory effect was significantly lower than the case through the delivery system ( P < 0 . 05 ) . At day 28 , the mineralization of cells was analyzed by ARS stain ( Fig . 6B & C ) . The treatment of phenamil free form increased the red stain level . The delivery of Sr ions ( treatment of Sr - MBN only w / o phenamil ) significantly enhanced the red color density in mineralized areas . Through the co - delivery of phenamil and Sr ions the mineralized areas became widespread and the deposited products showed higher red color density . The quantified data showed this trend of cellular mineralization in the order : medium control < phenamil free form < < Sr - MBN only < < phenamil - loaded Sr - MBN ( P < 0 . 05 , Fig . 6B ) . These results demonstrated well the synergistic effects of phenamil and Sr ions released from the Sr - MBN carriers on the differentiation and maturation of MSCs down to hard tissue lineage cells . We next sought to find the molecular mechanism underlying the stimulated osteo / odontogenic processes . Previous study showed phenamil could enhance osteogenic differentiation through Trb3 - dependent promotion of BMP signaling , which in turn accelerates the degradation of Smurf , a SMAD antagonist , resulting in stabilization of SMADs in nucleus [ 38 ] . This Trb3 / BMP signaling pathway was investigated in the osteo / odontogenic stimulation event of the co - delivered phenamil and Sr ions . The expression of proteins involved in this signaling pathway including Trb3 , Smurf1 , SMAD1 / 5 / 8 was examined by immunoblot assay , as shown in Fig . 6D - F . The treatment of phenamil ( free form ) significantly altered the expression of those proteins ( P < 0 . 05 ) ; Trb3 up , Smurf1 down , and SMAD up , proving an effective drug in the BMP signaling . When treated with Sr - MBN only ( 160 µg / ml , w / o phenamil ) , the cells were stimulated to express those BMP signaling proteins , to the levels similar to those observed in cells with phenamil only . The treatment of phenamil - loaded Sr - MBN further stimulated the up - and down - regulation of those proteins in cells . When the band intensities were quantified , the difference between phenamil - loaded Sr - MBN group and phenamil only or Sr - MBN only group was statistically significant ( P < 0 . 05 ) . The results confirmed that the delivery of phenamil and Sr ions through Sr - MBN carriers potentiated the BMP signaling in hDPSCs by down - regulating Smurf1 and in turn up - regulating the BMP signal transducer SMAD1 / 5 / 8 . 3 . 7 . Hard tissue regeneration in an in vivo mal - calcification model We next investigated the in vivo effects of the synergism of Sr ion and phenamil co - delivery through Sr - MBN . For this , an animal model involving mal - calcification conditions was designed . A defect was made in an extracted tooth which was implanted in subcutaneous sites of rats - this model is considered to demonstrate the ability of administered tools to regenerate in vivo hard tissues under severe mal - calcification conditions [ 75 ] . In particular , the Sr / phenamil MBN filled into the defect are in contact with dental pulp tissues , thus interacting with MSCs and possibly exerting in vivo efficacy . Six weeks post operation , μCT was used to obtain the 3D constructed and 2D projected images ( Fig . 7A ) . Morphometric analyses of the μCT images provided hard tissue formation indices quantitatively ( % hard tissue volume , surface area , and surface density ) , as presented in Fig . 7B . All the indices were recorded in the order : Sr - MBN + phenamil > Sr - MBN > MBN > phenamil > blank ( P < 0 . 05 ) , confirming the biological effects of Sr ions and phenamil drug delivered through the nanocarriers . Compared to the effects of phenamil ( PMN group ) , those of Sr ion ( Sr - MBN treatment group ) were more significant ( P < 0 . 05 ) ; this Acta biomaterialia 16 suggests that the Sr ions might be more critically involved in the in vivo mineralization events of pulp stem cells , and also the administration of free drug form was not as effective as it did in vitro thus requiring a carrier system . Of note , when the Sr ion and phenamil were co - delivered from the Sr - MBN the synergism was clear . The tissue samples were then histologically analyzed after HE stains to confirm the formation of osteo / dentinal structure . As shown in Fig . 7C , empty control group characterized decalcified enamel ( ‘E’ ) and old dentin ( ‘OD’ ) , and soft tissues in the pulpal region ; however , other groups showed osteo / dentinal tissues formed in the pulpal region . A higher magnification revealed this hard tissue structure . In fact , when decalcified with RapidCal reagent , enamel ( mostly inorganics ~ 96 % ) becomes hollow [ 76 ] , whereas dentin ( organics take ~ 20 % ) structure is revealed . Although the dentin can be revealed with a tubular structure in native tissues , newly formed dentinal tissues in a pulp chamber are generally reported to be nontubular , which termed as an ‘osteodentin’ structure [ 77 ] . Here we also observed such an osteodentin structure ( ‘yellow arrowed’ ) in the pulp chamber for all groups except blank control , and the osteodentin formation was more profound in the nanoparticle delivery groups , particularly in the Sr ion / phenamil co - delivered group . On a closer examination , a tertiary dentin layer ( ‘asterisks’ ) , which is considered an active layer rich in odontoblasts for dentin regeneration , was revealed well . The dentin - like tissue area and the tertiary dentin layer thickness were histomorphometrically analyzed to compare among the groups quantitatively ( Fig . 7D ) ; Sr - MBN + phenamil > Sr - MBN > MBN > phenamil > blank ( P < 0 . 05 ) , showing a trend similar to the µ CT data , and the results highlight again the synergistic role of Sr ions and phenamil drug delivered from Sr - MBN in the hard tissue regeneration in dentin defects . 4 . Concluding remarks As demonstrated , the designed Sr / phenamil co - delivering nanoparticle system was effective in stimulating osteo / odontogenesis of multipotent stem cells and osteo / dentinal tissue regeneration through the BMP signaling pathways . The series of processes demonstrated in the current findings are schematically illustrated in Fig . 8 . The Sr - MBN loaded with phenamil was internalized into cells through ATP - dependent macropinocytosis . The Sr ions and phenamil drug released from the nanoparticles target the activation of BMP signaling cascade ( Trb3 up - , Smurf1 down - , and SMAD up - regulation ) , which consequently promotes the osteo / odontogenesis and mineralization of human dental stem cells in vitro as well as the osteo / dentinal tissue regeneration in an in vivo mal - calcification condition . Thus , the mesoporous Sr - MBN can be considered as a promising therapeutic nanocarrier that loads small drug molecules at high quantity and delivers toward intracellular compartments at proper doses . On the one hand , the Sr ion , among other ions to be released from the Sr - MBN , showed significant effects on osteo / odontogenesis of MSCs , potentiating the clinical availability of the therapeutic nanoparticles ( considering currently available ‘strontium ranelate’ in the treatment of osteoporosis disease ) . On the other hand , the phenamil drug incorporated within Sr - MBN could be released stably at proper dose levels to stimulate osteo / odontogenesis of cells through regulating BMP signaling pathway . This small molecule , compared to BMP protein , is more easily accessible with low cost and can be administered at relevant doses through the delivery carrier otherwise often overdosed to cause unexpected side effects [ 78 ] . While other Acta biomaterialia 17 small molecule activators of BMP signaling , such as FK506 , cyclosporine A , and isoliquiritigenin can also be considered alternatives , the phenamil has been demonstrated to exert potent biological effects , and along with this , other aspects such as FDA - approved biocompatibility and low cost [ 79 ] approaches its clinical availability for hard tissue regeneration although further studies are needed . The novel concept of ionic delivery with drug molecules was realized on the mesoporous nanoparticle form of bioactive glass . While the current combination of Sr ion with phenamil is suited for osteo / odontogenesis of stem cells for hard tissue regeneration , the use of other combinatory molecules like Co with angiogenic factors , and Ag with antibacterial drugs can extend the applications with targeted cellular and tissue functions . Taken the innate chemical and biological properties of bioactive glass ( such as bioactivity , degradability , and cell compatibility ) , such a co - delivery potential of ions / biomolecules may allow MBN to become a next - generation inorganic nanocarrier platform . Acknowledgments This research was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea ( Global Research Laboratory Program : 201503263 , Priority Research Centers Program : 2009 - 0093829 , and Basic Research Program : 2015R1C1A1A01052127 ) . Special thanks to an illustrator ‘Sa - Beom Park’ for the illustration of figure 8 . Acta biomaterialia 18 References [ 1 ] G . J . Owens , R . K . Singh , F . Foroutan , M . Alqaysi , C . - M . Han , C . Mahapatra , H . - W . Kim , J . C . Knowles , Sol – gel based materials for biomedical applications , Prog . Mater . Sci . 77 ( 2016 ) 1 - 79 . [ 2 ] L . L . Hench , J . M . Polak , Third - Generation Biomedical Materials , Science 295 ( 5557 ) ( 2002 ) 1014 - 1017 . [ 3 ] E . T . Pashuck , M . M . Stevens , Designing Regenerative Biomaterial Therapies for the Clinic , Sci . Transl . Med . 4 ( 160 ) ( 2012 ) 160sr4 - 160sr4 . [ 4 ] N . J . Lakhkar , R . M Day , H . - W . Kim , K . Ludka , N . J . Mordan , V . Salih , J . C . Knowles , Titanium phosphate glass microcarriers induce enhanced osteogenic cell proliferation and human mesenchymal stem cell protein expression , J . Tissue Eng . 6 ( 2015 ) . [ 5 ] R . A . Perez , S . - J . Choi , C . - M . Han , J . - J . Kim , H . Shim , K . W . Leong , H . - W . Kim , Biomaterials control of pluripotent stem cell fate for regenerative therapy , Prog . Mater . Sci . 82 ( 2016 ) 234 - 293 . [ 6 ] J . R . Jones , Review of bioactive glass : from Hench to hybrids , Acta Biomater . 9 ( 1 ) ( 2013 ) 4457 - 86 . [ 7 ] S . Jebahi , H . Oudadesse , N . Jardak , I . Khayat , H . Keskes , A . Khabir , T . Rebai , H . El Feki , A . El Feki , Biological therapy of strontium - substituted bioglass for soft tissue wound - healing : responses to oxidative stress in ovariectomised rats , Ann . Pharm . Fr . 71 ( 4 ) ( 2013 ) 234 - 42 . [ 8 ] K . T . Shalumon , S . Sowmya , D . Sathish , K . P . Chennazhi , S . V . Nair , R . Jayakumar , Effect of incorporation of nanoscale bioactive glass and hydroxyapatite in PCL / chitosan nanofibers for bone and periodontal tissue engineering , J . Biomed . Nanotechnol . 9 ( 3 ) ( 2013 ) 430 - 40 . [ 9 ] M . M . McCafferty , G . A . Burke , B . J . Meenan , Calcium phosphate thin films enhance the response of human mesenchymal stem cells to nanostructured titanium surfaces , J . Tissue Eng . 5 ( 2014 ) . [ 10 ] B . Corradetti , M . Ferrari , Nanotechnology for mesenchymal stem cell therapies , J . Control . Acta biomaterialia 19 Release 240 ( 2016 ) 242 - 250 . [ 11 ] A . Saranti , I . Koutselas , M . A . Karakassides , Bioactive glasses in the system CaO – B2O3 – P2O5 : Preparation , structural study and in vitro evaluation , J . Non Cryst . Solids 352 ( 5 ) ( 2006 ) 390 - 398 . [ 12 ] A . El - Fiqi , J . H . Lee , E . J . Lee , H . W . Kim , Collagen hydrogels incorporated with surface - aminated mesoporous nanobioactive glass : Improvement of physicochemical stability and mechanical properties is effective for hard tissue engineering , Acta biomaterialia 9 ( 12 ) ( 2013 ) 9508 - 21 . [ 13 ] A . El - Fiqi , T . H . Kim , M . Kim , M . Eltohamy , J . E . Won , E . J . Lee , H . W . Kim , Capacity of mesoporous bioactive glass nanoparticles to deliver therapeutic molecules , Nanoscale 4 ( 23 ) ( 2012 ) 7475 - 88 . [ 14 ] S . Wang , X . Gao , W . Gong , Z . Zhang , X . Chen , Y . Dong , Odontogenic differentiation and dentin formation of dental pulp cells under nanobioactive glass induction , Acta Biomater . 10 ( 6 ) ( 2014 ) 2792 - 2803 . [ 15 ] C . Wu , J . Chang , Multifunctional mesoporous bioactive glasses for effective delivery of therapeutic ions and drug / growth factors , J . Control . Release 193 ( 2014 ) 282 - 295 . [ 16 ] L . Jung - Hwan , K . Min - Sil , M . Chinmaya , K . Haw - Won , Effect of aminated mesoporous bioactive glass nanoparticles on the differentiation of dental pulp stem cells , PLoS One 11 ( 3 ) ( 2016 ) e0150727 . [ 17 ] G . H . Kim , Y . D . Park , S . Y . Lee , A . El - Fiqi , J . J . Kim , E . J . Lee , H . W . Kim , E . C . Kim , Odontogenic stimulation of human dental pulp cells with bioactive nanocomposite fiber , Journal of biomaterials applications 29 ( 6 ) ( 2015 ) 854 - 66 . [ 18 ] J . Zhang , Y . D . Park , W . J . Bae , A . El - Fiqi , S . H . Shin , E . J . Lee , H . W . Kim , E . C . Kim , Effects of bioactive cements incorporating zinc - bioglass nanoparticles on odontogenic and angiogenic potential of human dental pulp cells , Journal of biomaterials applications 29 ( 7 ) ( 2015 ) 954 - 64 . Acta biomaterialia 20 [ 19 ] T . H . Kim , R . K . Singh , M . S . Kang , J . H . Kim , H . W . Kim , Inhibition of osteoclastogenesis through siRNA delivery with tunable mesoporous bioactive nanocarriers , Acta biomaterialia 29 ( 2016 ) 352 - 64 . [ 20 ] M . S . Kang , J . H . Kim , R . K . Singh , J . H . Jang , H . W . Kim , Therapeutic - designed electrospun bone scaffolds : mesoporous bioactive nanocarriers in hollow fiber composites to sequentially deliver dual growth factors , Acta biomaterialia 16 ( 2015 ) 103 - 16 . [ 21 ] I . K . Yazdi , M . B . Murphy , C . Loo , X . Liu , M . Ferrari , B . K . Weiner , E . Tasciotti , Cefazolin - loaded mesoporous silicon microparticles show sustained bactericidal effect against Staphylococcus aureus , J . Tissue Eng . 5 ( 2014 ) . [ 22 ] G . Z . Jin , C . M . Han , H . W . Kim , In vitro co - culture strategies to prevascularization for bone regeneration : A brief update , Tissue Eng . Regen . Med . 12 ( 2 ) ( 2015 ) 69 - 79 . [ 23 ] G . - Z . Jin , H . - W . Kim , Nanocomposite bioactive polymeric scaffold promotes adhesion , proliferation and osteogenesis of rat bone marrow stromal cells , Tissue Eng . Regen . Med . 11 ( 4 ) ( 2014 ) 284 - 290 . [ 24 ] S . Wang , Y . Xu , H . F . Chan , H . - W . Kim , Y . Wang , K . W . Leong , M . Chen , Nanoparticle - mediated inhibition of survivin to overcome drug resistance in cancer therapy , J . Control . Release 240 ( 2016 ) 454 - 464 . [ 25 ] W . Xia , J . Chang , Well - ordered mesoporous bioactive glasses ( MBG ) : A promising bioactive drug delivery system , J . Control . Release 110 ( 3 ) ( 2006 ) 522 - 530 . [ 26 ] X . Wu , G . Meng , S . Wang , F . Wu , W . Huang , Z . Gu , Zn and Sr incorporated 64S bioglasses : Material characterization , in - vitro bioactivity and mesenchymal stem cell responses , Mater . Sci . Eng . C Mater . Biol . Appl . 52 ( 2015 ) 242 - 50 . [ 27 ] R . F . De Godoy , S . Hutchens , C . Campion , G . Blunn , Silicate - substituted calcium phosphate with enhanced strut porosity stimulates osteogenic differentiation of human mesenchymal stem Acta biomaterialia 21 cells , J . Mater . Sci . Mater . Med . 26 ( 1 ) ( 2015 ) 5387 . [ 28 ] S . Murphy , A . W . Wren , M . R . Towler , D . Boyd , The effect of ionic dissolution products of Ca - Sr - Na - Zn - Si bioactive glass on in vitro cytocompatibility , J . Mater . Sci . Mater . Med . 21 ( 10 ) ( 2010 ) 2827 - 34 . [ 29 ] E . Bonnelye , A . Chabadel , F . Saltel , P . Jurdic , Dual effect of strontium ranelate : stimulation of osteoblast differentiation and inhibition of osteoclast formation and resorption in vitro , Bone 42 ( 1 ) ( 2008 ) 129 - 38 . [ 30 ] V . Mouriño , J . P . Cattalini , A . R . Boccaccini , Metallic ions as therapeutic agents in tissue engineering scaffolds : an overview of their biological applications and strategies for new developments , J . R . Soc . Interface 9 ( 68 ) ( 2012 ) 401 - 419 . [ 31 ] A . Hoppe , N . S . Güldal , A . R . Boccaccini , A review of the biological response to ionic dissolution products from bioactive glasses and glass - ceramics , Biomaterials 32 ( 11 ) ( 2011 ) 2757 - 2774 . [ 32 ] Y . Zhang , L . Wei , C . Wu , R . J . Miron , Periodontal regeneration using strontium - loaded mesoporous bioactive glass scaffolds in osteoporotic rats , PLoS One 9 ( 8 ) ( 2014 ) e104527 . [ 33 ] V . Krishnan , A . Bhatia , H . Varma , Development , characterization and comparison of two strontium doped nano hydroxyapatite molecules for enamel repair / regeneration , Dent . Mater . 32 ( 5 ) 646 - 659 . [ 34 ] J . Zhang , M . Wang , J . M . Cha , A . Mantalaris , The incorporation of 70s bioactive glass to the osteogenic differentiation of murine embryonic stem cells in 3D bioreactors , J . Tissue Eng . Regen . Med . 3 ( 1 ) ( 2009 ) 63 - 71 . [ 35 ] K . W . H . Lo , T . Jiang , K . A . Gagnon , C . Nelson , C . T . Laurencin , Small - molecule based musculoskeletal regenerative engineering , Trends Biotechnol . 32 ( 2 ) ( 2014 ) 74 - 81 . [ 36 ] K . W . Park , H . Waki , W . K . Kim , B . S . Davies , S . G . Young , F . Parhami , P . Tontonoz , The small Acta biomaterialia 22 molecule phenamil induces osteoblast differentiation and mineralization , Mol . Cell . Biol . 29 ( 14 ) ( 2009 ) 3905 - 14 . [ 37 ] X . Wang , H . He , X . Wu , J . Hu , Y . Tan , Promotion of dentin regeneration via CCN3 modulation on Notch and BMP signaling pathways , Biomaterials 35 ( 9 ) ( 2014 ) 2720 - 2729 . [ 38 ] K . W . Park , H . Waki , W . - K . Kim , B . S . J . Davies , S . G . Young , F . Parhami , P . Tontonoz , The Small Molecule Phenamil Induces Osteoblast Differentiation and Mineralization , Mol . Cell . Biol . 29 ( 14 ) ( 2009 ) 3905 - 3914 . [ 39 ] E . R . Balmayor , Targeted delivery as key for the success of small osteoinductive molecules , Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 94 ( 2015 ) 13 - 27 . [ 40 ] K . Iohara , M . Nakashima , M . Ito , M . Ishikawa , A . Nakasima , A . Akamine , Dentin regeneration by dental pulp stem cell therapy with recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein 2 , J . Dent . Res . 83 ( 8 ) ( 2004 ) 590 - 595 . [ 41 ] A . S . Mao , D . J . Mooney , Regenerative medicine : Current therapies and future directions , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 112 ( 47 ) ( 2015 ) 14452 - 9 . [ 42 ] K . S . A . Meiszterics , Study of bioactive calcium silicate ceramic systems for biomedical application , in : Á . Jobbágy ( Ed . ) , 5th European Conference of the International Federation for Medical and Biological engineering , SPringer2011 . [ 43 ] T . Kokubo , H . Takadama , How useful is SBF in predicting in vivo bone bioactivity ? , Biomaterials 27 ( 15 ) ( 2006 ) 2907 - 2915 . [ 44 ] J . Wang , H . Ma , X . Jin , J . Hu , X . Liu , L . Ni , P . X . Ma , The effect of scaffold architecture on odontogenic differentiation of human dental pulp stem cells , Biomaterials 32 ( 31 ) ( 2011 ) 7822 - 7830 . [ 45 ] Y . J . Choi , J . Y . Om , N . H . Kim , J . E . Chang , J . H . Park , J . Y . Kim , H . J . Lee , S . S . Kim , W . Chun , Heat shock transcription factor - 1 suppresses apoptotic cell death and ROS generation in 3 - nitropropionic acid - stimulated striatal cells , Mol . Cell . Biochem . 375 ( 1 - 2 ) ( 2013 ) 59 - 67 . Acta biomaterialia 23 [ 46 ] R . S . Prescott , R . Alsanea , M . I . Fayad , B . R . Johnson , C . S . Wenckus , J . Hao , A . S . John , A . George , In vivo generation of dental pulp - like tissue by using dental pulp stem cells , a collagen scaffold , and dentin matrix protein 1 after subcutaneous transplantation in mice , J . Endod . 34 ( 4 ) ( 2008 ) 421 - 426 . [ 47 ] J . - H . Kim , M . S . Kang , M . Eltohamy , T . - H . Kim , H . - W . Kim , Dynamic Mechanical and Nanofibrous Topological Combinatory Cues Designed for Periodontal Ligament Engineering , PLoS One 11 ( 3 ) ( 2016 ) e0149967 . [ 48 ] S . Yamaguchi , S . Nath , T . Matsushita , T . Kokubo , Controlled release of strontium ions from a bioactive Ti metal with a Ca - enriched surface layer , Acta Biomater . 10 ( 5 ) ( 2014 ) 2282 - 9 . [ 49 ] A . El - Fiqi , J . H . Kim , H . W . Kim , Osteoinductive fibrous scaffolds of biopolymer / mesoporous bioactive glass nanocarriers with excellent bioactivity and long - term delivery of osteogenic drug , ACS applied materials & interfaces 7 ( 2 ) ( 2015 ) 1140 - 52 . [ 50 ] H . - S . Yu , E . - J . Lee , S . - J . Seo , J . C . Knowles , H . - W . Kim , Feasibility of silica - hybridized collagen hydrogels as three - dimensional cell matrices for hard tissue engineering , J . Biomater . Appl . ( 2015 ) 0885328215590108 . [ 51 ] A . El - Fiqi , J . - H . Kim , R . A . Perez , H . - W . Kim , Novel bioactive nanocomposite cement formulations with potential properties : incorporation of the nanoparticle form of mesoporous bioactive glass into calcium phosphate cements , J . Mater . Chem . B 3 ( 7 ) ( 2015 ) 1321 - 1334 . [ 52 ] A . H . Faraji , P . Wipf , Nanoparticles in cellular drug delivery , Bioorg . Med . Chem . 17 ( 8 ) ( 2009 ) 2950 - 2962 . [ 53 ] Y . Zhang , L . Hu , D . Yu , C . Gao , Influence of silica particle internalization on adhesion and migration of human dermal fibroblasts , Biomaterials 31 ( 32 ) ( 2010 ) 8465 - 74 . [ 54 ] S . Gold , P . Monaghan , P . Mertens , T . Jackson , A clathrin independent macropinocytosis - like entry mechanism used by bluetongue virus - 1 during infection of BHK cells , PLoS One 5 ( 6 ) ( 2010 ) Acta biomaterialia 24 e11360 . [ 55 ] I . Torii , S . Morikawa , M . Nagasaki , A . Nokano , K . Morikawa , Differential endocytotic characteristics of a novel human B / DC cell line HBM - Noda : effective macropinocytic and phagocytic function rather than scavenging function , Immunology 103 ( 1 ) ( 2001 ) 70 - 80 . [ 56 ] L . Landgraf , I . Müller , P . Ernst , M . Schäfer , C . Rosman , I . Schick , O . Köhler , H . Oehring , V . V . Breus , T . Basché , C . Sönnichsen , W . Tremel , I . Hilger , Comparative evaluation of the impact on endothelial cells induced by different nanoparticle structures and functionalization , Beilstein J . Nanotechnol . 6 ( 2015 ) 300 - 312 . [ 57 ] O . Tsigkou , S . Labbaf , M . M . Stevens , A . E . Porter , J . R . Jones , Monodispersed Bioactive Glass Submicron Particles and Their Effect on Bone Marrow and Adipose Tissue - Derived Stem Cells , Adv . Healthc . Mater . 3 ( 1 ) ( 2014 ) 115 - 125 . [ 58 ] Z . Tao , B . B . Toms , J . Goodisman , T . Asefa , Mesoporosity and Functional Group Dependent Endocytosis and Cytotoxicity of Silica Nanomaterials , Chem . Res . Toxicol . 22 ( 11 ) ( 2009 ) 1869 - 1880 . [ 59 ] R . Lundmark , G . J . Doherty , M . T . Howes , K . Cortese , Y . Vallis , R . G . Parton , H . T . McMahon , The GTPase - Activating Protein GRAF1 Regulates the CLIC / GEEC Endocytic Pathway , Curr . Biol . 18 ( 22 ) ( 2008 ) 1802 - 1808 . [ 60 ] Y . Qiu , E . Rojas , R . A . Murray , J . Irigoyen , D . Gregurec , P . Castro - Hartmann , J . Fledderman , I . Estrela - Lopis , E . Donath , S . E . Moya , Cell uptake , intracellular distribution , fate and reactive oxygen species generation of polymer brush engineered CeO2 - x NPs , Nanoscale 7 ( 15 ) ( 2015 ) 6588 - 6598 . [ 61 ] D . Dutta , J . G . Donaldson , Search for inhibitors of endocytosis : Intended specificity and unintended consequences , Cell . Logist . 2 ( 4 ) ( 2012 ) 203 - 208 . [ 62 ] B . Yameen , W . I . Choi , C . Vilos , A . Swami , J . Shi , O . C . Farokhzad , Insight into nanoparticle Acta biomaterialia 25 cellular uptake and intracellular targeting , J . Control . Release 190 ( 2014 ) 485 - 499 . [ 63 ] O . Tsigkou , J . R . Jones , J . M . Polak , M . M . Stevens , Differentiation of fetal osteoblasts and formation of mineralized bone nodules by 45S5 Bioglass® conditioned medium in the absence of osteogenic supplements , Biomaterials 30 ( 21 ) ( 2009 ) 3542 - 3550 . [ 64 ] M . Bosetti , M . Cannas , The effect of bioactive glasses on bone marrow stromal cells differentiation , Biomaterials 26 ( 18 ) ( 2005 ) 3873 - 3879 . [ 65 ] W . Gong , Z . Huang , Y . Dong , Y . Gan , S . Li , X . Gao , X . Chen , Ionic Extraction of a Novel Nano - sized Bioactive Glass Enhances Differentiation and Mineralization of Human Dental Pulp Cells , J . Endod . 40 ( 1 ) ( 2014 ) 83 - 88 . [ 66 ] R . E . Yanes , D . Tarn , A . A . Hwang , D . P . Ferris , S . P . Sherman , C . R . Thomas , J . Lu , A . D . Pyle , J . I . Zink , F . Tamanoi , Involvement of lysosomal exocytosis in the excretion of mesoporous silica nanoparticles and enhancement of the drug delivery effect by exocytosis inhibition , Small 9 ( 5 ) ( 2013 ) 697 - 704 . [ 67 ] Y . Gao , Y . Wang , A . Fu , W . Shi , D . Yeo , K . Q . Luo , H . Ow , C . Xu , Tracking mesenchymal stem cell tumor - homing using fluorescent silica nanoparticles , J . Mater . Chem . B Mater . Biol . Med . 3 ( 7 ) ( 2015 ) 1245 - 1253 . [ 68 ] F . Yang , D . Yang , J . Tu , Q . Zheng , L . Cai , L . Wang , Strontium enhances osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells and in vivo bone formation by activating Wnt / catenin signaling , Stem Cells 29 ( 6 ) ( 2011 ) 981 - 91 . [ 69 ] S . Yamaguchi , S . Nath , T . Matsushita , T . Kokubo , Controlled release of strontium ions from a bioactive Ti metal with a Ca - enriched surface layer , Acta Biomater . 10 ( 5 ) ( 2014 ) 2282 - 2289 . [ 70 ] M . Inoue , R . Z . LeGeros , M . Inoue , R . Rohanizadeh , L . Guo , R . Davidson , K . Rui , H . Nagatsuka , N . Nagai , Effect of Magnesium , Strontium or Fluoride Ions on < i > in vitro < / i > Activities of Odontoblast - like Cells ( MDPC - 23 ) , J . Hard Tissue Biol . 14 ( 1 ) ( 2005 ) 5 - 12 . Acta biomaterialia 26 [ 71 ] E . Boanini , P . Torricelli , M . Gazzano , E . Della Bella , M . Fini , A . Bigi , Combined effect of strontium and zoledronate on hydroxyapatite structure and bone cell responses , Biomaterials 35 ( 21 ) ( 2014 ) 5619 - 5626 . [ 72 ] K . Saeki , G . W . Marshall , S . A . Gansky , C . R . Parkinson , S . J . Marshall , Strontium effects on root dentin tubule occlusion and nanomechanical properties , Dent . Mater . 32 ( 2 ) ( 2016 ) 240 - 251 . [ 73 ] G . - Z . Jin , M . Eltohamy , H . - W . Kim , Nanocomposite scaffolds incorporated with hydrophobically - functionalized mesoporous nanocarriers for the effective loading and long - term delivery of osteogenic drugs , RSC Adv . 5 ( 34 ) ( 2015 ) 26832 - 26842 . [ 74 ] J . Fan , C . S . Im , Z . K . Cui , M . Guo , O . Bezouglaia , A . Fartash , J . Y . Lee , J . Nguyen , B . M . Wu , T . Aghaloo , M . Lee , Delivery of Phenamil Enhances BMP - 2 - Induced Osteogenic Differentiation of Adipose - Derived Stem Cells and Bone Formation in Calvarial Defects , Tissue Eng . Part A 21 ( 13 - 14 ) ( 2015 ) 2053 - 65 . [ 75 ] A . Hosoya , T . Ninomiya , T . Hiraga , C . Zhao , K . Yoshiba , N . Yoshiba , M . Takahashi , T . Okabe , S . Wakitani , H . Yamada , E . Kasahara , H . Ozawa , H . Nakamura , Alveolar bone regeneration of subcutaneously transplanted rat molar , Bone 42 ( 2 ) ( 2008 ) 350 - 357 . [ 76 ] Y . - R . Zhang , W . Du , X . - D . Zhou , H . - Y . Yu , Review of research on the mechanical properties of the human tooth , In J Oral Sci 6 ( 2 ) ( 2014 ) 61 - 69 . [ 77 ] Y . Wang , M . Yan , Z . Wang , J . Wu , Z . Wang , Y . Zheng , J . Yu , Dental pulp stem cells from traumatically exposed pulps exhibited an enhanced osteogenic potential and weakened odontogenic capacity , Arch . Oral Biol . 58 ( 11 ) ( 2013 ) 1709 - 1717 . [ 78 ] K . Vrijens , W . Lin , J . Cui , D . Farmer , J . Low , E . Pronier , F . - Y . Zeng , A . A . Shelat , K . Guy , M . R . Taylor , T . Chen , M . F . Roussel , Identification of Small Molecule Activators of BMP Signaling , PLoS One 8 ( 3 ) ( 2013 ) e59045 . [ 79 ] J . Fan , C . S . Im , Z . - K . Cui , M . Guo , O . Bezouglaia , A . Fartash , J . - Y . Lee , J . Nguyen , B . M . Wu , Acta biomaterialia 27 T . Aghaloo , M . Lee , Delivery of Phenamil Enhances BMP - 2 - Induced Osteogenic Differentiation of Adipose - Derived Stem Cells and Bone Formation in Calvarial Defects , Tissue Eng . Part A 21 ( 13 - 14 ) ( 2015 ) 2053 - 2065 . Acta biomaterialia 28 Figure Legends Fig . 1 . Characteristics of nanocarriers . ( A ) TEM image of MBN and Sr - MBN with inset showing higher magnification and EDS data , ( B ) XPS wide scan with inset showing a narrow scan of Sr3 d . ( C ) Ions released from MBN and Sr - MBN ( 50 mg ) , as assayed by ICP - AES during immersion in Tris - buffer ( 10 ml , pH 7 . 4 , 37°C , and 120 rpm shaking ) . Released amount presented in both [ ppm ] and [ mM ] . Asterisks showing significant difference between groups ( n = 3 , p < 0 . 05 ) . Fig . 2 . Cell viability and internalization of nanoparticles . ( A ) Cell viability up to 3 days in an osteo / odontogenic medium treated with various concentrations ( 0 , 5 , 10 , 20 , 40 , 80 , 160 and 320 µg / ml ) of MBN and Sr - MBN , as measured by WST assay ; asterisk indicating significant difference compared to control w / o nanoparticles ( n = 6 , p < 0 . 05 ) . ( B - D ) Cell internalization assays , after 4 h treatment of nanoparticles ( 160 µg / ml ) in an osteo / odontogenic medium . ( B ) Internalized rhodamine123 - labeled MBN and Sr - MBN visualized under confocal microscope in green , and actin cytoskeleton ( red ) & nucleus ( blue , by DAPI ) co - stained ; z - stack image of cells on the xz - and yz - plane , revealing the rhodamine123 - labeled Sr - MBN green signals within cells . ( C ) Quantification of the uptake efficiency of nanoparticles , performed by a flow cytometry ( n = 3 ) ; pretreatment ( 1 h ) of cells with either sodium azide ( SA , 100 mM , inhibitor of ATP - dependent endocytosis ) , amiloride ( AL , 2 . 5 mM , inhibitor of macropinocytosis ) , genistein ( GE , 100 mM , inhibitor of caveolae - mediated endocytosis ) , or amantadine - HCl ( AT , 1 mM , inhibitor of clathrin mediated endocytosis ) used to elucidate endocytosis mechanism ; 4°C incubation of cells also used to prevent ATP - dependent endocytosis ; Different letters indicating significant difference among the treatment groups at p < 0 . 05 . ( D ) TEM ultrastructural images of cells ; red asterisks indicating the intracellular distribution of nanoparticles in endosomes and red arrows showing engulfing nanoparticles and the surrounding fluid with membrane ruffles , a typical characteristic of macropinocytosis . Fig . 3 . Change in concentration of ions during the culture of MSCs , either within cells ( ‘Intracellular’ ) or within culture medium ( ‘Extracellular’ ) up to 72 h . To determine ion concentration intracellularly or extracellularly , the cells were cultured with the nanoparticles ( 160 µg / mL ) for pre - determined periods ( 4 , 12 , 24 , 48 and 72 h ) , and then the cells and the medium were separately collected to analyze by ICP - AES ( n = 3 ) . Asterisk indicating significant difference between MBN and Sr - MBN ( n = 3 , p < 0 . 05 ) . Fig . 4 . Effects of the MBN and Sr - MBN treatment on the osteo / odontogenesis and maturation of MSCs . ( A ) Osteo / odontogenic gene expressions ( Col1 α , OCN , DMP - 1 , DSPP ) at 3 , 7 , 14 , and 21 days , ( B ) ALP activity at 14 and 21 days , and ( C & D ) mineralization image and quantification at 28 days in an osteo / odontogenic medium ( OS ) ; cellular mineralization observed by ARS staining under microscope , and the stain level quantified by the treatment with 10 % w / v of cetylpyridinium chloride monohydrate . Statistically significant difference noticed in ( A ) ( # : comparison with OS group , * : comparison between Sr - MBN and MBN , p < 0 . 05 , n = 4 ) . Different letters in ( B & C ) indicating significant difference among the treatment groups ( n = 5 , p < 0 . 05 ) . Fig . 5 . Loading of phenamil drug onto Sr - MBN and the release from the nanoparticles . ( A ) Phenamil loading data ( n = 3 ) and the fitting to Langmuir isotherm theory , ( B ) ATR - FTIR spectra of the phenamil - loaded nanoparticles , ( C ) phenamil release profile ( n = 3 ) recorded over 10 days with inset showing the release in the first 30 h , and ( D ) incremental release percentage of phenamil at each measurement point . Fig . 6 . Co - delivery effects of phenamil drug and Sr ions on the hard tissue lineage differentiation of cells via BMP2 / Smad signaling pathway . ( A ) Gene expressions ( DMP - 1 and DSPP ) , at 3 , 7 , 14 and 21 days ( n = 4 ) ; statistically significant difference symbolled ( # : comparison with OS group , * : comparison between Sr - MBN and MBN , p < 0 . 05 , n = 4 ) . ( B & C ) Cellular mineralization at day 28 by ARS assay ; statistically significant difference among groups presented in different letters ( n = 5 , p < 0 . 05 ) . ( D ) BMP signaling molecules ( Trb3 , Smurf1 , and BMP SMADs ( SMAD1 / 5 / 8 ) ) , examined by immunoblot analysis ; β - actin and PCNA used as control for total protein and nucleus protein , respectively . ( E ) Immunoblot bands of Trb3 and Smruf1 quantified by densitometry and normalized to β - actin . ( F ) SMAD protein expressions in nucleus quantified and normalized to PCNA ; statistically significant difference among groups presented in different letters ( n = 3 , p < 0 . 05 ) . Fig . 7 . Hard tissue regeneration in a mal - calcification model involving an extracted tooth defect implanted in a rat dorsal subcutaneous tissue . Six weeks post operation , ( A ) 3D reconstructed ( up ) and 2D projected ( down ; transaxial ( left ) , coronal ( right - up ) , and sagittal ( right - down ) ) micro - computed tomographic images of implanted tooth , displaying new hard ( dentinal ) tissue formation ( especially red color in 3D ) in a drilled defect area ; blank , phenamil ( PNM ) , MBN , Sr - MBN , and PNM - loaded Sr - MBN ( Sr - MBN + PNM ) . ( B ) % hard tissue volume , hard tissue surface , and hard tissue surface density analyzed from the region of interest in 3D reconstructed images by CTAn Skyscan software . ( C ) HE stained histological images ( 100x and 400x ) , showing the formation of a Acta biomaterialia 29 dentin - like ( typically termed ‘osteodentin’ ) structure and an active tertiary dentin layer rich in odontoblasts ( E : enamel , OD : old dentin , fOD : fractured old dentin , yellow arrows : new dentin , asterisks : tertiary dentin , and white dot arrow : soft tissue filled area after drilled ) ; vertical sectioned image presented in blank representatively to show drilled area , while horizontal sectioned images shown for other experimental groups to reveal regenerated tissues . ( D ) Histomorphometric data , quantitatively comparing the newly formed dentinal tissue area in a pulp chamber and the tertiary dentin layer thickness among groups , as analyzed by image J ( ver . 1 . 50b , NIH , USA ) . Different letters indicating significant difference among the treatment groups ( n = 5 , p < 0 . 05 ) . Fig . 8 . Schematically illustrated the synergistic role of Sr ions / phenamil delivered through nanoparticles ( Sr - MBN ) . The co - delivery of extrinsic drug molecule ‘phenamil’ and intrinsic ‘Sr ion’ activates osteo / odontogenic differentiation of hDPSCs through Trb3 - dependent BMP signaling pathway , and ultimately stimulates dentin regeneration . Acta biomaterialia 30 Table 1 . Summarized properties of MBN and Sr - MBN : Particle size by TEM , surface area by Brunauer - Emmett - Teller , pore size and pore volume by non - local density functional theory , and ζ - potential by dynamic light scattering . Nanoparticles Particle size ( nm ) Surface area ( m 2 / g ) Average pore size ( nm ) Total pore volume ( cm 3 / g ) ζ - potential ( mV ) MBN 64 . 9 ± 5 . 8 44 . 7 ± 1 . 86 7 . 5 ± 0 . 23 0 . 084 ± 0 . 003 - 11 . 7 ± 0 . 68 Sr - MBN 58 . 3 ± 3 . 2 66 . 5 ± 2 . 25 6 . 9 ± 0 . 92 0 . 120 ± 0 . 017 - 14 . 6 ± 0 . 48 Acta biomaterialia 31 Acta biomaterialia 32 Acta biomaterialia 33 Acta biomaterialia 34 Acta biomaterialia 35 Acta biomaterialia 36 Acta biomaterialia 37 Acta biomaterialia 38 Acta biomaterialia 39 Significance of work This study reports a novel design concept in inorganic nanoparticle delivery system for hard tissues - the co - delivery of therapeutic molecules comprised of ion ( Sr ) and drug ( Phenamil ) through a unique nanoparticle of mesoporous bioactive glass ( MBN ) . The physico - chemical and biological properties of MBN enabled an effective loading of both therapeutic molecules and a subsequently sustained / controlled release . The co - delivered Sr and Phenamil demonstrated significant stimulation of adult stem cell differentiation in vitro and osseous / dentinal regeneration in vivo , through BMP signaling pathways . We consider the current combination of Sr ion with Phenamil is suited for the osteo / odontogenesis of stem cells for hard tissue regeneration , and further , this ion / drug co - delivery concept can extend the applications to other areas that require specific cellular and tissue functions . Acta biomaterialia 40