THE ECONOMICS OF SCIENCE Why is it that we do science ? The answer most scientists may provide to this question is that their curiosity that drove them towards a career in science . The urge to learn and to discover . For most , this curiosity and passion for science is so strong that they take into account long hours and salaries that are lower than those in other professions . But such passion does of course not mean that there cannot be a quantitative study of the way science works , and of those doing science . Indeed , this is what Paula Stephan from Georgia State University undertakes in her book , How Economics Shapes Science . We can understand a lot by applying economic theory to understand the way we do science . This is not only important to reach a better way of doing science , but it might also lead to a better appreciation of the benefits that come from doing science . How well public funds are spent , and how important science is for all of us . The returns on investment , to use an economic term . One of the first question the book addresses is of course to understand why are people doing research ? What drives them in addition to the obvious curiosity ? What‟s the economic currency that makes a career in science lucrative ? Money of course , let‟s face it , is one reason . Some scientists really do get rich from all the startups and patent revenues – and Stephan provides good examples . But of course , that‟s just one aspect . A stronger driver perhaps are fame and recognition . Making an important discovery can create a historic legacy that is unrivalled in comparison to other professions . We know the names of famous scientists even after centuries but not nearly as well those of successful business men . The points that Stephan make here are all interesting and plausible . Indeed , my impression is that economics already knows a lot about the people doing science . The salaries of scientists , the economic costs of doing a PhD ( basically , in most cases you lose out financially ) . International migration patterns . The increasing number of people studying science , and consequently the fact that fewer and fewer of the scientists we train have a long - term perspective in academia . Academia no longer educates mainly for itself , but for others . There is a lot of data on that and the people working in science , and this book gives a great summary . Another area the book tries to tackle is that of science policy issues , although clearly there is still a lot that needs to be understood about the larger economic implications of doing science . What is the payback ; can it be measured at all ? How much public money to spend on science ? As much as possible ? Scientific research does pay back a lot in areas such as health or engineering . But surely there is a point where investing too much means a lot of irrelevant research being done . But how much investment then ? We have not really a good idea of how to do science efficiently and in the best way . Take US universities . As Stephan mentions , these are like shopping malls – inviting scientists to set up shop , bring in the money for these shops in terms of research grants , and then hoping customers will come , leading to lots of students as well as technology transfer . But is such a grant - driven system really the best way of doing long - term science versus short - term grant - based science where tough selection procedures mean that often you know the outcome before you even start the research ? Hardly . The same with science eduction . The book makes it pretty clear that the PhD and postdoc system is heavily tilted to the benefit of laboratory heads . There is not much specific , institution - based information available on the career paths of PhDs and postdocs . My own PhD granting institution certainly never followed up with me on my career path . Indeed , laboratory heads usually are eager to educate as many PhD students if possible , irrespective of their future career perspectives . And as Stephan consequently asks , is it really the best economics to educate a lot of PhDs only to have them become teachers , venture capitalists , journalists ( ahem ! ) and so on . And she has a point . Of course , too much planning of careers can be disastrous . Higher education is a long process , and the economic situation can change . The call for more engineering students in one year can lead to disappointed faces a few years down the line when too many graduates mean that employment perspectives are meagre . But generally , it might be useful to adjust the economics by making it more „expensive‟ to use PhD or postdoc resources . Or as Stephan suggested , separating education of PhDs from research labs by creating more research institutes outside of universities . It is generally difficult to find the right balance in science policy . Take technology transfer . Between 1989 and 1999 US universities have increased patent applications from 1 , 245 to 3 , 689 per year . But although patent revenues might be a welcome boost for the budget of universities their wider economic benefit for most universities might not be as compelling and as outlined in the book , they might stifle scientific discoveries elsewhere . The obvious alternative that would benefit businesses and not universities is to publish scientific results freely , and to „transfer‟ technology to companies by recruiting scientists from universities . There is a great quote by J . Robert Oppenheimer in the book : “The best way to send information is to wrap it up in a person . ” Start - ups out of universities could also be a great tool to stimulate economic activity and to benefit universities at the same time . A 1997 study by BankBoston also cited in the book found that by 1994 a total of 4 , 000 companies were founded by MIT faculty , employing a total of 1 . 1 million people . But which system makes the most sense on the macro - economic scale ? My own opinion here is that universities should not try too hard to be corporate entities but instead should have sufficient public funding . Such issues also play into the broader issue of how to best organize science . And the answer is that we don‟t know . Issues that we have to deal with are short versus long - term policy incentives , and short versus long - term research goals . How to deal with the international connectivity of science and the fact that funding mostly happens locally ? How much weight should science funding get in times of tight public budgets ? We only know a few obvious things , for example that short - term ups and downs in science funding don‟t do much good as science isn‟t done on the tap . Otherwise , we often are short of useful data . Source : http : / / allthatmatters . heber . org / 2012 / 04 / 09 / the - economics - of - science /