This is a repository copy of Differential requirements for actin during yeast and mammalian endocytosis . White Rose Research Online URL for this paper : http : / / eprints . whiterose . ac . uk / 108257 / Version : Accepted Version Article : Aghamohammadzadeh , S . and Ayscough , K . R . orcid . org / 0000 - 0003 - 3716 - 4490 ( 2009 ) Differential requirements for actin during yeast and mammalian endocytosis . Nature Cell Biology , 11 ( 8 ) . pp . 1039 - 1042 . ISSN 1465 - 7392 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb1918 eprints @ whiterose . ac . uk https : / / eprints . whiterose . ac . uk / Reuse Unless indicated otherwise , fulltext items are protected by copyright with all rights reserved . The copyright exception in section 29 of the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 allows the making of a single copy solely for the purpose of non - commercial research or private study within the limits of fair dealing . The publisher or other rights - holder may allow further reproduction and re - use of this version - refer to the White Rose Research Online record for this item . Where records identify the publisher as the copyright holder , users can verify any specific terms of use on the publisher’s website . Takedown If you consider content in White Rose Research Online to be in breach of UK law , please notify us by emailing eprints @ whiterose . ac . uk including the URL of the record and the reason for the withdrawal request . Under Pressure : the Differential Requirements for Actin during Yeast and Mammalian Endocytosis Soheil Aghamohammadazadeh and Kathryn R . Ayscough Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology , University of Sheffield Firth Court , Western Bank Sheffield , S10 2TN , UK Abstract Key features of clathrin - mediated endocytosis have been conserved across evolution . However , endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae is completely dependent on a functional actin cytoskeleton , while actin appears to be less critical in mammalian cell endocytosis . We reveal that the fundamental requirement for actin in early stages of yeast endocytosis is to provide a strong framework to support force generation required to direct the invaginating plasma membrane into the cell against turgor pressure . By providing osmotic support , pressure differences across the plasma membrane were removed and this reduced the requirement for actin - bundling proteins required for normal endocytosis . Conversely , increased turgor pressure in specific yeast mutants correlated with decreased rate of endocytic patch invagination . Endocytosis is a highly regulated and essential process in the majority of eukaryotic cells . It is required for recycling of plasma membrane lipids and trafficking proteins , and for uptake or down - regulation of cell - surface receptors . During endocytosis the plasma membrane invaginates into the cell resulting in the production of a vesicle that is then able to fuse with endosomes . Work in the model organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae has led to significant advances in our understanding of the distinct stages that take place during endocytosis in vivo . It is now widely believed that the broad stages of coat assembly ( early ) , invagination ( mid ) and scission / inward movement ( late ) are largely conserved across evolution , and that in many cases direct homologues of proteins are responsible for carrying out the same steps in the process 1 . One notable difference between yeast and mammalian cells is that F - actin is absolutely required during plasma membrane invagination in yeast . Sequestering monomeric actin with latrunculin , or stabilisation with jasplakinolide both block yeast endocytosis 2 - 4 . In mammalian cells , while actin is known to localise to sites of endocytosis , blocking its function does not generally prevent invagination , though the later stage of vesicle scission can be inhibited 5 - 7 . This observed difference between the systems has led to questions over the degree to which the yeast model can be more generally applied . In this study we aimed to address the reason for the observed differences in actin requirement . Considering the fundamental nature of the cells involved we reasoned that the primary distinction is the cell wall . This is needed in yeast to prevent lysis due to the cell ' s internal turgor pressure . This led us to hypothesise that an F - actin framework is needed to support the force generation required to pull membrane into the cell against this turgor pressure . Correspondence should be addressed to KA . Author Contributions . SA performed and analysed experiments . KRA designed experiments , analysed data and wrote the manuscript Online Supplementary Material includes methodology and details of strains used in this study . Europe PMC Funders Group Author Manuscript Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2010 May 24 . Published in final edited form as : Nat Cell Biol . 2009 August ; 11 ( 8 ) : 1039 – 1042 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1918 . E u r op e P M C F und e r s A u t ho r M a nu s c r i p t s E u r op e P M C F und e r s A u t ho r M a nu s c r i p t s To investigate the possibility that turgor pressure is a major reason for the F - actin requirement , we used cells that lack the actin - bundling proteins Sac6 and Scp1 that normally allow cells to cross link F - actin and generate a strong meshwork during endocytic invagination . In cells lacking these proteins the majority of endocytic assembly events fail , with both reduced invagination and post - scission movement 8 . If this actin framework is only required to support force generation for directing the invagination into the cell against the cell ' s own internal pressure , then the requirement for the actin bundling proteins would be lost if we reduce turgor pressure . To test this we assessed the lifetime of GFP - Abp1 in patches at the plasma membrane in wild - type cells and in cells lacking either one ( (cid:839) sac6 , (cid:839) scp1 ) or both ( (cid:839) sac6 (cid:839) scp1 ) actin - bundling proteins . GFP - Abp1 is widely used as a reporter of mid to late stages of endocytosis and marks the stage at which actin is assembled at the endocytic site . To reduce the effects of turgor pressure , sorbitol was added to the medium . Using a range of sorbitol concentrations ( 0 . 25 - 1 M ) and incubation times ( 10 minutes and 4 hours ) we observed that additon of sorbitol could fully rescue the endocytic lifetime defects of both single mutants and substantially rescue the double mutant defect . Rescue was fully evident at just 10 minutes with 0 . 5 M sorbitol indicating that gene expression is not required for the effect . To demonstrate that reduction in lifetime also corresponded to a rescue in invagination , endocytic patches were studied using kymographs . Kymographs are generated by collating images of the same fluorescent spot taken in a time lapse series . Thus , they are able to provide information on spatial position over time . Time is represented in the x - axis and distance moved ( i . e invagination ) by any movement in the y - axis . As shown in figure 1B , inward movement of the patches can be clearly seen in both single and double mutants . Quantification of the rescue reveals a significant increase in the number of endocytic patches that are now able to internalise ( figure 1C ) . Finally , the effect of sorbitol on fluid phase uptake of a fluorescent dye , Lucifer yellow was followed . Again the double mutant (cid:839) sac6 (cid:839) scp1 shows almost no uptake of the dye . In the presence of sorbitol interestingly while uptake into vesicles can be observed , movement of these to the vacuoles appears inhibited ( figure 1D ) . This indicates that while sorbitol can alleviate functions associated with turgor pressure at the plasma membrane , once vesicles have formed in the cell they continue to require bundled or crosslinked actin to move away from the membrane . While a requirement for actin - bundling during invagination and fluid phase endocytosis can be rescued by addition of sorbitol , there could still be a requirement for F - actin alone . To address this , cells were treated with 400 (cid:878) M latrunculin - A , which caused complete disassembly of actin patches3 . Sorbitol was then added to cells and uptake of Lucifer yellow was followed . Given that movement to the vacuole was not observed , uptake was categorised as unsuccessful ( when bright patches were still in the plane of the membrane ( M ) ) ; invaginated , when the patch had moved out of the plane but was still contiguous ( I ) , or successful when a region with no fluorescence could be seen between the vesicle and the plasma membrane ( S ) . As shown , ( figure 1E ) while addition of latrunculin - A blocks successful uptake of the fluid phase marker , this can be significantly rescued by addition of sorbitol . This demonstrates that even a complete absence of F - actin can be at least partially rescued by addition of sorbitol . Analysis of these data also indicate that while addition of sorbitol appears to assist the invagination step of endocytosis , it does infact have a slight inhibitory effect on scission and post - scission stages . This might explain why a previous study , assessing endocytic uptake rates ( rather than analysis of distinct stages ) , showed an inhibition of endocytosis under hypertonic conditions 9 . While the data strongly supports a link between turgor and a requirement for actin during the invagination stage of endocytosis , an important test of the hypothesis is that increasing turgor pressure should then make invagination more difficult . This could be manifested as Aghamohammadazadeh and Ayscough Page 2 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2010 May 24 . E u r op e P M C F und e r s A u t ho r M a nu s c r i p t s E u r op e P M C F und e r s A u t ho r M a nu s c r i p t s an increase in lifetime of endocytic patches , and potentially as an increased rate of failed internalisation events . To address this possibility we made use of mutant yeast strains reported to have an increase in cell turgor pressure . These are strains lacking the non - essential type 1 protein phosphatases Ppz1 and Ppz2 . Ppz deficient strains have increased steady state K + levels and K + is the major determinant of turgor pressure in S . cerevisiae 10 , 11 . In strains lacking either ppz gene alone or lacking both , the lifetime of GFP - Abp1 was measured . Deletion of the ppz genes led to a marked increase in lifetime of the GFP - Abp1 endocytic protein at the site of endocytosis ( figure 2A ) . Furthermore , assessment of successful invaginations revealed that loss of both of these type I phosphatases markedly reduced the chance of successful invagination from 82 . 5 % to 10 % . Kymographs also reveal differences with a clear increase in the non - motile stage of endocytosis ( figure 2B ) . A shift to hypotonic conditions also increases turgor and under such conditions yeast cells pump glycerol from the cell using the Fps1 transporter to restore osmotic balance . The behaviour of GFP - Abp1 patches was analysed in wild type cells and in a strain deleted for fps1 , before and after exposure to hypotonic conditions ( see materials and methods ) . While GFP - Abp1 lifetime was not significantly affected under these hypotonic conditions , there was a dramatic increase in the proportion of assembly events that did not culminate in successful invagination . The parental wild - type strain showed only 9 % of failed internalisation events , compared with 47 % failed events after 15 minutes incubation in hypotonic conditions . The (cid:839) fps1 strain showed 41 % failed events before shifting to hypotonic conditions and following the shift , no patches were observed to internalise ( n ≥ 30 ) . Together these data support the idea that increased turgor pressure and an impaired ability to be able to respond to such changes ( as in (cid:839) fps1 ) is detrimental to the ability of a cell to invaginate its plasma membrane as required for endocytosis . Given the data presented , a simple model can be put forward , whereby a robust actin meshwork is required to support inward growth of plasma membrane in endocytosis due to the turgor pressure across the yeast plasma membrane ( figure 2C ) . Alleviation of the pressure reduces the requirement for actin , while increased pressure makes invagination more difficult . Overall our data clearly demonstrate that turgor pressure is a key factor in the requirement in yeast cells for a robust actin meshwork to form during endocytosis . While the endocytic coat contains several proteins that are capable of deforming a membrane ( e . g . ENTH domain proteins ) , it cannot ensure inward growth of that membrane . Only with the force of actin polymerisation driven by the Arp2 / 3 complex and the type - I myosins , and the binding of this F - actin into bundles and crosslinked meshworks , can a membrane be successfully invaginated such that it can be pinched off to form a vesicle . Our data also shows that following scission actin is still required for movement of the vesicles away from the membrane . The alleviation of the pressure differences across the plasma membrane effectively make yeast more similar to a mammalian cell in having a greater requirement for actin at later , rather than the early invaginating , stages of endocytosis . Supplementary Material Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material . Acknowledgments We thank Viki Allan , Elizabeth Smythe and Steve Winder for discussions and critical reading of the manuscript , and Lynne Yenush ( Valencia , Spain ) for yeast strains . KRA is a Senior non - clinical MRC Fellow ( G0601600 ) . SA Aghamohammadazadeh and Ayscough Page 3 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2010 May 24 . E u r op e P M C F und e r s A u t ho r M a nu s c r i p t s E u r op e P M C F und e r s A u t ho r M a nu s c r i p t s is supported by a BBSRC studentship . The light microscopy - imaging centre at the University of Sheffield was funded by a grant from the Wellcome Trust ( GR077544AIA ) . References 1 . Smythe E , Ayscough KR . J . Cell Sci . 2006 ; 119 : 4589 – 4598 . [ PubMed : 17093263 ] 2 . Ayscough KR . Curr . Biol . 2000 ; 10 : 1587 – 1590 . [ PubMed : 11137010 ] 3 . Ayscough KR , et al . J . Cell Biol . 1997 ; 137 : 399 – 416 . [ PubMed : 9128251 ] 4 . Kaksonen M , Sun Y , Drubin DG . Cell . 2003 ; 115 : 475 – 487 . [ PubMed : 14622601 ] 5 . Merrifield CJ , Feldman ME , Wan L , Almers W . Nat Cell Biol . 2002 ; 4 : 691 – 8 . [ PubMed : 12198492 ] 6 . Merrifield CJ , Perrais D , Zenisek D . Cell . 2005 ; 121 : 593 – 606 . [ PubMed : 15907472 ] 7 . Yarar D , Waterman - Storer CM , Schmid SL . Mol Biol Cell . 2005 ; 16 : 964 – 75 . [ PubMed : 15601897 ] 8 . Gheorghe DM , et al . J . Biol . Chem . 2008 ; 283 : 15037 – 15046 . [ PubMed : 18400761 ] 9 . Whitacre JL , Davis DA , Toenjes KA , Brower SM , Adams AEM . Genetics . 2001 ; 157 : 533 – 43 . [ PubMed : 11156976 ] 10 . Merchan S , Bernal D , Serrano R , Yenush L . Euk . Cell . 2004 ; 3 : 100 – 107 . 11 . Yenush L , Mulet JM , Arino J , Serrano R . EMBO J . 2002 ; 21 : 920 – 929 . [ PubMed : 11867520 ] Aghamohammadazadeh and Ayscough Page 4 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2010 May 24 . E u r op e P M C F und e r s A u t ho r M a nu s c r i p t s E u r op e P M C F und e r s A u t ho r M a nu s c r i p t s Figure 1 . Alleviation of turgor pressure rescues a requirement for bundled actin during endocytosis ( A ) Wild - type yeast , or strains lacking either actin bundling protein (cid:839) sac6 , or (cid:839) scp1 or both (cid:839) sac6 (cid:839) scp1 were transformed with a marker of actin in endocytosis ( GFP - Abp14 ) . Sorbitol was added at either 0 . 25 , 0 . 5 , or 1 M to the cells for either 4 hours or 10 minutes and the effect on lifetimes of GFP - Abp1 measured . Number of patches assessed for each sample ≥30 in ≥4 cells . ( B ) Kymographs from these strains illustrating the effect of sorbitol on lifetime and behaviour of the patches . ( C ) The proportion of GFP - Abp1 patches showing inward movement was quantified for wild - type and the (cid:839) sac6 (cid:839) scp1 strain . Number of patches assessed for each sample ≥45 in ≥8 cells ( D ) Actin - bundling mutants affect uptake of the fluid phase marker Lucifer yellow . Addition of sorbitol increases the proportion of cells showing uptake of the stain into vesicles ( Ves ) and endosomes in cells but few cells still show vacuolar ( V ) staining indicating a post - scission requirement for actin that is not affected by sorbitol . Bar = 5 (cid:878) M . ( E ) . The effect of increasing latrunculin - A concentration on endocytosis and partial rescue of the effect by sorbitol . Cells were treated with either 100 or 400 (cid:878) M Latrunculin - A ( or the control with DMSO alone ) , for 10 minutes , prior to addition of sorbitol for 10 minutes , and Lucifer yellow for 20 minutes . Spots that were visualized were categorised as indicated - ( M ) for spots still in the plane of the plasma membrane ; ( I ) for spots that have moved out of the membrane but are still contiguous in terms of the lucifer yellow signal ; ( S ) for spots that have successfully undergone scission and are at least 250 nm from the membrane . Number of spots assessed for each sample ≥140 in ≥60 cells . Aghamohammadazadeh and Ayscough Page 5 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2010 May 24 . E u r op e P M C F und e r s A u t ho r M a nu s c r i p t s E u r op e P M C F und e r s A u t ho r M a nu s c r i p t s Figure 2 . Increases in turgor pressure are detrimental to endocytic invagination ( A ) . Deletion of the type I phosphatase genes ppz1 and ppz2 have been linked to an increase in turgor pressure10 . Strains lacking either or both ppz1 and ppz2 were transformed with GFP - Abp1 and the lifetimes of GFP in the endocytic patch complexes measured . Because we were unable to generate a viable (cid:839) ppz1 (cid:839) ppz2 double mutant in the Euroscarf strain used for our other experiments , this mutant was obtained from L . Yenush 10 and compared directly to its W303 background parent . Because the timings of W303 and BY4741 wild - type strains are different for endocytic markers , the timings here are relative to each parental strain . Differences between wild - type cells and all mutants are statistically relevant . In t - test comparisons : wild - type to (cid:839) ppz1 , P value 0 . 02 ; wt to (cid:839) ppz2 , P value 0 . 005 ; and wild type ( W303 ) to (cid:839) ppz1 (cid:839) ppz2 , P value ≤0 . 0001 . Number of patches assessed for each sample ≥30 in ≥4 cells . ( B ) Kymographs from wild - type and (cid:839) ppz1 (cid:839) ppz2 strains illustrating the marked effect of their deletion on endocytic invagination . ( C ) A model to illustrate the findings . ( i ) In wild - type cells in exponential phase the inward force generation by actin in association with its bundling proteins is sufficient to overcome the outward force of turgor pressure . ( ii ) in actin - bundling mutants little invagination is observed due to the inability of a sufficiently strong actin meshwork to support the required inward force . ( iii ) Addition of sorbitol effectively balances out cell turgor pressure and now the requirement for actin during invagination is substantially alleviated . Actin - red ; endocytic coat - blue ; turgor - black arrows ; external osmotic force - green arrows . Aghamohammadazadeh and Ayscough Page 6 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2010 May 24 . E u r op e P M C F und e r s A u t ho r M a nu s c r i p t s E u r op e P M C F und e r s A u t ho r M a nu s c r i p t s