Towards an overarching classification model of CSCW and groupware : a socio - technical perspective Armando Cruz 1 , António Correia 2 , Hugo Paredes 3 , Benjamim Fonseca 3 , Leonel Morgado 3 , Paulo Martins 3 1 Centro de Estudos em Educação , Tecnologias e Saúde , ESTGL , Instituto Politécnico de Viseu , Campus Politécnico de Viseu , 3504 - 510 Viseu , Portugal cruz . armando1 @ sapo . pt 2 UTAD – University of Trás - os - Montes e Alto Douro , Quinta de Prados , Apartado 1013 , Vila Real , Portugal ajcorreia1987 @ gmail . com 3 INESC TEC / UTAD , Quinta de Prados , Apartado 1013 , Vila Real , Portugal { hparedes , benjaf , leonelm , pmartins } @ utad . pt Abstract . The development of groupware systems can be supported by the per - spectives provided by taxonomies categorizing collaboration systems and theo - retical approaches from the multidisciplinary field of Computer - Supported Co - operative Work ( CSCW ) . In the last decades , multiple taxonomic schemes were developed with different classification dimensions , but only a few addressed the socio - technical perspective that encompasses the interaction between groups of people and technology in work contexts . Moreover , there is an ambiguity in the use of the categories presented in the literature . Aiming to tackle this vagueness and support the development of future groupware systems aware of social phe - nomena , we present a comprehensive classification model to interrelate techno - logical requirements with CSCW dimensions of communication , coordination , cooperation , time and space , regulation , awareness , group dynamics , and com - plementary categories obtained from a taxonomic literature review . Keywords : CSCW , groupware , taxonomy , classification scheme , meta - review , socio - technical requirements , group process support . 1 Introduction As systems and tools evolve and become more complex , it is much harder to evaluate them with high levels of completeness . Taxonomies provide a way to classify them according to their distinctive characteristics while establishing a basis for discussion and improvement . Commonly understood as “the science of classification” , taxonomy is the assay of the procedures and principles of evaluation , whose terminological gen - esis is derivative from the words taxis , signifying arrangement , and nomos , meaning study [ 1 ] . Its focus relies on the intelligibility and schematic arrangement of the phe - nomena through taxonomic units arranged in a classification model or an hierarchical structure . For the specific case of systems and tools developed to support group work , several taxonomic approaches were presented in the literature , including technology - oriented or cooperative work dimensions . Partly , this diversity can be justified by the increased complexity with the emergence of new groupware systems , but it is also a reflection of a lack of adequacy and / or scope of existing taxonomies . Grudin & Pol - trock [ 2 ] argued that CSCW research community leaned forward slightly on the fun - damental frameworks developed by Mintzberg and McGrath in the 1980s , and more research is needed to fill the gap between social and techie domains [ 3 ] , with a better understanding of the nature of collaborative work and the amount of technology fea - tures . This view is reflected by the CSCW acronym , which was coined to define two aspects considered then – as now – significant , cooperative work ( CW ) as social phe - nomenon that characterizes group work , and computer - supported ( CS ) in the perspec - tive of collaboration technologies that support it [ 4 ] . Currently , CSCW involves no - madic work activities and comprises observable practices such as planning , intellectu - al co - construction , task management , playing , massively production , mechanical as - sembly , problem - solving and negotiation , which can be reflected in the 3C model [ 5 ] . Groupware , a “sibling” term of CSCW , refers to technology itself and is usually con - ceptualized as “computer - based systems that support groups of people engaged in a common task ( or goal ) and that provide an interface to a shared environment” to em - power human interaction [ 5 ] . It provides a shared space for cooperation and enables awareness among group members , representing an outcome of CSCW research which encompasses sociological features of cooperative work in multiple forms and applica - tion fields ( e . g . , healthcare , learning , military training , tourism , among others ) . There - fore , these concepts are correlated and occasionally understood as synonymous . Grudin & Poltrock [ 2 ] claim for an evaluation of technology in use on real scenari - os ( e . g . , hospitals , museums and homes ) towards a formal theory of CSCW to support new group dynamics with awareness and adaptive mechanisms to the context of labor . However , some difficulties arose to identify system requirements , taking into account the way people work in group , the influence of technology in their activities [ 6 ] – and consequently , problems in developing systems that would be based on those require - ments . The lack of a standard set of collaboration dynamics and systems is one of the major gaps related to decomposition of collaboration processes in view of subsequent definition of system requirements and specification [ 7 ] . Task typologies unfilled in the literature have been applied by matching technology to tasks . Complementarily , collaboration is a phenomenon that can change over time and this fact implies a need to examine the articulation of cooperative work activities [ 4 ] . Thus , it would be useful to reformulate prior approaches used in the taxonomic models [ 8 ] and develop a clas - sification model to accommodate new systems with increased complexity . In this paper , we review multiple taxonomies that have been suggested to evaluate CSCW and groupware , ordering them chronologically according to the literature di - mensions . Subsequently , a set of evaluation categories is proposed towards a classifi - cation scheme that aims to encompass the general requirements of collaboration tech - nologies and cooperative work dynamics , addressing the problem of the lack of stand - ardization . This was accomplished via a content analysis method by searching the main common categories of classification models suggested in the literature . The aim is to bring an holistic and evolutionary perspective highlighting taxonomic categories . In addition to this introductory section , the structure of this article is subdivided by : a methodological approach used to collect taxonomies ; a meta - review of taxonomies proposed to evaluate CSCW and groupware domains , followed by a segment dedicat - ed to the analysis of results ; a section with a schematic organization of socio - technical requirements that can support collaboration ; and finally , a reflection section constitut - ed by syntactical remarks and future research possibilities based on existing gaps . 2 Methodology According to Weiseth et al . [ 7 ] , there is a lack of a practical , holistic framework that may conduct organizations and other social entities in their effort to specify , evaluate and acquire collaboration systems that can support their needs . Verginadis et al . [ 9 ] claims that further research is required to develop or validate ontological structures of collaboration processes for recurring high - value tasks . Emerging collaboration tools require that CSCW research understand the current context , significant effects in so - ciety that unfold around successfully implementations [ 2 ] . Penichet et al . [ 10 ] argue that new evaluations are required to fit the current collaboration systems , and Schmidt [ 11 ] pointed to the need of a theoretical framework for analyzing or modeling cooper - ative work and specifying requirements of computer - based systems meant to support cooperative work . There is a need to consider the space within which CSCW research is conducted to create an overarching theory and taxonomy of CSCW and groupware [ 2 ] . Due to the lack of systematic reviews with amplitude to cover taxonomic approa - ches presented in literature , a meta - review process is presented based on the Kitchen - ham‟s guidelines [ 12 ] to summarize the current background . The scope of this study relies in re - analyzing the literature references about group - ware characteristics at a technological perspective , and collaborative work categories related to the human factors and task dimensions , with the aim to provide a systematic approach surveying and synthesizing prior research in CSCW [ 13 ] . Due to their sys - tematic methodological nature , involving a discovery of theory through a data qualita - tive analysis , Inductive Analysis [ 14 ] and Theory for Analyzing [ 15 ] support a sub - stantial portion of the present literature review process with a focus on the evaluation model that summarizes information and conveys taxonomic categories . 2 . 1 Research questions In the first methodical compass , a set of Research Questions ( RQs ) is defined to or - ganize the main proposals of this study : RQ1 . Is a taxonomic background useful to CSCW scientific community ? How can it be enhanced according to the technological and group work paradigm shift ? RQ2 . How can we fill the gap of an unified taxonomy to CSCW and groupware ? RQ3 . How should we distill the socio - technical requirements for cooperative work and groupware systems from literature integrating them into a comprehensive model ? Following the standard systematic literature review method proposed by Kitchen - ham et al . [ 12 ] , RQ1 can be conceptualized into a temporal context , where last known taxonomic review was carried out by Bafoutsou & Mentzas [ 16 ] , and other taxonomy - related approaches maintained a similar focus to justify classification categories [ e . g . , 7 , 8 , 10 ] . In this sense , we explore post - 2002 references giving a different perspective compared to previous taxonomic review studies , and „dig‟ the basics of previous tax - onomies related with the main characteristics of group work and support systems . The second question ( RQ2 ) addresses the problem identified in Grudin & Poltrock [ 2 ] study , where they argued that “much has been done since McGrath [ 17 ] on the nature of tasks performed by groups” , and new technological implementations require that CSCW researchers understand the current work context to identify significant impacts on the societal domains . That is , we do not have an unified evaluation model to classi - fy the holistic nature of CSCW research field , and this aspect can be a research oppor - tunity for researchers to learn from the past taxonomic approaches and contribute to the understanding of emerging phenomena at a socio - technical perspective . The third issue ( RQ3 ) relies on the identification of a suitable set of categories to classify socio - technical requirements from literature , launching a research agenda for future studies with a more empirical genesis in psychological , sociological , anthropological , among other domains that characterize the origins of CSCW field [ 2 , 6 ] . 2 . 2 Search process and selection criteria The phase of exploratory literature review follows a manual search process to retrieve a set of taxonomy - related scientific articles and books since 1984 , not only for being an historical year for the origins of this field [ 6 ] but also for representing the course of two landmark studies perpetrated by McGrath [ 17 ] and Mintzberg [ 18 ] , not diminish - ing similar studies . The set of articles , books and technical reports of our sample were selected by have been used as sources in other review papers [ e . g . , 2 , 16 , 19 ] and as to complement these previous studies with new references in order to achieve an holistic perspective on the taxonomic categories proposed in CSCW and groupware domains . The selection of studies complied with the process is shown in the Figure 1 . First , an inquiry was made for a set of refined search terms in Google Scholar , ACM Digital Library and Web of Science databases ( see [ 20 ] for a detailed comparison ) , joining a word sequence constituted by the terms „taxonomy‟ , „classification‟ and „evaluation‟ , and aggregating them with „groupware‟ and „CSCW‟ . The search by terms „collabora - tion‟ , „cooperation‟ and „coordination‟ were not totally applied in this study due to its common representation in distinct fields , which can expand this taxonomic universe in the future with a different search approach . In addition , a broad - spectrum reference list was collected and was read their title , abstract or in full , only in the cases in which taxonomic nature was not clear in the abstract . In the case of Google Scholar indexed references , citation count was a selection criterion to organize results as an important bibliometric indicator to this analysis , which was obtained from Google Scholar cita - tion index . A review in the reference list of each publication allowed us to recognize taxonomic studies that were not found in the previous search . Figure 1 . Flow chart of taxonomic review process 2 . 3 Data analysis Focused literature review stage consisted in the full reading of papers . In this process , a scheme with the taxonomic attributes was developed to organize data about authors , year of publication , work dynamics in collaboration settings ( communication , cooper - ation and coordination ) , temporal and spatial dimensions , group issues ( types of group tasks , characteristics and size ) , technical categories of groupware applications ( scala - bility , software and hardware ) , and complementary categories ( e . g . , usability ) . In this context , the afore - explained classification scheme supported a study of literature pro - posals based on the classification dimensions proposed by Bafoutsou & Mentzas [ 16 ] . To build this scheme , the previously chosen articles was read and extracted from them a set of core characteristics that were interrelated with reviews proposed in the past . 3 Diggin’ the literature to find a context : taxonomic anthology As mentioned above , one of the earliest known taxonomic approaches for the study of groups was conceptualized by McGrath [ 17 ] . However , his research route was strong - ly influenced by significant preliminary studies . Carter et al . [ 21 ] classified tasks into six distinct typologies : clerical , discussion , intellectual construction , mechanical as - sembly , motor coordination and reasoning , which were introduced taking into account the group activity but cannot deal with the nature of the task outcome nor the relations between members at a coordination perspective . Meanwhile , Shaw [ 22 ] expressed the task complexity dimension , and McGrath & Altman [ 23 ] referred a need for systemat - ic conceptual analysis of tasks and their relations to group members , within which the tasks could be classified according to : physical properties ; behaviors needed and nor - mally evoked by the task ; behavior relationship among group members ( e . g . , coopera - tion requirements ) ; and the task goal , criterion and outcome ( e . g . , minimizing errors ) . Subsequent studies produced insights about the behavior requirements of intellec - tual tasks , specifying classification categories such as decision , production , problem - solving , discussion and performance . According to McGrath [ 17 ] , the first really pro - grammatic effort to show systematically the distinct characteristics of group tasks was carried out by Shaw [ 24 ] , surveying them from past published studies of small groups and extracting six categories along which group tasks vary : intellective versus manip - ulative requirements ; task difficulty ; intrinsic interest ; population familiarity ; solution multiplicity or specificity ; and cooperation requirements . Driven by the afore - referred visions , McGrath [ 17 ] extract the main ideas from literature and fit them together into a conceptually interrelated set of classification dimensions about tasks . The result was a group task circumplex constituted by four quadrants ( generate , choose , negotiate , or execute ) , within which are specific task types : planning , creativity , intellective , deci - sion - making , cognitive conflict , mixed - motive , contests / battles , and performance . In an organizational viewpoint , the model proposed by Mintzberg [ 18 ] claims that exec - utives ( strategic apex ) , managers ( middle line ) , support staff , individual contributors ( operating core ) and people formulating work processes ( technostructure ) often have different approaches , constraints , opportunities for action or competing priorities [ 2 ] . In the groupware domain , one of the first approaches was proposed by Bui & Jarke [ 25 ] , with a strong focus on communication requirements for Group Decision Support Systems ( GDSS ) . In this approach , a group communication arrangement can be clas - sified with respect to the spatial distance between decision meetings ( remote and co - located ) , temporal distance of the participants ( simultaneous and different time ) , con - trol centralization ( democratic or hierarchic ) , and cooperation degree in meeting set - tings ( cooperation and negotiation ) . The contingency perspective for GDSS research [ 26 ] has three dimensions : i ) task type ( planning , creativity , intellective , preference , cognitive conflict or mixed motive ) , ii ) member proximity ( face - to - face or dispersed ) , and iii ) group size ( smaller or larger ) . Task type distinction was based on McGrath‟s group task circumplex [ 17 ] , a vision corroborated by Jelassi & Beauclair [ 27 ] . Nunamaker et al . [ 28 ] proposed a taxonomy that replaced the task type criterion by time . Their scheme also takes into account the number of members of a team or group according to physical proximity and time dispersion . The time / space matrix was sug - gested by Johansen [ 29 ] with focus on the temporal and spatial dimensions . It is main - ly concerned with the technological support for group activities , and has four classes relating the time and place of team members‟ interaction . Grudin [ 6 ] brought an ex - tension that adds predictability of place and time to the original matrix . The taxonomy proposed by Ellis et al . [ 5 ] highlights the significance of 3C model ( communication , coordination and collaboration ) in the group interaction support . In their opinion , collaboration is based on information sharing , and coordination is con - cerned to shared objects access . Similar taxonomies ( e . g . , [ 30 , 31 , 32 ] ) were proposed to interrelate a set of application domains into the 3C model [ 30 ] , where an evaluation based on modes of collaboration is organized by communication , information sharing and coordination categories , and the collaboration synchronicity degree ( real - time or asynchronous ) [ 32 ] . Ellis & Wainer [ 31 ] developed a functional decomposition to the groupware systems taking into account the three dimensions intended to developers whose focus lies on the user interface , specifically : the groupware ontology associated to the data structure ; a coordination model that describes the effective management of interaction flow ; and an user interface model to help the interaction between the users and system . In the same year , Malone & Crowston [ 33 ] proposed a taxonomy of co - ordination tools , where the focus relies on the supported management process and it is dedicated to management issues , fairly independent of technical features . Hybrid taxonomies were introduced to associate categories of the central schemes ( time / space , 3C model , and application domains ) , and add new taxonomic elements to categorize the technological and social components of CSCW research . In the taxon - omy proposed by Jarczyk et al . [ 34 ] , collaboration systems were characterized by the follow classes of criteria : functional , application , technical , usability , ergonomics and scalability . Mentzas [ 35 ] classified the coordination - related aspects of group technol - ogy into five categories : coordination model characteristics , type of processing , deci - sion support , organizational environment , and objectives . Completing the evaluative review of Bafoutsou & Mentzas [ 16 ] , new taxonomies was introduced to provide : i ) a categorization of collaboration tools according to the underlying technology [ 36 ] , ii ) task ( decomposition and complexity ) , group ( size , composition , leadership , member characteristics , and subject ) and technology ( task support , tools , mode of communica - tion , process structure , and design ) [ 37 ] , or iii ) application - level categories of collabo - ration tools ( e . g . , workflow and group decision support ) or collaborative services [ 16 ] . Basically , the hybrid taxonomies proposed in the literature can give a broad - spectrum classification perspective , integrating the main previously contributions to help pro - grammers , academics and general public to understand collaboration systems . 4 Meta - analysis results As mentioned above , Bafoutsou & Mentzas [ 16 ] reviewed prior taxonomies presented in literature . Nevertheless , this review left out some studies ( e . g . , [ 11 , 17 , 18 , 30 , 25 , 27 , 28 , 31 , 32 , 37 , 38 ] ) taking into account the time interval of analysis ( 1987 - 2002 ) . The distribution of dimensions is represented within a classification scheme ( Table 1 ) , which is supplemented with more categories and taxonomies identified using our own methodical process . The sample of this review is circumspect to the 1984 - 2009 inter - val , where the selected criteria is based on the importance of McGrath‟s research into group tasks domain , and the complementarity to previous studies with a current sys - tematic analysis . The review scheme is constituted by : time / space ( which is the most addressed in the Table 1 , where collaboration can be synchronous and asynchronous , as well as co - located and remote ) ; CSCW characteristics ( based on 3C model ) ; group issues ( size , characteristics and task types ) ; technical criteria ( scalability , software and hardware ) ; and complementary features ( e . g . , ergonomics and usability , awareness , or application domains ) . The CSCW characteristics ( such as cooperation , coordination , communication , articulation work , division of labor , among others ) are at a similar level of group issues . In fact , they are included in taxonomic proposals since 1991 . By a chronological distribution of literature , it can be seen that the interest in 3C model characteristics has grown in the last years . The attention on other aspects was stable , with clear exceptions to group issues , whose interest experiences a notable fall in the last years . Also , a concern with human - computer interfaces is really obvious , with this feature being an important issue . Starting on their specific work , we will take it a step further , adding the dimension of CSCW characteristics , bibliometric indicators , and including both the more recent literature and that they left out from their study . Our contribution is highlighted in bold , giving a perspective of unexplored taxonomies . The study presented here could be expanded by considering aspects such as „collabo - ration patterns‟ [ 39 ] , collaboration needs adapted from Maslow‟s hierarchy [ 40 ] , and classification dimensions suggested by Boughzala et al . [ 41 ] to evaluate collaborative work and technology support centered on the MAIN + method , which were not taken into account in the present version but offer improvement possibilities . Table 1 . Distribution of classification dimensions across the literature Year Author ( s ) CSCW characteristics Time / Space Group issues Technical criteria Other Bibliometric indicators ¥ 1984 McGrath [ 17 ] * 2798 citations 1984 Mintzberg [ 18 ] * Organizational Structure 8393 citations § 1986 Bui & Jarke [ 25 ] * Mode of Interaction 52 citations 1987 DeSanctis & Gallupe [ 26 ] √ √ 1747 citations Jelassi & Beauclair [ 27 ] * Mode of Interaction 71 citations Stefik et al . [ 42 ] * Development / HCI 1033 citations 1988 Kraemer & King [ 43 ] √ √ 494 citations Johansen [ 29 ] √ 801 citations 1991 Ellis et al . [ 5 ] * √ Mode of Interaction ; Application - level 2912 citations Nunamaker et al . [ 28 ] * * 1590 citations 1992 Jarczyk et al . [ 34 ] √ √ Mode of Interaction ; Usability / Ergonomics ; Application - level 8 citations 1993 Mentzas [ 35 ] * √ √ Mode of Interaction 32 citations 1994 McGrath & Hollingshead [ 44 ] √ 646 citations Grudin [ 6 ] √ 934 citations Malone & Crowston [ 33 ] * √ 2589 citations Ellis & Wainer [ 31 ] Development / HCI 228 citations 1995 Coleman [ 45 ] Application - level 132 citations 1997 Grudin & Poltrock [ 32 ] * * 76 citations 1998 Fjermestad & Hiltz [ 37 ] * * Mode of Interaction ; Usability / Ergonomics ; Organizational Structure 596 citations 2000 Ellis [ 36 ] √ Application - level 22 citations 2000 Ferraris & Martel [ 38 ] * Regulation 27 citations 2002 Bafoutsou & Mentzas [ 16 ] * Application - level 134 citations 2002 Pumareja & Sikkel [ 46 ] * * * Application - level ; Awareness Indicators 5 citations 2002 Andriessen [ 47 ] * * Organizational Structure 6 citations 2003 Bolstad & Endsley [ 48 ] * * * Mode of Interaction 17 citations 2004 Neale et al . [ 49 ] * 165 citations 2006 Weiseth et al . [ 7 ] * * 23 citations 2007 Okada [ 50 ] * * * Awareness Indicators 0 citations Penichet et al . [ 10 ] * * Application - level 28 citations Elmarzouqi et al . [ 51 ] * * Development / HCI 6 citations 2008 Mittleman et al . [ 8 ] * * Application - level ; Awareness Indicators 17 citations 2009 Giraldo et al . [ 52 ] * Development / HCI 0 citations 2009 Golovchinsky [ 53 ] * * 26 citations 2009 Briggs et al . [ 54 ] * * Application - level 11 citations √ Bafoutsou & Mentzas [ 16 ] classification dimensions * Our systematic review‟s contribution ¥ Obtained from Google Scholar citation index at 8 April 2012 § Number of citations related to the first known Mintzberg‟s approach Bolstad & Endsley [ 48 ] proposed a classification scheme for collaboration tools in - tended to support the development of technology and acquisition of material for mili - tary purposes ( i . e . , face - to - face , video / audio conferencing , telephone , network radios , chat / instant messaging , whiteboard , program / application sharing , file transfer , e - mail , and domain specific tools . Moreover , categories are classified as collaboration charac - teristics ( collaboration time , predictability and place , and degree of interaction ) , tech - nology characteristics ( recordable / traceable , identifiable , and structured ) , information types ( emotional , verbal , textual , video , photographic information , and graphical / spa - cial ) , and collaboration processes ( data distribution , gathering , scheduling , planning , tracking , document creation , brainstorming , and shared situational awareness ) . Then , Neale et al . [ 49 ] proposed a pyramidal scheme for the evaluation of the sup - port provided by collaboration systems to activity awareness . This taxonomy focuses some of the core CSCW characteristics ( communication , coordination , collaboration , cooperation , information sharing , and light - weight interaction ) , linked to contextual factors , distributed process loss , work coupling , common ground , and activity aware - ness ) . Subsequently , Weiseth et al . [ 7 ] suggested a wheel of collaboration tools as a framework constituted by the collaboration environment , process and support , related to the functional areas of coordination ( mutual adjustment , planning , standardization ) , production ( mailing , search and retrieval , capturing , authoring , publishing ) , and deci - sion - making ( survey , query , evaluation and analysis , reporting , choice ) . In 2007 , Okada [ 50 ] introduced an hierarchical taxonomy to classify collaboration . From basis to top , it has : coexistence ( place and time ) , awareness ( influenced by hu - man , spatial , and temporal factors ) , sharing ( views , opinions , knowledge , operations , and others ) , and collaboration ( cooperation , and assertion ) . According to the author of this study , the degree of assertion and cooperation shown by the group members in - fluences the outcome of collaboration . Only high levels of assertion and cooperation result in coordination , a higher level of assertion results in collision , and if coopera - tion is higher than assertion the outcome is concession . Penichet et al . [ 10 ] considered that most of the taxonomies existing at the time were inadequate to classify more complex systems that include a large variety of tools . They argued that some tools are forced to fit in one category . In fact , these systems can be used in different ways and contexts in a synchronous and asynchronous setting . Thus , they proposed a taxonomy to accommodate some of such situations and interrelate time / space matrix with infor - mation sharing , communication and coordination . In the same year , Elmarzouqi et al . [ 51 ] approached the Augmented Continuum of Collaboration Model ( ACCM ) , which is also focused in the CSCW characteristics ( collaboration , cooperation , and coordina - tion ) , and relating them with ACCM components : co - production , communication , and conversation . In summary , this taxonomy is based on the 3C model , with addition of conversation , regulation and awareness . The Mittleman et al . ‟s [ 8 ] taxonomic study includes nine architectural implementations , with a specific granularity , to classify the attributes of groupware systems . This taxonomic effort follows a previous work [ 55 ] based on the encapsulation of collaboration patterns to classify collaborative work . A conceptual framework was suggested for the design of groupware user interfaces [ 52 ] with a focus on shared context , visualization area , activity , division of labor , task types , geographical information , people , events , time interval , object , strategy , as well as rules . Following the proliferation of systems and algorithms in industry and acad - emy , it was proposed an evaluation model for collaboration systems at an information seeking perspective [ 53 ] with the domains of intent , depth , concurrency , and location . Furthermore , Briggs et al . [ 54 ] give a social - technical perspective to define “seven areas of concern for designers of collaboration support systems” , subdividing them by goals , products , activities , patterns , techniques , tools , and scripts . This classification model represents the starting point for the classification model presented here . 5 Socio - technical requirements to support collaboration Taxonomic proposals of CSCW and groupware are varied , with a fair amount of dif - ferences . Penichet et al . [ 10 ] argued that one of the main reasons to this variety relies on the increased complexity of groupware tools . An overarching classification model is proposed to categorize collaboration requirements for a more social - oriented group - ware development . According to Johnson [ 56 ] , the creation and refinement of classi - fication systems and taxonomies are crucial processes in theory development , where the categories of a classification model should be mutually exclusive , exhaustive , and logically interrelated . The socio - technical classification model proposed here attempts to bring a continuum of collaboration dimensions , which problem relies on the lack of standardization of categories proposed in literature without terminological consensus . In the Figure 2 are shown socio - technical requirements for collaboration , organizing a set of categories taken from literature . The model intends to tackle the evident lack of consensus concerning to the conceptual structure of cooperative work and groupware at a combined perspective , comprising technical requirements and work dimensions in an unified classification model . The taxonomic elements of the scheme presented here are fully based in CSCW and group generic literature , which was extracted taking into account their temporal persistence , bibliometric impact , complementarity , and logical consistence . The “blocks” and “meta - blocks” of this model establish a set of domains according to their granularity , being structured at an hierarchical way . Figure 2 . Socio - technical classification model of CSCW and groupware The first category of this literature - based classification model is the 3C model . This category can be systematized into an interactive cycle through the well - known modes of collaboration . Communication can be understood as an interaction process between people [ 17 ] , involving explicit or implicit information exchange , in a private or public channel . The users‟ messages can be identified or anonymous , and conversation may occur with no support , structured or intellectual process support , with associated pro - tocols . As a requirement , groupware needs to be able to support the conversation be - tween two or more individuals , in an one - to - one , one - to - many or many - to - many set - ting . Coordination was defined by Malone & Crowston [ 33 ] as management of inter - dependencies between activities performed by multiple actors , which are based on the mutual objects that are exchanged between activities ( e . g . , design elements , manufac - tured parts , or resources ) . Some categories related to the coordination in the literature are : planning , control models , task / subtask relationship and information management , mutual adjustment , standardization , coordination protocol , modes of operation , and so on . In order to effectively support coordination , groupware needs to fulfill three im - portant requirements : time management , resources , or shared artifacts produced along the activity chain . Cooperative work arrangements appear and dissolve again . Oppo - sitely to conflict [ 17 ] , cooperation occurs when a group works toward a common goal [ 33 ] with high degrees of task interdependencies , sharing the available information by some kind of shared space [ 6 ] . Cooperation categories can range from production ( co - authoring ) , storage or manipulation of an artifact , to concurrency , access or floor con - trol . Technologically , cooperation is supported by systems with capabilities to send or receive messages , synchronously and / or asynchronously [ 8 , 35 ] , and also develop or share documents [ 32 ] , which are identified as requirements in socio - technical classifi - cation model . Furthermore , this terminology was adopted by representing a predomi - nant view in CSCW field , although not totally agreed by some researchers . Collaboration can occurs in a specific time ( synchronous and / or asynchronous ) and place ( co - located or remote ) , and may have high or low levels of predictability . If we granulize the Time / Space category , a set of subdomains can be distilled , more precise - ly : session persistence , delay between audio / video channels , reciprocity and homoge - neity of channels , delay of the message sent , and spontaneity of collaboration . Com - plementary , it can be useful to define contextual issues to improve work dynamics . In order to cooperate in the current polymorphic settings , group members must be aware of other‟s activities , creating group awareness at the workspace . The collabora - tion cycle is bounded by awareness , which is the perception of group about what each member develops , and the contextual knowledge that they have about what is happen - ing within the group [ 8 ] . In this sense , awareness mechanisms are essential in collabo - ration systems to reduce work losses . It characterizes space and atmosphere , activity , object , human , and meta - dimensions such as presence , influence , and abilities . The application - level category identifies a set of typologies for groupware systems . Mittleman et al . [ 8 ] proposed several categories and subcategories to classify collabo - ration technology according to its focus on the group level , covering work over a peri - od of time : i ) jointly authored pages ( conversation tools , polling tools , group dynam - ics , and shared editors ) ; ii ) streaming technologies ( desktop / application sharing , audio conferencing , and video conferencing ) ; iii ) information access tools ( shared file repo - sitories , social tagging systems , search engines , and syndication tools ) ; and iv ) aggre - gated systems . Complementary , a large set of meta - domains can be extensively identi - fied ( e . g . , message systems , information sharing technologies , GDSS , project , virtual workspaces , meeting minutes / records and electronic meeting rooms , process or event management systems , chat / instant messaging , notification systems , group calendars , collaboration laboratories , bulletin boards , data mining tools , e - mail , workflow sys - tems , intelligent agents , and so on . In this sense , a lack of consensus about groupware domains is a serious challenge to overcome . As a subcategory of groupware systems , regulation means the representation of mechanisms that enable participants to organ - ize themselves into a shared environment , where the regulation of collaboration activ - ities concerns the definition and evolution of work rules to ensure conformity between the activity and group goals [ 38 ] . It is worth noting that some of the regulation dimen - sions achieved from literature are : arenas ( location ) ; actors ( roles , places , and positi - ons ) ; tools ( regulative or not ) ; roles ( thematic or causal ) ; rules ( constraints , norms , or work rules ) ; types of interaction ; interactive scenarios ; and objects ( means of commu - nication and product of collaboration ) . The groupware application properties can be constituted by functional properties of collaboration tools : architecture , functional and quality properties , group processes support , collaboration interface ( portal , devices , or physical workspace ) , relationships ( collection , list , tree , and graph ) , core functionali - ty , content ( text , links , graphic , or data - stream ) , supported actions ( receive , add , asso - ciate , edit , move , delete , or judge ) , identifiability , access controls , alert mechanisms , intelligent / semi - intelligent software components , awareness indicators , and platform . GDSS elements can include hardware , software , organizationware and people support . Groups can be defined as “social aggregations of individuals” with awareness of its presence , conducted by its own norms , and supported by task interdependencies tow - ards a common goal in a shared purpose or work context [ 46 ] . In this sense , a group is constituted by particular characteristics , such as : size ( 3 to 7 , > 7 ) , composition , loca - tion , proximity , structure ( leadership and hierarchy ) , formation , group awareness ( low or high , and cohesiveness ) , behavior ( cooperative or competitive ) , autonomy , subject , and trust . The group members have a personal background ( work experience , training , and educational ) , skills , motivation , attitude towards technology , previous experience , satisfaction , knowledge , and personality . According to McGrath [ 17 ] , group tasks can be subdivided in creativity , planning , intellective , decision - making ( choosing , evalua - tion and analysis , search , report , and survey ) , cognitive - conflict , mixed - motive , con - tests / battles / competitive and performances / psychomotor , having a specific complexity associated to each task . The subcategories can be supported by cultural impact , goals , interdependency or information exchange needs , bottlenecks , or process gain and loss . The contextual or situational factors can range from organizational support ( rewards , budget , and training ) , cultural contexts ( trust or equity ) , physical setting , environment ( competition , uncertainly , time pressure , and evaluative tone ) , and business domain at an organizational way . Interaction variables are related to group factors : i ) interaction outcome variables , such as group outcomes ( quality of group performance , collabora - tion processes , and group development ) , individual outcomes ( expectations and satis - faction on system use , appreciation of group membership , and individual breakdowns in system use ) , and system outcomes ( enhancements and affordances ) ; ii ) processes , including individual , interpretation , motivation and performance dimensions ; and iii ) results , specifically individual rewards , group vitality , and organizational results ) . The independent variables are focused on classes of criteria ( functional , technical , usability , and ergonomics ) , meta - criteria ( scalability , and orthogonality ) and comple - mentary dimensions without a specific domain . Some of the other dimensions that can characterize a socio - technical collaboration scenario are : work coupling , shared tasks and goals , information richness and type , control centralization , activities , division of labor , patterns , techniques , scripts , assistance , learning monitoring , interaction degree , assertion , events , strategy , social connectivity , content management , process integra - tion , sharing ( view / opinion , knowledge / information , and work / operation ) , protection , distributed processes loss , or depth of mediation . However , categories such as acces - sibility are partially forgotten from CSCW literature studies . 6 Conclusions and future work This paper concludes that there are , in fact , common dimensions to the several taxon - omies addressed by literature with more or less regularity . The growth of importance of CSCW characteristics , in opposition to categories such as group issues , might sug - gest a relation between them . The 3C model is well accepted , widely used , and extre - mely useful to classify collaboration settings . A literature review leads us to establish requirements solid enough to characterize existing tools or group work dynamics , and the development of new ones . Some taxonomies ( e . g . , [ 5 , 17 ] ) have an high number of citations at a bibliometric level , which reflects the importance of organizational and group work dynamics , application - level , 3C model , and time / space . Oppositely , it is approached the studies of Okada [ 50 ] and Giraldo et al . [ 52 ] without citations . A collaboration project can fail due to the lack of literature - based and / or empirical studies about requirements and satisfactory practices . Theories , principles or concep - tual frameworks provided by psychology , sociology or anthropology in work contexts can improve group work [ 46 ] . The socio - technical classification model can reproduce a mutual adaptation process between groupware and people observable from a collab - oration perspective . A key contribution of this paper is to provide a systematic review of how groupware and work settings have been presented in CSCW literature . In this context , this work relies on a community - centered building model with literature sup - port to understand the complex taxonomic phenomena , expanding and adapting exist - ing approaches to create taxonomies and design a contemporary classification model . Organizations , academies , industries and other social entities can apply this model to retrieve insights about collaboration dynamics and improve the quality of interaction . In future , the literature classification can be done under a more detailed framework , where the taxonomic dimensions would be subdivided in several features . This aspect could help to find the functional requirements of groupware tools , making a step for - ward towards a more wide and consensual taxonomy of CSCW and groupware . There is a need to translate these theoretical propositions into practical guidelines using a set of methods such as semi - structured interviews or ethnography to find evidences about current virtualized work practices , breaking the „tunnel effect‟ of CSCW terminology . References 1 . Baladi , M . , Vitali , H . , Fadel , G . , Summers , J . , Duchowski , A . : A taxonomy for the design and evaluation of networked virtual environments : its application to collaborative design . International Journal on Interactive Design and Manufacturing 2 ( 1 ) , 17 - 32 ( 2008 ) . 2 . Grudin , J . , Poltrock , S . E . : Taxonomy and theory in Computer Supported Cooperative Work . In S . W . J . Kozlowski ( Ed . ) , The Oxford Handbook of Industrial and Organiza - tional Psychology . New York : Oxford University Press ( in press ) . 3 . Ackerman , M . S . : The intellectual challenge of CSCW : the gap between social require - ments and technical feasibility . Human - Computer Interaction 15 ( 2 ) , 179 - 203 ( 2000 ) . 4 . Schmidt , K . , Bannon , L . : Taking CSCW seriously : supporting articulation work . Com - puter Supported Cooperative Work 1 ( 1 ) , 7 - 40 ( 1992 ) . 5 . Ellis , C . A . , Gibbs , S . J . , Rein , G . L . : Groupware : some issues and experiences . Commu - nications of the ACM 34 ( 1 ) , 38 - 58 ( 1991 ) . 6 . Grudin , J . : Computer Supported Cooperative Work : History and focus . Computer 27 ( 5 ) , 19 - 26 ( 1994 ) . 7 . Weiseth , P . E . , Munkvold , B . E . , Tvedte , B . , Larsen , S . : The wheel of collaboration tools : A typology for analysis within a holistic framework . In Proceedings of the ACM Confer - ence on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW „06 ) , 239 - 248 ( 2006 ) . 8 . Mittleman , D . D . , Briggs , R . O . , Murphy , J . , Davis , A . : Toward a taxonomy of group - ware technologies . In Proceedings of the 14th Collaboration Researcher‟s International Workshop on Groupware ( CRIWG „08 ) , 307 - 321 ( 2008 ) . 9 . Verginadis , Y . , Papageorgiou , N . , Apostolou , D . , Mentzas , G . : A review of patterns in collaborative work . In Proceedings of the 16th ACM International Conference on Sup - porting Group Work ( GROUP „10 ) . ACM , NY , 283 - 292 ( 2010 ) . 10 . Penichet , V . M . R . , Marin , I . , Gallud , J . A . , Lozano , M . D . , Tesoriero , R . : A classifica - tion method for CSCW systems . Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 168 , 237 - 247 ( 2007 ) . 11 . Schmidt , K . : Analysis of cooperative work – a conceptual framework . Risø National La - boratory , DK - 4000 Roskilde , Denmark , [ Risø - M - 2890 ] , June ( 1990 ) . 12 . Kitchenham , B . , Brereton , O . P . , Budgen , D . , Turner , M . , Bailey , J . , Linkman , S . : Sys - tematic literature reviews in software engineering – a systematic literature review . Infor - mation and Software Technology 51 , 7 - 15 ( 2009 ) . 13 . Webster , J . , Watson , R . T . : Analyzing the past to prepare for the future : writing a litera - ture review . MIS Quarterly 26 ( 2 ) , 13 - 23 ( 2002 ) . 14 . Thomas , D . R . : A general inductive approach for qualitative data analysis . University of Auckland , New Zealand School of Population Health ( 2004 ) . 15 . Gregor , S . : The nature of theory in Information Systems . MIS Quarterly , 30 ( 3 ) , 611 - 642 ( 2006 ) . 16 . Bafoutsou , G . , Mentzas , G . : Review and functional classification of collaborative sys - tems . International Journal of Information Management 22 , 281 - 305 ( 2002 ) . 17 . McGrath , J . E . : Groups : interaction and performance . Englewood Cliffs , New Jersey : Prentice - Hall ( 1984 ) . 18 . Mintzberg , H . : A typology of organizational structure . In D . Miller & P . H . Friesen ( Eds . ) , Organizations : A Quantum View , Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Reprinted in R . Baecker ( Ed . ) , Readings in groupware and Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( 1993 ) , San Mateo , CA : Morgan Kaufmann , 68 - 86 ( 1984 ) . 19 . Zigurs , I . , Munkvold , B . E . : Collaboration technologies , tasks , and contexts : evolution and opportunity . In D . Galletta & P . Zhang ( Eds . ) , Human - Computer Interaction and Management Information Systems : Applications ( Vol . II ) , Armonk , NY : M . E . Sharpe , 143 - 169 ( 2006 ) . 20 . Mikki , S . : Google Scholar compared to Web of Science : A literature review . Nordic Journal of Information Literacy in Higher Education 1 ( 1 ) , 41 - 51 ( 2009 ) . 21 . Carter , L . F . , Haythorn , W . W . , Howell , M . A . : A further investigation of the criteria of leadership . Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 46 ( 6 ) , 589 - 595 ( 1950 ) . 22 . Shaw , M . E . : Some effects of problem complexity upon problem solution efficiency in different communication nets . Journal of Experimental Psychology 48 ( 3 ) , 211 - 217 ( 1954 ) . 23 . McGrath , J . E . , Altman , I . : Small group research : a synthesis and critique of the field . Chicago : Holt , Rinehart & Winston ( 1966 ) . 24 . Shaw , M . E . : Scaling group tasks : a method for dimensional analysis . JSAS Catalog of Selected Documents in Psychology 3 , p . 8 ( 1973 ) . 25 . Bui , T . , Jarke , M . : Communication requirements for Group Decision Support Systems . Journal of Management Information Systems 11 ( 4 ) , 9 - 20 ( 1986 ) . 26 . DeSanctis , G . , Gallupe , R . B . : A foundation for the study of Group Decision Support Systems . Management Science 33 ( 5 ) , 589 - 609 ( 1987 ) . 27 . Jelassi , M . T . , Beauclair , R . A . : An integrated framework for Group Decision Support Systems design . Information and Management 13 ( 3 ) , 143 - 153 ( 1987 ) . 28 . Nunamaker , Jr . , J . F . , Briggs , R . O . , Mittleman , D . : Electronic meetings to support group work . Communications of the ACM , 34 ( 7 ) , 40 - 61 ( 1991 ) . 29 . Johansen , R . : Groupware : computer support for business teams . New York and London : The Free Press ( 1988 ) . 30 . Borghoff , U . M . , Schlichter , J . H . : Computer - Supported Cooperative Work : introduction to distributed applications . USA : Springer ( 2000 ) . 31 . Ellis , C . A . , Wainer , J . : A conceptual model of groupware . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW „94 ) , 79 - 88 ( 1994 ) . 32 . Grudin , J . , Poltrock , S . E . : Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and groupware . In Advances in Computers , M . Zelkowitz ( Ed . ) , Orlando , FL : Academic Press 45 , 269 - 320 ( 1997 ) . 33 . Malone , T . W . , Crowston , K . : The interdisciplinary study of coordination . ACM Compu - ting Surveys 26 ( 1 ) , 87 - 119 ( 1994 ) . 34 . Jarczyk , A . , Loffler , P . , Volksen , G . : Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) – state of the art and suggestions for the future work . Internal Report , Version 1 . 0 , Siemens AG , Corporate Research ( 1992 ) . 35 . Mentzas , G . : Coordination of joint tasks in organizational processes . Journal of Infor - mation Technology 8 , 139 - 150 ( 1993 ) . 36 . Ellis , C . A . : An evaluation framework for collaborative systems . Technical Report , CU - CS - 901 - 00 , Department of Computer Science , University of Colorado at Boulder , USA ( 2000 ) . 37 . Fjermestad , J . , Hiltz , S . R . : An assessment of Group Support Systems experimental re - search : methodology and results . Journal of Management Information Systems 15 ( 3 ) , 7 - 149 ( 1998 ) . 38 . Ferraris , C . , Martel , C . : Regulation in groupware : the example of a collaborative drawing tool for young children . In Proceedings of 6th International Workshop on Groupware ( CRIWG „00 ) , 119 - 127 ( 1998 ) . 39 . Schümmer , T . , Lukosch , S . : Patterns for computer - mediated interaction . Chichester , UK : John Wiley & Sons Ltd . ( 2007 ) . 40 . Sarma , A . , Van Der Hoek , A . , Cheng , L . T . : A need - based collaboration classification framework . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ‟04 ) , Chicago , IL , RC 23339 ( 2004 ) . 41 . Boughzala , I . , Assar , S . , Romano Jr . , N . C . : An E - government field study of process vir - tualization modeling . In G . J . de Vreede ( Ed . ) , Group Decision and Negotiation , 154 ( 2010 ) . 42 . Stefik , M . , Foster , G . , Bobrow , D . G . , Kahn , K . , Lanning , S . , Suchman , L . : Beyond the chalkboard : computer support for collaboration and problem solving in meetings . Com - munications of the ACM 30 ( 1 ) , 32 - 47 ( 1987 ) . 43 . Kraemer , K . , King , J . : Computer - based systems for cooperative work and group decision making . ACM Computing Surveys 20 , 115 - 146 ( 1988 ) . 44 . McGrath , J . E . , Hollingshead , A . B . : Groups interacting with technology : ideas , evi - dence , issues , and an agenda . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications ( 1994 ) . 45 . Coleman , D . : Groupware : technology and applications . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Prentice Hall ( 1995 ) . 46 . Pumareja , D . T . , Sikkel , K . : An evolutionary approach to groupware implementation : the context of requirements engineering in the socio - technical frame . Technical Report TR - CTIT - 02 - 30 , Centre for Telematics and Informational Technology , University of Twente , Enschede , August ( 2002 ) . 47 . Andriessen , J . H . : Working with groupware : understanding and evaluating collaboration technology . London : Springer Verlag ( 2002 ) . 48 . Bolstad , C . A . , Endsley , M . R . : Tools for supporting team collaboration . In Proceedings of the 47th Annual Meeting of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society , Santa Mon - ica , CA : HFES , 374 - 378 ( 2003 ) . 49 . Neale , D . C . , Carroll , J . M . , Rosson , M . B . : Evaluating Computer - Supported Cooperative Work : models and frameworks . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW „04 ) , 112 - 121 ( 2004 ) . 50 . Okada , K . : Collaboration support in the information sharing space . IPSJ Magazine 48 ( 2 ) , 123 - 125 ( 2007 ) . 51 . Elmarzouqi , N . , Garcia , E . , Lapayre , J . C . : ACCM : a new architecture model for CSCW . In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work in Design ( CSCWD „07 ) , Melbourne , Australia ( 2007 ) . 52 . Giraldo , W . J . , Molina , A . I . , Gallardo , J . , Collazos , C . A . , Ortega , M . , Redondo , M . A . Classification of CSCW proposals based on a taxonomy . In Proceedings of the 13th In - ternational Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work in Design ( CSCWD „09 ) , IEEE Computer Society , Washington , D . C . , USA , 119 - 124 ( 2009 ) . 53 . Golovchinsky , G . , Pickens , J . , Back , M . : A taxonomy of collaboration in online infor - mation seeking . Paper presented at the Collaborative Information Retrieval Workshop at the Joint Conference on Digital Libraries ( JCDL „08 ) , 1 - 3 ( 2008 ) . 54 . Briggs , R . O . , Kolfschoten , G . , Vreede , G . - J . , Albrecht , C . , Dean , D . R . , Lukosch , S . : A seven - layer model of collaboration : Separation of concerns for designers of collaboration systems . In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Information Sys - tems , Phoenix , AZ ( 2009 ) . 55 . Briggs , R . O . , De Vreede , G . , Nnunamaker Jr . , J . F . : Collaboration engineering with thinkLets to pursue sustained success with Group Support Systems . Journal of Manage - ment Information Systems 19 ( 4 ) , 31 - 64 ( 2003 ) . 56 . Johnson , D . P . : Contemporary sociological theory : an integrated multi - level approach . New York : Springer ( 2008 ) .