COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 5 , 275 - 287 ( 1973 ) Encoding Processes in Recognition and Recall BARBARA TVERSKY ~ Hebrew University The present experiments demonstrate that picture - word stimuli are differentially encoded in anticipation of a recognition test than in anticipa - tion of a free - recall test . Subjects perform better on the retention test of which they have been informed , and different information from the stimuli is used to pass each test . These findings cannot be attributed to stimulus selection nor to pure pictorial encoding in anticipation of recognition and pure verbal encoding in anticipation of recall . Recognition is enhanced by encoding which integrates the details within each item while recall is enhanced by encoding which interrelates the items of a list . The superiority of recognition tests of memory to recall tests has typically been attributed to the fact that less information about an item is needed to pass a recognition test ( Postman , 1963 ) . Partial learning may be sufficient to choose the correct alternative or reject an incorrect alternative in a recognition test , but not enough to guarantee correct recall . Recently , several theorists , notably Estes and Da Polito ( 1967 ) , Kintsch ( 1970 ) ) Bahrick ( 1970 ) , and Anderson and Bower ( 1972 ) ) have proposed that an important difference between recognition and recall tests of memory is that the former by - pass the retrieval stage of memory necessary in recall . Since the correct alternative is presented in the recognition test , S presumably does not have to search his memory to find it . To support his contention , Kintsch ( 1970 ) reviewed and reported data on variables which have different effects on recognition and recall tests of memory . High frequency words are better recalled , while low fre - ‘This research was performed while the author held a postdoctoral fellowship from the National Institute of Mental Health at Stanford University . The research was supported by NIMH Grant MH 13950 - 06 to Stanford University and by the Advanced Projects Research Agency , United States Department of Defense , monitored by the United States Air Force Office of Scientific Research under Contract F44620 - 67 - C - 0099 at the University of Oregon . The author expresses her appreciation to Edward E . Smith for discussions throughout the years and to Lois Robinson for her enthusiastic assistance in data collection and analysis . Requests for reprints should be addressed to : Dr . Barbara Tversky ; Department of Psychology ; Hebrew University ; Jerusalem , Israel . 275 Copyright @ 1973 by Academic Press , Inc . All rights of reproduction in any form reserved , 276 BARBARA TVERSKY quency words are better recognized . Intention to learn aids recall , but has little or no effect on recognition . Interlist similarity hinders recall , but not recognition . Finally , certain organizational variables , such as clustering and approximation to English , increase recall , but not recogni - tion . These variables are thought to have their effect by rendering items more or less available at the retrieval or search phase of recall . Further support for the two - phase theory of recall comes from two programs of experimental work attempting to demonstrate implicit re - trieval and recognition of words in a recall task . Bahrick ( 1970 ) was able to predict success in prompted recall directly from performance in the two presumably underlying and independent subprocesses , retrieval and recognition . Anderson and Bower ( 1972 ) proposed that implicitly underlying free recall is a retrieval process which accesses words , fol - lowed by a recognition test of the appropriateness of the list - markers associated to the words at study . While retrievability of words increases as the words appear on more overlapping lists , recognition of the ap - propriate lists decreases , as predicted by their model . Implicit or explicit in both these views on recognition and recall , either a strength theory or a two - phase theory , is the notion that the same in - formation is stored by S in both situations . It would seem quite reason - able , however , for S to encode a stimulus differently in anticipation of a recall test than in anticipation of a recognition test , in part , precisely because the correct alternative is presented in a recognition test . When making the acquaintance of a new person , we encode differently in order to recall his name than to recognize his face . Likewise , when learning a new route , say from home to office , we encode the city scene differently to give directions to someone else - recall - from to find the way again the next day - recognize . Learning to speak a foreign lan - guage - recalling words - entails different encoding than learning to understand - recognizing words - and understanding spoken language requires different information from the stimuli from recognizing printed words . That is , it is not merely the case that more information is needed to pass a recall test than a recognition test , but rather than a different kind of information , information organized in a different manner , may be more efficacious in one situation than another , The student who asks his teacher whether the final examination will be essay or multiple - choice is in essence asking how to conduct his study . Several previous attempts to find encoding differences in these two memory tasks have failed ( e . g . , Freund , Brelsford , & Atkinson , 1969 ) . The experimental task must encourage expression of encoding strategies , as is evident in an experiment conducted by Loftus ( 1971 ) ) who did find better recall performance in pure recall trial blocks than in blocks where ENCODING IN RECOGNITION AND RECALL 277 recall and recognition trials were randomly mixed , and where the SS were not forewarned of test type . Demonstration of encoding differences in anticipation of recognition or recall also necessitates stimuli rich enough to be differentially encoded , and memory tests sensitive enough to detect encoding differences . Simple pictures of objects are richer in encoding possibilities than the words typically used in these experi - ments . It would be to the S’s advantage to encode information primarily pictorially from these stimuli if he expected a recognition task entailing discrimination of the correct picture from a similar picture . On the other hand , it would be advantageous to store mainly organized verbal infor - mation in anticipation of free recall . Just as object names would not be sufficient to pass a recognition task , unintegrated information about the appearance of objects would not maximize free recall . The present ex - periments used pictorial stimuli with both recall and recognition tests of retention . Since groups differ only in their instructions , differences in retention can be attributed to differential encoding of the material . EXPERIMENT I Method Stimdi . The stimuli were 30 slides of line drawings of familiar objects , with their names . The pictures were comparable in style and quality to dictionary drawings . The objects , in order of presentation as well as test , were : camera , umbrella , barrel , teapot , butterfly , television , windmill , barn , refrigerator , typewriter , submarine , binoculars , iron sailboat , cake , tricycle , tent , tree , lawnmower , kangaroo , fireplace , books , baggage , sky - scraper , desk , tractor , streetcar , pipe , fish , purse . For each stimulus , there was another picture with the same name , used as the foil in the recogni - tion test , which differed from the original in one of three ways : by orientation ( 0 ) , preserving detail ; by exemplar ( E ) , altering both out - line and internal detail ; or by internal detail ( D ) , preserving outline . There were 10 stimulus pairs of each type ; one of each pair was ran - domly chosen to be the originally presented stimulus , and the other , to be the foil . The first stimulus presented was of pair - type 0 ; the second , pair - type E ; the third , pair - type D ; the fourth , pair - type 0 , and so on . Subjects . Subjects were 76 Stanford students paid for their participa - tion . They were divided into four groups by factorially combining mem - ory instructions for recognition or for recall with memory test order , recognition first or recall first . Subjects were run in groups of four to ten . Procedure . Subjects expecting recall were told : This is an experiment in memory for pictures . I will project on the screen a series of 30 pictures of familiar objects with their names , one after the 278 BARBARA TVERSKY other , for about 2 set apiece . Afterward , your task will be to write down the names of as many of the objects as you can remember , in any order . Any questions ? The pictures were presented for 2 set each by a Carousel projector oper - ated by Hunter timer . Afterward , paper was distributed for the recall or recognition tasks as the appropriate instructions were read . Subjects receiving the recall test first ( n = 18 ) , were told : “Please write down the names of as many of the objects in the pictures as you can remember in any order they come to mind . ” Subjects given the recognition test first ( n = 23 ) were told : Before we proceed to the test of recall , I want to test your recognition of the pictures you saw . I will project the pictures you saw , one by one , along - side another similar , but new , picture . Your task is to decide which of the two pictures you saw previously . It you think it was the picture on the left , put an “X” in the left column . If you think it was the picture on the right , put an “X” in the right column . Then fill in the rating column . Put a “1” if you feel very confident of your judgment , a “2” if you feel confident , or a “3” if you feel unsure of your pair of pictures as they appear , and you will have 6 set in which to examine the pictures , make your judgment and ratings , and mark them on the paper . Is that clear ? Subjects were then given the other retention test with essentially the same instructions . Three minutes were allowed for recall . Recognition instructions were as follows : This is an experiment in memory for pictures . I will project on the screen a series of 36 pictures of familiar objects , one after another , for about 2 set apiece . Afterward , your task will be to recognize the pictures you are about to see and to discriminate each from another , very similar picture of the same object . Any questions ? Subjects were then given the two retention tests with essentially the same instructions as the recall - instructed groups , except “Before we proceed to the recognition test” preceded the recall instructions of the group re - ceiving the recall test prior to the recognition test ( n = 17 ; n = 18 for the group receiving recognition test first ) . Results Median percentage correct recognition and recall for each instructions by first test group is reported in Table 1 . On the recognition test , there was a highly significant effect of in - structions ( p < . OOl , median test ) . Median correct recognition for the groups informed of the recognition test was 26 . 5 ( 88 % ) for the group tested on recognition first , and 27 ( 90 % ) for the group tested on recall first . Median correct recognition for the recall - instructed groups , how - ever , was 22 ( 73 % ) for the group tested first on recognition , and 21 . 5 ENCODING IN RECOGNITION AND RECALL 279 TABLE 1 Median Percent , age Correct Recall and Recognition ( Chance = 509 ; ) for Each Instruction by First Test Group Instructions First test lCecal1 ltecognition Recall Recognition ltecall Recognition itecall scores 47 ( n = 18 ) so ( n = 17 ) 60 ( n = 23 ) 60 ( n = IX ) Rerognilion scores 72 90 73 xs ( 72 % ) for the group tested first on recall . Change performance would have yielded 15 correct ( 5o % j . Subjects expressed more confidence when their responses were correct . On the recall test , there was a highly significant effect of test order ( p < , 001 by a median test ) but no apparent effect of instructions . When recall was tested first , recall - instru’cted Ss remembered a median of 14 items ( 47 % ) while recognition - instructed Ss remembered a median of 15 items ( 50 % ) . When recognition was tested first , recall scores increased to a median of 18 items ( 60 % ) for both instructional groups . Close synonyms ( e . g . , “luggage” for “baggage” ) were scored as correct for all groups in all experiments . These constituted 2 . 2 % of the correct response for re - call - instructed groups and 3 . 7 % of the correct responses of recognition - instructed groups . As is evident from Table 2 , correct responses were distributed more or less evenly over the three types of stimulus - foil pairs , those differing in TABLE 2 Percentage of Correct Responses for StimullwFoil Pairs Differing by Orientat , ion , Exemplar , or Detail for Each Instructional Set , and Each Retention Test , Stimulus - foil difference Instruct , ional set Orientjalion Exemplar Detail Recall Recognition Recall Recognition 31 . 2 33 . 9 33 * 5 31 . 8 Recognition test 20 . 2 31 . 2 Recall test , 32 . 4 30 . 7 39 . 7 34 . 9 34 . 1 37 . 6 280 BARBARA TVERSKY orientation , exemplar , or detail , for both instructional groups and both retention tests . It appears that these manipulations yielded sets of picture pairs of comparable difficulty . EXPERIMENT II While an encoding effect was clearly demonstrated for the recognition test , no such effect was obtained for the recall test . This in itself is noteworthy , as the present experimental paradigm may be regarded as a double intentional - incidental learning paradigm . The “intentional” task is the retention test Ss were informed of , and the “incidental” task is not strictly so , but rather the retention test Ss were not informed of . In this light , the results indicate a strong positive effect of intention to learn on recognition memory , an effect typically demonstrated only on recall tasks . The recognition instructions , however , in contrast to the recall instruc - tions , were suggestive of an effective encoding strategy , that is , encoding sufficient visual information to make a difficult discrimination . In the second experiment , recall - instructed Ss were also provided with an effective encoding strategy . They were told that attempting to find relationships among the words and to group and remember related words together was very likely to increase their recall ( Anderson , 1972 ) . To further promote organization of items , the pictures were ordered in natural groups or clusters as much as possible in presentation . Method Stimuli . The previous stimuli were used in the following order : books , typewriter , desk , camera , binoculars , pipe , fireplace , television , refrig - erator , cake , teapot , iron , umbrella , purse , baggage , barrel , submarine , sailboat , tent , butterfly , fish , kangaroo , tree , skyscraper , windmill , barn , tractor , lawnmower , tricycle , streetcar . Subjects . Forty - five Ss were recruited from an ad in the local news - paper and paid for their participation . AI1 were 16 or older and most were students from Stanford University summer school or Palo Alto High school . Subject were run in groups of four to ten . Procedure . The procedure varied from that of the previous study in several ways . Twenty - six received the recall instructions of the previous experiment with the following addition : “Many experiments in free recall have shown that a very effective way to increase recall is to attempt to find relationships among the words and to group and remember re - lated or associated words together . ” Nineteen Ss received the same rec - ognition instructions as in the previous experiment . All Ss were tested first on recall and then on recognition , since test order was shown to have an effect on recall , but not on recognition . ENCODING IN RECOGNITION AND RECALL 281 Appropriate instructions significantly increased retention scores for both recall and recognition tests ( p < . 05 , median test ) . Recall instruc - tions increased recall scores from a median of 12 ( 40 % ) under recogni - tion instructions to a median of 18 . 5 ( 62 % ) under appropriate instruc - tions . Recognition instructions increased recognition scores from a median of 20 ( 67 % ) under recall instructions to a median of 26 ( 87 % ) . To help assess the extent to which recognition and recall tests utilized the same stored information , a phi correlation coefficient was computed between recognition and recall scores of each S . For convenience , these data from both experiments are reported together . The average correla - tion over both experiments was . 061 ; this is significantly greater than zero by a t test ( p < . OOl ) on the correlations transformed by Fisher T to z transformation , Overall , 70 Ss showed positive correlations , 41 Ss showed negative correlations , two Ss showed zero correlation , and for the remaining eight Ss the correlation was undefined , due to perfect recognition ; significantly more Ss had positive than negative correlations by a sign test ( p < . Ol ) . The average phi correlations , as well as the number of Ss with positive and negative correlations for each instruction by test group , is shown in Table 3 . From there , it seems evident that while there is a small positive correlation between recognition and re - call scores for the groups receiving the recall test first ( average phi correlation is . 086 ) , this relation seems to vanish in the group receiving the recognition test first ( average phi correlation is . 008 ) . EXPERIMENT III There remains a possibility that , although the organization recall instructions were given before presentation of the stimuli , their effect TABLE 3 Mean Phi Correlation Between Recognition and Recall Scores and Number of Ss Showing Positive and Negative Correlations For Instruction and First , Test , Groups of Experiments I and II Instjruction First test Recall Recognition Recall Recognition Recall Experiment I , 068 ( 12 + , 6 - ) , 049 ( 7 + , 6 - ) - . 006 ( llf , 12 - ) , 030 ( 7 + , 7 - ) Experiment II , 071 ( 18t - , 7 - ) , 157 ( 15 $ - , 3 - j 282 BARBARA TVEXXY was only to organize at retrieval , and not to encode differently at input . TO eliminate this possibility , two more groups of Ss were run . One group received the organization instructions before and after view - ing the stimuli , while the other group was instructed to organize only after stimulus presentation . Method Stimuli . The stimuli , order , and time of presentation were the same as in Experiment II . Subjects . Fifty - seven Ss , native English - speaking students at the College for Overseas Students , Hebrew University , Jerusalem , Israel volunteered to participate in this experiment . Procedure . A group of 32 Ss received the organization recall instruc - tions of Experiment II and a group of 25 Ss received the simple recall instructions of Experiment I . Before handing out response sheets to both groups , the experimenter repeated the organization recall instructions to both groups . No test of recognition was given . In other respects , the procedure was identical to that of Experiment II . Results Organization instructions before presentation of stimuli yielded sig - nificantly ( ; p < . 05 , median test ) higher recall than organization instruc - tions only before recall . Median correct for the group receiving orga - nization instructions prior to the stimuli was 14 . 5 ( 48 % ) while median recall for the group receiving organization instructions after the stimuli was 12 ( 40 % ) . It can be concluded that the present organization in - structions served to alter storage of these items rather than alter the manner in which they were retrieved . DISCUSSION Stimulus selection OS encoding strategies . Subjects , viewing the same picture - name stimuli , perform substantially better on the memory test , either free or picture recognition , for which they had been prepared . This finding cannot be attributed to stimulus selection , that is to at - tending selectively to some aspects of the stimulus , say the name for recall instructions and the picture for recognition instructions . In stimulus selection ( Underwood , 1963 ; Shepard , 1963 ) , the S chooses some aspects of the whole or nominal stimulus to enter into memory , called the functional stimulus , and fails to input to memory other aspects of the stimulus . In encoding , the S performs some operation on the func - tional stimulus ; he may group several functional stimuli together , by association , category , function , sound ; he may form a pictorial image of ENCODING IN RECOGNITION AND RECALL 283 a word or an acoustic image of a picture . For the recall task , simple re - call instructions which , according to the selection hypothesis , would have encouraged selecting the name for memory produced no better recall performance than recognition instructions , which would have encour - aged selecting the picture . Recall improved , in Experiments II and III , only under instructions to integrate and organize the various stimuli , processes which entail differential encoding of the stimuli over and above stimulus selection . For the recognition task , ignoring the pictures and simply selecting the name , as the recall Ss would have done under the selection hypothesis , would not have allowed above chance performance on the recognition test , in which the foils were similar - appearing pictures with the same names . Out of 67 Ss receiving recall instructions , only one S performed at chance level on the recognition test , and this S also had a very low recall score ( 30 % ) . In a task designed to elicit stimulus selec - tion , Loftus ( 1972 ; Experiment II ) monitored eye fixations while pre - senting pairs of pictures , one of which was chosen at random at the start of each trial to be ignored . Subjects successfully selected the appro - priate stimulus for viewing on 98 % of the trials . For those pictures not fixated , recognition memory remained at chance level . In contrast , the author ( 1973 ) monitored eye fixations in a replication of the present Experiment II . Instructions to recall or recognize had the expected effect on memory tasks ; that is , recognition - instructed Ss performed signifi - cantly better on the recognition task than recall - instructed Ss , while recall - instructed Ss performed significantly better on the recall test than recognition - instructed Ss . Fixation patterns , however , were identical under both sets of instructions . Under recall instructions , there were , on the average , 1 . 9 word and 3 . 8 picture fixations , and under recognition instructions , there were , on the average , 1 . 8 word and 3 . 9 picture fixa - tions ( t ( 13 ) = 0 . 92 for word fixations ; t ( 13 ) = 0 . 97 for picture fixa - tions ) . Thus , Ss selected the picture and name aspects of the stimuli for viewing with the same frequency under both recognition and recall instructions . Finally , the failure to find even a moderate correlation be - tween recognition and recall of items indicated that Ss could not have been using information selected for recall to pass the recognition test or vice versa . Information appropriate for performing both tests must have been selected and encoded during stimulus precentation by both instructional groups , yet information accessed for recall had been more effectively encoded under recall instructions , and information accessed for recognition had been more effectively encoded under recognition instructions . Just as Ss did not select the word part or the picture part of the stimuli in anticipation of recall or recognition , similarly , it is evident 284 BARBARA TVERSKY that Ss in general do not encode pictures only verbally for recall nor do they encode only pictorially for recognition . In an experiment with pic - torial stimuli , Bahrick and Boucher ( 1968 ) found no correlation between visual recognition and verbal recall of their items . They argue , however , that their recall task was performed from pictorially encoded informa - tion , albeit different pictorial information from that used in the recogni - tion task . Further support for pictorial encoding in free verbal recall comes from the results of Frost ( 1971 ) , who found a high degree of clustering by the arbitrary visual shapes of her pictures in verbal recall , On the other hand , although information about the appearances of the stimuli was necessary for above - chance recognition performance in the present experiments , that information conceivably could have been en - coded verbally ( e . g . , “front - top view of camera with black bands top and bottom , small button left of lens , two large and one small button top left , and small rectangular device with four circles top right” ) . This does seem unlikely , given the visual complexity of the stimuli and the difficulty of the recognition task , but Freund ( 1971 ) and Wyant , Banks , Berger , and Wright ( 1972 ) have presented evidence for a strong verbal component in picture recognition . Freund ( 1971 ) found that recognition could be enhanced by enforced verbal encoding or reduced by an interpolated < task ( counting backward ) known to reduce verbal memory . Wyant et al . ( 1972 ) found picture recognition accuracy to be strongly related to rated verbal describability at 3 - and IO - set presenta - tion rate , and only weakly related to rated visual similarity only at the 3 - set rate . Rather , it seems that the modality of encoding - pictorial , verbal , or some combination thereof - depends to a large extent on the exact nature of the expected retention test , In a same - different memory task , Tversky ( 1969 ) showed that Ss could pictorially encode both pic - tures and names in anticipation of picture recognition , yet verbally encode the same stimuli in anticipation of word recognition . Finally , Frost ( 1972 ) found that Ss encoded pictures both pictorially and ver - bally , though the particular aspects of the stimuli accessed depended on which memory task Ss had been set for as well as which memory task was given . Free recall protocols of recognition - set Ss revealed clustering by visual orientation as well as by semantic categories , whereas recall protocols of recall - set Ss revealed only semantic clustering . Reaction times in recognition tasks showed that both groups of Ss had stored information pictorially , though this information enjoyed faster access for the recognition - set Ss . Thus , although different information about the stimuli is drawn upon for recognition than for recall , it cannot be asserted that the former information is purely pictorially encoded and the latter verbally encoded . If modality does not necessarily characterize the difference between ENCODING IN RECOGNITION AND RECALL 285 recognition encoding and recall encoding , what , then , does ? The marked improvement in recall scores between Experiment I and Experiment II indicates that the active formation of associations and interrelations among the items is , as the instructions said , an effective way to increase recall ( Anderson , 1972 ) . The problem in recall is retrieving more items than are readily accessible from the memory span ; no more need be retrieved than the name of the items . To the extent that retrieving one item renders others accessible via associations or subjective organization ( Tulving , 1961 ) , recall is enhanced . Anderson ( 1972 ) has successfully simulated a wide variety of free recall situations using a model based on these notions . In contrast , successful recognition depends on encoding enough detail about the appearances of the stimuli to discriminate them from similarly appearing stimuli . Given each item name or some visual detaiIs at test , sufficient remaining details must have been encoded to correctly discriminate , although information about other items need not be stored with the encoding for a particular item . Thus , recognition is enhanced by integration of the details of each item while recall is enhanced by interrelating the items within a list . This analysis offers an explanation of the seemingly paradoxical finding that recognition memory is better or no worse under incidental than intentional instructions ( Eagle & Leiter , lQ64 ; Dombush & Winnick , 1967 ; Postman , Adams & Phillips , 1955 ) . The incidental task , typically a rating performed on each item , often requires detailed attention to each item , a condition favorable to recognition performance . Relation to retrieval . This analysis also suggests a way to reduce recognition performance , even below recall performance , as Tulving and Thomson ( 1971 ) ) Tulving ( 1968 ) ) and Light and Carter - Sobell ( 1970 ) have demonstrated . Tulving and Thomson ( 1971 ) reasoned that if the context or “cognitive environment” of a stimulus at recognition test is sufficiently different from the context at presentation , the stimulus will be differently encoded at test , and thereby fail to match or retrieve the original stimulus . These results , the authors claim , argue against the notion that recognition memory by - passes the retrieval stage of memory . Thus , both recognition and recall tasks entail encoding and retrieval stages , although the processes occurring at those stages differ in the two tasks . Taken together with the nresent experiments , these studies point to the intimate relationship between encoding and retrieval . Efficacious encoding anticipates retrieval in order to insure that the particular retrieval cue accesses the appropriate encoded stimulus . REFERENCES ANDERSON , J . R . FRAN : A simulation model of free recall . In C . H . Rower ( Ed . ) , The psychology of learning and motiuation Vol . 5 . New York : Academic Press , 1972 , pp . 315378 . 286 BARBARA TVERSKY ANDERSON , J . R . , & BOWER , G . H . Recognition and retrieval process in free recall . Psychological Review , 1972 , 79 , 97 - 132 . BAHRICK , H . P . Two - phase model for prompted recall . Psychological Review , 1970 , 77 , 215 - 222 . BAHRICK , H . P . , 8 : BOUCHER , B . Retention of visual and verbal codes of the same stimuli . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1968 , 78 , 417 - 422 . DORNBUSH , R . L . , & WINNICK , W . A . Short - term intentional and incidental learning . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1967 , 73 , 608 - 611 . EAGLE , M . , & LEITER , E . Recall and recognition in intentional and incidental learning . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1964 , 68 , 58 - 63 . ESTES , W . K . , & DA POLITO , F . Independent variation of information storage and retrieval processes in paired - associate learning . Journal of Experimental Psy - chology , 1967 , 75 , 18 - 26 . FREUND , R . D . Verbal and non - verbal processes in picture recognition . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , Stanford University , 1971 . FREUND , R . D . , BRELSFORD , J . W . , & ATKINSON , R . C . Recognition vs . recall : Storage or retrieval differences ? Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1969 , 21 , 214 - 224 . FROST , N . Clustering by visual shape in the free recall of pictorial stimuli . . Io ~ ournaZ of Experimental Psychology , 1971 , 88 , 409 - 413 . FROST , N . Encoding and retrieval in visual memory tasks . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1972 , 95 , 317 - 326 . KINTSCH , W . Models for free recall and recognition . In D . A . Norman ( Ed . ) , Models of human memory . New York : Academic Press , 1970 , pp . 333373 . LIGHT , L . L . , & CARTER - SOBELL , L . Effects of changed semantic context on recogni - tion memory . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 1970 , 9 , I - 11 . LOFTUS , G . R . Comparison of recognition and recall in a continuous memory task . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1971 , 91 , 220 - 226 . LOFTUS , G . R . Eye fixations and recognition memory for pictures . Cognitive Psychology , 1972 , 3 , 525 - 551 . POSTMAN , L . One - trial learning . In C . N . Cofer & B . S . Musgrave ( Eds . ) , Verbal behavior and learning : Problems and processes . New York : McGraw - Hill , 1963 , pp . 295321 . POST ~ N , L . Short - term memory and incidental learning . In A . W . Melton ( Ed . ) , Categories of human learning . New York : Academic Press , 1964 , pp . 146 - 201 . POSTMAN , L . , ADAMS , P . A . , & PHILLIPS , L . W . Studies in incidental learning II . The effects of association value and method of testing . Journal of Experimental Psy - chology , 1955 , 49 , l - 10 . SHEPARD . R . M . Comments on Professor Underwood’s paper . In C . N . Cofer & B . S . Musgrave ( Eds . ) , Verbal behavior and learning : Problems and processes . New York : McGraw - Hill , 1963 , pp . 48 - 70 . TUL ~ ING , E . Subjective organization in free recall of “unrelated” words . Psychological Review , 1962 , 69 , 344 - 354 . TULVING , E . When is recall higher than recognition ? Psychonomic Science , 1968 , 10 , 53 - 54 . TULVING , E . , & THOMSON , D . M . Retrieval processes in recognition memory : Effects of associative context . Journal of Experimental PsychoZogy , 1971 , 87 , 116 - 124 . TVERSKY , B . Pictorial and verbal encoding in a short - term memory task . Perception and Psychophysics , 1969 , 6 , 225 - 233 . ENCODING IN RECOGNITIOS AND RECALL 287 TVERSKY , B . Eye fixations in prediction of recognition and recall . Memory and Cognition , 1973 , in press . UNDERWOOD , B . J . Stimulus selection in verbal learning . In C . N . Cofer & B . S . Musgrave ( Eds . ) , Verbal behavior and learning : Problems and processes . New York : McGraw - Hill , 1963 , pp . 33 - 48 . WYANT , A . , BANKS , W . P . , BERGER , Il . , & WRIGHT , P . W . Verhal and pictorial similarity in recognition of pictures . Perception and Psychophysics , 1972 , 12 ( 2A ) , 151 - 153 . ( Accepted April 30 , 1973 )