University of South Florida Scholar Commons Graduate Theses and Dissertations Graduate School 10 - 19 - 2010 Analysis of Stochastic Disruptions to Support Design of Capacitated Engineered Networks Andrés Fernando Uribe - Sánchez University of South Florida Follow this and additional works at : http : / / scholarcommons . usf . edu / etd Part of the American Studies Commons This Dissertation is brought to you for free and open access by the Graduate School at Scholar Commons . It has been accepted for inclusion in Graduate Theses and Dissertations by an authorized administrator of Scholar Commons . For more information , please contact scholarcommons @ usf . edu . Scholar Commons Citation Uribe - Sánchez , Andrés Fernando , " Analysis of Stochastic Disruptions to Support Design of Capacitated Engineered Networks " ( 2010 ) . Graduate Theses and Dissertations . http : / / scholarcommons . usf . edu / etd / 3703 Analysis of Stochastic Disruptions to Support Design of Capacitated Engineered Networks by Andr´es Fernando Uribe - S´anchez A dissertation submitted in partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy Department of Industrial and Management Systems Engineering College of Engineering University of South Florida Major Professor : Alex Savachkin , Ph . D . Tapas K . Das , Ph . D . Jos´e Zayas - Castro , Ph . D . Alex Volinsky , Ph . D . Yuncheng You , Ph . D . Date of Approval October 19 , 2010 Keywords : enterprise networks , lean , capacity disruptions , countermeasure policies , pandemic inﬂuenza Copyright c (cid:13) 2010 , Andr´es Fernando Uribe - S´anchez DEDICATION To my father , Fernando Uribe . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I would like to thank Dr . Alex Savachkin , my friend , advisor and mentor . Without his support , this doctoral dissertation and rewarding research experience could not have been possible . Not only because his research interests were the reason to start my doctoral studies , but because his wisdom , hard work , work ethic , and truthful friendship have been a source of inspiration . I want to thank Dr . Tapas K . Das for his friendship , mentoring and encouragement during the past years . I am profoundly thankful to Dr . Jose Zayas - Castro , for everything he has done for me and because he always believed in my professional potential . Thanks are due to my closest friends and graduate classmates at the University of South Florida . I also would like to thank the other members of my committee , Dr . Alex Volinsky and Dr . Yuncheng You , for their contribution of time and intellectual energy in this endeavor . This achievement could not be possible without my family : Gladicilla , Anita , Mauro , Mapis , Paty , Hugo , Natis , Andrea , Soﬁ , and Pipe . I want to thank them for their love , support and encouragement throughout my life . They provided the strength I needed to continue . Thanks to God and to my father , because they have been always next to me . Last and by no means the least , I have been lucky to have the support , encouragement , faith , and love from my best friend and rock , Dayna Lee . This success is also yours . TABLE OF CONTENTS ABSTRACT ii INTRODUCTION 1 CONCLUSIONS 7 APPENDIX A : COPYRIGHT APPROVALS 10 APPENDIX B : PUBLICATION 1 : ANALYSIS OF HEALTHCARE SUPPLY CHAIN SYSTEMS EXPOSED TO RANDOM CAPACITY DISRUPTIONS 15 APPENDIX C : PUBLICATION 2 : TWO COUNTERMEASURE STRATEGIES TO MITIGATE RANDOM DISRUPTIONS IN CAPACITATED SYSTEMS 36 APPENDIX D : PUBLICATION 3 : AN OPTIMAL COUNTERMEASURE POLICY TO MITIGATE RANDOM CAPACITY DISRUPTIONS IN A PRODUCTION SYSTEM 54 APPENDIX E : PUBLICATION 4 : A PREDICTIVE DECISION AID METHODOLOGY FOR DYNAMIC MITIGATION OF INFLUENZA PANDEMICS 69 ABOUT THE AUTHOR End Page i ABSTRACT This work is a compilation of four manuscripts , three of which are published and one is in the second round of review , all in refereed journals . All four manuscripts focus on analysis of stochastic disruptions to support design of capacitated engineered networks . The work is motivated by limited ability to mitigate elevated risk exposure of large - scale capacitated enterprise networks functioning in lean environments . Such inability to sustain enterprise capacity in the face of disruptions of various origins has been causing multi - billion enterprise forfeitures and hefty insurance premiums . At the same time , decision support methodologies for reliable design of dynamic capacitated networks have been largely unavailable . This work is organized as follows . Paper 1 presents a methodology to analyze ca - pacitated healthcare supply chains using a framework of forward ﬂow - matching networks with multiple points of delivery . Special emphasis is given to developing stochastic models for capturing capacity trajectories at the points of delivery . Paper 2 focuses on assuring capacity availability for a critical vertex exposed to random stepwise capacity disruptions with exponentially distributed interarrival times and uniformly distributed magnitudes . We explore two countermeasure policies for a risk - neutral decision maker who seeks to maxi - mize the long - run average reward . We present an extensive numerical analysis as well as a sensitivity study on the ﬂuctuations of some system parameter values . Paper 3 extends the capacity assurance analysis for critical vertices by considering stepwise partial system capacity loss accumulating over time . We examine implementation of a countermeasure policy , aimed at reducing the disruption rate , for a risk - neutral decision maker who seeks to maximize long - run average return . We explore how the policy of maintaining the optimal disruption rate is aﬀected by a number of system parameters . Finally , Paper 4 presents a dynamic predictive methodology for mitigation of cross - regional pandemic outbreaks which can be used to estimate workforce capacity loss for critical vertices due to such societal disasters . ii INTRODUCTION Lean manufacturing philosophy and associated business practices have been widely em - braced and deployed by global enterprises . The design of capacitated engineered networks is driven by lean manufacturing philosophy and implementation of global outsourcing , re - duction of inventories , consolidation of suppliers , with the main purpose of improving oper - ational eﬃciency . An example is the US automotive industry , where some estimates assert that the shift to JIT scheduling has saved companies more than $ 1 billion a year in inventory costs alone . However , while lean manufacturing has substantially boosted operational eﬃciency , such reductionism has also left these enterprises operating in an increasingly risk - encumbered environment . Capacity disruptions triggered by forces of nature , property and process related hazards , and human interventions , have shown to have a profound impact on the engineered network risk . The following examples demonstrate how increased risk exposure and resulting capacity imbalance cause multi - billion enterprise forfeitures and increasing insurance premiums . In 1995 , an earthquake hit the port town of Kobe , razed to the ground 100 , 000 buildings and shut down Japan’s largest port for over two years . In 1999 , an earthquake in Taiwan displaced power lines to the semiconductor fabrication facilities responsible for more than 50 percent of the worldwide supplies of certain computer components , and shaved 5 percent oﬀ earnings for major hardware manufacturers including Dell , Apple , Hewlett - Packard , IBM , and Compaq . In September 2002 , longshoremen on the US West Coast were locked out in a labor strike for 11 days , forcing the shutdown of 29 ports . With more than $ 300 billion of dollars in goods shipped annually through these ports , the dispute caused between $ 11 and $ 22 billion in lost sales , spoiled perishables and underutilized capacity . That December , a political strike in Venezuela made transnational businesses including GM , BP , Ford , Goodyear and Procter & Gamble halt their manufacturing for the duration 1 of the conﬂict . The 2003 outbreak of SARS in China and Singapore forced Motorola to close several plants . More recently , the 2005 hurricane Katrina destroyed the infrastructure of the state of Louisiana . In the same year , a labor strike in Asiana Airlines resulted in over 90 percent of the cargo services canceled . Man - made disasters , from terrorist attacks to computer viruses , are also on the rise . Nowadays , a seemingly minor disruption in a lean infrastructure can have the potential to initiate a cascading sequence of capacity losses , threatening human lives and devastating large sectors of the economy . As a result of the above events , according to a recent survey by A . M . Best Company , Inc . of 600 executives , 69 percent of chief ﬁnancial oﬃcers , treasurers and risk managers at Global 1 , 000 companies in North America and Europe view property - related hazards – such as ﬁres and explosions – and supply chain disruptions as the leading threats to top revenue sources . Historically , enterprises have lacked appropriate decision support methodologies and computational tools suitable for addressing risk incurred through capacity disruptions . In academia , traditional research eﬀorts on minimizing the cost of supply chain operations and the focus on leveraging economies of scale often yield results that overconcentrate resources . Such optimal solutions can be very sensitive to system perturbations , initiated by internal and external disruptions . The inability to recognize the hidden costs of such overconcentration heightens the risk of increased costs and capacity imbalance . The traditional literature that explicitly model the impact of disruptions has so far been focusing primarily on a local level of issues including scheduling , ordering , inventory management , and lot sizing . These works have modeled local entities exposed to operational instabilities in ( i ) production rate and lead times , ( ii ) supply rate , including machine failures , ( iii ) prices of resources , and ( iv ) process quality and yield . One of the most common types of disruption appearing in the literature is that of supply rate changes . Important eﬀorts include ( i ) management of stochastic demand systems , where the product supply is disrupted for periods of random duration , ( ii ) classic economic order quantity ( EOQ ) problem with supply disruptions , ( iii ) order - quantity / reorder - point inventory models with two suppliers subject to independent disruptions to compute the 2 exact form of the average cost expression , and ( iv ) analytical models for computing the stationary distribution of the on - hand inventory in a continuous - review inventory system with compound Poisson demand , Erlang distributed lead time , and lost sales , where the supplier can assume one of the two “available” and “unavailable” states at any point in time according to a continuous - time Markov chain . Other studies address both supply disruptions and random demand . Some examples are ( i ) dynamic models concerning optimal inventory policies in the presence of market disruptions , which are often characterized by events with uncertain arrival time , severity and duration , ( ii ) the continuous - review stochastic inventory problem with random demand and random lead - time where supply may be disrupted due to machine breakdowns , strikes or other randomly occurring events , and ( iii ) the inventory - control model which includes a detailed Markovian model of the resupply system . A number of eﬀorts which address supply and demand changes have been developed in the ﬁeld of oil stockpiling , as there has been grave concern over the oil supply from the Middle East . Modeling production rate disruptions ( machine failures ) has been largely addressed by extending classical economic manufacturing quantity ( EMQ ) models . These eﬀorts include ( i ) the EMQ model when the production process is subject to a random deterioration from an in - control state to an out - of - control state , ( ii ) models of defect - generating process in the semiconductor wafer probe process to determine an optimal lot size , which reduces the average processing time on a critical resource , ( iii ) the approximation of the EMQ model with Poisson machine breakdowns and low failure rate , and ( iv ) the study of an unreliable production system with constant demand and random breakdowns , with the focus on the eﬀects of machine failure and repair on optimal lot - sizing decisions . Other studies derive some unique properties of their model compared to the classical EMQ model , under the assumption of exponentially distributed time between failures and instantaneous repair of the machine . Much of the recent literature focuses on minimizing costs of supply chain operations , whereas only a small fraction of the eﬀorts have been dedicated to modeling the impact of various disruptions , such as those aﬀecting demand patterns , supplier and production lead 3 times , prices , imperfect process quality , process yield , and other factors . However , so far , only a scant subset of the literature has attempted to analyze supply chain - wide disruptions , with most of the eﬀorts focusing on the facility location problems . At this point , we can summarize that research eﬀorts addressing the disruption of supply are still comparatively new and scant , and none of these attempts have addressed the issue of stochastic capacity disruptions in directed networks , in closed form . The work presented in this dissertation is motivated by the limited ability to mitigate elevated risk exposure of large - scale capacitated enterprise networks functioning in lean en - vironments . Such inability to sustain enterprise capacity in the face of disruptions of various origins has been causing multi - billion enterprise forfeitures and hefty insurance premiums . At the same time , decision support methodologies for reliable design of dynamic capaci - tated networks have been largely unavailable . This doctoral dissertation is a compilation of four manuscripts , three of which are published and one is in the second round of review , all in refereed journals . All four manuscripts focus on analysis of stochastic disruptions to support design of capacitated engineered networks . This work is organized as follows . The ﬁrst manuscript is the paper titled “Analysis of Healthcare Supply Chain Systems Exposed to Random Capacity Disruptions” . A ﬁnal version of this document , to appear in the special issue on “ Healthcare Systems Engineering ” in the International Journal of Collaborative Enterprise by Inderscience Publisher , is presented in the Appendix B . 1 . In - derscience Publisher retains the copyright of this manuscript . The written authorization from the publisher to include the paper in this Ph . D . dissertation is attached in Appendix A . In this paper , we present an attempt to contribute to development of mathematical tools for modeling and analysis of risk inherent in health care supply chains , such as pharmaceu - tical and medical equipment / device enterprises . Our underlying formulation leverages the analytical convenience of formalism of capacitated feed – forward ﬂow – matching networks ( FMNs ) with multiple points of delivery ( POD ) . Special emphasis is given to developing stochastic models for capturing capacity trajectories at the points of delivery . The second manuscript is titled “Two Countermeasure Strategies to Mitigate Random Disruptions in Capacitated Systems” . This paper is published in the Journal of Systems 4 Science and Systems Engineering , volume 19 , number 2 , pages 210 - 226 , 2010 , by Springer Publisher . A printed version is presented in the Appendix B . 2 . Springer Publisher retains the copyright of this manuscript . The written authorization from the publisher to include the paper in this Ph . D . dissertation is attached in Appendix A . In this document , we focus on assuring capacity availability for a critical vertex . We examine random stepwise capac - ity disruptions with exponentially distributed interarrival times and uniformly distributed magnitudes . We explore two countermeasure policies for a risk - neutral decision maker who seeks to maximize the long - run average reward . A one - phase policy considers implementa - tion of countermeasures throughout the entirety of a disruption cycle . The results of this analysis form a basis for a two - phase model which implements countermeasures during only a fraction of a disruption cycle . We present an extensive numerical analysis as well as a sensitivity study on the ﬂuctuations of some system parameter values . The third manuscript is titled “An Optimal Countermeasure Policy to Mitigate Random Capacity Disruptions in a Production System” . This paper is published in the International Journal of Agile Systems and Management , volume 3 , number 1 / 2 , pages 4 - 17 - 226 , 2008 , by Inderscience Publisher . A printed version is presented in the Appendix B . 3 . Inder - science Publisher retains the copyright of this manuscript . The written authorization from the publisher to include the paper in this Ph . D . dissertation is attached in Appendix A . This work extends the capacity assurance analysis for critical vertices . We investigate a manufacturing system exposed to unpredicted capacity disruptions with exponentially dis - tributed interoccurrence times and uniformly distributed magnitudes of disruptions . Each disruption renders a stepwise partial system capacity loss accumulating over time until the remaining capacity reaches a certain level , upon which the system gradually restores the lost capacity to the target level . We examine implementation of a countermeasure policy , aimed at reducing the disruption rate , for a risk - neutral decision maker who seeks to maximize long - run average return . We explore how the policy of maintaining the optimal disruption rate is aﬀected by a number of system parameters . The ﬁnal manuscript is titled “A Predictive Decision Aid Methodology for Dynamic Mit - igation of Inﬂuenza Pandemics” . This document is currently in the second round of review 5 in the special issue on “ Optimization in Disaster Relief ” in the OR Spectrum by Springer Publisher . A ﬁnal version of this document is presented in the Appendix B . 4 . Springer Publisher retains the copyright of this manuscript . The written authorization from the publisher to include the paper in this Ph . D . dissertation is attached in Appendix A . In this work , we present a large - scale simulation - based optimization methodology for developing dynamic predictive mitigation strategies for a network of regional pandemic outbreaks . The methodology considers measures of morbidity , mortality , and social distancing , translated into the societal and economic costs of lost productivity and medical expenses . We present a sensitivity analysis for estimating the marginal impact of changes in the total budget availability and variability of some critical mitigation parameters . The methodology is in - tended to assist public health policy makers . This eﬀort can be used to estimate workforce capacity loss for critical vertices due to such societal disasters . 6 CONCLUSIONS Current large - scale capacitated enterprise networks can span multiple continents and subsume hundreds of suppliers and customers . In addition , as these enterprises have been adopting the philosophy of lean manufacturing , including slimming inventory buﬀers , global outsourcing , and consolidating supplier base , such reductionism has also left them operating in an increasingly risk - encumbered environment . One of the most profound risk factors is unpredicted disruptions in available capacity , as might be caused by a number of controllable and uncontrollable factors , including nature , process hazards , and human activity . At the same time , eﬃcient predictive analytics and computational tools suitable for analyzing the impact of capacity disruptions on network risk have been largely unavailable . In this doctoral dissertation , motivated by limited ability to mitigate elevated risk ex - posure of large - scale capacitated enterprise networks functioning in lean environments , we focus on analysis of stochastic disruptions to support design of capacitated engineered net - works . In what follows , we summarize the main contribution of each manuscript . In the ﬁrst manuscript , we present an original analysis of health care supply chain systems exhibiting converging assembly and exposed to random capacity disruptions . The supply chain was modeled as a feed – forward ﬂow – matching network with multiple points of delivery - a mathematical formalism particularly useful for understanding changes in the aggregate network capacity , as might be impacted by unpredicted perturbations . In our novel work , we captured the time - ﬁxed probability law on the available eﬀective network capacity , in the presence of capacity propagation delays , in closed form . We then construed two models of stochastic dynamics of the available eﬀective capacity at the network level . These trajectories can be used to model a number of disruptive scenarios . Our analysis will contribute to understanding the degree of risk exposure and vulner - ability of global health care supply chains . Moreover , our study can be used to provide a substantive measure of the trade - oﬀ between a lean structure of the supply chain and its 7 robustness and agility . The stochastic models of capacity disruptions discussed in this paper present one of the initial attempts to characterize supply chain dynamics via a FMN - based formalism . In the future , these stochastic models of capacity dynamics will be generalized to feature diﬀerent recovery modes and incorporate disposition of strategic inventory buﬀers or capacity back - ups . This stochastic analytics will then be combined with the dynamics of demand at the points of delivery and capacity expenditures , to develop future methodolo - gies , based on the tenets of utility theory , to provide decision support for design of resilient health care supply chain systems . The second manuscript focuses on assuring capacity availability for a critical vertex of a large - scale capacitated enterprise network . We presented one of initial attempts to ﬁll the vacuum in the existing literature and to focus on development of active countermeasure policies for managing lean capacitated systems in the presence of random capacity disrup - tions . The vertex under consideration experienced stepwise partial capacity disruptions with exponentially distributed interarrival times and uniformly distributed magnitudes , fol - lowed by instantaneous recovery . Examples of such capacity dynamics include : ( i ) shortage of repair personnel and performance degradation caused by failing equipment with a full repair upon a complete failure , ( ii ) non - self - announcing stepwise system failures , and ( iii ) gradual equipment phaseout and modernization . This work explores two diﬀerent countermeasure policies for a risk - neutral decision maker , who seeks to maximize the long - run average reward . The initial model consid - ered a one - phase policy , where countermeasures were implemented during the entirety of a disruption cycle . The results of this model served as a basis to analyze a two - phase strat - egy , where countermeasures were activated during only a fraction of a disruption cycle . For the latter model , we aimed to determine the optimal threshold when the countermeasures should be disengaged . This paper provides one of the initial attempts for providing closed form solutions for optimal countermeasure policies for mitigation of random disruptions in capacitated systems . We hope that our work will be further generalized to address similar questions for capacitated systems evolving under more complex capacity dynamics . 8 The third manuscript extends the analysis on assuring capacity availability for a critical vertex of a large - scale capacitated enterprise network . We examined a production system experiencing periodic capacity disruptions , each of which is followed by a random recov - ery delay and a constant linear rate of recovery . The system manager’s objective was to implement a countermeasure strategy to alleviate the rate of disruptions with a decreasing convex cost function . We derived an optimal level of disruption rate that maximizes the long - run average reward . The results of comparative statics suggest that choosing to main - tain a lower disruption rate is optimal , if the system proﬁtability is high . We concluded that higher unit proﬁts and maximum capacity levels increase the costs of disruptions and hence , must be balanced by appropriate countermeasure strategies . Since shorter expected recovery delay and faster linear recovery reduce the economic loss of disruptions , the optimal level of lambda is increasing in both parameters . Finally , the fourth manuscript presents a dynamic predictive methodology for mitiga - tion of cross - regional pandemic outbreaks which can be used to estimate workforce capacity loss for critical vertices due to such societal disasters . The decision - aid methodology pre - sented in this paper incorporates varying virus epidemiology and region - speciﬁc population dynamics . The model supports development of mitigation strategies for an eﬃcient , pro - gressive allocation of a limited resource budget over a network of regional outbreaks . The model seeks to dynamically minimize the impact of ongoing outbreaks and the expected impact of potential outbreaks , spreading from the ongoing regions . The methodology con - siders measures of morbidity , mortality , and social distancing , translated into the societal and economic costs of lost productivity and medical expenses . 9 APPENDIX A COPYRIGHT APPROVALS 10 APPENDIX A ( Continued ) 11 APPENDIX A ( Continued ) 12 APPENDIX A ( Continued ) 13 APPENDIX A ( Continued ) 14 APPENDIX B : PUBLICATION 1 : ANALYSIS OF HEALTHCARE SUPPLY CHAIN SYSTEMS EXPOSED TO RANDOM CAPACITY DISRUPTIONS In this appendix , we present the ﬁnal version of the manuscript “Analysis of Healthcare Supply Chain Systems Exposed to Random Capacity Disruptions” to appear in the special issue on “Healthcare Systems Engineering” in the International Journal of Collaborative Enterprise by Inderscience Publisher . The co - author , Dr . Alex Savachkin , authorized to include this document in my dissertation . Inderscience Publisher retains the copyright of this manuscript . The written authorization from the publisher to include the paper in my Ph . D . dissertation is attached in Appendix A . 15 Int . J . Collaborative Enterprise , Vol . X , No . Y , xxxx 1 Copyright © 200x Inderscience Enterprises Ltd . Analysis of healthcare supply chain systems exposed to random capacity disruptions Alex Savachkin * and Andr é s Uribe - S á nchez DepUnivTamE - m E - m * Cor Abst y forces of nature , process - related haza ntions have shown to be a profound risk y chain systems , such as pharmaceutical and medmeththrouexamfeed - analyrandfounresil Key flow Refe as follows : Savachkin , A . and Uribe - Sánchez , A . ( xxxx ) ‘Analysis of healthcare supply chain systems expoVol . Biog Engithe Univ supp public health disaster mitigation and emergency planning , and healthcare engineering . AndManHis r in ca strat artment of Industrial and Management Systems Engineering , ersity of South Florida , pa , FL 33620 , USA ail : alexs @ usf . edu ail : auribe @ mail . usf . edu responding author ract : Capacity disruptions caused b rds , and man - made malignant interve factor for lean healthcare suppl ical equipment / devices enterprises . At the same time , decision support odologies suitable for analysing healthcare supply chain risk incurred gh capacity disruptions have been largely unavailable . In this paper , we ine capacitated healthcare supply chain systems using a framework of forward flow - matching networks with multiple points of delivery . We se two models of stochastic dynamics of such systems in the presence of om disruptions . The proposed closed - form analytics will serve as a dation for future mathematical methodologies for risk - based design of ient healthcare supply chains . words : healthcare ; supply chain ; lean ; capacity disruptions ; feed - forward , - matching networks ; FMNs ; stochastic dynamics . rence to this paper should be made sed to random capacity disruptions’ , Int . J . Collaborative Enterprise , X , No . Y , pp . 000 – 000 . raphical notes : Alex Savachkin received his PhD in Industrial neering at Texas A & M University in 2005 . He is an Assistant Professor of Department of Industrial and Management Systems Engineering at the ersity of South Florida , Tampa . His research interests include analytical ort of enterprise risk analysis , rés Uribe - Sánchez is a Doctoral student of the Department of Industrial and agement Systems Engineering at the University of South Florida , Tampa . esearch interests include risk - based analysis of random capacity dynamics pacitated enterprise networks and development of dynamic mitigation egies for cross - regional pandemic outbreaks . APPENDIX B ( Continued ) 16 2 A . Savachkin and A . Uribe - Sánchez 1 Introduction In a ealthcare expenses in the USA is six times more than that of othof s by poiQuinefIOMfra 1 2 3 ness 4 5 6 Of ality dimensions , two of them are directly impacted by pha ical equipment / devices supply chain systems : efficiency , defined as e of equipment , supplies , ideas , and energy’ , and timelin needed care and minimising unnecessary delays in getFordol20079 % ( Daphama 1 2 3 ma 4 ho 5 hos ilers ( Papageorgiou et al . , 2001 ; Shah , 2004 ) . Sin se in the transportation ( usually by shi 4 ) . pharmaceutical and medical equipment / devices supply chains is d uring philosophy and implementation of global outsourcing , s much as the per capita h er developed countries , the US healthcare system generates over a half - trillion dollars ystem waste , annually ( Porter and Teisberg , 2004 ) , and was ranked 37th in the world the World Health Organization ( Ertas et al . , 2000 ; Institute of Medicine , 2001 ) . As nted out by Institute of Medicine ( IOM ) in its ‘Envisioning the National Healthcare ality Report’ ( Hurtado et al . , 2001 ) , this alarming situation is mainly attributed to the ficiency , poor communication , redundancy , and misuse of system resources . The urged to reengineer the existing healthcare delivery system using a quality mework which includes six major dimensions : safety effectiveness patient centred timeliness efficiency even - handedness . the above six qu rmaceutical and med ‘avoiding waste , including wast ess , that refers to “obtaining ting that care” ( Hurtado et al . , 2001 ) . According to the ‘Global Pharmaceutical Market ecast to 2012’ report , the global pharmaceutical industry will earn around a trillion lars in revenues , and the USA will still the key world importer ( RNCOS , 2008 ) . In 3 , the USA import of pharmaceutical goods reached almost $ 32 billion , with almost of that coming from Europe , 13 % from Asia , and 8 % from North America vidson et al . , 2005 ) . Therefore , the improvement in the design of the underlying rmaceutical and medical equipment / devices supply chain systems is viewed as one of in priorities in reengineering the USA healthcare delivery system ( Brennan , 1998 ) . Nowadays , a typical pharmaceutical supply chain is a complex system that subsumes : primary manufacturing that produces small quantities of an active ingredient as a chemical secondary manufacturing that transforms the active ingredient into a final product rket warehouses or distribution centres w lesalers pitals or reta ce condary manufacturing facilities , which serve regional markets , are often located geographical regions different than the primary ones , p ) of the active ingredients can take weeks ( Shah , 200 The design of modern riven by lean manufact APPENDIX B ( Continued ) 17 Analysis of healthcare supply chain systems 3 reduction of inventories , and consolidation of suppliers , with the main purpose of imentMorelsuprespre of ( Hodis locKatamAsshoAsMa ( Lehealos disof andsupplyplaPapolunpol confocresby al disruptions . As a result , the inability to consider the hidden cost of o thalocsizins 1 2 proving operational efficiency . However , such reductionism has also left these erprises operating in an increasingly risk - encumbered environment ( Booth , 1996 ; hd , 2006 ) . Capacity disruptions triggered by forces of nature , property and process ated hazards , and human interventions , have shown to have a profound impact on the ply chain risk . The following examples demonstrate how increased risk exposure and ulting capacity imbalance cause multi - billion enterprise forfeitures and insurance miums . In 1995 , an earthquake devastated Kobe , the largest Port of Japan , cutting the supply pharmaceutics and medical equipment / devices shipped through this port for two years rwich , 2000 ; Sarkisian , 1995 ) . Another example of such radical single - point ruption is the September 2002 labour strike on the US West Coast when 29 ports were ked out for 11 days ( Hall , 2004 ; Isidore , 2002 ) . More recently , the 2005 hurricane rina destroyed an estimated of 106 health centres in the affected states , impacting ong others , the distribution of medicines ( Rosenbaum , 2006 ) . The American Diabetes sociation estimated that over 205 , 000 people with diabetes were affected by the insulin rtage due to hurricanes Katrina and Rita ( Coons , 2005 ) . Same year , a labour strike in iana Airlines resulted in over 90 % of the cargo services cancelled ( M2 Comm . , 2005 ) . n - made disasters are also on the rise , from terrorist attacks to computer viruses mos , 2003a , 2003b ) . Nowadays , a seemingly minor disruption born upstream a lean lthcare supply chain can have the potential to initiate a cascading sequence of capacity ses , threatening human lives and devastating large sectors of the economy . The existing literature on the design of pharmaceutical supply chains is scarce , connected , and mostly in the form of qualitative discussions . Description and analysis the key issues can be found in Shah ( 2004 ) , Booth ( 1996 ) , Harland ( 1996 ) , She ( 2001 ) , Koh et al . ( 2003 ) . The integration of suppliers in the design of new pharmaceutical chains has been discussed in Petersen et al . ( 2005 ) . Allocation of production nts and distributions points in the form of an optimisation problem is presented in pageorgiou et al . ( 2001 ) . The impact of dynamic demand on production and inventory icies is debated in Booth ( 1996 ) . Finally , Bayer et al . ( 2007 ) discussed the impact of certainty about future requirements due to technological , demographic , medical and icy changes . In some ways , pharmaceutical supply chains resemble the ones associated with sumer goods ( Koh et al . , 2003 ) . In the traditional supply chain design literature , the us on leveraging the economies of scale can yield results that over - concentrate ources . The optimal solutions can then be sensitive to system perturbations , initiated internal and extern ver - consolidation heightens the risk of capacity imbalance . The traditional literature t explicitly models the impact of disruptions has so far been focusing primarily on a al level of issues including scheduling , ordering , inventory management , and lot ing . These works have been mainly modelled local entities exposed to operational tabilities in : production rate and lead times ( Arreola - Risa and DeCroix , 1998 ; Meyer et al . , 1979 ; Parlar and Berkin , 1991 ; Parlar and Perry , 1996 ; Posner and Berg , 1989 ) supply rate ( Bielecki and Kumar , 1988 ; Parlar , 1997 ; Song and Zipkin , 1996 ) , including machine failures ( Abboud , 1997 ; Buzacott and Shantikumar , 1993 ; APPENDIX B ( Continued ) 18 4 A . Savachkin and A . Uribe - Sánchez Gallego , 1988a , 1988b ; Groenevelt et al . , 1992 ; Henig and Gerchak , 1990 ; Hopp et al . , 3 pric 4 ro Ho e cha w proSavanddisr toopha s . Our underlying formulation leveragflomaflofordydisheaaredisrstoaname propropretwwe dis recthe 2 Fedy hibit a converging assembly flow . The topology of such tier - like systems is such that , at each tier , system entities are joined in some way and advanced to subsequent merging . Supply chain systems of global pha esent a notable example of such systems , where each vertex ( i . e . , a production facility ) combines the input of ma terials , components , and parts from the suppliers in the preceding tier , to produce more 1989 ; Kim and Hong , 1997 ; Lee , 1992 ; Porteus , 1986 ; Rosenblatt and Lee , 1986 ) es of resources ( Arcelus and Srinivasan , 1995 ; Ardalan , 1995 ; Aull - Hyde , 1992 ; Taylor and Bradley , 1985 ; Tersine and Barman , 1995 ) p cess quality and yield ( Chao , 1987 ; Mohebbi , 2003 ; Weiss and Rosenthal , 1992 ) . wev r , so far , only a scant subset of the literature has attempted to analyse supply in - ide disruptions , with most of the efforts focusing on the facility location blems . Notable examples include Eiselt et al . ( 1996 ) , Snyder and Daskin ( 2005 ) , achkin et al . ( 2008 ) , Snyder et al . ( 2007 ) , Lee ( 2001 ) , Tsiakis et al . ( 2001 ) , and Atamt Zhang ( 2007 ) . None of these attempts have addressed the issue of stochastic capacity uptions in directed networks , in closed form . In this paper , we present an attempt to contribute to development of mathematical ls for modelling and analysis of risk inherent in healthcare supply chains , such as rmaceutical and medical equipment / devices enterprise es the analytical convenience of formalism of capacitated feed - forward w - matching networks ( FMNs ) with multiple points of delivery ( POD ) . FMNs offer a thematical structure suitable for modelling network assemblies , where , at each tier , the ws of system entities ( e . g . , materials , components , etc . ) are combined and forwarded subsequent merging . This formalism can be particularly useful for understanding namics in the capacitated healthcare supply chains impacted by unpredicted ruptions . In this effort , we are primarily focused on examining the capability of lthcare supply chains to sustain anticipated demand for system throughput . Our results useful for understanding , up to the probability law , the impact of unpredicted capacity uptions in healthcare supply chains . Special emphasis is given to developing chastic models for capturing capacity trajectories at the POD which will provide the lytical basis necessary to model network risk and develop risk - based design thodologies . The paper is organised as follows . Section 2 introduces the terminology and notation , vides a necessary account of the feed - forward FMN formalism , and constructs the bability law on the available effective capacity for FMNs with multiple POD , in the sence of capacity propagation delays . Section 3 builds upon this analysis and presents o stochastic models of the available effective network capacity . First , in Section 3 . 1 , cuss an instantaneous capacity loss with random recovery delay and a constant overy rate trajectory . A special case of this model is discussed in Section 3 . 2 . Finally , concluding remarks are presented in Section 4 . Feed - forward FMNs with multiple POD ed - forward FMNs offer a convenient mathematical paradigm that can describe namics of a wide range of capacitated networks which ex rmaceutical and medical equipment / devices enterprises pr APPENDIX B ( Continued ) 19 Analysis of healthcare supply chain systems 5 complex sub - assemblies . These sub - assemblies are then advanced to the succeeding tier , whin - Atandreafee the e available effective capacity of FMN with multiple POD . 2 . 1 Consider a feed - forward network , such as one shown in Figure 1 , which has a finite num empty tiers . Fig ere further merging occurs . The converging assembly flow nature prescribes that the flow rates for any vertex must match . A final product emerges the network at the POD . a strategic level of network design , re - entrant flows may be assumed as insignificant hence , the flow of assembly can be assumed as unidirectional ( or feed - forward ) . The der is referred to Dorogovtsev and Mendes ( 2003 ) for a more detailed exposition of d - forward networks . In what follows , we introduce the terminology and notation , followed by derivation of time - fixed distribution of th Terminology and notation ber 2 ≥ n of vertices and 2 ( ) ≥ ≤ m m n non - ure 1 A feed - forward network with multiple POD The tiers are numbered in ascending order , starting from tier 1 , where 1 > D POD are cated , and moving upstream the network . Vertices are numbered in ascending order , ting from vertices in tier 1 , from top to bottom within a tier , and moving upstream the work . Let k N be the set of vertices that belong to tier , 1 , . . . , . lostarnet = k k m Let 1 . = = ∪ m k k N N In what follows , we assume that : each unique component ( ingredient , part , material , etc . ) is supplied by only one vertex each vertex performs a single merging operation . We introduce ter 1 2 Thr ease of units of t ed product . the following minology and notation . oughput : the long - run average number of units of finished product per unit time . For exposition , the throughput of all vertices is measured in terms of the equivalent he finish Available production capacity of vertex j at time 0 , ( ) : > j p t C t maximum throughput uction resources of vertex that prod j are capable of sustaining at . t lable supply capacity of vertex Avai j at time 0 , ( ) : > s t C t maximum throughput that the j supply to vertex j is capable of sustaining at . t APPENDIX B ( Continued ) 20 6 A . Savachkin and A . Uribe - Sánchez Available effective capacity of vertex j at time 0 , ( ) : > j e t C t maximum throughput of vertex j at . t Note that ( ) min ( ) , ( ) . { } = j j j e p s C t C t C t Multifurcation coefficient , 0 1 , : ≤ ≤ > lable effective acity ji A j i the proportion of the avai cap of vertex j designated to feed vertex 1 . ( ) = ∑ ji i i A Capacity propagation delay , 0 : ≥ ji T time in - transit between vertices j and . i We networ say that a feed - forward k is flow - matching , if for a y , , 1 , . . . , , ∈ ∈ = N j N k m the fo balance equation holds ( see Figure 2 ) n : 1 + k n k ( ) ( ) . . . ( ) − = − = = − n j n n j i e j i C t T A C t T ( 1 ) 0 , > t i The left - asserts th om the feeding suppliers nd side of the eqube impof t Fig llowing 1 1 2 2 1 2 ( ) . = ∑ j j j i e j i j i e j i A C t T A A C t 1 − ∈ r i r k ih e h N hand side of equation ( 1 ) states the flow - matching assembly pr at for any network vertex , the effective in - flow capacities fr must match or else , they create a capacity imbalance ; the right ha inciple , i . e . , it ation essentially states the capacity preservation principle : each effective in - flow must equal to the total effective out - flow . The flow - matching nature of assembly can be acted by the presence of unpredicted capacity disruptions of various origins . Analysis his impact will be the focus of the forthcoming exposition . ure 2 The flow - matching principle what follows , we consider the following simplified characterisation of FMNs : network topology is deterministic and fixed 2 available production capacities ( ) j p C t are mutually independent for all In 1 j and all t 3 4 p 5 Assumption ( 2 ) above can be justified b at , for large and extended suppl chains , aceutical and medical equipment / devices enterprises , the various points of phically isolated and / or operating ind n sonable for disruptive events trig red b network has multiple POD ( 1 , . . . , ) = d D ca acity propagation delays are deterministic absence of backup capacity and inventor rs . y buffe y noting th y such as those of global pharm assembly are geogra epe dently . However , this assumption may not prove rea ge y nationwide labour strikes and political unrest . APPENDIX B ( Continued ) 21 Analysis of healthcare supply chain systems 7 Now , with assumptions ( 1 ) – ( 5 ) above , FMNs with multiple POD must posses the followi 1 2 , { } . ∈ ∈ m N n N 2 ji 3 ng properties . 1 { 1 , 2 , . . . , } , { 1 } = + N D D 0 , , , s . t . . Also , , , = ∀ ∈ < ∀ ∈ = k ji i j N j i i j N A 0 . A , , 0 , where 1 , 2 , . . . , ; 2 . + ∈ ∈ = = ≥ k s k ji ∀ j N i N A k m s 1 , at least one , s . t . 0 , where 1 , 2 , . . . , − ∈ ∃ ∈ > = k k ji . ∀ 4 j N i N A k m 5 of e 6 1 2 , , , 0 ∈ ∀ ∈ = > id jd d N i j N A A ( equal to the propositions of the distribution final product among the PODs ) . ∀ th , 1 ∈ = jj ∀ j N A and 0 . = jj T We now def k ine the th i path from vertex ∈ j N to vertex ∈ s l N as following ( see Fig ure 3 ) : { } 1 1 1 1 2 , , , . . . , : 0 . − + − − − = ∈ ∈ ∈ > i i k s i i jl k k k k s jj j l L j j N j N l N A A 2 Figure 3 0 , . . . , > − i Paths in FFN n , for each path , ijl L we define the product of the corresponding multifurcation coefficients as 1 1 2 1 . − − − + = (cid:34) i i i i k k k s ijl jj j j j l A A A A The We let min { } . = i A A i i cap jl We now jl jl i In additio for each unique path , jl L we define jl T as the total acity propagation delay o h : ijl L i n , f pat 1 1 2 1 . − − − + = + + + (cid:34) i i i ik k k s jj j j j l T T T T let jl T be the total capacity propagation delay of the path with the smallest value of it c fun etwork through . ijl A In the next sections , we are concerned w h haracterising the prob ility distribution ctions of individual POD as well as the o ab put . verall n APPENDIX B ( Continued ) 22 8 A . Savachkin and A . Uribe - Sánchez 2 . 2 Probability law on the available effective capacity of a POD In ble effsecent ∈ i s j Equation this section , we first derive the time - fixed distribution function of the availa ective capacity of point of delivery ( 1 , . . . , ) . = d d D We then use this result in the next tion to obtain the time - fixed probability law of the available effective capacity of the ire supply chain network . We begin by noting that for a fixed 0 , > t the available supply capacity of vertex k N can be expressed as 1 0 ( ) min { ( ) } . + > ∈ = − k Aji i ej ji j N t A C t T ( 2 ) i C ( 2 ) essentially suggests that the most disrupted feeding vertex in tier 1 + k N becomes th upply capacity of vertex i in tier . k N It foll } e determinant of the available s ows then that for vertex , , ∈ < k i N k m and a fixed 0 , > t { 1 ( ) min { ( ) , ( ) } in ( . + 0 min ( ) , m > ∈ ) ⎧ ⎫ ⎪ ⎪ = = − ⎨ ⎬ ⎪ ⎪ ⎩ ⎭ i i i j k e p s ji e C t C t C t A C t T i Aji p j N C t ji We are now in the fo Propositi d is giv in a position to express the available effective capacity of a point of deli rm of the following proposition . on 2 . 1 : For a fixed time 0 , > t the available effective capacity of POD very en by 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 , 3 , . . . , , , . . . , ( ) min ( ) , − − = = = = ∈ ∈ ⎨ ⎬ ⎠ ⎩ ⎭ ∏ d d i k k k k M m m e p p i i i i k k M m i d i N i N C t C t C T A ( ) { } 1 1 0 1 , . . . , \ 0 min ( ) , min , − > ∀ = ∈ > ⎫ ⎞ ⎜ ⎟ ⎝ ⎧ ⎫ ⎪ ⎪ = − ⎨ ⎬ ⎪ ⎪ ⎩ ⎭ i ikk d j jd M M A k m p jd p jd j N N A C t A C t T provided that ( ) ( ) and 0 . ⎧ ⎛ = − ∑ t = ∀ ∈ ∀ > i p e p m C t C t i N t The proof of this result is presented in the Appendix . Proposition ( 2 . 1 ) essentially asserts that factoring in the topology and magnitude of propagation delays , the vertex with the most disrupted available production capacity det ng point of delivery . Recall tha e assumed to be mutually ind Proposi eff ermines the avai t the available p er lable effective capacity of the correspondi roduction capacities of all vertices w ependent at all times . We now introduce the following result . tion 2 . 2 : For a fixed time 0 , > t the complimentary distribution of the available ective capacity of POD d is given by { } ( ) ( ) 1 ( ) 1 1 ( ) ( ) , where { \ } { } . − ∈ = > = = ∪ ∏ e d d p jd j C t e jd C t T j E F P C t F A E N N d α α α roof of this result is presented in the Appendix . The p APPENDIX B ( Continued ) 23 Analysis of healthcare supply chain systems 9 A product form of proposition ( 2 . 2 ) suggests that lean FMNs can be vulnerable to even m detrelwiPO 2 . 3 ability law on the available effective FMN capacity Sin effective cap s odest upstream disruptions . To a substantial extent , the degree of vulnerability is ermined by the nature of topology and capacity propagation delays . In addition , ative disposition of the impacted vertex and the dynamics of the disruption itself along th the recovery dynamics will ultimately determine the overall sustainability of the D . Prob ce the total available effective network capacity is the sum of the available acitie of the POD , the former can be expressed as following . ( ) { } ( ) min ( ) , min . 1 \ 1 1 0 ∈ = = > ⎡ ⎤ ⎧ ⎫ ⎢ ⎥ ⎪ ⎪ = − ⎨ ⎬ ⎢ ⎥ ⎪ ⎪ ⎢ ⎥ ⎩ ⎭ ⎣ ⎦ d d j jd j N N d d A ( 3 ) At this point , we introduce two simplifying assumptions for the output tier motivation to obtain closed form solution for the probability law on the available effective network capacity . First , we prescribe that for any point of delivery , d C assequsupanyjusUSth avthi ∑ ∑ D D e p jd p jd C t C t A C t T , driven by our ( ) ( ) . ≥ ∀ d d p s t C t t This assumption can be found reasonable in most cases when the final embly takes place in the USA , where the pharmaceutical and medical ipment / devices manufacturing , in general , is at least as reliable as that of the overseas pliers , such as those located in Asia ( Davidson et al . , 2005 ) . We also assume that for d and 2 ˆ , , . ∀ ∈ = = id jd i j N T T t This simplification can , in part , be tified by noting that for globally distributed supply networks with the final assembly in , the propagation times at the last tier are small compared to the total propagation time ughout the entire network , and , thus , the former can be assumed equal . We now consider a point of del ain an expression for the ilable effective capacity of d in terms of its ‘most constrained supplier’ 2 . ∈ v N To s end , recall that 2 , , . ∀ ∈ = id jd i j N A A Let 2 ∈ h N and define ˆ point of delivery ro a ivery d and aim to obt = hd d A a and ˆ . = hd T t t Le ( ) { } 2 ˆ arg min . ∈ = − h e h N C t t ( 4 ) are now ready to state th propo posit v We Pro ion 2 . 3 : For a fixed time 0 , > t the available effective capacity of POD d is given by e following important sition . ( ) ˆ ˆ ( ) . = − d v e d e C t a C t t Pr d p s we have that oof : Using proposition 2 . 1 and provided that ( ) ( ) > C t C t holds for all , t d APPENDIX B ( Continued ) 24 10 A . Savachkin and A . Uribe - Sánchez ( ) { } ( ) { } ( ) { } ( ) ( ) { } 1 1 2 1 2 1 2 \ 0 \ 0 \ 0 \ ( ) 0 ( ) min ( ) , min min ˆ ˆ min min ˆ ˆ ˆ min min , min ∈ > ∈ > ∈ ∈ > ∈ ∈ ∪ > ⎪ ⎪ = − ⎨ ⎬ ⎪ ⎪ ⎩ ⎭ − ⎧ ⎫ ⎪ ⎪ = − − ⎨ ⎬ ⎪ ⎪ ⎩ ⎭ ⎧ ⎫ ⎧ ⎫ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ = − − − ⎨ ⎨ ⎬⎬ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎩ ⎭ ⎩ ⎭ d d j jd j jd j jh h j jh e p jd p jd j N N A jd p jd j N N A d jh p jh h N j N N A d p jh p jh h N j N N N A C t C t A C t T A C t T a A C t T t a C t t A C t T t ( ) { } ( ) 2 ˆ ˆ min ˆ ˆ . ∈ ⎧ ⎫ ⎪ = − = − h v d e h N d e a C t t a C t t ately , we have the following result for expressing the available effective network on 2 . 4 : For a fixed time 0 , > t the available effective network capacity can be Immedi capacity . Propositi exp ( ) ˆ Pro sition 2 . 3 , ( ) ( ) 1 ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ . = = − = − ∑ v v D e d e d t t a C t t Pro pression for the total available effective capacity of a FMN w capacity of some crWe ar Propositi e available effwh ressed as D 1 ( ) . = = − ∑ d v e e d C t C t t of : Using propo ( ) 1 1 ( ) = = = − ∑ ∑ d v D D e d e d d C t a C t t C position 2 . 4 provides a general ex ith multiple points a delivery in terms of the available effective itical supplier 2 . ∈ v N e now ready to state the main result of this section . on 2 . 5 : For a fixed 0 , > t the complementary distribution of th ective capacity of a FMN with multiple POD is given by the following expression , ere 2 1 2 { \ ( ) } { } . = ∪ ∪ E N N N v ( ) { } ( ) ˆ ( ) ˆ ( ) . − − ⎧ ⎫ ⎪ ⎪ > = − > ⎨ ⎬ ∑ ∏ d v p jv e e jv C t T t C t P C t t F A α α α D 2 1 = ∈ ⎪ ⎪ ⎩ ⎭ j d j E oof : The proof combines proposition 2 . 4 and proposition 2 . 1 , applied to vertex . v P Pr APPENDIX B ( Continued ) 25 Analysis of healthcare supply chain systems 11 In the next section , we impose time dynamics for the available production capacity at the verof t 3 Stochastic trajectory of available effective capacity of FMN with multiple POD Proposi t the stochastic process 1 { ( ) , 0 } = ≥ ∑ d e d C t t is dependent , through the underlying topology , on the family of stochastic processes { ( ) , 0 } . ≥ j p C t t In this part of anaa c degsupappAnasscap 3 . 1 rate model Consider the following dynamics of the available production capacity of vertex . tex level , subject to random disruptions , and examine the resulting capacity trajectory he network . tion ( 2 . 5 ) asserts tha D lysis , we first discuss an instantaneous capacity loss with r delay and onstant rate recovery model for the { ( ) , 0 } ≥ j p C t t family . An instantan s capacity radation can be used to describe a sudden failure in supporting infrastructure , such as ply of electric power , chemical agents , and cyber grid . A graceful recovery can roximate equipment warm - up , progressive ma r stepwise modernisation . other example of such sample path is a terrorist attack warning causing an immediate embly shutdown , followed by area check - up and gradual release of production acity . Instantaneous capacity loss with random recovery delay and constant recovery andom recoveryeou o intenance , j The sys p rendering ed by a random delay and a constant rate 0 > α recovery ( Fi sto * C wi n ass { X ca i . i . dom R μ penden let - t n tem o erates at the target capacity level * . C Disruptions occur one at a time , each an instantaneous loss , follow gure 4 ) . The points of recovery form a sequence of stopping times , at which the process chastically regenerates . Let , ∈ (cid:96) n X n be the amoun time the vertex operates at the level before the - th n shock . { , } ∈ (cid:96) n X n are assumed to be i . i . d . random variables th mean . X μ Let Δ n C be the magnitude of the - th n loss ( 0 * , ) , ≤ Δ ≤ ∈ (cid:96) C C n and ume t of { , } Δ ∈ (cid:96) n C n are i . i . d . random variables with mean , Δ C μ independent of the } . n Let , ∈ (cid:96) n R n be a random recovery delay during which the available production acity remains at level * −Δ n C C ( Figure 4 ) . We assume that { } n R form a sequence of . ran variables with mean nd mutuall t of { } n X and . Δ n C We , ∈ (cid:96) n Y n be the length of the h recover riod p d , a y pe y inde , 0 . Δ = > n n C α α 1 ( ) , , = = + ∈ ∑ (cid:96) n n i i Z X R n whereby { } n Z forms an embedded renewal process . first seek to derive the lim mpl ry distrib { ( ) } . →∞ ≥ j p P C t u ginning with the { ( ) , C t t ne a ( ) , 0 * , ≤ ≤ ≥ u t u C t Y e Let W li Be rege { B state space { 0 , 1 } where ; u + i Y j p i itin ≥ g co imen 0 } process , ta we defi ution m t nerative process 0 } , with 1 , if ( ) ≥ ⎧⎪ = j p C t ( ) | 0 , otherwise . ⎨⎪⎩ B t u APPENDIX B ( Continued ) 26 12 A . Savachkin and A . Uribe - Sánchez The process is in state ‘1’ when the amount of the available production capacity is at least , u prodneoctimFi { the ng which the ate ‘1’ [ i . e . , the value of u T exceeds ( Flos > It t and it is in state ‘0’ otherwise . At the epoch , where a disruption causes the available uction capacity to fall below , u a transition occurs from state ‘1’ to state ‘0’ . At the t epoch , where the available production capacity recovers to level , u a transition urs from state ‘0’ to state ‘1’ , and the process regenerates . A cycle is defined as the e period between occurrence of two successive transitions from ‘0’ to ‘1’ ( see ure 4 ) . Clearly , the { ( ) , 0 } ≥ u B t t process has the same stopping times as the process ( ) , 0 } . ≥ j p t t Consider the first cycle of ( ) , 0 } ≥ u t t and let u T denote the portion of xc g C cycle igure the process process is in { B st duri , u 4 ) ] . Let T denote the length of the cycle , a of the ( f ) capacity s that causes the process to make a transition from state ‘1’ to state ‘0’ be as follows s . t . * . = Δ − u n N n C C u ( 5 ) hen follows that nd let the index irst * * , − − = + − = u N N α u C u C u T Z Z α ( 6 ) and * . Δ ⎛ ⎞ − = + − + ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟ u N u N N C C u T Z R ⎝ ⎠ u u α α ( 7 ) We then Note that with the probability mass function giv { P N ( 8 ) We Pro 1 : For the instantaneous capacity loss with random recovery delay and a constant r productio let { * } for 1 , 2 , . . . , . = Δ > − = u n u p P C C u n N N has a negative binomial distribution u en by ( 1 ) } ( 1 ) for 1 , 2 , . . . . − = − − = n u u u n p p n are now in a p ition to state the following important result . position 3 . os ecovery rate model , the limiting complimentary n capacity of vertex distribution of the available j is given by the ( 1 ) ∞ − k following expression , where 1 ( 1 ) , 0 * : = = − ≤ ≤ ∑ u u u k N kp p u C ( ) E ( * ) ( ) ( ) lim { ( ) } . ( ) ( ) Δ Δ →∞ Δ − + + − − ≥ = + + j u R C R C p t u X R C C u E N P C t u E N αμ μ αμ μ αμ αμ μ oof : From equations ( 6 ) – ( 8 ) , for this alternating regenerative stochastic process we er Pr obs ve that { } ( ) u E T lim ( ) ( ) ( * ) ( ) ( ) →∞ Δ Δ ≥ = − + + + − − j p t u X R C R C P C t u E T C u E N αμ αμ μ αμ μ . ( ) ( ) Δ + + u X R C E N αμ αμ μ APPENDIX B ( Continued ) 27 Analysis of healthcare supply chain systems 13 We have the following important corollary when * . = u C Co covery delay and a con rollary 3 . 1 : For the instantaneous capacity loss with r e andom r stant recovery rate model , the limiting probability that vertex j operates at the target acity level is given by { cap } lim ( ) * →∞ = = j p P C t C . ( ) Δ + X t X R C μ μ − μ μ α Proof : Note that in this case , 1 = u p and ( ) 1 . = u E N The result follows from proposition ( 3 . 1 ) . (cid:31) De ana t , as shown , Figure Fig spite its seemingly simple form , co 3 . 1 ca for sensitivity lysis - based decision suppor rollary e . g . , in n be used 5 and Figure 6 . ure 5 Sensitivity on Δ C μ and X μ ty on R μ and α Figure 6 Sensitivi APPENDIX B ( Continued ) 28 14 A . Savachkin and A . Uribe - Sánchez As shown in Figure 5 , there could be a certain trade - off in attempting to control the rate andvarproon t cononbe recothvallim for The coneff magnitude of disruptions ( via X μ and , Δ C μ respectively , assuming the other iables are fixed ) . Increasing the value of μ results in the limiting target capacity bability attaining its asymptomatic level in a steep or m re gradual fashion , depending he mean magnitude of disruption . Δ C μ On the other hand , if a decision - maker has no trol on the disruption dynamics , she may instead prefer a mitigation strategy focused agile recovery by effecting the mean recov elay R μ and recovery rate . α As can seen in Figure 6 , when the other variables are kept fixed , for small values of , R μ the overy rate can have a significant effect on the resultant limitin robability . On the er hand , as recovery delays become more prolonged ( particularly for comparable ues of ) , X μ attempting a more rapid recovery can yield only marginal impact on the iting probability , which reaches saturation at lower levels . We conclude this section with the following theorem providing the desired expression the limiting distribution of the available effective FMN capacity . ore X ery d o g p m 3 . 2 : For the instantaneous capacity loss with random recovery delay and a stant recovery rate model , the limiting complimentary distribution of the available ective FMN capacity is given by the following , where = (cid:4) jv j u u A v and 2 E 1 2 { / ( ) } { } = ∪ ∪ N N N v [ see also equation ( 4 ) ] : ( ) ( ) 2 1 ( * ) | ( ) . ( ) = Δ Δ ∈ Δ ⎪ ⎪ ⎩ ⎭ − + + + − − = + + ∏ (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) jv jv t d jv u X R C R C j E u X R C C u E N E N α αμ αμ μ αμ μ αμ αμ μ Proof : Combine propositions ( 2 . 5 ) and ( 3 . 1 ) . (cid:31) As shown next in Section 3 . 2 and further discussed in Section 4 , the model discussed above can serve as a foundation for a family of predictive models attempting to describe propagation of stochastic dynamics of capacity disruptions at the vertex level , to examine the Fig lim ( ) →∞ ⎧ ⎫ ⎪ ⎪ ≥ ⎨ ⎬ ∑ d D e P C t u limiting behaviour of the network . ure 7 Realisation of instantaneous capacity loss with random recovery delay and instantaneous restoration APPENDIX B ( Continued ) 29 Analysis of healthcare supply chain systems 15 3 . 2 Instantaneous capacity loss with random recovery delay and instantaneous In this sec sent a rather straightforward special case of the model discussed in SectlosFigcas α Proposi in distribution of the available pro recovery tion , we pre ion 3 . 1 . When recovery rate , = ∞ α the model exhibits an instantaneous capacity s followed by a random recovery delay and instantaneous restoration , as shown in ure 7 . The simplicity of this basic model can be appreciated by practitioners in the es when capacity ramp - up times i Y are small compared to i X and . i R In this section , we state the results without proofs which are trivial by substituting = ∞ into the results of the previous section . tion 3 . 3 : For the instantaneous capacity loss with random recovery delay and us recovery model , the limiting complimentary stantaneoduction capacity of vertex j is given by the following expression , where ( 1 ) 1 ) ( 1 ) , 0 * : ∞ − = = − ≤ ≤ ∑ k u u u k N kp p u C ( E lim { ( ) } 1 . ) ≥ = − R p P C t u μ ( ) ( →∞ t u X R E N Corollary 3 . 2 : For the instantaneous ca t + μ μ paci j random recovery delay and instan vertex y loss with taneous recovery model , the limiting probability that j operates at the target capacity is given by lim { ( ) * } . →∞ = = + j X p t X R P C t C μ μ μ ally , by combining prop Fin ositions ( 2 . 5 ) and ( 3 . 3 ) , we have the limiting distribution of the available of the following theorem . Theorem loss with random recovery delay and instan mplimentary distribution of the available eff effective FMN capacity in the form 3 . 4 : For the instantaneous capacity taneous recovery model , the limiting co ective FMN capacity is given by the following , where = (cid:4) jv jv u u A and 1 2 { \ ( ) } { } = ∪ ∪ N N N v [ see also equation ( 4 ) ] : 2 E 2 1 ( ) ( ) lim ( ) . ( ) ( ) →∞ = ∈ + − ⎧ ⎫ ⎪ ⎪ ≥ = ⎨ ⎬ + ⎪ ⎪ ⎩ ⎭ ∑ ∏ (cid:4) (cid:4) jv d jv D u X R R e t u X R d j E E N P C t u E N μ μ μ μ μ the formalism developed In t in Section 3 can prov fo r analytical computat stems . 4 Rehaschain systems , such as pharmaceutical and medical equipment / devices enterprises , can span multiple continents and subsume hundreds of suppliers and customers . In addition , as adopting the philosophy of lean manufacturing , including he next section , we discuss how undation for developing future ide a and scalable , risk - driven methodologies fo ional support of strategic design of healthcare supply chain sy Conclusions engineering the USA existing healthcare delivery into a timely and efficient system to invariably rely on robust and agile supply networks . Current healthcare supply these enterprises have been APPENDIX B ( Continued ) 30 16 A . Savachkin and A . Uribe - Sánchez slimming inventory buffers , global outsourcing , and consolidating supplier base , such redenvcapincpredisr exh ptions . The supply chain w forcap cappreof dissce vulprochadisdyndyndiswilexppro Ac Thquality of the paper . This work was supported by National Science Foundation Grant CMMI 0621030 . Re Ab and Control , Vol . 8 , pp . 385 – 397 . Arc asan , G . ( 1995 ) ‘Discount strategies for one - time only sales’ , IIE Transactions , Vol . 27 , pp . 618 – 624 . Ard comparative analysis of approaches for determining optimal price and order sale increases demand’ , European Journal of Operational Research , Vol . 84 , Arr disr , pp . 687 – 703 . uctionism has also left them operating in an increasingly risk - encumbered ironment . One of the most profound risk factor is unpredicted disruptions in available acity , as might be caused by a number of controllable and uncontrollable factors , luding nature , process hazards , and human activity . At the same time , efficient dictive analytics and computational tools suitable for analysing the impact of capacity uptions on network risk have been largely unavailable . In this paper , we present an original analysis of healthcare supply chain systems ibiting converging assembly and exposed to random capacity disru as modelled as a feed - forward FMN with multiple POD – a mathematical malism particularly useful for understanding changes in the aggregate network acity , as might be impacted by unpredicted perturbations . In our novel work , we tured the time - fixed probability law on the available effective network capacity , in the sence of capacity propagation delays , in closed form . We then construed two models stochastic dynamics of the available effective capacity at the network level . As cussed in Section 3 , these trajectories can be used to model a number of disruptive narios . Our analysis will contribute to understanding the degree of risk exposure and nerability of global healthcare supply chains . Moreover , our study can be used to vide a substantive measure of the trade - off between a lean structure of the supply in and its robustness and agility . The stochastic models of capacity disruptions cussed in this paper present one of the initial attempts to characterise supply chain amics via a FMN - based formalism . In the future , these stochastic models of capacity amics will be generalised to feature different recovery modes and incorporate position of strategic inventory buffers or capacity back - ups . This stochastic analytics l then be combined with the dynamics of demand at the POD and capacity enditures , to develop future methodologies , based on the tenets of utility theory , to vide decision support for design of resilient healthcare supply chain systems . knowledgements e authors would like to thank the referees and the editor for their help to improve the ferences boud , N . E . ( 1997 ) ‘A simple approximation of the EMQ model with Poisson machine failures’ , Production Planning elus , F . J . and Sriniv alan , A . ( 1995 ) ‘A quantity when a pp . 416 – 430 . eola - Risa , A . and DeCroix , C . A . ( 1998 ) ‘Inventory management under random supply uptions and partial backorders’ , Naval Research Logistics , Vol . 45 APPENDIX B ( Continued ) 31 Analysis of healthcare supply chain systems 17 Atamt , A . and Zhang , M . ( 2007 ) ‘Two - stage robust network flow and design under demand Aul disc Ba infra Dynamics , 29 July – 2 August , Bielecki , man Boo Bre Buzacott , nufacturing Systems , Prentice Chao , H Coons , lessons be learned and progress made ? ’ , Clinical Davi ryau Do Eiselt , H an u , Vol . 58 , pp . 71 – 74 . Ert Gal Gall Groeneve Hall , P . ( Har Hen rand Ho with 7 – 1384 . Ho Cult Hu Ins uncertainty’ , Operations Research , Vol . 55 , pp . 662 – 673 . l - Hyde , R . L . ( 1992 ) ‘Evaluation of supplier - restricted purchasing options under temporary price ounts’ , IIE Transactions , Vol . 24 , pp . 184 – 186 . yer , S . , Koberle - Gaiser , M . and Barlow , J . ( 2007 ) ‘Planning for adaptability in healthcare structure’ , Proceedings of the 25th International System p . 978 , Boston , USA . R . E . and Kumar , P . R . ( 1988 ) ‘Optimality of zero inventory policies for unreliable ufacturing systems’ , Operations Research , Vol . 36 , pp . 532 – 541 . th , R . ( 1996 ) ‘The role of supply - chain re - engineering in the pharmaceutical industry’ , Logistics Information Management , Vol . 9 , pp . 4 – 10 . nnan , C . ( 1998 ) ‘Integrating the healthcare supply chain’ , Healthcare Financial Management : Journal of the Healthcare Financial Management Association , Vol . 52 , No . 1 , p . 31 . J . A . and Shantikumar , J . G . ( 1993 ) Stochastic Models of Ma Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ . . ( 1987 ) ‘Inventory policy in the presence of market disruptions’ , Operations Research , Vol . 2 , pp . 274 – 281 . S . ( 2005 ) ‘After Katrina : will Therapeutics , Vol . 27 , No . 10 , pp . 1620 – 1621 . dson , L . , Greblov , G . and Bloomington , I . ( 2005 ) ‘The pharmaceutical industry in the global omy’ , Indiana Universi econ ty Kelley School of Business Bloomington , Indiana , available at http : / / www . bus . indiana . edu / davidso / lifesciences / lsresearchpapers / pharmaceutical % 20indust g12 . doc ( accessed on 16 August 2006 ) . rogovtsev , S . and Mendes , J . ( 2003 ) Evolution of Networks : From Biological Nets to the Internet and WWW , Oxford University Press , Oxford , Great Britain . . , Gendreau , M . and Laporte , G . ( 1996 ) ‘Optimal location of facilities on a network with nreliable node or link’ , Information Processing Letters as , A . , Tanik , M . and Maxwell , T . ( 2000 ) ‘Transdisciplinary engineering education and research model’ , Journal of Integrated Design and Process Science , Vol . 4 , No . 4 , pp . 1 – 11 . lego , G . ( 1988a ) ‘Linear control policies for scheduling a single facility after an initial disruption’ , Technical report 770 , School of OR and IE , Cornell University , Ithaca , NY . G . ( 1988b ) ‘Produce - up - to policies for scheduling a single facility after an initia ego , l disruption’ Technical report 771 , School of OR and IE , Cornell University , Ithaca , NY . lt , H . , Seidmann , A . and Pintelon , L . ( 1992 ) ‘Production lot sizing with machine breakdowns’ , Management Science , Vol . 38 , pp . 104 – 123 . 2004 ) ‘We’d have to sink the ships : impact studies and the 2002 West Coast Port lockout’ , Economic Development Quarterly , Vol . 18 , No . 4 , pp . 354 – 367 . land , C . ( 1996 ) ‘Supply network strategies the case of health supplies’ , European Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management , Vol . 2 , No . 4 , pp . 183 – 192 . ig , M . and Gerchak , Y . ( 1990 ) ‘The structure of periodic review policies in the presence of om yield’ , Operations Research , Vol . 38 , pp . 634 – 643 . pp , W . J . , Pati , N . and Jones , P . C . ( 1989 ) ‘Optimal inventory control in a production flow system failures’ , International Journal of Production Research , Vol . 27 , pp . 136 rwich , G . ( 2000 ) ‘Economic lessons of the Kobe earthquake’ , Economic Development and ural Change , Vol . 48 , No . 3 , pp . 521 – 542 . rtado , M . , Corrigan , J . and Swift , E . ( 2001 ) Envisioning the National Health Care Quality Report , National Academy Press . titute of Medicine ( 2001 ) Crossing the Quality Chasm : A New Health System for the 21st Century , National Academy Press Washington , DC . APPENDIX B ( Continued ) 32 18 A . Savachkin and A . Uribe - Sánchez Isidore , C . ( 2002 ) ‘Hope in West Coast Port talks’ , available at Kim e with general Ko chai Lee item , Vol . 38 , pp . 1314 – 1328 . Lee Lem Lem M2 Co available at Meyer , R ility and inventory in a production Mohd , N A Framework , SCMS - COCHIN . Mo Pap Par Eur Par Logi Par Pet Man 1 – 388 . Por Rev Por Posner , M ry system with unreliable RNC Ros No . Ros proc Sar Sav http : / / money . cnn . com / 2002 / 10 / 02 / news / economy / ports / index . htm . , C . H . and Hong , Y . ( 1997 ) ‘An extended EMQ model for a failure prone machin ime distribution’ , International Journal of Production Economics , Vol . 49 , p lifet p . 215 – 223 . h , R . , Schuster , E . , Chackrabarti , I . and Bellman , A . ( 2003 ) ‘Securing the pharmaceutical supply n’ , Auto - ID Center MIT , White Paper . , H . L . ( 1992 ) ‘Lot sizing to reduce capacity utilization in a production process with defective s , process corrections , and rework’ , Management Science , S . ( 2001 ) ‘On solving unreliable planar location problems’ , Computers and Operations Research , Vol . 28 , pp . 329 – 344 . os , R . ( 2003a ) ‘Slammer’ attacks may become way of life for net’ , available at http : / / news . com . com / Damage + control / 2009 - 1001 _ 3 - 983540 . html . . ( 2003b ) ‘Worm exposes apathy , Mi os , R crosoft flaws’ , available at http : / / news . com . com / 2100 - 1001 - 982135 . html . mm . ( 2005 ) ‘Asiana airlines apologizes for strike disruption’ , http : / / www . allbusiness . com . . R . , Rothkpof , M . H . and Smith , S . A . ( 1979 ) ‘Reliab storage system’ , Management Science , Vol . 25 , pp . 799 – 807 . . ( 2006 ) Supply Chain Risk Management : hebbi , E . ( 2003 ) ‘Supply interruptions in a lost - sales inventory system with random lead time’ , Computers and Operations Research , Vol . 30 , pp . 824 – 835 . ageorgiou , L . , Rotstein , G . and Shah , N . ( 2001 ) ‘Strategic supply chain optimization for the pharmaceutical industries’ , Ind . Eng . Chem . Res . , Vol . 40 , No . 1 , pp . 275 – 286 . lar , M . ( 1997 ) ‘Continuous - review inventory problem with random supply interruptions’ , opean Journal of Operational Research , Vol . 99 , pp . 366 – 385 . lar , M . and Berkin , D . ( 1991 ) ‘Future supply uncertainty in EOQ models’ , Naval Research stics , Vol . 38 , pp . 50 – 55 . lar , M . and Perry , D . ( 1996 ) ‘Inventory models of future supply uncertainty with single and multiple suppliers’ , Naval Research Log . , Vol . 43 , pp . 191 – 210 . ersen , K . , Handfield , R . and Ragatz , G . ( 2005 ) ‘Supplier integration into new product development : coordinating product , process and supply chain design’ , Journal of Operations agement , Vol . 23 , Nos . 3 – 4 , pp . 37 ter , M . and Teisberg , E . ( 2004 ) ‘Redefining competition in health care’ , Harvard Business iew , pp . 64 – 77 . teus , E . L . ( 1986 ) ‘Optimal lot sizing , process quality improvement and setup cost reduction’ , Operations Research , Vol . 34 , pp . 137 – 144 . . J . and Berg , M . ( 1989 ) ‘Analysis of a production - invento production facility’ , Operations Research Letters , Vol . 8 , pp . 339 – 345 . OS ( 2008 ) ‘Global pharmaceutical market forecast to 2012’ , available at : / / www . prlog . org / 1012 http 4036 - global - pharmaceutical - market - forecast - to - 2012 . html . enbaum , S . ( 2006 ) ‘US health policy in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina’ , Jama , Vol . 295 , 4 , pp . 437 – 440 . enblatt , M . J . and Lee , H . L . ( 1986 ) ‘Economic production cycles with imperfect production esses’ , IIE Transactions , Vol . 18 , pp . 48 – 55 . kisian , M . ( 1995 ) ‘Cost lessons of the Great Hanshin earthquake’ , Cost Engineering , Vol . 37 , No . 8 , pp . 13 – 16 . achkin , A . , Bakir , N . O . and Uribe - Sanchez , A . ( 2008 ) ‘An optimal countermeasure policy to mitigate random capacity disruptions in a production system’ , International Journal of Agile ems and Management , V Syst ol . 3 , Nos . 1 / 2 , pp . 4 – 17 . APPENDIX B ( Continued ) 33 Analysis of healthcare supply chain systems 19 Shah , N . ( 2004 ) ‘Pharmaceutical supply chains : key issues and strategies for optimization’ , She Inte Computers and Chemical Engineering , Vol . 28 , Nos . 6 – 7 , pp . 929 – 941 . , Y . ( 2001 ) ‘Supply chain management under the threat of international terrorism’ , rnational Journal of Logistics Management , Vol . 12 , No . 2 , pp . 1 – 12 . Snyder and Daskin ( 2005 ) ‘Reliability models for facility location : the expected failure cost case’ , Transportation Science , Vol . 39 , pp . 400 – 416 . Snyder , Daskin and Teo ( 2007 ) ‘The stochastic location model with risk pooling’ , European Jour 8 . Son Tay Ters Tsiakis , - echelon supply chain networks We Ap A1 Proof of proposition 2 . 1 Co ( ) ∈ i p m C t i N means that all vertices in the input tier m N have no suppliers , i . e . , they represent a starting point of assembly . Recursively , we have that nal of Operational Research , Vol . 179 , pp . 1221 – 123 g , J . and Zipkin , P . ( 1996 ) ‘Inventory control with information about supply conditions’ , Management Science , Vol . 42 , pp . 1409 – 1419 . lor , S . G . and Bradley , C . E . ( 1985 ) ‘Optimal ordering strategies for announced price increases’ , Operations Research , Vol . 33 , pp . 312 – 325 . R . J . and Barman , S . ( 1995 ) ‘Economic purchasi ine , ng strategies for temporary price discounts’ , European Journal of Operational Research , Vol . 80 , pp . 328 – 343 . P . , Shah , N . and Pantelides , C . ( 2001 ) ‘Design of multi under demand uncertainty’ , Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research , Vol . 40 , pp . 3585 – 3604 . iss , H . J . and Rosenthal , E . C . ( 1992 ) ‘Optimal ordering policies when anticipating a disruption in supply or demand’ , European Journal of Operational Research , Vol . 59 , pp . 370 – 382 . pendix ndition ( ) = ∀ i e C t { } ( ) min ( ) , ( ) = ( { ) } 2 2 2 2 2 min ( ) , ∈ = − ( ) ( ) { } ( ) 2 2 2 3 2 2 3 2 2 3 2 2 3 3 32 2 2 3 2 2 2 2 3 2 2 3 3 32 0 , 0 min ( ) , min , min ( ) , , ∈ ∈ > ∈ ∈ > ⎧ ⎫ ⎪ ⎪ = − − − ⎨ ⎬ ⎪ ⎪ ⎩ ⎭ = − − − d i i i i d i i i i p i d p i d i d i i e i d i i i N i N A p i d p i d i i i d e i d i i N i N A C t A C t T A A C t T T C t A C t T A A C t T T ( ) { } 3 2 1 1 1 2 2 1 2 2 2 , 3 , . . . , , , . . . , 0 1 , . . . , min ( ) , . − − − = = = = ∈ ∈ > ∀ = ⎧ ⎫ ⎛ ⎞ = − ⎜ ⎟ ⎨ ⎬ ⎝ ⎠ ⎩ ⎭ ∑ ∏ … d i k k k k M m m i ikk i M M p p i i i i k k M m i d i N i N A k m C t C t T A have the following . d d d e p Then we s C t C t C t d i p i d e i d i N C t A C t T APPENDIX B ( Continued ) 34 20 A . Savachkin and A . Uribe - Sánchez ⎧ ⎫ ⎛ ⎞ M M For each where valent to for some . Then 1 1 1 2 2 1 1 2 20 1 , . . . , 1 2 2 2 , 3 , . . . , , , . . . , 0 1 , . . . , 1 , , . . . , 2 2 , 3 , . . . , ( ) min ( ) , min ( ) , min − − − − > ∀ = − = = = = ∈ ∈ > ∀ = = ∈ ∈ = = = − ⎜ ⎟ ⎨ ⎬ ⎝ ⎠ ⎩ ⎭ ⎛ ⎞ = − ⎜ ⎟ ⎝ ⎠ ∑ ∏ ∑ d d i k k k k M m m i ikk d i k k m m k M A k m i ikk e p p i i i i k k M m i d i N i N A k m M p p i i d i N i N i i k M m C t C t C t T A C t C t T A { } 1 2 . − = ⎧ ⎫ ⎪ ⎪ ⎨ ⎬ ⎪ ⎪ ⎩ ⎭ ∏ k M k fixed vertex , M i the expression 1 1 2 2 , − − = = ⎛ ⎞ − ⎜ ⎟ ⎝ ⎠ ∑ i k k k k M M M p i i i i k k C t T A ∏ 1 1 1 2 2 , , . . . , ; 0 , − ∈ ∈ ∈ > k k m m i i i N i N i N A is equ ⎛ ⎞ M i 1 2 − = − ⎜ ⎟ ⎝ ⎠ ∑ k k M i i i i d k t T A iM p C path i from vertex M i to POD d { } 1 2 20 1 , . . . , 2 2 − − > ∀ = = ⎝ ⎠ i k k m m k k M A k m i ikk k k { } ( ) 1 ∈ ⎛ ⎞ ∏ M i N i N i i A Finally , as 1 − i 1 , , . . . , min = ∈ ⎛ ⎞ − ⎜ ⎟ ∑ M p i i d C t T 1 2 min . − = = − = − ⎜ ⎟ ⎝ ⎠ ∑ i k k M i M M M M p i i i d p i d i d k i C t T A C t T A the available effective capacity of the point of delivery can be expr = M essed ( ) { } 1 \ 0 ∈ > ⎪ ⎪ ⎩ ⎭ d d j jd j N N A ( ) min ( ) , min . ⎧ ⎫ ⎪ ⎪ = − ⎨ ⎬ e p jd p jd C t C t A C t T A2 Proof From pro we have that of proposition 2 . 2 position 2 . 1 and using the independence assumption , ( ) ( ) { } ( ) { } ( ) ( ) 1 \ min ( ) , min ∈ = − > ⎨ ⎨ ⎬ ⎬ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ d j p jd p jd j N N P C t A C t T α 1 1 ( ) 0 \ 0 1 1 ( ) ( ) ( ) min , where { \ } { } . > ∈ > − ∈ ⎫ ⎫ ⎪ ⎪ ⎩ ⎭ ⎩ ⎭ ⎧ ⎫ ⎪ ⎪ = > − > ⎨ ⎬ ⎪ ⎪ ⎩ ⎭ = = ∪ ∏ e d d jd d j jd p jd j C t e A p jd p jd j N N A jd C t T j E F P C t P C t A C t T F A E N N d α α α α α = > ⎧ ⎧ ⎪ ⎪ APPENDIX B ( Continued ) 35 APPENDIX C : PUBLICATION 2 : TWO COUNTERMEASURE STRATEGIES TO MITIGATE RANDOM DISRUPTIONS IN CAPACITATED SYSTEMS In this appendix , we present the ﬁnal version of the manuscript “Two Countermeasure Strategies to Mitigate Random Disruptions in Capacitated Systems” published in the Jour - nal of Systems Science and Systems Engineering , volume 19 , number 2 , pages 210 - 226 , 2010 , by Springer Publisher . The co - authors , Dr . Niyazi Bakir and Dr . Alex Savachkin , autho - rized to include this document in my dissertation . Springer Publisher retains the copyright of this manuscript . The written authorization from the publisher to include the paper in my Ph . D . dissertation is attached in Appendix A . 36 J Syst Sci Syst Eng ( Jun 2010 ) 19 ( 2 ) : 210 - 226 ISSN : 1004 - 3756 ( Paper ) 1861 - 9576 ( Online ) DOI : 10 . 1007 / s11518 - 010 - 5125 - y CN11 - 2983 / N © Systems Engineering Society of China & Springer - Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 TWO COUNTERMEASURE STRATEGIES TO MITIGATE RANDOM DISRUPTIONS IN CAPACITATED SYSTEMS ∗ Niyazi O . BAKIR 1 Alex SAVACHKIN 2 Andrés Uribe - SANCHEZ 3 1 Department of Industrial Engineering , Bilkent University , Turkey nonur @ bilkent . edu . tr 2 , 3 Department of Industrial and Management Systems Engineering , University of South Florida , USA 2 savachki @ eng . usf . edu ( (cid:13) ) 3 auribe @ mail . usf . edu Abstract We examine a capacitated system exposed to random stepwise capacity disruptions with exponentially distributed interarrival times and uniformly distributed magnitudes . We explore two countermeasure policies for a risk - neutral decision maker who seeks to maximize the long - run average reward . A one - phase policy considers implementation of countermeasures throughout the entirety of a disruption cycle . The results of this analysis form a basis for a two - phase model which implements countermeasures during only a fraction of a disruption cycle . We present an extensive numerical analysis as well as a sensitivity study on the fluctuations of some system parameter values . Keywords : Capacity analysis , capacitated system , lean , random disruptions , countermeasure policy ∗ This work was supported by U . S . National Science Foundation Grant CMMI 0621030 . 1 . Introduction and Motivation Lean manufacturing philosophy and associated business practices have been widely embraced and deployed by global enterprises . Some estimates assert that the shift to JIT scheduling in the US automotive industry has saved companies more than $ 1 billion a year in inventory costs , alone . While lean manufacturing has substantially boosted operational efficiency , it has also left enterprises operating in an increasingly risk - encumbered environment . Capacity disruptions triggered by forces of nature , property - and process - related hazards , and man - made interventions have proven to be the most profound influence on enterprise risk . As evidenced in 1995 , an earthquake hit the port town of Kobe , Japan , razed to the ground 100 , 000 buildings and shut down Japan ' s largest port for over two years . In 1999 , an earthquake in Taiwan displaced power lines to the semiconductor fabrication facilities responsible for more than 50 percent of the worldwide supplies of certain computer components , and shaved 5 percent off earnings for major hardware manufacturers including Dell , Apple , Hewlett - Packard , IBM , and APPENDIX C : ( Continued ) 37 Bak ı r et al . : Two Countermeasure Strategies to Mitigate Random Disruption in Capacitated Systems J Syst Sci Syst Eng 211 Compaq ( Wilcox 1999 ) . In September 2002 , longshoremen on the US West Coast were locked out in a labor strike for 11 days , forcing the shutdown of 29 ports . With more than $ 300 billion of dollars in goods shipped annually through these ports , the dispute caused between $ 11 and $ 22 billion in lost sales , spoiled perishables and underutilized capacity ( Isidore 2002 ) . In December 2002 , a political strike in Venezuela made transnational businesses including GM , BP , Ford , Goodyear and Procter & Gamble halt their manufacturing for the duration of the conflict ( Wilson 2003 ) . The recent 2003 outbreak of SARS in China and Singapore forced Motorola to close several plants ( Berniker 2003 ) . Man - made disasters are on the rise , from terrorist attacks to computer viruses ( Lemos 2003 ) . As a result of the above events , according to a recent survey by A . M . Best Company , Inc . of 600 executives , 69 percent of chief financial officers , treasurers and risk managers at Global 1 , 000 companies in North America and Europe view property - related hazards - such as fires and explosions - - and supply chain disruptions as the leading threats to top revenue sources ( A . M . Best Company 2006 ) . Historically , enterprises have lacked appropriate decision support methodologies and computational tools suitable for addressing risk incurred through capacity disruptions . In academia , traditional research efforts on minimizing the cost of supply chain operations and the focus on leveraging economies of scale often yield results that overconcentrate resources . Such optimal solutions can be very sensitive to parameter fluctuations , caused by supply chain disruptions . The inability to recognize the hidden costs of such overconcentration heightens the risk of increased costs and capacity imbalance . Much of the recent literature focuses on minimizing costs of supply chain operations ( see , for example , Barness - Shuster et al . ( 2002 ) , Cheung & Lee ( 2002 ) , Milner & Kouvelis ( 2002 ) , Corbett & DeCroix ( 2001 ) , Lee et al . ( 1997 ) ) , whereas only a small fraction of the efforts have been dedicated to modeling the impact of various disruptions , such as those affecting demand patterns , supplier and production lead times , prices , imperfect process quality , process yield , and other factors . One of the most common types of disruption appearing in the literature is that of supply rate changes . An excellent work by Arreola - Risa & DeCroix ( 1998 ) explores inventory management of stochastic demand systems , where the product supply is disrupted for periods of random duration . The classic economic order quantity ( EOQ ) problem with supply disruptions is studied by Parlar & Berkin ( 1991 ) and Parlar & Perry ( 1996 ) consider a order - quantity / reorder - point inventory models with two suppliers subject to independent disruptions to compute the exact form of the average cost expression . Mohebbi ( 2003 ) presents an analytical model for computing the stationary distribution of the on - hand inventory in a continuous - review inventory system with compound Poisson demand , Erlang distributed lead time , and lost sales , where the supplier can assume one of the two “available” and “unavailable” states at any point in time according to a continuous - time Markov chain . Papers addressing both supply disruptions and random demand include ( Chao 1987 , Parlar 1997 , Song & Zipkin 1996 ) . Chao ( 1987 ) APPENDIX C : ( Continued ) 38 Bak ı r et al . : Two Countermeasure Strategies to Mitigate Random Disruption in Capacitated Systems 212 J Syst Sci Syst Eng proposes a dynamic model concerning optimal inventory policies in the presence of market disruptions , which are often characterized by events with uncertain arrival time , severity and duration . Parlar ( 1997 ) considers a continuous - review stochastic inventory problem with random demand and random lead - time where supply may be disrupted due to machine breakdowns , strikes or other randomly occurring events . Song & Zipkin ( 1996 ) , explore an inventory - control model which includes a detailed Markovian model of the resupply system . A number of papers which address supply and demand changes have been developed in the field of oil stockpiling , as there has been grave concern over the oil supply from the Middle East ( Teisberg 1981 , Chap & Manne 1982 , Murphy et al . 1987 ) . Modeling production rate disruptions ( machine failures ) has been largely addressed by extending classical economic manufacturing quantity ( EMQ ) models . Rosenblatt & Lee ( 1986 ) derive an EMQ model when the production process is subject to a random deterioration from an in - control state to an out - of control state . Lee ( 1992 ) models the defect - generating process in the semiconductor wafer probe process to determine an optimal lot size , which reduces the average processing time on a critical resource . Abboud ( 1997 ) presents a simple approximation of the EMQ model with Poisson machine breakdowns and low failure rate . Groenevelt et al . ( 1992 ) study an unreliable production system with constant demand and random breakdowns , with the focus on the effects of machine failure and repair on optimal lot - sizing decisions . Assuming exponentially distributed time between failures and instantaneous repair of the machine , authors derive some unique properties of their model compared to the classical EMQ model . Groenevelt et al . ( 1992 ) extend their earlier work in Groenevelt et al . ( 1992 ) to the case where repair times are randomly distributed and excess demand is lost . Kim & Hong ( 1997 ) propose an extension to the model in Groenevelt et al . ( 1992 ) , which determines an optimal lot size when a machine is subject to random failures and the time to repair is constant . They formulate average cost functions for the optimal lot size , and derive conditions for determining the optimal lot size . Hopp et al . ( 1989 ) presents a model that assumes the ( s , S ) control policy . With Poisson failures and exponential repair times , a cost function is derived . Rahim ( 1994 ) presents an integrated model for determining an economic manufacturing quantity , inspection schedule and control chart design of an imperfect production process , where he assumes that the process is subject to the occurrence of a non - Markovian shock having an increasing failure rate . Among other notable examples of such works are Henig & Gerchak ( 1990 ) , Bielecki & Kumar ( 1988 ) , Buzacott & Shantikumar ( 1993 ) . Finally , Abboud ( 2001 ) examines a single machine production and inventory system with a deterministic production and demand rate , when the machine is subject to random failures . The author models the production / inventory system as a Markov chain and develops an algorithm to compute the potentials that are used to formulate the cost function . At this point , we can summarize that research efforts addressing the disruption of supply are still comparatively new and scant . Most of the open literature considering various APPENDIX C : ( Continued ) 39 Bak ı r et al . : Two Countermeasure Strategies to Mitigate Random Disruption in Capacitated Systems J Syst Sci Syst Eng 213 types of disruptions focuses on issues of inventory , ordering , production lot sizing , production scheduling , and cost management of inventory , setup , and backorder costs . To the best of our knowledge , there have been no attempts to consider introducing countermeasure policies for mitigating unpredicted capacity disruptions in a capacitated system , and analyze the benefits of such policies for the system manager . Our paper presents an initial attempt to fill the vacuum in this area . The paper has the following organization . In Section 2 , we introduce notation and problem definition . Section 3 presents analysis of a one - phase countermeasure policy , where a risk - neutral decision maker implements countermeasures during the entirety of a disruption cycle , striving to maximize the long - run average reward . These results are used in Section 4 to examine a richer class of policies , where countermeasures are activated during only a fraction of a disruption cycle . In Section 5 , we present a numerical analysis for determining the optimal phase threshold and examine the sensitivity of the optimal policy to fluctuations in system parameter values . Finally , Section 6 offers concluding remarks . 2 . Notation and Problem Definition For the rest of this paper , we define throughput as the long - run average of the number of item units per unit time processed by a capacitated system , and the available system capacity at time t , t C , is defined as the maximum throughput that system resources are capable of sustaining at t . Consider a lean ( i . e . , no inventory ) system with a target ( demand adjusted ) capacity * C experiencing periodic random disruptions , each of which may render a full or partial system capacity loss . We assume that disruptions occur one at a time and that the i th occurrence results in an instantaneous loss of magnitude i C Δ in the remaining system capacity . Following the i th disruption at time t , the system capacity remains at level t i C C − Δ until the next disruption unless the remaining capacity falls below a critical level c upon which the system regains all lost capacity back to * C . For the reason of simplicity , in this paper , we assumed instantaneous recovery . The system is assumed to stochastically regenerate at points of recovery ( Figure 1 ) . Capacity dynamics as such can be observed in a number of industrial scenarios including , but are not limited to , ( i ) shortage of repair personnel and performance degradation caused by failing equipment with a full repair upon a complete failure , ( ii ) non - self - announcing stepwise system failures , and ( iii ) gradual equipment phaseout and modernization . Figure 1 A realization of the system capacity dynamics Let * , i i C C α Δ = where { 0 1 , } i i α ≤ ≤ ∈ (cid:96) are assumed to form a sequence of i . i . d . random variables . The time of the first disruption is denoted by 1 X , and , 2 , 3 , i X i = … denotes the time between ( i - 1 ) th and i th disruptions ( Figure 1 ) . APPENDIX C : ( Continued ) 40 Bak ı r et al . : Two Countermeasure Strategies to Mitigate Random Disruption in Capacitated Systems 214 J Syst Sci Syst Eng We assume that , 2 , 3 , i X i = … are i . i . d . random variables . The time of the n th capacity loss is expressed as 1 n n i i Z X = = ∑ , 1 , 2 , . . . n = where we define 0 0 . Z = Let * 1 min { s . t . } n x i i N n C C x = = Δ > − ∑ . It then follows that c N is the number of capacity disruptions between two successive recovery epochs . As such , c N Y Z = is the time between two successive recovery events , which marks the beginning and the end of a regenerative cycle . A proactive decision maker has a number of mitigation options to reduce the rate of disruptions . When no countermeasures are implemented , he earns · t t R C π = at time t , where π is a time independent price factor minus item unit cost . Therefore , the revenue in each cycle is 0 · d Y t R C t C π π = = ⋅ ∫ . We assume that a cost of ( ) m λ per unit time is incurred to activate and operate a set of countermeasures that would maintain a rate of λ capacity disruptions per unit time . In this paper , we are not concerned with the description of the nature of specific countermeasure options but rather we focus on the analytics of the disruption rate reducing impact that those options have on the system performance . We assume that the decision maker has a risk - neutral utility function ( Keeney & Raiffa 1993 ) , and thus , our analysis will be based on the limiting long - run average reward as the criterion for policy assessment . Let ( ) R m Y λ Π = − ⋅ denote the total reward earned in one renewal cycle and 0 ( ) t t z R dz m t λ Π = − ⋅ ∫ denote the total reward by time t . The long - run average reward converges then to the following ( Ross 1996 ) : ( ) . ( ) t E t E Y Π Π → ( 1 ) In this paper , we first consider a one - phase mitigation policy in which countermeasures are activated throughout a regenerative cycle . Later , we will expand the analysis to examine a two - phase model . 3 . One - Phase Countermeasure Policy When countermeasures are engaged throughout the entire cycle , ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) E E C m E Y π λ Π = ⋅ − ⋅ , and hence , we seek to derive the expected cycle length and the expected cycle capacity . We assume that interarrival times i X are distributed exponentially with rate λ and that fractional capacity losses i α are distributed uniformly over [ 0 , 1 ] . Total capacity per cycle can be expressed as 1 * 1 2 1 , c c N N i i j i i i j C C X X α − = = = ⎡ ⎤ = − ⎢ ⎥ ⎢ ⎥ ⎣ ⎦ ∑ ∑∑ ( 1 ) whereas the cycle length is 1 c N i i Y X = = ∑ . Before we proceed with computing ( ) E C and ( ) E Y , we will need the following result to compute ( ) c E N , the expected number of capacity loss events per cycle . Result 1 Let , 1 , , i i n ζ = … be i . i . d . uniform [ 0 , 1 ] random variables . Then 1 ( ) / ! n n i i P u u n ζ = ≤ = ∑ Proof . We prove by induction . For 1 n = , the result is trivial . Assuming that the result holds for 1 n − , note that APPENDIX C : ( Continued ) 41 Bak ı r et al . : Two Countermeasure Strategies to Mitigate Random Disruption in Capacitated Systems J Syst Sci Syst Eng 215 1 2 1 2 , , , ( ) / ( 2 ) ! . n n f u u n ζ ζ ζ − − … = − We have 1 1 1 ( ) ( ) n n i i n i i P u P u ζ ζ ζ − = = ≤ = + ≤ ∑ ∑ 2 0 0 ( 2 ) ! n u u s s dy ds n − − = − ∫ ∫ 2 0 ( ) ( 2 ) ! n u s u s ds n − = − − ∫ . ( 1 ) ! ( 2 ) ! ! n n n u u u n n n n = − = − − ■ Now we are in a position to compute ( ) E Y using Result 1 . Let * ( 1 ) c C α = − for some ( 0 , 1 ) α ∈ . Note the equivalency of events { } c N n = and 1 1 1 { and } . n n i i i i α α α α − = = ≤ > ∑ ∑ Using Result 1 we have , 1 1 1 ( and ) n n i i i i P α α α α − = = ≤ > ∑ ∑ 1 1 1 ( ) ( ) n n i i i i P P α α α α − = = = ≤ − ≤ ∑ ∑ 1 , ( 1 ) ! ! n n n n α α − = − − which can be used to obtain , 1 1 ( ) [ ] ( 1 ) ! ! n n c n E N n n n α α − ∞ = = ⋅ − − ∑ 0 , ! n n e n α α ∞ = = = ∑ ( 2 ) and 1 1 ( ) ( | ) ( ) c N i c c n i E Y E X N n P N n ∞ = = = = = ∑ ∑ 1 1 ( ) ( ) . c c n n e P N n E N α λ λ λ ∞ = = ⋅ = = ⋅ = ∑ Computation of ( ) E C can be found in the Appendix . We have that * 2 3 1 ( ) ( ) ( , ) [ { n c k n k C E C P N n n h n α λ ∞ − = = = = ⋅ − ∑ ∑ ( , ) ( 2 ) ( 2 ( 2 , ) ) ( 1 ) , } ] c h n P N h α α α − + = ⋅ − + − ( 3 ) where 1 ( , ) , 1 ( ) ( 1 ) [ ] k k k h n n k n n n k α α α α + = − − + + − − and 1 1 ( 1 ) ( , ) ( 1 ) . 1 [ ] n n n n n n h n n n n α α α α α α + − − = − + + − Using ( 3 ) , we can compute the long - run average reward in the following way . Define ( ) C α as 2 3 1 ( ) ( ) { ( , ) n c k n k C P N n n h n α α ∞ − = = = = ⋅ − ∑ ∑ ( , ) } ( 2 ) ( 2 ( 2 , ) ) ( 1 ) . c h n P N h α α α − + = − + − Then , the limiting value of long - run average reward is given by the following expression . ( ) ( ) t E t E Y Π Π → * ( ) ( ) ( ) . ( ) / C C e m E E Y e α α π α λ λ λ λ ⋅ ⋅ − ⋅ Π = ( 4 ) In this section , we have considered a one - phase mitigation policy where countermeasures are implemented during the entire disruption cycle . The expression for the limiting long - run average reward ( Eq . 4 ) will serve as a basis for analyzing a two - phase policy in the next section . 4 . A Two - Phase Countermeasure Policy Consider the set of policies under which APPENDIX C : ( Continued ) 42 Bak ı r et al . : Two Countermeasure Strategies to Mitigate Random Disruption in Capacitated Systems 216 J Syst Sci Syst Eng countermeasures are activated at the beginning of each system cycle and remain in effect as long as system capacity exceeds a certain higher level l c c > , where * ( 1 ) l l c C α = − ⋅ for some ( 0 , 1 ) l α ∈ . Countermeasures remain deactivated for levels below l c , where the system becomes exposed to “normal” disruption rate . This model is driven by the idea that from the system manager ' s viewpoint , it is desirable to stay longer in the “on” zone , closer to the target level * C rather than prolong the “off” portion of the cycle . As in Section 2 and 3 , c is the critical lower level that triggers instantaneous capacity recovery ( Figure 2 ) . The system is said to be “on” when countermeasures are in effect and “off” otherwise . Long - run average reward of this altered process exhibits the same convergence property . Therefore , it is our interest in this section to compute [ ] / [ ] E E Y Π . Figure 2 A realization of the system capacity dynamics for a two - phase policy . Disruption rate during the “on” phase ( l λ ) is smaller than the disruption rate during the “off” phase ( λ ) . We first derive the distribution of the initial system capacity for the “off” period in a cycle . The following proposition summarizes the result , Proposition 1 Consider a capacitated system in which capacity disruption interarrival times are exponentially distributed with parameter λ , fractional stepwise capacity losses follow a uniform distribution on [ 0 , 1 ] , and capacity is restored fully and instantaneously upon falling below level c . Suppose that the system is “on” when * · , ( 1 ) t l C C α > − “off” otherwise , and * ( 1 ) , l c C α α α = − < . Then , the distribution of initial system capacity of the “off” period is given by the following , * 1 ( ) . ( ) cl l N i l i P C C e α α α α = Δ ≤ = − ∑ Proof . We proceed by considering the number of capacity losses during the “on” period , l c N . Let 1 k k i α Γ = ∑ . For 2 n ≥ , * 1 | ( ) cl l N i c i P C C N n α = Δ ≤ = ∑ 1 1 ( , ( , ) | , ) n l n l n l n l P α α α α α − − = Γ ≤ Γ ∈ Γ ≤ Γ > 1 1 ( , ( , ) ) / ( , n l n l n l P P α α α α − − = Γ ≤ Γ ∈ Γ ≤ ) n l α Γ > 1 0 ( ) ( ( , ) ) / [ ] l n n l f s P s s ds α α α α − Γ = ⋅ ∈ − − ∫ 1 ( 1 ) ! ! [ ] n n l l n n α α − − − 1 1 ( ) / . ( 1 ) ! ( 1 ) ! ! [ ] n n n l l l l n n n α α α α α − − = − − − − ( 5 ) Note that 1 1 ( ( , ) | ) l l P α α α α α ∈ > = ( ) / ( 1 ) . l l α α α − − Therefore , one can verify by slight modifications in the computations above that ( 5 ) holds for 1 n = as well . Using Result 1 , we APPENDIX C : ( Continued ) 43 Bak ı r et al . : Two Countermeasure Strategies to Mitigate Random Disruption in Capacitated Systems J Syst Sci Syst Eng 217 obtain * 1 1 ( ) ( ) ( ) cl l N i l c i n P C C P N n α α α ∞ = = Δ ≤ = − ⋅ = ∑ ∑ 1 1 / ( 1 ) ! ( 1 ) ! ! { [ ] } n n n l l l n n n α α α − − − − − 1 1 ( ) ( ) , ( 1 ) ! l nl l l n e n α α α α α α − ∞ = = − = − ⋅ − ∑ which concludes the proof . ■ Expected cycle reward is the sum of expected returns of the “on” and “off” cycle periods . Let l Y and s Y denote the length of the “on” and “off” cycle periods , respectively , where l s Y Y Y = + is the length of the cycle . Define 2 3 1 ( ) ( ) ( , ) { l n l l c k l n k C P N n n h n α α ∞ − = = = = ⋅ − ∑ ∑ ( , ) ( 2 ) ( 2 ( 2 , ) ) ( 1 ) . } l l c l l h n P N h α α α − + = ⋅ − + − Results of the previous section can be readily applied to obtain the expression for expected total capacity , l C , during the “on” period , which is * ( ) ( ) / l l l l E C C C α λ = ⋅ , where l λ is disruption rate during the “on” period . Similarly , we have ( ) / . l l l E Y e α λ = While the length of each cycle is affected by the change in disruption rate , the total number of disruption events in a cycle , c N , is determined solely by a uniform capacity reduction process that evolves independently from the disruption rate . Therefore , we can deduce immediately using ( 2 ) that ( ) c E N e α = and ( ) . l l c E N e α = Then , since capacity disruption rate remains at λ during the “off” period we have , ( ) . l s e e E Y α α λ − = Likewise , expected total capacity during the “off” period , s C , can be readily obtained after considering the initial capacity level in the “off” period , 0 C . Note that 1 * 0 1 2 1 , c c c c l l N N N N i s i i j i i j C C X C X α − − − = = = = ⋅ − ⋅ ∑ ∑ ∑ so that * 0 ( | ( 1 ) ) s E C C C α = − ⋅ * 0 0 ( | ( 1 ) ) l c c E N N C C C α λ − = − ⋅ = ⋅ * * 0 2 ( | ( 1 ) ) l c c n C P N N n C C α λ ∞ = − ⋅ − = = − ⋅ ∑ 1 2 1 ( | ) . l n i j c c i j E N N n α − = = ⋅ − = ∑ ∑ This expression can be simplified to yield the following . * 0 0 ( | ) s C C E C C e α α λ λ − = ⋅ − * 0 3 ( | ( 1 ) ) [ l c c n P N N n C C α ∞ = − = = − ⋅ ∑ 2 1 ( , ) ( , ) { } n k k h n h n α α α α − = − + − + ∑ * 0 ( 2 | ( 1 ) ) l c c P N N C C α − = = − ⋅ ⋅ ( 2 , ) ] h α α− * 0 ( , ) . C C e α α ψαα λ λ − = ⋅ − ⋅ We also have * 0 ( | ( 1 ) ) l c c P N N n C C α − = = − 1 ( ) ( ) . ( 1 ) ! ! n n n n α α α α − − − = − − APPENDIX C : ( Continued ) 44 Bak ı r et al . : Two Countermeasure Strategies to Mitigate Random Disruption in Capacitated Systems 218 J Syst Sci Syst Eng In order to compute ( ) s E C , we need the expression for 0 ( ) E C e α α − ⋅ , which is derived as follows , 0 ( ) E C e α α − ⋅ 0 ( ( | ) ) l c E E C e N α α− = ⋅ * 1 ( ) ( 1 ) l l c n C P N n e α α α α α ∞ − = = ⋅ = ⋅ − ⋅ ⋅ ∑ ∫ 1 1 { / [ ] } ( 1 ) ! ( 1 ) ! ! n n n l l l d n n n α α α α − − − − − 1 * 1 ( ) [ ] ( 1 ) ! ! l n n l l l n C e n n α α α α α α − ∞ − = = ⋅ − ⋅ ⋅ − ⋅ − ∑ 1 1 { / [ ] } ( 1 ) ! ( 1 ) ! ! n n n l l l n n n α α α − − − − − * ( ) l l l C e e α α α α α − = ⋅ − ⋅ ⋅ * ( ) l l C e e α α α α = ⋅ − ⋅ ⋅ Now , we are in a position to obtain ( ) : s E C * ( ) ( ) l s l C E C e e α α α α λ = ⋅ − * ( , ) l l C e d α α α ψαα α λ − ⋅ ∫ * ( , ) . l C f α α λ = ⋅ This brings us to the following principle proposition . Proposition 2 For the capacitated system described in Proposition 1 , the long - run average reward converges to the following expression . ( ) ( ) t E t E Y Π Π → * * ( ) [ ( , ) ] ( ) . [ / ] [ ( ) / ] l l l l l l l l l l C C C e f m e e e α α α α α π α α λ λ λ λ λ λ ⋅ ⋅ + − ⋅ = + − ( 6 ) Proof . Using Theorem 3 . 6 . 1 in ( Ross 1996 ) , we know that long - run average reward converges to , ( ( ) ( ) ) ( ) ( ) . ( ) ( ) t l s l l s l E C E C E Y m t E Y E Y π λ Π ⋅ + − ⋅ → + ( 7 ) The proof follows by substituting expressions for ( ) l E C , ( ) s E C , ( ) l E Y and ( ) s E Y into ( 7 ) . ■ 5 . Numerical Analysis and Sensitivity Study An optimal two - phase policy maximizes long - run average reward by activating countermeasures that set optimal levels of l λ and . l α In what follows , we conduct a parametric analysis of the optimal policy behavior ( Eq . 6 ) . Note that in computing ( , ) l f α α ( through ( , ) ) ψαα and ( ) , l l C α we encounter infinite sums which include terms ( ) l c c P N N n − = and ( ) , l c P N n = respectively . These terms represent the probability distribution of the number of disruptions during the “off” and “on” phases , respectively . Since the mean disruption magnitude is strictly positive and * C ( and hence , l c and c ) is finite , both of these terms go to zero as n → ∞ . Since the disrupted capacity is regained instantaneously at the end of each cycle , the solution to an optimum policy * * ( , ) l α α is trivial . Hence , we analyze the behavior of the optimal l α as a function of , α i . e . , * ( ) , l α α for fixed values of λ and . l λ We first observe that * ( ) l α α is monotonically non - decreasing in α : as α increases , the cycle time will APPENDIX C : ( Continued ) 45 Bak ı r et al . : Two Countermeasure Strategies to Mitigate Random Disruption in Capacitated Systems J Syst Sci Syst Eng 219 increase as well , and so are the periods of lower system capacity . On the other hand , increasing l α results in longer periods of higher system capacity . This trade - off between benefits and costs of activating countermeasures renders * ( ) . l α α α < In what follows , we use the initial parameter values as shown in Table 1 . The cost of countermeasures is assumed to be of the form ( ) ( / ) . r l l m λ λ λ = The cost decreases as the disruption rate l λ gets higher , which is used to measure effectiveness of countermeasure technology , and the cost increases in r , which is used to model the marginal cost of installing a more effective technology . As Figure 3 illustrates , * ( ) l α α is increasingly decreasing in r . We also observe that as r gets larger , * ( ) l α α exhibits a higher sensitivity to per unit changes in r . As one can see , in flat regions of Figure 3 , reducing the disruption rate is not economically sound . Table 1 Initial parameter values l λ π λ * C r 0 . 0005 1 , 000 0 . 001 1 1 Figure 3 A 3 - dimensional representation of * l α as a function of α and . r For a linear cost function ( r = 1 , plot I in Figure 4 ) , * ( ) l α α is increasing in ( / ) , l λ λ which implies that the incremental benefits of reducing the rate of capacity disruptions do not warrant the use of countermeasures over extended periods of time . However , if the marginal cost of installing better countermeasures is not constant ( r = 0 . 001 , plot II in Figure 4 ) , the plots of * ( ) l α α for different values of ( / ) l λ λ intersect . If the marginal cost of a decreased ( / ) l λ λ is relatively small , then * ( ) l α α may be increasing with a more advanced technology ( this relationship does not hold for higher values of ) α . However , both plots agree that the rate of increase of * ( ) l α α is higher in the lower region of ( / ) l λ λ values . Therefore , we see that expected increase in countermeasure costs over extended periods outweighs the benefits of better technology . Figure 4 Behavior of * ( ) l α α for different values of / . l λ λ Furthermore , we observe that * ( ) l α α is insensitive to changes in maximum capacity * C in the neighborhood of initial parameter values in Table 1 . Common wisdom , however , suggests that * C shall be positively correlated with the optimum period of activated countermeasures . APPENDIX C : ( Continued ) 46 Bak ı r et al . : Two Countermeasure Strategies to Mitigate Random Disruption in Capacitated Systems 220 J Syst Sci Syst Eng Should all items be sold , increasing * C would lead to higher profits and hence , countermeasures should be engaged for longer periods ( plot I in Figure 5 , where * C takes values in [ 0 , 0 . 1 ] ) . As * C approaches 0 . 1 , marginal increase in * ( ) l α α falls off sharply . This suggests that the optimal period of activated countermeasures is insensitive to changes in maximum capacity , if * C is already high . Also , the region of sensitivity of * C is a function of the unit profit . As illustrated in the second plot of Figure 5 , * ( ) l α α becomes responsive to changes in * C ∈ [ 0 . 1 , 1 . 0 ] , when π gets smaller ( this change in sensitivity may be minimal if * C is already high ) . Figure 5 Behavior of * ( ) l α α for different values of α and * . C A similar relation exists between * ( ) l α α and . π Figure 6 illustrates that * C is insensitive to changes in π around the original parameter value of π = 1000 whereas at lower unit profit levels , marginal changes in π render larger perturbations in * ( ) . l α α Changes in system capacity for low value items may require more radical changes in countermeasure policy . Nevertheless , the region of sensitivity is relatively small for both π and * , C which suggests on a larger scale that * ( ) l α α is quite robust to changes in system profitability . Figure 6 Behavior of * ( ) l α α for different values of α and . π 6 . Conclusions In this manuscript , we presented one of initial attempts to fill the vacuum in the existing literature focused on development of active countermeasure policies for managing lean capacitated systems in the presence of random capacity disruptions . The system under consideration experienced stepwise partial capacity disruptions with exponentially distributed interarrival times and uniformly distributed magnitudes , followed by instantaneous recovery . Examples of such capacity dynamics include : ( i ) shortage of repair personnel and performance degradation caused by failing equipment with a full repair upon a complete failure , ( ii ) non - self - announcing stepwise system failures , and ( iii ) gradual equipment phaseout and modernization . We explored two different countermeasure policies for a risk - neutral decision maker , who seeks to maximize the long - run average reward . The initial model considered a one - phase policy , APPENDIX C : ( Continued ) 47 Bak ı r et al . : Two Countermeasure Strategies to Mitigate Random Disruption in Capacitated Systems J Syst Sci Syst Eng 221 where countermeasures were implemented during the entirety of a disruption cycle . The results of this model served as a basis to analyze a two - phase strategy , where countermeasures were activated during only a fraction of a disruption cycle . For the latter model , we aimed to determine the optimal threshold when the countermeasures should be disengaged . In this paper , we are primarily concerned with analytics of the impact that countermeasure options can have on the system performance . In practice , the countermeasure options could range from purely technological solutions , such as installation of fire prevention water sprinkler systems , to non - technological decisions that could , for example , alleviate labor strikes or prevent terrorist attacks or political unrest . In this investigation , we considered two forms of the countermeasure cost functions . Our sensitivity analysis for the two - phase policy reveals that as the system profitability increases and the costs of countermeasures become smaller , the optimal countermeasure policy becomes less sensitive to changes in the system parameter values . In this paper , we did not address the question of the best critical threshold that initiates immediate capacity recovery , as we assumed that the cost associated with administering any level of α is zero . Therefore , the problem of obtaining the optimal pair * * ( , ) l α α has a trivial solution ( i . e . , set * α = 0 ) . Rather , we aimed to find the optimal time in each regenerative cycle when countermeasures should be terminated given a capacity recovery threshold of . α Section 5 presented a numerical analysis to determine optimal * ( ) l α α that maximized long - run average reward under various parametric settings . We presented the results of our sensitivity analysis for an exponential cost function . In general , * ( ) l α α was found to be quite sensitive to exponentially increasing cost , as well as capacity and unit profit changes , if the system was already operating with low profit margins . However , as the profitability of the system increased , * ( ) l α α had a robust response to system parameter changes . In general , capacity disruption risk can be mitigated by reducing the probability of the hazardous events as well as their severity . In this paper , we considered countermeasures that mostly impact the probability of hazardous events rather than their severity . For risks that render partial capacity disruptions , the model recommends implementation of countermeasures during only a fraction of the operational cycle . In many cases , partial capacity disruptions are caused by risks associated with daily operations , such as small fire events and stoppages due to machine failures . For such events , our results can substantiate that certain countermeasures may be cost prohibitive even when they offer significant reduction in the disruption rate . For example , in a manufacturing facility , installation of costly fire extinguishing systems may be disfavored to employee training programs that raise awareness of overall factory cleanliness . This paper provides one of the initial attempts for providing closed form solutions for optimal countermeasure policies for mitigation of random disruptions in capacitated systems . We hope that the presented models will be further generalized to address similar questions for capacitated systems evolving under more complex capacity dynamics . We also believe that such single - facility models will form a basis APPENDIX C : ( Continued ) 48 Bak ı r et al . : Two Countermeasure Strategies to Mitigate Random Disruption in Capacitated Systems 222 J Syst Sci Syst Eng to approach capacity management issues in large enterprise networks . Acknowledgment The authors like to thank the referees for their help to improve the quality of the paper . Appendix Computation of ( ) E C in Equation 3 . We begin by conditioning on . c N Noting the dependency between i C Δ and , c N we first compute the conditional density of 1 , k k i α Γ = ∑ ( | ) k c f s N n Γ = for 1 k n < − and 3 . n ≥ Note that ( | ) k c f s N n Γ = 1 1 ( , , ) . ( , ) k n n s n n P s u du P α α α α − − Γ = Γ = Γ > = Γ ≤ Γ > ∫ ( 8 ) Since ' i s α are independent , we can use Result 1 to obtain 1 ( , , ) k n n P s u α − Γ = Γ = Γ > 1 1 1 ( ) ( ) ( ) k n i i n i i k P s P u P u α α α α − = = + = = = > − ∑ ∑ 1 2 ( ) ( 1 ) . ( 1 ) ! ( 2 ) ! k n k s u s u k n k α − − − − = + − ⋅ ⋅ − − − ( 9 ) Substituting ( 9 ) in ( 8 ) and evaluating the integral , we obtain ( | ) k c f s N n Γ = 1 1 ( , ) n n P α α − = ⋅ Γ ≤ Γ > 1 2 ( ) ( 1 ) ( 1 ) ! ( 2 ) ! k n k s s u s u du k n k α α − − − − + − ⋅ ⋅ − − − ∫ 1 1 ( ) ( ) [ ( ) / ( 1 ) ! ( 1 ) ! ( ) ! k n k n k s s s k n k n k α α − − − − − − = ⋅ − − − − − 1 ( ) ] . ( 1 ) ! ! n n n n α α − − − We use this conditional density to compute ( | ) k c E N n Γ = as follows : ( | ) k c E N n Γ = 1 1 0 ( ) ( ) [ ( ) / ( 1 ) ! ( 1 ) ! ( ) ! k n k n k s s s k n k n k α α α − − − − − − = ⋅ − − − − − ∫ 1 ( ) ] . ( 1 ) ! ! n n ds n n α α − − − 1 ! 1 ! ( ) ! n n n k k n k n α α − = ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ − − 1 0 [ ( ) ( ) k n k n k s s ds α α α − − − − − ∫ 1 1 0 ( ) ] . k n k s s ds α α + − − + − ∫ Note that both integrals represent beta functions ( to see this , make a variable change / ) . t s α = Therefore , we arrange the expressions to obtain ( | ) k c E N n Γ = 1 ! 1 ! ( ) ! n n n k k n k n α α − = ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ − − [ ( ) ( 1 , ) n n k B k n k αα − − + − 1 ( 2 , ) ] n B k n k α + + + − 1 [ ] 1 ( ) ( 1 ) k k n k n n n k α α α + = ⋅ − − + + − ⋅ − ( , ) . k h n α = ( 10 ) Note that this expression holds for 1 k n < − and 3 . n ≥ For 1 k n = − and 2 , n ≥ 1 1 1 ( ) ( ) ( | ) ( , ) n n n c n n f s P s f s N n P α α α α − − Γ Γ − ⋅ > − = = ⋅ Γ ≤ Γ > APPENDIX C : ( Continued ) 49 Bak ı r et al . : Two Countermeasure Strategies to Mitigate Random Disruption in Capacitated Systems J Syst Sci Syst Eng 223 Using the above expression , we eventually obtain 1 ( | ) n c E N n − Γ = 1 1 0 1 ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ! ( 1 ) ! ! n n n s s ds n n n α α α α − − = ⋅ − + − − − ∫ 1 1 ( 1 ) [ ( 1 ) ] 1 n n n n n n n n n α α α α α + − − = − + + − ( , ) . h n α = ( 11 ) We can now derive expected capacity per cycle . Equation ( 1 ) gives 1 * 1 2 1 ( ) ( ( | ) ) c c N N i i j j c i i j E C E C E X X N n α − = = = = ⋅ − = ∑ ∑∑ * 2 [ ( ) { c n n C P N n λ ∞ = = = ⋅ − ∑ 1 2 1 ( 1 ) ( | ) } ] n i c i j c i j P N E X N n α λ − = = = = + ∑∑ * 2 [ ( ) { c n n C P N n λ ∞ = = = ⋅ − ∑ 1 2 1 ( ) ( | ) } ] n i i c i E X E N n α λ − = − ⋅ Γ = + ∑ * 2 [ ( ) { c n C P N n n λ ∞ = = = ⋅ − ∑ 1 2 ( | ) } ( 1 ) ] . n i c i E N n α − = Γ = + − ∑ Finally , substituting equations ( 10 ) and ( 11 ) , we obtain * 3 ( ) [ ( ) { c n C E C P N n n λ ∞ = = = ⋅ − ∑ 2 1 ( , ) ( , ) } n k k h n h n α α − = − ∑ ( 2 ) ( 2 ( 2 , ) ) ( 1 ) ] c P N h α α + = ⋅ − + − * * 3 ( ) [ ( ) c c n C C E N P N n λ λ ∞ = = − = ⋅ ∑ 2 1 { ( , ) ( , ) } ( 2 ) ( 2 , ) ] n k c k h n h n P N h α α α − = + + = ⋅ ∑ * * 3 [ ( ) c n C C e P N n α λ λ ∞ = = − = ⋅ ∑ 2 1 { ( , ) ( , ) } ( 2 ) ( 2 , ) ] . n k c k h n h n P N h α α α − = + + = ⋅ ∑ References [ 1 ] Abboud , N . E . ( 1997 ) . A simple approximation of the EMQ model with poisson machine failures . Production Planning and Control , 8 : 385 - 397 [ 2 ] Abboud , N . E . ( 2001 ) . A discrete - time Markov production - inventory model with machine breakdowns . Computers & Industrial Engineering , 39 : 95 - 107 [ 3 ] A . M . Best Company , Inc . ( 2006 ) . Managing Business Risk in 2006 and Beyond . In : Protecting Value . Available via DIALOG . http : / / www . protectingvalue . com . Cited September 9 , 2009 [ 4 ] Arreola - Risa , A . & DeCroix , C . A . ( 1998 ) . Inventory management under random supply disruptions and partial backorders . Naval Research Logistics , 45 : 687 - 703 [ 5 ] Barnes - Schuster , D . , Bassok , D . & Anupindi , R . ( 2002 ) . Coordination and flexibility in supply contracts with options . Manufacturing & Service Operations Management , 4 : 171 - 207 [ 6 ] Berniker , M . ( 2003 ) . SARS Morphs new concerns for Asian IT industry . In : APPENDIX C : ( Continued ) 50 Bak ı r et al . : Two Countermeasure Strategies to Mitigate Random Disruption in Capacitated Systems 224 J Syst Sci Syst Eng Internetnews . Available via DIALOG . http : / / www . internetnews . com / bus - news / arti cle . php / 2203101 . Cited September 9 , 2009 [ 7 ] Bielecki , R . E . & Kumar , P . R . ( 1988 ) . Optimality of zero inventory policies for unreliable manufacturing systems . Operations Research , 36 : 532 - 541 [ 8 ] Buzacott , J . A . & Shantikumar , J . G . ( 1993 ) . Stochastic Models of Manufacturing Systems . Prentice Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ [ 9 ] Chao , H . ( 1987 ) . Inventory policy in the presence of market disruptions . Operations Research , 2 : 274 - 281 [ 10 ] Chap , H . & Manne , S . ( 1982 ) . An integrated analysis of U . S . oil stockpiling policies . Ballinder Publishing Company , Tech . rep . Cambridge , MA [ 11 ] Cheung , K . & Lee , L . ( 2002 ) . The inventory benefit of shipment coordination and stock rebalancing in a supply chain . Management Science , 48 : 300 - 306 [ 12 ] Corbett , C . J . & DeCroix , G . A . ( 2001 ) . Shared - savings contracts for indirect materials in supply chains : channel profits and environmental impacts . Management Science , 47 : 881 - 893 [ 13 ] Groenevelt , H . , Seidmann , A . & Pintelon , L . ( 1992 ) . Production lot sizing with machine breakdowns . Management Science , 38 : 104 - 123 [ 14 ] Groenevelt , H . , Seidmann , A . & Pintelon , L . ( 1992 ) . Production batching with machine breakdowns and safety stocks . Operations Research , 40 : 959 - 971 [ 15 ] Henig , M . & Gerchak , Y . ( 1990 ) . The structure of periodic review policies in the presence of random yield . Operations Research , 38 : 634 - 643 [ 16 ] Hopp , W . J . , Pati , N . & Jones , P . C . ( 1989 ) . Optimal inventory control in a production flow system with failures . International Journal of Production Economics , 27 : 1367 - 1384 [ 17 ] Isidore , C . ( 2002 ) . Hope in West Coast port talks . In : CNN Money . Available via DIALOG . http : / / money . cnn . com / 2002 / 10 / 02 / news / eco nomy / ports / index . htm . Cited September 9 , 2009 [ 18 ] Lee , H . L . ( 1992 ) . Lot sizing to reduce capacity utilization in a production process with defective items , process corrections , and rework . Management Science , 38 : 1314 - 1328 [ 19 ] Lee , H . L . , Padamanabhan , P . & Whang , S . ( 1997 ) . Information distortion in supply chain : the bullwhip effect . Management Science , 43 : 546 - 558 [ 20 ] Lemos , M . ( 2003 ) . Worm exposes apathy , Microsoft flaws . In : CNET . Available via DIALOG . http : / / news . com . com / 2100 - 1001 - 982135 . Cited September 9 , 2009 [ 21 ] Lemos , M . ( 2003 ) . “Slammer” attacks may become way of life for Net . In : CNET . Available via DIALOG . http : / / news . com . com / Damage + control / 200 9 - 1001 _ 3 - 983540 . html . Cited September 9 , 2009 [ 22 ] Keeney , R . & Raiffa , H . ( 1993 ) . Decisions with Multiple Objectives : Preferences and Value Trade - offs . Cambridge University Press APPENDIX C : ( Continued ) 51 Bak ı r et al . : Two Countermeasure Strategies to Mitigate Random Disruption in Capacitated Systems J Syst Sci Syst Eng 225 [ 23 ] Kim , C . H . & Hong , Y . ( 1997 ) . An extended EMQ model for a failure prone machine with general lifetime distribution . International Journal of Production Economics , 49 : 215 - 223 [ 24 ] Milner , J . M . & Kouvelis , P . ( 2002 ) . On the complementary value of accurate demand information and production and supplier flexibility . Manufacturing & Service Operations Management , 4 : 99 - 113 [ 25 ] Mohebbi , E . ( 2003 ) . Supply interruptions in a lost - sales inventory system with random lead time . Computers and Operations Research , 30 : 824 - 835 [ 26 ] Murphy F . H . , Toman , M . A . & Weiss , H . J . ( 1987 ) . A stochastic dynamic Nash game analysis of policies for managing the strategic petroleum reserves of consuming nations . Management Science , 33 ( 4 ) : 484 - 499 [ 27 ] Parlar , M . ( 1997 ) . Continuous - review inventory problem with random supply interruptions . European Journal of Operational Research , 99 : 366 - 385 [ 28 ] Parlar , M . & Berkin , D . ( 1991 ) . Future supply uncertainty in EOQ models . Naval Research Logistics , 38 : 50 - 55 [ 29 ] Parlar , M . & Perry , D . ( 1996 ) . Inventory models of future supply uncertainty with single and multiple suppliers . Naval Research Logistics , 43 : 191 - 210 [ 30 ] Rahim , M . A . ( 1994 ) . Joint determination of production quantity , inspection schedule , and control chart design . IIE Transactions , 26 : 2 - 11 [ 31 ] Rosenblatt , M . J . & Lee , H . L . ( 1986 ) . Economic production cycles with imperfect production processes . IIE Transactions , 18 : 48 - 55 [ 32 ] Ross , S . M . ( 1996 ) . Stochastic Processes . John Wiley & Sons , Inc . , New York , NY [ 33 ] Song , J . & Zipkin , P . ( 1996 ) . Inventory control with information about supply conditions . Management Science , 42 : 1409 - 1419 [ 34 ] Teisberg , T . J . ( 1981 ) . A dynamic programming model of the U . S . strategic petroleum reserve . Bell Journal of Economics , 12 : 526 - 546 [ 35 ] Wilcox , J . ( 1999 ) . Taiwan earthquake could affect holiday PC sales . In : CNET . Available via DIALOG . http : / / news . com . com / 2100 - 1001 - 231332 . ht ml . Cited September 9 , 2009 [ 36 ] Wilson , S . ( 2003 ) . Political deadlock bolsters Chavez . In : Washington Post . Available via DIALOG . http : / / www . washingtonpost . com / ac2 / wp - dy n ? pagename = article & contentId = A15415 - 2 003Jan19 . Cited September 9 , 2009 Niyazi Onur Bak ı r is a Visiting Assistant Professor at Bilkent University in Ankara , Turkey . His research interests include decision making under uncertainty , probabilistic modeling , stochastic processes , and economics of information . Prior to joining Bilkent University , he worked as a postdoctoral research associate at the University of Southern California’s National Center for Risk and Economic Analysis of Terrorism Events ( CREATE ) . In summer 2004 , he worked as a visiting scholar at General Motors R & D , where he conducted research on production disruption APPENDIX C : ( Continued ) 52 Bak ı r et al . : Two Countermeasure Strategies to Mitigate Random Disruption in Capacitated Systems 226 J Syst Sci Syst Eng risks as a part of an enterprise risk management program . Dr . Bak ı r received a Ph . D . in industrial engineering and an M . S . in economics at Texas A & M University in 2004 . He has taught courses at Texas A & M University , University of Southern California and Bilkent University . Alex Savachkin is an Assistant Professor of the Department of Industrial & Management Systems Engineering at the University of South Florida , Tampa . His research interests include analytical support of enterprise risk analysis , public health disaster mitigation and emergency planning , and healthcare engineering . Dr . Savachkin received his Ph . D . in industrial engineering at Texas A & M University in 2005 . Andrés Uribe - Sánchez is a doctoral student of the Department of Industrial & Management Systems Engineering at the University of South Florida , Tampa . His research interests include risk - based analysis of random capacity dynamics in capacitated enterprise networks and development of dynamic mitigation strategies for cross - regional pandemic outbreaks . APPENDIX C : ( Continued ) 53 APPENDIX D : PUBLICATION 3 : AN OPTIMAL COUNTERMEASURE POLICY TO MITIGATE RANDOM CAPACITY DISRUPTIONS IN A PRODUCTION SYSTEM In this appendix , we present the ﬁnal version of the manuscript “An Optimal Counter - measure Policy to Mitigate Random Capacity Disruptions in a Production System” pub - lished in the International Journal of Agile Systems and Management , volume 3 , number 1 / 2 , pages 4 - 17 - 226 , 2008 , by Inderscience Publisher . The co - authors , Dr . Alex Savachkin and Dr . Niyazi Bakir , authorized to include this document in my dissertation . Inderscience Publisher retains the copyright of this manuscript . The written authorization from the publisher to include the paper in my Ph . D . dissertation is attached in Appendix A . 54 4 Int . J . Agile Systems and Management , Vol . 3 , Nos . 1 / 2 , 2008 Copyright © 2008 Inderscience Enterprises Ltd . An optimal countermeasure policy to mitigate random capacity disruptions in a production system Alex A . Savachkin * Department of Industrial and Management Systems Engineering , University of South Florida , 4202 E , Fowler Avenue , ENB118 , Tampa , FL 33620 - 5350 , USA Fax : + 1 - 813 - 974 - 5953 E - mail : savachki @ eng . usf . edu * Corresponding author Niyazi Onur Bakir Center for Homeland Security , University of Southern California , 3710 Mc Clintock Ave , Room 322 , Los Angeles , CA 90089 - 2902 , USA E - mail : nbakir @ usc . edu Andres Uribe - Sanchez Department of Industrial and Management Systems Engineering , University of South Florida , 4202 E . Fowler Avenue , ENB118 , Tampa , FL 33620 - 5350 , USA Fax : + 1 - 813 - 974 - 5953 E - mail : auribe @ mail . usf . edu Abstract : In this paper , we investigate a manufacturing system exposed to unpredicted capacity disruptions with exponentially distributed interoccurrence times and uniformly distributed magnitudes of disruptions . Each disruption renders a stepwise partial system capacity loss accumulating over time until the remaining capacity reaches a certain level , upon which the system gradually restores the lost capacity to the target level . We examine implementation of a countermeasure policy , aimed at reducing the disruption rate , for a risk - neutral decision maker who seeks to maximise long - run average return . We explore how the policy of maintaining the optimal disruption rate is affected by a number of system parameters . Keywords : production system ; capacity ; random disruptions ; stepwise loss ; linear recovery ; convex cost function ; countermeasure policy ; mitigation strategy . APPENDIX D ( Continued ) 55 Random capacity disruptions in a production system 5 Reference to this paper should be made as follows : Savachkin , A . A . , Bakir , N . O . and Uribe - Sanchez , A . ( 2008 ) ‘An optimal countermeasure policy to mitigate random capacity distruptions in a production system’ , Int . J . Agile Systems and Management , Vol . 3 , Nos . 1 / 2 , pp . 4 – 17 . Biographical notes : Alex A . Savachkin is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Industrial and Management Systems Engineering , University of South Florida at Tampa . He received BS in Industrial Engineering from Belarussian State University in 1996 , MS in Management of Technology from the University of Colorado in 1998 , and PhD in Industrial Engineering from Texas A & M University in 2005 . His research interests focus on analytical and computational support of enterprise risk management , supply chain design and disaster management . He has published in IIE Transactions . Niyazi Onur Bakir is a Postdoctoral Research Associate at the University of Southern California Center for Homeland Security ( CREATE ) . His area of study is economics of border security and evaluation of alternatives to prevent illegal introduction of weapons into United States . His research interests include decision making under uncertainty , probabilistic modelling , stochastic processes and economics of information . He received BS in Industrial Engineering from Bilkent University in Turkey in 1998 , MS in Economics from Texas A & M University in 2000 and a PhD in Industrial Engineering from Texas A & M University in 2004 . Andres Uribe - Sanchez is a doctoral student in the Department of Industrial and Management Systems Engineering , University of South Florida at Tampa . He received BS in Industrial Engineering from the University of Los Andes , Colombia in 2003 , and MS in Management Systems from the University of Puerto Rico in 2006 . 1 Introduction In 1995 , an earthquake hit the port town of Kobe , Japan , razed to the ground 100 , 000 buildings and shut down Japan’s largest port for over two years . In September 2002 , longshoremen on the US West Coast were locked out in a labour strike for 11 days , forcing the shutdown of 29 ports . With more than $ 300 billion of goods shipped annually through these ports , the dispute caused between $ 11 and $ 22 billion in lost sales , spoiled perishables and underutilised capacity . The recent 2003 outbreak of SARS in China and Singapore forced Motorola to close several plants ( Berniker , 2003 ) . Man - made disasters are also on the rise , from terrorist attacks to computer viruses ( Lemos 2003a , b ) . As evidenced from these and other examples , enterprises are consolidating their internal and external suppliers to gain economies of scale at the expense of heightened risk exposure to supply chain disruptions . Computational models and methodologies suitable for analysing the effects of capacity imbalance have been largely unavailable ( Savachkin and Wortman , 2006 ) . While the supply chain literature abounds , only a small portion of it has been dedicated to modelling the impact of various disruptions such as demand patterns , supplier and production lead times , prices , imperfect process quality and process yield . The research efforts have been focused primarily on modelling operational disruptions and localised issues of lot sizing , scheduling , ordering policy , management of costs , etc . The work on APPENDIX D ( Continued ) 56 6 A . A . Savachkin , N . O . Bakir and A . Uribe - Sanchez modelling local supply rate changes were pioneered by Meyer et al . ( 1979 ) , and later extended by Posner and Berg ( 1989 ) and Arreola - Risa and DeCroix ( 1998 ) . Parlar and Berkin ( 1991 ) studied the classic EOQ problem with supply disruptions , later extended by Parlar and Perry ( 1996 ) . Other work on production - inventory systems with deterministic demand and supply disruptions for a localised entity includes Bielecki and Kumar ( 1988 ) , Weiss and Rosenthal ( 1992 ) and Mohebbi ( 2003 ) . Papers addressing both supply disruptions and random demand include Chao ( 1987 ) , Parlar ( 1997 ) and Song and Zipkin ( 1996 ) . Modelling production rate disruptions , such as machine failures , challenged many researchers for several decades , and numerous research efforts have been devoted to extending classical Economic Manufacturing Quantity ( EMQ ) model ( Abboud , 1997 ; Buzacott and Shanthikumar , 1993 ; Groenevelt et al . , 1992 ; Henig and Gerchak , 1990 ; Hopp et al . , 1989 ; Kim and Hong , 1997 ; Lee , 1992 ; Porteus , 1986 ; Rosenblatt and Lee , 1986 ) . As an example , Gallego ( 1988a , b ) examine the classical economic lot - sizing model with single and multiple disruptions . A single localised unreliable bottleneck facility with a constant production and demand rate that is subject to random disruptions was analysed in Moinzadeh and Aggarwal ( 1997 ) . Temporary price changes have also attracted interest among operations researchers ( Arcelus and Srinivasan , 1995 ; Ardalan , 1995 ; Aull - Hyde , 1992 ; Taylor and Bradley , 1985 ; Tersine and Barman , 1995 ) . Our literature survey reveals that research efforts addressing the disruption of supply are insufficient . Most of the open literature focuses on reactive management of inventory , ordering policies , production lot sizing , scheduling and supply chain design . To the best of our knowledge , there have been no attempts to consider introduction of active countermeasure policies to mitigate unpredicted capacity disruptions in a production system . In this paper , we offer a modelling paradigm suitable for capturing a certain regenerative stochastic trajectory of capacity in a manufacturing facility exposed to hazardous events . The mitigation strategy focuses on decreasing the capacity disruption rate . The per unit time cost of countermeasures is modelled as a decreasing convex function of the rate . The rest of the paper has the following organisation . In Section 2 , we present capacity - related terminology and notation , and state model assumptions . In Sections 3 and 4 , we derive the average long - run reward as a function of the capacity disruption rate . In Section 5 , we analyse how the optimal disruption rate behaves as we vary 1 the unit profit 2 the maximum capacity level 3 the recovery rate 4 the rate of recovery delay . Section 6 offers our concluding remarks . 2 Problem We consider a manufacturing system and focus on its stochastic capacity , trajectory shaped in particular , by disruptions of random origin and mode . Let C t denote available system capacity at time t ≥ 0 , which is defined as the maximal throughput that system is internally capable of sustaining at t . Throughput is defined as usual as the long - run APPENDIX D ( Continued ) 57 Random capacity disruptions in a production system 7 average of the number of item units per unit time processed by the system . The system operates at a target capacity C * and experiences some periodic and unpredicted disruptions , each of which renders an instantaneous partial or full loss in system capacity . Disruptions are assumed to arrive one at a time , where the i th instance results in a decrease ∆ C i in the remaining system capacity . Capacity stays at the reduced level until the next arrival unless the remaining disrupted capacity falls below a critical threshold c > 0 , upon which the system experiences some recovery delay followed by a gradual restoration of accumulated lost capacity back to the level C * ( Figure . 1 ) . We assume that the system stochastically regenerates at the points of full recovery where each such point marks the beginning of a new regeneration cycle . Figure 1 A realisation of the system capacity trajectory The capacity trajectory described above subsumes as a special case the dynamics presented in Figure 2 ( with c = C * ) , where every degradation entails a recovery delay and a subsequent capacity comeback . Capacity dynamics as in Figure 2 can be observed in a number of manufacturing scenarios . An instantaneous capacity loss can be attributed to disruptions in supporting infrastructure ( e . g . power outages , intermittent compressed air supply , fires , etc . ) , labour strikes , and equipment failure or modernisation followed by a gradual capacity recovery . Another example is a warning of act of terrorism that ensues checking the area and a piecemeal unfolding of human and manufacturing resources . In what follows , we first focus on the general case ( Figure 1 ) and introduce modelling assumptions on capacity kinesics and mitigation options . Figure 2 A realisation of the system capacity trajectory ( c = C * ) APPENDIX D ( Continued ) 58 8 A . A . Savachkin , N . O . Bakir and A . Uribe - Sanchez Consider the first cycle , and let ∆ C i = α i C * , where { 0 ≤ α i ≤ 1 , i ∈ N } are i . i . d . random variables uniformly distributed over [ 0 , 1 ] . Let X 1 be the time epoch of the first disruption , and let X i , i ≥ 2 be an interarrival time between ( i − 1 ) th and i th disruptions . We assume that X i , i ≥ 1 are i . i . d . random variables distributed exponentially with a rate λ > 0 . The time of the n th capacity loss in each cycle is denoted by Z n = 1 n i i X = ∑ , where Z 0 = 0 . Let R represent a recovery delay distributed exponentially with a rate θ > 0 . Finally , we assume a constant rate γ > 0 of capacity recovery with W designated as the recovery period ( Figure 1 ) . The rates λ , θ , and γ are time - independent . Let N x = min 1 n s . t . C * – n i i C x = ⎧ ⎫ ∆ ≥ ⎨ ⎬ ⎩ ⎭ ∑ . Then , N c is the number of disruptions during the cycle . We have that 1 1 c N i i W C γ = = ∆ ∑ and hence the cycle time is Y = c N Z + R + W . We assume that a proactive system manager can integrate certain countermeasure options to maintain the rate of capacity disruptions at a fixed level λ , at a cost of c ( λ ) per unit time . If λ′ denotes a ‘regular’ disruption rate ( with no countermeasure options available ) , we assume that c ( λ ) = 0 for λ ≥ λ′ . We further assume that c ( · ) is convex and decreasing in λ . The mitigation strategy assumes that the countermeasures are deactivated during the recovery delay and recovery period . When the countermeasures are deactivated , the manager earns a profit π C t at time t , where π is a time independent unit price factor minus unit cost . Thus , the total reward earned during a renewal cycle is Π = π 0 Y t C dt ∫ – c ( λ ) c N Z = π C – c ( λ ) c N Z . The system manager’s objective is to maximise the long - run average reward , where the decision variable is λ . Towards this end , using the result of Theorem 3 . 6 . 1 in Ross ( 1996 ) , we observe that the long - run average reward converges to ( ) ( ) t E t E Y Π Π → Hence , in the next section , we aim to derive the expected cycle length and the expected cycle capacity . 3 Long - run average cycle capacity The total capacity per cycle can be expressed as Nc Z R W C C + C + C = where , Nc Z C C R , and C W represent total capacity associated with c N Z , R and W portions of the cycle period , respectively . In the Appendix , we calculate E ( ) Nc Z C = ( ) C α C * / λ , where ( ) C α is defined accordingly as well . Next , we obtain E ( C R ) as follows . APPENDIX D ( Continued ) 59 Random capacity disruptions in a production system 9 ( ) ( ) * 1 * * 1 * * 1 = = E ( ) = c c c N R i i N i i N i i E C E C C R C C R C C E α α θ = = = ⎛ ⎞ ⎡ ⎤ ∆ ⎜ ⎟ ⎢ ⎥ ⎜ ⎟ ⎣ ⎦ ⎝ ⎠ ⎛ ⎞ ⎡ ⎤ ⎜ ⎟ ⎢ ⎥ ⎜ ⎟ ⎣ ⎦ ⎝ ⎠ − ∑ ∑ ∑ – – E where ( ) ( ) = = = = = = = = 1 1 1 1 | ( ) 2 1 2 2 c c N N i i c c i n i c n c E E N n P N n n P N n e E N α α α ∞ ∞ = ⎛ ⎞ ⎛ ⎞ ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟ ⎝ ⎠ ⎝ ⎠ = = ∑ ∑ ∑ ∑ where E ( N c ) = e α , follows from ( 6 ) in Appendix . Therefore ( ) * = 1 2 R C e E C α θ ⎛ ⎞ − ⎜ ⎟ ⎝ ⎠ Next , we calculate E ( C W ) . To this end , we first obtain C W as follows : + 2 * * 1 = 2 c N W i i W C C C W γ α = ⎛ ⎞ ⎜ ⎟ ⎝ ⎠ ∑ – = = + 2 * * 1 * * 1 1 = – 2 c c c N N N i i i i i i C C C C γ α γ α α γ = ⎡ ⎤ ⎛ ⎞ ⎣ ⎦ ⎜ ⎟ ⎝ ⎠ ∑ ∑ ∑ = – + 2 2 2 2 2 * * * 1 1 1 2 c c c N N N i i i i i i C C C α α α γ γ γ = = = ⎡ ⎤ ⎡ ⎤ ⎣ ⎦ ⎣ ⎦ ∑ ∑ ∑ = = = – 2 2 2 * * 1 1 2 c c N N i i i i C C α α γ γ ⎡ ⎤ ⎣ ⎦ ∑ ∑ . It follows then that = = – = – 2 2 2 * * 1 * * 2 1 ( ) 2 2 Var 2 2 4 c c N i i N i i C C e C C e e α α α α γ γ α γ γ = ⎛ ⎞ ⎡ ⎤ ⎜ ⎟ ⎢ ⎥ ⎜ ⎟ ⎣ ⎦ ⎝ ⎠ ⎛ ⎞ ⎛ ⎞ + ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟ ⎝ ⎠ ⎝ ⎠ ∑ ∑ W E C E APPENDIX D ( Continued ) 60 10 A . A . Savachkin , N . O . Bakir and A . Uribe - Sanchez = – = = – + 2 2 * * 2 1 * * 2 Var | 2 2 4 2 2 4 12 c N i c i C C e e E N n C C e e e α α α α α α γ γ γ γ = ⎛ ⎞ ⎛ ⎞ ⎛ ⎞ + ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟ ⎝ ⎠ ⎝ ⎠ ⎝ ⎠ ⎛ ⎞ ⎜ ⎟ ⎝ ⎠ ∑ Therefore , = + – + 2 * * * * 2 ( ) ( ) 1 2 2 2 4 12 C C C e C C e e e α α α α α λ θ γ γ ⎛ ⎞ ⎛ ⎞ − + ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟ ⎝ ⎠ ⎝ ⎠ E C In the next section , we derive the expected cycle length and finalise computation of the long - run average reward limit . 4 Long - run average reward We calculate E ( W ) as ( ) ( ) * 1 * 1 1 * * 1 ( ) | 2 2 c c N i i N i c c n i c E W E C C E N n P N n C e C E N α α γ α γ γ γ = ∞ = = ⎛ ⎞ = ⎜ ⎟ ⎝ ⎠ ⎛ ⎞ = = = ⎜ ⎟ ⎝ ⎠ = = ∑ ∑ ∑ where E ( N c ) = e α , follows from ( 6 ) in Appendix . We then have that ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) = c N E Y E Z E R E W + + * 1 2 e e C α α λ θ γ = + + where ( ) c N E Z = e α / λ follows from ( 7 ) in Appendix . At this point , we are in a position to analyse the limiting behaviour of the long - run average reward which is given by the following expression ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) + + 2 * * * * 2 * ( ) ( ) ( ) / / 1 / 2 / 2 / 2 / 4 / 12 / ( ) / 1 / / 2 t E t E Y C C C e C e C e e e c e e C α α α α α α α π α λ θ γ γ λ λ λ θ γ Π Π → ⎡ ⎤ + − + − + − ⎣ ⎦ = To simplify the expression and gain meaningful insights , we limit our attention to the special case ( c = C * ) as presented in Figure 2 . Then the long - run average reward simplifies to APPENDIX D ( Continued ) 61 Random capacity disruptions in a production system 11 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) + + * * * 1 / 1 / 2 / 2 1 / 6 ( ) / 1 / 1 / / 2 t C C c E t E Y C π λ θ γ γ λ λ λ θ γ + + − − Π Π → = or multiplying both the numerator and the denominator by λ , ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) + * * * * C 1 / 2 / 2 1 / 6 + C = 1 1 / / 2 t C c E t E Y C λ θ γ γ λ λ θ γ ⎡ ⎤ π − − π Π Π ⎣ ⎦ → ⎡ ⎤ + + ⎣ ⎦ ( 1 ) To find the maximum long - run average reward , we equalise the first derivative of ( 1 ) with respect to λ , to zero . After simplification , we obtain ( ) * * 1 1 1 ( ) – c ( ) ( ) 6 2 2 C c γ θ θ γ ⎛ ⎞ ⎛ ⎞ π + = + λ λ λ − λ ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟ ⎝ ⎠ ⎝ ⎠ ' ' C c ( 2 ) The assumptions we made on c ( · ) render both sides of ( 2 ) positive . To see this , one needs to take the Taylor expansion to estimate c ( λ′ ) = 0 using λ as the reference point , and observe that c ( λ ) – λ · ( ) c λ ′ is positive since ( ) c ′ ⋅ < 0 . In the next section , we will analyse the results of comparative statics based on this equation to see how λ behaves as a function of 1 the unit profit π 2 the maximum capacity level C * 3 the recovery rate γ 4 the rate of recovery delay θ . 5 Behaviour of the optimal disruption rate As stated previously , the cost function c ( λ ) has two intervals . For λ λ′ ≤ , c ( λ ) is convex and decreasing in λ ( with c ( λ ′ ) = 0 ) , whereas c ( λ ) = 0 for λ > λ ′ . In this section , we assume that a solution λ * to ( 2 ) exists and satisfies λ * < λ′ . Note that λ appears only on the right hand side of ( 2 ) ( hereafter denoted as RHS ) . Since c ( · ) is convex , we have that RHS = * 1 ( ) ( ) 0 2 C c c λ λ λ λ θ γ ⎛ ⎞ ∂ ′′ ′′ − + − < ⎜ ⎟ ∂ ⎝ ⎠ ( 3 ) Note that ( 3 ) also ensures that the solution λ * to ( 2 ) , if it exists , is unique . We first consider the impact of the unit profit π , which appears only on the left hand side of ( 2 ) ( hereafter denoted as LHS ) . Note that LHS is increasing in π . Thus , as π increases , λ has to decrease to satisfy ( 2 ) . In other words , as the unit profit increases , disruptions become more costly , and hence λ * becomes smaller to reduce the number of disruptions over a long time horizon . Intuitively , increasing the maximum system capacity C * should have a similar impact on λ * . As the system profitability increases , λ should be reduced to ensure that the system operates at the maximum capacity level . This intuitive relationship follows APPENDIX D ( Continued ) 62 12 A . A . Savachkin , N . O . Bakir and A . Uribe - Sanchez mathematically only for a range of parameter values . Note that both RHS and LHS are increasing in C * . We have that * LHS 1 1 RHS ( ) ( ) 0 , 0 * 6 2 2 c c C C λ λ λ π γ θ γ ′ ⎛ ⎞ ∂ ∂ − = + > = > ⎜ ⎟ ∂ ∂ ⎝ ⎠ ( 4 ) Note that both derivatives in ( 4 ) are independent of C * . If ∂ LHS / ∂ C * > ∂ RHS / ∂ C * , then LHS exceeds RHS as C * is increased from the initial level . Therefore , the new λ * has to be smaller . This implies that if the system profitability is sufficiently high , λ * is a decreasing function of C * . Furthermore , if the ratio of γ to θ exceeds a certain threshold , the same relationship holds between λ * and C * . If the expected recovery delay is short , the loss induced by a single disruption is not high enough to justify a lower λ * when C * is increased . An increased rate of linear recovery γ clearly benefits the system performance . However , note that γ appears in both RHS and LHS of ( 2 ) . Taking the first order derivatives with respect to γ yields * * 2 2 LHS 1 RHS ( ) ( ) = – C 0 , = – C < 0 6 2 c c λ λ λ π γ γ γ γ ′ ∂ ∂ − < ∂ ∂ It follows then that ∂ LHS / ∂ γ < ∂ RHS / ∂ γ for all values of γ , if π > 3 ( c ( λ ) − λ ( ) c λ ′ ) . This implies that if the unit profit is sufficiently high , then λ * is increasing in γ . When the linear recovery rate is high , the loss from a disruption event is relatively low and hence are reduced countermeasure benefits . Therefore , the system manager shall not be motivated to maintain a low level of λ * as the economic benefits no longer outweigh the costs of such a policy . Finally , we discuss the relationship between λ * and θ . Similar to γ , the parameter θ appears in both RHS and LHS . We have that LHS RHS * 2 2 1 ( ) ( ) = C < 0 , < 0 2 c c λ λ λ π θ θ θ θ ′ ∂ ∂ − − = − ∂ ∂ Since ∂ LHS / ∂ θ < ∂ RHS / ∂ θ follows independent of θ for π C * > 2· ( c ( λ ) − λ · c ′ ( λ ) ) , we conclude that higher values of θ render a higher λ * , when system profitability is high . The intuition behind this relationship is simple . Higher values of θ mean reduced expected recovery delays , which in turn reduce the economic benefits of implementing countermeasures . Hence , it is economically sound to choose a higher λ * . 6 Conclusions In this paper , we examined a production system experiencing periodic capacity disruptions , each of which is followed by a random recovery delay and a constant linear rate of recovery . The system manager’s objective was to implement a countermeasure strategy to alleviate the rate of disruptions λ with a convex cost function that is decreasing in λ . We derived an optimal level of λ that maximises the long - run average reward . The results of comparative statics suggest that choosing to maintain a lower disruption rate is optimal , if the system profitability is high . We concluded that higher unit profits and maximum capacity levels increase the costs of disruptions and hence , APPENDIX D ( Continued ) 63 Random capacity disruptions in a production system 13 must be balanced by appropriate countermeasure strategies . Since shorter expected recovery delay and faster linear recovery reduce the economic loss of disruptions , the optimal level of λ is increasing in both parameters . Acknowledgement This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation Grant # DMI 0621030 . References Abboud , N . E . ( 1997 ) ‘A simple approximation of the EMQ model with poisson machine failures’ , Production Planning and Control , Vol . 8 , pp . 385 – 397 . Arcelus , F . J . and Srinivasan , G . ( 1995 ) ‘Discount strategies for one - time only sales’ , IIE Transactions , Vol . 27 , pp . 618 – 624 . Ardalan , A . ( 1995 ) ‘A comparative analysis of approaches for determining optimal price and order quantity when a sale increases demand’ , European Journal of Operational Research , Vol . 84 , pp . 416 – 430 . Arreola - Risa , A . and DeCroix , C . A . ( 1998 ) ‘Inventory management under random supply disruptions and partial backorders’ , Naval Research Logistics , Vol . 45 , pp . 687 – 703 . Aull - Hyde , R . L . ( 1992 ) ‘Evaluation of supplier - restricted purchasing options under temporary price discounts’ , IIE Transactions , Vol . 24 , pp . 184 – 186 . Berniker , M . ( 2003 ) SARS Morphs New Concerns for Asian IT Industry , Available at : http : / / www . internetnews . com / bus - news / article . php / 2203101 . Bielecki , R . E . and Kumar , P . R . ( 1988 ) ‘Optimality of zero inventory policies for unreliable manufacturing systems’ , Operations Research , Vol . 36 , pp . 532 – 541 . Buzacott , J . A . and Shanthikumar , J . G . ( 1993 ) Stochastic Models of Manufacturing Systems , Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Chao , H . ( 1987 ) ‘Inventory policy in the presence of market disruptions’ , Operations Research , Vol . 2 , pp . 274 – 281 . Gallego , G . ( 1988a ) ‘Linear control policies for scheduling a single facility after an initial disruption’ , Technical Report No . 770 , School of OR and IE , Cornell University , Ithaca , NY . Gallego , G . ( 1988b ) ‘Produce - up - to policies for scheduling a single facility after an initial disruption’ , Technical Report No . 771 , School of OR and IE , Cornell University , Ithaca , NY . Groenevelt , H . , Seidmann , A . and Pintelon , L . ( 1992 ) ‘Production lotsizing with machine breakdowns’ , Management Science , Vol . 38 , pp . 104 – 123 . Henig , M . and Gerchak , Y . ( 1990 ) ‘The structure of periodic review policies in the presence of random yield’ , Operations Research , Vol . 38 , pp . 634 – 643 . Hopp , W . J . , Pati , N . and Jones , P . C . ( 1989 ) ‘Optimal inventory control in a production flow system with failures’ , International Journal of Production Research , Vol . 27 , pp . 1367 – 1384 . Kim , C . H . and Hong , Y . ( 1997 ) ‘An extended EMQ model for a failure prone machine with general lifetime distribution’ , International Journal of Production Economics , Vol . 49 , pp . 215 – 223 . Lee , H . L . ( 1992 ) ‘Lot sizing to reduce capacity utilization in a production process with defective items , process corrections , and rework’ , Management Science , Vol . 38 , pp . 1314 – 1328 . Lemos , R . ( 2003a ) ‘Slammer’ Attacks may become Way of Life for Net , Available at : http : / / news . com . com / Damage + control / 2009 - 1001 _ 3 - 983540 . html . Lemos , R . ( 2003b ) Worm Exposes Apathy , Microsoft Flaws , Available at : http : / / news . com . com / 2100 - 1001 - 982135 . html . APPENDIX D ( Continued ) 64 14 A . A . Savachkin , N . O . Bakir and A . Uribe - Sanchez Meyer , R . R . , Rothkpof , M . H . and Smith , S . A . ( 1979 ) ‘Reliability and inventory in a production storage system’ , Management Science , Vol . 25 , pp . 799 – 807 . Mohebbi , E . ( 2003 ) ‘Supply interruptions in a lost - sales inventory system with random lead time’ , Computers and Operations Research , Vol . 30 , pp . 824 – 835 . Moinzadeh , K . and Aggarwal , P . ( 1997 ) ‘Analysis of a production / inventory system subject to random disruptions’ , Management Science , Vol . 43 , pp . 1577 – 1588 . Parlar , M . ( 1997 ) ‘Continuous - review inventory problem with random supply interruptions’ , European Journal of Operational Research , Vol . 99 , pp . 366 – 385 . Parlar , M . and Berkin , D . ( 1991 ) ‘Future supply uncertainty in EOQ models’ , Naval Research Logistics , Vol . 38 , pp . 50 – 55 . Parlar , M . and Perry , D . ( 1996 ) ‘Inventory models of future supply uncertainty with single and multiple suppliers’ , Naval Research Logistics , Vol . 43 , pp . 191 – 210 . Porteus , E . L . ( 1986 ) ‘Optimal lot sizing , process quality improvement and setup cost reduction’ , Operations Research , Vol . 34 , pp . 137 – 144 . Posner , M . J . and Berg , M . ( 1989 ) ‘Analysis of a production - inventory system with unreliable production facility’ , Operations Research Letters , Vol . 8 , pp . 339 – 345 . Rosenblatt , M . J . and Lee , H . L . ( 1986 ) ‘Economic production cycles with imperfect production processes’ , IIE Transactions , Vol . 18 , pp . 48 – 55 . Ross , S . M . ( 1996 ) Stochastic Processes , New York , NY : John Wiley & Sons , Inc . Savachkin , A . and Wortman , M . ( 2006 ) ‘Capacity disruption in supply networks : a concise literature survey’ , Under Review in Production and Operations Management , Available at : http : / / www . ieedge . com / papers / survey . pdf . Song , J . and Zipkin , P . ( 1996 ) ‘Inventory control with information about supply conditions’ , Management Science , Vol . 42 , pp . 1409 – 1419 . Taylor , S . G . and Bradley , C . E . ( 1985 ) ‘Optimal ordering strategies for announced price increases’ , Operations Research , Vol . 33 , pp . 312 – 325 . Tersine , R . J . and Barman , S . ( 1995 ) ‘Economic purchasing strategies for temporary price discounts’ , European Journal of Operational Research , Vol . 80 , pp . 328 – 343 . Weiss , H . J . and Rosenthal , E . C . ( 1992 ) ‘Optimal ordering policies when anticipating a disruption in supply or demand’ , European Journal of Operational Research , Vol . 59 , pp . 370 – 382 . APPENDIX D ( Continued ) 65 Random capacity disruptions in a production system 15 Appendix Computation of ( ) Nc Z E C . We begin by noting that Nc Z C can be expressed as 1 1 2 1 c c Nc N N i Z i j i i i j C C X X α − ∗ = = = ⎡ ⎤ = − ⎢ ⎥ ⎣ ⎦ ∑ ∑∑ ( A1 ) We first need the following result Result 1 : Let ζ i , i = 1 , … , n be i . i . d . random variables where ζ i ∼ [ 0 , 1 ] . Then 1 ( ) / ! n n i i P u u n ς = ≤ = ∑ Proof : We prove by induction . For n = 1 , the result is trivial . Assuming that the result holds for n − 1 , note that 1 2 1 2 , , , ( ) / ( 2 ) ! n n f u u n ς ς ς − − … = − We have 2 1 0 0 1 1 2 0 d d ( 2 ) ! ( ) d ( 2 ) ! ( 1 ) ! ( 2 ) ! ! n n n u u s i i n i i n n n n u s P u P u y s n s u u u u s s n n n n n ς ς ς − − − = = − ⎛ ⎞ ⎛ ⎞ ≤ = + ≤ = ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟ − ⎝ ⎠ ⎝ ⎠ = − = − = − − − ∑ ∑ ∫ ∫ ∫ □ Now we are in a position to compute ( ) c N E Z using Result 1 . Let c = ( 1 − α ) C ∗ for some α ∈ ( 0 , 1 ) . Note , the equivalency of events { N c = n } and 1 1 1 { and } n n i i i i α α α α − = = ≤ > ∑ ∑ . Using Result 1 we have 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 and ( 1 ) ! ! n n n n n n i i i i i i i i P P P n n α α α α α α α α α α − − − = = = = ⎛ ⎞ ⎛ ⎞ ⎛ ⎞ ≤ > = ≤ − ≤ = − ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟ − ⎝ ⎠ ⎝ ⎠ ⎝ ⎠ ∑ ∑ ∑ ∑ which can be used to obtain E ( N c ) , the expected number of capacity loss events per cycle ( ) 1 1 0 ( 1 ) ! ! ! n n n a c n n E N n e n n n α α α − ∞ ∞ = = ⎡ ⎤ = − = = ⎢ ⎥ − ⎣ ⎦ ∑ ∑ ( A2 ) and , therefore ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 1 1 1 | 1 c c N N i c c n i c c n E Z E X N n P N n n e P N n E N α λ λ λ ∞ = = ∞ = ⎛ ⎞ = = = ⎜ ⎟ ⎝ ⎠ = = = = ∑ ∑ ∑ ( A3 ) We proceed by conditioning on N c . Noting the dependency between ∆ C i and N c , we first compute the conditional density of 1 k k i α Γ = ∑ , ( | ) k c f s N n Γ = for k < n − 1 and n ≥ 3 . APPENDIX D ( Continued ) 66 16 A . A . Savachkin , N . O . Bakir and A . Uribe - Sanchez Note that ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 , , | d , 1 d , 1 ( ) ( 1 ) d , ( 1 ) ! ( 2 ) ! ( ) / ( 1 ) ! ( ) / ( 1 ) ! k k n n c s n n k n i i n s i i k n n k n k s n n n k n k k P s u f s N n u P P s P u P u u P s u s u u P k n k s n k s s k α α α α α α α α α α α α α α α α α − Γ − − = = + − − − − − − − − − Γ = Γ = Γ > = = Γ ≤ Γ > ⎛ ⎞ ⎛ ⎞ = = = > − ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟ Γ ≤ Γ > ⎝ ⎠ ⎝ ⎠ − = + − Γ ≤ Γ > − − − − − − − − = − ∫ ∑ ∑ ∫ ∫ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 1 ( ) ! / ( 1 ) ! / ! n n n k n n α α − ⎡ ⎤ − ⎢ ⎥ ⎢ ⎥ − − ⎣ ⎦ We use this conditional density to compute ( | ) k c E N n Γ = as follows : ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 ( ) / ( 1 ) ! ( ) / ( ) ! | d ( 1 ) ! / ( 1 ) ! / ! ! 1 ( ) ( ) d ( ) d ! ( ) ! n k n k k k c n n k n k k n k n n s n k s n k s E N n s k n n n k n k a s s s s s s k n k n α α α α α α α α α α α − − − − − − − + − − − ⎡ ⎤ − − − − − − ⎢ ⎥ Γ = = ⎢ ⎥ − − − ⎣ ⎦ ⎡ ⎤ = − − − + − ⎢ ⎥ ⎣ ⎦ − − ∫ ∫ ∫ Making a variable change t = s / α , we see both integrals are beta functions and rearrange the expression ( ) 1 1 ! 1 | ( ) ( 1 , ) ( 2 , ) ! ( ) ! 1 ( , ) ( ) ( ( / ) 1 ) 1 n n k c n n k n E N n k n k B k n k B k n k k n k n k k n k h n n k n n αα α α α α α α α + − ⎡ ⎤ Γ = = − − + − + + − ⎣ ⎦ − − + ⎡ ⎤ = − − + = ⎢ ⎥ − − + ⎣ ⎦ ( A4 ) Note that ( A4 ) holds for k < n − 1 and n ≥ 3 . For k = n − 1 and n ≥ 2 ( ) ( ) ( ) 1 1 1 ( ) | , n n n c n n f s P s f s N n P α α α α − − Γ Γ − > − = = Γ ≤ Γ > Using the above expression , we eventually obtain ( ) ( ) ( ) 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 | ( 1 ) d ( 2 ) ! / ( 1 ) ! / ! ( 1 ) ( 1 ) ( , ) 1 n n c n n n n n n s E N n s s n n n n n h n n n n α α α α α α α α α α − − − + − Γ = = − + − − − ⎡ ⎤ − = − + = ⎢ ⎥ + − ⎣ ⎦ ∫ ( A5 ) APPENDIX D ( Continued ) 67 Random capacity disruptions in a production system 17 Equation ( 5 ) gives ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 1 1 2 1 1 2 2 1 1 2 2 1 2 | 1 | ( 1 ) | | c c Nc N N i Z i i j c i i j n i c c i j c n i j n c i i c n i c i n E C E C E X X N n P N n C P N n E X N n n C P N n E X E N n C P N n n E N α α λ λ α λ λ λ − ∗ = = = ∞ − ∗ = = = ∞ ∗ − = = ∗ ∞ − = ⎛ ⎞ ⎛ ⎞ = − = ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟ ⎝ ⎠ ⎝ ⎠ ⎡ ⎤ ⎧ ⎫ = ⎛ ⎞ ⎪ ⎪ = = − = + ⎢ ⎥ ⎨ ⎜ ⎟⎬ ⎪ ⎪ ⎢ ⎥ ⎝ ⎠ ⎩ ⎭ ⎣ ⎦ ⎡ ⎤ − ⎧ ⎫ = = − Γ = + ⎨ ⎬ ⎢ ⎥ ⎩ ⎭ ⎣ ⎦ = = − Γ ∑ ∑∑ ∑ ∑∑ ∑ ∑ ∑ ( ) 2 ( 1 ) . n c i n α = ⎡ ⎤ ⎧ ⎫ = + − ⎨ ⎬ ⎢ ⎥ ⎩ ⎭ ⎣ ⎦ ∑ Finally , substituting Equations ( A4 ) and ( A5 ) , we obtain ( ) ( ) ( ) 2 3 1 ( , ) ( , ) ( ) 2 ( 2 ( 2 , ) ) ( 1 ) Nc n Z c k n k c C E C P N n n h n h n C C P N h α α λ α α α λ ∗ ∞ − = = ∗ ⎡ ⎧ ⎫ = = − − ⎨ ⎬ ⎢ ⎩ ⎭ ⎣ ⎤ + = − + − = ⎦ ∑ ∑ where ( ) C α is defined as ( ) ( ) 2 3 1 ( ) ( , ) ( , ) 2 ( 2 ( 2 , ) ) ( 1 ) n c k c n k C P N n n h n h n P N h α α α α α ∞ − = = ⎧ ⎫ = = − − + = − + − ⎨ ⎬ ⎩ ⎭ ∑ ∑ . APPENDIX D ( Continued ) 68 APPENDIX E : PUBLICATION 4 : A PREDICTIVE DECISION AID METHODOLOGY FOR DYNAMIC MITIGATION OF INFLUENZA PANDEMICS In this appendix , we present the version of the manuscript “A Predictive Decision Aid Methodology for Dynamic Mitigation of Inﬂuenza Pandemics” currently in the second round of review in the special issue on “Optimization in Disaster Relief ” in the OR Spectrum by Springer Publisher . The co - authors , Dr . Alex Savachkin , Alfredo Santana , Diana Prieto , and Dr . Tapas Das , authorized to include this document in my dissertation . Springer Publisher retains the copyright of this manuscript . The written authorization from the publisher to include the paper in my Ph . D . dissertation is attached in Appendix A . 69 A Predictive Decision Aid Methodology for Dynamic Mitigation of Inﬂuenza Pandemics Andr´es Uribe - S´anchez Alex Savachkin ∗ Alfredo Santana Diana Prieto - Santa Tapas K . Das Department of Industrial and Management Systems Engineering University of South Florida , Tampa , FL 33620 October 4 , 2010 Abstract The Institute of Medicine has recently pointed out the need for dynamic mitigation strategies for pandemic inﬂuenza . We present a large - scale simulation - based optimization methodology for devel - oping dynamic predictive mitigation strategies for a network of regional pandemic outbreaks . The methodology incorporates varying virus epidemiology and population dynamics , and generates a progressive allocation of a limited resource budget to procure vaccines and antivirals , their adminis - tration capacities , and resources to enforce social distancing . The methodology considers measures of morbidity , mortality , and social distancing , translated into the societal and economic costs of lost productivity and medical expenses . The model was calibrated using historic pandemic data and implemented on a sample cross - regional outbreak in Florida , U . S . , involving over four million inhabitants . We present a sensitivity analysis for estimating the marginal impact of changes in the total budget availability and variability of some critical mitigation parameters . The methodology is intended to assist public health policy makers . Keywords : pandemic inﬂuenza , mitigation , dynamic , vaccination , antiviral , social distancing . ∗ Corresponding author : 4202 E . Fowler Ave . , ENB118 , Tampa , FL , USA , tel : + 1 - 813 - 974 - 5577 , e - mail : alexs @ usf . edu APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 70 1 1 Motivation Pandemic inﬂuenza ( PI ) outbreaks have historically entailed enormous societal calamities aggravated by tremendous economic forfeitures . Since 2003 , scattered outbreaks of the avian - to - human transmittable H5N1 virus have been appearing through Asia , the Paciﬁc region , Africa , Europe , and the Near East [ 1 ] . As of December 2009 , the World Health Organization ( WHO ) has reported 447 conﬁrmed H5N1 infected cases which resulted in 263 mortalities worldwide [ 2 ] . Although instances of H5N1 human - to - human transmission have rarely shown up in the recent statistics , ever - mutating emerging virus strains with unpredictable epidemiology pose a menacing threat to the humankind . A milder human - to - human transmissible H1N1 virus subtype resurfaced in Mexico in the Spring of 2009 and swiftly propagated to a global H1N1 pandemic outbreak . As of late December 2009 , 208 countries have been aﬀected with a total number of mortalities of at least 11 , 516 [ 3 ] . Most experts have an ominous expectation that the next pandemic will likely be caused by an emerging highly pathogenic virus subtype , to which there is little or no preexisting immunity in humans [ 4 ] . Combating inﬂuenza pandemic outbreaks requires an understanding of real - time evolution of virus epidemiology and population dynamics . The practicality and eﬀectiveness of mitigation strategies also heavily depend on available emergency response infrastructure , mitigation resources , and allocation policies . At present , although the most commonly studied virus strain H5N1 has reached a worldwide case fatality ratio of more than 60 % in recent years [ 2 ] , prediction of the exact emerging virus subtype remains a challenging task . With modern technology , even after a new virus subtype is identiﬁed , a surge production of adequate stockpiles of a potent vaccine can take up to six months [ 5 , 6 ] . This may prove to be forbiddingly long for the vaccine to be an eﬀective mitigation resource in the critical onset stage of a pandemic . In the best case scenario , even if the emerged subtype has a known epidemiology , the existing stockpiles would be insuﬃcient [ 7 , 8 ] . Furthermore , supply of antiviral drugs , immunizers and other healthcare providers , hospital beds , resources to enforce social distancing , and logistics will also be substantially constrained . Hence , development of mitigation strategies must be done amidst limited knowledge of disease and population dynamics , constrained infrastructure , and limited availability and eﬀectiveness of clinical treatments . This challenge , attested by the recent H1N1 outbreak , has been acknowledged by WHO [ 8 ] and echoed by national public health authorities , including the U . S . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) [ 9 , 10 ] . 2 Status of Current Literature The existing general literature on pandemic modeling aims to address various aspects of the pandemic process including ( i ) underlying spatio - temporal structure , ( ii ) contact mechanism , ( iii ) disease trans - mission , ( iv ) disease natural history , and ( v ) development of containment and mitigation strategies . These aspects are closely interrelated . For instance , the nature of the spatio - temporal structure , in - cluding composition of the social mixing groups and temporal dynamics of the aﬀected population , drives the contact process which is the main determinant of the disease transmission [ 11 – 14 ] . A com - prehensive decision - aid model for containment and mitigation must take into account all of the above constituents ; it must incorporate the mechanism of disease progression , from initial infection , to asymp - APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 71 2 tomatic earlier phase , symptom manifestation , and ﬁnal health outcome ( recovery or death ) [ 15 – 17 ] ; it must also consider the population dynamics of disease spread , including individual susceptibility [ 18 , 19 ] , transmissibility [ 15 , 20 – 22 ] , and human behaviors that mediate infection generation [ 23 – 26 ] ; ﬁnally , it must incorporate the impact of pharmaceutical and non - pharmaceutical prevention and in - tervention , including vaccination , antiviral therapy , social distancing , school and workplace closures , travel restrictions , and use of low - cost measures , such as face masks and hand washing [ 14 , 17 , 27 – 33 ] . In essence , eﬀective mitigation strategies have a two - fold objective : ( i ) systemically to alter the disease dynamics and control disease progression with available clinical therapies , and ( ii ) to alter the social dynamics and contain disease propagation within the aﬀected communities . Mitigation strategies vary in the composition of the target groups , geo - spatial coverage , and implementation time . The current literature on assessment and development of PI containment and mitigation strategies can be broadly classiﬁed into ( i ) statistical models , ( ii ) mathematical models , ( iii ) simulation - based approaches , and ( iv ) combinations of thereof . In what follows , we present a summary survey of these approaches , mostly focusing on the simulation - based approaches . The statistical models , driven mainly by likelihood or regression - based approaches , have primarily been used for epidemiological parameter assessment and estimation of the pandemic impact [ 22 , 34 , 35 ] . Traditionally , these models have inherently featured relatively simple and general spatio - temporal structures ( e . g . , homogeneous social mixing groups [ 21 , 36 – 38 ] ) . The mathematical models have mostly focused on modeling virus spread and policy assessment . Notable examples of such models are dynamic compartmental approaches , typically represented in the form of a set of diﬀerential equations , which delineate transitions between disease phases ( e . g . , susceptible , exposed , symptomatic infected , etc . ) [ 11 , 39 – 41 ] . Based on the solution approach , the mathematical models can be subdivided into analytical ( or closed form ) and iterative . Compared to the statistical models , the dynamic - iterative models feature more granular composition of the mixing groups [ 11 , 33 , 42 ] . However , the degree of granularity is still limited since any additional spatio - temporal considerations can negatively impact the computational robustness of the models . Description of the contact processes in mathematical models generally does not take into account changes in the behavioral patterns during the course of the pandemic ( e . g . , compliance to intervention by vaccination and social distancing ) [ 39 – 41 ] . Consideration of behavioral aspects can be found in some of the recent simulation - based models [ 43 – 46 ] . Furthermore , mathematical models are typically based on the infection pathways and disease progression that are invariant to time and individual attributes [ 40 , 41 ] . The simulation - based approaches have been used for modeling virus spread and assessment and generation of pharmaceutical and / or non - pharmaceutical interventions . Based on the way of generating disease progression , these models can be categorized as those that track infection pathway of each individual entity [ 13 , 27 , 47 – 51 ] and the rest that are driven by occurrence of infection events [ 14 , 31 ] . In contrast to the statistical and mathematical models , the simulation models are capable of providing most detailed description of population dynamics whereby each individual can be assigned a set of attributes ( e . g . , age , gender , community , etc ) , that can be modiﬁed without altering the general model structure [ 47 , 52 ] . However , such comprehensive descriptive granularity is achieved at the expense of higher data demand and substantial computational burden . As a result , most existing simulation - based APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 72 3 approaches incorporate statistical and / or mathematical submodels ( e . g . , for infection generation ) in order to attain an eﬀective balance between model accuracy and practicality [ 47 , 51 ] . In recent years , the simulation - based models have focused on integration of therapeutical and non - therapeutical prevention and intervention , to develop synergistic strategies aimed at result - oriented use of constrained resources . These approaches ﬁrst aim to implement a form of social distancing to reduce the contact between the susceptible and the infected . The infected population is then treated with an antiviral therapy to reduce infectiousness , and the susceptible are vaccinated to increase their immunity . For example , [ 14 ] implemented social distancing for all contacted and symptomatic cases followed by antiviral application . Such strategies , which appear to be more discriminating and thus less expensive , have been found to be particularly eﬃcient for low transmissibility scenarios ( i . e . , scenarios with the values of the basic reproduction number below 1 . 8 [ 48 , 53 ] ) . Most notable among recent eﬀorts is a 2006 - 2007 initiative by MIDAS , the Models of Disease In - fectious Agent Study network , which studied three independent simulation models [ 54 ] . These models were used to emulate large - scale PI spread for rural areas of Asia [ 48 , 55 ] , U . S . and U . K . [ 13 , 49 ] , and the city of Chicago [ 56 ] . MIDAS cross - validated the models by simulating the city of Chicago , with 8 . 6M inhabitants , and implementing targeted layered containment ( TLC ) . Under TLC , the symp - tomatic infectious cases refrain from going to work ( take liberal leave ) , receive antiviral treatment , and become subject to household quarantine ; the asymptomatic contacts receive targeted antiviral prophy - laxis ( TAP ) and become subject to household quarantine . The research ﬁndings of the MIDAS network and other institutions [ 17 , 31 ] were used in a recent “Modeling Community Containment for Pandemic Inﬂuenza” report by the Institute of Medicine ( IOM ) , U . S . , to formulate a set of recommendations for mitigating PI at the local level [ 57 ] . These recommendations were used in a pandemic preparedness guidance developed jointly by CDC , HHS , and other federal U . S . agencies [ 58 ] . The IOM report [ 57 ] points out several limitations of the MIDAS models , observing that “ because of the signiﬁcant constraints placed on the models ” being considered by policy makers , “ the scope of models should be expanded . ” The IOM recommends that “ steps be taken now to adapt or develop decision - aid models that can be readily linked to surveillance data to provide real - time feedback during an epidemic . Research protocols should be developed , approved , and put in place now to generate the information needed during an outbreak to inform models , and improve their disease sub - models . ” The report also strongly recommends 1 ) “ that future modeling eﬀorts incorporate broader outcome measures . . . to include the costs and beneﬁts of intervention strategies ” , and 2 ) “ that models examining the potential eﬀectiveness of school and workplace closures on mitigating pandemic inﬂuenza include a broader range of closure options . ” We add here that most current approaches focus on assessment of policies deﬁned apriori ; few of the existing models for design of synergistic mitigation strategies are “learning” , i . e . , capable of predicting of and adapting to changes in the course of a pandemic , and ultimately generating a dynamic optimal strategy [ 51 ] . Furthermore , the majority of the current simulation models feature a single - region design ( see Appendix , Table 1 ) . In [ 51 ] , we developed a simulation - based optimization model for generating mitigation strategies for cross - regional pandemic outbreaks . The model was implemented on a sample outbreak and the resultant strategy was compared to the existing governmental pro - rata distribution policy , which allocates mitigation resources to each APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 73 4 aﬀected region in proportion to its population [ 59 ] . In this paper , we present a novel decision - aid methodology for developing dynamic predictive mit - igation strategies for a network of regional pandemic outbreaks . The methodology is driven by a large - scale simulation - based dynamic optimization model that incorporates varying virus epidemiology and region - speciﬁc population dynamics . The model generates mitigation strategies for an eﬃcient , pro - gressive allocation of limited resources , including stockpiles of vaccines and antiviral drugs , healthcare capacities for administration of vaccination and antiviral therapy , and social distancing enforcement re - sources . The optimization control seeks dynamically to minimize the impact of ongoing outbreaks and the expected impact of potential outbreaks , and allocates the resources accordingly . The methodology considers measures of morbidity , mortality , and social distancing , translated into the cost of lost pro - ductivity and medical expenses ( societal and economic costs ) . The model was calibrated using historic pandemic data and tested on a sample cross - regional outbreak in Florida , U . S . , with over four million inhabitants . We also present a sensitivity analysis for estimating the marginal impact ( measured in terms of the average total pandemic cost and the average number of fatalities ) of changes in the total budget availability and variability of some critical decision factors . These factors included : ( i ) vaccine eﬃcacy , ( ii ) eﬃcacy of antiviral therapy , ( iii ) social distancing conformance level , ( iv ) social distancing declaration threshold , and ( v ) social distancing period . Compared to our previous work in [ 51 ] , this paper features the following main advances : ( i ) in [ 51 ] , progressive resource allocations are irrevocable , i . e . , once resources are allocated to an aﬀected region , they remain in the region until full depletion , regardless of the posterior dynamics of the overall pandemic ; in contrast , our model is capable of re - allocating the resources remaining from the previous distributions , based on the current pandemic status , and thus achieving a more eﬃcient resource uti - lization ; ( ii ) our model incorporates the cost of the resources ( e . g . , vaccines , antiviral , etc . ) and strives to allocate a total available budget , as opposed to a separate allocation of total available quantities of individual resources , which vary signiﬁcantly in their relative cost and eﬀectiveness ; ( iii ) our model investigates optimal policy generation under two scenarios of virus severity : low transmissibility and high transmissibility , as opposed to a high transmissibility analysis in [ 51 ] ; ( iv ) our study attempts to analyze the aﬀect of social distancing policies ( namely , the target population conformance ) on the dynamics of societal and economic costs ; ( v ) in this paper , we also present a short description of our decision - aid simulation software made freely available to general public through our website . This paper has the following organization . In Section 3 , we present our simulation - based opti - mization methodology , including description of the population dynamics and disease transmission , the mechanism of disease progression , and therapeutical and non - therapeutical intervention , followed by description of the calibration methodology for single - region and cross - regional simulation models , and presentation of the optimization control model . In Section 4 , results of the testbed implementation are presented , followed by discussion of the sensitivity analysis . Conclusions are given in Section 5 . APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 74 5 3 Simulation - Based Optimization Model Our large - scale simulation - based optimization model generates predictive strategies to allocate a total available budget of mitigation resources over a network of regional pandemic outbreaks , progressively , from one aﬀected region to the next . Mitigation resources include stockpiles of vaccine ( s ) and antiviral drug ( s ) , hospital beds , capacities for vaccination and antiviral administration , social distancing en - forcement resources , among others . The methodology combines a cross - regional simulation model , a set of single - region simulation models , and an overarching dynamic optimization control . Figure 1 : Schematic of simulation - based optimiza - tion methodology The regions inside the network are classiﬁed as unaﬀected , ongoing outbreak ( which includes new outbreak ) , and contained ( see Fig . 1 ) . The re - gions are interconnected by air and land travel , which is emulated by the cross - regional model . The single - region model mimics the population and disease dynamics inside each ongoing region , impacted by available pharmaceutical and non - pharmaceutical prevention and intervention . The pandemic spreads from ongoing to unaﬀected re - gions by infectious travelers who pass through re - gional border control . At every new regional out - break episode ( epoch ) , the cross - regional model invokes the optimization control , which allocates the total available resource budget , including re - maining resources from the previous allocations , to the new / ongoing outbreak regions ( actual allo - cation ) and potential ( unaﬀected ) outbreak regions ( virtual allocation ) . The objective function of the optimization model incorporates measures of morbidity , mortality , and social distancing , translated into the cost of lost productivity and medical expenses . The objective function strives to minimize the total cost of the new / ongoing outbreaks and the expected cost of the potential outbreaks , spreading from the ongoing regions . Detailed daily pandemic statistics are collected for each aﬀected region , including the numbers of new infected , deceased , and quarantined cases , for diﬀerent age groups . As the regional outbreaks become contained , the model estimates their actual societal and economic costs . In the remainder of this section , we present the details of the cross - regional simulation model ( Sec - tion 3 . 1 ) and the single - region simulation model ( Section 3 . 2 ) , including the description of the calibra - tion methodology ( Section 3 . 3 ) . The dynamic optimization control model is presented in Section 3 . 4 , followed by analysis of the results of the testbed implementation in Section 4 . 3 . 1 Cross - Regional Simulation Model The cross - regional simulation model emulates propagation of the pandemic across the network of af - fected regions . It controls a set of single - region simulation models of ongoing outbreaks and invokes the optimization model for actual and virtual resource allocation at every new outbreak epoch . The APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 75 6 schematic of the cross - regional simulation model is presented in Fig . 2 . Figure 2 : Schematic of cross - regional simulation model The model is initialized by generating mixing groups and population dynamics for each network region ( for details , see Section 3 . 2 . 1 ) . A pandemic is triggered by injecting one or more infectious cases into a randomly selected region , designated as the initial outbreak region . Details associated with the resulting contact dynamics and disease propagation within the region are presented in Section 3 . 2 . As the symptomatic cases start seeking medical assistance , the new regional outbreak is detected . At this point , the model calls the optimization control which generates a resource allocation ( see Section 3 . 4 ) . The cross - regional simulation then passes control back to the single - region model , which executes a cycle ( e . g . , daily ) of the regional disease and population dynamics , now mediated by the allocated clinical therapies and social distancing measures ( see Section 3 . 2 ) . The simulation clock inside the single - region routine advances in smaller time increments ( e . g . , hourly ; see Section 4 ) . As the outbreak intensiﬁes , it spreads over to the unaﬀected regions , as infectious travelers pass undetected through air and land border control with some probability ( the probabilities are diﬀerent for asymptomatic and symptomatic cases ) . Travelers are considered to act independently . Each infectious traveler is assumed to initiate a regional outbreak with an equal , time - homogeneous probability ω for the entirety of his / her infection period , regardless of his / her point of origin . For each unaﬀected region , the outbreak probability at time t > 0 , P t , is calculated using the binomial probability law , as follows P t = 1 − ( 1 − ω ) n t , ( 1 ) where n t denotes the number of infectious travelers in the region at time t . Based on the outbreak probability value , the cross - regional model determines which of the unaﬀected regions have become new outbreaks ( in the testbed implementation , the values of P t were computed once at the end of each day ) . The model also determines if an outbreak has been contained , based on a certain threshold of the daily infection rate . The cross - regional simulation ends when all outbreaks have been contained . APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 76 7 3 . 2 Single - Region Simulation Model The single - region simulation model emulates population and disease dynamics within an aﬀected region . Figure 3 : Schematic of single - region simulation model A schematic of the model is shown in Fig . 3 . The model sub - sumes the following main compo - nents : ( i ) population dynamics , ( ii ) contact and infection process , ( iii ) disease natural history , and ( iv ) mitigation prevention and in - tervention , including measures of social distancing , vaccination , and antiviral application . The model collects detailed regional inﬂuenza statistics , including numbers of in - fected , recovered , deceased , and quarantined cases , for diﬀerent age groups . For a contained outbreak , its societal and economic costs are calculated . The societal cost includes the cost of lost lifetime productivity of the deceased ; the economic cost includes the cost of medical expenses of the recovered and deceased and the cost of lost productivity of the quarantined ( see Section 4 . 1 . 3 ) . The single - region simulation model builds upon a prototype presented in [ 47 ] . At any point of time , the population of an ongoing region is assumed to be composed of the fol - lowing exclusive compartments : susceptible , contacted , infected , recovered , and deceased ( see Fig . 4 ) . Figure 4 : Schematic of the disease progression model During the course of his / her social in - teraction , a susceptible individual may periodically come into contact with in - fectious cases . The contacted individual then either becomes infected with a cer - tain probability p or returns to the com - partment of susceptibles . An infected case then either dies with a certain prob - ability m or recovers . It is further assumed that a recovered person develops immunity and cannot be susceptible again . All recovered cases continue circulating through the mixing groups . In what follows , we present the details of the main components of the single - region simulation model . 3 . 2 . 1 Population Dynamics We model a region as a set of population centers composed of mixing groups of various types , in - cluding households , oﬃces , manufacturing facilities , universities , schools , churches , shopping centers , entertainment centers , etc . A household consists of household members , each of which is assigned a comprehensive set of attributes including age , gender , parenthood , workplace , immunity status , infec - tion susceptibility , probability of travel , and others . Each inhabitant is also assigned ∆ t time - discrete APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 77 8 ( e . g . , ∆ t = 1 hour ) weekday and weekend schedules , which depend on a number of factors , including : ( i ) age and parenthood , ( ii ) inhabitant’s disease status , ( iii ) travel status , ( iv ) social distancing decrees in place , and ( v ) inhabitant’s conformance to them . As their schedules advance , inhabitants circulate throughout the mixing groups , staying a certain amount of time in each of them . 3 . 2 . 2 Contact and Infection Processes Disease transmission occurs through contact events between infectious and susceptible individuals within the mixing groups . At the beginning of each period ∆ t ( e . g . , one hour ) , for each mixing group g , the simulation model tracks the total number of infectious cases n g present in the group . Each infectious case randomly generates r g per ∆ t unit of time new contacts , uniformly , from the susceptible cases present in the mixing group . We assume the following simplifying characterization of the contact process : ( i ) during ∆ t period , a susceptible may come into contact with at most one infectious case and ( ii ) each contact exposure lasts ∆ t units of time . Once a susceptible has started a contact exposure at time t , he / she will develop into an infectious case at time t + ∆ t with a certain probability that is calculated as shown below . Let L i ( t ) be a nonnegative continuous random variable that represents the duration of contact exposure , starting at time t , that is required for a contact i to become infected . We assume that L i ( t ) follows an exponential distribution with parameter λ i ( t ) , where λ i ( t ) represents the instantaneous force of infection applied to contact i at time t [ 42 , 60 , 61 ] . The probability that a susceptible i , whose contact exposure has started at time t , will develop into an infectious case at time t + ∆ t is then given as P { L i ( t ) ≤ ∆ t } = 1 − e − λ i ( t ) ∆ t . ( 2 ) 3 . 2 . 3 Disease Natural History Figure 5 : Schematic of disease natural history model It is assumed that upon becoming infected , an individual enters simultaneously into the phases of latency and incubation ( see Fig - ure 5 ) . During the incubation phase , the in - dividual stays asymptomatic ( i . e . , shows no visible symptoms ) . At the end of the latency phase , the individual becomes infectious and enters the infectious phase [ 49 , 54 , 55 , 62 ] . At the end of the incubation period , the in - dividual becomes symptomatic . At the conclusion of the infectious period , the individual enters the ﬁnal disease stage which culminates in his / her recovery or death . Mortality for inﬂuenza like diseases is a complex process , which is aﬀected by a number of factors and variables . For most of these variables , little or no accurate data has been collected from past pandemics . In addition , the time of death could oftentimes be weeks following the disease episode ( mainly attributable to subsequent pneumonia related complications [ 63 ] ) . Because of the uncertainty underlying the mortality process , we adopted a simpliﬁed , age - based form of the mortality probabilities , APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 78 9 where the mortality probability of infected i , m i is given as m i = µ i − τρ i , ( 3 ) where µ i is the age - dependent base mortality probability of infected i , ρ i is his / her status of antiviral treatment ( 0 or 1 ) , and τ is the eﬃcacy of the antiviral therapy , measured in terms of the reduction in the base mortality probability [ 55 ] . 3 . 2 . 4 Mitigation Strategies Mitigation prevention and intervention considered in the single - region model include pharmaceutical and non - pharmaceutical measures . Implementation of the mitigation measures is initiated upon de - tection of the ﬁrst conﬁrmed infected case [ 64 ] . At this point , mitigation resources are assigned ( see Section 3 . 4 ) and deployed in the region . The model considers a certain outbreak detection delay and a delay for deployment of ﬁeld responders . Pharmaceutical mitigation . Pharmaceutical prevention and intervention consist of vaccination and antiviral application . Vaccines are oﬀered to the individuals from a prespeciﬁed risk group , to reduce their infection susceptibility . It is assumed that a certain fraction of the risk group will not comply with vaccination . Once administered , the vaccine takes a certain period to become eﬀective ( typically , be - tween 10 and 14 days ) [ 65 ] . Vaccination is constrained by the available stockpile and the administration capacity , measured in terms of the number of immunizer - hours . For antiviral application , we assume that a certain fraction of symptomatic infected cases will seek medical assistance [ 66 , 67 ] . Those of them who belong to a prespeciﬁed mortality risk group , receive an antiviral treatment , to reduce their mortality probability ( see Eq . 3 ) . It is assumed that an antiviral becomes eﬀective immediately . The antiviral application is subject to availability of the antiviral stockpile and the administration capacity , measured in terms of the number of certiﬁed nurses . Both the antiviral application and vaccination are aﬀected by a number of social behavioral factors , including conformance of the target population , its degree of risk perception , and associated compliance of healthcare personnel [ 68 – 70 ] . The conformance level of the target population could be aﬀected by the demographical proﬁle of the region [ 71 – 75 ] and quality of the public information available [ 76 ] , among other factors . The degree of risk perception of the target population could be impacted by a negative experience developed during pharmaceutical campaigns of the previous outbreaks [ 77 , 78 ] , as well as by public fear and rumors [ 79 , 80 ] . Non - pharmaceutical mitigation . For a social distancing mediation , we adopted a guidance suggested by CDC , U . S . [ 58 ] . The guidance establishes ﬁve categories of pandemic severity ( from 1 to 5 ) and recommends diﬀerent quarantine and closure policies for each of the categories . The categories are determined based on the value of the case fatality ratio ( CFR ) , the cumulative proportion of the number of fatalities in the total infected population . Our simulation model periodically reassesses the CFR value during the pandemic course . For the CFR values lower than 0 . 1 % ( which corresponds to Category 1 ) , voluntary at - home isolation of the infected cases is implemented . If the CFR falls in the range between 0 . 1 % and 1 . 0 % ( Categories 2 and 3 ) , in addition to the above at - home isolation , the following measures are recommended : ( i ) voluntary quarantine of households members of infected APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 79 10 cases and ( ii ) child and adult social distancing . Finally , for the CFR values exceeding 1 . 0 % ( Categories 4 and 5 ) , all the above measures are implemented . Alike pharmaceutical measures , the eﬀectiveness of social distancing mitigation is also aﬀected by several of the behavioral factors mentioned above [ 76 ] . Our model considers a certain social distancing conformance level , which can vary based on the demographics proﬁle . Travel restrictions considered in the model included regional air and land border control for outgoing infected travelers ( for details , see the testbed implementation in Section 4 ) . 3 . 3 Calibration Methodology The single - region simulation model was calibrated using two commonly accepted measures of pandemic severity : the basic reproduction number ( R 0 ) and the infection attack rate ( IAR ) . R 0 is deﬁned as the average number of secondary infections , produced by a typical infected case in a totally susceptible population . Our model with its a detailed , person - to - person infection generation traceability allows identiﬁcation of all secondary infections created by each infected case . All infected cases are then classiﬁed by generation of infection , as in [ 31 , 48 ] , where a generation is deﬁned as the set of all infected cases ( oﬀsprings ) that are at the same tier of descent from their infection generators ( ancestors ) [ 61 ] . The value of R 0 is then calculated as the average reproduction number of a typical generation in the early stage of the pandemic when no interventions are implemented ( known as the baseline scenario ) . Our model was calibrated to attain the baseline values of R 0 similar to those obtained from historic pandemic data [ 48 , 53 ] ( see Section 4 . 1 . 2 ) . IAR is deﬁned as the ratio of the total number of infections over the pandemic period to the size of the initial susceptible population . To further calibrate our model , we used the following relationship between baseline R 0 and IAR , as presented in [ 14 , 61 ] : R 0 = − ln ( 1 − IAR ) IAR , for R 0 ≥ 1 , 0 < IAR < 1 . ( 4 ) Section 4 . 1 . 2 of this paper provides the details of the calibration process for a sample testbed scenario . 3 . 4 Optimization Model The optimization model is invoked at every new outbreak epoch to allocate the total available resource budget , including remaining resources from the previous allocations , to the new / ongoing outbreak regions ( actual allocation ) and potential outbreak regions ( virtual allocation ) . By doing so , the model seeks to progressively minimize the impact of ongoing outbreaks and the expected impact of potential outbreaks . Mitigation resources include stockpiles of vaccine ( s ) and antiviral drug ( s ) , hospital beds , capacities for vaccination and antiviral administration , social distancing enforcement resources , among others . The objective function of the optimization model incorporates measures of morbidity , mortality , and social distancing , translated into the cost of lost productivity and medical expenses . In what follows , we present the details of the model . We introduce the following notation . S = the set of all regions , A n = the set of regions in which pandemic is contained at the n th outbreak epoch ( n = 1 , 2 , . . . ) , B n = the set of ongoing regions at the n th outbreak epoch , APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 80 11 C n = the set of unaﬀected regions at the n th outbreak epoch , M n = budget availability at the n th outbreak epoch , R = the set of available types of mitigation resources ( R = { 1 , 2 , . . . , r } ) , c i = unit cost of type i resource , i ∈ R , ˆ q ni = amount of resource i remaining from previous allocations , at the n th outbreak epoch . Let TC nk denotes the total cost of an outbreak in region k at the n th outbreak epoch . The total cost is a function of the decision variables q nik which denote the amount of resource i allocated to region k at the n th outbreak epoch . We assume that outbreaks occur one at a time . At the n th new outbreak epoch in region j , the following optimization problem is invoked Min TC nj ( q n 1 j , q n 2 j , . . . , q nrj ) + X l ∈ B n \ { j } TC nl ( q n 1 l , q n 2 l , . . . , q nrl ) + X s ∈ C n TC ns ( q n 1 s , q n 2 s , . . . , q nrs ) · p ns subject to X i ∈ R c i · q n ij + X l ∈ B n \ { j } X i ∈ R c i · q nil + X s ∈ C n X i ∈ R c i · q nis · p ns − X i ∈ R c i · ˆ q ni ≤ M n q nij + X l ∈ B n \ { j } q n il + X s ∈ C n q n is · p n s ≥ ˆ q n i , ∀ i ∈ R . In the above objective function , the ﬁrst term represents the total cost of the new outbreak in region j , estimated at the n th outbreak epoch , and based on the actual resource allocation { q n 1 j , q n 2 j , . . . , q nrj } . The second term represents the total cost of ongoing outbreaks , excluding region j , which is ( re ) estimated at the n th outbreak epoch , based on the current pandemic status ( for details , see below ) . This cost is a function of the allocation { q n 1 l , q n 2 l , . . . , q nrl } , which may include amounts remaining from previous allocations . The third term represents the total expected cost of outbreaks in currently unaﬀected regions , based on the virtual allocation ( q n 1 s , q n 2 s , . . . , q nrs ) and the regional outbreak probabilities p ns . The ﬁrst model constraint relates the total available budget with the value of the current actual and virtual resource allocations , adjusted with the value of the resources remaining from the previous allocations . The second set of constraints guarantee that the needs of the current actual and vir - tual allocations will ﬁrst be satisﬁed using the resources remaining from the previous allocations ( the outstanding resource needs will then be fulﬁlled from the remaining budget ) . The total cost of an outbreak in region k at the n th outbreak epoch is calculated as following TC nk = X h ∈H ( m h + ¯ w h ) X nhk + X h ∈H ¯ w h · Y nhk + X h ∈H ˆ w h · D nhk + X h ∈H w h · V nhk + X h ∈H ˆ m h · U nhk , ( 5 ) where H = the set of age groups , m h = total medical cost of an infected case in age group h over his / her disease period , ˆ m h = total medical cost of an uninfected case in age group h over the pandemic period , ¯ w h = total cost of lost wages of an infected case in age group h over his / her disease period , ˆ w h = cost of lost lifetime wages of a deceased case in age group h , w h = daily cost of lost wages of a non - infected case in age group h who complies with quarantine , X nhk = total number of infected cases in age group h who seek medical assistance , APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 81 12 Y nhk = total number of infected cases in age group h who do not seek medical assistance , D nhk = total number of deceased cases in age group h , V nhk = total number of person - days of cases in age group h who comply with quarantine , U nhk = total number of uninfected cases in age group h . Variables X nhk , Y nhk , D nhk , V nhk , and U nhk are deﬁned for region k at the n th outbreak epoch . We determine the value of X nhk using the following regression model X nhk = δ 0 hk + X i ∈ R δ ihk · q ik + X i , m ∈ R , i 6 = m δ imhk · q ik · q mk , ( 6 ) where δ i ·· denotes the regression coeﬃcient associated with resource i , and δ im ·· is the regression coeﬃcient for the interaction between resources i and m . Similar expressions are used for Y hk , D hk , and V hk . U nhk is obtained by subtracting X n hk from the total population of the region at the n th outbreak epoch . We have that p nk = X l ∈ B n p nlk , where p nlk denotes the outbreak probability in region k , caused by an ongoing outbreak in region l , estimated at the n th outbreak epoch . This probability is considered to be a function of the resource allocation for region l at the n th outbreak epoch , and is calculated using the following regression model p nlk = γ 0 lk + X i ∈ R γ ilk · q il + X i , m ∈ R i 6 = m γ imlk · q il · q ml , ( 7 ) where γ i ·· denotes the regression coeﬃcient associated with resource i , γ im ·· is the regression coeﬃcient associated with interaction between resources i and m , and γ 0 ·· represents the intercept . 3 . 5 Simulation Optimization Algorithm Below we present the algorithm for the simulation optimization model . 1 . Estimate regression equations for all regions using the single - region simulation model ( Eq . 6 , 7 ) . 2 . Set n = 1 . Initialize sets of regions : A n = ∅ , B n = ∅ , C n = S . 3 . Select randomly the initial outbreak region j . 4 . Update sets of regions : B n ← B n ∪ { j } and C n ← C n \ { j } . 5 . Solve the resource allocation model for region j . Update the total budget availability . 6 . If B n 6 = ∅ , do Step 7 . Else , do Step 9 . 7 . ( a ) For each ongoing region , implement a next day run of its single - region simulation . ( b ) Check the containment status of each ongoing region . Update sets A n and B n , if needed . ( c ) For each unaﬀected region , calculate its outbreak probability . ( d ) Based on the outbreak probability values , determine if there is a new outbreak region ( s ) j . If there is no new outbreak ( s ) , go to Step 6 . Otherwise , go to Step 8 . 8 . For each new outbreak region j , APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 82 13 ( a ) Increment n ← n + 1 . ( b ) Update sets B n ← B n ∪ { j } and C n ← C n \ { j } . ( c ) Re - estimate regression equations for each region k ∈ B n ∪ C n using the single - region simu - lations , where each simulation is initialized to the current outbreak status in the region . ( d ) Determine the remaining availability of the previously allocated resources . ( e ) Solve the resource allocation model for each region k ∈ B n . ( f ) Update the total budget availability . 9 . Calculate the total cost ( Eq . 5 ) for each contained region and update the overall pandemic cost . 4 Testbed Illustration A sample cross - regional outbreak scenario included a network of four counties in Florida , U . S . : Hills - borough , Miami Dade , Duval , and Leon , with populations of 1 . 0 , 2 . 2 , 0 . 8 , and 0 . 25 million people , respectively . The H5N1 virus subtype was considered . A basic unit of time ∆ t for people’s schedules , contact dynamics , infection transmission , disease natural history , and implementation of interventions was taken to be one hour ( see Fig . 3 and Eq . 2 ) . Each regional simulation was run for a period ( up to 185 days ) until the number of new daily infections approached near zero ( see Section 4 . 1 . 3 ) . 4 . 1 Model Parameter Values This section presents the details on selecting parameter values for cross - regional and single - region models , including parameters of population and disease dynamics , calibration , and mitigation . 4 . 1 . 1 Parameters of Population and Disease Dynamics Demographic and social dynamics data for each of the regions was extracted from the U . S . Census [ 81 ] and the National Household Travel Survey [ 82 , 83 ] ( see Appendix , Tables 2 - 4 ) . Compositions of the regional mixing groups are shown in Appendix , Tables 5 - 8 [ 83 ] . In these tables , column 1 and 2 show the mixing group type and the number of mixing groups for each type , respectively . Column 3 shows the probability distribution among the types for assigning the workplaces of inhabitants . Columns 4 - 6 show the probability distribution among the types for assigning the weekday after - work errands , weekend errands , and errands during quarantine ( see § 4 . 1 . 3 ) , respectively . The last column contains the hourly contact rates for each mixing group type . The hourly schedules [ 83 ] were adopted from [ 47 ] . Each infected individual was assigned a daily travel probability of 0 . 24 % [ 82 ] , of which 7 % was by air and 93 % by land transportation . The origin - destination travel probabilities within the network of four regions were calculated based on the traﬃc volume data [ 84 – 87 ] ( see Appendix , Table 9 ) . Infection detection probabilities for regional border controls for symptomatic cases were assumed to be 95 % and 90 % [ 88 ] , for air and land transportation , respectively . These values were reduced by 70 % for asymptomatic travelers [ 88 ] . Travel bans were implemented for all detected infectious cases . An undetected infectious traveler was assumed to trigger a regional outbreak in his / her destination with a APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 83 14 time - homogeneous probability ω = 0 . 001 during his / her infectiousness period . The regional outbreak probabilities P t were calculated once at the end of each day using Eq . 1 . The instantaneous force of infection applied to contact i at time t ( λ i ( t ) in Eq . 2 ) was modeled as λ i ( t ) = − ln ( 1 − p i ( t ) ) , where p i ( t ) = α i − δθ i ( t ) , ( 8 ) Figure 6 : λ i ( t ) vs . p i ( t ) where α i is the age - dependent base instantaneous infec - tion probability of contact i , θ i ( t ) is his / her status of vac - cination at time t ( taken as 0 or 1 ) , and δ is the vaccine eﬃcacy , measured in terms of the reduction in the base in - stantaneous infection probability ( achieved after 10 days [ 65 ] ) . Note that , as p i ( t ) increases , the instantaneous force of infection λ i ( t ) grows at an increasing rate ( see Fig . 6 ) . The age - dependent base instantaneous infection probabil - ities were adopted from [ 49 ] ( see Appendix , Table 10 ) . The disease natural history for H5N1 virus subtype was taken as the following : a latent period of 29 hours , an incubation period of 46 hours , and an infectiousness period between 29 and 127 hours [ 89 ] . The values of the base mortality probability of infected case i , µ i ( Eq . 3 ) , were determined using the statistics recommended by the Working Group on Pandemic Preparedness and Inﬂuenza Response [ 90 ] . This data shows the percentage of mortality for age - based high - risk groups ( see Appendix , Table 11 , columns 1 - 3 ) . For the testbed scenario , the mortality probabilities for diﬀerent age groups ( Appendix , Table 11 , column 4 ) were estimated using the assumption that high - risk cases are expected to account for 85 % of the total number of fatalities , for each age group [ 90 ] . 4 . 1 . 2 Calibration of the Single - Region Models The single - region simulation models were calibrated against R 0 and IAR ( see Section 3 . 3 ) , using hourly contact rates within mixing groups . Original contact rates were adopted from [ 49 ] . These contact rates were adjusted to obtain the baseline values of R 0 similar to those estimated from past outbreaks [ 48 , 53 ] , for both high and low transmissibility scenarios ( see Appendix , Table 12 for a sample of contact rates ) . Figure 7 : Estimation of R 0 ( Hillsborough ) The values of R 0 were estimated for each re - gion using the average reproduction numbers for generations of infection , as presented in [ 31 , 48 ] , over multiple replicates ( e . g . , see Fig . 7 for the Hillsborough County ) . As the ﬁgure illustrates , generations 5 through 8 ( the solid line ) and gener - ations 7 to 9 ( the dotted line ) represent “typical” [ 31 ] or representative infectious cases , born in the early stage of the pandemic , when most of the re - gional population is susceptible . For the purpose of computing the value of R 0 , earlier generations were disregarded , as they were composed of a limited number of infected cases with highly variable individual reproduction numbers . APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 84 15 Historically , R 0 values for PI range between 1 . 4 and 3 . 9 , where PI with R 0 ≤ 1 . 8 are considered as of low transmissibility and PI with 2 . 2 ≤ R 0 ≤ 3 . 9 as of high transmissibility [ 48 , 53 ] . Henceforth , the R 0 value of 2 . 538 for the high transmissibility testbed ( Fig . 7 , solid line ) and 1 . 525 for the low transmissibility testbed ( Fig . 7 , dotted line ) were taken , for the Hillsborough County ( other regions had similar R 0 values ) . These values corresponded to the simulated IARs of 0 . 881 and 0 . 538 , respectively . Note that from the theoretical relationship in Eq . 4 , IAR of 0 . 881 and 0 . 538 yield R 0 of 2 . 426 and 1 . 435 , respectively . Thus , the simulated R 0 numbers show a good match with the theoretical approximations . 4 . 1 . 3 Mitigation Related Parameters The mitigation resources considered in the testbed included stockpiles of vaccines and antiviral , ad - ministration capacities for vaccination and antiviral therapy , and quarantine enforcement resources ( required to achieve a targeted social distancing conformance level ) . We assumed a 24 - hour CDC resource deployment delay once the ﬁrst infection case is conﬁrmed [ 64 ] . Pharmaceutical measures . The vaccination risk group included individuals younger than 5 years and older than 65 years [ 91 ] . The risk group for antiviral application included individuals below 15 years and above 55 years [ 91 , 92 ] . The eﬃcacy levels for the vaccine , δ ( in Eq . 8 ) and antiviral , τ ( in Eq . 3 ) were assumed to be 40 % [ 55 , 93 ] and 30 % , respectively . See Section 4 . 2 . 2 for a sensitivity analysis on both parameters . We assumed a 95 % target population conformance for both measures . The immunity development period for the vaccine was taken as 10 days [ 65 ] ; the antiviral was assumed to become eﬀective immediately . Table 13 summarizes vaccination and antiviral treatment resource requirements for each region along with resource costs [ 94 – 96 ] and the total budget requirement . Non - pharmaceutical measures . A simpliﬁed version of the CDC guidance for non - pharmaceutical interventions for Category 5 was implemented ( see Section 3 . 2 . 4 , [ 58 ] ) . Once the case fatality ratio has reached 1 . 0 % in the aﬀected region , a social distancing policy is declared and remains in eﬀect for 14 days [ 58 ] . Individuals below a prespeciﬁed age ξ ( 22 years ) were assumed to stay at home during the quarantine period . Of the remaining population , a certain proportion φ [ 97 ] stayed at home and was allowed a one - hour leave , every three days , to buy essential supplies . The remaining ( 1 − φ ) non - compliant proportion followed a regular schedule . All testbed scenarios considered the quarantine conformance level φ ( a decision variable ) bounded between 50 % and 80 % [ 76 , 97 ] . An outbreak was considered contained , if the daily new infections did not exceed ﬁve cases , for seven consecutive days . Once contained , a region was simulated for an additional 10 days [ 98 ] to allow an accurate estimation of the pandemic statistics . The costs of lost productivity and medical expenses were adopted from [ 90 ] and inﬂation - adjusted using [ 99 ] ( see Appendix , Table 14 ) . The medical costs of uninfected arising from the use of face masks and preventive medicine were not considered . The optimization model was based on regression equations re - estimated at every outbreak epoch . For each region , we developed a 2 5 statistical design of experiment , to estimate the regression coeﬃ - cients of the signiﬁcant decision variables ( factors ) and their interactions . To ease the very signiﬁcant computational burden , the testbed implementation considered allocation decisions only for new out - break regions . The simulation code was written in C + + and run on a Pentium IV with a 3 . 40 GHz CPU and 4 . 0 GB RAM . The running time for a cross - regional simulation replicate averaged 20 minutes . APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 85 16 4 . 2 Sensitivity Analysis This section presents a sensitivity analysis for assessing the marginal impact of changes in the total budget availability and variability of some of the critical factors , for both low and high transmissibility scenarios . The marginal impact was measured separately by the change in the total pandemic cost and the number of mortalities ( averaged over multiple replicates ) , resulting from a unit change in the total budget availability or a factor value , one at a time . Factors under consideration included : ( i ) antiviral eﬃcacy , ( ii ) vaccine eﬃcacy , ( iii ) social distancing conformance , ( iv ) social distancing declaration threshold , and ( v ) social distancing period . We also investigated the aﬀect of varying the social distancing conformance on the dynamics of the societal and economic costs . 4 . 2 . 1 Total Budget Availability Figures 8 ( a ) and 8 ( b ) show the dynamics of the pandemic impact , measured as the average number of fatalities and total cost , for diﬀerent levels of the total budget availability relative to the total budget requirement ( see Appendix , Table 13 ) . ( a ) ( b ) Figure 8 : Sensitivity analysis on total budget availability ( measured in terms of the average number of deaths ( a ) and the average total cost ( b ) ) As expected , the curves for the average number of deaths and total cost exhibit a downward trend , for both transmissibility scenarios , as the total budget availability increases . An increased budget trans - lates into higher availabilities of mitigation resources , which will mediate regional pandemic impact and reduce the probability of spread to unaﬀected regions . As also expected , a higher virus transmissibility generates more infections which , in turn , result into more fatalities and , subsequently , bigger societal and economic costs . As the budget availability approaches the budget requirement ( starting from ap - proximately 60 % ) , both impact curves show a converging behavior , for both scenarios , whereby the marginal impact of additional resource availability decreases . This can be explained by noting that the total budget requirement was calculated assuming the worst case scenario where all regions are aﬀected and provided with adequate resources to cover their respective populations at risk . APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 86 17 4 . 2 . 2 Antiviral Eﬃcacy Figures 9 ( a ) and 9 ( b ) show the behavior of the two impact measures for the level of the antiviral eﬃcacy ( τ in Eq . 3 ) between 10 % and 20 % , and a ﬁxed level of the total budget availability ( 50 % of the total requirement ) . ( a ) ( b ) Figure 9 : Sensitivity analysis on antiviral eﬃcacy ( measured in terms of the average number of deaths ( a ) and the average total cost ( b ) ) As expected from Eq . 3 , for both transmissibility scenarios , the two curves exhibit a decreasing trend which is approximately linear in the range of τ between 10 % and 15 % . As the value of τ approaches the value of the maximum base mortality probability ( approximately 16 % for the elderly risk group ) , the resultant eﬀective mortality probability tends to zero , which explains the converging behavior of the curve representing the total number of mortalities . The total cost curve exhibits a similar pattern . 4 . 2 . 3 Vaccine Eﬃcacy Both impact measure curves exhibit a downward trend as the vaccine eﬃcacy ( δ in Eq . 8 ) increases between 20 % and 35 % , with a ﬁxed level of the total budget availability ( 50 % of the total requirement ) ( a ) ( b ) Figure 10 : Sensitivity analysis on vaccine eﬃcacy ( measured in terms of the average number of deaths ( a ) and the average total cost ( b ) ) APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 87 18 ( see Fig . 10 ( a ) and 10 ( b ) ) . For lower transmissibility , the marginal utility of the vaccine eﬃcacy is less signiﬁcant which can be explained by noting that such scenarios generate fewer infections and consequently , the overall impact of a more eﬀective vaccine is less pronounced . 4 . 2 . 4 Social Distancing Conformance Level Reduction of the contact intensity through social distancing has long proven to be one of the most eﬃcient mitigation mechanisms . Figures 11 ( a ) and 11 ( b ) show the dynamics of the average number of fatalities and total cost for diﬀerent levels of the social distancing conformance . The analysis was conducted for conformance levels between 50 % and 80 % . ( a ) ( b ) Figure 11 : Sensitivity analysis on social distancing conformance ( measured in terms of the average number of deaths ( a ) and the average total cost ( b ) ) For both transmissibility scenarios , the two curves exhibit a downward trend , which can be attributed to a reduced contact intensity associated with higher conformance . The trends are steeper for higher transmissibility scenarios which are characterized by more intensive social dynamics within the mixing groups . The reduction in the contact intensity gets ampliﬁed throughout generations of infection within the aﬀected region and , more importantly , leads to reduced probabilities of spread to unaﬀected regions . ( a ) ( b ) Figure 12 : Sensitivity analysis on social distancing conformance ( societal ( a ) and economic cost ( b ) ) APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 88 19 Figures 12 ( a ) and 12 ( b ) show the dynamics of the total cost broken into the societal and economic components . The societal cost for the two scenarios generally decreases with quarantine conformance as a consequence of generating fewer infections and deaths ( and hence , smaller lost productivity ) during the quarantine period . For higher transmissibility , the marginal impact of the conformance level is more pronounced due to the eﬀect of amplifying reduction in contact intensity explained above . A similar behavior can be observed for the economic cost which incorporates the cost of medical expenses of the recovered / deceased ( over the entire pandemic period ) and the cost of lost productivity of the quarantined individuals ( during the social distancing period ) . 4 . 2 . 5 Social Distancing Declaration Threshold Figures 13 ( a ) and 13 ( b ) show the dynamics of the impact measures for diﬀerent levels of the social distancing declaration threshold , measured in terms of the CFR ( see Section 4 . 1 . 3 ) . The analysis was conducted for the CFR values between 0 . 2 % and 1 . 0 % . ( a ) ( b ) Figure 13 : Sensitivity analysis on social distancing declaration threshold ( measured in terms of the average number of deaths ( a ) and the average total cost ( b ) ) For both scenarios , the trends are increasing since later declaration leads to a growth in the number of infected and dead . It can also be observed that for higher transmissibility , the curves reach saturation starting from CFR of approximately 0 . 55 % . This can be explained by noting that in this case , the time diﬀerence in quarantine declaration using CFR values between 0 . 55 % and 1 . 0 % is insigniﬁcant . 4 . 2 . 6 Social Distancing Period Figures 14 ( a ) and 14 ( b ) show the dynamics of the average number of fatalities and total cost for values of the social distancing period between 10 and 14 days [ 58 ] . Similar to the analysis for the social distancing conformance level ( see Section 4 . 2 . 4 ) , for both transmissibility scenarios , the two curves exhibit a decreasing trend : once the case fatality ratio reaches a signiﬁcant value of 1 . 0 % , social distancing becomes the most eﬃcient containment measure . From this point , any additional quarantine days ( starting from 10 and up to 14 total days [ 58 ] ) will reduce both the contact intensity during the quarantine period and also the size of the post - quarantine infectious population . APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 89 20 ( a ) ( b ) Figure 14 : Sensitivity analysis on social distancing period ( measured in terms of the average number of deaths ( a ) and the average total cost ( b ) ) Based on our methodology , we have also developed a decision - aid simulator with a GUI which is made freely available to general public through our web site at http : / / imse . eng . usf . edu / pandemics . aspx . The simulator allows the input of data for regional demographic and social dynamics , and disease related parameters ( see Appendix , Fig . 15 ) . It is intended to assist public health decision makers in conducting customized what - if analysis for assessment of mitigation options and development of policy guidelines . Examples of such guidelines include targeted risk groups for vaccination and antiviral treatment , social distancing policies ( e . g . , thresholds for declaration and lifting , closure options ( i . e . , household - based , schools , etc . ) , and compliance targets ) , and guidelines for travel restrictions . 5 Conclusions The decision - aid methodology presented in this paper incorporates varying virus epidemiology and region - speciﬁc population dynamics . The model supports development of mitigation strategies for an eﬃcient , progressive allocation of a limited resource budget over a network of regional outbreaks . The model seeks to dynamically minimize the impact of ongoing outbreaks and the expected impact of potential outbreaks , spreading from the ongoing regions . The methodology considers measures of morbidity , mortality , and social distancing , translated into the societal and economic costs of lost productivity and medical expenses . As our analysis shows , for both transmissibility scenarios , starting with the budget availability of approximately 60 % , the marginal impact of additional resources steadily decreases . This can be ex - plained by observing that while the total budget requirement was determined assuming that all regions would be aﬀected , our dynamic predictive allocation generally decreases the probability of spread from the ongoing regions , which in turn reduces the actual resource need . The analysis also shows that compared to high transmissibility , the marginal utility of the vaccine eﬃcacy for low transmissibility is less signiﬁcant due to a relatively smaller infected population , which makes the overall impact of a more eﬀective vaccine less pronounced . We have observed that the overall pandemic cost is signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the social distancing conformance , particularly for higher transmissibility scenarios charac - APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 90 21 terized by more intense social interactions . A higher degree of social distancing conformance leads to a reduction in the contact intensity within the aﬀected region . This further reduces the probabilities of spread to unaﬀected regions . We have also observed that later declaration of social distancing leads to a growth in the number of infected and dead . Moreover , for both transmissibility scenarios , longer social distancing period ( from 10 to 14 days [ 58 ] ) signiﬁcantly reduces the pandemic cost by decreasing both the contact intensity and the size of the post - quarantine infectious population . To the best of our knowledge , the presented methodology is one of the ﬁrst attempts to oﬀer a dynamic predictive decision - aid tool , which incorporates measures of both societal and economic im - pact . Compared to the existing models , such as [ 51 ] , this model makes the following contributions : ( i ) the model is capable of re - allocating the resources remaining from the previous distributions , based on the current pandemic status , and thus achieves a more eﬃcient resource utilization ; ( ii ) the model incorporates the costs of the resources and aims to allocate a total available budget , as opposed to allocating available quantities of individual resources , which vary in their relative cost and eﬀective - ness ; ( iii ) the testbed implementation considers optimal policy generation under both low and high transmissibility scenarios ; ( iv ) ﬁnally , the paper attempts to investigate the dynamics of the societal and economic costs under varying social distancing policies . In addition , the simulation represents one of the ﬁrst of its kind in incorporating a broader range of social behavioral aspects . The simulation model features a ﬂexible design which can be particularized to an even broader range of pharmaceutical and non - pharmaceutical interventions and more granular mixing groups . The developed methodology is intended to assist public health decision makers in development of dynamic strategies for mitigation of large - scale cross - regional pandemic outbreaks . APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 91 22 6 Appendix Single region ( SR ) / Author , year Cross regional ( CR ) Model objective Key features Ferguson et al . , 2005 [ 48 ] , Ferguson et al . , 2006 [ 13 ] SR ( Thailand , 2005 ) , SR ( U . S . & UK , 2006 ) Model PI spread & assess mitigation strategies - 85M Thailand , 300M US , 58 . 1M UK - Use of GIS ( Landscan ) - Use of targeted mass prophylaxis and social distancing - A set of homogeneous mixing groups Glass et al . , 2006 [ 31 ] SR ( small town in New Mexico , U . S . ) Examine role of social dis - tancing - Targeted social distancing - Fixed , small - scale contact network - Time between infection events follows an exponential distribution Germann et al . , 2006 [ 49 ] SR ( U . S . ) Assess mitigation strategies - 281M inhabitants ( 2000 U . S . census data ) divided in 2000 - person communities - Sensitivity analysis on R 0 from 1 . 6 to 2 . 4 Wu et al . , 2006 [ 14 ] SR ( Hong Kong ) Test diﬀerent intervention scenarios - Natural history includes pre - symptomatic cases - Use of household - based interventions - Need for signiﬁcant stocks of antiviral drugs Colizza et al . , 2007 [ 23 , 100 ] CR ( global ) Model worldwide spread of a pandemic - Use of an air travel network - Diverse urban centers - Use of compartmental models ( SLIR ) - Analysis of antiviral and travel restrictions Halloran et al . , 2008 [ 54 ] SR ( Chicago ) Cross - validate tar - geted layered contain - ment models ( Fergu - son / Germann / Eubank ) - 8 . 6M people - R 0 from 1 . 9 to 3 . 0 - Assessment of intervention strategies Cooley et al . , 2007 [ 101 ] SR ( North Carolina , U . S . ) Compare a simulated pan - demic curve against real - life data - Use of 2003 - 04 North Carolina data - Use of ILI data to estimate model parameters Das , Savachkin & Zhu , 2008 [ 47 ] SR Mimic stochastic propagation of PI and assess mitigation strategies - Large - scale model ( 1 . 1M ) - Detailed schedules for inhabitants - Heterogeneous mixing groups Savachkin et al . , 2010 [ 51 ] CR ( Florida , U . S . ) Model PI spread & assess comprehensive dynamic mit - igation strategies - Dynamic predictive large - scale simulation - based optimization methodology - 4M people testbed - Use of vaccination , prophylaxes , and social distancing STEM - Eclipse , 2009 [ 102 ] CR ( global ) Model worldwide PI spread - Geographic visualization of PI spread - Use of SIR model - Limited to land transportation Table 1 : A summary of simulation - based PI containment and mitigation models APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 92 23 Adult Population Distribution by Age Age Group \ Region Hillsborough Miami Dade Duval Leon 23 - 29 0 . 16 0 . 15 0 . 16 0 . 24 30 - 64 0 . 67 0 . 66 0 . 69 0 . 63 65 - 99 0 . 17 0 . 19 0 . 15 0 . 13 Table 2 : Distribution of regional adult population by age [ 81 ] Children Population Distribution by Age Age Group \ Region Hillsborough Miami Dade Duval Leon 0 - 5 ( pre - school ) 0 . 24 0 . 22 0 . 24 0 . 16 6 - 9 ( elementary school ) 0 . 23 0 . 23 0 . 25 0 . 17 10 - 14 ( middle school ) 0 . 25 0 . 25 0 . 23 0 . 17 15 - 17 ( high school ) 0 . 13 0 . 14 0 . 14 0 . 10 18 - 22 ( college ) 0 . 15 0 . 16 0 . 14 0 . 40 Table 3 : Distribution of regional children population by age [ 81 ] Household Type Regional Population by Household Type # Adults # Children Hillsborough Miami Dade Duval Leon 1 0 0 . 28 0 . 25 0 . 27 0 . 30 1 1 0 . 04 0 . 04 0 . 04 0 . 04 2 0 0 . 31 0 . 26 0 . 30 0 . 32 1 2 0 . 04 0 . 05 0 . 05 0 . 04 2 1 0 . 13 0 . 15 0 . 14 0 . 13 1 3 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 01 2 2 0 . 13 0 . 15 0 . 13 0 . 11 1 4 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 00 2 3 0 . 06 0 . 08 0 . 06 0 . 04 Table 4 : Distribution of regional population by households [ 81 ] Mixing Group Number Distribution Distribution of Distribution of Distribution of Hourly ( MG ) Type of MG of Workplaces Weekday Errands Weekend Errands Quarantine Errands Contact Rate Home 1 0 . 066 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 800 1 . 500 Factory 613 0 . 058 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 750 Oﬃce 2 , 266 0 . 302 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 750 Pre - school 224 0 . 005 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 1 . 050 Elementary school 66 0 . 010 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 2 . 573 Middle school 134 0 . 203 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 3 . 750 High school 59 0 . 097 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 3 . 750 College 46 0 . 106 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 3 . 750 Afterschool center 256 0 . 007 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 1 . 500 Grocery store 390 0 . 026 0 . 619 0 . 515 0 . 100 0 . 375 Restaurant 223 0 . 087 0 . 278 0 . 256 0 . 000 0 . 375 Entertainment center 360 0 . 032 0 . 066 0 . 116 0 . 000 0 . 375 Church 86 0 . 001 0 . 037 0 . 113 0 . 100 0 . 375 Table 5 : Composition of mixing groups , Hillsborough County [ 82 ] APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 93 24 Mixing Group Number Distribution Distribution of Distribution of Distribution of Hourly ( MG ) Type of MG of Workplaces Weekday Errands Weekend Errands Quarantine Errands Contact Rate Home 1 0 . 092 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 800 1 . 500 Factory 1 , 353 0 . 035 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 750 Oﬃce 2 , 880 0 . 128 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 750 Pre - school 188 0 . 010 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 1 . 050 Elementary school 246 0 . 188 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 2 . 573 Middle school 84 0 . 098 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 3 . 750 High school 82 0 . 116 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 3 . 750 College 59 0 . 206 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 3 . 750 Afterschool center 507 0 . 006 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 1 . 500 Grocery store 942 0 . 025 0 . 619 0 . 515 0 . 100 0 . 375 Restaurant 3 , 935 0 . 085 0 . 278 0 . 255 0 . 000 0 . 375 Entertainment center 758 0 . 011 0 . 066 0 . 116 0 . 000 0 . 375 Church 266 0 . 000 0 . 037 0 . 113 0 . 100 0 . 375 Table 6 : Composition of mixing groups , Miami Dade County [ 82 ] Mixing Group Number Distribution Distribution of Distribution of Distribution of Hourly ( MG ) Type of MG of Workplaces Weekday Errands Weekend Errands Quarantine Errands Contact Rate Home 1 0 . 049 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 800 1 . 500 Factory 519 0 . 063 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 750 Oﬃce 2 , 880 0 . 313 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 750 Pre - school 74 0 . 006 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 1 . 050 Elementary school 116 0 . 170 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 2 . 572 Middle school 35 0 . 083 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 3 . 750 High school 30 0 . 087 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 3 . 750 College 21 0 . 112 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 3 . 750 Afterschool center 245 0 . 006 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 2 . 000 Grocery store 320 0 . 024 0 . 619 0 . 515 0 . 100 1 . 500 Restaurant 1 , 474 0 . 074 0 . 278 0 . 255 0 . 000 0 . 375 Entertainment center 244 0 . 012 0 . 066 0 . 116 0 . 000 0 . 375 Church 77 0 . 001 0 . 037 0 . 113 0 . 100 0 . 375 Table 7 : Composition of mixing groups , Duval County [ 82 ] Mixing Group Number Distribution Distribution of Distribution of Distribution of Hourly ( MG ) Type of MG of Workplaces Weekday Errands Weekend Errands Quarantine Errands Contact Rate Home 1 0 . 072 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 800 1 . 50 Factory 103 0 . 012 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 750 Oﬃce 1 , 093 0 . 212 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 750 Pre - school 20 0 . 008 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 1 . 050 Elementary school 30 0 . 106 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 2 . 573 Middle school 15 0 . 051 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 3 . 750 High school 14 0 . 064 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 3 . 750 College 9 0 . 374 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 3 . 750 Afterschool center 60 0 . 005 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 1 . 500 Grocery store 52 0 . 021 0 . 619 0 . 515 0 . 100 0 . 375 Restaurant 512 0 . 069 0 . 278 0 . 255 0 . 000 0 . 375 Entertainment center 73 0 . 006 0 . 066 0 . 116 0 . 000 0 . 375 Church 16 0 . 002 0 . 037 0 . 113 0 . 100 0 . 375 Table 8 : Composition of mixing groups , Leon County [ 82 ] Inter - Regional Travel Probability Origin \ Destination Hillsborough Miami Dade Duval Leon Hillsborough 0 . 00 0 . 60 0 . 27 0 . 13 Miami Dade 0 . 74 0 . 00 0 . 16 0 . 10 Duval 0 . 61 0 . 29 0 . 00 0 . 10 Leon 0 . 52 0 . 31 0 . 17 0 . 00 Table 9 : Inter - regional travel probabilities [ 84 – 87 ] APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 94 25 Age Group 0 - 5 6 - 19 20 - 29 31 - 65 66 - 99 α i 0 . 156 0 . 106 0 . 205 0 . 195 0 . 344 Table 10 : Instantaneous infection probability for diﬀerent age groups ; adopted from [ 49 ] Age Group % High - Risk Cases % Death for High - Risk Cases Mortality Probability 0 - 19 6 . 4 9 . 0 0 . 007 20 - 64 14 . 4 40 . 9 0 . 069 65 + 40 . 0 34 . 4 0 . 162 Table 11 : Mortality probability for diﬀerent age groups [ 90 ] Mixing group Hourly contact rate Home 1 . 50 Factory 0 . 75 Oﬃce 0 . 75 Preschool 1 . 05 Elementary school 2 . 57 Middle school 3 . 75 High school 3 . 75 University 3 . 75 Afterschool center 1 . 50 Grocery store 0 . 38 Restaurant 0 . 38 Entertainment center 0 . 38 Church 0 . 38 Table 12 : Hourly contact rates by mixing group ( Hillsborough County , high transmissibility scenario ) ; adopted from [ 49 ] Resource Requirements by Region Required Region Hillsb . Miami D . Duval Leon Total Cost of Budget by ( population ) ( 1 , 007 , 916 ) ( 2 , 209 , 702 ) ( 852 , 168 ) ( 248 , 761 ) ( 4 , 318 , 547 ) Resource Resource Resource Vaccine stock 305 , 036 679 , 181 241 , 522 76 , 007 1 , 301 , 745 $ 8 . 48 / dose $ 11 , 038 , 800 Antiviral stock 415 , 294 749 , 058 460 , 393 105 , 307 1 , 730 , 052 $ 60 / dose $ 103 , 803 , 140 No . nurses ( antiv . ) 650 1 , 104 786 166 2 , 706 $ 27 / hr 8 hr / day , 50 days $ 29 , 226 , 975 No . nurses ( vacc . ) 1 , 059 2 , 358 839 264 4 , 520 $ 27 / hr 8 hr / day , 14 days $ 13 , 668 , 326 Total Budget Requirement $ 157 , 737 , 241 Table 13 : Regional resource and budget requirements [ 94 – 96 ] APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 95 26 Pandemic Impact Measure ( age group , years ) Value US $ Average cost of lost lifetime productivity of a deceased case ( 0 - 19 ) $ 1 , 336 , 347 . 86 Average cost of lost lifetime productivity of a deceased case ( 20 - 64 ) $ 1 , 370 , 987 . 28 Average cost of lost lifetime productivity of a deceased case ( 65 - 99 ) $ 98 , 959 . 24 Average cost of lost productivity and medical expenses of a recovered / deceased case ( 0 - 19 ) $ 5 , 078 . 48 Average cost of lost productivity and medical expenses of a recovered / deceased case ( 20 - 64 ) $ 10 , 466 . 68 Average cost of lost productivity and medical expenses of a recovered / deceased case ( 65 - 99 ) $ 11 , 566 . 09 Average daily cost of lost productivity of a non - infected quarantined case ( 20 - 99 ) $ 432 . 54 Table 14 : Values of pandemic impact measures ( societal and economic costs ) [ 90 , 99 ] Figure 15 : A snapshot of the decision - aid simulator GUI Acknowledgments We would like to acknowledge with thanks the many helpful suggestions made by Prof . Yiliang Zhu , Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics at the University of South Florida , Tampa , FL , USA . APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 96 27 References [ 1 ] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) . Avian inﬂuenza : Current H5N1 situation . http : / / www . cdc . gov / flu / avian / outbreaks / current . htm # clusters , 2008 . Last accessed on 02 / 09 / 2008 . [ 2 ] World Health Organization ( WHO ) . Cumulative number of conﬁrmed human cases of Avian Inﬂuenza A ( H5N1 ) reported to WHO . http : / / www . who . int / csr / disease / avian _ influenza / country / cases _ table _ 2010 _ 07 _ 05 / en / index . html , 2010 . [ 3 ] World Health Organization . Pandemic ( H1N1 ) 2009 - update 107 . http : / / www . who . int / csr / don / 2010 _ 07 _ 02 / en / index . html , 2010 . Last accessed on 07 / 08 / 2010 . [ 4 ] Arthur Schoenstadt . Spanish Flu . http : / / flu . emedtv . com / spanish - flu / spanish - flu . html , 2009 . Last accessed on 12 / 15 / 2009 . [ 5 ] D . S . Fedson and S . Hant . Pandemic inﬂuenza and the global vaccine supply . Clinical Infectious Deseases , 36 : 1552 – 1561 , 2003 . [ 6 ] J . G . Aunins , A . L . Lee , and D . B . Volkin . Vaccine production . Boca Raton : CRC Press LLC , 2 edition , 2000 . [ 7 ] World Health Organization . Pandemic ( h1n1 ) 2009 vaccine deployment update - 17 decem - ber 2009 . http : / / www . who . int / csr / disease / swineflu / vaccines / h1n1 _ vaccination _ deployment _ update _ 20091217 . pdf , 2009 . [ 8 ] WHO Global Inﬂuenza Programme . Pandemic Inﬂuenza Preparedness and Response . Technical report , World Health Organization , 2009 . [ 9 ] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) . Preparing for Pandemic Inﬂuenza . http : / / www . cdc . gov / flu / pandemic / preparedness . htm , 2007 . Last accessed on 04 / 27 / 2009 . [ 10 ] U . S . Department of Health & Human Services . HHS pandemic inﬂuenza plan . http : / / www . hhs . gov / pandemicflu / plan / , 2007 . Last accessed on 03 / 27 / 2009 . [ 11 ] R . Larson . Simple models of inﬂuenza progression within a heterogeneous population . Operations Research , 55 ( 399 - 412 ) : 165 – 195 , 2007 . [ 12 ] M . E . Halloran , I . M . Longini , A . Nizam , and Y . Yang . Containing bioterrorist smallpox . Science , 298 : 1428 – 1432 , 2002 . [ 13 ] N . Ferguson , D . A . Cummings , C . Fraser , J . Cajka , Philip Cooley C . , and D . S . Burke . Strategies for mitigating an inﬂuenza pandemic . Nature , 442 ( 27 ) : 448 – 452 , 2006 . [ 14 ] J . T . Wu , S . Riley , C . Fraser , and G . Leung . Reducing the impact of the next inﬂuenza pandemic using household - based public health interventions . PLoS Med , 3 ( 9 ) : 1532 – 1540 , 2006 . [ 15 ] A . Handel , I . Longini , and R . Antia . Towards a quantitative understanding of the within - host dynamics of inﬂuenza A infections . Epidemics , 1 ( 3 ) : 185 – 195 , 2009 . [ 16 ] B . Pourbohloul , A . Ahued , B . Davoudi , R . Meza , L . A . Meyers , D . M . Skowronski , I . Villase˜nor , F . Galv´an , P . Cravioto , D . J . D . Earn , et al . Initial human transmission dynamics of the pandemic ( H1N1 ) 2009 virus in North America . Inﬂuenza Other Respi Viruses , 3 ( 5 ) : 215 – 222 , 2009 . APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 97 28 [ 17 ] M . Atkinson and L . Wein . Quantifying the Routes of Transmission for Pandemic Inﬂuenza . Bulletin of Mathematical Biology , 70 ( 3 ) : 820 – 867 , 2008 . [ 18 ] V . E . Pitzer , S . J . Olsen , C . T . Bergstrom , S . F . Dowell , and M . Lipsitch . Little evidence for genetic suscep - tibility to inﬂuenza A ( H5N1 ) from family clustering data . Emerg Infect Dis , 13 ( 7 ) : 1074 – 1076 , 2007 . [ 19 ] V . E . Pitzer , G . M . Leung , and M . Lipsitch . Estimating variability in the transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome to household contacts in Hong Kong , China . American journal of epidemiology , 166 ( 3 ) : 355 – 359 , 2007 . [ 20 ] Y . Yang , J . D . Sugimoto , M . E . Halloran , N . E . Basta , D . L . Chao , L . Matrajt , G . Potter , E . Kenah , and I . M . Longini Jr . The transmissibility and control of pandemic inﬂuenza A ( H1N1 ) virus . Science , 326 ( 5953 ) : 729 – 733 , 2009 . [ 21 ] Y . Yang , M . E . Halloran , J . Sugimoto , and I . M . Longini Jr . Detecting human - to - human transmission of avian inﬂuenza A ( H5N1 ) . Emerg Infect Dis , 13 ( 9 ) : 1348 – 1353 , 2007 . [ 22 ] S . Cauchemez , F . Carrat , C . Viboud , A . Valleron , and P . Boelle . A Bayesian ( MCMC ) approach to study transmission of inﬂuenza : application to household longitudinal data . Statist . Med . , 23 : 3469 – 3487 , 2004 . [ 23 ] V . Colizza , A . Barrat , M . Barthelemy , and A . Vespignani . The role of the airline transportation network in the prediction and predictability of global epidemics . PNAS , 103 : 2015 – 2020 , 2006 . [ 24 ] J . M . Epstein , J . Parker , D . Cummings , and R . A . Hammond . Coupled contagion dynamics of fear and disease : mathematical and computational explorations . PLoS One , 3 ( 12 ) , 2008 . [ 25 ] J . M . Epstein , D . M . Goedecke , F . Yu , R . J . Morris , D . K . Wagener , and G . V . Bobashev . Controlling pan - demic ﬂu : the value of international air travel restrictions . PLoS One , 2 ( 5 ) , 2007 . [ 26 ] M . E . Halloran . Invited commentary : Challenges of using contact data to understand acute respiratory disease transmission . American Journal of Epidemiology , 164 ( 10 ) : 945 , 2006 . [ 27 ] I . M . Longini , M . E . Halloran , A . Nizam , and Y . Yang . Containing pandemic inﬂuenza with antiviral agents . Am J Epidemiol , 159 ( 7 ) : 623 – 633 , 2004 . [ 28 ] Y . Yang , M . E . Halloran , and I . M . Longini Jr . A Bayesian model for evaluating inﬂuenza antiviral eﬃcacy in household studies with asymptomatic infections . Biostatistics , 10 ( 2 ) : 390 , 2009 . [ 29 ] Y . Tang , I . Longini , and M . Halloran . Design and evaluation of prophylactic interventions using disease incidence data from close contact groups . Applied Statistics , 55 ( 3 ) : 317 – 330 , 2006 . [ 30 ] D . O . Scharfstein , M . E . Halloran , H . Chu , and M . J . Daniels . On estimation of vaccine eﬃcacy using validation samples with selection bias . Biostatistics , 7 ( 4 ) : 615 , 2006 . [ 31 ] R . Glass , W . Beyeler , and H . Min . Targeted social distancing design for pandemic inﬂuenza . Emerging Infectious Diseases , 12 ( 11 ) : 1671 – 1681 , 2006 . [ 32 ] M . Lipsitch , T . Cohen , M . Murray , and B . R . Levin . Antiviral resistance and the control of pandemic inﬂuenza . PLoS Medicine , 4 ( 1 ) : 111 – 115 , 2007 . [ 33 ] Karima R . Nigmatulina and Richard C . Larson . Living with inﬂuenza : Impacts of government imposed and voluntarily selected interventions . European Journal of Operational Research , 195 ( 2 ) : 613 – 627 , 6 / 1 2009 . APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 98 29 [ 34 ] I . M . Longini and J . S . Koopman . Household and community transmission parameters from ﬁnal distri - butions of infections in households . Biometrics , 38 ( 115 - 126 ) , 1982 . [ 35 ] I . M . Longini . The generalized discrete - time epidemic model with immunity : a synthesis . Math Biosci , 82 : 19 – 41 , 1986 . [ 36 ] F . Ball and O . Lyne . Optimal vaccination policis for stochastic epdidemics among a population of house - holds . Mathematical Biosciences , 177 - 178 : 333 – 354 , 2002 . [ 37 ] C . Fraser , S . Riley , R . Anderson , N . Ferguson , and R . May . Factors that make an infectious disease outbreak controllable . PNAS , 101 ( 16 ) : 6146 – 6151 , 2004 . [ 38 ] F . Carrat , A . Lavenu , S . Cauchemez , and S . Deleguer . Repeated inﬂuenza vaccination of healthy children and adults : borrow now , pay later ? Epidemiol . Infect . , 134 : 6370 , 2005 . [ 39 ] J . Arino , F . Brauer , P . van den Driessche , J . Watmough , and J . Wu . Simple models for containment of a pandemic . J . R . Soc . Interface , 3 : 453 – 457 , 2006 . [ 40 ] C . Dargatz , V . Georgescu , and L . Held . Stochastic modelling of the spatial spread of inﬂuenza in germany . Austrian Journal of Statistics , 35 ( 1 ) : 520 , 2006 . [ 41 ] N . Ferguson , S . Mallett , H . Jackson , N . Roberts , and P . Ward . A population - dynamic model for evaluating the potential spread of drug - resistant inﬂuenza virus infections during community - based use of antivirals . Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy , 51 : 977 – 990 , 2003 . [ 42 ] J . T . Wu , S . Riley , C . Fraser , and G . Leung . Spatial considerations for the allocation of pre - pandemic inﬂuenza vaccination in the United States . Proc . R . Soc . Bio . Sci . , 274 ( 1627 ) : 2811 – 2817 , 2006 . [ 43 ] J . K . Kelso , G . J . Milne , and H . Kelly . Simulation suggests that rapid activation of social distancing can arrest epidemic development due to a novel strain of inﬂuenza . BMC Public Health , 9 ( 1 ) , 2009 . [ 44 ] N . Halder , J . K . Kelso , and G . J . Milne . Analysis of the eﬀectiveness of interventions used during the 2009 A / H1N1 inﬂuenza pandemic . BioMed Central , 10 ( 168 ) , 2010 . [ 45 ] H . Yasuda and K . Suzuki . Measures against transmission of pandemic H1N1 inﬂuenza in Japan in 2009 : simulation model . Euro surveillance : bulletin europ´een sur les maladies transmissibles = European com - municable disease bulletin , 14 ( 44 ) , 2009 . [ 46 ] G . J . Milne , J . K . Kelso , H . A . Kelly , S . T . Huband , and J . McVernon . A small community model for the transmission of infectious diseases : comparison of school closure as an intervention in individual - based models of an inﬂuenza pandemic . PLoS One , 3 ( 12 ) , 2008 . [ 47 ] T . Das , and A . Savachkin . A large scale simulation model for assessment of societal risk and development of dynamic mitigation strategies . IIE Transactions , 40 ( 9 ) : 893 – 905 , 2008 . [ 48 ] N . M . Ferguson , D . Cummings , S . Cauchemez , C . Fraser , S . Riley , M . Aronrag , S . Lamsirithaworn , and D . Burke . Strategies for containing an emerging inﬂuenza pandemic in Southeast Asia . Nature , 437 : 209 – 214 , 2005 . [ 49 ] T . Germann , K . Kadau , I . M . Longini , and C . Macken . Mitigation strategies for pandemic inﬂuenza in the United States . PNAS , 103 : 5935 – 5940 , 2006 . APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 99 30 [ 50 ] R . Patel , I . Longini , and M . Halloran . Finding optimal vaccination strategies for pandemic inﬂuenza using genetic algorithms . Journal of Theoretical Biology , 234 : 201 – 212 , 2005 . [ 51 ] A . Savachkin , A . Uribe , T . Das , and D . Prieto . Developing dynamic predictive strategies for mitigation of cross - regional pandemic outbreaks . IIE Transactions ( in review ) , 2010 . [ 52 ] A . Uribe , D . Prieto , A . Savachkin , T . Das , and Y . Zhu . A cross - regional pandemic outbreak simulation model : An aid to national resource allocation policy making . Proceedings of the 3rd INFORMS Workshop on Data Mining and Health Informatics ( DM - DI 2008 ) , 2008 . [ 53 ] C . Mills , J . Robins , and M . Lipsitch . Transmissibility of 1918 pandemic inﬂuenza . Nature , 432 : 904 – 906 , 2004 . [ 54 ] M . E . Halloran , N . M . Ferguson , S . Eubank , and I . Longini . Modeling targeted layered containment of an inﬂuenza pandemic in the United States . PNAS , 105 ( 12 ) : 4639 – 4644 , 2008 . [ 55 ] I . M . Longini , A . Nizam , X . Shufu , K . Ungchusak , W . Hanshaoworakul , D . Cummings , and M . E . Halloran . Containing pandemic inﬂuenza at the source . Science , 309 : 1083 – 1087 , 2005 . [ 56 ] S . Eubank , H . Guclu , V . Kumar , M . Marathe , A . Srinivasan , Z . Toroczkai , and N . Wang . Modelling disease outbreaks in realistic urban social networks . Nature , 429 : 180 – 184 , 2004 . [ 57 ] Committee on Modeling Community Containment for Pandemic Inﬂuenza . Modeling community contain - ment for pandemic inﬂuenza : A letter report . http : / / www . nap . edu / catalog / 11800 . html , 2006 . Last accessed on 12 / 09 / 2008 . [ 58 ] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) . Interim pre - pandemic planning guidance : Community strategy for pandemic inﬂuenza mitigation in the United States . http : / / www . pandemicflu . gov / plan / community / community _ mitigation . pdf , 2007 . Last accessed on 04 / 01 / 2009 . [ 59 ] HHS . Pandemic planning update iv , 2007 . http : / / www . pandemicﬂu . gov / plan / panﬂureport4 . html . [ 60 ] J . F . Lawless and JF Lawless . Statistical models and methods for lifetime data . Wiley New York , 1982 . [ 61 ] O . Diekmann and JAP Heesterbeek . Mathematical epidemiology of infectious diseases : Model building , analysis and interpretation . Wiley , 2000 . [ 62 ] M . Bootsma and N . Ferguson . The eﬀect of public health measures on the 1918 inﬂuenza pandemic in the us cities . PNAS , 104 ( 18 ) : 7588 – 7593 , 2007 . [ 63 ] J . F . Brundage and G . D . Shanks . Deaths from bacterial pneumonia during 1918 – 19 inﬂuenza pandemic . Emerging Infectious Diseases , 14 ( 8 ) : 1193 , 2008 . [ 64 ] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) . CDC inﬂuenza operational plan . http : / / www . cdc . gov / flu / pandemic / cdcplan . htm , 2006 . Last accessed on 03 / 27 / 2009 . [ 65 ] S . Pasteur . Inﬂuenza A ( H1N1 ) 2009 Monovalent Vaccine . http : / / www . fda . gov / downloads / biologicsbloodvaccines / vaccines / approvedproducts / ucm182404 . pfd , 2009 . Last accessed on 11 / 18 / 2009 . [ 66 ] R . J . Blendon , L . M . Koonin , J . M . Benson , M . S . Cetron , W . E . Pollard , E . W . Mitchell , K . J . Weldon , and M . J . Herrmann . Public response to community mitigation measures for pandemic inﬂuenza . Emerging Infectious Diseases , 14 ( 5 ) : 778 , 2008 . APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 100 31 [ 67 ] M . Z . Sadique , W . J . Edmunds , R . D . Smith , W . J . Meerding , O . de Zwart , J . Brug , and P . Beutels . Precau - tionary behavior in response to perceived threat of pandemic inﬂuenza . Emerging Infectious Diseases , 13 ( 9 ) : 1307 , 2007 . [ 68 ] R . Maunder , J . Hunter , L . Vincent , J . Bennett , N . Peladeau , M . Leszcz , J . Sadavoy , L . Verhaeghe , R . Stein - berg , and T . Mazzulli . The immediate psychological and occupational impact of the 2003 SARS outbreak in a teaching hospital . Canadian Medical Association Journal , 168 ( 10 ) : 1245 – 1251 , 2003 . [ 69 ] E . Robertson , K . Hershenﬁeld , S . L . Grace , and D . E . Stewart . The psychosocial eﬀects of being quarantined following exposure to SARS : a qualitative study of Toronto health care workers . Canadian Journal of Psychiatry , 49 : 403 – 407 , 2004 . [ 70 ] M . L . Pearson , C . B . Bridges , and S . A . Harper . Inﬂuenza vaccination of health - care personnel . Recommen - dations of the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee ( HICPAC ) and the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices ( ACIP ) [ Internet ] , 2006 . Last accessed on 10 / 28 / 2009 . [ 71 ] M . Keane , M . Walter , B . Patel , S . Moorthy , R . Stevens , K . Bradley , J . Buford , E . Anderson , L . Anderson , and K . Tibbals . Conﬁdence in vaccination : a parent model . Vaccine , 23 ( 19 ) : 2486 – 2493 , 2005 . [ 72 ] V . P . Niederhauser , G . Baruﬃ , and R . Heck . Parental decision - making for the varicella vaccine . Journal of Pediatric Health Care , 15 ( 5 ) : 236 – 243 , 2001 . [ 73 ] S . D . Rhodes and K . C . Hergenrather . Exploring hepatitis B vaccination acceptance among young men who have sex with men : facilitators and barriers . Preventive Medicine , 35 ( 2 ) : 128 – 134 , 2002 . [ 74 ] S . L . Rosenthal , R . K . Kottenhahn , F . M . Biro , and P . A . Succop . Hepatitis B vaccine acceptance among adolescents and their parents . Journal of Adolescent Health , 17 ( 4 ) : 248 – 255 , 1995 . [ 75 ] M . Smailbegovic , G . Laing , and H . Bedford . Why do parents decide against immunization ? The eﬀect of health beliefs and health professionals . Child : Care , Health & Development , 29 ( 4 ) : 303 , 2003 . [ 76 ] Colardo Department of Human Services Division of Mental Health . Pandemic inﬂuenza : Quarantine , isolation and social distancing . http : / / www . flu . gov / news / colorado _ toolbox . pdf , 2009 . Last accessed on 10 / 28 / 2009 . [ 77 ] T . J . Safranek , D . N . Lawrence , L . T . Kuriand , D . H . Culver , W . C . Wiederholt , N . S . Hayner , M . T . Osterholm , P . O’Brien , and J . M . Hughes . Reassessment of the association between Guillain - Barr´e syndrome and receipt of swine inﬂuenza vaccine in 1976 - 1977 : results of a two - state study . American journal of epidemiology , 133 ( 9 ) : 940 , 1991 . [ 78 ] K . M . Cummings , A . M . Jette , B . M . Brock , and D . P . Haefner . Psychosocial determinants of immunization behavior in a swine inﬂuenza campaign . Medical Care , 17 ( 6 ) : 639 – 649 , 1979 . [ 79 ] The New Yorker . The fear factor . http : / / www . newyorker . com / talk / comment / 2009 / 10 / 12 / 091012taco _ talk _ specter , 2009 . Last accessed on 10 / 28 / 2009 . [ 80 ] The New York Times . Doctors swamped by swine ﬂu vaccine fears . http : / / www . msnbc . msn . com / id / 33179695 / ns / health - swine _ flu / , 2009 . Last accessed on 10 / 28 / 2009 . [ 81 ] U . S Census Bureau . 2001 American community survey . http : / / www . census . gov / prod / 2001pubs / statab / sec01 . pdf , 2000 . Last accessed on 03 / 27 / 2009 . APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 101 32 [ 82 ] Bureau of transportation statistics . 2001 National household travel survey ( NTHS ) . http : / / www . bts . gov / programs / national _ household _ travel _ survey / , 2002 . Last accessed on 12 / 09 / 2008 . [ 83 ] A . Savachkin , A . Uribe - S´anchez , T . Das , D . Prieto , A . Santana , D . Martinez . Supplemental data and model parameter values for cross - regional simulation - based optimization testbed . http : / / imse . eng . usf . edu / pandemic / supplement . pdf , 2010 . Last accessed on 04 / 15 / 2010 . [ 84 ] Tampa International Airport : daily traﬃc volume data . http : / / www . tampaairport . com , 2010 . Last accessed on 04 / 07 / 2010 . [ 85 ] Miami International Airport : daily traﬃc volume data . http : / / www . miami - airport . com , 2010 . Last accessed on 04 / 07 / 2010 . [ 86 ] Jacksonville Aviation Authority : daily traﬃc volume data . http : / / www . jaa . aero / General / Default . aspx , 2010 . Last accessed on 04 / 07 / 2010 . [ 87 ] Tallahassee Regional Airport : daily traﬃc volume data . http : / / www . talgov . com / airport / index . cfm , 2010 . Last accessed on 04 / 07 / 2010 . [ 88 ] B . Ortutay . How thermal - imaging cameras spot ﬂu fevers . http : / / www . msnbc . msn . com / id / 30523865 / , 2010 . Last accessed on 03 / 19 / 2010 . [ 89 ] Writing committee of the World Health Organization ( WHO ) . Consultation on human inﬂuenza A / H5 . Avian inﬂuenza A ( H5N1 ) infection in humans . N Engl J Med , 353 ( 13 ) : 1374 – 1385 , 2005 . [ 90 ] M . Meltzer , N . Cox , and K . Fukuda . The economic impact of pandemic inﬂuenza in the United States : Priorities for intervention . Emerging Infectious Deseases , 5 ( 5 ) : 659 – 671 , 1999 . [ 91 ] World Health Organization ( WHO ) . WHO guidelines on the use of vaccine and antivirals during in - ﬂuenza pandemics . http : / / www . who . int / csr / resources / publications / influenza / 11 _ 29 _ 01 _ A . pdf , 2004 . Retreived 03 / 27 / 2009 . [ 92 ] Institute of Medicine ( IOM ) . Antivirals for pandemic inﬂuenza : Guidance on developing a distribution and dispensing program . The National Academies Press , 2008 . [ 93 ] J . Treanor , J . Campbell , K . Zangwill , T . Rowe , and M . Wolﬀ . Safety and immunogenicity of an inactivated subvirion inﬂuenza A ( H5N1 ) vaccine . N Engl J Med , 3554 ( 13 ) : 1343 , 2006 . [ 94 ] PayScale . Job : Registered nurse ( rn ) . http : / / www . payscale . com / rcsearch . aspx ? country = US & str = Registered + Nurse + , 2009 . Last accessed on 12 / 28 / 2009 . [ 95 ] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . CDC vaccine price list . http : / / www . cdc . gov / vaccines / programs / vfc / cdc - vac - price - list . htm # flu , 2009 . Last accessed on 12 / 28 / 2009 . [ 96 ] PharmacyChecker . com . Pricing & ordering comparisons . http : / / www . pharmacychecker . com / Pricing . asp ? DrugId = 36260 & DrugStrengthId = 61300 & sortby = Price , 2009 . Last accessed on 12 / 28 / 2009 . [ 97 ] R . J . Blendon , C . M . DesRoches , M . S . Cetron , J . M . Benson , T . Meinhardt , and W . Pollard . Attitudes toward the use of quarantine in a public health emergency in four countries . Health Aﬀairs , 25 ( 2 ) : 15 – 25 , 2006 . [ 98 ] A . Svensson . A note on generation times in epidemic models . Math Biosci , 208 ( 1 ) : 300 – 311 , 2007 . APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 102 33 [ 99 ] T . Halfhill . Inﬂation calculator . http : / / www . halfhill . com / inflatation . html , 2009 . Last accessed on 12 / 04 / 2009 . [ 100 ] V . Colizza , A . Barrat , A . Valleron M . Barthelemy , and A . Vespignani . Modeling the worldwide spread of pandemic inﬂuenza : baseline case and containment interventions . PLOS Medicine , 4 : 95 – 110 , 2007 . [ 101 ] P . Cooley , L . Ganapathi , G . Ghneim , S . Holmberg , W . Wheaton , and C . Hollingsworth . Using inﬂuenza - like illness data to reconstruct an inﬂuenza outbreak . Mathematical and Computer Modelling , ( 48 ) : 929 – 939 , 2008 . [ 102 ] Foundation Eclipse . The Spatio - Temporal Epidemiological Modeler . http : / / www . eclipse . org / stem / intro . php , 2009 . Last accessed on 11 / 06 / 2009 . APPENDIX E ( Continued ) 103 ABOUT THE AUTHOR Andr´es Uribe - S´anchez received his B . S . in Industrial Engineering with emphasis on Operations Research and Finance from the University of Los Andes , Bogota , Colombia in 2003 . In 2006 , he received his M . S . in Management Systems at the University of Puerto Rico at Mayagez . He received his Ph . D . in Industrial Engineering from the University of South Florida in 2010 . In April 2010 , he was awarded the Distinguished Graduate Achievement Award from the University of South Florida . His areas of research interest include engineering risk analysis , support of healthcare enterprise capacity management , and decision support for mitigation of large - scale public health disasters .