DOI : 10 . 1002 / adma . 200600319 Nano - to Microscale Porous Silicon as a Cell Interface for Bone - Tissue Engineering * * By Wei Sun , J . Edward Puzas , Tzong - Jen Sheu , Xi Liu , and Philippe M . Fauchet * An ideal material for orthopedic tissue engineering should be biocompatible , biodegradable , osteoconductive , osteoin - ductive , mechanically stable , and widely available . [ 1 – 4 ] Porous silicon ( PSi ) , a silicon - based material , fulfills these criteria . It is biocompatible [ 5 , 6 ] and biodegradable , [ 7 ] and supports hy - droxyapatite ( HA ) nucleation . [ 6 ] The micro - / nanoarchitecture of PSi may regulate cell behavior . The surface chemistry of PSi is flexible so that the interfacial properties between this material and living cells can be tailored easily by chemical modifications . Here , we report that PSi can support and pro - mote primary osteoblast growth , protein - matrix synthesis , and mineralization . We also show that the osteoconductivity of PSi and other cellular responses can be controlled by altering the micro - / nanoarchitecture of the porous interface . With this material , we are closer to a functional biomaterial with both osteoconductivity and drug - delivery functions . Recently , tissue - engineering strategies using engineered biomaterials that support and promote bone - tissue growth have been proposed for reconstructive surgeries . The goal of a tissue - engineering approach is to repair and regenerate dam - aged human tissue with biomaterial - based devices . The ap - proach requires functional cells derived from the target tissue , a matrix supporting those cells , bioactive molecules regulating cellular behavior , and the integration of this composite in the damaged tissue . [ 1 ] Si , a semiconductor material , has the poten - tial to achieve all the properties required for a tissue - engi - neering strategy . The physical and chemical properties of Si are widely known because of its wide use in the microelec - tronic industry . Moreover , sophisticated microfabrication techniques allow precise structures to be formed on Si sub - strates , some of which have been proposed for medical care . [ 8 – 16 ] The recent discovery of the biocompatibility , biodegrad - ability , and bioactivity of PSi [ 5 – 8 , 14 ] has opened the door for implantable applications of this Si - based material . After im - plantation of Si - based bioactive glass into rabbit bone , the ele - vation in Si concentration was only found at the implant site and not in other organs , and the implanted Si was efficiently excreted by urine . [ 17 ] Furthermore , the large surface - to - vol - ume ratio [ 18 ] and the chemical flexibility [ 19 ] of PSi makes it attractive for immobilizing bioactive molecules for drug - deliv - ery purposes . [ 20 – 22 ] These findings suggest that PSi can be a candidate for orthopaedic tissue engineering . Our investigations on the osteoconductivity of PSi were carried out using nanoscale ( < 15 nm , NanPSi ) , mesoscale ( ca . 50 nm , MesPSi ) , and macroscale ( ca . 1 l m , MacPSi ) pores in vitro . The PSi samples were produced by electro - chemical etching of p - type Si wafers in HF - based electrolytes . The various pore configurations were achieved by changing the Si substrate , the electrolyte content , or the current density ( see Supporting Information for detailed experimental infor - mation ) . As shown in Figure 1 , MacPSi had pores with open - ings close to 1 l m ; MesPSi had pores with pore openings around 50 nm ; and NanPSi had a spongy porous structure with pore sizes under 15 nm . Unlike polished Si wafers , which do not degrade in cell media , PSi can be degraded in such a solution . Preliminary experiments showed that freshly - etched MesPSi degraded faster than MacPSi in cell media ( see Sup - porting Information ) . The observation indicates that PSi , rather than Si , has potential in vivo degradation , and that MacPSi may be the most favorable candidate for bone - tissue engineering in terms of both biodegradability and stability . To protect PSi from gradual oxidation and degradation , a chemi - cal oxidation in hydrogen peroxide was carried out after etching to form a thin oxide layer on the surface . [ 18 ] Primary rat calvaria cells ( osteoblasts ) or rat osteosarcoma cells ( ROS 17 / 2 . 8 ) were seeded onto PSi substrates for from 1 h to 5 weeks and the substrates and cells were assayed both quali - tatively and quantitatively . Standard cell culture in 24 - well polystyrene culture plates was used as a control . The adhesion of osteoblasts to PSi surfaces was quantified by direct counting of the attached cells . The viability of the attached cells was determined by an adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) - based cell - viability assay . In adhesion studies ( 0 . 5 – 4 h ) , PSi chips bound slightly fewer osteoblasts than the tis - sue - culture plate , but the difference was not statistically sig - C O MM U N I C A T I O N Adv . Mater . 2007 , 19 , 921 – 924 © 2007 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim 921 – [ * ] Prof . P . M . Fauchet , W . Sun , Prof . J . E . Puzas , X . Liu Department of Biomedical Engineering University of Rochester Rochester , NY 14627 ( USA ) E - mail : fauchet @ ece . rochester . edu Prof . P . M . Fauchet Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering University of Rochester Rochester , NY 14627 ( USA ) Prof . J . E . Puzas , Dr . T . - J . Sheu Department of Orthopaedics University of Rochester Rochester , NY 14627 ( USA ) [ * * ] The authors thank April Frankenberg for the isolation of primary osteoblasts , Barbara Stroyer for the preparation of immunofluores - cence , and Jack Calcines for the help on AFM imaging . Supporting Information is available online from Wiley InterScience or from the author . nificant at 4 h ( Fig . 2a ) . Among porous samples , MacPSi anchored the most cells , and MesPSi exhibited the lowest cell affinity . The viability assay measuring ATP content in cells was conducted 4 h after the cells had been cultured on sam - ples ( Fig . 2b ) . We found that osteoblasts had the highest via - bility on MacPSi among the three forms of PSi . At 5 and 7 days of culturing , the metabolic activity of osteo - blasts was examined with the cell - viability assay . As seen in Figure 2b , lower viabilities were detected on MesPSi and NanPSi than the control . This could be attributed to the fact that fewer cells were attached to these samples initially . High - er viability was found on MacPSi than on control - tissue plates at days 5 and 7 , suggesting that either more osteoblasts survived on MacPSi or that the cells have higher metabolic activities at these time points than those grown on the other surfaces . So MacPSi is not toxic to osteoblasts and allow their growth on it . To verify whether the biological functions of the osteoblasts grown on PSi were affected by the substrate , real - time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction ( RT - PCR ) was em - ployed to quantify three characteristic biomarkers of bone formation : [ 1 ] alkaline phosphatase ( AP ) , osteocalcin ( OC ) and type I collagen ( Col1 ) . The ROS 17 / 2 . 8 cell line was used in these studies because we found it easy to extract RNA from this cell line . After culturing these cells on PSi for 7 days , the three genes were detected on all three types of PSi ( Fig . 2c ) . MacPSi maintained the transcription of all these biomarkers at a high level , comparable to the control surface . The osteo - blasts on NanPSi exhibited a low AP transcription , but the OC and Col1 transcriptional levels were conserved . All three RNAs were found on MesPSi substrates at a moderate level compared to the control . These results show that the surface geometry of the substrates influences cell behavior . Consider - ing attachment , viability , and gene expression , we conclude that MacPSi provides osteoblasts with the most favorable microenvironment to foster osteogenetic cells growth . The morphology of the cultured cells on PSi was character - ized by using fluorescence microscopy , scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ) , and fluorescence immunohistology . After cells adhered to substrates , they tended to spread out on the MacPSi and NanPSi surfaces ( Fig . 3a ) , but remained more separated and rounded on the MesPSi substrates . Within 3 – 5 days of culture , these ad - hered cells migrated , proliferated , and clustered to form mineralizing nodules ( Fig . 3b ) , a feature common in the pro - cess of bone formation . Upon matura - tion , the osteoblasts secreted an extra - cellular matrix ( ECM ) that could support further mineralization . Col1 , which constitutes approximately 95 % of this protein matrix in bones , was de - tected on all PSi samples from immuno - fluorescence after 1 week of culture ( Fig . 3c ) . OC , a major noncollagenous bone - matrix protein and late marker of osteoblast maturation , was also present on all the samples after 2 weeks of culture ( Fig . 3d ) . High resolu - tion SEM images demonstrated the presence of a fibrous mesh around cultured osteoblasts with the banding character - istics of Col1 ( Fig . 3e and f ) . These observations confirmed that PSi supports the functionalization of osteoblasts . A semiquantitative investigation on the mineralization of cultured osteoblasts on PSi samples further supported this finding . After 7 days of culture , calcified ECM layers were de - tected on MacPSi but not on the other two types of PSi . After 2 weeks , calcified layers were found on all PSi substrates . Using a dual fluorescence labeling method with propidium io - dide ( PI ) and calcein , we were able simultaneously to visual - ize the cells and the mineralized matrix ( Fig . 3g ) . The upper part of the image shows a fully calcified ECM layer with few cells remaining . In the lower part of the image , mineralization did not take place and more individual cells were detected . Figure 3h is an SEM image of an ECM layer deposited by the osteoblasts on MacPSi , and Figure 3i shows a cross section of the wafer with penetration of the mineralized matrix into the pores . The corresponding energy dispersive X - ray ( EDX ) spectrum of this layer is shown in Figure 3j . The atomic ratio of the major elements was obtained by quantifying the spec - tra . The Ca to P ratio in the matrix on MacPSi was 1 . 72 , sug - gesting the formation of an apatitelike material . This ratio is in the range ( 1 . 65 – 1 . 77 ) found in human bone minerals . [ 23 ] The Ca content was lower with NanPSi and the lowest with MesPSi . The finding is consistent with a low OC transcrip - tional level in the cells . The osteoblasts cultured on MacPSi seem to differentiate and mature faster than on the other sub - strates . As MacPSi enhanced the osteoblast viability ( Fig . 2b ) and mineralization ( described above ) and maintained the expres - sion of the biomarkers of bone formation ( Fig . 2c ) , we con - clude that it promotes osteoblast growth better than the other forms of PSi . The micrometer pore and the abundant flat Si surface present around the pores on MacPSi anchor the cells firmly while providing them with enough space to spread . This topography activates a cascade of intracellular signaling path - C O MM U N I C A T I O N 922 www . advmat . de © 2007 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Mater . 2007 , 19 , 921 – 924 Figure 1 . Images of the surface morphology of the three forms of PSi . a ) MacPSi : straight pores with openings close to 1 l m ( scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ) ) . b ) MesPSi : branching pores with pore openings of ca . 50 nm ( SEM ) . c ) NanPSi : spongy porous structure with pore sizes less than 15 nm ( atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) ) . ways and thus guides the cells to proliferate and fulfill their function efficiently . In contrast , nanoscale pores on NanPSi , though they may mimic protein - binding sites , may not anchor the cells firmly and provide the same mechanical signals to regulate cell behavior . The dense sub - micrometer pores and the very limited flat surface of MesPSi appear to hinder the spread of the bound cells and inhibit further growth . Thus , by tuning the local geometry of implant material , it is possible to control the mineralization and integration of the implant into a host . In summary , we have demonstrated that PSi displays prom - ising osteoconductivity . Different architectures of PSi induced different cellular responses of osteoblasts in terms of adhe - sion , metabolic activity , protein synthesis , and mineralization . MacPSi performed better than MesPSi and NanPSi in sup - porting osteoblast growth and sustaining their function . Con - sidering its higher rate of mineralization , its potential biode - gradability , and its potential drug - delivery function , MacPSi is a compelling biomaterial for bone - tissue engineering . The ability of all three forms of PSi to support cell growth makes them good candidates for tissue engineering in general . The large surface - to - volume ratio and flexible surface chemistry also make them appealing for microscale medical devices with both drug - delivery and scaffolding functions . The knowledge obtained in this study on the interaction between living cells and a semiconductor material will be the foundation for further development of electronic and optoelectronic bioin - terfaced devices . One possible future application would be to use electric fields or light to control the PSi - based device in order to attract host cells and adjust their behavior as well as to release embedded drugs that promote tissue regeneration . Received : February 15 , 2006 Revised : August 16 , 2006 Published online : March 6 , 2007 – [ 1 ] V . M . Goldberg , A . I . Caplan , in Orthopedic Tissue Engineering ( Eds : V . M . Goldberg , A . I . Caplan ) , Marcel Dekker , New York 2004 , Ch . 1 . [ 2 ] K . J . L . Burg , S . Porter , J . F . Kellam , Biomaterials 2000 , 21 , 2347 . [ 3 ] J . Salgado , O . P . Coutinho , R . L . Reis , Macromol . Biosci . 2004 , 4 , 743 . [ 4 ] W . R . Moore , S . E . Graves , G . I . Bain , Aust . N . Z . J . Surg . 2001 , 71 , 354 . [ 5 ] S . C . Bayliss , R . Heald , D . I . Fletcher , L . D . Buckberry , Adv . Mater . 1999 , 11 , 318 . [ 6 ] V . Chin , B . E . Collins , M . J . Sailor , S . N . Bhatia , Adv . Mater . 2001 , 13 , 1877 . [ 7 ] L . T . Canham , C . L . Reeves , J . P . Newey , M . R . Houlton , T . I . Cox , J . M . Buriak , M . P . Stewart , Adv . Mater . 1999 , 11 , 1505 . [ 8 ] L . T . Canham , C . L . Reeves , D . O . King , P . J . Branfield , J . G . Crabb , M . C . L . Ward , Adv . Mater . 1996 , 8 , 850 . [ 9 ] M . P . Stewart , J . M . Buriak , Adv . Mater . 2000 , 12 , 859 . [ 10 ] S . E . Letant , B . R . Hart , A . W . van Buuren , L . J . Terminello , Nat . Mater . 2003 , 2 , 391 . [ 11 ] H . Ouyang , M . Christophersen , R . Viard , B . L . Miller , P . M . Fauchet , Adv . Funct . Mater . 2005 , 15 , 1851 . [ 12 ] S . Chan , S . R . Horner , P . M . Fauchet , B . L . Miller , J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2001 , 123 , 11797 . [ 13 ] P . Heiduschka , S . Thanos , Prog . Neurobiol . 1998 , 55 , 433 . [ 14 ] L . T . Canham , Adv . Mater . 1995 , 7 , 1033 . [ 15 ] P . Fromherz , A . Stett , Phys . Rev . Lett . 1995 , 75 , 1670 . [ 16 ] G . Voskerician , M . S . Shive , R . S . Shawgo , H . von Recum , J . M . An - derson , M . J . Cima , R . Langer . Biomaterials 2003 , 24 , 1959 . C O MM U N I C A T I O N Adv . Mater . 2007 , 19 , 921 – 924 © 2007 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim www . advmat . de 923 a 0 . 5h 1h 2h 4h 0 50 100 150 200 250 ce ll s / mm 2 Time Control MacPSi MesPSi NanPSi b 4h 120h 168h 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 l u m i n esce n ce ( A . U . ) Time ControlMacPSiMesPSiNanPSi c AP OC Col1 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 1 . 4 g e n e e x p r es s i on Control MacPSi MesPSi NanPSi Figure 2 . The adhesion , metabolic activity and biomarkers of osteoblasts on PSi ( n = 3 and error bars represent standard errors ) . a ) Direct count of osteoblasts stained by propidium iodide ( PI ) on PSi and a control sur - face after incubation times of 0 . 5 , 1 , 2 , and 4 h . b ) Cell - viability assay of osteoblasts cultured on PSi and a control after 4 , 120 , and 168 h ( lumi - nescence was normalized to substrate area ) . c ) Gene expression of alka - line phosphatase ( AP ) , osteocalcin ( OC ) , and type I collagen ( Col1 ) in ROS osteoblasts cultured on PSi and a control surface for 7 days ( all the data are normalized to b - actin level ) . [ 17 ] W . Lai , J . Garinob , P . Ducheynet , Biomaterials 2002 , 23 , 213 . [ 18 ] Properties of Porous Silicon ( Ed : L . T . Canham ) , IEE / INSEPC , Lon - don 1997 . [ 19 ] J . M . Buriak , Chem . Rev . 2002 , 102 , 1272 . [ 20 ] X . Li , J . St . John , J . Coffer , Y . Chen , R . Pinizzotto , J . Newey , L . T . Canham , Biomed . Microdevices 2000 , 2 , 265 . [ 21 ] Y . Y . Li , F . Cunin , J . R . Link , T . Gao , R . E . Betts , S . H . Reiver , V . Chin , S . N . Bhatia , M . J . Sailor , Science 2003 , 299 , 2045 . [ 22 ] A . B . Foraker , R . J . Walczak , M . H . Cohen , T . A . Boiarski , C . F . Grove , P . W . Swaan , Pharm . Res . 2003 , 20 , 110 . [ 23 ] K . A . Hing , Philos . Trans . R . Soc . London Ser . A 2004 , 362 , 2821 . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ C O MM U N I C A T I O N 924 www . advmat . de © 2007 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim Adv . Mater . 2007 , 19 , 921 – 924 Figure 3 . Cell , extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , and the mineralization on PSi . a ) Osteoblasts adhere and spread out after 18 h of incubation ( stained by PI dye ) . b ) Cultured osteoblasts cluster to form nodules after 5 days ( stained by PI dye ) . c ) Immunofluorescence of Col1 after 1 week of culture ( Rhoda - mine fluorescence ) . d ) Immunofluorescence of OC after 2 weeks of culture ( Rhodamine fluorescence ) . e ) SEM image of an osteoblast surrounded by fibrous mesh after one week of culture . f ) Fibrils with banding characteristics of Col1 after one week of culture . g ) Ca - rich protein matrix with green fluorescence ( stained by calcein ) and osteoblasts with red fluorescence ( stained by PI dye ) at the mineralization front of the ECM laid down by osteo - blasts grown on MesPSi for four weeks . h ) SEM image of a protein layer on MacPSi ( top view ) . i ) SEM image of a protein matrix within pores ( cross section ) . j ) EDX spectrum of a protein layer ( the brightest part ) shown in ( h ) . The table shows the atomic percentage of the major elements detected ( Si is from the substrate and Au is introduced by sputtering for visualization purposes ) .