2 ACM ECHT CONFERENCE Virtual Reality and the Future of Hypertext Jay David Bolter School of Litemture , Communication , and Culture Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta , Georgia $ 0332 , USA Extended Abstract Virtual Reality has been largely conceived in terms this direction : the concept maps in hypertext sys - of the visual . Other senses , sound and touch , al - tema are examples of symbolic spaces in two di - though given roles , are clearly quite secondary . mensions . A third dimension would expand the What VR presents to the user is images , not texts . possibilities of representation . Such a hypertex - What role might text play in Virtual Reality ? This tualized virtual space might allow the creation of is particularly important for exponents of hyper - text unlike any that have ever been written . text , because VR threatens to become the hot new topic , and perhaps to diminish interest and re - search in hypertext . One could convincingly ar - gue there is no real direct competition : VR and hypertext can evolve side by side for different pur - poses . VR is useful for simulation and training , for medical imaging , for telepresence , and so on . Hypertext serves for databases of text materials , pedagogy , and interactive fiction and nonfiction . But even if VR and hypertext continue to evolve side by side , it remains interesting to consider how the two might merge . Virtual Reality and hypertext are products of two different communication technologies . Virtual Reality has its closest affinity to television , which is a perceptual medium . Hypertext comes out of the tradition of writing . Both VR and hypertext claim to be new ways of expressing information , although with different emphases . In VR , one sees and touches a perceptual space ; in hypertext one reads and writes in a textual space . Can the two be combined ? In particu - lar , can the space of virtual reality be hypertex - tualized ? One way to introduce text into vir - tual reality would be to write upon the surfaces in the virtual space . This would give us a vir - tual book , whose structure is expressed architec - turally in three dimensions . The book becomes a space that the reader enters and explores , a space in which the relationships among the surfaces de - fine relationships among the verbal ideas in the text . A more radical possibility y would be to turn the entire virtual space into a symbolic structure . Several hypertext systems are already moving in