PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 107 . Publication date : November 2017 . Why Users Do Not Want to Write Together When They Are Writing Together : Users’ Rationales for Today’s Collaborative Writing Practices DAKUO WANG , IBM T . J . Watson Research Center ; University of California Irvine HAODAN TAN , Indiana University Bloomington TUN LU , Fudan University This study 1 builds upon the 30 - years HCI research of collaborative writing and focuses on users’ experience of writing together in today’s context . By interviewing 30 participants from both academia and industry , the paper examines how people write together using today’s commercially available systems . The analysis focuses on the new co - editing capabilities ( e . g . , track changes ) that are integrated into commercial tools and thus adopted by users widely in the last decade . These capabilities enable new ways of working together ( e . g . , directly edit the content at the character level at the same time ) , but users reported reluctance to fully commit to these new working styles . We thus systematically analyze users’ rationales of why they do not want to write together while they are writing together with other . We argue that the development of collaborative writing tools is far from finished and these findings provide insights for the design of technology , and suggest future directions for research . CCS Concepts : • Human Computer Interaction → H . 5 . 3 . Group and Organization Interfaces KEYWORDS Collaborative writing , co - editing , writing tools , Word , Google Docs , asynchronous , synchronous writing , commenting ACM Reference format : Dakuo Wang , Haodan Tan , and Tun Lu . 2017 . Why Users Do Not Want to Write Together When They Are Writing Together : Users’ Rationales for Today’s Collaborative Writing Practices . PACMHCI , 1 , CSCW , Article 107 ( November 2017 ) , 18 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3134742 1 INTRODUCTION In recent decades , collaborative writing has become common and important in many professions . Researchers are encouraged to write papers and proposals with others [ 38 ] , that is why academic publications are co - authored more than ever before [ 15 ] . College students are taught how to write class assignments and project reports in groups , partially because companies expect employees to be capable of writing documents ( e . g . , progress reports and meeting minutes ) with their colleagues [ 10 ] . Wikipedia is the outcome of an amazing collaborative writing practice using wiki [ 43 ] . These are just a few instances from innumerable collaborative writing cases happening in our life . Certainly , research has been focusing on people’s various practices in collaborative writing for decades ( e . g . , [ 3 ] ; [ 14 ] ; [ 30 ] ; [ 32 ] ; [ 33 ] ; [ 34 ] ; [ 37 ] ; [ 38 ] ; [ 39 ] ; [ 41 ] ; [ 42 ] ; [ 24 ] ; [ 47 ] ) . Theoretical frameworks have been Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . 2573 - 0142 / 2017 / 11 - 107 $ 15 . 00 Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3134742 1 2 3 4 5 107 10 107 : 2 D . Wang et al . PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 107 . Publication date : November 2017 . proposed from this research ( [ 37 ] ; [ 25 ] ) . For example , one lasting research stream is to support collaboration awareness - - collaborators need to know who wrote what , where and when , in order to keep the collaboration going [ 14 ] . And a number of experimental systems ( e . g . , Prep [ 31 ] and ShrEdit [ 27 ] ) were developed in labs to support people’s collaborative writing . Today collaborative writing systems with many new co - editing capabilities are out of the laboratories and into the real world . For example , Microsoft Word and Google Docs are two commonly used word processors in today’s collaborative writing practices , and both systems have new features developed to specifically support collaboration . For example , to support collaboration awareness , Word has track - changes , and Google Docs has revision histories . However , there are only a few recent case studies ( e . g . , [ 8 ] ) that reported how people are using these new capabilities in the wild ; no systematic studies have been done to provide an account of user experience from the end - user’s perspective . The goal of this study is to better understand how people use today’s co - editing capabilities ( e . g . , synchronous editing and commenting ) in writing collaborations , and how they like their experience . Our motivation is to provide insights for design implications and future directions of collaborative writing research . We acknowledge that many researchers and designers have been exploring this question for 30 years , and some may argue that the systems are so sophisticated that there is not much research value in this domain . But we believe that we should thoroughly revisit this research topic now , because , as we will see in the related work section :  The technology shifts from personal computing to cloud computing in the last decade ( e . g . , [ 37 ] ; [ 26 ] ; [ 5 ] ) . Many new features impact people’s ways of collaboration , we may therefore expect new practices with these new features in the collaborative writing context as well ( e . g . , [ 36 ] ) .  And , the large - scale adoption of these systems with new co - editing capabilities in real world may reveal user behaviors that we have never seen in the controlled experimental settings ( e . g . , [ 8 ] ) . But old habits die hard . We may see people use these new capabilities but in the old ways . In this study , to better understand people’s real world collaborative writing practices and rationales behind their choices , we conducted semi - structured interviews with 30 participants , asking them questions such as : what tools and features do they use ( and how ) when they write together with others both at work and in off - work life , and how do they like the experience From the reported practices and rationales , we enrich the existing understanding on collaborative writing with an account from the user’s perspective , propose design implications for collaborative writing technologies , and suggest future research directions . 2 RELATED WORK In this section , we will first briefly review the 30 years collaborative writing research and some recent studies ; and then we will be discussing concepts such as synchronous writing versus asynchronous writing , and direct editing versus leaving comments . It is important to note that the ways these terms are used have changed in literature over time . Synchronous editing refers to two or more people editing a document simultaneously . It evolved from the oldest way ( collocated synchronous editing ) where coauthors sit in the same room and take turns at the keyboard ; to the old way ( locked co - editing ) where coauthors can work on a document separately but with paragraph or section locking ; to now ( close co - editing ) where coauthors can work on a document separately and edit adjacent characters . Asynchronous editing refers to two or more people editing a document one at a time . It also evolved from the old way where coauthors edit a document at different times , either physically marking it up , or creating a new version with separate comments to explain the changes they made ; to now where coauthors can pass the same copy of document back and forth , and use built in features like change - tracking and comments anchored to text to explain the changes they made . 2 . 1 Collaborative Writing Research’s History and Now In the early 1990s , Posner and Baecker were among the first generation of researchers in Human Computer Interaction ( HCI ) who studied collaborative writing ( e . g . , [ 37 ] ; [ 1 ] ; [ 34 ] ; [ 31 ] ) . Before that , the designers of Why Users Do Not Want to Write Together When They Are Writing Together … 107 : 3 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 107 . Publication date : November 2017 . collaborative writing systems mainly relied on research work about individual writing ( [ 38 ] ; [ 17 ] ) . And group writing back then refers to “a group of people writing in a room with pen and paper” [ 21 ] . In 1992 , Posner and Baecker’s classic paper , “How people write together , ” reported the results from interviews of a limited 10 people who had early experience of participating in collaborative writing projects [ 37 ] . Their participants were from the fields of medicine , computer science , psychology , journalism , and freelance writing . This paper developed a theoretical framework to describe various aspects of collaborative writing ( Table 1 ) , which guided the following decades of collaborative writing research . For example , they divided the collaborative writing process into 6 activities explicitly : brainstorm , research , plan , write , edit , and review . They suggested that a collaborative writing system should support all these activities . They then evaluated 7 existing collaborative writing systems ( e . g . , SASSE [ 28 ] that they built , and ShrEdit [ 27 ] ) , all of research prototypes . Their work directly inspired our choice of research method , we thus conducted an interview study to explore this research space within today’s context . Table 1 . Posner and Baecker’s framework of Collaborative Writing [ 37 ] . Role Writer Activity Brainstorm Consultant Planning Editor Writing Reviewer Editing Equal Work Reviewing Writing Strategy Single author ( i . e . , Scribe ) Document Control Method Centralized Horizontal division ( divide and conquer ) Relay Parallel writing ( different roles ) Independent Sequential writing Shared Join writing It is unrealistic and unnecessary to cover every detail of such a broad research space in this paper’s scope . As stated in the introduction , the main changes in collaborative writing context in recent years are the new co - editing capabilities , and the large - scale adoption in the wild . To cover the diverse use cases in the wild , we want to gather more interviewees from a variety of backgrounds . What are the new co - editing features ? We dig into recent literature to find hints of what these features are . A recent case study provides a qualitative account on how a group of four professors used Google Docs to write an entire book [ 8 ] . They started writing with Word , sending drafts via email because they were used to writing in this manner . However , they later switched to Google Docs because they found two limitations of the old working style : in asynchronous editing , only one author can directly work on a Word document at a time ; and during remote meetings , each of them had to make the same changes on their respective document copies to keep track of the discussion . With Google Doc’s co - editing and commenting capabilities , they developed new ways of writing together , which they think significantly increased their efficiency in both asynchronous and synchronous editing sessions . For example , they used the commenting feature as a voting mechanism in asynchronous editing : once an author changed the text , ( s ) he would leave a comment with explanations ; the three other collaborators needed to reply to that comment and agree on the changes . In synchronous editing along with discussions , they leveraged on the close co - editing capability ( i . e . , multiple users can directly edit the characters next to each other synchronously instead of locking a fragment ) : normally one co - author verbally proposed changes , a second one would type out these changes , followed by a third one correcting typos . 107 : 4 D . Wang et al . PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 107 . Publication date : November 2017 . From this reported case study , we can extract two capabilities that dominated these professors’ decision of switching styles of collaboration : the capability of supporting both asynchronous and more importantly synchronous editing , and the capability of supporting both close co - editing and leaving anchored comments . Thus , in the rest of this section , we focus on literature around these two capabilities . 2 . 2 Asynchronous and Synchronous Editing We do not need to elaborate on asynchronous editing capability as it is the default function of a collaborative editing tool . The synchronous editing capability is not a new capability either , at least in the laboratories . Even back in 1990s , Olson et al . [ 34 ] built ShrEdit , a tool much like today’s Google Docs , that allows multiple users to do close co - editing in a document from different computers connected by Ethernet . They then designed a lab experiment with 39 three - designer groups to compare writing together with whiteboard , paper and pencil , or ShrEdit . They found that the groups writing with ShrEdit generated fewer , but better , design ideas . They suggested that collaborative writing tools did not need to define explicit work processes ( that what Posner and Baecker [ 37 ] suggested ) ; instead , tools could be a “shared workspace” , which gave people the space and freedom to develop new work styles and adapt the tool . Mitchell et al . reported another laboratory study of two groups of 4 students in sixth grade who used a synchronous collaborative writing tool - - SASSE [ 28 ] . The researchers found that even though these students had never written with others or used the tool before , they managed to adopt the tool and finish the writing task . For example , they developed a sense of collaboration awareness , ownership , and new control strategies to integrate the synchronous editing feature into the process . Results suggested that even the most inexperienced people could learn how to write together with a synchronous editing tool , suggesting that the tool could be used in educational settings . In 2001 , Kim and Eklundh studied the synchronous collaborative writing practices in real world . They interviewed 11 academics with collaborative writing experience at that time , focusing on people’s reviewing behaviors [ 23 ] . They found that Word and LaTex were two commonly used tools in participants’ collaborative writing . Participants reported that they rarely wrote synchronously in documents . That is easy to understand : the “synchronous editing” in this study is not the same as today’s synchronous editing , where they had to take turns at the keyboard during face - to - face meetings ( the oldest way of synchronous editing ) . Researchers continued to evaluate the outcomes of adopting sophisticated synchronous editing features in the wild . Cerratto designed an in - situ experiment that asked participants to collaboratively write academic reports under two conditions : in one condition the participants sat together using Word , while in the other the participants collaborated remotely using Aspects2 [ 12 ] . These researchers found that introducing Aspects to people’s collaborative writing practices caused serious failures in both the document output and the collaboration process . This was because the synchronous collaborative editing required more coordination effort , and people in the remote group could not exchange as much coordination information as the co - located group could . Therefore , they suggested that synchronous collaborative editing should only apply to certain types of tasks . However , another earlier study suggested that distributed teams who write collaboratively could adapt to the limitations from the technology ( e . g . , no communication channel ) to some extent [ 19 ] . The picture was not simple . As for users’ perceptions around synchronous co - editing in the real world , Brodahl et al . surveyed college students about their perceptions of collaborative writing using web - based technologies ( e . g . , Google Docs ) [ 9 ] . Only 13 . 9 % of their 166 participants reported that they were motivated to use the tools for collaborative writing , and 70 . 5 % of them felt the tools were not working as expected . The researchers did not explain why people had such perceptions . Thus , we need to further explore people’s perceptions and practices of synchronous collaborative editing in today’s world . 2 . 3 Anchored Commenting and Close Co - Editing The anchored commenting feature is useful for co - authors to leave opinions ( e . g . , suggesting changes and leave high level comments ) by the side of the content , especially when co - authors do not want to directly 2 Aspects uses paragraph locking and therefore is not actually synchronous editing as offered in today’s Google Docs . Why Users Do Not Want to Write Together When They Are Writing Together … 107 : 5 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 107 . Publication date : November 2017 . edit the content . Researchers have studied users’ content editing behaviors in Google Docs and their social impacts on groups in the wild . From an interview study with 31 academic participants , Birnholtz and Ibara [ 5 ] found that users’ editing behaviors had a negative impact on how they felt about each other . These pairs of strangers did not like the implication that if someone directly changed their text , did not think the new text was better than their own . Consequently , people reported that they would think very carefully about how to make the changes and explain why . For example , participants commonly refrained from directly editing others’ work ; if they made the change , they left explanation comments after making changes . These researchers suggested that system designers should incorporate features , such as a communication channel via the chat function that supports a better group dynamic . Other than describing users have social concerns on the content editing , researchers did not explain why these users have such concerns . In a follow - up to [ 5 ] , researchers designed a laboratory study in which two strangers in a university worked together to write a document . They focused on the interaction between co - authors’ communications and their content changing behaviors , and whether this interaction impacts co - authors social relationship while they are writing in Google Docs [ 6 ] . The results showed that communication helps to maintain people’s social relationship in synchronous writings , but harms the social relationship in asynchronous writings . The number of edits also had a negative impact on people’s social relationship in asynchronous editing . Therefore , they suggested that Google Docs should show “ < Name > suggests < changes > ” as a comment instead of showing the changes reflected directly in the content , even when the user directly edited the content . This design implication is accepted in a new feature ( suggestion mode ) in Google Docs in 2015 . From these two studies , we can see that the picture is not simple . People have concerns about when to use close co - editing and when to use commenting , and using one way or the other has consequences on co - authors’ social relationship . The picture is even more complicated when this choice of using close co - editing versus commenting interplay with the choice of asynchronous or synchronous writing . In a more relevant and recent study , researchers focused on the complex ecology of co - authors editing behaviors , asynchronous versus synchronous mode , and the impact of these factors on the quality of the produced document [ 36 ] . In order to analyze co - authors’ close co - editing behaviors , they first developed an information visualization system , DocuViz [ 44 ] , which can generate historyflow [ 43 ] diagrams for Google Docs . Then , they visualized and examined the close co - editing behaviors for a set of 96 documents , all but one had evidence of simultaneous work . Their visualizations also revealed a host of new writing styles , such as divide and conquer , pasting in an example and replacing parts with new text , and one in which all group members wrote the whole ( short ) document and they blended the final from the best of each . This is very different from what Kim and Eklundh [ 23 ] reported in 2001 , where users said that they did not like the synchronous editing capability and thought the asynchronous way of work was sufficient . However , this study focuses only on the behavior of co - authors , “ what people do in collaborative writing ” , there is still a missing piece on “ what people think they do in collaborative writing , and why ” . 2 . 4 Research Questions In the current study , we are building upon the existing literature on what co - authors do with the new capabilities of collaborative writing . We want to fill the gap with an understanding of what people think they do in collaborative writing and why they choose to work in certain ways . Previous literature presented that people have concerns around the various ways of collaborative writing , and these concerns influence their behaviors . It is therefore necessary to understand people’s rationales that can explain their concerns and behaviors , if we want to continually improve the design of collaborative writing systems . Thus , we designed this interview study to answer the following two research questions : RQ1 : How do people use the new co - editing capabilities in their collaborative writing practices ? RQ2 : What are their rationales for choosing which practices they employ ? The RQ1 is about practice and the RQ2 is about perception . As above mentioned , this study focuses on two new co - editing features and we want to explore in details the new practices that are enabled by these two features : Why do people choose to write synchronously or asynchronously ? Why do people choose to close co - edit text versus describing suggestions to edit in an anchored comment ? 107 : 6 D . Wang et al . PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 107 . Publication date : November 2017 . 3 METHODOLOGY We followed the research method of previous studies ( e . g . , [ 23 ] ; [ 5 ] ) that explored collaborative writing from user’s perspective , and conducted a semi - structured interview with 30 people , asking questions such as : what kinds of document do they write together with others ? What tools or features stand out ? How do they write together ? And following their stories , we ask : why do they use or not use certain features and write in certain ways ? We acknowledge that the collaborative writing practices from interview data are “reported practices” , which may differ from “what people actually do” . As this paper’s goal is to provide an account of the practice from the user perspective , and more importantly , to explore the rationales in people’s mind , the “reported practice” is what we want . From now on , we refer to “reported practices” as “practice” for short . Table 2 . Summary of Interviewees . Interviewee # Demographic Occupation 1 - 6 2 Females , 4 Males , Age range 40 to 70 Professors 7 - 13 1 Female , 6 Males , Age range 22 to 30 Graduate Students 14 - 18 3 Female , 2 Males , Age range 18 to 20 College Students 19 - 21 3 Males , Age range 26 to 30 Industrial Researchers 22 - 25 1 Female , 3 Males , Age range 28 to 31 Software Engineers 26 - 28 2 Females , Age range 29 to 34 Consultants 29 1 Female , Age 25 Accountant 30 1 Female , Age 29 Lawyer We used snowball - sampling method [ 4 ] to recruit participants , starting with our colleagues , friends , and students , and asking them to refer their connects . Most of previous studies ( e . g . , [ 8 ] ; [ 5 ] ; [ 6 ] ; [ 23 ] ; [ 46 ] ; [ 36 ] ) recruited participants from academia and we want to compare our findings from today’s context with these studies , thus we recruited 18 interviewees from a U . S . university . As we are also interested in the co - editing practices outside academia , we further recruited 12 participants from industry . The interviewees’ demographic information and occupations are summarized in Table 2 . All interviewees were located in the United States ; eleven participants were interviewed in person , and nineteen participants were remotely interviewed by video conferencing via Skype or Google Hangout . Audio recordings were collected for all interviews with interviewees’ consent and then transcribed . While people from varying disciplines may use the word “collaborative writing” differently , in our interview , we adopt the definition that Dillon proposed in 1993 : any document production activities that involve more than one person is collaborative writing [ 13 ] . Thus , our interviewees understand that “any document that is produced by more than yourself is counted as a collaborative writing example” . That is why , as we will cover later , the interviewees shared many fringe cases of collaborative writing , such as a co - edited travel itinerary for the family . We conducted iterative coding analysis on all the interview transcripts using a Ground Theory approach [ 29 ] . The first two authors of this paper independently did open coding on types of co - edited documents , the new collaborative writing capabilities , the new practices to the interviewee , and user perceptions of these new capabilities and practices . After the initial coding is done , we shared and discussed the coded transcripts and memos , and developed a list of codes that were grouped into categories ( e . g . , tools and features , synchronous co - editing practices ) . These categories finally led to themes such as tools and features , practices of collaborative writing , when users do not want to write together and why . We then applied the developed set of codes to the whole corpus of transcripts . The full coding schema is in Table 3 . Why Users Do Not Want to Write Together When They Are Writing Together … 107 : 7 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 107 . Publication date : November 2017 . 4 RESULTS In this section , we will first briefly describe the overview perception of collaborative writing based on interviewees reported data , following by two short sub - sections of the reported “tools and features for collaborative writing” , and “collaborative writing practices” ( RQ1 ) . Many features and practices fit in Table 1’s framework . Our primary focus of this section is on the new theme that emerged from the data : interviewees reported that sometimes they do not want to write together when they co - edit a document , and we report interviewees’ rationales in four categories in details ( RQ2 ) . Table 3 . Coding Themes and Categories . Theme Category Tools and Features Web - based collaborative writing systems ( e . g . , Google Docs ) Personal word processing systems ( e . g . , Microsoft Word ) Other editor systems ( e . g . , VI ) Shared storage systems ( e . g . , Dropbox ) Computer - mediated communication systems ( e . g . , Email ) Synchronous access and editing features Commenting and suggesting changes features Collaboration awareness features ( e . g . , color cursor and tracking changes ) Build - in communication features ( e . g . , chat in Google Docs ) Other neat features ( e . g . , search text in images in Microsoft OneNote ) Practices Writing synchronously and asynchronously Commenting and directly editing Writing collocated and remotely Communication is important Role assignment and contribution attribution When and Why I Don’t Want to Write Together Role structures and concomitant power differentials Accountability and credit of contribution Privacy of writing Protocols and network effects 4 . 1 An Overview of Reported Users’ Experience of Today’s Collaborative Writing All our interviewees reported that they write collaboratively now more often and more complex than before . This result suggests a widely adoption of collaborative writing tools today than previous studies reported years ago [ 37 ] ; [ 23 ] . The variety of documents produced by collaborative writing today is also much broader than before . All interviewees mentioned work - related documents in different professions ( e . g . , group reports and scholarly publications ) ; meanwhile , more than one - third of interviewees wrote documents with others for personal purposes ( e . g . , travel itineraries , monthly expense , and wedding invitations ) . This is new , as previous literature reported only work - related or education - related writing collaboration . 107 : 8 D . Wang et al . PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 107 . Publication date : November 2017 . Collaborations have also been conducted on a larger scale . When compared to previous empirical studies where most collaboration had only two co - authors ( e . g . , [ 2 ] , [ 6 ] ) , our interviewees reported that they collaborate in bigger groups . For example , college students said now they are often required to work in groups with 3 or 4 others to finish class assignments . The engineers in IT companies said they are required to create and share documents with the whole company ; thousands of employees could read and comment on them . 4 . 2 Features and Tools for Collaborative Writing Today’s more frequent collaborative writing at a larger scale can mainly attribute to the widely adoption of commercially available systems and features that support co - editing well . Interviewees mentioned various systems and features as “good technologies” to support collaborative writing , as shown in Table 3 . For example , Microsoft Word and Google Docs among others ( e . g . , LaTex or VI ) , were the most commonly mentioned systems . Interviewees also think some other CSCW systems ( e . g . , Dropbox and Instant Messaging ) are useful for collaborative writing as well . Interviewees reported various features that they used in collaborative writing . Echoing our observation and literature , the capability of leaving comments by the side to suggest changes was one of the most commonly discussed features ( i . e . , “tracking changes and comment” in Word and “suggestion mode” in Google Docs ) . Another useful feature is the synchronous co - editing capability , and some interviewees greatly valued the ability to edit synchronously provided by some web - based editors . 4 . 3 Collaborative Writing Practices All interviewees reported generally two practices : using a word processor to write a document asynchronously , and then exchanging the document with email or shared repository systems ( e . g . , Dropbox ) ; or using a cloud - based word processor and editing the shared copy of the document synchronously or asynchronously . This result fits into the Table 1’s Document Control Method . We found that interviewees’ choices of systems and features often correspond to their choices of practices , or vice versa . When they wanted to write asynchronously , they would choose Word ; when they used Google Docs , it was more likely that they wanted to write synchronously . The choices of writing practices are not very different from the Writing Strategies discussed in Table 1 . Among these two ways of collaborative writing , there is no one that is better than the other . The following quote is a representative opinion from the interviewees : “The simultaneous writing is awesome ; however , the lack of simultaneous writing in Word is also awesome . So it’s like sometimes you want to write together [ at the same time ] , and then sometimes [ you don’t , because ] it’s distracting . ” ( Interviewee 8 , Graduate Student ) Other than the collaborative features and practices , many interviewees also reported the different editing roles they played in the collaboration . These features , practices , and roles fit pretty well in the Posner and Baecker framework , thus are not the focus of this paper . We are intrigued by the newly emerged theme from the data that : sometimes a user does not want to write together with others , even though they are in a writing collaboration . 4 . 4 When and Why Users Do Not Want to Write Together in Collaborative Writing Why do users not want to write together when they are collaboratively creating a document ? It turns out that different interviewees mean different things when they say they do not want to write together . Some refer “write together” as temporal together , that they don’t want to synchronously edit a document ; some others refer “write together” as a spatial together in the content , that they don’t want to close co - edit the content with others . We can see that users’ reluctance to the practice of “writing together” is around the two new capabilities that have been introduced together with the commercially available systems in the past decade . In the following section , we will unfold their rationales using the interviewees’ report . Why Users Do Not Want to Write Together When They Are Writing Together … 107 : 9 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 107 . Publication date : November 2017 . From now on in this section , we refer to “write together” specifically as “synchronous editing” and “close co - editing” , and we categorize interviewees’ reported rationales of why not “writing together” into four categories , each in a sub - section respectively : Role Structures and Concomitant Power Differentials , Awareness for Responsibility and Contribution , Writing Privacy , and Social Norms , Policy , and Network Effects . 4 . 4 . 1 Role Structures and Concomitant Power Differentials Various roles and the corresponding rights and expectations , often caused by power dynamics [ 18 ] , can influence people’s collaboration behaviors . This difference of role structure and expectations can be caused by social status and expertise . For example , students write together with professors , or programmers write together with designers . We found that the role structure and concomitant power differentials is one major category of reasons why many interviewees do not want to write together with others , but the reasons can be quite opposite : sometimes it is because of having the role structure , and sometimes it is because of lacking the role structure . 1 . Inherited group role structure is not explicitly reflected in the writing group . The Posner and Baecker framework ( e . g . [ 25 ] ; [ 37 ] ) discussed writing roles ( e . g . , writer and editor ) in a collaborative writing group , but our interviewees reported that the collaborators often have different inherited role structures ( e . g . , employees and managers ) in their organizations or in school , and current systems do not reflect such roles . Some interviewees do not want to write together ( i . e . , close co - edit ) because of this inherited organizational role structure . For example , students and employees reported that they do not want to directly edit their advisors’ ( or managers’ ) words . But they are more comfortable to edit their friends’ and students’ words . The professors said they felt quite comfortable to directly change their students’ writing . The role structures and concomitant power differentials in the student and advisor case may also be caused by the difference in expertise . For example , the professor reported that he only leaves comments to suggest changes to a senior colleague because he believes the colleague can address the minor issues ( e . g . , typos ) on his own ; whereas he needs to directly edit his students’ work due to their inexperience . Similarly , the IT engineers reported that they do not allow user - interface designers to directly touch their technical design section of the document , just as they will not change the designers’ words . 2 . Writing groups devise existing access control features to reflect the inherited group role structures . Some web - based systems ( e . g . , Google Docs ) allow users to assign various access permissions to different people , such as permissions of editing , commenting , or only viewing . The design of this feature is following the writing roles implication in Posner and Baecker’s framework [ 37 ] . Some interviewees reported that their teams would use this various access permissions to reflect the inherited group role structure of the team . For example , for a system design document in IT companies , the core engineer team will have permission to write and edit the document , while the designers may only have permission to read and leave comments . This is an example of how a team uses the existing document control feature to reflect the role structures and concomitant power differentials in order to avoid writing together ( i . e . , close co - editing ) . But the engineer interviewee also acknowledges the benefits of having other people to comment on the document with a diverse perspective , thus , they want to share the commenting permission with the whole company to encourage knowledge sharing . 3 . Writing groups that do not have an inherited role structure may need an explicit role structures and concomitant power differentials . In some scenarios , the team does not have an inherited role structure . And , some interviewees believe that will actually cause problems . “When people pretend that there’s not a leader or there’s not a hierarchy , that’s when the trouble starts . People would be thinking , everyone’s great and everything is fair and democratic . Well , that’s actually never true …” ( Interviewee 9 , Graduate Student ) Apparently , without an explicit role structure , interviewees reported that the worst scenario : no one wants to work ( social loafing ) . 107 : 10 D . Wang et al . PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 107 . Publication date : November 2017 . “No one was doing any work , and so somebody decided to take charge and just said okay , you know , you do this part , you do this part . ” ( Interview 15 , College Student ) Another interviewee shared such opinion , and he believes that the lack of a clear role structure makes it harder to resolve conflicts , so that he does not want to write with others in such situations . “It’s not the technology that makes it worse , it’s just the lack of leadership … why we need a leader [ to make the decision ] ? you can’t just be the person with an idea and everyone else has to like your idea…” ( Interviewee 19 , Industrial Researcher ) Luckily , in most of these writing groups , a new role structure will emerge , together with an “unspoken leader” . “In a team , usually there ' s someone who talks more than others , and even though we don ' t assign a leader , we assume that the person who talks the most is the person structured as a leader . ” ( Interviewee 3 , Professor ) With the opportunity of being a leader , an interviewee said she had a better chance to express her voice in the final draft . Other interviewees also reported that they often acknowledge such authority of the unspoken leader , which may help with resolving the conflicts and fostering people to write together . “So I believe the unspoken leader is the one who has the kind of authority in the document … I think this is kind of the implicit hierarchy that comes into that document . ” ( Interviewee 14 , College Student ) In summary , the role structures and concomitant power differentials of the writing group plays a vital role in users’ experience of collaborative writing . It is not a simple answer that having such role structure is necessarily good for writing together , or bad . We argue further research need to be done to fully understand the mist around it , and current collaborative writing systems lack sophisticated design to support . 4 . 4 . 2 Accountability and Credit of Contribution Collaboration awareness about who wrote what in the moment has been thoroughly studied in CSCW literature [ 14 ] . In this study , we found that knowing who wrote what from a retrospective perspective is also vital for the accountability and credit attribution purposes . Almost all interviewees fear that writing together might blur individuals’ accountability to mistakes and credit of contributions , that is another reason why people do not want to write together . 1 . Writing groups need awareness to everyone’s contribution retrospectively for the accountability and credit attribution purpose . Most of today’s text editors such as Google Docs and ShareLaTex , can support in - the - moment collaboration awareness in synchronous editing better than systems in earlier years [ 23 ] . One example is that Google Docs uses color - coded cursors in the document to indicate collaborators’ real - time position . But interviewees also reported that they need a retrospective awareness of who write what in the document , so that the group can attribute credits based on each individual’s contribution . “It’s for the purposes of academic evaluation so that a person could be rewarded with the grade that matches his efforts … It also helps with the team dynamics so that you can identify who delivered what they promised , and who did not . ” ( Interviewee 17 , College Student ) Being aware of everyone’s contribution can also help with writing groups’ reflections and trigger valuable discussions . “It ' s just easier for us to know who write s what so we can talk about it on the next day , like ‘ Okay , I see your paragraph written over here . It ' s written by you , so tell me more about it . ’” ( Interviewee 22 , Software Engineer ) In some professions , such a clear awareness of contributions is a must . One of our participants , who is a lawyer , reported that the “real writing together” is forbidden in her working place . Because an incorrectly phrased legal document can have severe consequences , and the law firm wants to know whom to blame . In this case , the law firm had to make it explicit that its employees cannot use the synchronous editing feature , and the interviewee shared her employer’s standpoint . Why Users Do Not Want to Write Together When They Are Writing Together … 107 : 11 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 107 . Publication date : November 2017 . “… [ writing together simultaneously ] will cause complications and other complex issues . For example , you will not be quite sure who is responsible for what changes or revisions . And that will involve issues . …” ( Interviewee 30 , Lawyer ) 2 . Current collaborative writing systems lack the retrospective awareness of accountability and credit of contribution , so users devise existing features to create it . In many commonly used systems , there is no feature to support the awareness of contribution retrospectively . However , many interviewees reported that they creatively devise the existing features to mark people’s contributions in the document . For example , many interviewees reported that they often change text fonts or colors to manually embed authorship information in the text , which is very useful in writing together . In a case told by an interviewee , the writing group decided that each of them would use a different background color to represent each individual’s contribution and responsibility ; and they wrote the color scheme at the beginning of the text . After they finished writing and revision , they deleted the colors from the final document . The feature of leaving comments or suggesting changes is not sufficient for the awareness of contribution purpose . For example , interviewees would use Google Docs revision history feature , but they complained limit of the revision history feature where it shows only the differences between adjacent versions of a document ; there is no overview view of each author’s contribution in the final draft . Lack of such awareness promotes freeloading and hurts motivation of writing together . “We want to have a sense of who is collaborating , [ and ] who is actually working on the project . ‘Cause usually a team has like five or six people . It ' s a lot of people in the team . And we don ' t want to have one guy or just two or three people do the most work and then the others not do anything . ” ( Interviewee 11 , Graduate Student ) 3 . Writing groups currently often rely on project management systems to maintain such awareness , but an integrated feature would be ideal . Users wanted features that clarify each collaborator’s responsibility and contributions over time . Interviewees from various professions ( e . g . , consultants , engineers , and the lawyer ) reported that they have to use project management systems in their companies to fulfill such needs . These systems were usually paired with a word processor system ( e . g . , Word ) . Writing groups can assign the writing , editing , or validating tasks to different team members , and track the progress . The system records each person’s “check - in” ( e . g . , uploading a document ) and “check - out” ( e . g . , downloading a document ) activities , as well as writing , editing , and reviewing processes . Therefore , the employer knows whom to attribute the credit , and whom to blame if anything goes wrong . “ [ So we ] have this very mature [ project management ] system to make sure that people know who made the mistakes or caused the problems , if there ' s anything wrong . ” In summary , many systems have implemented features to support collaboration awareness , but not sufficient to represent the awareness of accountabilities and credit of contributions . Lacking a sophisticated feature to represent the authorship in fine - grained editing , the synchronous close co - editing violates the needs of awareness of accountability and credit attribution . Thus , users do not want to write together . 4 . 4 . 3 The Privacy of Writing Sometimes it is not the team relation or technology get in the way of writing together , it is just the individual difference regarding writing . Some interviewees refuse to write together in a collaborative writing because of the concepts such as “ document is a private space ” and “ writing is private ” , which we synthesize as the privacy of writing . 1 . Some users believe writing should be a private activity because they do not want to be judged or distracted during the thought process . “You’re watching other people writing and you know yourself to be watched by the other people … I lost the pleasure of writing … Writing should be a private activity . ” ( Interviewee 21 , Industrial Researcher ) 107 : 12 D . Wang et al . PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 107 . Publication date : November 2017 . Some interviewees further explained why they think writing is private : they worried that their detailed typing behaviors ( e . g . , insert and delete the same word ) might be interpreted by others as struggling with the thought process . Such behaviors are really common in creative writing , but being watched or possibly judged by their collaborators would make them uncomfortable . “I don’t want people to see my thought process , because when [ I write ] , I type and then delete and then insert again … so I think it will be better for me just to go to another text document and then type … When I see that it is good [ enough ] , I will copy and paste it [ back into the document that is being synchronously edited ] . Interviewees also believed writing should be private because their writing process might be distracted when they saw what others were typing , or they think they might distract others as well . But they also acknowledge that they would want to be distracted by others’ writing , when their writing is closely related to others’ input and by seeing others’ writing , they can coordinate their thoughts . “I’m writing an introduction and I see someone working in a couple paragraphs later . I start looking at what they’re writing to converge on the same point . ” ( Interviewee 13 , Graduate Student ) 2 . Users’ concern for writing privacy is less severe in the writing tasks that do not have a privacy or credit attribution expectation . In writing tasks such as taking meeting minutes , setting up outlines , and brainstorming ideas in a meeting , interviewees reported that the synchronous close co - editing was very helpful and they had no issues with writing together . “I ' ll edit documents simultaneously , but those documents are primarily committee documents . Like I’m on a faculty - search committee , then we write a description of the position together [ during the meeting ] . ” ( Interviewee 4 , Professor ) In summary , the privacy of writing is a new concept that are reported by interviewees ; we suspect that it only emerges after a large user population adopted the writing together practice in their everyday life . This perception seems related to individual differences and writing task differences . Further exploration is needed to fully understand its cause and impact in collaborative writing . 4 . 4 . 4 Protocols and Network Effects The last category of rationales that some interviewees reported why they do not want to write together in collaborative writing is coded as protocols and network effects . Protocols in this context include both social norms ( they don’t think they should write together ) and organizational policy ( they are not allowed to write together ) . And the network effect in this context is not about adoption of technology , but on the level of practices ( others don’t write together , neither should I ) and perceptions ( others don’t want to write together , neither should I ) . 1 . Writing groups can have a shared social norm that they do not write together ( i . e . , direct edit ) . Some interviewees reported that their teams have a shared agreement that directly editing others’ work is not polite . It would therefore be rude to directly change “ a writing piece that belongs to somebody else . ” Rather , they would prefer to write “less” together , such as leaving high level comment by the side , or initiating an offline conversation to suggest changes , with showing their respect for others’ words . “ Usually I know that whatever that person wrote was for a reason . … they’re all very smart … s o I would never just delete anything without politely suggesting it first . ” ( Interviewee 24 , Software Engineer ) 2 . Users’ professions and organizational policy also influenced whether they write together . Student and faculty interviewees were generally open to close co - editing , whereas interviewees working in companies were extremely cautious about this type of others’ work . Some companies may ban the internal use of a competitor’s product ( e . g . , Microsoft bans Google Docs ) . Whether and how to write together of employees in those companies are influenced by their organizations’ policy . The aforementioned lawyer’s case is more extreme that the law firm not only restricts the systems to use but also forbids the close co - editing practice . Why Users Do Not Want to Write Together When They Are Writing Together … 107 : 13 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 107 . Publication date : November 2017 . 3 . Network effect on perceptions and practices is another reason why users ( don’t ) want to write together . The mindset and practice that one’s colleagues and friends all use is preferred over other mindsets and practices . We think it is part of the efforts to build common ground within one’s social network to ease the most likely potential collaborations . Even though Word released an online editor , and Google Docs developed an offline mode to function without Internet ; none of our interviewees have used it or would want to use it . Users tend to have a predefined perception simply because their friends and colleagues are using a tool to write in a specific way , and they thus believe the tool is best and only for that way . 5 DISCUSSION Overall , our interviewees reported that various tools and new features are being used in their today’s collaborative writing , and because of these new features , the users can adopt some new practices when they write together . However , to our surprise , people reported that they sometimes do not want to write “really” together when they write in a group . We further explored users’ rationales based on the interview data . In this section , we would like to propose three design implications based on the results . 5 . 1 Features to Reflect Inherited Group Role Structure and Concomitant Power Differentials In addition to the writing group roles ( e . g . , writer and editor in Posner and Baecker’s framework ) , co - authors often also have an inherited role structure in a collaboration , such as the manager and employee relationship . This inherited role structures and concomitant power differentials can impact users’ co - editing behaviors , but current systems do not reflect this information sufficiently , and that is why users sometimes devise existing features to achieve that . In line with this finding , we suggest that the system can design new features to leverage the team’s role structure information . For example , current systems ( e . g . , Word track - change ) show all the edits stacked together . We propose the system can present different levels of awareness of changes to the co - authors based on their relationships . If the change is made by a supervisor or expert , the user does not need to see the detailed level of changes ; whereas the user may want to see the detailed changes from a junior team member in order to ensure the quality . On the other side , a user can choose who can or cannot see his / her detailed editing behaviors in a synchronous collaborative writing . In this way , the user can have more flexibility to choose what to see and what not to see , and what to be seen and what not to be seen , based on the role structure . The system can be even smarter . In the workplace settings , many companies have an organization chart with all the relationship information between colleagues . Thus , the internal collaborative writing systems can harvest this information and make appropriate customizations on the user interface to reflect the group role structure . For example , the system could ask for the user’s preference of whose edits to show and which ones can be automatically accepted , skirting the possibilities of incorrect inferences from other sources . The machine learning algorithm thus can remember the user’s feedbacks and train models from these choices , which will result in a personalized system design . Such design implication may generalize to other CSCW systems and may go beyond workplace internal use . The public social media sites ( e . g . , LinkedIn ) also have some sort of role structure information between collaborators , and designers may easily incorporate it into the design of shared repository systems ( e . g . , Dropbox ) . However , certain unintended consequences of such design should also be considered . For example , incorporate organizational role structure into a collaborative writing system may further aggravate the imbalance of collaboration . The employees or juniors may be even less willing to edit the managers’ or seniors’ work , and contribute less . This imbalance of contribution in content has been shown associated to lower quality outcomes [ 36 ] . 107 : 14 D . Wang et al . PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 107 . Publication date : November 2017 . 5 . 2 Features to Support Awareness of Individual’s Accountability and Credit of Contribution Some users do not want to utilize the new capabilities to write together because such editing style may blur the individuals’ accountability and credit of contribution , as we have seen in the consultants and lawyer’s reported stories . They even prefer to use “the slow and old way” that asynchronously editing a document and exchanging the document via email so they could keep everything in order and traceable . A few engineer interviewees also expressed similar concern . Knowing who wrote a paragraph will not only clarify the accountability and credit of contribution , but also help with reflections on the writing , and trigger conversations . For example , knowing that a particular non - committed co - author had written very little could trigger a discussion of commitment level . Thus , we propose a system should preserve the information of individuals’ contributions and present it in an accessible way . Information visualization techniques fits in this need . We crafted a primitive design prototype in this direction , as shown in Figure 1 . In this visualization , different colors ( purple , green , and orange ) represent different authorship ( three authors ) in the final draft in a collaboratively written document after dozens of revisions . Such visualization provides a retrospective awareness of the overall authorship attribution of a co - authored multi - revision document , which can help with clarifying accountability and credit of contribution for co - authors using close co - editing practice . Existing functions such as Word’s track changes or Google Docs’s revision history are primary designed to reveal differences between two adjacent revisions of a document ; and once a document has dozens of revisions , the annotation gets messy and hard to read . This visualization design is proposed to complement certain awareness features . This system can also help researcher , as it can provide a labeled co - authored document corpus from users everyday writing practices . And this corpus can serve as the training dataset for Natural Language Processing , and Computational Linguistics researchers to train machine learning models to pick up the different writing styles ( i . e . , authorship attribution ) . For example , with the help of this visualization , researchers can easily label authorship difference at the paragraph level or the sentence level , and train the AI algorithm to pick up the difference . This can potentially turn any co - authored documents into a research corpus . Figure 1 . A Prototype of the Visualization System that Preserves and Presents the Full History of Co - Authors’ Contributions . This Figure Illustrates Three Co - Authors’ ( green , orange , and purple ) Edits in the Final Draft after Dozens of Revisions . We may also want to migrate visualizations from existing designs . The Babble system developed for synchronous computer - mediated communication systems by Erickson et al . [ 16 ] could also fit for today’s writing together context , as people do write synchronously more often . They designed a visualization ( Figure 2 ) to reflect how active each person is in a text - based conversation . When a person is more active ( or adds a lot of content to the document in our scenario ) , his / her dot will move toward the center of the circle . Why Users Do Not Want to Write Together When They Are Writing Together … 107 : 15 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 107 . Publication date : November 2017 . If a person is browsing other webpages or using other software , his / her dot will move outside the circle . We can use a similar metaphor to represent individuals’ commitment level and credit of contribution . However , we should be careful when interpreting this visualization , as this visualization is generated from traces of keyboard activates , and there are many other ways of contribution . This visualization presents a first glance to what is happening , and helps with raising some questions . But in order to answer these questions , one may need deeper evaluation and analyses . Figure 2 . The visualization used to represent the activeness of participants in Babble [ 16 ] . 5 . 3 Balancing the Privacy of Writing and Collaboration Awareness Users have individual difference regarding writing together , especially on synchronous close co - editing . Most interviewees found it a useful practice , but some interviewees found it distracting and uncomfortable . A few interviewees reported that they had to develop work - around strategies to avoid synchronous editing in a synchronous editing session . They often type in a separate private document , then copy and paste the satisfied paragraphs back to the shared document that others are working on . We suggest that the collaborative system can provide both a private writing place and the synchronous writing session . ShrEdit , a tool developed in the 1990s , explicitly supports a private writing session in addition to synchronous public editing [ 27 ] . And we also need to be careful with balancing the collaboration awareness . While a user is working in this private window , the fact that the person is actively writing should be displayed in a way that informs collaborators that the user is not being lazy or away from the keyboard . 6 LIMITATIONS AND CONCLUSION We acknowledge that due to the constrain of the study design ( e . g . , sampling and interviewing method ) , this study has a number of limitations . For example , our sample is not representative for a broader user population , and we have no intention of claiming any generalizable conclusion . We want the readers to take from this study with in - depth insights into how a subset of users think and do in collaborative writing at the current time . The findings on practices might be different in a few years , as people get more familiar with the technology and the technologies may also evolve ; however , the findings on rationales for why people choose certain practices may last much longer , and help us to interpret users’ new collaborative writing behaviors in future . Another limitation is that the contexts and kinds of collaborative writing are enormous and we are presenting results only from a number of reported cases . Boellstorff et al . reported a case study where they wrote a book in Google Docs [ 8 ] . Their experience is certainly different from the experiences reported by our engineer participants . But some of the phenomena that they reported share similarities with our interviewees’ reports ; thus , the rationales in this paper may also help with interpreting phenomena in other cases . For example , they devised the commenting feature to clarify and vote for changes , because they also needed an awareness of accountability and credit of contribution . We also want to clarify that we have no intention to argue that synchronous editing is better than asynchronous editing . We studied why people do not want to write together is not to claim that people 107 : 16 D . Wang et al . PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 107 . Publication date : November 2017 . should write together . On that point , we agree with most of our interviewees that sometimes we need asynchronous editing , and sometimes we need synchronous editing . In this paper , we used the comparison of synchronous and asynchronous as a lens to examine people’s practices , and identified challenges both in writing together and not writing together , so that we can design CSCW systems to better support both scenarios . This work also informs several future research directions . The variety of co - editing practices in different contexts require researchers to examine the details in each of these domains . We are looking forward to seeing research insights of writing together in workplaces or schools . In addition , this paper focused a lot on the temporal dimension but barely touched the spatial difference in writing collaboration . It will be interesting to study how people think and do in distributed collaborative writing versus collocated ones . The findings may lead to future design of communication channels in the collaborative writing systems . In conclusion , we have presented an interview study that focuses on people’s practices and perceptions about collaborative writing with today’s technology and context . Our results suggest that people from various occupations are writing together more frequently , more pervasively , and more complicatedly . Among other results , we found people sometimes do not want to write together in a collaborative writing , and we further explored the rationales in four categories : role structures and concomitant power differentials , accountability and credit of contribution , the privacy of writing , and protocols and network effects . We conclude the paper with system design implications and new research directions in collaborative writing . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work is generously supported by a Google Focused Faculty Research Award and a grant from the National Science Foundation ( ACI - 1322304 ) . We thank all the interviewees for contributing their time and insights . We also thank the anonymous reviewers , editors , and four senior researchers in the HCI field who commented and revised this work to make it publishable quality : Judy Olson , Gary Olson , Dan Russell , and Tom Erickson . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Ronald M . Baecker , Nastos Dimitrios , Ilona R . Posner , and Kelly L . Mawby . 1993 . The user - centered iterative design of collaborative writing software . In Proceedings of the INTERACT ' 93 and CHI ' 93 , 399 - 405 . [ 2 ] Eevi E . Beck . 1993 . A survey of experiences of collaborative writing . In Computer supported collaborative writing , pp . 87 - 112 . Springer London . [ 3 ] Michael S . Bernstein , Greg Little , Robert C . Miller , Bjorn Hartmann , Mark S . Ackerman , David R . Karger , David Crowell , and Katrina Panovich . 2015 . Soylent : a word processor with a crowd inside . Communications of the ACM , 58 ( 8 ) , 85 - 94 . [ 4 ] Patrick Biernacki , and Dan Waldorf . 1981 . Snowball sampling : Problems and techniques of chain referral sampling . Sociological methods & research 10 , no . 2 ( 1981 ) : 141 - 163 . [ 5 ] Jeremy Birnholtz and Steven Ibara . 2012 . Tracking changes in collaborative writing : edits , visibility and group maintenance . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 809 - 818 . [ 6 ] Jeremy Birnholtz , Stephanie Steinhardt , and Antonella Pavese . 2013 . Write here , write now ! : an experimental study of group maintenance in collaborative writing . In Proceedings of the CHI’13 , 961 - 970 . [ 7 ] Ina Blau and Avner Caspi . 2009 . What type of collaboration helps ? Psychological ownership , perceived learning and outcome quality of collaboration using Google Docs . In Proceedings of the Chais conference on instructional technologies research , 48 - 55 . [ 8 ] Tom Boellstorff , Bonnie Nardi , Celia Pearce , and T . L . Taylor . 2013 . Words with friends : writing collaboratively online . Interactions 20 , no . 5 ( 2013 ) : 58 - 61 . [ 9 ] Cornelia Brodahl , Said Hadjerrouit , and Nils Kristian Hansen . 2011 . Collaborative writing with Web 2 . 0 technologies : education students ' perceptions . In Journal of Information Technology Education : Innovations in Practice . [ 10 ] Rafael Calvo , Stephen T . O ' Rourke , Janet Jones , Kalina Yacef , and Peter Reimann . 2011 . Collaborative writing support tools on the cloud . Learning Technologies , IEEE Transactions on 4 , no . 1 ( 2011 ) : 88 - 97 . [ 11 ] Teresa Cerratto . 1999 . Instrumenting Collaborative Writing and its cognitive tools . In Proceedings HCP 99 Conference , Human Centred Processes , 24 - 26 . Why Users Do Not Want to Write Together When They Are Writing Together … 107 : 17 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 107 . Publication date : November 2017 . [ 12 ] Teresa Cerratto , and Henrry Rodriguez . 2002 . Studies of Computer Supported Collaborative Writing . Implications for System Design . In COOP , 139 - 154 . [ 13 ] Andrew Dillon . 1993 . How collaborative is collaborative writing ? An analysis of the production of two technical reports . In Computer supported collaborative writing , 69 - 85 . Springer London . [ 14 ] Paul Dourish , and Victoria Bellotti . 1992 . Awareness and coordination in shared workspaces . In Proceedings of the 1992 ACM conference on Computer - supported cooperative work , 107 - 114 . [ 15 ] Lisa S . Ede , and Andrea A . Lunsford . 1990 . Singular texts / plural authors : Perspectives on collaborative writing . SIU Press . [ 16 ] Thomas Erickson , David N . Smith , Wendy A . Kellogg , Mark Laff , John T . Richards , and Erin Bradner . 1999 . Socially translucent systems : social proxies , persistent conversation , and the design of “babble” . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 72 - 79 . [ 17 ] Linda Flower , and John R . Hayes . 1981 . A cognitive process theory of writing . College composition and communication ( 1981 ) : 365 - 387 . [ 18 ] Donelson R . Forsyth . 2009 . Group dynamics . Cengage Learning . [ 19 ] Jolene Galegher , and Robert E . Kraut . 1994 . Computer - mediated communication for intellectual teamwork : An experiment in group writing . Information systems research 5 , no . 2 ( 1994 ) : 110 - 138 . [ 20 ] Jonathan Grudin . 1988 . Why CSCW applications fail : problems in the design and evaluation of organizational interfaces . In Proceedings of the 1988 ACM conference on Computer - supported cooperative work , 85 - 93 . [ 21 ] Christina Haas . 1989 . Does the medium make a difference ? Two studies of writing with pen and paper and with computers . Human - Computer Interaction 4 , no . 2 ( 1989 ) : 149 - 169 . [ 22 ] Lester J Holtzblatt , Laurie E Damianos , & Daniel Weiss . 2010 . Factors impeding Wiki use in the enterprise : a case study . In Proceedings of CHI ' 10 Extended Abstracts , 4661 - 4676 . [ 23 ] Hee - Cheol Ezra Kim , and Kerstin Severinson Eklundh . 2001 . Reviewing practices in collaborative writing . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 10 , no . 2 ( 2001 ) : 247 - 259 . [ 24 ] Guo Li , Haiyi Zhu , Tun Lu , Xianghua Ding , and Ning Gu . 2015 . Is It Good to Be Like Wikipedia ? : Exploring the Trade - offs of Introducing Collaborative Editing Model to Q & A Sites . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ' 15 ) . 1080 - 1091 . [ 25 ] Paul Benjamin Lowry , Aaron Curtis , and Michelle René Lowry . 2004 . Building a taxonomy and nomenclature of collaborative writing to improve interdisciplinary research and practice . Journal of Business Communication 41 , no . 1 ( 2004 ) : 66 - 99 . [ 26 ] Paul Benjamin Lowry , and Jay F . Nunamaker Jr . 2003 . Using Internet - based , distributed collaborative writing tools to improve coordination and group awareness in writing teams . Professional Communication , IEEE Transactions on 46 , no . 4 ( 2003 ) : 277 - 297 . [ 27 ] Lola J . McGuffin , and Gary M . Olson . 1992 . ShrEdit : A Shared Electronic Work Space . University of Michigan , Cognitive Science and Machine Intelligence Laboratory . [ 28 ] Alex Mitchell , Ilona Posner , and Ronald Baecker . 1995 . Learning to write together using groupware . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , 288 - 295 . [ 29 ] Michael J . Muller , and Sandra Kogan . 2010 . Grounded theory method in HCI and CSCW . Cambridge : IBM Center for Social Software , 1 - 46 . [ 30 ] Michael Nebeling , Alexandra To , Anhong Guo , Adrian A . de Freitas , Jaime Teevan , Steven P . Dow , and Jeffrey P . Bigham . 2016 . WearWrite : Crowd - assisted writing from smartwatches . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 3834 - 3846 . ACM . [ 31 ] Christine M . Neuwirth , Ravinder Chandhok , David S . Kaufer , Paul Erion , James Morris , and Dale Miller . 1992 . Flexible diff - ing in a collaborative writing system . In Proceedings of the 1992 ACM conference on Computer - supported cooperative work , 147 - 154 . [ 32 ] Sylvie Noël , and Jean - Marc Robert . 2003 . How the Web is used to support collaborative writing . Behaviour & Information Technology 22 , no . 4 ( 2003 ) : 245 - 262 . [ 33 ] Sylvie Noël , and Jean - Marc Robert . 2004 . Empirical study on collaborative writing : What do co - authors do , use , and like ? Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 13 , no . 1 ( 2004 ) : 63 - 89 . [ 34 ] Judith S . Olson , Gary M . Olson , Marianne Storrøsten , and Mark Carter . 1993 . Groupwork close up : A comparison of the group design process with and without a simple group editor . ACM Transactions on Information Systems ( TOIS ) 11 , no . 4 ( 1993 ) : 321 - 348 . [ 35 ] Judith S . Olson , and Gary M . Olson . 2013 . Working together apart : Collaboration over the Internet . Synthesis Lectures on Human - Centered Informatics 6 , no . 5 ( 2013 ) : 1 - 151 . 107 : 18 D . Wang et al . PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 107 . Publication date : November 2017 . [ 36 ] Judith S . Olson , Dakuo Wang , Gary M . Olson , and Jingwen Zhang . 2017 . How people write together now : Beginning the investigation with advanced undergraduates in a project course . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) , 24 ( 1 ) , 4 . [ 37 ] Ilona R . Posner , and Ronald M . Baecker . 1992 . How people write together [ groupware ] . In System Sciences , 1992 . Proceedings of the Twenty - Fifth Hawaii International Conference on , vol . 4 , 127 - 138 . [ 38 ] Mike Sharples , J . S . Goodlet , Eevi E . Beck , Charles C . Wood , S . M . Easterbrook , and Lydia Plowman . 1993 . Research issues in the study of computer supported collaborative writing . In Computer supported collaborative writing , 9 - 28 . Springer London . [ 39 ] Neomy Storch . 2005 . Collaborative writing : Product , process , and students’ reflections . Journal of second language writing 14 , no . 3 ( 2005 ) : 153 - 173 . [ 40 ] Yunting Sun , Diane Lambert , Makoto Uchida , and Nicolas Remy . 2014 . Collaboration in the cloud at Google . In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM conference on Web science , 239 - 240 . [ 41 ] Susan G . Tammaro , Jane N . Mosier , Nancy C . Goodwin , and Gabriel Spitz . 1997 . Collaborative writing is hard to support : A field study of collaborative writing . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 6 , no . 1 ( 1997 ) : 19 - 51 . [ 42 ] Jaime Teevan , Shamsi T . Iqbal , and Curtis Von Veh . Supporting collaborative writing with microtasks . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 2657 - 2668 . ACM , 2016 . [ 43 ] Fernanda B . Viégas , Martin Wattenberg , and Kushal Dave . 2004 . Studying cooperation and conflict between authors with history flow visualizations . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , 575 - 582 . [ 44 ] Dakuo Wang , Judith S . Olson , Jingwen Zhang , Trung Nguyen , and Gary M . Olson . 2015 . DocuViz : Visualizing Collaborative Writing . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1865 - 1874 . [ 45 ] Steve Whittaker , Loren Terveen , and Bonnie A . Nardi . 2000 . Let ' s stop pushing the envelope and start addressing it : a reference task agenda for HCI . Human – Computer Interaction 15 , no . 2 - 3 ( 2000 ) : 75 - 106 . [ 46 ] Soobin Yim , Dakuo Wang , Judith S . Olson , Viet Vu , and Mark Warschauer . 2017 . Synchronous Collaborative Writing i n the Classroom : Undergraduates’ Collaboration Practices and their Impact on Writing Style , Quality , and Quantity . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( pp . 468 - 479 ) . ACM . [ 47 ] Soobin Yim , Mark Warschauer , Binbin Zheng , and Joshua F . Lawrence . 2014 . Cloud - Based Collaborative Writing and the Common Core Standards . Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy 58 , no . 3 ( 2014 ) : 243 - 254 . Received April 2017 ; revised July 2017 ; accepted November 2017 .