© 2006 Nature Publishing Group After invasion of host cells , some members of the gen - era Listeria , Shigella , Rickettsia , Mycobacterium and Burkholderia gain access to the cytosol by lysis of the entry vesicle . Once in the cytosol , these organisms are propelled by polymerization of the eukaryotic cyto - skeletal protein actin ( BOX 1 ) at the surface of one pole of the bacterium . Intracellular motile bacteria can reach speeds of 3 to 87 µ m per minute , depending on the cell type and the pathogen . Bacterial motility can lead to the formation of host - cell - membrane pro trusions tipped by intracellular bacteria that project into adja - cent cells . These protrusions can be engulfed and lysed by neighbouring cells by a process known as para - cytophagy , which is facilitated by bacterial proteins . Paracytophagy results in spreading of infection from one cell to the next in the absence of immune surveil - lance 1 , 2 . Actin - based motility can facilitate intracellular survival in other ways . For instance , rapid actin - based motility might assist Listeria monocytogenes in avoid - ing recognition by the ubiquitin degradation system 3 . The central role of actin - based motility in bacterial virulence is reflected in the marked attenuation of defined non - motile mutants of L . monocytogenes 4 , Shigella flexneri 5 – 7 and Burkholderia pseudomallei ( M . P . S . , E . E . G . & G . J . Bancroft , unpublished results ) . As such , bacterial factors that control actin assembly are often key determinants of virulence and attractive targets for intervention . This field has been described previously , most recently by Gouin et al . 8 In this review , we describe the most recent advances in the understanding of the mech - anisms of intracellular motility of both B . pseudomallei and Mycobacterium marinum . This review also focuses on the group of ‘attaching and effacing’ ( AE ) Escherichia coli that do not enter host cells , but attach intimately to the surface of enterocytes and form motile and undu - lating actin - rich structures termed pedestals , possibly facilitating spread to adjacent cells in the intestinal tract ( FIG . 1 ) . Recent studies reviewed below have revealed differences in the mechanisms by which AE pathogens recruit and activate cellular components to elicit pedestal formation . Mechanisms of actin - based motility The interaction between the eukaryotic - cell plasma membrane and the underlying actin cytoskeleton has a central role in cell motility , morphogenesis and phago - cytosis . However , because it is difficult to dissect such interactions at the molecular level , little is known about the factors that participate in the nucleation of actin filaments at these sites . The formation of actin - enriched structures by bacterial pathogens provides a convenient model to identify cellular factors that are recruited to sites of actin assembly and to dissect their role in actin dynamics . The actin tails formed by Listeria , Shigella and M . marinum , and the actin - rich arrays in the ped - estal structures induced by AE E . coli , are composed of short , crosslinked actin filaments that rapidly turn over , reminiscent of those at the leading edge of lamellipodia of motile cells . By contrast , the actin tails formed by spotted - fever - group Rickettsia species are composed of long , unbranched actin filaments that are similar to those found in filopodia . Identification and structure – function analysis of the bacterial factors that mediate actin - based motility of these pathogens has offered fas - cinating insights into the protein – protein interactions and signalling pathways that lead to lamellipodia and filopodia formation . Many of the bacterial factors that are necessary for intracellular motility are expressed at the pole of the Division of Microbiology , Institute for Animal Health , Compton Laboratory , Berkshire , RG20 7NN , UK . Correspondence to M . P . S . e - mail : mark - p . stevens @ bbsrc . ac . uk doi : 10 . 1038 / nrmicro1320 Lamellipodia Sheet - like protrusions of the plasma membrane associated with exploratory cell movements and cell motility . Composed of orthogonal , highly crosslinked actin arrays . The Rho GTPase Rac has a crucial role in lamellipodia formation through activation of NPFs . Filopodia Protrusions of the plasma membrane with finger - like morphology reaching 200 µm in length . Composed of dynamic bundles of actin filaments . Associated with rapid membrane remodelling , transient matrix adhesions and cell motility . Cdc42 has a crucial role in initiating filopodia formation . Actin - dependent movement of bacterial pathogens Joanne M . Stevens , Edouard E . Galyov and Mark P . Stevens Abstract | Listeria , Rickettsia , Burkholderia , Shigella and Mycobacterium species subvert cellular actin dynamics to facilitate their movement within the host cytosol and to infect neighbouring cells while evading host immune surveillance and promoting their intracellular survival . ‘Attaching and effacing’ Escherichia coli do not enter host cells but attach intimately to the cell surface , inducing motile actin - rich pedestals , the function of which is currently unclear . The molecular basis of actin - based motility of these bacterial pathogens reveals novel insights about bacterial pathogenesis and fundamental host - cell pathways . NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 4 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 91 REVIEWS © 2006 Nature Publishing Group p34 Arp3 Arp2 p40 p16 p20 p21 + NPF * * Facultative intracellular pathogen A pathogen that can replicate either within the host cell or as a cell - free unit . bacterium from which the actin - rich tail forms ( for example , Listeria ActA 9 , Shigella IcsA 10 and Burkholderia BimA 11 ) and are also expressed at high levels within the host cytosol ( Listeria ActA 12 , Shigella IcsA 13 and Mycobacterium motility factor 14 ) . In some instances , expression of the bacterial factor has been shown to be growth - phase dependent ( Shigella IcsA 15 ) . The strategies used by intracellular bacterial patho - gens to induce polar actin polymerization , and those used by AE E . coli to elicit pedestal formation at the plasma membrane , involve the recruitment and activa - tion of the cellular actin - related protein ( Arp ) 2 / 3 com - plex . However , pathogens that show actin - based motility can be separated into two groups depending on whether or not they mimic a cellular nucleation - promoting factor ( NPF ) ( for example , Listeria ActA and Rickettsia RickA ) or whether they require the recruitment of a cellular NPF to the bacterial surface to promote Arp2 / 3 - medi - ated motility ( for example , Shigella IcsA and AE E . coli Tir ) ( TABLE 1 ) . Pathogens expressing NPF mimics Listeria monocytogenes . L . monocytogenes is a Gram - positive facultative intracellular pathogen . Infections are frequently acquired through the oral route and can result in gastroenteritis and severe systemic sequelae , including meningitis , septicaemia and miscarriage . L . monocy - togenes induces its own uptake into non - phagocytic cells , replicates in the host - cell cytoplasm and spreads from cell to cell by actin - based motility . Identification and char - acterization of the bacterial and cellular factors that are required for actin - based motility of L . monocytogenes have contributed greatly to the understanding of cellular actin dynamics . Most notably , Listeria research has led to the characterization of the cellular Arp2 / 3 complex as a key actin - nucleating component 16 , 17 and has opened the way to studying actin - filament assembly in the absence of the plasma membrane using in vitro reconstitution systems . The L . monocytogenes factor that mediates actin - based motility is the product of the actA gene 4 , 18 . ActA is encoded in the lecithinase operon , upstream of a gene Box 1 | Regulation of actin polymerization Actin is one of the most abundant proteins in eukaryotic cells and exists in two forms , ATP - bound monomeric ( G ) actin and ADP - bound filamentous ( F ) actin . Filaments are assembled by the reversible polymerization of monomers at the fast - growing barbed ( plus ) end rather than the pointed ( minus ) end . A key protein that regulates polarized growth is profilin , which binds G - actin and funnels monomers to the barbed end of filaments . Polymerization requires ATP hydrolysis and is tightly regulated by monomer - and filament - binding proteins that also maintain the free monomer pool and mediate capping , crosslinking , bundling or severing of actin filaments 91 . An initial nucleation step creates free barbed ends by uncapping or severing of filaments or de novo nucleation of monomers . However , actin nucleation from free monomers is kinetically unfavourable and has to be stimulated by cellular factors . Actin - nucleating factors include formins 92 , Drosophila Spire 93 and the Arp ( actin - related protein ) 2 / 3 complex 94 . The best characterized of these is the highly conserved seven - subunit Arp2 / 3 complex , which comprises two Arp proteins and five additional protein subunits ; p16 , p20 , p21 , p34 and p40 ( see the figure ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex requires activation by proteins known as nucleation - promoting factors ( NPFs ) such as Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) - family members . The Arp2 and Arp3 subunits are structurally related to actin , and conformational changes induced by NPFs might allow these subunits to mimic barbed ends to serve as a template for polymerization . Arp2 / 3 can also crosslink newly formed filaments into Y - branched orthogonal arrays , creating actin networks . NPFs often share conserved domains , including proline - rich regions , WASP homology domain - 2 ( WH2 ) and central and acidic ( CA ) domains . Proline - rich regions recruit profilin and many regulatory proteins , whereas WH2 and CA domains respectively bind monomeric actin or the Arp2 / 3 complex . In eukaryotic cells , the NPFs WASP and neural ( N ) - WASP are in an autoinhibited conformation , which is relieved by the binding of the Rho family GTPase Cdc42 and phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) . This results in Arp2 / 3 activation and initiation of actin polymerization . The intracellular bacteria discussed in this review either mimic NPFs or NPF activators to initiate actin polymerization at their surfaces in the cytosol . However , pedestal - inducing enteropathogenic E . coli stimulate N - WASP - dependent actin polymerization at the plasma membrane through a Cdc42 - independent mechanism . This is facilitated by the host - cell adaptor protein Nck , which can substitute functionally for Cdc42 in the activation of N - WASP at tyrosine - phosphorylated Nck - binding sites 95 . The figure shows a ribbon diagram of the atomic structure of the bovine Arp2 / 3 complex . The inactive form of Arp2 / 3 is shown on the left . The model proposed by Robinson et al . 96 for the active form of the Arp2 / 3 complex involves a conformational change that brings Arp2 ( shown in grey ) and Arp3 ( shown in orange ) subunits together ( indicated by red arrows ) so that they mimic the barbed ends of actin filaments and might serve as a template for actin polymerization . Figure reproduced with permission from REF . 96 © ( 2001 ) American Association for the Advancement of Science . R E V I E W S 92 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 4 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2006 Nature Publishing Group a c b Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) . The prototypic member of a family of proteins that stimulate the low intrinsic nucleation activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex . that encodes a phospholipase ( PlcB ) that is required for lysis of membrane protrusions surrounding bacteria during intercellular spread 19 , 20 . ActA is both necessary and sufficient for actin - based motility , as attachment of ActA to Streptococcus pneumoniae and expression of ActA in the related , but non - pathogenic , Listeria innocua conferred actin - based motility on these other - wise non - motile bacteria in Xenopus oocyte extracts 21 , 22 . Furthermore , ActA - coated beads can polymerize actin and undergo motility in a cell - free system in the absence of other bacterial factors 23 . In vitro reconstitution experi - ments have shown that ActA can promote actin - based motility of coated beads in cell - free extracts that contain only purified Arp2 / 3 , CapZ , cofilin and ATP , but does not require Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) - family members 24 – 26 . As ActA shares similar domains with WASP - family members , and L . monocytogenes forms normal actin tails in neural - WASP ( N - WASP ) – / – cells 27 , Figure 1 | Interaction of bacterial pathogens with actin . The figure shows transmission electron micrographs of myosin - S1 - decorated actin tails that are induced by the intracellular pathogens Listeria monocytogenes ( a ) and Rickettsia conorii ( b ) . In R . conorii tails , actin filaments are long and arranged in parallel . In L . monocytogenes , filaments are short and highly crosslinked , displaying characteristic Y - branched structures . The density of the filaments is higher closer to the bacterium compared with the rest of the tail ( boxed regions ) . Part c shows a scanning electron micrograph of actin - rich pedestals induced by enteropathogenic Escherichia coli . Parts a and b are reproduced with permission from REF . 34 © ( 1999 ) The Company of Biologists Ltd . Part c is reproduced with permission from REF . 97 © ( 2004 ) John Wiley & Sons Ltd . Table 1 | Actin - based motility of intracellular bacterial pathogens L . monocytogenes R . conorii / rickettsii B . pseudomallei S . flexneri M . marinum Bacterial factor required ActA RickA BimA IcsA Unknown Polar localization of the factor ? Yes Unclear , surface exposed Yes Yes Unknown Actin - tail morphology Short , highly crosslinked filaments Long filaments in parallel , bundled in protrusions Unknown Short , highly crosslinked filaments Short , highly crosslinked filaments Rates of movement 10 – 87 µ m per minute 5 – 8 µ m per minute Unknown 3 – 26 µ m per minute 11 µ m per minute Homologues identified in other species Homologue identified in L . ivanovii 98 , 99 , complements L . monocytogenes actA mutant 99 Genes encoding RickA homologues identified in all SFG Rickettsia species , absent from typhus group 38 , 39 BimA homologue identified in pathogenic B . mallei and the non - pathogenic B . thailandensis 51 Close homologues in all virulent strains of S . dysenteriae , S . flexneri , S . boydii , S . sonnei and in EI E . coli 5 None described to date Mechanism of tail formation ActA functions as an Arp2 / 3 - dependent NPF ( WASP ) mimic , activating Arp2 / 3 in vitro without WASP - family members 17 , 24 Bacterial factor functions as an Arp2 / 3 - dependent NPF ( WASP ) mimic , activating Arp2 / 3 in vitro without WASP . Overexpression of WCA domain inhibits motility 38 , 39 N - WASP - independent , probably an NPF ( WASP ) mimic , involvement of Arp2 / 3 not clear , BimA does not interact with Arp2 / 3 or activate Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin polymerization in vitro 11 Arp2 / 3 and N - WASP - dependent , Cdc42 mimic Largely unknown but probably NPF ( WASP ) and Arp2 / 3 dependent Role in cell - to - cell spread ? Yes , actA mutant does not form plaques 18 Unknown Unknown Yes , icsA mutants do not form infective foci in cell culture 5 , 6 Unknown Role in virulence ? Yes 4 Unknown Yes ( G . J . Bancroft , E . E . G . & M . P . S . , unpublished results ) Yes 5 – 7 Unknown Arp2 / 3 , actin - related protein - 2 / 3 ; B . mallei , Burkholderia mallei ; B . pseudomallei , Burkholderia pseudomallei ; B . thailandensis , Burkholderia thailandensis ; EI E . coli , enteroinvasive Escherichia coli ; L . ivanovii , Listeria ivanovii ; L . monocytogenes , Listeria monocytogenes ; M . marinum , Mycobacterium marinum ; NPF , nucleation - promoting factor ; N - WASP , neural WASP ; R . conorii , Rickettsia conorii ; R . rickettsii , Rickettsia rickettsii ; S . boydii , Shigella boydii ; S . dysenteriae , Shigella dysenteriae ; S . flexneri , Shigella flexneri ; S . sonnei , Shigella sonnei ; SFG , spotted fever group ; WCA , WH2 , central and acidic ; WASP , Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 4 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 93 © 2006 Nature Publishing Group Actin L . monocytogenes ActA R . conorii RickA S . ﬂexneri IcsA B . pseudomallei BimA Proline - rich motif WH2 ( W ) domain ( binds actin monomers ) CA domain ( binds / activates Arp2 / 3 ) Glycine - rich repeats Arp2 / 3 N - WASP Src homology - 3 ( SH3 ) domain A small module of ~ 50 amino - acid residues found in proteins that interact with proline - rich motifs . Focal adhesion sites Adhesions by which cells attach to the underlying substrate . Many structural , cytoskeletal and signalling proteins are concentrated in these structures . Stress fibres Contractile filaments involved in the maintenance of cell shape that support the motile apparatus of the cell . At least one end is anchored by a focal adhesion site . Central and acidic ( CA ) domain Forms part of a larger domain called a WCA domain . This region of WASP - family proteins stimulates the Arp2 / 3 complex . WASP homology - 2 ( WH2 ) domain WASP homology - 2 domain motifs are composed of approximately 35 amino acids and are conserved in cellular proteins that recruit actin monomers . it is thought that ActA functions as an NPF , directly acti - vating the Arp2 / 3 complex by mimicking the activity of WASP . In infected cells , immunocytochemistry has shown that the ActA protein is asymmetrically distributed on the bacterial surface , and is localized at the site of actin - tail formation 9 . The mature ActA protein is expressed on the bacterial surface as a protein comprising 610 amino acids with three functional domains ( FIG . 2 ) . The N - terminal domain , composed of the first 233 amino - acid residues , contains all the necessary residues for motility in cultured cells and cell - free extracts 28 , 29 and can stimulate the activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex in vitro 17 . The central domain ( amino acids 234 – 394 ) , which con - tains proline / glutamic - acid - rich repeats reminiscent of Src homology - 3 ( SH3 ) domains , is not essential for motility , but deletion of this region shortens actin tails in infected cells and decreases the velocity of movement in Xenopus oocyte extracts 28 . Indeed , the number of proline - rich repeats in this region has been correlated with the velo - city of movement , with each contributing to ~ 2 . 5 µ m per minute 30 . The hydrophobic C - terminal portion of ActA probably constitutes a membrane anchor 18 , which tethers ActA to the bacterial surface after it secretion . Several host - cell proteins have been localized to the actin tails of L . monocytogenes in infected cells . Their importance in motility has been extensively reviewed elsewhere and is summarized in Supplementary information S1 ( table ) . The proline - rich region and C - terminal portion of ActA shows significant sequence similarity with zyxin , an actin - binding protein that is associated with focal adhesion sites and stress fibres 31 . Interestingly , although ActA mimics WASP - family proteins in its activation of Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin assembly in host cells , ActA and zyxin also harbour similar Arp2 / 3 - independent actin - polymerization activities in vitro 32 . From in vitro reconstitution experiments , it has been proposed that Listeria propulsion in host cells might involve an ini - tial Arp2 / 3 - dependent nucleation step followed by an Arp2 / 3 - independent tail - elongation phase that requires the actin - filament - bundling protein fascin 33 . Rickettsia species . Rickettsia are Gram - negative obligate intracellular bacteria that cause arthropod - borne diseases of humans , including typhus ( Rickettsia prowazekii and Rickettsia typhi ) and spotted - fevers ( Rickettsia conorii , Rickettsia rickettsii , Rickettsia sibirica and Rickettsia mon - tana ) . Rickettsia species of the spotted - fever group show actin - based motility in the cytosol and nucleus of host cells at 5 – 8 µ m per minute and are capable of intercellular spread 34 – 37 . Comparison of the complete genome sequence of R . conorii with that of R . prowazekii , which cannot use actin - based motility , identified a 2 - kb R . conorii - specific region that encodes a predicted protein of 517 amino acids known as RickA 38 , 39 . RickA contains a central proline - rich domain and a C - terminal WH2 domain followed by a region with homology to the central and acidic ( CA ) domains of WASP - family proteins , including an amphipathic helix predicted to bind the Arp2 / 3 com - plex 39 ( FIG . 2 ) . The RickA protein lacks predicted signal sequences for secretion or obvious hydrophobic domains that might serve as a membrane anchor . Separate analy - sis of the R . rickettsii genome for WASP - like proteins identified a 494 - amino - acid RickA homologue 39 . RickA homologues are also found in the genomes of R . sibirica and R . montana and share the same general organiza - tion , although there are differences in the number and sequence of proline - rich repeats and C - terminal WASP homology - 2 ( WH2 ) domains . RickA proteins from R . conorii , R . rickettsii and R . sibirica have a single WH2 domain similar to WASP , whereas R . montana RickA Figure 2 | Mechanisms of intracellular bacterial actin polymerization . Schematic diagram depicting the proposed mechanisms by which intracellular pathogens recruit and activate actin - related protein - 2 / 3 ( Arp2 / 3 ) - dependent actin polymerization at the bacterial surface . Listeria monocytogenes ActA directly interacts with , and activates , the Arp2 / 3 complex . The Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) homology - 2 ( WH2 ) domain binds to actin monomers , and the central and acidic ( CA ) regions bind to , and activate , Arp2 / 3 . Shigella flexneri IcsA functions as a Cdc42 mimic , recruiting neural ( N - ) WASP to the bacterial surface through a glycine - rich region , which in turn recruits and activates the Arp2 / 3 complex . Rickettsia conorii RickA interacts with , and directly activates , the Arp2 / 3 complex in a manner similar to that of ActA ; however , Rickettsia - induced actin tails lack the Y - branches seen in Listeria - induced tails , and other bacterial or cellular factors might organize the actin filaments into unbranched arrays . The structure of Burkholderia pseudomallei - induced actin tails and the molecular mechanism by which they form are unclear . The schematic reflects the tertiary structure of the proteins . R E V I E W S 94 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 4 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2006 Nature Publishing Group CAAX motif A motif that is post - translationally modified by farnesylation at the cysteine residue and that results in localization to the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane . Type III secretion system A transmembrane - spanning ‘needle complex’ involved in the secretion of two classes of proteins , translocators and effectors . Type V secreted protein A protein translocated across the outer membrane of Gram - negative bacteria through a transmembrane pore formed by a self - encoded β - barrel structure . has two WH2 domains similar to N - WASP 39 . Recent findings that the rickA gene of the non - motile and non - pathogenic spotted - fever - group organism Rickettsia pea - cockii is disrupted by a naturally occurring transposon also support a role for RickA in Rickettsia motility 40 . The overall structures of the identified RickA proteins indicate that they can act as NPF mimics . Indeed , purified R . conorii and R . rickettsii RickA polymerize pyrene - actin monomers in vitro in both an Arp2 / 3 - and concentration - dependent manner without requiring a cellular NPF 38 , 39 . Expression of the C - terminal CA domain of RickA , which recruits and activates the Arp2 / 3 complex in vitro , impairs actin - based motility of R . conorii in Hep - 2 cells 38 , 39 . Therefore , RickA recruits the Arp2 / 3 complex to the bac - terial surface and seems to function as a WASP mimic to initiate Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin polymerization . A striking distinction between the actin tails formed by R . rickettsii and those of other intracellular pathogens is that they comprise several distinct bundles of long unbranched F - actin filaments 41 ( FIG . 1b ) . R . rickettsii tails are distinct from those of R . conorii , which tend not to be bundled 34 . Consistent with the lack of Y - branched actin filaments in Rickettsia tails , the Arp2 / 3 complex is absent from the length of the tails in Rickettsia - infected cells 34 , 41 , 42 and localizes only to the bacteria – tail interface of motile Rickettsia 38 . Although Rickettsia actin tails are unbranched , puri - fied R . conorii and R . rickettsii RickA can stimulate the Y - branching activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex in vitro , and Y - branches can readily be detected around R . rick - ettsii RickA - coated beads in Xenopus oocyte extracts 38 , 39 . This implies that , whereas RickA has a role in forming the actin tails , other bacterial or host factors might organize the actin filaments into the unbranched arrays seen in Rickettsia - infected cells . The actin - binding protein vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) interacts with Rickettsia tails and this might influence actin - tail morphology , as VASP is thought to compete with capping proteins at the barbed ends of actin fila - ments , thereby increasing their length 43 . Given that Arp3 is localized only at the bacteria – tail interface during intracellular motility , it is possible that RickA initiates actin assembly by stimulating the nucleating activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex . Sustained motility might then involve elongation of the barbed end of tail filaments by an Arp2 / 3 - independent mechanism , as recently sug - gested for Listeria 33 . The extent to which Arp2 / 3 mediates continuous actin polymerization in tails , or promotes an initial nucleation step followed by Arp2 / 3 - independent elongation of actin filaments , might vary between the organisms described and requires further study . It has been reported that Listeria propulsion in host cells might involve an initial Arp2 / 3 - dependent nucleation step fol - lowed by an Arp2 / 3 - independent tail - elongation phase , as once motility had been initiated in an Arp2 / 3 depend - ent manner in vitro , propulsion could be maintained following inhibition of Arp2 / 3 solely in the presence of actin and fascin 33 . The role of RickA in intracellular motility , cell - to - cell spread and virulence of spotted - fever - group Rickettsia has yet to be proven , as genetic systems to manipulate these pathogens are unavailable . However , in vitro deple - tion and reconstitution experiments have confirmed that R . rickettsii RickA can promote the movement of coated beads in cell - free extracts in an Arp2 / 3 - dependent man - ner . Furthermore , targeting of a chimeric RickA – CAAX protein to the inner surface of the plasma membrane of eukaryotic cells induces the formation of filopodia - like structures 38 , distinct from the lamellipodia - like structures observed on expression of similarly targeted ActA 44 . RickA proteins might therefore serve as useful tools to dissect filopodia formation , and it will be of interest to determine if host proteins thought to con - tribute to filopodia assembly are required for actin - based motility of Rickettsia . It is presently unclear whether differences in the sequence of RickA homologues from other spotted - fever - group Rickettsia species leads to recruitment of distinct factors or activation of the actin - nucleating and Y - branching activities of the Arp2 / 3 complex to differ - ing extents . Of the typhus - group Rickettsia species , only R . typhi has been reported to show erratic actin - based motility , forming 1 – 3 - µ m straight or hooked actin tails that are shorter than those induced by R . conorii or R . rickettsii , although the rate of R . typhi movement is the same as R . rickettsii 36 , 37 , 41 . This is surprising , as the actin - tail length of L . monocytogenes has been correlated with velocity of actin - based motility 45 . Interestingly , analysis of the complete genome sequence of R . typhi failed to detect a homologue of RickA , indicating that it might use a distinct mechanism of actin - based motility 46 . Burkholderia pseudomallei . B . pseudomallei is a Gram - negative facultative intracellular pathogen that causes melioidosis , an invasive disease that is endemic in sub - tropical areas . The invasion of non - phagocytic cells by B . pseudomallei is dependent on a type III secretion system . After internalization , B . pseudomallei lyses the endocytic vacuole , forms actin tails in the cytosol and can spread from cell to cell 47 . Uniquely , B . pseudomallei can also induce cell fusion 48 , although the role of actin - based motility in this process is unknown . Analysis of the complete genome sequence of B . pseudomallei identified a putative type V secreted pro - tein , known as BimA , which contains proline - rich motifs and WH2 - like domains and which shares homology at the C terminus with the Yersinia type V secreted adhesin YadA . The finding that actin - based motility of B . pseudo - mallei in murine macrophages was abolished by bimA mutation and could be restored by transient expression of the gene in trans confirmed that BimA is necessary for B . pseudomallei motility 11 ( FIG . 3 ) . The following observa - tions indicate that BimA might function as an NPF mimic to induce actin - based motility in infected cells . First , the transient expression of BimA results in F - actin clustering that is reminiscent of that seen on WASP overexpres - sion 11 . Second , WASP - family members are not required for BimA - mediated actin polymerization in vitro 11 . Third , N - WASP is not recruited to the surface of intracellular B . pseudomallei 49 and , last , motility of B . pseudomallei is supported by N - WASP – / – fibroblasts 49 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 4 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 95 © 2006 Nature Publishing Group LPS BimA F - actin a d b c 5 µm 5 µm 5 µm By using green - fluorescent - protein fusions and immuno - cytochemistry , Arp2 / 3 - complex components have been shown to localize throughout B . pseudomallei - induced actin tails 49 . However , the role of the Arp2 / 3 complex in intracellular motility of B . pseudomallei is unclear , as over - expression of the WCA ( WH2 , central and acidic ) domain of Scar1 , which sequesters cellular Arp2 / 3 and inhibits actin - tail formation by S . flexneri , L . monocytogenes and R . conorii , does not interfere with actin - based motility of B . pseudomallei 49 . A purified but truncated BimA protein was reported to bind monomeric actin in a concentration - dependent manner and to weakly stimulate actin poly - merization in vitro in an Arp2 / 3 - independent manner 11 . These data imply that BimA alone might be sufficient for intracellular motility of B . pseudomallei . However , several post - translational modifications of BimA are possible and it is unclear if these , or bacterial cofactors , are needed for full activity . Taken together , these observations indicate that actin - based motility of B . pseudomallei occurs by a mechanism which is distinct to that used by other intra - cellular pathogens with respect to Arp2 / 3 dependence , but which might involve NPF mimicry . The related Burkholderia species Burkholderia mallei and Burkholderia thailandensis have BimA homologues 50 . B . mallei and B . thailandensis are capable of actin - based motility in murine macrophage - like cells , and the BimA homologues of these bacteria bind actin in vitro and can restore actin - based motility of a B . pseudo mallei bimA mutant 51 . However , the N termini of the BimA proteins of the three species differ in the number of WH2 domains , sequence of proline - rich motifs and the presence of a CA domain , which indicates that they might initiate actin assembly by distinct mechanisms . Consistent with the presence of a unique CA domain , only B . thailandensis BimA has been found to sequester Arp3 from cell extracts in vitro 51 . Pathogens that rely on cellular NPFs Shigella species . Shigella species are Gram - negative fac - ultative intracellular pathogens that cause acute gastro - enteritis in humans . The bacterium invades colonic epithelial cells in a type - III - secretion - system - dependent manner , escaping into the cytosol by lysis of the phago - somal membrane 52 . Within the cytosol , Shigella induces the formation of polar actin - rich tails 53 . Motile bacteria form membrane - bound protrusions that are engulfed by adjacent cells , and cell - to - cell spread is facilitated by the bacterial protein IcsB 1 , 54 – 57 . The gene that is essential for cell - to - cell spread of Shigella ( icsA , initially annotated as virG ) is encoded by the large virulence plasmid 5 . An icsA insertion mutant efficiently entered and replicated in cultured cells but was unable to spread from cell to cell or cause disease in a murine model 5 . The icsA gene of S . flexneri was localized to a 4 - kb fragment that putatively encodes a single protein , and homologous sequences were detected in other Shigella Figure 3 | Actin - based motility of Burkholderia pseudomallei . Confocal micrographs showing actin - based motility displayed by B . pseudomallei in J774 . 2 macrophage - like cells ( a ) , which is abolished on mutation of the bimA gene ( b ) and restored by expression of the cloned bimA gene in trans ( c ) . Bacteria are shown in red , F - actin in green . BimA ( blue ) is located at the bacterial surface ( yellow ) at the pole at which actin polymerization occurs ( red ) ( d ) . Scale bars in a – c represent 5 µ m . Figures reproduced with permission from REF . 11 © ( 2005 ) Blackwell Publishing . R E V I E W S 96 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 4 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2006 Nature Publishing Group Pleckstrin homology domain These domains share little sequence conservation but all have a common fold involved in lipid binding and targeting of proteins to the plasma membrane . CRIB domain Cdc42 / Rac interactive binding ( CRIB ) domains bind Cdc42 and other Rho - family GTPases . WAVE WASP - family verprolin homologous ( WAVE ) / Scar proteins are members of the WASP family of Arp2 / 3 activators that lack the domains required for Rho GTPase binding . As such , they are thought to be regulated in a different manner to other WASP - family members . and enteroinvasive E . coli ( EIEC ) strains 5 , 58 . The icsA gene is highly conserved in the sequenced genomes of Shigella dysenteriae and Shigella boydii ; however , most studies have focused on the product of the S . flexneri icsA gene . Characterization of the S . flexneri icsA locus revealed that the gene product is a 1 , 102 - amino - acid outer - membrane protein with an apparent molecular weight of 120 kDa 6 , 58 that belongs to a family of Gram - negative bacterial proteins secreted through the type V pathway 59 . IcsA is both necessary and sufficient for actin - based motility of S . flexneri . Early attempts to reconstitute actin - based motility of Shigella in cell - free extracts were unsuccessful , as IcsA is only expressed at levels that are sufficient to induce actin polymerization in the host - cell cytoplasm 13 . However , overexpression of IcsA in non - motile E . coli conferred actin - based motility in Xenopus oocyte extracts 21 , and beads coated with IcsA protein show actin - based motility in cell - free extracts in an Arp2 / 3 - dependent manner 10 , 21 . IcsA has no homology to Listeria ActA or other known bacterial or cellular actin nucleators . The sequences that are required to assemble actin in vitro have been localized to amino acids 53 – 508 ( REF . 60 ) but do not contain any obvious domain struc - tures or motifs known to recruit actin - associated pro - teins . Several cellular actin - associated proteins have been localized to Shigella tails . Their importance in motility has been extensively reviewed and is summarized in Supplementary information S1 ( table ) . Unlike Listeria ActA , which is an NPF , IcsA relies on the recruitment of a cellular NPF ( N - WASP ) for actin - tail formation . IcsA interacts directly with N - WASP in vitro and in vivo through a glycine - rich region , and depletion and reconstitution experiments in Xenopus oocyte extracts and cell - free systems have shown that N - WASP is essential for IcsA - mediated actin - tail assembly 25 , 61 , 62 . Consistent with this key role , Shigella does not form actin tails in N - WASP – / – cells 27 , and overexpression of a dominant - negative form of N - WASP markedly inhibits actin - tail formation by intracellular S . flexneri 61 . Domain - swap experiments have indicated that IcsA specifically interacts with N - WASP rather than with other WASP - family proteins through its N - terminal pleckstrin homology domain and calmodulin - binding IQ motif 62 . It has been proposed that once IcsA has recruited N - WASP to the bacterial surface , it mimics N - WASP activation by Cdc42 ( REF . 60 ) . There are conflict - ing reports of the association of Cdc42 with Shigella tails 63 , 64 . An N - WASP protein that lacks a CRIB domain and cannot interact with Cdc42 can rescue the actin - based motility defect of Shigella in N - WASP – / – cells , indicating that Cdc42 is not required for motility 27 . Furthermore , Shigella intracellular motility is unaffected by the clostridial toxin TcdB - 10463 , which inhibits the activity of the Rho - family GTPases of which Cdc42 is a member 65 . Taken together with the fact that Cdc42 is not required to reconstitute motility of E . coli IcsA in a cell - free system 25 , it is considered that IcsA mimics Cdc42 activation of N - WASP at the bacterial surface , probably by inducing conformational changes in N - WASP that release it from its autoinhibited conformation . This allows the association of N - WASP with the Arp2 / 3 complex . However , it should be noted that a key role for Abl - family kinases in the activation of N - WASP by phosphorylation has recently been described , and that this tyrosine - kinase family is indispensable for Shigella motility 66 . It is possible therefore that IcsA acts as an Abl - kinase mimic rather than a Cdc42 mimic . Mycobacterium marinum . The Gram - positive bacte - rium M . marinum causes a systemic tuberculosis - like disease in fish and amphibians , and pulmonary and cutaneous lesions in humans . The bacteria persist in macrophages in vivo and induce granuloma formation . M . marinum was recently reported to escape endosomes and spread from cell to cell . Cytoplasmic M . marinum induces actin tails in fish and murine macrophages , as well as murine cell - free extracts , promoting movement at up to 11 µ m per minute 14 . As with Listeria ActA , Shigella IcsA and Burkholderia BimA proteins , expression of the M . marinum factor ( s ) that promotes actin - based motil - ity is induced intracellularly , as broth - cultured bacteria were non - motile in cell - free extracts but bacteria isolated from infected cells were motile 14 . Ultrastructural analysis of F - actin tails formed by M . marinum revealed a branched pattern , consistent with the presence of Arp2 / 3 - complex components throughout the tails 14 . WASP is recruited to the bacte - rial pole at which actin assembly occurs , and it is likely that this initiates Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin polymeriza - tion 14 . Intracellular motility of M . marinum is reduced in WASP – / – cells and almost totally abolished in N - WASP – / – cells 67 . Motility could be restored by expression of WASP and N - WASP but not by expression of another WASP - family member WAVE , indicating a crucial role for these WASP - family NPFs in motility 67 . M . marinum motility has also been shown to be independent of upstream signalling molecules of WASP - family members 67 . By requiring WASP or N - WASP for actin - tail formation , M . marinum might use a mechanism similar to that of Shigella IcsA . Vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) is present throughout M . marinum - induced actin tails , probably as a result of the interaction of VASP with F - actin 14 . In this regard , M . marinum - induced actin tails are similar to those formed by Shigella , but differ from those of Listeria , as ActA directly recruits VASP to the bacteria – actin interface 68 ( see Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) . The bacterial factor ( s ) required for actin - based motility of M . marinum awaits identifica - tion , and it remains unclear whether other pathogenic mycobacteria share the ability to form actin tails , or what role actin - based motility has in the pathogenesis of M . marinum infections . Attaching and effacing Escherichia coli . In contrast to the bacterial pathogens discussed above , certain diarrhoea - genic E . coli pathotypes can be propelled by actin poly - merization without entering host cells . Enteropathogenic E . coli ( EPEC ) and enterohaemorrhagic E . coli ( EHEC ) induce attaching and effacing lesions on intestinal epi - thelia , which are characterized by intimate bacterial adherence to enterocytes on actin - rich ‘pedestals’ and R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 4 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 97 © 2006 Nature Publishing Group EPEC EPEC EHEC O157 EHEC O157 Nck Nck EspF u / TccP Tir Intimin Y474 - P Arp2 / 3 N - WASP Nck Actin nucleation EHEC O157 Tir Intimin Arp2 / 3 N - WASP EspF U / Tccp Actin nucleation a b Adaptor proteins Proteins involved in signalling cascades that lack any intrinsic enzymatic activities . They mediate protein – protein interactions to form diverse protein complexes . localized destruction of microvilli 69 ( FIG . 1 ) . Pedestals induced by EPEC O127 : H6 are not static and propel the bacteria from the cell surface , moving at up to 4 . 2 µ m per minute 70 , possibly to facilitate spread of the bacteria to adjacent enterocytes . EPEC pedestals can reach lengths of 10 µ m and tend to be longer and more electron - dense than those induced by EHEC O157 : H7 ( REF . 71 ) . Actin nucleation under adherent bacteria requires injection of the translocated intimin receptor ( Tir ) into enterocytes through a type III secretion system . Tir inserts into the host - cell plasma membrane so that its central extracellular domain functions as a receptor for the bac - terial outer - membrane protein intimin 72 . This interaction is necessary for optimal actin assembly 73 , 74 , which is both Arp2 / 3 - and N - WASP dependent . Pedestals do not form in N - WASP – / – cells despite adherence being unaffected , and can be restored by expression of full - length N - WASP or N - WASP mutants unable to bind Cdc42 , indicating that Cdc42 is not required for pedestal formation 27 . Actin assembly by EPEC O127 : H6 Tir requires phosphorylation of tyrosine residue 474 ( Y474 ) in the cytosolic C - terminal domain of Tir 75 ( FIG . 4 ) . Insertion of Tir into enterocyte membranes , and subsequent tyrosine phosphorylation , has been detected during infection of mice with the murine AE pathogen Citrobacter rodentium and is essen - tial for actin nucleation , at least in vitro 76 . Y474 is part of a 12 - amino - acid motif that recruits the host - cell adaptor protein Nck , which in turn recruits N - WASP 77 – 79 ( FIG . 4 ) . EPEC O127 : H6 Tir also recruits the host adaptor proteins Grb2 and CrkII , as well as other actin - regulatory proteins , focal - adhesion proteins and lipid - raft - associated proteins 80 . A peptide from EPEC O127 : H6 Tir comprising the 12 - amino - acid motif that contains phosphorylated Y474 can induce Nck clustering and actin assembly in Xenopus oocyte extracts 78 , and is conserved in the vaccinia - virus A36R protein , which mediates Nck and Grb2 recruitment and N - WASP – Arp2 / 3 - mediated motility of virions at the plasma membrane 81 , 82 . Recent evidence indicates that EPEC O127 : H6 Tir can also stimulate actin polymeriza - tion by a Nck - independent mechanism involving Tir oligomerization and phosphorylation of Y454 and Y474 ( REFS 73 , 78 ) . Studies of EHEC O157 : H7 Tir reveal that it recruits most of the same host factors as EPEC O127 : H6 Tir , with the exception of the adaptor proteins Nck , CrkII and Grb2 ( REF . 83 ) ( FIG . 4 ) . This correlates with the observation that EHEC O157 : H7 Tir lacks the crucial Y474 residue and is not tyrosine - phosphorylated in host cells 84 , 85 . Furthermore , the motif required for Nck recruitment is not conserved in Tir from EHEC O157 : H7 and O157 : H – , although it is found in EHEC serotypes O26 : H – and O111 : H – ( REF . 86 ) . Recent studies have shown that a proline - rich type III secreted protein ( EspF U / TccP ) is required to recruit N - WASP , α - actinin and Arp3 beneath adherent EHEC O157 : H7 for sub - sequent actin assembly 87 , 88 ( FIG . 4 ) . EspF U / TccP is trans - located into host cells by the bacteria , associates with both Tir and N - WASP and stimulates actin assembly in the presence of purified Arp2 / 3 ( REFS 87 , 88 ) . EHEC O157 : H7 Tir cannot restore the ability of EPEC O127 : H6 or C . rodentium tir mutants to form pedestals on cultured cells 76 , 88 , 89 . This correlates with the absence of EspF U / TccP in these bacteria and reflects the key role of EspF U / TccP in coupling EHEC O157 : H7 Tir to the N - WASP – Arp2 / 3 pathway . The role of actin - based motility of AE E . coli in patho - genesis remains unclear . When EspF U / TccP is mutated , intimin – Tir - mediated adherence of EHEC O157 : H7 and subsequent colonization in calves or sheep is unaf - fected , whereas in vitro pedestal formation is impaired 90 . Furthermore , a C . rodentium tir mutant complemented with a non - phosphorylated Y471F variant of Tir showed no defect in intestinal colonization in mice 76 . These data imply that the role of Tir in actin assembly can be uncoupled from its role in intimin - mediated adher - ence in vivo ; however , pedestals could still be detected under an adherent EHEC O157 : H7 espF U / tccP mutant in calves 90 and a C . rodentium Tir Y471F mutant in mice 76 , indicating that actin assembly might occur by distinct mechanisms in vivo . Figure 4 | Mechanisms of actin pedestal formation by enteropathogenic Escherichia coli ( EPEC ) O127 : H6 and enterohaemorrhagic E . coli ( EHEC ) O157 : H7 . a | Translocated intimin receptor ( Tir ) is injected into the enterocyte and inserts into the plasma membrane . The Tir extracellular domain binds to the bacterial outer - membrane protein intimin . Tyrosine residue 474 ( Y474 ) in the cytosolic C - terminal domain of Tir is phosphorylated , and the 12 - amino - acid motif that includes Y474 recruits the host - cell adaptor protein Nck which , in turn , recruits neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) . EHEC O157 : H7 Tir lacks the crucial Y474 residue and is not tyrosine - phosphorylated in host cells . The type III secreted protein ( EspF U / TccP ) is translocated from EHEC O157 : H7 into host cells , where it associates with both Tir and N - WASP and stimulates actin assembly . Non - O157 EHEC strains share the C - terminal 12 - amino - acid phosphopeptide that is typical of EPEC O127 : H6 Tir and that is required for Nck recruitment . b | The host adaptor protein Nck ( green ) localizes to the actin pedestal structures ( red ) formed by EPEC ( blue , left panel ) but not EHEC ( blue , middle panel ) . c | By contrast , the type III secreted factor EspF u / TccP ( yellow ) located at the tip of an actin pedestal ( red ) couples N - WASP to the EHEC O157 : H7 Tir protein under adherent bacteria ( blue ) . Part b is reproduced with permission from REF . 83 © ( 2003 ) Elsevier . Part c is reproduced with permission from REF . 87 © ( 2004 ) Elsevier . R E V I E W S 98 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 4 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2006 Nature Publishing Group Concluding remarks Analysis of bacterial actin - based motility has revealed novel insights into both pathogen biology and the con - trol of actin assembly in eukaryotic cells . It provides convenient models to study the formation of lamel - lipodia at the leading edge of motile cells ( Listeria and Shigella ) and filopodia ( Rickettsia ) , and can even be reconstituted in vitro using purified components . This allows the minimal requirements for actin assembly to be defined and enables the involvement of regula - tory factors in actin - tail formation , Y - branching , force generation and directionality to be assessed , although how in vitro assays relate to motility within the tightly packed milieu of the host - cell cytosol is unknown . The ability to generate knockout cell lines and animals or to deplete selected factors by use of small inhibitory RNA molecules ( siRNA ) will further define the role of bacterial and cellular cofactors in vivo . It will be of particular interest to determine how the Y - branched actin arrays induced by RickA in vitro are reorganized into the long unbranched filaments and bundles seen in Rickettsia - infected cells and filopodia . The structural basis of activation of Arp2 / 3 and endo genous NPFs by bacterial and cellular factors is poorly understood , and co - crystallization of such complexes and the develop - ment of specific inhibitors would aid understanding of the molecular events leading to actin assembly . The availability of complete bacterial genome sequences has facilitated identification of new factors that activate actin assembly , including Rickettsia RickA and Burkholderia BimA , and families of homologues of these proteins are emerging in related species that might stimulate actin dynamics in distinct ways . The sequences of such factors indicate that diverse post - translational modifications are possible , and it will be of interest to determine what role this might have in regulating their activity , polar localization and in bacterial virulence . Mutation of Listeria actA and Shigella icsA has proven to be an effective way of generating live - attenuated vac - cine strains that persist for long enough to induce pro - tective immunity but lack the ability to spread to deeper tissues . This knowledge might be useful in tackling emerging intracellular pathogens for which vaccines are not yet available , such as B . pseudomallei and B . mallei . Furthermore , screening of pharmacological agents for their ability to selectively interfere with actin assembly by pathogens might yield novel treatments for infections as well as other human diseases . 1 . Monack , D . M . & Theriot , J . A . Actin - based motility is sufficient for bacterial membrane protrusion formation and host cell uptake . Cell . Microbiol . 3 , 633 – 647 ( 2001 ) . 2 . Robbins , J . R . et al . Listeria monocytogenes exploits normal host cell processes to spread from cell to cell . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 1333 – 1350 ( 1999 ) . 3 . Perrin , A . J . , Jiang , X . , Birmingham , C . L . , So , N . S . & Brumell , J . H . Recognition of bacteria in the cytosol of mammalian cells by the ubiquitin system . Curr . Biol . 14 , 806 – 811 ( 2004 ) . 4 . Domann , E . et al . A novel bacterial virulence gene in Listeria monocytogenes required for host cell microfilament interaction with homology to the proline - rich region of vinculin . EMBO J . 11 , 1981 – 1990 ( 1992 ) . 5 . Makino , S . , Sasakawa , C . , Kamata , K . , Kurata , T . & Yoshikawa , M . A genetic determinant required for continuous reinfection of adjacent cells on large plasmid in S . flexneri 2a . Cell 46 , 551 – 555 ( 1986 ) . 6 . Bernardini , M . L . , Mounier , J . , d’Hauteville , H . , Coquis - Rondon , M . & Sansonetti , P . J . Identification of icsA , a plasmid locus of Shigella flexneri that governs bacterial intra - and intercellular spread through interaction with F - actin . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 86 , 3867 – 3871 ( 1989 ) . 7 . Sansonetti , P . J . , Arondel , J . , Fontaine , A . , d’Hauteville , H . & Bernardini , M . L . ompB ( osmo - regulation ) and icsA ( cell - to - cell spread ) mutants of Shigella flexneri : vaccine candidates and probes to study the pathogenesis of shigellosis . Vaccine 9 , 416 – 422 ( 1991 ) . 8 . Gouin , E . , Welch , M . D . & Cossart , P . Actin - based motility of intracellular pathogens . Curr . Opin . Microbiol . 8 , 35 – 45 ( 2005 ) . 9 . Kocks , C . , Hellio , R . , Gounon , P . , Ohayon , H . & Cossart , P . Polarized distribution of Listeria monocytogenes surface protein ActA at the site of directional actin assembly . J . Cell Sci . 105 , 699 – 710 ( 1993 ) . 10 . Goldberg , M . B . & Theriot , J . A . Shigella flexneri surface protein IcsA is sufficient to direct actin - based motility . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 92 , 6572 – 6576 ( 1995 ) . 11 . Stevens , M . P . et al . Identification of a bacterial factor required for actin - based motility of Burkholderia pseudomallei . Mol . Microbiol . 56 , 40 – 53 ( 2005 ) . This paper reported the identification of the bacterial factor that is required for B . pseudomallei actin - based motility in host cells . Biochemical studies showed that the factor ( BimA ) interacts with host - cell actin and can stimulate actin polymerization in vitro in an Arp2 / 3 - independent manner . 12 . Brundage , R . A . , Smith , G . A . , Camilli , A . , Theriot , J . A . & Portnoy , D . A . Expression and phosphorylation of the Listeria monocytogenes ActA protein in mammalian cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 90 , 11890 – 11894 ( 1993 ) . 13 . Magdalena , J . & Goldberg , M . B . Quantification of Shigella IcsA required for bacterial actin polymerization . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 51 , 187 – 196 ( 2002 ) . 14 . Stamm , L . M . et al . Mycobacterium marinum escapes from phagosomes and is propelled by actin - based motility . J . Exp . Med . 198 , 1361 – 1368 ( 2003 ) . The first study to show that M . marinum escapes from intracellular phagosomes and also spreads from cell to cell . Although the identity of the bacterial actin - based motility factor is still unknown , this study identified host - cell proteins that might be involved in motility by co - localization studies . 15 . Goldberg , M . B . , Theriot , J . A . & Sansonetti , P . J . Regulation of surface presentation of IcsA , a Shigella protein essential to intracellular movement and spread , is growth phase dependent . Infect . Immun . 62 , 5664 – 5668 ( 1994 ) . 16 . Welch , M . D . , Iwamatsu , A . & Mitchison , T . J . Actin polymerization is induced by Arp2 / 3 protein complex at the surface of Listeria monocytogenes . Nature 385 , 265 – 269 ( 1997 ) . Describes the initial purification of the human Arp2 / 3 complex and its biochemical characterization as an actin - polymerizing factor in L . monocytogenes . 17 . Welch , M . D . , Rosenblatt , J . , Skoble , J . , Portnoy , D . A . & Mitchison , T . J . Interaction of human Arp2 / 3 complex and the Listeria monocytogenes ActA protein in actin filament nucleation . Science 281 , 105 – 108 ( 1998 ) . 18 . Kocks , C . et al . L . monocytogenes - induced actin assembly requires the actA gene product , a surface protein . Cell 68 , 521 – 531 ( 1992 ) . 19 . Mengaud , J . , Geoffroy , C . & Cossart , P . Identification of a new operon involved in Listeria monocytogenes virulence : its first gene encodes a protein homologous to bacterial metalloproteases . Infect . Immun . 59 , 1043 – 1049 ( 1991 ) . 20 . Vazquez - Boland , J . A . et al . Nucleotide sequence of the lecithinase operon of Listeria monocytogenes and possible role of lecithinase in cell - to - cell spread . Infect . Immun . 60 , 219 – 230 ( 1992 ) . 21 . Kocks , C . et al . The unrelated surface proteins ActA of Listeria monocytogenes and IcsA of Shigella flexneri are sufficient to confer actin - based motility on Listeria innocua and Escherichia coli respectively . Mol . Microbiol . 18 , 413 – 423 ( 1995 ) . 22 . Smith , G . A . , Portnoy , D . A . & Theriot , J . A . Asymmetric distribution of the Listeria monocytogenes ActA protein is required and sufficient to direct actin - based motility . Mol . Microbiol . 17 , 945 – 951 ( 1995 ) . 23 . Cameron , L . A . , Footer , M . J . , van Oudenaarden , A . & Theriot , J . A . Motility of ActA protein - coated microspheres driven by actin polymerization . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 4908 – 4913 ( 1999 ) . 24 . Boujemaa - Paterski , R . et al . Listeria protein ActA mimics WASP family proteins : it activates filament barbed end branching by Arp2 / 3 complex . Biochemistry 40 , 11390 – 11404 ( 2001 ) . 25 . Loisel , T . P . , Boujemaa , R . , Pantaloni , D . & Carlier , M . F . Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 , 613 – 616 ( 1999 ) . This study characterized the minimal requirements for motility of both L . monocytogenes and E . coli IcsA in a cell - free system . 26 . Zalevsky , J . , Grigorova , I . & Mullins , R . D . Activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex by the Listeria ActA protein . ActA binds two actin monomers and three subunits of the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 3468 – 3475 ( 2001 ) . 27 . Lommel , S . et al . Actin pedestal formation by enteropathogenic Escherichia coli and intracellular motility of Shigella flexneri are abolished in N - WASP - defective cells . EMBO Rep . 2 , 850 – 857 ( 2001 ) . This study used N - WASP - deficient cells to prove the essential role of N - WASP in the actin cytoskeletal rearrangements induced by AE E . coli and S . flexneri . It also showed for the first time that N - WASP is dispensable for cellular filopodia formation . 28 . Lasa , I . , David , V . , Gouin , E . , Marchand , J . B . & Cossart , P . The amino - terminal part of ActA is critical for the actin - based motility of Listeria monocytogenes ; the central proline - rich region acts as a stimulator . Mol . Microbiol . 18 , 425 – 436 ( 1995 ) . 29 . Lasa , I . et al . Identification of two regions in the N - terminal domain of ActA involved in the actin comet tail formation by Listeria monocytogenes . EMBO J . 16 , 1531 – 1540 ( 1997 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 4 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 99 © 2006 Nature Publishing Group 30 . Smith , G . A . , Theriot , J . A . & Portnoy , D . A . The tandem repeat domain in the Listeria monocytogenes ActA protein controls the rate of actin - based motility , the percentage of moving bacteria , and the localization of vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein and profilin . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 647 – 660 ( 1996 ) . 31 . Golsteyn , R . M . , Beckerle , M . C . , Koay , T . & Friederich , E . Structural and functional similarities between the human cytoskeletal protein zyxin and the ActA protein of Listeria monocytogenes . J . Cell Sci . 110 , 1893 – 1906 ( 1997 ) . 32 . Fradelizi , J . et al . ActA and human zyxin harbour Arp2 / 3 - independent actin - polymerization activity . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 699 – 707 ( 2001 ) . 33 . Brieher , W . M . , Coughlin , M . & Mitchison , T . J . Fascin - mediated propulsion of Listeria monocytogenes independent of frequent nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 165 , 233 – 242 ( 2004 ) . This report showed that L . monocytogenes actin - based motility in cell - free systems can be divided into an Arp2 / 3 - dependent and an Arp2 / 3 - independent phase . The Arp2 / 3 - independent phase ( the elongation phase ) required the addition of cellular fascin and resulted in tails that consist of parallel bundles similar to those formed by Rickettsia . 34 . Gouin , E . et al . A comparative study of the actin - based motilities of the pathogenic bacteria Listeria monocytogenes , Shigella flexneri and Rickettsia conorii . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 1697 – 1708 ( 1999 ) . 35 . Heinzen , R . A . , Grieshaber , S . S . , Van Kirk , L . S . & Devin , C . J . Dynamics of actin - based movement by Rickettsia rickettsii in Vero cells . Infect . Immun . 67 , 4201 – 4207 ( 1999 ) . 36 . Heinzen , R . A . , Hayes , S . F . , Peacock , M . G . & Hackstadt , T . Directional actin polymerization associated with spotted fever group Rickettsia infection of Vero cells . Infect . Immun . 61 , 1926 – 1935 ( 1993 ) . 37 . Teysseire , N . , Chiche - Portiche , C . & Raoult , D . Intracellular movements of Rickettsia conorii and R . typhi based on actin polymerization . Res . Microbiol . 143 , 821 – 829 ( 1992 ) . 38 . Gouin , E . et al . The RickA protein of Rickettsia conorii activates the Arp2 / 3 complex . Nature 427 , 457 – 461 ( 2004 ) . One of two papers published in 2004 reporting the identity of the Rickettsia actin - based motility factor . Characterized the R . conorii RickA protein and demonstrated its expression on intracellular bacteria and its activity in vitro as an NPF . Also reported the conclusive co - localization of Arp2 / 3 with Rickettsia tails . 39 . Jeng , R . L . et al . A Rickettsia WASP - like protein activates the Arp2 / 3 complex and mediates actin - based motility . Cell . Microbiol . 6 , 761 – 769 ( 2004 ) . One of two papers published in 2004 reporting the identity of the Rickettsia actin - based motility factor . This concentrated on characterization of the R . rickettsii RickA protein , describing its similarity in sequence to WASP - family proteins and its ability to promote actin nucleation in vitro . 40 . Simser , J . A . , Rahman , M . S . , Dreher - Lesnick , S . M . & Azad , A . F . A novel and naturally occurring transposon , ISRpe1 in the Rickettsia peacockii genome disrupting the rickA gene involved in actin - based motility . Mol . Microbiol . 58 , 71 – 79 ( 2005 ) . 41 . Van Kirk , L . S . , Hayes , S . F . & Heinzen , R . A . Ultrastructure of Rickettsia rickettsii actin tails and localization of cytoskeletal proteins . Infect . Immun . 68 , 4706 – 4713 ( 2000 ) . 42 . Harlander , R . S . et al . Effects of ectopically expressed neuronal Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein domains on Rickettsia rickettsii actin - based motility . Infect . Immun . 71 , 1551 – 1556 ( 2003 ) . 43 . Bear , J . E . et al . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin filament capping regulates fibroblast motility . Cell 109 , 509 – 521 ( 2002 ) . 44 . Friederich , E . et al . Targeting of Listeria monocytogenes ActA protein to the plasma membrane as a tool to dissect both actin - based cell morphogenesis and ActA function . EMBO J . 14 , 2731 – 2744 ( 1995 ) . 45 . Theriot , J . A . , Mitchison , T . J . , Tilney , L . G . & Portnoy , D . A . The rate of actin - based motility of intracellular Listeria monocytogenes equals the rate of actin polymerization . Nature 357 , 257 – 260 ( 1992 ) . 46 . McLeod , M . P . et al . Complete genome sequence of Rickettsia typhi and comparison with sequences of other rickettsiae . J . Bacteriol . 186 , 5842 – 5855 ( 2004 ) . 47 . Stevens , M . P . & Galyov , E . E . Exploitation of host cells by Burkholderia pseudomallei . Int . J . Med . Microbiol . 293 , 549 – 555 ( 2004 ) . 48 . Kespichayawattana , W . , Rattanachetkul , S . , Wanun , T . , Utaisincharoen , P . & Sirisinha , S . Burkholderia pseudomallei induces cell fusion and actin - associated membrane protrusion : a possible mechanism for cell - to - cell spreading . Infect . Immun . 68 , 5377 – 5384 ( 2000 ) . 49 . Breitbach , K . et al . Actin - based motility of Burkholderia pseudomallei involves the Arp 2 / 3 complex , but not N - WASP and Ena / VASP proteins . Cell . Microbiol . 5 , 385 – 393 ( 2003 ) . A comprehensive study of the cellular factors recruited to B . pseudomallei actin - rich tails in infected cells . Notably , this study reported that Arp2 / 3 might be required for motility but that N - WASP and members of the Ena / VASP family are dispensable . 50 . Nierman , W . C . et al . Structural flexibility in the Burkholderia mallei genome . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 14246 – 14251 ( 2004 ) . 51 . Stevens , J . M . et al . Actin - binding proteins from Burkholderia mallei and B . thailandensis can functionally compensate for the actin - based motility defect of a B . pseudomallei bimA mutant . J . Bacteriol . 187 , 7857 – 7862 ( 2005 ) . 52 . Sansonetti , P . J . , Ryter , A . , Clerc , P . , Maurelli , A . T . & Mounier , J . Multiplication of Shigella flexneri within HeLa cells : lysis of the phagocytic vacuole and plasmid - mediated contact hemolysis . Infect . Immun . 51 , 461 – 469 ( 1986 ) . 53 . Pal , T . , Newland , J . W . , Tall , B . D . , Formal , S . B . & Hale , T . L . Intracellular spread of Shigella flexneri associated with the kcpA locus and a 140 - kilodalton protein . Infect . Immun . 57 , 477 – 486 ( 1989 ) . 54 . Allaoui , A . , Mounier , J . , Prevost , M . C . , Sansonetti , P . J . & Parsot , C . icsB : a Shigella flexneri virulence gene necessary for the lysis of protrusions during intercellular spread . Mol . Microbiol . 6 , 1605 – 1616 ( 1992 ) . 55 . Kadurugamuwa , J . L . , Rohde , M . , Wehland , J . & Timmis , K . N . Intercellular spread of Shigella flexneri through a monolayer mediated by membranous protrusions and associated with reorganization of the cytoskeletal protein vinculin . Infect . Immun . 59 , 3463 – 3471 ( 1991 ) . 56 . Prevost , M . C . et al . Unipolar reorganization of F - actin layer at bacterial division and bundling of actin filaments by plastin correlate with movement of Shigella flexneri within HeLa cells . Infect . Immun . 60 , 4088 – 4099 ( 1992 ) . 57 . Sansonetti , P . J . , Mounier , J . , Prevost , M . C . & Mege , R . M . Cadherin expression is required for the spread of Shigella flexneri between epithelial cells . Cell 76 , 829 – 839 ( 1994 ) . 58 . Lett , M . C . et al . virG , a plasmid - coded virulence gene of Shigella flexneri : identification of the VirG protein and determination of the complete coding sequence . J . Bacteriol . 171 , 353 – 359 ( 1989 ) . 59 . Desvaux , M . , Parham , N . J . & Henderson , I . R . The autotransporter secretion system . Res . Microbiol . 155 , 53 – 60 ( 2004 ) . 60 . Egile , C . et al . Activation of the CDC42 effector N - WASP by the Shigella flexneri IcsA protein promotes actin nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex and bacterial actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 1319 – 1332 ( 1999 ) . 61 . Suzuki , T . , Miki , H . , Takenawa , T . & Sasakawa , C . Neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein is implicated in the actin - based motility of Shigella flexneri . EMBO J . 17 , 2767 – 2776 ( 1998 ) . 62 . Suzuki , T . et al . Neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) is the specific ligand for Shigella VirG among the WASP family and determines the host cell type allowing actin - based spreading . Cell . Microbiol . 4 , 223 – 233 ( 2002 ) . 63 . Moreau , V . et al . A complex of N - WASP and WIP integrates signalling cascades that lead to actin polymerization . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , 441 – 448 ( 2000 ) . 64 . Suzuki , T . et al . Rho family GTPase Cdc42 is essential for the actin - based motility of Shigella in mammalian cells . J . Exp . Med . 191 , 1905 – 1920 ( 2000 ) . 65 . Mounier , J . et al . Rho family GTPases control entry of Shigella flexneri into epithelial cells but not intracellular motility . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 2069 – 2080 ( 1999 ) . 66 . Burton , E . A . , Oliver , T . N . & Pendergast , A . M . Abl kinases regulate actin comet tail elongation via an N - WASP - dependent pathway . Mol . Cell . Biol . 25 , 8834 – 8843 ( 2005 ) . 67 . Stamm , L . M . et al . Role of the WASP family proteins for Mycobacterium marinum actin tail formation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 14837 – 14842 ( 2005 ) . 68 . Gertler , F . B . , Niebuhr , K . , Reinhard , M . , Wehland , J . & Soriano , P . Mena , a relative of VASP and Drosophila Enabled , is implicated in the control of microfilament dynamics . Cell 87 , 227 – 239 ( 1996 ) . 69 . Kaper , J . B . , Nataro , J . P . & Mobley , H . L . Pathogenic Escherichia coli . Nature Rev . Microbiol . 2 , 123 – 140 ( 2004 ) . 70 . Sanger , J . M . , Chang , R . , Ashton , F . , Kaper , J . B . & Sanger , J . W . Novel form of actin - based motility transports bacteria on the surfaces of infected cells . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 34 , 279 – 287 ( 1996 ) . 71 . Shaner , N . C . , Sanger , J . W . & Sanger , J . M . Actin and α - actinin dynamics in the adhesion and motility of EPEC and EHEC on host cells . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 60 , 104 – 120 ( 2005 ) . 72 . Kenny , B . et al . Enteropathogenic E . coli ( EPEC ) transfers its receptor for intimate adherence into mammalian cells . Cell 91 , 511 – 520 ( 1997 ) . The first demonstration of a bacterium that translocates its own receptor into the eukaryotic host cell . The translocated receptor ( Tir ) was also shown to be required for actin nucleation at the plasma membrane . 73 . Campellone , K . G . & Leong , J . M . Nck - independent actin assembly is mediated by two phosphorylated tyrosines within enteropathogenic Escherichia coli Tir . Mol . Microbiol . 56 , 416 – 432 ( 2005 ) . 74 . Liu , H . , Magoun , L . , Luperchio , S . , Schauer , D . B . & Leong , J . M . The Tir - binding region of enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli intimin is sufficient to trigger actin condensation after bacterial - induced host cell signalling . Mol . Microbiol . 34 , 67 – 81 ( 1999 ) . 75 . Kenny , B . Phosphorylation of tyrosine 474 of the enteropathogenic Escherichia coli ( EPEC ) Tir receptor molecule is essential for actin nucleating activity and is preceded by additional host modifications . Mol . Microbiol . 31 , 1229 – 1241 ( 1999 ) . 76 . Deng , W . , Vallance , B . A . , Li , Y . , Puente , J . L . & Finlay , B . B . Citrobacter rodentium translocated intimin receptor ( Tir ) is an essential virulence factor needed for actin condensation , intestinal colonization and colonic hyperplasia in mice . Mol . Microbiol . 48 , 95 – 115 ( 2003 ) . 77 . Campellone , K . G . , Giese , A . , Tipper , D . J . & Leong , J . M . A tyrosine - phosphorylated 12 - amino - acid sequence of enteropathogenic Escherichia coli Tir binds the host adaptor protein Nck and is required for Nck localization to actin pedestals . Mol . Microbiol . 43 , 1227 – 1241 ( 2002 ) . 78 . Campellone , K . G . et al . Clustering of Nck by a 12 - residue Tir phosphopeptide is sufficient to trigger localized actin assembly . J . Cell Biol . 164 , 407 – 416 ( 2004 ) . 79 . Gruenheid , S . et al . Enteropathogenic E . coli Tir binds Nck to initiate actin pedestal formation in host cells . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 856 – 859 ( 2001 ) . 80 . Goosney , D . L . , DeVinney , R . & Finlay , B . B . Recruitment of cytoskeletal and signaling proteins to enteropathogenic and enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli pedestals . Infect . Immun . 69 , 3315 – 3322 ( 2001 ) . 81 . Frischknecht , F . et al . Actin - based motility of vaccinia virus mimics receptor tyrosine kinase signalling . Nature 401 , 926 – 929 ( 1999 ) . 82 . Scaplehorn , N . et al . Grb2 and Nck act cooperatively to promote actin - based motility of vaccinia virus . Curr . Biol . 12 , 740 – 745 ( 2002 ) . 83 . Campellone , K . G . & Leong , J . M . Tails of two Tirs : actin pedestal formation by enteropathogenic E . coli and enterohemorrhagic E . coli O157 : H7 . Curr . Opin . Microbiol . 6 , 82 – 90 ( 2003 ) . R E V I E W S 100 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 4 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2006 Nature Publishing Group 84 . DeVinney , R . , Puente , J . L . , Gauthier , A . , Goosney , D . & Finlay , B . B . Enterohaemorrhagic and enteropathogenic Escherichia coli use a different Tir - based mechanism for pedestal formation . Mol . Microbiol . 41 , 1445 – 1458 ( 2001 ) . 85 . DeVinney , R . et al . Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157 : H7 produces Tir , which is translocated to the host cell membrane but is not tyrosine phosphorylated . Infect . Immun . 67 , 2389 – 2398 ( 1999 ) . 86 . Paton , A . W . , Manning , P . A . , Woodrow , M . C . & Paton , J . C . Translocated intimin receptors ( Tir ) of Shiga - toxigenic Escherichia coli isolates belonging to serogroups O26 , O111 , and O157 react with sera from patients with hemolytic – uremic syndrome and exhibit marked sequence heterogeneity . Infect . Immun . 66 , 5580 – 5586 ( 1998 ) . 87 . Campellone , K . G . , Robbins , D . & Leong , J . M . EspFU is a translocated EHEC effector that interacts with Tir and N - WASP and promotes Nck - independent actin assembly . Dev . Cell 7 , 217 – 228 ( 2004 ) . 88 . Garmendia , J . et al . TccP is an enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157 : H7 type III effector protein that couples Tir to the actin - cytoskeleton . Cell . Microbiol . 6 , 1167 – 1183 ( 2004 ) . 89 . Kenny , B . The enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli ( serotype O157 : H7 ) Tir molecule is not functionally interchangeable for its enteropathogenic E . coli ( serotype O127 : H6 ) homologue . Cell . Microbiol . 3 , 499 – 510 ( 2001 ) . 90 . Vlisidou , I . et al . Role of intimin - Tir interactions and the Tir - cytoskeleton coupling protein ( TccP ) in the colonization of calves and lambs by Escherichia coli . Infect . Immun . 74 , 758 – 764 ( 2006 ) . 91 . Paavilainen , V . O . , Bertling , E . , Falck , S . & Lappalainen , P . Regulation of cytoskeletal dynamics by actin - monomer - binding proteins . Trends Cell Biol . 14 , 386 – 394 ( 2004 ) . 92 . Zigmond , S . H . Formin - induced nucleation of actin filaments . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 , 99 – 105 ( 2004 ) . 93 . Quinlan , M . E . , Heuser , J . E . , Kerkhoff , E . & Mullins , R . D . Drosophila Spire is an actin nucleation factor . Nature 433 , 382 – 388 ( 2005 ) . 94 . Welch , M . D . , DePace , A . H . , Verma , S . , Iwamatsu , A . & Mitchison , T . J . The human Arp2 / 3 complex is composed of evolutionarily conserved subunits and is localized to cellular regions of dynamic actin filament assembly . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 375 – 384 ( 1997 ) . 95 . Rohatgi , R . , Nollau , P . , Ho , H . Y . , Kirschner , M . W . & Mayer , B . J . Nck and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate synergistically activate actin polymerization through the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 26448 – 26452 ( 2001 ) . 96 . Robinson , R . C . et al . Crystal structure of Arp2 / 3 complex . Science 294 , 1679 – 1684 ( 2001 ) . 97 . Rottner , K . , Lommel , S . , Wehland , J . & Stradal , T . E . Pathogen - induced actin filament rearrangement in infectious diseases . J . Pathol . 204 , 396 – 406 ( 2004 ) . 98 . Chakraborty , T . et al . A focal adhesion factor directly linking intracellularly motile Listeria monocytogenes and Listeria ivanovii to the actin - based cytoskeleton of mammalian cells . EMBO J . 14 , 1314 – 1321 ( 1995 ) . 99 . Gouin , E . , Dehoux , P . , Mengaud , J . , Kocks , C . & Cossart , P . iactA of Listeria ivanovii , although distantly related to Listeria monocytogenes actA , restores actin tail formation in an L . monocytogenes actA mutant . Infect . Immun . 63 , 2729 – 2737 ( 1995 ) . Acknowledgements The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council and the Department for the Environment , Food and Rural Affairs . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . DATABASES The following terms in this article are linked online to : Entrez Genome Project : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / entrez / query . fcgi ? db = genomeprj Burkholderia pseudomallei | Citrobacter rodentium | EHEC O157 : H7 | Listeria innocua | Listeria monocytogenes | Mycobacterium marinum | Rickettsia conorii | Rickettsia prowazekii | Rickettsia rickettsii | Rickettsia sibirica | Rickettsia typhi | Shigella boydii | Shigella dysenteriae | Shigella flexneri | Streptococcus pneumoniae FURTHER INFORMATION The Institute for Animal Health : http : / / www . iah . bbsrc . ac . uk SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION See online article : S1 ( table ) Access to this links box is available online . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 4 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 101