ACTIN DYNAMICS , ARCHITECTURE , AND MECHANICS IN CELL MOTILITY Laurent Blanchoin , Rajaa Boujemaa - Paterski , Cécile Sykes , and Julie Plastino Laboratoire de Physiologie Cellulaire et Végétale , Institut de Recherches en Technologies et Sciences pour le Vivant , Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque / Commissariat a ` l’Energie Atomique et aux énergies alternatives / Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique / Université Joseph Fourier , Grenoble , France ; Institut Curie , Centre de Recherche , Paris , France ; Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque , Unité Mixte de Recherche 168 , Paris , France ; and Université Pierre et Marie Curie , Paris VI , Paris , France L Blanchoin L , Boujemaa - Paterski R , Sykes C , Plastino J . Actin Dynamics , Archi - tecture , and Mechanics in Cell Motility . Physiol Rev 94 : 235 – 263 , 2014 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / physrev . 00018 . 2013 . —Tight coupling between biochemical and me - chanical properties of the actin cytoskeleton drives a large range of cellular processes including polarity establishment , morphogenesis , and motility . This is possible because actin ﬁlaments are semi - ﬂexible polymers that , in conjunction with the molecular motor myosin , can act as biological active springs or “dashpots” ( in laymen’s terms , shock absorbers or ﬂuidizers ) able to exert or resist against force in a cellular environment . To modulate their mechanical properties , actin ﬁlaments can organize into a variety of architectures generating a diversity of cellular organizations including branched or crosslinked networks in the lamellipodium , parallel bundles in ﬁlopodia , and antiparallel structures in contractile ﬁbers . In this review we describe the feedback loop between biochemical and mechanical properties of actin organization at the molecular level in vitro , then we integrate this knowledge into our current understanding of cellular actin organization and its physiological roles . I . PREFACE ON ACTIN ORGANIZATION . . . 235 II . ACTIN DYNAMICS AND MECHANICS 237 III . CELLULAR SCALE : . . . 248 IV . CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVE 255 I . PREFACE ON ACTIN ORGANIZATION AND CELL MECHANICS Animal cells ( i . e . , those without a cell wall ) have the ability to change their shape to adapt to their environment , move through narrow spaces , divide , or allow exo - and endocytosis . The machinery of these shape changes relies on the assembly of proteins , in particular actin , a globular protein that polymer - izes into ﬁlaments of different types of organization : branched and crosslinked networks , parallel bundles , and anti - parallel contractile structures ( FIGURE 1A ) . These different architec - tures can be envisioned as a series of interconnected active springs and dashpots ( green and red symbols in FIGURE 1 B , respectively ) that act as mechanical elements to drive cell shape changes and motility . The purpose of this review is to correlate recent progress in our understanding of the interplay between biochemical elements and mechanical properties . Instead of describing biochemical and mechanical properties separately , our main goal here is to address piece by piece the integrated feedback loop between biochemistry and mechanics . At the front of the cell , branched and crosslinked networks in a quasi two - dimensional sheet make up the lamellipodium , and are the major engine of cell movement since they push the cell membrane by polymerizing against it ( FIGURE 1 A , iii ) . Aligned bundles underlie ﬁlopodia that are the ﬁngerlike struc - tures at the front of the cell , important for directional response of the cell ( FIGURE 1 A , iv ) . A thin layer of actin , called the cell cortex , coats the plasma membrane at the back and sides of the cell , important for cell shape maintenance and changes ( FIGURE 1 A , i ) . Therestofthecellcontainsathree - dimensionalnetworkof crosslinked ﬁlaments interspersed with contractile bundles , in - cluding stress ﬁbers that connect the cell cytoskeleton to the ex - tracellular matrix via focal adhesion sites ( FIGURE 1 A , ii ) . Con - traction in the cell is produced by the molecular motor protein myosin . Myosin assembles into antisymmetrical mini - ﬁla - ments that , once incorporated within an actin network , pro - voke actin ﬁlament gliding and thus global contraction in the cell body and tension at focal adhesion sites . To build such an array of different architectures , cells employ a battery of accessory proteins that sculpt the network and control the actin cytoskeleton mechanical response . In turn , mechanical cues feed back to control the biochemical activity of actin ﬁlaments and actin - binding proteins . In the following , we will describe this integrated view of actin cytoskeleton dy - namics starting from the simplest element , an actin ﬁlament , and increasing the complexity to the cellular context . Since the main goal of this review is to bring to light how the dynamics and the mechanics of actin structures control their physiology in the cell , we will focus our attention on the four different Physiol Rev 94 : 235 – 263 , 2014 doi : 10 . 1152 / physrev . 00018 . 2013 235 0031 - 9333 / 14 Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Filopodium parallel bundles Lamellipodium branched and crosslinked networks Stress fibers antiparallel contractile structures Cortex crosslinked networks A B contractile elements visco - elastic elements rigid rods ~ ~ i ) ii ) iv ) iii ) ACTIN DYNAMICS , ARCHITECTURE , AND MECHANICS 236 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m types of actin architecture depicted in FIGURE 1 A that have well - documented mechano - biology . Other types of cytoskele - ton organization such as podosomes or ﬁbrillar adhesions are important for cell migration but will not be reviewed exten - sively here since the link between dynamics and mechanical properties is still unclear . However , the basic molecular play - ers discussed here , including actin - nucleation machinery ( Arp2 / 3 complex and formins ) , actin disassembly machinery ( ADF / Coﬁlin ) , and actin contractile machinery ( myosins ) , are conserved in all actin organizations . As such , the general mechanisms that we describe here linking actin structure for - mation , dynamics , and mechanical properties could be used as a springboard to understand other complex actin structures in the future . II . ACTIN DYNAMICS AND MECHANICS A . Single Actin Filaments In this section we describe the basic building block of actin cytoskeleton architecture : the actin ﬁlament . Actin ﬁlament dynamics have been studied for decades , and the ﬁeld is lively with controversies ( 120 , 216 ) . For exhaustive reviews of actin biochemistry and cytoskeletal mechanics , see References 244 , 246 , 299 , 337 . Here we will summarize the main points only . The actin monomer , a 42 - kDa protein , is the basic unit for building a double - stranded helical actin ﬁlament ( 125 , 141 ) . The kinetics of actin ﬁlament assembly are thermodynamically limited by the nucleation step , consisting of the formation of actin dimers and trimers ( FIGURE 2 A and Ref . 285 ) . As soon as trimers are formed , they elongate rapidly as a function of the concentration of available actin monomers ( 333 ) . Polymeriza - tion of actin monomers at ﬁlament ends is followed by hydro - lysis of the ATP bound to the actin subunits inside the ﬁla - ments at a rate of 0 . 3 s (cid:1) 1 and phosphate dissociation at a rate of 0 . 002 s (cid:1) 1 ( FIGURE 2 A and Refs . 27 , 28 , 197 ) . In addition , actin monomers bind divalent cations like calcium and mag - nesium , and the nature of the bound cation affects polymer - ization dynamics ( 27 ) . Since cellular concentrations of Mg 2 (cid:2) are above millimolar , actin monomers under physiological conditions are loaded with MgATP ( 244 ) . Actin ﬁlaments are polar polymers with a right - handed helical twist and two ends that are dynamically different called barbed and pointed ends . The barbed end is the more dynamic end of the actin ﬁlament and elongates 10 times faster than the pointed end , at a rate of 11 . 6 (cid:1) M (cid:1) 1 ·s (cid:1) 1 ( 243 ) . Since cellular monomer concentrations can be as high as 300 (cid:1) M , actin ﬁlament barbed ends can assemble as fast as 3 , 000 subunits / s , meaning that an actin ﬁlament can reach length scales relevant to the cell ( 10 (cid:1) m ) in (cid:3) 2 s ( 244 ) . Measurements in vitro indicate that single actin ﬁlaments are semi - ﬂexible at the scale of a cell ( 110 ) . This means that actin ﬁlaments shorter than cell size , (cid:4) 10 (cid:1) m , behave like rigid rods , whereas longer ﬁlaments are able to bend and thermally ﬂuctuate because of thermal energy , k B T , on the order of 4 (cid:5) 10 (cid:1) 21 J at room temperature , where k B is the Bolzmann con - stant and T the temperature . This characteristic length of 10 (cid:1) m is called the “persistence length” designated by l p , which is exactly deﬁned as the length over which correlations in the direction of the tangent to the ﬁlament contour are lost ( FIGURE 2 B ) . In other words , a ﬁlament shorter than l p is straight and makes a constant angle with a reference , whereas a longer ﬁlament changes orientation along its length as soon as it is longer than l p . Due to their persistence length of 10 (cid:1) m , pure actin ﬁlaments are virtually straight at the cell scale . This is even more the case for microtubules with a persistence length of 1 mm that are straight tracks within the cell , suiting their main function as rails for transport ( FIGURE 2 B ) . In com - parison , DNA molecules with a persistence length of 45 nm are built to be compacted inside the nucleus ( FIGURE 2 B and Ref . 337 ) . The persistence length l p depends on the tempera - ture and the rigidity of the ﬁlament . Indeed , higher tempera - tures result in increased ﬂexibility and a smaller persistence length since thermal energy ( k B T ) will be greater . Conversely , increased rigidity leads to decreased ﬂexibility , and thus a lon - ger persistence length . In general , the persistence length scales with thermal energy as l p (cid:6) EI / k B T , where EI is called the ﬂexural rigidity of the ﬁlament ( 110 , 128 ) . However , mechanical constraints imposed by conﬁnement / geometry or by motor protein activity can bend actin ﬁlaments at the micron scale , well below their persistence length ( 22 , 161 , 220 , 327 ) . Moreover , in the cell lamellipodium , microtu - bules are sometimes observed to be bent , again well below their l p ( 35 ) . From in vitro buckling experiments , we have an idea of the force that needs to be applied to bend an actin ﬁlament . Imagine a beam of length L under compression , or a plastic ruler that we press on both sides . First , the beam is compressed as an elastic material , and then it suddenly bends or “buckles” under a certain compression force ( FIGURE 2 C ) . This compression force can be estimated considering that it should increase with increasing elastic modulus ( or increasing persistence length ) and decrease when the beam length in - creases ( it is easier to buckle a long beam ) . Then for homoge - neity reasons , the buckling force reads F B (cid:6) ( (cid:2) 2 k B T / L 2 ) l p ( 128 ) . This buckling force was measured for actin ﬁlaments constrained on one end by nucleating agents like formin and FIGURE 1 . Overlay of actin architecture and mechanics in the moving cell . A : schematic representation of the cell with the different architectures indicated : i ) the cell cortex ; ii ) an example of a contractile ﬁber , the stress ﬁber ; iii ) the lamellpodium ; and iv ) ﬁlopodia . The zoom regions highlight architectural speciﬁcities of different regions of the cell . B : overlay of the actin architecture and its mechanical proﬁle . The red rectangles are the shock absorbers ( dashpots ) that represent the actin network , while the green circles are active springs due to myosin motor activity . BLANCHOIN ET AL . 237 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m ADP - P i and ADP bound subunits Nucleation Elongation Contour length ( µm ) T o t a l f o r c e ( p N ) 0 . 5 0 . 4 0 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 1 0 . 01 end to end distance persistence length Lp ~ 10 µm persistence length Lp > 1 mm C G A T A T A T C G C G C G C G A T A T A T C G C G C G C G A T A T A T C G C G C G persistence length Lp ~ 45 nm 8 nm 25 nm 2 nm Actin Microtubule DNA double strand contour length 644444474444448 64 7 4 8 Force Force ATP - bound subunits 64 7 4 8 ATP hydrolysis / P i dissociation A B C 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 FIGURE 2 . Single ﬁlament assembly and mechanics . A : the kinetics of actin assembly . Actin polymerization from the pool of actin monomers happens in two phases . The thermodynamically limiting step for actin assembly , nucleation , is the formation of dimers and trimers . This is followed by rapid elongation at the more dynamic end , the barbed end , at 11 . 6 (cid:1) M (cid:1) 1 ·s (cid:1) 1 , ATP hydrolysis in the ﬁlament at 0 . 3 s (cid:1) 1 , and phosphate dissociation at 0 . 0022 s (cid:1) 1 . B : persistence lengths of different cytoskeletal elements . Actin ﬁlaments are semi - ﬂexible polymers with a diameter of 8 nm and a persistence length of 10 (cid:1) m . Microtubules are rigid with a diameter of 25 nm and a persistence length greater than 1 mm . Double - stranded DNA are ﬂexible molecules with a 2 nmdiameter and a persistence length of (cid:4) 45 nm . C : at the scale of the cell , actin ﬁlaments are almost straight structures , but they can nevertheless buckle under a load . The force exerted to bend the ﬁlament varies as a function of its contour length ( 22 ) . ACTIN DYNAMICS , ARCHITECTURE , AND MECHANICS 238 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m on the other end by an inactivated myosin to be on the order of 0 . 4 pN for a micrometer long ﬁlament ( FIGURE 2 C and Refs . 22 , 161 ) . For shorter ﬁlaments , this buckling force is greater since it scales inversely proportional to the square of the ﬁla - ment length . In fact , in a physiologically relevant scenario where ﬁlaments shorter than 0 . 5 (cid:1) m elongate through polym - erization of actin monomers at a concentration of 50 (cid:1) M , modeling suggests that this buckling force can be as large as 10 pN ( 22 , 132 ) . So single ﬁlaments growing against a load exert considerable forces before they buckle . Interestingly , both the nucleotide and the divalent cations bound to an actin ﬁlament modulate its bending properties ; for example , actin ﬁlaments become four times stiffer when the concentration of free cat - ions is increased ( 132 , 146 ) . In addition , as we will see in more detail in section II G , actin binding proteins such as ADF / coﬁlin not only modify the mechanical properties of the actin ﬁla - ment , but also the nucleotide state of actin monomers in the ﬁlament ( 28 , 76 , 194 , 251 ) . The polymerization of actin ﬁlaments and their association with actin regulatory proteins produce a variety of architec - tures . The following paragraphs detail the dynamic in vitro formation of the major types of actin architectures encoun - tered in cellular structures and their mechanical properties : branched actin networks , crosslinked meshworks , bundles of parallel actin ﬁlaments , and bundles of antiparallel actin ﬁla - ments . These organized actin structures are built in space and time in competition with the spontaneous assembly of unor - ganized actin ﬁlaments . Therefore , before going into detail on how speciﬁc structures assemble , we will ﬁrst describe how cellular proteins inhibit spontaneous , uncontrolled actin po - lymerization to focus assembly at sites where actin growth is needed . B . Keeping Actin Assembly Under Control : Role of Proﬁlin Actin polymerization nucleation is thermodynamically unfa - vorable ; however , once oligomers are formed , spontaneous actin assembly can occur if the concentration of actin mono - mer is above what is called “the critical concentration” at the barbed ends ( i . e . , 0 . 1 (cid:1) M ) ( 244 ) . This is the case in cells where the concentration of actin monomers in the cytoplasm can range from a few to hundreds of micromolar depending on cell type , with platelets and neutrophils weighing in at hundreds of micromolar while Xenopus egg cells and HeLa cells grown in suspension have less than 10 (cid:1) M ( 244 and references therein and Ref . 242 ) . Proﬁlin , an abundant actin monomer binding protein , plays an important role in actin homeostasis ( 7 , 145 , 234 , 244 , 325 ) . Proﬁlin functions by inhibiting the spontaneous formation of actin dimers or trimers , the building blocks for the nucleation of new actin ﬁlaments ( 244 ) . Actin monomers complexed with proﬁlin can only be used for de novo actin assembly catalyzed by cellular nucleation factors . These factors include the Arp2 / 3 complex , activated by WASP / WAVE family proteins ( see sect . II C ) and formins ( see sect . II E ) . Indeed , proﬁlin is key for the rapid elongation of ﬁlaments in the presence of formin : actin ﬁlament free barbed ends elongate at a rate of 10 (cid:1) M (cid:1) 1 ·s (cid:1) 1 , whereas the formin / proﬁlin tandem increases this rate of elongation up to 90 (cid:1) M (cid:1) 1 ·s (cid:1) 1 ( 119 , 160 , 209 , 264 , 322 ) . Another key role of proﬁlin is to exclu - sively drive actin assembly at the fast - growing barbed end of actin ﬁlaments , while preventing polymerization at the pointed end , thus giving a polarity in the growth of any type of actin architecture ( 250 ) . C . Branched Actin Networks One speciﬁc form of actin architecture involved in actin - based force generation for cell movement and shape changes is the branched network initiated by a complex made of seven pro - teins : the Arp2 / 3 complex ( FIGURE 3 A and Refs . 184 , 218 , 219 , 260 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex - branched actin organization is found for example at the leading edge of motile cells ( FIGURE 1 , Ref . 304 ) , at the site of clathrin mediated endocytosis ( 335 ) , and is necessary for meotic spindle positioning ( 177 , 348 ) and for the motility of some bacteria and viruses in host cell cytoplasm ( 47 , 91 ) . In vitro in cell extracts or pure protein mixes , the growth of a branched network at the surface of bacteria , micrometer - sized polystyrene beads or oil droplets generate movement , thus mimicking lamellipodium extension ( 20 , 33 , 46 , 181 ) . This mechanism of branch nucleation also generates a stress in a growing network on a spherical surface ( 223 ) . This stress is observed in the deformation of endosomes and biomimetic objects resembling endosomes that are able to move using the actin machinery ( 33 , 103 , 309 , 318 ) . All together these results indicate that branched networks can generate force and do work when assembled in proximity to a surface . The polymerization of a branched actin network in the pres - ence of the Arp2 / 3 complex is explosive , and in vivo , a multi - ple - switch mechanism is necessary to ﬁnely tune the kinetics of branch formation ( 122 , 190 ) . The whole process is seeded by a preexisting ﬁlament or “primer” whose side interacts with the Arp2 / 3 complex ( FIGURE 3 A and Refs . 3 , 186 , 292 ) . In addition to a primer , nucleating - promoting factors ( NPFs ) from the Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome protein ( WASP ) / WAVE family of proteins are necessary to activate the Arp2 / 3 com - plex ( 185 , 186 , 261 ) . A feature of the Arp2 / 3 - activating do - main of all NPFs is the presence of one or several WH2 do - mains NH 2 terminal to the Arp2 / 3 complex - binding motif . WH2 domains are short domains ( (cid:3) 50 amino acids ) that bind to monomeric actin and have a range of attributed roles in - cluding actin ﬁlament nucleation ( 130 , 266 ) . In NPFs , WH2 domains are invariably preceded on the NH 2 - terminal side by a polyproline domain that can bind proﬁlin - actin . This ar - rangement suggests a loading model where the polyproline region binds proﬁlin - actin and then hands it off to the WH2 BLANCHOIN ET AL . 239 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 7 - Capping Proteins ( - CP ) + Capping Proteins ( + CP ) long crosslinkers crosslinkers myosin and crosslinkers A Branched actin network C Parallel actin bundle B Crosslinked actin network D Anti - parallel actin bundle primer activation formins , Ena / VASP CP ATP , ADP - Pi , ADP subunits inactive / activated Arp2 / 3 complex profilin NPFs ACTIN DYNAMICS , ARCHITECTURE , AND MECHANICS 240 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m domain to participate in actin ﬁlament nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 62 ) . Somewhat counterintuitively , to build a branched network dense enough for efﬁcient force production , branch elongation needs to be limited by interaction with capping proteins that block growth at ﬁlament barbed ends ( FIGURE 3 A and Refs . 3 , 4 , 75 , 150 , 323 , 324 ) . Indeed , in the absence of capping pro - tein , branches elongate with no limitation , resulting in most cases in an array of parallel bundles growing away from the NPF sites , and thus this condition is not optimal for force production ( FIGURE 3 A and Refs . 3 , 4 , 115 , 150 , 233 , 256 ) . Instead , capping protein or proteins with similar activities work in synergy with the Arp2 / 3 complex to build a dense actin network of capped ﬁlaments that are sterically displaced by new branches formed at NPF sites ( 3 , 4 , 25 , 96 , 150 , 351 ) . In the presence of capping proteins , the mechanism of activa - tion of the Arp2 / 3 complex results in an actin network that should not be viewed as a homogeneous structure at the ﬁla - ment scale , but as a combination of subnetworks , each seeded by different primers . These subnetworks merge together de - pending on the biochemical conditions to build a homoge - neous network that can generate a force due to entanglement of new branches generated at the NPF sites . Subnetworks can thus be visualized as independent networks that are entangled if ﬁlaments are long enough to reach the neighboring network . This creates a repulsion effect that can be depicted by a spring , although it might also involve a viscous component , and no myosin is at work here ( FIGURE 3 A , mechanical representation and Refs . 3 , 150 ) . The degree of branching is of course important for deﬁning the mechanical state of a branched actin structure . The mechanics of a network is deﬁned by its mesh size (cid:3) that is variously taken as the spacing between actin ﬁlaments inside the network or the distance between ﬁxed crosslink points . In the case of branched networks , these points are both the Arp2 / 3 complex branch points and the entanglement points . This parameter is controlled by the actin monomer concentration , the Arp2 / 3 complex activity , and the amount of capping protein ( 150 , 252 ) . Mesh size and stiffness ( elastic modulus , E ) are related through E (cid:6) kTl p / (cid:3) 4 with the same notations used above , which highlights how strongly ( power 4 ) the mesh size affects the elastic modulus ( 223 ) . In a nutshell , increasing the network density dramatically increases its stiffness through decreasing its mesh size . The mechanical properties of branched actin networks are measured by “rheology” experiments , where the network is submitted to a force per unit surface or a pressure , and the consequent deformations are observed ( 59 , 191 , 252 , 340 ) . Such experiments were pioneered in the mid 1980s ( 275 , 350 ) . A deformation is quantiﬁed by the “strain , ” a dimensionless parameter that measures the displacement divided by the dis - tance over which the deformation is applied . If the strain is proportional to the applied force , the material is “elastic , ” meaning that it returns to its original shape when the force is removed . If the material does not come back to its original shape , this means that there is dissipation or ﬂowing , and thus a viscous component is present in the system . In the elastic response , stress ( or force per unit surface ) is proportional to strain , and the proportionality coefﬁcient is the elastic modu - lus . In the viscous response , stress is proportional to the rate of strain , and the proportionality coefﬁcient is the viscosity com - ponent . Therefore , an elastic modulus has the units of Pascal , whereas a viscous component has the units of Pascal second . Mechanical properties of actin networks are also studied by microrheology experiments , where beads are embedded in the network . This technique allows for the measurement of the network deformation when beads are displaced by optical or magnetic tweezers , called active microrheology . Alternatively , since the beads are small , they undergo Brownian motion be - cause of thermal energy , and the amplitude of this motion can be related to the rheological properties of the actin network , called passive microrheology . For a clear description of active or passive microrheology , see Reference 340 . Whatever the measurement technique , actin networks are found to be “vis - coelastic” materials in that they are generally elastic at small time scales ( time shorter than a minute ) and viscous at larger times ( longer than minutes ) due to rearrangements in the net - work . This is why a cell , or by extension , our epidermis that is made of many cells , comes back to its original shape when pinched brieﬂy , but remains baggy when deformed during a long time , for example , on our elbows and knees . How then does the microscopic ﬁlament organization of the branched actin network and its mechanical properties deter - mine force production in the cell ? Despite an array of different FIGURE 3 . Distinct actin ﬁlament organizations and their mechanical description . A : a branched actin network results from the autocatalytic branching activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex . Activated by nucleation promoting factors , NPFs , the Arp2 / 3 complex generates a branched network from the side of a preexisting actin ﬁlament , called a “primer . ” In the presence of capping proteins ( (cid:2) CP ) , branches are shorter . This yields dense and rigid subnetworks that evolve into an entangled meshwork . The entanglement of ﬁlament subnetworks leads to mechanical interactions that are represented by a spring ( in red ) connecting barycenters ( spheres ) of adjacent subnetworks . In the absence of capping proteins ( (cid:1) CP ) , actin ﬁlaments grow longer and can either align into an antiparallel organization or bend and coalesce into a parallel bundle . These parallel ﬁlaments form stable ﬁlopodia - like bundles that act as a solid body . B : long crosslinkers organize actin ﬁlaments into networks . These bonds act as rigid links and control the global elasticity of the actin network depending on their binding kinetics and concentration . C : short crosslinkers tightly pack unbranched ﬁlaments , such as those generated by formins or Ena / VASP proteins , into stiff , straight bundles . D : molecular motors , myosins , are dynamic links that gather antiparallel ﬁlaments into a contractile unit . They act as active springs . On the right , gray diagrams represent mechanical analogs of each molecular structure . BLANCHOIN ET AL . 241 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m studies concerning the mechanical properties and force gener - ation of branched networks , no clear consensus has emerged relating the detailed actin structure to how good the actin network is at moving an object ( 3 , 4 , 20 , 87 , 195 , 257 , 338 ) . New methods using NPF - micropatterning to orient actin net - work growth and control its geometry in combination with physical methods to measure force production , such as mag - netic colloids in magnetic ﬁelds , atomic force microscopy , or optical tweezers , should make it possible in the future to cor - relate the biochemical composition of the actin network and its microscopic organization to the force generated by the net - work ( 34 , 59 , 96 , 217 , 252 , 256 ) . D . Crosslinked Actin Networks For the sake of simplicity , we deﬁne a crosslinked actin net - work as any structure of actin ﬁlaments that is connected by proteins that bridge actin ﬁlaments together , excluding the Arp2 / 3 complex that has been described above . Crosslinked networks are involved in controlling cell shape and mechani - cal integrity ( 64 , 87 , 98 , 156 , 254 , 331 ) . Unlike the Arp2 / 3 complex , which is involved both in the initiation of actin as - sembly and in the organization of the network , crosslinking proteins play no or little role during actin assembly , but con - nect already polymerized actin ﬁlaments together to generate a complex macroscopic organization ( FIGURE 3 , B – D , and Refs . 85 , 129 , 148 , 331 ) . An identifying property of each crosslink - ing protein is the distance by which it bridges two actin ﬁla - ments ( FIGURE 3 , B AND C ) ; crosslink distances range from 10 nm for ﬁmbrin to 160 nm for ﬁlamin ( 153 , 282 , 297 ) . Cross - linkers that impose small crosslinking distances , such as ﬁm - brin or fascin , tightly pack actin ﬁlaments into bundles with actin ﬁlaments oriented in a parallel , antiparallel , or mixed polarity fashion depending on the crosslinker ( 178 , 289 ) . Larger crosslinkers , such as ﬁlamin or (cid:4) - actinin , are present in either bundles or networks depending on their concentrations ( 69 , 148 , 199 , 277 , 329 , 330 ) . In addition , recent results show that the rate of assembly of actin networks can inﬂuence how crosslinkers do their job through crowding effects ( 85 ) . In - deed , increasing the rate of actin assembly abolishes the for - mation of actin bundles generated by (cid:4) - actinin because fast actin assembly generates long ﬁlaments that have limited mo - bility , preventing them from being aligned into bundles by this crosslinker ( 85 ) . This observation could have a major impact on our understanding of network architecture formation in a crowded cell cytoplasm . Like for branched networks , the mechanical properties of crosslinked networks can be studied by rheology experiments . It is observed that if the crosslinked network is a homogeneous structure ( FIGURE 3 B , mechanical representation ) , applying a force on a long time scale gives time for redistribution of the crosslinkers , and global shape changes that remain once the force is released like for a viscous material ( 343 ) . If the force is applied on a short time scale , crosslinkers do not have time to reorganize and resist against the load ; the network then be - haves like an elastic material , returning to its original shape once the force vanishes ( 343 ) . The presence of crosslinkers in an actin network increases the elastic modulus and decreases the viscosity . However , crosslinked networks in most cases are a mixture of entangled and bundled ﬁlaments that prevent the network from having a linear viscoelastic response under force , since the different architectures respond differently . A nonlinear viscoelastic response where stress is no longer pro - portional to strain or strain rate can also be obtained in ho - mogeneous semi - ﬂexible networks considering that some ﬁla - ments are elongated under stress , whereas others are com - pressed ( 137 ) . So a detailed understanding of the actin architecture is necessary to understand the relationship be - tween actin organization and mechanical response ( 87 , 178 , 299 ) . E . Parallel Actin Bundles Parallel actin ﬁlament bundles are a type of structure found in a large number of cellular contexts including ﬁlopodia , mi - crovilli , and hair cells ( 14 , 254 , 324 , 345 , 346 ) . They are made of ﬁlaments oriented with their barbed ends in the same direc - tion , most of the time facing the cell membrane ( 64 ) . Actin ﬁlaments in a bundle are maintained in close contact via cross - linking proteins including (cid:4) - actinin , ﬁmbrin , and fascin that bind / unbind from the ﬁlament on the order of seconds , but this can vary if a load is applied to the crosslink ( FIGURE 3 C and Refs . 15 , 86 , 206 ) . It is an open question as to how the actin ﬁlaments that make up the bundle are initiated . Two nonexclusive mechanisms are generally admitted , one that requires the Arp2 / 3 complex and another that involves barbed end elongation enhancement proteins like formins or Ena / VASP proteins that will be dis - cussed in the next paragraph ( 3 , 4 , 39 , 115 , 200 , 256 , 264 , 276 , 305 , 323 , 324 , 345 ) . The ﬁrst situation occurs when capping protein is absent from Arp2 / 3 complex - generated net - works ( FIGURE 3 A , (cid:1) CP ) . As uncapped ﬁlaments elongate freely at their barbed ends , they tend to bundle via electrostatic interactions , and then a transition from branched to parallel actin ﬁlaments is observed . Geometrical constraints and the angle by which ﬁlaments are contacting each other can alter this transition and generate either parallel or antiparallel actin structures ( 256 ) . As the ﬁlaments start to organize in parallel structures , they can be captured by crosslinkers such as fascin that further stabilize the bundled conformation and stiffen the structure ( FIGURE 3 , A , mechanical representation , AND C ) . Interestingly this transition between branched and parallel ac - tin organization is observed in the actin comet tails of Listeria monocytogenes , a bacterium that uses cytoplasmic actin ma - chinery to move ( 42 ) . In this study , the Arp2 / 3 complex is removed from already moving Listeria , and movement con - tinues via parallel actin structures , crosslinked by fascin . An alternative for initiating parallel actin bundles is through formin proteins ( 63 , 112 ) . Formins are a large family of pro - ACTIN DYNAMICS , ARCHITECTURE , AND MECHANICS 242 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m teins characterized by the presence of the formin homology 1 and 2 ( FH1 and FH2 ) domains that work in concert during actin assembly ( 63 , 121 , 159 , 238 ) . The FH1 domain is an unstructured domain that acts as a lasso to rope in proﬁlin - actin molecules while the FH2 domain interacts with the barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments ( 60 , 104 ) . For most formins , the FH2 domain stays attached to the growing barbed ends as the ﬁlaments elongate , making formin a processive elongation machine ( 37 , 70 , 113 , 119 , 139 , 161 , 209 , 352 ) . In some cases , formins work together with the Arp2 / 3 complex or with the tumor suppressor adenomatous polyposis coli ( APC ) for actin assembly ( 26 , 30 , 37 ) . Some formins are not processive and move during actin assem - bly from the end to the side of actin ﬁlaments ( 201 ) . This latter property allows formin to be not only an elongator during actin assembly but also a crosslinking protein that organizes actin ﬁlaments into large parallel or antiparallel structures ( 114 , 201 , 203 , 214 ) . However , formins do not necessarily form bundles in vivo . A case in point is FMNL1 , which is able to bundle actin ﬁlaments in vitro but lacks the ability to gen - erate ﬁlopodia in cells ( 111 ) . For in vivo bundle formation , it is likely that formins work in concert with bundling proteins such as fascin ( for ﬁlopodia ) or ﬁmbrin ( for cables in yeast ) . Another component of actin bundles in vivo is Ena / VASP pro - teins , also associated with protrusive actin structures in gen - eral ( for review , see Ref . 316 and FIGURE 3 C ) . Anti - capping and barbed end elongation enhancement activity , shown using puriﬁed Ena / VASP proteins in vitro , may explain the role of Ena / VASP in ﬁlopodia formation ( 16 , 38 , 39 , 109 , 236 ) . However , Ena / VASP could also contribute to mechanical ri - gidity of bundles , since it is multimeric with ﬁlamentous actin binding sites , a common motif in crosslinking proteins . In - deed , Ena / VASP is found to magnify the effect of fascin on network rigidity , perhaps explaining the presence of these two proteins in ﬁlopodia ( 301 ) . However , on their own , Ena / VASP proteins only very modestly increase the rigidity of actin net - works , possibly due to the ﬂexibility the Ena / VASP tetramer ( 101 , 302 ) . The mechanical properties of bundles depend on the presence of crosslinkers and on whether the crosslink attaches actin ﬁlaments tightly together or lets them slide over each other . Mechanical properties of actin bundles can be estimated through their buckling force , which is , as for a single ﬁlament described above , the compression force necessary to bend the bundle . Since for a single ﬁlament this buckling force is F B (cid:6) ( (cid:2) 2 K B T / L 2 ) l p , for N ﬁlaments that are in a non - crosslinked bundle this becomes F B (cid:6) N ( (cid:2) 2 K B T / L 2 ) l p . For N ﬁlaments that cannot slide in the bundle since they are crosslinked , the buckling force scales with the power 4 of the radius of the bundle , therefore with N 2 . Thus the persistence length of an actin bundle reads L p (cid:6) Nl p for ﬁlaments freely able to slide over each other and L p (cid:6) N 2 l p when all ﬁlaments are statically attached to one another . Another type of force that can affect bundle mechanics is the force exerted by the actin crosslinkers , or the applied force needed to break the actin - crosslinker bond ( 86 , 298 ) . This rupture force depends on the type of actin binding proteins but ranges from 30 pN for (cid:4) - actinin to 50 pN for ﬁlamin ( 86 ) . Similar to a branched actin network , elongating actin bundles can exert enough force to move an object ( 200 , 264 ) . In a study using optical traps to measure the force generated by elongating bundles , a force of 1 pN is enough to stop the growth of a bundle made of a few ﬁlaments ( 88 ) . Similar force stops the growth of a single ﬁlament , suggesting that in the case of an actin bundle elongating freely against a load , only one ﬁlament is in contact with the load at a given time . The reason why actin bundles generated by formin are able to maintain bead motility is that all the barbed ends are elongated at the surface by a processive formin instead of arriving freely in contact with the load , and also the ﬁlaments form a bundle , preventing the active force of actin polymerization from being lost to buckling . As a result , more than one ﬁlament is pushing the bead , and therefore , forces add to push the bead in a coordinated fashion . This is the case for formin but could also be true for any processive elongation machinery , such as Ena / VASP proteins . A challenge for further investigation will be to correlate the number of actin ﬁlaments in a processively elon - gating bundle and the force exerted by this bundle as a func - tion of its length . Indeed , short stiff bundles stay straight as they apply a force against a load , whereas long actin bundles have a tendency to buckle and deform themselves instead of maintaining an increasing force against a load ( 200 , 264 ) . Interestingly , formin - mediated force generation via actin bun - dles has been shown to drive the motility of the bacterium Rickettsia ( 108 ) . F . Antiparallel Actin Organization Antiparallel actin structures with myosin - induced contraction are necessary for cytokinesis and for stress ﬁber function dur - ing the establishment of cell / cell and cell - matrix adhesions ( 45 , 126 , 170 , 281 , 289 , 311 , 315 ) . As for parallel actin bundles , antiparallel organizations are stabilized by crosslinking pro - teins that favor this speciﬁc conﬁguration ( FIGURE 3 D and Refs . 155 , 170 , 312 ) . Fimbrin and (cid:4) - actinin are good candi - dates to stabilize actin bundles in an antiparallel conformation ( 170 ) . Recent reconstitution of contractile networks in vitro reveals two steps during myosin / antiparallel actin bundle in - teraction in the presence of crosslinking proteins : contraction and myosin - induced disassembly ( 116 , 220 , 327 ) . The latter will be described in the subsequent section . In the absence of crosslinking proteins , antiparallel structures contract to a large extent under myosin action before disassembly , whereas in the presence of crosslinking proteins such as (cid:4) - actinin , the extent of contraction is limited before disassembly is initiated ( 255 ) . In addition to biochemical composition , the length of ﬁla - ments in the antiparallel network has a direct impact on its contractile properties as the number of myosin heads per unit BLANCHOIN ET AL . 243 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m length will vary and the tension along the contractile structure is proportional to the number of myosin heads ( FIGURE 3 D , mechanical representation , and Ref . 313 ) . The mechanism of bundle contraction has been addressed theoretically by analyt - ical continuous models or by a microscopic description of bundle architecture ( 24 , 175 , 176 ) . Minimum reconstituted systems for antiparallel contractile bundles , consisting of just a few components , seem to mimic most of the mechanical prop - erties of sophisticated contractile units in vivo ( 255 , 313 ) . The velocity of contraction depends on ﬁlament architecture : con - traction is faster for antiparallel ﬁlaments compared with branched networks . The orientation of the actin ﬁlaments in the contracting network is thus a major determinant for con - trolling the rate of contraction ( 155 , 255 ) . Moreover , the dy - namics of actin polymerization and depolymerization have to be taken into account in addition to myosin activity for ex - plaining phenomena such as actin ring contraction during cy - tokinesis ( 354 ) . Obviously more work is necessary to correlate biochemical composition and geometrical parameters of an - tiparallel bundle organization and their mechanical properties under tension generated by myosin motors , but recent recon - stituted systems are promising tools to unveil this connection ( 217 ) . G . Disassembly of Actin Networks In the previous sections , we described how the different actin organizations are built . In the following section , we address how actin structures are disassembled . Two key protein fac - tors are involved during actin disassembly , ADF / coﬁlin and myosin , both acting on actin ﬁlament mechanics . 1 . ADF / coﬁlin - induced disassembly ADF / coﬁlin was discovered in the 1980s in the brain as an actin disassembly factor ( 12 ) . Inspired by this pioneering work and almost simultaneously , the same protein going by the names of actophorin , destrin , coﬁlin , and depactin was discov - ered in different organisms including amoeba , starﬁsh , and mammals ( 21 ) . By general consensus , these proteins are now grouped under the name ADF / coﬁlin ( 21 ) . It is somewhat un - fortunate that the “D” in ADF stands for “depolymerization” since , as we will see in the following , ADF / coﬁlin is in fact a disassembly factor that uses fragmentation or severing to break down actin organizations ( 131 , 257 ) , as opposed to a depolymerization machine that affects the rate of depolymer - ization at the end of actin ﬁlaments ( 51 ) . Part of the confusion stems from the fact that in a bulk assay ADF / coﬁlin is reported to increase by 25 - fold the rate of actin dissociation from pointed ends ; however , evanescent wave microscopy ( also known as TIRF microscopy ) of single ﬁlaments in the presence of ADF / coﬁlin does not conﬁrm this ﬁnding ( 9 , 40 , 58 , 300 ) . Whereas the observation of actin ﬁlaments by classical epiﬂu - orescence microscopy requires the use of ﬂuorescent phalloi - din to preferentially label ﬁlaments so they can be seen against the noise of free ﬂuorophores in solution , evanescent wave microscopy is an alternative to observe single actin ﬁlaments formed from ﬂuorescently labeled monomers since it cuts down on the background by illuminating a restricted region of the sample . Therefore , evanescent wave microscopy is key for revealing the real mechanism of ADF / coﬁlin since it avoids ﬁlament visualization via ﬂuorescent phalloidin - stabilized ﬁl - aments , a real problem in the study of ADF / coﬁlin because phalloidin inhibits the interaction between ADF / coﬁlin and the actin ﬁlament ( 8 , 93 , 187 ) . With the use of evanescent wave microscopy , the ﬁrst important observation is that ADF / coﬁlin fragmentation efﬁciency depends on the degree of sat - uration of ADF / coﬁlin along actin ﬁlaments ( FIGURE 4 A and Refs . 9 , 76 , 83 , 193 , 300 ) . Indeed , poorly decorated actin ﬁlaments fragment more readily than fully decorated ﬁlaments that seem instead to be stabilized by ADF / coﬁlin decoration . This was puzzling until ADF / coﬁlin was shown to decrease the persistence length of actin ﬁlaments ﬁvefold to a l p of 2 (cid:1) m ( FIGURE 4 A ) . In other words , actin ﬁlaments decorated by ADF / coﬁlin are more ﬂexible ( 193 ) . This suggests a tight cou - pling between biochemistry and mechanics during actin frag - mentation by ADF / coﬁlin , a unique property that could be the object of an entire review on its own . From these observations a model has emerged to explain fragmentation by ADF / coﬁlin based on local stress accumulation at mechanical discontinu - ities , i . e . , at boundaries of bare and ADF / coﬁlin - decorated ﬁl - ament segments ( FIGURE 4 A and Refs . 76 , 194 ) . This is con - ﬁrmed by direct observation by two - color evanescent wave microscopy of the interaction of ADF / coﬁlin with actin ﬁla - FIGURE 4 . Remodeling and disassembly of dynamic actin structures . ADF / coﬁlin or myosin - mediated disassembly of individual or complex actin ﬁlament structures occurs through important modiﬁcations of their global mechanical properties . At the microscopic level , A : fragmentation of individual ﬁlament happens at the boundary of bare and ADF - decorated portions , whose persistence length is signiﬁcantly decreased . B : disassembly by ADF / coﬁlin can also occur by debranching of the Arp2 / 3 complex network . Additional proteins such as GMF can also induce branch dissociation . C : directed motion of myosins can induce ﬁlament buckling and eventually breakage when one end of the myoﬁlament moves faster than the other one . [ Adapted from Vogel et al . ( 327 ) . ] At the macroscopic level , D : ADF - mediated severing and debranching activities lead to the stochastic macroscopic fragmentation characterized by the loss of large network portions of actin tails polymerized at the surface of functionalized beads in the presence of ADF / coﬁlin ( 257 ) . This mechanism favors rapid actin turnover of actin structures away from the surface of the bead , due to the localization of ADF / coﬁlin in older parts of the tail ( ADF / coﬁlin is ﬂuorescently labeled ) . E : myosin - induced contraction and disassembly of a reconstituted contractile network on functionalized micropatterned bars ( 255 ) . Myosin - induced contraction of a coherent meshwork ends in mechanical breakage of ﬁlaments beyond a certain deformation limit . Waves of myosin ( green ) appear leading to actin disassembly , as visualized on functionalized micropatterned bars . For D and E , the cartoons illustrate the different steps over time during actin disassembly mediated by ADF / coﬁlin or myosin . ACTIN DYNAMICS , ARCHITECTURE , AND MECHANICS 244 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Maximalsevering at boundaries 0 A D F / c o f ili n b i nd i ng den s i t y A D F / c o f ili n b i nd i ng den s i t y 1 undecorated filament Lp ~ 10 um ADF / cofilin decorated filament Lp ~ 2 um Microscopic disassembly of actin filaments Macroscopic disassembly of actin networks ADF / cofilin - mediated fragmentation ADF / cofilin - mediated disassembly B Myosin - mediated buckling / breakage of actin filaments Myosin - mediated disassembly actin assembly fragmentation and debranching contraction 18 min 24 min 25 min 35 min 40 min time time 10 min actinmyosin ? ? disassembly GMF capping proteins myosin ATP , ADP - P i , ADP subunits Arp2 / 3 complex ADF / cofilin A C D E A D F / c o f ili n b i nd i ng den s i t y Debranching BLANCHOIN ET AL . 245 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m ments , which demonstrates that fragmentation occurs at the boundary ( 40 , 300 ) . In addition , the biochemical control of ADF / coﬁlin binding to actin ﬁlaments is complex : ADF / coﬁlin binds with a stronger afﬁnity to ADP subunits than ADP - P i or ATP subunits inside the ﬁlaments ( 28 , 183 ) . Interestingly , binding of ADF / coﬁlin to actin ﬁlaments also increases the rate of phosphate dissocia - tion from actin subunits , making the aging of actin ﬁlament from ATP to ADP subunits faster ( 28 ) . The ATP - loaded grow - ing barbed end of actin ﬁlaments is always excluded from decoration by ADF / coﬁlin , and therefore , ﬂuorescently labeled ADF / coﬁlin appears to be an excellent probe to monitor the nucleotide state of growing actin ﬁlaments ( 300 ) . In keeping with this , only the presence of capping proteins that block the elongation of actin ﬁlaments allows for full decoration of the actin ﬁlament by ADF / coﬁlin ( 300 ) . As a result , a stochastic fragmentation of growing actin ﬁla - ments is observed with ADF - coﬂin , with ﬁlament lengths showing phases of growth and shortening , a mechanism that is different from the vectorial disassembly process originally en - visioned ( 200 , 262 , 295 ) . The link between the mechanics of actin ﬁlaments , ADF / coﬁlin , and severing was further investi - gated using optical tweezers to stretch actin ﬁlaments , reveal - ing that stretched actin ﬁlaments are resistant to ADF / coﬁlin binding / severing ( 95 , 117 ) . This observation is in line with the idea that actin ﬁlaments may act as tension sensors to modu - late their own dynamics . It is very difﬁcult to predict how ADF / coﬁlin will act on actin ﬁlament bundles stabilized by crosslinking proteins ( 83 , 294 ) . On one hand , ADF / coﬁlin has been shown to synergize with fascin to disassemble parallel actin ﬁlaments ( 40 ) . On the other hand , crosslinking proteins have been shown to inhibit frag - mentation induced by ADF / coﬁlin , and direct visualization of bundle fragmentation by ADF / coﬁlin demonstrates that bun - dles are more resistant to fragmentation than single ﬁlaments ( 129 , 200 , 278 ) . The question as to how actin ﬁlament bundles are disassembled by ADF / coﬁlin is still open , especially in the context of actin dynamics in cells . Concerning branched networks , ADF / coﬁlin severs them , but also dissociates branches generated by the Arp2 / 3 complex ( FIGURE 4 B ) . The mechanism of branch dissociation is not fully understood , but a combination of dissociation of the Arp2 / 3 complex from the mother ﬁlament and / or from the pointed end of the daughter ﬁlaments has been proposed ( 25 , 52 , 189 ) . Another member of the ADF / coﬁlin superfamily , glia maturation factor ( GMF ) , targets the junction between actin subunits and the Arp2 / 3 complex of the daughter ﬁlament , dismantling branch points and inhibiting new actin assembly ( 31 , 97 , 182 , 347 ) . This microscopic effect of ADF / coﬁlin fam - ily proteins on the stability of Arp2 / 3 complex branch stability can be observed at the larger scale of dense branched networks reconstituted in vitro ( FIGURE 4 D ) . As for single growing actin ﬁlaments , ADF / coﬁlin targets the aged ADP part of the grow - ing actin network , thus focusing disassembly at sites that are removed from locations of active assembly ( 131 , 163 , 164 , 257 ) . It is also observed that stochastic severing or debranch - ing by ADF / coﬁlin facilitates network turnover through mac - roscopic network fracture where large portions of the net - work suddenly disintegrate , rather than by gradual ﬁlament depolymerization ( FIGURE 4 D and Refs . 131 , 257 ) . In the future , it will be interesting to understand how the effect of ADF / coﬁlin on the mechanical properties of single actin ﬁlaments is integrated at the level of a branched network as a whole . 2 . Myosin - induced disassembly Myosin - induced contraction has recently emerged as another waytodisassembleactinnetworks ( FIGURE4 , C AND E , andRefs . 116 , 155 , 220 , 255 , 292 , 327 , 339 ) . This was initially reported for actin ﬁlament bundles stabilized by fascin during an in vitro ﬁlament gliding assay ( 133 ) . In this study , actin bundles are able to slide along the myosin - coated surface at low myo - sin density , whereas they are disassembled at high myosin density . In solution , myosin - induced actin bundle disassembly occurs in two steps : ﬁrst bundle dissociation , then actin ﬁla - ment disassembly ( 116 ) . An “orientation selection” mecha - nism is proposed where selective contraction and disassembly by myosins occurs depending on the actin architecture ( 255 ) . Myosins are able to reorganize branched networks into an antiparallel organization and induce their contraction and dis - FIGURE 5 . Specialized actin organizations in vivo . Motile cells have distinct actin organizations in different locations in the cell , specialized for precise functions . i ) The actin cortex is anchored to the plasma membrane through ERM proteins and is contractile via myosin activity . ii ) One category of contractile bundles , the stress ﬁbers , are found spanning the cell body , usually oriented parallel to the direction of movement . They are attached to focal adhesions and involve a speciﬁc set of regulatory intracellular factors , among them formins , Ena / VASP proteins , (cid:4) - actinin , and myosin . iii ) Transverse arcs are speciﬁc antiparallel actin ﬁlament formations found at the back of the lamellipodium . They are contractile through myosin activity . iv ) The motor organelle , the lamellipodium , hosts rapid , massive , and localized polymerization of branched actin networks . A : initiation of this dendritic network occurs via the concerted activity of locally activated Arp2 / 3 complex binding to the side of an actin ﬁlament “primer” and by interaction with members of the WAVE family of proteins . Elongation of the network occurs by addition of the proﬁlin / actin complex ( black arrows ) to the barbed ends of actin ﬁlament in close contact with the plasma membrane . B : Ena / VASP proteins , the formin FMNL2 and capping proteins control the elongation of the network by modulating the dynamics at ﬁlament barbed ends ( right zoom inset ) . Ena / VASP and FMNL2 favor barbed end elongation whereas capping protein blocks it . v ) The sensors organelles , ﬁlopodia , are ﬁlled with parallel actin bundles elongated by the actin polymerases , Ena / VASP and formins , and tightly packed by the short bundler fascin . Another type of leading edge protrusion are blebs , initially formed as cytoskeleton - free membrane bulges driven by the internal pressure of the cell ( brown arrows ) . ACTIN DYNAMICS , ARCHITECTURE , AND MECHANICS 246 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m v ) Filopodium iv ) Lamellipodium iii ) Transverse arcs ii ) Focal adhesion Stress fibers i ) Cortex formins formin FMNL2 Ena / VASP WAVE capping proteins fascin α - actinin myosin ERM protein ATP , ADP - P i , ADP subunits profilin Arp2 / 3 complex Bleb A B BLANCHOIN ET AL . 247 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m assembly , while parallel actin bundles are unaffected ( FIGURE 4 D ) . This mechanism has major implications for cel - lular actin dynamics and contractile properties as will be dis - cussed in the following section . A possible molecular mechanism for myosin - induced contrac - tion and disassembly based on mechanical fragmentation of a single actin ﬁlament was recently proposed by two elegant studies ( FIGURE 4 C and Refs . 220 , 327 ) . Fragmentation occurs via actin ﬁlament buckling generated by myosin contraction . It is interesting to draw a parallel between this mechanism of fragmentation and severing by ADF / coﬁlin . In both cases , the fragmentation results from a mechanical effect on actin ﬁla - ments . Indeed , bending of actin ﬁlaments due to myosin con - traction or thermal ﬂuctuations induces high curvature and mechanical stress that favor fragmentation ( 194 , 220 , 327 ) . It is interesting to note that the inverse has also been shown to be true : actin ﬁlament curvature seems to favor branch formation ( 259 ) . The mechanics of actin ﬁlaments are obviously an im - portant intrinsic property that controls both actin assembly and disassembly . 3 . Disassembly versus depolymerization We argue here that most of actin structure destruction oc - curs by a mechanism of actin disassembly instead of depo - lymerization from ﬁlament ends ( 208 ) . Both ADF / coﬁlin - or myosin - induced fragmentation disrupt the mechanical in - tegrity of the actin organization . For branched networks , debranching and fragmentation by ADF / coﬁlin induce large fractures in the network and a macroscopic disintegration of the network ( FIGURE 4 D ) . However , the integrity of the network at the site of force generation ( i . e . , against the load ) is preserved by the fact that ADF / coﬁlin does not bind to ATP - actin subunits at sites of active assembly . In addition , proteins such as GMF that speciﬁcally target dissociation of branch junctions help in this mechanical destruction of the network . Similarly , myosin - induced actin disassembly at least in vitro has little to do with depolymerization , but instead is probably controlled by mechanical fragmentation that can propagate at a mesoscopic scale ( FIGURE 4 E ) . In the following section , we discuss in more detail the implications of these recent observations in a cellular context and why the debate is still open concerning the mechanism control - ling actin disassembly in vivo . III . CELLULAR SCALE : DYNAMICS AND MECHANICS OF INTEGRATED ACTIN STRUCTURES We saw in preceding sections how different protein factors regulate individual actin ﬁlament dynamics and mechanics and overall actin network properties . In FIGURE 5 , we re - visit the moving cell schematized in FIGURE 1 to under - stand how these different structures are integrated on the scale of the cell to produce efﬁcient force and movement . In the classic vision of the moving cell , largely inspired by studies of ﬁbroblasts moving on rigid surfaces , motility is the result of the protrusion of the front of the cell ( the leading edge ) , which then adheres to the substratum , fol - lowed by de - adhesion at the back of the cell concomitant with contraction to squeeze the cell body forward ( 1 , 2 , 172 , 205 ) . The actin cytoskeleton is a major player in all parts of this process ( 196 , 245 ) . In FIGURE 5 and the subsequent sections , we zoom in on different parts of the moving cell and discuss what is known about their actin dynamics and mechanics . Lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia ( FIGURE 5 , iv and v , respectively ) are the main organelles driving motility while contractile structures such as tra - verse arcs ( iii ) , focal adhesion - anchored stress ﬁbers ( ii ) , and the cell cortex ( i ) ensure mechanical integrity and coherent movement of the cell as a whole . In addition , in recent years , another kind of protrusion , the cellular bleb ( FIGURE 5 ) , has garnered increasing attention . Blebs can appear as leading edge protrusions , driving cell motility independently of or concomitantly with lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia . It should be pointed out that with the advent of culture conditions that more closely mimic the in vivo environ - ment ( 3 - dimensional geometries with adjustable mechan - ical properties ) , as well as developments in in vivo imag - ing of cell motility , it is becoming increasingly apparent that not all migrating cells in vivo actually look like the typiﬁed cell shown in FIGURE 5 , and properties such as shape and speed as well as the balance between bleb - based and lamellipodia - based motility can be modiﬁed ( 79 , 102 , 198 , 240 ) . However , the molecular ingredients behind cell motility are universal : actin ﬁlament forma - tion is nucleated by either formin or the Arp2 / 3 complex , and some sort of protrusion is formed via either directed actin assembly or via myosin contractility of the actin cortex , followed by cytoskeleton disassembly . TABLE 1 summarizes this idea , showing how the molecules intro - duced in section II are integrated into the four main cel - lular structures shown in FIGURE 5 and examples of the various incarnations of these structures in different cell types or in in vivo conditions . A . The Lamellipodium 1 . Lamellipodia construction The lamellipodium of the moving cell is a quasi - two - dimen - sional actin network formed via the assembly ﬁlaments be - neath the leading edge membrane , beautifully visualized by a variety of optical techniques ( FIGURE 5 , iv , A and B , and Refs . 290 , 304 , 310 , 326 , 344 ) . Numerous polymerization nucle - ation factors play a role in lamellipodia formation , but the main mode of ﬁlament assembly is via the Arp2 / 3 complex activated by a speciﬁc NPF , the WAVE complex , although formins may also play a role ( 48 ) . The WAVE complex is itself ACTIN DYNAMICS , ARCHITECTURE , AND MECHANICS 248 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m intrinsically inactive and needs Rac , a membrane - bound GTPase , and lipids to become functional for activating the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 61 , 173 ) . The end result of these layers of activation is the very tight control of Arp2 / 3 complex - based polymerization at the leading edge of the cell . However , up until recently , there was a long - standing contro - versy in the ﬁeld as to whether the meshlike appearance of the lamellipodium was due to ﬁlament branching via the Arp2 / 3 complex or to the criss - cross of straight ﬁlaments . Recent re - sults involving reanalysis of electron microscopy data origi - nally used to support the criss - cross theory have deﬁnitively shown that ﬁlaments are branched in the lamellopodia ( 291 , 319 , 346 ) . However , branches are not always positioned with the fork facing toward the leading edge membrane as is com - monly portrayed in the textbooks ( 306 ) . This is even more obvious in in vitro studies where the orientation of branches with respect to the polymerizing surface is random with many barbed ends growing away from the surface ( 3 ) . This is a direct consequence of the fact that surface / membrane - bound Arp2 / 3 complex starts a new ﬁlament off the side of a ﬁlament primer as described in a previous section on branched networks ( FIGURE 5 , iv , A ; Ref . 307 ) . This is likewise observed in vivo in an intracellular wound healing system , where primer ﬁlaments run parallel to the wound edge and branches are oriented obliquely to the protruding membrane ( 326 ) . In a related study , an analysis of the correlation of cell velocity with actin ﬁlament orientation shows that , in fact , faster cells display ﬁlaments oriented in an oblique manner , whereas ﬁlaments in slower cells are oriented mainly toward the direction of move - ment ( 334 ) . Future studies should shed light on how obliquely oriented actin growth produces movement and why in vivo many ﬁlaments are oriented with their barbed ends abutting the membrane . One hypothesis for the latter is that cellular factors such as formins , Ena / VASP proteins , or WASP family members may hold the barbed ends in this orientation ( 30 , 39 , 66 , 109 ) . Although N - WASP , downstream the RhoGTPase Cdc42 , also activates the Arp2 / 3 complex to form actin branches , up until recently only WAVE has been implicated in lamellipodia for - mation . N - WASP has been exclusively associated with ﬁlopo - dia formation and specialized protrusions of invasive cancer cells called invadopodia ( 258 , 274 ) . However , new studies have shown that N - WASP , not WAVE , is the major actin polymerization regulator in cells moving in three dimensions ( 308 ) , and in another study , that cells in three - dimensional environments are motile despite the fact that active Rac is completely mislocalized from the protruding edge of the cell ( 240 ) . These results modify the traditional view that the lamel - lipodium is formed via Rac signaling to WAVE and suggest Table 1 . Actin - binding protein composition of the major actin architectures and cellular examples Actin Structures Signature Biochemical Components Star Examples of Cell Types Displaying This Architecture Reviews Associated With Each Cell Type Lamellipodia * Branched actin ﬁlaments Fish keratocytes in 2D 169 , 245 , 273 Nucleation : Arp2 / 3 complex via WAVE activation , FMNL2 formin via Cdc42 activation Migrating cancer cells in 2D and 3D White blood cells in 2D , 3D , and in vivo Cross - linkers : alpha - actinin , ﬁlamin , ﬁmbrin Ena / VASP proteins Capping protein ADF / coﬁlin Filopodia Parallel actin ﬁlaments Neuronal growth cone cells in 2D 80 , 82 , 84 , 345 Nucleation : mDia2 and FMNL2 / 3 formins , Arp2 / 3 complex Crosslinker : fascin Melanoma cells in 2D Endothelial tip cells in vivo Ena / VASP proteins Contractile ﬁbers Antiparallel actin ﬁlaments Motile ﬁbroblasts in 2D 45 , 221 ( stress ﬁbers and transverse arcs ) Nonmuscle myosin II Nucleation : formins , Arp2 / 3 complex Crosslinker : alpha - actinin , myosin II Ena / VASP proteins Cells in 3D subjected to sheer stress ( example : endothelial arterial cells ) Cell cortex ¡ blebs Branched and unbranched actin ﬁlaments Nonmuscle myosin II Nucleator : unclear Formin - based ? Ezrin / radixin / moesin ( ERM ) proteins Amoeba like Dictyostelium discoideum and Entamoeba histolytica ( only examples of bleb - based movement in 2D ) Motile cells in vivo ( examples : germ cells in zebraﬁsh , fundulus deep cells ) 169 , 232 See text for a full list of components and references . * Other variants include pseudopodia , invadopodia , and lobopodia ( 36 ) . BLANCHOIN ET AL . 249 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m that actin polymerization machinery may depend on cell envi - ronment via mechanisms that remain to be elucidated . Recent studies have even shown that leading edge protrusion can occur in the absence of the Arp2 / 3 complex . When the Arp2 / 3 complex is knocked down more thoroughly than had previously been achieved or even knocked out entirely , cells are still motile , moving via ﬁngerlike protrusions resembling ﬁlopodia , although various defects in translocation are ob - served ( 266 , 303 , 342 ) . In addition , a role for Cdc42 in lamel - lipodial protrusion has been discovered as an activator of a formin FMNL2 ( FIGURE 5 , iv , B ) , so again driving home the idea that the Arp2 / 3 complex is not the only way to polymerize actin and push out a plasma membrane ( 30 ) . Another major player in lamellipodia dynamics is the Ena / VASP proteins , which are found at the leading edge of the moving cell and are associated with increased protrusion ( FIGURE 5 , iv , B ; Refs . 18 , 166 , 265 ) . 2 . Role of the plasma membrane in lamellipodia dynamics In the preceding section , we have essentially ignored the plasma membrane despite the fact that the membrane is in close proximity to the growing barbed ends of the actin net - work . Physical models of membrane - cytoskeleton interaction treat the membrane as the load opposing polymerization , with the magnitude of the load being proportional to how tense ( or tight ) the membrane is , also known as the “membrane ten - sion . ” In keeping with this , a study on cell spreading shows that protrusion is enhanced when the membrane tension is reduced ( 253 ) . On the microscopic scale of a single ﬁlament growing up against a membrane , there is no doubt that re - duced membrane tension allows more growth . However , on the macroscopic level of the entire cell , it is becoming increas - ingly apparent that the mechanics of the membrane play an active role in sculpting and organizing the actin cytoskeleton deeper in the cell body ( 77 , 151 ) . This idea that membrane tension can be a necessary and pos - itive regulator of cytoskeleton architecture was recently dem - onstrated in cells in two separate studies . First , in crawling Caenorhabditis elegans sperms cells , increasing membrane tension suppresses lateral lamellipodial protrusions , thus streamlining cytoskeleton assembly in the direction of move - ment and enhancing motility ( 17 ) . Tension is believed to drive the coalescence of ﬁlaments , overcoming the energetic penalty of bending to bring ﬁlaments together in a bundle in the ab - sence of crosslinking proteins or other clustering factors , as has been shown in vitro for actin ﬁlaments growing up against a membrane ( 179 , 210 ) . Likewise in locomoting neutrophils , membrane tension is a major polarity factor : high membrane tension leads to a high directionality of actin polymerization ( 127 ) . As in the sperm cell , high membrane tension in neutro - phils appears to suppress protrusions that are not going in the direction of movement , thus probably working with signaling pathways to conﬁne lamellipodia assembly to one side of the cell only . Conversely , membrane tension has also been impli - cated in crushing the actin network at the back of the cell and thus enhancing disassembly to permit retraction of the trailing edge ( 225 ) . Open issues include why the main protrusion itself is not suppressed by the membrane tension and the interplay between membrane tension and biochemical and signaling pathways ( 211 ) . As concerns the latter point , membrane ten - sion has been shown to affect membrane trafﬁcking and my - osin contractile activity , with high tension leading to a burst of exocytosis and also triggering myosin contraction ( 99 , 100 ) . Overall , whereas we once thought of the membrane as a pas - sive sack impeding leading edge actin polymerization , we now see it as an active player in actin organization and dynamics for protrusion . 3 . The mechanics of the lamellipodium The Arp2 / 3 - branched network in the lamellipodium is very homogeneous compared with other parts of the cell , a prop - erty that is explained by the homogenizing effect of branches , since their growth ﬁlls in the voids in the network , also stiff - ening it ( 317 ) . Myosin motors present at the rear of the lamel - lipodium have been shown to increase disassembly , and thus accelerate the turnover of actin ﬁlaments in the lamellipodium ( 225 , 339 ) . Therefore , at short time scales on the order of seconds , the lamellipodium is elastic , whereas at longer time scales , because of this turnover of actin ﬁlaments , the lamelli - podium is viscous . Many controlled studies of lamellipodial dynamics have been done on ﬁsh keratocytes , the fast - moving “Ferrari” of the cell motility world , and a useful system for studying how much force an active lamellipodium can exert . Fish keratocytes move at a velocity of micrometers per minute . In one study , forces generated during lamellipodium activity were measured by recording the deﬂection of glass ﬁbers as cantilevers in contact with the cell . The maximal force necessary to stall the whole cell body of a moving keratocyte is on the order of 35 nN , whereas the stall force necessary to stop lamellipodium extension is on the order of 3 nN for a contact surface of (cid:4) 1 (cid:1) m 2 , on the same order of magnitude as the force generated by Arp2 / 3 complex activation on micrometric beads ( 118 , 191 , 249 ) . In the case of the keratocyte , the force - velocity curve has a bent - down shape : at low force , the cell velocity is indepen - dent of the force until 50 % of the stall force is reached , and then velocity decreases . The force velocity curve can be de - scribed with the equation v 0 (cid:6) v 0 [ 1 - ( F / F s ) w ] , where v 0 is the velocity at zero force and F s is the stall force . The exponent w is positive for keratocytes , between 6 and 8 , and was deter - mined independently by aspect ratio observations and force measurements ( 118 , 152 ) . Contrary to cell measurements , in vitro measurements and theoretical models of actin growth show a rapidly decreasing force - velocity curve , thus proving that actin dynamics alone are insufﬁcient to explain cell mea - surements , and that either motor activity should be taken into account , or the length change of actin ﬁlaments under force ( 353 ) . Moreover , the ability of the keratocyte cytoskeleton to ACTIN DYNAMICS , ARCHITECTURE , AND MECHANICS 250 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m return to its original shape between successive stalling experi - ments is striking since no effect of force or velocity change is found after the lamellipodium has been stalled , contrarily to atomic force microscopy in vitro measurements of growing actin networks ( 118 , 235 ) . Therefore , the dynamic reorgani - zation of the lamellipodium through actin polymerization , dis - assembly , and motor activity results in a very robust structure that can resist a series of obstacles . However , adhesions , espe - cially nascent ones , may be less robust than the lamellipodium in resisting loads . This is shown in a micromanipulation ex - periment involving shear ﬂow , where a weak ﬂow of a few picoNewtons per micron acting on the leading edge of the keratocyte stops protrusion due to interference with adhesion while polymerization is unaltered ( 32 ) . B . Filopodia 1 . Filopodia formation Filopodia are the ﬁngerlike projections at the front of the cell , composed of unbranched , bundled actin ﬁlaments oriented with their growing ends toward the membrane ( FIGURE 5 , v ) . This orientation is due to the presence , in the ﬁlopodia tip complex , of formin and Ena / VASP proteins , both of which are capable of retaining the growing barbed ends at the cell mem - brane and enhancing ﬁlament growth , as previously described . While the mechanism of ﬁlopodia elongation is clear , how ﬁlopodia are initiated remains more of a mystery . In a nutshell and as discussed above with the Arp2 / 3 complex in vitro sys - tems , the debate centers on whether the Arp2 / 3 complex plays a role in the initiation of ﬁlopodia formation or whether ﬁlop - odia are nucleated exclusively by formin : the convergent ex - tension model versus the tip nucleation model , nicely reviewed in Reference 345 . Most evidence indicates that the former is the correct model and that ﬁlopodia are born out of the net - work via the coming together of branched ﬁlaments formed by the Arp2 / 3 complex , subsequently elongated by formin and VASP into straight ﬁlaments that are bundled by fascin ( 290 ) . A time course analysis of spontaneous ﬁlopodia formation in vitro on supported lipid bilayers in cell extract shows this order of events : ﬁrst the Arp2 / 3 complex machinery appears on the membrane , then actin and formin , and ﬁnally VASP and fascin ( 174 ) . However , the role of the Arp2 / 3 complex in ﬁlopodia initiation may need to be revisited in light of the new experiments described above where the Arp2 / 3 complex was knocked out entirely , and ﬁlopodia - like structures were still formed ( 303 , 342 ) . 2 . Filopodia mechanics Besides cell migration , ﬁlopodia have a role in sensing the cell environment , initiating cell contacts , and transmitting cell - cell signals . The response of ﬁlopodia to the mechanical stiffness of the local environment occurs through a motor - clutch mecha - nism ( 53 ) . Microorganisms exploit ﬁlopodia for their own advantage during infection for their capture by cells ( 263 ) . After capture , ﬁlopodia retract toward the cell body , leading to engagement of bacterial - cell contact and bacterial engulfment . This process was used to directly measure the force generated by ﬁlopodia by replacing the microorganism with a bead coated with the microorganism attachment proteins , coupled with an optical tweezer set - up . The force exerted by a retract - ing ﬁlopodia is on the order of 10 pN and can work over a distance of 10 (cid:1) m ( 212 , 328 ) . Filopodia retraction occurs at velocities of (cid:4) 100 nm / s requiring the activation in some cases of the ERK1 / 2 pathway that controls retrograde ﬂow via de - polymerization in ﬁlopodia ( 263 ) . Myosin II , V , and VI are not required for ﬁlopodia retraction , nor are microtubules ( 162 ) . Therefore , ﬁlopodia mechanics and dynamics appear to en - tirely rely on actin assembly and actin dynamics , and maybe also cortex rearrangements at the root of the ﬁlopodium , but not on myosin or microtubule activity . C . Contractile Fibers : Transverse Arcs and Ventral Stress Fibers Excluded from the lamellipodia / ﬁlopodia region , but present throughout the rest of the cell are the contractile ﬁbers . These structures are bundles of unbranched actin ﬁlaments of mixed polarity containing myosin II ( 221 , 239 ) . There are two main classes of contractile ﬁbers : ventral stress ﬁbers which run ap - proximately parallel to the direction of movement , linking focal adhesion sites ( FIGURE 5 , ii ) , and transverse arcs which run parallel to the advancing leading edge , just behind the dendritic network of the lamellipodium and not anchored in focal adhesions ( FIGURE 5 , iii ) . Dorsal stress ﬁbers are in the same class of structures , but since they are not contractile , we do not discuss them here . Despite their unbranched structure , transverse arc formation depends on the Arp2 / 3 complex and on myosin activity ( 126 ) . High - resolution imaging studies show that transverse arcs arise from the collapse of the dendritic network , powered by myosin ( 44 ) . Transverse arcs mark out the region of the cell where actin ﬂows slow down and where nascent cell - substrate contacts mature into stable focal adhesion structures ( FIGURE 5 , iii ) ; however , transverse arcs are not believed to contact focal adhesions ( 5 , 65 , 247 ) . Besides the role of myosin II in trans - verse arc formation , the formin FHOD1 with bundling and capping activity seems important for the transition between branched and antiparallel actin ﬁlament during arcs initiation ( 279 ) . In addition , transverse arcs and stress ﬁbers have also been shown to be seeded by dynamic ﬁlopodia that either collapse laterally into the lamellipodia to contribute to trans - verse arcs or remain perpendicular to the cell edge and con - tribute their distal end to stress ﬁber formation ( 222 ) . The role of transverse arcs in cell motility is not entirely clear . It seems that transverse arcs can be combined with noncon - tractile dorsal ﬁbers to make ventral stress ﬁbers ( 126 ) . It is also proposed that transverse arcs , via their contractility , crush the actin network and accelerate its disassembly ( 107 , 320 , BLANCHOIN ET AL . 251 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 339 ) . Another possible role for arcs is that they may provide a starting block to push off from for subsequent rounds of lead - ing edge protrusion , although not all protruding cells possess transverse arcs so there must be redundant mechanisms for supporting a lamellipodia ( 44 ) . Myosin is also present in ventral stress ﬁbers that have a key role in mechanosensing via cell - substrate adhesions and in ad - hesion formation ( FIGURE 5 , ii ) . How ventral stress ﬁbers are nucleated is not completely known , but seems to involve formins and Ena / VASP proteins and possibly Arp2 / 3 complex networks as well ( 143 , 315 ) . Laser nanosurgery of stress ﬁbers reveals that the retraction of the contractile ﬁber triggers the recruitment of proteins such as zyxin to the cut end to make a new adhesion ( 67 ) . Impeding stress ﬁber assembly impedes focal contact maturation and lamellipodium motility ( 224 , 286 , 287 ) . D . The Cell Cortex 1 . Cortex assembly In a preceding section , we saw how the cell membrane plays an active role in shaping the lamellipodia . This interplay is even more pronounced in the cell cortex , a thin actin shell that is contractile due to the presence of myosin in the network , un - derlying the inner face of the plasma membrane ( FIGURE 5 , i ) . This acto - myosin structure is several hundreds of nanometers thick and is a mix of bundled straight ﬁlaments and branched ﬁlaments , giving an average mesh size of (cid:4) 50 – 200 nm de - pending on the cell type ( 213 ) . The cortex was neglected by the cell motility community for many years , as work was focused on the formation of protru - sive structures like lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia . It is just over the last decade that we are beginning to get a clearer picture of cell cortex mechanics and biochemistry and its importance in cell shape changes and movement , from both an experimental and a theoretical point of view ( 140 , 230 , 231 , 270 ) . Cortical actin ﬁlament growth at the plasma membrane appears to be the result of different activation mechanisms , one of them relying on formin proteins ( 92 ) . In order for myosin contractile forces in the cortex to be communicated to the membrane , the actin cortex must be attached . Various proteins involved in this linkage have been identiﬁed , among which proteins from the ERM ( ezrin , radixin , moesin ) family are one of the most im - portant players ( 41 , 56 , 192 ) . An excellent demonstration of the importance of both the contractility of the acto - myosin cortex and its degree of attachment to the cell membrane comes from a study of meiosis in oocytes where alterations in either parameter lead to defects in cell division ( 171 ) . Another study shows that both the thickness and dynamics of the acto - myosin shell attached to the membrane play an important role in cell shape changes ( 147 ) . Cortical contractility in cells results in an inward pressure that tends to shrink the cell , which in turn generates an osmotic pressure difference that tends to increase cell volume . This pressure balance explains the round shape of cells before mi - tosis , as is shown using atomic force microscopy cantilevers to measure the force the cell develops when it rounds up ( 296 ) . Cortical contractility and cell internal pressure are the driving force behind a special type of cellular structure , the bleb ( FIGURE 5 ) . Blebs are membrane bulges that are dynamically extruded at the cell surface ( 54 , 57 ) . Blebs are triggered when holes form in the actin cortex or when the cortex is locally detached from the cell membrane ( 56 , 229 ) . In these situa - tions , the internal or hydrostatic pressure in the cell forces the piece of membrane that is not attached to the cell cortex to balloon out , thus forming a bleb . Recently , blebs have been shown to be a way for the cell to relax excess tension . This is the case for example at cellular poles during cytokinesis where blebs play the role of valves releasing cortical contractility , thus ensuring the stability of cleavage furrow positioning ( 283 ) . However , in other cases , blebs subsequently ﬁll with polymer - ized actin and myosin , and adhere to the substratum to drive motility . Called amoeboid motility , this is a mode of locomo - tion well - studied in the amoeba Dictyostelium ( 55 , 89 , 349 ) . Blebbing has also been shown to be an important mode of motility in vivo during development , in specialized moving cells like leukocytes and possibly in other three - dimensional motility contexts such as cancer cell invasion ( 29 , 168 , 169 ) . In fact , proving the versatility of cells , certain cells have been shown to switch between lamellipodia and blebs and recipro - cally depending on their cortical tension , the dynamics of actin polymerization , and the three - dimensional environment ( 19 , 341 ) . Other cell types , like zebraﬁsh embryonic cells , appear to maintain both lamellipodial / ﬁlopodial and bleb - type protru - sion mechanisms together , and the balance between the two is important for proper morphogenesis ( 78 ) . 2 . Acto - myosin cortex mechanics The acto - myosin cell cortex is characterized mechanically by its tension , which can be directly measured by micropipette aspiration , as was proposed a decade ago , where the force needed to suck a small region of the cell surface into a pipette is measured ( 123 ) . This tension is directly related to the activ - ity of myosin motors since decreasing their activity leads to a lower value of the tension ( 19 ) . Interestingly , in the same study , reducing the activation of actin polymerization leads to an increase in cortical tension since more myosin motors are able to bind per unit length of actin ﬁlament , therefore increas - ing the total tension generated by myosin . The membrane tension and the cortical ( or cell ) tension are not the same thing , although each can affect the other , and they are not measured by the same experimental technique . Based on membrane mechanics , membrane tension can be measured by tube pulling since the force to pull a tube depends on the square root of the tension , at least on a simple artiﬁcial mem - brane . In this case , tubes are pulled by optical tweezer trapping ACTIN DYNAMICS , ARCHITECTURE , AND MECHANICS 252 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m of a membrane - adhering micrometric bead , and applied forces are in the tens of picoNewton range ( 267 ) . The situation is more complicated in cells where the membrane has a complex composition and is also connected to the underlying cytoskel - eton . Tubes are devoid of actin cytoskeleton , so the lipids pulled into the tube must ﬁrst detach and then experience friction over the cytoskeleton to be able to ﬂow into the tube ( 43 , 72 , 124 ) . The measured tube forces are then a mixed measurement of the in - plane membrane tension and the at - tachment of this membrane to the cytoskeleton . Indeed , for some cell types , it seems that measured tube forces reﬂect al - most only the force needed to detach the membrane from the cytoskeleton , while in other cases , tube forces seem to reﬂect the real in - plane membrane tension ( 17 , 73 , 253 ) . Moreover , the complex composition of the membrane in a cell , with transmembrane proteins that prevent the two lipid leaﬂets from sliding over each other , creates an additional friction force that places membrane tubes out of equilibrium ( 50 ) . The take - home message concerning membrane / cortical tension is that while micropipette aspiration can directly measure corti - cal tension , it is difﬁcult to quantify how much of this tension derives from the membrane as opposed to the cytoskeleton , unless the membrane detaches from its un - derlying cytoskeleton , allowing for both modules to be analyzed separately ( 49 ) . E . Dynamic Remodeling of Cellular Actin So far we have discussed a steady - state view of the different cellular actin organizations . However , during most cellular shape changes , actin is continuously under intense reorganiza - tion , allowing cells to adapt to their environment ( 6 ) . Cell motility is an extreme case of this major remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton . One of the main mechanisms for remodel - ing actin networks is to disassemble them as an ensemble , a concept referred to in the cellular context as the “treadmilling array” model ( 245 ) . In this model , ﬁlament assembly at the front of the cell is matched by disassembly at the back of the lamellipodium , thus providing a pool of recycled monomers for subsequent rounds of polymerization and also keeping the width of the lamellipodium constant . This idea ﬁts well with experimental observations from bleaching , photoactivation , and speckle microscopy where the actin network formed at the front of the cell travels backwards as a unit before disappear - ing in the cell body ( 310 , 167 , 248 , 332 ) . This is true also in yeast where photobleached actin structures in large endocytic structures in the sla2 (cid:7) mutant move inward ( 227 ) . But the mechanism that generates this “treadmilling array” has prob - ably little to do with a vectorial process where actin subunits are incorporated at the barbed end and then come off the pointed end one by one ( 208 ) . It is more likely that the branched actin network disassembles by a macroscopic ADF / coﬁlin debranching / severing activity coupled to efﬁcient sup - pression of elongation of the generated fragments by capping proteins or similar factors such as Aip1 , an actin - binding pro - tein that inhibits elongation of ADF / coﬁlin - decorated ﬁla - ments ( FIGURE 6 and Refs . 163 , 208 , 226 , 257 ) . Interestingly , a detailed analysis of the different capping machineries in - volved in regulating branched network dynamics reveals that capping proteins are mostly involved at sites of active assem - bly , whereas Aip1 activity is tightly coupled with ADF / coﬁlin at sites of active disassembly ( 202 ) . This is also consistent with the fact that capping protein is not present in the back half of the lamellipodium ( 207 , 134 ) . Recent work highlights the im - portant role of Aip1 in recycling these small fragments back into the pool of actin monomers ( 228 ) . These recent ﬁndings also point toward a polymerizable pool of actin made of short oligomers ( 293 , 228 ) . How these oligomers participate in the overall dynamic assembly / disassembly of actin networks in cells is still unknown . In addition to actin reorganization modulated by ADF / coﬁlin disassembly , major actin structure reorganization can occur via contractility modulated by myosins that fragment actin ﬁlaments as explained above . Indeed , myosin not only reori - ents branched actin networks into parallel or antiparallel or - ganizations , but also favors disassembly of these networks ( FIGURE 6 ) . This begs the question as to why an alternative mechanism of actin disassembly in addition to ADF / coﬁlin fragmentation is necessary to disrupt cellular actin organiza - tion . First , certain structures such as tight bundles seem resis - tant to ADF / coﬁlin - modulated actin disassembly ( 129 , 278 ) . Second , the myosin - induced disassembly of actin network generates a travelling wave of actin disassembly that can prop - agate rapidly and favor massive and rapid disassembly when necessary ( 6 , 255 ) . Just as waves of assembly have been shown to be important for motility of certain cell types , so waves of disassembly may be used to perform complex stop - and - go or turning movements ( 336 ) . F . Actin Cytoskeleton and Disease Understanding how cytoskeleton mechanics and biochemistry add up to cell behavior can contribute to a molecular under - standing of cytoskeleton - based diseases . Alterations in the ac - tin cytoskeleton and its associated proteins have been linked to numerous disease states , ranging from microbial infections to deafness to immune system deﬁciencies . Indeed , much has been understood about the molecular mechanisms of actin - based motility from the study of how bacteria and viruses , such as Listeria monocytogenes , Shigella ﬂexneri , Ricketssia coronii , and Vaccinia virus , move in infected host cytoplasm ( 68 , 91 , 105 , 181 , 314 ) . These pathogens highjack the actin cellular machinery to move in the host cytoplasm and to in - crease infectivity and virulence . Reconstitution in vitro of bac - terial and virus motility demonstrates that the minimum ma - chinery for pathogen motility consists of actin , the Arp2 / 3 complex , and a capping factor with proﬁlin and ADF / coﬁlin to ensure actin monomer recycling ( 91 , 181 ) . This minimum ma - chinery has recently been extended to include formins since Ricketssia Sca2 , a bacterial - formin - like protein , drives the mo - tility of this bacteria , taking the place of the Arp2 / 3 complex as BLANCHOIN ET AL . 253 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m nucleator ( 108 , 188 ) . Interestingly , another formin ( INF2 ) lo - calized at the endoplasmic reticulum of mammalian cells is reported to modulate mitochondria ﬁssion and mutations in INF2 can result in Charcot - Marie - Tooth neuropathy ( 157 ) . A striking example of the link between actin mechanics and pathology , and one that has been receiving increasing atten - tion over the last decade , is cancer metastasis and invasion ( 165 , 204 ) . Invasion is a step in the metastasic program when tumor cells break through extracellular matrix barriers and invade surrounding tissues and the circulatory system . This process is driven by the lamellipodia , ﬁlopodia , and blebs de - scribed in this review , which allow the cell to translocate , but also specialized structures , invadopodia that allow the cell to make holes in the extracellular matrix . Invadopodia appear to be on the fence between lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia , with both branched and unbranched ﬁlaments and both Arp2 / 3 complex and mDia2 ( formin ) nucleation of actin formation ( 180 , 280 ) . In another study , the protein composition of these protrusions was proﬁled using subcellular fractionation techniques and proteomics , and in addition to actin , the Arp2 / 3 complex ac - tivator N - WASP , the actin bundler fascin and the Ena / VASP assembly fragmentation / disassembly remodeling contraction disassembly p r opu l s i on R e t r og r ad e F l o w FIGURE 6 . Dynamics of actin structures during motility . The specialized actin orga - nizations described in FIGURE 5 are in - volved in assembly and protrusive force production at the cell front and in contrac - tion and disassembly at the center and at the trailing edge of motile cells . The leading - edge actin organizations are extremely dy - namic . They are characterized by a mas - sive and fast assembly underneath the plasma membrane responsible for mem - brane protrusion . This assembly occurs in the lamellipodium , a 1 - (cid:1) m - width region , and is ﬁnely balanced by continuous ADF / coﬁlin - mediated fragmentation and myosin - induced remodeling followed by contraction and disassembly of aged actin organiza - tions . This tight spatiotemporal coordina - tion completes the actin turnover cycle and gives rise to the actin retrograde ﬂow to - ward the cell center . Simultaneously with leading edge protrusion , the trailing edge of the motile cell is retracted . Contractile stress ﬁbers ensure this coordination , per - mitting the continuum of events to occur in tightly regulated succession starting from protrusion at the front to retraction at the rear . The color codes in the zoom region correspond to the different mechanisms controlling actin dynamics ( assembly , frag - mentation / disassembly , remodeling , con - traction , and disassembly ) . This color code is used in the large arrows in the cell to illustrate where these different mecha - nisms occur during cell motility . ACTIN DYNAMICS , ARCHITECTURE , AND MECHANICS 254 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m family protein Mena , just to highlight a few , were associated with invadopodia formation ( 154 and references therein ) . The stiffness of the extracellular matrix surrounding tu - mors as well as the mechanics of the tumor mass itself , mostly determined by actomyosin cytoskeleton dynamcis , has also been shown to be different from normal tissue ( 106 , 271 ) . Furthermore , enhanced contractility of both invading cancer cells and the ﬁbroblasts that accompany them has been linked to more aggressive cancers ( 94 , 269 , 272 ) . The interest in looking at the mechanical properties of tumors is twofold : to identify possible targets for new anti - metastatic therapies , but also to use the tumor’s aberrant mechanical proﬁle to evaluate its metastatic potential and adapt therapies accordingly . Another role of the cytoskeleton in disease is indirect via trans - mission of external forces to the nucleus , which in turn acti - vates different pathways of gene expression and alters cell behavior ( 71 , 90 , 135 , 136 , 138 , 321 ) . One well - known ex - ample is the transcription factors YAP and TAZ , implicated in cell proliferation and growth , but also in human cancers . Re - cently , YAP and TAZ , which act in speciﬁc locations in tissues that are mechanically stressed , have been shown to be down - regulated by the actin machinery at locations not submitted to tension ( 10 , 81 ) . This is a very nice example of how the me - chanical and biochemical ( dynamical ) control of the actin cy - toskeleton is tightly coupled to transcriptional activity , termed a mechanical checkpoint ( 10 ) . As our understanding of the link between actin dynamics , architecture , and mechanics has improved and technological tools have facilitated our ability to mechanically perturb actin organization , other diseases such as atherosclerosis have been added to the list of actin mechanics - based pathologies ( 74 , 149 , 158 , 237 ) . The narrowing of arteries during atheroscle - rosis happens at the site of arterial branches and curvature where cells are put under tension by blood ﬂow ( 74 , 149 ) . This mechanical tension on the actin cytoskeleton ( 215 ) is pro - posed to trigger signaling pathways leading to cell death ( 74 , 241 ) . Much attention has been focused on how defects in actin as - sembly may be at the origin of a large number of pathologies ; however , actin disassembly may be equally important . Altered ADF / coﬁlin regulation is associated with diseases as diverse as Alzheimer’s disease and ischemic kidney disease ( 11 , 13 ) . In Alzheimer’s disease , hyperactivation of ADF / coﬁlin during neuronal dysfunction leads to stabilization of actin ﬁlament / ADF / coﬁlin rods via a mechanism described in the section II G on actin disassembly . These stable rods are sites for accumu - lation of a phosphorylated form of tau that is characteristic of tau - induced pathology during Alzheimer’s disease . Interaction of tau with rods might favor tau modiﬁcations or assembly into ﬁlamentous structures , the major component of neuroﬁ - brillary tangles ( NFTs ) . Rods could also block both neurite growth and vesicle transport . Thus actin rods because they are abnormally undynamic may act as the trigger to mediate the loss of synapses and the formation of NFTs , both pathological hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease . IV . CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVE Our goal in this review has been to emphasize the dual bio - chemical / mechanical nature of the actin cytoskeleton and bring together the different communities of actin biochemis - try , actin mechanics , and actin cell biology to provide a setting for future advances in the ﬁeld . The ﬁeld of actin cytoskeleton beneﬁts already to a large extent from the interdisciplinary work between biochemistry , cell biology , and physics , and we must continue to bridge the gaps between biochemistry and mechanics in the coming decade . There are still mysteries to be solved in the relationship be - tween actin dynamics and force production ( 6 , 87 , 208 ) . For example , why are different types of disassembly machineries necessary , and how are these different mechanisms coordi - nated in space and time to sustain the dynamics of the whole network and preserve cell integrity ? Another challenge is transferring what we have learned about actin networks in vitro to the cellular environment , for example , how a speciﬁc actin organization correlates with a particular mechanical out - put . Such a quest has already beneﬁted from new super - resolution imaging tools that allow for a precise cartography of the cell cytoskeleton ( 143 , 144 , 284 , 344 ) . However , we are still far from being able to follow in real time the dynamics of a single ﬁlament in a cellular environment and how associated proteins affect these dynamics , except in very speciﬁc cellular conditions ( 295 ) . Great promise for the ﬁeld of actin biome - chanics lies in the emergence of quantitative cell biology ap - proaches that allow for the quantiﬁcation of the number of molecules involved in a physiological event such as cytokine - sis , clathrin - mediated endocytosis , or lamellipodium protru - sion ( 23 , 142 , 268 , 288 , 292 ) . In addition , since we are on the way to surmounting technical hurdles associated with simul - taneously visualizing and manipulating the cell cytoskeleton by physical tools such as optical tweezers or atomic force mi - croscopy combined with ﬂuorescence and optical methods , we may have a way in the future to correlate molecular activity with mechanical properties . In the ﬁeld of cell motility , the relevance of studying molecular mechanisms in vitro or cell behavior in an environment far from a tissue is an open debate . However , we would argue that this variety of complementary approaches is the backbone of progress in the ﬁeld , since once a phenomenon has been characterized in cells in culture , its mechanism can be tested in vitro with a limited number of variables , to intelligently design further experiments in the more complex context of a tissue . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We acknowledge Dr . Agnieszka Kawska at IlluScientia . com for help in creating the ﬁgures . We thank Karin John for crit - BLANCHOIN ET AL . 255 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m ical reading of the manuscript . We thank Danijela Vignjevic , Michael Sixt , and Harry Higgs for critical reading of Table 1 . Address for reprint requests and other correspondence : L . Blanchoin , Laboratoire de Physiologie Cellulaire et Végétale , 38054 Grenoble , France ( e - mail : Laurent . blanchoin @ cea . fr ) ; or J . Plastino , Institut Curie , Centre de Recherche , F - 75248 Paris , France ( e - mail : Julie . plastino @ curie . fr ) . GRANTS This work was supported by the Agence Nationale de la Re - cherche Grants ANR - 08 - BLAN - 0012 - 12 , ANR - 09 - BLAN - 283 , and ANR - 12 - BSV5 - 0014 . R . Boujemaa - Paterski is a member of the Intitut Universitaire de France . DISCLOSURES No conﬂicts of interest , ﬁnancial or otherwise , are declared by the authors . REFERENCES 1 . Abercrombie M , Heaysman JEM , Pegrum SM . The locomotion of ﬁbroblasts in cul - ture . IV . Electron microscopy of the leading lamella . Exp Cell Res 67 : 359 – 367 , 1971 . 2 . AbercrombieM , HeaysmanJEM , PegrumSM . Locomotionofﬁbroblastsinculture . V . Surface marking with concanavalin A . Exp Cell Res 73 : 536 – 539 , 1972 . 3 . Achard V , Martiel JL , Michelot A , Guérin C , Reymann AC , Blanchoin L , Boujemaa - Paterski R . A “primer” - based mechanism underlies branched actin ﬁlament network formation and motility . Curr Biol 20 : 423 – 428 , 2010 . 4 . Akin O , Mullins RD . Capping protein increases the rate of actin - based motility by promoting ﬁlament nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Cell 133 : 841 – 851 , 2008 . 5 . Alexandrova AY , Arnold K , Schaub S , Vasiliev JM , Meister JJ , Bershadsky AD , Verk - hovsky AB . Comparative dynamics of retrograde actin ﬂow and focal adhesions : formation of nascent adhesions triggers transition from fast to slow ﬂow . PloS One 3 : e3234 , 2008 . 6 . AllardJ , MogilnerA . Travelingwavesinactindynamicsandcellmotility . CurrOpinCell Biol 25 : 107 – 115 , 2013 . 7 . Almo SC , Pollard TD , Way M , Lattman EE . Puriﬁcation , characterization and crystal - lization of Acanthamoeba proﬁlin expressed in Eschericia - Coli . J Mol Biol 236 : 950 – 952 , 1994 . 8 . Amann KJ , Pollard TD . Direct real - time observation of actin ﬁlament branching me - diatedbytheArp2 / 3complexusingtotalinternalreﬂectionﬂuorescencemicroscopy . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98 : 15009 – 15013 , 2001 . 9 . Andrianantoandro E , Pollard TD . Mechanism of actin ﬁlament turnover by severing and nucleation at different concentrations of ADF / coﬁlin . Mol Cell 24 : 13 – 23 , 2006 . 10 . Aragona M , Panciera T , Manfrin A , Giulitti S , Michielin F , Elvassore N , Dupont S , Piccolo S . A mechanical checkpoint controls multicellular growth through YAP / TAZ regulation by actin - processing factors . Cell 154 : 1047 – 1059 , 2013 . 11 . Bamburg JR , Bernstein BW , Davis RC , Flynn KC , Goldsbury C , Jensen JR , Maloney MT , Marsden IT , Minamide LS , Pak CW , Shaw AE , Whiteman I , Wiggan O . ADF / Coﬁlin - actin rods in neurodegenerative diseases . Curr Alzheimer Res 7 : 241 – 250 , 2010 . 12 . BamburgJR , HarrisHE , WeedsAG . Partialpuriﬁcationandcharacterizationofanactin depolymerizing factor from brain . FEBS Lett 121 : 178 – 182 , 1980 . 13 . BamburgJR , WigganOP . ADF / coﬁlinandactindynamicsindisease . TrendsCellBiol 12 : 598 – 605 , 2002 . 14 . Barral J , Martin P . The physical basis of active mechanosensitivity by the hair - cell bundle . Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 19 : 369 – 375 , 2011 . 15 . Bartles JR . Parallel actin bundles and their multiple actin - bundling proteins . Curr Opin Cell Biol 12 : 72 – 78 , 2000 . 16 . Barzik M , Kotova TI , Higgs HN , Hazelwood L , Hanein D , Gertler FB , Schafer DA . Ena / VASP proteins enhance actin polymerization in the presence of barbed end cap - ping proteins . J Biol Chem 280 : 28653 – 28662 , 2005 . 17 . BatchelderEL , HollopeterG , CampilloC , MezangesX , JorgensenEM , NassoyP , Sens P , Plastino J . Membrane tension regulates motility by controlling lamellipodium orga - nization . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108 : 11429 – 11434 , 2011 . 18 . Bear JE , Svitkina TM , Krause M , Schafer DA , Loureiro JJ , Strasser GA , Maly IV , Chaga OY , CooperJA , BorisyGG , GertlerFB . AntagonismbetweenEna / VASPproteinsand actin ﬁlament capping regulates ﬁbroblast motility . Cell 109 : 509 – 521 , 2002 . 19 . Bergert M , Chandradoss SD , Desai RA , Paluch E . Cell mechanics control rapid tran - sitions between blebs and lamellipodia during migration . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 : 14434 – 14439 , 2012 . 20 . Bernheim - GroswasserA , WiesnerS , GolsteynRM , CarlierMF , SykesC . Thedynam - icsofactin - basedmotilitydependonsurfaceparameters . Nature 417 : 308 – 311 , 2002 . 21 . Bernstein BW , Bamburg JR . ADF / coﬁlin : a functional node in cell biology . Trends Cell Biol 20 : 187 – 195 , 2010 . 22 . Berro J , Michelot A , Blanchoin L , Kovar DR , Martiel JL . Attachment conditions control actin ﬁlament buckling and the production of forces . Biophys J 92 : 2546 – 2558 , 2007 . 23 . Berro J , Sirotkin V , Pollard TD . Mathematical modeling of endocytic actin patch kinetics in ﬁssion yeast : disassembly requires release of actin ﬁlament fragments . Mol Biol Cell 21 : 2905 – 2915 , 2010 . 24 . Besser A , Colombelli J , Stelzer EH , Schwarz US . Viscoelastic response of contractile ﬁlament bundles . Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 83 : 051902 , 2011 . 25 . Blanchoin L , Amann KJ , Higgs HN , Marchand JB , Kaiser DA , Pollard TD . Direct observation of dendretic actin ﬁlament networks nucleated by Arp2 / 3 complex and WASP / Scar proteins . Nature 404 : 1007 – 1111 , 2000 . 26 . BlanchoinL , MichelotA . Actincytoskeleton : ateameffortduringactinassembly . Curr Biol 22 : R643 – 645 , 2012 . 27 . Blanchoin L , Pollard TD . Hydrolysis of ATP by polymerized actin depends on the bound divalent cation but not proﬁlin . Biochemistry 41 : 597 – 602 , 2002 . 28 . Blanchoin L , Pollard TD . Mechanism of interaction of Acanthamoeba actophorin ( ADF / coﬁlin ) with actin ﬁlaments . J Biol Chem 274 : 15538 – 15546 , 1999 . 29 . Blaser H , Reichman - Fried M , Castanon I , Dumstrei K , Marlow FL , Kawakami K , Solnica - Krezel L , Heisenberg CP , Raz E . Migration of zebraﬁsh primordial germ cells : a role for myosin contraction and cytoplasmic ﬂow . Dev Cell 11 : 613 – 627 , 2006 . 30 . Block J , Breitsprecher D , Kühn S , Winterhoff M , Kage F , Geffers R , Duwe P , Rohn JL , Baum B , Brakebusch C , Geyer M , Stradal TEB , Faix J , Rottner K . FMNL2 drives actin - basedprotrusionandmigrationdownstreamofCdc42 . CurrBiol 22 : 1005 – 1012 , 2012 . 31 . Boczkowska M , Rebowski G , Dominguez R . Glia Maturation Factor ( GMF ) interacts with Arp2 / 3 complex in a nucleotide state - dependent manner . J Biol Chem 288 : 25683 – 25688 , 2013 . 32 . Bohnet S , Ananthakrishnan R , Mogilner A , Meister JJ , Verkhovsky AB . Weak force stalls protrusion at the leading edge of the lamellipodium . Biophys J 90 : 1810 – 1820 , 2006 . 33 . Boukellal H , Campas O , Joanny JF , Prost J , Sykes C . Soft Listeria : actin - based propul - sion of liquid drops . Phys Rev E 69 : 061906 , 2004 . 34 . Brangbour C , du Roure O , Helfer E , Demoulin D , Mazurier A , Fermigier M , Carlier MF , Bibette J , Baudry J . Force - velocity measurements of a few growing actin ﬁla - ments . PLoS Biol 9 : e1000613 , 2011 . 35 . BrangwynneCP , MacKintoshFC , KumarS , GeisseNA , TalbotJ , MahadevanL , Parker KK , Ingber DE , Weitz DA . Microtubules can bear enhanced compressive loads in living cells because of lateral reinforcement . J Cell Biol 173 : 733 – 741 , 2006 . ACTIN DYNAMICS , ARCHITECTURE , AND MECHANICS 256 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 36 . Bravo - CorderoJJ , HodgsonL , CondeelisJ . Directedcellinvasionandmigrationduring metastasis . Curr Opin Cell Biol 24 : 277 – 283 , 2012 . 37 . Breitsprecher D , Jaiswal R , Bombardier JP , Gould CJ , Gelles J , Goode BL . Rocket launchermechanismofcollaborativeactinassemblydeﬁnedbysingle - moleculeimag - ing . Science 336 : 1164 – 1168 , 2012 . 38 . Breitsprecher D , Kiesewetter AK , Linkner J , Urbanke C , Resch GP , Small JV , Faix J . Clustering of VASP actively drives processive , WH2 domain - mediated actin ﬁlament elongation . EMBO J 27 : 2943 – 2954 , 2008 . 39 . Breitsprecher D , Kiesewetter AK , Linkner J , Vinzenz M , Stradal T , Small JV , Curth U , Dickinson RB , Faix J . Molecular mechanism of Ena / VASP - mediated actin - ﬁlament elongation . EMBO J 30 : 456 – 467 , 2011 . 40 . Breitsprecher D , Koestler SA , Chizhov I , Nemethova M , Mueller J , Goode BL , Small JV , Rottner K , Faix J . Coﬁlin cooperates with fascin to disassemble ﬁlopodial actin ﬁlaments . J Cell Sci 124 : 3305 – 3318 , 2011 . 41 . Bretscher A , Edwards K , Fehon RG . ERM proteins and merlin : integrators at the cell cortex . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 3 : 586 – 599 , 2002 . 42 . Brieher WM , Coughlin M , Mitchison TM . Fascin - mediated propulsion of Listeria monocytogenes independent of frequent nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex . J Cell Biol 165 : 233 – 242 , 2004 . 43 . Brochard - Wyart F , Borghi N , Cuvelier D , Nassoy P . Hydrodynamic narrowing of tubes extruded from cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 7660 – 7663 , 2006 . 44 . Burnette DT , Manley S , Sengupta P , Sougrat R , Davidson MW , Kachar B , Lippincott - SchwartzJ . Aroleforactinarcsintheleading - edgeadvanceofmigratingcells . NatCell Biol 13 : 371 – 381 , 2011 . 45 . Burridge K , Wittchen ES . The tension mounts : stress ﬁbers as force - generating mechanotransducers . J Cell Biol 200 : 9 – 19 , 2013 . 46 . Cameron LA , Footer MJ , Van Oudenaarden A , Theriot JA . Motility of ActA protein - coatedmicrospheresdrivenbyactinpolymerization . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 96 : 4908 – 4913 , 1999 . 47 . CameronLA , SvitkinaTM , VignjevicD , TheriotJA , BorisyGG . Dendriticorganization of actin comet tails . Curr Biol 11 : 130 – 135 , 2001 . 48 . CampelloneKG , WelchMD . Anucleatorarmsrace : cellularcontrolofactinassembly . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 : 237 – 251 , 2010 . 49 . Campillo C , Jerber J , Fisch C , Simoes - Betbeder M , Dupuis - Williams P , Nassoy P , SykesC . Mechanicsofmembrane - cytoskeletonattachmentin Paramecium . NewJPhys 14 : 125016 , 2012 . 50 . Campillo C , Sens P , Köster D , Pontani LL , Lévy D , Bassereau P , Nassoy P , Sykes C . Unexpected membrane dynamics unveiled by membrane nanotube extrusion . Bio - phys J 104 : 1248 – 1256 , 2013 . 51 . Carlier MF , Laurent V , Melki R , Didry D , Xia GX , Hong Y , Chua NH , Pantaloni D . Actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF / coﬁlin ) enhances the rate of ﬁlament turnover : implication in actin - based motility . J Cell Biol 136 : 1307 – 1322 , 1997 . 52 . Chan C , Beltzner CC , Pollard TD . Coﬁlin dissociates Arp2 / 3 complex and branches from actin ﬁlaments . Curr Biol 19 : 537 – 545 , 2009 . 53 . Chan CE , Odde DJ . Traction dynamics of ﬁlopodia on compliant substrates . Science 322 : 1687 – 1691 , 2008 . 54 . Charras G , Coughlin M , Mitchison TJ , Mahadevan L . Life and times of a cellular bleb . Biophys J 94 : 1836 – 1853 , 2008 . 55 . CharrasG , PaluchE . Blebsleadtheway : howtomigratewithoutlamellipodia . Nature 9 : 730 – 736 , 2008 . 56 . CharrasGT , HuCK , CoughlinM , MitchisonTJ . Reassemblyofcontractileactincortex in cell blebs . J Cell Biol 175 : 477 – 490 , 2006 . 57 . Charras GT , Yarrow JC , Horton MA , Mahadevan L , Mitchison TJ . Non - equilibration of hydrostatic pressure in blebbing cells . Nature 435 : 365 – 369 , 2005 . 58 . Chaudhry F , Breitsprecher D , Little K , Sharov G , Sokolova O , Goode BL . Srv2 / cyclase - associated protein forms hexameric shurikens that directly catalyze actin ﬁl - ament severing by coﬁlin . Mol Biol Cell 24 : 31 – 41 , 2013 . 59 . ChaudhuriO , ParekhSH , FletcherDA . Reversiblestresssofteningofactinnetworks . Nature 445 : 295 – 298 , 2007 . 60 . Chen Q , Nag S , Pollard TD . Formins ﬁlter modiﬁed actin subunits during processive elongation . J Struct Biol 177 : 32 – 39 , 2012 . 61 . ChenZ , BorekD , PadrickSB , GomezTS , MetlagelZ , IsmailAM , UmetaniJ , Billadeau DD , Otwinowski Z , Rosen MK . Structure and control of the actin regulatory WAVE complex . Nature 468 : 533 – 538 , 2010 . 62 . Chereau D , Kerff F , Graceffa P , Grabarek Z , Langsetmo K , Dominguez R . Actin - bound structures of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) - homology domain 2 andtheimplicationsforﬁlamentassembly . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 102 : 16644 – 16649 , 2005 . 63 . ChesaroneMA , DuPageAG , GoodeBL . Unleashingforminstoremodeltheactinand microtubule cytoskeletons . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 : 62 – 74 , 2010 . 64 . Chhabra ES , Higgs HN . The many faces of actin : matching assembly factors with cellular structures . Nat Cell Biol 9 : 1110 – 1121 , 2007 . 65 . Choi CK , Vicente - Manzanares M , Zareno J , Whitmore LA , Mogilner A , Horwitz AR . Actin and alpha - actinin orchestrate the assembly and maturation of nascent adhesions in a myosin II motor - independent manner . Nat Cell Biol 10 : 1039 – 1050 , 2008 . 66 . CoC , WongDT , GierkeS , ChangeV , TauntonJ . Mechanismofactinnetworkattach - ment to moving membranes : barbed end capture by N - WASP WH2 domains . Cell 128 : 901 – 913 , 2007 . 67 . Colombelli J , Besser A , Kress H , Reynaud EG , Girard P , Caussinus E , Haselmann U , Small JV , Schwarz US , Stelzer EHK . Mechanosensing in actin stress ﬁbers revealed by a close correlation between force and protein localization . J Cell Sci 122 : 1665 – 1679 , 2009 . 68 . Cossart P , Kocks C . The actin - based motility of the facultative intracellular pathogen Listeria monocytogenes . Mol Microbiol 13 : 395 – 402 , 1994 . 69 . CoursonDS , RockRS . Actincross - linkassemblyanddisassemblymechanicsforalpha - Actinin and fascin . J Biol Chem 285 : 26350 – 26357 , 2010 . 70 . Courtemanche N , Lee JY , Pollard TD , Greene EC . Tension modulates actin ﬁlament polymerization mediated by formin and proﬁlin . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110 : 9752 – 9757 , 2013 . 71 . Dahl KN , Ribeiro AJS , Lammerding J . Nuclear shape , mechanics , mechanotransduc - tion . Circ Res 102 : 1307 – 1318 , 2008 . 72 . DaiJ , SheetzMP . Mechanicalpropertiesofneuronalgrowthconemembranesstudied by tether formation with laser optical tweezers . Biophys J 68 : 988 – 996 , 1995 . 73 . Dai J , Sheetz MP . Membrane tether formation from blebbing cells . Biophys J 77 : 3363 – 3370 , 1999 . 74 . Davies PF . Hemodynamic shear stress and the endothelium in cardiovascular patho - physiology . Nature Clin Pract Cardiovasc Med 6 : 16 – 26 , 2009 . 75 . Dayel MJ , Akin O , Landeryou M , Risca V , Mogilner A , Mullins RD . In silico recon - stitution of actin - based symmetry breaking and motility . PLOS Biol 7 : 1000201 , 2009 . 76 . De La Cruz EM . How coﬁlin severs an actin ﬁlament . Biophys Rev 1 : 51 – 59 , 2009 . 77 . Diz - Muñoz A , Fletcher DA , Weiner OD . Use the force : membrane tension as an organizer of cell shape and motility . Trends Cell Biol 23 : 47 – 53 , 2012 . 78 . Diz - Muñoz A , Krieg M , Bergert M , Ibarlucea - Benitez I , Muller DJ , Paluch E , Heisen - berg CP . Control of directed cell migration in vivo by membrane - to - cortex attach - ment . PLOS Biol 8 : e1000544 , 2010 . 79 . Doyle AD , Wang FW , Matsumoto K , Yamada KM . One - dimensional topography underlies three - dimensional ﬁbrillar cell migration . J Cell Biol 184 : 481 – 490 , 2009 . 80 . Drees F , Gertler FB . Ena / VASP : proteins at the tip of the nervous system . Curr Opin Neurobiol 18 : 53 – 59 , 2008 . 81 . Dupont S , Morsut L , Aragona M , Enzo E , Giulitti S , Cordenonsi M , Zanconato F , Le Digabel J , Forcato M , Bicciato S , Elvassore N , Piccolo S . Role of YAP / TAZ in mecha - notransduction . Nature 474 : 179 – 183 , 2011 . BLANCHOIN ET AL . 257 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 82 . Eilken HM , Adams RH . Dynamics of endothelial cell behavior in sprouting angiogen - esis . Curr Opin Cell Biol 22 : 617 – 625 , 2010 . 83 . ElamWA , KangH , DelaCruzEM . Biophysicsofactinﬁlamentseveringbycoﬁlin . FEBS Lett 587 : 1215 – 1219 , 2013 . 84 . Faix J , Rottner K . The making of ﬁlopodia . Curr Opin Cell Biol 18 : 18 – 25 , 2006 . 85 . Falzone TT , Lenz M , Kovar DR , Gardel ML . Assembly kinetics determine the archi - tecture of alpha - actinin crosslinked F - actin networks . Nat Commun 3 : 861 , 2012 . 86 . Ferrer JM , Lee H , Chen J , Pelz B , Nakamura F , Kamm RD , Lang MJ . Measuring molecular rupture forces between single actin ﬁlaments and actin - binding proteins . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 : 9221 – 9226 , 2008 . 87 . FletcherDA , MullinsRD . Cellmechanicsandthecytoskeleton . Nature 463 : 485 – 492 , 2010 . 88 . FooterMJ , KerssemakersJW , TheriotJA , DogteromM . Directmeasurementofforce generation by actin ﬁlament polymerization using an optical trap . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 : 2181 – 2186 , 2007 . 89 . Friedl P , Borgmann S , Brocker EB . Amoeboid leukocyte crawling through extracellu - larmatrix : lessonsfromthe Dictyostelium paradigmofcellmovement . JLeukocBiol 70 : 491 – 509 , 2001 . 90 . Friedl P , Wolf K , Lammerding J . Nuclear mechanics during cell migration . Curr Opin Cell Biol 23 : 55 – 64 , 2011 . 91 . FrishknechtF , MoreauV , RöttgerS , GonﬂoniS , ReckmannI , Superti - FurgaG , WayM . Actin - based motility of vaccinia virus mimics tyrosine kinase signalling . Nature 401 : 926 – 929 , 1999 . 92 . FritzscheM , LewalleA , DukeT , KruseK , CharrasG . Analysisofturnoverdynamicsof the submembranous actin cortex . Mol Biol Cell 24 : 757 – 767 , 2013 . 93 . Fujiwara I , Suetsugu S , Uemura S , Takenawa T , Ishiwata S . Visualization and force measurement of branching by Arp2 / 3 complex and N - WASP in actin ﬁlament . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 293 : 1550 – 1555 , 2002 . 94 . GaggioliC , HooperS , Hidalgo - CarcedoC , GrosseR , MarshallJF , HarringtonK , Sahai E . Fibroblast - led collective invasion of carcinoma cells with differing roles for RhoGTPases in leading and following cells . Nat Cell Biol 9 : 1392 – 1400 , 2007 . 95 . Galkin VE , Orlova A , Egelman EH . Actin ﬁlaments as tension sensors . Curr Biol 22 : R96 – 101 , 2012 . 96 . Galland R , Leduc P , Guerin C , Peyrade D , Blanchoin L , Thery M . Fabrication of three - dimensionalelectricalconnectionsbymeansofdirectedactinself - organization . Nat Mater 12 : 416 – 421 , 2013 . 97 . Gandhi M , Smith BA , Bovellan M , Paavilainen V , Daugherty - Clarke K , Gelles J , Lap - palainen P , Goode BL . GMF is a coﬁlin homolog that binds Arp2 / 3 complex to stim - ulate ﬁlament debranching and inhibit actin nucleation . Curr Biol 20 : 861 – 867 , 2010 . 98 . Gardel ML , Kasza KE , Brangwynne CP , Liu J , Weitz DA . Chapter 19 : mechanical response of cytoskeletal networks . Meth Cell Biol 89 : 487 – 519 , 2008 . 99 . GauthierNC , FardinMA , Roca - CusachsP , SheetzMP . Temporaryincreaseinplasma membrane tension coordinates the activation of exocytosis and contraction during cell spreading . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108 : 14467 – 14472 , 2011 . 100 . Gauthier NC , Masters TA , Sheetz MP . Mechanical feedback between membrane tension and dynamics . Trends Cell Biol 22 : 527 – 535 , 2012 . 101 . Gentry B , van der Meulen S , Noguera P , Alonso - Latorre B , Plastino J , Koenderink G . Multiple actin binding domains of Ena / VASP proteins determine actin network stiff - ening . Eur Biophys J 41 : 979 – 990 , 2012 . 102 . Geraldo S , Simon A , Elkhatib N , Louvard D , Fetler L , Vignjevic DM . Do cancer cells havedistinctadhesionsin3Dcollagenmatricesandinvivo ? EurJCellBiol 91 : 930 – 937 , 2012 . 103 . Giardini PA , Fletcher DA , Theriot JA . Compression forces generated by actin comet tails on lipid vesicles . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100 : 6493 – 6498 , 2003 . 104 . Goode BL , Eck MJ . Mechanism and function of formins in the control of actin assem - bly . Annu Rev Biochem 76 : 593 – 627 , 2007 . 105 . Gouin E , Gantelet H , Egile C , Lasa I , Ohayon H , Villiers V , Gounon P , Sansonetti PJ , Cossart P . A comparative study of the actin - based motilities of the pathogenic bacte - riaListeriamonocytogenes , Shigellaﬂexneri and Rickettsiaconorii . JCellSci 112 : 1697 – 1708 , 1999 . 106 . GuckJ , SchinkingerS , LincolnB , WottawahF , EbertS , RomeykeM , LenzD , Erickson HM , Ananthakrishnan R , Mitchell D , Käs J , Ulvick S , Bilby C . Optical deformability as an inherent cell marker for testing malignant transformation and metastatic compe - tence . Biophys J 88 : 3689 – 3698 , 2005 . 107 . Gupton SL , Waterman - Storer CM . Spatiotemporal feedback between actomyosin andfocal - adhesionsystemsoptimizesrapidcellmigration . Cell 125 : 1361 – 1374 , 2006 . 108 . Haglund CM , Choe JE , Skau CT , Kovar DR , Welch MD . Rickettsia Sca2 is a bacterial formin - like mediator of actin - based motility . Nat Cell Biol 12 : 1057 – 1063 , 2010 . 109 . Hansen SD , Mullins RD . VASP is a processive actin polymerase that requires mono - meric actin for barbed end association . J Cell Biol 191 : 571 – 584 , 2010 . 110 . Harasim M , Wunderlich B , Peleg O , Kroger M , Bausch AR . Direct observation of the dynamics of semiﬂexible polymers in shear ﬂow . Phys Rev Lett 110 : 108302 , 2013 . 111 . Harris ES , Gauvin TJ , Heimsath EG , Higgs HN . Assembly of ﬁlopodia by the formin FRL2 ( FMNL3 ) . Cytoskeleton 67 : 755 – 772 , 2010 . 112 . Harris ES , Higgs HN . Actin cytoskeleton : formins lead the way . Curr Biol 14 : R520 – 522 , 2004 . 113 . Harris ES , Li F , Higgs HN . The mouse formin , FRLalpha , slows actin ﬁlament barbed end elongation , competes with capping protein , accelerates polymerization from monomers , and severs ﬁlaments . J Biol Chem 279 : 20076 – 20087 , 2004 . 114 . Harris ES , Rouiller I , Hanein D , Higgs HN . Mechanistic differences in actin bundling activity of two mammalian formins , FRL1 and mDia2 . J Biol Chem 281 : 14383 – 14392 , 2006 . 115 . Haviv L , Brill - Karniely Y , Mahaffy R , Backouche F , Ben - Shaul A , Pollard TD , Bern - heim - Groswasser A . Reconstitution of the transition from lamellipodium to ﬁlopo - dium in a membrane - free system . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 4906 – 4911 , 2006 . 116 . Haviv L , Gillo D , Backouche F , Bernheim - Groswasser A . A cytoskeletal demolition worker : myosin II acts as an actin depolymerization agent . J Mol Biol 375 : 325 – 330 , 2008 . 117 . Hayakawa K , Tatsumi H , Sokabe M . Actin ﬁlaments function as a tension sensor by tension - dependent binding of coﬁlin to the ﬁlament . J Cell Biol 195 : 721 – 727 , 2011 . 118 . HeinemannF , DoschkeH , RadmacherM . Keratocytelamellipodialprotrusionischar - acterized by a concave force - velocity relation . Biophys J 100 : 1420 – 1427 , 2011 . 119 . Higashida C , Miyoshi T , Fujita A , Oceguera - Yanez F , Monypenny J , Andou Y , Naru - miya S , Watanabe N . Actin polymerization - driven molecular movement of mDia1 in living cells . Science 303 : 2007 – 2010 , 2004 . 120 . Higgs HN . Discussing the morphology of actin ﬁlaments in lamellipodia . Trends Cell Biol 21 : 2 – 4 , 2011 . 121 . Higgs HN . Formin proteins : a domain - based approach . Trends Biochem Sci 30 : 342 – 353 , 2005 . 122 . Higgs HN , Pollard TD . Regulation of actin polymerization by Arp2 / 3 complex and WASp / Scar proteins . J Biol Chem 274 : 32531 – 32534 , 1999 . 123 . Hochmuth RM . Micropipette aspiration of living cells . J Biomech 33 : 15 – 22 , 2000 . 124 . Hochmuth RM , Shao JY , Dai J , Sheetz MP . Deformation and ﬂow of membrane into tethers extracted from neuronal growth cones . Biophys J 70 : 358 – 369 , 1996 . 125 . Holmes KC , Popp D , Gebhard W , Kabsch W . Atomic model of the actin ﬁlament . Nature 347 : 44 – 49 , 1990 . 126 . Hotulainen P , Lappalainen P . Stress ﬁbers are generated by two distinct actin assem - bly mechanisms in motile cells . J Cell Biol 173 : 383 – 394 , 2006 . 127 . HoukAR , JilkineA , MejeanCO , BoltyanskiyR , DufresneER , AngenentSB , Altschuler SJ , Wu LF , Weiner OD . Membrane tension maintains cell polarity by conﬁning signals to the leading edge during neutrophil migration . Cell 148 : 175 – 188 , 2012 . 128 . HowardJ . MechanicsofMotorProteinsandtheCytoskeleton . Sunderland , MA : Sinauer , 2001 , p . 384 . ACTIN DYNAMICS , ARCHITECTURE , AND MECHANICS 258 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 129 . Huang S , Robinson RC , Gao LY , Matsumoto T , Brunet A , Blanchoin L , Staiger CJ . Arabidopsis VILLIN1 generates actin ﬁlament cables that are resistant to depolymer - ization . Plant Cell 17 : 486 – 501 , 2005 . 130 . Husson C , Cantrelle FX , Roblin P , Didry D , Le KHD , Perez J , Guittet E , Van Heijen - oort C , Renault L , Carlier MF . Multifunctionality of the (cid:5) - thymosin / WH2 module : G - actin sequestration , actin ﬁlament growth , nucleation , and severing . Ann NY Acad Sci 1194 : 44 – 52 , 2010 . 131 . Ingerman E , Hsiao JY , Mullins RD . Arp2 / 3 complex ATP hydrolysis promotes lamel - lipodial actin network disassembly but is dispensable for assembly . J Cell Biol 200 : 619 – 633 , 2013 . 132 . Isambert H , Venier P , Maggs AC , Fattoum A , Kassab R , Pantaloni D , Carlier MF . Flexibility of actin ﬁlaments derived from thermal ﬂuctuations . J Biol Chem 270 : 11437 – 11444 , 1995 . 133 . Ishikawa R , Sakamoto T , Ando T , Higashi - Fujime S , Kohama K . Polarized actin bun - dles formed by human fascin - 1 : their sliding and disassembly on myosin II and myosin V in vitro . J Neurochem 87 : 676 – 685 , 2003 . 134 . Iwasa JH , Mullins RD . Spatial and temporal relationships between actin - ﬁlament nu - cleation , capping , and disassembly . Curr Biol 17 : 395 – 406 , 2007 . 135 . IyerKV , PulfordS , MogilnerA , ShivashankarGV . Mechanicalactivationofcellsinduces chromatin remodeling preceding MKL nuclear transport . Biophys J 103 : 1416 – 1428 , 2012 . 136 . JaaloukDE , LammerdingJ . Mechanotransductiongoneawry . NatRevMolCellBiol 10 : 63 – 73 , 2009 . 137 . Janmey PA , McCormick ME , Rammensee S , Leight JL , Georges PC , MacKintosh FC . Negative normal stress in semiﬂexible biopolymer gels . Nat Mater 6 : 48 – 51 , 2007 . 138 . Janmey PA , Wells RG , Assoian RK , McCulloch CA . From tissue mechanics to tran - scription factors . Differentiation 86 : 112 – 120 2013 . 139 . Jegou A , Carlier MF , Romet - Lemonne G . Formin mDia1 senses and generates me - chanical forces on actin ﬁlaments . Nat Commun 4 : 1883 , 2013 . 140 . Joanny JF , Prost J . Active gels as a description of the actin - myosin cytoskeleton . HFSP J 3 : 94 – 104 , 2009 . 141 . Kabsch W , Mannherz HG , Suck D , Pai EF , Holsmes KC . Atomic structure of the actin : DNase I complex . Nature 347 : 37 – 44 , 1990 . 142 . KaksonenM , ToretCP , DrubinDG . Harnessingactindynamicsforclathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 : 404 – 414 , 2006 . 143 . Kanchanawong P , Shtengel G , Pasapera AM , Ramko EB , Davidson MW , Hess HF , Waterman CM . Nanoscale architecture of integrin - based cell adhesions . Nature 468 : 580 – 584 , 2010 . 144 . Kanchanawong P , Waterman CM . Advances in light - based imaging of three - dimen - sional cellular ultrastructure . Curr Opin Cell Biol 24 : 125 – 133 , 2012 . 145 . KangF , PurichDL , SouthwickFS . Proﬁlinpromotesbarbed - endactinﬁlamentassem - bly without lowering the critical concentration . J Biol Chem 274 : 36963 – 36972 , 1999 . 146 . Kang H , Bradley MJ , McCullough BR , Pierre A , Grintsevich EE , Reisler E , De La Cruz EM . Identiﬁcation of cation - binding sites on actin that drive polymerization and mod - ulate bending stiffness . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 : 16923 – 16927 , 2012 . 147 . Kapustina M , Elston TC , Jacobson K . Compression and dilation of the membrane - cortex layer generates rapid changes in cell shape . J Cell Biol 200 : 95 – 108 , 2013 . 148 . Kasza KE , Broedersz CP , Koenderink GH , Lin YC , Messner W , Millman EA , Naka - muraF , StosselTP , MackintoshFC , WeitzDA . Actinﬁlamentlengthtuneselasticityof ﬂexibly cross - linked actin networks . Biophys J 99 : 1091 – 1100 , 2010 . 149 . Kaunas R , Usami S , Chien S . Regulation of stretch - induced JNK activation by stress ﬁber orientation . Cell Signal 18 : 1924 – 1931 , 2006 . 150 . KawskaA , CarvalhoK , ManziJ , Boujemaa - PaterskiR , BlanchoinL , MartielJL , SykesC . Howactinnetworkdynamicscontroltheonsetofactin - basedmotility . ProcNatlAcad Sci USA 109 : 14440 – 14445 , 2012 . 151 . Keren K . Cell motility : the integrating role of the plasma membrane . Eur Biophys J 40 : 1013 – 1027 , 2011 . 152 . Keren K , Pincus Z , Allen GM , Barnhart EL , Marriott G , Mogilner A , Theriot JA . Mechanism of shape determination in motile cells . Nature 453 : 475 – 480 , 2008 . 153 . Klein MG , Shi W , Ramagopal U , Tseng Y , Wirtz D , Kovar DR , Staiger CJ , Almo SC . Structure of the actin crosslinking core of ﬁmbrin . Structure 12 : 999 – 1013 , 2004 . 154 . Klemke RL . Trespassing cancer cells : “ﬁngerprinting” invasive protrusions reveals metastatic culprits . Curr Opin Cell Biol 24 : 662 – 669 , 2012 . 155 . Kohler S , Bausch AR . Contraction mechanisms in composite active actin networks . PloS One 7 : e39869 , 2012 . 156 . KohlerS , SchallerV , BauschAR . Collectivedynamicsofactivecytoskeletalnetworks . PloS One 6 : e23798 , 2011 . 157 . Korobova F , Ramabhadran V , Higgs HN . An actin - dependent step in mitochondrial ﬁssion mediated by the ER - associated formin INF2 . Science 339 : 464 – 467 , 2013 . 158 . KothapalliD , LiuSL , BaeYH , MonslowJ , XuT , HawthorneEA , ByﬁeldFJ , Castagnino P , Rao S , Rader DJ , Pure E , Phillips MC , Lund - Katz S , Janmey PA , Assoian RK . Car - diovascular protection by ApoE and ApoE - HDL linked to suppression of ECM gene expression and arterial stiffening . Cell Reports 2 : 1259 – 1271 , 2012 . 159 . KovarDR . Moleculardetailsofformin - mediatedactinassembly . CurrOpinCellBiol 18 : 11 – 17 , 2006 . 160 . Kovar DR , Harris ES , Mahaffy R , Higgs HN , Pollard TD . Control of the assembly of ATP - and ADP - actin by formins and proﬁlin . Cell 124 : 423 – 435 , 2006 . 161 . Kovar DR , Pollard TD . Insertional assembly of actin ﬁlament barbed ends in associa - tion with formins produces piconewton forces . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101 : 14725 – 14730 , 2004 . 162 . Kress H , Stelzer EHK , Holzer D , Buss F , Grifﬁths G , Rohrbach A . Filopodia act as phagocytic tentacles and pull with discrete steps and a load - dependent velocity . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 : 11633 – 11638 , 2007 . 163 . KuehHY , BrieherWM , MitchisonTJ . Quantitativeanalysisofactinturnoverin Listeria comet tails : evidence for catastrophic ﬁlament turnover . Biophys J 99 : 2153 – 2162 , 2010 . 164 . Kueh HY , Charras GT , Mitchison TJ , Brieher WM . Actin disassembly by coﬁlin , coro - nin , and Aip1 occurs in bursts and is inhibited by barbed - end cappers . J Cell Biol 182 : 341 – 353 , 2008 . 165 . Kumar S , Weaver VM . Mechanics , malignancy , and metastasis : the force journey of a tumor cell . Cancer Metastasis Rev 28 : 113 – 127 , 2009 . 166 . LacayoCI , PincusZ , VanDuijnMM , WilsonCA , FletcherDA , GertlerFB , MogilnerA , TheriotJA . Emergenceoflarge - scalecellmorphologyandmovementfromlocalactin ﬁlament growth dynamics . PLOS Biol 5 : 2035 – 2052 , 2007 . 167 . LaiFP , SzczodrakM , BlockJ , FaixJ , BreitsprecherD , MannherzHG , StradalTE , Dunn GA , Small JV , Rottner K . Arp2 / 3 complex interactions and actin network turnover in lamellipodia . EMBO J 27 : 982 – 992 , 2008 . 168 . LammermannT , BaderBL , MonkleySJ , WorbsT , Wedlich - SoldnerR , HirschK , Keller M , Forster R , Critchley DR , Fassler R , Sixt M . Rapid leukocyte migration by integrin - independent ﬂowing and squeezing . Nature 453 : 51 , 2008 . 169 . Lammermann T , Sixt M . Mechanical modes of “amoeboid” cell migration . Curr Opin Cell Biol 21 : 636 – 644 , 2009 . 170 . Laporte D , Ojkic N , Vavylonis D , Wu JQ . alpha - Actinin and ﬁmbrin cooperate with myosin II to organize actomyosin bundles during contractile - ring assembly . Mol Biol Cell 23 : 3094 – 3110 , 2012 . 171 . LarsonSM , LeeHJ , HungP , MatthewsLM , RobinsonDN , EvansJP . Corticalmechan - ics and meiosis II completion in mammalian oocytes are mediated by myosin - II and ezrin - radixin - moesin ( ERM ) proteins . Mol Biol Cell 21 : 3182 – 3192 , 2010 . 172 . Lauffenburger DA , Horwitz AF . Cell migration : a physically integrated molecular process . Cell 84 : 359 – 369 , 1996 . 173 . Lebensohn AM , Kirschner MW . Activation of the WAVE complex by coincident sig - nals controls actin assembly . Mol Cell 36 : 512 – 524 , 2009 . 174 . LeeK , GallopJL , RambaniK , KirschnerMW . Self - assemblyofﬁlopodia - likestructures on supported lipid bilayers . Science 329 : 1341 – 1345 , 2010 . BLANCHOIN ET AL . 259 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 175 . Lenz M , Gardel ML , Dinner AR . Requirements for contractility in disordered cyto - skeletal bundles . New J Phys 14 : 033037 , 2012 . 176 . Lenz M , Thoresen T , Gardel ML , Dinner AR . Contractile units in disordered actomy - osin bundles arise from F - actin buckling . Phys Rev Lett 108 : 238107 , 2012 . 177 . Li R , Albertini DF . The road to maturation : somatic cell interaction and self - organiza - tion of the mammalian oocyte . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 14 : 141 – 152 , 2013 . 178 . LielegO , SchmollerKM , ClaessensMM , BauschAR . Cytoskeletalpolymernetworks : viscoelastic properties are determined by the microscopic interaction potential of cross - links . Biophys J 96 : 4725 – 4732 , 2009 . 179 . Liu AP , Richmond DL , Maibaum L , Pronk S , Geissler PL , Fletcher DA . Membrane - induced bundling of actin ﬁlaments . Nat Phys 4 : 789 – 793 , 2008 . 180 . Lizarraga F , Poincloux R , Romao M , Montagnac G , Le Dez G , Bonne I , Rigaill G , Raposo G , Chavrier P . Diaphanous - related formins are required for invadopodia formation and invasion of breast tumor cells . Cancer Res 69 : 2792 – 2800 , 2009 . 181 . LoiselTP , BoujemaaR , PantaloniD , CarlierMF . Reconstitutionofactin - basedmotility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 : 613 – 616 , 1999 . 182 . Luan Q , Nolen BJ . Structural basis for regulation of Arp2 / 3 complex by GMF . Nat Struct Mol Biol 20 : 1062 – 1068 , 2013 . 183 . MabuchiI . Anactin - depolymerizingprotein ( depactin ) fromstarﬁshoocytes : proper - ties and interaction with actin . J Cell Biol 97 : 1612 – 1621 , 1983 . 184 . Machesky LM , Atkinson SJ , Ampe C , Vandekerckhove J , Pollard TD . Puriﬁcation of a corticalcomplexcontainingtwounconventionalactinsfrom Acanthamoeba byafﬁnity chromatography on proﬁlin agarose . J Cell Biol 127 : 107 – 115 , 1994 . 185 . Machesky LM , Insall RH . Scar1 and the related Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , regulate the actin cytoskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr Biol 8 : 1347 – 1356 , 1998 . 186 . Machesky LM , Mullins RD , Higgs HN , Kaiser DA , Blanchoin L , May RC , Hall ME , Pollard TD . Scar , a WASp - related protein , activates nucleation of actin ﬁlaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96 : 3739 – 3744 , 1999 . 187 . Maciver SK , Zot HG , Pollard TD . Characterization of actin ﬁlament severing by actophorin from Acanthamoeba castellanii . J Cell Biol 115 : 1611 – 1620 , 1991 . 188 . Madasu Y , Suarez C , Kast DJ , Kovar DR , Dominguez R . Rickettsia Sca2 has evolved formin - like activity through a different molecular mechanism . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110 : E2677 – 2686 , 2013 . 189 . Mahaffy RE , Pollard TD . Kinetics of the formation and dissociation of actin ﬁlament branches mediated by Arp2 / 3 complex . Biophys J 91 : 3519 – 3528 , 2006 . 190 . Marchand JB , Kaiser DA , Pollard TD , Higgs HN . Interaction of WASP / Scar proteins with actin and vertebrate Arp2 / 3 complex . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 76 – 82 , 2001 . 191 . Marcy Y , Prost J , Carlier MF , Sykes C . Forces generated during actin - based propul - sion : adirectmeasurementbymicromanipulation . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 5992 – 5997 : 2004 . 192 . McClatchey AI , Fehon RG . Merlin and the ERM proteins : regulators of receptor distribution and signaling at the cell cortex . Trends Cell Biol 19 : 198 – 206 , 2009 . 193 . McCulloughBR , BlanchoinL , MartielJL , DelaCruzEM . Coﬁlinincreasesthebending ﬂexibilityofactinﬁlaments : implicationsforseveringandcellmechanics . JMolBiol 381 : 550 – 558 , 2008 . 194 . McCullough BR , Grintsevich EE , Chen CK , Kang H , Hutchison AL , Henn A , Cao W , Suarez C , Martiel JL , Blanchoin L , Reisler E , De La Cruz EM . Coﬁlin - linked changes in actin ﬁlament ﬂexibility promote severing . Biophys J 101 : 151 – 159 , 2011 . 195 . McGrathJL , EungdamrongNJ , FisherCI , PengF , MahadevanL , MitchisonTJ , KuoSC . The force - velocity relationship for the actin - based motility of Listeria monocytogenes . Curr Biol 13 : 329 – 332 , 2003 . 196 . Medalia O , Geiger B . Frontiers of microscopy - based research into cell - matrix adhe - sions . Curr Opin Cell Biol 22 : 659 – 668 , 2010 . 197 . Melki R , Fievez S , Carlier MF . Continuous monitoring of P i release following nucleo - tidehydrolysisinactinortubulinassemblyusing2 - amino - 6 - mercapto - 7 - methylpurine ribonucleoside and purine - nucleoside phosphorylase as an enzyme - linked assay . Bio - chemistry 35 : 12038 – 12045 , 1996 . 198 . Meyer AS , Hughes - Alford SK , Kay JE , Castillo A , Wells A , Gertler FB , Lauffenburger DA . 2Dprotrusionbutnotmotilitypredictsgrowthfactor - inducedcancercellmigra - tion in 3D collagen . J Cell Biol 197 : 721 – 729 , 2012 . 199 . Meyer RK , Aebi U . Bundling of actin ﬁlaments by alpha - actinin depends on its molec - ular length . J Cell Biol 110 : 2013 – 2024 , 1990 . 200 . Michelot A , Berro J , Guerin C , Boujemaa - Paterski R , Staiger CJ , Martiel JL , Blanchoin L . Actin - ﬁlamentstochasticdynamicsmediatedbyADF / coﬁlin . CurrBiol 17 : 825 – 833 , 2007 . 201 . MichelotA , DeriveryE , Paterski - BoujemaaR , GuerinC , HuangS , ParcyF , StaigerCJ , Blanchoin L . A novel mechanism for the formation of actin - ﬁlament bundles by a nonprocessive formin . Curr Biol 16 : 1924 – 1930 , 2006 . 202 . MichelotA , GrassartA , OkreglakV , CostanzoM , BooneC , DrubinDG . Actinﬁlament elongation in Arp2 / 3 - derived networks is controlled by three distinct mechanisms . Dev Cell 24 : 182 – 195 , 2013 . 203 . Michelot A , Guerin C , Huang S , Ingouff M , Richard S , Rodiuc N , Staiger CJ , Blanchoin L . Theforminhomology1domainmodulatestheactinnucleationandbundlingactivity of Arabidopsis FORMIN1 . Plant Cell 17 : 2296 – 2313 , 2005 . 204 . Mierke CT . Physical break - down of the classical view on cancer cell invasion and metastasis . Eur J Cell Biol 92 : 89 – 104 , 2013 . 205 . Mitchison TJ , Cramer LP . Actin - based cell motility and cell locomotion . Cell 84 : 371 – 379 , 1996 . 206 . MiyataH , YasudaR , KinositaKJr . Strengthandlifetimeofthebondbetweenactinand skeletal muscle alpha - actinin studied with an optical trapping technique . Biochim Bio - phys Acta 1290 : 83 – 88 , 1996 . 207 . Miyoshi T , Tsuji T , Higashida C , Hertzog M , Fujita A , Narumiya S , Scita G , Watanabe N . Actin turnover - dependent fast dissociation of capping protein in the dendritic nucleation actin network : evidence of frequent ﬁlament severing . J Cell Biol 175 : 947 – 955 , 2006 . 208 . Miyoshi T , Watanabe N . Can ﬁlament treadmilling alone account for the F - actin turnover in lamellipodia ? Cytoskeleton 70 : 179 – 190 , 2013 . 209 . Mizuno H , Higashida C , Yuan Y , Ishizaki T , Narumiya S , Watanabe N . Rotational movement of the formin mDia1 along the double helical strand of an actin ﬁlament . Science 331 : 80 – 83 , 2011 . 210 . Mogilner A , Rubinstein B . The physics of ﬁlopodial protrusion . Biophys J 89 : 782 – 795 , 2005 . 211 . Mogilner A , Zhu J . Cell polarity : tension quenches the rear . Curr Biol 22 : R48 – 51 , 2012 . 212 . MooreSW , Roca - CusachsP , SheetzMP . Stretchyproteinsonstretchysubstrates : the importantelementsofintegrin - mediatedrigiditysensing . DevCell 19 : 194 – 206 , 2010 . 213 . Morone N , Fujiwara T , Murase K , Kasai RS , Ike H , Yuasa S , Usukura J , Kusumi A . Three - dimensional reconstruction of the membrane skeleton at the plasma mem - brane interface by electron tomography . J Cell Biol 174 : 851 – 862 , 2006 . 214 . Moseley JB , Goode BL . Differential activities and regulation of Saccharomyces cerevi - siae formin proteins Bni1 and Bnr1 by Bud6 . J Biol Chem 280 : 28023 – 28033 , 2005 . 215 . Mott RE , Helmke BP . Mapping the dynamics of shear stress - induced structural changes in endothelial cells . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 293 : C1616 – C1626 , 2007 . 216 . Mullins RD . The instability of stabilization . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 : 10743 – 10744 , 2012 . 217 . Mullins RD , Hansen SD . In vitro studies of actin ﬁlament and network dynamics . Curr Opin Cell Biol 25 : 6 – 13 , 2013 . 218 . Mullins RD , Heuser JA , Pollard TD . The interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high afﬁnity pointed end capping , and formation of branching networks of ﬁlaments . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95 : 6181 – 6186 , 1998 . 219 . Mullins RD , Stafford WF , Pollard TD . Structure , subunit topology , and actin - binding activity of the ARP2 / 3 complex from Acanthamoeba . J Cell Biol 136 : 331 – 343 , 1997 . 220 . Murrell MP , Gardel ML . F - actin buckling coordinates contractility and severing in a biomimetic actomyosin cortex . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 : 20820 – 20825 , 2012 . ACTIN DYNAMICS , ARCHITECTURE , AND MECHANICS 260 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 221 . NaumanenP , LappalainenP , HotulainenP . Mechanismsofactinstressﬁbreassembly . J Microsc 231 : 446 – 454 , 2008 . 222 . Nemethova M , Auinger S , Small JV . Building the actin cytoskeleton : ﬁlopodia contrib - ute to the construction of contractile bundles in the lamella . J Cell Biol 180 : 1233 – 1244 , 2008 . 223 . Noireaux V , Golsteyn RM , Friederich E , Prost J , Antony C , Louvard D , Sykes C . Growing an actin gel on spherical surfaces . Biophys J 278 : 1643 – 1654 , 2000 . 224 . Oakes PW , Beckham Y , Stricker J , Gardel ML . Tension is required but not sufﬁcient forfocaladhesionmaturationwithoutastressﬁbertemplate . JCellBiol 196 : 363 – 374 , 2012 . 225 . OferN , MogilnerA , KerenK . Actindisassemblyclockdeterminesshapeandspeedof lamellipodial fragments . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108 : 20394 – 20399 , 2011 . 226 . Okada K , Ravi H , Smith EM , Goode BL . Aip1 and coﬁlin promote rapid turnover of yeast actin patches and cables : a coordinated mechanism for severing and capping ﬁlaments . Mol Biol Cell 17 : 2855 – 2868 , 2006 . 227 . Okreglak V , Drubin DG . Coﬁlin recruitment and function during actin - mediated en - docytosis dictated by actin nucleotide state . J Cell Biol 178 : 1251 – 1264 , 2007 . 228 . OkreglakV , DrubinDG . LossofAip1revealsaroleinmaintainingtheactinmonomer pool and an in vivo oligomer assembly pathway . J Cell Biol 188 : 769 – 777 , 2010 . 229 . Paluch E , Piel M , Prost J , Bornens M , Sykes C . Cortical actomyosin breakage triggers shape oscillations in cells and cell fragments . Biophys J 89 : 724 – 733 , 2005 . 230 . PaluchE , SykesC , ProstJ , BornensM . Dynamicmodesofthecorticalactomyosingel during cell locomotion and division . Trends Cell Biol 16 : 5 – 10 , 2006 . 231 . Paluch E , van der Gucht J , Sykes C . Cracking up : symmetry breaking in cellular systems . J Cell Biol 175 : 687 – 692 , 2006 . 232 . PaluchEK , RazE . Theroleandregulationofblebsincellmigration . CurrOpinCellBiol 25 : 582 – 590 , 2013 . 233 . Pantaloni D , Boujemaa R , Didry D , Gounon P , Carlier MF . The Arp2 / 3 complex branchesﬁlamentbarbedends : functionalantagonismwithcappingproteins . NatCell Biol 2 : 385 – 391 , 2000 . 234 . Pantaloni D , Carlier MF . How proﬁlin promotes actin ﬁlament assembly in the pres - ence of thymosinß4 . Cell 75 : 1007 – 1014 , 1993 . 235 . Parekh SH , Chaudhuri O , Theriot JA , Fletcher DA . Loading history determines the velocity of actin - network growth . Nat Cell Biol 7 : 1219 – 1223 , 2005 . 236 . PasicL , KotovaT , SchaferDA . Ena / VASPproteinscaptureactinﬁlamentbarbedends . J Biol Chem 283 : 9814 – 9819 , 2008 . 237 . Passerini AG , Polacek DC , Shi C , Francesco NM , Manduchi E , Grant GR , Pritchard WF , PowellS , ChangGY , StoeckertCJJr , DaviesPF . Coexistingproinﬂammatoryand antioxidative endothelial transcription proﬁles in a disturbed ﬂow region of the adult porcine aorta . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101 : 2482 – 2487 , 2004 . 238 . Paul A , Pollard TD . The role of the FH1 domain and proﬁlin in formin - mediated actin - ﬁlament elongation and nucleation . Curr Biol 18 : 9 – 19 , 2008 . 239 . Pellegrin S , Mellor H . Actin stress ﬁbers . J Cell Sci 120 : 3491 – 3499 , 2007 . 240 . Petrie RJ , Gavara N , Chadwick RS , Yamada KM . Nonpolarized signaling reveals two disctinct modes of 3D cell migration . J Cell Biol 197 : 439 – 455 , 2012 . 241 . PeytonSR , GhajarCM , KhatiwalaCB , PutnamAJ . TheemergenceofECMmechanics and cytoskeletal tension as important regulators of cell function . Cell Biochem Biophys 47 : 300 – 320 , 2007 . 242 . Plastino J , Olivier S , Sykes C . Actin ﬁlaments align into hollow comets for rapid VASP - mediated propulsion . Curr Biol 14 : 1766 – 1771 , 2004 . 243 . Pollard TD . Rate constants for the reactions of ATP - and ADP - actin with the ends of actin ﬁlaments . J Cell Biol 103 : 2747 – 2754 , 1986 . 244 . PollardTD , BlanchoinL , MullinsRD . Molecularmechanismscontrollingactinﬁlament dynamics in nonmuscle cells . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 29 : 545 – 576 , 2000 . 245 . Pollard TD , Borisy GG . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell 112 : 453 – 465 , 2003 . 246 . Pollard TD , Cooper JA . Actin and actin - binding proteins . A critical evaluation of mechanisms and functions . Annu Rev Biochem 55 : 987 – 1035 , 1986 . 247 . Ponti A , Machacek M , Gupton SL , Waterman - Storer CM , Danuser G . Two distinct actinnetworksdrivetheprotrusionofmigratingcells . Science 305 : 1782 – 1786 , 2004 . 248 . Ponti A , Vallotton P , Salmon WC , Waterman - Storer CM , Danuser G . Computational analysis of F - actin turnover in cortical actin meshworks using ﬂuorescent speckle microscopy . Biophys J 84 : 3336 – 3352 , 2003 . 249 . Prass M , Jacobson K , Mogilner A , Radmacher M . Direct measurement of the lamelli - podial protrusive force in a migrating cell . J Cell Biol 174 : 767 – 772 , 2006 . 250 . Pring M , Weber A , Bubb M . Proﬁlin - actin complexes directly elongate actin ﬁlaments at the barbed end . Biochemistry 31 : 1827 – 1836 , 1992 . 251 . ProchniewiczE , JansonN , ThomasDD , DelaCruzEM . Coﬁlinincreasesthetorsional ﬂexibility and dynamics of actin ﬁlaments . J Mol Biol 353 : 990 – 1000 , 2005 . 252 . PujolT , duRoureO , FermigierM , HeuvinghJ . Impactofbranchingontheelasticityof actin networks . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 : 10364 – 10369 , 2012 . 253 . RaucherD , SheetzMP . Cellspreadingandlamellipodialextensionrateisregulatedby membrane tension . J Cell Biol 148 : 127 – 136 , 2000 . 254 . Revenu C , Athman R , Robine S , Louvard D . The co - workers of actin ﬁlaments : from cell structures to signals . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 5 : 635 – 646 , 2004 . 255 . Reymann AC , Boujemaa - Paterski R , Martiel JL , Guérin C , Cao W , Chin HF , De La Cruz EM , Théry M , Blanchoin L . Actin network architecture can determine myosin motor activity . Science 336 : 1310 – 1314 , 2012 . 256 . Reymann AC , Martiel JL , Cambier T , Blanchoin L , Boujemaa - Paterski R , Théry M . Nucleation geometry governs ordered actin networks structures . Nat Mat 9 : 827 – 832 , 2010 . 257 . Reymann AC , Suarez C , Guerin C , Martiel JL , Staiger CJ , Blanchoin L , Boujemaa - PaterskiR . Turnoverofbranchedactinﬁlamentnetworksbystochasticfragmentation with ADF / coﬁlin . Mol Biol Cell 22 : 2541 – 2550 , 2011 . 258 . Ridley AJ . Life at the leading edge . Cell 145 : 1012 – 1022 , 2011 . 259 . Risca VI , Wang EB , Chaudhuri O , Chia JJ , Geissler PL , Fletcher DA . Actin ﬁlament curvature biases branching direction . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 : 2913 – 2918 , 2012 . 260 . RobinsonRC , TurbedskyK , KaiserDA , MarchandJB , HiggsHN , ChoeS , PollardTD . Crystal structure of Arp2 / 3 complex . Science 294 : 1679 – 1684 , 2001 . 261 . Rohatgi R , Ma L , Miki H , Lopez M , Kirchausen H , Takenawa T , Kirschner M . The interactionbetweenN - WaspandtheArp2 / 3complexlinksCdc42 - dependentsignals to actin assembly . Cell 97 : 221 – 231 , 1999 . 262 . Roland J , Berro J , Michelot A , Blanchoin L , Martiel JL . Stochastic severing of actin ﬁlaments by actin depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin controls the emergence of a steady dynamical regime . Biophys J 94 : 2082 – 2094 , 2008 . 263 . RomeroS , GromponeG , CarayolN , MounierJ , GuadagniniS , PrevostMC , Sansonetti PJ , TranVanNhieuG . ATP - mediatedErk1 / 2activationstimulatesbacterialcaptureby ﬁlopodia , which precedes Shigella invasion of epithelial cells . Cell Host Microbe 9 : 508 – 519 , 2011 . 264 . Romero S , Le Clainche C , Didry D , Egile C , Pantaloni D , Carlier MF . Formin is a processive motor that requires proﬁlin to accelerate actin assembly and associated ATP hydrolysis . Cell 119 : 419 – 429 , 2004 . 265 . Rottner K , Behrendt B , Small JV , Wehland J . VASP dynamics during lamellipodia protrusion . Nat Cell Biol 1 : 321 – 322 , 1999 . 266 . RottyJD , WuC , BearJE . Newinsightsintotheregulationandcellularfunctionsofthe Arp2 / 3 complex . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 14 : 7 – 12 , 2013 . 267 . Roux A , Cuvelier D , Nassoy P , Prost J , Bassereau P , Goud B . Role of curvature and phase transition in lipid sorting and ﬁssion of membrane tubules . EMBO J 24 : 1537 – 1545 , 2005 . 268 . Ryan GL , Watanabe N , Vavylonis D . Image analysis tools to quantify cell shape and protein dynamics near the leading edge . Cell Struct Funct 38 : 1 – 7 , 2013 . 269 . Sahai E , Marshall CJ . Differing modes of tumour cell invasion have distinct requirements forRho / ROCKsignallingandextracellularproteolysis . NatCellBiol 5 : 711 – 719 , 2003 . BLANCHOIN ET AL . 261 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 270 . Salbreaux G , Charras G , Paluch E . Actin cortex mechanics and cellular morphogene - sis . Trends Cell Biol 22 : 536 – 545 , 2012 . 271 . Samuel MS , Lopez JI , McGhee EJ , Croft DR , Strachan D , Timpson P , Munro J , Schröder E , Zhou J , Brunton VG , Barker N , Clevers H , Sansom OJ , Anderson KI , WeaverVM , OlsonMF . Actomyosin - mediatedcellulartensiondrivesincreasedtissue stiffness and (cid:5) - catenin activation to induce epidermal hyperplasia and tumor growth . Cancer Cell 19 : 776 – 791 , 2011 . 272 . Sanz - Moreno V , Gaggioli C , Yeo M , Albrengues J , Wallberg F , Viros A , Hooper S , Mitter R , Féral Chloé C , Cook M , Larkin J , Marais R , Meneguzzi G , Sahai E , Marshall Chris J . ROCK and JAK1 signaling cooperate to control actomyosin contractility in tumor cells and stroma cancer . Cell 20 : 229 – 245 , 2011 . 273 . Sanz - Moreno V , Marshall CJ . The plasticity of cytoskeletal dynamics underlying neo - plastic cell migration . Curr Opin Cell Biol 22 : 690 – 696 , 2010 . 274 . Sarmiento C , Wang W , Dovas A , Yamaguchi H , Sidani M , El - Sibai M , DesMarais V , Holman HA , Kitchen S , Backer JM , Alberts AS , Condeelis J . WASP family members and formin proteins coordinate regulation of cell protrusions in carcinoma cells . J Cell Biol 180 : 1245 – 1260 , 2008 . 275 . Sato M , Leimbach G , Schwarz WH , Pollard TD . Mechanical properties of actin . J Biol Chem 260 : 8585 – 8592 , 1985 . 276 . Schirenbeck A , Arasada R , Bretschneider T , Stradal T , Schleicher M , Faix J . The bundling activity of vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein is required for ﬁlopodium formation . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 7694 – 7699 , 2006 . 277 . Schmoller KM , Lieleg O , Bausch AR . Cross - linking molecules modify composite actin networks independently . Phys Rev Lett 101 : 118102 , 2008 . 278 . Schmoller KM , Semmrich C , Bausch AR . Slow down of actin depolymerization by cross - linking molecules . J Struct Biol 173 : 350 – 357 , 2011 . 279 . Schönichen A , Mannherz HG , Behrmann E , Mazur AJ , Kühn S , Silván U , Schoenen - bergerCA , FacklerOT , RaunserS , DehmeltL , GeyerM . FHOD1isacombinedactin ﬁlament capping and bundling factor that selectively associates with actin arcs and stress ﬁbers . J Cell Sci 126 : 1891 – 1901 , 2013 . 280 . Schoumacher M , Goldman RD , Louvard D , Vignjevic DM . Actin , microtubules , and vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments cooperate for elongation of invadopodia . J Cell Biol 189 : 541 – 556 , 2010 . 281 . Schwarz US , Gardel ML . United we stand : integrating the actin cytoskeleton and cell - matrixadhesionsincellularmechanotransduction . JCellSci 125 : 3051 – 3060 , 2012 . 282 . Sedeh RS , Fedorov AA , Fedorov EV , Ono S , Matsumura F , Almo SC , Bathe M . Structure , evolutionary conservation , and conformational dynamics of Homo sapiens fascin - 1 , an F - actin crosslinking protein . J Mol Biol 400 : 589 – 604 , 2010 . 283 . Sedzinski J , Biro M , Oswald A , Tinevez JY , Salbreaux G , Paluch E . Polar actomyosin contractility destabilizes the position of the cytokinetic furrow . Nature 476 : 462 – 466 , 2011 . 284 . SenguptaP , VanEngelenburgS , Lippincott - SchwartzJ . Visualizingcellstructureandfunc - tionwithpoint - localizationsuperresolutionimaging . DevCell 23 : 1092 – 1102 , 2012 . 285 . Sept D , Elcock AH , McCammon JA . Computer simulations of actin polymerization can explain barbed - pointed end asymmetry . J Mol Biol 294 : 1181 – 1189 , 1999 . 286 . ShemeshT , BershadskyAD , KozlovMM . Physicalmodelforself - organizationofactin cytoskeleton and adhesion complexes at the cell front . Biophys J 102 : 1746 – 1756 , 2012 . 287 . Shemesh T , Verkhovsky AB , Svitkina TM , Bershadsky AD , Kozlov MM . Role of focal adhesions and mechanical stresses in the formation and progression of the lamellum interface . Biophys J 97 : 1254 – 1264 , 2009 . 288 . Sirotkin V , Berro J , Macmillan K , Zhao L , Pollard TD . Quantitative analysis of the mechanismofendocyticactinpatchassemblyanddisassemblyinﬁssionyeast . MolBiol Cell 21 : 2894 – 2904 , 2010 . 289 . SkauCT , CoursonDS , BestulAJ , WinkelmanJD , RockRS , SirotkinV , KovarDR . Actin ﬁlamentbundlingbyﬁmbrinisimportantforendocytosis , cytokinesis , andpolarization in ﬁssion yeast . J Biol Chem 286 : 26964 – 26977 , 2011 . 290 . Small JV , Herzog M , Anderson K . Actin ﬁlament organization in the ﬁsh keratocyte lamellipodium . J Cell Biol 129 : 1275 – 1286 , 1995 . 291 . Small JV , Winkler C , Vinzenz M , Schmeiser C . Reply : Visualizing branched actin ﬁla - ments in lamellipodia by electron tomography . Nat Cell Biol 13 : 1013 – 1014 , 2011 . 292 . Smith BA , Daugherty - Clarke K , Goode BL , Gelles J . Pathway of actin ﬁlament branch formationbyArp2 / 3complexrevealedbysingle - moleculeimaging . ProcNatlAcadSci USA 110 : 1285 – 1290 , 2013 . 293 . Smith MB , Kiuchi T , Watanabe N , Vavylonis D . Distributed actin turnover in the lamellipodium and FRAP kinetics . Biophys J 104 : 247 – 257 , 2013 . 294 . Staiger CJ , Blanchoin L . Actin dynamics : old friends with new stories . Curr Opin Plant Biol 9 : 554 – 562 , 2006 . 295 . Staiger CJ , Sheahan MB , Khurana P , Wang X , McCurdy DW , Blanchoin L . Actin ﬁlament dynamics are dominated by rapid growth and severing activity in the Arabi - dopsis cortical array . J Cell Biol 184 : 269 – 280 , 2009 . 296 . Stewart MP , Helenius J , Toyoda Y , Ramanathan SP , Muller DJ , Hyman AA . Hydro - static pressure and the actomyosin cortex drive mitotic cell rounding . Nature 469 : 226 – 230 , 2011 . 297 . Stossel TP , Condeelis J , Cooley L , Hartwig JH , Noegel A , Schleicher M , Shapiro SS . Filamins as integrators of cell mechanics and signalling . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2 : 138 – 145 , 2001 . 298 . Streichfuss M , Erbs F , Uhrig K , Kurre R , Clemen AE , Bohm CH , Haraszti T , Spatz JP . Measuring forces between two single actin ﬁlaments during bundle formation . Nano letters 11 : 3676 – 3680 , 2011 . 299 . StrickerJ , FalzoneT , GardelML . MechanicsoftheF - actincytoskeleton . JBiomech 43 : 9 – 14 , 2010 . 300 . Suarez C , Roland J , Boujemaa - Paterski R , Kang H , McCullough BR , Reymann AC , GuerinC , MartielJL , DelaCruzEM , BlanchoinL . Coﬁlintunesthenucleotidestateof actin ﬁlaments and severs at bare and decorated segment boundaries . Curr Biol 21 : 862 – 868 , 2011 . 301 . Suei S , Plastino J , Kreplak L . Fascin and VASP synergistically increase the Young’s modulus of actin comet tails . J Struct Biol 177 : 40 – 45 , 2012 . 302 . SueiS , SeyanR , NogueraP , ManziJ , PlastinoJ , KreplakL . ThemechanicalroleofVASP in an Arp2 / 3 - complex - based motility assay . J Mol Biol 413 : 573 – 583 , 2011 . 303 . SuraneniP , RubinsteinB , UnruhJR , DurninM , HaneinD , LiR . TheArp2 / 3complexis required for lamellipodia extension and directional ﬁbroblast cell migration . J Cell Biol 197 : 239 – 251 , 2012 . 304 . Svitkina TM , Borisy GC . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin in dendriticorganizationandtreadmillingofactinﬁlamentarrayinlamellipodia . JCellBiol 145 : 1009 – 1026 , 1999 . 305 . SvitkinaTM , BulanovaEA , ChagaOY , VignjevicDM , KojimaS , VasilievJM , BorisyGG . Mechanism of ﬁlopodia intitiation by reorganization of a dendritic network . J Cell Biol 160 : 409 – 421 , 2003 . 306 . Svitkina TM , Verkhovsky AB , McQuade KM , Borisy GG . Analysis of the actin - myosin II system in ﬁsh epidermal keratocytes : mechanism of cell body translocation . J Cell Biol 139 : 397 – 415 , 1997 . 307 . Sykes C , Plastino J . Actin ﬁlaments up against a wall . Nature 464 : 365 – 366 , 2010 . 308 . TangH , LiA , BiJ , VeltmanDM , ZechT , SpenceHJ , YuX , TimpsonP , InsallRH , Frame MC , Machesky LM . Loss of Scar / WAVE complex promotes N - WASP and FAK - de - pendent invasion . Curr Biol 23 : 107 – 117 , 2013 . 309 . Taunton J , Rowning BA , Coughlin ML , Wu M , Moon RT , Mitchison TJ , Larabell CA . Actin - dependent propulsion of endosomes and lysosomes by recruitment of N - WASP . J Cell Biol 148 : 519 – 530 , 2000 . 310 . Theriot JA , Mitchison TJ . Actin microﬁlament dynamics in locomoting cells . Nature 352 : 126 – 131 , 1991 . 311 . Thery M , Pepin A , Dressaire E , Chen Y , Bornens M . Cell distribution of stress ﬁbres in response to the geometry of the adhesive environment . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 63 : 341 – 355 , 2006 . 312 . Thoresen T , Lenz M , Gardel ML . Reconstitution of contractile actomyosin bundles . Biophys J 100 : 2698 – 2705 , 2011 . ACTIN DYNAMICS , ARCHITECTURE , AND MECHANICS 262 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 313 . Thoresen T , Lenz M , Gardel ML . Thick ﬁlament length and isoform composition deter - mineself - organizedcontractileunitsinactomyosinbundles . BiophysJ 104 : 655 – 665 , 2013 . 314 . Tilney LG , Portnoy DA . Actin ﬁlaments and the growth , movement , and spread of the intracellularbacterialparasite , Listeriamonocytogenes . JCellBiol 109 : 1597 – 1608 , 1989 . 315 . Tojkander S , Gateva G , Schevzov G , Hotulainen P , Naumanen P , Martin C , Gunning PW , Lappalainen P . A molecular pathway for myosin II recruitment to stress ﬁbers . Curr Biol 21 : 539 – 550 , 2011 . 316 . TrichetL , SykesC , PlastinoJ . Relaxingtheactincytoskeletonforadhesionandmove - ment with Ena / VASP . J Cell Biol 181 : 19 – 25 , 2008 . 317 . Tseng Y , Wirtz D . Dendritic branching and homogenization of actin networks medi - ated by Arp2 / 3 complex . Phys Rev Lett 93 : 258101 – 258103 , 2004 . 318 . Upadhyaya A , Chabot JR , Andreeva A , Samadani A , van Oudenaarden A . Probing polymerization forces by using actin - propelled lipid vesicles . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100 : 4521 – 4526 , 2003 . 319 . Urban E , Jacob S , Nemethova M , Resch GP , Small JV . Electron tomography reveals unbranchednetworksofactinﬁlamentsinlamellipodia . NatCellBiol 12 : 429 – 435 , 2010 . 320 . Vallotton P , Danuser G , Bohnet S , Meister JJ , Verkhovsky AB . Tracking retrograde ﬂow in keratocytes : news from the front . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 1223 – 1231 , 2005 . 321 . Versaevel M , Grevesse T , Gabriele S . Spatial coordination between cell and nuclear shape within micropatterned endothelial cells . Nat Commun 3 : 671 , 2012 . 322 . Vidali L , van Gisbergen PA , Guerin C , Franco P , Li M , Burkart GM , Augustine RC , BlanchoinL , BezanillaM . Rapidformin - mediatedactin - ﬁlamentelongationisessential for polarized plant cell growth . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 : 13341 – 13346 , 2009 . 323 . VignjevicD , PeloquinJ , BorisyGG . Invitroassemblyofﬁlopodia - likebundles . Methods Enzymol 406 : 727 – 739 , 2006 . 324 . Vignjevic D , Yarar D , Welch MD , Peloquin J , Svitkina T , Borisy GG . Formation of ﬁlopodia - likebundlesinvitrofromadendriticnetwork . JCellBiol 160 : 951 – 962 , 2003 . 325 . VinsonVK , DeLaCruzEM , HiggsHN , PollardTD . Interactionsof Acanthamoeba proﬁlin withactinandnucleotidesboundtoactin . Biochemistry 37 : 10871 – 10880 , 1998 . 326 . VinzenzM , NemethovaN , SchurF , MuellerJ , NaritaA , UrbanE , WinklerC , SchmeiserC , KoestlerSA , RottnerK , ReschGP , MaedaY , SmallJV . Actinbranchingintheinitiationand maintenanceoflamellipodia . JCellSci 125 : 2775 – 2785 , 2012 . 327 . Vogel SK , Petrasek Z , Heinemann F , Schwille P . Myosin motors fragment and com - pact membrane - bound actin ﬁlaments . Elife 2 : e00116 , 2013 . 328 . Vonna L , Wiedemann A , Aepfelbacher M , Sackmann E . Micromechanics of ﬁlopodia mediatedcaptureofpathogensbymacrophages . EurBiophysJ 36 : 145 – 151 , 2007 . 329 . WachsstockDH , SchwartzWH , PollardTD . Afﬁnityofalpha - actininforactindeterminesthe structureandmechanicalpropertiesofactinﬁlamentgels . BiophysJ 65 : 205 – 214 , 1993 . 330 . Wachsstock DH , Schwarz WH , Pollard TD . Cross - linker dynamics determine the mechanical properties of actin gels . Biophys J 66 : 801 – 809 , 1994 . 331 . Wagner B , Tharmann R , Haase I , Fischer M , Bausch AR . Cytoskeletal polymer net - works : the molecular structure of cross - linkers determines macroscopic properties . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 13974 – 13978 , 2006 . 332 . WatanabeN , MitchisonTJ . Single - moleculespeckleanalysisofactinﬁlamentturnover in lamellipodia . Science 295 : 1083 – 1086 , 2002 . 333 . Wegner A , Engel J . Kinetics of the cooperative association of actin to actin ﬁlaments . Biophys Chem 3 : 215 – 225 , 1975 . 334 . WeichselJ , UrbanE , SmallJV , SchwarzUS . Reconstructingtheorientationdistribution ofactinﬁlamentsinthelamellipodiumofmigratingkeratocytesfromelectronmicros - copy tomography data . Cytometry Part A 81 : 496 – 507 , 2012 . 335 . Weinberg J , Drubin DG . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in budding yeast . Trends Cell Biol 22 : 1 – 13 , 2012 . 336 . Weiner OD , Marganski WA , Wu LF , Altschuler SJ , Kirschner MW . An actin - based wave generator organizes cell motility . PLoS Biol 5 : e221 , 2007 . 337 . Wen Q , Janmey PA . Polymer physics of the cytoskeleton . Curr Opin Solid State Mater Sci 15 : 177 – 182 , 2011 . 338 . Wiesner S , Helfer E , Didry D , Ducouret G , Lafuma F , Carlier MF , Pantaloni D . A biomimeticmotilityassayprovidesinsightintothemechanismofactin - basedmotility . J Cell Biol 160 : 387 – 398 , 2003 . 339 . Wilson CA , Tsuchida MA , Allen GM , Barnhart EL , Applegate KT , Yam PT , Ji L , Keren K , Danuser G , Theriot JA . Myosin II contributes to cell - scale actin network treadmill - ing through network disassembly . Nature 465 : 373 – 377 , 2010 . 340 . Wirtz D . Particle - tracking microrheology of living cells : principles and applications . Annu Rev Biophys 38 : 301 – 326 , 2009 . 341 . Wolf K , Mazo I , Leung H , Engelke K , von Andrian UH , Deryugina EI , Strongin AY , Bröcker EB , Freidl P . Compensation mechanism in tumor cell migration : mesenchy - mal - amoeboid transition after blocking of pericellular proteolysis . J Cell Biol 160 : 267 – 277 , 2003 . 342 . Wu C , Asokan SB , Berginski ME , Haynes EM , Sharpless NE , Grifﬁth JD , Gomez SM , BearJE . Arp2 / 3iscriticalforlamellipodiaandresponsetoextracellularmatrixcuesbut is dispensable for chemotaxis . Cell 148 : 973 – 987 , 2012 . 343 . XuJ , SchwarzWH , KasJA , StosselTP , JanmeyPA , PollardTD . Mechanicalproperties of actin ﬁlament networks depend on preparation , polymerization conditions , and storage of actin monomers . Biophys J 74 : 2731 – 2740 , 1998 . 344 . Xu K , Babcock HP , Zhuang X . Dual - objective STORM reveals three - dimensional ﬁlament organization in the actin cytoskeleton . Nat Meth 9 : 185 – 188 , 2012 . 345 . Yang C , Svitkina T . Filopodia initiation focus on the Arp2 / 3 complex and formins . Cell Adh Migr 5 : 402 – 408 , 2011 . 346 . Yang C , Svitkina T . Visualizing branched actin ﬁlaments in lamellipodia by electron tomography . Nat Cell Biol 13 : 1012 – 1013 , 2011 . 347 . Ydenberg CA , Padrick SB , Sweeney MO , Gandhi M , Sokolova O , Goode BL . GMF severs actin - Arp2 / 3 complex branch junctions by a coﬁlin - like mechanism . Curr Biol 23 : 1037 – 1045 , 2013 . 348 . Yi K , Li R . Actin cytoskeleton in cell polarity and asymmetric division during mouse oocyte maturation . Cytoskeleton 69 : 727 – 737 , 2012 . 349 . Yoshida K , Soldati T . Dissection of amoeboid movement into two mechanically dis - tinct modes . J Cell Sci 119 : 3833 – 3844 , 2006 . 350 . ZanerKS , StosselTP . PhysicalbasisoftherheologicpropertiesofF - actin . JBiolChem 258 : 11004 – 11009 , 1983 . 351 . Zhu J , Mogilner A . Mesoscopic model of actin - based propulsion . PLoS Comput Biol 8 : e1002764 , 2013 . 352 . Zigmond SH , Evangelista M , Boone C , Yang C , Dar AC , Sicheri F , Forkey J , Pring M . Forminleakycapallowselongationinthepresenceoftightcappingproteins . CurrBiol 13 : 1820 – 1823 , 2003 . 353 . Zimmermann J , Brunner C , Enculescu M , Goegler M , Ehrlicher A , Käs J , Falcke M . Actin ﬁlament elasticity and retrograde ﬂow shape the force - velocity relation of mo - tile cells . Biophys J 102 : 287 – 295 , 2012 . 354 . Zumdieck A , Kruse K , Bringmann H , Hyman AA , Jülicher F . Stress generation and ﬁlament turnover during actin ring constriction . PloS One 2 : e696 , 2007 . BLANCHOIN ET AL . 263 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 94 (cid:127) JANUARY 2014 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on J u l y 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m