insight review articles 194 NATURE | VOL 413 | 13 SEPTEMBER 2001 | www . nature . com M echanical forces impinge on us from all directions , transmitting valuable information about the external environment . Mechanosensory cells transduce these mechanical forces and transmit this sensory information to the brain . Hearing , touch , sense of acceleration — each informs us about what is nearby and how we are moving relative to our surroundings . An organism detects sensory information with a variety of cells that respond to force . Although different structurally , hair cells within our ear , cutaneous mechanoreceptors of our skin , and invertebrate mechanoreceptors share many mechanistic features ; whether mutual molecular mechanisms underlie these similar transduction mechanisms remains to be determined . Here we review mechanisms of mechanosensory transduction by invertebrates and vertebrates , highlighting the increasing molecular understanding of transduction in each system . General features of mechanotransduction As with most sensory systems , mechanosensory cells place a premium on speed and sensitivity . A common theme is for mechanical forces to be directed to specific ion channels , which can open rapidly and amplify the signal by permitting entry of large numbers of ions . Mechanical forces can also affect intracellular events in cells — such as gene transcrip - tion — directly through the cell surface and cytoskeleton , although such mechanisms typically are not used for rapid sensory transduction . Speed requires that mechanical forces be funnelled directly to transduction channels , without intervening sec - ond messengers . Sensitivity requires that the maximal amount of stimulus energy be directed to the transduction channel . A general model — borrowed from worm touch receptors 1 , 2 and hair cells 3 — that applies to many mechanosensory transduction systems is illustrated in Fig . 1 ; its key feature is a transduction channel that detects deflection of an external structure relative to an internal structure , such as the cytoskeleton . Such a deflection could take the form of deformation of the skin , oscillation of a hair cell’s hair bundle , or vibration of a fly’s bristle . Deflection changes tension in all elements of the system , and the transduction channel responds by changing its open probability . This general mechanism also explains other features that are common to mechanosensory cells , such as adaptation . Vestibular hair cells , for example , must reject the constant 1 - g gravitational force to detect stimuli one - millionth that size 4 . During adaptation to a sustained stimulus , where there is a constant relationship between external and internal structures , tension applied to the transduction channel declines through a readjustment of the machinery . Adaptation could occur through deformation of the external coupling structure , lengthening of the external or internal anchors , slipping of the internal anchor relative to the cytoskeleton , or changes within the channel Molecular basis of mechanosensory transduction Peter G . Gillespie & Richard G . Walker Oregon Hearing Research Center and Vollum Institute , Oregon Health & Science University , Portland , Oregon 97201 , USA ( e - mail : gillespp @ ohsu . edu ) Mechanotransduction — a cell’s conversion of a mechanical stimulus into an electrical signal — reveals vital features of an organism’s environment . From hair cells and skin mechanoreceptors in vertebrates , to bristle receptors in flies and touch receptors in worms , mechanically sensitive cells are essential in the life of an organism . The scarcity of these cells and the uniqueness of their transduction mechanisms have conspired to slow molecular characterization of the ensembles that carry out mechanotransduction . But recent progress in both invertebrates and vertebrates is beginning to reveal the identities of proteins essential for transduction . Extracellular link Transductionchannel Intracellular link Membrane Cytoskeleton Deflection Extracellular anchor Figure 1 General features of mechanosensory transduction . A transduction channel is anchored by intracellular and extracellular anchors to the cytoskeleton and to an extracellular structure to which forces are applied . The transduction channel responds to tension in the system , which is increased by net displacements between intracellular and extracellular structures . © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd itself . Appropriately , all of these structures and interactions are amenable to molecular characterization . Invertebrate mechanoreceptor models Interesting in their own right , invertebrate mechanoreceptors have also attracted considerable attention because they can be readily approached with genetics . The two most utilized invertebrate models — the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans and fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster — have yielded candidate transduction channels , as well as possible accessory molecules . Other kingdoms possess mechanoreceptors too . Although not a mechanosensory transduction channel in the sense we discuss here , the cloned and reconstituted MscL channel of Escherichia coli responds unequivocally to membrane tension in the absence of other proteins 5 . The discovery of these channels in archaebacteria 6 highlights the ancient nature of mechanotransduction and its critical role in all cells . Although no MscL homologues have been identified in eukaryotes , the ability to determine the functional consequences of structural perturbations should permit an unparalleled view of a mechanically gated channel . Touch mechanotransduction in C . elegans A simple and ingenious genetic screen identified C . elegans mutants ( mec mutants ) that were defective in mechanosensation 7 , 8 . Mutant worms that responded inappropriately or not at all to the simple touch of an eyelash were selected and most of the responsible genes have been identified . Although some of the gene products participate in development of the six mechanosensory touch neurons in the worm 9 , 10 , most of the gene products seem to constitute a transduction machinery ( Fig . 2 ) . The identities and interactions of cloned mutant genes suggest a mechanoreceptive complex , with a mechanically sensitive ion channel connected to both intracellular cytoskeletal components and extracellular matrix proteins ( including the mantle surmounting the touch - receptor process ) to form a transduction apparatus ( reviewed in refs 1 , 2 ) . Consistent with the general model for a mechanotransduction apparatus ( Fig . 1 ) , which requires an intra - and extracellularly tethered channel , several of the mec genes encode components of the cytoskeleton , the extracellular matrix , or the links to them ( Fig . 2 ) . The genes mec - 7 and mec - 12 encode (cid:2) - and (cid:3) - tubulins 11 , 12 , which constitute the 15 - protofilament microtubules in sensory dendrites of touch neurons . Perhaps serving as a linker between these microtubules and a transduction channel , the MEC - 2 protein is expressed exclusively by touch - receptor neurons and shows homolo - gy to stomatin , an integral membrane protein found in many cell types , which associates with the cytoskeleton and is involved in ionic homeostasis of the cell 13 . MEC - 5 is a specialized collagen - like mole - cule secreted by the hypodermal cells that surround the receptor process and may be an extracellular anchor for the transduction apparatus 14 . The multidomain MEC - 9 protein is expressed and secreted by the sensory neurons 14 and interacts genetically with MEC - 5 and the proposed transduction channel MEC - 4 ( ref . 15 ) , suggesting that they function together as part of the extracellular linkages of the transduction machinery . Transduction by DEG / ENaCs The most intriguing set of genes to come from the screens for mec mutants were the degenerins ( DEGs ) , which encode ion channels related to vertebrate epithelial sodium channels ( ENaCs ) responsible for Na + adsorption ( reviewed in ref . 16 ; see Box 1 ) . Most mutations in the C . elegans DEG genes mec - 4 and mec - 10 render the animal insen - sitive to light touch , whereas dominant gain - of - function mutations in mec - 4 and mec - 10 , as well as unc - 8 and deg - 1 , cause degeneration of the touch neurons ( hence the familial name ) , probably by causing the channels to be open constantly 17 . Because of their critical role in the touch - receptor neurons , DEGs have been proposed to act as mechanosensory transduction channels or subunits thereof 18 . Attempts to elicit mechanically induced currents from heterologous cells expressing these channels have been unsuccessful 19 , although suction - induced currents have been observed in patches containing the related vertebrate ENaC (cid:3) - subunit 20 . It is possible that DEGs might require specific interactions with both intracellular and extracellular tethers and even other channel subunits for mechanical gating . Confirmation of these molecules as transduction insight review articles NATURE | VOL 413 | 13 SEPTEMBER 2001 | www . nature . com 195 Figure 2 C . elegans touch - receptor structure and transduction model . a , View of C . elegans showing positions of mechanoreceptors . AVM , anterior ventral microtubule cell ; ALML / R , anterior lateral microtubule cell left / right ; PVM , posterior ventral microtubule cell ; PLML / R , posterior lateral microtubule cell left / right . b , Electron micrograph of a touch - receptor neuron process . Mechanotransduction may ensue with a net deflection of the microtubule array relative to the mantle , a deflection detected by the transduction channel . Arrow , 15 - protofilament microtubules ; arrowhead , mantle . Modified from ref . 3 . c , Proposed molecular model for touch receptor . Hypothetical locations of mec proteins are indicated . c Extracellular anchor ( MEC - 5 ) Extracellular link ( MEC - 9 ) Transduction channel ( MEC - 4 , MEC - 6 ? , MEC - 10 ) Stomatin - like ( MEC - 2 ) Microtubule ( MEC - 7 , MEC - 12 ) b Cuticle Hypodermis a ALML ALMR Cuticle Mantle Neuronalprocess Hypodermis PVM AVM PLML PLMR © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd channels , however , awaits electrophysiological recording of receptor currents from mutant touch neurons . Given the importance of DEG / ENaC family members in C . elegans mechanoreceptors , a role for these channels in the mechani - cal senses of other organisms seems likely . For example , there are at least 14 members of DEG / ENaC gene family in the fly genome , two of which , ripped pocket ( rpk ) and pickpocket ( ppk ) , have been character - ized 21 . There are currently no described mutants in either rpk or ppk with which to evaluate the role of these channels in the fly , although restricted expression of PPK to mechanosensory neurons is suggestive of a role in mechanosensation . Vertebrates also have a large complement of DEG / ENaC channels ( Box 1 ) ; the human genome encodes at least a dozen such genes . More recent research on these channels has implicated them in various mechanosensory modalities . For example , the (cid:4) - subunit of ENaC is present in sensory endings of baroreceptors , the mechanosensory neurons that sense blood pressure 22 , and mechani - cally stimulated baroreceptor activity is blocked by benzamil , an amiloride analogue that also blocks ENaCs 22 . Another member of the DEG / ENaC superfamily , brain sodium channel 1 (cid:3) ( BNC1 (cid:3) ) , a splice variant of BNC1 , is expressed in dorsal root ganglia and transported to a number of cutaneous mechanosensory terminals 23 . BNC1 (cid:3) is found in most identified cutaneous mechanoreceptors , and not in endings specialized for other sensory modalities , indicating a particular role in touch . To evaluate the role of BNC1 in touch sensation , mechanorecep - tor responses were examined in mice whose BNC1 gene had been deleted 24 . In homozygous mutant mice , rapidly adapting neurons fired only about half the number of action potentials as wild - type mice in response to a 20 - (cid:5) m stimulus . Furthermore , slowly adapting neurons from BNC1 - null mutants showed a modest decrease in sensitivity . One might expect that deleting a transduction channel or one of its subunits from the transduction complex might produce a more profound phenotype — BNC1 - null neurons still responded to stimuli and there were no obvious behavioural deficits — but other members of this family may have compensated for the loss of BNC1 . Indeed , the (cid:2) - and (cid:4) - subunits of ENaC have been recently localized to mechanoreceptor terminals in the skin 25 , 26 . Unfortunately , mice bearing targeted disruptions of these two genes die of defects in elec - trolyte metabolism within a few days of birth ( reviewed in ref . 27 ) , making analysis of their mechanoreceptor function difficult . Drosophila mechanotransduction When Kernan and colleagues screened for mechanosensory mutants in fruitflies using an adaptation of the C . elegans screen 28 , they put Drosophila on the mechanosensory map . Renowned and increasing - ly powerful genetic tools coupled with the ability to record mechanosensory receptor potentials and currents from bristles make Drosophila a consummate model system for dissecting mechanosen - sation . The fly mechanosensory system comprises two sets of mechanoreceptors . Type I sensory organs have one to three sensory neurons , each with a single ciliated sensory dendrite , supported by accessory cells ( Fig . 3 ) , whereas type II mechanoreceptor neurons have multiple nonciliated dendrites and no accessory cells . Type I mechanoreceptors include bristle mechanoreceptors , chordotonal organs such as the Johnston’s organ ( the fly’s antennal hearing appa - ratus ) and campaniform sensilla , which are featured prominently in halteres , the club - shaped mechanoreceptive structures that relay information about wing beat . Because the large bristles are hollow and contain a conductive high - K + endolymph ( similar to the endolymph of vertebrate hearing and vestibular organs ) that also bathes the apical surface of the sensory epithelium , electrical access to the tiny sensory dendrite can be gained by snipping the bristle and placing a recording ( and stimulation ) electrode over its cut end 28 , 29 . It is possible to clamp the potential across this sensory epithelium and record mechanically gated transduction currents 29 . To test whether the larval mutants identified by the behavioural screen were defective in the transduction pathway , mechanoreceptor potentials were recorded from mutant adult sensory bristles and compared with those from the bristles of wild - type flies . A number of the larval touch - insensitive mutants developed into profoundly uncoordinated adults and showed either a reduced mechanoreceptor potential ( remp mutants ) or no mechanoreceptor potential ( nomp mutants ) at all . Evolution has apparently conserved the transduction 196 NATURE | VOL 413 | 13 SEPTEMBER 2001 | www . nature . com Members of the growing DEG / ENaC superfamily traverse the membrane twice and have intracellular N and C termini ; a 33 - residue portion of the N terminus is conserved among family members ( reviewed in ref . 16 ) . This domain , which shows similarity to thiol proteases , including the conservation of a catalytic histidine residue , is found near the first transmembrane region and may be important in subunit interactions . A large extracellular loop contains two or three cysteine - rich regions and is followed by the second transmembrane segment , which is thought to function as the channel’s pore . Degenerins . These include mec - 4 and mec - 10 , present in C . elegans touch receptors , as well as unc - 8 , unc - 105 and deg - 1 . Interacting genetically with type IV collagen in C . elegans muscle , unc - 105 might mediate stretch sensitivity in muscle 62 . Certain mutations in these genes cause dominant degenerative cell death , perhaps by constitutive ion - channel activation . Epithelial sodium channels ( ENaCs ) . Also called amiloride - sensitive sodium channels for their sensitivity to this drug , the ENaCs are responsible for Na + resorption in many epithelia , such as the kidney , distal colon , secretory glands and respiratory airways . In addition , the sense of salty taste is mediated by ENaC channels in the fungiform papillae of the tongue ( see review in this issue by Lindemann , pages 219 – 225 ) . The C terminus of ENaCs contains a proline - rich PY domain that mediates regulation of the channels by Nedd4 , a ubiquitin - protein ligase that binds specifically to the PY domain . These molecules form heteromultimeric channels with some combination of (cid:3) - , (cid:2) - , (cid:4) - and (cid:6) - subunits likely in either a tetrameric or octomeric configuration . Acid - sensing ion channels ( ASICs ) . Found in a variety of tissues , ASICs are activated by extracellular protons and may mediate pain induced by acidosis . ASIC1 is activated at relatively high pH levels and inactivates rapidly ; there are two variants , ASIC1a and ASIC1b . ASIC2 also has two variants — ASIC2a , known additionally as BNC1 ( brain sodium channel 1 , sometimes abbreviated BNaC1 ) , and ASIC2b , also known as BNC2 or ASIC - (cid:2) . The BNCs have also been labelled MDEGs ( mammalian degenerins ) , a phylogenetically inappropriate term . ASIC3 was originally named DRASIC ( dorsal - root acid - sensing ion channel ) , although this channel is actually found in many tissues . Drosophila family members . Of the ~ 14 members of DEG / ENaC gene family in the fly genome , only two have been characterized : ripped pocket ( rpk ) and pickpocket ( ppk ) . Because PPK is expressed in peripheral neurons thought to mediate mechanosensation , this channel is a strong transduction - channel candidate . Box 1 DEG / ENaC channels insight review articles © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd mechanism of various mechanosensory modalities in flies , as almost all of the uncoordinated mutants identified in this screen are also deaf 30 . So far , only two of the mutant genes have been identified molecu - larly , nompA 31 and nompC 29 . Like the results from the C . elegans screen , the screen from flies has produced an extracellular - matrix protein and an ion channel ( Fig . 3 ) . The mechanosensory gene nompA encodes a modular protein , secreted by the supporting cells and localized to the extracellular dendritic cap - like structures of type I mechanoreceptors and some chemoreceptors . NompA probably serves as an extracellular mechanical link between the sensory den - drites of type I mechanoreceptors and their associated cuticular structures . It shows similarity to a number of proteins , including the tectorins 32 , extracellular molecules that transmit mechanical stimuli to mechanoreceptive hair cells in the vertebrate auditory system . The potency of coupling electrophysiology with traditional Drosophila genetics was demonstrated in the cloning of the mechanosensory gene nompC 29 . Although three alleles of nompC were severely uncoordinated and showed near - complete abrogation of transduction current , a fourth allele had near wild - type amplitude of response , but noticeably faster adaptation than controls . This indicated that the NompC protein would be intimately involved with the transduction and adaptation process . The Drosophila nompC gene and a closely related C . elegans homologue encode a new and unusual member of the transient receptor potential ( TRP ) family of ion channels ( see review in this issue by Hardie and Raghu , pages 186 – 193 ) . The predicted protein of 1 , 619 amino acids can be divided into two regions : first , an unusual ~ 1 , 150 - amino - acid amino terminus composed of 29 ankyrin repeats , and second , a carboxy - terminal segment with six transmembrane domains , a predicted pore loop , and sequence similarity to TRP channels . Ankyrin repeats are 33 - residue motifs with a conserved backbone and variable residues that mediate specific protein – protein interactions 33 . Ankyrin repeats are found in numerous proteins of widely varying functions and subcellular locations 34 . Other members of the TRP channel family have between one and four ankyrin repeats of unknown function ; that NompC bears 29 such domains suggests that it interacts either very strongly with a small number of partners or less avidly with many molecules . Several lines of evidence led to the conclusion that NompC serves as a mechanosensory transduction channel . ( 1 ) NompC shows simi - larity with other sensory transduction channels in its primary sequence . ( 2 ) Loss - of - function nompC mutants show loss of almost all transduction current , whereas a point mutation in NompC changes the adaptation profile of the transduction current . ( 3 ) The Drosophila nompC gene is expressed specifically in mechanosensory organs . ( 4 ) A C . elegans NompC – GFP fusion construct is expressed in putative mechanosensory neurons at the site of transduction . ( 5 ) The N terminus of NompC is replete with ankyrin domains , a property one might expect of a mechanically tethered transduction channel . Because opening of the transduction channels in fly mechanore - ceptors takes place within 200 (cid:5) s of a mechanical stimulus 29 , fly mechanotransduction seems to take place by direct opening of a mechanically gated conductance without intervening second messengers . Although NompC accounts for ~ 90 % of the transduc - tion current , it is unclear whether the NompC channel is itself mechanically sensitive or instead takes its gating cue from the small mechanically activated current that can be observed in nompC - null traces . NompC would then be serving as an adapting amplifier of the true mechanically gated channel . TRP channels and the closely related cyclic nucleotide - gated and vanilloid - receptor channels are involved or expressed in many senso - ry systems , including phototransduction , olfaction and taste , as well as in the perception of heat , acid and pain ( see accompanying reviews in this issue ) . So the discovery that a member of this superfamily acts as or influences a transduction channel in mechanosensation should not be unexpected . Indeed , TRP family members have also been implicated in mechanotransduction’s sister sense , osmosensation . A C . elegans TRP channel , OSM - 9 , is expressed in dendrites of some cil - iated sensory neurons and is required for osmosensation and nose touch sensation 35 . In addition , a new mammalian member of the vanilloid - receptor family is expressed in osmotically sensitive cells and forms osmotically gated channels when expressed in cells 36 . Cilium - bearing mechanoreceptors in both C . elegans and Drosophila express NompC , whereas the non - ciliated touch - receptor NATURE | VOL 413 | 13 SEPTEMBER 2001 | www . nature . com 197 Figure 3 Drosophila bristle - receptor model . a , Lateral view of D . melanogaster showing the hundreds of bristles that cover the fly’s cuticle . The expanded view of a single bristle indicates the locations of the stereotypical set of cells and structures associated with each mechanosensory organ . Movement of the bristle towards the cuticle of the fly ( arrow ) displaces the dendrite and elicits an excitatory response in the mechanosensory neuron . b , Transmission electron micrograph of an insect mechanosensory bristle showing the insertion of the dendrite at the base of the bristle . The bristle contacts the dendrite ( arrowhead ) so that movement of the shaft of the bristle will be detected by the neuron . c , Proposed molecular model of transduction for ciliated insect mechanoreceptors , with the locations of NompC and NompA indicated . Extracellular anchor ( NompA ) Extracellular link Intracellular link Microtubule c Adaptingtransductionchannel ( NompC ) Non - adapting transductionchannel Adaptationmachinery b a Endolymph Dendrite Socketcell Sheathcell Neuron Shaft Cuticle insight review articles © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd neurons in worms and the type II multiple dendritic neurons of flies instead express members of the DEG / ENaC family . This suggests not only a morphological schism , but also a mechanistic difference between these two kinds of mechanoreceptors . All vertebrate hair cells are endowed with a true cilium , or kinocilium , during the construction of the actin - based hair bundle . Given this odd remnant of ontogeny , it has been speculated that ciliated mechanoreceptors of invertebrates might be related to their once - ciliated vertebrate counterparts . Indeed this relationship extends further to the conser - vation of molecules that control the development of vertebrate and invertebrate mechanoreceptor organs . Lateral inhibition through signalling of the Notch receptor and its ligand Delta controls the cell - fate patterning of both Drosophila mechanoreceptor neurons 37 and vertebrate hair cells 38 . In addition , fly Atonal and its mammalian homologue Math1 also control the specification of cell type . Drosophila atonal mutants are devoid of chordotonal organs ; similarly , Math1 - knockout mice generate no hair cells during development of the sensory epithelium 39 . Their signalling is so similar that Math1 can substitute for Atonal in development of Drosophila mechanoreceptor organs 40 . Although both signalling modalities are found in other cell types , their control over vertebrate and invertebrate mechanoreceptors , as well as the sharing of special - ized sensory structures , suggests that mechanoreceptors evolved prior to the common ancestor of invertebrates and vertebrates and that those mechanoreceptors might share more than just their developmental algorithms . Auditory and vestibular transduction by hair cells Hair cells , the mechanoreceptors of the inner ear , transduce auditory and vestibular stimuli to allow us to hear and sense movements of our head . Jutting apically from a hair cell , the mechanically sensitive hair bundle bends back and forth in response to stimuli that are directed to it . Auditory stimuli induce a vibration of the structure on which the hair cells sit ( the basilar membrane ; Fig . 4 ) . Vestibular stimuli cause displacement of acellular structures overlying the hair cells ( otolithic membrane in the saccule and utricle , responsible for linear - acceleration detection ; cupula in the semicircular canals , responsible for rotational detection ) , resulting in bundle deflection . An excitatory deflection of a hair bundle ( Fig . 4 ) directly opens transduction channels , which admit cations and depolarize the hair cell . Inhibitory deflections close transduction channels and hyperpolarize the cell . These changes in membrane potential in turn increase ( depolarization ) or decrease ( hyperpolarization ) neurotransmitter release from graded synapses on basolateral surfaces of hair cells . Transduction mechanism The gating - spring model 41 successfully describes key biophysical features of mechanical transduction in hair cells . Transduction chan - nels open so fast — within microseconds of a stimulus — that second - messenger cascades cannot have a central role 41 . Instead , elastic gating springs transmit external forces to transduction channels , and the channels’ open probability depends on the tension in these springs . Thus , when tension is high , channels spend most of their time open ; when tension is low , channels close . Although the original formation of the model indicated that the open probability of transduction channels in the absence of any gating - spring tension was < 0 . 0001 ( ref . 3 ) , recent data from auditory hair cells suggest that the zero - tension open probability is 100 - times larger 42 . This debate is relevant to chan - nel identification ; higher open probabilities for the channel in the 198 NATURE | VOL 413 | 13 SEPTEMBER 2001 | www . nature . com Tip link e Transductionchannel Adaptationmotor Opposite stereocilium Actin d Tectorialmembrane Stereocilia c Innerhair cell Outerhair cells Nervefibres Basilarmembrane b Basilar membrane Organ of Corti a Cochlea Semicircularcanals Figure 4 Inner - ear structure and hair - cell transduction model . a , Gross view of part of the inner ear . Sound is transmitted through the external ear to the tympanic membrane ; the stimulus is transmitted through the middle ear to the fluid - filled inner ear . Sound is transduced by the coiled cochlea . b , Cross - section through the cochlear duct . Hair cells are located in the organ of Corti , resting on the basilar membrane . c , Sound causes vibrations of the basilar membrane of the organ of Corti ; because flexible hair - cell stereocilia are coupled to the overlying tectorial membrane , oscillations of the basilar membrane cause back - and - forth deflection of the hair bundles . d , Scanning electron micrograph of hair bundle ( from chicken cochlea ) . Note tip links ( arrows ) . e , Proposed molecular model for hair - cell transduction apparatus . insight review articles © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd absence of external force suggest that channel conductance might be detectable when expressed in a heterologous cell type . The anatomical correlate of the gating spring has long been assumed to be the tip link , a fine extracellular filament that connects adjacent stereocilia along the sensitivity axis 43 . Tip links are in posi - tion to be stretched by excitatory stimuli and slackened by inhibitory ones ( Fig . 4 ) . But high - resolution structural characterization of the tip link has indicated that it might be too stiff to account for the gating spring . Instead , the elastic element within the bundle might reside elsewhere , such as the intracellular filaments at the basal insertion of the tip link 44 . Transduction - channel properties One approach to determining the identity of molecules required for transduction has been to extensively characterize transduction and adaptation , then suggest candidate molecules for the channel or motor . But the transduction channel , a nonselective cation channel 45 , has few properties that distinguish it from other channels . Its conductance is large , ~ 100 pS ( ref . 46 ) , and its permeability to Ca 2 + is substantial 47 . The channel is blocked by relatively low concentra - tions of aminoglycoside antibiotics 48 , amiloride and its derivatives 49 , La 3 + ( ref . 50 ) , tubocurarine 51 , and Ca 2 + - channel antagonists such as D - 600 ( ref . 52 ) and nifedipine 53 . Unfortunately , this inhibition spec - trum does not obviously match any other known channel type and the affinities of these blockers do not allow their use in biochemical isolation of transduction channels from inner - ear tissue . Early hopes that the transduction channel might incorporate the (cid:3) - subunit of the ENaC family were dashed by the persistence of normal transduction in mice lacking this subunit 54 . But the DEG / ENaC family is large , so the hair - cell transduction channel may yet be identified from this family . An alternative candidate is the P2X 2 receptor , a purinergic - receptor channel that is located in hair bundles 55 , although expression of P2X 2 is low 56 at a time when hair cells transduce vigorously 57 . Furthermore , the transduction channel and hair - cell P2X 2 receptor show distinct patterns of blockade by inhibitors 51 . Another possible source for the transduction channel is the TRP family , which includes at least two channels definitely involved in mechanosensation ( NompC in flies and OSM - 9 in worms ) ; the conductance properties of this family certainly could accommodate those of the hair - cell transduction channel 58 . insight review articles NATURE | VOL 413 | 13 SEPTEMBER 2001 | www . nature . com 199 Two forms of adaptation are present in hair cells , each of which can modify the mechanical properties of the bundle ( see figure opposite ) . Fast adaptation is remarkably quick ( a millisecond or less in turtle auditory hair cells 63 ) , requires Ca 2 + ( which enters through open transduction channels ) , and is tuned within individual hair cells , so that cells responding to high sound frequencies adapt more speedily than those tuned to lower frequencies 63 . Fast adaptation correlates with active hair - bundle movements 64 , 65 ; hair bundles respond to a simple stimulus with a complex , active mechanical response . In hair cells of lower vertebrates , a step stimulus near threshold can initiate a bundle response in the opposite direction with sufficient force to move the bundle back to its original position . In vestibular hair cells , a distinct mechanism — negative hair - bundle stiffness — permits oscillatory behaviour that is controlled by the mechanism responsible for slow adaptation , the adaptation motor 66 . A bundle with negative hair - bundle stiffness actually moves farther in response to a stimulus than the size of the stimulus itself . The adaptation motor continuously moves the hair bundle into the range of negative stiffness , triggering bundle oscillations that enable much more sensitive detection of small signals . Ca 2 + - dependent channel closure could act synergistically with negative hair - bundle stiffness to power even larger active bundle movements . Slow adaptation is thought to be mediated by an adaptation motor . Because the force producer of the adaptation motor may be a cluster of myosin molecules 67 , the motor has attracted much attention . The strongest candidate is myosin 1c ( Myo1c ; formerly known as myosin I (cid:2) ) , which is located near stereociliary tips at tip - link ends 67 . Myosin VIIA ( Myo7a ) may also be important in adaptation . In outer hair cells that are genetically deficient in this myosin , large displacements are required to begin to open channels , indicating that these cells lack the force generator that maintains resting tension 68 . Gatingspring Transductionchannel Adaptationmotor a b Positivedeflection Positivedeflection Returnto rest Channelsclose Bundlemovement Climbing adaptation Slippingadaptation Box 2 Figure Hair - cell transduction and adaptation . a , Transduction and fast adaptation . At rest ( left panel ) , transduction channels spend ~ 5 % of the time open , allowing a modest Ca 2 + entry ( pink shading ) . A positive deflection ( middle ) stretches the gating spring ( drawn here as the tip link ) ; the increased tension propagates to the gate of the transduction channel , and channels open fully . The resulting Ca 2 + flowing in through the channels shifts the channels’ open probability to favour channel closure ( right ) . As the gates close , they increase force in the gating spring , which moves the bundle back in the direction of the original stimulus . b , Transduction and slow adaptation . Slow adaptation ensues when the motor ( green oval ) slides down the stereocilium ( lower right ) , allowing channels to close . After the bundle is returned to rest ( lower left ) , gating - spring tension is very low ; adaptation re - establishes tension and returns the channel to the resting state . Box 2 Adaptation by hair cells © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd Adaptation by hair cells Like all other sensory receptors , hair cells respond to sustained stimuli by adapting , which restores their sensitivity to threshold deflections . The mechanisms responsible for adaptation also set the resting tension in gating springs ; the resulting open probability enables maximal sensitivity and high - frequency signal transmis - sion 59 . Properties of adaptation vary substantially from preparation to preparation , and recent data suggest that this arises from differ - ences in hair cells in different organs . Two distinct Ca 2 + - dependent forms of adaptation operate simultaneously in hair cells that have been examined closely ; one form is fast and involves the transduction channel directly , whereas the other is slower and uses an adaptation motor ( Box 2 ) . Much attention has been paid to the molecular characterization of adaptation , as this approach should elicit strong candidates for members of the transduction apparatus . Fast adaptation occurs on a millisecond to sub - millisecond timescale , and probably ensues when Ca 2 + enters an open transduc - tion channel , binds to a site near the channel , and causes the channel to close ( Box 2 ) . In slow adaptation , which requires tens to hundreds of milliseconds for completion , a motor molecule is hypothesized to insight review articles 200 NATURE | VOL 413 | 13 SEPTEMBER 2001 | www . nature . com Hair - bundle proteins identified by genetics or other means can be assembled into an incomplete molecular model ( see figure ) . Hair bundles contain more than 30 major proteins 69 , however , indicating many more molecules remain to be identified . Usher genes . At least ten different genes can cause Usher syndrome , with varying clinical impact . Usher 1 , caused by mutations at six or more loci , is the most clinically severe form of the disease . The first of these genes identified , that responsible for Usher 1B , was MYO7A 70 . Hair bundles are disarrayed when Myo7a from mouse 71 or zebrafish 72 is mutated , which supports a role for Myo7a in anchoring ankle links , a class of stereociliary crosslinks near the base of the stereocilia 73 . A new member of the cadherin family of Ca 2 + - dependent cell - adhesion molecules , Cdh23 , is responsible for Usher 1D 74 ; because stereocilia adhesion is disrupted in the corresponding mouse mutant , waltzer , Cdh23 probably forms one of the classes of stereociliary crosslinks 75 . The gene mutated in Usher 1F 76 , 77 and the mouse deafness model Ames waltzer 78 encodes another member of the cadherin family , protocadherin - 15 ( Pcd15 ) . Ames waltzer mice have disorganized stereocilia , suggesting that Pcd15 might crosslink adjacent stereocilia . Mutations in the genes encoding Myo7a , Pcd15 and Cdh23 produce an identical clinical phenotype , indicating that these proteins may be part of the ankle - link complex . A new protein — harmonin or USH1C — is mutated in Usher 1C ; its multiple PDZ domains indicate a role in assembling a complex of proteins , although it might also assemble with ankle links . Usher 2 has three identified loci and is characterized by a modest hearing loss , normal balance and late - onset retinitis pigmentosa . USH2A , a molecule with multiple domains shared by extracellular matrix / adhesion molecules , is mutated in Usher 2A 79 . Myo7a - interacting proteins . Two proteins have been identified by two - hybrid screening with Myo7a bait . One is the RII subunit of the cyclic AMP - dependent protein kinase 80 , which coincides with an earlier observation that the resting open probability of the transduction channel declines in response to agents that raise cAMP levels 63 . The other is a new protein named vezatin 81 , which localizes in hair cells to the ankle - link region and , in tissue - culture cells , interacts with cadherin - based cellular junctions . This protein most likely forms the transmembrane link between Myo7a and the ankle links . Other myosin isozymes . Myo6 and Myo15 may participate in hair - bundle formation and maintenance . Myo6 , a negative - end - directed motor , localizes to the cuticular plate and basal insertions of the stereocilia ; it may provide outward force on stereocilia or anchor the stereociliary membrane 73 , 82 . Mice lacking Myo15 have abnormally short stereocilia , indicating that this isozyme might participate in actin - filament elongation ( as do yeast myosin I isozymes 83 ) . Ca 2 + control in stereocilia . Because Ca 2 + entry through open transduction channels is essential for fast and slow adaptation and may regulate tip - link assembly 84 , proteins that control Ca 2 + levels in stereocilia should be essential for hair - cell function . A conventional knockout approach 85 , as well as identification of the mouse deafness mutants deafwaddler ( dfw ) 86 and Wriggle mouse sagami ( wri ) 87 , showed that mice require isoform 2 of the plasma - membrane Ca 2 + - ATPase ( PMCA ) for proper auditory and vestibular function . In all hair cells , the only isoform found in the bundle is PMCA2a 88 , which can be present at the remarkably high density of 2 , 000 molecules per (cid:5) m 2 ( ref . 89 ) . Calmodulin is present in hair bundles at high concentrations 90 , 91 , where it regulates PMCA , myosins and presumably other bundle molecules 92 . A gene that interacts genetically with dfw , modifier of deafwaddler ( mdfw ) 93 , seems to be a Cdh23 allele 75 . Mice heterozygous for dfw become deaf only when homozygous for mdfw ; a possible explanation is that the level of intracellular Ca 2 + in the stereocilia — presumably higher when only one PMCA2 allele is present — affects the function of this candidate Cdh23 allele . Furthermore , a gene that imparts age - related hearing loss , ahl1 , also seems to be a Cdh23 allele . Structural proteins . A properly formed hair bundle is essential for mechanotransduction . Actin has long been known to be the main cytoskeletal element of hair bundles 94 , and fimbrin was identified as an important crosslinker over a decade ago 95 . More recently , espin was identified as a second crosslinker of stereocilia , responsible for the jerker mouse deafness mutation 96 . In addition , a human homologue of the fly protein diaphanous is mutated in the nonsyndromic deafness DFNA1 ( ref . 97 ) . Diaphanous is a ligand for the actin - binding protein profilin and is a target for regulation by Rho , which regulates cytoskeletal assembly in many cell types . Box 3 Essential molecules for hair cells PMCA CaM Pcd15 ? ? ? Myo1c Myo7a ActinFimbrinEspin Harmonin PKA Cdh23 Vezatin Box 3 Figure Schematic illustration of identified hair - bundle proteins showing hypothetical locations of molecules implicated in stereocilia function . Myo7a , vezatin , Cdh23 and PKA may form the ankle - link complex . Pcd15 presumably also interconnects stereocilia . Myo1c may carry out adaptation , whereas PMCA maintains a low Ca 2 + concentration . Actin , fimbrin and espin have structural roles ; not shown is DFNA1 , which may help form the cytoskeleton . Calmodulin regulates several enzymes within the bundle , including PMCA , Myo1c and Myo7a . © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd move up and down the actin core of a stereocilium to restore gating - spring tension towards its resting value 60 . Slow adaptation may be mediated by either myosin 1c ( Myo1c or myosin I (cid:2) ) or by myosin VIIA ( Myo7a ) ( Box 2 ) . Essential molecules for transduction Traditional biochemical and molecular - biological methods for iden - tification of molecules essential for hair - cell function have been largely thwarted by hair cells’ scarcity . The identification of ‘deafness genes’ by genetic screens has been the most productive approach used so far . Mutation of at least 100 human genes and 50 mouse genes lead to deafness associated with other dysfunctions ( syndromic deafness ) or deafness alone ( nonsyndromic deafness ) . But protein products of deafness genes generally do not have direct roles in mechanotransduction . Although unfortunate for those interested in transduction , this observation is unsurprising : the inner ear is a complicated structure , and sound detection relies on middle - and inner - ear formation , hair - bundle assembly , ionic homeostasis , synaptic transmission and a host of other events . Many of these deafness genes instead encode proteins required for develop - ment of the auditory or vestibular systems , for maintenance of the unusual extracellular fluid ( endolymph ) , or for other essential functions not directly related to mechanical transduction 61 . A few of the identified molecules do seem to carry out their critical roles in stereocilia . Molecules essential for hair bundles fall readily into several classes of molecules ( described in Box 3 ) : cytoskeletal components like actin , espin , Myo6 , Myo7a , Myo15 and the mammalian homologue of diaphanous ; cell - adhesion or junctional molecules like Cdh23 , protocadherin - 15 ( Pcd15 ) and vezatin ; and the calcium pump PMCA2 . These molecules and others prominent in hair bundles like fimbrin and calmodulin can be assembled into a speculative and incomplete picture ( Box 3 ) . An important question is whether the already - identified molecules form a transduction com - plex or instead are important for other hair - bundle functions , such as maintaining structural integrity of the bundle . Loss of Myo7a , Pcd15 and Cdh23 , at least , leads to disarrayed hair bundles , suggesting that these molecules help hold stereocilia together . Future directions for mechanotransduction research Because of the difficulties in working with tiny , inaccessible touch cells , the genetic scheme of C . elegans touch transduction has yet to be confirmed by electrophysiological or biochemical experiments . Perhaps the model will be more easily approached in a vertebrate mechanoreceptive cell that is more amenable to such approaches ; the relevance of transduction in such a cell type will depend on the molecular makeup of the transduction apparatus in various mechanoreceptive cells . Alternatively , the challenges of measuring mechanically sensitive currents in C . elegans may yet be overcome . Characterization of mechanotransduction in Drosophila has just begun . Although there is strong evidence indicating that NompC contributes to Drosophila mechanotransduction , residual mechani - cally sensitive current remaining in the absence of NompC indicates that other transduction channels are present . In addition , little is known about the ultrastructure of the transduction apparatus — where exactly is it located and how do mechanical stimuli lead to channel opening ? The combination of electrophysiology and power - ful genetics afforded by the sequenced fly genome suggests that we can expect important developments over the coming few years . A crucial question for the field is the generality of the results from invertebrate model systems . The touch - receptor transduction apparatus of C . elegans seems to be used by some vertebrate mechanoreceptors . Does conservation through the vertebrates also hold for the distinct Drosophila transduction apparatus ? In addition to shared developmental - control molecules and intriguing structural similarities during development , Drosophila mechan - otransduction exhibits several surprising physiological similarities to vertebrate transduction by hair cells . These similarities include a high - K + - receptor endolymph made by supporting cells , directional selectivity , adaptation to sustained mechanical stimuli that is voltage - and size - dependent , microsecond response latencies , and sensitivity to nanometre - scale stimuli 29 . Although no obvious homologues of nompC are present in the human genome , the presence of dozens of orphan members of the broader TRP family suggests that a vertebrate transduction channel could still come from this family . Identification of more of the remp and nomp genes should assist in determining the generality of this transduction system . Many questions remain about hair - cell transduction . The rough draft of the transduction apparatus comprising of the known pro - teins of the hair bundle is , to say the least , incomplete . Although two strong candidates have been advanced for the adaptation motor , we do not know how the motor assembles and how it interacts with other parts of the transduction apparatus . Although Cdh23 and Pcd15 each probably contribute to stereociliary crosslinks , which crosslinks contain these molecules remains unknown . Equally mysterious are the identities of two of the most interesting parts of the transduction apparatus , the transduction channel and tip link . Furthermore , the known human and mouse deafness genes do not constitute a saturat - ing search of the genomes , and only a fraction of these have been cloned . Although the genetic approach is powerful , other important transduction molecules that are essential elsewhere in the organism will be missed . Screening for proteins that interact with essential hair - bundle proteins — such as those interacting with Myo7a — will continue to be a powerful method for discovering new bundle pro - teins , including those involved in transduction . The complete sequencing of the human and mouse genomes will no doubt spur more powerful approaches . The transduction channel and other important molecules are there — someone has probably already seen their sequences — but we still do not know how to recognize them . The next five years will undoubtedly be an exciting time , as the molecular clues that have begun to emerge will stimulate the right experiments to find the rest of the transduction apparatus . (cid:2)(cid:2) 1 . Chalfie , M . A molecular model for mechanosensation in Caenorhabditis elegans . Biol . Bull . 192 , 125 – 130 ( 1997 ) . 2 . Tavernarakis , N . & Driscoll , M . Molecular modeling of mechanotransduction in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 59 , 659 – 689 ( 1997 ) . 3 . Hudspeth , A . J . Hair - bundle mechanics and a model for mechanoelectrical transduction by hair cells . Soc . Gen . Physiol . Ser . 47 , 357 – 370 ( 1992 ) . 4 . Narins , P . M . & Lewis , E . R . The vertebrate ear as an exquisite seismic sensor . J . Acoust . Soc . Am . 76 , 1384 – 1387 ( 1984 ) . 5 . Sukharev , S . I . , Blount , P . , Martinac , B . , Blattner , F . R . & Kung , C . A large - conductance mechanosensitive channel in E . coli encoded by mscL alone . Nature 368 , 265 – 268 ( 1994 ) . 6 . Kloda , A . & Martinac , B . Molecular identification of a mechanosensitive channel in archaea . Biophys . J . 80 , 229 – 240 ( 2001 ) . 7 . Chalfie , M . & Sulston , J . Developmental genetics of the mechanosensory neurons of Caenorhabditis elegans . Dev . Biol . 82 , 358 – 370 ( 1981 ) . 8 . Chalfie , M . & Au , M . Genetic control of differentiation of the Caenorhabditis elegans touch receptor neurons . Science 243 , 1027 – 1033 ( 1989 ) . 9 . Duggan , A . , Ma , C . & Chalfie , M . Regulation of touch receptor differentiation by the Caenorhabditis elegansmec - 3 and unc - 86 genes . Development 125 , 4107 – 4119 ( 1998 ) . 10 . Way , J . C . & Chalfie , M . mec - 3 , a homeobox - containing gene that specifies differentiation of the touch receptor neurons in C . elegans . Cell 54 , 5 – 16 ( 1988 ) . 11 . Savage , C . et al . mec - 7 is a beta - tubulin gene required for the production of 15 - protofilament microtubules in Caenorhabditis elegans . Genes Dev . 3 , 870 – 881 ( 1989 ) . 12 . Fukushige , T . et al . MEC - 12 , an (cid:3) - tubulin required for touch sensitivity in C . elegans . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 395 – 403 ( 1999 ) . 13 . Huang , M . , Gu , G . , Ferguson , E . L . & Chalfie , M . A stomatin - like protein necessary for mechanosensation in C . elegans . Nature 378 , 292 – 295 ( 1995 ) . 14 . Du , H . , Gu , G . , William , C . M . & Chalfie , M . Extracellular proteins needed for C . elegans mechanosensation . Neuron 16 , 183 – 194 ( 1996 ) . 15 . Gu , G . , Caldwell , G . A . & Chalfie , M . Genetic interactions affecting touch sensitivity in Caenorhabditis elegans . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 6577 – 6582 ( 1996 ) . 16 . Alvarez de la Rosa , D . , Canessa , C . M . , Fyfe , G . K . & Zhang , P . Structure and regulation of amiloride - sensitive sodium channels . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 62 , 573 – 594 ( 2000 ) . 17 . Garcia - Anoveros , J . , Ma , C . & Chalfie , M . Regulation of Caenorhabditis elegans degenerin proteins by a putative extracellular domain . Curr . Biol . 5 , 441 – 448 ( 1995 ) . 18 . Huang , M . & Chalfie , M . Gene interactions affecting mechanosensory transduction in Caenorhabditis elegans . Nature 367 , 467 – 470 ( 1994 ) . 19 . Garcia - Anoveros , J . , Garcia , J . A . , Liu , J . D . & Corey , D . P . The nematode degenerin UNC - 105 forms ion channels that are activated by degeneration - or hypercontraction - causing mutations . Neuron 20 , 1231 – 1241 ( 1998 ) . 20 . Kizer , N . , Guo , X . L . & Hruska , K . Reconstitution of stretch - activated cation channels by expression of the (cid:3) - subunit of the epithelial sodium channel cloned from osteoblasts . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA insight review articles NATURE | VOL 413 | 13 SEPTEMBER 2001 | www . nature . com 201 © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd 94 , 1013 – 1018 ( 1997 ) . 21 . Adams , C . M . et al . Ripped pocket and pickpocket , novel Drosophila DEG / ENaC subunits expressed in early development and in mechanosensory neurons . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 143 – 152 ( 1998 ) . 22 . Drummond , H . A . , Price , M . P . , Welsh , M . J . & Abboud , F . M . A molecular component of the arterial baroreceptor mechanotransducer . Neuron 21 , 1435 – 1441 ( 1998 ) . 23 . Garcia - Anoveros , J . , Samad , T . A . , Woolf , C . J . & Corey , D . P . Transport and localization of the DEG / ENaC ion channel BNaC1 (cid:3) to peripheral mechanosensory terminals of dorsal root ganglia neurons . J . Neurosci . 21 , 2678 – 2686 ( 2001 ) . 24 . Price , M . P . et al . The mammalian sodium channel BNC1 is required for normal touch sensation . Nature 407 , 1007 – 1011 ( 2000 ) . 25 . Fricke , B . et al . Epithelial Na + channels and stomatin are expressed in rat trigeminal mechanosensory neurons . Cell Tissue Res . 299 , 327 – 334 ( 2000 ) . 26 . Drummond , H . A . , Abboud , F . M . & Welsh , M . J . Localization of beta and gamma subunits of ENaC in sensory nerve endings in the rat foot pad . Brain Res . 884 , 1 – 12 ( 2000 ) . 27 . Hummler , E . & Horisberger , J . D . Genetic disorders of membrane transport . V . The epithelial sodium channel and its implication in human diseases . Am . J . Physiol . 276 , G567 – G571 ( 1999 ) . 28 . Kernan , M . , Cowan , D . & Zuker , C . Genetic dissection of mechanosensory transduction : mechanoreception—defective mutations of Drosophila . Neuron 12 , 1195 – 1206 ( 1994 ) . 29 . Walker , R . G . , Willingham , A . T . & Zuker , C . S . A Drosophila mechanosensory transduction channel . Science 287 , 2229 – 2234 ( 2000 ) . 30 . Eberl , D . F . , Hardy , R . W . & Kernan , M . J . Genetically similar transduction mechanisms for touch and hearing in Drosophila . J . Neurosci . 20 , 5981 – 5988 ( 2000 ) . 31 . Chung , Y . D . , Zhu , J . , Han , Y . & Kernan , M . J . nompA encodes a PNS - specific , ZP domain protein required to connect mechanosensory dendrites to sensory structures . Neuron 29 , 415 – 428 ( 2001 ) . 32 . Legan , P . K . , Rau , A . , Keen , J . N . & Richardson , G . P . The mouse tectorins . Modular matrix proteins of the inner ear homologous to components of the sperm - egg adhesion system . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 8791 – 8801 ( 1997 ) . 33 . Sedgwick , S . G . & Smerdon , S . J . The ankyrin repeat : a diversity of interactions on a common structural framework . Trends Biochem . Sci . 24 , 311 – 316 ( 1999 ) . 34 . Rubtsov , A . M . & Lopina , O . D . Ankyrins . FEBS Lett . 482 , 1 – 5 ( 2000 ) . 35 . Colbert , H . A . , Smith , T . L . & Bargmann , C . I . OSM - 9 , a novel protein with structural similarity to channels , is required for olfaction , mechanosensation , and olfactory adaptation in Caenorhabditis elegans . J . Neurosci . 17 , 8259 – 8269 ( 1997 ) . 36 . Liedtke , W . et al . Vanilloid receptor - related osmotically activated channel ( VR - OAC ) , a candidate vertebrate osmoreceptor . Cell 103 , 525 – 535 ( 2000 ) . 37 . Schweisguth , F . , Gho , M . & Lecourtois , M . Control of cell fate choices by lateral signaling in the adult peripheral nervous system of Drosophila melanogaster . Dev . Genet . 18 , 28 – 39 ( 1996 ) . 38 . Adam , J . et al . Cell fate choices and the expression of Notch , Delta and Serrate homologues in the chick inner ear : parallels with Drosophila sense - organ development . Development 125 , 4645 – 4654 ( 1998 ) . 39 . Bermingham , N . A . et al . Math1 : an essential gene for the generation of inner ear hair cells . Science 284 , 1837 – 1841 ( 1999 ) . 40 . Ben - Arie , N . et al . Functional conservation of atonal and Math1 in the CNS and PNS . Development 127 , 1039 – 1048 ( 2000 ) . 41 . Corey , D . P . & Hudspeth , A . J . Kinetics of the receptor current in bullfrog saccular hair cells . J . Neurosci . 3 , 962 – 976 ( 1983 ) . 42 . van Netten , S . M . & Kros , C . J . Gating energies and forces of the mammalian hair cell transducer channel and related hair bundle mechanics . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B 267 , 1915 – 1923 ( 2000 ) . 43 . Pickles , J . O . , Comis , S . D . & Osborne , M . P . Cross - links between stereocilia in the guinea pig organ of Corti , and their possible relation to sensory transduction . Hearing Res . 15 , 103 – 112 ( 1984 ) . 44 . Kachar , B . , Parakkal , M . , Kurc , M . , Zhao , Y . & Gillespie , P . G . High - resolution structure of hair - cell tip links . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 13336 – 13341 ( 2000 ) . 45 . Corey , D . P . & Hudspeth , A . J . Ionic basis of the receptor potential in a vertebrate hair cell . Nature 281 , 675 – 677 ( 1979 ) . 46 . Crawford , A . C . , Evans , M . G . & Fettiplace , R . The actions of calcium on the mechano - electrical transducer current of turtle hair cells . J . Physiol . 434 , 369 – 398 ( 1991 ) . 47 . Ricci , A . J . & Fettiplace , R . Calcium permeation of the turtle hair cell mechanotransducer channel and its relation to the composition of endolymph . J . Physiol . 506 , 159 – 173 ( 1998 ) . 48 . Kroese , A . B . , Das , A . & Hudspeth , A . J . Blockage of the transduction channels of hair cells in the bullfrog’s sacculus by aminoglycoside antibiotics . Hear Res . 37 , 203 – 217 ( 1989 ) . 49 . Rusch , A . , Kros , C . J . & Richardson , G . P . Block by amiloride and its derivatives of mechano - electrical transduction in outer hair cells of mouse cochlear cultures . J . Physiol . 474 , 75 – 86 ( 1994 ) . 50 . Sand , O . Effects of different ionic environments on the mechano - sensitivity of the lateral line organs in the mudpuppy . J . Comp . Physiol . A 102 , 27 – 42 ( 1975 ) . 51 . Glowatzki , E . , Ruppersberg , J . P . , Zenner , H . P . & Rusch , A . Mechanically and ATP - induced currents of mouse outer hair cells are independent and differentially blocked by d - tubocurarine . Neuropharmacology 36 , 1269 – 1275 ( 1997 ) . 52 . Baumann , M . & Roth , A . The Ca 2 + permeability of the apical membrane in neuromast hair cells . J . Comp . Physiol . 158 , 681 – 688 ( 1986 ) . 53 . Jorgensen , F . & Kroese , A . B . Ca selectivity of the transduction channels in the hair cells of the frog sacculus . Acta Physiol . Scand . 155 , 363 – 376 ( 1995 ) . 54 . Rusch , A . & Hummler , E . Mechano - electrical transduction in mice lacking the alpha - subunit of the epithelial sodium channel . Hear Res . 131 , 170 – 176 ( 1999 ) . 55 . Housley , G . D . et al . Expression of the P2X 2 receptor subunit of the ATP - gated ion channel in the cochlea : implications for sound transduction and auditory neurotransmission . J . Neurosci . 19 , 8377 – 8388 ( 1999 ) . 56 . Housley , G . D . , Luo , L . & Ryan , A . F . Localization of mRNA encoding the P2X2 receptor subunit of the adenosine 5 (cid:7) - triphosphate - gated ion channel in the adult and developing rat inner ear by in situ hybridization . J . Comp . Neurol . 393 , 403 – 414 ( 1998 ) . 57 . Kros , C . J . , Rüsch , A . & Richardson , G . P . Mechano - electrical transducer currents in hair cells of the cultured neonatal mouse cochlea . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B 249 , 185 – 193 ( 1992 ) . 58 . Harteneck , C . , Plant , T . D . & Schultz , G . From worm to man : three subfamilies of TRP channels . Trends Neurosci . 23 , 159 – 166 ( 2000 ) . 59 . Hudspeth , A . J . & Gillespie , P . G . Pulling springs to tune transduction : adaptation by hair cells . Neuron 12 , 1 – 9 ( 1994 ) . 60 . Howard , J . & Hudspeth , A . J . Mechanical relaxation of the hair bundle mediates adaptation in mechanoelectrical transduction by the bullfrog’s saccular hair cell . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 84 , 3064 – 3068 ( 1987 ) . 61 . Steel , K . P . & Kros , C . J . A genetic approach to understanding auditory function . Nature Genet . 27 , 143 – 149 ( 2001 ) . 62 . Liu , J . , Schrank , B . & Waterston , R . H . Interaction between a putative mechanosensory membrane channel and a collagen . Science 273 , 361 – 364 ( 1996 ) . 63 . Ricci , A . J . & Fettiplace , R . The effects of calcium buffering and cyclic AMP on mechano - electrical transduction in turtle auditory hair cells . J . Physiol . 501 , 111 – 124 ( 1997 ) . 64 . Benser , M . E . , Marquis , R . E . & Hudspeth , A . J . Rapid , active hair bundle movements in hair cells from the bullfrog’s sacculus . J . Neurosci . 16 , 5629 – 5643 ( 1996 ) . 65 . Ricci , A . J . , Crawford , A . C . & Fettiplace , R . Active hair bundle motion linked to fast transducer adaptation in auditory hair cells . J . Neurosci . 20 , 7131 – 7142 ( 2000 ) . 66 . Martin , P . , Mehta , A . D . & Hudspeth , A . J . Negative hair - bundle stiffness betrays a mechanism for mechanical amplification by the hair cell . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 12026 – 12031 ( 2000 ) . 67 . Gillespie , P . G . & Corey , D . P . Myosin and adaptation by hair cells . Neuron 19 , 955 – 958 ( 1997 ) . 68 . Richardson , G . P . et al . A missense mutation in myosin VIIA prevents aminoglycoside accumulation in early postnatal cochlear hair cells . Ann . NY Acad . Sci . 884 , 110 – 124 ( 1999 ) . 69 . Gillespie , P . G . & Hudspeth , A . J . High - purity isolation of bullfrog hair bundles and subcellular and topological localization of constituent proteins . J . Cell Biol . 112 , 625 – 640 ( 1991 ) . 70 . Gibson , F . et al . A type VII myosin encoded by the mouse deafness gene shaker - 1 . Nature 374 , 62 – 64 ( 1995 ) . 71 . Self , T . et al . Shaker - 1 mutations reveal roles for myosin VIIA in both development and function of cochlear hair cells . Development 125 , 557 – 566 ( 1998 ) . 72 . Ernest , S . et al . Mariner is defective in myosin VIIA : a zebrafish model for human hereditary deafness . Hum . Mol . Genet . 9 , 2189 – 2196 ( 2000 ) . 73 . Hasson , T . et al . Unconventional myosins in inner - ear sensory epithelia . J . Cell Biol . 137 , 1287 – 1307 ( 1997 ) . 74 . Bolz , H . et al . Mutation of CDH23 , encoding a new member of the cadherin gene family , causes Usher syndrome type 1D . Nature Genet . 27 , 108 – 112 ( 2001 ) . 75 . Di Palma , F . et al . Mutations in Cdh23 , encoding a new type of cadherin , cause stereocilia disorganization in waltzer , the mouse model for Usher syndrome type 1D . Nature Genet . 27 , 103 – 107 ( 2001 ) . 76 . Ahmed , Z . M . et al . Mutations of the protocadherin gene PCDH15 cause Usher syndrome type 1F . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 69 , 25 – 34 ( 2001 ) . 77 . Alagramam , K . N . et al . Mutations in the novel protocadherin PCDH15 cause Usher syndrome type 1F . Hum . Mol . Genet . 10 , 1709 – 1718 ( 2001 ) . 78 . Alagramam , K . N . et al . The mouse Ames waltzer hearing - loss mutant is caused by mutation of Pcdh15 , a novel protocadherin gene . Nature Genet . 27 , 99 – 102 ( 2001 ) . 79 . Eudy , J . D . et al . Mutation of a gene encoding a protein with extracellular matrix motifs in Usher syndrome type IIa . Science 280 , 1753 – 1757 ( 1998 ) . 80 . Kussel - Andermann , P . et al . Unconventional myosin VIIA is a novel A - kinase - anchoring protein . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 29654 – 29659 ( 2000 ) . 81 . Kussel - Andermann , P . et al . Vezatin , a novel transmembrane protein , bridges myosin VIIA to the cadherin - catenins complex . EMBO J . 19 , 6020 – 6029 ( 2000 ) . 82 . Self , T . et al . Role of myosin VI in the differentiation of cochlear hair cells . Dev . Biol . 214 , 331 – 341 ( 1999 ) . 83 . Lechler , T . , Shevchenko , A . & Li , R . Direct involvement of yeast type I myosins in Cdc42 - dependent actin polymerization . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 363 – 373 ( 2000 ) . 84 . Zhao , Y . , Yamoah , E . N . & Gillespie , P . G . Regeneration of broken tip links and restoration of mechanical transduction in hair cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 15469 – 15474 ( 1996 ) . 85 . Kozel , P . J . et al . Balance and hearing deficits in mice with a null mutation in the gene encoding plasma membrane Ca 2 + - ATPase isoform 2 . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 18693 – 18696 ( 1998 ) . 86 . Street , V . A . , McKee - Johnson , J . W . , Fonseca , R . C . , Tempel , B . L . & Noben - Trauth , K . Mutations in a plasma membrane Ca 2 + - ATPase gene cause deafness in deafwaddler mice . Nature Genet . 19 , 390 – 394 ( 1998 ) . 87 . Takahashi , K . & Kitamura , K . A point mutation in a plasma membrane Ca 2 + - ATPase gene causes deafness in Wriggle Mouse Sagami . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 261 , 773 – 778 ( 1999 ) . 88 . Dumont , R . et al . Plasma membrane Ca 2 + - ATPase isoform 2a is the PMCA of hair bundles . J . Neurosci . 21 , 5066 – 5078 ( 2001 ) . 89 . Yamoah , E . N . et al . Plasma membrane Ca 2 + - ATPase extrudes Ca 2 + from hair cell stereocilia . J . Neurosci . 18 , 610 – 624 ( 1998 ) . 90 . Shepherd , G . M . G . , Barres , B . A . & Corey , D . P . “Bundle - blot” purification and initial protein characterization of hair cell stereocilia . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 86 , 4973 – 4977 ( 1989 ) . 91 . Walker , R . G . , Hudspeth , A . J . & Gillespie , P . G . Calmodulin and calmodulin - binding proteins in hair bundles . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 90 , 2807 – 2811 ( 1993 ) . 92 . Walker , R . G . & Hudspeth , A . J . Calmodulin controls adaptation of mechanoelectrical transduction by hair cells of the bullfrog’s sacculus . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 2203 – 2207 ( 1996 ) . 93 . Noben - Trauth , K . , Zheng , Q . Y . , Johnson , K . R . & Nishina , P . M . mdfw : a deafness susceptibility locus that interacts with deaf waddler ( dfw ) . Genomics 44 , 266 – 272 ( 1997 ) . 94 . Flock , A . , Cheung , H . C . , Flock , B . & Utter , G . Three sets of actin filaments in sensory cells of the inner ear . Identification and functional orientation determined by gel electrophoresis , immunofluorescence / electron microscopy . J . Neurocytol . 10 , 133 – 147 ( 1981 ) . 95 . Tilney , M . S . et al . Preliminary biochemical characterization of the stereocilia and cuticular plate of hair cells of the chick cochlea . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 1711 – 1723 ( 1989 ) . 96 . Zheng , L . et al . The deaf jerker mouse has a mutation in the gene encoding the espin actin - bundling proteins of hair cell stereocilia and lacks espins . Cell 102 , 377 – 385 ( 2000 ) . 97 . Lynch , E . D . et al . Nonsyndromic deafness DFNA1 associated with mutation of a human homolog of the Drosophila gene diaphanous . Science 278 , 1315 – 1318 ( 1997 ) . Acknowledgements We thank M . Driscoll and N . Tavernarakis for the electron micrograph of Fig . 2 and T . A . Keil for the electron micrograph of Fig . 3 . insight review articles 202 NATURE | VOL 413 | 13 SEPTEMBER 2001 | www . nature . com © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd