Supporting Content and Process Common Ground in Computer - Supported Teamwork Gregorio Convertino ( 1 ) , Helena M . Mentis , Mary Beth Rosson , Aleksandra Slavkovic * , John M . Carroll College of Information Sciences and Technology & Department of Statistics * The Pennsylvania State University , University Park , PA , USA { gconvertino , hmentis , mrosson , jcarroll } @ ist . psu . edu , sesa @ stat . psu . edu * ABSTRACT We build on our prior work with computer - supported teams performing a complex decision - making task on maps , where the distinction between content and process common ground is proposed . In this paper we describe a distributed geo - collaboration software prototype . The system design rationale was gleaned from fieldwork , literature on team cognition , and an earlier lab study introducing a reference task with face - to - face teams . We report on a controlled ex - periment that evaluates this design rationale . Distinct sets of measures show that that the prototype supported both con - tent and process common ground , offsetting the costs im - posed by the distributed setting . We interpret the results in relation to prior work on common ground and draw impli - cations for moving beyond current models of sharing and coordination . Author Keywords Common ground , CSCW , design , prototype ACM Classification Keywords H5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION The process of building common ground in the context of complex team activities is quite different from the knowl - edge sharing process that supports common ground in con - versations [ 7 ] . Teamwork involves not only the exchange and management of information but also the coordination of actions and the generation of solutions . For example , when specialized experts work in teams on a complex task like emergency management planning , intelligence analysis , or pioneer scientific missions , they must not only communi - cate efficiently but also coordinate the work process and generate solutions ex novo . Each expert must individually parse , filter , and make sense of the content ; as a team , members exchange and co - analyze content , and develop a strategy of action . In the course of the work process they generate and accumulate judgments or syntheses in order to construct a solution for the task . Note that in such cases the work process is managed without the aid of a pre - existing shared script , as is typical for routine human conversations . A central implication of these characteristics of complex teamwork is that support tools must meet needs that may not be present in communication - oriented activities . These needs include managing large amounts of content in a short time , including content that is tied to team members’ task - related roles ; supporting both individual and collaborative analysis and syntheses ; minimizing coordination costs due to distribution of labor across a set of diverse experts ; and enabling low - cost integration of knowledge and solutions . In this paper , we describe a new phase of our research pro - gram that has been studying the development of common ground in emergency management planning tasks . In prior work we have reported on field studies of real world emer - gency management teams [ 21 ] and a lab study designed to define and validate a reference task and associated proce - dures and measures [ 2 , 7 ] . These lab study investigations helped us to define materials , methods , and measures that are useful in evaluating collaboration in a complex geospa - tial planning tasks ; we focused in particular on charting the development of common ground in teams performing the task [ 7 ] . Working from our fieldwork results , the lab study , and published literature , we developed and implemented design ideas for a prototype system to support distributed emergency management planning . The present paper summarizes the rationale behind the de - sign of the software prototype , and the details of a lab study of this software that uses the earlier reference task in a distributed setting ( henceforth the Dis / SW study ) . We discuss how the results from this second study – in combination with those from the prior FTF / Paper study – can be used to assess the efficacy of our design reasoning . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( 1 ) Gregorio Convertino moved to the Palo Alto Research Center , Aug - mented Social Cognition Group , Palo Alto , CA ( convertino @ parc . com ) . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . CHI 2009 , April 4 – 9 , 2009 , Boston , Massachusetts , USA . Copyright 2009 ACM 978 - 1 - 60558 - 246 - 7 / 09 / 04… $ 5 . 00 . CHI 2009 ~ Computer Mediated Communication 2 April 9th , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 2339 In this paper , we first introduce the task of emergency man - agement planning , drawing from both field and lab work . Next , we introduce the collaborative geospatial prototype that we developed , with design rationale drawn from our empirical work as well as related research on team cogni - tion , computer - mediated communication ( CMC ) , and com - puter - supported cooperative work ( CSCW ) ( see reviews in [ 8 , 18 ] ) . Then , we summarize the study of the prototype system , focusing on findings that speak to the design ra - tionale of the system . Finally , we draw implications for moving beyond a few unnecessarily restrictive notions about sharing in computer - supported teamwork . Emergency Management Planning Our initial field study of two local communities in Central Pennsylvania focused on the planning phase of the emer - gency management work conducted by these communities [ 21 ] . The planning phase occurs prior to any actual emer - gency disaster and allows stakeholders to discuss and prac - tice emergency management strategies . During this phase , we found that emergency management planning teams pe - riodically engage in activities that involve geo - collaboration . A central activity was the tabletop exercise , where team members walk through a scenario and re - consider existing response procedures on a shared map in a meeting table setting . The team rehearses interdependencies and builds a shared planning experience ; this experience supports improvisation during actual crises . An important need for these teams is to have tools that en - able efficient and unbiased sharing ( e . g . , processing large amounts of information and balancing the contributions from different experts ) for flexible knowledge sharing and coordination across different agencies . Team members’ ability to build these shared experiences together was con - strained by their availability for co - located meetings ; there was little to no support for distributed work . When meeting in person , their ability to share and manage large amounts of content was limited by the lack of interactivity in the physical tools they used . Maps and paper - based annotations do not support exploration and retrieval of information , distributed annotations , re - editable shared annotations , or reuse of prior annotations or their categorizations . Another key issue was the absence of explicit acknow - ledgements or reinforcements of the roles that are adopted by members representing different agencies ( e . g . , police , civil government ) and expertise ( e . g . , healthcare , engineer - ing ) . The roles , which consist of sets of agency - specific competences and responsibilities , are a central organizer of emergency management planning . The absence of role - oriented tools limited on the one hand their ability to select the right content to share ( e . g . , what should a civil engineer contribute at any given point ) and on the other hand their ability to implicitly share the act of sharing itself . By this we mean coming to a common understanding of how shared data , judgments , or actions are related to roles ( e . g . , agency - specific data , judgments , or actions ) , as well as the strategy for tackling the overall task ( e . g . , first sharing rele - vant data and then discussing it by area ) . These observa - tions suggested to us a central requirement for design of role - defining and role - supporting features . Building from the fieldwork , we began to investigate re - gional emergency planning more systematically and to de - sign a system that supports more flexible and distributed forms of these planning activities . This required us to first develop a reference task for studying complex emergency planning processes in a lab setting . In the field we had ob - served the practice of the tabletop exercises [ 21 ] during the planning phase . We developed a simulated version of this task as our reference task and we used it in a lab study of emergency planning that took place in a FTF setting , using paper maps , post - it notes , and markers . In the FTF / Paper study we validated the task materials and procedures , de - veloped measures that characterize the process and product of the teamwork [ 2 , 7 ] . Content and Process Common Ground A central contribution of the initial lab study was the articu - lation of two types of common ground – process and con - tent [ 7 ] . While content coordination requires an abundance of grounded content , process coordination requires a con - tinual updating of grounded how - to conventions also re - ferred to as procedural and strategic knowledge . Clark and Brennan offered a general distinction between content and process common ground , relying on classic examples of collaboration [ 5 ] . However , note that their in - vestigations focused on formation of common ground in conversations ( e . g . , [ 18 ] ) and not on generative group work in complex tasks . This theory of human language relies on the analogy of communication as a form of collaboration . It involves coordination of the content exchanged and coordi - nation of the process of communication itself . We identify and study this distinction in the context of teamwork . Here , with " process " we mean more broadly the process of group work and not only the mechanics of communication [ 16 ] . In our conceptualization , content common ground encom - passes " I know that you know that I know what . " This is the shared understanding on the subject and focus of work . It is what is commonly referred to as common ground ( e . g . , the drugstore scenario ) . This results from exchanging content and mutually checking and signaling understanding . In contrast , process common ground encompasses " I know that you know that I know how . " This is the shared under - standing of the rules , procedures , timing , and manner in which the interaction will be conducted . This is more akin to a blind pass in basketball . Not only do team members share an understanding of how to do the work but they also learn the signals of when to apply different shared tactics . In a blind pass , I see my teammate looking towards the right but moving the ball to her left . Thus , I prepare myself to catch the ball as opposed to moving down the court . CHI 2009 ~ Computer Mediated Communication 2 April 9th , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 2340 Reflecting back to the field study findings , we see that con - tent and process common ground are related to our observa - tions of the emergency management planning teams . Con - tent common ground is related to the need to selectively share information : team members must know what the group is discussing , why they are discussing it , and what information is known by themselves and others , if they are to make task - relevant contributions . At the same time , process common ground is related to the need to implicitly share information : team members can be more effective in their information sharing once they know how the group is working to achieve its goal . This process knowledge helps them to know when they should perform specific actions that can help to make progress toward the shared goal . SYSTEM AND DESIGN RATIONALE The prototype ( Figure 1 ) features a team map on the right and a role - specific map on the left . Each map displays mul - tiple layers of geographical data . The team map is a shared object that is used collaboratively by all team members . The role - specific maps contain unshared data layers that are used privately by each user . The toolbar has tools for navi - gation within both maps ( e . g . , zoom - in and zoom - out ) , as well as tools for annotation ( e . g . , add a note , scribble tool ) . The team members can communicate freely through a shared audio channel . More details about the software ar - chitecture and the user interface can be found in [ 21 , 12 ] . The design rationale for this system was grounded in our fieldwork , prior research on team cognition [ 8 ] , and our FTF / Paper lab study [ 7 ] . We focus , below , on the two as - pects of common ground : what knowledge is critical to share ( design rationale for supporting content common ground ) , and how it is convenient or effective to share it ( design rationale for supporting process common ground ) . Design Rationale for Content Common Ground The development of content common ground in teamwork can be enhanced by enabling team members to be selective in determining what knowledge should be shared . Early research on team decision - making operationalized shared knowledge as team mental models ( knowledge structures held in common by members ) , and focused on how shared mental models predicted team performance ( e . g . , [ 4 ] ) . More recently , researchers of team decision - making and collabo - rative technology have shifted attention from team mental models to transactive models of sharing - knowledge of who knows what within a team . Transactive models appear more appropriate for group tasks involving interdependency and role specialization ; researchers have argued that the work of teams making complex decisions is more accu - rately represented by such models ( e . g . , [ 13 , 17 ] ) . There - fore , the ability of multi - role teams to share large amounts of content could be productively augmented through tools that afford selective sharing of information when it is needed during the collaboration process as opposed to shar - ing all information up front . Thus , to provide support for development of content com - mon ground , we introduced the following two features : ( 1 ) A prominent distinction between role ( private ) and team ( public ) spaces . The primary function of the software is to coordinate multiple unshared role - specific views of the map with one shared team view of the map . ( 2 ) Role - specific indicators to communicate individual team member’s actions on the shared map ; the pointers are color - coded to specify owner as well as the highlighting around each team members’ annotations . By constantly presenting to team members the contrast of private role - specific and shared general information views , we hoped that the software would reinforce the importance of role - specific information , instilling in members a more proactive approach to their responsibilities in the task ( see [ 27 ] ) . To make the sharing of role - specific information as easy as possible , we included a low - cost function for shar - ing ( see the Copy - To button in the middle of Figure 1 ) . By identifying all shared information in two ways ( during the act of sharing via a color - coded telepointer and selec - tion emphasis , and afterwards via color - coded annotations ) , we hoped that members would be continually reminded that different team members ( i . e . , roles ) were contributing dif - ferent types of information in addition to what specific in - formation had been contributed by each of their partners during discussion . This should help them to generate a sense of ‘who knows what’ that would be useful in organiz - ing and managing their shared information space . Working from our reference task and associated measures , we translated these design goals into specific expectations about team members’ behavior , in the Dis / SW study :  As team members become more sensitized to their own role - specific information , they should be more likely to “push” information they hold into the discussion , rather than wait to have it “pulled” from others . Taking the initiative to share rather than waiting to be asked is in - dicative of greater content common ground . We have already seen this trend in the FTF / Paper study , but we expect it to be greater in this study because of the role - emphasizing features of the software prototype .  On the shared map , team members can always see what information has been shared by which team member . In the original FTF / Paper study we found that recall of this information ( i . e . , a measure of shared knowledge ) increased as teams gained greater content common ground . We expect this effect to be even greater in the software - supported teams , because we have included explicit support for identifying these contributions .  The combination of improved role - specific sharing and better knowledge of what was shared should enhance team members’ perceptions of the quality of their team’s collaboration ( i . e . , relative to FTF / Paper teams ) . CHI 2009 ~ Computer Mediated Communication 2 April 9th , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 2341 Figure 1 : Software Prototype User Interface . Design Rationale for Process Common Ground Our second general consideration in the design of the dis - tributed system is that process common ground can be sup - ported by enabling implicit forms of sharing . In other words , we wanted to reduce team members’ need for overt sharing and negotiation of coordination strategies ( see " im - plicit coordination " in [ 15 ] ) . Research on teams in dynamic situations has suggested that to perform effectively the team members need to share pre - existing strategic knowledge , which allows them to develop an understanding of cue / action sequences ( i . e . , which cue should trigger which action ) , cue patterns and their signifi - cance ( i . e . , cue patterns associated with task strategies ) , team resources and capabilities ( i . e . , roles , resources and expertise ) , and strategies most appropriate for the current task ( see review in [ 8 ] ) . For example , again consider a well - trained basketball team , where a successful blind pass from one player to another requires both to simultaneously assess a pattern of cues in the shared dynamic environment of the game , and promptly respond to the current situation using an agreed tactic with no need for explicit communication . To provide support for the development of process common ground , we introduced the following two features : ( 1 ) We used several indications of a member ' s role ( e . g . , color - coding , labels ) that were associated to object selec - tions and updates and other actions taking place as part of the team’s interaction on the shared team map . These indi - cators provide a trace of the collaboration that is taking place - visual support for an implicit sharing process . ( 2 ) We ensured that there was low - cost but explicit mecha - nism for moving information from role - specific to team maps ( the Copy - To button ) . This provides a lightweight punctuation to the act of sharing ; it also gives each member explicit control over their acts of sharing , reinforcing to each one their goals and responsibilities in deciding to add information to the shared map . Kraut and collaborators [ e . g . , 24 ] found that a shared visual space improves not only communication efficiency ( i . e . , content management ) but also the knowledge of the task structure and situation awareness ( i . e . , useful to managing the process ) , especially in complex problem solving tasks . Similarly , we expected that affordances of the prototype that give more ‘visibility’ to the process of role - specific sharing would help team members to more quickly develop a shared understanding of when and how to share their in - dividual pieces of knowledge ; or to further annotate content already shared . The indicators of a member’s role on the CHI 2009 ~ Computer Mediated Communication 2 April 9th , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 2342 shared map would act as awareness - supporting tools ( i . e . , visual cues ) , enabling sharing at a tacit level . These design goals were translated into more specific expectations :  If the role - related identifications of content on the shared map makes team members tacitly aware of part - ners’ sharing actions , then the team will require fewer explicit dialog acts that would otherwise be used to synchronize communication and sharing . They should also require fewer acts related to regulation of the team’s progress toward a goal . Conversely , more acts would focus on judgments . Thus , we should see less Checking and Management but more Judgment acts .  If the software system promotes more rapid develop - ment of process common ground ( relative to FTF teams using paper ) , then the team’s communication will become more efficient . As more process common ground is shared , fewer communication acts are needed overall , because the members have less need to explic - itly manage the work process and can focus more on assessing and sharing information to complete the task . More generally , we can summarize our design goals and expectations for both content and process common ground in this way : our essential design strategy is to make other - wise tacit aspects of individual and group activity explicit , visible , and permanent ( e . g . , through color - coded annota - tions ) . Such tracking and recording of the shared work should promote distributed cognition and transactive mem - ory , by making selected aspects of past activities a tangible resource rather than a burden to short - term memory . SOFTWARE PROTOTYPE EVALUATION After implementing a software prototype that embodied the design goals outlined above , we set out to test the effective - ness of our design ( i . e . , the Dis / SW study ) . We used the identical reference task , map content , experiment design , and measures of the earlier FTF / Paper study . This allowed investigating not only how common ground developed over the three runs in the Dis / SW teams , but also how this com - pared to the results of FTF / Paper teams ( see [ 7 , 10 ] ) . The reference task is similar in topic and types of information as that used by emergency management teams . But to system - atically investigate sharing process and decision outcomes the information was distributed as described below . Collaborative Task and Roles The teams were asked to generate the best plan for evacuat - ing a family from a flooded area to an appropriate shelter . Each member played the role of an expert ( Public Works , Environmental , or Mass Care ) . Because the participants were not actual experts we had to impose the beliefs and knowledge possessed by an expert . Each participant was given a detailed description about his / her role and role - specific background information . They were also given the following information for the task : role - specific maps , in - formation sheets with role - specific and shared information , and a shared task scenario with background information . Each team was directed to develop plans for three alterna - tive scenarios of the same type of task ; members played the same roles in each scenario . All of the scenarios were simi - lar in that there was a family in need of rescue in a flood plain ( map center ) ; there were four possible shelters ( pe - riphery of the map ) and only one route to each shelter . Each scenario was of equivalent complexity and the order was counterbalanced across the sixteen groups in the sample . Of the four shelters to choose from , one is optimal ( i . e . , it has the least number of problems , here called cons ) , but the information provided to each member is biased toward one of the three other suboptimal solutions . But if the team pools its information across roles , then the fourth shelter is clearly the best alternative : it has 4 cons as opposed to 7 cons for each of the other three shelters . Procedure Participants were seated at three different workstations in three adjoining rooms . At each workstation , a participant had a Dell Optiplex with a 19” widescreen LCD , a micro - phone , and set of speakers for verbal communication be - tween team members and with the experimenters . They then read descriptions of their individual roles and the task scenario and read the role - specific information sheet relat - ing each piece of information to their role - specific map . At this point , the participants began to collaborate on the planning task . They were instructed to share information with the team by copying information onto the shared map . When they reached a decision , they wrote down the final plan along with three alternatives in order of preference in a final plan document . Teams were given about 20 minutes to complete this task . At the end , the participants completed ( 1 ) a questionnaire that asked them to rate the quality of the groups’ process and performance ; and ( 2 ) a set of open - ended questions that assessed the participants’ recall of the solutions generated , and the information considered for each solution . This process was repeated three times , with new scenarios and information presented each time . Participants The study was run with 16 teams . Forty - eight university students were recruited from a large northeastern United States university and were assigned to teams . Same - gender teams , eight male and eight female were formed . The tasks were performed in English and all participants were fluent English speakers , about 28 % of the participants were non - native speakers . About 70 % had undergraduate degrees and the remaining had graduate degrees ( with age range from 20 to 40 years ) . The participants had little prior experience with emergency management planning or operations . Data Collection Post - Task Questionnaire and Cature Software In prior work [ 9 ] we presented a questionnaire that pro - duces seven self - reported indices of group process ( gain of shared knowledge ; quality of communication ; communica - CHI 2009 ~ Computer Mediated Communication 2 April 9th , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 2343 tion means ; understanding & expression ; ease of referenc - ing & planning ; interpersonal awareness ; and awareness over time ) and indices for perceived team performance and satisfaction . We administered the questionnaire after each run , resulting in three sets of the nine indices ( see [ 26 ] ) . The interaction of the distributed teams via the software prototype was recorded through tools provided by Noldus Information Technology [ 28 ] : uLog 2 . 0 ( with Camtasia by TechSmith ) for logging keystroke - level events and The Observer XT 7 . 0 for integrating the multiple data records ( keystroke - level logs and videos ) from each team and run . Communication Structure As common ground increases , communication becomes more efficient , because the shared understanding means that conversation topics need less introduction or clarification . Conversational turns occur more rapidly and utterances are more compact ( e . g . , more turns , fewer words , more syn - chronicity ) . Researchers have relied on these measures to assess the effects of different communication settings on communication efficiency and amount of common ground [ e . g . , 20 , 22 ] . We expected to observe similar trends , with our teams becoming more efficient in their communication as common ground increased . We transcribed the communication records of the 16 teams during Runs 1 and 3 . We adapted the analysis scheme used by Sellen [ 22 ] , which breaks a dialogue into turns and pauses . It also codes simultaneous speech , including speech that causes an interruption ( SSI , taking the floor ) , and non - interruptive simultaneous speech ( SSNI ) . We compared counts and durations for runs 1 and 3 , normalizing for the length of the run ( see [ 7 ] ) . Dialogue Patterns We coded the content of the transcripts , using an adaptation ( [ 7 ] ) of the Conversation Game Analysis method ( [ 23 , 20 ] ) . This scheme classifies the communicative functions of dia - logue acts ( what the speaker is attempting to achieve ) rather than their linguistic form or meaning . The method is rele - vant because it was specifically validated on dialogs in map - based collaborative tasks [ 23 , 20 ] . We adapted it to our task domain [ 7 ] . Table 1 summarizes the codes and descriptions . Two coders were trained in parallel to use the coding scheme . For better reliability they coded the dialogues sepa - rately while reviewing the video of the interaction together . For every few minutes of a session , they viewed the video and coded the transcript , then compared their codes . At each such review step they negotiated and agreed about any conflicting codes , referring to the coding scheme . Three samples of coded transcripts were compared . The level of inter - coder agreement was about 82 % . The cases of dis - agreements were discussed and resolved . Recall of Task Information A third set of measures assessed group members’ retention of task - relevant information . After each session , we probed their memories for the solution chosen as the rescue plan and the information contributed by themselves and their partners . The expectation is that as common ground in - creases , the members will recall more about the solutions discussed , including the information provided by partners ( e . g . , [ 19 ] ) . A measure of recall was obtained by measuring how many available cons were remembered by the mem - bers after each run [ see 9 ] . Class Dialogue Act Description Add Info ( AI ) Provides new information , not elic - ited . Query ( Q ) Question used to elicit new informa - tion . T r a n s f er I n f o ( t o s h a re ) Reply ( R ) Reply to query to provide new in - formation . Check ( CH ) Verify own understanding , refers to information previously presented by others . Align ( AL ) Verify partner’s understanding , refers to information previously presented to others . Clarify ( CL ) Clarifies or restates information already presented . C h ec k U nd er s t a nd i n g ( t o c oo r d i n a t e s h a r i n g ) Acknowledge ( AC ) Signals receipt of information , un - derstanding . Manage ( MN ) Instruction , command , direct or indirect request for action ; orches - trating strategy , how to do the work Judge ( J ) Individual judgment , opinion , or preference . Summarize ( SA ) Summarizes information previously presented . Confirm ( CO ) Requests partners’ agreement on a proposed decision . M a n ag e P r o ce ss & D ec i s i o n ( t o p er f o r m t a s k ) Agree ( AG ) Indicates approval for a prior judg - ment or decision . Table 1 : Dialogue Act Codes and their Description RESULTS Selective Sharing & Content Common Ground Our first set of results addresses our assertion that a promi - nent distinction in the system between role ( private ) and team ( public ) spaces and role - specific pointers in the shared workspace supports content common ground , which affords selective sharing of knowledge in the distributed team . Setting Matters in Selective Information Sharing We expected and found extra costs introduced by the dis - tributed medium which undermined the development of content common ground and thus hindered selective infor - mation sharing . In the comparison of post - task question - naire results from run 1 of the Dis / SW study to run 3 of the CHI 2009 ~ Computer Mediated Communication 2 April 9th , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 2344 FTF / Paper study , we found that FTF / Paper participants ( 36 participants , 12 teams ) gave slightly higher ratings than the Dis / SW participants ( 48 participants , 16 teams ) for quality of process and outcome ( MANOVA test F 9 , 66 = 3 . 9 , p < . 001 ) . Specifically , the measures of Ease of Referencing and over - all Satisfaction are significantly higher in the FTF / Paper condition . However , there is no significant difference in the ratings of the Gain of Shared Knowledge . We also analyzed the communication structure to compare the costs of grounding and communication efficiency across the two studies ( Table 2 ) . The communication throughput was slower or smaller in the Dis / SW teams . The frequency of turns was smaller and the average turn length was longer ( e . g . , 10 - 11 vs . 7 - 9 words ) than in the FTF / Paper teams . In addition , in the Dis / SW condition , there was significant less synchronicity among the turns of communication : there were more one - speaker - only turns ( Dis / SW ( 85 - 87 % ) vs . FTF / Paper ( 63 - 64 % ) , see IT / turns ) and less simultaneous speech turns ( Dis / SW ( 13 - 14 % ) vs . FTF / Paper ( 34 - 32 % ) , see SSI / turns and SSNI / turns ) . In the Dis / SW teams there were fewer interruptions that slightly increased with time ( 5 - 7 % of the turns ) whereas they were more frequent and constant in the FTF / Paper study ( 11 - 12 % of the turns ) . The simulta - neous non - interruptive speech turns , such as brief acknow - ledgements or failed attempts to grab the floor , remained fewer ( 8 - 8 . 5 % of the turns ) in comparison to the FTF / Paper study ( slightly decreasing , 23 % to 20 % ) . These results are consistent with prior research ( e . g . , [ 20 , 22 ] ) and give a measure of the extra costs imposed on the task by the dis - tributed setting ( i . e . , lack of cues available in FTF work ) . Benefits Offset the Costs in Content Common Ground Despite these costs , benefits were found which we believe offset the costs . One of our strongest hypotheses was that " Push " acts will increase over time in the Dis / SW study , which would show an increment in the efficiency of content sharing due to greater content common ground . We com - pared the percentage of both Push ( Add Info ) and Pull ( Re - plies to questions ) between runs 1 and 3 in the SW - based teams . We found a significant increment of the proportion of “Push” acts per run ( from 9 . 5 % to 12 . 2 % , t 15 = 2 . 4 , p < . 05 ) , and , as related trend , a significant decrement of the Pull acts ( from 3 . 7 % to 2 . 3 % , t 15 = 3 . 3 , p < . 05 ) ( see Figure 2 ) . In addition to mean - based tests , we also used a semi - parametric version of the Poisson regression model with repeated measures [ 1 ] to test the effect of Run on the pro - portion of Push and Pull acts ( proportion relative to total acts per run ) . In such models , the exponential of the esti - mated regression coefficients , exp ( ß ) , tell us how does the expected count , that is proportion , of the response change as the predictor variable increases by one unit ; e . g , as run increases by one unit , if ß > 0 then the expected number of a dialog acts in the following run will be exp ( ß ) times larger , and for ß < 0 , the number will be exp ( ß ) times smaller . The standard error of ß is given in parenthesis . The effect of run was significant on “Push” acts ( ß = . 12 ( 0 . 06 ) , p < . 05 ) and nearly significant on “Pull” acts ( ß = . 11 ( 0 . 06 ) , p < . 06 ) . FTF / Paper Dis / SW Measures R1 R3 R1 R3 Effect # Words 3206 2200 1724 1106 * * , * # Turns 381 312 155 118 * * , * # Words / turn 8 . 6 7 . 0 10 . 9 9 . 6 * * , * # Turns / sec 0 . 29 0 . 34 0 . 13 0 . 17 * * , * # IT / sec 0 . 18 0 . 22 0 . 11 0 . 15 * * , * # IT / Turns 63 % 64 % 87 % 85 % * * # LIT / Turns 40 % 35 % 56 % 51 % * * , * # SIT / Turns 26 % 30 % 31 % 34 % * P # SSI / Turns 11 % 12 % 5 % 7 % * * , * S # SSNI / Turns 23 % 20 % 9 % 8 % * P Table 2 . Communication Structure Measures In the rightmost column effects ( p < . 05 ) of Medium ( * * ) and Run ( * ) , * P and * S for effect of Run in Dis / SW or FTF / Paper study only We also found that , compared to FTF / Paper teams , the Dis / SW teams used a greater proportion of Push acts ( Dis / SW ( 10 . 9 % ) vs . FTF / Paper ( 8 . 5 % ) ) and a smaller pro - portion of Pull acts ( Dis / SW ( 3 . 0 % ) vs . FTF / Paper ( 4 . 4 % ) ) . We fit an extended Poisson regression model to test the effect of both Run and Medium + Setting ( FTF / Paper vs . Dis / SW ) on the proportions of Push and Pull acts . Note that this allows us to tease apart the effects of the two factors but also to infer their relationship . For the Push acts , we found that Run predicts a significant increase ( ß = . 26 ( 0 . 12 ) , p < . 05 ) , and the difference due to Medium + Setting ap - proaches significance ( ß = . 26 ( 0 . 15 ) , p < . 08 ) . For the Pull acts , Run predicts a decrease ( ß = - . 23 ( 0 . 12 ) , p < . 06 ) , with the difference due to Medium + Setting being highly signifi - cant ( ß = - . 81 ( 0 . 15 ) , p < . 001 ) . The interaction between these two predictors is significant ( ß = . 39 ( 0 . 19 ) , p < . 05 ) . This shows that the Dis / SW condition favored a significantly faster growth in the efficiency of content sharing over the runs ( i . e . , increased Push and decreased Pull , Figure 2 ) . Figure 2 : Push vs . Pull in Software Study vs . Paper Study CHI 2009 ~ Computer Mediated Communication 2 April 9th , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 2345 Contrasting the team map to their role map also allowed the participants to easily determine which of their individual cons had already been pushed to the team . It allowed them to quickly decide which information needed to be pushed . Another prediction was that Dis / SW team members would remember more of the discussed information than the FTF / Paper team members . As in our earlier study , we found that the proportion of post - run recall of information by each member in the Dis / SW study increased more significantly ( 44 % to 83 % , t 15 = 2 . 8 , p < . 01 ) than for FTF / Paper members ( 46 % to 72 % , t 15 = 2 . 8 , p < . 05 ) . The information considered were those discussed by the team and relevant to the chosen shelter . Both results suggest a net benefit of the medium for content common round , despite the distributed setting . Finally , we also hypothesized that the subjective assessment of process and outcome in the Dis / SW participants would increase significantly over the runs . The results of the post - task questionnaire showed that indeed the perceived quality of the process and outcome grew over the three runs ( MANOVA : F 18 , 57 = 2 . 4 , p < . 01 ) . The increment pertained mainly the questionnaire indices for Quality of Communi - cation , Quality of Communication Means , Ease of Refer - encing & Planning , Awareness over time , Perceived Per - formance ( Univariate ANOVAs , p < . 05 ) . The results , how - ever , did not confirm the prediction that these perceptions would improve more in Dis / SW than in FTF / Paper teams . Implicit Sharing & Process Common Ground Our second set of results respond to our assertion that the indications of roles associated to members’ actions and annotations in the shared workspace combined with a tool that makes the sharing act deliberate and visible ( ‘copy to’ button ) promote the development of process common ground to afford implicit sharing of how - to knowledge and . Setting Matters in Implicit Information Sharing Two findings suggested that the distributed setting intro - duced extra costs and hindered implicit sharing about some aspects of the decision process . First , while the FTF / Paper teams decreased their overall proportion of Management ( MN ) acts over the runs ( 7 . 9 % to 5 . 5 % ) , the Dis / SW teams used a relatively greater proportion of MN acts in the first run ( 10 . 6 % ) , and this proportion had less decrement ( to 9 . 4 % ) . This may be because a distributed setting introduces conversation management issues that were not present in the FTF / Paper setting , and that these issues are less likely to be resolved by increments in process content ground . Second , the proportion of explicit Agreement acts in the Dis / SW teams increased whereas they decreased in the FTF / Paper setting ( FTF / Paper ( 10 . 6 % to 9 % ) vs . Dis / SW ( 7 % to 9 % ) ; Run x Medium + Setting interaction , ß = - . 38 ( 0 . 15 ) , p < . 01 ) . This is probably due to the lack of non - verbal cues in the distributed setting . The distributed teammates still needed to explicitly express their agreement on proposals even after they had built considerable shared experience and improved their performance . Benefits Offset the Costs in Process Common Ground Despite these specific costs , we also found an overall net benefit in the development of process common ground in the Dis / SW teams . Type Description Example Strategy Statement or question regarding higher level process for discussion or decision strategy . Should we just write down everything that we know with sticky notes first ? Action A command towards a partner or statement re - garding their own action . Put that together . I’ll write that down here . Task A statement regarding the task itself . Do we have to … write down the route to it or just the selection of the shelter ? Prompt A general or specific prompt intended to move discussion along . 1 ) So , what else ? 2 ) What was your first choice ? Medium A statement regarding the function of the software . My computer is really slow . Table 3 : Management Act Sub - Types As for the FTF / Paper study , we more carefully analyzed the MN acts through a second round of content analysis . The same coding scheme from the FTF / Paper study was used [ 7 ] , with the only addition being a category for MN acts that pertained to the software medium . The scheme had five categories : Strategy , Action , Task , Prompt , and Medium ( Table 3 ) . Two coders ran the analysis independently and obtained a high initial intercoder agreement ( Kappa = . 83 ) . Then the disagreements were discussed and resolved . This more detailed analysis revealed two subcategories that may be indicators of process common ground development , in that they decreased from run 1 to run 3 . These were MN acts reflecting Strategy ( t 15 = 2 . 02 , p < . 06 ) and Task ( t 15 = 3 . 12 , p < . 01 ) . On the contrary , lower - level management acts pertaining to Action , Prompt and Medium remained high and quite stable over the three runs . We expected that the software medium would better sup - port implicit sharing and reduce the need to coordinate ex - plicitly the sharing process . Thus we hypothesized that there would be fewer Checking dialogue acts in the Dis / SW compared to the FTF / Paper study ; our analyses confirmed this ( overall , FTF / Paper ( 39 % ) vs . Dis / SW ( 34 % ) ; in run 3 specifically , FTF / Paper ( 41 % ) vs . Dis / SW ( 34 % ) , F 1 , 26 = 3 . 9 p < 0 . 05 ) . This result is also confirmed by a Poisson regres - sion analysis that revealed significant effects of both Me - dium + Setting and Run ; the proportion of Checking was lower for Dis / SW teams than for FTF / Paper ( Me - dium + Setting effect , ß = - . 18 ( 0 . 18 ) , p < . 001 ) . More impor - tantly , the interaction between Medium + Setting and Run is CHI 2009 ~ Computer Mediated Communication 2 April 9th , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 2346 significant ( ß = . 39 ( 0 . 09 ) , p < . 001 ) . As conveyed by Figure 3 , checking in the Dis / SW teams was not only lower overall but remained relatively stable over time rather than increas - ing as in the FTF / Paper teams . Figure 3 : Checking Understanding Dialogue Acts in Software Study vs . Paper Study The Checking acts are one measure of the costs for coordi - nating a sharing process ( e . g . , [ 20 ] ) ; it appears that our software design was successful in reducing this cost . Our earlier finding of fewer Pull acts by the Dis / SW teams since run 1 ( Figure 2 ) is also consistent with the reduction in Checking ( Figure 3 ) ; it suggests that in general members had less need for explicitly coordinating the sharing process ( i . e . , knowing ‘when’ and perhaps ‘by whom’ a piece of information is needed ) . Also recall that despite the distrib - uted setting , the communication structure increased in effi - ciency over the runs ( Table 2 , right columns , see Dis / SW ) . Since the need for checking in the Dis / SW teams members reduced , then they focused more on generating judgments about the content . The task was in fact a judgment task . We found that the proportion of Judgments acts in the Dis / SW teams was larger ( Dis / SW 23 % vs . FTF / Paper 20 % , effect of Medium + Setting , ß = - . 40 ( 0 . 21 ) , p < . 05 ) . DISCUSSION We presented a collaborative geospatial prototype and its design rationale , which originated from the results of our own fieldwork with emergency management teams and prior research on team cognition . We also presented the results of an experiment with distributed teams using this prototype system . Despite the expected costs due to the distributed setting , we found evidence of a net benefit in development of content and process common ground in the teams . Using multiple related measures of team behavior , we showed how specific design features contributed to the development of both content and process common ground . Beyond Current Models of Sharing A general implication is that CSCW designers should move to a more expansive view of sharing and coordination . First , we must move beyond mere content : The support of common ground in teamwork cannot simply focus on effi - cient exchange of content . For complex decision - making tasks like emergency management planning , sharing ‘how to’ approach a problem and bring it to a solution is at least as important as sharing content about the task itself . Fur - ther , the empirical attention to process common ground should inspire new design ideas for enhancing the implicit sharing of procedural and strategic knowledge among team members . We implemented features - role indications asso - ciated with actions , and shared annotations within the team workspace - and provided empirical evidence of their bene - fits in collaboration ( e . g . , reductions in explicit checking and management of strategy ) . Second , we must move beyond mere knowledge in com - mon : Even our notions of the content that is shared in teamwork must be broader than that implied by traditional models of individual cognition ( e . g . , [ 3 ] ) . In heterogeneous work teams , diverse experts come together so as to know more and judge more accurately than each can do individu - ally . In this task context , transactive models of sharing are more suitable than the shared team mental models [ 13 , 17 ] . Collaborative tools should help experts emphasize to their collaborators’ attention the knowledge that is most relevant at this point in time . If low - level details are managed indi - vidually by each expert and shared only when needed , then the team can focus on aggregations of data , judgments and strategy . Third , and more generally , we must move beyond mere FTF collaboration , which is often seen as a universal refer - ence model for collaboration [ 14 ] . To the contrary , we maintain that a well - designed CSCW systems can allow distributed teams to perform better ( and do more ) than FTF teams . It can allow to do more than simply ‘being there’ [ 11 , 27 ] . To accomplish this , the design must be grounded in task - specific empirical research , and the affordances in - troduced should seek to do more than approximate FTF . For example , we implemented functionalities that allow members to copy their private annotations onto the public map . This leads to wholly new and editable objects for use by the team . The annotations record the role of the creator ; however subsequent use ( e . g . , views ) , can be analyzed and presented for other purposes ( e . g . , summarizing or voting ) . We are exploring a few extensions to the prototype , delib - erately seeking CSCW tools that support collaboration be - yond what FTF , as model of collaboration , can do [ 11 ] . Current Limitations and Future Work The effect of run ( time or shared work experience ) on con - tent and process common ground measures were confirmed by both lab studies . However , the results do not allow us yet to clearly distinguish the effects of the Medium ( Paper versus SW ) from those of the Setting ( FTF versus Distrib - uted ) . In the first phase of our empirical research on com - mon ground with small teams the strategy has been to start from emulating emergency management planning situations from the field and , then , systematically compare two very different conditions ( FTF / Paper vs . Dis / SW condition ) , measuring the effects of both Medium and Setting . Note CHI 2009 ~ Computer Mediated Communication 2 April 9th , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 2347 that comparing these conditions with a Distributed / Paper condition would raise the problem of low ecologic validity . Our ongoing and future work is to run new experiments that can help disentangle the effects of Medium and Setting , refine the design rationale , and apply it to new types of complex collaborative tasks . A second SW lab experiment with a new version of the software prototype has been com - pleted and a new experiment is being planned . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by the U . S . Office of Naval re - search under award N000140510549 . We thank Noldus Information Technology ( Lucas Noldus , Andrew Spink , Tobias Heffelaar ) [ 28 ] for providing useful software tools for data collection and analysis . We thank Caitlin Ferro , Craig Ganoe , Blaine Hoffman , Alex Ting , and Su Chuen Foo for their valuable contributions in developing the soft - ware , running the experiments , and analyzing the data . REFERENCES 1 . Agresti , A . ( 2002 ) Categorical Data Analysis . John Wiley & Sons , NJ . 2 . Carroll et al . ( 2007 ) Prototyping collaborative geospatial emergency planning . In Proc . ISCRAM 2007 . 3 . Carroll et al . ( 2008 ) . Common Ground in Teamwork : toward a Conceptual Model . In Letsky M . Warner N . , Fiore S . , Smith , C . ( Eds . ) , Macrocognition in teams . Amsterdam , NL : Elsevier . 4 . Cannon - Bowers , J . A . , Salas , E . , & Converse , S . A . ( 1993 ) . Shared mental models in expert team decision making . In N . J . Castellan ( Ed . ) , Individual and group decision making : Current issues . 221 – 246 . 5 . Clark , H . H . & Brennan , S . E . ( 1991 ) . Grounding in communication . In L . B . Resnick , J . Levine & S . D . Teasley ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on socially shared cogni - tion . Washington , DC : APA . 6 . Clark , H . H . ( 1996 ) Using language . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . 7 . Convertino , G . , Mentis , H . , Rosson , M . B . , Carroll , J . M . , Slavkovic , A . , and Ganoe , C . H . ( 2008 ) . Articulating common ground in cooperative work : content & proc - ess . Proc . CHI . 1637 - 1646 . ACM Press . 8 . Convertino , G . , Ganoe , C . H . , Schafer , W . , Yost , B . , and Carroll , J . M . ( 2005 ) . A multiple view approach to sup - port common ground in distributed and synchronous geo - collaboration . In Proc . CMV 2005 . 121 - 132 . 9 . Convertino G . , Mentis , H . et al . ( 2007 ) . How does com - mon ground increase ? In Proc . ACM Group 2007 . 10 . Convertino G . , Mentis H . et al . ( 2008 ) Comparing Me - dia in Emergency Planning . In Proc . ISCRAM 2008 . 11 . Convertino G . , Wu A . , Zhang X . et al . ( 2008 ) . Design - ing Group Annotations and Process Visualizations for Role - Based Collaboration . Internat . Workshop on Social Computing , Behavioral Modeling , Prediction . 12 . Convertino , Zhao et al . ( 2007 ) . A Role - based Multi - View Approach to support GeoCollaboration . In Proc . HCI International 2007 . Lawrence Erlbaum Ass . 13 . Cooke , N . J . , Salas , E . , Cannon - Bowers , J . A . , & Stout , R . ( 2000 ) . Measuring team knowledge . Human Fac - tors , 42 , 151 - 173 . 14 . Hollan , J . D . & Stornetta , S . ( 1992 ) : Beyond Being There . In Proc . ACM CHI 92 . 15 . Kleinman , D . L . , & Serfaty , D . ( 1989 ) Team perform - ance assessment in distributed decision making . In R . Gilson , J . P . Kincaid , B . Godiez . Proc . Interactive Net - worked Simulation for Training Conference . 16 . McGrath , J . E . ( 1984 ) . Groups : Interaction and per - formance . NJ : Prentice - Hall . 17 . Mohammed S . & Dumville B . C . ( 2001 ) . Team mental models in a team knowledge framework : expanding the - ory and measurement across disciplinary boundaries . Journal of Organizational Behavior . 22 . 18 . Monk , A . ( 2003 ) . Common ground in electronically mediated communication : Clark’s theory of language use , in J . M . Carroll ( Ed . ) , Toward a multidisciplinary science of HCI . MIT Press . 19 . Monk , A . , McCarthy , J . , Watts , L . , & Daly - Jones , O . Measures of process . In Thomas , P . J . ( Ed . ) , CSCW re - quirements and evaluation . Berlin : Springer - Verlag . 20 . Sanford A . , Anderson A . H . , & Mullin J . ( 2003 ) . Audio channel constraints in video - mediated communication . Interacting with Computers , 16 ( 6 ) . 21 . Schafer W . , Ganoe C . , Carroll J . M . ( 2007 ) . Supporting Community Emergency Management Planning through a Geocollaboration Software Architecture . CSCW , 16 . 22 . Sellen , A . J . ( 1995 ) . Remote conversations : the effects of mediating talk with technology . HCI , 10 . 23 . Anderson , A . H . , Bader , M . , Bard , E . , Boyle , E . , Do - herty , G . , Garrod , S . , Isard , S . , Kowtko , J . , McAllister , J . , Sotillo , C . , Thompson , H . , 1991 . The HCRC Map Task Corpus . Language and Speech 34 ( 4 ) , 351 – 360 . 24 . Kraut R . E . , Gergle D . , Fussell , S . R . ( 2002 ) The use of visual information in shared visual spaces : informing the development of virtual co - presence , In Proc . the ACM conference on Proc . ACM CSCW 2002 . 25 . Stewart , D . D . , & Stasser , G . ( 1995 ) . Expert role assign - ment and information sampling during collective recall and decision making . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 69 , 619 – 628 . 26 . Carroll , J . M . , Rosson , M . B . , Farooq , U . , Xiao , L ( In press ) . Beyond being aware . Information and Organiza - tions . 27 . Cscl . ist . psu . edu / public / projects / ONRproject / quest . html ( Last accessed Jan 12 2009 ) . 28 . Www . noldus . com / human - behavior - research ( Last ac - cessed Jan 12 2009 ) CHI 2009 ~ Computer Mediated Communication 2 April 9th , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 2348