Big Ideas in Sports Analytics and Statistical Tools for their Investigation A Preprint Benjamin S . Baumer Statistical & Data Sciences Smith College Northampton , MA 01063 bbaumer @ smith . edu Gregory J . Matthews Mathematics and Statistics Loyola University Chicago Chicago , IL 60660 gmatthews1 @ luc . edu Quang Nguyen Statistics & Data Science Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburgh , PA 15213 nmquang @ cmu . edu January 11 , 2023 Abstract Sports analytics—broadly deﬁned as the pursuit of improvement in athletic performance through the analysis of data—has expanded its footprint both in the professional sports industry and in academia over the past 30 years . In this paper , we connect four big ideas that are common across multiple sports : the expected value of a game state , win probability , measures of team strength , and the use of sports betting market data . For each , we explore both the shared similarities and individual idiosyncracies of analytical approaches in each sport . While our focus is on the concepts underlying each type of analysis , any implementation necessarily involves statistical methodologies , computational tools , and data sources . Where appropriate , we outline how data , models , tools , and knowledge of the sport combine to generate actionable insights . We also describe opportunities to share analytical work , but omit an in - depth discussion of individual player evaluation as beyond our scope . This paper should serve as a useful overview for anyone becoming interested in the study of sports analytics . K eywords sports analytics · R packages · sports data · pairwise comparisons · datasets 1 Introduction Insights derived from the analysis of data have transformed the world of sports over the last few decades . While baseball—a naturally discrete sport with more than a century’s worth of professional data—may be the sport with the longest relationship with sports analytics , one would be hard - pressed to identify a professional sport today in which sports analytics is not having an impact . In basketball , analytics has driven a shift in the conventional wisdom about shot selection . Most teams are shooting more three - pointers , settling for fewer long two - point shots , deploying more versatile defenders , and relying less on the strategy of pounding the ball into the paint in an attempt to get a high - percentage shot ( Schuhmann , 2021 ) . In American football , teams are going for it on fourth down far more often than in the past , a direct result of statistical analysis showing that most teams were previously overly conservative ( Lopez , 2020 ) . And , of course , in baseball , teams are using defensive shifts to maximize the probability of recording an out , encouraging hitters to improve their launch angles , and optimizing pitcher repertoires to minimize contact ( Healey , 2017 ) . These are just the most obvious examples of strategic changes that are fueled by insights extracted from data by practitioners of sports analytics . Similar insights are now being made in less obvious settings , including esports ( Clark et al . , 2020 ; Maymin , 2021 ) . These insights come both from academia , where researchers typically use public data to produce high - caliber , peer - reviewed scientiﬁc work , as well as from industry , where highly - trained analysts work with with players , coaches , and team oﬃcials to put new ideas into immediate a r X i v : 2301 . 04001v1 [ s t a t . A P ] 10 J a n 2023 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 eﬀect thanks to high - resolution , often proprietary data . A growing pool of people move seamlessly between these two worlds , leading to the formation of partnerships and the cross - pollination of ideas . Every sport is diﬀerent , with its own set of rules , strategies , methods of data collection , number of players , and the magnitude of the role of chance . At the same time , many sports are similar , either because one evolved from the other , or the structure of the games share certain attributes . Sports that are closely related historically may or may not share common applications of analytical methods . For example , despite belonging to the same bat - and - ball family , baseball and cricket diﬀer in strategies such as batting order or sacriﬁce plays . Conversely , with just a few small tweaks , analytical metrics might work just as well across sports that are unrelated and quite diﬀerent . For instance , an Elo rating could be equally valid for chess players and ice hockey teams . In this paper , we explore four key ideas that have widespread applicability across many sports : the expected value of a game state ( Section 2 ) , win probability ( Section 3 ) , measures of team strength ( Section 4 ) , and the use of sports betting market data ( Section 5 ) . In each case , we deﬁne the concept mathematically , explain how it originated , and give examples of its applications in multiple sports . Our goal is to unify the conceptual threads , while doing some justice to the customizations necessary to make a metric meaningful in a particular sport . We include copious references to original works of scholarship . Doing the work of sports analytics requires computing with data . While the sources of sports data are too numerous to list , in Section 6 we highlight a few computational tools ( including a table of R packages ) that make this kind of work possible . Section 7 lists several opportunities for disseminating work publicly . We conclude in Section 8 with a short discussion of some ideas that are not explored in this paper . Notably , we omit a treatment of individual player ratings for team sports , since this concept has been covered ably in these pages by Albert ( 2015 ) , and its inclusion would double the length of this manuscript . We do , however , discuss individual player ratings in the context of one - person teams ( e . g . , chess , tennis ) in Section 4 . We encourage readers to explore Cochran et al . ( 2017 ) and Albert et al . ( 2016 ) for collections of articles in sports analytics that provide broad coverage of the ﬁeld . 2 The expected value of a game state In many sports , the ﬁrst step towards an analytical understanding is the estimation of the expected value of a game state at any given point in it . Mathematically , we deﬁne X to be a random variable indicating the number of points ( or runs ) that a team will score over some determined amount of time ( e . g . , remainder of game , quarter , period , or inning ) . Let s ∈ S be a tuple that encodes the state of a game . Then our task is to estimate : E [ X | s ] = X x ≥ 0 Pr [ X = x | s ] · x , ( 1 ) for any state s ∈ S , where Pr [ X = x | s ] is the probability of scoring x points given that the game is in state s and S is the set of all possible states . The concept of a state is easier to grasp in a sport that can be modeled as discrete ( in the sense of discrete event simulation ) . By discrete , we mean a sport that can be easily broken into short , distinct segments of action which are typically summarized categorically . Each of these segments might represent a state s . For example , each pitch in baseball is either a ball or a strike . If the ball is put in play , then there may be a complex sequence of movements by the players , but ultimately ( within a few seconds ) that sequence will end and no more action will be permitted until the next pitch . At the beginning and end of each phase of action , we will know deﬁnitively which team is on oﬀense and defense , which runners are on which bases , the score , how many outs there are , etc . Tennis could similarly be viewed as a series of discrete actions deﬁned by each point . To say that a player is winning 6 - 2 , 3 - 1 , 40 - 15 and serving with one fault committed is to characterize the state of the match . In American football , the game can be broken down into a discrete sequence based on each down . Contrast this to sports like lacrosse , soccer , or any variant of hockey , which feature largely running clocks and continuous player movement . In these sports , it is not obvious how to break up the action into discrete chunks . In this Section , we illustrate how the fundamental concept of the expected value of a game state leads to compelling ﬁndings in a variety of sports . 2 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 Table 1 : George Lindsey’s expected run matrix . Note how ( when reading across the rows ) the expected runs decrease as outs increase for the same conﬁguration of baserunners , while ( when reading down the columns ) expected runs generally increase as baserunners advance . 000 means no runners on base , and 110 means runners on second and third bases . Out Base 0 1 2 000 0 . 461 0 . 243 0 . 102 001 0 . 813 0 . 498 0 . 219 010 1 . 194 0 . 671 0 . 297 011 1 . 390 0 . 980 0 . 355 100 1 . 471 0 . 939 0 . 403 101 1 . 940 1 . 115 0 . 532 110 1 . 960 1 . 560 0 . 687 111 2 . 220 1 . 642 0 . 823 2 . 1 Discrete event analysis First , we explore results derived from the expected value of a state in sports where discrete event analysis is common . We draw primarily on baseball and American football , but applications in other sports ( e . g . , tennis ) are common ( see for example , Kovalchik & Reid ( 2019 ) ) . 2 . 1 . 1 In baseball , the expected run matrix In baseball , s is typically determined by two factors : the conﬁguration of the runners on base ( there are 8 possibilities ) and the number of outs ( 3 possibilities ) . Thus , there are | S | = 24 = 8 · 3 basic states of an inning in baseball 1 , and we are often interested in the number of runs that will be scored from some state until the end of the inning . In this example using baseball , E [ X | s ] is the expected number of runs scored between now and the end of the inning given that the inning is currently in state s . The collection of estimates E [ X | s ] for all 24 states is called the expected run matrix 2 , and it is foundational in baseball analytics . Early work on this topic can be found in Lindsey ( 1963 ) , who used play - by - play data to compute an empirical estimate for the mean number of runs scored in the remainder of the inning for each of these 24 possible states of an inning . This line of work led to analysis of all types of common baseball strategies . For example , many baseball teams elect to attempt a sacriﬁce bunt with a runner on ﬁrst and no one out in the inning , with the goal of moving the runner to second base , at the cost of the batter being out . Figure 1 shows a reproduction of Lindsey ( 1963 ) ’s original calculations , and Table 1 shows the expected run matrix in its most common form . Tango et al . ( 2007 ) ( and many subsequent analyses ) conclude that the sacriﬁce bunt is rarely worth it , because most teams would be expected to score more runs with a runner on ﬁrst and no outs than they would with a runner on second and one out . It is worth emphasizing that the values in E [ X | s ] are estimates , and the precision of those estimates has many subtleties . First , the values within the expected run matrix change over time . For example , any estimation of the values in the expected run matrix based on data from a high - scoring era ( e . g . , the early 2000s ) will yield diﬀerent values than equivalent analysis in a low - scoring era . In a high run - scoring environment , where there are many home runs , the value of a walk may be higher , since a player who walks is more likely to score on a subsequent home run . Conversely , in a low run - scoring environment where hits are hard to come by , stolen bases and sacriﬁce bunts may be comparatively more valuable . Thus , a careful estimate of E [ X | s ] would include a time parameter t , indicating when the estimate is appropriate . 1 25 , if you include the absorbing state of 3 outs that describes the end of an inning . 2 There is no inherent dimensionality to E [ X | s ] . The matrix nomenclature stems from its values typically being displayed in 8 × 3 grid . However , when computing with E [ X | s ] , it is most often convenient to treat it as a 24 × 1 vector . 3 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 Figure 1 : Table 1 from Lindsey’s original paper . The column labeled E ( T , B ) gives the expected run matrix as a vector , based on Lindsey’s analysis of Major League Baseball data from 1959 and 1960 . 4 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 Figure 2 : Table 1 from Carter and Machol’s original paper . Note the monotonic increase in expected point values as the team gets closer to the endzone . Second , the characterization of S as having 24 states is only the simplest possible . The inning , or the score of the game , or even the weather , could be incorporated into S , as those conditions might reasonably aﬀect the estimate of E [ X | s ] . More deﬁnitively , the identity of the current batter , pitcher , or batter on deck , might also aﬀect the estimate of E [ X | s ] . Indeed , Tango et al . ( 2007 ) show that when a particularly weak - hitting batter is up ( i . e . , the pitcher ) , a sacriﬁce bunt becomes a more eﬀective strategy . See Albert & Bennett ( 2001 ) for a fuller discussion of the use of the expected run matrix in baseball and Marchi et al . ( 2018 ) for examples of how to estimate the expected run matrix using Retrosheet data and the R statistical computing language ( R Core Team , 2022 ) . 2 . 1 . 2 In American football , expected points The concept of estimating the value of the state of a game is easily extended to other sports . For example , in American football , s is determined by situational variables such as down , yardage to the next ﬁrst down , time remaining in the game , and ﬁeld position . The task of estimating expected points of possession in football goes back to Carter & Machol ( 1971 ) , who estimate the expected points for 1st and 10 plays in the NFL , given any yard line on the football ﬁeld . Due to limitations regarding the amount of data collected , the authors divide football ﬁeld into 10 - yard buckets , centered at their midpoints ( e . g . 5 , 15 , 25 , 35 , etc . ) , before averaging the value of the next scoring instance across the ﬁeld to obtain the expected points . Figure 2 shows a reproduction of Carter & Machol ( 1971 ) ’s estimates . As expected , the estimated expected points increases monotonically as the teams gets closer to the endzone . One limitation of this approach is the linearity assumption , which results in a high negative expected point value when the oﬀensive team is 95 yards away from the opponent’s goal line . Early work on expected point values in American football can also be found in Carroll et al . ( 1988 ) . In particular , the authors consider a similar approach to Carter & Machol ( 1971 ) and propose a linear model for expected points in the NFL . They determine that every extra 25 yards is associated with 2 more points scored on average for a football team . 5 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 Other attempts at modeling expected points in football are Goldner ( 2012 ) and Goldner ( 2017 ) , who propose a Markov framework . In particular , the author considers a football drive as an absorbing Markov chain , consisting of distinct absorbing states that include touchdowns , ﬁeld goals , and other possession outcomes . An absorbing state is a link in a Markov chain from which there are no possible transitions ( i . e . , it is the end of the chain ) . For any given play , the expected points are calculated using the absorption probabilities for diﬀerent scoring events . A more in - depth overview of the history of expected points in sports is provided in Yurko et al . ( 2019 ) ( Section 1 . 1 ) . Most importantly , Yurko et al . ( 2019 ) use publicly available data provided by the nﬂscrapR package ( Horowitz et al . , 2020 ) to model the expected points on a play - by - play level in football . The authors introduce a multinomial logistic regression approach , which takes into account the current down , time remaining , yards from endzone , yards to go , and indicators for goal down situation and whether there are less than two minutes remaining in the half . Their model estimates the probabilities of the following possible scoring outcomes after each play : no score , safety , ﬁeld goal , and touchdown for both the oﬀensive and defensive teams , all of which have a point value . The expected points for a play can then be calculated accordingly , by summing up the products of the scoring event point values and their associated probabilities ( see Equation 1 ) . In addition , Pelechrinis et al . ( 2019 ) develop an expected points framework in the same spirit as the previous work , but account for the strength of the opponents in their method . They state that by failing to account for opponent strength appropriately , about 124 . 8 points per team each season ( or about 3 . 8 wins per season ) are not credited correctly . This is a substantial amount in a 16 - game season . 2 . 1 . 3 In American football , 4th down strategy The concept of expected points in American football has many applications . One of the most notable and well - studied topics is the evaluation of 4th down strategy . There is near universal consensus in the literature that NFL teams have been too conservative in the past when making 4th down decisions . Romer ( 2006 ) examines 4th down decisions in the NFL using expected points by focusing only on examples from the ﬁrst quarter of a game ( to avoid issues with end - of - half and end - of - game decision making ) . They concluded that teams don’t go for it enough if teams are trying to maximize their probability of winning the game . Numerous other papers ( see Lopez ( 2020 ) for details ) use the analysis of the expected number of points to improve fourth down strategy . In addition to Romer ( 2006 ) , later work by Yam & Lopez ( 2019 ) uses win probability ( see Section 3 ) , rather than expected points , and a causal inference framework to reach similar conclusions that NFL teams are too conservative in going for it on 4th down . In addition , they estimate that a better strategy would be worth about 0 . 4 wins per season on average , a substantial amount comparable to the eﬀect size reported by Pelechrinis et al . ( 2019 ) above . Lopez ( 2020 ) presents an introduction to NFL tracking data , and examines 4th down behavior as an example of the type of problem that can be more thoroughly studied with the increase in granularity of the tracking data over traditional NFL data . In the past , when looking at down and distance data to study whether NFL coaches are making good decisions about whether to “go for it” or punt on 4th down , the distance data is only a rounded approximation of the true distance “to go” ( i . e . 1 yard , 1 foot , and 1 inch will all be recorded as 4th and 1 . In fact , anything up to 2 yard will recorded as 4th and 1 ( Lopez , 2022 ) . However , a coach on the ﬁeld during a game will be able to clearly see the diﬀerence between 1 inch and 1 yard , and this information will factor into their decision making . With tracking data , the “to go” distance can be much more accurately assessed and therefore evaluation of 4th down coaching decisions can now account for this “extra” information that is available to a coach on the ﬁeld of play , but not recorded in traditional NFL data . Many past analyses of the decision to go for it or not on 4th down conclude that coaches in the NFL are too conservative in their decision making . Lopez ( 2020 ) also concludes that coaches are too conservative on 4th down decision making , but notes further that past estimates of the magnitude of how conservative coaches are on 4th down may be overstated due to the way in which to go yardage was recorded only approximately in the past . 2 . 1 . 4 Other applications of expected points in American football Researchers have also applied the notion of expected points to investigate other aspects of the game of football , including quarterback performance and coaching decisions . For quarterback evaluation , White & Berry ( 2002 ) present a tiered logistic regression method that can be , in general , applied to any regression setting with a polychotomous response . Using this technique , they estimate 6 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 the value of NFL plays using a simple expected points model with down , yards to go , and yards to goal as predictors . Accordingly , the model results are utilized to obtain ratings and rankings for NFL passers . Alamar ( 2010 ) implements an expected points framework to examine play calling in the NFL . However , rather than assessing each play on its own , they evaluate the play in the context of the drive . Based on play - by - play data from 2005 through 2008 , they determine that teams are under - utilizing passing plays in some situations . Another application of expected points is to evaluate kickoﬀ decisions made by football coaches , as demon - strated by Urschel & Zhuang ( 2011 ) . Speciﬁcally , they look at surprise on - sides kicks versus regular kickoﬀs and the decision to accept a touchback versus returning the kickoﬀ . Using data from the 2009 NFL season , they conclude , as many have , that coaches in the NFL tend to make conservative decisions . 2 . 2 Continuous event analysis Even in sports where the concept of a state is more diﬃcult to deﬁne , the value of a possession can be estimated with the help of tracking data . Over the past decade or so , professional sports leagues have collected tracking data which record the locations of all players and the ball ( or puck ) throughout a game . This high - resolution data allows researchers to produce advanced analyses of the captured spatiotemporal information and better understand the game . This is a great leap forward from older resources such as traditional box - score results and play - by - play data . 2 . 2 . 1 In basketball , expected point value In basketball , Cervone et al . ( 2014 ) and Cervone et al . ( 2016 ) introduce expected possession value ( EPV ) as a means toward an assessment of a player’s on - court performance . This metric is a continuous - time estimate of the expected number of points for the oﬀensive team on a given possession using player and ball locations . The EPV takes into account all possible outcomes ( a shot attempt , a pass , etc . ) for a given player with the ball , with diﬀerent weights being assigned to each decision . The computation of the EPV statistic is done using a ( technically discrete ) Markov model conditioned on spatial locations . Consequently , the authors derive a metric called EPV - Added ( EPVA ) , measuring a player’s EPV contribution in a given situation relative to a league - average player . A demonstration of the EPV model presented in Cervone et al . ( 2016 ) is available at https : / / github . com / dcervone / EPVDemo . Figure 3 illustrates how the provided tracking data informs the evolution of EPV throughout the play . It displays a snapshot of a possession during the NBA regular season matchup between the Miami Heat and the Brooklyn Nets on November 1 , 2013 . Miami is the team on oﬀense in this possession , whose outcome is a 26 - foot three - point miss by Mario Chalmers . The plot consists of two elements : 1 ) ( bottom ) the player locations on the court at a particular moment in this possession : when the ball just left Chalmers’s hands , and 2 ) ( top ) a line graph showing how the EPV changes continuously throughout the play until the three - point attempt . For this possession , the estimated EPV for the Miami Heat reaches its peak at 1 . 276 points at the moment the shot is taken . Note that Miami starts the play with an EPV of approximately 1 . 0 points , which indicates their implied average points per possession . Chalmers’ shot is worth 3 points , so the EPV of 1 . 276 points implies that the model estimate of the probability of Chalmers making this shot is 42 . 5 % . A breakthrough in this work is that this estimate is conditional on the locations of the other 9 players on the basketball court . Another framework for estimating expected points in basketball is proposed by Sicilia et al . ( 2019 ) . The authors oﬀer a diﬀerent point of view on expected points , where they ﬁrst consider a classiﬁcation model which returns the probabilities for whether a player would commit a foul ( shooting and non - shooting ) , turnover , or attempt a shot . The values associated with each of those “terminal actions” are then used to compute the expected points within a basketball play . See also Bornn et al . ( 2017 ) for more information on how tracking data have enabled advanced statistical analyses of basketball in recent years . The strategy of maximizing expected points in basketball has led directly to the proliferation of three - point shooting in the NBA . 2 . 2 . 2 In American football , yards gained In Section 2 . 1 . 2 , we discussed advances in American football analytics based on discrete game states deﬁned by down , yards to ﬁrst down , ﬁeld position , etc . The advent of player tracking data makes it possible to analyze American football using continuous states . For example , Yurko et al . ( 2020 ) use tracking data provided by the 2019 NFL Big Data Bowl ( see Section 7 ) to model the expected yards gained for a ball - carrier during the 7 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 Figure 3 : Player locations and estimated EPV for a possession during the Miami Heat ( red ) vs . Brooklyn Nets ( black ) NBA game on November 1 , 2013 . The captured moment is when Miami’s Mario Chalmers just releases a three - point shot , which ends up as a missed ﬁeld goal . Figure created by Cervone , et al . https : / / github . com / dcervone / EPVDemo course of a play . As an extension to pre - existing approaches , the authors use conditional density estimation to obtain a probability distribution for the number of yards gained during the play , rather than only producing a single estimate for the expected yards gained . Accordingly , the probability of various types of outcomes at the end of a play such as a touchdown or a ﬁrst - down gain can be computed from the distribution of the end - of - play yard line . Expected point value is also the main component of a novel NFL quarterback evaluation metric introduced by Reyers & Swartz ( 2021 ) . The authors take advantage of player tracking data to account for diﬀerent passing and running options on the football ﬁeld that are available to the quarterback . The expected points and probabilities associated with the possible quarterback options are estimated using the method of ensemble learning via stacking . 2 . 2 . 3 In other sports The notion of expected possession value has also been extended to association football ( soccer ) . Fernandez et al . ( 2021 ) implement deep learning methods to examine the instantaneous expected value of soccer possessions . This approach considers passes , ball drives , and shots in soccer as the main set of actions used to compute the EPV metric . Many applications can be derived from this framework , including predicting which footballer on the pitch is most likely to receive the next pass from the current on - ball player . Macdonald ( 2012 ) uses expected goals to evaluate ice hockey players , but does not have access to player tracking data necessary to evaluate possessions . Kumagai et al . ( 2021 ) oﬀer an EPV metric for ice hockey via a Bayesian space - time framework . 2 . 3 Optimal strategies that don’t maximize expected points Earlier in Section 2 , we deﬁned the expected value of a possession based on the state s of the game in terms of the expected number of points ( runs ) X that would be scored in the remainder of some period of time . We then showed how this value could be used to analyze the relative eﬀectiveness of certain strategies , with 8 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 the simple idea that strategies that yield higher expected values are preferable . Generally , the goal of any sport is to score more points than the other team , which most often means trying to score as many points as possible , leading to a general strategy of maximizing expected points . However , there are situations in which maximizing the number of expected points is not the desired strategy . For example , in the bottom of the ninth inning of a tied baseball game , the optimal strategy for winning the game is maximizing the probability of scoring at least one run , which may diﬀer from the strategy of maximizing expected runs . If we let U be the set of all strategies , then we assert that it is not always the case that the strategy u ∈ U that maximizes the expected number of points will maximize the probability of winning : arg max u ∈ U Pr [ X > 0 | s , u ] 6 = arg max u ∈ U E [ X | s , u ] . Consider the situation where runners are on ﬁrst and third base , and the score is tied in the bottom of the ninth inning with no one out . Information derived from Table 1 reveals that the expected number of runs scored in the remainder of the inning is 1 . 94 runs , while the probability of scoring zero runs is 0 . 13 . The defense is in a tight spot , facing an 87 % probability of losing the game . However , by walking the hitter to load the bases , they create the opportunity to force the lead runner at home and thus reduce the chances of scoring to 82 % , even though they raise the expected number of runs scored to 2 . 22 . In this case , the defensive team is wise to pursue the strategy of maximizing the expected number of runs scored , because it minimizes the probability of scoring at least one run . Maximizing the probability of scoring is optimal in any sudden - death situation , which has ( but currently does not ) included overtime in American football ( Martin et al . , 2018 ) . The situation gets even more interesting when teams modify both their oﬀensive and defensive strategies simultaneously . For example , in hockey teams will often pull their goalie when trailing in the ﬁnal period . This strategy severely weakens their defense but strengthens their oﬀense . The hope is to score a quick goal to get back in the game , but the risk is falling further behind . Beaudoin & Swartz ( 2010 ) show that NHL coaches do not always employ the optimal strategies , usually by waiting too long to pull their goalies . Skinner ( 2011 ) develops a general framework for these desperation strategies , which include the onside kick in American football , pulling the inﬁeld and / or outﬁeld in baseball , and of course , the fabled Hack - a - Shaq strategy in basketball . 3 Win probability A related , but diﬀerent concept to expected points is the notion of win probability . Win probability is simply an estimate of the probability that a team will win the game , given its current state s . Extending the mathematical framework we deﬁned in Section 2 , let W i be a binary random variable that indicates a win for team i . Then , Pr [ W i | s ] , is the win probability for team i in the state s . This win probability is closely related to the expected value of a state . Albert ( 2015 ) deﬁnes the win probability as : Pr [ W i | s ] = X X ≥ 0 Pr [ X | s ] · Pr [ W i | X , s ] , where Pr [ W i | X , s ] is the probability that team i will win the game given that they score X points from state s . Win probability is easily extended to provide a measure of the impact of sports plays and individual player contributions , as discussed in Albert ( 2015 ) . Given its popularity , recent books on sports analytics often dedicate multiple chapters entirely to win probability . These include Albert & Bennett ( 2001 ) , Schwarz ( 2004 ) , Tango et al . ( 2007 ) , Albert et al . ( 2016 ) , and Winston et al . ( 2022 ) . In this section , we discuss notable previous work on win probability in baseball , American football , basketball , and several other sports . 3 . 1 Baseball The notion of win probability in baseball goes back to at least as early as Lindsey ( 1961 ) , who calculates the expected win probability after each inning based on the distribution of runs scored in each inning . Inspired by 9 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 Lindsey ( 1961 ) ’s work , Mills & Mills ( 1970 ) utilize win probability to introduce Player Win Average ( PWA ) , a measure of a player’s contribution to the game outcome . In particular , PWA is computed as PWA = Win Points Win Points + Loss Points , where the win and loss points represent how much the player positively and negatively impacts their team’s probability of winning after each play . In eﬀect , the win points are the sum of the changes in Pr [ W i | s ] from one state to the next . Additionally , a mathematical model for estimating win probability in baseball is presented in Tango et al . ( 2007 ) . The authors use Markov chains to look at win expectancy throughout the course of a baseball game . This approach considers diﬀerent states of the game such as base , inning , outs and score , and outputs win probabilities accordingly . See Albert ( 2015 ) for a more detailed historical overview of the use of win probability in baseball . 3 . 2 American football In recent years , a number of statistical methods have been used to build well - calibrated win probability models in American football . These are ﬂexible algorithms that have high predictability , can account for nonlinear interactions between the explanatory variables , require few assumptions , and produce feature importance scores . Lock & Nettleton ( 2014 ) implement a random forest framework to provide a win probability estimate before each play in a football game . Covariates included in this tree - based method are the current down , score diﬀerential , time remaining , adjusted score , point spread , number of timeouts remaining for each team , total points scored , current yard line , and yards to go for a ﬁrst down . According to this model , the diﬀerence in score between the two teams is the most important feature for predicting win probabilities at any given moment in an NFL game . In addition , Yurko et al . ( 2019 ) estimate win probability in the NFL using a generalized additive model ( GAM ) , as part of the nﬂscrapR package ( Horowitz et al . , 2020 ) and nﬂWAR framework . This model takes into account the estimated expected points obtained from the model described in Section 2 , along with other predictors for time , current half , and timeouts . The two win probability frameworks proposed by Lock & Nettleton ( 2014 ) and Yurko et al . ( 2019 ) were also implemented in Yam & Lopez ( 2019 ) with minimal modiﬁcations . Speciﬁcally , the authors combined both approaches to estimate the win probability for each play , with an overall goal of assessing fourth down decision - making in American football . A vital highlight of Yurko et al . ( 2019 ) ’s win probability model is that it is fully reproducible and uses publicly available data . One of Yurko et al . ( 2019 ) ’s goals was also to encourage researchers to “use , explore , and improve upon our work , ” which ultimately inspired nﬂfastR ( Carl & Baldwin ( 2022 ) ) , now considered the successor to nﬂscrapR . Figure 4 shows a win probability graph for the 2018 NFL Playoﬀs Divisional Round matchup between the New Orleans Saints and the Minnesota Vikings on January 14 , 2018 . We obtain the estimated probability of winning for each team using the nﬂfastR R package , which implements a gradient boosting model via the xgboost library ( Chen et al . ( 2022 ) ) for estimating win probabilities . Minnesota was leading throughout the ﬁrst three quarters of the game , having win probabilities of 0 . 869 , 0 . 941 , and 0 . 742 at the end of the ﬁrst , second , and third quarters , respectively . The win probabilities get close to parity late in the fourth quarter , when the Saints took the lead with 3 : 01 left in the game . The last play of this game—famously known as the Minneapolis Miracle—resulted in a drastic swing in win probabilities for both teams . With 10 seconds remaining in the game , the Vikings begin the ﬁnal possession with a 25 . 3 % chance of winning . Their probability increased to a perfect 1 when Stefon Diggs scored a game - winning 61 - yard receiving touchdown as the game clock expired . 3 . 3 Basketball Stern ( 1994 ) provides an investigation of in - game win probability and the scoring process in basketball using a Brownian motion model . Let p ( l , t ) represent the win probability for the home team given an l - point lead after t seconds of game time . The model introduced by Stern ( 1994 ) is a probit regression model , which 10 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 0 . 00 0 . 25 0 . 50 0 . 75 1 . 00 0 900 1800 2700 3600 Time Remaining ( seconds ) W i n P r obab ili t y Minnesota Vikings New Orleans Saints Figure 4 : Win probability graph for New Orleans Saints vs . Minnesota Vikings in the 2017 – 18 NFL Playoﬀs . provides an estimate for p ( l , t ) . Speciﬁcally , p ( l , t ) = Φ l + ( 1 − t ) µ p ( 1 − t ) σ 2 ! . Here , a Brownian motion process with drift µ points advantage for the home team and variance σ 2 is used to model the score diﬀerence between the home and away teams . On a related note , Deshpande & Jensen ( 2016 ) extend Stern ( 1994 ) ’s framework by applying it in a Bayesian setting . Deshpande & Jensen ( 2016 ) propose a Bayesian linear regression model to assess the impact of individual players on their team’s chance of winning at any given time of a basketball game . This model assumes independence of observations and constant variability in win probability . Moreover , McFarlane ( 2019 ) uses logistic regression to estimate win probability for evaluating end - of - game decisions in the NBA . The approach takes into account the remaining game time , score diﬀerence , and point spread . This win probability model is then applied to the calculation of the End - of - game Tactics Metric ( ETM ) , measuring how the chance of winning a basketball game diﬀers between the optimal and on - court actual decisions . 3 . 4 Other sports The idea of win probability is also applied to other sports , with a diverse range of statistical techniques being used to estimate the probability of winning for a player or team . Brenzel et al . ( 2019 ) use three - dimensional Markov models to estimate win probability throughout a curling match . In particular , the authors propose both homogeneous and heterogeneous Markov models for estimating the chance of winning in curling , with diﬀerent independence assumptions on the relationship between performance and the current state of the game . In esports , Maymin ( 2021 ) relies on logistic regression to build a well - calibrated in - game win probability model for each speciﬁc moment during a game of League of Legends . Moreover , Guan et al . ( 2022 ) develop an in - game win probability model for the National Rugby League using functional data analysis . In this 11 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 approach , the rugby play - by - play event data are treated as functional , and the win probability is expressed as a function of the match time . 4 Team strength A third crucial idea in sports analytics is the estimation of team strength . First , we brieﬂy introduce a simple method for estimating team strength based on win - loss record . Next , we detail three other more sophisticated methods for estimating team strength in sports through pairwise evaluations . The methods in this Section apply equally well to multiplayer teams and single - player teams . The impetus for all methods for estimating team strength is the realization that win - loss records are a noisy measure of team strength . As binary outcomes , and with all sports ( except perhaps chess ) involving some element of chance , wins and losses carry some signal of team strength , but we can do better . 4 . 1 Expected winning percentage A simple method for estimating team strength that has become popular in sports analytics is expected winning percentage—often called Pythagorean expectation—developed by James ( 2003 ) . Later , Miller ( 2007 ) derived the formula as a consequence of assuming that runs ( in baseball ) are generated by two independent Weibull processes . Expected winning percentage is just : (cid:91) wpct = X α X α + Y α , where X is the number of points ( runs ) that a team has scored , and Y is the number of points ( runs ) that they have allowed , over some speciﬁed time period . James’s work was originally in baseball , and he posited the value of α = 2 . The resemblance to the formula for computing the length of the hypotenuse in a right triangle provides the nod to Pythagoras . Subsequent analysts have tried to ﬁnd the optimal value of α for various time periods . This can be done with a few lines of code , after observing that X α X α + Y α = 1 1 + ( Y / X ) α and ﬁtting a non - linear model ( see similar discussion in Baumer et al . ( 2021 ) ) . Figure 5 illustrates the quality of the ﬁt in Major League Baseball since 1954 , where the optimal value of α is 1 . 84 . Many authors have ﬁt expected winning percentage models to other sports—too many to cite here . See , for example , Hamilton ( 2011 ) for association football ( soccer ) , Caro et al . ( 2013 ) for Division I college football , and notably , future NBA general manager Daryl Morey for basketball ( Dewan & Zminda , 1993 ) . 4 . 2 Bradley - Terry models Perhaps the most widely - used probability model for predicting the outcome of a paired comparison is the Bradley - Terry model ( BTM ) ( Bradley & Terry , 1952 ) . For a pair of players ( or teams ) i and j , let Π ij denote the probability that i is preferred to j . Then the BTM is a logistic regression model with parameters β i , β j such that log (cid:18) Π ij Π ji (cid:19) = β i − β j . Here , exp ( β i ) is often viewed as a representation of team i ’s ability . The BTM can be implemented in R via the BradleyTerry2 package ( Turner & Firth , 2020 ) . As an example , we consider the data given in Agresti ( 2018 ) ( page 247 ) on tennis results from 2014 – 2018 for ﬁve men’s professional players : Novak Djokovic , Roger Federer , Andy Murray , Rafael Nadal , and Stan Wawrinka . We ﬁt a BTM to estimate the win probability for each pair of players and obtain a ranking for this group of ﬁve . Table 2 shows the estimated coeﬃcients of the ﬁtted BTM . According to the abilities , between 2014 and 2018 the players are ranked as follows : 1 ) Djokovic , 2 ) Federer , 3 ) Wawrinka , 4 ) Nadal , 5 ) Murray . In addition to an ordering , the magnitude of the coeﬃcients in Table 2 provide a measure of relative strength . 12 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 75 1 . 00 1 . 25 1 . 50 Ratio of Runs Scored to Runs Allowed W i nn i ng P e r c en t age Figure 5 : Winning percentages vs . runs scored and runs allowed in baseball , 1954 – 2021 . The navy line represents the expected winning percentage model posited by James , with the exponent value of 2 . The gold line shows the same model with an optimal exponent of 1 . 84 . Table 2 : The estimated abilities ( with standard errors ) for each tennis player , relative to Wawrinka , obtained from the ﬁtted Bradley - Terry model . Player Ability SE Djokovic 1 . 176 0 . 500 Federer 1 . 136 0 . 511 Wawrinka 0 . 000 0 . 000 Nadal - 0 . 062 0 . 515 Murray - 0 . 569 0 . 568 To obtain win probabilities , as an illustration , for the Federer - Nadal matchup , an estimate for the probability of a Federer victory is : ˆΠ 24 = exp ( ˆ β 2 − ˆ β 4 ) 1 + exp ( ˆ β 2 − ˆ β 4 ) = exp ( 1 . 136 + 0 . 062 ) 1 + exp ( 1 . 136 + 0 . 062 ) = 0 . 768 . 4 . 3 Elo ratings Another widely known tool for measuring team strength is the Elo rating system ( Elo , 1978 ) , which was originally developed for chess . Given two players i and j with unknown ratings R i and R j , the probability Π ij of i beating j is deﬁned as Π ij = 1 1 + K ( R j − R i ) / 400 . 13 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 In this formula , K is commonly known as the K - factor , or development coeﬃcient . The International Chess Federation ( FIDE ) uses K = 10 for players with any previously achieved rating of at least 2400 . Finally , K = 40 is given to new players with under 30 games played , and players under the age of 18 with rating less than than 2300 ( FIDE , 2022 ) . Another interpretation for Π ij is the expected score of the game for player i . The scores of 0 , 0 . 5 , and 1 are associated with three possible game outcomes loss , tie , and win , respectively . After a game , the updated Elo rating R ∗ i for player i is R ∗ i = R i + K ( S i − Π ij ) , where S i ∈ { 0 , 0 . 5 , 1 } . When a tournament concludes , a post - tournament rating is obtained for each player based on the rating updates for all games played . To illustrate , we consider a chess game played on June 1 , 2022 on Chess . com by one of the authors , with data obtained from the chessR package ( Zivkovic , 2022 ) ( see Section 6 . 1 ) . Prior to the game , the author was rated 1732 , whereas his opponent was rated 1683 . Since both ratings are below 2400 , we apply a development coeﬃcient of K = 20 to this example . The probability of the author ( a ) defeating their opponent ( b ) was Π ab = 1 1 + 20 ( 1683 − 1732 ) / 400 = 0 . 591 . The author won the match : that outcome is associated with a score of S a = 1 . The post - game Elo rating for the author is thus R ∗ a = 1732 + 20 ( 1 − 0 . 591 ) = 1740 . Besides chess , the Elo system has also been implemented to estimate team strength in other sports . See Koning ( 2017 ) for more information on applications of the Elo rating in soccer , and Kovalchik & Reid ( 2019 ) and Kovalchik ( 2016 ) for Elo ratings in tennis . Furthermore , Elo ratings are used extensively for rankings of teams in numerous sports by the data journalists at FiveThirtyEight . com . 4 . 4 Bayesian state - space models Glickman & Stern ( 1998 ) propose a Bayesian state - space model for paired comparisons for predicting NFL games , allowing team strength parameters to vary over time . In particular , they model point diﬀerential in the NFL by introducing week - to - week and season - to - season as the two primary sources of variation in team strengths . See also Glickman & Stern ( 2017 ) for more discussion on estimating team strengths in American football . More recently , Lopez et al . ( 2018 ) extend Glickman & Stern ( 1998 ) ’s state - space model to understand randomness in the four major American sports leagues . Betting moneylines are used in place of point diﬀerentials in order to estimate team strengths , and this framework also accounts for home advantage . Both papers motivate the usefulness of model - based measures of team strength by demonstrating their superiority to low - resolution win - loss records . Apart from sports gambling , having an accurate estimate of team strength is useful to team oﬃcials , who are constantly monitoring and forecasting their team’s ability . In a similar Bayesian setting , Koopman & Lit ( 2015 ) study English Premier League soccer match results by assuming a bivariate Poisson distribution with time - varying team abilities . This state - space approach appears to improve on bookmaker’s odds . 5 Sports betting market data Most of the research in sports analytics is fueled by the analysis of data recorded from the outcome of sports contests . However , a growing body of literature is informed by data from sports betting markets . Since the 2018 United States Supreme Court decision in Murphy v . National Collegiate Athletic Association , sports gambling has exploded in the U . S . The increasing interest in sports gambling has led to increasing interest in sports gambling data , and that data has proven useful to researchers in at least two major ways . First , betting market data is probably the best source for estimating the true probability of a team winning a game . The eﬃciency of betting market data in this respect has been demonstrated time and time again . The utility of these estimates have then informed research that has helped us learn about the sports themselves . In this sense , data generated by sports gambling has been an important source of data useful for sports analytics ( see Section 5 . 2 ) . 14 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 Table 3 : 2023 NBA Championship odds for the top 6 and bottom 6 teams . Retrieved from FanDuel Sportsbook on January 9 , 2023 . Rank Team Line Odds Prob . Prob . Normalized 1 Boston Celtics 390 4 . 9 0 . 204 0 . 163 2 Milwaukee Bucks 500 6 . 0 0 . 167 0 . 133 3 Brooklyn Nets 800 9 . 0 0 . 111 0 . 089 4 Golden State Warriors 900 10 . 0 0 . 100 0 . 080 5 Los Angeles Clippers 1000 11 . 0 0 . 091 0 . 073 6 Denver Nuggets 1100 12 . 0 0 . 083 0 . 067 25 Oklahoma City Thunder 50000 501 . 0 0 . 002 0 . 002 26 Orlando Magic 50000 501 . 0 0 . 002 0 . 002 27 Charlotte Hornets 50000 501 . 0 0 . 002 0 . 002 28 Houston Rockets 50000 501 . 0 0 . 002 0 . 002 29 San Antonio Spurs 50000 501 . 0 0 . 002 0 . 002 30 Detroit Pistons 50000 501 . 0 0 . 002 0 . 002 Total - 496590 4995 . 9 1 . 253 1 . 000 Second , sports analytics researchers have studied various types of sports gambling outlets ( including fantasy sports ) . This research has estimated probabilities , evaluated common strategies , and oﬀered optimized approaches for a variety of diﬀerent games of chance ( see Section 5 . 3 ) . Some researchers have then tried to demonstrate a positive return on some of these betting strategies , with very limited success . 5 . 1 Example : Win probabilities from betting market data To see how betting market data can be used to estimate team strengths , consider the betting lines posted on FanDuel Sportsbook for the 2023 NBA Champion on January 9 , 2023 and shown in Table 3 . This is a futures market , because the actual NBA champion will not be determined until June 2023 . The Boston Celtics are the favorite to win , with a moneyline of + 390 , meaning that a $ 100 bet on the Celtics to win the championship will pay back the original bet and an additional $ 390 if the Celtics win it all . This style of odds are sometimes called American odds . The corresponding fractional odds have the Celtics at 4 . 9 : 1 to win the championship . Conversely , six teams share the lowest odds at + 50000 . These moneylines ( ‘ i ) can be converted into an implied probability ( p i ) using the formula : p i = 100 100 + ‘ i . The sum of those probabilities is greater than one—this is why the sportsbook makes money regardless of who wins the championship . However , the implied probabilities can be normalized by dividing by their sum to recover true probabilities of each team winning the championship . Many diﬀerent researchers have shown that these normalized implied probabilities are accurate , unbiased , and eﬃcient estimates of the true unknowable probabilities ( see Lopez et al . ( 2018 ) for discussion and an extensive list of references ) . In this case , the FanDuel futures market suggests that the Celtics have a 16 . 3 % chance of winning the championship , while the Milwaukee Bucks have the second best chance , at 13 . 3 % . These implied probabilities can be used to ﬁt various models for team strength , as described in Section 4 . 5 . 2 The use of betting market data for sports analytics While Lopez et al . ( 2018 ) use betting market data to model team strengths , they do not directly address strategies for betting or ineﬃciencies in betting markets . Early work by Gandar et al . ( 1988 ) examine the rationality of NFL betting markets and concludes that statistical tests fail to reject the hypothesis of rationality . Related work such as Lacey ( 1990 ) and Boulier et al . ( 2006 ) explores the eﬃciency of NFL betting markets in the mid - 1980s and late - 1990s , respectively . Neither paper ﬁnds strong evidence for ineﬃciencies in the markets . Boulier & Stekler ( 2003 ) compare the predictive performance of power rankings and media experts to the betting market for NFL games and found that the betting market is the best for predicting winners . Lopez & Matthews ( 2015 ) show that betting market data was most useful in predicting men’s college basketball tournament outcomes . 15 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 Sports betting market data has also been used to investigate competitive behavior within leagues . Soebbing & Humphreys ( 2013 ) ﬁnd evidence that sports bettors think tanking in the NBA is occurring , although the evidence for whether it actually is remains mixed . 5 . 3 Analytics for sports betting Many diﬀerent types of bets can be placed on sports . For individual contests , bets involve point spreads , moneylines ( see Section 5 . 1 for an example ) , odds , or other ways of handicapping which team will win . Money can also be wagered on futures , where odds are given in advance for events that may or may not transpire ( e . g . , a certain team making the playoﬀs , or a certain player winning the MVP award ) . Here , we focus on betting pools , in which a group of people compete to predict winners in multiple contests ( often a tournament ) . We also address the inevitable question of whether strategies exist that will consistently beat the market . 5 . 3 . 1 Betting pools One popular type of betting pool is a survivor pool , in which participants stay in the competition as long as they continue to successfully pick winners . Bergman & Imbrogno ( 2017 ) present formal optimization approaches for NFL survivor pools and conclude that planning for only part of the season yields optimal results in terms of maximizing survival probability . Imbrogno & Bergman ( 2022 ) estimate the probability of having to share the winning pot in NFL survivor pools . Perhaps the most commonly - studied sports betting market surrounds the NCAA men’s college basketball tournament . Breiter & Carlin ( 1997 ) use Monte Carlo methods to study the standard “oﬃce pool . ” Kaplan & Garstka ( 2001 ) consider a variety of NCAA college basketball pools , and ﬁnd that the simple strategy of picking the team with the better seed is generally , but not always , optimal . Metrick ( 1996 ) ﬁnds that bettors overback the heaviest favorites . Niemi et al . ( 2008 ) show an improved return on investment by picking an undervalued champion and then completing the rest of one’s bracket by using published odds . Clair & Letscher ( 2007 ) develop and test strategies for maximizing expected return in both survivor and tournament - style pools . 5 . 3 . 2 Beating the market Naturally , after studying the eﬃciency of sports betting markets , researchers try to ﬁnd ineﬃciencies that can be exploited for ﬁnancial gain . Not surprisingly ( given the eﬃciency of these markets ) , such gains are hard to come by . Sauer ( 1998 ) ﬁnds that while racetrack betting markets are generally eﬃcient , information asymmetry plays a role in creating ineﬃcient markets . Nichols ( 2014 ) concludes that the impact of travel is not completely incorporated into the betting markets , but that any eﬀect is too small to ﬁnd any proﬁtable advantage . Paul & Weinbach ( 2014 ) investigate the less - saturated betting market for the WNBA and fail to ﬁnd strategies for positive return on investment . Spann & Skiera ( 2009 ) show no way to beat the market in the German premier soccer league , given the high fees associated with placing bets . More successfully , Buttrey ( 2016 ) explores the NHL betting market and produces a model to predict win probabilities in given games , then tests the model by placing market price bets in games where the predicted probability diﬀers from the market . They ﬁnd that their methods were able to produce a positive return on investment . 6 Tools Analytical work in sports requires facility with an ever - changing set of computational tools for working with data . Sources of authoritative data about sports are myriad , and are too numerous to list here . Software tools for sports analytics are similarly numerous . For R , we maintain a CRAN Task View for Sports Analytics that catalogs R packages published on the Comprehensive R Archive Network ( CRAN ) and organizes them by sport ( Baumer et al . , 2022 ) . Table 4 provides an overview of the currently available sport - speciﬁc CRAN packages . Recently , Casals et al . ( 2022 ) oﬀer a systematic review of sport - related packages on CRAN . Further , a more general collection of software tools is being curated by the SportsDataverse initiative ( Gilani , 2022 ) . In the remainder of this section , we highlight a few tools for sports analytics that are of general interest and illustrate a common paradigm for how these tools can be used in conjunction . 16 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 Table 4 : A summary of sport - speciﬁc packages available on the Comprehensive R Archive Network ( CRAN ) as of October 16 , 2022 . While the major North American sports dominate the list , perhaps the fastest - growing collection is for esports . Sport Number of Packages List of Packages American Football 12 nﬂverse , nﬂfastR , nﬂreadr , nﬂ4th , nﬂseedR , nﬂplotR , NFLSimulatoR , ﬄr , ﬀscrapr , ﬀsimulator , gsisdecoder , cfbfastR Association Football ( Soccer ) 9 worldfootballR , engsoccerdata , socceR , ggsoccer , footballpenaltiesBL , footBayes , itscalledsoccer , FPLdata , EUfootball Basketball 8 BAwiR , AdvancedBasketballStats , uncmbb , BasketballAnalyzeR , NBAloveR , wehoop , hoopR , toRvik Baseball / Softball 7 Lahman , retrosheet , pitchRx , mlbstats , baseballDBR , baseballr , runexp Chess 5 chess , stockﬁsh , bigchess , rchess , chessR Esports 5 CSGo , rbedrock , ROpenData , opendotaR , RDota2 Hockey 5 hockeyR , NHLData , nhlapi , nhlscrape , fastRhockey Cricket 4 yorkr , cricketr , cricketdata , howzatR GPS Activity Tracking 3 trackeR , trackeRapp , rStrava Track and Field 2 combinedevents , JumpeR Australian Rules Football 1 ﬁtzRoy Swimming 1 SwimmeR Volleyball 1 volleystat 6 . 1 Case study in how tools ﬁt together : chess Many tools in sports analytics provide the ability to read , write , and plot data stored in a sport - speciﬁc format . For example , consider chess , where the sequence of moves in games is often recorded in Portable Game Notation ( PGN ) . Software tools can then be built around this well - deﬁned format . The chess package ( Lente , 2020 ) provides R users with the ability to read , write , display , and manipulate chess data in PGN format . Application programming interfaces ( APIs ) are also a common source for data retrieval . In chess , the chessR package ( Zivkovic , 2022 ) allows R users to download game data from the Chess . com API . This type of infrastructure , where one package is the “workhorse” that facilitates common generic data operations , and other packages layer on speciﬁc functionality , is common in sports analytics . See Section 4 . 3 for an example of how the chessR package can be used to compute Elo ratings . Figure 6 shows a rendering of the starting chess board obtained via the chess package , along with the ﬁnal position in the game won by one of the authors mentioned earlier in Section 4 . 3 ( with data downloaded via the chessR package ) . We note how the contextual information provided by the chessboard is instrumental in helping the reader understand the data ( How many of us can visualize PGN directly ? ) . In Section 6 . 2 , we outline a collection of graphical tools that provide similar context for diﬀerent playing surfaces . 6 . 2 Graphical tools Creating eﬀective data graphics is a key component of statistical communication , and sports is no exception . We highlight a few packages that assist with the creation of data graphics about sports . Each professional sports team has its own brand , most obviously identiﬁed by a team logo and set of colors . The teamcolors R package ( Baumer & Matthews , 2020 ) provides color palettes and logos for men’s and women’s professional and collegiate sports teams , as well as color and ﬁll scale functions compatible with ggplot2 ( Wickham et al . , 2022 ) . For example , the NFL teams’ colors and logos shown in Figure 4 were provided by the teamcolors package . Figure 7 illustrates how the use of team colors , which have a natural association for many sports fans , can help to untangle what would otherwise be messy data graphics . In Figure 17 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 Figure 6 : At left , the starting chess board printed via the chess package . At right , the ﬁnal position for one of the authors’ recent wins ( a checkmate playing Black ) . 7 , 30 diﬀerent lines are plotted on top of one another , crisscrossing and intersecting in various unpredictable ways . However , the use of team colors to identify the lines makes it possible to follow the trajectory of most teams over the course of the season . nﬂplotR ( Carl , 2022 ) has a similar goal to teamcolors . It also provides ggplot2 extensions but is designed speciﬁcally for the NFL . A great feature of nﬂplotR is the collection of geom _ * ( ) ( geometric object ) functions that enhance high - quality plotting of NFL team logos and player images with ggplot2 . Figure 8 shows a scatterplot of oﬀensive and defensive expected points added for NFL teams in the 2021 regular season . The logos of all 32 American football clubs are plotted in place of the usual dots , making it easier for the reader to identify which team each data point represents . Player tracking data contains coordinates that reveal player movement , and these coordinates are always understood in context relative to reference points on the ﬁeld , court , ice , board , or pitch for a particular sport . Orienting these points graphically may require drawing a complex set of guidelines that provide that context to readers . Thankfully , the sportyR package ( Drucker , 2022 ) contains generic playing surfaces for baseball , basketball , curling , American football , ice hockey , soccer , and tennis that can be added to ggplot graphics with a single function call . The surfaces plotted in Figure 9 are helpful in contextualizing player tracking data ( such as those shown in Figure 3 ) and would be laborious for each analyst to have to create on their own . With the increased availability of player tracking data , this particular tool should see increased usage . 6 . 3 Case study in the evolution of tools and research : baseball As the granularity of baseball data has evolved over time , so too have the statistical methodologies for modeling that data , and the tools for working with it . For example , before George Lindsey’s work ( see Section 2 ) , most of the baseball data that was publicly available was seasonal : it showed only season totals for each player . These data , now available through the Lahman package ( Friendly et al . , 2022 ) , were suﬃcient to study broad trends in baseball , and led to insights such as the value of expected winning percentage ( see Section 4 . 1 ) and the importance of on - base percentage relative to batting average . These relatively simple insights fueled the “Moneyball” ( Lewis , 2004 ) era revolution in sports analytics ( B . Baumer & Zimbalist , 2014 ) . Over time , the resolution of baseball data has improved to include play - by - play data , pitch - by - pitch data , and now player tracking data . 18 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 COL ARI NYN ATL MIL LAN PHI MIA CIN PIT SDN SFN CHN SLN WAS 90 wins −60 −30 0 30 0 50 100 150 Cumulative Games Played G a m e s abo v e . 500 Daily MLB Standings , 2021 Source : Retrosheet Figure 7 : The progression of National Leauge team standings during the 2021 Major League Baseball season . Note how the use of team colors makes it possible to untangle what would otherwise be a messy jumble of indistinguishable lines . Data provided by retrosheet and colors provided by teamcolors . The retrosheet package ( Douglas & Scriven , 2021 ) now provides access to the historical play - by - play data available from Retrosheet ( this is a comprehensive version of what Lindsay collected for his research ) . This play - by - play data allowed researchers to learn about strategies , like those that we discussed in Section 2 . In baseball , this deepened our understanding of bunting , stolen bases , handedness , batting order , and many other aspects of the game . Play - by - play data underlies much of the analysis in Tango et al . ( 2007 ) . The pitchRx package ( Sievert , 2015 ) provides access to pitch - by - pitch data that fueled innovative research into catcher framing ( Deshpande & Wyner , 2017 ) , pitch values ( Healey , 2019 ) , and pitch classiﬁcation ( Sidle & Tran , 2018 ) . Catcher framing is a notable example of a concept that scouts talked about for decades , but that could not be quantiﬁed by analysts until data of the appropriate resolution became available . While play - by - play data allows us to make valuations between plays , player tracking data allows us to make valuations within plays . The baseballr package ( Petti & Gilani , 2022 ) now provides access to player tracking data from Statcast . These data have led to investigations into how defensive shifts aﬀect batting performance ( Bouzarth et al . , 2021 ) , as well as how launch angles aﬀect the probability of hitting a home run ( Marchi et al . , 2018 ) . As we saw above with chess , the packages in baseball ﬁt together in creative ways . In Figure 7 , we showed how teamcolors can illuminate data pulled from retrosheet to make an informative data graphic . One could just as easily use sportyR to generate a ﬁeld graphic , and then overlay player tracking data obtained from baseballr to depict defensive shifts . Thus , these R packages enable research by making data more easily available . Moreover , because R is scriptable , they make it easier to share research that is reproducible . Recent conferences , such as the Carnegie Mellon Sports Analytics Conference , have included a reproducible research competition to foster these eﬀorts ( see Section 7 ) . 19 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 −0 . 10 −0 . 05 0 . 00 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 15−0 . 15 −0 . 10 −0 . 05 0 . 00 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 15 Offensive EPA / play D e f en s i v e EPA / p l a y Figure 8 : Oﬀensive and defensive expected points added per play for the 2021 NFL regular season , plotted with nﬂplotR using data from nﬂfastR . Figure 9 : At left , an NBA basketball court drawn by sportyR . At right , an NHL hockey rink drawn by sportyR . 20 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 7 Opportunities Public research in sports analytics is driven in part by several notable competitions and conferences . These venues have been an important source of new ideas and have contributed to the diversiﬁcation of the ﬁeld by breaking down barriers to entry . In 2014 , Kaggle launched its ﬁrst March Machine Learning Mania competition for predicting the outcome of the NCAA men’s basketball tournament . 243 entrants competed for the $ 15 , 000 cash prize by submitting predicted probabilities for every possible pairwise matchup among the 68 college basketball teams in the tournament ( Glickman & Sonas , 2015 ) . Subsequently , the Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports ( JQAS ) released a special issue on prediction methodology for the NCAA men’s basketball tournament . Among the published papers , we learned that the winning entry was based on a fairly simple logistic regression model trained on betting market data ( Lopez & Matthews , 2015 ) . Thus , the competition not only sparked interest in sports analytics , but also resulted in peer - reviewed research which , in that case , demonstrated the value of quality data over sophisticated modeling . Perhaps motivated by his success in the Kaggle March Madness competition , Michael Lopez joined the National Football League and launched the Big Data Bowl in 2019 . This annual competition has similarly fueled new research directions in American football and a JQAS special issue on player tracking data in the National Football League ( Lopez , 2020 ) . Successful entries and their corresponding publications ( Chu et al . , 2020 ; Deshpande & Evans , 2020 ; Yurko et al . , 2020 ) have launched the careers of several of the most prominent early - career researchers in sports analytics . Similar competitions that provide opportunities for aspiring researchers to tackle sports analytics problems include the Big Data Cup for ice hockey and the SABR Diamond Dollars Case Competition for baseball , and the Big Data Derby for horse racing . As the ﬁeld of sports analytics has grown , a proliferation of sports speciﬁc and regional sports analytics conferences have arisen . The biennial New England Symposium on Statistics in Sports is likely the longest - running academic conference devoted to sports analytics . Its West Coast counterpart is The Cascadia Symposium on Statistics in Sports . Many inﬂuential results have been showcased for the ﬁrst time at these conferences . Other prominent sports analytics conferences include the Carnegie Mellon Sports Analytics Conference , UConn Sports Analytics Symposium , and MathSport International . The highest - proﬁle sports analytics conference is undoubtedly the Sloan Sports Analytics Conference , which draws academics , industry professionals , vendors , and media organizations . While the conference holds a research competition and has certainly drawn attention to sports analytics , it has also been criticized for a variety of shortcomings . These criticisms include a lack of emphasis on reproducibility in the research competition , high ticket prices , the large salaries taken by the organizers , and the lack of diversity among attendees and presenters ( Funt , 2022 ) . It is also worth noting that a signiﬁcant , but unknown , proportion of the most innovative research is being conducted by professional sports teams . This research will likely never be published , because each team will use it to their competitive advantage . Part of what enables this research is better data . For example , professional sports teams can collect biometric data on their own players , and use that data to learn about how their workouts , sleep patterns , and diets impact their athletic performance . While this research may constitute “emerging methodologies , ” it unfortunately will take years , if at all , before the public beneﬁts from it . 8 Conclusion As an applied science , sports analytics may lack a grand uniﬁed theory that succinctly characterizes game play across all sports . However , as a maturing discipline , sports analytics has been able to address fundamental questions common to many sports . In this paper , we explore three of those big questions : Who are the best teams and how good are they ? What is the likelihood of each team winning the game at any given juncture ? Is there a generic framework for evaluating strategies at any given juncture in a game ? Other fundamental questions are addressed elsewhere . How signiﬁcant is the element of chance in a particular sport ? Given that we know who the best teams are , who are the best players and how can we quantify their relative contributions ? What combinations of players work best together in a particular sport ? In particular , see Lopez et al . ( 2018 ) for estimations of the element of chance across four major sports . The second question is often addressed using a formulation of wins above replacement ( WAR ) —see Baumer et al . ( 2015 ) and 21 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 Yurko et al . ( 2019 ) for details in baseball and American football . Recent work by Che & Glickman ( 2022 ) also addresses this question across sports . The third question is most compelling in sports like basketball , ice hockey , and soccer , where substitutions are common and it is obvious that diﬀerent combinations of players with diﬀerent sets of skills will result in squad of varying strengths and weaknesses . The concept of plus - minus , and then adjusted plus - minus is frequently applied to address this question ( see Hvattum ( 2019 ) for a comprehensive overview of applications ) . In drawing together these three big ideas in sports analytics , we have also drawn attention to new uses of sports betting market data , some computational tools for doing sports analytics work , and opportunities to showcase that work . Our discussion in Section 6 . 3 shows how the increased resolution of available data has catalyzed new research directions in baseball , but this same dynamic is playing out in all sports . It is through these exchanges of ideas , tools , models , and data that analytics moves our collective understanding of sports forward . Acknowledgments We are grateful to Michael Lopez and Katherine Evans for their thoughts on early versions of this paper . The R Markdown ﬁle that generated this paper , including all R code , is available at https : / / github . com / beanumber / wire21 . References Agresti , A . ( 2018 ) . An introduction to categorical data analysis ( 3rd ed . ) . Hoboken , NJ : John Wiley & Sons . Alamar , B . ( 2010 ) . Measuring risk in NFL playcalling . Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports , 6 ( 2 ) , 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2202 / 1559 - 0410 . 1235 Albert , J . ( 2015 ) . Player evaluation using win probabilities in sports competitions . Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews : Computational Statistics , 7 ( 5 ) , 316 – 325 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / wics . 1358 Albert , J . , & Bennett , J . ( 2001 ) . Curve ball : Baseball , statistics , and the role of chance in the game . New York : Springer . Albert , J . , Glickman , M . E . , Swartz , T . B . , & Koning , R . H . ( 2016 ) . Handbook of statistical methods and analyses in sports ( p . 520 ) . New York : Chapman ; Hall / CRC Press . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1201 / 9781315166070 Baumer , B . S . , Jensen , S . T . , & Matthews , G . J . ( 2015 ) . openWAR : An open source system for evaluating overall player performance in Major League Baseball . Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports , 11 ( 2 ) , 69 – 84 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / jqas - 2014 - 0098 Baumer , B . S . , Kaplan , D . T . , & Horton , N . J . ( 2021 ) . Modern Data Science with R ( 2nd ed . , pp . 1 – 673 ) . Boca Raton , FL : Chapman ; Hall / CRC Press . https : / / mdsr - book . github . io / mdsr2e / Baumer , B . S . , & Matthews , G . J . ( 2020 ) . Teamcolors : Color palettes for pro sports teams . http : / / github . com / beanumber / teamcolors Baumer , B . S . , Nguyen , Q . , & Matthews , G . J . ( 2022 ) . CRAN task view : Sports analytics . https : / / CRAN . R - project . org / view = SportsAnalytics Baumer , B . , & Zimbalist , A . ( 2014 ) . The sabermetric revolution : Assessing the growth of analytics in baseball ( p . 187 ) . Philadelphia : University of Pennsylvania Press . Beaudoin , D . , & Swartz , T . B . ( 2010 ) . Strategies for pulling the goalie in hockey . The American Statistician , 64 ( 3 ) , 197 – 204 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1198 / tast . 2010 . 09147 Bergman , D . , & Imbrogno , J . ( 2017 ) . Surviving a national football league survivor pool . Oper . Res . , 65 , 1343 – 1354 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / opre . 2017 . 1633 Bornn , L . , Cervone , D . , Franks , A . , & Miller , A . ( 2017 ) . Studying basketball through the lens of player tracking data . In Handbook of statistical methods and analyses in sports ( pp . 261 – 286 ) . Boca Raton , FL : CRC Press . Boulier , B . L . , & Stekler , H . O . ( 2003 ) . Predicting the outcomes of national football league games . Interna - tional Journal of Forecasting , 19 ( 2 ) , 257 – 270 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / s0169 - 2070 ( 01 ) 00144 - 3 Boulier , B . L . , Stekler , H . O . , & Amundson , S . ( 2006 ) . Testing the eﬃciency of the national football league betting market . Applied Economics , 38 ( 3 ) , 279 – 284 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00036840500368904 Bouzarth , E . , Grannan , B . , Harris , J . , Hartley , A . , Hutson , K . , & Morton , E . ( 2021 ) . Swing shift : A mathematical approach to defensive positioning in baseball . Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports , 17 ( 1 ) , 47 – 55 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / jqas - 2020 - 0027 22 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 Bradley , R . A . , & Terry , M . E . ( 1952 ) . Rank analysis of incomplete block designs : I . The method of paired comparisons . Biometrika , 39 ( 3 / 4 ) , 324 – 345 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 2334029 Breiter , D . J . , & Carlin , B . P . ( 1997 ) . How to play oﬃce pools if you must . Chance , 10 ( 1 ) , 5 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09332480 . 1997 . 10554789 Brenzel , P . , Shock , W . , & Yang , H . ( 2019 ) . An analysis of curling using a three - dimensional markov model . Journal of Sports Analytics , 5 ( 2 ) , 101 – 119 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3233 / jsa - 180279 Buttrey , S . E . ( 2016 ) . Beating the market betting on NHL hockey games . Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports , 12 ( 2 ) , 87 – 98 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / jqas - 2015 - 0003 Carl , S . ( 2022 ) . nﬂplotR : NFL logo plots in ggplot2 . https : / / CRAN . R - project . org / package = nflplotR Carl , S . , & Baldwin , B . ( 2022 ) . nﬂfastR : Functions to eﬃciently access NFL play by play data . https : / / CRAN . R - project . org / package = nflfastR Caro , C . A . , Machtmes , R . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Testing the utility of the pythagorean expectation formula on division one college football : An examination and comparison to the morey model . Journal of Business & Economics Research ( JBER ) , 11 ( 12 ) , 537 – 542 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 19030 / jber . v11i12 . 8261 Carroll , B . N . , Palmer , P . , Thorn , J . , & Pietrusza , D . ( 1988 ) . The hidden game of football ( p . 415 ) . New York : Total Sports , Inc . Carter , Virgil . , & Machol , R . E . ( 1971 ) . Technical note – operations research on football . Operations Research , 19 ( 2 ) , 541 – 544 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / opre . 19 . 2 . 541 Casals , M . , Fernández , J . , Martínez , V . , Lopez , M . , Langohr , K . , & Cortés , J . ( 2022 ) . A systematic review of sport - related packages within the R CRAN repository . International Journal of Sports Science & Coaching , 1 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 17479541221136238 Cervone , D . , D’Amour , A . , Bornn , L . , & Goldsberry , K . ( 2014 ) . Pointwise : Predicting points and valuing decisions in real time with NBA optical tracking data . 28 , 3 . http : / / www . lukebornn . com / papers / cervone _ ssac _ 2014 . pdf Cervone , D . , D’Amour , A . , Bornn , L . , & Goldsberry , K . ( 2016 ) . A multiresolution stochastic process model for predicting basketball possession outcomes . Journal of the American Statistical Association , 111 ( 514 ) , 585 – 599 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01621459 . 2016 . 1141685 Che , J . , & Glickman , M . ( 2022 ) . Athlete rating in multi - competitor games with scored outcomes via monotone transformations . arXiv Preprint arXiv : 2205 . 10746 . https : / / arxiv . org / pdf / 2205 . 10746 Chen , T . , He , T . , Benesty , M . , Khotilovich , V . , Tang , Y . , Cho , H . , Chen , K . , Mitchell , R . , Cano , I . , Zhou , T . , Li , M . , Xie , J . , Lin , M . , Geng , Y . , Li , Y . , & Yuan , J . ( 2022 ) . Xgboost : Extreme gradient boosting . https : / / github . com / dmlc / xgboost Chu , D . , Reyers , M . , Thomson , J . , & Wu , L . Y . ( 2020 ) . Route identiﬁcation in the National Football League : An application of model - based curve clustering using the EM algorithm . Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports , 16 ( 2 ) , 121 – 132 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / jqas - 2019 - 0047 Clair , B . , & Letscher , D . ( 2007 ) . Optimal strategies for sports betting pools . Operations Research , 55 ( 6 ) , 1163 – 1177 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / opre . 1070 . 0448 Clark , N . , Macdonald , B . , & Kloo , I . ( 2020 ) . A Bayesian adjusted plus - minus analysis for the esport Dota 2 . Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports , 16 ( 4 ) , 325 – 341 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / jqas - 2019 - 0103 Cochran , J . , Bennett , J . , & Albert , J . ( Eds . ) . ( 2017 ) . The Oxford anthology of statistics in sports , volume 1 : 2000 - 2004 ( p . 544 ) . London : Oxford University Press . https : / / global . oup . com / academic / product / the - oxford - anthology - of - statistics - in - sports - 9780198724926 Deshpande , S . K . , & Evans , K . ( 2020 ) . Expected hypothetical completion probability . Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports , 16 ( 2 ) , 85 – 94 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / jqas - 2019 - 0050 Deshpande , S . K . , & Jensen , S . T . ( 2016 ) . Estimating an NBA player’s impact on his team’s chances of winning . Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports , 12 ( 2 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / jqas - 2015 - 0027 Deshpande , S . K . , & Wyner , A . ( 2017 ) . A hierarchical bayesian model of pitch framing . Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports , 13 ( 3 ) , 95 – 112 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / jqas - 2017 - 0027 Dewan , J . , & Zminda , D . ( 1993 ) . STATS basketball scoreboard 1993 - 1994 ( p . 288 ) . HarperPerennial . Douglas , C . , & Scriven , R . ( 2021 ) . Retrosheet : Import professional baseball data from retrosheet . https : / / github . com / colindouglas / retrosheet Drucker , R . ( 2022 ) . sportyR : Plot scaled ggplot representations of sports playing surfaces . https : / / github . com / sportsdataverse / sportyR Elo , A . E . ( 1978 ) . The rating of chessplayers , past and present . New York : Arco Publishing . Fernandez , J . , Bornn , L . , & Cervone , D . ( 2021 ) . A framework for the ﬁne - grained evaluation of the instantaneous expected value of soccer possessions . Machine Learning , 110 ( 6 ) , 1389 – 1427 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10994 - 021 - 05989 - 6 FIDE . ( 2022 ) . Rating calculator . https : / / ratings . fide . com / calc . phtml 23 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 Friendly , M . , Dalzell , C . , Monkman , M . , & Murphy , D . ( 2022 ) . Lahman : Sean lahman baseball database . https : / / CRAN . R - project . org / package = Lahman Funt , D . ( 2022 ) . At Sloan sports conference , criticism mounts over diversity , access . The Washington Post . https : / / www . washingtonpost . com / sports / 2022 / 06 / 13 / sloan - sports - conference - diversity / Gandar , J . , Zuber , R . , O’Brien , T . , & Russo , B . ( 1988 ) . Testing rationality in the point spread betting market . The Journal of Finance , 43 ( 4 ) , 995 – 1008 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 6261 . 1988 . tb02617 . x Gilani , S . ( 2022 ) . SportsDataverse . https : / / sportsdataverse . org Glickman , M . E . , & Sonas , J . ( 2015 ) . Introduction to the NCAA men’s basketball prediction methods issue . Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports , 11 ( 1 ) , 1 – 3 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / jqas - 2015 - 0013 Glickman , M . E . , & Stern , H . S . ( 1998 ) . A state - space model for national football league scores . Journal of the American Statistical Association , 93 ( 441 ) , 25 – 35 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01621459 . 1998 . 10474084 Glickman , M . E . , & Stern , H . S . ( 2017 ) . Estimating team strength in the NFL . In Handbook of statistical methods and analyses in sports ( pp . 113 – 136 ) . Boca Raton , FL : CRC Press . http : / / glicko . net / research / nfl - chapter . pdf Goldner , K . ( 2012 ) . A Markov model of football : Using stochastic processes to model a football drive . Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports , 8 ( 1 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / 1559 - 0410 . 1400 Goldner , K . ( 2017 ) . Situational success : Evaluating decision - making in football . In Handbook of statistical methods and analyses in sports ( pp . 199 – 214 ) . Boca Raton , FL : CRC Press . Guan , T . , Nguyen , R . , Cao , J . , & Swartz , T . ( 2022 ) . In - game win probabilities for the National Rugby League . The Annals of Applied Statistics , 16 ( 1 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1214 / 21 - aoas1514 Hamilton , H . H . ( 2011 ) . An extension of the pythagorean expectation for association football . Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports , 7 ( 2 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2202 / 1559 - 0410 . 1335 Healey , G . ( 2017 ) . The new Moneyball : How ballpark sensors are changing baseball . Proceedings of the IEEE , 105 ( 11 ) , 1999 – 2002 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / JPROC . 2017 . 2756740 Healey , G . ( 2019 ) . A bayesian method for computing intrinsic pitch values using kernel density and nonparametric regression estimates . Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports , 15 ( 1 ) , 59 – 74 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / jqas - 2017 - 0058 Horowitz , M . , Yurko , R . , Ventura , S . , & Dutta , R . ( 2020 ) . NﬂscrapR : Compiling the NFL play - by - play API for easy use in r . https : / / github . com / maksimhorowitz / nflscrapR Hvattum , L . M . ( 2019 ) . A comprehensive review of plus - minus ratings for evaluating individual players in team sports . International Journal of Computer Science in Sport , 18 ( 1 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2478 / ijcss - 2019 - 0001 Imbrogno , J . , & Bergman , D . ( 2022 ) . Computing the number of winning NFL survivor pool entries . The College Mathematics Journal , 53 ( 4 ) , 282 – 291 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07468342 . 2022 . 2099704 James , B . ( 2003 ) . The new Bill James historical baseball abstract . Free Press . Kaplan , E . H . , & Garstka , S . J . ( 2001 ) . March madness and the oﬃce pool . Management Science , 47 ( 3 ) , 369 – 382 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 47 . 3 . 369 . 9769 Koning , R . H . ( 2017 ) . Rating of team abilities in soccer . In Handbook of statistical methods and analyses in sports ( pp . 371 – 388 ) . Boca Raton , FL : CRC Press . Koopman , S . J . , & Lit , R . ( 2015 ) . A dynamic bivariate poisson model for analysing and forecasting match results in the english premier league . Journal of the Royal Statistical Society : Series A ( Statistics in Society ) , 178 ( 1 ) , 167 – 186 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / rssa . 12042 Kovalchik , S . A . ( 2016 ) . Searching for the GOAT of tennis win prediction . Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports , 12 ( 3 ) , 127 – 138 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / jqas - 2015 - 0059 Kovalchik , S . A . , & Reid , M . ( 2019 ) . A calibration method with dynamic updates for within - match forecasting of wins in tennis . International Journal of Forecasting , 35 ( 2 ) , 756 – 766 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijforecast . 2017 . 11 . 008 Kumagai , B . , Nahabedian , M . , Châtel , T . , & Stokes , T . ( 2021 ) . Bayesian space - time models for expected possession added value . Hockey - Graphs . https : / / hockey - graphs . com / 2021 / 07 / 06 / bayesian - space - time - models - for - expected - possession - added - value - part - 1 - of - 2 / Lacey , N . J . ( 1990 ) . An estimation of market eﬃciency in the NFL point spread betting market . Applied Economics , 22 ( 1 ) , 117 – 129 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00036849000000056 Lente , C . ( 2020 ) . Chess : Read , write , create and explore chess games . https : / / github . com / curso - r / chess Lewis , M . ( 2004 ) . Moneyball : The art of winning an unfair game ( p . 336 ) . New York : WW Norton & Company . Lindsey , G . R . ( 1961 ) . The progress of the score during a baseball game . Journal of the American Statistical Association , 56 ( 295 ) , 703 – 728 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01621459 . 1961 . 10480656 Lindsey , G . R . ( 1963 ) . An investigation of strategies in baseball . Operations Research , 11 ( 4 ) , 477 – 501 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / opre . 11 . 4 . 477 24 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 Lock , D . , & Nettleton , D . ( 2014 ) . Using random forests to estimate win probability before each play of an NFL game . Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports , 10 ( 2 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / jqas - 2013 - 0100 Lopez , M . J . ( 2022 ) . personal communication . Lopez , M . J . ( 2020 ) . Bigger data , better questions , and a return to fourth down behavior : An introduction to a special issue on tracking data in the national football league . Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports , 16 ( 2 ) , 73 – 79 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / jqas - 2020 - 0057 Lopez , M . J . , & Matthews , G . J . ( 2015 ) . Building an NCAA men’s basketball predictive model and quantifying its success . Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports , 11 ( 1 ) , 5 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / jqas - 2014 - 0058 Lopez , M . J . , Matthews , G . J . , & Baumer , B . S . ( 2018 ) . How often does the best team win ? A uniﬁed approach to understanding randomness in North American sport . The Annals of Applied Statistics , 12 ( 4 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1214 / 18 - aoas1165 Macdonald , B . ( 2012 ) . An expected goals model for evaluating NHL teams and players . Proceed - ings of the 2012 MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference . https : / / assets . pubpub . org / mku181yp / ee0d61ed - af35 - 4b1f - ba86 - 71c216935690 . pdf Marchi , M . , Albert , J . , & Baumer , B . S . ( 2018 ) . Analyzing baseball data with R ( 2nd ed . , p . 360 ) . Boca Raton , FL : Chapman ; Hall / CRC Press . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1201 / 9781351107099 Martin , R . , Timmons , L . , & Powell , M . ( 2018 ) . A Markov chain analysis of NFL overtime rules . Journal of Sports Analytics , 4 ( 2 ) , 95 – 105 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3233 / JSA - 170198 Maymin , P . Z . ( 2021 ) . Smart kills and worthless deaths : eSports analytics for league of legends . Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports , 17 ( 1 ) , 11 – 27 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / jqas - 2019 - 0096 McFarlane , P . ( 2019 ) . Evaluating NBA end - of - game decision - making . Journal of Sports Analytics , 5 ( 1 ) , 17 – 22 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3233 / jsa - 180231 Metrick , A . ( 1996 ) . March madness ? Strategic behavior in NCAA basketball tournament betting pools . Jour - nal of Economic Behavior & Organization , 30 ( 2 ) , 159 – 172 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0167 - 2681 ( 96 ) 00855 - 4 Miller , S . J . ( 2007 ) . A derivation of the pythagorean won - loss formula in baseball . Chance , 20 ( 1 ) , 40 – 48 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09332480 . 2007 . 10722831 Mills , E . G . , & Mills , H . D . ( 1970 ) . Player win averages : A complete guide to winning baseball players . The Harlan D . Mills Collection . https : / / trace . tennessee . edu / utk _ harlan / 6 / Nichols , M . W . ( 2014 ) . The impact of visiting team travel on game outcome and biases in NFL betting markets . Journal of Sports Economics , 15 ( 1 ) , 78 – 96 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1527002512440580 Niemi , J . B . , Carlin , B . P . , & Alexander , J . M . ( 2008 ) . Contrarian strategies for NCAA tournament pools : A cure for March madness ? Chance , 21 ( 1 ) , 35 – 42 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09332480 . 2008 . 10722884 Paul , R . J . , & Weinbach , A . P . ( 2014 ) . Market eﬃciency and behavioral biases in the WNBA betting market . International Journal of Financial Studies , 2 , 193 – 202 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / ijfs2020193 Pelechrinis , K . , Winston , W . , Sagarin , J . , & Cabot , V . ( 2019 ) . Evaluating NFL plays : Expected points adjusted for schedule . International Workshop on Machine Learning and Data Mining for Sports Analytics , 11330 , 106 – 117 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 17274 - 9 _ 9 Petti , B . , & Gilani , S . ( 2022 ) . Baseballr : Acquiring and analyzing baseball data . https : / / CRAN . R - project . org / package = baseballr R Core Team . ( 2022 ) . R : A language and environment for statistical computing . R Foundation for Statistical Computing . https : / / www . R - project . org / Reyers , M . , & Swartz , T . B . ( 2021 ) . Quarterback evaluation in the National Football League using tracking data . AStA Advances in Statistical Analysis . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10182 - 021 - 00406 - 8 Romer , D . ( 2006 ) . Do ﬁrms maximize ? Evidence from professional football . Journal of Political Economy , 114 ( 2 ) , 340 – 365 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 501171 Sauer , R . D . ( 1998 ) . The economics of wagering markets . Journal of Economic Literature , 36 ( 4 ) , 2021 – 2064 . https : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 2565046 Schuhmann , J . ( 2021 ) . NBA’s 3 - point revolution : How 1 shot is changing the game . NBA . com . https : / / www . nba . com / news / 3 - point - era - nba - 75 Schwarz , A . ( 2004 ) . The numbers game : Baseball’s lifelong fascination with statistics . New York : Thomas Dunne Books / St . Martin’s Press . Sicilia , A . , Pelechrinis , K . , & Goldsberry , K . ( 2019 , July ) . DeepHoops : Evaluating Micro - Actions in Basketball Using Deep Feature Representations of Spatio - Temporal Data . Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3292500 . 3330719 Sidle , G . , & Tran , H . ( 2018 ) . Using multi - class classiﬁcation methods to predict baseball pitch types . Journal of Sports Analytics , 4 ( 1 ) , 85 – 93 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3233 / JSA - 170171 25 A preprint - January 11 , 2023 Sievert , C . ( 2015 ) . pitchRx : Tools for harnessing MLBAM ’gameday’ data and visualizing pitchfx . http : / / cpsievert . github . com / pitchRx Skinner , B . ( 2011 ) . Scoring strategies for the underdog : A general , quantitative method for determining optimal sports strategies . Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports , 7 ( 4 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2202 / 1559 - 0410 . 1364 Soebbing , B . P . , & Humphreys , B . R . ( 2013 ) . Do gamblers think that teams tank ? Evidence from the NBA . Contemporary Economic Policy , 31 ( 2 ) , 301 – 313 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1465 - 7287 . 2011 . 00298 . x Spann , M . , & Skiera , B . ( 2009 ) . Sports forecasting : A comparison of the forecast accuracy of prediction markets , betting odds and tipsters . Journal of Forecasting , 28 ( 1 ) , 55 – 72 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / for . 1091 Stern , H . S . ( 1994 ) . A brownian motion model for the progress of sports scores . Journal of the American Statistical Association , 89 ( 427 ) , 1128 – 1134 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01621459 . 1994 . 10476851 Tango , T . M . , Lichtman , M . G . , & Dolphin , A . E . ( 2007 ) . The book : Playing the percentages in baseball . Sterling , VA : Potomac Books . Turner , H . , & Firth , D . ( 2020 ) . BradleyTerry2 : Bradley - terry models . https : / / github . com / hturner / BradleyTerry2 Urschel , J . , & Zhuang , J . ( 2011 ) . Are NFL coaches risk and loss averse ? Evidence from their use of kickoﬀ strategies . Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports , 7 ( 3 ) , 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2202 / 1559 - 0410 . 1311 White , C . , & Berry , S . ( 2002 ) . Tiered polychotomous regression : Ranking NFL quarterbacks . The American Statistician , 56 ( 1 ) , 10 – 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1198 / 000313002753631312 Wickham , H . , Chang , W . , Henry , L . , Pedersen , T . L . , Takahashi , K . , Wilke , C . , Woo , K . , Yutani , H . , & Dunnington , D . ( 2022 ) . ggplot2 : Create elegant data visualisations using the grammar of graphics . https : / / CRAN . R - project . org / package = ggplot2 Winston , W . L . , Nestler , S . , & Pelechrinis , K . ( 2022 ) . Mathletics : How gamblers , managers , and fans use mathematics in sports ( 2nd ed . ) . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Yam , D . R . , & Lopez , M . J . ( 2019 ) . What was lost ? A causal estimate of fourth down behavior in the national football league . Journal of Sports Analytics , 5 ( 3 ) , 153 – 167 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3233 / jsa - 190294 Yurko , R . , Matano , F . , Richardson , L . F . , Granered , N . , Pospisil , T . , Pelechrinis , K . , & Ventura , S . L . ( 2020 ) . Going deep : Models for continuous - time within - play valuation of game outcomes in american football with tracking data . Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports , 16 ( 2 ) , 163 – 182 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / jqas - 2019 - 0056 Yurko , R . , Ventura , S . , & Horowitz , M . ( 2019 ) . nﬂWAR : A reproducible method for oﬀensive player evaluation in football . Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports , 15 ( 3 ) , 163 – 183 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / jqas - 2018 - 0010 Zivkovic , J . ( 2022 ) . chessR : Functions to extract , clean and analyse online chess game data . https : / / github . com / JaseZiv / chessR 26