Exp Neurol . 2003 Aug ; 182 ( 2 ) : 399 - 411 . The chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans neurocan , brevican , phosphacan , and versican are differentially regulated following spinal cord injury . Jones LL , Margolis RU , Tuszynski MH . Department of Neurosciences - 0626 , University of California - San Diego , 9500 Gilman Drive , La Jolla , CA 92093 , USA . Abstract Chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans ( CSPGs ) are extracellular matrix ( ECM ) molecules that are widely expressed throughout the developing and adult CNS . In vitro studies demonstrate their potential to restrict neurite outgrowth , and it is believed that CSPGs also inhibit axonal regeneration after CNS injury in vivo . Previous studies demonstrated that CSPGs are generally upregulated after spinal cord injury , and more recent reports have begun to identify individual proteoglycans that may play dominant roles in limiting axonal regeneration . The current study systematically examined the extended deposition patterns after CNS injury of four putatively inhibitory CSPGs that have not been extensively investigated previously in vivo : neurocan , brevican , phosphacan , and versican . After spinal cord injury , neurocan , brevican , and versican immunolabeling increased within days in injured spinal cord parenchyma surrounding the lesion site and peaked at 2 weeks . Neurocan and versican were persistently elevated for 4 weeks postinjury , and brevican expression persisted for at least 2 months . On the other hand , phosphacan immunolabeling decreased in the same region immediately following injury but later recovered and then peaked after 2 months . Combined glial fibrillary acidic protein ( GFAP ) immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization demonstrated that GFAP astrocytes constituted a source of neurocan production after spinal cord injury . Thus , the production of several CSPG family members is differentially affected by spinal cord injury , overall establishing a CSPG - rich matrix that persists for up to 2 months following injury . Optimization of strategies to reduce CSPG expression to enhance regeneration may need to target several different family members over an extended period following injury . PMID : 12895450 [ PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE ]