M OLECULAR AND C ELLULAR B IOLOGY , June 2002 , p . 3905 – 3926 Vol . 22 , No . 11 0270 - 7306 / 02 / $ 04 . 00 (cid:1) 0 DOI : 10 . 1128 / MCB . 22 . 11 . 3905 – 3926 . 2002 Copyright © 2002 , American Society for Microbiology . All Rights Reserved . Intracellular Retention of Glycosylphosphatidyl Inositol - Linked Proteins in Caveolin - Deﬁcient Cells Federica Sotgia , 1 , 2 Babak Razani , 1 Gloria Bonuccelli , 1 , 2 William Schubert , 1 Michela Battista , 1 Hyangkyu Lee , 1 Franco Capozza , 1 Ann Lane Schubert , 1 Carlo Minetti , 2 J . Thomas Buckley , 3 and Michael P . Lisanti 1 , 4 * Department of Molecular Pharmacology 1 and Division of Hormone - Dependent Tumor Biology , 4 The Albert Einstein Comprehensive Cancer Center , Albert Einstein College of Medicine , Bronx , New York 10461 ; Servizio Malattie Neuro - Muscolari , Università di Genova , Istituto Gaslini , 16147 Genoa , Italy 2 ; and Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology , University of Victoria , Victoria , British Columbia V8W 3P6 , Canada 3 Received 14 December 2001 / Returned for modiﬁcation 12 February 2002 / Accepted 26 February 2002 The relationship between glycosylphosphatidyl inositol ( GPI ) - linked proteins and caveolins remains con - troversial . Here , we derived ﬁbroblasts from Cav - 1 null mouse embryos to study the behavior of GPI - linked proteins in the absence of caveolins . These cells lack morphological caveolae , do not express caveolin - 1 , and show a (cid:2) 95 % down - regulation in caveolin - 2 expression ; these cells also do not express caveolin - 3 , a muscle - speciﬁc caveolin family member . As such , these caveolin - deﬁcient cells represent an ideal tool to study the role of caveolins in GPI - linked protein sorting . We show that in Cav - 1 null cells GPI - linked proteins are prefer - entially retained in an intracellular compartment that we identify as the Golgi complex . This intracellular pool of GPI - linked proteins is not degraded and remains associated with intracellular lipid rafts as judged by its Triton insolubility . In contrast , GPI - linked proteins are transported to the plasma membrane in wild - type cells , as expected . Furthermore , recombinant expression of caveolin - 1 or caveolin - 3 , but not caveolin - 2 , in Cav - 1 null cells complements this phenotype and restores the cell surface expression of GPI - linked proteins . This is perhaps surprising , as GPI - linked proteins are conﬁned to the exoplasmic leaﬂet of the membrane , while caveolins are cytoplasmically oriented membrane proteins . As caveolin - 1 normally undergoes palmitoyl - ation on three cysteine residues ( 133 , 143 , and 156 ) , we speculated that palmitoylation might mechanistically couple caveolin - 1 to GPI - linked proteins . In support of this hypothesis , we show that palmitoylation of caveolin - 1 on residues 143 and 156 , but not residue 133 , is required to restore cell surface expression of GPI - linked proteins in this complementation assay . We also show that another lipid raft - associated protein , c - Src , is retained intracellularly in Cav - 1 null cells . Thus , Golgi - associated caveolins and caveola - like vesicles could represent part of the transport machinery that is necessary for efﬁciently moving lipid rafts and their associated proteins from the trans - Golgi to the plasma membrane . In further support of these ﬁndings , GPI - linked proteins were also retained intracellularly in tissue samples derived from Cav - 1 null mice ( i . e . , lung endothelial and renal epithelial cells ) and Cav - 3 null mice ( skeletal muscle ﬁbers ) . Over the past 10 years , increasing evidence has suggested that the plasma membrane is not a homogenous “sea of lipids” in which the proteins freely diffuse but instead is composed of distinct membrane microdomains characterized by the local accumulation of different lipids and proteins ( 29 ) . In particu - lar , recent studies support the existence of cholesterol - and sphingolipid - rich membrane domains , which have been termed lipid rafts ( 29 , 87 ) . The close packing of cholesterol and sphingolipids makes these microdomains more ordered and less ﬂuid than the rest of the bulk plasma membrane and confers upon these mem - brane domains special biophysical properties , making them resistant to solubilization with nonionic detergents at low tem - peratures ( 1 , 6 , 9 ) . Moreover , the existence of lipid rafts helps to regulate the lateral diffusion of proteins and dictates ener - getic rules so that the segregation of lipid - modiﬁed proteins ( either exoplasmic GPI - linked proteins or cytoplasmically ori - ented acylated proteins , such as Src - family kinases ) is favored ( 8 ) . These lipid raft domains can exist by themselves or can be enriched in one particular structural protein which can dra - matically modify their form and function ( 29 ) . The ﬁrst integral membrane protein identiﬁed as a lipid raft modiﬁer was caveo - lin ( 52 , 75 , 78 ) ; when the caveolin protein is integrated into the microenvironment of a lipid raft , a caveolar vesicle is gener - ated ( 29 , 42 ) . As a consequence , several discrete classes of microdomains exist within the plane of the plasma membrane , i . e . , non - caveolar lipid rafts and caveolar lipid rafts , among others ( 29 , 87 ) . Lipid rafts are localized mainly at the level of the plasma membrane , but they can also form within internal membrane compartments , such as the Golgi ( 31 ) . Therefore , the partitioning of caveolins into these lipid raft domains may begin to occur at the level of the Golgi apparatus ( 31 ) , initi - ating the biogenesis of caveolae . Caveolin is only the ﬁrst of a three - member gene family , and as a consequence , caveolin has been retermed caveolin - 1 ( 82 , 92 ) . Caveolin - 1 and - 2 are coexpressed and show nearly iden - tical tissue distributions , whereas caveolin - 3 is expressed in a muscle - speciﬁc fashion ( 70 , 82 , 89 , 92 ) . As a result of its cho - * Corresponding author . Mailing address : Department of Molecular Pharmacology , The Albert Einstein Cancer Center , Albert Einstein College of Medicine , 1300 Morris Park Ave . , Bronx , NY 10461 . Phone : ( 718 ) 430 - 8828 . Fax : ( 718 ) 430 - 8830 . E - mail : lisanti @ aecom . yu . edu . 3905 on J anua r y 6 , 2018 b y gue s t h tt p : / / m c b . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m lesterol - binding activity ( 43 , 61 , 94 ) , caveolin - 1 is thought to play a central role in the formation of plasmalemmal caveolae , morphologically deﬁned as 50 - to 100 - nm diameter invagina - tions of the plasma membrane . In the process of the formation of caveolae , caveolin - 1 and caveolin - 2 hetero - oligomerize to form high - molecular - mass structures ( 15 , 57 , 77 , 81 ) . The interaction of these caveolin oligomers with cholesterol and sphingolipids may play a critical role at this stage by inducing the clustering and recruitment of certain lipid - modiﬁed membrane proteins while excluding other transmembrane proteins and lipid components ( 52 , 87 ) . Caveolae were ﬁrst independently described by two pioneers in the ﬁeld of electron microscopy , Yamada and Palade , in the early 1950s ( 66 , 95 ) . Omega - shaped invaginations occurring singly or in clusters , caveolae are found in many different cell types , but are most abundant in ﬁbroblasts , adipocytes , endo - thelial cells , type I pneumocytes , epithelial cells , and smooth muscle cells . Although they were ﬁrst described as endocytic structure for the transport of both small and large molecules across endothelial cells ( 86 ) , they are now considered a com - plex membrane system that participates in many cellular func - tions . Most notably , caveolae are dramatically enriched in lip - id - modiﬁed cytoplasmic signaling molecules , including Src family tyrosine kinases , heterotrimeric G proteins , and nitric oxide synthase , among others ( 14 , 52 ) . As a consequence , caveolae are believed to act as message centers that coordinate signal transduction processes at the plasma membrane ( 52 , 87 ) . Over the last decade , much attention has been focused on a class of proteins which are attached to the external surface of the plasma membrane through a C - terminal lipid moiety , termed glycosylphosphatidyl inositol ( GPI ) . In polarized epi - thelial cells , GPI - linked proteins are selectively transported to the apical surface through the exocytic pathway while prefer - entially excluded from the basolateral membrane ( 7 , 44 , 47 , 49 , 51 , 91 ) . The GPI - linked family of proteins shows a wide func - tional diversity of members that includes molecules that par - ticipate in cell - cell adhesion , cell surface interactions , and sig - nal transduction ( 23 , 50 ) . What is known about the biogenesis of GPI - anchored pro - teins ? Although side chain modiﬁcations and the fatty acid composition of the GPI anchor may vary , all GPI anchors contain a conserved core glycan structure . Precursor proteins that are destined to be GPI anchored contain a GPI attach - ment signal at their extreme C terminus that is cleaved and replaced with a GPI moiety within the lumen of the ER ( 11 , 12 , 60 ) . At the level of the trans - Golgi network , GPI - linked pro - teins then begin to partition into lipid raft microdomains and become resistant to solubilization by the detergent Triton X - 100 ( 6 ) . In this regard , it is thought that the GPI anchor acts as a targeting signal for the association of this class of proteins with lipid rafts . However , it remains unknown how GPI - an - chored proteins are then transported from lipid rafts at the trans - Golgi to lipid rafts at the cell surface . It has been pro - posed that caveola - like vesicles located at the level of the Golgi might act as exocytic vesicular carriers to transport GPI - linked proteins to the cell surface ( 45 , 54 , 78 ) . However , evidence to directly support this hypothesis is lacking . Thus , the exact bio - synthetic functional relationship between GPI - anchored pro - teins , caveolae , and the caveolin proteins remains controver - sial . Here , we investigate whether a loss of caveolin protein ex - pression and caveolae directly affects the cellular distribution of GPI - anchored proteins . For this purpose , we studied the membrane trafﬁcking of GPI - linked proteins in caveolin - deﬁ - cient mouse models ( 28 , 73 ) . Using standard homologous re - combination techniques , we recently generated caveolin - 1 null mice and derived mouse embryo ﬁbroblasts ( MEFs ) from these animals ( 72 ) . These cells lack morphological caveolae , do not express caveolin - 1 , and show a (cid:2) 95 % down - regulation in caveolin - 2 expression ; these cells also do not express caveo - lin - 3 , a muscle - speciﬁc caveolin family member . As such , these caveolin - deﬁcient cells represent the ideal tool to study the role of caveolins in GPI - linked protein sorting . In order to visualize endogenous GPI - linked proteins as a general class of molecules , we employed a lectin - like bacterial toxin , aerolysin , which selectively recognizes the core glycan structure of the GPI anchor only when it is attached to proteins ( 5 , 16 , 62 ) . Consequently , aerolysin does not discriminate between the different GPI - anchored proteins ( 16 ) . Similar experiments were carried out using skeletal muscle tissue samples derived from caveolin - 3 null mice ( 28 , 30 ) . We now show that expression of palmitoylated caveolin - 1 is normally required for the efﬁcient transport of GPI - linked proteins from the Golgi complex to the plasma membrane . Our current results are entirely consistent with the original identiﬁcation of caveolin - 1 as VIP - 21 ( vesicular integral mem - brane protein with a molecular mass of 21 kDa ) , a prominent component of trans - Golgi - derived transport vesicles ( reviewed in references 29 , 52 , and 73 ) . MATERIALS AND METHODS Materials . Antibodies and their sources were as follows : anti - caveolin - 1 mono - clonal antibody ( MAb ) ( clone 2297 ) , anti - caveolin - 2 MAb ( clone 65 ) , and anti - caveolin - 3 MAb ( clone 26 ) ( 81 , 83 , 89 ) ( gifts of Roberto Campos - Gonzalez , BD Transduction Laboratories , Inc . ) ; anti - caveolin - 1 poloclonal antibody ( PAb ) N - 20 ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) ; anti - caveolin - 2 PAb and anti - caveolin - 3 PAb ( Afﬁnity Bioreagents , Inc . ) ; anti - (cid:3) - dystroglycan ( mouse MAb ; Novocastra ) ; anti - Cab45 PAb ( gift of Philipp E . Scherer ) ; proaerolysin and anti - aerolysin MAb ( Protox Biotech ) ; anti - aerolysin rabbit PAb ( 16 , 62 ) ( Buckley laboratory ) ; anti - T - cadherin PAb H - 126 ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) ; anti - Tamm - Horsfall glyco - protein sheep PAb ( Chemicon , Inc . ) ; anti - Src MAb ( Upstate Biotechnology ) ; anti - (cid:3) - actin MAb ( clone AC - 15 ) ( Sigma ) ; anti - carbonic anhydrase - IV PAb ( CA - IV ; gift of William S . Sly , St . Louis University School of Medicine ) . A variety of other reagents were purchased commercially as follows : cell culture reagents and the Lipofectamine liposomal transfection reagent were from Gibco / BRL . Expression vectors . The cDNAs encoding full - length caveolin - 1 , caveolin - 2 , and caveolin - 3 were subcloned into pCB7 , a mammalian expression vector driven by the cytomegalovirus promoter ( 15 , 81 – 83 , 92 ) . The cDNAs encoding the wild - type caveolin - 1 and the caveolin - 1 palmitoylation mutants ( 17 ) were not epitope tagged and were subcloned into the pCAGGS vector , as we previously described ( 38 , 39 ) . The cDNA encoding human c - Src in the pUSE - Amp cyto - megalovirus - based vector was purchased from Upstate Biotechnology , Inc . Immunoblot analysis . Mouse tissues were harvested , minced with a scissors , homogenized in a Polytron tissue grinder for 30 s at a medium - range speed , and solubilized with lysis buffer ( 10 mM Tris , pH 8 ; 150 mM NaCl ; 1 % Triton X - 100 , 60 mM octyl glucoside ) containing protease inhibitors ( Boehringer Mannheim ) . In order to prepare cell lysates , cells were cultured in their respective media and allowed to reach (cid:2) 80 to 90 % conﬂuency . Subsequently , they were washed with phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) and incubated with lysis buffer containing pro - tease inhibitors . Protein concentrations were quantiﬁed using the bicinchoninic acid reagent ( Pierce ) , and the volume required for 10 (cid:4) g of protein was deter - mined . Samples were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( SDS - PAGE ) ( 10 % acrylamide ) and transferred to nitrocellu - lose . The nitrocellulose membranes were stained with Ponceau S ( to visualize protein bands ) , followed by immunoblot analysis . All subsequent wash buffers contained 10 mM Tris ( pH 8 . 0 ) – 150 mM NaCl – 0 . 05 % Tween - 20 , which was 3906 SOTGIA ET AL . M OL . C ELL . B IOL . on J anua r y 6 , 2018 b y gue s t h tt p : / / m c b . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m supplemented with 1 % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) and 4 % nonfat dry milk ( Carnation ) for the blocking solution and 1 % BSA for the antibody diluent . Primary antibodies were used at a 1 : 1 , 000 dilution . Horseradish peroxidase - conjugated secondary antibodies ( 1 : 5 , 000 dilution ; Pierce ) were used to visualize bound primary antibodies with the Supersignal chemiluminescence substrate ( Pierce ) . Proaerolysin overlay assays . GPI - linked proteins were visualized using the proaerolysin overlay assay ( 5 , 16 , 62 ) . Brieﬂy , samples were separated by SDS - PAGE ( 10 % acrylamide ) and transferred to nitrocellulose . Membranes were blocked with 4 % lowfat dried milk and 1 % BSA in PBST ( PBS – 0 . 5 % Tween 20 ) . Blots were then incubated at room temperature for 1 h with 20 nM proaerolysin in PBST , washed three times , and incubated with a 1 : 4 , 000 dilution of an anti - aerolysin MAb probe . After washing for 15 min , membranes were incubated with an anti - mouse antibody conjugated to horseradish peroxidase ( Pierce ) . Bound immunoglobulin G ( IgG ) was detected using a chemiluminescent substrate ( Pierce ) . Puriﬁcation of caveola - enriched membrane fractions . Caveola - enriched mem - brane fractions were puriﬁed essentially as we previously described ( 53 , 78 ) . Brieﬂy , 200 mg of lung tissue was placed in 2 ml of MBS ( 25 mM MES [ mor - pholineethanesulfonic acid ] , pH 6 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl ) containing 1 % Triton X - 100 and solubilized by using rapid 10 - s bursts of a rotor homogenizer and passing 10 times through a loose - ﬁtting Dounce homogenizer . The sample was mixed with an equal volume of 80 % sucrose ( prepared in MBS lacking Triton X - 100 ) , transferred to a 12 - ml ultracentrifuge tube , and overlaid with a discontinuous sucrose gradient ( 4 ml of 30 % sucrose , 4 ml of 5 % sucrose , both prepared in MBS lacking detergent ) . The samples were subjected to centrifugation at 200 , 000 (cid:5) g ( 39 , 000 rpm in a Sorval rotor TH - 641 ) for 16 h . A light - scattering band was observed at the 5 / 30 % sucrose interface . Twelve 1 - ml fractions were collected , and 10 (cid:4) g of each fraction were subjected to SDS - PAGE and either to immu - noblotting or to the proaerolysin overlay assay . Immunostaining of parafﬁn sections . Tissue sections derived from wild - type and Cav - 1 null mice were deparafﬁnized in xylene for 4 min and rehydrated through a graded series of ethanol and placed in PBS . Antigen retrieval was performed by microwave irradiation in 0 . 01 M trisodium citrate buffer , pH 6 . Sections were preblocked in PBS supplemented with 1 % BSA , 10 % horse serum , and 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 fo r 1 h atroom temperature . The sections were then labeled with a given polyclonal primary antibody at room temperature for 1 h . After a 15 - min wash in PBS , rhodamine - conjugated secondary antibodies were added to the sections for 30 min . The sections were then washed in PBS for 15 min . Slow - Fade antifade reagent was added to prevent bleaching of the ﬂuoro - chrome . Samples were imaged with an Olympus inverted microscope . For the nuclear counterstaining , before mounting the slides , DAPI was added for 15 min at room temperature . 3T3 MEF culture and transfection . MEFs were obtained from day 13 . 5 em - bryos and immortalized using the 3T3 protocol , as we previously described ( 72 ) . Immortalized MEF cells were grown in Dulbecco minimal essential medium supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , 2 mM glutamine , 100 U of penicillin / ml , and 100 (cid:4) g of streptomycin ( Gibco / BRL ) / ml . Cells ( (cid:2) 40 to 50 % conﬂuent ) were transiently transfected with a given cDNA by using the Lipo - fectamine liposomal transfection reagent , per the manufacturer’s instructions , and analyzed 36 to 48 h posttransfection . Immunoﬂuorescence microscopy . The procedure was performed essentially as we have previously described , with minor modiﬁcations ( 40 , 72 ) . MEFs ( either untransfected or transfected ) were ﬁxed for 30 min in PBS containing 2 % paraformaldehyde and rinsed with PBS . The cells were then incubated in per - meabilization buffer ( PBS , 0 . 2 % BSA , 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 ) for 10 min , washed with PBS , and labeled with 10 (cid:6) 8 M proaerolysin . After washing with PBS ( three times ) , cells were incubated with a 1 : 500 dilution of an anti - aerolysin MAb . The bound primary antibody was visualized with a tagged secondary antibody ( ﬂuo - rescein isothiocyanate [ FITC ] - conjugated goat anti - mouse IgG [ Jackson Immu - nochemicals ] ) . Cells were then washed with PBS ( three times ) , and slides were mounted with Slow - Fade anti - fade reagent ( Molecular Probes ) . A cooled charge - coupled device camera attached to an Olympus microscope was used for detection of bound secondary antibodies . For double - labeling experiments , the appropriate primary polyclonal antibody was incubated along with the anti - aerolysin MAb and detected with a lissamine - rhodamine - conjugated goat anti - rabbit secondary antibody ( Jackson Immunochemicals ) . Biochemical detection of cell surface GPI - linked proteins . Wild - type and Cav - 1 null 3T3 MEFs were grown to conﬂuence on 10 - cm - diameter dishes , washed twice with ice - cold PBS containing CaCl 2 ( 0 . 1 mM ) and MgCl 2 ( 1 mM ) [ PBS - C / M ] , and subjected to cell surface biotinylation with sulfo – N - hydroxysuc - cinimide ( NHS ) – biotin ( 0 . 5 mg / ml ; Pierce ) , essentially as we have described previously ( 51 , 76 ) . Then , the cells were scraped into 1 ml of ice - cold lysis buffer containing 10 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 15 M NaCl , 1 % Triton X - 114 , and protease inhibitors and homogenized with a Dounce ( ﬁve strokes ) . After 30 min on ice , the samples were brieﬂy warmed to 37°C ( for 2 to 3 min ) ; this step allows the solubilization of GPI - linked proteins and causes the detergent Triton X - 114 to undergo phase separation ( 45 , 51 ) . The detergent phase was collected by cen - trifugation in the Microfuge ( 14 , 000 (cid:5) g for 30 s ) at room temperature ; hydro - phobic integral membrane proteins ( including GPI - linked proteins ) are known to partition almost exclusively into the lower Triton X - 114 detergent phase ( 46 , 49 ) . The detergent phase ( (cid:2) 100 to 150 (cid:4) l ) was then diluted with 900 (cid:4) l of ice - cold 10 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 15 M NaCl , 60 mM octyl - glucoside , and protease inhibitors . After dilution of the detergent phase , the samples were then subjected to cen - trifugation in the Microfuge ( 14 , 000 (cid:5) g for 10 min ) at 4°C to remove any material that was not solubilized . The resulting lysates were precleared with protein A - Sepharose . Then , streptavidin - agarose beads ( 50 (cid:4) l of a slurry ) were added to each tube to collect the biotinylated cell surface integral membrane proteins ( 48 ) ( including GPI - linked proteins ) and the samples were incubated for 4 to 6 h at 4°C rotating in the cold room . After washing the streptavidin - beads ( three times ) with ice - cold 10 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 15 M NaCl , 60 mM octyl - glucoside , and protease inhibitors , the bound material was eluted by boiling in SDS - PAGE sample buffer . After SDS - PAGE and transfer to nitrocellulose , GPI - linked proteins were visualized using the proaerolysin overlay assay , as described above . Two 10 - cm - diameter plates of cells were used for each exper - imental condition . Triton X - 100 insolubility . MEFs were washed twice with ice - cold PBS ; then , a buffer containing 25 mM MES , pH 6 . 5 , 0 . 15 M NaCl , 1 % Triton X - 100 , and protease inhibitors was gently added to the cells ( 90 ) . After 30 min of incubation at 4°C without agitation , the soluble fraction was collected . The insoluble frac - tion was extracted using 1 % SDS . Equal volumes of the soluble and insoluble fractions were resolved by SDS - PAGE ( 10 % acrylamide ) and analyzed by proaerolysin overlay or by immunoblotting . Immunostaining of skeletal muscle sections . Gastrocnemius muscles were isolated from wild - type and Cav - 3 null mice , rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen - cooled isopentane , and stored in liquid nitrogen . Unﬁxed frozen sections ( 6 (cid:4) m thick ) of skeletal muscle were prepared and then blocked with 1 % BSA , 10 % horse serum , and 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 for 1 h at room temperature . Sections were incubated with a given primary antibody diluted in PBS containing 1 % BSA . After three washes with PBS , sections were incubated with the appropriate secondary antibody ( FITC - conjugated goat anti - mouse antibody or lissamine - rhodamine - conjugated goat anti - rabbit antibody ) . Finally , the sections were washed three times with PBS and the slides were mounted with the Slow - Fade antifade reagent . For proaerolysin staining , sections were blocked as described above and labeled with 10 (cid:6) 8 M proaerolysin . After washing with PBS ( three times ) , cells were incubated with a 1 : 500 dilution of an anti - aerolysin rabbit PAb . The bound primary antibody was visualized with a rhodamine - conjugated anti - rabbit secondary antibody . Slides were then washed with PBS ( three times ) and mounted with the Slow - Fade antifade reagent . Cholera toxin uptake studies . Wild - type and Cav - 1 null 3T3 MEFs were grown on glass coverslips , and the cells were washed twice with ice - cold PBS containing CaCl 2 ( 0 . 1 mM ) and MgCl 2 ( 1 mM ) ( PBS - C / M ) . Cholera toxin B subunit ( CT - B ; Sigma ) was then diluted into ice - cold PBS - C / M for a ﬁnal concentration of 1 (cid:4) g / ml . The diluted CT - B solution was then applied to the cells . After 30 min on ice , the cells were then washed twice with ice - cold PBS - C / M and normal media ( prewarmed to 37°C ) was added . The cells were then incubated at 37°C for various times ( 5 , 15 , 30 , and 45 min ) to allow CT - B internalization . Internaliza - tion of CT - B was then stopped by placing the cells on ice , washing with ice - cold PBS - C / M ( two times ) , and ﬁxation with 2 % para - formaldehyde . Immunoﬂuo - rescent detection of the CT - B was performed using a rabbit polyclonal anti - CT - B antibody ( Sigma ) . The bound primary antibody was visualized with a rhodamine - conjugated anti - rabbit secondary antibody . RESULTS In lung tissue from Cav - 1 - deﬁcient mice , GPI - anchored pro - teins are expressed at normal levels and are correctly targeted to lipid rafts but are retained in an intracellular perinuclear compartment . In order to understand the effect of a caveolin - 1 deﬁciency on the phenotypic behavior of GPI - linked proteins , we ﬁrst analyzed lung tissue samples from Cav - 1 null mice as the caveolin - 1 protein is normally highly expressed in the lung , an endothelial - rich tissue source . Lysates were prepared from V OL . 22 , 2002 CAVEOLIN - DEPENDENT SORTING OF GPI - LINKED PROTEINS 3907 on J anua r y 6 , 2018 b y gue s t h tt p : / / m c b . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m wild - type and Cav - 1 null lung tissue and subjected to SDS - PAGE / proaerolysin overlay analysis . Figure 1A shows that , surprisingly , GPI - anchored proteins were expressed at normal levels in Cav - 1 null mice . Previous studies have shown that GPI - anchored proteins are normally targeted to lipid rafts which are membrane microdo - mains that are enriched in cholesterol and sphingolipids ( 1 , 6 ) . The cholesterol / sphingolipid - rich composition of lipid rafts makes them more ordered than the rest of the plasma mem - brane and confers upon them special biochemical properties . FIG . 1 . 3908 on J anua r y 6 , 2018 b y gue s t h tt p : / / m c b . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m In particular , lipid rafts are resistant to solubilization with nonionic detergents at low temperatures , thereby facilitating their puriﬁcation ( 8 , 9 ) . When the caveolin - 1 protein is ex - pressed , it is targeted to lipid rafts , where it induces the trans - formation of lipid rafts into caveolar microdomains ( 29 , 87 ) . To determine if GPI - anchored proteins are correctly tar - geted to lipid rafts in Cav - 1 null mice , lung tissue samples were next subjected to extraction with ice - cold Triton X - 100 and sucrose density gradient ultracentrifugation , an established procedure that allows the puriﬁcation of lipid rafts / caveolae ( 53 , 55 , 78 , 90 ) ; fractions 4 and 5 contained caveolin - 1 and represented the lipid raft / caveola - enriched fractions , while fractions 8 to 12 contained the bulk of cellular membranes and cytosolic proteins . To visualize the distribution of GPI - linked proteins across the gradient , an aliquot of each gradient frac - tion was subjected to SDS - PAGE and proaerolysin overlay analysis . Figure 1B and C shows that GPI - linked proteins are correctly targeted to lipid rafts in Cav - 1 null mice ( Fig . 1C ) , compared to normal wild - type controls ( Fig . 1B ) . These results indicate that caveolin - 1 expression is clearly not required for maintaining the association of GPI - linked proteins with lipid rafts . We next investigated the subcellular localization of GPI - anchored proteins . For this purpose , we immunostained lung parafﬁn sections from wild - type and Cav - 1 null mice with rab - bit PAbs directed against carbonic anhydrase IV ( CA - IV ) . CA - IV is a GPI - linked enzyme originally puriﬁed from lung tissue , and CA - IV is prominently expressed on the luminal side of the alveolar capillary endothelium ( 24 ) . Samples were also subjected to nuclear counterstaining with DAPI ( 4 , 6 - dia - midino - 2 - phenylindole ) , which emits blue ﬂuorescence upon binding to AT - rich DNA regions . Figure 1D shows that in wild - type mice , CA - IV was ex - pressed on the plasma membrane , as expected . In striking contrast , CA - IV was retained in an intracellular perinuclear compartment in Cav - 1 null mice . Thus , the trafﬁcking of lipid rafts / GPI - linked proteins may be altered in Cav - 1 null mice . Intracellular retention of GPI - linked proteins within lipid rafts at the Golgi complex in Cav - 1 - deﬁcient 3T3 MEFs . To better understand the altered localization of GPI - linked pro - teins in lung tissue samples , we next analyzed the behavior of GPI - linked proteins in MEFs derived from Cav - 1 (cid:1) / (cid:1) and Cav - 1 (cid:6) / (cid:6) animals ( 72 ) . These cells constitute an ideal model for studying how caveolin - 1 may affect the trafﬁcking of various endogenously expressed proteins , such as GPI - anchored pro - teins , under physiological conditions . Two different MEF clones for each genotype ( wild - type and Cav - 1 null ) were generated in our laboratory and immortalized using a deﬁned 3T3 - passaging protocol ( 72 ) . Here , we present the ﬁrst characterization of these 3T3 - immortalized wild - type and Cav - 1 null MEF clones . These four new cell lines ( (cid:7) 35 passages ) will be extremely useful in studying the role of caveo - lae and caveolin - 1 in membrane protein trafﬁcking , as they provide a highly transfectable mammalian complementation system for studying caveolin - 1 - dependent cell function ( s ) . Im - munoblot analysis of protein lysates from wild - type and Cav - 1 null 3T3 MEFs revealed a complete absence of caveolin - 1 expression and a dramatic reduction of caveolin - 2 expression in Cav - 1 null 3T3 MEFs ( Fig . 2A ) . These ﬁndings are consis - tent with our previous results using primary cultures of wild - type and Cav - 1 null MEFs ( passages 1 to 5 ) ( 72 ) . Equal protein loading was assessed by immunoblotting with anti - (cid:3) - actin IgG . FIG . 1 . Phenotypic behavior of GPI - anchored proteins in lung tis - sue from Cav - 1 null mice . ( A ) GPI Western blot analysis . The expres - sion levels of lung GPI - anchored proteins remain unchanged in Cav - 1 null mice compared with those of wild - type control mice . Lung tissue samples from wild - type and Cav - 1 null mice were homogenized in lysis buffer , and 20 (cid:4) g of lysate from each sample was separated by SDS - PAGE . After transfer to nitrocellulose , the blots were subsequently subjected to proaerolysin overlay to visualize GPI - linked proteins or to caveolin - 1 immunoblotting . ( B and C ) Cellular fractionation . GPI - anchored proteins were targeted to lipid rafts / caveola - enriched frac - tions in lung tissue from wild - type and Cav - 1 null mice . Lipid rafts / caveola microdomains were separated from other cellular constituents by using sucrose ﬂotation gradients ( see Materials and Methods ) . Lung tissue from wild - type and Cav - 1 null mice was homogenized thor - oughly in lysis buffer containing 1 % Triton X - 100 and subjected to sucrose gradient centrifugation . Twelve 1 - ml fractions were collected , and 10 (cid:4) g of each fraction was separated by SDS - PAGE and trans - ferred to nitrocellulose . The distribution of GPI - anchored proteins was analyzed by proaerolysin overlay . Note that GPI - anchored proteins cofractionate with caveolin - 1 ( fractions 4 and 5 ) in lung tissue from wild - type mice ( B ) . However , GPI - anchored proteins are still targeted to lipid rafts ( fractions 4 and 5 ) in lung tissue from Cav - 1 null mice ( C ) . ( D ) CA - IV immunostaining . GPI - linked proteins show differences in their localization patterns in lung tissue from Cav - 1 null mice . Lung parafﬁn sections from wild - type and Cav - 1 null mice were labeled with an antibody directed against an abundant lung endothelial GPI - an - chored protein , CA - IV . Bound primary antibodies were detected with a ﬂuorescently labeled secondary antibody . Nuclear counterstaining was performed using DAPI . Top , CA - IV localizes at the plasma mem - brane in wild - type lung endothelial cells ( see arrows ) . Bottom , GPI - anchored CA - IV shows a perinuclear localization pattern in Cav - 1 null lung endothelial cells ( see arrowhead ) ; arrows point to the cell surface . 3909 on J anua r y 6 , 2018 b y gue s t h tt p : / / m c b . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m FIG . 2 . 3910 SOTGIA ET AL . M OL . C ELL . B IOL . on J anua r y 6 , 2018 b y gue s t h tt p : / / m c b . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m We ﬁrst assessed the localization of GPI - linked proteins by cell surface staining using wild - type and Cav - 1 null MEFs . Cells were ﬁxed in the absence of any detergents and subjected to labeling with proaerolysin . Figure 2B ( lower panel ) shows that little or no GPI surface staining was detectable in Cav - 1 null cells . On the contrary , in wild - type MEFs , GPI - anchored proteins showed their normal characteristic punctate distribu - tion at the cell surface ( Fig . 2B , upper panel ) . Identical results were obtained with both Cav - 1 null 3T3 MEF clones . We next performed immunolocalization after permeabiliza - tion with detergent to allow the detection of a potential intra - cellular pool of GPI - linked proteins with proaerolysin . In wild - type MEFs , GPI - linked proteins were efﬁciently targeted to the plasma membrane , and in fact , they often showed a polarized distribution ; two exposures are shown to better illustrate this point ( Fig . 2C ) . However , in Cav - 1 null MEFs , GPI - linked proteins were primarily retained at the level of a perinuclear compartment and were not able to efﬁciently reach the plasma membrane ( Fig . 2D ) . This ﬁnding is consistent with the ob - served intracellular retention of GPI - linked proteins in the lung tissue samples ( Fig . 1D ) . We identiﬁed this perinuclear compartment as the Golgi complex ( Fig . 3A ) by performing double - labeling experiments with antibodies directed against a Golgi marker protein , Cab45 , that is endogenously expressed ( 80 ) . Given the observed intracellular retention of GPI - linked proteins , we wondered if such localization might affect their stability or their expression levels . To our surprise , however , GPI - anchored proteins were expressed at normal levels in Cav - 1 null MEFs , as seen by proaerolysin overlay ( Fig . 3B ) . Note the two major GPI - linked proteins of proteins (cid:2) 35 and (cid:2) 60 kDa ( see arrows ) . To biochemically detect only cell surface GPI - anchored pro - teins , we next used cell surface biotinylation and concentrated the biotinylated GPI - linked proteins by phase separation using the detergent Triton X - 114 and precipitation with streptavidin agarose beads ( see Materials and Methods ) . The recovered biotinylated GPI - linked proteins were then visualized via the proaerolysin overlay assay . We anticipated that only a subset of GPI - anchored proteins would be detected via this method , as they also must be lysine - rich proteins in order to be labeled by sulfo - NHS - biotin , which reacts only with free amino groups at the cell surface . Interestingly , using this approach in wild - type MEFs , we successfully detected the two major endogenous GPI - linked proteins ( (cid:2) 35 and (cid:2) 60 kDa ; compare with Fig . 3B ) at the cell surface ( Fig . 3C , arrows ) . Importantly , visual - ization of these GPI - linked proteins was strictly dependent on cell surface biotinylation , as they were not observed if cell surface biotinylation was omitted ( compare (cid:1) and (cid:6) lanes ) . In striking contrast , no cell surface GPI - linked proteins were de - tected in Cav - 1 null MEFs ( Fig . 3C ) , consistent with our ﬁnd - ings from immunoﬂuorescence microscopy ( Fig . 2B ) . These data provide clear biochemical evidence that the two major endogenous GPI - linked proteins are not located at the cell surface in Cav - 1 null MEFs . To examine if this intracellular pool of GPI - linked proteins remains associated with lipid rafts , we also assessed their Triton solubility proﬁle . Figure 3D shows that GPI - anchored proteins are predominantly Triton insoluble and that their distribution pattern is essentially identical both in wild - type and Cav - 1 null MEFs . Thus , we conclude that a loss of caveolin - 1 expression does not affect the expression levels or raft - association of GPI - linked proteins . However , loss of caveolin - 1 does result in the preferred intracellular retention of GPI - linked proteins in both lung tissue and cultured 3T3 ﬁbroblasts . Recombinant expression of caveolin - 1 or caveolin - 3 restores cell surface expression of GPI - linked proteins in Cav - 1 null MEFs . Given that the absence of caveolin - 1 expression causes the intracellular retention of GPI - linked proteins at the level of the Golgi , we speculated that we could rescue this trafﬁcking defect by recombinantly expressing caveolin - 1 in Cav - 1 null MEFs . For this purpose , Cav - 1 null MEFs were transiently transfected with the cDNA encoding caveolin - 1 . Figure 4A shows that recombinant expression of caveolin - 1 leads to the cell surface expression of GPI - linked proteins in Cav - 1 null MEFs , successfully complementing the defect in their transport . Interestingly , caveolin - 1 and GPI - linked pro - teins showed colocalization at the cell surface in caveolin - 1 - transfected cells . The same micrograph also shows two un - transfected Cav - 1 null MEFs in which GPI - anchored proteins are retained in the Golgi complex . Currently , the caveolin gene family consists of caveolin - 1 , - 2 , and - 3 ( 21 ) . Caveolin - 1 and - 2 are coexpressed and form hetero - oligomeric complexes in many cell types ( 79 , 81 ) , while caveolin - 3 is exclusively expressed in muscle cells ( including skeletal , cardiac , and smooth muscle ) ( 70 , 89 , 92 ) . Therefore , we next examined whether transient expression of either caveolin - 2 or caveolin - 3 could rescue the cell surface expression of GPI - linked proteins . FIG . 2 . Intracellular retention of GPI - linked proteins in Cav - 1 - deﬁcient 3T3 MEFs . ( A ) Caveolin Western blot analysis . 3T3 MEFs from Cav - 1 knockout ( KO ) mice show an absence of caveolin - 1 and severely reduced caveolin - 2 levels . Samples containing 10 (cid:4) g of lysates from wild - type ( WT ) and Cav - 1 null MEFs were loaded in each lane , subjected to SDS - PAGE , and immunoblotted with an anti - Cav - 1 MAb ( clone 2297 ) or with an anti - Cav - 2 MAb ( clone 26 ) . Equal protein loading was assessed using an anti - (cid:3) - actin MAb . Results for two independent clones of each genotype are shown . ( B ) GPI cell surface labeling . Wild - type and Cav - 1 null MEFs were grown on coverslips at a density of (cid:2) 70 to 80 % conﬂuency . After ﬁxation , the cells were not permeabilized . Instead , they were directly labeled with 10 (cid:6) 8 M proaerolysin and then incubated with an anti - aerolysin MAb . Bound primary antibodies were visualized with an FITC - conjugated anti - mouse antibody ( see Materials and Methods ) . Note that in wild - type MEFs , GPI - anchored proteins show a punctate pattern of cell surface staining , as expected . In striking contrast , Cav - 1 null MEFs show little or no detectable cell surface labeling of GPI - linked proteins . ( C and D ) GPI staining after detergent permeabilization . Wild - type and Cav - 1 null MEFs were grown on coverslips at a density of (cid:2) 70 to 80 % conﬂuency . After ﬁxation , the cells were permeabilized and then labeled with 10 (cid:6) 8 M proaerolysin . Bound proaerolysin was visualized as described above in the legend for panel B . ( C ) In wild - type MEFs , GPI - anchored proteins were targeted to the plasma membrane and often assumed a polarized distribution . Arrows point at the cell surface . A longer exposure is also shown in the lower panel to illustrate the overall shape and contour of the cells . ( D ) In Cav - 1 null MEFs , GPI - anchored proteins were primarily retained intracellularly in a perinuclear compartment ( arrowheads ) . N , nucleus . V OL . 22 , 2002 CAVEOLIN - DEPENDENT SORTING OF GPI - LINKED PROTEINS 3911 on J anua r y 6 , 2018 b y gue s t h tt p : / / m c b . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m FIG . 3 . 3912 SOTGIA ET AL . M OL . C ELL . B IOL . on J anua r y 6 , 2018 b y gue s t h tt p : / / m c b . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m For this purpose , Cav - 1 null MEFs were transiently transfected with the cDNAs encoding caveolin - 2 or caveolin - 3 . Figure 4B shows that recombinant expression of caveolin - 2 could not compensate for caveolin - 1’s absence , as the GPI - linked proteins are still retained intracellularly . This is perhaps not sur - prising in light of recent evidence showing that in the absence of caveolin - 1 expression , the stability and proper folding of the caveolin - 2 protein is compromised . For example , in the absence of caveolin - 1 , caveolin - 2 expression is greatly reduced via protea - somal degradation , residual caveolin - 2 is trapped intracellularly at the level of the Golgi , and thus , caveolin - 2 lacks the ability to induce caveola formation at the plasma membrane ( 59 , 67 , 72 ) . In contrast , Fig . 4C shows that recombinant expression of caveolin - 3 rescued the ability of GPI - linked proteins to exit from the Golgi complex and to properly reach the cell surface . In this regard , it is interesting to note that caveolin - 3 , which has the highest homology to caveolin - 1 , is necessary and suf - ﬁcient to induce the morphological formation of caveolae in muscle cells ( 28 , 41 ) . Thus , we conclude that expression of either caveolin - 1 or caveolin - 3 is required for the efﬁcient transport of GPI - anchored proteins to the plasma membrane . Expression of palmitoylated caveolin - 1 is required for efﬁ - cient transport of GPI - linked proteins to the plasma mem - brane in Cav - 1 null MEFs . How does cytoplasmically oriented caveolin - 1 interact with luminal GPI - linked proteins if they reside on opposite sides of the Golgi lipid bilayer ? As caveo - lin - 1 normally undergoes palmitoylation on three cysteine res - idues ( 133 , 143 , and 156 ) within its C - terminal domain ( 17 ) , one possibility is that this interaction is mediated by the trans - bilayer association of the two or three fatty acyl groups on the GPI anchor with the three palmitoyl moieties attached to caveolin - 1 . The acyl group - dependent association of caveolin - 1 with cholesterol ( 94 ) may also link the cytoplasmic and exo - plasmic leaﬂets of the lipid bilayer , as cholesterol is present in both leaﬂets and can potentially form dimers that span the membrane , acting as a bridge ( 33 ) ( Fig . 5A ) . Alternatively , palmitoylation of caveolin - 1 may simply affect the global orga - nization of lipid rafts , thereby facilitating the recruitment of GPI - linked proteins . To test this hypothesis , we next examined the ability of a panel of four palmitoylation - deﬁcient caveolin - 1 mutants to rescue the cell surface expression of GPI - linked proteins in Cav - 1 null MEFs . In these mutants , each caveolin - 1 palmitoyl - ation acceptor site is mutated from cysteine to serine ( C133S , C143S , C156S , and the triple mutant C133 , 143 , 156S - Pal Mi - nus ) ( Fig . 5B ) . Importantly , palmitoylation - deﬁcient caveolin - 1 correctly forms high - molecular - mass oligomers and is correctly targeted to the plasma membrane / caveolae , behaving as wild - type caveolin - 1 ( 17 , 56 , 94 ) . However , this occurs despite the fact that palmitoylation - deﬁcient caveolin - 1 fails to recruit choles - terol to caveolar membranes ( 94 ) . Similarly , it has been pre - viously shown that all four of the caveolin - 1 palmitoylation mutants used here correctly reach the plasma membrane and are correctly targeted to lipid rafts / caveolae ( 17 , 94 ) . Figure 5C shows that palmitoylation - deﬁcient caveolin - 1 ( C133 , 143 , 156S - Pal Minus ) completely fails to rescue the cell surface transport of GPI - linked proteins . In order to further dissect this phenomenon , we next transiently transfected each caveolin - 1 single mutant and analyzed the distribution of GPI - linked proteins by proaerolysin immunoﬂuorescence . Interest - ingly , recombinant expression of caveolin - 1 ( C133S ) was suf - ﬁcient to recruit GPI - anchored proteins to the plasma membrane , although with a lower efﬁciency than wild - type caveolin - 1 ( Fig . 5D ) . In contrast , recombinant expression of caveolin - 1 ( C143S ) or caveolin - 1 ( C156S ) failed to rescue the cell surface expression of GPI - linked proteins ( Fig . 5E and F ) . Thus , palmitoylation of caveolin - 1 at cysteine residues 143 and 156 is most critical for caveolin - 1 to functionally facilitate the cell surface transport of GPI - linked proteins . These results support the hypothesis that caveolin - 1 palmitoyl groups some - how facilitate the clustering of GPI - linked proteins in Golgi - associated caveola - like vesicles that are then transported to the plasma membrane . Thus , palmitoylated caveolin - 1 normally functions as a molecular escort to allow the efﬁcient cell sur - face transport of GPI - linked proteins . In Cav - 3 null mice , GPI - anchored proteins are expressed at normal levels but display an abnormal localization pattern and are retained intracellularly . Our previous studies have demonstrated that Cav - 3 null mice show various alterations in FIG . 3 . GPI - linked proteins are preferentially retained within lipid rafts at the level of the Golgi complex in Cav - 1 null MEFs . ( A ) Double labeling with a Golgi marker protein . Formaldehyde - ﬁxed and permeabilized Cav - 1 null MEFs were double labeled with proaerolysin to visualize GPI - linked proteins and with Cab45 , an endogenous Golgi marker protein . Bound primary antibodies were visualized with distinctly tagged secondary antibodies ( see Materials and Methods ) . Note that the distributions of GPI - anchored proteins and Cab - 45 precisely coincide , identifying the perinuclear region as the Golgi complex ( arrowhead ) . N , nucleus . ( B ) GPI Western blot analysis . The expression levels of GPI - anchored proteins remained unchanged in Cav - 1 null MEFs , compared with wild - type ( WT ) control MEFs . A 10 - (cid:4) g sample of cell lysate was loaded in each lane and separated by SDS - PAGE . The blots were subsequently subjected to proaerolysin overlay analysis to visualize GPI - linked proteins . Note the two major GPI - linked proteins with molecular masses of (cid:2) 35 and (cid:2) 60 kDa ( see arrows ) . KO , knockout . ( C ) Biochemical detection of cell surface GPI - linked proteins . To detect only cell surface GPI - anchored proteins , we used cell surface biotinylation and concentrated the biotinylated GPI - linked proteins by phase separation using the detergent Triton X - 114 and precipitation with streptavidin agarose beads ( see Materials and Methods ) . The recovered biotinylated GPI - linked proteins were then visualized via the proaerolysin overlay assay . Note that by using this approach , we successfully detected the two major endogenous GPI - linked proteins ( (cid:2) 35 and (cid:2) 60 kDa ; see arrows ) at the cell surface in wild - type MEFs . Importantly , visualization of these GPI - linked proteins was strictly dependent on cell surface biotinylation , as they were not observed if cell surface biotinylation was omitted . In striking contrast , no cell surface GPI - linked proteins were detected in Cav - 1 null MEFs . (cid:1) , samples subjected to cell surface biotinylation with sulfo - NHS - biotin ; (cid:6) , the biotinylation step was omitted ( a critical negative control ) . ( D ) GPI detergent insolubility . GPI - anchored proteins are detergent insoluble both in wild - type and knockout MEFs . After incubation of wild - type and Cav - 1 null MEFs with a buffer containing 1 % Triton X - 100 , the soluble fraction was collected . Then , the insoluble fraction was extracted using 1 % SDS . Equal volumes of the soluble fraction and insoluble fraction were resolved by SDS - PAGE ( 10 % acrylamide ) and analyzed by proaerolysin overlay or caveolin - 1 immunoblotting . Note that a caveolin - 1 deﬁciency did not affect the detergent solubility of the GPI - anchored proteins ; they remain predominantly Triton insoluble , indicative of their association with lipid rafts . V OL . 22 , 2002 CAVEOLIN - DEPENDENT SORTING OF GPI - LINKED PROTEINS 3913 on J anua r y 6 , 2018 b y gue s t h tt p : / / m c b . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m FIG . 4 . Recombinant expression of caveolin - 1 or caveolin - 3 re - stores the robust cell surface expression of GPI - linked proteins in Cav - 1 null MEFs . Cav - 1 null MEFs were transiently transfected with full - length cDNAs encoding either caveolin - 1 , caveolin - 2 , or caveo - lin - 3 . Thirty - six hours posttransfection , cells were formaldehyde ﬁxed and doubly immunostained with proaerolysin and with either anti - Cav - 1 , anti - Cav - 2 or anti - Cav - 3 PAb . ( A ) Caveolin - 1 . Recombinant expression of caveolin - 1 rescues the ability of GPI - anchored proteins to reach the plasma membrane . Note that both GPI - linked proteins and caveolin - 1 colocalized to the plasma membrane in caveolin - 1 - transfected cells ( arrows ) . In the same ﬁeld , two untransfected cells that did not express caveolin - 1 showed the retention of GPI - anchored proteins in the Golgi complex ( arrowheads ) . N , nucleus . ( B ) Caveo - lin - 2 . Recombinant expression of caveolin - 2 failed to restore the cell surface expression of GPI - linked proteins . Note that both GPI - an - chored proteins and caveolin - 2 were colocalized to the Golgi complex ( arrowheads ) . The image shown is that of a caveolin - 2 - transfected cell . N , nucleus . ( C ) Caveolin - 3 . Recombinant expression of caveolin - 3 rescued the ability of GPI - anchored proteins to reach the plasma membrane . Note that both GPI - linked proteins and caveolin - 3 colo - calized to the plasma membrane in the caveolin - 3 - transfected cell ( arrows ) . In the same ﬁeld , an untransfected cell that did not express caveolin - 3 showed the retention of GPI - anchored proteins in the Golgi complex ( arrowhead ) . N , nucleus . 3914 SOTGIA ET AL . M OL . C ELL . B IOL . on J anua r y 6 , 2018 b y gue s t h tt p : / / m c b . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m their skeletal muscle ﬁbers , with a loss of sarcolemmal caveo - lae , a biochemical defect in the targeting of the dystrophin - dystroglycan complex to lipid rafts , and an immature disorga - nized T - tubule system ( 28 ) . As we show here that recombinant expression of caveolin - 3 in Cav - 1 null MEFs is sufﬁcient to rescue the cell surface expression of GPI - linked proteins , we wondered whether Cav - 3 null mice also show defects in the trafﬁcking of GPI - linked proteins in vivo . Lysates from skeletal muscle tissue biopsies from wild - type and Cav - 3 null mice were subjected to SDS - PAGE and proaerolysin overlays to detect GPI - linked proteins . Figure 6A shows that GPI - linked proteins are expressed at normal levels in skeletal muscle from Cav - 3 null mice . Western blot analysis of the same samples was also performed using a caveolin - 3 - speciﬁc MAb probe to conﬁrm that caveolin - 3 expression is indeed absent in skeletal muscle from Cav - 3 null mice . Next , frozen sections were prepared from skeletal muscle biopsies taken from wild - type and Cav - 3 null mice . These fro - zen sections were ﬁrst stained with proaerolysin to visualize the distribution of GPI - linked proteins . A rabbit PAb directed against aerolysin was then used to detect bound proaerolysin in order to minimize secondary antibody cross - reactivity . Figure 6B shows that in skeletal muscle tissue sections from wild - type mice , GPI - linked proteins were localized to the sarcolemma ( i . e . , muscle cell plasma membrane ) , as expected . Interestingly , skeletal muscle ﬁbers from Cav - 3 null mice displayed signiﬁ - cant changes in the distribution of GPI - anchored proteins . Note the intracellular retention of GPI - linked proteins in Cav - 3 null skeletal muscle ﬁbers ; in contrast , the neighboring endothelial cells which express caveolin - 1 showed a normal labeling pattern . We next immunostained these skeletal muscle frozen sec - tions with antibodies to T - cadherin , an endogenously ex - pressed GPI - linked protein that plays a role in cell - cell adhe - sion in muscle . In contrast to the classical cadherins , T - cadherin does not possess transmembrane and cytosolic do - mains and is instead attached to the cell membrane by a GPI anchor ( 2 ) . Recent studies have shown that T - cadherin local - izes within caveolin - rich membrane domains in vascular smooth muscle cells ( 71 ) . Interestingly , staining either with proaerolysin or with a speciﬁc PAb directed against T - cadherin showed a similar immunostaining pattern ( Fig . 6C ) . Note that in Cav - 3 null mice , the skeletal muscle ﬁbers show signiﬁcant intracellular retention of T - cadherin . As expected , T - cadherin was localized to the muscle cell plasma membrane in wild - type muscle ﬁbers . As an important internal control , we also assessed the im - munoreactivity of our samples by using antibodies to (cid:3) - dystro - glycan . We chose (cid:3) - dystroglycan since it is a ubiquitous mem - brane protein that we have previously shown to be expressed at normal levels at the sarcolemma in Cav - 3 null mice ( 28 ) . Note that , as expected , the overall sarcolemmal localization of (cid:3) - dystroglycan is not affected in caveolin - 3 null mice ( Fig . 6D ) . We conclude that in Cav - 3 null mice , GPI - anchored proteins are expressed at normal levels but display an abnormal local - ization pattern and are retained intracellularly . These results directly support our observations obtained with Cav - 1 null MEFs . Intracellular retention of GPI - linked protein in the renal tubules of Cav - 1 null mice . As GPI - linked proteins are selec - tively targeted to the apical surface of polarized renal epithelial cells in culture ( 7 , 44 , 49 , 51 ) , we next examined the expression and the distribution of GPI - anchored proteins in the renal tubules of the kidney in vivo . First , the kidneys were harvested , and lysates were prepared to examine the expression levels of GPI - linked proteins by SDS - PAGE and proaerolysin overlays . Interestingly , no changes in the expression of GPI - linked pro - teins were observed in kidneys derived from Cav - 1 null mice ( Fig . 7A ) . Western blot analysis of the same samples was also performed using a caveolin - 1 - speciﬁc PAb probe to conﬁrm that caveolin - 1 expression was indeed absent in kidney from Cav - 1 null mice . Kidney parafﬁn sections from wild - type and Cav - 1 null mice were generated and immunostained with antibodies directed against a speciﬁc renal tubule GPI - anchored protein , Tamm - Horsfall , which is also known as the major urinary glycoprotein ( 13 , 74 ) . Figure 7B shows that the Tamm - Horsfall protein was properly localized at the apical surface of renal tubular epithe - lial cells and shows a ring - like staining pattern in the wild - type mice , as expected . In contrast , the Tamm - Horsfall protein is largely excluded from this location and is mainly found intra - cellularly in Cav - 1 null mice . Thus , it appears that caveolin - deﬁcient mice show a pleio - tropic defect in the cell surface transport of GPI - linked pro - teins . Perinuclear retention of c - Src in Cav - 1 - deﬁcient MEFs : re - combinant expression of caveolin - 1 restores the normal plasma membrane distribution of c - Src . As GPI - linked pro - teins are retained in lipid rafts at the level of the Golgi complex in Cav - 1 null MEFs , we wondered whether other lipid raft marker proteins might suffer a similar fate . Thus , we next examined the distribution of c - Src , a member of the Src family of tyrosine kinases and a cytoplasmic lipid raft marker protein ( 88 ) in Cav - 1 null MEFs . If c - Src is retained in an intracellular compartment as well , this might suggest that lipid rafts them - selves may be preferentially retained intracellularly in Cav - 1 null MEFs . To facilitate the detection of c - Src , wild - type and Cav - 1 null MEFs were transiently transfected with the cDNA encoding the human c - Src protein and were subjected to analysis by immunoﬂuorescence microscopy using anti - Src IgG . Figure 8A shows that in wild - type MEFs , c - Src resided at the plasma membrane , as expected . In contrast , in Cav - 1 null MEFs , c - Src was preferentially retained at an intracellular perinuclear site that we identiﬁed as the Golgi complex ( Fig . 8A ; data not shown ) . Importantly , the intracellular retention of c - Src could be rescued by the recombinant expression of caveolin - 1 in Cav - 1 null MEFs ( Fig . 8B ) . However , palmitoylation - deﬁcient caveo - lin - 1 ( C133 , 143 , 156S - Pal Minus ) showed little or no ability to rescue the plasma membrane targeting of c - Src ( Fig . 8C and D ) . Thus , we conclude that palmitoylation of caveolin - 1 is normally required for the efﬁcient cell surface transport of lipid rafts that contain GPI - linked proteins and Src family kinases . In this regard , Golgi - associated caveolins and caveola - like vesicles could represent part of the transport machinery that is necessary for efﬁciently moving lipid rafts and their associated proteins from one cellular compartment to the next—in this case , from the Golgi to the plasma membrane . V OL . 22 , 2002 CAVEOLIN - DEPENDENT SORTING OF GPI - LINKED PROTEINS 3915 on J anua r y 6 , 2018 b y gue s t h tt p : / / m c b . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Consistent with these ﬁndings , we have previously shown that palmitoylation of caveolin - 1 is required for caveolin - 1 to be tyrosine phosphorylated by c - Src in transiently transfected Cos - 7 cells ( 38 ) ; however , we did not evaluate the subcellular distribution of c - Src in these transfected Cos - 7 cells . Thus , our current ﬁndings using caveolin - 1 - deﬁcient ﬁbroblasts provide a novel molecular explanation for this uncoupling event , as we now show that c - Src is retained in the Golgi , while palmitoy - lation - deﬁcient caveolin - 1 localizes to the plasma membrane . Clustering and internalization of CT - B is impaired in Cav - 1 FIG . 5 . 3916 SOTGIA ET AL . M OL . C ELL . B IOL . on J anua r y 6 , 2018 b y gue s t h tt p : / / m c b . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m null MEFs . Since the other lipid raft markers that we tested were retained intracellularly in Cav - 1 null MEFs ( GPI - linked proteins and c - Src ) , we searched for a lipid raft marker that still remained at the cell surface . This would then allow us to assess the effect of a loss of caveolin - 1 on the clustering and internalization of lipid rafts at the cell surface . Interestingly , the binding of CT - B to the cell surface of Cav - 1 null cells was essentially the same as in wild - type MEFs . CT - B speciﬁcally binds GM 1 , an abundant cell surface glycosphingolipid , and is normally internalized via plasmalemmal caveolae , as visualized by electron microscopy ( 58 , 69 ) . As such , CT - B has been ex - tensively used by ﬂuorescence microscopy as a cell surface lipid raft marker to follow the internalization of GM 1 ( 34 , 64 ) . In addition , in vivo chemical cross - linking studies with an iodin - ated derivative of GM 1 showed that GM 1 interacts directly with caveolin - 1 in intact cells , despite the fact that GM 1 ( exo - plasmic ) and caveolin - 1 ( cytoplasmic ) are on opposite sides of the lipid bilayer ( 25 ) . Furthermore , the efﬁciency of the chem - FIG . 5 . Expression of palmitoylated caveolin - 1 is required for efﬁcient transport of GPI - linked proteins to the plasma membrane in Cav - 1 null MEFs . ( A ) Schematic diagram . GPI - linked proteins are conﬁned to the exoplasmic leaﬂet of the membrane , while caveolins are cytoplasmically oriented membrane proteins . As caveolin - 1 normally undergoes palmitoylation on three cysteine residues ( 133 , 143 , and 156 ) , we speculate that caveolin - 1 palmitoylation might mechanistically serve to couple caveolin - 1 to GPI - linked proteins . In direct support of this hypothesis , in vivo chemical cross - linking studies with an iodinated derivative of GM 1 ( a glycosphingolipid ) showed that GM 1 interacted directly with caveolin - 1 in intact cells , despite the fact that GM 1 ( exoplasmic ) and caveolin - 1 ( cytoplasmic ) are on opposite sides of the lipid bilayer ( 25 ) . The acyl group - dependent association of caveolin - 1 with cholesterol ( 94 ) may also link the cytoplasmic and exoplasmic leaﬂets of the lipid bilayer , as cholesterol is present in both leaﬂets and can potentially form dimers that span the membrane - acting as a bridge ( 33 ) . Alternatively , palmitoylation of caveolin - 1 may simply affect the global organization of lipid rafts , thereby indirectly facilitating the recruitment of GPI - linked proteins . ( B ) Palmitoylation - deﬁcient caveolin - 1 mutants . A representation of the N - terminal , membrane - spanning , and C - terminal domains of caveolin - 1 is shown . Each cysteine residue within caveolin - 1 that is normally palmitoylated was mutated to a serine , either individually or in combination . ( C to F ) GPI staining after detergent permeabilization . Cav - 1 null MEFs were transfected with each of the full - length cDNAs encoding the above indicated caveolin - 1 palmitoylation mutants . Thirty - six hours posttransfection , cells were formaldehyde ﬁxed and doubly immunostained with proaerolysin and with an anti - caveolin - 1 PAb ( N20 ) . Note that palmitoylation - deﬁcient caveolin - 1 ( C133 , 143 , and 156S - Pal Minus ) completely failed to rescue the cell surface transport of GPI - linked proteins . However , recombinant expression of caveolin - 1 ( C133S ) was sufﬁcient to recruit GPI - anchored proteins to the plasma membrane , although with a lower efﬁciency than wild - type caveolin - 1 . In contrast , recombinant expression of caveolin - 1 ( C143S ) and caveolin - 1 ( C156S ) failed to rescue the cell surface expression of GPI - linked proteins . Thus , palmitoylated caveolin - 1 normally functions as a molecularescorttoallowtheefﬁcientcellsurfacetransportofGPI - linkedproteins . ( CtoF ) Arrowspointatthecellsurface , whilearrowheadspointattheGolgi complex . N , nucleus . V OL . 22 , 2002 CAVEOLIN - DEPENDENT SORTING OF GPI - LINKED PROTEINS 3917 on J anua r y 6 , 2018 b y gue s t h tt p : / / m c b . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m FIG . 6 . 3918 on J anua r y 6 , 2018 b y gue s t h tt p : / / m c b . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m ical cross - linking of photoreactive GM 1 to caveolin - 1 is in - creased by (cid:2) 5 - fold by the addition of CT - B , a pentameric molecule ( 25 ) . Figure 9 shows the behavior of cell surface - bound CT - B in wild - type and Cav - 1 null MEFs . In wild - type cells , the cluster - ing and internalization of CT - B was apparent after 15 to 30 min and was nearly complete by 45 min . After 45 min , CT - B accumulated intracellularly in a perinuclear compartment ( Fig . 9A and B , left ) , as expected . In contrast , Cav - 1 null MEFs clearly showed impaired clustering and internalization of CT - B . Little or no clustering of CT - B occurred at 15 to 30 min , and by 45 min , there was little or no accumulation in a perinu - clear compartment . The efﬁcient internalization of CT - B in Cav - 1 null cells was rescued by recombinant expression of the caveolin - 1 cDNA ( data not shown ) . Thus , caveolin - 1 is also required for the efﬁcient internalization of lipid raft markers at the cell surface . The present ﬁndings for cholera toxin , a membrane - bound ligand , are consistent with our previously published studies showing that the internalization of the protein albumin , a sol - uble ligand , is blocked in ( i ) primary cultures of Cav - 1 null MEFs in vitro ( 72 ) and ( ii ) Cav - 1 null endothelial cells in vivo ( 84 ) . In addition , they support the hypothesis that caveolin - 1 - containing vesicles function both in the endocytic and exocytic transport of certain lipid raft - associated molecules . Further - more , these studies make it highly unlikely that the intracellu - lar retention of GPI - linked proteins that we observed for Cav - 1 null 3T3 MEFs is due to their rapid endocytosis from the cell surface . In addition , other groups have suggested that the internal - ization of cholera toxin is independent of caveolin - 1 and caveo - lae , but they have used overexpression systems or highly trans - formed cell lines ( 3 , 65 , 85 , 93 ) . Thus , our experiments presented here were conducted under more physiologically relevant circumstances and clearly demonstrate that the inter - nalization of cholera toxin is a caveolin - dependent process . DISCUSSION The mechanisms underlying the sorting and vesicular trans - port of GPI - anchored proteins are largely unknown . It has been observed that GPI - linked proteins partition into lipid rafts at the level of the trans - Golgi , as revealed by their resis - tance to solubilization by nonionic detergents at low temper - atures . However , it remains unknown how these lipid raft - associated GPI - linked proteins are clustered , packaged , and transported to the plasma membrane . One attractive hypoth - esis is that lipid rafts containing GPI - linked proteins are incor - porated into Golgi - associated caveola - like vesicles for trans - port to the plasma membrane . This hypothesis was ﬁrst proposed in the early 1990s ( 45 , 54 , 78 ) ; however , it remained untested until now . Here , we exploited a new experimental model system that allowed us to test this hypothesis directly . Recently , we and others generated Cav - 1 null mice ( 72 ) . Fibroblasts derived from their embryos ( MEFs ) represent the ideal tool to study the role of caveolins in GPI - linked protein sorting . These Cav - 1 null MEFs lack morphological caveolae , do not express caveolin - 1 , and show a (cid:2) 95 % down - regulation in caveolin - 2 expression ( 72 ) ; these cells also do not express caveolin - 3 , a muscle - speciﬁc caveolin family member ( 72 ) . As such , these cells are truly deﬁcient in caveolins and caveolae . Using these Cav - 1 null MEFs , we show that GPI - linked proteins are expressed at normal levels and are still associated with lipid rafts , as judged by their resistance to solubilization by Triton X - 100 at low temperature . However , these GPI - linked proteins are retained intracellularly in a perinuclear compart - ment that we identify as the Golgi complex . Interestingly , the recombinant expression of caveolin - 1 in Cav - 1 null MEFs can correct this phenotype and rescue the ability of GPI - linked proteins to reach the cell surface . Thus , expression of caveo - lin - 1 is normally required for the efﬁcient transport of GPI - linked proteins to the cell surface . These results directly sup - port the hypothesis that lipid rafts containing GPI - linked proteins are normally incorporated into Golgi - derived caveola - like vesicles and transported to the plasma membrane . Our present results are also entirely consistent with the original identiﬁcation of caveolin - 1 as a component of trans - Golgi de - rived transport vesicles ( 19 , 37 ) . They also suggest that caveo - lin - 1 may move among various membranous compartments because it has afﬁnities for several distinct lipid microenviron - ments . As caveolin - 1 is only the ﬁrst member of a gene family , we tested whether recombinant expression of the other two mem - bers of this family , namely caveolin - 2 and - 3 , can exert a similar effect . And indeed , caveolin - 3 expression , but not that of caveolin - 2 , can restore the cell surface expression of GPI - anchored proteins in Cav - 1 null MEFs . Further evidence is provided by our analysis of Cav - 3 null mice , as skeletal muscle ﬁbers derived from these mice displayed an altered pattern of GPI - linked protein localization , with the accumulation of a signiﬁcant intracellular pool of GPI - linked proteins . Based on these ﬁndings , we can conclude that caveolin - 1 and caveolin - 3 , but not caveolin - 2 , are both independently required for the efﬁcient cell surface transport of GPI - anchored proteins , de - pending on the tissues where they are expressed . Several in - dependent lines of evidence also now indicate that expression FIG . 6 . In Cav - 3 null mouse skeletal muscle ﬁbers , GPI - anchored proteins are expressed at normal levels but display an abnormal localization pattern and are retained intracellularly . ( A ) GPI Western blot analysis . Protein lysates were prepared from skeletal muscle biopsies taken from wild - type ( WT ) and Cav - 3 null ( KO ) mice . After SDS - PAGE and transfer to nitrocellulose , the blots were subjected to proaerolysin overlay to detect GPI - linked proteins or to caveolin - 3 immunoblotting . Note that the GPI - anchored proteins were expressed at normal levels in the skeletal muscle of Cav - 3 null mice , compared to those of wild - type control mice . ( B to D ) Immunohistochemistry . Skeletal muscle tissue frozen sections were prepared from wild - type and Cav - 3 null mice . These frozen sections were then immunostained with ( i ) proaerolysin to reveal the distribution of GPI - linked proteins ( B ) , ( ii ) a PAb directed against T - cadherin , an endogenous GPI - linked protein that is prominently expressed in skeletal muscle ( C ) , or ( iii ) a MAb directed against (cid:3) - dystroglycan ( D ) . Note the intracellular retention of GPI - linked proteins ( B and C ) in Cav - 3 null skeletal muscle ﬁbers ; in contrast , the neighboring endothelial cells ( arrows ) which express caveolin - 1 showed a normal labeling pattern . V OL . 22 , 2002 CAVEOLIN - DEPENDENT SORTING OF GPI - LINKED PROTEINS 3919 on J anua r y 6 , 2018 b y gue s t h tt p : / / m c b . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m FIG . 7 . Intracellular retention of GPI - linked proteins in the renal tubules of Cav - 1 null mice . ( A ) GPI Western blot analysis . Protein lysates were prepared from kidneys harvested from wild - type ( WT ) and Cav - 1 null ( KO ) mice . After SDS - PAGE and transfer to nitrocellulose , the blots were subjected to proaerolysin overlay to detect GPI - linked proteins or to caveolin - 1 immunoblotting . Note that the GPI - anchored proteins were expressed at normal levels in the kidneys of Cav - 1 null mice , compared to those of wild - type control mice . ( B ) Tamm - Horsfall immunostaining . Kidney parafﬁn sections prepared from wild - type and Cav - 1 null mice were immunostained with a polyclonal sheep antibody directed against the Tamm - Horsfall protein , a GPI - anchored protein endogenously expressed in the renal tubules . Note that in wild - type mice , the Tamm - Horsfall protein was properly localized at the apical cell surface of renal tubular epithelial cells and showed a ring - like staining pattern , as expected . In contrast , in Cav - 1 null mice , the Tamm - Horsfall protein was largely excluded from the apical plasma membrane and was found mainly intracellularly in a vesicular perinuclear compartment that was proximal to the apical cell surface . N , nucleus . FIG . 8 . Perinuclear retention of c - Src in Cav - 1 - deﬁcient MEFs : recombinant expression of caveolin - 1 restores the normal plasma membrane distribution of c - Src . ( A ) c - Src immunostaining . Wild - type ( WT ) and Cav - 1 null ( KO ) MEFs were transiently transfected with the cDNA encoding c - Src . Cells were then ﬁxed , permeabilized , and immunolabeled with a speciﬁc antibody directed against c - Src . Note that in wild - type MEFs , c - Src resided at the plasma membrane , as expected . In contrast , in Cav - 1 null MEFs , c - Src was preferentially retained at an intracellular perinuclear site . ( B ) Wild - type caveolin - 1 . Cav - 1 null MEFs were cotransfected with the cDNAs encoding c - Src and wild - type caveolin - 1 . c - Src expression was detected with a speciﬁc mouse MAb ; caveolin - 1 expression was detected with a rabbit PAb ( N - 20 ) . Bound primary antibodies were visualized by incubation with distinctly tagged ﬂuorescent secondary antibodies . Cells expressing both transfected gene products were selected for imaging . Note that expression of wild - type caveolin - 1 restored the normal plasma membrane distribution of c - Src . ( C and D ) Palmitoylation - deﬁcient caveolin - 1 . Cav - 1 null MEFs were cotransfected with the cDNAs encoding c - Src and palmitoylation - deﬁcient ( C133 , 143 , and 156S - Pal Minus ) caveolin - 1 . The recombinant expression of c - Src and caveolin - 1 was detected as described above for panel B . Note that palmitoylation - deﬁcient caveolin - 1 showed little ( C ) or no ( D ) ability to rescue the plasma membrane targeting of c - Src . Thus , we conclude that palmitoylation of caveolin - 1 is normally required for the efﬁcient cell surface transport of lipid rafts that contain GPI - linked proteins and Src - family kinases . ( A to C ) Arrows point at the cell surface , while arrowheads point at the Golgi complex . N , nucleus . 3920 SOTGIA ET AL . M OL . C ELL . B IOL . on J anua r y 6 , 2018 b y gue s t h tt p : / / m c b . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m FIG . 8 . V OL . 22 , 2002 CAVEOLIN - DEPENDENT SORTING OF GPI - LINKED PROTEINS 3921 on J anua r y 6 , 2018 b y gue s t h tt p : / / m c b . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m FIG . 9 . Clustering and internalization of CT - B is impaired in Cav - 1 null MEFs . Wild - type and Cav - 1 null 3T3 MEFs were incubated with CT - B for 30 min on ice , unbound material was removed , and the cells were then warmed to 37°C to allow clustering and internalization to occur . CT - B binding and internalization were visualized by immunostaining with anti - CT IgG . ( A ) MEFs after 5 , 15 , and 30 min of internalization . Note that the cell surface clustering and internalization of CT - B was clearly impaired in Cav - 1 null ( KO ) MEFs . Arrows point at areas of cell surface clustering and internalization in wild - type ( WT ) MEFs . ( B ) MEFs after 45 min of internalization . Note that little or no cell surface clustering and internalization was apparent in Cav - 1 null MEFs . In contrast , by 45 min , internalization of CT - B in wild - type MEFs was virtually complete , with a high concentration of CT - B accumulating in a perinuclear compartment ( arrows ) . 3922 on J anua r y 6 , 2018 b y gue s t h tt p : / / m c b . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m of either caveolin - 1 or caveolin - 3 , but not of caveolin - 2 , is sufﬁcient to drive formation of caveolae ( 18 , 20 , 26 , 28 , 32 , 41 , 42 , 59 , 72 ) . These results strongly suggest a functional inter - dependence between caveolin expression , formation of caveo - lae , and GPI - anchored protein transport to the cell surface . In order to dissect the mechanisms underlying the intracel - lular retention of GPI - linked proteins in Cav - 1 null MEFs , we explored the hypothesis that lipid - lipid interactions between caveolin - 1 and GPI - anchored proteins could play a prominent role in the biosynthetic targeting of GPI - linked proteins to the cell surface . Lipid modiﬁcation of certain proteins , for exam - ple , c - Src but surprisingly not caveolin - 1 itself , is an essential feature for caveolar targeting ( 10 , 17 , 88 ) . Nevertheless , pal - mitoylation of caveolin - 1 is required for its coupling to the c - Src tyrosine kinase ( 39 ) and for cholesterol binding ( 94 ) . In the present study , we show that palmitoylation of caveolin - 1 at Cys - 143 and Cys - 156 is required for caveolin - 1 to complement the defect in the cell surface transport of GPI - linked proteins in Cav - 1 null MEFs . Thus , we speculate that the lipid moiety of the GPI anchor and the caveolin - 1 palmitoyl groups somehow interact with each other across the bilayer to allow the cluster - ing of GPI - linked proteins in Golgi - associated caveola - like ves - icles that are then transported to the plasma membrane . The acyl group - dependent association of caveolin - 1 with choles - terol ( 94 ) may also link the cytoplasmic and exoplasmic leaﬂets of the lipid bilayer , as cholesterol is present in both leaﬂets and can potentially form dimers that span the membrane ( 33 ) , thus acting as a bridge ( Fig . 5A ) . Alternatively , palmitoylation of caveolin - 1 may simply affect the global organization of lipid rafts , thereby indirectly facilitating the recruitment of GPI - linked proteins . We then speculated that perhaps Golgi - associated caveola - like vesicles could act as vesicular carriers for “shipping” other lipid raft - associated “cargo” molecules to the cell surface . To test this hypothesis , we next examined the trafﬁcking of c - Src in Cav - 1 null MEFs . c - Src and other Src family tyrosine kinases undergo lipid modiﬁcations , such as myristoylation and palmi - toylation , that act as targeting signals for partitioning cytoplas - mic signaling molecules into lipid rafts and caveolae . Using Cav - 1 null MEFs , we show that , like GPI - anchored proteins , c - Src is preferentially retained at an intracellular perinuclear site that we identiﬁed as the Golgi complex . Interestingly , intracellular retention of c - Src was rescued by recombinant expression of caveolin - 1 . However , palmitoylation - deﬁcient caveolin - 1 showed little or no ability to rescue the plasma membrane targeting of c - Src . Thus , Golgi - associated caveolins and caveola - like vesicles may represent part of the transport machinery that is necessary for efﬁciently moving lipid rafts and their associated proteins from the Golgi to the plasma membrane . These ﬁndings are consistent with our recent observation that palmitoylation of caveolin - 1 is required for its coupling to the c - Src tyrosine kinase at the cell surface , as assessed using the tyrosine phosphorylation of caveolin - 1 ( pY14 ) as an in vivo measure of this association ( 39 ) . Importantly , the Src - mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of caveolin - 1 could be competitively uncoupled by the antibody - induced clustering of GPI - linked proteins within caveolae at the cell surface ( 39 ) . As GPI - acyl FIG . 9— Continued . V OL . 22 , 2002 CAVEOLIN - DEPENDENT SORTING OF GPI - LINKED PROTEINS 3923 on J anua r y 6 , 2018 b y gue s t h tt p : / / m c b . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m groups are restricted to the exoplasmic leaﬂet of the lipid bilayer , while caveolin - 1 palmitoyl groups and the c - Src myr - istoyl group reside within the cytoplasmic leaﬂet of the lipid bilayer , these results provide further evidence that there is communication between lipid moieties within the exoplasmic and cytoplasmic leaﬂets of the lipid bilayer . Thus , similar in - teractions operating at the cell surface or within the Golgi complex could possibly mediate the association of GPI - linked proteins with caveola - like vesicles and the caveolin proteins . Our present results may also explain the effects of activated Ras proteins on the trafﬁcking of endogenous GPI - linked pro - teins in ﬁbroblastic cells . At least two previous reports have documented the loss of cell surface expression of GPI - linked proteins in H - Ras - transformed NIH 3T3 cells ( 4 , 35 ) . In addi - tion , we have previously shown that caveolin - 1 protein expres - sion and caveolae are dramatically down - regulated or absent in H - Ras ( G12V ) - transformed NIH 3T3 cells ( 20 , 36 ) ; constitu - tive activation of the Ras - p42 / 44 - MAP kinase pathway leads to substantial decreases in caveolin - 1 mRNA levels and directly inhibits caveolin - 1 gene transcription , as shown using caveo - lin - 1 promoter – luciferase reporter constructs ( 22 ) . Thus , loss of cell surface expression of GPI - linked proteins in Ras - trans - formed NIH 3T3 cells may be due to the down - regulation of caveolin - 1 protein expression and caveolae in these cells . Finally , although the expression of caveolins 1 and 2 is rel - atively ubiquitous , clearly not all cells express the caveolin proteins . For example , it has been shown that T lymphocytes possess cell surface pools of GPI - linked proteins that partici - pate in signal transduction , but T cells fail to express any known caveolin family members and lack caveolae ( 26 , 27 , 68 ) . Thus , other functional homologues of the caveolins must exist to direct the cell surface transport of GPI - linked proteins and other lipid raft components in cells that normally do not ex - press caveolin gene family members . The search for such func - tional homologues of the caveolins will be greatly facilitated by the use of the 3T3 – Cav - 1 – null MEF complementation system that we describe herein . By analogy with the caveolins , we predict that such functional homologues will be oligomeric lipid - modiﬁed integral membrane proteins that partition into lipid rafts . Recently , Nichols et al . ( 63 ) demonstrated that rapid cycling of a transiently transfected minimal GPI - linked protein ( GPI - green ﬂuorescent protein ) between the Golgi apparatus and the cell surface may occur . However , the caveolin - 1 - depen - dence of this phenomenon was not tested . In addition , we did not detect a cell surface pool of endogenous GPI - linked pro - teins in caveolin - 1 deﬁcient ﬁbroblasts—in contrast to the work of Nichols and colleagues , who used an exogenous GPI - an - chored protein ( 63 ) . This may be due to their use of a transient overexpression system rather than the study of endogenous GPI - linked proteins ( this report ) . As we show that the uptake of cholera toxin ( which binds to the glycolipid - GM1 ) is blocked in caveolin - 1 - deﬁcient cells , it is highly unlikely that GPI - linked proteins ( which are also tethered through a glycolipid linkage ) are being rapidly endocytosed in our cell system . In addition , we and others have previously shown that the endo - cytosis of endogenous GPI - linked proteins ( such as decay - accelerating factor [ DAF ] ) is an extremely slow and inefﬁcient process ( see Fig . 4A in reference 45 ) . Similarly , Nichols and colleagues concluded that the rate of transfer of GPI - green ﬂuorescent protein from the Golgi to the plasma membrane ( exocytosis ) was (cid:2) 22 times faster than the rate of transfer from the plasma membrane to the Golgi ( endocytosis ) ; as such , they calculated an average residence time of (cid:2) 200 min at the plasma membrane and an average residence time of (cid:2) 9 min within the Golgi complex . Thus , their data ﬁt well with the notion of a Golgi - retention - driven pathway in caveolin - deﬁ - cient cells that is dependent on the expression of palmitoylated caveolins . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by grants from the NIH , the Muscular Dystrophy Association ( MDA ) , the Susan G . Komen Breast Cancer Foundation , and the American Heart Association ( AHA ) , as well as a Hirschl / Weil - Caulier Career Scientist Award ( all to M . P . L . ) . F . S . was a recipient of a fellowship from Telethon - Italia . REFERENCES 1 . Ahmed , S . N . , D . A . Brown , and E . London . 1997 . On the origin of sphin - golipid / cholesterol - rich detergent - insoluble cell membranes : physiological concentrations of cholesterol and sphingolipid induce formation of a deter - gent - insoluble , liquid - ordered lipid phase in model membranes . Biochemis - try 36 : 10944 – 10953 . 2 . Angst , B . D . , C . Marcozzi , and A . Magee . 2001 . The cadherin superfamily : diversity in form and function . J . Cell Sci . 114 : 629 – 641 . 3 . Badizadegan , K . , B . L . Dickinson , H . E . Wheeler , R . S . Blumberg , R . K . Holmes , and W . I . Lencer . 2000 . Heterogeneity of detergent - insoluble mem - branes from human intestine containing caveolin - 1 and ganglioside G ( M1 ) . Am . J . Physiol . Gastroint . Liver Physiol . 278 : G895 - G904 . 4 . Bamezai , A . , and K . L . Rock . 1991 . Effect of ras - activation on the expression of GPI - anchored proteins on the plasma membrane . Oncogene 6 : 1445 – 1451 . 5 . Brodsky , R . A . , G . L . Mukhina , K . L . Nelson , T . S . Lawrence , R . J . Jones , and J . T . Buckley . 1999 . Resistance of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria cells to the glycosylphosphatidylinositol - binding toxin aerolysin . Blood 93 : 1749 – 1756 . 6 . Brown , D . , and J . K . Rose . 1992 . Sorting of GPI - anchored proteins to glycolipid - enriched membrane subdomains during transport to the apical cell surface . Cell 68 : 533 – 544 . 7 . Brown , D . A . , B . Crise , and J . K . Rose . 1989 . Mechanism of membrane anchoring affects polarized expression of two proteins in MDCK cells . Sci - ence 245 : 1499 – 1501 . 8 . Brown , D . A . , and E . London . 1998 . Functions of lipid rafts in biological membranes . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 14 : 111 – 136 . 9 . Brown , D . A . , and E . London . 1997 . Structure of detergent - resistant mem - brane domains : does phase separation occur in biological membranes ? Bio - chem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 240 : 1 – 7 . 10 . Buss , J . E . , M . P . Kamps , K . Gould , and B . M . Sefton . 1986 . The absence of myristic acid decreases membrane binding of p60src but does not affect tyrosine protein kinase activity . J . Virol . 58 : 468 – 474 . 11 . Caras , I . W . , G . N . Weddell , M . A . Davitz , V . Nussenzweig , and D . W . Martin , Jr . 1987 . Signal for attachment of a phospholipid membrane anchor in decay acelerating factor . Science 238 : 1280 – 1283 . 12 . Caras , J . W . , G . N . Weddell , and S . R . Williams . 1989 . Analysis of the signal for attachment of a glycophospholipid membrane anchor . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 1387 – 1396 . 13 . Cavallone , D . , N . Malagolini , and F . Seraﬁni - Cessi . 2001 . Mechanism of release of urinary Tamm - Horsfall glycoprotein from the kidney GPI - an - chored counterpart . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 280 : 110 – 114 . 14 . Couet , J . , S . Li , T . Okamoto , P . S . Scherer , and M . P . Lisanti . 1997 . Mo - lecular and cellular biology of caveolae : paradoxes and plasticities . Trends Cardiovasc . Med . 7 : 103 – 110 . 15 . Das , K . , R . Y . Lewis , P . E . Scherer , and M . P . Lisanti . 1999 . The membrane spanning domains of caveolins 1 and 2 mediate the formation of caveolin hetero - oligomers . Implications for the assembly of caveolae membranes in vivo . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 18721 – 18728 . 16 . Diep , D . B . , K . L . Nelson , S . M . Raja , E . N . Pleshak , and J . T . Buckley . 1998 . Glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchors of membrane glycoproteins are bind - ing determinants for the channel - forming toxin aerolysin . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 2355 – 2360 . 17 . Dietzen , D . J . , W . R . Hastings , and D . M . Lublin . 1995 . Caveolin is palmi - toylated on multiple cysteine residues : palmitoylation is not necessary for localization of caveolin to caveolae . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 6838 – 6842 . 18 . Drab , M . , P . Verkade , M . Elger , M . Kasper , M . Lohn , B . Lauterbach , J . Menne , C . Lindschau , F . Mende , F . C . Luft , A . Schedl , H . Haller , and T . V . Kurzchalia . 2001 . Loss of caveolae , vascular dysfunction , and pulmonary defects in caveolin - 1 gene - disrupted mice . Science 293 : 2449 – 2452 . 3924 SOTGIA ET AL . M OL . C ELL . B IOL . on J anua r y 6 , 2018 b y gue s t h tt p : / / m c b . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 19 . Dupree , P . , R . G . Parton , G . Raposo , T . V . Kurzchalia , and K . Simons . 1993 . Caveolae and sorting in the trans - Golgi network of epithelial cells . EMBO J . 12 : 1597 – 1605 . 20 . Engelman , J . A . , C . C . Wycoff , S . Yasuhara , K . S . Song , T . Okamoto , and M . P . Lisanti . 1997 . Recombinant expression of caveolin - 1 in oncogenically transformed cells abrogates anchorage - independent growth . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 16374 – 16381 . 21 . Engelman , J . A . , X . L . Zhang , F . Galbiati , D . Volonte , F . Sotgia , R . G . Pestell , C . Minetti , P . E . Scherer , T . Okamoto , and M . P . Lisanti . 1998 . Molecular genetics of the caveolin gene family : implications for human cancers , diabe - tes , Alzheimer’s disease , and muscular dystrophy . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 63 : 1578 – 1587 . 22 . Engelman , J . A . , X . L . Zhang , B . Razani , P . R . G . , and M . P . Lisanti . 1999 . p42 / 44 MAP kinase - dependent and - independent signaling pathways regu - late caveolin - 1 gene expression . Activation of Ras - MAP kinase and PKA signaling cascades transcriptionally down - regulates caveolin - 1 promoter ac - tivity . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 32333 – 32341 . 23 . Ferguson , M . A . J . 1994 . What can GPI do for you . Parasitol . Today 10 : 48 – 52 . 24 . Fleming , R . E . , E . C . Crouch , C . A . Ruzicka , and W . S . Sly . 1993 . Pulmonary carbonic anhydrase IV : developmental regulation and cell - speciﬁc expres - sion in the capillary endothelium . Am . J . Physiol . 265 : L627 - L635 . 25 . Fra , A . M . , M . Masserini , P . Palestini , S . Sonnino , and K . Simons . 1995 . A photo - reactive derivative of ganglioside GM1 speciﬁcally cross - links VIP21 - caveolin on the cell surface . FEBS Lett . 375 : 11 – 14 . 26 . Fra , A . M . , E . Williamson , K . Simons , and R . G . Parton . 1995 . De novo formation of caveolae in lymphocytes by expression of VIP21 - caveolin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 92 : 8655 – 8659 . 27 . Fra , A . M . , E . Williamson , K . Simons , and R . G . Parton . 1994 . Detergent - insoluble glycolipid microdomains in lymphocytes in the absence of caveolae . J . Biol . Chem . 269 : 30745 – 30748 . 28 . Galbiati , F . , J . A . Engelman , D . Volonte , X . L . Zhang , C . Minetti , M . Li , H . J . Hou , B . Kneitz , W . Edelmann , and M . P . Lisanti . 2001 . Caveolin - 3 null mice show a loss of caveolae , changes in the microdomain distribution of the dystrophin - glycoprotein complex , and T - tubule abnormalities . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 21425 – 21433 . 29 . Galbiati , F . , B . Razani , and M . P . Lisanti . 2001 . Emerging themes in lipid rafts and caveolae . Cell 106 : 403 – 411 . 30 . Galbiati , F . , B . Razani , and M . P . Lisanti . 2001 . Caveolae and caveolin - 3 in muscular dystrophy . Trends Mol . Med . 7 : 435 – 441 . 31 . Gkantiragas , I . , B . Brugger , E . Stuven , D . Kaloyanova , X . Y . Li , K . Lohr , F . Lottspeich , F . T . Wieland , and J . B . Helms . 2001 . Sphingomyelin - enriched microdomains at the Golgi Complex . Mol . Biol . Cell . 12 : 1819 – 1833 . 32 . Hagiwara , Y . , T . Sasaoka , K . Araishi , M . Imamura , H . Yorifuji , I . Nonaka , E . Ozawa , and T . Kikuchi . 2000 . Caveolin - 3 deﬁciency causes muscle degen - eration in mice . Hum . Mol . Genet . 9 : 3047 – 3054 . 33 . Harris , J . S . , D . E . Epps , S . R . Davio , and F . J . Kezdy . 1995 . Evidence for transbilayer , tail - to - tail cholesterol dimers in dipalmitoylglycerophosphocho - line liposomes . Biochemistry 34 : 3851 – 3857 . 34 . Henley , J . R . , E . W . Krueger , B . J . Oswald , and M . A . McNiven . 1998 . Dynamin - mediated internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 141 : 85 – 99 . 35 . Ivanyi , D . , J . Janssen , and J . G . Collard . 1986 . Expression of Ly - 6 and Thy - 1 antigens on NIH 3T3 cells suppressed after transformation with activated human ras - oncogenes . Int . J . Cancer 38 : 575 – 580 . 36 . Koleske , A . J . , D . Baltimore , and M . P . Lisanti . 1995 . Reduction of caveolin and caveolae in oncogenically transformed cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 92 : 1381 – 1385 . 37 . Kurzchalia , T . , P . Dupree , R . G . Parton , R . Kellner , H . Virta , M . Lehnert , and K . Simons . 1992 . VIP 21 , A 21 - kD membrane protein is an integral component of trans - Golgi - network - derived transport vesicles . J . Cell Biol . 118 : 1003 – 1014 . 38 . Lee , H . , D . Volonte , F . Galbiati , P . Iyengar , D . M . Lublin , D . B . Bregman , M . T . Wilson , R . Campos - Gonzalez , B . Bouzahzah , R . G . Pestell , P . E . Scherer , and M . P . Lisanti . 2000 . Constitutive and growth factor - regulated phosphorylation of caveolin - 1 occurs at the same site ( Tyr - 14 ) in vivo : iden - tiﬁcation of a c - Src / Cav - 1 / Grb7 signaling cassette . Mol . Endocrinol . 14 : 1750 – 1775 . 39 . Lee , H . , S . E . Woodman , J . A . Engelman , D . Volonte’ , F . Galbiati , H . L . Kaufman , D . M . Lublin , and M . P . Lisanti . 2001 . Palmitoylation of caveo - lin - 1 at a single site ( Cys - 156 ) controls its coupling to the c - Src tyrosine kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 35150 – 35158 . 40 . Li , S . , J . Couet , and M . P . Lisanti . 1996 . Src tyrosine kinases , G alpha subunits and H - Ras share a common membrane - anchored scaffolding pro - tein , Caveolin . Caveolin binding negatively regulates the auto - activation of Src tyrosine kinases . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 29182 – 29190 . 41 . Li , S . , F . Galbiati , D . Volonte , M . Sargiacomo , J . A . Engelman , K . Das , P . E . Scherer , and M . P . Lisanti . 1998 . Mutational analysis of caveolin - induced vesicle formation . Expression of caveolin - 1 recruits caveolin - 2 to caveolae membranes . FEBS Lett . 434 : 127 – 134 . 42 . Li , S . , K . S . Song , S . S . Koh , A . Kikuchi , and M . P . Lisanti . 1996 . Baculo - virus - based expression of mammalian caveolin in Sf21 insect cells . A model system for the biochemical and morphological study of caveolar biogenesis . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 28647 – 28654 . 43 . Li , S . , K . S . Song , and M . P . Lisanti . 1996 . Expression and characterization of recombinant caveolin : puriﬁcation by poly - histidine tagging and choles - terol - dependent incorporation into deﬁned lipid membranes . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 568 – 573 . 44 . Lisanti , M . P . , I . W . Caras , M . A . Davitz , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1989 . A glycophospholipid membrane anchor acts as an apical targeting signal in polarized epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 2145 – 2156 . 45 . Lisanti , M . P . , I . W . Caras , T . Gilbert , D . Hanzel , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1990 . Vectorial apical delivery and slow endocytosis of a glycolipid - anchored fusion protein in transfected MDCK cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 87 : 7419 – 7423 . 46 . Lisanti , M . P . , M . C . Field , I . W . Caras , A . K . Menon , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1991 . Mannosamine , a novel inhibitor of glycosyl - phosphatidylino - sitol incorporation into proteins . EMBO J . 10 : 1969 – 1977 . 47 . Lisanti , M . P . , A . Le Bivic , A . R . Saltiel , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1990 . Prefered apical distribution of glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) anchored proteins : a highly conserved feature of the polarized epithelial cell pheno - type . J . Membr . Biol . 113 : 155 – 167 . 48 . Lisanti , M . P . , A . Le Bivic , M . Sargiacomo , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1989 . Steady - state distribution and biogenesis of endogenous MDCK glycopro - teins : evidence for intracellular sorting and polarized cell surface delivery . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 2117 – 2127 . 49 . Lisanti , M . P . , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1990 . Glycophospholipid mem - brane anchoring provides clues to the mechanism of protein sorting in polarized epithelial cells . Trends Biochem . Sci . 15 : 113 – 118 . 50 . Lisanti , M . P . , E . Rodriguez - Boulan , and A . R . Saltiel . 1990 . Emerging functional roles for the glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) membrane pro - tein anchor . J . Membr . Biol . 117 : 1 – 10 . 51 . Lisanti , M . P . , M . Sargiacomo , L . Graeve , A . R . Saltiel , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1988 . Polarized apical distribution of glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol anchored proteins in a renal epithelial cell line . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 85 : 9557 – 9561 . 52 . Lisanti , M . P . , P . Scherer , Z . - L . Tang , and M . Sargiacomo . 1994 . Caveolae , caveolin and caveolin - rich membrane domains : a signalling hypothesis . Trends Cell Biol . 4 : 231 – 235 . 53 . Lisanti , M . P . , P . E . Scherer , J . Vidugiriene , Z . - L . Tang , A . Hermanoski - Vosatka , Y . - H . Tu , R . F . Cook , and M . Sargiacomo . 1994 . Characterization of caveolin - rich membrane domains isolated from an endothelial - rich source : Implications for human disease . J . Cell Biol . 126 : 111 – 126 . 54 . Lisanti , M . P . , Z . - L . Tang , and M . Sargiacomo . 1993 . Caveolin forms a hetero - oligomeric protein complex that interacts with an apical GPI - linked protein : implications for the biogenesis of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 123 : 595 – 604 . 55 . Lisanti , M . P . , Z . - T . Tang , P . Scherer , and M . Sargiacomo . 1995 . Caveolae puriﬁcation and GPI - linked protein sorting in polarized epithelia . Methods Enzymol . 250 : 655 – 668 . 56 . Monier , S . , D . J . Dietzen , W . R . Hastings , D . M . Lublin , and T . V . Kurzcha - lia . 1996 . Oligomerization of VIP21 - caveolin in vitro is stabilized by long chain fatty acylation or cholesterol . FEBS Lett . 388 : 143 – 149 . 57 . Monier , S . , R . G . Parton , F . Vogel , J . Behlke , A . Henske , and T . Kurzchalia . 1995 . VIP21 - caveolin , a membrane protein constituent of the caveolar coat , oligomerizes in vivo and in vitro . Mol . Biol . Cell 6 : 911 – 927 . 58 . Montesano , R . , J . Roth , A . Robert , and L . Orci . 1982 . Non - coated membrane invaginations are involved in binding and internalization of cholera and tetanus toxins . Nature ( London ) 296 : 651 – 653 . 59 . Mora , R . , V . Bonilha , A . Marmostein , P . E . Scherer , D . Brown , M . P . Lisanti , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1999 . Caveolin - 2 localizes to the Golgi complex but redistributes to plasma membrane , caveolae , and rafts when co - ex - pressed with caveolin - 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 25708 – 25717 . 60 . Moran , P . , H . Raab , W . J . Kohr , and I . W . Caras . 1991 . Glycophospholipid membrane anchor attachment : molecular analysis of the cleavage / attach - ment site . J . Biol . Chem . 266 : 1250 – 1257 . 61 . Murata , M . , J . Peranen , R . Schreiner , F . Weiland , T . Kurzchalia , and K . Simons . 1995 . VIP21 / caveolin is a cholesterol - binding protein . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 92 : 10339 – 10343 . 62 . Nelson , K . L . , S . M . Raja , and J . T . Buckley . 1997 . The glycosylphosphati - dylinositol - anchored surface glycoprotein Thy - 1 is a receptor for the chan - nel - forming toxin aerolysin . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 12170 – 12174 . 63 . Nichols , B . J . , A . K . Kenworthy , R . S . Polishchuk , R . Lodge , T . H . Roberts , K . Hirschberg , R . D . Phair , and J . Lippincott - Schwartz . 2001 . Rapid cycling of lipid raft markers between the cell surface and Golgi complex . J . Cell Biol . 153 : 529 – 541 . 64 . Oh , P . , D . P . McIntosh , and J . E . Schnitzer . 1998 . Dynamin at the neck of caveolae mediates their budding to form transport vesicles by GTP - driven ﬁssion from the plasma membrane of endothelium . J . Cell Biol . 141 : 101 – 114 . 65 . Orlandi , P . A . , and P . H . Fishman . 1998 . Filipin - dependent inhibition of cholera toxin : evidence for toxin internalization and activation through caveolae - like domains . J . Cell Biol . 141 : 905 – 915 . 66 . Palade , G . E . , and R . R . Bruns . 1968 . Structural modiﬁcation of plasmalem - mal vesicles . J . Cell Biol . 37 : 633 – 649 . 67 . Parolini , I . , M . Sargiacomo , F . Galbiati , G . Rizzo , F . Grignani , J . A . En - V OL . 22 , 2002 CAVEOLIN - DEPENDENT SORTING OF GPI - LINKED PROTEINS 3925 on J anua r y 6 , 2018 b y gue s t h tt p : / / m c b . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m gelman , T . Okamoto , T . Ikezu , P . E . Scherer , R . Mora , E . Rodriguez - Boulan , C . Peschle , and M . P . Lisanti . 1999 . Expression of caveolin - 1 is required for the transport of caveolin - 2 to the plasma membrane . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 25718 – 25725 . 68 . Parolini , I . , M . Sargiacomo , M . P . Lisanti , and C . Peschle . 1996 . Signal transduction and GPI - linked proteins ( Lyn , Lck , CD4 , CD45 , G proteins , CD 55 ) selectively localize in Triton - insoluble plasma membrane domains of human leukemic cell lines and normal granulocytes . Blood 87 : 3783 – 3794 . 69 . Parton , R . G . 1994 . Ultrastructural localization of gangliosides : GM1 is concentrated in caveolae . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 42 : 155 – 166 . 70 . Parton , R . G . , M . Way , N . Zorzi , and E . Stang . 1997 . Caveolin - 3 associates with developing T - tubules during muscle differentiation . J . Cell Biol . 136 : 137 – 154 . 71 . Philippova , M . P . , V . N . Bochkov , D . V . Stambolsky , V . A . Tkachuk , and T . J . Resink . 1998 . T - cadherin and signal - transducing molecules co - localize in caveolin - rich membrane domains of vascular smooth muscle cells . FEBS Lett . 429 : 207 – 210 . 72 . Razani , B . , J . A . Engelman , X . B . Wang , W . Schubert , X . L . Zhang , C . B . Marks , F . Macaluso , R . G . Russell , M . Li , R . G . Pestell , D . Di Vizio , H . J . Hou , B . Kneitz , G . Lagaud , G . J . Christ , W . Edelmann , and M . P . Lisanti . 2001 . Caveolin - 1 null mice are viable but show evidence of hyperproliferative and vascular abnormalities . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 38121 – 38138 . 73 . Razani , B . , and M . P . Lisanti . 2001 . Caveolin - deﬁcient mice : insights into caveolar function and human disease . J . Clin . Investig . 108 : 1553 – 1561 . 74 . Rindler , M . J . , S . S . Naik , N . Li , T . C . Hoops , and M . N . Peraldi . 1990 . Uromodulin ( Tamm - Horsfall glycoprotein / uromucoid ) is a phosphatidyli - nositol - linked membrane protein . J . Biol . Chem . 265 : 20784 – 20789 . 75 . Rothberg , K . G . , J . E . Heuser , W . C . Donzell , Y . Ying , J . R . Glenney , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1992 . Caveolin , a protein component of caveolae mem - brane coats . Cell 68 : 673 – 682 . 76 . Sargiacomo , M . , M . P . Lisanti , L . Graeve , A . LeBivic , andE . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1989 . Integral and peripheral protein composition of the apical and basolateral membrane domains in MDCK cells . J . Membr . Biol . 107 : 277 – 286 . 77 . Sargiacomo , M . , P . E . Scherer , Z . - L . Tang , E . Kubler , K . S . Song , M . C . Sanders , and M . P . Lisanti . 1995 . Oligomeric structure of caveolin : impli - cations for caveolae membrane organization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 92 : 9407 – 9411 . 78 . Sargiacomo , M . , M . Sudol , Z . - L . Tang , and M . P . Lisanti . 1993 . Signal transducing molecules and GPI - linked proteins form a caveolin - rich insolu - ble complex in MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 122 : 789 – 807 . 79 . Scheiffele , P . , P . Verkade , A . M . Fra , H . Virta , K . Simons , and E . Ikonen . 1998 . Caveolin - 1 and - 2 in the exocytic pathway of MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 140 : 795 – 806 . 80 . Scherer , P . E . , G . Z . Lederkremer , S . Williams , M . Fogliano , G . Baldini , and H . F . Lodish . 1996 . Cab45 , a novel ( Ca2 (cid:1) ) - binding protein localized to the Golgi lumen . J . Cell Biol . 133 : 257 – 268 . 81 . Scherer , P . E . , R . Y . Lewis , D . Volonte , J . A . Engelman , F . Galbiati , J . Couet , D . S . Kohtz , E . van Donselaar , P . Peters , and M . P . Lisanti . 1997 . Cell - type and tissue - speciﬁc expression of caveolin - 2 . Caveolins 1 and 2 co - localize and form a stable hetero - oligomeric complex in vivo . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 29337 – 29346 . 82 . Scherer , P . E . , T . Okamoto , M . Chun , I . Nishimoto , H . F . Lodish , and M . P . Lisanti . 1996 . Identiﬁcation , sequence and expression of caveolin - 2 deﬁnes a caveolin gene family . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 93 : 131 – 135 . 83 . Scherer , P . E . , Z . - L . Tang , M . C . Chun , M . Sargiacomo , H . F . Lodish , andM . P . Lisanti . 1995 . Caveolin isoforms differ in their N - terminal protein sequence and subcellular distribution : identiﬁcation and epitope mapping of an isoform - spe - ciﬁc monoclonal antibody probe . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 16395 – 16401 . 84 . Schubert , W . , P . G . Frank , B . Razani , D . Park , C . - W . Chow , and M . P . Lisanti . 2001 . Caveolae - deﬁcient endothelial cells show defects in the uptake and transport of albumin in vivo . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 48619 – 48622 . 85 . Shogomori , H . , and A . H . Futerman . 2001 . Cholera toxin is found in detergent - insoluble rafts / domains at the cell surface of hippocampal neurons but is inter - nalized via a raft - independent mechanism . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 9182 – 9188 . 86 . Simionescu , N . 1983 . Cellular aspects of transcapillary exchange . Physiol . Rev . 63 : 1536 – 1560 . 87 . Smart , E . J . , G . A . Graf , M . A . McNiven , W . C . Sessa , J . A . Engelman , P . E . Scherer , T . Okamoto , and M . P . Lisanti . 1999 . Caveolins , liquid - ordered domains , and signal transduction . Mol . Cell . Biol . 19 : 7289 – 7304 . 88 . Song , K . S . , M . Sargiacomo , F . Galbiati , M . Parenti , and M . P . Lisanti . 1997 . Targeting of a G alpha subunit ( G i1 alpha ) and c - Src tyrosine kinase to caveolae membranes : clarifying the role of N - myristoylation . Cell . Mol . Biol . ( Noisy - Le - Grand ) 43 : 293 – 303 . 89 . Song , K . S . , P . E . Scherer , Z . - L . Tang , T . Okamoto , S . Li , M . Chafel , C . Chu , D . S . Kohtz , and M . P . Lisanti . 1996 . Expression of caveolin - 3 in skeletal , cardiac , and smooth muscle cells . Caveolin - 3 is a component of the sarco - lemma and co - fractionates with dystrophin and dystrophin - associated glyco - proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 15160 – 15165 . 90 . Song , K . S . , Z . - L . Tang , S . Li , and M . P . Lisanti . 1997 . Mutational analysis of the properties of caveolin - 1 . A novel role for the C - terminal domain in mediating homotypic caveolin - caveolin interactions . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 4398 – 4403 . 91 . Soole , K . L . , M . A . Jepson , G . P . Hazlewood , H . J . Gilbert , and B . H . Hirst . 1995 . Epithelial sorting of a glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored bacterial protein expressed in polarized renal MDCK and intestinal Caco - 2 cells . J . Cell Sci . 108 : 369 – 377 . 92 . Tang , Z . - L . , P . E . Scherer , T . Okamoto , K . Song , C . Chu , D . S . Kohtz , I . Nishimoto , H . F . Lodish , and M . P . Lisanti . 1996 . Molecular cloning of caveolin - 3 , a novel member of the caveolin gene family expressed predom - inantly in muscle . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 2255 – 2261 . 93 . Torgersen , M . L . , G . Skretting , B . van Deurs , and K . Sandvig . 2001 . Inter - nalization of cholera toxin by different endocytic mechanisms . J . Cell Sci . 114 : 3737 – 3747 . 94 . Uittenbogaard , A . , and E . J . Smart . 2000 . Palmitoylation of caveolin - 1 is required for cholesterol binding , chaperone complex formation , and rapid transport of cholesterol to caveolae . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 25595 – 25599 . 95 . Yamada , E . 1955 . The ﬁne structure of the gall bladder epithelium of the mouse . J . Biophys . Biochem . Cytol . 1 : 445 – 458 . 3926 SOTGIA ET AL . M OL . C ELL . B IOL . on J anua r y 6 , 2018 b y gue s t h tt p : / / m c b . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m