© 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Focus on MIcRoBIAL HosT cELL suBVERsIon R E V I E W Virus entry by macropinocytosis Jason Mercer 1 and Ari Helenius 1 , 2 As obligatory intracellular parasites , viruses rely on host - cell functions for most aspects of their replication cycle . This is born out during entry , when most viruses that infect vertebrate and insect cells exploit the endocytic activities of the host cell to move into the cytoplasm . Viruses belonging to vaccinia , adeno , picorna and other virus families have been reported to take advantage of macropinocytosis , an endocytic mechanism normally involved in fluid uptake . The virus particles first activate signalling pathways that trigger actin - mediated membrane ruffling and blebbing . Usually , this is followed by the formation of large vacuoles ( macropinosomes ) at the plasma membrane , internalization of virus particles and penetration by the viruses or their capsids into the cytosol through the limiting membrane of the macropinosomes . We review the molecular machinery involved in macropinocytosis and describe what is known about its role in virus entry . Introduction Eukaryotic cells are capable of different types of endocytosis ranging from receptor - mediated uptake of soluble ligands by clathrin - coated vesicles to ingestion of large particles by phagocytosis ( Fig . 1 ) . The processes differ not only in the nature of the cargo but also in the cellular factors involved , the signals needed for activation , and the fate of the internalized material . As shown in Fig . 1 , several unrelated mechanisms fall under the category of pinocytosis , the internalization of fluid and solutes . Macropinocytosis is unique among them because , unlike other pinocytic processes , it is pre - ceded by vigorous plasma membrane activity in the form of ruf - fling . It involves the formation of large vacuoles , and it is primarily used for the non - selective internalization of fluid and membrane 1 . Under special circumstances it can , however , drive the uptake of particles including bacteria and viruses , which use it for infectious cell entry 2 – 5 . Apart from its involvement in infection , macropinocy - tosis is receiving increasing attention because of its roles in immune defense and clearance of apoptotic bodies . It is also of growing inter - est as a potential mechanism for delivery of nucleic acids , peptides and therapeutics into cells . Several recent reviews focus on different aspects of macropinocytosis 6 – 13 . Macropinocytosis In most situations , macropinocytosis can be defined as a transient , growth factor - induced , actin - dependent endocytic process that leads to internalization of fluid and membrane into large vacuoles . It is associated with considerable cell - wide plasma membrane ruffling induced by the activation of actin and microfilaments connected to the plasma membrane . The ruffles take the form of planar folds ( lamellipodia ) , circular cup - shaped membrane extensions ( circular ruffles ) and in some cases large plasma membrane extrusions ( blebs ) ( Fig . 2a ) . These dynamic protrusions provide the membrane and the energy required for the formation of endocytic vacuoles , mac - ropinosomes . While most ruffles simply melt back into the plasma membrane , a few fold back forming fluid - filled cavities and undergo membrane fission . The closed vacuoles that are formed are no longer connected with the plasma membrane 14 , 15 ( Fig . 2b , c ) . Lacking a par - ticle or a cytoplasmic coat to guide their formation , these macropi - nosomes are inhomogeneous in size and irregular in shape . With a diameter of 0 . 5 – 10 μ m , they are larger than other pinocytic vesicles . Their formation often results in a transient increase in cellular fluid uptake ( 5 – 10 - fold over baseline ) . A variety of particles including bacteria , apoptotic bodies , necrotic cells and viruses can induce the ruffling behaviour independently of growth factors , and as a result they can be internalized together with fluid in macropinosomes 2 – 5 , 16 , 17 . This allows particle - uptake in cell types that are not capable of phagocytosis , which is a distinct mechanism for the endocytosis of large particles limited to several specialized cell types such as macrophages and amoeba . Some cell types , such as den - dritic cells , are capable of both macropinocytosis and phagocytosis 18 . Nevertheless , the molecular mechanisms underlying phagocytosis are clearly different from macropinocytosis ( Box 1 ) . Induction of macropinocytosis Macropinocytosis is usually initiated by external stimulation . The stimulus is commonly in the form of growth factors that trigger acti - vation of receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) . These , in turn , activate a signalling cascade that induces changes in the dynamics of actin filaments and trigger plasma membrane ruffling . Table 1 and Fig . 3 show the cellular factors and signalling pathways involved , and the core factors , which seem to be conserved from mammals to amoeba 19 , are discussed below . 1 ETH Zurich , Institute of Biochemistry , Schafmattsrasse 18 , ETH Hoenggerberg , Zurich , Switzerland 8093 . 2 Correspondence should be addressed to A . H . ( e - mail : ari . helenius @ bc . biol . ethz . ch ) 510 nature cell biology VoLuME 11 | nuMBER 5 | MAY 2009 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . R E V I E W Focus on MIcRoBIAL HosT cELL suBVERsIon Small GTPases . Ras superfamily GTPases play a crucial role . Ras activa - tion by RTKs initiates three parallel signalling pathways involving Rac1 , Rab5 , Arf6 and phosphatidylinositol - 3 - kinase ( PI ( 3 ) K ; refs 20 , 21 ) . These function together to modulate ruffle formation , macropinosome clo - sure and membrane trafficking 22 . Once activated , Rac1 , a Rho GTPase , is responsible for triggering all three types of membrane ruffles 23 , 24 . It does this by activating effectors of actin polymerization , stability and turnover , as well as effectors of myosin - dependent contraction . Although not involved in growth factor - mediated macropinocytosis , another Rho GTPase , Cdc42 , has a role in ruffling during Salmonella typhimurium invasion and during macropinocytosis in immature dendritic cells , a cell type in which the process does not require external stimulation 9 , 25 , 26 . These cells undergo continuous ruffling and engulfment of large volumes of extracellular fluid as part of their immunosurveillance function . After activation , Rab5 , a Rab GTPase best known for its role in early endosome dynamics , relocalizes to circular ruffles together with RN - tre , a Rab5 GAP / effector that interacts with F - actin to promote ruffle - asso - ciated actin cross - linking 22 . Rabankyrin - 5 , another Rab5 effector , associ - ates with newly formed macropinosomes and probably targets Rab5 to nascent macropinosomes 27 . Arf6 , an ARF GTPase involved in endocytic membrane trafficking , plasma membrane remodelling and induction of membrane curvature , promotes Ras - mediated ruffling and macropinocytosis by recycling Rac1 to the plasma membrane 28 – 32 . Its role in macropinocytosis has been recently reviewed 7 , 33 . Activation of Arf6 by its guanine exchange factors ( GEFs ) , EFA6 or ARNO , can initiate a Ras - independent macropinocytic program 34 , 35 . The functions of the effectors activated by Ras and Arf largely overlap , suggesting synergistic roles for Ras and Arf6 during Ras - mediated macropinocytosis 7 , 33 . Additionally , Arf6 affects intracellular macropinosome trafficking 7 . Kinases . Macropinocytosis depends on several kinases 36 . One of the most important is the p21 - activated kinase 1 ( Pak1 ) a serine / threonine kinase activated by Rac1 or Cdc42 . Pak1 regulates cytoskeleton dynam - ics and motility , and is needed during all stages of macropinocytosis 37 – 39 . On activation , it relocates to the plasma membrane where it activates a variety of effectors needed for ruffling , blebbing and macropinosome formation 24 , 40 – 45 . In addition , Pak1 activates carboxy - terminal - binding protein - 1 / brefeldin A - ADP ribosylated substrate ( CtBP - 1 also known as BARS ) , a factor required for macropinosome closure 39 . Protein kinase C ( PKC ) a Ca 2 + - and diacylglycerol - dependent serine / threonine kinase , is also required . It is activated by RTKs or PI ( 3 ) K and after association with the plasma membrane it promotes ruffling and macropinosome formation 46 , 47 . PKC activators such as phorbol esters can induce ruffling and fluid uptake in the absence of receptor activation 15 , 48 . Although the exact function of PKC is unclear , it is implicated in signal transduction and amplification 23 . The activation of c - Src , a non - receptor tyrosine Src - family kinase ( SFK ) , stimulates ruffling and macropinocytosis 49 . On activation , a cytoplasmic pool of Src is shuttled to sites of ruffling where it enhances Endocytosis Pinocytosis Phagocytosis Macropinocytosis Lipid raft - mediated Dynamin - dependent Dynamin - independent Non - clathrin / non - caveolar Caveolar Clathrin - mediated SFV VSV HIV - 1 FlaviBunya InfluenzaAd2 / 5 SV40 BK LCMV HPV16 Influenza SV40 PVD VV MV Ad3 CVBHSV1EV1HIV - 1 AMPV HSV1 Figure 1 Endocytic pathways used by viruses . Eukaryotic endocytic mechanisms are divided into two main classes depending on whether uptake involves mainly fluid and solutes ( pinocytosis , cell drinking ) or large particles ( phagocytosis , cell eating ) . Phagocytosis is restricted to specialized phagocytic cells and is responsible for receptor - dependent uptake of large particles such as bacteria . Pinocytosis encompasses several distinct mechanisms that can be further divided into those that require the GTPase dynamin for vesicle fission and those that do not . Shown here are the pathways used by viruses . Note that in some cases a virus can use more than one pathway . The viruses shown are : semliki forest virus ( SFV ) ; vesicular stomatis virus ( VSV ) ; human immunodeficiency virus 1 ( HIV - 1 ) ; flaviviruses ( Flavi ) ; bunyaviruses ( Bunya ) ; influenzavirus ( Influenza ) ; adenovirus 2 / 5 ( Ad2 / 5 ) ; simian virus 40 ( SV40 ) ; BK virus ( BK ) ; human papilloma virus 16 ( HPV16 ) ; lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus ( LCMV ) ; polyomavirus ( PVD ) ; vaccina virus mature virion ( VV MV ) ; adenovirus 3 ( Ad3 ) ; coxsackievirus B ( CVB ) ; herpes simplex virus 1 ( HSV1 ) ; echovirus 1 ( EV1 ) and mimivirus ( AMPV ) . Dynamin is shown as small blue circles at the neck of forming endocytic vesicles . The blue lines represent actin . nature cell biology VoLuME 11 | nuMBER 5 | MAY 2009 511 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . R E V I E W Focus on MIcRoBIAL HosT cELL suBVERsIon receptor activity 50 , 51 . It also activates the Ras - effectors Arp2 / 3 , Rac1 and PI ( 3 ) K ( refs 46 , 52 ) . Thus , c - Src works synergistically with RTKs to enhance macropinocytic signalling 51 . Other factors . Na + / H + exchangers are also important ; in fact so important that the effect of inhibitors such as amiloride and EIPA is sometimes used as the main diagnostic test to identify macropinocytosis 53 . The inhibitors prevent induction of membrane ruffling , but it is not clear whether they do this by interfering with actin modulation directly or by preventing alkalinization of the cytosol 53 , 54 . Since cell - specific effects involving non - macropinocytic pathways have been reported , it is not advisable to rely solely on this criterion for classifying a process as macropinocytic 55 . Depletion of cholesterol blocks both membrane ruffling and mac - ropinocytosis 56 . The effect is probably caused by the redistribution of phosphoinositides in the plasma membrane affecting the localization of Rac1 , Arf6 and other signalling factors 56 , 57 . Ruffles and blebs are highly dynamic actin - based structures and , as such , contain numerous regu - lators of actin polymerization , disassembly , filament stabilization and cytoskeletal - membrane attachment , all of which are required for mac - ropinocytosis 58 – 65 ( Fig . 2d ) . These regulators include WAVE and Arp2 / 3 , which form nucleation sites for actin polymerization 66 – 68 . Macropinosome closure In the simplest scheme , a single membrane fission event is sufficient to close a macropinosome 10 . As shown in Table 1 , closure is governed by a set of factors other than those needed for induction , including kinases , myosins , fusion / fission factors and GTPases 69 . For example , although present in lamellipodia , Rab34 is needed downstream of Rac1 , PI ( 3 ) K and PKC . It may be required during macropinosome formation and / or closure , similarly to Rab5 / Rabankyrin during the closure of circular ruffles 27 . Interestingly , Rab34 is not involved in phorbol ester - induced macropinocytosis in HeLa cells , suggesting that it represents a cell - type or ligand - specific effector 70 . PI ( 3 ) K and its effectors are responsible for the formation of lipid micro - domains in ruffles and macropinocytic cups that serve as platforms for signalling and cytoskeletal modulation 10 , 71 , 72 . Activated by c - Src and Rac1 , PI ( 3 ) K is essential for the closure of macropinocytic cups , and possibly ruffle formation and macropinosome fusion 46 , 73 – 75 . Myosins are present in membrane ruffles 54 , 76 . Modulated by Pak1 , they provide contractile activity for the closure of macropinosomes 44 , 45 , 77 , 78 . Inhibitors of class II myosins and myosin - light - chain kinase affect ruffle curvature and prevent closure 78 , 79 . Circular ruffles close by a ‘purse - string’ mechanism akin to phagosome closure . Several myosins ( class I , II , V and X ) are found in these ruffles 54 , 78 . The formation of circular ruffles stimulated by PDGF is partially depend - ent on the multi - functional GTPase , dynamin 80 , 81 . Inhibition of dynamin prevents targeting of Rac1 to ruffles . It is possible that dynamin , which is localized to the leading edge of a circular ruffle , has a role in macropino - some closure similar to its role in the closure of phagocytic cups . In contrast to circular ruffles , the membrane scission that separates lamellipodial mac - ropinosomes from the plasma membrane is independent of dynamin 82 . Recent evidence suggests that CtBP - 1 / BARS fulfills this role 39 . CtBP - 1 is recruited to ruffles and macropinocytic cups . Inhibition of CtBP - 1 results in the failure to complete macropinosome closure . Like myosin , the closure activity of CtBP - 1 is dependent on Pak1 activity . Although known to be dynamin - independent , the mechanism of bleb - associated macropinosome closure remains to be determined 24 . Macropinocytosis and phagocytosis share many common features including a large vacuole size , transient activation and actin depend - ence , as well as many other cellular factors and regulatory compo - nents . However , the processes are fundamentally different . Role of particle . Although macropinocytosis can promote parti - cle uptake , the particle is not essential . In contrast , phagocytosis is strictly particle - driven , and it depends on receptor interactions over the entire surface of the ingested particle . The cell forms the phago - cytic cup and phagosome following the contour of the particle . Fluid uptake . Macropinocytosis involves the uptake of large amounts of fluid and solutes . Phagocytosis does not , because the apposition of the phagosomal membrane with the particle surface is so tight it limits the unoccupied volume in the forming phagosome . Cargo specificity . Fluid uptake through macropinocytosis is non - specific , whereas particle uptake by phagocytosis is specific . Cell - type specificity . If properly activated , almost all cell types are capable of macropinocytosis . Phagocytosis is a property of a few specialized cell types . Cellular machinery . The receptors that trigger phagocytosis are usu - ally specialized for interaction with the surface components of relevant cargo particles . The receptors that trigger macropinocytosis have other physiological roles and are present on many cell types . These include growth factor receptors that activate common signalling pathways . Global versus local membrane activation . During phagocytosis , actin modifications are localized to the phagocytic cup that forms around the particle . Macropinocytosis involves global activation of the actin cytoskeleton resulting in plasma membrane ruffling and the formation of lamellipodia or blebs over the entire surface of the cell . BOX1 Macropinocytosis versus phagocytosis Macropinocytosis Phagocytosis Extracellular milieu Ab - coated particle Antibody Receptor In the study of endocytosis , viruses offer advantages over traditional endogenous ligands . Infection of the cell as detected by expression of viral proteins provides a clear quantitative endpoint assay . The viral load can be extremely low with less than one particle added per cell . When combined with different perturbation regimens ( inhibitors , small interfering RNAs or dominant negative / active constructs ) and high - throughput screening , infection assays can be used to define endocytic factors in different endocytic path - ways 92 . Moreover , viral particles are often identifiable by electron microscopy without labelling , and fluorescently tagged virions allow single - particle tracking in live cells . In addition , a variety of antibodies , mutants and other tools are available . BOX 2 Viruses as tools to study endocytosis 512 nature cell biology VoLuME 11 | nuMBER 5 | MAY 2009 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . R E V I E W Focus on MIcRoBIAL HosT cELL suBVERsIon Macropinosome trafficking and maturation When detached from the plasma membrane , macropinosomes move deeper into the cytoplasm . They are sensitive to cytoplasmic pH , undergo acidification and participate in homo - and heterotypic fusion events 53 , 83 . In macrophages , macropinosomes follow a fate similar to endosomes ; their maturation program involves gain and loss of classic early / late endosomal markers before fusion with lysosomes 84 . A similar process has been reported in cells over - expressing Src kinase and in Dictyostelium discoideum 19 , 49 . In human carcinoma A431 cells , most macropinosomes recycle back to the cell surface and release their contents into the extracellular space 83 . However , the macropinosomes acquire some early endosome proteins needed for homotypic fusion 85 , 86 . A role for sorting nexins , SNX1 and SNX5 , in macropinocytosis has been suggested 87 , 88 . They localize to microdomains in macropinosomes and depletion of SNX1 prevents recycling and maturation of macropinosomes 89 , 90 . There is no consensus as to the final fate of macropinosomes . Trafficking seems to depend on cell type and mode of induction . Viruses enter by endocytosis Whether replication occurs in the nucleus or the cytoplasm , animal viruses first penetrate into the cytosol . Some penetrate directly through the plasma membrane , whereas most postpone penetration until they have taken advantage of the endocytotic machinery of the cell to overcome barriers posed by the plasma membrane and the cortical cytoskeleton . The type of endocytosis used is determined by particle size , choice of receptor , cell tropism and the mode of transmission 91 . Viruses have emerged as valuable tools for the study of endocytic mech - anisms ( Box 2 ) . Several recent studies have reported that viruses can make use of macropinocytosis either as a direct endocytic route for productive infec - tion or indirectly to assist in penetration of particles that have entered by some other endocytic mechanism . The literature is still limited , and the experimental approaches used for classification of the endocytic pathway are variable . Thus , we discuss in Box 3 what type of experi - ments and criteria are needed to define a role for macropinocytosis in virus entry . Table 1 Cellular factors involved in growth factor stimulated ( GFS ) and virus induced macropinocytosis Type of macropino - cytosis Growth factor stimulated Direct virus entry Assisted virus entry Cellular factors GFS Induction Closure Trafficking VV MV Ad3 EV1 CVB HSV HIV Ad2 / 5 RV Fluid - uptake Induction Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Colocalization Yes / No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No No Cytoskeleton Actin Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Microtubules Yes / No Yes / No No Yes No Yes Myosins Yes / No Yes Yes Yes GTPases Ras Yes Yes Yes Rac1 / Cdc42 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Rab5 Yes Yes Yes Yes / No Yes Rab34 / Rah Yes / No No Yes / No Yes Arf6 Yes / No Yes Yes Yes No Kinases Ser / Thr kinases Yes Yes Yes Tyrosine kinases Yes Yes Yes Yes Protein kinase C Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes PI ( 3 ) kinase Yes Yes / No Yes Yes Yes Yes Pak1 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Closure factors CtBP1 Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Dynamin 2 Yes / No Yes / No No No No No No Others Na + / H + exchange Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Cholesterol Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Acidification Yes / No No No Yes / No Yes Yes Yes No Yes No Yes Yes Integrins Yes / No No Yes Yes Yes SNX1 / 5 Yes The factors are listed according to molecular function ( cytoskeletal elements , GTPases and kinases etc . ) and stage in the macropinocytosis process for which they are required ( induction , closure or trafficking ) . They are designated as indispensable ( green , Yes ) , not required ( red , No ) and required in a system - dependent fashion ( yellow , Yes / No ) or as untested ( grey , blank ) . Factors used by viruses that rely on direct macropinocytic entry are distinguished from viruses that use macropinocytosis - assisted entry . Viruses shown are vaccinia virus mature virions ( VV MV ) ; adenovirus 3 ( Ad3 ) ; echovirus 1 ( EV1 ) ; coxsackievirus B ( CVB ) ; herpes simplex virus 1 ( HSV1 ) ; human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) ; adenovirus 2 / 5 ( Ad2 / 5 ) and rubella virus ( RV ) . nature cell biology VoLuME 11 | nuMBER 5 | MAY 2009 513 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . R E V I E W Focus on MIcRoBIAL HosT cELL suBVERsIon Viruses that internalize via macropinosomes Vaccinia virus . Vaccinia virus is a large , enveloped , double - stranded DNA virus that replicates in the cytosol . This prototype member of the poxvirus family served as the vaccine strain for the eradication of smallpox . Recent studies show that mature vaccinia virions enter tissue - culture cells using a macropinocytic mechanism 24 , 93 , 94 . In doing so , the virions mimic the uptake of apoptotic bodies , which can also enter cells through macropinocytosis 24 . While a minority of mature virions fuse with the plasma membrane , most are endocytosed into large , heterogeneous , uncoated vacuoles where fusion is triggered by low pH ( ref . 95 ) . Addition of mature viri - ons to cells causes a rapid , transient increase of fluid - phase uptake , and internalized mature virions colocalize with fluid phase markers . Entry and infection are critically dependent on actin rearrangements and Rac1 ( refs 24 , 93 ) . Inhibitor analysis shows that several serine / threonine - , tyrosine - and phosphatidylinositol kinases such as Pak1 , PKC and PI ( 3 ) K are also needed 24 , 93 . In addition , Na + / H + exchangers , myosin II and cholesterol are required 24 , 96 . Inhibition of dynamin has no impact and Arf6 mutants block infection — but at a post - penetration step 24 . The membrane of mature virions is enriched in phosphatidylserine , a phospholipid that is needed for the macropinocytic uptake of apoptotic debris 5 , 97 , 98 . By modifying the lipid content of mature virions , it has been shown that phosphatidylserine is essential for endocytosis 24 . Therefore , mature virions seem to elicit the macropinocytic response in host cells by mimicking apoptotic bodies . Notably , the association of mature virions with cells does not induce ruffling , but rather the formation of large transient plasma membrane blebs 24 ( Fig . 4 ) . As in other situations where blebbing occurs , the blebs rapidly fill up with actin and actin - associated proteins before retract - ing 24 , 58 . Data from focused ion beam - scanning electron microscopy ( FIB - SEM ) suggests that virions internalize adjacent to retracting blebs 99 ( Fig . 4d ) . The macropinocytic uptake of mature virions and fluid seems to occur as part of the bleb retraction process . Further studies are needed to determine to what extent bleb - associated macropinosome formation and closure differs from that of conventional lamellipodia - associated macropinocytosis . Similar plasma membrane blebbing is observed during macropinocytic internalization triggered by the bacterial pathogens Yersinia enterocolitica and Shigella flexneri 100 , 101 . Adenovirus 3 . Representing a diverse family of non - enveloped , double - stranded DNA viruses , adenoviruses infect the upper and lower respi - ratory , urinary and digestive tracts . The species B human adenovirus serotype 3 ( Ad3 ) is associated with epidemic conjunctivitis and fatal respiratory and systemic diseases 102 . Its entry into epithelial and haemat - opoietic cells by direct macropinocytosis has been demonstrated using a collection of inhibitors , siRNAs and mutant proteins 103 . By binding to its receptor CD46 , Ad3 activates Rac1 - mediated macropi - nocytosis , a process that normally functions in CD46 downregulation 102 , 104 . The virus induces clustering of α v - integrins , which triggers several cel - lular responses including activation of PI ( 3 ) K ( refs 103 , 105 ) . Electron Actin - associated factors Lamellipodia Circular Retracting blebs Nucleation Arp2 / 3 Yes Yes No WASP Yes Yes WAVE Yes Yes VASP Yes Yes No Polymerization Cortactin Yes Yes Yes Coronin Yes Yes Yes Profilin Yes Yes Depolymerization Cofilin Yes Crosslinking Hsp27 Yes Yes Yes α - Actinin Yes Yes Yes Fimbrin Yes Yes Yes Fascin Yes Yes No Filamin Yes Yes Yes Membrane tethering ERMs Yes Yes Yes Circular ruffle Bleb Lamellipodia - like Membrane protrusion a b c Macropinosomeseparation Macropinosomeclosure Figure 2 Macropinosome formation is an actin based process . ( a ) The plasma membrane protrusions involved in macropinocytosis can take the form of planar lamellipodia , circular ruffles or blebs , depending on the cell type and the nature of ligand . Lamellipodia and circular ruffles require polymerization of actin . Bleb formation is probably the result of local actin cortex destabilization . The blue lines represent actin and the red lines highlight the portion of the protrusion that will constitute the membrane of the macropinosome when it is formed . ( b ) To form a macropinosome , lamellipodia probably fold back on the plasma membrane , forming a cave - like invagination , and undergo a membrane fission event that separates the lumen of the macropinosome from the extracellular space . The individual protrusions in circular ruffles are likely to combine and then together close off the macropinosome by membrane fission . The closure of bleb - associated macropinosomes may involve the formation of a vacuole next to the retracting bleb followed by membrane fission . In each case , the star represents the site of closure . ( c ) After closure the macropinosomes move further into the cytoplasm . ( d ) The actin nucleation , polymerization , depolymerization , crosslinking and membrane tethering factors recruited to lamellipodial ruffles 58 , circular ruffles 59 and collapsing blebs 58 largely overlap , with the exception of retracting blebs that do not seem to contain Arp2 / 3 , WASP or WAVE . Green boxes represent factors localized to protrusions ; red boxes represent factors not localized to protrusions and grey boxes indicate that there is no data . 514 nature cell biology VoLuME 11 | nuMBER 5 | MAY 2009 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . R E V I E W Focus on MIcRoBIAL HosT cELL suBVERsIon microscopy showed multiple Ad3 virions within large , uncoated vacu - oles . Endocytosis spatially and temporally coincides with enhanced fluid uptake , and productive entry is sensitive to inhibitors targeting F - actin , endosomal acidification , Na + / H + exchangers and PKC . Moreover , the virus activates Pak1 and CtBP1 for closure of Ad3 - macropinosomes 103 . Echovirus 1 . A small , non - enveloped RNA virus belonging to the picor - naviridae family , echovirus 1 ( EV1 ) can cause meningoencephalitis , car - ditis and mild respiratory or enteric diseases . The evidence that this virus makes use of macropinocytosis is as follows : EV1 and its receptors , the α 2 β 1 - integrins , co - internalize into vacuolar structures that accumulate fluid - phase markers and do not contain caveolin - 1 , glycosyl - phosphati - dylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored proteins or flotillin 1 ( ref . 106 ) . Infection is dependent on actin dynamics and Rac1 . It also requires cholesterol , Pak1 , PI ( 3 ) K , PLC and Na + / H + exchangers 106 . Inhibition of dynamin has no impact on infection but , as with Ad3 , EV1 depends on CtBP1 for its internalization and infection 39 . Coxsackievirus B . This is another picornavirus thought to enter cells by macropinocytosis . Group B coxsackieviruses ( CVB ) can infect several organs causing complications such as myocarditis and hepatitis . CVB has been proposed to enter epithelia at tight junctions by stimulating the internalization of junctional membrane components together with itself into macropinosomes 107 . Consistent with this interpretation , internal - ized virions colocalize with fluid phase markers and the Rab5 effector , Rabankyrin - 5 . CVB entry requires the activity of Ras , Rab5 and Rab34 GTPases , Na + / H + exchangers and PKC . Entry and infection are inde - pendent of dynamin . Surprisingly , Rac1 , which is required to target the virus to tight junctions is not required for virus internalization 108 . Herpes simplex virus 1 . Infection with herpes simplex virus 1 ( HSV1 ) , a large enveloped double - stranded DNA virus , can cause complications ranging from mucosal blisters to deadly brain infections 109 . HSV1 shows cell type - dependent entry mechanisms 110 . Investigation of HSV1 entry into epidermal keratinocytes , HeLa and CHO cells points to macropino - cytosis , although further analysis is needed . Inhibition by lysosomotropic agents indicates that virions penetrate after acid - activation 111 , 112 . Electron microscopy shows HSV1 virions to be in large , uncoated vesicles during the early stages of internalization 112 . These are thought to correspond to macropinosomes because they also contain fluid phase markers . In addition , viral entry and infection can be prevented through inhibition of PI ( 3 ) K or RTKs 111 . Human immunodeficiency virus . An enveloped , single - stranded RNA lentivirus , human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV - 1 ) is the causative agent of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome ( AIDS ) . HIV - 1 has been reported to internalize by cell type - specific entry mechanisms . Direct mac - ropinocytosis of HIV - 1 has been suggested as the entry mechanism into primary human macrophages and brain microvascular endothelial cells . Primary human macrophages : electron microscopy showed that HIV - 1 virions enter large uncoated intracellular vacuoles 113 . While most virions appeared to be degraded , a subset fused with the limiting membrane of the vacuole in a pH - independent fashion . The vacuoles were postulated to represent macropinosomes on the basis of their large size , irregular shape and the sensitivity of HIV - 1 entry and infection to inhibition of Na + / H + exchange . Brain microvascular endothelial cells ( BMVECs ) : electron micros - copy of HIV - 1 - infected BMVECs showed that surface bound virions are entangled by microvilli and subsequently internalize into large cyto - plasmic vacuoles together with fluid phase markers 114 . Entry is sensi - tive to cholesterol extraction , inhibition of Na + / H + exchange and MAPK signalling . As in macrophages , most incoming virions are degraded . Interestingly , macropinocytosis of HIV - 1 into BMVECs is not a pro - ductive infection route , but rather one which is subverted by HIV - 1 for cell - to - cell transmission . Similar findings have been reported for the transmission of HIV - 1 from dendritic cells to CD4 + T cells 115 . In addi - tion , Pak1 and its substrate dynein light chain 1 are required in an early stage of HIV - 1 infection 116 , 117 . These studies provide new insights into HIV - 1 entry into target cells , but the conclusion that HIV - 1 requires macropinocytosis for entry is premature . The use of amiloride and its derivatives cannot be used as a sole criterion for macropinocytosis ( Box 3 ) . Macropinocytosis - assisted virus internalization In addition to viruses that enter cells within macropinosomes , some viruses use other endocytic mechanisms for entry but require macropi - nocytosis to promote penetration . There is no cellular factor or pharmacological inhibitor that by itself allows definition of the macropinocytic pathway . To determine whether a virus is using this pathway ( directly or indirectly ) , several tests and approaches are needed . The following should be considered as the minimal set of requirements to satisfy the definition of virus macropinocytosis . 1 . Ruffling or blebbing . With the exception of dendritic cells , viruses using macropinocytosis cause cytoskeletal rearrangements in the form of ruffling or blebbing . 2 . Fluid uptake . Virus addition should induce a transient and robust increase in fluid phase uptake . In the case of direct mac - ropinocytic uptake , virus particles internalized within intracel - lular vacuoles should co - localize with fluid - phase markers . Fluorescently labelled compounds ( Lucifer yellow ) , high molecular weight polysaccharides ( fluorescent dextrans ) and soluble enzymes ( horseradish peroxidase ; HRP ) are generally used as markers . 3 . Actin . Entry and infection should be sensitive to inhibitors of actin dynamics ( latrunculin A , cytochalasins B / D and jasplakinolide ) . 4 . Rho GTPases . Infection should depend on Rac1 or Cdc42 , but not RhoA . Dominant - negative and constitutively active constructs are available . 5 . Na + / H + exchangers . Endocytosis and infection should be inhib - ited by amiloride or ethylisopropyl amiloride ( EIPA ) . 6 . Kinases . Inhibitors of Pak1 ( dominant - negative constructs and IPA - 3 ; Ref . 127 ) , PI ( 3 ) K ( wortmannin and LY294002 ) and PKC kinases ( bisindolylmaleimide and rottlerin ) should block entry . 7 . Other factors worth testing . These include dynamin - 2 ( domi - nant - negative constructs and dynasore ) , myosin II ( blebbistatin and ML - 7 ) , microtubules ( nocodazole ) and Arf6 ( dominant - negative and constitutively active constructs ) . Note that the requirement for these factors varies with cell type and / or virus . It is important to note that some viruses make use of several endo - cytic mechanisms and that the regulatory network underlying endo - cytosis is pleitropic and cell - type dependent . BOX 3 Experimental criteria for macropinocytosis of viruses nature cell biology VoLuME 11 | nuMBER 5 | MAY 2009 515 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . R E V I E W Focus on MIcRoBIAL HosT cELL suBVERsIon Adenovirus 2 / 5 . Species C human adenoviruses 2 and 5 ( Ad2 and Ad5 ) are associated with respiratory infections . Like Ad3 , binding of Ad2 / 5 to its receptor induces the integrin clustering needed for internaliza - tion . Virus particles are internalized by clathrin - mediated endocytosis , requiring dynamin and other clathrin - adaptors 118 . Virus binding also induces ruffling and macropinocytosis . Ad2 / 5 - induced macropino - somes are lysed in a virus dependent fashion and their contents released into the cytosol . This lysis is required for Ad2 / 5 escape and subsequent infection . Ad2 / 5 triggered macropinocytosis depends on integrins , PKC , actin dynamics , Rac1 , Na + / H + exchange and cholesterol 118 , 119 . It is independent of dynamin 118 . These observations highlight the ability of viruses to selectively modulate distinct endocytic mechanisms for the purpose of trafficking and disrupting intracellular compartments 120 . Rubella virus . The small , enveloped single - stranded RNA rubella virus ( RB ) is restricted to humans . Infections are usually mild resulting in rash and fever . Electron microscopy showed RV within clathrin - coated pits and vesicles 121 . Internalized RV particles also colocalize with markers of clathrin - mediated endocytosis 122 . Infection is sensitive to lysosomotropic agents , chlorpromazine and hypertonic conditions 122 , 123 . Collectively these results indicate that RV enters cells by clathrin - mediated endocytosis . However , as seen with Ad2 / 5 , inhibition of Na + / H + exchange , actin or microtubule polymerization , which inhibits macropinocytosis , pre - vents RV infection 122 . This suggests that clathrin - mediated endocytosis of RV may depend on macropinocytosis . Additional studies are needed to confirm the requirement for macropinocytosis and to define the mechanism . More detailed analysis is required for many of the viruses discussed above . However , they all seem to share some of the central character - istics of macropinocytic pathways such as actin and Na + / H + - exchanger dependence . As more is learned , it is likely that virus - dependent vari - ability in the molecular requirements will be uncovered . This may reflect either cell - type or virus - specific macropinocytic responses . Perspectives Many questions remain about macropinocytosis and its involvement in virus entry . Since the macropinocytic process itself is still incom - pletely characterized , it is unclear how large the system variations are . Are there several different types of macropinocytosis , and if so how do they differ ? It is unclear how many different viruses are using these pathways and how they are able to trigger the relevant responses in different host cell types . Grb2 Actin modulation PLC Rac1 Rab5 PI ( 3 ) K Nck Src PAK1 LIMK Ras Arf 6 PKC Rab34 PI ( 5 ) K Actin modulation Macropinosometrafficking Macropinosomeclosure MLCK CtBP1 Adaptors Kinases Other GTPases Outcome DAG RTK MLC Sos Vav Gab1 GEFS Figure 3 Signalling during RTK - activated macropinocytosis . The activation of macropinocytosis through ligand - induced dimerization of RTKs initiates a multi - branched signalling cascade that involves a diverse array of molecular players ( adaptors , GTPases , kinases , phospholipases , myosins and fission / fusion factors ) . These signalling cascades are responsible for initiating actin modulation , macropinosome closure and macropinosome trafficking . Solid arrows represent direct allosteric or catalytic activation and dashed arrows represent interactions that serve as signal amplifiers . 516 nature cell biology VoLuME 11 | nuMBER 5 | MAY 2009 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . R E V I E W Focus on MIcRoBIAL HosT cELL suBVERsIon More generally , one may ask why viruses have evolved to use macropi - nocytosis for entry . A relatively straightforward reason could be particle size . For example the vaccinia virus and HSV1 are probably too large for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . For large virus particles , macropinocy - tosis is probably preferable over phagocytosis because it does not limit infection to a few specialized cell types . We suspect , although there is little evidence , that another reason why a virus might use macropinocytosis is immune evasion . The com - position and fate of macropinosomes probably differ from those of normal endosomes and phagosomes . By entering through macropi - nosomes , a virus may not be exposed to the full ensemble of Toll - like receptors and other factors that trigger innate immune responses . Depending on the cell type and the itinerary of macropinosomes , the incoming cargo may also escape delivery into the endosomal compart - ments involved in antigen presentation . Macropinocytosis of apoptotic debris is known to suppress activation of innate immune responses 124 . It has been reported that during murine lung infection by the vaccinia virus there is little macrophage infiltration and T cell maturation 125 . This aspect of virus entry clearly deserves further study . The considerable induction of changes in cell behaviour during mac - ropinocytosis , such as ruffling and increased motility may , in the context of in vivo infection , allow viruses to spread more efficiently through epi - thelial layers , basal lamina and other obstacles . Although experiments using cultured cells can be informative , it is important to study the mecha - nisms of entry using tissue explants and animals . More attention will need to be focused on the intracellular fates of macropinosomes , internalized fluid and particles . AcknowledgeMents We apologize to those individuals whose work we were unable to discuss due to space limitations . We thank members of the Helenius laboratory for thoughtful discussion . Funding was obtained from ETH Zurich and EMBO . Published online at http : / / www . nature . com / naturecellbiology / Reprints and permissions information is available online at http : / / npg . nature . com / reprintsandpermissions / 1 . Watts , C . & Marsh , M . Endocytosis : what goes in and how ? J . Cell Sci . 103 , 1 – 8 ( 1992 ) . 2 . Watarai , M . et al . Legionella pneumophila is internalized by a macropinocytotic uptake pathway controlled by the Dot / Icm system and the mouse Lgn1 locus . J . Exp . Med . 194 , 1081 – 1096 ( 2001 ) . 3 . Francis , C . L . , Ryan , T . A . , Jones , B . D . , Smith , S . J . & Falkow , S . Ruffles induced by Salmonella and other stimuli direct macropinocytosis of bacteria . Nature 364 , 639 – 642 ( 1993 ) . 4 . Fabbri , A . et al . Rho - activating Escherichia coli cytotoxic necrotizing factor 1 : macropi - nocytosis of apoptotic bodies in human epithelial cells . Int . J . Med . Microbiol . 291 , 551 – 554 ( 2002 ) . 5 . Hoffmann , P . R . et al . Phosphatidylserine ( PS ) induces PS receptor - mediated mac - ropinocytosis and promotes clearance of apoptotic cells . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 649 – 659 ( 2001 ) . 6 . Amyere , M . et al . Origin , originality , functions , subversions and molecular signalling of macropinocytosis . Int . J . Med . Microbiol . 291 , 487 – 494 ( 2002 ) . 7 . Donaldson , J . G . , Porat - Shliom , N . & Cohen , L . A . Clathrin - independent endocytosis : a unique platform for cell signaling and PM remodeling . Cell . signal . 21 , 1 – 6 ( 2009 ) . 500 nm 10 µm 10 µm 10 µm a b c d Figure 4 Vaccinia virus - induced macropinocytosis involves blebbing of the plasma membrane . Vaccinia virus induces non - conventional macropinocytic ruffling as visualized by scanning electron microscopy . ( a ) Epidermal growth factor induces lamellipodial ruffling in A431 cells . Lamellipodial ruffles appear as flat sheet - like projections covering the whole of the cell surface . Image reproduced with permission 118 . ( b ) Macrophages stimulated with macrophage colony - stimulating factor show circular ruffling predominantly localized to the dorsal cell surface . Circular ruffles appear as cup - shaped projections . Image reproduced with permission 126 . ( c ) Addition of vaccinia virus mature virions ( western reserve strain ) induces systemic blebbing in HeLa cells . The blebs uniformly cover the surface of the infected cell . ( d ) High - pressure frozen cells were imaged by 3D focused ion beam - scanning electron microscopy 99 . Virus particles ( red ) are seen associated with endocytic invaginations next to retracting blebs . Closure of bleb - associated macropinosomes may resemble the closure of lamellipodia ruffles ( see Fig . 2b ) . Images c and d were provided by M . Lucas and R . Wepf ( from the Electron Microscopy Centre of the ETH Zurich and ETH Zurich , respectively ) . ( a – c ) Arrowheads designate respective membrane perturbations and insets show high magnifications of the same perturbations . nature cell biology VoLuME 11 | nuMBER 5 | MAY 2009 517 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . R E V I E W Focus on MIcRoBIAL HosT cELL suBVERsIon 8 . Jones , A . T . Macropinocytosis : searching for an endocytic identity and role in the uptake of cell penetrating peptides . J . Cell . Mol . Med . 11 , 670 – 684 ( 2007 ) . 9 . Norbury , C . C . Drinking a lot is good for dendritic cells . Immunology 117 , 443 – 451 ( 2006 ) . 10 . Swanson , J . A . Shaping cups into phagosomes and macropinosomes . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 639 – 649 ( 2008 ) . 11 . Kirkham , M . & Parton , R . G . Clathrin - independent endocytosis : new insights into caveolae and non - caveolar lipid raft carriers . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1746 , 349 – 363 ( 2005 ) . 12 . Mayor , S . & Pagano , R . E . Pathways of clathrin - independent endocytosis . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 603 – 612 ( 2007 ) . 13 . Sansonetti , P . J . Microbes and microbial toxins : paradigms for microbial - mucosal inter - actions III . Shigellosis : from symptoms to molecular pathogenesis . Am . J . Phys . 280 , G319 – 323 ( 2001 ) . 14 . Swanson , J . A . & Watts , C . Macropinocytosis . Trends Cell Biol . 5 , 424 – 428 ( 1995 ) . 15 . Swanson , J . A . Phorbol esters stimulate macropinocytosis and solute flow through macrophages . J . Cell Sci . 94 , 135 – 142 ( 1989 ) . 16 . Xu , W . et al . IL - 10 - producing macrophages preferentially clear early apoptotic cells . Blood 107 , 4930 – 4937 ( 2006 ) . 17 . Erwig , L . P . & Henson , P . M . Clearance of apoptotic cells by phagocytes . Cell Death Differ . 15 , 243 – 250 ( 2008 ) . 18 . Xiang , S . D . et al . Pathogen recognition and development of particulate vaccines : does size matter ? Methods 40 , 1 – 9 ( 2006 ) . 19 . Maniak , M . Fluid - phase uptake and transit in axenic Dictyostelium cells . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1525 , 197 – 204 ( 2001 ) . 20 . Bar - Sagi , D . , McCormick , F . , Milley , R . J . & Feramisco , J . R . Inhibition of cell surface ruffling and fluid - phase pinocytosis by microinjection of anti - ras antibodies into living cells . J . Cell . Phys . 69 – 73 ( 1987 ) . 21 . Bar - Sagi , D . & Feramisco , J . R . Induction of membrane ruffling and fluid - phase pinocytosis in quiescent fibroblasts by ras proteins . Science 233 , 1061 – 1068 ( 1986 ) . 22 . Lanzetti , L . , Palamidessi , A . , Areces , L . , Scita , G . & Di Fiore , P . P . Rab5 is a signal - ling GTPase involved in actin remodelling by receptor tyrosine kinases . Nature 429 , 309 – 314 ( 2004 ) . 23 . Ridley , A . J . , Paterson , H . F . , Johnston , C . L . , Diekmann , D . & Hall , A . The small GTP - binding protein rac regulates growth factor - induced membrane ruffling . Cell 70 , 401 – 410 ( 1992 ) . Receptor - mediated endocytosis Processes by which receptor - bound extracellular ligands are internalized by vesicles formed at the plasma membrane . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis An endocytic process driven by the formation of a clathrin - coat on the cytoplasmic leaflet of the plasma membrane . Phagocytosis Actin - mediated specialized processes by which large particles are engulfed and endocytosed by specialized cells . Pinocytosis Processes by which fluids and solutes are endocytosed . Macropinocytosis Actin - mediated processes used for the inter - nalization of fluids , and sometimes extracellular particles , in large , uncoated endocytic vesicles . Ruffling The formation of motile wave - like cell - surface structures . Ruffles are similar to lamellipodia , and their formation is involved in the process of macropinocytosis . Lamellipodia Actin - rich sheet - like projections found at the leading edge of motile cells . Lamellipodia are formed by a two - dimensional actin meshwork and are active sites of actin nucleation and polymerization . Plasma membrane blebs Irregular , fluid - filled extrusions of the plasma membrane caused by the loss of cytoskeleton - plasma mem - brane attachment . Cellular blebbing is associated with apoptosis , motility and cell division . Receptor Tyrosine Kinases ( RTKs ) Cell surface receptors that contain cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase domains . They function as ini - tiators of signal transduction on binding growth factors , cytokines and hormones . Ras - superfamily GTPases A large group of related GTPases comprising eight subfamilies . By oscillating between GDP - and GTP bound forms , they serve as molecular switches for the regulation of cell growth , differentiation , movement and vesicle trafficking . Rho GTPases Members of the Ras superfamily of GTPases . Rho fam - ily members regulate several aspects of intracellular actin dynamics . The best characterized Rho GTPases are RhoA , Rac1 and Cdc42 . Rab GTPases Members of the Ras superfamily of GTPases . They have diverse roles in the regulation of membrane trafficking , vesicle formation and fusion . There are approximately 70 different human Rabs for specific transport pathways and subcellular compartments . GAP ( GTPase Activating Protein ) A family of regulatory proteins that bind to and stimulate the GTPase activity of the various Ras GTPases . The net result of GAP binding is the shutdown of GTPase activity and termination of signalling . ARF GTPases The ADP Ribosylation Factors ( ARFs ) are members of the Ras superfamily of GTPases . ARFs are generally membrane associated and regulate various aspects of membrane trafficking and actin dynamics . GEF ( Guanine nucleotide Exchange Factor ) Serve as activators of the Ras family GTPases by facilitating the switch from an inactive GDP - bound to an active GTP - bound state . Diacylglycerol ( DAG ) This is formed when phospholipase C hydrolyses PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . It activates PKC and facilitates its binding to the plasma membrane . Phorbol esters These are diacylglycerol ‘mimics’ that activate PKC , and thus stimulate downstream functions such as macropi - nocytosis . The most commonly used phorbol ester is phorbol - 12 - myristate - 13 - acetate ( PMA ) . Src - family kinases . Proto - oncogene tyrosine kinases that regulate cell growth , migration and cytoskeletal organization . Amiloride Inhibitor of Na + / H + exchangers in the plasma membrane and intracellular organelles . Amiloride induces a rise in intracellular pH . It is typically used as an inhibitor of macropinocytosis . Phosphoinositides A class of lipids required for the local recruit - ment and modulation of signalling factors for endocytosis , actin rearrangement and membrane trafficking . Myosins A large family of motor proteins required for actin - based motility and contraction . Dynamin A large GTPase required for various types of endocy - tosis and intracellular scission events . Dynamin is indispensable for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Dictyostelium discoideum An amoeba that serves as a model sys - tem for studies of phagocytosis and macropinocytosis . Sorting nexins A large family of proteins with conserved phospho - lipid - binding motifs ( phox domains ) that mediate binding to phospho - inositides . They are involved in endocytic trafficking events . Dominant negative / active mutants Mutant versions of proteins that when expressed result in inhibitory or stimulatory phenotypes , respectively . Apoptotic bodies Vesicles generated during apoptosis by pinching off of the dying cell membrane . Yersinia enterocolitica A species of gram - negative bacteria . Infections result in severe diarrhea , hepatic or splenic abscesses , and can cause chronic inflammatory disease such as arthritis . Shigella flexneri A species of motile gram - negative enterobacteria . It can cause diarrhea , fever , vomiting and abdominal cramps . GPI - anchored proteins Proteins that have a glycosylphosphati - dylinositol lipid moiety that anchors them to the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane . Lysosomotropic agents A class of membrane - permeable weak bases that elevate the pH of acidic organelles such as endosomes and lysosomes . Box 4 Glossary 518 nature cell biology VoLuME 11 | nuMBER 5 | MAY 2009 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . R E V I E W Focus on MIcRoBIAL HosT cELL suBVERsIon 24 . Mercer , J . & Helenius , A . Vaccinia virus uses macropinocytosis and apoptotic mimicry to enter host cells . Science 320 , 531 – 535 ( 2008 ) . 25 . Garrett , W . S . et al . Developmental control of endocytosis in dendritic cells by Cdc42 . Cell 102 , 325 – 334 ( 2000 ) . 26 . Chen , L . M . , Hobbie , S . & Galan , J . E . Requirement of CDC42 for Salmonella - induced cytoskeletal and nuclear responses . Science 274 , 2115 – 2118 ( 1996 ) . 27 . Schnatwinkel , C . et al . The Rab5 effector Rabankyrin - 5 regulates and coordinates different endocytic mechanisms . PLoS Biol . 2 , E261 ( 2004 ) . 28 . Donaldson , J . G . Arfs , phosphoinositides and membrane traffic . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 33 , 1276 – 1278 ( 2005 ) . 29 . Svensson , H . G . et al . A role for ARF6 in dendritic cell podosome formation and migra - tion . Eur . J . Immunol . 38 , 818 – 828 ( 2008 ) . 30 . Lundmark , R . , Doherty , G . J . , Vallis , Y . , Peter , B . J . & McMahon , H . T . Arf family GTP loading is activated by , and generates , positive membrane curvature . Biochem . J . 414 , 189 – 194 ( 2008 ) . 31 . Radhakrishna , H . , Al - Awar , O . , Khachikian , Z . & Donaldson , J . G . ARF6 requirement for Rac ruffling suggests a role for membrane trafficking in cortical actin rearrangements . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 855 – 866 ( 1999 ) . 32 . Radhakrishna , H . , Klausner , R . D . & Donaldson , J . G . Aluminum fluoride stimulates sur - face protrusions in cells overexpressing the ARF6 GTPase . J . Cell Biol . 134 , 935 – 947 ( 1996 ) . 33 . Porat - Shliom , N . , Kloog , Y . & Donaldson , J . G . A unique platform for H - Ras signaling involving clathrin - independent endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 765 – 775 ( 2008 ) . 34 . Franco , M . et al . EFA6 , a sec7 domain - containing exchange factor for ARF6 , coordinates membrane recycling and actin cytoskeleton organization . EMBO J . 18 , 1480 – 1491 ( 1999 ) . 35 . Santy , L . C . & Casanova , J . E . Activation of ARF6 by ARNO stimulates epithelial cell migration through downstream activation of both Rac1 and phospholipase D . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 599 – 610 ( 2001 ) . 36 . Liberali , P . , Ramo , P . & Pelkmans , L . Protein kinases : starting a molecular systems view of endocytosis . Ann . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 24 , 501 – 523 ( 2008 ) . 37 . Parrini , M . C . , Matsuda , M . & de Gunzburg , J . Spatiotemporal regulation of the Pak1 kinase . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 33 , 646 – 648 ( 2005 ) . 38 . Dharmawardhane , S . et al . Regulation of macropinocytosis by p21 - activated kinase - 1 . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 3341 – 3352 ( 2000 ) . 39 . Liberali , P . et al . The closure of Pak1 - dependent macropinosomes requires the phos - phorylation of CtBP1 / BARS . EMBO J . 27 , 970 – 981 ( 2008 ) . 40 . Galisteo , M . L . , Chernoff , J . , Su , Y . C . , Skolnik , E . Y . & Schlessinger , J . The adaptor protein Nck links receptor tyrosine kinases with the serine - threonine kinase Pak1 . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 20997 – 21000 ( 1996 ) . 41 . Puto , L . A . , Pestonjamasp , K . , King , C . C . & Bokoch , G . M . p21 - activated kinase 1 ( PAK1 ) interacts with the Grb2 adapter protein to couple to growth factor signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 9388 – 9393 ( 2003 ) . 42 . Dharmawardhane , S . , Brownson , D . , Lennartz , M . & Bokoch , G . M . Localization of p21 - activated kinase 1 ( PAK1 ) to pseudopodia , membrane ruffles , and phagocytic cups in activated human neutrophils . J . Leukoc . Biol . 66 , 521 – 527 ( 1999 ) . 43 . Dharmawardhane , S . , Sanders , L . C . , Martin , S . S . , Daniels , R . H . & Bokoch , G . M . Localization of p21 - activated kinase 1 ( PAK1 ) to pinocytic vesicles and cortical actin structures in stimulated cells . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 1265 – 1278 ( 1997 ) . 44 . Even - Faitelson , L . , Rosenberg , M . & Ravid , S . PAK1 regulates myosin II - B phosphoryla - tion , filament assembly , localization and cell chemotaxis . Cell . Signal . 17 , 1137 – 1148 ( 2005 ) . 45 . Sanders , L . C . , Matsumura , F . , Bokoch , G . M . & de Lanerolle , P . Inhibition of myosin light chain kinase by p21 - activated kinase . Science 283 , 2083 – 2085 ( 1999 ) . 46 . Amyere , M . et al . Constitutive macropinocytosis in oncogene - transformed fibroblasts depends on sequential permanent activation of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase and phos - pholipase C . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 3453 – 3467 ( 2000 ) . 47 . Miyata , Y . , Nishida , E . , Koyasu , S . , Yahara , I . & Sakai , H . Protein kinase C - dependent and - independent pathways in the growth factor - induced cytoskeletal reorganization . J . Biol . Chem . 264 , 15565 – 15568 ( 1989 ) . 48 . Keller , H . U . Diacylglycerols and PMA are particularly effective stimulators of fluid pinocytosis in human neutrophils . J . Cell . Physiol . 145 , 465 – 471 ( 1990 ) . 49 . Kasahara , K . et al . Role of Src - family kinases in formation and trafficking of macropi - nosomes . J . Cell . Physiol . 211 , 220 – 232 ( 2007 ) . 50 . Sandilands , E . et al . RhoB and actin polymerization coordinate Src activation with endosome - mediated delivery to the membrane . Dev . Cell 7 , 855 – 869 ( 2004 ) . 51 . Donepudi , M . & Resh , M . D . c - Src trafficking and co - localization with the EGF receptor promotes EGF ligand - independent EGF receptor activation and signaling . Cell . Signal . 20 , 1359 – 1367 ( 2008 ) . 52 . Bougneres , L . et al . Cortactin and Crk cooperate to trigger actin polymerization during Shigella invasion of epithelial cells . J . Cell . Biol . 166 , 225 – 235 ( 2004 ) . 53 . West , M . A . , Bretscher , M . S . & Watts , C . Distinct endocytotic pathways in epidermal growth factor - stimulated human carcinoma A431 cells . J . Cell . Biol . 109 , 2731 – 2739 ( 1989 ) . 54 . Dowrick , P . , Kenworthy , P . , McCann , B . & Warn , R . Circular ruffle formation and closure lead to macropinocytosis in hepatocyte growth factor / scatter factor - treated cells . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 61 , 44 – 53 ( 1993 ) . 55 . Ivanov , A . I . Pharmacological inhibition of endocytic pathways : is it specific enough to be useful ? Methods Mol . Biol . 440 , 15 – 33 ( 2008 ) . 56 . Grimmer , S . , van Deurs , B . & Sandvig , K . Membrane ruffling and macropinocytosis in A431 cells require cholesterol . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 2953 – 2962 ( 2002 ) . 57 . Kwik , J . et al . Membrane cholesterol , lateral mobility , and the phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate - dependent organization of cell actin . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 13964 – 13969 ( 2003 ) . 58 . Charras , G . T . , Hu , C . K . , Coughlin , M . & Mitchison , T . J . Reassembly of contractile actin cortex in cell blebs . J . Cell Biol . 175 , 477 – 490 ( 2006 ) . 59 . Buccione , R . , Orth , J . D . & McNiven , M . A . Foot and mouth : podosomes , invadopodia and circular dorsal ruffles . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 647 – 657 ( 2004 ) . 60 . Grogan , A . et al . Cytosolic phox proteins interact with and regulate the assembly of coronin in neutrophils . J . Cell Sci . 110 , 3071 – 3081 ( 1997 ) . 61 . Holt , M . R . & Koffer , A . Cell motility : proline - rich proteins promote protrusions . Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 38 – 46 ( 2001 ) . 62 . Suzuki , K . et al . Activation induces dephosphorylation of cofilin and its translocation to plasma membranes in neutrophil - like differentiated HL - 60 cells . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 19551 – 19556 ( 1995 ) . 63 . Lavoie , J . N . , Hickey , E . , Weber , L . A . & Landry , J . Modulation of actin microfilament dynamics and fluid phase pinocytosis by phosphorylation of heat shock protein 27 . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 24210 – 24214 ( 1993 ) . 64 . Bretscher , A . , Reczek , D . & Berryman , M . Ezrin : a protein requiring conformational activation to link microfilaments to the plasma membrane in the assembly of cell surface structures . J . Cell Sci . 110 , 3011 – 3018 ( 1997 ) . 65 . D’Angelo , R . et al . Interaction of ezrin with the novel guanine nucleotide exchange factor PLEKHG6 promotes RhoG - dependent apical cytoskeleton rearrangements in epithelial cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 4780 – 4793 ( 2007 ) . 66 . Machesky , L . M . et al . Mammalian actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex localizes to regions of lamellipodial protrusion and is composed of evolutionarily conserved pro - teins . Biochem . J . 328 , 105 – 112 ( 1997 ) . 67 . Takenawa , T . & Suetsugu , S . The WASP - WAVE protein network : connecting the mem - brane to the cytoskeleton . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 37 – 48 ( 2007 ) . 68 . Pollard , T . D . Regulation of actin filament assembly by Arp2 / 3 complex and formins . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 36 , 451 – 477 ( 2007 ) . 69 . Sun , P . et al . Small GTPase Rah / Rab34 is associated with membrane ruffles and mac - ropinosomes and promotes macropinosome formation . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 4063 – 4071 ( 2003 ) . 70 . Goldenberg , N . M . , Grinstein , S . & Silverman , M . Golgi - bound Rab34 is a novel member of the secretory pathway . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 4762 – 4771 ( 2007 ) . 71 . Lindmo , K . & Stenmark , H . Regulation of membrane traffic by phosphoinositide 3 - kinases . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 605 – 614 ( 2006 ) . 72 . Araki , N . , Egami , Y . , Watanabe , Y . & Hatae , T . Phosphoinositide metabolism during membrane ruffling and macropinosome formation in EGF - stimulated A431 cells . Exp . Cell Res . 313 , 1496 – 1507 ( 2007 ) . 73 . Hawkins , P . T . et al . PDGF stimulates an increase in GTP - Rac via activation of phos - phoinositide 3 - kinase . Curr . Biol . 5 , 393 – 403 ( 1995 ) . 74 . Araki , N . , Johnson , M . T . & Swanson , J . A . A role for phosphoinositide 3 - kinase in the completion of macropinocytosis and phagocytosis by macrophages . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 1249 – 1260 ( 1996 ) . 75 . Araki , N . , Hamasaki , M . , Egami , Y . & Hatae , T . Effect of 3 - methyladenine on the fusion process of macropinosomes in EGF - stimulated A431 cells . Cell Struct . Funct . 31 , 145 – 157 ( 2006 ) . 76 . Buss , F . et al . The localization of myosin VI at the golgi complex and leading edge of fibroblasts and its phosphorylation and recruitment into membrane ruffles of A431 cells after growth factor stimulation . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 1535 – 1545 ( 1998 ) . 77 . Chew , T . L . , Masaracchia , R . A . , Goeckeler , Z . M . & Wysolmerski , R . B . Phosphorylation of non - muscle myosin II regulatory light chain by p21 - activated kinase ( γ - PAK ) . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 19 , 839 – 854 ( 1998 ) . 78 . Araki , N . , Hatae , T . , Furukawa , A . & Swanson , J . A . Phosphoinositide - 3 - kinase - independent contractile activities associated with Fc γ - receptor - mediated phagocytosis and macropinocytosis in macrophages . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 247 – 257 ( 2003 ) . 79 . Swanson , J . A . et al . A contractile activity that closes phagosomes in macrophages . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 307 – 316 ( 1999 ) . 80 . Schlunck , G . et al . Modulation of Rac localization and function by dynamin . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 256 – 267 ( 2004 ) . 81 . Liu , Y . W . , Surka , M . C . , Schroeter , T . , Lukiyanchuk , V . & Schmid , S . L . Isoform and splice - variant specific functions of dynamin - 2 revealed by analysis of conditional knock - out cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 5347 – 5359 ( 2008 ) . 82 . Cao , H . , Chen , J . , Awoniyi , M . , Henley , J . R . & McNiven , M . A . Dynamin 2 mediates fluid - phase micropinocytosis in epithelial cells . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 4167 – 4177 ( 2007 ) . 83 . Hewlett , L . J . , Prescott , A . R . & Watts , C . The coated pit and macropinocytic pathways serve distinct endosome populations . J . Cell Biol . 124 , 689 – 703 ( 1994 ) . 84 . Racoosin , E . L . & Swanson , J . A . Macropinosome maturation and fusion with tubular lysosomes in macrophages . J . Cell Biol . 121 , 1011 – 1020 ( 1993 ) . 85 . Roberts , R . L . , Barbieri , M . A . , Ullrich , J . & Stahl , P . D . Dynamics of rab5 activation in endocytosis and phagocytosis . J . Leukoc . Biol . 68 , 627 – 632 ( 2000 ) . 86 . Hamasaki , M . , Araki , N . & Hatae , T . Association of early endosomal autoantigen 1 with macropinocytosis in EGF - stimulated A431 cells . Anat . Rec . 277 , 298 – 306 ( 2004 ) . 87 . Kerr , M . C . et al . Visualisation of macropinosome maturation by the recruitment of sorting nexins . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 3967 – 3980 ( 2006 ) . 88 . Lim , J . P . , Wang , J . T . , Kerr , M . C . , Teasdale , R . D . & Gleeson , P . A . A role for SNX5 in the regulation of macropinocytosis . BMC Cell Biol . 9 , 58 ( 2008 ) . 89 . Bryant , D . M . et al . EGF induces macropinocytosis and SNX1 - modulated recycling of E - cadherin . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 1818 – 1828 ( 2007 ) . 90 . Merino - Trigo , A . et al . Sorting nexin 5 is localized to a subdomain of the early endo - somes and is recruited to the plasma membrane following EGF stimulation . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 6413 – 6424 ( 2004 ) . 91 . Marsh , M . & Helenius , A . Virus entry : open sesame . Cell 124 , 729 – 740 ( 2006 ) . 92 . Pelkmans , L . et al . Genome - wide analysis of human kinases in clathrin - and caveolae / raft - mediated endocytosis . Nature 436 , 78 – 86 ( 2005 ) . nature cell biology VoLuME 11 | nuMBER 5 | MAY 2009 519 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . R E V I E W Focus on MIcRoBIAL HosT cELL suBVERsIon 93 . Locker , J . K . et al . Entry of the two infectious forms of vaccinia virus at the plasma membane is signaling - dependent for the IMV but not the EEV . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 2497 – 2511 ( 2000 ) . 94 . Huang , C . Y . et al . A novel cellular protein , VPEF , facilitates vaccinia virus penetration into HeLa cells through fluid phase endocytosis . J . Virol . 82 , 7988 – 7999 ( 2008 ) . 95 . Townsley , A . C . , Weisberg , A . S . , Wagenaar , T . R . & Moss , B . Vaccinia virus entry into cells via a low - pH - dependent endosomal pathway . J . Virol . 80 , 8899 – 8908 ( 2006 ) . 96 . Chung , C . S . , Huang , C . Y . & Chang , W . Vaccinia virus penetration requires cholesterol and results in specific viral envelope proteins associated with lipid rafts . J . Virol . 79 , 1623 – 1634 ( 2005 ) . 97 . Ichihashi , Y . & Oie , M . The activation of vaccinia virus infectivity by the transfer of phosphatidylserine from the plasma membrane . Virology 130 , 306 – 317 ( 1983 ) . 98 . Henson , P . M . , Bratton , D . L . & Fadok , V . A . Apoptotic cell removal . Curr . Biol . 11 , R795 – 805 ( 2001 ) . 99 . Lucas , M . et al . Correlative 3D Microscopy : CLSM and FIB / SEM tomography . A study of cellular entry of vaccinia virus . Imaging Microsc . 10 , 30 – 31 ( 2008 ) . 100 . Niebuhr , K . et al . Conversion of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P ( 2 ) into PtdIns ( 5 ) P by the S . flexneri effector IpgD reorganizes host cell morphology . EMBO J . 21 , 5069 – 5078 ( 2002 ) . 101 . Young , V . B . , Falkow , S . & Schoolnik , G . K . The invasin protein of Yersinia enteroco - litica : internalization of invasin - bearing bacteria by eukaryotic cells is associated with reorganization of the cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 116 , 197 – 207 ( 1992 ) . 102 . Hayashi , S . & Hogg , J . C . Adenovirus infections and lung disease . Curr . Opin . Pharmacol . 7 , 237 – 243 ( 2007 ) . 103 . Amstutz , B . et al . Subversion of CtBP1 - controlled macropinocytosis by human adeno - virus serotype 3 . EMBO J . 27 , 956 – 969 ( 2008 ) . 104 . Sirena , D . et al . The human membrane cofactor CD46 is a receptor for species B adenovirus serotype 3 . J . Virol . 78 , 4454 – 4462 ( 2004 ) . 105 . Wickham , T . J . , Mathias , P . , Cheresh , D . A . & Nemerow , G . R . Integrins α v β 3 and α v β 5 promote adenovirus internalization but not virus attachment . Cell 73 , 309 – 319 ( 1993 ) . 106 . Karjalainen , M . et al . A Raft - derived , Pak1 - regulated entry participates in α 2 β 1 integrin - dependent sorting to caveosomes . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 2857 – 2869 ( 2008 ) . 107 . Coyne , C . B . , Shen , L . , Turner , J . R . & Bergelson , J . M . Coxsackievirus entry across epithelial tight junctions requires occludin and the small GTPases Rab34 and Rab5 . Cell Host Microbe 2 , 181 – 192 ( 2007 ) . 108 . Coyne , C . B . & Bergelson , J . M . Virus - induced Abl and Fyn kinase signals permit coxsackievirus entry through epithelial tight junctions . Cell 124 , 119 – 131 ( 2006 ) . 109 . Shukla , D . & Spear , P . G . Herpesviruses and heparan sulfate : an intimate relationship in aid of viral entry . J . Clin . Invest . 108 , 503 – 510 ( 2001 ) . 110 . Garner , J . A . Herpes simplex virion entry into and intracellular transport within mam - malian cells . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 55 , 1497 – 1513 ( 2003 ) . 111 . Nicola , A . V . , Hou , J . , Major , E . O . & Straus , S . E . Herpes simplex virus type 1 enters human epidermal keratinocytes , but not neurons , via a pH - dependent endocytic path - way . J . Virol . 79 , 7609 – 7616 ( 2005 ) . 112 . Nicola , A . V . , McEvoy , A . M . & Straus , S . E . Roles for endocytosis and low pH in herpes simplex virus entry into HeLa and Chinese hamster ovary cells . J . Virol . 77 , 5324 – 5332 ( 2003 ) . 113 . Marechal , V . et al . Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 entry into macrophages mediated by macropinocytosis . J . Virol . 75 , 11166 – 11177 ( 2001 ) . 114 . Liu , N . Q . et al . Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 enters brain microvascular endothelia by macropinocytosis dependent on lipid rafts and the mitogen - activated protein kinase signaling pathway . J . Virol . 76 , 6689 – 6700 ( 2002 ) . 115 . Wang , J . H . , Wells , C . & Wu , L . Macropinocytosis and cytoskeleton contribute to dendritic cell - mediated HIV - 1 transmission to CD4 + T cells . Virology 381 , 143 – 154 ( 2008 ) . 116 . Nguyen , D . G . , Wolff , K . C . , Yin , H . , Caldwell , J . S . & Kuhen , K . L . “UnPAKing” human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) replication : using small interfering RNA screen - ing to identify novel cofactors and elucidate the role of group I PAKs in HIV infection . J . Virol . 80 , 130 – 137 ( 2006 ) . 117 . Fontenot , D . R . et al . Dynein light chain 1 peptide inhibits human immunodeficiency virus infection in eukaryotic cells . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 363 , 901 – 907 ( 2007 ) . 118 . Meier , O . et al . Adenovirus triggers macropinocytosis and endosomal leakage together with its clathrin - mediated uptake . J . Cell Biol . 158 , 1119 – 1131 ( 2002 ) . 119 . Imelli , N . , Meier , O . , Boucke , K . , Hemmi , S . & Greber , U . F . Cholesterol is required for endocytosis and endosomal escape of adenovirus type 2 . J . Virol . 78 , 3089 – 3098 ( 2004 ) . 120 . Meier , O . & Greber , U . F . Adenovirus endocytosis . J . Gene Med . 5 , 451 – 462 ( 2003 ) . 121 . Lee , J . Y . & Bowden , D . S . Rubella virus replication and links to teratogenicity . Clin . Microbiol . Rev . 13 , 571 – 587 ( 2000 ) . 122 . Kee , S . H . et al . Effects of endocytosis inhibitory drugs on rubella virus entry into VeroE6 cells . Microbiol . Immunol . 48 , 823 – 829 ( 2004 ) . 123 . Petruzziello , R . et al . Pathway of rubella virus infectious entry into Vero cells . J . Gen . Virol . 77 , 303 – 308 ( 1996 ) . 124 . Albert , M . L . Death - defying immunity : do apoptotic cells influence antigen processing and presentation ? Nat Rev Immunol 4 , 223 – 231 ( 2004 ) . 125 . Hayasaka , D . , Ennis , F . A . & Terajima , M . Pathogeneses of respiratory infections with virulent and attenuated vaccinia viruses . Virol . J . 4 , 22 ( 2007 ) . 126 . Araki , N . , Hatae , T . , Yamada , T . & Hirohashi , S . Actinin - 4 is preferentially involved in circular ruffling and macropinocytosis in mouse macrophages : analysis by fluorescence ratio imaging . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 3329 – 3340 ( 2000 ) . 127 . Deacon , S . W . et al . An isoform - selective , small - molecule inhibitor targets the autoreg - ulatory mechanism of p21 - activated kinase . Chem . Biol . 15 , 322 – 331 ( 2008 ) . 520 nature cell biology VoLuME 11 | nuMBER 5 | MAY 2009