A critical look at technological innovation typology and innovativeness terminology : a literature review Rosanna Garcia * 1 , Roger Calantone 2 Department of Marketing & Supply Chain Management , Michigan State University , East Lansing , MI , USA Received 30 September 2001 ; accepted 20 May 2001 Abstract A plethora of deﬁnitions for innovation types has resulted in an ambiguity in the way the terms ‘innovation’ and ‘innovativeness’ are operationalized and utilized in the new product development literature . The terms radical , really - new , incremental and discontinuous are used ubiquitously to identify innovations . One must question , what is the difference between these different classiﬁcations ? To date consistent deﬁnitions for these innovation types have not emerged from the new product research community . A review of the literature from the marketing , engineering , and new product development disciplines attempts to put some clarity and continuity to the use of these terms . This review shows that it is important to consider both a marketing and technological perspective as well as a macrolevel and microlevel perspective when identifying innovations . Additionally , it is shown when strict classiﬁcations from the extant literature are applied , a signiﬁcant shortfall appears in empirical work directed toward radical and really new innovations . A method for classifying innovations is suggested so that practitioners and academics can talk with a common understanding of how a speciﬁc innovation type is identiﬁed and how the innovation process may be unique for that particular innovation type . A recommended list of measures based on extant literature is provided for future empirical research concerning technological innovations and innovativeness . © 2002 PDMA . All rights reserved . “A rose is a rose is a rose . And a rose by any other name would smell just as sweet . ” Gertrude Stein & William Shakespeare 1 . Introduction Academics generally believe that they have begun to understand the process of developing innovations and it doesn’t matter what they call them ; new innovations smell just as sweet by any other name . The innovation process has been identiﬁed for radical , incremental , really new , discon - tinuous , and imitative innovations , as well as for architec - tural , modular , improving , and evolutionary innovations . Based on solid empirical research , normative strategies have been suggested for each of these different types of innovations . Yet , one has to ask , what is the difference between a radical innovation , a really new product innova - tion , and a discontinuous innovation ? What is the difference between an incremental innovation and an imitative inno - vation ? Just as important , does it matter how innovations are labeled ? No less than ﬁfteen constructs and at least 51 distinct scale items have been used in just 21 empirical studies in the new product development ( NPD ) literature that model prod - uct innovativeness ( see Table 1 and Appendix A ) . This lack of consistency in operationalizing ‘innovationativeness’ has resulted in the interchangeable use of the constructs ‘inno - vation’ and ‘innovativeness’ to deﬁne innovation types . Although this may seem to be an insigniﬁcant point , this has led to incongruent categorizations of innovation typology and widespread confusion as to what empirical studies are actually reporting . An innovation that one researcher may term ‘really new’ is termed ‘radical’ or ‘discontinuous’ by another researcher . Additionally , there is no consistent de - lineation on what is considered ‘high’ , ‘moderate’ and ‘low’ degree of innovativeness and if that correlates to the cate - gorizations of ‘radical’ , ‘really new’ , and ‘incremental’ in - novations or some other typology . Although this lack of conformance in deﬁning ‘innova - tion’ and ‘innovativeness’ has been recognized [ 7 , 21 , 25 , 27 , 36 ] there has been no embracement of any consistent di - mensions of these constructs . This may be due to the fact that innovations are researched from many scholastic com - munities and address each community’s select audience . * Corresponding author . Tel . : (cid:1) 1 - 517 - 353 - 6381 ; fax : (cid:1) 1 - 517 - 432 - 1112 . E - mail address : garciar8 @ msu . edu ( R . Garcia ) . The Journal of Product Innovation Management 19 ( 2002 ) 110—132 0737 - 6782 / 02 / $ – see front matter © 2002 PDMA . All rights reserved . PII : S0737 - 6782 ( 01 ) 00132 - 1 However , a large proportion of signiﬁcant ﬁndings regard - ing innovations have originated in the last 15 years from the research of the Journal of Product Innovation Management with its diverse base of engineers , marketers , product man - agers , and R & D team members [ 8 ] . For this reason , it is important that a consistent set of working deﬁnitions evolve from this community of researchers . Why is it necessary to have a consistent typology for identifying innovations ? It is only possible to advance our knowledge of innovations by understanding what is the difference between a radical innovation , a really new inno - vation , and an incremental innovation . This literature re - view will demonstrate how inconsistencies in labeling in - novations have signiﬁcantly contributed to a lack of academic advancements regarding the NPD process of dif - ferent types of innovations . NPD researchers have identiﬁed various innovation types on an ad hoc basis , and this has resulted in research myopia . More bluntly , researchers often believe that their work is ‘new’ and ‘important’ when in - stead it just relabels / redeﬁnes / reiterates ﬁndings from pre - vious studies with different labeling of innovations . Find - ings from other ﬁelds ( organizational behavior , engineering , strategic management ) are often overlooked because they emphasize a ‘different’ type of innovation . A recent meta - analysis by Henard & Szymanski [ 26 ] emphasizes this point as it may exclude the ﬁndings from other disciplines be - cause of this identiﬁcation crisis . In empirical research , hypothesis building regarding in - novation types has also discounted relevant prior research that does not use the same terminology as the research being undertaken . This leads to ‘new’ ﬁndings that are in fact rehashes of previous work . Additionally , this lack of con - sistency can lead to the reversal of causal notions in hy - pothesis building . Where innovativeness may be modeled as the cause it may be more appropriately modeled as the effect . The identiﬁcation of innovation types and their in - ﬂuence on the market place is really a problem as old as classical economics [ 51 ] ! To ignore these distinctions is to turn one’s back , literally , on sixty - ﬁve years of research on the innovation process . Because new product researchers have not found consis - tency in labeling and identifying innovations , we cannot expect practitioners to have learned from our research en - deavors . Managers looking for an understanding of how to address the idiosyncratic problems associated with radical innovations will have difﬁculties ﬁnding the holy grail from our research efforts . Managers see more conﬂict in empir - ical results than is factually true , natural , or even possible in empirical research . Thus , they make choices of which re - search ﬁnding is ‘relevant’ based on the presentation style , the ‘hot topic’ of the meeting , or whatever supports their personal motivations or that of their current consultant . One cannot expect managers to embrace confusing conﬂicting results . For example , a manager assigned to a new product team must ﬁrst discern if he / she is working with a radical , really new , discontinuous , disruptive , incremental , or imi - tative innovation . Upon making this distinction ( if even possible ) , he / she will then disregard a substantial and sig - niﬁcant amount of research ﬁndings that may have helped advance the NPD project . For empirical research to have an impact on practice , it should be focused , clear and report ‘true’ differences , not results biased by mis - deﬁned outcomes . For these reasons , we believe that this literature review can be useful for facilitating future advancements in the NPD process . The purpose of this article is to delineate the domain of the constructs ‘innovation’ and ‘innovativeness’ , to provide an operational deﬁnition , and to introduce a comprehensive framework for directing future research . We draw on new product literature in marketing , management , and engineer - ing to provide a candid review of the usage of the termi - nology technological ‘innovation’ and ‘innovativeness’ . In - stead of inventing yet another original typology , we will synthesize a categorization that provides a parsimonious conceptualization of the overarching factors of interest to Table 1 Constructs used to model product innovation / innovativeness Construct Study * (cid:1) Product innovativeness 2 , 6 , 7 , 9 , 12 , 13 , 15 , 17 (cid:1) Radicalness ( discontinuous ) 11 , 14 , 16 , 18 , 20 , 21 (cid:1) Newness to ﬁrm 1 , 6 , 10 , 13 , 19 (cid:1) Technical content 4 , 8 (cid:1) Newness to market 19 (cid:1) Newness of technology 19 (cid:1) Newness to customer 10 (cid:1) Product uniqueness 1 (cid:1) Product ( superiority ) 1 (cid:1) Synergy ( ﬁt ) 1 (cid:1) Product / market ﬁt 6 (cid:1) Marketing task similarity 3 (cid:1) Product complexity 3 (cid:1) Development complexity 3 (cid:1) Product type 5 * Some studies used more than one construct . 1 . Cooper ( 1979 ) 2 . Lawton & Parasuraman ( 1980 ) 3 . More ( 1982 ) 4 . Maidique & Zirger ( 1984 ) 5 . Yoon & Lilien ( 1985 ) 6 . Cooper & de Brentani ( 1991 ) 7 . Kleinschmidt & Cooper ( 1991 ) 8 . Lee & Na ( 1994 ) 9 . Ali , Krapfel , & LaBahn ( 1995 ) 10 . Atuahene - Gima ( 1995 ) 11 . Green , Gavin , & Aiman - Smith ( 1995 ) 12 . Olson , Walker & Ruekert ( 1995 ) 13 . Mishra , Kim , & Lee ( 1996 ) 14 . Souder & Song ( 1997 ) 15 . Schmidt & Calantone ( 1998 ) 16 . Colarelli O’Connor ( 1998 ) 17 . Song & Montoya - Weiss ( 1998 ) 18 . Veryzer ( 1998 ) 19 . Goldenberg , Lehman , & Mazursky ( 1999 ) 20 . Kessler & Chakrabarti ( 1999 ) 21 . Chandy & Tellis ( 2000 ) 111 R . Garcia , R . Calantone / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 19 ( 2002 ) 110—132 new product researchers and practitioners concerning new product / process / service innovations . 2 . Inovation and innovativeness explicated 2 . 1 . ‘Innovation’ deﬁned . In order to begin to identify innovation types , it is ﬁrst important to deﬁne a ‘technological innovation’ . Engineer - ing , marketing , management and even economics provide unique spins as to what is considered an innovation . A review of this literature reveals that the 1991 OECD [ 44 ] study on technological innovations best captures the essence of innovations from an overall perspective : ‘Innovation’ is an iterative process initiated by the perception of a new market and / or new service opportunity for a technology - based invention which leads to development , production , and marketing tasks striving for the commercial success of the invention . This deﬁnition addresses two important distinctions : [ 1 ] the ‘innovation’ process comprises the technological devel - opment of an invention combined with the market introduc - tion of that invention to end - users through adoption and diffusion , and [ 2 ] the innovation process is iterative in nature and thus , automatically includes the ﬁrst introduction of a new innovation and the reintroduction of an improved innovation . This iterative process implies varying degrees of innovativeness and thus , necessitates a typology to de - scribe different types of innovations . As pointed out by an anonymous reviewer , the OECD deﬁnition also references ‘technology - based inventions’ . Technological innovations are those innovations that embody inventions from the in - dustrial arts , engineering , applied sciences and / or pure sci - ences . Examples include innovations from the electronics , aerospace , pharmaceuticals , and information systems indus - tries . It is important to elucidate that an invention does not become an innovation until it has processed through pro - duction and marketing tasks and is diffused into the mar - ketplace [ 19 , 34 , 53 ] . “The solution to a basic scientiﬁc puz - zle or the invention of a new “product” only in a laboratory setting makes no direct economic contribution . Innovation includes not only basic and applied research but also prod - uct development , manufacturing , marketing , distribution , servicing , and later product adaptation and upgrading” [ 53 p . 1 ] . A discovery that goes no further than the laboratory remains an invention . A discovery that moves from the lab into production , and adds economic value to the ﬁrm ( even if only cost savings ) would be considered an innovation . Thus , an innovation differs from an invention in that it provides economic value and is diffused to other parties beyond the discoverers . The continual evolution of innovations is the iterative nature referenced in the OECD deﬁnition . Utterback and Abernathy [ 60 ] describe the iterative process of innovation . “A basic idea underlying the proposed model of product innovation is that products will be developed over time in a predictable manner with initial emphasis on product perfor - mance , then emphasis on product variety and later emphasis on product standardization and costs” [ p . 642 ] . This itera - tive nature results in a variety of different innovation types , typically called ‘radical innovations’ for products at the early stages of diffusion and adoption and ‘incremental innovations’ at the advanced stages of the product life cycle . Innovations do not occur just during the production devel - opment phases but also may occur during the diffusion process in which a product or process may undergo contin - ual improvements and upgrades . “Diffusion is seldom , if ever , a simple process of replication by unimaginative im - itators” [ 18 p . 305 ] . A clariﬁcation of the differentiation between process innovations and the innovation process is also worthwhile . “A production process [ innovation ] is the system of process equipment , work force , task speciﬁcation , material inputs , work and information ﬂows , and so forth that are employed to produce a product or service” [ 60 p . 641 ] . Once the production process has become standardized for product innovations , process innovations will evolve to improve the output productivity . Classic examples of process innova - tions are the ﬂoat glass process for ﬂat - sheet glass manu - facturing and the Bessemer process for converting iron to steel , which revolutionized the steel industry . The primary focus of ‘process innovations’ is the efﬁciency improve - ment of the production process for ‘product innovations’ [ 59 ] . What is not evident and can lead to confusion between distinguishing between process innovations and the innova - tion process is that process innovations can lead to new product innovations . 2 . 2 . ‘Innovativeness’ deﬁned ‘Innovativeness’ is most frequently used as a measure of the degree of ‘newness’ of an innovation . ‘Highly innova - tive’ products are seen as having a high degree of newness and ‘low innovative’ products sit at the opposite extreme of the continuum . However , little continuity exists in the new product literature regarding from whose perspective this degree of newness is viewed and what is new . Although the majority of research takes a ﬁrm’s perspective toward new - ness , others look at new to the world [ 54 ] , new to the adopting unit [ 15 ] , new to the industry [ 10 ] , new to the market [ 31 , 38 ] , and new to the consumer [ 4 ] , ( see Table 2 ) . This relative nature of deﬁning innovativeness has contrib - uted to the lack of advancement in understanding the NPD process as studies cannot be compared across different units of analysis . The bouncing point of view of newness , creates distinctive , unique studies that never achieve the status of “re” - search . Despite the varying perspectives for ‘innovativeness’ a single consistency does exist ; it is always modeled as the degree of discontinuity in marketing and / or technological 112 R . Garcia , R . Calantone / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 19 ( 2002 ) 110—132 factors , ( see Table 3 ) . We thus maintain that product inno - vativeness is a measure of the potential discontinuity a product ( process or service ) can generate in the marketing and / or technological process . From a macro perspective , ‘innovativeness’ is the capacity of a new innovation to create a paradigm shift in the science and technology and / or market structure in an industry . From a micro perspective , ‘innovativeness’ is the capacity of a new innovation to inﬂuence the ﬁrm’s existing marketing resources , techno - logical resources , skills , knowledge , capabilities , or strat - egy . In the next section we will demonstrate how many researchers have labeled varying degrees of product inno - vativeness as different typologies . First , it must be emphasized that product innovativeness does not equate to ﬁrm innovativeness . Firm or organiza - tional innovativeness has been deﬁned as the propensity for a ﬁrm to innovate or develop new products [ 16 ] . It has also been deﬁned as the propensity for a ﬁrm to adopt innova - tions [ 13 , 48 ] . In either case , the innovativeness of a product that a ﬁrm markets or adopts is not a measure of organiza - Table 2 Newness factors 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 New to : New to the world x x x x New to the industry x x x x New to scientiﬁc community x x New to the market ( place ) x x x x x x x x x New to the ﬁrm x x x x x x x x New to the customer x x New what : New technology x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x New product line x x x x x x x x x x New product beneﬁts / features x x x x New product design x x x x x x New process x x x x x x x New service x New competition x x x x x New customers x x x x New customer need x x New consumption patterns x x x New uses x x x New improvements / changes x x x x New development skills x x New marketing / sales / distribution skills x x x x x x New managerial skills x New learning / experience / knowledge x x x New quality / beneﬁts x x x 1 . Cooper ( 1979 ) 2 . Lawton & Parasuraman ( 1980 ) 3 . More ( 1982 ) 4 . Maidique & Zirger ( 1984 ) 5 . Yoon & Lilien ( 1985 ) 6 . Cooper & de Brentani ( 1991 ) 7 . Kleinschmidt & Cooper ( 1991 ) 8 . Lee & Na ( 1994 ) 9 . Ali , Krapfel , & LaBahn ( 1995 ) 10 . Atuahene - Gima ( 1995 ) 11 . Green , Gavin , & Aiman - Smith ( 1995 ) 12 . Olson , Walker & Ruekert ( 1995 ) 13 . Mishra , Kim , & Lee ( 1996 ) 14 . Souder & Song ( 1997 ) 15 . Schmidt & Calantone ( 1998 ) 16 . Colarelli O’Connor ( 1998 ) 17 . Song & Montoya - Weiss ( 1998 ) 18 . Veryzer ( 1998 ) 19 . Goldenberg , Lehman , & Mazursky ( 1999 ) 20 . Kessler & Chakrabarti ( 1999 ) 21 . Chandy & Tellis ( 2000 ) 113 R . Garcia , R . Calantone / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 19 ( 2002 ) 110—132 Table 3 Summary of constructs and factors in empirical research Author Construct name Factors # of items AlphaorR Varianceexplained Scale Categories # of products / projects Dependentvariable Cooper ( 1979 ) Product innovativeness Newness to the ﬁrm 8 NR 10 . 10 % 0 – 10 Likert Continuum 195 New product success Product uniqueness ( Pioneer ) 6 2 . 20 % 0 – 10 Likert Product uniqueness / superiority 3 9 . 00 % 0 – 10 Likert Lawton & Parasuraman ( 1980 ) Product innovativeness Change in behavioral patterns 1 NR 1 – 7 Likert High / Medium / Low 107 Adoption of mktg concept Product newness 1 1 – 7 Likert High / Medium / Low More ( 1982 ) Marketing task similarity 10 NR NR Continuum 43 Accept / reject decision Production complexity 5 NR NR Distribution difﬁculty 5 NR NR Development complexity 5 NR NR Maidique & Zirger ( 1984 ) Degree of technical content NR NR NR Radicalbreakthrough / signiﬁcanttechnicalchange / incrementalchange Survey I n (cid:2) 78 Survey II n (cid:2) 58 Success / failure Innovation type — — NR True / adoption Yoon & Lilien ( 1985 ) Product type — — NR Original new products / reformulatednewproducts 112 New product performance Cooper & de Brentani ( 1991 ) Synergy 7 0 . 837 1 – 7 Likert Continuum 106 New service success Newness to the ﬁrm 7 0 . 724 1 – 7 Likert Innovativeness of service product 3 0 . 71 1 – 7 Likert Product uniqueness and superiority 6 0 . 75 1 – 7 Likert Product / market ﬁt 3 0 . 712 1 – 7 Likert Kleinschmidt & Cooper ( 1991 ) Product innovativeness 6 NR NR Highly / moderately / low innovativeness 195 New product performance McDonough ( 1993 ) Product type — — Routine / radical 32 New product development speed 114 R . G a r c i a , R . C a l an t on e / T h e J ou r na l o f P r odu c t I nno v a ti on M anag e m e n t 19 ( 2002 ) 110 — 132 Table 3 Summary of constructs and factors in empirical research ( cont . ) Author Construct name Factors # of items AlphaorR Varianceexplained Scale Categories # of products / projects Dependentvariable Lee & Na ( 1994 ) Technical innovativeness of product 1 — 1 – 5 Likert Incrementallyimproving / radical 75 Technicalperformance Ali , Krapfel , & LaBahn ( 1995 ) Product innovativeness 3 0 . 77 1 – 7 Likert Continuum 73 Cycle time Technical content 3 0 . 82 1 – 7 Likert Green , Gavin , & Aiman - Smith ( 1995 ) Radicalness of innovation Technicaluncertainty 6 3 % 1 – 7 Radical 213 None—factoranalysis Technicalinexperience 3 18 % 1 – 7 Likert Technology cost 3 11 % 1 – 7 Likert Business experience 4 61 % 1 – 7 Likert Atuahene - Gima ( 1995 ) Product newness Newness to customers 6 0 . 78 Radical / Incremental 119 Radical New product performance Newness to ﬁrm 1 103 Incremental Olson , Walker & Ruekert ( 1995 ) Product innovativeness Newness of product 5 0 . 81 NR 1 – 5 Radical / incremental 45 Product and ﬁnancialoutcomesefﬁciencyoutcomespsychosocialoutcomes Mishra , Kim & Lee ( 1996 ) General characteristics Productinnovativeness 1 r (cid:2) 0 . 675 0 – 10 Likert Continuum 144 New product success Customization of the product 1 r (cid:2) 0 . 629 Technology content 1 r (cid:2) 0 . 621 correlation with DV Newness to the ﬁrm 8 NR 0 – 10 Likert Continuum Souder & Song ( 1997 ) Radicalness 3 0 . 74 1 – 5 Likert Continuum 156 New product success Schmidt & Calantone ( 1998 ) Product innovativeness — — High / low Innovative / incremental 161 Likelihood of failure / self - reportedcommitment / go / stop decision Colarelli O’Connor ( 1998 ) Source of technology 5 NR Discontinuous 9 Market learning Nature of market needs 4 NR 115 R . G a r c i a , R . C a l an t on e / T h e J ou r na l o f P r odu c t I nno v a ti on M anag e m e n t 19 ( 2002 ) 110 — 132 Table 3 Summary of constructs and factors in empirical research ( cont . ) Author Construct name Factors # of items AlphaorR Varianceexplained Scale Categories # of products / projects Dependentvariable Song & Montoya - Weiss ( 1998 ) Product innovativeness NR NR Really new / incremental 163 Really new / 169 incremental New product success Veryzer ( 1998 ) Discontinuity index Discontinuity of product beneﬁts NR NR NR High / medium / low 7 Customer input / customerevaluation Discontinuity of technologicalcapabilities NR NR NR Discontinuity of consumptionpatterns NR NR NR Goldenberg , Lehmann & Mazursky ( 1999 ) Newness Newness to the market 1 — 0 – 2 High / moderate / low 197 New product success Newness to the ﬁrm 1 — 0 – 1 New / not new Newness of the technology 1 — 0 – 2 High / moderate / low Kessler & Chakrabarti ( 1999 ) Product radicalness 2 NR 1 – 5 Radical / incremental 42 radical 33 incremental Innovation speed Chandy & Tellis ( 2000 ) Radical product innovation Technologydifference 1 — 1 – 9 Continuum 64 Radical product innovation Customer beneﬁts 1 — 1 – 9 * NR (cid:2) not reported . 116 R . G a r c i a , R . C a l an t on e / T h e J ou r na l o f P r odu c t I nno v a ti on M anag e m e n t 19 ( 2002 ) 110 — 132 tional innovativeness . Many ﬁrms have taken an innovation strategy of imitating and improving upon existing products or technologies . This approach is described by the ‘analyz - er’ strategy suggested by Miles and Snow [ 39 ] . This type of ﬁrm is very successful at improving upon existing product designs . Microsoft is a classic example of this type of strategy . Even successful analyzers , including Microsoft , are often viewed by their competitors as great imitators and not highly innovative . Thus , a highly innovative product does not automatically imply highly innovative ﬁrms . 3 . Innovation typology comparisons There is no question that not all innovations are the same . Accordingly , they are frequently classiﬁed into typologies as a means of identifying their innovative characteristics or degree of innovativeness . It has been theorized and empir - ically tested that the varying degrees of newness and the discontinuities resulting from highly innovative innovations will change the important factors in the NPD process [ 18 , 47 , 54 ] . This contingency approach to the NPD process has resulted in researchers devising ad hoc typologies to label degrees of innovativeness . A review of the literature reveals the following categorizations : Y eight categories – reformulated / new parts / remerchan - dising / new improvements / new products / new user / new market / new customers [ 29 ] ; Y ﬁve categories – systematic / major / minor / incremental / unrecorded [ 18 ] ; Y tetra - categorization – incremental / modular / architec - tural / radical [ 27 ] , niche creation / architectural / regular / revolutionary [ 1 ] , incremental / evolutionary market / evolutionary technical / radical [ 42 ] , incremental / market breakthrough / technological breakthrough / radical [ 7 ] , incremental / architectural / fusion / breakthrough [ 57 ] ; Y triadic categorization – low innovativeness / moderate innovativeness / high innovativeness [ 31 ] , incremental / new generation / radically new [ 62 ] and , Y dichotomous categorization – discontinuous / continu - ous [ 3 , 47 ] , instrumental / ultimate [ 23 ] , variations / re - orientations [ 43 ] , true / adoption [ 37 ] , original / refor - mulated [ 64 ] , innovations / reinnovations [ 49 ] , radical / routine [ 38 ] , evolutionary / revolutionary [ 59 ] , sustaining / disruptive [ 9 ] , really new / incremental [ 50 , 54 ] , breakthrough / incremental [ 46 ] , and radical / incre - mental [ 5 , 18 , 4 , 30 , 35 , 52 , 56 ] . This abundance of typologies has resulted in the same name being used for different types of innovations and the same innovation being classiﬁed under different typologies . The following review of four different classiﬁcations by four groups of researchers will demonstrate this point . Utterback [ 59 ] provides the following deﬁnition of a discontinuous or radical innovation : “By discontinuous change or radical innovation , I mean change that sweeps away much of a ﬁrm’s existing investment in technical skills and knowledge , designs , production technique , plant and equipment” [ p . 200 ] . From Utterback’s perspective , dislocation or discontinuity at the ﬁrm level or in the indus - try accompanies the introduction of radical innovations . Continuous ( incremental ) innovations give way to standard - ization and status quo within the ﬁrm or industry . Rothwell and Gardiner [ 49 ] focus on technological dis - continuity , by emphasizing ‘reinnovations’ or improve - ments on existing innovations . Their dichotomy of ‘innova - tions’ and ‘reinnovations’ leads to several subcategories . ‘Innovations’ are radically new inventions establishing landmark new products , and as such , create new industries . ‘Reinnovations’ dominate much of the contemporary “real” industrial world . They result in existing technology improv - ing upon existing product design ( incremental ) , new tech - nology improving existing products ( generational ) , existing technology creating new products ( new mark products ) , improved materials improving existing products ( improve - ments ) , and new technology improving subsystems of ex - isting products ( minor details ) . Another viewpoint , Kleinschmidt and Cooper’s [ 31 ] study of 195 new products , leads to a triad categorization . Klein - schmidt and Cooper’s typology distinguishes between ‘high’ , ‘moderate’ , and ‘low’ innovativeness . Highly innovative prod - ucts include new to the world products and new to the ﬁrm lines , which are also new to the market . Moderately innovative products consist of less innovative new lines to the ﬁrm and new products to the existing product line . Low innovative products include modiﬁcations , cost reductions , and reposi - tioning . A fourth perspective , Abernathy and Clark’s [ 1 ] matrix categorization focuses on competitive signiﬁcance by map - ping technology competence against market environments . The four resulting categories for innovations are ‘niche creation’ , ‘architectural’ , ‘regular’ and ‘revolutionary’ . In niche creations , stable and well - speciﬁed existing technol - ogy is reﬁned , improved , or changed to support a new market position . These reﬁnements build on established technical competence and improve product applicability in emerging market segments . Architectural innovations forge new market linkages with new technology through the cre - ation of new industries or the reformation of existing ones . They set the future architecture of the industry . Regular innovations build on established technical and production competences targeted to existing markets and customers . They often involve incremental improvements in process technology . Revolutionary innovations disrupt and obsolete technical and production competence but target existing markets and customers . A couple of examples will demonstrate how just these four different classiﬁcation approaches can lead to different labeling of the same innovation . A classic example is the typewriter . Utterback [ 59 ] writes , “Discontinuities were observed between the periods of the manual typewriter , electrics , dedicated work 117 R . Garcia , R . Calantone / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 19 ( 2002 ) 110—132 processors , and personal computers . Of the large manual type - writer ﬁrms of the early twentieth century , none were success - ful in jumping onto the bandwagon of the electric typewriter ; it was IBM , an outsider that developed both the product and its market” [ p . 201 ] . Based on this scenario , Utterback would designate the electric typewriter as a radical innovation be - cause the new technology brought about industrial discontinu - ity and new competitors . The Rothwell and Gardiner typology identiﬁed an ‘in - cremental’ design as adding radical new features to improve upon an existing innovation . Thus , Rothwell and Gardiner would label the electrical technology advancement from manual to electric typewriters as an incremental innovation . Kleinschmidt and Cooper would label the typewriter tech - nology evolution a moderate innovation and Abernathy and Clark would call it a revolutionary innovation . Another example is the Canon laser photocopier which produced digital signals that could be electronically digi - tally processed , stored or transmitted simultaneously to a number of distant slave printers . The analog system of its conventional predecessors were unable to network . The new technology was the application of a laser and electronic information processing step inserted between the original optical and print systems . The digital processing subsystem allowed the production of a technologically new laser dig - ital copier . Utterback would label the movement from ana - log to digital technology a market broadening , competence enhancing , radical innovation . Yet for Rothwell and Gardiner , radical technology embedded in a reinnovation does not constitute a radical innovation , instead just a rede - sign on an ‘innovation’ . Thus , they would label this inno - vation an incremental innovation with a subassembly change . Kleinschmidt and Cooper would label it a moderate innovation , and to Abernathy and Clark the copier technol - ogy evolution is a regular innovation . As these two examples demonstrate , the same innovation can be labeled on either ends of the scale of innovativeness depending on the researcher . This ambiguity in classiﬁcation schema makes it impractical , if not impossible , to accurately compare research studies . With these types of terminology irregularities , it is impossible to accumulate knowledge regard - ing innovation types and how their varying degrees of newness alter the NPD process . The next section will review how inconsistencies also plague the operationalization of product innovativeness in empirical literature . 4 . Empirical literature compared As the previous review demonstrated , ad hoc categori - zations of innovations into degrees of innovativeness has led to inconsistencies in labeling innovation types . This becomes evident by examining how product innovativeness has been operationalized in the empirical literature . Table 1 lists 15 constructs identiﬁed and Appendix A lists 51 dis - tinct measures from the extant NPD literature . A review of the literature reveals incongruence in the operationalization of product ( process / service ) innovative - ness at four different levels : [ 1 ] modeling from a macro or microperspective , [ 2 ] modeling marketing and / or techno - logical discontinuities , [ 3 ] modeling a single dimensional or multifactorial construct , and [ 4 ] modeling innovativeness as a categorical or continuous variable . A single theme , how - ever , does underlie all these classiﬁcations of innovations : innovativeness is a measure of discontinuity in the status quo in marketing factors and / or technology factors . This section focuses on the studies that have reached empirical conclusions about the moderating or mediating effects of product innovativeness . We also include studies where product innovativeness is modeled as a dependent variable . The unit of analysis considered is the project level for products , processes , and services developed for the purpose of outside - the - ﬁrm commercialization . We will not review studies that have focused on ﬁrm innovativeness . 4 . 1 . Macro / microperspective The measurements utilized in the empirical analyses re - viewed can be broken into two frameworks ; ( a ) a mac - rolevel where the concern is measuring how the character - istics of product innovation is new to the world , the market , or an industry [ 4 , 35 , 37 , 40 , 50 , 64 ] , and ( b ) a microlevel where product innovativeness is identiﬁed as new to the ﬁrm or the customer [ 41 ] . In the literature included in this comparison , researchers most frequently used both a macro and a microperspective in modeling the construct [ 2 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 31 , 20 , 21 , 45 ] . The distinction between macro and micro perspectives is important as it identiﬁes newness of an innovation to whom and from whose perspective . Compar - isons across research ﬁndings become more relevant with this delineated perspective . From a macro perspective , innovativeness is evaluated based on factors exogenous to the ﬁrm , such as familiarity of the innovation to the world and industry or creation of new competitors from the introduction of new innovations . Macro discontinuities are felt worldwide , industry - wide or market - wide . The discontinuities that result are not depen - dent upon a ﬁrm’s strategy or structure , its competencies , its knowledge base or its availability of resources . It must take a highly radically innovative product to cause discontinuity in the world . Few products have the inertial forces to accomplish this feat , although they do exist , for example , the Watt steam engine ( circa 1769 ) , the telegraph ( circa 1840 ) , and the World Wide Web ( circa 1980 ) . The steam engine drove the industrial revolution and the World Wide Web is a major driving force in the infor - mational revolution . Discontinuities to an industry are more easily identiﬁable . The Sony Walkman created a new mar - ket for mobile entertainment and a new industry for minia - turized electronics . The Apple computer instigated new uses , new customers and new distribution channels for home computers . Innovations causing discontinuities in the 118 R . Garcia , R . Calantone / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 19 ( 2002 ) 110—132 marketplace are ubiquitous ; examples include , the compact disc , antilock brakes , sport utility vehicles , polartec ﬂeece , homogenization procedures , nylon material , and the ATM . The microperspective views product innovativeness as new to the ﬁrm or new to the ﬁrm’s customer [ 11 , 12 , 31 , 41 ] . Discontinuities can occur in a ﬁrm’s marketing or R & D strategy , in a ﬁrm’s supplier or distribution chains , or in its sales approach . However , a product’s innovativeness is con - tingent upon the ﬁrm’s capabilities and competencies . For a electronics manufacturer such as IBM to begin to manufac - ture and market electric automobiles would be a disruptive and discontinuance endeavor . Yet , for General Motors to design and market the same electric vehicle would not be considered discontinuous . Similarly , the same product may be deﬁned with varying degrees of innovativeness by a ﬁrm’s customers . 4 . 2 . Marketing / technological discontinuities Technological innovations have two ‘forces’ from which discontinuities may originate – from a marketing direction or from a technological direction . Product innovation may require new marketplaces to evolve , and / or new marketing skills for the ﬁrm . Similarly , product innovations may re - quire a paradigm shift in the state of science or technology embedded in a product , new R & D resources , and / or new production processes for a ﬁrm . Some products , of course , may require discontinuities in both marketplace and tech - nological factors . Studies reviewed cover all three of these scenarios ; marketplace discontinuity [ 4 , 33 , 50 , 64 ] , techno - logical discontinuity [ 10 , 37 ] , and both types of discontinui - ties [ 2 , 11 , 12 , 21 , 31 , 35 , 40 , 41 , 45 ] . 4 . 3 . Single / multiple factors ‘Product innovativeness’ was most often modeled as a multidimensional reﬂective variable as opposed to a single dimensional variable . The single factor operationalization varied from measuring one item up to nine items . Even from a single dimension viewpoint there was no consistency in taking a macro or microperspective or both and in taking a marketing or technological perspective or both . All con - structs reported in the studies take these perceptions in different combinations , that is , a macroperspective of mar - keting forces , microperspective of technological forces , and so forth . The multifactorial operationalization of product innova - tiveness had greater consensus among the studies . The most commonly employed multidimensional construct used both macro and micromeasures to determine discontinuities in both market and technology issues . These multidimensional studies comprised on average three factors . The construct ‘newness to the ﬁrm’ was used in half of these studies . Of the 21 differently labeled factors identiﬁed by researchers through factor analysis ( see Table 3 ) , 12 unique factors were identiﬁed ( Table 4 ) . Of course , only a test of discriminant validity can verify their distinctiveness . 4 . 4 . Categorical / continuous measures The fourth level showing lack of consensus was in using categorical or continuous measures . Those researchers us - ing categorical measures most frequently summed the scales and split the sample into groupings of high / low / moderate innovativeness or some similar categorization [ 31 ] . Using this method does not allow for external validity as the split in the data is dependent upon the sample of an often - limited population . Nor does it allow the ﬁndings from one study on radical innovations to be compared to another study on radical innovations . For example , one ﬁrm may have a marketing strategy which focuses on incremental improve - ments on products . Any divergence from this strategy would result in a radical innovation to that ﬁrm ( recall our IBM / General Motors example ) . However , that product may not be a radical innovation to the next ﬁrm . Thus , ﬁndings for one study cannot be compared to another study as the degree of innovativeness is a factor of the newness of the innovation to a particular ﬁrm . ‘Continuous measures’ used a set of 1 – 5 or 1 – 7 Likert scale items ( ordinal measures ) and then often used the summated measures as an independent or dependent vari - able in the model being evaluated . Overall no consistency exists in the operationalization of innovativeness in terms of categorical or continuous measurement . Table 4 Factors used to model product innovation / innovativeness Construct Study * (cid:1) Product newness to the ﬁrm 1 , 2 , 3 , 5 , 8 (cid:1) Product uniqueness ( 1st to market ) 1 (cid:1) Product uniqueness / superiority 1 , 6 (cid:1) Change in behavioral patterns 2 , 7 (cid:1) Product newness to customers 3 (cid:1) Technical uncertainty 4 (cid:1) Technical inexperience ( newness ) 4 , 7 , 8 , 9 (cid:1) Technology cost 4 (cid:1) Business experience 4 (cid:1) Product innovativeness 6 (cid:1) Discontinuity of product beneﬁts 7 (cid:1) Newness to the market 8 (cid:1) Customer beneﬁts 9 * Some studies found more than one factor . 1 . Cooper ( 1979 ) 2 . Lawton & Parasuraman ( 1980 ) 3 . Atuahene - Gima ( 1995 ) 4 . Green , Gavin , & Aiman - Smith ( 1995 ) 5 . Olson , Walker & Ruekert ( 1995 ) 6 . Mishra , Kim , & Lee ( 1996 ) 7 . Veryzer ( 1998 ) 8 . Goldenberg , Lehman , & Mazursky ( 1999 ) 9 . Chandy & Tellis ( 2000 ) 119 R . Garcia , R . Calantone / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 19 ( 2002 ) 110—132 4 . 5 . Consensus on discontinuities Measuring product innovativeness based on marketing and / or technological discontinuities was the single level of consensus in the literature reviewed . Highly innovative products were seen to have shallow existing market or technical knowledge bases , whereas low - level innovative products did not require new product marketing or techno - logical knowledge . This review of the literature clearly demonstrates that there are few consistencies in the new product development literature for operationalizing ‘product innovativeness’ . As previously noted , this lack of consistency has resulted in little accumulated knowledge beyond an ad hoc level con - cerning the effects of innovativeness of a product on the NPD process . Many studies result in ‘new’ ﬁndings that are just another way of phrasing the same issue addressed in another study . In order to propose a method of operation - alizing product innovativeness , it is ﬁrst necessary to build a framework for identifying different product innovation types based on their discontinuities . In the next section , we will propose such a framework and then suggest a means of operationalizing ‘product innovativeness’ which will pro - vide consistency and convergence in modeling this con - struct . 5 . A typogoly for identifying technological innovations Recent new product development literature has eluci - dated the importance of categorizing innovations into radi - cal and incremental [ 7 , 38 , 54 , 61 ] . However , as previously demonstrated , ‘radical’ and ‘incremental’ can be deﬁned in numerous fashions and is dependent upon from whose per - spective innovativeness is being evaluated . “At present , the literature does not contain a measure of the radicalness of innovations , yet this is a critical variable in the ﬁeld of innovation and new products” [ 7 p . 1 ] . It is our goal in this section to provide a typology for classifying innovations based upon the extant literature . We will provide answers to our questions posed in the introduction ; ‘What is the dif - ference between a radical , really new and discontinuous innovation ? ’ and ‘What is the difference between an incre - mental and imitative innovation ? ’ It is important to empha - size that this typology is relative – relative to the ﬁrm . What one ﬁrm identiﬁes as a really new innovation , can be labeled as an incremental innovation by another ﬁrm . The important fact remains that the procedures for developing really new innovations are relevant to the one ﬁrm and incremental innovation development procedures are relevant to the other ﬁrm – even though they are both developing the same in - novation . The end results for the ﬁrms will be the same , the process of reaching this result will differ signiﬁcantly . In no way should this confuse the identiﬁcation process for de - termining the ‘innovativeness’ of a new product . The new product literature has mainly used a dichoto - mous classiﬁcation for identifying innovation type . We be - lieve that this dichotomy is too simplistic . Radical innova - tions are rare in occurrence . It has been suggested that only 10 % of all new innovations fall into the category of radical innovations [ 6 , 22 , 49 , 63 ] . Although Rothwell and Gardiner have suggested that incremental innovations cover the 90 % of the remaining cases , we do not agree with this conclu - sion . We maintain that a third category is necessary in classifying innovations . We will use ‘really new’ to identify this third categorization . Looking at the two levels previously discussed , macro versus micro and marketing versus technology perspectives , a means for identifying innovation types using Boolean logic can be devised ( see Appendix B ) . This logic provides unambiguous labels for ‘radical’ , ‘really new’ , and ‘incre - mental’ innovations . Radical innovations are innovations that cause marketing and technological discontinuities on both a macro and microlevel . Incremental innovations occur only at a microlevel and cause either a marketing or tech - nological discontinuity but not both . Really new innova - tions cover the combinations in between these two ex - tremes . Based on this classiﬁcation schema , there are eight com - binations of innovation types possible . It is impossible to have an innovation that is discontinuous on a macro level and not on a microlevel , thus , several combinations are eliminated . Radical innovations represent 1 / 8 of these pos - sibilities or 12 . 5 % ( Table 5 ) . Really new innovations rep - resent 4 of the 8 combinations or 50 % of all types of innovations , and incremental innovations represent 37 . 5 % of technological innovations . Our splits are in line with the Maidique and Zirger [ 37 ] breakdown which categorized 16 . 7 % of all innovations to be ‘radical breakthrough’ prod - ucts , 58 . 3 % as ‘signiﬁcant technical change’ products , and 25 % as ‘incremental change’ products . Kleinschmidt & Cooper [ 31 ] provided breakdowns of 30 % to ‘highly inno - vative’ products , 47 % to ‘moderately innovative’ products and 23 % to ‘low innovativeness’ . Additionally , Grifﬁn [ 22 ] found similar results in a more recent study ( breakdowns of 10 % , 42 % & 48 % ) . The important distinction is that in a random sample , radical innovations are rare and should be not account for more than 20 % of the sample , likewise , incremental innovations should account for no less than 20 % of the sample . In this section we describe the charac - teristics of each of these types of innovations . 5 . 1 . Radical innovations Radical innovations have been deﬁned as innovations that embody a new technology that results in a new market infrastructure [ 10 , 54 ] . We have also maintained that radical innovation introductions result in discontinuities on both a macro and micro level . An innovation that causes disconti - nuity on a world , industry or market level will automatically cause discontinuities on the ﬁrm and customer level . If a new industry results from a radical innovation ( i . e . , the 120 R . Garcia , R . Calantone / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 19 ( 2002 ) 110—132 World Wide Web ) , new ﬁrms and new customers also emerge for that innovation . Radical innovations often do not address a recognized demand but instead create a demand previously unrecog - nized by the consumer . This new demand cultivates new industries with new competitors , ﬁrms , distribution chan - nels , and new marketing activities . In the late 1970s most households could not imagine a reason why they would need a home computer . Today a multibillion dollar market targets these exact customers . Radical new technology acts as the catalyst for the emergence of new markets and / or new industries . A tool that can aid in the identiﬁcation of radical inno - vations is the technology S - curve introduced by Foster [ 17 ] . The S - curve has been used to describe the origin and evo - lution of technologically discontinuous / radical innovations [ 7 , 59 , 60 ] . This theory suggests that technological product performance moves along an S - curve until technical limi - Table 5 Typology for identifying innovations Innovation type Level Present Examples Radical innovation • Macro • Steam engine ▪ Marketing discontinuity X • Telegraph ▪ Technology discontinuity X • WWW • Micro ▪ Marketing discontinuity X ▪ Technology discontinuity X Really new • Macro • Canon laserjet ▪ Marketing discontinuity • Early fax machines ▪ Technology discontinuity X • Electron microscope • Micro ▪ Marketing discontinuity X ▪ Technology discontinuity X Really new • Macro • Sony walkman ▪ Marketing discontinuity X • Early telephone ▪ Technology discontinuity • Micro ▪ Marketing discontinuity X ▪ Technology discontinuity X Really new • Macro • Hummer ▪ Marketing discontinuity X • Early commercial jetliner ▪ Technology discontinuity • Micro ▪ Marketing discontinuity X ▪ Technology discontinuity Really new • Macro • Diesel locomotive ▪ Marketing discontinuity ▪ Technology discontinuity X • Micro ▪ Marketing discontinuity ▪ Technology discontinuity X Incremental • Macro • Super sonic transport ▪ Marketing discontinuity • BMW - M5 ▪ Technology discontinuity • Micro ▪ Marketing discontinuity X ▪ Technology discontinuity X Incremental • Macro • Digital automotive control systems ▪ Marketing discontinuity ▪ Technology discontinuity • Micro ▪ Marketing discontinuity ▪ Technology discontinuity X Incremental • Macro • “Health” foods ▪ Marketing discontinuity ▪ Technology discontinuity • Micro ▪ Marketing discontinuity X ▪ Technology discontinuity 121 R . Garcia , R . Calantone / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 19 ( 2002 ) 110—132 tations cause research effort , time , and / or resource inefﬁ - ciencies to result in diminishing returns . New innovations replace the old technology and a new S - curve is initiated ( see Fig . 1 ) . Foster characterized the technology evolution ; “early in an R & D program , knowledge bases need to be built , lines of inquiry must be drawn and tested and tech - nical problems surfaced . Researchers need to investigate and discard unworkable approaches . Thus , until this knowl - edge has been acquired , the pace of progress toward tech - nological limits is usually slow . But then it picks up , typi - cally reaching a maximum when something like half the technical potential has been realized . At this point , the technology begins to be constrained by its limits , and the rate of performance improvement begins to slow” [ 17 p . 217 ] . Similar analogies can be made for proposing a market S - curve . Early in market formation , knowledge bases need to be built , lines of inquiry must be drawn and tested , and market - related issues surface . Marketers need to investigate and discard unworkable approaches ( i . e . , the World Wide Web marketplace at this time ) . New markets evolve that support the new technological innovation , new competitors enter the market , and new partners and distribution channels emerge to exploit the new technology . Thus , until this market know - how has been acquired , the pace of progress toward market limits may be slow . Diminishing returns are experienced when the market place becomes saturated with competitors and me - too products . Thus , a radical innovation can be identiﬁed by the initi - ation of a new technology and new marketing S - curve . With this viewpoint it is easy to see that ‘planning’ for radical innovation requires understanding how to strategically plan for both the technological discontinuities and marketplace discontinuities for the global marketplace . Most ﬁrms are unable to alter the inertial forces driving the ﬁrm down a particular path , thus , to plan for major strategic changes based on macrolevel changes is unlikely . This is not to say that nimble innovative ﬁrms or even serendipity in more staid ﬁrms cannot drive radical innovations , but more to the point , because of their nature , radical innovations are rare . Another test for radical innovations is to determine if the ﬁrm’s internal marketing and technology S - curve has been impacted . Kusunoki [ Kusunoki , 1997 , 32 ] writes , “ . . . be - sides technological capabilities , introducing radical product change to a market often requires a new set of organiza - tional capabilities embedded in structures , communication channels , and information processing procedures of organi - zations , and it is usually quite difﬁcult for established ﬁrms to adjust their organizational capabilities for developing innovative products” [ p . 369 ] . A failure to ﬁnd discontinuity in technology and marketing strategies within a ﬁrm , should automatically exclude the product from being considered radical . Finding a microlevel shift in the S - curves , is nec - essary but not sufﬁcient criteria for radical innovativeness as it also is an indicator of really new innovations . 5 . 2 . Really new innovations Although they comprise the majority of innovations , it is surprising that the moderately innovative class of innova - tions that lie in between radical and incremental has had so little attention in the literature in the last twenty years . Kleinschmidt & Cooper deﬁne moderately innovative prod - ucts as “consisting of lines to the ﬁrm , but where the products were not as innovative ( that is not new to the market ) and new items in existing product lines for the ﬁrm” [ p . 243 ] . We will term the moderately innovative product a ‘really new’ innovation . On a macro level , a really new product will result in a market discontinuity or a technolog - ical discontinuity but will not incorporate both . ( If both do occur , it should be classiﬁed as a radical innovation , if no discontinuity occurs at the macro level , it should be classi - ﬁed as an incremental innovation . ) On a microlevel any combination of marketing and / or technological discontinu - ity can occur in the ﬁrm . Really new innovations are easily identiﬁable by the criteria that a discontinuity must occur on either a marketing or technological macro basis in combi - nation with a microlevel discontinuity . They can evolve into new product lines ( e . g . , Sony Walkman ) , product line ex - tensions with new technology ( e . g . , Canon Laserjet ) , or new markets with existing technology ( e . g . , early fax machines ) . Frequently ‘really new’ products are misclassiﬁed as ‘radical innovations’ and ‘radical innovations’ are misclas - siﬁed as ‘really new’ products . A case in point is the recent research by Kessler & Chakrabarti [ 30 ] . They empirically investigated the array of factors that affect speed of the innovation process . They sorted 75 projects into ‘degree of change undertaken’ identifying 33 incremental innovations and 42 radical innovations . Since less than 20 % of innova - tions develop into radically new products , it is unlikely that these 42 innovations were ‘radical’ . Evaluating the innova - tion’s technology and market S - curves is an easy test to determine the appropriate classiﬁcation . Fig . 1 . Technology / Marketing S - Curve Phenomena ( adapted from Foster 1986 ) . 122 R . Garcia , R . Calantone / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 19 ( 2002 ) 110—132 Likewise the research by Atuahene - Gima [ 4 ] on market orientation uses ‘degree of product newness’ to classify 103 incremental innovations and 119 radical innovations . The groups were split into product improvements and line ex - tensions ( incremental innovations ) and new product lines and new to the world products ( radical innovations ) . As radical innovations do not occur more frequently than in - cremental innovations , Atuahene - Gima’s ‘radical’ innova - tions may more likely have been really new products . New product lines rarely result in both new marketing and tech - nical infrastructures . With this reclassiﬁcation from radical innovation to really new product innovations , one must question whether the destructive radical innovation process is accelerated by concept clarity , champion presence , and colocations as reported in the Kessler & Chakrabarti ﬁnd - ings or is it the really new product innovation process that is sped to market by these factors ? Song & Montoya - Weiss [ 54 ] classify really new innova - tions as “as an entirely new product category and / or pro - duction and delivery system . A really new product is one that : ( 1 ) relies on technology never used in the industry before ; ( 2 ) has an impact on or causes signiﬁcant changes in the whole industry ; and ( 3 ) is the ﬁrst of its kind and totally new to the market” ( pg . 126 ) . By this deﬁnition , it is likely that a portion of Song & Montoya - Weiss’ 163 really new innovations may have been radical innovations . ( Their sam - ple split was 163 really new innovations and 169 incremen - tal innovations ) . This classiﬁcation for radical and really new innovation now allows us to differentiate these two types of innovations from discontinuous innovations . 5 . 3 . Discontinuous innovations A discontinuous innovation may be either a radical in - novation or really new innovation dependent upon at which level ( macro / micro ) and which S - curve ( s ) ( marketing / tech - nology / both ) is affected by the introduction of the invention to the marketplace . Frequently discontinuous innovations refer to technological discontinuities [ 10 , 58 , 61 ] . Rice et al . [ 46 ] deﬁne discontinuous innovations as “ ‘game changers’ which has potential ( 1 ) for a 5 – 10 times improvement in performance compared to existing products ; ( 2 ) to create the basis for a 30 – 50 % reduction in costs ; or ( 3 ) to have new - to - the world performance features” ( pg . 52 ) . Rice et al . provide examples such as GE’s digital X - ray , TI’s digital light projector , GM’s hybrid vehicle , IBM’s silicon germa - nium devices and the Otis bi - directional elevator . These examples demonstrate new technologies that did not lead to discontinuity in the existing market infrastructures . The digital X - ray and the digital light projector are product line extensions . The hybrid vehicle , the IBM semiconductor , and the bi - directional elevator are new product lines . Thus , we contend that most examples of discontinuous innova - tions are really new innovations since only one of the S - curves is affected . A discontinuous innovation may in - deed be a radical innovation if both S - curves are perturbed . 5 . 4 . Incremental innovations Incremental innovations can easily be deﬁned as prod - ucts that provide new features , beneﬁts , or improvements to the existing technology in the existing market . “An incre - mental new product involves the adaptation , reﬁnement , and enhancement of existing products and / or production and delivery systems” [ 54 ] , p . 126 ] . Incremental innovations will occur only on a microperspective affecting either the marketing and / or technology S - curve ( s ) . Incremental inno - vations will not result in macro discontinuities which are only seen in radical or really new innovations . “Incremental innovations are important on two main counts : ﬁrst as a competitive weapon in a technologically mature market ; and second , because streamlined procedures based on ex - isting technology can help alert a business in good times to threats and opportunities associated with the shift to a new technological plateau” [ 28 ] . For many ﬁrms , incremental innovations are the lifeblood of the organization . Incremental innovations evolve from the iterative nature of the process of innovation previously discussed . Rothwell and Gardiner [ 49 ] show that incremental innovations can occur at all stages of the new product development process . At the conceptualization stage , R & D may use existing tech - nology to improve an existing product design . At the mature stage of a product’s life , line extensions may result in incremental innovations . Rothwell and Gardiner point out that a ‘borrowed’ technology from a different industry may be new to a different market . If it does not alter on a macrolevel either the technology or marketing S - curves or on a microlevel both curves , this borrowed technology would be considered an incremental innovation . 5 . 5 . Imitative innovations As previously noted , the difference between incremental and imitative innovations should be clariﬁed . Grupp [ 24 ] provides a very succinct deﬁnition of imitative innovations . “Innovation occurs only in the ﬁrst company to complete industrial R & D which culminates in the launch of the ﬁrst product on the markets . Rival innovations are designated imitations even if , in intracorporate term , very similar R & D processes are only a short distance from one another chro - nologically . The imitator need not necessarily be aware of or be able to beneﬁt from the ﬁrst innovator . Imitations can thus be just as resource - intensive , especially R & D inten - sive , as the ﬁrst innovation” [ p . 20 ] . Because of their iter - ative nature , imitative products are frequently new to the ﬁrm , but not new to the market . Thus , imitative innovations usually have low technological innovativeness and low mar - ket innovativeness . Imitative innovations should not be underrated . Innova - tive imitators can signiﬁcantly alter the market direction . “If an innovator does not move quickly , and keep moving , the early imitators can play a major role in ”remaking“ or ”creatively destroying“ the market . . . Moreover , if they 123 R . Garcia , R . Calantone / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 19 ( 2002 ) 110—132 have more resources and already have a large market share , it is their imitative reactions that will have the most impact on changing the market and the rate of change and compet - itive dynamics in the market” [ 14 ] pg . 69 ] . Based on our typology , imitative innovations will most likely be incre - mental innovations , although on rare occasions they will be really new innovations . Using items that measure product innovativeness on a macro and microlevel and on marketing and technological discontinuity , it is easy to classify highly innovative prod - ucts as radical innovations , moderately innovative products as really new innovations and low innovativeness products as incremental innovations . As we have noted , other typolo - gies have been utilized but we recognize these as just alternative variations of these three product types . Thus , in consensus with many researchers , we suggest that the labels ‘radical’ , ‘really new’ , and ‘incremental’ are appropriate classiﬁcations for signifying diminishing degrees of product innovativeness . Now that we have proposed a classiﬁcation schema for product innovations , in the next section we will focus on providing a method of operationalizing product innovativeness in future empirical analyses . 6 . Operationalization of ‘product innovativeness’ We previously discussed how product innovativeness has been modeled in the extant literature ( Tables 1 and 4 ) . We also demonstrated how inconsistencies currently exist in these operationalizations . We , thus , propose an operation - alization that may provide congruence to this construct beyond that obtained to date . As emphasized , product in - novativeness must be evaluated upon two dimensions , a macro / micro and a marketing / technology discontinuity . This leads to modeling ‘product innovativeness’ as a sec - ond - order factor model . Fig . 2 provides a visual conceptu - alization for the following discussion . Second - order factors are easily modeled in structural equation models and are not so easily represented in other modeling methodologies . We use the second - order model to facilitate the discussion that the construct ‘innovativeness’ is comprised of two distinctly different components that must both be represented in the measures in order to provide content validity . Radical innovations were previously iden - tiﬁed as innovations that have discontinuities along both levels ( macro / micro ) and both sublevels ( marketing / tech - nology ) . Really new innovations are identiﬁed as having discontinuities along just a single level of the macro level ( macromarketing or macrotechnology ) but not both , and at the sublevel on any dimension - micromarketing and micro - technology . Incremental innovations have discontinuities just along the micro level . Failure to include measures that represent both levels of this construct will result in fatal content validity misrepresentation . Thus , regardless of the methodological techniques employed in an empirical study , the following discussion is valid for suggesting an opera - tionalization method for the construct ‘technological inno - vativeness’ for NPD studies . Below , we elaborate on this multilevel factor and develop propositions for operational - izing this construct . 6 . 1 . First order factor At the ﬁrst order level , the macro and micro perspectives are distinct from each other . The most important distinction to keep in mind is that on a macro level , discontinuities are exogenous to the ﬁrm . On either a macro or micro level , product innovativeness must embody a marketing or a tech - nology discontinuity . We maintain that the higher the inno - vativeness in both factors , the greater the impact on product innovativeness . If the market discontinuity is low or the technological discontinuity is low , this leads to low product innovativeness . On the contrary , high discontinuity in both factors leads to high product innovativeness . The ﬁrst factor level allows the split representation on the macro level – from an industry perspective , and on the micro level – from a ﬁrm perspective . It may have been noted that we did not model ‘newness to the world’ or ‘newness to the market’ . ‘Newness to the industry’ automatically implies ’newness to the market’ as the marketplace is a subset of the industry , thus , it does not need to be explicitly modeled . The distinction between the marketplace and an industry is that the industry is com - prised of several different markets . For example the com - puter industry is made up of the mainframe market , the laptop market , the home computer market , and so forth . If an innovation is new to the industry , it is new to the marketplace or marketspace . ‘New to the world’ has also not been modeled in our operationalization . By our deﬁnition only radical innova - tions are new to the world . However , all innovations can be evaluated based on their newness to the industry and new - ness to the ﬁrm using our conceptualization . New to the world implies new to the industry and new to the ﬁrm . For Fig . 2 . Operationalization of innovativeness . 124 R . Garcia , R . Calantone / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 19 ( 2002 ) 110—132 this reason it is not valid to include newness to the world in determining product innovativeness of different types of innovations . Newness to the world could be used as a measure when studying radical innovations alone , but is not necessary in order to describe really new or incremental innovations . Thus , at the ﬁrst - order on a macro level for product innovativeness of an innovation , P1a : The greater the discontinuity in the industry’s mar - keting S - curve , the higher the degree of newness of the innovation . P1b : The greater the discontinuity in the industry’s tech - nology S - curve ( dissemination curve ) , the higher the degree of newness of the innovation . Likewise at the ﬁrst - order on a micro level , P2a : The greater the discontinuity in the ﬁrm’s market - ing knowledge , the higher the degree of newness of the innovation to the ﬁrm . P2b : The greater the discontinuity in the ﬁrm’s technol - ogy knowledge , the higher the degree of newness of the innovation to the ﬁrm . 6 . 2 . Second - order factor The second - order factor shows the formative conceptu - alization of the macro and micro perspective of product innovativeness . The greater the newness of the product innovation to the industry , the higher the product innova - tiveness . The greater the newness of the product innovation to the ﬁrm , the higher the product innovativeness . Failure to evaluate both of these factors in the modeling of product innovativeness will result in fatal errors to content validity . An innovation should never be evaluated for its innovative - ness based on only a macro or micro level . Thus , P3a : A positive relationship exists between an innova - tion’s newness to the industry and its degree of product innovativeness . P3b : A positive relationship exists between an innova - tion’s newness to the ﬁrm and its degree of product innovativeness . 6 . 3 . Newness to the customer We have modeled newness to the customer as a reﬂective construct to product innovativeness . A product’s innova - tiveness classiﬁcation is never dependent upon the view - point of the customer . This is an error of reversal of causal inferences . The goal of identifying innovation typologies is to build an understanding of how the ﬁrm must approach the development process of new products . Thus , to use the customer’s perspective for identifying products would be liken as letting the customer drive the innovative process of the ﬁrm . This viewpoint is not to be confused with com - pletely ignoring the customer when identifying innovation types . The customer perspective is considered as the ﬁrm evaluates its market strategy of innovative products . Thus , P4 : A positive relationship exists between product inno - vativeness and newness to the customer . Our seven research propositions ﬁt the broad framework depicted in Fig . 2 . It facilitates parsimonious conceptualiza - tion and , more importantly , offers an operationalization that may be easily tested . This single construct ‘product inno - vativeness’ for technology - based projects can be utilized as a mediating or moderating variable or it can also be used to split innovations into product type categories . We also sug - gest measures for testing this model based on extant litera - ture ( Table 6 ) . 7 . Conclusions and future research Once the ‘name game’ is resolved by allowing studies on innovations to be evaluated along common dimensions , it is revealed that few empirical studies have identiﬁed the id - iosyncrasies of the development process for radical and really new innovations . We ﬁnd considerable anecdotal evidence that radical innovations require unique and sophis - ticated development strategies , but little empirical evidence to support these theories . It has been shown empirically that radical products entail greater risk [ 30 , 41 , 45 ] , product champions are more valuable in the radical development process [ 35 , 37 ] , and radical innovation are best identiﬁed using both a technological and business perspective [ 22 ] . It is just these few studies that have put the ‘radical innova - tion’ as the primary emphasis . Four additional studies [ 4 , 7 , 30 , 55 ] labeled innovations as ’radical’ , however , the deﬁ - nitions provided for ‘radical innovations’ and the projects sampled could be considered ‘really new innovations’ as they have been identiﬁed in this review . Thus , it is uncertain if the ﬁndings in these four studies are relevant only to radical innovation or to both radical and really new inno - vations . The Journal of Product Innovation Management’s May 1998 Special Issue has contributed to half of the existing empirically supported knowledge regarding really new in - novations . Song and Montoya - Weiss [ 54 ] conducted an extensive study on the key differences in determinants of new product success between really new and incremental products . Really new product successes are positively im - pacted by increasing the proﬁciency level of strategic plan - ning activities , whereas , working to improve proﬁciency in business and market opportunity analysis is counter produc - tive for really new products . Other researchers have found that customer research is critical in the early development stages in order to assess the types and degrees of disconti - nuities inherent in really new innovations [ 61 ] . Addition - ally , managers are more likely to carry a risky NPD project through commercialization when the product is really new than when it is less innovative [ 50 ] . Although Colarelli 125 R . Garcia , R . Calantone / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 19 ( 2002 ) 110—132 O’Connor [ 10 ] used the label ‘discontinuous’ , it can be concluded that market learning for really new innovations differ drastically from those associated with conventional new product development processes . Four additional studies explored the differences between really new innovations and incremental innovations . Al - though the innovations were labeled ‘original new products’ [ 64 ] , ‘signiﬁcant innovations’ [ 37 ] , ‘moderately innovative’ [ 31 ] , and ‘medium newness to the ﬁrm’ [ 20 ] , all these can be considered really new innovations . These studies reveal that really new products are more diversiﬁcation oriented [ 64 ] , that success can be increased by delaying launch [ 64 ] , and that managerial sponsorship is important for really new innovations [ 37 ] . Kleinschmidt and Cooper [ 31 ] and Gold - enberg , et al [ 20 ] found contradictory results . By the Klein - schmidt and Cooper deﬁnition , moderately innovative prod - ucts are not as successful as highly innovative or low innovative products , ( a U - shaped relationship exists be - tween innovativeness and success ) . Goldenberg , et al report that successful products tend to be moderately new to the market , but not new to the ﬁrm . These varying results appear to be symptomatic of the different deﬁnitions used for moderately innovative products . We believe that the inconsistencies in labeling and op - erationalizing innovations in the new product literature may have contributed to the slow progression of knowledge in these areas . Using a critical review of the new product development literature in the marketing , management and engineering disciplines , we have suggested a typology for labeling innovation types and a method of operationalizing product innovativeness . Our propositional inventory and integrative framework represent efforts to build a founda - tion for the systematic development of a theory - based def - inition of product innovativeness . Additional research is needed to empirically test this proposed operationalization . However , we believe a framework is now in place for researchers to provide continuity to their deﬁnition of prod - uct innovativeness . ‘Incremental innovations’ incorporate product improve - ments ( features , beneﬁts , price , manufacturing , process ) Table 6 Possible measures to use in empirical analysis Micro - level / marketing measures Source 1 . Customers / clients totally new to the ﬁrm • Cooper ( 1979 ) 2 . New market approach ( customer contact , advertising promotion etc . ) • Cooper ( 1979 ) 3 . New competitors for the ﬁrm • Cooper ( 1979 ) 4 . Product use ( needs served ) new to the ﬁrm • Cooper ( 1979 ) 5 . Class of service / product totally new to the ﬁrm • Cooper & de Brentani ( 1991 ) 6 . Improvements / revisions to existing company products • Cooper & de Brentani ( 1991 ) 7 . Satisﬁes clearly identiﬁed customer / client need • Cooper & de Brentani ( 1991 ) 8 . Fit with managerial skills and preferences / expertise / resource capabilities • Cooper & de Brentani ( 1991 ) 9 . Firm’s prior experience for selling product in this line of business • Green , Gavin , & Aiman - Smith ( 1995 ) 10 . Product / service was more complex than we have introduced into the same market • Atuahene - Gima ( 1995 ) 11 . Responds to important changes in customer needs / wants • Cooper & de Brentani ( 1991 ) 12 . The product technology is new to the customer • Ali , Krapfel , & LaBahn ( 1995 ) Micro - level / technology measures Source 13 . Newness of the technology : how large is required technology change in order to develop the product • Goldenberg , Lehman , & Mazursky ( 1999 ) 14 . Science and technology knowledge base newness to ﬁrm’s R & D • Green , Gavin , & Aiman - Smith ( 1995 ) 15 . Production process new to the ﬁrm • Cooper ( 1979 ) 16 . Product technological newness to the ﬁrm • Green , Gavin , & Aiman - Smith ( 1995 ) 17 . Modiﬁcation of technology currently in use at the ﬁrm • Colarelli O’Connor ( 1998 ) 18 . Degree of difference for other products in technical characteristics or speciﬁcations • Lee & Na ( 1994 ) 19 . Complexity of manufacturing technology • More ( 1982 ) Macro - level / marketing measures Source 20 . New to the world • Atuahene - Gima ( 1995 ) 21 . Totally new competitive environment • Cooper & de Brentani ( 1991 ) 22 . Consistent with existing customer values / operating systems • Souder & Song ( 1997 ) 23 . Existence of potential demand only ( no actual demand ) • Cooper ( 1979 ) 24 . Newness to the market • Cooper ( 1979 ) Macro - level / technological measures Source 25 . Science & technology ( S & T ) state of art within general scientiﬁc community • Green , Gavin , & Aiman - Smith ( 1995 ) 26 . Level of S & T knowledge base within the general scientiﬁc community • Green , Gavin , & Aiman - Smith ( 1995 ) 27 . Predictability of progress in S & T knowledge area within general scientiﬁc community • Green , Gavin , & Aiman - Smith ( 1995 ) 28 . Modiﬁcation of technology used in other industries • Colarelli O’Connor ( 1998 ) 29 . Improvement / modiﬁcation of technology in use elsewhere in the industry • Colarelli O’Connor ( 1998 ) 30 . Innovation incorporates a substantially different core technology relative to the previous product generation • Chandy & Tellis ( 2000 ) 126 R . Garcia , R . Calantone / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 19 ( 2002 ) 110—132 into innovations using existing technologies targeted to - wards existing markets . On a macrolevel , ‘really new’ prod - uct innovations result in either market discontinuities or technology discontinuities but not both , and result in both types of discontinuities on a microlevel . Really new prod - ucts include new technologies to existing markets ( product line extensions or new product lines ) or existing technolo - gies to new markets ( also new product lines ) . Most new product innovations will fall into one of these two catego - ries . On a rare occasion , a radical innovation will emerge . It will result in discontinuities in both the existing market structure and the existing technology structure . Radical in - novations result in the creative destruction or envelopment and suppression of the existing infrastructure . Examples include the steam engine , the World Wide Web and the Bessemer steel manufacturing process . How innovations are labeled is important if researchers want to increase their understanding of the development process of different types of innovations . Future research is needed to determine how really new product innovations differ from radical innovations in altering the new product development process . Because of the rarity of radical inno - vations , this may be difﬁcult to accomplishment without reaching back into history . The goal for future researchers should be to help practitioners identify how the character - istics of radical new products , compared to really new products , will alter the new product development process . Radical innovations can rarely be planned ; it is through the creativity and genius of innovators and marketers that they evolve into commercialized products . Researchers can help this process by identifying how to take that rare rose and give it a distinct place in the litany of innovations . Another area for future research concerns the term ‘tech - nology’ . Research is needed to determine how ‘technolog - ical’ innovations are identiﬁed in the new product develop - ment literature . Again , many researchers have varying def - initions of what is considered a technological innovation . Congruence in understanding what realm of new products should be considered ‘technological’ will also greatly in - crease our knowledge of the innovation process . Notes 1 . Rosanna Garcia is a doctoral candidate in Marketing & Supply Chain at Michigan State University . Her research interests are in new product development and complex systems . Prior to joining academia , she worked as a new product manager in the telecommu - nications industry for several years . 2 . Roger Calantone is the Eli Broad Professor of Mar - keting and Product Innovation at Michigan State Uni - versity . His research interests include the study of the new product development processes , the management of technology and the manufacturing and engineering interface . He has published in several journals includ - ing the Journal of Marketing , the Journal of Marketing Research , the Journal of Product Innovation Manage - ment , Management Science and Marketing Science . Acknowledgments The authors would like to acknowledge participants at the 1999 PDMA International Conference for comments on an earlier version of this manuscript . We would also like to thank two reviewers , as well as the editor of JPIM , for their helpful comments . Special thanks goes to Paul Rummel for his assistance with modeling Boolean logic . 127 R . Garcia , R . Calantone / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 19 ( 2002 ) 110—132 128 R . Garcia , R . Calantone / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 19 ( 2002 ) 110—132 129 R . Garcia , R . Calantone / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 19 ( 2002 ) 110—132 References [ 1 ] Abernathy WJ , Clark KB . Innovation . mapping the winds of creative destruction . Research Policy 1985 ; 14 ( 1 ) : 3 – 22 . [ 2 ] Ali A , Krapfel R , LaBahn D . Product innovativeness and entry strategy : impact on cycle time and break - even time . Journal of Prod - uct Innovation Management 1995 ; 12 : 54 – 69 . [ 3 ] Anderson P , Tushman ML . Technological discontinuities and domi - nant designs : a cyclical model of technological change . Administra - tive Science Quarterly 1990 ; 35 : 604 – 33 . [ 4 ] Atuahene - Gima K . An exploratory analysis of the impact of mar - ket orientation on new product performance : a contingency ap - proach . Journal of Product Innovation Management 1995 ; 12 : 275 – 93 . [ 5 ] Balachandra R , Friar JH . Factors in success in r & d projects and new product innovation : a contextual framework . IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 1997 ; 44 ( 3 ) : 276 – 87 . [ 6 ] Booz - Allen Hamilton . New products management for the 1980s . New York : Booz - Allen Hamilton Inc . 1982 . 130 R . Garcia , R . Calantone / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 19 ( 2002 ) 110—132 [ 7 ] Chandy RK , Tellis GJ . The incumbents curse : incumbency , size , and radical product innovation . Journal of Marketing 2000 ; 64 : 1 – 17 . [ 8 ] Cheng CH , Kumar A , Motwani JG , Reisman A , Madan MS . A citation analysis of the technology innovation management journals . IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 1999 ; 46 ( 1 ) : 4 – 13 . [ 9 ] Christensen CM . The innovator’s dilemma : when new technologies cause great ﬁrms to fail . Boston , MA : Harvard Business School Press . 1997 . p . 1 – 225 . [ 10 ] Colarelli O’Connor G . Market learning and radical innovation : a cross case comparison of eight radical innovation projects . Journal of Product Innovation Management 1998 ; 15 ( 2 ) : 151 – 66 . [ 11 ] Cooper RG . The dimensions of industrial new product success and failure . Journal of Marketing 1979 ; 43 : 93 – 103 . [ 12 ] Cooper RG , de Brentani U . New industrial ﬁnancial services : what distinguishes the winners . Journal of Product Innovation Manage - ment 1991 ; 8 : 75 – 90 . [ 13 ] Damanpour F . Organizational innovation : a meta - analysis of effects of determinants , and moderators . Academy of Management Journal 1991 ; 34 ( 3 ) : 555 – 90 . [ 14 ] Dickson PR . Toward a general theory of competitive rationality . Journal of Marketing 1992 ; 56 ( 1 ) : 69 – 82 . [ 15 ] Ettlie JE , Rubenstein AH . Firm size and product innovation . Journal of Product Innovation Management 1987 ; 4 : 89 – 108 . [ 16 ] Ettlie JE , BridgesWP , O’Keefe RD . Organization strategy and struc - tural differences for radical versus incremental innovation . Manage - ment Science 1984 ; 30 : 682 – 95 . [ 17 ] Foster RN . Innovation , the attacker’s advantage . New York : Summit , 1986 . [ 18 ] Freeman C . Critical survey : the economics of technical change . Cam - bridge Journal of Economics 1994 ; 18 ( 5 ) : 463 – 514 . [ 19 ] Freeman C . The nature of innovation and the evolution of the pro - ductive system . In : OECD , editors . Technology and productivity - the challenge for economic policy . Paris : OECD , 1991 . p . 303 – 14 . [ 20 ] Goldenberg J , Lehmann DR , Mazursky D . The primacy of the idea itself as a predictor of new product success . Marketing Science Institute Working Paper , 1999 . [ 21 ] Green SG , Gavin MB , Aiman - Smith L . Assessing a multidimensional measure of radical technological innovation . IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 1995 ; 42 ( 3 ) : 203 – 14 . [ 22 ] Grifﬁn A . PDMA research on new product development practices : updating trends , and benchmarking best practices . Journal of Product Innovation Management 1997 ; 14 : 429 – 58 . [ 23 ] Grossman JB . The supreme court and social change : a preliminary inquiry . American Behavioral Scientist 1970 ; 13 : 535 – 51 . [ 24 ] Grupp H . Foundations of economics of innovation : theory , measure - ment , and practice . Northampton , MA : Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd . , 1998 . [ 25 ] Henard D , Szymanski DM . Why are some new products more suc - cessful than others ? A meta - analysis of the empirical evidence” : Texas A & M University , forthcoming . [ 26 ] Heany DF . The degrees of product innovation . The Journal of Busi - ness Strategy 1983 ; 3 ( 4 ) : 3 – 14 . [ 27 ] Henderson RM , Clark KB . Architectural innovation : the reconﬁgu - ration of existing product technologies , and the failure of established ﬁrms . Administrative Science Quarterly 1990 ; 35 : 9 – 30 . [ 28 ] Johne FA , Snelson PA . Success factors in product innovation : a selective review of the literature . Journal of Product Innovation Man - agement 1988 ; 5 : 114 – 28 . [ 29 ] Johnson SC , Jones C . How to organize for new products . Harvard Business Review 1957 ; 5 – 6 : 49 – 62 . [ 30 ] Kessler EH , Chakrabarti AK . Speeding up the pace new product development . Journal of Product Innovation Management 1999 ; 16 : 231 – 47 . [ 31 ] Kleinschmidt EJ , Cooper RG . The impact of product innovativeness on performance . Journal of Product Innovation Management 1991 ; 8 : 240 – 51 . [ 32 ] Kusunoki K . Incapability of technological capability : a case study on product innovation in the japanese facsimile machine industry . Jour - nal of Product Innovation Management 1997 ; 4 : 368 – 82 . [ 33 ] Lawton L , Parasuraman A . The impact of the marketing concept on new product planning . Journal of Marketing 1980 ; 44 : 19 – 25 . [ 34 ] Layton E . Conditions of technological development . In : de Solla Price D , Spiegel - Rosing ID . Science , technology , and society , Bev - erly Hills , CA : Sage Publications , 1977 . [ 35 ] Lee M , Na D . Determinants of technical success in product develop - ment when innovative radicalness is considered . Journal of Product Innovation Management 1994 ; 11 : 62 – 8 . [ 36 ] Leonard - Barton D , Wilson E . Commercializing technology : imagi - native understanding of user needs . Case study N9 – 694 - 102 . Cam - bridge , MA : Harvard Business School , 1994 . [ 37 ] Maidique MA , Zirger BJ . A study of success , and failure in product innovation : the case of the US electronics industry . IEEE Transac - tions on Engineering Management . 1984 ; EM - 31 ( 4 ) : 192 – 203 . [ 38 ] Meyers PW , Tucker FG . deﬁning roles for logistics during routine and radical technological innovation . Journal of Academy of Market - ing Science 1989 ; 17 ( 1 ) : 73 – 82 . [ 39 ] Miles RE , Snow CC . Organizational strategy , structure , process . New York : McGraw - Hill Publishing Company , 1978 . [ 40 ] Mishra S , Kim D , Lee DH . Factors affecting new product success : cross country comparisons . Journal of Product Innovation Manage - ment 1996 ; 13 : 530 – 50 . [ 41 ] More RA . Risk factors in accepted and rejected new industrial prod - ucts . Industrial Marketing Management 1982 ; 11 : 9 – 15 . [ 42 ] Moriarty RT , Kosnik TJ . High - tech concept , continuity , and change . IEEE Engineering Management Review 1990 ; 3 : 25 – 35 . [ 43 ] Normann R . Organizational innovativeness : product variation , and reorientation . Administrative Science Quarterly 1971 ; 16 : 203 – 15 . [ 44 ] OECD . The nature of innovation and the evolution of the productive system . technology and productivity - the challenge for economic pol - icy . Paris : OECD , 1991 . p . 303 – 14 . [ 45 ] Olson EM , Walker OC , Ruekert RW . Organizing for effective new product development : the moderating role of product innovativeness . Journal of Marketing 1995 ; 59 : 48 – 62 . [ 46 ] Rice MP , Colarelli O’Connor G , Peters LS , Morone JG . Managing discontinuous innovation . Research Technology Management 1998 ; 41 ( 3 ) : 52 – 8 . [ 47 ] Robertson TS . The process of innovation and the diffusion of inno - vation . Journal of Marketing 1967 ; 31 : 14 – 9 . [ 48 ] Rogers EM . Diffusion of innovations . New York : The Free Press , 1995 . [ 49 ] Rothwell R , Gardiner P . Reinnovation and robust designs : producer and user beneﬁts . Journal of Marketing Management 1988 ; 3 ( 3 ) : 372 – 87 . [ 50 ] Schmidt JB , Calantone RJ . Are really new product development projects harder to shut down ? Journal of Product Innovation Man - agement 1998 ; 15 ( 2 ) : 111 – 23 . [ 51 ] Schumpeter JA . Business cycles : a theoretical , historical , and statis - tical analysis of the capitalist process . Vol . 2 . New York : McGraw Hill , 1939 . [ 52 ] Schumpeter JA . The theory of economic development . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press , 1934 . [ English translation from Ger - man edition , Leipzig 1912 ] . [ 53 ] Smith BLR , Barﬁeld CE . Technology , R & D , and the economy . Washington , DC : The Brookings Institution , 1996 . [ 54 ] Song MX , Montoya - Weiss MM . Critical development activities for really new versus incremental products . Journal of Product Innova - tion Management 1998 ; 15 ( 2 ) : 124 – 35 . [ 55 ] Souder WE , Song MX . Contingent product design , and marketing strategies inﬂuencing new product success , and failure in US , and Japanese electronic ﬁrms . Journal of Product Innovation Management 1997 ; 14 : 21 – 34 . 131 R . Garcia , R . Calantone / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 19 ( 2002 ) 110—132 [ 56 ] Stobaugh R . Innovation , and competition : the global management of petrochemical products . Boston , MA : Harvard Business School Press , 1988 . [ 57 ] Tidd J . Development of novel products through intraorganizational , and interorganizational networks : the case of home automation . Jour - nal of Product Innovation Management 1995 ; 12 : 307 – 22 . [ 58 ] Tushman ML , Anderson P . Technological discontinuities and orga - nizational environments . Administrative Science Quarterly 1986 ; 31 : 439 – 65 . [ 59 ] Utterback JM . Mastering the dynamics of innovation . Boston , MA : Harvard Business School Press , 1996 . [ 60 ] Utterback JM , Abernathy WJ . A dynamic model of process , and product innovation . Omega 1975 ; 33 : 639 – 56 . [ 61 ] Veryzer RW . Key factors affecting customer evaluation of discontin - uous new products . Journal of Product Innovation Management 1998 ; 15 ( 2 ) : 136 – 50 . [ 62 ] Wheelwright SC , Clark KB . Revolutionizing product development . New York : Free Press , 1992 . [ 63 ] Wind Y , Mahajan V . New product development process : a perspec - tive for reexamination . Journal of Product Innovation Management 1988 ; 15 ( 2 ) : 34 – 310 . [ 64 ] Yoon E , Lilien GL . New industrial product performance : the effect of market characteristics and strategy . Journal of Product Innovation Management 1985 ; 3 : 134 – 44 . 132 R . Garcia , R . Calantone / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 19 ( 2002 ) 110—132