Perspectives on the Social Psychology of Creativity The Harvard community has made this article openly available . Please share how this access benefits you . Your story matters Citation Amabile , Teresa M . , and Julianna Pillemer . " Perspectives on the Social Psychology of Creativity . " Journal of Creative Behavior 46 , no . 1 ( 2012 ) : 3 – 15 . Published Version doi : 10 . 1002 / jocb . 001 Citable link http : / / nrs . harvard . edu / urn - 3 : HUL . InstRepos : 9349326 Terms of Use This article was downloaded from Harvard University’s DASH repository , and is made available under the terms and conditions applicable to Open Access Policy Articles , as set forth at http : / / nrs . harvard . edu / urn - 3 : HUL . InstRepos : dash . current . terms - of - use # OAP 1 Title : Perspectives on the Social Psychology of Creativity Authors : Teresa M . Amabile , tamabile @ hbs . edu Julianna Pillemer , jpillemer @ hbs . edu Harvard Business School Soldiers Field Road Boston , MA 01778 Submitted to Journal of Creative Behavior , December 2011 . 2 Abstract Scholars began serious study into the social psychology of creativity about 25 years after the field of creativity research had taken root . Over the past 35 years , examination of social and environment influences on creativity has become increasingly vigorous , with broad implications for the psychology of human performance , and with applications to education , business , and beyond . In this article , we revisit the origins of the social psychology of creativity , trace its arc , and suggest directions for its future . 3 Many laypersons still view creativity as purely a product of individual talents and traits . For a long while , most creativity researchers seemed to hold the same view . Even though J . P . Guilford’s landmark address to the American Psychological Association in 1950 ( Guilford , 1950 ) exhorted researchers to seriously dig into creativity as a cognitive and social process as well as a personality trait , the field stayed rather narrow for many years . In the 1950s , 1960s , and early 1970s , the predominant impression that a reader of the literature would glean was something like this : creativity is a quality of the person ; most people lack that quality ; people who possess the quality – geniuses – are different from everyone else , in talent and personality ; we must identify , nurture , appreciate , and protect the creatives among us – but , aside from that , there isn’t much we can do . That , at least , is the impression that the first author of this paper , Teresa Amabile , formed when , in her Stanford psychology graduate program in the mid - 1970s , she explored the literature out of a long - standing curiosity about creativity . The most prominent creativity research of the time involved deep psychological study of widely - recognized creators in fields such as architecture , mathematics , and creative writing , comparing them to less - accomplished peers . These landmark studies by Donald MacKinnon , Frank Barron , and their colleagues at the Institute for Personality Assessment and Research at Berkeley were fascinating ( e . g . , Barron , 1961 ; MacKinnon , 1965 ) . They identified some clear differences in backgrounds , abilities , and – especially – personalities between the more - and the less - creative groups . Another giant in the field , E . Paul Torrance , had been busy putting these insights to practical use . By the early 1960s , the field seemed to converge around a definition of creativity as the production of novel , appropriate ideas or works . Leveraging this solid 4 conceptualization , and the growing body of work on the psychological assessment of human potential and performance , Torrance created the Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking ( TTCT ) ( Torrance 1966 ) . With that work , he unleashed a torrent of instruments devised by other researchers to detect various aspects of creative ability , creative personality , or both . Although many of these , along with Guilford’s own tests of creative ability ( Guilford , 1963 ) , gained considerable currency among researchers ( e . g . , Speller & Schumacher , 1975 , Manske & Davis , 1968 ) ) , the TTCT remained ( and , for many , remains ) the standard - bearer for researchers and educators . This work , in total , served to reinforce the impression – and , indeed , the belief among laypersons and scholars – that creativity depends on special qualities of unusual persons . But couldn’t there be more to the story than this ? Five hints whispered that there was . First , a broader reading of the creativity literature , to include not only scholarly writing but also the autobiographies and journals of well - known creative professionals in a number of fields , suggested that even ―geniuses‖ had good days and bad days . That is , their production of novel , appropriate work ebbed and flowed – often as a function , it seemed , of pressures , constraints , and other events impinging on them from their social environment . Albert Einstein , for example , felt so overwhelmed by the strict examination period at his militaristic boarding school that he almost lost interest in science altogether . It wasn’t until he fortuitously failed an exam and subsequently enrolled in an academy emphasizing individual thought that his creativity truly began to flourish . Others , such as the writers Sylvia Plath and Thomas Wolfe , were plagued by the desire for public esteem ; 5 despite early successes , they were never truly able to free themselves from the fear of not living up to these external expectations . Second , the motivation to do creative work , which can surely shift from day to day and even moment to moment , appeared to be a factor in the fluctuating performance of even widely - recognized creative individuals . Poet Anne Sexton demonstrated a generally consistent drive to write simply because she loved doing so . However , there were times in her life when the promise of fame or money , urging from mentors to create good work , or family obligations , threatened to hamper her ability to perform at her best . Third , there were other currents in the early creativity literature suggesting that creativity was not a fixed , trait - like quality of individuals but , rather , a skill that might be taught , learned , practiced , and improved . In fact , several training programs emerged in the 1950s and 1960s , claiming to enhance the creativity of enrolled teams and individuals . The concept of brainstorming , a method for improving group problem solving , was first introduced in an advertising firm by Alex Osborn . Osborn asserted that the generation of creative ideas by groups could be enhanced by following his four basic brainstorming rules - - the most important of which is deferring judgment ( Osborn , 1963 ) . Working with Osborn , researcher Sidney Parnes used the rules of brainstorming , as well as other techniques , to develop the Creative Problem Solving ( CPS ) training program ; initial tests of the program were promising ( Parnes , 1967 ) . Fourth , the psychologist Richard Crutchfield , who had studied conformity , began writing some provocative and compelling papers on situational forces that might influence both conformity and its near opposite , creativity ( Crutchfield , 1955 , 1962 ) . 6 Fifth , an intriguing paper by social psychologist Arie Kruglanski and his colleagues had appeared in 1971 ( Kruglanski , Friedman , & Zeevi , 1971 ) . Although , ironically , this paper was published in the Journal of Personality , it reported a randomized - control experiment showing that a manipulated social - environmental factor could cause differences in creative behavior . The specific factor manipulated in this study was a desirable external reward for participation , offered to participants in the experimental condition . The contracted - for reward lowered both creative output and participants’ enjoyment of the task itself . This experiment dovetailed with – and expanded beyond – research that Amabile’s graduate advisor , Mark Lepper , had been doing on the undermining of children’s intrinsic interest by extrinsic reward ( Lepper , Greene , & Nisbett , 1973 ) . Intrigued by the confluence of these five information streams , Amabile announced to her advisors that she planned to create a social psychology of creativity . ( They responded somewhat warily , but agreed to indulge the impulse – at least for the dissertation . ) Unbeknownst to Amabile and her advisors , Dean Keith Simonton , another social - psychologist - in - training many miles away ( Harvard , that east - coast Stanford ) , had the same idea . For the next several years , with each other’s encouragement ( after having discovered each other’s first published papers on creativity ) , Amabile and Simonton used very different methods and very different levels of analysis to build the foundation for what has become a cottage industry . Simonton used archival data on great creators in history and sophisticated statistical methods ( historiometry ) to determine how various social , cultural , and political factors affect creative success ( fame , eminence , originality , and productivity ) . 7 Simonton’s subjects ranged from classical composers to scientific giants in history , as well as creative products like musical themes ( e . g . , Simonton , 1975 ; 1980 ) . Some of his work investigated trends over multiple generations . In essence , Simonton developed a macro - level social psychology of creativity by examining broad social influences on well - known creative individuals in history . This work culminated in a ―Darwinian‖ theory of creativity ( Simonton , 1999 ) . By contrast , Amabile focused on the immediate , micro - level : How differences in the social environment surrounding task engagement might alter the creative behavior of ordinary people . The remainder of this paper traces the trajectory of scholars’ work on the micro - level social psychology of creativity , and plants some signposts to its possible future . Enablers of Social - Psychological Research in Creativity : Experiments and Consensual Assessment Before advances in the field by Simonton and Amabile , existing approaches to measurement fell short of an acceptable assessment for social psychological research . Most creativity assessment was done through pencil and paper tests . Personality tests , biographical inventories , and even the more widely - used behavioral measures such as the TTCT , were useful in assessing individual differences on very specific items . But , for precisely this reason , they were problematic for use in experiments which sought to minimize within - group variability to uncover socio - environmental influences on creativity . Some early studies obtained expert ratings of products or people on creativity . Although marking an important movement away from pencil and paper tests , this method 8 typically lacked a clear operational definition of creativity and a rigorous set of procedures to avoid rater biases . Simonton addressed the measurement problem by constructing variables from existing records , such as word - counts of biographical dictionary entries for individuals in various fields , to estimate expert subjective assessments of the work of various creators , both living and ( mostly ) dead . Drawing from the strengths and attempting to address the shortcomings of existing methods , Amabile ( 1982 ) developed the Consensual Assessment Technique ( CAT ) for use in experiments examining social and environmental effects on creativity . The CAT is rooted in a consensual operational definition of creativity : a product is creative to the extent that expert raters independently agree upon this judgment . An appropriate task for the use of the CAT must be sufficiently open - ended to allow for novel creations , must not depend to a great degree on special skills for which there is wide variation in the target population , and must result in a readily judged product or response . Judges should be external observers with experience in the target domain , and should use their own subjective judgments of creativity to independently rate the products relative to one another . Acceptable inter - judge reliability is considered to be . 70 or higher . Because it relies on subjective assessment ( as does real - world creativity ) , the CAT overcomes the difficulty of defining ultimate ―objective‖ criteria for creativity . The technique has been used reliably in a variety of between - subjects experimental designs across multiple ages and skill levels , with a variety of tasks from domains that include art , writing , musical composition , and various forms of problem - solving . Over the past 30 9 years , the CAT has been employed in hundreds of laboratory and field experiments that , cumulatively , have advanced the social psychology of creativity to a considerable extent . In the past 15 years , the scope of the CAT has broadened . Baer , Kaufman and Gentile ( 2004 ) found an extremely high level of interrater agreement on the creativity of a wide range of writing products ( teenagers’ essays , poems , and stories ) completed outside of a formal experimental setting , thus suggesting possible use in an educational setting . Hennessey & Kim ( 2008 ) found high reliability among raters of children’s art and stories in the U . S . , South Korea , Saudi Arabia , and China , suggesting that the CAT is an applicable and valuable tool for multi - cultural studies of creativity . In another non - experimental application , Amabile and colleagues ( 1996 ) used expert within - company raters to assess the creativity of the work done by a large number of project teams in a high - tech firm . Thus , the CAT has emerged as a widely applicable method for assessing creativity in research carried out by social , educational , and organizational psychologists . The Intrinsic Motivation Principle of Creativity The cornerstone for the micro - level social psychology of creativity was the Intrinsic Motivation Hypothesis of Creativity . Articulated by Amabile in 1983 ( Amabile 1983a ) , the Intrinsic Motivation Hypothesis of Creativity proposed that ―The intrinsically motivated state is conducive to creativity , whereas the extrinsically motivated state is detrimental . ‖ Intrinsic motivation arises from the individual’s perceived value of engaging in the task itself ( e . g . , finding it interesting , enjoyable , satisfying , or positively challenging ) , while extrinsic motivation comes from outside sources ( e . g . , the promise of rewards or praise , or the threat of failing to meet a deadline or receiving a negative evaluation ) . In short , extrinsic motivators and extrinsic constraints in the social 10 environment could alter motivational state from intrinsic to extrinsic and , thus , undermine creative behavior . In the first experiment to establish the negative effect of expected evaluation on creativity , Amabile ( 1979 ) had university students create a paper collage under one of several different expected - evaluation conditions ; comparison groups did not expect evaluation . In general , compared to collages created by participants not expecting expert evaluation , judge - rated creativity was lower for those collages created by participants who expected evaluation by art experts – evaluations that would purportedly be shown to the participants . The only exception to this pattern was the group of participants who expected evaluation on creativity and were given specific hints on how to make a creative collage . Moreover , intrinsic interest in the collage activity was lowered by expected evaluation – even for participants in the specific - creativity - hints condition . Further research replicated and expanded these findings . For example , two studies by Amabile , Goldfarb and Brackfield ( 1990 ) again showed negative effects of expected evaluation on adults’ artistic creativity , and revealed a marginally significant effect of surveillance ( participants believing they were being watched while working ) . In addition , post - task self - report measures indicated that surveillance had a negative effect on creativity to the extent that participants felt evaluated by those watching . Shalley and Perry - Smith ( 2002 ) added considerable nuance to our understanding of the link between intrinsic motivation and creativity , in their own study of expected evaluation . In a laboratory experiment , they drew on Cognitive Evaluation Theory ( Deci & Ryan , 1985 ) to examine differences between informational evaluation ( evaluation that participants expect will give them useful performance information ) and controlling 11 evaluation ( evaluation that participants see as solely intended to monitor their behavior ) . Both intrinsic motivation and creativity were significantly higher in the informational than the controlling evaluation condition . This study , and others ( e . g . , Amabile , Hennessey , & Grossman , 1986 ) , make clear that the specific form and presentation of extrinsic motivators can dramatically affect the impact of social - environmental influences such as evaluation and reward on intrinsic motivation and creativity . Amabile ( 1996a ) eventually revised the terminology , from the Intrinsic Motivation Hypothesis to the Intrinsic Motivation Principle of Creativity , due to a growing body of empirical support indicating that intrinsic motivation is indeed a crucial determinant of creativity across multiple populations and contexts . Despite new evidence that extrinsic motivation can sometimes combine synergistically with intrinsic motivation in supporting creativity ( Amabile , 1993 ) , and despite some challenges to the role of intrinsic motivation in creativity ( e . g . , Eisenberger & Cameron , 1996 ) , the weight of empirical evidence from a variety of domains confirms the importance of intrinsic motivation to creativity . Over the past 15 years , research into the effects of social - environmental factors on intrinsic motivation and creativity has expanded beyond the laboratory , and has occasionally included aspects of personality as well . Much of this work has focused on creativity in organizational settings . For example , Zhou ( 2003 ) integrated theories on intrinsic motivation and observational learning to examine how creative models and supervisory behavior influence employee creativity . She focused primarily on two supervisor behaviors : close monitoring ( hypothesized to decrease intrinsic motivation and , thus , creativity ) and developmental feedback ( hypothesized to increase intrinsic 12 motivation and creativity ) . In addition , Zhou examined the effects of having creative coworkers ( models ) . Using survey data in a field setting , Zhou found that creative personality moderates the relationship between supervisory behavior , the presence of creative co - workers , and creativity . Participants with less creative personalities exhibited higher levels of creativity under low close monitoring and the presence of creative coworkers . These social - environmental factors had less impact on participants with higher scores on the creative personality scale . Other scholars have looked at variables moderating the intrinsic motivation - creativity relationship . For example , Grant and Barry ( 2011 ) discovered that perspective - taking moderates the relationship between intrinsic motivation and creativity in organizations . These authors suggest that intrinsic motivation may focus the mind on the ―novel‖ aspects of creativity , which are particularly important in activities such as creating artwork , but may not relate as closely to the ―usefulness‖ aspect of creativity , which , for example , is highly important in business . Using data from two field studies and one lab study , Grant and Berry found that other - focused psychological processes – prosocial motivation and perspective - taking – strengthen the relationship between intrinsic motivation and creativity in organizational settings . Other organizational creativity research has examined the effects of the social environment along with constructs that are related to intrinsic motivation , as well as how the motivation - creativity relationship might unfold in different cultural settings . Liu , Chen , and Yao ( 2011 ) extend beyond the research linking intrinsic motivation and creativity , to examine how ―harmonious passion‖ interacts with autonomy to influence creativity . The authors define harmonious passion as ―the autonomous internalization of 13 an activity , making it part of one’s identity and thus creating a sense of personal enjoyment and free choice about pursuing the activity . ‖ They cite previous research on self - determination theory and intrinsic / extrinsic motivation in constructing their hypothesis that harmonious passion moderates the effects of both external support for autonomy at one’s organization and individual autonomy on creativity . These researchers assert that harmonious passion is a stronger motivator than simple intrinsic motivation , because those possessing it internalize the activity as part of their identity ; essentially , harmonious passion is a strong and stable form of intrinsic motivation . The study assessed the autonomy orientation of each individual , autonomy support at the team level and unit level , harmonious passion , and creativity ( team - leader rated ) , using survey measures administered to members of two firms in China . The main finding was that harmonious passion moderated the relationship between creativity and three levels of autonomy—individual , team , and organizational . Moreover , harmonious passion was a stronger factor than both intrinsic and extrinsic motivation in predicting creativity . Very recently , the Intrinsic Motivation Principle of Creativity has gained considerable currency among laypersons . This is largely due to Daniel Pink’s bestselling 2010 book Drive , which engagingly describes and explains the positive effects of intrinsic motivation ( and the negative effects of extrinsic motivation ) on many aspects of human performance , including creativity . Pink dubs managers , educators , and others who believe in the superiority of intrinsic motivation as ―Type I’s , ‖ and those who rely on extrinsic motivators as ―Type X’s . ‖ Pink proposes that an understanding of the power of intrinsic motivation is important not only for promoting creativity , but also for avoiding catastrophe . He asserts that much of the recent worldwide financial disaster , and many of 14 the problems with organizations today , can be traced to a focus on short - term goals in the form of external rewards . Pink points out that , as psychologists had discovered years earlier , human needs go far beyond basic drives of survival , seeking rewards , and avoiding punishment . In one of his more memorable phrases , Pink notes that humans are not horses ; we seek interesting things that give our life meaning . The Componential Theory of Creativity : Social - Environmental Forces in Context Social - environmental influences can significantly influence creativity but , clearly , they are but one determining force . Prior to and simultaneous with the development of the social psychology of creativity , psychologists from a number of sub - disciplines have theorized about how creativity happens and what influences it . Attempting to avoid theoretical fragmentation , Amabile ( 1983a , 1983b ; 1996a ) proposed a comprehensive theory of creativity that integrated conceptualizations of intrinsic motivation and the social environment with the cognitive and personality constructs that earlier theorists had emphasized . The componential theory includes three intra - individual components that influence creativity , and one external component – the social environment . The intra - individual components are ( 1 ) domain - relevant skills ( expertise , technical skill , and innate talent in the relevant domain ( s ) of endeavor ) ; ( 2 ) creativity - relevant skills , later renamed ―creativity - relevant processes‖ ( flexible cognitive style , personality traits such as openness to experience , skill in using creative - thinking heuristics , and persistent work style ) , and ( 3 ) intrinsic task motivation . According to the theory , these components combine in a multiplicative fashion ; none can be completely absent , if some level of creativity is to result . 15 The external component , the social environment , can influence each of the intra - individual components . Domain - relevant and creativity - relevant skills can be affected by training , modeling , and experience afforded by the social environment . However , the most immediate and prevalent influence of the environment is exerted on the motivational component , as evidenced by empirical research on the Intrinsic Motivation Principle of Creativity . Building on earlier models of the creative process , the componential theory specifies the component ( s ) that are likely to most strongly influence each stage of the process by which novel , appropriate ideas are produced . ( Like most creativity - stage theories , the componential theory acknowledges that a stage - like sequence is a convenient artifice , with real creative problem - solving being much messier . ) The first stage , initially called ―problem or task presentation‖ ( re - dubbed ―problem or task identification‖ in the 1996 revision of the theory ) is the point at which the person becomes aware that there is an opportunity or a need to solve a problem or undertake a new task . Here , task motivation plays a prominent role , because it determines whether and how the person will chose to engage with the problem at hand . In the second stage , ―preparation , ‖ domain - relevant skills play an important role as the person gathers information ( and possibly learns new skills ) in order to undertake the task . Creativity - relevant skills and task motivation largely determine the outcome of the third stage , ―response generation‖ during which candidate solutions or response possibilities are produced . In the fourth stage , ―response validation , ‖ the person relies on domain - relevant skills to evaluate the novelty and usefulness of the candidate responses . In the fifth and final stage , ―outcome , ‖ the response is communicated and the outcome of the process is 16 evaluated . If the result is complete success ( a novel and useful solution that is accepted by others ) or total failure ( no progress towards a solution ) , the process ends . If there is some progress toward the final goal , the person likely returns to the first stage and takes another stab at it . The componential theory has been tested and enlarged in a wide range of psychological studies over the past 25 years . One of the most interesting developments concerns the discovery of team - level ( and perhaps organization - level ) creativity - relevant processes , to add to the individual - level creativity - relevant processes in the original theory . For example , Taggar ( 2002 ) examined how personality traits and team processes impact the creativity of small groups on an open - ended set of tasks . Results supported and expanded upon parts of the componential model . Not only did individual differences relate in predicted ways to creative output , but there was also evidence of ―team creativity - relevant processes‖ : a group’s ability to work together effectively and make the most of each member’s skill set . These creativity - relevant processes moderated the relationship between individual creativity and group creative output . Hirst , van Knippenberg , and Zhou ( 2009 ) also investigated a team - level construct but , although Tagger ( 2002 ) studied team creativity - relevant processes , these authors examined the team context as an aspect of the external social environment . Building on the componential theory , Hirst and colleagues proposed and found that the team context can enhance individual creativity by fostering individual learning . This study predicted employee creativity from learning orientation ( an individual - level construct related to both intrinsic motivation and the acquisition of domain - relevant and creativity - relevant skills ) and team learning behavior ( the extent to which the individual’s team engages in 17 collective problem - solving and reflection ) . Utilizing survey data from R & D teams across several companies in three different countries , the authors found that an individual’s learning orientation – the person’s preference for challenging activities that develop new skills and afford creativity – positively predicts individual creativity . The study also uncovered an intriguing non - linear interaction between individual orientations and team learning context . This research not only builds our understanding of the individual creativity components , but it also highlights team context as a key social - environmental variable . Clearly , the research by Tagger ( 2002 ) and Hirst , van Knippenberg , and Zhou ( 2009 ) , as well as others , suggests extending Amabile’s componential theory to include group processes . Other theorists have built from the componential theory to create their own related theories of creativity . In their ―investment theory of creativity‖ Sternberg and Lubert ( 1991 ) propose that creativity is a result of the extent to which six resources ( intellectual processes , knowledge , intellectual style , personality , motivation , and environmental context ) are combined and utilized . Woodman , Sawyer and Griffin ( 1993 ) propose a theory of creativity that builds upon the interaction between person and social environment to form an ―interactional framework for organizational creativity . ‖ Their theory explores how person , process , product and situation interact to incite innovation at the individual and organizational level , this relating to but also expanding upon the componential theory . The 1996 revision of the componential theory in Amabile’s Creativity in Context contains a few alterations of nomenclature and a revision of the graphical presentation to prominently depict the social - environment component . In more recent research , Amabile 18 and colleagues ( Amabile , Barsade , Mueller & Staw , 2005 ) propose that affect – both affective state and trait affectivity – be added to the theory . Because affect is a psychological process that is particularly relevant to creative thinking , and because it is distinct from intrinsic motivation , it should be considered as an additional element of the creativity - relevant processes component . Moreover , because Weiss and Cropanzano’s Affective Events Theory ( 1996 ) and Amabile’s subsequent research ( Amabile & Kramer , 2011 ) highlight the impact of events in the work environment on affective state , affect joins the list of creativity - relevant process elements that can be significantly influenced by the social environment . In the years since the componential theory of creativity was first published , its impact on the field has been evidenced both through direct citations of the theory by empirical and theoretical scholars and through a growing recognition of the central role that social - environmental forces play in creativity . Amabile’s own creativity research has become both more macroscopic , examining organizational dynamics that can influence the creative productivity of individuals and project teams , and more microscopic , identifying specific events in individuals’ daily work experience that can influence perceptions of the work environment , affect , intrinsic motivation , and – as a consequence – creativity ( see Amabile & Kramer , 2011 ) . The Present as a Window to the Future Recent trends in creativity research reveal that researchers from many disciplines are keenly interested in creativity and , in particular , the social - environmental forces that can influence creativity . This burgeoning interest is giving rise to some interesting cross - disciplinary collaborations . For example , organizational behavior scholars have paired 19 with social psychologists to examine the conditions under which work teams might perform more creatively . In a fascinating study of previously - unacquainted , diverse teams working together on similar projects over several months , one such group of researchers found that what happens in the first few minutes of a team’s life can profoundly affect creativity on team projects ( Polzer , Milton , & Swann , 2002 ) . Specifically , if the members of the team become acquainted by sharing their views of themselves during their initial meeting – through a process termed interpersonal congruence – the team is likely to receive higher creativity scores on its projects . Another recent study combined social and cognitive psychology , by presenting participants with information about how other persons had presumably assessed a product . Some participants were primed with paradoxical frames , or ―mental templates individuals use to embrace seemingly contradictory statements or dimensions of a task or situation . ‖ Specifically , all participants were given a prototype of a toy , and were told that it was praised for either its high creativity ( creative frame ) , its low production cost ( efficiency frame ) , or both ( paradoxical frame ) . Creative performance on an unrelated task was highest for those in the paradoxical frame condition , presumably because their complex thinking had been enhanced . In a follow - up study , participants who were primed by thinking of paradoxical statements ( versus merely interesting ones ) also performed more creatively ( Miron - Spektor , Gino , & Argote , 2011 ) . In other cross - disciplinary pairings , economists have begun collaborating with psychologists . In one recent paper ( Gino & Ariely , in press ) , a series of five lab studies found that ―moral flexibility‖ increases with both dispositional and situational creativity . In the basic paradigm , following initial assessments of dispositional creativity , some 20 participants were primed to think creativity ; all then completed a series of tasks in which they had the opportunity to cheat in reporting their results . Whether people were more creative dispositionally or as a result of being primed toward flexible thinking , they were more likely to be dishonest in their responses . Results suggested that creativity promotes the ability to justify one’s behavior to oneself and , thus , increases the probability of engaging in dishonest behavior – at least in certain situations . The explosion of interest in creativity among scholars in a variety of fields , although encouraging , has a downside : the fragmentation of research into sub - fields ( see Hennessey & Amabile , 2010 ) . The cross - disciplinary collaborations just described represent only a small subset of current creativity research . Many new discoveries about creativity are being made each year within particular disciplines , but few of those discoveries exert an influence on the wider community of creativity scholarship . For example , neuroscience has revealed that semantic activation of the right hemisphere can lead to ―aha‖ moments of insight ( Bowden and Jung - Beeman , 1998 ) . Participants attempted to solve a series of word problems , and after each were presented with a solution or non - solution word , in either the left vision field ( right hemisphere ) or right vision field ( left hemisphere ) which they had to quickly read aloud . Results indicated that solutions to unsolved problems were more quickly read only when presented to the right hemisphere , thus indicating activation that could lead to later insight . Although problem - solving has also been studied by educational psychologists , using a cross - cultural lens ( e . g . , Ng , 2003 , 2005 ; Zha et al . , 2006 ) , there is little evidence that the problem - solving insights of the neuroscientists have been combined in a meaningful way with the problem - solving insights of the educational psychologists . 21 We cannot say where the social psychology of creativity will go in the next decade or two , but we can suggest where it should go . It should move toward a comprehensive view of individual creative behavior in social context , with insights ranging from the neuropsychological responses elicited by social stimuli , to the dynamics of teams solving problems at a distance , to the cultural influences that can shape the production of new and useful ideas in any domain . We have learned much , but the most interesting revelations surely lie ahead . 22 References Amabile , T . M . ( 1979 ) . Effects of external evaluation on creativity . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 37 , 221 - 233 . Amabile , T . M . ( 1982 ) . Social psychology of creativity : A consensual assessment technique . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 43 , 997 - 1013 . Amabile , T . M . ( 1983a ) . The social psychology of creativity . New York : Springer - Verlag . Amabile , T . M . ( 1983b ) . The social psychology of creativity : A componential conceptualization . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 45 , 357 - 376 . Amabile , T . M . ( 1996a ) . Creativity in context . Boulder , CO : Westview . Amabile , T . M . ( 1996b ) . Assessing the work environment for creativity . Academy Of Management Journal , 39 ( 5 ) , 1154 - 1184 . Amabile , T . M . , Barsade , S . G . , Mueller , J . S . , & Staw , B . M . ( 2005 ) . Affect and creativity at work . Administrative Science Quarterly , 50 ( 3 ) , 367 – 403 . Amabile , T . M . , Goldfarb , P . , & Brackfield , S . C . ( 1990 ) . Social influences on creativity : evaluation , coaction , and surveillance . Creativity Research Journal , 3 , 6 - 21 . Amabile , T . M . , Hennessey , B . A . , & Grossman , B . S . ( 1986 ) . Social influences on creativity : The effects of contracted - for reward . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 50 , 14 - 23 . Amabile , T . M . & Kramer , S . ( 2011 ) . The Progress Principle : Using small wins to ignite joy , engagement , and creativity at work . Boston , MA : Harvard Business Review Press . Baer J . , Kaufman J . C . , & Gentile C . A . ( 2004 ) . Extension of the Consensual Assessment Technique to Nonparallel Creative Products . Creative Research Journal , 16 ( 1 ) . 113 - 117 . Barron , F . ( 1961 ) . Creative vision and expression in writing and painting . In Conference on the creative person . Berkeley : University of California , Institute of Personality Assessment and Research . Bowden E . M . & Jung - Beeman M . ( 1998 ) . Getting the right idea : semantic activation in the right hemisphere may help solve insight problems . Psychological Science , 9 , 435 – 40 . 23 Crutchfield , R . S . ( 1955 ) . Conformity and character . American Psychologist , 10 , 191 - 198 . Crutchfield , R . ( 1962 ) . Conformity and creative thinking . In H . Gruber , G . Terell , & M . Wertheimer ( Eds . ) , Contemporary approaches to creative thinking . New York : Atherton Press . Deci , E . L . & Ryan , R . M . ( 1985 ) . Intrinsic motivation and self - determination in human behavior . New York : Plenum . Eisenberger , R . , & Cameron , J . ( 1996 ) . Detrimental effects of reward : Reality or myth ? American Psychologist , 51 , 1153 - 1166 . Gino , F . , & Ariely , D . ( 2012 ) . The dark side of creativity : original thinkers can be more dishonest . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology . Forthcoming . Grant , A . M . , & Berry , J . W . ( 2011 ) . The Necessity of Others is the Mother of Invention : Intrinsic and Prosocial Motivations , Perspective Taking , and Creativity . Academy of Management Journal , 54 ( 1 ) , 73 - 96 . Guilford , J . P . Creativity . American Psychologist , 1950 , 5 , 444 - 454 . Guilford , J . P . ( 1960 ) Intellectual resources and their values as seen by scientists . In C . W . Taylor , C . & Barron , F . ( 1963 ) . Scientific creativity : Its recognition and development . New York : Wiley . Hennessey , K . , & Kim , G . ( 2008 ) . A Multi - cultural Application of the Consensual AssessmentTechnique . The International Journal of Creativity & Problem Solving , 18 ( 2 ) : 87 - 100 . Hirst , G . ( 2009 ) . A cross - level perspective on employee creativity : goal orientation , team learning behavior , and individual creativity . Academy Of Management Journal , 52 ( 2 ) , 280 - 293 . Kruglanski , A . W . , Friedman , I . and Zeevi , G . ( 1971 ) , The effects of extrinsic incentive on some qualitative aspects of task performance . Journal of Personality , 39 , 606 – 617 . Lepper , M . R . , Greene , D . , & Nisbett , R . E . ( 1973 ) . Undermining children ' s intrinsic interest with extrinsic reward : A test of the " overjustification " hypothesis . Journal Of Personality And Social Psychology , 28 ( 1 ) , 129 - 137 . Liu , D . , Chen , X . , & Yao , X . ( 2011 ) . From autonomy to creativity : A multilevel investigation of the mediating role of harmonious passion . Journal of Applied Psychology , 96 ( 2 ) , 294 - 309 24 MacKinnon , D . W . Personality and the realization of creative potential . American Psychologist , 1965 , 20 , 273 - 281 . Manske , M . E . , & Davis , G . A . ( 1968 ) . Effects of simple instructional biases upon performance in the unusual uses test . Journal of General Psychology , 79 , 25 - 33 . Miron - Spektor , E . , Gino , F . , & Argote , L . ( 2011 ) . Paradoxical frames and creative sparks : Enhancing individual creativity through conflict and integration . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 116 ( 2 ) , 229 - 240 . Ng A . K . ( 2003 ) . A cultural model of creative and conforming behavior . Creativity Research Journal , 15 , 223 - 33 . Ng A . K . ( 2005 ) . Creativity , learning goal and self - construal : A cross - cultural investigation . Korean Journal of Thinking & Problem Solving , 15 , 65 - 80 . Osborn , A . ( 1963 ) . Applied imagination : Principles and procedures of creative thinking . New York : Scribner’s . Parnes , S . ( 1967 ) . Creative Behavior Guidebook . New York : Scribner’s . Pink , D . ( 2009 ) Drive : The Surprising Truth About What Motivates Us . New York , NY : Riverhead Books . Polzer J . , Milton L . P . , Swann B . ( 2002 ) . Capitalizing on diversity : interpersonal congruence in small work groups . Administrative Science Quarterly , 47 , 296 – 324 Torrance , E . P . ( 1966 ) The Torrance tests of creative thinking : Norms - technical manual . Lexington , Mass . : Personnel Press . Shalley , C . E . , & Perry - Smith , J . E . ( 2001 ) . Effects of social - psychological factors on creative performance : The role of informational and controlling expected evaluation and modeling experience . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 84 , 1 - 22 . Shalley , C . , Gilson , L . , & Blum , T . ( 2009 ) . Interactive effects of growth need strength , work context , and job complexity on self - reported creative performance . Academy Of Management Journal , 52 ( 3 ) , 489 - 505 . Simonton , D . K . ( 1975 ) . Sociocultural context of individual creativity : A trans - historical time - series analysis . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 32 , 1119 - 1133 . Simonton , D . K . ( 1980 ) . Thematic fame and melodic originality in classical music : a multivariate computer - content analysis . Journal of Personality , 48 , 206 - 219 . 25 Simonton , D . K . ( 1999 ) . Origins of genius : Darwinian perspectives on creativity . New York : Oxford University Press . Speller , K . G . , & Schumacher , G . M . ( 1975 ) . Age and set in creative test performance . Psychological Reports , 36 , 447 - 450 . Sternberg R . , Lubart , T . ( 1991 ) . An Investment Theory of Creativity and Its Development . Human Development , 34 , 1 - 31 Taggar , S . ( 2002 ) . Individual creativity and group ability to utilize individual creative resources : A multilevel model . Academy Of Management Journal , 45 ( 2 ) , 315 - 330 . Weiss , H . M . , & Cropanzano , R . ( 1996 ) . Affective events theory : A theoretical discussion of the structure , causes and consequences of affective experiences at work . In B . M . Staw & L . L . Cummings ( Eds . ) , Research in organization behavior ( Vol . 19 , pp . 1 - 74 ) . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Woodman , R . W . ( 1993 ) . Toward a theory of organizational creativity . Academy Of Management Review , 18 ( 2 ) , 293 - 321 Zha , P . , Walczyk , J . J , Griffith - Ross , D . A . , Tobacyk , J . J . , & Walczyk , D . F . , ( 2006 ) . The impact of culture and individualism - collectivism on the creative potential and achievement of American and Chinese adults . Creativity Research Journal , 18 , 355 - 66 . Zhou , J . ( 2003 ) . When the presence of creative coworkers is related to creativity : Role of supervisor close monitoring , developmental feedback , and creative personality . Journal of Applied Psychology , 88 ( 3 ) , 413 - 422 .