1 A platform for dissecting force sensitivity and multivalency in actin networks Joseph T . Levin 1 , Ariel Pan 1 , Michael T . Barrett 1 , Gregory M . Alushin 1 , * 1 Laboratory of Structural Biophysics and Mechanobiology , The Rockefeller University , New York , New York , USA . * Correspondence : galushin @ rockefeller . edu 2 Abstract The physical structure and dynamics of cells are supported by micron - scale actin networks with diverse geometries , protein compositions , and mechanical properties . These networks are composed of actin filaments and numerous actin binding proteins ( ABPs ) , many of which engage multiple filaments simultaneously to crosslink them into specific functional architectures . Mechanical force has been shown to modulate the interactions between several ABPs and individual actin filaments , but it is unclear how this phenomenon contributes to the emergent force - responsive functional dynamics of actin networks . Here , we engineer filament linker complexes and combine them with photo - micropatterning of myosin motor proteins to produce an in vitro reconstitution platform for examining how force impacts the behavior of ABPs within multi - filament assemblies . Our system enables the monitoring of dozens of actin networks with varying architectures simultaneously using total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy , facilitating detailed dissection of the interplay between force - modulated ABP binding and network geometry . We apply our system to study a dimeric form of the critical cell - cell adhesion protein α - catenin , a model force - sensitive ABP . We find that myosin forces increase α - catenin’s engagement of small filament bundles embedded within networks . This activity is absent in a force - sensing deficient mutant , whose binding scales linearly with bundle size in both the presence and absence of force . These data are consistent with filaments in smaller bundles bearing greater per - filament loads that enhance α - catenin binding , a mechanism that could equalize α - catenin’s distribution across actin - myosin networks of varying sizes in cells to regularize their stability and composition . Keywords : actin cytoskeleton , mechanobiology , α - catenin 3 Main : The actin cytoskeleton mediates mechanical interactions between cells and their local environments , facilitating cell movement and the integration of cells into tissues ( 1 ) . The cytoskeleton’s diverse functions are implemented by subcellular networks composed of actin filaments ( F - actin ) and more than 100 different actin - binding proteins ( ABPs ) ( 2 ) . The geometric arrangement of actin filaments within these networks ( i . e . relative filament orientations , inter - filament angles , and spacing ) , as well as their local ABP composition , determines their mechanical properties and biochemical activities ( 3 ) . While signaling processes that converge on Rho GTPases to initiate the formation of specific classes of actin networks are well - established ( 4 , 5 ) , our understanding of feedback mechanisms which dynamically tune the geometry and composition of networks as they engage in mechanical functions remains limited . Multiple actin networks , featuring divergent architectures optimized for specific functions , frequently co - exist within the same cytoplasm . Branched actin networks , defined by the presence and activity of the ARP2 / 3 complex , polymerize at the leading edge of migrating cells with characteristic 70° branching angles to push the cell membrane forward and drive migration ( 6 , 7 ) . Contractile co - linear actin bundles known as stress fibers , powered by non - muscle myosin II and crosslinked by α - actinin , are linked to cell - cell and cell - extracellular matrix adhesions and mediate their force - dependent stabilization ( 8 ) . Branched actin networks become denser and develop the capacity to generate greater forces when exposed to resistive load both in vitro ( 9 , 10 ) and in cells ( 11 ) , while stress fibers feature mechanical damage repair mechanisms mediated by the force - depedent localization of proteins from the LIN - 11 , Isl - 1 and MEC - 3 ( LIM ) domain superfamily ( 12 , 13 ) . A balance between protrusive forces , generated by branched F - actin , and contractile forces , generated by actin - myosin networks , is necessary for cellular mechanical homeostasis . This is exemplified at adherens junctions , where branched actin pushing facilitates the formation of cadherin - cadherin contacts across adjacent plasma membranes ( 14 , 15 ) , while contractile actin - myosin assemblies are required to maintain intercellular tension and mature junction architecture ( 16 ) . How distinct network - level force response mechanisms emerge from the activities of individual protein components , many of which overlap between functionally and architecturally distinct networks , remains unclear . 4 Several ABPs have been reported to engage in force - modulated interactions with individual actin filaments , which could contribute to the force - sensitivity of actin networks ( 17 , 18 ) . This includes canonical F - actin nucleation and polymerization factors ( 19 – 24 ) , depolymerization / severing factors ( 25 , 26 ) , and cell adhesion proteins ( 27 – 31 ) whose binding affinity is moderately up - or down - regulated by force , as well as LIM domain proteins ( 32 , 33 ) , which solely bind F - actin in the presence of force . Several force - modulated ABPs feature multiple F - actin binding domains which they use to engage filaments simultaneously , e . g . ARP2 / 3 ( 19 , 20 ) and α - actinin ( 34 ) , suggesting mechanical regulation of their multivalent F - actin binding activities could play a role in the force - sensitive filament crosslinking geometry of networks . Here we specifically focus on the critical cell - cell adhesion protein αE - catenin , which forms both force - stabilized bonds when tension is applied across its F - actin binding interface ( “catch bonds” ) ( 27 , 30 ) , and preferentially binds mechanically stressed F - actin ( “force - activated binding” ) ( 31 ) . The protein exists in two forms , as a soluble dimer with F - actin crosslinking activity that has been suggested to act as a competitive inhibitor of ARP2 / 3 to coordinate the balance between branched actin generation and actin - myosin contractility at adherens junctions ( 35 ) , and as a core component of the plasma membrane anchored heterotrimeric E - cadherin – α - catenin – ß - catenin ( cadherin - catenin ) complex , which serves as the primary linkage between adherens junctions and the cytoskeleton ( 36 ) . While F - actin catch - bonding by cadherin - catenin complex associated α - catenin has been interpreted to mediate mechanical stabilization of adhesion ( 37 , 38 ) , an activity which is also present in the dimeric form ( 30 ) , to our knowledge the functional implications of force - activated F - actin binding by the dimeric form have not been assessed . We thus selected dimeric α - catenin to conduct a case study dissecting the interplay between forces , actin network architecture , and multivalent ABP - F - actin binding interactions . Technical considerations have limited analysis of how force modulates ABP – F - actin binding interactions in the context of higher - order networks . Biophysical assays with single molecule resolution , including optical ( 23 , 25 , 27 – 31 ) and magnetic tweezers ( 24 ) and flow - based systems coupled with total internal reflection fluorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy ( 19 – 22 , 26 ) , have provided detailed information into the force sensitivity of ABPs , but these studies have generally been limited to examining individual actin filaments . Analysis of reconstituted actin networks with microrheology techniques ( 34 , 39 ) and atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) ( 9 , 10 ) , as well as fluorescence microscopy of mechanically stimulated cells ( 40 ) , 5 have provided insight into network - level force responses , but generally lack the resolution to report on the behavior of individual ABP – F - actin interactions . Recent studies combining AFM with single - molecule TIRF detected the force - sensitive incorporation of individual ABPs within branched actin networks ( 9 , 10 ) , but the corresponding architecture of the network itself could not be visualized in detail due to nanoscale crowding and the detection limits of light microscopy . We recently introduced a myosin - motor based force reconstitution assay compatible with TIRF which we have used to characterize force - modulated interactions between ABPs and individual filaments ( 31 , 32 ) . Here , we adapt that assay to the study of networks by incorporating engineered filament end - to - end crosslinking complexes , as well as photo - micropatterning of myosin motor proteins into micron - scale stripes which mimic the sarcomeric organization of stress fibers . We find this system spontaneously generates hundreds of entangled actin networks experiencing myosin - generated forces , in parallel , on a coverslip , facilitating detailed dissection of their architectural dynamics while monitoring ABP engagement . We apply this system to show that myosin forces enhance dimeric α - catenin’s engagement of small filament bundles within networks versus large bundles , likely due to each filament in smaller bundles bearing relatively higher tension than those in larger bundles . Consistently , a mutation which specifically impairs α - catenin’s force - activated actin binding ( 31 ) abrogates this effect , resulting in a linear relationship between bundle size and α - catenin binding . We speculate this activity could facilitate localization of α - catenin dimers to contractile networks at newly - formed adherens junctions in order to suppress ARP2 / 3 activation ( 35 ) . Our reconstitution system enables systematic dissection of how multivalent ABPs engage architecturally - diverse networks with sufficient throughput to parse inherent heterogeneities ; we anticipate it will facilitate exploring mechanistic principles of force - sensitivity that emerge at the network level . Results : Myosins apply tensile force to an engineered paired actin filament complex Myosin motor proteins are biochemically tractable , which has facilitated the development of fluorescence imaging - based myosin force reconstitution assays for studying mechanically - regulated actin - binding interactions ( 23 , 31 – 33 ) . In a traditional gliding filament assay ( 41 ) , a single species of 6 immobilized motor exerts force on filaments , which are translocated across a glass coverslip ( Fig . 1A ) . To capture load - bearing filaments , we previously implemented a “dual motor” system ( 31 , 32 ) , where a mixture of the plus ( “barbed” ) - end directed motor myosin - 5 and the minus ( “pointed” ) - end directed motor myosin - 6 is immobilized , which engage in a tug - of - war . Binding interactions between fluorescently labelled ABPs and F - actin can then be monitored in the presence of ATP - dependent force generation . This system features substantial heterogeneity , as both compressive and tensile forces can be generated depending on the local spatial distribution of motor species along a filament , with force magnitudes that vary with the stochastic progression of motors through their mechanochemical cycles . Thus , although this system has the advantages of utilizing physiological force generators and supporting examination of numerous filaments in parallel , the complexity imposed by its component myosins have limited precise biophysical interpretation of ABPs’ mechanical regulatory mechanisms ( 31 , 32 ) . With the goal of developing a system featuring a more uniform force distribution , we engineered a complex composed of two copies of the CapZAB capping protein heterodimer , covalently attached through a linker complex . We reasoned this “capping protein complex” ( CPC ) would engage a pair of filaments by their plus ends , resulting in their head - to - head arrangement ( Fig . 1A ) in a “paired filament complex” ( PFC ) . In the presence of a plus - end directed motor ( myosin - 5 ) , PFCs would solely come under tension . The CPC features a modular design which we assemble in a step - wise fashion , using three individually purified protein parts and the Spy / Snoop system ( 42 , 43 ) to form specific covalent linkages between tagged proteins ( Fig . S1A ) . In our initial assembly , a construct consisting of a HaloTag flanked by two SnoopTags is reacted with an excess of a SpyCatcher - SnoopCatcher adapter . We purify the three - part covalent conjugate by size exclusion chromatography , then react it with an excess of SpyTagged capping protein . A second round of chromatography separates the final five - part complex , which features one HaloTag , two adapters , and two capping protein heterodimers , from intermediates ( Fig . S1B ) . This final purified CPC binds F - actin in a filament end concentration - dependent manner ( Fig . S2A ) . When mixed with actin filaments labeled with fluorescent phalloidin , CPC generates head - to - head arranged PFCs which come under tension in the presence of immobilized myosin - 5 and ATP , which we visualize with TIRF microscopy ( Fig . 1B , Movie S1 ) . Formation of PFCs is dependent on the relative 7 abundance of filament ends and CPC . The median filament length in our assay is 8 . 6 µ m . By accounting for typical F - actin structure , we estimate an average of approximately 3 , 000 actin subunits per filament , and a corresponding barbed end concentration of 0 . 6 nM . Under conditions where there is a substantial excess of CPC ( 10 nM ) , CPCs overwhelmingly associate with single filaments , likely because unbound CPCs have a diffusional advantage in encountering free barbed ends compared with CPCs already associated with a filament on one side . In this regime , we observe numerous CPCs in each field of view , but close to 90 % are associated with the trailing end of single gliding filaments as opposed to forming PFCs ( Fig . 1C ) . As CPC concentration is titrated down to 1 nM , there is a steady reduction in the number of singly - filament bound CPCs and a corresponding increase in the proportion of CPCs embedded between two filaments to form a PFC . However , this regime features a lower number of CPCs per field of view ( Fig . 1C ) ; thus , there is a trade - off between PFC formation efficiency and the number of productive observations per experiment . Over time , motors pulling on the two sides of a PFC tear its constituent pair of filaments apart , causing them to explosively separate in opposite directions when the interface between one capping protein heterodimer and its bound actin filament breaks ( Fig . 1B , inset ) . The majority of PFCs persist for dozens of seconds , with a median time to rupture of 26 - 29 seconds ( Fig . 1D ) which is independent of CPC concentration ( Fig . S2B ) . A small population of PFCs are long lived , persisting for over 6 minutes before rupturing . While the lifetime of PFC - associated fluorophores exceeds the time to rupture in the vast majority of cases , we do observe instances of the central CPC bleaching in a single step prior to PFC breakage , suggesting we are recording individual CPCs linking filaments ( Fig . S2E ) . Collectively , our engineered CPC generates molecular tugs - of - war across pairs of oppositely oriented single actin filaments which break after tens of seconds under myosin derived tension , sufficient for quantitative observations with TIRF . A DNA - based capping protein complex supports modular assemblies To demonstrate the modularity of our system , and because DNA is a ubiquitous molecular handle with well - defined biophysical properties ( 44 ) , we next designed and constructed a CPC where the central component is composed of two parts featuring complementary DNA handles that associate through base - 8 pairing ( CPC - DNA , Fig . 1A ) . We assemble this protein - DNA complex using the same SpyTagged capping protein heterodimer , which is conjugated to an adapter featuring a SpyCatcher domain , a HaloTag for fluorescent labelling , and a PCV2 HUH - tag , which forms sequence - specific covalent adducts with DNA ( 45 ) ( Fig . S1C ) . This two - part protein complex is then separately reacted with two DNA handles which feature complementary base - pairing regions , via a common specific 5’ DNA sequence which reacts with the PCV2 domain ( Fig . S1D ) . We call the two resultant complexes half - CPC - DNA 1 and half - CPC - DNA 2 . Sequential rounds of size exclusion chromatography purify the protein - DNA adducts , followed by anion exchange chromatography to remove residual protein which is not DNA conjugated . Half - CPC - DNA 1 and half - CPC - DNA 2 are each able to independently engage and translocate with the plus ends of actin filaments in gliding filament assays ( Movie S2 , S3 ) . Mixed overnight , the two half - CPC - DNAs become base paired , forming a full CPC - DNA . When CPC - DNA is added to F - actin , it is capable of assembling filaments into DNA - based PFCs ( dPFCs ) which break under tensile force ( Fig . 1E and S3A , Movie S4 ) , as we observed with PFCs assembled with the proteinaceous CPC ( Fig . 1B ) . We observe that , upon rupture , both fluorescently - labelled half - CPC - DNAs remain associated with the same filament , indicating the breakage occurs at the interface between a capping protein heterodimer and its bound filament . Notably , dPFC assembly occurs at lower efficiency with CPC - DNA compared to PFC assembly with the proteinaceous CPC , and we see numerous instances of single half - CPC - DNAs ( either half - CPC - DNA 1 or half - CPC - DNA 2 ) translocating in isolation associated with filament plus ends , as well as full CPC - DNAs associated with single filaments ( Fig . S3A and B ) , suggesting this system will require further optimization for practical experimental utility . Nevertheless , successful dPFC assembly with CPC - DNA demonstrates the generalizability of our CPC approach : such an arrangement may prove useful for the integration of DNA based fluorescent force - reporters ( 46 ) or to generate defined higher - order assemblies of tensed filaments through DNA origami and sequence - addressable handles ( 47 ) . Micropatterning myosin motors generates higher - order PFC networks While individual PFCs displayed the anticipated behavior in the presence of barbed - end directed force , the infrequency of spatially isolated PFCs on stochastically distributed fields of myosin - 5 limited their utility for investigating mechanically - regulated ABP - F - actin interactions . Inspired by the sarcomeric 9 organization of contractile muscle fibers ( 48 ) and stress fibers ( 8 ) , we implemented a protein micropatterning approach , using a PRIMO device to photo - pattern 10 µ m - spaced stripes of fibrinogen - GFP binding protein ( 49 ) that is specifically bound by GFP - tagged myosin - 5 , interleaved with 10 µ m passivated gaps ( Fig . S4 ) . In this geometry , we reasoned PFCs would become trapped between stripes as motors on adjacent stripes pull paired filaments in opposite directions , while unpaired single filaments would be attracted onto the stripes . Despite this spatial organization , the system still features heterogeneities . Filaments can be engaged by variable and fluctuating numbers of motors , whose positions remain random within the stripes , and thus we anticipate force magnitude will vary both between different filaments and along individual filaments in time . This configuration nevertheless recapitulates some of the mechanical complexity of cytoskeletal networks in cells , as the underlying forces are generated by physiological motors , whose variability in quantity , synchronization and inter - motor spacing also impose a range of forces on F - actin in vivo . On the addition of F - actin pre - incubated with CPC and ATP to our micropatterned surface , the vast majority of F - actin binds to the motor protein stripes . Over time , single filaments protruding from the edge of stripes are either pulled onto them or pushed off and released into solution as the motors operate ( Fig . 2A ) . A sparse collection of filaments remain spanning the gaps between stripes , which we interpret to be filaments in PFCs which become trapped as motors on adjacent stripes pull the two sides of the PFC in opposite directions . Consistently , in the absence of CPC , the limited number of filaments which remain spanning the gaps between stripes do not move , suggesting they are trapped by binding inactive motors or adhering to the coverslip on one side ( Fig S5A ) , while samples featuring PFCs continue to undergo slow force - dependent dynamics . This self - organization is in marked contrast to the unordered dynamics of PFCs and single filaments on stochastically distributed fields of motors ( Fig . 2A ) . Unlike the single PFCs observed on stochastic motor fields ( Fig . 1B ) , we primarily observe collections of PFCs becoming tangled as the motors operate , generating interwoven networks of tensed bundles . These complex network structures are highly dynamic , rearranging as their constituent filaments break before motor forces ultimately result in their complete destruction ( Movie S5 ) . The flexible head - to - head filament orientation enforced by the CPC combined with motor micropatterning is necessary for networks to emerge ; when either of these aspects of the system is absent , networks do not form . In the 10 absence of CPC , the few filaments that are trapped between stripes do not interweave to form higher order networks , persisting instead as individual filaments / small bundles with lower F - actin fluorescence intensities than CPC - dependent networks ( Fig . S5A - C ) . As no additional filament crosslinking ABPs are included in our assay , the collection of filaments into bundles emerges solely from tensile forces acting on webs of filaments entangled by the CPC . We observe dozens of networks in each microscopic field of view ( Fig 2B ) , which vary in size , geometric complexity , and lifetime , with most networks persisting for tens of seconds to minutes ( Fig . 2C ) . The filament arrangement enforced by the CPC leads us to infer that bundled filaments within networks are predominantly parallel , with filament plus ends congregating around the central knot . We note two prominent arrangements of such knots , which we refer to as the “Y” and “star” configurations ( Fig . 2A ) . In the Y configuration , at least two PFCs are entwined to generate a three - pronged structure . This architecture facilitates observing the dynamic force - balance imposed by the motor stripes while networks rearrange , as breakage of one prong results in the joint between the other two straightening , thereby producing a colinear bridge between stripes ( Fig . 2D ) . In “star” configurations , filaments radiate outwards from a central knot , where CPCs tend to be gathered tensile forces over time ( Fig . 2E ) . We infer this to be the result of the greater deformation tolerance of CPCs , which feature multiple flexible linkers within their covalent assembly , versus actin filaments , whose non - covalent inter - subunit interfaces can be readily broken by motor forces under our assay conditions ( 32 ) . Star configurations are prone to sequential rearrangements as their constituent prongs break , drastically changing the shape of the structure over time before it collapses . Notably , in both network configurations , the prongs composing networks have widely varying fluorescence intensities , indicating that they are primarily composed of bundles rather than individual filaments . In sum , combining PFCs with motor micropatterning enables us to generate dozens of tensed networks in parallel with varying dynamic architectures , providing a platform to probe the interplay of tension and network architecture in controlling F - actin engagement by ABPs . Dimeric α - catenin features force - activated F - actin binding We next employed our system to dissect how force and network architecture impact F - actin engagement by dimeric α - catenin . The protein’s dimerization occurs via a domain in the protein’s N - 11 terminal head , while the C - terminal tail contains its actin - binding domain ( ABD ) . Here we employ a construct spanning amino acids 56 - 906 of human α - catenin with an N - terminal HaloTag for fluorescent labelling , where the first 55 N - terminal residues were truncated to enhance stability . The purified protein eluted from a size exclusion chromatography column at a retention volume consistent with dimerization ( Fig . S6A ) . As this construct comprises the majority of the α - catenin sequence , we hereafter refer to it as “full - length” ( FL ) α - catenin for simplicity . As our previous studies of α - catenin’s mechanosensitivity focused on its isolated ABD , we first examined whether dimeric FL α - catenin maintains force - activated F - actin binding activity . We previously found the ABD’s force - activated binding depends on the protein’s disordered C - terminal extension ( CTE ) comprising residues 872 - 906 , as removal of this segment compromised increased binding to tensed F - actin ( 31 ) . We thus generated an analogous construct in FL α - catenin , comprising residues 56 - 871 , which we refer to as α - catenin D C . This construct also eluted as a dimer from a size exclusion column , and both FL α - catenin and α - catenin D C displayed F - actin binding and bundling activity in co - sedimentation assays ( Fig . S6B ) . We next examined the force - dependent F - actin engagement of both constructs in our assay by comparing their F - actin association before and after adding ATP to activate motors , conducting paired analysis of the same microscopic fields . Upon addition of ATP , qualitative changes in filament orientation and morphology occurred , as slackened filaments are pulled taut by the motors and interdigitated networks undergo force - dependent rearrangements ( Fig . S7A , Movie S6 ) . Ratiometric measurement of the fluorescence intensity of bound FL α - catenin versus underlying F - actin revealed a marked increase in the per - filament binding of FL α - catenin in the presence of ATP , a behavior which was essentially uniform across trials , demonstrating this form of α - catenin also possesses force - activated binding activity . Notably , an increase in the α - catenin : F - actin ratio indicates enhanced binding on the per - filament level , rather than the signal increase being driven by filaments being incorporated into larger bundles through motor activity ( Fig . S7B ) . Consistently , we do not observe a significant change in the distribution of F - actin intensities upon ATP addition ( Fig . S7C ) . Conversely , α - catenin D C displays a more variable response , without a striking increase in F - actin binding upon ATP addition ( Fig . S7B ) . We do nevertheless observe a significant increase ( p = 0 . 011 ) in its binding on average , suggesting the CTE deletion impairs but does not completely eliminate force - activated binding . Notably , we were able to observe this weak effect due to 12 the substantially higher throughput enabled by the PFC / motor patterning assay presented here versus our prior implementation of the dual - motor assay ( 31 ) . Nevertheless , our data are broadly consistent with dimeric FL α - catenin possessing force - activated actin binding activity mediated by the protein’s CTE , suggesting this occurs through a similar mechanism as we previously reported for the isolated α - catenin ABD ( 31 ) . The distribution of α - catenin is heterogeneous within individual networks To assess how α - catenin’s force - activated binding could intersect with its engagement of higher - order F - actin assemblies , we undertook a detailed analysis of a large network composed of several interlocking stars ( Fig . 3 ) in the presence of ATP and FL α - catenin . Qualitatively , we observed substantial heterogeneity in both the F - actin and α - catenin fluorescent intensities across the different prong - like segments composing the network ( Movie S7 ) . As the network underwent mechanical transitions prior to its eventual collapse , we noted substantial changes in α - catenin intensity in specific segments . To quantify this phenomenon , we time averaged frames between substantive transitions ( when constituent filament bundles break or change position ) , which we refer to as “states” , manually split the network into its segments , and measured the average fluorescence intensity of both α - catenin and F - actin in each segment across states ( Fig . 3A ) . We first examined the relationship between segment α - catenin intensity and F - actin intensity , focusing on state 2 ( Fig . 3B ) . While there was a moderate correlation between the amount of F - actin in a segment and the degree of α - catenin binding , segments with similar F - actin intensity could feature α - catenin binding which varied by greater than 5 - fold ( Fig . 3B ) . This suggests that in the context of mechanically active networks , FL α - catenin’s binding is not solely controlled by the local density of F - actin binding sites . When monitored across states , multiple segments featured a dynamic increase in their α - catenin : F - actin ratio ( Fig . 3C ) . This was not due to an increase in F - actin abundance , as there is no excess G - actin in our system to support additional polymerization , and all segments featured a loss of F - actin signal over time ( Fig . 3C ) , likely due to filament breakage and fluorophore bleaching . The most parsimonious explanation for this observation is that a subset of segments within the network are more 13 susceptible to force - enhanced α - catenin binding , which reweights the distribution of α - catenin across the network as it undergoes mechanical rearrangements . α - catenin’s force - activated F - actin binding is more prominent in smaller actin bundles We next sought to determine the mechanistic basis of α - catenin’s heterogeneous force - activated binding within networks . We noted that in the representative network we examined , segments which featured a dynamic increase in α - catenin binding across states tended to have lower F - actin intensities relative to segments featuring stable α - catenin binding ( Fig . 3C ) , leading us to hypothesize that smaller bundles could be more susceptible to mechanical regulation . Consistently , when examining data from three additional networks , we observed that smaller network segments qualitatively appeared to feature a broader distribution in the fold change of their α - catenin intensities over time ( Fig . 3D ) . To quantitatively examine whether this phenomenon was mediated by α - catenin’s force - activated actin binding activity , we compared the relationship between network segment size ( F - actin intensity ) and α - catenin engagement ( α - catenin intensity ) for both FL α - catenin and α - catenin D C in the presence and absence of myosin force generation . To facilitate higher - throughput analysis , we conducted unpaired comparisons of specimens treated with ATP versus those treated with apyrase to remove residual nucleotide from the system . Networks were automatically detected and segmented by binarization and thresholding of the F - actin channel ( Fig . S8B ) , allowing us to examine thousands of segments across experimental replicates ( Fig . 4A ) . In the apyrase ( no force ) condition , both FL α - catenin and α - catenin D C displayed an approximately linear relationship between F - actin intensity and α - catenin intensity , suggesting in this regime network engagement is driven purely by mass action without dimeric α - catenin’s multiple actin - binding domains conferring notable avidity effects . However , in the presence of ATP and motor activity , FL α - catenin’s distribution broadens , with a notable enrichment of segments in the quadrant representing the upper 50 % of α - catenin intensity and the lower 50 % of F - actin intensity ( Fig . 4A , grey dotted rectangle ) . This effect is absent in the α - catenin D C force - sensing deficient mutant , suggesting it is specifically mediated by α - catenin’s force - activated F - actin binding activity . This subpopulation of smaller bundles extensively bound by α - catenin contributes markedly to FL α - catenin ' s significantly greater mean 14 α - catenin : F - actin ratio in the + ATP condition ( Fig . 4B , darker points ) , driving the phenomenon of force - activated binding at the bulk level . While we do observe significant differences in the distribution of F - actin intensities between conditions , these are modest and do not clearly track with force - activated binding by FL catenin in the + ATP condition ( Fig . 4C ) . Collectively , these data suggest that in the presence of myosin activity dimeric FL α - catenin’s force - activated binding enhances binding to smaller bundles , leading to an equalization of total α - catenin across networks of different sizes . Discussion Here , we introduce a reconstitution platform that allows the dissection of force - regulated ABP binding behaviors in the context of higher - order F - actin networks . Our approach enables the heterogeneous architecture and dynamics of micron - scale networks experiencing active myosin forces , recapitulating aspects of the complexity of actin networks in cells , to be analyzed in quantitative detail with TIRF microscopy . While our proteinaceous CPC / PFC system spontaneously forms heterogenous networks on micropatterned substrates , the CPC - DNA system can likely be further engineered to facilitate the generation of defined assemblies through DNA nanotechnology ( 47 ) . Additionally , DNA - based fluorescent force - reporters ( 46 ) should be compatible with this system , which would enable examining the relationship between local force magnitudes and ABP engagement , of particular importance for establishing detailed mechanisms of force - regulated binding . Our myosin micropatterning approach complements previously reported reconstitution systems where actin nucleation factors are patterned in the presence of soluble motors ( 50 , 51 ) , which also give rise to active networks with emergent micron - scale dynamics . More complex patterns of motors , as well as simultaneous patterning of motors and actin nucleating factors , may facilitate reconstitutions of increasing complexity that recapitulate multiple types of actin networks simultaneously side - by - side , enabling studies of how ABPs are partitioned across networks within a common compartment . We applied our approach to study the force - regulated binding of dimeric FL α - catenin , finding that , in the presence of myosin forces , the protein preferentially engages smaller actin bundles embedded within higher order networks . Our data are compatible with a model in which these network segments bear greater load per filament than larger bundle segments ( Fig . 5 ) , rendering them more susceptible to 15 force - evoked conformational transitions which modulate α - catenin engagement . This mechanism presupposes that motors apply force of a similar total magnitude to a network segment regardless of its size , a criterion which is likely fulfilled by the embedded segments analyzed in Fig . 3 , which do not directly contact the motor stripes and thus experience forces distributed through the network . A non - exclusive alternative is that the filament packing of larger bundles could potentially also restrict the conformational landscapes of their component filaments . A limitation of our study which precludes discriminating between these mechanisms is our inability to directly measure the distribution of forces , which can likely be overcome in future work using force probes embedded in CPC - DNA as described above . Our system is furthermore in principle compatible with cryo - electron microscopy studies , which could be used to examine the conformational landscape of F - actin within tensed PFC bundles . The absence of clear avidity effects conferred by dimeric α - catenin’s dual actin - binding domains is unexpected , as actin - bundling proteins are anticipated to display enhanced engagement of multi - filament assemblies . A recent structural study of FL α - catenin suggested that both of the protein’s ABDs can simultaneously bind the same actin filament ( 52 ) , mediated by the well - established flexibility of the head domain and its linkage to the ABD ( 53 ) . As we nevertheless clearly observe actin - bundling activity ( Fig . S6B ) , as has previously be reported ( 54 ) , our data are compatible with a model in which the protein is capable of binding single filaments with both ABDs as well as bridging pairs of filaments . In this scenario , the protein’s binding should be driven solely by the total availability of actin binding sites rather than their arrangement into a specific geometry , which would increase linearly with bundle size . As only the ABD of FL α - catenin bound to F - actin was visualized by Izard and colleagues ( 52 ) , future structural studies will be required to dissect the protein’s potential multiple F - actin binding modes . Biologically , we speculate that α - catenin’s force - activated binding of smaller F - actin bundles could facilitate equalizing the protein’s distribution across bundles of differing sizes in cells . This could potentially mediate inhibition of ARP2 / 3 branching by dimeric α - catenin as contractile networks are formed at nascent adherens junctions ( 35 ) , a hypothesis which could be tested in future work by examining the junctional dynamics of epithelial cells expressing the force - activated binding deficient mutant α - catenin D C . Other force - activated actin binding proteins have been reported to display mechanically triggered localization to smaller F - actin bundles embedded within larger networks in cells . 16 Zyxin ( 12 ) , along with other LIM proteins ( 13 , 32 , 33 ) , rapidly localizes to “stress fiber strain sites” , mechanically - induced tears in stress fibers which feature reduced actin density ( 12 ) , suggesting that the mechanical fragility of network segments featuring low filament numbers may be more generally productively harnessed by cells . The tools we introduce here should more broadly facilitate investigating how this and other network - level phenomena intersect with mechanical regulation of ABPs . Acknowledgements : We gratefully acknowledge Pinar Gurel and Harry Higgs for the gift of the CapZA1 / CapZB constructs . We also acknowledge Wendy Gordon for the gift of the PCV2 construct and fruitful discussions of its use . We also acknowledge Scott Gradia for the gift of the 2HRT pET vector ( via Addgene , plasmid # 29718 ) . This work was funded by a Pew Biomedical Scholar Award , an Alfred P . Sloan Foundation Matter - to - Life Award ( G - 2020 - 14047 ) , and NIH / NIGMS grant R01GM141044 to G . M . A . Author Contributions : JL and GMA designed research . JL , AP , and MB performed research . JL , AP , and GMA analyzed data . JL and GMA wrote the paper , with input from all authors . Competing Interests : The authors declare no competing interests . Data and Materials Availability : TIRF movies and raw data supporting this study will be made available at DOI : 10 . 5281 / zenodo . 8239706 . All DNA constructs are available from the corresponding author without restriction . Code Availability : Custom scripts used to quantify TIRF data will be made available at : https : / / github . com / alushinlab / patterns - PFCs 17 Methods Actin purification Actin was purified from chicken skeletal muscle as described previously ( 32 , 55 ) , and all steps were conducted at 4°C . Briefly , chicken muscle acetone powder was resuspended in 20 mL of G - Ca buffer ( 2 mM Tris - Cl pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 5 mM DTT , 0 . 2 M ATP , 0 . 01 % NaN 3 , 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 ) and mixed by inversion for 30 min before centrifugation at 185 , 913 g in a Ti70 rotor for 30 min . The supernatant was filtered through 90 mm filter paper ( Whatman ) and retained . The pellet was then resuspended in another 20 mL of G - Ca buffer and the inversion mixing , centrifugation , and filtering steps were repeated . Next , 50 mM KCl and 2 mM MgCl 2 were added to the pooled supernatants , which contain actin monomers , to initiate actin polymerization , followed by incubation for 1 hour . Dry KCl was then added to achieve a concentration of 800 mM and the solution was incubated for 30 min to facilitate the dissociation of contaminating factors from actin filaments . The solution was then divided into two tubes and centrifuged in a Ti70 rotor at 185 , 913 g for 3 hours . Each pellet was resuspended in 2 mL of G - Ca buffer and incubated overnight . The resuspended pellets were gently transferred to a Dounce chamber , homogenized for 30 passes , sheared three times through 26G and 30G needles consecutively , then dialyzed in SnakeSkin dialysis tubing ( MWCO 10 kDa ) ( Thermo Fisher ) in 1 L of G - Ca buffer overnight . The actin solution was then sheared through a 30G needle again before dialysis in 1 L of fresh G - Ca buffer for another day . It was then centrifuged in a Ti90 rotor at 419 , 832 g for 3 hours . The upper 2 / 3 of the supernatant was purified by size - exclusion chromatography using a HiLoad 16 / 600 Superdex 200 column ( Cytiva ) . The second half of the peak was collected and purified actin was maintained in G - Ca buffer at 4°C before use . F - actin preparation F - actin was polymerized fresh for each experiment from G - actin in G - Mg ( 2 mM Tris - Cl pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 5 mM DTT , 0 . 2 M ATP , 0 . 1 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 01 % NaN 3 ) buffer with KMEI ( 50 mM KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM EGTA , 10 mM imidazole pH 7 . 0 , 1 mM DTT ) added to initiate polymerization as described previously ( 56 ) . Polymerization was left to occur at room temperature for 1 - 2 hours . For TIRF microscopy , polymerized F – actin was incubated with fluorescently labelled phalloidin ( Alexa Fluor™ Plus 555 Phalloidin or Alexa 18 Fluor™ 488 Phalloidin , Invitrogen ) in a 1 : 1 . 2 ( actin : phalloidin ) molar ratio for 10 min at room temperature before being placed on ice . Expression cloning Expression vectors for α - catenin were constructed by inserting the cDNA sequence of H . sapiens αE - catenin 56 - 906 ( FL α - catenin ) or αE - catenin 56 - 871 ( α - catenin ΔC ) and HaloTag ( Promega ) into pET vector 2HR - T through Gibson assembly ( 57 ) . Expression vectors for CPC components were constructed by insertion of synthesized E . coli codon optimized cDNA sequences into bacterial expression vectors with N - terminal His6 - tags and 3C cleavage sites by Gibson assembly . pET vector 2HR - T was used for the SpyCatcher - SnoopCatcher , SnoopTag - HaloTag - SnoopTag , SpyCatcher - HaloTag - PCV2 constructs . A pRSF Duet 1 vector ( Millipore Sigma ) was used for the CapZA and SpyTag - CapZB construct . CapZA and CapZB cDNA sequences were derived from M . musculus CapZA1 ( 286 residues ) and CapZB ( isoform 2 , 272 residues ) . cDNA sequences for SpyTag , SpyCatcher , SnoopTag amd SnoopCatcher were identical to those reported by Howarth and colleagues ( 42 , 43 ) . Expression vectors for myosin - 5 and calmodulin were previously described ( 32 ) . Briefly , for myosin - 5 , H . sapiens myosin 5a ( residues 1 – 1091 ) was cloned into a modified pCAG mammalian expression vector with C - terminal non - fluorescent GFP - tag ( S65T ) and a Flag - tag . For calmodulin , human full - length calmodulin ( residues 1 - 149 ) was cloned into a modified pCAG mammalian expression vector with no tag . Expression and purification of proteins α - catenins and CPC components were expressed in BL21 ( DE3 ) E . coli cells ( New England Biolabs ) , grown in LB media at 37°C to an optical density of 0 . 5 - 0 . 8 and induced with 0 . 2 mM IPTG . After induction , the cells were grown overnight at 15°C , spun down at 15 , 970 g in a JLA 8 . 1 rotor ( Beckman Coulter ) , and cell pellets collected and stored at - 80°C until use . Cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer ( 50 mM Tris - Cl pH 8 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , 2 mM b - mercaptoethanol , 20 mM imidazole ) containing lysozyme ( Affymetrix / USB ) at a 1 mg / mL working 19 concentration , nutated at 4°C for 1 hour , after which the lysate was sonicated for 5 min . The lysate was then clarified by spinning in a JA 25 . 50 rotor ( Beckman Coulter ) at 48 , 380 g for 30 min at 4°C . Cleared lysate was incubated with Ni - NTA resin ( Qiagen ) for 2 hours on a rotator at 4°C , after which the flow - through was discarded and the resin was washed with two bed volumes of wash buffer ( 50 mM PO 43 - pH 8 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , 20 mM imidazole , 2 mM b - mercaptoethanol ) . Proteins were subsequently eluted in elution buffer ( 50 mM PO 43 - pH 8 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , 250 mM imidazole , 2 mM b - mercaptoethanol ) . For α - catenins , purified His - tagged TEV protease ( prepared according to a published protocol ( 58 ) ) was added at 0 . 05 mg / mL working concentration , then the eluent was dialyzed against dilution buffer ( 50 mM PO 43 - pH 8 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , 2 mM b - mercaptoethanol ) overnight , during which time digestion occurred . For CPC components , purified His - tagged 3C protease ( prepared according to a published protocol ( 59 ) ) was added at 0 . 05 mg / mL working concentration , then similarly dialyzed . These mixtures were incubated with Ni - NTA resin and the flow - through containing cleaved protein was retained . Ion exchange chromatography was conducted on a HiTrapQ anion exchange column ( Cytiva ) followed by size exclusion chromatography on a Superdex 200 Increase column ( Cytiva ) in gel filtration buffer ( 50 mM PO 43 - pH 8 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , 2 mM b - mercaptoethanol , 1 mM EDTA ) , and the final protein concentration was estimated using the Bradford colorimetric assay ( Pierce ) , calibrated with BSA ( Gemini ) . Lastly , 10 % v / v glycerol was added , and the protein snap - frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at - 80°C until use . Myosin - 5 was purified from transiently transfected FreeStyle HEK293 cells ( Thermo Fisher ) as previously described ( 32 ) . Briefly , HEK cells were grown to a density of 1x10 6 cells / ml before co - transfection with myosin - 5 and calmodulin . Calmodulin and myosin - 5 expression plasmids were prepared from E . coli 5α cells ( New England Biolabs ) , transformed with the each of plasmids , grown up overnight in a 500 ml culture and maxiprepped ( PureYield Maxiprep Kit , Promega ) . 400 µ g of calmodulin and myosin - 5 expression vectors ( at a 1 : 6 ratio ) were mixed with 15 ml FreeStyle 293 media ( Thermo Fisher ) and 1 . 2 ml of PEI ( Polysciences ) before incubation for 15 min at room temperature , followed by transfection by mixing with 400 mL of cells . Transfected cells were grown on an orbital shaker at 250 rpm in 8 % CO 2 at 37°C , then harvested 72 hours post transfection by centrifugation at 15 , 970 g in a JLA 8 . 1 rotor ( Beckman Coulter ) . Cell pellets were snap - frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at - 80°C until use . 20 For purification , cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl pH 8 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 2 % CHAPS , 2mM ATP , 1 mM PMSF , 1 mg / mL aprotinin , leupeptin , and pepstatin ) , and were incubated on a rocker for 1 hour . The lysate was clarified by spinning in a JA 25 . 50 rotor ( Beckman Coulter ) at 48 , 380 g for 30 min at 4°C . The resultant supernatant was mixed with anti - Flag M2 affinity beads ( Sigma - Aldrich ) and incubated on a rocker for 1 . 5 hours . The protein - bound beads were washed three times with wash buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl pH 8 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , and 2 mM ATP ) . Protein was eluted with wash buffer supplemented with 100 mg / mL Flag peptide ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . The eluent was buffer - exchanged to a storage buffer ( 10 mM Tris - HCl pH 8 . 0 , 100 mM NaCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , and 3 mM DTT ) using a spin concentrator ( Amicon Ultra - 4 , MWCO 50 kDa ) , snap - frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at - 80°C until use . Human calmodulin was also purified from Bl21 ( DE3 ) E . coli cells ( New England Biolabs ) using a published protocol ( 60 ) , stored in gel filtration buffer supplemented with 5 % v / v glycerol , snap - frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at - 80°C until use . Generation of CPCs Purified protein components were reacted together in the sequence indicated in Fig . S1 using published protocols ( 42 , 43 , 45 ) . To make the proteinaceous CPC , an excess of SpyCatcher - SnoopCatcher was reacted with SnoopTag - HaloTag - SnoopTag in gel filtration buffer overnight at 4°C with gentle shaking . The covalently conjugated three - part complex was separated from excess starting reagents by gel filtration chromatography ( Superdex 200 Increase column ) and then reacted with an excess of Capping Protein - SpyTag under the same conditions . A final round of gel filtration chromatography separated the five - part covalent complex from starting reagents . To prepare half - CPC - DNAs 1 and 2 , an excess of SpyCatcher - HaloTag - PCV2 was reacted with Capping Protein - SpyTag , again overnight at 4°C with gentle shaking . The resultant two - part covalent complex was separated from excess starting reagents by gel filtration chromatography , divided in half , and then each half was reacted with an excess of DNA 1 ( AAGTATTACCAGAAAAAGGGCCACGGTGGGCCTTGTTTCA ) or DNA 2 ( AAGTATTACCAGAAACCACACTCCGGTGGACCGAAGCGCGTGAAACAAGGCCCACCGTGGCCCTT ) 21 overnight at 4°C with gentle shaking in HUH reaction buffer ( 50 mM HEPES pH 8 . 0 , 50 mM NaCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM MnCl 2 ) . The resultant DNA - protein conjugates were separated from excess starting reagents by gel filtration chromatography ( Superdex 200 Increase column ) and anion exchange chromatography ( HiTrapQ column ) . Labeling of ABPs For TIRF microscopy assays , α - catenins and CPC were thawed and incubated with JF - 646 - Halo ( Promega ) for 2 hours on ice in a 1 : 1 molar ratio , followed by desalting through a Zeba Spin Desalting column ( Thermo Fisher ) to remove unreacted dye . Labelled proteins were then clarified by ultracentrifugation at 96 , 460 g in a TLA100 rotor for 20 min at 4°C . Half - DNA - CPC 1 was labeled according to the same protocol , while half - DNA - CPC 1 was labelled with JF - 549 - Halo ( Promega ) in the same way , to create a two color CPC - DNA . Synthesis of Fibrinogen - GBP Fibrinogen and GBP were reacted together using published protocols ( 49 ) . Briefly , fibrinogen ( Millipore Sigma ) was resuspended in fibrinogen buffer ( 100 mM NaHCO 3 pH 8 . 3 , 0 . 5 mM EDTA ) and reacted with an excess of maleimide - PEG8 - succinimidyl ester for 1 hour at room temperature , desalted through a Zeba Spin Desalting column ( Thermo Fisher ) , and reacted with an excess of GBP3xCys ( prepared according to the same protocol ) and mixed overnight at 4°C . Excess free cysteine was added to quench unreacted maleimide groups , and fibrinogen conjugates were precipitated by ammonium sulfate saturation , resuspended in fibrinogen buffer and ultracentrifuged to removed aggregates . Fibrinogen - GBP was snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at - 80°C until use . Pelleting Assays Pelleting assays were conducted following the protocol described by Mei et al . ( 31 ) . Briefly , F - actin was polymerized at 1 µ M in G - Mg and KMEI for 1 hour at room temperature . Clarified CPC ( 20 nM ) , FL α - catenin or α - cateninΔC ( both 1 µ M ) was added and incubated for 15 min at room temperature . This mixture was then spun down in a TLA - 100 rotor ( Beckman Coulter ) at 9 , 892 g for 30 min at 4°C to 22 sediment actin filament bundles into a low - speed pellet . The supernatant was subsequently collected and spun down again in a new centrifuge tube in the same rotor at 386 , 400 g for 30 min at 4°C to sediment single actin filaments into a high - speed pellet . The resultant supernatant was collected , and the low - speed and high - speed pellets were gently washed once with the G - Mg - KMEI solution before resuspension in SDS - PAGE loading buffer . For PAGE analysis , the supernatant and pellets were then run on a 12 % NuPAGE Bis - Tris protein gel ( Thermo Fisher ) followed by Coomassie R250 staining . For the CPC end - binding assay , only a high - speed centrifugation step was conducted , 2 mg / ml BSA was included with F - actin to block centrifuge tubes , and specified F - actin samples were vortexed for 30 s at maximum speed prior to addition of CPC to shear filaments and generate free ends for binding . For western blot analysis ( CPC end - binding assay , Fig . S2A ) , the supernatant and pellets were run on a 12 % Tris - Glycine protein gel ( Thermo Fisher ) and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane . The membrane was blocked overnight in blocking buffer ( 5 % DIFCO skimmed milk , 20 mM Tris pH 7 . 6 , 150 mM NaCl , 0 . 1 % Tween20 ) , followed by incubation with anti - HaloTag mAb ( Promega ) at a 1 : 2000 dilution in blocking buffer . The membrane was washed 3 times for 5 min in TBST ( 20 mM Tris pH 7 . 6 , 150 mM NaCl , 0 . 1 % Tween20 ) before incubation with anti - mouse - HRP ( Cell Signaling Technologies ) at a 1 : 2000 dilution in blocking buffer , followed by 3 further washes . Finally , imaging was conducted using western bright ECL buffer ( Advansta ) on photographic film ( Carestream ) in a dark room . Coverslip preparation Glass coverslips ( Corning 24 - 60mm , # 1 . 5 ) were cleaned by sonication in 100 % acetone for 30 min and 100 % ethanol for 10 min , rinsed with water 3 times , then cleaned by sonication in 2 % Hellmanex III liquid cleaning concentrate ( HellmaAnalytics ) and finally rinsed in water 3 times before air dying . Coverslips were then protein micropatterned ( see below ) or PEG - silanated by overnight incubation with 1 mg / ml mPEG - silane ( Laysan Bio ) dissolved in ethanol . Silanated coverslips were washed in water 3 times before air drying and storage at 4°C prior to use . Protein micropatterning 23 The patterning procedure is outlined in Fig . S4 . Cleaned coverslips were plasma activated for 5 min in air in an expanded plasma cleaner ( Harrick Plasma ) , and PDMS stencils with 3 mm x 3 mm wells were applied ( Alvéole labs ) . Wells were passivated with 0 . 1 mg / ml PLL - PEG solution in patterning buffer ( 10 mM HEPES pH 7 . 4 ) for 1 - 2 hours , then rinsed with DPBS ( Gibco ) 4 times . Wells were filled with 5 µ l PLPP solution ( Alvéole labs ) and photopatterned using a PRIMO system ( Alvéole labs ) with UV radiation focused on the glass - buffer interface . For initial characterization of reconstituted networks ( Fig . 2 ) , patterns consisted of 10 µ m stripes with 10 µ m spacing were generated at a dosage of 1000 mJ / cm 2 . For a - catenin experiments ( Fig . 3 - 5 ) , patterns consisted of 2 . 5 µ m stripes with 17 . 5 µ m spacing were generated at a dosage of 2000 mJ / cm 2 , which we empirically found to be more suitable for imaging due to fluorescent background produced by a - catenin ' s nonspecific adsorption to the stripes . Wells were washed 6 times with DPBS and treated according to a modified protocol based on Watson et al . ( 49 ) . Wells were incubated with 0 . 1 mg / ml fibrinogen - GBP in patterning buffer for 10 - 20 min in a humidified petri dish at room temperature . Wells were washed with DPBS 6 times and incubated with 0 . 5 mg / ml PLL - PEG in patterning buffer for a further 10 - 20 min . Wells were washed with DPBS 6 times and incubated with 1 mg / ml casein ( Sigma ) in patterning buffer for a further 10 - 20 min . Wells were washed with DPBS 10 times and left in DPBS in a humidified petri dish at 4°C until use . At no point was the patterned well allowed to dry out ; all wash steps were carried out by removing as much liquid as possible without drying the surface , followed by adding back 10 µ l DPBS on top and mixing . TIRF force reconstitution assays Dual - color or tri - color TIRF image sequences ( movies ) were recorded at room temperature ( approximately 25°C ) using a Nikon TiE inverted microscope equipped with an H - TIRF module and an Agilent laser launch , driven by Nikon Elements software . Images were taken every 2 s with an Apo TIRF 60X or 100X 1 . 49 NA objective ( Nikon ) on an Andor iXon EMCCD camera . 488 - phalloidin , 555 - phalloidin plus / JF549 and JF646 fluorophores were excited by laser lines at 488 nm , 561 nm and 640 nm , respectively . For ATP - only assays on unpatterned cover slips ( used in PFC and CPC characterization ) , a PDMS gasket was applied to silanated coverslips to create wells . 1 µ M F - actin was pre - incubated with 1 , 24 2 , 5 or 10 nM CPC and left for 15 min at room temperature . Each well was prepared immediately before imaging by incubating with 50 nM myosin - 5 for 3 min , washed with MB ( 20 mM MOPS pH 7 . 4 , 5 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 1 mM EGTA , 50 mM KCl , 1 mM DTT ) , followed by incubation with the F - actin / CPC mixture for 30 s , followed by a final wash with MB . An imaging buffer with an oxygen scavenger system and supplemented with calmodulin ( MB O . S . 1X ATP : 20 mM MOPS pH 7 . 4 , 5 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 1 mM EGTA , 50 mM KCl , 50 mM DTT , 15 mM glucose , 2 mM ATP ) was added , and imaging commenced . For assays on patterned coverslips , 1 µ M F - actin was pre - incubated with 1 or 2 nM CPC and left for 15 min at room temperature , then each well was prepared immediately before imaging by first removing the DPBS . Wells were then incubated with 50 nM myosin - 5 for 3 min , washed with MB , followed by incubation with the F - actin / CPC mixture for 30 s , then a final MB wash . Imaging buffer was added , and imaging commenced . For α - catenin experiments a similar procedure was used except that 5 µ M FL α - catenin or α - cateninΔC were preincubated with imaging buffer or an identical buffer without ATP ( MB O . S . no ATP : 20 mM MOPS pH 7 . 4 , 5 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 1 mM EGTA , 50 mM KCl , 50 mM DTT , 15 mM glucose ) . In paired + / - ATP experiments , the - ATP buffer ( including α - catenin ) was added and the well imaged for 2 min before recording was paused and two equivalents of + ATP buffer ( including α - catenin ) were added to the well . Recording resumed immediately ( less than 10 s of non - recording ) . In ATP / apyrase experiments , for the apyrase condition , myosin - 5 was incubated with apyrase ( New England Biolabs ) at 25 units / mL working concentration at room temperature for 10 min before being added to the well , and only - ATP buffer preincubated with α - catenin was used . For the ATP condition , untreated myosin - 5 and only + ATP buffer preincubated with α - catenin were used . Image analysis and quantification Image analysis was conducted with FIJI ( 61 ) , as well as custom python scripts using the sciki - image ( 62 ) and NumPy ( 63 ) libraries . On unpatterned surfaces , individual PFCs and single filament complexes were manually identified at frame 10 of TIRF microscopy movies and counted to quantify absolute number of filament complexes and proportion of PFCs . Time to rupture was manually recorded for a subset of PFCs , defined as the time between frame 10 and final frame where the intact PFC was 25 observed . For a subset of PFCs , in the frames preceding PFC rupture F - actin fluorescence was recorded in a 21 x 6 pixel box , and CPC fluorescence in a 14 x 14 pixel box . Barbed end concentration was estimated by tracing filaments in experiments in the absence of CPC to measure their average length , estimating the number of subunits expected in a filament of that average length based on the rise of 2 . 73 nm between subunits on adjacent strands ( 64 ) , then dividing the G - actin concentration used in the polymerization reaction by that number . On patterned surfaces , star and Y configuration actin networks were manually identified at frame 10 of TIRF microscopy movies , and time to rupture was recorded , defined as the time between frame 10 and the final frame where network F - actin is seen bridging adjacent stripes . The number of actin bundles seen traversing single 136 µ m long stripes was measured by taking a line scan , recording actin fluorescence intensity , and counting the number of peaks . For α - catenin experiments + / - ATP on patterned surfaces , for each stripe , F - actin fluorescence intensity was threshholded to generate a binary mask , skeletonized , and then dilated to form consistent 5 - pixel wide masks containing filament bundle segments . F - actin and α - catenin fluorescence intensity was recorded for each stripe and exemplar heatmaps of the fluorescence intensity ratio in masked areas were generated . For each stripe , the average F - actin fluorescence intensity and average α - catenin : F - actin fluorescence intensity ratio was calculated in the masked regions before and after addition of ATP , then compared . Four regions of interest featuring interconnected groups of F - actin bundles were identified , grouped into time periods of stable F - actin configurations and averaged to capture different states of the networks . For each average frame , line scans were taken across individual F - actin bundle segments and the average F - actin fluorescence intensity and α - catenin fluorescence intensity of each segment was recorded for calculating the α - catenin : F - actin fluorescence intensity ratio . In one exemplar case ( Fig . 4A ) , masks covering the F - actin bundle segments were generated manually and the underlying α - catenin : F - actin fluorescence intensity ratios were calculated on a per - pixel basis to generate a heat map . As outlined in Fig . S8 , in α - catenin ATP / apyrase experiments , for each stripe , the F - actin fluorescence intensity was thresholded to generate a binary mask , skeletonized , and convolved with a 3 x 3 pixel branch point finding filter to separate individual filament bundle segments . The debranched 26 skeleton was then dilated to form consistent 5 - pixel wide masks containing actin filament bundles . The average F - actin intensity and α - catenin fluorescence intensity was measured for each bundle segment to calculate the α - catenin : F - actin fluorescence ratio . Plotting and statistical analyses All plotting and statistical analyses were performed with GraphPad Prism . 27 References : 1 . T . D . Pollard , J . A . Cooper , Actin , a central player in cell shape and movement . Science 326 , 1208 – 1212 ( 2009 ) . 2 . T . D . Pollard , Actin and Actin - Binding Proteins . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 8 , a018226 ( 2016 ) . 3 . L . Blanchoin , R . Boujemaa - Paterski , C . Sykes , J . Plastino , Actin dynamics , architecture , and mechanics in cell motility . Physiol . Rev . 94 , 235 – 263 ( 2014 ) . 4 . A . Hall , Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton . Science 279 , 509 – 514 ( 1998 ) . 5 . A . J . Ridley , Rho GTPases and actin dynamics in membrane protrusions and vesicle trafficking . Trends Cell Biol . 16 , 522 – 529 ( 2006 ) . 6 . A . M . Gautreau , F . E . Fregoso , G . Simanov , R . Dominguez , Nucleation , stabilization , and disassembly of branched actin networks . Trends Cell Biol . 32 , 421 – 432 ( 2022 ) . 7 . K . J . Amann , T . D . Pollard , The Arp2 / 3 complex nucleates actin filament branches from the sides of pre - existing filaments . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 306 – 310 ( 2001 ) . 8 . S . Pellegrin , H . Mellor , Actin stress fibres . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 3491 – 3499 ( 2007 ) . 9 . P . Bieling , et al . , Force Feedback Controls Motor Activity and Mechanical Properties of Self - Assembling Branched Actin Networks . Cell 164 , 115 – 127 ( 2016 ) . 10 . P . Bieling , J . Weichsel , R . D . Mullins , D . A . Fletcher , The molecular mechanism of load adaptation by branched actin networks . Elife 11 , e73145 ( 2022 ) . 11 . J . Mueller , et al . , Load Adaptation of Lamellipodial Actin Networks . Cell 171 , 188 - 200 . e16 ( 2017 ) . 12 . M . A . Smith , et al . , A Zyxin - Mediated Mechanism for Actin Stress Fiber Maintenance and Repair . Dev . Cell 19 , 365 – 376 ( 2010 ) . 13 . M . A . Smith , et al . , LIM Domains Target Actin Regulators Paxillin and Zyxin to Sites of Stress Fiber Strain . PLOS ONE 8 , e69378 ( 2013 ) . 14 . N . Efimova , T . M . Svitkina , Branched actin networks push against each other at adherens junctions to maintain cell – cell adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 217 , 1827 – 1845 ( 2018 ) . 15 . J . X . H . Li , V . W . Tang , W . M . Brieher , Actin protrusions push at apical junctions to maintain E - cadherin adhesion . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 117 , 432 – 438 ( 2020 ) . 16 . H . - C . Yu - Kemp , et al . , Micron - scale supramolecular myosin arrays help mediate cytoskeletal assembly at mature adherens junctions . J . Cell Biol . 221 , e202103074 ( 2021 ) . 17 . A . Jégou , G . Romet - Lemonne , Mechanically tuning actin filaments to modulate the action of actin - binding proteins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 68 , 72 – 80 ( 2021 ) . 18 . X . Sun , G . M . Alushin , Cellular force - sensing through actin filaments . FEBS J . ( 2022 ) https : / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / febs . 16568 . 28 19 . V . I . Risca , et al . , Actin filament curvature biases branching direction . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 109 , 2913 – 2918 ( 2012 ) . 20 . N . G . Pandit , et al . , Force and phosphate release from Arp2 / 3 complex promote dissociation of actin filament branches . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 117 , 13519 – 13528 ( 2020 ) . 21 . A . Jégou , M . - F . Carlier , G . Romet - Lemonne , Formin mDia1 senses and generates mechanical forces on actin filaments . Nat . Commun . 4 , 1883 ( 2013 ) . 22 . N . Courtemanche , J . Y . Lee , T . D . Pollard , E . C . Greene , Tension modulates actin filament polymerization mediated by formin and profilin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 110 , 9752 – 9757 ( 2013 ) . 23 . D . Zimmermann , et al . , Mechanoregulated inhibition of formin facilitates contractile actomyosin ring assembly . Nat . Commun . 8 , 1 – 13 ( 2017 ) . 24 . M . Yu , et al . , mDia1 senses both force and torque during F - actin filament polymerization . Nat . Commun . 8 , 1650 ( 2017 ) . 25 . K . Hayakawa , H . Tatsumi , M . Sokabe , Actin filaments function as a tension sensor by tension - dependent binding of cofilin to the filament . J . Cell Biol . 195 , 721 – 727 ( 2011 ) . 26 . H . Wioland , A . Jegou , G . Romet - Lemonne , Torsional stress generated by ADF / cofilin on cross - linked actin filaments boosts their severing . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 116 , 2595 – 2602 ( 2019 ) . 27 . C . D . Buckley , et al . , Cell adhesion . The minimal cadherin - catenin complex binds to actin filaments under force . Science 346 , 1254211 ( 2014 ) . 28 . D . L . Huang , N . A . Bax , C . D . Buckley , W . I . Weis , A . R . Dunn , Vinculin forms a directionally asymmetric catch bond with F - actin . Science 357 , 703 – 706 ( 2017 ) . 29 . L . M . Owen , N . A . Bax , W . I . Weis , A . R . Dunn , The C - terminal actin - binding domain of talin forms an asymmetric catch bond with F - actin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 119 , e2109329119 ( 2022 ) . 30 . C . Arbore , et al . , α - catenin switches between a slip and an asymmetric catch bond with F - actin to cooperatively regulate cell junction fluidity . Nat . Commun . 13 , 1146 ( 2022 ) . 31 . L . Mei , et al . , Molecular mechanism for direct actin force - sensing by α - catenin . eLife 9 , e62514 ( 2020 ) . 32 . X . Sun , et al . , Mechanosensing through Direct Binding of Tensed F - Actin by LIM Domains . Dev . Cell 55 , 468 - 482 . e7 ( 2020 ) . 33 . J . D . Winkelman , C . A . Anderson , C . Suarez , D . R . Kovar , M . L . Gardel , Evolutionarily diverse LIM domain - containing proteins bind stressed actin filaments through a conserved mechanism . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 117 , 25532 – 25542 ( 2020 ) . 34 . Y . Mulla , et al . , Weak catch bonds make strong networks . Nat . Mater . 21 , 1019 – 1023 ( 2022 ) . 35 . F . Drees , S . Pokutta , S . Yamada , W . J . Nelson , W . I . Weis , α - catenin is a molecular switch that binds E - cadherin - β - catenin and regulates actin - filament assembly . Cell 123 , 903 – 915 ( 2005 ) . 36 . A . Kobielak , E . Fuchs , α - catenin : at the junction of intercellular adhesion and actin dynamics . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 614 – 625 ( 2004 ) . 29 37 . N . Ishiyama , et al . , Force - dependent allostery of the α - catenin actin - binding domain controls adherens junction dynamics and functions . Nat . Commun . 9 , 5121 ( 2018 ) . 38 . C . N . Duong , et al . , Force - induced changes of α - catenin conformation stabilize vascular junctions independently of vinculin . J . Cell Sci . 134 , jcs259012 ( 2021 ) . 39 . H . Lee , J . M . Ferrer , F . Nakamura , M . J . Lang , R . D . Kamm , Passive and active microrheology for cross - linked F - actin networks in vitro . Acta Biomater . 6 , 1207 – 1218 ( 2010 ) . 40 . E . S . Schiffhauer , et al . , Mechanoaccumulative elements of the mammalian actin cytoskeleton . Curr . Biol . 26 , 1473 – 1479 ( 2016 ) . 41 . S . J . Kron , J . A . Spudich , Fluorescent actin filaments move on myosin fixed to a glass surface . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 83 , 6272 – 6276 ( 1986 ) . 42 . A . H . Keeble , et al . , Evolving Accelerated Amidation by SpyTag / SpyCatcher to Analyze Membrane Dynamics . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed Engl . 56 , 16521 – 16525 ( 2017 ) . 43 . G . Veggiani , et al . , Programmable polyproteams built using twin peptide superglues . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 113 , 1202 – 1207 ( 2016 ) . 44 . C . Cecconi , E . A . Shank , F . W . Dahlquist , S . Marqusee , C . Bustamante , Protein - DNA chimeras for single molecule mechanical folding studies with the optical tweezers . Eur . Biophys . J . 37 , 729 – 738 ( 2008 ) . 45 . K . N . Lovendahl , A . N . Hayward , W . R . Gordon , Sequence - Directed Covalent Protein - DNA Linkages in a Single Step Using HUH - Tags . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 139 , 7030 – 7035 ( 2017 ) . 46 . P . B . Tarsa , et al . , Detecting force - induced molecular transitions with fluorescence resonant energy transfer . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed Engl . 46 , 1999 – 2001 ( 2007 ) . 47 . N . D . Derr , et al . , Tug - of - war in motor protein ensembles revealed with a programmable DNA origami scaffold . Science 338 , 662 – 665 ( 2012 ) . 48 . H . E . Huxley , Fifty years of muscle and the sliding filament hypothesis . Eur . J . Biochem . 271 , 1403 – 1415 ( 2004 ) . 49 . J . L . Watson , et al . , High - efficacy subcellular micropatterning of proteins using fibrinogen anchors . J . Cell Biol . 220 , e202009063 ( 2021 ) . 50 . A . - C . Reymann , et al . , Actin network architecture can determine myosin motor activity . Science 336 , 1310 – 1314 ( 2012 ) . 51 . M . Pochitaloff , et al . , Flagella - like beating of actin bundles driven by self - organized myosin waves . Nat . Phys . 18 , 1240 – 1247 ( 2022 ) . 52 . E . S . Rangarajan , E . W . Smith , T . Izard , Distinct inter - domain interactions of dimeric versus monomeric α - catenin link cell junctions to filaments . Commun . Biol . 6 , 276 ( 2023 ) . 53 . M . Bush , et al . , An ensemble of flexible conformations underlies mechanotransduction by the cadherin – catenin adhesion complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 116 , 21545 – 21555 ( 2019 ) . 54 . D . L . Rimm , E . R . Koslov , P . Kebriaei , C . D . Cianci , J . S . Morrow , Alpha 1 ( E ) - catenin is an actin - binding and - bundling protein mediating the attachment of F - actin to the membrane adhesion complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 92 , 8813 – 8817 ( 1995 ) . 30 55 . J . D . Pardee , J . A . Spudich , “Purification of Muscle Actin” in Methods in Enzymology , Methods in Enzymology . , ( 1982 ) , pp . 164 – 181 . 56 . P . S . Gurel , et al . , Cryo - EM structures reveal specialization at the myosin VI - actin interface and a mechanism of force sensitivity . eLife 6 , e31125 . 57 . D . G . Gibson , et al . , Enzymatic assembly of DNA molecules up to several hundred kilobases . Nat . Methods 6 , 343 – 345 ( 2009 ) . 58 . J . E . Tropea , S . Cherry , D . S . Waugh , Expression and purification of soluble His ( 6 ) - tagged TEV protease . Methods Mol . Biol . Clifton NJ 498 , 297 – 307 ( 2009 ) . 59 . M . G . Cordingley , R . B . Register , P . L . Callahan , V . M . Garsky , R . J . Colonno , Cleavage of small peptides in vitro by human rhinovirus 14 3C protease expressed in Escherichia coli . J . Virol . 63 , 5037 – 5045 ( 1989 ) . 60 . J . A . Putkey , G . R . Slaughter , A . R . Means , Bacterial expression and characterization of proteins derived from the chicken calmodulin cDNA and a calmodulin processed gene . J . Biol . Chem . 260 , 4704 – 4712 ( 1985 ) . 61 . J . Schindelin , et al . , Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat . Methods 9 , 676 – 682 ( 2012 ) . 62 . S . Van Der Walt , et al . , scikit - image : image processing in Python . PeerJ 2 , e453 ( 2014 ) . 63 . C . R . Harris , et al . , Array programming with NumPy . Nature 585 , 357 – 362 ( 2020 ) . 64 . E . H . Egelman , N . Francis , D . J . DeRosier , F - actin is a helix with a random variable twist . Nature 298 , 131 – 135 ( 1982 ) . 31 Figures : Figure 1 . Capping protein complexes assemble actin filaments into paired filament complexes . A ) Cartoons of a typical gliding filament assay ( left ) , and modified gliding filament assays using CPC to form PFCs ( center ) or CPC - DNA to form dPFCs ( right ) . B ) Left : Micrograph of a field of PFCs . Scale bar , 10 µ m . Arrowheads indicate single filament complexes . Right : Montages of two PFCs which undergo ruptures . Scale bar , 2 µ m . C ) Quantification of mean number of CPCs bound to filaments ( gray bars ) versus proportion of CPCs engaged in PFCs ( red points ) at different CPC concentrations . Error bars represent s . d . ; n = 26 from 7 trials . See Fig . S2C for individual measurements . D ) Quantification of time to rupture of PFCs . n = 130 from 26 trials . E ) Representative micrograph of a field of dPFCs prepared with CPC - DNA . Scale bar , 10 µ m . Arrowheads indicate single filament complexes featuring only one half - CPC - DNA . Right : montage of a PFC where signal from both half - CPC - DNA 1 and 2 are apparent prior to rupture . Scale bar , 2 µ m . 32 Figure 2 . Micropatterning myosin - 5 collects PFCs into tensed networks . A ) Montages of PFCs on stochastically distributed ( top ) and micropatterned ( bottom ) fields of myosin - 5 . F - actin is black ; CPC is not shown . Vertical bars indicate positions of myosin - 5 stripes . Scale bar , 10 µ m . Inset cartoons indicate PFC configurations at highlighted positions . B ) Quantification of number of PFC networks per stripe . Bar indicates mean . n = 42 from 4 trials . C ) Quantification of times to rupture of PFC networks . n = 45 from 4 trials . D ) Montages of “Y” configuration ( left ) and “star” configuration ( right ) networks breaking over time . Scale bars , 2 µ m . 33 Figure 3 . FL α - catenin binding is heterogenous within tensed F - actin networks . A ) Time averaged images of actin fluorescence intensity ( top ) , FL α - catenin fluorescence intensity ( middle ) and α - catenin : F - actin fluorescence intensity ratio ( bottom ) of 8 configurationally distinct states of a PFC network . Bundle segments highlighted in shades of pink feature an increase in their α - catenin : F - actin fluorescence intensity ratio over time . Scale bar , 2 µ m . B ) Scatterplot of F - actin versus α - catenin fluorescence intensity of bundle segments from state 2 in A . Black points represent non - highlighted bundle segments . Linear regression is displayed . C ) α - catenin : F - actin fluorescence intensity ratio ( top ) and F - actin fluorescence intensity ( bottom ) of bundle segments across all 8 states of the network . Black lines represent non - highlighted bundles segments . D ) Scatterplot of maximal fold - change in α - catenin fluorescence intensity during the imaging period versus F - actin intensity of bundle segments . n = 31 ; shades of grey indicate measurements from the 4 networks analyzed . 34 Figure 4 . Force - activated F - actin binding mediates FL α - catenin’s enrichment on small bundles . A ) Representative α - catenin : F - actin fluorescence intensity ratio images of PFC networks ( vertical bars indicate positions of myosin - 5 stripes ) and associated scatter plots of normalized F - actin versus ɑ - catenin fluorescence intensity of bundle segments for FL ɑ - catenin ( left ) or ɑ - cateninΔC ( right ) , in the presence of ATP ( top ) or apyrase ( bottom ) . Different colored points indicate data from 3 independent trials . n = 2 , 449 ( FL ɑ - catenin + ATP ) ; 2 , 243 ( FL ɑ - catenin + apyrase ) ; 1 , 668 ( ɑ - cateninΔC + ATP ) ; 2 , 241 ( ɑ - cateninΔC + apyrase ) . Grey boxes indicate quadrant representing the top 50 % of α - catenin fluorescence intensity and bottom 50 % of F - actin fluorescence intensity . Linear regressions are displayed . Scale bar , 10 µ m . B ) Pooled analysis of ɑ - catenin : F - actin fluorescence intensity ratios of data from A compared with unpaired Welch’s t - test . Bars indicate means ; darker points correspond to boxed quadrants in A . C ) Pooled analysis of F - actin fluorescence intensity of data from A , analyzed as in B . 35 Figure 5 . Conceptual model of force - mediated bundle size discrimination . F - actin crosslinkers with force - activated F - actin binding activity balance enhanced engagement of smaller filament bundles , where individual filaments experience a higher load per filament , with mass - action driven association to larger bundles featuring more binding sites . This balances the total number of crosslinkers per bundle across a range of filament bundle sizes . Bundle engagement by force insensitive F - actin crosslinkers is driven solely by the number of binding sites , leading to their accumulation on larger filament bundles . 36 Supplemental Figures : Figure S1 . Assembly and purification of CPCs . A ) SDS - PAGE analysis of proteinaceous CPC components . B ) Reaction scheme and SDS - PAGE analysis of the assembled five - part CPC . Asterisk indicates CapZA , which is non - covalently associated with the CPC . C ) SDS - PAGE analysis of CPC - DNA components . D ) Reaction scheme and SDS - PAGE analysis of the two halves of the assembled CPC - DNA . Asterisk indicates CapZA . 37 Figure S2 . Characterization of PFCs assembled with CPC . A ) SDS - PAGE analysis of CPC / F - actin co - sedimentation assay . 2 mg / ml BSA was included as blocking reagent . Vortexing filaments shears them , increasing the free barbed - end concentration . Enhanced CPC co - sedimentation under this condition indicates end - dependent binding . B ) Time to rupture for PFCs from Fig . 1C , pooled by CPC concentration . Bars indicate means . n = 38 ( 1 nM ) ; 33 ( 2 nM ) ; 27 ( 5 nM ) ; 32 ( 10 nM ) from 26 independent trials . KW test with Dunn’s correction for multiple comparisons . C ) Replotting of data from Fig . 1D , showing all data points for number of CPCs bound to filaments ( black ) and proportion of CPCs engaged in PFCs ( red ) versus CPC concentration . n = 7 ( 1 nM ) ; 6 ( 2 nM ) ; 6 ( 5 nM ) ; 6 ( 10 nM ) independent trials . D ) Additional montages of PFCs breaking under tension over time . Scale bar , 1 µ m . E ) Top : montage where CPC bleaches prior to PFC rupture . Scale bar , 1 µ m . Bottom : fluorescence intensity of F - actin and CPC in each frame . One - step bleaching of CPC indicates the presence of a single molecule . 38 Figure S3 . Characterization of dPFCs assembled with CPC - DNA . A ) Left : micrograph of a field of dPFCs prepared with CPC - DNA . Scale bar , 10 µ m . Right : montage of single filament with a complete CPC - DNA attached moving over time ( orange ) and montage of dPFC breaking over time ( green ) . B ) Montages of additional dPFCs breaking under tension over time . Scale bar , 1 mm . 39 Figure S4 . Protein micropatterning procedure . Cartoon of PRIMO UV photopatterning procedure showing two adjacent stripes of myosin - 5 on a coverslip ( see Methods for details ) . 40 Figure S5 . “Star” and “Y” configuration F - actin networks form in the presence of CPC . A ) Micrographs of F - actin on micropatterned fields of myosin - 5 in the presence ( top ) and absence ( bottom ) of CPC . Scale bar , 10 µ m . B ) Detail views of gaps between stripes in both conditions selected for linescan analysis ( dotted lines ) . C ) F - actin intensity profile along linescans : + CPC condition , green ; - CPC condition , orange . The lower intensity of peaks in the - CPC condition indicates reduced F - actin bundling . 41 Figure S6 . Purification and characterization of FL ɑ - catenin and ɑ - cateninΔC . A ) Size exclusion chromatography profiles of purified FL ɑ - catenin ( top ) and ɑ - cateninΔC ( bottom ) . Molecular weights of Halo - tagged FL ɑ - catenin and ɑ - cateninΔC are 128 kDa and 124 kDa , respectively . Dotted lines indicate retention volumes of specified molecular weight standards . B ) SDS - PAGE analysis of co - sedimentation assays of FL ɑCatenin ( top ) and ɑCateninΔC ( bottom ) . S = supernatant , LS = low speed pellet , HS = high speed pellet . 42 Figure S7 . Dimeric FL α - catenin features force - activated F - actin binding activity . A ) Top : micrographs of PFC networks in the presence of FL ɑ - catenin ( left ) or ɑ - cateninΔC ( right ) before and after the addition of ATP . Bottom : ɑ - catenin : F - actin fluorescence intensity ratio images of the same fields of view . Vertical bars indicate positions of myson - 5 stripes . Scale bar , 10 µ m . B ) Paired analysis of average ɑ - catenin : F - actin fluorescence intensity ratio per inter - stripe gap before and after ATP addition for FL ɑ - catenin ( left ) or ɑ - cateninΔC ( right ) . Welch’s t - test : n = 40 gaps from 4 independent trials ( FL ɑ - catenin ) ; 35 gaps from 3 independent trials ( ΔC ) . Shades of grey indicate points from different trials . C ) Paired analysis ( Welch’s t - test ) of actin fluorescence intensity from same data presented in B . 43 Figure S8 . Image segmentation and quantification pipeline . A ) Representative micrographs of PFC networks in the presence of either FL ɑ - catenin ( left ) or ɑ - cateninΔC ( right ) treated with either ATP ( top row ) or apyrase ( bottom row ) . Fields of view are identical to those depicted in the α - catenin : F - actin fluorescence intensity ratio images in Fig 4A . Vertical bars indicate the positions of patterned myosin - 5 stripes . Scale bar , 10 µ m . B ) Cartoon showing how bundle segments are identified and segmented from networks for analysis . See Methods for details . Scale bar , 10 µ m . 44 Movie Legends : Movie S1 : PFCs prepared with CPC come under tension on a random field of myosin - 5 motors . Same field of view as Fig . 1B . F - actin is black ; CPC is magenta . Green arrows highlight PFCs , which turn red immediately before PFC rupture . Scale bar , 10 µ m . Movie S2 : Half - CPC - DNA 1 translocates on barbed ends of actin filaments in a gliding assay . From a single field of view , left frame displays half - CPC - DNA 1 ( magenta ) , right frame displays F - actin ( black ) . In addition to mobile half - CPC - DNAs , some molecules adhere to the surface and do not translocate . Scale bar , 10 µ m . Movie S3 : Half - CPC - DNA 2 translocates on barbed ends of actin filaments in a gliding assay . From a single field of view , left frame displays half - CPC - DNA 2 ( cyan ) , right frame displays F - actin ( black ) . The sample features a mixture of mobile and immobile half - CPC - DNAs . Scale bar , 10 µ m . Movie S4 : dPFCs made with CPC - DNA under tension on a random field of myosin - 5 motors . Same field of view as Fig . 1E . F - actin is black ; half - CPC - DNA 1 is magenta ; half - CPC - DNA 2 is cyan . Green arrows highlight dPFCs , which turn red immediately before dPFC rupture . Scale bar , 10 µ m . Movie S5 : higher - order PFC networks under tension on micropatterned stripes of myosin - 5 . Same field of view as Fig . 2A . F - actin is black , CPC not shown . Regions featuring uniform high density of F - actin correspond to myosin - 5 stripes . Scale bar , 10 µ m . Movie S6 : FL α - catenin accumulates on PFC networks in response to tension . From a single field of view , left frame displays F - actin , right frame displays FL α - catenin . Recording was initiated after ATP addition to activate motors . Regions featuring uniform high density of F - actin and α - catenin correspond to myosin - 5 stripes . Scale bar , 10 µ m . Movie S7 : FL α - catenin dynamically localizes within a mechanically rearranging PFC network . From a single field of view of network analyzed in Fig . 3 , left frame displays F - actin , middle frame displays FL α - catenin . Right frame displays time - averaged F - actin signal between substantial transitions assigned as states . Patterned stripes are not visible but are present to the immediate left and right of the frame . Scale bar , 2 µ m .