Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33305 - w Tail proteins of phage SU10 reorganize into the nozzle for genome delivery Marta Š iborová 1 , Tibor Füzik 1 , Michaela Procházková 1 , Ji ř í Nová č ek 1 , Martin Bene š ík 2 , Anders S . Nilsson 3 & Pavel Plevka 1 Escherichia coli phage SU10 belongs to the genus Kuravirus from the class Caudoviricetes of phages with short non - contractile tails . In contrast to other short - tailed phages , the tails of Kuraviruses elongate upon cell attachment . Here we show that the virion of SU10 has a prolate head , containing genome and ejection proteins , and a tail , which is formed of portal , adaptor , nozzle , and tail needle proteins and decorated with long and short ﬁ bers . The binding of the long tail ﬁ bers to the receptors in the outer bacterial membrane induces the straightening of nozzle proteins and rotation of short tail ﬁ bers . After the re - arrangement , the nozzle proteins and short tail ﬁ bers alternate to form a nozzle that extends the tail by 28 nm . Subsequently , the tail needle detaches from the nozzle proteins and ﬁ ve types of ejection proteins are released from the SU10 head . The nozzle with the putative extension formed by the ejection proteins enables the delivery of the SU10 genome into the bacterial cytoplasm . It is likely that this mechanism of genome delivery , involving the formation of the tail nozzle , is employed by all Kuraviruses . Phages from the genus Kuravirus belong to the class Caudoviricetes of phages with short non - contractile tails 1 . Kuraviruses , including the Escherichia coli phage SU10 , are distinguished among short - tailed phages by large genomes with 75 – 80 , 000 base pairs encoding more than 50 proteins 2 – 4 . Kuraviruses arelytic , and some of them have short replication cycles and produce a plentiful progeny , which makes them candidates for use in phage therapy against pathogenic strains of E . coli 5 – 7 . A phage cocktail containing phage ES17 , from the genus Kur - avirus , was used in a case study to treat E . coli infection of the prostate and urinary tract 8 . The genomes of kuraviruses are accommodated in prolate heads , characterized by ﬁ vefold symmetry and elongation in the direction of the tail axis 2 , 3 . The genomes of tailed phages are packaged into pre - formed pro - heads by molecular motors through a channel formed by thedodecamerofportalproteins , whichreplacesapentamerofcapsid proteins at one of the ﬁ vefold vertices of the capsid . Phage tails are attached to the portal complexes 9 . Common tail components of pha - ges with short tails infecting Gram - negative bacteria are adaptor proteins , major tail proteins , tail needle proteins , and tail ﬁ bers 10 . The tail ﬁ bers enable the initial binding of phages to bacteria 11 – 13 , whereas tail needles are responsible for the penetration of the host cell ’ s outer membrane 14 , 15 . The heads of most short - tailed phages contain ejection proteins , which enable the delivery of phage genomes into the host cells . The ejection proteins form a translocation complex that elon - gates the tail to span the bacterial cell wall 16 – 19 . The pressure inside the phage head enables the ejection of 30 – 50 % of the genome into a bacterial cell 20 – 22 . However , after equalization of the pressures inside the phage headand bacterial cytoplasm , the remainder of the DNA has to be delivered into the bacterium by another mechanism 21 , 23 , 24 . It has been shown , using negative - stain electron microscopy , that phage SU10 has a longer tail than most phages formerly classi ﬁ ed to the family Podoviridae , and that the tail undergoes a conformational change upon binding to bacteria 2 . Here we present cryo - electron microscopy ( cryo - EM ) structures of the virion and genome release intermediate of bacteriophage SU10 and cryo - electron tomography ( cryo - ET ) characterization of its Received : 31 January 2022 Accepted : 12 September 2022 Check for updates 1 Central European Institute of Technology , Kamenice 753 / 5 , 625 00 Brno , Czech Republic . 2 Faculty of Science , Masaryk University , Kamenice 753 / 5 , 625 00 Brno , Czech Republic . 3 Department of Molecular Biosciences , The Wenner - Gren Institute , Stockholm University , 106 91 Stockholm , Sweden . e - mail : pavel . plevka @ ceitec . muni . cz Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5622 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 ( ) : , ; 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 ( ) : , ; attachment to E . coli cells . After binding to the host , SU10 tail , nozzle proteins , and short ﬁ bers re - arrange to form a nozzle that extends the tail . Kuraviruses share more than 70 % sequence similarity in their tail proteins . Therefore , itislikelythatthismechanismofgenomedelivery , involving the formation of the tail nozzle , is employed by most , if not all Kuraviruses . Results and discussion Structure of SU10 virion The virion of bacteriophage SU10 has a prolate head with a length of 1430 Å and a diameter of 460Å , which is formed by the major capsid protein ( gp9 ) ( Fig . 1a , Supplementary Table 1 , 2 ) 2 . The tail is 220 Å long and decorated with six long and six short tail ﬁ bers ( Fig . 1a – c , 2a , c , Supplementary Table 1 , 2 ) . The tail is attached to one of the vertices of the prolate capsid , where the dodecamer of portal proteins ( gp6 ) replaces a pentamer of capsid proteins ( Figs . 1a – c ) . The part of the portal complex protruding from the capsid enables the binding of the dodecamer of adaptor proteins ( gp11 ) . The adap - tor complex provides six attachment sites for long tail ﬁ bers , each of which is formed by a trimer of long tail ﬁ ber proximal proteins ( gp12 ) and a trimer of long tail ﬁ ber distal proteins ( gp13 ) ( Figs . 1c , 2a , c ) . A hexamer of nozzle proteins ( gp17 ) is attached to the adaptor complex and enables the binding of six short tail ﬁ bers , trimers of short tail ﬁ ber protein ( gp16 ) ( Fig . 2a , c ) . The tail needle , which is formed by three polypeptide chains ( gp18 ) , protrudes from the central channel formed by the nozzle proteins ( Figs . 1a – c and 2a , c ) . SU10 capsid and structure of major capsid protein The prolate capsid of SU10 is organized with ﬁ vefold symmetry and is built from 715 copies of the major capsid protein organized with the triangulation parameters T end = 4 , T mid = 20 ( Fig . 3a , Supplementary Fig . 1 , 2 ) . The major capsid protein forms capsomers of two types : pentamersandhexamers . Thecentraltubularpartof thecapsidisbuilt from 90 hexamers arranged in nine layers of a ten - entry helix ( Fig . 3a ) . The capsid is closed on both ends with caps formed by the major capsidproteinsorganizedwithlocalT = 4quasi - icosahedralsymmetry . The closure of the caps is enabled by pentamers , which are bent in contrast to the ﬂ atter hexamers ( Fig . 3a , Supplementary Fig . 1 ) . However , the formation of the prolate SU10 head also requires varia - tion in the shape of hexamers and in the angles at which they interact . The hexamers in the caps are more bent ( H4 , H5 ; 149 - 150° ) , whereas those that form the tubular part of the capsid are relatively ﬂ at ( H1 , H2L , H2R , H3 ; 154 – 164° ) ( Supplementary Fig . 2 ) . All hexamer - hexamer and hexamer - pentamer interfaces in the caps are arched ( 145° ) ( Sup - plementary Fig . 2A ) , however , the hexamers that form the tubular part of the capsid are connected by two types of interfaces , arched ( 145° ) and more planar ( 160° ) ( Supplementary Fig . 2 ) . The arched interfaces enable the formation of rings of hexamers , whereas the more planar ones mediate interactions between the rings ( Supplementary Fig . 2 ) . The major capsid protein of SU10 has an HK97 fold , which is common among tailed bacteriophages and herpesviruses ( Fig . 3b ) 25 . According to the convention , the capsid protein can be divided into the N - terminal arm , peripheral domain , extended loop , axial domain , and glycine - rich loop ( Fig . 3b ) . The major difference between the Fig . 1 | Structure of virion and genome - release intermediate of phage SU10 . a Surface representation of composite cryo - EM map of virion of phage SU10 colored according to protein type . The major capsid protein ( gp9 ) is shown in turquoise , portal protein ( gp6 ) in magenta , adaptor protein ( gp11 ) in yellow , long tail ﬁ bers ( gp12 ) in violet , nozzle protein ( gp17 ) in red , short tail ﬁ bers ( gp16 ) in green , and tail needle ( gp18 ) in light blue . The length of the virion is 1590Å . For details on the construction of the composite map , please see the Materials and methods section . b The same as A , but the front half of the composite map of the SU10 head was removed to show the structure of the genome in grey . The inset shows a 2D class average of the SU10 virion . The scale bar indicates 45nm . c Compositecryo - EMmapofportalandtailcomplexesofSU10virion . Thelengthof the complex is 540Å . D Cryo - EMreconstruction ofportaland tail complexes from an SU10 genome release intermediate . e Composite cryo - EM map of genome - release intermediate of SU10 . The front half of the head was removed to show the structureofthegenomeremaininginthecapsid . Theinsetshowsa2Dclassaverage of the SU10 genome release intermediate . f Schematic representation of segment ofSU10genomeencodingstructuralproteinscolor - codedthesameastheproteins in panels a to e . Proteins shown in white are either non - structural or were not identi ﬁ ed in the reconstructions . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33305 - w Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5622 2 capsid proteins forming hexamers and pentamers is in the structure of the annular loop positioned at the tip of the axial domain ( Fig . 3b ) . In hexamers , the annular loop protrudes away from the axial domain ( Fig . 3b , c ) . Thesixannularloopsfromsubunitsformingonehexamer form a ring around its quasi - sixfold axis ( Fig . 3c ) . In contrast , in subunits formingpentamers theannularloopisbent90°towardsthe capsid center ( Fig . 3c ) . The beta - strands from the loops of major capsid proteins from a pentamer form a beta - barrel with a central pore with a diameter of 8 Å that penetrates through the capsid . ( Fig . 3c , Supplementary Fig . 3G ) . The pore may serve for the passage of ions and water molecules from and into the capsid during genome packaging and ejection . The genome of SU10 encodes a protein ( gp10 ) with a predicted immunoglobulin - like foldsimilarto that of the minor capsid protein of phage Epsilon15 and the N - terminal domain of head ﬁ ber protein of bacteriophage φ 29 26 , 27 . However , the cryo - EM reconstruction of the SU10 head does not contain density corresponding to minor capsid proteins . It is possible that gp10 of SU10 has a different function or binds to the capsid with low af ﬁ nity and was lost during phage pur - i ﬁ cation ( Supplementary Fig . 4C ) . Structure of genome packaged in SU10 virion The cryo - EM density of the genome in the SU10 virion was resolved in both ﬁ vefold symmetric and asymmetric reconstructions of its head ( Fig . 1b , Supplementary Fig . 3 ) . Despite the differences in the sym - metries imposed during the reconstruction processes , the arrange - ments of the genome densities are similar ( Supplementary Fig . 3A – D ) . Nine shells of density can be distinguished inside the tubular part of the head , whereas only four shells are resolved underneath the capsid caps ( Supplementary Fig . 3 ) . In the three outermost shells , the density separates into strands , which can be interpreted as segments of double - stranded DNA ( Supplementary Fig . 3A – D , F ) . The resolved structure of the genome in the cryo - EM reconstruction indicates that the genome packaging results in a similar ordering of the DNA in most SU10 virions . However , links between the DNA segments in the central partoftheSU10head , whichmustexistbecausethegenomeisformed of a single 77 , 325bp long double - stranded DNA 2 , are not resolved . In both ﬁ ve - fold symmetric and asymmetric reconstructions of the SU10 head , the DNA strands in the two outermost layers are organized as ten - entry helices ( Supplementary Fig . 3B , D ) . The DNA strands from the outermost layer of the genome curve to avoid the beta - barrels protruding from pentamers of capsid proteins ( Supplementary Fig . 3G ) . The intriguing organization of the DNA may be used as additional restraints in future studies of the phage genome packaging process by computer simulations . The proteins gp20 - 24 are present in the SU10 virion , but absent from the genome release intermediate , indicating that they are ejec - tion proteins ( Supplementary Fig . 4C , Supplementary Table 1 ) . How - ever , the reconstruction of the SU10 virion does not contain resolved density that could be attributed to the putative ejection proteins ( Fig . 1b ) , as is the case in tailed phages T7 , Epsilon15 , and N4 17 , 18 , 28 . The genome of SU10 ispackaged in the capsidwith a density of 0 . 48Da / Å 3 , whichiscomparable to the 0 . 49 – 0 . 52 Da / Å 3 determined previously for bacteriophages P22 , lambda , T4 , ϕ 29 , and T7 29 . Therefore , the capsid of SU10 could contain both genomic DNA and ejection proteins . Portal complex The portal complex of SU10 is embedded in the capsid at one of its ﬁ vefold vertices , where it replaces a pentamer of capsid proteins ( Figs . 1a , b , 4a ) . TheportalproteinofSU10canbedividedintothewing , Fig . 2 | Conformational changes of SU10 tail associated with genome release . Cartoon representations of proteins forming tail of SU10 virion a , c and genome release intermediate b , d . The portal protein ( gp6 ) is shown in magenta , adaptor protein ( gp11 ) inyellow , longtail ﬁ berprotein ( gp12 ) inviolet , nozzleprotein ( gp17 ) inred , shorttail ﬁ berprotein ( gp16 ) ingreen , andtailneedleprotein ( gp18 ) inlight blue . a , b views perpendicular to the tail axis and c , d views along the tail axis towards the phage head . In the SU10 virion , the short tail ﬁ bers are tilted towards thecapsidandthetailneedleprotrudesfromthetailcomplex . Thegenomerelease intermediate of SU10 b , d lacks the tail needle and contains a 277Å - long nozzle formed by short tail ﬁ bers and nozzle proteins . Tail needle and central and receptor - binding domain of the short tail ﬁ ber were modeled using AlphaFold2 multimerand ﬁ ttedintothecryo - EMmap . Theremainingstructureswerebuiltinto cryo - EM reconstructions . For details on the structure prediction and building , please see the Materials and methods section . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33305 - w Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5622 3 stem , clip , crown , and barrel domains ( Fig . 4b ) 29 . The wing domain is the largest , and is formed by eight helices and a β - sandwich containing two β - sheets of ﬁ ve and three antiparallel β - strands ( Fig . 4b ) . The positively charged side - chains of Lys 3 and Lys 5 from the wing domain interact with the DNA that wraps around the portal complex ( Fig . 4a ) . The two lysines are repeated twelve times in the portal complex , and thus form a high - avidity interface that is likely to bind DNA soon after thegenomepackagingisinitiated . AnchoringtheDNAendtotheportal wouldin ﬂ uencethepackagingofthegenomeintotheheadandits ﬁ nal structure . Furthermore , the wing domain mediates the interactions of theportalcomplexwiththecapsid ( Fig . 4a , c ) . Becauseofthemismatch of the ﬁ vefold symmetry of the capsid and twelvefold symmetry of the portal , we characterized their interactions using an asymmetric reconstruction of the neck region of the SU10 virion , which reached a resolution of 4 . 6Å ( Supplementary Table 2 ) . Residues 8 – 44 from the wing domain form a curved α - helix that lines the inner face of the capsid ( Fig . 4a , b ) . Additional interactions between the portal and capsid are mediated by the wing domain ’ s stem loop ( Fig . 4a , b ) . The tunnel loop from the wing domain narrows the portal channel of SU10 to 33 Å ( Fig . 4 , Supplementary Fig . 5 ) . In phages T7 and P23 - 45 , it was shown that the tunnel loops open the portal channel and thus regulate genome release 15 , 30 . However , the tunnel loops in the SU10 virion and genome release intermediate have the same structure , therefore it is likely that a different mechanism ensures the genome retention of SU10 ( Supplementary Fig . 5 ) . The stem domain connects the wing and clip domains and spans across the capsid shell ( Fig . 4b ) . The clip domain of the portal complex reaches out from the capsid and enables the attachment of the adaptor proteins ( Fig . 4a ) . Adaptor complex The dodecamer of SU10 adaptor proteins forms the interface between the dodecamer of portal proteins and hexamer of nozzle proteins ( Figs . 1c , 2a , and 5 ) . The adaptor protein of SU10 has the same domain organization as those of phages T7 and KP32 : a helix bundle domain , long tail ﬁ ber dock domain , and embracing loop ( Fig . 5c ) 15 . An embracing loop of adaptor protein is wedged between the clip Fig . 3 | SU10 capsid and major capsid protein . a Cartoon representation of pro - teins forming virion of phage SU10 . The prolate capsid has ﬁ vefold symmetry and the capsid proteins are organized with the parameters of T end = 4 , T mid = 20 . Pen - tamers of capsid proteins are shown in orange , hexamers in dark cyan or light sea green . Pentamers are of two types , based on their position in the capsid . The P1 pentamer is positioned on the ﬁ vefold axis of the particle , whereas the remaining P2 pentamers are positioned on quasi - ﬁ vefold axes at the borders between the tubularpart of the capsid and the caps . Thereare six variants of hexamers : H1 that formthecentralpartoftheprolatehead ; H2LandH2Rbelongtothecentralpartof the capsid but interact with terminal caps ; H3 are between P2 pentamers ; H4 are between P1 and P2 pentamers ; and H5 are between P2 pentamers and the portal complex . b ComparisonofstructuresofmajorcapsidproteinsformingH1hexamer ( colored according to the domains ) and P1 pentamer ( white ) . The major capsid protein of SU10 has an HK97 fold 25 , 66 . The major differences in the structures of P1 and H1 subunits are in the N - terminal arm , extended - loop , and the annular loop . The domain organization of the major capsid protein is shown as a 1D plot . c Cartoon representation of major capsid proteins forming P2 pentamer and H2R hexamer . Twomajorcapsidproteinsthatmediatethemajorityofcontactsbetween the pentamer and hexamer are shown with domains highlighted in color . The remainingsubunitsareshowninalternatingwhiteanddarkgrey . TheG - loopsofall subunits are highlighted in magenta . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33305 - w Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5622 4 Fig . 4 | Structure of SU10 portal complex and its interactions with capsid . a Cartoon representation of portal complex embedded in capsid . One portal pro - teinisshowninmagenta , andtheremainingsubunitsinalternatingwhiteandgrey . The cryo - EM density ofthe capsidisshown in turquoise , and thatof DNAisshown in grey . The density of a putative end of the dsDNA genome or ejection proteins insidethe barrelofthe portalcomplexisshown in orange . The maps of capsid and DNAareshownat2 σ and4 σ , respectively . b Cartoonrepresentationofasubunitof portal protein colored according to the domain composition . The domain organization of portal protein is shown as a 1D plot . c Interactions of portal com - plexwithcapsid , viewedalongtailaxisfromoutsidetheparticle . Portalproteinsare shown in alternating pink and purple , capsid proteins are shown in dark and light turquoise . The directions of spine helices from the peripheral domains of major capsid proteins and N - terminal helices from the wing domains of portal proteins are highlighted with arrows to emphasize the mismatch between the ﬁ vefold symmetry of the capsid and twelvefold symmetry of the portal . Fig . 5 | Adaptor complex and its interactions with long tail ﬁ bers , portal , and capsid . a , b Cartoonrepresentationofadaptorcomplexdecoratedwithsixlongtail ﬁ bers viewed along and perpendicular to tail axis . Two selected adaptor proteins from the dodecamerare highlighted inorange and yellow . The remaining subunits areshowninalternatingwhiteandgrey . Eachofthesixlongtail ﬁ bersisformedbya trimer of gp12 proteins ( violet ) . c Superposition of structures of two neighboring adaptor proteins that differ in the conformation of their long tail ﬁ ber dock loops . One of the adaptor proteins is colored according to the domain composition . The superimposed subunit is shown in white . The domain organization of adaptor proteinisshownasa1Dplot . d Interactionsofadaptorproteinswithlongtail ﬁ ber . Fiber dock loops ( green ) of two neighboring adaptor proteins interact with one long tail ﬁ ber . The three subunits that form the long tail ﬁ ber are differentiated by shades of violet . The N - terminus of each long tail ﬁ ber protein from one long tail ﬁ berformsuniqueinteractionswiththeadaptorcomplex . e Interactionsofadaptor complex with capsid viewed along tail axis from outside the particle . Adaptor proteins are shown in alternating yellow and orange , capsid proteins are shown in shades of turquoise . Directions of spine helices from the peripheral domains of major capsid proteins and ﬁ ber dock loops of adaptor proteins are indicated with arrows to emphasize the symmetry mismatch between the capsid and adaptor complex . f Interface between portal proteins and C - terminal embracing loops of adaptor proteins . The embracing loop ( orange ) goes in between the portal clip domains of portalsubunitA ( grey ) and B ( white ) , thenit crosses the stem ofportal subunit C ( dark magenta ) and reaches between the wing loop ( cyan ) of subunit C and stem of subunit D ( pink ) . The neighboring adaptor proteins differ in the structures of their embracing loops . The embracing loop ( yellow ) of the adaptor protein with the other conformation passes in between the portal clip domains of portal subunits B ( white ) and C ( dark magenta ) , then crosses the stem of portal subunitD ( pink ) andreachesbetweenthewingloop ( lightblue ) ofsubunitD ( grey ) and stem of subunit E ( pink ) . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33305 - w Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5622 5 domains of a pair of neighboring portal proteins and binds to stem loops of two additional portal proteins positioned clockwise when looking at the portal complex from outside the capsid ( Fig . 5f ) . The longtail ﬁ berdockdomainsoftwoneighboringadaptorproteinsdiffer in structure because they interact with different parts of one long tail ﬁ ber ( Fig . 5a , b , d ) . The SU10 long tail ﬁ ber dock domain is similar to those of phages T7 and KP32 ( Supplementary Fig . 6 ) 15 , 31 , which have long tail ﬁ bers 13 , 32 . In contrast , the adaptor proteins of phages P22 and Sf6 , which do not have long tail ﬁ bers , lack the long tail ﬁ ber dock domains ( Supplementary Fig . 6 ) 12 , 27 . Long tail ﬁ bers Six long tail ﬁ bers are attached to the sides of the adaptor complex ( Figs . 1a – c , 2a and 5a , b ) . The long tail ﬁ ber of SU10 is formed by trimers of long tail ﬁ ber proximal ( gp12 ) and distal ( gp13 ) proteins . One long tail ﬁ ber branches from the helix bundle domain of every second subunit of the adaptor complex ( Figs . 2a , c and 5a , b ) . The N - termini of two long tail ﬁ ber proximal proteins from one ﬁ ber extend to cover the surface of the helix bundle domain of the neighboring adaptor protein located counterclockwise when looking at the adaptor complex from outside the capsid ( Fig . 5b , d ) . The N - terminus of the third long tail ﬁ ber proximal protein binds to the long tail ﬁ ber dock domain of the adaptor protein from which the ﬁ ber branches out ( Fig . 5d ) . The long tail ﬁ bers form additional contacts with the ﬁ ber dock loops that protrude radially from the ﬁ ber dock domains of adaptor proteins ( Fig . 5a , c , d ) . The coiled - coiled part of each long tail ﬁ ber is held by ﬁ ber dock loops from two neighboring adaptor proteins ( Fig . 5a , d ) . The cryo - EM reconstruc - tion of the tail enabled the building of 90 residues from the N - terminus of the 786 - residue long tail ﬁ ber proximal protein ( Figs . 2a , c and 5a , b ) . The remainder of the long tail ﬁ ber was not resolved , probably because of its ﬂ exibility . Electron micrographs of puri ﬁ ed phages show that the long tail ﬁ ber is 700 Å long and con - tains one elbow joint , which divides the ﬁ ber into 300 - and 400 - Å - long segments ( Supplementary Fig . 4a , b ) . Structure of SU10 nozzle protein The hexamer of nozzle proteins , attached to the adaptor , is decorated with six short tail ﬁ bers , and its central channel is plugged with a tail needle ( Figs . 1a – c , 2a , c and 6 ) . According to the convention Fig . 6 | Structureofnozzleproteinsandshorttail ﬁ bers . Cartoonrepresentation of hexamer of nozzle proteins with attached short tail ﬁ bers from SU10 virion viewed from outside the particle along ( a ) and perpendicular ( b ) to tail axis . The nozzle proteins are shown in alternating white and grey , and short tail ﬁ bers in green . One of thenozzle proteinsishighlightedincolor , withthe platformdomain shown in orange , beta - propeller domain in blue , short tail ﬁ ber dock in magenta , and four nozzle domains in red . The black arrowhead in panel ( b ) shows the interaction of nozzle domain 4 and the short tail ﬁ ber . c Comparison of structures of nozzle proteins and short tail ﬁ bers in SU10 virion and genome release inter - mediate . Thenozzleproteinfromthevirioniscoloredasinpanels a and b , andthe three gp16subunits forminga shorttail ﬁ berare distinguished by shadesofgreen . The superimposed structures of nozzle protein and short tail ﬁ ber from the gen - ome release intermediate are shown in white and light green , respectively . The domain organization of nozzle protein is shown as a 1D plot . d Comparison of structures of beta - propeller domains from nozzle proteins of SU10 virion and genomereleaseintermediate , showninrainbowcolorsandwhite , respectively . The seven - bladed beta - propeller domain is rainbow - colored from the N - terminus in bluetotheC - terminusinred . Theshorttail ﬁ berdockloopisanextensionofblade 1 ( β 1 ) , whereas the nozzle domains are inserted between blade 2 ( β 2 ) and blade 3 ( β 3 ) . e Interactions of short ﬁ ber dock loop ( magenta ) with three short tail ﬁ ber proteins ( shades of green ) . The side chains of Trp 839 , Trp 847 , and Trp 857 from the short ﬁ ber dock loop form a star with quasi - threefold symmetry , which enables attachment of the short tail ﬁ ber , which is a trimer . Residues Tyr 23 , Ile 24 , and Tyr 25 from each short tail ﬁ ber protein clamp a segment of the ﬁ ber dock loop before each of the tryptophans . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33305 - w Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5622 6 established for phage T7 15 , the nozzle protein of SU10 can be divided into the platform , beta - propeller , and nozzle domains ( Fig . 6a – c ) . However , the nozzle proteins of SU10 and T7 exhibit no detectable sequence similarity . The platform domain has a beta - sandwich fold with the two beta - sheets formed by ﬁ ve and three beta - strands , respectively ( Fig . 6c ) . The platform domain of each nozzle protein interacts with the helix bundle domains of two adjacent adaptor proteins . The distinct inter - actions of the nozzle proteins only induce minimal differences in the structure of the neighboring adaptor proteins . The seven - bladed beta - propeller domain has a diameter of 50 Å and forms the core of the nozzle protein ( Fig . 6d ) . Blades 4 , 5 , and 6 of the beta - propeller domain line the tail channel , whereas blades 1 , 2 , and 3 are distant from the tail axis . The beta - propeller domain is interrupted by two entry and exit points of the polypeptide main chain , so - called openings . The ﬁ rst opening in blade 1 includes the entry of the main chain from the N - terminal part of the platform domain and the exit of the main chain to the C - terminal part of the platform domain ( Fig . 6d ) . The structure of blade 1 of the beta - propeller is stabilized by the antiparallel interaction of the outermost beta - strand , which is formed by C - terminal residues of the domain , with the remaining strands formed by residues from the N - terminus of the domain , a so - called velcro closure ( Fig . 6d ) 33 . The second opening is caused by the insertion of nozzle domains between beta - propeller blades 2 and 3 ( Fig . 6d ) . Loops protruding from the edges of blades 4 and 5 enable the binding of the tail needle . The loops have different conformations in the genome release intermediate , resulting in the broadening of the tail channel diameter from 25 to 31Å ( Supplemen - taryFig . 5 ) . Theshort tail ﬁ ber dock loop is located at the edge of blade 1 of the beta - propeller domain and enables the attachment of a short tail ﬁ ber ( Fig . 6c – e ) . In the SU10 virion , the Ig - like nozzle domains are organized into an L - shape arrangement ( Figs . 2a , 6a – c ) . The ﬁ rst two nozzle domains form a blunt tip of the tail , then there is an 82° turn and the remaining two domains point towards the capsid ( Fig . 6c ) . The contacts between nozzle proteins are mediated by the platform and beta - propeller domains . In addition , the nozzle domains wrap around the tail , and nozzle domain 1 interacts with nozzle domains 2 and 3 from the nozzle protein located clockwise when looking at the tail along its axis towards the capsid ( Fig . 6a , b ) . Nozzle domain 4 interacts with the short tail ﬁ ber dock loop from the nozzle protein located counter - clockwise ( Fig . 6a , b ) . The multiple interactions of nozzle domains stabilize the native structure of the SU10 tail . Short tail ﬁ bers The short tail ﬁ ber ofSU10 hasa length of 210Å , is straight , and can be divided into proximal , central , and receptor - binding domains ( Figs . 2 , 6a – c , Supplementary Fig . 7 ) . The proximal domain was reconstructed to a resolution of 3 . 8Å , which enabled the building of the ﬁ rst 98 residues of gp16 ( Fig . 6a – c , Supplementary Fig . 7 ) . The alpha helices that form the proximal domain are interrupted by short loops that mediate the swapping of positions of the helices from individual subunits within the domain ( Supplementary Fig . 7 ) . The central and receptor - binding domains modeled using the program AlphaFold2 multimer could be ﬁ tted into the 7 and 15Å resolution cryo - EM reconstructions , respectively , with a real - space correlation coef ﬁ cient of 0 . 81 ( Supplementary Fig . 7A ) 34 . The central domain is similar to the tip of the short tail ﬁ ber of phage T4 ( PDB : 1PDI ) ( Supplementary Fig . 7 ) 35 , 36 , whereas the receptor - binding domain resembles the tip of the long tail ﬁ ber of phage T4 ( PDB : 2XGF ) , which recognizes lipopo - lysaccharides or the outer membrane porin protein C ( Supplementary Fig . 7 ) 36 . Additionally , both the central and receptor - binding domain - s are similar to the corresponding parts of the receptor - binding protein of temperate bacteriophage JUB59 ( PDB : 6OV6 ) ( Supplemen - tary Fig . 7 ) 37 . The SU10 short tail ﬁ ber protein contains two pairs of histidines ( His 194 and His 196 , His 230 and His 232 ) , which may bind Fe 2 + ions and thus stabilise the ﬁ ber , as occurs in T4 and JUB59 36 – 39 . The short tail ﬁ ber is attached to a ﬁ ber dock loop from a nozzle protein ( Fig . 6c , e ) . The ﬁ ber dock loop contains tryptophans 839 , 847 , and 857 , the side chains of which are arranged in a pseudo - threefold symmetry ( Fig . 6e ) . Each tryptophan side chain forms hydrophobic interactions with Ile24 from one of the three short tail ﬁ ber proteins ( Fig . 6e ) . Furthermore , the side chains of Tyr 23 , Ile 24 , and Tyr 25 of each short tail ﬁ ber clamp a segment of the polypeptide before the tryp - tophans of the ﬁ ber dock loop ( Fig . 6e ) . Residues 3 – 6 of the short tail ﬁ ber interact with residues 303 – 308 from nozzle domain 4 of the nozzle protein located clockwise when looking along the tail axis towards the capsid ( Fig . 6b ) . The position of the short tail ﬁ ber is additionally stabilized by the interaction of the central domain of the shorttail ﬁ berwithresidues71 – 78ofthelongtail ﬁ ber ( Figs . 1c , 2a , c ) . It is likely that the disruption of these interactions enables coordination of the conformational changes of the long and short tail ﬁ bers , as well as those of the nozzle proteins , upon the binding of SU10 to the host cell . Tail needle ThestructureoftheSU10tailneedlewithimposedthreefoldsymmetry was reconstructed to a resolution of 15Å ( Figs . 1a – c , 2a , c , Supple - mentary Fig . 8 ) . The structure of the tail needle , predicted by Alpha - fold2 multimer , can be divided into coiled - coil and C - terminal domains , and couldbe ﬁ ttedintothe cryo - EM density with areal - space correlation coef ﬁ cient of 0 . 80 ( Supplementary Fig . 8A , B ) . The coiled - coil domain of the SU10 tail needle is homologous to the tail needle of the phage P22 14 , which was shown to bend up to 18° 40 . Therefore , we expect the tail needleof SU10 tobe similarly ﬂ exible , whichmaybe the reason why wecould not resolve it to a high resolution . The C - terminal domain has a beta - prism structure similar to that of the central tail spikes of Myoviridae phages ( Fig . 2a , c , SupplementaryFig . 8A , B ) 38 , 41 , 42 . ThebindingoftheSU10tailneedletothetailchannelisenabledbytwo loops on blade 4 and one loop on blade 5 of the beta - propeller domain of the nozzle proteins ( Supplementary Fig . 8C , D ) . The 260 - Å - long tail needle protrudes 200 Å from the nozzle complex ( Figs . 1c , 2a , c ) . Head of SU10 genome release intermediate The capsid of the genome release intermediate of SU10 is identical to that of the virion ( Fig . 1 , Supplementary Table 3 ) . The induction of SU10 genome release in vitro by osmotic shock results in the incom - plete ejection of the phage DNA ( Supplementary Fig . 4 ) . The recon - struction of the head of the SU10 genome release intermediate containsringsofputativeDNAdensityattachedtotheinnerfaceofthe capsid ( Fig . 1e , Supplementary Fig . 9 ) . Even though the DNA density in the reconstruction of the genome release intermediate is organized in rings , the DNA remaining inside the head is most likely a single con - tinuous strand . The rings are artefacts caused by the combination of structural variability of the DNA segments in individual particles and their misalignment during the reconstruction process . The propensity of the SU10 capsid to organize DNA strands , as observed in the gen - ome release intermediate , is likely to in ﬂ uence the genome structure during packaging . The asymmetric reconstruction of the capsid cap without a tail contains asphericalshell of density with an outer diameter of 80 Å and wall thicknessof 15Å ( SupplementaryFig . 9C , E ) . This sphereofdensity is also visible in two - dimensional class averages of the genome release intermediates ( Supplementary Fig . 9F ) . The sphere is not centered on the ﬁ vefold symmetry axis of the capsid , but is connected by a density to the beta - barrel formed by annular loops of major capsid proteins fromapentamer ( SupplementaryFig . 9E ) . Thepositionofthespherical shell of density leaves one edge of the pentamer accessiblefor binding DNA ( Supplementary Fig . 9C ) . The asymmetric reconstruction of the SU10viriondidnotcontainthissphericalshellofdensity , however , itis Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33305 - w Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5622 7 possible that the asymmetric alignment required to resolve the sphere structurewaspreventedbythestrongsignalfromthegenome . Itisnot clear what forms the observed spherical shell of density . The radius of the sphere is too small for it to be formed by bent dsDNA 43 . Therefore , it is likely that the spherical shell is formed by proteins . Structural rearrangement of SU10 tail for genome release The tail of the SU10 genome release intermediate is reorganized into the nozzle built from nozzle proteins and short tail ﬁ bers ( Figs . 2c , d , 6c , Supplementary Fig . 5 , SupplementaryMovie 1 ) . Toformthe nozzle , the four nozzle domains undergo an extensive structural change from the L shape in the SU10 virion to the straight arrangement in the genome release intermediate ( Fig . 6c ) . In the new conformation , the four domains form a line pointing away from the portal complex . While the interaction of the short tail ﬁ ber dock loop with a short tail ﬁ ber remains preserved , the connections of the short tail ﬁ ber loop to the beta - propeller domain rotate about each other and bend 135° to point away from the phage head ( Fig . 6c , d ) . The same rotation is performed by the short tail ﬁ ber . In the new arrangement , the nozzle proteins and short tail ﬁ bers alternate to form a nozzle that prolongs the tail by 277Å ( Figs . 1d , 2b , d ) . Furthermore , the distal part of the beta - propeller domain of the nozzle protein shifts 3 Å away from the Fig . 7 | SU10 structure and mechanism of genome delivery . a Segment of infected E . coli cell 45min post - infectioncontains SU10phages atvariousstages of infection cycle . Virions outside the cell are shown in turquoise , genome release intermediates with formed nozzles in dark blue , empty particles in cyan , and pro - genyvirionsinsidethecellinred . Innerandoutercellmembranesarehighlightedin dark orange and orange respectively , vesicles in light orange , ribosomes in light blue , chemoreceptor array in green , and ﬂ agellum in violet . Positions of phage particles , ribosomes ( EMD - 13270 ) , andthechemoreceptorarray ( EMD - 10160 ) were identi ﬁ ed using template matching as implemented in EMclarity 64 , 65 , and the cor - responding high - resolution structures were positioned into the tomogram . b Scheme of SU10 virion . c Mechanism of SU10 attachment and genome delivery . ( 1 ) TheSU10virionattachestoacellsurfacevialongtail ﬁ bers . ( 2 ) Thebindingofall six long tail ﬁ bers positions the phage with its long axis perpendicular to the bac - terial membrane . The tail needle can interact with the outer membrane . ( 3 ) The short tail ﬁ bers rotate towards the cell membrane and the nozzle proteins straighten to form a nozzle . ( 4 ) The tail needle dissociates from the tail . Ejection proteins are released from the phage head , degrade cell wall peptidoglycan , and extend the phage nozzle to form a channel across the periplasm . The ejection of SU10 DNA into bacterial cytoplasm is initiated . ( 5 ) The empty particle remains associated with the cell . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33305 - w Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5622 8 tail axis , resulting in a broadening of the tail channel ( Fig . 6c , Supple - mentary Fig . 8C , D ) . The formation of the nozzle is required to bring the receptor - binding domains of short tail ﬁ bers into a position in which they can interact with the outer membrane of E . coli . Cryo - ET and ﬂ uorescence microscopy of SU10 - infected cells Tomograms of SU10 - infected E . coli demonstrate that multiple phages can bind and deliver their genomes into one cell ( Fig . 7a , Supple - mentary Fig . 10 , Supplementary Movie 2 ) . Some of the phages were only attached by long tail ﬁ bers , whereas the tails of the remaining phages formed nozzles ( Fig . 7a , Supplementary Fig . 10 ) . Furthermore , thephageswithnozzleswereinvariousstagesofgenomerelease , from full to empty heads . The empty particles remained attached to the cell surface ( Fig . 7a , Supplementary Fig . 10D – F ) . In the late stages of SU10 infection , the sample contained outer membrane vesicles with bound phage particles ( Fig . 7a , Supplementary Fig . 10J – L ) . The membrane vesicles can be shed by bacteria growing in planktonic culture 44 – 46 . Under the conditions of E . coli cultivation used in our experiments , numerous progeny virions assembled in the infected cells45 to 65min post - infection ( Supplementary Fig . 10J – L ) . The few initially formed particles were distributed randomly , however over time after infec - tion , the progeny virions assembled into regular arrays , as has been described previously 2 . Airyscan confocal images of E . coli cells with labelled membranes and genomes , which wereinfected by SU10 with labelled DNA , veri ﬁ ed that numerous phage particles bind and deliver their genomes into one cell ( Supplementary Fig . 10C – F ) . The ﬂ uorescence signal from the labeled phage DNA was detectable in the cell cytoplasm until cell lysis , and it was even incorporated into progeny virions ( Supplementary Fig . 10I , L ) . The infected cells retained their native shape unit 45min post - infection , however at 65min they lost turgor ( Supplementary Fig . 10J – L ) . Mechanism of SU10 genome delivery The initial binding of the SU10 virion to receptors in the outer mem - brane of E . coli is mediated by long tail ﬁ bers , which have receptor - binding domains at their distal ends ( Fig . 7b , c ) . The structures of the SU10 virion and genome release intermediate differ in the direction in which the long tail ﬁ bers point away from the adaptor complexes ( Fig . 2c , d ) . The long tail ﬁ bers in the genome release intermediate are rotated6 . 6°relativetotheirorientationinthevirion . Wespeculatethat under native conditions this conformational change is induced by phage binding to the bacterial membrane . Furthermore , the move - ment of the long tail ﬁ bers probably disrupts their interactions with short tail ﬁ bers and thus primes them for the formation of the tail nozzle . The binding of all six SU10 long tail ﬁ bers to receptors posi - tions the phage with its long axis perpendicular to the bacterial membrane ( Fig . 7a , c ) . The putative interaction of the tail needle with the bacterial membrane triggers conformational changes to nozzle proteins , which lead to the disruption of the interaction of nozzle domain four with the short tail ﬁ ber . By arranging into a straight line parallel with the tail axis , the nozzle domains make room for the 135° rotation of the short tail ﬁ bers to point away from the phage head . The short tail ﬁ bers and nozzle proteins alternate to form a 277 - Å - long nozzle ( Fig . 7c ) . The formation of the nozzle enable the predicted receptor - binding domains of short tail ﬁ bersto interact with receptors at the cell surface . The binding of the short tail ﬁ bers to receptors may force the tail needle , which protrudes from the nozzle , through the outer E . coli membrane . Subsequently , the tail needle dissociates from the tail to enable the opening of the tail channel ( Fig . 7c ) . Ejection proteins are probably ejected from the SU10 head before or together with the beginning of the genome . The ejection proteins form a translocation channel across the periplasmic space and the ejection protein gp20 , with transglycosylase activity , degrades the cell wall peptidoglycan . The phage genome is delivered to the E . coli cytoplasm through a channel that is formed by the nozzle and the translocation channel ( Fig . 7c ) . Methods SU10 propagation and puri ﬁ cation Phage SU10 was propagated on E . coli strain ECOR10 , grown at 37 °C in nutrient broth ( Oxoid ) . Phage lysate from 300ml of bacterial culture was treated with turbonuclease ( Abnova ) ( ﬁ nal concentration 5 Units / ml ) , centrifuged at 6000 x g for 20min at 4 °C , and ﬁ ltered through a 0 . 45 μ m polyethersulfone syringe ﬁ lter . Phages from the ﬁ ltrate were pelleted by centrifugation at 54 , 000 x g for 2 . 5h at 4 °C in a 50 . 2 Ti rotor ( Beckman Coulter ) . Phage pellets were dissolved by overnight incubation in 6ml of a phage buffer ( 50mM Tris - Cl , 10mM NaCl , 10mM CaCl 2 , pH 8 . 0 ) at 4 °C . Dissolved pellets were overlaid onto a step CsCl density gradient ( 3ml of each CsCl solution in phage buffer with densities 1 . 45g / ml , 1 . 50g / ml , and 1 . 70g / ml ) and centrifuged at 210 , 000x g for 4 h at 12°C using an SW40Ti rotor ( Beckman Coulter ) . Bandscontainingphageparticles werecollectedusinga0 . 8 mmgauge needle and syringe . Caesium chloride was removed by dialysis against the phage buffer at 4 °C overnight using Visking dialysistubing type 8 / 32 ″ , 0 . 05 mm thick ( part no . 1780 . 1 , Carl Roth , Germany ) . Induction of phage genome release The puri ﬁ ed phage sample ( 10 12 PFU / ml ) was 10 x diluted using a solution of 3 M urea in the phage buffer and incubated at 42° for 30min . Afterincubation , thesamplewas3x dilutedinthephagebuffer and treated with Turbonuclease ( Abnova ) at a ﬁ nal concentration of 3 . 5 Units / ml for 15 min at room temperature . Phage particles were pelleted by centrifugation at 75 , 000x g at 4° for 1h in a 50 . 2 Ti rotor ( Beckman Coulter ) and resuspended in the phage buffer . The protein composition of SU10 virions and genome release intermediates were compared using SDS gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry analysis . Identi ﬁ cation of structural proteins of phage SU10 The puri ﬁ ed SU10 phage was resuspended in Laemmli buffer and boiled for 3 min , then the sample was treated with Turbonuclease at a ﬁ nal concentration of 2 Units / ml ( Abnova ) for 15 min at room tem - perature . Proteins were separated by tricine gradient gel electro - phoresis . All major protein bands were cut from the gel and used for mass spectrometry analysis . Mass spectrometry data processing and analyses were performed using the software FlexAnalysis 3 . 4 and MS BioTools ( BrukerDaltonics ) . Mascotsoftware ( MatrixScience , London , UK ) was used for sequence searches in exported MS / MS spectra against the National Center for Biotechnology Information database and a local database supplied with the expected protein sequences . The mass tolerance of peptides and MS / MS fragments for MS / MS ion searches were 50 parts per million and 0 . 5Da , respectively . The oxi - dation of methionine and propionyl - amidation of cysteine as optional modi ﬁ cations and one enzyme miscleavage were set for all searches . Peptides with a statistically signi ﬁ cant peptide score ( P < 0 . 05 ) were considered . Cryo - EM sample preparation , data collection , motion correc - tion , and CTF estimation Puri ﬁ ed phage solution ( 4 μ l ) with a concentration of 10 12 PFU / ml was pipetted onto a holey carbon - coated copper grid ( R2 / 1 , mesh 200 ; Quantifoil ) , blotted and vitri ﬁ ed by plunging into liquid ethane using an FEI Vitrobot Mark IV . The vitri ﬁ ed sample was transferred to a Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁ c Titan Krios electron microscope operated under cryogenic conditions and at an acceleration voltage of 300 kV . The beam was aligned for parallel illumination in NanoProbe mode , and coma - free alignments were performed to remove the residual beam tilt . Micrographs of SU10 virions were collected at a magni ﬁ ca - tion of 59 , 000x on a Falcon III direct electron detector operating in Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33305 - w Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5622 9 linear mode , resulting in a calibrated pixel size of 1 . 38 Å / pix . Imaging was done under low - dose conditions ( total dose 49 e − / Å 2 ) and defocus values ranging from − 1 . 2 to − 2 . 7 μ m . The one - second exposure was fractionated into 40 frames and saved as a movie . The dataset of genome release intermediates was collected at a magni ﬁ cation of 105 , 000 x at a K2 Summit direct electron detector operating in counting mode , resulting in a calibrated pixel size of 1 . 34 Å / pix . Ima - ging was done under low - dose conditions ( total dose 52 e − / Å 2 ) and defocus values ranging from − 1 . 2 to − 2 . 7 μ m . The eight - second expo - surewasfractionated into 40 frames and saved asa movie . Automated data acquisitions were performed using the software EPU ( Falcon III detector ) or Serial EM ( K2 Summitdetector ) . The movies were motion - corrected globally and locally ( 5×5 patches ) using the software MotionCor2 47 and saved as dose - weighted micrographs . Defocus values were estimated from aligned non - dose - weighted micrographs using the program Gctf 48 . Cryo - ET of SU10 virions Grids of SU10 virions prepared for single - particle acquisition were used torecord tomography tiltseries covering an angularrange from − 60° to + 60° with 2° increments , with the bidirectional tilting scheme under low - dose conditions using SerialEM . Each tilt series was collected with a nominal defocus value of − 6 µ m . Each image was acquired as a movie of 7 frames at a Falcon II detector operated in counting mode using a dose of 1 e − / Å 2 per tilt . The total cumulative dose for each tilt series was 57 e − / Å 2 . The calibrated pixel size was 1 . 8 Å . Tomograms were reconstructed using eTomo from the pack - age IMOD 49 . Subtomograms of heads of SU10 virions were averaged using the program PEET 50 , 51 from the package IMOD with applied D5 symmetry . Reconstruction of head of SU10 virion CrYOLO from the software package SPHIRE neural network was trained on a subset of images of heads of SU10 virions picked manually 52 . Final auto picking was done on 4 x binned micrographs using crYOLO . The resulting particle coordinates were corrected for thebinningfactor , andimagesofparticles ( boxsize1296×1296pixels ) were extracted from the 9 , 000 original unbinned micrographs using Relion 53 . Particleswerebinnedto256px ( 6 . 99Å / pixel ) usingreciprocal space binning as implemented in the software package Xmipp 54 . Sev - eral rounds of 2D classi ﬁ cation were performed in Relion to select intactvirions from the auto - picked set of particles . The initialmodel of the SU10 head from subtomogram averaging was low - pass ﬁ ltered to a resolution of 30 Å . Several rounds of 3D classi ﬁ cation and re ﬁ nement with imposed C5 symmetry were performed using Relion 3 . 1 . The software package Spider 55 was used to prepare a cylindrical mask excluding the phage genome to prevent the signal from the genome from interfering with the capsid reconstruction . After initial auto re ﬁ nement with imposed C5 symmetry , 3D classi ﬁ cation was per - formed without the alignment step . Particles belonging to the best class were selected for further Relion auto re ﬁ nement with imposed C5 symmetry and maximum allowed deviations from previous orien - tations of 10° . As the resolution of the reconstruction increased , the particles were gradually unbinned to 512 px ( 3 . 49Å / pixel ) and 1296 px ( 1 . 38 Å / pixel ) . The ﬁ nal C5 symmetrized reconstruction was threshold - masked , divided by the modulation transfer function , and B - factor sharpenedduringthepost - processinginRelion3 . 1 . Tofurtherimprove the resolution of the capsid , we divided the capsid into the C5 symmetric cap without a tail , D10 symmetric central part , and C5 symmetric cap with a tail . All these parts were re - extracted into smaller boxes , and their reconstructions were re ﬁ ned using local angular searches . To obtain an asymmetric reconstruction of the phagetailandthesurroundingcapsid , symmetry - relaxationfromC5to C1 was performed using the program relion _ relax _ symm ( Supple - mentary Fig . 11 ) . Reconstructions of portal and tail from SU10 virion Particle orientations from the C5 reconstruction of the phage head were used to extract sub particle images centered on portals and tails of SU10 virions . The images of sub - particles were subjected to several rounds of 2D classi ﬁ cations , which enabled the selection of homo - geneous datasets . After initial auto re ﬁ nement with imposed C12 symmetry for the portal and C6 and C3 symmetries for the tail , 3D classi ﬁ cations were performed without the alignment step . Particles belonging to the best classes were selected for further Relion auto re ﬁ nement with imposed symmetries and maximum allowed devia - tions from previous orientations of 10° . The resulting maps were threshold - masked , divided by the modulation transfer function , and B - factor sharpened during the post - processing in Relion ( Supple - mentary Fig . 11 ) . Tail needle reconstruction Particle orientations from the C6 reconstruction of the phage tail were used to extract sub - particle images centered on the tail needle of the SU10 virion . The images of sub - particles were subjected to several rounds of 2D classi ﬁ cations , which enabled the selection of a homo - geneous dataset . After initial auto - re ﬁ nement with relax symmetry set to C3 , 3D classi ﬁ cation was performed without the alignment step . Particles belonging to the best class were selected for further Relion auto - re ﬁ nement with imposed C3 symmetry and maximum allowed deviations from previous orientations of 10° ( Supplementary Fig . 11 ) . Asymmetric reconstruction of SU10 virion To obtain an asymmetric reconstruction of the whole SU10 virion , the orientations from the C5 symmetrized head reconstruction were relaxed using relion _ relax _ symm . The software package Spider 55 was used to prepare a spherical mask covering the phage tail and 40 nm of the capsid . The initial reconstruction was performed on particle images bin - ned to 256 px ( 6 . 99Å / pixel ) , using a high regularization factor and allowing only rotational searches . The successful relaxation of the symmetrywasveri ﬁ edbythepresenceofbiologicallyrelevantfeatures inthepartsofthereconstructionbelongingtoboththeheadandtailof the phage . Subsequently , the reconstructions were continued with data binned to 512 px ( 3 . 49 Å / pixel ) and 1296 px ( 1 . 38 Å / pixel ) ( Sup - plementary Fig . 11 ) . Reconstruction of SU10 genome release intermediate capsid SU10 genome release intermediates were manually boxed using e2boxer from the software package EMAN2 56 . The resulting particle coordinates were used to extract particles from the 5688 micrographs using Relion 53 , 54 . Particles were binned to 256 px ( 6 . 99 Å / pixel ) using reciprocal space binning as implemented in the software package Xmipp 54 . Several rounds of 2D classi ﬁ cation in Relion were performed to select intact genome releaseintermediates from the set ofparticles . ThereconstructionofthecapsidoftheSU10virion , low - pass ﬁ lteredto aresolutionof30 Å , wasusedastheinitialmodelfor3Dreconstruction in Relion . Several rounds of 3D classi ﬁ cation and re ﬁ nement with imposed C5 symmetry were performed using Relion 3 . 1 . The resulting map was threshold - masked , divided by the modulation transfer func - tion , and B - factor sharpened during the post - processing in Relion ( Supplementary Fig . 12 ) . Reconstruction of tail of SU10 genome release intermediate Particle orientations from the C5 reconstruction of the capsid of SU10 genome release intermediate were used to extract sub - particle images centered on tails . The images of sub - particles were subjected to several rounds of 2D classi ﬁ cations , which enabled the selection of a homogeneous dataset . After initial autore ﬁ nement with imposed C6 symmetry , 3D classi ﬁ cation was performed without the alignment step . Particles belonging to the best class were selected for further Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33305 - w Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5622 10 Relion autore ﬁ nement with imposed C6 symmetry and maximum allowed deviations from previous orientations of 10° . The resulting map was threshold - masked , divided by the modulation transfer func - tion , and B - factor sharpened during the post - processing in Relion ( Supplementary Fig . 12 ) . Asymmetric reconstruction of capsid top of SU10 genome release intermediate Particle orientations from the C5 reconstruction of the capsid of the SU10 genome release intermediate were used to extract sub - particle images centered on capsid tops . The images of sub - particles were subjected to several rounds of 2D classi ﬁ cations , which enabled the selection of a homogeneous dataset . Particles were C5 symmetry expanded , and 3D classi ﬁ cation into ten classes was performed with - out the alignment step . Particles belonging to the best classes were selected , and particle duplicates from symmetry expansion were removed . The resulting particles were used for further Relion autore - ﬁ nement without symmetry and with maximum allowed deviations from previous orientations of 10° ( Supplementary Fig . 12 ) . Cryo - EM structure determination and re ﬁ nement PDB structures were built using the program COOT 47 ( portal protein , adaptorprotein , residues1 - 90oflongtail ﬁ ber , andproximaldomainof shorttail ﬁ ber ) , builtautomaticallyusingDeepTracer 57 ( nozzleprotein ) or modeled using Alphafold2 34 ( central and receptor - binding domains ofshorttail ﬁ berandtailneedle ) . Thestructureswereiterativelyre ﬁ ned in real space using the program PHENIX real _ space _ re ﬁ ne . py 58 and corrected manually in COOT 47 and ISOLDE 59 . The quality of the struc - tures and their ﬁ t to the cryo - EM density maps was assessed using comprehensive validation in the program PHENIX . FSC curves of cryo - EM reconstructions are presented in Supplementary Fig . 13 . Model to map FSC curves of individual structures , and examples of the ﬁ t of PDB models to cryo - EM densities are shown in Supplementary Fig . 14 . AlphaFold2 structure prediction Structures of SU10 proteins that were not resolved in cryo - EM recon - structions to suf ﬁ cient resolution to enable structural determination were predicted using a local installation of AlphaFold multimer 2 . 1 . 2 . The software was installed from https : / / github . com / deepmind / alphafold , using a Dockerised environment . For prediction , data - bases recommended by AlphaFold authors at the time of installation ( winter 2021 ) , were used ( BFD , MGnify , PDB70 , PDB , PDB seqres , Uniclust30 , UniProt , UniRef90 ) 34 . Preparation of composite cryo - EM maps of SU10 virion and genome release intermediate The composite map of the SU10 virion was prepared by combining segments from sub particle reconstructions of SU10 virion regions . Sub - particle reconstructions of regions of the SU10 virion were ﬁ tted into asymmetric reconstruction of the complete SU10 virion using Chimera 60 – 62 ( the Fit in Map command ) . The composite map was built from the following reconstructions : C5 symmetrized capsid recon - struction ; portal from C12 symmetrized neck reconstruction ; adaptor , long tail ﬁ bers , nozzle , and short tail ﬁ bers from C6 symmetrized tail reconstruction ; and C3 symmetrised tail needle reconstruction . Seg - ments of sub - particle reconstructions were combined into the com - posite map using the following procedure : ( 1 ) Masks covering PDB structures of the component proteins were generated using pdb2mrc . ( 2 ) The masks were extended by six voxels and an additional four voxels of soft edge ( Relion3 - relion _ mask _ create ) . ( 3 ) The sub - particle reconstructions were multiplied by the corresponding masks ( Relion3 - relion _ image _ handler ) . ( 4 ) For each segment threshold the structure of the entire component with maximum resolved details was selected for display . For a short tail ﬁ ber map with decreasing resolution along the ﬁ ber , three segments with different thresholds were selected . ( 5 ) The maps of segments were normalized using CCP4 mapmask . ( 6 ) The normalized segments were combined into the ﬁ nal composite map using the Chimera command vop add onGrid . The composite map of the SU10 genome release intermediate was prepared using the same procedure from capsid reconstructed with C5 symmetry and tail reconstructed with C6 symmetry . Fluorescence microscopy sample preparation , data collection , and processing An exponentially growing culture of E . coli ECOR10 ( OD = 0 . 3 ) was infected with bacteriophage SU10 ( MOI = 10 ) pre - stained with DmaO ( BIOTIUM ) in the presence of 0 . 002M CaCl 2 . The infection was per - formed in a PS 75 / 25 mm cellview cell culture slide with a glass bottom ( Greiner bio - one ) at 37 °C , with 100 RPM shaking and allowed to pro - ceed for 5 , 25 , 45 , and 65min . Bacterial membranes and DNA were stained with SynaptoRed ( BIOTIUM ) ( ﬁ nal concentration 4 μ M ) and DAPI ( Roche ) ( ﬁ nal concentration 300nM ) . For imaging , the samples were ﬁ xed with a mixtureof glutaraldehyde and formaldehyde ( 0 . 125 % and 4 % , respectively ) in a 50 mM phosphate buffer ( pH = 7 . 5 ) . To pre - vent motion during imaging , samples were overlaid with 1 % low - melting agarose in the phage buffer . Samples wereimaged using a ZeissLSM 880confocalmicroscope withAiryscaninR - Smode , with ﬂ uorophoreexcitationatthefollowing wavelengths : DAPI at 405nm , DmaO at 488 nm , and SynaptoRed at 514 nm . Data was processed using ZEN Blackand visualized using Fiji 63 . Cryo - ET of SU10 - infected E . coli cells An exponentially growing culture of E . coli ECOR10 ( OD = 0 . 3 ) was infected with the bacteriophage SU10 ( MOI = 10 ) . The infection was allowed to progress for 5 , 25 , 45 , and 65 min . 1 . 5 ml of infected bac - terial culture was pelleted by centrifugation at 10 , 000 x g for 1 min at 4° . Thepelletswereresuspended in15 μ lofthephagebufferandkept on ice . Gold ﬁ ducial markers ( 10 nm beads ) were applied to the holey carbon - coated copper grid ( R3 . 5 / 1 , mesh 200 ; Quantifoil ) for elec - tron microscopy , wicked with ﬁ lter paper and immediately covered with4 μ l of cell suspension . Subsequently , the grids wereblotted and vitri ﬁ ed by plunging into liquid ethane using a Vitrobot Mark IV . Tomographic tilt series covering an angular range from − 60° to + 60° with 3° increments were recorded automatically using a dose - symmetric tilting scheme under low - dose conditions at a K2 Sum - mit direct electron detector , positioned behind the energy ﬁ lter in the Titan Krios microscope . Each tilt series was collected with a nominal defocus value of − 6 µ m and acquired as a movie containing 5 frames in counting mode of the detector , using a dose of 2 e − / Å 2 per tilt . The total cumulative dose for each tilt series was 57 e − / Å 2 . The calibrated pixel size was 4 . 33 Å . Tomograms were reconstructed and visualized using IMOD from the software package eTomo 58 . Mem - branes and ﬂ agella were segmented using the program Amira 64 . Positions of phage particles , ribosomes ( EMD - 13270 ) , and the che - moreceptor array ( EMD - 10160 ) were identi ﬁ ed using template matching as implemented in EMclarity 64 , 65 , and the corresponding high - resolution structures were positioned into the tomogram using in - house scripts https : / / github . com / fuzikt / tomostarpy . Reporting summary Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article . Data availability The cryo - EM reconstructions and corresponding PDB structures were deposited under the following EMDB and PDB codes : Structures of SU10 virion : capsid with ﬁ vefold symmetry EMD - 14488 and PDB - 7Z49 , asymmetric capsid reconstruction EMD - 14492 and PDB - 7Z4B , capsid top EMD - 14485 and PDB - 7Z46 , capsid center EMD - 14484 and PDB - 7Z45 , capsid bottom EMD - 14487 and PDB - 7Z48 , assymmetric Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33305 - w Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5622 11 reconstruction of capsid bottom and tail EMD - 14489 and PDB - 7Z4A , neck with twelvefold symmetry EMD - 14483 and PDB - 7Z44 , tail with sixfold symmetry EMD - 14486 and PDB - 7Z47 , tail needle with threefold symmetry EMD - 14909 , and composite map of the whole virion EMD - 14977 . Structures of genome release intermediate : capsid with ﬁ vefold symmetry EMD - 14490 , tailwithsixfoldsymmetryEMD - 14495and PDB - 7Z4F , capsidtopEMD - 14491 , andcompositemapof thewholegenome release intermediate EMD - 14920 . Code availability Scripts for positioning high - resolution structures into the tomograms are available from https : / / github . com / fuzikt / tomostarpy . References 1 . Ackermann , H . - W . , Nguyen , Y . - M . & Delage , R . Un nouveau bac - tériophage d ’ entérobactéries à tête allongée et queue courte . Annales de . l ’ Institut Pasteur / Virologie 132 , 229 – 234 ( 1981 ) . 2 . Mirzaei , M . K . , Eriksson , H . , Kasuga , K . , Haggård - Ljungquist , E . & Nilsson , A . S . Genomic , Proteomic , Morphological , and Phyloge - netic Analyses of vB _ EcoP _ SU10 , a Podoviridae Phage with C3 Morphology . PLoS ONE . 9 , e116294 ( 2014 ) . 3 . Savalia , D . et al . Genomic and Proteomic Analysis of phiEco32 , a Novel Escherichia coli Bacteriophage . J . Mol . Biol . 377 , 774 – 789 ( 2008 ) . 4 . Kropinski , A . M . , Lingohr , E . J . & Ackermann , H . - W . The genome sequence of enterobacterial phage 7 - 11 , which possesses an unu - sually elongated head . Arch . Virol . 156 , 149 – 151 ( 2011 ) . 5 . Kaper , J . B . , Nataro , J . P . & Mobley , H . L . T . Pathogenic Escherichia coli . Nat . Rev . Microbiol . 2 , 123 – 140 ( 2004 ) . 6 . Górski , A . et al . PhageTherapy : What Have We Learned ? Viruses 10 , 288 ( 2018 ) . 7 . Haines , M . E . K . et al . Analysis of Selection Methods to Develop Novel Phage Therapy Cocktails Against Antimicrobial Resistant Clinical Isolates of Bacteria . Front . Microbiol . 12 , 613529 ( 2021 ) . 8 . Terwilliger , A . et al . Phage Therapy Related Microbial Succession Associated with Successful Clinical Outcome for a Recurrent Urinary Tract Infection . Viruses 13 , 2049 ( 2021 ) . 9 . Fokine , A . & Rossmann , M . G . Molecular architecture of tailed double - stranded DNA phages . Bacteriophage 4 , e28281 ( 2014 ) . 10 . Casjens , S . R . & Molineux , I . J . Short Noncontractile Tail Machines : Adsorption and DNA Delivery by Podoviruses . in 143 – 179 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4614 - 0980 - 9 _ 7 ( 2012 ) . 11 . Leiman , P . G . et al . The Structures of Bacteriophages K1E and K1 - 5 Explain Processive Degradation of Polysaccharide Capsules and Evolution of New Host Speci ﬁ cities . J Molecular Biol . 371 , 836 – 849 ( 2007 ) . 12 . Tang , L . , Marion , W . R . , Cingolani , G . , Prevelige , P . E . & Johnson , J . E . Three - dimensionalstructureofthebacteriophageP22tail machine . EMBO J . 24 , 2087 – 2095 ( 2005 ) . 13 . Cuervo , A . etal . StructuralCharacterizationoftheBacteriophageT7 Tail Machinery . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 26290 – 26299 ( 2013 ) . 14 . Olia , A . S . , Casjens , S . & Cingolani , G . Structure of phage P22 cell envelope – penetrating needle . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 14 , 1221 – 1226 ( 2007 ) . 15 . Cuervo , A . et al . Structures of T7 bacteriophage portal and tail sug - gest a viral DNA retention and ejection mechanism . Nat . Commun . 10 , 3746 ( 2019 ) . 16 . Hrebík , D . et al . Structure and genome ejection mechanism of Staphylococcus aureus phage P68 . Sci . Adv . 5 , eaaw7414 ( 2019 ) . 17 . Choi , K . et al . Insight into DNA and Protein Transport in Double - strandedDNA Viruses : The Structure of Bacteriophage N4 . Microsc . Microanalysis . 14 , 1574 – 1575 ( 2008 ) . 18 . Jiang , W . et al . Structure of epsilon15 bacteriophage reveals gen - ome organization and DNA packaging / injection apparatus . Nature 439 , 612 – 616 ( 2006 ) . 19 . Jin , Y . et al . Bacteriophage P22 ejects all of its internal proteins before its genome . Virology 485 , 128 – 134 ( 2015 ) . 20 . Grayson , P . & Molineux , I . J . Is phage DNA ‘ injected ’ into cells — biologists and physicists can agree . Curr . Opin . Microbiol . 10 , 401 – 409 ( 2007 ) . 21 . Van Valen , D . et al . A Single - Molecule Hershey - Chase Experiment . Curr . Biol . 22 , 1339 – 1343 ( 2012 ) . 22 . Molineux , I . J . & Panja , D . Popping the cork : mechanisms of phage genome ejection . Nat . Rev . Microbiol . 11 , 194 – 204 ( 2013 ) . 23 . Evilevitch , A . The mobility of packaged phage genome controls ejection dynamics . Elife 7 , e37345 ( 2018 ) . 24 . Chen , Y . - J . et al . Two - Stage Dynamics of In Vivo Bacteriophage Genome Ejection . Phys . Rev . X 8 , 021029 ( 2018 ) . 25 . Duda , R . L . & Teschke , C . M . TheamazingHK97fold : versatileresults of modest differences . Curr . Opin . Virol . 36 , 9 – 16 ( 2019 ) . 26 . Chang , J . T . et al . Visualizing the Structural Changes of Bacter - iophage Epsilon15 and Its Salmonella Host during Infection . J . Mol . Biol . 402 , 731 – 740 ( 2010 ) . 27 . Chang , J . , Weigele , P . , King , J . , Chiu , W . & Jiang , W . Cryo - EM Asymmetric Reconstruction of Bacteriophage P22 Reveals Organi - zation of its DNA Packaging and Infecting Machinery . Structure 14 , 1073 – 1082 ( 2006 ) . 28 . Chen , W . et al . Structural changes of a bacteriophage upon DNA packaging and maturation . Protein Cell 11 , 374 – 379 ( 2020 ) . 29 . Lokareddy , R . K . et al . Portal protein functions akin to a DNA - sensor that couples genome - packaging to icosahedral capsid maturation . Nat . Commun . 8 , 14310 ( 2017 ) . 30 . Bay ﬁ eld , O . W . et al . Cryo - EM structure and in vitro DNA packaging ofathermophilicvirus with supersizedT = 7capsids . Proc . NatlAcad . Sci . 116 , 3556 – 3561 ( 2019 ) . 31 . Pyra , A . et al . Tail tubular protein A : a dual - function tail protein of KlebsiellapneumoniaebacteriophageKP32 . Sci . Rep . 7 , 2223 ( 2017 ) . 32 . K ę sik - Szeloch , A . et al . Characterising the biology of novel lytic bacteriophages infecting multidrug resistant Klebsiella pneumo - niae . Virol . J . 10 , 100 ( 2013 ) . 33 . Fülöp , V . & Jones , D . T . β Propellers : structural rigidity and func - tional diversity . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 9 , 715 – 721 ( 1999 ) . 34 . Jumper , J . et al . Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold . Nature 596 , 583 – 589 ( 2021 ) . 35 . Kostyuchenko , V . A . et al . Three - dimensional structure of bacter - iophage T4 baseplate . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 10 , 688 – 693 ( 2003 ) . 36 . Bartual , S . G . et al . Structure of the bacteriophage T4 long tail ﬁ ber receptor - bindingtip . Proc . NatlAcad . Sci . 107 , 20287 – 20292 ( 2010 ) . 37 . Pellizza , L . et al . Structure of the putative long tail ﬁ ber receptor - binding tip of a novel temperate bacteriophage from the Antarctic bacterium Bizionia argentinensis JUB59 . J . Struct . Biol . 212 , 107595 ( 2020 ) . 38 . Harada , K . et al . Crystal structure of the C - terminal domain of Mu phagecentralspikeandfunctionsofboundcalciumion . Biochimica et . Biophysica Acta ( BBA ) - Proteins Proteom . 1834 , 284 – 291 ( 2013 ) . 39 . Browning , C . , Shneider , M . M . , Bowman , V . D . , Schwarzer , D . & Leiman , P . G . Phage Pierces the Host Cell Membrane with the Iron - Loaded Spike . Structure 20 , 326 – 339 ( 2012 ) . 40 . Olia , A . S . , Casjens , S . & Cingolani , G . Structural plasticity of the phage P22 tail needle gp26 probed with xenon gas . Protein Sci 18 , 537 – 548 ( 2009 ) . 41 . Taylor , N . M . I . et al . Structure of the T4 baseplate and its function in triggering sheath contraction . Nature 533 , 346 – 352 ( 2016 ) . 42 . Yamashita , E . et al . The host - binding domain of the P2 phage tail spike reveals a trimeric iron - binding structure . Acta Crystallogr . Sect . F . Struct . Biol . Crystallization Commun . 67 , 837 – 841 ( 2011 ) . 43 . Brinkers , S . , Dietrich , H . R . C . , de Groote , F . H . , Young , I . T . & Rieger , B . The persistence length of double stranded DNA determined using dark ﬁ eld tethered particle motion . J . Chem . Phys . 130 , 215105 ( 2009 ) . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33305 - w Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5622 12 44 . Parent , K . N . et al . OmpA and OmpC are critical host factors for bacteriophageSf6entryin Shigella . Mol . Microbiol . 92 , 47 – 60 ( 2014 ) . 45 . Parent , K . N . , Gilcrease , E . B . , Casjens , S . R . & Baker , T . S . Structural evolution of the P22 - like phages : Comparison of Sf6 and P22 pro - capsid and virion architectures . Virology 427 , 177 – 188 ( 2012 ) . 46 . Reyes - Robles , T . et al . Vibrio cholerae Outer Membrane Vesicles Inhibit Bacteriophage Infection . J . Bacteriol . 200 , e00792 - 17 ( 2018 ) . 47 . Emsley , P . & Cowtan , K . Coot : model - building tools for molecular graphics . Acta Crystallogr . Section D Biol . Crystallogr . 60 , 2126 – 2132 ( 2004 ) . 48 . Zhang , K . Gctf : Real - time CTF determination and correction . J . Struct . Biol . 193 , 1 – 12 ( 2016 ) . 49 . Kremer , J . R . , Mastronarde , D . N . & McIntosh , J . R . Computer Visualization of Three - Dimensional Image Data Using IMOD . J . Struct . Biol . 116 , 71 – 76 ( 1996 ) . 50 . Heumann , J . M . , Hoenger , A . & Mastronarde , D . N . Clustering and variance maps for cryo - electron tomography using wedge - masked differences . J . Struct . Biol . 175 , 288 – 299 ( 2011 ) . 51 . Nicastro , D . etal . TheMolecularArchitectureofAxonemesRevealed by Cryoelectron Tomography . Science ( 1979 ) 313 , 944 – 948 ( 2006 ) . 52 . Wagner , T . et al . SPHIRE - crYOLO is a fast and accurate fully auto - mated particle picker for cryo - EM . Commun . Biol . 2 , 218 ( 2019 ) . 53 . Zivanov , J . et al . New tools for automated high - resolution cryo - EM structure determination in RELION - 3 . Elife 7 , e42166 ( 2018 ) . 54 . delaRosa - Trevín , J . M . etal . Xmipp3 . 0 : Animprovedsoftwaresuite for image processing in electron microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 184 , 321 – 328 ( 2013 ) . 55 . Shaikh , T . R . et al . SPIDER image processing for single - particle reconstruction of biological macromolecules from electron micrographs . Nat . Protoc . 3 , 1941 – 1974 ( 2008 ) . 56 . Tang , G . et al . EMAN2 : An extensible image processing suite for electron microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 157 , 38 – 46 ( 2007 ) . 57 . Pfab , J . , Phan , N . M . & Si , D . DeepTracer for fast de novo cryo - EM protein structure modeling and special studies on CoV - related complexes . In Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 118 , e2017525118 ( 2021 ) . 58 . Afonine , P . V . et al . Real - space re ﬁ nement in PHENIX for cryo - EM and crystallography . Acta Crystallogr . Section D Struct . Biol . 74 , 531 – 544 ( 2018 ) . 59 . Croll , T . I . ISOLDE : a physically realistic environment for model building into low - resolution electron - density maps . Acta Crystal - logr . Section D Struct . Biol . 74 , 519 – 530 ( 2018 ) . 60 . Goddard , T . D . et al . UCSF ChimeraX : Meeting modern challenges in visualization and analysis . Protein Sci . 27 , 14 – 25 ( 2018 ) . 61 . Pettersen , E . F . et al . UCSF ChimeraX : Structure visualization for researchers , educators , anddevelopers . ProteinSci . 30 , 70 – 82 ( 2021 ) . 62 . Pettersen , E . F . et al . UCSF Chimera — A visualization system for exploratory research and analysis . J Comput . Chem . 25 , 1605 – 1612 ( 2004 ) . 63 . Schindelin , J . et al . Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat . Methods . 9 , 676 – 682 ( 2012 ) . 64 . Himes , B . A . & Zhang , P . emClarity : software for high - resolution cryo - electron tomography and subtomogram averaging . Nat . Methods . 15 , 955 – 961 ( 2018 ) . 65 . Burt , A . et al . Complete structure of the chemosensory array core signalling unit in an E . coli minicell strain . Nat . Commun . 11 , 743 ( 2020 ) . 66 . Suhanovsky , M . M . & Teschke , C . M . Nature ׳ s favorite building block : Deciphering folding and capsid assembly of proteins with the HK97 - fold . Virology 479 – 480 , 487 – 497 ( 2015 ) . Acknowledgements We gratefully acknowledge CEITEC MU Cryo - electron microscopy and tomography core facility and Proteomics Core Facility of CIISB , Instruct - CZ Centre supported by MEYS CR ( LM2018127 ) for their assis - tance with obtaining the scienti ﬁ c data presented here . We acknowl - edge the core facility CELLIM supported by the Czech - BioImaging large RI project ( LM2018129 funded by MEYS CR ) for their support with obtaining scienti ﬁ c data presented in this paper . We greatly appreciate access to computing and storage facilities owned by parties and pro - jects contributing to the National Grid Infrastructure MetaCentrum , provided under the program Projects of Large Infrastructure for Research , Development , and Innovations ( LM2010005 ) . This study was supported by the IT4Innovations Centre of Excellence ( project CZ . 1 . 05 / 1 . 1 . 00 / 02 . 0070 ) . This work , including the efforts of Pavel Plevka , was funded by Czech Ministry of Education , Youth and Sports ERC - CZ Consolidator grant LL1906 , Czech Science Foundation grant GA18 - 17810S , and the project National Institute of Virology and Bacteriology ( Program EXCELES , ID Project No . LX22NPO5103 ) - Funded by the Eur - opeanUnion - Next Generation EU . Thefunders hadno role in thedesign ofthestudy , datacollectionandinterpretation , orthedecisiontosubmit the work for publication . Author contributions Conceptualization P . P . ; methodology M . Š . , T . F . , M . P . , J . N . , and M . B . ; validation M . Š . and T . F . ; formal analysis M . Š . , M . P . , J . N , and M . B . ; investigationM . Š . , M . P . , J . N . , andM . B . ; resourcesA . N . ; datacurationM . Š . and T . F . ; writing — original draft preparation M . Š . , T . F . , and P . P . ; writing — review and editing M . Š . , T . F . , and P . P . ; visualization M . Š . and T . F . ; supervision P . P . ; funding acquisition P . P . Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . Additional information Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33305 - w . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Pavel Plevka . Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the other anonymous reviewer ( s ) for their contribution to the peer review of this work . Peer reviewer reports are available . Reprints and permission information is available at http : / / www . nature . com / reprints Publisher ’ s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur - isdictional claims in published maps and institutional af ﬁ liations . Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 International License , which permits use , sharing , adaptation , distribution and reproduction in any medium or format , as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author ( s ) and the source , provide a link to the Creative Commons license , and indicate if changes were made . The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article ’ s Creative Commons license , unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material . If material is not included in the article ’ s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use , you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder . To view a copy of this license , visit http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / . © The Author ( s ) 2022 Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33305 - w Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5622 13