Creative Exploration Using Topic Based Bisociative Networks Faez Ahmed Dept . of Mechanical Engg . University of Maryland faez00 @ umd . edu Mark Fuge Dept . of Mechanical Engg . University of Maryland fuge @ umd . edu Abstract Bisociative knowledge discovery is an approach that combines elements from two or more “in - compatible” domains to generate creative solu - tions and insight . Inspired by Koestler’s no - tion of bisociation , in this paper we propose a computational framework for the discovery of new connections between domains to promote creative discovery and inspiration in design . Speciﬁcally , we propose using topic models on a large collection of unstructured text ideas from multiple domains to discover creative sources of inspiration . We use these topics to generate a Bisociative Information Network—a graph that captures conceptual similarity between ideas—that helps designers ﬁnd creative links within that network . Using a dataset of thou - sands of ideas from OpenIDEO , an online col - laborative community , our results show useful - ness of representing conceptual bridges through collections of words ( topics ) in ﬁnding cross - domain inspiration . We show that the discov - ered links between domains , whether presented on their own or via ideas they inspired , are per - ceived to be more novel and can also be used as creative stimuli for new idea generation . 1 Introduction In the ﬁeld of design and engineering , many existing tools support creativity during idea generation . These tools help designers generate solutions and explore a larger design space . This exploration is useful during concep - tual design when divergent thinking can help avoid ﬁxa - tion [ Jansson and Smith , 1991 ; Purcell and Gero , 1996 ] and dead - end branching [ Shah et al . , 2003 ] , leading to more creative solutions [ Siangliulue et al . , 2015 ] . But how should one go about this creative exploration ? One option is to combine ideas from diﬀerent sources . Henri Poincaré [ Poincaré , 1910 ] said “Among cho - sen combinations the most fertile will often be those formed of elements drawn from domains which are far apart . . . Most combinations so formed would be entirely sterile ; but certain among them , very rare , are the most fruitful of all . ” Inspired by similar thinking , designers often connect seemingly unrelated information , for ex - ample , by using metaphors or analogy [ Hey et al . , 2008 ] . The entire ﬁeld of Biomimicry or Biologically - inspired Design—ﬁnding designs in nature and adapting their principles to man - made artifacts—is just one link be - tween diﬀerent domains that designers have found fruit - ful . This paper presents computational techniques for ﬁnding other such bridges between domains—or bisoci - ations [ Koestler , 1964 ] —given a set of design ideas . Identifying good bisociations requires answering three technical questions : 1 ) What ( speciﬁcally and computa - tionally ) does it mean to “bridge” a domain ? 2 ) Assum - ing that I ﬁnd such bridges , which bridges are creative ? and 3 ) Assuming I have found a creative bridge between domains , how do I represent that conceptual bridge to a designer such that they ﬁnd it useful ? Researchers have heavily studied those ﬁrst two ques - tions . The remainder of the introduction reviews that past work and then focuses on the main theory that we leverage in this paper—Bisociative Networks—which builds a network ( i . e . , graph ) and then uses properties of that network to ﬁnd bridges between domains . How - ever , the way standard Bisociative Networks represent ideas ( i . e . , using bridging words ) causes problems for design exploration , both when forming the bisociative network and when using the output . This paper’s be - low methodology resolves those two problems . We use a randomized controlled experiment and qualitative com - parisons of the output to demonstrate its eﬃcacy with respect to standard baselines and existing state of the art . 1 . 1 Creativity and Finding Inspiration [ Boden , 1994 ] deﬁnes creativity as “the ability to come up with ideas or artifacts that are new , surprising and valuable . ” The ﬁrst factor—newness or novelty—implies that an idea should not have existed previously , i . e . , be original . The second factor is the notion of surprise—an idea may be surprising because it may seem unlikely or un - familiar ( even if it is not , in and of itself , new ) . The third factor is the notion of value—a new concept must be valuable ( not just new and surprising ) to qualify as a r X i v : 1801 . 10084v1 [ c s . S I ] 30 J a n 2018 creative . However , an idea’s value depends on many scientiﬁc , social , economic , political and other factors . Hence agreeing over the degree of creativity is diﬃcult and context dependent . Boden’s model of creativity also deﬁnes three roads to creativity : Combinatorial Creativity which combines ideas within a domain , Exploratory Creativity which ﬁnds new ideas across existing domains , and Trans - formational Creativity which ﬁnds something new out - side known domains . We focus on Exploratory Creativ - ity—coming up with a new meaningful combinations . An example of such creative inspiration is the design of the Shinkansen high speed train in Japan , which was in - spired by the beak of a kingﬁsher [ DeYoung and Hobbs , 2009 ] . Similarly , natural silk inspired the design of syn - thetic ﬁbers , such as Nylon and Kevlar [ Gosline et al . , 1999 ] . To support Exploratory Creativity , researchers across many ﬁelds have developed diﬀerent computational ap - proaches under diﬀerent names . In the engineering de - sign domain , predictive models have been employed to characterize hidden patterns within existing data sets . For example , [ Benami and Jin , 2002 ] investigated factors which stimulate creativity in conceptual design . [ Pahl et al . , 2007 ] presented a generic model of the process leading to innovative design by comparing all the pro - cesses of creating outlined in the psychological litera - ture . Their model deﬁnes and makes visible the path of generation and divergence of ideas , followed by a pe - riod of ‘editing’ and a ﬁnal convergence into innovation . [ Zahner et al . , 2010 ] provide two methods to reduce ﬁx - ated thinking— abstracting and re - representing . They showed that abstractness promoted original ideas in the design of information systems . Similarly , the eﬀect of dif - ferent level of abstraction for textual representations in [ Gonçalves et al . , 2012 ] showed the beneﬁt of distant tex - tual stimuli for generating original ideas . These models , while useful for single domain , are often limited in their ability to draw connections between seemingly unrelated domains . Sometimes , innovative design solutions across multiple , seemingly unrelated domains may be omitted entirely . Generating original solutions by borrowing ideas from multiple domains has been a key challenge for design - ers . One of the widely used method to this problem is Design - by - analogy ( DbA ) , which has been shown to be an eﬀective method for inspiring innovative design solu - tions . It is a practice in which designers use solutions from other domains to gain inspiration . DbA supports designers in developing conceptual designs for new prod - ucts by discovering new insights from multiple domains . Engineering designers have often used design by anal - ogy for Bio - Inspired design too . It allows engineers to take ideas from nature and develop new design solutions for engineering problems by searching design analogies from biological domains . However , identifying useful so - lutions from outside domains using DbA is non trivial . For example , [ Fu et al . , 2013 ] measured distances be - tween patents using a hierarchical Bayesian model and showed that priming people with patents too “far” ( in terms of tree path length ) from a target patent can be harmful to retrieving analogies , while likewise recom - mending patents too “near” can result in design ﬁxation . Likewise , [ Chan et al . , 2015 ] analyzed winning ideas sub - mitted to the online design challenge website OpenIDEO and found , via each idea’s citations network , that the best design ideas often came from sources of inspiration which are not far away ( in terms of path lengths in the citation graph ) . Like these prior approaches , our method provides an automated computational tool to ﬁnd abstract inspira - tions from unrelated domains by modeling a concept of “distance " between ideas and domains . However , unlike past approaches , we do not assume that this distance metric is context independent ( unlike , for example , tree hierarchy or citation graph paths ) . Our method dif - fers from past studies , as it does not directly measure distances to identify ideas that are far - oﬀ or close by to a domain , but learns from the data to identify pos - sible sources of inspiration . It does so by looking at ideas which are confused to belong to some other do - main . Whereas past approaches ﬁnd existing ideas as creative inspiration , we discover hidden concepts within ideas , which act as creative inspiration . Speciﬁcally , we focus on a prior line of work called Bisociative Creative Information Exploration which is inspired by Koestler’s model of creativity [ Koestler , 1964 ] proposed in the 1960s . His model centers around the concept of biso - ciation . 1 . 2 Koestler’s Concept of Bisociation Bisociation , according to Koestler , means joining un - related , often conﬂicting , information in a new way [ Koestler , 1964 ] . He makes a clear distinction between habitual thinking ( association ) operating within a sin - gle plane of thought , and the more creative bisociative mode of thinking which connects independent planes of thought . Koestler conjectured that bisociation is a gen - eral mechanism for the creative act in the ﬁeld of humor , science , engineering , and the arts . Figure 1 provides a simple illustration to bisociation , by showing examples from a set of three OpenIDEO de - sign challenges ( or what we will call “domains” ) . Specif - ically , each of the three challenges—improving womens’ safety in urban environments , reducing the risk of un - lawful detection , and increasing vibrancy in cites fac - ing economic decline—had several ideas ( represented as markers in Fig . 1 ) that users submitted in response to the challenge . Bisociations are indirect connections between ideas , which cross the border between ( i . e . , bridge ) do - mains ( or in this case , diﬀerent challenges ) . On surface , these domains are quite dissimilar , however , one may discover an indirect concept , which is common to these domains . In Fig . 1 , for example , several ideas across all three challenges leverage the idea using wearable acces - sories to address the challenge problem . Koestler would call that concept—the use of wearable accessories—a bisociation , in that ideas from one challenge or domain Figure 1 : Three design domains and outlier ideas ( ideas from these domains which are more similar to other do - mains ) . Topics common among outlier ideas but uncom - mon overall have high bisociation score . In this exam - ple , topic on using ‘clothing’ and ‘material’ is a b - topic . These ideas and challenge domains were sampled from the OpenIDEO dataset we introduce in the Results sec - tion . might more easily transfer between domains that jointly share the concept . We show later in the paper how ideas from a design collection for these three domains were found to have this concept common among them . We will also deﬁne precisely how to represent and compute bridging concepts in later sections . Researchers have applied bisociation most readily to the discovery and exploration of research literature ( i . e . , academic papers ) . This work is typiﬁed by the work of [ Swanson , 1986 ] who introduces “Swanson linking” to connect medical literature by assuming that new knowledge and insight arises when connecting knowl - edge sources which were thought to be unrelated . In his seminal paper , Swanson investigated connections be - tween migraine and magnesium , based on published re - search papers . He found indirect relations via bridging terms ( b - terms ) —words that signaled possible connec - tions between two domains—that suggested magnesium deﬁciency may cause migraines . Several researchers have continued Swanson’s line of research , for example the RaJoLink method [ Petri˘e et al . , 2009 ] and the BISON project [ Berthold , 2012 ; Dubitzky et al . , 2012 ] . These eﬀorts pursued new algo - rithms to create , analyze , and explore domain - bridging words within text document collections . For example , [ Juršič et al . , 2012b ] select and rank keywords they claim highlight bridging words that help people discover cross - domain links that can lead to new ideas . They show that their methodology places a signiﬁcantly higher number of bridging words towards the top of a ranked list com - pared to chance rankings . [ Kang , 2016 ] and [ Kang and Tucker , 2017 ] applied bisociative design methodology to discover product attributes that correlate to an increase in enterprise proﬁt . They do so by analyzing the associa - tions between function attributes and 3D form attributes among diﬀerent products . They use Latent Dirichlet Al - location ( LDA ) to extract the function attributes from the product descriptions and Reeb graphs to represent the form . [ Tucker and Kang , 2012 ] studied bisociations by decomposition of a design artifact by form , function and behavior to quantify the level of similarity among items across domains . The authors demonstrated their method on marine and aviation domains . These bisoci - ation studies are also supplemented by research on biso - ciative networks , predominantly used for creative explo - ration . 1 . 3 BisoNets : Bisociative Information Networks A Bisociative Information Network ( or BisoNet ) is a method of practically computing Koestler’s bisociation . A BisoNet represents concepts as a network—a graph with vertices and edges—and then deﬁnes functions on that network that compute creative bisociations . This approach leads to two intimately coupled technical chal - lenges . The ﬁrst , which is common to all network mod - eling approaches , lies in how one constructs the network itself— e . g . , what are the nodes and edges in the network , and how does that choice aﬀect the outcome ? The sec - ond , speciﬁc to bisociation , lies in how one computes which nodes “bridge” domains in a creative way . We review the ﬁrst challenge in this section , and address the second later in our methodology . In brief , the way that past work represented BisoNets ( i . e . , using speciﬁc bridging words ) , while eﬀective for academic literature , does not perform well for design concepts . One of the contributions of this paper lies in deﬁning a more appro - priate network representation and subsequent function for computing bisociation under that new representation . Speciﬁcally , a BisoNet is a weighted , undirected , k - partite graph 1 of concepts , such that similar concepts are connected by an edge—in essence , a similarity graph , but with a particular form of similarity called bisociation that we detail later in the paper . Vertices in BisoNets can represent any unit of analysis , such as words , docu - ments , ideas , people , etc . Vertices of the same type are grouped into vertex partitions—for example , partition - ing all words from a particular document together , or partitioning all articles from a given ﬁeld together . As with all network models , a key diﬀerentiator among past work lies in how they calculate the edge weight be - tween the graph nodes . For example , ﬁnding relations between such nodes often focuses on discovering seman - tically related terms , frequently using lexical databases and ontologies . Edge weights can be calculated using measures like cosine similarity , Normalized Google Dis - tance Measure ( NGD ) [ Cilibrasi and Vitanyi , 2007 ] , or similarity functions tailor - made for bisociation discov - 1 A k - partite graph is one whose nodes can be one of k number of types , and whose edges only link nodes of diﬀerent type— e . g . , assigning papers to reviewers is a bipartite graph , where a paper can link to a reviewer , and a reviewer to a paper , but reviewers cannot link to other reviewers . ery , like Segond and Borgelt’s Bison measure [ Segond and Borgelt , 2009 ] . Researchers have applied BisoNets to exploration of Biological and Financial Literature [ Schmidt et al . , 2012 ] and Music Discovery [ Stober et al . , 2012 ] , with unstruc - tured text documents being one of the most widely used ( and most challenging ) applications . These past text - based approaches work well when there are speciﬁc , tech - nical terms embedded in documents that are shared be - tween domains . For example , in the autism - calcineurin benchmark dataset [ Berthold , 2012 ] , standard BisoNet exploration tools identify individual scientiﬁc terms like “paroxysmal” or “Bcl - 2” that discover links between two scientiﬁc domains ( in that case , between autism and the human immune system ) . However , this example also highlights two key issues with past BisoNet approaches that make them ill - suited for creative design exploration . First , past representations relied on identifying spe - ciﬁc bridging words . As we demonstrate in our results , for design concepts this does not work well since design descriptions often rely on multiple words or ideas taken holistically together as a system—that is , there are no magic bridging words ( like “Bcl - 2” in the autism exam - ple ) but rather collections of words or phrases that , in aggregate , provide a new frame within which to view a design problem . Current approaches to bisociation do not handle such cases . This paper resolves that problem by introducing bridging topics—called b - topics , rather than bridging terms , to capture richer representations for bridges across domains . Second , existing BisoNet approaches ﬁnd bridging terms between only two , pre - identiﬁed domains ( e . g . , the autism - calcineurin or migraine - magnesium datasets ) . This assumes that one knows , apriori , which two do - mains will likely produce good bridging terms . While this pre - knowledge of domains may exist for certain de - sign applications ( e . g . , in bio - inspired design ) , in general we largely do not know which combinations of two do - mains will be fruitful . This paper resolves this problem by generalizing existing bisociation techniques to explo - ration across multiple domains at once , not just between two . We demonstrate below that this leads to much richer exploration of possible bridging concepts than if we were to pre - select two domains apriori . Aside from bisociation , some researchers have ap - proached the same problem from the perspective of Serendipity [ Roberts , 1989 ; Kamahara et al . , 2005 ] . Serendipitous discoveries overlap with bisociations since they often involve realizing a connection between dissim - ilar domains of knowledge . Serendipity has mainly been applied to recommender systems [ Onuma et al . , 2009 ] . 1 . 4 This Paper’s Contributions Our work builds upon earlier BisoNet tech - niques [ Schmidt et al . , 2012 ] , but with three main diﬀerences . First , we apply bisociation principles to fourteen domains that are broader than analysis of sci - entiﬁc papers . Most of the previous techniques applied BisoNets to either a migraine and magnesium dataset or an autism - calcineurin domain . These datasets only have two domains and performance evaluation is straight - forward due to the advantage of having gold standard bridging terms . Second , by comparing with CrossBee tool—the existing state of the art in computational bisociation—we show that ﬁnding words as b - terms for unstructured text is not as useful for design concepts , thus small collections of words should be used instead . We propose using topic models for this purpose and re - deﬁne bisociation metrics such that they work for topics . Finally , we evaluate our method using human preferences elicited by crowd workers on Amazon Turk . This paper’s key contributions are : 1 . The introduction of bridging topics—via Topic Models [ Blei and Laﬀerty , 2009 ] —as a representa - tion for computing bisociative links in the network . 2 . Introducing a new objective function for ranking topics by their bisociation potential 3 . Generating a BisoNet from topic representations via identifying likely edges . 4 . Demonstrating that bisociation can be used in do - mains far broader than identifying bridging words within academic literature . Such bisociation pro - duces new inspirational frames for design problems that , within our experiments , led humans to gener - ate more creative solutions . 5 . Generalizing the principles of bisociation to simul - taneously handle multiple domains , rather than just between two domains . One major challenge compared to past BisoNet work is the lack of comprehensive benchmark datasets for mul - tiple domains outside of scientiﬁc literature . One of this paper’s ancillary outcomes is to enable creation of such a dataset , so that others can study multi - domain biso - ciation in broad design domains . We have made data corresponding to our results available online 2 . 2 Methodology Let us say that we are given ideas from D domains . Here , we propose a method , which ﬁnds a ranked list of con - cepts which indirectly connects these domains . Next , we also show how these concepts can be used to gen - erate a BisoNet . Our approach to creative exploration consists of three main steps : 1 ) constructing the net - work nodes—that is , learning each idea’s topic represen - tations , 2 ) ﬁnding likely bridging topics ( or b - topics ) and using those topics to create network edges that connect idea domains , and 3 ) constructing a BisoNet from highly probable bridging topics , so that users can explore and navigate a graph of cross - domain inspirations . 2 . 1 Representing Ideas The ﬁrst step is to computationally represent an idea or design . In this research , we only consider text doc - uments ; however , the techniques we develop below for 2 https : / / github . com / IDEALLab / bisonet topic collections will transfer to other inputs or media ( e . g . , images ) . Traditionally , research on representing text documents largely used a vector space model where a document is expressed by a vector of keyword weights using the TF - IDF method [ Salton and Buckley , 1988 ] . Researchers have since developed various other dimen - sion reduction techniques to capture the hidden semantic structure in a document including probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis ( pLSA ) [ Hofmann , 1999 ] and topic modeling [ Blei and Laﬀerty , 2009 ] . The “topics” pro - duced by topic modeling techniques are clusters of sim - ilar words . A topic model captures this intuition in a mathematical framework , which allows examining a set of documents and discovering , based on the statistics of the words in each , what the topics might be and what each document’s balance of topics is . Latent Dirichlet Allocation ( LDA ) [ Blei et al . , 2003 ] —is a widely used topic modeling method . In LDA , each document is described as a random mixture over a set of hidden topics and each topic is a discrete distri - bution over a text vocabulary—that is , words can be - long to discrete clusters , and LDA learns from data how strongly any word should belong to any cluster . LDA has been applied to many areas [ Wei and Croft , 2006 ; Krestel et al . , 2009 ; Rosen - Zvi et al . , 2004 ] and several variants of LDA have also been proposed to tackle corre - lated [ Blei and Laﬀerty , 2007 ] and network - based [ Chang and Blei , 2009 ] structure between topics . In design , [ Chan et al . , 2014 ] used LDA to represent ideas on OpenIDEO and showed that concepts that cite sources had greater success than those that did not cite sources of inspiration . [ Chan and Schunn , 2015 ] also used LDA to represent ideas , where they hypothesized that itera - tion is necessary to convert far combinations into creative concepts . The key insight from topic models relevant to our work is that , rather than using the speciﬁc bridging words from a document ( as in standard BisoNet examples like “Bcl - 2” above ) , we can instead cluster words together into overall topics that contain sets of related words . For example , single bridging word like ‘care’ can be vague . It can refer to care in hospitals , care for the elderly or health insurance care etc . However , the ambiguity is reduced for a semantically related collection of words like { ‘care’ , ‘health’ , ‘patient’ , ‘hospital’ , ‘doctor’ , ‘med - ical’ , ‘center’ } , as it provides clearer framing and con - text . Although , subjectivity of interpretation is a de - sirable property of our approach compared to showing existing ideas , it can often act as double edged sword in the design process . While showing existing ideas can often be too speciﬁc , showing single words can be too ambiguous . Under what conditions does including mul - tiple words increase or decrease the clarity ? One way to think about context clarity is whether a word ( or set of words ) collapses the Conditional Shannon Entropy of the topic posterior probability distribution in a topic model . When single words are used , the topic distribution gen - erally has high entropy , implying that single word can come from many topics or contexts . When multiple re - lated words from the same topic are used , the posterior probability distribution collapses to zero entropy ( there is no topic uncertainty ) and thus refers to only one topic . The above assumes that topics are a reasonable proxy for “context " or “framing " —an assumption we believe is reasonable , given that topic models are designed to cap - ture document context . Hence , we claim that collections of relevant words ( i . e . , topics ) can act as better bridges between design domains than individual terms used in current Bisociative Networks . In this paper , we use LDA to capture the topic distri - bution of ideas , however our contributions are indepen - dent of the speciﬁc topic model variant or implementa - tion used . Speciﬁcally , we learn the topic distribution for each idea a corpus of designs—this means that we represent each design idea ( text document , in this case ) as a M - dimensional vector of numbers between 0 and 1 that corresponds to which topics are most prevalent in that idea . We use these vectors to identify edges and possible bridging topics . 2 . 2 Bridging Topic Identiﬁcation Given sets of ideas and their topics proportions , our goal is to ﬁnd , for a given domain or set of ideas , what top - ics might bridge across other domains . One naïve ap - proach to ﬁnding bridging topics might be to simply look for topics that two or more domains have in com - mon—after all , if a topic is highly represented within two domains , it seems sensible to expect that those top - ics would somehow bridge those two domains . The main problem with that approach is that the topics that are both representative of a particular domain and common across domains tend to be overly general topics that do not provide much creative insight—for example , com - mon cross - domain topics might include topics such as { ‘the’ , ‘and’ , ‘is’ , ‘of’ } or { ‘man’ , ‘woman’ , ‘he’ , ‘she’ , ‘they’ } , etc . While such topics certainly do bridge across domains , they are unlikely to meaningfully re - frame the problem in a creative way . Instead , we are looking for a kind of “Goldilocks” topic ; topics that are uncommon enough to bring new insight to a problem , but common enough across domain outliers that the topic can be readily understood and adapted . This intuition—that we need to identify outliers within domains , but commonalities between domains—was the primary goal of previous research on bisociation ; the cen - tral idea being to rank all bridging topics as a function of how rare they occur overall and how common they are among outliers within its own domain . Speciﬁcally , we generalize the approach of Jur˘si˘c et al . [ Juršič et al . , 2012a ] to collections of word ( topics ) rather than single words . Their essential approach was to train a machine classiﬁer to distinguish domains from one another using individual words within documents , and then search for documents or terms that the classiﬁer reliably mis - classiﬁes as a diﬀerent domain . Why is that approach reasonable ? The intuition is that doc - uments that actually live within one domain—but are consistently classiﬁed as being in another ( false nega - tives ) —are more likely to “bridge” domains . Jur˘si˘c et al . found this outlier - ﬁnding approach to be stable , even un - der minor modiﬁcations to the dataset , and that it con - sistently located the gold - standard bridging terms within the benchmark dataset . To ﬁnd bisociation scores for topics , we ﬁrst ﬁnd out - lier ideas in every domain . Here , outlier ideas are false negatives in the multi - label classiﬁcation— documents that have greater similarity to documents in some other domain than to those of their own domain . To ﬁnd these outliers , we train a multi - class classiﬁer and the docu - ments wrongly classiﬁed by it ( false negative ) are marked as domain outliers . The input to the multi - class classiﬁer is the vectorial representation for each document and the output labels are the domain index . Ground truth dur - ing training is the true label of the domain . If one uses a poor classiﬁer with large number of false negatives ( low recall ) , it would wrongly consider many ideas as outliers . Hence , the b - topic scoring will be erroneous and topics in such domains may get artiﬁcially high b - scores . The rationale is that topics with high bisociation score are more common in outlier documents and less common overall . The outlier documents according to classiﬁca - tion models should not belong to their domain and thus are likely to have borrowed concepts from other domains . Let I be the set of all N documents from M domains and O d be the set of outliers for domain d . Let X be the N × T document - topic matrix , where row i represents i th document’s T dimensional topic proportion vector . For topic t in domain d : Topic bisociation score ( t , d ) = (cid:80) j ∈ O d X j , t (cid:80) i ∈I X i , t ( 1 ) The above score is used to rank every topic by their potential to be a true bisociation candidate for a given domain ( d ) . For classiﬁcation with multiple domains , we build a joint classiﬁcation model to simultaneously classify all the documents . To make the outlier set more robust , the prediction scores for the three classiﬁers with highest accuracy are added to ﬁnd the output domain in classiﬁcation . Documents whose predicted challenge are diﬀerent from true challenge are allotted to the outlier set . While we describe the exact classiﬁers we use in our results section , the speciﬁc choice of classiﬁer is not central to the contributions of this paper ; any ensemble that meaningfully reduces the classiﬁer variance should suﬃce . 2 . 3 Generating the BisoNet Lastly , we create a BisoNet where links between bridging nodes in diﬀerent domains can be visualized and under - stood using graph exploration techniques . Essentially , we deﬁne a procedure for linking the bridging topics ( b - topics ) of a BisoNet by ﬁnding weights that indicate the association strength . For BisoNets with words as nodes ( rather than top - ics ) , [ Segond and Borgelt , 2009 ] showed that keeping the edges between words that had the highest bisociation Algorithm 1 : RankBisociativeTopics Input : A collection of domains D ( with | D | = N ) A collection of ideas I vector d I of which domain d ∈ D each idea i ∈ I belongs to A query domain q ∈ D Output : List of topics ranked by Bisociation w . r . t . domain q 1 topics , X ← VectorizeIdeas ( I ) 2 O ← FindOutliers ( X , d I ) 3 topicScores = (cid:80) j ∈ O d X j , t / (cid:80) i ∈I X i , t ∀ t ∈ T 4 return topics . rankBy ( topicScores ) 5 6 def VectorizeIdeas ( I ) : 7 topics , X = runLDA ( I ) 8 return topics , X 9 def FindOutliers ( X , d I ) : 10 classifier = trainDomainClassifier ( X , d I ) 11 D predicted = classifier . predictDomainProbabilities ( X ) 12 outliers ← ∅ 13 for i ∈ X do 14 d true ← d I [ i ] 15 d predicted ← argmax d ∈D D predicted [ i , d ] 16 if d true (cid:54) = d predicted then 17 outliers ← outliers ∪ i 18 return outliers Algorithm 2 : GenerateBisoNet Input : A collection of domains D ( with | D | = N ) A collection of ideas I vector d I of which domain d ∈ D each idea i ∈ I belongs to A query domain q ∈ D ( Optional ) Bisociation threshold τ for a topic to become a vertex ( Optional ) Bison Measure threshold (cid:15) for two topics to share an edge Output : BisoNet ( G ) 1 V ← ∅ , E ← ∅ 2 for q ∈ D do 3 T q = RankBisociativeTopics ( D , I , d I , q ) 4 T q = DropLowBisociatonTopics ( T q , τ ) ( Optional , for pruning ) 5 V ← V ∪ T q 6 for T i , T j ∈ V do 7 t = topicBisonMeasure ( T i , T j ) ( Eqn . 2 ) 8 if t < (cid:15) then 9 continue ( Optional , for pruning ) 10 E ← E ∪ ( T i , T 2 , j ) 11 return G = ( V , E ) T D 1 , D 2 ( p , q ) = (cid:88) i ∈ R (cid:32) k (cid:112) X i , p · X i , q (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) Both topics occur in idea ? · (cid:18) 1 − | tan − 1 ( X i , p ) − tan − 1 ( X i , q ) | tan − 1 ( 1 ) (cid:19) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) Topic proportions similar ? (cid:33) ( 2 ) Where R is the set of i ideas obtained by the union of domains D 1 and D 2 . In Equation 2 , the product term X i , p · X i , q implies that for two topics to be sim - ilar ( have a high bison measure ) , they should both have large positive proportions in a document , as a vanish - ing topic proportion means that the two topics do not co - occur in the corresponding document . Secondly , they are more related if they have similar proportions . To further understand this , we have to keep in mind that having two topics , both of which have a topic propor - tion of 0 . 1 , should be less important than having two topics with a topic proportion of 0 . 5 . In the ﬁrst case , the topics we are comparing appear only rarely in the considered document . On the other hand , in the latter case these topic appear very frequently in this document , which means that they are strongly linked according to this document . The arctan function normalizes the eﬀects of compar - ing topic proportions of diﬀerent magnitude . Parameter k can be adjusted according to the importance one is willing to give to low topic proportion values . Hence , this form has the advantage that it takes into account that two topic proportion values for the same index have to be positive , similarity between topics is greater if the topic proportion values are large and the same diﬀerence between topic proportions has diﬀerent impact according to the values of the topic proportions . The procedure to obtain a BisoNet is described in Al - gorithm 2 . To simplify the network for visualization pur - poses , one may threshold the bisociation score of topics to select a small percentage of the highest scoring topics as edges ; these topics have high potential to be bisocia - tive . After calculating the edge weights ( the topic bison measure ) between remaining topics , edge pruning can be done to retain only a small fraction of highest weight edges . 3 Results and Discussion To study our method’s eﬀectiveness on a concrete ex - ample , we apply our technique to 14 OpenIDEO chal - lenges to ﬁnd interesting connections between domains . We then create a BisoNet for graph exploration and show meaningful themes discovered between diﬀerent do - mains . Finally , we verify our results with diﬀerent hu - man experiments conducted with crowd workers . 3 . 1 Dataset OpenIDEO is a successful online open innovation com - munity centered around designing products , services , and experiences that promote social impact by build - ing of ideas from distributed individuals [ Fuge et al . , 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 localfoodamnestyweb - start - up eat - better well - work womens - safety bone - marrow maternal - health usaidvotingmayo - clinic employmentcreativecities Figure 2 : All ideas from 14 challenges projected on a 2 - D plane using t - Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Em - bedding ( t - SNE ) . Some challenges ( e . g . , the voting chal - lenge # 10 ) , do not overlap many domains , while others ( e . g . , # 14 ) may have signiﬁcant overlap . 2014 ] . Generally , challenges have various stages like : ‘Research , Ideas , Applause , Reﬁnement , Evaluation , and Winners . ’ and address very diﬀerent social issues . We focus on the ‘Ideas’ stage , where participants generate and view potential design ideas . In this stage , hundreds to thousands of ideas are submitted in a single challenge . Reading ideas posted in past challenges or even the same challenge to gain inspiration when developing their own ideas is challenging—for a single , medium - sized chal - lenge ( ≈ 500 ideas ) it would take a person over 40 hours to read all idea entries . Because of this , participants of - ten ﬁlter by date , the total number of comments , or just pick ideas randomly from the same challenge as inspi - ration . Once inspired , participants in a challenge may submit new ideas containing text and images , linking to existing ideas that inspired them . Over time , submit - ted ideas accrue views , applause , and comments as other participants provide feedback [ Fuge and Agogino , 2014 ] . Past work on helping ﬁlter ideas on OpenIDEO has in - vestigated ﬁnding a small subset of diverse ideas [ Ahmed et al . , 2016 ] and ranking ideas by quality after training a classiﬁer to identify winning ideas [ Ahmed and Fuge , 2017 ] . We ran our experiment on 14 diﬀerent challenges ( do - mains ) with total 3918 ideas submitted to these chal - lenges . The challenge titles are shown in Table 2 . To gain some intuition about how similar or diﬀerent these domains are , Fig . 2 projects the topic vectors of all ideas into 2 - D using t - Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Em - bedding ( t - SNE ) [ Maaten and Hinton , 2008 ] . t - SNE is a technique for dimensionality reduction that is particu - larly well suited for the visualization of high - dimensional datasets . The algorithm preferentially cares about pre - serving the local structure of the high - dimensional data . If two points are close in the original space , there is a strong attractive force between the points in the embed - ding , while if any two points are far apart in the origi - nal space , the algorithm is relatively free to place these points around . As Fig . 2 demonstrates , some challenges like challenge 14 have many ideas which overlap with other challenges , while others like challenge 10 have a tight cluster whose ideas largely diﬀer from other challenges . This disparity is expected ; for example , challenge 10 involves improv - ing voting access during elections ( a comparatively nar - row and speciﬁc problem ) , while challenge 14 addresses improving vibrancy in cities facing economic decline ( a comparatively broad and open - ended problem ) . Later we ﬁnd that this observation is further supported when we perform outlier detection , with some challenges hav - ing fewer outliers . Topics in such challenges will not have high bisociation potential and are unlikely to be good bisociation candidates . This is because the bisociation score in Eq . 1 is proportional to the number of outliers . Intuitively , if a domain is very narrow and speciﬁc ( like bone marrow or voting challenges ) , it is less likely to gain from indirect connections with other domains . Before demonstrating our model , the next section summarizes how existing state - of - the - art in BisoNet dis - covery—the “CrossBee” tool 3 —performs on design ex - amples to motivate the use of topics instead of words to bridge design domains . Thereafter , we discuss insights into the topic model and b - topics obtained using LDA . Then we run two experiments on Amazon’s Mechani - cal Turk platform to gather human evaluation data . In the ﬁrst experiment , workers assess whether the b - topics themselves are creative ( compared to non - b - topics ) . In the second , we use the b - topics as inspiration in an idea generation task and ask workers to create or judge the generated ideas . Our experiments show that the above methodology is able to discover topics and produce ideas which people ﬁnd creative . 3 . 2 CrossBee Results : Comparison to existing state - of - the - art The existing state - of - the - art bisociation tool is the CrossBee ( Cross Context Bisociation Explorer ) . It is an online tool to analyze text documents from two diﬀerent domains . The tool ﬁnds and rank orders bridging terms ( b - terms ) but does not create a BisoNet . However , we demonstrate below that several issues arise when using words for design exploration rather than our proposed bridging topics . Since CrossBee can only handle two do - mains at once , we use it to ﬁnd b - terms from Challenge 6 ( women’s safety ) and 14 ( city vibrancy ) in our dataset as an illustrative and representative example . The full challenge topics are , respectively , “How might we make low - income urban areas safer and more empowering for 3 crossbee . ijs . si women and girls ? ” 4 and “How might we restore vibrancy in cities and regions facing economic decline ? ” 5 The top ten b - terms obtained using CrossBee between the women safety and city vibrancy challenge were : “health , space , mobile , project , people , urban , commu - nity , city , program , area” . Without any gold standard data for b - terms on this particular example , it is diﬃcult to say which of these b - terms are actually bisociative . However , looking at each term individually , one realizes that it is diﬃcult to discover connections between these non - scientiﬁc domains by just using individual words like “health” or “space” . Individual words like “space” can be ambiguous and may have diﬀerent meanings depending on the context . Here “space” may refer to the space oc - cupied by a body or related to the physical universe . However , a collection of semantically related words like “space” , “outer” , “universe” , “earth” , “atmosphere” reduces ambiguity . This is unlike b - terms in autism - calcineurin dataset , where individual terms like “paroxysmal” or “Bcl - 2” can lead one to discover links between two spe - ciﬁc , scientiﬁc concepts because they are quite domain speciﬁc . Next , we contrast this with our method that incorporate our proposed b - topics rather than standard b - terms . 3 . 3 Qualitative Results : Discovered B - Topics We run LDA with 100 topics on all the 3918 documents from 14 domains and set the hyper - parameters for topic distribution smoothness and topic - word to values recom - mended in prior literature [ Griﬃths and Steyvers , 2004 ] . The output of LDA is topic - word and document - topic distributions along with the topics . To gain some intu - ition about LDA’s output , we list the top 7 words for some of the learned topics : 1 . food , cook , meal , recipe , restaurant , ingredient , eat 2 . care , health , patient , hospital , doctor , medical , cen - ter 3 . money , bank , saving , funding , pay , loan , ﬁnancial 4 . person , individual , need , van , match , contact , database These topics often ( though not always , as shown by Topic 4 ) refer to some meaningful concept . Topic 1 above refers to food and restaurants , while Topic 2 refers to health care . Note that we have used LDA for topic analysis , but other topic model variants [ Newman et al . , 2011 ] can also be used . To score these topics , we ﬁrst ﬁnd ideas that are out - liers in a challenge . To train the classiﬁcation model to classify ideas into challenges , the document - topic vectors were used as input . We trained multiple classiﬁcation models to predict the domain , given vectors of ideas . For this dataset , three methods—Linear Discriminant , 4 https : / / challenges . openideo . com / challenge / womens - safety / 5 https : / / challenges . openideo . com / challenge / vibrant - cities / Bagged Trees , and Subspace discriminant [ MATLAB , 2016 ] —had highest cross - validation accuracy of 87 . 5 % , 88 . 2 % and 87 . 3 % . The classiﬁcation scores of these methods were added and the resultant method with 91 % accuracy was used to allocate predicted domains to ev - ery idea . The average F - 1 score is 0 . 90 . Ideas assigned to domains diﬀerent from their true domain ( false nega - tives ) were identiﬁed as outliers . The number of outliers in each challenge is shown in Table 2 . Next , Eq . 1 was used to ﬁnd the topic bisociation score for every topic in every domain . To clarify and visualize our below explanations , we represent a topic by its top 10 words , however , in reality each topic assigns a likeli - hood to every word and so other reasonable thresholding strategies could be used . Let us take an example b - topic from challenge six ( the womens’ safety challenge ) : “used , materials , design , clothing , wear , recycling , create , make , glass , shoe” . The idea with highest proportion of this b - topic is entitled “Red Chilli Powder Filled Glass Bangle for Women’s Self - defense . 6 ” It discusses how a hollow glass bangle ﬁlled with hot red chili powder or pepper spray can be used by women in self - defense . This idea combines wear - able accessories with self - defense mechanisms for women safety . The same b - topic has also been used in other contexts for diﬀerent domains . As one example , in chal - lenge nine ( related to unlawful detention of human rights activists ) , an idea entitled “Emergency shoes” proposes using special shoes with embedded wireless devices to help rights activists communicate their location to oth - ers in the event they are kidnapped or unlawfully de - tained . Multiple ideas across seemingly unrelated chal - lenges—public safety , bone marrow registration , unlaw - ful detention , among others—pursued a common theme of using clothing or wearable accessories as a possible solution . Surprisingly , this topic was the 5 th least used topic among all existing ideas , making the concept quite rare . Such links may not be immediately obvious but once discovered can lead to diﬀerent ideas than those that exist within the target domains . As a second example , a diﬀerent b - topic for chal - lenge 6 ( womens’ safety ) contains “street , neighborhoods , residence , community , walk , tour , owners , home , lo - cal , house” . The topic relates to walking in neighbor - hoods and is the 3 rd least used topic . A representative idea from the women safety challenge for this topic is “You’ll Never Walk Alone 7 ” which describes how women in low - income urban areas often share similar routes and could form walking groups by creating a group walking timetable between main points like bus stops . Likewise , in challenge 14 ( city vibrancy ) the idea entitled “Youth Led Tours 8 ” proposes using local youths to guide visitors on walking tours through their cities , showing visitors 6 https : / / challenges . openideo . com / challenge / womens - safety / refinement / red - chilli - powder - glass - bangle - for - self - defence 7 https : / / challenges . openideo . com / challenge / womens - safety / ideas / walking - group 8 https : / / challenges . openideo . com / challenge / the city as the residents see it . The women safety chal - lenge took place three years after the vibrant city chal - lenge , and many participants could arguably have gained insight from studying this related concept of combining a walking activity with womens’ safety . However , most users were unlikely to have looked three years back in an unrelated challenge to discover such a connection . Using our method to mine bisociative links between seemingly unrelated domains can inspire people to propose such creative cross - domain solutions . So far , we have discussed b - topics derived from do - main outlier ideas , however , one can argue that creative links can also be found by using outlier topics directly , by identifying the most infrequently cited topics . How - ever , we found this approach to be insuﬃcient to iden - tify bisociations , as these topics are often meaningless or completely unrelated to the problem in hand . For exam - ple , for challenge six , we found the outlier topic to be : “donation , donor , marrow , bone , registration , aware , reg - ister , people , swab , spread” . This topic , predominantly used in bone marrow related challenge 7 , is completely unrelated to women safety and has practically zero pro - portion in current domain . Hence , adding such topics as exemplars does not identify a meaningful link . Although , we have not studied the distance between domains directly , as a consequence of ﬁnding the b - topics among domain outliers , we ﬁnd that the discovered biso - ciations are also from nearby domains , that is not from domains which are too “far” to share no outliers nor too “near” to be within domain . In our analysis , the out - liers are false negatives of the classiﬁcation model , ideas which are far from their original domain , such that clas - siﬁer confuses them to belong to another domain . The b - topics are topics which are common between outliers of two domains and uncommon overall . This generally means these topics are on concepts which are far from the mainstream concepts of the domain , but not very far from the domain to be absent from the outlier . As the bisociation score of a topic is proportional to the number of outliers ( Eq . 1 ) , domains with more outliers ( hence more nearby domains ) have higher chances of discovering true bisociations . For example , the voting challenge has only seven outliers , hence topics get a low bisociation score in it , implying that it is unlikely to ﬁnd an indirect connection from other domains . The chal - lenge is narrow in scope and far away from all other domains ( as visualized in Fig . 2 ) . Further research is needed to establish if discovering bisociations using out - lier method supports previous research in [ Fu et al . , 2013 ; Chan et al . , 2015 ] showing that the “distance " away from the design problem of the creativity stimulus has an in - ﬂuence on the quality of the new solution . 3 . 4 Qualitative Results : Exploring the Resulting BisoNet So far , we discussed ranking topics by their bisociation potential . Next , we create a BisoNet across challenges to vibrant - cities / concepting / youth - led - tours explore concepts which can be borrowed between chal - lenges . Note that for 14 challenges , if existing word - based BisoNets without pruning are used with a global vocabulary size of 2000 , the number of nodes in the net - work will be 28 , 000 . This will make graph exploration diﬃcult , if not impossible . By using 100 topics , we re - duce the network size by 95 % to 1400 nodes . However , to further help network exploration , one can optionally ob - tain further reduction by node removal and edge pruning methods . Formatting the full BisoNet of all 14 challenges legi - bly in this paper is diﬃcult , so for clarity we discuss and visualize a smaller sample . Figure 3 shows a small sub - set of a full BisoNet by viewing the portion connecting challenge six and nine . Challenge six addresses women safety and empowerment while challenge nine addresses gathering information from hard to access areas to pre - vent mass violence . To make network visualization easy , we only show the largest connected component of the graph after retaining the edges with the top 0 . 5 % of edge weights and use parameter value k = 0 . 5 in Eq . 2 . This BisoNet has 20 nodes , representing ten topics . Challenge nine is shown by yellow squares , while challenge six is shown by green circles . A larger edge weight ( thicker line ) between two diﬀerent topics mean that topics may co - occur together in similar proportions in same ideas in these challenges . A larger edge weight between the same topic across two challenges illustrates that it has a high topic bisociation score ( Eq . 2 ) . By inspecting the graph in Figure 3 , we ﬁnd topics that likely refer to a few broad themes that can ap - ply to both domains . For example , the right side of the graph has topics on technology related solutions like network coverage or phone messaging with top words in topics being “device , use , technology , area , signal” ( Topic 22 ) and “phone , message , send , text , mobile” ( Topic 67 ) . Within challenge 9 , we ﬁnd that the idea with highest proportion of latter topic is entitled “Balloon Communi - cations”—it proposes ﬂying an iridium based sat - phone as a weather balloon payload over the aﬀected area and receive / transmit text messages from local cell phones . Another idea in challenge nine proposed a text message based wristband that can send any number of prede - ﬁned messages to a connector , network , or hub . Related to same topic in challenge six on womens’ safety , we ﬁnd linked ideas like creating a mobile application that can deter assault by automatically notifying your emergency contacts if the user does not travel from their stated start and end points safely or quickly . By using the proposed BisoNet to isolate these concepts that share b - topics across diﬀerent challenges , we could promote more eﬀective cross - pollination of ideas . Similarly , in Figure 3 we ﬁnd the left side topics are re - lated to education and training ( Topic 9 with words “girl , community , slums , schools” and Topic 90 with words “woman , income , training , urban” ) . These are predom - inant in challenge 10 ( womens’ safety ) and not heav - ily used in challenge 9 . Uncovered themes include gov - ernment policy improvements and community support . For example , within community support , a challenge 9 idea entitled “Reﬂexive distributive community warning system” talks about organizing channels of communica - tion and introducing universal codes that could increase speed of transmission and accuracy of information within a community . It mentions steps to design codes for dan - ger , layout the location of each community in the area , and instructs each village with speciﬁc actions to un - dertake if they experience or witness atrocities . A simi - lar concept of community preparation and action could likely also apply to safety in urban areas . Within the womens’ safety challenge , one idea possessing this b - topic talks about establishing community - ﬁtness centers to create a larger network of people who can recognize each other on the streets , commute together , and feel an overall sense of community . This idea discusses building a community , while the idea in challenge nine addresses action after the community is formed . Through the pro - cess of BisoNet graph exploration and use of b - topics to guide inspiration , our hypothesis is that ideas and concepts from other domains can help designer better explore , cross - pollinate , or gain inspiration within their own domain . As stated by Pioncaré above , while not all links may be useful , some may give valuable insights . 3 . 5 Quantitative Results : Human Evaluation Our subjective analysis demonstrated a subset of use - ful b - topics and cross - domain links that the proposed BisoNet method identiﬁed . However , verifying BisoNet performance directly and objectively is diﬃcult , as cre - ative inspiration depends on human perception and there is no accepted gold - standard dataset within design ( un - like those for existing word - based BisoNets using in aca - demic literature search [ Schmidt et al . , 2012 ] ) . More - over , quantitatively comparing our topic based links with those of the word - based Crossbee b - terms would not represent a fair comparison , since our b - topics contain strictly more information compared to a single b - word . One possible baseline against which to compare our method is to create topics using LDA , but , rather than going through the eﬀort of ﬁnding b - topics , just show a designer a random topic from LDA as inspiration and compare the outcomes . However , this may be a compar - atively weak baseline , as topics produced by LDA can vary in coherence and human interpretability . To create a stronger baseline , we calculate Pointwise Mutual In - formation ( PMI ) for each topic and pick a random topic with similar PMI . Recent work [ Newman et al . , 2010 ] has shown that PMI can be used to estimate human - judged topic coherence—hence the baseline random topic ( r - topic ) is similar in coherence to b - topic , resulting in a fairer comparison . To measure topic coherence , we use normalized PMI score , calculated over the entire Wikipedia corpus . To compare the creativity of b - topics with an r - topic , we use crowd workers on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk platform . One naïve way to quantitatively compare b - and r - topics topic is to ﬁnd existing ideas from the chal - 9 10 22 26 48 53 67 89 90 99 9 10 22 26 48 53 67 89 90 99 empower by training social support local organizations improve government policy remote network access police in dangerous areas education reform for slums alerts on phone and radio Figure 3 : A snapshot of BisoNet showing links between topics between challenge six and nine addressing , respec - tively , womens’ safety and gathering information from hard to access areas . We only show largest connected component after thresholding to top 0 . 5 % edges with highest bison similarity . Node with id 6 _ 9 represents challenge six with topic id nine . Higher edge weights are shown with thicker lines . Major themes of the topics are captioned . lenges with a high proportion of a b - topic versus r - topic and ask workers to rate the idea on quality and nov - elty . Although straightforward to implement , results from such an approach may be misleading . Two ideas on OpenIDEO may diﬀer for multiple reasons—poor gram - mar , domain knowledge of author , etc . Thus , workers should ideally compare topics or ideas generated by the same author , where the only diﬀerence lies in the seed topic used for inspiration . To address this , we con - ducted two randomized experiments to answer two re - search questions : • Are b - topics perceived as creative ? • Do b - topics , when used for creative inspiration , pro - duce more creative ideas ? In both of our subsequent experiments , we use crowd - sourcing to both generate and evaluate the creativity of the generated ideas , building upon techniques used by researchers in both engineering and computer supported collaborative work [ Green et al . , 2014 ; Kittur et al . , 2013 ; Kittur , 2010 ] . Quantitative Experiment 1 : Are b - topics perceived as creative ? Here we consider the hypothesis that b - topics can ﬁnd more creative links between design domains compared to baseline . To test this , we ﬁrst showed both b - topics and baseline topics to online workers and asked them to rate the topics themselves . To design the survey , we selected four challenges and four topics in each challenge . Four b - topics were selected randomly from the top ten topics with highest bisociation score for a challenge ( total 16 b - topics for four challenges . ) While we chose the challenges Figure 4 : Objective survey example Which concept can lead to a solution which is more unique , unusual , or novel ? Challenge 6 Challenge 13 Challenge 9 Challenge 14 0 20 40 20 40 60 80 Percentage Strongly Prefer Baseline Moderately Prefer Baseline No preference Moderately Prefer B - Topic Strongly Prefer B - Topic Figure 5 : Novelty scores from objective assessment . Each challenge had 4 B - topic comparisons which were rated by 30 workers . Which concept can lead to a solution which is more useful for the intended purpose ? Challenge 6 Challenge 13 Challenge 9 Challenge 14 0 20 40 20 40 60 80 Percentage Strongly Prefer Baseline Moderately Prefer Baseline No preference Moderately Prefer B - Topic Strongly Prefer B - Topic Figure 6 : Quality scores from objective assessment . Each challenge had 4 B - topic comparisons which were rated by 30 workers . randomly , we did not select a challenge with very few outliers , as all the topics in such challenges have low bisociation scores . For the baseline , we found three random topics that had similar PMI scores to the b - topic and selected the one with the lowest bisociation score ( the random base - line topic should not also be a b - topic ) . We showed the challenge brief to 30 Turkers for each pair of b - topic and r - topic . For novelty , the workers were asked “which topic can lead to a solution which is more unique , ” while for quality , the workers were asked “which concept can lead to a solution which is more useful for the intended pur - pose” as shown in Fig . 4 . These survey questions are based on [ Pang and Seepersad , 2016 ] , where novelty and quality questions were used to ﬁnd concepts which are more creative . We ensured that the crowdsourced re - sponses were valid using a few quality checks . First , we allowed only those Turkers to participate , whose accep - tance rate of past work was more than 95 % . Second , in every survey , we added one subjective question ask - ing Turker to explain the rationale behind their choice . Some Turkers , who were only trying to maximize ques - tions answered ( and thus not meaningfully participat - ing ) , often entered gibberish to this question and their responses were discarded . Finally , we also recorded time at task and number of clicks on page to ﬁlter out partic - ipants whose metrics were obvious outliers . The survey results are shown in Fig . 5 and Fig . 6 , where we notice that most workers preferred b - topics for both novelty and quality compared to other topics . We do not report statistical signiﬁcant analyses for these ex - periments , as the Likert scales are ordinal and compar - ison for a particular domain are between diﬀerent sets of topics with varying b - scores . In some assessments , the workers were asked to explain their choice , giving us useful insights into their thinking . For example , one user who strongly preferred concept 2 for novelty but prefers concept 1 for quality in Fig . 4 quotes “I have never heard of discounts or oﬀers or free things as a reward to help in - form about mass violence . Advertisements , social inter - action , campaigns and interacting with the public seem more useful , as many victims involved in areas where such crimes take place are not interested in discounts or free oﬀers to stop violence . They just want the violence stopped . ” while another user who supports the b - topic says “Concept 1 sounds like ’getting the word out’ about atrocities and therefore hoping to prevent them . Con - cept 2 sounds like a tacky marketing ploy . ” Experiment 1 Limitations : This experiment was a more direct way of measuring perceived novelty and quality of generated b - topics . Although our results showed that b - topics are perceived to be more creative than the baseline , this observation should be taken with a grain of salt . First , we represent a topic by its top 10 words for sake of clarity . However , it is possible that discarding those lower - ranked words might subtly change the topic’s perceived meaning . Second , we presented the words in order of their proportion in the topic . It is possible that using a word cloud or a diﬀerent ordering of the same words within the top 10 may alter a topic’s perception by the online workers . 9 Studying both eﬀects would be an interesting area of future work but is not further addressed in this paper . Another limitation of this experiment is that it is not straightforward to run direct tests of statistical signiﬁ - cance to test whether or not b - topics are perceived as more creative than the baseline , in part because the dif - ferences in bisociation scores come from diﬀerent popula - tions and eﬀect sizes , complicating traditional inference models . Despite these limitations , we studied within cat - egory ( e . g . , Prefer B - Topic , Neutral , etc . ) trends for each challenge , as the diﬀerence in bisociation score between a random topic and b - topic increases . To do so , we noted diﬀerences in the b - scores between a b - topic and random topic with respect to the proportion of the response rate from the survey participants . Ideally , increasing diﬀer - ence in bisociation should lead to stronger relative pref - erence for b - topics over random topics . We ﬁnd that , for each challenge , a higher percentage of respondents preferred b - topics over the baseline and Challenges 6 , 9 , and 14 mirror the slope behavior we would expect while challenge 13 does not . However , as the slope estimates are noisy and fairly small in magnitude , it is diﬃcult to make strong statements about the eﬀect . As such , our results should be interpreted with appropriate caution . Quantitative Experiment 2 : Do b - topics produce more creative ideas ? Next , we tested whether b - topics inspire more creative ideas by conducting a set of idea generation experiments and evaluations . First , we provided a few workers with the challenge brief and two topics . The workers were asked to write an original solution to the problem in more than 100 words . They were explicitly instructed to use the set of words from the provided topic ( collection of 10 words ) as inspirations to their idea . Each worker was asked to perform this task twice , us - ing two diﬀerent topics : a b - topic and , as a baseline , the topic with highest proportion for the challenge prompt they received ( most common topic ) . For a given pair of topics , we generate ﬁve pair of ideas from 5 workers . The workers are asked to self assess their ideas on quality and novelty . Next , we judge the quality and novelty of these idea pairs ( ideas generated by same worker ) by asking another , independent set of 10 workers to compare these ideas on quality and novelty . The order of ideas is ran - domized and to remove possible bias on novelty , we do 9 To test this eﬀect , we jumbled the words of a topic to gen - erate two collection of words—“production , market , selling , customer , increase , produce , brand , supply , sale , distribu - tion” and “produce , supply , distribution , market , customer , sale , brand , production , increase , selling” . These two groups use the same set of 10 words and were given to workers to compare novelty and quality between them . Only 50 % of the workers gave no preference between the topics . This ob - servation could either mean lack of attention on task or the concept perceived by a worker from reading the words in a topic is dependent on word ordering . Which idea is more unique , unusual , or novel ? Idea1 Idea 2 Idea 3 Idea 4 Idea 5 0 20 40 60 80 20 40 60 80 Percentage Strongly Prefer Baseline Moderately Prefer Baseline No preference Moderately Prefer B - Topic Strongly Prefer B - Topic Figure 7 : Novelty scores for ideas on topic “city , local , government , create , need , people , urban , citizens , eco - nomic , new” vs “garden , growing , farming , urban , plant , food , land , vegetables , community , fruits ” . Each idea pair is rated by 10 workers . Which idea is more useful for the intended purpose ? Idea1 Idea 2 Idea 3 Idea 4 Idea 5 0 20 40 60 80 20 40 60 Percentage Strongly Prefer Baseline Moderately Prefer Baseline No preference Moderately Prefer B - Topic Strongly Prefer B - Topic Figure 8 : Quality scores for ideas on topic “city , local , government , create , need , people , urban , citizens , eco - nomic , new” vs “garden , growing , farming , urban , plant , food , land , vegetables , community , fruits” . Each idea pair is rated by 10 workers . Which idea is more unique , unusual , or novel ? Idea 1 Idea 2 Idea 3 Idea 4 Idea 5 0 20 40 60 20 40 60 80 Percentage Strongly Prefer Baseline Moderately Prefer Baseline No preference Moderately Prefer B - Topic Strongly Prefer B - Topic Figure 9 : Novelty scores for ideas on topic “woman , safety , safe , areas , urban , community , low , city , ideas , in - come” vs “device , use , technology , area , signal , network , community , access , people , remote” . Each idea pair is rated by 10 workers . Challenge Baseline Topic : ‘city , lo - cal , government , create , need , people , urban , cit - izens , economic , new’ B - Topic : ‘garden , growing , farming , urban , plant , food , land , vegetables , community , fruits’ Howmightwere - storevi - brancyincitiesandregionsfacingeco - nomicdecline ? I feel that citizens within an urban environment need to work with city and local government to identify and create new economic programs and opportunities to make their locations vibrant . Within the city , the main motivation will have to be for the citizens to want to improve their lives and surroundings . It starts from within by showing pride in their neighbor - hoods . I think that it starts small with some - thing like a community garden in which a va - cant lot or piece of land is turned into something that can be a positive for the community as a whole . Street beautiﬁca - tion and just an overall caring about the neigh - borhood can lead to a turn around but it starts with the citizens needing to want it to happen . I feel that since most urban neigh - borhoods do not have supermarkets that are convenient , it might be a huge plus to start urban farming . A commu - nity garden in which fruits and vegetables can be grown and sold to the public who have no other access to them . I think that vacant or under used land would be a wonder - ful place to put this . I think the citizens can plant and grow the vegetables and fruits and sell them which would make the project eco - nomically feasible as well . It would be self sustaining and it would be a source of pride for the people . Table 1 : Sample ideas submitted by a crowd worker on two topics Which idea is more useful for the intended purpose ? Idea 1 Idea 2 Idea 3 Idea 4 Idea 5 0 20 40 20 40 60 80 Percentage Strongly Prefer Baseline Moderately Prefer Baseline No preference Moderately Prefer B - Topic Strongly Prefer B - Topic Figure 10 : Quality scores for ideas on topic “woman , safety , safe , areas , urban , community , low , city , ideas , in - come” vs “device , use , technology , area , signal , network , community , access , people , remote” . Each idea pair is rated by 10 workers . not repeat judges , hence using 50 unique workers . The experiment was done on Challenge 14 on improving city vibrancy and the topics are shown in Table 1 . Figures 7 and 8 show the quality and novelty results , respectively . Overall , we found that the workers judged ideas gen - erated using the b - topic as more novel but not neces - sarily higher quality . When the writers of an idea were asked to rate their own ideas— i . e . , the one generated with the b - topic prompt versus the baseline common topic—for novelty , three writers gave no preference while one strongly preferred the b - topic idea and one moder - ately preferred the b - topic idea . For quality , one strongly preferred the b - topic idea , two writers moderately pre - ferred the b - topic idea , one gave no preference and one strongly preferred the baseline idea . Table 1 compares a sample idea pair . When the idea was evaluated by the independent raters , the b - topic idea received more favorable ratings for both novelty and quality , as shown in Fig . 7 and Fig . 8 . We have two main observations . First , the idea writ - ers were able to draw a connection between seemingly unrelated topic on ’garden , growing , farming’ and pro - pose novel ideas on city vibrancy . Secondly , the raters found the ideas prompted by b - topics more novel . Per - haps not surprisingly , the challenge topic was found to be more useful , compared to the b - topic , in part because it directly addressed the challenge issue . To further test , how the results generalize to other challenges , we conducted the same experiment for Chal - lenge 6 on women safety . Here , the b - topic was “device , use , technology , area , signal , network , community , ac - cess , people , remote " and the most common topic for this challenge was “woman , safety , safe , area , urban , commu - nity , low , city , ideas , income " . We found that the b - topic was rarely used in this challenge , with only eight ideas having it as the highest proportion topic . Fig . 9 and Fig . 10 show the novelty and quality scores for set of ﬁve idea pairs generated by ﬁve Turkers and rated by another ten each . We ﬁnd , that for this challenge too , b - topic was preferred for both novelty and quality . Experiment 2 Limitations : While this experiment tested how useful b - topics were for inspiring creative ideas , it comes with a few caveats . First , it is diﬃcult to guarantee how much of the idea was inspired by the novel connection provided by the topic ; i . e . , we could not force them to use the topic , though , anecdotally , by and large the ideas did appear to leverage the pro - vided topic . In addition , there can be variations within the quality of work that the workers produce due to a writer’s past knowledge in a domain . Likewise , novice or non - imaginative writers may fail to see a relation - ship or connection between the challenge theme and b - topic , compared to the more obvious connections with the baseline common topic that is closer to the chal - lenge domain . We also cannot isolate a particular topic ; i . e . , a generated idea may well use other concepts too , so the ﬁnal ratings of an idea can depend on multiple factors beyond the chosen b - topic . Lastly , given that this experiment consists of 50 evaluations by raters from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk service , we should be careful when generalizing these results other domains and rater populations ; replicating these results with additional ex - periments on alternative rater populations would pro - vide useful comparisons . The monetary motivation and the time constraints for Turkers may also impact the experimental results . Lastly , as with experiment 1 , it is not straightforward to run direct tests of statistical signiﬁcance to test whether or not b - topics statistically more creative ideas than the baseline , again due to dif - ferences in bisociation scores from diﬀerent populations with complicates traditional statistical inference models . As such , our results should be interpreted with appro - priate caution . 4 Conclusions , Limitations , and Future Work This paper presented a method for exploring cross - domain design ideas through the use of Bisociative Infor - mation Networks ( BisoNets ) . Speciﬁcally , it introduced the use of bridging topics ( b - topics ) and generalized past results in BisoNets to allow simultaneous exploration of multiple domains . The paper demonstrated this capa - bility on an example of design exploration and discovery using a dataset of thousands of ideas from OpenIDEO , an online collaborative community . In doing so , it an - swered the following two questions 1 ) Are b - topics per - ceived as creative ? 2 ) Do b - topics , when used for creative inspiration , produce more creative ideas ? Our qualitative results demonstrated the limitations of existing BisoNet techniques when applied to non - specialist domains , along with the usefulness of repre - senting conceptual bridges through collections of words ( topics ) rather than single terms . We also demonstrated the usefulness and eﬃciency of ﬁnding cross - domain in - spiration from collections of thousands of ideas ; such techniques have direct applications for both large - scale design ideation , in addition to traditional design search and retrieval for analysis of patents or other analogical stimuli . Our quantitative results demonstrated that b - topics , whether presented on their own or via ideas they inspired , were generally viewed as more novel , though not necessarily higher quality , compared to non - b - topic baselines . We also found that b - topics , when used for creative inspiration , helped produce more creative ideas compared to most common topic for a domain . These ﬁndings show that bridging concepts can be found in outlier ideas which belong to one domain , but are confused to belong to another . Due to the rarity of these outlier ideas in the current domain , such links may not be immediately obvious , but once discovered they can lead to creative ideas . In contrast to past work , we show that representing the bridging concepts using latent topics is advantageous over single words . We also diﬀer from past approaches which use distance metrics by us - ing a classiﬁcation model for outlier detection . This has the inherent advantage of ﬁnding bisociations depending on the distribution of ideas between domains and not distance between them . These outlier ideas help identify bisociations far from the mainstream concept , but not very far from the domain . The main limitations of our proposed techniques are two - fold . First , our method relies on generating good topic distributions for each idea . With the available multitude of topic model variants , this is easier said than done . We used standard LDA to ﬁnd collections of words organized in a ﬁxed number of topics . In an unknown domain , it is diﬃcult to know how many topics exist ( though there are non - parametric , countably inﬁnite di - mensional LDA variants that can handle this [ Teh et al . , 2004 ] ) . As topic models themselves are not aware of ex - isting bisociations ; an interesting albeit challenging area of research would be to incorporate bisociation principles within the LDA update equations , so that topics found are more likely to be bisociative . Second , even if the b - topics themselves are accurate , they still require some creative imagination on the part of the designer to connect the b - topic to the challenge at hand . While presenting collections of words or exem - plar ideas are two straightforward mechanisms to help spark this inspiration , future research could address the open question as to what format or intervention would best help designers internalize or connect ideas across domains . It would also be interesting to study the ef - fect of topics with similar bisociation score but varying in other attributes like the degree of abstraction and the type of words used . One of the directions of future work can be to study eﬀectiveness of b - topic when it is dom - inated by certain type of words like functional words or behavior words . Lastly , the use of topics or word collections as a vehicle to bridge two domains is a somewhat blunt ( if eﬀective ) instrument , when compared to other more structured analogical reasoning approaches that require more detail about a design idea beyond just unstructured text— e . g . , Gentner’s Structure - Mapping framework [ Gentner , 1983 ] or the use of Functional Basis Structures in biologically inspired design [ Cheong et al . , 2011 ] . Merging bisocia - tion with those more formal analogical structures could provide the best of both worlds . 5 Acknowledgements This work was partially funded through a University of Maryland Minta Martin grant , as well as support from the Department of Mechanical Engineering . Partial funding for open access provided by the UMD Libraries’ Open Access Publishing Fund . References [ Ahmed et al . , 2016 ] Ahmed , F . , David Gorbunov , L . , and Fuge , M . ( 2016 ) . Discovering diverse , high qual - ity design ideas from a large corpus . In Proceedings of ASME International Design Engineering Technical Conferences ( IDETC’16 ) . ASME . [ Ahmed and Fuge , 2017 ] Ahmed , F . and Fuge , M . ( 2017 ) . Capturing winning ideas in online design com - munities . In Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( CSCW 2017 ) . [ Benami and Jin , 2002 ] Benami , O . and Jin , Y . ( 2002 ) . Creative stimulation in conceptual design . Proceed - ings of ASME DETC / CIE , Montreal , QC , Canada , DETC2002 / DTM - 34023 , 2 ( 1 ) . [ Berthold , 2012 ] Berthold , M . R . ( 2012 ) . Towards biso - ciative knowledge discovery . In Bisociative Knowledge Discovery , pages 1 – 10 . Springer . [ Blei and Laﬀerty , 2007 ] Blei , D . M . and Laﬀerty , J . D . ( 2007 ) . A correlated topic model of science . The An - nals of Applied Statistics , pages 17 – 35 . [ Blei and Laﬀerty , 2009 ] Blei , D . M . and Laﬀerty , J . D . ( 2009 ) . Topic models . Text Mining : Classiﬁcation , Clustering , and Applications , 10 ( 71 ) : 34 . [ Blei et al . , 2003 ] Blei , D . M . , Ng , A . Y . , and Jordan , M . I . ( 2003 ) . Latent dirichlet allocation . the Journal of Machine Learning Research , 3 : 993 – 1022 . [ Boden , 1994 ] Boden , M . A . ( 1994 ) . Précis of the cre - ative mind : Myths and mechanisms . Behavioral and brain sciences , 17 ( 3 ) : 519 – 531 . [ Chan et al . , 2015 ] Chan , J . , Dow , S . P . , and Schunn , C . D . ( 2015 ) . Do the best design ideas ( really ) come from conceptually distant sources of inspiration ? De - sign Studies , 36 : 31 – 58 . [ Chan et al . , 2014 ] Chan , J . , Schunn , C . , and Dow , S . ( 2014 ) . Overreliance on conceptually far sources de - creases the creativity of ideas . In Proceedings of the Cognitive Science Society , volume 36 . [ Chan and Schunn , 2015 ] Chan , J . and Schunn , C . D . ( 2015 ) . The importance of iteration in creative con - ceptual combination . Cognition , 145 : 104 – 115 . [ Chang and Blei , 2009 ] Chang , J . and Blei , D . M . ( 2009 ) . Relational topic models for document net - works . In International Conference on Artiﬁcial In - telligence and Statistics , pages 81 – 88 . [ Cheong et al . , 2011 ] Cheong , H . , Chiu , I . , Shu , L . , Stone , R . , and McAdams , D . ( 2011 ) . Biologi - cally meaningful keywords for functional terms of the functional basis . Journal of Mechanical Design , 133 ( 2 ) : 021007 . [ Cilibrasi and Vitanyi , 2007 ] Cilibrasi , R . L . and Vi - tanyi , P . M . ( 2007 ) . The google similarity distance . IEEE Transactions on knowledge and data engineer - ing , 19 ( 3 ) . [ DeYoung and Hobbs , 2009 ] DeYoung , D . and Hobbs , D . ( 2009 ) . Discovery of Design : Searching Out the Creator’s Secrets . New Leaf Publishing Group . [ Dubitzky et al . , 2012 ] Dubitzky , W . , Kötter , T . , Schmidt , O . , and Berthold , M . R . ( 2012 ) . Towards creative information exploration based on koestler’s concept of bisociation . pages 11 – 32 . [ Fu et al . , 2013 ] Fu , K . , Chan , J . , Cagan , J . , Kotovsky , K . , Schunn , C . , and Wood , K . ( 2013 ) . The mean - ing of “near” and “far” : the impact of structuring design databases and the eﬀect of distance of anal - ogy on design output . Journal of Mechanical Design , 135 ( 2 ) : 021007 . [ Fuge and Agogino , 2014 ] Fuge , M . and Agogino , A . ( 2014 ) . How online design communities evolve over time : the birth and growth of OpenIDEO . In ASME 2014 International Design Engineering Tech - nical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference . American Society of Mechan - ical Engineers . [ Fuge et al . , 2014 ] Fuge , M . , Tee , K . , Agogino , A . , and Maton , N . ( 2014 ) . Analysis of collaborative design networks : A case study of OpenIDEO . Journal of Computing and Information Science in Engineering , 14 ( 2 ) : 021009 + . [ Gentner , 1983 ] Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy . Cognitive sci - ence , 7 ( 2 ) : 155 – 170 . [ Gonçalves et al . , 2012 ] Gonçalves , M . , Cardoso , C . , and Badke - Schaub , P . ( 2012 ) . Find your inspira - tion : exploring diﬀerent levels of abstraction in tex - tual stimuli . In DS 73 - 1 Proceedings of the 2nd In - ternational Conference on Design Creativity Volume 1 . [ Gosline et al . , 1999 ] Gosline , J . , Guerette , P . , Ortlepp , C . , and Savage , K . ( 1999 ) . The mechanical design of spider silks : from ﬁbroin sequence to mechanical func - tion . Journal of Experimental Biology , 202 ( 23 ) : 3295 – 3303 . [ Green et al . , 2014 ] Green , M . , Seepersad , C . C . , and Hölttä - Otto , K . ( 2014 ) . Crowd - sourcing the evalua - tion of creativity in conceptual design : A pilot study . In ASME 2014 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Informa - tion in Engineering Conference , pages V007T07A016 – V007T07A016 . American Society of Mechanical Engi - neers . [ Griﬃths and Steyvers , 2004 ] Griﬃths , T . L . and Steyvers , M . ( 2004 ) . Finding scientiﬁc topics . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 101 ( suppl 1 ) : 5228 – 5235 . [ Hey et al . , 2008 ] Hey , J . , Linsey , J . , Agogino , A . M . , and Wood , K . L . ( 2008 ) . Analogies and metaphors in creative design . International Journal of Engineering Education , 24 ( 2 ) : 283 . [ Hofmann , 1999 ] Hofmann , T . ( 1999 ) . Probabilistic la - tent semantic indexing . In Proceedings of the 22nd Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Re - search and Development in Information Retrieval , pages 50 – 57 . ACM . [ Jansson and Smith , 1991 ] Jansson , D . G . and Smith , S . M . ( 1991 ) . Design ﬁxation . Design studies , 12 ( 1 ) : 3 – 11 . [ Juršič et al . , 2012a ] Juršič , M . , Cestnik , B . , Urbančič , T . , and Lavrač , N . ( 2012a ) . Bisociative literature min - ing by ensemble heuristics . In Bisociative Knowledge Discovery , pages 338 – 358 . Springer . [ Juršič et al . , 2012b ] Juršič , M . , Sluban , B . , Cestnik , B . , Grčar , M . , and Lavrač , N . ( 2012b ) . Bridging con - cept identiﬁcation for constructing information net - works from text documents . In Bisociative Knowledge Discovery , pages 66 – 90 . Springer . [ Kamahara et al . , 2005 ] Kamahara , J . , Asakawa , T . , Shimojo , S . , and Miyahara , H . ( 2005 ) . A community - based recommendation system to reveal unexpected interests . In Multimedia Modelling Conference , 2005 . MMM 2005 . Proceedings of the 11th International , pages 433 – 438 . IEEE . [ Kang , 2016 ] Kang , S . W . ( 2016 ) . Bisociative design : concept exploration by mining design associations across multiple products . [ Kang and Tucker , 2017 ] Kang , S . W . and Tucker , C . S . ( 2017 ) . Exploring the correlation between new func - tion attributes mined from diﬀerent product domains and market sales . The Engineering Economist , pages 1 – 30 . [ Kittur , 2010 ] Kittur , A . ( 2010 ) . Crowdsourcing , collab - oration and creativity . ACM Crossroads , 17 ( 2 ) : 22 – 26 . [ Kittur et al . , 2013 ] Kittur , A . , Nickerson , J . V . , Bern - stein , M . , Gerber , E . , Shaw , A . , Zimmerman , J . , Lease , M . , and Horton , J . ( 2013 ) . The future of crowd work . In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Com - puter Supported Cooperative Work , CSCW ’13 , pages 1301 – 1318 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . [ Koestler , 1964 ] Koestler , A . ( 1964 ) . The act of creation . [ Krestel et al . , 2009 ] Krestel , R . , Fankhauser , P . , and Nejdl , W . ( 2009 ) . Latent dirichlet allocation for tag recommendation . In Proceedings of the third ACM conference on Recommender systems , pages 61 – 68 . ACM . [ Maaten and Hinton , 2008 ] Maaten , L . v . d . and Hin - ton , G . ( 2008 ) . Visualizing data using t - sne . Journal of Machine Learning Research , 9 ( Nov ) : 2579 – 2605 . [ MATLAB , 2016 ] MATLAB ( 2016 ) . version 9 . 0 . 0 ( R2016a ) . The MathWorks Inc . , Natick , Mas - sachusetts . [ Newman et al . , 2010 ] Newman , D . , Baldwin , T . , Cave - don , L . , Huang , E . , Karimi , S . , Martinez , D . , Scholer , F . , and Zobel , J . ( 2010 ) . Visualizing search results and document collections using topic maps . Web Se - mantics : Science , Services and Agents on the World Wide Web , 8 ( 2 ) : 169 – 175 . [ Newman et al . , 2011 ] Newman , D . , Bonilla , E . V . , and Buntine , W . ( 2011 ) . Improving topic coherence with regularized topic models . In Advances in neural infor - mation processing systems , pages 496 – 504 . [ Onuma et al . , 2009 ] Onuma , K . , Tong , H . , and Falout - sos , C . ( 2009 ) . Tangent : a novel , ’surprise me’ , recom - mendation algorithm . In Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge dis - covery and data mining , pages 657 – 666 . ACM . [ Pahl et al . , 2007 ] Pahl , A . - K . , Newnes , L . , and McMa - hon , C . ( 2007 ) . A generic model for creativity and innovation : overview for early phases of engineering design . Journal of Design Research , 6 ( 1 - 2 ) : 5 – 44 . [ Pang and Seepersad , 2016 ] Pang , M . A . and Seepersad , C . C . ( 2016 ) . Crowdsourcing the evaluation of design concepts with empathic priming . In ASME 2016 In - ternational Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Con - ference , pages V007T06A004 – V007T06A004 . Ameri - can Society of Mechanical Engineers . [ Petri˘e et al . , 2009 ] Petri˘e , I . , Urban˘ei˘e , T . , Cestnik , B . , and Macedoni - Lukši˘e , M . ( 2009 ) . Literature min - ing method rajolink for uncovering relations between biomedical concepts . Journal of Biomedical Informat - ics , 42 ( 2 ) : 219 – 227 . [ Poincaré , 1910 ] Poincaré , H . ( 1910 ) . Mathematical cre - ation . The Monist , pages 321 – 335 . [ Purcell and Gero , 1996 ] Purcell , A . T . and Gero , J . S . ( 1996 ) . Design and other types of ﬁxation . Design studies , 17 ( 4 ) : 363 – 383 . [ Roberts , 1989 ] Roberts , R . M . ( 1989 ) . Serendipity : Ac - cidental discoveries in science . Serendipity : Accidental Discoveries in Science , by Royston M . Roberts , pp . 288 . ISBN 0 - 471 - 60203 - 5 . Wiley - VCH , June 1989 . , page 288 . [ Rosen - Zvi et al . , 2004 ] Rosen - Zvi , M . , Griﬃths , T . , Steyvers , M . , and Smyth , P . ( 2004 ) . The author - topic model for authors and documents . In Proceedings of the 20th conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intel - ligence , pages 487 – 494 . AUAI Press . [ Salton and Buckley , 1988 ] Salton , G . and Buckley , C . ( 1988 ) . Term - weighting approaches in automatic text retrieval . Information Processing & Management , 24 ( 5 ) : 513 – 523 . [ Schmidt et al . , 2012 ] Schmidt , O . , Kranjc , J . , Mozetič , I . , Thompson , P . , and Dubitzky , W . ( 2012 ) . Bisocia - tive exploration of biological and ﬁnancial literature using clustering . In Bisociative Knowledge Discovery , pages 438 – 451 . Springer . [ Segond and Borgelt , 2009 ] Segond , M . and Borgelt , C . ( 2009 ) . “bisonet” generation using textual data . In Workshop on Explorative Analytics of Information Networks at ECML PKDD 2009 , page 12 . [ Shah et al . , 2003 ] Shah , J . J . , Smith , S . M . , and Vargas - Hernandez , N . ( 2003 ) . Metrics for measuring ideation eﬀectiveness . Design Studies , 24 ( 2 ) : 111 – 134 . [ Siangliulue et al . , 2015 ] Siangliulue , P . , Arnold , K . C . , Gajos , K . Z . , and Dow , S . P . ( 2015 ) . Toward collabora - tive ideation at scale : Leveraging ideas from others to generate more creative and diverse ideas . In Proceed - ings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Sup - ported Cooperative Work & Social Computing , pages 937 – 945 . ACM . [ Stober et al . , 2012 ] Stober , S . , Haun , S . , and Nürn - berger , A . ( 2012 ) . Bisociative music discovery and recommendation . In Bisociative Knowledge Discov - ery , pages 472 – 483 . Springer . [ Swanson , 1986 ] Swanson , D . R . ( 1986 ) . Fish oil , ray - naud’s syndrome , and undiscovered public knowledge . Perspectives in biology and medicine , 30 ( 1 ) : 7 – 18 . [ Teh et al . , 2004 ] Teh , Y . W . , Jordan , M . I . , Beal , M . J . , and Blei , D . M . ( 2004 ) . Sharing clusters among related groups : Hierarchical dirichlet processes . In NIPS , pages 1385 – 1392 . [ Tucker and Kang , 2012 ] Tucker , C . and Kang , S . ( 2012 ) . Bisociative design framework for knowl - edge discovery across seemingly unrelated product domains . Proceedings of the ASME IDETC / CIE , Chicago , IL , Paper No . DETC2012 - 70764 . [ Wei and Croft , 2006 ] Wei , X . and Croft , W . B . ( 2006 ) . LDA - based document models for ad - hoc retrieval . In Proceedings of the 29th Annual International ACM SI - GIR conference on Research and development in in - formation retrieval , pages 178 – 185 . ACM . [ Zahner et al . , 2010 ] Zahner , D . , Nickerson , J . V . , Tver - sky , B . , Corter , J . E . , and Ma , J . ( 2010 ) . A ﬁx for ﬁxation ? rerepresenting and abstracting as creative processes in the design of information systems . AI EDAM , 24 ( 2 ) : 231 – 244 . Title Numberofideas Numberofout - liers 1 . How might we better connect food produc - tion and consumption ? 606 45 2 . How can technology help people working to uphold human rights in the face of unlawful detention ? 165 22 3 . How might we support web entrepreneurs in launching and growing sustainable global businesses ? 157 17 4 . How can we raise kids awareness of the beneﬁts of fresh food so they can make better choices ? 180 16 5 . How might we create healthy communities within and beyond the workplace ? 240 12 6 . How might we make low - income urban ar - eas safer and more empowering for women and girls ? 573 50 7 . How might we increase the number of reg - istered bone marrow donors to help save more lives ? 285 11 8 . How might we improve maternal health with mobile technologies for low - income coun - tries ? 176 12 9 . How might we gather information from hard - to - access areas to prevent mass violence against civilians ? 166 27 10 . How might we design an accessible elec - tion experience for everyone ? 154 7 11 . How might we all maintain well - being and thrive as we age ? 134 13 12 . How can we equip young people with the skills , information and opportunities to suc - ceed in the world of work ? 148 35 13 . How might we inspire young people to cultivate their creative conﬁdence ? 608 41 14 . How might we restore vibrancy in cities and regions facing economic decline ? 326 48 Table 2 : 14 Challenges incorporated in dataset showing the size of the challenge and number of outliers