A Design of Distributed Brainstorming Support Tool with Gamiﬁcation Elements Hiroaki Furukawa , Takaya Yuizono School of Knowledge Science Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 1 - 1 Asahidai , Nomi , Ishikawa , Japan Email : { hfurukawa , yuizono } @ jaist . ac . jp Akira Sakai Faculty of Economics Kumamoto Gakuen University 2 - 5 - 1 Oe , Chuo - ku , Kumamoto , Japan Email : akr - sakai @ kumagaku . ac . jp Abstract —This paper describes the design of a distributed brainstorming support tool focusing on gamiﬁcation . In previous studies , there are very few studies focused on continuous creative activities . Gamiﬁcation elements in the distributed brainstorming tool are aimed at maintaining intrinsic motivation toward contin - uous creative activities . The activities for gamiﬁcation elements are earning points by idea generation , create a avatar with the earned points , and competing with other players for total points . We show interface design of gamiﬁcation for distributed brainstorming , and then describe a plan of control experiments to demonstrate hypothetical effects of the gamiﬁcation , such as maintenance of idea generation by intrinsic motivation . I . I NTRODUCTION Smart devices , such as smart phones or tablet computers , have become popular in recent years [ 8 ] . Moreover , studies of groupware or creativity support tools using smart devices have advanced with the improvement of CPU and network performance [ 2 ] , [ 13 ] , [ 16 ] . Feedback to ideas is recognized as one of the methods to activate brainstorming . It is expected that feedback to generate ideas will prompt brainstorming participants to work on communication and collaboration , thus motivation for idea generation would be maintained [ 12 ] , [ 18 ] . Motivation has been an especially important element in order to improve the quality and productivity in brainstorming [ 1 ] , [ 17 ] . Motivation has been classiﬁed into extrinsic or intrinsic motivation . Extrinsic motivation is external factors such as money , while intrinsic motivation is internal factors such as enthusiasm or interest in other participants’ positive feedback . Intrinsic motivation has been suggested to better support creativity [ 1 ] . In addition , gamiﬁcation recently has been focused on as means to maintain motivation [ 6 ] . Gamiﬁ - cation is a technique that applies the characteristic know - how of games to the real world [ 5 ] , [ 10 ] . Moreover , gamiﬁcation enables continuous social activities while maintaining intrinsic motivation [ 11 ] , [ 14 ] . In previous studies , the various approach has been suggested to support brainstorming , however there are very few studies focused on continuous creative activities . Thus , the purpose of this study is to design continuous creative activities that are based on a distributed brainstorming tool using elements of gamiﬁcation . To accomplish the goal , we propose a design as the following brainstorming game , earning points by idea generation , creating a avatar with earned points and competing with other players through the total value of avatar’s points they accumulate . This paper consists of the following sections : Section 2 describes related work of brainstorming support tools and gamiﬁcation . Section 3 gives an overview and the implemen - tation methods of the proposed tool . Section 4 describes the discussion of differences between existing distributed brain - storming support tools and the designed tool , and both the hypothesis and experimental conditions are presented as future plans . Section 5 concludes this paper and remarks on future work to be done . II . B RAINSTORMING SUPPORT TOOLS AND G AMIFICATION A . Brainstorming support tools In this section , we classiﬁed brainstorming support tools into four quadrants consisting of two axes labeled “Space” ( horizontal ) and “Support method” ( vertical ) [ Fig . 1 ] . The axis labeled “Space” is the decision axis of distance between the other participants , classiﬁed into “Face - to - face environment” and “Distributed environment” . The axis labeled “Support method” is the decision axis of the method type to support brainstorming , classiﬁed into “Direct support” and “Indirect support” . The method type labeled “Direct support” shows the method to inﬂuence the contents of brainstorming such as the im - plementation environment , or design in brainstorming . The method type labeled “Indirect support” shows the methods to maintain motivation for brainstorming such as feedback to ideas , or facilitation for generating ideas . 1 ) Quadrant I “Face - to - face environment” - “Direct sup - port” : Hilliges et al . implemented an electronic brainstorming system ( EBS ) [ 9 ] . They aimed to collaborate some of the beneﬁts of previous EBS with the positive social implications of face - to - face groups . As a result , they suggested that their system was shown similarly to classical brainstorming in the quality and quantity of ideas , and it is considered to be help in designing next collaborative systems for these kinds of socio - technical settings . 2016 11th International Conference on Knowledge , Information and Creativity Support Systems ( KICSS ) , Yogyakarta , Indonesia 978 - 1 - 5090 - 5130 - 4 / 16 / $ 31 . 00 ©2016 IEEE Fig . 1 . Four quadrants of brainstorming support tools . 2 ) Quadrant II “Distributed environment” - “Direct sup - port” : Chan et al . designed “IdeaGens” which is a crowd ideation system addressing major challenges with relevance of the crowd context [ 3 ] . They focused on successful strategies from face - to - face group brainstorming such as personalized feedback by facilitators , and evaluated the investigated system using ﬂuency and creativity of generated ideas . As a result , they argued that expert facilitators increased the ﬂuency and creativity of ideas , while novice facilitators decrease creativity . Wang et al . implemented a brainstorming support tool that presented pictures with a relationship to a conversation searched on a computer agent [ 19 ] . They aimed to evaluate the effect of cultural differences on brainstorming in multicultural groups . As a result , they described pictures related to the conversation to help to convert diversity of culture into a creativity , in regards to originality and diversity of ideas . 3 ) Quadrant III “Distributed environment” - “Indirect sup - port” : We implemented a brainstorming support system using backchannel communication [ 7 ] . Backchannel communication could contribute to idea generation through communication between participants . As a result , we found backchannel communication was effective in improving ﬂuency of ideas . As a study of using gamiﬁcation elements , we implemented an EBS using gamiﬁcation elements [ 20 ] . Gamiﬁcation elements were identiﬁed as : - Increase in level to challenge the participants - Tracking of scores to provide enjoyable play - A leader board to support participant interaction - Rewards for participants - Badges to support all of these previously mentioned points As a result , gamiﬁcation elements were effective in improv - ing the quality of ideas ( ﬂuency , ﬂexibility , and originality ) . 4 ) Quadrant IV “Face - to - face environment” - “Indirect support” : Tausch et al . mentioned that feedback could im - prove creative processes in brainstorming sessions [ 18 ] . They implemented “Groupgarden” : a visualization to provide feed - back to a group in the form of metaphors , such as ﬂow - ers ( symbolizing group members ) or a tree ( visualizing the performance of group ) , and validated the effectivity of the investigated system . As a result , they found that feedback raised the average number of ideas in each group . B . Gamiﬁcation The term “Gamiﬁcation” was described by Terill in 2008 as “ taking game mechanics and applying them to other web properties to increase engagement . ” , and became current term in industry around 2010 [ 5 ] , [ 11 ] . 1 ) Deﬁnition : A deﬁnition of gamiﬁcation has been pre - sented by Deterding et al . and Huotari et al . . First , Deterding et al . proposed a deﬁnition of gamiﬁcation is “ The use of game design elements in non - game contexts . ” [ 5 ] . Second , Huotari et al . argued that the approach of Deterding et al . had several shortcomings originating in the skills and experiences of the user , and proposed an alternative deﬁnition as “ A process of enhancing a service with affordances for gameful experiences in order to support user’s overall value creation . ” [ 10 ] . 2 ) Effects on motivation : Huotari et al . suggested a frame - work based on the effects of gamiﬁcation from the deﬁnitions and the discussion on affordances for motivation [ 11 ] . They reviewed existing research about gamiﬁcation , and proved the following viewpoints : independent variables ( investigated affordances for motivation ) , dependent variables ( investigated psychological or behavioral consequences from gamiﬁcation ) , the contexts of gamiﬁcation , and types of studies carried out the gamiﬁed systems . As a result , they described that gamiﬁcation provides positive effects to motivation . Never - theless these studies used either interviews on evaluation or questionnaires , and no studies have been evaluated with the quantity of deliverables . III . G AMIFICATION D ESIGN FOR D ISTRIBUTED B RAINSTORMING Our previous studies [ 7 ] , [ 20 ] focused on Quadrant III to support brainstorming , however a consideration of intrinsic motivation , a key factor of creativity , is insufﬁcient for those designs of brainstorming systems . In this study , we consider gamiﬁcation design to support intrinsic motivation in a dis - tributed brainstorming setting . A . Elements of Gamiﬁcation This study is classiﬁed into quadrant III : “Distributed envi - ronment” - “Indirect support” of the four quadrants of brain - storming support tools . We aimed to design a brainstorming support tool that takes on the appearance of a community game using elements of gamiﬁcation in a distributed environment . 2016 11th International Conference on Knowledge , Information and Creativity Support Systems ( KICSS ) , Yogyakarta , Indonesia Kumar et al . advocated the following elements as sources of motivation in gamiﬁcation : Collecting , Connecting , Achieve - ment , Feedback , Self - Expression , Reciprocity and Blissful Productivity [ 15 ] . 1 ) Collecting : The element “Collecting” utilizes the desire to collect something . Collections may have two types of values : a monetary value such as trading cards , or a symbol of social status such as followers on Twitter . 2 ) Connecting : The element “Connecting” utilizes the de - sire to connect with friends of a community . It can mean connecting to others to join a community . It is obvious in community that is consist of something held in the common . If people share experiences with friends in the community , it reconﬁrms their presence and makes life more joyful . 3 ) Achievement : The element “Achievement” utilizes the desire to get satisfaction from achievements . If people chal - lenge the mission , they are motivated to knuckle down to become successful . When they have completed the mission , they will get positive psychological feedback that creates motivation to do it again . Conversely , if a mission is too difﬁcult or too easy , the motivation for achievement may be going down . Thus it is important to provide just the right level of achievement . 4 ) Feedback : The element “Feedback” utilizes the desire to receive responses to one’s their own behavior . People may look at responses when they talk , and they will thereby keep talking . In another words , it motivates them to continue taking the next action . Receiving no feedback can be extremely demotivating . It is even more necessary in a distributed environment in the absence of feedback such as facial expressions and body language . 5 ) Self - Expression : The element “Self - Expression” utilizes the desire to present oneself to others . People may hope to be recognized as better than others . For example , online game players have spent the time to customize their avatars ( e . g . molding of face and body , accessories , etc . ) indicating they are motivated to present themselves . 6 ) Reciprocity : The element “Reciprocity” utilizes the sense of reciprocity . Everybody has had the experience of feeling forced to make a purchase out of the feel of reciprocity if one accepts a “free” sample . This element motivates them to act and continue to participate . 7 ) Blissful Productivity : The element “Blissful Productiv - ity” is based on “Flow” proposed by Csikszentmihalyi . Csik - szentmihalyi deﬁned the concept of “Flow” as “ The mental state of operating in which a person in an activity is fully immersed in the feeling of energized focus , full involvement and the success in the process of the activity ” [ 4 ] . Players of video game experience “Flow” when the difﬁculty level at the game was balanced against their skill . Games provide appro - priate levels whether they can clear as their skills improve . It motivates them to increase their own skills in order to reach self - actualization . In this study , four elements of gamiﬁcation , 1 ) Collecting , 2 ) Connecting , 4 ) Feedback and 5 ) Self - Expression , were utilized to design a distributed brainstorming tool . TABLE I C ORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN FUNCTIONS AND ELEMENTS OF GAMIFICATION . Function Name GamiﬁcationElements Functional Overview PostIdea Feedback It is used to post and show ideas . CreateAvatar Collecting It is used to create new avatar . ChangeAvatar Self - Expression It is used to change self avatar . PlayerRanking Connecting It is used to show player ranling of total score . AvaterDictionary Collecting It is used to show dic - tionary of avatar . B . Design of Gamiﬁcation We have designed an implementation of four gamiﬁcation elements in the following ﬁve screens : Show Idea screen , Create Avatar screen , Change Avatar screen , Player Ranking screen and Avatar Dictionary screen ( Fig . 2 ) . The default screen at startup is the Show Idea screen , with the tab bar displayed at the bottom of the screen providing transitions for each screens . This tool actualizes support of distributed brainstorming using six gamiﬁcation functions with four elements of gami - ﬁcation . ( TABLE I ) . Details of functions are described as follows : 1 ) PostIdea - The element “Feedback” ( Fig . 3 ) : The player can input a new idea by tapping the ‘Avatar’ . The ‘Theme’ shows the theme of the brainstorming session . ( e . g . “ New usage of empty bottles . ” ) The player inputs an idea in the textbox while conﬁrming the theme . Then , the player taps the ‘Post’ button which posts the idea to the top of idea list . The idea displays the following elements : ‘Avatar’ , ‘Player name’ , ‘contents of idea’ and ‘Posting time’ . How to create new avatar is described in the CreateAvatar function , and how to change their avatar is described in ChangeAvatar function . The ‘level’ and ‘ticket’ increase with the posting of ideas . These tickets are necessary to create the avatar in the CreateAvatar function . 2 ) CreateAvatar - The element “Collecting” ( Fig . 4 ) : Player can create the avatar in exchange for ﬁve tickets . When the picture is tapped , player creates the avatar at random . The avatar is used in the ChangeAvatar function and the AvatarDictionary function . The ‘score’ is added for avatar’s ‘CP’ . The ‘CP’ takes a random value , but with a high rarity avatar , there is an increased possibility of a high ‘CP’ . The relationship between avatar rarity is shown in Fig . 4 . The ‘score’ is used in the PlayerRanking function . 3 ) ChangeAvatar - The element “Self - Expression” ( Fig . 5 ) : The player can change the avatar displayed with the idea and ‘Player Ranking’ . When the ‘Change Avatar’ button is tapped , it displays the avatar ( s ) that the player has already been 2016 11th International Conference on Knowledge , Information and Creativity Support Systems ( KICSS ) , Yogyakarta , Indonesia Fig . 2 . Five screens of the implemented tool . Fig . 3 . Post Idea Function . awarded . Player taps the displayed avatar ( s ) and the chosen avatar becomes his / her own avatar . The ChangeAvatar function allows players to change their own avatar in the PostIdea function and PlayerRanking functon . 4 ) PlayerRanking - The element “Connecting” ( Fig . 2 ) : The PlayerRanking function shows a ‘score’ ranking with other players who have received points in the CreateAvatar function . The display contents are player name , level , avatar ( with rarity and ‘CP’ ) and ‘score’ . 5 ) AvatarDictionary - The element “Collecting” ( Fig . 6 ) : The avatar created in the CreateAvatar function is registered in an avatar dictionary . If the player already has it , a character is shown , and the reverse side is shown if player has not acquired the avatar . The details for the avatar is displayed when it is Fig . 4 . Create Avatar Function . TABLE II T WO VIEWS INTO EACH FUNCTIONS ; BASIC BRAINSTORMING TOOL OR GAMIFICATION TOOL . Function Name Basic Brainstorming Tool Gamiﬁcation Tool PostIdea posting idea getting ticket showing idea list showing avatar CreateAvatar none creating avatar adding score ChangeAvatar none changing avatar PlayerRanking none showing ranking list AvatarDictionary none showing avatar dictionary tapped by the player . TABLE II indicates the tool design of the above functions in two views ; a basic brainstorming tool or a gamiﬁcation tool . 2016 11th International Conference on Knowledge , Information and Creativity Support Systems ( KICSS ) , Yogyakarta , Indonesia Fig . 5 . Change Avatar Function . Fig . 6 . Avatar Dictionary Function . IV . DISCUSSION AND FUTURE PLAN A . Discussion This design is characterized by the player competing with other players . It has been regarded that distributed brain - storming support tools help for cooperative work in existing studies . Our approach is to support competition with others in brainstorming . However , competition in contents of ideas is thought to lead to criticism . This conﬂicts with the basic rules of brainstorming . We designed this brainstorming support tool with gami - ﬁcation elements , not competition in contents of ideas but competition in the score as a result of idea generation . It is expected that the quantity of ideas will be increased by intrinsic motivation based on the competitive spirit between players . B . Future Plan We plan to carry out experiments to compare the following two tools to conﬁrm whether gamiﬁcation elements affect idea generation of participants in brainstorming . • With Gamiﬁcation Elements • Without Gamiﬁcation Elements The hypotheses of the gamiﬁcation effects for distributed brainstorming are shown below : H1 ( With gamiﬁcation elements ) Gamiﬁcation elements help to sustain the generated number of ideas because moti - vation for idea generation is maintained by gamiﬁcation . H2 ( Without gamiﬁcation elements ) The generated number of ideas decreases because motivation for idea generation decreases with time . Experiments will be carried out in four patterns ( combina - tion of two themes and two tools ) with two groups ( four or ﬁve participants per group ) . Experimental results will be evaluated on the following four indicators : Quantity of ideas : Evaluated by the total quantity of ideas generated during the experiment . Quality of ideas : Evaluated in three categories : Fluency , Flexibility and Originality . Frequency of use in tool functions : Evaluated by the use each function in the process of generating ideas , moreover frequency of use in tool functions . Questionnaire results : It is evaluated the effects on motivation of participants in brainstorming for idea gen - eration by gamiﬁcation elements . Questionnaire items assume the following : usability of tool , usefulness to idea generation , whether or not participants enjoyed brainstorming by the tool and whether participants want to use the tool again . V . CONCLUDING REMARKS AND FUTURE WORK The purpose of this study is to support continuous creative activities with “Gamiﬁcation Elements” . We have classiﬁed brainstorming support tools into four quadrants consisting of two axes we have called “Space” and “Support method” ; and it has shown the position in relation to previous studies of brainstorming support tool . It is mentioned that a consider - ation of intrinsic motivation is insufﬁcient in the design of brainstorming systems in previous studies . It will allow us to investigate effects of gamiﬁcation brings to intrinsic motivation in idea generation . We have designed the activities for gamiﬁcation elements : earned points by idea generation , receiving a avatar with earned points and competing with other players total points . In the future work , we will carry out controlled experiments to verify and quantify the effects of gamiﬁcation elements . A CKNOWLEDGMENT This work was supported partially by Joseph George Tomei ( Full professor of Kumamoto Gakuen University ) . 2016 11th International Conference on Knowledge , Information and Creativity Support Systems ( KICSS ) , Yogyakarta , Indonesia R EFERENCES [ 1 ] T . M . Amabile , Creativity in Context , Westview Press , 1996 . [ 2 ] M . B¨ohmer , T . S . Saponas and J . Teevan , Smartphone Use Does Not Have to Be Rude : Making Phones a Collaborative Presence in Meetings , MobileHCI ’13 Proceedings of the 15th international conference on Human - computer interaction with mobile devices and services , pp . 342 – 351 , 2013 . [ 3 ] J . Chan , S . Dang and S . P . Dow , Improving Crowd Innovation with Expert Facilitation , CSCW ’16 Proceedings of the 19th ACM Confer - ence on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing , pp . 1223 – 1235 , 2016 . [ 4 ] M . Csikszentmihalyi , Flow : The Psychology of Optimal Experience , New York Harper and Row , 1990 . [ 5 ] S . Deterding , D . Dixon , R . Khaled and L . Nacke , From Game De - sign Elements to Gamefulness : Deﬁning “Gamiﬁcation” , MindTrek ’11 Proceedings of the 15th International Academic MindTrek Conference : Envisioning Future Media Environments , pp . 9 – 15 , 2011 . [ 6 ] S . Deterding , Gamiﬁcation : Designing for Motivation , interactions Vol - ume 19 Issue 4 , July + August 2012 , pp . 14 – 17 , 2012 . [ 7 ] H . Furukawa , T . Yuizono and S . Kunifuji , Idea Planter : A Backchannel Function for Fostering Ideas in a Distributed Brainstorming Support System , KICSS’2013 , pp . 92 – 103 , 2013 . [ 8 ] Gartner , Gartner Says Smartphone Sales Grew 46 . 5 Percent in Sec - ond Quarter of 2013 and Exceeded Feature Phone Sales for First Time , Gartner ( Online ) , http : / / www . gartner . com / newsroom / id / 2573415 ( accessed 2016 - 06 - 21 ) . [ 9 ] O . Hilliges , L . Terrenghi , S . Boring , D . Kim , H . Richter and A . Butz , Designing for Collaborative Creative Problem Solving , C & C ’07 Pro - ceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity & Cogni - tion , pp . 137 – 146 , 2007 . [ 10 ] K . Huotari and J . Hamari , Deﬁning Gamiﬁcation - A Service Marketing Perspective , MindTrek ’12 Proceeding of the 16th International Aca - demic MindTrek Conference , pp . 17 – 22 , 2012 . [ 11 ] K . Huotari , J . Koivisto and H . Sarsa , Does Gamiﬁcation Work ? A Literature Review of Empirical Studies on Gamiﬁcation , HICSS ’14 Proceedings of the 2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , pp . 3025 – 3034 , 2014 . [ 12 ] J . J . H . Jung , C . Schneider and J . S . Valacich , The Inﬂuence of Real - Time Identiﬁability and Evaluability Performance Feedback on Group Electronic Brainstorming Performance , HICSS ’05 Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 38th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS’05 ) - Track 1 - Volume 01 , pp . 30 . 1 , 2005 . [ 13 ] M . Kim , M . Lee , S . Kim and K . Cho , Data Exchange Method for Web - based Collaboration System between Smart Devices , Computing and Convergence Technology ( ICCCT ) 2012 7th International Conference on Date of Conference , pp . 160 – 163 , 2012 . [ 14 ] K . Knaving , S . Bj¨ork , Designing for Fun and Play , Gamiﬁcation ’13 Proceedings of the First International Conference on Gameful Design , Research , and Applications , pp . 131 – 134 , 2013 . [ 15 ] J . Kumar and M . Herger , Gamiﬁcation at Work : Designing Engaging Business Software , The Interaction Design Foundation , 2013 . [ 16 ] A . Lucero , J . Ker¨anen and H . Korhonen , Collaborative Use of Mobile Phones for Brainstorming , MobileHCI ’10 Proceedings of the 12th international conference on Human computer interaction with mobile devices and services , pp . 337 – 340 , 2010 . [ 17 ] J . Schumann , P . C . Shih , D . F . Redmiles and G . Horton , Supporting Initial Trust in Distributed Idea Generation and Idea Evaluation , GROUP ’12 Proceedings of the 17th ACM International Conference on Supporting Group Work , pp . 199 – 208 , 2012 . [ 18 ] S . Tausch , D . Hausen , I . Kosan , A . Raltchev and H . Hussmann , Groupgarden : Supporting Brainstorming through a Metaphorical Group Mirror on Table or Wall , NordiCHI ’14 Proceedings of the 8th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Fun , Fast , Foundational , pp . 514 – 550 , 2014 . [ 19 ] H . C . Wang , S . R . Fussell and D . Cosley , From Diversity to Creativ - ity : Stimulating Group Brainstorming with Cultural Differences and Conversationally - Retrieved Pictures , CSCW ’11 Proceedings of the ACM 2011 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 265 – 274 , 2011 . [ 20 ] T . Yuizono , Q . Xing and H . Furukawa , Effects of Gamiﬁcation on Elec - tronic Brainstorming Systems , Collaboration Technologies and Social Computing 7th International Conference , CollabTech 2014 , Santiago , Chile , September 8 - 10 , 2014 . Proceedings , pp . 54 – 61 , 2014 . 2016 11th International Conference on Knowledge , Information and Creativity Support Systems ( KICSS ) , Yogyakarta , Indonesia