Regulation of Actin Assembly Associated With Protrusion and Adhesion in Cell Migration CHRISTOPHE LE CLAINCHE AND MARIE - FRANCE CARLIER Laboratoire d’Enzymologie et Biochimie Structurales , Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque , Gif - sur - Yvette , France I . Introduction 489 II . Actin - Based Protrusions 491 A . The lamellipodium and the lamella 491 B . Actin treadmilling 491 C . Nucleation of actin filaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex in response to signaling 493 D . Filopodia formation 499 III . Actin Dynamics and Cell - Matrix Adhesion 501 A . Adhesion controls the mechanical coupling between the actin cytoskeleton and the substrate 501 B . Description of cell - matrix adhesions 502 C . Actin dynamics associated with adhesions 503 IV . Conclusions and Perspectives 507 Le Clainche C , Carlier M - F . Regulation of Actin Assembly Associated With Protrusion and Adhesion in Cell Migration . Physiol Rev 88 : 489 – 513 , 2008 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / physrev . 00021 . 2007 . —To migrate , a cell ﬁrst extends protru - sions such as lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia , forms adhesions , and ﬁnally retracts its tail . The actin cytoskeleton plays a major role in this process . The ﬁrst part of this review ( sect . II ) describes the formation of the lamellipodial and ﬁlopodial actin networks . In lamellipodia , the WASP - Arp2 / 3 pathways generate a branched ﬁlament array . This polarized dendritic actin array is maintained in rapid treadmilling by the concerted action of ADF , proﬁlin , and capping proteins . In ﬁlopodia , formins catalyze the processive assembly of nonbranched actin ﬁlaments . Cell matrix adhesions mechanically couple actin ﬁlaments to the substrate to convert the treadmilling into protrusion and the actomyosin contraction into traction of the cell body and retraction of the tail . The second part of this review ( sect . III ) focuses on the function and the regulation of major proteins ( vinculin , talin , tensin , and (cid:1) - actinin ) that control the nucleation , the binding , and the barbed - end growth of actin ﬁlaments in adhesions . I . INTRODUCTION Cell migration plays a key role in many physiological and pathological processes . During embryonic develop - ment , cell migration is required for morphogenetic pro - cesses like gastrulation ( 98 ) . Neural crest cells also un - dergo dramatic cell migration to colonize several tissues during vertebrate embryogenesis ( 125 ) . The immune re - sponse is also accompanied by the movement of several cell types ( 129 ) . Finally , in cancers , abnormal cell migra - tion is a hallmark feature of metastatic cells ( 236 ) . Cell migration is a highly orchestrated multistep pro - cess . To migrate , a cell ﬁrst acquires a characteristic polarized morphology in response to extracellular signals . At the cell front , actin assembly drives the extension of ﬂat membrane protrusions called lamellipodia and ﬁnger - like protrusions called ﬁlopodia . At the leading edge of the lamellipodium , the cell forms adhesions that connect the extracellular matrix to the actin cytoskeleton to an - chor the protrusion and tract the cell body . Finally , to move forward , the cell retracts its trailing edge by com - bining actomyosin contractility and disassembly of adhe - sions at the rear ( Fig . 1 ) . Migration varies from one cell type to another . For example , ﬁbroblasts exhibit a relatively slow and unco - ordinated movement with protruding and retracting lamellipodia , and they contain many stress ﬁbers connected to large focal adhesions . In contrast , ﬁsh keratocytes that move faster are characterized by the presence of a unique persistent lamellipodium , small adhesions , and the absence of stress ﬁbers and ﬁlopodia . Nevertheless , in these cells , the role and the regulation of actin dynamics associated with membrane protrusion and cell - matrix adhesion are generally accepted as common features of cell migration . In each of Physiol Rev 88 : 489 – 513 , 2008 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / physrev . 00021 . 2007 . www . prv . org 489 0031 - 9333 / 08 $ 18 . 00 Copyright © 2008 the American Physiological Society on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m these cellular processes , actin dynamics are the result of a concerted regulation of parameters that govern the assem - bly , stability , and organization of actin ﬁlaments by a speciﬁc set of proteins . To understand how actin dynamics control cell mi - gration , this review addresses the following basic ques - tions : How is rapid actin assembly maintained at steady state in the lamellipodium during cell migration ? How is actin assembly constantly initiated in a site - directed fash - ion to account for directional migration ? How is actin assembly initiated , regulated , and mechanically coupled to adhesion to enable protrusion and traction of the cell body ? What are the functions of the actin binding proteins present in cell - matrix adhesions ? The ﬁrst part of this review ( sect . II ) focuses on our current understanding of how cells extend protrusions in the direction of migration . We detail the regulation of actin treadmilling that is considered as the engine that generates the protrusive force in lamellipodia . We also describe the signal responsive machineries that ﬁnely tune the nucleation of actin ﬁlaments and direct the protrusion . The formation of different protrusions , such as lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia , in the same cellular environment , can be explained by the activation of two different nucleation machineries ( Arp2 / 3 and formins ) that generate actin arrays with different archi - tecture and dynamics ( Fig . 1 ) . The second part of this review ( sect . III ) focuses on the function and the regulation of actin dynamics at sites FIG . 1 . Schematic illustration of the actin cytoskeleton in a migrating cell . This schematic cell contains the major structures found in migrating cells but does not correspond to a precise cell type . A : in lamellipodia , branched actin ﬁlaments are generated at the plasma membrane by the signal responsive WASP - Arp2 / 3 machinery and maintained in fast treadmilling by a set of regulatory proteins ( ADF , capping proteins , proﬁlin ) . The mechanism of branched nucleation is detailed in Figure 3 , the regulation of WASP proteins is developed in Figure 4 , and the regulation of actin treadmilling is presented in Figure 2 . B : during cell migration , cells extend ﬁngerlike protrusions called ﬁlopodia beyond the leading edge of protruding lamellipodia to sense the environment . At the tip of ﬁlopodia , formins like mDia2 catalyze the processive assembly of proﬁlin - actin . The resulting nonbranched actin ﬁlaments are tightly bundled by several proteins including fascin and the Irsp53 - Eps8 complex . The processive assembly of proﬁlin - actin catalyzed by formins is presented in Figure 5 . Note that VASP is also present at the tip of ﬁlopodia , but its role is still controversial ( see sect . II D1 ) . C : slow moving cells form focal adhesions in response to RhoA signaling . Focal adhesions connect the extracellular matrix to contractile bundles made of actin ﬁlaments , myosin II , and bundling proteins including (cid:1) - actinin . Focal adhesions contain a variety of actin binding proteins including side binding proteins , capping proteins , and nucleators . D : the lamella is characterized by a slow actin turnover and contains the signature proteins tropomyosin and myosin II . The mechanisms by which actin ﬁlaments are nucleated and anchored at the plasma membrane are not known . Lp , lamellipodium ; Fp , ﬁlopodium ; Lm , lamella ; SF , stress ﬁber ; FA , focal adhesion ; FC , focal complex . 490 LE CLAINCHE AND CARLIER Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m of adhesion to the extracellular matrix . To convert the polarized treadmilling into protrusion and the actomyosin contraction into traction of the cell body and retraction of the tail , cell - matrix adhesions mechanically couple actin ﬁlaments to the substrate . This coupling involves a variety of actin binding proteins that control the nucleation , the binding , and the barbed - end growth of actin ﬁlaments ( Fig . 1 ) . These proteins may tune the degree of force transmission to the substrate . Although the existence and the mechanism of actin nucleation are still unclear , we describe several hypotheses that involve known actin nucleators such as Arp2 / 3 and the formin mDia1 in this process . Finally , we present the function and the regula - tion of four major actin binding proteins : vinculin , talin , tensin , and (cid:1) - actinin . II . ACTIN - BASED PROTRUSIONS A . The Lamellipodium and the Lamella How actin assembly is converted into a protrusive force is a central question in understanding cell migration . Seminal experiments showed how actin dynamics are coupled to the protrusion of the lamellipodium , a ﬂat cellular protrusion where actin is organized in a bidimen - sional dendritic array of branched ﬁlaments ( see Ref . 206 for a review ) ( Fig . 1 ) . First , the microinjection of ﬂuores - cent actin followed by ﬂuorescence recovery after photo - bleaching ( FRAP ) analyses in the lamellipodium of a ﬁ - broblast demonstrated that actin ﬁlaments polymerize at the leading edge and depolymerize at the rear in a process known as “treadmilling . ” This observation suggested to the authors that this process is the result of the treadmill - ing of ﬁlaments whose length corresponds to the width of the lamellipodium ( 237 ) . Second , the movement of a pho - toactivated ﬂuorescent actin mark in the lamellipodium of a moving keratocyte remains stationary with respect to the substrate , indicating that the movement occurs at the same rate as actin assembly . In this experiment , the ex - ponential decay of actin ﬂuorescence suggested that actin ﬁlaments , which are nucleated and released from the plasma membrane , are short and depolymerize rapidly in the cytoplasm , ruling out the hypothesis of the treadmill - ing of long actin ﬁlaments ( 224 ) . However , because the pointed end depolymerization of actin ﬁlaments all along the lamellipodium feeds the fast elongation of actin ﬁla - ment barbed ends at the leading edge , the treadmilling concept has been extended to the whole actin network . Depending on the degree of mechanical coupling between the actin cytoskeleton and the substrate , the treadmilling is mainly converted into protrusion in fast - moving cells and retrograde ﬂow in slow - moving cells . The treadmill - ing is responsible for the retrograde ﬂow at the front of the lamellipodium , whereas myosin II activity generates this ﬂow at the back . Until recently , it was thought that the treadmilling of actin ﬁlaments in the lamellipodium was sufﬁcient to support the protrusion of the leading edge . However , studies based on ﬂuorescence speckle microscopy pro - posed that two distinct but overlapping actin networks are involved in this process . Fast - moving and short - lived speckles deﬁned the lamellipodium , and slow - moving and long - lived speckles deﬁned the lamella ( 88 , 167 ) . The observation of the lamella behind the lamellipodium in electron microscopy showed a loose array of unbranched actin ﬁlaments ( 217 ) that is enriched in tropomyosin and myosin II ( 51 , 219 ) . The microinjection of skeletal muscle tropomyosin in cells displaces Arp2 / 3 and actin depoly - merizing factor ( ADF ) ( see sect . II , B2 and C ) from the leading edge , resulting in the loss of the lamellipodia . Surprisingly , this treatment increases leading edge protru - sion persistence and migration rate ( 73 ) . Based on these observations , the authors suggested that the lamella plays the major role in protrusion , whereas the lamellipodium is dispensable . The lamellipodium would serve another function such as sensing the environment . Another pos - sibility is that the lamellar and lamellipodial actin net - works have redundant functions in cell migration . B . Actin Treadmilling 1 . Molecular basis of actin treadmilling Actin assembly is a dissipative biochemical process in which actin hydrolyzes ATP upon polymerization , thus creating a difference between the critical concentration ( C c ) of the ATP - bound barbed end ( C c (cid:1) 0 . 06 (cid:2) M ) and the ADP - bound pointed end ( C c (cid:1) 0 . 6 (cid:2) M ) . At steady state , the value of the concentration of monomeric actin ( C ss (cid:1) 0 . 1 (cid:2) M ) implies that the barbed end elongation balances the pointed end depolymerization so that on average the ﬁlament moves forward and keeps the same length . This process is called “treadmilling . ” The resulting force is thought to push the membrane to form the lamellipodium . Therefore , the control of actin depolymerization at the pointed end and polymerization at the barbed end deter - mines the protrusive force . Because the treadmilling of pure actin is too slow to account for the fast locomotion of cells , many studies have been carried out to identify actin binding proteins that accelerate the treadmilling cycle . The following paragraphs detail the molecular mechanisms by which a set of proteins ( ADF , proﬁlin , and capping proteins ) cooperate to accelerate the treadmill - ing rate ( Fig . 2 ) . 2 . ADF ADF ( also called coﬁlin ) is localized throughout the lamellipodium but excluded from the leading edge ( 217 ) . In vitro , ADF binds to the sides of the ADP - actin ﬁlament ACTIN DYNAMICS IN CELL MIGRATION 491 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m and changes its structure , which causes an increase in the rate of pointed end depolymerization ( 30 , 32 ) . As a result , partial depolymerization occurs and the steady - state con - centration of G - actin ( monomeric actin ) increases up to a new value that allows barbed end growth to balance faster pointed end depolymerization . Hence , it is by in - creasing the rate of depolymerization that ADF promotes a higher rate of barbed end growth and potentially fosters actin - based motility ( Fig . 2 ) . In addition , the change in twist of the ﬁlament linked to ADF binding ( 140 ) weakens the structure and causes a modest severing effect , result - ing in a two - to threefold decrease in average length ( 30 , 131 ) . Based on real - time imaging of Oregon green actin ﬁlaments , it was recently proposed that , at low concen - tration , ADF promotes the depolymerization by severing actin ﬁlaments , not by increasing the dissociation be - tween subunits , whereas it nucleates actin ﬁlaments at higher concentrations ( 6 ) . It must be taken into account that these data were obtained exclusively with a high percentage of biochemically uncharacterized ﬂuores - cently labeled actin . We showed that labeling actin with TMR alters the functional interaction of many actin bind - ing proteins including ADF ( 164 ) . Most importantly , the severing does not explain the effect of ADF on actin - based motility . The severing in itself is not catalytic , does not depolymerize F - actin , and does not increase the crit - ical concentration ( 30 ) required to increase the velocity of processes driven by barbed end growth . In good agreement with its biochemical function , ADF increases the velocity of Listeria and N - WASP - coated beads in reconstituted motility assays and de - creases the length of the actin tails ( 30 , 249 ) . Identical effects are reported in vivo , where the RNAi knockdown of ADF in Drosophila S2 cells increases the width of the lamellipodial actin network ( 88 ) . The activity of ADF is regulated by phosphorylation . The LIM kinase phosphorylates ADF and inactivates it , whereas the phosphatase slingshot activates it ( 8 , 151 ) . 3 . Proﬁlin and WH2 - containing proteins Proﬁlin is an abundant protein that binds monomeric actin and also contributes to increase the treadmilling rate ( see Ref . 258 for a review ) . The proﬁlin - actin complex assembles exclusively at the barbed end ; thus it enhances the directionality of treadmilling ( Fig . 2 ) . The combined effects of ADF and proﬁlin enhance the treadmilling rate by 125 - fold ( 52 ) . The WH2 ( WASP homology 2 ) domain proteins in - clude functional homologs of proﬁlin . The WH2 domains FIG . 2 . Regulation of actin treadmilling . 1 ) ADF binds to the side of ADP - actin ﬁlaments and induces pointed - end depolymerization to increase the concentration of monomeric actin at steady state . 2 ) Proﬁlin enhances the exchange of ADP for ATP to recycle actin monomers . The proﬁlin - actin complex assembles exclusively at the barbed end . 3 ) By blocking the majority of actin ﬁlament barbed ends , capping proteins increase the concentration of monomeric actin at steady state and funnel the ﬂux of actin monomers to the noncapped ﬁlaments , which individually grow faster . 492 LE CLAINCHE AND CARLIER Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m are found in a variety of proteins divided into four major subfamilies : proteins with WH2 repeats like actobindin and ciboulot that promote barbed end assembly in a proﬁlin - like fashion ( 20 , 79 ) , proteins that sequester actin monomers like thymosin (cid:3) 4 ( 161 ) , signaling proteins like WASP in which the WH2 domain contributes to the Arp2 / 3 - dependent mechanism of nucleation ( see sect . II C5 A ) , and proteins of the spire family that nucleate actin ﬁla - ments ( 172 ) . A structural and mutagenetic study showed that the weaker interaction of the COOH - terminal region of the ﬁrst WH2 domain of ciboulot is responsible for the opposite function of ciboulot and thymosin (cid:3) 4 ( 78 ) . Re - cently , Co et al . ( 40 ) demonstrated the importance of the WH2 domain of N - WASP in actin - based motility . They suggested that barbed end capture by N - WASP WH2 do - mains is required to propel N - WASP - coated beads ( see sect . II C1 ) ( 40 ) . 4 . Barbed end capping proteins Capping proteins cap the barbed ends of actin ﬁla - ments with high afﬁnity ( 195 ) . By blocking the majority of the barbed ends , capping proteins increase the concen - tration of monomeric actin at steady state to the critical concentration of the pointed end . This higher concentra - tion of G - actin feeds the rare noncapped ﬁlaments that grow faster in a process known as “funneling” of tread - milling ( see Ref . 162 for a review ) ( Fig . 2 ) . Capping pro - teins also control the density of the actin array by limiting the length of actin ﬁlaments ( 249 ) . A number of capping proteins involved in different cellular functions and controlled by distinct signaling pathways have been identiﬁed . The heterodimeric cap - ping protein ( CP ) controls lamellipodium protrusion ( 182 ) . Both phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) and the protein CARMIL inhibit actin ﬁlament capping by CP ( 195 , 256 ) . Whether this uncapping mechanism con - tributes to the initiation of actin assembly in response to signaling is still an open issue . Proteins of the gelsolin family such as the capping and severing protein gelsolin and the capping protein CapG are involved in cell migra - tion ( see Ref . 203 for a review ) . However , the CapG / gelsolin double knockout mice have only mild defects , suggesting a redundancy for the capping function ( 250 ) . Tensin is a large modular protein that caps actin ﬁlaments in focal adhesions ( see sect . III C2 C ) . Twinﬁlin combines ADP - G - actin sequestering and ADP - bound barbed ends capping to regulate actin assembly associated with endo - cytosis ( 75 ) . Eps8 , an autoinhibited capping protein acti - vated by the signaling protein Abi1 , localizes along the leading edge of lamellipodia and supports ﬁlopodia for - mation and efﬁcient motility of Listeria in host cells ( 53 , 54 ) . Finally , Hip1R forms a complex with cortactin that blocks actin ﬁlament barbed end elongation associated with endocytosis ( 116 ) . The dynamics of capping protein interaction with barbed ends in vitro have been examined by modeling the kinetics of barbed end growth from spectrin - actin seeds in the presence of capping protein . The derived dissocia - tion rate constant was very low ( 0 . 0005 s (cid:2) 1 ) ( 195 ) . The dynamics of capping protein interaction with barbed ends in vivo have been addressed more recently using ﬂuores - cence speckle microscopy ( 88 , 146 ) . Surprisingly , the dis - sociation constant derived from speckle lifetime appears three orders of magnitude shorter in vivo than in vitro ( 0 . 58 s (cid:2) 1 ) . The RNAi knock down of ADF increases the lifetime of barbed end - bound capping protein ( 88 , 146 ) . These data indicate that in vivo the dissociation of cap - ping protein is linked to ﬁlament depolymerization from the pointed end , which eventually releases the capper in the cytoplasm . The average lifetime of capped ﬁlaments should then be identical to the time of residence of the capper at barbed ends , whereas speckle microscopy of ﬁlaments indicates that it is longer . To explain these unexpected results , several hypotheses have been made : an unknown factor uncaps ﬁlaments rapidly , the capped ﬁlaments are preferentially depolymerized by ADF , or the severing activity of ADF near the barbed end accelerates the depolymerization of the capped barbed ends ( 88 , 146 ) . The measurement of the length distribution of actin ﬁla - ments in the zone of capping proteins would help to understand these observations . C . Nucleation of Actin Filaments by the Arp2 / 3 Complex in Response to Signaling 1 . Nucleation is required to maintain the turnover of a stationary actin array in the presence of a barbed end capper To maintain the treadmilling rate constant , migrating cells nucleate actin ﬁlaments continuously to balance the effect of capping proteins . In the lamellipodium of migrat - ing cells , the nucleating factor is the Arp2 / 3 complex activated by the signaling proteins WASP ( see Ref . 70 for a review ) . Listeria , Shigella , or N - WASP - coated beads placed in a minimum motility medium containing the pure proteins ADF , proﬁlin , capping proteins , and Arp2 / 3 move at the same rate as lamellipodia protrude ( 126 , 249 ) . In agree - ment with this study , all these proteins are required for lamellipodium extension in Drosophila S2 cells ( 182 ) . Altogether , these observations demonstrate that , in mi - grating cells , lamellipodium extension is a self - organized process resulting from the site - directed nucleation of a polarized actin array maintained in rapid treadmilling by a combination of soluble proteins . In addition to fuelling the treadmilling with new actin ﬁlaments , the localized activation of Arp2 / 3 directs the protrusion . ACTIN DYNAMICS IN CELL MIGRATION 493 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m 2 . The Arp2 / 3 complex The Arp2 / 3 complex was initially discovered in Acanth - amoeba ( 130 ; see Refs . 70 , 80 for reviews ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex localizes at the leading edge of migrating cells ( 217 ) where it nucleates branched actin ﬁlaments ( see sect . II C3 ) . Arp2 / 3 is a stable complex of seven conserved subunits including the two actin - related proteins Arp2 and Arp3 and ARPC1 , ARPC2 , ARPC3 , ARPC4 , and ARPC5 . In humans there are two isoforms of Arp3 ( Arp3 and the Arp3 (cid:3) ) and ARPC1 ( ARPC1A and ARPC1B ) ( 80 ) . Whether the incorporation of these different subunits provides different activities or regulations to the complex is still an open issue . The reconstitution of human recom - binant Arp2 / 3 complex provided multiple insights into the role of the individual subunits in the stability of the com - plex and the nucleation of branched ﬁlaments . In partic - ular , this study showed that ARPC2 and ARPC4 form the structural core of the complex , Arp3 is involved in the nucleation process , and ARPC1 , ARPC3 , and ARPC5 con - tribute to the activation of the complex by WASP and ActA ( 72 ) . The crystal structure of the bovine Arp2 / 3 complex in its inactive state conﬁrmed the structural similarities of Arp3 and Arp2 with actin and the central role of the core proteins ARPC2 and ARPC4 . Neverthe - less , major structural changes are required to account for the mechanisms of branched nucleation ( 179 ) . 3 . Mechanisms of branched nucleation The comparison of actin and the two Arp subunits showed that the differences in sequence are found mainly at the pointed end while the barbed end is conserved . Based on these observations , Kelleher et al . ( 97 ) predicted a model in which a complex Arp2 - Arp3 - actin mimics an actin nucleus to initiate actin assembly from its barbed end . The ﬁrst biochemical studies and electron micros - copy observations suggested that the Arp2 / 3 complex was a nucleator , a pointed end capper , and a branching agent ( 148 ) . Direct observation of actin ﬁlaments labeled with rhodamine - phalloidin in ﬂuorescent microscopy sug - gested that Arp2 / 3 activated by the VCA domain of WASP proteins ( see sect . II C5 A ) nucleated actin ﬁlaments by branching the side of preexisting ﬁlaments ( 4 , 16 ) . Actin ﬁlament branches are not stable and dissociate from the mother ﬁlament with a half - time of 500 – 800 s ( 17 , 115 ) . Finally , the real - time observation of actin ﬁlament branch - ing using total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence micros - copy ( TIRFM ) showed that branching occurred preferen - tially near the barbed end ( 4 ) . Based on these ﬁndings , the authors proposed the “dendritic nucleation” model in which the Arp2 / 3 complex binds to the side of a preex - isting ﬁlament and initiates a lateral branch ( Fig . 3 ) . In contrast , based on the following ﬁndings : the au - tocatalytic nucleation of actin ﬁlaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex depends on the number rather than the length of actin ﬁlaments , mother ﬁlaments capped at their barbed ends do not branch , the lengths of mother and daughter ﬁlaments are nearly identical , an alternative mechanism was proposed in which the complex Arp2 / 3 - VCA - G - actin branches actin ﬁlaments at their barbed end ( 21 , 160 ) ( Fig . 3 ) . These kinetic data do not provide structural information on the organization of the different subunits of Arp2 / 3 and VCA - bound actin at the branch junction . In particular , they do not discriminate between a model in which one Arp subunit would incorporate into the mother ﬁlament ( 160 ) and an alternative model in which the actin monomer bound to the WH2 domain of VCA would incor - porate at the barbed end of the mother ﬁlament , thus positioning Arp2 - Arp3 complex to initiate the daughter branch on the side of the barbed end of the mother ﬁlament ( 115 ) . A recent study that combined ﬂuorescent labeling of Arp2 / 3 subunits and cryo - EM localized Arp2 and Arp3 in the daughter branch , favoring the second model . The authors also showed that the Arp2 / 3 complex associates with the mother ﬁlament with its long axis aligned perpendicular to the mother ﬁlament with the barbed ends of Arp2 and Arp3 facing the direction of the daughter ﬁlament growth ( 57 ) . 4 . ATP binding and hydrolysis on Arp2 / 3 ATP exchange and hydrolysis , which control the re - cycling of actin monomers and the stability of actin ﬁla - ments , play a critical role in actin treadmilling . Sequence analysis and structural modeling predicted that the amino acids involved in ATP binding and hydrolysis on actin are conserved in both Arp2 and Arp3 ( 97 , 136 ) , raising the question of the role of the nucleotide bound to actin , Arp2 , and Arp3 in the nucleation / stability of branched ﬁlaments . Photo - cross - linking , gel ﬁltration , and (cid:4) - ATP ﬂuores - cence measurements showed that the inactive Arp2 / 3 complex binds one ATP with high afﬁnity on Arp3 . The binding of N - WASP to Arp2 / 3 reveals a second high - afﬁn - ity site on Arp2 that is required for branched nucleation ( 114 ) . Mutations in the ATP binding pocket of both Arp2 and Arp3 conﬁrmed the critical role of ATP binding to Arp2 in the branched nucleation process ( 69 , 136 ) . Differ - ent conditions of photo - cross - linking experiments led oth - ers to propose that the inactive Arp2 / 3 binds ATP on both Arp2 and Arp3 with similar afﬁnities ( 48 , 136 ) . However , ATP - (cid:4) - ATP exchange was unaffected by mutations abol - ishing ATP binding to Arp2 but drastically impaired by mutations on Arp3 , consistent with the view that Arp3 but not Arp2 binds ATP tightly in the absence of N - WASP ( 136 ) . The resolution of the crystal structure of nucleotide free , ATP , or ADP - bound Arp2 / 3 indicated that the bind - ing of ATP to Arp3 is important to maintain the structure of the cleft in its closed conformation , whereas ATP did not change the structure of Arp2 in which subdomains 1 494 LE CLAINCHE AND CARLIER Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m and 2 are ﬂexible and absent from the electron density maps ( 153 , 179 ) . These observations may explain why Arp3 binds ATP with high afﬁnity and Arp2 binds ATP with low afﬁnity in the inactive complex ( 114 ) . ATP is not hydrolyzed on Arp2 / 3 alone or associ - ated with N - WASP ( 114 ) . ATP is hydrolyzed on Arp2 , not on Arp3 , after a delay following ﬁlament branching ( 115 ) . Depending on the experimental procedure , the delay was found to be 800 s ( 115 ) or a few seconds ( 49 , 135 ) . These kinetic data clearly showed that ATP hy - drolysis is not involved in branched nucleation but more likely in a later reaction . Branched actin ﬁlaments carrying a nonhydrolyzable analog of ATP on Arp2 / 3 did not debranch , demonstrating that ATP hydrolysis on Arp2 but not on actin is a prerequisite for debranch - ing ( 115 ) ( Fig . 3 ) . In agreement with our ﬁndings , mu - tations in amino acids of Arp2 required for ATP hydro - lysis did not affect the branched nucleation but strongly inhibited debranching ( 135 ) . Debranching is slower than the renewal of actin ﬁl - aments in the lamellipodium . Therefore , the debranching is likely to be regulated to contribute to the destabiliza - tion of actin arrays in vivo . Several observations support this hypothesis . First , Martin et al . ( 135 ) showed recently FIG . 3 . Model for the catalytic cycle of branching by Arp2 / 3 . Top : the barbed end branching model . 1 ) The branching complex made of G - actin , Arp2 / 3 , and the VCA domain of WASP / N - WASP ( or WAVE isoforms ) binds to the barbed end of the mother ﬁlament . This incorporation is mediated by the actin subunit of the branching complex . 2 ) Arp2 / 3 nucleates a lateral branch . ATP hydrolysis on actin dissociates the branched junction from the membrane - bound activator . The growth of the mother and daughter ﬁlaments drives membrane protrusion . 3 ) ATP hydrolysis on Arp2 induces debranching . 4 ) After depolymerization of the branched ﬁlament , Arp2 / 3 and actin are released . 5 ) Nucleotide exchange is required to recycle actin and Arp2 / 3 . The duplication of barbed ends at the plasma membrane can easily account for the formation of a polarized dendritic actin array in which the barbed ends face the plasma membrane . Bottom : the side branching model . This model proposes that Arp2 / 3 activated by the COOH - terminal domain of WASP / N - WASP ( or WAVE isoforms ) binds to the side of an actin ﬁlament . In this activated state , Arp2 - Arp3 - G - actin mimics an actin nucleus to initiate a lateral branch . ACTIN DYNAMICS IN CELL MIGRATION 495 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m that a yeast mutant blocked for ATP hydrolysis on Arp2 and debranching displayed longer actin tails associated with endocytic sites . Second , in the lamellipodium of Drosophila S2 cells , ﬂuorescent Arp2 / 3 speckles disap - pear faster than actin speckles , indicating that debranch - ing is not the result of actin depolymerization . The short lifetime of Arp2 / 3 speckles ( 22 s ) also showed that de - branching is much faster in vivo than in vitro ( t 1 / 2 (cid:1) 500 – 800 s ) , suggesting the existence of an unknown mecha - nism of regulation ( 88 ) . This observation could reﬂect the binding of ADF to the side of ADP - actin ﬁlaments that is known to accelerate the debranching rate in vitro ( 17 ) . Altogether , these observations suggest that ATP hydroly - sis on Arp2 / 3 plays the role of a timer regulating the plasticity of the branched actin array , making it softer at a distance from the leading edge . Since debranching re - leases free depolymerizing pointed ends , it is tempting to anticipate that the regulation of debranching not only controls the organization and the mechanical properties of the actin array but also the treadmilling rate . 5 . Activation of Arp2 / 3 The establishment of the polarity of the lamellipodial actin network is a critical event in the initiation of cell migration . Studies on the propulsion of the bacteria Lis - teria revealed that Arp2 / 3 is required for the formation of the polarized actin tail that propels the bacteria in the host cell . The discovery that Arp2 / 3 is activated by the Listeria transmembrane protein ActA ( 247 , 248 ) strongly suggested that , in cellular processes like lamellipodium protrusion , Arp2 / 3 must be activated by membrane - asso - ciated signaling proteins to initiate the growth of a polar - ized actin network . The following paragraphs describe the signaling pathways leading to the activation of Arp2 / 3 . Note that this part of the review does not cover the nonmammalian activators of Arp2 / 3 ( see Ref . 70 for a complete list ) . A ) THE WISKOTT - ALDRICH SYNDROME PROTEINS . I ) Role in cell migration . In the 1990s , microinjection experiments showed the speciﬁcity of Rho - GTPases in the reorganiza - tion of actin assembly in response to signaling , establish - ing that Rac1 , Cdc42 , and RhoA induce the formation of rufﬂes , ﬁlopodia , and stress ﬁbers , respectively ( 152 ) . The Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome proteins ( WASP ) were then identiﬁed as Arp2 / 3 activators that control actin assembly downstream of Cdc42 and Rac1 . This family of proteins includes the hematopoietic WASP , the ubiquitous N - WASP ( neural - WASP ) , and SCAR ( suppressor of cAMP receptor ) / WAVE ( WASP - family verprolin homology pro - tein ) isoforms 1 , 2 , and 3 . These proteins are involved in the regulation of actin dynamics in a variety of cellular processes including endocytosis , phagocytosis , cell mi - gration , intracellular trafﬁc , and internalization and pro - pulsion of pathogens ( see Refs . 212 , 221 for reviews ) . It was initially found that the function of N - WASP in cell migration was restricted to ﬁlopodia formation in response to Cdc42 ( 142 ) , whereas WAVE isoforms ( see sect . II C5 B ) were responsible for lamellipodium protru - sion in response to Rac1 ( 143 ) . However , N - WASP (cid:2) / (cid:2) ﬁbroblasts form ﬁlopodia in response to Cdc42 ( 127 ) ( see sect . II D1 ) . Moreover , the growing number of reports describing the localization of N - WASP at the leading edge of lamellipodia in MDCK , MDBK , myogenic , and carci - noma cells ( 13 , 96 , 117 , 128 ) suggested a role for N - WASP in lamellipodial dynamics . In agreement with these obser - vations , the siRNA depletion of N - WASP in MDBK cells inhibits cell migration ( 13 ) . Nevertheless , in ﬁbroblasts of N - WASP knockout mice ( 207 ) and in HeLa ( 85 ) and Dro - sophila S2 cells ( 182 ) depleted of N - WASP or WASP by RNAi , the formation of lamellipodia was not affected . In these cells and others , many studies demonstrated that the formation of lamellipodia is controlled by WAVE iso - forms ( 85 , 182 , 209 , 213 , 254 , 255 ) . Finally , the RNAi depletion and the transfection of dominant negative forms of N - WASP or WAVE2 in myogenic cells reduced both the formation of lamellipodia and cell migration ( 96 ) . Although it seems that WAVE isoforms play a more im - portant role than N - WASP in cell migration , these obser - vations suggest that the relative contribution of N - WASP and WAVE isoforms depends on cell type . II ) Regulation of WASP / N - WASP . A ) Activation of WASP / N - WASP . N - WASP is a modular protein that con - tains a NH 2 - terminal WASP homology 1 domain ( WH1 ) , followed by a basic region ( B ) , a GTPase binding domain ( GBD ) , a proline - rich domain ( PRD ) , and a COOH - termi - nal catalytic domain ( VCA or WA ) . The VCA domain is composed of two WASP homology 2 domains ( WH2 ) , a connector region ( C ) , and an acidic domain ( A ) ( Fig . 4 ) . In vitro Cdc42 activates N - WASP , which in turn stimulates the ability of Arp2 / 3 to nucleate actin ﬁlaments ( 56 , 184 ) . N - WASP is autoinhibited by an intramolecular contact between the GBD domain and the VCA domain . The bind - ing of Cdc42 - GTP and PIP 2 to the GBD and the basic domains , respectively , activate N - WASP synergistically . Cdc42 and PIP2 disrupt the intramolecular interaction to unmask the VCA domain ( 100 , 168 , 183 ) . The exposed VCA domain binds Arp2 / 3 , G - actin , and a ﬁlament barbed end as substrates to catalyze the formation of a branched ﬁla - ment ( see sect . II C3 ) . In addition to Cdc42 , the Rho GTPase Rac1 activates N - WASP ( 225 ) . The proline - rich region of N - WASP is a target for SH3 domain - containing proteins like Grb2 , Nck , or Abi1 ( 31 , 85 , 185 ) that activate N - WASP . VASP , which is localized along the leading edge of protruding lamellipodia ( 189 ) , interacts with the proline - rich region of WASP but not N - WASP ( 34 ) . This VASP binding motif found in WASP is conserved in WAVE1 and WAVE2 . In vitro , VASP enhances the propulsion of WASP - coated beads in a minimum motility medium ( 34 ) . Simi - 496 LE CLAINCHE AND CARLIER Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m larly , VASP interacts with the Arp2 / 3 activators ActA from Listeria and accelerates the propulsion of Listeria and ActA - coated beads by increasing the rate of dissociation of the branched ﬁlament from ActA ( 193 ) . Whether this activity corresponds to the role of VASP in lamellipodia extension remains to be established . More recently IQGAP1 , a protein that has multiple binding partners including F - actin , microtubule binding proteins ( CLIP - 170 and APC ) , adherens junctions proteins ( E - cadherin and (cid:3) - catenin ) , Rho GTPases ( Cdc42 and Rac1 ) , and calmod - FIG . 4 . Regulation of Arp2 / 3 activators . Top : WASP and N - WASP are modular proteins that contain a NH 2 - terminal WASP homology 1 domain ( WH1 ) , followed by a basic region ( B ) , a GTPase binding domain ( GBD ) , a proline - rich domain ( PRD ) , and a COOH - terminal catalytic domain ( VCA ) . The VCA domain is composed of a WASP homology 2 domain ( WH2 ) , a connector region ( C ) , and an acidic domain ( A ) . N - WASP contains two WH2 domains . WASP and N - WASP ( not shown ) exist in an auto - inhibited conformation in which the VCA domain ( green ) is occluded by an intramolecular interaction . The binding of WIP ( WASP interacting protein ) or its homolog CR16 ( corticosteroids and regional expression 16 ) to the WH1 ( WASP homology 1 ) domain of WASP and N - WASP maintains this inactive state . A variety of ligands synergistically activate WASP and N - WASP by disrupting the intramolecular interaction to expose the COOH - terminal domain that binds and activates the Arp2 / 3 complex . The ligands include phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) that binds the B domain ; the RhoGTPases Cdc42 , Rac1 , and TC10 that bind to the GBD ; IQGAP1 that binds to a region encompassing the B and GBD domains of N - WASP ; and several SH3 domain - containing proteins that interact with the central PRD ( for a complete list , see Ref . 221 ) . The phosphorylation of one tyrosine by Src and two serines by casein kinase II ( CKII ) also contribute to the activation of WASP . Middle : WAVE1 , - 2 , and - 3 are modular proteins that contain an NH 2 - terminal WHD domain ( WAVE homology domain ) followed by a basic region ( B ) , a proline - rich domain ( PRD ) , and a COOH - terminal catalytic domain ( VCA ) . WAVE1 , - 2 , and - 3 are part of a stable complex with four other proteins including Nap1 ( Nck - associated protein ) , PIR121 ( p53 - inducible mRNA ) , HSPC300 ( hematopoietic stem progenitor cell 300 ) , and Abi1 ( Abl - interactor 1 ) . It was initially proposed that the complex is inactive and that Rac1 dissociates the active HSPC300 - WAVE subcomplex . It was also proposed that the complex is active and that Rac1 does not dissociate it . In this model , Rac1 would only target the complex to the plama membrane . The protein Irsp53 ( insulin receptor substrate protein 53 ) has been shown to activate WAVE2 in the presence of Rac1 and phosphati - dylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( PIP 3 ) . Bottom : cortactin is a modular protein that consists of a NH 2 - terminal acidic domain ( NTA ) that binds the Arp2 / 3 complex , tandem repeats ( 1 – 6 ) that bind actin ﬁlaments , an (cid:1) - helical region , a proline - rich domain ( PRD ) , and a COOH - terminal SH3 domain . Cortactin displays a weak activity that is enhanced by the binding of WIP or Fgd1 to its COOH - terminal SH3 domain . This SH3 domain also binds and activates N - WASP , resulting in a synergistic activation of Arp2 / 3 by cortactin and N - WASP . Cortactin is phosphorylated on two serines by serine / threonine kinases including Erk and three tyrosines by tyrosine kinases including Src . ACTIN DYNAMICS IN CELL MIGRATION 497 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m ulin ( 26 ) was identiﬁed as a novel activator of N - WASP ( 13 , 117 ) . IQGAP1 links the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 pathway to the ﬁbroblast growth factor ( FGF ) receptor , FGFR1 ( 13 ) ( Fig . 4 ) . Recent ﬁndings identiﬁed a mechanism by which WASP proteins may remain activated after signaling is switched off . Torres and Rosen ( 227 ) demonstrated that the activation of WASP by Cdc42 unmasks the residue Y291 of WASP allowing its phosphorylation by Src . This phosphorylation prevents the autoinhibitory interaction and maintains WASP in its active conformation after dis - sociation of Cdc42 ( 227 ) ( Fig . 4 ) . Interestingly , Cory et al . ( 42 ) also reported that casein kinase II phosphorylates two serines ( S483 and S484 ) located in the VCA domain of WASP . In contrast to the previous report , the authors show that this phosphorylation is constitutive and does not require the previous activation of WASP . This phos - phorylation increases the afﬁnity of WASP for Arp2 / 3 and results in a higher stimulation of actin assembly both in vitro and in vivo ( 42 ) ( Fig . 4 ) . Altogether these two studies provide an example of molecular memory in cell signaling . B ) Inhibition of WASP / N - WASP . The basal activity of N - WASP observed in vitro is not compatible with site - directed actin assembly in response to signaling , suggest - ing that WASP proteins must be inhibited in resting cells . WIP ( WASP interacting protein ) and the homolog CR16 ( corticosteroids and regional expression 16 ) , which inter - act with both WASP and N - WASP ( 138 , 175 ) , inhibit N - WASP in vitro ( 138 ) ( Fig . 4 ) . However , WIP is necessary for actin - based processes including Cdc42 - dependent ex - tension of ﬁlopodia in ﬁbroblasts and immunological syn - apse formation in lymphocytes ( 7 , 138 ) . To explain these apparent discrepancies , several hypotheses have been proposed . First , in lymphocytes , WASP is part of a tet - rameric complex ZAP - 70 - CrkL - WIP - WASP . TCR activa - tion leads to WIP phosphorylation and dissociation of the complex , allowing WASP to activate the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 194 ) . Second , TOCA - 1 can only activate N - WASP in com - plex with WIP ( 81 ) . Hence , WIP would keep WASP / N - WASP inactive in the cytoplasm and control its localized activation . III ) Regulation of WAVE isoforms . SCAR ( suppres - sor of cAMP receptor ) / WAVE ( WASP - family verprolin ho - mology protein ) isoforms 1 , 2 , and 3 were identiﬁed as WASP - related proteins . WAVE proteins are thought to be the major activators of Arp2 / 3 at the leading edge of lamellipodia downstream of Rac1 ( 143 ) . The regulation of SCAR / WAVE proteins is very different from that of N - WASP and WASP described above . In contrast to WASP / N - WASP , SCAR / WAVE proteins are not autoinhibited , and they are not direct targets of Rho - GTPases since they do not contain any GBD domain . WAVE1 , - 2 , and - 3 are part of a stable complex with four other proteins including Nap1 ( Nck - associated protein ) , PIR121 ( p53 - inducible mRNA ) , HSPC300 ( hematopoietic stem progenitor cell 300 ) , and Abi1 ( Abl - interactor 1 ) ( 55 , 211 ) . Nap1 and Abi1 , which form the core of the complex , recruit PIR121 and the subcomplex HSPC300 - WAVE , respectively ( 63 ) . Whether and how the subunits of the complex activate or inhibit WAVE isoforms is still controversial . Eden et al . ( 55 ) ﬁrst suggested that the WAVE1 complex isolated from bovine brain is inactive , and binding of Rac1 or Nck promotes the dissociation of Nap1 , PIR121 , and Abi1 from the subcomplex WAVE1 - HSPC300 , allowing WAVE1 to activate the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 55 ) . Recent studies chal - lenged this model and showed that the recombinant WAVE2 complex is active . Moreover , Rac1 did not disso - ciate the complex ( 86 , 209 ; see Ref . 212 for a review ) . An alternative model for WAVE2 activation proposed that the protein IRSp53 binds Rac1 and WAVE2 to form a Rac1 / IRSp53 / WAVE2 complex that induces membrane rufﬂing ( 144 ) ( Fig . 4 ) . B ) CORTACTIN . Cortactin , an actin ﬁlament - binding pro - tein , is an important link between signaling pathways and the actin cytoskeleton in a variety of cellular processes including cell migration , cell - cell adhesion , and endocyto - sis ( see Ref . 43 for a review ) . In cells , cortactin is enriched at the leading edge of lamellipodia where it colocalizes with actin and Arp2 / 3 ( 245 ) . Although the importance of cortactin in cell migration is generally accepted , its pre - cise role in lamellipodial dynamics is still unclear ( dis - cussed in Ref . 43 ) . Cortactin is a modular protein that consists of a NH 2 - terminal acidic domain that binds the Arp2 / 3 com - plex , tandem repeats that bind actin ﬁlaments , and a COOH - terminal SH3 domain . The acidic domain and the tandem repeats are sufﬁcient to stimulate the Arp2 / 3 com - plex ( 230 , 243 ) . Although this activity is very low com - pared with WASP proteins , the binding of WIP and Fgd1 to the SH3 domain of cortactin greatly enhances the ac - tivation of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 101 , 103 ) . Interestingly , cortactin and N - WASP cooperate tightly to stimulate actin assembly through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Cortactin and N - WASP binding to Arp2 / 3 are not mutually exclusive and activate the complex synergistically ( 242 ) . More recently , two independent studies showed that the SH3 domain of cortactin binds and activates N - WASP to stimulate cell migration ( 108 , 137 ) . A large body of evidence indicates that cortactin phosphorylation plays an important role in actin remod - eling in a variety of physiological and pathological pro - cesses ( 43 ) . Cortactin is phosphorylated by tyrosine ki - nases including Src , Fyn , Syk , and Fer and by serine / threonine kinases including Erk and PAK ( 43 ) . In vitro , the phosphorylation of cortactin by Erk enhances the activation of N - WASP ( 137 ) . Several effects of cortactin phosphorylation by Src have also been described . First , cortactin phosphorylation by Src prevents Erk - phosphor - ylated cortactin from activating N - WASP ( 137 ) . Second , in 498 LE CLAINCHE AND CARLIER Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m a reconstituted assay , cortactin phosphorylation by Src enhanced Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin assembly in the presence of Nck1 , N - WASP , and WIP ( 223 ) ( Fig . 4 ) . The relative contribution of these activities in vivo remains to be determined . C ) SPECIFICITY OF ARP2 / 3 ACTIVATORS . The density of the branched actin network , which controls the mechanical properties of the actin array , contributes to change the cell shape in many actin - based processes such as lamel - lipodium protrusion , endocytosis , and phagocytosis . Each Arp2 / 3 activator has distinct activities and regulation that are well - adapted to achieve speciﬁc cellular functions . WASP proteins harbor different levels of Arp2 / 3 activa - tion that depend on the number of acidic amino acids at the COOH terminus . Among the WASP proteins , N - WASP is 16 - fold more active than WASP and 68 - fold more active than Scar1 / WAVE1 in solution ( 262 ) . Al - though cortactin is a much weaker activator than WASP proteins , it activates N - WASP and stabilizes the branched ﬁlaments , thus contributing to the density of the actin array . In addition to these intrinsic differ - ences , N - WASP , cortactin , and WAVE also regulate cell shape differently by coupling actin assembly to differ - ent membrane curvature proteins . For example , N - WASP associates with BAR domain - containing pro - teins such as endophilin ( 159 ) and EFC domain - con - taining proteins such as syndapin - I ( 99 ) that are thought to sense or promote membrane invagination in endocytosis . Cortactin also interacts with dynamin that is involved in membrane invagination and scission dur - ing endocytosis ( 196 ) . Interestingly , WAVE2 interacts with the IMD domain containing protein Irsp53 ( 144 ) . In contrast to BAR and EFC domains , the IMD domain has an opposite structure and induces membrane protru - sion . These observations suggest that membrane - de - forming proteins and actin assembly synergize to in - duce membrane protrusion ( 139 , 221 ) . A full description of the relative contribution of these pathways will require an in - depth cell biological dissection of the spatial and temporal localization of Arp2 / 3 regulators . The dissection of the sequential roles of several Arp2 / 3 activators in yeast already showed that they are involved in different steps of endocytosis ( 214 ) . The development of biosensors to probe the activity of Arp2 / 3 ( 69 ) and WASP proteins ( 128 ) will also help to establish the speciﬁcity of these different pathways . D . Filopodia Formation In migrating cells , lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia are overlapping but distinct actin networks with different organization and dynamic properties . How the cell man - ages to build such different structures in the same cellular environment is a crucial issue in the coordination of protrusions in cell migration . The past years have seen a growing number of molecular models explaining how ﬁlopodia emerge from the lamellipodial actin network ( see Ref . 59 for a review ) . 1 . Description and ﬁrst molecular models During cell migration , cells extend ﬁngerlike protru - sions called ﬁlopodia beyond the leading edge of protrud - ing lamellipodia to sense the environment ( Fig . 1 ) . These protrusions contain 15 – 20 parallel ﬁlaments tightly packed into a bundle with their barbed ends facing the membrane ( 118 ) . Extension and retraction of ﬁlopodia are controlled by actin assembly at the tip and retrograde ﬂow , respectively ( 60 , 132 , 145 , 155 ) . Nobes and Hall ( 152 ) established that the Rho - GTPase Cdc42 controls the formation of ﬁlopodia . The fact that N - WASP potentiates the ability of Cdc42 to in - duce ﬁlopodia ( 142 ) suggested that the stimulation of Arp2 / 3 was involved in the initiation of these structures . However , N - WASP null ﬁbroblasts extend normal ﬁlopo - dia in response to Cdc42 ( 127 ) , Arp2 / 3 is excluded from ﬁlopodia ( 218 ) , and the branched actin network nucleated by Arp2 / 3 is not compatible with the tight bundle of unbranched actin ﬁlaments found in ﬁlopodia . To concil - iate these data , it was proposed that the formation of ﬁlopodia was the result of a local rearrangement of the lamellipodial branched actin network generated by Arp2 / 3 into parallel ﬁlaments by proteins like fascin ( 218 , 232 ) . However , this model does not include the constant nucle - ation of actin ﬁlaments that is required to balance the capping protein effect . The fact that VASP localizes at the tip of ﬁlopodia ( 218 ) and causes the dissociation of cap - ping proteins from the barbed ends ( 12 ) led the authors to propose a model in which VASP promotes ﬁlopodia ex - tension by protecting the barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments generated by Arp2 / 3 from capping . This model was fur - ther supported by the observation that capping protein depletion induces the formation of ﬁlopodia ( 141 ) . How - ever , the observation that ﬁlopodia form normally in Arp2 / 3 - depleted cells ruled out this model ( 208 ) . Also , the inhibition of barbed end capping by VASP was not con - ﬁrmed ( 193 , 197 ) . So far , the link between the known biochemical activities of VASP ( actin ﬁlament binding , bundling , and nucleation ) and its localization at the tip of ﬁlopodia is not understood . Additional models ascribed a key role for the Cdc42 effector Irsp53 in the formation of ﬁlopodia ( 54 , 109 ) . The protein Irsp53 activated by Cdc42 would recruit Mena to bundle actin ﬁlament and promote the formation of ﬁlopodia ( 109 ) . In addition , the ability of the Irsp53 - Eps8 complex to bundle actin ﬁlaments is required for the Cdc42 - depen - dent formation of ﬁlopodia ( 54 ) . Although these mecha - nisms account for the structural reorganization of actin ACTIN DYNAMICS IN CELL MIGRATION 499 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m ﬁlaments downstream of Cdc42 , they do not explain the fast elongation of actin ﬁlament in ﬁlopodia . The newly discovered formins are good candidates to nucleate par - allel actin ﬁlaments at the tip of ﬁlopodia . 2 . Role of formins in ﬁlopodia formation Formins are involved in many different cellular pro - cesses including cytokinesis , endocytosis , ﬁlopodia for - mation , cell polarity , cell - cell adhesion , and cell - matrix adhesion ( see Refs . 71 , 104 for reviews ) . Several observations demonstrate the role of formins in the formation of ﬁlopodia downstream of Rho - GTPases in both mammalian cells and Dictyostelium . The diapha - nous - related formin mDia2 localizes at the tip of ﬁlopodia ( 165 , 166 ) . The expression of a constitutively active mDia2 induced the formation of ﬁlopodia ( 235 ) , whereas microinjection of anti - mDia2 antibodies or expression of a dominant negative form of mDia2 blocked actin reorga - nization and ﬁlopodia formation in response to Cdc42 in NIH 3T3 cells ( 166 ) . A variety of Rho - GTPases appear to activate a given forming . For instance , Rif ( Rho in ﬁlopodia ) seems to play a more prominent role in the formation of mDia2 - dependent ﬁlopodia than Cdc42 ( 165 ) . Cdc42 may not be involved in targeting mDia2 to the tip of ﬁlopodia , but simply contributes to its activation ( 166 ) . In Dictyo - stelium , dDia2 also localizes at the tip of ﬁlopodia and is required for their extension ( 199 ) . The ability of dDia2 to induce ﬁlopodia also depends on the bundling activity of the F - actin binding domain of VASP ( 198 ) . Formins are modular proteins characterized by the presence of two conserved domains : formin homology 1 and 2 ( FH1 and FH2 ) . The FH1 domain contains polypro - line repeats that interact with SH3 domains and proﬁlin ( 58 , 241 ) . The FH2 domain nucleates actin ﬁlaments by stabilizing an actin dimer ( 106 , 170 , 171 , 192 ) . Formins exist in an autoinhibited conformation in which the COOH - terminal DAD ( diaphanous autoregula - tory domain ) interacts with the NH 2 - terminal DID ( diaph - anous inhibitory domain ) and masks the nucleating do - main FH2 ( 1 , 119 ) . Biochemical and structural studies demonstrate that the binding of Rho - GTPases to the NH 2 - terminal GBD domain present in most formin isoforms releases this autoinhibitory interaction ( 110 , 119 , 188 ) . In addition to its nucleating activity , the FH2 domain binds to the barbed end and acts as a “leaky capper” by slowing down the elongation and dissociation rates ( 170 , 171 , 266 ) without affecting the critical concentration . The resolution of the crystal structure of the FH2 domain of the yeast formin Bni1p revealed a “donut - shaped” struc - ture corresponding to a ﬂexible antiparallel dimer of elon - gated FH2 domains ( 252 ) . The linker between the FH1 and FH2 domains that mediates the dimerization is re - quired for the nucleating activity of the FH2 domain ( 202 ) . In the presence of proﬁlin , a single actin ﬁlament , whose barbed end is bound to a formin ( mDia1 ) - coated bead , grows rapidly by processive barbed end assembly for up to 4 , 000 consecutive steps . This remarkable observation demonstrates that proﬁlin induces a switch in the func - tion of the formin mDia1 from a leaker capper to a pro - cessive motor of actin assembly . In this process , mDia1 increases the rate constant for proﬁlin - actin association to the barbed end by 15 - fold ( 187 ) . Such a processive activity requires a source of free energy . mDia1 is not a canonic motor itself but , in agreement with the deﬁnition of a molecular motor , it accelerates ATP hydrolysis asso - ciated with proﬁlin - actin assembly to dissociate proﬁlin from the barbed end allowing further elongation ( 186 , 187 ) ( Fig . 5 ) . Although it was reported that several form - ins catalyze the processive growth of ADP - actin ﬁlaments in the absence of proﬁlin ( 105 ) , a theoretical model failed to accommodate these data using the published K d for proﬁlin binding to actin ( 231 ) . The structure of TMR - actin in complex with the FH2 domain of Bni1p suggested a mechanism for formin processivity . In this structure , the ﬁlament sits in the center of the formin ring where each FH2 domain interacts with two actin subunits . On the basis of this structure , the formin dimer makes contact with the three terminal subunits at the barbed end , con - sistent with its nucleating function . One protomer of the formin dimer interacts with the ﬁrst ( terminal ) and sec - ond subunits ; the second protomer interacts with the second and third subunits . Release of one of the two bonds between the second actin subunit and one pro - tomer has to be hypothesized to uncap the barbed end and allow processive growth ( 158 ) ( Fig . 5 ) . This dissoci - ation could be mediated by ATP hydrolysis and the result - ing proﬁlin dissociation ( 186 , 187 ) . The helical structure of the ﬁlament implies a rotation of the formin around the barbed end . However , the absence of supercoils in teth - ered ﬁlaments emanating from an immobilized formin ruled out this possibility ( 107 ) . Although a theoretical model has been proposed ( 201 ) , this paradox is still not understood . In a minimum motility medium containing ADF , pro - ﬁlin , ATP , and actin , mDia1 - coated beads move at a much faster rate ( 20 (cid:2) m / min ) ( 187 ) than the Arp2 / 3 - dependent N - WASP beads ( 2 (cid:2) m / min ; Ref . 249 ) . This movement is further accelerated by gelsolin , but in contrast to Arp2 / 3 - dependent movement , gelsolin poisons mDia1 - coated beads resulting in a transient movement ( 187 ) . These observations demonstrate that the activation of two dif - ferent nucleation machineries ( N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 and form - ins ) at the plasma membrane , in the presence of the same pool of soluble proteins , is sufﬁcient to generate two actin networks with different structural and dynamic proper - ties . This may explain why lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia , which are characterized by different actin organization and dynamics , coexist in the same cells . 500 LE CLAINCHE AND CARLIER Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m III . ACTIN DYNAMICS AND CELL - MATRIX ADHESION In order for cells to migrate rapidly , adhesions form at the leading edge and disassemble at the trailing edge . In these structures , adhesion is mediated by integrins , a large family of heterodimeric transmembrane receptors that connect the extracellular matrix to the actin cytoskel - eton . Activation of integrins results in a variety of intra - cellular responses including the phosphorylation - depen - dent recruitment of signaling proteins . This part focuses on actin dynamics associated with cell - matrix adhesion . Therefore , the role of major signaling proteins such as the adaptor paxillin and the kinases Src and FAK is beyond the scope of this review ( for reviews , see Refs . 25 , 33 , 229 ) . A . Adhesion Controls the Mechanical Coupling Between the Actin Cytoskeleton and the Substrate Cell locomotion depends on the protrusion of the leading edge , the traction of the cell body , and the retrac - tion of the tail . In these processes , cell matrix adhesion acts as a “molecular clutch” that controls the mechanical coupling between actin dynamics and the substrate ( 24 , 83 , 120 , 145 , 215 , 216 ) . When the clutch is engaged , the force generated by actin assembly at the leading edge of the lamellipodium is converted into protrusion ( Fig . 6 B ) . In contrast , when the clutch is disengaged , the slippage that occurs between the polymerizing actin network and adhesions increases the retrograde ﬂow and decreases the protrusion rate ( Fig . 6 A ) . This molecular clutch also controls the transmission of the actomyosin contractile force applied on focal adhesions that enables the traction of the cell body and the retraction of the tail ( Fig . 6 , A and B ) . In addition to transmitting the force , cell - matrix ad - hesions behave as mechanosensors . The tension gener - ated by the actomyosin contraction induces focal adhe - sion maturation during which the structure grows , re - cruits new actin binding proteins , and initiates actin assembly ( see Refs . 244 , 253 , 261 , 263 for reviews ) . The molecular clutch engagement is determined by regulated molecular interactions at different levels : inte - grin - substrate , integrin - actin binding proteins , and actin ﬁlaments - actin binding proteins . Until recently , it was FIG . 5 . Model for the processive assembly of proﬁlin - actin by the formin mDia1 . 1 ) The assembly of proﬁlin - actin to a formin - bound barbed end results in a situation in which the two terminal actin subunits bind proﬁlin and cap the barbed end . Each FH2 protomer of the mDia1 dimer makes two contacts with the terminal subunits at a barbed end ; the ﬁrst protomer interacts with the ﬁrst and second subunits , and the second protomer interacts with the second and third subunits . 2 ) ATP hydrolysis induces the dissociation of proﬁlin . 3 ) The translocation of one FH2 protomer releases one of the two actin - formin bonds . 4 ) Addition of the next proﬁlin - actin subunit to the uncapped formin - bound barbed end . ACTIN DYNAMICS IN CELL MIGRATION 501 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m difﬁcult to measure the relative contribution of these interfaces and their individual components to the force transmission . A recent work that combined TIRFM and speckle ﬂuorescence microscopy ( SFM ) revealed differ - ent degrees of correlated motions between actin binding proteins , integrin , and the retrograde ﬂow of actin ﬁla - ments in focal adhesions . This study showed that (cid:1) - acti - nin displays the highest coupling ; vinculin and talin motion was only partially coupled , whereas integrin was not coupled to actin ﬁlaments ( 83 ) . Similar conclusions were derived from spatiotemporal image correlation spectroscopy ( STICS ) ( 24 ) . These experiments suggested that vinculin and talin form transient linkages that enable a partial transmission of force to the substrate . Although it is still difﬁcult to predict the ability of known actin binding proteins to transmit the force , we can anticipate several possible mechanisms . The molec - ular clutch engagement should depend , in part at least , on the association and dissociation rates of a variety of actin binding proteins present in focal adhesions . In addition , the ability of several actin binding proteins to block or accelerate actin ﬁlament barbed end elongation may con - trol the force transmission differently . For example , a true capping protein like tensin , which blocks actin ﬁlament barbed end elongation ( see sect . III C2 C ) , is expected to provide a stable link and an efﬁcient force transmission . In contrast , a nucleator and processive motor like the formin mDia1 that accelerates the elongation of actin ﬁlament barbed ends ( see sect . II D2 ) should compensate the actomyosin tension . Finally , the tension generated by stress ﬁbers also depends on their mechanical properties . A protein like (cid:1) - actinin that increases the stiffness of stress ﬁbers by bundling actin ﬁlaments may facilitate the transmission of force . How these activities are integrated and / or sequentially well orchestrated to ﬁnely tune the force transmission during focal adhesion maturation is not understood . B . Description of Cell - Matrix Adhesions Adhesion structures can be classiﬁed into focal com - plexes , focal adhesions , and ﬁbrillar adhesions . The clas - siﬁcation depends on their size , shape , intracellular local - ization , molecular composition , and dynamics ( see Refs . 244 , 253 , 261 , 263 for reviews ) . Focal complexes are highly dynamic nascent adhesions that disassemble and reassemble at the leading edge during protrusion in a process called adhesion turnover . Focal complexes ap - pear as small dotlike structures of 1 (cid:2) m 2 at the cell periphery of spreading cells or at the leading edge of migrating cells . These structures are associated with a loose actin meshwork ( 190 ) . Early focal complexes con - tain (cid:3) 3 - integrin , talin , and paxillin . Vinculin , (cid:1) - actinin , VASP , and FAK appear in late focal complexes ( 111 , 190 , 260 , 261 ) ( Fig . 7 A ) . In slow moving cells , focal complexes that did not disassemble mature into focal adhesions ( or focal contacts ) of 2 – 5 (cid:2) m long in response to RhoA signaling . Focal adhesions are more stable and display a slower turnover than focal complexes . They are located at the cell periphery and more centrally in less motile re - gions , associated with the end of stress ﬁbers . These structures contain high levels of vinculin , talin , paxillin , zyxin , (cid:1) - actinin , VASP , FAK , phosphotyrosine proteins , and integrin (cid:1) V (cid:3) 3 ( 261 ) and actopaxin ( 150 ) ( Fig . 7 B ) . Fibrillar adhesions that arise from focal adhesions are elongated structures associated with ﬁbronectin ﬁbrils and located more centrally in cells . In contrast to focal FIG . 6 . Adhesion acts as a “molecular clutch” to convert the force generated by actin assembly into protrusion . In these panels , the actin network is represented in gray . The newly polymerized actin is represented in pink . A : the molecular clutch is disengaged ; there is no connection between adhesions and the actin cytoskeleton . In this situation , no protrusion occurs because actin treadmilling is mainly converted into retrograde ﬂow . B : the molecular clutch is fully engaged . The strong connection between the polymerizing actin network and the substrate results in membrane protrusion . Moreover , this connection enables the conversion of the acto - myosin tension into traction of the cell body and retraction of the tail . 502 LE CLAINCHE AND CARLIER Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m adhesions , ﬁbrillar adhesions are not associated with stress ﬁbers but only thin actin cables and contain high levels of tensin and (cid:1) 5 (cid:3) 1 - integrin , only traces of paxillin , and no vinculin ( Fig . 7 C ) . The elongation of ﬁbrillar ad - hesions depends on the deformability of the extracellular matrix ( 264 ) . In addition to the classical focal complexes and focal adhesions , several cell types form unique adhesion struc - tures . Podosomes and invadopodia are two actin - rich structures that combine adhesion and matrix degradation properties in physiological and pathological invasion pro - cesses ( for recent reviews , see Refs . 28 , 121 ) . C . Actin Dynamics Associated With Adhesions 1 . Initiation of actin assembly at adhesion sites Although the nucleation of actin ﬁlaments in lamelli - podia and ﬁlopodia is now well understood , less is known about the initiation of actin assembly at adhesion sites . In cells , microinjected rhodamine - labeled mono - meric actin incorporates ﬁrst in focal complexes at the cell periphery and slightly later in stress ﬁbers ( 68 ) . Live cell microscopy also shows that actin structures appear as small spots at the leading edge and extend into stress ﬁbers ( 239 ) . Whether these ﬁrst observations correspond to the elongation of captured preexisting actin ﬁlaments or nucleation of actin ﬁlaments or both is still unclear . The following sections give an overview of molecular pathways that have been proposed to initiate actin assem - bly in early focal complexes and mature focal adhesions . A ) INITIATION OF ACTIN ASSEMBLY AT FOCAL COMPLEXES . Ex - tensive research has been carried out to identify the mo - lecular pathways linking integrins to actin assembly at adhesions sites . Among the downstream targets of Rac1 that control the formation of focal complexes , recent ﬁndings identiﬁed the Arp2 / 3 complex as a potential actin nucleator in nascent focal complexes . Arp2 / 3 has been colocalized with vinculin at the leading edge in focal complexlike structures . These authors also showed that vinculin interacts directly with Arp2 / 3 . In addition , cells transfected with a vinculin point mutant , which does not interact with Arp2 / 3 , showed defects in lamellipodium extension and cell spreading ( 50 ) . However , vinculin does not activate Arp2 / 3 in vitro ( 50 ) , and the known activators of Arp2 / 3 ( N - WASP , WAVEs , and cortactin ) have not been localized at focal complexes . Although the mechanism of actin ﬁlament nucleation at focal complexes remains elu - sive , several formins regulated by Rac1 appear as inter - esting candidates . VASP , which displays a weak nucleat - ing activity in vitro ( 112 ) and localizes to focal complexes ( 176 ) , is also a good candidate . Finally , the study of multiprotein complexes made of early components of focal complexes like talin , vinculin , and others could reveal unanticipated nucleating activities . B ) FORMATION OF STRESS FIBERS ASSOCIATED WITH MATURE FOCAL ADHESIONS . Stress ﬁbers are contractile bundles of actin and myosin associated with focal adhesions . These structures are distributed in three classes : ventral stress ﬁbers that are located at the ventral cell surface and associated with focal adhesions at both ends , dorsal stress ﬁbers that are associated with focal adhesions at one end , and transverse arcs that are not associated with focal adhesions ( 82 , 205 ) ( Fig . 1 ) . The force applied by these structures to focal adhesions enables the retraction of the rear of the cell . Although the contractile actomyo - sin array is organized differently in other cell types , its function remains the same ( 204 ) . Stress ﬁbers contain antiparallel actin ﬁlaments ( 45 ) , myosin II ( 62 ) , and sev - eral actin ﬁlament binding proteins , including (cid:1) - actinin ( 113 ) . Stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions are functionally interactive structures . Focal adhesions initiate the elon - gation of stress ﬁbers , and the tension generated by stress ﬁbers enhances the growth of mechanosensitive focal adhesions . Accordingly , the inhibition of myosin II - medi - ated contractility using different strategies affects both stress ﬁbers and focal adhesion formation ( 14 , 38 , 76 , 95 , 163 , 190 , 233 ) . The formation of stress ﬁbers connected to focal adhesions involves the organization of contractile acto - myosin bundles and actin assembly in response to RhoA ( 177 ) . First , the GTP - bound RhoA activates ROCK ( Rho - kinase ) that phosphorylates the myosin II light chain ( MLC ) and inhibits the MLC phosphatase . The phosphor - ylated myosin II assembles into myosin ﬁlaments and associates with actin ﬁlaments to form contractile stress ﬁbers ( 102 ) ( Fig . 7 B ) . The induction of contractility by the RhoA - ROCK pathway is required for the formation of focal adhesions ( 5 ) and seems to be the major function of this pathway since the inhibition of RhoA is bypassed by an external force ( 178 ) . The myosin II - driven contractility of stress ﬁbers im - plies that these structures are composed of actin ﬁla - ments with barbed ends facing focal adhesions and actin ﬁlaments with reverse polarity . If it becomes clear that the ﬁrst population of ﬁlaments is nucleated or recruited by focal adhesion proteins , the origin of the second pop - ulation is unclear . The constant rufﬂing at the cell front and the lateral ﬂow could bring preexisting actin ﬁlaments with opposite polarity that associate into stress ﬁbers through myosin ( 204 ) . Accordingly , the microinjection of rhodamine - labeled phalloidin revealed the recruitment of existing ﬁlaments by stress ﬁbers ( 238 ) . Alternatively , the binding of bipolar myosin mini - ﬁlaments to the ﬁrst pop - ulation of ﬁlaments may initiate polymerization of ﬁla - ments of opposite polarity . To understand how stress ﬁbers are assembled , a detailed analysis of their structure , in terms of number of free and capped barbed ends and pointed ends , would be useful . ACTIN DYNAMICS IN CELL MIGRATION 503 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m 504 LE CLAINCHE AND CARLIER Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m In addition to the actomyosin contractility , several lines of evidence suggest that RhoA activates actin assem - bly through the actin nucleating factor mDia1 . 1 ) The simultaneous expression of ROCK and formin mDia1 re - capitulates the formation of focal adhesions and stress ﬁbers ( 240 ) . 2 ) In cells where RhoA is inhibited , the transfection of constitutively active mutants of mDia1 is sufﬁcient to restore the growth of focal adhesions in response to an external force . 3 ) Inhibition of mDia1 leads to a decrease in the number of stress ﬁbers ( 226 , 240 ) . 4 ) The autoinhibitory domain of mDia1 inhibits actin assembly induced by puriﬁed integrin complexes in vitro ( 29 ) . 5 ) The siRNA knock down of mDia1 affects both the dynamics and the morphology of dorsal stress ﬁbers ( 82 ) . However , the total depletion of mDia1 does not abolish the formation of stress ﬁbers but only decreases their elongation rate ( 82 ) , suggesting that the major function of mDia1 is probably not to nucleate the ﬁlaments but to link their processive growth to focal adhesions ( 187 ) . Since focal adhesions are the result of the maturation of focal complexes , it is also possible that the actin ﬁlaments present in stress ﬁbers have been nucleated earlier in focal complexes . 2 . Function and regulation of major actin binding proteins A ) VINCULIN . Vinculin is a ubiquitously expressed actin ﬁlament binding protein that localizes in late focal com - plexes and focal adhesions . Vinculin is considered as a tumor suppressor ( 181 ) because vinculin null ﬁbroblasts are less adherent and show increased cell migration ( 251 ) , whereas overexpression of vinculin inhibits cell migration ( 180 ) . Interestingly , in vinculin null ﬁbroblasts , the num - ber and the size of focal adhesions are reduced , whereas their turnover is faster . This last observation together with the high level of vinculin in focal adhesions suggest that this protein plays a key role in the stabilization of the adhesive structure during the maturation of focal com - plexes into focal adhesions . This large protein of 1 , 066 amino acids ( 116 kDa ) is made of a NH 2 - terminal globular head ( Vh ) and a COOH - terminal elongated tail ( Vt ) linked by a central polypro - line - rich domain ( Fig . 7 D ) . Vinculin is regulated by an intramolecular interaction in which the head interacts with the tail ( 94 ) . This intramolecular interaction masks the actin ﬁlament binding domain located in the tail The binding of several ligands including talin , (cid:1) - actinin , and the Shigella protein IpaA to the head domain of the autoinhibited vinculin disrupts the intramolecular inter - action and exposes the cryptic actin binding domain . This process is deﬁned as “activation” of vinculin ( see Refs . 47 , 265 for reviews ) . Vinculin binding to actin ﬁlaments is activated by a peptide corresponding to one of the numerous vinculin binding sites ( VBS ) of talin ( 11 , 67 ) . The recent resolution of vinculin crystal structure in its active and inactive states ( 9 , 89 ) revealed that the head domain undergoes dramatic structural changes ( an helical bundle conver - sion ) upon talin VBS binding ( 89 ) . However , the concen - tration of talin peptide at which 50 % of vinculin is bound to F - actin is (cid:3) 500 (cid:2) M in a cosedimentation assay ( 10 ) because the head - to - tail binding ( K d (cid:1) 20 – 50 nM between isolated domains and (cid:4) 1 nM for the full - length protein ) is stronger than the binding of the talin peptide to the head ( K d (cid:1) 400 nM ) ( 9 ) . The very low apparent afﬁnity of talin for full - length vinculin suggests that in vivo the activation of vinculin is a complex process in which several ligands cooperate to activate vinculin ( 9 ) . In support to this hy - pothesis , the disruption of the head - to - tail interaction is a prerequisite for the formation of vinculin - talin complexes in cells ( 41 ) . In addition , the binding of PIP 2 to the tail domain induces a conformational change in vinculin that exposes the talin binding site ( 66 ) . Similarly , the binding of VASP to a FPPP motif in the linker region increases the afﬁnity of the tail domain for PIP 2 ( 84 ) . PIP 2 and F - actin binding to vinculin are mutually exclusive ( 210 ) , suggest - ing that other combinations of ligands induce actin ﬁla - ment binding to vinculin . Actin ﬁlaments also contribute to the activation of vinculin ( 35 ) . The cryo - EM structure of the tail domain bound to actin ﬁlaments revealed the presence of two actin binding sites ; one is partly masked by the intramolecular interaction with the head domain , whereas the second is exposed , opening the possibility for actin to cooperate with other ligands to fully unfold FIG . 7 . Actin binding proteins in focal complexes , focal adhesions , and ﬁbrillar adhesions . A : focal complexes are formed in response to Rac1 signaling . Nascent focal complexes contain integrin (cid:3) 3 , talin ( Ta ) , and Paxillin ( Pa ) . In this simpliﬁed representation , VASP ( V ) , tensin ( Ten ) , FAK , (cid:1) - actinin ( A ) , and vinculin ( Vin ) are absent from focal complexes and appear only in focal adhesions . These proteins are actually present in late focal complexes . B : the maturation of focal complexes into focal adhesions occurs in response to RhoA signaling . In this process , RhoA stimulates the contractility of stress ﬁbers by activating ROCK . ROCK phosphorylates the myosin light chain and inhibits the myosin light - chain phosphatase ( MLC Pase ) . Although mDia1 has never been localized in focal adhesions , several lines of evidence suggest that it contributes to the nucleation and elongation of actin ﬁlaments downstream of RhoA in these structures . Focal adhesions contain integrin (cid:3) 3 and a variety of actin binding proteins : the side binders and / or cross - linkers ﬁlamin ( F ) , (cid:1) - actinin ( A ) , talin ( Ta ) , vinculin ( Vin ) , (cid:1) - and (cid:3) - parvins ( (cid:1) , (cid:3) ) , actopaxin ( AP ) , the leaky capper vinculin ( Vin ) , and the capping protein tensin ( Ten ) . C : ﬁbrillar adhesions contain high levels of tensin . D : domains and binding partners of vinculin , talin , tensin , and (cid:1) - actinin . CH , calponin homology ; SP , spectrin repeat ; EF , EF hand motif ; ABD , actin binding domain ; SH2 , Src homology 2 ; PTB , phoshotyrosine binding domain ; FERM , four - point - one , ezrin , radixin , moesin ; Int , integrin binding domain ; VBS , vinculin binding site ; YP proteins , tyrosine - phosphorylated proteins . ACTIN DYNAMICS IN CELL MIGRATION 505 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m vinculin in its active state ( 91 ) . However , Bois et al . ( 19 ) challenged this combinatorial mechanism and proposed that the high - afﬁnity binding of VBS peptides of talin or (cid:1) - actinin is sufﬁcient to activate vinculin ( 19 ) . The regulation of actin binding to vinculin has been very well documented , but little is known about the func - tion of this interaction . The vinculin binding protein IpaA from the bacteria Shigella , which is injected in the host cell during bacteria entry , provides valuable insights into the physiological function of vinculin . In vivo , IpaA in - duces a vinculin - dependent actin depolymerization ( 22 , 228 ) . In vitro , the IpaA - vinculin complex prevents actin assembly ( 22 ) . The binding of the COOH - terminal domain of IpaA to the head domain of vinculin is sufﬁcient to unmask the tail domain , promote actin ﬁlament binding , and partially cap actin ﬁlament barbed ends ( 174 ) . Struc - tural studies demonstrate that the COOH terminus of IpaA mimics the activation of vinculin by talin ( 74 , 90 ) , sug - gesting that the “leaky capping” of actin ﬁlament barbed ends at focal adhesions could represent the cellular func - tion of activated vinculin . As mentioned earlier , the turn - over of vinculin at focal adhesions is partially coupled to that of actin ﬁlaments , suggesting a role for vinculin in the mechanical coupling between actin ﬁlaments and the sub - strate ( 24 , 83 ) . Whether the leaky capping function of vinculin contributes to the force transmission in focal adhesions is an open issue . B ) TALIN . Several studies suggest that talin is an im - portant component of adhesions that links the integrin receptors to the actin cytoskeleton . In C . elegans , both the RNAi knockdown of talin and integrin knockout affect cytoskeleton organization and cell migration ( 44 ) . In Dro - sophila , talin is essential for integrin function ( 27 ) . In mice , talin knockout provokes cell migration defects , leading to an early embryonic lethality ( 147 ) . The study of talin (cid:2) / (cid:2) ES cells , the microinjection of dominant nega - tive forms and antibodies as well as the RNAi knockdown revealed that talin is essential for focal adhesion assembly ( 2 , 77 , 134 , 154 , 169 ) . Force measurement experiments demonstrated a requirement of talin for the 2 pN bond corresponding to the integrin - actin linkage in nascent focal complexes ( 92 ) . Talin is also required for the rein - forcement of the integrin - actin linkage and the assembly of adhesions in response to an external force ( 64 ) . Talin is a large protein ( 270 kDa ) made of a small globular head domain and a large elongated rod domain that associates into an antiparallel homodimer . The head domain contains a FERM ( four - point - one , ezrin , radixin , moesin ) domain that directly binds integrin (cid:1) IIb , (cid:3) 1 and (cid:3) 3 cytoplasmic tails , FAK , layilin , PIP 2 , and actin ﬁla - ments . The binding of PIP 2 to talin induces a conforma - tional change of the protein and enhances the interaction between the cytoplasmic tail of (cid:3) 1 - integrin and talin ( 133 ) . The rod contains an I / LWEQ actin ﬁlament binding do - main . This domain also mediates dimerization and con - tains multiple vinculin binding sites ( see Refs . 47 , 149 for reviews ) ( Fig . 7 D ) . Talin connects actin ﬁlaments to focal adhesions di - rectly through the I / LWEQ and the FERM domains and indirectly through the vinculin binding sites . The I / LWEQ domain is regulated by an intramolecular interaction in which an upstream (cid:1) - helix ( USH ) masks the actin binding site ( 200 , 257 ) . So far , the mechanism of activation of the I / LWEQ domain in focal adhesions , the respective impor - tance of the two actin binding domains of talin , and the synergy between talin and vinculin in the anchorage of ﬁlament barbed ends at focal complexes and focal adhe - sions are challenging issues . The role of talin is not only to link the cytoplasmic tail of (cid:3) - integrins to the actin cytoskeleton but also to increase the afﬁnity of the extracellular domain of inte - grin for the extracellular matrix ( 220 , 222 ) . In Drosophila , a mutation in the integrin binding site located in the talin head domain reduced integrin activation but had no effect on the ability of talin to connect integrin to the actin cytoskeleton , suggesting that these two functions of talin are regulated by distinct mechanisms ( 222 ) . C ) TENSIN . This modular protein of 1 , 744 amino acids binds to the side of actin ﬁlaments through its NH 2 - termi - nal domain and to the barbed end of ﬁlaments through a central domain . The COOH terminus of tensin contains a SH2 ( Src homology 2 ) domain that interacts with tyrosine - phosphorylated proteins and a phoshotyrosine binding domain ( PTB ) that interacts with the cytoplasmic tail of (cid:3) - integrins ( see Ref . 122 for a review ) ( Fig . 7 D ) . The study of tensin knockout mice revealed that this protein plays an important role in kidney and skeletal muscles ( 87 , 124 ) . At the cellular level , the localization of tensin at focal adhesions ( 123 ) is mediated by a NH 2 - terminal motif distinct from the actin binding site and the PTB domain ( 37 ) . Tensin also plays a critical role in cell migration . This function depends on both the focal adhesion targeting domains and a functional SH2 do - main ( 36 , 37 ) . Tensin negatively regulates actin assembly by cap - ping the barbed end of ﬁlaments through its central do - main . This capping activity has been the subject of de - bates . The ﬁrst fragment of tensin puriﬁed from chicken gizzard called “insertin” was described to inhibit partially barbed end assembly , allowing insertion of monomers between barbed ends and barbed end - bound insertin ( 191 , 246 ) . However , further studies showed that tensin is a true capping protein that completely inhibits actin assem - bly ( 39 ) . The capping activity of tensin provides a mech - anism to control the transmission of force between the actin cytoskeleton and focal adhesions . D ) (cid:1) - ACTININ . (cid:1) - Actinin is an abundant cytoskeletal protein that belongs to the family of structurally related proteins spectrin , dystrophin , and utrophin . This modular protein contains a NH 2 - terminal calponin homology ( CH ) 506 LE CLAINCHE AND CARLIER Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m domain that interacts with actin ﬁlaments , central spec - trin repeats ( SP ) , and COOH - terminal EF hand motifs ( see Refs . 23 , 156 for reviews ) ( Fig . 7 D ) . (cid:1) - Actinin is a homodimer that cross - links ﬁlaments into parallel bun - dles . The presence of (cid:1) - actinin along stress ﬁbers and its ability to bundle actin ﬁlaments suggest that it plays an important role in controlling the stiffness of these ﬁbers , which may inﬂuence the transmission of the contractile force . In focal adhesions , (cid:1) - actinin interacts with several proteins including the cytoplasmic tail of (cid:3) - integrins ( 157 ) , vinculin ( 234 ) , and zyxin ( 46 ) . The disruption of the integrin - (cid:1) - actinin interaction by chromophore - assisted la - ser inactivation ( CALI ) induces the retraction of stress ﬁbers , indicating that (cid:1) - actinin is one of the major links between actin ﬁlaments and focal adhesions ( 173 ) . The VBS may contribute to the activation of vinculin in focal adhesions . Like talin and the Shigella protein IpaA , (cid:1) - ac - tinin binds to vinculin head domain and disrupts the head - to - tail intramolecular interaction ( 18 ) . Whether (cid:1) - ac - tinin reveals the barbed end capping function of vinculin has yet to be demonstrated . Interestingly , the VBS of (cid:1) - actinin is buried in one spectrin repeat located in the rod domain ( 259 ) . A similar spectrin repeat undergoes dramatic structural changes to form stable intermediates upon mechanical stress ( 3 ) , suggesting that (cid:1) - actinin could be a mechanosensitive protein that recruits and activates vinculin in response to actomyosin contraction . IV . CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES In the last years , the underlying principles that gov - ern actin dynamics associated with membrane protrusion and cell - matrix adhesion during cell migration have started to be unraveled . The development of quantitative cell biology approaches constantly reﬁnes our working models . For instance , speckle ﬂuorescence microscopy showed that the observed rates of ﬁlament debranching and of capping protein turnover are higher in vivo than the rates measured in vitro , suggesting that in vivo these processes are controlled by mechanisms that are not fully understood . In addition , growing evidence for the contri - bution of a second actin network , the lamella in mem - brane protrusion raised new questions , such as the nature of the mechanism that controls the coordination and structural cohesivity between the lamellar and lamellipo - dial actin meshworks . Since the growth of the lamella is independent of Arp2 / 3 and ADF , new important concepts in actin nucleation and turnover are expected to emerge from the study of lamella - speciﬁc actin binding proteins . Finally , the discovery that membrane curvature proteins contribute to the formation of membrane protrusions changed our simple view that the protrusive force is only generated by actin assembly . Understanding the regulation of actin assembly in cell - matrix adhesions and its role in the force transmis - sion to the substrate are even more challenging . Cur - rently , no model can explain how the few known activi - ties are spatiotemporally orchestrated in adhesions . Therefore , the full biochemical characterization of indi - vidual actin binding proteins and complexes present in adhesions as well as an in - depth dissection of the corre - lated motions of this proteins in living cells are required . Despite X - ray structures of individual components and complexes , cryo - EM structures of actin ﬁlaments associ - ated with individual components and AFM low - resolution picture of the actin network associated with focal adhe - sions ( 61 ) , our understanding of several aspects of adhe - sion is still limited by the lack of an ultrastructural model of actin ﬁlaments barbed end - associated complexes . Cryo - EM studies on whole focal adhesions could ﬁll this gap . The molecular processes underlying the mechano - sensitivity of focal adhesion is one of the most exciting questions ( for reviews , see Refs . 15 , 65 ) . The identity of the deformable proteins that transmit the force of acto - myosin contractility to focal adhesions and the mecha - nism by which these proteins induce the maturation of focal adhesions is still an open issue . Insight into these questions requires the development of conformation - sen - sitive biosensors of focal adhesions proteins . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Address for reprint requests and other correspondence : C . Le Clainche , Laboratoire d’Enzymologie et Biochimie Structurales , CNRS , 91198 Gif - sur - Yvette , France ( e - mail : leclainc @ lebs . cnrs - gif . fr ) . GRANTS M . - F . Carlier is supported by the Ligue contre le Cancer ( e´quipe labellise´e ) , by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche ( ANR , PCV ) , and by Human Frontier Science Program ( HFSP ) Research Grant RGP0072 / 2003 - C . REFERENCES 1 . Alberts AS . Identiﬁcation of a carboxyl - terminal diaphanous - re - lated formin homology protein autoregulatory domain . J Biol Chem 276 : 2824 – 2830 , 2001 . 2 . Albiges - Rizo C , Frachet P , Block MR . Downregulation of talin alters cell adhesion and the processing of the alpha 5 beta 1 integrin . J Cell Sci 108 : 3317 – 3329 , 1995 . 3 . Altmann SM , Grunberg RG , Lenne PF , Ylanne J , Raae A , Herbert K , Saraste M , Nilges M , Horber JK . Pathways and intermediates in forced unfolding of spectrin repeats . Structure 10 : 1085 – 1096 , 2002 . 4 . Amann KJ , Pollard TD . The Arp2 / 3 complex nucleates actin ﬁlament branches from the sides of pre - existing ﬁlaments . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 306 – 310 , 2001 . 5 . Amano M , Chihara K , Kimura K , Fukata Y , Nakamura N , Matsuura Y , Kaibuchi K . Formation of actin stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions enhanced by Rho - kinase . Science 275 : 1308 – 1311 , 1997 . 6 . Andrianantoandro E , Pollard TD . Mechanism of actin ﬁlament turnover by severing and nucleation at different concentrations of ADF / coﬁlin . Mol Cell 24 : 13 – 23 , 2006 . 7 . Anton IM , de la Fuente MA , Sims TN , Freeman S , Ramesh N , Hartwig JH , Dustin ML , Geha RS . WIP deﬁciency reveals a ACTIN DYNAMICS IN CELL MIGRATION 507 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m differential role for WIP and the actin cytoskeleton in T and B cell activation . Immunity 16 : 193 – 204 , 2002 . 8 . Arber S , Barbayannis FA , Hanser H , Schneider C , Stanyon CA , Bernard O , Caroni P . Regulation of actin dynamics through phosphorylation of coﬁlin by LIM - kinase . Nature 393 : 805 – 809 , 1998 . 9 . Bakolitsa C , Cohen DM , Bankston LA , Bobkov AA , Cadwell GW , Jennings L , Critchley DR , Craig SW , Liddington RC . Structural basis for vinculin activation at sites of cell adhesion . Nature 430 : 583 – 586 , 2004 . 10 . Bass MD , Patel B , Barsukov IG , Fillingham IJ , Mason R , Smith BJ , Bagshaw CR , Critchley DR . Further characterization of the interaction between the cytoskeletal proteins talin and vin - culin . Biochem J 362 : 761 – 768 , 2002 . 11 . Bass MD , Smith BJ , Prigent SA , Critchley DR . Talin contains three similar vinculin - binding sites predicted to form an amphi - pathic helix . Biochem J 341 : 257 – 263 , 1999 . 12 . Bear JE , Svitkina TM , Krause M , Schafer DA , Loureiro JJ , Strasser GA , Maly IV , Chaga OY , Cooper JA , Borisy GG , Gertler FB . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin ﬁlament capping regulates ﬁbroblast motility . Cell 109 : 509 – 521 , 2002 . 13 . Bensenor LB , Kan HM , Wang N , Wallrabe H , Davidson LA , Cai Y , Schafer DA , Bloom GS . IQGAP1 regulates cell motility by linking growth factor signaling to actin assembly . J Cell Sci 120 : 658 – 669 , 2007 . 14 . Bershadsky A , Chausovsky A , Becker E , Lyubimova A , Geiger B . Involvement of microtubules in the control of adhesion - depen - dent signal transduction . Curr Biol 6 : 1279 – 1289 , 1996 . 15 . Bershadsky AD , Balaban NQ , Geiger B . Adhesion - dependent cell mechanosensitivity . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 19 : 677 – 695 , 2003 . 16 . Blanchoin L , Amann KJ , Higgs HN , Marchand JB , Kaiser DA , Pollard TD . Direct observation of dendritic actin ﬁlament net - works nucleated by Arp2 / 3 complex and WASP / Scar proteins . Nature 404 : 1007 – 1011 , 2000 . 17 . Blanchoin L , Pollard TD , Mullins RD . Interactions of ADF / coﬁlin , Arp2 / 3 complex , capping protein and proﬁlin in remodeling of branched actin ﬁlament networks . Curr Biol 10 : 1273 – 1282 , 2000 . 18 . Bois PR , Borgon RA , Vonrhein C , Izard T . Structural dynamics of alpha - actinin - vinculin interactions . Mol Cell Biol 25 : 6112 – 6122 , 2005 . 19 . Bois PR , O’Hara BP , Nietlispach D , Kirkpatrick J , Izard T . The vinculin binding sites of talin and alpha - actinin are sufﬁcient to activate vinculin . J Biol Chem 281 : 7228 – 7236 , 2006 . 20 . Boquet I , Boujemaa R , Carlier MF , Preat T . Ciboulot regulates actin assembly during Drosophila brain metamorphosis . Cell 102 : 797 – 808 , 2000 . 21 . Boujemaa - Paterski R , Gouin E , Hansen G , Samarin S , Le Clainche C , Didry D , Dehoux P , Cossart P , Kocks C , Carlier MF , Pantaloni D . Listeria protein ActA mimics WASp family proteins : it activates ﬁlament barbed end branching by Arp2 / 3 complex . Biochemistry 40 : 11390 – 11404 , 2001 . 22 . Bourdet - Sicard R , Rudiger M , Jockusch BM , Gounon P , San - sonetti PJ , Nhieu GT . Binding of the Shigella protein IpaA to vinculin induces F - actin depolymerization . EMBO J 18 : 5853 – 5862 , 1999 . 23 . Broderick MJ and Winder SJ . Spectrin , alpha - actinin , dystro - phin . Adv Protein Chem 70 : 203 – 246 , 2005 . 24 . Brown CM , Hebert B , Kolin DL , Zareno J , Whitmore L , Hor - witz AR , Wiseman PW . Probing the integrin - actin linkage using high - resolution protein velocity mapping . J Cell Sci 119 : 5204 – 5214 , 2006 . 25 . Brown MC , Turner CE . Paxillin : adapting to change . Physiol Rev 84 : 1315 – 1339 , 2004 . 26 . Brown MD , Sacks DB . IQGAP1 in cellular signaling : bridging the GAP . Trends Cell Biol 16 : 242 – 249 , 2006 . 27 . Brown NH , Gregory SL , Rickoll WL , Fessler LI , Prout M , White RA , Fristrom JW . Talin is essential for integrin function in Drosophila . Dev Cell 3 : 569 – 579 , 2002 . 28 . Buccione R , Orth JD , McNiven MA . Foot and mouth : podo - somes , invadopodia and circular dorsal rufﬂes . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 5 : 647 – 657 , 2004 . 29 . Butler B , Gao C , Mersich AT , Blystone SD . Puriﬁed integrin adhesion complexes exhibit actin - polymerization activity . Curr Biol 16 : 242 – 251 , 2006 . 30 . Carlier MF , Laurent V , Santolini J , Melki R , Didry D , Xia GX , Hong Y , Chua NH , Pantaloni D . Actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF / coﬁlin ) enhances the rate of ﬁlament turnover : implication in actin - based motility . J Cell Biol 136 : 1307 – 1322 , 1997 . 31 . Carlier MF , Nioche P , Broutin - L’Hermite I , Boujemaa R , Le Clainche C , Egile C , Garbay C , Ducruix A , Sansonetti P , Pantaloni D . GRB2 links signaling to actin assembly by enhancing interaction of neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASp ) with actin - related protein ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex . J Biol Chem 275 : 21946 – 21952 , 2000 . 32 . Carlier MF , Ressad F , Pantaloni D . Control of actin dynamics in cell motility . Role of ADF / coﬁlin . J Biol Chem 274 : 33827 – 33830 , 1999 . 33 . Carragher NO , Frame MC . Focal adhesion and actin dynamics : a place where kinases and proteases meet to promote invasion . Trends Cell Biol 14 : 241 – 249 , 2004 . 34 . Castellano F , Le Clainche C , Patin D , Carlier MF , Chavrier P . A WASp - VASP complex regulates actin polymerization at the plasma membrane . EMBO J 20 : 5603 – 5614 , 2001 . 35 . Chen H , Choudhury DM , Craig SW . Coincidence of actin ﬁla - ments and talin is required to activate vinculin . J Biol Chem 281 : 40389 – 40398 , 2006 . 36 . Chen H , Duncan IC , Bozorgchami H , Lo SH . Tensin1 and a previously undocumented family member , tensin2 , positively reg - ulate cell migration . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 : 733 – 738 , 2002 . 37 . Chen H , Lo SH . Regulation of tensin - promoted cell migration by its focal adhesion binding and Src homology domain 2 . Biochem J 370 : 1039 – 1045 , 2003 . 38 . Chrzanowska - Wodnicka M , Burridge K . Rho - stimulated con - tractility drives the formation of stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions . J Cell Biol 133 : 1403 – 1415 , 1996 . 39 . Chuang JZ , Lin DC , Lin S . Molecular cloning , expression , map - ping of the high afﬁnity actin - capping domain of chicken cardiac tensin . J Cell Biol 128 : 1095 – 1109 , 1995 . 40 . Co C , Wong DT , Gierke S , Chang V , Taunton J . Mechanism of actin network attachment to moving membranes : barbed end cap - ture by N - WASP WH2 domains . Cell 128 : 901 – 913 , 2007 . 41 . Cohen DM , Kutscher B , Chen H , Murphy DB , Craig SW . A conformational switch in vinculin drives formation and dynamics of a talin - vinculin complex at focal adhesions . J Biol Chem 281 : 16006 – 16015 , 2006 . 42 . Cory GO , Cramer R , Blanchoin L , Ridley AJ . Phosphorylation of the WASP - VCA domain increases its afﬁnity for the Arp2 / 3 complex and enhances actin polymerization by WASP . Mol Cell 11 : 1229 – 1239 , 2003 . 43 . Cosen - Binker LI , Kapus A . Cortactin : the gray eminence of the cytoskeleton . Physiology 21 : 352 – 361 , 2006 . 44 . Cram EJ , Clark SG , Schwarzbauer JE . Talin loss - of - function uncovers roles in cell contractility and migration in C . elegans . J Cell Sci 116 : 3871 – 3878 , 2003 . 45 . Cramer LP , Siebert M , Mitchison TJ . Identiﬁcation of novel graded polarity actin ﬁlament bundles in locomoting heart ﬁbro - blasts : implications for the generation of motile force . J Cell Biol 136 : 1287 – 1305 , 1997 . 46 . Crawford AW , Michelsen JW , Beckerle MC . An interaction between zyxin and alpha - actinin . J Cell Biol 116 : 1381 – 1393 , 1992 . 47 . Critchley DR . Cytoskeletal proteins talin and vinculin in integrin - mediated adhesion . Biochem Soc Trans 32 : 831 – 836 , 2004 . 48 . Dayel MJ , Holleran EA , Mullins RD . Arp2 / 3 complex requires hydrolyzable ATP for nucleation of new actin ﬁlaments . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98 : 14871 – 14876 , 2001 . 49 . Dayel MJ , Mullins RD . Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex : addition of the ﬁrst subunit of the new ﬁlament by a WASP protein triggers rapid ATP hydrolysis on Arp2 . PLoS Biol 2 : E91 , 2004 . 50 . DeMali KA , Barlow CA , Burridge K . Recruitment of the Arp2 / 3 complex to vinculin : coupling membrane protrusion to matrix ad - hesion . J Cell Biol 159 : 881 – 891 , 2002 . 51 . DesMarais V , Ichetovkin I , Condeelis J , Hitchcock - DeGregori SE . Spatial regulation of actin dynamics : a tropomyosin - free , actin - 508 LE CLAINCHE AND CARLIER Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m rich compartment at the leading edge . J Cell Sci 115 : 4649 – 4660 , 2002 . 52 . Didry D , Carlier MF , Pantaloni D . Synergy between actin depo - lymerizing factor / coﬁlin and proﬁlin in increasing actin ﬁlament turnover . J Biol Chem 273 : 25602 – 25611 , 1998 . 53 . Disanza A , Carlier MF , Stradal TE , Didry D , Frittoli E , Con - falonieri S , Croce A , Wehland J , Di Fiore PP , Scita G . Eps8 controls actin - based motility by capping the barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments . Nat Cell Biol 6 : 1180 – 1188 , 2004 . 54 . Disanza A , Mantoani S , Hertzog M , Gerboth S , Frittoli E , Steffen A , Berhoerster K , Kreienkamp HJ , Milanesi F , Di Fiore PP , Ciliberto A , Stradal TE , Scita G . Regulation of cell shape by Cdc42 is mediated by the synergic actin - bundling activity of the Eps8 - IRSp53 complex . Nat Cell Biol 8 : 1337 – 1347 , 2006 . 55 . Eden S , Rohatgi R , Podtelejnikov AV , Mann M , Kirschner MW . Mechanism of regulation of WAVE1 - induced actin nucleation by Rac1 and Nck . Nature 418 : 790 – 793 , 2002 . 56 . Egile C , Loisel TP , Laurent V , Li R , Pantaloni D , Sansonetti PJ , Carlier MF . Activation of the CDC42 effector N - WASP by the Shigella ﬂexneri IcsA protein promotes actin nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex and bacterial actin - based motility . J Cell Biol 146 : 1319 – 1332 , 1999 . 57 . Egile C , Rouiller I , Xu XP , Volkmann N , Li R , Hanein D . Mechanism of ﬁlament nucleation and branch stability revealed by the structure of the Arp2 / 3 complex at actin branch junctions . PLoS Biol 3 : e383 , 2005 . 58 . Evangelista M , Blundell K , Longtine MS , Chow CJ , Adames N , Pringle JR , Peter M , Boone C . Bni1p , a yeast formin linking cdc42p and the actin cytoskeleton during polarized morphogenesis . Science 276 : 118 – 122 , 1997 . 59 . Faix J , Rottner K . The making of ﬁlopodia . Curr Opin Cell Biol 18 : 18 – 25 , 2006 . 60 . Forscher P , Smith SJ . Actions of cytochalasins on the organiza - tion of actin ﬁlaments and microtubules in a neuronal growth cone . J Cell Biol 107 : 1505 – 1516 , 1988 . 61 . Franz CM , Muller DJ . Analyzing focal adhesion structure by atomic force microscopy . J Cell Sci 118 : 5315 – 5323 , 2005 . 62 . Fujiwara K , Pollard TD . Fluorescent antibody localization of myosin in the cytoplasm , cleavage furrow , mitotic spindle of hu - man cells . J Cell Biol 71 : 848 – 875 , 1976 . 63 . Gautreau A , Ho HY , Li J , Steen H , Gygi SP , Kirschner MW . Puriﬁcation and architecture of the ubiquitous Wave complex . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101 : 4379 – 4383 , 2004 . 64 . Giannone G , Jiang G , Sutton DH , Critchley DR , Sheetz MP . Talin1 is critical for force - dependent reinforcement of initial inte - grin - cytoskeleton bonds but not tyrosine kinase activation . J Cell Biol 163 : 409 – 419 , 2003 . 65 . Giannone G , Sheetz MP . Substrate rigidity and force deﬁne form through tyrosine phosphatase and kinase pathways . Trends Cell Biol 16 : 213 – 223 , 2006 . 66 . Gilmore AP , Burridge K . Regulation of vinculin binding to talin and actin by phosphatidyl - inositol - 4 – 5 - bisphosphate . Nature 381 : 531 – 535 , 1996 . 67 . Gingras AR , Ziegler WH , Frank R , Barsukov IL , Roberts GC , Critchley DR , Emsley J . Mapping and consensus sequence iden - tiﬁcation for multiple vinculin binding sites within the talin rod . J Biol Chem 280 : 37217 – 37224 , 2005 . 68 . Glacy SD . Pattern and time course of rhodamine - actin incorpora - tion in cardiac myocytes . J Cell Biol 96 : 1164 – 1167 , 1983 . 69 . Goley ED , Rodenbusch SE , Martin AC , Welch MD . Critical conformational changes in the Arp2 / 3 complex are induced by nucleotide and nucleation promoting factor . Mol Cell 16 : 269 – 279 , 2004 . 70 . Goley ED , Welch MD . The ARP2 / 3 complex : an actin nucleator comes of age . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 : 713 – 726 , 2006 . 71 . Goode BL , Eck MJ . Mechanism and function of formins in control of actin assembly . Annu Rev Biochem 76 : 593 – 627 , 2007 . 72 . Gournier H , Goley ED , Niederstrasser H , Trinh T , Welch MD . Reconstitution of human Arp2 / 3 complex reveals critical roles of individual subunits in complex structure and activity . Mol Cell 8 : 1041 – 1052 , 2001 . 73 . Gupton SL , Anderson KL , Kole TP , Fischer RS , Ponti A , Hitchcock - DeGregori SE , Danuser G , Fowler VM , Wirtz D , Hanein D , Waterman - Storer CM . Cell migration without a lamel - lipodium : translation of actin dynamics into cell movement medi - ated by tropomyosin . J Cell Biol 168 : 619 – 631 , 2005 . 74 . Hamiaux C , van Eerde A , Parsot C , Broos J , Dijkstra BW . Structural mimicry for vinculin activation by IpaA , a virulence factor of Shigella ﬂexneri . EMBO Rep 7 : 794 – 799 , 2006 . 75 . Helfer E , Nevalainen EM , Naumanen P , Romero S , Didry D , Pantaloni D , Lappalainen P , Carlier MF . Mammalian twinﬁlin sequesters ADP - G - actin and caps ﬁlament barbed ends : implica - tions in motility . EMBO J 25 : 1184 – 1195 , 2006 . 76 . Helfman DM , Levy ET , Berthier C , Shtutman M , Riveline D , Grosheva I , Lachish - Zalait A , Elbaum M , Bershadsky AD . Caldesmon inhibits nonmuscle cell contractility and interferes with the formation of focal adhesions . Mol Biol Cell 10 : 3097 – 3112 , 1999 . 77 . Hemmings L , Rees DJ , Ohanian V , Bolton SJ , Gilmore AP , Patel B , Priddle H , Trevithick JE , Hynes RO , Critchley DR . Talin contains three actin - binding sites each of which is adjacent to a vinculin - binding site . J Cell Sci 109 : 2715 – 2726 , 1996 . 78 . Hertzog M , van Heijenoort C , Didry D , Gaudier M , Coutant J , Gigant B , Didelot G , Preat T , Knossow M , Guittet E , Carlier MF . The beta - thymosin / WH2 domain : structural basis for the switch from inhibition to promotion of actin assembly . Cell 117 : 611 – 623 , 2004 . 79 . Hertzog M , Yarmola EG , Didry D , Bubb MR , Carlier MF . Control of actin dynamics by proteins made of beta - thymosin re - peats : the actobindin family . J Biol Chem 277 : 14786 – 14792 , 2002 . 80 . Higgs HN , Pollard TD . Regulation of actin ﬁlament network formation through ARP2 / 3 complex : activation by a diverse array of proteins . Annu Rev Biochem 70 : 649 – 676 , 2001 . 81 . Ho HY , Rohatgi R , Lebensohn AM , Le M , Li J , Gygi SP , Kirsch - ner MW . Toca - 1 mediates Cdc42 - dependent actin nucleation by activating the N - WASP - WIP complex . Cell 118 : 203 – 216 , 2004 . 82 . Hotulainen P , Lappalainen P . Stress ﬁbers are generated by two distinct actin assembly mechanisms in motile cells . J Cell Biol 173 : 383 – 394 , 2006 . 83 . Hu K , Ji L , Applegate KT , Danuser G , Waterman - Storer CM . Differential transmission of actin motion within focal adhesions . Science 315 : 111 – 115 , 2007 . 84 . Huttelmaier S , Mayboroda O , Harbeck B , Jarchau T , Jock - usch BM , Rudiger M . The interaction of the cell - contact proteins VASP and vinculin is regulated by phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphos - phate . Curr Biol 8 : 479 – 488 , 1998 . 85 . Innocenti M , Gerboth S , Rottner K , Lai FP , Hertzog M , Stradal TE , Frittoli E , Didry D , Polo S , Disanza A , Benesch S , Di Fiore PP , Carlier MF , Scita G . Abi1 regulates the activity of N - WASP and WAVE in distinct actin - based processes . Nat Cell Biol 7 : 969 – 976 , 2005 . 86 . Innocenti M , Zucconi A , Disanza A , Frittoli E , Areces LB , Steffen A , Stradal TE , Di Fiore PP , Carlier MF , Scita G . Abi1 is essential for the formation and activation of a WAVE2 signalling complex . Nat Cell Biol 6 : 319 – 327 , 2004 . 87 . Ishii A , Lo SH . A role of tensin in skeletal - muscle regeneration . Biochem J 356 : 737 – 745 , 2001 . 88 . Iwasa JH , Mullins RD . Spatial and temporal relationships be - tween actin - ﬁlament nucleation , capping , disassembly . Curr Biol 17 : 395 – 406 , 2007 . 89 . Izard T , Evans G , Borgon RA , Rush CL , Bricogne G , Bois PR . Vinculin activation by talin through helical bundle conversion . Nature 427 : 171 – 175 , 2004 . 90 . Izard T , Tran Van Nhieu G , Bois PR . Shigella applies molecular mimicry to subvert vinculin and invade host cells . J Cell Biol 175 : 465 – 475 , 2006 . 91 . Janssen ME , Kim E , Liu H , Fujimoto LM , Bobkov A , Volk - mann N , Hanein D . Three - dimensional structure of vinculin bound to actin ﬁlaments . Mol Cell 21 : 271 – 281 , 2006 . 92 . Jiang G , Giannone G , Critchley DR , Fukumoto E , Sheetz MP . Two - piconewton slip bond between ﬁbronectin and the cytoskele - ton depends on talin . Nature 424 : 334 – 337 , 2003 . 93 . Johnson RP , Craig SW . F - actin binding site masked by the in - tramolecular association of vinculin head and tail domains . Nature 373 : 261 – 264 , 1995 . ACTIN DYNAMICS IN CELL MIGRATION 509 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m 94 . Johnson RP , Craig SW . An intramolecular association between the head and tail domains of vinculin modulates talin binding . J Biol Chem 269 : 12611 – 12619 , 1994 . 95 . Kaverina I , Krylyshkina O , Small JV . Microtubule targeting of substrate contacts promotes their relaxation and dissociation . J Cell Biol 146 : 1033 – 1044 , 1999 . 96 . Kawamura K , Takano K , Suetsugu S , Kurisu S , Yamazaki D , Miki H , Takenawa T , Endo T . N - WASP and WAVE2 acting down - stream of phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase are required for myogenic cell migration induced by hepatocyte growth factor . J Biol Chem 279 : 54862 – 54871 , 2004 . 97 . Kelleher JF , Atkinson SJ , Pollard TD . Sequences , structural models , cellular localization of the actin - related proteins Arp2 and Arp3 from Acanthamoeba . J Cell Biol 131 : 385 – 397 , 1995 . 98 . Keller R . Cell migration during gastrulation . Curr Opin Cell Biol 17 : 533 – 541 , 2005 . 99 . Kessels MM , Qualmann B . Syndapins integrate N - WASP in recep - tor - mediated endocytosis . EMBO J 21 : 6083 – 6094 , 2002 . 100 . Kim AS , Kakalis LT , Abdul - Manan N , Liu GA , Rosen MK . Autoinhibition and activation mechanisms of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . Nature 404 : 151 – 158 , 2000 . 101 . Kim K , Hou P , Gorski JL , Cooper JA . Effect of Fgd1 on cortactin in Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin assembly . Biochemistry 43 : 2422 – 2427 , 2004 . 102 . Kimura K , Ito M , Amano M , Chihara K , Fukata Y , Nakafuku M , Yamamori B , Feng J , Nakano T , Okawa K , Iwamatsu A , Kaibuchi K . Regulation of myosin phosphatase by Rho and Rho - associated kinase ( Rho - kinase ) . Science 273 : 245 – 248 , 1996 . 103 . Kinley AW , Weed SA , Weaver AM , Karginov AV , Bissonette E , Cooper JA , Parsons JT . Cortactin interacts with WIP in regulat - ing Arp2 / 3 activation and membrane protrusion . Curr Biol 13 : 384 – 393 , 2003 . 104 . Kovar DR . Molecular details of formin - mediated actin assembly . Curr Opin Cell Biol 18 : 11 – 17 , 2006 . 105 . Kovar DR , Harris ES , Mahaffy R , Higgs HN , Pollard TD . Con - trol of the assembly of ATP - and ADP - actin by formins and proﬁlin . Cell 124 : 423 – 435 , 2006 . 106 . Kovar DR , Kuhn JR , Tichy AL , Pollard TD . The ﬁssion yeast cytokinesis formin Cdc12p is a barbed end actin ﬁlament capping protein gated by proﬁlin . J Cell Biol 161 : 875 – 887 , 2003 . 107 . Kovar DR , Pollard TD . Insertional assembly of actin ﬁlament barbed ends in association with formins produces piconewton forces . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101 : 14725 – 14730 , 2004 . 108 . Kowalski JR , Egile C , Gil S , Snapper SB , Li R , Thomas SM . Cortactin regulates cell migration through activation of N - WASP . J Cell Sci 118 : 79 – 87 , 2005 . 109 . Krugmann S , Jordens I , Gevaert K , Driessens M , Vandeker - ckhove J , Hall A . Cdc42 induces ﬁlopodia by promoting the formation of an IRSp53 : Mena complex . Curr Biol 11 : 1645 – 1655 , 2001 . 110 . Lammers M , Rose R , Scrima A , Wittinghofer A . The regulation of mDia1 by autoinhibition and its release by Rho * GTP . EMBO J 24 : 4176 – 4187 , 2005 . 111 . Laukaitis CM , Webb DJ , Donais K , Horwitz AF . Differential dynamics of alpha 5 integrin , paxillin , alpha - actinin during forma - tion and disassembly of adhesions in migrating cells . J Cell Biol 153 : 1427 – 1440 , 2001 . 112 . Laurent V , Loisel TP , Harbeck B , Wehman A , Grobe L , Jock - usch BM , Wehland J , Gertler FB , Carlier MF . Role of proteins of the Ena / VASP family in actin - based motility of Listeria mono - cytogenes . J Cell Biol 144 : 1245 – 1258 , 1999 . 113 . Lazarides E , Burridge K . Alpha - actinin : immunoﬂuorescent lo - calization of a muscle structural protein in nonmuscle cells . Cell 6 : 289 – 298 , 1975 . 114 . Le Clainche C , Didry D , Carlier MF , Pantaloni D . Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex by Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome protein is linked to enhanced binding of ATP to Arp2 . J Biol Chem 276 : 46689 – 46692 , 2001 . 115 . Le Clainche C , Pantaloni D , Carlier MF . ATP hydrolysis on actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex causes debranching of dendritic actin arrays . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100 : 6337 – 6342 , 2003 . 116 . Le Clainche C , Pauly BS , Zhang CX , Engqvist - Goldstein AE , Cunningham K , Drubin DG . A Hip1R - cortactin complex nega - tively regulates actin assembly associated with endocytosis . EMBO J 26 : 1199 – 1210 , 2007 . 117 . Le Clainche C , Schlaepfer D , Ferrari A , Klingauf M , Grohm - anova K , Veligodskiy A , Didry D , Le D , Egile C , Carlier MF , Kroschewski R . IQGAP1 stimulates actin assembly through the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 pathway . J Biol Chem 282 : 426 – 435 , 2007 . 118 . Lewis AK , Bridgman PC . Nerve growth cone lamellipodia contain two populations of actin ﬁlaments that differ in organization and polarity . J Cell Biol 119 : 1219 – 1243 , 1992 . 119 . Li F , Higgs HN . The mouse Formin mDia1 is a potent actin nucleation factor regulated by autoinhibition . Curr Biol 13 : 1335 – 1340 , 2003 . 120 . Lin CH , Thompson CA , Forscher P . Cytoskeletal reorganization underlying growth cone motility . Curr Opin Neurobiol 4 : 640 – 647 , 1994 . 121 . Linder S . The matrix corroded : podosomes and invadopodia in extracellular matrix degradation . Trends Cell Biol 17 : 107 – 117 , 2007 . 122 . Lo SH . Tensin . Int J Biochem Cell Biol 36 : 31 – 34 , 2004 . 123 . Lo SH , An Q , Bao S , Wong WK , Liu Y , Janmey PA , Hartwig JH , Chen LB . Molecular cloning of chick cardiac muscle tensin . Full - length cDNA sequence , expression , characterization . J Biol Chem 269 : 22310 – 22319 , 1994 . 124 . Lo SH , Yu QC , Degenstein L , Chen LB , Fuchs E . Progressive kidney degeneration in mice lacking tensin . J Cell Biol 136 : 1349 – 1361 , 1997 . 125 . Locascio A , Nieto MA . Cell movements during vertebrate devel - opment : integrated tissue behaviour versus individual cell migra - tion . Curr Opin Genet Dev 11 : 464 – 469 , 2001 . 126 . Loisel TP , Boujemaa R , Pantaloni D , Carlier MF . Reconstitu - tion of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 : 613 – 616 , 1999 . 127 . Lommel S , Benesch S , Rottner K , Franz T , Wehland J , Kuhn R . Actin pedestal formation by enteropathogenic Escherichia coli and intracellular motility of Shigella ﬂexneri are abolished in N - WASP - defective cells . EMBO Rep 2 : 850 – 857 , 2001 . 128 . Lorenz M , Yamaguchi H , Wang Y , Singer RH , Condeelis J . Imaging sites of N - wasp activity in lamellipodia and invadopodia of carcinoma cells . Curr Biol 14 : 697 – 703 , 2004 . 129 . Luster AD , Alon R , von Andrian UH . Immune cell migration in inﬂammation : present and future therapeutic targets . Nat Immunol 6 : 1182 – 1190 , 2005 . 130 . Machesky LM , Atkinson SJ , Ampe C , Vandekerckhove J , Pol - lard TD . Puriﬁcation of a cortical complex containing two uncon - ventional actins from Acanthamoeba by afﬁnity chromatography on proﬁlin - agarose . J Cell Biol 127 : 107 – 115 , 1994 . 131 . Maciver SK , Zot HG , Pollard TD . Characterization of actin ﬁla - ment severing by actophorin from Acanthamoeba castellanii . J Cell Biol 115 : 1611 – 1620 , 1991 . 132 . Mallavarapu A , Mitchison T . Regulated actin cytoskeleton as - sembly at ﬁlopodium tips controls their extension and retraction . J Cell Biol 146 : 1097 – 1106 , 1999 . 133 . Martel V , Racaud - Sultan C , Dupe S , Marie C , Paulhe F , Gal - miche A , Block MR , Albiges - Rizo C . Conformation , localization , integrin binding of talin depend on its interaction with phosphoi - nositides . J Biol Chem 276 : 21217 – 21227 , 2001 . 134 . Martel V , Vignoud L , Dupe S , Frachet P , Block MR , Albiges - Rizo C . Talin controls the exit of the integrin alpha 5 beta 1 from an early compartment of the secretory pathway . J Cell Sci 113 : 1951 – 1961 , 2000 . 135 . Martin AC , Welch MD , Drubin DG . Arp2 / 3 ATP hydrolysis - cata - lysed branch dissociation is critical for endocytic force generation . Nat Cell Biol 8 : 826 – 833 , 2006 . 136 . Martin AC , Xu XP , Rouiller I , Kaksonen M , Sun Y , Belmont L , Volkmann N , Hanein D , Welch M , Drubin DG . Effects of Arp2 and Arp3 nucleotide - binding pocket mutations on Arp2 / 3 complex function . J Cell Biol 168 : 315 – 328 , 2005 . 137 . Martinez - Quiles N , Ho HY , Kirschner MW , Ramesh N , Geha RS . Erk / Src phosphorylation of cortactin acts as a switch on - switch off mechanism that controls its ability to activate N - WASP . Mol Cell Biol 24 : 5269 – 5280 , 2004 . 138 . Martinez - Quiles N , Rohatgi R , Anton IM , Medina M , Saville SP , Miki H , Yamaguchi H , Takenawa T , Hartwig JH , Geha RS , 510 LE CLAINCHE AND CARLIER Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m Ramesh N . WIP regulates N - WASP - mediated actin polymerization and ﬁlopodium formation . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 484 – 491 , 2001 . 139 . Mattila PK , Pykalainen A , Saarikangas J , Paavilainen VO , Vihinen H , Jokitalo E , Lappalainen P . Missing - in - metastasis and IRSp53 deform PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - rich membranes by an inverse BAR do - main - like mechanism . J Cell Biol 176 : 953 – 964 , 2007 . 140 . McGough A , Pope B , Chiu W , Weeds A . Coﬁlin changes the twist of F - actin : implications for actin ﬁlament dynamics and cellular function . J Cell Biol 138 : 771 – 781 , 1997 . 141 . Mejillano MR , Kojima S , Applewhite DA , Gertler FB , Svitkina TM , Borisy GG . Lamellipodial versus ﬁlopodial mode of the actin nanomachinery : pivotal role of the ﬁlament barbed end . Cell 118 : 363 – 373 , 2004 . 142 . Miki H , Sasaki T , Takai Y , Takenawa T . Induction of ﬁlopodium formation by a WASP - related actin - depolymerizing protein N - WASP . Nature 391 : 93 – 96 , 1998 . 143 . Miki H , Suetsugu S , Takenawa T . WAVE , a novel WASP - family protein involved in actin reorganization induced by Rac . EMBO J 17 : 6932 – 6941 , 1998 . 144 . Miki H , Yamaguchi H , Suetsugu S , Takenawa T . IRSp53 is an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the regulation of membrane rufﬂing . Nature 408 : 732 – 735 , 2000 . 145 . Mitchison T , Kirschner M . Cytoskeletal dynamics and nerve growth . Neuron 1 : 761 – 772 , 1988 . 146 . Miyoshi T , Tsuji T , Higashida C , Hertzog M , Fujita A , Naru - miya S , Scita G , Watanabe N . Actin turnover - dependent fast dissociation of capping protein in the dendritic nucleation actin network : evidence of frequent ﬁlament severing . J Cell Biol 175 : 947 – 955 , 2006 . 147 . Monkley SJ , Zhou XH , Kinston SJ , Giblett SM , Hemmings L , Priddle H , Brown JE , Pritchard CA , Critchley DR , Fassler R . Disruption of the talin gene arrests mouse development at the gastrulation stage . Dev Dyn 219 : 560 – 574 , 2000 . 148 . Mullins RD , Heuser JA , Pollard TD . The interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high afﬁnity pointed end capping , formation of branching networks of ﬁlaments . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95 : 6181 – 6186 , 1998 . 149 . Nayal A , Webb DJ , Horwitz AF . Talin : an emerging focal point of adhesion dynamics . Curr Opin Cell Biol 16 : 94 – 98 , 2004 . 150 . Nikolopoulos SN , Turner CE . Actopaxin , a new focal adhesion protein that binds paxillin LD motifs and actin and regulates cell adhesion . J Cell Biol 151 : 1435 – 1448 , 2000 . 151 . Niwa R , Nagata - Ohashi K , Takeichi M , Mizuno K , Uemura T . Control of actin reorganization by Slingshot , a family of phospha - tases that dephosphorylate ADF / coﬁlin . Cell 108 : 233 – 246 , 2002 . 152 . Nobes CD , Hall A . Rho , rac , cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress ﬁbers , lamellipodia , ﬁlopodia . Cell 81 : 53 – 62 , 1995 . 153 . Nolen BJ , Littleﬁeld RS , Pollard TD . Crystal structures of actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex with bound ATP or ADP . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101 : 15627 – 15632 , 2004 . 154 . Nuckolls GH , Romer LH , Burridge K . Microinjection of antibod - ies against talin inhibits the spreading and migration of ﬁbroblasts . J Cell Sci 102 : 753 – 762 , 1992 . 155 . Okabe S , Hirokawa N . Actin dynamics in growth cones . J Neu - rosci 11 : 1918 – 1929 , 1991 . 156 . Otey CA , Carpen O . Alpha - actinin revisited : a fresh look at an old player . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 58 : 104 – 111 , 2004 . 157 . Otey CA , Pavalko FM , Burridge K . An interaction between alpha - actinin and the beta 1 integrin subunit in vitro . J Cell Biol 111 : 721 – 729 , 1990 . 158 . Otomo T , Tomchick DR , Otomo C , Panchal SC , Machius M , Rosen MK . Structural basis of actin ﬁlament nucleation and pro - cessive capping by a formin homology 2 domain . Nature 433 : 488 – 494 , 2005 . 159 . Otsuki M , Itoh T , Takenawa T . Neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein is recruited to rafts and associates with endophilin A in response to epidermal growth factor . J Biol Chem 278 : 6461 – 6469 , 2003 . 160 . Pantaloni D , Boujemaa R , Didry D , Gounon P , Carlier MF . The Arp2 / 3 complex branches ﬁlament barbed ends : functional antag - onism with capping proteins . Nat Cell Biol 2 : 385 – 391 , 2000 . 161 . Pantaloni D , Carlier MF . How proﬁlin promotes actin ﬁlament assembly in the presence of thymosin beta 4 . Cell 75 : 1007 – 1014 , 1993 . 162 . Pantaloni D , Le Clainche C , Carlier MF . Mechanism of actin - based motility . Science 292 : 1502 – 1506 , 2001 . 163 . Pelham RJ Jr , Wang Y . Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by substrate ﬂexibility . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94 : 13661 – 13665 , 1997 . 164 . Pelikan Conchaudron A , Didry D , Le KH , Larquet E , Boisset N , Pantaloni D , Carlier MF . Analysis of tetramethylrhodamine - labeled actin polymerization and interaction with actin regulatory proteins . J Biol Chem 281 : 24036 – 24047 , 2006 . 165 . Pellegrin S , Mellor H . The Rho family GTPase Rif induces ﬁlo - podia through mDia2 . Curr Biol 15 : 129 – 133 , 2005 . 166 . Peng J , Wallar BJ , Flanders A , Swiatek PJ , Alberts AS . Dis - ruption of the Diaphanous - related formin Drf1 gene encoding mDia1 reveals a role for Drf3 as an effector for Cdc42 . Curr Biol 13 : 534 – 545 , 2003 . 167 . Ponti A , Machacek M , Gupton SL , Waterman - Storer CM , Danuser G . Two distinct actin networks drive the protrusion of migrating cells . Science 305 : 1782 – 1786 , 2004 . 168 . Prehoda KE , Scott JA , Mullins RD , Lim WA . Integration of multiple signals through cooperative regulation of the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 complex . Science 290 : 801 – 806 , 2000 . 169 . Priddle H , Hemmings L , Monkley S , Woods A , Patel B , Sutton D , Dunn GA , Zicha D , Critchley DR . Disruption of the talin gene compromises focal adhesion assembly in undifferentiated but not differentiated embryonic stem cells . J Cell Biol 142 : 1121 – 1133 , 1998 . 170 . Pring M , Evangelista M , Boone C , Yang C , Zigmond SH . Mech - anism of formin - induced nucleation of actin ﬁlaments . Biochemis - try 42 : 486 – 496 , 2003 . 171 . Pruyne D , Evangelista M , Yang C , Bi E , Zigmond S , Bretscher A , Boone C . Role of formins in actin assembly : nucleation and barbed - end association . Science 297 : 612 – 615 , 2002 . 172 . Quinlan ME , Heuser JE , Kerkhoff E , Mullins RD . Drosophila Spire is an actin nucleation factor . Nature 433 : 382 – 388 , 2005 . 173 . Rajfur Z , Roy P , Otey C , Romer L , Jacobson K . Dissecting the link between stress ﬁbres and focal adhesions by CALI with EGFP fusion proteins . Nat Cell Biol 4 : 286 – 293 , 2002 . 174 . Ramarao N , Le Clainche C , Izard T , Bourdet - Sicard R , Ageron E , Sansonetti PJ , Carlier MF , Tran Van Nhieu G . Capping of actin ﬁlaments by vinculin activated by the Shigella IpaA carboxyl - terminal domain . FEBS Lett 581 : 853 – 857 , 2007 . 175 . Ramesh N , Anton IM , Hartwig JH , Geha RS . WIP , a protein associated with wiskott - aldrich syndrome protein , induces actin polymerization and redistribution in lymphoid cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94 : 14671 – 14676 , 1997 . 176 . Reinhard M , Halbrugge M , Scheer U , Wiegand C , Jockusch BM , Walter U . The 46 / 50 kDa phosphoprotein VASP puriﬁed from human platelets is a novel protein associated with actin ﬁlaments and focal contacts . EMBO J 11 : 2063 – 2070 , 1992 . 177 . Ridley AJ , Hall A . The small GTP - binding protein rho regulates the assembly of focal adhesions and actin stress ﬁbers in response to growth factors . Cell 70 : 389 – 399 , 1992 . 178 . Riveline D , Zamir E , Balaban NQ , Schwarz US , Ishizaki T , Narumiya S , Kam Z , Geiger B , Bershadsky AD . Focal contacts as mechanosensors : externally applied local mechanical force in - duces growth of focal contacts by an mDia1 - dependent and ROCK - independent mechanism . J Cell Biol 153 : 1175 – 1186 , 2001 . 179 . Robinson RC , Turbedsky K , Kaiser DA , Marchand JB , Higgs HN , Choe S , Pollard TD . Crystal structure of Arp2 / 3 complex . Science 294 : 1679 – 1684 , 2001 . 180 . Rodriguez Fernandez JL , Geiger B , Salomon D , Ben - Ze’ev A . Overexpression of vinculin suppresses cell motility in BALB / c 3T3 cells . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 22 : 127 – 134 , 1992 . 181 . Rodriguez Fernandez JL , Geiger B , Salomon D , Sabanay I , Zoller M , Ben - Ze’ev A . Suppression of tumorigenicity in trans - formed cells after transfection with vinculin cDNA . J Cell Biol 119 : 427 – 438 , 1992 . 182 . Rogers SL , Wiedemann U , Stuurman N , Vale RD . Molecular requirements for actin - based lamella formation in Drosophila S2 cells . J Cell Biol 162 : 1079 – 1088 , 2003 . ACTIN DYNAMICS IN CELL MIGRATION 511 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m 183 . Rohatgi R , Ho HY , Kirschner MW . Mechanism of N - WASP acti - vation by CDC42 and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . J Cell Biol 150 : 1299 – 1310 , 2000 . 184 . Rohatgi R , Ma L , Miki H , Lopez M , Kirchhausen T , Takenawa T , Kirschner MW . The interaction between N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex links Cdc42 - dependent signals to actin assembly . Cell 97 : 221 – 231 , 1999 . 185 . Rohatgi R , Nollau P , Ho HY , Kirschner MW , Mayer BJ . Nck and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate synergistically activate actin polymerization through the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 pathway . J Biol Chem 276 : 26448 – 26452 , 2001 . 186 . Romero S , Didry D , Larquet E , Boisset N , Pantaloni D , Carlier MF . How ATP hydrolysis controls ﬁlament assembly from proﬁlin - actin : implication for formin processivity . J Biol Chem 282 : 8435 – 8445 , 2007 . 187 . Romero S , Le Clainche C , Didry D , Egile C , Pantaloni D , Carlier MF . Formin is a processive motor that requires proﬁlin to accelerate actin assembly and associated ATP hydrolysis . Cell 119 : 419 – 429 , 2004 . 188 . Rose R , Weyand M , Lammers M , Ishizaki T , Ahmadian MR , Wittinghofer A . Structural and mechanistic insights into the in - teraction between Rho and mammalian Dia . Nature 435 : 513 – 518 , 2005 . 189 . Rottner K , Behrendt B , Small JV , Wehland J . VASP dynamics during lamellipodia protrusion . Nat Cell Biol 1 : 321 – 322 , 1999 . 190 . Rottner K , Hall A , Small JV . Interplay between Rac and Rho in the control of substrate contact dynamics . Curr Biol 9 : 640 – 648 , 1999 . 191 . Ruhnau K , Gaertner A , Wegner A . Kinetic evidence for insertion of actin monomers between the barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments and barbed end - bound insertin , a protein puriﬁed from smooth muscle . J Mol Biol 210 : 141 – 148 , 1989 . 192 . Sagot I , Klee SK , Pellman D . Yeast formins regulate cell polarity by controlling the assembly of actin cables . Nat Cell Biol 4 : 42 – 50 , 2002 . 193 . Samarin S , Romero S , Kocks C , Didry D , Pantaloni D , Carlier MF . How VASP enhances actin - based motility . J Cell Biol 163 : 131 – 142 , 2003 . 194 . Sasahara Y , Rachid R , Byrne MJ , de la Fuente MA , Abraham RT , Ramesh N , Geha RS . Mechanism of recruitment of WASP to the immunological synapse and of its activation following TCR ligation . Mol Cell 10 : 1269 – 1281 , 2002 . 195 . Schafer DA , Jennings PB , Cooper JA . Dynamics of capping protein and actin assembly in vitro : uncapping barbed ends by polyphosphoinositides . J Cell Biol 135 : 169 – 179 , 1996 . 196 . Schafer DA , Weed SA , Binns D , Karginov AV , Parsons JT , Cooper JA . Dynamin2 and cortactin regulate actin assembly and ﬁlament organization . Curr Biol 12 : 1852 – 1857 , 2002 . 197 . Schirenbeck A , Arasada R , Bretschneider T , Schleicher M , Faix J . Formins and VASPs may co - operate in the formation of ﬁlopodia . Biochem Soc Trans 33 : 1256 – 1259 , 2005 . 198 . Schirenbeck A , Arasada R , Bretschneider T , Stradal TE , Schleicher M , Faix J . The bundling activity of vasodilator - stimu - lated phosphoprotein is required for ﬁlopodium formation . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 7694 – 7699 , 2006 . 199 . Schirenbeck A , Bretschneider T , Arasada R , Schleicher M , Faix J . The Diaphanous - related formin dDia2 is required for the formation and maintenance of ﬁlopodia . Nat Cell Biol 7 : 619 – 625 , 2005 . 200 . Senetar MA , Foster SJ , McCann RO . Intrasteric inhibition me - diates the interaction of the I / LWEQ module proteins Talin1 , Talin2 , Hip1 , Hip12 with actin . Biochemistry 43 : 15418 – 15428 , 2004 . 201 . Shemesh T , Otomo T , Rosen MK , Bershadsky AD , Kozlov MM . A novel mechanism of actin ﬁlament processive capping by formin : solution of the rotation paradox . J Cell Biol 170 : 889 – 893 , 2005 . 202 . Shimada A , Nyitrai M , Vetter IR , Kuhlmann D , Bugyi B , Na - rumiya S , Geeves MA , Wittinghofer A . The core FH2 domain of diaphanous - related formins is an elongated actin binding protein that inhibits polymerization . Mol Cell 13 : 511 – 522 , 2004 . 203 . Silacci P , Mazzolai L , Gauci C , Stergiopulos N , Yin HL , Hayoz D . Gelsolin superfamily proteins : key regulators of cellular func - tions . Cell Mol Life Sci 61 : 2614 – 2623 , 2004 . 204 . Small JV , Resch GP . The comings and goings of actin : coupling protrusion and retraction in cell motility . Curr Opin Cell Biol 17 : 517 – 523 , 2005 . 205 . Small JV , Rottner K , Kaverina I , Anderson KI . Assembling an actin cytoskeleton for cell attachment and movement . Biochim Biophys Acta 1404 : 271 – 281 , 1998 . 206 . Small JV , Stradal T , Vignal E , Rottner K . The lamellipodium : where motility begins . Trends Cell Biol 12 : 112 – 120 , 2002 . 207 . Snapper SB , Takeshima F , Anton I , Liu CH , Thomas SM , Nguyen D , Dudley D , Fraser H , Purich D , Lopez - Ilasaca M , Klein C , Davidson L , Bronson R , Mulligan RC , Southwick F , Geha R , Goldberg MB , Rosen FS , Hartwig JH , Alt FW . N - WASP deﬁciency reveals distinct pathways for cell surface projections and microbial actin - based motility . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 897 – 904 , 2001 . 208 . Steffen A , Faix J , Resch GP , Linkner J , Wehland J , Small JV , Rottner K , Stradal TE . Filopodia formation in the absence of functional WAVE - and Arp2 / 3 - complexes . Mol Biol Cell 17 : 2581 – 2591 , 2006 . 209 . Steffen A , Rottner K , Ehinger J , Innocenti M , Scita G , Weh - land J , Stradal TE . Sra - 1 and Nap1 link Rac to actin assembly driving lamellipodia formation . EMBO J 23 : 749 – 759 , 2004 . 210 . Steimle PA , Hoffert JD , Adey NB , Craig SW . Polyphospho - inositides inhibit the interaction of vinculin with actin ﬁlaments . J Biol Chem 274 : 18414 – 18420 , 1999 . 211 . Stovold CF , Millard TH , Machesky LM . Inclusion of Scar / WAVE3 in a similar complex to Scar / WAVE1 and 2 . BMC Cell Biol 6 : 11 , 2005 . 212 . Stradal TE , Scita G . Protein complexes regulating Arp2 / 3 - medi - ated actin assembly . Curr Opin Cell Biol 18 : 4 – 10 , 2006 . 213 . Suetsugu S , Yamazaki D , Kurisu S , Takenawa T . Differential roles of WAVE1 and WAVE2 in dorsal and peripheral rufﬂe forma - tion for ﬁbroblast cell migration . Dev Cell 5 : 595 – 609 , 2003 . 214 . Sun Y , Martin AC , Drubin DG . Endocytic internalization in bud - ding yeast requires coordinated actin nucleation and myosin motor activity . Dev Cell 11 : 33 – 46 , 2006 . 215 . Suter DM , Forscher P . An emerging link between cytoskeletal dynamics and cell adhesion molecules in growth cone guidance . Curr Opin Neurobiol 8 : 106 – 116 , 1998 . 216 . Suter DM , Forscher P . Substrate - cytoskeletal coupling as a mechanism for the regulation of growth cone motility and guid - ance . J Neurobiol 44 : 97 – 113 , 2000 . 217 . Svitkina TM , Borisy GG . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymer - izing factor / coﬁlin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin ﬁlament array in lamellipodia . J Cell Biol 145 : 1009 – 1026 , 1999 . 218 . Svitkina TM , Bulanova EA , Chaga OY , Vignjevic DM , Kojima S , Vasiliev JM , Borisy GG . Mechanism of ﬁlopodia initiation by reorganization of a dendritic network . J Cell Biol 160 : 409 – 421 , 2003 . 219 . Svitkina TM , Verkhovsky AB , McQuade KM , Borisy GG . Anal - ysis of the actin - myosin II system in ﬁsh epidermal keratocytes : mechanism of cell body translocation . J Cell Biol 139 : 397 – 415 , 1997 . 220 . Tadokoro S , Shattil SJ , Eto K , Tai V , Liddington RC , de Pereda JM , Ginsberg MH , Calderwood DA . Talin binding to integrin beta tails : a ﬁnal common step in integrin activation . Science 302 : 103 – 106 , 2003 . 221 . Takenawa T , Suetsugu S . The WASP - WAVE protein network : connecting the membrane to the cytoskeleton . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8 : 37 – 48 , 2007 . 222 . Tanentzapf G , Brown NH . An interaction between integrin and the talin FERM domain mediates integrin activation but not linkage to the cytoskeleton . Nat Cell Biol 8 : 601 – 606 , 2006 . 223 . Tehrani S , Tomasevic N , Weed S , Sakowicz R , Cooper JA . Src phosphorylation of cortactin enhances actin assembly . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 : 11933 – 11938 , 2007 . 224 . Theriot JA , Mitchison TJ . Actin microﬁlament dynamics in lo - comoting cells . Nature 352 : 126 – 131 , 1991 . 225 . Tomasevic N , Jia Z , Russell A , Fujii T , Hartman JJ , Clancy S , Wang M , Beraud C , Wood KW , Sakowicz R . Differential regula - tion of WASP and N - WASP by Cdc42 , Rac1 , Nck , PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . Bio - chemistry 46 : 3494 – 3502 , 2007 . 512 LE CLAINCHE AND CARLIER Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m 226 . Tominaga T , Sahai E , Chardin P , McCormick F , Courtneidge SA , Alberts AS . Diaphanous - related formins bridge Rho GTPase and Src tyrosine kinase signaling . Mol Cell 5 : 13 – 25 , 2000 . 227 . Torres E , Rosen MK . Contingent phosphorylation / dephosphory - lation provides a mechanism of molecular memory in WASP . Mol Cell 11 : 1215 – 1227 , 2003 . 228 . Tran Van Nhieu G , Ben - Ze’ev A , Sansonetti PJ . Modulation of bacterial entry into epithelial cells by association between vinculin and the Shigella IpaA invasin . EMBO J 16 : 2717 – 2729 , 1997 . 229 . Turner CE . Paxillin and focal adhesion signalling . Nat Cell Biol 2 : E231 – 236 , 2000 . 230 . Uruno T , Liu J , Zhang P , Fan Y , Egile C , Li R , Mueller SC , Zhan X . Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin polymeriza - tion by cortactin . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 259 – 266 , 2001 . 231 . Vavylonis D , Kovar DR , O’Shaughnessy B , Pollard TD . Model of formin - associated actin ﬁlament elongation . Mol Cell 21 : 455 – 466 , 2006 . 232 . Vignjevic D , Yarar D , Welch MD , Peloquin J , Svitkina T , Borisy GG . Formation of ﬁlopodia - like bundles in vitro from a dendritic network . J Cell Biol 160 : 951 – 962 , 2003 . 233 . Volberg T , Geiger B , Citi S , Bershadsky AD . Effect of protein kinase inhibitor H - 7 on the contractility , integrity , membrane an - chorage of the microﬁlament system . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 29 : 321 – 338 , 1994 . 234 . Wachsstock DH , Wilkins JA , Lin S . Speciﬁc interaction of vin - culin with alpha - actinin . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 146 : 554 – 560 , 1987 . 235 . Wallar BJ , Stropich BN , Schoenherr JA , Holman HA , Kitchen SM , Alberts AS . The basic region of the diaphanous - autoregula - tory domain ( DAD ) is required for autoregulatory interactions with the diaphanous - related formin inhibitory domain . J Biol Chem 281 : 4300 – 4307 , 2006 . 236 . Wang W , Goswami S , Sahai E , Wyckoff JB , Segall JE , Con - deelis JS . Tumor cells caught in the act of invading : their strategy for enhanced cell motility . Trends Cell Biol 15 : 138 – 145 , 2005 . 237 . Wang YL . Exchange of actin subunits at the leading edge of living ﬁbroblasts : possible role of treadmilling . J Cell Biol 101 : 597 – 602 , 1985 . 238 . Wang YL . Mobility of ﬁlamentous actin in living cytoplasm . J Cell Biol 105 : 2811 – 2816 , 1987 . 239 . Wang YL . Reorganization of actin ﬁlament bundles in living ﬁbro - blasts . J Cell Biol 99 : 1478 – 1485 , 1984 . 240 . Watanabe N , Kato T , Fujita A , Ishizaki T , Narumiya S . Coop - eration between mDia1 and ROCK in Rho - induced actin reorgani - zation . Nat Cell Biol 1 : 136 – 143 , 1999 . 241 . Watanabe N , Madaule P , Reid T , Ishizaki T , Watanabe G , Kakizuka A , Saito Y , Nakao K , Jockusch BM , Narumiya S . p140mDia , a mammalian homolog of Drosophila diaphanous , is a target protein for Rho small GTPase and is a ligand for proﬁlin . EMBO J 16 : 3044 – 3056 , 1997 . 242 . Weaver AM , Heuser JE , Karginov AV , Lee WL , Parsons JT , Cooper JA . Interaction of cortactin and N - WASp with Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr Biol 12 : 1270 – 1278 , 2002 . 243 . Weaver AM , Karginov AV , Kinley AW , Weed SA , Li Y , Parsons JT , Cooper JA . Cortactin promotes and stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin ﬁlament network formation . Curr Biol 11 : 370 – 374 , 2001 . 244 . Webb DJ , Parsons JT , Horwitz AF . Adhesion assembly , disas - sembly and turnover in migrating cells – over and over and over again . Nat Cell Biol 4 : E97 – 100 , 2002 . 245 . Weed SA , Karginov AV , Schafer DA , Weaver AM , Kinley AW , Cooper JA , Parsons JT . Cortactin localization to sites of actin assembly in lamellipodia requires interactions with F - actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex . J Cell Biol 151 : 29 – 40 , 2000 . 246 . Weigt C , Gaertner A , Wegner A , Korte H , Meyer HE . Occur - rence of an actin - inserting domain in tensin . J Mol Biol 227 : 593 – 595 , 1992 . 247 . Welch MD , Iwamatsu A , Mitchison TJ . Actin polymerization is induced by Arp2 / 3 protein complex at the surface of Listeria monocytogenes . Nature 385 : 265 – 269 , 1997 . 248 . Welch MD , Rosenblatt J , Skoble J , Portnoy DA , Mitchison TJ . Interaction of human Arp2 / 3 complex and the Listeria monocyto - genes ActA protein in actin ﬁlament nucleation . Science 281 : 105 – 108 , 1998 . 249 . Wiesner S , Helfer E , Didry D , Ducouret G , Lafuma F , Carlier MF , Pantaloni D . A biomimetic motility assay provides insight into the mechanism of actin - based motility . J Cell Biol 160 : 387 – 398 , 2003 . 250 . Witke W , Sharpe AH , Hartwig JH , Azuma T , Stossel TP , Kwi - atkowski DJ . Hemostatic , inﬂammatory , ﬁbroblast responses are blunted in mice lacking gelsolin . Cell 81 : 41 – 51 , 1995 . 251 . Xu W , Coll JL , Adamson ED . Rescue of the mutant phenotype by reexpression of full - length vinculin in null F9 cells : effects on cell locomotion by domain deleted vinculin . J Cell Sci 111 : 1535 – 1544 , 1998 . 252 . Xu Y , Moseley JB , Sagot I , Poy F , Pellman D , Goode BL , Eck MJ . Crystal structures of a Formin Homology - 2 domain reveal a tethered dimer architecture . Cell 116 : 711 – 723 , 2004 . 253 . Yamada KM , Geiger B . Molecular interactions in cell adhesion complexes . Curr Opin Cell Biol 9 : 76 – 85 , 1997 . 254 . Yamazaki D , Suetsugu S , Miki H , Kataoka Y , Nishikawa S , Fujiwara T , Yoshida N , Takenawa T . WAVE2 is required for directed cell migration and cardiovascular development . Nature 424 : 452 – 456 , 2003 . 255 . Yan C , Martinez - Quiles N , Eden S , Shibata T , Takeshima F , Shinkura R , Fujiwara Y , Bronson R , Snapper SB , Kirschner MW , Geha R , Rosen FS , Alt FW . WAVE2 deﬁciency reveals distinct roles in embryogenesis and Rac - mediated actin - based mo - tility . EMBO J 22 : 3602 – 3612 , 2003 . 256 . Yang C , Pring M , Wear MA , Huang M , Cooper JA , Svitkina TM , Zigmond SH . Mammalian CARMIL inhibits actin ﬁlament capping by capping protein . Dev Cell 9 : 209 – 221 , 2005 . 257 . Yang S , Cope MJ , Drubin DG . Sla2p is associated with the yeast cortical actin cytoskeleton via redundant localization signals . Mol Biol Cell 10 : 2265 – 2283 , 1999 . 258 . Yarmola EG , Bubb MR . Proﬁlin : emerging concepts and lingering misconceptions . Trends Biochem Sci 31 : 197 – 205 , 2006 . 259 . Ylanne J , Scheffzek K , Young P , Saraste M . Crystal structure of the alpha - actinin rod : four spectrin repeats forming a thight dimer . Cell Mol Biol Lett 6 : 234 , 2001 . 260 . Zaidel - Bar R , Ballestrem C , Kam Z , Geiger B . Early molecular events in the assembly of matrix adhesions at the leading edge of migrating cells . J Cell Sci 116 : 4605 – 4613 , 2003 . 261 . Zaidel - Bar R , Cohen M , Addadi L , Geiger B . Hierarchical as - sembly of cell - matrix adhesion complexes . Biochem Soc Trans 32 : 416 – 420 , 2004 . 262 . Zalevsky J , Lempert L , Kranitz H , Mullins RD . Different WASP family proteins stimulate different Arp2 / 3 complex - dependent ac - tin - nucleating activities . Curr Biol 11 : 1903 – 1913 , 2001 . 263 . Zamir E , Geiger B . Molecular complexity and dynamics of cell - matrix adhesions . J Cell Sci 114 : 3583 – 3590 , 2001 . 264 . Zamir E , Katz M , Posen Y , Erez N , Yamada KM , Katz BZ , Lin S , Lin DC , Bershadsky A , Kam Z , Geiger B . Dynamics and segregation of cell - matrix adhesions in cultured ﬁbroblasts . Nat Cell Biol 2 : 191 – 196 , 2000 . 265 . Ziegler WH , Liddington RC , Critchley DR . The structure and regulation of vinculin . Trends Cell Biol 16 : 453 – 460 , 2006 . 266 . Zigmond SH , Evangelista M , Boone C , Yang C , Dar AC , Sicheri F , Forkey J , Pring M . Formin leaky cap allows elongation in the presence of tight capping proteins . Curr Biol 13 : 1820 – 1823 , 2003 . ACTIN DYNAMICS IN CELL MIGRATION 513 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 88 (cid:127) APRIL 2008 (cid:127) www . prv . org on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m doi : 10 . 1152 / physrev . 00021 . 2007 88 : 489 - 513 , 2008 . Physiol Rev Christophe Le Clainche and Marie - France Carlier Protrusion and Adhesion in Cell Migration Regulation of Actin Assembly Associated With You might find this additional info useful . . . 266 articles , 118 of which can be accessed free at : This article cites / content / 88 / 2 / 489 . full . html # ref - list - 1 86 other HighWire hosted articles , the first 5 are : This article has been cited by [ PDF ] [ Full Text ] [ Abstract ] , July 1 , 2014 ; 127 ( 13 ) : 2840 - 2848 . J Cell Sci R . Soll , Brian C . Schutte and Martine Dunnwald Leah C . Biggs , Rachelle L . Naridze , Kris A . DeMali , Daniel F . Lusche , Spencer Kuhl , David Interferon regulatory factor 6 regulates keratinocyte migration [ PDF ] [ Full Text ] [ Abstract ] , July 15 , 2014 ; 25 ( 14 ) : 2152 - 2160 . Mol . Biol . Cell Shamim A . Sinnar , Susumu Antoku , Jean - Michel Saffin , Jon A . Cooper and Shelley Halpain dynamicsCapping protein is essential for cell migration in vivo and for filopodial morphology and [ PDF ] [ Full Text ] [ Abstract ] , September 15 , 2014 ; 23 ( 18 ) : 4745 - 4757 . Hum . Mol . Genet . Barrington G . Burnett Partridge , Leonid V . Chernomordik , Kenneth H . Fischbeck , Charlotte J . Sumner and Katherine V . Bricceno , Tara Martinez , Evgenia Leikina , Stephanie Duguez , Terence A . myogenic gene expression and focal adhesion dynamics Survival motor neuron protein deficiency impairs myotube formation by altering [ PDF ] [ Full Text ] [ Abstract ] , October 22 , 2014 ; 34 ( 43 ) : 14219 - 14232 . J . Neurosci . Manuel Yepes Changhua Chen , Lihong Cheng , Andrew Nicholson , Frank C . Tong , Jaekeun Park and Fang Wu , Marcela Catano , Ramiro Echeverry , Enrique Torre , Woldeab B . Haile , Jie An , Improves Neurological Outcome Following Ischemic Stroke Urokinase - Type Plasminogen Activator Promotes Dendritic Spine Recovery and [ PDF ] [ Full Text ] [ Abstract ] , December , 2014 ; 6 ( 6 ) : 458 - 472 . J Mol Cell Biol Shu - Yi Wei , Ting - Er Lin , Wei - Li Wang , Pei - Ling Lee , Min - Chien Tsai and Jeng - Jiann Chiu migratory human blood T - lymphocytes coordinate flow - induced directionality and deformation of b and - d Protein kinase C - including high resolution figures , can be found at : Updated information and services / content / 88 / 2 / 489 . full . html can be found at : Physiological Reviews about Additional material and information http : / / www . the - aps . org / publications / prv website at http : / / www . the - aps . org / . MD 20814 - 3991 . Copyright © 2008 by the American Physiological Society . ISSN : 0031 - 9333 , ESSN : 1522 - 1210 . Visit our published quarterly in January , April , July , and October by the American Physiological Society , 9650 Rockville Pike , Bethesda provides state of the art coverage of timely issues in the physiological and biomedical sciences . It is Physiological Reviews on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m This information is current as of February 13 , 2015 . website at http : / / www . the - aps . org / . MD 20814 - 3991 . Copyright © 2008 by the American Physiological Society . ISSN : 0031 - 9333 , ESSN : 1522 - 1210 . Visit our published quarterly in January , April , July , and October by the American Physiological Society , 9650 Rockville Pike , Bethesda provides state of the art coverage of timely issues in the physiological and biomedical sciences . It is Physiological Reviews on F eb r ua r y 13 , 2015 D o w n l oaded f r o m