Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 Collaborative Writing as a Process of Formalizing Group Memory’ Munir Mandviwalla Temple University Computer and Information Sciences Abstract A common form of collective memory is the group - authored document . Examining collaborative writing from the group memory perspective may yield important design and theoretical insights . This paper views collaborative writing as a cognitive process in which a portion of group memory is formalized . This view is the basis for expanding an existing model of individual writing to include colla . borative writing and group memory . A collaborative writing tool is analyzed with the design implications from the expanded model . Zbe analysis suggests that a group memory view of collaborative writing contributes useful insights that can guide the design of computer - based ‘colkborative writing tools . 1 . Introduction In today’s increasingly team - based organizations , team work often culminates in the production of reports that reflect the contributions of their various members . Such contributions may take the form of independently written sections or may stem from direct collaboration on all or portions of these documents . Attempting to reconcile the words and ideas of individuals with the intent of the group is a difficult and daunting task . Computer - based collaborative writing tools may serve an important role in helping teams successfully complete their collaborative writing tasks . Over the past decade a rich body of empirical and developmental work has emerged on computer - based systems that support collaborative writing [ 10 , 18 , 20 ] . Previous work has typically viewed collaborative writing from one or a combination of the following perspectives : a task focus in which the production of a joint report is the root of analysis and typically addresses issues of partitioning and coordination ; a communication focus Stanley D . Clark II Kent Sandoe Claremont Graduate School Programs in Information Science that emphasizes media effects and representation ; and a group focus that emphasizes roles , interdependence , and management of conflict . This paper will explore an alternative perspective in which collaborative writing is viewed as a cognitive process in which a portion of group memory is formalized . It is our contention that collaborative documents emerge from the process of formalizing abstract and concrete memories to a concrete representation - - the document . A collaborative document at the most basic level is created by some type of collective thinking process . Examining the formation of a collective memory can provide useful insights into this thinking process . 2 . Previous work on collaborative writing There are several empirical studies of the collaborative writing process [ lo , 18 , 3 , 21 . These studies are useful for understanding the activities that occur in the collaborative writing act . However , a cognitive account of the underlying processes involved in collaborative writing is missing . A number of experimental and commercial systems support collaborative writing ( e . g . , SASSE [ l ] , PREP [ 171 , GROVE [ 41 , Quilt [ 111 , ForComment , Markup , and Aspects ) . Some are full featured multi - user writing systems , while others focus on specific aspects of collaborative writing such as annotation . All are self - contained systems that concentrate on supporting interaction among collaborators . Sharples et al . [ 20 ] in a summary of collaborative writing research issues , identify partitioning strategies , interleaving of tasks , interdependence among group members , roles , conflict management , communication and media effects , and constraints , as areas of previous and future research . ’ Author contact information : Munir Mandviwalla : mandviwm @ astro . ocis . temple . edu . Stan Clark : clarksQcgs . edu . Kent Sandoe : sandoek @ cgs . edu 1060 - 3425 / 95 $ 4 . 00 0 1995 IEEE 342 Proceedings of the 28th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ' 95 ) 1060 - 3425 / 95 $ 10 . 00 © 1995 IEEE Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 THE r . RITER’S L O N G - T E R M M E M O R Y 11 Knawladge 0 , Topic , Audience . at - d wimp Plm ! J V . FtITING PROCESS I Figure 1 : Individual Writing Model ( [ 5 ] ) In the following sections of the paper we develop a cognitive description of collaborative writing as a process in which group memory is formalized . We introduce a model of individual writing from the collaborative perspective . An expanded model of collaborative writing is proposed where writing is viewed as the process of formalizing group memory . The model and requirements from previous studies of collaborative writing are used to describe and then analyze the design of a prototype tool called GroupWord . 3 . Importance of individual writing Studies show that individual work is integral to collaborative writing . Kraut et al . , [ lo ] report that authors divide responsibility for tasks among themselves ; sequencing their work so that a partner remains passive until they receive a completed task . In their study , individuals work on assigned portions of a project , meet frequently to discuss ideas and share feedback , and rely on simple mechanisms to facilitate collaboration . The proportion of joint work to independent work is moderated by the type of task , phase of the project , and channels available to the group [ 6 ] . Posner and Baecker [ 18 ] define single writer , scribe , separate writers , joint writing , and consulted ( i . e . , outside consultant ) as collaborative writing strategies . The first three strategies emphasize individual work . 4 . Individual writing model Flower and Hayes [ 5 ] present a model of the cognitive process underlying the individual writing task ( see Figure 1 ) . The model is based on a detailed protocol analysis of the writing process and consists of planning , translating , and reviewing . During the writing , individuals access their long term memory for topic , audience , and writing plan knowledge . The components of the model represent elementary mental processes that may be performed at any time ; they do not represent stages of linear activity . The processes have a hierarchical structure in which any given process may be embedded in another process . A “monitor” governs the writer’s movement from one process to another . Major aspects of the planning process include goal - setting , generating ideas , and organizing . The writing is directed by a network of hierarchically related goals . 5 . Understanding collaborative writing 5 . 1 . The underlying forces According to Flower and Hayes [ 5 ] , there are three forces that serve as critical inputs to the individual writing process . These forces also play a role in collaborative writing : l the text produced so far , l individual long term memories and stored knowledge , and l the task . Text - . Each additional word and sentence in a growing document constrains the text that comes next . In other words , the document is a unfolding concrete - representation of memory and the initial scaffolding in this memory constrains the structures that come next . For example , a sentence created by one writer establishes a concrete memory that influences the sentence construction of another writer because of the need to maintain conceptual and stylistic consistency . The text produced in the document also represents the formalization of the various memories involved in the collaborative writing task . 343 Proceedings of the 28th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ' 95 ) 1060 - 3425 / 95 $ 10 . 00 © 1995 IEEE Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 Each writer will bring a different set of individual memories to the collaborative writing task . These memories will come from printed materials such as a reference book and memories stored inside a writer’s brain cells . One problem in the individual writing task is accessing this memory to serve the current context . In the collaborative writing situation fragments of one writer’s memories have the potential of triggering and mixing with the memories of other writers . For example , a sentence or spoken utterance by one writer may trigger : concrete memories in a second writer which may involve either factual information or inferences about the first writer’s orientation ; or abstract memories such as conceptualizing the point being made or thoughts about the cultural background of the issue . Thetask . Some groups may see document creation as a primary task , others may see it as a secondary result of their main mission . In terms of timing , a group may be engaged in collaborative writing on a continuous or on - going basis from its inception forward , or it may attempt to document its activities in a post - hoc or after - the - fact fashion . Arrayed in their simplest terms , the dimensions of role ( primary and secondary ) and timing ( continuous and post - hoc ) provide four basic modes of interaction . These modes of interaction place different constraints on the writing process . For example , a secondary role and post - hoc scenario may require fewer revisions and a lower intensity of interaction during the writing process . How the task is stored in memory may also influence the writing . For example , one writer may interpret the task based on the language or wording of the problem statement . Others may use the social structure surrounding the problem statement to understand what the “real task is . ” 5 . 2 . The formalization process Writing also involves four basic processes : planning , translating , reviewing , and monitoring [ 5 ] . The processes are embedded in each other in a recursive iterative manner . Each process is described next in the context of collaborative writing . planninp . The term planning refers to the formation of an internal representation of the writing related knowledge . This internal planning knowledge includes abstract images that will eventually lead to the prose in the document . Planning in a collaborative situation may also be understood as the process of creating a group memory where abstract and concrete knowledge is formalized into a document . Where formalization is the key process of creating a concrete group memory . Examples include establishment of shared goals on procedures ( “lets start with a discussion of problem” ) and content ( “we should put in something about our methodology” ) , grouping and organizing together ideas from different writers , and the actual generation of ideas and text . Translatinp . This is the process of creating text to represent ideas . In the individual writing process , writers are sometimes overwhelmed by the amount of information that they need to juggle in short term memory . The collaborative situation may place greater demands on short term memory given that writers will be faced with having to translate and understand ideas from other writers . Reviewing . This process occurs as a planned activity or is triggered by an unplanned evaluation of written text . In collaborative writing , the reviewing process is where coordination problems are most likely to surface . Revising a group memory is a fertile ground for conflict such as when one writer’s revisions of another’s work are viewed as a rejection of the original writer’s interpretation of the collective memory . One way to understand this problem is to consider the act of revising as an exercise in interpreting the memories embedded in the document . & IQ & X . The monitor strategizes the above processes in terms of sequencing and time spent . Such activities may need to be negotiated in the collaborative case . For example , one writer triggered by their internal monitor may want to move on to formal review while another may desire to keep writing . One indication of successful writing is returning to high level goals . In collaborative writing this process may be aided by the collective memory of the group that remembers goals and reminds other members of those goals . However , the collective memory may be so large and fragmented that nothing of value can be contributed . Thus , providing for a useful group memory is an important issue in designing a collaborative writing tool . 6 . Model of collaborative writing In the previous section , the individual writing model of Flower and Hayes [ 5 ] was expanded to describe collaborative writing issues . This section integrates these issues into a group memory - oriented model of collaborative writing ; an integrated model is useful for generating research hypotheses and design implications . It should be emphasized that this is a first - cut working model that requires refinement through empirical testing . 344 Proceedings of the 28th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ' 95 ) 1060 - 3425 / 95 $ 10 . 00 © 1995 IEEE Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 INDIVIDUAL GROUP ACTIVITY MEMORY planning , coordinating norming , defining rules , procedures norms , roles I I ORGANIZATIONAL / EXTRA - ORGANIZATIONAL CONTEXT The form of collective memory has been described as ranging from the abstract , informal and intangible to the concrete , formal , and tangible [ 19 ] . To the extent that a collaborative document reflects the memory of its writers , it is likely to be located on the latter part of this continuum . After all , documents themselves are concrete , tangible , and formed through the articulation of highly formal symbols . However , the abstract memories and interpretations of the concrete memories play a critical part in the collaborative writing process . Therefore , a group memory view of collaborative writing implies the need to attend to all the various forms of memory ; not just the concrete representation . The model in Figure 2 shows three processes that reflect this need . The processes are continuously active during the collaborative writing task : Forming . All groups begin making memory immediately and automatically as soon as their members start to interact . Principally , this occurs through the establishment of norms and the definition of roles . Forming is the construct in which some of the constraints on the writing process ( long term memories and the task ) combine together to establish a contextualized non - verbal working area in memory for framing and formalizing activities . Framinp . Refers to activities that include the creation of document preparation rules and procedures . One important activity is the role definition . For example , one individual is often assigned to coordinate and monitor the writing process , others to produce specific document segments , and still others to review and edit the material . . . & m & kng . This is the act of collaborative writing in which the forming and framing activities are crystallized into text . Formalizing also includes revising and editing . From the group memory perspective , these activities also involve formulating abstract memories to concrete text2 . Each of these processes are continuously active and may interrupt another process . They are organized in a hierarchical nested manner . For example , a formalizing process may contain several embedded framing processes . 7 . Design implications The group memory model of collaborative writing presents interesting design implications for developing computer - based support for collaborative writing : Entanplement . When writers interact through sentences or other media , they transform and absorb memories of other writers . The fidelity with which these memories are transferred may cause problems . Collaborative writing may create so many conflicting memories that writers find it hard to filter and forget material and goals that should be discarded . Writers * We also use the term “formalizing” in this paper to refer to the overall process of creating a group document because the actual writing is the critical step in collaborative writing . Figure 2 : A group memory model of collaborative writing 345 Proceedings of the 28th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ' 95 ) 1060 - 3425 / 95 $ 10 . 00 © 1995 IEEE may end up spending all their time with the framing process to reconcile different backgrounds and not allocate enough time on the important process of formalizing . . . u . It will be difficult to synchronize the forming , framing , and formalizing processes among writers . Writers fluidly move from thinking about some memories such as high level goals ( forming - - framing ) to other memories such as plans for revision ( framing - - formalizing ) . . . m . The act of producing a collective memory can produce different interpretations of the collective memory . As noted earlier this can be a fertile ground for conflict and negotiation . In the remainder of the paper we apply the above insights to analyze the design of computer - based collaborative writing tools . Such an analysis can elicit design options that have been neglected or overlooked in the past . The context of our analysis is the critical evaluation of an existing collaborative writing tool - - GroupWord . 8 . GroupWord GroupWord ( I [ 151 , [ 131 ) is based on the premise that a major component of any writing is the individual working in front of a word - processor . Creating a collaborative writing tool that is separated from the tool used for individual writing can lead to problems in training because users will have to learn two packages ; usage because the interface of the collaborative writing package will probably be different from and less familiar than a word processor ; and features because the collaborative writing tool will probably lack the features of a commercial word processing package . Recent efforts such as SEPIA [ S ] explicitly incorporate individual work support . However , SEPIA only supports the process of doing work individually ; it does not provide the large feature set available in commercial word processors . GroupWriter [ 121 is based on a commercial word processing engine and is interface compatible with Microsoft Word . This approach while addressing some of the problems listed above , still results in a separate self - contained product . GroupWord is built “on top of” Microsoft Word for Windows and Microsoft Access3 . It is programmed with the WordBasic macro language and takes advantage of built - in collaborative writing features in Word for 3 GroupWord was developed in Word for Windows l . lA and has now been upgraded to version 6 . OA . This newest version of GroupWord has been enhanced to use Access 2 . 0 for recording historical information . Windows such as redlining , annotation , and document comparison . GroupWord was designed to work with the CGSE meta environment [ 14 ] . The CGSE meta environment is a groupware shell through which users select the features and applications they need from a menu of options . GroupWord may be used with other environments such as Lotus Notes . The overall strategy is to use the meta environment for general collaboration and GroupWord for document - based collaboration . Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 Requirements ndividual Writing Basic word - processing Seamlessness with other media Collaborative Writing Preserve identities Enhance communication Enhance collaborator awareness Focused collaboration Peripheral awareness Annotations Undo Session control loles Explicit roles Lctivities Variety of activities Brainstorming Researching Planning ( outline ) Planning ( process ) Writing Editing Reviewing Transitions between activities . document Control Methods Several access methods Separate document segments Version and change control Lkiting Strategies One or several writers Synchronous writing Asynchronous writing GroupWord + + + + + + * - - + + - + + * * + + * + + + + + + + - t + + + + + + + + + + Legena : + + gooa , + some , - none , - meta enwronment Table 1 : Design requirements and GroupWord The three main distinguishing characteristics of GroupWord , as compared to other collaborative writing tools , are : l seamlessness with individual writing , l comprehensive individual writing features and , l the assumption that a collaborative writing tool will only support document - specific activities leaving other areas of group support such as guided brainstorming to other groupware applications available from the meta environment . 346 Proceedings of the 28th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ' 95 ) 1060 - 3425 / 95 $ 10 . 00 © 1995 IEEE Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 Most of the other characteristics of GroupWord follow a list of empirically derived collaborative writing requirements provided by Posner and Baecker and associates [ 18 , 11 . Table 1 subjectively rates GroupWord on each requirement . See Appendix I for a detailed description of GroupWord . 9 . GroupWord and group memory Any computer - based writing tool can support the final creation of a concrete representation of group memory . However , collaborative writing and group memory creation is not a stage - based process that ends with a comprehensive “memory dump” to paper . Research indicates that writing with others is a complex process where formalization iteratively occurs in concert with other activities . There are several obstacles to the formalization process that may benefit from computer support . We revisit the design implications presented in section 7 to outline potential obstacles and corresponding solutions . The completeness , accessibility , and relevance criteria identified by Sandoe et al . [ 19 ] for evaluating group memory are used as part of the analysis . Entanglement . Identifying annotations by author can ensure that there is no confusion about who added what . However , annotations may be deleted and it may be difficult to disentangle the underlying meaning of annotations scattered all over the document . For example , to access annotations a writer has to follow the standard linear format of a document . There may be other more useful views of this information . From the perspective of entanglement it would also be useful to keep track of revision marks including the original text . Current collaborative writing tools including GroupWord address this aspect of entanglement by color coding the new text . However , the color coding approach may be incomplete because there are few ways to easily access this information . In addition , a large number of revision and annotation marks jumbled together in one paragraph is confusing . In other words , it is not enough to have a complete recording of all the relevant memories ; the memories also have to be accessible [ 191 . Therefore , the latest implementation of GroupWord also stores a permanent , easily retrievable record of all annotations and revised paragraphs in an database stamped with author , date , and time information . The database allows different views of this information . For example , view changes by historical sequence , by author , or grouped by sub - document . Seeing all the changes made by a particular author in a single screen will help other authors learn ( or revisit ) the thinking underlying the changes . Paragraphs can also be viewed in historical sequence where the writer can see what the paragraph looked like two weeks ago , or what it looked like when it was modified by one writer two weeks ago without any of the changes made by another writer . In a future version , it may also be useful to provide statistical information about changes to the document . For example , Hill et al . [ 9 ] use a scroll bar to visually depict the number of times a section has been read and edited . Another problem of entanglement is differentiating a personal contribution from the group document . Individuals may need to focus solely on the text that they have produced and go through a whole sequence of forming , framing , and formalizing processes before they fully formalize a single thought . If these thoughts are represented too early in the group document then they may entangle with other writers thoughts . GroupWord addresses this issue by emphasizing individual work so that it is possible for users to work on their own on a section . Individual work support is also available in other systems [ e . g . , 8 . 11 . At a higher level , outlining features in GroupWord can delineate different sections of the document . This feature is useful for addressing problems of entanglement at the topic , as opposed to the paragraph and sentence construction level . . . Svnchronu ; atlon . Most current collaborative writing tools synchronize access to the formalized document through various strategies . For example , in GroupWord write access to the document is coordinated to an event : the release of a section . A potential problem in this or any other scheme is that the type of access may be incompatible with a particular writer’s style of working . In a computer - based environment it is important to establish some type of structured methodology for shared file access ; whether it is implemented at the sentence , paragraph , section , or document level is dependent on the flexibility and power of the underlying computing environment . Our model of collaborative writing suggests that the process of formalizing a group document is an iterative recursive process . A writer may formalize one sentence in one part of the document , but this may trigger some framing activities that influence another part of the document , that may in turn trigger the revision of a paragraph in another part of the document . Computer - based synchronization of collaborative writing will have to balance the need to provide a flexible mode of working and at the same time guarantee structured and safe access to the main group document . . Annotation and revision marking features in GroupWord and other tools can support the recording of a negotiation process . The negotiation information must be easily accessible in the collaborative 347 Proceedings of the 28th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ' 95 ) 1060 - 3425 / 95 $ 10 . 00 © 1995 IEEE Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 writing tool ( or environment ) . Decision making tools are also needed because a simple record of the negotiating process does not help with the actual negotiation . Since negotiation in writing centers around text , these tools will have to operate within the medium of a document . For example , it may be useful to have a voting tool pop - up over the document , automatically collect the text under contention , and then present all the proposed revisions to that text to other writers as voting choices . At present , GroupWord does not support this feature . There may be a short window of opportunity in the document creation process where such negotiation features will be used ; unless the issue is very important , writers will tend to forget the actual context of the disagreement . 10 . Conclusion There is still a great deal of research needed on what group memory is , the process of collaborative writing , and how the two interact . In this paper , we have expanded an existing and relatively well - supported model of individual writing to collaborative writing using group memory as the main construct . A recurring theme in our analysis is that collaborative writing involves important memories that support the process of creating a final document . These process meta - memories which involve negotiations , synchronization steps , and strategies to avoid entanglement are typically forgotten and lost when the group has finished the task of document construction . However , capturing met & memories and providing computer - based tools to act upon them during the collaborative writing process may assist groups in the goal of creating better documents . References 1 . Baecker , R . M . , Nastos , D . , Posner , I . R . , & Mawby , K . L . The User - centered Iterative Design of Collaborative Writing Software . Proceedings of IhTERCHZ’ 93 , 399 - 405 . 2 . Beck , E . E . , A Survey of Experiences of Collaborative Writing . In Sharples , M . ( ed . ) Computer Supported Collaborative Writing . Springer - Verlag , London , 1993 , pp 87 - 112 . 3 . Dillon , A . How Collaborative is Collaborative Writing ? An Analysis of the Production of Two Technical Reports . In Sharples , M . ( ed . ) Computer Supported Collaborative Writing . Springer - Verlag , London , 1993 , pp 69 - 85 . 4 . Ellis , C . , Gibbs , S . , & Rein , G . Groupware : Some Issues and Experiences . Communications of the ACM , 34 ( 1 ) , 1991 , 39 - 58 . 5 . Flower , L . S . , & Hayes , F . R . A cognitive process theory of writing . College Composition and Communication , 32 , 1981 , 365 - 387 . 6 . Galegher , J . & Kraut , R . Computer - Mediated Communication and Collaborative Writing : Media Influence and Adaptation to Communicative Constraints . Proceedings of CSCW’92 , 155 - 162 . 7 . Greenberg , S . Personalizable Groupware : Accommodating Individual Roles and Group Differences . Proceedings of European CSCW’91 , 17 - 3 1 . 8 . Haake , J . M . & Wilson , B . Supporting Collaborative Writing of Hyperdocurnents in SEPIA . Proceedings of CSCW’92 , 138 - 146 . 9 . Hill , W . , Hollan , J . , Wroblewski , D . , & McCandless , T . Edit Wear and Read Wear . Proceedings of CHI’92 , 3 - 9 . 10 . Kraut , R . , Galegher I . , & Egido , C . Relationships and Tasks in Scientific Research Collaborations . Greif , I . ( Ed . ) Computer Supported Cooperative Work : A book of Readings , California : Morgan Kaufmann , 1988 . 11 . Leland , M . , Fish , R . , & Kraut , R . Collaborative Document Production using Quilt . Proceedings of CSCW’88 , 206 - 215 . 12 . Malcolm , N . & Gaines , B . R . A Minimalist Approach to the Development of a Word Processor Supporting Group Writing Activities . Proceedings of COCS’91 , 147 - 152 . 13 . Mandviwalla , M . The Design of Group Support astems . Unpublished Ph . D . dissertation , Programs in Information Science , Claremont Graduate School , January , 1994 . 14 . Mandviwalla , M . , Gray , P . , Olfman , I . . , & Satzinger , J . The Claremont GDSS Support Environment . Proceedings of HICSS’91 , III , 600 - 607 . 15 . Mandviwalla , M . & Clark , S . The Importance of Individual Work in Collaborative Writing . Working Paper . Temple University , September 1993 . 16 . Miles , V . , McCarthy , J . , Dix , A . , Harrison , M . , & Monk , A . Reviewing Design for a Synchronous - - Asynchronous Group Editing Environment . In Sharples , M . ( Ed . ) Computer Supported Collaborative Writing . London : Springer - Verlag , 1993 , 137 - 160 . 17 . Neuwirth , C . , Kaufer , D . , Chandhok , R . , & Morris , J . Issues in the Design of Computer Support for Co - writing and Commenting . Proceedings of CSCW’90 , 183 - 195 . 18 . Posner , I . R . , & Baecker , R . M . How People Write Together . Proceedings of HZCSS’92 , IV , 127 - 138 . 19 . Sandoe , K . , Olfinan , L . , & Mandviwalla , M . Meeting in Time : Recording the Workgroup Conversation . Proceedings of ICIS’91 , 26 1 - 27 1 . 20 . Sharples , M . , Goodlet , J . S . , Beck , E . E . , Wood , C . C . , Easterbrook , S . M . , & Plowman , L . Research Issues in the Study of Computer Supported Collaborative Writing . In Sharples , M . ( Ed . ) Computer Supported Collaborative Writing . London : Springer - Verlag . 1993 , 9 - 28 . 348 Proceedings of the 28th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ' 95 ) 1060 - 3425 / 95 $ 10 . 00 © 1995 IEEE Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 Appendix I - - Description of GroupWord GroupWord will operate on any Windows 3 . X compatible personal computer and network . It requires Microsoft Word for Windows 6 . OA and , optionally for revision and annotation history , Microsoft Access 2 . 0 . A copy of the application resides on each workstation while the documents are stored on the central server . The GroupWord architecture uses a multi - document design . The group document is a composite document that consists of sub - documents ( sections ) . The composite document has pointers ( or links ) which reference the sub - documents . The system automatically creates individual views of documents based on user and terminal information . The documents and sections are maintained in a manner that is transparent to everyone except the document coordinator . S & ~ QJD Menu Structure . GroupWord consists of a set of custom menus along with associated routines that complement the standard Word for Windows interface . Through this interface a team member has an independent view of the composite group document and can edit individual sections . Figures 1A and 1B show the composite and section views . The user can go back and forth to the normal Word for Windows menus by selecting Restore or GroupWord from the Utilities menu . Figure IB : File Menu in Document Section d asynchronous access . Team members can work on the group document at any time assuming they have the appropriate access . Simultaneous access is available whether it is from the same location - - such as a conference room where the team is gathered for a meeting , or from distributed locations - - such as individuals in their offices conversing on the phone . & les . Team members have different roles in the collaboration process . For example , a reviewer has different requirements than a person that contributes text . GroupWord supports different roles such as writing , editing , commenting , or simply viewing various sections . Unlike systems such as Quilt [ ll ] , roles are not explicitly assigned in GroupWord . The user may change roles by picking the appropriate command from the menu . . Multiple users access the composite document in read - only mode while working in individual sections . Sections may be as large or small as necessary for the functioning of the group . Users may only edit a section of the document at a time . To edit a section of the group document a user places the cursor in the area of the document to be edited and then pulls down the Edit menu shown in Figure 2 . By clicking on Edit section . . . users can edit the section in a separate sub - section window if they have the appropriate authority . The menus in this window allow access to a selected subset of Word for Window’s standard features . In this menu , users can at any point select Save for Group ( see Figure 1B ) to save their changes and update the group document . GroupWord supports an “explicit release’ floor control scheme in which the person editing a section must explicitly release it ( by closing the sub - document ) before it is available to another user for editing [ 7 ] . Other members can see additions and changes to the main group document by updating their view . Edit section . . . Bedline section . . . Get Updated View . Figure 2 : Menus in Composite Document . . m . When a section of the group document is locked for annotation , only the assigned owner can edit the section , while others have annotation capability . Users select the portion of the group document that they wish to annotate and then click on Annotate section . . . from the Edit menu ( see Figure 2 ) . Within the sub - document users follow the normal annotation procedures of Word for Windows . The system automatically inserts a user’s initials beside every annotation . To remain anonymous , users can select Annotate Anonymously to insert ‘ANON’ instead of 349 Proceedings of the 28th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ' 95 ) 1060 - 3425 / 95 $ 10 . 00 © 1995 IEEE Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii international Conference on System Sciences - 1995 their initials . Redlining is accessed in a manner similar to annotating . Additions and revisions by individual team members are marked so that deleted text is not erased but merely crossed out , new text is underlined , and change indicators in the margin show where the text has been changed . Views of the w . As with reports run against a database , a user’s view of the composite document is current as of the moment it was obtained , but the view does not automatically change as the underlying document information changes . Users get a new view every time they enter the composite document or update a sub - document . At any time users can go to the View menu ( see Figure 2 ) and select Get Updated View . . . . e The collaborative writing process is started with a designated document coordinator who generates the group document by importing documents , outlining the document , or starting with a blank slate . An underlying assumption is that collaborative writing takes place in a cooperative environment where free flow of information between members of the group is the expected norm . Therefore , all members of the group can view all parts of the document . 350 Proceedings of the 28th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ' 95 ) 1060 - 3425 / 95 $ 10 . 00 © 1995 IEEE