Volume 22 December 1 , 2011 4563 MBoC | ARTICLE The actin nucleation factor JMY is a negative regulator of neuritogenesis Elif Nur Firat - Karalar , Peter P . Hsiue , and Matthew D . Welch Department of Molecular and Cell Biology , University of California , Berkeley , Berkeley , CA 94720 ABSTRACT Junction - mediating and regulatory protein ( JMY ) is a p53 cofactor that was re - cently shown to nucleate actin assembly by a hybrid mechanism involving tandem actin monomer binding and Arp2 / 3 complex activation . However , the regulation and function of JMY remain largely uncharacterized . We examined the activity of JMY in vitro and in cells , its subcellular distribution , and its function in fibroblast and neuronal cell lines . We demonstrat - ed that recombinant full - length JMY and its isolated WASP homology 2 domain , connector , and acidic region ( WWWCA ) have potent actin - nucleating and Arp2 / 3 - activating abilities in vitro . In contrast , the activity of full - length JMY , but not the isolated WWWCA domain , is sup - pressed in cells . The WWWCA domain is sufficient to promote actin - based bead motility in cytoplasmic extracts , and this activity depends on its ability to activate the Arp2 / 3 complex . JMY is expressed at high levels in brain tissue , and in various cell lines JMY is predominantly cytoplasmic , with a minor fraction in the nucleus . Of interest , silencing JMY expression in neuronal cells results in a significant enhancement of the ability of these cells to form neu - rites , suggesting that JMY functions to suppress neurite formation . This function of JMY re - quires its actin - nucleating activity . These findings highlight a previously unrecognized func - tion for JMY as a modulator of neuritogenesis . INTRODUCTION The actin cytoskeleton plays essential roles in basic cellular pro - cesses , including migration , adhesion , division ( Pollard and Cooper , 2009 ) , and membrane trafficking ( Lanzetti , 2007 ) , as well as in spe - cialized processes like neuritogenesis ( Kessels et al . , 2010 ) . In the case of cell migration , dynamic actin polymerization in protrusive structures such as filopodia and lamellipodia generates the force that drives leading - edge protrusion . Neuronal cells also rely on these membrane protrusions for establishment of polarity , forma - tion of growth cones , and neurite extension during development and differentiation . Understanding how the actin cytoskeleton con - tributes to these cellular processes requires a complete character - ization of the regulators of actin polymerization . Nucleation is the rate - limiting step in actin polymerization and is accelerated by three classes of nucleators : the Arp2 / 3 complex and its activators the nucleation - promoting factors ( NPFs ) , formins , and tandem - monomer - binding nucleators ( Campellone and Welch , 2010 ; Firat - Karalar and Welch , 2010 ) . Each has a distinct molecular mechanism of action and mode of regulation . The junction - mediat - ing and regulatory protein ( JMY ) was recently discovered as a hy - brid of the NPF and tandem - monomer - binding nucleator classes ( Zuchero et al . , 2009 ) . Originally identified as a partner of the tran - scription coactivator p300 , JMY was shown to function in the p53 response by augmenting p53 - dependent transcription and apop - tosis ( Shikama et al . , 1999 ) . On DNA damage , JMY is released from Mdm2 ( which normally targets it for ubiquitin - dependent degrada - tion ) and accumulates in the nucleus ( Coutts et al . , 2007 ) . These functions are mediated by its unique N - terminal domain and cen - tral coiled - coil region . In addition , JMY has a C - terminal WASP homology 2 domain , connector , and acidic region ( WWWCA ) con - sisting of three actin - binding WH2 domains ( WWW ) and Arp2 / 3 - binding connector ( C ) and acidic ( A ) regions ( Zuchero et al . , 2009 ) . The WWW domain of JMY nucleates unbranched actin filaments independent of the Arp2 / 3 complex by bringing together actin monomers in a manner similar to the tandem - monomer - binding nucleator Spire . In addition , the WWWCA domain activates the Arp2 / 3 complex to promote the formation of Y - branched actin net - works . Thus JMY is unique among known nucleators in combining Arp2 / 3 – dependent and Arp2 / 3 – independent nucleating abilities in the same protein . Monitoring Editor Fred Chang Columbia University Received : Jul 1 , 2011 Revised : Sep 15 , 2011 Accepted : Sep 21 , 2011 This article was published online ahead of print in MBoC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E11 - 06 - 0585 ) on September 30 , 2011 . Address correspondence to : Matthew D . Welch ( welch @ berkeley . edu ) . Abbreviations used : FBS , fetal bovine serum ; JMY , junction - mediating and regu - latory protein ; NPF , nucleation - promoting factor ; RA , retinoic acid ; WWWCA , WASP homology 2 domain , connector , and acidic region . © 2011 Firat - Karalar et al . This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author ( s ) . Two months after publication it is avail - able to the public under an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported Creative Commons License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 ) . “ASCB ® , “ “The American Society for Cell Biology ® , ” and “Molecular Biology of the Cell ® ” are registered trademarks of The American Society of Cell Biology . 4564 | E . N . Firat - Karalar et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell How the actin - nucleating activity of JMY is regulated remains undetermined . The N - terminal domains of NPFs from the well - char - acterized WASP and WAVE families are highly divergent and confer distinct modes of regulation that generally involve modulating the accessibility of the C - terminal WCA domain ( Campellone and Welch , 2010 ) . For WASP and N - WASP , the activity of the WCA do - main is autoinhibited through intramolecular interactions between it and the upstream domains , and inhibition is relieved by the Rho - family GTPases Cdc42 and Rac , the lipid phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate , many SH3 - containing proteins , and phosphoryla - tion ( Miki et al . , 1998 ; Rohatgi et al . , 1999 , 2000 ; Higgs and Pollard , 2000 ; Kim et al . , 2000 ; Prehoda et al . , 2000 ; Torres and Rosen , 2003 ; Tomasevic et al . , 2007 ) . In contrast , the activity of the WCA domain in WAVEs is trans - inhibited by interacting proteins and activated by Rac , phosphatidylinositol ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) - triphosphate , IRSp53 , and phos - phorylation ( Eden et al . , 2002 ; Suetsugu et al . , 2006 ; Derivery et al . , 2009 ; Ismail et al . , 2009 ; Lebensohn and Kirschner , 2009 ) . Because the role of full - length JMY in actin assembly has not yet been deter - mined , it is not clear whether JMY is regulated by a WASP - type , a WAVE - type , or another mechanism . JMY is reported to localize to the nucleus ( Coutts et al . , 2007 ; Zuchero et al . , 2009 ) and also to the leading edge in migrating cells . It plays a role in migration by promoting Arp2 / 3 – mediated actin polymerization ( Zuchero et al . , 2009 ) and by modulating cell adhe - sion through down - regulation of cadherin expression and stability ( Coutts et al . , 2009 ) . In addition , the intrinsic nucleating ability of JMY might be required for its function in the nucleus as a transcrip - tional coactivator ( Coutts et al . , 2009 ) . JMY is also important for spindle migration , asymmetric cell division , and cytokinesis in mouse oocytes ( Sun et al . , 2011 ) . Nevertheless , it remains to be determined whether JMY plays a role in other actin - dependent cellular pro - cesses . Here we investigated the activity of full - length JMY in actin as - sembly in vitro and in cells and the cellular role of JMY in neurons . We found that full - length JMY and the isolated WWWCA region have comparable actin - nucleating and Arp2 / 3 complex – activating abilities in vitro but that the ability of full - length JMY to induce actin polymerization in cells is significantly lower . This suggests that the NPF and nucleating activity of full - length JMY is inhibited under na - tive conditions . Moreover , we report a previously unrecognized role for JMY in neurons as a negative regulator of neurite outgrowth dur - ing differentiation . RESULTS Full - length JMY nucleates actin filaments and activates the Arp2 / 3 complex in vitro JMY contains a unique N - terminal domain , three central coiled - coil segments , a polyproline region , and a C - terminal WWWCA domain ( Figure 1A ) . The isolated JMY WWWCA domain was previously shown to both nucleate actin polymerization and promote Arp2 / 3 complex – mediated actin assembly ( Zuchero et al . , 2009 ) , but the activity of the full - length JMY protein was not described . To deter - mine whether full - length JMY affects actin assembly in vitro , we puri - fied histidine ( His ) - tagged full - length recombinant JMY ( His - JMY ) from insect cells ( Figure 1B ) and examined its ability to promote actin nucleation in the absence and presence of Arp2 / 3 complex using the pyrene – actin polymerization assay . His - JMY induced rapid , dose - dependent actin polymerization in the absence of Arp2 / 3 complex , and actin polymerization was further accelerated in the presence of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Figure 1C and Supplemental Figure S1A ) . The Arp2 / 3 – stimulating activity , but not the intrinsic actin nucleation ac - tivity , was disrupted by mutating a conserved tryptophan residue ( W981 ) in the A domain ( Figure 1C ) , which was implicated in Arp2 / 3 complex binding and activation by all NPFs ( Marchand et al . , 2001 ) . To examine the potential mode of JMY regulation , we next assessed the relative activity of full - length JMY compared with its WWWCA domain . To this end , we purified maltose - binding protein ( MBP ) – tagged , full - length recombinant JMY ( MBP - JMY ) and MBP - JMY - WWWCA from insect cells ( Figure 1B ) and compared their intrinsic nucleating and Arp2 / 3 – activating abilities . At all doses tested , MBP - JMY and MBP - JMY - WWWCA had comparable activities in the ab - sence and presence of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Figure 1D and Supple - mental Figure S1B ) . This suggests that , under these conditions , recombinant full - length JMY is fully active , similar to recombinant WAVEs , as well as the more recently described NPFs WHAMM and WASH ( Campellone et al . , 2008 ; Duleh and Welch , 2010 ; Jia et al . , 2010 ) . It does not appear to be autoinhibited like recombinant N - WASP and WASP ( Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ; Tomasevic et al . , 2007 ) . Because isolation of tightly autoinhibited recombinant WASP re - quired expression in mammalian cells ( Tomasevic et al . , 2007 ) , we also sought to examine the actin polymerization activity of full - length JMY purified from mammalian cells . We generated a stable 293 human epithelial kidney cell line expressing JMY with an N - ter - minal localization and affinity purification ( LAP ) tag ( Cheeseman and Desai , 2005 ) consisting of green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) , a TEV protease cleavage site , and an S peptide ( Supplemental Figure S2A ) . With the use of anti – GFP - antibody affinity chromatography followed by TEV cleavage , S - JMY was purified from the stably trans - fected cell line but not control untransfected cells ( Supplemental Figure S2B ) . No stoichiometric binding partners copurified with JMY under these conditions , although substoichiometric binding part - ners may be present . The activity of JMY expressed in mammalian cells was comparable to that of JMY purified from insect cells ( Sup - plemental Figure S2C ) , suggesting that recombinant JMY is fully ac - tive for actin polymerization regardless of the cell type from which it is purified . To examine the organization of actin filaments nucleated by full - length JMY in the absence and presence of the Arp2 / 3 complex , we visualized individual filaments in polymerization reactions with His - JMY by fluorescence microscopy ( Figure 1 , E and F ) . By itself , His - JMY nucleated unbranched filaments , as described previously for JMY - WWWCA ( Zuchero et al . , 2009 ) . In the presence of the Arp2 / 3 complex , His - JMY stimulated the formation of Y - branches , albeit at a lower frequency than the GST - N - WASP - WWCA control . These re - sults are consistent with the ability of full - length JMY to nucleate actin polymerization by itself and activate Arp2 / 3 – mediated branch - ing and polymerization . JMY - WWWCA promotes actin - based motility by an Arp2 / 3 complex – dependent mechanism To examine the relative contributions of JMY’s intrinsic nucleating activity and its Arp2 / 3 complex – stimulating activity to generate ac - tin - based forces in cell cytosol , we next examined the ability of JMY - WWWCA and the Arp2 / 3 activation – deficient mutant JMY - WWWCA ( W981A ) to promote actin - driven bead motility in Xenopus laevis egg extracts . In similar experiments , other NPFs promote bead mo - tility by an Arp2 / 3 complex – dependent mechanism ( Yarar et al . , 2002 ) . We first purified GST - JMY - WWWCA and GST - JMY - WWWCA ( W981A ) from Escherichia coli and confirmed that GST - JMY - WW - WCA nucleated actin polymerization by itself and activated Arp2 / 3 – mediated actin polymerization , whereas GST - JMY - WWWCA ( W981A ) only nucleated actin polymerization and was defective in activating the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Figure 2A ) . When 0 . 5 - μm - diameter beads were coated with JMY - WWWCA and added to cell extracts , Volume 22 December 1 , 2011 JMY is a negative regulator of neuritogenesis | 4565 they formed actin comet tails ( Figure 2B ) and underwent motility with a mean rate of 7 . 7 μm / min ( standard error of the mean [ SEM ] = 0 . 4 μm / min , n = 20 over three independent experiments ; Figure 2C and Supplemental Movie S1 ) . In contrast , beads coated with mutant JMY - WWWCA ( W981A ) did not undergo motility or form comet tails ( Figure 2B ) . These results demonstrate that JMY - WW - WCA is sufficient to polymerize actin and direct actin - based motility in cell cytosol and that motile force requires an ability to acti - vate the Arp2 / 3 complex . JMY is widely expressed in mammalian tissues and cell lines To begin to investigate the cellular function of JMY , we determined its expression pat - tern in mammalian tissues and cell lines . We generated a polyclonal antibody against full - length His - JMY that recognized a major protein of ∼ 125 kDa , roughly corresponding to the predicted molecular mass of native JMY ( 111 kDa ) , in extracts from a wide range of mouse tissues ( Figure 3A ) and mamma - lian cell lines ( Figure 3B ) . JMY was expressed in most tissues examined and exhibited par - ticularly high expression levels in brain and testis ( Figure 3A ) . In addition , JMY was ex - pressed in all cultured mammalian cell lines tested , including monkey Cos7 and human HFF fibroblasts , human 293 epithelial cells , human SY5Y , mouse Neuro 2a , and rat PC - 12 neuronal cells ( Figure 3B ) . Thus JMY has a wide expression profile in mammalian tis - sues and cell lines . JMY localizes to both nucleus and cytosol Given that JMY has been reported to local - ize to both the nucleus and cytosol ( or lead - ing edge ; Coutts et al . , 2007 , 2009 ; Zuchero et al . , 2009 ) , we next assessed its relative distribution between these two compart - ments by fractionation of monkey Cos7 and mouse Neuro 2a cell lysates into nuclear and cytosolic fractions . The nuclear marker protein NonO and the cytosolic marker pro - tein tubulin fractionated with their respec - tive compartments with little cross - contami - nation , confirming the fidelity of the procedure ( Figure 4 , A and B ) . In each cell line , endogenous JMY was found in both cytosolic and nuclear fractions but was en - riched in the cytosol ( mean ± SEM of cytoso - lic JMY is 81 % ± 1 % [ Cos7 ] , 83 % ± 1 % [ Neuro 2a ] ; Figure 4 , A and B ) . Further frac - tionation of the cytosolic extracts into mem - brane - associated and soluble components demonstrated that JMY did not associate with membranes ( unpublished data ) , in con - trast to other NPFs , including WHAMM , the closest vertebrate homologue of JMY in se - quence ( Campellone et al . , 2008 ) . To further assess the subcellular distribution of JMY , we trans - fected Cos7 cells with an N - terminally enhanced GFP – tagged vari - ant of JMY ( GFP - JMY ) and observed its localization . Consistent with the results of fractionation studies , GFP - JMY was visualized in both FIGURE 1 : Full - length JMY and its isolated WWWCA domain have comparable actin - nucleating and Arp2 / 3 – activating activities in vitro . ( A ) Domain organization of JMY and other NPFs are shown . A , acidic domain ; B , basic domain ; C , connector domain ; CC , coiled - coil region ; GBD , GTPase - binding domain ; N , N - terminal domain ; P , polyproline region ; PRD , proline - rich domain ; SHD , Scar - homology domain ; TBR , tubulin - binding region ; W , WH2 domain ; WAHD1 , WASH homology domain 1 ; WMD , WHAMM membrane interaction domain . ( B ) Purified His - JMY , His - JMY ( W981A ) , MBP - JMY , and MBP - JMY - WWWCA were resolved by SDS – PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue . ( C ) Actin ( 2 μM , 7 % pyrene labeled ) was polymerized with the indicated concentrations of His - JMY with or without 20 nM Arp2 / 3 complex . When not indicated , 200 nM His - JMY or His - JMY ( W981A ) was used . a . u . , arbitrary units . ( D ) Actin was polymerized with the indicated concentrations of MBP - JMY or MBP - JMY - WWWCA with or without 20 nM Arp2 / 3 complex . ( E ) Images of actin filaments ( 2 μM actin ) polymerized by 200 nM His - JMY or a GST - N - WASP - WWCA control with or without 10 nM Arp2 / 3 complex . Arrows highlight examples of branched filaments . Scale bar , 5 μm . ( F ) Quantification of the percentage of branched filaments for the conditions described in E . Data are the mean ± SEM of three experiments with at least 200 filaments counted in 10 different fields ( * p < 0 . 05 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 ) . 4566 | E . N . Firat - Karalar et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell the nucleus and cytosol ( Figure 4C ) . In some instances , cytosolic GFP - JMY appeared to be concentrated with actin filaments at the cell periphery in membrane ruffles , similar to what has been re - ported for endogenous JMY at the leading edge of mouse mela - noma cells and human neutrophil cells ( Zuchero et al . , 2009 ) . In agreement with the fractionation data , quantification of the total intensity of GFP - JMY fluorescence in the nucleus versus the cytosol revealed that 19 % ± 1 % was in the nucleus and 81 % ± 1 % was in the cytosol ( mean ± SEM ; Figure 4 , C and D ) . Thus our results demonstrate that most of the JMY in cells is in the cytosol , supporting the notion that JMY carries out actin - depen - dent functions in this compartment . Full - length JMY is less active than JMY - WWWCA in promoting ectopic actin assembly in cells To investigate the mode of regulation of JMY in cells , we assessed the effect of GFP - JMY expression on F - actin abundance . For other NPFs , the effect of protein overex - pression on the overall quantity of F - actin in cells is correlated with their mechanism of regulation . For WASP and N - WASP , which are regulated by autoinhibition ( Miki et al . , 1998 ; Kim et al . , 2000 ; Prehoda et al . , 2000 ) , overexpression of the full - length protein does not lead to an overall increase in cel - lular F - actin ( Campellone et al . , 2008 ) . In contrast , for WAVEs , which are regulated by trans - inhibition ( Eden et al . , 2002 ; Derivery et al . , 2009 ; Ismail et al . , 2009 ; Lebensohn and Kirschner , 2009 ) , overexpression of the full - length protein leads to a global increase in cellular F - actin ( Campellone et al . , 2008 ) . To address whether JMY may be regulated by autoinhibition or trans - regulation in cells , we compared the effects of expressing full - length GFP - JMY or truncated GFP - JMY - WWWCA on F - actin content by quantifying the ratio of fluorescent phalloidin staining intensity in transfected compared with nearby nontransfected cells . Of interest , U2OS and Cos7 cells transfected with GFP - JMY - WWWCA had a sig - nificant increase in F - actin content relative to nearby nontransfected control cells , whereas F - actin content in cells transfected with GFP - JMY was indistinguishable from that in untransfected controls ( Figure 5 , B and C ) . Nevertheless , over the population of cells , GFP - JMY and GFP - JMY - WWWCA were expressed at similar levels ( in U2OS extracts [ GFP - JMY ] = 131 nM , [ GFP - JMY - WWWCA ] = 151 nM ; in Cos7 extracts [ GFP - JMY ] = 63 nM , [ GFP - JMY - WWWCA ] = 76 nM ) . When we quantified and correlated the level of fluorescence of GFP - JMY - WWWCA or GFP - JMY with the intensity of actin fluores - cence in individual U2OS cells , there was a positive correlation for GFP - JMY - WWWCA ( p < 0 . 001 , r 2 = 0 . 22 ) but no correlation for full - length GFP - JMY ( p = 0 . 9 , r 2 = 0 . 0003 ; Figure 5D ) . These observa - tions suggest that JMY - WWWCA is constitutively active , whereas full - length JMY is inhibited in its ability to polymerize actin in cells . JMY does not play a crucial role in the migration of mouse embryonic fibroblast cells Previous studies suggested that JMY plays a role in cell migration in U2OS human osteosarcoma cells ( Coutts et al . , 2009 ; Zuchero et al . , 2009 ) . To investigate whether JMY functions in cell migration in other cell types , we examined the effect of silencing JMY by RNA interference ( RNAi ) in mouse embryonic fibroblasts ( MEFs ) and NIH 3T3 fibroblasts . These cells were transfected with control glyceral - dehyde - 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase ( GAPDH ) small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) or JMY siRNA , and depletion of JMY was confirmed by immunoblotting ( Figure 6A and Supplemental Figure S3A ) . To measure cell migration , confluent cell monolayers were scratch - wounded , and the percentage of wound closure was monitored over 4 . 5 h for MEFs and 12 h for NIH 3T3 cells by phase contrast microscopy . JMY - silenced cells and control cells had a statistically FIGURE 3 : JMY is widely expressed in mammalian tissues and cell lines . ( A ) Extracts from mouse tissues ( 20 μg / lane ) or ( B ) from SY5Y , PC - 12 , Neuro 2a , Cos7 , HFF , NIH 3T3 , 293 , and MEF cells were immunoblotted with anti - JMY antibody . Anti - tubulin antibody was used as a loading control . FIGURE 2 : JMY - WWWCA – coated beads undergo actin - based motility in X . laevis egg extracts . ( A ) Actin ( 2 μM , 7 % pyrene labeled ) was polymerized with 200 nM GST - JMY - WWWCA or GST - JMY - WWWCA ( W981A ) with or without 20 nM Arp2 / 3 complex . ( B ) JMY - WWWCA – and JMY - WWWCA ( W981A ) – coated beads were incubated in X . laevis egg extracts supplemented with rhodamine – actin , and actin structures were visualized by fluorescence microscopy . Arrows highlight bead clusters . Scale bar , 2 . 5 μm . ( C ) Time - lapse images of a rhodamine - labeled actin comet tail ( Figure 2B , inset ) trailing a moving JMY - WWWCA – coated bead . Images were taken at 10 - s intervals . Scale bar , 2 . 5 μm . Volume 22 December 1 , 2011 JMY is a negative regulator of neuritogenesis | 4567 similar percentage of wound closure after 4 . 5 h for MEF cells ( Figure 6 , B and C ; mean ± SEM of 76 % ± 5 % closure for JMY si - lenced cells , 82 % ± 5 % for controls , p = 0 . 45 ) and 12 h for NIH 3T3 cells ( Supplemental Figure S3 , B and C ; mean ± SEM of 62 % ± 3 % closure for JMY - silenced cells , 61 % ± 3 % for controls , p = 0 . 96 ) . Because previous studies showed that the NPF WAVE2 localizes to lamellipodia and is crucial for cell motility ( Suetsugu et al . , 2003 ; Yamazaki et al . , 2003 ; Yan et al . , 2003 ) , we also tested whether the failure to observe a migration defect in JMY - silenced cells might be due to functional redundancy between JMY and WAVE2 . We per - formed similar wound - healing assays in matched WAVE2 − / − MEF cells ( Yan et al . , 2003 ) also silenced for JMY expression as described earlier ( Figure 6A ) . Although WAVE2 − / − cells were defective in wound closure compared with WAVE + / + controls , silencing of JMY expression did not cause a more pronounced migration defect ( Figure 6 , C and D ; 53 % ± 4 % closure for WAVE2 − / − vs . 51 % ± 3 % for WAVE2 − / − and JMY silenced , p = 0 . 68 ) . Thus we were unable to detect a role for JMY during the motility of MEF and NIH 3T3 cells , implying that JMY may not be a universal regulator of cell migration . JMY negatively influences neurite outgrowth upon neuronal cell differentiation in an actin - dependent manner Because we did not observe an effect of JMY silencing on the mi - gration of MEF cells , and because JMY is highly expressed in brain relative to other tissues , we hypothesized that it might have a tissue - specific function in neuronal cells . We therefore investi - gated a role for JMY in neuronal differen - tiation and neurite formation using Neuro 2a mouse neuroblastoma cells , a well - stud - ied cell line that can be induced to differen - tiate and undergo neuritogenesis by retinoic acid ( RA ) treatment ( Wu et al . , 1998 ) . We first examined whether JMY protein levels changed during RA - induced differentiation . Of interest , we observed a strong down - regulation of JMY protein levels over the first 48 h of RA treatment compared with the tubulin loading control ( Figure 7 , A and B ) , suggesting that JMY expression is sup - pressed during differentiation . Biochemical fractionation of Neuro 2a cell lysates into nuclear and cytosolic fractions did not reveal any change in the relative distribution of JMY between the two compartments upon RA - induced differentiation ( Figure 4B ) , sug - gesting that the two pools of JMY are down - regulated proportionally . To investigate whether JMY is function - ally important during neuronal differentia - tion , we examined the effect of JMY silenc - ing by RNAi on RA - induced differentiation , neurite outgrowth , and neuronal morpho - genesis . Neuro 2a cells were transfected either with control GAPDH siRNA or with one of two independent JMY siRNAs and induced to differentiate by RA treatment . Depletion of JMY was confirmed by immu - noblotting ( Figure 7C ) . We first investi - gated the ability of cells to form neurites upon JMY depletion . Surprisingly , we ob - served a statistically significant , twofold increase in the number of cells bearing neurites when JMY was silenced ( Figure 7 , D and E ) . To determine whether the effect on neurite outgrowth was a spe - cific result of JMY silencing , we transfected cells with an siRNA - resistant version of LAP - JMY ( LAP - JMY * ) , which was expressed in siRNA - treated cells as verified by immunoblotting ( Figure 7F ) . Ex - pression of LAP - JMY * , but not LAP alone , rescued the effect on neurite outgrowth , confirming that the previous phenotype is a specific result of JMY silencing ( Figure 7 , F and G ) . We also inves - tigated the effect of JMY depletion on neuronal morphogenesis and F - actin content but did not observe a significant effect on a variety of neurite characteristics , including mean neurite length , mean number of neurites per cell , mean number of neurite branch - points per unit neurite length , or mean F - actin content of neuronal cells ( Supplemental Figure S4 ) . Collectively these results indicate that JMY functions as a negative modulator of neurite outgrowth and that this function may be restricted to the early stages of neu - ritogenesis . Finally , we assessed whether the inhibitory effect of JMY on neu - rite formation requires its actin polymerization activity . To this end , we generated an siRNA - resistant , actin - polymerization defective mutant of JMY missing the WWWCA domain ( LAP - JMY Δ WWWCA ) and tested its ability to rescue the phenotype caused by JMY silencing . Depletion of endogenous JMY and ectopic expression of siRNA - resistant LAP - JMY Δ WWWCA were confirmed by FIGURE 4 : JMY localizes to both the nucleus and the cytosol . ( A , B ) Nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions from ( A ) Cos7 or ( B ) Neuro 2a cells treated with or without retinoic acid ( RA ) for 72 h were resolved by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotted with antibodies to JMY , NonO ( a nuclear marker ) , and tubulin ( a cytosolic marker ) . Relative amounts of JMY in the nucleus and cytosol were determined by densitometry and are represented as the mean ± SEM of three experiments . ( C ) Images of GFP - JMY in Cos7 cells stained for actin filaments with Alexa 568 – phalloidin . JMY localizes to both the nucleus and the cytosol , and is sometimes enriched in membrane ruffles ( top ) . The chosen images represent extremes of GFP - JMY nuclear accumulation ( top , 16 % GFP - JMY intensity in the nucleus ; bottom , 41 % GFP - JMY intensity in the nucleus ) . Scale bars , 5 μm . ( D ) Scatter plot of the percentage of GFP - JMY intensity in the nucleus and cytosol of GFP - JMY – transfected Cos7 cells . Data are from three experiments with 50 cells quantified per experiment . 4568 | E . N . Firat - Karalar et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell immunoblotting ( Figure 7F ) . In contrast with LAP - JMY * , expression of LAP - JMY Δ WWWCA in JMY - silenced cells did not rescue the neu - rite outgrowth phenotype ( Figure 7F ) . Expression of siRNA - resistant LAP - JMY - WWWCA * also did not rescue the neurite outgrowth phe - notype caused by JMY silencing , suggesting that simply increasing the F - actin content of differentiated Neuro 2a cells is not sufficient for rescue and that other domains of JMY play an important role . To examine the relative contributions of JMY’s intrinsic nucleating and Arp2 / 3 complex – stimulating activities to neurite formation , we next tested the ability of an siRNA - resistant Arp2 / 3 activation – deficient mutant , LAP - JMY ( W981A ) * , to rescue the phenotype caused by JMY silencing . Expression of LAP - JMY ( W981A ) * partially rescued the neurite outgrowth phenotype , suggest - ing that JMY’s function in inhibiting neurite formation requires its ability to act as an ac - tin assembly protein and that both its intrin - sic nucleating and Arp2 / 3 complex – stimu - lating activities contribute to this process . DISCUSSION JMY was recently discovered as a unique actin assembly protein that nucleates actin both as a tandem - monomer - binding nuclea - tor and an NPF ( Zuchero et al . , 2009 ) and also functions as a p300 coactivator in the p53 response ( Shikama et al . , 1999 ; Coutts et al . , 2009 ) . Here we show that full - length JMY is fully active as an actin nucleator and NPF in vitro but that its activity is suppressed in cells compared with its isolated WWWCA domain , suggesting that full - length native JMY is regulated by an inhibitory mecha - nism . Moreover , we uncover a new function for JMY in neurite outgrowth during neu - ronal differentiation . Our results demonstrate that purified re - combinant full - length JMY is a potent actin nucleator and Arp2 / 3 – activating NPF and has comparable activity to its WWWCA do - main in vitro . Moreover , recombinant JMY purified from stably transfected mammalian cells is as active as JMY purified from insect cells . These data do not provide direct sup - port for regulation of JMY by autoinhibition . Moreover , we did not find support for trans - regulation of JMY by interacting partners based on the observations that JMY overex - pressed in mammalian cells does not copu - rify with any stoichiometric binding partners and does not fractionate with high – molecu - lar weight complexes in brain extracts like the WAVEs ( Eden et al . , 2002 ; Gautreau et al . , 2004 ; Suetsugu et al . , 2006 ; unpub - lished data ) . Thus our analysis of the activity of recombinant JMY is inconclusive with re - gard to understanding the mechanism of JMY regulation . This is perhaps not surpris - ing , as the biochemical activity of recombi - nant versions of other NPFs exhibit variabil - ity depending on differences in experimental conditions . Purified recombinant WASP and N - WASP , which are known to be regulated by an autoinhibitory mechanism ( Kim et al . , 2000 ; Rohatgi et al . , 2000 ) , exhibit variable activity in vitro , ranging from constitutively active to modestly active ( Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ; Yarar et al . , 1999 ; Tomasevic et al . , 2007 ) . In contrast , native WASP and N - WASP puri - fied from tissue sources are fully autoinhibited ( Higgs and Pollard , 2000 ; Ho et al . , 2004 ) . Similarly , recombinant WAVE complex , which is regulated by trans - inhibition , exhibits activity ranging from full to inactive , depending on the expression and purification methods ( Innocenti et al . , 2004 ; Suetsugu et al . , 2006 ; Derivery et al . , 2009 ; Ismail et al . , 2009 ; Chen et al . , 2010 ) , whereas native WAVE complex is fully inhibited ( Eden et al . , 2002 ; Lebensohn and Kirschner , 2009 ) . Thus the activity of NPFs in vitro depends on the source of protein FIGURE 5 : Expression of JMY - WWWCA causes a global increase in cellular F - actin content , but expression of full - length JMY does not . ( A ) Top , GFP - JMY ( green in merge on right ) and F - actin ( stained with Alexa 568 – phalloidin ; red in merge on right ) in transfected and nontransfected U2OS cells . Bottom , GFP - JMY - WWWCA and F - actin in transfected and nontransfected U2OS cells . Scale bars , 5 μm . ( B , C ) Quantification of the ratio of F - actin staining intensity in transfected / nontransfected ( B ) U2OS or ( C ) Cos7 cells . Data are the mean ± SEM of three experiments with 25 cells examined per sample ( * * * p < 0 . 001 ) . ( D ) Graph of GFP - JMY or GFP - JMY - WWWCA fluorescence intensity vs . Alexa 568 – phalloidin fluorescence intensities plotted for individual transfected U2OS cells . Data are from three experiments with 25 cells per experiment . Lines represent the best fit for each condition ( linear regression analysis : for GFP - JMY - WWWCA , positive linear correlation with a slope of 0 . 5 ± 0 . 1 , r 2 = 0 . 22 , p < 0 . 0001 ; for GFP - JMY , no correlation , r 2 = 0 . 0003 , p = 0 . 9 ) . Volume 22 December 1 , 2011 JMY is a negative regulator of neuritogenesis | 4569 and conditions for purification , with the native protein presumably exhibiting a more natural mode of regulation . Understanding how JMY is regulated may require purification of the native protein from tissue sources to determine whether it is autoinhibited or copurifies with interacting partners that participate in trans - regulation . In contrast to the comparable actin - polymerizing activity of full - length JMY relative to its WWWCA domain in vitro , cells expressing full - length JMY show no increase in F - actin content compared with the higher F - actin levels in cells expressing JMY - WWWCA . This ob - servation suggests that full - length JMY is inhibited in its ability to polymerize actin relative to the WWWCA domain in cells . Cells ex - pressing full - length N - WASP also do not exhibit an increase in F - actin content , whereas cells expressing full - length WAVE2 show a significant increase ( Campellone et al . , 2008 ) . By analogy , this sug - gests that JMY might be regulated by autoinhibition like WASP / N - WASP . In addition to autoinhibition , it is also possible that JMY is regulated by other mechanisms such as posttranslational modifica - tion . For example , WASP ( Cory et al . , 2003 ; Torres and Rosen , 2003 ) , WAVE1 ( Kim et al . , 2006 ) , and WAVE2 ( Lebensohn and Kirschner , 2009 ) are regulated by phosphorylation . Further investigation of au - toinhibition and posttranslational modification as possible regula - tory mechanisms of JMY is required . A distinguishing feature of JMY among actin nucleators is its dual localization to both the cytosol and nucleus . In contrast to previous studies that identified the nucleus as the primary location of JMY ( Coutts et al . , 2007 ; Zuchero et al . , 2009 ) , the results of our cell frac - tionation studies show that ∼ 80 % of JMY is located in the cytosol . Of interest , the fraction of nuclear JMY ranges from ∼ 10 to 40 % in indi - vidual cells , suggesting that JMY may shuttle in and out of the nu - cleus depending on the physiological state of the cell . Although previous studies demonstrated that JMY accumulates in the nucleus upon DNA damage ( Coutts et al . , 2007 , 2009 ) and relocates from the nucleus to the leading edge in migrating cells ( Zuchero et al . , 2009 ) , neither of these triggers was activated in the conditions we used for fractionation and localization ex - periments . We also did not observe redistri - bution of JMY between the nucleus and cy - tosol upon RA - induced differentiation of Neuro 2a cells . Clearly , more work is needed to determine the mechanisms that regulate JMY distribution between nuclear and cyto - solic compartments . The cytosolic pool of JMY does not lo - calize to specific cellular structures , other than a small proportion that colocalizes with actin in membrane ruffles . Despite its local - ization to ruffles , we did not observe a de - fect in cell migration in JMY - depleted MEF and NIH 3T3 cells , regardless of whether MEF cells expressed WAVE2 , an NPF that is important for lamellipodia formation and cell migration ( Yamazaki et al . , 2003 ) . This observation contrasts with recent studies showing that JMY plays a role in cell migra - tion by activating Arp2 / 3 – mediated actin polymerization ( Zuchero et al . , 2009 ) and by down - regulating cadherin expression and stability ( Coutts et al . , 2009 ) . It is noteworthy that we used MEF and NIH 3T3 cells to ex - amine the function of JMY in wound - healing assays , whereas other groups used U2OS epithelial cells . Thus a role for JMY in mi - gration does not appear to be broadly distributed across all cell types . In addition to examining its role in fibroblast cell migration , we also tested the function of JMY in neurons because it is highly ex - pressed in brain relative to other tissues . The actin cytoskeleton plays important roles in various stages of neuronal development , including neurite outgrowth and differentiation , axon path finding , and dendritic spine formation and maintenance ( Kessels et al . , 2010 ) . Although the molecular machinery that regulates actin po - lymerization in neurons is not fully characterized , different actin nu - cleators , including the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Korobova and Svitkina , 2008 ) and its NPFs N - WASP ( Banzai et al . , 2000 ; Pinyol et al . , 2007 ; Wegner et al . , 2008 ) , WAVE1 ( Kim et al . , 2006 ) , and WAVE2 ( Ito et al . , 2010 ) , as well as the tandem actin - monomer - binding nuclea - tor Cordon - bleu ( Ahuja et al . , 2007 ) , were shown to positively regu - late stages of neuronal development through their role in growth cone formation and dynamics . In contrast , we found that JMY is a negative regulator of neurite outgrowth because its depletion in Neuro 2a cells results in a significant increase in the number of cells that form neurites . Our observation that JMY protein levels are sig - nificantly down - regulated upon RA - induced differentiation and neu - rite outgrowth is also consistent with such an inhibitory function . Given that JMY is an actin - nucleating protein , we further investi - gated whether its function in modulating neurite outgrowth involves its actin polymerization activity and what relative contributions its intrinsic nucleating and Arp2 / 3 - stimulating activities make to this process . Rescue experiments with full - length JMY , a mutant that cannot polymerize actin , and a mutant that cannot activate the Arp2 / 3 complex , show that negative regulation of neurite outgrowth requires JMY’s actin - nucleating activity and that both intrinsic and Arp2 / 3 complex – dependent activities participate . Rescue experi - ments with the WWWCA domain of JMY further reveal that the abil - ity of this constitutively active domain to cause a global increase in cellular F - actin is not sufficient for JMY’s function during neurite FIGURE 6 : JMY silencing does not affect cell migration in mouse embryonic fibroblasts . ( A ) Extracts from WAVE2 + / + and WAVE2 − / − cells transfected with GAPDH or JMY siRNAs for 72 h were resolved by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotted with anti - JMY and anti - tubulin antibodies . ( B ) Time course ( 0 – 4 . 5 h ) of wound closure in WAVE2 + / + and WAVE2 − / − cells 72 h after transfection with either GAPDH or JMY siRNA . Scale bars , 10 μm . ( C ) Quantification of the percentage of wound closure 4 . 5 h after wound initiation . Data represent the mean ± SEM of the remaining wound area in three experiments ( * * * p < 0 . 001 ) . 4570 | E . N . Firat - Karalar et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell outgrowth , and that the upstream N - terminal and coiled - coil do - mains are also required , likely for enabling proper cellular localiza - tion and regulation . One key challenge in the future will be to under - stand the molecular mechanism of JMY’s inhibitory role in neurite outgrowth through its effect on actin polymerization . One possibility is that JMY might function as a downstream effec - tor of Rac , Rho , or Cdc42 , which have been shown to regulate cy - toskeletal dynamics in neurons ( Govek et al . , 2005 ) . Rac and Cdc42 function in lamellipodia and filopodia formation in the growth cone ( Kozma et al . , 1997 ) and promote neurite formation ( Sarner et al . , 2000 ; Aoki et al . , 2004 ) . On the other hand , activation of Rho inhibits neurite formation and induces re - traction by antagonizing Rac activity and promoting the polymerization of a thick layer of cortical actin filaments that may in - terfere with the cytoskeletal remodeling needed for neurite formation ( Yamaguchi et al . , 2001 ) . Consistent with this , toxin - me - diated inactivation of Rho ( Jalink et al . , 1994 ) or expression of dominant - negative Rho ( Sebok et al . , 1999 ) induced neurite forma - tion in rat adrenal medulla PC12 and mouse neuroblastoma N1E - 115 cells . Given the similar effects of JMY and Rho inhibition on neurite formation , it seems reasonable to speculate that JMY might be an effector protein of Rho that functions in the assembly of the cortical actin cytoskeleton in neurons . A balance between antagonistic activities of different Rho GTPases is suggested to regu - late neuritogenesis ( Leeuwen et al . , 1997 ) , and JMY might participate in establishing this balance . A second mechanism by which JMY may modulate neurite outgrowth is via a role as a transcriptional regulator . Retinoic acid serves as a master regulator of gene expression during neuronal differentiation by binding to nuclear RA receptors and modulating ex - pression of genes that participate in neu - ronal differentiation ( Clagett - Dame et al . , 2006 ) . Because JMY functions in transcrip - tional regulation by binding to p300 ( Shikama et al . , 1999 ) , a coactivator for diverse tran - scription factors , it might exert its inhibitory function by modulating RA - mediated gene expression . Future work will distinguish be - tween the roles of JMY as a transcription co - factor or actin assembly protein in neurons . Although our study sheds light on the cellular regulation and function of JMY , nu - merous questions remain . One concerns the nature of JMY regulation in cells . Actin - nu - cleating proteins are regulated by small GT - Pases , protein – protein interactions , and / or posttranslational modifications , and it is likely that JMY is also regulated by similar mechanisms . A second question concerns why JMY combines two very different cellu - lar functions—transcriptional regulation and actin assembly—in one protein . Given the emerging role for nuclear actin in transcription regulation ( Skarp and Vartiainen , 2010 ) , it is tempting to speculate that JMY acts as a mo - lecular link between the actin cytoskeleton and the transcription machinery . It will be important to examine transcription - and actin - related functions of JMY in cellular processes , including neuritogen - esis , to understand whether they work together or independently . Answering these questions will contribute to our understanding of the cellular function of JMY and the general mechanisms that regu - late actin dynamics in the cytosol and nucleus . FIGURE 7 : JMY negatively regulates neurite outgrowth in Neuro 2a cells in an actin - dependent manner . ( A ) Extracts from Neuro 2a cells that were induced to differentiate with RA and harvested at the indicated time points were resolved by SDS – PAGE and blotted with anti - JMY antibodies and with anti - tubulin antibodies as a loading control . ( B ) Quantification of JMY expression levels relative to tubulin by densitometry . Data are the mean ± SEM in three experiments . ( C ) Extracts from Neuro 2a cells treated with control GAPDH siRNA or each of two independent JMY siRNAs for 96 h were resolved by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotted with anti - JMY antibodies and anti - tubulin antibodies . ( D ) Quantification of the percentage of cells bearing neurites in Neuro 2a cells transfected with control GAPDH siRNA and two independent JMY siRNAs . Data are the mean ± SEM of three experiments with 500 cells quantified for each ( * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ) . ( E ) F - Actin stained with Alexa 488 – phalloidin in control and JMY - silenced Neuro 2a cells . Arrows highlight cells bearing neurites . Scale bar , 10 μm . ( F ) Extracts from Neuro 2a cells treated with control GAPDH or JMY siRNAs , then transfected with LAP , LAP - JMY * – , LAP - JMY ( W981A ) * – , LAP - JMY Δ WWWCA – , and LAP - JMY - WWWCA * – expressing plasmids and induced with retinoic acid for 48 h , were resolved by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotted with anti - JMY antibodies and anti - tubulin antibodies . ( G ) Quantification of the percentage of cells bearing neurites in Neuro 2a cells treated with control GAPDH or JMY siRNAs , then transfected with LAP – , LAP - JMY * – , LAP - JMY ( W981A ) * – , LAP - JMY Δ WWWCA – , and LAP - JMY - WWWCA * – expressing plasmids and induced with retinoic acid for 48 h . Data are the mean ± SEM of three experiments with 500 cells quantified for each ( * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 ) . Volume 22 December 1 , 2011 JMY is a negative regulator of neuritogenesis | 4571 MATERIALS AND METHODS Plasmids Plasmids are listed in Supplemental Table S1 . The JMY coding se - quence was amplified by PCR from full - length mouse JMY cDNA ( accession BC090835 ; Open Biosystems , Thermo Biosystems , Huntsville , AL ) using primers listed in Supplemental Table S2 . The JMY - W981A point mutation and four silent point mutations in the RNAi - resistant LAP - JMY * , LAP - JMY ( W981A ) * , and LAP - JMY - WW - WCA * were introduced using the QuikChange Site - Directed Muta - genesis Kit ( Stratagene , Santa Clara , CA ) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions using primers listed in Supplemental Ta - ble S2 . The DNA sequence of each construct was verified . Protein expression and purification His - JMY , His - JMY ( W981A ) , MBP - JMY , MBP - JMY - WWWCA , and rArp2 / 3 complex were expressed and purified using the baculovirus expression system . Sf9 and Hi5 insect cells were cultured at 28°C in Grace’s medium supplemented with 2 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ; JR Scientific , Woodland , CA ) , penicillin , and streptomycin . Bacmids and baculoviruses were generated in E . coli and Sf9 cells using the Bac - to - Bac system according to the manufacturer’s instructions ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) . Recombinant proteins were then ex - pressed by infecting Hi5 cells for 72 h at 28°C with the appropriate baculovirus strains . Hi5 cells were pelleted , lysed by freeze – thaw in nickel - nitriloacetic acid ( Ni - NTA ) lysis buffer ( 50 mM NaH 2 PO 4 , pH 8 . 0 , 300 mM NaCl , 10 mM imidazole , and protease inhibitors [ 10 μg / ml each of aprotinin , leupeptin , pepstatin , and 1 mM phenyl - methylsulfonyl fluoride ] ) for the purification of His - JMY and His - JMY ( W981A ) or MBP - binding lysis buffer ( 20 mM Tris , pH 7 . 6 , 250 mM NaCl , 100 mM KCl , 1 mM dithiothreitol [ DTT ] , 1 mM EDTA , 5 % glycerol , and protease inhibitors ) for the purification of MBP - JMY and MBP - JMY - WWWCA and clarified by centrifugation . His - JMY and His - JMY ( W981A ) were purified from the resulting supernatant by Ni - NTA chromatography ( Qiagen , Valencia , CA ) , followed by anion - exchange chromatography on a HiTrap QP column ( GE Healthcare , Piscataway , NJ ) and finally gel filtration chromatography on a Superdex 200 column ( GE Healthcare ) into gel filtration buffer ( 20 mM 3 - ( N - morpholino ) propanesulfonic acid , pH 7 . 0 , 100 mM KCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 5 mM ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid [ EGTA ] , 1 mM EDTA , 0 . 5 mM DTT , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 10 % glycerol , and protease inhibitors ) . MBP - JMY and MBP - JMY - WWWCA were purified from the resulting supernatant by amylose affinity chromatography ( New England BioLabs , Ipswich , MA ) , followed by gel filtration chroma - tography into gel filtration buffer on a Superdex 200 and Superdex 75 column , respectively . rArp2 / 3 complex was purified as described previously ( Goley et al . , 2004 ) . GST - JMY - WWWCA , GST - JMY - WWWCA ( W981A ) , and GST - N - WASP - WWCA were expressed in E . coli BL21 - Rosetta cells grown to OD 600 = 0 . 6 and induced with 1 mM isopropyl β - d - 1 - thiogalactopyranoside for 4 h at 37°C . Following expression , bacte - ria were pelleted and lysed by freeze – thaw and sonication with 1 mg / ml lysozyme in glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) – binding lysis buffer ( 1 × phosphate - buffered saline [ PBS ; 137 mM NaCl , 2 . 7 mM KCl , 8 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 1 . 46 mM KH 2 PO 4 ] , pH 7 . 4 , 250 mM KCl , and protease inhibitors ) . The proteins were purified by affinity chroma - tography on glutathione – Sepharose ( GE Healthcare ) , followed by gel filtration chromatography on a Superdex 75 column ( GE Health - care ) into gel filtration buffer . For affinity purification of recombinant JMY from mammalian cells , JMY was tagged with an N - terminal LAP tag ( LAP - JMY ) con - sisting of GFP , a TEV protease cleavage site , and the S peptide por - tion of RNAse ( Cheeseman and Desai , 2005 ) . The 293 cells were transfected with LAP - JMY , and stable cell lines that express LAP - JMY were selected in 1 mg / ml G418 . LAP - based purification was performed as described previously ( Cheeseman and Desai , 2005 ) with the following modifications . Briefly , cells were lysed in LAP lysis buffer ( 75 mM 4 - ( 2 - hydroxyethyl ) - 1 - piperazineethanesulfonic acid [ HEPES ] , pH 7 . 5 , 1 . 5 mM EGTA , 1 . 5 mM MgCl 2 , 300 mM KCl , 15 % glycerol , 0 . 4 % NP - 40 , and protease inhibitors ) , and LAP - JMY was first isolated from the cell extracts using protein A – Sepharose beads ( GE Healthcare ) coated with anti - GFP antibodies . Bound protein was eluted by cleaving with 0 . 06 mg / ml TEV protease in TEV cleav - age buffer ( 50 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 5 , 1 mM EGTA , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 300 mM KCl , 10 % glycerol , 0 . 05 % NP - 40 , and 1 mM DTT ) . The superna - tant after TEV cleavage contained S - JMY along with other binding proteins . Antibody generation and immunoblotting Polyclonal anti - JMY and anti - GFP antibodies were generated by im - munizing rabbits ( Covance , Berkeley , CA ) with full - length His - JMY and His - GFP , respectively . Antibodies were affinity - purified using standard procedures ( Harlow and Lane , 1988 ) . Anti - JMY was used for immunoblotting at 1 : 4000 . Other primary antibodies used for immunoblotting were anti - JMY ( M - 300 ; 1 : 1000 ; Santa Cruz Biotech - nology , Santa Cruz , CA ) , anti – tubulin E7 ( 1 : 5000 , developed by M . Klymkowsky at the University of Colorado , Boulder , CO , and main - tained by the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank at the Uni - versity of Iowa , Iowa City , IA ) , and anti - NonO ( 1 : 4000 ; BD Biosci - ences , San Diego , CA ) . Horseradish peroxidase – conjugated secondary antibodies were from GE Healthcare . For immunoblot - ting , extracts were resolved by SDS – PAGE and transferred onto ni - trocellulose membranes that were then probed with primary and secondary antibodies and visualized by chemiluminescence ( GE Healthcare ) . For determining tissue - specific expression of JMY , a mouse tissue blot ( Imgenex , San Diego , CA ) was used . Arp2 / 3 – complex activity assays Rabbit skeletal muscle actin and pyrene - labeled actin were pre - pared and pyrene actin polymerization assays were performed es - sentially as described previously ( Goley et al . , 2004 ) . Pyrene actin and unlabeled actin were mixed in G - buffer ( 5 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , and 0 . 2 mM DTT ) to generate a 3 μM G - actin solution with 7 % pyrene – actin . Fourteen μl of reaction mix - ture containing proteins to be tested in the assay was mixed with 6 μl of 10 × initiation buffer ( 20 mM MgCl 2 , 10 mM EGTA , and 5 mM ATP ) , and this mixture was added to 40 μl of G - actin mix to start polymerization . Fluorescence was detected at 20 - s intervals at 365 - nm excitation and 407 - nm emission wavelengths using a mi - croplate reader ( Infinite F200 Pro ; Tecan , Männedorf , Switzerland ) for experiments with MBP - JMY and MBP - JMY - WWWCA or a spec - trofluorimeter ( Fluorolog - 3 ; Horiba Jobin Yvon , Edison , NJ ) for all other experiments . Magellan , version 7 . 0 , software for the mi - croplate reader and DataMax , version 2 . 2 . 12B , software for the spectrofluorimeter were used for data collection . Polymerization reactions were allowed to reach steady state , and curves were nor - malized for differences in steady - state fluorescence . For actin branching experiments , 3 μM actin mix was polymer - ized under the same conditions as those described for the pyrene – actin polymerization assays . Samples were collected as soon as the polymerization reactions reached steady state and immediately sta - bilized with rhodamine – - phalloidin ( Molecular Probes , Invitrogen ) . Stabilized filaments were diluted , applied to poly - l - lysine – coated coverslips ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) , and imaged using an BX51 microscope ( Olympus , Center Valley , PA ) equipped with a 4572 | E . N . Firat - Karalar et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 60 × objective and an Orca - ER camera ( Hamamatsu , Hamamatsu , Japan ) , using μManager software ( Edelstein et al . , 2010 ) . For each condition , branched and unbranched filaments in 10 different im - ages were manually counted using ImageJ software ( National Insti - tutes of Health , Bethesda , MD ) in three separate experiments and the percentage branching was calculated . A filament with more than one branch was counted as one . Image analysis and contrast adjust - ment were done using Photoshop ( Adobe , San Jose , CA ) . Bead motility assays For bead motility experiments , polystyrene microspheres ( 0 . 5 μm , nonfunctionalized ; Polysciences , Warrington , PA ) were incubated on ice with 1 μM GST - JMY - WWWCA or GST - JMY - WWWCA ( W981A ) for 1 h and then blocked with 5 mg / ml bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) for 15 min . Beads were washed and resuspended in CSF - XB ( 10 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 7 , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 , 100 mM KCl , 5 mM EGTA , and 50 mM sucrose ) and kept at 4°C . Beads ( 1 μl ) were incu - bated with 1 μl of actin ( 2 μM , 20 % rhodamine labeled ) and 8 μl of X . laevis egg extract ( Maresca and Heald , 2006 ) , and 2 μl of this re - action was squashed between a microscope slide and 22 - mm - square glass coverslips , sealed , and observed after 15 – 30 min using fluorescence microscopy as described later . To determine rates of movement , fluorescence images were recorded every 10 s , and rates of movement were determined by averaging the distance in a 1 - to 3 - min time interval using ImageJ software . Cell fractionation For nuclear and cytosolic fractionation , cells were washed with PBS and lysed in cytosolic lysis buffer ( 10 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 9 , 10 mM KCl , 0 . 1 mM EDTA , 0 . 4 % NP - 40 , and protease inhibitors ) for 15 min on ice . The homogenate was then centrifuged at 3000 × g for 3 min to sediment nuclei , and the pellet was used to make the nuclear fraction . The supernatant was resedimented at 3000 × g for 5 min , and the resulting supernatant was the cytosolic fraction . The nuclear pellet was washed with cytosolic lysis buffer , resuspended in nuclear lysis buffer ( 20 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 9 , 0 . 4 M NaCl , 1 mM EDTA , 10 % glycerol , and protease inhibitors ) , sonicated on ice , and sedimented at 15 , 000 × g for 5 min , and the resulting supernatant was the nu - clear fraction . Nuclear and cytosolic extract volumes were equalized before taking samples for SDS – PAGE to ensure that equal amounts of each fraction were loaded on the gel . Equal volumes of each frac - tion were resolved by SDS – PAGE and blotted with anti - JMY anti - bodies , and the intensity of JMY bands in each fraction was deter - mined by densitometry using Photoshop . Relative JMY levels in the nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions were calculated after determining the ratio of nuclear and cytosolic JMY band intensities . Mammalian cell culture , transfection , and RNA interference Cos7 , U2OS , 293 , HFF , NIH 3T3 , WAVE2 + / + , and WAVE2 − / − MEFs ( Yan et al . , 2003 ) and SY5Y and Neuro 2a cells were cultured at 37°C in 5 % CO 2 in DMEM ( Invitrogen ) supplemented with 10 % FBS ( JR Scientific ) , penicillin , and streptomycin . PC12 cells were cultured at 37°C in 5 % CO 2 in RPMI 1640 ( Invitrogen ) supplemented with 10 % FBS , penicillin , and streptomycin . For localization of recombinant tagged proteins , mammalian cells were transfected with the indi - cated DNA constructs using Lipofectamine LTX ( Invitrogen ) for Neuro 2a cells and Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) for other cell lines , in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions . At 24 h posttransfection , cells were seeded onto glass coverslips for subse - quent immunofluorescence experiments . To silence JMY expres - sion by RNAi , Neuro 2a cells were transfected independently with 20 nM each of two different siRNAs ( JMY siRNA # 1 : sc - 35725 , Santa Cruz Biotechnology , and JMY siRNA # 2 , ID 75606 , Ambion , Invitro - gen ) using RNAiMAX ( Invitrogen ) . For rescue experiments , Neuro2a cells were transfected with the expression plasmids 24 h posttrans - fection with the siRNAs . For differentiation experiments , Neuro 2a cells at 24 h posttransfection were seeded onto glass coverslips coated with 1 mg / ml poly - d - lysine ( Sigma - Aldrich ) at a density of 10 4 cells / cm 2 . For wound - healing experiments , WAVE2 + / + , WAVE2 − / − , and NIH 3T3 cells were plated on glass - bottom plates ( MatTek , Ashland , MA ) that were marked to guide the localization of wounds . Cells were transfected with 20 nM control GAPDH siRNA or JMY siRNA # 1 once for MEF cells on day 1 and twice for NIH 3T3 cells on days 1 and 2 and were grown to confluency over 72 h . One day before wound - ing , cells were serum starved in DMEM with 0 . 5 % FBS for 16 h . After serum starvation , three parallel wounds were made by scratching the cell monolayer with a 27 - G syringe . Cells were washed with PBS to remove detached cells and replaced with fresh complete me - dium . Phase contrast images of eight different wounds per sample were captured using an Olympus IX71 microscope with a 20 × ( 0 . 75 numerical aperture [ NA ] ) PlanApo phase objective every 1 . 5 h over a period of 4 . 5 h for MEF cells and every 3 h over a period of 12 h for NIH 3T3 cells ( image acquisition described later ) . The wound area at each time point was determined using ImageJ ( Abramoff et al . , 2004 ) , and the percentage of wound closure was defined as the difference between the wound area at 0 h ( defined as 100 ) and the remaining wound area at 4 . 5 h . Immunofluorescence microscopy , image acquisition , and microscopic quantification For immunofluorescence experiments , cells were washed with PBS , fixed in PBS with 2 . 5 % paraformaldehyde for 30 min at 37°C , and permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 for 5 min . They were then blocked with PBS with 1 % BSA and 1 % FBS and treated with 4 U / ml Alexa Fluor 488 – phalloidin or Alexa Fluor 568 – phalloidin ( Invitro - gen ) in PBS with 1 % BSA . Coverslips were mounted on glass slides using ProLong Gold antifade reagent ( Invitrogen ) . Images were acquired using 20 × ( 0 . 75 NA ) , 60 × ( 1 . 40 NA ) , or 100 × ( 1 . 35 NA ) PlanApo objective lenses on an Olympus IX71 mi - croscope equipped with a Coolsnap HQ camera ( Photometrics , Tucson , CA ) . Images were captured using MetaMorph ( Universal Imaging , Molecular Devices , Sunnyvale , CA ) or μManager ( Edelstein et al . , 2010 ) software and converted to 8 - bit tiff files , and brightness / contrast levels were adjusted using Photoshop . Quantification was done in a blinded manner by scoring cells that were chosen ran - domly . Statistical significance and p values were assessed by analy - sis of variance and Student’s t tests using Prism software ( GraphPad Software , La Jolla , CA ) . For quantification of total GFP - JMY levels in the cytosol and nu - cleus of cells expressing GFP - JMY , images of transfected cells were acquired as described earlier . Nuclear and cytosolic boundaries were outlined , and the GFP - JMY fluorescence intensity in each area was measured using Photoshop . Relative GFP - JMY levels in the nucleus and cytosol were calculated by dividing the fluorescence intensity of each area by the total fluorescence intensity of the cell . For quantification of relative F - actin levels in cells expressing GFP - JMY and GFP - JMY - WWWCA , images of transfected and non - transfected cells in the same field were acquired as described ear - lier . Cell boundaries were outlined , and the mean intensity of Alexa Fluor 568 – phalloidin fluorescence was measured using Photoshop . F - Actin fluorescence intensities from transfected cells were then normalized relative to that of nearby nontransfected cells that had a similar overall area . For images with more than one nontransfected Volume 22 December 1 , 2011 JMY is a negative regulator of neuritogenesis | 4573 complex and enhances actin polymerization by WASP . Mol Cell 11 , 1229 – 1239 . Coutts AS , Boulahbel H , Graham A , La Thangue NB ( 2007 ) . Mdm2 targets the p53 transcription cofactor JMY for degradation . EMBO Rep 8 , 84 – 90 . Coutts AS , Weston L , La Thangue NB ( 2009 ) . A transcription co - factor inte - grates cell adhesion and motility with the p53 response . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 , 19872 – 19877 . Derivery E , Lombard B , Loew D , Gautreau A ( 2009 ) . The Wave complex is intrinsically inactive . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 66 , 777 – 790 . Duleh SN , Welch MD ( 2010 ) . WASH and the Arp2 / 3 complex regulate endosome shape and trafficking . Cytoskeleton 67 , 193 – 206 . Edelstein A , Amodaj N , Hoover K , Vale R , Stuurman N ( 2010 ) . Com - puter control of microscopes using μManager . Curr Protoc Mol Biol Unit14 . 20 . Eden S , Rohatgi R , Podtelejnikov AV , Mann M , Kirschner MW ( 2002 ) . Mechanism of regulation of WAVE1 - induced actin nucleation by Rac1 and Nck . Nature 418 , 790 – 793 . Firat - Karalar EN , Welch MD ( 2010 ) . New mechanisms and functions of actin nucleation . Curr Opin Cell Biol 23 , 4 – 13 . Gautreau A , Ho HY , Li J , Steen H , Gygi SP , Kirschner MW ( 2004 ) . Purification and architecture of the ubiquitous Wave complex . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101 , 4379 – 4383 . Goley ED , Rodenbusch SE , Martin AC , Welch MD ( 2004 ) . Critical conforma - tional changes in the Arp2 / 3 complex are induced by nucleotide and nucleation promoting factor . Mol Cell 16 , 269 – 279 . Govek EE , Newey SE , Van Aelst L ( 2005 ) . The role of the Rho GTPases in neuronal development . Genes Dev 19 , 1 – 49 . Harlow E , Lane D ( 1988 ) . Antibodies : A Laboratory Manual , Cold Spring Harbor , NY : Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press . Higgs HN , Pollard TD ( 2000 ) . Activation by Cdc42 and PIP ( 2 ) of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASp ) stimulates actin nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex . J Cell Biol 150 , 1311 – 1320 . Ho HY , Rohatgi R , Lebensohn AM , Le M , Li J , Gygi SP , Kirschner MW ( 2004 ) . Toca - 1 mediates Cdc42 - dependent actin nucleation by activating the N - WASP - WIP complex . Cell 118 , 203 – 216 . Innocenti M , Zucconi A , Disanza A , Frittoli E , Areces LB , Steffen A , Stradal TE , Di Fiore PP , Carlier MF , Scita G ( 2004 ) . Abi1 is essential for the formation and activation of a WAVE2 signalling complex . Nat Cell Biol 6 , 319 – 327 . Ismail AM , Padrick SB , Chen B , Umetani J , Rosen MK ( 2009 ) . The WAVE regulatory complex is inhibited . Nat Struct Mol Biol 16 , 561 – 563 . Ito H , Morishita R , Shinoda T , Iwamoto I , Sudo K , Okamoto K , Nagata K ( 2010 ) . Dysbindin - 1 , WAVE2 and Abi - 1 form a complex that regulates dendritic spine formation . Mol Psychiatry 15 , 976 – 986 . Jalink K , van Corven EJ , Hengeveld T , Morii N , Narumiya S , Moolenaar WH ( 1994 ) . Inhibition of lysophosphatidate - and thrombin - induced neurite retraction and neuronal cell rounding by ADP ribosylation of the small GTP - binding protein Rho . J Cell Biol 126 , 801 – 810 . Jia D , Gomez TS , Metlagel Z , Umetani J , Otwinowski Z , Rosen MK , Billadeau DD ( 2010 ) . WASH and WAVE actin regulators of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) family are controlled by analogous structurally related complexes . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 , 10442 – 10447 . Kessels MM , Schwintzer L , Schlobinski D , Qualmann B ( 2010 ) . Controlling actin cytoskeletal organization and dynamics during neuronal morpho - genesis . Eur J Cell Biol 90 , 926 – 933 . Kim AS , Kakalis LT , Abdul - Manan N , Liu GA , Rosen MK ( 2000 ) . Autoin - hibition and activation mechanisms of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . Nature 404 , 151 – 158 . Kim Y et al . ( 2006 ) . Phosphorylation of WAVE1 regulates actin polymeriza - tion and dendritic spine morphology . Nature 442 , 814 – 817 . Korobova F , Svitkina T ( 2008 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex is important for filopodia formation , growth cone motility , and neuritogenesis in neuronal cells . Mol Biol Cell 19 , 1561 – 1574 . Kozma R , Sarner S , Ahmed S , Lim L ( 1997 ) . Rho family GTPases and neuronal growth cone remodelling : relationship between increased com - plexity induced by Cdc42Hs , Rac1 , and acetylcholine and collapse in - duced by RhoA and lysophosphatidic acid . Mol Cell Biol 17 , 1201 – 1211 . Lanzetti L ( 2007 ) . Actin in membrane trafficking . Curr Opin Cell Biol 19 , 453 – 458 . Lebensohn AM , Kirschner MW ( 2009 ) . Activation of the WAVE complex by coincident signals controls actin assembly . Mol Cell 36 , 512 – 524 . Leeuwen FN , Kain HE , Kammen RA , Michiels F , Kranenburg OW , Collard JG ( 1997 ) . The guanine nucleotide exchange factor Tiam1 affects neuronal ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Ken Campellone , Steve Duleh , and Taro Ohkawa for help - ful discussions and comments on the manuscript . This work was sup - ported by grants from the National Institutes of Health / National In - stitute of General Medical Sciences ( GM059609 ) and the University of California Cancer Research Coordinating Committee to M . D . W . and a predoctoral fellowship from the American Heart Association ( 0715035Y ) to E . N . F . REFERENCES Abramoff MD , Magalhaes PJ , Ram SJ ( 2004 ) . Image processing with Image J . Biophotonics International 11 , 36 – 42 . Ahuja R , Pinyol R , Reichenbach N , Custer L , Klingensmith J , Kessels MM , Qualmann B ( 2007 ) . Cordon - bleu is an actin nucleation factor and con - trols neuronal morphology . Cell 131 , 337 – 350 . Aoki K , Nakamura T , Matsuda M ( 2004 ) . Spatio - temporal regulation of Rac1 and Cdc42 activity during nerve growth factor - induced neurite outgrowth in PC12 cells . J Biol Chem 279 , 713 – 719 . Banzai Y , Miki H , Yamaguchi H , Takenawa T ( 2000 ) . Essential role of neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein in neurite extension in PC12 cells and rat hippocampal primary culture cells . J Biol Chem 275 , 11987 – 11992 . Campellone KG , Webb NJ , Znameroski EA , Welch MD ( 2008 ) . WHAMM is an Arp2 / 3 complex activator that binds microtubules and functions in ER to Golgi transport . Cell 134 , 148 – 161 . Campellone KG , Welch MD ( 2010 ) . A nucleator arms race : cellular control of actin assembly . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 , 237 – 251 . Cheeseman IM , Desai A ( 2005 ) . A combined approach for the localization and tandem affinity purification of protein complexes from metazoans . Sci STKE 2005 , pl1 . Chen Z , Borek D , Padrick SB , Gomez TS , Metlagel Z , Ismail AM , Umetani J , Billadeau DD , Otwinowski Z , Rosen MK ( 2010 ) . Structure and control of the actin regulatory WAVE complex . Nature 468 , 533 – 538 . Clagett - Dame M , McNeill EM , Muley PD ( 2006 ) . Role of all - trans retinoic acid in neurite outgrowth and axonal elongation . J Neurobiol 66 , 739 – 756 . Cory GO , Cramer R , Blanchoin L , Ridley AJ ( 2003 ) . Phosphorylation of the WASP - VCA domain increases its affinity for the Arp2 / 3 cell , the average fluorescence intensity of these cells was used as the reference intensity for normalization . For correlation and linear regression analysis between GFP and actin fluorescence intensities in transfected cells , images were acquired using identical illumina - tion conditions , mean background intensities were subtracted from the GFP and Alexa Fluor 568 – phalloidin fluorescence intensities , and actin fluorescence values were then plotted as a function of GFP values in arbitrary units . For quantification of mean F - actin intensi - ties in differentiated Neuro 2a cells that were transfected with con - trol GAPDH siRNA or one of the two independent JMY siRNAs , images were acquired using identical illumination conditions , then mean background intensities were subtracted from mean Alexa Fluor 568 – phalloidin fluorescence intensities , and average phalloi - din intensities were plotted . Neurite initiation and morphological quantification At 24 h posttransfection with plasmids expressing JMY or siRNA to silence its expression , Neuro 2a cells were induced to differentiate with 20 μM RA ( Sigma - Aldrich ) in DMEM with 2 % FBS for 48 and 72 h . The cells were quantified for the following parameters : per - centage of cells with neurites , defined as an outgrowth with a length more than twice the diameter of the cell body ; average neurite length , defined as the distance from cell body to the distal tip , mea - sured using the NeuronJ plugin ( Meijering et al . , 2004 ) for ImageJ ( Abramoff et al . , 2004 ) ; average number of neurites per cell ; and mean number of neurite branchpoints per unit neurite length , for which branchpoints are defined as secondary neurites of any length arising from the primary neurite . 4574 | E . N . Firat - Karalar et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell Suetsugu S , Kurisu S , Oikawa T , Yamazaki D , Oda A , Takenawa T ( 2006 ) . Optimization of WAVE2 complex - induced actin polymerization by membrane - bound IRSp53 , PIP ( 3 ) , and Rac . J Cell Biol 173 , 571 – 585 . Suetsugu S , Yamazaki D , Kurisu S , Takenawa T ( 2003 ) . Differential roles of WAVE1 and WAVE2 in dorsal and peripheral ruffle formation for fibro - blast cell migration . Dev Cell 5 , 595 – 609 . Sun SC , Sun QY , Kim NH ( 2011 ) . JMY is required for asymmetric division and cytokinesis in mouse oocytes . Mol Hum Reprod 17 , 296 – 304 . Tomasevic N , Jia Z , Russell A , Fujii T , Hartman JJ , Clancy S , Wang M , Beraud C , Wood KW , Sakowicz R ( 2007 ) . Differential regulation of WASP and N - WASP by Cdc42 , Rac1 , Nck , and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 . Biochemistry 46 , 3494 – 3502 . Torres E , Rosen MK ( 2003 ) . Contingent phosphorylation / dephosphoryla - tion provides a mechanism of molecular memory in WASP . Mol Cell 11 , 1215 – 1227 . Wegner AM , Nebhan CA , Hu L , Majumdar D , Meier KM , Weaver AM , Webb DJ ( 2008 ) . N - wasp and the arp2 / 3 complex are critical regulators of actin in the development of dendritic spines and synapses . J Biol Chem 283 , 15912 – 15920 . Wu G , Fang Y , Lu ZH , Ledeen RW ( 1998 ) . Induction of axon - like and dendrite - like processes in neuroblastoma cells . J Neurocytol 27 , 1 – 14 . Yamaguchi Y , Katoh H , Yasui H , Mori K , Negishi M ( 2001 ) . RhoA inhibits the nerve growth factor - induced Rac1 activation through Rho - associated kinase - dependent pathway . J Biol Chem 276 , 18977 – 18983 . Yamazaki D , Suetsugu S , Miki H , Kataoka Y , Nishikawa S , Fujiwara T , Yoshida N , Takenawa T ( 2003 ) . WAVE2 is required for directed cell migration and cardiovascular development . Nature 424 , 452 – 456 . Yan C et al . ( 2003 ) . WAVE2 deficiency reveals distinct roles in embryogen - esis and Rac - mediated actin - based motility . EMBO J 22 , 3602 – 3612 . Yarar D , D’Alessio JA , Jeng RL , Welch MD ( 2002 ) . Motility determinants in WASP family proteins . Mol Biol Cell 13 , 4045 – 4059 . Yarar D , To W , Abo A , Welch MD ( 1999 ) . The Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein directs actin - based motility by stimulating actin nucleation with the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr Biol 9 , 555 – 558 . Zuchero JB , Coutts AS , Quinlan ME , Thangue NB , Mullins RD ( 2009 ) . p53 - cofactor JMY is a multifunctional actin nucleation factor . Nat Cell Biol 11 , 451 – 459 . morphology ; opposing roles for the small GTPases Rac and Rho . J Cell Biol 139 , 797 – 807 . Marchand JB , Kaiser DA , Pollard TD , Higgs HN ( 2001 ) . Interaction of WASP / Scar proteins with actin and vertebrate Arp2 / 3 complex . Nat Cell Biol 3 , 76 – 82 . Maresca TJ , Heald R ( 2006 ) . Methods for studying spindle assembly and chromosome condensation in Xenopus egg extracts . Methods Mol Biol 322 , 459 – 474 . Meijering E , Jacob M , Sarria JC , Steiner P , Hirling M , Unser M ( 2004 ) . Design and validation of a tool for neurite tracing and analysis in fluorescence microscopy images . Cytometry A 58 , 167 – 176 . Miki H , Sasaki T , Takai Y , Takenawa T ( 1998 ) . Induction of filopodium forma - tion by a WASP - related actin - depolymerizing protein N - WASP . Nature 391 , 93 – 96 . Pinyol R , Haeckel A , Ritter A , Qualmann B , Kessels MM ( 2007 ) . Regulation of N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex by Abp1 controls neuronal mor - phology . PLoS One 2 , e400 . Pollard TD , Cooper JA ( 2009 ) . Actin , a central player in cell shape and movement . Science 326 , 1208 – 1212 . Prehoda KE , Scott JA , Mullins RD , Lim WA ( 2000 ) . Integration of multiple signals through cooperative regulation of the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 complex . Science 290 , 801 – 806 . Rohatgi R , Ho HY , Kirschner MW ( 2000 ) . Mechanism of N - WASP activation by CDC42 and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . J Cell Biol 150 , 1299 – 1310 . Rohatgi R , Ma L , Miki H , Lopez M , Kirchhausen T , Takenawa T , Kirschner MW ( 1999 ) . The interaction between N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex links Cdc42 - dependent signals to actin assembly . Cell 97 , 221 – 231 . Sarner S , Kozma R , Ahmed S , Lim L ( 2000 ) . Phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase , Cdc42 , and Rac1 act downstream of Ras in integrin - dependent neurite outgrowth in N1E - 115 neuroblastoma cells . Mol Cell Biol 20 , 158 – 172 . Sebok A , Nusser N , Debreceni B , Guo Z , Santos MF , Szeberenyi J , Tigyi G ( 1999 ) . Different roles for RhoA during neurite initiation , elongation , and regeneration in PC12 cells . J Neurochem 73 , 949 – 960 . Shikama N , Lee CW , France S , Delavaine L , Lyon J , Krstic - Demonacos M , La Thangue NB ( 1999 ) . A novel cofactor for p300 that regulates the p53 response . Mol Cell 4 , 365 – 376 . Skarp KP , Vartiainen MK ( 2010 ) . Actin on DNA—an ancient and dynamic relationship . Cytoskeleton 67 , 487 – 495 .