JCB : Article The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 J . Cell Biol . Vol . 203 No . 6 1063 – 1079 www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201306162 JCB 1063 Correspondence to Philippe Chavrier : philippe . chavrier @ curie . fr M . Hertzog’s present address is Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique , UMR 5100 , Université Paul Sabatier , 31062 Toulouse , France . Abbreviations used in this paper : CCD , charge - coupled device ; MT1 - MMP , membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase ; N - WASP , neuronal Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ; SIM , structured illumination microscopy ; TIRFM , total interfer - ence reflection fluorescence microscope ; VAMP7 , vesicle - associated membrane protein 7 ; WASH , Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein and Scar homolog . Introduction The matrix - degrading protrusions of the plasma membrane known as invadopodia are currently thought to form in invasive tumor cells when the extracellular matrix and cues from the tumor microenvironment , such as growth factors , trigger the assembly of F - actin into precursor structures through a signaling cascade involving Cdc42 and Nck1 and the actin regulatory proteins neuronal Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) , Arp2 / 3 complex , cortactin , and cofilin ( Lorenz et al . , 2004 ; Yamaguchi et al . , 2005 ; Clark et al . , 2007 ; Ayala et al . , 2008 ; Oser et al . , 2009 , 2010 ; Murphy and Courtneidge , 2011 ) . These precursors then mature into functional invadopodia upon accumulation of the trans - membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase ( MT1 - MMP ; Artym et al . , 2006 ; Clark et al . , 2007 ; Sakurai - Yageta et al . , 2008 ; Yu et al . , 2012 ) . A significant fraction of MT1 - MMP is internalized from the cell surface as a means to regulate its surface level ( Jiang et al . , 2001 ; Uekita et al . , 2001 ) ; In MDA - MB - 231 human breast adenocarcinoma cells , we found the majority of intracellular MT1 - MMP located in a late endosome compartment ( Steffen et al . , 2008 ) . We and others reported that an exocytic machinery comprising cortactin , the vesicle - docking exocyst complex , and the SNARE protein vesicle - associated membrane protein 7 ( VAMP7 ) is required for MT1 - MMP delivery to invadopodia and invadopodia activity in tumor cells cultured on cross - linked gelatin as a matrix ( Artym et al . , 2006 ; Clark et al . , 2007 ; Sakurai - Yageta et al . , 2008 ; Steffen et al . , 2008 ; Liu et al . , 2009 ; Williams and Coppolino , 2011 ) . Based on these findings , we proposed that this cohort of proteins regulates the trafficking and exocytosis of MT1 - MMP from late endocytic storage compartments to its invadopodial target plasma membrane ( Poincloux et al . , 2009 ) . However , the nature of the carriers that mediate plasma membrane R emodeling of the extracellular matrix by carcinoma cells during metastatic dissemination requires for - mation of actin - based protrusions of the plasma membrane called invadopodia , where the trans - membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase ( MT1 - MMP ) accumulates . Here , we describe an interaction between the exocyst complex and the endosomal Arp2 / 3 activator Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein and Scar homolog ( WASH ) on MT1 - MMP – containing late endosomes in invasive breast carcinoma cells . We found that WASH and exocyst are required for matrix degradation by an exocytic mecha - nism that involves tubular connections between MT1 - MMP – positive late endosomes and the plasma membrane in contact with the matrix . This ensures focal delivery of MT1 - MMP and supports pericellular matrix degradation and tumor cell invasion into different pathologically rele - vant matrix environments . Our data suggest a general mechanism used by tumor cells to breach the basement membrane and for invasive migration through fibrous collagen - enriched tissues surrounding the tumor . Endosomal WASH and exocyst complexes control exocytosis of MT1 - MMP at invadopodia Pedro Monteiro , 1 , 2 Carine Rossé , 1 , 2 Antonio Castro - Castro , 1 , 2 Marie Irondelle , 1 , 2 Emilie Lagoutte , 1 , 2 Perrine Paul - Gilloteaux , 1 , 3 Claire Desnos , 4 , 5 Etienne Formstecher , 6 François Darchen , 4 , 5 David Perrais , 7 , 8 Alexis Gautreau , 9 Maud Hertzog , 1 , 2 and Philippe Chavrier 1 , 2 1 Research Center , Institut Curie , 75005 Paris , France 2 Membrane and Cytoskeleton Dynamics and 3 Cell and Tissue Imaging Facility , Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique UMR 144 , 75005 Paris , France 4 Université Paris Descartes and 5 Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique , UMR8192 , 75006 Paris , France 6 Hybrigenics services SAS , 75014 Paris , France 7 University of Bordeaux and 8 Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique , Interdisciplinary Institute for Neuroscience , UMR 5297 , 33000 Bordeaux , France 9 Laboratoire d’Enzymologie et Biochimie Structurales , Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique UPR3082 , 91198 Gif - sur - Yvette , France © 2013 Monteiro et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the pub - lication date ( see http : / / www . rupress . org / terms ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported license , as described at http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 / ) . T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y JCB • VOLUME 203 • NUMBER 6 • 2013 1064 Gomez and Billadeau , 2009 ; Derivery et al . , 2012 ) . Endosomal puncta of WASH and cortactin were more closely associated ( mean distance of  2 pixels ) as compared with WASH and Exo84 - positive ones (  5 pixels ; Fig . 1 E ) . Similarly , we observed another component of the WASH complex , FAM21 , associated with cortactin domains on MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes ( Fig . S1 C ) . WASH was also apposed to punctate structures containing the late endocytic SNARE protein VAMP7 on the limiting membrane of these endosomes ( Fig . S1 D ) , in agreement with the predominant localization of MT1 - MMP to late endo - somes ( Steffen et al . , 2008 ; Williams and Coppolino , 2011 ) . WASH - and cortactin - positive puncta were similarly associated with MT1 - MMP – containing endosomes in BT - 549 breast cancer cells ( Fig . S1 E ) . To further evaluate association of WASH with cortactin or Exo84 on MT1 - MMP – containing endosomes , we performed a Duolink in situ proximity ligation assay ( Söderberg et al . , 2006 ) . This analysis confirmed a strong association between WASH and cortactin and a weaker one between WASH and Exo84 , with most of the Duolink signal coinciding with MT1 - MMP – containing endosomes ( Fig . 1 , F and G ) . Finally , endog - enous WASH protein in HeLa cell extracts coimmunoprecipitated with overexpressed full - length Exo84 and Sec3 and with en - dogenous Sec8 ( Fig . 1 H ) , thus confirming the two - hybrid re - sults and showing that WASH interacts with the exocyst complex in vivo . Together , these findings reveal the existence of WASH - and Arp2 / 3 – F - actin – cortactin – positive domains on MT1 - MMP – containing late endosomes . The exocyst complex is closely apposed to and interacts with WASH - positive subdomains on MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes , suggesting a coordinated func - tion of these complexes in breast tumor cells . WASH and exocyst control actin assembly on MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes To investigate the roles of WASH and the exocyst complex we first looked at the morphology of MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes in MDA - MB - 231 cells silenced for WASH or Exo84 with two independent siRNAs ( Fig . S2 , A and B ) . As previously reported ( Steffen et al . , 2008 ) , MT1 - MMP accumulated in large vacuolar compartments in the central region of the cell as well as in smaller vesicles spread throughout the cytoplasm ( Fig . 2 A , class # 1 ) . Silencing of WASH resulted in drastic changes in the morphol - ogy of the MT1 - MMP – containing endosomes : in  60 % of cells they aggregated in the center ( Fig . 2 , A and B , class # 2 ) and in  15 % of them large clumps of MT1 - MMP – positive structures appeared ( Fig . 2 , A and B , class # 3 ) . We observed a similar , albeit less marked , phenomenon in cells silenced for Exo84 ( Fig . 2 , A and B ) . Live - cell imaging revealed perinuclear aggregated MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes in WASH - depleted cells , some with exaggerated tubular membrane extensions ( Fig . 2 C and Video 2 ) . This phenotype is reminiscent of endo - some tubulation induced upon depletion of WASH seen in other cell types ( Derivery et al . , 2009 ; Gomez and Billadeau , 2009 ; Gomez et al . , 2012 ) . Given the proposed function of WASH - dependent actin / cortactin assembly in regulation of endosomal tubule dynamics , we explored the contribution of WASH and exocyst complex to the formation of Arp2 / 3 – F - actin – cortactin punctate domains on MT1 - MMP – positive late endosomes . delivery of MT1 - MMP , the mechanism underlying MT1 - MMP exocytosis in the biogenesis of invadopodia , and how exocytosis is possibly influenced by the composition and biophysical prop - erties of the matrix remain poorly understood . Recent studies have documented an essential role for actin cytoskeleton dynamics in endosome function ( Derivery et al . , 2009 ; Gomez and Billadeau , 2009 ; Morel et al . , 2009 ; Puthenveedu et al . , 2010 ; Carnell et al . , 2011 ; Harrington et al . , 2011 ) . The mechanism emerging from these on - going studies indicates that actin – Arp2 / 3 assemblies organize early endosomal membranes into functional subdomains and contribute to cargo sorting and generation of transport intermediates . Some of these studies also highlighted the essential role of the newly identified Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein and Scar homolog ( WASH ) complex , a member of the WASP ( Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ) family of Arp2 / 3 activators associated with the endosomal / lysosomal system and playing a major role in the polymerization of endosomal actin ( Derivery et al . , 2009 ; Gomez and Billadeau , 2009 ; Duleh and Welch , 2010 ) . All together , these data support a critical role for WASH in linking Arp2 / 3 and F - actin – assisted elongation and fission of endosomal tubules with sorting and trafficking from the endosomal system to the cell surface ( Derivery et al . , 2009 ; Gomez and Billadeau , 2009 ; Puthenveedu et al . , 2010 ; Carnell et al . , 2011 ; Temkin et al . , 2011 ; Zech et al . , 2011 ; Gomez et al . , 2012 ) . Here , we describe a novel interaction of WASH with the exocyst complex on MT1 - MMP – containing late endosomes in invasive breast tumor cells . Our data support a mechanism of exocytosis of MT1 - MMP through late endosome - to - plasma membrane connections occurring at invadopodia and requiring WASH and exocyst complexes for their formation . Results WASH and the exocyst complex interact on MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes in breast tumor cells In a series of yeast two - hybrid screens aimed at isolating part - ners of the eight subunits of the exocyst complex , we identified interactions of both Exo84 and Sec3 exocyst subunits with the amino - terminal region of WASH . Overlapping regions from in - dependent isolated clones defined WASH domains interacting with Sec3 ( amino acids 9 – 109 of WASH ) or with Exo84 ( amino acids 15 – 258 of WASH ; unpublished data ) . By using fluorescence microscopy of MDA - MB - 231 cells overexpressing GFP - WASH and immunofluorescence microscopy of the endogenous protein and in agreement with the function of WASH as an activator of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Derivery et al . , 2009 ; Gomez and Billadeau , 2009 ; Duleh and Welch , 2010 ) , we observed WASH puncta closely associated with punctate accumulations of Arp2 / 3 com - plex , F - actin , and the F - actin – binding protein cortactin on MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes ( Fig . S1 A and Fig . 1 , A and B ) . Exo84 was also detected as puncta closely apposed to and par - tially overlapping with WASH and cortactin - positive subdomains on MT1 - MMP – containing endosomes ( Fig . 1 , C and D ; and Fig . S1 B ) . Live - cell imaging revealed highly dynamic WASH puncta associated with cortactin ( Video 1 ) . The number of WASH - cortactin patches seemed to correlate with endosome size ( Fig . 1 B ; 1065 WASH and exocyst control invadopodia formation • Monteiro et al . cortactin domains associated with WASH patches ( Fig . 2 , F and G ) . Similar observations were obtained upon depletion of Sec8 exocyst subunit ( unpublished data ) . Together , these data indicate that WASH controls actin polymerization on MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes and suggest that the exocyst com - plex associated with WASH may finely tune actin assembly required for regulation of endosomal membrane scission and remodeling ( Derivery et al . , 2009 ; Gomez and Billadeau , 2009 ; Park et al . , 2013 ) . Silencing of WASH led to a large reduction of cortactin accu - mulation on endosomal compartments ( Fig . 2 , D and E ) . In con - trast , silencing of N - WASP that is required for invadopodial actin assembly ( Yamaguchi et al . , 2005 ; Oser et al . , 2009 , 2010 ; Yu et al . , 2012 ) had no effect on endosomal cortactin ( and WASH ) - positive microdomains ( Fig . S3 C and Fig . 2 , D and E ) . Interestingly , silencing of Exo84 was accompanied by a limited but significant increase of the size of WASH patches on MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes and a marked lengthening of comet - shaped Figure 1 . WASH and exocyst complex associate on adjacent subdomains on MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes . ( A ) Association of endogenous WASH and cortactin ( Cttn ) on microdomains on MT1 - MMPmCh – positive late endosomes . ( B ) Zoom of boxed regions in A . Images represent the middle plane of the cells . ( C ) MDA - MB - 231 cells transfected with GFP - WASH were plated on cross - linked gelatin , stained for Exo84 and MT1 - MMP , and imaged by 3D deconvolution microscopy . ( D ) Zoom of boxed region in C ( box 1 ) and from another cell ( box 2 ) . Bars : ( A and C ) 5 µm ; ( B and D ) 1 µm . ( E ) Box plots of the distance between adjacent puncta of WASH and cortactin or Exo84 on MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes ( in pixels ) . Whiskers show 25 – 75 % . Numbers of cells ( n ) and of WASH - cortactin and WASH - Exo84 doublets ( d ) analyzed from independent experiments are indicated . ( F ) Quantification of Duolink dots using different antibody pairs as indicated ( mean Duolink dots per cell ± SEM ; n represents the number of cells analyzed for each condition ) . * * * , P < 0 . 001 as compared with WASH - Exo84 combination . ( G ) Immunolabeling of MT1 - MMP ( green ) was performed after the Duolink reaction between WASH and Exo84 antibodies ( red dots ) . Bar , 5 µm . ( H ) Coimmunoprecipitation of exocyst subunits with WASH in HeLa cell lysates . Bound proteins were analyzed by immunoblotting with antibodies against WASH , HA - tag , and Sec8 . Input lysates ( 1 % ) were loaded as control . JCB • VOLUME 203 • NUMBER 6 • 2013 1066 Figure 2 . Regulation of MT1 - MMP – positive endosome dynamics by WASH and exocyst complex . ( A and B ) MDA - MB - 231 cells treated with the indicated siRNAs were plated on cross - linked gelatin and stained for endogenous MT1 - MMP . Bars , 5 µm . Cells were scored according to the distribution of MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes , i . e . , normal distribution ( # 1 , blue boxes in B ) , clustered endosomes ( # 2 , green box ) , and aggregated endosomes ( # 3 , red box ) . Values ploted in B are mean ± SEM of normalized endosome distribution from three independent experiments scoring  100 cells for each siRNA . * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * , P < 0 . 01 ; * * * , P < 0 . 001 compared with siNT - treated cells ( B ) . ( C ) MDA - MB - 231 cells expressing MT1 - MMP - mCh were treated as in A and time series were acquired by spinning - disk microscopy ( see Video 2 ) . Still images from the time series are shown . Arrows point to tubular extensions emanating from MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes in cells depleted of WASH . Bars , 5 µm . ( D ) MDA - MB - 231 cells treated with the indicated siRNA were processed for immunofluorescence microscopy with antibodies against cortactin ( red ) and WASH ( green ) . Images were acquired by 3D deconvolution microscopy of the 1067 WASH and exocyst control invadopodia formation • Monteiro et al . invadopodial plasma membrane to allow the delivery of MT1 - MMP for matrix degradation . We added a tracer to the extracel - lular milieu to test whether the endosome lumen was accessible through such connections . MDA - MB - 231 cells expressing MT1 - MMPmCh were plated on fluorescent gelatin and FITC - dextran was added for a 1 - min pulse ; then cells were examined imme - diately after washing out the tracer . A subset of MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes were loaded with FITC - dextran during the pulse ( Fig . 4 A , arrowheads ) , some exocytosed their MT1 - MMP content while filling up with the dextran ( Fig . 4 A , doublehead arrow ) . Cortactin - rich puncta and foci of matrix degradation were seen adjacent to FITC - dextran pulse - labeled endosomes ( Fig . 4 , B and C , arrowheads ) . In addition , after a 1 - min pulse , fluorescent dextran – labeled endosomes were positive for Rab7 and VAMP7 , arguing that these represent late endosomes making direct connection with the plasma membrane ( Fig . 4 , D and E ) . Furthermore , by live - cell TIRFM we observed regurgitation of the luminal FITC - dextran content of endosomes , some occur - ring through visible thin tubules extending from the endosome ( Fig . 4 F ) . MT1 - MMP – containing tubule emanating from plasma membrane – docked endosome was also visible by TIRFM ( Fig . 4 G ) . These observations suggest the existence of tubular connections between MT1 - MMP – positive late endosomes and the invadopodial plasma membrane that may mediate MT1 - MMP delivery to the surface . MT1 - MMP exocytosis requires WASH and the exocyst complex We used TIRFM to analyze the effect of silencing of WASH or Exo84 on the density of MT1 - MMPmCh – positive endosomes in the zone beneath the plasma membrane . Large numbers of MT1 - MMP vesicles were visible at the adherent plasma mem - brane of MDA - MB - 231 cells ( Fig . 5 A ) . Silencing of WASH or Exo84 significantly reduced MT1 - MMP – positive endosome density beneath the plasma membrane ( Fig . 5 , A and B ) , along with the observed collapse of MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes in the cell center ( Fig . 2 , A and C ) . All together , these findings indicate that both WASH and the exocyst complex play an im - portant role in polarization and tethering of MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes at the plasma membrane . The contribution of WASH and Exo84 to the delivery of MT1 - MMP to the invadopodial plasma membrane was assessed by quantifying the surface accumulation of MT1 - MMPpHluorin ( Lizárraga et al . , 2009 ) ; fluorescence of this construct is eclipsed in the acidic envi - ronment of the late endosome and rises upon exocytosis and exposure to the extracellular pH ( Miesenböck , 2012 ) . MT1 - MMPpHluorin accumulated at the level of cortactin - positive invadopodia on the ventral cell surface ( Fig . 5 , C and D ) . Knock - down of WASH or Exo84 led to a 50 % reduction of surface WASH is present at docking sites of MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes corresponding to invadopodia Given that MT1 - MMP is the key component for pericellular matrix degradation by invadopodia and that the exocyst complex is involved in MT1 - MMP delivery to these structures ( Sakurai - Yageta et al . , 2008 ; Liu et al . , 2009 ) , we investigated whether WASH was also associated with invadopodia . Immunofluores - cence microscopy of MDA - MB - 231 cells plated on fluorescent gelatin revealed MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes flanked by WASH - positive puncta in contact with the plasma membrane , some of which were associated with matrix degradation ( Fig . 3 , A – C ) . Observation by total interference reflection fluorescence microscope ( TIRFM ) of cells plated on a thin layer of cross - linked gelatin coexpressing MT1 - MMPmCherry and GFP - tagged WASH or Exo84 showed that puncta of WASH and Exo84 associated with MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes were in close contact with the adherent plasma membrane ( Fig . 3 , D and E ) . Similarly , WASH - positive puncta associated with MT1 - MMP – containing endo - somes were visible at the plasma membrane in BT - 549 cells by TIRFM ( Fig . 3 F ) . We also observed MT1 - MMP – positive en - dosomes flanked by plasma membrane – apposed puncta contain - ing Arp2 / 3 , FAM21 , cortactin , and Exo84 ( Fig . 3 , G and H ; and Fig . S3 , A and B ) . Matrix degradation was strictly confined to and superimposed upon WASH – FAM21 – cortactin – Arp2 / 3 – exocyst puncta adjacent to MT1 - MMP – containing endosomes ( Fig . 3 , A , G , and H , arrowheads ; and Fig . S3 , A and B , arrowheads ) , strongly suggesting that these structures represent bona fide invadopodia . TIRFM of GFP - cortactin and MT1 - MMPmCh doc - umented repeated docking of MT1 - MMP – containing endosomes at the level of cortactin - positive invadopodia ( Fig . 3 , I and J ; and Video 3 ) . Interestingly , although all invadopodia were positive for N - WASP , association of WASH with cortactin - positive inva - dopodia was inversely correlated with the surface of matrix deg - radation underlying each invadopodium ( Fig . 3 K and Fig . S3 C ) . These results suggest that WASH , associated with MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes , interacts transiently with invadopodia and preferentially at an early stage of their lifetime ( associated with smaller degradation area ) in contrast to N - WASP that is perma - nently associated with invadopodia . Invadopodia correspond to late endosome - to - plasma membrane connections Based on the proposed role of WASH - mediated Arp2 / 3 activa - tion in the formation of endosomal tubular membrane exten - sions ( Puthenveedu et al . , 2010 ; Gomez et al . , 2012 ; Piotrowski et al . , 2013 ) , we hypothesized that WASH puncta , possibly in conjunction with the exocyst complex , may regulate the forma - tion of transient continuities between late endosomes and the middle plane of the cells . A region of interest ( dashed line ) was drawn manually around WASH - cortactin structures for quantification ( shown in E ) . Bars , 5 µm . ( E ) Quantification of the integrated intensity of perinuclear endosomal cortactin and WASH in cells treated as in D and normalized to the integrated intensity in control cells in two independent experiments . ns , not significant ; * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * , P < 0 . 01 compared with control . ( F ) MDA - MB - 231 cells treated with the indicated siRNAs were processed for immunofluorescence microscopy with cortactin and WASH antibodies and analyzed by high - resolu - tion (  100 - nm spatial resolution ) 3D SIM . Bar , 1 µm . ( G ) Quantification of the projected surface of WASH and cortactin puncta in cells as described in F , normalized to mean projected surface of the puncta in control cells set to 100 ( three independent experiments ; n = 25 puncta for each condition ; * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * * , P < 0 . 001 compared with control ) . JCB • VOLUME 203 • NUMBER 6 • 2013 1068 Figure 3 . Association of WASH endosomal puncta with invadopodia . ( A ) MDA - MB - 231 cells plated on cross - linked FITC - labeled gelatin ( blue ) were stained with antibodies against MT1 - MMP ( red ) and WASH ( green ) and imaged by 3D deconvolution microscopy . Image is a single section in the ventral plane of the cell in contact with gelatin . Insets corresponding to the boxed region show split channels with dashed line representing the contour of the MT1 - MMP – containing endosome projected on the FITC - gelatin image . Arrowhead points to matrix degradation restricted to WASH puncta adjacent to MT1 - MMP – positive endosome . Bars : ( main ) 5 µm ; ( inset ) 1 µm . ( B ) Orthogonal section through the dashed line in A . From left to right : merged image , MT1 - MMP ( M ) , WASH ( W ) , and FITC - gelatin ( G ) signals . ( C ) Fluorescence intensity profile through the dashed line in the boxed region in A ( x - axis , in pixels ; y - axis , in arbitrary units ) . ( D and E ) MDA - MB - 231 cells expressing MT1 - MMPmCh and GFP - WASH ( D ) or GFP - Exo84 ( E ) plated on cross - linked gelatin and 1069 WASH and exocyst control invadopodia formation • Monteiro et al . Exocytosis of MT1 - MMP occurs at contact sites with type I collagen fibers through a WASH - and exocyst - dependent mechanism We analyzed the organization and dynamics of invadopodia in cells invading through 3D type I collagen environments in rela - tion with WASH - and exocyst - positive MT1 - MMP – containing endosomes . Staining of the cells for F - actin and cleaved colla - gen I fibers ( Col1 - 3 / 4 C antibody ) revealed the formation of linear accumulations of F - actin on the inner face of the plasma mem - brane associated with collagen fibers , coincident with regions of collagenolytic activity ( Fig . 7 A ) . These structures have been previously reported and named linear invadopodia ( Juin et al . , 2012 ) . Similarly to classical dotty - like invadopodia on gelatin ( Fig . S3 C ) , N - WASP colocalized with F - actin in linear invado - podia ( Fig . 7 B ) . Labeling with anti - WASH antibodies showed the typical pattern of endosomal WASH - positive puncta ( Fig . 7 C ) , some of which were closely apposed to linear invadopodia stained for cortactin although WASH did not accumulate in linear inva - dopodia ( Fig . 7 , C [ inset ] , D , and E ) . We used live - cell imaging to analyze the dynamic interactions of WASH - and cortactin - positive puncta with linear invadopodia in cells in a 3D fibrillar collagen environment . Live - cell imaging of MDA - MB - 231 cells expressing DsRed - cortactin and GFP - WASH ( Video 4 and Fig . 7 , D and E ) plated on a layer of fluorescent collagen I fibers revealed the dynamic assembly of cortactin - positive linear inva - dopodia along collagen fibers and their disassembly upon re - modeling and relaxation of the underlying fibers ( Video 4 and Fig . 7 E ) . In addition , cortactin - and WASH - positive endosomal puncta interacted highly dynamically with linear invadopodia ( Video 4 and Fig . 7 , D and E ) . On examination of the time - lapse sequences there was no obvious transfer of cortactin from endo - somal puncta to the linear invadopodia ( Fig . 7 E ) . Analysis of MT1 - MMP distribution in fixed cells showed that cortactin puncta were associated with MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes ( Fig . 7 , F and G , arrows ) in the vicinity of linear invadopodia positive for cortactin and MT1 - MMP ( Fig . 7 , G and H , arrow - heads ) , in agreement with the collagenolytic activity of these structures . All together , these data suggested that collagen I fibers elicit actin assembly and the formation of N - WASP – positive col - lagenolytic linear invadopodia and the dynamic recruitment of WASH - cortactin – positive endosomes probably involved in MT1 - MMP delivery to these structures . Exocytic events of MT1 - MMP were monitored in live cells cultured on fibrillar collagen using the MT1 - MMPpHluorin construct . In cells expressing simultaneously mCherry - and pHluorin - tagged MT1 - MMP , dynamic late endosomes ( red ) were observed in the cytoplasm , with visible green flashes corresponding accumulations of MT1 - MMPpHluorin ( Fig . 5 E ) , indicating that WASH and exocyst complex are critical for MT1 - MMP exo - cytosis at invadopodia . WASH and exocyst complex are required for invasive migration through type I collagen Silencing of MT1 - MMP is known to reduce drastically the ability of MDA - MB - 231 cells to degrade a matrix of cross - linked gelatin as a basement membrane mimick ( Artym et al . , 2006 ; Sakurai - Yageta et al . , 2008 ; Fig . 6 A ) . Silencing of WASH diminished the proportion of cells that were able to degrade gelatin and led to a 60 – 80 % reduction in these cells’ capacity to do so , similar to the effect of silencing various subunits of the exocyst com - plex , e . g . , Sec6 , Sec8 , and Sec10 ( Sakurai - Yageta et al . , 2008 ) and Exo84 ( Fig . 6 A ) . MT1 - MMP levels were unaffected by the various siRNA treatments ( Fig . S2 E ) . By comparison , silencing of N - WASP also led to 60 % inhibition of matrix degradation , similar to the effect seen on WASH depletion ( Fig . 6 A ) . Thus , both plasma membrane - and endosome - associated actin nucle - ation - promoting factors , N - WASP and WASH , are required for invadopodia activity in breast tumor cells . In addition , depletion of WASH or Exo84 led to a significant reduction in the ability of MDA - MB - 231 cells to invade through a layer of Matrigel , similar to MT1 - MMP knockdown ( Fig . 6 B ) . Degradation of cross - linked gelatin and Matrigel is represen - tative of carcinoma cells remodeling and breaching the basement membrane . MT1 - MMP is also required for dissemination of can - cer cells within fibrous type I collagen ( Fig . 6 C ; Sabeh et al . , 2004 , 2009 ; Wolf et al . , 2007 ) , thus the question arose whether or not the WASH - and exocyst - dependent mechanism of exocytosis of MT1 - MMP – containing late endosomes also operated during remod - eling of collagen fibers and invasive migration by tumor cells . We analyzed the capacity of MDA - MB - 231 cells to invade the colla - gen I – filled , cell - free central portion of a 96 - well plate over a 2 - d culture period . Knockdown of WASH or Exo84 resulted in a strong inhibition of the invasion capacity of the cells in type I collagen similar to the silencing of MT1 - MMP ( Fig . 6 , C and D ) . In addi - tion , we found that silencing of WASH or Exo84 resulted in a 75 – 85 % inhibition of pericellular collagen I degradation revealed by the Col1 - 3 / 4 C antibody recognizing the cleaved fragment of collagen I dependent on MT1 - MMP activity as indicated by the reduction of Col1 - 3 / 4 C signal on MT1 - MMP depletion ( Fig . 6 , E and F ; Wolf et al . , 2007 ) . Thus these data indicate a general requirement for the exocyst complex and WASH for matrix remod - eling and for the invasive potential of breast tumor cells . analyzed by live - cell dual color TIRFM . Time interval between each image is 1 s . Bars , 1 µm . ( F ) BT - 549 cells plated on cross - linked gelatin were fixed and immunostained for MT1 - MMP and WASH and analyzed by TIRFM . Insets are higher magnification views of the boxed regions . ( G and H ) Cells treated as in A , stained with antibodies against MT1 - MMP ( red ) and p34 - Arc subunit of Arp2 / 3 complex ( G , green ) or FAM21 ( H , green ) . Arrowheads point to the accumulation of the markers near degradative invadopodia adjacent to MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes . Bars : ( main ) 5 µm ; ( inset ) 1 µm . ( I ) MDA - MB - 231 cells expressing GFP - cortactin and MT1 - MMP - mCh plated on cross - linked gelatin and analyzed by dual color TIRFM . A still image from a representative time - lapse series is shown . ( J ) A series of time - lapse TIRFM images corresponding to the boxed region in panel I . Numbers in the series of time - lapse images represent the time in minutes . Two events of docking of MT1 - MMP – containing endosomes ( labeled # 1 and # 2 ) are boxed in pink . ( K ) Cells as in A were stained for cortactin and WASH or N - WASP . The graph shows the percentage of WASH - ( pink bars ) or N - WASP – positive ( blue bars ) degradative invado - podia positive for cortactin ( not depicted ) as a function of the surface of matrix degradation ( in pixels ) . Values are means ± SEM scoring 360 invadopodia from 15 WASH - labeled cells and 135 invadopodia from five N - WASP – labeled cells . JCB • VOLUME 203 • NUMBER 6 • 2013 1070 repeated exocytosis in the vicinity of the collagen fibers ( Fig . S4 , A and B , arrowheads ) . Live - cell imaging of cells express - ing MT1 - MMPpHluorin and mCherry - WASH showed that MT1 - MMP – containing endosomes undergoing exocytosis were to the de - quenching of pHluorin fluorescence upon exocyto - sis ( Video 5 and Fig . S4 ) . Endosomes scanning portions of the plasma membrane in contact with collagen I fibers were visi - ble ( Video 5 and Fig . S4 , A and B , t = 0 min ) , which underwent Figure 4 . Tubular connection between MT1 - MMP – containing late endosomes and the invadopodial plasma membrane . ( A ) MDA - MB - 231 cells expressing MT1 - MMPmCh were plated on cross - linked gelatin . One optical section was taken in the ventral plane of the cells by confocal spinning disk microscopy ( top ) . A second optical section was taken after a 1 - min pulse of FITC - dextran added to the medium ( bottom ) . Arrowheads point to MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes filled with FITC - dextran during the pulse . The double - headed arrow points to an endosome that lost its MT1 - MMP content and filled up with FITC - dextran . Bar , 5 µm . ( B ) MDA - MB - 231 cells expressing DsRed - cortactin treated as in A and imaged immediately after the FITC - dextran pulse . Arrowheads point to cortactin - positive puncta adjacent to dextran - labeled endosomes . Bars , 5 µm . ( C ) MDA - MB - 231 cells expressing MT1 - MMPmCh ( not depicted ) were plated on cross - linked fluorescent gelatin , pulsed with FITC - dextran , and analyzed by confocal spinning disk microscopy 1 – 2 min after the pulse . Arrowheads point to focal degradation of the matrix adjacent to a FITC - labeled endosome . Dashed line represents the contour of the FITC - dextran – containing endosome projected on the gelatin image . ( D and E ) MDA - MB - 231 cells expressing Rab7 - GFP ( D ) or VAMP7 - GFP ( E ) were plated on cross - linked gelatin for 5 h . An optical section was taken immediately after a 1 - min pulse of A647 - dextran added to the medium . Insets are higher magnification views of the boxed regions that point to Rab7 - ( D ) or VAMP7 ( E ) - positive endosomes filled with A647 - dextran during the pulse . Bars : ( main ) 5 µm ; ( insets ) 1 µm ) . ( F ) Live - cell imaging of MDA - MB - 231 cells analyzed by TIRFM immediately after the FITC - dextran pulse . The indicated times in the image gallery are seconds after the pulse . Arrowhead points to a tubular extension emanating from the FITC - dextran – labeled endosome during regurgitation of the fluid - phase tracer . Bar , 2 µm . ( G ) MDA - MB - 231 cells expressing MT1 - MMPmCh analyzed by TIRFM . The arrowhead points to an MT1 - MMP – positive tubule . Bar , 1 µm . 1071 WASH and exocyst control invadopodia formation • Monteiro et al . with other sites for multiple rounds of MT1 - MMP exocytosis , some remained at the same position for several minutes ( Videos 5 and 6 ; Fig . S4 ; and Fig . 8 , A and B ) . These findings raised the issue of the duration of endosome - to - plasma membrane openings . Using an extracellular pH shifts protocol ( Video 7 ; Perrais et al . , 2004 ) , we observed that some endosomes remained opened for several minutes as shown by the fluorescence of pHluorin in the endosomal lumen that was sensitive to the iterative shifts of ex - tracellular pH ( at least for 4 min in the example shown in Fig . 8 E and up to 15 min [ not depicted ] ) . Of note , similar long - lasting fusion pore openings have been reported during zymogen gran - ule exocytosis in exocrine pancreatic acinar cells ( up to 15 min ; Perrais et al . , 2004 ; Thorn et al . , 2004 ; Sokac and Bement , 2006 ) . Moreover , the exchange of low and high pH solution within the endosome could take up to 30 s , consistent with the restricted diffusion of solutions through a long tubular connec - tion . Thus , through the functions of WASH and exocyst com - plex , tumor cells can engage late endocytic MT1 - MMP storage compartment in the formation of tubular continuities with the flanked by WASH puncta ( Video 6 and Fig . 8 , A and B , red arrowheads ) and exocytosis preferentially occurred at contact sites with fibers ( Video 6 and Fig . 8 , A and B , green arrow - heads ) . Multiple exocytic events led to surface accumulation of MT1 - MMP along the collagen fibers ( at linear invadopodia ; Fig . 8 A , white arrowheads ) and fiber remodeling ( Video 6 ) . Quantitative assessment of MT1 - MMPpHluorin flashes revealed a strong inhibition of MT1 - MMP exocytic events upon knock - down of WASH or Exo84 ( Fig . 8 C ) , whereas overall MT1 - MMP expression was similar in the different cell populations ( not depicted ) . So far , our observations were compatible with a WASH / Exocyst - dependent mechanism whereby MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes exocytose the protease at contact sites with collagen fibers but do not collapse within the plasma membrane bilayer . They also revealed that MT1 - MMPpHLuorin flashes lasted for several minutes ( Fig . 8 D ) . In addition , we noticed that although some endosomes with de - quenched MT1 - MMPpHluorin were moving along fibers and could possibly detached and reengage Figure 5 . WASH and exocyst complex are required for invadopodial degradation of the matrix . ( A ) Effect of WASH or Exo84 silencing on the density of MT1 - MMPmCh – positive vesicles in the subplasma membrane region of MDA - MB - 231 cells observed by TIRFM . Insets are the corresponding wide - field images showing similar MT1 - MMP expression . Bars , 5 µm . ( B ) Box plots showing the density of subplasma membrane MT1 - MMP vesicles . Number of cells analyzed from four experiments is indicated ( n ) . * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * * , P < 0 . 001 ( compared with control cells treated with siNT ) . ( C ) MDA - MB - 231 cells ex - pressing MT1 - MMPpHluorin and DsRed - cortactin were plated on cross - linked gelatin for 2 – 3 h and analyzed by dual color TIRFM . A merged image from a representative time - lapse series is shown . ( D , top ) Split signals from the boxed region in C showing accumulations of MT1 - MMPpHluorin at cortactin - positive invadopodia . Bar , 5 µm . ( bottom ) Kymograph views of TIRF time series acquired every 10 s . ( E ) MDA - MB - 231 cells expressing MT1 - MMPpHluorin were treated with the indicated siRNAs , plated on cross - linked gelatin , and analyzed by TIRFM . Plots show the percentage of cells with MT1 - MMPpHluorin – positive invadopodia . Values are means ± SEM from three independent experiments scoring a total of 150 – 200 cells for each cell population . * * * , P < 0 . 001 ( compared with cells treated with non - targeting siRNA ) . JCB • VOLUME 203 • NUMBER 6 • 2013 1072 membrane proteins in different cell types ( Derivery et al . , 2009 ; Gomez and Billadeau , 2009 ; Zech et al . , 2011 ; Gomez et al . , 2012 ; Piotrowski et al . , 2013 ) . In addition , the exocyst complex , which mediates the tethering of exocytic vesicles to the plasma mem - brane , is also required for the delivery of MT1 - MMP to invado - podia ( Sakurai - Yageta et al . , 2008 ; Liu et al . , 2009 ; this study ) . Strikingly , our study reveals that WASH - and F - actin – positive puncta on MT1 - MMP endosomes are adjacent to exocyst - positive puncta on this compartment and some components of these two multiprotein complexes ( WASH , Exo84 , and Sec3 based on two - hybrid data ) can interact with each others . The segregation of WASH domains on the cytolic face of the endosomal membrane depends on actin polymerization , which is induced by WASH - mediated activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Derivery et al . , 2012 ) . The mechanism underlying the subdomain organization of the exocyst complex at the surface of MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes is presently unknown ; however , we found that exocyst compo - nents can negatively regulate WASH - dependent endosomal actin plasma membrane at contact sites with the extracellular matrix to allow delivery of the protease to the surface and to ensure matrix remodeling required for invasive migration . Discussion Our data , which are summarized in a model presented in Fig . 9 , support a general mechanism of invadopodia formation whereby the functions of WASH and exocyst complex on closely ap - posed punctate domains on the cytosolic face of MT1 - MMP – positive late endosomes ensure focal delivery of MT1 - MMP for pericellular matrix degradation . We found that loss of WASH function induces disappear - ance of endosomal F - actin puncta and a collapse of MT1 - MMP – positive late endosomal system , which is accompanied by defects in MT1 - MMP recycling and delivery to the invadopodial plasma membrane . This is in agreement with an established function of the WASH complex in the recycling route of various plasma Figure 6 . WASH and exocyst complex are re - quired for matrix remodeling and the invasive potential of breast tumor cells . ( A ) MDA - MB - 231 cells treated with indicated siRNAs were plated on cross - linked FITC - labeled gelatin and the percentage of degradative cells ( gray bars ) and the degradation index ( white bars ) were calculated . Values are means ± SEM from at least three independent experiments scoring a total of 300 – 400 cells for each siRNA . * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * , P < 0 . 01 ; * * * , P < 0 . 001 ( com - pared with siNT - treated cells ) . ( B ) MDA - MB - 231 cells treated with indicated siRNAs were quantified on the lower side of the Transwell filter after invasion through Matrigel . Values are mean ± SEM of normalized percentage from two to three independent experiments . * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * , P < 0 . 01 ( compared with siNT - treated cells ) . ( C ) 3D type I collagen cir - cular invasion assay of MDA - MB - 231 cells ex - pressing Histone - 2B - GFP treated with indicated siRNAs after 48 h . Dashed circles represent the collagen – cell interface at time 0 . ( D ) Values represent mean invasion index ± SEM for the different cell populations from three indepen - dent experiments , normalized to cells treated with non - targeting siRNA ( * * * , P < 0 . 001 ) . ( E ) MDA - MB - 231 cells treated with the indicated siRNAs were embedded in collagen I . Pericel - lular collagenolysis was detected using anti - Col1 - 3 / 4 C antibodies ( in black in the inverted image ) . Nuclei were stained with DAPI ( red ) . Bars , 50 µm . ( F ) Quantification of collagenoly - sis by MDA - MB - 231 cells treated with the in - dicated siRNAs . Values are mean normalized degradation index ± SEM from three ( siNT , siExo84d , and siMT1 - MMP ) or two indepen - dent experiments ( siWASHd ) . n represents the number of cells analyzed for each cell popula - tion . * * * , P < 0 . 001 ( as compared with siNT - treated cells ) . 1073 WASH and exocyst control invadopodia formation • Monteiro et al . endosome organization and for MT1 - MMP recycling to the sur - face . Therefore , in addition to its well - established function as a tethering factor for exocytic vesicles to the plasma membrane ( Heider and Munson , 2012 ) , our findings suggest an unprecedented role for the exocyst in regulating endosomal membrane dynamics . Remarkably , we found that MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes contact and establish connections with the plasma membrane in assembly . In this respect , two - hybrid data mapping of the binding site of Exo84 and Sec3 exocyst subunits to the amino - terminal region of WASH suggests a possible competition mechanism because this region of WASH is also required for association with other WASH complex components ( Gomez and Billadeau , 2009 ; Jia et al . , 2010 ) . A consequence of exocyst’s interaction with WASH could thus be a fine regulation of actin assembly required for late Figure 7 . WASH - and cortactin - positive MT1 - MMP – containing endosomes are recruited in the periphery of linear invadopodia in association with collagen fibers . ( A ) MDA - MB - 231 cells on a layer of collagen I fibers stained with anti - Col1 - 3 / 4 C antibodies recognizing MMP - cleaved collagen I ( red ) and for F - actin ( green ) revealing collagenolytic linear invadopodia . Inset is a higher magnification of the boxed region . Bars , 5 µm . ( B and C ) Cells were plated on a layer of Alexa Fluor 647 – conjugated type I collagen ( blue ) for 30 min and stained for N - WASP ( green ) and F - actin ( red ; B ) or WASH ( green ) and cortactin ( red ; C ) . Insets are higher magnification of boxed regions . Bars : ( main and B [ inset ] ) 5 µm ; ( C , inset ) 1 µm . ( D ) MDA - MB - 231 cells expressing GFP - WASH ( green ) and DsRed - cortactin ( red ) were plated on a layer of Alexa Fluor 647 – conjugated type I collagen ( blue ) for 30 min and imaged by confocal spin - ning disk microscopy . A still image from a representative time - lapse series is shown ( t = 25 min ) . Arrowheads point to WASH - and cortactin - positive puncta ( associated with late endosomes ) apposed to a cortactin - positive linear invadopodium aligned on collagen fibers . Insets show a higher magnification of WASH and cortactin endosomal puncta . The corresponding time - lapse series is shown in Video 4 . Bars : ( main ) 5 µm ; ( inset ) 1 µm . ( E ) Higher magnification of the boxed region in D at representative time points . A linear cortactin - positive invadopodium aligned with collagen fibers forms on the inner face of the plasma membrane ( 13 – 14 min ; red arrowheads ) ; at 60 min , this structure disassembled while collagen I fibers were remodeled . Time is in minutes . Bar , 5 µm . ( F – H ) Cells on Alexa Fluor 647 – conjugated type I collagen ( blue ) stained for MT1 - MMP ( red ) and cortactin ( green ) . G and H are higher magnification of the boxed region in F . Arrows point to cortactin - positive puncta associated with MT1 - MMP – containing endosomes in the vicinity of cortactin - and MT1 - MMP – positive linear invadopodia ( arrowheads ) . Bars , 5 µm . JCB • VOLUME 203 • NUMBER 6 • 2013 1074 actin assembly ( He and Guo , 2009 ; Hertzog and Chavrier , 2011 ; this study ) , suggests a mechanism whereby WASH and exocyst may work in a coordinated manner to control the formation of endosome - to - plasma membrane connections ensuring MT1 - MMP targetting to the invadopodial plasma membrane . In addition , the exocyst complex is known to control SNARE complex assembly and to influence vesicle fusion ( Heider and Munson , 2012 ) . Thus , the exocyst could regulate membrane fusion at invadopodial en - dosome - to - plasma membrane connections . Whether the exocyst can interact and influence the activity of the late endosome SNARE protein VAMP7 , which is required for MT1 - MMP contact with the matrix ( basement membrane or fibrous type I collagen ) at the level of WASH – F - actin – cortactin – and exocyst - positive puncta . These connections , most likely tubular , that form between late endosomes and the plasma membrane allow exocyto - sis of MT1 - MMP to the surface and they occur at and correspond to bona fide invadopodia . It is currently though that WASH - dependent actin assembly can generate the force to drive the for - mation of endosomal tubular extensions ( Puthenveedu et al . , 2010 ; Derivery et al . , 2012 ; Gomez et al . , 2012 ; Piotrowski et al . , 2013 ) . This , together with the capacity of the exocyst complex to mediate membrane tethering and modulate WASH - dependent Figure 8 . A WASH - and Exo84 - dependent exocytic mechanism of MT1 - MMP involved in pericellular collagenolysis . ( A and B ) Live - cell imaging of MDA - MB - 231 cells expressing MT1 - MMPpHluorin ( green ) and mCherry - WASH ( red ) constructs , plated on a layer of collagen I for 30 min ( see Video 6 ) . The galleries show exocytosis of MT1 - MMPpHluorin – positive endosomes ( green arrowheads ) in the vicinity of a collagen type I fiber ( blue ) . These endosomes harbor WASH - positive patches ( red arrow - heads ) . The asterisks in B point the reacidification of a WASH - and MT1 - MMPpHluorin – positive endosome . Time is represented in minutes . Bars , 2 µm . ( C ) MDA - MB - 231 cells expressing MT1 - MMPmCherry and MT1 - MMPpHluorin silenced for the indicated proteins were seeded on a layer of type I collagen fibers and imaged over a 30 - min time perios and the frequency of MT1 - MMPpHLuorin exocytic events was quantified ( box plots of events / cell / min ) . The number of cells analyzed for each cell popula - tion is indicated . * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * , P < 0 . 01 ; * * * , P < 0 . 001 ( compared with siNT - treated cells ) . ( D ) Lifetime of MT1 - MMPpHluorin – positive flashes ( in minutes ) . Data show the number of pHLuorin exocytic flashes per cell for the different lifetimes ± SEM from five cells out of three independent experiments . ( E ) MDA - MB - 231 cells expressing MT1 - MMPpHluorin were cultured on a layer of Cy3 - labeled type I collagen fibers and subjected to external pH shifts alternating between 7 . 4 ( white zones ) and 5 . 5 ( gray zones ) . The plots represent pHLuo - rin intensity of a MT1 - MMP – positive endosome that underwent exocytosis ( circled with a solid line in the inset on the right ) and of a region of the plasma membrane ( dashed line ) . The corresponding time - lapse series is shown in Video 7 . The gallery above the plot represents a sequence starting with external pH 7 . 4 cor - responding to the circled MT1 - MMPpHLuorin – positive endosome ( see inset ) . Bars : ( inset ) 5 µm ; ( gallery ) 1 µm . 1075 WASH and exocyst control invadopodia formation • Monteiro et al . Finally , this study supports the conclusion that two pools of F - actin – cortactin coexist and cooperate to ensure invadopodia formation and function . One pool is associated with and depends on N - WASP activity , which is associated with the core invadopo - dia structure forming on the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane in association with the matrix . These N - WASP – F - actin – cortactin – positive structures include typical dotty - like in - vadopodia forming on the adherent plasma membrane in cells on gelatin or basement membrane ( Yamaguchi et al . , 2005 ; Artym et al . , 2006 ; Oser et al . , 2010 ; Yu et al . , 2012 ) and linear F - actin – based structures assembling in association with collagen fibers in tumor cells invading through a 3D fibrous environment ( Juin et al . , 2012 ; Yu et al . , 2012 ; this study ) . These different structures rep - resent docking sites for MT1 - MMP – containing endosomes and may provide a physical scaffold for plasma membrane protru - sion and MT1 - MMP retension to penetrate the extracellular matrix and basement membrane . The second pool , with a punctate organization , is associated with and depends on WASH activity on MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes and , together with other components including the exocyst complex , contributes to an exo - cytic mechanism that fuels the invadopodia with the proteolytic activity necessary for pericellular matrix remodelling . The coor - dinated function of WASH and the exocyst complex in the funda - mental biology of invadopodium - mediated proteolysis in different pathologically relevant matrix environments demonstrated here appears a crucial part of the invasive program of carcinoma cells . delivery to invadopodia , has to be established ( Steffen et al . , 2008 ; Williams and Coppolino , 2011 ) . Our findings also demonstrate that exocytosis of MT1 - MMP does not occur through complete collapse of MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes into the plasma membrane , but by a mechanism whereby late endosomes are retrieved apparently intact after fission of endosome - to - plasma membrane connections and can possibly engage in multiple exocytic events . Strikingly , some of these connections remain open for several minutes ; however , transfer of MT1 - MMP from the storage endosome to the inva - dopodial plasma membrane is tightly controlled as a large portion of the protease remains associated with the endosome . Thus , the tubular connection forming between the two membrane compart - ments in a WASH / exocyst - dependent manner may exert different functions ; it could stabilize and restrict the extension of the fusion pore between the two membranes and it may also act as a filter to prevent free diffusion of MT1 - MMP out of the endosome . Along this line , it was recently shown that N - WASP – dependent invadopodial F - actin can prevent the diffusion of MT1 - MMP out of the invadopodia through some interaction of the cytoplas - mic domain of the protease with the actin network ( Yu et al . , 2012 ) . The same type of interactions with WASH - dependent F - actin surrounding the connecting tube would limit diffusion of MT1 - MMP out of the endosome and ensure controlled delivery of MT1 - MMP to the plasma membrane for controlled remodel - ing of the basement membrane and collagen fibers . Figure 9 . Schematic model of the general mechanism of exocytosis of MT1 - MMP – positive late endosomes at the invadopodial plasma membrane . WASH - dependent Arp2 / 3 complex activation and actin / cortactin assembly controls the dynamics of tubular endosomal membrane extensions ( inset i ) and tubular endosome - to - plasma connections required for transfer and delivery of MT1 - MMP from the endosome to the invadopodial plasma membrane ( inset ii ) . The exocyst complex mediates tethering of MT1 - MMP – positive late endosomes with the target membrane ( ii ) . Fusion between the endosomal membrane tubule and the invadopodial plasma membrane may necessitate the SNARE protein VAMP7 ( not depicted ; Steffen et al . , 2008 ; Williams and Coppolino , 2011 ) . Actin and cortactin assembly at invadopodia requires N - WASP and allows membrane protrusion formation and retention of MT1 - MMP ( insets ii and iii ; Yamaguchi et al . , 2005 ; Artym et al . , 2006 ; Oser et al . , 2010 ; Yu et al . , 2012 ) . Mature invadopodia are responsible for penetrating and breaching the basement membrane in contact with carcinoma cells ( 1 and 2 ; Hotary et al . , 2006 ; Rowe and Weiss , 2008 ) . In the fibrous , collagen - rich extracellular membrane environment surrounding the tumor ( 3 ) , fibers that oppose cell movement , involving recognition by yet unidentified collagen receptors , trigger the assembly of N - WASP – and F - actin – positive linear invadopodia and the recruitment and exocytosis of MT1 - MMP – containing endosomes based on the conserved WASH and exocyst - dependent mechanism ( inset iv ) . JCB • VOLUME 203 • NUMBER 6 • 2013 1076 Threshold command of MetaMorph was divided by the number of phalloi - din - labeled cells in the field to define a degradation index , which was normalized to the degradation index of control siNT - treated cells set to 100 as described previously ( Sakurai - Yageta et al . , 2008 ) . Indirect immunofluorescence microscopy , 3D deconvolution , and image analysis MDA - MB - 231 cells were cultured on gelatin - coated coverslips . Cells were extracted with 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 in 4 % paraformaldehyde and stained for immunofluorescence microscopy . Images were acquired with a wide - field microscope ( Eclipse 90i Upright ; Nikon ) using a 100× Plan Apo VC 1 . 4 oil objective and a highly sensitive cooled interlined charge - coupled device ( CCD ) camera ( CoolSnap HQ2 ; Roper Scientific ) . A z - dimension series of images was taken every 0 . 2 µm by means of a piezoelectric motor ( Physik Instrumente ) and the images were deconvoluted ( Sibarita , 2005 ) . For quantification of the effect of WASH knockdown on cortactin distribution , a perinuclear region was drawn with the Region Tool of MetaMorph 7 ( Molecular Devices ) and the integrated intensity was measured with the Region Measurement command . For quantification of the effect of Exo84 knockdown on WASH - cortactin domains , individual WASH and cortactin subdomains were circled with MetaMorph 7 and the integrated intensity was measured with the Region Measurement command . WASH , Exo84 , and cortactin spot detection and codistribution analysis To detect endosomes , an automatic Otsu threshold is applied to the Gaussian - filtered MT1 - MMP – positive endosome image (  = 1 . 5 pixels ) . Statistics about each endosome are then saved . For each endosome , WASH and Exo84 ( or WASH and cortactin ) spots are searched for in a neighboring of x pixels ( manually set by user ) in their respective channel . Their number and position are saved per endosome ( see the macro in Text file S2 in on - line supplemental material ) . From the position of WASH and Exo84 ( or WASH and cortactin ) spots around each endosomes , each WASH spot is paired with its closest Exo84 ( or cortactin ) spot neighbor , optimized over all spots around this endosome . This allowed measuring of the distribution of distance between WASH - Exo84 ( or WASH - cortactin ) spots ( see the co - distribution analysis Zip file S3 in online supplemental material ) . Duolink in situ proximity ligation assay For Duolink assay ( Söderberg et al . , 2006 ) , cells grown on coverslips coated with cross - linked gelatin were permeabilized with 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 in 4 % paraformaldehyde , fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde , and then incubated with primary antibodies : rabbit polyclonal anti - WASH , goat poly - clonal anti - Exo84 , and mouse monoclonal anti - cortactin . Secondary anti - bodies tagged with short DNA oligonucleotides were added . Hybridization , ligation , amplification , and detection were realized according to the man - ufacturer’s protocol ( Olink Bioscience ) . In brief , secondary antibodies were incubated in a preheated humidity chamber for 1 h at 37°C . Ligation was performed with a ligase - containing ligation solution for 30 min at 37°C . Then , the amplification step was performed with a polymerase - containing ampli - fication solution for 1 h and 40 min at 37°C . Finally , coverslips were incu - bated with Cy3 - conjugated IgGs to detect Duolink signal . Coverslips were analyzed by wide - field microscopy and WASH - Exo84 or WASH - cortactin Duolink signal staining was manually counted for each cell and compared with control conditions in which one of the primary antibodies was omitted . Live - cell spinning disk confocal microscopy and FITC - dextran pulse experiment MDA - MB - 231 cells stably expressing MT1 - MMPmCh were plated on glass - bottom dishes ( MatTek Corporation ) coated with cross - linked gelatin and kept in a humidified atmosphere at 37°C and 1 % CO 2 . Movement of MT1 - MMPmCh – containing vesicles was monitored by acquiring z - stack sequences by confocal spinning disk microscopy ( 1 z - stack / 4 s ) with a microscope ( Eclipse TE2000 - U ; Nikon ) equipped with a 60× 1 . 45 NA oil immersion objective , a PIFOC Objective stepper , a CSU22 confocal unit ( Yokogawa Corporation of America ) , and an HQ2 CCD camera steered by Meta - morph and a temperature controller . For dextran pulse experiments , MDA - MB - 231 cells expressing MT1 - MMPmCh ( or transiently expressing Rab7 - GFP or VAMP7 - GFP ) were plated in glass - bottom dishes coated with Alexa Fluor 594 – conjugated cross - linked gelatin ( or unlabeled gelatin ) and a z - stack of images was acquired before adding dextran . FITC - or Alexa Fluor 647 – conjugated dextran ( 10 , 000 MW ) was added to the medium at 2 mg / ml final concentration ( from a 20 - mg / ml stock solution ) . After 1 min at 37°C , cells were washed and z - stack sequences were acquired . Materials and methods Antibodies and constructs Antibodies used in this study are listed in Table S1 . Full - length mouse WASH cDNA amino - terminally fused with GFP or mCherry was subcloned in pcDNA3 . 1 vector ( Derivery et al . , 2009 ) . Full - length rat cortactin cDNA ( provided by M . A . McNiven , Mayo Clinic , Rochester , MI ) was subcloned in pDsRed1 - N1 and pEGFP - N1 ( Takara Bio Inc . ) in fusion with carboxy - terminal DsRed or GFP , respectively . Human full - length Exo84 and Sec3 were sub - cloned in pcDNA3 . 1 plasmid with amino - terminal GFP or carboxy - terminal HA tags . Yeast two - hybrid screening The coding sequence for full - length human Sec3 ( GenBank accession no . gi : 7023219 ) and Exo84 ( GenBank accession no . gi : 58331103 ) were PCR amplified and cloned into pB27 as carboxy - terminal fusions to LexA . The constructs were checked by sequencing the entire inserts and used as baits to screen at saturation a highly complex human placenta domain library constructed into pP6 . pB27 and pP6 derive from the original pBTM116 ( Vojtek and Hollenberg , 1995 ) and pGADGH ( Bartel et al . , 1993 ) plas - mids , respectively . For Sec3 , 96 million clones ( 10 - fold the complexity of the library ) were screened using a mating approach with Y187 ( mat  ) and L40  Gal4 ( mata ) yeast strains as previously described ( Fromont - Racine et al . , 1997 ) . 353 His + colonies were selected on a medium lacking tryp - tophan , leucine , and histidine , supplemented with 2 mM 3 - aminotriazole . For Exo84 , 64 million clones were screened and 164 His + colonies were selected using the same protocol . The prey fragments of the positive clones were amplified by PCR and sequenced at their 5  and 3  junctions . The re - sulting sequences were used to identify the corresponding interacting pro - teins in GenBank using a fully automated procedure . The protein interactions from this publication have been submitted to the IMEx consortium through IntAct ( Kerrien et al . , 2012 ) and assigned the identifier IM - 17363 . Cell culture , DNA transfection , stable cell lines , and RNAi The human breast adenocarcinoma cell line MDA - MB - 231 ( HTB - 26 ; American Type Culture Collection ) was maintained in L - 15 culture medium ( Sigma - Aldrich ) with 2 mM glutamine and 15 % FCS at 37°C in 1 % CO 2 . MDA - MB - 231 cells stably expressing MT1 - MMPmCherry ( MT1 - MMPmCh ) were cultured in the same medium supplemented with 0 . 5 mg / ml G418 ( Sakurai - Yageta et al . , 2008 ) . MDA - MB - 231 cells stably expressing MT1 - MMPpHluorin ( Lizárraga et al . , 2009 ) , with the GFP - derivative pHluorin tag ( super - ecliptic variant [ Miesenböck , 2012 ] ) inserted in the extracellular domain , were generated by lentiviral transduction . For transient expression , MDA - MB - 231 cells were transfected with plasmid constructs ( 1 µg ) using Lipofectamine LTX ( Invitrogen ) or Nucleofector ( Lonza ) according to the manufacturers’ in - structions . Cells were analyzed 48 h after transfection . BT - 549 ( HTB - 122 ; American Type Culture Collection ) human breast cancer cells were cultured in RPMI medium with 2 mM glutamine and 10 % FCS at 37°C in 5 % CO 2 . siRNA transfection was performed using 50 nM siRNA with Lullaby reagent ( OZ Biosciences ) . Cells were analyzed 72 h after treatment . The siRNA sequences used in this study are shown in Table S2 . Immunoprecipitation For expression of HA - tagged Exo84 and Sec3 exocyst complex subunits , HeLa cells were transiently transfected using FuGENE ( Roche ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . 48 h after transfection , cells were lysed in lysis buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 4 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 1 mM EDTA , and complete Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail ; Roche ) , and then centrifuged at 13 , 000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C . Supernatants ( 1 – 2 mg of total protein in 1 ml ) were incubated with 1 – 2 µg of anti - WASH antibodies or con - trol irrelevant IgGs ( anti - GST ) for 1 h at 4°C , and then protein G – Sepharose 4 Fast Flow ( 50 µl ; GE Healthcare ) was added and the incubation was continued for a further 2 h at 4°C . Beads were washed four times in lysis buffer and bound proteins were eluted in SDS sample buffer , separated by SDS - PAGE , and detected by immunoblotting with indicated antibodies using ECL Western Blotting Detection Reagents ( GE Healthcare ) . Fluorescent gelatin degradation assay MDA - MB - 231 cells were incubated for 5 h on FITC - conjugated cross - linked gelatin ( Invitrogen ) as described previously ( Sakurai - Yageta et al . , 2008 ) , and then fixed and stained for F - actin and cortactin . Cells were imaged with the 63× objective of a wide - field microscope ( DM6000 B / M ; Leica ) equipped with a CCD CoolSnap HQ camera ( Roper Scientific ) and steered by Metamorph ( Molecular Devices ) . For quantification of degradation , the total area of degraded matrix in one field ( black pixels ) measured with the 1077 WASH and exocyst control invadopodia formation • Monteiro et al . of Gaussian filter ( Sage et al . , 2005 ) , with variance reflecting the expected spot size . The spot detection then consists in finding the local minima , sorting them in ascending order of intensity , applying a flood - fill algorithm to each of them using a fixed noise tolerance value set up for all experiments at 10 , 000 , and discarding higher minima whose fill regions touch those of lower minima . Detected spots are then counted and saved for visual verification . No manual correction was done . Degradation index is the number of degradation spots divided by the number of cells present in the field , normalized to the degradation index of control cells set to 100 . MT1 - MMPpHluorin exocytosis on collagen type I fibers MDA - MB - 231 cells stably coexpressing MT1 - MMPmCherry and MT1 - MMPpHluorin constructs were treated with nontargeting , WASH , or Exo84 siRNA for 72 h and plated atop of a drop of polymerized type I collagen . Cells were imaged by confocal spinning disk microscopy ( two images / min ) . The number of exocytic events of MT1 - MMPphLuorin ( i . e . , GFP flashes ) was measured per minute and per cell . As a control we measured the mean fluor - escence intensity of MT1 - MMPmCherry for each cell . Extracellular pH shifts experiment MDA - MB - 231 cells stably expressing MT1 - MMPpHluorin were plated on polymerized type I collagen conjugated with Cy3 . Cells were imaged on a microsope ( IX71 ; Olympus ) with a 100× , 1 . 49 NA objective at a frame rate of 0 . 5 Hz with a QuantEM EMCCD camera . Cells were bathed in a solution containing 140 mM NaCl , 2 mM KCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 2 mM CaCl 2 , 10 mM Hepes , and 5 mM d - glucose , and adjusted to pH 7 . 4 and 315 mosm . For the solution at pH 5 . 5 , Hepes was replaced by MES . Solution exchange was performed as described previously ( Perrais et al . , 2004 ) . Statistical analyses Statistical analyses were performed using analysis of variance or Student’s t test in Prism software . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows additional data on markers associated with MT1 - MMP – positive endosomes in MDA - MB - 231 and BT - 549 cells . Fig . S2 shows levels of pro - teins in cells targeted by different siRNAs . Fig . S3 shows additional stain - ing of endosomal and invadopodial markers . Fig . S4 shows a gallery of images taken from a time - lapse sequence of cells expressing MT1 - MMPmCh and MT1 - MMPpHLuorin . Tables S1 and S2 list antibodies and show sequences of the siRNAs used in this study , respectively . Video 1 shows the dynamics of GFP - WASH – and DsRed - cortactin – positive cytoplasmic puncta in MDA - MB - 231 cells . Video 2 shows clustering and tubulation of a MT1 - MMP – positive late endosomal system induced upon silencing of WASH in MDA - MB - 231 cells . Video 3 dynamically shows contacts of MT1 - MMPmCherry – positive endosomes with GFP - cortactin – positive invadopo - dia on the ventral membrane of MDA - MB - 231 cells plated on gelatin . Video 4 documents the existence of two dynamic pools of DsRed - cortactin in MDA - MB - 231 cells plated on a layer of collagen fibers ; one pool assem - bles along collagen fibers and correspond to linear invadopodia , and an - other pool is associated with GFP - WASH – positive puncta on late endosomes . Video 5 shows MDA - MB - 231 cells simultaneously expressing mCherry - and pHLuorin - tagged fusion protein of MT1 - MMP plated on a layer of collagen fibers . The pH sensitivity of pHLuorin allows the visualization of exocytic events of MT1 - MMP – containing endosomes occurring near collagen fibers . Video 6 documents that exocytic MT1 - MMPpHLuorin – positive endosomes are positive for mCherry - WASH . Video 7 shows the fluorescence change of MT1 - MMPpHLuorin – containing late endosomes according to the pH of the external medium indicative of long - lived late endosome - to - plasma mem - brane connections . Zip file S1 contains two macros : one for degradation spot detection and one for DAPI - stained nuclei counting , to compute the degradation index of collagen . Text file S2 is the macro used to detect en - dosomes and aggregated spots . Zip file S3 ( codistribution analysis ) con - tains Matlab scripts used to quantify the distance between WASH spots and their closest neighbored cortactin spots ( or Exo84 spots ) for each endosome . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 201306162 / DC1 . The authors wish to thank J . Camonis for initiating the Drosoman yeast two - hybrid joint project between Institut Curie and Hybrigenics SA , A . Savina for help with FITC - dextran experiments , and K . Wolf and P . Friedl for advice and help with experiments using Col1 - 3 / 4 C antibody . We are indebted to V . Fraisier and the staff of the Cell and Tissue Imaging Facility and Nikon Imaging Center at Institut Curie – Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique for help with image acqui - sition . We thank members of P . Chavrier’s laboratory for helpful discussions . TIRFM MDA - MB - 231 cells transfected with GFP - and mCherry - tagged proteins were plated on glass - bottom dishes coated with cross - linked unlabeled gelatin as previously described . Simultaneous dual color TIRFM sequences were acquired on an inverted microscope ( TE2000 ) equipped with a 100× TIRF objective ( 1 . 47 NA ) , a TIRF arm , an image splitter ( DV ; Roper Scientific ) installed in front of the CCD camera and a temperature controller . GFP and m - Cherry were excited with 491 - and 560 - nm lasers , respectively ( 100 mW ; Roper Scientific ) , both controlled for power by an acousto - optic tunable filter . Fluorescent emissions were selected with bandpass and longpass filters ( Chroma Technology Corp . ) and captured by a QuantEM EMCCD camera ( Roper Scientific ) . The system was driven by Metamorph . To measure the subplasma membrane density of MT1 - MMP endosomes , cells stably expressing MT1 - MMPmCh and silenced for the protein of interest were plated on a layer of unlabeled gelatin and imaged by TIRFM for an exposure time of 100 ms and with 1 pixel corresponding to 160 nm . The density of MT1 - MMPmCh structures was evaluated by thresholding images using using ImageJ software . The threshold was set at 1 . 3× the cytoplasmic background . The size of the cell footprint was not affected by the siRNAs used . High - resolution 3D structured illumination microscopy ( SIM ) Image acquisition was performed in the 3D SIM mode with a N - SIM micro - scope ( Nikon ) equipped with a 100× 1 . 49 NA oil immersion objective , laser illumination ( 488 nm at 200 mW and 561 nm at 100 mW ) and an EM CCD camera ( DU - 897 ; Andor Technology ) . Image reconstruction was performed using the NIS - Elements software ( Nikon ; based on Gustafsson et al . [ 2008 ] ) . Matrigel and collagen I invasion assays The Transwell Matrigel invasion assay has been previously described ( Steffen et al . , 2008 ) . Invasive migration in 3D type I collagen was assessed using the Oris Cell Invasion Assay ( Platypus Technologies ) . H2B - EGF – expressing MDA - MB - 231 cells were reverse transfected with Lullaby reagent with MT1 - MMP , WASH , or Exo84 siRNAs ( 50 nM ) . 24 h after transfection , cells were trypsinized and counted and 40 , 000 cells / well were seeded in the presence of Oris Cell Seeding Stoppers to restrict seeding to the outer annular regions of the wells in a 96 - well plate previously coated with a bottom layer of acid - extracted rat tail tendon type I collagen ( 2 . 2 mg / ml ; BD ) . Removal of the stoppers reveals a 2 - mm diameter unseeded region in the center of each well , into which seeded cells may invade during a 48 - h time period , once a collagen I overlay has been applied . H2B - EGFP nuclei images were ac - quired from each well at the beginning ( T0 ) and 48 h after invasion ( T2 ) using a cooled CCD camera ( HQ2 ) mounted on a microscope ( TE2000 ) equipped with a 4× objective CFI Plan Fluor 0 . 13 NA , 17 . 1 WD . Image analysis was performed using Metamorph software . The index of invasion was determined by thresholding the area occupied by H2B - EGFP nuclei in the detection zone of each well after 48 h of invasion . This index is defined by the total area occupied by H2B - EGFP nuclei in unseeded area at the end of the assay ( T2 ) by subtracting the area occupied by H2B - EGFP nuclei at the beginning of the experiment ( T0 ) . This area of invasion was normal - ized and results from three independent experiments are represented . Live - cell imaging of cells on a layer of fibrous type I collagen Glass bottom dishes ( MatTek Corporation ) were layered with 100 µl of a solution of type I collagen mixed with Alexa Fluor 647 – conjugated type I collagen ( 10 % final ) at a final concentration of 2 . 2 mg / ml ( Sabeh et al . , 2004 ) . After gelling for 3 min at 37°C , the collagen layer was washed gently in PBS and 1 ml of the cell suspension in L15 medium with 15 % FCS ( 1 . 5 – 2 . 5 × 10 5 cells / ml ) was added . Cells were incubated for 30 min at 37°C in 1 % CO 2 before live - cell imaging using multi - color spinning disk confocal microscopy . Quantification of pericellular collagenolysis Cells treated with siRNAs against MT1 - MMP , WASH , Exo84 , or non - targeting siRNA for 48 h ( Table S2 ) were trypsinized and resuspended in 0 . 2 ml of 2 . 2 mg / ml collagen I solution ( 2 . 5 × 10 5 cells / ml ) loaded on a glass cov - erslip . After gelling for 30 min at 37°C , complete medium was added and collagen - embedded cells were incubated for 24 h at 37°C in 1 % CO 2 . After fixation in 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS at 37°C for 30 min , samples were incubated with anti – Col1 - 3 / 4 C antibodies ( 2 . 5 µg / ml ) for 2 h at 4°C , washed extensively with PBS , and counterstained with Cy3 - conjugated anti - rabbit IgG antibodies , DAPI , and Alexa Fluor 488 – phalloidin to see the cell shape . Image acquisition was performed with an A1R confocal mi - croscope ( Nikon ) with a 40× oil objective . Quantification of degradation spots was performed with a homemade ImageJ macro ( Zip file S1 in the online supplemental material ) . Images were preprocessed by a laplacian JCB • VOLUME 203 • NUMBER 6 • 2013 1078 Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) family are controlled by analogous structurally related complexes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 107 : 10442 – 10447 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0913293107 Jiang , A . , K . Lehti , X . Wang , S . J . Weiss , J . Keski - Oja , and D . Pei . 2001 . Regulation of membrane - type matrix metalloproteinase 1 activity by dynamin - mediated endocytosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 98 : 13693 – 13698 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 241293698 Juin , A . , C . Billottet , V . Moreau , O . Destaing , C . Albiges - Rizo , J . Rosenbaum , E . Génot , and F . Saltel . 2012 . Physiological type I collagen organization induces the formation of a novel class of linear invadosomes . Mol . Biol . Cell . 23 : 297 – 309 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E11 - 07 - 0594 Kerrien , S . , B . Aranda , L . Breuza , A . Bridge , F . Broackes - Carter , C . Chen , M . Duesbury , M . Dumousseau , M . Feuermann , U . Hinz , et al . 2012 . The IntAct molecular interaction database in 2012 . Nucleic Acids Res . 40 : D841 – D846 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / nar / gkr1088 Liu , J . , P . Yue , V . V . Artym , S . C . Mueller , and W . Guo . 2009 . The role of the exocyst in matrix metalloproteinase secretion and actin dynamics during tumor cell invadopodia formation . Mol . Biol . Cell . 20 : 3763 – 3771 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E08 - 09 - 0967 Lizárraga , F . , R . Poincloux , M . Romao , G . Montagnac , G . Le Dez , I . Bonne , G . Rigaill , G . Raposo , and P . Chavrier . 2009 . Diaphanous - related formins are re - quired for invadopodia formation and invasion of breast tumor cells . Cancer Res . 69 : 2792 – 2800 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 08 - 3709 Lorenz , M . , H . Yamaguchi , Y . Wang , R . H . Singer , and J . Condeelis . 2004 . Imaging sites of N - wasp activity in lamellipodia and invadopodia of carcinoma cells . Curr . Biol . 14 : 697 – 703 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2004 . 04 . 008 Miesenböck , G . 2012 . Synapto - pHluorins : genetically encoded reporters of synaptic transmission . Cold Spring Harb . Protoc . 2012 : 213 – 217 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / pdb . ip067827 Morel , E . , R . G . Parton , and J . Gruenberg . 2009 . Annexin A2 - dependent polym - erization of actin mediates endosome biogenesis . Dev . Cell . 16 : 445 – 457 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 01 . 007 Murphy , D . A . , and S . A . Courtneidge . 2011 . The ‘ins’ and ‘outs’ of podosomes and invadopodia : characteristics , formation and function . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 : 413 – 426 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm3141 Oser , M . , H . Yamaguchi , C . C . Mader , J . J . Bravo - Cordero , M . Arias , X . Chen , V . Desmarais , J . van Rheenen , A . J . Koleske , and J . Condeelis . 2009 . Cortactin regulates cofilin and N - WASp activities to control the stages of invadopo - dium assembly and maturation . J . Cell Biol . 186 : 571 – 587 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200812176 Oser , M . , C . C . Mader , H . Gil - Henn , M . Magalhaes , J . J . Bravo - Cordero , A . J . Koleske , and J . Condeelis . 2010 . Specific tyrosine phosphorylation sites on cortactin regulate Nck1 - dependent actin polymerization in invadopodia . J . Cell Sci . 123 : 3662 – 3673 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 068163 Park , L . , P . A . Thomason , T . Zech , J . S . King , D . M . Veltman , M . Carnell , S . Ura , L . M . Machesky , and R . H . Insall . 2013 . Cyclical action of the WASH complex : FAM21 and capping protein drive WASH recycling , not initial recruitment . Dev . Cell . 24 : 169 – 181 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2012 . 12 . 014 Perrais , D . , I . C . Kleppe , J . W . Taraska , and W . Almers . 2004 . Recapture after exocytosis causes differential retention of protein in granules of bovine chromaffin cells . J . Physiol . 560 : 413 – 428 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1113 / jphysiol . 2004 . 064410 Piotrowski , J . T . , T . S . Gomez , R . A . Schoon , A . K . Mangalam , and D . D . Billadeau . 2013 . WASH knockout T cells demonstrate defective receptor trafficking , proliferation , and effector function . Mol . Cell . Biol . 33 : 958 – 973 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MCB . 01288 - 12 Poincloux , R . , F . Lizárraga , and P . Chavrier . 2009 . Matrix invasion by tumour cells : a focus on MT1 - MMP trafficking to invadopodia . J . Cell Sci . 122 : 3015 – 3024 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 034561 Puthenveedu , M . A . , B . Lauffer , P . Temkin , R . Vistein , P . Carlton , K . Thorn , J . Taunton , O . D . Weiner , R . G . Parton , and M . von Zastrow . 2010 . Sequence - dependent sorting of recycling proteins by actin - stabilized endosomal microdomains . Cell . 143 : 761 – 773 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2010 . 10 . 003 Rowe , R . G . , and S . J . Weiss . 2008 . Breaching the basement membrane : who , when and how ? Trends Cell Biol . 18 : 560 – 574 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2008 . 08 . 007 Sabeh , F . , I . Ota , K . Holmbeck , H . Birkedal - Hansen , P . Soloway , M . Balbin , C . Lopez - Otin , S . Shapiro , M . Inada , S . Krane , et al . 2004 . Tumor cell traffic through the extracellular matrix is controlled by the membrane - anchored collagenase MT1 - MMP . J . Cell Biol . 167 : 769 – 781 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200408028 Sabeh , F . , R . Shimizu - Hirota , and S . J . Weiss . 2009 . Protease - dependent versus - independent cancer cell invasion programs : three - dimensional amoeboid movement revisited . J . Cell Biol . 185 : 11 – 19 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200807195 Sage , D . , F . R . Neumann , F . Hediger , S . M . Gasser , and M . Unser . 2005 . Automatic tracking of individual fluorescence particles : application to the study of P . Monteiro was the recipient of a PhD fellowship from Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer . C . Rossé was the recipient of a postdoctoral fellowship from Fondation ARC pour la recherche sur le cancer . Support was provided by grants from the Fondation ARC pour la recherche sur le cancer ( SL220100601356 ) and Agence Nationale pour la Recherche ( ANR - 08 - BLAN - 0111 ) to P . Chavrier , by GenHomme Network ( 02490 - 6088 ) to Hybrigenics SA and to Institut Curie , and by core funding from the Institut Curie and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique . Submitted : 28 June 2013 Accepted : 18 November 2013 References Artym , V . V . , Y . Zhang , F . Seillier - Moiseiwitsch , K . M . Yamada , and S . C . Mueller . 2006 . Dynamic interactions of cortactin and membrane type 1 matrix metal - loproteinase at invadopodia : defining the stages of invadopodia formation and function . Cancer Res . 66 : 3034 – 3043 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 05 - 2177 Ayala , I . , M . Baldassarre , G . Giacchetti , G . Caldieri , S . Tetè , A . Luini , and R . Buccione . 2008 . Multiple regulatory inputs converge on cortactin to control invadopodia biogenesis and extracellular matrix degradation . J . Cell Sci . 121 : 369 – 378 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 008037 Bartel , P . L . , C . T . Chien , R . Sternglanz , and S . Fields . 1993 . Using the two - hybrid system to detect protein - protein interactions . In Cellular Interactions in Development : A Practical Approach , D . A . Hartley , editor . Oxford University Press , Oxford . 153 – 179 . Carnell , M . , T . Zech , S . D . Calaminus , S . Ura , M . Hagedorn , S . A . Johnston , R . C . May , T . Soldati , L . M . Machesky , and R . H . Insall . 2011 . Actin polymerization driven by WASH causes V - ATPase retrieval and vesicle neutralization before exocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 193 : 831 – 839 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201009119 Clark , E . S . , A . S . Whigham , W . G . Yarbrough , and A . M . Weaver . 2007 . Cortactin is an essential regulator of matrix metalloproteinase secretion and extra - cellular matrix degradation in invadopodia . Cancer Res . 67 : 4227 – 4235 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 06 - 3928 Derivery , E . , C . Sousa , J . J . Gautier , B . Lombard , D . Loew , and A . Gautreau . 2009 . The Arp2 / 3 activator WASH controls the fission of endosomes through a large multiprotein complex . Dev . Cell . 17 : 712 – 723 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 09 . 010 Derivery , E . , E . Helfer , V . Henriot , and A . Gautreau . 2012 . Actin polymerization controls the organization of WASH domains at the surface of endosomes . PLoS ONE . 7 : e39774 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0039774 Duleh , S . N . , and M . D . Welch . 2010 . WASH and the Arp2 / 3 complex regulate endosome shape and trafficking . Cytoskeleton ( Hoboken ) . 67 : 193 – 206 . Fromont - Racine , M . , J . C . Rain , and P . Legrain . 1997 . Toward a functional analysis of the yeast genome through exhaustive two - hybrid screens . Nat . Genet . 16 : 277 – 282 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ng0797 - 277 Gomez , T . S . , and D . D . Billadeau . 2009 . A FAM21 - containing WASH complex regulates retromer - dependent sorting . Dev . Cell . 17 : 699 – 711 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 09 . 009 Gomez , T . S . , J . A . Gorman , A . A . de Narvajas , A . O . Koenig , and D . D . Billadeau . 2012 . Trafficking defects in WASH - knockout fibroblasts originate from collapsed endosomal and lysosomal networks . Mol . Biol . Cell . 23 : 3215 – 3228 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E12 - 02 - 0101 Gustafsson , M . G . , L . Shao , P . M . Carlton , C . J . Wang , I . N . Golubovskaya , W . Z . Cande , D . A . Agard , and J . W . Sedat . 2008 . Three - dimensional resolution doubling in wide - field fluorescence microscopy by structured illumination . Biophys . J . 94 : 4957 – 4970 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 107 . 120345 Harrington , A . W . , C . St Hillaire , L . S . Zweifel , N . O . Glebova , P . Philippidou , S . Halegoua , and D . D . Ginty . 2011 . Recruitment of actin modifiers to TrkA endosomes governs retrograde NGF signaling and survival . Cell . 146 : 421 – 434 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 07 . 008 He , B . , and W . Guo . 2009 . The exocyst complex in polarized exocytosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 21 : 537 – 542 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2009 . 04 . 007 Heider , M . R . , and M . Munson . 2012 . Exorcising the exocyst complex . Traffic . 13 : 898 – 907 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2012 . 01353 . x Hertzog , M . , and P . Chavrier . 2011 . Cell polarity during motile processes : keeping on track with the exocyst complex . Biochem . J . 433 : 403 – 409 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1042 / BJ20101214 Hotary , K . , X . Y . Li , E . Allen , S . L . Stevens , and S . J . Weiss . 2006 . A cancer cell me - talloprotease triad regulates the basement membrane transmigration pro - gram . Genes Dev . 20 : 2673 – 2686 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gad . 1451806 Jia , D . , T . S . Gomez , Z . Metlagel , J . Umetani , Z . Otwinowski , M . K . Rosen , and D . D . Billadeau . 2010 . WASH and WAVE actin regulators of the 1079 WASH and exocyst control invadopodia formation • Monteiro et al . chromosome dynamics . IEEE Trans . Image Process . 14 : 1372 – 1383 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TIP . 2005 . 852787 Sakurai - Yageta , M . , C . Recchi , G . Le Dez , J . B . Sibarita , L . Daviet , J . Camonis , C . D’Souza - Schorey , and P . Chavrier . 2008 . The interaction of IQGAP1 with the exocyst complex is required for tumor cell invasion downstream of Cdc42 and RhoA . J . Cell Biol . 181 : 985 – 998 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200709076 Sibarita , J . B . 2005 . Deconvolution microscopy . Adv . Biochem . Eng . Biotechnol . 95 : 201 – 243 . Söderberg , O . , M . Gullberg , M . Jarvius , K . Ridderstråle , K . J . Leuchowius , J . Jarvius , K . Wester , P . Hydbring , F . Bahram , L . G . Larsson , and U . Landegren . 2006 . Direct observation of individual endogenous protein complexes in situ by proximity ligation . Nat . Methods . 3 : 995 – 1000 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth947 Sokac , A . M . , and W . M . Bement . 2006 . Kiss - and - coat and compartment mixing : coupling exocytosis to signal generation and local actin assembly . Mol . Biol . Cell . 17 : 1495 – 1502 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E05 - 10 - 0908 Steffen , A . , G . Le Dez , R . Poincloux , C . Recchi , P . Nassoy , K . Rottner , T . Galli , and P . Chavrier . 2008 . MT1 - MMP - dependent invasion is regulated by TI - VAMP / VAMP7 . Curr . Biol . 18 : 926 – 931 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2008 . 05 . 044 Temkin , P . , B . Lauffer , S . Jäger , P . Cimermancic , N . J . Krogan , and M . von Zastrow . 2011 . SNX27 mediates retromer tubule entry and endosome - to - plasma membrane trafficking of signalling receptors . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 : 715 – 721 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb2252 Thorn , P . , K . E . Fogarty , and I . Parker . 2004 . Zymogen granule exocytosis is characterized by long fusion pore openings and preservation of vesicle lipid identity . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 101 : 6774 – 6779 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0400336101 Uekita , T . , Y . Itoh , I . Yana , H . Ohno , and M . Seiki . 2001 . Cytoplasmic tail – dependent internalization of membrane - type 1 matrix metalloproteinase is important for its invasion - promoting activity . J . Cell Biol . 155 : 1345 – 1356 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200108112 Vojtek , A . B . , and S . M . Hollenberg . 1995 . Ras - Raf interaction : two - hybrid anal - ysis . Methods Enzymol . 255 : 331 – 342 . Williams , K . C . , and M . G . Coppolino . 2011 . Phosphorylation of membrane type 1 - matrix metalloproteinase ( MT1 - MMP ) and its vesicle - associated mem - brane protein 7 ( VAMP7 ) - dependent trafficking facilitate cell invasion and migration . J . Biol . Chem . 286 : 43405 – 43416 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M111 . 297069 Wolf , K . , Y . I . Wu , Y . Liu , J . Geiger , E . Tam , C . Overall , M . S . Stack , and P . Friedl . 2007 . Multi - step pericellular proteolysis controls the transition from indi - vidual to collective cancer cell invasion . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 : 893 – 904 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb1616 Yamaguchi , H . , M . Lorenz , S . Kempiak , C . Sarmiento , S . Coniglio , M . Symons , J . Segall , R . Eddy , H . Miki , T . Takenawa , and J . Condeelis . 2005 . Molecular mechanisms of invadopodium formation : the role of the N - WASP – Arp2 / 3 complex pathway and cofilin . J . Cell Biol . 168 : 441 – 452 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200407076 Yu , X . , T . Zech , L . McDonald , E . G . Gonzalez , A . Li , I . Macpherson , J . P . Schwarz , H . Spence , K . Futó , P . Timpson , et al . 2012 . N - WASP coordinates the deliv - ery and F - actin – mediated capture of MT1 - MMP at invasive pseudopods . J . Cell Biol . 199 : 527 – 544 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201203025 Zech , T . , S . D . Calaminus , P . Caswell , H . J . Spence , M . Carnell , R . H . Insall , J . Norman , and L . M . Machesky . 2011 . The Arp2 / 3 activator WASH regu - lates  5  1 - integrin - mediated invasive migration . J . Cell Sci . 124 : 3753 – 3759 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 080986