A Didactic Methodology for Crafting Information Visualizations Mandy Keck * , Rainer Groh , Zana Vosough * divergentthinking convergentthinking INPUT step 1 : Morphological Analysis with building blocks step 2 : Selection & Fusion step 3 : Improvement Data & Task description a ) Building block out of the dimension Layout Structure b ) Visualization Inspiration Card Data Task or bottom - up approach top - down approach first iteration : dimension Visual Element second iteration : dimension Grid applying Gestalt Laws validation combination patterncreation VisualizationConcept + C on s t r u c t i on K i t convergent + divergent thinking Fig . 1 . Our proposed didactic methodology consists of three main steps which follow divergent and convergent strategies . Abstract —Finding or creating the right information visualization solution that meets design goals can be a very challenging task , not only for students but also for visualization experts . In this paper , we introduce a didactic methodology for designing interactive visualizations through hands - on activities . Our approach can assist students and anyone interested in crafting , ranking , and improving new visualization solutions . The suggested approach follows divergent and convergent thinking that motivates designing several low - ﬁdelity prototypes , discussing pros and cons of each in groups , and improving the ﬁnal solution by incorporating visual and perceptual principles . The methodology is described with teaching course examples for undergraduate and graduate students . We also list observations made when applying the methodology online and ofﬂine along with gathered student feedback . Index Terms —Didactic Methodology , Creativity Method , Construction Kit , Visual Encodings , Gestalt Principles 1 I NTRODUCTION Several design processes and taxonomies have been proposed in the last decades in order to either create visualizations or to organize existing techniques ( cp . [ 5 , 7 , 21 – 23 ] ) . However , these design processes are very high - level descriptions and do not provide a methodological guidance of each step ( cp . [ 19 , 20 ] ) . Moreover , a number of authors have offered design principles in different areas of information visualization ( InfoVis ) and HCI [ 16 , 24 , 29 ] . These design principles often help to create a basic understanding of the design approach . However , the formulation of those principles is rather broad and general , and does not help students to apply these principles . Recently , InfoVis pedagogy and education has been shifting to - wards a clear set of instructions to walk students through hands - on InfoVis activities that involve analog or digital tools and materi - als [ 11 – 13 , 19 , 20 , 27 ] . Another common strategy in design practice is applying divergent thinking – considering numerous ideas , and conver - gent thinking – reﬁning and selecting ideas [ 2 , 21 , 27 ] . Both strategies can be supported by sketching – especially during the ideation phase of InfoVis design . In general , low - ﬁdelity prototyping techniques like sketching , have been found to be quick , useful , and cheap approaches to • Mandy Keck is with Technische Universit¨at Dresden , Germany . E - mail : mandy . keck @ tu - dresden . de • Rainer Groh is with Technische Universit¨at Dresden , Germany . E - mail : rainer . groh @ tu - dresden . de • Zana Vosough is with SAP Labs , Palo Alto , USA . E - mail : zana . vosough @ sap . com generate and brainstorm various solutions [ 6 , 15 , 28 ] . Nevertheless , gen - erating several different ideas remains a challenging task , particularly for novice designers . In our previous work , we introduced a construction kit as a theo - retical framework for designing novel visualization solutions [ 14 ] . In this paper , we extend the work and propose a step - by - step teaching methodology for students , designers , journalists , and data analysts . Our methodology ( see Fig . 1 ) includes several teaching activities that educate the students during the conceptual phase of the design pro - cess . We follow divergent and convergent strategies with support from worksheets and stickers , resulting in several low - ﬁdelity prototypes . In the following , we ﬁrst describe our didactic methodology , and then share our experience and lessons learnt from applying these activities to three teaching scenarios both in online and ofﬂine settings . Finally , we conclude with possible future directions . 2 D IDACTIC M ETHODOLOGY Our methodology includes three successive activities that are presented in Fig . 1 and described in more details in the following subsections . It consists of divergent ( blue ) and convergent ( red ) steps to ﬁrst generate a variety of ideas and then analyse and critically reﬁne them . Our methodology is a step - by - step guide through the design process that focuses on helping students craft quick prototypes and communi - cate their design decisions in a group . Input : The methodology requires inputs such as data and task descrip - tion that are either provided upfront , or are developed on previous analysis activities . Furthermore , educators hand over students work - sheets containing teaching materials . 2 . 1 Morphological Analysis with Building Blocks Our methodology starts with an ideation phase that lets students con - struct a wide range of tentative solutions . We follow the construction 186 2020 IEEE Visualization Conference ( VIS ) 978 - 1 - 7281 - 8014 - 4 / 20 / $ 31 . 00 ©2020 IEEE DOI 10 . 1109 / VIS47514 . 2020 . 00044 2020 I EEE V i s u a li za ti on C on f e r e n ce ( V I S ) | 978 - 1 - 7281 - 8014 - 4 / 20 / $ 31 . 00 © 2020 I EEE | DO I : 10 . 1109 / V I S 47514 . 2020 . 00044 Glyph Area Image Text Line Flow Point Icon VISUAL ELEMENT CONNECTORS LAYOUT STRUCTURE Single List Tiles Bars 123 Matrix ABCD 2D - Plot Cluster ParallelPlot Table Map Node - Link Nested Indented Partitioned GRID Rectangular Radial Navigate Pan Rotate Zoom Distort Inspect Select Exclude Remove Adjust Highlight Group Sort Filter Aggregate Append INTERACTION SUCCESSIVE JUXTAPOSED SUPERIMPOSED NESTED Triangular Free - form Fig . 2 . Building blocks assigned to the dimensions Visual Element , Grid , Layout Structure and Interaction [ 14 ] ( top ) , and connectors for the combination of patterns ( bottom ) . kit approach [ 14 ] . While construction kits originate from the ﬁeld of mechanical engineering , product design , and architecture , they also can be applied to non - physical domains such as HCI and InfoVis . Typically , construction kits consist of a collection of building blocks designed at a comparable abstraction level that together deﬁne a design space for a speciﬁc problem domain [ 10 ] . Hence , the selection and combination of different building blocks results in multiple design variations . Our design space includes different dimensions : Visual Element , Grid , Layout Structure , and Interaction ( shown in Fig . 2 ) . These building blocks can be combined into a pattern by assigning at least one element from each dimension . Patterns follows the what - why - how approach ( cp . [ 3 , 23 , 26 ] ) : the building blocks describe how the interface is designed , the data types and tasks refer to what and why it is visualized . The goal of this activity is to create a variety of solutions ( see Fig . 1 , step 1 ) . This activity can either start with a set of building blocks from the Layout Structure dimension ( bottom - up approach ) or a set of visualizations as inspiration cards [ 1 , 11 , 17 , 25 ] ( top - down approach ) . In the bottom - up approach , suitable building blocks of the Layout Structure dimension are provided by the educator in the form of stickers . For example , the building blocks Node - link , Partitioned , Indented , and Nested are dependent on hierarchical data structures . In the top - down approach , visualization inspiration cards are provided by the educator and students have the task to deconstruct them into individual building blocks . Next , we carry out a morphological analysis [ 32 ] . This is a creativity inducing technique that helps explore a wide range of possible solutions for complex problems . During the ﬁrst iteration , a worksheet with a combination table is prepared for both approaches . It contains the Visual Element and the selected Layout Structure building blocks ( see Fig . 5 , left ) . Often , not all combinations result in functional visualization ideas . The goal of this sketching task is to systematically explore the design space in order to generate and test unusual combinations . Then the result is presented and discussed with the students and educator . The most promising solutions are selected by the group and the morphological analysis is repeated with the Grid dimension building blocks . After a second round of discussion , the ﬁnal selected solutions will be transferred to patterns ( see Fig . 5 , right ) . Worksheets with pattern templates and building block stickers are designed for this step ( see Fig . 4 ) . 2 . 2 Selection and Fusion Phase The second phase focuses on selecting the best options out of the created patterns during the previous phase . If required , these solutions can be combined to create novel visualisations ( see Fig . 1 , step 2 ) . The ﬁrst task of this phase revolves around students evaluating the generated patterns . The ﬁnal decision for which pattern is best is obtained by reevaluating the data and task types along with assessing Structure : Multidimensional Type : Categorical , Quantitative Task : Analyze B : ParallelSets Flow Rectangular Highlight Inspect ParallelPlot Structure : Hierarchical Type : Quantitative Task : Analyze A : IciclePlot Rectangular Partitioned Area Highlight Adjust Filter Fig . 3 . Construction plan for Parallel Hierarchies . Fig . 4 . Pattern worksheet with sketches and stickers ( left ) , and two digital patterns created in Miro ( right ) . the perceptual aspect of the created solutions using well - known visual encodings [ 4 , 18 , 23 ] . The educator provides a ranked list of relevant visual encodings to students . Then , the students are asked to ﬁnd the visual encodings used in the design of each pattern . Figure 6 shows an example of a worksheet with ordered visual encodings derived from [ 23 , p . 102 ] to validate six patterns . Moreover , to determine which data attributes have been encoded by each visual channel , different colors are assigned to each attribute . Analysing this worksheet can be an invaluable step for the participants to discuss the visual aspects of the patterns and prioritize them for further development . After that , a fusion step is pursued in order to merge suitable patterns based on the given tasks and data structures . Patterns can be combined into a construction plan to cover more complex data and task types ( see Fig . 3 ) . This construction process is supported by four different connectors : a ) Successive to show patterns successively , b ) Juxtaposed to show patterns next to each other , c ) Superimposed to show patterns combined in one view , and d ) Nested to show one pattern embedded in another one ( see Fig . 2 , bottom ) . The fusion task is supported by blank sheets for sketching , pattern templates , and stickers with building blocks and connectors . During this step , different combinations are tested by sketching , and possible ideas are saved as construction plans and sketches for further discussions . 2 . 3 Improvement Phase The importance of visual perception and cognition are well understood in the InfoVis literature [ 9 , 31 ] . Our methodology is a comprehensive process that does not only lead to InfoVis creation ( step 1 ) , but also covers the assessment ( step 2 ) , and improvement ( step 3 ) on the basis of well - known perceptual principles . For the improvement phase , we follow the Gestalt Principles of perception as one of the fundamental works to explain cognitive processes to students [ 16 ] . After a general introduction , the educator asks the participants to search for Gestalt principles present on the selected sketches . Moreover , the students are asked to improve the solutions in order to steer the user’s attention towards the important parts of the visualization [ 16 ] . A worksheet is provided to the students with the list of Gestalt principles and example ﬁgures to explain each principle . Final changes on items placement on space , coloring , or highlighting can be done during this phase . 187 Fig . 5 . Worksheet examples for morphological analysis : left ) ofﬂine version of the ﬁrst iteration with Layout Structure Parallel Plot and Partitioned , right ) online version of the second iteration with Grid building blocks ( step 1 , divergent thinking ) . Icicle Plot Sunburst Parallel Sets Chord HierarchicalChord ParallelHierarchies tree quantitative values dimensions accurate least most PositionAligned Unaligned Length Angle Area Color Hierarchical Multidimensional Hierarchical Multidimens . Fig . 6 . Validating the design of six selected visualizations with respect to visual encodings ( step 2 , convergent thinking ) . 3 A PPLICATION OF THE M ETHODOLOGY In this section , we present three teaching scenarios in which our method - ology has been tested . Course description : The methodology has been used to teach infor - mation visualization design at different levels and for different types of courses . These include two Information Visualization courses for undergraduate students and a Visual Analytics course for graduate stu - dents . The courses provide a theoretical background to InfoVis – e . g . data and task types , visualization and interaction techniques , visual encodings , and Gestalt principles . Our methodology was followed in the second phase of the course to offer practical projects based on the theoretical sessions . The methodology was conducted with 7 un - dergraduate Media Computer Science students in the winter semester 2019 / 2020 , 9 undergraduate students in summer semester 2020 , and 7 graduate students in summer semester 2020 . Due to the worldwide pandemic , the courses in summer semester 2020 had to be held in an online environment . We used the online collaboration tool Miro 1 and recreated the workshop materials within the Miro boards . The link to the workshop materials are provided in the supplemental material . Explanatory examples : We used a recently published visualization technique called Parallel Hierarchies [ 30 ] as a running example to describe each step of the workshops to the students . Parallel Hierar - chies are a visual - interactive solution to the problem of cross - tabulating numerical aggregates over hierarchical categories . Fig . 8 shows an example of applying Parallel Hierarchies to the 1990 US Census data set . The data model behind the census data set has three important in - gredients : multiple dimensions with categorical properties , hierarchies deﬁned over these categorical properties , and aggregate numbers for each category . The quantitative attribute in this example is the number of people . The given task is to ﬁnd correlations between attributes and relationships , trends , and outliers within the data structure . 3 . 1 Course Examples The methodology was carried during four 90 - minute sessions . During each session we spent the ﬁrst 30 minutes to introduce the activity’s details using the Parallel Hierarchies example . 1 http : / / www . miro . com Session 1 : First , the structure of the construction kit was explained . In order to do that , Parallel Hierarchies was deconstructed by the educator into a construction plan ( see Fig . 3 ) . The visualization solution can be explained by merging two patterns , describing the techniques of Icicle Plot and Parallel Sets with the Superimposed connector . Then , the students received a task to deconstruct three different visualizations selected by the educator , in groups of 3 to 4 . The main goal is to help students gain an understanding of the building blocks and patterns . A similar approach was used in the online setting , but each student deconstructed visualization examples alone , and then discussed the results with the rest of the group . Since the online course took longer they mainly ﬁnalized the three deconstruction tasks as homework . Session 2 : In the second session the morphological analysis was applied ( step 1 in Figure 1 ) . Again Parallel Hierarchies were used as example to explain the sketching task with the combination table ( see Fig . 5 , left ) . Afterwards , the educator provided students different building blocks and students were asked to start a morphological analysis . Research has shown that the parallel prototyping approach has many beneﬁts in creating more divergent and better results [ 8 ] . Therefore , the participants were asked to exchange their combination tables with their neighboring student after each iteration ( only during the ofﬂine course ) . The goal was to involve as many students as possible in designing several variations . Each student spent 20 minutes on one sketching task . After several rounds of sketching solutions they created their ﬁnal pattern templates . Later , the educator put all the results on a whiteboard ( ofﬂine course ) or Miro board ( online course ) for the ﬁnal group discussion . Fig . 4 shows an example made of sketches and stickers ( left ) and two digi - tal patterns using the building blocks provided in the Miro board ( right ) . Session 3 : After a short introduction on visual encodings and their rankings for different data types ( categorical and ordered data ) , the educator gave students a worksheet including the selected patterns from session 2 and a ranked list of visual encodings ( step 2 in Fig . 1 ) . Fig . 6 shows one example of this table to examine the perceptual accuracy of six selected visualizations . The educator started with ﬁnding the visual encodings used in the design of Parallel Hierarchies and Hierarchical Chord diagrams . Then the students were asked to ﬁll in the table and discuss their answers in small groups . After that , the entire group together tried to evaluate and analyse all the solutions and prioritize them based on the choice of visual encodings . Students were able to compare the visualization solutions under the same data category . For example , they mentioned that in the hierarchical category , Icicle plot uses more accurate visual channels than Sunburst . Similarly , under the multidimensional category , Parallel Sets appear to be a better choice from the perceptual point of view than circular visualizations . However , such conclusions are not the only reason to select one solution over the others and depending on the data and tasks this can vary extensively . After prioritizing the solutions under the educator’s supervision , the students – in groups of 3 to 4 – were encouraged to search for mergeable patterns and if possible to sketch novel visualization ideas and a construction plan . In the end , all the ideas were presented to the whole group . 188 a ) b ) c ) d ) Fig . 7 . Applying the principles of a ) Figure and Ground , b ) Symmetry , c ) Closure , d ) Similarity and Continuity via interaction to Parallel Hierarchies ( step 3 , convergent thinking ) . Fig . 8 . Parallel Hierarchies show some data properties of the 1990 US Census data set [ 30 ] . Session 4 : During the introduction round of session 4 , the educator showed several examples of how different visualizations take advantage of Gestalt principles ( step 3 in Fig . 1 ) . Afterwards , the educator asked the students to discuss in small groups how Gestalt principles may be used to improve the design of Parallel Hierarchies . Fig . 7 shows a few sketching examples to illustrate the principles . For example , coloring or hatching Parallel Hierarchies can reinforce the principle of ﬁgure & ground ( Fig . 7 a ) . The principle of symmetry is considered in the axes design ( Fig . 7 b ) or the principle of closure is applied so that an easily recognizable trapezoidal shape emerges ( Fig . 7 c ) . In addition , the principle of similarity is followed in the design of Parallel Hierarchies by using a color code for indicating different dimensions and different levels of one hierarchy ( Fig . 7 d ) . Moreover , during the interaction design , the principle of continuity is used to represent the connected items of Parallel Hierarchies as a unit ( Fig . 7 d ) . These examples were sketched in a group together with the educator , and the students were asked to analyse other visualizations as homework . 3 . 2 Observations and Discussion While our didactic methodology has been applied only three times to InfoVis courses , we have already made several observations and received valuable feedback that we brieﬂy present in this section . First , we observed that some visual elements are not distinguishable by the students during the sketching tasks . For example , icons , glyphs , and points lead to similar sketches on this high level of abstraction ( see Fig . 5 , left ) . However , they were distinguished by the students during the deconstruction process . Second , instead of presenting just the ﬁnal sketches , we asked the students to explain their ideas with a construction plan including all building blocks and patterns involved . We observed how quicker the students understood each others solutions with this approach because of this common visual language . This helped espe - cially during the intermediate discussion steps between the group and educator . Third , we made the observation that the sketching tasks were well followed by the online students . Students successfully used both : uploading pictures of sketches on paper , and drawing sketches directly on the Miro board . However , it took longer in the online setting and some tasks had to be concluded as homework . Also , group work was more difﬁcult to perform online and thus the exchange of solutions was skipped in that setting . Fourth , during the visual encodings evaluation step , students had often the same problem distinguishing the applied visual encodings in particular visualizations , for example Angle or Area in Sunburst . Last but not least , another observation made through the courses was the inherent ambiguity of Gestalt principles . We all know that Gestalt principles are not unambiguous mathematical concepts , but are subject to interpretation – something apparent in the students’ own varying interpretations . We realized that our choices of formu - lation , description , and examples played a crucial role in reducing or exacerbating ambiguity . At the end of the forth session we asked the students about their feed - back on the methodology and how it helped them to understand , create , and evaluate different visualization solutions . They stated that the mor - phological analysis helped them during the brainstorming process to quickly craft novel visualizations that they could not have imagined otherwise . They also mentioned the usefulness of group discussions , and the methodology’s good documentation strategy . While the feed - back was mostly positive , some students complained that the process of sketching solution using different Grid building blocks was not easy to follow – particularly with the free - form and triangular building blocks . 4 C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK In this paper , we presented a didactic methodology for constructing interactive information visualizations . It follows divergent and con - vergent thinking in order to assist students and designers to create , rank , and improve their ideas quickly . The method builds on strategies such as construction kits , parallel prototyping , morphological analysis , and design principles that are applied to the application scenario of information visualization . We follow low - ﬁdelity prototyping using structured worksheets that support each step of the methodology . The worksheets can be found under the link to our supplemental materials for both online and ofﬂine settings 2 . In the current state , the didactic methodology focuses on low - ﬁdelity prototypes that help students to rapidly create and test different ap - proaches . Extending our methodology on high - ﬁdelity prototypes , followed by evaluations with users or heuristics is a part of our future work . So far , we have tested the methodology with undergraduate and graduate students in Media Computer Science . Different iterations of this workshop with InfoVis beginners and interdisciplinary teams are still planned for the future in order to improve and vary the methodol - ogy for different scenarios . The feedback we gathered proves already the potential of using our solution to form a common language within interdisciplinary teams with different domain knowledge . We also want to evaluate in future courses , whether the application of Gestalt principles supports the process of transforming a visualization idea into an interactive visualization approach . Furthermore , different design spaces can be considered . For example , the application of the methodology to immersive 3D interfaces or tangible interfaces is conceivable . Our plans for future work will pick up where the courses leaves off and explore such extensions of the base methodology . Currently , we are planning workshops in industrial settings and with advanced students who are already familiar with the methodology to run a more creative and less systematic approach . A CKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors wish to thank Esther Lapczyna and Thomas Gr¨under for helping us with the course preparation . Special thanks to Lo¨ıc A . Royer and anonymous reviewers for their constructive feedback on the paper . 2 http : / / www . visual - search . org / construction - kit / 189 R EFERENCES [ 1 ] Ideo Method Cards , https : / / www . ideo . com / post / method - cards , 2003 ( last visited : August 24 , 2020 ) . [ 2 ] The design council : Innovation by design , https : / / tinyurl . com / y5ey7tl3 , 2014 ( last visited : August 24 , 2020 ) . [ 3 ] W . Aigner , S . Miksch , H . Schumann , and C . Tominski . Visualization of Time - Oriented Data . Springer Publishing Company , Incorporated , 1st ed . , 2011 . [ 4 ] J . Bertin . Semiology of graphics : diagrams , networks , maps . 1983 . [ 5 ] K . B¨orner , A . Bueckle , and M . Ginda . Data visualization literacy : Deﬁni - tions , conceptual frameworks , exercises , and assessments . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 116 ( 6 ) : 1857 – 1864 , 2019 . [ 6 ] B . Buxton . Sketching user experiences : getting the design right and the right design . Morgan kaufmann , 2010 . [ 7 ] M . Card . Readings in information visualization : using vision to think . Morgan Kaufmann , 1999 . [ 8 ] S . P . Dow , A . Glassco , J . Kass , M . Schwarz , D . L . Schwartz , and S . R . Klemmer . Parallel prototyping leads to better design results , more diver - gence , and increased self - efﬁcacy . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . , 17 ( 4 ) , Dec . 2011 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 1879831 . 1879836 [ 9 ] S . Few . Data Visualization for Human Perception in ”The Encyclopedia of Human - Computer Interaction” , 2nd Ed . Interaction Design Foundation , 2020 . [ 10 ] G . Fischer and A . C . Lemke . Construction kits and design environments : Steps toward human problem - domain communication . SIGCHI Bull . , 20 ( 1 ) , July 1988 . [ 11 ] S . He and E . Adar . Vizitcards : A card - based toolkit for infovis design education . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , 23 ( 1 ) : 561 – 570 , 2017 . [ 12 ] S . Huron , B . Bach , U . Hinrichs , M . Keck , and J . Roberts . Ieee vis work - shop on data vis activities to facilitate learning , reﬂecting , discussing , and designing . Workshop on IEEE VIS 2020 , 2020 . [ 13 ] S . Huron , P . Gourlet , U . Hinrichs , T . Hogan , and Y . Jansen . Let’s get physical : Promoting data physicalization in workshop formats . In Pro - ceedings of the 2017 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems , DIS ’17 , p . 1409 – 1422 . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2017 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3064663 . 3064798 [ 14 ] M . KeckandR . Groh . AConstructionKitforVisualExplorationInterfaces . In EuroVis 2019 - Short Papers . The Eurographics Association , 2019 . [ 15 ] D . F . Keefe , D . Acevedo , J . Miles , F . Drury , S . M . Swartz , and D . H . Laidlaw . Scientiﬁc sketching for collaborative vr visualization design . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , 14 ( 4 ) : 835 – 847 , 2008 . [ 16 ] K . Koffka . Principles of Gestalt psychology . Routledge , 2013 . [ 17 ] D . Lockton , D . Harrison , and N . A . Stanton . Exploring design patterns for sustainable behaviour . The Design Journal , 16 ( 4 ) : 431 – 459 , 2013 . doi : 10 . 2752 / 175630613X13746645186124 [ 18 ] J . Mackinlay . Automating the design of graphical presentations of rela - tional information . ACM Trans . Graph . , 5 ( 2 ) : 110 – 141 , Apr . 1986 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 22949 . 22950 [ 19 ] G . E . Marai . Activity - centered domain characterization for problem - driven scientiﬁc visualization . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , 24 ( 1 ) : 913 – 922 , 2018 . [ 20 ] S . McKenna , A . Lex , and M . Meyer . Worksheets for guiding novices through the visualization design process , 2017 . [ 21 ] S . McKenna , D . Mazur , J . Agutter , and M . Meyer . Design activity frame - work for visualization design . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , 20 ( 12 ) : 2191 – 2200 , 2014 . [ 22 ] T . Munzner . A nested model for visualization design and validation . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , 15 ( 6 ) : 921 – 928 , 2009 . [ 23 ] T . Munzner . Visualization analysis and design . AK Peters / CRC Press , 2014 . [ 24 ] R . Pettersson . Informationdesign : Anintroduction , vol . 3 . JohnBenjamins Publishing , 2002 . [ 25 ] S . Ribecca and J . Schwabish . The Graphic Continuum Cards , http : / / datavizcatalogue . com / blog / using - ﬂash - cards - teaching - data - visualization / , 2017 ( last visited : August 24 , 2020 ) . [ 26 ] A . Rind , W . Aigner , M . Wagner , S . Miksch , and T . Lammarsch . Task cube : A three - dimensional conceptual space of user tasks in visualization design and evaluation . Information Visualization , 15 ( 4 ) : 288 – 300 , 2016 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1473871615621602 [ 27 ] J . C . Roberts , C . Headleand , and P . D . Ritsos . Sketching designs using the ﬁve design - sheet methodology . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , 22 ( 1 ) : 419 – 428 , 2016 . [ 28 ] J . C . Roberts , C . J . Headleand , and P . D . Ritsos . Five Design - Sheets : Creative Design and Sketching for Computing and Visualisation . Springer Publishing Company , Incorporated , 1st ed . , 2017 . [ 29 ] E . R . Tufte . The visualdisplay of quantitative information , vol . 2 . Graphics press Cheshire , CT , 1983 . [ 30 ] Z . Vosough , M . Hogr¨ofer , L . A . Royer , R . Groh , and H . - J . Schulz . Parallel hierarchies : A visualization for cross - tabulating hierarchical categories . Computers & Graphics , 2018 . [ 31 ] C . Ware . Information Visualization – Perception for Design . Morgan Kaufmann , 3rd ed . , 2013 . [ 32 ] F . Zwicky . Discovery , invention , research , through the morphological approach . Science , 163 ( 3873 ) : 1317 – 1318 , 1969 . 190