* Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique ( CNRS ) Unité Mixte Recherche ( UMR ) 144 and Institut Curie , 26 rue d’Ulm , 75248 Paris Cedex 05 , France . ‡ Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe , Institut für Toxikologie und Genetik , Postfach 3640 , 76021 Karlsruhe , Germany . e - mails : Jean - Paul . Thiery @ curie . fr ; sleeman @ itg . fzk . de doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm1835 Mesoderm In animals with three tissue layers , the mesoderm is the middle layer of tissue , lying between the ectoderm and the endoderm . In vertebrates , it forms the skeleton , muscles , heart , spleen , kidney and other internal organs . Endoderm The innermost germ layer of the developing embryo . It gives rise to the lungs , digestive tract , thyroid , thymus , liver and pancreas . Phyla Large groups of species that share the same body plan . The animal kingdom is composed of about 30 phyla including Porifera , Cnidaria , Arthropoda , Echinodermata , and Chordata , which includes the Vertebrata as a subphylum . Complex networks orchestrate epithelial – mesenchymal transitions Jean Paul Thiery * and Jonathan P . Sleeman ‡ Abstract | Epithelial – mesenchymal transition is an indispensable mechanism during morphogenesis , as without mesenchymal cells , tissues and organs will never be formed . However , epithelial - cell plasticity , coupled to the transient or permanent formation of mesenchyme , goes far beyond the problem of cell - lineage segregation . Understanding how mesenchymal cells arise from an epithelial default status will also have a strong impact in unravelling the mechanisms that control fibrosis and cancer progression . Epithelial and mesenchymal cells differ in various func - tional and phenotypic characteristics ( FIG . 1 ) . Epithelial cells form layers of cells that are closely adjoined by specialized membrane structures , such as tight junctions , adherens junctions , desmosomes and gap junctions . In addition , epithelial cells have apical – basolateral polarization , which manifests itself through the localized distri bution of adhe - sion molecules such as cadherins and certain integrins , the organization of cell – cell junctions as a lateral belt , the polarized organization of the actin cytoskeleton , and the presence of a basal lamina at the basal surface . Epithelial cells are motile and can move away from their nearest neighbours , while remaining within the epithelial layer 1 . However , cells do not detach and move away from the epithelial layer under normal conditions . Mesenchymal cells , on the other hand , do not form an organized cell layer , nor do they have the same api - cal – basolateral organization and polarization of the cell - surface molecules and the actin cytoskeleton as epithelial cells . They contact neighbouring mesenchymal cells only focally , and are not typically associated with a basal lamina . In culture , mesenchymal cells have a spindle - shaped , fibroblast - like morphology , whereas epithelial cells grow as clusters of cells that maintain complete cell – cell adhesion with their neighbours ( FIG . 1 ) . Cultured mesenchymal cells tend be highly motile , but this is not necessarily the case in vivo 2 . Indeed , there is plastic - ity in the way that mesenchymal cells migrate — they might migrate together as chains , or as individual cells that exhibit either cyclic extension – adhesion – retraction translocation or amoeboid - type crawling 3 . Epithelial cells can convert into mesenchymal cells by a process known as the epithelial – mesenchymal transi - tion ( EMT ; FIG . 2 ) . The term EMT describes a series of events during which epithelial cells lose many of their epithelial characteristics and take on properties that are typical of mesenchymal cells , which require complex changes in cell architecture and behaviour ( FIGS 1 , 2 ) . The transition from epithelial - to mesenchymal - cell characteristics encompasses a spectrum of inter - and intracellular changes , not all of which are always seen during EMT . EMT does not therefore necessarily refer to a lineage switch . The precise spectrum of changes that occur during EMT is probably determined by the inte - gration of extracellular signals the cell receives , although this is still unclear . The reverse process , known as mes - enchymal – epithelial transition ( MET ) has also been reported 4 – 7 . During embryogenesis , a number of extracellular signals can convert epithelial cells into mesenchymal cells by triggering EMT ( FIG . 2 ) . Mesenchymal cells do not derive exclusively from the mesoderm primary germ layer 8 , epithelial endodermal cells can also produce mesenchymal cells 9 . EMT regulates important processes during the early stages of development of most organ - isms , except the two phyla of Porifera and Cnidaria ( BOX 1 ) ; in the absence of EMT , development cannot proceed past the blastula stage . MET occurs during somitogenesis , kidney development , and coelomic - cavity formation 4 – 7 . Interestingly , EMT also has a role in adult organisms , as it has been shown to contribute to the pathology of certain diseases 10 . EMT did not receive molecular analysis until the early 1980s . Since then , a number of molecular differ - ences have been observed between mesenchymal and epithelial cells ( FIGS 1 , 2 ) . For example , mesenchymal cells do not express epithelial ( E ) - cadherin , whereas epithelial cells do 11 . The constitution of intermediate filaments is also different , with vimentin being typical of mesenchymal cells and different types of cytokeratin R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 131 a b c d e f Porifera The most primitive phylum of the animal kingdom , it includes sponges . Cnidaria Radially symmetrical animals that form a phylum that includes jellyfish , corals , hydra and anemonies . Blastula stage An early - stage embryo that is composed of a hollow ball of cells . being characteristic of epithelial cells . However , recent insights into the network of signals that regulate EMT and their role and integration during embryologi - cal processes indicated that several mechanisms are involved in the initiation and execution of EMT in development , and that the molecular mechanisms that regulate EMT are considerably overlapping with those that control cell adhesion , motility invasion , survival and differentiation . It is anticipated that our under - standing of the role of EMT in development and also diseases such as fibrosis and cancer will be unravelled at the molecular level within the next decade . Given the recent rapid advance in our knowledge of the signalling strategies that orchestrate EMT , we discuss here the current understanding of the molecular basis of EMT and also the central importance of the sig - nalling pathways that are involved in EMT in various developmental processes . Finally , we turn our atten - tion to discuss pathological situations in which the same molecular pathways that regulate developmental EMT have an important role . Signalling EMT Tissue - culture studies have been instrumental in defin - ing the molecular regulation of EMT . These studies show that several extracellular activators can trigger EMT , that extensive crosstalk exists between the signalling pathways that activate and repress EMT , and that EMT - inducing signalling pathways have many common endpoints , including downregulation of E - cadherin expression and expression of EMT - associated genes ( FIG . 3 ) . On the other hand , in vivo , each EMT event is regulated by a particular subset of EMT activators and repressors . For example , transforming growth factor - β 2 ( TGF β 2 ) regu - lates EMT in the atrioventricular canal , whereas TGF β 3 regulates palate - fusion EMT 12 . Furthermore , the effect of a given inducer on EMT is context dependent — scat - ter factor / hepatocyte growth factor ( SF / HGF ) induces EMT during somitogenesis , but it inhibits EMT in other processes 13 . The triggers and the signalling pathways that regulate EMT have been previously reviewed 14 – 16 , so here we give a brief overview of the cascades that are involved in this process and highlight some recent important findings . EMT is triggered by an interplay of extracellular sig - nals , including components of the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , such as collagen and hyaluronic acid 17 , as well as soluble growth factors , such as members of the TGF β and fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) families , epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) and SF / HGF ( FIG . 3 ) . Receptor - mediated signalling in response to these ligands trig - gers the activation of intracellular effector molecules , such as members of the small GTPase family — Ras , Rho and Rac — and members of the Src tyrosine - kinase family . These effectors orchestrate the disassembly of junctional complexes and the changes in cytoskeletal organization that occur during EMT . The activation of signalling pathways also results in the activation of transcriptional regulators such as snail ( now known as SNAI1 ( REF . 18 ) ) and slug ( now known as SNAI2 ) , which regulate the changes in gene - expression patterns that underlie EMT . A central target of these transcriptional regulators is the repression of the E - cadherin gene , an important caretaker of the epithelial phenotype . Downregulation of E - cadherin ( or mutations that occur in cancer ) has several important consequences that are of direct relevance to EMT . E - cadherin levels become limit - ing , which results in the loss of E - cadherin - depend - ent intercellular epithelial junctional complexes , and E - cadherin - mediated sequestering of β - catenin in the cytoplasm is abolished . As a result , β - catenin localizes Figure 1 | Images of EMT . SCp2 murine mammary cells ( a ) were treated with matrix metalloproteinase - 3 ( b ) to induce epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) 10 . In both panels , cells were stained with anti - phalloidin antibodies to visualize the actin microfilaments and 4 ′ , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ( DAPI ) to visualize DNA . Pictures courtesy of D . Radisky ( Mayo Clinic Cancer Center , Jacksonville , Florida , USA ) . Eph4 V12 - transformed murine mammary cells ( c ) were treated with transforming - growth factor - β ( d ) to induce EMT . Cells were stained with anti - E - cadherin ( green ) and anti - vimentin ( red ) antibodies . Pictures courtesy of H . Beug ( Institute of Molecular Pathology , Vienna , Austria ) . EMT in rat bladder carcinoma NBT - II cells . Pre - EMT cells were stained with anti - desmoplakin antibodies to visualize desmosomes ( e ) , whereas post - EMT cells were stained with anti - vimentin antibodies to visualize vimentin expression ( f ) . R E V I E W S 132 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio Tight - junction dissociation Adherens - junction and desmosome dissociation EMT EMT EMT Epithelial markers E - cadherin ClaudinsOccludinsDesmoplakinCytokeratin - 8 , - 9 and - 18 Mucin - 1 Mesenchymal markers FibronectinVitronectinFSP1VimentinSmooth - muscle actin FGFR2 IIIb and IIIc splice variants EMT effectors Growth factors CytokinesECM MET effectors AdhesionCortical actin MFs Epithelial cells Tight - junction formation , completion of cell - polarity programme MET MET MET Desmosomeassociation Mesenchymal cells Initial E - cadherin adhesive contact Rho - GTPase activation , cortical - actin - cytoskeleton reorganization , adherens - junction assembly to the nucleus and feeds into the Wnt signalling pathway by activating transcriptional regulation through LEF / TCF4 ( lymphoid - enhancer - binding factor / T - cell factor - 4 ) . The role of SNAI1 regulation . The central role of SNAI1 in the regulation of EMT has been underscored by recent studies that show the complex regulation of SNAI1 stability , subcellular localization and function through different phosphorylation events . The activity of glycogen - synthase kinase - 3 β ( GSK3 β ) is inhibited by the AKT / PKB ( protein kinase B ) , Wnt and Hedgehog pathways , each of which regulate EMT 19 , 20 . GSK3 β has been shown to phosphorylate a number of transcrip - tion factors — such as p53 , Myc and nuclear factor of activated T cells ( NFAT ) — which causes its export from the nucleus 21 . GSK3 β phosphorylates two Ser residues on SNAI1 , one of which targets SNAI1 for ubiquitina - tion and degradation , whereas the other promotes its nuclear export 22 . Mutations in SNAI1 that prevent GSK3 β - mediated phosphorylation result in a stabilized form of SNAI1 that localizes in the nucleus and induces EMT . As expected , inhibition of GSK3 β activity led to enhanced cellular levels of SNAI1 with concomitant downregulation of E - cadherin . It has also been shown that activators of EMT , such as EGF , signal to SNAI1 through p21 - activated kinase - 1 ( PAK1 ) 23 . PAK1 phosphorylates SNAI1 on a different Ser residue from GSK3 β , which results in the accumulation of SNAI1 in the nucleus and subsequent SNAI1 - medi - ated transcriptional repression of target genes . Mutation of the phosphorylation site on SNAI1 or knockdown of PAK1 expression resulted in cytoplasmic accumulation of SNAI1 and ablation of its transcriptional - repressor activity . These studies show how different signalling pathways that regulate EMT impinge upon SNAI1 func - tion , by regulating its activity through phosphorylation of different sites that alter its stability and subcellular localization . Crosstalk between integrins and cadherins . In addition to dissociating cell – cell adhesions , the cells that undergo EMT have to regulate the integrin - mediated contacts with the ECM . Extensive crosstalk between integrin signalling and pathways that regulate EMT has been observed . For example , the TGF β signalling through p38 MAPK that is required for EMT is dependent on signalling by β 1 integrin 24 . Conversely , TGF β - induced expression of disabled - 2 ( DAB2 ) , an adaptor molecule Figure 2 | The cycle of epithelial - cell plasticity . The diagram shows the cycle of events during which epithelial cells are transformed into mesenchymal cells and vice versa . The different stages during EMT ( epithelial – mesenchymal transition ) and the reverse process MET ( mesenchymal – epithelial transition ) are regulated by effectors of EMT and MET , which influence each other . Important events during the progression of EMT and MET , including the regulation of the tight junctions and the adherens junctions , are indicated . A number of markers have been identified that are characteristic of either epithelial or mesenchymal cells and these markers are listed in BOX 1 and BOX 2 . E - cadherin , epithelial cadherin ; ECM , extracellular matrix ; FGFR2 , fibroblast - growth - factor receptor - 2 ; FSP1 , fibroblast - specific protein - 1 ; MFs , microfilaments . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 133 Primitive colonial protozoans Single - celled organisms that live in colonies — they might be the organisms from which Porifera developed . Diploblastic Animals that are composed of two cell layers . They belong to the phylum Cnidaria . that binds to β 1 integrin , is required for integrin activa - tion , the formation of focal adhesions and cell survival during EMT 25 . Similarly , α 2 β 1 integrin is required for aspects of collagen and FGF1 - induced EMT 26 . Recent work has uncovered a fascinating level of cross - talk between integrins and E - cadherin that coordinates the switch from cadherin - to integrin - mediated adhe - sions during EMT . Downregulation of E - cadherin has been shown to signal to integrins , because endo cytosis of E - cadherin results in the activation of the small GTPase Rap1 — a protein that regulates the cytoplasmic activa - tion of integrins and that is required for focal - adhesion formation 27 . On the other hand , integrins can cause the downregulation of E - cadherin in a number of ways . Integrin - linked kinase ( ILK ) interacts with the cytoplas - mic domain of β 1 and β 3 integrins , and it is activated through cellular interactions with the ECM and growth factors . ILK downregulates E - cadherin expression 28 , and is required for TGF β - induced EMT 29 . β 1 integrins also activate RhoA and Rac1 , which leads to the disruption of cadherin - mediated adhesions 30 . Integrin - mediated focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) activation can transiently down - regulate Rac1 in epithelial HeLa cells at sites of formation of N - cadherin - mediated cell – cell contacts 31 , 32 . These find - ings are in agreement with the observation that constitu - tive Rac1 activation does not allow the establishment of cell – cell contacts 33 . In addition , constitutively active Src induces EMT and internalization of E - cadherin in KM12C cells that is dependent on signalling by α v β 1 integrin as well as on Src - dependent FAK phosphorylation 31 . Together , these studies illustrate the cross - regulation that exists between E - cadherin and integrins . Integrated approaches to EMT study Classic molecular - and cell - biology techniques have helped us to understand some of the molecular mechanisms that cells use to regulate EMT . However , EMT is a dynamic process that involves many over - lapping regulatory pathways as well as intra - and intercellular events , and interdisciplinary approaches are required to understand this complex regulation . For example , the dynamic formation and dissolution of junctional complexes is a central process during EMT ( FIGS 2 , 4 ) , and biophysical approaches together with high - throughput screening have recently shed light on the EMT - related modulation of junctional - complex integrity . The fully polarized epithelial phenotype requires the assembly of adherens junctions , tight junctions and desmosomes 34 . The initiation of desmosomes is poorly understood , but it is clear that the formation of adherens and tight junctions are closely linked . Signalling pathways that control EMT converge on the control of E - cadherin , the prototypic epithelial adhesion molecule in adherens junctions . Small focal adherens junctions first appear at the tips of protrusions during the initial stages of epithelial - cell contact . These contain E - cadherin , immunoglobulin ( Ig ) - superfamily adhesion molecules ( nectins and junctional adhesion molecules ( JAMs ) ) , as well as zonula occludens - 1 ( ZO - 1 ; REF . 35 ; a tight - junction protein , which interacts with the actin cytoskeleton ) . Initial contacts are E - cadherin - mediated and mature into adherens junctions in cooperation with nectins 36 . These contacts promote the formation of tight junctions : JAMs nucleate clusters of two parti - tioning - defective proteins ( PAR3 and PAR6 , which are components of a metazoan polarity complex ) and atypi - cal protein kinase C ( aPKC ) together with claudin and occludin , which anchor the actin cytoskeleton through ZO - 1 , - 2 , and - 3 ( FIG . 4a ) . Nectin - mediated adhesion also cooperates at this early phase , perhaps through the ability of these proteins to nucleate cadherin – catenin complexes 37 . Mechanical forces during adhesion formation . The force of separation of cell doublets that express differ - ent levels of E - cadherin has recently been measured quantitatively 33 , 38 . The force that developed during the initial contact between two E - cadherin - express - ing cells in suspension is on the order of a few nano - Newtons ( nN ) after 30 seconds . A rapid increase in adhesion strength is observed between 30 seconds and 30 minutes , which is followed by a slower increase up to 1 hour later , reaching a force of more than 200 nN . The initial contact does not require connection to the actin cytoskeleton , which is subsequently absolutely required for the strengthening of cell adhesion . The force of separation of cell doublets that express type II cadherin - 7 and - 11 is much weaker than the force necessary to detach type - I - E - cadherin - mediated cell adhesion . A switch from type I cadherins to type II cadherins is usually observed during EMT , which leads to the formation of migrating mesenchymal cells 38 . Box 1 | EMT in evolution and development Mesenchymal cells are a great invention of metazoans that allow the shaping of the embryo through gastrulation . These cells are able to move and settle at sites of critical epithelial – mesenchymal interactions or they can differentiate into new structures . The formation of mesenchymal cells during evolution occurred more than 600 million years ago as a critical step in the establishment of the three germ layers . Sponges have no mesoderm , nor any structured layers , and therefore they cannot form tissues and organs . The Cnidarians are derived from the primitive colonial protozoans , but represent diploblastic species with ectoderm and endoderm , which allow the establishment of more elaborate tissue structures . However , they lack mesoderm . The importance of epithelial – mesenchymal transitions ( EMTs ) in morphogenesis was considerably augmented with the appearance of the Vertebrata , a subphylum of Chordates . Somite morphogenesis and neural - crest ontogeny are two important acquisitions of vertebrates . The detailed strategy for EMT differs at various sites in a given embryo and is species - dependent . However , the effector molecules are evolutionarily conserved and include Wnts , fibroblast growth factors ( FGFs ) , snails , nuclear factor ( NF ) - κ B and E - cadherin . A plethora of molecules can induce SNAI1 during development , many of which are conserved throughout evolution , whereas a few are restricted to vertebrates . SNAI1 is expressed in the endoderm of Cnidarians , which is formed by the invagination of the ectoderm . Wnts and SNAI1 were already utilized in primitive species for induction of epithelial - cell plasticity prior to the acquisition of EMT during evolution . This situation is reminiscent of SNAI1 expression in the invaginating mesoderm in the fruitfly ( Drosophila melanogaster ) 18 . It is now clear that SNAI1 is not a primary inducer of mesoderm or neural crest , but , rather , contributes to epithelial - cell plasticity and EMT through modulation of adhesive interactions , which allow cell movement . The anti - apoptotic function of SNAI1 might be important in embryos , in which epithelial cells need protection from cell death during the dramatic morphological changes that occur during EMT . R E V I E W S 134 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio FAK Paxillin Crk Rac Cytoskeleton E - cadherin Cytoskeleton E - cadherin E - cadherin Desmosomes DOCK180 Ras Ras MAPK GSK3 β SNAI1 SNAI1 SNAI1 P13K TAK1 MAPK SMADs ILK AKT / PKB SMURF1 H / E ( Spl ) RhoA Rac1b ROS PAR6 SNAI2 Src NF - κ B Twist CytoskeletonAdherensjunctions EMT programme Integrins RTK WntR ETaR TGF β R Occludin NOTCH Jagged1 ? MMP3 Ectoderm The outermost of the three primary germ layers of the embryo , from which the skin , nerve tissue and sensory organs develop . Mesenchyme Embryonic tissue that is composed of loosely organized , unpolarized cells of both mesodermal and ectodermal ( for example , neural crest ) origin , with a component - rich extracellular matrix . High - throughput mapping of the TGF network . The dis - solution of tight junctions is an early step during EMT , and recent high - throughput protein – protein - interac - tion screens have revealed the molecular mechanisms through which TGF β signalling regulates this proc - ess 39 , 40 . In these LUMIER ( luminescence - based mam - malian interactome mapping ) studies , fluorescently tagged TGF β receptor - 1 ( TGF β R1 ) was co - transfected with a FLAG - tagged prey library into HEK293T cells and the interaction of the prey protein with TGF β R1 was assessed . Several candidate TGF β R1 - interacting proteins were identified , and subsequent bioinformatic and molecular - and cell - biology analyses led to the iden - tification of pathways that regulate tight - junction disso - lution ( see below ) . Importantly , the LUMIER approach also allowed the dynamic changes in the network of protein – protein interactions in response to TGF β to be documented 39 . Occludin , a structural component of tight junctions , was shown to interact with TGF β R1 ( REF . 39 ) . Mutation of the TGF β R1 - binding site on occludin showed that the TGF β R1 – occludin interaction is required for the localization of TGF β R1 to tight junctions , which is criti - cal for TGF β - mediated tight - junction dissolution during EMT . Furthermore , PAK1 ( REF . 23 ; see above ) was also found to physically associate with TGF β R1 , although the significance of this interaction on PAK1 activity was not assessed . PAR6 was also found to interact with TGF β R1 ( REF . 40 ) . PAR6 functions as a scaffold for the assembly of polarity - regulating proteins such as Rho , aPKC and PAR3 , and orchestrates the assembly of tight junc - tions . In NMuMG cells , PAR6 forms a member of the TGF β R1 – occludin complex . After treatment of cells with TGF β , TGF β R2 is also recruited to this complex and phosphorylates PAR6 . PAR6 localizes to dynamic protrusions of polarized migratory cells together with SMURF1 , an E3 ubiquitin ligase that ubiquitylates RhoA and controls local RhoA degradation 40 , 41 . Moreover , both SMURF1 and RhoA ubiquitination were found to be necessary for tight - junction dissolution ( FIG . 4b ) . Mutation of the Ser that is phosphorylated by TGF β R2 on PAR6 caused abrogation of tight - junction dissolu - tion , but did not interfere with TGF β - dependent SMAD activation or aspects of TGF β - induced EMT such as vimentin expression . This observation indicates that PAR6 phosphorylation in response to TGF β represents only one of the many pathways that are regulated by TGF β during EMT . EMT is required for gastrulation EMT is an integral part of the tissue remodelling that occurs during embryogenesis . Epithelial sheets can remodel through distinct processes , which include cell intercalation , invagination , evagination , branching and multi - layering ( FIG . 5 ) . Epithelial - cell plasticity has been maintained in all metazoans , and epithelial sheets can convert reversibly or irreversibly into mesenchymal cells through EMT . This process is extremely critical as it often allows the formation of the three - layered embryo through gastrulation . It is also responsible for the forma - tion of other structures , particularly in the vertebrates , such as the vertebrae , the cardiac valves , the craniofacial structures , the neural derivatives and the secondary pal - ate , as well as mediating the disappearance of the male mullerian duct . Gastrulation ( the formation of the gut ) is a primordial process of development in most metazoans . Following cellularization or cleavages of the egg , the newly formed blastula undergoes a dramatic reorganization , which leads to the establishment of the three primary germ layers : ectoderm , mesoderm and endoderm . ERK activation regulates EMT in the sea urchin . A first EMT at the vegetal pole leads to the formation of the primary mesenchyme , whereas the secondary mesen - chyme forms at the tip of the invaginating endoderm after a second EMT . Although the primary and second - ary mesenchymes differ notably in terms of cell lineage , they undergo a similar EMT , which is characterized by the activation of the extracellular signal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) pathway 42 , 43 . Inhibition of the activity of MAPK and ERK kinase ( MEK ) abrogates the formation of the Figure 3 | Overview of the molecular networks that regulate EMT . A selection of the signalling pathways that are activated by regulators of EMT and a limited representation of their crosstalk is illustrated . Activation of receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) is known to induce EMT in several epithelial cell types and in vivo , but it is now clear that the EMT process often requires co - activation of integrin receptors . The role of transforming growth factor - β ( TGF β ) signalling in EMT is established for a limited number of normal and transformed cell lines , whereas in vivo data has indicated a mutual regulation of the TGF β and NOTCH pathways during EMT . There is now increasing evidence that other signalling pathways could have an important role in EMT , including G - protein - coupled receptors . Matrix metalloproteinases ( MMPs ) can also trigger EMT through as - yet - undefined receptors . ETaR , endothelin - A receptor ; FAK , focal adhesion kinase ; GSK3 β , glycogen - synthase kinase - 3 β ; H / E ( Spl ) , hairy / enhancer of split ; ILK , integrin - linked kinase ; MAPK , mitogen - activated protein kinase ; NF - κ B , nuclear factor - κ B ; PAR6 , partitioning - defective protein - 6 ; PI3K , phosphatidyl - inositol 3 - kinase ; PKB , protein kinase - B ; ROS , reactive oxygen species ; TAK1 , TGF β - activated kinase - 1 ; TGF β R , TGF β receptor ; WntR , Wnt receptor . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 135 aPKC SMURF1 PAR6 RhoA RhoA CDC42 PAR3 aPKC TGF β RI Claudin Occludin α 6 β 4 Integrin Laminin - 5 Plectin Gap junction Cytokeratin DesmoplakinPlakoglobin X β - Catenin β - Catenin α - Catenin α - Catenin α - Actinin Vinculin F - actin Afadin Afadin ZO - 2 ZO - 1 ZO - 3 ZO - 2 ZO - 1 ZO - 3 JAM Claudin Occludin JAM Nectin Nectin Desmocollin Desmoglein EGFRMetIGF1R E - cadherin E - cadherin Tight junction Adherens junction Desmosomes a b TGF β TGF β RII TGF β RI PAR6 PAR3 P Actin Ub Proteasome primary mesenchyme . The temporal inhibition of ERK indicates that this pathway is not involved in the initial specification of mesodermal cells , but , rather , mediates their ingression and subsequent engagement in skel - etogenesis . The transcription factors ETS1 and ALK1 are among the main targets of ERK that are required for EMT . Overexpression of ETS1 results in an excessive number of primary mesenchymal cells , whereas ALK1 directly promotes skeletogenesis . The ERK - mediated formation of primary mesenchyme is under the control of Wnt – β - catenin signalling , whereas the NOTCH – delta pathway contributes to the formation of the secondary mesenchyme . Receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) might also be activated early in the primary and secondary mesenchymal cell progenitors . The resulting activation of ERK pathways contributes to the transcription of mesodermal regulatory and differentiation genes that are required for EMT . A complex network orchestrates EMT in fruitflies . Gastrulation in the fruitfly ( Drosophila melanogaster ) initiates at the completion of the cellularization step in a stripe of ventral cells , which invaginate as an epithelium , but subsequently undergo an EMT . The newly formed mesenchymal cells migrate dorsally along the ectoderm before differentiating into visceral and somatic meso - derm . Snail ( the orthologue of vertebrate SNAI1 ) and the transcription factor Twist are expressed in the pre - sumptive mesoderm and in the invaginating cells . Twist and Snail mutants have a defective gastrulation , which indicates that these genes are essential for gastrulation . These genes belong to a regulatory network , which is controlled by Dorsal ( nuclear factor ( NF ) - κ B ) . Dorsal is involved in the establishment of the dorso – ventral axis , and therefore controls the specification of meso - dermal and ectodermal lineages prior to gastrulation . Snail downregulates the transcription of Shotgun ( the orthologue of vertebrate E - cadherin ) in mesodermal cells that undergo invagination at the ventral furrow 44 . Pebble , a Rho guanine nucleotide - exchange factor , which was originally characterized as an essential com - ponent of cytokinesis , is also expressed in the invaginat - ing mesodermal cells 45 . Pebble mutants have defective EMT , as mesodermal cells remain as aggregates and fail to migrate dorsally . Pebble probably has a role in the reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton through acti - vation of Rho1 or Rac1 , thereby promoting the down - regulation of fruitfly E - cadherin and the locomotion of mesenchymal cells . These small GTPases have already been shown to control the remarkable shape changes in the invagination of the ventral furrow 45 , where the epithelial mesoderm undergoes a dramatic elongation along its apico – basal axis . EMT occurs in the zebrafish organizer . The zebrafish ( Danio rerio ) organizer is the site for EMT of axial mesendoderm cells , which subsequently migrate for - ward along with non - axial cells that undergo conver - gence – extension movements . Liv1 , a seven - spanning transmembrane receptor that is involved in Zn 2 + trans - port 46 is downstream of signal transducer and activator Figure 4 | Molecular events in junctional complexes during EMT . In response to various epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) inducers — such as signalling through the epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) , Met and the insulin - growth - factor - 1 receptor ( IGF1R ) — intact junctional complexes in epithelial cells ( a ) are dissociated ( b ) as a consequence of several molecular events , including transcriptional downregulation of important components , such as E - cadherin . Activation of these receptor tyrosine kinases has an important impact on the assembly and stability of adherens - junction components . Transforming growth factor - β ( TGF β ) can induce tight - junction disassembly through degradation of RhoA and subsequent depolymerization of filamentous ( F ) - actin . RhoA is ubiquitylated by SMURF1 , a ubiquitin ligase that is recruited to the TGF β receptor ( TGF β R ) complex that is assembled as part of the tight junction . This finding supports the idea that the EMT signalling pathways alter the stability of junctional complexes by destabilizing the cortical cytoskeleton . JAM , junctional adhesion molecule ; α PKC , atypical protein kinase C ; PAR3 / 6 , partitioning - defective protein - 3 / 6 ; ZO - 1 / 2 / 3 , zonula occludens - 1 / 2 / 3 . R E V I E W S 136 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio EMT in gastrulation and neural crest Intercalation EMT in multi - layering EMT in convergence – extension Involution Cavitation Cavitation EMT in branching of ectoderm - mesoderm - or endoderm - derived tubes MET in mesoderm differentiation Organizer A small dorsal region of the vertebrate gastrula - stage embryo that has the remarkable capacity to organize a complete embryonic body plan . Hilde Mangold and Hans Spemann first identified the organizer in amphibian embryos using tissue transplantation . Mesendoderm Cells that form early during gastrulation in the vertebrate and are destined to give rise to mesodermal and endodermal derivatives . Rostrocaudal The anterior – posterior ( head to tail ) polarity of animals . of transcription - 3 ( Stat3 ) , and is able to mediate all the cell - autonomous functions of Stat3 in axial mesendo - dermal cells . In Liv1 - depleted embryos , mesendoder - mal cells remain cohesive within the organizer , and similar defects are observed in Snail - defective mutants , although Liv1 and Snail are regulated independently . Nonetheless , Liv1 activity depends on its promotion of Snail nuclear localization in organizer cells . Snail might be activated by a RTK – MAPK pathway , and possibly cooperates with a cytokine - receptor – Stat pathway to downregulate E - cadherin . However , it is likely that other effectors of the Stat3 pathway contrib - ute to the restriction of the specific migration of axial mesendodermal cells . Multiple pathways contribute to EMT in mouse gastrula . In murine ( Mus musculus ) gastrulation , EMT is respon - sible for the formation of mesoderm and definitive endoderm . FGF receptor - 1 ( FGFR1 ) signalling controls the expression of SNAI1 , which inhibits E - cadherin transcription 47 . Inactivation of SNAI1 leads to complete inhibition of EMT , although some mesodermal markers , such as brachyury , appear in cell clusters at the site of ingression 48 . The Wnt signalling pathway is also involved in this process , as expression of a truncated β - catenin construct in oocytes induced a premature EMT in the epiblast , concomitant with SNAI1 transcription 49 . The prematurely formed mesenchymal cells lost E - cadherin expression and gained several mesodermal markers , including brachyury and LEF1 , which are direct targets of β - catenin . Multiple pathways contribute to EMT in mouse gastrulation . However , the role of individual effectors such as β - catenin must be evaluated more extensively because the Wnt – β - catenin canonical pathway regulates the formation of the node . The node is the most critical transient embryonic structure that serves as an organ - izing centre for subsequent development , including the formation of the primitive streak , the anterio – posterior axis 50 and the somites 51 . Lessons from neural - crest EMT After gastrulation in vertebrates , epidermal and neural territories are progressively defined along the rostrocaudal axis . The neural crest is a transient population of cells that forms at the boundary between these two territories . Neural - crest cells undergo an EMT within the dorsal neural epithelium and subsequently migrate , before giving rise to many different derivatives . Neural - crest cells are certainly one of the best model systems to study EMT , as many of the newly formed mesenchymal cells migrate over long distances , and the induction of the neural - crest territory and the subsequent programme of migration and differentiation are under the control of overlapping signalling pathways . However , there are significant differences in the mechanisms that induce neural - crest formation in different vertebrates , and a unique molecular scheme for neural ontogeny is there - fore unlikely to be found . BMPs in the African clawed frog and zebrafish . A gradient of bone morphogenetic proteins ( BMPs ) has been shown to be critical in the African clawed frog and zebrafish embryos for the induction and refining of boundaries between neural tissues , the neural crest and the adjacent ectoderm — these are characterized by high , medium and low BMP expression , respectively 52 . High BMP concentrations indirectly repress neural markers and induce epidermal cytokeratins . Intermediate concen - trations induce neural - crest - cell markers such as Snail , Snail2 , Sox9 , ( a member of the SoxE subgroup of the high mobility group ( HMG ) - box - containing transcrip - tion factors ) , transcription factor AP2 and the winged - helix transcription factor Foxd3 . Other signals include FGF and Wnt . The current proposal is that these neural - crest inducers function through Zic ( Zinc - finger transcrip - tion factor ) , Pax3 / 7 ( paired - box proteins - 3 and - 7 ) , Dlx5 and Msx1 / 2 to specify the dorsal neural tube and neural - crest territory 52 ( FIG . 6 ; Dlx genes encode homeobox transcription - factor orthologues to the fruitfly Distal - less gene ; Msx proteins are homeobox transcription factors that are related to Msh ( the fruitfly muscle - segment homeobox gene ) ) . Genes that are induced by these transcription factors include Figure 5 | Tissue remodelling and EMT . During embryonic development , epithelial cells ( purple cells ) undergo partial or complete epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) ( pink cells ) . EMT is an important component of various morphogenic events , such as gastrulation , neural - crest formation and branching of the three germ - layer - derived tubes ( blue cells ) . The reverse process , during which mesenchymal cells ( green ) undergo mesenchymal – epithelial transitions ( METs ) , also has an important role during embryonic development . Most animals gastrulate using a full EMT , including fruitflies ( Drosophila melanogaster ) , most amphibians ( such as urodeles ) , fish , birds , reptiles and mammals . However , there are some notable exceptions , such as the African clawed frog ( Xenopus laevis ) — in this organism individual mesenchymal cells are not formed during gastrulation , but rather a mass of epiblast cells penetrate the blastocoel cavity ( involution ) and converge – extend to form the axial mesoderm ( notochord and somites ) . This mechanism , however , implies that gastrulating cells must exchange rapidly with their neighbours to form an elongated structure . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 137 Inductive events Dorsalization Neural - crest segregation and delamination Ectoderm BMPWntFGF Neural plate ZIC PAX3 / 7 MSX1 / 2 Neural crest Adhesion for motility EMT Apoptosis N - cadherin Cadherin - 7 β 1 Integrin FOXD3 SOX9 SNAI1 / 2 ? Neural crest A transient embryonic structure of vertebrates that appears in the ectoderm at the junction between the neural plate and lateral ectoderm . This structure gives rise to many distinct derivatives following precise migratory routes at each axial level . The derivatives include cranio – facial structures ( cartilage , bone , muscles ) , melanocytes , adrenal medulla , and cells of the sensory and autonomic nervous systems . Snail , Snail2 , Sox9 , Sox10 , AP2 , Foxd3 and Myc in the neural - crest territory 52 . In the African clawed frog , Snail2 , which is an EMT - inducing gene in the neural crest , responds directly to Wnt signalling through its Tcf / Lef - binding site 53 , 54 . The relative interdependence of these transcription factors and their unconserved hierarchy at the head and trunk level and in differ - ent species is a remarkable feature in the control of neural - crest ontogeny 55 , 56 . Insights from chick and mouse experiments . A series of complementary experiments in chick ( Gallus gallus ) and mouse embryos have now allowed the definition of some epistatic relationships in neural - crest EMT 55 . In chick embryos , Foxd3 and Sox10 inhibit N - cadherin expression and promote expression of β 1 integrin and type II cadherin - 7 , which are normally expressed in migratory neural - crest cells . However , Foxd3 requires the concomitant expression of Sox9 and Snail2 to induce EMT in mouse embryos . Sox9 has a dual role as it inhibits cell death and specifies the neural - crest - cell lineages . Snail1 can also inhibit cell death ; this could explain why loss of Sox9 induces cell death , as Sox9 - null cells lack Snail1 expression . However , none of these genes has proven to be the master gene of EMT , and the important effectors of EMT remain to be discovered in the context of neural - crest formation . Furthermore , the proposed connection with the genes that specify the neural - plate border and neural crest in terms of EMT has not been established . EMT regulates heart - valve formation Endocardial EMT is regulated through the TGF β and NOTCH signalling pathways . TGF β functions through the activation of the transcription factors SMAD2 , - 3 and - 4 , and the subsequent activation of SNAI1 57 , which represses transcription of E - cadherin . NOTCH genes are transmembrane receptors for the delta and serrate / jagged families . Ligand binding results in a γ - secretase - mediated cleavage of the cytoplasmic tail of the NOTCH proteins . The cleaved NOTCH tail translocates to the nucleus and regulates gene expres - sion through binding to the transcription factor RBPJk / CBF1 / Su ( H ) , which activates genes of the hairy / enhancer of split ( Hes ) family . Recent studies provided a fascinating insight into how the TGF β and NOTCH pathways interact to orchestrate EMT . Analysis of RBPJk and NOTCH1 mutant embryos indicated that NOTCH - induced TGF β 2 transcription regulates the endocardial EMT that is required for cardiac - valve development 58 . Disruption of NOTCH signalling was associated with loss of SNAI1 expression , and inappro - priate vascular endothelial ( VE ) - cadherin expression . Importantly , TGF β - family members are known to pro - mote endocardial EMT 59 , and the reduced transcrip - tion of TGF β 2 that was observed in the outflow tract and atrioventricular - canal myocardium of RBPJk - and NOTCH1 - mutant embryos , indicated that NOTCH - induced TGF β 2 expression has an important role in EMT that occurs during the formation of the cardiac valve . TGF β - induced EMT in cultured epithelial cells was also found to induce the Hes - family member HEY1 and the NOTCH ligand JAG1 ( REF . 60 ) . HEY1 - and JAG1 - knockdown or inhibition of NOTCH blocked TGF β - induced EMT . TGF β - induced HEY1 expres - sion is biphasic , the initial phase being dependent on SMAD3 but independent of JAG1 , whereas the second phase is JAG1 - dependent . These data are consistent with a model in which TGF β induces expression of HEY1 and JAG1 through SMAD3 . JAG1 then acti - vates NOTCH , which leads to a second wave of HEY1 expression . Taken together , these observations indicate a close mutual regulation of the TGF β and NOTCH signalling pathways during EMT . The roles of EMT in disease EMT has an important role in the development of many tissues during embryogenesis , but similar cell changes are recapitulated during pathological proc - esses , such as fibrosis and cancer ( BOX 2 ) . A common spectrum of EMT - associated changes in morphology and gene - expression patterns are associated with these events , and recent studies have shown a remark - able similarity between the signalling pathways that regulate EMT in these pathological processes . Figure 6 | Different signalling pathways cooperate to regulate EMT during neural - crest determination and segregation . The neural - crest territory is progressively determined in a rostrocaudal gradient along the neural axis of the vertebrate embryo at the interface between the neural tube and the lateral ectoderm . This simplified scheme does not reflect the formidable complexity of the signalling pathways that regulate the epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) during neural - crest determination and segregation . The pathways that are involved differ from species to species and at different axial levels . Although this figure depicts three distinct steps with a different set of molecules for induction , dorsalization and delamination , these events occur as a continuum in time and space . EMT itself occurs during a certain period of time at each axial level , concommitantly with initial lineage segregation and protection from apoptosis . Factors that execute EMT in the context of neural - crest determination remain to be identified . Altered cell - adhesion properties have an important role in the migration of neural - crest cells . BMP , bone morphogenetic protein ; FGF , fibroblast growth factor ; MSX1 / 2 , homeobox transcription factors related to Msh ( the muscle - segment homeobox gene in fruitflies ) ; PAX3 / 7 , paired - box proteins 3 / 7 ; ZIC , zinc - finger transcription factor . R E V I E W S 138 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio Basement membrane An extracellular - matrix structure that can be visualized by light microscopy and lines the basal side of epithelia . SNAI2 regulates re - epithelialization . During re - epithe - lialization of wounded skin , keratinocytes undergo a series of changes that are reminiscent of EMT , including loss of polarity and alteration of the actin cytoskeleton , disruption of cell – cell contacts , and partial or complete breakdown of the basement membrane 61 , 62 . The cells also change their motile properties and migrate from the wounded edge of the epithelium into the de - epitheli - alized area . However , not all features of EMT are seen . For example , the migrating keratinocytes remain part of a cohesive cell sheet , as they retain some intercel - lular junctions . The keratinocytes subsequently regain their epithelial characteristics during the final stages of re - epithelialization . Recent studies indicated that SNAI2 has an important role in orchestrating this process . SNAI2 is expressed in keratinocytes at wound margins , consistent with a possi - ble role in early wound re - epithelialization . Importantly , targeted deletion of Snai2 in mice dramatically reduces epithelial outgrowth from skin explants , whereas consti - tutive expression of SNAI2 in keratinocytes resulted in accelerated re - epithelialization 63 . A complex network controls EMT during fibrosis . Chronic kidney disease is characterized by cumula - tive tissue fibrosis , which results in the progressive loss of kidney function . Fibrosis is characterized by increased numbers of myofibroblasts that deposit interstitial ECM , and a significant fraction of these fibroblasts are thought to arise through EMT of the tubular epithelial cells 64 . Inflammatory processes in response to injury in the kidney lead to increased lev - els of factors such as TGF β , EGF and FGF2 that can induce EMT of tubular epithelial cells 64 , 65 . In addi - tion , animal models of kidney disease indicate that EMT occurs in tubular epithelial cells 66 – 68 , although these models do not always accurately reflect human disease processes . However , similar observations have been made in studies of human renal fibrosis 69 , 70 . Genetic tagging of renal tubules in experimental animals has shown that , in the fibrotic kidney , 36 % of the fibroblast - specific protein - 1 ( FSP1 ) - posi - tive fibroblasts arise from tubular epithelial cells 71 . Furthermore , targeted deletion of tissue - type plas - minogen activator ( tPA ) blocked tubular - epithelium EMT but not activation of interstitial fibroblasts after obstructive kidney injury , which results in reduced fibrosis 72 . This observation also underscores the possible importance of tubular epithelium EMT for kidney fibrosis . EMT could be responsible for fibrosis in other organs . The emerging paradigm is that inflammatory media - tors that are produced in response to injury cause EMT , which can lead to fibrosis . In the peritoneal cavity , renal dialysis causes injury to the mesothelial lining . This results in EMT of mesothelial cells , expression of SNAI1 and the onset of fibrosis 73 , probably as a result of TGF β production 74 ; these events have now been confirmed in animal models 75 . TGF β levels are also increased in the lungs of patients with fibrotic pulmonary diseases such as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis 76 , 77 . TGF β induces Box 2 | Evidence supporting a role for EMT during tumour progression Phenotypic • Expression of proteins that are characteristic of mesenchymal cells ( for example vimentin , fibroblast - specific protein - 1 ( FSP1 / S100A4 ) , SNAI1 and SNAI2 , nuclear β - catenin and stromelysin - 3 ) and loss of epithelial markers ( for example E - cadherin 11 , 15 ) correlates with tumour progression and poor prognosis 18 , 93 . • Invasion of adenocarcinomas is accompanied by the release of single cells through an epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) process 15 . Genetic • Sarcomatoid carcinomas contain tumour - cell populations that have mixed carcinoma and sarcoma phenotypes . Both populations arise from a common epithelial precursor , which indicates that EMT is involved in this transformation . • Genetic analysis indicates that carcinoma cells contribute to the stromal - fibroblast population in tumours 94 . Functional • FSP1 / S100A4 is a lineage marker for mesenchymal cells . Depletion of FSP1 / S100A4 - positive cells in tumours suppresses metastasis 95 . • Manipulation of E - cadherin expression causes both change of phenotype and invasive behaviour 11 , 15 , 96 . • Conditional expression of ERBB2 ( also known as HER2 / neu ) induces the formation of tumours that regress upon withdrawal of ERBB2 expression . The regressed tumours can relapse and metastasize through spontaneous induction of SNAI1 . These tumours consist of mesenchymal cells 93 . • Claudin - 1 , a tight - junction component , is upregulated in colorectal tumours . Expression of claudin - 1 in colonic carcinoma cells induces phenotypic and gene - expression changes that are characteristic of EMT , and promotes metastasis . Inhibition of claudin - 1 expression in metastatic cells suppresses metastasis 97 . • Transforming growth factor - β ( TGF β ) induces EMT in H - Ras - transformed mammary epithelial cells . Inhibition of NF - κ B activity reverses the TGF β - induced EMT and also abrogates the metastatic potential of these cells in vivo 98 . • Twist is expressed in invasive lobular breast carcinomas . Suppression of twist expression in tumour cells reduces their metastatic potential in vivo . On the other hand , ectopic expression of twist promotes EMT , expression of mesenchymal markers , increased motility and downregulation of E - cadherin 99 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 139 EMT of alveolar epithelial cells 78 , 79 and fibroblastic cells that express both epithelial and mesenchymal mark - ers can be detected in human biopsies 79 . Furthermore , a significant body of evidence points to TGF β - induced EMT of lens epithelial cells as an important event during cataract formation and injury - induced lens - capsule fibro - sis 80 . The recurring theme of the involvement of TGF β in the pathogenesis of EMT - dependent fibrotic diseases is highlighted by the finding that Smad3 – / – mice are resist - ant to the induction of several fibrotic diseases 81 . Similarly , injury - induced lens - capsule fibrosis requires SMAD3 ( REF . 82 ) , and is inhibited by gene - therapy - mediated expression of SMAD7 , which inhibits TGF β signalling 83 . EMT and cancer . Numerous observations support the idea that EMT has a central role in tumour progres - sion . During progression to metastatic competence , carcinoma cells acquire mesenchymal gene - expression patterns and properties . This results in changed adhesive properties , and the activation of proteolysis and motility , which allows the tumour cells to metastasize and estab - lish secondary tumours at distant sites 84 . In tissue culture this progression is accompanied by partial or complete EMT , and induction of EMT in many carcinoma cell lines results in the acquisition of metastatic properties in vivo ( BOX 2 ) . It has recently been suggested that the acquisition of mesenchymal markers and properties during tumour progression simply reflects genomic instability and that EMT does not occur in tumours 85 . However , it is highly unlikely that the coordinated and complex gene - expression patterns that are required to endow tumour cells with the mesenchymal properties that are required for metastasis could arise through random mutations as a result of genomic instability . Rather , it is more likely that genomic instability changes the expression of important factors that regulate EMT . SNAI1 , for example , regulates the expression of many EMT - associated genes in colorectal carcinoma cells 86 . In this regard , it is striking that the same signalling pathways that regulate developmental EMT are also activated during tumour progression . It is also clear that the EMT that is observed in cultured tumour cells con - verts into increased metastatic potential in vivo ( BOX 2 ) , arguing against the idea that EMT in tumour cells is a tissue - culture artefact without biological significance . Future perspectives EMT in vivo is embedded in context - dependent induc - tive and differentiation events . This finding reflects the fact that all morphogenetic processes must be tighly controlled and integrated with the other processes that occur during embryonic development . At each site of EMT in the embryo , the previous developmental history has to be taken into account . In vivo studies are invalu - able for studying EMT , but suffer from the drawback that they are much more demanding than the in vitro studies , particularly in mice . High - throughput studies 39 , 40 , how - ever , have the potential to unravel the different facets of EMT rapidly . In addition , the new extensive screening of RNA interference ( RNAi ) libraries in the fruitfly and morpholino oligonucleotide libraries in zebrafish should help to identify the critical nodes of the interaction net - works that regulate EMT . Due to their simplified context , in vitro studies allow the relatively easy identification of pathways that are involved in the morphological conversion of epithelial cells , and several pathways that can induce EMT have been discovered . However , further analysis is required in a more global context . In vitro studies are limited , because very few immortalized epithelial cell lines can undergo EMT . The induction of EMT by TGF β in immortalized NMuMG cells is almost unique , whereas Eph4 cells need to be Ras transformed , otherwise they undergo apoptosis when they are exposed to TGF β . Moreover , most cell lines are not fully polarized and often lack tight junctions owing to the culture condi - tions or their status of transformation , which limits their utility for the study of EMT . Another problem consists of the kinetics of EMT conversion , which vary considerably from hours to a week . Some of the molecular events of EMT are embedded in other cel - lular programmes , and it is therefore not a surprise to see very few informative studies on differential gene expression during EMT . Better in vitro models are clearly required to study EMT , and those obtained in three - dimensional cultures where epithelial cells can polarize and form functional glandular structures hold particular promise 87 – 90 . In these models , EMT needs to be induced transiently using inducible constructs . The use of reporter genes under the control of EMT - regulated promoters will also be important to indicate the critical steps in the execution of the EMT programme . The FGFR2 IIIb and IIIc splice variants , for example , could be used as one of the markers of the transition 91 . SNAI1 , E - cadherin and vimentin are also possible candidates , although the promoters that have been defined so far have not yet provided specific tools in vivo , because their temporal and spatial expression is not restricted to sites of EMT . Specific gene expression that is driven by the tissue - plasminogen - activator promoter in murine neural - crest cells can constitute a new marker of late - phase EMT 92 . More work is therefore required to develop appropriate promoter constructs . These could also be used for imag - ing in vivo or the specific inactivation of candidate genes that might be involved in EMT proccesses . Additional studies are required to understand how the molecular machines that control epithelial - cell polarity are assembled and how they can be altered dur - ing the early stages of EMT . One of the crucial issues is to understand the crosstalk between cadherin - and integrin - mediated adhesion . Intriguingly , these two adhesive complexes share numerous structural and enzymatic components , and they are both associated with tyrosine - kinase surface receptors , most of which have been implicated in EMT . These problems require an interdisciplinary approach in which cell - and molecu - lar - biology methods are combined with emerging tech - niques in biophysics and imaging , and particularly with global high - throughput analyses . Together , these studies hold the promise of elucidating the complex molecular strategies that regulate EMT . R E V I E W S 140 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio 1 . Schock , F . & Perrimon , N . Molecular mechanisms of epithelial morphogenesis . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 , 463 – 493 ( 2002 ) . 2 . Thompson , E . W . , Newgreen , D . F . & Tarin , D . Carcinoma invasion and metastasis : a role for epithelial – mesenchymal transition ? Cancer Res . 65 , 5991 – 5995 ( 2005 ) . 3 . Friedl , P . Prespecification and plasticity : shifting mechanisms of cell migration . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 , 14 – 23 ( 2004 ) . 4 . Christ , B . & Ordahl , C . P . Early stages of chick somite development . Anat . Embryol . ( Berl ) 191 , 381 – 396 ( 1995 ) . 5 . Funayama , N . , Sato , Y . , Matsumoto , K . , Ogura , T . & Takahashi , Y . Coelom formation : binary decision of the lateral plate mesoderm is controlled by the ectoderm . Development 126 , 4129 – 4138 ( 1999 ) . 6 . Locascio , A . & Nieto , M . A . Cell movements during vertebrate development : integrated tissue behaviour versus individual cell migration . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 11 , 464 – 469 ( 2001 ) . 7 . Nieto , M . A . The snail superfamily of zinc - finger transcription factors . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 155 – 166 ( 2002 ) . 8 . Gilbert S . F . Developmental Biology , 7th edn ( Sinauer Associates Inc . , 2003 ) . 9 . Gershengorn , M . C . , et al . Epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition generates proliferative human islet precursor cells . Science 306 , 2261 – 2264 ( 2004 ) . 10 . Radisky , D . C . Epithelial – mesenchymal transition . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 4325 – 4326 ( 2005 ) . 11 . Peinado , H . , Portillo , F . & Cano , A . Transcriptional regulation of cadherins during development and carcinogenesis . Int . J . Dev . Biol . 48 , 365 – 375 ( 2004 ) . 12 . Wang , J . et al . Atrioventricular cushion transformation is mediated by ALK2 in the developing mouse heart . Dev . Biol . 286 , 299 – 310 ( 2005 ) . 13 . Zavadil , J . & Bottinger , E . P . TGF - β and epithelial - to - mesenchymal transitions . Oncogene 24 , 5764 – 5774 ( 2005 ) . 14 . Savagner , P . Leaving the neighborhood : molecular mechanisms involved during epithelial – mesenchymal transition . Bioessays 23 , 912 – 923 ( 2001 ) . 15 . Thiery , J . P . Epithelial – mesenchymal transitions in tumour progression . Nature Rev . Cancer 2 , 442 – 454 ( 2002 ) . A comprehensive review of the basics of EMT . 16 . Thiery , J . P . Epithelial – mesenchymal transitions in development and pathologies . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 740 – 746 ( 2003 ) . 17 . Zoltan - Jones , A . , Huang , L . , Ghatak , S . & Toole , B . P . Elevated hyaluronan production induces mesenchymal and transformed properties in epithelial cells . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 45801 – 45810 ( 2003 ) . 18 . Barrallo - Gimeno , A . & Nieto , M . A . The Snail genes as inducers of cell movement and survival : implications in development and cancer . Development 132 , 3151 – 3161 ( 2005 ) . An excellent review of the different facets of the snail genes . 19 . Polakis , P . Wnt signaling and cancer . Genes Dev . 14 , 1837 – 1851 ( 2000 ) . 20 . Grille , S . J . et al . The protein kinase Akt induces epithelial mesenchymal transition and promotes enhanced motility and invasiveness of squamous cell carcinoma lines . Cancer Res . 63 , 2172 – 2178 ( 2003 ) . 21 . Beals , C . R . , Sheridan , C . M . , Turck , C . W . , Gardner , P . & Crabtree , G . R . Nuclear export of NF - ATc enhanced by glycogen synthase kinase - 3 . Science 275 , 1930 – 1934 ( 1997 ) . 22 . Zhou , B . P . et al . Dual regulation of Snail by GSK - 3 β - mediated phosphorylation in control of epithelial – mesenchymal transition . Nature Cell Biol . 6 , 931 – 940 ( 2004 ) . 23 . Yang , Z . et al . Pak1 phosphorylation of snail , a master regulator of epithelial - to - mesenchyme transition , modulates snail’s subcellular localization and functions . Cancer Res . 65 , 3179 – 3184 ( 2005 ) . 24 . Bhowmick , N . A . , Zent , R . , Ghiassi , M . , McDonnell , M . & Moses , H . L . Integrin β 1 signaling is necessary for transforming growth factor - β activation of p38MAPK and epithelial plasticity . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 46707 – 46713 ( 2001 ) . 25 . Prunier , C . & Howe , P . H . Disabled - 2 ( Dab2 ) is required for transforming growth factor β - induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 17540 – 17548 ( 2005 ) . 26 . Valles , A . M . , Boyer , B . , Tarone , G . & Thiery , J . P . α 2 β 1 integrin is required for the collagen and FGF - 1 induced cell dispersion in a rat bladder carcinoma cell line . Cell Adhes . Commun . 4 , 187 – 199 ( 1996 ) . 27 . Balzac , F . et al . E - cadherin endocytosis regulates the activity of Rap1 : a traffic light GTPase at the crossroads between cadherin and integrin function . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 4765 – 4783 ( 2005 ) . 28 . Oloumi , A . , McPhee , T . & Dedhar , S . Regulation of E - cadherin expression and β - catenin / Tcf transcriptional activity by the integrin - linked kinase . Biochem . Biophys . Acta 1691 , 1 – 15 ( 2004 ) . 29 . Li , Y . , Yang , J . , Dai , C . , Wu , C . & Liu , Y . Role for integrin - linked kinase in mediating tubular epithelial to mesenchymal transition and renal interstitial fibrogenesis . J . Clin . Invest . 112 , 503 – 516 ( 2003 ) . 30 . Gimond , C . et al . Induction of cell scattering by expression of β 1 integrins in β 1 - deficient epithelial cells requires activation of members of the rho family of GTPases and downregulation of cadherin and catenin function . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 1325 – 1340 ( 1999 ) . 31 . Avizienyte , E . & Frame , M . C . Src and FAK signalling controls adhesion fate and the epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 17 , 542 – 547 ( 2005 ) . 32 . Yano , H . et al . Roles played by a subset of integrin signaling molecules in cadherin - based cell – cell adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 166 , 283 – 295 ( 2004 ) . 33 . Chu , Y . S . et al . Force measurements in E - cadherin - mediated cell doublets reveal rapid adhesion strengthened by actin cytoskeleton remodeling through Rac and Cdc42 . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 1183 – 1194 ( 2004 ) . 34 . Perez - Moreno , M . , Jamora , C . & Fuchs , E . Sticky business : orchestrating cellular signals at adherens junctions . Cell 112 , 535 – 548 ( 2003 ) . 35 . Ebnet , K . , Suzuki , A . , Ohno , S . & Vestweber , D . Junctional adhesion molecules ( JAMs ) : more molecules with dual functions ? J . Cell Sci . 117 , 19 – 29 ( 2004 ) . 36 . Takai , Y . & Nakanishi , H . Nectin and afadin : novel organizers of intercellular junctions . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 17 – 27 ( 2003 ) . 37 . Martinez - Rico , C . et al . Separation force measurements reveal different types of modulation of E - cadherin - based adhesion by nectin - 1 and - 3 . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 4753 – 4760 ( 2005 ) . 38 . Chu , Y . S . et al . Prototypical type - I E - cadherin and type - II cadherin - 7 mediate very distinct adhesiveness through their extracellular domain . J . Biol . Chem . Oct 16 2005 ( doi / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M506185200 ) . 39 . Barrios - Rodiles , M . et al . High - throughput mapping of a dynamic signaling network in mammalian cells . Science 307 , 1621 – 1625 ( 2005 ) . 40 . Ozdamar , B . et al . Regulation of the polarity protein Par6 by TGF β receptors controls epithelial cell plasticity . Science 307 , 1603 – 1609 ( 2005 ) . 41 . Wang , H . R . et al . Regulation of cell polarity and protrusion formation by targeting RhoA for degradation . Science 302 , 1775 – 1779 ( 2003 ) . Exploited an advanced technique to discover new critical partners in tight junctions that couple signalling and morphogenesis . 42 . Fernandez - Serra , M . , Consales , C . , Livigni , A . & Arnone , M . I . Role of the ERK - mediated signaling pathway in mesenchyme formation and differentiation in the sea urchin embryo . Dev . Biol . 268 , 384 – 402 ( 2004 ) . 43 . Rottinger , E . , Besnardeau , L . & Lepage , T . A Raf / MEK / ERK signaling pathway is required for development of the sea urchin embryo micromere lineage through phosphorylation of the transcription factor Ets . Development 131 , 1075 – 1087 ( 2004 ) . 44 . Oda , H . , Tsukita , S . & Takeichi , M . Dynamic behavior of the cadherin - based cell – cell adhesion system during Drosophila gastrulation . Dev . Biol . 203 , 435 – 450 ( 1998 ) . 45 . Smallhorn , M . , Murray , M . J . & Saint , R . The epithelial – mesenchymal transition of the Drosophila mesoderm requires the Rho GTP exchange factor Pebble . Development 131 , 2641 – 2651 ( 2004 ) . 46 . Yamashita , S . et al . Zinc transporter LIVI controls epithelial – mesenchymal transition in zebrafish gastrula organizer . Nature 429 , 298 – 302 ( 2004 ) . 47 . Ciruna , B . & Rossant , J . FGF signaling regulates mesoderm cell fate specification and morphogenetic movement at the primitive streak . Dev . Cell 1 , 37 – 49 ( 2001 ) . 48 . Carver , E . A . , Jiang , R . , Lan , Y . , Oram , K . F . & Gridley , T . The mouse snail gene encodes a key regulator of the epithelial – mesenchymal transition . Mol . Cell Biol . 21 , 8184 – 8188 ( 2001 ) . 49 . Kemler , R . et al . Stabilization of β - catenin in the mouse zygote leads to premature epithelial – mesenchymal transition in the epiblast . Development 131 , 5817 – 5824 ( 2004 ) . 50 . Huelsken , J . et al . Requirement for β - catenin in anterior – posterior axis formation in mice . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 567 – 578 ( 2000 ) . 51 . Lickert , H . et al . Formation of multiple hearts in mice following deletion of β - catenin in the embryonic endoderm . Dev . Cell 3 , 171 – 181 ( 2002 ) . 52 . Meulemans , D . & Bronner - Fraser , M . Gene - regulatory interactions in neural crest evolution and development . Dev . Cell 7 , 291 – 299 ( 2004 ) . A comprehensive review that provides a basis for stimulating new evolution and development studies . 53 . del Barrio , M . G . & Nieto , M . A . Overexpression of Snail family members highlights their ability to promote chick neural crest formation . Development 129 , 1583 – 1593 ( 2002 ) . 54 . Vallin , J . et al . Cloning and characterization of three Xenopus slug promoters reveal direct regulation by Lef / β - catenin signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 30350 – 30358 ( 2001 ) . 55 . Cheung , M . et al . The transcriptional control of trunk neural crest induction , survival , and delamination . Dev . Cell 8 , 179 – 192 ( 2005 ) . An advanced study that addresses the complexity of signalling pathways in neural - crest ontogeny in vivo . 56 . Morales , A . V . , Barbas , J . A . & Nieto , M . A . How to become neural crest : from segregation to delamination . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 16 , 655 – 662 ( 2005 ) . 57 . Peinado , H . , Quintanilla , M . & Cano , A . Transforming growth factor β - 1 induces snail transcription factor in epithelial cell lines : mechanisms for epithelial mesenchymal transitions . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 21113 – 21123 ( 2003 ) . 58 . Timmerman , L . A . et al . Notch promotes epithelial – mesenchymal transition during cardiac development and oncogenic transformation . Genes Dev . 18 , 99 – 115 ( 2004 ) . 59 . Nakajima , Y . , Yamagishi , T . , Hokari , S . & Nakamura , H . Mechanisms involved in valvuloseptal endocardial cushion formation in early cardiogenesis : roles of transforming growth factor ( TGF ) - β and bone morphogenetic protein ( BMP ) . Anat . Rec . 258 , 119 – 127 ( 2000 ) . 60 . Zavadil , J . , Cermak , L . , Soto - Nieves , N . & Bottinger , E . P . Integration of TGF - β / Smad and Jagged1 / Notch signalling in epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition . EMBO J . 23 , 1155 – 1165 ( 2004 ) . A well - designed study to investigate a complex network of interactions in EMT . 61 . Woodley , D . T . Reepithelialization . in The molecular and cellular biology of wound healing ( ed Clarke , A . F . ) 339 – 354 ( Plenum Press , New York , 1998 ) . 62 . Martin , P . Wound healing — aiming for perfect skin regeneration . Science 276 , 75 – 81 ( 1997 ) . 63 . Savagner , P . et al . Developmental transcription factor slug is required for effective re - epithelialization by adult keratinocytes . J . Cell Physiol . 202 , 858 – 866 ( 2005 ) . 64 . Liu , Y . Epithelial to mesenchymal transition in renal fibrogenesis : pathologic significance , molecular mechanism , and therapeutic intervention . J . Am . Soc . Nephrol . 15 , 1 – 12 ( 2004 ) . 65 . Kalluri , R . & Neilson , E . G . Epithelial – mesenchymal transition and its implications for fibrosis . J . Clin . Invest . 112 , 1776 – 1784 ( 2003 ) . 66 . Strutz , F . et al . Identification and characterization of a fibroblast marker : FSP1 . J . Cell Biol . 130 , 393 – 405 ( 1995 ) . 67 . Ng , Y . Y . et al . Tubular epithelial - myofibroblast transdifferentiation in progressive tubulointerstitial fibrosis in 5 / 6 nephrectomized rats . Kidney Int . 54 , 864 – 876 ( 1998 ) . 68 . Yang , J . & Liu , Y . Dissection of key events in tubular epithelial to myofibroblast transition and its implications in renal interstitial fibrosis . Am . J . Pathol . 159 , 1465 – 1475 ( 2001 ) . 69 . Jinde , K . et al . Tubular phenotypic change in progressive tubulointerstitial fibrosis in human glomerulonephritis . Am . J . Kidney Dis . 38 , 761 – 769 ( 2001 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 141 70 . Rastaldi , M . P . et al . Epithelial – mesenchymal transition of tubular epithelial cells in human renal biopsies . Kidney Int . 62 , 137 – 146 ( 2002 ) . 71 . Iwano , M . et al . Evidence that fibroblasts derive from epithelium during tissue fibrosis . J . Clin . Invest . 110 , 341 – 350 ( 2002 ) . 72 . Yang , J . et al . Disruption of tissue - type plasminogen activator gene in mice reduces renal interstitial fibrosis in obstructive nephropathy . J . Clin . Invest . 110 , 1525 – 1538 ( 2002 ) . 73 . Yanez - Mo , M . et al . Peritoneal dialysis and epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition of mesothelial cells . N . Engl . J . Med . 348 , 403 – 413 ( 2003 ) . 74 . Aguilera , A . , Yanez - Mo , M . , Selgas , R . , Sanchez - Madrid , F . & Lopez - Cabrera , M . Epithelial to mesenchymal transition as a triggering factor of peritoneal membrane fibrosis and angiogenesis in peritoneal dialysis patients . Curr . Opin . Investig . Drugs 6 , 262 – 268 ( 2005 ) . 75 . Margetts , P . J . et al . Transient overexpression of TGF - β 1 induces epithelial mesenchymal transition in the rodent peritoneum . J . Am . Soc . Nephrol . 16 , 425 – 436 ( 2005 ) . 76 . Salez , F . et al . Transforming growth factor - β 1 in sarcoidosis . Eur . Respir . J . 12 , 913 – 919 ( 1998 ) . 77 . Khalil , N . et al . Regulation of the effects of TGF - β 1 by activation of latent TGF - β 1 and differential expression of TGF - β receptors ( T β R - I and T β R - II ) in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis . Thorax 56 , 907 – 915 ( 2001 ) . 78 . Yao , H . W . , Xie , Q . M . , Chen , J . Q . , Deng , Y . M . & Tang , H . F . TGF - β 1 induces alveolar epithelial to mesenchymal transition in vitro . Life Sci . 76 , 29 – 37 ( 2004 ) . 79 . Willis , B . C . et al . Induction of epithelial – mesenchymal transition in alveolar epithelial cells by transforming growth factor - β 1 : potential role in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis . Am . J . Pathol . 166 , 1321 – 1332 ( 2005 ) . 80 . de Iongh , R . U . , Wederell , E . , Lovicu , F . J . & McAvoy , J . W . Transforming growth factor - β - induced epithelial – mesenchymal transition in the lens : a model for cataract formation . Cells Tissues Organs 179 , 43 – 55 ( 2005 ) . 81 . Flanders , K . C . Smad3 as a mediator of the fibrotic response . Int . J . Exp . Pathol . 85 , 47 – 64 ( 2004 ) . 82 . Saika , S . et al . Smad3 signaling is required for epithelial – mesenchymal transition of lens epithelium after injury . Am . J . Pathol . 164 , 651 – 663 ( 2004 ) . 83 . Saika , S . et al . Smad3 is required for dedifferentiation of retinal pigment epithelium following retinal detachment in mice . Lab . Invest . 84 , 1245 – 1258 ( 2004 ) . 84 . Sleeman , J . P . The lymph node as a bridgehead in the metastatic dissemination of tumors . Recent Results Cancer Res . 157 , 55 – 81 ( 2000 ) . 85 . Tarin , D . , Thompson , E . W . & Newgreen , D . F . The fallacy of epithelial mesenchymal transition in neoplasia . Cancer Res . 65 , 5996 – 6000 ( 2005 ) . 86 . De Craene , B . et al . The transcription factor snail induces tumor cell invasion through modulation of the epithelial cell differentiation program . Cancer Res . 65 , 6237 – 6244 ( 2005 ) . 87 . Affolter , M . et al . Tube or not tube : remodeling epithelial tissues by branching morphogenesis . Dev . Cell 4 , 11 – 18 ( 2003 ) . 88 . Nelson , C . M . & Bissell , M . J . Modeling dynamic reciprocity : engineering three - dimensional culture models of breast architecture , function , and neoplastic transformation . Semin . Cancer Biol . 15 , 342 – 352 ( 2005 ) . 89 . O’Brien , P . M . et al . Immunoglobulin genes expressed by B - lymphocytes infiltrating cervical carcinomas show evidence of antigen - driven selection . Cancer Immunol . Immunother . 50 , 523 – 532 ( 2001 ) . 90 . Debnath , J . & Brugge , J . S . Modelling glandular epithelial cancers in three - dimensional cultures . Nature Rev . Cancer 5 , 675 – 688 ( 2005 ) . 91 . Savagner , P . , Valles , A . M . , Jouanneau , J . , Yamada , K . M . & Thiery , J . P . Alternative splicing in fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 is associated with induced epithelial – mesenchymal transition in rat bladder carcinoma cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 5 , 851 – 862 ( 1994 ) . 92 . Pietri , T . et al . Conditional β 1 - integrin gene deletion in neural crest cells causes severe developmental alterations of the peripheral nervous system . Development 131 , 3871 – 3883 ( 2004 ) . 93 . Moody , S . E . et al . The transcriptional repressor Snail promotes mammary tumor recurrence . Cancer Cell 8 , 197 – 209 ( 2005 ) . A remarkable model for the role of EMT in breast cancer progression . 94 . Petersen , O . W . et al . Epithelial to mesenchymal transition in human breast cancer can provide a nonmalignant stroma . Am . J . Pathol . 162 , 391 – 402 ( 2003 ) . 95 . Xue , C . , Plieth , D . , Venkov , C . , Xu , C . & Neilson , E . G . The gatekeeper effect of epithelial – mesenchymal transition regulates the frequency of breast cancer metastasis . Cancer Res . 63 , 3386 – 3394 ( 2003 ) . 96 . Perl , A . K . , Wilgenbus , P . , Dahl , U . , Semb , H . & Christofori , G . A causal role for E - cadherin in the transition from adenoma to carcinoma . Nature 392 , 190 – 193 ( 1998 ) . 97 . Dhawan , P . et al . Claudin - 1 regulates cellular transformation and metastatic behavior in colon cancer . J . Clin . Invest . 115 , 1765 – 1776 ( 2005 ) . 98 . Huber , M . A . et al . NF - κ B is essential for epithelial – mesenchymal transition and metastasis in a model of breast cancer progression . J . Clin . Invest . 114 , 569 – 581 ( 2004 ) . 99 . Yang , J . et al . Twist , a master regulator of morphogenesis , plays an essential role in tumor metastasis . Cell 117 , 927 – 939 ( 2004 ) . Acknowledgements This work was supported , in part , by the European Union under the auspices of the European Economic Comunity Framework Programme 6 Specific Targeted Research Project BRECOSM ( Breast Cancer Metastasis ) . This review is dedi - cated to the memory of Professor Shoichiro Tsukita of Kyoto University who passed away in December 2005 . Competing interests statement The authors declared no competing financial interests . DATABASES The following terms in this article are linked online to : Flybase : http : / / flybase . bio . indiana . edu / Pebble | Twist UniProtKB : http : / / us . expasy . org / uniprot AKT / PKB | brachyury | DAB2 | E - cadherin | FAK | GSK3 β | LEF / TCF4 | Liv1 | occludin | PAK1 | PAR3 | SNAI1 | SNAI2 | TGF β 2 | TGF β 3 | TGF β R1 | TGF β R2 | ZO - 1 Access to this interactive links box is free online . R E V I E W S 142 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio