Effect of Clathrin Heavy Chain - and (cid:1) - Adaptin - specific Small Inhibitory RNAs on Endocytic Accessory Proteins and Receptor Trafficking in HeLa Cells * Received for publication , July 8 , 2003 , and in revised form , September 3 , 2003 Published , JBC Papers in Press , September 6 , 2003 , DOI 10 . 1074 / jbc . M307290200 Lars Hinrichsen‡ , Jens Harborth § ¶ , Lars Andrees‡ , Klaus Weber § , and Ernst J . Ungewickell‡ (cid:1) From the ‡ Department of Cell Biology in the Center of Anatomy , Hannover Medical School , D - 30623 Hannover , Germany and the § Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology of the Max - Planck - Institute for Biophysical Chemistry , D - 37070 Go¨ttingen , Germany To assess the contribution of individual endocytic pro - teins to the assembly of clathrin coated pits , we depleted the clathrin heavy chain and the (cid:1) - adaptin subunit of AP - 2 in HeLa - cells using RNA interference . 48 h after transfection with clathrin heavy chain - specific short in - terfering RNA both , the heavy and light chains were de - pleted by more than 80 % . Residual clathrin was mainly membrane - associated , and an increase in shallow pits was noted . The membrane - association of adaptors , clath - rin assembly lymphoid myeloid leukemia protein ( CALM ) , epsin , dynamin , and Eps15 was only moderately affected by the knockdown and all proteins still displayed a punc - tate staining distribution . Clathrin depletion inhibited the uptake of transferrin but not that of the epidermal growth factor . However , efficient sorting of the epidermal growth factor into hepatocyte growth factor - regulated ty - rosine kinase substrate - positive endosomes was im - paired . Depletion of (cid:1) - adaptin abolished almost com - pletely the plasma membrane association of clathrin . Binding of Eps15 to membranes was strongly and that of CALM moderately reduced . Whereas the uptake of trans - ferrin was efficiently blocked in (cid:1) - adaptin knockdown cells , the internalization and sorting of the epidermal growth factor was not significantly impaired . Since nei - ther clathrin nor AP - 2 is essential for the internalization of EGF , we conclude that it is taken up by an alternative mechanism . Clathrin - coated vesicles move cell surface receptors to endo - somes and return some of them through recycling endosomes back to the plasma membrane ( 1 , 2 ) . Lysosomal enzymes are transported by clathrin coated vesicles from the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) 1 to the endosomal compartment ( 1 ) . Moreover , clathrin coats are also involved in the sorting of mono - ubiquiti - nated proteins into internal vesicles of multivesicular endo - somes ( MVE ) ( 3 ) . MVE play an essential role in the down - regulation of signaling receptors such as the activated epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) ( 4 ) . Principal struc - tural components of plasma membrane - derived clathrin - coated vesicles are clathrin that consists of three heavy and three light chains and the heterotetrameric adaptor protein AP - 2 com - posed of (cid:1) , (cid:2) 2 , (cid:3) 2 , and (cid:4) 2 subunits . The structurally related AP - 1 adaptor complex is found mainly in the TGN ( 5 ) . The clathrin coat on MVE does not include any of the conventional adaptor complexes ( AP - 1 , AP - 2 , or AP - 3 ) ( 6 ) , but labels positive for the clathrin binding protein Hrs ( hepatocyte growth factor - regulated tyrosine kinase substrate ) ( 7 ) . In addition to adaptors a number of accessory proteins are involved in clathrin coat assembly on the plasma membrane . These include Eps15 and the ENTH domain proteins epsin , CALM , and its neuronal homolog AP180 . Epsin and CALM / AP180 can associate through their ENTH domain with the rare membrane lipid phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) , which might define the sites of coat assembly ( 8 , 9 ) . Recent evidence suggests that the association of the epsin ENTH do - main with the membrane induces an increase in curvature that could support the budding process ( 10 ) . Epsin also associates directly with the clathrin heavy chain ( 11 , 12 ) with the (cid:1) - ap - pendage domain of AP - 2 ( 11 – 13 ) and with (cid:2) 2 - appendage do - main of AP - 2 ( 14 ) . AP180 associates directly with clathrin and AP - 2 ( 11 – 18 ) . In general , short protein - protein interaction mo - tifs determine the specificity of the interactions between endo - cytic proteins with clathrin and adaptors ( 19 ) . The interaction of the more widely expressed AP180 homolog CALM with AP - 2 is not as well documented yet ( 20 ) . Apart from the ENTH domain , the polypeptide chain of both , epsin and AP180 , are largely disordered ( 21 ) . This property might allow the efficient recruitment of AP - 2 and clathrin to sites of coat assembly . In fact it was recently demonstrated that the proteins AP180 , AP - 2 , and clathrin are sufficient to induce clathrin - coated buds on PIP 2 - containing monolayers ( 8 ) . The endocytic accessory protein Eps15 interacts with the appendage domain of (cid:1) - adap - tin ( 22 ) but not with clathrin ( 23 ) . By immunoelectron micros - copy it was detected on the rim of plasma membrane clathrin - coated pits ( 24 ) and on the limiting membrane of early endosomes ( 25 ) where it is likely to associate with Hrs ( 26 , 27 ) . The function of Eps15 on endosomes is not yet fully understood but transfection experiments with dominant negative mutant Eps15 have indicated that it is essential for the recruitment of AP - 2 to the plasma membrane ( 28 ) . There are numerous other endocytic proteins not mentioned so far that are either involved in the recruitment of specific * This work was supported by the German Research Foundation and the Fond der Chemischen Industrie . The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges . This article must therefore be hereby marked “ advertisement ” in accordance with 18 U . S . C . Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . ¶ Current address : Alnylam Pharmaceuticals , 790 Memorial Dr . , Suite 202 , Cambridge , MA 02139 . (cid:1) To whom correspondence should be addressed . Fax : 49 - 511 - 532 - 3903 ; E - mail : ungewickell . ernst @ mh - hannover . de . 1 The abbreviations used are : TGN , trans - Golgi network ; BSA , bovine serum albumin ; CALM , clathrin assembly lymphoid myeloid leukemia protein ; EEA1 , early endosomal antigen 1 ; EGF , epidermal growth factor ; EGFR , epidermal growth factor receptor ; EH domain , Eps15 homology domain ; ENTH , epsin N - terminal homology domain ; Hrs , hepatocyte growth factor - regulated tyrosine kinase substrate ; MVE , multivesicular endosomes ; PBS , phosphate - buffered saline ; TBS , Tris - buffered saline ; PIP 2 , phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ; RNAi , RNA interference ; siRNA , short interfering RNA ; HC , heavy chain ; LC , light chain . T HE J OURNAL OF B IOLOGICAL C HEMISTRY Vol . 278 , No . 46 , Issue of November 14 , pp . 45160 – 45170 , 2003 © 2003 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Inc . Printed in U . S . A . This paper is available on line at http : / / www . jbc . org 45160 a t M a x P l a n c k I n s t . B i ophy s i k a li s c h e C h e m i e , O tt o H a hn B i b l , P f . 2841 , 37018 G o e tti ng e n on O c t ob e r 26 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m cargo , e . g . (cid:2) - arrestin and Dab2 ( 29 – 32 ) , into coated pits or they function like amphiphysin and dynamin at downstream stages of the budding and fission process ( 33 – 36 ) . Upon the release of coated vesicles into the cytosol , the clathrin coat is removed by the combined action of auxilins , hsc70 and synaptojanin ( 37 – 42 ) . Other endocytic accessory proteins such as HIP1 / HIP1R and intersectin are linking clathrin - mediated endocytosis to the actin - based cytoskeleton ( reviewed in Ref . 43 ) . The function of novel putative endocytic proteins discovered in the past by homology searches , proteomic approaches , yeast two - hybrid screens or other means was mostly confirmed by their inhibitory effects on receptor internalization when over - expressed as dominant negative variants . While this clearly indicates an involvement of the overexpressed protein in endo - cytosis , it often tells little about the stage in the endocytic process where a particular protein is needed . Clathrin coat formation seems to be governed by a complex web of reversible protein - protein interactions that engage under tight temporal and spatial regulation . Overexpression of almost any compo - nent of the endocytic machinery often results in its complete collapse due to the unregulated sequestration of one or more interaction partners . Therefore , alternative approaches have been developed that aim at the elimination of select compo - nents or of their genes . Among the most powerful methodolo - gies for reducing the cellular concentration of proteins is RNA interference ( RNAi ) . Recently this technique was adopted to mammalian cells where the transfection of 21 - nucleotide RNA duplexes with two nucleotide 3 (cid:1) overhang resulted in the spe - cific degradation of cognate mRNA and thus in the depletion of the encoded protein ( 44 ) . Here we employed RNAi in HeLa cells to reduce the cellular concentration of the clathrin heavy chain and that of the AP - 2 (cid:1) - adaptin subunit . The transfected cells were examined by immunofluorescence , Western blotting , cell fractionation , elec - tron microscopy , and functional endocytosis assays . Our results indicated that both proteins were efficiently depleted from the transfected cells within 48 h . The knockdown of clathrin heavy chain was paralleled by the disappearance of clathrin light chains . Residual clathrin on the plasma membrane was mainly found in shallow coated pits . The membrane association of the endocytic proteins AP - 2 , CALM , and epsin was only marginally affected . Transferrin uptake was strongly inhibited in the knockdown cells , but the uptake of EGF appeared to be normal . However , intracellular trafficking of the EGF was impaired . Moreover , the intracellular distribution of the early endosomal marker EEA1 , of Hrs , and that of the large mannose 6 - phos - phate receptor was altered upon clathrin depletion . (cid:1) - Adaptin depletion had a strong effect on the membrane association of both clathrin and Eps15 . It also inhibited transferrin uptake but had no effect on EGF internalization . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Antibodies and Reagents— Mouse monoclonal antibodies used for immunofluorescence were as follows : X22 , anti - clathrin heavy chain ( 45 ) ; AP . 6 , anti - (cid:1) - adaptin ( 46 ) ; monoclonal antibody 100 / 3 , anti - (cid:5) - adap - tin , ( 47 ) ; anti - EEA1 ( BD Biosciences , catalog number 610456 ) . Mouse monoclonal antibodies used for Western blotting were as follows : monoclonal antibody 100 / 1 anti - (cid:2) - adaptin ( 47 ) , anti - clathrin heavy chain ( BD Biosciences , catalog number 610500 ) , anti - (cid:1) - adaptin ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , catalog number sc - 17771 , Santa Cruz , CA ) , and anti - (cid:3) 2 ( AP - 50 from BD Biosciences ) . Rabbit polyconal antibodies for immunofluorescence and Western blotting were as follows : affinity - purified R461 directed against clathrin light chains ( 47 ) . Antisera directed against CALM were raised against the peptide CRPPNPFGPVPGAAQIQFM , and antisera directed against Eps15 were raised against the peptide CQEDLELAIALSK - SEISEA . To generate an antibody against epsin , the peptide CEERIR - RGDDLRLQMA was used as antigen . Peptide synthesis and custom immunizations were performed by BioScience ( Go¨ttingen , Germany ) . Actin was detected on Western blots by the affinity - purified serum R442 - 6 raised against bovine actin in our laboratory . For most appli - cations the polyclonal sera were affinity - purified using the respective peptides attached to Sulfo - link resin ( Pierce ) . The purified antibodies were eluted with 0 . 1 M glycine , pH 2 . 5 . The polyclonal rabbit antibody against the cation - independent mannose 6 - phosphate receptor was ob - tained from B . Hoflack ( Max - Planck - Institut fu¨r Zellbiologie und Gene - tik , Dresden , Germany ) . A polyclonal rabbit antibody against EEA1 was from M . Zerial ( Max - Planck - Institut fu¨r Zellbiologie und Genetik , Dresden , Germany ) and H . Stenmark ( Oslo , Norway ) provided the polyclonal rabbit serum against Hrs . A second polyclonal rabbit anti - body against epsin that was used for staining epsin in cells was ob - tained from L . Traub ( Pittsburgh , PA ) ( 17 ) . Fluorescein isothiocyanate and rhodamine - labeled anti - mouse or anti - rabbit antibodies were from Molecular Probes ( Leiden , The Netherlands ) . Secondary horseradish peroxidase - conjugated anti - mouse or anti - rabbit antibodies were from ICN ( Aurora , OH ) . Biotin - labeled transferrin ( Molecular Probes ) was detected by NeutrAvidin coupled to horseradish peroxidase ( Molecular Probes ) . Texas Red - labeled EGF and Texas Red - labeled transferrin were from Molecular Probes . 125 I - labeled EGF ( 6 . 25 MBq / (cid:3) g ) was ob - tained from New England Nuclear / PerkinElmer Life Sciences ( Zaventem , Belgium ) . siRNA— The clathrin heavy chain siRNAs ( AACCUGCGGUCUGG - AGUCAAC , HC oligo I , and AAUGGAUCUCUUUGAAUACGG , HC oligo II ) was obtained from Dharmacon ( Lafayette , CO ) . The (cid:1) - adaptin siRNA ( GAGCAUGUGCACGCUGGCCAGCU , (cid:1) - oligo I ) was purchased from Proligo ( Hamburg , Germany ) , and a second (cid:1) - adaptin siRNA ( AA - GAGGUGUGGUACCGAGUCA ( (cid:1) - oligo II ) ) was from Dharmacon . Firefly ( Photinus pyralis ) luciferase siRNA ( AACGTTACCGCGGAAT - ACTTCGA ) was obtained from Dharmacon . Selected sequences were submitted to BLAST searches against the human genome sequence to ensure that only the desired mRNA was targeted . siRNA duplex for - mation was performed as described elsewhere ( 44 ) . Cell Culture and Transfection— HeLa SS6 cells were grown at 37 °C and 5 % CO 2 in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium ( Invitrogen , Karlsruhe , Germany ) supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum ( Se - romed , Berlin , Germany ) , 1 m M sodium pyruvate ( Sigma , Taufkirchen , Germany ) , 100 units / ml penicillin , and 100 (cid:3) g / ml streptomycin ( In - vitrogen ) . Cells were regularly passaged to maintain exponential growth . 24 h before transfection with siRNA the cells were trypsin - digested and resuspended at a density of 0 . 5 – 0 . 8 (cid:2) 10 5 cells / ml in fresh medium containing 10 % fetal calf serum but no pyruvate or antibiotics . For most experiments the cells were seeded in 24 - well plates ( Nunc , Wiesbaden , Germany ) . Oligofectamine ( Invitrogen ) was used for the delivery of siRNAs into HeLa cells following the procedure of Harborth et al . ( 48 ) . For 3 (cid:2) 10 4 cells 60 pmol of RNA duplex were used . Control cells were transfected with firefly luciferase siRNA . For some experi - ments the luciferase siRNA was omitted , because we noted that the transfection reagent was the sole cause for any transient cellular stress . The final volume of the transfection mixture was 600 (cid:3) l per well . Cells were assayed 48 h after transfection unless indicated otherwise in the legends to the figures . The extent of gene silencing was assessed by Western blotting of cell lysates . To control for any differences in cell numbers the signal of the silenced protein was related to that of actin . Alternatively , in some experiments the signal originating from the targeted protein was related to total cellular protein as determined by BCA - 200 protein assay ( Pierce ) . Data shown represent averages of three independent transfection experiments performed in parallel . Western Blotting— For Western blotting siRNA - treated cells were trypsin - digested in 24 - well plates at 37 °C until the cells detached . The protease was stopped with cold medium containing 10 % fetal calf se - rum . Subsequently the cells were washed with PBS and then solubi - lized in hot SDS sample buffer . Proteins were separated by SDS - PAGE using 9 – 19 % gradient gels ( 49 ) and then electroblotted onto Protran nitrocellulose transfer membrane ( Schleicher & Schu¨ll , Dassel , Germa - ny ) . Horseradish - conjugated secondary antibodies were visualized us - ing the chemiluminescence reagent detection system from PerkinElmer Life Sciences ( Zaventem , Belgium ) . In case of reprobing the membrane with different primary antibodies , the membranes were stripped for 30 min at 50 °C in a buffer containing 62 . 5 m M Tris - HCl , 100 m M (cid:2) - mer - captoethanol , 2 % SDS , pH 6 . 7 . Immunofluorescence Microscopy— For immunofluorescence cells were grown and transfected on glass cover slips which were placed in 24 - well plates . For some experiments cells transfected with clathrin or (cid:1) - adaptin siRNA were trypsin - digested after 24 h and mixed with approximately the same number of control cells and then replated on glass cover slips . This allowed viewing and photographing control and knockdown cells next to each other within the same field . 48 h after Gene Silencing of Endocytic Proteins 45161 a t M a x P l a n c k I n s t . B i ophy s i k a li s c h e C h e m i e , O tt o H a hn B i b l , P f . 2841 , 37018 G o e tti ng e n on O c t ob e r 26 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m transfection they were fixed for 10 min at room temperature in 4 % formaldehyde solution prepared by dissolving paraformaldehyde in 2 . 7 m M KCl , 1 . 9 m M KH 2 PO 4 , 8 . 2 m M Na 2 PO 4 , 137 m M NaCl , pH 7 . 4 ( PBS ) . The fixative was either used freshly or stored in aliquots at (cid:3) 20 °C . After fixation the cells were washed three times with 20 m M Tris - HCl , 140 m M NaCl , pH 7 . 6 ( TBS ) and then permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in TBS for 5 min . After permeabilization the cells were washed in PBS and then incubated with the primary antibody fo r 1 h at 37°C . Primary antibodies were diluted with PBS containing 3 % BSA . The cover slips were thoroughly washed between the incubations with pri - mary and secondary antibodies . The secondary antibody was also di - luted with 3 % BSA in PBS and the incubation time wa s 1 h at 37°C . Nuclei were stained with Hoechst 33342 ( Molecular Probes ) ( 1 (cid:3) M in 3 % BSA / PBS ) for 10 min on ice . Finally the cells were embedded in Prolong Antifade ( Molecular Probes ) . Labeled cells were viewed with a Nikon Eclipse E800 microscope equipped with Epi - fluorescence attachment ( Nikon , Tokyo , Japan ) . Images were recorded with a CCD camera ( Princeton Instruments , Trenton , NJ ) using IPLab software ( Scanalyt - ics , Inc . , Fairfax , VA ) . Final figures were arranged with Adobe Photo - shop version 5 . 0 and Illustrator Version 8 . 0 ( Adobe , San Jose , CA ) . EGF and Transferrin Uptake Assays— 48 h after transfection the cells were serum starved for 30 min with medium containing 0 . 1 % BSA at 37 °C . For immunofluorescence studies 20 (cid:3) l of Texas Red - labeled EGF ( 10 ng / ml in culture medium supplemented with 0 . 1 % BSA ) or 20 (cid:3) l of Texas Red - labeled transferrin ( 5 (cid:3) g / ml in culture medium supple - mented with 0 . 1 % BSA ) , respectively , were applied to cells grown on glass coverslips and incubated fo r 1 h onice . For quantitative uptake assays , 120 (cid:3) l of 125 I - labeled EGF ( 10 ng / ml ) or biotin - labeled trans - ferrin ( 250 ng / ml ) , respectively , were used per well of a 24 - well plate that contained (cid:4) 10 5 cells . Unbound ligand was removed by quick washes with prewarmed serum free medium , and bound ligand was allowed to be internalized upon incubation in 0 . 1 % BSA - containing medium for varies lengths of time at 37 °C . For immunofluorescence studies the cells were processed as described above . For quantitative uptake experiments unbound ligand ( 125 I - labeled EGF or biotin - labeled transferrin ) was removed by a 2 . 5 - min incubation in 0 . 5 M NaCl , 0 . 2 M sodium acetate buffer , pH 4 . 5 , followed by a wash cycle with the same solution ( 50 ) . Cells incubated with radioactively labeled EGF were then lysed in hot 0 . 1 M Tris - HCl , pH 8 , supplemented with 1 % SDS and counted in a (cid:5) - counter ( Berthold BF 2111 , Wildbad , Germany ) . Inter - nalized biotinylated transferrin was quantitated by Western blotting using NeutrAvidin conjugated to horseradish peroxidase . Signals were detected by chemiluminescence . Cell Fractionation— siRNA transfected HeLa cells were grown in 2 - ml dishes ( Nunc ) for 48 h and then washed first with PBS and then with ice - cold lyses buffer ( 100 m M sodium phosphate , 50 m M NaCl , 1 m M MgCl 2 , 1 m M EGTA , pH 7 . 4 ) containing Complete Mini - protease inhib - itor mixture ( Roche , Grenzach , Germany ) . The cells were freeze - thawed twice in 0 . 3 ml of lyses buffer and collected by scraping . The suspension was centrifuged for 45 min at 90 , 000 (cid:2) g in a Beckman Optima TL bench top ultracentrifuge ( Beckman Coulter Inc . , Fullerton , CA ) at 4 °C . Both supernatant and pellet fractions were denatured in SDS - sample buffer and subjected to SDS - PAGE and Western blotting . Electron Microscopy— siRNA transfected and control cells grown in 24 - well plates were washed twice with PBS and then fixed for 30 min with 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1 M cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 3 . Subse - quently the cells were washed for 10 min with 0 . 5 ml of cacodylate buffer , incubated fo r 1 h in asolution containing 1 % osmium tetroxide , and then dehydrated in an ascending series of 25 , 50 , 75 , and 100 % ethanol . The cells were detached from the surface of the well with propylenoxide , transferred to a reaction tube , pelleted , supplemented with a 1 : 1 mixture of Epon and propylenoxide , and incubated for 30 min at 40 °C . Next they were transferred into a solution of 25 % propylenox - ide and 75 % Epon and incubated for 90 min at 40 °C . This was followed by an incubation for 45 min at 40 °C in pure Epon . The Epon was once more replaced and then allowed to polymerize for 20 h at 40 °C and followed by 40 h at 60 °C . 50 – 70 - nm sections were cut using an Ultro - tom III Ultramicrotom ( LKB , Bromma , Sweden ) . Sections were placed on copper grids and contrasted with lead citrate and 10 % uranyl ace - tate . The sections were viewed with a Zeiss EM902 electron microscope ( Zeiss , Oberkochen , Germany ) . RESULTS Effect of Clathrin Heavy Chain Depletion on Associated Pro - teins— To inhibit the expression of the clathrin heavy chain , we selected an siRNA duplex that targeted the segment 3311 – 3333 of the heavy chain open reading frame . Control cells were transfected with a control siRNA ( luciferase ) or with the trans - fection reagent alone , because the presence of the luciferase siRNA did not affect the cells . To quantitate the reduction in clathrin heavy chain expression the transfected cells were ly - sed in SDS - sample buffer and analyzed by immunoblotting with antibodies directed against the clathrin heavy chain , clathrin light chain and actin as a control , respectively ( Fig . 1 A ) . This analysis was performed with aliquots taken before the transfection ( day 0 ) and then daily until day 4 . On the second day after transfection both , the signals from the clath - rin heavy and light chains were strongly reduced , whereas the actin signals had changed only slightly . Quantification of the data by densitometry and normalization relative to the actin signals showed that the cellular concentration of the clathrin heavy chain had dropped to 16 % on day 2 compared with control cells ( Fig . 1 B ) . The lowest level of about 5 % was reached on day 3 . Day 4 showed a slight recovery of the heavy chain signal , which is probably due to the growth of poorly or non - transfected cells . The decrease in cellular heavy chain concen - tration is mirrored by that of the light chains as shown with a polyclonal antiserum which recognizes preferentially the F IG . 1 . Clathrin HC depletion in HeLa cells by transfection with siRNA . A , Western blot analysis of lysates from clathrin siRNA - transfected and mock - transfected cells stained for clathrin heavy chain , light chain , and actin . Lysates were prepared 48 h after transfection . B , time course of the heavy chain knockdown . Band intensities of clathrin heavy and light chain were quantified by densitometry and divided by the actin signal to account for differences in sample loadings . Mock - transfected cells were set as 100 % . The data show that the clathrin heavy chain is effectively depleted already 48 h post - transfection . Note that the reduction of the heavy chain is paralleled by the disappearance of the clathrin light chain . The data are averages of two independent experiments . C , Western blot analysis of lysates from clathrin siRNA - transfected and mock - transfected NIH 3T3 mouse fibroblasts cells stained for clathrin heavy chain and actin . Note that the human - specific RNA duplex had no effect on the expression of mouse clathrin heavy chain . Gene Silencing of Endocytic Proteins 45162 a t M a x P l a n c k I n s t . B i ophy s i k a li s c h e C h e m i e , O tt o H a hn B i b l , P f . 2841 , 37018 G o e tti ng e n on O c t ob e r 26 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m smaller of the two light chains ( Fig . 1 , A and B ) . This observa - tion suggests that light chains are not stable unless complexed with heavy chains . We also noted that the heavy chain knock - down affected the viability of cells when only 0 . 2 (cid:2) 10 5 cells / cm 2 were seeded . Usually after 4 days the majority of the cells had died . When the cell number was doubled or tripled , the cells survived , but 48 h after transfection their number still reached only 40 % of those that were transfected with luciferase siRNA . The cells did not undergo apoptosis , since neither in situ end labeling using terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase and fluorescein deoxy - UTP or staining for the presence of the caspase cleavage product of cytokeratin 18 ( 51 ) gave any indi - cation of increased apoptosis in knockdown cells ( data not shown ) . Thus , the lower cell number after inhibition of heavy chain expression is likely the result of impaired proliferation . Usually we analyzed cells seeded at high density 2 days after transfection . The time course of the reduction of the clathrin heavy chain indicates a half - life of 18 – 20 h for clathrin in transfected HeLa cells . This is in agreement with the half - life of clathrin in DT40 lymphocytes upon controlled shut down of clathrin heavy chain expression using a tetracyclin - regulatable expression system ( 52 ) . However , in another report a half - life of 50 h was determined for clathrin in a B cell line ( 53 ) . We do not yet understand the reasons for this apparent discrepancy . Gene silencing by RNAi is known to be highly specific ( 54 ) . Even small changes between target and siRNA sequence render the latter ineffective . The clathrin siRNA ( HC oligo I ) that was used to silence the clathrin heavy chain gene in human HeLa cells targets a region in the human clathrin mRNA , which differs in several positions from the mouse heavy chain sequence . Therefore , mouse 3T3 fibroblasts served as an excellent control for our selected clathrin siRNA , since it failed to silence the expression of the mouse clathrin heavy chain ( Fig . 1 C ) . Immunofluorescence clearly showed that the typical dot - like staining pattern of clathrin heavy and light chains was reduced in the transfected cells as expected from the immunoblotting results ( Fig . 2 ) . For the analysis of most of our immunofluores - cence experiments clathrin siRNA - treated and control cells were trypsin - digested 24 h after transfection , then mixed and re - plated . This procedure allowed the microscopic observation of control and transfected cells within the same field . When clathrin heavy chain knockdown cells were stained with the affinity - purified polyclonal anti - light chain serum , we noted that this antibody was generally slightly more sensitive than the monoclonal antibody X22 , which is directed against the clathrin heavy chain . This is probably due to the recognition of more than one epitope and / or a better accessibility of the light chain epitopes by the polyclonal serum rather than to a heavy chain - independent association of light chains with membranes ( Fig . 2 , A and A (cid:1) ) . Despite this minor difference the anti - light chain serum served as a faithful indicator for the clathrin heavy chain knockdown in HeLa cells . Close inspection of the transfected cells revealed that after 2 days the clathrin signal was generally weak , but it did not disappear completely . Espe - cially in the perinuclear area where the density of clathrin coated structures is usually the highest , some residual staining was often still evident ( Fig . 2 , A and A (cid:1) ) . We could duplicate this result with a different RNA duplex that targeted the seg - ment 564 – 582 encoding residues of the clathrin N - terminal domain ( Fig . 2 , B and B (cid:1) ) . Next we determined whether the localization of the adaptor complexes AP - 2 and AP - 1 or other endocytic accessory proteins were affected by silencing the expression of the clathrin heavy chain gene . Antibodies to AP - 2 show a punctate staining pat - tern originating mostly from coated structures on the plasma membrane . This pattern remained unchanged after clathrin heavy chain depletion ( Fig . 2 , C and C (cid:1) ) . If at all , the intensity of the AP - 2 dots were only slightly diminished and accompa - nied by a weak diffuse cytosolic staining . In control cells the AP - 1 adaptor localizes mostly to the perinuclear area , but it is also present at peripheral vesicular structures ( 1 , 55 ) . After clathrin depletion AP - 1 - positive structures seemed to be more tightly confined to the perinuclear area ( Fig . 2 , D and D (cid:1) ) . A number of endocytic accessory proteins have been postu - lated to coordinate the assembly of clathrin - coated pits on the plasma membrane . Among those are the proteins CALM and its neuronal homolog AP180 , epsin , and Eps15 . CALM / AP180 and epsin can associate directly with clathrin and AP - 2 . Through their respective ENTH domains they can also directly interact with the rare phospholipid PIP 2 ( 8 , 56 , 57 ) . To deter - mine whether the association of accessory proteins with the plasma membrane is altered upon clathrin heavy chain knock - down , we analyzed their cellular distribution in HeLa cells . In control cells CALM colocalized perfectly with plasma mem - brane clathrin coated pits as described previously ( 20 ) ( Fig . 2 , E and E (cid:1) ) . Upon clathrin knockdown the distribution of CALM was not significantly altered ( Fig . 2 , E and E (cid:1) ) . The next pro - tein we looked at was Eps15 . Our immunofluorescence results were consistent with its association with AP - 2 . Surprisingly when the clathrin heavy chain was knocked down , the staining intensity of Eps15 increased significantly ( Fig . 2 , F and F (cid:1) ) . This could be explained either by an increased accessibility of Eps15 for the primary antibody or by an increased membrane association in the absence of clathrin . In contrast to the results obtained for Eps15 , the cellular distribution and staining in - tensity of epsin was not significantly affected by the clathrin knockdown ( Fig . 2 , G and G (cid:1) ) . In conclusion our data show that the endocytic accessory proteins CALM , epsin , and Eps15 ap - pear not to depend on clathrin for their stable association with the plasma membrane . Clathrin sorts the mannose 6 - phosphate receptor from TGN to the endosomal compartment and probably back from there to the TGN ( 58 ) . Upon clathrin depletion the receptor appeared more concentrated within the perinuclear area ( Fig . 2 , H and H (cid:1) ) . Clathrin is also present on endosomal membranes where it functions in receptor sorting ( 5 ) . The early endosomal marker EEA1 was used to test by immunofluorescence whether endo - somes were also affected by the clathrin knockdown . EEA1 - positive structures are usually dispersed throughout the cyto - plasm in control cells . However , upon silencing of clathrin expression the endosomes clustered within the perinuclear area ( Fig . 2 , I and I (cid:1) ) . A similar observation was made by Bennett et al . ( 60 ) who demonstrated that overexpression of clathrin hubs induced perinuclear aggregation of endosomes . Recently it was shown that the hepatocyte growth factor - reg - ulated tyrosine kinase substrate ( Hrs ) recruits clathrin to early endosomes ( 61 ) . Its cellular distribution overlaps with that of EEA1 in baby hamster kidney cells ( 62 ) . We made similar observations in HeLa cells . Interestingly , after clathrin knock - down Hrs was also found on large perinuclear structures ( Fig . 2 , J and J (cid:1) ) that contained EEA1 ( Fig . 2 , K and K (cid:1) ) . Biochemical Analysis of Clathrin Knockdown Cells— To quantitatively examine the effect of clathrin heavy chain de - pletion on the membrane association of residual clathrin , adap - tors , and endocytic accessory proteins , homogenates from con - trol and clathrin knockdown cells were prepared and fractionated by ultracentrifugation into a membrane and cyto - solic pool . We employed a homogenization buffer that ensured the stability of the coat of coated vesicles ( Fig . 3 A ) , but unlike coated vesicle isolation buffer ( 63 ) , it also prevented spontane - ous self - assembly of cytosolic coat components ( data not Gene Silencing of Endocytic Proteins 45163 a t M a x P l a n c k I n s t . B i ophy s i k a li s c h e C h e m i e , O tt o H a hn B i b l , P f . 2841 , 37018 G o e tti ng e n on O c t ob e r 26 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m F IG . 2 . Effect of clathrin HC depletion on clathrin - associated proteins and cargo . 24 h after transfection HeLa cells treated with clathrin HC - specific siRNAs and mock - transfected cells were trypsinized , mixed , and grown for another 24 h on coverslips . This made it possible to view knockdown and control cells within the same field . The cultures were double stained for : clathrin HC with X22 and light chains ( LC ) with R461 after transfection with HC - oligo I ( A and A (cid:1) ) ( the arrows point at cells with strongly reduced clathrin staining ) , clathrin HC with X22 and LC with R461 after transfection with HC oligo II ( B and B (cid:1) ) , clathrin LC and the (cid:1) - adaptin subunit of AP - 2 with AP . 6 ( C and C (cid:1) ) , LC and the (cid:5) - adaptin subunit of AP - 1 with 20D6 ( D and D (cid:1) ) , HC and CALM ( E and E (cid:1) ) , HC and Eps15 ( F and F (cid:1) ) , HC and epsin ( G and G (cid:1) ) , HC and mannose 6 - phosphate receptor ( m6p ) ( H and H (cid:1) ) , HC and EEA1 ( I and I (cid:1) ) , HC and Hrs ( J and J (cid:1) ) , Hrs and EEA1 ( K and K (cid:1) ) ( the arrows point at cells that are likely to be depleted in clathrin ) . Cells in C to K were transfected with HC oligo I . The bar corresponds to 10 (cid:3) m . Gene Silencing of Endocytic Proteins 45164 a t M a x P l a n c k I n s t . B i ophy s i k a li s c h e C h e m i e , O tt o H a hn B i b l , P f . 2841 , 37018 G o e tti ng e n on O c t ob e r 26 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m shown ) . The analysis of both pools by SDS - PAGE and Western blotting showed that the membrane association of residual clathrin was increased from 49 to 80 % ( Fig . 3 , B and C ) . Likewise the membrane - bound form of the Golgi - adaptor AP - 1 was slightly increased after clathrin knockdown . In contrast the membrane - bound fraction of AP - 2 , Eps15 , and CALM , re - spectively , was slightly reduced , whereas that of epsin and dynamin remained unchanged ( Fig . 3 B ) . We did not observe any significant increases or decreases of the total cellular con - centration of any of the aforementioned adaptor or accessory proteins upon depletion of the clathrin heavy chain expression . This was also true for dynamin , which is inconsistent with the recent report ( 64 ) of a 10 - fold increase in dynamin levels upon a 10 % reduction of clathrin expression by antisense RNA ( Fig . 3 C ) . Ultrastructural Analysis of Clathrin Knockdown Cells— Ul - trathin sections of control and clathrin knockdown cells , fixed 48 h after transfection , were viewed by electron microscopy . We generally noticed a reduction in peripheral clathrin - coated membranes profiles by at least 60 % . The data were obtained from three independent experiments and based on the analysis of at least 10 complete cell profiles taken from each experiment . It was also observed that the ratio of shallow coated pits ( de - fined by a greater width than depth ) to deep invaginated ones changed from 0 . 6 in controls to 2 . 3 in clathrin knockdown cells . This suggests that bud formation might be impaired upon clathrin depletion ( Fig . 4 ) . The frequent occurrence of adjacent shallow coated dimples in knockdown cells might be a related phenomenon ( Fig . 4 ) . Effects of (cid:1) - Adaptin Depletion on Clathrin and Endocytic Accessory Proteins— The AP - 2 adaptor is considered to be a major organizer of clathrin coats on the plasma membrane where it interacts with cargo , lipid , accessory proteins , and clathrin . However , endocytic accessory proteins such as AP180 / CALM are also capable of recruiting clathrin to liposomes and lipid monolayers ( 8 ) . It was therefore of interest to knockdown the (cid:1) - adaptin subunit of AP - 2 . The target of the siRNA was the cDNA segment 1053 – 1075 , which corresponds to codons 351 – 356 of human (cid:1) c - adaptin . The (cid:1) - adaptin - specific siRNA effi - ciently reduced the expression of (cid:1) - adaptin by about 95 % within 24 h ( Fig . 5 , A and B ) . This result suggested that the (cid:1) - adaptin has a very high turnover rate . After 48 h depletion of (cid:1) - adaptin resulted in a 40 % decrease in cell numbers compared with the observed 60 % decrease upon clathrin depletion indi - cating that HeLa cells adjust better to the loss of (cid:1) - adaptin than to that of the clathrin heavy chain . The knockdown of the (cid:1) - adaptin subunit of AP - 2 affected also the stability of the (cid:3) 2 - and the (cid:2) - type subunits ( Fig . 5 A ) . (cid:3) 2 was reduced to about 30 % and the (cid:2) - type subunits to (cid:4) 80 % . The difference in the extend of the reduction between the (cid:2) - type subunits and (cid:3) 2 is readily explained by the fact that the monoclonal antibody 100 / 1 used for Western blotting recognizes both the (cid:2) 2 subunit , which is part of AP - 2 , and the highly related (cid:2) 1 , which is a component of the AP - 1 adaptor complex ( 47 ) . Only the (cid:2) 2 subunit is expected to become instable in the absence of the (cid:1) subunit . Inhibition of (cid:1) - adaptin expression was also seen in mouse fibroblasts with (cid:1) - oligo I siRNA ( Fig . 5 C ) . This was expected , since (cid:1) - oligo I targets a region that is conserved between mouse and man . Immunofluorescence analysis performed after 24 h showed that the (cid:1) - adaptin signal was strongly reduced in transfected cells . This was paralleled by a strong reduction of the periph - eral clathrin light chain signal ( Fig . 6 , A and A (cid:1) ) . A second siRNA duplex targetting the nucleotide sequence 1498 – 1518 ( codons 460 – 466 ) had similar effects on the expression of (cid:1) - adaptin ( inset to Fig . 6 A ) . By electron microscopy we could confirm an almost complete absence of peripheral clathrin - coated membrane profiles ( data not shown ) . These results sug - gest that the AP - 2 adaptor is essential for the stable recruit - ment of clathrin to the plasma membrane . It was also of interest to examine the effect of (cid:1) - adaptin depletion on Eps15 , because in previous reports it was suggested that Eps15 is constitutively associated with AP - 2 and required for the re - cruitment of AP - 2 to the plasma membrane ( 23 , 65 ) . By immu - F IG . 3 . Effect of clathrin depletion on the membrane associa - tion of coat proteins . A , stability of coated vesicles in lyses buffer . Clathrin - coated vesicles were incubated for 15 min on ice with lyses buffer and pelleted afterward by ultracentrifugation . Supernatant ( S ) and pellet ( P ) were analyzed by SDS - PAGE . Note that lyses buffer does not solubilize the coat proteins from the membrane . B , membrane association of coat proteins and endocytic accessory proteins upon clath - rin depletion . Cells were scraped off the surface from the tissue culture plates in lyses buffer and fractionated by ultracentrifugation into mem - brane and cytosol fraction . Both were analyzed by Western blotting . C , effect of clathrin depletion on cellular dynamin concentration . The error bars show the deviation within data from three independent samples that were analyzed in duplicates by Western blotting . F IG . 4 . Electron micrograph of shallow clathrin - coated after clathrin depletion . These structures were frequently seen 48 h after transfection with clathrin siRNA but rarely in control cells . Bar : 100 nm . Gene Silencing of Endocytic Proteins 45165 a t M a x P l a n c k I n s t . B i ophy s i k a li s c h e C h e m i e , O tt o H a hn B i b l , P f . 2841 , 37018 G o e tti ng e n on O c t ob e r 26 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m nofluorescence we noted in (cid:1) - adaptin siRNA - treated cells that the association of Eps15 with the plasma membrane appeared to be significantly reduced but less than that of (cid:1) - adaptin ( Fig . 6 , B and B (cid:1) ) . The intensities of CALM ( Fig . 6 , C and C (cid:1) ) and epsin ( Fig . 6 , D and D (cid:1) ) were slightly reduced in the (cid:1) - adaptin knockdown cells . Cell fractionation showed that the (cid:1) - adaptin depletion decreased the amount of membrane - associated clath - rin by about 30 % , that of Eps15 by 77 % , and that of CALM by 46 % ( Fig . 7 ) . The membrane - associated fraction of residual (cid:1) - adaptin increased by about 24 % whereas that of epsin re - mained unchanged ( Fig . 7 ) . Taken together , our results show that for the organization of clathrin in coated plasma membrane patches the (cid:1) - adaptin subunit of AP - 2 is of major importance . Moreover it also stabi - lizes the plasma membrane association of Eps15 . Differential Effects of Clathrin and (cid:1) - Adaptin Knockdowns on Receptor - mediated Endocytosis and Receptor Sorting— The effects of clathrin and (cid:1) - adaptin knockdowns on the endocyto - sis of transferrin and EGF were investigated by immunofluo - rescence and quantitative uptake assays . The clathrin knock - down strongly inhibited the uptake of fluorescently labeled transferrin ( Fig . 8 A ) . Similarly , treating cells with (cid:1) - adaptin siRNA efficiently reduced the uptake of transferrin ( Fig . 8 , C and C (cid:1) ) . These results were confirmed by quantitative uptake assays utilizing biotinylated transferrin ( Fig . 9 , A and B ) . Somewhat different and more complex results were obtained for the uptake of fluorescently labeled EGF . In control cells EGF accumulates within 10 min in EEA1 and Hrs - positive structures that probably correspond to multivesicular endo - somes ( 3 ) . Upon knocking down clathrin the staining pattern of EGF was different . Instead of concentrating in endosomal structures the EGF was present in numerous small vesicular structures of low fluorescent intensity ( Fig . 8 , B and B (cid:1) and inset ) . To confirm that EGF was actually taken up by the cells , we analyzed the uptake of iodinated EGF in control and in clathrin siRNA - treated cells . We observed only minor differ - ences in the uptake rate ( Fig . 9 C ) . When we analyzed the internalization of fluorescently la - beled EGF upon (cid:1) - adaptin depletion , we detected no significant difference to control cells . This suggests that a functional AP - 2 adaptor is not required for the internalization of EGF ( Fig . 8 , D and D (cid:1) ) . Since AP - 2 expression is already strongly inhibited after 24 h , we also checked the uptake of EGF on day 1 after transfection and observed no significant inhibition ( Fig . 8 , E and E (cid:1) ) . This observation suggests that the lack of inhibition is not due to a slow up - regulation of an alternative uptake mech - anism for EGF . F IG . 6 . The effect of (cid:1) - adaptin depletion on clathrin and the accessory proteins CALM , Eps15 , and epsin . HeLa cells trans - fected with (cid:1) - adaptin siRNA oligo I were mixed with control cells 24 h after transfection and cocultivated for another 24 h . The cells were then double stained for (cid:1) - adaptin ( A – D ) and LC ( A (cid:1) ) , Eps15 ( B (cid:1) ) , CALM ( C (cid:1) ) , and epsin ( D (cid:1) ) . Note that the plasma membrane association of clathrin LC and Eps15 were strongly reduced . A subtle effect on CALM was also observed . Inset in A , transfection with (cid:1) - adaptin - specific siRNA oligo II . The bar corresponds to 10 (cid:3) m . F IG . 5 . siRNA - induced (cid:1) - adaptin depletion in HeLa cells . A , Western blot of lysates from knockdown - trans - fected and mock - transfected cells stained for (cid:1) - adaptin and actin 48 h after trans - fection . B , normalized time course of the depletion . Note that in contrast to clath - rin ( Fig . 1 ) (cid:1) - adaptin is almost completely eliminated from the transfected cells within 24 h . C , Western blot analysis of lysates from (cid:1) - adaptin siRNA - transfected and mock - transfected NIH 3T3 mouse fi - broblasts cells stained for (cid:1) - adaptin and actin . Note that (cid:1) - oligo I reduced also the expression of mouse (cid:1) - adaptin . Gene Silencing of Endocytic Proteins 45166 a t M a x P l a n c k I n s t . B i ophy s i k a li s c h e C h e m i e , O tt o H a hn B i b l , P f . 2841 , 37018 G o e tti ng e n on O c t ob e r 26 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Taken together our data show that clathrin and AP - 2 are absolutely required for efficient transferrin uptake . In the case of EGF , clathrin seems not essential for the uptake but seems to be required for accumulation of internalized EGF in mul - tivesicular endosomes . This might explain why the knockdown of (cid:1) - adaptin , which functions mainly in initial steps in endo - cytosis , had little effect on EGF uptake . DISCUSSION To analyze the contributions of individual endocytic proteins to the formation of clathrin - coated vesicles , we used RNAi to deplete the clathrin heavy chain and the (cid:1) subunit of the AP - 2 adaptor in HeLa cells . As judged by semiquantitative Western blotting , transfection with heavy chain - specific siRNA reduced the cellular clathrin concentration to less than ten percent within 3 days . The estimated half - life of clathrin in transfected HeLa cells corresponded to only 18 – 20 h . This is consistent with the half - life of clathrin in DT40 lymphocytes where the heavy chain gene was replaced by a clathrin cDNA under the control of a tetracycline - regulatable promoter ( 52 ) . In contrast , a half - life of (cid:4) 50 h for the clathrin heavy chain was determined by pulse - chase experiments in the mouse B cell lymphoma line ( 53 ) . At this point we do not know whether a sudden interfer - ence with clathrin expression might indirectly shorten its life span or whether the half - life of clathrin is a function of cell type and / or species . Concomitantly with the depletion of the heavy chain we noted a reduction in cellular light chain concentra - tion , indicating that free light chains are not stable in cytosol . Clathrin depletion had , however , little effect on the intracellu - lar concentrations of adaptors , epsin , Eps15 , and CALM . Very recently it was reported that upon expression of clathrin anti - sense RNA in baby hamster kidney cells the steady - state level of dynamin increased 10 - fold within 2 days of antisense RNA induction ( 64 ) . Parallel to this increase in the level of dynamin an accumulation of clathrin - coated pits on the plasma mem - brane and on endosomes was noted . Most strikingly , however , was the observation that many of the coated pits were con - nected to the plasma membrane by long dynamin - wrapped tubules . Moreover , a very early inhibition of transferrin uptake took already effect when the clathrin concentration was re - duced by only 10 % ( 64 ) . Although we also noted a clathrin RNAi - induced relative increase in shallow coated pits at the expense of deeply invaginated and / or coated vesicles , long dy - namin - wrapped tubules were never observed , even when serial sections were examined ( data not shown ) . We also did not detect an increase in the level of dynamin upon clathrin deple - tion ( Fig . 3 C ) . These apparent discrepancies between our ob - servations and that of Iversen et al . ( 64 ) might be explained by different experimental approaches and / or the use of different cell lines . The accumulation of shallow pits after clathrin depletion in HeLa is consistent with recent observation in living cells . FRAP ( fluorescence recovery after photo bleaching ) measure - ments indicated that clathrin triskelia rapidly exchange be - tween the cytosolic pool and membrane - associated lattices ( 66 ) . It was suggested that this exchange might underlie the re - organization of the clathrin lattice during the budding process ( 66 ) . In this scenario a limiting supply of cytosolic clathrin protomers might then be expected to slow this exchange , re - sulting in an accumulation of shallow coated pits . This inter - pretation is also supported by the results of our cell fraction - ation studies , which indicated that the residual clathrin of knockdown cells was preferentially membrane - associated . This observation could also explain a discrepancy that was noted when the effects of the clathrin knockdown were analyzed by semiquantitative Western blotting and by ultrastructural anal - ysis . Whereas 2 days after transfection the former indicated a depletion of the clathrin heavy chain by (cid:4) 80 % , coated mem - branes appeared to be reduced by only 60 % . Depletion of clathrin had only a small effect on the mem - brane association of AP - 1 , AP - 2 , and CALM and not a signifi - cant one on epsin and dynamin . Only the fluorescence signal of Eps15 appeared consistently stronger in clathrin - depleted cells . However , we do not think that this reflects an increase in the membrane association of Eps15 when clathrin is depleted , because Western blots of the membrane fraction did not sug - gest a shift from the cytosolic pool of Eps15 to the membrane fraction . More likely is an increased accessibility of Eps15 for antibodies when clathrin is not present . Despite the induced strong reduction of the clathrin level , all endocytic proteins that were investigated here retained their punctate staining pattern , which suggests that they are still concentrated on the membrane in patches . Similar observations were made previ - ously with the adaptors AP - 2 and AP - 1 . Overexpression of auxilin 2 ( cyclin G - associated kinase ) caused clathrin to aggre - gate together with auxilin 2 into large perinuclear aggresomes , whereas the punctate distribution of AP - 2 remained unaltered ( 39 ) . AP - 1 staining was also not affected in these cells . Eisen - berg and co - workers ( 68 ) made similar observations when they overexpressed auxilin or AP180 . Clathrin - independent mem - brane association of adaptors was also confirmed when clathrin was repressed in DT - 40 lymphocytes ( 52 ) and in engineered BHK21 cells that expressed antisense clathrin heavy chain ( 64 ) . Clathrin depletion caused a change in the localization of EEA1 - and Hrs - positive endosomal structures to the perinu - clear area . Similarly we noted a relocation of the large mannose 6 - phosphate receptor to this region . These observations are consistent with results obtained by overexpressing clathrin fragments that lack N - terminal and distal domains in HeLa cells , which demonstrated a similar redistribution of the endo - somal compartment ( 60 ) . Depletion of (cid:1) - adaptin from HeLa cells occurred not only very efficiently but also unusually rapid . Within 24 h more than 90 % of the (cid:1) - adaptin signal was gone indicating a very high turnover rate for this protein . The knockdown had also a profound effect on the membrane association of clathrin and Eps15 . By electron microscopy we only very rarely detected peripheral clathrin coats , whereas numerous coated structures were still present in the Golgi region ( data not shown ) . This F IG . 7 . Membrane association of coat proteins upon (cid:1) - adaptin depletion . (cid:1) - Adaptin siRNA - transfected and mock - transfected cells were scraped in lyses buffer and then fractionated by ultracentrifuga - tion into a membrane and a cytosol pool . The fractions were subjected to SDS - PAGE and visualized by Western blotting using enhanced chemi - luminescence . The signals were quantitated by densitometry . Note that only the clathrin heavy chains and especially Eps15 were released to a significant extent into the cytosolic pool , whereas residual (cid:1) - adaptin in the knockdown cells was predominantly membrane - associated . Gene Silencing of Endocytic Proteins 45167 a t M a x P l a n c k I n s t . B i ophy s i k a li s c h e C h e m i e , O tt o H a hn B i b l , P f . 2841 , 37018 G o e tti ng e n on O c t ob e r 26 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m result clearly demonstrated the importance of AP - 2 for the stable membrane association of both proteins . For clathrin this was expected , but not necessarily for Eps15 . This protein was considered to be essential for the recruitment of AP - 2 to the plasma membrane , because a mutant Eps15 that lacked two of its three EH domains failed to localize to membranes and moreover prevented the membrane association of AP - 2 and clathrin ( 23 ) . In a different experimental setting , permeabi - lized HER14 fibroblasts , stably transfected with EGF receptor , F IG . 8 . Uptake of transferrin and EGF upon clathrin heavy chain and (cid:1) - adaptin depletion . 48 h post - transfection serum - starved siRNA - transfected HeLa cells were incubated with fluores - cence - labeled transferrin or EGF fo r 1 h on icefollowed by a wash and an incubation with serum free medium for 10 min at 37 °C . The cells were then fixed and stained for AP - 2 or clathrin heavy chain . A and A (cid:1) , transferrin uptake after transfection with clathrin siRNA ; B and B (cid:1) , EGF uptake after transfection with clathrin siRNA ; C and C (cid:1) , trans - ferrin uptake after transfection with (cid:1) - adaptin siRNA ; D and D (cid:1) , EGF uptake after transfection with (cid:1) - adaptin siRNA ; E and E (cid:1) , EGF uptake after transfection with (cid:1) - adaptin siRNA 24 h after transfection with (cid:1) - adaptin - specific siRNA . Note that transfection with (cid:1) - adaptin - spe - cific siRNA strongly affected the uptake of transferrin , whereas that of EGF appeared to be normal . Bar corresponds to 10 (cid:3) m . F IG . 9 . Quantitation of transferrin and EGF endocytosis upon clathrin heavy chain and (cid:1) - adaptin depletion . A , 48 h post - trans - fection clathrin siRNA - transfected and mock - transfected HeLa cells were serum - starved and then incubated with biotin - labeled transferrin for 1 h on icefollowed by an incubation at 37 °C for the indicated times . The cells were acid washed and then analyzed by Western blotting . Peroxidase - conjugated NeutrAvidin was used to quantify the uptake . The intensity is shown in arbitrary units ( a . u . ) . B , the same procedure as described in the legend to A was used for HeLa cells transfected with (cid:1) - adaptin - specific siRNA . C , serum - starved transfected and non trans - fected HeLa cells depleted of the clathrin heavy chain were incubated with 125 I - labeled EGF for 1 h on icefollowed by an incubation at 37 °C for the indicated times . The cells were then acid - washed , and the radioactivity was determined in a (cid:5) - counter . Bars are averages of three independent measurements . Note that clathrin depletion had little effect on the uptake of EGF . Gene Silencing of Endocytic Proteins 45168 a t M a x P l a n c k I n s t . B i ophy s i k a li s c h e C h e m i e , O tt o H a hn B i b l , P f . 2841 , 37018 G o e tti ng e n on O c t ob e r 26 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m were extracted with 0 . 5 M Tris and then analyzed by immuno - fluorescence for the presence of Eps15 . Whereas clathrin and AP - 2 were completely extracted by Tris , Eps15 still retained a punctate staining distribution suggesting an association with the membrane that is independent of AP - 2 and clathrin ( 69 ) . These observations strongly supported a function for Eps15 in recruiting AP - 2 to the plasma membrane . However , our results described here show that Eps15 also requires AP - 2 for its localization to the membrane and suggest that only a complex of AP - 2 and Eps15 has membrane binding competence . Once properly bound , Eps15 might resist extraction by Tris in vitro better than other coat components , but this does not necessar - ily reflect the order of recruitment to the membrane in vivo . The extent of the membrane association of the accessory protein CALM was also reduced after depletion of (cid:1) - adaptin . This effect is probably directly linked to the depletion of AP - 2 rather than that of clathrin , since depletion of clathrin did not effect membrane association of CALM significantly . In contrast epsin seemed to interact normally with the plasma membrane in the absence of AP - 2 and clathrin , possibly by virtue of its affinity for the membrane lipid PIP 2 ( 8 ) . To examine the functional consequences of the clathrin and (cid:1) - adaptin depletions , we tested the uptake of transferrin and EGF . Transferrin uptake was blocked upon clathrin and AP - 2 depletion . This result was not unexpected , since it is well established that the transferrin receptor enters cells through clathrin - coated pits ( 70 ) . In contrast EGF uptake by HeLa cells was not significantly affected by clathrin depletion as indicated by the uptake of radiolabeled EGF . However , the intracellular trafficking of EGF differed from that in control cells where we observed fluorescently labeled EGF within 10 min in large EEA1 - and Hrs - positive structures , which are likely to corre - spond to MVE . It is believed that activated signaling receptors are sorted into the membrane of the luminal vesicles for deg - radation by lysosomal enzymes . However , after clathrin deple - tion , the EGF did not accumulate in Hrs - positive structures but remained finely dispersed in small vesicular structures that are not accessible from the cell surface . In contrast (cid:1) - adaptin depletion did not prevent the accumulation of EGF in Hrs - positive organelles . Taken together , our data suggest that in HeLa cells the internalization of EGF does not depend on the clathrin , but it is essential for EGF sorting to MVE . A flat bilayered clathrin coat found on the limiting membrane of MVE has been implicated recently in the sorting of ubiquitinated receptors into the internal vesicles ( 61 ) . Thus , it is likely that clathrin depletion interferes with this process . Although a number of previous reports have stressed an involvement of AP - 2 in the uptake of EGF ( 65 , 69 , 71 – 73 ) , there are at least three reports that are consistent with our observa - tions . EGFR mutants that lack the AP - 2 binding determinant were down - regulated in B82 fibroblasts with similar kinetics as the wild type receptor ( 74 ) . Moreover , it has been shown that a dominant negative (cid:3) 2 subunit of AP - 2 impairs the uptake of transferrin but not that of EGF ( 75 ) . Very recently it was shown that overexpression of a C - terminal fragment of AP180 , which efficiently blocks transferrin uptake , did not interfere with the EGF - induced uptake of EGFR ( 76 ) . More , albeit indi - rect , evidence for an alternative entry route of EGF into HeLa cells came from observations we made with (cid:2) - methylcyclodex - trin . This reagent extracts cholesterol from membranes and is known to inhibit the budding of clathrin coated pits . This leads to an accumulation of shallow coated pits ( 77 ) . Whereas trans - ferrin was readily concentrated within these structures , we noted only rarely colocalization of EGF with these pits ( data not shown ) . What might be an alternative uptake mechanism for EGF ? There is already convincing evidence that the acti - vated EGFR induces membrane ruffles that result in the for - mation of macropinocytic structures ( 59 , 67 , 76 ) . Macropinocy - tosis involves primarily the actin - based cytoskeleton rather than the clathrin endocytosis machinery , and it is therefore unlikely to be affected by a clathrin knockdown . We therefore think that in HeLa cells EGF uptake via clathrin - coated pits plays only a very minor role but clathrin is essential for its accumulation in EEA1 - and Hrs - positive organelles . To confirm the specificity of the clathrin heavy chain siRNA , we transfected HeLa cells with a second RNA duplex ( HC oligo II ) , which targeted a different sequence within the open read - ing frame of the heavy chain gene . HC oligo II silenced the expression of the heavy chain to a similar extent . In contrast when HC oligo I was transfected into mouse fibroblasts no silencing was obtained , because the target sequence differs in three positions . Similarly , a second (cid:1) - adaptin - specific RNA duplex was effective in silencing the expression of (cid:1) - adaptin in Hela cells , and as predicted on the basis of conserved target sequences in man and mouse , the (cid:1) - oligo I silenced (cid:1) - adaptin in both species . Although clathrin depletion clearly diminished the growth rate of HeLa cells , they were nevertheless capable of adjusting to the depletion of at least 80 % of their endogenous clathrin without undergoing apoptosis . Moreover , under optimal growth conditions they readily coped with the depletion of more than 95 % of their endogeneous (cid:1) - adaptin without dying . This adaptive potential of the HeLa cells will allow a systematic dissection of the function of individual endocytic proteins by RNAi , but it will also require more sophisticated phenotype analysis such as internalization kinetics and observations of the coated pit dynamics in living cells . Acknowledgments— We thank B . Grossmann , C . Lemke , and E . Mal - lon for expert technical assistance ; A . Hundt for photographic work ; B . Hoflack , L . Traub , H . Stenmark , and M . Zerial for supplying essential reagents ; and R . Bauerfeind and A . Ungewickell for helpful comments on the manuscript . REFERENCES 1 . Brodsky , F . M . , Chen , C . Y . , Knuehl , C . , Towler , M . C . , and Wakeham , D . E . ( 2001 ) Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 17 , 517 – 568 2 . van Dam , E . M . , and Stoorvogel , W . ( 2002 ) Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 169 – 182 3 . Stahl , P . D . , and Barbieri , M . A . ( 2002 ) Science’s STKE http : / stke . sciencemag . org / cgi / content / full / OC _ sigtrans ; 2002 / 141 / pe32 4 . Katzmann , D . J . , Babst , M . , and Emr , S . D . ( 2001 ) Cell 106 , 145 – 155 5 . Stoorvogel , W . , Oorschot , V . , and Geuze , H . J . ( 1996 ) J . Cell Biol . 132 , 21 – 33 6 . Sachse , M . , Urbe , S . , Oorschot , V . , Strous , G . J . , and Klumperman , J . ( 2002 ) Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 1313 – 1328 7 . Raiborg , C . , Bache , K . G . , Mehlum , A . , Stang , E . , and Stenmark , H . ( 2001 ) EMBO J . 20 , 5008 – 5021 8 . Ford , M . G . , Pearse , B . M . , Higgins , M . K . , Vallis , Y . , Owen , D . J . , Gibson , A . , Hopkins , C . R . , Evans , P . R . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2001 ) Science 291 , 1051 – 1055 9 . Takei , K . , and Haucke , V . ( 2001 ) Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 385 – 391 10 . Stahelin , R . V . , Long , F . , Peter , B . J . , Murray , D . , De Camilli , P . , McMahon , H . T . , and Cho , W . ( 2003 ) J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 28993 – 28999 11 . Chen , H . , Fre , S . , Slepnev , V . I . , Capua , M . R . , Takei , K . , Butler , M . H . , Di Fiore , P . P . , and De Camilli , P . ( 1998 ) Nature 394 , 793 – 797 12 . Rosenthal , J . A . , Chen , H . , Slepnev , V . I . , Pellegrini , L . , Salcini , A . E . , Di Fiore , P . P . , and De Camilli , P . ( 1999 ) J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 33959 – 33965 13 . Owen , D . J . , Vallis , Y . , Noble , M . E . , Hunter , J . B . , Dafforn , T . R . , Evans , P . R . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 1999 ) Cell 97 , 805 – 815 14 . Owen , D . J . , Vallis , Y . , Pearse , B . M . , McMahon , H . T . , and Evans , P . R . ( 2000 ) EMBO J . 19 , 4216 – 4227 15 . Ahle , S . , and Ungewickell , E . ( 1986 ) EMBO J . 5 , 3143 – 3149 16 . Morgan , J . R . , Prasad , K . , Hao , W . , Augustine , G . J . , and Lafer , E . M . ( 2000 ) J . Neurosci . 20 , 8667 – 8676 17 . Drake , M . T . , Downs , M . A . , and Traub , L . M . ( 2000 ) J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 6479 – 6489 18 . Drake , M . T . , and Traub , L . M . ( 2001 ) J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 28700 – 28709 19 . Dell’Angelica , E . C . ( 2001 ) Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 315 – 318 20 . Tebar , F . , Bohlander , S . K . , andSorkin , A . ( 1999 ) Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 2687 – 2702 21 . Kalthoff , C . , Alves , J . , Urbanke , C . , Knorr , R . , and Ungewickell , E . J . ( 2001 ) J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 8209 – 8216 22 . Benmerah , A . , Begue , B . , Dautry - Varsat , A . , and Cerf - Bensussan , N . ( 1996 ) J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 12111 – 12116 23 . Benmerah , A . , Bayrou , M . , Cerf - Bensussan , N . , and Dautry - Varsat , A . ( 1999 ) J . Cell Sci . 112 , 1303 – 1311 24 . Tebar , F . , Sorkina , T . , Sorkin , A . , Ericsson , M . , and Kirchhausen , T . ( 1996 ) J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 28727 – 28730 Gene Silencing of Endocytic Proteins 45169 a t M a x P l a n c k I n s t . B i ophy s i k a li s c h e C h e m i e , O tt o H a hn B i b l , P f . 2841 , 37018 G o e tti ng e n on O c t ob e r 26 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 25 . Torrisi , M . R . , Lotti , L . V . , Belleudi , F . , Gradini , R . , Salcini , A . E . , Confalonieri , S . , Pelicci , P . G . , and Di Fiore , P . P . ( 1999 ) Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 417 – 434 26 . Bache , K . G . , Raiborg , C . , Mehlum , A . , and Stenmark , H . ( 2003 ) J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 12513 – 12521 27 . Bean , A . J . , Davanger , S . , Chou , M . F . , Gerhardt , B . , Tsujimoto , S . , and Chang , Y . ( 2000 ) J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 15271 – 15278 28 . Benmerah , A . , Lamaze , C . , Begue , B . , Schmid , S . L . , Dautry - Varsat , A . , and Cerf - Bensussan , N . ( 1998 ) J . Cell Biol . 140 , 1055 – 1062 29 . Miller , W . E . , and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 2001 ) Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 , 139 – 145 30 . Goodman , O . B . , Jr . , Krupnick , J . G . , Santini , F . , Gurevich , V . V . , Penn , R . B . , Gagnon , A . W . , Keen , J . H . , and Benovic , J . L . ( 1996 ) Nature 383 , 447 – 450 31 . Morris , S . M . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2001 ) Traffic 2 , 111 – 123 32 . Mishra , S . K . , Keyel , P . A . , Hawryluk , M . J . , Agostinelli , N . R . , Watkins , S . C . , and Traub , L . M . ( 2002 ) EMBO J . 21 , 4915 – 4926 33 . Shupliakov , O . , Low , P . , Grabs , D . , Gad , H . , Chen , H . , David , C . , Takei , K . , De Camilli , P . , and Brodin , L . ( 1997 ) Science 276 , 259 – 263 34 . Vallee , R . B . , Herskovits , J . S . , Aghajanian , J . G . , Burgess , C . C . , and Shpetner , H . S . ( 1993 ) CIBA Found Symp 176 , 185 – 193 ; 193 – 187 35 . van der Bliek , A . M . , Redelmeier , T . E . , Damke , H . , Tisdale , E . J . , Meyerowitz , E . M . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1993 ) J . Cell Biol . 122 , 553 – 563 36 . Herskovits , J . S . , Burgess , C . C . , Obar , R . A . , and Vallee , R . B . ( 1993 ) J . Cell Biol . 122 , 565 – 578 37 . Cremona , O . , Di Paolo , G . , Wenk , M . R . , Luthi , A . , Kim , W . T . , Takei , K . , Daniell , L . , Nemoto , Y . , Shears , S . B . , Flavell , R . A . , McCormick , D . A . , and De Camilli , P . ( 1999 ) Cell 99 , 179 – 188 38 . Ungewickell , E . , Ungewickell , H . , Holstein , S . E . , Lindner , R . , Prasad , K . , Barouch , W . , Martin , B . , Greene , L . E . , and Eisenberg , E . ( 1995 ) Nature 378 , 632 – 635 39 . Umeda , A . , Meyerholz , A . , and Ungewickell , E . ( 2000 ) Eur . J . Cell Biol . 79 , 336 – 342 40 . Newmyer , S . L . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2001 ) J . Cell Biol . 152 , 607 – 620 41 . Schlossman , D . M . , Schmid , S . L . , Braell , W . A . , and Rothman , J . E . ( 1984 ) J . Cell Biol . 99 , 723 – 733 42 . Greener , T . , Zhao , X . , Nojima , H . , Eisenberg , E . , and Greene , L . E . ( 2000 ) J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 1365 – 1370 43 . Qualmann , B . , and Kessels , M . M . ( 2002 ) Int . Rev . Cytol . 220 , 93 – 144 44 . Elbashir , S . M . , Harborth , J . , Lendeckel , W . , Yalcin , A . , Weber , K . , and Tuschl , T . ( 2001 ) Nature 411 , 494 – 498 45 . Chin , D . J . , Straubinger , R . M . , Acton , S . , Nathke , I . , andBrodsky , F . M . ( 1989 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 86 , 9289 – 9293 46 . Brodsky , F . M . ( 1985 ) J . Cell Biol . 101 , 2055 – 2062 47 . Ahle , S . , Mann , A . , Eichelsbacher , U . , and Ungewickell , E . ( 1988 ) EMBO J . 7 , 919 – 929 48 . Harborth , J . , Elbashir , S . M . , Bechert , K . , Tuschl , T . , and Weber , K . ( 2001 ) J . Cell Sci . 114 , 4557 – 4565 49 . Lindner , R . , and Ungewickell , E . ( 1992 ) J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 16567 – 16573 50 . Sorkin , A . , and Carpenter , G . ( 1991 ) J . Biol . Chem . 266 , 23453 – 23460 51 . Leers , M . P . , Kolgen , W . , Bjorklund , V . , Bergman , T . , Tribbick , G . , Persson , B . , Bjorklund , P . , Ramaekers , F . C . , Bjorklund , B . , Nap , M . , Jornvall , H . , and Schutte , B . ( 1999 ) J . Pathol . 187 , 567 – 572 52 . Wettey , F . R . , Hawkins , S . F . , Stewart , A . , Luzio , J . P . , Howard , J . C . , and Jackson , A . P . ( 2002 ) Science 297 , 1521 – 1525 53 . Acton , S . L . , and Brodsky , F . M . ( 1990 ) J . Cell Biol . 111 , 1419 – 1426 54 . Sharp , P . A . ( 2001 ) Genes Dev . 15 , 485 – 490 55 . Katzmann , D . J . , Odorizzi , G . , and Emr , S . D . ( 2002 ) Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 3 , 893 – 905 56 . De Camilli , P . , Chen , H . , Hyman , J . , Panepucci , E . , Bateman , A . , and Brunger , A . T . ( 2002 ) FEBS Lett . 513 , 11 – 18 57 . Itoh , T . , Koshiba , S . , Kigawa , T . , Kikuchi , A . , Yokoyama , S . , and Takenawa , T . ( 2001 ) Science 291 , 1047 – 1051 58 . Meyer , C . , Zizioli , D . , Lausmann , S . , Eskelinen , E . L . , Hamann , J . , Saftig , P . , von Figura , K . , and Schu , P . ( 2000 ) EMBO J . 19 , 2193 – 2203 59 . Lynch , D . K . , Winata , S . C . , Lyons , R . J . , Hughes , W . E . , Lehrbach , G . M . , Wasinger , V . , Corthals , G . , Cordwell , S . , and Daly , R . J . ( 2003 ) J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 21805 – 21813 60 . Bennett , E . M . , Lin , S . X . , Towler , M . C . , Maxfield , F . R . , and Brodsky , F . M . ( 2001 ) Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 2790 – 2799 61 . Raiborg , C . , Bache , K . G . , Gillooly , D . J . , Madshus , I . H . , Stang , E . , and Stenmark , H . ( 2002 ) Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 394 – 398 62 . Raiborg , C . , Bremnes , B . , Mehlum , A . , Gillooly , D . J . , D’Arrigo , A . , Stang , E . , and Stenmark , H . ( 2001 ) J . Cell Sci . 114 , 2255 – 2263 63 . Pearse , B . M . ( 1976 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 73 , 1255 – 1259 64 . Iversen , T . G . , Skretting , G . , Van Deurs , B . , and Sandvig , K . ( 2003 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 100 , 5175 – 5180 65 . Benmerah , A . , Gagnon , J . , Begue , B . , Megarbane , B . , Dautry - Varsat , A . , and Cerf - Bensussan , N . ( 1995 ) J . Cell Biol . 131 , 1831 – 1838 66 . Wu , X . , Zhao , X . , Baylor , L . , Kaushal , S . , Eisenberg , E . , and Greene , L . E . ( 2001 ) J . Cell Biol . 155 , 291 – 300 67 . Bretscher , M . S . , and Aguado - Velasco , C . ( 1998 ) Curr . Biol . 8 , 721 – 724 68 . Zhao , X . , Greener , T . , Al - Hasani , H . , Cushman , S . W . , Eisenberg , E . , and Greene , L . E . ( 2001 ) J . Cell Sci . 114 , 353 – 365 69 . van Delft , S . , Schumacher , C . , Hage , W . , Verkleij , A . J . , and van Bergen en Henegouwen , P . M . ( 1997 ) J . Cell Biol . 136 , 811 – 821 70 . Hanover , J . A . , Willingham , M . C . , and Pastan , I . ( 1984 ) Cell 39 , 283 – 293 71 . Nesterov , A . , Kurten , R . C . , and Gill , G . N . ( 1995 ) J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 6320 – 6327 72 . Sorkin , A . , McKinsey , T . , Shih , W . , Kirchhausen , T . , and Carpenter , G . ( 1995 ) J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 619 – 625 73 . Boll , W . , Gallusser , A . , and Kirchhausen , T . ( 1995 ) Curr . Biol . 5 , 1168 – 1178 74 . Nesterov , A . , Wiley , H . S . , and Gill , G . N . ( 1995 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 92 , 8719 – 8723 75 . Nesterov , A . , Carter , R . E . , Sorkina , T . , Gill , G . N . , and Sorkin , A . ( 1999 ) EMBO J . 18 , 2489 – 2499 76 . Yamazaki , T . , Zaal , K . , Hailey , D . , Presley , J . , Lippincott - Schwartz , J . , and Samelson , L . E . ( 2002 ) J . Cell Sci . 115 , 1791 – 1802 77 . Subtil , A . , Gaidarov , I . , Kobylarz , K . , Lampson , M . A . , Keen , J . H . , and McGraw , T . E . ( 1999 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 96 , 6775 – 6780 Gene Silencing of Endocytic Proteins 45170 a t M a x P l a n c k I n s t . B i ophy s i k a li s c h e C h e m i e , O tt o H a hn B i b l , P f . 2841 , 37018 G o e tti ng e n on O c t ob e r 26 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Klaus Weber and Ernst J . Ungewickell Lars Hinrichsen , Jens Harborth , Lars Andrees , Receptor Trafficking in HeLa Cells on Endocytic Accessory Proteins and - Adaptin - specific Small Inhibitory RNAs a Effect of Clathrin Heavy Chain - and and Biogenesis : Membrane Transport , Structure , Function , doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M307290200 originally published online September 6 , 2003 2003 , 278 : 45160 - 45170 . J . Biol . Chem . 10 . 1074 / jbc . M307290200 Access the most updated version of this article at doi : . JBC Affinity Sites Find articles , minireviews , Reflections and Classics on similar topics on the Alerts : When a correction for this article is posted • When this article is cited • to choose from all of JBC ' s e - mail alerts Click here http : / / www . jbc . org / content / 278 / 46 / 45160 . full . html # ref - list - 1 This article cites 76 references , 49 of which can be accessed free at a t M a x P l a n c k I n s t . B i ophy s i k a li s c h e C h e m i e , O tt o H a hn B i b l , P f . 2841 , 37018 G o e tti ng e n on O c t ob e r 26 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m