Annals of Oncology 14 : 1346 – 1363 , 2003 Review DOI : 10 . 1093 / annonc / mdg365 © 2003 European Society for Medical Oncology Novel therapeutic strategies targeting the epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) family and its downstream effectors in breast cancer G . Atalay , F . Cardoso , A . Awada & M . J . Piccart * * Correspondence to : Dr M . J . Piccart , Jules Bordet Institute , Boulevard de Waterloo , 125 , 1000 Brussels , Belgium . Tel : + 32 - 2 - 541 - 32 - 06 ; Fax : + 32 - 2 - 538 - 08 - 58 ; E - mail : martine . piccart @ bordet . be Jules Bordet Institute , Department of Medical Oncology , Brussels , Belgium Received 11 November 2002 ; revised 27 February 2003 ; accepted 22 April 2003 From the early experience with tamoxifen to the current use of Herceptin ® , targeted therapy has been proven to be an important part of breast cancer ( BC ) treatment . In the last decade , advances in molecular biology have allowed scientists to design highly individualized , ‘smart’ pharmaceuticals , capable of manipulating the growth factor pathways and the genes that are involved in the development and maintenance of the malignant pheno - type . The epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) family , as one of the best studied growth factor pathways in cancer , resembles a ‘treasure island’ by providing a wide range of biologically relevant targets involved in breast carcinogenesis . While a large number of new agents targeting this pathway are continuingly being tested in preclinical experiments , clinicians are witnessing the migration of some of these agents to daily practice . The aim of this review is to provide clinicians with an updated synopsis of the most advanced anti - erbB therapeutic strategies with activity against BC . Key words : Akt , breast cancer , EGFR ( ErbB ) family , HER - 2 , MAPK Targeted therapy for breast cancer : history and challenges Our standards of care in medical oncology are largely based on empirical observations . More recently , advances in molecular biology have led to the identification of specific targets involved in fundamental steps of carcinogenesis . New biological targets have been extensively investigated as potential prognostic and / or predictive factors and a broad spectrum of promising biological agents are designed to block their critical function in development and maintenance of the malignant phenotype . There are already a few examples showing that , when a biologically relevant target is inhibited in some way , the patients whose tumors express that specific target can enjoy significant clinical benefit . This progress will undoubtedly represent a revolution in cancer therapy by lead - ing to a shift in our clinical practice from non - specific use of anti - neoplastic agents to the use of specific , targeted ones . However , despite the enthusiasm generated in recent years , this is not a new concept in medical history , since ‘targeted therapy’ has long been known in breast cancer ( BC ) management , since the approval of anti - estrogen tamoxifen for the treatment of metastatic breast cancer ( MBC ) in the 1970s . Targeted biological therapies have the advantage of maximiz - ing efficacy while often reducing toxicity when compared with classical chemotherapeutic agents . Clinical development of these agents requires different methodological procedures , mainly due to their different mechanism ( s ) of action . For example , they usu - ally exert their desired effects at doses lower than their maximum tolerated dose , therefore the concept of ‘optimal biological dose’ is preferred to define their recommended clinical doses . In addi - tion , verification of their biological effect at the target through appropriately selected surrogate pharmacodynamic markers con - stitutes an essential part of the trials investigating these agents . Biological agents target specific molecules , the expression or presence of which have to be determined in order to identify the specific patient group that is most likely to benefit from this therapy . One example is the determination of HER - 2 status for trastuzumab ( Herceptin ® ) therapy . Unfortunately , most of the tests developed for this purpose still need to be validated . This valid - ation procedure might be time consuming , as exemplified by the measurement of estrogen and progesterone receptor , our tradi - tional and best known predictive factors available for more than 30 years . Recent reports indicate that major inter - laboratory dis - crepancies still exist in measurement of hormone receptors in breast tumors [ 1 ] . The scenario regarding HER - 2 is even more worrisome , since the benefit of trastuzumab has been proven to be limited to patients with HER - 2 overexpressing / amplified tumors and treatment with this agent is associated with a non - negligible risk of cardiotoxicity . Poor inter - and even intra - laboratory con - cordance in HER - 2 testing by immunohistochemistry ( IHC ) has long been reported . However , recent reports suggest that even fluorescence in situ hybridization is not 100 % reliable [ 2 ] . This issue is of particular importance due to currently ongoing trials of trastuzumab in the adjuvant setting . Finally , it would be unreal - istic to think that one could inhibit the contribution of a specific 1347 metabolic pathway to the carcinogenesis process by blocking one single critical molecule in the biological network , unless that molecule represents the sole mechanism for the development of a particular cancer , as in the example of STI - 571 ( Gleevec ® ) for chronic myeloid leukemia . The genomic instability of the tumor and the complex interplay between different signal transduction pathways ( STPs ) always provide several alternative ‘escape routes’ whenever the tumor’s survival is compromised . Therefore , we might need to evaluate the activity of several tightly intercon - nected biological pathways simultaneously in order to predict the desired effect of a biological agent . The recent literature investi - gating the role of phosphorylated forms of cell surface receptors and their downstream effectors provides valuable insights into our understanding of possible resistance mechanisms to targeted agents and suggests that it might also be important to analyze whether these receptors are in an activated state or not , in addition to checking their presence in the cell membrane [ 3 ] . A large body of biological agents targeting key molecules in the tumor cell machinery , interfering with metabolic pathways involved in cellular proliferation , angiogenesis , cell cycle regula - tion , apoptosis , etc . , are in different phases of development . This review will focus mainly on the new agents targeting the members and downstream effectors of the epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) signaling pathway . Materials and methods A systematic literature search was performed to review the published clinical trials , reviews and abstracts focusing on the role of the EGFR signaling path - way in BC and the novel therapeutic strategies that target it . Three major sources were used : ( i ) the Medline search tool applying the words ‘breast cancer’ and the terms ‘EGFR’ , ‘Her - 2’ , ‘Akt’ , ‘MAPK’ ; ( ii ) a manual search of the proceedings books of the major international oncology meetings , includ - ing the American Society of Clinical Oncology ( ASCO ) , American Association for Cancer Research ( AACR ) , European Society of Medical Oncology ( ESMO ) , European Cancer Conference ( ECCO ) , San Antonio Breast Cancer Meeting ( SABCM ) and EORTC – NCI – AACR Molecular Targets and Cancer Thera - peutics Symposium ; and ( iii ) the reference lists of existing reviews and clinical studies . Part I : the EGFR signaling pathway and its downstream effectors as promising targets I - A . The EGFR signaling network It is crucial to know each step in the complicated EGFR subway network in order to better understand both how this signaling net - work contributes to breast carcinogenesis and how the biological agents targeting this pathway function . The EGFR family of receptors consists of four closely related members : EGFR / ErbB1 , HER - 2 / ErbB2 , HER - 3 / ErbB3 and HER - 4 / ErbB4 [ 4 ] . All recep - tors have an extracellular domain ( ECD ) responsible for ligand binding , a helical transmembrane segment and an intracellular protein tyrosine kinase ( TK ) domain . At present , ten ligands have been identified to bind HER - 1 , HER - 3 and HER - 4 : epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) , transforming growth factor alpha ( TGF - α ) , amphiregulin , heparin - binding epidermal growth factor ( HB - EGF ) , betacellulin , epiregulin and neuregulins 1 to 4 [ 5 ] . HER - 2 is con - sidered to be an ‘orphan’ receptor , since no specific direct ligand has been identified as yet , and increasing evidence suggests that it acts mainly as a co - receptor , increasing the affinity of ligand binding to the dimeric receptor complex . TK activity , which is required for receptor mediated cellular signaling , is present in all receptors except HER - 3 . Instead , HER - 3 has six intracellular binding sites for phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) , which is therefore a potent activator of this enzyme . The binding of ligands induces dimerization of two identical ( homodimer ) or different ( heterodimer ) receptors . The dimerization partner has an import - ant impact on the type and number of downstream effectors activated and also on the downregulation mechanism of the ligand bound receptors . Signaling through HER - 2 and - 3 requires hetero - dimerization since , as stated , HER - 2 has no known ligand and HER - 3 lacks TK activity . Importantly , HER - 2 is the preferred dimerization and signaling partner for all other HER receptors [ 6 ] . Upon dimerization , intracellular TK domains are phosphorylated , which in turn provide docking sites for several adaptor proteins and signaling enzymes . These proteins link upstream membrane receptor kinases to downstream intracellular protein kinases , which control a wide variety of cellular processes , including cel - lular proliferation , apoptosis and angiogenesis . Not surprisingly , the involvement of multiple ligands , paired combinations of four receptors and plenty of intracellular downstream effectors ( signal processing units ) result in extensive diversification of EGFR signals mediated by the EGFR family of receptors [ 7 ] . PI3K and mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) pathways are the two major downstream signaling cascades activated by the EGFR family of receptor TKs ( Figure 1 ) . The intracellular part of the receptor determines the type and intensity of the downstream signaling pathway that is activated . For example , EGFR ( ErbB - 1 ) , in contrast to other members of the HER family of receptors , induces relatively weak activation of the PI3K pathway since this receptor has no intracellular binding sites for PI3K . Molecules targeted to the downstream effectors of the EGFR family of TKs are in various stages of development [ 8 – 10 ] and will be briefly discussed in the second part of this review . ( 1 ) Ras – Raf – MAPK pathway . Ras proteins are small guanine nucleotide binding proteins serving as a key intermediary in several STPs , thereby controlling a wide variety of cellular processes including growth , differentiation , apoptosis and cytoskeletal organ - ization [ 11 ] . Ras proteins are activated in response to a wide variety of intracellular and extracellular stimuli . Activated Ras is rapidly converted to its guanosine diphosphate ( GDP ) - bound inactive state by hydrolysis of the bound guanosine triphosphate ( GTP ) by an intrinsic GTPase activity . This mechanism of inac - tivation is thought to be impaired in mutant Ras , which remains in the activated form and conveys uncontrolled proliferative signals continuously , despite the absence of stimulation . Ras proteins are mutationally activated in ∼ 30 % of human cancers , including BC [ 11 ] . Ras is synthesized as an inactive cytosolic propeptide and is localized to the inner surface of the plasma membrane only after a series of post - translational modifications , facilitating its asso - ciation with plasma membrane . Protein farneysl transferase , which 1348 catalyses the most important step in activation of Ras , represents a novel target for the development of new anticancer agents . Ras can be activated by receptor TKs ( Figure 1 ) . Tyrosine phos - phorylated receptors provide binding sites for the adaptor protein Grb2 ( growth factor receptor - bound protein 2 ) , which recruits Ras activator protein SOS ( son - of - sevenless guanine nucleotide exchange factor ) . Upon binding to Grb2 , SOS mediates the activa - tion of Ras by facilitating its switch from the inactive GDP - bound from to the GTP - bound active form . Then , GTP - bound Ras can activate several downstream effector pathways . Raf - 1 , another protein kinase , is one of these effector molecules . It phos - phorylates MEK1 ( MAPK / Erk kinase ) and MEK2 , which in turn phosphorylate the MAPKs , ERK1 and - 2 ( extracellular signal - regulated kinases ) . Once activated , Erk1 and - 2 translocate into the nucleus , where they phosphorylate a variety of substrates , including nuclear transcription factors , and ultimately lead to transcription of target genes associated with cellular proliferation . Other substrates for Ras signaling include Rac / Rho ( small GTP - binding proteins ) , PI3K and mitogen - activated protein kinase kinase ( MEKK ) . The Rac – rho pathway is involved in cytoskeletal organization , the PI3K pathway is associated with cell survival , and the MEKK and MAPK pathways mediate cellular proliferation signals . The MAPK pathway is activated preferen - tially by mitogens , growth factors and tumor promoters , and the other downstream pathways mediated by Ras signaling are stimu - lated by inflammatory cytokines , hormones and various forms of stress stimuli . MEKK is a serine threonine phosphatase , which activates another MAPK family member JNK ( Jun N - terminal kinase ) via SEK ( stress - activated protein kinase ) , and the activa - tion of this pathway is associated with apoptosis and / or prolifera - tion depending on the dynamic balance between different STPs . JNK activates nuclear transcription factor c - Jun , a major compo - nent of activator protein - 1 ( AP - 1 ) . The other component of AP - 1 , c - fos , is activated by the MAPK pathway mediated through EGFR signaling [ 12 ] . The generation of AP - 1 is thought to play an important role in the development of endocrine resistance in BC as one of the critical intersection points between estrogen recep - tor ( ER ) and EGFR signaling pathways [ 13 ] . Many STPs impinge on Ras - mediated signaling at different levels , so that the net effect of a given stimulus reflects merely the balance of crosstalk among these pathways . ( 2 ) PI3K – Akt pathway . The PI3K family of enzymes has been linked to many aspects of malignant transformation , including increased proliferation , growth , motility , invasiveness , metastases , angiogenesis and cell survival . Since the PI3K family of kinases , their targets and regulators are implemented in a wide variety of human tumors , they are considered to be potential new targets . PI3K is activated by a diverse set of stimuli including cell surface receptors ( G - protein - coupled receptors , receptors with TK activity ) , tyrosine phosphorylated proteins ( e . g . insulin - regulated Figure 1 . Downstream effectors of epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) signaling pathway . PLC γ , phospholipase C ; PKC , protein kinase C ; NF κ B , nuclear factor κ B ; PI3K , phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase ; MEK , mitogen - activated protein kinase ; MEKK , mitogen - activated protein kinase kinase ; JNK , Jun N - terminal kinase ; MAPK , mitogen - activated protein kinase ; mTOR , mammalian target of rapamycin . 1349 substrate , IRS ) and small G proteins ( e . g . Ras ) . EGFR ( ErbB - 1 ) , in contrast to other members of the HER family of receptors , induces activation of the PI3K pathway relatively weakly , since this receptor has no intracellular binding sites for PI3K . Upon acti - vation , PI3K phosphorylates the inositol ring of membrane phos - phatidylinositols ( PIP3 and PIP2 ) , which recruit several proteins to the cell membrane such as PKB ( protein kinase B , also known as Akt ) , PDK1 ( 3 - phosphoinositide - dependent protein kinase ) and PDK2 , small proteins of the Ras family , enabling these signal - ing proteins to come into close contact with their substrates [ 14 ] . PKB / Akt , a serine threonine kinase , is thought to be the major player in the PI3K pathway ; however , it can be activated by other molecules independent of the PI3K pathway , such as PKA ( pro - tein kinase A ) , the calmodulin - dependent kinase pathway , and cellular stresses like heat shock and hyperosmolarity [ 15 ] . Among three Akt proteins , Akt2 and Akt3 were shown to be activated in human BC samples [ 14 ] . The binding of PKB to phosphatidyl - inositols is followed by its phosphorylation and activation by PDKs . Once activated , Akt regulates a number of proteins involved in the regulation of the cell cycle ( cyclin D and E2F ) , apoptosis and cell survival [ p21 , p27 , nuclear factor κ B ( NF - κ B ) , Forkhead proteins , caspases and BAD ] [ 16 ] . Akt also phosphorylates a number of other proteins , the functions of which are closely related to BC , such as BRCA1 and ER [ 17 , 18 ] . It has been shown that ER - α can bind PI3K and activate PI3K / Akt pathway in an estrogen - independent manner [ 18 – 20 ] . Many other STPs converge on the PI3K pathway at the level of Akt . For example , Ras activates the PI3K pathway , while Akt also regulates the activity of the Ras – Raf – MAPK pathway through phosphorylation and inactivation of Raf [ 21 ] . PI3K signaling can be inhibited by protein phosphatases , the prototype of which is the tumor suppressor gene product PTEN ( phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10 ) [ 22 ] . Loss of PTEN activity due to either mutations or gene deletions is associated with malig - nancies such as Cowden’s syndrome . mTOR ( mammalian target of rapamycin ) kinases are among the downstream targets of Akt , and they are thought to link mitogenic stimulation to protein synthesis and cell cycle regulation [ 23 ] . The inhibition of mTOR blocks the progression of the cell cycle at the G 1 phase . Tumor cells without PTEN activity are considered to be more sensitive to mTOR inhibitors due to their increased level of Akt activity [ 24 ] . I - B . The EGFR signaling pathway in BC The EGFR family of receptors is involved in the regulation of normal breast development [ 25 , 26 ] . Preclinical data suggest that all compartments of EGFR signaling network including ligands , receptors and downstream effectors are implicated in the develop - ment and progression of BC [ 16 , 27 ] . Overexpression of HER - 2 in transgenic mouse mammary glands has been shown to promote oncogenic transformation and development of malignant pheno - type [ 28 – 31 ] . In line with this data , HER - 2 activation has been reported to increase metastatic / invasive potential and to induce progression of cell cycle by disrupting the delicate balance between cyclins and the endogenous CDK inhibitors in BC cell lines [ 32 , 33 ] . Hence , not surprisingly , HER - 2 overexpression is associated with aggressive disease biology and reduced survival in BC patients [ 34 , 35 ] . These preclinical findings are further supported clinically by the success of trastuzumab , a monoclonal antibody against HER - 2 , which led to improved survival , longer time to progression , higher response rate and longer duration of response in MBC patients with HER - 2 overexpressing tumors [ 36 ] . Numerous studies have also reported that EGFR ( HER - 1 ) over - expression is a poor prognostic factor in BC , often associated with advanced disease [ 37 – 41 ] . While HER - 2 overexpression is shown to be an early event in BC development , HER - 1 seems to be involved in later stages [ 42 ] . The expression of both receptors is inversely correlated with the ER status of the tumor and HER - 1 / 2 heterodimers have been shown to increase metastatic potential of BC cell lines [ 43 , 44 ] . Accumulating data suggest that EGFR and HER - 2 also predict for a poor response to endocrine therapy , and that the mutual interaction between ER and growth factor path - ways seems to hotwire the events inducing endocrine resistance in ER - positive breast tumors [ 45 – 52 ] . Acquisition of resistance to endocrine therapy was shown to be associated with upregulation of EGFR signaling in BC cell lines [ 53 , 54 ] . ErbB receptors enhance ER signaling either by directly activating ER or through activation of MAPK and Akt [ 55 – 57 ] . Moreover , there is pre - clinical evidence that estrogen itself suppresses the transcription and expression of ErbB receptors [ 58 ] . So far , preclinical data have shown that agents blocking HER - 1 or HER - 2 driven signaling pathways can restore hormone sensitivity in endocrine - resistant , HER - 2 overexpressing breast tumors , delay the development of endocrine resistance and enhance the antiproliferative effect of endocrine agents [ 59 – 66 ] . These effects are partly mediated by the inhibition of downstream signaling cascades involved in the development of endocrine resistance . The expression of MAPK or Akt has been reported to predict a worse clinical outcome in patients treated with endocrine therapy [ 67 , 68 ] . Both MAPK and Akt are capable of activating ER in a ligand independent manner by phosphorylating ER at Ser - 118 and - 167 , and activated MAPK can also enhance ER signaling by recruiting nuclear receptor co - activators [ 56 , 57 , 69 , 70 ] . The impact of EGFR downstream effectors on cell cycle progression may also indirectly mediate endocrine resistance . For example , Akt and MAPK phosphorylate the cell cycle inhibitor p27 , which is required for the G 1 arrest mediated by anti - estrogens [ 71 ] . In addition , phosphorylation by MAPK leads to destabilization and proteasome - mediated degrad - ation of p27 in BC cell lines , therefore disturbing its inhibitory effect on cell cycle progression [ 72 ] . Importantly , Akt - induced cytoplasmic sequestration of p27 in human BC specimens has recently been shown to be associated with reduced patient sur - vival [ 73 – 75 ] . Endogenous Akt , either constitutively activated via PTEN mutations and overexpression of ErbB receptors or induced by therapeutic agents , has been shown to promote BC cell survival [ 76 ] . Induction of Akt activity in response to commonly used thera - peutic modalities in BC is considered to be a potential mechanism of therapeutic resistance . Indeed , inhibition of Akt by a targeted agent has been shown to potentiate trastuzumab - , doxorubicin - , paclitaxel - and tamoxifen - mediated apoptosis in BC cell lines [ 76 ] . EGFR signaling also seems to be vital for the survival of ER - negative BC . Akt - 3 is overexpressed in ER - negative breast 1350 cell lines and in tissue samples taken from patients [ 77 ] . In addition , EGF - induced activation of PKC ( one of the downstream substrates of PI3K ) and NF - κ B has been shown to mediate cel - lular proliferation in ER - negative BC cells [ 78 ] . Regarding the other receptors of the EGFR family , HER - 3 , the kinase deficient member , has also been shown to be expressed in BC , while the expression of HER - 4 is uncommon in breast carcinomas compared with normal breast epithelium and is asso - ciated with favorable prognostic factors [ 79 – 81 ] . Of note , HER - 2 / HER - 3 heterodimers have the highest mitogenic potential and are constitutively activated in BC cells with HER - 2 gene amplifica - tion [ 4 , 82 ] . Consequently , all these data render the EGFR family of recep - tors , their ligands and their downstream effectors rational targets for the development of novel antitumor strategies in BC . Part II : novel strategies targeting the EGFR family and its downstream effectors I . Targeting HER - 2 signaling ( a ) Monoclonal antibodies . Herceptin ® for the treatment of BC and Gleevec ® ( imatinib mesylate , STI - 571 ) for the treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia have provided the most prominent initial proof that targeted cancer therapy can translate into improved clinical outcomes . Trastuzumab represents the only biological targeted therapy for BC in routine clinical practice today . The establishment of the unique role of HER - 2 in malignant trans - formation in preclinical models , coupled with the biological sig - nificance of HER - 2 overexpression in BC and the preclinical demonstration of the antitumor activity of monoclonal antibodies ( mAbs ) directed against HER - 2 , encouraged the development of this drug [ 83 – 85 ] . HER - 2 is overexpressed in 20 – 25 % of breast tumors and is associated with a poor prognosis [ 83 ] . Trastuzumab is a humanized antibody , composed of an antigen - binding com - ponent ( from the murine monoclonal antibody 4D5 ) combined with human immunoglobulin G , and is shown to have a single agent activity of 15 % in pre - treated patients and 26 % in previously untreated patients [ 86 , 87 ] . Anti - HER - 2 monoclonal antibodies affect tumor growth both directly by altering the receptor’s signal - ing properties and indirectly by antibody - dependent cell - mediated toxicity and complement - dependent cytotoxicity . Although tras - tuzumab’s direct inhibitory actions on breast tumor growth and proliferation are not precisely characterized , it is thought to act by : ( i ) downregulating Her - 2 / neu receptor ; ( ii ) blocking receptor dimerisation ; ( iii ) altering Her - 2 phosphorylation state and / or signaling properties ; ( iv ) altering gene expression ; ( v ) inducing apoptosis ; and ( vi ) inhibiting angiogenesis [ 88 – 90 ] . The success obtained in MBC clinical trials is only the beginning of the trastu - zumab story in BC ; the best way to measure HER - 2 , the best schedule and duration of trastuzumab therapy , the best combina - tions with other agents and the role of trastuzumab in early BC are among the key questions that remain to be answered . Interest - ingly , only ∼ 40 % of patients with HER - 2 overexpression respond to trastuzumab . Recent investigations focused on the role of the co - expression patterns of Her dimers , the proportion of activated ( phosphorylated ) receptors and the impact of several other pathways , e . g . IGF - IR ( insulin - like growth factor receptor I ) on HER - 2 - mediated signal transduction , in order to unravel the mechanisms of therapeutic resistance to trastuzumab [ 3 , 88 , 91 ] . Preclinical data , demonstrating that the HER - 2 signaling pathway is highly interactive with other biological pathways such as ER signaling , and that trastuzumab has synergic or additive activity with mul - tiple cytotoxic agents , led to a number of phase I / II trials being conducted to evaluate the efficacy of this agent in combination with endocrine agents ( e . g . tamoxifen , aromatase inhibitors ) , other biological agents ( e . g . ZD1839 , OSI 774 , celecoxib , flavo - piridol , R115777 ) , cytokines ( interleukin - 2 and - 12 ) and cytotoxic agents ( e . g . vinorelbine , carboplatin ) in MBC patients [ 92 ] . Intensive research is also ongoing in order to determine the mechanism of trastuzumab - mediated cardiotoxicity , the most rele - vant side effect of trastuzumab . A recent in vivo trial has shed some light on this issue by studying the role of ErbB2 in ErbB2 conditional mutant mice that have ventricular - restricted deletion of ErbB2 . These mice , unlike ErbB knockout mice , were viable without morphological cardiac defects at birth . They were shown to develop dilated cardiomyopathy and the cardiomyocytes iso - lated from these mice were more sensitive to anthracycline toxic - ity [ 93 ] . A few new agents designed to increase the efficacy of trastuzu - mab are currently being tested in preclinical trials . One of them , Herceptin – DM - 1 , represents a combination of trastuzumab with a highly potent microtubule toxin , mytansinoid . It has been shown that the immunoconjugate has more potent antitumor activity compared with trastuzumab alone in both HER - 2 - responsive and - resistant breast tumor models [ 94 ] . The cytotoxicity of the DM - 1 , which is released upon internalization of the conjugate , is con - fined only to HER - 2 - expressing cells [ 95 ] . Two other humanized mAbs targeting HER - 2 are being developed : 2C4 and MDX - H210 . 2C4 is directed to an epitope of ECD of HER 2 , involved in the dimerization process , and does not require high HER - 2 expression for antitumor activity . It inhibits MAPK and PI3K pathways , pre - vents Her - 2 / Her - 3 heterodimerization and sensitizes tumor cells to chemotherapy in preclinical experiments [ 96 , 97 ] . MDX - H210 is a bispecific mAb directed against both HER - 2 and the Fc gamma receptor , which mediates phagocytosis and cytolysis of HER - 2 overexpressing BC cells by macrophages [ 98 ] . Granulocyte colony stimulating factor ( G - CSF ) and interferon γ were found to enhance the immune - based cytotoxic potential of MDX - H210 and therefore were co - administered with MDX - H210 in several phase I trials [ 99 , 100 ] . Available data from phase I studies have shown that MDX - H210 is biologically active and able to induce temporary disease stabilization in patients with HER - 2 - over - expressing advanced tumors [ 101 ] . ( b ) Tyrosine kinase inhibitors . Another mechanism by which one can target HER - 2 is the inhibition of its TK activity . The safety , tolerability and pharmacokinetics of a new selective HER - 2 tyro - sine kinase inhibitor ( TKI ) , TAK - 165 , is currently being evaluated in a multicenter phase I trial in HER - 2 expressing MBC patients [ 102 , 103 ] . Curcumin and emodin , two natural compounds derived from plants , were also shown to possess anti - TK activity in preclinical experiments [ 104 , 105 ] . Emodin inhibits HER - 2 TK 1351 activity , suppresses the transformation of HER - 2 overexpressing BC and sensitizes them to chemotherapeutic agents , including cisplatin , doxorubicin , etoposide and paclitaxel [ 104 , 106 ] . Cur - cumin inhibits HER - 2 TK and depletes HER - 2 / neu protein in HER - 2 - expressing BC cell lines [ 105 ] . Compound 820 , an irre - versible HER - 2 TKI , and CP 654577 , a selective HER - 2 TKI , are the two other new agents with potent activity against HER - 2 - expressing tumor cell lines , in vitro and in vivo [ 107 , 108 ] . ( c ) Antisense strategies . The growth of HER - 2 - overexpressing cell lines is shown to be inhibited by a plasmid that expresses HER - 2 / neu antisense RNA . This method leads to decreased gene expression at both translational and transcriptional levels . More - over , regarding the growth inhibition of BC cells , the antisense HER - 2 / neu RNA is synergic with trastuzumab and a number of cytotoxic agents [ 109 ] . ( d ) Active immunization against HER - 2 by vaccines . The genera - tion of active immune response to HER - 2 represents an attractive alternative to passive immunity provided by mAbs . The major goal of cancer vaccines is to induce a specific immune response to a tumor - specific antigen and establish a long - term immunological memory for this reaction . Several vaccination strategies using either whole HER - 2 or its components such as ECD , synthetic peptides and naked DNA are being evaluated . A phase I / II clinical trial is currently assessing the safety and the tolerability of AutoVac ® HER - 2 DNA pharmaccine in Europe . This vaccine stimulates the patient’s own immune system to induce a strong killer cell ( CTL ) response against HER - 2 - overexpressing tumor cells [ 110 ] . Another vaccine , called AutoVac ® HER - 2 protein pharmaccine , has been shown to be at least as effective as trastuzumab in con - trolling the growth of breast tumors in xenograft models [ 110 ] . Disis et al . [ 111 , 112 ] reported that the development and main - tenance of T - cell immunity to HER - 2 protein after active immuniz - ation with HER - 2 peptide vaccines is possible in patients with HER - 2 - overexpressing breast , ovarian and non - small - cell lung cancer ( NSCLC ) , while keeping an acceptable toxicity profile . HER - 2 protein - based vaccination strategies containing ECD fused with portions of the intracellular domain ( ICD ) of HER - 2 are thought to be more immunogenic and have been shown to elicit antibody response to HER - 2 in animal models . Furthermore , several adjuvants are being combined with HER - 2 / neu antigens in order to generate a substantial immune response in the host . A phase I HER - 2 vaccine trial with fused HER - 2 ECD and ICD combined with an adjuvant is currently being planned in order to evaluate the immunogenicity and safety of this vaccine in high - risk BC patients . Tumor derived heat - shock proteins ( HSPs ) have been shown to evoke an immune response in preclinical experiments [ 113 ] . Therefore , it is thought that the combination of an HSP with a tumor - specific antigen may enhance the immune response against that particular antigen . A recombinant HSP110 – HER - 2 vaccine ( HSP110 is non - covalently complexed to the ICD of HER - 2 during heat shock in vitro ) has been shown to elicit both cellular and humoral immune response against the ICD [ 114 ] . Such an approach is not patient specific , is applicable to all tumors expressing HER - 2 and does not require tumor specimens to pre - pare the vaccine . ( e ) Gene therapy . Transcriptional regulators , such as adenoviral 5E1A ( adenovirus type 5 early region 1A ) gene product , have been shown to downregulate the HER - 2 promoter , repress the HER - 2 gene and reverse the transformed phenotype in preclinical studies [ 115 ] . A phase I gene therapy clinical trial , which was con - ducted on the basis of these promising preclinical data , has already been completed in advanced breast and ovarian cancer patients [ 116 ] . ( f ) Other strategies . ( i ) Targeted immune effector cells . The anti - tumoral activity of immune effector cells can be modified by viral transduction methods . It has recently been reported that genetic - ally modified natural killer ( NK ) cells expressing a chimeric anti - gen specific for tumor - associated ErbB - 2 selectively , and efficiently lysed ErbB - 2 - expressing breast tumor cells . Such promising experimental data might allow NK - based therapeutic strategies for ErbB - expressing tumors [ 117 ] . ( ii ) HSP inhibitors . Heat shock proteins have emerged as attrac - tive targets for new anticancer drugs because these molecules modulate the STPs controlling tumor cell growth and survival . These molecules are not mutated in cancer , but they facilitate malignant transformation by enhancing the activity of many onco - genic growth factor receptors , kinases and transcription factors . HSP90 is required for the refolding of proteins in response to environmental stress and the conformational maturation of several signaling proteins [ 113 ] . The function of HSPs can be inhibited by compounds that bind to a conserved pocket in the amino terminal of the protein . One such compound is 17 - AAG ( 17 - allylamino - 17 - demathoxygeldanamycin ) , which is currently in phase I clin - ical trials in advanced cancer patients [ 118 ] . Agents targeting HSP90 chaperone stimulate the dissociation of the client proteins from the chaperone complex and cause their ubiquitin - dependent degradation by the proteasome pathway . HER - 2 TK is one of the most sensitive targets for HSP90 inhibitors . HER - 2 - overexpressing cell lines are found to be particularly sensitive to the antiprolifer - ative effects of 17 - AAG . Treatment with 17 - AAG results in the inhibition of Akt activity in BC cell lines through the abrogation of HER - 2 / HER - 3 heterodimers ( due to degradation of HER - 2 and dephosphorylation of HER - 3 and uncoupling of PI3K from HER - 3 [ 119 , 120 ] . Interestingly , the growth arrest and apoptosis induced by 17 - AAG is shown to be dependent not only on the overexpression of HER - 2 , but also on the co - expression of HER - 3 and the activation of the PI3K pathway . ( iii ) Histone deacetylase inhibitors . The inhibitors of histone deacetylators are another group of new promising agents that lead to the acetylation of histone proteins and alter chromatin structure . They have been shown to deplete the levels of several proteins ( e . g . HER - 2 , EGFR , Raf - 1 ) that are normally stabilized by bind - ing to HSP90 in cells . These agents are in preclinical stages of development [ 121 ] . ( iv ) Proteasome inhibitors . The proteasome is an enzyme complex , present in all cells , responsible for the proteolytic degrad - ation of cellular proteins that are involved in inflammation , cell cycle regulation , gene expression , cellular growth and differen - tiation [ 122 ] . If the function of the proteasome is impaired , unregulated degradation of vital cellular proteins , such as cell cycle regulatory proteins or growth factor receptors ( ErbB family ) , can 1352 lead to uncontrolled proliferation . The proteasome pathway has been implicated in HER - 2 protein degradation [ 72 ] . It is possible that proteasome inhibition can increase the number of Her - 2 receptors , hence increasing the efficacy of trastuzumab therapy . Accordingly , a phase I dose escalating study of PS - 341 , a proteas - ome inhibitor , in combination with trastuzumab in HER - 2 - over - expressing MBC patients is ongoing at our institution . II . Targeting HER1 / ErbB1 ( EGFR ) Deregulation of EGFR ( ErbB1 ) , another member of the EGFR family , has also been implicated in the development of a number of human tumors including BC [ 123 ] . The mutated receptor ( EGFR vIII ) , which is constitutively active in the absence of ligands , and the overexpression of EGFR represent the two most important mechanisms causing EGFR deregulation [ 123 , 124 ] . Dysfunctional receptor downregulation and the overexpression of ligands are other mechanisms leading to increased signaling through EGFR [ 123 ] . Of note , EGFR itself is a critical down - stream element of other signaling systems induced by integrins and cytokine receptors . Ultimately , all these factors lead to high TK activity , which facilitates signal transduction to the nucleus , promoting reduced apoptotic potential and cell cycle progression . Currently , overexpression is the only mechanism by which EGFR deregulation can be detected ( by IHC ) . In contrast to HER - 2 overexpression , which is generally due to gene amplification and predicts response to trastuzumab therapy , the overexpression is only one of the several mechanisms by which EGFR deregulation occurs , and data regarding the correlation between EGFR over - expression and response to EGFR targeting agents are conflicting . The EGFR expression rate in BC is in the range of 14 – 91 % , depending on the method of assessment , and is almost always caused by increased receptor synthesis [ 125 ] . EGFR mutations have been reported in 78 % of BC cases by RT – PCR and 27 % by IHC [ 126 , 127 ] . Ongoing trials with anti - EGFR treatment strat - egies in BC will define the prognostic significance of EGFR expression and its potential to predict response . There are a number of ways of targeting EGFR deregulation [ 7 , 123 ] ( Table 1 ) , some of which will be described below . ( a ) Ligand - based strategies . Toxin conjugated ligands are gener - ated by conjugating a potent cellular toxin with one of the ligands of the HER family receptor . For example , the TGF - α – pseudo - monas exotoxin A conjugate has been evaluated in a phase I trial [ 123 ] . The generation of systemic anti - ligand immunity in the host , either by active or passive immunization with ligands , can reduce the ligand concentration for receptor activation . Addition - ally , ligand / anti - EGFR antibody complexes , such as TGF - α single chain anti - EGFR , can also interfere with EGFR signaling at the receptor level [ 128 ] . ( b ) Monoclonal antibodies . Given the success with trastuzumab therapy and the contribution of EGFR signaling in breast carcino - genesis , the potential role of other anti - EGFR mAbs in BC whet the oncologist’s appetite for new therapeutic successes . So far , the antitumor effect of several other anti - EGFR mAbs has only been tested in BC cell lines . Blocking antibodies act as receptor antagonists and prevent ligand binding . One major limitation of antibody treatments is the development of anaphylactic reactions due to potential immuno - genicity . IMC - C225 ( Erbitux ® ) , a chimeric monoclonal antibody directed against EGFR , is in the late stages of clinical develop - ment ( phase II – III ) for colorectal , pancreatic , and head and neck cancer [ 129 – 131 ] . Among other anti - EGFR mAbs , there are three fully humanized mAbs in clinical evaluation : ABX - EGF is currently undergoing phase I / II evaluation , h - R3 has completed phase I evaluation [ 132 , 133 ] and EMD 72000 has shown promis - ing activity with acceptable toxicity as a single agent in a phase I trial [ 134 ] . The combined treatment with h - R3 and radiotherapy induced objective responses in advanced head and neck cancer patients in a phase II trial [ 135 ] . Two other anti - EGFR mAbs , ICR - 62 , a rat anti - EGFR mAb , and EMD 55900 , a murine anti - EGFR mAb , inhibit the proliferation of head and neck tumor cell lines and have been evaluated in phase I trials [ 130 , 136 ] . How - ever , in a phase II trial of glioblastoma patients EMD 55900 did not demonstrate favorable antitumor activity [ 137 ] . mAb 806 , which is currently being evaluated in preclinical experiments , spe - cifically recognizes amplified and mutant versions of the EGFR that are expressed by different types of tumors , including gliomas [ 138 ] . The generation of an antitumor immune response with concur - rent inhibition of EGFR can be achieved by bispecific anti - EGFR mAbs that can target both the EGFR and the immune effector cells . In this group of agents , MDX - 447 is currently being investi - gated in phase I / II trials [ 139 ] . Toxin - conjugated antibodies represent another modality of extracellular targeting . Usually , a potent cellular toxin such as pseudomonas toxin A or diphtheria toxin is conjugated to an anti - EGFR antibody to generate an immuntoxin conjugate . These conjugates enter the cell via receptor - mediated endocytosis and kill the target cell ultimately through inhibition of protein syn - thesis . Although the exact relationship between tumor EGFR expression and response has not yet been established , interesting treatment strategies are being investigated in order to enhance the antitumor efficacy of anti - EGFR mAbs , particularly for those tumors with low levels of EGFR expression . For example , the combination of TNF - α , which increases EGFR expression , with anti - EGFR mAbs ( EMD 55900 or EMD 72000 ) has been shown to improve antitumor activity of anti - EGFR mAbs in animal models [ 140 ] . Many anti - EGFR strategies could be adapted directly to EGFR vIII ( mutated EGFR ) , which has the advantage of being specific - ally expressed only on the cancer cells [ 141 ] . Therapeutic mAbs against mutant EGFR may find extensive clinical applications in those tumors that frequently express this variant , such as gliomas and non - small - cell lung carcinomas . The optimal methodology for EGFR vIII status determination and the confirmation of its reported high rate expression in breast tumor specimens need to be achieved in parallel with the ongoing experimental and clinical trials testing anti - EGFR vIII strategies . ( c ) Tyrosine kinase inhibitors . TKIs are small molecules that bind to the ATP binding site in the intracellular domain of receptors and block TK activity either reversibly or irreversibly . One major advantage , compared with mAbs , is their ability to block EGFR with mutated or deleted ECD . In addition to selective EGFR TKIs 1353 T a b l e 1 . A g e n t s t a r g e ti n g E G F R p a t h w a y ( i n p r ec li n i ca l a nd c l i n i ca l ph a s e s o f d e v e l op m e n t ) T a r g e t A g e n t M ec h a n i s m o f ac ti on P h a s e o f d e v e l op m e n t S u rr og a t e m a r k e r s e v a l u a t e d A dv e r s e e ff ec t s E G F R I M C - C 225 ( E r b it ux ® ) c h i m e r i c m A b P h a s e III – h ea d a nd n ec k ca n ce r ; ph a s e II – c o l on a nd p a n c r ea ti c ca n ce r ; p r ec li n i ca l – c o m b i n a ti on w it h c y t o t ox i c a g e n t s i n BC ce ll li n e s p M A P K ( E r k1 / 2 ) , p A k t , K i 67 i n s k i n A c n e i f o r m r a s h , f e v e r , c h ill s , a s t h e n i a , n a u s ea A B X - E G F ( hu m a n i ze d m A b ) P h a s e I / II – r e n a l , p r o s t a t e , N S C L C a nd e s oph a g ea l ca n ce r NA A c n e i f o r m r a s h h - R 3 ( hu m a n i ze d m A b ) P h a s e II – h ea d a nd n ec k ca n ce r NA H ypo t e n s i on , f e v e r , t r e m o r , n a u s ea , s o m no l e n ce E M D 55700 ( r a t m A b ) P h a s e II – G M ( un f a vo r a b l e ac ti v it y ) NA F e w s i d e - e ff ec t s : r a s h , e l e v a ti on i n t r a n s a m i n a s e s E M D 72000 ( hu m a n i ze d m A b ) P h a s e II – ov a r i a n a nd h ea d a nd n ec k ca n ce r s NA R a s h ( D LT : h ea d ac h e a nd f e v e r ) I C R 62 ( m u r i n e m A b ) P h a s e I NA F e v e r , r i go r , c h e s t p a i n M u t a n t E G F R M A b 806 m A b a g a i n s t E G F R v I II a nd E G F R - ov e r - e x p r e ss i ng ce ll s P r ec li n i ca l NA NA Y 10 m A b a g a i n s t hu m a n a nd m u r i n e m u t a t e d E G F R P r ec li n i ca l NA NA E G F R a nd i mm un e e ff ec t o r ce ll s M 26 . 1 F ( a b ′ ) 2 - C D 3 ( l yp m ho c y t e ) B i s p ec i f i c a n ti - E G F R m A b P r ec li n i ca l NA NA M DX - 447 - C D 64 ( I g G R ) P h a s e II – h ea d a nd n ec k ca n ce r ( ongo i ng ) NA H ea d ac h e , f e v e r , c h ill s , hyp e r t e n s i on , m y a l g i a s , n a u s ea e d e m a , f a ti gu e , a rr hy t h m i a ( D LT i n ph a s e I : hypo t e n s i on ) H 22 - E G F - C D 64 P r ec li n i ca l NA NA E G F R / C D 86 P r ec li n i ca l NA NA E G F R Z D 1839 ( Ir e ss a ® ) p . o . R e v e r s i b l e T K I P h a s e III – N S C L C ; ph a s e II – b r ea s t , h ea d a nd n ec k a nd r e n a l ca n ce r s ; ph a s e I / II – c o l on a nd p r o s t a t e ca n ce r s p E G F R , p M A P K , p A k t , p27 K I P 1 , K i 67 , c - f o s i n s k i n A c n e i f o r m r a s h , d i a rr h ea , n a u s ea , t r a n s i e n t e l e v a ti on i n t r a n s a m i n a s e s O S I 774 ( T a r ce v a ® ) p . o . ( C P 358 , 774 ) P h a s e III – N S C L C a nd p a n c r ea ti c ca n ce r ; ph a s e II – h ea d a nd n ec k , ov a r i a n a nd BC s p E G F R , p E R K , p A k t i n s k i n ; c h a ng e s i n 18 - F DG by P ET s ca n R a s h , d i a rr h ea , n a u s ea , f a ti gu e , h ea d ac h e , t r a n s i e n t e l e v a ti on i n t r a n s a m i n a s e s P D 153035 P r ec li n i ca l NA NA E G F R , H E R - 2 P K I 166 p . o . P h a s e I c o m p l e t e d p E G F R , p M A P K , p A k t i n s k i n a nd h a i r f o lli c l e s N a u s ea , vo m iti ng , d i a rr h ea , r a s h , f a ti gu e , r e v e r s i b l e t r a n s a m i n a s e e l e v a ti on G W 2016 p . o . P h a s e I P K s t udy – h ea lt hy vo l un t ee r s ; ph a s e I t r i a l s und e r w a y NA R a s h , d i a rr h ea , h ea d ac h e , e l e v a ti on o f t r a n s a m i n a s e s 1354 T a b l e 1 . ( C on ti nu e d ) E G F R , e p i d e r m a l g r o w t h f ac t o r r ece p t o r ; E G F , e p i d e r m a l g r o w t h f ac t o r ; N S C L C , non - s m a ll - ce ll l ung ca n ce r ; G M , g li ob l a s t o m a m u lti f o r m e ; D LT , do s e - li m iti ng t ox i c it y ; NA , no t a v a il a b l e ; P K , ph a r m ac ok i n e t i c s ; s c F v , s i ng l e c h a i n a n ti body fr a g m e n t ; F DG , f l uo r od e oxyg l u c o s e ; P ET , po s it r on e m i ss i on t o m og r a phy ; p . o . , o r a ll y ; BC , b r ea s t ca n ce r ; ET A , p s e udo m on a s t ox i n A ; m A b , m ono c l on a l a n t i body ; T K I , t y r o s i n e k i n a s e i nh i b it o r ; M A P K , m it og e n - ac ti v a t e d p r o t e i n k i n a s e . T a r g e t A g e n t M ec h a n i s m o f ac ti on P h a s e o f d e v e l op m e n t S u rr og a t e m a r k e r s e v a l u a t e d A dv e r s e e ff ec t s E G F R , H E R - 2 , H E R - 4 C I 1033 p . o . Irr e v e r s i b l e T K I P h a s e I c o m p l e t e d ; ph a s e II – BC p E G F R , p H E R - 2 , p27 , K i 67 i n s k i n a nd t u m o r ti ss u e N a u s ea , vo m iti ng a s t h e n i a , d i a rr h ea ( D LT : s t o m a titi s , r a s h , r e v e r s i b l e hyp e r s e n s iti v it y ) P D 158780 P r ec li n i ca l NA NA B I B X 1382 B S P r ec li n i ca l NA NA E G F R AG 1478 P r ec li n i ca l NA NA P D 169414 P r ec li n i ca l i n BC ce ll li n e s NA NA P D 168393 P r ec li n i ca l NA NA E K B 569 P r ec li n i ca l NA NA L F M - A 12 T K I P r ec li n i ca l i n BC ce ll li n e s NA NA W H I - P 97 P r ec li n i ca l i n BC ce ll li n e s NA NA E G F R s c F v ( 225 ) L i g a nd + a n ti - E G F R a n ti body c o m p l e x e s P r ec li n i ca l NA NA s c F v ( 14 E 1 ) P r ec li n i ca l NA NA E G F R l i g a nd E G F – g e n i s t e i n T ox i n - c on j ug a t e d li g a nd P r ec li n i ca l i n BC ce ll li n e s NA NA E G F – d i ph t h e r a t ox i n P r ec li n i ca l NA NA E G F – R n a s e P r ec li n i ca l i n BC ce ll li n e s NA NA E G F – d e x t r a n P r ec li n i ca l NA NA T G F - α – r i c i n A P r ec li n i ca l NA NA T G F - α – ET A P h a s e I NA – E G F R R NA A n ti s e n s e o li gonu c l e o ti d e s A n ti s e n s e m o l ec u l e s P r ec li n i ca l i n BC ce ll li n e s NA NA R i bo z y m e s P r ec li n i ca l NA NA E G F R F D 137 T K I + c y t o t ox i c a g e n t c o m p l e x e s P r ec li n i ca l NA NA B J 2000 P r ec li n i ca l NA NA S M A 41 P r ec li n i ca l NA NA A c t i v e i mm un i za t i on a g a i n s t E G F E G F - P 64 K R e c o m b i n a n t E G F v a cc i n e P h a s e II – a dv a n ce d s o li d t u m o r s NA L o ca l it c h i ng , e r y t h e m a a t t h e s it e o f i n j ec ti on 1355 ( e . g . ZD1839 , OSI - 774 ) , some of these agents are capable of inhibiting both HER - 1 and HER - 2 TKs , so called ‘dual inhibit - ors’ , while others can inhibit the TK activity of HER - 1 , HER - 2 and HER - 4 and are known as ‘pan - erbB inhibitors’ . ZD1839 ( Iressa ® ) and OSI - 774 ( Tarceva ® ) are the two TKIs in more advanced stages ( phase III ) of clinical development , par - ticularly in NSCLC . They are also the two TKIs that are in the most advanced stage ( phase II trials ) of development in MBC . An open - label multicenter phase II study evaluated the efficacy and safety of ZD1839 in 63 heavily pre - treated advanced breast cancer ( ABC ) patients who had visceral - dominant disease [ 142 ] . The reported clinical benefit rate was 4 . 8 % , with one partial response ( PR ) and two stable diseases ( SD ) lasting ≥ 6 months . The median progression - free survival and survival were 57 and 144 days , respectively . Overall , the treatment was well tolerated with a tox - icity pattern similar to the one observed in single agent trials in advanced NSCLC . One - quarter of the patients experienced grade 3 – 4 toxicity , primarily grade 3 diarrhea , nausea and rash . Interest - ingly , a marked relief of bone pain was observed in 42 % of patients . The interim results of another phase II study of ZD1839 ( 500 mg / day ) in ABC patients with ER - negative and tamoxifen - resistant ER - positive tumors were recently presented [ 143 ] . Among the 22 patients enrolled to date , two had a PR and 10 patients had SD at 4 weeks ; roughly one - third of patients experienced rash , most of which was grade 1 or 2 in severity . OSI - 774 ( 150 mg / day ) has also been evaluated in an open - label multicenter phase II study in ABC patients refractory to prior chemotherapy [ 144 ] . Two cohorts of patients were accrued : the first cohort ( n = 47 ) included patients who received prior therapy with an anthra - cycline , a taxane and capecitabine , and the second ( n = 22 ) group consisted of patients who had tumor progression during prior chemotherapy . Two PRs , one in each cohort , were reported and median time to progression was 43 days . More than 50 % of patients experienced an acneiform rash but again , the severity was generally mild . Diarrhea , asthenia and nausea were the other treatment - related side - effects , and no correlation was detected between the number of responses and EGFR expression . Despite encouraging preclinical data , these somewhat disappointing ini - tial efficacy results of both ZD1839 and OSI - 774 underscore the need for a better understanding of the EGFR biology in BC . Addi - tionally , it may also be argued that the study populations had advanced stage disease , which is fairly refractory to conventional treatments . Therefore , further evaluation of EGFR TKIs in differ - ent settings , such as less heavily pre - treated patients , and probably in combination with other drugs , is needed . Accumulating data suggest that TKIs may also be useful in the treatment and chemoprevention of ductal carcinoma in situ ( DCIS ) [ 145 ] . Preclinically , ZD1839 has been shown to inhibit proliferation in DCIS even more effectively than trastuzumab [ 146 , 147 ] and a phase II study is currently assessing its role in this setting . A recent in vivo study highlighted the potential of ZD1839 as a preventive strategy in BC [ 148 ] . ZD1839 has been shown to delay development of mammary tumors in transgenic mice that overexpress HER - 2 in mammary tissue and usually develop ER - negative tumors over time . Given the intensive interplay between estrogen receptors and the EGFR signaling pathway ( see Part I - A above ) and also the fact that anti - EGFR agents are also capable of enhancing the activity of several cytotoxic drugs , many other phase II trials are assessing the efficacy of ZD1839 and OSI - 774 , either alone or in combin - ation with traditional endocrine agents ( anastrozole , fulvestrant ) and cytotoxic drugs in MBC patients . It has been shown that ZD1839 inhibits the growth of HER - 2 - overexpressing BC cell lines both in vivo and in vitro [ 149 – 151 ] . Moreover , a synergic growth inhibition is also observed when these cell lines are treated with the combination of trastuzumab and ZD1839 [ 152 ] . These data provide a strong rationale for a number of ongoing and planned clinical trials that intend to target the two receptors simul - taneously . EKB 569 , another EGFR TKI , has been evaluated in a phase I trial [ 153 ] . PKI166 , a dual inhibitor , has recently completed phase I evaluation in MBC [ 154 – 156 ] . Another dual inhibitor , GW 2016 , has been shown to inhibit phosphorylation of HER - 2 and EGFR TKs and the activation of downstream MAPK and Akt pathways in BC cell lines [ 157 – 159 ] . The safety , tolerability and pharmaco - kinetics of escalating oral doses of this agent have been assessed in a double blind , randomized , placebo controlled , crossover phase I study in healthy volunteers [ 160 ] . CI 1033 , an orally active pan - erbB inhibitor , has been shown to be well tolerated and to have a favorable pharmacokinetic profile in a phase I study , in patients with advanced solid tumors [ 161 , 162 ] , and is currently being evaluated in a phase II MBC trial . Many other potentially effective TKIs are awaiting clinical evaluation . ( d ) Antisense strategies . EGFR activity can be inhibited at the nuclear level by the use of antisense oligonucleotides or ribozymes . Antisense oligonucleotides specific for EGFR and EGFR ligands interact with the complementary nucleic acid sequences in the target cell and block the transcription of specific target proteins [ 163 ] . Ribozymes are catalytically active small RNA molecules , capable of causing a site - specific cleavage of target mRNA . The interruption of gene expression by ribozymes is particularly promising for mutant forms of EGFR [ 164 ] . So far neither of these strategies has been clinically investigated . ( e ) ‘Combi - targeting’ concept . Another interesting approach is the ‘combi - targeting’ concept that involves the synthesis of chi - meric compounds possessing both TK inhibiting and cytotoxic activity . Such compounds , upon hydrolytic cleavage in physio - logical conditions , generate a cytotoxic DNA alkylating agent and an EGFR TK inhibitor [ 165 – 167 ] . Three of such compounds have recently been reported to have potent antitumor activity preclinic - ally . The rationale of this concept is based on the accumulating evidence that the antitumor activity of several chemotherapeutic agents can be enhanced when they are combined with anti - EGFR agents . ( f ) Vaccination strategies . Patients with advanced stage tumors were immunized with human recombinant EGF chemically linked to either TT ( titanic toxoid ) or P64k ( Neisseria meningitidis recombinant protein ) , intradermically , in a pilot clinical trial . This vaccination strategy was shown to be safe ( without skin toxicity ) , feasible and immunogenic in humans , and to induce subjective 1356 clinical improvement during the period when anti - EGF antibody titers were present [ 168 ] . III . Agents targeting downstream effectors of the EGFR pathway Signal transduction pathways , which serve as ‘signal - processing units’ , transfer signals from the cell surface to the nucleus . A number of interesting agents targeting critical elements in these STPs are in various phases of drug development . ( 1 ) Agents targeting RAS – RAF – MAPK pathway . In ∼ 30 % of human cancers , mutated Ras genes produce abnormal proteins that remain locked in the activated state , thereby relaying uncontrolled proliferative signals [ 11 ] . Ras mutations are not common in BC ( < 5 % ) . However , the fact that Ras can be activated by multiple stimuli , including EGFR family TKs , renders Ras a promising therapeutic target in BC [ 169 ] . Only a few agents targeting the Ras – Raf – MAPK pathway are in clinical stages of development in BC , but many of these agents are in the late phases of clinical development in other cancer types . ( a ) Targeting Ras . Farnesyl transferase ( FTase ) , which catalyzes a critical step in Ras activation , represents an important target for drug development . The initial early clinical studies with farnesyl transferase inhibitors ( FTIs ) focusing on colorectal cancer ( CRC ) , NSCLC and pancreatic cancers , known to have a high incidence of K - ras mutations , did not satisfy the high expectations of thera - peutic success . Surprisingly , the FTIs showed activity in some tumor types with low incidence of Ras mutations such as BC , gliomas and acute myeloid leukemia . Furthermore , emerging bio - logical data suggest that K - ras may also be prenylated by geranyl - geranyl transferase ( GGTase ) as an alternative to prenylation by FTase , and that the FTases can modify many other proteins involved in carcinogenesis such as RhoB , the PI3K / Akt pathway and centromere proteins E and F [ 11 ] . All these data generated suspicion with respect to the role of RAS as the principal target of FTIs . The future development of FTIs will require a revision and clarification of previously described preclinical mechanisms by which FTIs induce their biological effects in tumor tissues , and based on this improved understanding , the conduct of clinical trials with proper clinical and biological end points . Among the multiple FTIs developed , only four reached clinical stages of evaluation . Two , R115777 ( tipifarnib ) and SCH 66336 , are orally bio - available and the other two , BMS - 214662 and L778 , 123 , must be administered intravenously . R115777 is in various stages of development in multiple tumor types , e . g . in phase III trials in CRC and pancreatic cancer in combination with cytotoxic agents [ 170 ] . It is the only member of FTIs that is in late stages of clinical development in BC . The results of the first phase II study in ABC suggest that this agent has clinical activity with good tolerability and that the response is not dependent on ER or HER - 2 status [ 8 ] . Further results on the correlation of response with EGFR expression and Ras mutation status are awaited with interest . SCH 66336 ( lonafarnib ) is being evaluated in a phase II trial for treatment of patients with progressive glioblastoma multi - forme and in a phase III trial in advanced NSCLC patients [ 170 ] . L - 778 , 123 , which inhibits both FTase and GGTase type I , has recently been evaluated in patients with NSCLC in a phase II trial [ 171 , 172 ] . BMS 214662 is in phase I clinical trials at the moment [ 173 , 174 ] . ISIS 2503 is a 20 - base antisense phosphorothioate oligodeoxy - ribonucleotide that specifically reduces the expression of H - ras mRNA and inhibits tumor cell growth in preclinical studies [ 170 ] . The phase I data indicate a tolerable toxicity profile [ 175 ] , a phase II trial has already evaluated the efficacy of this agent in advanced NSCLC patients and phase I combination studies with cytotoxic agents are currently ongoing [ 176 , 177 ] . To date , this agent has not been clinically evaluated in BC . Clinical trials evaluating the efficacy of vaccines against mutant Ras peptides are ongoing , especially in CRC and pancreatic cancer [ 178 ] . No clinical data are available yet with respect to their use in BC . ( b ) Targeting Raf . BAY 439006 , which inhibits Raf kinase ( Raf - 1 ) , one of the downstream effectors of Ras , is the first com - pound of this category to enter clinical trials [ 179 ] . Available phase I data have shown that it has activity in renal , colon , pan - creatic , hepatocarcinoma , ovarian and lung tumors , and could induce meaningful disease stabilizations [ 180 ] . The main toxicity of this orally bio - available agent is confined to skin including rash , palmar plantar erythema and folliculitis [ 170 , 181 ] . ISIS 5132 is an antisense oligonucleotide that inhibits Raf - kinase . Phase II studies evaluating the efficacy of this agent are underway in pros - tate , CRC and ovarian cancers [ 170 ] . Both these agents have not yet been clinically tested in BC . ( c ) Targeting MEK . CI 1040 ( PD 1843220 ) , a small molecule MEK inhibitor , has shown low toxicity and moderate efficacy in phase I trials [ 182 , 183 ] . Based on this promising phase I data , this agent is moving into phase II clinical trials with 800 mg twice daily as the recommended dose . ( 2 ) Agents targeting PI3K / Akt pathway . ( a ) Targeting mTOR . The mTOR pathway is a key growth factor - mediated signal trans - duction pathway that regulates cell growth , closely related to the PI3K / Akt pathway . mTOR - dependent growth factor signaling include estrogen , HER - 2 / neu and IGF - 1 , all of which can be inhibited by mTOR inhibition , resulting in G 1 arrest of the cell cycle [ 184 ] . CCI - 779 is an m - TOR inhibitor with activity seen in BC cells , both in vitro and in vivo , and is the only agent of this category in later stages of clinical development in BC . PTEN - deficient , estrogen - dependent and HER - 2 - positive BC cell lines seem to be particularly sensitive to CCI - 779 . Furthermore , CCI - 779 acts synergically with taxanes , doxorubicin , trastuzumab and EGFR inhibitors in BC growth inhibition . Phase I single - agent trials showed good tolerability and potential activity in breast , renal and prostate cancer . Phase II single - agent trials in breast and renal cancer were recently closed [ 185 , 186 ] . The phase II BC trial evaluated two doses levels of CCI - 779 ( 75 and 250 mg ) in 109 patients with advanced disease who had failed prior chemo - therapy with taxanes , anthracyclines or both . The interim report involved the first 85 patients and objective responses were seen at the two dose levels ( one CR and three PRs ) . Side - effects were generally mild and the most frequently occurring grade 3 – 4 toxicities were asthenia , depression , γ glutamyl transpeptidase increase , hypercholestrolemia , leucopenia , mucositis and somno - lence . Based on this preliminary clinical activity , further evaluation 1357 of this agent in combination with other treatment modalities is planned in BC ( 187 ) . ( b ) Targeting Akt . 17 - AAG , an indirect inhibitor of Akt activ - ity , is an ansamycin antibiotic which has shown antitumor effects in HER - 2 - overexpressing BC cell lines in several preclinical experiments [ 60 , 61 ] . It inhibits the chaperone function of HSP90 , which in turn depletes several key signaling proteins involved in cell cycle control , hormone signaling and growth factor pathways , including HER - 2 , Akt and Raf - 1 . The preliminary findings from phase I trials in advanced cancer patients reported disease stabil - ization with acceptable toxicity [ 118 , 187 ] . PTEN gene therapy is among other attractive strategies aimed at inhibiting Akt activity , since mutations of this gene by themselves lead to cancer syndromes , and because Akt has increasingly been shown to play an important role in BC [ 76 , 188 ] . Surrogate markers for measuring the biological effects of targeted agents As stated in the introductary part of this review , one of the most important issues in trials evaluating the efficacy of targeted bio - logical agents is the development of assays to measure the desired Table 2 . Agents targeting the downstream effectors of EGFR family ( in preclinical and clinical phases of develepment ) EGFR , epidermal growth factor receptor ; PI3K , phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase ; p . o . , orally ; NSCLC , non - small - cell lung cancer ; HG , high grade ; GM , glioblastoma multiforme ; FC , flow cytometry ; PBMC , peripheral blood mononuclear cells ; PBL , peripheral blood lymphocytes ; Lck ( p56 lck ) , protein from the Src family of tyrosine kinases ; Grp 78 , 78 kDa glucose - regulated protein that belongs to the family of ∼ 70 kDa heat shock proteins ( HSP70 ) ; HDJ - 2 , HSP40 ; DLT , dose - limiting toxicity ; NA , not available ; GGT , γ glutamly transpeptidase ; FDG , fluorodeoxyglucose ; PET , positron emission tomography ; Rap 1A , Ras - related protein 1A ; BC , breast cancer . Target Agent Mechanism of action Phase of development Surrogate markers evaluated Toxicity in clinical trials RAS – RAF – MAPKpathway ISIS 2503 Ras antisense Phase II – NSCLC NA Fever , fatigue , nausea , moderate thrombocytopenia R 115777 ( Zarnestra ® ) p . o . Farnesyl transferase inhibitors Phase II – breast and renal cancer and MDS ; phase III – colon cancer ; phase II / III – pancreas ; phase I – leukemias , NSCLC ; phase I / II HG astrocytoma Buccal mucosa prelamin A Myelosuppression , fatigue , rash , neuropathy , diarrhea , nausea , hypotension , vomiting , headache ( DLT in phase I : neuropathy , fatigue , neutropenia ) BMS 214662 Phase I Rho - B , lamin B , ras in PBL ; FT activity in PBMCs Nausea , vomiting , diarrhea , fatigue , elevation of transaminases SCH 66336 p . o . Phase III – NSCLC ; phase II – GM Peroxisomal protein ( PxF ) in PBMC and prelamin A in buccal mucosa Nausea , vomiting , fatigue , diarrhea , headache , moderate myelosuppression L - 778 , 123 Phase II – NSCLC HDJ - 2 , Rap1A ; in PBMC Nausea , vomiting fatigue , myelosuppression , QT prolongation BAY 439006 p . o . Raf kinase inhibitor Phase I ERK1 / 2 in PBL by FC Palmar – plantar erythema , anorexia , fatigue , alopecia , and diarrhoea ISIS 5132 Raf antisense Phase II – prostate and colon NA Fever CI 1040 ( PD 184352 ) MEK inhibitor Phase I completed pMAPK in PBMC and tumor Diarrhea , fatigue , nausea , rash , vomiting PI3K – Akt pathway CCI 779 mTOR inhibitor Phase II – BC ; phase II – renal cancer PTEN , Akt Hyperglycemia , anaemia hypertrygliceridemia , hypokalemia , leucopenia , mucositis , elavated GGT Wortmanin PI3K inhibitors Preclinical – BC cell lines NA NA LY 294002 Preclinical – BC cell lines NA NA 17 - AAG HSP90 inhibitor Phase I completed Lck kinase , Akt , Raf - 1 , HSP 70 , HSP Grp 78 , CDK4 in PBLs , HER - 2 and MAPK in skin , changes in 18 - FDG by PET scan Fatigue , nausea , vomiting , hepatotoxicity 1358 biological effect . The development of such assays requires a clear understanding of the mechanism of action of the drug under investigation in order to select the most appropriate marker of therapeutic activity . The practical limitations of tumor biopsies , such as availability and accessibility , are critical issues . There - fore , the development of assays in surrogate tissues such as skin and blood cells , which normally express the target molecules and are easily accessible , offers an important opportunity to observe the biological activity of these agents . However , it is unknown to what extent the changes in the surrogate tissues reflect the effects of the agent in the tumor . In other words , the demonstration of inhibition of a surrogate end point does not necessarily indicate a treatment effect in the tumor . Studies comparing biopsies from both surrogate tissues and tumor tissues are needed . In addition , it is essential to correlate clinical outcome and surrogate markers prospectively , in order to validate their predictive value . Tables 1 and 2 summarize the surrogate markers and the sites measured in clinical trials testing anti - EGFR agents . Consequently , on the eve of cancer therapy driven by proteogenomic information , obtaining frozen samples of all tumors for future evaluation is of utmost importance . Conclusions Given this wide range of new attractive molecules , the future holds promise for witnessing major advances in the management of BC . So far , continuing enthusiasm for the identification of new , targeted agents has removed the blindfold from our eyes . We are no longer playing blind man’s bluff , no longer running in the dark . However , the clarification of whether the current state of excite - ment in the development of new targeted biological agents will be accompanied by a therapeutic benefit , as in the case of trastu - zumab and STI 571 , is the second essential step of our job . This could only be achieved by making tremendous efforts to evaluate these new molecules in well designed randomized clinical trials . Acknowledgements The authors thank ‘Le Fond Jean - Claude Heuson’ for their research support and Carolyn Straehle , PhD , for her editorial assistance . References 1 . Harvey JM , Clark G , Osborne K et al . Estrogen receptor status by immunohistochemistry is superior to the ligand binding assay for pre - dicting response to adjuvant endocrine therapy in breast cancer . J Clin Oncol 1999 ; 17 : 1474 – 1481 . 2 . Roche PC , Suman VJ , Jenkins RB et al . Concordance between local and central laboratory HER - 2 testing in the breast Intergroup trial N9831 . J Natl Cancer Inst 2002 ; 94 : 855 – 857 . 3 . Thor AD , Liu S , Edgerton S et al . Activation ( tyrosine phosphorylation ) of ErbB - 2 ( HER - 2 / neu ) : a study of incidence and correlation with out - come in breast cancer . J Clin Oncol 2000 ; 18 : 3230 – 3239 . 4 . Yarden Y . The EGFR family and its ligands in human cancer : signalling mechanisms and therapeutic opportunities . Eur J Cancer 2000 ; 37 ( Suppl 4 ) : S3 – S8 . 5 . Salomon D , Gullick W . The erbB family of receptors and their ligands : multiple targets for therapy . Signal 2001 ; 2 : 4 – 11 . 6 . Graus - Porta D , Beerli RR , Daly JM et al . ErbB - 2 , the preferred hetero - dimerization partner of all receptors , is a mediator of lateral signaling . EMBO J 1997 ; 16 : 1647 – 1655 . 7 . Prenzel N , Fischer OM , Streit S et al . The epidermal growth factor family as a central element for cellular signal transduction and diversifi - cation . Endocr Relat Cancer 2001 ; 8 : 11 – 31 . 8 . Johnston SRD , Hickish T , Houston S et al . Efficacy and tolerability of two dosing regimens of R115777 ( Zarnestra ) , a farnesyl protein trans - ferase inhibitor , in patients with advanced breast cancer . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2002 ; 21 : 35a ( Abstr 138 ) . 9 . Chan S , Johnston S , Scheulen ME et al . First report a phase II study of safety and activity of CCI - 779 for patients with locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer failing prior chemotherapy . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2002 ; 12 : 44a ( Abstr 175 ) . 10 . Sebolt - Leopold JS . MEK - targeted therapy : Lessons learned with CI - 1040 . Clin Cancer Res 2001 ; 7 : P818 . 11 . Rowinsky EK , Windle JJ , Von Hoff DD . Ras protein farnesyltrans - ferase : a strategic target for anticancer therapeutic development . J Clin Oncol 1999 ; 17 : 3631 – 3652 . 12 . Nicholson RI , Mc Clelland RA , Robertson JF et al . Involvement of ster - oid hormone and growth factor cross - talk in endocrine response in breast cancer . Endocr Relat Cancer 1999 ; 3 : 373 – 387 . 13 . Stephen RDJ , Lu B , Scott GK et al . Increased activator protein - 1 DNA binding and c - Jun NH2 - terminal kinase activity in human breast tumors with acquired tamoxifen resistance . Clin Cancer Res 1999 ; 5 : 251 – 256 . 14 . Fry MJ . Phosphoinositide 3 - kinase signalling in breast cancer : how big a role might it play ? Breast Cancer Res 2001 ; 3 : 302 – 312 . 15 . Downward J . Mechanisms and consequences of activation of protein kinase B / akt . Curr Opin Cell Biol 1998 ; 10 : 262 – 267 . 16 . Mills GB , Lu Y , Fang X et al . The role of genetic abnormalities of PTEN and phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase pathway in breast and ovarian tumori - genesis , prognosis , and therapy . Semin Oncol 2001 ; 28 ( Suppl 16 ) : 125 – 141 . 17 . Altiok S , Batt D , Altiok N et al . Heregulin induces phosphorylation of BRCA1 through phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase / AKT in breast cancer cells . J Biol Chem 1999 ; 274 : 32274 – 32278 . 18 . Simoncini T , Hafezi - Moghadam A , Brazil DP et al . Interaction of oestro - gen receptor with the regulatory subunit of phosphatidylinositol - 3 - OH kinase . Nature 2000 ; 407 : 538 – 541 . 19 . Campbell RA , Bhat - Nakshatri P , Patel NM et al . Phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase / AKT - mediated activation of estrogen receptor α : a new model for anti - estrogen resistance . J Biol Chem 2001 ; 276 : 9817 – 9824 . 20 . Fernando RI , Wimalasena J . Signal transduction pathways that mediate 17 - β estradiol induced anti - apoptosis in breast carcinoma cells . Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 2002 ; 43 : 197 ( Abstr 990 ) . 21 . Rommel C , Clarke BA , Zimmermann S et al . Differentiation stage - specific inhibition of the Raf – MEK – ERK pathway by Akt . Science 1999 ; 286 : 1738 – 1741 . 22 . Vazquez F , Sellers WR . The PTEN tumor suppressor protein : an antagonist of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase signalling . Biochim Biophys Acta 2000 ; 1470 : M21 – M35 . 23 . Dancey J . Mammalian target of Rapamycin as a target for cancer thera - peutic development . Clin Cancer Res 2001 ; 7 : 3823S – 3824S . 24 . Neshat MS , Mellinghoff IK , Tran C et al . Enhanced sensitivity of PTEN - deficient tumors to inhibition of FRAP / mTOR . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001 ; 98 : 10314 – 10319 . 25 . Yarden Y . Biology of HER2 and its importance in breast cancer . Onco - logy 2001 ; 61 ( Suppl 2 ) : 1 – 13 . 26 . Stern DF . Tyrosine kinase signalling in breast cancer : ErbB family recep - tor tyrosine kinases . Breast Cancer Res 2000 ; 2 : 176 – 183 . 1359 27 . Salomon DS , Brandt R , Ciardiello F et al . Epidermal growth factor - related peptides and their receptors in human malignancies Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 1995 ; 19 : 183 – 232 . 28 . Guy CT , Webster MA , Schaller M et al . Expression of the neu proto - oncogene in the mammary epithelium of transgenic mice induces metastatic disease . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992 ; 89 : 10578 – 10582 . 29 . Di Fiore PP , Pierce JH , Kraus MH et al . erbB - 2 is a potent oncogene when overexpressed in NIH / 3T3 cells . Science 1987 ; 237 : 178 – 182 . 30 . Eccles SA . The role of c - erbB - 2 / Her - 2 / neu in breast cancer progression and metastasis . J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia 2001 ; 6 : 393 – 406 . 31 . Hudziak RM , Schlessinger J , Ullrich A . Increased expression of the putative growth factor receptor p185HER2 causes transformation and tumorigenesis of NIH 3T3 cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1987 ; 84 : 7159 – 7163 . 32 . Harari D , Yarden Y . Molecular mechanisms underlying ErbB2 / HER2 action in breast cancer . Oncogene 2000 ; 19 : 6102 – 6114 . 33 . Brandt BH , Roetger A , Dittmar T et al . c - erbB - 2 / EGFR as dominant heterodimerization partners determine a mitogenic phenotype in human breast cancer cells . FASEB J 1999 ; 13 : 1939 – 1949 . 34 . Ross JS , Fletcher JA . The HER - 2 / neu oncogene in breast cancer : prog - nostic factor , predictive factor , and target for therapy . Oncologist 1998 ; 3 : 237 – 252 . 35 . Menard S , Fortis S , Castiglioni F et al . HER2 as a prognostic factor in breast cancer . Oncology 2001 ; 61 ( Suppl 2 ) : 67 – 72 . 36 . Slamon DJ , Leyland - Jones B , Shak S et al . Use of chemotherapy plus a monoclonal antibody against HER2 for metastatic breast cancer that overexpresses HER2 . N Engl J Med 2001 ; 344 : 783 – 792 . 37 . Klijn JG , Berns PM , Schmitz PI et al . The clinical significance of epider - mal growth factor receptor ( EGF - R ) in human breast cancer : a review on 5232 patients . Endocr Rev 1992 ; 13 : 3 – 17 . 38 . Klijn JG , Look MP , Portengen H et al . The prognostic value of epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGF - R ) in primary breast cancer : results of a 10 year follow - up study . Breast Cancer Res Treat 1994 ; 29 : 73 – 83 . 39 . Tsutsui S , Ohno S , Murakami S et al . Prognostic value of epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) and its relationship to the estrogen recep - tor status in 1029 patients with breast cancer . Breast Cancer Res Treat 2002 ; 71 : 67 – 75 . 40 . Walker RA , Dearing SJ . Expression of epidermal growth factor receptor mRNA and protein in primary breast carcinomas . Breast Cancer Res Treat 1999 ; 53 : 167 – 176 . 41 . Pawlowski V , Revillion F , Hebbar M et al . Prognostic value of the type I growth factor receptors in a large series of human primary breast cancers quantified with a real - time reverse transcription - polymerase chain reac - tion . Clin Cancer Res 2000 ; 6 : 4217 – 4225 . 42 . Biscardi JS , Ishizawar RC , Silva CM et al . Tyrosine kinase signalling in breast cancer : epidermal growth factor receptor and c - Src interactions in breast cancer . Breast Cancer Res 2000 ; 2 : 203 – 210 . 43 . Menard S , Balsari A , Casalini P et al . HER - 2 - positive breast carcinomas as a particular subset with peculiar clinical behaviors . Clin Cancer Res 2002 ; 8 : 520 – 525 . 44 . Konecny G , Pauletti G , Pegram M et al . Quantitative association between HER - 2 / neu and steroid hormone receptors in hormone recep - tor - positive primary breast cancer . J Natl Cancer Inst 2003 ; 95 : 142 – 153 . 45 . Newby JC , Johnston SR , Smith IE et al . Expression of epidermal growth factor receptor and c - erbB2 during the development of tamoxifen resist - ance in human breast cancer . Clin Cancer Res 1997 ; 3 : 1643 – 1651 . 46 . Kato S , Masuhiro Y , Watanabe M et al . Molecular mechanism of a cross - talk between oestrogen and growth factor signalling pathways . Genes Cells 2000 ; 5 : 593 – 601 . 47 . Harris AL , Nicholson S , Sainsbury R et al . Epidermal growth factor receptor and other oncogenes as prognostic markers . J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1992 ; 11 : 181 – 187 . 48 . Lee AV , Cui X , Oesterreich S . Cross - talk among estrogen receptor , epi - dermal growth factor , and insulin - like growth factor signaling in breast cancer . Clin Cancer Res 2001 ; 7 ( 12 Suppl ) : 4429s – 4435s . 49 . Nicholson RI , Hutcheson IR , Harper ME et al . Modulation of epidermal growth factor receptor in endocrine - resistant , oestrogen receptor - posi - tive breast cancer . Endocr Relat Cancer 2001 ; 8 : 175 – 182 . 50 . Nicholson S , Sainsbury JR , Halcrow P et al . Expression of epidermal growth factor receptors associated with lack of response to endocrine therapy in recurrent breast cancer . Lancet 1989 ; 1 : 182 – 185 . 51 . Nicholson RI , McClelland RA , Gee JM et al . Epidermal growth factor receptor expression in breast cancer : association with response to endo - crine therapy . Breast Cancer Res Treat 1994 ; 29 : 117 – 125 . 52 . Pietras RJ , Arboleda J , Reese DM et al . HER - 2 tyrosine kinase pathway targets estrogen receptor and promotes hormone - independent growth in human breast cancer cells . Oncogene 1995 ; 10 : 2435 – 2446 . 53 . Yarden RI , Wilson MA , Chrysogelos SA . Estrogen suppression of EGFR expression in breast cancer cells : a possible mechanism to modu - late growth . J Cell Biochem 2001 ; 81 ( S36 ) : 232 – 246 . 54 . Yarden RI , Lauber AH , El - Ashry D et al . Bimodal regulation of epidermal growth factor receptor by estrogen in breast cancer cells . Endocrinology 1996 ; 137 : 2739 – 2747 . 55 . Bunone G , Briand PA , Miksicek RJ et al . Activation of the unliganded estrogen receptor by EGF involves the MAP kinase pathway and direct phosphorylation . EMBO J 1996 ; 15 : 217421 – 217483 . 56 . Sun M , Paciga JE , Feldman RI et al . Phosphatidylinositol - 3 - OH kinase ( PI3K ) / AKT2 , activated in breast cancer , regulates and is induced by estrogen receptor α ( ER α ) via interaction between ERalpha and PI3K . Cancer Res 2001 ; 61 : 5985 – 5991 . 57 . Kato S , Endoh H , Masuhiro Y et al . Activation of the estrogen receptor through phosphorylation by mitogen - activated protein kinase . Science 1995 ; 270 : 1491 – 1494 . 58 . Read LD , Keith D Jr , Slamon DJ et al . Hormonal modulation of HER - 2 / neu protooncogene messenger ribonucleic acid and p185 protein expres - sion in human breast cancer cell lines . Cancer Res 1990 ; 50 : 3947 – 3951 . 59 . Massarweh S , Mohsin SK , Shou J et al . Inhibition of epidermal growth - factor / Her - 2 receptor signalling using ZD1839 ( Iressa ) restores tamoxifen sensitivity and delays resistance to estrogen deprivation in Her - 2 overexpressing breast tumors . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2002 ; 21 : 33a ( Abstr 130 ) . 60 . Massarweh S , Shou J , DiPietro M et al . Targeting the epidermal growth factor receptor pathway improves the anti - tumor effect of tamoxifen and delays acquired resistance in a xenograft model of breast cancer . Breast Cancer Res Treat 2002 ; 76 ( Suppl 1 ) : S33 ( Abstr 18 ) . 61 . Knowlden JM , Hutcheson IR , Jones HE et al . Elevated levels of epi - dermal growth factor receptor / c - erbB2 heterodimers mediate an auto - crine growth regulatory pathway in tamoxifen - resistant MCF - 7 cells . Endocrinology 2003 ; 144 : 1032 – 1044 . 62 . Kurokawa H , Arteaga CL . Inhibition of erbB receptor ( HER ) tyrosine kinases as a strategy to abrogate antiestrogen resistance in human breast cancer . Clin Cancer Res 2001 ; 7 ( 12 Suppl ) : 4436s – 4442s . 63 . Wakeling AE , Nicholson RI , Gee JM . Prospects for combining hor - monal and nonhormonal growth factor inhibition . Clin Cancer Res 2001 ; 7 ( 12 Suppl ) : 4350s – 4355s . 64 . Arteaga CL . Epidermal growth factor receptor dependence in human tumors : more than just expression ? Oncologist 2002 ; 7 ( Suppl 4 ) : 31 – 39 . 65 . Witters LM , Kumar R , Chinchilli VM et al . Enhanced anti - proliferative activity of the combination of tamoxifen plus HER - 2 - neu antibody . Breast Cancer Res Treat 1997 ; 42 : 1 – 5 . 66 . Kunisue H , Kurebayashi J , Otsuki T et al . Anti - HER2 antibody enhances the growth inhibitory effect of anti - oestrogen on breast cancer cells expressing both oestrogen receptors and HER2 . Br J Cancer 2000 ; 82 : 46 – 51 . 1360 67 . Perez - Tenorio G , Stal O , Southeast Sweden Breast Cancer Group . Acti - vation of AKT / PKB in breast cancer predicts a worse outcome among endocrine treated patients . Br J Cancer 2002 ; 86 : 540 – 545 . 68 . Gee JM , Robertsson JFR , Ellis IO et al . Phosphorylation of ERK1 / 2 mitogen - activated protein kinase is associated with poor response to anti - hormonal therapy and decreased patient survival in clinical breast cancer . Int J Cancer 2001 ; 95 : 247 – 254 . 69 . Kurokawa H , Lenferink AE , Simpson JF et al . Inhibition of HER2 / neu ( erbB - 2 ) and mitogen - activated protein kinases enhances tamoxifen action against HER2 - overexpressing , tamoxifen - resistant breast cancer cells . Cancer Res 2000 ; 60 : 5887 – 5894 . 70 . Atanaskova N , Keshamouni VG , Krueger JS et al . MAP kinase / estrogen receptor cross - talk enhances estrogen mediated signaling and tumor growth but does not confer tamoxifen resistance . Oncogene 2002 ; 21 : 4000 – 4008 . 71 . Donovan JC , Milic A , Slingerland JM . Constitutive MEK / MAPK acti - vation leads to p27 ( Kip1 ) deregulation and antiestrogen resistance in human breast cancer cells . J Biol Chem 2001 ; 276 : 40888 – 40895 . 72 . Lenferink AE , Simpson JF , Shawver LK et al . Blockade of the epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase suppresses tumorigenesis in MMTV / Neu + MMTV / TGF - α bigenic mice . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000 ; 97 : 9609 – 9614 . 73 . Liang J , Zubovitz J , Petrocelli T et al . PKB / Akt phosphorylates p27 , impairs nuclear import of p27 and opposes p27 - mediated G 1 arrest . Nat Med 2002 ; 8 : 1153 – 1160 . 74 . Shin I , Yakes FM , Rojo F et al . PKB / Akt mediates cell - cycle progression by phosphorylation of p27 ( Kip1 ) at threonine 157 and modulation of its cellular localization . Nat Med 2002 ; 8 : 1145 – 1152 . 75 . Viglietto G , Motti ML , Bruni P et al . Cytoplasmic relocalization and inhibition of the cyclin - dependent kinase inhibitor p27 ( Kip1 ) by PKB / Akt - mediated phosphorylation in breast cancer . Nat Med 2002 ; 8 : 1136 – 1144 . 76 . Clark AS , West K , Streicher S et al . Constitutive and inducible Akt activ - ity promotes resistance to chemotherapy , trastuzumab , or tamoxifen in breast cancer cells . Mol Cancer Ther 2002 ; 1 : 707 – 717 . 77 . Nakatani K , Thompson DA , Barthel A et al . Up - regulation of Akt3 in estrogen receptor - deficient breast cancers and androgen - independent prostate cancer lines . J Biol Chem 1999 ; 274 : 21528 – 21532 . 78 . Biswas DK , Dai SC , Cruz A et al . The nuclear factor κ B ( NF - κ B ) : a potential therapeutic target for estrogen receptor negative breast cancers . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001 ; 98 : 10386 – 10391 . 79 . Lemoine NR , Barnes DM , Hollywood DP et al . Expression of the ERBB3 gene product in breast cancer . Br J Cancer 1992 ; 66 : 1116 – 1121 . 80 . Bacus SS , Chin D , Yarden Y et al . Type 1 receptor tyrosine kinases are differentially phosphorylated in mammary carcinoma and differentially associated with steroid receptors . Am J Pathol 1996 ; 148 : 549 – 558 . 81 . Vogt U , Bielawski K , Schlotter CM et al . Amplification of erbB - 4 onco - gene occurs less frequently than that of erbB - 2 in primary human breast cancer . Gene 1998 ; 223 : 375 – 380 . 82 . Ram TG , Schelling ME , Hosick HL . Blocking HER - 2 / HER - 3 function with a dominant negative form of HER - 2 in cells stimulated by heregulin and in breast cancer cells with HER - 2 gene amplification . Cell Growth Differ 2000 ; 11 : 173 – 183 . 83 . Slamon DJ , Clark GM , Wong SG et al . Human breast cancer : correlation of relapse and survival with amplification of the HER - 2 / neu oncogene . Science 1987 ; 235 : 177 – 182 . 84 . Carter P , Presta L , Gorman CM et al . Humanization of an anti - p185HER - 2 antibody for human cancer therapy . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992 ; 89 : 4285 – 4289 . 85 . Ullrich A , Schlessinger J . Signal transduction by receptors with tyrosine kinase activity . Cell 1990 ; 61 : 203 – 212 . 86 . Cobleigh MA , Vogel CL , Tripathy D et al . Multinational study of the efficacy and safety of humanized anti - HER - 2 monoclonal antibody in women who have HER - 2 - overexpressing metastatic breast cancer that has progressed after chemotherapy for metastatic disease . J Clin Oncol 1999 ; 17 : 2639 – 2648 . 87 . Vogel CL , Cobleigh MA , Tripathy D et al . Efficacy and safety of trastu - zumab as a single agent in first - line treatment of HER - 2 - overexpressing metastatic breast cancer . J Clin Oncol 2002 ; 20 : 719 – 726 . 88 . Cardoso F , Piccart MJ , Durbecq V et al . Resistance to trastuzumab : a necessary evil or a temporary challenge ? Clin Breast Cancer 2002 ; 3 : 217 – 257 . 89 . Baselga J , Albanell J , Molina MA et al . Mechanism of action of trastu - zumab and scientific update . Semin Oncol 2001 ; 28 ( 5 Suppl 16 ) : 4 – 11 . 90 . Yip YL , Ward RL . Anti - ErbB - 2 monoclonal antibodies and ErbB - 2 directed vaccines . Cancer Immunol Immunother 2002 ; 50 : 569 – 587 . 91 . Lu Y , Zi X , Zhao Y et al . Insulin - like growth factor - 1 receptor signalling and resistance to trastuzumab . J Natl Cancer Inst 2001 ; 93 : 1852 – 1857 . 92 . Winer EP , Burstein HJ . New combinations with Herceptin in metastatic breast cancer . Oncology 2001 ; 61 ( Suppl 2 ) : 50 – 57 . 93 . Crone SA , Zhao YY , Fan L et al . ErbB2 is essential in the prevention of dilated cardiomyopathy . Nat Med 2002 ; 8 : 459 – 465 . 94 . Schwall RH , Dugger D , Erickson SL et al . Potent preclinical efficacy of Herceptin - DM1 against HER - 2 - overexpressing breast tumors in vivo . Clin Cancer Res 2001 ; 7 : 3784s ( Abstr 652 ) . 95 . Lewis Phillips GD , La Fleur M , Totpal R et al . In vitro efficacy of Hercep - tin - maytansinoid conjugate on human breast tumor cells . Clin Cancer Res 2001 ; 7 : 3787s ( Abstr 664 ) . 96 . Fox WD , Tindell CA , Galkin A et al . Anti - tumor effects of 2C4 , a humanized monoclonal antibody targeted to an epitope of the Her - 2 / neu extracellular domain , in human prostate cancer xenografts . Clin Cancer Res 2001 ; 7 : 3763s ( Abstr 543 ) . 97 . Agus D . Targeting ligand - activated ErbB2 signalling inhibits breast and prostate tumour growth . Cancer Cell 2002 ; 2 : 127 – 137 . 98 . Watanabe M , Wallance PK , Keler T et al . Antibody dependent cellular phagocytosis ( ADCP ) and antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity ( ADCC ) of breast cancer cells mediated by bispecific antibody , MDX - 210 . Breast Cancer Res Treat 1999 ; 53 : 199 – 207 . 99 . Posey JA , Raspet R , Verma U et al . A pilot trial of GM - CSF and MDX - H210 in patients with erbB - 2 - positive advanced malignancies . J Immuno - ther 1999 ; 4 : 371 – 379 . 100 . Lewis LD , Cole BF , Wallace PK et al . Pharmacokinetic - pharmaco - dynamic relationships of the bispecific antibody MDX - H210 when administered in combination with interferon γ : a multiple - dose phase - I study in patients with advanced cancer which overexpresses HER - 2 / neu . J Immunol Methods 2001 ; 248 : 149 – 165 . 101 . Valone FH , Kaufman PA , Guyre PM et al . Phase Ia / Ib trial of bispecific antibody MDX - 210 in patients with advanced breast or ovarian cancer that overexpresses the proto - oncogene HER - 2 / neu . J Clin Oncol 1995 ; 9 : 2281 – 2292 . 102 . Naito K , Matsutani E , Tamura T et al . TAK - 165 , a selective inhibitor of HER - 2 tyrosine kinase : 1 . Nature of tyrosine kinase inhibition and selec - tive antitumor activity in vivo and in vitro . Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 2002 ; 43 : 786 ( Abstr 3897 ) . 103 . Yoshida S , Naito K , Hori A et al . TAK - 165 , a selective inhibitor of HER - 2 tyrosine kinase : 2 . Mechanism of antitumor activity on HER - 2 signal transduction pathway . Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 2002 ; 43 : 786 ( Abstr 3898 ) . 104 . Zhang L , Chang CJ , Bacus SS et al . Suppressed transformation and induced differentiation of HER - 2 / neu - overexpressing breast cancer cells by Emodin . Cancer Res 1995 ; 55 : 3890 – 3896 . 1361 105 . Hong RL , Spohn WH , Hung MC . Curcumin inhibits tyrosine kinase activity of p185neu and also depletes p185neu . Clin Cancer Res 1999 ; 7 : 1884 – 1891 . 106 . Zhang L , Lau YK , Xia W et al . Tyrosine kinase inhibitor emodin sup - presses growth of HER - 2 / neu - overexpressing breast cancer cells in athy - mic mice and sensitizes these cells to the inhibitory effect of paclitaxel . Clin Cancer Res 1999 ; 5 : 343 – 353 . 107 . Rabindran SK , Discafani CM , Floyd MB et al . Antitumor activity of compound 820 in xenografts : an orally active irreversible inhibitor of the Her - 2 receptor tyrosine kinase . Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 2002 ; 43 : 1001 ( Abstr 4965 ) . 108 . Barbacci EG , Bocoe BP , Cox ED et al . The biological and biochemical effects of CP - 654577 , a selective erbB2 kinase inhibitor , on human breast cancer cells . Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 2002 ; 43 : 1002 ( Abstr 4969 ) . 109 . Yang DC , McCreary MS , Jiang XP et al . Inhibition of human breast cancer cell growth by a plasmid that expresses Her - 2 / neu antisense RNA . Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 2002 ; 43 : 88 ( Abstr 439 ) . 110 . Autovac™ Pipeline . [ on - line ] www . pharmexa . com / 140 . asp ? menu = 0202 ( 5 November 2002 , date last accessed ) 111 . Disis ML , Grabstein KH , Sleath PR et al . Generation of immunity to the HER - 2 / neu oncogenic protein in patients with breast and ovarian cancer using a peptide - based vaccine . Clin Cancer Res 1997 ; 6 : 1289 – 1297 . 112 . Disis ML , Gooley TA , Rinn K et al . Generation of T - cell immunity to the HER - 2 / neu protein after active immunization with HER - 2 / neu peptide - based vaccines . J Clin Oncol 2002 ; 20 : 2624 – 2632 . 113 . Jolly C , Morimoto RI . Role of the heat shock response and molecular chaperones in oncogenesis and cell death . J Natl Cancer Inst 2000 ; 92 : 1564 – 1572 . 114 . Manjili MH , Henderson R , Wang XY et al . Development of a recom - binant HSP110 - HER - 2 / neu vaccine using the chaperoning properties of HSP110 . Cancer Res 2002 ; 62 : 1737 – 1742 . 115 . Yu D , Shi D , Scanlon M et al . Reexpression of neu - encoded oncoprotein counteracts the tumor - suppressing but not the metastasis - suppressing function of E1A . Cancer Res 1993 ; 53 : 5784 – 5790 . 116 . Wang SC , Hung MC . HER - 2 overexpression and cancer targeting . Semin Oncol 2001 ; 28 ( Suppl 16 ) : 115 – 124 . 117 . Uherek C , Tonn T , Uherek B et al . Retargeting of natural killer - cell cyto - lytic activity to ErbB2 - expressing cancer cells results in efficient and selective tumor cell destruction . Blood 2002 ; 100 : 1265 – 1273 . 118 . Wilson RH , Tkimoto CH , Agnew EB et al . Phase I pharmacologic study of 17 - ( allylamino ) - 17 - demethoxygeldanamycin ( AAG ) in adult patients with advanced solid tumors . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2001 ; 20 : 82a ( Abstr 325 ) . 119 . Munster PM , Marchion DC , Basso AD et al . Degradation of HER - 2 by ansamycins induces growth arrest and apoptosis in cells with HER - 2 overexpression via HER - 3 , phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase - Akt - dependent pathway . Cancer Res 2002 ; 62 : 3132 – 3137 . 120 . Solit DB , Basso AD , Munster PN et al . 17 - Allylamino - geldanmycin causes AKT inactivation and enhances the antitumor effects of pacli - taxel . Clin Cancer Res 2001 ; 7 ( Suppl ) : 3740s . 121 . Scott GK , Benz CC . Antitumor activity of histone deacetylase inhibitor linked to ErbB2 transcript destabilization . Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 2002 ; 43 : 334 ( Abstr 1655 ) . 122 . Adams J , Palombella VJ , Sausville EA et al . Proteasome inhibitors : a novel class of potent and effective antitumor agents . Cancer Res 1999 ; 59 : 2615 – 2622 . 123 . Baselga J . New technologies in epidermal growth factor receptor - targeted cancer therapy . Signal 2001 ; 1 : 12 – 21 . 124 . Pedersen MW , Meltorn M , Damstrup L et al . The type III epidermal growth factor receptor mutation . Biological significance and potential target for anti - cancer therapy . Ann Oncol 2001 ; 6 : 745 – 760 . 125 . Tumor focus . The EGFR family in breast cancer . Signal 2001 ; 2 : 17 – 21 . 126 . Moscatello DK , Holgado - Madruga M , Godwin AK et al . Frequent expression of a mutant epidermal growth factor receptor in multiple human tumors . Cancer Res 1995 ; 55 : 5536 – 5539 . 127 . Voldborg BR , Damstrup L , Spang - Thomsen M et al . EGFR and EGFR mutations , function and possible role in clinical trials . Ann Oncol 1997 ; 8 : 1197 – 1206 . 128 . Ciardiello F . Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors as anticancer agents . Drugs 2000 ; 60 : 25 – 32 . 129 . Baselga J . EGFR receptor as a target : preclinical and clinical studies . Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 2002 ; 43 : 1172 – 1173 . 130 . Herbst RS , Shin DM . Monoclonal antibodies to target epidermal growth factor receptor - positive tumors : a new paradigm for cancer therapy . Cancer 2002 ; 94 : 1593 – 1611 . 131 . Sweeney CJ . Epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors : combination with cytotoxic agents . Medscape CME circle 2002 . [ on - line ] www . medscape . com / viewarticle / 439173 _ 9 ( 5 November 2002 , date last accessed ) . 132 . Figlin RA , Belldegrun A , Lohner ME et al . ABX - EGF : a fully human anti - EGF receptor antibody in patients with advanced cancer . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2001 ; 20 : 1000 ( Abstr 1102 ) . 133 . Crombet - Ramos T , Torres L , Solano M et al . Pharmacological and clin - ical evaluation of the humanized anti - EGFR monoclonal antibody , h - R3 , in patients with advanced epithelial carcinomas . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2001 ; 20 : 1000 ( Abstr 1012 ) . 134 . Tewes M , Schleucher N , Dirsch O et al . A phase I trials of the humanized anti epidermal growth factor receptor monoclonal antibody EMD 72000 in patients with EGFR expressing solid tumors . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2002 ; 21 : 95a ( Abstr 378 ) . 135 . Crombet - Ramos T , Osorio M , Cruz T et al . Use of the anti - EGFR anti - body combination with radiotherapy in the treatment of advanced head and neck cancer . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2002 ; 21 : 14a ( Abstr 53 ) . 136 . Modjtahedi H , Hickish T , Nicolson M et al . Phase I trial and tumour localisation of the anti - EGFR monoclonal antibody ICR62 in head and neck or lung cancer . Br J Cancer 1996 ; 73 : 228 – 235 . 137 . Stragliotto G , Vega F , Stasiecki P et al . Multiple infusions of anti - epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) monoclonal antibody ( EMD 55 , 900 ) in patients with recurrent malignant gliomas . Eur J Cancer 1996 ; 32A : 636 – 640 . 138 . Baselga J . Why the epidermal growth factor receptor ? The rationale for cancer therapy . Oncologist 2002 ; 7 : 2 – 8 . 139 . Pfister DG , Lipton A , Belt R et al . A phase I trial of the epidermal growth factor receptor - directed bispecific antibody ( BsAB ) MDX - 447 in patients with solid tumors . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999 ; 18 : 433a ( Abstr 1667 ) . 140 . Hambek M , Solbach C , Schnuerch HG et al . Tumor necrosis factor α sensitizes low epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) - expressing carcinomas for anti - EGFR therapy . Cancer Res 2001 ; 61 : 1045 – 1049 . 141 . Wikstrand CJ , Hale LP , Batra SK et al . Monoclonal antibodies against EGFR vIII are tumor specific and react with breast and lung carcinomas and malignant gliomas . Cancer Res 1995 ; 55 : 3140 – 3148 . 142 . Robertson JFR , Gutteridge E , Cheung KL et al . A phase II study of ZD1839 ( ‘Iressa’ ) in tamoxifen resistant ER - positive and endocrine insensitive ( ER - negative ) breast cancer . Breast Cancer Res Treat 2002 ; 76 ( Suppl 1 ) : S96 ( Abstr 357 ) . 143 . Albain K , Elledge R , Gradishar WJ et al . Open - label , phase II , multi - center trial of ZD 1839 ( ‘Iressa’ ) in patients with advanced breast cancer . Breast Cancer Res Treat 2002 ; 76 ( Suppl 1 ) : S33 ( Abstr 20 ) . 144 . Winer E , Cobleigh M , Dickler M et al . Phase II multicenter study to evalu - ate the efficacy and safety of Tarceva ( erlotinib ; OSI - 774 ) in women with previously treated locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer . Breast Cancer Res Treat 2002 ; 76 ( Suppl 1 ) : S115 ( Abstr 445 ) . 1362 145 . Bundred NJ , Chan K , Anderson NG . Studies of epidermal growth factor receptor inhibition in breast cancer . Endocr Relat Cancer 2001 ; 8 : 183 – 189 . 146 . Chan KC , Knox F , Woodburn JR et al . EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibition decreases epithelial proliferation in DCIS of the breast , whereas cErbB2 blockade does not . Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 2000 ; 41 : 482 ( Abstr 3074 ) . 147 . Chan KC , Knox WF , Woodburn JR et al . ZD 1839 an epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor , inhibits proliferation in normal and preinvasive breast epithelia . Proceedings of the AACR - NCI - EORTC International Conference on Molecular Targets and Cancer Therapeutics . 1999 ; 7 : ( Abstr 27 ) . 148 . Lu C , Zhang Y , Hill J et al . Prevention of breast cancer in MMTV - ErbB2 transgenic mice using the tyrosine kinase inhibitor , ZD 1839 ( Iressa ) . Breast Cancer Res Treat 2002 ; 76 ( Suppl 1 ) : S33 ( Abstr 19 ) . 149 . Normanno N , Campiglio M , De LA et al . Cooperative inhibitory effect of ZD1839 ( Iressa ) in combination with trastuzumab ( Herceptin ) on human breast cancer cell growth . Ann Oncol 2002 ; 13 : 65 – 72 . 150 . Moasser MM , Basso A , Averbuch SD et al . The tyrosine kinase inhibitor ZD1839 ( ‘Iressa’ ) inhibits HER2 - driven signaling and suppresses the growth of HER2 - overexpressing tumor cells . Cancer Res 2001 ; 61 : 7184 – 7188 . 151 . Moulder SL , Yakes FM , Muthuswamy SK et al . Epidermal growth factor receptor ( HER1 ) tyrosine kinase inhibitor ZD1839 ( Iressa ) inhibits HER2 / neu ( erbB2 ) - overexpressing breast cancer cells in vitro and in vivo . Cancer Res 2001 ; 61 : 8887 – 8895 . 152 . Anderson NG , Ahmad T , Chan K et al . ZD1839 ( Iressa ) , a novel epider - mal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) tyrosine kinase inhibitor , potently inhibits the growth of EGFR - positive cancer cell lines with or without erbB2 overexpression . Int J Cancer 2001 ; 94 : 774 – 782 . 153 . Greenberger LM , Discafani C , Wang YF et al . EKB 569 : a new irrevers - ible inhibitor of epidermal growth factor tyrosine kinase for the treat - ment of cancer . Clin Cancer Res 2000 ; 6 : 4544s ( Abstr 388 ) . 154 . Durnez H , Hoekstra R , Eskens F et al . A phase I and pharmacolocigal study of PKI166 , an epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor , administered orally 3 times a week to patients with advanced cancer . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2002 ; 21 : 86a ( Abstr 341 ) . 155 . Murren JR , Papadimitrakopoulou VA , Sizer KC et al . A phase I dose - escalating study to evaluate the biological activity and pharmacokinetics of PKI166 , a novel tyrosine kinase inhibitor , inpatients with advanced cancers . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2002 ; 21 : 95a ( Abstr 377 ) . 156 . Hoekstra H , Dumez F , Eskens K et al . A phase I and pharmacological study of intermittent dosing of PKI166 a novel epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor , administered orally to patients with advanced cancer . Clin Cancer Res 2001 ; 7 : 3771s ( Abstr 585 ) . 157 . Bruns CJ , Solorzano CC , Harbison MT et al . Blockade of the epidermal growth factor receptor signaling by a novel tyrosine kinase inhibitor leads to apoptosis of endothelial cells and therapy of human pancreatic carcinoma . Cancer Res 2000 ; 60 : 2926 – 2935 . 158 . Rusnak DW , Affleck K , Cockerill SG et al . The characterization of novel , dual ErbB - 2 / EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors : Potential therapy for cancer . Cancer Res 2001 ; 61 : 7196 – 7203 . 159 . Xia W , Mulin R , Keith B et al . Effect of GW 2016 , a dual inhibitor of erbB - 2 and EGFR tyrosine kinases , on EGFr induced receptor tyrosine autophosphorylation state and downstream signaling pathway . Clin Cancer Res 2001 ; 7 : 3768s ( Abstr 570 ) . 160 . DeSimone PA , Bence AK , Anderson EB et al . A phase I study to inves - tigate the safety , tolerability , and pharmacokinetics of single oral escalat - ing doses of GW572016 in healthy volunteers . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2002 ; 21 : 94a ( Abstr 375 ) . 161 . Allen LF , Lenehan PF , Eiseman IA et al . Potential benefits of the irre - versible pan - erbB inhibitor , CI - 1033 , in the treatment of breast cancer . Semin Oncol 2002 ; 3 ( Suppl 11 ) : 11 – 21 . 162 . Rinehart JJ , Wilding G , Willson J et al . A phase I clinical and pharmaco - kinetic study of oral CI - 1033 , a pan - erbB tyrosine kinase inhibitor , in patients with advanced solid tumors . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2002 ; 21 : 11a ( Abstr 41 ) . 163 . Halatsch ME . Selective ribozyme mediated inhibition of 801 - bp deletion - mutant EGFR mRNA expression in human cancers . Signal 2001 ; 2 : 12 – 16 . 164 . Yamazaki H , Kijima H , Ohnishi Y et al . Inhibition of tumor growth by ribozyme - mediated suppression of aberrant epidermal growth factor receptor gene expression . J Natl Cancer Inst 1998 ; 90 : 581 – 587 . 165 . Qui Q , Dudoit F , Matheson SL et al . The combi - targeting concept : FD 137 , a novel 3 , 3 - disubstituted bi - functional nitrosurea with signal transduction inhibitory properties . Clin Cancer Res 2001 ; 7 : 3770s ( Abstr 580 ) . 166 . Brahimi F , Matheson SL , McNamee J et al . The combi - targeting con - cept : Epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) - mediated tumor selec - tivity . Clin Cancer Res 2001 ; 7 : 3773s ( Abstr 594 ) . 167 . Matheson SL , Mc Namee J , Jean - Claude BJ . The combi - targeting con - cept : a tandem approach to chemosensitivity and chemoselectivity . Clin Cancer Res 2001 ; 7 : 3780s ( Abstr 629 ) . 168 . Gonzalez G , Crombet T , Catala M et al . A novel vaccine composed of human - recombinant epidermal growth factor linked to a carrier protein : Report of a pilot clinical trial . Ann Oncol 1998 ; 9 : 431 – 435 . 169 . Rowinsky EK . Progress in development of farnesyl transferase inhibit - ors as anticancer therapeutics . Medscape CME circle 2002 . [ on - line ] www . medscape . com / viewprogram / 1695 ( 5 November 2002 , date last accessed ) . 170 . Adjei AA . Blocking oncogenic Ras signaling for cancer therapy . J Natl Cancer Inst 2001 ; 93 : 1062 – 1074 . 171 . Evans TL , Fidias P , Skarin A et al . A phase II study of efficacy and toler - ability of the farnesyl protein transferase inhibitor L - 778 , 123 as first line therapy in patients with advanced non small cell lung cancer . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2002 ; 21 : 13b ( Abstr 1861 ) . 172 . Lobell RB , Liu D , Buser CA et al . Preclinical and clinical pharmaco - dynamic assessment of L - 778 , 123 , a dual inhibitor of farnesyl : protein transferase and greanylgeranyl : protein transferase type - 1 . Mol Cancer Ther 2002 ; 1 : 747 – 758 . 173 . Zhu AX , Supko JG , Ryan DP et al . A phase I clinical , pharmacokinetic and phamacodynamic study of the farnesyl transferase inhibitor BMS 214662 given as a 24 hour continuous intravenous infusion once weekly × 3 in patients with advanced solid tumors . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2002 ; 21 : 92a ( Abstr 366 ) . 174 . Taberno J , Albanell J , Rojo F et al . A phase I pharmacokinetic and serial tumor and PBMC pharmacodynamic study of weekly 24 - hour infusion BMS - 214662 , a farnesyltransferase inhibitor , in patients with advanced solid tumors . Clin Cancer Res 2001 ; 7 : 3775s ( Abstr 604 ) . 175 . Gordon MS , Sandler AB , Holmlund JT et al . A phase I trial of ISIS 2503 , an antisense inhibitor of H - ras , administered by a 24 - hour weekly infu - sion to patients with advanced cancer . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999 ; 18 : 157a ( Abstr 604 ) . 176 . Dang T , Johnson D , Kelly N et al . Multicencenter phase II trial of an anti - sense inhibitor of H - ras ( ISIS - 2503 ) in advanced non small cell lung cancer . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2001 ; 20 : 332a ( Abstr 1325 ) . 177 . Adjei AA , Erlichman C , Sloan JA et al . A phase I trial of ISIS 2503 , an antisense inhibitor of H - ras in combination with Gemcitabine in patients with advanced cancer . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2000 ; 19 : 186a ( Abstr 722 ) . 178 . Behrens RJ , Bernstein SA , Edison M et al . Phase II / pilot trial of adjuvant therapy in pancreatic and colorectal cancer patients with mutant ras vaccine . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2002 ; 21 : 29a ( Abstr 112 ) . 1363 179 . Lyons JF , Wilhelm S , Hibner B et al . Discovery of a novel Raf kinase inhibitor . Endocr Relat Cancer 2001 ; 8 : 219 – 225 . 180 . Strumberg D , Schuehly U , Moeller JG et al . Phase I clinical pharmaco - kinetic and pharmacodynamic study of the Raf kinase inhibitor BAY 43 - 9006 in patients with locally advanced or metastatic cancer . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2001 ; 20 : 83a ( Abstr 330 ) . 181 . Awada A , Hendlisz A , Gil T et al . Final results of a clinical and pharmaco - kinetic ( PK ) phase I study of Raf kinase inhibitor BAY 43 - 9006 in refractory solid cancers : a promising anti - tumor agent . Eur J Cancer 2002 ; 38 ( Suppl 7 ) : S52 ( Abstr 162 ) . 182 . LoRusso PM , Adjei AA , Meyer MB et al . A phase I clinical and pharmacokinetic evaluation of the oral MEK inhibitor , CI - 1040 , admin - istered for 21 consecutive days , repeated every 4 weeks in patients with advanced cancer . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2002 ; 21 : 81a ( Abstr 321 ) . 183 . Mitchell DY , Reid JM , Parchment RE et al . Pharmacokinetics and phar - macodynamics of the oral MEK inhibitor , CI 1040 , following multiple dose administration to patients with advanced cancer . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2002 ; 21 : 81a ( Abstr 320 ) . 184 . Schmelzie T , Hall MN . TOR , a central controller of cell growth . Cell 2000 ; 103 : 253 – 262 . 185 . Chan S , Johnston S , Scheulen ME et al . Phase II safety and activity trial of two dose levels of CCI - 779 in women with previously treated locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer . Breast Cancer Res Treat 2002 ; 76 ( Suppl 1 ) : S132 ( Abstr 526 ) . 186 . Atkins MB , Hidalgo M , Stadler W et al . A randomised double - blind phase 2 study of intravenous CCI - 779 administered weekly to patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2002 ; 21 : 10a ( Abstr 36 ) . 187 . Banerji U , O’Donell A , Scurr M et al . Phase I trial of the heat shock pro - tein 90 inhibitor 17 - allylamino17 - demethoxygeldanamycin ( 17AAG ) . Pharmacokinetic profile and pharmacodynamic endpoints . Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2001 ; 20 : 82a ( Abstr 326 ) . 188 . Tanaka M , Grossman H . PTEN human gene therapy of human bladder cancer inhibits cell growth and exhibits increased cytotoxicity in com - bination with doxorubicin . Clin Cancer Res 2001 ; 7 : 3738s ( Abstr 421 ) .