THE PARTICIPATORY DESIGN OF EXPOSURE ASSESSMENT APPARATUS David Holstius , University of California , Berkeley Background and Aims : Sensor - equipped phones , handheld monitors , and instrumented bicycles are just three examples of the diverse forms of personal and microenvironmental monitoring equipment that could emerge from advances in increasingly affordable , digital , and real - time measurement technologies . Who participates in the design of this emerging set of technologies , how , and what effect does it have on exposure assessment and environmental health ? What benefits could emerge from involving research participants more extensively in the design of instrumentation , as well as its staging and operation ? What systematic approaches can guide broader participation in this activity ? We present a process - oriented framework and method for eliciting and thinking through these problems as well as reflections and lessons learned . Methods and Materials : We review the Participatory Design ( PD ) framework , a well - established tradition of theory and method for the user - centered design of persuasive digital technologies ( Davis 2009 ) , as well as recent case studies in community - oriented PD ( DiSalvo 2008 ) and citizen sensing ( Willett 2010 , Dutta 2009 ) . We extend the contributions of this work by describing an iterative , workshop - oriented approach for the participatory design of exposure assessment apparatus . Relying on small - group sketching and description , as well as intensive rapid prototyping , the method results in the construction of functioning artefacts as well as stories and demonstrations . Results : Using commercially available , open - source components , we were able to construct several artefacts within a series of six workshops spread over three months . We identified four areas for future work to streamline and increase the value of such activity for exposure assessment stakeholders : ( 1 ) benchmarking and response characterization of low - cost , off - the shelf sensors ; ( 2 ) modularization of components identified and described in multiple artefacts ; ( 3 ) curricula and analytical techniques guiding the use and interpretation of measurements obtained from such artefacts ; and ( 4 ) collaboration with the emerging maker and hacker subculture , from whom we drew examples , materials , and inspiration . Conclusions : Low - cost and do - it - yourself ( DIY ) sensing platforms may offer innovative ways for professionals and non - professionals to expand participation by cooperating on the design of exposure assessment instrumentation . Workshop methods are time - intensive and require dedicated involvement from scientists , designers , and engineers ; however , this might be ameliorated . Further exploration of the potential for Participatory Design methods in exposure assessment is warranted . References J . Davis . Design methods for ethical persuasive computing . Persuasive ' 09 : Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Persuasive Technology ( 2009 ) C . DiSalvo , I . Nourbakhsh , D . Holstius , A . Akin , and M . Louw . The neighborhood networks project : A case study of critical engagement and creative expression through participatory design . Proceedings of the Conference on Participatory Design ( 2008 ) P . Dutta , P . M . Aoki , N . Kumar , A . Mainwaring , C . Myers , W . Willett and A . Woodruff . (cid:127)Common Sense : Participatory Urban Sensing Using a Network of Handheld Air Quality Monitors ( demonstration ) . (cid:127)Proc . 7th ACM Conf . on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems ( SenSys ' 09 ) , Nov . 2009 , 349 - 35 S . Kuznetsov , E . Paulos . Participatory sensing in public spaces : activating urban surfaces with sensor probes . Proceedings of the Conference on the Design of Interactive Systems ( 2010 ) W . Willett , P . Aoki , N . Kumar , S . Subramanian and A . Woodruff . (cid:127)Common Sense Community : Scaffolding Mobile Sensing and Analysis for Novice Users . (cid:127)Proc . 8th Int ' l Conf . on Pervasive Computing ( Pervasive ' 10 ) , May 2010 , 301 - 318