Statistica Sinica 21 ( 2011 ) , 5 - 42 AN OVERVIEW OF COMPOSITE LIKELIHOOD METHODS Cristiano Varin , Nancy Reid and David Firth Universit ` a Ca’ Foscari Venezia , University of Toronto and University of Warwick Abstract : A survey of recent developments in the theory and application of com - posite likelihood is provided , building on the review paper of Varin ( 2008 ) . A range of application areas , including geostatistics , spatial extremes , and space - time mod - els , as well as clustered and longitudinal data and time series are considered . The important area of applications to statistical genetics is omitted , in light of Larribe and Fearnhead ( 2011 ) . Emphasis is given to the development of the theory , and the current state of knowledge on eﬃciency and robustness of composite likelihood inference . Key words and phrases : Copulas , generalized estimating equations , geostatistics , Godambe information , longitudinal data , multivariate binary data , pseudo - likeli - hood , quasi - likelihood , robustness , spatial extremes , time series . 1 . Introduction Composite likelihood is an inference function derived by multiplying a col - lection of component likelihoods ; the particular collection used is often deter - mined by the context . Because each individual component is a conditional or marginal density , the resulting estimating equation obtained from the derivative of the composite log - likelihood is an unbiased estimating equation . Because the components are multiplied , whether or not they are independent , the inference function has the properties of likelihood from a misspeciﬁed model . This paper reviews recent work in the area of composite likelihood , reviews the contribu - tions presented at a workshop on composite likelihood held at the University of Warwick in April , 2008 , and presents an overview of developments since then . It complements and extends the review of Varin ( 2008 ) ; in particular adding more details on various types of composite likelihood constructed from marginal and conditional inference , adding yet more application areas , and considering spatial aspects in greater detail . A review of composite likelihood in statistical genetics is given in Larribe and Fearnhead ( 2011 ) . In Section 2 we give an overview of the main inferential results for com - posite likelihood , all based on the asymptotic theory of estimating equations 6 CRISTIANO VARIN , NANCY REID AND DAVID FIRTH and misspeciﬁed models . Section 3 surveys the wide range of application ar - eas where composite likelihood has been proposed , often under names such as pseudo - likelihood or quasi - likelihood , and Section 4 concentrates on a number of theoretical issues . In Section 5 we consider some of the computational aspects of construction of , and inference from , composite likelihood , and conclude in Section 6 with a summary of unresolved issues . 2 . Composite Likelihood Inference 2 . 1 . Deﬁnitions and notation Consider an m - dimensional vector random variable Y , with probability den - sity function f ( y ; θ ) for some unknown p - dimensional parameter vector θ ∈ Θ . Denote by { A 1 , . . . , A K } a set of marginal or conditional events with associ - ated likelihoods L k ( θ ; y ) ∝ f ( y ∈ A k ; θ ) . Following Lindsay ( 1988 ) a composite likelihood is the weighted product L C ( θ ; y ) = K ∏ k = 1 L k ( θ ; y ) w k , where w k are nonnegative weights to be chosen . If the weights are all equal then they can be ignored : selection of unequal weights to improve eﬃciency is discussed in the context of particular applications in Sections 3 and 4 . Although the above deﬁnition allows for combinations of marginal and con - ditional densities ( Cox and Reid ( 2004 ) ) , composite likelihoods are typically dis - tinguished in conditional and marginal versions . Composite conditional likelihoods Perhaps the precedent of composite likeli - hood is the pseudolikelihood proposed by Besag ( 1974 , 1975 ) for approximate inference in spatial processes . This pseudolikelihood is the product of the condi - tional densities of a single observation given its neighbours , L C ( θ ; y ) = m ∏ r = 1 f ( y r | { y s : y s is neighbour of y r } ; θ ) . More recent variants of Besag’s proposal involve using blocks of observations in both conditional and conditioned events , see Vecchia ( 1988 ) and Stein , Chi and Welty ( 2004 ) . Liang ( 1987 ) studies composite conditional likelihoods of type L C ( θ ; y ) = m ¡ 1 ∏ r = 1 m ∏ s = r + 1 f ( y r | y r + y s ; θ ) , ( 2 . 1 ) COMPOSITE LIKELIHOODS 7 and applies them to stratiﬁed case - control studies . Further work on this proposal may be found in Hanfelt ( 2004 ) , Wang and Williamson ( 2005 ) , and Fujii and Yanagimoto ( 2005 ) . Molenberghs and Verbeke ( 2005 ) in the context of longitudinal studies , and Mardia et al . ( 2008 ) in bioinformatics , construct composite likelihoods by pooling pairwise conditional densities L C ( θ ; y ) = m ∏ r = 1 m ∏ s = 1 f ( y r | y s ; θ ) , or by pooling full conditional densities L C ( θ ; y ) = m ∏ r = 1 f ( y r | y ( ¡ r ) ; θ ) , where y ( ¡ r ) denotes the vector of all the observations but y r . Composite marginal likelihoods The simplest composite marginal likelihood is the pseudolikelihood constructed under working independence assumptions , L ind ( θ ; y ) = m ∏ r = 1 f ( y r ; θ ) , sometimes referred to in the literature as the independence likelihood ( Chan - dler and Bate ( 2007 ) ) . The independence likelihood permits inference only on marginal parameters . If parameters related to dependence are also of interest it is necessary to model blocks of observations , as in the pairwise likelihood ( Cox and Reid ( 2004 ) ; Varin ( 2008 ) ) L pair ( θ ; y ) = m ¡ 1 ∏ r = 1 m ∏ s = r + 1 f ( y r , y s ; θ ) , ( 2 . 2 ) and in its extensions constructed from larger sets of observations , see Caragea and Smith ( 2007 ) . For continuous symmetric responses with inference focused on the depen - dence structure , Curriero and Lele ( 1999 ) and Lele and Taper ( 2002 ) propose composite marginal likelihoods based on pairwise diﬀerences , L diﬀ ( θ ; y ) = m ¡ 1 ∏ r = 1 m ∏ s = r + 1 f ( y r − y s ; θ ) . ( 2 . 3 ) 8 CRISTIANO VARIN , NANCY REID AND DAVID FIRTH Terminology Composite likelihoods are referred to with several diﬀerent names , including pseudolikelihood ( Molenberghs and Verbeke ( 2005 ) ) , approximate like - lihood ( Stein , Chi and Welty ( 2004 ) ) , and quasi - likelihood ( Hjort and Omre ( 1994 ) ; Glasbey ( 2001 ) ; Hjort and Varin ( 2008 ) ) . The ﬁrst two are too generic to be informative , and the third is a possible source of misunderstanding as it over - laps with a well established alternative ( McCullagh ( 1983 ) ; Wedderburn ( 1974 ) ) . Composite marginal likelihoods in time series are sometimes called split - data like - lihoods ( Ryd´en ( 1994 ) ; Vandekerkhove ( 2005 ) ) . In the psychometric literature , methods based on composite likelihood are called limited information methods . We consistently use the phrase composite ( marginal / conditional ) likelihood in this review , and use the notation L C ( · ) and c‘ ( · ) for the likelihood and log - likelihood function , respectively . If needed , we distinguish marginal , L MC , and conditional , L CC , composite likelihoods . 2 . 2 . Derived quantities The maximum composite likelihood estimator ˆ θ CL locates the maximum of the composite likelihood , or equivalently of the composite log - likelihood c‘ ( θ ; y ) = ∑ Kk = 1 ‘ k ( θ ; y ) w k , where ‘ k ( θ ; y ) = log L k ( θ ; y ) . In standard problems ˆ θ CL may be found by solving the composite score function u ( θ ; y ) = ∇ θ c‘ ( θ ; y ) , which is a linear combination of the scores associated with each log - likelihood term ‘ k ( θ ; y ) . Composite likelihoods may be seen as misspeciﬁed likelihoods , where mis - speciﬁcation occurs because of the working independence assumption among the likelihood terms forming the pseudolikelihood . Consequently , the second Bartlett identity does not hold , and we need to distinguish between the sensitivity matrix H ( θ ) = E θ { −∇ θ u ( θ ; Y ) } = ∫ { −∇ θ u ( θ ; y ) } f ( y ; θ ) d y and the variability matrix J ( θ ) = var θ { u ( θ ; Y ) } , and the Fisher information needs to be substituted by the Godambe information matrix ( Godambe ( 1960 ) ) G ( θ ) = H ( θ ) J ( θ ) ¡ 1 H ( θ ) , ( 2 . 4 ) also referred to as the sandwich information matrix . We reserve the notation I ( θ ) = var θ { ∇ θ log f ( Y ; θ ) } for the expected Fisher information ; if c‘ ( θ ) is a true log - likelihood function then G = H = I . An estimating equation u ( θ ; y ) which has H ( θ ) = J ( θ ) for all θ is called information unbiased , after Lindsay ( 1982 ) . COMPOSITE LIKELIHOODS 9 2 . 3 . Asymptotic theory In the case of n independent and identically distributed observations Y 1 , . . . , Y n from the model f ( y ; θ ) on R m , and n → ∞ with m ﬁxed , some standard asymptotic results are available from Kent ( 1982 ) , Lindsay ( 1988 ) , and Molen - berghs and Verbeke ( 2005 , Chap . 9 ) , which we now summarize . Since L C ( θ ; y ) = n ∏ i = 1 L C ( θ ; y i ) , and c‘ ( θ ; y ) = n ∑ i = 1 c‘ ( θ ; y i ) , under regularity conditions on the component log - densities we have a central limit theorem for the composite likelihood score statistic , leading to the result that the composite maximum likelihood estimator , ˆ θ CL is asymptotically normally distributed : √ n ( ˆ θ CL − θ ) d → N p { 0 , G ¡ 1 ( θ ) } , where N p ( µ , Σ ) is the p - dimensional normal distribution with mean and variance as indicated , and G ( θ ) is the Godambe information matrix in a single observation , deﬁned at ( 2 . 4 ) . The ratio of G ( θ ) to the expected Fisher information I ( θ ) determines the asymptotic eﬃciency of ˆ θ CL relative to the maximum likelihood estimator from the full model . If θ is a scalar this can be assessed or plotted over the range of θ ; see , for example , Cox and Reid ( 2004 , Fig . 1 ) . Suppose scientiﬁc interest is in a q - dimensional subvector ψ of the param - eter θ = ( ψ , τ ) . Composite likelihood versions of Wald and score statistics for testing H 0 : ψ = ψ 0 are easily constructed , and have the usual asymptotic χ 2 q distribution , see Molenberghs and Verbeke ( 2005 ) . The Wald - type statistic is W e = n ( ˆ ψ C L − ψ 0 ) T G ψψ ( ˆ θ CL ) ( ˆ ψ C L − ψ 0 ) , where G ψψ is the q × q submatrix of the Godambe information pertaining to ψ . The score - type statistic is W u = 1 nu ψ { ψ 0 , ˆ τ C L ( ψ 0 ) } T e H ψψ e G ψψ e H ψψ u ψ { ψ 0 , ˆ τ C L ( ψ 0 ) } , where H ψψ is the q × q submatrix of the inverse of H ( θ ) pertaining to ψ , and e H = H { ψ 0 , ˆ τ C L ( ψ 0 ) } . As in ordinary likelihood inference W e and W u suﬀer from practical limitations : W e is not invariant to reparametrization , while W u may be numerically unstable . In addition , estimates of the variability and sensitiv - ity matrices H ( θ ) and J ( θ ) are needed . While they can sometimes be evaluated explicitly , it is more usual to use empirical estimates . As H ( θ ) is a mean , its em - pirical estimation is straightforward , but the empirical estimation of J ( θ ) requires some internal replication ; see Section 5 . 10 CRISTIANO VARIN , NANCY REID AND DAVID FIRTH The composite likelihood ratio statistic W = 2 [ c‘ ( ˆ θ C L ; y ) − c‘ { ψ 0 , ˆ τ CL ( ψ 0 ) ; y } ] ( 2 . 5 ) seems preferable , but it has the drawback of a non - standard asymptotic distri - bution W d → q ∑ j = 1 λ j Z 2 j , where Z 1 , . . . , Z q are independent normal variates and λ 1 , . . . , λ q are the eigen - values of the matrix ( H ψψ ) ¡ 1 G ψψ . This result can be derived under the general framework of misspeciﬁed likelihoods , see Kent ( 1982 ) and the book length ex - position of White ( 1994 ) . Geys , Molenberghs and Ryan ( 1999 ) propose the adjusted composite like - lihood ratio statistic W 0 = W / ¯ λ with an approximate χ 2 q distribution , where ¯ λ denotes the average of the eigenvalues λ j ; Rotnitzky and Jewell ( 1990 ) suggest this for the independence likelihood . The mean of W 0 coincides with that of its asymptotic χ 2 q distribution , but higher order moments diﬀer . A better solution is provided by a Satterthwaite ( 1946 ) adjustment W 00 = νW / ( q ¯ λ ) with approx - imate χ 2 ν distribution , where the rescaling and the eﬀective degrees of freedom ν = ( ∑ qj = 1 λ j ) 2 / ∑ qj = 1 λ 2 j are chosen so that the mean and the variance of W 00 coincide with that of the approximate distribution ( Varin ( 2008 ) ; Lindsay , Pilla and Basak ( 2000 ) ) . Chandler and Bate ( 2007 ) propose a diﬀerent type of adjustment for the independence likelihood : essentially stretching the composite log - likelihood on the θ - axis about ˆ θ CL to ensure , at least approximately , that the second Bartlett identity holds , and thus that the usual χ 2 q approximation can be used . Vertical rescaling is another possibility , discussed brieﬂy in Chandler and Bate ( 2007 , Sec . 6 ) , and extended to composite likelihood in Pace , Salvan and Sartori ( 2011 ) . In the scalar parameter case , vertical rescaling is the same as dividing the com - posite log - likelihood ratio statistic by J ¡ 1 H . Saddlepoint approximations for quadratic forms are derived in Kuonen ( 1999 ) , and seem directly applicable to W , but we are not aware of detailed discussion of this application . The computational simplicity of composite likelihood functions in typical situations allows use of the parametric bootstrap . This has the advantage of working also in non - standard settings , such as when the parameter under the null hypothesis lies on the boundary of the parametric space ( Bellio and Varin ( 2005 ) ) , but it has the drawback of requiring the complete speciﬁcation of a joint model for the data , thus losing in model robustness . COMPOSITE LIKELIHOODS 11 Analogues of the Akaike ( AIC ) and the Bayesian ( BIC ) information crite - ria for model selection are easily derived in the framework of composite likeli - hoods . They have the usual forms AIC = − 2 c‘ ( ˆ θ CL ; y ) + 2dim ( θ ) and BIC = − 2 c‘ ( ˆ θ CL ; y ) + dim ( θ ) log n , where dim ( θ ) is an eﬀective number of parameters , estimated from the sensitivity matrix and the Godambe information : dim ( θ ) = tr { H ( θ ) G ( θ ) ¡ 1 } . Formal derivation of these information criteria may be found in Varin and Vidoni ( 2005 ) for the composite AIC criterion , and in Gao and Song ( 2010 ) for the composite BIC criterion . These criteria may be used for model averaging ( Claeskens and Hjort ( 2008 ) ) , or for selection of tuning parameters in shrinkage methods . See Gao and Song ( 2010 ) for examples of the Lasso penalty with composite marginal likelihoods . The inference in the previous section follows directly from the usual asymp - totic theory , under standard regularity conditions . It is also of interest to consider the case where n is ﬁxed and m increases , as in the case of a single ( n = 1 ) long time series or a spatial dataset . In this case the asymptotic theory depends on the availability of internal replication : for example in an autoregressive model of small - ish order , there is suﬃcient independence in a single long series to obtain a central limit result . The asymptotic variance for pairwise likelihood , and a modiﬁed version of it , was treated in Cox and Reid ( 2004 ) using Taylor series expansions . Since the validity of these expansions depends on the consistency of θ , which does not hold in general for m → ∞ , the argument is purely informal , and a more rigorous treatment is needed . Cox and Reid ( 2004 ) also suggest that it may be possible to choose a 6 = 0 in the composite log - likelihood ‘ C ( θ ) = ‘ pair ( θ ) − am‘ ind ( θ ) to ensure consistency as m → ∞ for ﬁxed n , but to our knowledge no examples of this strategy have been investigated . 3 . Applications 3 . 1 . Gaussian random ﬁelds Geostatistical models for large datasets are increasingly common , partic - ularly with the use of automatic collection methods such as remote sensing , and composite likelihood methods for approximate inference are very appeal - ing . A typical model in geostatistics applications is a Gaussian random ﬁeld Y = { Y ( c ) : c ∈ C ⊂ IR 2 } with mean function µ ( c ) and covariance matrix Σ ( θ ) whose entries reﬂect spatial correlation ; Cressie ( 1993 ) gives several examples of parametric spatial correlation functions . Classical geostatistics estimation of θ is based on various methods of curve ﬁtting to the sample variogram ( Cressie ( 1993 ) ) . These methods have been strongly criticised , as there is considerable ar - bitrariness in tuning the ﬁtting algorithms , and the resulting estimators are often ineﬃcient ( Diggle and Ribeiro ( 2007 , Sec . 6 . 3 ) ) . Maximum likelihood estimation 12 CRISTIANO VARIN , NANCY REID AND DAVID FIRTH would be more eﬃcient , but requires the inversion of the covariance matrix Σ ( θ ) , usually with a computational cost of order O ( m 3 ) . This cost is prohibitive with many modern spatial , or spatio - temporal , data sets . Let y r = y ( c r ) be the observation of process Y at location c r . Stemming from the work by Besag ( 1974 ) , Vecchia ( 1988 ) proposes approximating the full likelihood with the composite conditional likelihood L CC ( θ ; y ) = f ( y 1 ; θ ) m ∏ r = 2 f ( y r | B r ; θ ) , where B r is a subset of { y r ¡ 1 , . . . , y 1 } chosen so as to make feasible the compu - tation of L C . Vecchia ( 1988 ) suggestes restricting B r to a number of neighbours of y r . The use of this composite conditional likelihood is illustrated in Vecchia ( 1988 ) by the spatial analysis of water levels in 93 observation wells from an aquifer in the Saratoga Valley in Wyoming . Stein , Chi and Welty ( 2004 ) further develop Vecchia’s proposal , and use it to approximate the restricted likelihood function . The authors show that statistical eﬃciency can be improved using blocks of observations in place of single observations , L CC ( θ ; y ) = f ( z 1 ; θ ) B ∏ b = 2 f ( z b | B 0 b ; θ ) , where z 1 , . . . , z B are B blocks of data and B 0 b is a subset of { z b ¡ 1 , . . . , z 1 } . This approximate restricted likelihood method is used in Stein , Chi and Welty ( 2004 ) to analyse a data set of over 13 , 000 measurements of levels of chlorophyll in Lake Michigan . The measurements were made in a highly irregular pattern , which creates some challenges in the choice of conditioning sets . It was found that including some distant observations in the conditioning sets leads to a remarkable improvement in the eﬃciency of the composite likelihood parameter estimators . Diﬃculties with the composite likelihoods of Stein , Chi and Welty ( 2004 ) and Vecchia ( 1988 ) arise with the selection of the observation order and of the conditioning sets B b and B 0 b . To overcome such complications , in the pair of papers Caragea and Smith ( 2006 , 2007 ) three diﬀerent likelihood approximations all based on splitting the data into blocks are proposed . The ﬁrst method , the “big blocks likelihood” , consists in estimating θ from the joint density of the block means . The second method is denoted “small blocks” and it is the composite marginal likelihood formed by the product of densities for all the observations in each block , L MC ( θ ; y ) = B ∏ b = 1 f ( z b ; θ ) , COMPOSITE LIKELIHOODS 13 where z 1 , . . . , z B are B blocks of data . Hence , while the big blocks likelihood captures large - sample properties of the process but ignores the within blocks dependence , the small blocks method does the opposite . A proposed compromise between the two , called a hybrid method , is to use the big blocks likelihood multiplied by the composite conditional likelihood formed by the product of conditional densities of the observations within blocks , conditioned on the block mean . Eﬃciency studies indicate poor performance of the big blocks method , while the small blocks and the hybrid methods work similarly with high eﬃciency . Caragea and Smith ( 2006 ) illustrate the good behaviour of the last two methods for spatial estimation of rainfall trends across the south - central U . S . A . A major reason for concern with maximum likelihood estimation is the diﬃ - culty in checking the assumption of multivariate normality . This diﬃculty is also shared by these blockwise strategies . In contrast , the pairwise likelihood ( 2 . 2 ) and the composite likelihood of diﬀerences ( 2 . 3 ) just require bivariate normality for pairs of observations , which is much simpler to validate . Pairwise likelihood was suggested for inference in geostatistical models ﬁrst in Hjort and Omre ( 1994 ) and then further developed for image models by Nott and Ryd´en ( 1999 ) . The composite likelihood based on diﬀerences ( 2 . 3 ) is proposed by Curriero and Lele ( 1999 ) and applied to temperature data in three dimensional geothermal ﬁelds in Mateu et al . ( 2007 ) . 3 . 2 . Spatial extremes The rise in hazardous environmental events leads to much interest in statisti - cal modelling of spatial extremes . A ﬂexible approach to this problem is provided by max - stable models obtained from underlying Gaussian random ﬁelds con - structed by building on unpublished work of Smith ( 1990 ) . Despite the attractive properties of these models , both classical and Bayesian inference are impractical because of the curse of dimensionality with the likelihood computation , see Davi - son and Gholamrezaee ( 2009 ) . At the present time , only expressions for bivariate marginal densities have been derived . Thus , pairwise likelihood inference is nat - urally considered as a surrogate for impossible ordinary likelihood analysis in Davison and Gholamrezaee ( 2009 ) and Padoan , Ribatet and Sisson ( 2010 ) with applications to maximum temperatures in Switzerland and maximum precipita - tions in the U . S . A . , respectively . In these papers computations are carried out with the R Development Core Team ( 2009 ) package SpatialExtremes by Rib - atet ( 2009 ) , which seems to be the ﬁrst publicly available software implementing composite likelihood methods . A related approach is followed by Smith and Stephenson ( 2009 ) , where pair - wise likelihood is used in place of the unfeasible ordinary likelihood for Bayesian inference in max - stable spatial processes . The approach is illustrated through analysis of annual maximum rainfall data in South - West England . 14 CRISTIANO VARIN , NANCY REID AND DAVID FIRTH 3 . 3 . Serially correlated random eﬀects In longitudinal and panel studies , random eﬀects models are popular choices for modelling unobserved heterogeneity . In these models the outcomes are mod - elled as independent variables conditionally upon a subject - speciﬁc random eﬀect , usually assumed to be constant for all the measurements . The latter assumption may be unrealistic in most cases : better models should take into account also the possible serial dependence within subject - speciﬁc measurements . Consider longitudinal counts Y ir observed at occasion r = 1 , . . . , m i for sub - ject i = 1 , . . . , n . This type of data may be naturally modelled as conditionally independent Poisson variables Y ir | U i ∼ Po { U i exp ( x T ir β ) } , where U i is a random eﬀect , x ir is a covariate vector , and β are unknown re - gression coeﬃcients . A common assumption is that U 1 , . . . , U n are independent Gamma variables with unit mean . Accordingly , the marginal distribution of Y ir is negative binomial . To account for serial dependence Henderson and Shi - makura ( 2003 ) suggest extending the above model by assuming diﬀerent Gamma - distributed random eﬀects U ir for each measurement , Y ir | U ir ∼ Po { U ir exp ( x T ir β ) } , while specifying the joint distribution of U ir to describe the serial dependence . For example , Henderson and Shimakura ( 2003 ) propose an autoregressive depen - dence of type cor ( U ir , U js ) = { ρ j r ¡ s j if i = j 0 if i 6 = j . Unfortunately , the higher model ﬂexibility of the above formulation is paid for in terms of computational complexity . The likelihood function involves a number of terms exponentially increasing with the series length m i . Likelihood computation is impractical except in low dimensions . Hence , Henderson and Shimakura ( 2003 ) propose that inference be based on the pairwise likelihood L pair ( θ ; y ) = n ∏ i = 1 1 m i − 1 m i ¡ 1 ∏ r = 1 m i ∏ s = r + 1 f ( y ir , y is ; θ ) . The weights 1 / ( m i − 1 ) are used to match the ordinary likelihood in the case of independence , as suggested in LeCessie and van Houwelingen ( 1994 ) . Henderson and Shimakura ( 2003 ) illustrate pairwise likelihood inference for the above model with the analysis of a clinical trial on the number of analgesic doses taken by hospital patients in successive time intervals following abdominal surgery . COMPOSITE LIKELIHOODS 15 A further development of the Henderson and Shimakura ( 2003 ) work is pro - vided by Fiocco , Putter and van Houwelingen ( 2009 ) , who modify the autoregres - sive Gamma process U ir to enhance numerical stability when large counts are in - volved . They further suggest a two - step composite likelihood analysis where ﬁrst regression and overdispersion parameters are estimated from the independence likelihood , and then dependence parameters are obtained separately from the pairwise likelihood . In their simulation studies , Fiocco , Putter and van Houwelin - gen ( 2009 ) ﬁnd that this two - step approach loses little in eﬃciency with respect to joint estimation of all the parameters from the pairwise likelihood , and apply this approach to a meta - analysis study for survival curves . A motivation similar to that of Henderson and Shimakura ( 2003 ) and Fiocco , Putter and van Houwelingen ( 2009 ) underlies the work by Varin and Czado ( 2010 ) , who suggest an autoregressive mixed probit model for ordinal and binary longitudinal outcomes . The response Y ir is viewed as a censored version of a continuous unobserved variable Y ⁄ ir , Y ir = y ir ↔ α y ir ¡ 1 < Y ⁄ ir ≤ α y ir , y ir ∈ { 1 , . . . , h } , where −∞ ≡ α 0 < α 1 < . . . < α h ¡ 1 < α h ≡ ∞ are suitable threshold parameters . The unobserved Y ⁄ ir is modelled with a normal linear mixed model Y ⁄ ir = x T ir β + U i + † ir , where U 1 , . . . , U n are n independent normal distributed random eﬀects with zero mean and variance σ 2 . To account for serial dependence , the errors † ir are as - sumed to be generated from an autoregressive process of order one , † ir = ρ† ir ¡ 1 + ( 1 − ρ 2 ) 1 / 2 η ir , where η ir are independent standard normal innovations . Accordingly , the likeli - hood function is a product of n rectangular normal probabilities of dimensions m 1 , . . . , m n . With the exception of longitudinal studies with a small number of measurements m i , the evaluation of the likelihood requires time - consuming Monte Carlo methods with possible numerical instabilities . Hence , Varin and Czado ( 2010 ) propose the use of pairwise likelihood inference based on pairs of observations less than q units apart , L ( q ) pair ( θ ; y ) = n ∏ i = 1 ∏ f r , s : j t ir ¡ t is j• q g f ( y ir , y is ; θ ) , where t ir is the time of observation r on subject i . The bivariate probabili - ties f ( y ir , y is ; θ ) are easily computed with very precise deterministic quadrature 16 CRISTIANO VARIN , NANCY REID AND DAVID FIRTH methods available in standard statistical software , thus avoiding the need for simulations . This work is motivated by the analysis of a longitudinal study on the determinants of headache severity : the data consist of pain severity diaries compiled by the patients four times a day for periods of diﬀerent lengths , from four days to almost one year of consecutive measurements ; the outcome is the severity of headache measured on an ordinal scale with six levels . Covariate data included personal and clinical information , as well as weather conditions . 3 . 4 . Spatially correlated random eﬀects The numerical diﬃculties described in case of serially correlated random eﬀects further increase with spatially correlated random eﬀects . Consider a gen - eralized linear model with linear predictor g { E ( Y ( c ) } = x ( c ) T β + U ( c ) , c ∈ C ⊂ IR 2 , where g is a suitable link function and { U ( c ) : c ∈ C ⊂ IR 2 } is a zero - mean stationary Gaussian random ﬁeld . Models of this type are termed generalized linear geostatistical models in Diggle and Ribeiro ( 2007 ) . Given the observations at m locations c 1 , . . . , c m , the likelihood function is expressed in terms of a single m - dimensional integral , L ( θ ; y ) = ∫ IR m m ∏ r = 1 f { y ( c r ) | u ( c r ) ; θ } f { u ( c 1 ) , . . . , u ( c m ) ; θ } d u ( c 1 ) . . . d u ( c m ) , whose approximation may be diﬃcult even for moderate m . Typical solutions are based on simulation algorithms such as Monte Carlo expectation - maximization or Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithms , see Diggle and Ribeiro ( 2007 ) for references . For large data sets , simulation methods become very demanding and thus pairwise likelihood represents an eﬀective alternative . This was ﬁrst studied by Heagerty and Lele ( 1998 ) for binary data with probit link . They proposed a pairwise likelihood formed by pairs of observations not more than q units apart , L ( q ) pair ( θ ; y ) = ∏ f r , s : k c r ¡ c s k 2 • q g f { y ( c r ) , y ( c s ) ; θ } . Heagerty and Lele ( 1998 ) use these ideas for spatial modelling of defoliation by gypsy moths in Massachusetts . Varin , Høst and Skare ( 2005 ) investigate pairwise likelihood for generalized linear models and suggest that excluding pairs formed by observations too distant may be not only numerically eﬃcient but also statistically eﬃcient . Apanasovich et al . ( 2008 ) consider pairwise likelihood inference for logistic regression with a linear predictor expressed by the sum of a nonparametric term and a spatially COMPOSITE LIKELIHOODS 17 correlated random eﬀect accounting for short range dependence . This last work is motivated by spatial modelling of aberrant crypt foci in colon carcinogenesis . 3 . 5 . Joint mixed models Correlated random eﬀects are also used for joint modelling of multivariate longitudinal proﬁles . Let ( Y ( 1 ) ir , . . . , Y ( d ) ir ) T be a vector of d outcomes for subject i = 1 , . . . , n at occasion r = 1 , . . . , m i . A possible modelling strategy for data of this type consists in assuming a mixed model for each single outcome and then modelling the association among the outcomes with a suitable covariance matrix for the random eﬀects . Suppose for ease of exposition a random intercept generalized linear model for each outcome , g { E ( Y ( v ) ir ) } = x T ir β + U ( v ) i , v = 1 , . . . , d , where U ( v ) i is a random eﬀect speciﬁc for outcome v and subject i ( i = 1 , . . . , n ) . The various univariate mixed models can be combined by assuming a d - dimen - sional multivariate normal distribution for all the random eﬀects , U ( 1 ) i , . . . , U ( d ) i , of a single subject ( i = 1 , . . . , n ) . With the assumption of independence among diﬀerent subjects , the likeli - hood is L ( θ ; y ) = n ∏ i = 1 L i ( θ ; y ( 1 ) i , . . . , y ( d ) i ) , with y ( v ) i = ( y ( v ) i 1 , . . . , y ( v ) im i ) T indicating the vector of all observations of outcome v for subject i . When the dimension d of the outcomes increases , the number of random eﬀects parameters , ( d 2 ) + d , grows quadratically , making the maximization of the likelihood quickly out of reach even in the case of normal linear mixed models where the likelihood has an analytic form . Molenberghs and Verbeke ( 2005 , Sec . 25 ) propose to alleviate these compu - tational diﬃculties by the method of “pairwise ﬁtting” . Consider the composite marginal likelihood constructed from all pairs of outcomes , L MC ( θ 1 , 2 , . . . , θ d ¡ 1 , d ; y ) = d ¡ 1 ∏ v = 1 d ∏ w = v + 1 L ( θ v , w ; y ( v ) , y ( w ) ) , ( 3 . 1 ) where L ( θ v , w ; y ( v ) , y ( w ) ) is the likelihood based on outcomes v and w only . In contrast to previously discussed composite likelihoods , here diﬀerent pair - speciﬁc parameters are assumed , i . e . θ v , w , is the subset of θ pertaining to the assumed distribution of ( Y ( v ) , Y ( w ) ) . This separate parameterization is necessary to allow distinct maximization of each term L ( θ v , w ; y ( v ) , y ( w ) ) forming the composite like - lihood ( 3 . 1 ) , and thus resolve the computational diﬃculties associated with joint maximization . 18 CRISTIANO VARIN , NANCY REID AND DAVID FIRTH Let ω = ( θ 1 , 2 , . . . , θ d ¡ 1 , d ) T be the vector containing all the ( d 2 ) pair - speciﬁc parameters . Then , ˆ ω = ( ˆ θ 1 , 2 , . . . , ˆ θ d ¡ 1 , d ) T locates the maximum of the composite likelihood ( 3 . 1 ) . Accordingly , we have √ n ( ˆ ω − ω ) d −→ N { 0 , G ¡ 1 ( ω ) } . Obviously , there is a one - to - many correspondence between ω and the original parameter θ , for example , θ v , w and θ v , w have some components of θ in common . A single estimate of θ may then be obtained by averaging all the corresponding pair - speciﬁc estimates in ˆ ω . If we denote by A the weight matrix such that ˆ θ = Aˆ ω , then inference is based on the asymptotic distribution √ n ( ˆ θ − θ ) d −→ N { 0 , A T G ¡ 1 ( ω ) A } . Further details of the pairwise ﬁtting method can be found in a series of papers by S . Fieuws and his colleagues with applications to multivariate longitudinal proﬁles of hearing thresholds ( Fieuws and Verbeke ( 2006 ) ; Fieuws , Verbeke , and Molen - berghs ( 2007 ) ) , batteries of binary questionnaires on psychocognitive functioning ( Fieuws et al . ( 2006 ) , Fieuws , Verbeke , and Molenberghs ( 2007 ) ) and analysis of several biochemical and physiological markers for failure of renal graft ( Fieuws et al . ( 2007 ) ) . Barry and Bowman ( 2008 ) apply the pairwise ﬁtting method to a longitudinal study designed to compare the facial shapes of a group of 49 infants with unilateral cleft lip and palate with those of a group of 100 age - matched controls . 3 . 6 . Time - varying correlation matrices Engle , Shephard , and Sheppard ( 2009 ) propose composite likelihood meth - ods for risk management with high - dimensional portfolios . Consider a m - dimen - sional vector of log - returns y t observed at times t = 1 , . . . , T . Risk management models assume that Y t is a martingale diﬀerence sequence E ( Y t | F t ¡ 1 ) = 0 , Cov ( Y t | F t ¡ 1 ) = H t , where F t ¡ 1 is the information up to time t − 1 , and H t is a time - varying co - variance matrix . Models proposed for H t are parametrized in terms of dynamics parameters of interest θ and of nuisance parameters λ . Standard inference is based on a two - step approach . First , nuisance parameters are estimated using a method of moments . Then , parameters of interest are obtained by maximizing a misspeciﬁed likelihood constructed under working assumptions of multinormality with the nuisance parameters kept ﬁxed at their moment - based estimates . There are two sources of diﬃculty with the above ﬁtting method . First , the method needs the inversion of T correlation matrices H t , each requiring O ( m 3 ) COMPOSITE LIKELIHOODS 19 operations . Second , even if these inversions were possible , the precision of the resulting estimators for θ would quickly fail because the dimension of nuisance parameters grows as the number of assets K increases . In order to overcome these diﬃculties , Engle , Shephard , and Sheppard ( 2009 ) investigate the use of composite marginal likelihoods formed by summing up ( misspeciﬁed ) log - likelihoods of subsets of assets . This approach resolves the numerical diﬃculties connected with the inversion of high dimensional matrices . The problem of increasing numbers of nuisance parameters is addressed by using moment estimators for the nuisance parameters speciﬁc to each asset , and as - suming a common set of parameters across assets ; these common parameters are estimated by composite likelihood . This methodology is developed further for composite likelihood analysis of a panel of GARCH models in Pakel , Shephard , and Sheppard ( 2011 ) , and simulation studies indicate that composite likelihood methods work very well when there are a large number of short series . 3 . 7 . Marginal regression models with missing data Statistical analysis of longitudinal data is complicated by the likely occur - rence of missing responses . The popular method of generalized estimating equa - tions ( GEEs ) devised by Liang and Zeger ( 1986 ) provides valid inference un - der the assumption of ignorable missing data ( missing completely at random ) . Complications arise when such an assumption cannot be trusted . If the weaker assumption of missing - at - random is valid , then GEEs can be saved by the use of inverse probability weights , as in Robins ( 1995 ) . A diﬃculty with this strategy is that it requires correct speciﬁcation of the missing data process , something that can be awkward in practice . Alternatively , one may base inference on the ob - served likelihood . However , this strategy suﬀers from lack of robustness because it relies on correct speciﬁcation of the joint distribution of all observed responses . In this context , composite likelihood methods are attractive as a compro - mise between advantages from likelihood - type analysis and robustness to model speciﬁcation of GEEs . In the following lines , we summarize composite likelihood inference for marginal regression in presence of noningnorable missing data . If only parameters in the univariate margins are of interest , Troxel , Lip - sitz and Harrington ( 2003 ) suggest basing inference under missing at random assumptions on the independence likelihood L ind ( β , γ ; y , r ) = n ∏ i = 1 m i ∏ r = 1 { f ( y ir , o ir ; β , γ ) } o ir { ∫ Y f ( y ir , o ir ; β , γ ) d y ir } 1 ¡ o ir = n ∏ i = 1 m i ∏ r = 1 { f ( y ir ; β ) π ir ( γ ) } o ir [ ∫ Y f ( y ir ; β ) { 1 − π ir ( γ ) } d y ir ] 1 ¡ o ir , 20 CRISTIANO VARIN , NANCY REID AND DAVID FIRTH where β are marginal regression parameters , o ir indicates whether observation r on subject i has been observed or not , and π ir ( γ ) is the probability of having observed it modelled as a function of parameter γ . This independence likelihood thus requires only the correct speciﬁcation of univariate margins f ( y ir ; β ) and of observation probabilities π ir ( γ ) . This approach is applied in Troxel , Lipsitz and Harrington ( 2003 ) to evaluation of adjuvant chemotherapy following surgery in a longitudinal study of 430 breast cancer patients with up to 37 % missing responses . See also Parzen et al . ( 2006 ) for another illustration using data from the well - known Six Cities longitudinal study on the health eﬀects of air pollution . In situations where the association between responses is substantial , this in - dependence likelihood may lead to sensible , but ineﬃcient , inferences on regres - sors β . For such situations , Parzen et al . ( 2007 ) suggest incorporating information about dependence by moving to the pairwise likelihood L pair ( β , α , γ ; y , o ) = L 1 × L 2 × L 3 × L 4 , with L 1 = n ∏ i = 1 m i ¡ 1 ∏ r = 1 m i ∏ s = r + 1 { f ( y ir , y is , o ir , o is ; β , α , γ ) } o ir o is , L 2 = n ∏ i = 1 m i ¡ 1 ∏ r = 1 m i ∏ s = r + 1 { ∫ Y f ( y ir , y is , o ir , o is ; β , α , γ ) d y ir } ( 1 ¡ o ir ) o is , L 3 = n ∏ i = 1 m i ¡ 1 ∏ r = 1 m i ∏ s = r + 1 { ∫ Y f ( y ir , y is , o ir , o is ; β , α , γ ) d y ir } o ir ( 1 ¡ o is ) , L 4 = n ∏ i = 1 m i ¡ 1 ∏ r = 1 m i ∏ s = r + 1 { ∫ Y ∫ Y f ( y ir , y is , o ir , o is ; β , α , γ ) d y ir d y is } ( 1 ¡ o ir ) ( 1 ¡ o is ) , where α is a vector of association parameters involved in the joint distribution of a pair of responses . This pairwise likelihood is contrasted in Parzen et al . ( 2007 ) with the previously described independence likelihood of Troxel , Lipsitz and Harrington ( 2003 ) , again with analysis of data from the Six Cities study . The results show advantages from modelling also the dependence between responses . Although the above pairwise likelihood may improve estimation eﬃciency compared to the independence likelihood , this comes at the cost of requiring correct speciﬁcation of bivariate margins both of responses and of missingness indicators . In particular , the speciﬁcation of the missing data mechanism even only for pairs is a critical aspect . Yi , Zeng and Cook ( 2009 ) show how to over - come this . They assume that , given any pair of responses ( y ij , y ik ) and covariates x i , the missing data process does not contain information on parameter β and COMPOSITE LIKELIHOODS 21 α . With this assumption , inference can be based on the pairwise likelihood con - structed from the observed pairs of responses only , L pair ( β , α ; y ) = n ∏ i = 1 m i ¡ 1 ∏ r = 1 m i ∏ s = r + 1 f ( y ir , y is ; β , α ) o ir o is , without requiring speciﬁcation of the missing process distribution . Yi , Zeng and Cook ( 2009 ) show that this leads to an unbiased estimating equation and hence consistent inference for ( β , α ) , without assuming the missing at random mechanism . 4 . Properties 4 . 1 . Introduction The motivation for the use of any version of composite likelihood is usually computational : to avoid computing or , in some cases , modelling the joint distri - bution of a possibly high - dimensional response vector . This is particularly true in applications of composite likelihood to mixed and random eﬀects models , where the likelihood requires integration over the distribution of the random eﬀects , as described in Section 3 . Within this context , where composite likelihood is essen - tially a misspeciﬁed model , interest has often focused on the relative eﬃciency of estimation from composite likelihood relative to the full likelihood . In Section 4 . 1 below we summarize the main results on eﬃciency of composite likelihood estimation . Another motivation for the use of composite likelihood is a notion of robust - ness , in this case robustness under possible misspeciﬁcation of the higher order dimensional distributions . For example , if pairwise likelihood is used for depen - dent binary data , it is not necessary to choose a model for joint probabilities of triples and quadruples , and to the extent that a number of possibilities for these could be consistent with the modelled joint probabilities of pairs , composite like - lihood is , by construction , robust against these alternatives . This is a diﬀerent notion of robustness than that in robust point estimation , and closer in spirit to the type of robustness achieved by generalized estimating equations . However , for many high - dimensional models , it is not clear what types of higher - order joint densities are indeed compatible with the modelled lower order marginal densities , so it is diﬃcult to study the robustness issue in any generality . In Section 4 . 2 below we summarize what seems to be known about robustness in the literature . Composite likelihood has also been used to construct joint distributions in settings where there are not obvious high dimensional distributions at hand , for example in the use of frailty models in survival data ( Fiocco , Putter and van Houwelingen ( 2009 ) ) . 22 CRISTIANO VARIN , NANCY REID AND DAVID FIRTH Another feature of composite likelihood , noted for example in Liang and Yu ( 2003 ) , is that the likelihood surface can be much smoother than the full joint likelihood , and thus easier to maximize . This is related to , but slightly diﬀerent than , the ease of computation of composite likelihood , and closer in spirit to robustness of composite likelihood : by not specifying very high dimensional characteristics of the model , we are perhaps allowing a less complex structure on the parameter space as well . Renard , Molenberghs and Geys ( 2004 ) use the term computational robustness ; in simulations they found that pairwise likelihood is more robust to convergence than their comparison method based on penalized quasi - likelihood . Computational aspects are considered in more detail in Section 5 . 4 . 2 . Relative eﬃciency The seemingly high eﬃciency of composite likelihood methods in many ap - plications has contributed to the increased interest in , and literature on , these methods . Three possible types of eﬃciency comparisons are : ( i ) asymptotic eﬃciency computed by an analytical calculation of G ( θ ) and comparison with the Fisher information I ( θ ) , ( ii ) estimated asymptotic eﬃciency using simulation based estimates of G ( θ ) and I ( θ ) , and ( iii ) empirical eﬃciency using simulation based estimates of var ( ˆ θ CL ) and var ( ˆ θ ) . The ﬁrst gives the clearest interpreta - tion , although under the model assumption of the ‘asymptotic ideal’ , whereas the third is closer to what may be achieved with ﬁnite sample sizes . A drawback of simulation based studies is that many aspects of the model must be speciﬁed in advance , so the relevance of the results to other , slightly diﬀerent , models is not always clear . When θ is a vector , an overall summary of the comparison of G ( θ ) with I ( θ ) can be computed using the ratio of the determinants , but more usually the diagonal components corresponding to particular parameters of interest are compared . In exceptional cases pairwise likelihood estimators are fully eﬃcient , and even identical to the maximum likelihood estimators . Mardia , Hughes and Taylor ( 2007 ) show that composite conditional estimators are identical to maximum like - lihood estimators in the multivariate normal distribution with arbitrary means and covariances , and Zi ( 2009 ) gives the same result for pairwise likelihood . Mardia et al . ( 2009 ) provide an explanation for this , by showing that compos - ite conditional estimators are fully eﬃcient in exponential families that have a certain closure property under subsetting . Under further restrictions , composite marginal estimators are also fully eﬃcient . An interesting special case is the equi - correlated multivariate normal distribution : a single observation vector has mean µ and covariance matrix σ 2 { ( 1 − ρ ) I + ρ 11 T } , where I is the identity ma - trix of dimension m , and 1 is an m - vector of 1’s . With µ and σ unknown , both COMPOSITE LIKELIHOODS 23 pairwise maximum likelihood estimators and pairwise and full composite condi - tional maximum likelihood estimators are identical to the maximum likelihood estimator . If µ is ﬁxed the same result holds , but if σ 2 is ﬁxed , then compos - ite likelihood estimates for ρ are not fully eﬃcient . Although this model is not covered by the closure result of Mardia et al . ( 2009 ) , they adapt their discussion to show why the result continues to be true . It is possible that the method of Mardia et al . ( 2009 ) may also be adapted to explain the relatively high eﬃciency of composite likelihood methods in more complex applications , at least in some special cases . For example , while the bivariate von Mises distribution is not in the class of exponential families treated in Mardia et al . ( 2009 ) , that paper shows that it is close to that class for most parameter values : this clariﬁes some results presented in Mardia et al . ( 2008 ) on this model . The quadratic exponential distribution was proposed as a model for multi - variate binary data in Cox ( 1972 ) , and inference for this model was developed in Zhao and Prenctice ( 1990 ) . As noted in Cox and Reid ( 2004 ) its likelihood function is equal to the pairwise likelihood function for binary data generated by a probit link . This provides a simple example where pairwise likelihood has full eﬃciency . Two - way contingency tables also have pairwise likelihood estimators equal to maximum likelihood estimators ( Mardia et al . ( 2009 ) ) . Hjort and Varin ( 2008 ) also study in detail properties of composite condi - tional and composite marginal likelihoods in a simpliﬁed class of models . In their case they restrict attention to Markov chain models , and both theoretical anal - ysis and detailed calculations provide strong evidence that composite marginal likelihood inference is both eﬃcient and robust , and preferable to composite con - ditional likelihood inference . In their case the full likelihood is given by ‘ ( θ ; y ) = ∑ a , b y a , b log p a , b ( θ ) , where y a , b is the number of transitions from a to b , p a , b ( θ ) is the stationary transition probability function , and a , b range over the number of states in the Markov chain . This is a curved exponential family model , so the theory of Mardia et al . ( 2009 ) does not apply . The pairwise log - likelihood function is c‘ ( θ ; y ) = ∑ a , b y a , b log p a , b ( θ ) + ∑ a y a + log p a ( θ ) , ( 4 . 1 ) where y a + = ∑ b y a , b and p a ( θ ) is the equilibrium probability that the chain is in state a . Equation ( 4 . 1 ) is interpreted in Hjort and Varin ( 2008 ) as a penalized log - likelihood , with a penalty function that is targetted on matching the equilibrium distribution . This provides a diﬀerent explanation of the eﬃciency and robustness of pairwise likelihood inference . 24 CRISTIANO VARIN , NANCY REID AND DAVID FIRTH The papers by Mardia et al . ( 2009 ) and Hjort and Varin ( 2008 ) seek to establish some general results about composite likelihood , albeit in relatively specialized settings . The rest of the literature that we have reviewed on composite likelihood is typically concerned with comparisons in particular models motivated by applications . In the paragraphs below we highlight recent work on eﬃciency that seems to us to be particularly useful . In models for clustered data , where observations y ir , r = 1 , . . . , m i , within the i th cluster are correlated , asymptotic relative eﬃciency can often be assessed by obtaining analytical expressions for G ( θ ) and J ( θ ) . Within this context , ex - tensive studies of asymptotic relative eﬃciency are available , and there is also a literature on the choice of weights , usually related to cluster size , for achieving op - timal eﬃciency . For pairwise likelihood , Joe and Lee ( 2009 ) investigate the choice of weights for clustered data in detail , and show that the best choice of weights depends on the strength of the dependence within clusters . The models investi - gated analytically are the multivariate normal , where direct comparisons to the maximum likelihood estimator can be made , and the multivariate binary , created by dichotomizing multivariate normal observations . The weights 1 / ( m i − 1 ) , rec - ommended in Kuk and Nott ( 2000 ) , LeCessie and van Houwelingen ( 1994 ) , and Zhao and Joe ( 2005 ) , are suitable for the limiting case of independence within clusters , but the weights 1 / { m i ( m i − 1 ) } are optimal for very strong dependence . A compromise suggested in Joe and Lee ( 2009 ) is 1 / [ ( m i − 1 ) { 1 + 0 . 5 ( m i − 1 ) } ] , which works well for a range of parameter values and models . Most applications to date however have used the simpler weights 1 / ( m i − 1 ) . Joe and Lee ( 2009 ) also show that the best choice of weights depends on which parameter is to be estimated , providing further detail on the earlier results of Kuk and Nott ( 2000 ) and others that unweighted pairwise likelihood can be preferable for inference about the association parameters , whereas weighting improves on the estimation of the parameters in the mean . When modelling clustered data the parameters in the one - dimensional mar - gins are usually regression coeﬃcients and variances , and the association param - eters only appear in the two - dimensional margins . This suggests using separate approaches for inference on these two sets of parameters , and several sugges - tions along these lines have appeared in various contexts . Zhao and Joe ( 2005 ) explore using the independence likelihood for the marginal parameters and pair - wise likelihood for the association parameters , although in most cases the full pairwise likelihood method turns out to be more eﬃcient . Kuk ( 2007 ) suggests a quite promising hybrid method that uses optimal score functions for the marginal parameters , and pairwise likelihood for the association parameters , regarded as nuisance parameters . This hybrid method is shown to be related to , but better than , alternating logistic regression ( Carey , Zeger , and Diggle ( 2003 ) ) , and is COMPOSITE LIKELIHOODS 25 illustrated on ordinal count data , as well as negative binomial count data ; the latter application is also treated in Henderson and Shimakura ( 2003 ) . For further discussion of this approach see Varin ( 2008 ) . The same data structure y ir , r = 1 , . . . , m i , may arise as longitudinal data , in which case serial dependence of the observations is usually part of the model . In this case the inferential problem is more similar to time series analysis , with the diﬀerence that longitudinal data is typically n independent short time series , rather than a single long time series . Asymptotic eﬃciency for longitudinal data is studied analytically in Joe and Lee ( 2009 ) . The weighting schemes typically proposed in time series analysis downweight observations that are far apart in time , and Joe and Lee ( 2009 ) ﬁnd that choosing weights so that the pairwise likelihood is constructed only from adjacent pairs is preferable to the full pairwise likelihood involving all possible pairs in the sequence . For time series models both marginal and conditional composite likelihoods have been proposed , with a possible weighting scheme chosen to downweight observations that are far apart in time . Explicit comparison of the simulation variance for composite marginal likelihood of diﬀerent orders is illustrated in Varin and Vidoni ( 2006 ) , where again it is shown that including too distant observations in the composite marginal formulation can lead to a loss of eﬃciency . Simulations of non - stationary time series are presented in a particular model for ecology in Lele ( 2006 ) , where the pairwise likelihood is shown to be more eﬃcient than the independence likelihood . There are a number of investigations of asymptotic relative eﬃciency for clustered and longitudinal data that rely on simulations , rather than analytical calculations of the asymptotic variances . Such studies can consider more com - plex models for marginal and association parameters , but it is diﬃcult to gain an overall picture of the results . Examples of simulation studies that show high relative eﬃciency for pairwise likelihood in binary data include Renard et al . ( 2002 ) , Renard , Molenberghs and Geys ( 2004 ) , Fieuws and Verbeke ( 2006 ) and Feddag and Bacci ( 2009 ) . The last paper considers a multidimensional Rasch model proposed for longitudinal studies in item response theory . In all these pa - pers pairwise likelihood has good simulation - based eﬃciency relative to inference based on the full likelihood function , or in some cases approximations to it , but there is likely to be a statistical ‘ﬁle - drawer’ problem in that situations for which composite likelihood performs poorly are perhaps unlikely to be published , at least until a method can be developed that seems to work well . Sparse clustered binary data may arise in ﬁnely stratiﬁed studies , and two versions of composite likelihood are suggested in Hanfelt ( 2004 ) and in Wang and Williamson ( 2005 ) , using Liang ( 1987 ) ’s composite conditional likelihood ( 2 . 1 ) . Simulations in Wang and Williamson ( 2005 ) compare composite likelihood es - timators of marginal and association parameters to estimators derived from an 26 CRISTIANO VARIN , NANCY REID AND DAVID FIRTH estimating equations approach . The two methods have comparable eﬃciency ; the authors note that the composite likelihood equations for the association pa - rameters very often have multiple roots , which makes numerical work based on composite likelihood rather diﬃcult in this setting . It would be useful to have an explanation for this , as most authors who comment on numerical aspects of composite likelihood estimation report that composite likelihood functions are well behaved and relatively easy to maximize . In the approach of Hanfelt ( 2004 ) to sparse binary data there are an increas - ing number of nuisance parameters , and an adaptation of the estimating equation for the association parameter derived from the composite conditional likelihood is needed . Hjort and Varin ( 2008 ) note that in the Neyman - Scott model of several normal groups with common mean but separate variances , the pairwise likelihood based on diﬀerences gives consistent inference for the common variance , even as the number of groups increases . Composite likelihood inference with very large numbers of nuisance parameters is also considered in Engle , Shephard , and Shep - pard ( 2009 ) and Pakel , Shephard , and Sheppard ( 2011 ) . Heagerty and Lele ( 1998 ) propose the use of pairwise likelihood for spatial binary data generated through a multivariate probit model . Limited simulations there suggest that the pairwise likelihood estimator is eﬃcient for estimating parameters in the mean , but somewhat less eﬃcient in estimation of variance parameters . See Bhat , Sener and Eluru ( 2010 ) for an extension to regression analysis of spatially correlated ordinal responses . A general approach to spatial generalized linear mixed models is discussed in Varin , Høst and Skare ( 2005 ) , and simulations are presented showing that pairwise likelihood inference for both mean and variance parameters in a Poisson random eﬀects model does better than inference based on a high - dimensional Laplace approximation of the full likelihood . Several computational issues arise in ﬁtting pairwise and full log - likelihoods in spatial generalized linear mixed models , and the authors describe an EM - type algorithm ; see Section 5 . Caragea and Smith ( 2007 ) use analytical calculations of asymptotic eﬃ - ciency , as well as simulations , to choose among three possible composite like - lihood approaches for Gaussian random ﬁelds , as described in Section 3 . 1 above . Their conclusions are broadly that a method that uses groups of nearby obser - vations ( “small blocks” ) is more eﬃcient than a version closer to independence likelihood , and that for estimating regression parameters a hybrid method is slightly better . Simulations of spatial point processes presented in Guan ( 2006 ) show that adaptive estimation of the weights assigned to the likelihood of each pair can be eﬀective . While most simulation studies show that some version of composite likelihood has high eﬃciency , a warning is presented in Oliveira ( 2004 ) , where a new spatial COMPOSITE LIKELIHOODS 27 model for rainfall is proposed . This model is based on a mixture of discrete and continuous spatial processes to represent both the occurrence and amount of rainfall , and it is noted that simulations indicate very poor performance of pairwise likelihood for estimating parameters in the spatial correlation functions . Simulation eﬃciency of pairwise likelihood in general state space models is considered in Varin and Vidoni ( 2009 ) and Joe and Lee ( 2009 ) , and Andrieu , Doucet , and Tadic ( 2005 ) develop a version of composite likelihood adapted to sequential Monte Carlo inference . 4 . 3 . Robustness Many authors refer to composite likelihood inference as robust , because com - posite likelihood requires only model assumptions on the lower dimensional con - ditional or marginal densities , and not detailed speciﬁcation of the full joint distribution . Thus if there are several joint distributions with the same lower dimensional marginal or conditional distributions , the inference is the same for all members of that family . A small number of papers investigate robustness in more detail , usually through simulations from a misspeciﬁed model . For example , Lele and Taper ( 2002 ) investigate the behaviour of ˆ θ CL from the likelihood based on pairwise diﬀerences , ( 2 . 3 ) , in their case a one - way random eﬀects model , ﬁrst assuming normality for the distribution of the random eﬀects , and then simulating the random eﬀects under non - normal distributions . They conclude that composite likelihood estimators and restricted maximum likelihood ( REML ) estimators of variance components behave similarly under model misspeciﬁcation . The REML likelihood is the likelihood function for the marginal distribution of the residuals , which for normal theory models is the same as the likelihood based on pairwise diﬀerences , so may be very close to ( 2 . 3 ) in the models that Lele and Taper ( 2002 ) study . Wang and Williamson ( 2005 ) present simulations of sparse clustered bi - nary data under a model for which the correlation structure is misspeciﬁed , and their results also indicate that composite likelihood methods continue to have high eﬃciency . In longitudinal data analysis it is not unusual to have missing observations , and modelling this can be important for valid inferences . This is considered in detail in Parzen et al . ( 2007 ) , and again in Yi , Zeng and Cook ( 2009 ) , as discussed in Section 3 . 4 . The fact that some versions of composite likelihood are indeed robust to the speciﬁcation of the missing data mechanism is another very attractive feature of composite likelihood . The inverse of the Godambe information , G ( θ ) , is often called the robust variance estimate , as it is computed under the assumption that the model is mis - 28 CRISTIANO VARIN , NANCY REID AND DAVID FIRTH speciﬁed , and composite likelihood models are by deﬁnition misspeciﬁed . How - ever the use of G ¡ 1 ( θ ) as a variance estimator does not guarantee , for example , that the composite likelihood estimator has high eﬃciency under a range of mod - els consistent with the composite likelihood ; these need to be investigated on their own merits . Liang and Qin ( 2000 ) use a specialized version of composite conditional like - lihood for a number of non - standard regression models , where modelling of the distribution of the explanatory variables may be needed . Their simulations ad - dress robustness to misspeciﬁcation of this aspect of the modelling , noting that the composite maximum likelihood estimator continues to have small bias , but somewhat larger variance , under this misspeciﬁcation . Finally , Kent ( 1982 ) calls the log - likelihood ratio statistic W robust if its asymptotic distribution was χ 2 p , rather than the more complex form given after ( 2 . 5 ) , and discusses a special class of exponential family models that guarantee this result by showing that the score equations are information unbiased . This line of argument is developed further in Mardia et al . ( 2009 ) . 4 . 4 . Identiﬁability It is not clear whether or not composite likelihood methods give meaningful results if there is no joint distribution compatible with the component densi - ties used to construct the composite likelihood . In the case that the composite likelihood is constructed from conditional distributions , the Hammersley - Cliﬀord Theorem speciﬁes when there is a genuine joint distribution consistent with these conditional distributions , and this was used in Besag ( 1974 , 1975 ) in his develop - ment of pseudo - likelihood for spatial data . This issue is pursued in Wang and Ip ( 2008 ) , where the key notion of interactions is deﬁned , and their role in ensuring the compatibility of conditional and joint distributions is emphasized ; see also Arnold , Castillo , and Sarabia ( 2001 ) . There is not an analogous result for composite marginal likelihood , although there is likely to be a connection to the theory of construction of joint distribu - tions using copulas . Several papers on the use of composite marginal likelihood use a copula construction ( Bhat , Sener and Eluru ( 2010 ) ; Tibaldi et al . ( 2004 ) ; Andersen ( 2004 ) ) but many applications of composite marginal likelihood do not . For example , the development of composite likelihood for spatial extremes described in Section 3 . 2 uses pairwise marginals as a proxy for a genuine joint distribution . We may , however , consider the composite Kullback - Leibler divergence , CKL ( g , f ; θ ) = K ∑ k = 1 w k E g { log g ( y ∈ A k ) − log f ( y ∈ A k ; θ ) } , COMPOSITE LIKELIHOODS 29 consisting of the linear combination of the Kullback - Leibler divergences for each term of the composite likelihood . Under some regularity conditions the maxi - mum composite likelihood estimator ˆ θ CL is consistent for the parameter value minimizing CKL , and inference about this pseudo - parameter may be useful for particular applications . We could also view the estimating equation from the composite likelihood as a reasonable speciﬁcation of knowledge about parameters of lower dimensional marginal distributions , in the spirit of generalized estimat - ing equations ; see Varin ( 2008 ) . This might be especially true for estimating parameters in the mean function . Joe and Lee ( 2009 ) note in passing that unless the component likelihoods in a composite likelihood construction are “rich enough to identify the parameter” , the composite likelihood estimator will not be consistent . Presumably , if a full joint distribution exists in which the parameters of the components are ( subvec - tors of the ) parameters of the full joint distribution , this guarantees identiﬁability . However it seems possible that the parameters of the component densities could be identiﬁable under weaker conditions . In the approach outlined in Section 3 . 3 . 3 , each component marginal density has its own parameter θ rs , say , and the estimator used for the notional parameter θ of interest is a linear combination of the pairwise estimators ˆ θ rs . The connection of this to identiﬁability of joint densities is not clear . 5 . Computational Aspects 5 . 1 . Standard errors Standard errors and conﬁdence interval computation require the estimation of the Godambe matrix and its components . Again , it is useful to distinguish between the case of n large with m ﬁxed , and vice - versa . The ﬁrst case is simpler with easily computed sample estimates of the sensitivity and variability matrices . The sample estimate of the sensitivity matrix is given by ˆH ( θ ) = − 1 n n ∑ i = 1 ∇ u ( ˆ θ CL ; y i ) , where u ( θ ; y i ) = ∇ c‘ ( θ ; y i ) . Computation of Hessians can be avoided by exploiting the second Bartlett identity , which remains valid for each individual likelihood term forming the composite likelihood . This yields the alternative estimate ˆH ( θ ) = 1 n n ∑ i = 1 m ∑ r = 1 u ( ˆ θ CL ; y ir ) u ( ˆ θ CL ; y ir ) T . 30 CRISTIANO VARIN , NANCY REID AND DAVID FIRTH The sample estimate of the variability matrix is expressed by the outer product of the composite scores computed at ˆ θ CL , ˆJ ( θ ) = 1 n n ∑ i = 1 u ( ˆ θ CL ; y i ) u ( ˆ θ CL ; y i ) T . The above empirical estimates of H and J may be imprecise when n is not suf - ﬁciently large compared to the dimension of θ . This is well known in the longi - tudinal literature where resampling methods , such as jackknife or bootstrap , are often used to obtain more robust estimates of the covariance matrix of ˆ θ CL ; see for example Lipsitz , Dear and Zhao ( 1994 ) . The jackknife covariance matrix is given by var jack ( ˆ θ CL ) = n − 1 n n ∑ i = 1 ( ˆ θ ( ¡ i ) CL − ˆ θ CL ) ( ˆ θ ( ¡ i ) CL − ˆ θ CL ) T , where ˆ θ ( ¡ i ) CL is the composite likelihood estimator of θ with y i deleted . Zhao and Joe ( 2005 ) use var jack for estimation of the standard errors of maximum pairwise likelihood estimators with clustered data . A further possible advantage of the jackknife method is the possibility to obtain an approximate bias correction of ˆ θ CL . In certain applications the computation of the set of ˆ θ ( ¡ i ) CL can be excessively expensive , and then it may be convenient to consider a ﬁrst - order approximation where ˆ θ ( ¡ i ) CL is approximated with a single step of the Newton - Raphson algorithm . More diﬃcult is the case of m large when n is ﬁxed , with the extreme sit - uation of n = 1 when a single time - series or spatial process is observed . While the sample estimate of the sensitivity matrix H has the usual form , diﬃculties arise for the variability matrix J . A sample estimate of the latter is possible only if the data can be grouped into pseudo - independent replicates . Considering a temporal or spatial process with good mixing properties , a sample estimate of J can be obtained by splitting the region under study into subregions treated as approximately independent : ˆJ ws ( θ ) = 1 B B ∑ b = 1 | S b | u ( ˆ θ CL ; y ∈ S b ) u ( ˆ θ CL ; y ∈ S b ) T , where S 1 , . . . , S B are B possibly overlapping subregions and | S | denotes the di - mension of set S . Heagerty and Lele ( 1998 ) term this method window subsam - pling and use it for pairwise likelihood inference with spatial binary data . For more details and guidance on the choice of the subregions , we refer to Lumley and Heagerty ( 1999 ) . When conditions for ensuring the validity of window subsamping or other empirical estimates are not satisﬁed , estimation of J must be done under model COMPOSITE LIKELIHOODS 31 assumptions . In certain contexts , it may be possible to compute J explicitly . For example , in the case of the pairwise likelihood , model - based estimation of J typically requires computation of four - dimensional expectations . When it is easy to simulate data from the complete model , Monte Carlo simulations can be used either for estimating the J matrix with ˆJ mc ( θ ) = 1 B B ∑ b = 1 u ( ˆ θ CL ; y ( b ) ) u ( ˆ θ CL ; y ( b ) ) T , where y ( 1 ) , . . . , y ( B ) are independent draws from the ﬁtted model , or for direct estimation of the covariance matrix of ˆ θ CL from repeated ﬁtting of simulated data . 5 . 2 . Composite likelihood expectation - maximization algorithm The expectation - maximization algorithm ( Dempster , Laird and Rubin ( 1977 ) ; EM ) and its variants are popular methods to obtain maximum likelihood esti - mates in a number of situations . Examples include missing data , censored data , latent variables , ﬁnite mixture models , and hidden Markov models . See McLach - lan and Krishnan ( 2008 ) for a book length exposition . The EM algorithm can be straightforwardly extended to maximization of composite likelihoods . This can be useful for models where the expectation step involves high - dimensional integration , thus making impractical the use of a stan - dard EM algorithm . The ﬁrst example of the use of a composite EM algorithm seems to be the pairwise EM algorithm proposed by Liang and Yu ( 2003 ) in network tomography , see also Castro et al . ( 2004 ) . Varin , Høst and Skare ( 2005 ) consider an approximate version of the same algorithm for inference in spatial generalized linear mixed models discussed in Section 3 . 4 . Gao and Song ( 2011 ) discuss properties of a general composite marginal likelihood EM algorithm and give an illustration of the pairwise version for multivariate hidden Markov models applied to time - course microarray data . Here we brieﬂy summarize only the pairwise EM algorithm . Let x 1 , . . . , x m be the complete data and y 1 , . . . , y m the observed data . Denote by θ ( 0 ) a starting value for θ . Given θ ( h ) , the pairwise EM algorithm iterate at step h , the next iterate θ ( h + 1 ) is the value such that Q ( θ ( h + 1 ) | θ ( h ) ) ≥ Q ( θ | θ ( h ) ) , for any θ ∈ Θ , where Q ( θ | θ ( h ) ) is the sum of bivariate conditional probabilities Q ( θ | θ ( h ) ) = m ¡ 1 ∑ r = 1 m ∑ s = r + 1 E { log f ( x r , x s ; θ ) | y r , y s ; θ ( h ¡ 1 ) } . 32 CRISTIANO VARIN , NANCY REID AND DAVID FIRTH As shown in detail by Gao and Song ( 2011 ) , it is easy to prove that this algorithm shares the three key properties of standard EM algorithms , namely ( i ) the ascent property L pair ( θ ( h + 1 ) ; y ) ≥ L pair ( θ ( h ) ; y ) , h = 1 , 2 , . . . ( ii ) convergence to a stationary point of the objective function , and ( iii ) convergence rate depending on the curvature of the objective function . 5 . 3 . Low - dimensional integration versus high - dimensional integration In many applications , the motivation for composite likelihood inference is to substitute awkward high - dimensional integration involved in full likelihoods with low - dimensional integrals . The latter can often be computed by using accurate deterministic quadrature rules . For example , Bellio and Varin ( 2005 ) approxi - mate integrals involved in logistic regression models with random eﬀects using normal scale mixtures and bivariate quadrature rules . In contrast , high - dimensional integrals typically require Monte Carlo simu - lation methods with various potential diﬃculties . First , the computational time may be too large for practical purposes . Second , the simulation error may be sub - stantial and diﬃcult to evaluate , making the optimization of the approximated likelihood troublesome . A third reason for concern regards reproducibility of results , especially for a non - technical audience . A possible advantage of simulated maximum likelihood versus composite like - lihood methods is the possibility to base inference on the standard asymptotic results , without the need to compute the more diﬃcult Godambe information or to modify the chi - squared distribution of the likelihood ratio test . However , some authors suggest the use of the Godambe information also for simulated maximum likelihood to take into account the simulation error due to the use of a ﬁnite number of draws ; see for example McFadden and Train ( 2000 ) . Thus , the potential simplicity of maximum likelihood inference is lost when using sim - ulations to approximate the likelihood . For a comparison between simulated maximum likelihood based on quasi - Monte Carlo rules and pairwise likelihood for ordinal probit models see Bhat , Varin , and Ferdous ( 2010 ) . 5 . 4 . Combinatorial diﬃculties As observed by one referee , another computational motivation for preferring the composite likelihood method is the combinatorial diﬃculty associated with some likelihood - type analyses based on the complete data . Examples of this include computation of the partial likelihood ( Cox ( 1975 ) ) for the proportional hazards model when the number of events is large , and computation of the con - ditional likelihood for case - control studies with a large number of cases . Other COMPOSITE LIKELIHOODS 33 combinatorial diﬃculties arise when the computation of the joint distribution of the data requires conditioning on the order statistics , thus involving m ! permu - tations , where m is the sample size ( Kalbﬂeisch ( 1978 ) ) . While the diﬃculty of computing high - dimensional integrals leads naturally to composite marginal likelihoods , avoiding these combinatorial diﬃculties leads to the use of composite conditional likelihoods , as in Liang ( 1987 ) and Liang and Qin ( 2000 ) . 6 . Conclusions 6 . 1 . Relations with other approaches In many applications of marginal or conditional composite likelihood , the ap - proach of generalized estimating equations originated in Liang and Zeger ( 1986 ) is a natural alternative . This approach deﬁnes an estimating equation through a model for the mean , and accommodates correlation among observations , and non - homogeneous variances , by weighting the estimating equation appropriately . Liang and Zeger ( 1986 ) showed that as long as the estimating equation for the mean is correctly speciﬁed , the resulting estimator is consistent , and suggested using a working covariance matrix to this end . Many reﬁnements have since been suggested , and the method is very convenient for semi - parametric modelling of complex data . A possible drawback of the method is that there is no objective function , which can be useful for comparing multiple roots of the estimating equation . For clustered binary data Molenberghs and Verbeke ( 2005 , Chap . 9 ) give a detailed comparison of the estimating equations from pairwise likelihood , with weight 1 / ( m i − 1 ) for clusters of size m i , to two versions of generalized estimating equations , GEE1 and GEE2 , where the latter requires modelling of the ﬁrst four moments of the data ; they argue that pairwise likelihood is a com - promise between the two , with computational complexity similar to GEE1 , but eﬃciency closer to GEE2 . Many of the more complex applications of composite likelihood , particularly in longitudinal or clustered data , provide comparisons using simulation studies to some type of estimating equation , usually a generalized estimating equation ; see for example Geys et al . ( 2001 ) , Hanfelt ( 2004 ) , and Zhao and Ma ( 2009 ) . Hybrid methods that combine features of composite likelihood with generalized estimating equations , as in Kuk ( 2007 ) , seem quite promising . In the other direction , Oman et al . ( 2007 ) use a generalized estimating equation approach to simplify the computation of pairwise likelihood . In its most general form composite likelihood encompasses many types of likelihood - like functions suggested in the statistical literature , including partial likelihood for censored survival data and its many extensions , as well as non - parametric likelihoods for counting processes . For example , Wellner and Zhang ( 2000 , 2007 ) propose non - parametric and semi - parametric estimators for panel 34 CRISTIANO VARIN , NANCY REID AND DAVID FIRTH count data using an independence likelihood , and Andersen ( 2004 ) uses pairwise likelihood in the proportional hazards model . Other extensions to likelihood composition include the weighted likelihood of Zidek and Hu ( 1997 ) and the par - titioning of likelihood for maximization by parts in Kalbﬂeisch , Song and Fan ( 2005 ) . 6 . 2 . Some challenges Using the most general deﬁnition of composite likelihood , it may be diﬃ - cult to derive very many speciﬁc properties beyond perhaps consistency of the point estimator , as the range of models is simply too broad ( Lindsay , Yi and Sun ( 2011 ) ) . In this subsection we consider some ideas that seem promising for further research in the theory and application of composite marginal likelihood and composite conditional likelihood . Some theoretical issues are mentioned in passing in Section 4 , and others are addressed in papers in this special issue . One important question is the rela - tion between the lower dimensional marginal or conditional distributions used to construct composite likelihood and the underlying joint distribution . For condi - tional densities , the Hammersley - Cliﬀord Theorem ( Besag ( 1974 ) ) provides some guarantees about the existence of a full joint distribution , even if this distribu - tion is not computable . There is not a similar result for the compounding of low - dimensional joint densities , beyond univariate marginal densities , where the independence likelihood corresponds trivially to a full joint distribution . While some authors state that the existence of such a full joint density is needed for sensible inference from composite likelihood , others argue that the parameters in the low - dimensional margins may be interpretable anyway . Varin and Vidoni ( 2005 ) argue this from the point of view of Kullback - Leibler divergence , whereas Faes et al . ( 2008 ) devise a method of relating individual parameters in compo - nent densities to a common parameter of interest . The theory of construction of multivariate distributions using copulas ( Joe ( 1997 ) ) may be useful for exploring these ideas further . In work as yet unpublished , presented at a session on composite likelihood at the Joint Statistical Meetings in Washington , 2009 , G . Y . Yi gave several illustrative examples that raise questions about modelling based on composite likelihood , and questions about the comparison of composite likelihood to full likelihood methods . A modelling example assumes the following pairwise distri - bution for binary data : f ( y r , y s ; β ) ∝ exp ( βy r + βy s + β rs y r y s ) 1 + exp ( βy r + βy s + β rs y r y s ) . If the binary vector has , for example , length 3 , then pairwise likelihood will lead to diﬀerent estimates of β 12 , β 13 and β 23 , yet the strong form of the marginal model COMPOSITE LIKELIHOODS 35 assumed constrains the full joint density to have β 12 = β 13 = β 23 . Similarly , it is not diﬃcult to construct examples where pairwise conditional densities are not compatible with any joint density . A somewhat diﬀerent point arises in the symmetric normal example of pairwise likelihood , where Y follows a normal distribution with covariance matrix Σ = ( 1 − ρ ) I + ρ 11 T , where I is the identity and 1 is an m - vector of 1’s . In the full joint distribution for a vector Y of length m , Σ is only positive deﬁnite for − 1 / ( m − 1 ) < ρ < 1 , whereas the pairwise composite likelihood requires only that − 1 / 2 < ρ < 1 ; thus pairwise likelihood would be expected to be unsuitable for ρ < 0 , a point conﬁrmed in Mardia , Hughes and Taylor ( 2007 ) . Several recent papers , including some in this special issue ( Okabayashi , John - son and Geyer ( 2011 ) ) ; Davis and Yau ( 2011 ) ; Ng et al . ( 2011 ) ) address the ques - tion of how many terms to include in a composite likelihood , following along the lines of Varin and Vidoni ( 2005 ) . The answer is likely to depend fairly strongly on the application , but from a theoretical point of view it is possible to study in a more general way the information accumulation provided , or not provided , by adding additional terms . Lindsay , Yi and Sun ( 2011 ) discuss in detail a number of aspects of the design of composite likelihoods , with particular emphasis on the components of the composite likelihood score function . This design issue seems especially relevant for the context of spatial and time series applications , where replication is obtained from observations suﬃciently distant in time or space . A special aspect of this is the weighting of subsets of observations , which has been studied in some detail particularly for clustered and / or longitudinal data . A more general understanding of the asymptotic eﬃciency of composite marginal likelihood would be welcome . Some progress is made in Mardia et al . ( 2009 ) , but the conditions there seem rather strong , and apply more easily to composite conditional likelihood . One motivation for the use of composite marginal likelihood is that it is easier to model the univariate , bivariate , or trivariate dependence than the full joint dependence . The claim is often made that these models are more robust than the full joint models , but it seems diﬃcult to make this precise . This is partly because it is not always clear how much the speciﬁcation of , for example , the bivariate marginals constrains the full joint distribution . A related question , suggested by Bruce Lindsay in personal communication , is whether there may be a higher dimensional model in which J = H so that asymptotic eﬃciency is achieved at this particular model . Most of the study of inference from composite likelihood has focussed on point estimation and estimation of the asymptotic variance of the composite maximum likelihood estimator . This follows fairly directly from the theory of estimating equations , at least if the dimension of the vector is ﬁxed while the 36 CRISTIANO VARIN , NANCY REID AND DAVID FIRTH sample size increases . In ordinary likelihood theory inference based on the log - likelihood ratio statistic is often preferred , but its asymptotic distribution for the composite likelihood analogue is diﬃcult to work with . Promising alternatives include the Satterthwaite ( 1946 ) type corrections mentioned in Section 2 . 3 and the adjustment developed in Pace , Salvan and Sartori ( 2011 ) . Calibration of composite likelihoods is a key ingredient also for approximate Bayesian inference as discussed in Pauli , Racugno and Ventura ( 2011 ) . Another aspect of the asymptotic theory that needs further study is the case of increasing dimension m with ﬁxed or slowly increasing sample size : this is particularly important for genetics applications . There does not seem to be a rigorous proof that the composite maximum likelihood estimator is , or is not , consistent , under various conditions on m and n : some heuristics were sketched in Cox and Reid ( 2004 ) . One very important methodological development that is touched on in sev - eral papers in this issue , as well as in other literature , is the use of composite likelihood methods with missing data and with mis - measured data . This seems a particularly important applied issue , as composite likelihood methods are so often used with longitudinal data in medical applications , where missed visits may be nearly unavoidable , and lead to gaps in the series available for each subject in the study . In some models the mechanism for missingness does not need to be modelled in the composite likelihood approach ( He and Yi ( 2011 ) ) . Molenberghs et al . ( 2011 ) use ideas of double robustness from the theory of es - timating equations to adjust for missingness under the assumption of missing at random , and Gao and Song ( 2011 ) develop EM - type algorithms that however require missingness to be completely at random . Another important methodological aspect is computation , particularly es - timation of J ( θ ) when there is not internal replication . Several strategies are suggested in Section 5 . 1 , but a systematic comparison in a broad range of mod - els could be worthwhile . Composite likelihood is being developed , often independently by researchers in diﬀerent ﬁelds , for use in a wide variety of application areas well beyond the spatial or longitudinal data for which it was originally developed : computer experiments , network analysis , population genetics , and investment portfolios , to name only a few of the recent applications . It is a natural way to simplify the modelling of complex systems , and seems likely to become well established as an alternative approach to full likelihood inference . Acknowledgements We are grateful to Don Fraser and Grace Yun Yi for helpful discussions , and to a referee and associate editor for comments on an earlier draft . The research COMPOSITE LIKELIHOODS 37 was partially supported by MIUR Italia , NSERC Canada and ESRC UK . The 2008 workshop at Warwick was supported by UK research councils ESRC , via the National Centre for Research Methods , and EPSRC , via the Centre for Research in Statistical Methodology . References Andersen , E . ( 2004 ) . Composite likelihood and two - stage estimation in family studies . Biostatis - tics 5 , 15 - 30 . Andrieu , C . , Doucet , A . and Tadic , V . ( 2005 ) . On - line parameter estimation in general state - space models . In 44th Conference on Decision and Control , 332 - 337 . Apanasovich , T . , Ruppert , D . , Lupton , J . , Popovic , N . and Carroll , R . ( 2008 ) . Aberrant crypt foci and semiparametric modeling of correlated binary data . Biometrics 64 , 490 - 500 . Arnold , B . , Castillo , E . and Sarabia , J . ( 2001 ) . Conditionally speciﬁed distributions : An intro - duction . Statist . Sci . 16 , 249 - 274 . Barry , S . and Bowman , A . ( 2008 ) . Linear mixed models for longitudinal shape data with appli - cations to facial modelling . Biostatistics 9 , 555 - 565 . Bellio , R . and Varin , C . ( 2005 ) . A pairwise likelihood approach to generalized linear models with crossed random eﬀects . Stat . Model . 5 , 217 - 227 . Besag , J . ( 1974 ) . Spatial interaction and the statistical analysis of lattice systems . J . Roy . Statist . Soc . Ser . B 36 , 192 - 236 . Besag , J . ( 1975 ) . Statistical analysis of non - lattice data . Statistician 24 , 179 - 195 . Bhat , C . R . , Sener , P . N . and Eluru , N . ( 2010 ) . A ﬂexible spatially dependent discrete choice model : Formulation and application to teenagers’ weekday recreational activity participa - tion . Transportation Research Part B 44 , 903 - 921 . Bhat , C . R . , Varin , C . and Ferdous , N . ( 2010 ) . A comparison of the maximum simulated likeli - hood and composite marginal likelihood estimation approaches in the context of the mul - tivariate ordered response model . Advances in Econometrics : Maximum Simulated Likeli - hood Methods and Applications 26 , ( Edited by W . H . Greene ) . Emerald Group Publishing Limited . Caragea , P . and Smith , R . L . ( 2006 ) . Approximate likelihoods for spatial processes . Preprint . Caragea , P . and Smith , R . L . ( 2007 ) . Asymptotic properties of computationally eﬃcient alter - native estimators for a class of multivariate normal models . J . Multivariate Anal . 98 , 1417 - 1440 . Carey , V . , Zeger , S . and Diggle , P . ( 2003 ) . Modelling multivariate binary data with alternating logistic regressions . Biometrika 80 , 517 - 526 . Castro , R . , Coates , M . , Liang , G . , Nowak , R . and Yu , B . ( 2004 ) . Network tomography : recent developments . Statist . Sci . 19 , 499 - 517 . Chandler , R . E . and Bate , S . ( 2007 ) . Inference for clustered data using the independence log - likelihood . Biometrika 94 , 167 - 183 . Claeskens , G . and Hjort , N . ( 2008 ) . Model Selection and Model Averaging , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . Cox , D . ( 1975 ) . Partial likelihood . Biometrika 62 , 269 - 276 . Cox , D . R . ( 1972 ) . The analysis of multivariate binary data . Appl . Statist . 21 , 113 - 120 . Cox , D . and Reid , N . ( 2004 ) . A note on pseudolikelihood constructed from marginal densities . Biometrika 91 , 729 - 737 . 38 CRISTIANO VARIN , NANCY REID AND DAVID FIRTH Cressie , N . ( 1993 ) . Statistics for Spatial Data , Wiley , New York . Curriero , F . and Lele , S . ( 1999 ) . A composite likelihood approach to semivariogram estimation . J . Agric . Biol . Environ . Stat . 4 , 9 - 28 . Davis , R . A . and Yau , C . Y . ( 2011 ) . Comments on pairwise likelihood in time series models . Statist . Sinica 21 , 255 - 277 . Davison , A . and Gholamrezaee , M . ( 2009 ) . Geostatistics of extremes . Technical report , EPFL . Preprint . Dempster , A . , Laird , N . and Rubin , D . ( 1977 ) . Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the EM algorithm . J . Roy . Statist . Soc . Ser . B 39 , 1 - 22 . Diggle , P . and Ribeiro , P . ( 2007 ) . Model - based Geostatistics . Springer , New York . Engle , R . F . , Shephard , N . and Sheppard , K . ( 2009 ) . Fitting and testing vast dimensional time - varying covariance models . Preprint . Faes , C . , Aerts , M . , Molenberghs , G . , Geys , H . , Teuns , G . and Bijnens , L . ( 2008 ) . A high - dimensional joint model for longitudinal outcomes of diﬀerent nature . Statist . Medicine 27 , 4408 - 4427 . Feddag , M . - L . and Bacci , S . ( 2009 ) . Pairwise likelihood for the longitudinal mixed Rasch model . Comput . Statist . Data Anal . 53 , 1027 - 1037 . Fieuws , S . and Verbeke , G . ( 2006 ) . Pairwise ﬁtting of mixed models for the joint modeling of multivariate longitudinal proﬁles . Biometrics 62 , 424 - 431 . Fieuws , S . , Verbeke , G . , Boen , G . and Delecluse , C . ( 2006 ) . High dimensional multivariate mixed models for binary questionnaire data . Appl . Statist . 55 , 449 - 460 . Fieuws , S . , Verbeke , G . , Maes , B . and Vanrenterghem , Y . ( 2007 ) . Predicting renal graft failure using multivariate longitudinal proﬁles . Biostatistics 9 , 419 - 431 . Fieuws , S . , Verbeke , G . and Molenberghs , G . ( 2007 ) . Random - eﬀects models for multivariate repeated measures . Statist . Meth . Medical Res . 16 , 387 - 397 . Fiocco , M . , Putter , H . and van Houwelingen , J . C . ( 2009 ) . A new serially correlated gamma - frailty process for longitudinal count data . Biostatistics 10 , 245 - 257 . Fujii , Y . and Yanagimoto , T . ( 2005 ) . Pairwise conditional score functions : a generalization of the Mantel - Haenszel estimator . J . Statist . Plann . Inference 128 , 1 - 12 . Gao , X . and Song , P . X . - K . ( 2010 ) . Composite likelihood Bayesian information criteria for model selection in high dimensional data . J . Amer . Statist . Assoc . , to appear . Gao , X . and Song , P . X . - K . ( 2011 ) . Composite likelihood EM algorithm with applications to multivariate hidden Markov model . Statist . Sinica 21 , 165 - 185 . Geys , H . , Molenberghs , G . and Ryan , L . ( 1999 ) . Pseudolikelihood modeling of multivariate outcomes in developmental toxicology . J . Amer . Statist . Assoc . 94 , 734 - 745 . Geys , H . , Regan , M . , Catalano , P . and Molenberghs , G . ( 2001 ) . Two latent variable risk assess - ment approaches for mixed continuous and discrete outcomes from developmental toxicity data . J . Agric . Biol . Environ . Stat . 6 , 340 - 355 . Glasbey , C . ( 2001 ) . Non - linear autoregressive time series with multivariate Gaussian mixtures as marginal distributions . Appl . Statist . 50 , 143 - 154 . Godambe , V . ( 1960 ) . An optimum property of regular maximum likelihood estimation . Ann . Math . Statist . 31 , 1208 - 1211 . Guan , Y . ( 2006 ) . A composite likelihood approach in ﬁtting spatial point process models . J . Amer . Statist . Assoc . 101 , 1502 - 1512 . Hanfelt , J . ( 2004 ) . Composite conditional likelihood for sparse clustered data . J . Roy . Statist . Soc . Ser . B 66 , 259 - 273 . COMPOSITE LIKELIHOODS 39 He , W . and Yi , G . Y . ( 2011 ) . A pairwise likelihood method for correlated binary data with / without missing observations under generalized partially linear single - index models . Statist . Sinica 21 , 207 - 229 . Heagerty , P . and Lele , S . ( 1998 ) . A composite likelihood approach to binary spatial data . J . Amer . Statist . Assoc . 93 , 1099 - 1111 . Henderson , R . and Shimakura , S . ( 2003 ) . A serially correlated gamma frailty model for longi - tudinal count data . Biometrika 90 , 335 - 366 . Hjort , N . and Omre , H . ( 1994 ) . Topics in spatial statistics ( with discussion , comments and re - joinder ) . Scand . J . Statist . 21 , 289 - 357 . Hjort , N . and Varin , C . ( 2008 ) . ML , PL , QL in Markov chain models . Scand . J . Statist . 35 , 64 - 82 . Joe , H . ( 1997 ) , Multivariate Models and Multivariate Dependence Concepts , Chapman & Hall , London . Joe , H . and Lee , Y . ( 2009 ) . On weighting of bivariate margins in pairwise likelihood . J . Multi - variate Anal . 100 , 670 - 685 . Kalbﬂeisch , J . ( 1978 ) . Likelihood methods and nonparametric tests . J . Amer . Statist . Assoc . 73 , 167 - 170 . Kalbﬂeisch , J . D . , Song , P . X . - K . and Fan , Y . ( 2005 ) . Maximization by parts in likelihood inference . J . Amer . Statist . Assoc . 100 , 1145 - 1158 . Kent , J . ( 1982 ) . Robust properties of likelihood ratio tests . Biometrika 69 , 19 - 27 . Kuk , A . ( 2007 ) . A hybrid pairwise likelihood method . Biometrika 94 , 939 - 952 . Kuk , A . and Nott , D . ( 2000 ) . A pairwise likelihood approach to analyzing correlated binary data . Statist . Probab . Lett . 47 , 329 - 335 . Kuonen , D . ( 1999 ) . Saddlepoint approximations for distributions of quadratic forms in normal variables . Biometrika 86 , 929 - 935 . Larribe , F . and Fearnhead , P . ( 2011 ) . On composite likelihoods in statistical genetics . Statist . Sinica 21 , 43 - 69 . LeCessie , S . and van Houwelingen , J . C . ( 1994 ) . Logistic regression for correlated binary data . Appl . Statist . 43 , 95 - 108 . Lele , S . ( 2006 ) . Sampling variability and estimates of density dependence : a composite - likelihood approach . Ecology 87 , 189 - 202 . Lele , S . and Taper , M . ( 2002 ) . A composite likelihood approach to ( co ) variance components estimation . J . Statist . Plann . Inference 103 , 117 - 135 . Liang , K . - Y . ( 1987 ) . Extended Mantel - Haenszel estimating procedure for multivariate logistic regression models . Biometrics 43 , 289 - 299 . Liang , K . - Y . and Qin , J . ( 2000 ) . Regression analysis under non - standard situations : a pairwise pseudolikelihood approach . J . Roy . Statist . Soc . Ser . B 62 , 773 - 786 . Liang , G . and Yu , B . ( 2003 ) . Maximum pseudo likelihood estimation in network tomography . IEEE Trans . Signal Process . 51 , 2043 - 2053 . Liang , K . - Y . and Zeger , S . ( 1986 ) . Longitudinal data analysis using generalized linear models . Biometrika 73 , 13 - 22 . Lindsay , B . G . ( 1982 ) . Conditional score functions : some optimality results . Biometrika 69 , 503 - 512 . Lindsay , B . ( 1988 ) . Composite likelihood methods . Contemporary Mathematics 80 , 220 - 239 . Lindsay , B . G . , Pilla , R . S . and Basak , P . ( 2000 ) . Moment - based approximations of distributions using mixtures : theory and application . Ann . Inst . Statist . Math . 52 , 215 - 230 . 40 CRISTIANO VARIN , NANCY REID AND DAVID FIRTH Lindsay , B . G . , Yi , G . Y . and Sun , J . ( 2011 ) . Issues and strategies in the selection of composite likelihoods . Statist . Sinica 21 , 71 - 105 . Lipsitz , S . , Dear , K . and Zhao , L . ( 1994 ) . Jackknife estimators of variance for parameter esti - mates from estimating equations with applications to clustered survival data . Biometrics 50 , 842 - 846 . Lumley , T . and Heagerty , P . ( 1999 ) . Weighted empirical adaptive variance estimators for cor - related data regression . J . Roy . Statist . Soc . Ser . B 61 , 459 - 477 . Mardia , K . V . , Hughes , G . and Taylor , C . C . ( 2007 ) . Eﬃciency of the pseudolikelihood for multivariate normal and von mises distributions . Preprint . Mardia , K . V . , Hughes , G . , Taylor , C . C . and Singh , H . ( 2008 ) . A multivariate von Mises distribution with applications to bioinformatics . Canadian Journal of Statistics 36 , 99 - 109 . Mardia , K . V . , Kent , J . T . , Hughes , G . and Taylor , C . C . ( 2009 ) . Maximum likelihood estimation using composite likelihoods for closed exponential families . Biometrika 96 , 975 - 982 . Mateu , J . , Porcu , E . , Christakos , G . and Bevilacqua , M . ( 2007 ) . Fitting negative spatial co - variances to geothermal ﬁeld temperatures in Nea Kessani ( Greece ) . Environmetrics 18 , 759 - 773 . McCullagh , P . ( 1983 ) . Quasi - likelihood functions . Ann . Statist . 11 , 59 - 67 . McFadden , D . and Train , K . ( 2000 ) . Mixed MNL models for discrete responses . J . Appl . Econo - metrics 15 , 447 - 470 . McLachlan , G . and Krishnan , T . ( 2008 ) . The EM Algorithm and Extensions . Second Edition , Wiley , Hoboken , New Jersey . Molenberghs , G . , Kenward , M . G . , Verbeke , G . and Birhanu , T . ( 2011 ) . Pseudo - likelihood for incomplete data . Statist . Sinica 21 , 187 - 206 . Molenberghs , G . and Verbeke , G . ( 2005 ) . Models for Discrete Longitudinal Data . Springer , New York . Ng , C . T . , Joe , H . , Karlis , D . and Liu , J . ( 2011 ) . Composite likelihood for time series models with a latent autoregressive process . Statist . Sinica 21 , 279 - 305 . Nott , D . and Ryd´en , T . ( 1999 ) . Pairwise likelihood methods for inference in image models . Biometrika 86 , 661 - 676 . Okabayashi , S . , Johnson , L . and Geyer , C . J . ( 2011 ) . Extending pseudo - likelihood for Potts models . Statist . Sinica 21 , 331 - 347 . Oliveira , V . D . ( 2004 ) . A simple model for spatial rainfall ﬁelds . Stochastic Environmental Research and Risk Assessment 18 , 131 - 140 . Oman , S . , Landsman , V . , Carmel , Y . and Kadmon , R . ( 2007 ) . Analyzing spatially distributed binary data using independent - block estimating equations . Biometrics 63 , 892 - 890 . Pace , L . , Salvan , A . and Sartori , N . ( 2011 ) . Adjusting composite likelihood ratio statistics . Statist . Sinica 21 , 129 - 148 . Padoan , S . , Ribatet , M . and Sisson , S . ( 2010 ) . Likelihood - based inference for max - stable pro - cesses . J . Amer . Statist . Assoc . 105 , 263 - 277 . Pakel , C . , Shephard , N . and Sheppard , K . ( 2011 ) . Nuisance parameters , composite likelihoods and a panel of GARCH models . Statist . Sinica 21 , 307 - 329 . Parzen , M . , Lipsitz , S . , Fitzmaurice , G . , Ibrahim , J . and Troxel , A . ( 2006 ) . Pseudo - likelihood methods for longitudinal binary data with non - ignorable missing responses and covariates . Statist . Medicine 25 , 2784 - 2796 . COMPOSITE LIKELIHOODS 41 Parzen , M . , Lipsitz , S . , Fitzmaurice , G . , Ibrahim , J . , Troxel , A . and Molenberghs , G . ( 2007 ) . Pseudo - likelihood methods for the analysis of longitudinal binary data subject to nonig - norable non - monotone missingness . J . Data Sci . 5 , 1 - 21 . Pauli , F . , Racugno , W . and Ventura , L . ( 2011 ) . Bayesian composite marginal likelihoods . Statist . Sinica 21 , 149 - 164 . R Development Core Team ( 2009 ) , R : A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing , R Foundation for Statistical Computing , Vienna , Austria . ISBN 3 - 900051 - 07 - 0 . http : / / www . R - project . org . Renard , D . , Geys , H . , Molenberghs , G . , Burzykowski , T . and Buyse , M . ( 2002 ) . Validation of surrogate endpoints in multiple randomized clinical trials with discrete outcomes . Biomet - rical J . 8 , 921 - 935 . Renard , D . , Molenberghs , G . and Geys , H . ( 2004 ) . A pairwise likelihood approach to estimation in multilevel probit models . Comput . Statist . Data Anal . 44 , 649 - 667 . Ribatet , M . ( 2009 ) . A User’s Guide to the SpatialExtremes Package . EPFL , Lausanne , Switzer - land . Robins , J . ( 1995 ) . Analysis of semiparametric regression models for repeated outcomes in the presence of missing data . J . Amer . Statist . Assoc . 90 , 106 - 121 . Rotnitzky , A . and Jewell , N . ( 1990 ) . Hypothesis testing of regression parameters in semipara - metric generalized linear models for cluster correlated data . Biometrika 77 , 485 - 497 . Ryd´en , T . ( 1994 ) . Consistent and asymptotically normal parameter estimates for hidden Markov models . Ann . Statist . 22 , 1884 - 1895 . Satterthwaite , F . E . ( 1946 ) . An approximate distribution of estimates of variance components . Biometrics Bulletin 2 , 110 - 114 . Smith , E . and Stephenson , A . ( 2009 ) . An extended Gaussian max - stable process model for spatial extremes . J . Statist . Plann . Inference 139 , 1266 - 1275 . Smith , R . ( 1990 ) . Max - stable processes and spatial extremes . Unpublished . Stein , M . , Chi , Z . and Welty , L . ( 2004 ) . Approximating likelihoods for large spatial data sets . J . Roy . Statist . Soc . Ser . B 66 , 275 - 296 . Tibaldi , F . , Molenberghs , G . , Burzykowski , T . and Geys , H . ( 2004 ) . Pseudo - likelihood estima - tion for a marginal multivariate survival model . Statist . Medicine 23 , 924 - 963 . Troxel , A . , Lipsitz , S . and Harrington , D . ( 2003 ) . Marginal models for the analysis of longitudi - nal measurements with nonignorable non - monotone missing data . Biometrika 85 , 661 - 672 . Vandekerkhove , P . ( 2005 ) . Consistent and asymptotically normal parameter estimates for hidden Markov mixtures of Markov models . Bernoulli 11 , 103 - 129 . Varin , C . ( 2008 ) . On composite marginal likelihoods . Adv . Statist . Anal . 92 , 1 - 28 . Varin , C . and Czado , C . ( 2010 ) . A mixed autoregressive probit model for ordinal longitudinal data . Biostatistics 11 , 127 - 138 . Varin , C . , Høst , G . and Skare , Ø . ( 2005 ) . Pairwise likelihood inference in spatial generalized linear mixed models . Comput . Statist . Data Anal . 49 , 1173 - 1191 . Varin , C . and Vidoni , P . ( 2005 ) . A note on composite likelihood inference and model selection . Biometrika 92 , 519 - 528 . Varin , C . and Vidoni , P . ( 2006 ) . Pairwise likelihood inference for ordinal categorical time series . Comput . Statist . Data Anal . 51 , 2365 - 2373 . Varin , C . and Vidoni , P . ( 2009 ) . Pairwise likelihood inference for general state space models . Econometric Rev . 28 , 170 - 185 . 42 CRISTIANO VARIN , NANCY REID AND DAVID FIRTH Vecchia , A . V . ( 1988 ) . Estimation and model identiﬁcation for continuous spatial processes . J . Roy . Statist . Soc . Ser . B 50 , 297 - 312 . Wang , M . and Williamson , J . M . ( 2005 ) . Generalization of the Mantel - Haenszel estimating function for sparse clustered binary data . Biometrics 61 , 973 - 981 . Wang , Y . and Ip , E . ( 2008 ) . Conditionally speciﬁed continuous distributions . Biometrika 95 , 735 - 746 . Wedderburn , R . ( 1974 ) . Quasi - likelihood functions , generalized linear models , and the Gauss - Newton method . Biometrika 61 , 439 - 447 . Wellner , J . A . and Zhang , Y . ( 2000 ) . Two estimators of the mean of a counting process with panel count data . Ann . Statist . 28 , 779 - 814 . Wellner , J . A . and Zhang , Y . ( 2007 ) . Two likelihood - based semiparametric estimation methods for panel count data with covariates . Ann . Statist . 35 , 2106 - 2142 . White , H . ( 1994 ) . Estimation , Inference and Speciﬁcation Analysis . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . Yi , G . Y . , Zeng , L . and Cook , R . J . ( 2009 ) . A robust pairwise likelihood method for incomplete longitudinal binary data arising in clusters . Canad . J . Statist . , to appear . Zhao , H . and Ma , W . - Q . ( 2009 ) . A pairwise likelihood procedure for analyzing exchangeable binary data with random cluster sizes . Comm . Statist . Theory Methods 38 , 594 - 606 . Zhao , L . P . and Prenctice , R . L . ( 1990 ) . Correlated binary regression using a quadratic expo - nential model . Biometrika 77 , 642 - 648 . Zhao , Y . and Joe , H . ( 2005 ) . Composite likelihood estimation in multivariate data analysis . Canad . J . Statist . 33 , 335 - 356 . Zi , J . ( 2009 ) . On some aspects of composite likelihood . PhD dissertation , University of Toronto . Zidek , J . V . and Hu , F . ( 1997 ) . The asymptotic properties of the maximum - relevance weighted likelihood estimators . Canad . J . Statist . 25 , 45 - 59 . Dipartimento di Statistica , Universit ` a Ca’ Foscari , Venezia , Italy . E - mail : sammy @ unive . it Department of Statistics , University of Toronto , Toronto M5S 3GS , Canada . E - mail : reid @ utstat . utoronto . ca Department of Statistics , University of Warwick , Coventry CV4 7AL , UK . E - mail : d . ﬁrth @ warwick . ac . uk ( Received November 2009 ; accepted August 2010 )