Fordham Intellectual Property , Media and Entertainment Law Journal Volume 27 Volume XXVII Number 2 Article 3 2017 Recreating Copyright : The Cognitive Process of Creation and Copyright Law Omri Rachum - Twaig University of California at Berkeley School of Law , omrirach @ post . tau . ac . il Follow this and additional works at : https : / / ir . lawnet . fordham . edu / iplj Part of the Intellectual Property Law Commons This Article is brought to you for free and open access by FLASH : The Fordham Law Archive of Scholarship and History . It has been accepted for inclusion in Fordham Intellectual Property , Media and Entertainment Law Journal by an authorized editor of FLASH : The Fordham Law Archive of Scholarship and History . For more information , please contact tmelnick @ law . fordham . edu . Recommended Citation Omri Rachum - Twaig , Recreating Copyright : The Cognitive Process of Creation and Copyright Law , 27 Fordham Intell . Prop . Media & Ent . L . J . 287 ( 2017 ) . Available at : https : / / ir . lawnet . fordham . edu / iplj / vol27 / iss2 / 3 Recreating Copyright : The Cognitive Process of Creation and Copyright Law Cover Page Footnote Visiting Researcher , University of California at Berkeley School of Law ; Research Fellow , Edmond J . Safra Center for Ethics , Buchmann Faculty of Law , Tel Aviv University ; Research Fellow , Zvi Meitar Center for Advanced Legal Studies , Buchmann Faculty of Law , Tel Aviv University . This Article is based on a chapter from my PhD dissertation written under the supervision of Professor Michael Birnhack , Zvi Meitar Center for Advanced Legal Studies , Buchmann Faculty of Law , Tel Aviv University . This research was supported by a scholarship from the S . Horowitz Institute for Intellectual Property in Memory of Dr . Amnon Goldenberg , Buchmann Faculty of Law , Tel Aviv University . I wish to thank Michael Birnhack for his invaluable comments , suggestions , and support and for reading earlier drafts of this Article . I also wish to thank Mark Lemley , Orly Lobel , Peter Menell , Shai Lavi , and David Heyd for very helpful discussions on this Article ; participants of the Edmond J . Safra Center for Ethics Turn of the Year Workshop 2015 for their comments and lead commentator Dotan Oliar for his thorough reading of a draft of this Article and for his great comments ; the participants of the Sixth Annual Workshop of the Israeli Forum on IP ; the participants of the Corporate Innovation and Legal Policy Seminar at the University of San Diego ; and the participants of the Buchmann Faculty of Law PhD Colloquium for their thoughtful comments . Last , but definitely not least , I wish to thank Asaf Wiener and Ohad Somech for countless conversations on this Article and for always reading and discussing my drafts . This article is available in Fordham Intellectual Property , Media and Entertainment Law Journal : https : / / ir . lawnet . fordham . edu / iplj / vol27 / iss2 / 3 287 Recreating Copyright : The Cognitive Process of Creation and Copyright Law Omri Rachum - Twaig * I NTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 288 I . C OGNITIVE P SYCHOLOGY AND THE L AW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 293 II . T HE C REATIVE C OGNITION —T HEORIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . 297 A . Stage and Componential Process Theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 298 B . Creativity as a Cognitive Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 305 C . Creativity as Problem Solving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 310 D . Creativity as Problem Finding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 314 III . C RYSTALLIZATION OF THE U NFOCUSED T HOUGHT —T HE C RUCIAL R OLE OF K NOWLEDGE AND M EMORY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 315 A . Unfocused Thought—Associative Thought and Abstract Ideas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 315 B . The Use of Task - Relevant Knowledge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 317 * Visiting Researcher , University of California at Berkeley School of Law ; Research Fellow , Edmond J . Safra Center for Ethics , Buchmann Faculty of Law , Tel Aviv University ; Research Fellow , Zvi Meitar Center for Advanced Legal Studies , Buchmann Faculty of Law , Tel Aviv University . This Article is based on a chapter from my PhD dissertation written under the supervision of Professor Michael Birnhack , Zvi Meitar Center for Advanced Legal Studies , Buchmann Faculty of Law , Tel Aviv University . This research was supported by a scholarship from the S . Horowitz Institute for Intellectual Property in Memory of Dr . Amnon Goldenberg , Buchmann Faculty of Law , Tel Aviv University . I wish to thank Michael Birnhack for his invaluable comments , suggestions , and support and for reading earlier drafts of this Article . I also wish to thank Mark Lemley , Orly Lobel , Peter Menell , Shai Lavi , and David Heyd for very helpful discussions on this Article ; participants of the Edmond J . Safra Center for Ethics Turn of the Year Workshop 2015 for their comments and lead commentator Dotan Oliar for his thorough reading of a draft of this Article and for his great comments ; the participants of the Sixth Annual Workshop of the Israeli Forum on IP ; the participants of the Corporate Innovation and Legal Policy Seminar at the University of San Diego ; and the participants of the Buchmann Faculty of Law PhD Colloquium for their thoughtful comments . Last , but definitely not least , I wish to thank Asaf Wiener and Ohad Somech for countless conversations on this Article and for always reading and discussing my drafts . 288 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 IV . T HE U SE OF T ASK - R ELEVANT K NOWLEDGE AND M EMORY IN THE C REATIVE P ROCESS . . . . . . . . . . . 320 A . Theoretical Analysis of the Use of Knowledge and Memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 321 B . Empirical Studies on Creativity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 326 C . Historical Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 335 V . I MPLICATIONS FOR C OPYRIGHT L AW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 338 A . The Use of Prior Knowledge in the Creative Process and Copyright’s Originality Requirement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 338 B . The Creative Process and the Author’s Independent Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 340 C . The Use of Prior Knowledge and the Right to Make Derivative Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 343 C ONCLUSION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 351 I NTRODUCTION Copyright law reflects the intuitive understanding of creativity in the eyes of the law . This is because copyright law’s primary goal is to promote creativity . 1 But is the legal understanding of creativity in line with cognitive psychology’s understanding of the creative process ? This Article examines whether copyright law is harmo - nious with cognitive psychology’s understanding of creativity . Some scholars posit that theories of creativity fit well with current copyright law . In an article published in the Harvard Law Review , 1 See U . S . C ONST . art . I , § 8 , cl . 8 ( providing that Congress has the power “ [ t ] o promote the Progress of Science . . . . ” ) ; see also Twentieth Century Music Corp . v . Aiken , 422 U . S . 151 , 156 ( 1975 ) ( noting that copyright’s “ultimate aim” is “to stimulate artistic creativity for the general public good” ) ; Kelly v . Arriba Soft Corp . , 336 F . 3d 811 , 820 ( 9th Cir . 2003 ) ( “The Copyright Act was intended to promote creativity , thereby benefitting the artist and the public alike . ” ) ; Warner Bros . Inc . v . Am . Broad . Cos . , 720 F . 2d 231 , 240 ( 2d Cir . 1983 ) ( “It is a fundamental objective of the copyright law to foster creativity . ” ) ; Julie E . Cohen , Creativity and Culture in Copyright Theory , 40 U . C . D AVIS L . R EV . 1151 , 1151 ( 2007 ) ( “Creativity is universally agreed to be a good that copyright law should seek to promote . . . . ” ) ; Ned Snow , The Regressing Progress Clause : Rethinking Constitutional Indifference to Harmful Content in Copyright , 47 U . C . D AVIS L . R EV . 1 , 40 ( 2013 ) ( “ [ I ] n no uncertain terms the Court has articulated a view of copyright that defines the primary objective of copyright as creativity or originality ( which turns on creativity ) . ” ) . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 289 Joseph Fishman , a scholar studying the relationship between intel - lectual property and creativity , argued that , based upon some ac - counts of creativity , copyright law’s constraints on creativity ac - tually push authors to create more original and creative works . 2 This Article’s goal is to offer a broader assessment of creativity studies and to question whether they indeed fit with copyright law’s assumptions about creativity . This Article focuses on four main doctrines and concepts in copyright law . The first is the originality requirement in copyright law . 3 The second is the concept of romantic authorship . The third is the idea / expression dichotomy that grants copyright protection to expressions and denies it to ideas . 4 The fourth , which is closely related to the third , is the right to make derivative works . 5 Copy - right law treats derivative works separately from original works and creates , to some extent , an identity between derivative works and reproductions . 6 This attitude toward derivative works is not easy to justify . This Article examines whether the cognitive psychology of creativity is consonant with this legal doctrine and how to best ap - ply cognitive psychology’s findings to the law . The copyright doctrines discussed in this Article are based upon implicit and explicit assumptions about creativity . The origi - nality doctrine , for example , is based upon the express assumption that creative works include an original contribution from the au - thor . 7 By contrast , the idea / expression dichotomy has a more im - plicit assumption about creativity ; it assumes that ideas are more important to the promotion of creativity than expressions . This implicit assumption is evidenced by different normative approach - 2 See Joseph P . Fishman , Creating Around Copyright , 128 H ARV . L . R EV . 1333 , 1360 – 90 ( 2015 ) . Fishman’s argument is based upon the “path of least resistance” approach to creativity and empirical studies based upon it . Id . This Article discusses this approach to creativity as part of its broader theory of creative cognition , along with other approaches to creativity . See infra Section IV . B . 3 See 17 U . S . C . § 102 ( a ) ( 2012 ) . 4 See § 102 ( b ) ( “In no case does copyright protection for an original work of authorship extend to any idea , procedure , process , system , method of operation , concept , principle , or discovery , regardless of the form in which it is described , explained , illustrated , or embodied in such work . ” ) . 5 See id . § 103 ( a ) . 6 See id . 7 See § 102 ( a ) . 290 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 es to copyright law , such as utilitarian analysis and natural rights theories , which suggest that non - protection of ideas is necessary for promoting creativity and that the protection of expression is harmful to creativity . 8 The exclusive right to make derivative works is based upon a similar assumption . Under a utilitarian analysis , authors are properly granted an exclusive right to make derivative works , if we assume an original author’s incentive to create deriva - tive works promotes creativity that outweighs the creativity that would result from second authors’ free access to preexisting ex - pressions as the basis for the their works . 9 In other words , the law assumes that the free making of derivative works is less important for promoting creativity than preserving the first author’s incentive to create “original” works . This Article contends that the law’s idea / expression dichoto - my , which requires the same standard of review for both derivative works and reproductions , is not justified under cognitive psycholo - gy’s understanding of the creative process . During the cognitive process of creation , authors utilize their prior knowledge to crys - tallize abstract thoughts into new ideas . Specifically , authors em - ploy domain - relevant knowledge and memory as building blocks in their creative process . Cognitive psychology posits that both ideas and expressions ( in copyright terms ) are possible knowledge com - ponents that creativity is based on and identifies both types of knowledge as an inherent part of the creative process . This Ar - ticle’s argument focuses on the descriptive - critical level , and ar - gues that as far as the distinction between derivative works ( based on expressions of previous works ) and original works ( that are based on abstract ideas or unprotected expressions ) is concerned , there is a mismatch between copyright law and cognitive psycholo - gy’s understanding of creativity . In fact , it is possible that the basic 8 For an economic analysis of the idea / expression dichotomy , see W ILLIAM M . L ANDES & R ICHARD A . P OSNER , T HE E CONOMIC S TRUCTURE OF I NTELLECTUAL P ROPERTY L AW 91 – 92 ( 2003 ) . For a Lockean justification for the idea / expression dichotomy , see Wendy J . Gordon , A Property Right in Self - Expression : Equality and Individualism in the Natural Law of Intellectual Property , 102 Y ALE L . J . 1533 , 1581 – 83 ( 1993 ) , and Justin Hughes , The Philosophy of Intellectual Property , 77 G EO . L . J . 287 , 310 – 14 ( 1988 ) . 9 For an economic analysis of the derivative work right , see L ANDES & P OSNER , supra note 8 , at 108 – 15 . For a critique on this analysis , see infra note 384 . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 291 idea / expression dichotomy in copyright law is also discordant with cognitive psychology . Although a shift to a new copyright regime is premature , a normative reevaluation of the legal justifications un - derlying the current regime is proper , considering this Article’s conclusions . Additionally , the findings suggested in this Article could be used as a basis for a normative discussion under various approaches in the absence of other empirical data about the effects current copyright law has on creativity . Literature on the cognitive psychology of creativity includes theoretical literature as well as empirical and historical studies that seek to outline the various cognitive stages of the creative process and the common pattern of creativity identifiable in authors’ cogni - tive process . This Article reviews the existing literature on the cognitive psychology of creativity , discusses its main characteris - tics , and extracts several substantial notions about the various stag - es of the creative process and the importance of previous know - ledge and memory in the creative process . These notions demon - strate that there is a gap between the way the law understands de - rivative work and its place in the creative world . This gap warrants a reevaluation of the legal justifications underlying the exclusive right to make derivative works , the scope of this right , and the re - medies for infringement . 10 The notion regarding the centrality of prior relevant knowledge in the creative process , and its role as a knowledge component for both ideas and expressions , is one of the grounds on which this Ar - ticle argues that the law should conceptually separate mere repro - ductions from the making of derivative works under copyright . Whereas mere reproductions are properly considered uncreative by cognitive psychology and the law , derivative works are the result of creative activity that is not qualitatively different from making an “original” work . To reflect this distinction between creative and 10 It is important to note that , although this Article argues that copyright law and the right to make a derivative work right should be analyzed in light of the cognitive understanding of creativity , the creative process—even in its cognitive context—is fluid and not predefined . It is likely that the cognitive process of creation is affected by various factors that are external to the author and only one of these factors may be the law . Nevertheless , the law’s effect on creativity should be scrutinized in order to maximize the law’s efficacy . 292 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 non - creative activities , copyright law should separate the reproduc - tion right from the derivative work right . In addition , two other aspects of cognitive psychology could il - luminate copyright law . First , the cognitive psychology of creativity could contribute to a better , more precise understanding of copy - right law’s originality requirement . Copyright should embrace psy - chology’s understanding that not every creative product should be considered entirely original . The second concerns copyright’s re - quirement of an independent contribution by the author . Post - modern copyright law purportedly utilizes a definition of indepen - dent contribution that is significantly narrower than the “romantic author” approach , the predecessor to copyright’s current under - standing of an independent contribution , which was criticized as too broad . 11 The cognitive process of creativity strongly suggests that although a work of authorship has many sources external to the author , the author nevertheless has an independent contribu - tion that cannot be disregarded . Before delving into the core arguments , it is important to out - line several characteristics of cognitive psychology’s discourse on creativity . First , this field does not distinguish between creative activities that concern works of authorship in copyright terms and creative activities that concern inventions in patent law terms . Therefore , when necessary , this Article articulates the differences that may arise in light of this lack of differentiation . Second , the meaning of many terms in cognitive psychology is different from both common parlance and legal terminology . Two main terms warrant explanation here : The field of cognitive psychology uses the terms “problem” or “task” to refer to the goal driving the au - thor’s creative process . 12 Put differently , these terms mean the task that the creative activity revolves around . 13 The creative environ - ment in which the creative process takes place is referred to as a “domain , ” and this Article uses the term “task - domain” often . This term means the creative environment relevant to the task the author seeks to complete . Another important point is the meaning 11 See infra notes 364 – 72 and accompanying text . 12 See Todd I . Lubart , Models of the Creative Process : Past , Present and Future , 13 C REATIVITY R ES . J . 295 , 297 ( 2001 ) . 13 See id . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 293 of the term knowledge . In cognitive psychology , knowledge in - cludes various components of information . Some of these may ap - pear to copyright experts as ideas in their legal sense . However , as this Article points out , the term knowledge in cognitive psychology includes informational components that reflect expressions in the copyright sense . 14 This Article is organized in the following manner : Part I dis - cusses cognitive psychology’s relevance to the law . Part II presents the predominant theories of the process of creation and emphasizes the main characteristics of each group of theories . Part III divides the cognitive process of creation into two main stages : the stage of abstract unfocused ideation , and the stage of crystallization of a preliminary idea using previous domain - relevant knowledge and memory . Part IV uses theoretical , empirical and historical research to explain the role of prior domain - relevant knowledge and memo - ry in the process of creation . Finally , Part V discusses how the dis - course of cognitive psychology and the notions extracted from it may affect copyright law and , specifically , the right to make deriva - tive works . I . C OGNITIVE P SYCHOLOGY AND THE L AW A short discussion about the relevance of cognitive psychology to the law and the connection of these two fields of knowledge is appropriate . This discussion obviously has implications for the va - lidity of the relationship between cognitive psychology of creativity and copyright law as this Article suggests . When a connection be - tween the law and an extralegal field of knowledge is suggested , the first question to ask is what the relations between the two are . One 14 Two disclaimers are appropriate . First , this Article is not advocating for a direct link between the use of prior knowledge and memory in the creative process and the creation of derivative works in the legal context . In this sense , it does not argue that every work of authorship is a derivative work because many works are based upon knowledge that the law treats as a mere idea . The claim is limited to the argument that making derivative works—i . e . , using prior knowledge that contains explicit protected expression as part of the creative process—is an inherent part of the creative process and is not qualitatively different from making an original work with preexisting “ideas . ” Second , this Article does not suggest that the law’s distinction between original works and derivative works is impossible to justify normatively . Instead , this Article posits that this distinction is discordant with cognitive psychology’s understating of creativity . 294 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 option is a relation of subordination , meaning that the law should adapt itself to notions from the extralegal field . A second option is a relation of description , explanation , and projection , meaning that the extralegal field explains the law and the legal rules and de - scribes their effects on the real world . A third option , sometimes derived from the second , is a utilitarian relation , meaning that the extralegal field could be used as a tool to design rules that will best achieve the law’s goals . 15 The relation between the law and an extralegal field is derived from that field’s characteristics and theo - retical goals . If the extralegal field has a normative goal , the first type of relation is concerned . If , on the other hand , the extralegal field has a descriptive goal , then the second or third relations are relevant . This is demonstrated by the relation between economics and psychology , and the relation between both and the law . As far as economics is concerned , the neoclassical economic theory could be viewed as normative because it proposes a maxim of good that people should adhere to . This normative maxim of wealth maximization is based on the Benthamian approach that “it is the greatest happiness of the greatest number that is the measure of right and wrong . ” 16 A more concrete conceptualization of wealth maximization is the sum of subjective individual preferences . To apply the normative aspect of the economic theory , economists de - veloped a secondary theory that is mostly descriptive . Thus , for example , the neoclassical economic theory assumes that human beings behave rationally . 17 This assumption serves as a foundation for explaining and predicting the conditions that will maximize the sum of private preferences . Mathematical tools , such as formal models could inform how this normative maxim is best fulfilled . 15 For a similar analysis , see Christine Jolls , Cass R . Sunstein & Richard Thaler , A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics , 50 S TAN . L . R EV . 1471 , 1474 ( 1998 ) , which suggests that different approaches to the law could be positive , descriptive , or normative , and Cass R . Sunstein , Behavioral Analysis of Law , 64 U . C HI . L . R EV . 1175 , 1177 ( 1997 ) . Steven Shavell , for example , recognized that the economic analysis in the context of law has a normative aspect as well as a descriptive one . See S TEVEN S HAVELL , F OUNDATIONS OF E CONOMIC A NALYSIS OF L AW 1 – 2 ( 2004 ) . 16 J EREMY B ENTHAM , A F RAGMENT ON G OVERNMENT vi ( 1776 ) . 17 See , e . g . , Daniel Kahneman , New Challenges to the Rationality Assumption , 150 J . I NSTITUTIONAL & T HEORETICAL E CON . 18 , 18 ( 1994 ) . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 295 Cognitive psychologists claim their field has an explanatory and descriptive purpose , which follows from its place in the natural sciences , as this branch of science aims to describe phenomena in the world . Cognitive psychology seeks to examine and explain how people perceive and process information . 18 The scientific aspect of the field is best demonstrated by reviewing the names of its sub - fields , such as experimental cognitive psychology , cognitive sciences , and cognitive neuroscience . 19 Cognitive neuroscience , which examines the relationship between cognitive processes and biological processes in the human brain , is a clear example of cogni - tive psychology’s explanatory and descriptive purpose . 20 Addition - ally , in the remaining subfields of cognitive psychology , the de - clared research methodology is empirical and the aim of the re - searchers is to describe and explain information processing . 21 The combination of economics and psychology—cognitive psychology , specifically—and of both with the law , demonstrates the different types of relationships discussed above . After refusing to acknowledge psychology as science for decades , economic theory began to absorb notions from the field of cognitive psychol - ogy in the second half of the twentieth century . 22 This led to the development of behavioral economics , an economic theory that reviews basic assumptions and premises in neoclassical economics in order to develop better and more accurate assumptions . 23 For example , behavioral economics challenges the rationality assump - tion , which holds that human beings behave rationally to maximize their wealth and is an integral component of neoclassical econom - 18 See M ICHAEL W . E YSENCK & M ARK T . K EANE , C OGNITIVE P SYCHOLOGY : A S TUDENT ’ S H ANDBOOK 1 – 3 ( 4th ed . 2000 ) ; Keith J . Holyoak , Psychology , in T HE MIT E NCYCLOPEDIA OF THE C OGNITIVE S CIENCES xxxix ( Robert A . Wilson & Frank C . Keil eds . 1999 ) . 19 See E YSENCK & K EANE , supra note 18 , at 3 . 20 See id . at 16 – 17 ; Thomas D . Albreit & Helen J . Neville , Neurosciences , in T HE MIT E NCYCLOPEDIA OF THE C OGNITIVE S CIENCES , supra note 18 , at li . 21 See E YSENCK & K EANE , supra note 18 , at 3 – 12 . 22 See Colin F . Camerer & George Loewenstein , Behavioral Economics : Past , Present , Future , in A DVANCES IN B EHAVIORAL E CONOMICS 3 , 5 – 7 ( Colin F . Camerer & George Lewenstein eds . , 2004 ) . 23 See id . at 7 . 296 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 ics . 24 However , behavioral economics and notions from the field of psychology did not lead to the rejection of the normative premises of neoclassical economics , which are centered on achieving wealth maximization . 25 This is because principles of psychology have in - fluenced only the theoretical level of economics , which is descrip - tive and explanatory rather than normative . This is evident in the legal context as well . The basic premises of neoclassical economics entered the legal field and led to the de - velopment of economic analyses of law . 26 Economic theory was applied to law in two aspects as well , normative and descriptive . Thus , the economic analysis of law is based on the underlying nor - mative standpoint that society should strive for wealth maximiza - tion . 27 Additionally , the economic analysis of law as a descriptive enterprise assumes—as neoclassical economics does—that human beings behave rationally . This assumption underlies economic ana - lyses’ predictions about human decision - making and the outcome of different legal rules . 28 Notions from psychology ( and cognitive psychology , specifically ) entered the legal field primarily under the economic analysis of law as a descriptive and explanatory theory . Thus , the same notions about human behavior that substituted the rationality assumption ( and others ) in neoclassical economics were applied to law to import behavioral economics to the legal con - text . 29 Here , too , the psychological notions had nothing to do with the normative aspect of the discussion ; instead , only descriptive and explanatory psychological principles were applied to the law . 30 24 See generally Kahneman , supra note 17 ; Amos Tversky & Daniel Kahneman , Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions , 59 J . B US . 251 ( 1986 ) ; Amos Tversky & Daniel Kahneman , The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology of Choice , 211 S CI . 453 ( 1981 ) . 25 See Camerer & Loewenstein , supra note 22 , at 3 . 26 See , e . g . , S HAVELL , supra note 15 , at 4 . 27 See id . at 1 – 4 ; see also Richard Posner , Utilitarianism , Economics , and Legal Theory , 8 J . L EGAL S TUD . 103 , 119 ( 1979 ) . 28 See S HAVELL , supra note 15 , at 4 . 29 See , e . g . , Jolls , Sunstein & Tahler , supra note 15 ; Sunstein , supra note 15 . 30 See generally Richard A . Posner , Rational Choice , Behavioral Economics , and the Law , 50 S TAN . L . R EV . 1551 ( 1997 ) ( critiquing the application of behavioral economics to the law by arguing that behavioral economics does not suggest a new normative maxim that neoclassical economics did not account for ) . This criticism is overstated because the purpose of importing behavioral notions into both economics and law was not normative ; rather , it satisfied explanatory and descriptive goals . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 297 The study of creativity within cognitive psychology is a scientif - ic field that seeks to describe and explain the cognitive processes underlying creative behavior . 31 The scientific aspect of creativity research is evident in many empirical studies , conducted under various methodologies , that aim to explain and measure different aspects of creative behavior . 32 The theoretical goal of this Article is to evaluate notions about creativity from the field of cognitive psy - chology and to use them as explanatory and descriptive tools to improve copyright law . Like the psychological notions in economic analysis , the discussion in this Article does not suggest an indepen - dent normative theory of copyright . However , the data and find - ings presented in this Article could lead to a better understanding of the existing legal rules that govern creative behavior and their relation to human behavior , and , thus , to a better application of ex - isting normative approaches to the law . II . T HE C REATIVE C OGNITION —T HEORIES The birth of the modern understanding of the cognitive process of creation is attributed to British psychologist Graham Wallas and his book The Art of Thought , which was published in 1926 . 33 In his 31 See , e . g . , Robert J . Sternberg & Todd I . Lubart , The Concept of Creativity : Prospects and Paradigms , in H ANDBOOK OF C REATIVITY 3 , 7 ( Robert J . Sternberg ed . , 1999 ) [ hereinafter H ANDBOOK OF C REATIVITY 1999 ] . For a critical analysis of whether creativity studies are scientific , see Robert T . Brown , Creativity : What Are We to Measure ? , in H ANDBOOK OF C REATIVITY 3 , 6 – 8 ( John A . Glover , Royce R . Ronning & Cecil R . Reynolds eds . , 1989 ) [ hereinafter H ANDBOOK OF C REATIVITY 1989 ] . 32 For a discussion of research measuring creativity , see Dennis Hocevar & Patricia Bachelor , A Taxonomy and Critique of Measurements Used in the Study of Creativity , in H ANDBOOK OF C REATIVITY 1989 , supra note 31 , at 53 , and Jonathan A . Plucker & Joseph S . Renzulli , Psychometric Approaches to the Study of Human Creativity , in H ANDBOOK OF C REATIVITY 1999 , supra note 31 , at 35 . For a discussion of empirical research based on experimental studies , see Mark A . Runco & Shawn Okuda Sakamoto , Experimental Studies of Creativity , in H ANDBOOK OF C REATIVITY 1999 , supra note 31 , at 62 . For a discussion of the biological aspects of creativity and cognitive neuroscience research , see Arne Dietrich , The Cognitive Neuroscience of Creativity , 11 P SYCHONOMIC B ULL . & R EV . 1011 ( 2004 ) ; Colin Martindale , Biological Bases of Creativity , in H ANDBOOK OF C REATIVITY 1999 , supra note 31 , at 137 ; and Keith Sawyer , The Cognitive Neuroscience of Creativity : A Critical Review , 23 C REATIVITY R ES . J . 137 ( 2011 ) . 33 See G RAHAM W ALLAS , T HE A RT OF T HOUGHT ( 1926 ) . Creativity was discussed in ancient times as well . Plato and Aristotle , for example , discussed the sources of creativity , and in ancient Greece , the Greeks believed that Zeus and his nine daughters , the muses , 298 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 book , Wallas described various cognitive stages of the creative process that became the basis for current theories of creativity . In the second half of the twentieth century , cognitive psychologists strived to develop a comprehensive model of the creative process . This Part presents the predominant theories of the cognitive process of creation . In addition to outlining these approaches , this Part shows that , despite their differences , they all dedicate signifi - cant discussion to authors’ use of prior domain - relevant know - ledge , memory , and heuristics in the creative process . For this pur - pose , this Part uses the taxonomy offered in the field of cognitive psychology for the different approaches , 34 while referring to origi - nal literature and additional scholarship in order to conceptualize different approaches to the creative process . A . Stage and Componential Process Theories The modern stage and componential approaches to creativity are a direct continuation of Wallas’ scholarship , and therefore , to understand them , it is important to first describe his stage theory of creativity . Wallas hypothesized that four stages formed the creative process : preparation , incubation , illumination , and verification . 35 The preparation stage consists of a preliminary identification of the problem or task at hand and its definition . 36 Conscious think - ing , reliance on the author’s prior knowledge , expertise , and ana - lytical capabilities , and other components that draw from the au - were the source of creative thought . See R OBERT W . W EISBERG , C REATIVITY : U NDERSTANDING I NNOVATION IN P ROBLEM S OLVING , S CIENCE , I NVENTION , AND THE A RTS 90 – 92 ( 2006 ) . In modern times , the beginning of scholarly thought about creativity is attributed to Sigmund Freud and Henri Poincaré , who saw the source of creativity in unconscious thinking . See id . at 92 – 94 . 34 See Aaron Kozbelt , Ronald A . Beghetto & Mark A . Runco , Theories of Creativity , in T HE C AMBRIDGE H ANDBOOK OF C REATIVITY 20 , 30 – 35 ( James C . Kaufman & Robert J . Sternberg eds . , 2010 ) . 35 See W ALLAS , supra note 33 , at 80 . 36 See id . at 82 – 84 . The literature on cognitive psychology typically uses the term “problem” to describe the beginning of the creative process . The meaning of this term is not identical to its common meaning ; instead , it is more closely related to the term “task . ” The term refers to a wide range of instances that could lead to creative activity , whether it is a specific professional or logical problem that needs to be solved , and whether it is the beginning of a task ( professional , artistic , scientific or otherwise ) that is ill - defined . See Lubart , supra note 12 , at 297 . This Part uses the terms “problem” and “task” to describe the task an author pursues during the creative process . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 299 thor’s domain - relevant knowledge , characterize this stage . 37 The incubation stage is characterized by a lack of conscious thought about the task , and the author often consciously engages in other problems and tasks . 38 At this stage , unconscious processes occur , which consist mainly of associative thinking and the combination of ideas . 39 In the illumination stage , a promising idea breaks into the consciousness of the author , who identifies that an idea is crystal - lizing in his mind intuitively . 40 Finally , in the verification stage , the author works consciously and examines , refines , and develops the idea that passed into his consciousness during the illumination stage . 41 The author also examines the validity of the idea and crys - tallizes it into its exact form . 42 Wallas’ stage theory was the basis for empirical studies that sought to verify his theory . In addition , the theory was the basis for more elaborate theoretical models in the same spirit . 43 However , Wallas’ division to four stages was too vague to account for the var - ious characteristics of the creative process , and his focus on the different components included in each stage lacked detail . 44 For example , Wallas did not explain the relationship between the dif - ferent stages or their significance and position in the creative process . 45 In addition , Wallas did not explain the sub - processes of each stage , which was particularly problematic for the incubation stage . 46 One of the most significant models that was developed on the basis of Wallas’ stage theory in order to fill in the gaps was Te - resa Amabile’s componential model to creativity , which was first 37 See W ALLAS , supra note 33 , at 82 – 84 ( describing the author at the preparation stage as an “educated” person who is proficient in distinguishing between ideas and memory encoding , and has gathered a wide spectrum of facts that allow him more associative possibilities ) ; see also Lubart , supra note 12 , at 296 . 38 See W ALLAS , supra note 33 , at 86 . 39 See id . 40 See id . at 97 . 41 See id . at 81 . 42 See id . 43 See , e . g . , Sandra E . Moriarty & Bruce G . Vandenbergh , Advertising Creatives Look at Creativity , 18 J . C REATIVE B EHAV . 162 , 166 ( 1984 ) ( identifying Wallas’ four stages through a qualitative survey of advertisers’ work ) ; see also Lubart , supra note 12 , at 297 ( classifying Amabile’s approach as a continuation of Wallas’ work ) . 44 See Lubart , supra note 12 , at 299 . 45 See id . at 298 – 99 . 46 See , e . g . , id . 300 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 introduced in her book The Social Psychology of Creativity , published in 1983 , 47 and later updated in her 1996 book , Creativity in Con - text . 48 Amabile , as well as Wallas , suggested four main stages in the creative process . Her first stage is the problem or task presentation stage . 49 This stage comes into play when the author is highly moti - vated to identify a problem or to engage in a task , or when the prob - lem or task are presented by an external entity . 50 The second stage is the preparation stage , which Amabile defined as the stage where the author constructs or activates a task - relevant knowledge data - base . 51 When the author has sufficient task - relevant knowledge and expertise , this stage may be significantly shortened . 52 The third stage is the response generation stage in which the author gene - rates possible responses to the task or problem by searching , con - sciously or unconsciously , for possible solution paths . 53 The fourth stage is the response validation stage , which Amabile described as the stage in which task - relevant knowledge and skills have a signifi - cant role . 54 In this stage , the potential generated responses are ana - lyzed using existing knowledge and formed in a way that will fit the solution and be functional . 55 In addition to her four stages , Amabile emphasized three cogni - tive components that come into play in each of the stages . 56 The first component , and the most important one for the purpose of this Article , is the domain - relevant skills component . 57 Amabile defined this component as one that contains all possible responses 47 See generally T ERESA M . A MABILE , T HE S OCIAL P SYCHOLOGY OF C REATIVITY ( 1983 ) [ hereinafter A MABILE , S OCIAL P SYCHOLOGY ] . 48 See generally T ERESA M . A MABILE , C REATIVITY IN C ONTEXT ( 1996 ) [ hereinafter A MABILE , C ONTEXT ] . 49 See id . at 95 . 50 See id . 51 See id . 52 See id . This Article uses task - relevant knowledge to refer to knowledge that is relevant to the environment of the creative activity . This means the knowledge and expertise that are related to the specific creative environment and tradition . 53 See id . at 55 – 56 . 54 See id . at 96 . 55 See id . 56 See id . at 83 . 57 See id . at 85 . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 301 that the author can perceive . 58 A new response is generated from this pool of possible responses and then validated using task - relevant information and knowledge . 59 This component also in - cludes the author’s prior factual knowledge about the task - domain that consists of facts , principles , common paradigms , and aesthetic criteria , as well as technical abilities that are necessary for the task - domain . 60 She argued that there is significant importance in the way task - relevant knowledge is stored and coded ; information coded by general principles will be more useful to the author than a bundle of facts with narrow applicability . 61 This component was identified by Amabile as mainly within the preparation and re - sponse validation stages . 62 The second component Amabile identified is creativity - relevant skills . 63 She defined this component as the “something extra” that is required for creative activity . 64 It is what determines the amount that by which the new idea surpasses the old ideas that it is built upon . 65 Without creative - relevant skills , even authors with excellent task - relevant skills will be unable to create a new product . 66 Amabile offered the following set of characteristics to describe this component : the ability to break through common con - ceptions ; the ability to develop new cognitive systems for problem solving ; the ability to understand complex situations ; the ability to maintain a wide range of available responses over time ; suspension of response validation ; the use of the widest categories possible ; and precise memory and creative conception of works in the world . 67 This component includes knowledge about the task - 58 See id . 59 See id . 60 See id . at 85 – 86 . This component includes knowledge of the general technique that is related to the relevant task and , more importantly , knowledge and familiarity with concrete previous instances that are related to the task and could be used to complete the relevant task . This means that the task - relevant knowledge also includes visual ( or audible ) memory of previous works known to the author . See id . 61 See id . at 95 . 62 See id . at 95 – 96 . 63 See id . at 86 – 90 . 64 See id . at 86 . 65 See id . 66 See id . at 88 . 67 See id . at 88 – 89 . 302 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 relevant heuristics that could operate in both an explicit and con - scious mode or in an implicit and unconscious one . 68 Amabile iden - tified this component as related to the response generation stage . 69 The third component Amabile identified is task motivation . 70 This component distinguishes between the author’s inner task - motivation ( i . e . , the personal interest the author has in a specific task ) and outer task - motivation ( i . e . , a social or professional con - straint that obliges the author to engage with a specific task ) . 71 Ac - cording to Amabile , while the first enhances creativity , the latter inhibits the author’s creative abilities . 72 The motivation component affects both the task presentation and the response validation stag - es . 73 In another example , cognitive psychologists Mark Runco and Ivonne Chand introduced a five - component model for creativity in 1995 . 74 These components are divided into two tiers . 75 The first tier consists of problem finding , idea finding , and evaluation com - ponents . 76 The problem - finding component includes identifying and defining a problem or task , and the idea finding component re - flects creativity and mental flexibility . 77 The evaluation component reflects critical thinking about an idea . 78 The second tier includes knowledge ( divided into declarative and procedural knowledge ) and motivation ( divided into internal and external motivation ) . 79 Procedural knowledge refers to knowledge of strategies that facili - 68 See id . at 89 . Amabile defined “heuristics” as any principle or instrument that contributes to the reduction of the average solution search time . See id . ( citing Allen Newell et al . , The Processes of Creative Thinking , in C ONTEMPORARY A PPROACHES TO C REATIVE T HINKING : A S YMPOSIUM H ELD AT THE U NIVERSITY OF C OLORADO 63 , 78 ( Gruber et al . eds . , 1962 ) ) . 69 See A MABILE , C ONTEXT , supra note 48 , at 94 . 70 See id . at 90 – 93 . 71 See id . at 90 – 91 . 72 See A MABILE , S OCIAL P SYCHOLOGY , supra note 47 , at 91 . 73 See A MABILE , C ONTEXT , supra note 48 , at 93 . 74 See Mark A . Runco & Ivonne Chand , Cognition and Creativity , 7 E DUC . P SYCHOL . R EV . 243 , 245 ( 1995 ) . 75 See id . 76 See id . 77 See id . 78 See id . 79 See id . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 303 tate accomplishing task - relevant processes ( i . e . , know - how ) . 80 Dec - larative knowledge , on the other hand , refers to the author’s factual knowledge . 81 Runco and Chand placed these components in the second tier because they contribute to the creative process more than they control it . 82 Despite the similarities between Runco and Chand’s and Ama - bile’s models , some differences should be articulated . While Ama - bile attributed the task - relevant skills to the preparation and re - sponse validation stages , Runco and Chand argued that knowledge ( declarative and procedural ) affects not only the problem - finding stage , but also the idea finding stage . 83 This is significant because Amabile identified a stage in the creative process where prior knowledge has no contribution , whereas Runco and Chand posited that knowledge affects every stage of the creative process . 84 The componential models to creativity were criticized on sev - eral grounds . First , because these approaches suggest a wide array of components that are interrelated , they were criticized due to lack of parsimony . 85 Second , the models are difficult to verify em - pirically because every component must be identified and meas - ured separately to reach a valid conclusion . 86 Third , the approaches 80 See id . at 246 . 81 See id . It is important to emphasize that the term “factual knowledge” does not refer to facts in the copyright sense . The meaning of the term is visual , semantic , or symbolic knowledge that includes all task - relevant details in the author’s memory . In this sense , factual knowledge could consist of informative factual knowledge as well as concrete expressions of preexisting task - related works . For example , when a painter seeks to paint a sunflower field , several types of knowledge could come into play . Procedural knowledge in this context includes painting methods and techniques , and the painter’s professional abilities and expertise . Declarative knowledge in this context consists of several types of information as well . Simple facts include the painter’s acquaintance with the sunflower and its visual form in nature . Another type of declarative knowledge is preexisting visual works use of sunflowers in different visual ways and any specific visual images of sunflowers . 82 See id . at 245 – 46 . 83 See id . at 245 . 84 See id . 85 See Todd I . Lubart , Componential Models , in 1 E NCYCLOPEDIA OF C REATIVITY 295 , 299 ( Mark A . Runco & Steven R . Pritzker eds . , 1999 ) . 86 See id . 304 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 do not explain which stage or component is most important to crea - tivity . 87 Every one of the models in the stage and componential ap - proaches dedicates significant attention to knowledge - based com - ponents throughout the creative process . In Wallas’ theory , the use of prior knowledge is evident in both the preparation stage , when the author uses his previous education and knowledge , and the va - lidation stage , in which the author validates the creative product in light of his task - relevant knowledge . 88 Under Amabile’s approach , prior knowledge plays a significant role in task presentation , prepa - ration , response generation , and validation . 89 In the preparation and validation stages , according to Amabile , the author uses his task - relevant skills , which include factual ( semantic ) knowledge . 90 Runco and Chand , for their part , emphasized the use of task - relevant declarative knowledge in every part of the creative process . 91 Under each of these theories , the use of prior knowledge con - sists of various types of information that could be used as a basis for a work of authorship . Ideas ( in their legal sense ) are obviously in - cluded as well as methods , processes , and other abstract compo - nents that are essential to the creative process . However , the de - scription of the task - relevant knowledge under these theories in - cludes the use of knowledge components that reflect concrete and explicit expressions ( in the legal sense ) formed from works that are stored in the author’s memory . Both types of knowledge could be the basis of creative activity under cognitive psychology . Copyright law only partially matches the cognitive understand - ing of creativity . With respect to the use of prior knowledge in pre - liminary phases of the creative process—for example , in the input and processing phases ( reflected in the preparation and incubation stages in Wallas’ model , 92 or the preparation and response genera - 87 See id . at 289 – 99 . 88 See W ALLAS , supra note 33 , at 80 , 86 . 89 See A MABILE , C ONTEXT , supra note 48 , at 94 . 90 See id . 91 See Runco & Chand , supra note 74 , at 248 . 92 See supra notes 35 – 39 and accompanying text . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 305 tion stages in Amabile’s model ) 93 —copyright law allows the use of any type of knowledge that the theories consider . This is because copyright law is not interested in the preliminary phases of creativi - ty . It is concerned only with the concrete final creative product : the output . With regard to the output , however , copyright law allows the use of ideas or unprotected expressions as the basis for creativi - ty , but it does not allow the use of protected expressions ( with some exceptions , including the fair use doctrine ) . This is in con - trast to the approaches presented above that view expressions as relevant knowledge types for creativity in all of their phases . 94 In addition , it is important to emphasize that Wallas and Ama - bile identified stages in the creative process where the author has an individual contribution and prior knowledge does not play a role . 95 This is evident in Wallas’ illumination stage and in Ama - bile’s response generation stage . 96 Even in Runco and Chand’s model , which holds that knowledge affects every stage of the crea - tive process , there is specific attention to the author’s individual contribution to the creative process in the ideation stage . 97 These findings support copyright law’s originality requirement , which affords copyright protection only when the author’s expression displays a modicum of creativity original to the author . 98 This is in contrast to post - modern approaches that reject the “romantic au - thor” approach . 99 In this sense , copyright law matches the cogni - tive understanding of creativity . B . Creativity as a Cognitive Process Aaron Kozbelt , Ronald A . Beghetto , and Mark A . Runco , re - searchers in the field of cognitive psychology who study the crea - 93 See supra notes 48 – 53 and accompanying text . 94 See supra notes 35 – 91 and accompanying text . 95 See supra notes 35 – 73 and accompanying text . 96 See supra notes 40 , 53 and accompanying text . 97 See supra notes 74 – 82 and accompanying text . 98 See 17 U . S . C . § 102 ( a ) ( 2012 ) ( “Copyright protection subsists , in accordance with this title , in original works of authorship . . . . ” ) ; Feist Publ’ns , Inc . v . Rural Tel . Serv . Co . , 499 U . S . 340 , 346 ( 1991 ) . 99 The “romantic author” approach sees the individual author as the only source for any work of authorship and describes the creative process as an individual endeavor in which the work is created out of nothing . See infra Section V . B . 306 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 tive process , identified a group of theories that concentrates on cognitive processes that characterize the creative process , which they named “cognitive theories . ” 100 These approaches aim to identify cognitive abilities and processes that are necessary for cre - ative activity and focus on the process of creation and on the au - thor . 101 The main difference between this group of approaches and the stage and componential theories is that the cognitive theories do not concentrate on the timeline of the creative process or on the chronological stage at which sub - processes take place . Instead , they focus on the type of cognitive processes that are relevant and ne - cessary for creativity . American psychologist J . P . Guilford , who tried to distinguish between divergent and convergent thinking , developed one of the most important models in this group of theories . 102 Divergent thinking refers to the unfocused process of associative thought that leads to different directions and may cause an original task - relevant idea to occur . 103 Convergent thinking , in contrast , occurs when cognition seeks to find a correct , applicable , and usable solution that fits task - relevant conventions , mainly using deduction . 104 At this stage , there is significant use of stored memory that affects the creative product . 105 A similar model was suggested by John R . Suler who referred to two sub - processes in the creative process—primary and second - ary—based upon principles of Sigmund Freud’s psychoanalysis . 106 The primary sub - process of thinking usually occurs unconsciously and was described by Suler as more primitive than the secondary sub - process . 107 During this sub - process , memories and past expe - riences mix together ; thought is mainly metaphoric because the 100 See Kozbelt , Beghetto & Runco , supra note 34 , at 31 . 101 See id . 102 See J . P . G UILFORD , T HE N ATURE OF H UMAN I NTELLIGENCE 138 ( 1967 ) ; see also W EISBERG , supra note 33 , at 95 – 97 . 103 See G UILFORD , supra note 102 , at 138 . 104 See id . at 171 . 105 See id . at 313 – 15 . 106 See John R . Suler , Primary Process Thinking and Creativity , 88 P SYCHOL . B ULL . 144 ( 1980 ) . 107 See id . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 307 borderlines between memories are fuzzy . 108 In contrast , the second sub - process is characterized by conceptual organization of memo - ry . 109 In this sub - process , the author is able to access and control the unfocused thoughts developed in the primary sub - process and crystallize them into socially meaningful products . 110 Liane Gabora , a researcher who contributed to this line of theo - ries , observed that the creative process requires phases of unfo - cused and focused thought and the ability to combine the two . 111 Gabora’s significant contribution in this context is the use of tools from neuroscience and the cognitive sciences to propose a biologi - cal conceptualization of these processes . 112 Gabora explained that the human memory is “stored” in neurons and each neuron is re - sponsible for the storage of several memories . 113 Each memory is split between different neurons . 114 Access to stored memories de - pends on contextual stimulations ; a specific stimulation activates a group of cells containing various neurons that respond to the sti - mulation . 115 Gabora argued that in a state of unfocused thought many cell groups and their respective neurons , which are otherwise inactive , are activated , . 116 These excess neurons are referred to as “neurds . ” 117 Thus , Gabora proposed that the purpose of unfo - cused thought is to gather neurds to use as a solution for the rele - vant task or problem . 118 The relevant neurons will pass through to the focused thought and the author will use them to crystallize a concrete idea . 119 According to this approach , which was named the 108 See id . 109 See id . at 145 . 110 See id . at 145 – 46 . 111 See Liane Gabora , Revenge of the ‘Neurds’ : Characterizing Creative Thought in Terms of the Structure and Dynamics of Memory , 22 C REATIVITY R ES . J . 1 ( 2010 ) . 112 See id . at 3 . 113 See id . 114 See id . at 5 . 115 See id . at 5 – 6 . 116 See id . at 9 . 117 See id . at 12 . 118 See id . at 9 . 119 See id . 308 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 “honing theory of creativity , ” unfocused thought leads to original but impractical ideas that are honed using focused thought . 120 Ronald A . Finke , Thomas B . Ward , and Steven M . Smith pre - sented a different theory of creativity called the “Geneplore” model in 1992 . 121 The name of the model is derived from its main two processes , generate and explore , which that are subject to con - straints that depend on the creative product . 122 Fink , Ward , and Smith defined the model as more heuristic than explanatory , and said its aim is to show that most creative activities could be de - scribed in terms of primary production of potential ideas followed by thorough research of these ideas . 123 Different types of idea pro - duction processes include restoring memory structures , creating simple associations from these structures , and recombining them or transferring the memory structures to new forms . 124 It is important to clarify that the term “ideas” in the context of the Geneplore model does not have the same meaning as the equivalent legal term ; rather , it refers to the production of any part of the creative product . 125 Different types of exploration processes include the search for new characteristics of mental structures , the search for compatible metaphors , the search for new operability of existing memory structures , and the evaluation of the potential to use them in different contexts . 126 This model does not distinguish between generation and exploration processes and posits that the author switches between different modes many times throughout the creative process . 127 Finally , the Geneplore model assumes that the relevant task or the end product can cast constraints on both 120 See Nicholas Davis & Ellen Yi - Luen Do , Quantifying the Artistic Experience with Perceptive Sketching Tools : Cognitive Technologies to Support Creativity Researchers , 22 C OMUNICAÇÃO & S OCIEDADE 76 , 80 ( 2012 ) . 121 See R ONALD A . F INKE , T HOMAS B . W ARD & S TEVEN M . S MITH , C REATIVE C OGNITION : T HEORY , R ESEARCH AND A PPLICATIONS 17 – 43 ( 1992 ) . 122 See id . at 17 – 28 . 123 See Thomas B . Ward , Steven M . Smith & Ronald A . Finke , Creative Cognition , in H ANDBOOK OF C REATIVITY 1999 , supra note 31 , at 189 , 191 . 124 See F INKE , W ARD & S MITH , supra note 121 , at 20 ; Ward , Smith & Finke , supra note 123 , at 191 – 92 ; Lubart , supra note 12 , at 299 – 300 . 125 See Ward , Smith & Finke , supra note 123 , at 191 . 126 See F INKE , W ARD & S MITH , s upra note 121 , at 26 ; Lubart , supra note 12 , at 299 – 300 ; Ward , Smith & Finke , supra note 123 , at 191 – 92 . 127 See Ward , Smith & Finke , supra note 123 , at 191 . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 309 processes at any point during the creative process . 128 An example of such constraints is restricted resources of limited operability . 129 These approaches best illustrate the general division of the cre - ative process into two sub - processes : the unfocused phase , in which abstract ideas are created , 130 and the focused phase , in which the ideas are crystallized into concrete form . 131 Guilford , Suler , and Gabora made an explicit division between these two stages : They showed that the focused phase of creativity is characterized by uti - lizing prior task - relevant knowledge and memory . 132 Guilford and Gabora stressed that stored memory plays a crucial part in creativi - ty . 133 Though they did not explicitly define whether this use of memory includes ideas or expression in copyright terms , they did refer to the use of complete memory units , 134 and it is more than likely that such a use consists of both ideas and expression . Finke , Ward , and Smith , for their part , showed that knowledge and mem - ory play a significant role in every phase of creativity . 135 In addition , the idea generation part of their model is specifically characterized by the restoration of existing memory structures and recombination in order to produce new creative products . 136 Here , too , there was reference to the use of preexisting expression ( in copyright terms ) as a basis for creativity , since these memory structures are capable of bearing concrete expressions as well as ideas . When a memory structure that holds task - relevant preexisting works is restored , it is more than likely that it will contain expressions rather than mere ideas . 137 A substantial match between the cognitive approaches to crea - tivity and copyright law is evident here as well . Copyright law al - lows the use of many types of knowledge and memory components 128 See , e . g . , id . 129 See F INKE , W ARD & S MITH , supra note 121 , at 26 . 130 See id . at 17 . 131 See id . 132 See G UILFORD , supra note 102 , at 108 , see also W ALLAS , supra note 33 , at 81 ; Gabora , supra note 111 , at 3 ; Suler , supra note 106 , at 144 – 45 . 133 See G UILFORD , supra note 102 , at 139 ; Gabora , supra note 111 , at 14 . 134 See G UILFORD , supra note 102 , at 116 ; Gabora , supra note 111 , at 9 – 10 . 135 See F INKE , W ARD & S MITH , supra note 121 , at 20 . 136 See id . at 20 – 21 . 137 See F INKE , W ARD & S MITH , supra note 121 , at 20 ; Lubart , supra note 12 , at 299 – 300 ; Ward , Smith & Finke , supra note 123 , at 191 – 92 . 310 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 for the crystallization of unfocused ideas into concrete creative products . 138 Among these are abstract ideas ( or methods , facts and processes ) as well as unprotected expression ( in the public domain or by fair use ) . 139 However , as far as the use of protected expres - sions during the output phase of creativity is concerned , there is a mismatch between copyright law’s derivative work right and the cognitive theories of creativity . Similar to the discussion of theories about the stages of creativi - ty , the creative cognition theories focus on the independent contri - bution of the author to the creative product . Notably , Guilford , Su - ler , and Gabora’s models included a phase of unfocused cognition that is not related to the use of prior knowledge . 140 It also appeared in the Geneplore model , which articulated the independent cogni - tive features of the author that are not attributed to prior know - ledge . 141 In the context of copyright law , these theories have impli - cations on the romantic author discourse and on the originality re - quirement . 142 Later sections show that the division to two main sub - processes is also compatible with other theories of creativity . C . Creativity as Problem Solving One of the most significant theories on the process of creation posits that it is a problem - solving process . 143 However , in contrast to classical problem solving , where the goal is known but the paths to the solution are not , this theory holds that the creative process is characterized by ill - defined goals and problems . 144 Further , al - 138 See 17 U . S . C . § 103 ( 2012 ) . But see id . § 102 ( b ) . 139 See § 103 . But see § 102 ( b ) . 140 See G UILFORD , supra note 102 , at 315 ; Gabora , supra note 111 , at 9 ; Suler , supra note 106 , at 146 . 141 See generally F INKE , W ARD & S MITH , supra note 121 . 142 See infra Section V . B . 143 See Kozbelt , Beghetto & Runco , supra note 34 , at 33 . 144 See id . ( defining creativity as an ill - defined problem - solving process ) ; Lubart , supra note 12 , at 297 ( stating that the term “problem” in the creative context also refers to a task that the author wishes to engage in ) ; see also J ACOB W . G ETZELS & M IHALY C SIKSZENTMIHALYI , T HE C REATIVE V ISION : A L ONGITUDINAL S TUDY OF P ROBLEM F INDING IN A RT 84 ( 1976 ) ; David Collins , A Synthesis Process Model of Creative Thinking in Music Composition , 33 P SYCHOL . M USIC 193 , 195 ( 2005 ) ; Yingxu Wang , On Cognitive Foundations of Creativity and the Cognitive Process of Creation , 3 I NT ’ L J . C OGNITIVE I NFORMATICS & N AT . I NTELLIGENCE 1 , 2 ( 2009 ) [ hereafter Wang , Cognitive Foundations ] ; 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 311 though there may be cases in which there is no problem at all , it is usually possible to split ill - defined problems into well - defined sub - problems in a way that fits the classical model of problem - solving theory . 145 Kozbelt , Beghetto , and Runco also noted that these ap - proaches focus both on the creative process and the author—the former because these approaches deal with common cognitive psy - chology approaches that refer to the representation of problem and heuristic searching , and the latter by emphasizing the expertise that is required from the author in the specific task - domain . 146 Guilford suggested one of the first models of creative problem solving . 147 His model was based on several main recursive stages that are connected with intermediary processes that affect the problem - solving process . 148 The first stage Guilford proposed is the filtering stage , during which the author’s attention is directed to a specific input . 149 The next stage is cognition , in which the author recognizes the problem and defines it . 150 At this stage , the author’s cognition is open to receiving additional inputs from the environ - ment . 151 The following stage is production , in which potential solu - tions to the problem are produced . 152 Then , another cycle of the cognition and production stages appears ; new knowledge is ga - thered and additional potential solutions are created . 153 This cycle ends when a potential solution is compatible with the problem . 154 In between each of these stages , there is an intermediate stage of evaluation where the author checks the validity of the input , the potential solutions , and the problem structure . 155 The foundation of the entire process is the author’s stored memory , which feeds Yingxu Wang & Vincent Chiew , On the Cognitive Process of Human Problem Solving , 11 C OGNITIVE S YS . R ES . 81 , 85 ( 2010 ) . 145 See Kozbelt , Beghetto & Runco , supra note 34 , at 33 . 146 See id . 147 See G UILFORD , supra note 102 , at 313 – 16 . 148 See id . at 315 . 149 See id . 150 See id . 151 See id . 152 See id . 153 See id . 154 See id . 155 See id . 312 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 every one of the different stages . 156 Importantly , when Guilford discussed stored memory , he referred to different types of informa - tion , such as visual - figural , symbolic , semantic , and behavioral . 157 Philip Johnson - Laird , a psychologist professor and researcher focusing , among other things , on the creative process , proposed another model for creativity which fits the problem - solving and ex - pertise category . 158 He theorized that five assumptions underlie the creative process : ( 1 ) the outcome of the process must be innovative for the author ; ( 2 ) the outcome of the process may be innovative for society , but the author’s mental process will be the same even if another author has already reached the same outcome ; ( 3 ) presum - ably , the creative products are unknown in advance ; ( 4 ) creativity adheres to preexisting constraints and conventions , whether exter - nal or internal to the author , and the author does not function as a closed system but is affected by existing aesthetic values ; ( 5 ) works of authorship are not composed of “nothing ; ” rather , they are founded on preexisting grounds that function as raw material even for the most original works . 159 The problem - solving and expertise approach to creativity is supported by a wealth of empirical and historical studies . Experi - mental research demystified some of the cognitive processes un - derling creative innovation by showing that prior failed solution attempts leads to proper problem representation and heuristic learning that is crucial to creativity . 160 In addition , historical studies based on personal manuscripts of important artists have also shown that expertise plays an integral role in the creative process . Ameri - can cognitive psychologist John R . Hayes , for example , studied five hundred works of seventy - six great composers and found that only three were composed before the tenth year of the composer’s ca - reer . 161 As a result , some scholars have postulated that there is a 156 See id . 157 See id . 158 See Philip N . Johnson - Laird , How Jazz Musicians Improvise , 19 M USIC P ERCEPTION 415 , 419 – 20 ( 2002 ) . 159 See id . 160 See Kozbelt , Beghetto & Runco , supra note 34 , at 33 . 161 See John R . Hayes . Cognitive Processes in Creativity , in H ANDBOOK OF C REATIVITY 1989 , supra note 31 , at 139 ; see also Robert W . Weisberg , Creativity and Knowledge : A Challenge to Theories , in H ANDBOOK OF C REATIVITY 1999 , supra note 31 , at 226 , 230 – 31 . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 313 “10 - year rule , ” requiring at least ten years of experience to create masterpieces . 162 Other significant experiments have shown how artists and scientists explicitly utilize previous works to improve their creative skills . 163 The creative problem - solving and expertise approaches best il - lustrate the importance of task - relevant knowledge to the creative process and the significance of prior knowledge and memory to in - novation . These approaches—mainly Guilford’s—explain that the use of prior knowledge and memory applied to various types of in - formation also include concrete and material types of knowledge and not only ideas , processes , or methods . 164 In this sense , it in - cludes expression ( in copyright terms ) as an information type that is at the basis of creativity . Part III uses the historical research that verifies these theories to demonstrate the importance of knowledge and memory in creativity . In addition , the Part shows that these approaches fit the general division of the creative process into two sub - processes . However , it is important to note that the creative problem - solving approaches were criticized for two reasons : their inability to explain how authors identify problems at the beginning of the creative process ; and their significant focus on expertise and prior knowledge as the only source of creativity . 165 This difficulty is especially relevant to creative activities in which the problem is ill - defined or does not exist because the activation of a heuristic me - chanism in the problem - domain cannot account for the first stage of creativity . 166 The problem - finding approach to creativity com - pletes this gap . 162 See Weisberg , supra note 161 . The “10 - year rule” suggested by Hayes was criticized because it does not account for different fields of creativity . See id . 231 – 232 . Nevertheless , the idea behind this rule was validated by future studies that examined the length of preparation time artists need before achieving significant accomplishments in their fields . See id . at 232 . 163 For a list of studies , see Kozbelt , Beghetto & Runco , supra note 34 , at 33 . The different theories of creativity do not distinguish between authors and inventors , despite the distinction in copyright and patent laws . 164 See G UILFORD , supra note 102 , at 315 . 165 See Kozbelt , Beghetto & Runco , supra note 34 , at 33 – 34 . 166 Id . 314 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 D . Creativity as Problem Finding The problem - finding approach was proposed primarily as a reaction to the problem - solving approach to creativity and its shortcoming in explaining how authors identify problems and in - itiate the required motivation to engage in problem solving . 167 The problem - finding approach is attributed first and foremost to Jacob Getzels and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi , two leading and groundbreaking creativity researchers who pointed out the impor - tance of theorizing the problem - finding stage of creativity in 1976 . 168 They argued that problem finding is a crucial first step to problem solving , and that is it not necessarily separated from the solution itself . 169 To test this hypothesis , they observed thirty - one art students performing an open task that required them to draw a set of objects provided by the researchers . 170 The study suggested that the openness of an author to a problem , and his investigative behavior while creating and adjusting the structure and content of the preliminary problem , indicate that the author is engaged in problem finding while searching for a solution for the first identi - fied problem . 171 However , Kozbelt , Beghetto , and Runco emphasized that the problem - finding approach , which was much more subjective , was not sufficiently validated through empirical research . 172 They ar - gued that the research , which attempted to explain this approach , empirically could be better conceptualized under problem - solving models . 173 Thus , they argued that the distinction between both ap - proaches is explained by scholars’ differing emphasis and goals , rather than by the substantive differences in the two scholars’ theories . 174 For example , if one is interested in the subjective moti - vation of authors , he would focus on the problem - finding approach ; whereas , if one wishes to focus on the cognitive processes that 167 See id . at 34 . 168 See G ETZELS & C SIKSZENTMIHALYI , supra note 144 , at 89 – 106 . 169 See id . at 84 . 170 See id . at 85 – 86 . 171 See id . at 90 . 172 See Kozbelt , Beghetto & Runco , supra note 34 , at 35 . 173 See id . 174 See id . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 315 cause the creation of new ideas , he would focus on the problem - solving approach . The problem - finding approach is a complementary stage to the problem - solving approach in the sense that it accounts for the indi - vidual contribution of the author within the process of creation , when the problem - solving approach does not . If the two approach - es are understood as two components of the same creative process , they are compatible with the description of the creative process as a two - phase process of unfocused and focused cognitive activity . In the legal context , the problem - finding approach emphasizes the independent contribution of the author to the creative product and conflicts with the post - modern approaches that diminished the au - thor’s role in the creative process . III . C RYSTALLIZATION OF THE U NFOCUSED T HOUGHT — T HE C RUCIAL R OLE OF K NOWLEDGE AND M EMORY In spite of the differences between the various theories that seek to explain the cognitive process of creation , they all share gen - eral characteristics that have important implications for copyright law in general and , specifically , for the right to make derivative works . This Part argues that all the approaches include a division of the creative process into two main sub - processes . Thus , it is possi - ble to characterize the creative process as follows : At the first stage , the author engages in unfocused thought where she has sig - nificant individual contribution to the process ; and , at the second stage , the unfocused thought is crystallized into a concrete creative product in a way that is mainly dictated by prior task - relevant knowledge and memory stored in the author’s brain . Each of these processes has implications for copyright law . A . Unfocused Thought—Associative Thought and Abstract Ideas The first characteristic all approaches to creativity have in common is that they refer to a phase of unfocused attention during which abstract ideas of the creative activity are formed . For exam - ple , in Wallas’ stage theory , the incubation stage is characterized 316 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 by unfocused associative thought . 175 Similarly , the response genera - tion stage in Amabile’s model is characterized by abstract cognitive processes , which are driven by highly abstract creative - relevant skills . 176 Runco and Chand also refer to this creative phase in their idea presentation stage , which is described by unfocused creative thinking . 177 Further , the unfocused thought phase is explicitly mentioned in some of the creative cognition approaches . Guilford , for example , referred to it as part of the divergent thinking process , which he described as unfocused and associative . 178 Similarly , Suler referred to the primary thought process as a metaphorical phase in which memories are not separated from one another . 179 Gabora’s model offered a biological description of the unfocused phase of creativity when she described the formation of “neurds” during unfocused stimulation of neuron groups , which import relevant memory and knowledge into the focused thought stage . 180 Finke , Ward , and Smith’s Geneplore model more subtly distin - guishes between the two phases . However , significant characteris - tics of the generation component of the model are compatible with the unfocused thought description . The generation component in - cludes , for example , associative thought that is followed by new potential ideas . 181 In addition , some characteristics of the explora - tion component of the model are also compatible with unfocused thought , for instance , the metaphorical thought which the authors attribute to the exploration component . 182 When considering the problem - solving and problem - finding approaches together , it is evident that they also refer to compo - nents that are compatible with the unfocused thought phase . For example , although Guilford’s model appears highly structured and 175 See W ALLAS , supra note 33 , at 86 . 176 See A MABILE , C ONTEXT , supra note 48 , at 88 – 89 , 95 . 177 See Runco & Chand , supra note 74 , at 245 – 46 . 178 See G UILFORD , supra note 102 , at 138 . 179 See Suler , supra note 106 , at 144 . 180 See Gabora , supra note 111 , at 5 – 6 , 10 . 181 See F INKE , W ARD & S MITH , supra note 121 , at 20 ; Ward , Smith & Finke , supra note 123 , at 191 – 92 . 182 See F INKE , W ARD & S MITH , supra note 121 , at 24 ; Ward , Smith & Finke , supra note 123 , at 192 . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 317 based on analytical phases of knowledge use , it also recognizes the role of illumination and intuition in the creative process . 183 John - son - Laird’s assumption that the products of the creative process cannot be pre - known , 184 along with the notion that ill - defined prob - lems could be split into several well - defined problems , 185 illustrates that the problem - solving approach identifies a stage that is not sole - ly analytic and not necessarily based on knowledge and expertise . Thus , these approaches also fit the unfocused thought phase of creativity and the problem - finding approach . The discussion thus far shows that the predominant approach - es to the cognitive process of creativity systematically identify stag - es and components in which unfocused thought occurs and pro - duces preliminary abstract ideas at the early stages of the creative process . However , for the purpose of this Article , the more rele - vant stage of creativity is the phase in which the abstract ideas are crystallized into a socially valuable concrete product . The next Sec - tion discusses how each of these theories identifies stages of crys - tallization of ideas using task - relevant knowledge and memory . B . The Use of Task - Relevant Knowledge The second characteristic that all approaches to creativity share is reliance on preexisting task - relevant knowledge and memory in different stages of the creative process . One example is found in Wallas’ stage theory . The use of task - relevant knowledge is evident in two main stages : the preparation and validation stages . In the preparation stage , as described by Wallas , the author uses prior ex - pertise and task - relevant knowledge to prepare for the creative process . 186 At the validation stage , the author consciously examines the preliminary ideas in light of his task - relevant expertise . Know - ledge plays a crucial role at this point as well . In fact , Wallas him - self described the preparation and validation stages as strongly in - terrelated . 187 183 See G UILFORD , supra note 102 , at 321 – 24 . 184 See Johnson - Laird , supra note 158 , at 419 . 185 See Kozbelt , Beghetto & Runco , supra note 34 , at 33 . 186 See W ALLAS , supra note 33 , at 88 – 84 ; see also Collins , supra note 144 , at 209 ( finding that composers consciously choose between known genres at the preparation stage according to qualitative empirical research ) . 187 See W ALLAS , supra note 33 , at 85 – 86 . 318 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 Amabile’s further developed stage model explicitly acknowl - edged the use of task - relevant knowledge . The model defined task - relevant skills as one of the three components of the creative process . 188 Like the analysis suggested above with regard to Wallas’ theory , Amabile attributed the use of task - relevant knowledge to the preparation and response validation stages . 189 It thus seems that Amabile dedicated a significant and explicit attention to the use of task - relevant knowledge in the creative process . 190 Runco and Chand also explicitly acknowledged the significance of task - relevant knowledge ( which they referred to as declarative know - ledge ) as a main component that affects the problem presentation and ideation stages . 191 The use of task - relevant knowledge is also emphasized in the creative cognition approaches . Guilford’s convergent thinking in - cluded analytical skills and the use of knowledge and memory as he stated explicitly . 192 The secondary thought process described by Suler also fits the use of prior task - relevant knowledge because its purpose is to consciously control and form abstract ideas into con - crete products . 193 The same applies for Gabora’s honing model of creativity , in which the author’s memory holds the most significant part . 194 Although Gabora identified the use of memory at the phase of unfocused thought , she explicitly noted that it is used in the fo - cused thought phase when memory cells are activated along with the sporadic ideas created by activation of “neurds . ” 195 The gener - ation process in Finke , Ward , and Smith’s Geneplore model also consisted of task - relevant knowledge use . 196 The researchers de - fined this process as including the restoration of knowledge and 188 See A MABILE , C ONTEXT , supra note 48 , at 85 – 86 . 189 See id . at 95 – 96 . 190 See id . 191 See Runco & Chand , supra note 74 , at 245 – 46 . 192 See G UILFORD , supra note 102 , at 313 – 15 , 319 . 193 See Suler , supra note 106 , at 145 – 46 . 194 See Gabora , supra note 111 , at 10 . 195 See id . 196 See F INKE , W ARD & S MITH , supra note 121 , at 19 . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 319 memory structures and adapting them for compatibility with the relevant task . 197 The problem - solving approach to creativity best illustrates the significance and centrality of task - relevant knowledge and memory to the process of creation . The essence of this approach is the un - derstanding of the creative process as a logical - analytical system to problem solving that is based on task - relevant expertise and pre - vious knowledge . 198 The use of prior knowledge is evident in Guil - ford’s model , in which memory storage is used during every cogni - tive activity throughout the creative process . 199 He expressly re - ferred to the importance of knowledge in the creative process and explained that it was characterized by restoring , reproducing , and adapting memory structures into a new product . 200 Guilford also articulated the different types of information that are used , includ - ing semantic , visual , and symbolic knowledge . 201 Johnson - Laird’s approach also focused on task - relevant knowledge and the crucial role of memory in the process of creation . Indeed , two of his five assumptions about creativity concern these components : He pointed out that the creative process must fit predefined creative constraints and be based upon preexisting elements . 202 In addition , Robert Weisberg , an American cognitive psychologist who focused on creativity studies and the study of geniality , demonstrated the importance of task - relevant knowledge and expertise in a series of experiments . 203 Thus , the cognitive process of creation is divided into two main sub - processes : ( 1 ) unfocused thought , during which abstract ideas form as a result of the author’s associative thought ; and ( 2 ) the use of task - relevant knowledge and memory during focused thought for 197 See id . , at 20 ; Ward , Smith & Finke , supra note 123 , at 191 – 92 ; see also Thomas B . Ward & Yuliya Kolomyts , Cognition and Creativity , in T HE C AMBRIDGE H ANDBOOK OF C REATIVITY , supra note 34 , at 93 , 93 . 198 See G UILFORD , supra note 102 , at 317 . 199 See id . at 315 . 200 See id . at 319 . 201 See id . 202 See Johnson - Laird , supra note 158 , at 419 – 20 . 203 See R OBERT W . W EISBERG , C REATIVITY : B EYOND THE M YTH OF G ENIUS 113 – 22 ( 1993 ) [ hereinafter W EISBERG , G ENIUS ] ; Robert W . Weisberg , Problem Solving and Creativity , in T HE N ATURE OF C REATIVITY : C ONTEMPORARY P SYCHOLOGICAL P ERSPECTIVES 148 , 148 – 60 ( Robert J . Sternberg ed . , 1988 ) . 320 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 the purpose of crystallizing preliminary abstract ideas into a con - crete perceivable form . As noted above , the two sub - processes are relevant to copyright law . 204 The first sub - process is relevant to the discussion on the independent and original contribution of the au - thor to a creative product—copyright law’s originality require - ment—especially in light of post - modern discourse on the roman - tic author approach . The second sub - process is most relevant to the idea / expression dichotomy and the derivative work right be - cause the use of prior knowledge is an inherent part of the creative process and incorporates what copyright law refers to as a deriva - tive work . Further , the second sub - process reveals a mismatch be - tween the law and the cognitive psychology of creativity . The next Part will focus on how cognitive psychologists describe the use of prior task - relevant knowledge and the notions that arise from these descriptions , which , as discussed below , have important implica - tions for copyright law and the derivative work right . IV . T HE U SE OF T ASK - R ELEVANT K NOWLEDGE AND M EMORY IN THE C REATIVE P ROCESS The use of task - relevant knowledge and memory are a crucial and inseparable part of creativity under cognitive psychology’s predominant approaches to creativity . Now , it is important to dis - cuss the way task - relevant knowledge and memory are formed and used . To this end , this Part discusses theoretical notions about the use of prior knowledge that are based on empirical and historical studies of the cognitive process of creativity . The Part argues that the use of task - relevant knowledge and memory is not restricted to creative activities ( such as ideas , processes , and methods ) that are not afforded protection under copyright law and are therefore free to be used for further creative activities . Rather , task - relevant knowledge and memory also include concrete expressions that are stored in the author’s memory as part of his visual , semantic , and symbolic knowledge . Consequently , the use of expression as a basis for creative activity is not qualitatively different from the use of mere ideas under the cognitive understanding of the creative process . Both elements are an inherent part of the creative 204 See supra notes 130 – 42 and accompanying text . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 321 process . 205 This observation has significant implications for copy - right law , especially the derivative work right . As emphasized in the introduction , the tension between the use of task - relevant knowledge and memory in the creative process and the derivative work right does not necessarily lead to the conclu - sion that authors should be deprived of an exclusive right to their derivative works . Nevertheless , copyright law’s distinction be - tween ideas and expressions is not justified by the theoretical un - derpinnings of creativity because there is a mismatch between the legal norm and the cognitive understanding of creativity . Accor - dingly , the legal profession should question whether the law should bridge this gap and fully mirror the cognitive understanding of creativity . It is also important to note that it may be that the crea - tive process is affected by external factors such as culture , econo - my , religion , and the law . This Article does not argue that the cog - nitive process of creation is a closed and fixed system ; it argues that to the extent the law affects creativity , as may happen due the ex - isting mismatch presented here , it is important to ask whether this effect is desired and justified . A . Theoretical Analysis of the Use of Knowledge and Memory In their work , Runco and Chand dedicated a vast discussion to the role of knowledge and memory in creativity . 206 As for know - ledge , they suggested a distinction between procedural and declara - tive knowledge . 207 Procedural knowledge refers to familiarity with strategies by which certain task - related processes could be accom - plished ( i . e . , know - how ) . 208 When an author chooses a useful strat - egy , procedural knowledge has a significant contribution to creativ - ity . 209 In a series of studies , Runco , Chand , and their collaborators tested the effect of procedural knowledge on creativity . 210 The re - searchers divided participants into two groups and gave each group 205 It is important to note that copyright law permits the use of another’s expressions in certain circumstances , such as under the fair use doctrine . See 17 U . S . C . § 107 ( 2012 ) . 206 See Runco & Chand , supra note 74 , at 245 – 46 , 249 . 207 See id . at 246 . 208 See id . 209 See id . 210 See id . at 246 – 47 . 322 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 the same task . 211 One group received general guidelines about how to accomplish the task , while the other group received explicit di - rections for achieving the task . 212 The studies revealed not only that explicit directions lead to greater innovation , but also that pro - cedural knowledge may overcome thought fixation at the ideation stage of creativity . 213 Declarative knowledge , on the other hand , refers to factual in - formation stored in the author’s memory . 214 Runco and Chand theorized that declarative knowledge contributes to the creative process by supplying the necessary information for the creation of ideas . 215 Support for this theory is found in historical studies that show the need to acquire expertise in a field before achieving sub - stantial creative accomplishments . 216 Runco and Chand argued that declarative knowledge directly affects the ideation stage because an author with greater task - relevant expertise has a wider set of tools to develop preliminary ideas . 217 For example , they argued that when a person is asked to engage in an open task that includes round objects , he will have an advantage if his expertise includes knowledge of round things , such as an astronomer who knows the general features of planets or a biologist who understands mole - cules or cells . 218 They also emphasized that declarative knowledge is mainly experience - based but could be achieved by relevant envi - ronmental cues . 219 Additionally , Runco and Chand explained that both procedural and declarative knowledge are stored in long - term memory , which 211 See id . 212 See id . 213 See id . at 247 . For the full studies , see Ivonne Chand & Mark A . Runco , Problem Finding Skills as Components in the Creative Process , 14 P ERSONALITY & I NDIVIDUAL D IFFERENCES 155 ( 1993 ) ; Mark A . Runco , Maximal Performance on Divergent Thinking Tests by Gifted , Talented , and Nongifted Children , 23 P SYCHOL . S CH . 308 ( 1986 ) ; M . A . Runco & S . M . Okuda , The Instructional Enhancement of the Flexibility and Originality Scores of Divergent Thinking Tests , 5 A PPLIED C OGNITIVE P SYCHOL . 435 ( 1991 ) . 214 See Runco & Chand , supra note 74 , at 246 . 215 See id . at 248 . 216 See , e . g . , Hayes , supra note 161 . For a discussion of additional similar studies , see infra Section IV . C . 217 Runco & Chand , supra note 74 , at 248 . 218 See id . 219 See id . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 323 can be accessed at any moment in order to engage with a task . 220 However , they noted that merely accessing procedural and declara - tive knowledge would likely lead to an unoriginal and uncreative product . 221 They posited that the memory in which knowledge is stored could be divided into two types : episodic , defined as a de - tailed memory of an experience , and semantic , defined as a memo - ry that contains only general characteristics of the relevant expe - rience . 222 Semantic memory is especially relevant to the creative process because it contains “gaps” and therefore does not allow a full reproduction of a relevant experience . 223 Thus , semantic mem - ory allows an author to restore parts of a specific experience and reconstruct other parts to engage in a relevant task . 224 Runco and Chand argued that such reconstruction of memory is a creative ac - tivity . 225 It is important to clarify once again that declarative know - ledge consists of concrete instances , and , in this sense , includes both ideas and expressions in copyright terms . The result of the reflection on explicit artistic expressions , as part of an experience that is stored in the author’s memory , while restoring it and recon - structing it may be an example of a derivative work in the legal sense . In fact , Runco and Chand explained that creative thinking is memory - based . 226 They relied on scholars Pat Langley and Ran - dolph Jones , who argued that knowledge assists creativity by allow - ing its restoration thought indexes created for each creative - domain . 227 Langley and Jones explained : Humans possess no general creativity factor ; so no such component exists to be measured . Instead , 220 See id . 221 See id . The use of the term originality in this context does not refer to the meaning of this term in the legal context . However , it seems that the intent of the authors was very similar because they emphasized that mere restoration of information without additional creativity or adaptation is not a creative or original activity . See id . 222 See id . at 249 . 223 See id . 224 See id . 225 See id . ; see also Wang , Cognitive Foundations , supra note 144 , at 2 ( “The nature of creation is a new and unusual relationship between two or more objects that generates a novel and meaningful concept , solution , method , explanation , or product . ” ) . 226 See Runco & Chand , supra note 74 , at 249 . 227 See id . 324 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 humans possess a wealth of knowledge structures indexed by concepts that a person judges as impor - tant . The level of creativity that one exhibits will depend on one’s knowledge , one’s indexing scheme , and the particular situation in which one finds oneself . 228 Runco and Chand’s account of the use of prior knowledge and memory in the creative process is also backed by additional theoret - ic literature . Roger Schank , an American cognitive psychologist who focuses on artificial intelligence and creativity , described in his knowledge structure model that when an author encounters a cog - nitive input , he processes it in light of his existing knowledge struc - tures and that input is embedded into memory in a way that allows future access . 229 Dynamic memory , according to Schank , refines this process when inputs are received in the author’s memory that relate to existing knowledge structures or past experiences . 230 Thus , an author’s prior experiences alter the author’s knowledge structure . 231 Accordingly , the author’s ability to understand new phenomena and problems in the world is based on a dynamic mem - ory loaded with knowledge of prior experiences . When an author is required to engage with a task , he uses prior knowledge structures and experiences to detect what Schank refers to as an “explanation pattern” that the author used in the past . 232 Schank also argued that the creative process is characterized by two sub - processes . 233 The first is the search for a possible explanation pattern , and the second is an adaptation process in which the explanation pattern is restored from memory and adapted so that it is compatible with the relevant task . 234 The emphasis on the adaptation and restructuring as a basis for creativity is evident here as well . 235 This theoretical 228 See id . ( citing Pat Langley & Randolph Jones , A Computational Model of Scientific Insight , in T HE N ATURE OF C REATIVITY , supra note 203 , at 177 , 199 ) . 229 See Roger C . Schank , Creativity as a Mechanical Process , in T HE N ATURE OF C REATIVITY , supra note 203 , at 220 , 221 . 230 See id . 231 See id . 232 See id . 233 See id . 234 See id . 235 See id . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 325 approach could apply to both the adaptation and restructuring of expressions and ideas that are part of an author’s knowledge base . Both types of knowledge could be part of the cognitive process of creativity . American psychologist Robert J . Sternberg also empathized the role of knowledge and memory in creativity in his three - facet mod - el to creativity . 236 He referred to the components of knowledge ac - quisition in the process of creation and their effect on creative illu - mination . 237 Of the three potential causes for illumination pre - sented , two refer to processes similar to those discussed thus far . One cause , according to Sternberg , is “selective combination , ” in which illumination is created due to a synthesis between separate pieces of stored information . 238 The ability to perform such a process depends on the author’s prior knowledge—the wider the knowledge pool , the greater variety of combinations . Additionally , Sternberg referred to “selective comparison , ” which compares new information to preexisting knowledge and its characteristics to understand and use the new information . 239 He argued that problem solving by analogy is one example of this cause of illumination . 240 Paul J . Locher , a professor of experimental psy - chology , reached similar conclusions . 241 He reviewed empirical and historical studies on the process of creation , such as brain imaging , X - ray studies of artworks , and archival studies on the creation of historical masterpieces in real time . 242 Based on these studies , Locher argued that the use of procedural and declarative know - ledge is essential and central to all stages of the creative process . 243 Sternberg’s emphasis on the importance of synthesis between ex - isting knowledge components in the process of creation , along with Locher’s focus on the importance of declarative knowledge ( which 236 See Robert J . Sternberg , A Three - Facet Model of Creativity , in T HE N ATURE OF C REATIVITY , supra note 203 , at 125 , 137 . 237 See id . at 135 . 238 See id . at 136 . 239 See id . 240 See id . 241 See Paul J . Locher , How Does a Visual Artist Create an Artwork , in T HE C AMBRIDGE H ANDBOOK OF C REATIVITY , supra note 34 , at 131 , 131 . 242 See id . 243 See id . at 143 . 326 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 includes both ideas and expression ) to the creative process support the argument that no qualitative distinction between ideas and ex - pressions exists . B . Empirical Studies on Creativity American creativity researchers Wayne Baughman and Michael Mumford assumed in their studies that merely restoring an applica - tion of prior experiences and knowledge by the author is not likely to lead to creativity . 244 However , they argued that combining and restructuring existing knowledge is a good mechanism for idea - tion . 245 This argument was based on several studies showing that creative development in many fields requires the combination and restructuring of existing knowledge . 246 They referred to the re - search of Michele Mobley ( and his co - authors ) , who argued that it is impossible to create something from nothing and that a genera - tion of new ideas has to be based on existing knowledge struc - tures . 247 Mobley hypothesized that if authors are asked to combine diverse categories , their creative products will be more original . 248 To test this theory , 160 participants were asked to work with ex - emplars of various categories , to combine them in order to create new categories , and to suggest new exemplars for the new catego - ries and write a story that describes them . 249 They found more ori - ginality when participants combined more distant categories , but the results also demonstrated that the quality of the products de - clined when participants worked with distant categories , which was likely due to difficulties that arose when working with unknown categories . 250 244 See Wayne A . Baughman & Michael D . Mumford , Process - Analytic Models of Creative Capacities : Operations Influencing the Combination - and - Reorganization Process , 8 C REATIVITY R ES . J . 37 , 38 ( 1995 ) . 245 See id . 246 See id . 247 See id . at 39 ( citing Michele I . Mobley et al . , Process Analytic Models of Creative Capacities : Evidence for the Combination and Reorganization Process , 5 C REATIVITY R ES . J . 125 ( 1992 ) ) . 248 See id . ( citing Mobley et al . , supra note 247 ) . 249 See id . at 39 – 40 ( citing Mobley et al . , supra note 247 ) . 250 See id . at 40 ( citing Mobley et al . , supra note 247 ) . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 327 Following Mobley , Baughman and Mumford conducted the fol - lowing study : 155 participants were given exemplars of undefined categories . 251 They were first asked to identify each category ac - cording to the exemplars provided . 252 They were then asked to create a category that united all the categories mapped by them and to find an exemplar for the united category . 253 Finally , the partici - pants were asked to define the new category and to find more ex - emplars for it . 254 Analyzing the findings , Baughman and Mumford concluded that , under some conditions , tasks involving the combi - nation of categories lead to better and more original creative prod - ucts . 255 In addition , they noted that the process of combination and reorganization is executed by searching for the characteristics of each category and mapping them , and that only a combination of the two would lead to greater originality . 256 Finke , Ward , and Smith conducted a line of similar studies fo - cusing on a combination and reorganization of the categories and the importance of exemplars . 257 They focused on the effects that categories and known perceptions have on the creative process . 258 This was based on the perception that new ideas , as creative as they may be , are usually developed as limited expansions of exist - ing perceptions . 259 Their first study , conducted in 1994 , consisted of five experiments . 260 In the first experiment , thirty - seven partici - pants were asked to draw an animal they may encounter on a dif - ferent planet , another animal from the same species , and an animal from the same planet but from a different species . 261 The results showed that the vast majority of animals drawn had earthy features ( bilateral symmetry , sensory organs , limbs , etc . ) , which shows that 251 See id . at 42 . 252 See id . at 43 . 253 See id . 254 See id . 255 See id . at 54 . 256 See id . at 54 – 55 . 257 See Ward , Smith & Finke , supra note 123 , at 191 – 92 , 195 . 258 See id . at 195 . 259 See id . 260 See Thomas B . Ward , Structured Imagination : The Role of Category Structure in Exemplar Generation , 27 C OGNITIVE P SYCHOL . 1 , 7 ( 1994 ) . 261 See id . 328 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 when an author is asked to create an exemplar for a known catego - ry , his work will be highly structured . 262 In their second experiment , 180 participants were asked to draw an animal residing on a different planet that is completely dif - ferent than earth . 263 The participants were divided into four groups ; one group did not receive any guidance , and the other group was instructed that the animal had either feathers , fur , or lives underwater . 264 This experiment also indicated that there is significant use of prior knowledge of the characteristics of a catego - ry in the process of finding a new exemplar for the category . 265 That is why participants in the feathers group tended to draw winged animals , and participants in the underwater group tended to draw animals with fins . 266 Similarly , participants in the fur and feather groups tended to draw animals with two feet and partici - pants in the feathers group tended to draw animals with a beak . 267 Three additional experiments also produced results showing that participants usually restore known exemplars of earthy animals when asked to draw imaginary animals . 268 Based on these findings , Finke , Ward , and Smith proposed the term “structured imagination” to describe an author’s tendency to create new ideas while preserving existing categories and noted : “Imagination is structured or directed by knowledge of the catego - ry or categories most related to the individual’s goals . ” 269 Later , Finke , Ward , and Smith explained that the use of knowledge in this context refers to both long - tem memory and to knowledge gathered during engagement with the relevant task . 270 To describe the process in which the author uses preexisting knowledge structures , Finke , Ward , and Smith proposed the “path of least resistance” 262 See id . at 8 – 11 . 263 See id . at 12 . 264 See id . 265 See id . at 13 – 18 . 266 See id . at 13 . 267 See id . at 13 – 14 . 268 See id . at 22 – 23 , 26 – 28 , 30 . 269 Id . at 31 . 270 See Ward , Smith & Finke , supra note 123 , at 198 . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 329 model . 271 They postulated that when an author imagines a new ent - ity , she first determines the task - relevant knowledge - domain , and then accesses the existing knowledge in that domain to construct a new entity . 272 Thomas Ward , a cognition and creativity researcher , and Yu - liya Kolomyts , a language researcher , both of the University of Al - abama , expanded this model and noted that when authors develop new ideas in a specific domain , their first inclination is to access specific exemplars from this domain as a starting point , retrieve characteristics from these exemplars , and then import them into developing ideas . 273 This is based on empirical findings of Ward and his followers , which suggested that to develop an exemplar for a new domain , authors develop products that are substantially simi - lar to exemplars of existing domains . 274 It is likely that this tenden - cy is an inherent part of structured imagination . 275 Notably , Ward theorized that the probability of innovative creativity is higher when the author uses larger systems of knowledge instead of mere exemplars . 276 However , Ward and Kolomyts emphasized that , while using more abstract ideas would probably lead to more crea - tivity , it would come at the expense of compatibility and usability of the creative products and thus diminish their value . 277 Therefore , it should be expected that the “constraining” effect that reliance on prior knowledge and exemplars has on innovation is necessary to reach meaningful and valuable creative products . 278 The studies discussed in this Article thus far focus on creative thought , generally , and all fields of creative activity—not only those to which copyright law applies . 279 There are very few empiri - 271 See id . ; see also Ward , supra note 260 , at 35 ; Thomas B . Ward , What’s Old About New Ideas ? , in T HE C REATIVE C OGNITION A PPROACH 157 , 174 ( Steven M . Smith , Thomas B . Ward , & Ronald A . Finke eds . , 1995 ) . 272 See sources cited supra note 271 . 273 See Ward & Kolomyts , supra note 197 , at 100 . 274 See id . at 99 . 275 See id . 276 See Ward , supra note 260 , at 36 . 277 See Ward & Kolomyts , supra note 197 , at 100 . 278 See id . at 101 . 279 It is important to note that the theoretical literature on cognitive psychology does not distinguish between works of authorship , inventions , and abstract creative thought . 330 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 cal studies that focus directly on artworks and other works of au - thorship . Nevertheless , there are numerous studies relevant to this Article’s discussion that examine the process of making works of art . Japanese cognitive psychologists Sawako Yokochi and Takeshi Okada attempted to empirically test different theoretical approach - es to creativity by studying the process of creating artworks . 280 For this purpose , they observed Chinese Suibokuga , a traditional pain - ter in his sixties with twenty years of experience , for a three - year period . 281 The painter was asked to draw eight paintings on an empty canvas and eight additional paintings on a canvas containing fifteen random lines drawn by two other participants . 282 Yokochi and Okada identified two important characteristics in these studies : First , when the painter worked with the empty canvas , he used the same painting strategy every time . 283 Second , when the painter worked with predetermined random lines , his paintings were less accurate in their composition but much more original in their style . 284 This observation was corroborated by interviews with the painter after the study . 285 The researchers concluded , based on this findings , that the approach of Finke , Ward , and Smith was accurate and that combining preexisting knowledge structures containing components from past experiences contributes significantly to in - novation . 286 Another qualitative study conducted by cognitive psychologists Mary - Anne Mace and Tony Ward attempted to develop a model for the creative process behind artworks . 287 They conducted semi - This does not diminish the applicability of these theories to creative activities governed by copyright law . 280 See Sawako Yokochi & Takeshi Okada , Creative Cognitive Process of Art Making : A Field Study of a Traditional Chinese Ink Painter , 17 C REATIVITY R ES . J . 241 , 241 ( 2005 ) . 281 See id . at 243 . 282 See id . 283 See id . at 244 – 45 . The researchers noted that in fifteen out of the sixteen paintings the painter started drawing a tree and only later added other objects . Id . 284 See id . at 247 . 285 See id . 286 See id . at 250 ; see also Ward , Smith & Finke , supra note 123 , at 192 . 287 See Mary - Anne Mace & Tony Ward , Modeling the Creative Process : A Grounded Theory Analysis of Creativity in the Domain of Art Making , 14 C REATIVITY R ES . J . 179 , 180 ( 2002 ) . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 331 structured interviews with authors during the creative process . 288 At the first stage , sixteen visual artists were interviewed at three different times during their creative process—first , at the begin - ning of the process , second , in the middle of the it , and third at the end of the process . 289 The participants were asked to describe their creative process at the relevant stage of the interview and to refrain from reporting general theories about the creative process . 290 After analyzing the findings , the researchers proposed a detailed model for the creation of artworks based on the interviews . 291 According to Mace and Ward , the creation of a work of art does not develop out of a conceptual void ; rather , it is a product of thought and on - going experience . 292 They argued that the author obtains a vast knowledge base of the creative process over time , explicitly and implicitly understanding techniques , skills , genres , theories , aes - thetics , prior works , and art in its contemporary and historical sense . 293 This knowledge develops along with the process of crea - tion , and the author refers to it at every stage of the process . 294 They later verified the results of this study . 295 It is important to note that Mace and Ward explicitly emphasized that the creative process is also based on explicit knowledge of prior works that the author refers to during the process . 296 They also stressed that this aspect links the process of creating a current work with previous and future works in the same domain . 297 In this sense , it is clear that the process of creation includes the use of expressions as well as ideas . 298 In the past three decades , the number of quantitative empirical studies of creativity using methodologies and instruments from neurosciences has grown tremendously . The two main methodolo - gies in this field are the use of functional magnetic resonance imag - 288 See id . at 181 . 289 See id . 290 See id . 291 See id . at 182 – 88 . 292 See id . at 182 . 293 See id . at 188 . 294 See id . 295 See id . 296 See id . at 189 . 297 See id . at 182 . 298 See id . 332 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 ing ( “fMRI” ) and an electroencephalogram ( “EEG” ) . 299 One ex - ample of such a study was American cognitive psychologist Robert L . Solso , who examined the creative process in real - time using fMRI . 300 Solso measured the brain activity of British portrait artist Humphrey Ocean while he drew portraits of figures that were pre - sented to him , and compared it to the brain activity of another ama - teur participant performing the same task . 301 The two participants were asked to draw the faces of presented figures for thirty seconds while undergoing fMRI . 302 The results of the study showed excessive activity in the right - rear part of the amateur participant’s brain when compared to Ocean’s . 303 According to Solso , this showed that Ocean’s expe - rience and expertise in face - detection and understanding may have led to less effort in the parts of the brain charged with face - detection . 304 The more interesting result , however , was that Ocean’s brain showed excessive activity in the front - central part of the right lobe , which is in charge of associative thinking and mani - pulation of visual structures . 305 According to Solso , this indicated that , while the amateur participant reproduced the figures pre - sented to him , Ocean thought about them and associatively adapted them . 306 In a different fMRI study conducted by cognition and brain scientist Melissa Ellamil ( and her co - authors ) , fifteen visual art students were presented with short book descriptions and asked to 299 See Keith Sawyer , The Cognitive Neuroscience of Creativity : A Critical Review , 23 C REATIVITY R ES . J . 137 , 138 – 40 ( 2011 ) . An fMRI uses magnetic traits of oxygenated blood cells in comparison with un - oxygenated cells to examine which parts of the brain are active at a specific time . The technique produces an image portraying the difference between the oxygenation levels of different blood cells and shows a model - based image of the active parts of the brain during the sample . An EEG measures electromagnetic pulses created by the activity of neurons in the brain cortex by placing electrodes on the scalp of the participant . Id . 300 See Robert L . Solso , Brain Activities in a Skilled Versus a Novice Artist : An fMRI Study , 34 L EONARDO 31 , 33 ( 2001 ) . 301 See id . 302 See id . 303 See id . 304 See id . 305 See id . at 33 – 34 . 306 See id . at 34 . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 333 draw illustrations for each book’s cover on a tablet computer con - nected to fMRI . 307 Later , they were asked to review their illustra - tions and evaluate them . 308 The researchers noted that at the pro - duction stage of the illustrations , excessive brain action occurred in the medial temporal lobe , which is in charge of the processing of semantic memory and recombination of memory using associa - tions . 309 The researchers explained that this finding fits theoretical approaches that focus on associative processing and recombination of existing knowledge as the basis for creativity . 310 Studies using the EEG methodology have also validated some of the theoretical approaches to creativity concerning the use of task - relevant knowledge and memory . 311 Austrian cognitive psy - chologists Andreas Fink and Mathias Benedek reviewed many EEG studies that focused on creativity . 312 Among other findings , they concluded that all studies showed changes in alpha power in the author’s brain cortex during creative activity . 313 One of the consistent changes that Fink and Benedek identified was an in - crease in alpha power in the rear part of the parietal lobe of the brain cortex . 314 They surmised that because this part of the brain is in charge of memory , the increase in alpha power should be unders - 307 See Melissa Ellamil et al . , Evaluative and Generative Modes of Thought During the Creative Process , 59 N EURO I MAGE 1783 , 1784 – 85 ( 2012 ) . 308 See id . at 1785 . 309 See id . at 1786 , 1791 . 310 See id . at 1791 . For additional studies finding a correlation between creativity and brain activity in the medial temporal lobe , see Huimin Zheng , Jiayi Luo & RongjunYu , From Memory to Prospection : What Are the Overlapping and the Distinct Components Between Remembering and Imagining ? , 5 F RONTIERS P SYCHOL . 1 , 10 ( 2014 ) . 311 See , e . g . , Andreas Fink & Mathias Benedek , EEG Alpha Power and Creative Ideation , 44 N EUROSCIENCE & B IOBEHAVIORAL R EV . 111 , 111 ( 2014 ) . 312 See id . at 113 . 313 See id . As explained above , an EEG measures electromagnetic pulses created by the activity of neurons in the brain cortex . See supra note 299 and accompanying text . These pulses are measured in several frequencies . The frequency between 8 and 12 Hz is referred to as “alpha power . ” The changes in alpha power are measured before and after a stimulating event occurs . A decrease in alpha power is referred to as event - related desynchronization , while an increase in alpha power is referred to as event - related synchronization . See Fink & Benedek , supra note 311 , at 114 – 15 . 314 See Fink & Benedek , supra note 311 , at 117 . 334 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 tood as an attempt to search and restore memory in order to use and recombine knowledge for the creative process . 315 Despite the differences in the various neuroscientific studies of creativity , many researchers reached similar conclusions about the use of task - relevant knowledge and memory in the creative process . American creativity researcher Keith Sawyer , for example , re - viewed the studies published in this field between October 2010 and May 2011 . 316 Although he urged psychologists to think critical - ly about the use of neuroscience in creativity studies and to under - stand the shortcomings , he nevertheless concluded that there are a number of areas where the results are undisputed . 317 For instance , he emphasized that associative thinking—the recombination of preexisting knowledge and task - relevant expertise—is an undis - puted part of creativity . 318 In a different literature review , cognitive psychologists Sureyya Yoruk and Mark Runco examined fMRI and EEG studies conducted from 2004 to 2014 . 319 They concluded that creativity is characterized by excessive brain activity in the left part of the brain , specifically in the lower parietal lobe , which is in charge of storing semantic memory . 320 In addition , they argued that these areas of the brain are in charge of creating preliminary associ - ations that function as a step toward more distant associations that develop in the right hemisphere of the brain where EEG studies show excessive alpha power . 321 Therefore , they concluded that creativity is characterized by the processing and recombination of semantic memory and task - relevant knowledge contained within such processing . 322 315 See id . at 119 . For similar findings , see Mathias Benedek et al . , Alpha Power Increases in Right Parietal Cortex Reflects Focused Internal Attention , 56 N EUROPSYCHOLOGIA 393 ( 2014 ) . 316 See Sawyer , supra note 299 , at 149 – 50 . 317 See id . 318 See id . at 149 . 319 See Sureyya Yoruk & Mark A . Runco , The Neuroscience of Divergent Thinking , 56 A CTIVITAS N ERVOSA S UPERIOR 1 , 1 ( 2014 ) . 320 See id . at 11 . 321 See id . at 11 – 12 . 322 See id . at 13 . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 335 C . Historical Studies One of the methodologies used in creativity studies is archival research , which examines the creation of works of art by reviewing the personal documents made by artists while they created master - pieces . 323 This Section focuses on the studies conducted by Robert Weisberg , a cognitive psychologist focusing on creativity , geniality , and expertise who shed light on the importance of expertise and task - relevant knowledge to the creative process from a historical perspective . Weisberg’s first two case studies are from the field of visual arts , specifically , masterpieces of Pablo Picasso . 324 The first work is Les Demoiselles d’Avignon published in 1907 . 325 Weisberg analyzed the creative process of this work by comparing X - ray images of the final product to sketches preserved by Picasso . 326 Weisberg de - scribed the various stages in Picasso’s work as well as the parts in which Picasso used prior works . 327 However , the most important observation for this Article’s purposes is the identification of ex - ternal sources of Picasso’s work . 328 Weisberg learned that the nude female figures in Picasso’s work were based on and adapted from figures included in other painters’ masterpieces . 329 For example , the kneeling female in the bottom - right part of Picasso’s painting is very similar to the female in Paul Cezanne’s work entitled The Three Bathers . 330 In addition , the two central female figures in Pi - casso’s work are similar to the two women who appear in Goya’s Nuda Maja and Manet’s Olympia . 331 The general composition of Picasso’s work is drawn from his colleague Henri Matisse’s work , Le Bonheur de Vivre . 332 323 For a description of this methodology , see Locher , supra note 242 , at 132 – 34 . 324 See W EISBERG , G ENIUS , supra note 203 , at 193 – 208 . 325 See id . at 193 – 201 . 326 See id . at 196 . 327 See id . at 195 – 98 . 328 See id . at 194 – 201 . 329 See id . at 198 – 99 . 330 See id . at 198 . 331 See id . 332 See id . at 199 . 336 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 Weisberg conducted similar research regarding Picasso’s mas - terpiece Guernica . 333 He explained that this work is substantially based on previous works of Picasso . 334 But , more importantly , Weisberg also noted that Guernica , which referred to the atrocities of the Spanish civil war , was substantially based on Goya’s series of sketches entitled The Disasters of War from 1816 . 335 Weisberg em - phasized that several figures and positions presented in Goya’s sketches appear , after stylistic adaptations , in Picasso’s Guerni - ca . 336 Weisberg found similar findings in musical compositions . 337 He studied many of the early works of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart and found significant reliance on other composers’ works . 338 For in - stance , Mozart’s first four piano concerti ( K . 37 , 29 , 40 , 41 ) did not contain any original music—they were adapted from the works of five other composers . 339 In addition , Mozart’s three consecutive piano concerti ( K . 107 nos . 1 – 3 ) composed in 1772 were actually the works of Johann Christian Bach ( Johan Sebastian Bach’s younger son ) and were rearranged and orchestrated by Mozart . 340 A similar pattern was identified in Mozart’s first symphonies and chamber compositions , which were stylized according to pre - classical styles and based on the compositions of young Bach and other German composers . 341 Likewise , Weisberg found reliance on prior works in Mozart’s later compositions . 342 He argued that the finale of Mozart’s Jupiter symphony—the last that Mozart com - posed—was based on five themes that were drawn from other composers’ work . 343 Similarly , Mozart’s three E - flat horn concerti was substantially based on Antoni Rosetti’s horn concerti from the same period . 344 333 See id . at 202 – 09 . 334 See id . at 202 . 335 See id . at 208 . 336 See id . 337 See Weisberg , supra note 161 , at 235 – 36 . 338 See id . 339 See id . at 235 . 340 See id . 341 See id . at 236 . 342 See W EISBERG , G ENIUS , supra note 203 , at 225 . 343 See id . 344 See id . at 225 – 26 . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 337 Weisberg divided his studies into two categories of creativity . He described the first as reproductive creativity . 345 The category includes the Guernica , the structure of which Picasso based on his previous works . 346 Weisberg noted that these cases show this type of creativity occurs through the reproduction of prior knowledge without modifying its form and by adapting it to fit new needs through analogical transfer . 347 Weisberg described the second type of creativity as reproductive restructuring . 348 An example of this is Picasso’s Les Demoiselles d’Avignon , which is speculated to have been substantially restructured after Picasso visited an ethnograph - ic museum and encountered primitive sculpture . 349 Weisberg in - ferred from these case studies that every work is linked to prior work and that every work has a preceding work , as the past is a cru - cial basis for innovation . 350 In light of these observations , Weisberg proposed a model that explains the use of task - relevant knowledge in creativity . 351 In contrast to the notion that creativity begins with the reception of input from the environment that is later processed according to stored knowledge ( bottom - up model ) , he contended that task - relevant knowledge forms the perception of input from the environment ( top - down model ) . 352 Thus , when a person identi - fies a new event in the environment , the mere identification is go - verned by the preexisting task - relevant knowledge already stored in his memory , which further evidences task - relevant knowledge’s critical contribution to creativity . 353 The studies presented in this Part—theoretical , empirical , and historical—all point to the same conclusion : They all focus , in one way or another , on the significant role task - relevant knowledge and 345 See Robert W . Weisberg , Case Studies of Creative Thinking : Reproduction Versus Restructuring in the Real World , in T HE C REATIVE C OGNITION A PPROACH , supra note 271 , at 53 , 57 – 62 . 346 See id . at 57 – 58 . 347 See id . at 61 – 62 . 348 See id . at 63 – 69 . 349 See id . at 63 – 65 . 350 See W EISBERG , supra note 33 , at 112 – 13 . This notion is an explicit expression of the idea of progress in copyright law and is directly related to the difficulties with the current definition of the derivative work right . 351 See id . at 114 – 18 . 352 See id . 353 See id . 338 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 memory have in the cognitive process of creation and describe in different ways how these components are used by the author . These studies all show that the creative process includes the use of existing knowledge structures inherently and in a concrete way that is identifiable in different stages of the process and its outcomes . The use of knowledge structures is not limited to ideas ( in copy - right terms ) ; it also includes the explicit use of expressions . Under this reading of the cognitive psychology literature on creativity , there is no qualitative difference between creative activities based upon ideas and those based on explicit expressions . The products of both are considered creative under these approaches . This is the main notion that this Article tries to extract from the cognitive psy - chology discourse on creativity . The next Part explains how this notion can be applied to copyright law and what implications it may have on different copyright doctrines . V . I MPLICATIONS FOR C OPYRIGHT L AW After establishing the notion that the creative process is charac - terized by two main processes—one of unfocused thought and generation of abstract ideas and the other of focused thought and crystallization of abstract ideas—and showing that the use of know - ledge and memory ( not limited to ideas but also to explicit expres - sions ) is an inherent part of the creative process , this Part points out the implications of these notions on some aspects of copyright law and examines to what extent the legal doctrine matches the cognitive understanding of creativity . The Part argues that this no - tion has significant implications for copyright law’s originality re - quirement , derivative work right , and idea / expression dichotomy . A . The Use of Prior Knowledge in the Creative Process and Copyright’s Originality Requirement The originality requirement is at the heart of copyright and aims to ensure that non - original works do not receive copyright protection . 354 The originality requirement is part of copyright’s statutory requirements in many jurisdictions but “originality” is 354 See 17 U . S . C . § 102 ( a ) ( 2012 ) . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 339 not statutorily defined . 355 Section 102 ( a ) of the Copyright Act states that “ [ c ] opyright protection subsists , in accordance with this title , in original works . . . . ” 356 Courts in many jurisdictions have struggled with defining the exact meaning of originality for copy - right purposes . In the notorious Feist Publications , Inc . , v . Rural Tel - ephone Service Co . case , the Supreme Court ruled that in order to prove originality for copyright purposes , a work should be an inde - pendent creation of the author and should be somewhat creative . 357 The ruling did not end the debate on the meaning of originality and creativity in copyright law . 358 Without delving into the various ap - proaches to creativity and originality in copyright law , it seems that one definition is not in dispute—for a work or any part of it to be original , it must be the author’s independent creation . 359 If originality , in its undisputed meaning , is the sine qua non for copyright protection , the importance of reliance on prior know - ledge and memory in the process of creation has significant impli - cations for the requirement . If this Article’s argument is correct , it is likely that every author’s work is based on components ( includ - ing expressions ) from other authors’ works . Further , if an author’s work is based on another author’s expression , then it may , under certain circumstances , be a derivative work . 360 Conversely , if a work is based on ideas or unprotected expression , then it is an “original work . ” 361 As a result , many works of authorship are not copyrightable and remain in the public domain . Courts sometimes indeed distinguish between different components of a work that are 355 See id . § 101 . 356 See § 102 ( a ) ( emphasis added ) . 357 See 499 U . S . 340 , 346 ( 1991 ) ( “ [ O ] riginality requires independent creation plus a modicum of creativity . ” ) . 358 For a review of the case’s influence on other jurisdictions and the creative choice test for originality , see Daniel J . Gervais , Feist Goes Global : A Comparative Analysis of the Notion of Originality in Copyright Law , 49 J . C OPYRIGHT S OC ’ Y U . S . A . 949 ( 2002 ) , and Elizabeth F . Judge & Daniel Gervais , Of Silos and Constellations : Comparing Notions of Originality in Copyright Law , 27 C ARDOZO A RTS & E NT . L . J . 375 ( 2009 ) , which examines the reception of the creative choice test in different jurisdictions . 359 See Feist , 499 U . S . at 345 . 360 See 17 U . S . C . § § 101 , 103 ( b ) , 106 ( 2012 ) . 361 See id . § 102 ( a ) . 340 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 copyrightable and those that are not . 362 Nevertheless , the discourse in copyright law and specifically in court decisions is about the co - pyrightabilty of a work as a whole . 363 The notions in this Article indicate that this may not be the right question to ask and that courts should instead ask what components of the work are copy - rightable . This Article emphasizes the mismatch between the legal doc - trine and the cognitive understanding of creativity . In the context of the originality requirement , there is a match as far as the prin - ciples of the doctrine are considered but a mismatch as to its appli - cation in courts . The few doubts raised here articulate the potential contribution that notions from cognitive psychology of creativity may have for copyright law . B . The Creative Process and the Author’s Independent Contribution Commentators such as James Boyle , Jessica Litman , and R . Keith Sawyer argue that copyright law perceives creativity from a “romantic” point of view attributed to the western world . 364 This romantic point of view understands creativity as a moment of reve - lation in which a work is created from nothing—a light bulb mo - ment—and portrays the author as an independent individual work - ing in the dark until the awaited breakthrough . 365 362 See Oracle Am . , Inc . v . Google Inc . , 750 F . 3d 1339 , 1357 – 58 ( Fed . Cir . 2014 ) ( stating that the question of whether the originality requirement should be tested for each component of the work is usually discussed in an infringement analysis and specifically in computer software cases ) . The common test is the abstraction - filtration - comparison test . At the first stage , the work is abstracted to its components . At the second stage , each component is scrutinized using the idea / expression dichotomy and other copyright doctrines that deny liability for infringement . At the third stage , the protected components are compared to the allegedly infringing ones . Courts differ as to whether the second stage refers to copyrightability in general or only as a defense against an infringement action . It may be that the notions from cognitive psychology support the application of the second stage in the copyrightability part of the analysis regarding any type of work , not only computer software . 363 See supra note 362 . 364 See James D . A . Boyle , The Search for an Author : Shakespeare and the Framers , 37 A M . U . L . R EV . 625 , 629 ( 1987 ) ; Jessica Litman , The Public Domain , 39 E MORY L . J . 965 , 965 ( 1990 ) ; R . Keith Sawyer , The Western Cultural Model of Creativity : Its Influence on Intellectual Property Law , 86 N OTRE D AME L . R EV . 2027 , 2033 ( 2011 ) . 365 See O RLY L OBEL , T ALENT W ANTS TO B E F REE : W HY W E S HOULD L EARN TO L OVE L EAKS , R AIDS , AND F REE R IDING 140 ( 2013 ) . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 341 Many scholars criticize the romantic approach to creativity . The first stage of the criticism relied on the common notion that no work could be created out of nothing and that it is obvious that one needs to rely on prior knowledge to innovate . 366 This notion was so obvious to critical scholars that some of them referred to it as a cliché . 367 Kwall suggested , however , that in spite of the fact that every work is based on previous knowledge , the individual contri - bution of the author to new work still justifies copyright protec - tion . 368 Nevertheless , it seems that the romantic approach to au - thorship has lost credit , at least in academic scholarship for the last two decades . It also seems that this intuitive notion is becoming more substantial as knowledge becomes more and more available and technological advancements make it more accessible and usa - ble for further innovation . 369 In their important and constitutive book , which was the first to offer an alternative to the romantic author approach to copyright law , Martha Woodmansee , a professor of English literature , and Peter Jaszi , an acclaimed copyright scholar , showed that the legal norms in copyright law are a product of the romantic author ap - proach and are not compatible with the social understanding of creativity . 370 Woodmansee showed that the romantic author ap - proach is a product of the eighteenth century and is a short episode in comparison to the documented history of creativity in earlier centuries , and that , in the past , the creative process was perceived as a social action that is not attributed to one individual . 371 On the 366 See S . C . G ILFILLAN , T HE S OCIOLOGY OF I NVENTION 77 – 78 ( 1935 ) ; Paul Goldstein , Derivative Rights and Derivative Works in Copyright , 30 J . C OPYRIGHT S OC ’ Y U . S . A . 209 , 218 ( 1983 ) ; Andrew Hargadon & Robert I . Sutton , Building an Innovation Factory , H ARV . B US . R EV . , May – June 2000 , at 157 , 158 – 59 . 367 See Litman , supra note 364 , at 966 . 368 See R OBERTA R OSENTHAL K WALL , T HE S OUL OF C REATIVITY : F ORGING A M ORAL R IGHTS L AW FOR THE U NITED S TATES 2 ( 2010 ) . 369 See , e . g . , Naomi Abe Voegtli , Rethinking Derivative Rights , 63 B ROOK . L . R EV . 1213 , 1214 ( 1997 ) . 370 See T HE C ONSTRUCTION OF A UTHORSHIP : T EXTUAL A PPROPRIATION IN L AW AND L ITERATURE ( Martha Woodmansee & Peter Jaszi eds . , 1994 ) . 371 See Martha Woodmansee , On the Author Effect : Recovering Collectively , in T HE C ONSTRUCTION OF A UTHORSHIP : T EXTUAL A PPROPRIATION IN L AW AND L ITERATURE , supra note 370 , at 15 ; Martha Woodmansee , The Genius and the Copyright : Economic and Legal Conditions of the Emergence of the “Author , ” 17 E IGHTEENTH - C ENTURY S TUD . 425 , 426 ( 1984 ) . 342 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 basis of these notions , Jaszi argued that the influence of the roman - tic author approach on copyright law led to a gap between the so - cial understanding of creativity and the legal one , which makes it difficult for copyright law to adapt and govern more complex mod - els of creativity and specifically multiple - authorship works . 372 The notions from the cognitive psychology of creativity as pre - sented in this Article show that this understanding of creativity leads to a somewhat different conclusion . Although the cognitive process of creation is characterized by substantial reliance on prior task - relevant knowledge and memory , an inseparable part of crea - tivity has to do with the unfocused thought of the author and cogni - tive processes that are original to him . 373 Therefore , it seems that the creative process is not a romantic individual process in the sense that the author is the sole origin of the work , but , on the oth - er hand , it is not based solely on prior knowledge and works . In fact , there is a significant match between copyright’s originality requirement and the cognitive understanding of creativity that arti - culates the author’s original contribution . These notions could be the basis for further discussion of the place of the individual author in the process of creation and in copyright law . One example of the implications of such a discussion is the joint authorship doctrine in copyright law . Section 201 ( a ) of the Copyright Act states that “ [ t ] he authors of a joint work are co - owners of copyright in the work . ” 374 A “joint work” is defined as “a work prepared by two or more authors with the intention that their contributions be merged into inseparable or interdependent parts of a unitary whole . ” 375 One of the most debated aspects about this doctrine revolves around what contribution to a joint work is considered authorship . The two main positions were argued by copyright scholars Melville Nimmer , who asserted that the contri - 372 See Peter Jaszi , On the Author Effect : Contemporary Copyright and Collective Creativity , in T HE C ONSTRUCTION OF A UTHORSHIP : T EXTUAL A PPROPRIATION IN L AW AND L ITERATURE , supra note 370 , at 29 [ hereinafter Jaszi , Author Effect ] ; Peter Jaszi , Toward a Theory of Copyright : The Metamorphoses of “Authorship , ” 1991 D UKE L . J . 455 ( 1991 ) [ hereinafter Jaszi , Theory of Copyright ] . 373 See Jaszi , Author Effect , supra note 372 ; Jaszi , Theory of Copyright , supra note 372 . 374 17 U . S . C . § 201 ( a ) ( 2012 ) . 375 Id . § 101 . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 343 bution does not have to be copyrightable on its own , 376 and Paul Goldstein , who argued that the contribution should be indepen - dently copyrightable . 377 The findings from the cognitive psychology of creativity may offer guidance here . If the process of creation involves independent contribution of the author , and the process does not make a distinc - tion between ideas and expressions , there is no reason to think that an independent contribution to a work of authorship—which con - sists of ideas and is therefore not copyrightable on its own—is not a creative contribution that amounts to authorship . Thus , Nimmer’s claim that non - copyrightable contributions to a work of authorship could qualify as joint authorship may fit well with the understand - ing of creativity . 378 C . The Use of Prior Knowledge and the Right to Make Derivative Works The right to make derivative works is a relatively new right in copyright law’s bundle of rights and was first introduced in the Copyright Act of 1976 . 379 It expanded the preexisting adaptation right and absorbed the case law’s expansion of the reproduction right . 380 The derivative work right granted authors exclusive rights to works that are “based upon one or more preexisting works , such 376 See 1 M ELVILLE B . N IMMER & D AVID N IMMER , N IMMER ON C OPYRIGHT § 6 . 07 [ A ] [ 3 ] ( 2015 ) . Nimmer’s approach was explicitly rejected by the Second Circuit in Childress v . Taylor and later in the Ninth Circuit as well . Id . ( citing 945 F . 2d 500 , 506 ( 2d Cir . 1991 ) ) . The Seventh Circuit , however , accepted Nimmer’s approach and decided that the contribution of ideas could be sufficient for joint authorship . See id . 377 See P AUL G OLDSTEIN , G OLDSTEIN ON C OPYRIGHT § 4 . 2 . 1 . 1 , at 4 : 7 ( 3d ed . 2005 & Supp . 2007 ) . Goldstein’s approach was followed in the Childress case and in subsequent cases in the Ninth Circuit . See supra note 376 and accompanying text . 378 For an analysis of different tests for the constitution of joint authorship that attempts to solve the problems with the intent requirement based on notions from creativity studies , see Gregory N . Mandel , Left - Brain Versus Right - Brain : Competing Conceptions of Creativity in Intellectual Property Law , 44 U . C . D AVIS L . R EV . 283 , 357 – 61 ( 2010 ) . Mandel contends that the requirement for joint authorship would be a “non - market - substitutable - contribution . ” Id . 379 See 17 U . S . C . § 106 ( 2012 ) . 380 See Oren Bracha , The Ideology of Authorship Revisited : Authors , Markets , and Liberal Values in Early American Copyright , 118 Y ALE L . J . 186 , 224 – 33 ( 2008 ) ; Goldstein , supra note 366 , at 211 – 15 ; Jed Rubinfeld , Freedom of Imagination : Copyright’s Constitutionality , 112 Y ALE L . J . 1 , 49 – 52 ( 2002 ) . 344 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 as a translation , musical arrangement , dramatization , fictionaliza - tion , motion picture version , sound recording , art reproduction , abridgment , condensation , or any other form in which a work may be recast , transformed , or adapted . ” 381 With regard to the applica - tion of the current doctrine , Nimmer argued that the right to make derivative works is “superfluous” because the making of a deriva - tive work will ( almost ) always involve reproduction of the underly - ing work ; 382 however , Professor Pamela Samuelson argued that the derivative work right could be understood in a different way that could exist independently from the reproduction right . 383 On the normative level , however , most commentators have argued that the current , broad definition of the derivative work right is unjusti - fied . 384 The derivative work right’s current definition raises significant questions and difficulties , which focus mainly on the tension be - tween first and second authors , and on the constraints that the right casts on the development of new expressions . The difficulties involve two different aspects of the derivative work right . The first aspect is the scope of the right in light of its statutory definition . This aspect is substantial because it caps the borders of the legal discourse on derivative works and sets its start and end points and 381 17 U . S . C . § 101 ( 2012 ) . 382 See 2 N IMMER & N IMMER , supra note 376 , § 8 . 09 [ A ] [ 1 ] . 383 See Pamela Samuelson , The Quest for a Sound Conception of Copyright’s Derivative Work Right , 101 G EO . L . J . 1505 ( 2013 ) . 384 For a critique of the derivative work right based on freedom of speech , see Christina Bohannan , Taming the Derivative Work Right : A Modest Proposal for Reducing Overbreadth and Vagueness in Copyright , 12 V AND . J . E NT . & T ECH . L . 669 , 688 ( 2010 ) ; Niva Elkin - Koren , Cyberlaw and Social Change : A Democratic Approach to Copyright Law in Cyberspace , 14 C ARDOZO A RTS & E NT . L . J . 215 , 277 – 83 ( 1996 ) ; Neil W . Netanel , Copyright and a Democratic Civil Society , 106 Y ALE L . J . 283 , 347 – 64 ( 1996 ) ; Voegtli , supra note 369 , at 1213 – 58 . For an economic critique on the derivative work right , see Shyamkrishna Balganesh , Foreseeability and Copyright Incentives , 122 H ARV . L . R EV . 1569 ( 2009 ) ; Shubha Ghosh , Market Entry and the Proper Scope of Copyright , 12 I NT ’ L J . E CON . & B US . 347 , 351 ( 2005 ) ; Goldstein , supra note 366 , at 227 ; Mark A . Lemley , The Economics of Improvement in Intellectual Property Law , 75 T EX . L . R EV . 989 , 1048 – 68 ( 1997 ) ; Lydia Pallas Loren , The Changing Nature of Derivative Works in the Face of New Technologies , 4 J . S MALL & E MERGING B US . L . 57 , 77 – 78 ( 2000 ) ; Glynn S . Lunney , Reexamining Copyright’s Incentives - Access Paradigm , 49 V AND . L . R EV . 483 , 650 – 53 ( 1996 ) ; Chris Newman , Transformation in Property and Copyright , 56 V ILL . L . R EV . 251 , 252 – 53 ( 2011 ) ; Stewart Sterk , Rhetoric and Reality in Copyright Law , 94 M ICH . L . R EV . 1197 , 1215 – 17 ( 1996 ) ; Voegtli , supra note 369 , at 1241 – 45 . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 345 the number of cases to which it applies . The second aspect con - cerns remedies for copyright infringement . This aspect determines the right’s strength to a great extent—that is , the stronger the re - medies granted to the copyright holder ( or the prohibition on whoever is not ) , the stronger the right , and vice versa . In the absence of empirical data that could offer guidance , at least on a utilitarian basis , as to the proper balance between first authors’ interests and second authors’ interests , it is possible to turn to findings from cognitive psychology’s account of creativi - ty . 385 Moreover , as a recent study shows , there is good reason to doubt whether authors are in fact rational agents that respond to market incentives . Based on behavioral experiments , Stephan Bechtold , Christopher Buccafusco , and Christopher Sprigman showed that authors’ decision to borrow from existing works or create works “from scratch” is not affected by copyright law’s in - centives , but by their subjective belief about the difficulty of inno - vation . 386 These findings emphasize the importance of understand - ing cognitive psychology’s account of creativity and applying it to the law in order to create more efficient copyright doctrines . The notion regarding the use of prior knowledge and memory in the creative process and the lack of qualitative differences between ideas and expressions in this context warrant asking whether copy - right law’s distinction between derivative and original works is jus - tified . As far as the first aspect is concerned—the scope of the deriva - tive work right—there is a strong link between the legal norm and the cognitive understanding of creativity . If , for example , it turned out that the scope of the derivative work right is very broad , but the reliance on expressions during the process of creation is marginal , it would raise the question of whether such a legal right is needed and justified . In contrast , if the scope of the derivative work right is narrow , vague , and applied to a limited set of cases , but the use of preexisting expressions is inherent to the process of creation ( as 385 For a similar approach , see Fishman , supra note 2 , at 1341 , and Jeanna C . Former , A Psychology of Intellectual Property , 104 N W . U . L . R EV . 1441 , 1458 – 59 ( 2010 ) . 386 See Stephan Bechtold , Christopher Buccafusco & Christopher Jon Sprigman , Innovation Heuristics : Experiments on Sequential Creativity in Intellectual Property , 91 I ND . L . R EV . 1251 , 1297 ( 2016 ) . 346 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 this Article attempts to show ) , scholars should ask whether the le - gal doctrine should better reflect the behavioral aspects of creativi - ty . But , more important , due to the significance of the use of prior knowledge and memory in the cognitive process of creation ( which is not limited to ideas but also includes explicit expressions ) , a bet - ter understanding of the right to make derivative works is war - ranted . The making of a derivative work is , in its nature , a creative activity under cognitive approaches to creativity and is not qualita - tively different than an original work ( that is not based on protected expressions ) . This observation has great importance as far as the scope of the derivative right and its intersection with the reproduc - tion right are concerned . This Article argues that the reproduction right should apply only to mere reproductions , which are inherent - ly uncreative and therefore qualitatively different from derivative or original works . 387 To illustrate this point , consider the following example . As - suming that the literary masterpiece The Catcher in the Rye 388 is an original work that is creative under copyright law , there are three different alternatives for works based on this work . One alternative is the making of a literary work whose main character is a sixteen - year - old teenager who runs away from home to the big city and reaches important notions about the life of adults during his jour - ney . This work would probably be considered original under copy - right law because it only uses the general underlying idea in the original work , and would also be considered creative under the cognitive approaches presented above . Another alternative is the making of a literary work entitled “60 Years Later : Coming Through the Rye , ” which presents the relationship between Mr . C . ( a reference to Holden Caulfield ) and the 90 - year - old author 387 A reservation is appropriate here . There obviously are reproductive actions , in copyright terms , that use explicit copyrighted expressions without adding original expressions to them which are very creative in the cognitive behavioral sense . One example is the use of an expression while changing its mode of presentation or presenting it in a different context that gives it new meaning . These activities are typically allowed under the fair use doctrine . This Article does not focus on the interrelations between fair use and reproduction , but it seems that the fair use doctrine sufficiently accounts for the cognitive notions regarding the creativity of such activities . 388 See generally J . D . S ALINGER , C ATCHER IN THE R YE ( Little , Brown & Co . 1951 ) . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 347 who created his character and refers to specific scenes from the original work . 389 This work would fall under the category of deriva - tive works because it uses explicit expression from the original work and contributes additional originality . It would also be consi - dered creative under the cognitive approaches that view the re - combination of prior knowledge as part of creativity . A third alter - native would be a literal repeat of the original work’s text while changing the name of the main character Holden Caulfield to James Sheffield . Under copyright law , this is considered a repro - duction despite the marginal changes . In contrast to the two first alternatives , the third option is not considered creative under the cognitive approaches because it is an exact restoration of know - ledge without any other creative components . This example illustrates the gap between the legal categories and the cognitive understanding of creativity . The cognitive psy - chology approaches do not distinguish between knowledge types such as ideas or expressions as a basis for creativity . They also do not distinguish between the uses of different knowledge types along the timeline of creativity—meaning , in the input , processing , or output stages of creativity . Copyright law , in contrast , is interested almost solely in the output stage and in the final creative product . At many points , there is a match between the cognitive under - standing of creativity and copyright law . Thus , as far as the use of any type of knowledge ( ideas or expression ) at the time of input and processing is concerned , copyright law allows such use because these stages of creativity are not governed . At the output stage , so long as the use of knowledge led to the creation of ideas or unpro - tected expressions ( whether they are in the public domain or al - lowed under the fair use doctrine ) , it is generally not considered an infringement under copyright law as well . The mismatch between copyright law and the cognitive under - standing of creativity is most strongly evident in the use of pro - tected expressions during the output stage of creativity . When this occurs during a creative activity that involves an original contribu - tion of the second author , a derivative work is sometimes made . 389 These were the facts that led to the decision in Salinger v . Colting , 607 F . 3d 68 ( 2d Cir . 2010 ) . 348 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 While the law distinguishes between a derivative work and an orig - inal work , under the cognitive understanding of creativity both are creative activities . In contrast , while the law makes almost no dis - tinction between derivative works and mere reproductions , the cognitive approaches to creativity view derivative works as part of creativity but not reproductions . It so happens that while the cogni - tive approaches to creativity views the use of prior expression in the output stage of creativity as an inherent part of the creative process , the legal doctrine sometimes prohibits this behavior and categorizes it as copyright infringement ( see Figure 1 ) . Figure 1 : The Components of the Creative Process Under Each of the Theories of Creativity 390 Components Idea Method Fact Expression Thought Education Technical Skill Aesthetic Criteria Analytical Skill Copyright Law Not Protected 391 Not Protected 392 Not Protected 393 Protected ( if original ) 394 Not Protected Sometimes Protected 395 Not Protected Sometimes Protected 396 Not Protected Wallas 397 390 The + sign in this table indicates that , under the relevant stage and the relevant approach , the knowledge type in the specific column is being used . Empty cells indicate that the relevant knowledge type is not being used . 391 See 17 U . S . C . § 102 ( b ) ( 2012 ) . 392 See id . 393 See id . 394 See id . 395 Knowledge acquired through education may sometimes be a protected expression . For example , a painter that studies the cubism style and acquires knowledge about the visual way in which Picasso expressed the minotaur figure is acquiring knowledge of an explicit expression . If the painter uses Picasso’s minotaur figure as part of his acquired education , he uses a protected expression . 396 Aesthetic criteria are often considered as methods , facts , or abstract ideas that are not copyrightable . Nevertheless , aesthetic criteria at their early stages in a specific creative field may be considered as explicit copyrightable expression . This is the case when a second author wishes to use explicit expressions from a previous work in the same field because of the aesthetic value he attaches to them . For example , assuming the Picasso was the first to express the female body in a non - proportional way in which the organs are presented as cubes , it is possible to think of such an expression as copyrightable . A second author who applies this aesthetic criterion may be using a protected expression . Whether this would be considered a use of expression or a use of a mere idea depends of the level of abstraction in which the idea / expression dichotomy is referred to . 397 See generally W ALLAS , supra note 33 . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 349 Preparation + + + + + Incubation + + Illumination + + Validation + + + + + + + Amabile 398 Preparation + + + + + + + Response Generation + + + Response Validation + + + + + + Task - relevant Skills + + + + + + Creativity - relevant Skills + + + Runco 399 Problem Presentation + Ideation + + + + + + + + Evaluation + + + + + + + Declarative Knowledge + + + Procedural Knowledge + + + + + + Guilford 400 Evaluation + + + + + + + Cognition + + + Generation + + + + + + + Gabora 401 Unfocused Thought + + Focused Thought + + + + + + + Finke 402 Generate + + + + + Explore + + To illustrate the spectrum of the match between the cognitive process of creation and copyright law , this Article returns to the Cather in the Rye example . 403 The match between copyright law and 398 See generally A MABILE , C ONTEXT , supra note 48 . 399 See generally Runco & Chand , supra note 74 . 400 See generally G UILFORD , supra note 102 . 401 See generally Gabora , supra note 111 . 402 See generally F INKE , W ARD & S MITH , supra note 121 . 403 See generally S ALINGER , supra note 388 . 350 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 the cognitive approaches to creativity is reflected by the fact that the law allows making future works based upon Salinger’s book in different ways . Thus , it is possible to make another book that tells the story of a teenager going through complex adolescence in which he critically looks at adult life without it constituting copy - right infringement . Such a work would rely substantially on prior knowledge of various types such as ideas , education , and aesthetic criteria from the first work . A different type of use that reflects the match between copyright law and the cognitive approaches to crea - tivity is the use of explicit plot lines from the original work during the input and processing phases , so long as the output does not in - clude these expressions . Copyright law also allows the use of expli - cit scenes and plot lines , and even the character of Holden Caul - field , to express a different mode of expression that substantially changes their original meaning . Under the fair use doctrine , it would probably be permissible to use the character of Holden Caul - field and plot lines from the book to criticize the oppression of mi - norities in a certain country without it constituting copyright in - fringement . This would also allow reliance on prior knowledge . The mismatch between copyright law and the cognitive approaches to creativity exists when explicit protected expressions are used to make a new work of authorship—a sequel , for example . This was the case in Salinger v . Colting , where the court ruled that a sequel used explicit expressions from it and therefore infringed Salinger’s copyrights . 404 This Article argues that , in order to relax the tension between the legal doctrine and the cognitive approaches to creativity , it is first necessary to completely separate the reproduction right from the derivative work right . Second , in order to create a full match between the legal doctrine and the cognitive approaches to creativi - ty , a shift in the remedies regime is warranted . This Article does not argue that these changes to the legal doctrine are justified solely by the cognitive understanding of creativity ; they are also justified by intra - legal normative justifications to copyright law , which could not be discussed here . This Article does , however , argue that such changes could better fit the creative behavior of human beings and 404 See 607 F . 3d 68 , 83 ( 2d Cir . 2010 ) . 2017 ] RECREATING COPYRIGHT 351 that , if normatively justified , they should replace the current doc - trine which does not fit the behavior it governs . C ONCLUSION There is a mismatch between important copyright law doc - trines and the cognitive understanding of creativity . Specifically , this Article focuses on the distinction between derivative works and original works , and the idea / expression dichotomy . To subs - tantiate this claim , it discusses theoretical approaches to creativity as well as empirical and historical studies that focus on the process of creation . Under all approaches to creativity , the creative process could be divided into two main processes . The first is unfocused thought in which abstract ideas are generated . The second refers to the process of crystallization of the unfocused thought into con - crete perceivable products using task - relevant knowledge and memory . Both explicitly and through a suggested reading of the literature , theoretical approaches to creativity view both ideas and expressions as knowledge components that are inherent to the cre - ative process . These notions from the cognitive psychology of creativity dis - course assist in portraying several potential implications for copy - right law . This Article explains that one implication could apply to the originality requirement in copyright law in that the analysis should shift from the originality of a work as a whole to the original - ity of its specific components , which courts often do already . It also suggests that post - modern approaches which require an idea of original contribution of an individual author are not consistent with the cognitive process of creation . While the cognitive understand - ing of creativity shows that many components of the creative process are based on prior knowledge , it also acknowledges a signif - icant independent contribution of the author . This Article’s main goal is to articulate the argument that the distinction copyright law makes between derivative works ( based on protected expressions ) and original works ( based on ideas and unprotected expressions ) is an intra - legal normative distinction and is not based on any justification inherent to creativity . In this sense , this Article argued that there is no qualitative difference between 352 FORDHAM INTELL . PROP . MEDIA & ENT . L . J . [ Vol . XXVII : 287 original works and derivative works under the cognitive approaches to creativity . Likewise , the idea / expression dichotomy also finds no justification in creativity . Therefore , if the distinction between de - rivative works and original works is merely a normative legal one , the mismatch between creativity and the law could justify a more careful evaluation of the normative intra - legal justifications to cop - yright law . Such evaluation will be developed in future research .