Clamped - Filament Elongation Model for Actin - Based Motors Richard B . Dickinson * and Daniel L . Purich † Department of * Chemical Engineering , University of Florida College of Engineering , and † Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology , University of Florida College of Medicine , Gainesville , Florida 32610 - 0245 USA ABSTRACT Although actin - based motility drives cell crawling and intracellular locomotion of organelles and certain pathogens , the underlying mechanism of force generation remains a mystery . Recent experiments demonstrated that Listeria exhibit episodes of 5 . 4 - nm stepwise motion corresponding to the periodicity of the actin filament subunits , and extremely small positional fluctuations during the intermittent pauses [ S . C . Kuo and J . L . McGrath . 2000 . Nature . 407 : 1026 – 1029 ] . These findings suggest that motile bacteria remain firmly bound to actin filament ends as they elongate , a behavior that appears to rule out previous models for actin - based motility . We propose and analyze a new mechanochemical model ( called the “Lock , Load & Fire” mechanism ) for force generation by means of affinity - modulated , clamped - filament elongation . During the locking step , the filament’s terminal ATP - containing subunit binds tightly to a clamp situated on the surface of a motile object ; in the loading step , actin (cid:1) ATP monomer ( s ) bind to the filament end , an event that triggers the firing step , wherein ATP hydrolysis on the clamped subunit attenuates the filament’s affinity for the clamp . This last step initiates translocation of the new ATP - containing terminus to the clamp , whereupon another cycle begins anew . This model explains how surface - tethered filaments can grow while exerting flexural or tensile force on the motile surface . Moreover , stochastic simulations of the model reproduce the signature motions of Listeria . This elongation motor , which we term actoclampin , exploits actin’s intrinsic ATPase activity to provide a simple , high - fidelity enzymatic reaction cycle for force production that does not require elongating filaments to dissociate from the motile surface . This mechanism may operate whenever actin polymerization is called upon to generate the forces that drive cell crawling or intracellular organelle motility . INTRODUCTION The cytoskeleton plays an indispensable role in cell motility ( Bray , 1992 ; Stossel , 1993 ) . In the case of actin - based motility , Peskin et al . ( 1993 ) offered the first model attempt - ing to explain how polymerizing actin filaments might rectify the Brownian motion of an object to produce a unidirectional force . Their original “Brownian ratchet” model assumed the filaments were stiff , such that thermal fluctuations affected only the object being propelled . Be - cause the thermal fluctuations of the motile object are too small to produce the observed motions , Mogilner and Oster ( 1996 ) later proposed the Elastic Brownian Ratchet model in which the thermal motions of the polymerizing filaments collectively produce a directed force . Both models require untethered filament ends at a surface for the free energy of monomer addition to generate a force . Because the intracellular and in vitro motility of Listeria monocytogenes appears to reproduce all of the key features of actin - based motility in nonmuscle cells , this microorgan - ism has become a widely studied model system . Through the use of a high - resolution , laser - tracking technique to study the detailed motions of Listeria in Cos7 cells , Kuo and McGrath ( 2000 ) reached the following conclusions : 1 ) mo - tile bacteria move with extremely small Brownian fluctua - tions ( (cid:1) 0 . 1 nm ) , suggesting a tight force balance between compressed and taut actin filaments in the actin tail tethered to the bacterial surface ; and 2 ) in a manner reminiscent of molecular motors , Listeria trajectories exhibited 5 . 4 - nm steps , corresponding to the subunit periodicity of actin fil - aments . Because filaments appeared to elongate at the bac - terial surface while tethered , Kuo and McGrath argued against Brownian Ratchet models that required filament elongation and force generation by free filament ends that fluctuate away from the surface of the motile object ( here - after referred to as the motile surface ) . They also proposed that the forward force due to elongating flexed filaments is resisted by a few taut filaments , upon which bacteria appear to “slip” to reveal the 5 . 4 - nm periodicity . Based on the extremely small intermittent fluctuations observed between steps , Kuo and McGrath estimated a stiffness that would require a minimum force of 220 pN to displace the bacterium by 5 . 4 nm . These small fluctuations appeared to resume immediately after each 5 . 4 - nm step , a finding that we take as evidence that the bond between the tethering apparatus ( hereafter referred to as the “clamp” ) and the taut lagging filaments must have been stressed by a force of similar magnitude during each pause . Such forces are extremely large for noncovalent bonds , exceeding even the force needed to break avidin’s highly affine bond for biotin ( K d (cid:2) 10 (cid:3) 13 M ) on a similar time scale ( Merkel et al . 1999 ) . Therefore , considering the large force apparently applied on the lagging filament , the observed (cid:2) 10 - s (cid:3) 1 “slip - rate” is unexpectedly slow . Moreover , if stepwise mo - tion arises from rate - limiting advancement of a clamp on a lagging filament , and if such a large force were to accelerate clamp advancement , episodes of stepwise motion would not Submitted May 23 , 2001 ; and accepted for publication September 28 , 2001 . Address reprint requests to Daniel L . Purich , Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology , Univ . Florida College of Medicine , Gainesville , FL 32610 - 0245 . Tel . and Fax : 352 - 392 - 1546 ; E - mail : dlpurich @ biochem . med . ufl . edu . © 2002 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 02 / 02 / 605 / 13 $ 2 . 00 605 Biophysical Journal Volume 82 February 2002 605 – 617 endure . Despite this apparently strong filament - to - clamp bond , filaments under compression nonetheless grow rap - idly , exhibiting elongation rates comparable to the diffu - sion - limited rate of monomer addition ( Pollard et al . , 2000 ) . For filaments to remain tethered and for persistent stepwise motion to be revealed , the rate of clamp progression along a filament obviously cannot exceed the monomer addition rate . We take the fact that the clamp progresses at a rate close to , but not exceeding , the diffusion - limited monomer addition rate as evidence for an affinity - modulated mecha - nism , whereby new monomer addition somehow triggers a new cycle of release and advancement of the clamp . In such a mechanism , substantial energy would be required to at - tenuate the initially strong clamp - to - filament affinity and allow efficient clamp advancement and force generation on compressively flexed filaments . Assuming filament elongation generates the force driving actin - based motility , then spontaneous , irreversible , and rapid filament growth requires the free energy change for monomer addition and clamp advancement to exceed the work needed to advance the clamp against an opposing force . The free energy change upon monomer addition alone is (cid:3) kT ln ( [ A ] / [ A ] ( (cid:4) ) critical ) , where k is Boltzmann’s con - stant , T is the absolute temperature , [ A ] is the actin mono - mer concentration , and [ A ] ( (cid:4) ) critical is the critical actin con - centration of the ( (cid:4) ) end . In previous actin - based motility models , large energy changes ( e . g . , 4 . 6 – 6 . 2 kT per mono - mer based on 10 – 50 (cid:1) M ( Mogilner and Oster , 1996 ) and 14 kT per monomer ( Noireaux et al . , 2000 ) ) were assumed for calculating the substantial predicted forces . Because most of the intracellular unpolymerized actin is sequestered by thy - mosin - (cid:2) 4 , however , the free actin (cid:1) ATP is only 3 – 10 (cid:5) [ A ] ( (cid:4) ) critical ( Stossel , 1993 ) ; the resultant 1 – 2 kT per mono - mer could only sustain filament growth against forces of no more than 1 . 5 – 3 . 5 pN . In myosin - based motility , ATP hydrolysis plays a central role in the mechanochemistry of force generation , and the same is true for dynein - and kinesin - based motility ( Khan and Sheetz , 1997 ; Scholey et al . , 1985 ) . Actin filaments serve as a passive scaffold to and from which myosin attaches and detaches ( Rayment et al . , 1996 ) , and microtu - bules do the same for dynein and kinesin motors . Even so , actin - bound ATP and tubulin - bound GTP hydrolyze during actin filament and microtubule self - assembly ( MacNeal and Purich , 1978 ; Stossel , 1993 ) . If the free energy of actin - bound ATP hydrolysis could be harnessed for work , 20 kT per monomer would be immediately available , assuming intracellular [ ATP ] / [ ADP ] of 10 and [ P i ] at 2 mM . Com - plete transduction of this chemical - bond energy into work could sustain a force of nearly 32 pN per filament . Cooke ( 1975a , b ) demonstrated that hydrolysis is not required for monomer addition , because p ( NH ) ppA , a nonhydrolyzable ATP analog , supports filament assembly with little change in the critical concentration . It is known , however , that ATP hydrolysis is required for opposite - end filament assembly / disassembly ( “treadmilling” ) by modifying the plus - and minus - end critical concentrations ( Wegner and Engel , 1975 ) . Because [ A ] ( (cid:3) ) critical is approximately 10 (cid:5) [ A ] ( (cid:4) ) critical ( Wegner , 1982 ) , this difference in affinity re - quires only 2 . 3 kT , or (cid:2) 10 % of the total energy available from ATP hydrolysis . These observations raise important new questions : How can filaments continue to elongate , while remaining strongly teth - ered to the surface ? If tethering limits the forward motion , as suggested by Kuo and McGrath ( 2000 ) , what advantage is gained by such a strong binding interaction between filaments and bacterial surface ? Can a single growth rule explain rapid elongation of tethered filaments under either a strong tensile force ( for taut filaments ) or a strong compressive force ( for flexed filaments ) ? How might an ensemble of elongating fil - aments lead to the signature stepwise motion with extremely small fluctuations during intermittent pauses ? Finally , beyond the increment of energy required for treadmilling , what be - comes of the remaining 90 % of energy released during hydro - lysis of filament - bound actin (cid:1) ATP ? To address these and related issues , we propose a novel clamped - filament elongation mechanism that links force generation to affinity - modulated clamp interactions relying on the free energy of filament - bound ATP hydrolysis . In this cyclic process , a clamp remains locked onto an ATP - containing filament subunit until loading of new actin (cid:1) ATP monomer ( s ) triggers ATP hydrolysis on the clamped sub - unit . The energy of ATP hydrolysis is transduced into a conformational change that attenuates filament affinity for the clamp , thereby allowing filament translocation and re - locking of the clamp onto newly added ATP - containing subunits at or near the filament terminus . The model pre - dicts force generation by surface - tethered , elongating fila - ments , even while under an opposing force , in a manner that reproduces the stepwise motion of Listeria . To our knowl - edge , this model is the first biophysical description of a molecular motor coupled directly to ATP hydrolysis during filament elongation . MODEL DESCRIPTION Clamped - filament growth We have developed a model to explain how filaments can elongate while remaining strongly tethered to the motile surface , and how filament growth can generate a motile force . Shown in Fig . 1 is our model for a surface - bound , affinity - modulated clamp motor that is mechanochemically coupled to ATP hydrolysis during filament elongation . We refer to this mechanism as the “Lock , Load , & Fire” model , because it entails : locking of a surface - bound clamp onto the terminal actin (cid:1) ATP subunit on the actin filament ; loading of new actin (cid:1) ATP monomers onto the terminus ; and firing ( i . e . , hydrolysis ) of ATP in the clamped subunit ( s ) to attenuate clamp affinity for the filament . This last step initiates clamp 606 Dickinson and Purich Biophysical Journal 82 ( 2 ) 605 – 617 translocation and relocking onto terminal ATP - containing subunits , whereupon another three - step cycle begins anew . In Fig . 1 , the high - affinity and low - affinity binding sites are represented by deep and shallow potential energy wells , respectively . The mean total time required for one cycle , in which the clamp advances 5 . 4 nm , is therefore the time T m required for addition and ATP hydrolysis on two mono - mers , plus the mean time (cid:3) required for shifting and relock - ing onto the new terminus . ( See Table 1 for definitions of symbols and parameters . ) Growing filaments remain con - tinuously tethered to the motile surface , and the energy of penultimate ATP hydrolysis enables essential conforma - tional changes that attenuate clamp - to - filament binding en - ergy . When the opposite ends of the filament are firmly immobilized in a cross - linked filament network ( e . g . , the “rocket” tail of motile Listeria ) , filament elongation will increase filament flexural force on the motile surface ( Fig . 2 ) . This simple growth rule for monomer addition , ATP hydrolysis , and clamp / filament translocation defines a re - petitive enzymatic cycle of clamped - filament elongation and force generation . Force generation For actin polymerization to generate a force , elongation must proceed even when the filament exerts a substantial FIGURE 1 The Lock , Load & Fire model for a clamped - filament elongation motor . ( a ) Essential features are a surface - tethering domain and an affinity - modulated clamp . The role of the other components is specified in the text . This diagram illustrates the Locking ( or high - affinity binding ) of the clamp onto ATP - containing subunits at the filament end . [ Note : Although not explicitly treated in this model , profilin ( light blue circles ) is likely to facilitate monomer addition by concentrating actin (cid:1) ATP complex within the polymerization zone ( see Discussion ) . ] ( b ) The reaction begins with a clamped filament , the energy status of which is schematically represented by a green circle in the deep potential energy well situated immediately below the terminal actin (cid:1) ATP ( red subunits ) . Other shallow energy wells , located at 5 . 4 - nm intervals along the filament , correspond to the greatly attenuated clamp affinity for actin (cid:1) ADP (cid:1) Pi or actin (cid:1) ADP ( both shown as blue subunits ) within the filament . Each cycle of filament growth includes : 1 ) Loading of new ATP - containing monomers onto the filament end , a process that is schematically represented by the two additional red monomers and the unoccupied deep potential energy well positioned immediately below them ; 2 ) Firing , wherein ATP hydrolysis attenuates clamp - binding affinity , as indicated by the conversion of a deep energy well to a shallow energy well ; 3 ) Shifting and relocking , which includes the diffusive translocation and subsequent binding of the new filament end to the clamp ( now shown as the green circle in the deep , terminal potential energy well ) . A Clamped - Filament Elongation Motor 607 Biophysical Journal 82 ( 2 ) 605 – 617 flexural force on the surface . In this respect , each cycle of new monomer addition and translocation performs mechan - ical work ( i . e . , a force acting through a distance ) . In our model , ATP hydrolysis drives this process by creating an energy difference between the clamp bound to penultimate actin (cid:1) ADP versus the clamp bound to terminal actin (cid:1) ATP . The rate of clamp translocation is determined by the energy landscape over the 5 . 4 - nm distance between the two sites . Lacking the details of this landscape , a simple , self - consis - tent treatment is to assume a flat energy landscape between the shallow energy well ( weak - or nonbinding ) at the hy - drolyzed site and an infinitely deep well ( irreversible bind - ing ) at the adjacent nonhydrolyzed site . The transition in clamp position between the two wells is treated as one - dimensional diffusion of the free filament end ( with diffu - sivity , D f ) over the 5 . 4 - nm distance d to fall immediately and irreversibly into the deep energy well . Depending on whether the filament is tense or flexed , this diffusion is either facilitated by the tensile force on a taut filament or opposed by the flexural force on a compressed filament . The time required for this displacement can be calculated as the mean time for the filament end to diffuse on the domain z 1 (cid:4) z (cid:1) z 1 (cid:4) d , starting at z 1 and reaching its instantaneous rebinding site at z 1 (cid:4) d . We assumed a Hookean force – distance relationship , F ( z ) (cid:6) (cid:3) (cid:5) ( z (cid:3) z 0 ) , where (cid:5) and z 0 are the stiffness and equilibrium position , respectively . By con - straining the filament to move on a flat energy landscape only in the z - direction between z 1 and z 1 (cid:4) d , we avoid making assumptions about the unknown details of intermo - lecular forces between the filament and the clamp . Our assumption of a reflective barrier at z 1 requires a pawl - like effect preventing the clamp from retreating toward subunits more distal from the filament terminus ; such an effect could simply be created sterically by added monomers terminal to clamp , thereby preventing filament backsliding . For a com - pressed filament , the mean time (cid:3) for the filament to shift this distance under the compressive force F ( z ) from the position z 1 to the perfect sink at z 1 (cid:4) d is shown in the Appendix to be (cid:3)(cid:6) 1 D f (cid:1) z 1 z 1 (cid:4) d d xe (cid:5) ( x (cid:3) z 0 ) 2 / 2kT (cid:1) z 1 x d ye (cid:3) (cid:5) ( y (cid:3) z 0 ) 2 / 2kT (cid:6) kT (cid:5) D f (cid:2) (cid:7) (cid:1) x 0 x 1 d xe x 2 (cid:7) erf (cid:8) x (cid:9) (cid:8) erf (cid:8) x 0 (cid:9)(cid:10) , ( 1 ) where x 0 (cid:11) (cid:12) (cid:5) / 2 kT ( z 1 (cid:3) z 0 ) and x 1 (cid:11) (cid:12) (cid:5) / 2 kT ( z 1 (cid:4) d (cid:3) z 0 ) . The more general treatment of a filament under either FIGURE 2 Illustration of typical filament states of an ensemble of elongating clamped filaments , with opposite ends anchored within a cross - linked network . Because filaments elongate independently , they exist in various states of monomer loading , elongation , compression , and tension . Each three - step elongation cycle increases the compressive force of the leading flexed filaments onto the motile surface , or relieves tension on taut lagging filaments . The motile surface advances when a force imbalance occurs , often resulting in discrete steps when the most lagging filament advances . TABLE 1 Definition of symbols and parameters Symbol Parameters [ A ] Actin monomer concentration [ A ] critical Macroscopic critical actin monomer concentration [ A ] ( (cid:4) ) critical Microscopic critical actin monomer concentration for plus end [ A ] ( (cid:3) ) critical Microscopic critical actin monomer concentration for minus end b Diameter of actin filament d Subunit spacing of an actin filament ( 5 . 4 nm ) D f Filament diffusivity D s Diffusivity of motile surface F Force on filament end F drag Drag force on motile surface k Boltzmann’s constant L “Tube length” of actin filament n T Instantaneous number of filaments under tension N Number of filaments tethered to motile surface R Radius of curvature of tail - generating region on Listeria T Absolute temperature T m Combined mean time for monomer - loading and ATP - hydrolysis steps v s Instantaneous velocity of motile surface W Work required to shift filament end a distance of 5 . 4 nm z Position variable for filament end during clamp shift z 0 Equilibrium position for filament end z 1 Position of filament end at instant of clamp dissociation z s Position of motile surface (cid:9) f Coefficient of drag on filament (cid:10) Viscosity of fluid between filaments (cid:5) Stiffness of filament under compression (cid:5) T Stiffness of filament under tension (cid:11) p Persistence length of actin filament (cid:3) Mean time for filament to shift one subunit following clamp dissociation (cid:3) rel Relaxation time for position fluctuations of motile surface between shifts (cid:12) Mean spacing between filaments near motile surface 608 Dickinson and Purich Biophysical Journal 82 ( 2 ) 605 – 617 tension or compression ( or the transition between these two states ) is presented in the Appendix . Irreversible binding at z 1 (cid:4) d assumes that the difference between the binding energies of the clamp on the ADP - versus ATP - subunits ( estimated to be up to 39 kT from the available free energy of hydrolysis of two subunits ) is much larger than the work of clamp translocation . As shown in the Results section , we predict appreciable filament elongation rates up to (cid:2) 12 pN of opposing force , corresponding to a maximal clamp - translocation work of about 16 kT . Because this maximal work is much less than the 39 kT of energy available from ATP hydrolysis , it is unnecessary to treat the clamp - translocation reaction as reversible ; therefore , no ex - plicit accounting for the energy of ATP hydrolysis is re - quired . Stochastic simulations To determine whether our model can faithfully generate the signature stepwise progression and small fluctuations re - ported by Kuo and McGrath ( 2000 ) , we simulated the stochastic motion of a motile surface by accounting for the elastic and viscous forces associated with N independent tethered filaments acting in parallel . As illustrated in Fig . 2 , each filament i was assumed to experience its own degree of compression / tension , depending on its hypothetical equilib - rium end position , z 0 , i , relative to the position z s of the motile surface . This Hookean spring force is given by F i (cid:6) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:5) T (cid:7) z 0 , i (cid:8) z s (cid:10) z s (cid:13) z 0 , i (cid:3) (cid:5) (cid:7) z 0 , i (cid:8) z s (cid:10) z s (cid:13) z 0 , i ( 2 ) where (cid:5) T and (cid:5) are the filament stiffnesses under tension or compression , respectively . The clamp advancement corre - sponded to a shift in z 0 , i by a distance d and was assumed to occur with a uniform probability per unit time , 1 / ( T m (cid:4) (cid:3) ) , where (cid:3) was calculated from Eq . 1 , using updated instanta - neous values of z s and z 0 , i . Although this treatment com - bines the sequential events of monomer addition , hydroly - sis , and shifting of the clamp position into a single event , such an assumption only affects the waiting - time distribu - tion between clamp translocations , not the mean time . A more detailed treatment , which must await experimental determination of the sequential steps and rate constants involved in monomer addition and induced hydrolysis , is beyond the immediate scope of this treatment . Ignoring other viscous resistance ( see Discussion ) , we only account for the viscous drag of the individual tethered filaments ( see Discussion ) , each contributing a coefficient of drag , (cid:9) f (cid:6) kT / D f . We did not account for other contri - butions to viscous drag on the motile surface , which would require specifying unknown geometric details . Assuming that inertia of the motile surface is negligible compared to viscous forces , the motion of the motile surface can be described by the stochastic differential equation , dz s (cid:6) v s dt (cid:14) (cid:2) 2 D s dW t , ( 3 ) where v s (cid:6) ( 1 / N (cid:9) f ) ¥ i (cid:6) 1 N F i is the instantaneous determin - istic velocity of the motile surface , D s (cid:6) kT / N (cid:9) f (cid:6) D f / N is its effective diffusivity , and dW t is an increment in the Wiener process ( (cid:13) dW t (cid:14) (cid:6) 0 , (cid:13) dW t2 (cid:14) (cid:6) dt ) . Eq . 3 was numer - ically integrated using the Euler algorithm ( Gardiner , 1985 ) with a time increment , (cid:15) t , chosen by considering the char - acteristic relaxation time of the motile surface , (cid:3) rel (cid:6) N (cid:9) f / [ n T (cid:5) T (cid:4) ( N (cid:3) n T ) (cid:5) ] , where n T is the instantaneous number of filaments under tension . For the simulations shown here , the time increment was chosen as about one - tenth of the relaxation time for a single trailing filament , or 0 . 5 (cid:1) s for 80 filaments . dW was simulated using MATLAB’s normally distributed psuedorandom number generator ( Mathworks , Inc . , Natick , MA ) . Increases in z 0 , i were made when MAT - LAB’s routine for uniform pseudorandom number genera - tion on the interval [ 0 , 1 ] successfully yielded values less than (cid:15) t / ( T m (cid:4) (cid:3) ) . The initial equilibrium positions of fila - ment ends were randomly distributed over a 60 - nm range , and the initial value of z s in the simulation was taken as the initial mechanical equilibrium position ( where ¥ i (cid:6) 1 N F i (cid:6) 0 ) of this distribution . A histogram of the filament strain dis - tribution ( z 0 , i (cid:3) z s ) was tracked over time and found to evolve to an apparent steady - state distribution within a simulation time of several T m . This distribution quickly stabilized because elongation rates of leading filaments be - gan to stall under larger compression , and forward progres - sion was limited by a few taut lagging filaments . It should be evident from Eq . 3 that the motion of the motile surface , resulting from the collective action of the ensemble of independent filaments , need not progress only by 5 . 4 - nm steps when clamps on individual filaments translocate . In fact , clamp translocation on compressed filaments has only a small effect on motile - surface displacement . The motile surface advances by 5 . 4 - nm steps only when the clamp on a single taut filament translocates , whereby the mechanical equilibrium position shifts by approximately 5 . 4 nm . When more than one filament is under tension , clamp transloca - tion on filaments under tension results in smaller steps ( see Results and Discussion ) . Parameter estimation The key model parameters necessary in the model are T m , D f , (cid:5) , and (cid:5) T . D f and (cid:5) were estimated from statistical mechanical theory for semiflexible chains in semidilute solutions . A semiflexible actin filament segment of length L can be approximated as a Hookean spring with longitudinal stiffness (cid:5) (cid:6) kT (cid:11) p2 / L 4 where (cid:11) p is the filament persistence length ( Isambert and Maggs , 1996 ) . Near the motile surface , where filament crowding is expected to be important , L A Clamped - Filament Elongation Motor 609 Biophysical Journal 82 ( 2 ) 605 – 617 represents the tube length , defined as the characteristic distance between collisions of a filament with neighboring filaments . This parameter can be estimated from the mean spacing between filaments (cid:12) , as L (cid:16) (cid:12) 4 / 5 (cid:11) p1 / 5 ( Isambert and Maggs , 1996 ) . Unless otherwise noted , we estimate (cid:11) p (cid:6) 15 (cid:1) m ( Gittes et al . , 1993 ) and (cid:12) (cid:6) 100 nm ( assuming roughly 100 filaments crowded behind a motile bacterium’s hemi - spherical pole of radius R (cid:6) 400 nm and surface area 2 (cid:7) R 2 (cid:6) 10 6 nm 2 ) , to calculate values of L (cid:6) 270 nm and (cid:5) (cid:6) 0 . 17 pN / nm . Note that thermal fluctuations reduce the filament’s equilibrium length from the full length to a mean square end - to - end distance of 2 (cid:11) p [ L (cid:3) (cid:11) p ( 1 (cid:3) e (cid:3) L / (cid:11) p ) ] ( Doi and Edwards , 1986 ) . For parameters used above , the root - mean - square end - to - end distance is less than 1 nm away from its full length ; therefore strain under tension can be assumed entirely due to stretching of the filament itself . We use an experimental value for the stretch stiffness (cid:5) T (cid:6) 60 pN / nm ( Higuchi et al . , 1995 ) . The diffusivity of the filament segment is approximated by the rigid rod diffusivity , D f (cid:6) kT ln ( L / b ) / ( 4 (cid:7)(cid:10) L ) (cid:16) 4 (cid:5) 10 6 nm 2 / s ( Go¨tter et al . , 1996 ) where the filament diameter b is taken as 7 nm ( Janmey et al . , 1990 ) , and the interstitial fluid viscosity (cid:10) is taken as that of water ( 10 (cid:3) 9 pN - s / nm 2 ) . Our assumption of constant parameters , D f and (cid:5) , requires that the cross - linked actin network that anchors filament ends distal to the motile surface advances continuously with z s , such that the tube length used to estimate these parameters remains constant . As shown under Results , the mean relocking time (cid:3) after firing of uncompressed filaments is predicted to be much shorter than typical experimentally observed times required for tethered filaments to elongate by 5 . 4 nm . Consequently , the model predicts that filament elongation must be rate - limited by the monomer - addition and ATP - hydrolysis steps , such that the motile surface progresses at an average rate approximately equal to d / T m . Elongation rates during actin - based motility typically range from (cid:2) 0 . 05 to 1 (cid:1) m / s ( Stossel 1993 ; Southwick and Purich , 1994 ) , setting the range of T m values from 0 . 1 s down to 0 . 005 s . RESULTS Force effects on elongation rate The mean time for a clamp translocation to occur ( called the mean relocking time , (cid:3) ) as a function of applied force preceding the shift is plotted in Fig . 3 A . The results are shown for various values of the mean filament spacing , (cid:12) , which determines the effective filament diffusivity and compressive stiffness . It can be shown by asymptotic anal - ysis of Eq . 1 that , for larger compressive forces (cid:5) ( z 1 (cid:3) z 0 ) (cid:17)(cid:17) (cid:12) (cid:5) kT , (cid:3) increases with an approximate exponential dependence on the translocation work , W (cid:6) (cid:5) [ ( z 1 (cid:3) z 0 ) d (cid:4) 1 ⁄ 2 d 2 ] , which is approximately equal to (cid:5) ( z 1 (cid:3) z 0 ) d , when ( z 1 (cid:3) z 0 ) (cid:17)(cid:17) d . Therefore , W is effectively the transition - state energy for the clamp - translocation event . Unless the compressive force is greater than (cid:2) 6 – 8 pN , the mean relocking time (cid:3) is predicted to be much smaller than the typical observed times required for filaments to elongate 5 . 4 nm during actin - based motility . Consequently , if velocities in actin - based motility are limited by the elongation rates of lagging filaments ( those not under strong compression ) , a self - consistent conclusion is that the mean speed of the motile surface is limited primarily by monomer addition / ATP - hydrolysis ( i . e . , by T m rather than by (cid:3) ) . These times , and the total mean time (cid:3) (cid:4) T m for a complete cycle of loading , firing , and relocking , are plotted in Fig . 3 A . Here , we have used an intermediate value of T m ( i . e . , 0 . 027 s ) based on an assumed maximal elongation rate d / T m of 200 nm / s . The force - dependent elongation rates ( corresponding to the mean shift times in Fig . 3 A ) are shown in Fig . 3 B . Long shift times at higher forces have the effect of stalling elongation . Over the range of filament spacing values shown ( i . e . , 50 nm (cid:1) (cid:12) (cid:1) 125 nm ) , filament growth is predicted to stall only when the compressive force greatly exceeds (cid:2) 8 pN . The model predicts a force - independent growth rate for smaller opposing forces , where growth is limited only by T m . The clamped - filament elongation rate should remain unimpeded for significant opposing forces , thereby allowing the filament to exert up to several pN of flexural force onto the motile surface . Simulation of actin - based motility The signature stepwise progression and small fluctuations reported by Kuo and McGrath ( 2000 ) have been faithfully reproduced in our simulations of a motile surface propelled by a large number of filaments that obey the Lock , Load , & Fire mechanism . Simulated trajectories of the motile surface are shown in Fig . 4 A for a system of 80 clamped filaments and maximal filament growth rates of 50 and 200 nm / s . These trajectories represent a short time interval of a longer trajectory , taken after the steady - state distribution of fila - ment equilibrium lengths relative to z s was established . As a consequence of the reduced filament growth rate under large compressive forces and the lagging filaments limiting the velocity , the mean velocity of the surface was (cid:2) 80 – 90 % of the maximal filament growth rate , d / T m . Consistent with the experimental observations by Kuo and McGrath ( 2000 ) , the simulated motion exhibited step - wise progression with small fluctuations during intermittent pauses ( Fig . 4 A ) . When the long - time trajectories ( 10 s of total simulated time after reaching steady state ) were ana - lyzed in terms of their pair - wise displacements , we obtained a distribution ( Fig . 4 B ) displaying major peaks equally spaced at 5 . 4 - nm intervals . The power spectrum of this pairwise frequency distribution ( Fig . 4 C ) exhibited a major peak situated at 0 . 18 nm (cid:3) 1 ( the reciprocal of the 5 . 4 - nm periodicity ) ; additional peaks are spaced at intervals of (cid:2) n / 5 . 4 nm (cid:3) 1 ( where n (cid:6) 1 , 2 , 3 , . . . ) . This simulation therefore shows the same strong 0 . 18 - nm (cid:3) 1 peak and a 610 Dickinson and Purich Biophysical Journal 82 ( 2 ) 605 – 617 smaller 0 . 36 - nm (cid:3) 1 peak observed by Kuo and McGrath ( 2000 ) , who noted that smaller peaks at higher frequencies in the experiments would have been obscured by measure - ment noise . The location of the peaks in the power spectrum can be understood in terms of the steps resulting from various states of filament compression / tension . The 5 . 4 - nm steps correspond to the release and relocking of a single lagging filament under tension , with the other filaments remaining under compression throughout the step . Addi - tional peaks in the power spectrum correspond to smaller 5 . 4 / n - nm fractional step sizes , which resulted from a vari - able number of trailing filaments under tension . For exam - ple , a discrete 2 . 7 - nm step occurred when one of only two tense filaments shifted . During the simulated time evolution of filament growth , the number of filaments under tension varied slowly ; extended episodes occurred where only one or two filaments were tense , and episodes with three or more tense filaments were rare . As indicated by the spectra in Fig . 4 C , doubling the number of filaments increased the weight of the higher frequency peaks . However , simulations consistently showed that the filament number did not sig - nificantly affect the overall mean speed of the motile sur - face , as expected when the speed is limited only by clamp translocation rate of the most lagging filament ( s ) . Because all filaments remain tethered to the surface , the model also predicts that the strong compressive force ex - erted by multiple flexed filaments balances the correspond - ingly large tension on a few lagging filaments . The total stiffness of motile surface between steps was (cid:5) eff (cid:6) n T (cid:5) T (cid:4) ( N (cid:3) n T ) (cid:5) , which resulted in small positional fluctuations ( kT / (cid:5) eff ) 1 / 2 (cid:2) 0 . 1 – 0 . 2 nm , depending on the instantaneous number of trailing filaments . The magnitude of these fluc - tuations was consistent with the very small fluctuations observed with motile Listeria ( Kuo and McGrath , 2000 ) . Simulations were repeated for several different filament numbers and for different values of the filament stiffness and diffusivity . These parameters did not appreciably influ - ence the mean speed of the motile surface , which was primarily determined by d / T m . Whenever (cid:5) T (cid:17)(cid:17) (cid:5) , stepwise motion with 5 . 4 - nm increments and small fluctuations dur - ing intermittent pauses consistently appeared . DISCUSSION The Lock , Load , & Fire mechanism for actin - based motility treats the force - producing step as a consequence of an affinity - modulating ATP - hydrolysis reaction linked directly to filament elongation . The scheme explains how tethered filaments can continue to elongate unhindered while under moderate compressive forces ( less than (cid:2) 8 pN / filament ) and still remain tethered while elongating under a large tensile force . Our model - based simulations faithfully pre - dict both the signature step - wise motions and the very small positional fluctuations observed by Kuo and McGrath ( 2000 ) . We therefore suggest that this model , or some closely related variant , describes the force - producing pro - cess in actin - based motility . Beyond those properties already considered , our model also predicts other significant features of a clamped - fila - ment elongation motor . First , except for large opposing forces ( (cid:17) 6 – 10 pN / filament ) , the motility rate should be limited only by the composite rate constant for monomer loading and ATP hydrolysis ( loading and firing ) ; it is the latter process that relieves the tension exerted on the lagging filament ( s ) . Second , the model predicts that filament elon - gation should stall only when large compressive forces are exerted on the filament . Third , the model anticipates a weak dependence , if any , of the motility rate on the number of filaments propelling the motile surface . Fourth , the model FIGURE 3 Predicted motile properties of a motor operating by the Lock , Load , & Fire mechanism . ( A ) Plot of the mean time and ( B ) resultant growth rates for one filament - elongation cycle versus applied force . Curves are shown for various values of the mean filament spacing (cid:12) , which influences the effective filament diffusivity and stiffness . The total mean time ( solid blue lines ) for monomer addition ( loading ) , ATP hydrolysis ( firing ) , and clamp translocation ( relocking ) is the sum of the force - dependent mean relocking time (cid:3) ( solid red lines ) and the force - indepen - dent mean time to load and fire T m ( horizontal dashed red line ) . A Clamped - Filament Elongation Motor 611 Biophysical Journal 82 ( 2 ) 605 – 617 simulations could reproduce experimentally consistent mo - tile behavior without invoking the viscous properties of the surrounding medium or the mechanical properties of the surrounding actin network , beyond those factors affecting filament orientation , effective stiffness , and filament - end diffusivity . Supporting these predictions is the consistent finding that Shigella moves as fast as Listeria , despite the fact that Shigella is nearly twice as large and contains fewer filaments in its rocket tail ( Zeile et al . , 1996 ; Suzuki et al . , 1996 ) . Also , the motility rates of both microorganisms does not appear to correlate with the viscosity of the surrounding medium , whether it is the cytoplasm of intact cells or in diluted cell extracts . Several simplifying assumptions facilitated analysis of the clamped - filament growth model and allowed us to avoid specifying the details of the motile surface . For example , we have assumed a parallel array of filaments , consistent with the filament orientations observed within filipodia and in Listeria rocket tails ( Sechi et al . , 1997 ) . Also , we expect tethered filaments to be swept into alignment by the strong action of the other filaments pushing the motile surface . We also chose not to account for any force - induced dissociation of filaments from the clamp , dissociation of the clamp from the motile surface , or breakage of filaments under tension , although we expect these effects to be small based on the experimentally observed persistent stepwise motion of Lis - teria ( Kuo and McGrath , 2000 ) . We also have not explicitly accounted for any filament binding interactions that may affect the assumed stiffness or mobility of filament seg - ments in the neighborhood of the clamp / surface . In this respect , we recognize that other filament side - binding pro - teins ( e . g . , tropomyosin , cofilin , etc . ) may modulate the filament’s mechanical properties . We have also neglected viscous interactions beyond those of the tethered filaments , which avoids consideration of the hydrodynamic profile of the propelled object or specifying other viscous resistance to the motion . We estimate that the effective viscosity of the surrounding medium would have to be roughly ten times larger than the interstitial fluid viscosity for the drag on a propelled object ( 400 - nm radius ) to exceed the drag caused FIGURE 4 ( A ) Simulated trajectories exhibiting stepwise motions with small positional fluctuations during intermittent pauses for two different maximal filament growth rates , d / T m (cid:6) 50 nm / s and 200 nm / s . The red lines show 5 . 4 - nm steps corresponding to the subunit periodicity of actin filaments . ( B ) Distribution of pairwise displacements from a 10 - s simulation ( d / T m (cid:6) 200 nm / s ) . The major peaks are indicative of pauses spaced predominantly at 5 . 4 - nm intervals , reflecting the monomer - sized steps taken as a single lagging filament shifts by one register . ( C ) Power spectrum of the pairwise frequency distribution . Note the major peaks of decreasing magnitude spaced at 0 . 18 - nm (cid:3) 1 intervals . These peaks measure the periodicity in the pairwise frequency distribution that resulted from discrete 5 . 4 / n - nm steps , where n (cid:6) 1 , 2 , 3 . Peaks corresponding to n (cid:17) 2 resulted from episodes where n lagging filaments under tension balanced the compressive forces of the other leading filaments . When a lagging filament is released from a clamp , its tension is transferred to the remaining n (cid:3) 1 filaments , resulting in a 5 . 4 / n - nm step . Also shown is a spectrum for a simulation carried out with 160 filaments for the same parameter values ( dashed line ) , exhibiting larger peaks at higher spatial frequencies due to an increased number of fractional steps when more filaments act on the surface . Other than its effect on the step - size distribution , the filament number did not significantly affect the long - time mean speed of the motile surface , which was limited by the advancement of the most - lagging filament ( s ) . 612 Dickinson and Purich Biophysical Journal 82 ( 2 ) 605 – 617 by 80 tethered filaments . In any case , the magnitude of viscous drag only affects the relaxation time of positional fluctuations , without altering the key characteristics of the trajectories on a longer time scale ( i . e . , the magnitude of the fluctuations , the stepwise motion , and the mean velocity ) . Finally , as in previous biophysical models ( Noireaux et al . , 2000 ; Mogilner and Oster , 1996 ) of actin - based motility , we have taken an admittedly coarse - grained approach of esti - mating the stiffness and mobility of filaments from theories for semiflexible worm - like chains in semidilute solution , thus avoiding detailed modeling of filament dynamics and filament – filament interactions . Exclusion of these compli - cations does not compromise the key conclusions of sus - tained filament elongation under a large force and step - wise motion with small fluctuations during intermittent pauses . In our model , the energy of rapid ATP hydrolysis fol - lowing monomer addition reduces the binding affinity of the clamp on the penultimate subunit , thereby creating a bind - ing energy differential between the low - affinity penultimate binding site and the high - affinity terminal site . This energy differential is the thermodynamic driving force for irrevers - ible shifting of the clamp to the new terminal end . The most straightforward way to model this process was to treat the shift as “diffusion” of the filament between the two clamp - binding sites . On an energy landscape of the clamp – filament interaction , binding - site dimensions were considered small compared to 5 . 4 nm . Moreover , lacking actual rate constants , we assumed that clamp dissociation from actin (cid:1) ATP was negligibly slow ( corresponding to an infi - nitely deep energy well ) on the relevant time scale , whereas clamp dissociation from actin (cid:1) ADP was assumed to be fast . Therefore , the energy of ATP hydrolysis is implicitly ac - counted for in the boundary conditions for the differential equation ( Appendix ) whose solution is shown in Eq . 1 . The hydrolysis energy was taken to be large enough to convert a deep potential well into a shallow well at the penultimate site , and to make rebinding at the terminal site irreversible . In the absence of details of the energy landscape , our approach reasonably predicts the rate - dependence of clamp advancement on a filament under an opposing force . We have not specified the precise step in the pathway from ATP hydrolysis to phosphate release where the clamp - binding affinity is attenuated . In principle , this could occur at one of at least three stages : conversion of filament - bound actin (cid:1) ATP to form filament - bound actin (cid:1) ADP (cid:1) P i ; conversion of filament - bound actin (cid:1) ATP to form filament - bound actin * (cid:1) ADP (cid:1) P i ( where the * indicates stored conformational energy ) , followed by conversion to actin (cid:1) ADP (cid:1) P i ; and con - version of filament - bound actin (cid:1) ADP (cid:1) P i to form actin (cid:1) ADP ( with the release of phosphate ) . Recent studies on the crystal structure of actin (cid:1) ADP complex suggest a model for how P i - release after ATP hydrolysis may change the actin pro - tein conformation and its dynamics during filament assem - bly ( Otterbein et al . , 2001 ) . Because their structural studies were carried out with actin monomer , it remains to be determined if the same is true for actin units in a filament . Our assumption that actin - bound ATP hydrolysis attenu - ates the affinity of filament - to - clamp interaction remains to be experimentally verified . Nevertheless , there is ample precedence in the cytoskeletal and signal - transduction liter - ature for modulation of protein – protein binding affinity through hydrolysis of nucleoside 5 (cid:18) - triphosphates ( Purich , 2001 ) . For example , ATP hydrolysis attenuates actin mono - mer affinity for filament ends and binding interactions be - tween adjacent subunits in an assembled filament ( Pollard , 1986a , b ; Pollard et al . , 2000 ) . In this case and in our model , the high - affinity state is the nucleoside 5 (cid:18) - triphosphate - containing subunit . A similar type of affinity modulation occurs in GTP - dependent microtubule assembly / disassem - bly , with tubulin (cid:1) GDP exhibiting much lower affinity for microtubule ends than tubulin (cid:1) GTP ( Karr et al . , 1979 ; Purich and Southwick , 1999 ) . Finally , the regulatory action of many G - proteins is thought to be affinity modulated in a similar manner ( Vale , 1996 ; Purich , 2001 ) . Treating the filament shift as a diffusion - limited process assumes that the work of the relocking step exceeds the energy of any peaks in the free energy landscape between the binding positions . If the energy of a transition barrier exceeds this work at some intermediate distance (cid:15) (cid:1) d , then the energy barrier is predicted to increase with compression by (cid:5) ( z 1 (cid:3) z 0 (cid:4) (cid:15) ) (cid:15) , making (cid:3) scale with exp [ (cid:5) ( z 1 (cid:3) z 0 (cid:4) (cid:15) ) (cid:15) / kT ] , rather than with exp [ (cid:5) ( z 1 (cid:3) z 0 (cid:4) d / 2 ) d / kT ] . Con - sequently , as observed in studies of force - dependent bond breakage ( Merkel et al . , 1999 ) , different exponential depen - dencies on force may arise at different regimes of compres - sive force . Such considerations await additional details about the energy landscape of clamp - to - filament interaction and its transitions . In any case , such variations to the model would not alter the prediction of an exponential dependence of the mean relocking time on the applied force . Because we have neglected the viscous drag of the motile surface itself , no net work attends its translation , and the energy of ATP hydrolysis ( beyond that needed for tread - milling ) is ultimately dissipated as heat . This feature is neither unexpected nor unreasonable given the fact that , for example , the work required to translate a bacterium at a nominal speed of 200 nm / s is 5 – 6 orders of magnitude less than the energy released in ATP hydrolysis on 80 tethered filaments in the actin - rich rocket tail during the motion . In the absence of a significant resisting force , the energy of ATP hydrolysis is instead expended to establish tensegrity at the motile surface due to the force balance between leading and lagging filaments . However , by providing up to 8 pN per filament without stalling , ATP hydrolysis could yield far more than enough force than would be needed , for example , to drive a motile bacterium unimpeded through highly viscous regions within the cytoplasm . This feature may explain the smooth trajectories of Listeria in time - lapse video microscopy ( Dabiri et al . , 1990 ) . How the energy of A Clamped - Filament Elongation Motor 613 Biophysical Journal 82 ( 2 ) 605 – 617 ATP hydrolysis ultimately dissipates into heat depends on whether a filament is compressed or under tension . When under compression , the energy of hydrolysis drives the filament to reach a new state of greater flexure , such that the chemical energy is temporarily converted to mechanical energy . In contrast , when a filament is under tension , the hydrolysis - induced clamp release results in a sudden force imbalance between the flexural and tensile forces within the ensemble . This imbalance allows the motile surface to pro - ceed in a forward motion that is resisted by the viscous drag of the other tethered filaments until the forces are again rebalanced . This action converts a portion of the accumu - lated mechanical energy of the flexed filaments into heat by viscous dissipation , leaving the rest to be lost as heat in later steps . Whenever elongation becomes uncoupled from clamp advancement , as would be expected in the case of in vitro actin polymerization , chemical - bond energy released during ATP hydrolysis will be dissipated directly as heat . If the Lock , Load , & Fire mechanism is the main route for actin polymerization in living cells , then penultimate hydrolysis should make ADP the predominant nucleotide in actin filaments . A virtue of this affinity - modulated mechanism is that the clamp - to - filament bond is main - tained throughout all steps in the motile process , even when actin (cid:1) ATP monomers are scarce or unavailable . The phenomenon of penultimate hydrolysis was first ob - served with microtubules and served as the basis for boundary - stabilization during microtubule assembly / dis - assembly ( Karr et al . , 1979 ) . In this case , newly added tubulin (cid:1) GTP dimers induce hydrolysis of GTP on the penultimate tubulin dimers in a microtubule ( Purich and Angelastro , 1994 ; Purich and Southwick , 1999 ; O’Brien et al . , 1987 ) . Although there is limited evidence concern - ing penultimate hydrolysis during actin filament assem - bly , Angelastro and Purich ( 1994 ) determined that the ATP and ADP content of actin filaments isolated intact from PC12 cells , neuroblastoma cells , rat embryonic dorsal root ganglion neurons , and their measurements were consistent with the presence of only a few actin (cid:1) ATP molecules on the ( (cid:4) ) ends of actin filaments . They suggested that new monomer addition somehow facilitates ATP hydrolysis on the neighboring or penul - timate actin subunit of filaments assembling within cells . In the absence of affinity - modulated clamps , in vitro actin assembly is known to permit the accumulation of more actin (cid:1) ATP molecules on the ( (cid:4) ) ends . Because fil - ament severing by gelsolin and related proteins should result in the formation of unclamped filaments , one can - not discount the likely accumulation of actin (cid:1) ATP mole - cules on unclampled filament ends . Our model effectively treats penultimate ATP hydro - lysis as a fast first - order isomerization ( actin (cid:1) ATP 3 actin (cid:1) ADP (cid:1) P i ) that is triggered by addition of the new actin (cid:1) ATP at the filament end . If the rate constant for ATP hydrolysis did not greatly exceed the rate constant for monomer addition , then hydrolysis would not occur strictly on penultimate subunits . This circumstance could lead to an accumulation of multiple actin (cid:1) ATP subunits on the terminal side of the clamp , to the extent allowed by steric constraints . Provided that terminal actin (cid:1) ATP subunits hydrolyze slowly relative to the rate of adding new monomers , the clamp will still tether the filament to the surface . However , two lines of evidence weigh against slower exponential ATP hydrolysis on subunits on the terminal side of the clamp : 1 ) clamp advancement proceeds at a rate comparable to the diffusion - limited monomer - addition rate , suggesting that the processes are coupled , such that monomer addition triggers prompt hydrolysis ; and 2 ) uncoupled ATP - hydrolysis on subunits terminal with respect to the clamp position would be expected to occasionally result in step skipping , whereby the clamp shifts past a number of weak - binding actin (cid:1) ADP subunits that have already undergone hydro - lysis . The latter feature was not evident in trajectories of Kuo and McGrath ( 2000 ) . In any case , our model can be readily extended to deal with the possibility of hydro - lyzed subunits terminal to the clamp by accounting for the individual events of monomer addition and hydrolysis and clamp translocation over distances corresponding to steps over multiple subunits ( i . e . , 5 . 4 nm , 10 . 8 nm , 16 . 2 nm , etc . ) . Finally , one cannot exclude the possibility that the clamp’s association with the filament end would lead to accelerated penultimate ATP hydrolysis , analogous to the 50 – 200 - times enhancement of myosin ATPase activ - ity in the presence of assembled actin filaments ( Cooke , 1975a ) . Recent investigations suggest that two related families of proteins may serve as building blocks for the affinity - modulated clamps proposed in our model . First , Dro - sophila Ena ( Gertler et al . , 1995 ) and mammalian vaso - dilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) ( Bachmann et al . , 1999 ) are the founding members of the Ena / VASP family that also includes Mena , Avena , RNB6 , and the Ena / VASP - like protein known as Evl . These actin - regu - latory proteins are found associated with actin filaments in focal adhesions and highly dynamic membrane regions undergoing filipodium formation , lamellipodium exten - sion , and various forms of ruffling . The C - terminal EVH1 domain anchors VASP onto the motile surface of membrane - protrusion sites or at the trailing pole of mo - tile intracellular pathogens such as Listeria ( Niebuhr et al . , 1997 ; Southwick and Purich , 1996 ) , Shigella ( Suzuki et al . , 1996 ; Laine et al . , 1997 ) , and vaccinia ( Zeile et al . , 1998 ) . The central proline - rich domains bind profilin and profilin (cid:1) actin (cid:1) ATP , which likely facilitates monomer loading in our proposed mechanism . The EVH2 domain , which is the likely filament - binding domain in our model , lacks any recognizable ATP - binding motif found in other motor proteins . Bachmann et al . ( 1999 ) found that human VASP contains an F - actin binding domain 614 Dickinson and Purich Biophysical Journal 82 ( 2 ) 605 – 617 ( residues 259 – 276 ) , which resembles the C - terminal re - gion in the filament side - binding protein villin . Second , Wiscott – Aldrich sydrome protein ( WASP ) and its neuro - nal analog N - WASP are distantly related to the Ena / VASP family ( Reinhard et al . , 2001 ) . N - WASP is known to be essential for Shigella ( Mimuro et al . , 2000 ) and vaccinia motility ( Frischknecht et al . , 1999 ) . It is also significant that both WASP and N - WASP contain N - terminal EVH1 domains , centrally located proline - rich domains , and verprolin - homology regions and C - terminal cofilin homology domains . Like villin , cofilin is known to bind with high affinity to the surface of actin fila - ments , and the presence of a cofilin homology region in WASP and N - WASP suggests an attractive means for assembling an affinity - modulated clamp . Although it is too early to know how affinity - modulated clamps are assembled , the structural features of these actin - regula - tory proteins provide promising hints about some of the essential binding interactions . We stress that other actin - regulatory proteins , beyond those described above , may also be involved in the active motor unit , and future studies must address the minimal components required for motor assembly and activity . Clamped - filament growth is reminiscent of DNA polymer - ase processivity ( Kuriyan and O’Donnell , 1993 ; Bloom et al . , 1996 ) , a kinetic phenomenon that improves polymerization efficiency by keeping a polymerase in contact with its biopoly - mer substrate throughout multiple catalytic rounds ( McClure and Chow , 1980 ) . Our proposed mechanism anticipates an initial clamp - loading step that generates the high - affinity in - teraction between the clamp and its elongating filament . The Arp2 / 3 complex may fulfill this role in at least two ways : first by nucleating new filaments , such that terminal subunit ATP hydrolysis is prevented , and second by loading ATP - contain - ing nuclei onto empty clamps . Listeria ActA is known to activate Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin nucleation , but further work is also needed to learn whether these nuclei contain actin (cid:1) ATP and precisely how ActA – Arp2 / 3 binding might facilitate the insertion of polymerization nuclei in empty clamps . Recent investigations suggest that Arp2 / 3 complex must be supplied continuously to maintain actin - based motility ( Pollard et al . , 2000 ) , and , by controlling the supply of polymerization nuclei , Arp2 / 3 may be a critical component for regulating the activity of our putative clamped - filament elongation motor . In summary , our proposed model is consistent with published observations of actin - based motility and the properties of actin and known cytoskeletal proteins . The clamped - filament growth model involves force - genera - tion by surface - tethered filaments and successfully pre - dicts the small fluctuations and stepwise motions as the collective action of an ensemble of clamped filaments . In contrast to apparently similar motions of stepper - type molecular motors ( e . g . , myosin , dynein , and kinesin ) , this characteristic behavior arises from the forward force generated by the leading filaments after the release and translocation of a lagging filament on its clamp . To identify this putative motor complex , we offer the name actoclampin , a composite of two root words and a suffix : “acto - ” ( from actin , as in acto myosin ) (cid:4) “clamp” ( mean - ing a clasping device used for strengthening flexible / moving objects and for securely fastening two or more components ) (cid:4) “in” ( designating its protein origin ) . The actoclampin motor would be unique among known mo - lecular motors in that hydrolysis of filament - bound actin (cid:1) ATP is predicted to modulate the clamp binding strength to promote filament elongation and force pro - duction simultaneously . APPENDIX In this Appendix , we derive the mean time for the filament end to shift a distance , d , to rebind to the clamp . The filament end is assumed to be subjected to a force , F ( z ) , and fluctuates in position with characteristic diffusivity , D f . The Fokker – Planck equation for the probability density , p ( z , t (cid:4) z (cid:18) , 0 ) , is given by (cid:15) p (cid:7) z , t (cid:4) z (cid:18) , 0 (cid:10) (cid:15) t (cid:6) (cid:3) (cid:15) (cid:15) z (cid:5) D f kT F (cid:7) z (cid:10) p (cid:7) z , t (cid:4) z (cid:18) , 0 (cid:10) (cid:14) D f (cid:15) p (cid:7) z , t (cid:4) z (cid:18) , 0 (cid:10) (cid:15) z (cid:6) , ( A1 ) where z is the filament end position at time t , and z (cid:18) is the position at time zero . The force on the filament end due to compression and tension is given by F (cid:7) z (cid:10) (cid:6) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:5) T (cid:7) z (cid:8) z 0 (cid:10) z (cid:16) z 0 (cid:3) (cid:5) (cid:7) z (cid:8) z 0 (cid:10) z (cid:13) z 0 , ( A2 ) where z 0 is the hypothetical equilibrium filament - end position . As shown in Gardiner ( 1985 ) the mean exit time (cid:3) , from the interval z 1 (cid:1) z (cid:1) z 1 (cid:4) d , is governed by the differential equation D f kT F (cid:7) z (cid:18) (cid:10) d (cid:3) d z (cid:18) (cid:14) D f d 2 (cid:3) d z (cid:18) 2 (cid:6) (cid:3) 1 ( A3 ) with boundary conditions , ( d (cid:3) / d z ) (cid:4) z 1 (cid:6) 0 and (cid:3) ( z 1 (cid:4) d ) (cid:6) 0 . The solution is (cid:3)(cid:6) 1 D f (cid:1) z 1 z 1 (cid:4) d d x (cid:17) (cid:3) 1 (cid:7) x (cid:10) (cid:1) z 1 x d y (cid:17) (cid:7) y (cid:10) , ( A4 ) where (cid:17) (cid:7) x (cid:10) (cid:6) exp (cid:5) (cid:1) z 1 x d zF (cid:7) z (cid:10) kT (cid:6) (cid:6) (cid:7) exp (cid:8) (cid:5) T ( z 0 (cid:3) z 1 ) 2 2 kT (cid:9) exp (cid:8) (cid:3) (cid:5) (cid:7) x (cid:8) z 0 (cid:10) 2 2 kT (cid:9) for z 1 (cid:4) z 0 (cid:4) x exp (cid:8) (cid:5) T (cid:7) z 0 (cid:8) z 1 (cid:10) 2 2 kT (cid:9) exp (cid:8) (cid:3) (cid:5) T (cid:7) x (cid:8) z 0 (cid:10) 2 2 kT (cid:9) for z 1 (cid:4) x (cid:16) z 0 exp (cid:8) (cid:5) (cid:7) z 0 (cid:8) z 1 (cid:10) 2 2 kT (cid:9) exp (cid:8) (cid:3) (cid:5) (cid:7) x (cid:8) z 0 (cid:10) 2 2 kT (cid:9) for z 0 (cid:16) z 1 . ( A5 ) A Clamped - Filament Elongation Motor 615 Biophysical Journal 82 ( 2 ) 605 – 617 Carrying out the integrals yields (cid:3) (cid:6) (cid:2) (cid:7) D f (cid:7) (cid:18) 2 (cid:1) x 1 x 2 d xe x 2 (cid:7) erf (cid:8) x (cid:9) (cid:8) erf (cid:8) x 1 (cid:9)(cid:10) for z 1 (cid:13) z 0 (cid:18) T2 (cid:1) (cid:3) x 2 (cid:3) x 1 d xe x 2 (cid:7) erf (cid:8) (cid:3) x 1 (cid:9) (cid:8) erf (cid:8) x (cid:9)(cid:10) for z 1 (cid:14) d (cid:16) z 0 (cid:18) T2 (cid:1) 0 (cid:3) x 1 d xe x 2 (cid:7) erf (cid:8) (cid:3) x 1 (cid:9) (cid:8) erf (cid:8) x (cid:9)(cid:10) (cid:14) (cid:1) 0 x 2 d xe x 2 (cid:8) (cid:18) T (cid:18) erf (cid:8) (cid:3) x 1 (cid:9) (cid:14) (cid:18) 2 erf (cid:8) x (cid:9)(cid:9) for z 1 (cid:16) z 0 (cid:16) z 1 (cid:14) d , ( A6 ) where (cid:18) (cid:10) (cid:2) kT (cid:5) , (cid:18) T (cid:10) (cid:2) kT (cid:5) T , and the integral limits are given by x 1 (cid:6) (cid:7) (cid:7) z 1 (cid:8) z 0 (cid:10) (cid:2) 2 (cid:18) for z 1 (cid:13) z 0 (cid:7) z 1 (cid:8) z 0 (cid:10) (cid:2) 2 (cid:18) T for z 1 (cid:16) z 0 and x 2 (cid:6) (cid:7) (cid:7) z 1 (cid:8) z 0 (cid:14) d (cid:10) (cid:2) 2 (cid:18) for z 1 (cid:14) d (cid:13) z 0 (cid:7) z 1 (cid:8) z 0 (cid:14) D (cid:10) (cid:2) 2 (cid:18) T for z 1 (cid:14) d (cid:16) z 0 . Note Added in Proof : After submitting our manuscript , we became aware of the report by Lindberg et al . ( 1981 ) , who were probably the first to glimpse the actoclampin motor in electron micrographs of the leading edge of motile glial cells . They proposed that profilin (cid:1) actin complex is the immediate precursor for filaments that assemble into membrane - associated “organizing units” during motility . Hajkova et al . ( 2000 ) also reported that covalently cross - linked profilin (cid:1) actin ( abbreviated : P (cid:5) A ) promptly arrests all actin - dependent motility upon microinjection into cultured cells . We take their observation of P (cid:5) A - induced trapping of actin filaments on the peripheral membrane’s inner surface as an indication that the actoclampin motor advances and locks onto P (cid:5) A , thereby arresting motility by steri - cally blocking filament elongation . If P (cid:5) A proves to be a potent substoi - chiometric motility inhibitor , such an observation would essentially verify our assumption that each force - producing filament is bound to the motile surface by means of an affinity - modulated clamp . This investigation was supported in part by grants from the University of Florida’s Biomedical Engineering Program and Office of Research and Graduate Education . We also thank our colleagues Brian Burgess , Frederick Southwick , Robert Cohen , and William Zeile for helpful discussions . REFERENCES Angelastro , J . M . , and D . L . Purich . 1994 . Phosphorylation states of actin filament adenine nucleotides in detergent - extracted neuronal cytoskel - etal fractions . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 201 : 1490 – 1494 . Bachmann , C . , L . Fischer , U . Walter , and M . Reinhard . 1999 . The EVH2 domain of the vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein mediates tetramer - ization , F - actin binding , and actin bundle formation . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 23549 – 23557 . Bloom , L . B . , J . Turner , Z . Kelman , J . M . Beechem , M . O’Donnell , and M . F . Goodman . 1996 . Dynamics of loading the beta sliding clamp of DNA polymerase III onto DNA . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 30699 – 30708 . Bray , D . 1992 . Cell Movements . Garland Publishing , Inc . , New York . Cooke , R . 1975a . The bound nucleotide of actin . J . Supramol . Struct . 3 : 146 – 153 . Cooke , R . 1975b . The role of the bound nucleotide in the polymerization of actin . Biochemistry . 14 : 3250 – 3256 . Dabiri , G . A . , J . M . Sanger , D . A . Portnoy , and F . S . Southwick . 1990 . Listeria monocytogenes moves rapidly through the host - cell cytoplasm by inducing directional actin assembly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 87 : 6068 – 6072 . Doi , M . , and S . F . Edwards . 1986 . The Theory of Polymer Dynamics . Clarendon Press , Oxford , U . K . Frischknecht , F . , V . Moreau , S . Rottger , S . Gonfloni , I . Reckmann , G . Superti - Furga , and M . Way . 1999 . Actin - based motility of vaccinia virus mimics receptor tyrosine kinase signalling . Nature . 401 : 926 – 929 . Gardiner , C . W . 1985 . Handbook of Stochastic Methods for Physics , Chemistry , and the Natural Sciences . Springer - Verlag , New York . Gertler , F . B . , A . R . Comer , J . L . Juang , S . M . Ahern , M . J . Clark , E . C . Liebl , and F . M . Hoffmann . 1995 . Enabled , a dosage - sensitive suppres - sor of mutations in the Drosophila Abl tyrosine kinase , encodes an Abl substrate with SH3 domain - binding properties . Genes Dev . 9 : 521 – 533 . Gittes , F . , B . Mickey , J . Nettleton , and J . Howard . 1993 . Flexural rigidity of microtubules and actin filaments measured from thermal fluctuations in shape . J . Cell . Biol . 120 : 923 – 934 . Go¨tter , R . , K . Kroy , E . Frey , M . Ba¨rmmann , and E . Sackmann . 1996 . Dynamic light scattering from semidilute actin solutions : a study of hydrodynamic screening , filament bending stiffness , and the effect of tropomyosin / troponin - binding . Macromolecules . 29 : 30 – 36 . Hajkova , L . , T . Nyman , U . Lindberg , and R . Karlsson . 2000 . Effects of cross - linked profilin : (cid:2) / (cid:19) - actin on the dynamics of the microfilament system in cultured cells . Exp . Cell Res . 256 : 112 – 121 . Higuchi , H . , T . Yanagida , and Y . E . Goldman . 1995 . Compliance of thin filaments in skinned fibers of rabbit skeletal muscle . Biophys . J . 69 : 1000 – 1010 . Isambert , H . , and A . Maggs . 1996 . Dynamics and rheology of actin solutions . Macromolecule . 29 : 1036 – 1040 . Janmey , P . A . , S . Hvidt , G . F . Oster , J . Lamb , T . P . Stossel , and J . H . Hartwig . 1990 . Effect of ATP on actin filament stiffness . Nature . 347 : 95 – 99 . Karr , T . L . , A . E . Podrasky , and D . L . Purich . 1979 . Participation of guanine nucleotides in nucleation and elongation steps of microtubule assembly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 76 : 5475 – 5479 . Khan , S . , and M . P . Sheetz . 1997 . Force effects on biochemical kinetics . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 66 : 785 – 805 . Kuo , S . C . , and J . L . McGrath . 2000 . Steps and fluctuations of Listeria monocytogenes during actin - based motility . Nature . 407 : 1026 – 1029 . Kuriyan , J . , and M . O’Donnell . 1993 . Sliding clamps of DNA polymerases . J . Mol . Biol . 234 : 915 – 925 . Laine , R . O . , W . Zeile , F . Kang , D . L . Purich , and F . S . Southwick . 1997 . Vinculin proteolysis unmasks an ActA homolog for actin - based Shigella motility . J . Cell Biol . 138 : 1255 – 1264 . Lindberg , U . , A . S . Ho¨glund , and R . Karlsson . 1981 . On the ultrastructural organization of the microfilament system and the possible role of pro - filactin . Biochimie . 63 : 307 – 323 . MacNeal , R . K . , and D . L . Purich . 1978 . Stoichiometry and role of GTP hydrolysis in bovine neurotubule assembly . J . Biol . Chem . 253 : 4683 – 4687 . McClure , W . R . , and Y . Chow . 1980 . The kinetics and processivity of nucleic acid polymerases . Methods Enzymol . 64 : 277 – 297 . 616 Dickinson and Purich Biophysical Journal 82 ( 2 ) 605 – 617 Merkel , R . , P . Nassoy , A . Leung , K . Ritchie , and E . Evans . 1999 . Energy landscapes of receptor – ligand bonds explored with dynamic force spec - troscopy . Nature . 397 : 50 – 53 . Mimuro , H . , T . Suzuki , S . Suetsugu , H . Miki , T . Takenawa , and C . Sasakawa . 2000 . Profilin is required for sustaining efficient intra - and intercellular spreading of Shigella flexneri . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 28893 – 28901 . Mogilner , A . , and G . Oster . 1996 . Cell motility driven by actin polymer - ization . Biophys . J . 71 : 3030 – 3045 . Niebuhr , K . , F . Ebel , R . Frank , M . Reinhard , E . Domann , U . D . Carl , U . Walter , F . B . Gertler , J . Wehland , and T . Chakraborty . 1997 . A novel proline - rich motif present in ActA of Listeria monocytogenes and cy - toskeletal proteins is the ligand for the EVH1 domain , a protein module present in the Ena / VASP family . EMBO J . 16 : 5433 – 5444 . Noireaux , V . , R . M . Golsteyn , E . Friederich , J . Prost , C . Antony , D . Louvard , and C . Sykes . 2000 . Growing an actin gel on spherical sur - faces . Biophys . J . 78 : 1643 – 1654 . O’Brien , E . T . , W . A . Voter , and H . P . Erickson . 1987 . GTP hydrolysis during microtubule assembly . Biochemistry . 26 : 4148 – 4156 . Otterbein , L . R . , P . Graceffa , and R . Dominguez . 2001 . The crystal structure of uncomplexed actin in the ADP state . Science . 293 : 708 – 711 . Peskin , C . S . , G . M . Odell , and G . F . Oster . 1993 . Cellular motions and thermal fluctuations : the Brownian ratchet . Biophys . J . 65 : 316 – 324 . Pollard , T . D . 1986a . Assembly and dynamics of the actin filament system in nonmuscle cells . J . Cell Biochem . 31 : 87 – 95 . Pollard , T . D . 1986b . Rate constants for the reactions of ATP - and ADP - actin with the ends of actin filaments . J . Cell Biol . 103 : 2747 – 2754 . Pollard , T . D . , L . Blanchoin , and R . D . Mullins . 2000 . Molecular mecha - nisms controlling actin filament dynamics in nonmuscle cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 29 : 545 – 576 . Purich , D . L . 2001 . Enzyme catalysis : a new definition accounting for noncovalent substrate - and product - like states . Trends Biochem . Sci . 26 : 417 – 421 . Purich , D . L . , and J . M . Angelastro . 1994 . Microtubule dynamics : bioen - ergetics and control . Adv . Enzymol . Relat . Areas Mol . Biol . 69 : 121 – 154 . Purich , D . L . , and F . S . Southwick . 1999 . Energetics of nucleotide hydro - lysis in polymer assembly / disassembly : the cases of actin and tubulin . Methods Enzymol . 308 : 93 – 111 . Rayment , I . , C . Smith , and R . G . Yount . 1996 . The active site of myosin . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 58 : 671 – 702 . Reinhard , M . , T . Jarchau , and U . Walter . 2001 . Actin - based motility : stop and go with Ena / VASP proteins . Trends Biochem . Sci . 26 : 243 – 249 . Scholey , J . M . , M . E . Porter , P . M . Grissom , and J . R . McIntosh . 1985 . Identification of kinesin in sea urchin eggs , and evidence for its local - ization in the mitotic spindle . Nature . 318 : 483 – 486 . Sechi , A . S . , J . Wehland , and J . V . Small . 1997 . The isolated comet tail pseudopodium of Listeria monocytogenes : a tail of two actin filament populations , long and axial and short and random . J . Cell Biol . 137 : 155 – 167 . Southwick , F . S . , and D . L . Purich . 1996 . Intracellular pathogenesis of listeriosis . N . Engl . J . Med . 334 : 770 – 776 . Stossel , T . P . 1993 . On the crawling of animal cells . Science . 260 : 1086 – 1094 . Suzuki , T . , S . Saga , and C . Sasakawa . 1996 . Functional analysis of Shigella VirG domains essential for interaction with vinculin and actin - based motility . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 21878 – 21885 . Vale , R . D . 1996 . Switches , latches , and amplifiers : common themes of G proteins and molecular motors . J . Cell Biol . 135 : 291 – 302 . Wegner , A . 1982 . Treadmilling of actin at physiological salt concentra - tions . An analysis of the critical concentrations of actin filaments . J . Mol . Biol . 161 : 607 – 615 . Wegner , A . , and J . Engel . 1975 . Kinetics of the cooperative association of actin to actin filaments . Biophys . Chem . 3 : 215 – 225 . Zeile , W . L . , R . C . Condit , J . I . Lewis , D . L . Purich , and F . S . Southwick . 1998 . Vaccinia locomotion in host cells : evidence for the universal involvement of actin - based motility sequences ABM - 1 and ABM - 2 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 95 : 13917 – 13922 . Zeile , W . L . , D . L . Purich , and F . S . Southwick . 1996 . Recognition of two classes of oligoproline sequences in profilin - mediated acceleration of actin - based Shigella motility . J . Cell Biol . 133 : 49 – 59 . A Clamped - Filament Elongation Motor 617 Biophysical Journal 82 ( 2 ) 605 – 617