Article Bleb Expansion in Migrating Cells Depends on Supply of Membrane from Cell Surface Invaginations Graphical Abstract Highlights d Migrating zebraﬁsh PGCs allows for in vivo study of cellular protrusions d Rapid expansion of bleb - type protrusions required for cell motility occurs locally d Bleb expansion requires the unfolding of membrane invaginations as a membrane source d The formation of plasma membrane invaginations depends on Cdc42 Authors Mohammad Goudarzi , Katsiaryna Tarbashevich , Karina Mildner , . . . , Michel Bagnat , Timo Betz , Erez Raz Correspondence erez . raz @ uni - muenster . de In Brief Blebs are cellular protrusions that play key roles in a range of physiological and disease processes . Employing the primordial germ cells of zebraﬁsh as an in vivo model for cell migration , Goudarzi et al . show that the rapid expansion of protrusions of this type depends on unfolding of membrane invaginations . Goudarzi et al . , 2017 , Developmental Cell 43 , 1 – 11 December 4 , 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Inc . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2017 . 10 . 030 Developmental Cell Article Bleb Expansion in Migrating Cells Depends on Supply of Membrane from Cell Surface Invaginations Mohammad Goudarzi , 1 Katsiaryna Tarbashevich , 1 Karina Mildner , 2 Isabell Begemann , 3 Jamie Garcia , 4 Azadeh Paksa , 1 Michal Reichman - Fried , 1 Harsha Mahabaleshwar , 1 Heiko Blaser , 5 Johannes Hartwig , 1 Dagmar Zeuschner , 2 Milos Galic , 3 Michel Bagnat , 4 Timo Betz , 1 and Erez Raz 1 , 6 , * 1 Institute for Cell Biology , ZMBE , Von - Esmarch - Strasse 56 , 48149 M € unster , Germany 2 Electron Microscopy Unit , Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine , Ro¨ntgenstrasse 20 , 48149 M € unster , Germany 3 Workgroup Nanoforces in Cells , Institute of Medical Physics und Biophysics , DFG Cluster of Excellence ’Cells in Motion’ ( EXC 1003 ) , Robert - Koch - Strasse 31 , 48149 M € unster , Germany 4 Department of Cell Biology , Duke University , 333B Nanaline Duke Building , Box 3709 , Durham , NC 27710 , USA 5 Germ Cell Development , Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry , Am Fassberg 11 , 37070 Go¨ttingen , Germany 6 Lead Contact * Correspondence : erez . raz @ uni - muenster . de https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2017 . 10 . 030 SUMMARY Cell migration is essential for morphogenesis , organ formation , and homeostasis , with relevance for clin - ical conditions . The migration of primordial germ cells ( PGCs ) is a useful model for studying this pro - cess in the context of the developing embryo . Zebra - ﬁsh PGC migration depends on the formation of cellular protrusions in form of blebs , a type of protru - sion found in various cell types . Here we report on the mechanisms allowing the inﬂation of the membrane during bleb formation . We show that the rapid expan - sion of the protrusion depends on membrane invag - inations that are localized preferentially at the cell front . The formation of these invaginations requires the function of Cdc42 , and their unfolding allows bleb inﬂation and dynamic cell - shape changes per - formed by migrating cells . Inhibiting the formation and release of the invaginations strongly interfered with bleb formation , cell motility , and the ability of the cells to reach their target . INTRODUCTION Protrusions in motile cells can be formed by polarized actin poly - merization at the cell front or by hydrostatic pressure generated in the cytoplasm by the contractile actomyosin cortex ( Charras and Paluch , 2008 ; Paluch and Raz , 2013 ; Small et al . , 2002 ; Diz - Munoz et al . , 2016 ; Friedl and Wolf , 2010 ; Fackler and Grosse , 2008 ; Welch , 2015 ) . Blebs are generated in regions of the cell circumference where the plasma membrane detaches from the cell cortex or at locations where membrane - to - cortex attachment is reduced . Such ‘‘weak spots’’ can result from local reduction in the level of molecules such as ezrin / radixin / moesin ( Fehon et al . , 2010 ; Paluch and Raz , 2013 ) , or as a consequence of an increase in local contractility of the cell cortex ( Keller and Eggli , 1998 ; Paluch et al . , 2005 ) . Certain models describing cell - shape changes during protrusion formation assume that the cell volume is preserved and generally consider the plasma membrane to behave as a ﬂat elastic substance ( Kabaso et al . , 2011 ; Strychalski and Guy , 2013 ) . In a recent study , however , Taloni et al . ( 2015 ) suggest that protrusion formation involves an increase in cell volume and surface , further highlighting the need for a membrane source for the bleb formation . Since stretching of a ﬂat plasma membrane just prior to its rupture is limited to 2 % – 3 % ( Kleinschmidt , 2006 ; Kwok and Evans , 1981 ; Sheetz et al . , 2006 ) and given that the force needed for such expansion is 2 – 3 orders of magnitude greater than the force cells can generate ( Sheetz et al . , 2006 ) , the question that arises con - cerns the source of the additional membrane required for bleb inﬂation . Here we used primordial germ cells ( PGCs ) that migrate through the developing embryo ( Barton et al . , 2016 ) as an in vivo model for investigating the cellular mechanisms contributing to protrusion formation in single - cell migration . We ﬁnd that the rapid expansion of the bleb - type protrusions in zebraﬁsh PGCs depends on invaginations found around the cell circumference . Unfolding of these structures provides the membrane for protru - sion inﬂation in the direction of cell migration . RESULTS During the ﬁrst day of embryonic development , zebraﬁsh PGCs migrate from the positions at which they are speciﬁed toward the region where the gonad develops ( Barton et al . , 2016 ; Paksa and Raz , 2015 ) . The migrating zebraﬁsh PGCs can be visualized within the developing embryo by expression of ﬂuorescent pro - tein fusions that label speciﬁc cellular structures ( Blaser et al . , 2005 ; Kardash et al . , 2010 ) . It was shown that as PGCs migrate in live embryos , they extend bleb - type protrusions ( Blaser et al . , 2006 ; Goudarzi et al . , 2012 ) . Bleb expansion is characterized by rapid ﬂow of cytoplasm driven by hydrostatic pressure , leading to outward deformation of the cell membrane ( Paluch and Raz , Developmental Cell 43 , 1 – 11 , December 4 , 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Inc . 1 Please cite this article in press as : Goudarzi et al . , Bleb Expansion in Migrating Cells Depends on Supply of Membrane from Cell Surface Invaginations , Developmental Cell ( 2017 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2017 . 10 . 030 2013 ) . Despite the importance of blebs for cell migration and their prevalence in other processes ( e . g . , apoptosis and cell divi - sion ) , experimental data concerning the source of membrane required for bleb growth are still lacking ( Paluch and Raz , 2013 ) . The Rapid Inﬂation of the Bleb Requires a Local Membrane Source As the ﬁrst step in studying the cellular mechanisms underlying bleb formation , we measured the cell surface area , volume , and membrane ﬂuorescence intensity during blebbing of PGCs whose membrane was labeled with farnesylated EGFP . The sur - face and volume were analyzed using 3D reconstructions of spinning - disk microscopy stacks by the Imaris software module ( Bitplane ) employing the surface function for bleb and pre - bleb Figure 1 . Cell Shape and Membrane Char - acteristics during Bleb Inﬂation In Vivo ( A ) 3D reconstruction showing a PGC before and after bleb inﬂation . The graph on the right shows the ratio of the cell surface area and the volume comparing bleb with the pre - bleb time points . ( B ) Schematic view of a PGC circumference prior to and following bleb formation , with black and orange colors representing the measured areas . The graph shows the ratio between the circum - ferenceofcellsexcludingtheblebareabeforeand after bleb expansion ( normalized to the whole - cell circumference ) and the same ratio for the bleb area ( median = 94 . 1 % and 141 . 8 % for ‘‘Rest’’ and ‘‘Bleb , ’’ respectively ) . The circumference of the bleb prior to inﬂation was deﬁned as the membrane length of the bleb neck at the pre - bleb time point . ( C ) 3D surface reconstruction for bleb ( green ) and the whole cell ( gray ) prior and after bleb expan - sion . The graph on the right shows the change in surface area of the bleb and the whole cell , before ( Pre - Bleb ) and after ( Bleb ) bleb expansion . ( D ) A PGC expressing farnesylated EGFP protein priortoandfollowingblebinﬂation . Thecelloutline was calculated using the Radial analysis program ( see STAR Methods ) and the bleb was deﬁned by the change in the velocity of the plasma mem - brane . The central half of the bleb region ( red dashed line ) was monitored over time and the ﬂuorescence intensities were plotted ( right ) . The averageintensityobtained from 10measurements is presented in red . The graphs in ( A ) and ( B ) show median and inter - quartile range for data obtained in three indepen - dentexperiments . Thepvalue ( * * * * p < 0 . 0001 ) was calculated using a non - parametric Mann - Whitney U test . n representsthenumberof blebsanalyzed . InallofthepanelsthePGCmembranewaslabeled with farnesylated EGFP . See also Figure S6 . time points . The ﬂuorescence intensity at the membrane was quantiﬁed , employ - ing a three - step Radial analysis program ( see STAR Methods ) : ( 1 ) identiﬁcation of cell contours ( segmentation ) ; ( 2 ) determi - nation of the distance between the cell edge and its center around the cell perim - eter ; and ( 3 ) identiﬁcation of maximal ﬂuorescence in 10 pixel areas around the cell edge . Blebs were located in a Postprocess step ( see STAR Methods ) by identifying areas with dynamic shape alterations . As presented in Figure 1A , the apparent cell surface area and volume of cells did not change as a result of bleb expansion . We next measured the cell circumference at the region of the bleb and at the rest of the cell , before and after bleb inﬂation ( Fig - ure 1B , left ) . This analysis revealed a substantial increase in the perimeter of the bleb region upon bleb inﬂation ( Figure 1B , right ) . Indeed , this increase can also be observed in a 3D presentation , where the surface area of the bleb and that of the whole cell are measured before and after bleb inﬂation ( an example is shown in Figure 1C ) . Interestingly , using the Radial analysis 2 Developmental Cell 43 , 1 – 11 , December 4 , 2017 Please cite this article in press as : Goudarzi et al . , Bleb Expansion in Migrating Cells Depends on Supply of Membrane from Cell Surface Invaginations , Developmental Cell ( 2017 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2017 . 10 . 030 and Postprocess programs that allow for detection of cell outline and signal evaluation in cells undergoing dynamic shape alter - ations ( see STAR Methods ) , we noticed a local reduction in membrane - associated EGFP intensity in the bleb region during bleb expansion ( Figure 1D ) . These observations are consistent with the assumption that bleb formation is a local event and does not involve transfer of material toward the protrusion . To examine this hypothesis further , we photoconverted a farnesylated Dendra2 protein ( Dendra2 - F ) at the vicinity of a forming bleb ( Figure 2A ) and monitored the position and shape of the photoconverted area . Despite the technical difﬁculties associated with this manipula - tion in deep layers of the embryo and the fact that the precise position where blebs form is unknown prior to their expansion , we were able to photoconvert the membrane - targeted Dendra2 protein very close to and even at the edge of forming blebs . By following the edge velocity of the converted area relative to the bleb , we sought to determine whether bulk ﬂow of membrane toward the bleb could be observed . Interestingly , as the bleb expanded no directed ﬂow of the converted Dendra ( red ) could be observed ( Figure 2A , middle and lower panels ; Movie S1A ) . Additionally , the spread of the converted Dendra2 - F ( red ) signal during the experiment was symmetrical relative to its center ( see intensity proﬁle in Figure 2B ) and similar between blebbing and non - blebbing cells ( Figure 2C ) . Measuring the intensity allowed tracking the lateral velocity of the center of the photoconverted area , which was found to be close to zero independent of whether a bleb formed or not ( Figure 2C ) , with a diffusion rate of the ﬂuorescent proteins ( 1 . 8 m m / s , measured at the edge of the converted area , see STAR Methods ) similar to that previously described for other membrane - bound proteins ( e . g . , D = 1 . 7 ± 0 . 22 m m 2 / s for GFP - labeled plextrin - homology domain of PLC d 1 [ PH d 1 ] [ Goehring et al . , 2010 ] ) . Consistent with photocon - version experiments , photobleached areas located next to a forming bleb showed no displacement toward the region of membrane inﬂation ( Figure S1A and Movie S1B ) . Lastly , photo - bleached regions located within the inﬂating bleb showed local expansion upon bleb growth with only limited signal diffusion from the rest of the cell ( with the ﬂuorophore fused to a farnesy - lation signal [ Figure S1B and Movie S1C ] or to a truncated non - internalizable 7 - transmembrane Cxcr4b receptor , respec - tively [ Figure S1C ] ) . Together , the results of these in vivo experiments are consistent with the idea that a local supply of membrane supports bleb expansion . Nevertheless , as this anal - ysis relied on monitoring ﬂuorescent proteins , the formation of the bleb could depend on lipid ﬂow or fusion of vesicles that do not contain the labeled membrane marker . To investigate the possibility that lipid ﬂow supports bleb expansion , we exposed isolated PGCs to the lipid dye FM4 - 64 , thereby labeling lipids in the outer leaﬂet of the plasma mem - branes . Normal blebs that formed occasionally by the dissoci - ated PGCs ( in contrast to the more common traveling ‘‘circus blebs’’ that form under these conditions [ Charras et al . , 2008 ] ) showed reduced plasma membrane label intensity at the tip of blebs ( Figures S1D and S1E ) . The non - homogeneous distribu - tion of the lipid dye ﬂuorescence ( Figure S1D ) is consistent with the idea that the plasma membrane is not a ﬂat structure but rather contains wrinkles . Together , our data do not support the notion that lipid or membrane - anchored proteins ﬂow into the forming bleb , but instead suggest that local membrane supply supports bleb inﬂation . Membrane Invaginations Act as a Source for Plasma Membrane in Blebbing Cells Structures such as ﬁlopodia and caveolae could potentially constitute a membrane reservoir required for bleb expansion . Along these lines , it has been previously shown that ﬁlopodia are more abundant at the front of migrating PGCs ( Meyen et al . , 2015 ) , the site at which blebs occur more frequently ( Reichman - Fried et al . , 2004 ) . However , we observed that when blebs inﬂated , the average length of nearby ﬁlopodia remained unaltered ( Figure S2 ) , suggesting that these structures do not contribute membrane material to the bleb . We subse - quently examined other potential membrane - storing structures that could contribute membrane to the inﬂating bleb . Caveolae are small ( 50 – 100 nm in diameter ) membrane invag - inations that contain proteins and lipids , including caveolins ( Nassoy and Lamaze , 2012 ; Sinha et al . , 2011 ) . In mouse lung endothelial ( Sinha et al . , 2011 ) and muscle cells ( Gervasio et al . , 2011 ) , caveolae were shown to buffer membrane tension in response to physical stretch . Caveolin - 1 ( Cav1 ) protein plays an essential role in caveola formation in non - muscle tissues ( Drab et al . , 2001 ; Sinha et al . , 2011 ) and its mRNA is uniformly expressed in early zebraﬁsh embryo including the PGCs ( Fig - ure S3A ) . To follow the distribution of the protein within the PGCs , we expressed Cav1a - GFP fusion protein in the embryo and followed its localization . As shown previously ( Arbizzani et al . , 2015 ) , the Cav1a - GFP marks the membrane in certain lineages of the somatic cells ( Figure S3B ) . Interestingly , in migrating PGCs Cav1 - GFP is primarily localized to structures in the vicinity of the plasma membrane at the back of the migrating cells , subcellular localization that appeared inconsis - tent with a role in bleb formation ( Figure S3B ) . Nevertheless , we proceeded to examine PGC behavior in mutant embryos lacking the maternal and zygotic of both Cav1 and Cav3 pro - teins , mutants in which caveola formation and function are severely impaired , such that they are strongly reduced in number ( Cao et al . , 2016 ; Garcia et al . , 2017 ) . In these experiments , despite the lack of both caveolin proteins , we observed no effect on either bleb expansion or on the ability of the cells to actively migrate and reach their target ( Figure S3C and Movie S2 ) . Together , employing the available tools for an in vivo analysis , our data argue against a signiﬁcant role for caveolae in bleb formation . We next examined whether vesicles could serve as a local membrane source for bleb expansion . Vesicles were previously shown to be important for the migration of different cell types by allowing the transport of relevant molecules to the membrane and by providing membrane material ( Hopkins et al . , 1994 ; Spiczka and Yeaman , 2008 ; Zanchi et al . , 2010 ) . To examine the possibility that polarized deposition of vesicles contributes to bleb expansion , we determined the position of the Golgi apparatus , which we found to be localized away from the cell front ( Figure S4A , left panel ) . We then examined the possible role of the exocyst complex ( Inoue et al . , 2003 ) , early endosomes ( Chavrier et al . , 1990 ) , and recycling vesicles ( Takahashi et al . , 2012 ) in bleb formation . Fluorescently tagged Endobrevin ( VAMP8 ) and Rab11a showed localization at the back of the cells Developmental Cell 43 , 1 – 11 , December 4 , 2017 3 Please cite this article in press as : Goudarzi et al . , Bleb Expansion in Migrating Cells Depends on Supply of Membrane from Cell Surface Invaginations , Developmental Cell ( 2017 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2017 . 10 . 030 Figure 2 . Lack of Membrane Flow in the Direction of the Forming Bleb in PGCs Migrating within Live Embryos ( A ) Farnesylated - Dendra2 ( Dendra2 - F ) expressed on the plasma membrane of PGCs from 7 to 8 hr post fertilization ( hpf ) embryos was photoconverted ( green to red ) at the border of a forming bleb ( white dashed line shows the contours of two sequential blebs , with the blue dashed line marking the edge of the converted area up to the 12 s time point ) . Cells were imaged at a frequency of one time point per second and the photoconversion time point is presented as zero ( 0 s ) . No directional ﬂow with respect to the forming bleb is observed . Seven events of photoconversion next to a forming bleb were analyzed . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( B ) 3D surface plot of the converted area showing the intensity change along the circumference ( 0 (cid:1) – 60 (cid:1) ) of the cell presented in ( A ) over 48 s , but no change in the position of the center of the converted area . The inset shows the circumferential intensity in the ﬁrst ( 1 s ) and the last frame after photoconversion ( 48 s ) . A schematic of the cell analyzed is presented below the x axis . ( C ) Graph showing the velocity of the center of the photoconverted region in cells where blebs did not form ( n = 5 , black ) and in cells in which bleb inﬂation occurred next to the photoconverted area ( n = 7 , red ) . t = 0 is the time of bleb formation . See also Figure S1 . 4 Developmental Cell 43 , 1 – 11 , December 4 , 2017 Please cite this article in press as : Goudarzi et al . , Bleb Expansion in Migrating Cells Depends on Supply of Membrane from Cell Surface Invaginations , Developmental Cell ( 2017 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2017 . 10 . 030 ( Figure S4A , middle and right panels ) , while tagged Rab5c and Exo70 proteins were found in uniformly distributed vesicles ( Figure S4A , bottom panels ) . Toward clarifying the role of vesi - cles in blebbing , we expressed high levels of previously described dominant - negative forms of the Exo70 ( Inoue et al . , 2003 ) , Rab11a ( Ren et al . , 1998 ) , and Rab5c ( Stenmark et al . , 1994 ) . The dominant - negative proteins were expressed either in all cells of the embryo or speciﬁcally in the PGCs . While global expression adversely affected embryonic development , reﬂect - ing efﬁcient inhibition of the protein function ( Figure S4B , global DN expression ) , preferential expression in PGCs neither affected the ability of cells to reach their migration target ( Figure S4B , DN expression in PGCs ) nor blebbing rates ( Figure S4C ) , sup - porting the idea that Exo70 , Rab11a , and Rab5c function is not essential for this process . Together , these results are consistent with the idea that vesicle transport and recycling do not play a major role in bleb formation . Another potential source for membrane material supporting bleb expansion are invaginations of the plasma membrane . The involvement of such invaginations in bleb inﬂation was previously hypothesized ( Sens and Plastino , 2015 ) . Indeed , membrane unfolding was suggested to fuel cell surface growth in the context of cellularization of Drosophila embryos ( Figard et al . , 2013 , 2016 ) and for increasing the apparent cell surface area in the context of osmotic swelling and phagocytosis ( Hallett and Dewitt , 2007 ) . In the case of bleb formation in vitro , in trypsinated CHO and NIH3T3 cells that form ‘‘traveling’’ non - directional oscillating blebs , membrane invaginations were observed ( Kapustina et al . , 2013 ) . However , the relevance and role of such structures for polarized bleb formation and their importance for cell migration in the physiological context of the live organism has never been addressed . Intriguingly , examining PGCs within live embryos we could observe dynamic inward - pointing membrane indentations ( Movie S3A ) . Interestingly , invaginations that appear similar to the structures we detected were described in other cell types that lack caveolae , i . e . , in yeast cells . These invaginations , termed eisosomes ( Karotki et al . , 2011 ) , were found to be essential for rapid membrane expansion upon osmotic shock ( Kabeche et al . , 2015 ) . Detailed characterization of the PGCs in ﬁxed embryos conﬁrmed the presence of such inward exten - sions ( Figure 3A , red arrowhead ) . The membrane invaginations often appeared as disconnected structures whose link to the plasma membrane could be traced through optical sections ( Figure 3A , red arrowheads ; Movie S3B ) . Importantly , such structures could not be observed within blebs , suggesting that they unfolded and provide membrane material for bleb inﬂation ( e . g . , see Movie S3A ) . This phenomenon could be clearly demonstrated in ﬁxed cells following an increase in contractility within the PGCs by overexpression of a constitutively active form of myosin light chain kinase ( CA - MLCK ) ( Blaser et al . , 2006 ) ( Fig - ure 3B ) . In this case , the unusually large blebs induced by expression of CA - MLCK were mostly devoid of such membrane structures and the number of overall invaginations detected in the cells was dramatically reduced ( Figure 3B ) . Additionally , plasma membrane invaginations could be observed on ultrathin sections by electron microscopy . These invaginations were detected in the context of the tissue by laser - mark - assisted correlative transmission electron micro - scopy ( EM ) ( Goudarzi et al . , 2015 ) and by a Teneo VolumeScope ( VS ) serial block - face electron microscope ( FEI ) ( Figures 3C and 3D ) . Although in these experiments with ﬁxed material we could not deﬁne the polarity of the cells , we conﬁrmed the presence of membrane invaginations along the surface of PGCs . Quantifying the amount of suboptical resolution wrinkling over the whole sur - face of two PGCs using the Teneo VS electron microscope ( Fig - ure 3C and Movie S3C ) , we found that the measured cell circum - ference is signiﬁcantly larger than that measured in a line that excludes the EM - detected invaginations ( 35 % and 25 % in the two examples in Figure 3D ) . Importantly , these measurements are an underestimate , as invaginations were not followed through multiple planes . Nevertheless , they are in the range of the measured length difference between the pre - bleb and post - bleb ( ca . 50 % for length expansion ) , suggesting that they provide a very signiﬁcant amount of material needed for bleb expansion . To directly investigate the role of membrane invaginations in bleb formation , we followed their dynamics by expressing BAR domains as curvature sensors ( Frost et al . , 2009 ) . These BAR domains can sense curvatures that are induced by external push or internal pull ( Galic et al . , 2012 ) . We found that N - BAR domains of amphiphysin and nadrin labeled dynamic invagina - tions at the circumference of the cell ( Movie S4A and S4B , respectively ) , and used the N - BAR domain of amphiphysin ( hereafter referred to as Amph - N - BAR - YFP ) in the following experiments . At the protein level used ( e . g . , 50 pg of Amph - N - BAR - YFP per embryo ) no effect on blebbing or migration was observed , such that we considered the reagent to serve merely as a sensor . It was only when 5 - fold amounts were used that inhibition of protrusion formation was observed ( Figure S5 ) . Strikingly , the fusion protein was found to be distinctly localized to the plasma membrane ( Figure 4A ) . Expression was particu - larly prominent at the leading edge of migrating cells where dynamic changes in cell shape and blebbing occur ( Movie S4C ) . Thus , these results conﬁrm the presence of invaginations along the cell surface of PGCs and are consistent with their involvement in the process of blebbing . In addition , when compared with a farnesylated form of the mCherry protein , the ﬂuorescence intensity level of Amph - N - BAR - YFP was more dramatically reduced during bleb expansion and was markedly enhanced during bleb retraction ( Figures 4A and 4B ; Movie S4C ) . Together , these observations are in line with the idea that during bleb expansion membrane invaginations are ﬂat - tened and reform in the course of bleb retraction . The data presented above suggest that rapid release of mem - brane material from the invaginations allows bleb inﬂation in the context of the live embryo . To examine this point in a different setup , we exposed PGCs in a disrupted embryo to hypo - osmotic conditions inducing waterinﬂuxandobservedthedisappearance of the Amph - N - BAR - YFP - marked membrane invaginations ( Fig - ure 4C , left panel and graph ; ﬁrst part of Movie S5 ) . Conversely , exposingtheembryostohyper - osmoticmediumresultedinrefor - mation of the invaginations in the PGCs and restoration of the blebbingactivity ( Figure4C , rightpanel ; secondpartofMovieS5 ) . Membrane Unfolding Is Essential for Bleb Formation and Cell Migration As a ﬁrst step in determining whether membrane unfolding is of functional importance for bleb formation , we examined their Developmental Cell 43 , 1 – 11 , December 4 , 2017 5 Please cite this article in press as : Goudarzi et al . , Bleb Expansion in Migrating Cells Depends on Supply of Membrane from Cell Surface Invaginations , Developmental Cell ( 2017 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2017 . 10 . 030 localization relative to other structures . As shown in Figure 5A , microtubules and the microtubule - organizing center were local - ized primarily to the back of the cell and did not show co - locali - zation with Amph - N - BAR - YFP . In contrast , we observed strong co - localization between the BAR - domain - labeled invaginations and labeled actin ( Figure 5B , cell front facing the microscope objective ) . Importantly , the invaginations labeled by Amph - N - BAR - YFP were concentrated at the front of the cell where the actin signal was elevated due to the presence of actin - rich Figure 3 . Detailed Analysis of PGCs within theTissueRevealsMembraneInvaginations ( A ) Three confocal planes of a PGC plasma membrane labeled with farnesylated mCherry providing a z axis view of invaginations extending into the cell interior . One such invagination is highlighted with a red arrowhead at each of the three planes . Note that in the ﬁrst plane , the connectionofthestructuretothemembraneisnot clearly seen , such that it resembles a vesicle . Additional invaginations connected to the plasma membrane are marked with black asterisks . ( B ) The graph shows the number of membrane invaginations in wild - type PGCs and in PGCs with elevatedcontractility ( CA - MLCK ) , withanexample for a manipulated cell presented on the right ( n = 22 and n = 29 cells from 6 to 19 embryos , respectively ; the graph shows the combined data from two independent experiments ) . The red dashed line highlights the contour of a large traveling bleb with black asterisks marking mem - brane invaginations within the cell body ( see also Movie S4D ) . The p value ( * * * * p < 0 . 0001 ) is calcu - lated using a non - parametric Mann - Whitney U test . ( C ) Localization of PGCs for the correlative EM analysis , employing an arrowhead - shaped laser mark ( asterisk ) . The dashed area labels one of the PGCs studied in the Teneo VolumeScope ( right panel ) . ( D ) The Teneo VolumeScope data was used to measure the extent of extra plasma membrane stored in invaginations and wrinkles in PGCs ( excludinglongmembranetubesthatspanmultiple planes ) . Every200nmthecircumferenceofthecell was outlined , either by following the invaginations andwrinklespreciselyorbycrudetracingofthecell circumference ( see example in the magniﬁed re - gion at the bottom ) . The ratio between the circum - ference lengths obtained using the detailed Teneo VolumeScopedataandthecoarseestimatefortwo cellsispresented ( 29and15sectionswereusedfor example A and B , respectively ) . Scale bars , 5 m m . See also Figure S2 . structures ( Figure 5C ) ( Kardash et al . , 2010 ) . To determine whether actomyosin contractility is required for the generation of the invaginations , we expressed a dominant - negative form of Rho kinase ( DN - ROCK ) in PGCs ( Blaser et al . , 2006 ) . In cells expressing DN - ROCK , membrane invaginations continued to form at the cell front ( Figure 5D ) . Consis - tent with the idea that bleb formation is coupled with the release of membrane from invaginations , expression of CA - MLCK that elevated contractility led to the formation of large blebs devoid of invaginations ( Movie S4D ) . Interestingly , similar to our observations , invaginations whose formation does not depend on caveolae were previously described in yeast , where they function as membrane stores ( Kabeche et al . , 2015 ; Karotki et al . , 2011 ) , and as part of the CLIC / GEEC endocytosis pathway ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) , 6 Developmental Cell 43 , 1 – 11 , December 4 , 2017 Please cite this article in press as : Goudarzi et al . , Bleb Expansion in Migrating Cells Depends on Supply of Membrane from Cell Surface Invaginations , Developmental Cell ( 2017 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2017 . 10 . 030 which is controlled by the actin regulator Cdc42 ( Heasman and Ridley , 2008 ; Mayor et al . , 2014 ) . Remarkably , expressing a dominant - negative form of Cdc42 ( DN - Cdc42 , N17 ) ( Akeda et al . , 2002 ) in the germ cells led to round cell morphology , decreased formation of the membrane invaginations , and reduced blebbing ( Figure 5E and Movie S6 ) . This observation is consistent with the notion that membrane invaginations essen - tial for bleb formation depend on actin for their formation . Impor - tantly , relative to controls a signiﬁcantly larger number of the manipulated cells failed to reach their target by the end of the ﬁrst day of development ( Figure 5F ) . While BAR domains serve as sensors for membrane curvature , at a high concentration they stabilize or even induce membrane invaginations ( Frost et al . , 2009 ; Peter et al . , 2004 ) . Expressing high levels of Amph - N - BAR - YFP in the PGCs ( 250 pg ) ( Figure S5 ) resulted in an increase in membrane invaginations ( Figure 6A ) and their persistence ( Figure 6A , graph ) . Strikingly , this manipu - lation led to a gradual decrease in blebbing activity along with cell rounding ( Figure 6B and Movie S4E ) . Indeed , cells express - ing high levels of the Amph - N - BAR - YFP largely failed to reach their migration target ( Figure 6C ) , without an effect on their viability as judged by the presence of the cells in older ( 48 hr post fertilization [ hpf ] ) embryos ( Figure 6C ) . DISCUSSION The results reported in this study provide evidence for the pres - ence of distinct membrane invaginations at the leading edge of blebbing cells and demonstrate their role in bleb formation and migration in the context of a live embryo . Our results show that cells use such structures for rapid local changes in the surface area needed for protrusion formation and retraction . In the course of bleb expansion , the invaginations are ironed out and subsequently reformed when blebs retract . Inhibiting the forma - tion or the unfolding of these structures resulted in inhibition of bleb generation and PGC migration . Figure 4 . Analysis of Plasma Membrane Invaginations Unfolding and Folding during Bleb Inﬂation and Retraction ( A ) The YFP - labeled N - BAR domain of amphi - physin interacts with the plasma membrane and marks membrane structures protruding into the cytoplasm , and the mCherry - F protein labels the PGC’s plasma membrane . White arrowheads point to the position of bleb expansion . The graph on the right shows that the signal intensity of the BAR domain ( Amph - N - BAR - YFP ) on the plasma membraneisreduceduponblebexpansion , witha smaller reduction observed using the farnesylated mCherry ( mCherry - F ) probe ( median = 0 . 41 and 0 . 71 for the N - BAR probe and the mCherry - F , respectively ; n = 37 cells from 21 embryos ) . ( B ) A similar analysis to that in ( A ) was conducted during bleb retraction . White arrowheads point to the position of bleb retraction . The graphs present the intensity ratio of each of the two probes , Amph - N - BAR - YFP and mCherry - F , between the retracted bleb and the expanded bleb ( median = 1 . 91 and 1 . 35 for the N - BAR probe and the mCherry - F , respectively ; n = 21 cells from 15 embryos ) . ( C ) Two PGCs in deyolked embryos expressing N - BAR domain of amphiphysin and lifeAct in iso - osmotic ( left , upper panel ) and later in hypo - osmotic conditions ( left , lower panel ) . The graph showsthechangeinthecircumferenceofthecells in a confocal section after the exposure to hypo - osmoticmedium . Thevaluesarenormalizedtothe circumference in the iso - osmotic solution ( n = 26 cells ) . Right panels show a PGC expressing N - BAR domain of amphiphysin ( Amph - N - BAR - YFP ) subjected to a change from hypo - osmotic to hyper - osmotic conditions ( right upper and lower panels , respectively ) . All graphs show median and interquartile range . Thepvalue ( * * * * p < 0 . 0001 ) was calculated using a non - parametric Mann - Whitney U test . Scale bars , 5 m m . See also Figures S3 and S4 . Developmental Cell 43 , 1 – 11 , December 4 , 2017 7 Please cite this article in press as : Goudarzi et al . , Bleb Expansion in Migrating Cells Depends on Supply of Membrane from Cell Surface Invaginations , Developmental Cell ( 2017 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2017 . 10 . 030 According to Taloni et al . ( 2015 ) , aquaporin - dependent water inﬂux is responsible for bleb expansion in PGCs , in a process that involves an increase in cell volume . Employing fast micro - scopy instrumentation to achieve high z axis resolution and using a different approach in volume rendering , we reached to a different conclusion , i . e . , we could not detect a substantial change in cell volume or cell surface correlated with protrusion formation ( a reduction of 3 % on average in cell volume and no change in average cell surface area ; Figure 1A ) ( Blaser et al . , 2006 ) . Consistently , following the intensity of a cytoplasmic ﬂuorescence protein we did not detect a reduction in signal upon protrusion formation , arguing against inﬂux of water into the forming bleb ( Figure S6 ) . We propose that the role of the membrane invaginations is to provide material allowing rapid reduction in membrane tension and fast expansion of blebs . We show that in polarized cells Figure 5 . Membrane invaginations in PGCs migrating within live embryos require Cdc42 for formation and colocalize with polymerized actin structures ( A ) Lack of co - localization between membrane invaginations labeled by Amph - N - BAR - YFP and microtubules labeled with mCherry - CLIP170 . ( B ) Confocal images of membrane invaginations labeled with the Amph - N - BAR - YFP protein and their co - localization with polymerized actin labeled with LifeAct - mCherry protein . The cell orientation is such that the front is facing the lens . ( C ) Co - localization of membrane invaginations in polarized PGCs labeled by Amph - N - BAR - YFP with polymerized actin labeled with LifeAct - mCherry protein . The cell front faces upper right . ( D ) Membrane invaginations labeled with the Amph - N - BAR - YFP protein in cells in which contractility was inhibited by the expression of a dominant - negative form of ROCK ( DN - ROCK ) . mCherry - F labels the plasma membrane . ( E ) Dominant - negative form of Cdc42 ( DN - Cdc42 ) expressed in the cells reduces the number of dynamic membrane invaginations labeled with Amph - N - BAR YFP . Polymerized actin is labeled with LifeAct - mCherry protein . ( F ) Inhibition of Cdc42 function in a fraction of the PGC population led to mislocalization of the treated cells ( yellow cells ) . The asterisks mark the migration target of the cells in 24 hpf embryos and the white arrowheads point to PGCs expressing a control or the DN - Cdc42 proteins . The graph shows the quantitation of the result ( n = 41 and n = 38 embryos from two independent experi - ments ) . Median ( 1 and 5 , respectively ) and interquartile range are shown . The p value ( * * * * p < 0 . 0001 ) was calculated using a non - parametric Mann - Whitney U test . Scale bars , 5 m m . these membrane invaginations and actin - rich structures co - localize at the cell front and assume that their rapid release in the course of bleb expansion can be considered passive , as shown in in vitro setting in a different context ( Kosmalska et al . , 2015 ) . The local association between invagi - nations and the actin could be extended to a functional link , as disruption of Cdc42 adversely affects membrane invagination formation and culminates in abnormal cell shape and impaired migration . We suggest that vesicle fusion , caveolae , and ﬁlopodia are not essential sources for membrane material in the context of bleb inﬂation , but the level of accuracy of this analysis does not rule out the option that these and other membrane sources contribute to some extent to the process . Direct tests for the model we propose would require the use of methods such as atomic force microscopy or optical tweezers - mediated mem - brane tether pulling , while monitoring the effect on folds in the plasma membrane . Rather , we show that transient invaginations play this role . Although we study zebraﬁsh PGC migration , the presented 8 Developmental Cell 43 , 1 – 11 , December 4 , 2017 Please cite this article in press as : Goudarzi et al . , Bleb Expansion in Migrating Cells Depends on Supply of Membrane from Cell Surface Invaginations , Developmental Cell ( 2017 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2017 . 10 . 030 results could be relevant for other cell types that generate blebs for their migration ( e . g . , Lammermann and Sixt , 2009 ; Diz - Munoz et al . , 2016 ) , as well as for other cellular events where blebs are found ( e . g . , Norman et al . , 2010 ; Laster and Mackenzie , 1996 ) . It would also be interesting to determine whether the distribution or the dynamics of such invaginations are altered upon the transi - tion between lamellipodia and bleb - driven migration in cells that can switch between the two modes of protrusion formation ( Diz - Munoz et al . , 2016 ; Driscoll and Danuser , 2015 ; Friedl and Wolf , 2010 ; Welch , 2015 ) . Lastly , in addition to their relevance for bleb formation in a range of contexts , the results presented here are relevant for other processes whereby rapid addition of membrane is required . For example , cellularization in Drosophila was shown to involve membrane unfolding to fuel cleavage furrow ingres - sion ( Figard et al . , 2013 , 2016 ) , similar to lamellipodia extension where folds were also implicated ( Gauthier et al . , 2011 ) , and in phagocytosis whereby membrane folds provide the membrane area required for pseudopod extension ( Masters et al . , 2013 ) . Comparing the molecular composition and dynamics of these structures in different cell types will shed light on the mecha - nisms responsible for their formation and the control over their release in the different cellular processes involving rapid mem - brane expansion . STAR + METHODS Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following : d KEY RESOURCES TABLE d CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS B Zebraﬁsh Strains d METHOD DETAILS B RNA Expression , Constructs , and Injections B Spinning Disk ( SD ) Microscopy B Volume and Surface Area Measurement B Cell Circumference Measurement B Change in Signal Intensities during Bleb Expansion B Photoconversion B Analysis of Lateral Mobility of Photoconverted Area B Confocal Imaging of Fixed PGCs B Manipulations of Medium Osmolarity B Circumference Measurement of Teneo Volume - Scope Data B BAR Domain Expression in PGCs B Generation of Non - ligand Binding Non - internalizable CXCR4b Figure 6 . Release of Membrane Invagina - tions Is Required for Cell Blebbing In Vivo ( A ) The morphology of a wild - type PGC at 18 hpf , injected with control RNA ( left ) and of a PGC expressing high levels of the amphiphysin N - BAR domain ( two right panels ) . Domains of increased plasma membrane accumulation ( mCherry - F label , red ) are observed at locations where high levels of YFP - tagged N - BAR domain protein ( yellow ) are present ( arrowheads ) . The graph on the right presents the persistence of the invaginations as measured over 2 min under conditions of low ( 50 pg , n = 1 , 014 in 28 cells ) and high ( 250 pg , n = 437 in 33 cells ) amounts of RNA injected per embryo . Three independent experiments were conducted with a median of 30 s ( for 50 pg ) and 40 s ( for 250 pg ) . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( B ) An overlay of six membrane contours ( each 20 s apart ) of PGCs labeled with farnesylated mCherry in control ( 250 pg RNA , upper ) and in cells overexpressing the amphiphysin N - BAR domain ( 250 pg RNA , lower ) , with the graph showing the number of blebs per minute ( n is the number ofcells analyzed , median = 1 . 5and 0 . 5 for control and N - BAR expression , respectively ) . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( C ) PGCs expressing high levels of the amphi - physin N - BAR domain protein exhibit defects in arrival at the region where the gonad develops . Asterisks label the migration target of PGCs in 24 - hpf and 48 - hpf embryos , and arrowheads point to some of the mislocalized PGCs . The graph presents the percentage of mislocalized PGCs in control and in PGCs expressing RNA encodingfortheN - BARdomainprotein ( 250pg , N is the number of embryos analyzed ) ( median = 0 % and 29 % for control and Amph - N - BAR respectively , data obtained from three independent experiments ) . Thepvalue ( * * * * p < 0 . 0001 ) wascalculatedusinganon - parametric Mann - Whitney Utest . Thegraphsshowmedians andinterquartileranges . SeealsoFigureS5 . Developmental Cell 43 , 1 – 11 , December 4 , 2017 9 Please cite this article in press as : Goudarzi et al . , Bleb Expansion in Migrating Cells Depends on Supply of Membrane from Cell Surface Invaginations , Developmental Cell ( 2017 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2017 . 10 . 030 B Filopodia Length Measurement B Labeling PGCs’ Plasma Membrane Lipids B Photobleaching B Cytoplasmic Intensity Measurement upon Bleb B Whole - Mount In Situ Hybridization B CLEM on PGCs and VolumeScope d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS d DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes six ﬁgures and six movies and can be found with this article online at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2017 . 10 . 030 . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS M . Goudarzi performed all the experiments except for the following : K . M . and D . Z . performed the EM studies ; K . T . performed experiments examining the possible involvement of BAR - domain - containing proteins in bleb formation ; A . P . designed probes and performed the two - color in situ hybridization ; H . B . generated the VAMP8 and Exo70 plasmids ; M . R . - F . designed the Exo70 and designed and generated the Cdc42 plasmid ; H . M . designed and con - structedtheRab5candRab11aplasmids ; I . B . andM . Galicdesignedandcon - structed the amphiphysin and Nadrin plasmids ; M . B . and J . G . performed the experiments involving the caveolin mutant embryos ; J . H . designed and con - structed the CLIP170 plasmid ; T . B . analyzed experiments relevant for mem - brane ﬂow ; E . R . participated in all the experimental design and guidance . All authors contributed to the writing of the manuscript , and M . R . - F . edited and critically read multiple versions of the manuscript . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by the European Research Council ( ERC , CellMig , no . 268806 ) , the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( DFG , RA863 / 11 - 1 ) , and the IZKF Muenster ( Raz2 / 021 / 16 ) to E . R . , the Cells In Motion Cluster of Excellence ( EXC 1003 - CIM ) to E . R . , T . B . , and M . G . , and the NIH ( AR065439 ) to M . B . We thank Nina Knubel for the design of the graphical abstract . We thank FEI ( Eindhoven , the Netherlands ) for their kind support in recording the Teneo VolumeScope data , especially Ingo Gestmann and Liesbeth Hekking . Received : July 30 , 2017 Revised : September 27 , 2017 Accepted : October 26 , 2017 Published : November 22 , 2017 REFERENCES Akeda , Y . , Kodama , T . , Kashimoto , T . , Cantarelli , V . , Horiguchi , Y . , Nagayama , K . , Iida , T . , and Honda , T . ( 2002 ) . Dominant - negative Rho , Rac , and Cdc42 facilitate the invasion process of Vibrio parahaemolyticus into Caco - 2 cells . Infect . Immun . 70 , 970 – 973 . Arbizzani , F . , Mayrhofer , M . , and Mione , M . ( 2015 ) . Novel transgenic lines to ﬂuorescently label clathrin and caveolin endosomes in live zebraﬁsh . Zebraﬁsh 12 , 202 – 203 . Barton , L . J . , LeBlanc , M . G . , and Lehmann , R . ( 2016 ) . Finding their way : themes in germ cell migration . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 42 , 128 – 137 . Blaser , H . , Eisenbeiss , S . , Neumann , M . , Reichman - Fried , M . , Thisse , B . , Thisse , C . , andRaz , E . ( 2005 ) . Transitionfromnon - motilebehaviourtodirected migration during early PGC development in zebraﬁsh . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 4027 – 4038 . Blaser , H . , Reichman - Fried , M . , Castanon , I . , Dumstrei , K . , Marlow , F . L . , Kawakami , K . , Solnica - Krezel , L . , Heisenberg , C . P . , and Raz , E . ( 2006 ) . Migration of zebraﬁsh primordial germ cells : a role for myosin contraction and cytoplasmic ﬂow . Dev . Cell 11 , 613 – 627 . Cao , J . , Navis , A . , Cox , B . D . , Dickson , A . L . , Gemberling , M . , Karra , R . , Bagnat , M . , and Poss , K . D . ( 2016 ) . Single epicardial cell transcriptome sequencing identiﬁes Caveolin 1 as an essential factor in zebraﬁsh heart regeneration . Development 143 , 232 – 243 . Charras , G . , and Paluch , E . ( 2008 ) . Blebs lead the way : how tomigrate without lamellipodia . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 730 – 736 . Charras , G . T . , Coughlin , M . , Mitchison , T . J . , and Mahadevan , L . ( 2008 ) . Life and times of a cellular bleb . Biophys . J . 94 , 1836 – 1853 . Chavrier , P . , Parton , R . G . , Hauri , H . P . , Simons , K . , and Zerial , M . ( 1990 ) . Localization of low molecular weight GTP binding proteins to exocytic and en - docytic compartments . Cell 62 , 317 – 329 . Deerinck , T . J . , Bushong , E . A . , Thor , A . , and Ellisman , M . H . ( 2010 ) . NCMIR methods for 3D EM : a new protocol for preparation of biological specimens for serial block face scanning electron microscopy . Nat . Center Microsc . Imag . Res . 6 – 8 . Diz - Munoz , A . , Romanczuk , P . , Yu , W . , Bergert , M . , Ivanovitch , K . , Salbreux , G . , Heisenberg , C . P . , and Paluch , E . K . ( 2016 ) . Steering cell migration by alter - nating blebs and actin - rich protrusions . BMC Biol . 14 , 74 . Drab , M . , Verkade , P . , Elger , M . , Kasper , M . , Lohn , M . , Lauterbach , B . , Menne , J . , Lindschau , C . , Mende , F . , Luft , F . C . , etal . ( 2001 ) . Lossofcaveolae , vascular dysfunction , and pulmonary defects in caveolin - 1 gene - disrupted mice . Science 293 , 2449 – 2452 . Driscoll , M . K . , andDanuser , G . ( 2015 ) . Quantifying modes of3Dcellmigration . Trends Cell Biol . 25 , 749 – 759 . Fackler , O . T . , and Grosse , R . ( 2008 ) . Cell motility through plasma membrane blebbing . J . Cell Biol . 181 , 879 – 884 . Fehon , R . G . , McClatchey , A . I . , and Bretscher , A . ( 2010 ) . Organizing the cell cortex : the role of ERM proteins . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 276 – 287 . Figard , L . , Wang , M . , Zheng , L . , Golding , I . , and Sokac , A . M . ( 2016 ) . Membrane supply and demand regulates F - actin in a cell surface reservoir . Dev . Cell 37 , 267 – 278 . Figard , L . , Xu , H . , Garcia , H . G . , Golding , I . , andSokac , A . M . ( 2013 ) . Theplasma membrane ﬂattens out to fuel cell - surface growth during Drosophila cellulari - zation . Dev . Cell 27 , 648 – 655 . Friedl , P . , and Wolf , K . ( 2010 ) . Plasticity of cell migration : a multiscale tuning model . J . Cell Biol . 188 , 11 – 19 . Frost , A . , Unger , V . M . , and DeCamilli , P . ( 2009 ) . TheBAR domain superfamily : membrane - molding macromolecules . Cell 137 , 191 – 196 . Galic , M . , Jeong , S . , Tsai , F . C . , Joubert , L . M . , Wu , Y . I . , Hahn , K . M . , Cui , Y . , and Meyer , T . ( 2012 ) . External push and internal pull forces recruit curvature - sensing N - BAR domain proteins to the plasma membrane . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 874 – 881 . Garcia , J . , Bagwell , J . , Njaine , B . , Norman , J . , Levic , D . S . , Wopat , S . , Miller , S . E . , Liu , X . , Locasale , J . W . , Stainier , D . Y . R . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Sheath cell invasion and trans - differentiation repair mechanical damage caused by loss of caveo - lae in the zebraﬁsh notochord . Curr . Biol . 27 , 1982 – 1989 . Gauthier , N . C . , Fardin , M . A . , Roca - Cusachs , P . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2011 ) . Temporary increase in plasma membrane tension coordinates the activation of exocytosis and contraction during cell spreading . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 14467 – 14472 . Gervasio , O . L . , Phillips , W . D . , Cole , L . , and Allen , D . G . ( 2011 ) . Caveolae respond to cell stretch and contribute to stretch - induced signaling . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 3581 – 3590 . Goehring , N . W . , Chowdhury , D . , Hyman , A . A . , and Grill , S . W . ( 2010 ) . FRAP analysis of membrane - associated proteins : lateral diffusion and membrane - cytoplasmic exchange . Biophys . J . 99 , 2443 – 2452 . Goudarzi , M . , Banisch , T . U . , Mobin , M . B . , Maghelli , N . , Tarbashevich , K . , Strate , I . , van den Berg , J . , Blaser , H . , Bandemer , S . , Paluch , E . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Identiﬁcation and regulation of a molecular module for bleb - based cell motility . Dev . Cell 23 , 210 – 218 . Goudarzi , M . , Mildner , K . , Babatz , F . , Riedel , D . , Klambt , C . , Zeuschner , D . , and Raz , E . ( 2015 ) . Correlative light and electron microscopy of rare cell pop - ulations in zebraﬁsh embryos using laser marks . Zebraﬁsh 12 , 470 – 473 . 10 Developmental Cell 43 , 1 – 11 , December 4 , 2017 Please cite this article in press as : Goudarzi et al . , Bleb Expansion in Migrating Cells Depends on Supply of Membrane from Cell Surface Invaginations , Developmental Cell ( 2017 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2017 . 10 . 030 Hallett , M . B . , and Dewitt , S . ( 2007 ) . Ironing out the wrinkles of neutrophil phagocytosis . Trends Cell Biol . 17 , 209 – 214 . Heasman , S . J . , and Ridley , A . J . ( 2008 ) . Mammalian Rho GTPases : new in - sights into their functions from in vivo studies . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 690 – 701 . Hopkins , C . R . , Gibson , A . , Shipman , M . , Strickland , D . K . , and Trowbridge , I . S . ( 1994 ) . Inmigratingﬁbroblasts , recyclingreceptorsareconcentratedinnarrow tubules in the pericentriolar area , and then routed to the plasma membrane of the leading lamella . J . Cell Biol . 125 , 1265 – 1274 . Inoue , M . , Chang , L . , Hwang , J . , Chiang , S . H . , and Saltiel , A . R . ( 2003 ) . The exocyst complex is required for targeting of Glut4 to the plasma membrane by insulin . Nature 422 , 629 – 633 . Kabaso , D . , Shlomovitz , R . , Schloen , K . , Stradal , T . , and Gov , N . S . ( 2011 ) . Theoreticalmodelforcellularshapesdrivenbyprotrusiveandadhesiveforces . PLoS Comput . Biol . 7 , e1001127 . Kabeche , R . , Howard , L . , and Moseley , J . B . ( 2015 ) . Eisosomes provide mem - brane reservoirs for rapid expansion of the yeast plasma membrane . J . Cell Sci . 128 , 4057 – 4062 . Kapustina , M . , Elston , T . C . , and Jacobson , K . ( 2013 ) . Compression and dila - tion of the membrane - cortex layer generates rapid changes in cell shape . J . Cell Biol . 200 , 95 – 108 . Kardash , E . , Reichman - Fried , M . , Maitre , J . L . , Boldajipour , B . , Papusheva , E . , Messerschmidt , E . M . , Heisenberg , C . P . , and Raz , E . ( 2010 ) . A role for Rho GTPases and cell - cell adhesion in single - cell motility in vivo . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 47 – 53 , 41 – 11 . Karotki , L . , Huiskonen , J . T . , Stefan , C . J . , Ziolkowska , N . E . , Roth , R . , Surma , M . A . , Krogan , N . J . , Emr , S . D . , Heuser , J . , Grunewald , K . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Eisosome proteins assemble into a membrane scaffold . J . Cell Biol . 195 , 889 – 902 . Keller , H . , and Eggli , P . ( 1998 ) . Protrusive activity , cytoplasmic compartmen - talization , and restriction rings in locomoting blebbing Walker carcinosarcoma cells are related to detachment of cortical actin from the plasma membrane . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 41 , 181 – 193 . Kleinschmidt , J . H . ( 2006 ) . Folding kinetics of the outer membrane proteins OmpA and FomA into phospholipid bilayers . Chem . Phys . Lipids 141 , 30 – 47 . Kosmalska , A . J . , Casares , L . , Elosegui - Artola , A . , Thottacherry , J . J . , Moreno - Vicente , R . , Gonzalez - Tarrago , V . , del Pozo , M . A . , Mayor , S . , Arroyo , M . , Navajas , D . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Physical principles of membrane remodelling during cell mechanoadaptation . Nat . Commun . 6 , 7292 . Kwok , R . , and Evans , E . ( 1981 ) . Thermoelasticity of large lecithin bilayer vesi - cles . Biophys . J . 35 , 637 – 652 . Lammermann , T . , and Sixt , M . ( 2009 ) . Mechanical modes of ’amoeboid’ cell migration . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 21 , 636 – 644 . Laster , S . M . , and Mackenzie , J . M . , Jr . ( 1996 ) . Bleb formation and F - actin dis - tribution during mitosis and tumor necrosis factor - induced apoptosis . Microsc . Res . Tech . 34 , 272 – 280 . Masters , T . A . , Pontes , B . , Viasnoff , V . , Li , Y . , andGauthier , N . C . ( 2013 ) . Plasma membrane tension orchestrates membrane trafﬁcking , cytoskeletal remodel - ing , and biochemical signaling during phagocytosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 11875 – 11880 . Mayor , S . , Parton , R . G . , and Donaldson , J . G . ( 2014 ) . Clathrin - independent pathways of endocytosis . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 6 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a016758 . Meyen , D . , Tarbashevich , K . , Banisch , T . U . , Wittwer , C . , Reichman - Fried , M . , Maugis , B . , Grimaldi , C . , Messerschmidt , E . M . , and Raz , E . ( 2015 ) . Dynamic ﬁlopodia are required for chemokine - dependent intracellular polarization dur - ing guided cell migration in vivo . Elife 4 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 05279 . Minina , S . , Reichman - Fried , M . , and Raz , E . ( 2007 ) . Control of receptor inter - nalization , signaling level , and precise arrival at the target in guided cell migra - tion . Curr . Biol . 17 , 1164 – 1172 . Nassoy , P . , and Lamaze , C . ( 2012 ) . Stressing caveolae new role in cell me - chanics . Trends Cell Biol . 22 , 381 – 389 . Norman , L . L . , Brugues , J . , Sengupta , K . , Sens , P . , and Aranda - Espinoza , H . ( 2010 ) . Cell blebbing and membrane area homeostasis in spreading and retracting cells . Biophys . J . 99 , 1726 – 1733 . Paksa , A . , and Raz , E . ( 2015 ) . Zebraﬁsh germ cells : motility and guided migra - tion . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 36 , 80 – 85 . Paluch , E . , Piel , M . , Prost , J . , Bornens , M . , andSykes , C . ( 2005 ) . Cortical acto - myosin breakage triggers shape oscillations in cells and cell fragments . Biophys . J . 89 , 724 – 733 . Paluch , E . K . , and Raz , E . ( 2013 ) . The role and regulation of blebs in cell migra - tion . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 25 , 582 – 590 . Peter , B . J . , Kent , H . M . , Mills , I . G . , Vallis , Y . , Butler , P . J . , Evans , P . R . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2004 ) . BAR domains as sensors of membrane curvature : the amphiphysin BAR structure . Science 303 , 495 – 499 . Reichman - Fried , M . , Minina , S . , and Raz , E . ( 2004 ) . Autonomous modes of behavior in primordial germ cell migration . Dev . Cell 6 , 589 – 596 . Ren , M . , Xu , G . , Zeng , J . , DeLemos - Chiarandini , C . , Adesnik , M . , andSabatini , D . D . ( 1998 ) . Hydrolysis of GTP on rab11 is required for the direct delivery of transferrin from the pericentriolar recycling compartment to the cell surface but not from sorting endosomes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 6187 – 6192 . Sabharanjak , S . , Sharma , P . , Parton , R . G . , and Mayor , S . ( 2002 ) . GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endosomes via a distinct cdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway . Dev . Cell 2 , 411 – 423 . Sens , P . , and Plastino , J . ( 2015 ) . Membrane tension and cytoskeleton organi - zation in cell motility . J . Phys . Condens Matter 27 , 273103 . Sheetz , M . P . , Sable , J . E . , and Dobereiner , H . G . ( 2006 ) . Continuous mem - brane - cytoskeleton adhesion requires continuous accommodation to lipid and cytoskeletondynamics . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 35 , 417 – 434 . Sinha , B . , Koster , D . , Ruez , R . , Gonnord , P . , Bastiani , M . , Abankwa , D . , Stan , R . V . , Butler - Browne , G . , Vedie , B . , Johannes , L . , etal . ( 2011 ) . Cells respond to mechanical stress by rapid disassembly of caveolae . Cell 144 , 402 – 413 . Small , J . V . , Stradal , T . , Vignal , E . , and Rottner , K . ( 2002 ) . The lamellipodium : where motility begins . Trends Cell Biol . 12 , 112 – 120 . Spiczka , K . S . , andYeaman , C . ( 2008 ) . Ral - regulatedinteractionbetweenSec5 and paxillin targets Exocyst to focal complexes during cell migration . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 2880 – 2891 . Stenmark , H . , Parton , R . G . , Steele - Mortimer , O . , Lutcke , A . , Gruenberg , J . , and Zerial , M . ( 1994 ) . Inhibition of rab5 GTPase activity stimulates membrane fusion in endocytosis . EMBO J . 13 , 1287 – 1296 . Strychalski , W . , and Guy , R . D . ( 2013 ) . A computational model of bleb forma - tion . Math . Med . Biol . 30 , 115 – 130 . Takahashi , S . , Kubo , K . , Waguri , S . , Yabashi , A . , Shin , H . W . , Katoh , Y . , and Nakayama , K . ( 2012 ) . Rab11 regulates exocytosis of recycling vesicles at the plasma membrane . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 4049 – 4057 . Taloni , A . , Kardash , E . , Salman , O . U . , Truskinovsky , L . , Zapperi , S . , and La Porta , C . A . ( 2015 ) . Volume changes during active shape ﬂuctuations in cells . Phys . Rev . Lett . 114 , 208101 . Tarbashevich , K . , Reichman - Fried , M . , Grimaldi , C . , and Raz , E . ( 2015 ) . Chemokine - dependent pH elevation at the cell front sustains polarity in direc - tionally migrating zebraﬁsh germ cells . Curr . Biol . 25 , 1096 – 1103 . Thisse , C . , andThisse , B . ( 2008 ) . High - resolutioninsituhybridizationtowhole - mount zebraﬁsh embryos . Nat . Protoc . 3 , 59 – 69 . Veldkamp , C . T . , Seibert , C . , Peterson , F . C . , De la Cruz , N . B . , Haugner , J . C . , 3rd , Basnet , H . , Sakmar , T . P . , and Volkman , B . F . ( 2008 ) . Structural basis of CXCR4 sulfotyrosine recognition by the chemokine SDF - 1 / CXCL12 . Sci . Signal . 1 , ra4 . Welch , M . D . ( 2015 ) . Cell migration , freshly squeezed . Cell 160 , 581 – 582 . Zanchi , R . , Howard , G . , Bretscher , M . S . , and Kay , R . R . ( 2010 ) . The exocytic gene secA is required for Dictyostelium cell motility and osmoregulation . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 3226 – 3234 . Developmental Cell 43 , 1 – 11 , December 4 , 2017 11 Please cite this article in press as : Goudarzi et al . , Bleb Expansion in Migrating Cells Depends on Supply of Membrane from Cell Surface Invaginations , Developmental Cell ( 2017 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2017 . 10 . 030 STAR + METHODS KEY RESOURCES TABLE REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Antibodies Anti - Digoxigenin - AP , Fab fragments from sheep Roche Cat # 11093274910 ; RRID : AB _ 514497 Anti - Fluorescein - AP , Fab fragments from sheep Roche Cat # 11426338910 ; RRID : AB _ 514504 Chemicals , Peptides , and Recombinant Proteins Glutaraldehyde solution , for electron microscopy , 25 % in H2O Sigma G5882 - 10X1ML FM4 - 64 ThermoFisher Cat # T13320 UltraPure (cid:2) Low Melting Point Agarose Invitrogen Cat # 16520100 Leibovitz’s L - 15 media ThermoFisher Cat # 31415 - 029 Critical Commercial Assays mMessage Machine kit Ambion Cat # AM1340 Deposited Data Post - process _ analysis This paper Zip ﬁle at - https : / / doi . org / 10 . 17632 / wmtzc7w3d7 . 2 Radial analysis This paper Zip ﬁle at - https : / / doi . org / 10 . 17632 / wmtzc7w3d7 . 2 Experimental Models : Organisms / Strains Zebraﬁsh : AB Zebraﬁsh International Resource Center ( ZIRC ) ZFIN : ZDB - GENO - 960809 - 7 Zebraﬁsh : Tg ( kop : EGFP - f - UTRnanos3 ) Blaser et al . , 2006 ZDB - ALT - 070406 - 1 Zebraﬁsh : Tg ( kop : mCherry - f - UTR - nanos3 ) Tarbashevich et al . , 2015 ZDB - ALT - 150810 - 1 Zebraﬁsh : Tg ( kop : EGFP - LIFEACT - UTRnanos3 ) Meyen et al . , 2015 ZDB - ALT - 141104 - 1 Zebraﬁsh : cav3 pd1149 Garcia et al . , 2017 ZDB - ALT - 160405 - 5 Zebraﬁsh : cav1 pd1104 Cao et al . , 2016 ZDB - ALT - 170907 - 1 Oligonucleotides RNA : 480 : cdc42 ( T17N ) . 3’nanos3UTR ( Dominant Negative ) This paper N / A RNA : 554 : cd14 - 3’nanos3UTR This paper N / A RNA : 947 : zfrab5c ( S36N ) - 3’nanos3UTR ( Dominant Negative ) This paper N / A RNA : 949 : zfrab11a ( S25N ) - 3’nos1 UTR ( Dominant Negative ) This paper N / A RNA : A700 : egfp - zfvamp8 - 3’nos1 UTR This paper N / A RNA : A801 : dsred - rab5c - 3’globin UTR This paper N / A RNA : A803 : zfrab11a - 3’globin UTR This paper N / A RNA : A279 : dsredex - [ human beta 1 , 4 - galactosyltransferase ] - 3’nos1UTR This paper N / A RNA : A741 : dn - zfexo70 - 3’nanos3UTR ( Dominant Negative ) This paper N / A RNA : A918 : pa - gfp - 3’globin UTR This paper N / A RNA : B007 : lifeact - Ruby - 3’nanos3 UTR This paper N / A RNA : B790 : ca - zfmlck - 3’nanos3 UTR This paper N / A RNA : B854 : D cxcr4b - egfp - 3’nanos3 UTR This paper N / A RNA : C229 : cav1a - egfp - 3’nanos3 UTR This paper N / A RNA : C504 : cav1a - egfp - 3’globin UTR This paper N / A RNA : C584 : mcherry - clip170h - 3’nanos3 UTR This paper N / A RNA : C944 : dendra2 - f - 3’nanos3 UTR This paper N / A RNA : D333 : dn - exo70 - 3’globin UTR ( Dominant Negative ) This paper N / A RNA : D597 : zfrab5c ( S36N ) - 3’globin UTR ( Dominant Negative ) This paper N / A ( Continued on next page ) e1 Developmental Cell 43 , 1 – 11 . e1 – e5 , December 4 , 2017 Please cite this article in press as : Goudarzi et al . , Bleb Expansion in Migrating Cells Depends on Supply of Membrane from Cell Surface Invaginations , Developmental Cell ( 2017 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2017 . 10 . 030 CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the Lead Contact , Erez Raz ( erezraz @ uni - muenster . de ) . EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS Zebraﬁsh Strains Zebraﬁsh ( Danio rerio ) of the AB background and transgenic ﬁsh carrying the Tg ( kop : EGFP - f - UTRnanos3 ) expressing EGFP on the membrane of PGCs as a result of maternal expression of mRNA that includes the nanos3 untranslated region ( Blaser et al . , 2005 ) , Tg ( kop : EGFP - f - UTRnanos3 ) expressing mCherry on the membrane of PGCs as a result of maternal expression of mRNA that includes the nanos3 untranslated region ( Tarbashevich et al . , 2015 ) and Tg ( kop : EGFP - LIFEACT - UTRnanos3 ) expressing EGFP - life - act protein that labels actin structures in PGCs as a result of maternal expression of mRNA that includes the nanos3 untranslated region ( Meyen et al . , 2015 ) were used as wild - type ﬁsh . cav1 ; cav3 mutants ﬁsh were previously described ( Cao et al . , 2016 ; Garcia et al . , 2017 ) . Brieﬂy , the cav1 1104 mutants were generated using TALEN pairs to target to the common sequence of both cav1 isoforms , leading to a 23nt deletion and the cav3 pd1149 mutant allele was generated using two CRISPRs that remove a 765 - bp region between exon 1 and intron 1 , resulting in the deletion of 90 bp of coding sequence . Zebraﬁsh were maintained on a 14 - hour light / 10 - hour dark cycle , and fertilized eggs were collected and raised at 25 . 1 (cid:1) C , 27 . 7 (cid:1) C or 32 (cid:1) C . Embryos were kept in 0 . 3x Danieau’s solution [ 17 . 4 mM NaCl , 0 . 21 mM KCl , 0 . 12 mM MgSO 4 $ 7H 2 O , 0 . 18 mM Ca ( NO 3 ) 2 , 1 . 5 mM HEPES ( pH 7 . 6 ) ] . The embryos used were of early developmental stages , precluding determination of the sex of the animals . The general ﬁsh maintenance at the Institute follows the regulations of the LANUV NRW and is supervised by the veterinarian ofﬁce of the city of Muenster . METHOD DETAILS RNA Expression , Constructs , and Injections mRNA was synthesized using the mMessage Machine kit ( Ambion ) . RNAs were injected into the yolk of one - cell stage or into one of the eight blastomeres of the 8 - cell stage embryo embryos . The experimental and control embryos were from same clutch of eggs . For a list of the RNA - expression constructs used see the ‘‘Key Resources Table’’ . Spinning Disk ( SD ) Microscopy Embryos were imaged using Carl Zeiss Axio imager Z1 microscope equipped with Yokogawa csu10B spinning disk . Samples maintained at 28 (cid:1) C using heated stage ( PECON , TempController 2000 - 2 ) . Imaging was performed using Cascade camera and Visitron Systems acquisition software ( Visi - View 2007 - 2011 ) . A 405 nm laser was employed in bleaching and photoconversion experiments . Volume and Surface Area Measurement PGCs from 7 - 8hpf Tg ( kop : mCherry - f - UTRnanos3 ) transgenic line were imaged using a spinning disk microscope with 1 m m differ - ence between z - planes and 2 sec time intervals between stacks . 3D reconstructions were generated using the Imaris software ( Bit - plane ) employing the surface function for Bleb and Pre - Bleb time points . Continued REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER RNA : D601 : zfrab11a ( S25N ) - 3’globin UTR ( Dominant Negative ) This paper N / A RNA : D617 : amph - nbar - yfp - 3’nanos3 UTR This paper N / A Software and Algorithms Graphpad GraphPad Software , La Jolla California USA https : / / www . graphpad . com / scientiﬁcsoftware / prism Imaris , version 8 . 4 . 1 , 2016 Bitplane Inc . http : / / www . bitplane . com Fiji NIH https : / / ﬁji . sc ZEN software , versions 2010B SP1 ( Release version 6 . 0 for LSM710 ) and 2014 SP1 ( black edition , 64bit , Release version 9 . 0 for Lightsheet Z . 1 ) Zeiss https : / / www . zeiss . com / microscopy / int / products / microscope - software / zen . html VisiView , version 2 . 1 . 4 , 2014 Visitron Systems GmbH http : / / www . visitron . de / Products / Software / VisiView / visiview . html Developmental Cell 43 , 1 – 11 . e1 – e5 , December 4 , 2017 e2 Please cite this article in press as : Goudarzi et al . , Bleb Expansion in Migrating Cells Depends on Supply of Membrane from Cell Surface Invaginations , Developmental Cell ( 2017 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2017 . 10 . 030 Cell Circumference Measurement PGCs in embryos from the Tg ( kop : mCherry - f - UTRnanos3 ) line were imaged by Spinning Disk microscopy at 7 hpf at a rate of one Z - stack per 2 seconds with 1 m m optical sections . During analysis , the plane of bleb inﬂation was selected and the change in the cell circumference in the bleb region and the rest of the cell was measured using the freehand tool of the Fiji software . The expression of the ﬂuorescent protein on the PGC membrane was achieved using mRNA that includes the nanos3 untranslated ( Blaser et al . , 2005 ) . Change in Signal Intensities during Bleb Expansion The cell contour was deﬁned using a custom - made program ( Radial analysis , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 17632 / wmtzc7w3d7 . 2 ) based on thresholding the intensity of the plasma membrane labeled with ﬂuorescent protein ( EGFP - F ) . Blebs were identiﬁed using ‘‘postprocess _ analysis’’ software ( https : / / doi . org / 10 . 17632 / wmtzc7w3d7 . 2 ) based on the velocity of the plasma membrane , manu - ally validated and the intensity of the central half of the bleb was plotted over time ( red dashed line in the Figure 1D ) . Photoconversion Embryos of the AB background were injected at 1 - cell stage with 50pg of dendra2 - f - nanos3 - 3’UTR mRNA , leading to expression of the Dendra2 - F protein on the membrane of the PGCs . At 7 - 8hpf a selected region on the plasma membrane of PGCs was irradiated using a 405 nm laser at 5 % of the power , converting Dendra2 - F molecules from green to red . Analysis of Lateral Mobility of Photoconverted Area Following photoconversion , images of the green ( unconverted ) and red ( converted ) channel were recorded with a time - resolution of 1s per time point . The cell perimeter was detected using thresholding and the photoconverted intensity was measured ( Figure 2B ) as function of the perimeter and angle . To describe the diffusion we followed a recently developed model ( Goehring et al . , 2010 ) to gain a ﬁt function for the 1D intensity proﬁle of the photoconverted region : I ð t ; x 1 ; x 2 Þ = I bg + b 2 (cid:1) erf (cid:3) x (cid:3) x 2 ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 2 Dt p (cid:5) (cid:3) erf (cid:3) x (cid:3) x 1 ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 2 Dt p (cid:5)(cid:6) Here , I bg is the background intensity , b is a pre - factor indicating the conversion efﬁciency , erf is the error function , x 1 and x 2 are the beginning and the end of the converted region and D is the diffusion constant . Fitting this model to the time evolution of the intensity allows to track the lateral velocity of the photoconverted area , which was found to be close to 0 independent of whether a bleb formed or not ( Figure 2C ) . This approach does also provide the diffusion constant of the Dendra2 - F protein which , was found to be D = 1 : 8±0 : 7 m m 2 s ( mean ± std , n = 8 ) , comparable to the diffusion constant of other membrane bound proteins ( Goehring et al . , 2010 ) . Confocal Imaging of Fixed PGCs Embryos of transgenic line Tg ( kop : mCherry - f - UTRnanos3 ) were ﬁxed at 8hpf in 2 % PFA for 2 hours and imaged using Zeiss LSM - 710 confocal microscope equipped with 63x water - immersion objective with NA = 1 , 0 pinhole 1AU and 1 m m optical slices . Images were analyzed using Fiji software . Manipulations of Medium Osmolarity 7 - 9hpf embryos from Tg ( kop : mCherry - f - UTRnanos3 ) transgenic line were de - yolked manually ( see movie 1 in ( Goudarzi et al . , 2015 ) . The embryos were then maintained in 1 % low melting point agarose ( Invitrogen ) covered with Leibovitz’s L - 15 as iso - osmotic medium ( Gibco ) . Frames were captured at 5 sec intervals on a confocal spinning disk microscope for up to 30 min . Hypo - osmotic treatment was induced by replacing the medium with distilled water , while the hyper - osmotic treatment was induced by exchange of the medium with a 2osmol NaCl solution . The circumference of the cells was measured manually using Fiji freehand tool . Circumference Measurement of Teneo VolumeScope Data A VolumeScope SEM picture per 200 nm was selected for analysis . Multiple lines were drawn either precisely following the plasma membrane contours ( detailed measurement ) , or by mimicking the resolution of light microscopy and ignoring small folds ( coarse measurement ) . These measurements were performed for two PGCs ( 29 slices ( example A ) and 15 slices ( example B ) ) . For each type of measurement ( detailed and course ) the total length of the lines was measured and the ratio between them was determined . BAR Domain Expression in PGCs The N - BAR domain of human Amphiphysin and Nadrin fused to YFP was expressed in PGCs by injection of 50pg mRNA into 1 - cell stage embryos . A 1 m m 2 region of interest was used for measuring the mean label intensity . For overexpression of the N - BAR protein , 250pg of the Amphiphysin - encoding RNA were injected and the migration and morphology of PGCs examined . e3 Developmental Cell 43 , 1 – 11 . e1 – e5 , December 4 , 2017 Please cite this article in press as : Goudarzi et al . , Bleb Expansion in Migrating Cells Depends on Supply of Membrane from Cell Surface Invaginations , Developmental Cell ( 2017 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2017 . 10 . 030 Generation of Non - ligand Binding Non - internalizable CXCR4b A truncation ( amino acids 15 to 25 ) in region of ligand binding site of CXCR4b ( Veldkamp et al . , 2008 ) was generated rendering the protein inactive in cell guidance in addition to a truncation in the c - terminal part of the molecule that inhibits internalization of the receptor ( Minina et al . , 2007 ) . This molecule was used in the photobleaching experiments . Filopodia Length Measurement Length of the ﬁlopodia was measured before and after bleb inﬂation using the Freehand tool of Fiji . Labeling PGCs’ Plasma Membrane Lipids Embryos from 9hpf Tg ( kop : mCherry - f - UTRnanos3 ) transgenic line where deyolked in Leibovitz’s L - 15 ( Gibco ) medium ( see movie 1 in ( Goudarzi et al . , 2015 ) . Embryos were then transferred to a drop of 1 % low melting point agarose ( Invitrogen ) containing 0 . 4 mM FM4 - 64 ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ) . Imaging was performed using a Zeiss LSM710 confocal microscope ( three Z - planes within a focal depth of 4 m m were captured every 2 , 5sec for 50 time points ) . The data presented in the Figure S1E , are derived from a maximum projection of the 3 Z - planes . The minimum and maximum intensity values in expanded blebs and pre - bleb membranes were determined as follows – a line tracing the membrane was drawn and signal intensity was measured for 1 m m 2 blocks along it . The maximum and minimum block intensity values were then determined for each membrane region . The values presented in the graph are the ratios between the maximum intensity measured in the expanded bleb and that in the pre - bleb ( Figure S1E , left ) . Similarly , the ratios between the minimum intensity measured in the expanded bleb and that measured in the pre - bleb are presented ( Fig - ure S1E , right ) . Photobleaching For bleaching of the cell plasma membrane , a line - bleach ( 15 - pixel width ( 3 . 5 m m ) ) was deﬁned in Visi - View software . Bleaching was performed using a spinning - disk confocal microscope employing 10 % ( 7 mW ) power 405 nm laser and 63x water - immersion objec - tive NA = 1 . 0 . Due to variability in the depth of the cells within the embryo and the position within the microscope ﬁeld , the precise laser power reaching the cell membrane differs signiﬁcantly between experiments . This variability leads to bleaching of the ﬂuorophore in a very large membrane area or conversely to no effect . For this reason , successful informative photoconversion and photobleaching was achieved in 20 % of the trials . Cytoplasmic Intensity Measurement upon Bleb Intensity of cytoplasmic GFP was measured using a circular region ( 2 m m radius ) before and after bleb inﬂation . The ratio was determined by dividing the bleb value by the pre - bleb value . Whole - Mount In Situ Hybridization Two - color whole - mount chromogenic in situ hybridization was performed as described previously ( Thisse and Thisse , 2008 ) . Brieﬂy , embryos were ﬁxed in 4 % PFA in PBS for 48 hours at 8 (cid:1) C , hand dechorionated and stored in 100 % MeOH at - 20 (cid:1) C . Embryos were permeabilized using 10 m g / ml Proteinase K ( Roche ) in PBT ( 1x PBS + 0 . 1 % Tween ) for 30 sec and ﬁxed again for 1 hour . Hybridization was performed using Digoxigenin - labeled nanos3 [ GenBank : NM _ 131878 ] and ﬂuorescein - labeled caveolin1 [ GenBank : NM _ 212651 ] probes were synthetized according to the manufacturer’s protocol ( Roche , Switzerland ) . Detection of the probes was performed sequentially by incubating the embryos with an anti - Digoxigenin or anti - Fluorescein antibody coupled to alkaline phosphase ( Roche ) diluted 1 : 5000 and 1 : 10000 respectively in blocking solution ( 0 . 1 % Tween in PBS , 2 % sheep serum , 2 mg / ml BSA ) . Removal of the ﬁrst antibody was achieved in 0 . 1 M glycine , pH 2 . 2 , for 10 min . The staining reaction was performed using either NBT / BCIP ( Roche , blue staining ) or INT / BCIP ( Roche , red staining ) in NTMT buffer ( 100 mM Tris HCl pH 9 . 5 , 50 mM MgCl 2 , 100 mM NaCl , 0 . 1 % Tween ) . Images were captured on an Axioplan2 microscope ( Zeiss ) using a SPOT Xplorer camera ( SPOT Im - aging Solutions ) controlled by Metamorph ( Visitron Systems ) software and processed using ImageJ ( NIH ) . CLEM on PGCs and VolumeScope For localization of PGCs in the tissue in electron microscopy analysis , the samples were initially ﬁxed in 2 % paraformaldehyde , 0 . 2 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1 M PHEM - buffer . As the germ cells are a very rare population ( about 0 . 2 % of the cells in the embryo at this stage ) we relied on the GFP signal for locating the cells as presented in ( Goudarzi et al . , 2015 ) . Employing higher glutaraldehyde concen - tration initially would eliminate the GFP signal in the cells , preventing their identiﬁcation and analysis by EM . We then employed a laser - marking technique ( arrow in Figure 3 ) to label the position of PGCs . Following the 2 % paraformaldehyde , 0 . 2 % glutaraldehyde ﬁxation the samples were re - ﬁxed in a solution of 2 % paraformaldehyde , 2 % glutaraldehyde . Subsequently , the samples were ﬁxed again , including thiocarbohydrazide and osmium tetroxide in the solution , as required for the imaging of serial block face scanning electron microscopy ( Deerinck et al . , 2010 ) . The sample was then dehydrated and embedded in Epon . The region of interest was sectioned using an ultramicrotome ( UC6 , Leica , Austria ) . The sample was glued to a VolumeScope stub ( Agar Scientiﬁc ) and grounded with silver paint and a thin layer of platinum . Serial block face scanning electron microscopy was performed on Teneo VolumeScope ( FEI , Eindhoven , the Netherlands ) , operating in low vacuum mode ( 50 Pa ; water vapor ) . 500 images were acquired every 20 nm with a 10 nm x 10 nm pixel size . Developmental Cell 43 , 1 – 11 . e1 – e5 , December 4 , 2017 e4 Please cite this article in press as : Goudarzi et al . , Bleb Expansion in Migrating Cells Depends on Supply of Membrane from Cell Surface Invaginations , Developmental Cell ( 2017 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2017 . 10 . 030 QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 6 software , or using Microsoft Excel . All graphs depict median and inter - quartile range values . DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY All relevant data are available as ZIP ﬁles named Radial _ analysis and Postprocess _ Analysis that can be downloaded from https : / / doi . org / 10 . 17632 / wmtzc7w3d7 . 2 . e5 Developmental Cell 43 , 1 – 11 . e1 – e5 , December 4 , 2017 Please cite this article in press as : Goudarzi et al . , Bleb Expansion in Migrating Cells Depends on Supply of Membrane from Cell Surface Invaginations , Developmental Cell ( 2017 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2017 . 10 . 030