Computer Supported Cooperative Work : The Journal of Collaborative Computing 7 : 123 – 156 , 1998 . 123 c (cid:13) 1998 Kluwer Academic Publishers . Printed in the Netherlands . Network Communities : Something Old , Something New , Something Borrowed : : : ELIZABETH D . MYNATT and VICKI L . O’DAY Xerox PARC E - mail : mynatt @ parc . xerox . com ; oday @ parc . xerox . com ANNETTE ADLER Xerox Corporation E - mail : adler @ parc . xerox . com MIZUKO ITO Stanford University & Institute for Research on Learning E - mail : mito @ portola . com ( Received January 1997 ; in ﬁnal form June 1997 ) Abstract . Collaboration has long been of considerable interest to both designers and researchers in the CHI and CSCW communities . This paper contributes to this discussion by proposing the concept of network communities as a new genre of collaboration for this discussion . Network communities are robust and persistent communities based on a sense of locality that spans both the virtual and physical worlds of their users . They are a technosocial construct that requires understanding of both the technology and the sociality embodying them . We consider several familiar systems as well as historical antecedents to describe the affordances these systems offer their community of users . Based on our own experience as designers , users and researchers of a variety of network communities , we extend this initial design space along three dimensions : the boundary negotiations between real and virtual worlds , support for social rhythms and the emergence and development of community . Finally we offer implications for designers , researchers and community members based on our ﬁndings . Key words : Affordance , identity , media space , MOOs , MUDs , network community , technosociality 1 . Introduction The CSCW community has long recognized the importance of collaboration in the context of informal , awareness - rich , and serendipitous practices of long - term collaborators . In this paper , we extend this discussion by describing an emergent genre of collaboration : network communities . Network communities are robust and persistent communities based on a sense of locality that spans both the virtual and physical worlds of their users . Drawing on prior work as well as our own experience , we offer observations about these technologically - mediated communi - ties and suggest design implications associated with them . This discussion will be based on an understanding of the affordances of the technologies used to support network communities and their relation to other forms of community . 124 E . D . MYNATT ET AL . Community as a social phenomenon deals with establishing and working with meaningful connections between people . Technology has always played an impor - tant role in this ( Dourish , 1993 ; Grudin , 1990 ) . Historically , systems for linking and supporting robust social connections between people , whether they are in close proximity or distributed over longer distances , have included point to point solutions ( letters , the automobile , telephone ) ( Nye , 1992 ) , task - focused or work - modeling solutions ( memos , forms , manuals ) ( Yates ) , and one - to - many broad - cast solutions ( radio , TV , newspapers ) ( Nye , 1992 ; Yates , 1989 ) . More recently , computationally - based systems have been designed to support various aspects of collaboration , coordination , and community : email , newsgroups , bulletin boards , and shared task tools are just a few examples . These systems have all been useful in collaboration and further , supporting community , yet they also share similar limitations : (cid:15) Point to point connections tend to support individual interactions , not multiple connections within groups to establish shared context on an ongoing basis . (cid:15) Task - focused or work - modeled connections can be too narrowly specialized to handle ad hoc and unanticipated group activities as well as evolution over time . (cid:15) Unbounded , uncertain connections or high turnover participation make it difﬁ - cult for groups to establish and maintain common awareness , group coherence , shared experience , and trust . Media spaces and MUDs have attempted to address these concerns by creating persistent , predictable , multi - user connections that support a wide range of user interaction and collaborative activity . Media spaces ( whether analog or digital ) are multimedia environments connecting geographically dispersed spaces . In contrast to teleconferencing , these persistent video and audio connections create a new sense of locality by bridging these separate spaces . MUDs are computationally - based environments that provide access to a persistent , online “world” . Like media spaces , these persistent , ﬂexible , multi - user environments can generate a sense of a known virtual place that can be inhabited and shaped by an emerging community . This paper is a reﬂection on our previous and ongoing experiences as designers , users and researchers of media spaces and MUDs . Stemming from our initial discussions , we worked from a shared intuition that these seemingly different environments demonstrated common technical and social affordances for nurturing community . We use the name network communities to refer collectively to these environments . Although many other technologies such as chat , net news and email share some of these technological capabilities , we argue that media spaces and MUDs are exemplary systems in that they were designed to support multiple aspects of network - mediated communities . In this paper , we describe these common capabilities or affordances as well as common design implications in the genesis and sustenance of network communities . Some of these observations will be familiar , as they have also been noted by designers and users of individual systems . Our