Electronic copy available at : http : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 2480861 An Ounce of Common Sense Is Worth a Pound of Theory Ernest N . Biktimirov * Faculty of Business Brock University 500 Glenridge Ave St . Catharines , Ontario , Canada L2S 3A1 905 . 688 . 5550 x 3843 ebiktimirov @ brocku . ca Published in Advances in Financial Education 1 , Fall 2003 , 1 - 12 Citation information : Biktimirov E . N . ( 2003 ) . “An ounce of common sense is worth a pound of theory , ” Advances in Financial Education 1 , Fall , 1 - 12 . ABSTRACT This paper proposes the use of proverbs in the teaching of finance . Familiar proverbs facilitate teaching by appealing to students’ prior knowledge , by presenting ideas in a concise and original way , and by making the learning process more enjoyable and efficient . The paper presents more than five dozen proverbs accompanied by their related financial concepts , which are organized into twelve thematic groups . Strategies for the effective use of proverbs in the classroom are suggested as well . * I thank Barbara Sainty , Robert Welch , and an anonymous referee for helpful comments . Electronic copy available at : http : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 2480861 2 An Ounce of Common Sense Is Worth a Pound of Theory INTRODUCTION Teaching can be more efficient when an instructor can relate new concepts to the existing experience of students . Students will also retain the new material better if it is presented concisely , from an original point of view , and in an entertaining way . This paper proposes the use of proverbs in the teaching of finance . The introduction of proverbs into financial instruction can “kill several birds with one stone . ” First , familiar proverbs will appeal to students’ prior knowledge and will help them to understand abstract financial concepts easier . Second , using proverbs to present ideas in a concise and original way will serve as an efficient explanation tool and will improve retention . Third , proverbs with their wit , humor , and original point of view will bring entertainment and excitement into the classroom , making the learning process more enjoyable and efficient . Instructors have offered analogies , metaphors , and examples to explain financial concepts . For instance , Forbes [ 1991 ] suggests using relations between American and Canadian dollars to illustrate the time value of money concept . Mann [ 1996 ] uses air conditioners and heaters to explain calls and puts . Gilkeson and Lamb [ 2000 ] propose using the baseball card and Beanie Baby collectibles markets to describe equity and emerging markets , respectively . Finally , Kane [ 1999 ] shows how examples from popular music can be used to teach principal - agent problems . Instructors have also addressed the incorporation of humor in the teaching of finance to make education more attractive . For example , Becker [ 1993 ] suggests using a David Letterman type “Top Ten List” in a finance class , and Ardalan [ 1998 ] demonstrates the use of entertaining metaphors in an introductory finance course . Taken together , an examination of financial education literature shows a continual search for new ways to teach finance . This paper contributes to this literature by offering the use of proverbs as an innovative teaching tool to relate financial concepts to students’ prior knowledge . Proverbs also present complex concepts in a concise and original way and bring excitement to the classroom . 3 The paper is organized as follows . The next section describes the teaching benefits of proverbs , presents the results of empirical research , and suggests strategies for the effective use of proverbs in the classroom . The following section contains proverbs , accompanied by the appropriate financial concept they illustrate , and classifies them into twelve subsections . The final section provides a summary and conclusions . PROVERBS AS A TEACHING TOOL The Oxford English Dictionary defines a proverb as “a concise sentence , often metaphorical or alliterative in form , which is held to express some truth ascertained by experience or observation and familiar to all . ” Being a colorful part of any language , proverbs have been extensively applied in the teaching of English and other languages . The use of proverbs has been limited outside of language instruction . The few examples of applying proverbs in other areas of teaching include the use proverbs as a tool to promote reflection among science teachers [ Nichols , Tippins and Wieseman , 1997 ] and a quiz on the chemical interpretation of proverbs [ Ibanez , 2002 ] . Proverbs , however , can provide a number of teaching benefits , which are discussed in the next subsection . Teaching Benefits of Proverbs This subsection uses several examples to illustrate the teaching benefits of proverbs . Suppose an instructor needs to explain the principle of diversification . To illustrate this concept , an instructor can use the proverb “don’t put all your eggs in one basket . ” The sense of diversification by the spreading of investments across several assets is clearly conveyed by the proverb . Using this proverb will help an instructor to achieve a number of teaching objectives . First , this well - known proverb , which advises to not risk everything on one venture , will appeal to students’ prior knowledge and will help them to relate the concept of diversification to their life experience . Second , a concise and familiar proverb associated with a financial concept facilitates the retention of the concept by students . Also , the terse and pithy nature of proverbs makes them an indispensable explanation tool that can summarize the main idea of a half - hour lecture . Finally , the proverb makes the learning process more exciting by providing an original 4 point of view on an otherwise abstract financial principle . The metaphorical analogy provided by the proverb spices up the material . The advantage of presenting a financial concept from a different perspective , or by using an interesting analogy , can be especially beneficial when students have problems understanding that concept . For example , students frequently have difficulty accepting that costs that occurred in the past and cannot be recovered ( sunk costs ) should be ignored in the capital budgeting analysis . To clarify this concept for students , an instructor can illustrate it with the proverb “it’s no use crying over spilled milk . ” This familiar expression will present the concept of sunk costs from a different point of view , one that may be more easily understood by students . Students appreciate it when instructors explain new concepts in an original way . For instance , Csikszentmihalyi and McCormack [ 1995 , p . 6 ] present a student’s description of exemplary teaching : “Mr . C . is such a fantastic teacher because he has a special way of thinking that catches your attention . He makes brains go , he makes brains think , and he says things in a way that you just can’t forget them . ” The use of proverbs can serve as an indispensable teaching tool for capturing students’ attention and conveying new ideas in a unique and memorable way . The following subsection provides support for the teaching benefits of proverbs based on the results of empirical educational research . Empirical Educational Research A large body of literature examines the effect of analogies , metaphors and humor on learning . The study by Moreno and Di Vesta ( 1994 ) is especially of interest here because it examines the effect of proverbs , which are referred to as adages in their paper , on learning . Specifically , the authors analyze the effect of proverbs on college students’ recall and text comprehension . They compare the learning outcomes of the proverb titles , chosen to represent the main idea of each passage , with the learning effects of general titles . For example , they study the effect of the proverb title “A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush” compared to the impact of the general title “The effects of delay of gratification , ” and the proverb heading “A stitch in time saves nine” is contrasted with the general heading “Some theories on timing of experiences in development . ” 5 Moreno and Di Vesta ( 1994 ) find that proverbs facilitate comprehension and retention of new material . Moreover , the elaboration of a proverb and the explanation of its relation to the topic further enhanced the learning benefits . While mixed results have been found , a growing body of research supports the view that college students benefit from the use of analogies in the classroom . For example , Halpern , Hansen and Riefer [ 1990 ] and Newby , Ertmer and Stepich [ 1995 ] find that analogies have a positive impact on college students’ comprehension and retention . Baker and Lawson [ 2001 ] report not only an improvement in student comprehension , but also positive student evaluations of analogy - based instruction . The empirical research on the role of metaphors in learning has produced similar results . For instance , Pearson , Raphael , TePaske and Hyser [ 1981 ] and Reynolds and Schwartz [ 1983 ] show that the use of metaphors facilitates student recall of new information . Certain proverbs also have a dash of humor in them , which assists the learning process and makes it more enjoyable . Researchers have found a positive relationship between teachers’ use of humor and learning [ Ziv , 1988 ] , student perceptions of their learning [ Gorham and Christophel , 1990 ; Wanzer and Frymier , 1999 ] , and teacher evaluations [ Bryant , Comisky , Crane and Zillmann , 1980 ] . In addition , some studies also show that humor that is relevant to the lecture material facilitates retention [ Kaplan and Pascoe , 1977 ; Desberg , Henschel , Marhsall and McGhee , 1981 ] . Furthermore , researchers also argue that humor promotes a more enjoyable classroom environment [ Korobkin , 1988 ; Neuliep , 1991 ; Desberg et al . , 1981 ] . Taken together , empirical educational research provides evidence that innovative teaching tools , such as proverbs , analogies , metaphors , and humor , facilitate comprehension and retention of new material , and make the learning process more enjoyable . The simple addition of proverbs into instruction , however , may have only a marginal impact or no effect at all . To achieve all the teaching benefits of using proverbs , it is necessary to follow several teaching strategies that are discussed in the next subsection . 6 Teaching Strategies for Using Proverbs in the Classroom In this subsection , I present several teaching strategies for the effective use of proverbs in the classroom . These strategies originate from my personal teaching experience and from the recommendations of educational literature . The first and most important prerequisite for the successful use of proverbs in teaching is the students’ understanding of the meaning of proverbs and their relations to financial concepts . If students do not understand the interpretation of a proverb , they will not be able to relate it to their prior knowledge and to a new financial topic . This requirement becomes especially important given a growing number of foreign students enrolled in finance courses who may not be familiar with many English proverbs . Explanation of proverbs will not only help their understanding , but will also facilitate their recall [ Honeck , 1973 ; Honeck , Riechmann and Hoffman , 1975 ] . Also , even if students recognize a proverb , the instructor has to ensure that they can establish connections between the proverb and its financial concept . As mentioned earlier , the elaboration of a proverb and the explanation of its relation to new material improve comprehension and retention compared to using proverbs without any interpretation [ Moreno and Di Vesta , 1994 ] . Second , I suggest starting the explanation of a new financial concept with a proverb and then continuing it with the discussion of the concept itself . In this case , students will have a point of reference to which they will be able to relate the new material . For example , an instructor can begin a lecture on the risk - return tradeoff with the proverb “nothing ventured , nothing gained . ” This familiar proverb , which implies that higher expected returns are associated with larger risks , will appeal to students’ prior knowledge and will help them to follow the instructor’s explanation . Third , I recommend using all relevant proverbs when more than one proverb can illustrate the same financial concept . For example , both “a door must be shut or open” and “you cannot have your cake and eat it too” can be used to explain to students the concept of mutually exclusive alternatives . If students are not familiar with a proverb , have difficulty with connecting the proverb to a financial concept , or the proverb does not appeal to their prior knowledge , a second proverb may offer another perspective and , therefore , avoid these problems . Dupin and 7 Johsua [ 1989 ] and Spiro , Feltovich , Coulson , and Anderson [ 1989 ] provide the same recommendation based on their research of the use of analogies for instruction , and Cameron [ 2002 ] offers similar advice based on her study of the use of metaphor in learning science . Anecdotally , I have followed these teaching strategies and have had a positive experience using proverbs in my finance courses . Each proverb attracted students’ attention , added a new dimension to the discussion of a financial concept and created a friendlier atmosphere in the classroom . On many occasions students told me that proverbs helped them grasp the essence of financial concepts . PROVERBS AND THEIR FINANCIAL APPLICATIONS This section presents 62 proverbs accompanied by their related financial concepts . The great majority of the presented proverbs are selected from Simpson and Speake [ 1998 ] . Each proverb is classified into one of twelve subsections . The first eleven subsections refer to different financial areas , and the last subsection contains proverbs that can be used to convey an instructor’s advice to students about learning , or serve as captivating introductory statements . For easy reference , all subsections , except the last one , and proverbs are listed in alphabetical order by first word . Proverbs appear in italics , and if more than one proverb can be used to illustrate a financial concept , the alternative proverbs are separated by “and . ” To save space , descriptions of the financial concepts being illustrated are kept to a minimum . Depending on the level of instruction , a teacher can provide as much additional explanation as necessary . Agency Relationships If you would be well served , serve yourself suggests that someone , hired to act on behalf of another person , may not always act in the best interests of that person . Such conflict is called an agency problem . 8 Capital Budgeting A door must either be shut or open and you cannot have your cake and eat it too define mutually exclusive alternatives . It is no use crying over spilled milk highlights the irrelevance of sunk costs in capital budgeting decisions . Know which side one’s bread is buttered on emphasizes the importance of identifying where a company’s profits come from in a performance analysis of different divisions of the same company . Separate the wheat from the chaff and separate the sheep from the goats describe the objective of capital budgeting analysis , which is to separate good investment opportunities from bad ones . Derivative Securities Kill two birds with one stone describes financial instruments that achieve two objectives at the same time . For example , convertible bonds allow investors to attain both the safety of bonds and the upward potential of stocks . One man’s loss is another man’s gain illustrates the concept of a zero - sum game , under which investor’s profits can come only from someone else’s losses , for example , options and futures markets’ payoffs . Financial Planning and Forecasting A chain is no stronger than its weakest link warns that the accuracy of forecasted numbers is limited by the precision of the inputs used in the analysis . Better the devil you know than the devil you don’t know and forewarned is forearmed emphasize the importance of financial planning and forecasting . Don’t count your chickens before they are hatched cautions that forecasted numbers are only our best estimates , and that they should never be considered as actual numbers . 9 Garbage in , garbage out advises that even a sophisticated analysis can produce grossly false conclusions if the original numbers used in the analysis were seriously in error . Hindsight is better than foresight suggests that , due to uncertainty , forecasted numbers will never be as accurate as the actual numbers , which can be observed only after the event has taken place . Hope for the best and prepare for the worst illustrates scenario analysis , which requires the forecasting of the best and worst possible outcomes . Personal Investing Don’t bite off more than you can chew , and if you don’t like the heat , get out of the kitchen , and stretch your arm no further than your sleeve will reach advise investors to not undertake investments that exceed their risk tolerance . He laughs best who laughs last stresses that in long - term horizon investments short - term performance is irrelevant . If you can’t beat them , join them advises an investor who cannot outperform the market to receive market returns simply by investing in market index funds . Make hay while the sun shines , and strike while the iron is hot , and the early bird catches the worm recommend decisive action in capital markets . Since security prices adjust quickly to new information in efficient capital markets , an investor should react promptly to new information to have a better chance of receiving above - average returns . One man’s meat is another man’s poison illustrates that what is appropriate for one person’s portfolio can be unsuitable for another person’s portfolio . For example , risky investments with the potential of high returns , which are suitable for a retirement portfolio of a young person , can be a disastrous investment for a person who is near retirement . Rome was not built in a day conveys that it takes time to achieve a large financial goal . There is a time and place for everything states that different investments are appropriate for different situations . There is no such thing as bad weather , only the wrong clothes can be paraphrased as “there is no such thing as a bad market , only the wrong investments . ” The paraphrased form of the proverb suggests that investors can earn superior returns in both rising and declining markets . 10 Indeed , short selling and put options give investors an opportunity to profit in a falling market as well . You pays your money and you takes your chances advises an investor that paying for investment advice does not guarantee above - average returns . Portfolio Management A stitch in time saves nine illustrates the importance of a regular portfolio rebalancing . Cut your coat according to your cloth emphasizes that each portfolio should be constructed according to its specific objectives and constraints . Fight fire with fire suggests that risky securities ( e . g . , options , futures ) can be used to reduce the risk of a portfolio . Keep no more cats than will catch mice advises limiting the number of assets in a portfolio only to those that are required to achieve an investment objective , for example , diversification benefits . Risk and Return Don’t put all your eggs in one basket explains the principle of diversification , according to which investing in more than one asset can reduce risk . Nothing is certain but the unforeseen , and nothing is permanent but change , and the unexpected always happens state that the total return will always include both expected and unexpected portions , no matter how sophisticated the analysis used to derive the expected return . Nothing ventured , nothing gained and there is no such thing as a free lunch describe the fundamental relation between risk and return , which is that an investor should be willing to take a larger amount of risk to have higher expected returns . You can’t find gold in a coalmine implies that high returns cannot be found among low risk investments . 11 Security Valuation All that glitters is not gold and you can’t tell a book by its cover can be used to explain two points . First , just because a company has sound fundamentals and an experienced management team does not necessarily mean it is a profitable investment . Investors must compare their value estimates with the current market price of the stock . As a result , good companies can be poor investments and average firms can provide great value . Second , the proverbs point out that an investment should not be evaluated simply based on its return or risk alone . Only if an investment provides an adequate compensation for its risk can it be considered as an attractive investment . Beauty is in the eye of the beholder illustrates that an investment that looks unattractive for one investor can look appealing to another . It is the market consensus that determines securities prices . The worth of a thing is what it will bring introduces the fundamental theory of valuation , which is that the value of any financial asset can be determined as the present value of all expected cash flows . Stock Price Behavior A rising tide lifts all boats suggests that a rising stock market can raise the prices of all stocks . The bigger they are , the harder they fall implies that sometimes stocks that have experienced spectacular returns in one period are the ones that are hit the hardest in the following period . The darkest hour is just before the dawn and when things are at the worst they begin to mend suggest that financial markets are often at their worst just before they begin to improve , providing a great buying opportunity for disciplined investors . 12 Technical Analysis Coming events cast their shadows before illustrates one of the main differences between efficient market hypothesis and technical analysis . While under the efficient market hypothesis stock prices react quickly to new information , under technical analysis stock prices adjust slowly . As a result , technical analysts can benefit from gradual price adjustments by trading as soon as prices begin to change . History repeats itself provides the rationale behind technical analysis , which is based on the assumption that prices move in trends that repeat themselves over time . One swallow does not make a summer notes that technical analysts should not focus only on one or two indicators , but should develop their estimates using a consensus of numerous technical indicators . Straws tell which way the wind blows describes how small changes in stock price or trading volume behavior can trigger technical trading rules signaling large future stock price changes . Time Value of Money Better an egg today than a hen tomorrow and time is money emphasize the time value of money , which is that a dollar today is more valuable than a dollar tomorrow . Money makes money , and great oaks from little acorns grow , and little and often fills the purse illustrate the power of compounding , which is the principle of keeping earned interest in the investment to earn more interest , resulting in considerable growth over long time periods . General Teaching Proverbs In addition to the above proverbs illustrating financial concepts , proverbs can also be used to convey instructional advice to students regarding learning or simply serve as intriguing introductory statements . This subsection presents several of these types of proverbs . 13 For want of a nail the shoe was lost and the devil is in the details advise students to pay attention to details when answering questions . Nothing is certain but death and taxes provides a humorous introduction to the topic of taxes . There is more than one way to skin a cat serves as an introduction to a discussion of several techniques that address the same problem , for example , different capital budgeting techniques or various methods for assessing a project’s risk . We must learn to walk before we can run introduces the order of instructional topics . For example , one must first learn the present value of future cash flows to be able to value stocks and bonds . SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS Instructors have suggested analogies , metaphors , examples , and humor to teach finance to students . This paper contributes to the financial education literature by offering proverbs as an innovative teaching tool to explain financial concepts . This paper presents more than five dozen proverbs accompanied by their related financial concepts . Each proverb is classified into one of twelve groups to make it easier for instructors to use the suggested proverbs . Eleven of these groups represent different financial areas , while the last group refers to general teaching proverbs . The use of proverbs in finance instruction provides several benefits . First , familiar proverbs will appeal to students’ prior knowledge and will help them to understand abstract financial concepts easier . Second , proverbs , presenting ideas in a concise and original way , will serve as an effective explanation tool and will improve retention . Third , proverbs with their wit , humor , and original point of view will bring entertainment and excitement into the classroom , making the learning process more enjoyable and efficient . To apply proverbs effectively in the classroom , I recommend several teaching strategies in this paper . First , an instructor has to ensure that students understand the interpretation of a proverb and its relation to a financial concept . Second , I suggest starting with a proverb and then following it with the explanation of the financial concept itself . Finally , I recommend using all relevant proverbs when more than one proverb can illustrate the same financial concept . 14 While this paper presents a relatively large number of proverbs , this list , by no means , is all - inclusive . Instructors are encouraged to introduce new proverbs , some of which maybe used primarily in their regions , into their teaching . Also , a growing number of business schools offer special programs for homogeneous groups of international students and executives both in North America and overseas . Since many English proverbs have equivalents in other languages , I suggest to instructors that they use related foreign proverbs whenever possible . While identifying equivalent foreign proverbs and understanding them will require additional work on the part of the instructor , the benefits will greatly outweigh the costs . As a rule , international students do not expect English - speaking instructors to know foreign proverbs , or , especially , to use them for explaining new material . Therefore , the use of foreign proverbs in the classroom pleasantly surprises students and shows that the instructors have some knowledge of the culture of their students . I personally used Chinese proverbs in my teaching to groups of students from China , and , in my opinion , the positive teaching effect of proverbs was even larger than that for groups of domestic students . Proverbs have the potential to become an effective teaching instrument in the toolbox of finance instructors , and make both teaching and learning processes more efficient , exciting and enjoyable for everyone . 15 REFERENCES Ardalan , K . “On the Use of Entertaining Metaphors in the Introductory Finance Course , ” Financial Practice and Education , 8 ( Spring / Summer , 1998 ) , 108 - 119 . Baker , W . P . and A . E . Lawson . “Complex Instructional Analogies and Theoretical Concept Acquisition in College Genetics , ” Science Education , 85 ( November , 2001 ) , 665 - 683 . Becker , M . W . “Top Ten Lists in Finance Class , ” Financial Practice and Education , 3 ( Fall , 1993 ) , 109 - 111 . Bryant , J . , P . W . Comisky , J . S . Crane , and D . Zillmann . “Relationship between College Teachers’ Use of Humor in the Classroom and Students’ Evaluations of Their Teachers , ” Journal of Educational Psychology , 72 ( August , 1980 ) , 511 - 519 . Cameron , L . “Metaphors in the Learning of Science : A Discourse Focus , ” British Educational Research Journal , 28 ( No . 5 , 2002 ) , 673 - 688 . Csikszentmihalyi , M . and J . McCormack . “The Influence of Teachers , ” in K . Ryan and J . M . Cooper ( Eds . ) Kaleidoscope : Readings in Education ( Boston , 1995 ) , 7th Edition , Houghton Mifflin Co . , 2 - 8 . Desberg , P . , D . Henschel , C . Marhsall , and P . McGhee . “The Effect of Humor on Retention of Lecture Material , ” Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Psychological Association . ( Montreal , Canada , September 1 - 5 , 1981 ) , ( ERIC Document Reproduction Service No . ED 223118 ) . Dupin , J . J . and S . Johsua . “Analogies and “Modeling Analogies” in Teaching : Some Examples in Basic Electricity , ” Science Education , 73 ( April , 1989 ) , 207 - 224 . Forbes , S . W . “A Note on Teaching the Time Value of Money , ” Financial Practice and Education , 1 ( Spring , 1991 ) , 91 . Gilkeson , J . H . and R . P . Lamb . “From Beanie Babies to Baseball Cards : A Financial Application of Collectibles Markets , ” Journal of Financial Education , 26 ( Spring , 2000 ) , 14 - 21 . Gorham , J . and D . M . Christophel . “The Relationship of Teachers’ Use of Humor in the Classroom to Immediacy and Student Learning , ” Communication Education , 39 ( January , 1990 ) , 46 - 62 . 16 Halpern , D . F . , C . Hansen , and D . Riefer . “Analogies as an Aid to Understanding and Memory , ” Journal of Educational Psychology , 82 ( June , 1990 ) , 298 - 305 . Honeck , R . P . “Interpretive versus Structural Effects on Semantic Memory , ” Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 12 ( August , 1973 ) , 448 - 455 . Honeck , R . P . , P . Riechmann , and R . R . Hoffman . “Semantic Memory for Metaphor : The Conceptual Base Hypothesis , ” Memory and Cognition , 3 ( July , 1975 ) , 409 - 415 . Ibanez , J . G . “Using Proverbs in Chemistry , ” Journal of Chemical Education , 79 ( April , 2002 ) , 454 - 455 . Kane , S . “Teaching Principal - Agent Problems Using Examples from Popular Music , ” Financial Practice and Education , 9 ( Spring / Summer , 1999 ) , 116 - 120 . Kaplan , R . M . and G . C . Pascoe . “Humorous Lectures and Humorous Examples : Some Effects upon Comprehension and Retention , ” Journal of Educational Psychology , 69 ( February , 1977 ) , 61 - 65 . Korobkin , D . “Humor in the Classroom : Considerations and Strategies , ” College Teaching , 36 ( Fall , 1988 ) , 154 - 158 . Mann , S . V . “Calls are Like Air Conditioners ; Puts are Like Heaters , ” Journal of Financial Education , 22 ( Spring , 1996 ) , 61 - 64 . Moreno , V . and F . J . Di Vesta . “Analogies ( Adages ) as Aids for Comprehending Structural Relations in Text , ” Contemporary Educational Psychology , 19 ( April , 1994 ) , 179 - 198 . Neuliep , J . W . “An Examination of the Content of High School Teachers’ Humor in the Classroom and the Development of an Inductively Derived Taxonomy of Classroom Humor , ” Communication Education , 40 ( October , 1991 ) , 343 - 355 . Newby , T . J . , P . A . Ertmer , and D . A . Stepich . “Instructional Analogies and the Learning of Concepts , ” Educational Technology Research and Development , 43 ( No . 1 , 1995 ) , 5 - 18 . Nichols , S . E . , D . Tippins , and K . Wieseman . “A Toolkit for Developing Critically Reflective Science Teachers , ” Journal of Science Teacher Education , 8 ( May , 1997 ) , 77 - 106 . Pearson , P . D . , T . E . Raphael , N . TePaske , and C . Hyser . “The Function of Metaphor in Children’s Recall of Expository Passages , ” Journal of Reading Behavior , 13 ( Fall , 1981 ) , 249 - 261 . Reynolds , R . E . and R . M . Schwartz . “Relation of Metaphoric Processing to Comprehension and Memory , ” Journal of Educational Psychology , 75 ( June , 1983 ) , 450 - 459 . 17 Simpson , J . and J . Speake . The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Proverbs ( Oxford , 1998 ) , 3rd Edition , Oxford University Press . Spiro , R . J . , P . J . Feltovich , R . L . Coulson , and D . K . Anderson . “Multiple Analogies for Complex Concepts : Antidotes for Analogy - Induced Misconception in Advanced Knowledge Acquisition . In S . Vosniadou and A . Ortony ( Eds . ) Similarity and Analogical Reasoning ( Cambridge , 1989 ) , Cambridge University Press , 498 - 531 . Wanzer , M . B . and A . B . Frymier . “The Relationship between Student Perceptions of Instructor Humor and Students’ Reports on Learning , ” Communication Education , 48 ( January , 1999 ) , 48 - 62 . Ziv , A . “Teaching and Learning with Humor : Experiment and Replication , ” Journal of Experimental Education , 57 ( Fall , 1988 ) , 5 - 15