Recent Advances in Physical Reservoir Computing : A Review Gouhei Tanaka a , b , 1 , Toshiyuki Yamane c , Jean Benoit H´eroux c , Ryosho Nakane a , b , Naoki Kanazawa c , Seiji Takeda c , Hidetoshi Numata c , Daiju Nakano c , and Akira Hirose a , b a Institute for Innovation in International Engineering Education , Graduate School of Engineering , The University of Tokyo , Tokyo 113 - 8656 , Japan b Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Systems , Graduate School of Engineering , The University of Tokyo , Tokyo 113 - 8656 , Japan c IBM Research – Tokyo , Kanagawa 212 - 0032 , Japan Abstract Reservoir computing is a computational framework suited for temporal / sequential data processing . It is derived from several recurrent neural network models , including echo state networks and liquid state machines . A reservoir comput - ing system consists of a reservoir for mapping inputs into a high - dimensional space and a readout for pattern analysis from the high - dimensional states in the reservoir . The reservoir is ﬁxed and only the readout is trained with a simple method such as linear regression and classiﬁcation . Thus , the major advan - tage of reservoir computing compared to other recurrent neural networks is fast learning , resulting in low training cost . Another advantage is that the reser - voir without adaptive updating is amenable to hardware implementation using a variety of physical systems , substrates , and devices . In fact , such physical reservoir computing has attracted increasing attention in diverse ﬁelds of re - search . The purpose of this review is to provide an overview of recent advances in physical reservoir computing by classifying them according to the type of the reservoir . We discuss the current issues and perspectives related to physical reservoir computing , in order to further expand its practical applications and develop next - generation machine learning systems . Keywords : Neural networks , machine learning , reservoir computing , nonlinear dynamical systems , neuromorphic device 2010 MSC : 68Txx , 37N20 1 Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to G . T . ( gouhei @ sat . t . u - tokyo . ac . jp ) Preprint submitted to Neural Networks December 20 , 2018 a r X i v : 1808 . 04962v2 [ c s . ET ] 19 D ec 2018 Contents 1 Introduction 4 2 Reservoir computing ( RC ) 6 2 . 1 Basic framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 2 . 2 Recent trends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 3 Dynamical systems models for RC 12 3 . 1 Delayed dynamical systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 3 . 2 Cellular automata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 3 . 3 Coupled oscillators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 4 Electronic RC 16 4 . 1 Analog circuits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 4 . 2 FPGAs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 4 . 3 VLSIs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 4 . 4 Memristive RC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 4 . 4 . 1 Neuromemristive circuits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 4 . 4 . 2 Memristive systems and devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 5 Photonic RC 24 5 . 1 Optical node arrays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 5 . 2 Time - delay systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 5 . 2 . 1 Opto - electronic and optical feedback with gain . . . . . . 26 5 . 2 . 2 Optical feedback in a laser cavity . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28 6 Spintronic RC 30 7 Mechanical RC 32 8 Biological RC 34 8 . 1 Brain regions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34 8 . 2 in - vitro cultured cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37 9 Others 38 10 Conclusions and outlook 39 2 Abbreviations in alphabetical order AD : Analog - to - Digital ANN : Artiﬁcial Neural Network ASIC : Application Speciﬁc Integrated Circuit ASN : Atomic Switch Network BMI : Brain Machine Interface BPDC : Backpropagation Decorrelation BPTT : Backpropagation Through Time CA : Cellular Automaton CPU : Central Processing Unit DA : Digital - to - Analog DNA : Deoxyribonucleic acid ECG : Electrocardiogram EEG : Electroencephalogram EMG : Electromyogram ESN : Echo State Network fMRI : functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging FNN : Feedforward Neural Network FORCE : First Order Reduced and Controlled Error FPGA : Field - Programmable Gate Array GPU : Graphics Processing Unit LIF : Leaky Integrate - and - Fire LLG : Landau - Lifshitz - Gilbert LSM : Liquid State Machine LSTM : Long Short - Term Memory MEA : Microelectrode Array MFCC : Mel - Frequency Cepstrum Coeﬃcient MTJ : Magnetic Tunnel Junction NARMA : Nonlinear Autoregressive Moving Average ODE : Ordinary Diﬀerential Equation PM Particulate Matter RC : Reservoir Computing RNN : Recurrent Neural Network RTRL : Real - Time Recurrent Learning SNN : Spiking Neural Networks SOA : Semiconductor Optical Ampliﬁer STDP : Spike - Timing - Dependent Plasticity STO : Spin Torque Oscillator VCSEL : Vertical Cavity Surface Emitting Laser VLSI : Very Large Scale Integration XOR : Exclusive OR YIG : Yttrium Iron Garnet 3 1 . Introduction Artiﬁcial neural networks ( ANNs ) constitute the core information process - ing technology in the ﬁelds of artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning , which have witnessed remarkable progress in recent years , and they are expected to be increasingly employed in real - world applications ( Samarasinghe , 2016 ) . ANNs are computational models that mimic biological neural networks . They are represented by a network of neuron - like processing units interconnected via synapse - like weighted links . Network architectures of ANNs are typically clas - siﬁed into feedforward networks ( Schmidhuber , 2015 ) and recurrent networks ( Mandic et al . , 2001 ) , the choice of which depends on the type of computa - tional task . Feedforward neural networks ( FNNs ) are mainly used for static ( non - temporal ) data processing , as individual input data are independently processed even if they are given sequentially . In short , FNNs are capable of approximating nonlinear input - output functions . On the other hand , recurrent neural networks ( RNNs ) are suited for dynamic ( temporal ) data processing , as they can embed temporal correlations of the inputs into their dynamical be - havior . In other words , RNNs are capable of representing dynamical systems driven by sequential inputs owing to their feedback connections . Reservoir computing ( RC ) is an RNN - based framework and is therefore suit - able for temporal / sequential information processing ( Jaeger and Haas , 2004 ) . Speciﬁcally , RC is a uniﬁed computational framework ( Verstraeten et al . , 2007 ; Lukoˇseviˇcius and Jaeger , 2009 ) , derived from independently proposed RNN models , such as echo state networks ( ESNs ) ( Jaeger , 2001a ) and liquid state ma - chines ( LSMs ) ( Maass et al . , 2002 ) . The backpropagation decorrelation ( BPDC ) learning rule ( Steil , 2004 , 2007 ) for RNNs is also regarded as a predecessor of RC . In RC , input data are transformed into spatiotemporal patterns in a high - dimensional space by an RNN in the reservoir . Then , a pattern analysis from the spatiotemporal patterns is performed in the readout , as shown in Fig . 1 ( a ) . The main characteristic of RC is that the input weights ( W in ) and the weights of the recurrent connections within the reservoir ( W ) are not trained whereas only the readout weights ( W out ) are trained with a simple learning algorithm such as linear regression . This simple and fast training process makes it possible to drastically reduce the computational cost of learning compared with standard RNNs , which is the major advantage of RC ( Jaeger , 2002 ) . The RC models have been successfully applied to many computational problems , such as temporal pattern classiﬁcation , prediction , and generation . To enhance computational performance of RC , it is necessary to appropriately represent sample data and optimally design the RNN - based reservoir . The methods for obtaining eﬀective reservoirs , which have been summarized in ( Lukoˇseviˇcius and Jaeger , 2009 ) , are categorized into task - independent generic guidelines and task - dependent reser - voir adjustments . The role of the reservoir in RC is to nonlinearly transform sequential in - puts into a high - dimensional space such that the features of the inputs can be eﬃciently read out by a simple learning algorithm . Therefore , instead of RNNs , other nonlinear dynamical systems can be used as reservoirs . In par - 4 ticular , physical RC using reservoirs based on physical phenomena has recently attracted increasing interest in many research areas ( Fig . 1 ( b ) ) . Various physical systems , substrates , and devices have been proposed for realizing RC . A mo - tivation for physical implementation of reservoirs is to realize fast information processing devices with low learning cost . For hardware implementation of nor - mal RNNs where training is necessary , we often rely on advanced technologies of neural network hardware ( Misra and Saha , 2010 ) and neuromorphic hardware ( Hasler and Marr , 2013 ) . In contrast , physical implementation of reservoirs can be achieved using a variety of physical phenomena in the real world , because the mechanism for adaptive changes for training is not necessary . Actually , physical RC is one of the candidates of unconventional computing paradigms based on novel hardware ( Hadaeghi et al . , 2017 ) . Although design principles for conventional RC , such as ESNs ( Ozturk et al . , 2007 ; Lukoˇseviˇcius , 2012 ) and LSMs ( Maass , 2011 ) , have been examined comprehensively , the following issues require further investigation : how to design physical reservoirs for achieving high computational performance and how much computational power can be attained by individual physical RC systems . The purpose of this review is to provide an overview of recent advances in RC , with special focus on physical RC . Published studies on physical RC can be found not only in neural network journals but also in specialized journals related to the respective physical systems . Our objective is to provide a com - prehensive viewpoint with regard to interdisciplinary studies on physical RC by classifying them according to the type of the physical phenomenon utilized for the reservoir . Toward this end , we summarize the characteristics of individual physical reservoirs . Our classiﬁcation , which highlights the similarities and dif - ferences among diﬀerent physical reservoirs , is useful for gaining insights into further developments in physical RC . Some physical reservoirs are promising for developing next - generation ma - chine learning hardware devices and chips . Such hardware - based RC can signif - icantly speed up data processing compared to software - based RC , and it is often motivated by the need to reduce the power consumed by machine learning hard - ware . In particular , the RC framework using a simple readout is suited to low - cost real - time computation , which is not achievable with other machine learning frameworks based on iterative learning algorithms leading to high learning cost . Currently , many online services rely on cloud computing ( Armbrust et al . , 2010 ) where tasks are performed at computers far from devices of end users on the In - ternet . Owing to the ever - growing amount of data at network edges , increasing communication latency is becoming a bottleneck for high - speed cloud comput - ing . An emerging alternative computing paradigm for reducing the latency is edge computing ( Shi et al . , 2016 ) where tasks are performed at computers close to devices of end users and sensors , preferably in real time . Machine learning hardware for real - time temporal data processing , such as RC hardware , enables eﬃcient edge computing , and therefore , is expected to become increasingly sig - niﬁcant in the future . On the other hand , physical constraints make it diﬃcult to optimize the conditions of reservoirs in physical RC . Many issues remain to be addressed in order to realize eﬃcient physical RC systems and devices for 5 Figure 1 : RC frameworks where the reservoir is ﬁxed and only the readout weights W out are trained . ( a ) A conventional RC system with an RNN - based reservoir as in ESNs and LSMs . ( b ) A physical RC system in which the reservoir is realized using a physical system or device . practical applications . Our review introduces potential candidates of physical reservoirs for such devices . The remainder of this review article is organized as follows . In Sec . 2 , we brieﬂy describe the basic concept of RC and its recent trends . In the subsequent sections , we introduce diﬀerent types of physical RC systems , including RC based on well - known dynamical systems models ( Sec . 3 ) , electronic RC ( Sec . 4 ) , photonic RC ( Sec . 5 ) , spintronic RC ( Sec . 6 ) , mechanical RC ( Sec . 7 ) , biological RC ( Sec . 8 ) , and others ( Sec . 9 ) . Finally , we discuss the current issues and future research directions in Sec . 10 . 2 . Reservoir computing ( RC ) First , we outline the fundamental concept of RC in Sec . 2 . 1 . For a more detailed background and overview of conventional RC , readers may refer to the following well - organized articles : the survey paper ( Lukoˇseviˇcius and Jaeger , 2009 ) , the review papers ( Schrauwen et al . , 2007 ; Lukoˇseviˇcius et al . , 2012 ; Scardapane and Wang , 2017 ) , and the special issue on ESNs and LSMs in Neural Networks ( Jaeger et al . , 2007 ) . Then , we discuss the recent trends in RC in Sec . 2 . 2 . 2 . 1 . Basic framework Since the 1980s , RNNs have been used for temporal / sequential pattern recog - nition . They are characterized by feedback ( recurrent ) connections for generat - ing history - dependent dynamical responses to inputs . The two major gradient - based learning algorithms for RNNs are backpropagation through time ( BPTT ) ( Rumelhart et al . , 1985 ; Werbos , 1990 ) and real - time recurrent learning ( RTRL ) ( Williams and Zipser , 1989 ; Doya , 1998 ) . These classical methods for training RNNs are discussed in a tutorial on RC ( Jaeger , 2002 ) . The BPTT is used for batch learning with a ﬁxed length of sequential data , and its space complex - ity ( i . e . computer memory ) increases with the length of the data because an RNN is unfolded in time and converted to an FNN with shared weights . The RTRL shows excellent performance in online learning , but its time complexity 6 ( i . e . computational time ) is high . Most RNN - based methods , including long short - term memory ( LSTM ) ( Hochreiter and Schmidhuber , 1997 ) , use one of the above - mentioned algorithms or a combination of them . In the early 2000s , ESNs ( Jaeger , 2001a ; Jaeger and Haas , 2004 ) and LSMs ( Maass et al . , 2002 ; Maass , 2011 ) were independently proposed as seminal RC models . They are diﬀerent from conventional RNNs in that the weights on the recurrent connections in the reservoir are not trained but only the weights in the readout are trained ( Schrauwen et al . , 2007 ; Lukoˇseviˇcius and Jaeger , 2009 ) . The nonlinear mapping of an input signal into a high - dimensional space in the reservoir is eﬀective for pattern analysis of the input information as in the kernel method ( Hofmann et al . , 2008 ) . To apply a simple machine learning method to the readout , the reservoir should be appropriately designed in advance . The characteristics of the two above - mentioned models , ESNs and LSMs , are brieﬂy summarized below . The ESN was proposed by Jaeger ( Jaeger , 2001a ; Jaeger and Haas , 2004 ) . This model uses an RNN - based reservoir consisting of discrete - time artiﬁcial neurons ( Fig . 1 ( a ) ) . When the feedback from the output to the reservoir is absent , the time evolution of the neuronal states in the reservoir is described as follows ( Jaeger , 2001a ) : x ( n ) = f ( W in u ( n ) + W x ( n − 1 ) ) , ( 1 ) where n denotes the discrete time , x ( n ) is the state vector of the reservoir units , u ( n ) is the input vector , W in is the weight matrix for the input - reservoir connec - tions , and W is the weight matrix for the recurrent connections in the reservoir . The function f represents an element - wise activation function of the reservoir units , which is typically a sigmoid - type activation function . Equation ( 1 ) rep - resents a non - autonomous dynamical system forced by the external input u ( n ) . The output is often given by a linear combination of the neuronal states as follows : y ( n ) = W out x ( n ) , ( 2 ) where y ( n ) is the output vector and W out is the weight matrix in the readout . In supervised learning , this weight matrix is trained to minimize the diﬀerence between the network output and the desired output for a certain time period ( see Sec . 8 of ( Lukoˇseviˇcius and Jaeger , 2009 ) for details ) . The performance of the ESN depends on the design of the RNN - based reservoir . To approximate the input temporal signal , the RNN - based reservoir should have the echo state property , whereby it asymptotically eliminates any information from the initial conditions ( Jaeger , 2001a ) . It is empirically observed that the echo state prop - erty is obtained for any input if the spectral radius ( i . e . the maximum eigenvalue of W ) is adjusted to be smaller than unity . A practical guide for reservoir design in ESNs can be found in ( Lukoˇseviˇcius , 2012 ) . Recently , it was reported that the ESN has universal computational power under some conditions ( Grigoryeva and Ortega , 2018 ) . The LSM was proposed by Maass et al . ( Maass et al . , 2002 ; Maass , 2011 ) to explore the computational capability of neural microcircuits in the brain 7 ( Maass and Markram , 2004 ) . The purpose of LSMs is to develop biologically relevant learning models using spiking neural networks ( SNNs ) with recurrent architectures . The architecture of the LSM is similar to that shown in Fig . 1 ( a ) and the reservoir units are typically given by excitatory and inhibitory spiking neurons . Although the units are principally modeled with leaky integrate - and - ﬁre ( LIF ) neurons , other biologically plausible spiking neuron models can also be used ( Wojcik and Kaminski , 2007 ; Grzyb et al . , 2009 ) . The topology and connectivity of the RNN in the LSM follow the constraints of biological neural networks . Speciﬁcally , the probability that two neurons are connected depends on the distance between their positions . Such a reservoir is often called a liquid and the LSM operation is called liquid computing because it is similar to ex - citable media exhibiting ripples in response to external stimulation inputs . The reservoir dynamics is generally described as follows ( Maass et al . , 2002 ) : x M ( t ) = ( L M u ) ( t ) , ( 3 ) where t denotes continuous time , x M is the reservoir state ( neuronal activation patterns ) , u ( · ) is the input encoded as a spike sequence , and L M is the ﬁlter for transforming the input into the reservoir state . The output is given by y ( t ) = f M ( x M ( t ) ) , ( 4 ) where y ( t ) is the output and f M is a memory - less readout map . A simple ma - chine learning algorithm or a biologically plausible learning rule can be adopted to train the readout map . If the reservoir and the readout map have certain properties , the LSM can approximate any time series ( Maass et al . , 2002 ; Maass and Markram , 2004 ) . This indicates its universal computational power for tem - poral inputs . The LSMs can incorporate new ﬁndings about biological mecha - nisms of information processing in the brain . 2 . 2 . Recent trends The number of studies on RC has been rapidly increasing in recent years . In this subsection , we discuss the recent trends in RC studies from several viewpoints , including applications , methods , and physical realizations . First , RC has been successfully applied to many practical problems involv - ing real data . One of the reasons for this success is that researchers outside the neural network community have recognized the advantages of RC . The sim - plicity of the training method in RC is attractive for non - expert developers . Table 1 lists examples of subjects that have been addressed using RC . Most of these studies are involved in machine learning applications , such as pattern classiﬁcation , time series forecasting , pattern generation , adaptive ﬁltering and control , and system approximation . In particular , RC meets the demands for low training cost and real - time processing in these applications . Some bench - mark tasks related to these applications are listed in Table 2 . The input and output information for an RC system are determined depending on the task . In pattern classiﬁcation tasks , the input is a time series and the output is a 8 Table 1 : Examples of subjects in RC applications . Category Examples Biomedical EEG , fMRI , ECG , EMG , heart rates , biomarkers , BMI , eye movement , mammogram , lung images . Visual Images , videos . Audio Speech , sounds , music , bird calls . Machinery Vehicles , robots , sensors , motors , compressors , controllers , actuators . Engineering Power plants , power lines , renewable energy , engines , fuel cells , batteries , gas ﬂows , diesel oil , coal mines , hydraulic excavators , steam generators , roller mills , footbridges , air conditioners . Communication Radio waves , telephone calls , Internet traﬃc . Environmental Wind power and speed , ozone concentration , PM2 . 5 , wastewater , rainfall , seismicity . Security Cryptography . Financial Stock price , stock index , exchange rate . Social Language , grammar , syntax , smart phone . discrete value representing a pattern class . More speciﬁcally , in a spoken digit recognition task , the input is a sound signal corresponding to one of ten dif - ferent utterances of the digits from zero to nine and the output is one of the ten digits . The goal of this task is to output the correct digit number from a sound signal of an unknown digit . To remove unnecessary information and noise , the original sound signal is typically transformed into a feature value such as mel - frequency cepstrum coeﬃcient ( MFCC ) in a preprocessing step and then given to the reservoir . Although RC is suited for temporal pattern recognition , it can be applied to image recognition by transforming an image into a sequence of pixel values . As RC can deal with any sequential data in principle , further expansion of its application ﬁelds is widely expected . Second , many variants of RC models have been proposed to improve the per - formance of the original ones . New RC models have been devised by using new architectures such as multiple reservoirs ( Gallicchio et al . , 2017 ; Malik et al . , 2017 ) and evolving reservoirs ( Qiao et al . , 2017 ) , combining RC with other fea - ture extraction methods such as untrained convolutional networks ( Tong and Tanaka , 2018 ) and reinforcement learning ( Murakami et al . , 2015 ; Chang et al . , 2018 ) , incorporating new learning algorithms such as the FORCE learning ( Sus - sillo and Abbott , 2009 ) and its variants ( Pyle and Rosenbaum , 2018 ) , and / or employing various types of reservoir elements ( Xia et al . , 2015 ; Inubushi and Yoshimura , 2017 ) . In addition , theoretical studies have provided a deeper un - derstanding of the relationship between the computational performance of RC and the dynamics of reservoirs , in terms of nonlinear dynamical systems theory , information theory , and statistical theory . A comprehensive overview of these 9 Table 2 : Applications and related benchmark tasks of RC . Applications Benchmark tasks Pattern classiﬁcation Spoken digit recognition ( Verstraeten et al . , 2005b ) Waveform classiﬁcation ( Paquot et al . , 2012 ) Human action recognition ( Soh and Demiris , 2012 ) Handwritten digit image recognition ( Jalalvand et al . , 2015 ) Time series forecasting Chaotic time series prediction ( Jaeger , 2001a ) NARMA time series prediction ( Jaeger , 2003 ) Pattern generation Sine - wave generation ( Jaeger , 2002 ) Limit cycle generation ( Hauser et al . , 2012 ) Adaptive ﬁltering and control Channel equalization ( Jaeger and Haas , 2004 ) System approximation Temporal XOR task ( Bertschinger and Natschl¨ager , 2004 ) Temporal parity task ( Bertschinger and Natschl¨ager , 2004 ) Short - term memory Memory capacity ( Jaeger , 2001b ) studies is beyond the scope of this review . Finally , physical realizations of RC models have attracted considerable at - tention . A straightforward method is to implement RNNs using neural network hardware or neuromorphic computing techniques . Another method is to em - ploy other dynamical systems instead of RNNs . Any dynamical system has the potential to serve as a reservoir if it can exhibit dynamical responses to inputs . Such reservoirs were previously regarded as “exotic” ( Lukoˇseviˇcius and Jaeger , 2009 ) , but the number of studies on physical RC has been rapidly increasing . Various physical reservoirs have been proposed using diﬀerent types of physical systems , substrates , and devices . Some physical RC systems are aimed at de - veloping energy - eﬃcient machine learning hardware and others are at exploring natural computing based on novel substrates . There are several requirements for a physical reservoir to eﬃciently solve computational tasks . ( i ) High dimensionality is necessary to map inputs into a high - dimensional space . This property facilitates the separation of originally inseparable inputs in classiﬁcation tasks and allows reading out spatiotempo - ral dependencies of inputs in prediction tasks . The dimensionality is related to the number of independent signals obtained from the reservoir . ( ii ) Non - linearity is necessary for a reservoir to operate as a nonlinear mapping . This property allows inputs that are not linearly separable to be transformed into those that are linearly separable in classiﬁcation tasks . It is also useful for ef - fectively extracting nonlinear dependencies of inputs in prediction tasks . ( iii ) Fading memory ( or short - term memory ) ( Maass et al . , 2002 , 2004 ) is necessary to ensure that the reservoir state is dependent on recent - past inputs but inde - pendent of distant - past inputs . It is also referred to as the echo state property , indicating that the current state of the reservoir and the output depend only on a ﬁnite number of past states and inputs ( Jaeger , 2001a ; Yildiz et al . , 2012 ) . 10 Figure 2 : A ﬂuidic RC where the reservoir is the water in a bucket ( Fernando and Sojakka , 2003 ) . Figure reproduced with permission from Springer Nature . Such a property is particularly important for representing sequential data with short - term dependencies . ( iv ) Separation property is required to separate the responses of a reservoir to distinct signals into diﬀerent classes . On the other hand , a reservoir should be insensitive to unessential small ﬂuctuations , such as noise , so that similar inputs are classiﬁed into the same class . Therefore , when a system parameter variation causes a transition between non - chaotic and chaotic regimes , it is often recommended that the parameter be set close to the transition point ( the so - called edge of chaos ( Bertschinger and Natschl¨ager , 2004 ; Legenstein and Maass , 2007 ) ) where the transformation by a reservoir is neither very expanding nor very contracting . The responses of physical RC systems are used to train a readout that is re - alized using physical devices or software - based computations . Linear regression or another simple machine learning algorithm is used in the readout of ESN - type RC ( Lukoˇseviˇcius and Jaeger , 2009 ) , while a perceptron - like local learning rule or a synaptic plasticity - based one is used for the readout neurons in LSM - type RC ( Maass et al . , 2002 ) . An intriguing example of physical RC in an early study is a ﬂuidic RC with water in a bucket for pattern recognition as shown in Fig . 2 ( Fernando and Sojakka , 2003 ) . The input signals are transmitted to electric motors that generate ripples on the water surface , and the ripples are recorded using a video camera . From the recorded signals , a software - based readout is trained . The performance of the liquid computer is demonstrated in an XOR task and a spoken digit recognition task . Subsequently , many dynamical systems models and physical systems have been employed as potential reservoirs . We classify these RC systems , substrates , and devices , depending on the type of the physical phenomenon in the reservoir and review the individual reservoirs in the following sections . 11 Figure 3 : RC using a single nonlinear node reservoir with time - delayed feedback ( Appeltant et al . , 2011 ) . 3 . Dynamical systems models for RC In this section , we review several types of reservoirs based on well - known non - linear dynamical systems models , including delayed dynamical systems ( Sec . 3 . 1 ) , cellular automata ( Sec . 3 . 2 ) , and coupled oscillators ( Sec . 3 . 3 ) . 3 . 1 . Delayed dynamical systems The reservoirs in ESNs and LSMs generate high - dimensional signals using a network of interacting neuron nodes , which are regarded as a special class of high - dimensional dynamical systems . Another way to generate high - dimensional patterns is to use a time - delayed dynamical system , as described in the following form ( Lepri et al . , 1994 ) : d x ( t ) d t = F ( t , x ( t ) , x ( t − τ ) ) , ( 5 ) where t represents continuous time , x is the state variable , F is a function determining the ﬂow of this system , and τ > 0 is the delay period . This system is capable of exhibiting rich nonlinear behavior including periodic oscillations and deterministic chaos depending on the system parameter setting . In the ﬁrst proposal of a single - node reservoir with delayed feedback ( Appeltant et al . , 2011 ) , the reservoir was implemented using electronic circuits with a feedback loop ( see Sec . 4 . 1 for details ) . As shown in Fig . 3 , the input signal is time - multiplexed by a mask function ( Appeltant et al . , 2014 ) and fed to the single nonlinear node . The virtual nodes are set at N time points that equally divide the delay period τ . The time interval between two consecutive nodes is θ ≡ τ / N . The states at these virtual nodes , x ( t − ( N − i ) θ ) for i = 1 , . . . , N , are used as the reservoir state at time t and then fed to the output layer through weighted connections . These connection weights are trained in the readout . The system was successfully applied to the spoken digit recognition task and the nonlinear autoregressive moving average ( NARMA ) - 10 time series prediction task . 12 The architecture of the single - node reservoir with delayed feedback was ex - tended in two ways ( Ort´ın and Pesquera , 2017 ) . One is an ensemble of two separate time - delayed reservoirs whose outputs are combined at the readout . The other is a circular concatenation of the delay lines of two reservoirs , form - ing a longer delay line . These extended architectures were shown to achieve better performance , faster processing speed , and higher robustness than the single - node reservoir . An extensive amount of work has been performed on single - node reservoirs with delayed feedback ( Brunner et al . , 2018a ) . The simplicity of the single - node reservoir with delayed feedback is advan - tageous for physical implementation compared with network - based reservoirs consisting of a large number of nodes . In fact , single - node reservoirs have been widely employed for electronic RC ( Sec . 4 ) and photonic RC ( Sec . 5 . 2 ) . 3 . 2 . Cellular automata A cellular automaton ( CA ) is a simple dynamical systems model where both state and time are discrete ( Wolfram , 2018 ) . The discrete states on the cells are updated according to a given ( local ) evolution rule . Depending on the rule , the CA can exhibit rich behavior , including ordered , critical ( or the edge of chaos ) , and chaotic dynamics , in spite of its simplicity . It is heuristically conjectured that the computational capability of CA is maximized at the edge of chaos . This conjecture has been conﬁrmed in a numerical study on RC based on a random Boolean network , which is an extended version of CA ( Snyder et al . , 2013 ) . Other studies employed CA - based reservoirs as shown in Fig . 4 ( Yilmaz , 2014 , 2015a , b ) . Binary or non - binary inputs are randomly mapped onto the initial states of CA through an encoding procedure . According to the predeﬁned evolution rule , CA exhibits nonlinear dynamical behavior , through which the input data are projected onto an expressive and discriminative space . The entire state of the CA evolution is vectorized and used as a feature vector for processing in the readout . The CA reservoirs are binary in nature and suitable for symbolic computation including Boolean logic . The CA - based RC system can perform 5 - bit and 20 - bit temporal memory tasks , which require long short - term memory capability , with less computation compared to ESNs ( Yilmaz , 2015a ) . The binary operations and simple update rules of CA reservoirs are advantageous for implementation with parallel hardware , such as ﬁeld - programmable gate arrays ( FPGAs ) and graphics processing units ( GPUs ) . In a recent study ( Mor´an et al . , 2018 ) , diﬀerent CA evolution rules were tested for the MNIST handwritten character recognition by numerical simulations and the best rule giving the highest accuracy was speciﬁed as rule 90 ( Martin et al . , 1984 ) . Then , a CA - based reservoir with this rule was implemented with FPGA and applied to the MNIST task . Compared to other FPGA - based neural networks , the proposed method achieved competitive results in terms of accuracy , speed , and power dissipation . The architecture of the CA reservoir can be extended in several ways . For instance , a parallel loosely coupled architecture ( Nichele and Gundersen , 2017 ) and a layered deep architecture ( Nichele and Molund , 2017 ) have been proposed . The rules of CA can also be extended by employing two CA rules of diﬀerent 13 Figure 4 : RC using cellular automata ( Yilmaz , 2015b ) . classes in the reservoir layer to satisfy two competing requirements of the CA reservoir , i . e . , sensitivity to the current input and asymptotic insensitivity to past inputs ( McDonald , 2017 ) . The ﬁrst half of the CA reservoir is driven by a rule generating chaos or the edge of chaos for hyperdimensional projection of the inputs , while the second half is driven by a rule generating an ordered state for short - term memory . 3 . 3 . Coupled oscillators Coupled nonlinear oscillators are ubiquitous in mechanical , chemical , elec - tronic , biological , optical , spintronic , and quantum mechanical systems . They can be used as physical reservoirs . When each oscillator is described with a ﬁrst - order ordinary diﬀerential equation ( ODE ) , a system of N coupled oscillators can be described in the following general form : d x i ( t ) d t = F ( x i ( t ) ) + G ( x 1 ( t ) , . . . , x N ( t ) ) , for i = 1 , . . . , N , ( 6 ) where t represents continuous time , x i ( t ) is the state of oscillator i at time t , F is a function determining the dynamics of isolated oscillators , and G is a cou - pling function . The coupled oscillator model consists of the term representing the dynamics of individual oscillators and the coupling term representing the interactions between oscillators . A reservoir based on nonlinear mechanical oscillators has been proposed ( Coulombe et al . , 2017 ) . Such reservoirs are composed of multiple inertial masses arranged in a chain , which are coupled with their nearest neighbors by springs , as illustrated in Fig . 5 ( a ) . The masses are grounded by linear or nonlinear springs with damping . The entire equation of motion is described by coupled Duﬃng oscillators ( second - order ODEs ) driven by periodic forcing . The input signal is applied to the reservoir through amplitude modulation of the periodic forcing . The outputs from the reservoir are envelope signals con - taining only the low - frequency amplitude variations in the high - frequency mass 14 Figure 5 : RC using coupled oscillators . ( a ) A mechanical reservoir with coupled nonlinear oscillators ( Coulombe et al . , 2017 ) . ( b ) A DNA reservoir with coupled chemical oscillators ( Goudarzi et al . , 2013 ) . ( c ) A synchronization - based RC with coupled phase oscillators ( Ya - mane et al . , 2015 ) . position signals . The output signal is calculated by a linear combination of the weighted envelope signals . A reservoir with nonlinear mechanical oscillators can be compactly fabricated using microelectromechanical systems technology in an energy - eﬃcient manner . The performance of such a reservoir computer was eval - uated in a parity task and a spoken digit recognition task . Other mechanical reservoirs are reviewed in Sec . 7 . Chemical reactions are often modeled with coupled chemical oscillators to reproduce their oscillatory behavior far from a steady state . A deoxyribonucleic acid ( DNA ) reservoir was designed with coupled deoxyribozyme - based oscil - lators at molecular scale as shown in Fig . 5 ( b ) ( Goudarzi et al . , 2013 ) . The reservoir consists of diﬀerent DNA species interacting via biochemical reactions in a microﬂuidic reaction chamber , which can be mathematically represented as coupled ODEs with state variables representing concentrations of the product molecules of the DNA species . The input signal is encoded as ﬂuctuations in 15 the inﬂux of species into the reactor , and the reservoir state is monitored by ﬂuorescent probes . A software - based readout is trained to map the oscillator dynamics to a target output . A chemical oscillator - based RC with three DNA species was applied to a temporal signal - tracking task . When coupled nonlinear oscillators show limit cycle motions , they can be reduced to coupled phase oscillators under the assumption of weak interactions ( Nakao , 2016 ) . After the reduction , the amplitude of the motion is eliminated and the dynamics is restricted to the phase domain . Coupled phase oscilla - tors can exhibit rich dynamical behavior , including phase transition , cluster - ing , and phase synchronization , which are available for RC . A phase - based RC encodes the input signal as phases of the oscillators and adopt phase synchro - nization for computation as shown in Fig . 5 ( c ) ( Yamane et al . , 2015 ) . In this method , the phase coupling function is appropriately designed to perform func - tion approximations . This approach based on synchronization can contribute to development of phase - based information processing ( Parihar et al . , 2017 ) and wave - based neuromorphic computing ( Katayama et al . , 2016 ) . 4 . Electronic RC RC systems implemented with electronic circuits and devices have been ac - tively studied for developing machine learning devices with low training cost . Any existing ANN and neuromorphic circuits are available in principle as elec - tronic reservoirs , but simpler conﬁgurations have been explored to reduce energy consumption , speed up computation , and cope with imperfection and noise in hardware . In this section , we start with single - node reservoirs implemented with analog circuits ( Sec . 4 . 1 ) and then introduce RC systems implemented with FPGAs which are common reconﬁgurable hardware devices consisting of large arrays of simple conﬁgurable logic blocks and conﬁgurable interconnection structures ( Sec . 4 . 2 ) . Subsequently , we review very - large - scale integrated circuit ( VLSI ) designs for RC devices ( Sec . 4 . 3 ) . Finally , we focus on memristive RC based on memristive units ( Sec . 4 . 4 ) . 4 . 1 . Analog circuits As described in Sec . 3 . 1 , a single nonlinear node with delayed feedback well works as a reservoir where the input information is transformed into the states of the virtual nodes . The single - node reservoir imposes less hardware require - ments compared to a network - type reservoir consisting of a large number of units and interconnections ( Soriano et al . , 2015a ) . A nonlinear analog elec - tronic circuit was implemented for constructing a single - node reservoir with a delay line , in combination with other digital hardware components for pre - and post - processing ( Appeltant et al . , 2011 ; Soriano et al . , 2015b ) . The system archi - tecture is schematically shown in Fig . 6 ( a ) . The input signal is time - multiplexed with a mask that deﬁnes the connection weights from the input to the virtual nodes on the delay line ( Appeltant et al . , 2014 ) and kept to be positive by adding a bias voltage by digital processing . Then , the converted signal is in - jected into the single nonlinear node implemented with an analog Mackey - Glass 16 nonlinear element circuit with a delayed feedback ( the upper panel in Fig . 6 ( a ) ) , corresponding to the following equation : d x ( t ) d t = − x ( t ) + η ( x ( t − τ ) + γI ( t ) ) 1 + ( x ( t − τ ) + γI ( t ) ) p , ( 7 ) where t is dimensionless time , x is the dynamical variable , τ is the delay in the feedback loop , η is the feedback strength , γ is the input scaling , I ( t ) is the external input current , p is the parameter for tuning the nonlinearity . The states of the virtual nodes are linearly combined to produce the output in the digital postprocessing part . The training of the output weights are performed using a linear regression algorithm . The digital and analog parts are interfaced by digital - to - analog ( DA ) and analog - to - digital ( AD ) converters with 12 - bits resolution . The proposed system was successfully applied to spoken digit recog - nition , memory capacity estimation , and time series prediction , by appropriately adjusting the feedback strength η . The eﬀect of the quantization noise caused by AD and DA conversion on the computational performance was also investi - gated in comparison with numerical simulations . A recent study proposed an extended system composed of multiple delayed feedback reservoirs based on the Mackey - Glass circuit in a deep layer structure ( Li et al . , 2018 ) . The presented system was applied to time series prediction tasks with Santa Fe dataset and ECG signals . Another study considered a single - node reservoir implemented with the Chua’s circuit driven by external input forcing , which exhibits chaotic dynamics , and applied it to non - temporal nonlinear tasks ( Jensen and Tufte , 2017 ) . On the other hand , a spike - based single - node reservoir with a delay loop was proposed with its analog implementation design ( Zhao et al . , 2016 ) . The information transmission is based on spike signals for power eﬃciency , instead of time - continuous analog signals requiring peripheral modules for signal conver - sion and ampliﬁcation . The spike - based delayed feedback circuit demonstrated nonlinear transformation from input spike sequences to output spike sequences . A spike timing - dependent encoder for encoding analog inputs as temporal spike trains and a masking process were used to design an RC system with a spike - based single - node reservoir ( Li et al . , 2017 ) . Numerical experiments showed that the optimal mask for yielding high computational performance is diﬀerent depending on the task . 4 . 2 . FPGAs FPGAs have often been used to implement ANNs as their reconﬁgurability is suited for concurrent processing and adaptive weight updating in ANNs ( Zhu and Sutton , 2003 ; Omondi and Rajapakse , 2006 ) . In the context of RC , many FPGA implementations have been studied to realize reservoirs and / or readouts ( Antonik , 2018 ) . Network - based reservoirs can be constructed using a variety of components , such as binary neurons , sigmoid neurons , stochastic neurons , and spiking neurons . A signiﬁcant issue is how to choose hardware - friendly network components and eﬃciently implement them . 17 Figure 6 : ( a ) Electronically implemented RC system using a single - node reservoir based on the Mackey - Glass equation with delay ( Soriano et al . , 2015b ) . Figure reproduced and modiﬁed with permission from Springer Nature . ( b ) Architecture of an FPGA - based LSM system for speech recognition ( Schrauwen et al . , 2008 ) . Figure reproduced with permission from Elsevier . Binary neurons are often employed to compose neural network circuits as they are suited to be handled in digital platform . In an early study , a reservoir composed of stochastic bitstream neurons was implemented on an FPGA board to explore eﬃcient hardware implementation ( Verstraeten et al . , 2005a ) . The stochastic bitstream neuron is based on stochastic computing where its state value is represented as a statistical characteristic of a suﬃciently long bitstream , e . g . as a probability of “1” in a binary sequence ( Bade and Hutchings , 1994 ) . Whereas sigmoid neurons require a large number of multipliers and adders for updating their states , stochastic bitstream neurons enable to simplify hardware implementation of those arithmetic operations . The proposed system with a small - world network of 25 neurons was applied to a simple task of generating a phase - shifted version of the input sinusoidal signal . A similar reservoir based on stochastic logic was implemented on an FPGA board using a random network of neuron units ( Alomar et al . , 2014 ) . The proposed system composed of 10 neurons was applied to a nonlinear time series prediction task . The above FPGA - based reservoir computers use oﬄine batch learning . This limitation was overcome by the ﬁrst FPGA implementation of a reservoir computer with an online learning algorithm ( Antonik et al . , 2015 ) . The neuron units in this reservoir have a sinusoidal activation function and the linear readout provides 18 a gradient descent algorithm for real - time learning . It was conﬁrmed that the reservoir computer on the FPGA board has a signiﬁcant advantage in the high - speed processing over the software - based reservoir implemented in a high - end laptop . It was demonstrated that the proposed system can successfully solve channel equalization problems with constant and those with variable channels . Implementations of recurrent SNNs for LSMs on FPGAs have been reported in many studies . The hardware LSMs can be regarded as a special form of neuromorphic hardware . The information is coded by temporal patterns in spike sequences , unlike the rate coding in analog neuron hardware . Eﬃcient hardware architectures for implementing LSMs on an FPGA were explored for real - time information processing and applied to isolated digit speech recogni - tion ( Schrauwen et al . , 2008 ) . The overview of the system architecture for speech processing is shown in Fig . 6 ( b ) . The speech signals are transformed into cochleograms by the Lyon cochlear ear model ( Lyon , 1982 ) and then con - verted to spike signals via Bens Spiker Algorithm ( Schrauwen and Van Camp - enhout , 2003 ) before being fed to the SNN reservoir . The spikes generated in the SNN are ﬁltered by a low - pass ﬁlter and sampled , and the weighted sum of the sampled signals is used to produce the system output in the postprocess - ing step . The SNN consists of 200 LIF neurons and the exponential synapse models ( Gerstner and Kistler , 2002 ) . A novel implementation technique for digital SNNs was devised on the basis of serial arithmetic operations instead of parallel ones , in order to enhance scalability of the hardware device . An - other study presented an eﬃcient design and architecture for general - purpose FPGA - based LSMs based on LIF neuron models with a biologically plausible learning rule ( Wang et al . , 2015 ) . As a method to enhance energy eﬃciency , a light mode where some neuron units in the SNN are powered oﬀ was considered for simple tasks . The proposed neuromorphic LSM was successfully applied to speech and image recognition tasks with four diﬀerent datasets . Furthermore , it was shown that the stand - alone FPGA - based LSM with parallel processing can speed up the runtime and reduce the energy consumption using the ﬁring - activity dependent power gating and approximate arithmetic , compared to the implementation on a general - purpose CPU ( Wang et al . , 2016 , 2017 ) . Other FPGA implementations of LSMs were demonstrated using stochastic spiking neurons in a ring network ( Alomar et al . , 2016 ) , multiplier - less reconﬁgurable architectures ( Ghani et al . , 2015 ) , and a spike - time - dependent encoder ( Yi et al . , 2016 ) . In a recent work , a novel digital neuromorphic architecture called a spik - ing temporal processing unit was proposed by incorporating temporal buﬀers in each spiking neuron to model arbitrary synaptic response functions ( Smith et al . , 2017 ) . This scheme was adopted to implement an LSM on an FPGA chip , and its pattern classiﬁcation ability was evaluated in a spoken digit recognition task . In another FPGA - based study , improvements in cost and energy eﬃciency of hardware LSMs were achieved by developing a reservoir tuning method based on a hardware - friendly spike - timing - dependent plasticity ( STDP ) learning algo - rithm in speech and image recognition ( Liu et al . , 2018 ) . The remaining FPGA - based reservoirs are the single - node reservoirs with delayed feedback ( see Secs . 3 . 1 and 4 . 1 ) . An FPGA - based single - node reservoir 19 with a delay loop was demonstrated using a Boolean logic element ( Haynes et al . , 2015 ) . The Boolean logic element was set to operate as the XOR gate and the delay loop was realized as a cascade of pairs of inverter gates . The states of the virtual nodes are collected and linearly combined to produce an output in an external computer . It was shown that , by appropriately adjusting parameters such as the length of the time delay , the transient dynamics of the single - node reservoir is useful for classiﬁcation of short input patterns . In another study , the single nonlinear node was realized with a digitized version of the Mackey - Glass equation in Eq . ( 7 ) and the delay line was implemented with the random access memory block ( Alomar et al . , 2015 ) . The training of output weights is conducted on the FPGA board . The presented system was successfully applied to a waveform pattern classiﬁcation task and a time series prediction task . 4 . 3 . VLSIs Some eﬀorts have made to eﬃciently integrating reservoir circuits in VL - SIs . In an early study , an electronic reservoir was implemented with a general - purpose ANN application - speciﬁc integrated circuit ( ASIC ) which is a mixed - mode hardware using analog computation and digital signaling ( Sch¨urmann et al . , 2005 ) . This system consists of 256 McCulloch - Pitts binary neuron nodes and 33k analog synapses . The input and output information are given by binary sequences . Experimental results showed that the computational performance of the RC system in a temporal 3 - bit parity task is maximized when the neural network exhibits critical dynamics at the edge of chaos , as in the case of previous results of software simulations ( Bertschinger and Natschl¨ager , 2004 ) . Neuromorphic approaches to RC based on spikes and pulses have recently at - tracted much attention . Prototypes of pulse - based information processors were fabricated on a printed circuit board and an ASIC , on which can RC systems can be implemented ( Petre and Cruz - Albrecht , 2016 ) . These systems are based on asynchronous pulse processing that uses a time encoder for converting ana - log signals into pulse domain signals and an event - driven computing scheme for power eﬃciency . In another study , a digital design architecture for implement - ing LSMs on reconﬁgurable platforms was proposed for real - time processing of input data ( Polepalli et al . , 2016a , b ) . The reservoir consists of LIF neurons with random connectivity having spatial locality . The readout layer consists of a two - layer perceptron and the output weights are adjusted based on a gradient descent method . The performance of the proposed model was numerically evalu - ated in epileptic seizure detection from EEG signals and user identiﬁcation from walking patterns . Hardware - friendly readout implementation techniques have been focused on some studies for energy - eﬃcient learning in VLSI - based LSMs . Inspired by dendrites in biological neurons , a hardware - friendly readout archi - tecture for LSMs and an eﬃcient learning rule with adaptive network rewiring were proposed ( Roy et al . , 2014 ) . The eﬃciency of the proposed architecture was demonstrated in a spike train classiﬁcation task and an approximation task of retrieving the sum of ﬁring rates of input spike trains . In another study , a biologically inspired local learning rule was presented for low - power VLSI im - plementation of LSMs to reduce hardware implementation costs ( Zhang et al . , 20 2015 ) . It was numerically shown that the overhead of hardware implemen - tation can be reduced by the new learning rule in a speech recognition task . The tradeoﬀ between hardware overhead and computational performance in hardware - implemented LSMs was discussed in a simulation study ( Jin and Li , 2017 ) . 4 . 4 . Memristive RC This section focuses on reservoirs implemented with memristive circuits and devices . The main characteristic of a memristive element , diﬀerentiating from other fundamental circuit elements , is that its resistance changes with time de - pending on the current ﬂow that has passed through it ( Chua , 1971 ; Williams , 2014 ) . The existence of a memristor ( or memory resistor ) was ﬁrst predicted from theoretical consideration ( Chua and Kang , 1976 ) and after a long time physically realized using titanium dioxide ( TiO 2 ) ( Strukov et al . , 2008 ) . Al - though there are some debates about whether the memristor is truly counted as a fundamental passive circuit element ( Abraham , 2018 ) , memristive devices indeed exist in reality and are promising for computing . We classify memristive reservoirs into two types : neuromemristive reservoirs consisting of both neuron circuits and memristor synapses ( Sec . 4 . 4 . 1 ) and memristive reservoirs without neuron units ( Sec . 4 . 4 . 2 ) . 4 . 4 . 1 . Neuromemristive circuits Neuromorphic computing with non - von Neumann architecture has rapidly progressed in recent years . Neuromorphic devices / chips have been fabricated by diﬀerent research groups ( Walter et al . , 2015 ) . Neuromemristive systems are a subclass of neuromorphic computing systems that use memristors to mimic the synaptic plasticity in biological neurons , where the memristor conductance corresponds to the synaptic weight ( Indiveri et al . , 2013 ; Thomas , 2013 ) . Nano - scale memristive synapses have considerable potential as elements of energy - eﬃcient neuromorphic devices . A memristor - based ESN with cellular neural network structures ( i . e . , lo - cally connected arrays ) was proposed using staircase memristor models ( Yang et al . , 2016 ) . Numerical simulation showed that , due to the simple structure , the performance of the proposed model was successful but worse than that of the original ESN model with a random connection topology in a time se - ries prediction task . Other ESN - type reservoirs were designed using memristor crossbar arrays ( Merkel et al . , 2014 ; Donahue et al . , 2015 ) . Memristor crossbar arrays are often used to implement direct synaptic connections in neuromor - phic devices , because they are suitable for vector - matrix multiplication , and the conductances of memristive synapses can be adaptively updated by applying voltage pulses . Double crossbar arrays were used to realize recurrent connec - tions in ESNs ( Hassan et al . , 2017 ) and LSMs ( Soures et al . , 2017 ) . The use of memristor crossbar arrays in the readout part of ESNs was proposed for a digital ( or mixed signal ) reservoir with a doubly twisted troidal structure ( Ku - dithipudi et al . , 2016 ) . A more general on - chip system using analog memristive 21 nanosynapses was presented for emulating a reservoir computer and performing recognition tasks ( Bennett et al . , 2017 ) . 4 . 4 . 2 . Memristive systems and devices Memristive systems and devices are capable of exhibiting nonlinear dynamics and responding to inputs in a history - dependent manner . Even without neuron units , memristors can exhibit nonlinear transformation of input signals . By exploiting these favorable properties for a dynamic reservoir , some studies have proposed reservoirs based on memristive systems and devices . There are various memristive devices having diﬀerent current - voltage characteristics , but ideally , they can be formulated as memristive systems categorized into a special class of dynamical systems ( Chua , 1971 ; Chua and Kang , 1976 ) . A current - controlled memristor with time - invariant characteristic is generally described as follows : V = R ( w , I ) I , ( 8 ) d w d t = f ( w , I ) , ( 9 ) where t represents continuous time , V is the voltage , R is the time - varying resistance , I is the current , and w is a vector representing the internal state of the system . The function f determines how the internal state evolves depending on the input current . A network of memristors can be used as a reservoir to nonlinearly map an input signal into a high - dimensional feature space , as shown in Fig . 7 ( a ) . The ﬁrst memristor - based reservoir was proposed in ( Kulkarni and Teuscher , 2012 ) . The proposed model was applied to a wave pattern classiﬁcation task and an associative memory task , but the readout is not a simple linear regression model but the genetic algorithm . Therefore , the merit of the memristive reservoir is unclear . As the connectivity of the memristors aﬀects the computational perfor - mance of memristor - based RC , subsequent studies have extended the structure of the memristor network to a regular mesh structure for investigating the vari - ation tolerance of RC ( B¨urger and Teuscher , 2013 ) and to a hierarchical struc - ture for enhancing the computational capability of RC ( B¨urger et al . , 2015b ) . Moreover , the correlation between the computational capacity and the energy consumption of RC with random memristor networks was investigated to clar - ify its potential and limitations ( B¨urger et al . , 2015a ) . In the above - mentioned studies , the behavior of memristor - based reservoirs was computed using circuit simulators . On the other hand , a general mathematical model of memristor networks was explicitly formulated to promote theoretical and numerical anal - yses of memristive RC ( Tanaka et al . , 2017 ) . This formulation is applicable to any memristor network if the memductance of a single memristor is expressed as a function of its magnetic ﬂux as in the linear drift model ( Strukov et al . , 2008 ) . The numerical simulation showed that the variability in the memristive elements , which is generally thought to be undesired , can be beneﬁcial if the network topology and the input scaling are appropriately selected . In ( Carbajal et al . , 2015 ) , new memristor models with volatility were proposed to introduce 22 Figure 7 : ( a ) RC based on a memristive network . ( b ) A fabricated memristor array where several cells are selected to work as a reservoir on the whole ( Du et al . , 2017 ) . The inset shows tungsten oxide ( WO x ) memristor with a metal - insulator - metal structure . Figure reproduced from ( Du et al . , 2017 ) , licensed under CC - BY 4 . 0 . ( c ) An atomic switch network device composed of self - assembled silver nanowires ( Stieg et al . , 2014 ) . Figure reproduced with permission from Springer Nature . the fading memory property into the standard non - volatile memristor model . Other memory devices , such as memcapacitors , are potential components of a network - type reservoir with low power consumption ( Tran and Teuscher , 2017 ) . Several studies have demonstrated physical implementations of memristive reservoirs . A memristor - based reservoir device was recently demonstrated as shown in Fig . 7 ( b ) ( Du et al . , 2017 ) , where the reservoir is not a network of memristors but a group of independent memristors . An input signal is divided into multiple segments , and each segment is then separately transformed into an output signal by the individual memristive devices . The collection of the output signals is used as the state of the entire reservoir . It was experimentally demonstrated that this RC device performs well in image recognition and time series prediction tasks . Memristive behavior is observed also in atomic switch networks ( ASNs ) , which are aggregations of a number of silver nanowires in - terconnected with each other and formed via a thermodynamically driven self - organized growth process , as shown in Fig . 7 ( c ) ( Stieg et al . , 2012 ) . The RC 23 device based on ASNs was applied to a waveform generation task ( Sillin et al . , 2013 ; Stieg et al . , 2014 ) . 5 . Photonic RC In this section , the rich literature on reservoir photonic implementations is categorized and brieﬂy summarized . An alternative discussion on this speciﬁc area can be found in ( Van der Sande et al . , 2017 ) . Reviews on topics related to photonic spike processing ( Prucnal et al . , 2016 ) and photonics for neuromorphic applications ( Ferreira et al . , 2017 ) have also been published recently . In this review , optical reservoirs are categorized as spatially distributed array reservoirs ( Sec . 5 . 1 ) and reservoirs with delay feedback ( Sec . 5 . 2 ) . On this last category , a detailed tutorial has recently been published ( Brunner et al . , 2018b ) . 5 . 1 . Optical node arrays A photonic reservoir computer , with the potential advantages of low power consumption and extremely fast computation , was ﬁrst proposed in 2008 and subsequently reﬁned on the basis of numerical simulations ( Vandoorne et al . , 2008 , 2011 ) . The design is based on a chip - integrated device with single - mode waveguides . Semiconductor optical ampliﬁers ( SOAs ) are assembled in a 4 × 4 array , with each node connected to a maximum of four neighbors in a swirl conﬁguration , as shown in Fig . 8 . The eﬀect of non - uniformity of the nodes and the delay and phase shift between interconnections were studied . An experi - mental prototype was reported in 2014 ( Vandoorne et al . , 2014 ) . Readout was performed at 11 of the 16 nodes by photodetectors providing nonlinearity , owing to the limitations imposed by optical loss . The signal input was inserted via a single node and the training of the reservoir and processing of the output were performed oﬄine . Experimental demonstrations include a 2 - bit XOR logical operator , header recognition , and spoken digit classiﬁcation . A proposed related design is a platform in which the nodes are microring resonators providing nonlinear responses ( Mesaritakis et al . , 2013 ) . With a ran - domly interconnected 6 × 6 array , successful operation for a pattern recognition task was numerically demonstrated . Another related study developed a node - based framework adapted to a coupled - mode theory to simulate a large number of cavities eﬃciently ( Vaerenbergh et al . , 2015 ) . A drawback of photonic reser - voirs is that a compact design results in short time delays ; hence , the required input and readout operation rates may be too high for practical implementation . A digital mask modulation technique was reported to alleviate this problem and decrease the input signal rate by a factor of 40 ( Schneider et al . , 2016 ) . There is a design choice for the number of nodes that are linked to the input signal . This aspect was recently studied , and it was found that the power eﬃciency was improved for an input signal fully connected to the array ( Katumba et al . , 2017 ) . An intrinsic limitation of single - mode waveguide - integrated passive op - tical reservoirs is loss accumulation for a large number of nodes and long delay 24 Figure 8 : A 4 × 4 node array optical reservoir with a swirl connection pattern ( Vandoorne et al . , 2011 ) . lines . A chip - integrated multimode photonic circuit with a low - loss optical Y - junction combiner was proposed , simulated , and applied to a header recognition task ( Katumba et al . , 2018 ) . The concept of a device built instead on a photonic crystal platform was ﬁrst proposed for a multiple superimposed oscillator waveform prediction task ( Fiers et al . , 2014 ) . Good simulation results were reported for a reservoir struc - ture made of an array of resonator cavities for which there is bistability in the optical power . More recently , a reservoir built from photonic crystal cavities with multiple waveguide inputs and outputs was designed to exploit ﬁeld mix - ing dynamics and was shown to exhibit memory up to 6 bits ( Laporte et al . , 2018 ) . Another family of reservoirs with photonic nodes is based on free - space op - tics principles . A conﬁguration with a diﬀraction grating and Fourier imaging was designed with randomly interconnected microring resonators and applied to an imaging pattern task ( Mesaritakis et al . , 2015 ) . Another reservoir with a diﬀractive optical element was recently described on the basis of an 8 × 8 laser array and a spatial light modulator . Rich interaction dynamics was experimen - tally observed , and the potential for scaling up to a complex conﬁguration with low power consumption was illustrated ( Brunner and Fischer , 2015 ; Van der Sande et al . , 2017 ) . Further modiﬁcations to this setup , including the use of a laser illumination ﬁeld and digital micro - mirror device , led to the realization of an RNN with hundreds of nonlinear optical nodes applied to a time series pre - diction task ( Bueno et al . , 2018 ) . A reservoir in which node interaction comes from the scattering of light passing through a microscopic slide with a simple layer of white paint was also proposed and applied to logical function operation , with signal input via a micro - mirror array ( Dong et al . , 2016 ) . 25 5 . 2 . Time - delay systems 5 . 2 . 1 . Opto - electronic and optical feedback with gain The most extensively studied implementation of an optical reservoir com - puter is a conﬁguration that uses a single physical node with a time - delayed feedback signal ( Appeltant et al . , 2011 ) , as explained in Sec . 3 . 1 . The input signal is converted into a staircase waveform by a sample - and - hold procedure . A weight mask related to the number of virtual nodes in the feedback loop is applied to each symbol step . The weights of the output signal are calculated oﬄine during the training procedure . In this section we describe this class of systems as well as related designs . In the ﬁrst experimental demonstrations ( Larger et al . , 2012 ; Paquot et al . , 2012 ) , the feedback loop was optoelectronic . Light from a continuously emitting laser source is sent to a modulator for information processing . The optical output reaching a photodiode is ampliﬁed and electronically combined with the input signal to drive the modulator , as shown in a generic form in Fig . 9 ( a ) . Readout is performed either by sampling the feedback photodiode output or with an optical splitter collecting part of the light in the loop and a second photodiode . Demonstrations include generation of the NARMA equation of order 10 , equalization of a nonlinear channel , and spoken digit recognition . In these pioneering demonstrations , the signal input rate was in the MHz range . A number of related published studies have reported diﬀerent components , design optimization , and the addition of new functionality . A reservoir in which the input signal is fed by directly modulating the laser , node nonlinearity is achieved by a birefringent plate , and multiple feedback loops with diﬀerent de - lay times for enhanced connectivity are realized with an FPGA , was reported ( Martinenghi et al . , 2012 ) . Designs with an all - optical feedback in Fig . 9 ( b ) in which the electronics in the loop was replaced by a semiconductor optical ampli - ﬁer and a ﬁber coupler ( Duport et al . , 2012 ) or a ﬁber ampliﬁer , semiconductor saturable absorber , and ﬁber coupler ( Dejonckheere et al . , 2014 ) have also been demonstrated experimentally . A critical limiting factor for reservoir prototypes is the impact of noise on performance . This issue was investigated numerically and experimentally , and the importance of a preprocessing mask weight with multiple values , as opposed to binary values , was demonstrated ( Soriano et al . , 2013 ) . It was also shown that when an optoelectronic loop setup was used for a reservoir computer , the system could perform learning tasks even if the feedback was removed to obtain an extreme learning machine conﬁguration if the response was slower than the masked input steps to provide some interaction between neighboring neurons ( Ort´ın et al . , 2015 ) . The system without feedback was found to be capable of performing a cancer type classiﬁcation task with genetic microarray data . A chip - integrated device that combines physical optical nodes and time mem - ory functions by connecting in series several ring resonators with a time - encoded input optical signal was also described ( Zhang et al . , 2014 ) and is included here for completeness even though the feedback is not ampliﬁed . Performance for signal classiﬁcation and chaotic time series prediction tasks was numerically in - 26 Figure 9 : Time - delay reservoir conﬁguration examples . Blue and gray lines represent optical and electronic signals , respectively . ( a ) Opto - electronic feedback loop . ( b ) All - optical feedback loop with gain . ( c ) Passive optical feedback and opto - electronic node with gain . ( d ) Feedback into a laser cavity by a partially reﬂecting mirror . vestigated . In another scheme , a reservoir with a coherently - driven passive cav - ity was reported , in which the low optical loss led to good operation ( Vinckier et al . , 2015 ) . State - of - the - art results were obtained numerically and experimen - tally for a spoken digit recognition task . A parallel reservoir computer based on a ﬁber loop with frequency multiplexing of neurons was also reported ( Akrout et al . , 2016 ) , where the realization of nonlinear channel equalization and isolated spoken digit recognition was simulated . Another example of added functionality is the simultaneous computation of three independent tasks in a time - delay optical system with three so - called vir - tual reservoirs , as the system typically has an inherent bandwidth higher than the input signal rate ( Duport et al . , 2016b ) . To avoid electronic preprocessing of the input signal into a step waveform as an input mask , an implementation of a fully analogue reservoir with time delay was also proposed and only slight performance degradation compared to a step signal was observed ( Duport et al . , 2016a ) . At the output layer , the signal was split between a readout photodiode 27 and a modulated portion applying the readout coeﬃcients online . In another publication , the potential of an optoelectronic feedback reservoir computer for high speed processing was clearly demonstrated in the realization of a setup capable of performing a million - words - per - second classiﬁcation task using fast electronics for input and output processing ( Larger et al . , 2017 ) . Phase modu - lators were used in the feedback loop , and the delay between the virtual nodes corresponded to an input signal rate of approximately 17 GHz . An interesting application was shown in ( Qin et al . , 2017 ) , namely the identi - ﬁcation and classiﬁcation of a packet header for switching in an optical network application . The low hardware requirements compared to a traditional neural network were emphasized . This concept was further extended to a system with two feedback loops to perform simultaneous recognition of packet headers for two optical channels ( Zhao et al . , 2018 ) . An optoelectronic reservoir computer was also applied to the task of generating a long - range periodic time series and the emulation of a chaotic system ( Antonik et al . , 2017b , c ; Antonik , 2018 ) . The underlying concept of this work was to feed the signal output processed by an FPGA back into the reservoir , in addition to the usual feedback signal . Periodic frequency and random patterns were successfully generated . Some recently published articles have reported the potential of novel schemes for online training . A new method based on gradient descent training with BPTT was recently proposed and experimentally shown with an optoelectronic feedback loop ( Hermans et al . , 2015b , a , 2016 ) . The scheme cannot be strictly labelled as a reservoir , because the input weights are optimized to enhance performance , but may have a signiﬁcant impact on the development of future related systems . Results obtained for the TIMIT phoneme recognition task were similar to those reported for a fully oﬄine trained RC with a larger number of nodes . By connecting an FPGA performing a gradient descent algorithm at the loop output , a device with a very low symbol error rate was also demonstrated for a distorted wireless signal recovery task , particularly for a high signal - to - noise ratio environment ( Antonik et al . , 2017a ) . A multimode polymer waveguide - based design in which coupling and prop - agation losses are small has recently been proposed ( H´eroux et al . , 2017 , 2018 ) . The feedback is all - optical and the nodes are opto - electronic , composed of photo - diode , ampliﬁer , and vertical cavity surface emitting laser ( VCSEL ) chip arrays , as shown in Fig . 9 ( c ) . Simulations with this reservoir yielded promising results for signal recovery and nonlinear time series prediction tasks . As the gain is located in the neurons , there is no fundamental limitation on the aggregation of a large number of physical nodes in a future device . Moreover , as the optical path is on the centimeter scale with low loss and signals can cross each other , there is added ﬂexibility , compared to a chip - integrated device , in the imple - mentation of multiple relatively long delay feedbacks on a solid substrate in a compact format . 5 . 2 . 2 . Optical feedback in a laser cavity A second class of time - delayed optical reservoir computers has been inves - tigated in recent years , in which the nonlinearity comes not from a discrete 28 element in the loop but from the nonlinear response of a laser when a delayed signal re - enters its cavity . Light input and output with the same aperture is achieved by polarization rotation with a circulator component or another suit - able mechanism . In the ﬁrst reports ( Brunner et al . , 2013b ; Hicke et al . , 2013 ) , good results were experimentally obtained with a semiconductor laser for spoken digit recognition and chaotic time series prediction tasks . In another study that is related but not strictly categorized as a reservoir as there was no feedback component , a similar system based on a nonlinear resonant cavity was used to demonstrate optical vector - matrix product operations ( Brunner et al . , 2013a ) . In an alternative conﬁguration , a semiconductor ring laser was implemented as the nonlinear node , with the potential for on - chip integration and simulta - neous processing of two tasks by modes with opposite propagation directions . Numerical studies have shown good results for chaotic time series prediction and nonlinear channel equalization tasks ( Nguimdo et al . , 2015 ) . Delayed systems are sensitive to phase change , but in a subsequent study , it was explained that this problem can be alleviated with a modiﬁed readout layer ( Nguimdo et al . , 2016 ) . In another related setup , information was sent into the laser cavity via phase modulation , and a partially transparent mirror split the laser output into a de - layed component going back into the cavity and a transmitted component for readout ( Nakayama et al . , 2016 ) , as shown schematically in Fig . 9 ( c ) . The eﬃciency of a chaotic input mask generated from a separate optical cavity sub - jected to feedback was compared to other digital and analogue masking schemes and numerically studied for a chaotic time series prediction task . Performance improvement was observed , provided that the mask frequency was near the relaxation oscillation of the ring cavity laser . It was experimentally conﬁrmed that a chaotic or colored - noise mask gives better results with a properly selected cut - oﬀ frequency ( Kuriki et al . , 2018 ) . In another study , numerical simulation of a reservoir in which the input signal was applied to a tunable Bragg reﬂector providing external feedback to the laser cavity was proposed , and the reservoir was applied to a waveform classiﬁcation task ( Takeda et al . , 2016 ) . Another application was described in ( Qin et al . , 2016 ) , where a delayed optical feedback setup with a polarization circulator was adopted for optical packet header identiﬁcation at 10 GB / s . The optimal feedback parameters were found and a low recognition error was obtained provided that the signal - to - noise ratio was above 15 dB . Calculations with a ring laser system for dual - channel packet header recognition have also been reported ( Bao et al . , 2018 ) . The optimal operation conditions for an all - optical feedback loop system were experimentally investigated in ( Bueno et al . , 2017 ) . The eﬀects of detuning of the frequency between an injection laser and the reservoir laser as well as the locking of the laser state were studied for a chaotic time series prediction task . Moreover , very recently a system with two optical feedback loops was studied numerically for a time series prediction task with an information processing rate of 1 GB / s ( Hou et al . , 2018 ) . Performance was improved over a single loop conﬁguration owing to the rich dynamics . 29 6 . Spintronic RC Several reservoirs based on spin electronics ( spintronics ) have been proposed . Spintronics is an emerging research ﬁeld of nanoscale electronics involving both charge and spin of electrons for developing new electronic devices , such as non - volatile storage ( Wolf et al . , 2001 ) . Spin systems are potential candidates for low - power and small - scale reservoir devices . Three types of spin - based reservoirs with spin oscillations , spin waves , and skyrmions are summarized . A reservoir with a spin torque oscillator ( STO ) was experimentally demon - strated ( Torrejon et al . , 2017 ) . The spin torque oscillator is fabricated with a magnetic tunnel junction ( MTJ ) element composed of two ferromagnets ( the top free layer and the bottom pinned layer ) separated by a thin insulator , as shown in Fig . 10 ( a ) . When a constant DC current is injected into an MTJ , the spin di - rection in the free layer rotates owing to the spin torque that originates from the spin - polarized electron current generated by the pinned layer . After a transient time , the oscillation is stabilized at a frequency depending on the magnitude of the input current . The reservoir uses the nonlinear relationship between the in - put current and the oscillation frequency as well as history - dependent transient motions of the spin in the free layer . In a spoken digit recognition task , the sound data is given to the single STO as an input current after a preprocessing step and the voltage output of the STO is used to train the readout . It was shown that the digit prediction performance of the proposed method is better than that in the case without STO . The possibility of using chaotic dynamics in an STO with time - delayed feedback for RC has been explored in ( Williame et al . , 2017 ) . By adjusting the amplitude and delay time of the feedback cur - rent , good conditions for spin motions in RC can be speciﬁed . Another study numerically investigated the eﬀect of memory and nonlinearity of STO - based reservoirs with single and multiple MTJs in a short - memory task and a parity check task ( Furuta et al . , 2018 ) . A random binary voltage was used as an in - put and the time - varying resistance of the MTJ device was used as an output . The spin dynamics in the free layer follows the Landau - Lifshitz - Gilbert ( LLG ) equation ( Lakshmanan , 2011 ) . It was demonstrated that the performance in the two tasks depends on the duration of the input pulse voltage . Spatial propagation of spin motions , or spin waves , can also be used for spin - tronic reservoir ( Nakane et al . , 2018 ) . The proposed reservoir device structure consists of a thin Yttrium iron garnet ( YIG ) ﬁlm between a magneto - electric coupling layer and a conductive substrate , as shown in Fig . 10 ( b ) . The input voltage signals applied at the input electrodes on the top layer cause a change in the uniaxial magnetic anisotropy constant of the middle garnet layer due to the magneto - electric eﬀect . This stimulation disturbs the alignment of spins in the same direction ; thus , the phase diﬀerence between neighboring spins is transmitted through a material as spin waves . The spin motions in a three - dimensional space were simulated by solving the LLG equation . The spin waves can show input history - dependent transient motions and nonlinear interferences ( Stancil and Prabhakar , 2009 ) . Spin motions measured at the output electrodes were used to train a regression model in the readout . Numerical demonstration 30 Figure 10 : ( a ) Schematic illustration of the spin torque oscillator ( left ) and the reservoir device structure with a bias current input and a voltage output ( right ) ( Torrejon et al . , 2017 ) . ( b ) Schematic illustration of a spin - wave - based reservoir device ( Nakane et al . , 2018 ) . Figure reproduced with permission from IEEE . ( c ) A possible structure of a skyrmion - based reservoir device ( Prychynenko et al . , 2018 ) . showed that a characteristic of the input pattern can be well estimated by the spin - wave - based RC when the electrode positions and the duration of the spin motions used for computation are appropriately selected . Another type of spin - based reservoir device could be realized using mag - netic skyrmion , which is a nano - scaled magnetic vortex in a magnetic ma - terial , as shown in Fig . 10 ( c ) ( Prychynenko et al . , 2018 ) . It is known that a current - induced transfer of a skyrmion can show nonlinear dynamics and history - dependent spin responses , which are favorable for a reservoir . In the proposed device , the input is an electron current at the source and the output is the voltage between the source and the drain . By injection of a constant current , a skyrmion initially present between the source and the drain moves toward the drain and is then annihilated at the drain . The output voltage changes with the distance between the skyrmion position and the drain , in response to the input current . Interacting multiple skyrmions can generate more complex be - 31 havior , and skyrmion fabrics are potentially attractive options for implementing a reservoir ( Bourianoﬀ et al . , 2018 ) . 7 . Mechanical RC Mechanical systems , such as soft and compliant robots , are possible options for physical reservoirs . Soft and compliant robots with ﬂexible bodies are diﬃ - cult to control due to their complex body dynamics compared with rigid robots with stiﬀ bodies . However , such complex behavior can be favorably leveraged to generate rich nonlinear dynamics required for RC . The idea of outsourcing computation to a physical body is known as morphological computing in the ﬁeld of robotics ( Pfeifer and Bongard , 2006 ) . Soft and compliant robots are typically composed of deformable bodies . A primitive model available as a physical reservoir is a mass - spring network , which can be regarded as coupled mechanical oscillators as described in Sec . 3 . 3 . A mass - spring network reservoir where mass points are randomly connected to neighboring mass points via nonlinear springs was proposed in ( Hauser et al . , 2011 ) . The motion of each nonlinear spring can be described as follows : d x 1 d t = x 2 , ( 10 ) d x 2 d t = − p ( x 1 ) − q ( x 2 ) + u , ( 11 ) where t represents continuous time , x 1 is the displacement of the spring from its rest length , x 2 is the velocity of the spring motion , p and q are nonlinear functions representing the properties of the spring , and u is the sum of external forces acting on the spring . The input signal is given to some randomly chosen nodes as the external force , inducing nonlinear responses of the mass - spring network . The output signal is obtained as a linear combination of the actual lengths of the springs . Simulations demonstrated the computing power of RC based on the mass - spring network in time series approximation and robot arm tasks . By adding feedback loops from the output , the reservoir of a mass - spring network can be applied to pattern generation tasks , which are useful for producing locomotion of robots and biological organisms ( Hauser et al . , 2012 ) . In another extensive study , a reservoir model of a mass - spring - damper network was numerically investigated to clarify the link between the property of the mechanical reservoir and its computational ability in locomotion learning ( Urbain et al . , 2017 ) . By replacing point masses in a mass - spring network by stiﬀ bars , a tensegrity - like structure is obtained . Tensegrity ( tension integrity ) indicates a structural principle that uses isolated compression elements loaded in a continuous net - work of tension elements , leading to a physical structure combining strength and ﬂexibility . The compliant body of a tensegrity robot was exploited as a physical reservoir and successfully applied to stable gait pattern generation and terrain pattern classiﬁcation in numerical experiments ( Caluwaerts and 32 Figure 11 : ( a ) A tensegrity structure - based reservoir ( Caluwaerts et al . , 2014 ) . Figure re - produced with permission from NASA Ames Research Center . ( b ) A reservoir based on a soft octopus robot ( Nakajima et al . , 2015 ) . Figure reproduced from ( Nakajima et al . , 2015 ) , licensed under CC - BY 4 . 0 . Schrauwen , 2011 ) . Moreover , how to eﬀectively implement control in physi - cal reservoirs with tensegrity structure was investigated by considering various learning rules including a reward - modulated Hebbian learning rule ( Caluwaerts et al . , 2013 ; Burms et al . , 2015 ) . A physical prototype of a reservoir compli - ant tensegrity robot ( ReCTeR , Fig . 11 ( a ) ) was developed for creating planetary rovers ( Caluwaerts et al . , 2014 ) . The highly compliant body of ReCTeR con - sists of 24 passive spring - cable assemblies and 6 actuated spring - cable assemblies connecting non - parallel struts . The reservoir states obtained from the sensors attached to the struts were used to control the robot in order to approximate desired signals under various control strategies . In another study , better con - ditions for a tensegrity - based reservoir computer were explored ( Fujita et al . , 2018 ) . Another type of physical body is a muscular hydrostat system inspired by oc - topus limbs , as shown in Fig . 11 ( b ) ( Nakajima et al . , 2013 ) . This is an extreme embodiment of a soft robotic arm without a skeleton , involving virtually un - limited degrees of freedom . Even though the hydrodynamic eﬀect yields highly complex and time - varying dynamics of the soft robotic arm , its motion was suc - cessfully learned by an ESN - based controller in a simulation study ( Kuwabara et al . , 2012 ) and in an experimental study using a real robot made of silicone rubber ( Li et al . , 2012 ) . These studies suggested that the complex dynamics of the soft body can be used for RC . The computational capability of the soft body was demonstrated in nonlinear system approximations and body dynamics control without an external controller ( Nakajima et al . , 2014 , 2015 ) . Other attempts to control real robots and generate diﬀerent robot behav - iors , based on the concept of RC , can be found in studies on a pneumatically driven soft robot arm ( Eder et al . , 2017 ) , a spine - driven quadruped robot ( Zhao et al . , 2013 ) , a dog - like quadruped robot ( Wyﬀels et al . , 2010 ) , and a much less 33 compliant quadrupedal robot ( Degrave et al . , 2015 ) . 8 . Biological RC The mechanism behind computing ability of the brain is one of the myster - ies in neuroscience . Considerable eﬀorts have been made to explain the brain computing function using an analogy to computational models in ANNs and machine learning . In attempts to understand the relationship between informa - tion processing in the brain and RC , researchers have speculated about which part of the brain can be regarded as a reservoir or a readout as well as about how subnetworks of the brain work in the RC framework . On the other hand , physi - cal RC based on in vitro biological components has been proposed to investigate the computational capability of biological systems in laboratory experiments . We review recent studies on RC hypotheses in brain regions ( Sec . 8 . 1 ) and RC using in vitro cultured cells ( Sec . 8 . 2 ) . 8 . 1 . Brain regions The idea of LSM was originally motivated by the real - time information pro - cessing of time - varying input streams in cortical microcircuits ( Maass et al . , 2002 ; Maass and Markram , 2004 ) as described in Sec . 2 . 1 . Since then , re - searchers debated on whether reservoir computation is actually conducted in the brain and which brain regions can be interpreted to use this computational framework ( Fig . 12 ) . It is suggested that RC is one of the general frameworks for state - dependent computation in cortical networks , emerging from the inter - action between the incoming stimulation and the internal dynamics in RNNs ( Buonomano and Maass , 2009 ) . Some researchers have hypothesized that the spatiotemporal information processing in cortical and subcortical networks can be interpreted as RC through neurophysiological experiments and / or computa - tional models , as described below . First , we summarize RC - related studies on cortical regions including pre - frontal and visual areas . The prefrontal cortex is a front part of the cerebral cortex , which is associated with the planning of cognitive behavior , personal - ity expression , decision making , and moderating social behavior ( Fuster , 2015 ) . The ﬂexible context - dependent computations in the prefrontal cortex can be explained by the population dynamics of neurons with recurrent connectivity , indicating that the prefrontal circuits are used for both selection and integra - tion of task - relevant inputs ( Mante et al . , 2013 ) . The RC properties in monkey prefrontal cortex were investigated to explore how contexts of sensory inputs are represented in cortical dynamics ( Enel et al . , 2016 ) . A reservoir of model neurons was compared with the monkey prefrontal cortex in terms of their rep - resentational and dynamical properties during a cognitive task . Then , it was shown that the reservoir of randomly connected RNNs can obtain a dynamic form of mixed selectivity ( Rigotti et al . , 2013 ) and thus perform a complex context - dependent cognitive task as in cortical neurons . This result suggests that RC can be a model of cognitive processing in local generic prefrontal corti - cal networks . A discussion on the computational role of the thalamus ( Dehghani 34 Figure 12 : A possibility that some brain regions work as reservoirs . and Wimmer , 2018 ) also highlights the close relationship between the compu - tational properties of the prefrontal cortex and the main features of RC . It is suggested that the context - dependent computing in the prefrontal cortex relies on the task - dependent modulation of the cortical reservoir by thalamic func - tions . The visual cortex is a part of the cerebral cortex that processes visual in - formation . The visual cortex located in the occipital lobe is divided into the primary visual cortex ( early visual areas ) and visual association cortex ( higher - order visual areas ) ( Grill - Spector and Malach , 2004 ) . An experimental study showed evidence that early visual areas have fading memory properties de - manded by LSMs ( Nikoli´c et al . , 2009 ) . In this experiment , in vivo data of neuronal spiking activities in cat primary visual cortex for diﬀerent visual stim - ulus were obtained as a reservoir state and they were classiﬁed by a simple linear classiﬁer emulating linear integrate - and - ﬁre readout neurons . The new perspec - tive that the primary visual cortex can perform time - dependent computation for sequential inputs based on memory mechanisms is in contrast to the conven - tional one that it executes frame - by - frame computation based on memory - less hierarchically organized feedforward architectures ( Serre et al . , 2005 ) . The lim - itation of the conventional viewpoint is that the frame - by - frame computation cannot respond to changes in the context and environment behind visual inputs . Second , we move on to studies on RC in subcortical structures including the cerebellum and the basal ganglia . In terms of learning styles , the cerebellum and the basal ganglia can be characterized by supervised learning and reinforcement learning , respectively , which are complementary to each other ( Doya , 2000 ) . The cerebellum is mainly involved in the coordination of body movement and is responsible for the learning of motor and non - motor skills ( Rapoport et al . , 2000 ) . The classical hypothesis is that the cerebellum is a learning device , such as a simple perceptron ( Marr , 1969 ; Albus , 1971 ) . Another viewpoint from a model - based study is that the functional role of cerebellar circuits is interpreted as an LSM ( Yamazaki and Tanaka , 2007 ) . In the proposed model , the granular layer constructed with a recurrent inhibitory circuit is regarded as a reservoir that receives inputs through mossy ﬁbers , and the Purkinje cells are regarded as readout neurons . Numerical studies showed that the cerebellar circuit model 35 successfully learns Boolean functions . This LSM hypothesis highlights an indi - rect functional pathway from the precerebellar nucleus to the cerebellar nucleus through the LSM model consisting of the granular layer and the Purkinje cells , in addition to the direct pathway from the precerebellar nucleus to the cere - bellar nucleaus , which is regarded as a simple perceptron as in the classical hypothesis . Further exploration in this direction has made it possible to incor - porate recent anatomical and physiological ﬁndings on cerebellar microcircuits into computational models ( D’Angelo et al . , 2016 ) . The striatum is the primary input module of the basal ganglia and a critical component of the reward system . It plays a signiﬁcant role not only in motor control and planning but also in reward - modulated decision making . However , it is not obvious how the environmental states are represented in the reinforce - ment learning of the basal ganglia . Based on the hypothesis that the striatum responds to diverse inputs from diﬀerent cortical sources and plays a compu - tational role for discriminating inputs in reinforcement learning - based decision making , the LSM properties of a striatal microcircuit were studied with com - putational models ( Toledo - Su´arez et al . , 2014 ) . It was demonstrated that the separation and approximation properties required for the LSM are generated using a model network of medium spiny neurons and fast spiking interneurons coupled via inhibitory synapses in a supervised learning task . Third , we focus on the discussion on the relationship between RC and work - ing memory . Working memory is a cognitive process that temporarily stores and manages information for carrying out complex cognitive tasks ( Daneman and Carpenter , 1980 ; Baddeley , 2003 ) and is believed to be involved in multi - ple cortical and subcortical regions ( Dutta et al . , 2014 ; Eriksson et al . , 2015 ) . However , elucidating the mechanism for task - dependent switching of the role of neural circuitry remains an unresolved issue . Multiple working memory mod - els based on RC and their variants have been proposed , including the working memory model with generic cortical microcircuit models with feedback ( Maass et al . , 2007 ) , the ESN - based working memory model ( Pascanu and Jaeger , 2011 ) , the reservoir model for storing diﬀerent time constants of memory traces for reward expectation in reinforcement learning ( Bernacchia et al . , 2011 ) , the au - tonomously emerged working memory model through reward - modulated online learning rule that enables the same neural circuit to solve diﬀerent tasks ( Ho - erzer et al . , 2012 ) , and the comparative analysis of three working memory models including the RC - based one ( Barak et al . , 2013 ) . As described above , the biological plausibility of RC in the brain regions has been examined in many studies , but it requires further investigation . To address this issue , the RC models should be evaluated from multiple aspects of structural , dynamical , and functional properties of cognitive systems . For instance , an investigation focused on the robustness and resilience of reservoir models against structural perturbations in cortical circuits ( Vincent - Lamarre et al . , 2016 ) . Examination of RC from the neuroscience viewpoint is expected to be useful for its applications in brain machine interfacing , disease care , and robot control . 36 8 . 2 . in - vitro cultured cells A model system to gain insights into the spatiotemporal information pro - cessing in vivo is cultured biological components in vitro . RC with biological neurons has been demonstrated to investigate the com - putational function of an assembly of biological components . Microelectrode arrays ( MEAs ) are widely used to electrically stimulate neuronal cultures and measure their responses as shown in Fig . 13 ( Obien et al . , 2015 ) . An RC system that combines a reservoir based on cultured cells on MEAs and a computer - aided readout is regarded as a hybrid biological - silicon computer . An early study demonstrated an LSM using in vitro rat cortical neurons plated on MEAs ( Haﬁzovic et al . , 2007 ) . Two stimulation patterns with rectangular voltage pulses were given to the electrodes for generating the action potentials of the cultured neurons . The spatiotemporal patterns of spike events recorded with MEAs were transformed into a time - continuous reservoir state by a leaky in - tegrator . In the readout on an external computer , a support vector machine ( SVM ) was employed for classiﬁcation of the stimulation patterns . We note that this readout is not a linear classiﬁer and thus the eﬀectiveness of this reser - voir remains undetermined . This work was followed by similar experiments . In one such study , the classiﬁcation ability was investigated with a larger num - ber of stimulation patterns and SVM classiﬁers , and the tradeoﬀ between the number of patterns and the separability was evaluated ( Ortman et al . , 2011 ) . In ( Dockendorf et al . , 2009 ) , two types of electrical stimulation protocols were used . One is the low - frequency stimulation inducing bursts spikes and the other is the high - frequency stimulation suppressing the burst response . Living cor - tical networks react to these stimulus patterns diﬀerently , generating distinct spatiotemporal spike trains . The goal is to reconstruct the input spatial stim - ulation pattern from the temporal structures of the spike trains . The results show that the input reconstruction is successful if an appropriate window size is chosen , suggesting the separation property in the biological cell networks . In another study , input coding and output decoding methods for LSMs with cul - tured neurons have been considered ( George et al . , 2014 ) . The proposed input coding method allowed the realization of a large number of input patterns using stimulations through a small number of electrodes . The spatiotemporal spike patterns in the reservoir of cultured cells were transformed into spatial patterns such that a linear classiﬁer works well in the readout . Instead of electrical stimuli , an optogenetic approach for controlling neuronal activities more precisely has been used in RC experiments . Optical stimuli us - ing random dot patterns were projected onto rat cortical neurons cultured on MEAs as a reservoir ( Dranias et al . , 2013 ) . Through experiments on short - term memory for optical inputs , it was shown that the results closely match those of corresponding in vivo experiments in ( Nikoli´c et al . , 2009 ) . This suggests that the mechanism of state - dependent information processing in vivo can be studied using cultured neuronal networks . Based on a similar experimental set - ting , more complex tasks in the time domain were tested ( Ju et al . , 2015 ) . In classiﬁcation tasks of spike template patterns and musical styles , high classi - ﬁcation performance was achieved if appropriate MEA channels were selected 37 Figure 13 : A reservoir of in - vitro cell cultures . before the readout process and the spatiotemporal memory processes lasted for several seconds . In addition to the input separability , the control of biological reservoirs has received considerable attention in terms of robot control . In this case , the reser - voir receives feedback inputs from the output . The FORCE learning ( Sussillo and Abbott , 2009 ) was used for a closed loop reservoir with cultured neurons to control the output at a target constant value ( Takahashi et al . , 2016 ) . This technique was adopted to control a mobile robot , by which the robot can avoid obstacles and traverse a maze . An application of the concept of RC to robot control is discussed in ( Aaser et al . , 2017 ) . Finally , reservoirs based on other living organisms are discussed . A reser - voir with bacterium Escherichia coli ( E . coli ) reacts to diﬀerent chemical inputs and generate complex temporal patterns ( Jones et al . , 2007 ) . A population of E . coli was placed in a ﬂask and exposed to sequential inputs that indicate time - varying combinatorial conditions of chemical environments and temperatures . Then , samples of E . coli were moved to a microarray to measure the mRNA and protein concentrations , representing the state of the gene regulatory net - work . Perceptron learning was used in the readout to classify the stimuli into the appropriate classes . Numerical simulations corresponding to the above ex - perimental design conﬁrmed that the proposed RC is partially successful in an XOR problem and shows good performance in a separation problem . This study motivated a corresponding experiment in a wet lab . In ( Didovyk et al . , 2014 ) , genetically engineered bacterial cell cultures were used for realizing a variety of simple classiﬁers separating diﬀerent chemical inputs , which are aggregated to form a more complex classiﬁer . This conceptual design of machine learning in synthetic biology can be extended to a reservoir computer . 9 . Others There are many other candidates for physical reservoirs . Attempts to exploit novel physical reservoirs for RC can contribute to exploration of unconventional 38 computing methods ( Hadaeghi et al . , 2017 ) . We introduce two types of physical reservoirs that are not categorized into the aforementioned types . The ﬁrst one is RC realized by nano - scale materials and substrates that exhibit stimulation - dependent changes . An example is the atomic switch net - work introduced in Sec . 4 . 4 . 2 . Another proposal is a nano - scale reservoir with quantum dots and chemical compounds that change their absorption spectrum depending on the pH or redox potential in their environment ( Obst et al . , 2013 ) . An input signal is given as a change in chemical properties of the compounds , which aﬀect the signal transfer between quantum dots randomly dispersed in a space , encoded as an emission pattern . Simulations conﬁrmed the potential computational performance in an image recognition task . In another study , reservoirs were conﬁgured with physical substrates consisting of carbon nan - otubes and polymer mixtures ( Dale et al . , 2016a , b ) . A computer - aided evolu - tionary algorithm determines the control voltage signals and the locations of input / output electrodes for ﬁnding an optimal conﬁguration of the reservoir . Experimental results showed that the material - based RC with the optimized reservoir conﬁguration is successful in time series prediction benchmark tasks . Another recently proposed idea is to use complex quantum dynamics for RC ( Fujii and Nakajima , 2017 ) . A quantum system consists of multiple qubits ( or quantum bit , indicating the minimum unit of information in quantum comput - ing ) . For N qubits , there are 2 N basis states for a pure quantum state . In quantum RC , each individual node of a quantum reservoir is deﬁned by the sys - tem’s basis states , not by qubits ; therefore , a large number of hidden nodes can be implicitly implemented behind true nodes that are monitored by ensemble measurements . In response to an input signal injected into the ﬁrst qubit , the quantum system temporally evolves under a Hamiltonian . Then , the states of the qubits obtained by ensemble average measurements are transformed with time multiplexing into a set of signals that are linearly combined to yield an output signal in the readout . High computational performance of the quantum RC was demonstrated in benchmark tasks . In a subsequent study ( Nakajima et al . , 2018 ) , spatial multiplexing was proposed to enhance the computational power of quantum RC by constructing a system of multiple decoupled quantum reservoirs . Physical implementation of a quantum reservoir system is a challenge for the future . 10 . Conclusions and outlook This review paper has summarized recent trends in RC , with special focus on physical RC . Physical reservoirs have been categorized based on the type of dynamical system ( Sec . 3 ) and physical phenomenon ( Secs . 4 - 9 ) . Most physical reservoirs are designed and conﬁgured to satisfy multiple requirements , such as high - dimensionality , nonlinearity , input history - dependent response , fading memory property ( echo state property ) , and / or separation property ( Sec . 2 . 2 ) . However , dynamical behavior produced by diﬀerent types of physical reservoirs exhibits high diversity in terms of the degree of nonlinearity , transient response 39 time , signal transmission speed , and spatial dimension . This diversity makes physical reservoirs appropriate for various tasks and data . Physical reservoirs are classiﬁed into several types according to the architec - ture , including network - type reservoir , single - node reservoir with time - delayed feedback , and excitable medium reservoir . They are characterized as follows : • Network - type reservoirs consist of interacting nonlinear elements , such as artiﬁcial neurons ( Sec . 2 . 1 ) , oscillators ( Sec . 3 . 3 ) , standard circuit ele - ments ( Secs . 4 . 2 and 4 . 3 ) , memristive elements ( Sec . 4 . 4 ) , optical nodes ( Sec . 5 . 1 ) , springs ( Sec . 7 ) , biological cells ( Sec . 8 . 2 ) . They can be sim - ply scaled up by increasing the number of network elements for higher dimensionality . However , realization of a large - scale reservoir requires so - phisticated technology to implement massive recurrent interconnections . • Single nonlinear node reservoirs with time - delayed feedback generate input - dependent patterns in a high - dimensional space using virtual nodes on a delay loop ( Sec . 3 . 1 ) . Such reservoirs have been intensively studied for electronic RC ( Secs . 4 . 1 and 4 . 2 ) and photonic RC ( Sec . 5 . 2 ) . These reser - voirs can avoid the problem of massive interconnections and thus are more hardware friendly . However , designing and implementing an appropriate delayed feedback loop is not a straightforward task . • Excitable medium reservoirs use propagation of waves triggered by stim - ulation inputs . Propagation phenomena are widely observed in ﬂuids ( Sec . 2 . 2 ) , cellular automata ( Sec . 3 . 2 ) , magnetic materials ( Sec . 6 ) , and elastic media ( Sec . 7 ) . They have the potential to realize extremely ef - ﬁcient physical RC by harnessing rich physical properties of waves , such as interference , resonance , and synchronization ( Katayama et al . , 2016 ) . However , their computational power has not been fully understood thus far . There are general issues to be addressed in physical RC . First , appropri - ate preprocessing is necessary for maximizing the computational power of each physical RC system . In fact , some studies have empirically demonstrated that adequate information transformation of input data is necessary for satisfactory performance . In addition , temporal and spatial scaling of input data critically aﬀects the computational performance as the dynamic range is limited in phys - ical reservoirs . Second , each physical reservoir needs to be optimized by the selection of the best - suited material or substrate as well as the tuning of hyper - parameters , such as the shape and size of the reservoir . Mathematical modeling and analysis of a physical reservoir , under physical constraints and practical conditions , are useful for determining the reservoir settings systematically . It is also practically important to ensure scalability in a single reservoir as well as in combined multiple reservoirs . Third , a training algorithm in the readout should be suitably chosen to be compatible with the physical property of RC . Even if a physical reservoir has high signal processing speed , the total computation speed of the entire physical RC system for real - time information processing is limited 40 by the training speed in the readout . One possible solution to this problem is to use a physically realized readout instead of a software - based one . Moreover , evaluation of computational performance , processing speed , mem - ory , power eﬃciency , and scalability of physical RC systems is necessary for comparison with other relevant methods including current digital computers . The computational performance is evaluated with a task - dependent measure , such as classiﬁcation accuracy in classiﬁcation tasks and prediction error in prediction tasks . The measures called kernel quality and generalization ability ( Legenstein and Maass , 2007 ; B¨using et al . , 2010 ) are also useful for evaluating the eﬀectiveness of a physical reservoir . The processing speed is measured by how much information is processed in a unit time for each task . For instance , in speech recognition tasks , the number of words processed per second under a very low word error rate condition is a measure for processing speed ( Larger et al . , 2017 ) . The memory in reservoirs means the length of time during which the past input information is kept in the reservoir dynamics . The memory ca - pacity is a standard measure for evaluating the memory performance ( Jaeger , 2001b ) . The power eﬃciency is evaluated by power consumption required for performing a speciﬁc task . For instance , in a study on photonic reservoir ( Vinck - ier et al . , 2015 ) , the total optical power injected into a passive optical cavity reservoir is considered for assessing its power eﬃciency aside from power con - sumption for the other hardware components in preprocessing steps and the readout . The scalability of physical reservoirs is determined by how much the reservoir components can be miniaturized and whether they can be eﬃciently implemented on a small - scale chip . The evaluation of emerging RC technologies from these diﬀerent aspects would highlight the advantage and disadvantage of each reservoir . Some physical RC systems are suited for realizing next - generation machine learning hardware devices and chips with low power consumption . Such RC hardware is potentially capable of high - speed online computation for dynamic data , in contrast to relatively expensive computation in deep learning hardware for static data . This type of hardware is in great demand as edge computing devices for reducing the communication load in the IoT society , where a massive amount of data is produced and transmitted . Developments of device technology and ﬁndings of new materials for this purpose are highly expected . Other physi - cal RC systems are useful for exploring the applicability of natural phenomena to information processing under realistic constraints in biology , chemistry , physics , and engineering . In particular , studies on biological reservoirs are expected to provide new insights into the mechanism of real - time information processing in the brain regions ( Sec . 8 . 1 ) . Physical RC still remains in an early stage of development . It seems pre - mature to compare diﬀerent physical RC technologies in terms of performance , speed , memory , power eﬃciency , and scalability , because these characteristics highly depend on the implementation method . It is an ongoing challenge to explore eﬃcient implementation methods for each type of reservoir . For full - scale development of physical RC , further investigation is required from vari - ous aspects , such as performance evaluations in practical applications , devel - 41 opments of implementation technology , and theoretical understanding of dy - namics and computational function . It is intriguing to exploit novel physical phenomena for RC and to combine physical RC with other machine learning al - gorithms / hardware . We expect this review to facilitate future interdisciplinary research on physical RC . Acknowledgments We would like to thank Ze Hei for his assistance in collecting the relevant papers and the anonymous reviewers for helpful comments that improved the quality of this review . This work was partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP16H00326 ( GT ) . References Aaser , P . , Knudsen , M . , Huse Ramstad , O . , van de Wijdeven , R . , Nichele , S . , Sandvig , I . , Tufte , G . , Bauer , U . S . , Halaas , Ø . , Hendseth , S . , et al . , 2017 . Towards making a cyborg : A closed - loop reservoir - neuro system , in : Pro - ceedings of the European Conference on Artiﬁcial Life 2017 , MIT Press . pp . 430 – 437 . Abraham , I . , 2018 . The case for rejecting the memristor as a fundamental circuit element . Scientiﬁc reports 8 , 10972 . Akrout , A . , Bouwens , A . , Duport , F . , Vinckier , Q . , Haelterman , M . , Massar , S . , 2016 . Parallel photonic reservoir computing using frequency multiplexing of neurons . arXiv : 1612 . 08606 [ physics ] arXiv : 1612 . 08606 . Albus , J . S . , 1971 . A theory of cerebellar function . Mathematical Biosciences 10 , 25 – 61 . Alomar , M . L . , Canals , V . , Mart´ınez - Moll , V . , Rossell´o , J . L . , 2014 . Low - cost hardware implementation of reservoir computers , in : Power and Timing Modeling , Optimization and Simulation ( PATMOS ) , 2014 24th International Workshop on , IEEE . pp . 1 – 5 . Alomar , M . L . , Canals , V . , Morro , A . , Oliver , A . , Rossello , J . L . , 2016 . Stochas - tic hardware implementation of liquid state machines , in : Neural Networks ( IJCNN ) , 2016 International Joint Conference on , IEEE . pp . 1128 – 1133 . Alomar , M . L . , Soriano , M . C . , Escalona - Mor´an , M . , Canals , V . , Fischer , I . , Mi - rasso , C . R . , Rossell´o , J . L . , 2015 . Digital implementation of a single dynamical node reservoir computer . IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II : Ex - press Briefs 62 , 977 – 981 . Antonik , P . , 2018 . Application of FPGA to Real - Time Machine Learning : Hard - ware Reservoir Computers and Software Image Processing . Springer . 42 Antonik , P . , Duport , F . , Hermans , M . , Smerieri , A . , Haelterman , M . , Massar , S . , 2017a . Online Training of an Opto - Electronic Reservoir Computer Applied to Real - Time Channel Equalization . IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 28 , 2686 – 2698 . Antonik , P . , Haelterman , M . , Massar , S . , 2017b . Brain - Inspired Photonic Signal Processor for Generating Periodic Patterns and Emulating Chaotic Systems . Physical Review Applied 7 , 054014 . Antonik , P . , Hermans , M . , Haelterman , M . , Massar , S . , 2017c . Random Pattern and Frequency Generation Using a Photonic Reservoir Computer with Output Feedback . Neural Processing Letters , 1 – 14 . Antonik , P . , Smerieri , A . , Duport , F . , Haelterman , M . , Massar , S . , 2015 . FPGA implementation of reservoir computing with online learning , in : 24th Belgian - Dutch Conference on Machine Learning . Appeltant , L . , Van der Sande , G . , Danckaert , J . , Fischer , I . , 2014 . Constructing optimized binary masks for reservoir computing with delay systems . Scientiﬁc reports 4 , 3629 . Appeltant , L . , Soriano , M . C . , Van der Sande , G . , Danckaert , J . , Massar , S . , Dambre , J . , Schrauwen , B . , Mirasso , C . R . , Fischer , I . , 2011 . Information processing using a single dynamical node as complex system . Nature commu - nications 2 , 468 . Armbrust , M . , Fox , A . , Griﬃth , R . , Joseph , A . D . , Katz , R . , Konwinski , A . , Lee , G . , Patterson , D . , Rabkin , A . , Stoica , I . , et al . , 2010 . A view of cloud computing . Communications of the ACM 53 , 50 – 58 . Baddeley , A . , 2003 . Working memory : looking back and looking forward . Nature reviews neuroscience 4 , 829 . Bade , S . L . , Hutchings , B . L . , 1994 . FPGA - based stochastic neural networks - implementation , in : FPGAs for Custom Computing Machines , 1994 . Pro - ceedings . IEEE Workshop on , IEEE . pp . 189 – 198 . Bao , X . , Zhao , Q . , Yin , H . , Qin , J . , 2018 . Recognition of the optical packet header for two channels utilizing the parallel reservoir computing based on a semiconductor ring laser . Modern Physics Letters B , 1850150 . Barak , O . , Sussillo , D . , Romo , R . , Tsodyks , M . , Abbott , L . , 2013 . From ﬁxed points to chaos : three models of delayed discrimination . Progress in neurobi - ology 103 , 214 – 222 . Bennett , C . H . , Querlioz , D . , Klein , J . O . , 2017 . Spatio - temporal learning with arrays of analog nanosynapses , in : 2017 IEEE / ACM International Sympo - sium on Nanoscale Architectures ( NANOARCH ) , IEEE . pp . 125 – 130 . 43 Bernacchia , A . , Seo , H . , Lee , D . , Wang , X . J . , 2011 . A reservoir of time constants for memory traces in cortical neurons . Nature neuroscience 14 , 366 . Bertschinger , N . , Natschl¨ager , T . , 2004 . Real - time computation at the edge of chaos in recurrent neural networks . Neural computation 16 , 1413 – 1436 . Bourianoﬀ , G . , Pinna , D . , Sitte , M . , Everschor - Sitte , K . , 2018 . Potential imple - mentation of reservoir computing models based on magnetic skyrmions . AIP Advances 8 , 055602 . Brunner , D . , Fischer , I . , 2015 . Reconﬁgurable semiconductor laser networks based on diﬀractive coupling . Optics Letters 40 , 3854 – 3857 . Brunner , D . , Penkovsky , B . , Marquez , B . , Jacquot , M . , Fischer , I . , Larger , L . , 2018a . Tutorial : Photonic neural networks in delay systems . Journal of Applied Physics 124 , 152004 . Brunner , D . , Penkovsky , B . , Marquez , B . A . , Jacquot , M . , Fischer , I . , Larger , L . , 2018b . Tutorial : Photonic neural networks in delay systems . Journal of Applied Physics 124 , 152004 . Brunner , D . , Soriano , M . C . , Fischer , I . , 2013a . High - Speed Optical Vector and Matrix Operations Using a Semiconductor Laser . IEEE Photonics Technology Letters 25 , 1680 – 1683 . Brunner , D . , Soriano , M . C . , Mirasso , C . R . , Fischer , I . , 2013b . Parallel pho - tonic information processing at gigabyte per second data rates using transient states . Nature communications 4 , 1364 . Bueno , J . , Brunner , D . , Soriano , M . C . , Fischer , I . , 2017 . Conditions for reser - voir computing performance using semiconductor lasers with delayed optical feedback . Optics Express 25 , 2401 – 2412 . Bueno , J . , Maktoobi , S . , Froehly , L . , Fischer , I . , Jacquot , M . , Larger , L . , Brun - ner , D . , 2018 . Reinforcement learning in a large - scale photonic recurrent neural network . Optica 5 , 756 – 760 . Buonomano , D . V . , Maass , W . , 2009 . State - dependent computations : spatiotem - poral processing in cortical networks . Nature Reviews Neuroscience 10 , 113 . B¨urger , J . , Goudarzi , A . , Stefanovic , D . , Teuscher , C . , 2015a . Computational capacity and energy consumption of complex resistive switch networks . AIMS Materials Science 2 , 530 – 545 . B¨urger , J . , Goudarzi , A . , Stefanovic , D . , Teuscher , C . , 2015b . Hierarchical composition of memristive networks for real - time computing , in : Nanoscale Architectures ( NANOARCH ) , 2015 IEEE / ACM International Symposium on , IEEE . pp . 33 – 38 . 44 B¨urger , J . , Teuscher , C . , 2013 . Variation - tolerant computing with memristive reservoirs , in : Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE / ACM International Symposium on Nanoscale Architectures , IEEE Press . pp . 1 – 6 . Burms , J . , Caluwaerts , K . , Dambre , J . , 2015 . Reward - modulated hebbian plas - ticity as leverage for partially embodied control in compliant robotics . Fron - tiers in neurorobotics 9 , 9 . B¨using , L . , Schrauwen , B . , Legenstein , R . , 2010 . Connectivity , dynamics , and memory in reservoir computing with binary and analog neurons . Neural com - putation 22 , 1272 – 1311 . Caluwaerts , K . , Despraz , J . , I¸s¸cen , A . , Sabelhaus , A . P . , Bruce , J . , Schrauwen , B . , SunSpiral , V . , 2014 . Design and control of compliant tensegrity robots through simulation and hardware validation . Journal of the royal society interface 11 , 20140520 . Caluwaerts , K . , D’Haene , M . , Verstraeten , D . , Schrauwen , B . , 2013 . Locomo - tion without a brain : physical reservoir computing in tensegrity structures . Artiﬁcial life 19 , 35 – 66 . Caluwaerts , K . , Schrauwen , B . , 2011 . The body as a reservoir : locomotion and sensing with linear feedback , in : 2nd International conference on Morpholog - ical Computation ( ICMC 2011 ) , pp . 45 – 47 . Carbajal , J . P . , Dambre , J . , Hermans , M . , Schrauwen , B . , 2015 . Memristor models for machine learning . Neural computation . Chang , H . H . , Song , H . , Yi , Y . , Zhang , J . , He , H . , Liu , L . , 2018 . Distributive dynamic spectrum access through deep reinforcement learning : A reservoir computing based approach . IEEE Internet of Things Journal . Chua , L . , 1971 . Memristor - the missing circuit element . IEEE Transactions on circuit theory 18 , 507 – 519 . Chua , L . O . , Kang , S . M . , 1976 . Memristive devices and systems . Proceedings of the IEEE 64 , 209 – 223 . Coulombe , J . C . , York , M . C . , Sylvestre , J . , 2017 . Computing with networks of nonlinear mechanical oscillators . PloS one 12 , e0178663 . Dale , M . , Miller , J . F . , Stepney , S . , Trefzer , M . A . , 2016a . Evolving carbon nan - otube reservoir computers , in : International Conference on Unconventional Computation and Natural Computation , Springer . pp . 49 – 61 . Dale , M . , Stepney , S . , Miller , J . F . , Trefzer , M . , 2016b . Reservoir computing in materio : An evaluation of conﬁguration through evolution , in : Computational Intelligence ( SSCI ) , 2016 IEEE Symposium Series on , IEEE . pp . 1 – 8 . Daneman , M . , Carpenter , P . A . , 1980 . Individual diﬀerences in working memory and reading . Journal of verbal learning and verbal behavior 19 , 450 – 466 . 45 D’Angelo , E . , Antonietti , A . , Casali , S . , Casellato , C . , Garrido , J . A . , Luque , N . R . , Mapelli , L . , Masoli , S . , Pedrocchi , A . , Prestori , F . , et al . , 2016 . Mod - eling the cerebellar microcircuit : New strategies for a long - standing issue . Frontiers in cellular neuroscience 10 , 176 . Degrave , J . , Caluwaerts , K . , Dambre , J . , Wyﬀels , F . , 2015 . Developing an embodied gait on a compliant quadrupedal robot , in : Intelligent Robots and Systems ( IROS ) , 2015 IEEE / RSJ International Conference on , IEEE . pp . 4486 – 4491 . Dehghani , N . , Wimmer , R . D . , 2018 . A computational perspective of the role of thalamus in cognition . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1803 . 00997 . Dejonckheere , A . , Duport , F . , Smerieri , A . , Fang , L . , Oudar , J . L . , Haelterman , M . , Massar , S . , 2014 . All - optical reservoir computer based on saturation of absorption . Optics express 22 , 10868 – 10881 . Didovyk , A . , Kanakov , O . I . , Ivanchenko , M . V . , Hasty , J . , Huerta , R . , Tsimring , L . , 2014 . Distributed classiﬁer based on genetically engineered bacterial cell cultures . ACS synthetic biology 4 , 72 – 82 . Dockendorf , K . P . , Park , I . , He , P . , Pr´ıncipe , J . C . , DeMarse , T . B . , 2009 . Liq - uid state machines and cultured cortical networks : The separation property . Biosystems 95 , 90 – 97 . Donahue , C . , Merkel , C . , Saleh , Q . , Dolgovs , L . , Ooi , Y . K . , Kudithipudi , D . , Wysocki , B . , 2015 . Design and analysis of neuromemristive echo state net - works with limited - precision synapses , in : Computational Intelligence for Se - curity and Defense Applications ( CISDA ) , 2015 IEEE Symposium on , IEEE . pp . 1 – 6 . Dong , J . , Gigan , S . , Krzakala , F . , Wainrib , G . , 2016 . Scaling up Echo - State Networks with multiple light scattering . arXiv : 1609 . 05204 [ physics ] arXiv : 1609 . 05204 . Doya , K . , 1998 . Recurrent networks : Supervised learning , in : The handbook of brain theory and neural networks , MIT Press . pp . 796 – 800 . Doya , K . , 2000 . Complementary roles of basal ganglia and cerebellum in learning and motor control . Current opinion in neurobiology 10 , 732 – 739 . Dranias , M . R . , Ju , H . , Rajaram , E . , VanDongen , A . M . , 2013 . Short - term mem - ory in networks of dissociated cortical neurons . Journal of Neuroscience 33 , 1940 – 1953 . Du , C . , Cai , F . , Zidan , M . A . , Ma , W . , Lee , S . H . , Lu , W . D . , 2017 . Reservoir computing using dynamic memristors for temporal information processing . Nature communications 8 , 2204 . 46 Duport , F . , Schneider , B . , Smerieri , A . , Haelterman , M . , Massar , S . , 2012 . All - optical reservoir computing . Optics express 20 , 22783 – 22795 . Duport , F . , Smerieri , A . , Akrout , A . , Haelterman , M . , Massar , S . , 2016a . Fully analogue photonic reservoir computer . Scientiﬁc Reports 6 , 22381 . Duport , F . , Smerieri , A . , Akrout , A . , Haelterman , M . , Massar , S . , 2016b . Virtu - alization of a Photonic Reservoir Computer . Journal of Lightwave Technology 34 , 2085 – 2091 . Dutta , A . , Shah , K . , Silvanto , J . , Soto , D . , 2014 . Neural basis of non - conscious visual working memory . Neuroimage 91 , 336 – 343 . Eder , M . , Hisch , F . , Hauser , H . , 2017 . Morphological computation - based control of a modular , pneumatically driven , soft robotic arm . Advanced Robotics , 1 – 11 . Enel , P . , Procyk , E . , Quilodran , R . , Dominey , P . F . , 2016 . Reservoir comput - ing properties of neural dynamics in prefrontal cortex . PLoS computational biology 12 , e1004967 . Eriksson , J . , Vogel , E . K . , Lansner , A . , Bergstr¨om , F . , Nyberg , L . , 2015 . Neu - rocognitive architecture of working memory . Neuron 88 , 33 – 46 . Fernando , C . , Sojakka , S . , 2003 . Pattern recognition in a bucket , in : European Conference on Artiﬁcial Life , Springer . pp . 588 – 597 . Ferreira , d . L . T . , Shastri , B . J . , Tait , A . N . , Nahmias , M . A . , Prucnal , P . R . , 2017 . Progress in neuromorphic photonics . Nanophotonics 6 , 577 – 599 . Fiers , M . A . A . , Vaerenbergh , T . V . , Wyﬀels , F . , Verstraeten , D . , Schrauwen , B . , Dambre , J . , Bienstman , P . , 2014 . Nanophotonic Reservoir Computing With Photonic Crystal Cavities to Generate Periodic Patterns . IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 25 , 344 – 355 . Fujii , K . , Nakajima , K . , 2017 . Harnessing disordered - ensemble quantum dy - namics for machine learning . Physical Review Applied 8 , 024030 . Fujita , K . , Yonekura , S . , Nishikawa , S . , Niiyama , R . , Kuniyoshi , Y . , 2018 . Envi - ronmental and structural eﬀects on physical reservoir computing with tenseg - rity . Journal of the Institute of Industrial Applications Engineers 6 , 92 – 99 . Furuta , T . , Fujii , K . , Nakajima , K . , Sumito , T . , Hitoshi , K . , Suzuki , Y . , Miwa , S . , 2018 . Macromagnetic simulation for reservoir computing utilizing spin - dynamics in magnetic tunnel junctions . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1805 . 09977 . Fuster , J . , 2015 . The prefrontal cortex . Academic Press . Gallicchio , C . , Micheli , A . , Pedrelli , L . , 2017 . Deep reservoir computing : a critical experimental analysis . Neurocomputing 268 , 87 – 99 . 47 George , J . B . , Abraham , G . M . , Singh , K . , Ankolekar , S . M . , Amrutur , B . , Sikdar , S . K . , 2014 . Input coding for neuro - electronic hybrid systems . Biosystems 126 , 1 – 11 . Gerstner , W . , Kistler , W . M . , 2002 . Spiking neuron models : Single neurons , populations , plasticity . Cambridge university press . Ghani , A . , See , C . H . , Migdadi , H . , Asif , R . , Abd - Alhameed , R . A . , Noras , J . M . , 2015 . Reconﬁgurable neurons - making the most of conﬁgurable logic blocks ( clbs ) , in : Internet Technologies and Applications ( ITA ) , 2015 , IEEE . pp . 475 – 478 . Goudarzi , A . , Lakin , M . R . , Stefanovic , D . , 2013 . Dna reservoir computing : a novel molecular computing approach , in : International Workshop on DNA - Based Computers , Springer . pp . 76 – 89 . Grigoryeva , L . , Ortega , J . P . , 2018 . Echo state networks are universal . Neural Networks 108 , 495 – 508 . Grill - Spector , K . , Malach , R . , 2004 . The human visual cortex . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 27 , 649 – 677 . Grzyb , B . J . , Chinellato , E . , Wojcik , G . M . , Kaminski , W . A . , 2009 . Which model to use for the liquid state machine ? , in : Neural Networks , 2009 . IJCNN 2009 . International Joint Conference on , IEEE . pp . 1018 – 1024 . Hadaeghi , F . , He , X . , Jaeger , H . , 2017 . Unconventional Information Process - ing Systems , Novel Hardware : A Tour D’Horizon . IRC - Library , Information Resource Center der Jacobs University Bremen . Haﬁzovic , S . , Heer , F . , Ugniwenko , T . , Frey , U . , Blau , A . , Ziegler , C . , Hier - lemann , A . , 2007 . A cmos - based microelectrode array for interaction with neuronal cultures . Journal of neuroscience methods 164 , 93 – 106 . Hasler , J . , Marr , H . B . , 2013 . Finding a roadmap to achieve large neuromorphic hardware systems . Frontiers in neuroscience 7 , 118 . Hassan , A . M . , Li , H . H . , Chen , Y . , 2017 . Hardware implementation of echo state networks using memristor double crossbar arrays , in : Neural Networks ( IJCNN ) , 2017 International Joint Conference on , IEEE . pp . 2171 – 2177 . Hauser , H . , Ijspeert , A . J . , F¨uchslin , R . M . , Pfeifer , R . , Maass , W . , 2011 . To - wards a theoretical foundation for morphological computation with compliant bodies . Biological cybernetics 105 , 355 – 370 . Hauser , H . , Ijspeert , A . J . , F¨uchslin , R . M . , Pfeifer , R . , Maass , W . , 2012 . The role of feedback in morphological computation with compliant bodies . Biological cybernetics 106 , 595 – 613 . 48 Haynes , N . D . , Soriano , M . C . , Rosin , D . P . , Fischer , I . , Gauthier , D . J . , 2015 . Reservoir computing with a single time - delay autonomous boolean node . Physical Review E 91 , 020801 . Hermans , M . , Antonik , P . , Haelterman , M . , Massar , S . , 2016 . Embodiment of Learning in Electro - Optical Signal Processors . Physical Review Letters 117 , 128301 . Hermans , M . , Dambre , J . , Bienstman , P . , 2015a . Optoelectronic Systems Trained With Backpropagation Through Time . IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 26 , 1545 – 1550 . Hermans , M . , Soriano , M . C . , Dambre , J . , Bienstman , P . , Fischer , I . , 2015b . Photonic Delay Systems as Machine Learning Implementations . Journal of Machine Learning Research 16 , 2081 – 2097 . H´eroux , J . B . , Numata , H . , Kanazawa , N . , Nakano , D . , 2018 . Optoelectronic reservoir computing with vcsel , in : 2018 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks ( IJCNN ) , IEEE . pp . 1 – 6 . H´eroux , J . B . , Numata , H . , Nakano , D . , 2017 . Polymer Waveguide - Based Reser - voir Computing , in : Neural Information Processing , Springer , Cham . pp . 840 – 848 . Hicke , K . , Escalona - Mor´an , M . A . , Brunner , D . , Soriano , M . C . , Fischer , I . , Mi - rasso , C . R . , 2013 . Information processing using transient dynamics of semi - conductor lasers subject to delayed feedback . IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 19 , 1501610 – 1501610 . Hochreiter , S . , Schmidhuber , J . , 1997 . Long short - term memory . Neural com - putation 9 , 1735 – 1780 . Hoerzer , G . M . , Legenstein , R . , Maass , W . , 2012 . Emergence of complex compu - tational structures from chaotic neural networks through reward - modulated hebbian learning . Cerebral cortex 24 , 677 – 690 . Hofmann , T . , Sch¨olkopf , B . , Smola , A . J . , 2008 . Kernel methods in machine learning . The annals of statistics , 1171 – 1220 . Hou , Y . , Xia , G . , Yang , W . , Wang , D . , Jayaprasath , E . , Jiang , Z . , Hu , C . , Wu , Z . , 2018 . Prediction performance of reservoir computing system based on a semiconductor laser subject to double optical feedback and optical injection . Optics Express 26 , 10211 – 10219 . Indiveri , G . , Linares - Barranco , B . , Legenstein , R . , Deligeorgis , G . , Prodromakis , T . , 2013 . Integration of nanoscale memristor synapses in neuromorphic com - puting architectures . Nanotechnology 24 , 384010 . Inubushi , M . , Yoshimura , K . , 2017 . Reservoir computing beyond memory - nonlinearity trade - oﬀ . Scientiﬁc Reports 7 , 10199 . 49 Jaeger , H . , 2001a . The ”echo state” approach to analysing and training recurrent neural networks - with an erratum note . Bonn , Germany : German National Research Center for Information Technology GMD Technical Report 148 , 13 . Jaeger , H . , 2001b . Short term memory in echo state networks . volume 5 . GMD - Forschungszentrum Informationstechnik . Jaeger , H . , 2002 . Tutorial on training recurrent neural networks , covering BPPT , RTRL , EKF and the” echo state network” approach . volume 5 . GMD - Forschungszentrum Informationstechnik Bonn . Jaeger , H . , 2003 . Adaptive nonlinear system identiﬁcation with echo state net - works , in : Advances in neural information processing systems , pp . 609 – 616 . Jaeger , H . , Haas , H . , 2004 . Harnessing nonlinearity : Predicting chaotic systems and saving energy in wireless communication . Science 304 , 78 – 80 . Jaeger , H . , Maass , W . , Principe , J . , 2007 . Special issue on echo state networks and liquid state machines . Jalalvand , A . , Van Wallendael , G . , Van de Walle , R . , 2015 . Real - time reser - voir computing network - based systems for detection tasks on visual contents , in : Computational Intelligence , Communication Systems and Networks ( CI - CSyN ) , 2015 7th International Conference on , IEEE . pp . 146 – 151 . Jensen , J . H . , Tufte , G . , 2017 . Reservoir computing with a chaotic circuit , in : Proceedings of the European Conference on Artiﬁcial Life 14 , MIT Press . pp . 222 – 229 . Jin , Y . , Li , P . , 2017 . Performance and robustness of bio - inspired digital liquid state machines : A case study of speech recognition . Neurocomputing 226 , 145 – 160 . Jones , B . , Stekel , D . , Rowe , J . , Fernando , C . , 2007 . Is there a liquid state machine in the bacterium escherichia coli ? , in : Artiﬁcial Life , 2007 . ALIFE’07 . IEEE Symposium on , Ieee . pp . 187 – 191 . Ju , H . , Dranias , M . R . , Banumurthy , G . , VanDongen , A . M . , 2015 . Spatiotempo - ral memory is an intrinsic property of networks of dissociated cortical neurons . Journal of Neuroscience 35 , 4040 – 4051 . Katayama , Y . , Yamane , T . , Nakano , D . , Nakane , R . , Tanaka , G . , 2016 . Wave - based neuromorphic computing framework for brain - like energy eﬃciency and integration . IEEE Transactions on Nanotechnology 15 , 762 – 769 . Katumba , A . , Freiberger , M . , Bienstman , P . , Dambre , J . , 2017 . A Multiple - Input Strategy to Eﬃcient Integrated Photonic Reservoir Computing . Cog - nitive Computation 9 , 307 – 314 . 50 Katumba , A . , Heyvaert , J . , Schneider , B . , Uvin , S . , Dambre , J . , Bienstman , P . , 2018 . Low - Loss Photonic Reservoir Computing with Multimode Photonic Integrated Circuits . Scientiﬁc Reports 8 , 2653 . Kudithipudi , D . , Saleh , Q . , Merkel , C . , Thesing , J . , Wysocki , B . , 2016 . De - sign and analysis of a neuromemristive reservoir computing architecture for biosignal processing . Frontiers in neuroscience 9 , 502 . Kulkarni , M . S . , Teuscher , C . , 2012 . Memristor - based reservoir computing , in : 2012 IEEE / ACM International Symposium on Nanoscale Architectures ( NANOARCH ) , pp . 226 – 232 . Kuriki , Y . , Nakayama , J . , Takano , K . , Uchida , A . , 2018 . Impact of input mask signals on delay - based photonic reservoir computing with semiconductor lasers . Optics Express 26 , 5777 – 5788 . Kuwabara , J . , Nakajima , K . , Kang , R . , Branson , D . T . , Guglielmino , E . , Cald - well , D . G . , Pfeifer , R . , 2012 . Timing - based control via echo state network for soft robotic arm , in : Neural Networks ( IJCNN ) , The 2012 International Joint Conference on , IEEE . pp . 1 – 8 . Lakshmanan , M . , 2011 . The fascinating world of the landau – lifshitz – gilbert equation : an overview . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A : Mathematical , Physical and Engineering Sciences 369 , 1280 – 1300 . Laporte , F . , Katumba , A . , Dambre , J . , Bienstman , P . , 2018 . Numerical demon - stration of neuromorphic computing with photonic crystal cavities . Optics Express 26 , 7955 – 7964 . Larger , L . , Bayl´on - Fuentes , A . , Martinenghi , R . , Udaltsov , V . S . , Chembo , Y . K . , Jacquot , M . , 2017 . High - Speed Photonic Reservoir Computing Using a Time - Delay - Based Architecture : Million Words per Second Classiﬁcation . Physical Review X 7 , 011015 . Larger , L . , Soriano , M . C . , Brunner , D . , Appeltant , L . , Gutierrez , J . M . , Pes - quera , L . , Mirasso , C . R . , Fischer , I . , 2012 . Photonic information processing beyond Turing : An optoelectronic implementation of reservoir computing . Optics Express 20 , 3241 – 3249 . Legenstein , R . , Maass , W . , 2007 . Edge of chaos and prediction of computational performance for neural circuit models . Neural Networks 20 , 323 – 334 . Lepri , S . , Giacomelli , G . , Politi , A . , Arecchi , F . , 1994 . High - dimensional chaos in delayed dynamical systems . Physica D : Nonlinear Phenomena 70 , 235 – 249 . Li , J . , Bai , K . , Liu , L . , Yi , Y . , 2018 . A deep learning based approach for analog hardware implementation of delayed feedback reservoir computing system , in : Proceedings of 19th International Symposium In Quality Electronic Design ( ISQED ) , pp . 308 – 313 . 51 Li , J . , Zhao , C . , Hamedani , K . , Yi , Y . , 2017 . Analog hardware implementa - tion of spike - based delayed feedback reservoir computing system , in : Neural Networks ( IJCNN ) , 2017 International Joint Conference on , IEEE . pp . 3439 – 3446 . Li , T . , Nakajima , K . , Cianchetti , M . , Laschi , C . , Pfeifer , R . , 2012 . Behav - ior switching using reservoir computing for a soft robotic arm , in : Robotics and Automation ( ICRA ) , 2012 IEEE International Conference on , IEEE . pp . 4918 – 4924 . Liu , Y . , Jin , Y . , Li , P . , 2018 . Online adaptation and energy minimization for hardware recurrent spiking neural networks . ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems ( JETC ) 14 , 11 . Lukoˇseviˇcius , M . , 2012 . A practical guide to applying echo state networks , in : Neural networks : Tricks of the trade . Springer , pp . 659 – 686 . Lukoˇseviˇcius , M . , Jaeger , H . , 2009 . Reservoir computing approaches to recurrent neural network training . Computer Science Review 3 , 127 – 149 . Lukoˇseviˇcius , M . , Jaeger , H . , Schrauwen , B . , 2012 . Reservoir computing trends . KI - K¨unstliche Intelligenz 26 , 365 – 371 . Lyon , R . , 1982 . A computational model of ﬁltering , detection , and compression in the cochlea , in : Acoustics , Speech , and Signal Processing , IEEE Interna - tional Conference on ICASSP’82 . , IEEE . pp . 1282 – 1285 . Maass , W . , 2011 . Liquid state machines : motivation , theory , and applications , in : Computability in context : computation and logic in the real world . World Scientiﬁc , pp . 275 – 296 . Maass , W . , Joshi , P . , Sontag , E . D . , 2007 . Computational aspects of feedback in neural circuits . PLoS computational biology 3 , e165 . Maass , W . , Markram , H . , 2004 . On the computational power of circuits of spiking neurons . Journal of computer and system sciences 69 , 593 – 616 . Maass , W . , Natschl¨ager , T . , Markram , H . , 2002 . Real - time computing without stable states : A new framework for neural computation based on perturba - tions . Neural computation 14 , 2531 – 2560 . Maass , W . , Natschl¨ager , T . , Markram , H . , 2004 . Fading memory and kernel properties of generic cortical microcircuit models . Journal of Physiology - Paris 98 , 315 – 330 . Malik , Z . K . , Hussain , A . , Wu , Q . J . , 2017 . Multilayered echo state machine : a novel architecture and algorithm . IEEE Transactions on cybernetics 47 , 946 – 959 . 52 Mandic , D . P . , Chambers , J . A . , et al . , 2001 . Recurrent neural networks for prediction : learning algorithms , architectures and stability . Wiley Online Library . Mante , V . , Sussillo , D . , Shenoy , K . V . , Newsome , W . T . , 2013 . Context - dependent computation by recurrent dynamics in prefrontal cortex . nature 503 , 78 . Marr , D . , 1969 . A theory of cerebellar cortex . The Journal of physiology 202 , 437 – 470 . Martin , O . , Odlyzko , A . M . , Wolfram , S . , 1984 . Algebraic properties of cellular automata . Communications in mathematical physics 93 , 219 – 258 . Martinenghi , R . , Rybalko , S . , Jacquot , M . , Chembo , Y . K . , Larger , L . , 2012 . Photonic nonlinear transient computing with multiple - delay wavelength dy - namics . Physical review letters 108 , 244101 . McDonald , N . , 2017 . Reservoir computing & extreme learning machines using pairs of cellular automata rules , in : Neural Networks ( IJCNN ) , 2017 Interna - tional Joint Conference on , IEEE . pp . 2429 – 2436 . Merkel , C . , Saleh , Q . , Donahue , C . , Kudithipudi , D . , 2014 . Memristive reservoir computing architecture for epileptic seizure detection . Procedia Computer Science 41 , 249 – 254 . Mesaritakis , C . , Bogris , A . , Kapsalis , A . , Syvridis , D . , 2015 . High - speed all - optical pattern recognition of dispersive Fourier images through a photonic reservoir computing subsystem . Optics Letters 40 , 3416 – 3419 . Mesaritakis , C . , Papataxiarhis , V . , Syvridis , D . , 2013 . Micro ring resonators as building blocks for an all - optical high - speed reservoir - computing bit - pattern - recognition system . JOSA B 30 , 3048 – 3055 . Misra , J . , Saha , I . , 2010 . Artiﬁcial neural networks in hardware : A survey of two decades of progress . Neurocomputing 74 , 239 – 255 . Mor´an , A . , Frasser , C . F . , Rossell´o , J . L . , 2018 . Reservoir computing hardware with cellular automata . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1806 . 04932 . Murakami , M . , Kr¨oger , B . , Birkholz , P . , Triesch , J . , 2015 . Seeing [ u ] aids vo - cal learning : Babbling and imitation of vowels using a 3d vocal tract model , reinforcement learning , and reservoir computing , in : Development and Learn - ing and Epigenetic Robotics ( ICDL - EpiRob ) , 2015 Joint IEEE International Conference on , IEEE . pp . 208 – 213 . Nakajima , K . , Fujii , K . , Negoro , M . , Mitarai , K . , Kitagawa , M . , 2018 . Boost - ing computational power through spatial multiplexing in quantum reservoir computing . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1803 . 04574 . 53 Nakajima , K . , Hauser , H . , Kang , R . , Guglielmino , E . , Caldwell , D . G . , Pfeifer , R . , 2013 . A soft body as a reservoir : case studies in a dynamic model of octopus - inspired soft robotic arm . Frontiers in computational neuroscience 7 , 91 . Nakajima , K . , Hauser , H . , Li , T . , Pfeifer , R . , 2015 . Information processing via physical soft body . Scientiﬁc reports 5 , 10487 . Nakajima , K . , Li , T . , Hauser , H . , Pfeifer , R . , 2014 . Exploiting short - term memory in soft body dynamics as a computational resource . Journal of The Royal Society Interface 11 , 20140437 . Nakane , R . , Tanaka , G . , Hirose , A . , 2018 . Reservoir computing with spin waves excited in a garnet ﬁlm . IEEE Access 6 , 4462 – 4469 . Nakao , H . , 2016 . Phase reduction approach to synchronisation of nonlinear oscillators . Contemporary Physics 57 , 188 – 214 . Nakayama , J . , Kanno , K . , Uchida , A . , 2016 . Laser dynamical reservoir comput - ing with consistency : An approach of a chaos mask signal . Optics Express 24 , 8679 – 8692 . Nguimdo , R . M . , Verschaﬀelt , G . , Danckaert , J . , der Sande , G . V . , 2015 . Simul - taneous Computation of Two Independent Tasks Using Reservoir Computing Based on a Single Photonic Nonlinear Node With Optical Feedback . IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 26 , 3301 – 3307 . Nguimdo , R . M . , Verschaﬀelt , G . , Danckaert , J . , der Sande , G . V . , 2016 . Reduc - ing the phase sensitivity of laser - based optical reservoir computing systems . Optics Express 24 , 1238 – 1252 . Nichele , S . , Gundersen , M . S . , 2017 . Reservoir computing using non - uniform binary cellular automata . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1702 . 03812 . Nichele , S . , Molund , A . , 2017 . Deep reservoir computing using cellular au - tomata . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1703 . 02806 . Nikoli´c , D . , H¨ausler , S . , Singer , W . , Maass , W . , 2009 . Distributed fading mem - ory for stimulus properties in the primary visual cortex . PLoS biology 7 , e1000260 . Obien , M . E . J . , Deligkaris , K . , Bullmann , T . , Bakkum , D . J . , Frey , U . , 2015 . Re - vealing neuronal function through microelectrode array recordings . Frontiers in neuroscience 8 , 423 . Obst , O . , Trinchi , A . , Hardin , S . G . , Chadwick , M . , Cole , I . , Muster , T . H . , Hoschke , N . , Ostry , D . , Price , D . , Pham , K . N . , et al . , 2013 . Nano - scale reservoir computing . Nano Communication Networks 4 , 189 – 196 . Omondi , A . R . , Rajapakse , J . C . , 2006 . FPGA implementations of neural net - works . volume 365 . Springer . 54 Ort´ın , S . , Pesquera , L . , 2017 . Reservoir computing with an ensemble of time - delay reservoirs . Cognitive Computation 9 , 327 – 336 . Ort´ın , S . , Soriano , M . C . , Pesquera , L . , Brunner , D . , San - Mart´ın , D . , Fischer , I . , Mirasso , C . R . , Guti´errez , J . M . , 2015 . A Uniﬁed Framework for Reservoir Computing and Extreme Learning Machines based on a Single Time - delayed Neuron . Scientiﬁc Reports 5 , 14945 . Ortman , R . L . , Venayagamoorthy , K . , Potter , S . M . , 2011 . Input separability in living liquid state machines , in : International Conference on Adaptive and Natural Computing Algorithms , Springer . pp . 220 – 229 . Ozturk , M . C . , Xu , D . , Pr´ıncipe , J . C . , 2007 . Analysis and design of echo state networks . Neural computation 19 , 111 – 138 . Paquot , Y . , Duport , F . , Smerieri , A . , Dambre , J . , Schrauwen , B . , Haelterman , M . , Massar , S . , 2012 . Optoelectronic Reservoir Computing . Scientiﬁc Reports 2 , 287 . Parihar , A . , Shukla , N . , Jerry , M . , Datta , S . , Raychowdhury , A . , 2017 . Com - puting with dynamical systems based on insulator - metal - transition oscillators . Nanophotonics 6 , 601 – 611 . Pascanu , R . , Jaeger , H . , 2011 . A neurodynamical model for working memory . Neural networks 24 , 199 – 207 . Petre , P . , Cruz - Albrecht , J . , 2016 . Neuromorphic mixed - signal circuitry for asynchronous pulse processing , in : Rebooting Computing ( ICRC ) , IEEE In - ternational Conference on , IEEE . pp . 1 – 4 . Pfeifer , R . , Bongard , J . , 2006 . How the body shapes the way we think : a new view of intelligence . MIT press . Polepalli , A . , Soures , N . , Kudithipudi , D . , 2016a . Digital neuromorphic design of a liquid state machine for real - time processing , in : Rebooting Computing ( ICRC ) , IEEE International Conference on , IEEE . pp . 1 – 8 . Polepalli , A . , Soures , N . , Kudithipudi , D . , 2016b . Reconﬁgurable digital design of a liquid state machine for spatio - temporal data , in : Proceedings of the 3rd ACM International Conference on Nanoscale Computing and Communi - cation , ACM . p . 15 . Prucnal , P . R . , Shastri , B . J . , de Lima , T . F . , Nahmias , M . A . , Tait , A . N . , 2016 . Recent progress in semiconductor excitable lasers for photonic spike process - ing . Advances in Optics and Photonics 8 , 228 – 299 . Prychynenko , D . , Sitte , M . , Litzius , K . , Kr¨uger , B . , Bourianoﬀ , G . , Kl¨aui , M . , Sinova , J . , Everschor - Sitte , K . , 2018 . Magnetic skyrmion as a nonlinear re - sistive element : A potential building block for reservoir computing . Physical Review Applied 9 , 014034 . 55 Pyle , R . , Rosenbaum , R . , 2018 . A model of reward - modulated motor learning with parallelcortical and basal ganglia pathways . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1803 . 03304 . Qiao , J . , Li , F . , Han , H . , Li , W . , 2017 . Growing echo - state network with multiple subreservoirs . IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems 28 , 391 – 404 . Qin , J . , Zhao , Q . , Xu , D . , Yin , H . , Chang , Y . , Huang , D . , 2016 . Optical packet header identiﬁcation utilizing an all - optical feedback chaotic reservoir computing . Modern Physics Letters B 30 , 1650199 . Qin , J . , Zhao , Q . , Yin , H . , Jin , Y . , Liu , C . , 2017 . Numerical Simulation and Experiment on Optical Packet Header Recognition Utilizing Reservoir Com - puting Based on Optoelectronic Feedback . IEEE Photonics Journal 9 , 1 – 11 . Rapoport , M . , van Reekum , R . , Mayberg , H . , 2000 . The role of the cerebellum in cognition and behavior : a selective review . The Journal of neuropsychiatry and clinical neurosciences 12 , 193 – 198 . Rigotti , M . , Barak , O . , Warden , M . R . , Wang , X . J . , Daw , N . D . , Miller , E . K . , Fusi , S . , 2013 . The importance of mixed selectivity in complex cognitive tasks . Nature 497 , 585 . Roy , S . , Banerjee , A . , Basu , A . , 2014 . Liquid state machine with dendritically enhanced readout for low - power , neuromorphic vlsi implementations . IEEE transactions on biomedical circuits and systems 8 , 681 – 695 . Rumelhart , D . E . , Hinton , G . E . , Williams , R . J . , 1985 . Learning internal repre - sentations by error propagation . Technical Report . California Univ San Diego La Jolla Inst for Cognitive Science . Samarasinghe , S . , 2016 . Neural networks for applied sciences and engineering : from fundamentals to complex pattern recognition . CRC Press . Van der Sande , G . , Brunner , D . , Soriano , M . C . , 2017 . Advances in photonic reservoir computing . Nanophotonics 6 , 561 – 576 . Scardapane , S . , Wang , D . , 2017 . Randomness in neural networks : an overview . Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews : Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 7 . Schmidhuber , J . , 2015 . Deep learning in neural networks : An overview . Neural networks 61 , 85 – 117 . Schneider , B . , Dambre , J . , Bienstman , P . , 2016 . Using Digital Masks to Enhance the Bandwidth Tolerance and Improve the Performance of On - Chip Reservoir Computing Systems . IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 27 , 2748 – 2753 . 56 Schrauwen , B . , DfHaene , M . , Verstraeten , D . , Van Campenhout , J . , 2008 . Com - pact hardware liquid state machines on FPGA for real - time speech recogni - tion . Neural networks 21 , 511 – 523 . Schrauwen , B . , Van Campenhout , J . , 2003 . Bsa , a fast and accurate spike train encoding scheme , in : Proceedings of the international joint conference on neural networks , IEEE Piscataway , NJ . pp . 2825 – 2830 . Schrauwen , B . , Verstraeten , D . , Van Campenhout , J . , 2007 . An overview of reservoir computing : theory , applications and implementations , in : Proceed - ings of the 15th European Symposium on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks . p . 471 - 482 2007 , pp . 471 – 482 . Sch¨urmann , F . , Meier , K . , Schemmel , J . , 2005 . Edge of chaos computation in mixed - mode VLSI - “a hard liquid” , in : Advances in neural information processing systems , pp . 1201 – 1208 . Serre , T . , Kouh , M . , Cadieu , C . , Knoblich , U . , Kreiman , G . , Poggio , T . , 2005 . A theory of object recognition : computations and circuits in the feedforward path of the ventral stream in primate visual cortex . AI Memo 2005 - 036 / CBCL Memo 259 , Massachusetts Inst . of Technology , Cambridge . Shi , W . , Cao , J . , Zhang , Q . , Li , Y . , Xu , L . , 2016 . Edge computing : Vision and challenges . IEEE Internet of Things Journal 3 , 637 – 646 . Sillin , H . O . , Aguilera , R . , Shieh , H . H . , Avizienis , A . V . , Aono , M . , Stieg , A . Z . , Gimzewski , J . K . , 2013 . A theoretical and experimental study of neuromorphic atomic switch networks for reservoir computing . Nanotechnology 24 , 384004 . Smith , M . R . , Hill , A . J . , Carlson , K . D . , Vineyard , C . M . , Donaldson , J . , Fol - lett , D . R . , Follett , P . L . , Naegle , J . H . , James , C . D . , Aimone , J . B . , 2017 . A novel digital neuromorphic architecture eﬃciently facilitating complex synap - tic response functions applied to liquid state machines , in : Neural Networks ( IJCNN ) , 2017 International Joint Conference on , IEEE . pp . 2421 – 2428 . Snyder , D . , Goudarzi , A . , Teuscher , C . , 2013 . Computational capabilities of random automata networks for reservoir computing . Physical Review E 87 , 042808 . Soh , H . , Demiris , Y . , 2012 . Iterative temporal learning and prediction with the sparse online echo state gaussian process , in : Neural Networks ( IJCNN ) , The 2012 International Joint Conference on , IEEE . pp . 1 – 8 . Soriano , M . C . , Brunner , D . , Escalona - Mor´an , M . , Mirasso , C . R . , Fischer , I . , 2015a . Minimal approach to neuro - inspired information processing . Frontiers in computational neuroscience 9 , 68 . Soriano , M . C . , Ort´ın , S . , Brunner , D . , Larger , L . , Mirasso , C . R . , Fischer , I . , Pes - quera , L . , 2013 . Optoelectronic reservoir computing : Tackling noise - induced performance degradation . Optics Express 21 , 12 – 20 . 57 Soriano , M . C . , Ort´ın , S . , Keuninckx , L . , Appeltant , L . , Danckaert , J . , Pes - quera , L . , Van der Sande , G . , 2015b . Delay - based reservoir computing : noise eﬀects in a combined analog and digital implementation . IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems 26 , 388 – 393 . Soures , N . , Hays , L . , Kudithipudi , D . , 2017 . Robustness of a memristor based liquid state machine , in : Neural Networks ( IJCNN ) , 2017 International Joint Conference on , IEEE . pp . 2414 – 2420 . Stancil , D . D . , Prabhakar , A . , 2009 . Spin waves . Springer . Steil , J . J . , 2004 . Backpropagation - decorrelation : online recurrent learning with o ( n ) complexity , in : Neural Networks , 2004 . Proceedings . 2004 IEEE Inter - national Joint Conference on , IEEE . pp . 843 – 848 . Steil , J . J . , 2007 . Online reservoir adaptation by intrinsic plasticity for backpropagation – decorrelation and echo state learning . Neural Networks 20 , 353 – 364 . Stieg , A . Z . , Avizienis , A . V . , Sillin , H . O . , Aguilera , R . , Shieh , H . H . , Martin - Olmos , C . , Sandouk , E . J . , Aono , M . , Gimzewski , J . K . , 2014 . Self - organization and emergence of dynamical structures in neuromorphic atomic switch net - works , in : Memristor Networks . Springer , pp . 173 – 209 . Stieg , A . Z . , Avizienis , A . V . , Sillin , H . O . , Martin - Olmos , C . , Aono , M . , Gimzewski , J . K . , 2012 . Emergent criticality in complex turing b - type atomic switch networks . Advanced Materials 24 , 286 – 293 . Strukov , D . B . , Snider , G . S . , Stewart , D . R . , Williams , R . S . , 2008 . The missing memristor found . nature 453 , 80 . Sussillo , D . , Abbott , L . F . , 2009 . Generating coherent patterns of activity from chaotic neural networks . Neuron 63 , 544 – 557 . Takahashi , H . , Yasuda , S . , Yada , Y . , Kanzaki , R . , 2016 . Reservoir computing with dissociated neuronal culture . Frontiers in Neuroscience 27 . Takeda , S . , Nakano , D . , Yamane , T . , Tanaka , G . , Nakane , R . , Hirose , A . , Nak - agawa , S . , 2016 . Photonic reservoir computing based on laser dynamics with external feedback , in : International Conference on Neural Information Pro - cessing , Springer . pp . 222 – 230 . Tanaka , G . , Nakane , R . , Yamane , T . , Takeda , S . , Nakano , D . , Nakagawa , S . , Hirose , A . , 2017 . Waveform classiﬁcation by memristive reservoir computing , in : International Conference on Neural Information Processing , Springer . pp . 457 – 465 . Thomas , A . , 2013 . Memristor - based neural networks . Journal of Physics D : Applied Physics 46 , 093001 . 58 Toledo - Su´arez , C . , Duarte , R . , Morrison , A . , 2014 . Liquid computing on and oﬀ the edge of chaos with a striatal microcircuit . Frontiers in computational neuroscience 8 , 130 . Tong , Z . , Tanaka , G . , 2018 . ”reservoir computing with untrained convolutional neural networks for image recognition , in : Proc . International Conference on Pattern Recognition , p . ( to appear ) . Torrejon , J . , Riou , M . , Araujo , F . A . , Tsunegi , S . , Khalsa , G . , Querlioz , D . , Bor - tolotti , P . , Cros , V . , Yakushiji , K . , Fukushima , A . , et al . , 2017 . Neuromorphic computing with nanoscale spintronic oscillators . Nature 547 , 428 . Tran , S . D . , Teuscher , C . , 2017 . Memcapacitive reservoir computing , in : 2017 IEEE / ACM International Symposium on Nanoscale Architectures ( NANOARCH ) , IEEE . pp . 115 – 116 . Urbain , G . , Degrave , J . , Carette , B . , Dambre , J . , Wyﬀels , F . , 2017 . Morpho - logical properties of mass - spring networks for optimal locomotion learning . Frontiers in neurorobotics 11 , 16 . Vaerenbergh , T . V . , Fiers , M . , Dambre , J . , Bienstman , P . , 2015 . Eﬃcient simu - lation of optical nonlinear cavity circuits . Optical and Quantum Electronics 47 , 1471 – 1476 . Vandoorne , K . , Dambre , J . , Verstraeten , D . , Schrauwen , B . , Bienstman , P . , 2011 . Parallel Reservoir Computing Using Optical Ampliﬁers . IEEE Trans - actions on Neural Networks 22 , 1469 – 1481 . Vandoorne , K . , Dierckx , W . , Schrauwen , B . , Verstraeten , D . , Baets , R . , Bien - stman , P . , Campenhout , J . V . , 2008 . Toward optical signal processing using Photonic Reservoir Computing . Optics Express 16 , 11182 – 11192 . Vandoorne , K . , Mechet , P . , Van Vaerenbergh , T . , Fiers , M . , Morthier , G . , Ver - straeten , D . , Schrauwen , B . , Dambre , J . , Bienstman , P . , 2014 . Experimental demonstration of reservoir computing on a silicon photonics chip . Nature communications 5 , 3541 . Verstraeten , D . , Schrauwen , B . , dfHaene , M . , Stroobandt , D . , 2007 . An ex - perimental uniﬁcation of reservoir computing methods . Neural networks 20 , 391 – 403 . Verstraeten , D . , Schrauwen , B . , Stroobandt , D . , 2005a . Reservoir computing with stochastic bitstream neurons , in : Proceedings of the 16th annual Prorisc workshop , pp . 454 – 459 . Verstraeten , D . , Schrauwen , B . , Stroobandt , D . , Van Campenhout , J . , 2005b . Isolated word recognition with the liquid state machine : a case study . Infor - mation Processing Letters 95 , 521 – 528 . 59 Vincent - Lamarre , P . , Lajoie , G . , Thivierge , J . P . , 2016 . Driving reservoir models with oscillations : a solution to the extreme structural sensitivity of chaotic networks . Journal of computational neuroscience 41 , 305 – 322 . Vinckier , Q . , Duport , F . , Smerieri , A . , Vandoorne , K . , Bienstman , P . , Haelter - man , M . , Massar , S . , 2015 . High - performance photonic reservoir computer based on a coherently driven passive cavity . Optica 2 , 438 – 446 . Walter , F . , R¨ohrbein , F . , Knoll , A . , 2015 . Neuromorphic implementations of neurobiological learning algorithms for spiking neural networks . Neural Net - works 72 , 152 – 167 . Wang , Q . , Jin , Y . , Li , P . , 2015 . General - purpose lsm learning processor ar - chitecture and theoretically guided design space exploration , in : Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference ( BioCAS ) , 2015 IEEE , IEEE . pp . 1 – 4 . Wang , Q . , Li , Y . , Li , P . , 2016 . Liquid state machine based pattern recognition on FPGA with ﬁring - activity dependent power gating and approximate comput - ing , in : Circuits and Systems ( ISCAS ) , 2016 IEEE International Symposium on , IEEE . pp . 361 – 364 . Wang , Q . , Li , Y . , Shao , B . , Dey , S . , Li , P . , 2017 . Energy eﬃcient parallel neuromorphic architectures with approximate arithmetic on FPGA . Neuro - computing 221 , 146 – 158 . Werbos , P . J . , 1990 . Backpropagation through time : what it does and how to do it . Proceedings of the IEEE 78 , 1550 – 1560 . Williame , J . , Accioly , A . D . , Kim , J . V . , 2017 . Chaotic dynamics in a macrospin spin - torque nano - oscillator with time - delayed feedback . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1709 . 04310 . Williams , R . J . , Zipser , D . , 1989 . A learning algorithm for continually running fully recurrent neural networks . Neural computation 1 , 270 – 280 . Williams , R . S . , 2014 . How we found the missing memristor , in : Memristors and Memristive Systems . Springer , pp . 3 – 16 . Wojcik , G . M . , Kaminski , W . A . , 2007 . Liquid state machine and its separation ability as function of electrical parameters of cell . Neurocomputing 70 , 2593 – 2597 . Wolf , S . , Awschalom , D . , Buhrman , R . , Daughton , J . , Von Molnar , S . , Roukes , M . , Chtchelkanova , A . Y . , Treger , D . , 2001 . Spintronics : a spin - based elec - tronics vision for the future . Science 294 , 1488 – 1495 . Wolfram , S . , 2018 . Cellular automata and complexity : collected papers . CRC Press . 60 Wyﬀels , F . , D’Haene , M . , Waegeman , T . , Caluwaerts , K . , Nunes , C . , Schrauwen , B . , 2010 . Realization of a passive compliant robot dog , in : Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics ( BioRob ) , 2010 3rd IEEE RAS and EMBS International Conference on , IEEE . pp . 882 – 886 . Xia , Y . , Jahanchahi , C . , Mandic , D . P . , 2015 . Quaternion - valued echo state networks . IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems 26 , 663 – 673 . Yamane , T . , Katayama , Y . , Nakane , R . , Tanaka , G . , Nakano , D . , 2015 . Wave - based reservoir computing by synchronization of coupled oscillators , in : Inter - national Conference on Neural Information Processing , Springer . pp . 198 – 205 . Yamazaki , T . , Tanaka , S . , 2007 . The cerebellum as a liquid state machine . Neural Networks 20 , 290 – 297 . Yang , X . , Chen , W . , Wang , F . Z . , 2016 . Investigations of the staircase mem - ristor model and applications of memristor - based local connections . Analog Integrated Circuits and Signal Processing 87 , 263 – 273 . Yi , Y . , Liao , Y . , Wang , B . , Fu , X . , Shen , F . , Hou , H . , Liu , L . , 2016 . FPGA based spike - time dependent encoder and reservoir design in neuromorphic computing processors . Microprocessors and Microsystems 46 , 175 – 183 . Yildiz , I . B . , Jaeger , H . , Kiebel , S . J . , 2012 . Re - visiting the echo state property . Neural networks 35 , 1 – 9 . Yilmaz , O . , 2014 . Reservoir computing using cellular automata . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1410 . 0162 . Yilmaz , O . , 2015a . Machine learning using cellular automata based feature expansion and reservoir computing . Journal of Cellular Automata 10 . Yilmaz , O . , 2015b . Symbolic computation using cellular automata - based hyper - dimensional computing . Neural computation 27 , 2661 – 2692 . Zhang , H . , Feng , X . , Li , B . , Wang , Y . , Cui , K . , Liu , F . , Dou , W . , Huang , Y . , 2014 . Integrated photonic reservoir computing based on hierarchical time - multiplexing structure . Optics Express 22 , 31356 – 31370 . Zhang , Y . , Li , P . , Jin , Y . , Choe , Y . , 2015 . A digital liquid state machine with biologically inspired learning and its application to speech recognition . IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems 26 , 2635 – 2649 . Zhao , C . , Li , J . , Liu , L . , Koutha , L . S . , Liu , J . , Yi , Y . , 2016 . Novel spike based reservoir node design with high performance spike delay loop , in : Proceed - ings of the 3rd ACM International Conference on Nanoscale Computing and Communication , ACM . p . 14 . 61 Zhao , Q . , Nakajima , K . , Sumioka , H . , Hauser , H . , Pfeifer , R . , 2013 . Spine dynamics as a computational resource in spine - driven quadruped locomotion , in : Intelligent Robots and Systems ( IROS ) , 2013 IEEE / RSJ International Conference on , IEEE . pp . 1445 – 1451 . Zhao , Q . , Yin , H . , Zhu , H . , 2018 . Simultaneous recognition of two channels of optical packet headers utilizing reservoir computing subject to mutual - coupling optoelectronic feedback . Optik 157 , 951 – 956 . Zhu , J . , Sutton , P . , 2003 . FPGA implementations of neural networks – a survey of a decade of progress , in : International Conference on Field Programmable Logic and Applications , Springer . pp . 1062 – 1066 . 62