Volume 24 August 1 , 2013 2299 Mechanisms of actin disassembly William Brieher Department of Cell and Developmental Biology , University of Illinois , Urbana , IL 61801 ABSTRACT The actin cytoskeleton is constantly assembling and disassembling . Cells harness the energy of these turnover dynamics to drive cell motility and organize cytoplasm . Al - though much is known about how cells control actin polymerization , we do not understand how actin filaments depolymerize inside cells . I briefly describe how the combination of imag - ing actin filament dynamics in cells and using in vitro biochemistry progressively altered our views of actin depolymerization . I describe why I do not think that the prevailing model of actin filament turnover—cofilin - mediated actin filament severing—can account for actin fila - ment disassembly detected in cells . Finally , I speculate that cells might be able to tune the mechanism of actin depolymerization to meet physiological demands and selectively control the stabilities of different actin arrays . INTRODUCTION Actin filaments in cells are highly dynamic , rapidly assembling in some regions of the cell while disassembling in others . Fast actin depolymerization allows cells to rapidly reconfigure their cytoskele - ton in response to both internal and external cues . At the biochemi - cal level , fast actin depolymerization is necessary to replenish the pool of polymerizable actin monomer that is used to rapidly assem - ble actin filaments and perform work ( Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . Therefore actin depolymerization is critical for actin - dependent pro - cesses , but the mechanism of actin depolymerization operating in cells is not known . TReADMIllINg , COfIlIN , AND SeveRINg Actin filaments in pure solution turn over slowly at steady state through an ATP - dependent process know as treadmilling ( Wegner , 1982 ) . To treadmill , actin uses a small portion of the energy from ATP hydrolysis on actin to destabilize the filament to a slight extent , resulting in the slow release of ADP - actin subunits from the pointed ends of filaments . Classic photobleaching experiments performed at the leading edge of migrating cells were consistent with a model in which actin filaments assembled at the tip of the lamellipodium and disassembled at the base—hence treadmilling ( Wang , 1985 ) . Protrusion of the leading edge could thus be neatly explained by the intrinsic properties of F - actin . The model is very appealing , and treadmilling is a popular model for describing actin filament turn - over in cells . There are , however , two caveats . The first is that actin filaments in cells are too densely packed to directly visualize the mode of disassembly at the single - filament level by light microscopy . The extent to which this problem limited interpretation of mechanism became very apparent with the appli - cation of fluorescence speckle microscopy to actin arrays ( Watanabe and Mitchison , 2002 ; Ponti et al . , 2003 ) . Speckling revealed that ac - tin assembly and disassembly reactions are not restricted to the tip and base of the lamellipodium . Instead , both reactions are distrib - uted throughout the structure from the tip to the base . Some of the filaments are polymerizing , whereas others right next to them are disassembling . Therefore we can no longer unequivocally state the mechanism of depolymerization at the single - filament level . Any and all modes of actin filament disassembly depicted in Figure 1 could be operating in cells . The second caveat is that actin filaments depolymerize much faster in cells than in pure solution , implying the existence of cellular factors that accelerate actin disassembly ( Zigmond , 1993 ) . These factors could in principle accelerate pointed - end dissociation to en - hance treadmilling , but treadmilling need not be an essential fea - ture of actin filaments based on evidence from the world of bacterial actin filaments . Prokaryotic ParM , for example , is structurally related to actin ( Carballido - Lopez , 2006 ) , but ParM uses the energy from ATP hydrolysis to drive dynamic instability , not treadmilling ( Garner et al . , 2004 ) . In principle , then , if cellular factors were to help actin capture more of the energy from ATP hydrolysis , they could alter the mechanism to any of those depicted in Figure 1 . The discrepancy between in vitro and in vivo actin disassembly rates motivated the search for actin disassembly factors , and mem - bers of the cofilin family of small actin - binding proteins were the Monitoring Editor William Bement University of Wisconsin Received : Apr 15 , 2013 Revised : Apr 29 , 2013 Accepted : May 22 , 2013 DOI : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E12 - 09 - 0694 Address correspondence to : William Brieher ( wbrieher @ illinois . edu ) . © 2013 Brieher . This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author ( s ) . Two months after publication it is available to the public under an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported Cre - ative Commons License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 ) . “ASCB ® , ” “The American Society for Cell Biology ® , ” and “Molecular Biology of the Cell ® ” are registered trademarks of The American Society of Cell Biology . MBoC | PeRSPeCTIve 2300 | W . Brieher Molecular Biology of the Cell hypothesis that cofilin - mediated actin - filament severing is the pri - mary mode of disassembly driving actin dynamics in cells . CAN SeveRINg AND TReADMIllINg ACCOUNT fOR ACTIN DISASSeMBly IN CellS ? Several years ago Hao Yuan Kueh , Tim Mitchison , and I compared the effects of two drugs , latrunculin B and cytochalasin D , on the dynamics of Listeria actin comet tails ( Kueh et al . , 2008 ) . Cytochala - sin D is a drug that caps the barbed ends of actin filaments , prevent - ing it from growing or shrinking . Latrunculin , on the other hand , binds to actin monomer and prevents it from incorporating into polymer . Listeria is a bacterial pathogen that harnesses the energy of actin polymerization on its surface to propel it through the host’s cytoplasm ( Tilney and Portnoy , 1989 ) . As the bacterium is propelled forward , it leaves an actin comet tail behind it that rapidly depo - lymerizes with exponential kinetics ( Theriot et al . , 1992 ) . Cofilin is necessary for comet tail disassembly ( Rosenblatt et al . , 1997 ) . Both latrunculin and cytochalasin D stopped Listeria propulsion , which was expected . However , cytochalasin D also blocked comet tail dis - assembly , which was unexpected . The cytochalasin D result is incon - sistent with treadmilling—why should capping the barbed end block disassembly at the pointed end ? The result is also inconsistent with severing—cytochalasin D should , if anything , enhance severing by blocking filament reannealing . This is not an isolated case unique to Listeria , because cytochalasin D also blocked actin depolymeriza - tion in protruding lamellipodia ( Kueh et al . , 2008 ) . Either we have more to learn about cytochalasin D or , just maybe , actin filaments in cells depolymerize from their barbed ends . One might be tempted to brush aside the cytochalasin D result as some effect of the drug other than capping of filament barbed ends ( Cooper , 1987 ) . Nevertheless , cofilin - mediated actin filament severing remains an unsatisfactory model for actin filament turnover in cells because it cannot explain the morphogenesis of the Listeria actin comet tail . Comet tail assembly is restricted to the bacterial surface , whereas the rest of the comet tail only depolymerizes ( Theriot et al . , 1992 ; Kueh et al . , 2010 ) . Although severing will produce more pointed ends that shrink , severing will also create more barbed ends that grow . Actin - filament barbed ends produced by cofilin - mediated severing serve as sites for actin assembly in vitro ( Ichetovkin et al . , 2002 ) . Furthermore , acute activation of cofilin at the leading edge of migrating cells results in a burst of actin assembly , not disassembly , presumably due to the abrupt formation of new barbed ends created by a round of severing ( Ghosh et al . , 2004 ) . Disassembly dominated by severing cannot be operating in the Listeria actin comet tail because no new actin assembly can be detected along the length of the dissolving comet tail ( Kueh et al . , 2010 ) . Finally , loss of polymer mass from comet tails via severing alone would require two cuts before the resulting filament could diffuse away from the comet tail , which is inconsistent with their ex - ponential decay profile ( Kueh et al . , 2010 ) . AUxIlIARy fACTORS COUlD AlTeR The MeChANISM Of DePOlyMeRIzATION Thus cofilin - mediated filament severing alone cannot account for actin disassembly dynamics detected in cells . The implication is that cells express additional factors that augment cofilin function and alter the mechanism of depolymerization . In fact , whereas co - filin is necessary for actin depolymerization , it does not appear to be sufficient under conditions normally found inside cells , and ad - ditional factors appear to be required to help cofilin overcome intracellular obstacles that would otherwise inhibit actin disassem - bly . Cells contain high concentrations of polymerizable actin leading candidates ( Bamburg , 1999 ) . Lappalainen and Drubin ( 1997 ) combined yeast genetics with imaging and a small - molecule inhibi - tor of actin assembly to prove that cofilin is essential for actin depo - lymerization in cells . Cofilin severs actin filaments in pure solution but does not appear to accelerate the rate at which actin subunits dissociate from filament ends ( Andrianantoandro and Pollard , 2006 ) , and cofilin - mediated severing of actively growing filaments has been detected in vitro ( Michelot et al . , 2007 ) . Cofilin - mediated actin filament severing , presumably followed by slow depolymerization from the pointed end , is now the prevailing model for actin disas - sembly in cells . Bundles of actin filaments can be seen fragmenting in neuronal growth cones of Aplysia ( Medeiros et al . , 2006 ) . We do not know the fate of such severed filaments , however , or how they might depolymerize down to monomer . Nor is it even clear whether actin - filament severing is the dominant mode of disassembly operating in cells . Fluorescence speckle microscopy of actin in lamellipodia , for example , suggests that fast actin depolymerization extends all the way to the tip of the leading edge ( Watanabe and Mitchison , 2002 ) , but the short filaments we expect to see from fre - quent severing events are not found in electron tomograms of lamellipodia ( Urban et al . , 2010 ) . In fact , a number of nagging ob - servations of actin filament turnover in cells are inconsistent with the FIGURE 1 : Alternative modes of actin disassembly . ( A ) Treadmilling filaments lose actin subunits from the pointed ends of filaments . Pure actin treadmills at steady state , which is a popular model for describing actin turnover in cells . ( B ) Dynamic instability would occur if ATP hydrolysis were to convert the barbed end from one that grows to one that shrinks . Microtubules and prokaryotic ParM filaments undergo dynamic instability , but dynamic instability has not been seen with actin . ( C ) Severing cuts a filament to produce two daughter filaments without loss of polymer mass . Cofilin severs actin filaments in vitro . ( D ) Whole - filament destabilization proposes a highly cooperative process in which long stretches of polymer abruptly convert to monomer . Whole - filament destabilization might describe actin disassembly in the presence of cofilin , coronin , and Aip1 . Volume 24 August 1 , 2013 Mechanisms of actin disassembly | 2301 tune the mechanism of depolymerization to meet physiological de - mands . Whole - filament destabilization , for example , could be ad - vantageous when cells needs to remove an actin array quickly and completely , such as during phagosome maturation ( Bengtsson et al . , 1993 ) . A severing - dominated regime , on the other hand , could allow cells to deform an actin array without losing much poly - mer mass . Semaphorin 3A , for example , induces neuronal growth cone collapse ( Fan et al . , 1993 ) . The process requires both cofilin and myosin II ( Aizawa et al . , 2001 ; Gallo , 2006 ) . Although actin poly - mer mass is lost upon exposure to Semaphorin 3A , some F - actin remains , and myosin II pulls on it to retract the neurite ( Gallo , 2006 ) . Severing might weaken the array , allowing it to flow more freely in response to myosin II – dependent contractile forces . Different auxiliary factors could also be used to selectively control the stability of different actin arrays in cells . The stability of actin within different networks can vary from seconds to hours ( Zigmond , 1993 ; Kueh and Mitchison , 2009 ) . How cells manage to simultane - ously maintain actin arrays of such varying stabilities in a shared cyto - sol is not known . Selectively stabilizing certain actin arrays with tro - pomyosin appears to be one mechanism ( Kuhn and Bamburg , 2008 ) . Selectively destabilizing different actin arrays with different combina - tions of cofilin and supplementary factors could be a complementary mechanism . Selective destabilization of a particular actin array might be operating in Drosophila nurse cells , in which CAP specifically con - trols the amount of actin that assembles at apical cell – cell junctions , whereas cofilin controls the amount of actin throughout the entire cell ( Baum and Perrimon , 2001 ) . The extent to which other disassem - bly factors help control the amount and stability of F - actin in other actin arrays is an interesting question for the future . fUTURe DIReCTIONS Identifying which mechanisms of actin depolymerization are operat - ing in cells is the obvious goal , but directly visualizing depolymeriza - tion of single filaments in cells is still beyond the resolution of light microscopy . As an alternative , we can analyze actin depolymeriza - tion in vitro under defined conditions in greater detail to better dis - tinguish between different mechanisms of disassembly . This infor - mation could then be used to help better detect the mechanism of actin depolymerization operating within an actin array in vivo . In the process , we might uncover new roles for actin depolymerization in controlling the morphogenesis of the actin cytoskeleton , with po - tential consequences for our understanding of actin - dependent processes such as cell motility . monomer , which is used to drive fast actin assembly , and depo - lymerization must occur against this thermodynamic barrier . There is also a stoichiometric problem caused by the high concentration of actin polymer in cells that is in large excess of the depolymer - izers . A variety of auxiliary factors have been identified that aug - ment cofilin function , including Aip1 , coronin , and CAP ( Ono , 2007 ) . The importance of these factors in actin turnover dynamics has been demonstrated in multiple organisms ( Ono , 2007 ) , and some of them help cofilin to overcome inhibition of disassembly by excess monomer and polymer ( Brieher et al . , 2006 ; Normoyle and Brieher , 2012 ) . The key question is whether these auxiliary factors simply accelerate cofilin - mediated severing or alter the mechanism . In many cases the auxiliary factors enhance cofilin - mediated severing ( Ono et al . , 2004 ; Ono , 2007 ; Moseley et al . , 2006 ; Gandhi et al . , 2009 ; Normoyle and Brieher , 2012 ; Chaudhry et al . , 2013 ) . In contrast , the combination of cofilin , coronin , and Aip1 altered the mechanism of depolymerization to one in which long stretches of actin polymer appeared to disassemble catastrophi - cally in a single step ( Kueh et al . , 2008 ) . This mechanism has been referred to alternatively as bursting or whole - filament destabiliza - tion to reflect either the abruptness of the disassembly event or the possibility that the filament is disassembling under these con - ditions through every imaginable pathway ( severing , pointed - end loss , barbed - end loss , unraveling of the protofilaments ) . The mole - cular mechanism underlying whole - filament destabilization is not known , but it is presumably a highly cooperative process . One possibility is that the combination of cofilin and coronin drives highly cooperative cofilin binding to F - actin to create long stretches of polymer coated with cofilin and possibly coronin . These coated segments of polymer are envisioned to be highly unstable in the presence of Aip1 . Although this model is highly speculative , cofilin binds cooperatively to F - actin . The cooperativity is weak ( Andrianantoandro and Pollard , 2006 ) , but it might be strength - ened by coronin , which enhances cofilin binding to Listeria actin comet tails as well as F - actin in pure solution ( Brieher et al . , 2006 ) — this , despite the fact that coronin occludes the cofilin - binding site on F - actin ( Galkin et al . , 2008 ) and the two proteins compete for binding to the filament ( Cai et al . , 2007 ) . Such stretches of cofilin - coronin – laden polymer are then envisioned to be superior sub - strates for Aip1 - mediated disassembly . Our understanding of the mechanism of disassembly under these conditions is still in its infancy and arguably too murky to justify the names that I helped assign to it . Nevertheless , despite what we call it , severing does not suffice to describe filament disassembly in the presence of these three factors , and the triple mixture of cofilin , coronin , and Aip1 is the only depolymerization cocktail that we know of that is blocked by cytochalasin D , which is the situation in cells ( Kueh et al . , 2008 ) . Catastrophic disassembly that removes entire fila - ments in a single step could also account for exponential decay of Listeria actin comet tails ( Kueh et al . , 2010 ) . Determining whether this mode of actin disassembly is operating in cells and understanding why cytochalasin D blocks it will require a detailed understanding of the underlying mechanism driving bursting / whole - filament destabilization . POSSIBle IMPlICATIONS fOR ACTIN - DePeNDeNT Cell BIOlOgy The number of auxiliary factors , in conjunction with their potential ability to alter the mechanism of actin depolymerization , could have important consequences for actin - dependent cell biology . Cells could conceivably control the activities of the disassembly factors to ACKNOWleDgMeNTS I thank colleagues and mentors for sharing and discussing their ideas with me on actin depolymerization . I thank Ambika Nadkarni and Vivian Tang for commenting on the manuscript . RefeReNCeS Aizawa H et al . ( 2001 ) . Phosphorylation of cofilin by LIM - kinase is neces - sary for semaphorin 3A - induced growth cone collapse . Nat Neurosci 4 , 367 – 373 . Andrianantoandro E , Pollard TD ( 2006 ) . Mechanism of actin filament turnover by severing and nucleation at different concentrations of ADF / cofilin . Mol Cell 24 , 13 – 23 . Bamburg JR ( 1999 ) . Proteins of the ADF / cofilin family : essential regulators of actin dynamics . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 15 , 185 – 230 . Baum B , Perrimon N ( 2001 ) . Spatial control of the actin cytoskeleton in Drosophila epithelial cells . Nat Cell Biol 3 , 883 – 890 . Bengtsson T , Jaconi ME , Gustafson M , Magnusson KE , Theler JM , Lew DP , Stendahl O ( 1993 ) . Actin dynamics in human neutrophils during adhesion and phagocytosis is controlled by changes in intracellular free calcium . Eur J Cell Biol 62 , 49 – 58 . 2302 | W . Brieher Molecular Biology of the Cell Medeiros NA , Burnette DT , Forscher P ( 2006 ) . Myosin II functions in actin - bundle turnover in neuronal growth cones . Nat Cell Biol 8 , 215 – 226 . Michelot A , Berro J , Guerin C , Boujemaa - Paterski R , Staiger CJ , Martiel JL , Blanchoin L ( 2007 ) . Actin - filament stochastic dynamics mediated by ADF / cofilin . Curr Biol 17 , 825 – 833 . Moseley JB , Okada K , Balcer HI , Kovar DR , Pollard TD , Goode BL ( 2006 ) . Twinfilin is an actin - filament - severing protein and promotes rapid turn - over of actin structures in vivo . J Cell Sci 119 , 1547 – 1557 . Normoyle KP , Brieher WM ( 2012 ) . Cyclase - associated protein ( CAP ) acts directly on F - actin to accelerate cofilin - mediated actin severing across the range of physiological pH . J Biol Chem 287 , 35722 – 35732 . Ono S ( 2007 ) . Mechanism of depolymerization and severing of actin fila - ments and its significance in cytoskeletal dynamics . Int Rev Cytol 258 , 1 – 82 . Ono S , Mohri K , Ono K ( 2004 ) . Microscopic evidence that actin - interacting protein 1 actively disassembles actin - depolymerizing factor / Cofilin - bound actin filaments . J Biol Chem 279 , 14207 – 14212 . Pollard TD , Borisy GG ( 2003 ) . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disas - sembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 . Ponti A , Vallotton P , Salmon WC , Waterman - Storer CM , Danuser G ( 2003 ) . Computational analysis of F - actin turnover in cortical actin meshworks using fluorescent speckle microscopy . Biophys J 84 , 3336 – 3352 . Rosenblatt J , Agnew BJ , Abe H , Bamburg JR , Mitchison TJ ( 1997 ) . Xenopus actin depolymerizing factor / cofilin ( XAC ) is responsible for the turnover of actin filaments in Listeria monocytogenes tails . J Cell Biol 136 , 1323 – 1332 . Theriot JA , Mitchison TJ , Tilney LG , Portnoy DA ( 1992 ) . The rate of actin - based motility of intracellular Listeria monocytogenes equals the rate of actin polymerization . Nature 357 , 257 – 260 . Tilney LG , Portnoy DA ( 1989 ) . Actin filaments and the growth , movement , and spread of the intracellular bacterial parasite , Listeria monocyto - genes . J Cell Biol 109 , 1597 – 1608 . Urban E , Jacob S , Nemethova M , Resch GP , Small JV ( 2010 ) . Electron tomography reveals unbranched networks of actin filaments in lamel - lipodia . Nat Cell Biol 12 , 429 – 435 . Wang YL ( 1985 ) . Exchange of actin subunits at the leading edge of living fibroblasts : possible role of treadmilling . J Cell Biol 101 , 597 – 602 . Watanabe N , Mitchison TJ ( 2002 ) . Single - molecule speckle analysis of actin filament turnover in lamellipodia . Science 295 , 1083 – 1086 . Wegner A ( 1982 ) . Treadmilling of actin at physiological salt concentrations . An analysis of the critical concentrations of actin filaments . J Mol Biol 161 , 607 – 615 . Zigmond SH ( 1993 ) . Recent quantitative studies of actin filament turnover during cell locomotion . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 25 , 309 – 316 . Brieher WM , Kueh HY , Ballif BA , Mitchison TJ ( 2006 ) . Rapid actin monomer - insensitive depolymerization of Listeria actin comet tails by cofilin , coronin , and Aip1 . J Cell Biol 175 , 315 – 324 . Cai L , Makhov AM , Bear JE ( 2007 ) . F - actin binding is essential for coronin 1B function in vivo . J Cell Sci 120 , 1779 – 1790 . Carballido - Lopez R ( 2006 ) . The bacterial actin - like cytoskeleton . Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 70 , 888 – 909 . Chaudhry F , Breitsprecher D , Little K , Sharov G , Sokolova O , Goode BL ( 2013 ) . Srv2 / cyclase - associated protein forms hexameric shurikens that di - rectly catalyze actin filament severing by cofilin . Mol Biol Cell 24 , 31 – 41 . Cooper JA ( 1987 ) . Effects of cytochalasin and phalloidin on actin . J Cell Biol 105 , 1473 – 1478 . Fan J , Mansfield SG , Redmond T , Gordon - Weeks PR , Raper JA ( 1993 ) . The organization of F - actin and microtubules in growth cones exposed to a brain - derived collapsing factor . J Cell Biol 121 , 867 – 878 . Galkin VE , Orlova A , Brieher W , Kueh HY , Mitchison TJ , Egelman EH ( 2008 ) . Coronin - 1A stabilizes F - actin by bridging adjacent actin protomers and stapling opposite strands of the actin filament . J Mol Biol 376 , 607 – 613 . Gallo G ( 2006 ) . RhoA - kinase coordinates F - actin organization and myosin II activity during semaphorin - 3A - induced axon retraction . J Cell Sci 119 , 3413 – 3423 . Gandhi M , Achard V , Blanchoin L , Goode BL ( 2009 ) . Coronin switches roles in actin disassembly depending on the nucleotide state of actin . Mol Cell 34 , 364 – 374 . Garner EC , Campbell CS , Mullins RD ( 2004 ) . Dynamic instability in a DNA - segregating prokaryotic actin homolog . Science 306 , 1021 – 1025 . Ghosh M , Song X , Mouneimne G , Sidani M , Lawrence DS , Condeelis JS ( 2004 ) . Cofilin promotes actin polymerization and defines the direction of cell motility . Science 304 , 743 – 746 . Ichetovkin I , Grant W , Condeelis J ( 2002 ) . Cofilin produces newly polymer - ized actin filaments that are preferred for dendritic nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr Biol 12 , 79 – 84 . Kueh HY , Brieher WM , Mitchison TJ ( 2010 ) . Quantitative analysis of actin turnover in Listeria comet tails : evidence for catastrophic filament turn - over . Biophys J 99 , 2153 – 2162 . Kueh HY , Charras GT , Mitchison TJ , Brieher WM ( 2008 ) . Actin disassembly by cofilin , coronin , and Aip1 occurs in bursts and is inhibited by barbed - end cappers . J Cell Biol 182 , 341 – 353 . Kueh HY , Mitchison TJ ( 2009 ) . Structural plasticity in actin and tubulin poly - mer dynamics . Science 325 , 960 – 963 . Kuhn TB , Bamburg JR ( 2008 ) . Tropomyosin and ADF / cofilin as collaborators and competitors . Adv Exp Med Biol 644 , 232 – 249 . Lappalainen P , Drubin DG ( 1997 ) . Cofilin promotes rapid actin filament turnover in vivo . Nature 388 , 78 – 82 .