Review The Croonian lecture 2006 Structure of the living cell Iain D . Campbell * Department of Biochemistry , University of Oxford , South Parks Road , Oxford OX1 3QU , UK The smallest viable unit of life is a single cell . To understand life , we need to visualize the structure of the cell as well as all cellular components and their complexes . This is a formidable task that requires sophisticated tools . These have developed from the rudimentary early microscopes of 350 years ago to a toolbox that includes electron microscopes , synchrotrons , high magnetic ﬁelds and vast computing power . This lecture brieﬂy reviews the development of biophysical tools and illustrates how they begin to unravel the ‘molecular logic of the living state’ . Keywords : structure ; macromolecules ; cells ; microscopy ; cell migration 1 . WHAT IS STRUCTURAL BIOLOGY ? Cells vary widely in size but are , typically , around one - hundredth of a millimetre ( 10 m m ) in diameter . Each cell is surrounded by a thin membrane with a complex interior , packed with many millions of molecules . Although the life we see around us appears very diverse ( from ants to elephants ! See ﬁgure 1 ) , it is remarkably similar at the level of molecules ; the exploration of life in the range 10 m m – 0 . 1 nm is thus especially rewarding ( the size of an atom is approx . 0 . 1 nm Z 10 K 10 m ) . Such small things cannot be observed with the naked eye , so magniﬁcation tools are required to visualize them . Studies of cell structure , structural cell biology , began when early microscopes , developed around 350 years ago , gave the ﬁrst glimpse of single cells . Since then , increasingly sophisticated instruments have revealed ever more information about cell structure ( Schliwa 2002 ; ﬁgure 2 ) . Visualization of the large molecules ( macromolecules ) found in cells , structural molecular biology , only began around 60 years ago when atomic resolution models of DNA and proteins were ﬁrst obtained ( protein dimensions are usually more than 1000 times smaller than cells ) . Like studies of cells , studies of macromolecules have advanced remarkably ( ﬁgure 2 ) and high - resolution structures of many thousands of them are now known ( Campbell 2002 ) . The protein databank ( PDB ) is a depository for all the solved structures and a quick browse of the web site gives a sense of their range and beauty , see http : / / www . rcsb . org / pdb / Welcome . do . Although structural cell biology and structural molecular biology largely evolved as separate disciplines , there is an increasing awareness that they are more and more convergent ( Sali et al . 2003 ; Harrison 2004 ) . Ever better resolution can be achieved in studies of intact cells and ever larger structures and complexes can be seen using molecular methods . A new structural biology is emerging that encompasses both approaches . Advances in all branches of science depend heavily on the development of new techniques 1 and this is particularly true for structural biology . To illustrate the advances made since the time of William Croone ( 1633 – 1684 ) , I will brieﬂy trace the evolution and development of visualization methods . To understand life , we need to know the structure and mechanism of cellular machinery that drives key cellular processes such as cell division , protein synthesis and energy production . To do this , we need to use a range of techniques that give temporal as well as spatial information about the molecules in the crowded environment that exists in and around a cell . The complexity of this problem is clearly illustrated by artistic impressions of the crowded molecular interior of a cell ( Goodsell 2005 ; http : / / www . scripps . edu / mb / goodsell / illustration / patterson / ; Berman et al . 2000 ) . This is a static two - dimensional view ; in reality , the components are in a constant state of ﬂux , being manufactured , broken down and moving in three dimensions . As someone trained in physical sciences , much of my emphasis here will be placed on contributions that have passed from physics into the biological sciences , but many other disciplines , including genetics , chemistry and medicine have , of course , also made seminal contributions to our current level of understanding . To indicate what the current level of understanding is , I will expand a little on one area of personal research interest , cell movement on a surface , a fascinating example of the dynamism of the living state . 2 . THE LIVING CELL To set the scene , here are a few quotations from previous eloquent descriptions of the essentials of the living cell : Phil . Trans . R . Soc . B ( 2008 ) 363 , 2379 – 2391 doi : 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2006 . 1960 Published online 24 January 2007 * iain . campbell @ bioch . ox . ac . uk Lecture delivered 4 October 2006 Typescript received 18 September 2006 2379 This journal is q 2007 The Royal Society With the cell , biology discovered its atom . . To characterize life , it was henceforth essential to study the cell and analyse its structure . ( Jacob 1973 ) a factory that contains an elaborate net - work of interlocking assembly lines , each of which is composed of a set of large protein machines . ( Alberts 1998 ) a bustling community of macromolecules , like a metropolitan city . ( Vale 2003 ) the real units of function and structure in an organism are cells and not genes ? ( Brenner 2003 ) to build the most basic yeast cell . you would have to miniaturize about the same number of components as are found in a Boeing 777 and ﬁt them in a sphere just 5 m m across ; then somehow you would have to persuade that sphere to reproduce . ( Bryson 2003 ) Early investigators of cells , including the great Louis Pasteur ( 1822 – 1895 ) , were ‘vitalists’ , who believed that living organisms have a non - physical inner essence which makes them alive . Although some might still argue that life cannot be completely understood by the usual approaches of molecular biology , which involves separation and dissection of the component parts , there is overwhelming evidence to suggest that life is explicable in terms of the laws of physics and chemistry . As Albert Lehninger ( 1917 – 1986 ) pointed out in early editions of his well - known biochemistry text book living organisms are composed of lifeless molecules . that conform to all the laws of chemistry but interact with each other in accordance with another set of principles—the molecular logic of the living state . ( Lehninger 1975 ) The latter half of the twentieth century saw remarkable developments in ideas about biology at the molecular level . Some of these are : monomers ( nucleotides , amino acids and sugars ) , which are strung together to make polymers ( DNA , proteins and polysaccharides ) ; a gene ( DNA ) provides the template for RNA ( a close - chemical relative of DNA ) , which , in turn , speciﬁes the linear sequence of amino acids in a protein ; this sequence deﬁnes the protein three - dimensional structure that consists of helical and sheet - like substructures ; proteins form the main structural and functional components of cells ; proteins interact with numerous molecular partners . Much of the remarkable success of modern cellular and molecular biology methods is due to ‘empirical reductionism’ where , for practical reasons , components unaided human eye light microscope transmission electron microscope local environment NMR field gradient crystals / diffraction X - rays FRET AFM 0 . 1nm 1nm 10 nm 100 nm 1µm 10µm 100µm 1mm 10mm 1cm 1m 10m a t o m a m i no ac i d s DNA d i a m e t e r p r o t e i n r i bo s o m e v i r u s m it o c hond r i a , b ac t e r i a b l ood ce ll s i n s ec t p l a n t l a r g e m a mm a l s l a r g e a m o e b a Figure 1 . Illustration of the dimensions of some life - related systems on a logarithmic scale ( powers of 10 ) . The range visible by some of the different methods mentioned in the text is indicated by horizontal arrows . X - rays and NMR can be used to look at human anatomy in hospitals using tomographic methods , so these are shown as having the capacity to view a very wide range of dimensions . Their application at the nanometre level and below is , however , the only aspect dealt with in the text . FRETrefers to ‘ﬂuorescence resonance energy transfer’ and AFM to ‘atomic force microscopy’ . 2380 I . D . Campbell Structure of the living cell Phil . Trans . R . Soc . B ( 2008 ) of biological systems are isolated , puriﬁed , dissected and manipulated to extract information about their structure and properties . It is always important , however , to think about how these isolated components work inthe context of the intact living cell . One alternative to the reductionist approach would be to assemble some form of primitive ‘artiﬁcial life’ in a test tube . Intensive efforts to do this are underway , but the construction of a minimum life form , apparently requiring around 300 genes , still seems a very long way off ( Deamer 2005 ) , not least owing to the difﬁculty in making catalysts that reproduce themselves . There is also the view that the spatial organization in a cell is not ( entirely ) written in the genetic blueprint ; it emerges . from the interplay of genetically speciﬁed molecules . con - strained by heritable structures . ( Harold 2005 ) This idea , that we need more than genes to make life , is consistent with the ‘law’ proposed by Rudolf Virchow ( 1821 – 1902 ) ‘Omnis cellula e cellula’ ( every cell comes from a pre - existing cell ) , but this might make the task of reproducing life harder than anticipated ! Life is dominated by natural selection . Evolution - ary forces are clearly apparent in cellular structures . Biological systems utilize components that have been found , by chance , to be effective and robust . The ribosome , the machine that synthesizes proteins using an RNA template , has been retained in very similar form by all kinds of life . Mitochondria , the energy - providing compartments in many cells , are thought to have arisen from what were once separate free - living organisms . Structural molecular biology has also shown that a limited number of protein structural folds or domains are used repeatedly in various ways . Certain structures were apparently found to make effective and versatile scaffolds and then these were retained and exchanged between organisms ( this will be discussed further under ‘cell migration’ ; ﬁgures 3 and 4 ) . This lecture emphasizes biophysical studies at the level of the single cell . It is worth pointing out , however , that higher levels of organization , as observed in multi - cellular organisms like animals , emerge from the blueprint provided by a single cell . Familiar characteristics exhibited by animals , including 500nm 10nm A B C E F D G H 10µm ( a ) ( d ) ( b ) ( c ) 1nm Figure 2 . An illustration of advances in structural cell biology ( a and b ) and structural molecular biology ( c and d ) . ( a ) Drawings of ‘animalcules’ seen by van Leeuwenhoek in a single lens microscope ( ﬁgure 3 in the reference Leeuwenhoek 1683 ) . ( b ) Visualization of the actin network ( orange colour ) and cytoplasmic complexes ( light blue colour ) in a Dictyostelium cell , embedded in vitriﬁed ice and viewed by electron microscopy ( Baumeister 2004 ) . ( c ) A photograph of the ﬁrst model of a protein , myoglobin , derived from X - ray diffraction data . The polypeptide chains are white and the haem group is shown as a grey disc ( Kendrew et al . 1958 ) . ( d ) The large subunit of the ribosome ( PDB accession code 1ffk ) is composed of two strands of RNA ( shown as grey and brown wire models ) and many different protein chains , shown in blue . Several of the proteins were not seen in this crystallographic structure but can be detected using cryo - electron microscopy . The dimension bars are approximate . Note that the resolution of the myoglobin model , approximately 0 . 5 nm , was only enough to show the general path of the polypeptide . The much larger ribosome , obtained some 40 years later was obtained at a resolution of around 0 . 25 nm ( Ban et al . 2000 ) , sufﬁcient to observe individual amino acids and bases . ( a – c ) are reproduced with permission . ( d ) was produced using the computer visualization program R ASTOP ( http : / / www . geneinﬁnity . org / rastop / manual / index . html ) . Structure of the living cell I . D . Campbell 2381 Phil . Trans . R . Soc . B ( 2008 ) structure , response to stimuli , and reproduction , are all programmed by a single cell . Even sophisticated higher level properties , such as consciousness , arise from the ways in which our neuronal cells are connected together . 3 . THE EVOLUTION OF STRUCTURAL CELL BIOLOGY Man has long been interested in the structure ( anatomy ) of living organisms . Early pioneers , largely based in Padua , were Andreas Vesalius ( 1514 – 1564 ) , who wrote one of the ﬁrst textbooks on anatomy , Hieronymus Fabricius ( 1537 – 1619 ) , who was Galileo’s physician , and William Harvey ( 1578 – 1657 ) , who discovered the circulation of blood . Dissection of tissue structure to the level of individual cells eluded these pioneers because the available tools were rudimentary . Our understanding of living systems began to improve when a contemporary of Croone 2 , Antonie van Leeuwenhoek ( 1623 – 1723 ) , used a single lens micro - scope that he had ground himself to observe pond water and a variety of other liquids ; he noted I . saw , with great wonder , that . there were many very little living animalcules , very prettily a - moving . ( Leeuwenhoek 1683 ; ﬁgure 2 a ) The study of single cells , a word ﬁrst used by Robert Hooke ( 1635 – 1703 ) , thus began . Microscopy improved in the next 200 years and Ernst Abbe´ ( 1840 – 1905 ) developed a theory showing that the resolving power of microscopes was approximately proportional to half the wavelength of the observing light ; for blue light , this corresponds to a resolution of around 200 nm . Abbe´’s collaborators , notably Carl Zeiss ( 1816 – 1888 ) and Otto Schott ( 1851 – 1935 ) , improved lenses to the point where they could achieve the calculated resolution limit . Pioneers also improved selective staining procedures that allowed them better to visualize different cellular components and , by the end of the nineteenth century , many important features of cell structure and neuronal networks were beginning to emerge ( Cajal 1906 ) . Improvements continued to be made in optical microscopes by enhancing the contrast between different cellular substructures ( Zernike 1953 ) , but in the early twentieth century the ability to view cells remained limited . Albert Claude ( 1899 – 1983 ) sum - marized the situation in his Nobel lecture of 1974 : Until 1930 or thereabout biologists . were permitted to see the objects of their interest , but not to touch them ; the cell was as distant from us , as the stars and galaxies were from ( astronomers ) . More frustrating was that we knew that the instrument at our disposal , the microscope—so efﬁcient in the 19 th century – had ceased to be of any use , having reached , irremediably , the theoretical limits of its resolving power . ( Claude 1975 ) This situation was changed by the introduction of the electron microscope . Electrons are particles but act like waves with a wavelength which is inversely proportional to their velocity . Lenses for electrons can be made by bending the electron path with applied magnetic or electric ﬁelds . Based on this principle , the ﬁrst electron microscopes were constructed in the 1930s ( Ruska 1986 ) . These have a theoretical resolving power much better than 1 nm but , in practice , this level cannot be readily achieved for biological samples . By developing methods to ‘ﬁx’ cells , with chemicals such as glutaraldehyde , and to stain them , with metals like osmium and uranium , Keith Porter , Albert Claude , George Palade and others were able to discover many cellular substructures and compartments using the electron microscope ( Palade 1975 ) . Like all methods , the electron microscope has limitations . These include severe sample damage caused by the electron beam in evacuated sample chambers and low contrast between different parts of the sample . There have been a number of important recent technical advances in electron microscopy ( EM ) that have had a signiﬁcant impact on studies of cell structure ( see also molecules discussed below ) . These techniques include rapid freezing of an aqueous sample , avoidance of metal stains and sophisticated computer programs that can analyse and average noisy images . The background variation , or ‘noise’ , arises because very low electron irradiation doses have to be used to avoid destroying the sample . Another advance came from the application of ‘tomography’ methods , which were ﬁrst used to look at the structure of viruses in the 1960s ( Crowther et al . 1970 ) . A series of images of an object are taken at different angles to the electron beam . A three - dimensional image can then be recon - structed from these angle - dependent images . By combining these approaches—frozen hydrated samples , low doses , tomography and data analysis— detailed images of the structure of cells have now been obtained ( Nickell et al . 2006 ) . This technology allows many structural features of a cell , including ribosomes , actin ﬁlaments and membrane structures , to be visualized at a resolution of around 2 nm ( Baumeister 2004 ) , although most of the other molecules in the cell are still invisible and / or unrecognizable ( ﬁgure 2 b ) . X - rays , like electrons , can have wavelengths short enough to give less than nanometre resolution , but the construction of X - ray lenses is a formidable problem . Some progress is , however , being made with longer wavelength ‘soft’ X - rays and interesting images of cells are beginning to be produced ( Attwood 2006 ) . Light microscopy has also undergone a remarkable renaissance in the last 20 years . Certain ‘ﬂuorescent’ molecules absorb light at one wavelength and re - emit it at a different , longer wavelength . Beautiful images of ﬂuorescent macromolecules in their cellular location are becoming familiar , as are ‘movies’ of living cells , obtained using time lapse photography ( Dunn & Jones 2004 ) . These developments have been enabled by improved ﬂuorescent molecules ( Zhang et al . 2002 ) and new microscope technology . One example of a ﬂuorescent molecule that is having a major impact is green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) ( Tsien 2003 ) . This occurs naturally in some jellyﬁsh and the ﬂuorescent centre is produced by the protein itself ; GFP can be attached speciﬁcally to molecules inside cells and visualized in living cells . An example of an important technological improve - ment in light microscopes was the development of confocal methods . The idea of reducing unwanted light scattering from the specimen by scanning a small spot 2382 I . D . Campbell Structure of the living cell Phil . Trans . R . Soc . B ( 2008 ) of light and observing the ﬂuorescent emission was demonstrated in the 1950s by Marvin Minsky , but was not developed commercially for many years ( Amos & White 2003 ) . Further developments include total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy , where only a thin layer of a specimen near a surface is observed ; a light beam reﬂected from a surface induces a thin layer of light ( approx . 100 nm thick ) on the opposite side of the reﬂecting surface and this can be used to excite ﬂuorescent molecules selectively ( Schneckenburger 2005 ) . In a modiﬁcation of the confocal microscope , two light beams can be made to interfere with each other , so that they generate exceptionally small scanning spots ( Garini et al . 2005 ) ; this approach has taken the resolution of microscopes to better than 100 nm , well beyond the theoretical ‘limit’ calculated by Abbe´ . With each technical development , our view of cell structure has been extended ( Schliwa 2002 ) . We now have a bewildering amount of information about the complexity and structure of cells and their contents . It should be recognized that much of the technology that we use to observe cells—ﬁxation , staining and even GFP—perturbs what is observed . This is , of course , a well - known philosophical as well as practical problem in science , but there is much reason to be optimistic : the history of cell - structure studies clearly illustrates how science advances in cycles of technical develop - ment , increased knowledge and improved models . 4 . THE EVOLUTION OF STRUCTURAL MOLECULAR BIOLOGY Biological macromolecules , such as proteins and nucleic acids , are constructed from atoms and bonds with dimensions of around 0 . 1 nm . To understand how macromolecules operate , we need to know how the atoms come together to form their precise and intricate shapes , thus forming structural scaffolds , catalysts and a variety of elaborate machines . Although EM has the capacity to give at least 0 . 1 nm resolution , it is severely limited by practical difﬁculties and alternative tech - niques were , fortunately , also developed . There are now three main experimental methods that can give atomic resolution structural information—X - ray crystallography , electron crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance ( NMR ) . The serendipitous discovery of X - rays by Wilhelm Ro¨ngten ( 1845 – 1923 ) in 1895 , followed by the structure determination of crystalline common salt in 1913 by Lawrence Bragg ( 1890 – 1971 ) , led to the discipline of X - ray crystallography . Small crystals of macromolecules are irradiated with a beam of X - rays ( wavelength around 0 . 1 nm ) to produce a diffraction pattern , which is then interpreted in terms of a three - dimensional atomic model . This method has been spectacularly successful in recent years , although the ﬁrst steps , by the pioneers like Max Perutz ( 1914 – 2002 ) and John Kendrew ( 1917 – 1997 ) were painstakingly slow ( Rossmann 1994 ) . A major early stumbling block was to recover essential phase information about the waves making the diffraction pattern ( ﬁgure 2 c ) . Several ways of solving this ‘phase problem’ have now been devised , including one where naturally occurring sulphur in a protein is substituted by another element , selenium . X - ray crystallography and its lesser used cousin , neutron crystallography , have now been used to solve more than 33 000 macromolecular structures : see http : / / www . rcsb . org / pdb / Welcome . do . Protein structures used to take decades to solve , but now new structures can often be derived in a few days ; the hard part is usually to obtain crystals of pure protein . More recently , two other techniques have been shown to be capable of giving atomic resolution information about biological macromolecules . One of these is electron crystallography , where electron microscope images of thin two - dimensional crystals , collected at different angles to the electron beam ( tomography ) , are combined with electron diffraction information to give a three - dimensional structure . This approach was used to give the ﬁrst model of the structure of a protein from a salt - loving bacterium ( Henderson & Unwin 1975 ) ; it was shown to have seven membrane - spanning helices . The number of structures obtained by this method is still relatively small , but there are some important examples of its use , especially with membrane proteins ( Gonen et al . 2005 ) . The other method that can give atomic resolution structural information is NMR , a technique ﬁrst demonstrated independently in 1946 by Felix Bloch ( 1905 – 1983 ) and Ed Purcell ( 1912 – 1997 ) . This method observes nuclei that have magnetic dipoles . These ‘resonate’ in the radiofrequency range ( 10 – 1000 MHz ) when they are placed in a strong magnetic ﬁeld . The resonance frequency is exquisitely sensitive to the electrons around the nuclear dipole , so that individual resonances can be resolved and assigned to particular atoms in a macromolecule . Proteins are made from strings of amino acids . There are only 20 amino acids so that even a small protein will contain several amino acids of one type in its sequence . An NMR spectrum of a small protein will usually be able to resolve all the different nuclear resonances from different groups and to assign them to speciﬁc positions in the amino acid sequence . Assignment is done by identifying the amino acids’ neighbours in the known protein sequence ( just as the three ‘e’s in the word ‘sequence’ are made unique when neighbouring letters are considered ) . Thousands of speciﬁc short - range interactions ( approx . 0 . 3 nm ) between nuclear dipoles can be detected in a protein . This information , combined with ‘molecular dynamics simulations’ ( see next paragraph ) , allows the structure of macromolecules to be calculated 3 ( Wu¨thrich 2003 ) . An advantage of the method , which has now solved over 5600 structures , is that the protein is simply dissolved in water ; crystals are not required and there is no ‘phase problem’ . There is , however , a practical size limit because the resonances can no longer be resolved and assigned when the macromolecules become very large . The method works best for determining the structure and dynamics of relatively small macro - molecules of about 200 amino acids in length ( approx . 22 kDa ) ; this limit can , however , be extended to over 50 kDa by extensive and expensive isotope labelling ( e . g . substituting 12 C by 13 C , 14 N by 15 N and many 1 H by 2 H ; Kay 2005 ) . Structure of the living cell I . D . Campbell 2383 Phil . Trans . R . Soc . B ( 2008 ) The above three methods , crystallography , EM and NMR , depend heavily on computational methods to derive , reﬁne and visualize models of the macromolecule or complex being studied . Computer modelling is also very useful for giving insight into the structure of proteins with a close relative of the known structure . Modelling can also be used to explore ways in which two molecules might dock together , an approach much used by the pharmaceutical industry in their quest for new drugs . Simulations of molecular motions in a computer , by allowing atoms to move under the inﬂuence of various energetic restraints , can give considerable insight into possible macromolecular structures and how the various parts can move with respect to each other . Such simulations are usually carried out by considering a ‘box’ containing the molecule ( s ) of interest plus solvent water . The possible trajectories of the atoms in the box are calculated , one very short step ( 10 K 15 s ) at a time , using laws of physics that were ﬁrst described by Isaac Newton ( 1643 – 1727 ) . Anexampleofthisapproachisthe exploration of how proteins can fold from an extended chain toawell - deﬁned structure ( Vendruscolo & Dobson 2005 ) . These ‘molecular dynamics’ simulations are also very important in reﬁning structures derived from experimental information . A difﬁculty is that the time - scales that can be simulated , even using very powerful computers , are relatively short ( approx . 10 ns ) compared with the time - scales of most molecular interactions in the cell . This limitation has been relaxed to some extent recently by the realization that larger time - step sizes can often be used if suitable approximations are made ( Bahar & Rader 2005 ) . There have been exceptional technical develop - ments and improvements in structure - determination methods over the last 30 years . The improvements in computers are familiar to us all , but X - ray sources , NMR spectrometers , microscopes and data collection procedures are all orders of magnitude better than they were ; for example , the signal - to - noise ratio obtained in a single scan NMR spectrum is now several orders of magnitude better than it was 40 years ago—a result of higher ﬁeld strengths , better elec - tronics and better data collection methods . We also must not forget that molecular biology methods have improved dramatically ; almost any speciﬁed protein can now be produced by expressing its gene in host cells , often in simple bacteria , and the sequences of most important proteins are now known owing to genome - sequencing projects . These various improvements have led to an extraordinary growth in structural information in the last 25 years . Representative examples of most classes of existing protein structures are already known . Even systems thought to be particularly intractable , such as proteins embedded in membranes , are yielding to sustained efforts ( see http : / / blanco . biomol . uci . edu / m embrane _ proteins _ xtal . html ) . The key structural features of several of the essential , multi - component molecular machines in cells have also been solved . Examples include muscle action ( Geeves & Holmes 2005 ) , the transcription of DNA into RNA ( Armache et al . 2005 ) and the synthesis of proteins from an RNA template on the ribosome ( Moore & Steitz 2005 ; ﬁgure 2 d ) . In many cases , the models for these complex machines have been obtained using com - binations of all the molecular structural tools mentioned above—crystallography , EM , NMR and molecular modelling . This astonishing success certainly does not mean that structural molecular biology is reaching an end . While structures of complexes like the ribosome , which are relatively stable and resistant to the rigours of isolation and puriﬁcation , have now been solved , it is clear that many of the networks of protein – protein interactions which make essential complexes are transient . It will , therefore , be much harder to build up a picture of how these dynamic systems operate . 5 . BRIDGING THE GAPS I have outlined current ways of visualizing cells ( m m ) and molecules ( 0 . 1 nm ; ﬁgure 2 ) . How can we ﬁt all this together to obtain an operational model of the living cell ? The methods discussed so far still leave many gaps in our knowledge about the ‘bustling community of molecules’ in the cellular environment . Filling these gaps remains a major technical challenge . EM of cell structures has already been mentioned and is a tool that can give structural information over a wide range ( nanometre to micrometre ) . Large macro - molecular complexes can be studied by EM using ‘single particle’ analysis ; the particles are embedded in ice formed by rapid freezing and images are taken using a weak dose of electrons . Many thousands of noisy images are collected , analysed and averaged to obtain a three - dimensional reconstruction of the object . This method still cannot give us atomic resolution images , but resolution better than 1 nm is possible ( Frank 2006 ) . This method is especially powerful when used in combination with other techniques ; for example , high - resolution X - ray structures of components can be ﬁtted into low - resolution EM images of multi - component complexes . This is the one way of ﬁnding out about the operation of an assembled cellular machine like a muscle ( Geeves & Holmes 2005 ) . Other techniques that span structural studies of cells and molecules include those that can observe the location and properties of a single molecule at a time . Early success was achieved using ‘patch clamp’ methods , where ions passing though a single mem - brane - spanning channel were detected electrically ( Sakmann 1992 ) . Atomic force microscopy ( Binnig & Rohrer 1983 ) , where a sharp probe is scanned in a controlled way over molecules on a surface thus tracing their shape , has become a valuable and ﬂexible tool both for looking at large molecules and studying various interactions ( Horber & Miles 2003 ) . Scanning EM can also be powerful in the 100 nm range ( Wanner et al . 2005 ) . Another way of manipulating single molecules is to use the small , but measurable force that light exerts on an object . In 1970 , Arthur Ashkin noticed that he could use laser light to trap small latex beads ( Ashkin 1997 ) . This technology , often referred to as ‘optical tweezers’ , can manipulate single molecules and measure the forces they exert . The innumerable interacting networks among cel - lular components in a cell are sometimes called the ‘interactome’ ( Cusick et al . 2005 ) . These interactions 2384 I . D . Campbell Structure of the living cell Phil . Trans . R . Soc . B ( 2008 ) are the key to what makes cells ‘alive’ . What experimental tools can be used to deﬁne them ? Cell fractionation and analysis of the contents of the fractions are a ﬁrst step ; an early example was enzyme assays of fractions obtained after ultracentrifugation ( Duve 1975 ) . The fractionation approach is now generally called ‘proteomics’ when applied to studies of protein components of the cell . Protein mixtures can be resolved by spreading them out in two dimensions by electrophoresis ; separation in one dimension is based on charge , the other on size . Once resolved , the different proteins can be identiﬁed by measuring their mass accurately in a mass spectrometer . A recent review classiﬁes the location of thousands of different proteins in different cellular compartments using such methods ( Yates et al . 2005 ) . Microscopy can also determine the location of particular molecules if they are tagged with visible labels and there are ambitious projects to tag all the proteins in a genome with GFP ( Simpson & Pepperkok 2003 ) . While a catalogue of components , with their cellular locations , is essential , we also need to know about the dynamic organization of the ‘elaborate network of interlocking assembly lines’ . One way forward is to map the various interactions using ‘screening’ methods where a large number of potential targets can be investigated rapidly . One such is the ‘yeast two - hybrid’ screen where an interaction between proteins is detected by switching on a gene that results in a colour reaction . This approach has been used to identify over 4000 protein – protein interactions in the nematode worm , Caenorhabditis elegans ( Li et al . 2004 ) . Other promising methods for identifying multiple interactions include protein ‘microarrays’ ( Bertone & Snyder 2005 ) and large - scale afﬁnity puriﬁcation ( Gavin et al . 2006 ) . Once potential interacting partners have been identiﬁed in screens , we need to quantify the interactions using a variety of biophysical tools ( Harding & O’Shea 2003 ; Piehler 2005 ) . Among these is a sensor device ( surface plasmon resonance ) that monitors changes in mass at a surface when two components interact ( Karlsson 2004 ) . Measurements of interactions can also be carried out at the single molecule level using ﬂuorescence microscopy ( Kelley et al . 2001 ) . For example , if two suitable ﬂuorescent probes come within approximately 10 nm of each other , the ﬂuorescence emitted by one is perturbed by the presence of the other . This ‘ﬂuorescence resonance energy transfer’ can be used to detect interactions between molecules and measure their separation in a living cell ( Michalet et al . 2003 ) . Another way to deﬁne macromolecular interactions is NMR ( Clarkson & Campbell 2003 ) . The advantage here is that when two molecules are added together in solution , induced perturbations in the NMR spectra can be identiﬁed and mapped onto the three - dimensional structure to show exactly where the interactions take place . My emphasis , so far , has been on physical methods , but it has also been suggested that ‘mathematics is biology’s next microscope—only better ! ’ ( Cohen 2004 ) Mathematics can certainly make contributions in a number of ways . One is to give a robust statistical basis for computer - based analyses of the growing databases of sequences , structures and interaction networks . Web - based tools in ‘bioinformatics’ are now a major part of modern cellular and molecular biology ( e . g . http : / / www . ebi . ac . uk / ) . These allow exploration of the large and rapidly growing biological databases to extract information about sequences , structures and interactions . A recent promising extension is the syste - matic analysis of protein structures to make predictions about protein – protein interactions ( Aloy & Russell 2005 ) . Other contributions of mathematics already mentioned include image analysis , molecular simulations and molecular modelling . A theme of this lecture is the drive towards visualization of the workings of a living cell . We live in an age where the genome sequences and structural properties of most of the component parts are known , yet the complexity of dynamic cellular networks is bewildering . It is therefore timely to try to employ mathematical methods to help , using an approach often now called ‘systems biology’ ( Aderem 2005 ) . Among the goals would be the explanations for how properties , not apparent in the individual parts , can ‘emerge’ from a complex assembly . Mathematics can help here by using sets of equations to describe a network of interacting components . The predictive and explanatory power of such models can , however , only be as good as the quantitative information ( about rate constants and concentrations of the interacting com - ponents ) that they rely on . Close cooperation between modellers and experimentalists should encourage the acquisition of critical quantitative data and enable the validation of models as they are constructed . In a recent example from this laboratory , it was possible to use a combination of equations and experiments to deduce how a single bacterial cell can develop into two different cell types—a spore and a mother cell—in response to stress ( Iber et al . 2006 ) ; this example illustrated how mathematical modelling can guide experiments and give fresh insight into the functioning of whole systems . 6 . AN EXAMPLE—CELL MIGRATION To illustrate how the complex molecular interactions in a living cell can be unravelled , I will brieﬂy discuss cell migration . All the molecular and cellular tools mentioned above have been brought to bear on this topic . Cell motility is a recognizable property of a living system and van Leeuwenhoek quickly realized that the tiny moving objects he saw in his microscope were alive . The ability of a cell to move is a necessary feature of many essential processes in life and disease , including the development of an embryo , the repair of tissue and the spread of cancer . Key questions we need to answer are : ‘how do cells move ? ’ and ‘how do they respond to stimuli ? ’ Much progress has already been achieved and a large amount of information on this topic is already available in the literature ( Bray 2001 ; Ridley et al . 2003 ; Webb et al . 2005 ) and Websites ( http : / / www . cellmigra - tion . org / index . shtml ) . I will concentrate here on eukaryotic cells that can crawl on surfaces , such as Structure of the living cell I . D . Campbell 2385 Phil . Trans . R . Soc . B ( 2008 ) ﬁbroblasts ( skin cells ) and neutrophils ( a type of white blood cell ) . Figure 3 contains a simpliﬁed illustration of a cell moving on a surface . Neutrophils migrate from the blood stream to infected tissues to hunt out and destroy unwanted invaders when they ‘smell’ danger . The danger signal may be a peptide derived from bacteria ; this is detected by a cell surface protein receptor , which then transmits a signal to the cell interior , resulting in cell movement in a particular direction . The chief forward propulsion force comes from the directed addition of globular actin monomers to a growing actin ﬁlament ( F - actin ) . This actin assembly process is driven by hydrolysis of adenosine triphosphate , the main fuel of life . Another key feature of cell propulsion in crawling cells is the formation of contacts , called focal adhesions , between the extracellular molecules , the extracellular matrix and the actin ﬁlaments . These provide the ‘grip’ that allows the cell to drag itself forward . The cells extend a thin ( approx . 200 nm thick ) leaﬂet of cytoplasm , called a lamellipodium , at the front of the cell , where new focal adhesions are formed . At the same time , focal adhesions at the rear of the cell dissolve and the actin ﬁlaments retract . Without an external signal , the cells stop moving and go into a quiescent state . A few highlights and key features of the molecular processes involved in cell migration , particu - larly focal adhesion formation , follow . ( a ) Structural cell biology Techniques that visualise cells have been used to obtain striking movies of migrating cells ; these show not only the movement of the entire cell , but also the paths of speciﬁc proteins within the cell ( see http : / / www . cbrinstitute . org / labs / springer / lab _ goodies / springer _ teaching _ movies . html ; http : / / www . cellmigration . org / science / sci _ movies . shtml ) . The location of particular proteins can be detected using a microscope , provided that they are speciﬁcally labelled with GFP or an antibody , a protein derived from the immune system selected to bind to the target protein . This kind of microscopy has detected and classiﬁed numerous proteins associated with focal adhesions . Combinations of ﬂuorescence and electron microscopy can be used to measure structural features of a migrating cell ; for example , ﬂuorescence can be used to follow the dynamics of ﬁlament assembly while EM of metal - coated replicas can give details of the structures formed ( Kandere - Grzybowska et al . 2005 ) . Mechanical forces , generated while cells migrate , are important for maintaining a healthy cell ( Matthews et al . 2006 ) and these forces can be monitored using optical tweezers ( Jiang et al . 2003 ) . Mathematical modelling has also been a useful tool for predicting aspects of cell migration including protrusion dynamics ( Mogilner 2006 ) . ( b ) Structural molecular biology Structural studies of molecules have made signiﬁcant contributions to all aspects of cell migration by determining the structure and interactions of the various molecules involved . More than 50 different proteins have been found associated with focal adhesions ( Zamir & Geiger 2001 ) and some key examples are shown in ﬁgure 3 e . These proteins have a wide range of functions . Particularly important are integrins , large adhesion receptors which are formed from a and b protein subunits that span the plasma membrane . Integrins have been shown to be essential in functions ranging from embryo development to cell death ( Hynes 2002 ; Ginsberg et al . 2005 ) . Integrins adhere to the stiff structures , like collagen , in the extracellular matrix , and link them to the relatively rigid , although dynamic , actin ﬁlaments inside the cell . The integrin - mediated linkages between collagen and actin are not direct and there are bridging proteins , such as ﬁbronectin , outside the cell and talin , ﬁlamin and paxillin inside the cell ( ﬁgure 3 e ) . Remarkably , we now have structural information about most of the molecules associated with focal adhesions ( ﬁgures 3 and 4 ) . One example where structure determination methods have given great insight is the growth and control of actin ﬁlaments ; the available structures of numerous protein complexes show how the assembly and disassembly of actin monomers is controlled and how branch points in the ﬁlaments are generated ( Paavilainen et al . 2004 ; Egile et al . 2005 ) . Another elegant example of the power of modern structural molecular biology is given by studies of integrins ( ﬁgures 3 e and 5 ) . Structure determinations of various integrins and fragments , using all three of the available high - resolution tools—crystallography ( Xiong et al . 2002 ; Xiao et al . 2004 ) , EM ( Adair et al . 2005 ) and NMR ( Vinogradova et al . 2002 ) —have taught us much about how they bind to their substrates and how their afﬁnity is switched between ‘on’ and ‘off’ states by structural changes ( Campbell & Ginsberg 2004 ; Luo & Springer 2006 ) . ( c ) Modular proteins A general feature of focal adhesions and most signalling complexes is that the constituent proteins are modular—constructed from several modules or domains . Some examples of module structure are shown in ﬁgure 4 . These modular units are found repeatedly in many different proteins ( Campbell 2003 ) . Cells construct all their machinery from only a few thousand different module types . Consider one example , the Fn3 module : there are over 3000 different proteins in the Interpro database ( http : / / www . ebi . ac . uk / interpro / ) that contain at least one copy of an Fn3 module . As shown in ﬁgure 3 , one of these modules binds to integrins . Modules like Fn3 can be recognized at the sequence level , although less than 25 % of their sequences may be conserved between different versions . There is good evidence that all sequence - identiﬁed Fn3 modules have similar three - dimensional structures . Modular units in proteins are usually relatively rigid structures and most of the observed ﬂexibility in the intact proteins and their complexes arises from movements in the linkages between domains . A rearrangement of domains is often used to produce a change in protein activity ; e . g . in ﬁgure 3 , both Src and integrins ( ﬁgure 5 ) undergo extensive domain rearrangements when they go from the ‘off’ to the ‘on’ states ( Campbell 2003 ) . 2386 I . D . Campbell Structure of the living cell Phil . Trans . R . Soc . B ( 2008 ) ( d ) Flexible protein regions The idea that proteins form well - deﬁned three - dimensional folds , and that they are modular , has become relatively familiar ( ﬁgure 4 ) . Another feature that is becoming increasingly apparent is that many segments of proteins are unstructured when they are not associated with another macromolecule ( Fink 2005 ) . Careful analysis of protein databases , together with experimental evidence , indicates that a large fraction ( more than 30 % ) of the proteins coded for in various genomes contain disordered regions . These unfolded regions do , however , play an important role in the formation of signalling complexes . The cytoplasmic tails of integrins are a good example : they can form complexes with a wide range of different proteins including talin , focal adhesion kinase and the actin cross - linking protein ﬁlamin . Single amino acid sub - stitutions in integrin tails can be lethal and the way that the tails bind to their partner proteins is ﬁne - tuned by adding or removing phosphate groups ( Campbell & Ginsberg 2004 ; Wegener et al . in press ) . ( e ) Communication and signalling Extracellular signals are detected by protein receptors that span the cell membrane . Actin ﬁlaments assemble in a particular direction . Focal adhesions form and dissolve in response to signals received from their environment . Integrins can change their afﬁnity and communicate with the interior of the cell by under - going structural changes . These are all examples of communication and signalling . Cells have developed a number of ways of sending signals . One common induced change inside the cell is the addition of a phosphate group , by a kinase , to an amino acid in an intracellular protein ( Stoker 2005 ) . The added phosphate group changes the types of interactions and reactions that take place . Two kinases are shown in ﬁgure 3 e ( Src and FAK ) ; each has a kinase domain ( blue pentagon ) and two other domains that mediate protein – protein interactions ( ﬁgure 4 ) . These enzymes are localized at the cell membrane . Phosphate additions by kinases are balanced by their removal by phosphatases and the balance can be tipped one way or the other by slight environmental changes . Calcium ions are another common intracellular signal ; their concentration can be increased locally by opening membrane channels . Calpain is an important protein in the regulation of focal adhesion formation . On receiving a calcium signal , it cuts some of the proteins in focal adhesions into pieces , thus causing the focal adhesion to dissolve at the rear of the cell , facilitating forward movement ( ﬁgure 3 d ; Franco et al . 2004 ) . Another set of important signalling proteins is the Rho family , relatively small proteins that can exist in an ‘off’ or an ‘on’ state ( Jaffe & Hall 2005 ) , depending on whether a guanine nucleotide di - or triphosphate is bound . Rho proteins are essential for promoting actin polymerization and members of this protein family are found in the ‘on’ state at the front edge of migrating cells . Yet another important family of proteins involved in signalling are ones that act on lipids in the membrane that surrounds the cell ; examples are inositol kinase enzymes ( e . g . PI3K and PIPK ) that locally phosphor - ylate lipids which then help recruit proteins to speciﬁc regions of the cell membrane ( ﬁgure 3 e ) . ( f ) Integrins adjust their afﬁnity by structural changes A key feature of cell migration and focal adhesion formation is the ability of integrins to exist in different inside outside ( a ) ( e ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) Fl T Fak A P PTP Src Fn I a I b Pk V Figure 3 . ( a ) A representation of a cell showing some intracellular organelles such as mitochondria ( blue - green ) and the nucleus ( pink ) ; ( b ) a side view of the same cell showing some of the actin cytoskeleton ( green ) and focal adhesions ( brown ) that form a bridge between the extracellular matrix ( blue hatching ) and the actin cytoskeleton ; ( c ) the cell extends in a directed way by generating actin ﬁlaments that extend by the addition of actin monomers ; ( d ) new focal adhesions form at the front and old ones dissolve at the rear of the cell ; ( e ) a schematic of some of the modular proteins that make up a focal adhesions ; A , actin ; P , paxillin ; T , talin ; Fl , ﬁlamin ; Fak , focal adhesion kinase ; V , vinculin ; PTP , phosphatases ; Pk , PIP kinase ; I a and I b , a and b subunits of integrin ; Fn , part of ﬁbronectin , a large protein in the extracellular matrix . Structure of the living cell I . D . Campbell 2387 Phil . Trans . R . Soc . B ( 2008 ) afﬁnity states that can be inﬂuenced by signals both from outside and inside a cell . For example , when a neutrophil in the blood stream detects a problem it ﬁrst slows down by ‘rolling’ on the surface of the blood vessel ; it then switches integrins to a high afﬁnity state and goes through the vessel wall to seek out and destroy the problem . There is a body of evidence to suggest that the ‘on’ state which binds tightly to surfaces corre - sponds to the relatively straight orientation shown in ﬁgures 3 e and 5 , with the membrane - spanning regions of each subunit separated . In the low afﬁnity ‘off’ state , however , the extracellular region of the integrin is compact and bent and the two membrane - spanning regions are close together . The nature of this ‘inside - out’ activation process has become much clearer recently and a number of key intracellular players have been identiﬁed , including talin , one of the proteins that couples the cytoplasmic tails to F - actin ( Campbell & Ginsberg 2004 ; Luo & Springer 2006 ; ﬁgure 3 e ) . In a recent study from this laboratory , we obtained the structure of an integrin tail in complex with talin . We designed and made amino acid changes to produce talin variants that fail to support integrin activation . These results revealed the unique and highly speciﬁc nature of the talin – tail complex . The integrin tail can also interact with numerous other proteins , but talin has unique structural properties that bind the tail near the membrane . This promotes the separation of the tails and thus integrin activation ( Wegener et al . in press ) . 1VO5 CH 1DXX Fn3 1TTG FAT 1OW6 Vinc 1ST6 Talin 1SJ8 calf PSI 1YUK 1JV2 1JV2 Ferm 1JI9 1A71 LIM EG β TD 2HNP SH2 IgFlmnIgFlmn PTBc TyrK 1FMK actin 1J6Z SH3 PIPKc 1Bo1 1L3Y 1G83 1G83 vwA 1JV2 1JV2 β pro Figure 4 . The structures of some of the modular protein units identiﬁed in ﬁgure 3 e . The symbols generally correspond to those used in the SMART module database ( http : / / smart . embl - heidelberg . de / ) . The structures were drawn using the graphics program R ASTOP ( http : www . geneinﬁnity . org / rastop / ) ; they can be seen to consist of a series of helices and strands . The LIM domain contains two zinc ions , coloured in magenta . PDB ( http : / / www . rcsb . org / pdb / ) accession codes , for the coordinates used to generate the protein representations , are shown for each structure . The structures were produced using R ASTOP ( http : / / www . geneinﬁnity . org / rastop / manual / index . html ) . vWA Figure 5 . An illustration of two of the conformational states available to integrins . These correspond to an ‘off’ state on the left and an ‘on’ state , also shown in ﬁgure 3 e . The large movements mainly arise from a rearrangement of the various modular units , but there is also a signiﬁcant movement of a helical segment in the vWA domain in going from on state to the other ( Luo & Springer 2006 ) . The ‘on’ state can be stabilized by talin ( cloverleaf structure ) binding to the beta tail ( red ; Wegener et al . in press ) . 2388 I . D . Campbell Structure of the living cell Phil . Trans . R . Soc . B ( 2008 ) ( g ) Summary The above brief and incomplete description of some of the complex events going on when a cell migrates is intended to give a glimpse of the current state of knowledge . Cell migration involves numerous proteins with weak , dynamic interactions orchestrated in time and space that result in cell movement in a speciﬁed direction . The task of the structural biologist is to explain observations made at the cellular level ( micrometer ) in term of detailed interactions formed by protein interfaces at the sub - nanometre level . This can now be done in certain cases ; e . g . talin interactions with integrin tails lead to an increase in integrin afﬁnity . We are at a stage where most of the key players in particular processes , e . g . focal adhesion formation , are known but the numerous competitive interactions in the cell and the ﬁne - tuning achieved by phosphorylation and protein cleavage are not yet very well understood . 7 . CONCLUSION The history of single cell investigation , begun over 300 years ago , has shown that the more we examine cells and their constituents the more remarkable they seem . Innumerable carefully balanced processes—self - assembly and disassembly , phosphorylation and dephosphorylation , synthesis and breakdown—are continually in play and the balance is adjusted by small changes in environment and energy ﬂow . Our main challenge is to discover how all these components work together in a concerted way . How can this growing mountain of facts be assimilated , and where will the new ideas come from that will help us gain a broader perspective ? ( Bray 2003 ) Can we deﬁne the ‘molecular logic of the living state’ ? Molecular and structural biology have been extraordi - narily successful and it has been argued that the molecular paradigm , which so successfully guided the discipline throughout most of the 20th century , is no longer a reliable guide—it has run its course . ( Woese 2004 ) In my view , the ‘mountain of facts’ is not yet complete enough to properly formulate the new integrated vision of the living world that Carl Woese and all of us aspire to . Much progress has been made but we have a continuing need to create better tools , experiments and models before we can fully unravel the complex machinery of life . The current way forward is likely to be a modular approach where we try to understand one set of protein interactions , e . g . focal adhesion formation , and then extrapolate that understanding to the whole system . When we have established sufﬁcient level of under - standing and success at our chosen level , we can reach out to other levels . ( Noble 2006 ) Grateful thanks are given to : many essential colleagues who have mentored and worked with me over the years ; several friends , notably Mark Howarth , who gave valuable comments on this manuscript ; various agencies , including the Wellcome Trust , BBSRC , Medical Research Council and the National Institutes of Health Cell Migration Consortium , who have provided funds and the Royal Society who gave me the unexpected and undeserved honour to present this lecture . ENDNOTES 1 ‘Progress in science depends on new techniques , new discoveries and new ideas , probably in that order’ attributed to Brenner ( 2002 ) . 2 As an example of crude tools leading to crude models , Croone put forward a model of muscle contraction , based on the observation that bladders inﬂated by ‘several robust youths’ could exert a considerable force . He proposed that a chemical reaction took place between blood and nervous ﬂuid that caused the muscle to swell and thus produce limb movement ( Nayler & Maquet 2000 ) . Models of muscle contraction have since improved ( Geeves & Holmes 2005 ) ! 3 In some ways the ability of NMR to solve structures is surprising since the wavelength of the applied radiation is much larger ( more than 1 m ) than the macromolecules studied ( cf . microscopes where high resolution requires short wavelength ) . The required resolution actually arises from the local interactions between nuclear resonances that are assigned and resolved . In magnetic resonance imaging the resolution arises from the applied ﬁeld gradients . REFERENCES Adair , B . D . , Xiong , J . P . , Maddock , C . , Goodman , S . L . , Arnaout , M . A . & Yeager , M . 2005 Three - dimensional EM structure of the ectodomain of integrin a V b 3 in a complex with ﬁbronectin . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 1109 – 1118 . ( doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200410068 ) Aderem , A . 2005 Systems biology : its practice and challenges . Cell 121 , 511 – 513 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2005 . 04 . 020 ) Alberts , B . 1998 The cell as a collection of protein machines : preparing the next generation of molecular biologists . Cell 92 , 291 – 294 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 00 ) 80922 - 8 ) Aloy , P . & Russell , R . B . 2005 Structure - based systems biology : a zoom lens for the cell . FEBS Lett . 579 , 1854 – 1858 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . febslet . 2005 . 02 . 014 ) Amos , W . B . & White , J . G . 2003 How the confocal laser scanning microscope entered biological research . Biol Cell . 95 , 335 – 342 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / S0248 - 4900 ( 03 ) 00078 - 9 ) Armache , K . J . , Kettenberger , H . & Cramer , P . 2005 The dynamic machinery of mRNA elongation . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 15 , 197 – 203 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . sbi . 2005 . 03 . 002 ) Ashkin , A . 1997 Optical trapping and manipulation of neutral particles using lasers . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 4853 – 4860 . ( doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 94 . 10 . 4853 ) Attwood , D . 2006 Nanotomography comes of age . Nature 442 , 642 – 643 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / 442642b ) Bahar , I . & Rader , A . J . 2005 Coarse - grained normal mode analysis in structural biology . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 15 , 586 – 592 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . sbi . 2005 . 08 . 007 ) Ban , N . , Nissen , P . , Hansen , J . , Moore , P . B . & Steitz , T . A . 2000 The complete atomic structure of the large ribosomal subunit at 2 . 4 A˚ resolution . Science 289 , 905 – 920 . ( doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 289 . 5481 . 905 ) Baumeister , W . 2004 Mapping molecular landscapes inside cells . Biol . Chem . 385 , 865 – 872 . ( doi : 10 . 1515 / BC . 2004 . 113 ) Berman , H . M . , Bhat , T . N . , Bourne , P . E . , Feng , Z . , Gilliland , G . , Weissig , H . & Westbrook , J . 2000 The Protein Data Bank and the challenge of structural genomics . Nat . Struct . Biol . 7 ( suppl . ) , 957 – 959 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / 80734 ) Bertone , P . & Snyder , M . 2005 Advances in functional protein microarray technology . FEBS . J . 272 , 5400 – 5411 . ( doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1742 - 4658 . 2005 . 04970 . x ) Binnig , G . & Rohrer , H . 1983 Scanning tunneling microscopy . Surf . Sci . 126 , 236 – 244 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / 0039 - 6028 ( 83 ) 90716 - 1 ) Structure of the living cell I . D . Campbell 2389 Phil . Trans . R . Soc . B ( 2008 ) Bray , D . 2001 Cell movements : from molecules to motility . New York , NY : Garland . Bray , D . 2003 Molecular networks : the top - down view . Science 301 , 1864 – 1865 . ( doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1089118 ) Brenner , S . 2002 Life sentences : Detective Rummage investigates . Genome Biol . 3 , 1013 . Brenner , S . 2003 Nature’s gift to science ( Nobel lecture ) . Chembiochem 4 , 683 – 687 . ( doi : 10 . 1002 / cbic . 200300625 ) Bryson , B . 2003 A short history of nearly everything . London , UK : Doubleday . Cajal , S . R . y . 1906 The Structure and Connexions of Neurons . Nobel prize in physiology or medicine lecture Nobel Foundation . Campbell , I . D . 2002 Timeline : the march of structural biology . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 377 – 381 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm800 ) Campbell , I . D . 2003 Modular proteins at the cell surface . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 31 , 1107 – 1114 . Campbell , I . D . & Ginsberg , M . H . 2004 The talin – tail interaction places integrin activation on FERM ground . Trends Biochem . Sci . 29 , 429 – 435 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tibs . 2004 . 06 . 005 ) Clarkson , J . & Campbell , I . D . 2003 Studies of protein – ligand interactions by NMR . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 31 , 1006 – 1009 . Claude , A . 1975 The coming of age of the cell . Science 189 , 433 – 435 . ( doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1098146 ) Cohen , J . E . 2004 Mathematics is biology’s next microscope , only better ; biology is mathematics’ next physics , only better . PLoS Biol . 2 , e439 . ( doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0020439 ) Crowther , R . A . , Amos , L . A . , Finch , J . T . , De Rosier , D . J . & Klug , A . 1970 Three dimensional reconstructions of spherical viruses by fourier synthesis from electron micrographs . Nature 226 , 421 – 425 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / 226421a0 ) Cusick , M . E . , Klitgord , N . , Vidal , M . & Hill , D . E . 2005 Interactome : gateway into systems biology . Hum . Mol . Genet . 14 ( Suppl . 2 ) , R171 – R181 . ( doi : 10 . 1093 / hmg / ddi335 ) Deamer , D . 2005 A giant step towards artiﬁcial life ? Trends Biotechnol . 23 , 336 – 338 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tibtech . 2005 . 05 . 008 ) Dunn , G . A . & Jones , G . E . 2004 Cell motility under the microscope : Vorsprung durch Technik . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 667 – 672 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm1439 ) Duve , C . 1975 Exploring cells with a centrifuge . Science 189 , 186 – 194 . ( doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1138375 ) Egile , C . , Rouiller , I . , Xu , X . P . , Volkmann , N . , Li , R . & Hanein , D . 2005 Mechanism of ﬁlament nucleation and branch stability revealed by the structure of the Arp2 / 3 complex at actin branch junctions . PLoS Biol . 3 , e383 . ( doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0030383 ) Fink , A . L . 2005 Natively unfolded proteins . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 15 , 35 – 41 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . sbi . 2005 . 01 . 002 ) Franco , S . J . , Rodgers , M . A . , Perrin , B . J . , Han , J . , Bennin , D . A . , Critchley , D . R . & Huttenlocher , A . 2004 Calpain - mediated proteolysis of talin regulates adhesion dynamics . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 , 977 – 983 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1175 ) Frank , J . 2006 Three dimensional electron microscopy of macromolecular assemblies . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Garini , Y . , Vermolen , B . J . & Young , I . T . 2005 From micro to nano : recent advances in high - resolution microscopy . Curr . Opin . Biotechnol . 16 , 3 – 12 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . copbio . 2005 . 01 . 003 ) Gavin , A . C . et al . 2006 Proteome survey reveals modularity of the yeast cell machinery . Nature 440 , 631 – 636 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nature04532 ) Geeves , M . A . & Holmes , K . C . 2005 The molecular mechanism of muscle contraction . Adv . Protein Chem . 71 , 161 – 193 . Ginsberg , M . H . , Partridge , A . & Shattil , S . J . 2005 Integrin regulation . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 17 , 509 – 516 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2005 . 08 . 010 ) Gonen , T . , Cheng , Y . , Sliz , P . , Hiroaki , Y . , Fujiyoshi , Y . , Harrison , S . C . & Walz , T . 2005 Lipid - protein interactions in double - layered two - dimensional AQP0 crystals . Nature 438 , 633 – 638 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nature04321 ) Goodsell , D . S . 2005 Visual methods from atoms to cells . Structure 13 , 347 – 354 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . str . 2005 . 01 . 012 ) Harding , S . E . & O’Shea , P . 2003 Intermolecular associations in 2D and 3D . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 31 , 971 – 1057 . Harold , F . M . 2005 Molecules into cells : specifying spatial architecture . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 69 , 544 – 564 . ( doi : 10 . 1128 / MMBR . 69 . 4 . 544 - 564 . 2005 ) Harrison , S . C . 2004 Whither structural biology ? Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 11 , 12 – 15 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nsmb0104 - 12 ) Henderson , R . & Unwin , P . N . 1975 Three - dimensional model of purple membrane obtained by electron microscopy . Nature 257 , 28 – 32 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / 257028a0 ) Horber , J . K . & Miles , M . J . 2003 Scanning probe evolution in biology . Science 302 , 1002 – 1005 . ( doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1067410 ) Hynes , R . O . 2002 Integrins : bidirectional , allosteric signaling machines . Cell 110 , 673 – 687 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 02 ) 00971 - 6 ) Iber , D . , Clarkson , J . , Yudkin , M . D . & Campbell , I . D . 2006 The mechanism of cell differentiation in Bacillus subtilis . Nature 441 , 371 – 374 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nature04666 ) Jacob , F . 1973 The logic of life : a history of heredity . New York , NY : Pantheon . Jaffe , A . B . & Hall , A . 2005 Rho GTPases : biochemistry and biology . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 21 , 247 – 269 . ( doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . cellbio . 21 . 020604 . 150721 ) Jiang , G . , Giannone , G . , Critchley , D . R . , Fukumoto , E . & Sheetz , M . P . 2003 Two - piconewton slip bond between ﬁbronectin and the cytoskeleton depends on talin . Nature 424 , 334 – 337 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nature01805 ) Kandere - Grzybowska , K . , Campbell , C . , Komarova , Y . , Grzybowski , B . A . & Borisy , G . G . 2005 Molecular dynamics imaging in micropatterned living cells . Nat . Methods 2 , 739 – 741 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth796 ) Karlsson , R . 2004 SPR for molecular interaction analysis : a review of emerging application areas . J . Mol . Recog . 17 , 151 – 161 . ( doi : 10 . 1002 / jmr . 660 ) Kay , L . E . 2005 NMR studies of protein structure and dynamics . J . Magn . Reson . 173 , 193 – 207 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmr . 2004 . 11 . 021 ) Kelley , A . M . , Michalet , X . & Weiss , S . 2001 Chemical physics . Single - molecule spectroscopy comes of age . Science 292 , 1671 – 1672 . Kendrew , J . C . , Bodo , G . , Dintzis , H . M . , Parrish , R . G . , Wyckoff , H . & Phillips , D . C . 1958 A three - dimensional model of the myoglobin molecule obtained by x - ray analysis . Nature 181 , 662 – 666 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / 181662a0 ) Leeuwenhoek , A . v . 1683 Containing some microscopical observations , about animals in the scurf of the teeth . Phil . Trans . R . Soc . B 14 , 568 – 574 . Lehninger , A . L . 1975 Biochemistry , 2nd edn . New York , NY : Worth Publishers . Li , S . et al . 2004 A map of the interactome network of the metazoan C . elegans . Science 303 , 540 – 543 . ( doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1091403 ) Luo , B . H . & Springer , T . A . 2006 Integrin structures and conformational signaling . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 , 579 – 586 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2006 . 08 . 005 ) Matthews , B . D . , Overby , D . R . , Mannix , R . & Ingber , D . E . 2006 Cellular adaptation to mechanical stress : role of 2390 I . D . Campbell Structure of the living cell Phil . Trans . R . Soc . B ( 2008 ) integrins , Rho , cytoskeletal tension and mechanosensitive ion channels . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 508 – 518 . ( doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 02760 ) Michalet , X . , Kapanidis , A . N . , Laurence , T . , Pinaud , F . , Doose , S . , Pﬂughoefft , M . & Weiss , S . 2003 The power and prospects of ﬂuorescence microscopies and spectro - scopies . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 32 , 161 – 182 . ( doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . biophys . 32 . 110601 . 142525 ) Mogilner , A . 2006 On the edge : modeling protrusion . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 , 32 – 39 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2005 . 11 . 001 ) Moore , P . B . & Steitz , T . A . 2005 The ribosome revealed . Trends Biochem . Sci . 30 , 281 – 283 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tibs . 2005 . 04 . 006 ) Nayler , M . & Maquet , P . 2000 William Croone , on the reason of the movement of the muscles . Trans . Am . Phil . Soc . 90 , 1 – 127 . ( doi : 10 . 2307 / 1586013 ) Nickell , S . , Koﬂer , C . , Leis , A . P . & Baumeister , W . 2006 A visual approach to proteomics . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 225 – 230 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm1861 ) Noble , D . 2006 The music of life . Oxford , UK : Oxford University Press . Paavilainen , V . O . , Bertling , E . , Falck , S . & Lappalainen , P . 2004 Regulation of cytoskeletal dynamics by actin - monomer - binding proteins . Trends Cell Biol . 14 , 386 – 394 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2004 . 05 . 002 ) Palade , G . 1975 Intracellular aspects of the process of protein synthesis . Science 189 , 347 – 358 . ( doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1096303 ) Piehler , J . 2005 New methodologies for measuring protein interactions in vivo and in vitro . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 15 , 4 – 14 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . sbi . 2005 . 01 . 008 ) Ridley , A . J . , Schwartz , M . A . , Burridge , K . , Firtel , R . A . , Ginsberg , M . H . , Borisy , G . , Parsons , J . T . & Horwitz , A . R . 2003 Cell migration : integrating signals from front to back . Science 302 , 1704 – 1709 . ( doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1092053 ) Rossmann , M . G . 1994 The beginnings of structural biology . Recollections , special section in honor of Max Perutz . Protein Sci . 3 , 1731 – 1733 . Ruska , E . 1986 The development of the electron microscope and of electron microscopy . Nobel prize in physics lecture . Nobel Foundation . Sakmann , B . 1992 Nobel Lecture . Elementary steps in synaptic transmission revealed by currents through single ion channels . EMBO . J . 11 , 2002 – 2016 . Sali , A . , Glaeser , R . , Earnest , T . & Baumeister , W . 2003 From words to literature in structural proteomics . Nature 422 , 216 – 225 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nature01513 ) Schliwa , M . 2002 The evolving complexity of cytoplasmic structure . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 291 – 296 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm781 ) Schneckenburger , H . 2005 Total internal reﬂection ﬂuor - escence microscopy : technical innovations and novel applications . Curr . Opin . Biotechnol . 16 , 13 – 18 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . copbio . 2004 . 12 . 004 ) Simpson , J . C . & Pepperkok , R . 2003 Localizing the proteome . Genome Biol . 4 , 240 . ( doi : 10 . 1186 / gb - 2003 - 4 - 12 - 240 ) Stoker , A . W . 2005Proteintyrosinephosphatasesandsignalling . J Endocrinol . 185 , 19 – 33 . ( doi : 10 . 1677 / joe . 1 . 06069 ) Tsien , R . Y . 2003 Breeding molecules to spy on cells . Harvey Lect . 99 , 77 – 93 . Vale , R . D . 2003 The molecular motor toolbox for intracellular transport . Cell 112 , 467 – 480 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 03 ) 00111 - 9 ) Vendruscolo , M . & Dobson , C . M . 2005 Towards complete descriptions of the free - energy landscapes of proteins . Phil . Trans . R . Soc . A 363 , 433 – 450 . ( doi : 10 . 1098 / rsta . 2004 . 1501 ) Vinogradova , O . , Velyvis , A . , Velyviene , A . , Hu , B . , Haas , T . , Plow , E . & Qin , J . 2002 A structural mechanism of integrin a IIb b 3 “inside - out” activation as regulated by its cyto - plasmic face . Cell 110 , 587 – 597 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 02 ) 00906 - 6 ) Wanner , G . , Schroeder - Reiter , E . & Formanek , H . 2005 3D analysis of chromosome architecture : advantages and limitations with SEM . Cytogenet . Genome Res . 109 , 70 – 78 . ( doi : 10 . 1159 / 000082384 ) Webb , D . J . , Zhang , H . & Horwitz , A . F . 2005 Cell migration : an overview . Methods Mol . Biol . 294 , 3 – 11 . Wegener , K . L . , Partridge , A . W . , Han , J . , Pickford , A . R . , Liddington , R . C . , Ginsberg , M . H . & Campbell , I . D . In press . Structural basis of integrin activation by Talin . Cell . Woese , C . R . 2004 A new biology for a new century . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 68 , 173 – 186 . ( doi : 10 . 1128 / MMBR . 68 . 2 . 173 - 186 . 2004 ) Wu¨thrich , K . 2003 NMR studies of structure and function of biological macromolecules ( Nobel Lecture ) . J . Biomol . NMR 27 , 13 – 39 . ( doi : 10 . 1023 / A : 1024733922459 ) Xiao , T . , Takagi , J . , Coller , B . S . , Wang , J . H . & Springer , T . A . 2004 Structural basis for allostery in integrins and binding to ﬁbrinogen - mimetic therapeutics . Nature 432 , 59 – 67 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nature02976 ) Xiong , J . P . , Stehle , T . , Zhang , R . , Joachimiak , A . , Frech , M . , Goodman , S . L . & Arnaout , M . A . 2002 Crystal structure of the extracellular segment of integrin a V b 3 in complex with an Arg - Gly - Asp ligand . Science 296 , 151 – 155 . ( doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1069040 ) Yates III , J . R . , Gilchrist , A . , Howell , K . E . & Bergeron , J . J . 2005 Proteomics of organelles and large cellular structures . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 6 , 702 – 714 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm1711 ) Zamir , E . & Geiger , B . 2001 Molecular complexity and dynamics of cell - matrix adhesions . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 3583 – 3590 . Zernike , F . 1953 How I discovered phase contrast . Nobel prize in physics lecture . Nobel Foundation . Zhang , J . , Campbell , R . E . , Ting , A . Y . & Tsien , R . Y . 2002 Creating new ﬂuorescent probes for cell biology . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 906 – 918 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm976 ) Structure of the living cell I . D . Campbell 2391 Phil . Trans . R . Soc . B ( 2008 )