Environ Health Perspect DOI : 10 . 1289 / EHP174 Note to readers with disabilities : EHP strives to ensure that all journal content is accessible to all readers . However , some figures and Supplemental Material published in EHP articles may not conform to 508 standards due to the complexity of the information being presented . If you need assistance accessing journal content , please contact ehp508 @ niehs . nih . gov . Our staff will work with you to assess and meet your accessibility needs within 3 working days . Supplemental Material Advancing Exposure Science through Chemical Data Curation and Integration in the Comparative Toxicogenomics Database Cynthia J . Grondin , Allan Peter Davis , Thomas C . Wiegers , Benjamin L . King , Jolene A . Wiegers , David M . Reif , Jane A . Hoppin and Carolyn J . Mattingly Table of Contents Part 1 . Agricultural Health Study Part 2 . CTD Set Analyzer tool Part 3 . CTD MyVenn tool Table S1 . Key data fields and counts for CTD exposure curation References Part 1 Agricultural Health Study ( AHS ) ( Alavanja et al . 1996 ) . Following standard curation practices ( Davis et al . 2011 ) , interactions between chemical stressors and diseases in AHS papers were coded for type of relationship and significance in exposure statements . Each exposure statement describes a single interaction between a single stressor and a single outcome . When authors provided statistically significant evidence of a disease outcome as a result of a chemical exposure ( author metrics varied , but often included odds ratios , relative risks , P - values and confidence intervals ) , this was curated as a positive or negative interaction between a stressor and disease outcome as appropriate . Interactions that showed a positive or negative trend that did not reach statistical significance ( P - trend ) were curated as hypothetical / predictive . Interactions that lacked correlation , as concluded by the authors , were coded as null interactions . In cases where the relationship between a stressor and outcome was evaluated but the results were inconclusive , the result was not recorded . All interactions between a single stressor and disease were sorted , counted , assigned a numerical value to represent the relationship , and visualized as a matrix ; greater than two positive interactions were assigned a value of five , those with 1 - 2 positive interactions were assigned a value of two , single positive interactions combined with single negative interactions were assigned a value of 0 . 1 , no interactions were assigned a value of 0 , null interactions were assigned a value of - 0 . 1 , and negative interactions were assigned a value of - 2 . Because many stressor - disease combinations had multiple interactions , a single value was designated to best represent a consensus of curated literature . For heatmap analysis ( Figure 4 ) , hypothetical / predictive interactions were included with positive correlations . The R / ComplexHeatmap package was used for single linkage clustering of diseases by class , and then within class , by frequency . Part 2 CTD Set Analyzer tool . To examine how integration of exposure data with CTD can add biological context to exposure information , we examined the set of 21 genes ( Figure 5B ) that interacted with 3 or more of the 16 AHS pesticides that have an association with Prostatic Neoplasms , and together form a gene - gene interaction network . Using CTD’s SetAnalyzer tool , ( http : / / ctdbase . org / tools / analyzer . go ? q ) , ‘Genes’ were selected as the input type in part 1 , the list of 21 genes were entered as the data set in part 2 , ‘Enriched Diseases’ were selected as the type of analysis in part 3 , and a threshold of 0 . 01 was entered as the corrected p - value in part 4 . Part 3 CTD MyVenn tool . CTD’s MyVenn tool was used to examine how CTD core and exposure data sets complement each other and inform additional analyses for 18 AHS pesticides ( aldrin , atrazine , butylate , carbofuran , chlorpyrifos , coumaphos , diazinon , dichlorvos , EPTC , fonofos , glyphosate , malathion , methyl bromide , metribuzin , parathion , permethrin , phorate , and terbufos ) . The complete CTD exposure data file was downloaded ( http : / / ctdbase . org / downloads / # exposureevents ) and sorted to identify diseases associated with each pesticide exposure and whether the relationship was a “positive correlation” or “prediction / hypothesis” . Similarly , diseases associated with each of the 18 pesticides from core CTD data were downloaded and filtered to include only “M - type” ( marker / mechanism ) relationships . Separate analyses were conducted for each of the 18 pesticides , selecting ‘Diseases’ as the input type in part 1 of the MyVenn tool ( http : / / ctdbase . org / tools / myVenn . go ) , and the respective disease sets generated from exposure and core curation entered in part 2 as Set 1 and Set 2 , respectively . Results are described in Figure 6 for 10 of the 18 pesticides that showed differences between the two data sets . Environ Health Perspect DOI : 10 . 1289 / EHP174 Table S1 . Key data fields and counts for CTD exposure curation Exposure Category Curation Field Vocabulary a Validation Process Curated data type Counts b 1 . Curation Identifiers PubMed identification number CV pubMed ID , valid record must be processed for reference to be saved to database Articles reviewed 1 , 712 Curatable ? CV must be yes / no Articles curated 1 , 067 Study title FT / SD Study titles 216 Study years CV numerical value , collection start year must be less than or equal to collection end year 44 , 526 Author email FT field not blank ; format conforms to apache common email validation function 1 , 037 Influencing health factors CV values match CTD controlled vocabulary Influencing factors 11 Author summary FT Author statements 1 , 067 2 . Stressor Chemical stressor CV must be a valid CTD vocabulary chemical name Chemical stressors 609 c Stressor source CV values match CTD controlled vocabulary Stressor categories 6 Stressor details FT 20 , 269 Stressor notes FT 7 , 482 3 . Receptor Number of receptors CV must be numeric 40 , 404 Receptor CV values match CTD controlled vocabulary Receptor types 12 Smoking status CV values match CTD controlled vocabulary Smoking status types 4 Age CV must be single numeric value or valid range format 34 , 202 Gender CV values match CTD controlled vocabulary Genders 2 Race / ethnicity CV values match CTD controlled vocabulary of PhenX terms Race categories 27 Receptor notes FT 20 , 609 4 . Event Methods FT / SD Methods 477 Limit of detection CV if present , must be single numeric value or valid range format 18 , 319 Detection frequency CV numeric value , must be < or = 100 % 17 , 106 Medium assayed FT / SD Media types assayed 154 Chemical or gene marker CV must be a valid CTD vocabulary chemical or gene name Chemicals / genes 621 c and 71 Exposure marker measurement level CV if present , must contain valid single numeric value , range , equal < LOD or equal < value1 ‐ value2 and contain LOD value and measurement units in respective fields Exposure marker measurements 51 , 982 Measurement units FT / SD must be present if marker measurement value is present Measurement units 285 Measurement statistical category FT / SD Statistical categories 370 Assay notes FT 21 , 450 Country CV values match CTD controlled vocabulary from ISO 3166 table Countries reported 98 State ( US ) or province CV values match US state abbreviations US states reported 49 Geographic details FT 28 , 896 Event notes FT 5 , 107 5 . Outcome Outcome correlation CV values match CTD controlled vocabulary Outcome statements 2 , 901 Disease or phenotype CV must be a valid CTD vocabulary disease name Diseases / phenotyp es 245 and 146 Anatomical site of phenotype CV must be a valid CTD vocabulary anatomy name Anatomical terms 44 Outcome notes FT 524 a CV = controlled vocabulary ; FT = free text ; SD = standardizing b as of August 2015 ; data in bold are currently available in download file c Stressors denote chemicals used in an exposure event , while chemical markers include one or more metabolites of the chemical stressors References Alavanja MC , Sandler DP , McMaster SB , Zahm SH , McDonnell CJ , Lynch CF , et al . 1996 . The agricultural health study . Environ Health Perspect 104 : 362 - 369 . Davis AP , Wiegers TC , Rosenstein MC , Murphy CG , Mattingly CJ . 2011 . The curation paradigm and application tool used for manual curation of the scientific literature at the comparative toxicogenomics database . Database ( Oxford ) 2011 : bar034 .