Cornell University ILR School DigitalCommons @ ILR CAHRS Working Paper Series Center for Advanced Human Resource Studies ( CAHRS ) 10 - 1 - 1989 Interviewer Assessments of Applicant " Fit " : An Exploratory Investigation Sara L . Rynes Cornell University Barry A . Gerhart Cornell University Follow this and additional works at : http : / / digitalcommons . ilr . cornell . edu / cahrswp Part of the Human Resources Management Commons Thank you for downloading an article from DigitalCommons @ ILR . Support this valuable resource today ! This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Center for Advanced Human Resource Studies ( CAHRS ) at DigitalCommons @ ILR . It has been accepted for inclusion in CAHRS Working Paper Series by an authorized administrator of DigitalCommons @ ILR . For more information , please contact hlmdigital @ cornell . edu . Interviewer Assessments of Applicant " Fit " : An Exploratory Investigation Abstract Although both strategic management theorists and practicing recruiters endorse selecting applicants on the basis of " fit , " precise delineation of fit in a selection context remains elusive . Moreover , the majority of previous work in this area has been based on anecdotes , case studies , or prescriptions rather than empirical evidence . The present investigation examines interviewers ' assessments of job applicants in terms of both general and firm - specific employability ( i . e . , fit ) . Results suggest that ( 1 ) assessments of general employability differ from firm - specific assessments , ( 2 ) there is a firm - specific component to interviewers ' evaluations of job applicants , and ( 3 ) interpersonal skills , goal orientation , and physical attractiveness contribute to assessments of fit ( holding general employability constant ) , while objective qualifications ( e . g . , grade point average , extracurricular offices , years experience ) do not . Suggestions for future research are offered . Keywords CAHRS , ILR , center , human resource , job , worker , advanced , labor market , satisfaction , employee , work , manage , management , health care , flexible benefit , HRM , employ , model , industrial relations , labor market , job satisfaction , job performance , productivity , measurement , compensation , pay , voluntary turnover , salary , pay level , benefit , pay raise , job growth , managerial , employment growth , college degree Disciplines Business | Human Resources Management Comments Suggested Citation Rynes , S . , & Gerhart , B . ( 1989 ) . Interviewer assessments of applicant " fit " : An exploratory investigation ( CAHRS Working Paper # 89 - 13 ) . Ithaca , NY : Cornell University , School of Industrial and Labor Relations , Center for Advanced Human Resource Studies . http : / / digitalcommons . ilr . cornell . edu / cahrswp / 411 This article is available at DigitalCommons @ ILR : http : / / digitalcommons . ilr . cornell . edu / cahrswp / 411 Interviewer Assessments of Applicant " Fit " : An Exploratory Investigation Sara Rynes Corne ) ) University Barry Gerhart Corne ) ) University Working Paper # 89 - 13 ( Revised October 1989 ) Center for Advanced Human Resource Studies New York State School of Industrial and Labor Relations Cornell University Ithaca , N . Y . 14851 - 0952 ( 607 ) 255 - 3279 Forthcoming in Personnel Psychology This paper has not undergone formal review or approval of the faculty of the ILR School . It is intended to make the results of Center research , conferences , and projects available to others interested in human resource management in preliminary form to encourage discussion and suggestions . 2 Applicant Fit Abstract Although both strategic management theorists and practicing recruiters endorse selecting applicants on the basis of " fit , " precise delineation of fit in a selection context remains elusive . Moreover , the majority of previous work in this area has been based on anecdotes , case studies , or prescriptions rather than empirical evidence . The present investigation examines interviewers ' assessments of job applicants in terms of both general and firm - specific employability ( i . e . , fit ) . Results suggest that ( 1 ) assessments of general employability differ from fmn - specifIc assessments , ( 2 ) there is a finn - specific component to interviewers ' evaluations of job applicants , and ( 3 ) interpersonal skills , goal orientation , and physical attractiveness contribute to assessments of fit ( holding general employability constant ) , while objective qualifications ( e . g . , grade point average , extracurricular offices , years experience ) do not . Suggestions for future research are offered . 3 Applicant Fit Interviewer Assessments of Applicant " Fit " : An Exploratory Investigation The notion that it is desirable for individuals to " fit " their environments has become a basic tenet in many areas of psychology and human resource management For example , questions concerning person - environment fit have provided much of the impetus for research in occupational psychology and vocational guidance ( Holland , 1973 ; Spokane , 1987 ) ; recruitment ( Schneider , 1976 ; Wanous , 1980 ) ; socialization ( Fisher , 1986 ) and work adjustment ( Lofquist & Dawis , 1968 ) . Although each of the above literatures focuses to some extent on both individual and organizational outcomes , it is nevenheless fair to say that the primary emphasis has been on individual perceptions and outcomes , panicularly satisfaction . To the extent that organizational outcomes are addressed in these literatures , they are typically conceptualized through the mediating effects of fit on individual attitudes , intentions , and behaviors . Recently , however , the concept of fit has gained increasing currency on the organizational side as well , particularly in relation to employee selection . Consistent with the general trend toward contingency theories of management ( e . g . , Harrigan , 1983 ; Miles and Snow , 1978 ; Schuler & Jackson , 1987 ) , academics and consultants have increasingly recommended that job applicants be assessed in terms of their fit with the employing organization ' s strategies , culture , norms and values ( e . g . , Gerstein & Reisman , 1983 ; Herben & Deresky , 1987 ; Kerr , 1982 ; Leontiades , 1982 ; Olian & Rynes , 1984 ; Tichy , Fombron & Devanna , 1982 ) . 4 Applicant Fit Despite the current popularity and intuitive appeal of such recommendations , the concept of fit in selection remains elusive . For example , much of the prescriptive literature is based on logical argument rather than empirical evidence ( e . g . , Olian & Rynes , 1984 ; Snow & Miles , 1986 ) . Moreover , even among studies that claim an empirical foundation , the " data " are more likely to be comprised of anecdotes or case studies than conventional empirical validation results ( e . g . , Gerstein & Reisman , 1983 ; Leontides , 1982 ; Ricklefs , 1979 ) . Third , the precise dimensions of fit have not been subjected to recommended construct validation procedures ( e . g . , Schwab , 1980 ) . As such , " fit " continues to elude precise , consistent definition . The present research represents an exploratory investigation of three important , but largely unexamined , questions concerning interviewer assessments of applicant fit : ( 1 ) How ( if at all ) do assessments of fit differ from assessments of general employability ? ( 2 ) To what extent do assessments of fit reflect something other than idiosyncratic recruiter preferences ? and ( 3 ) What kinds of trait evaluations are associated with assessments of fit , holding " objective " qualifications and assessments of general employability constant ? We turn now to a brief discussion of how these questions have ( or perhaps more accurately , have not ) been addressed in previous selection research . Applicant Fit : An Elusive Construct Any evaluation of the role of fit in prior selection research depends critically on how one defines it . For example , if fit is defined primarily as the correspondence between individual knowledge , skills , and abilities ( KSAs ) and job requirements , then the voluminous validation literature can surely be said to have addressed fit in considerable detail . 5 Applicant Fit However , most discussions of fit appear to emphasize applicant characteristics that extend far beyond the realm of job - analytically - derived KSAs . For example , Ricklefs ( 1979 ) talks about the search for candidates with appropriate " chemistry , " while Schneider ( 1987 ) describes the tendency of CUITentorganizational members to hire only " right types " ( e . g . , individuals highly similar to themselves and CUITentemployees ; see also Klimoski & Strickland , 1977 ) . A cursory review of the traits commonly associated with fit , chemistry , or right types reveals such attributes as personal values , political orientation , hobbies , personality traits , attire , physical characteristics , use of leisure time , and even eating habits ( e . g . , Herben & Deresky , 1987 ; Mayfield & Carlson , 1966 ; Ricklefs , 1979 ) . Moreover , discussions of fit suggest that such factors become panicularly imponant once preliminary screening establishes that all ( remaining ) candidates meet minimal job requirements ( e . g . , Ricklefs , 1979 ) . If so , these factors may become the principal criteria for determining who , from among a pool of similarly qualified applicants , actually receives a job offer . Although there is no universally accepted conceptualization of fit in a selection context , we believe the following statements are consistent with the bulk of ( limited ) previous literature on the subject : ( 1 ) although fit may encompass some elements of correspondence between individual KSAs and job requirements , the construct extends considerably beyond such immediate job - related factors ; ( 2 ) assessments of fit become most imponant after applicants have been deemed adequately qualified to perform the work ; as such , they are often the determinative assessment in decisions to extend job offers ; ( 3 ) as commonly employed , the notion of fit implies a distinct firm - specific component to applicant evaluation ; that is , evaluations of fit are presumed to include something more 6 Applicant Fit than just ( a ) assessments of " general employability " for any organization or ( b ) idiosyncratic reactions of individual evaluators ; and ( 4 ) because many of the attributes associated with fit are interpersonally exhibited and evaluated , fit is most commonly assessed via the employment interview . Because there is such limited empirical and construct validity evidence concerning fit in selection contexts , it is likely that future research will lead to modifications or refinements of the preceding generalizations . Nevertheless , in the interim we shall use the above framework for discussing the present investigation , as well as its relationship to previous research . Research Questions The first question , " How do assessments of firm - specific fit differ from assessments of general employability ? " is important because there is some doubt as to whether the two constructs are in any way differentiable . For example , some authors have suggested that typical recruitment and selection procedures are really searches for a generically " ideal " candidate : someone who is not only well - qualified , but also couneous , loyal , trustwonhy , and obeys the corporate laws ( e . g . , Schneider , 1976 ) . Additionally , many of the anecdotal descriptions of fit ( not to mention most interview evaluation forms ) read like a list of " apple pie " attributes : leadership , motivation , enthusiasm , creativity , analytic abilities , warmth , intelligence , and so on . Therefore , unless these generic qualities are evaluated in a somewhat more " tailored " fashion when assessing fit ( versus general employability ) , the concept of fit may be more a comfoning fiction than a strategically - based reality . Unfonunately , most previous interview research does not permit examination of general versus firm - specific evaluative components . This is because the vast majority of 7 Applicant Fit studies have either restricted their attention to interviewers from a single fum . or completely confounded fum and interviewer effects in multi - fIrm samples ( e . g . . Arvey & Campion . 1982 ; Mayfield . 1964 ) . As such . it is impossible to separate interviewers ' assessments into components reflecting ( a ) general preferences ( e . g . . common stereotypes applied widely across interviewers and firms ; see Hakel & Schuh . 1971 ) ; ( b ) firm - specific preferences ( i . e . . fIt ) . and ( c ) idiosyncratic preferences among interviewers within a given fIrm ( e . g . . MayfIeld & Carlson . 1966 ) . Moreover . interpretation of the dependent variable becomes clouded in such studies : where evaluation formats do not distinguish between general and fIrm - specific employability . it is diffIcult to know how much attention subjects focus on each component in formulating their overall evaluations . The second question . " Do assessments of fit reflect anything more than the idiosyncratic preferences of individual recruiters ? " is also important . For applicant - organization fit to have any of the benefits hypothesized by strategic management theorists . it must not only reflect something more than assessments of general " apple pie " attributes . but also more than individual idiosyncracies and biases . In other words . there must be a greater degree of communality among the assessments of individuals from the same firm than among individuals from different firms . That there are wide individual differences in assessments of applicants is clear . First . previous research has shown important individual differences in both perceived importance and favorability of certain applicant attributes ( e . g . . Mayfield & Carlson . 1966 ; Valenzi & Andrews . 1973 ) . Second . prior interview research has generally produced disappointing interrater reliability evidence . although estimates vary widely across studies 8 Applicant Fit ( Wagner , 1949 ; Mayfield , 1964 ; Arvey & Campion , 1982 ) . Third , previous research suggests that most organizations spend little time training interviewers in how to evaluate applicant suitability , or what to what to tell applicants about the job or firm ( e . g . , Rynes & Boudreau , 1986 ) . In sum , given the wide variability in individual assessments and the apparent lack of organizational attention to explicitly shaping interviewers ' preferences , it is possible that their evaluations reflect only general and / or idiosyncratic stereotypes , with nonexistent or insignificant firm - specific components . Again , most previous research does not permit examination of this question . Although limited evidence suggests that interviewers from the same firm sometimes vary widely in their interpretations of specific information ( e . g . , Mayfield & Carlson , 1966 ; Valenzi & Andrews , 1973 ) , the existence of cenain idiosyncratic interpretations does not rule out the simultaneous coexistence of other shared perceptions due to common organizational membership . ( Moreover , both of the aforementioned studies used " paper people " and generic job descriptions , neither of which would be expected to elicit much in the way of firm - specific reactions ) . Indeed , recent evidence suggesting that panel interviews improve interrater reliability ( Arvey & Campion , 1982 ) is consistent with the notion that interviewers from a single organization agree more closely than those from different organizations . However , definitive suppon for this interpretation is precluded by the fact that panel interviews typically include other features believed to enhance reliability as well ( e . g . , structured questioning , standardized administrative procedures , and simultaneous viewing of the identical interviewee " performance " ) . 9 Applicant Fit The third question , " What kinds of trait evaluations are associated with fit , holding objective qualifications and general employability constant ? " has also escaped empirical scrutiny . Anecdotal accounts and post - hoc speculations concerning dimensionality abound ; however , methodical study of construct dimensionality is sorely lacking . To date , few studies have been designed to permit examination of the similarities or differences between general , finn - specific , and individual - specific components of interviewer assessments . However , there are a few notable exceptions . For example , Bass ( 1951 ) studied independent ratings of applicants by managers from the same , and different , organizations ( insurance and office machines ) . Each manager used a ftrnl - specific structured interview to evaluate applicants for sales positions within his own firm . Ratings ( of the same student ) correlated . 74 when made by managers from the same office machine firm , . 56 for managers from the same insurance firm , but . 24 and - . 10 when managerial ratings were paired across companies . Thus , Bass ' results are consistent with the notion that common organizational membership enhances interviewer perceptions of applicant fit . However , there are two potentially imponant confounds : the use of company - specific structured interviews , and potential differences in sales positions across the two ftrnls . The results are also based on a very small number of interviewers and only two organizations . A second relevant study was performed by Mayfield and Carlson ( 1966 ) as pan of a larger investigation of interviewer assessments . In the main study , the authors showed that cenain pieces of applicant information drew highly uniform reactions from interviewers , while others generated highly diverse reactions . 10 Applicant Fit In the substudy , 31 randomly selected items describing hypothetical applicant characteristics were evaluated ( in terms of favorability ) by 110 insurance managers from 42 firms . Their responses were then compared with those of 77 managers from a single insurance firm . Comparisons of within - item variances revealed that for all but two items , variance for the within - firm group was as large as that for the between - firm group . According to the authors , " The results give no indication that disagreement is greater for managers from different companies than for managers from the same company " ( Mayfield & Carlson , 1966 , p . 46 ) . It should be noted , however , that although the authors analyzed differences in item - by - item variability , they did not report any measures of average interrater agreement ( e . g . , reliabilities ) for the between - versus within - firm groups . Thus , results from Bass ( 1951 ) and Mayfield & Carlson ( 1966 ) suggest conflicting conclusions regarding the presence of a firm - specific component in employability assessments . However , the studies varied in a number of respects : Bass ' subjects evaluated real applicants on an overall basis in actual interviews , whereas Mayfield & Carlson ' s evaluated " paper people characteristics , " item by item , in an experimental setting . Moreover , both studies were based on a very small number of within - firm examinations ( only one firm in Mayfield & Carlson ) , and both were performed long before the recent interest in contingency theories of management and strategic notions of fit . The present research represents an exploratory attempt to shed new light on the question of whether or not there is indeed a firm - specific component to assessments of applicant fit . Recruiters from multiple organizations provided assessments of both general employability and firm - specific employability ( i . e . , fit ) for a two - year sample of graduating MBA job seekers . This design yielded multiple evaluations of each job candidate by 11 Applicant Fit recruiters from diverse organizations , including fifty - six instances where a given job seeker was interviewed by two or more recruiters from the same organization . More specifically , we examine how ratings of general employability differ from assessments of fit for a particular organization , and whether interviewers from the same firm agree more in their assessments of employability ( both general and fmn - specific ) than pairs of recruiters from different organizations . Finally , we conduct preliminary analyses to determine which subjectively evaluated applicant traits are associated with assessments of fit ( and which are not ) , controlling for objective applicant characteristics ( e . g . , GPA , extracurricular offices ) and assessments of general employability . Hypotheses The first question concerns whether , or in what ways , assessments of general employability differ from assessments of firm - specific employability . Three differences were predicted a priori . First , it was hypothesized that assessments of fmn - specific employability ( i . e . , fit ) would be lower , on average , than assessments of general employability . Previous research suggests that interviewers typically weight negative information more heavily than positive because they fear being criticized for making false positive selection errors ( e . g . , Springbett , 1958 ) . Because this fear only comes into play when interviewers make judgments regarding their own fmns , we expected that interviewers would apply more stringent standards in evaluating firm - specific than general employability . Additionally , one would expect that in evaluating organization - applicant fit , there would be more potentially disqualifying dimensions than when considering the more abstract question of general 12 Applicant Fit employability . Finally , it would be unlikely that interviewers would view applicants as highly suited to their firms if they did not also perceive them as generally employable . The second hypothesis was that firm - specific evaluations would be more variable than general assessments . If organizational characteristics ( culture , values , business strategies ) indeed influence interviewers ' judgments of fit , over and above general and idiosyncratic rater tendencies , then differences in interviewers ' organizations should produce greater variance in firm - specific than general assessments . Based on a similar logic , the third hypothesis was that inter - rater reliabilities would be lower for firm - specific than general employability assessments . Again , to the extent that differences in organizational characteristics primarily influence assessments of firm - specific fit ( at least more so than general employability ) , this should be reflected in lower agreement ( between raters from different firms ) on the firm - specific employability measure . Finally , the fact that two recruiters from the same organization sometimes ( independently ) interviewed the same applicant provided us with a second , and more direct , test of the notion that assessments of applicant fit contain a firm - specific component . Thus , hypothesis four predicted that recruiters from the same organization who independently interviewed the same applicant would agree more closely on firm - specific employability than when paired with recruiters from different companies who evaluated those same applicants . Method Sample . Data were provided by recruiters who interviewed graduating MBA students from a nationally ranked ( top five to top twenty , depending on the poll ) Ivy League business school during the 1987 - 88 and 1988 - 89 recruiting seasons . Recruiter participation 13 Applicant Fit was solicited by the Placement Director , who ( truthfully ) informed recruiters that their feedback would be used to ( 1 ) provide specific interviewing guidance to those students who were having difficulty generating offers , and ( 2 ) determine whether there were any areas in which the school ' s graduates were perceived as needing general improvement . ( In general , however , applicants appear to have been highly employable . For example , in the 1987 - 88 season , the typical student received more than 3 job offers and accepted a job paying $ 47 , 000 per year ) . In the first recruiting season , recruiters from 89 organizations provided 1155 sets of ratings on 156 students , for an average of 7 . 4 evaluation sets per student . In the second season , 83 organizations provided 1104 sets of ratings on 190 students , for an average of 5 . 8 sets per student . The school in question has a reputation for being heavily finance - oriented . Indeed , approximately 55 % of the student sample sought positions in finance , 16 % in marketing , 6 % in accounting , and 23 % in general management or other areas . Still , there is not much pressure for students to develop a functional specialty during the program : all students take the same core courses in the first year , and many graduate without declaring a specific major . In most cases , interviews were arranged and allocated via applicant bidding procedures . However , at least some of the slots were set aside for " closed " interviews , where recruiters explicitly asked to interview particular students on the basis of pre - visit resume screening . In general , it was felt ( and confmned by the Placement Director ) that most students would be perceived as at least minimally qualified for the positions for which they 14 Applicant Fit interviewed ( a potential " boundary condition " for assessing fit ) . This assumption was based on several considerations . First , students were only invited to closed interviews when recruiters had already judged that they were probably well - qualified for the position . Second , applicants would be unlikely to bid ( or at least to bid many points ) for interviews where they did not meet position specifications , as this would reduce the number of points available for interviews for which they were better qualified . Third , many of the positions listed involved general management or traineeships , and the school is typically regarded as producing generally trained rather than specialized business graduates . Instruments . Following each interview , recruiters provided three kinds of assessments about each applicant : ( 1 ) ratings on ten specific trait scales ( e . g . general knowledge , demonstrated leadership , warmth ) , ( 2 ) ratings of " overall employability , " and ( 3 ) ratings of " employability in your firm ( i . e . , fit ) . " All items were measured on 5 - point scales , with " 5 " indicating the most favorable evaluation . Additional information about " objective " applicant characteristics ( GPA , sex , number of extracurricular offices held , years of business experience , major ) came from a student data base maintained by the school . Finally , a preliminary investigation undenaken by school administrators had suggested that physical characteristics , particularly physical attractiveness , might also be associated with recruiters ' evaluations . Consequently , two placement officials independently evaluated each applicant in tenus of physical attractiveness and height ( 3 - point scales : average , significantly above / below average ) . Officials were instructed to evaluate attractiveness in a first - impression sense ( i . e . , as would be judged by a recruiter meeting the individual for the first time , in interview attire ) . Raters were chosen for their close familiarity with nearly all 15 Applicant Fit graduating students . However , " backup " help was available , if needed , in the form of photographs on file . Interrater correlations were . 50 for attractiveness , and . 64 for height . Analyses . Three types of analyses were conducted to address the question of how fInn - specifIc employability assessments differ from general employability assessments . First , average ratings for the two evaluations were calculated and t - tested for significant differences . Second , their variances were computed and compared . Third , interrater reliabilities for the two measures were estimated using intraclass correlations ( Ebel , 1951 ; Guilford , 1954 ) . The second question addressed the extent to which assessments of fmn - specifIc employability reflect anything more than idiosyncratic interviewer preferences and general employability assessments . This involved comparing the interrater reliabilities of a subset of recruiters from the same fIrm who independently evaluated a particular applicant ( N = 56 recruiter pairS ) 1 with " between - finn " interrater reliabilities for the same set of applicants . More specifically , wherever same - fmn interviewers rated the same candidate , within - fIrm interrater correlations were calculated for both the general employability and firm - specific measures . Then , each of these interviewers was paired with another randomly selected interviewer from a different organization who also interviewed that applicant . Average values for pairs of these ( across - firm ) interrater correlations were then compared with the within - fmn correlations . To the extent that within - fIrm interviewer evaluations reveal closer agreement than between - fmn pairs , particularly on the fIrm - specific measure , support would be indicated for the presence of a finn - specific component in the applicant evaluation process . 16 Applicant Fit Finally , a number of exploratory analyses were conducted to determine what kinds of applicant characteristics predict interviewers ' evaluations of firm - specific employability . Three categories of possible predictors were examined via regression analyses : objective characteristics ( OPA , sex , number of extracurricular offices held , years of business experience , major ) ; physical characteristics ( average rated attractiveness , averaged rated height ) , and subjective interviewer assessments of the ten specific traits . Results Turning first to differences between assessments of general and firm - specific employability , t - tests revealed that mean assessments of firm - specific employability in the two years ( 3 . 28 , 3 . 25 ) were lower than mean assessments of general employability ( 3 . 79 , 3 . 79 ; t = 24 . 4 and 24 . 0 , respectively ) . Second , using the coefficient of variation ( i . e . the standard deviation / mean x 1 ( 0 ) , firm - specific employability ratings in each of the two years ( 3 . 20 , 3 . 63 ) were also more variable across interviewers than general employability assessments ( 2 . 12 , 2 . 45 ) . On the other hand , average interrater reliabilities for those who interviewed the same students were vinually indistinguishable for the general versus firm - specific measures ( . 184 vs . . 179 in 1988 ; . 246 vs . . 204 in 1989 ) . As a whole , then , our results suggest that interviewers respond differently to requests for general versus firm - specific ratings . However , based on these analyses alone , there is little suppon for the notion that raters from different organizations agree more closely on assessments of general employability than on firm - specific fit . Moreover , although assessments of firm - specific employability displayed greater variance than general employability , this could be explained by the fact that interviewers were less lenient on the firm - specific evaluation and , as such , used a wider ponion of the scale . Thus , the question 17 Applicant Fit remains whether the greater variability in firm - specific ratings reflects anything more than idiosyncratic recruiter preferences and / or statistical artifacts . A more appropriate method is to obtain interrater reliability estimates from recruiters within a single firm evaluating the same students . These reliabilities can then be compared to reliabilities obtained when each of these recruiters is paired with another randomly selected interviewer from a different organization who also interviewed the same applicant . This analysis revealed that within - firm pairs agreed more closely than between - firm pairs on both general and firm - specific ratings . However , the agreement was substantially more pronounced for the firm - specific ( . 49 vs . 20 ) than the general rating ( . 33 vs . 24 ; with each correlation based on 56 recruiter pairs ) . This result , then , does suggest that interviewers from the same organization share at least some common notions about firm - specific employability or applicant fit 2 To test the extent to which objective characteristics ( GPA , sex , business experience , major , and number of extracurricular offices held ) explain assessments of fit , over and above assessments of general employability , firm - specific ratings were first regressed on general employability to obtain a baseline model . 3 Adding objective characteristics to this model did not improve its explanatory power in either 1988 ( F6 . 573 = 1 . 75 ) or 1989 ( F6 . 517 = . 82 ) . This finding is consistent with our prior speculations that ( a ) candidates were , by and large , perceived as adequately qualified on an objective basis , and ( b ) assessments of fit involve something more than evaluation of objective qualifications . In contrast , an analogous procedure revealed that height and attractiveness did add explanatory power to a model of fit ( F2 . 918 = 8 . 73 , P < . 01 ) . As shown by standardized 18 Applicant Fit regression coefficients , attractiveness ( Batt = . 087 ; p < . 001 ) rather than height ( Bhci & ht = . 028 ; n . s . ) accounted for most of the improvement in the model . Firm - specific assessments were also regressed on the ten specific items used for student feedback ( equation 1 , Table 1 ) . In addition , general employability was added to a second equation to determine whether the magnitude or statistical significance of particular coefficients would be affected ( equation 2 ) . If so , one plausible interpretation would be that general employability mediates the effects of those items on assessments of fit . ( Insen Table 1 about here ) As Table 1 indicates , several variables are statistically significant in the first equation in each of the two years . However , once general employability is controlled ( equation 2 ) , only demonstrated leadership , goal orientation , and warmth remain statistically significant in both years . An imponant concern with the preceding analysis is that the collinearity among items inflates the standard errors . In addition , this collinearity suggests that a more parsimonious model could be obtained by factor analyzing the items . Thus , as an alternative strategy , we statistically removed the variance in each of the specific items accounted for by general employability , factor analyzed these residualized items , and computed factor scores . 4 To determine the number of factors , a scree test was used . In addition , we looked for stability in the factor loadings matrix across the two years of data . ( The descriptive statistics for these variables appear in the Appendix . ) 19 Applicant Fit A four - factor solution ( Table 2 ) using principal factor analysis and an onhogonal rotation was chosen for both years , accounting for 51 % and 46 % of the total variance in 1987 - 88 and 1988 - 89 , respectively . s The structure across the two years was very stable , with factor 1 apparently picking up interpersonal characteristics ( interpersonal ) , factor 2 related to future plans and goals ( goal orientation ) , factor 3 related to breadth of knowledge and awareness ( knowledge ) , and factor 4 related to prior accomplishments and demonstrated leadership ( accomplishments ) . ( Insert Tables 2 and 3 about here ) Finally , the variance in firm - specific ratings explained by general employability was statistically removed ( via regression analysis ) for each year ' s data to obtain residualized fit scores . These residuals were then regressed on the four factors . Results ( Table 3 ) suggested that assessments of fit were most heavily associated with the interpersonal factor , followed by goal orientation and past accomplishments . In contrast , assessed knowledge appeared to have little impact on assessed fit . Discussion In answer to our first question , present results suggest that interviewer assessments of firm - specific employability do differ somewhat from evaluations of general employability . First , recruiters appear to be more stringent in their evaluations of firm - specific than general employability . This is not surprising , given that there are probably more dimensions on which to " disqualify " an applicant in a firm - specific context , and also that firm - specific assessments are likely to be of greater personal consequence to the interviewer ( e . g . , Webster , 1949 ; Mayfield , 1964 ) . 20 Applicant Fit Second , ftrm - specific evaluations exhibit greater variability across ( between - ftrm ) interviewers than do general employability assessments . This finding is consistent with ( but not probative of ) the notion that differences in ftrm characteristics influence evaluations of ftrm - speciftc employability , over and above general evaluations of applicant characteristics and qualiftcations . Further evidence of a ftrm - speciftc component to interview judgments is provided by the higher within - than across - ftrm interrater reliabilities for assessments of the same applicant . Moreover , although a ftrm - speciftc component appears to be present in both general and ftrm - speciftc evaluations . the effect was much stronger for the latter than the former . Thus , as hypothesized , shared organizational membership appears to influence assessments of ftt to a greater extent than general employability . Taken together , the above results suggest the importance of precisely deftning in interview research which kind of " employability " interviewers are expected to assess . Previous studies have typically asked interviewers to provide a single overall rating ( sometimes in conjunction with speciftc dimensional ratings as well ) , where rater and ftrm effects are completely confounded in the interviewer ' s response . As such , there is no way of knowing the extent to which subjects in previous interview research were focusing on general , as opposed to firm - speciftc , employability in their assessments . Moreover , previous reviews of the interview literature have not addressed the potential implications of different wordings of the overall rating scale . Thus , our results suggest that at least some of the previously reported differences in between - study findings may be attributable to different wordings of the dependent variable , and correspondingly different interpretations as to the degree of ftrm - speciftcity required in the evaluations . 21 Applicant Fit Our preliminary investigations into the determinants of firm - specific fit suggest that " objective " qualifications have little explanatory value , at least in this highly credentialed sample . This accords with our prior assumptions that ( a ) most of the applicants in this study were regarded as at least minimally qualified for most positions , and ( b ) assessments of fit ( as well as general employability ) involve something beyond evaluation of knowledges , skills , abilities , and past accomplishments . Consistent with prior anecdotal repons ( e . g . , Ricklefs , 1979 ) , our results suggest that a variety of subjectively assessed factors do , in fact , influence fit assessments . In panicular , assessments of interpersonal skills , future goal orientation , and personal appearance all contributed significantly to these assessments , controlling for general employability . Of course , given the nature of the data , it is impossible to say precisely which aspects of , say , goal orientation had the greatest influence on recruiters , or which had the largest firm - specific ( as opposed to idiosyncratic or general ) component . In summary , in contrast to most previous discussions of applicant fit , the present study provides concrete empirical evidence that assessments of fit ( a ) differ from assessments of general employability , and ( b ) reflect something more than idiosyncratic interviewer preferences . These findings have not been observed in prior interview research for two reasons : the vast majority of studies have completely confounded interviewer and firm characteristics , and have not distinguished between general and firm - specific employability . In addition , the present research improves on the limited research that has examined firm - versus individual - specific components of applicant evaluations . For example , in comparison with Bass ( 1951 ) , our results ( a ) are based on far more recruiters and students , ( b ) employ both general and rum - specific evaluations ( the precise nature of Bass ' overall 22 Applicant Fit rating scale is not specified ) , and ( c ) do not perfectly confound fInn , job , and structured interview effects . In comparison with Mayfield and Carlson ( 1966 ) , our results are based on holistic evaluations of real applicants by real recruiters in actual hiring situations , rather than on specifIc " paper people " attributes considered in isolation from one other . In addition , only a single fIrm was represented in the within - fInn portion of Mayfield and Carlson ' s investigation . Nevenheless , present results leave many imponant questions about fIt unanswered . Future research in this area seems highly desirable for at least three reasons . First , practicing recruiters consistently confInn the imponance of perceived " fit " in their referral and hiring decisions , panicularly when applicants are at least minimally qualified ( e . g . , Ricklefs , 1979 ) . Indeed , one major impetus for the present research was the frequency with which recruiters at this panicular business school explained their decision processes to the Placement Director in tenns of " fit . " When pressed for specifIcs , they usually responded with lists of generic , " apple pie " attributes such as leadership , analytical abilities , motivation , warmth , enthusiasm , goal orientation , and the like . Hence , a decision was made to investigate how assessments of finn - specific fit might differ from those required by the more general measure then in use ( Le . , the general employability measure in the present research ) . Additionally , the strategic management literature continues to prescribe that recruiters should assess the compatibility of applicant characteristics with organizational nonns , values , strategies , and traditional ways of doing business ( e . g . , Kerr , 1982 ; Miles & Snow , 1986 ; Olian & Rynes , 1984 ; Posner , Kouzes , & Schmidt , 1985 ) . Thus , both nonnatively and positively , the concept of fInn - specifIc fIt fIgures heavily in discussions of selection . 23 Applicant Fit Finally , prior research suggests that organizations devote few resources to training recruiters as to what to look for in applicants , or what to tell applicants about organizations ( Rynes & Boudreau , 1986 ) . To the extent that recruiters and hiring managers do not receive consistent , systematic information about organizational priorities and preferences , their assessments are likely to reflect larger proportions of general and / or idiosyncratic elements , and smaller fIrm - specifIc components . In short , organizations often assume that recruiters will " absorb " the culture , rather than systematically acting to insure it . In terms of specific recommendations , one of the top priorities for future research is to pursue additional construct definition and validation . Present results give some preliminary guidelines as to the types of factors that are more ( e . g . , interpersonal skills , appearance ) or less important ( e . g . , general knowledge ) in assessments of fit . However , future research is needed to determine ( 1 ) precisely which aspects of , say , interpersonal skills are most important ( on average ) in fIt assessment , ( 2 ) whether these aspects are generally important to all interviewers , or only to some , and ( 3 ) the extent to which the perceived favorability of specific behaviors related to these aspects is consistently assessed by interviewers from various organizations ( e . g . , certain ~ of appearance might be evaluated very differently by interviewers from Vogue versus U . S . News & World Report , yet appearance per se might be important to both ) . Anecdotally , a wide variety of personal characteristics have been mentioned as possible determinants of fit : individualistic versus group orientation , attitudes toward risk , personal appearance and attire , ethnic background , extent of specialized versus general skills , and extent of previous work experience ( some firms prefer it , others do not ; see Ricklefs , 1979 ) . As such , it would be helpful if future researchers were to determine 24 Applicant Fit whether these and other differences can be reliably summarized via more general dimensions . As a next step , the generalizability of such dimensions across job levels , observers ( e . g . , applicant versus interviewer ) , and time periods ( pre - versus post - hire ) should also be assessed . Historically , interview researchers have discovered at least two kinds of applicant attributes : those that are evaluated rather consistently across interviewers , and those that generate highly idiosyncratic evaluations ( e . g . , Mayfield & Carlson , 1966 ; Rakel & Schuh , 1971 ) . Present results ( as well as the strategic management literature ) suggest a third probable category : attributes that are evaluated neither completely generally nor idiosyncratically , but rather , that are evaluated more similarly by members of the same organization than different ones . To address this question , more intensive methodologies should be employed in future investigations . For example , a reasonable first step would be to define specific aspects of organizational culture , values , and strategies that are believed to most strongly affect assessments of applicant or employee fit ( see Schneider , 1975 ) . This might be done through one - on - one interviews with multiple members of diverse organizations , or through group procedures such as or brainstorming or critical incident techniques . Similar methods could be used to generate lists of applicant attributes ( e . g . , political conservatism , risk taking , achievement orientation , gregariousness ) that are believed to correspond to these organizational characteristics ( employment security , environmental dynamism ) . In a similar vein , Chatman ( 1989 ) , has described the use of a standardized instrument to generate applicant and organization value profiles that can be compared to assess fit . Consistent 25 Applicant Fit with our preceding discussion , however , we would expect value congruence to be only one of several key components of fit . Once potentially relevant dimensions of organizations and applicants have been identified , experimentally - generated applicant profiles ( e . g . , videotapes , resumes ) or face - to - face role - playing applicants could be evaluated by multiple managers from companies known to have widely varying cultures , values , and business strategies ( e . g . , IBM versus Data General ; U . S . Sprint versus AT & T ) . Applicant profiles or role plays might be specifically constructed to vary along dimensions believed to be particularly important to " fitting in " with the competing cultures ( e . g . , group versus individualistic orientation , shott versus long time perspective ) . This type of design would permit examination not only as to whether incumbents of the same organizations assess fit more similarly than different ones , but also which applicant characteristics contribute most heavily to fll1t1 - specific assessments of fit . Moreover , because such a design would generate multiple within - firm evaluators per applicant ( rather than only two , as in the present investigation ) , more powerful analysis of variance techniques could be employed to separate applicant , rater , and firm sources of variance in evaluations . It would also be important to determine the extent to which applicants and interviewers agree on the dimensions , both organizational and individual , that are imponant to achieving a good fit . At present , we know little about the extent to which the dimensionality of organizational - applicant fit depends on who is making the assessment , the employer or the applicant . In addition to identifying the factors that influence fit ( content ) , it would be useful to examine how such factors are considered in assessing fit ( process ) . 26 Applicant Fit For example , to what extent do employers use a sequential versus compensatory model in considering general " objective " qualifications and firm - specific criteria ? Are fit assessments closely linked to first impressions ? Verbal protocol analysis could be a useful tool in addressing such questions . Another area for future research would be to determine the extent to which initial assessments of fit prove to be accurate over time . Ideally , such research would be conducted longitudinally , dimensionally as well as holistically , and from the applicant ' s perspective as well as the employer ' s . For example , although it has been argued that employee dispositions or personality are stable over time ( e . g . , Staw & Ross , 1985 ) , other evidence suggests that the extent of stability varies according to changes in situational factors ( Gerhatt , 1987 ) and further , that the latter may influence personality ( e . g . , Kohn & Schooler , 1982 ) . An additional important area for future research concerns the extent to which selecting for fit is functional , or dysfunctional , for organizations . In a sense , the question being posed here is whether or not selecting on the basis of fit is a " valid " selection procedure that actually enhances the predictability of subsequent employee ( and organizational ) performance . For example , Schneider ( 1983 ; 1987 ) has raised the possibility that selecting the " right types " may appear optimal in the shott run ( e . g . , by reducing training or socialization costs ) , but prove dysfunctional in the longer run ( via an inability to adapt to diverse or changing circumstances ) . A second possibility is that cettain dimensions of fit are functional only in the shott term , while others are functional in both the shott and the 27 Applicant Fit longer tenn . Yet another possibility is that the long - and short - tenn utilities of selecting for various aspects of fit are contingency - dependent . Unfortunately , research of this type will have to await clearer elaboration of the " fit " construct and its dimensionality ( Schwab , 1980 ) . One potentially useful distinction may be that between " supplementary " or congruent types of fit , and " complementary " fit , where " the environment is viewed as deficient in some way , and personnel decisions are made to correct the deficit by hiring an individual with complementary ( incongruent ) skills " ( Spokane , 1987 : 218 ) . This kind of distinction is already apparent in the executive succession literature , where supplementary fit ( e . g . , insider succession ) is thought to be desirable under most nonnal circumstances , but complementary fit more desirable when turnarounds are needed ( e . g . , Herbert & Deresky , 1987 ) . Given the substantial interest among both academics and practitioners in questions of fit , it is interesting to speculate why so little empirical work has been pursued in this area . At least one explanation would seem to lie in the perceived " softness " of the construct ( see also Posner , et al . , 1985 ) relative to other selection predictors , particularly in light of post - Griggs employment validation standards . Another potential explanation concerns the conventional association between assessments of fit and employment interviews , which have endured a long history of academic denigration ( e . g . , Webster , 1949 ; Mayfield , 1964 ; Hakel , 1982 ; Arvey & Campion , 1982 ) . However , times are changing . For example , concerns about stagnating employee productivity and changes in labor force composition have increased employers ' willingness to implement more and more varied selection devices , including ability testing , honesty testing , and personality assessments ( e . g . , BNA , 1986 ; Day & Silvennan , 1989 ) . Second , 28 Applicant Fit recent Supreme Coun decisions have shifted the burden of proof in discrimination cases squarely on the shoulders of the plaintiff , making experimentation with alternative selection techniques less risky for employers . Third , recent meta - analyses and methodological reviews of prior interview research have reached more optimistic conclusions about the potential reliability and validity of employment interviews ( see Dreher , Ash & Hancock , 1988 ) . And founh , valid or not , employers ( including human resource and industrial psychology depanments ! ) almost universally continue to use the interview to assess fit ( Arvey & Campion , 1982 ; Hakel , 1982 ) . If the preceding assessment is correct , then the time for serious " fit " research has finally arrived . 29 Applicant Fit References Bass , B . M . ( 1951 ) . Situational tests : Individual interviews compared with leaderless group discussions . Educational and Psycholo ~ ical Measurement , 11 , 67 - 75 . Bureau of National Affairs ( 1986 ) . Selection tests : Employer interest increasing . Bulletin to Mana ~ ement , Jan . 2 , pp . 2 , 7 . Chatman , lA . ( 1989 ) . Improving organizational research : A model of person - organization fit . Academy of Management Review , 14 , 333 - 349 . Day , D . V . & Silverman , S . B . ( 1989 ) . Personality and job performance : Evidence of incremental validity . Personnel Psycholo ~ y , 42 , 25 - 36 . Dreher , G . F . , Ash , RA . & Hancock , P . ( 1988 ) . The role of the traditional research design in underestimating the validity of the employment interview . Personnel Psycholo ~ y , 41 , 315 - 328 . Ebel , R L . ( 1951 ) . Estimation of the reliability of ratings . Psychometrika , 16 , 407 - 24 . Gerhart , B . ( 1987 ) . How important are dispositional factors as determinants of job satisfaction ? Implications for job design and other personnel programs . Journal of Applied Psycholo ~ y , 72 , 366 - 373 . Gerstein , M . & Reisman , H . ( 1983 ) Strategic selection : Matching executives to business conditions . Sloan Management Review , 24 33 - 49 . Guilford , J . P . ( 1954 ) . Psychometric Methods . New York : McGraw - Hill . Hakel , M . D . & Schuh , AJ . ( 1971 ) . Job applicant attributes judged important across seven diverse occupations . Personnel Psycholo ~ y , 24 , 45 - 52 . Hakel , M . D . ( 1982 ) . Employment interviewing . In K . M . Rowland & G . R Ferris ( eds . ) , Personnel Mana ~ ement Boston : Allyn & Bacon . Harrigan , K . R . ( 1983 ) Research methodologies for contingency approaches to business 30 Applicant Fit strategy . Academy of Management Review , ~ , 398 - 405 . Harvey , R . J . ( 1982 ) . The future of partial correlation as a means to reduce halo in performance ratings . Journal of Applied Psychology , 67 , 171 - 176 . Herbert , T . T . & Deresky , H . ( 1987 ) . Should general managers match their business strategies ? Organizational Dynamics , 1 . 5 . , 3 , 40 - 51 . Holland , J . ( 1973 ) . Making vocational choices : A theory of careers . Englewood Cliffs , N . J . : Prentice - Hall . Holzbach , R L . ( 1978 ) . Rater bias in performance ratings : Superior , self - , and peer ratings . Journal of Applied Psychology , 63 , 579 - 588 . Hulin , C . L . ( 1982 ) . Some reflections on general performance dimensions and halo rating eITor . Journal of Applied Psychology , 67 , 165 - 170 . KeIT , J . ( 1982 ) Assigning managers on the basis of the life cycle . Journal of Business Strategy , 2 , 58 - 65 . Klimoski , RJ . & Strickland , W . J . ( 1977 ) Assessment centers : Valid or merely prescient ? Personnel Psychology , 30 , 353 - 361 . Kohn , M . L . & Schooler , C . ( 1982 ) . Job conditions and personality . American Journal of Sociology , 87 , 1257 - 1286 . Landy , F . 1 . , Vance , R . J . , Barnes - FatTell , J . L . ( 1980 ) . Statistical control of halo eITorin performance ratings . Journal of Applied Psychology , ~ , 501 - 506 . Leontiades , M . ( 1982 ) Choosing the right manager to fit the strategy . Journal of Business Strategy , l , 58 - 69 . Lofquist , L . H . & Dawis , RW . ( 1968 ) . Adjustment to work : A psychological view of man ' s problems in a work - oriented society . New York : Appleton - Century - Crofts . 31 Applicant Fit Mayfield , E . C . ( 1964 ) . The selection interview - - A re - evaluation of published research . Personnel Psycholo ~ , 17 , 239 - 260 . Mayfield , E . C . & Carlson , R . E . ( 1966 ) . Selection interview decisions : First results from a long - term research project Personnel Psychology , 19 , 41 - 53 . Miles , RE . & Snow , C . C . ( 1978 ) . Organizational strategy . structure and process . New York : McGraw - Hill . Miller , E . C . ( 1980 ) . Hire in haste , repent at leisure - - Team selection process at Graphic Controls . Organizational Dynamics , H , 2 - 26 . Murphy , K . R ( 1982 ) . Difficulties in the statistical control of halo . Journal of Applied Psychology , 67 , 161 - 164 . Olian , J . D . & Rynes , S . L . ( 1984 ) . Organizational staffing : Integrating practice with strategy . Industrial Relations , 23 , 170 - 183 . Posner , B . Z . , Kouzes , J . m . & Schmidt , W . H . ( 1985 ) . Shared values make a difference . Human Resource Management , 24 , 293 - 309 . Ricklefs , R ( 1979 ) . The hidden hurdle : Executive recruiters say firms tend to hire " our kind of person " . Wall Street Journal , Sept . 19 , 1979 . Rynes , S . L . & Boudreau , J . W . ( 1986 ) . College recruiting in large organizations : Practice , evaluation , and research implications . Personnel Psychology , 39 , 729 - 758 . Schneider , B . ( 1975 ) Organizational climates : An essay . Personnel Psychology , 28 , 447 - 479 . Schneider , B . ( 1976 ) . Staffing Organizations . Santa Monica : Goodyear Publishing . Schneider , B . ( 1983 ) . Interactional psychology and organizational behavior . In L . L . Cummings and B . M . Staw ( eds . ) , Research in Organizational Behavior , 5 . , 32 Applicant Fit Greenwich , Ct . : JAI Press , 1 - 31 . Schneider , B . ( 1987 ) . The people make the place . Personnel Psycholoi ) ' , ~ , 437 - 454 . Schuler , R . S . & Jackson , S . E . ( 1987 ) . Linking competitive strategies with human resource management practices . Academy of Management Executive , 1 , 207 - 221 . Schwab , D . P . ( 1980 ) . Construct Validity in organizational behavior . In L . L . Cummings & B . M . Staw ( ds . ) , Research in Or ~ anizational Behavior , 2 , Greenwich , cr . : JAI Press , 3 - 43 . Snow , C . C . and Miles , R . E . ( 1986 ) . Organizational strategy , design , and human resources management . In S . L . Rynes & G . T . Milkovich ( eds . ) , Current Issues in Human Resource Management , Plano , TX . : Business Publications , Inc . , 60 - 69 . Springbett , B . M . ( 1958 ) . Factors affecting the final decision in the employment interview . Canadian Journal of Psychology , 12 , 13 - 22 . Staw , B . M . ( 1986 ) Organizational psychology and the pursuit of the happy / productive worker . California Management Review , 28 , 40 - 53 . Staw , B . M . & Ross , J . ( 1985 ) . Stability in the midst of change : A dispositional approach to job attitudes . Journal of Applied Psycholo ~ y , 20 , 469 - 480 . Tichy , N . M . , Fombrun , C . & Devanna , M . A . ( 1982 ) Strategic human resource management , Sloan Management Review , 23 , 47 - 61 . Valenzi , E . & Andrews , I . R . ( 1973 ) Individual differences in the decision processes of employment interviewers . Journal of Applied Psychology , 58 , 49 - 53 . Wagner , R . ( 1949 ) . The employment interview : A critical summary . Personnel Psychology , 2 , 17 - 46 . Wanous , J . P . ( 1980 ) . Organizational entry : Recruitment , selection , and socialization of Newcomers . Reading , MA . : Addison - Wesley . 33 Applicant Fit Authors ' Notes Authors contributed equally to this project . We wish to thank Laurie Foltman and James Schmotter of the Johnson Graduate School of Business , Cornell University for their contribution to the study . We also wish to thank the School of Industrial and Labor Relations , the Center for Advanced Human Resource Studies , and the U . S . Army Research Institute ( Contract SRFC - MDA903 - 87 - KOOOI ) for financial and staff suppon for this project . However , the authors retain sole responsibility for the views and findings contained herein . 34 Applicant Fit Footnotes 1 . In each instance where records indicated that two same - fIrm recruiters had interviewed the same student , the fIrm was called to verify whether or not the interviews and ratings were truly conducted independently ( as opposed , for example , to panel interviews ) . In the vast majority of cases , they were ; where they were not , they were eliminated from further analysis . Of the remaining fIrms , in all but one case , the two recruiters from the same fIrm were sent to interview applicants for similar jobs , but for different locations and on different days . Given that fIt assessments are likely to include both job - specifIc and fIrm - specific components , our observed interrater correlations are likely to underestimate the agreement that would be obtained where multiple recruiters from the same fIrm interviewed applicants for the exact same job . In fact , although the sample size is too small to be conclusive , the one fIrm ( a fInancial services firm ) where multiple recruiters did interview for the exact same job seemed to show greater interrater agreement , particularly on the fIrm - specifIc employability measure . Follow - up conversations with the recruiting coordinator ( a line manager ) made clear that she believed such agreement was a result of the following factors : their recruiters ( also line managers ) received interview training , were provided with a common list of attributes to look for in applicants , and were hiring for a special general fInance rotation program involving four six - month assignments , which they themselves had already completed . 2 . The sample of applicants interviewed by two recruiters per fIrm did not differ from the broader sample in terms of either fIrm - specifIc ratings ( mean = 3 . 3 , SD = 1 . 1 versus mean = 3 . 3 , SD = 1 . 0 ) or general employability ratings ( mean = 3 . 8 , SD = . 8 versus mean = 3 . 8 , SD = . 8 ) . 35 Applicant Fit 3 . The sample sizes for these analyses were reduced because some measures ( e . g . offices held ) depended on student responses to a post - graduation questionnaire with a response rate of approximately 60 % . 4 . See Holzbach ( 1978 ) , Landy , Vance , Barnes - Farrell ( 1980 ) , Murphy ( 1982 ) , Hulin ( 1982 ) , and Harvey ( 1982 ) for discussions of this procedure . 5 . Principal components analysis showed that the corresponding four components had eigenvalues of at least 1 . 0 in each year . ( Eigenvalues from principal components analysis do not correspond to those from principal factor analysis ) . 1988 1989 Eq . l Eq . 2 EQ . l Eq . 2 General Employability NjA . 341 * * * NjA . 566 * * * Awareness . 082 * . 031 . 056 . 028 Knowledge . 009 . 002 . 015 - . 048 Accomplishments . 008 * * . 018 . 041 - . 021 Leadership . 084 * * . 055 * . 121 * * * . 076 * Goals . 136 * * * . 096 * . 096 * . 097 * Plans . 189 * * * . 156 * * * . 099 * . 026 Appearance . 043 . 006 . 034 - . 001 Warmth . 175 * * * . 148 * * * . 093 * * . 079 * * Verbal Skills . 093 * * . 047 . 233 * * * . 083 * * Listening Skills . 106 * * * . 092 * * * . 042 - . 015 R2 . 614 * * * . 657 * * * . 426 * * * . 575 * * * 36 Applicant Fit Table 1 Rewession of Firm - specific Fit on Item Ratings and General Employability Note : Entries are standardized regression coefficients . * p < . 05 * * p < . 01 * * * p < . 001 Factor Loadings 1988 ( 1989 ) Factor 1 Factor 2 Factor3 Factor 4 Listening 66 ( 61 ) 09 ( 09 ) 16 ( 07 ) 07 ( 10 ) Warmth 63 ( 62 ) 03 ( 01 ) 01 ( 00 ) 07 ( 06 ) Verbal 59 ( 59 ) 17 ( 11 ) 23 ( 12 ) 06 ( 03 ) Appearance 46 ( 50 ) 12 ( 14 ) 10 ( 04 ) 09 ( 00 ) Goals 14 ( 19 ) 77 ( 72 ) 21 ( 14 ) 21 ( 20 ) Plans 19 ( 15 ) 76 ( 73 ) 19 ( 19 ) 22 ( 19 ) Knowledge 19 ( 07 ) 19 ( 15 ) 73 ( 68 ) 23 ( 22 ) Awareness 19 ( 11 ) 19 ( 15 ) 71 ( 68 ) 14 ( 16 ) Accomp . 13 ( 04 ) 14 ( 12 ) 19 ( 21 ) 61 ( 62 ) Leadership 13 ( 06 ) 20 ( 20 ) 10 ( 15 ) 60 ( 61 ) Eigenvalue 3 . 2 ( 2 . 5 ) . 89 ( . 54 ) . 59 ( . 60 ) . 46 ( . 62 ) 37 Applicant Fit Table 2 Results from Principal Factor Analysis of Interview Ratin ~ Dimensions Note : Decimals for factor loadings omitted . * p < . 05 * * p < . 01 * * * p < . 001 1988 1989 Interpersonal . 320 * * * . 258 * * * Goal Orientation . 257 * * * . 215 * * * Knowledge . 065 * . 042 Accomplishments . 133 * * * . 157 * * * R2 . 237 . 174 38 Applicant Fit Table 3 Rewession of Residualized Fit Score on Factor Scores Note : Entries are standardized regression coefficients . * p < . 05 * * p < . 01 * * * p < . 001 1988 Intercorrelations 1989 Mean SD ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) ( 10 ) ( 11 ) ( 12 ) Mean SD AWARE ( 1 ) 3 . 79 . 72 1 . 00 . 829 . 572 . 514 . 634 . 628 . 490 . 463 . 605 . 524 . 645 . 597 3 . 82 . 74 mow ( 2 ) 3 . 74 . 77 . 808 1 . 00 . 623 . 540 . 631 . 633 . 491 . 440 . 599 . 548 . 632 . 589 3 . 75 . 76 ACCOMP ( 3 ) 3 . 83 . 82 . 598 . 628 1 . 00 . 710 . 592 . 604 . 445 . 482 . 513 . 472 . 642 . 587 3 . 80 . 85 LEADER ( 4 ) 3 . 56 . 92 . 587 . 592 . 743 1 . 00 . 592 . 596 . 437 . 458 . 486 . 439 . 597 . 571 3 . 56 . 88 GOAL ( 5 ) 3 . 62 . 89 . 608 . 617 . 593 . 625 1 . 00 . 874 . 482 . 450 . 585 . 505 . 656 . 663 3 . 59 . 87 PLAN ( 6 ) 3 . 60 . 91 . 639 . 627 . 603 . 623 . 851 1 . 00 . 521 . 475 . 593 . 523 . 664 . 679 3 . 60 . 89 APPEAR ( 7 ) 3 . 83 . 75 . 489 . 452 . 417 . 424 . 524 . 539 1 . 00 . 565 . 557 . 519 . 560 . 529 3 . 95 . 73 WARM ' l ' H ( 8 ) 3 . 88 . 83 . 442 . 423 . 410 . 425 . 479 . 462 . 592 1 . 00 . 593 . 647 . 551 . 592 3 . 94 . 82 VERBAL ( 9 ) 3 . 81 . 90 . 583 . 564 . 505 . 520 . 598 . 596 . 619 . 616 1 . 00 . 689 . 635 . 621 3 . 82 . 92 LISTEN ( 10 ) 3 . 79 . 86 . 536 . 516 . 517 . 494 . 581 . 559 . 560 . 652 . 704 1 . 00 . 565 . 595 3 . 85 . 78 GEN EMP ( 11 ) 3 . 80 . 81 . 696 . 680 . 663 . 655 . 695 . 706 . 604 . 567 . 712 . 655 1 . 00 . 739 3 . 85 . 78 Ji ' IIUI EMP ( 12 ) 3 . 30 1 . 05 . 611 . 594 . 597 . 621 . 684 . 675 . 537 . 559 . 668 . 624 . 775 1 . 00 3 . 37 1 . 02 Appendix Means , Standard Deviations , and Intercorrelations 1988 correlations are above the diagonal ( N = 1145 ) ; 1989 correlations are below the diagonal ( N = 1087 )