Lysosomes are membrane - bound organelles that were first described in 1955 by Christian de Duve 1 . They have an acidic lumen , which is limited by a single - lipid bilayer membrane and contains several types of hydro - lases that are devoted to the degradation of specific substrates . The lysosomal membrane contains proteins that are involved in the transport of substances into and out of the lumen , acidification of the lyso somal lumen and fusion of the lysosome with other cell ular structures 2 . Extracellular material that is destined for degradation reaches the lysosome mainly through the endocytic pathway 3 , whereas intra cellular compo - nents are transported to the lysosome by autophagy 4 – 6 . Lysosomes can also secrete their contents by fusing with the plasma membrane 7 , 8 . This process , which is known as lysosomal  exocytosis  , is very active in particular cell types , such as cells from the haemato - poietic lineage 9 , osteoclasts 10 and melanocytes 11 . In addition to cellular clearance and secretion , the lyso - some mediates a range of biological processes , such as plasma membrane repair , cell homeostasis , energy metabolism and the immune response . Little is known about how lysosomal function varies in different cells , tissues , life stages and individuals , as well as under differ ent physio logical conditions . However , in recent years , the static view of the lysosome has progressively changed into a much broader and dynamic perspective . The ability of the lysosome to adapt to different environmental cues became evident with the discovery that lysosomal biogenesis and function are subject to global transcriptional regulation . This novel concept of ‘lysosomal adaptation’ is important for our understand - ing of how basic biological processes , ranging from cellular clearance to the control of energy metabolism , respond to environmental cues . In this Review , we first describe the structure of the lysosome and its established role in cellular clearance . We then consider the emerging roles of lyso somes , inc - luding their function in nutrient sensing and signalling , before discussing the identification of the transcription factor EB ( TFEB ) as a key protein that regulates lyso - somal biogenesis and autophagy 12 , 13 . Finally , we focus on how lysosomal dysfunction leads to human disease . Lysosome structure The complex series of events leading to the formation of a mature lysosome has been described in recent arti - cles 2 , 14 – 21 . The mature lysosome has an acidic lumen encircled by a cholesterol - poor membrane 22 ( BOX 1 ) . The main function of the lysosomal membrane is to segre - gate the  aggressive  acidic environment of the lumen from the rest of the cell . This is ensured by the presence of a thick glycocalyx that lines the internal perimeter to prevent the lysosomal membrane being degraded by luminal acid hydrolases . The lysosomal mem - brane also actively mediates the fusion of lysosomes Glycocalyx The polysaccharide - based coating on the inner side of a lysosomal membrane that protects this organelle from digestion by lysosomal enzymes . Signals from the lysosome : a control centre for cellular clearance and energy metabolism Carmine Settembre 1 – 4 , Alessandro Fraldi 1 , Diego L . Medina 1 and Andrea Ballabio 1 – 4 Abstract | For a long time , lysosomes were considered merely to be cellular incinerators involved in the degradation and recycling of cellular waste . However , now there is compelling evidence indicating that lysosomes have a much broader function and that they are involved in fundamental processes such as secretion , plasma membrane repair , signalling and energy metabolism . Furthermore , the essential role of lysosomes in autophagic pathways puts these organelles at the crossroads of several cellular processes , with significant implications for health and disease . The identification of a master regulator , transcription factor EB ( TFEB ) , that regulates lysosomal biogenesis and autophagy has revealed how the lysosome adapts to environmental cues , such as starvation , and targeting TFEB may provide a novel therapeutic strategy for modulating lysosomal function in human disease . 1 Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine ( TIGEM ) , Via Pietro Castellino 111 , 80131 , Naples , Italy . 2 Department of Molecular and Human Genetics , Baylor College of Medicine , Houston , Texas , USA . 3 Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute , Texas Children’s Hospital , Houston , Texas , USA . 4 Medical Genetics , Department of Pediatrics , Federico II University , Via Pansini 5 , 80131 Naples , Italy . Correspondence to A . B . e - mail : ballabio @ tigem . it doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3565 R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 14 | MAY 2013 | 283 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology LYNUS Glycocalyx Lysosome membrane Traﬃcking and fusion machinery proteins ( for example , RABs and SNAREs ) Catabolic enzymes ( for example , HGSNAT ) Transporters ( for example , NPC1 , LAMP2A LAAT1 ) Structural proteins ( for example , LAMP1 ) Ion channels ( for example , CIC7 , MCOLN1 ) Lysosomal nutrient sensing machinery Hydrolases ( for example , sulfatases ) Activators ( for example , PSAP ) Autophagosomes Intracytoplasmic vacuoles that contain elements of the cytoplasm of a cell . They fuse with lysosomes , and the contents are subjected to enzymatic digestion . Danon disease An X - linked dominant disorder caused by mutations in the gene encoding lysosome - associated membrane protein 2 ( LAMP2 ) . It predominantly affects cardiac muscle . Niemann – Pick disease type C1 An autosomal recessive lipid storage disorder that is caused by mutation in the NPC1 ( Niemann Pick type C1 ) gene . It is characterized by progressive neurodegeneration . with other cellular structures , such as late endosomes , autophagosome s and the plasma membrane , as well as the transport of metabolites , ions and soluble substrates into and out of lysosomes . Lysosomal trafficking and fusion are mediate d by spe - cific sets of membrane - associated RAB GTPases 17 , 18 , 23 , 24 and SNARE proteins 25 – 27 . Of note , the ability of mini - mal ‘synthetic’ endosomes to fuse in vitro with purified early endosomes or with each other was reconstituted by using 17 recombinant human proteins , including specific RAB GTPases and SNAREs 28 . RAB5 and RAB7 are specifically involved in the tethering and dock - ing processes in endolysosomal membrane traffick ing pathways 23 , 24 . Furthermore , a reduction in RAB5 levels decreases the number of endosomes and lysosomes and blocks endocytosis 29 . A specific combinatorial set of SNAREs , including vesicle - associated mem - brane protein 7 ( VAMP7 ) , VAMP8 , VTI1B , syntaxin 7 and syntaxin 8 , forms the trans - complexes that drive lysosom e – endosome fusion and the homotypic fusion between endosomes 25 . Interestingly , recent studies revealed that SNAREs that are involved in the fusion between autophagosomes and endolysosomal vesicles , such as syntaxin 17 , also participate in autophagosome biogenesis 30 , 31 . The lysosomal lumen contains approximately 60 dif - ferent soluble hydrolases , which are active at acidic pH . These enzymes are the main players in the execution of multistep catabolic processes . They include mem - bers of protein families such as the sulphatases , glyco - sidases , peptidases , phosphatases , lipases and nucleases , which allow the lysosome to hydrolyse a vast repertoire of biological substrates , including glycosaminoglycans , sphingolipids , glycogen and proteins . The targeting of most lysosomal enzymes to lysosomes , as well as their ability to be secreted and taken up again by cells , is mediated by a mannose - 6 - phosphate modification that they undergo in the late Golgi compartments 14 , 32 . The ability of cells to take up lysosomal enzymes via the mannose - 6 - phosphate receptor ( MPR ) is the basis for enzyme replacement therapy for several lysosomal storage diseases ( LSDs ) 33 . A different targeting mecha - nism , which is mediated in part by the lysosomal recep - tor LIMP2 ( lysosome integral membrane protein 2 ; also known as SCARB2 ) , was recently identified for β - glucocerebrosidase 34 . Box 1 | The structure of the lysosome Lysosomes have a limiting membrane , which is composed of a single - lipid bilayer and integral and peripheral proteins , and an acidic lumen that contains soluble hydrolytic enzymes and activators 47 – 49 , 194 , 195 . A glycocalyx lines the internal lysosomal perimeter , protecting the membrane from the acidic environment of the lumen . Soluble enzymes are directly involved in the degradation of metabolites , whereas the lysosomal membrane segregates this catalytic potential and also actively participates in the maintenance of plasma membrane integrity , the establishment of the acidic pH of the lysosomal lumen , metabolite and ion transport , lysosomal trafficking and catalysis . Some key functional categories of lysosomal membrane proteins are shown ( see the figure ) . Trafficking and fusion machinery proteins comprise SNAREs and RABs . Structural proteins include lysosome - associated membrane protein 1 ( LAMP1 ) , which is the most abundant lysosomal membrane protein accounting for 50 % of total protein in this membrane . LAMP1 is mainly involved in lysosomal trafficking by mediating the attachment of lysosomes to the transport machinery 2 , 196 . The lysosomal nutrient sensing ( LYNUS ) machinery includes several protein complexes that interact on the lysosomal surface , and its role is to sense the nutrient content of the lysosome and signal the information to the nucleus ( see main text ) . An important component of the LYNUS machinery is the vacuolar ATPase ( v - ATPase ) , a large multimeric channel that uses the energy derived from ATP hydrolysis to transport protons across the lysosomal membrane in order to generate the acidic pH of the lysosomal lumen 197 , 198 . Several ion channels have been identified on the lysosomal membrane . The transient receptor potential ( TRP ) family member mucolipin 1 ( MCOLN1 ) is a non - selective cation channel 199 that is involved in Ca 2 + signalling during lysosomal fusion with other membranes , such as the plasma membrane 85 – 87 and autophagosomes 200 . A deficiency in MCOLN1 causes mucolipidosis type IV , a lysosomal storage disease 201 , 202 . CIC7 , a Cl – channel , contributes to lysosomal acidification and is involved in inherited osteopetrosis 60 , 61 , 203 . Transporters in the lysosomal membrane include LAMP2A , which mediates chaperone - mediated autophagy by binding cytosolic protein substrates on the lysosomal membrane so that they can be internalized and degraded 5 , 204 . Mutations of LAMP2A cause Danon disease , which is associated with the accumulation of autophagic vacuoles in muscle cells 205 . Niemann – Pick C1 protein 1 ( NPC1 ) is a lysosomal membrane protein involved in the export of cholesterol from the endolysosomal compartment , and it is mutated in Niemann – Pick disease type C1 ( REF . 206 ) . The recently identified lysosomal amino acid transporter 1 ( LAAT1 ) is involved in the transport of Lys and Arg across the lysosomal membrane and into the lysosome , and it has a crucial role in cellular amino acid homeostasis 207 . Enzymes on the lysosomal membrane include heparan - α glucosaminide N - acetyltransferase ( HGSNAT ) . This enzyme participates in the stepwise degradation of heparan sulphate 208 – 210 , and mutation of this protein causes mucopoly saccharidosis type IIIC . PSAP , prostate - specific acid phosphatase . R E V I E W S 284 | MAY 2013 | VOLUME 14 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology • Nutrient sensing and control of energy metabolism • Feedback control of lysosomal biogenesis Degradation and recycling of extracellular substrates • Specialized secretion • Plasma membrane repair Degradation and recycling of intracellular substrates Autophagosome Lysosome Lateendosome Nucleus Plasmamembrane DegradationSecretionSignalling The selective degradation of intra - lumenal mem - branes and lipids within lysosomes occurs in specialized intra - lysosomal vesicles . These vesicles contain a com - plex machinery composed of proteins that are involved in lipid degradation , such as water - soluble acid hydrolases and sphingolipid activator proteins ( SAPs ) 35 – 39 . Studying glycosphingolipid catabolism in patients with defects in this process was instrumental for the understandin g of this complex pathway 40 – 42 . Importantly , a number of non - lysosomal proteins modulate the functions of lysosome - resident proteins . Prominent examples of these are the two different types of MPRs , cation - independent MPR ( CI - MPR ) and cation - dependent MPR ( CD - MPR ) , which dynami - cally shuttle between the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) and late endosomes and are involved in the targeting of lysosomal enzymes to the lysosome 32 . Another example is sulphatase - modifying factor 1 ( SUMF1 ) , an endo - plasmic reticulum ( ER ) - resident protein that is respon - sible for a post - translational modification ( PTM ) , the conversion of a highly conserved Cys in the active site to α - formylglycine , which is required for the activation of all sulphatases 43 , 44 . Various methods have been used to purify lyso somes and analyse their proteome 45 – 49 . Some of these approaches are based on subcellular fractionations , whereas others are based on specific features of soluble lysosomal proteins , such as the mannose - 6 - phosphate modification of their carbohydrate moieties 49 . In these efforts , it has been difficult to distinguish between lysosome - resident pro - teins , which are constituents of the lyso somal machin - ery , and proteins that are delivered to the lysosome for degradation . Therefore , we are still far from the iden - tification and functional characterization of all lyso - somal proteins . On the basis of current data , a little over 100 bona fide lysosome - resident proteins have been identified ; ~ 70 of these are lysosomal matrix proteins and ~ 50 are lysosomal membrane proteins 48 . However , these numbers are likely to increase in the near future . Lysosome functions Lysosomal functions can be schematically divided into three main types : degradation , secretion and signalling ( FIG . 1 ) . Lysosome - mediated degradation . Similar to the trans - port of urban waste to incinerators , the collection and transport of cellular waste to lysosomes requires com - plex logistics . The cell has developed different routes for transporting extracellular and intracellular waste to the lysosome . Extracellular material reaches the lysosome mainly through endocytosis . The capture of extra - cellular material and integral membrane proteins occurs through specific endocytic mechanisms according to the nature of the cargo . Prominent examples of endocytosis are phagocytosis , macropinocytosis , clathrin - mediated endocytosis , caveolin - mediated endocytosis and clathrin - and caveolin - independent endocytosis 50 . Signalling receptors may undergo endocytosis through clathrin - mediated endocytosis 51 or clathrin - independent mecha - nisms 52 . After internalization , the receptors are routed to early endosomes 53 . From the endosomes , the receptors can either be recycled back to the plasma membrane to allow for repeated receptor activation or be sorted and targeted for lysosomal degradation , resulting in the termin ation of receptor signalling 54 – 56 . A known hallmark of endosome - to - lysosome matu - ration is the progressive decrease of the internal pH to ~ pH 5 in the mature lysosome 57 . This is crucial for the uptake of acid hydrolases by MPRs into the endosomal lumen and the recycling of receptors back to the Golgi network 15 . The generation and maintenance of the lyso - somal pH gradient requires the activity of a proton - pumping v - type ATPase , which uses the energy of ATP hydrolysis to pump protons into the lysosomal lumen 58 . Additional lysosomal membrane channels are thought to be involved in lysosomal acidification , such as the anion transporter chloride channel 7 ( ClC7 ) 59 – 62 and the catio n transporters mucolipin 1 ( MCOLN1 ; also known as TRPML1 ) and two pore calcium chann el 1 ( TPC1 ) and TCP2 ( REF . 62 ) , which mediate Ca 2 + and Na + release from the lysosome 62 – 65 , 106 . However , the role of each of these channels and the precise mechanisms underlying the complex regulation of lysosomal acidification and ion balance are still controversial and require further investigation . Intracellular materials reach the lysosome through the process of autophagy , a  self - eating  catabolic pathway that is used by cells to capture their own cytoplasmic components destined for degradation and recycling . Three types of autophagy have been identified : micro - autophagy ; chaperone - mediated autophagy ( CMA ) ; and macroautophagy . During microautophagy , cytosolic Figure 1 | Main functions of the lysosome and their relationship with key cellular processes . Lysosomes are involved in the degradation and recycling of intracellular material ( via autophagy ) and extracellular material ( via endocytosis ) . In these processes , lysosomes fuse with autophagosomes and with late endosomes , respectively . The resulting breakdown products are used to generate new cellular components and energy in response to the nutritional needs of the cell . Lysosomes also undergo Ca 2 + regulated exocytosis to secrete their content into the extracellular space and to repair damaged plasma membranes . Upon plasma membrane injury , lysosomes rapidly migrate to the damaged site and fuse with the plasma membrane to allow efficient resealing . More recently , lysosomes have been identified as signalling organelles that can sense nutrient availability and activate a lysosome - to - nucleus signalling pathway that mediates the starvation response and regulates energy metabolism . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 14 | MAY 2013 | 285 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Lysosome - related organelles ( LROs ) . Cell type - specific compartments that include melanosomes , lytic granules , major histocompatibility complex class II compartments , platelet - dense granules , basophil granules , azurophil granules and Drosophila melanogaster pigment granules . proteins are engulfed in the lysosome through the direct invagination of lysosomal or endosomal membranes 6 , 66 , 67 . In CMA , cytosolic proteins are transported into the lyso - somal lumen through chaperone - and receptor - mediated internalization , which requires the unfolding of proteins and their translocation via lysosome - associated mem - brane protein 2A ( LAMP2A ) 5 , 68 , 69 . Macroautophagy , herein referred to as autophagy , relies on the bio genesis of autophagosomes , which are double membrane - bound vesicles that sequester cytoplasmic material and then fuse with lysosomes . Thus , the role of all three types of autophagy in degradation and recycling processes is strictly dependent on lysosomal function . Autophagy is activated by a broad range of cellular stress - inducing conditions and it mediates the degra - dation of protein aggregates , oxidized lipids , damaged organelles and intracellular pathogens . The resulting breakdown products are used to generate new cellu - lar components and energy in response to the nutri - tional needs of the cell . The mechanisms underlying autophagy and its relevance both in health and disease have been extensively studied in the past decade and comprehensivel y described in recent reviews 70 , 71 . Lysosomal exocytosis . Lysosomes can secrete their content through a process called lysosomal exocytosis , which can be detected by the translocation of lysosomal membrane marker proteins ( for example , LAMP1 ) to the plasma membrane 7 , 8 , 72 . In this process , lysosomes fuse with the plasma membrane through a Ca 2 + - regulated mechanism that leads to a bulk release of the lyso somal content into the extracellular matrix 72 – 77 . Initially , lyso somal exocyto - sis was thought to be limited to  professional  secretory cells that contain a subset of specialized lysosome - related organelle s ( LROs ) 75 , but soon it was shown that any cell type can perform this function 72 . Lysosomal exocytosi s mediates several physiological processes , such as degran - ulation in cytotoxic T lymphocytes 78 , bone resorp - tion by osteoclasts 10 , parasite defence by mast cells and eosinophi ls 79 , 80 , melanocyte function in pigmentation 11 , platele t function in coagulation 81 and hydrolase release by spermato zoa during fertilization 82 . The molecular machinery mediating Ca 2 + - regulated exocytosis of conventional lysosomes includes the vesicle SNARE ( v - SNARE ) VAMP7 , the Ca 2 + senso r synapto tagmin VII ( SYTVII ) on lysosomes , the tar - get SNAREs ( t - SNAREs ) SNAP23 and syntaxin 4 on the plasma membrane 83 and several RAB proteins on the lysosomal surface 8 , 27 , 83 , 84 . Another important mediator of lyso somal exocytosis is the lysosomal membrane Ca 2 + channe l MCOLN1 ( REFS 85 – 87 ) . It was also pos - tulated that autophagy proteins may regulate lysosomal exo cytosis . For example , lipidation of the late autophago - some marker LC3 is required for the secretion of lyso - somal contents into the extracellular space , as this directs the lysosomes to fuse with the plasma membrane 88 – 90 . However , autophagosomes may not be mediating this process 89 . Lysosomal exocytosis is not only responsible for the secretion of lysosomal content , it also has a crucial role in plasma membrane repair . Plasma membrane injuries induce the rapid migration of lysosomes to the damaged site . Lysosomes then fuse to the plasma membrane and efficiently reseal the damaged sites 91 , 92 . This process is also important in defence mechanisms against bacterial infection 93 and has been implicated in a specific type of muscular dystrophy , which is characterized by a defect in muscle fibre repair 94 . Lysosomal exocytosis is transcriptionally regulated by TFEB , a master regulator of lysosomal biogenesis ( see below ) . TFEB induces both the docking and fusion of lysosomes with the plasma membrane by regu lating the expression of certain genes , the protein prod - ucts of which increase lysosomal dynamics and cause a MCOLN1 - mediated increase in intracellular Ca 2 + ( REF . 86 ) . Interestingly , TFEB - mediated regulation of lysosomal exocytosis has an important role in osteoclast differentiation and bone resorption 95 . Signalling from lysosomes . It has become evident that the lysosome plays an important part in nutrient sens - ing and in signalling pathways that are involved in cell metabolism and growth . Remarkably , the kinase complex mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 ( mTORC1 ) , a master controller of cell and organism growth 96 , exerts its activity on the lysosomal surface 97 . The lyso - somal localization of mTORC1 suggests a mechanistic co - regulation between cell growth and cell catabolism . Growth factors , hormones , amino acids , glucose , oxygen and stress are the major activators of mTORC1 , which in turn positively regulates proteins , mRNAs , lipid bio - synthesis and ATP production 96 , 98 . In this way , mTORC1 regulates the balance between biosynthetic and catabolic states . When nutrients are present , mTORC1 directly phosphorylates and suppresses the activity of the kinase complex ULK1 – ATG13 – FIP200 ( unc - 51 - like kinase 1 – autophagy - related 13 – focal adhesion kinase family - interacting protein of 200 kDa 99 – 101 ) , which is required to induce autophagosome biogenesis 102 , 103 . The inhibi - tion of mTORC1 , by either starvation or drugs , leads to the activation of ULK1 – ATG13 – FIP200 and autophagy . Thus , the level of cellular autophagy inversely corre - lates with mTORC1 activity , and the pharmacological inhibitio n of mTORC1 potently stimulates autophagy . It was recently shown that the level of amino acids inside the lysosomal lumen controls mTORC1 docking on the lysosomal surface , which is a prerequisite for its activity , and that amino acids must accumulate in the lysosomal lumen in order for mTORC1 to bind and become activated 104 . These observations support the idea that mTORC1 activity is dependent on the lysosome and explains why mTORC1 is reactivated upon the lysosomal degradation of autophagic substrates that occurs dur - ing starvation 105 . A recent study demonstrated that an endolysosomal ATP - sensitive Na + - permeable channel , lysoNa ATP , which is located on the lysosomal membrane , also interacts with mTORC1 and participates in nutrient sensing . During starvation , mTORC1 is released from the lysosomal surface , and lysoNa ATP is constitutively open . Thus , lysoNa ATP regulates lysosomal pH stability and amino acid homeostasis by responding to ATP lev - els and controlling the lysosomal membrane potential 106 . R E V I E W S 286 | MAY 2013 | VOLUME 14 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved RAPTOR mTORmLST8 DEPTOR mTORC1 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology RAGA / B RAGC / D Ragulator RHEB v - ATPase LYNUS machinery Lysosome Lysosome LYNUS TFEBP Lysosome LYNUS T F E B TFEB TFEB TFEB PGC1 α PPAR α TFEB Lysosomal and autophagy genes Nucleus TFEB autoregulatoryloop Autophagosome Autolysosome Lipophagy Lysosome Lipid droplets Peroxisome Free fatty acids Mitochondrion Starvation , lysosomal stress Fatty acid β - oxidation LysoNa ATP 1 2 3 4 6 5 Thus , a complex signalling machinery , which involves mTORC1 as well as additional protein complexes , is located on the lysosomal surface . This machinery , herein referred to as LYNUS ( lysosome nutrient sensing ) , responds to the lysosomal amino acid content and signals the information both to the cytoplasm and the nucleus . The main components of the LYNUS machinery are illustrated in FIG . 2 . The involvement of the lysosome in nutrient sensing is a new concept that expands our view of this organelle from simply being an effector of cellular clearance to being a sensor and regulator of various cellular functions , including cell cycle progression , growth , macromolecule biosynthesis and autophagy 107 . The recent discovery of a starvation - induced lysosome - to - nucleus signalling mechanism ( see below ) further supports this concept 108 . Interestingly , autophagic lysosomal reformation ( ALR ) , a recently described evolutionarily conserved process by which nascent lysosomes are formed from autolysosomal membranes , also requires mTORC1 reactivation during prolonged starvation 105 , 109 , 110 . Furthermore , prolonged starvation also controls lysosomal reformation through the kinase activity of phosphatidylinosit ol 4 - kinase IIIβ ( PI4KIIIβ ) 21 . Regulation of lysosome function The recent discovery of a  lysosomal gene network  and of its master regulator TFEB has revealed that lyso - somal function can be coordinated to respond and adapt to environmental cues . The central role of TFEB in regulating lysosomal biogenesis , lysosome - to - nucleus signallin g and lipid catabolism is discussed below . TFEB regulates lysosomal biogenesis and cellular clear - ance . Lysosome - mediated cellular clearance processes require the concerted action of hydrolases , the acidifica - tion machinery and membrane proteins . The expression and activity of these components must be coordinated Figure 2 | Model of TFEB regulation and function during starvation . This model illustrates how the activity of transcription factor EB ( TFEB ) is induced by limited nutrient availability and mediates the starvation response by regulating lipid catabolism . In the presence of sufficient nutrients , TFEB interacts with the lysosome nutrient sensing ( LYNUS ) machinery , which senses lysosomal nutrient levels via the vacuolar ATPase ( v - ATPase ) complex , and is phosphorylated by mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 ( mTORC1 ) on the lysosomal surface ( 1 ) . This keeps TFEB inactive by cytosolic sequestration . During starvation , mTORC1 is released from the LYNUS machinery and becomes inactive . Thus , TFEB can no longer be phosphorylated by mTORC1 and translocates to the nucleus , where it induces its own transcription ( 2 ) . Therefore , starvation regulates TFEB activity through a dual mechanism that involves a post - translational modification ( that is , phosphorylation ) and a transcriptional autoregulatory loop . Once in the nucleus , TFEB regulates the expression of genes involved in the lysosomal – autophagy pathway ( 3 ) , as well as of PPAR α ( peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor - α ) and PGC1 α ( PPAR γ co - activator 1 α ) and their target genes ( 4 ) . In this way , TFEB controls the starvation response by activating both lipophagy ( 5 ) and fatty acid β - oxidation ( 6 ) . The insert shows the main components of the LYNUS machinery . mTORC1 , which includes regulatory proteins associated with mTOR , such as RAPTOR ( regulatory - associated protein of mTOR ) , mLST8 ( mammalian lethal with SEC13 protein ) and DEPTOR ( DEP domain - containing mTOR - interacting protein ) 211 , physically interacts with RAG GTPases ( RAGA or RAGB and RAGC or RAGD ) , which activate mTORC1 on the lysosomal surface 212 . A complex known as Ragulator mediates the activation and docking of RAG GTPases to the lysosomal membrane 97 , 213 . The small GTPase RAS homologue enriched in brain ( RHEB ) is also involved in the growth factor - mediated activation of mTORC1 ( REFS 214 , 215 ) . The v - ATPase complex functions in amino acid sensing and mediates amino acid - sensitive interactions between RAG GTPases and Ragulator , which is the initial step in lysosomal signalling 104 . The endolysosomal ATP - sensitive Na + - permeable channel ( lysoNa ATP ) , which comprises the subunits two pore calcium channel 1 ( TPC1 ) and TPC2 , is located on the lysosomal membrane , and it has recently been shown to interact with mTORC1 and to participate in nutrient sensing 106 . The nature of the interaction between lysoNa ATP and mTORC1 is unknown but seems to be independent form other components of the LYNUS machinery as well as TFEB and its interacting proteins ( see main text ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 14 | MAY 2013 | 287 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology In vivo perturbations ( genetic , environmental , drugs ) • Knockout • Drug • RNAi • Overexpression Learningalgorithm Measure response ( microarrays ) Learn Sample Computational model Lysosomal genes are highly co - expressed Lysosomal gene promoters contain E - boxes 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 0 1 2 B i t s 3 ′ 5 ′ G G G T C A C G T G A C C C Promoter analysis of lysosomal genes Co - expression analysis of lysosomal genes using publicly available microarray data TFEB binds to speciﬁc E - boxes ( CLEAR sites ) The CLEAR gene network Regulation of lysosomal gene expression to allow optimal lysosomal function in different physio - logical and pathological conditions , such as growth , starvation , infection and the pathological accumulation of lysosomal substrates . This concept of lysosomal adap - tation has emerged only recently , as little attention was given to the study of the transcriptional regulation of the genes encoding lysosomal proteins . The recent dis - covery of a lysosomal gene network — the coordinated lysosomal expression and regulation ( CLEAR ) network — and of its master regulator TFEB ( a member of the MITF ( microphthalmia - associated transcription factor ) subfamily of transcription factors 111 that was previously implicated in a specific type of chromosomal trans - location associated with renal carcinoma 112 ) provides experimental evidence that lysosomal function is glob - ally controlled 12 . The systems biology approach used to identify the CLEAR network is summarized in BOX 2 . Consistent with its role as a modulator of the CLEAR network , TFEB positively regulates the expression of lysosomal genes , controls the number of lysosomes and promotes the ability of cells to degrade lysosomal substrates 12 , 113 . Further unbiased genomic and expres - sion analyses , together with deep sequencing of TFEB chromatin - immunoprecipitates , allowed a more detailed analysis of the CLEAR network and revealed that TFEB is a central regulator of cellular degradative pathways 114 . Specifically , it activates the transcription of genes that encode proteins involved in several aspects of cellular clearance , such as lysosomal biogenesis , autophagy , exocytosis , endocytosis and additional lysosome - associate d processes , such as phagocytosis , the immune response and lipid catabolism . Interestingly , many non - lysosoma l proteins involved in the degradation of known autophagy substrates were also found to be members of this network 114 . These observations suggested that TFEB also regulates autophagy 114 . Indeed , TFEB over - expression in cultured cells significantly increased the number of autophagosomes and enhanced lysosome – autophagosome fusion and the degradation of long - lived proteins that are known autophagy substrates 13 . Consistently , viral - mediated overexpression of TFEB in the liver induced autophagy 13 . Thus , although the deliv - ery of autophagy substrates to the lysosome and their degradation by lysosomal enzymes are distinct cellular processes , they are mechanistically linked by a common transcriptional regulatory programme 13 , 115 . Other examples of transcription factors that regu - late autophagy have been reported 116 – 123 . The forkhead box O ( FOXO ) transcription factor family ( including FOXO1 , FOXO3 , FOXO4 and FOXO6 ) is negatively regulated by the insulin pathway in an AKT - dependent manner . FOXO proteins are well conserved and have Box 2 | The identification of the CLEAR gene network Gene networks control several aspects of cellular function and metabolism , such as the coordination of the cellular response to environmental conditions . In specialized organelles , this coordination is facilitated by compartmentalization . A systems biology approach was used to test the hypothesis that lysosomal genes are co - expressed , regulated by common factors and able to respond to similar environmental cues ( see the figure ) . The expression behaviour of genes encoding lysosomal proteins was analysed using publicly available microarray data . This analysis revealed that lysosomal genes have a statistically significant tendency to be co - expressed in various different tissues and cell types as well as under different conditions 12 . Subsequently , pattern discovery analysis revealed the presence of a palindromic 10 - base site in the promoters of known lysosomal genes . This sequence was previously identified as a specific version of a known target site for basic - helix – loop – helix ( bHLH ) transcription factors , also known as an E - box . Thus , these two independent approaches , namely co - expression and promoter analyses , identified a new gene network which was named CLEAR ( coordinated lysosomal expression and regulation ) . Further studies demonstrated that transcription factor EB ( TFEB ) , which belongs to the MITF ( microphthalmia - associated transcription factor ) subfamily of bHLH transcription factors , binds to CLEAR target sites in the promoters of lysosomal genes and positively regulates their expression , acting as a master regulator of the CLEAR network 12 . Bits , universal measurement of sequence conservation . R E V I E W S 288 | MAY 2013 | VOLUME 14 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Wolman’s disease An early - onset fulminant disorder of infancy with substantial infiltration of several organs , including the spleen and the liver , by macrophages filled with cholesteryl esters and triglycerides . It is caused by mutations in the gene encoding lipase A . a crucial role in many cellular processes , including in the regulation of autophagy 120 , 124 . FOXO3 is activated during fasting and mediates the transcription of many genes that directly and indirectly regulate autophagy induction 121 , 122 . Thus , FOXO3 regulation and func - tion are very similar to those of TFEB , suggesting pos - sible interactions between the two pathways . Indeed , FOXO3A overexpression increases cellular Gln levels and inhibits mTORC1 activity , leading to TFEB activa - tion and the coordinated transcriptional activation of lysosomal biogenesis and autophagy 119 . Another trans - cription factor that regulates autophagy is ZKSCAN3 , which belongs to the family of zinc - fing er transcription factors that contain KRAB and SCAN domains and has recently been identified as a repressor of autophagy 123 . When ZKSCAN3 is silenced , cellular senescence and autophagy are promoted . By contrast , when ZKSCAN3 is overexpressed , autophagy is suppressed in diverse cel - lular models . ZKSCAN3 was also shown to negatively regulate the expression of genes involved in autophagy and lysosome biogenesis and function . Interestingly , starvation induces the cytoplasmic accumulation of ZKSCAN3 and thereby inhibits its activity . Conversely , nutrient availability promotes ZKSCAN3 nuclear translocation in an mTOR - dependent manner 123 . In conclusion , it seems that TFEB and ZKSCAN3 have opposing functions in regulating lysosome biogenesis and autophagy in response to cellular needs . It will be interesting to determine whether these two transcription factors work in conjunction with each other . TFEB conveys signals from the lysosome to the nucleus . Transcriptional mechanisms that control crucial cell ular functions should respond to environmental cues . Under basal conditions in most cell types , TFEB is located in the cytoplasm . However , under specific conditions , such as starvation or lysosomal dysfunction , TFEB rapidly translocates to the nucleus 12 , 13 . This process is controlled by the TFEB phosphorylation status ; phosphorylated TFEB is located predominantly in the cytoplasm , whereas the dephosphorylated form is found in the nucleus 13 . Phosphoproteomic studies identified at least ten differ - ent phosphorylation sites in the TFEB protein , suggesting a complex regulatory mechanism 125 . At least three dif - ferent kinases have been shown to phosphorylate TFEB : ERK2 ( REFS 13 , 126 ) ; mTORC1 ( REFS 108 , 126 – 129 ) , and protein kinase Cβ ( PKCβ ) 95 . Phosphorylation of Ser142 by ERK2 and of both Ser142 and Ser211 by mTORC1 is crucial in determining the subcellular localization of TFEB . Mutation of either or both of these Ser residues to Ala results in the constitutive nuclear localization of TFEB 13 , 108 , 127 , 129 . By contrast , during osteoclast differentia - tion , PKCβ - induced phosphorylation of three Ser resi - dues located in the final 15 carboxy - terminal amino acids of TFEB stabilizes the protein and increases its activity 95 . Interestingly , cytoplasmic TFEB is located both in the cytosol and on the lysosomal surface , where it interacts with mTORC1 and the LYNUS machinery 108 , 130 ( FIG . 2 ) . This observation suggests a mechanism by which the lysosome regulates its own biogenesis by controlling TFEB subcellular localization . Cellular conditions that lead to mTORC1 inactivation , such as stress , starvation and lysosomal inhibition , induce TFEB nuclear trans - location and thus activate the lysosomal system 108 , 127 , 129 . In addition , several isoforms of the 14 - 3 - 3 protein family have an important role in controlling TFEB sub cellular localization by retaining phosphorylated TFEB in the cytoplasm 127 , 129 . More recently , TFEB was shown to interact with active RAG GTPases 130 . This interaction promotes the lysosomal localization of TFEB and its mTORC1 - dependent phosphorylation 130 . Interestingly , other members of the basic - helix – loop – helix ( bHLH ) family of transcription factors , such as MITF and TFE3 , the sequences of which are closely related to TFEB , seem to be regulated by a similar mechanism 129 , 130 . It will be interesting to investigate whether other additional mTOR - independent mechanisms also regulate the nuclear translocation of TFEB . Recent data indicate that cellular nutrient levels regu - late TFEB also at the transcriptional level . The absence of serum and amino acids from the cell culture medium induces TFEB expression , whereas their re - addition in activates this transcription factor . Similarly , depriv - ing mice of food for 24 hours induces TFEB expression in multiple tissues 131 . Interestingly , the trans criptional response of TFEB to nutrients is mediated by an auto - regulatory feedback loop in which TFEB binds to its own promoter in a starvation - dependent manner and induces its own expression 131 . Thus , the regulation of TFEB activity by nutrients involves a rapid , p hosphorylation - dependent post - transcriptional switch , which is respons ible for the nuclear translocation of TFEB , and a transcriptional autoregulatory component , which allows for a slower , more sustained response . This complex regulation mediates the cellular starvation response by inducing lipid catabolism 131 ( see below ) . In conclusion , TFEB participates in a lysosome - to - nucleus signalling mechanism that conveys infor - mation on the lysosomal status to the nucleus to trigger a transcriptional response . This crosstalk between the lysosome and the nucleus controls cellular clearance and energy metabolism . A proposed model of TFEB regulatio n by nutrients is illustrated in FIG . 2 . TFEB regulates lipid catabolism . Autophagy has a cen - tral role in lipid metabolism by shuttling lipid droplets to lysosomes , where they are hydrolysed into free fatty acids ( FFAs ) and glycerol . This process , called macro - lipophagy 132 , 133 , indicates the presence of a tight rela - tionship between intracellular lipid metabolism and lysosomes . Interestingly , excessive lipid overload may in turn inhibit autophagy . This could be caused by either an alteration of the composition of the lysosomal mem - brane , rendering it less prone to fusion with autophago - somes 134 , 135 , or by the downregulation of autophagy genes 136 . Restoring liver autophagy ameliorates the metabolic phenotype of genetically induced obese mice ( Ob / Ob ) , suggesting that enhancing lysosomal function may be a possible therapeutic strategy for the treatment of obesity 136 . Interestingly , lysosomal dysfunction was associated with an altered energy balance in mouse models of LSDs 137 . In addition , in Wolman’s disease , the R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 14 | MAY 2013 | 289 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Multiple sulphatase deficiency ( MSD ) . An autosomal recessive inherited disease that is caused by mutations in the sulphatase - modifying factor 1 ( SUMF1 ) gene . Mucopolysaccharidosis ( MPS ) . A metabolic disorder that is caused by the absence or malfunctioning of lysosomal enzymes needed to break down molecules . deficiency of lysosomal acid lipase leads to a severe intracellular fat accumulation 138 . These studies suggest that the regulation of the lyso - somal and autophagic pathways may have an effect on cell ular lipid metabolism . Indeed , TFEB was found to regulate liver lipid metabolism 131 . Transcriptome analysis in the mouse liver after viral - mediated TFEB over expression revealed that this transcription factor positively regulates the expression of genes involved in several steps of lipid breakdown , such as lipophagy , fatty acid oxidation and ketogenesis . Interestingly , PPAR α ( peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor - α ) and PGC1 α ( PPARγ co - activato r 1α ) , which are key regula - tors of lipid metabolism in response to starvation 131 , 139 , are significantly induced by TFEB . In addition , TFEB was shown to directly bind to the PGC1 α promoter in a starvation - sensitive manner 131 . Remarkably , whereas liver - specific TFEB knockout caused defective lipid degradation during starvation , TFEB overexpression enhanced liver fat catabolism and prevented diet - induced obesity 131 . Thus , TFEB controls the cellular response to nutrient levels and induces a meta - bolic switch that allows the organism to generate energy from stored lipids . These observations shed new light on the role of the lysosome in cellular energy metabolism and the mechanisms underlying obesity and metabolic syndrome . A proposed model for the role of TFEB in lipid catabolism is illustrated in FIG . 2 . TFEB regulation and function are evolutionarily con - served . The Caenorhabditis elegans genome encodes a single homologue of TFEB , HLH - 30 , which is a trans - cription factor that recognizes a DNA motif similar to the CLEAR motif and drives the transcription of metabolic genes 140 . HLH - 30 acts in a similar manner to TFEB dur - ing C . elegans starvation . Hlh‑30 mRNA progressively accumulates during starvation and rapidly decreases after the re - addition of food , as is the case with mammalian TFEB 131 , 141 . HLH - 30 also responds to starvation in a man - ner similar to its human counterpart , as it can be detected mainly in the cytoplasm of well - fed C . elegans and pre - dominantly in the nucleus of fasting animals 141 . The autoregulatory loop that regulates TFEB transcription is conserved in C . elegans 131 . Interestingly , HLH - 30 activity is required to mobilize cytosolic lipids in fasting nema - todes . Starved hlh‑30 mutants failed to mobilize lipids as promptly as wild - type animals 131 , 141 , indicating that HLH - 30 is required for C . elegans to efficiently use lipid stores during periods of starvation . HLH - 30 is essential for the induction of lipid catabolism genes such as lipase 2 , lipase 3 and lipase 5 during fasting 141 , and the induction of these genes is greatly compromised in starved nema - todes when hlh‑30 is deleted 131 . Notably , starved hlh‑30 mutants fail to mobilize their lipid stores due to a severe transcriptional response defect . In wild - type C . elegans , starvation results in lifespan extension 142 . However , loss of hlh‑30 was shown to result in the abrogation of starvation - induced lifespan exten - sion 131 , 141 , suggesting an important role for HLH - 30 ( and possibly TFEB ) in longevity . Consistent with this , nematodes that are mutant for daf‑2 , which encodes the insulin - like growth factor 1 ( IGF - 1 ) receptor , have an increased lifespan , and it has been shown that they exhibit upregulated autophagy 143 . In conclusion , HLH - 30 and mouse TFEB share evolutionarily conserved functions in the adaptation of organisms to starvation . As observed for mammalian TFEB , hlh‑30 expression is autoregulated , required for lipid mobilization and is essential for the starvation response . The C . elegans model will be very useful for studying , in more detail , the potential role of TFEB in cell survival and ageing in different conditions , considering that TFEB total loss of function is embryonic lethal in mice 144 . The striking conservation of TFEB func - tion in C . elegans suggests that this regulatory mecha - nism evolved early to facilitate organismal adaptation to challengin g nutritional conditions 131 , 141 . Lysosomal dysfunction and human disease Lysosomal dysfunction has been associated with several human diseases , as well as with the process of ageing , which may be associated with a decline in lysosomal function and a progressive accumulation of intra cellular material ( for example , lipofuscin and ubiquitin ) 145 . Indeed , enhancement of the autophagic—lysosomal pathway seems to be an important determinant of the anti - ageing effect of caloric restriction 146 . The identi - fication of factors that regulate lysosomal biogenesis and function , such as TFEB , should pave the way to the development of novel therapeutics for diseases in which lysosoma l dysfunction is aberrant . Lysosomal dysfunction in LSDs and neurodegenerativ e diseases . For more than three centuries , it has been known that genetic defects in specific lysosomal components lead to the accumulation of substrates that are not degraded in the lysosomal lumen , followed by progressive lysosomal dysfunction in several tissues and organs . These disorders are known as LSDs . The classification of LSDs and their clinical features has been reviewed in detail in several recent articles 147 – 152 . Although these diseases were among the first for which both the biochemical and the molecular basis were recognized , the mechanisms by which the stor - age of material that has not been degraded in lysosomes translates into cellular and tissue dysfunction and clini - cal symptoms have yet to be fully elucidated . The main mechanisms that have been identified so far are summa - rized in BOX 3 . A global impairment of lysosomal func - tion has an important role in the pathogenesis of several LSDs , because a deficiency in individual lysosomal pro - teins can have broad consequences on the basic functions of lysosomes 147 . In particular , several studies have dem - onstrated an impairment of the autophagic pathway in LSDs 147 , 153 – 157 . This results in the secondary accumulation of autophagy substrates , such as dysfunctional mitochon - dria and polyubiquitylated proteins , which have a crucial role in disease pathogenesis 157 . A block of autophagy in LSDs may be caused by a defect in the fusion between lysosomes and autophagosomes , as observed in multiple sulphatase deficiency ( MSD ) and mucopolysaccharidosis type IIIA ( MPSIIIA ) , which may be caused by abnorm - alities in membrane lipid composition and SNARE protei n distribution 156 . R E V I E W S 290 | MAY 2013 | VOLUME 14 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Mutations of lysosomal hydrolases , lysosomal membrane proteins or non - lysosomal proteins Primary storage ( for example , GAGs , glycogen ) Secondary storage ( for example , lipids ) Lysosomal dysfunction Pathogeniccascades • Ca 2 + defects • Impaired signalling • Lysosomal membrane permeabilization Autophagy impairment Tertiary storage ( cytosolic autophagic substrates ) Pathogeniccascades Gaucher’s disease An autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder due to the deficient activity of β - glucocerebrosidase . Current therapeutic strategies for LSDs are aimed at either restoring or replacing the activity of defective lyso - somal enzymes , and they involve molecular chaperones , enzyme replacement or viral - mediated gene therapy 158 . Inhibition of substrate synthesis is another available thera peutic option for some LSDs 158 . These strategies , however , have limitations , such as the difficulty of tar - geting the enzyme , or the gene , to the required sites in the body . For instance , a major hurdle for delivering therapies to the brain is the difficulty that these enzymes encoun - ter in crossing the blood – brain barrier . Considering that LSDs include over 60 different diseases and that in most cases each therapy is strictly disease - specific , the over - all costs of preclinical studies and clinical trials will be extremely high . Accumulating evidence indicates that lysosomal and autophagy dysfunction is one of the main mechanisms underlying common neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson’s disease , Alzheimer’s disease and Huntington’s disease 159 , 160 ( FIG . 3 ) . Mutated aggregate - prone protein s that cause neurodegenerative diseases , such as expanded huntingtin ( HTT ) in Huntington’s disease and mutated α - synuclein in Parkinson’s disease , are cleared by boosting the lysosomal – autophagic pathway 161 – 163 . In addition , aggregate - prone proteins may in turn affect the efficiency of autophagy by inhibiting cargo recognitio n by autophagosomes 164 , 165 . Mutations in genes encoding essential components of the endolysosomal—autophagic pathway have also been described in several neurodegenerative diseases . A significant number of patients with Parkinson’s diseas e , particularly among Ashkenazi Jews 166 , are hetero zygous for mutations in the gene encoding the lysosomal enzyme β - glucocerebrosidase 167 . Homozygous muta - tions in the same gene cause Gaucher’s disease , a neuro - degenerative LSD 168 . It has been proposed that lower levels of β - glucocerebrosidase lead to an increased accumulation of glucosylceramide in the lysosome , and this in turn accelerates the synthesis and stabilization of soluble α - synuclein oligomers that eventually convert into amyloid fibrils . Furthermore , the accumulation of α - synuclein also blocks the trafficking of newly synthe - sized β - glucocerebrosidase to the lysosome and thus further amplifies glucosylceramide accumulation 169 . In addition , mutations in ATPase type 13A2 ( ATP13A2 ) , a component of the lysosomal acidification machinery , were found in patients with hereditary parkinsonism 170 and are associated with lysosomal dysfunction , defective Box 3 | Mechanisms of lysosomal storage diseases ( LSDs ) LSDs are a group of rare and recessively inherited metabolic dysfunctions with an overall incidence of 1 in 5000 . LSDs are caused by mutations of genes encoding proteins that localize to the lysosomal lumen , lysosomal membrane or other cellular compartments that contribute to lysosomal function . These disorders are characterized by the progressive accumulation of material that has not been degraded in the lysosomes of most cells and tissues . Approximately 60 different types of LSDs have been recognized . Historically , LSDs have been classified on the basis of the type of material that accumulates in the lysosomes , such as mucopolysaccharides , sphingolipids , glycoproteins , glycogen and lipofuscins . LSDs often show a multisystemic phenotype that is associated with severe neurodegeneration , mental decline , cognitive problems and behavioural abnormalities . Other tissues that are commonly affected are bone and muscle . Cell and tissue pathology are the result of a complex series of pathogenic cascades that occur downstream of lysosomal dysfunction . The figure illustrates the main steps underlying LSD pathogenesis . Mutations in genes that are important for lysosomal function result in the accumulation of specific substrates that have not been degraded in the lysosome ( primary storage ) . This leads to the accumulation of additional lysosomal substrates ( secondary storage ) due to a blockage in lysosomal trafficking . Excessive lysosomal storage has a broad impact on lysosomal function by causing defects in Ca 2 + homeostasis , signalling abnormalities and lysosomal membrane permeabilization . In addition , lysosomal dysfunction is associated with autophagy impairment , due to defective fusion between lysosomes and autophagosomes . This causes the accumulation of autophagic substrates such as aggregate - prone proteins and dysfunctional mitochondria ( tertiary storage ) , which contributes to neurodegeneration . GAGs , glycosaminoglycans . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 14 | MAY 2013 | 291 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Mutation of genes involved in the endolysosomal pathway ATP13A2 ( PD ) CATD ( AD ) GBA ( PD ) PSEN1 / 2 ( AD ) VPS35 ( PD ) Ageing Mutation of genes encoding aggregate - prone proteins SNCA ( PD ) APP ( AD ) HTT ( HD ) MAPT ( PD / AD ) Gain of function Loss of function Lysosomal function and autophagy Enhanced protein aggregation ( α - synuclein , HTT , A β - peptides and Tau ) Defective cellular clearance and accumulation of neurotoxic proteins Neurodegeneration PARKIN ( PD ) PINK ( PD ) CHMP2B ( FTD ) RAB7 ( CMT2B ) WDR45 ( SENDA ) Fronto - temporal dementia A disorder associated with fronto - temporal lobar degeneration . Charcot – Marie – Tooth type 2B Autosomal dominant peripheral sensory neuropathy due to mutations in the late endosomal small GTPase RAB7 . Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis A clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders that are characterized by the intracellular accumulation of autofluorescent lipopigment storage material . Pompe’s disease An autosomal recessive inherited disease , also known as glycogen storage disease II . This prototypic lysosomal storage disease is caused by mutations in the gene encoding acid α - 1 , 4 - glucosidase . clearance of autophagosomes and accumulation of α - synuclein 171 . Similarly , mutations in the genes encod - ing PINK ( PTEN - induced putative kinase ) and PARKIN ( Parkinson’s disease protein ) are associated with the defective clearance of mitochondria via an organel le - specific type of autophagy known as mitophagy , lead - ing to Parkinson’s disease 172 – 175 . Parkinson’s disease was also observed in patients carrying mutations in the VPS35 ( vacuolar protein sorting 35 ) , which encodes an endosomal protein involved in the retrograde transport between endosomes and the TGN 176 , 177 . Lysosomal and autophagy dysfunction have also been identified in patients with Alzheimer’s disease car - rying mutations in presenilin 1 ( PSEN1 ) 178 . At least two different mechanisms , one involving a defect in lyso - somal acidification machinery 178 and the other a defect in lysosomal Ca + 2 homeostasis 179 , have been proposed to explain lysosomal dysfunction in these patients . Additional examples of neurodegenerative diseases that are caused by mutations of proteins involved in endo - some and lysosome maturation include fronto - temporal dementia and Charcot – Marie – Tooth type 2B , which are due to mutations in charged multivesicular body pro - tein 2B ( CHMP2B ) 180 and RAB7 ( REF . 181 ) , respectively . Of note , a mutation in the autophagic protein WD repeat domain 45 ( WDR45 ) has been recently associated with SENDA ( static encephalopathy of childhood with neuro - degeneration in adulthood ) , a neurodegenerative disease characterized by iron accumulation in the brain 182 . TFEB activation as a potential therapy . The similarities between the mechanisms that lead to LSDs and common neurodegenerative diseases suggest that therapeutic strat - egies aimed at rescuing and / or enhancing lysosomal and autophagic function may have an impact on both types of diseases . Several attempts have been made to treat animal models of neurodegenerative diseases by enhancing the lysosomal—autophagic pathway 160 , 183 – 189 . An appealing therapeutic perspective , which has become available since the recent discovery of TFEB , would be to enhance cell - ular clearance by inducing TFEB function . Preliminary evidence showed that cells with enhanced TFEB levels dis - played a faster rate of glycosaminoglycans ( GAGs ) clear - ance compared with control cells 12 . TFEB over expression also resulted in a striking reduction of GAGs and cellular vacuolization in glia - differentiated neuronal stem cells ( NSCs ) that were isolated from mouse models of MSD and MPSIIIA , two severe types of LSD 86 . Similar results were obtained using this approach in cells from patients with other types of LSDs and / or the respective mouse models , including neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis type 3 ( due to muta - tions of the CLN3 gene ; also known as Batten disease ) and Pompe’s disease 86 . In all cases , TFEB overexpression led to the clearance of the storage material within cells . TFEB - mediated cellular clearance was also observed in vivo in mouse models of MSD and Pompe’s disease upon viral - mediated TFEB gene transfer 86 , 190 . TFEB overexpression in a mouse model of Pompe’s diseas e reduced glycogen load and lysosomal size , improved autophagosome pro - cessing and alleviated the accumulation of autophagic vacuoles in muscle from affected mice . Interestingly , the clearance effect of TFEB was found to be dependent on the autophagy pathway , and in the muscl e , TFEB was shown to induce exocytosis of autophagolysosomes ( also known as autolysosomes ) via their fusion with the plasma membrane 190 . Notably , TFEB was also used as a tool to promote cellular clearance in common neurodegenera - tive diseases . TFEB gene delivery in a mouse model of Parkinson’s disease ameliorated tissue pathology 191 . In a recent study , TFEB was identified as the main mediator of the ability of PGC1α to promote cell ular clearance and to decrease neurotoxicity in a mouse model of Huntington’s disease 192 . Finally , TFEB overexpression in the liver of mice carrying a mutated form of α1 - antitrypsin resulted in the clearance of this mutated protein and rescued the liver fibrosis phenotype 193 . The mechanism by which TFEB promotes the clear - ance of storage material needs to be further elucidated . TFEB induction rescues lysosomal storage in LSDs in spite of a complete deficiency of one or more lysosomal enzymes . A prevailing mechanism in this case may be the activation of lysosomal exocytosis , by which the stored material may be secreted from cells upon TFEB over - expression . However , in general , it is possible that TFEB - mediated cellular clearance is the result of the combined effects of lysosomal biogenesis , autophagy and lysosomal exocytosis ( FIG . 4 ) . The possibility of pharmacologically Figure 3 | Defective cellular clearance in neurodegenerative diseases . Defective cellular clearance , leading to neurodegeneration , can result from two different mechanisms . First , loss - of - function mutations of genes involved in the lysosomal – autophagic pathway ( for example , ATP13A2 ( ATPase type 13A2 ) , CATD ( cathepsin D ) , GBA ( beta - glucosidase , acid ) , PSEN1 ( presenilin 1 ) , PSEN2 , VPS35 ( vacuolar protein sorting 35 ) , PARKIN ( Parkinson’s disease protein ) , PINK ( PTEN - induced putative kinase ) , CHMP2B ( charged multivesicular body protein 2B ) , RAB7 and WDR45 ( WD repeat 45 ) ) can affect cellular degradation and recycling processes . Second , gain - of - function mutations of aggregate - prone proteins ( for example , SNCA ( alpha - synuclein ) , APP ( amyloid precursor protein ) , HTT ( huntingtin ) and MAPT ( microtubule - associated protein TAU ) may lead to enhanced protein aggregation and impairment of lysosomal – autophagic pathways . In addition , a global decrease of lysosomal – autophagy function has been observed during ageing and may contribute to an impairment of cellular clearance . Ultimately , and regardless of the mechanism involved , defective cellular clearance leads to the accumulation of neurotoxic proteins and neuronal cell death . AD , Alzheimer’s disease ; CMT2B , Charcot – Marie – Tooth type 2B ; FTD , fronto - temporal dementia ; PD , Parkinson’s disease ; SENDA , static encephalopathy of childhood with neurodegeneration in adulthood . R E V I E W S 292 | MAY 2013 | VOLUME 14 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology TFEB Lysosomalexocytosis Autophagy Cellular clearance Lysosomebiogenesis modulating lysosomal function , for example by inhib - iting TFEB phosphorylation or by increasing TFEB dephosphorylation , represents an attractive thera - peutic strategy to promote cellular clearance in all of the above - mentioned diseases . Therefore , drug screening approaches aimed at identifying molecules that promote TFEB nuclear translocation present an interesting path forward . However , careful , long - term studies evaluating the potential side effects will be required . Pulsatile treat - ments that can increase TFEB activity for only limited periods of time may be the best option for diseases in which the accumulation of storage material takes a long time . At this stage , it is too early to determine whether TFEB induction will be a viable thera peutic option for LSDs or for other diseases . However , the broad range of diseases that might be treated by this therapeutic strateg y make it a very appealing avenue . Conclusions and future perspectives The emerging role of the lysosome in important processes , such as nutrient sensing , signalling and metabolism , requires further investigation — what we know today is just the  tip of the iceberg  . Systematic approaches , such as transcriptomics , proteomics and metabolomics , coupled with the power of systems biology , will be particularly important for identifying all the components of the lysosome and understand - ing the role of the greater lysosomal system 152 . These approaches should be complemented by in vivo imaging and intravital microscopy , which allow the visualization of lysosomes in the context of a living organism and in specific physiological or pathological conditions . Interdisciplinary approaches will also allow us to answer intriguing questions . How does lysosome number , size and content vary in different cell types , in different tissues or in different individuals ? Do different types of lysozymes exist with specialized roles ? To what extent do environmental or pathological conditions influence the composition , function or identity of lysosomes ? What is the physiological role of lysosomal signalling and its involvement in human disease ? Besides the involvement in neurodegenerative dis - eases , the role of the lysosome in other pathological processes , such as abnormalities of lipid metabolism , infections and even ageing , is still largely unexplored . Transcriptomic and proteomic analysis of patient - derived tissues and whole genome and exome sequenc - ing of the DNA of patients may lead to the discovery of lysosomal variation as a predisposing factor for additional human diseases . Furthermore , studying lysosomal function in various disease processes will affect the development of novel therapeutic strategies . Moreover , the development of high - content screening approaches will pave the way for the identification of novel compounds that are able to modulate lysosomal function , which could in turn be used as effective drugs to promot e cellular clearance . Figure 4 | TFEB regulates cellular clearance . Transcription factor EB ( TFEB ) controls lysosomal biogenesis by regulating the level of lysosomal enzymes , lysosomal acidification and the number of lysosomes . TFEB also controls autophagy by regulating the number of autophagosomes and the fusion between autophagosomes and lysosomes . Finally , TFEB regulates the docking and fusion of lysosomes to the plasma membrane in the process of lysosomal exocytosis . The concerted action of these three processes leads to cellular clearance . 1 . de Duve , C . The lysosome turns fifty . Nature Cell Biol . 7 , 847 – 849 ( 2005 ) . 2 . Saftig , P . & Klumperman , J . Lysosome biogenesis and lysosomal membrane proteins : trafficking meets function . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 623 – 635 ( 2009 ) . A comprehensive overview of lysosomal function and the role of lysosomal membrane proteins . 3 . Luzio , J . P . , Parkinson , M . D . , Gray , S . R . & Bright , N . A . The delivery of endocytosed cargo to lysosomes . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 37 , 1019 – 1021 ( 2009 ) . 4 . Mizushima , N . , Levine , B . , Cuervo , A . M . & Klionsky , D . J . Autophagy fights disease through cellular self - digestion . Nature 451 , 1069 – 1075 ( 2008 ) . 5 . Kaushik , S . & Cuervo , A . M . Chaperone - mediated autophagy : a unique way to enter the lysosome world . Trends Cell Biol . 22 , 407 – 417 ( 2012 ) . 6 . Mijaljica , D . , Prescott , M . & Devenish , R . J . Microautophagy in mammalian cells : revisiting a 40 - year - old conundrum . Autophagy 7 , 673 – 682 ( 2011 ) . 7 . Chieregatti , E . & Meldolesi , J . Regulated exocytosis : new organelles for non - secretory purposes . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 6 , 181 – 187 ( 2005 ) . 8 . Verhage , M . & Toonen , R . F . Regulated exocytosis : merging ideas on fusing membranes . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 19 , 402 – 408 ( 2007 ) . 9 . Blott , E . J . & Griffiths , G . M . Secretory lysosomes . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 122 – 131 ( 2002 ) . 10 . Mostov , K . & Werb , Z . Journey across the osteoclast . Science 276 , 219 – 220 ( 1997 ) . 11 . Stinchcombe , J . , Bossi , G . & Griffiths , G . M . Linking albinism and immunity : the secrets of secretory lysosomes . Science 305 , 55 – 59 ( 2004 ) . 12 . Sardiello , M . et al . A gene network regulating lysosomal biogenesis and function . Science 325 , 473 – 477 ( 2009 ) . Discovers that lysosomal function is subject to global transcriptional regulation by the master regulator TFEB . 13 . Settembre , C . et al . TFEB links autophagy to lysosomal biogenesis . Science 332 , 1429 – 1433 ( 2011 ) . Shows that the biogenesis of both lysosomes and autophagosomes are jointly regulated by TFEB . Starvation induces TFEB cytoplasm - to - nucleus shuttling via a phosphorylation - dependent mechanism . 14 . Braulke , T . & Bonifacino , J . S . Sorting of lysosomal proteins . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1793 , 605 – 614 ( 2009 ) . 15 . Luzio , J . P . , Pryor , P . R . & Bright , N . A . Lysosomes : fusion and function . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 622 – 632 ( 2007 ) . 16 . Pfeffer , S . R . Rab GTPases : specifying and deciphering organelle identity and function . Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 487 – 491 ( 2001 ) . 17 . Zerial , M . & McBride , H . Rab proteins as membrane organizers . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 107 – 117 ( 2001 ) . 18 . Rink , J . , Ghigo , E . , Kalaidzidis , Y . & Zerial , M . Rab conversion as a mechanism of progression from early to late endosomes . Cell 122 , 735 – 749 ( 2005 ) . 19 . Henne , W . M . , Buchkovich , N . J . & Emr , S . D . The ESCRT pathway . Dev . Cell 21 , 77 – 91 ( 2011 ) . 20 . Luzio , J . P . et al . ESCRT proteins and the regulation of endocytic delivery to lysosomes . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 37 , 178 – 180 ( 2009 ) . 21 . Sridhar , S . et al . The lipid kinase PI4KIII β preserves lysosomal identity . EMBO J . 32 , 324 – 339 ( 2013 ) . 22 . Schulze , H . , Kolter , T . & Sandhoff , K . Principles of lysosomal membrane degradation : cellular topology and biochemistry of lysosomal lipid degradation . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1793 , 674 – 683 ( 2009 ) . 23 . Rojas , R . et al . Regulation of retromer recruitment to endosomes by sequential action of Rab5 and Rab7 . J . Cell Biol . 183 , 513 – 526 ( 2008 ) . 24 . Wang , T . , Ming , Z . , Xiaochun , W . & Hong , W . Rab7 : role of its protein interaction cascades in endo - lysosomal traffic . Cell . Signal . 23 , 516 – 521 ( 2011 ) . 25 . Pryor , P . R . et al . Combinatorial SNARE complexes with VAMP7 or VAMP8 define different late endocytic fusion events . EMBO Rep . 5 , 590 – 595 ( 2004 ) . 26 . Weber , T . et al . SNAREpins : minimal machinery for membrane fusion . Cell 92 , 759 – 772 ( 1998 ) . 27 . Jahn , R . & Scheller , R . H . SNAREs — engines for membrane fusion . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 631 – 643 ( 2006 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 14 | MAY 2013 | 293 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 28 . Ohya , T . et al . Reconstitution of Rab - and SNARE - dependent membrane fusion by synthetic endosomes . Nature 459 , 1091 – 1097 ( 2009 ) . 29 . Zeigerer , A . et al . Rab5 is necessary for the biogenesis of the endolysosomal system in vivo . Nature 485 , 465 – 470 ( 2012 ) . 30 . Itakura , E . , Kishi - Itakura , C . & Mizushima , N . The hairpin - type tail - anchored SNARE syntaxin 17 targets to autophagosomes for fusion with endosomes / lysosomes . Cell 151 , 1256 – 1269 ( 2012 ) . 31 . Hamasaki , M . et al . Autophagosomes form at ER – mitochondria contact sites . Nature 495 , 389 – 393 ( 2013 ) . 32 . Ghosh , P . , Dahms , N . M . & Kornfeld , S . Mannose 6 - phosphate receptors : new twists in the tale . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 4 , 202 – 212 ( 2003 ) . 33 . Neufeld , E . F . The uptake of enzymes into lysosomes : an overview . Birth Defects Orig . Artic . Ser . 16 , 77 – 84 ( 1980 ) . 34 . Reczek , D . et al . LIMP - 2 is a receptor for lysosomal mannose - 6 - phosphate - independent targeting of β - glucocerebrosidase . Cell 131 , 770 – 783 ( 2007 ) . Reveals a new transport mechanism of lysosomal enzymes that is responsible for the targeting of β - glucocerebrosidase . 35 . Gallala , H . D . , Breiden , B . & Sandhoff , K . Regulation of the NPC2 protein - mediated cholesterol trafficking by membrane lipids . J . Neurochem . 116 , 702 – 707 ( 2011 ) . 36 . Munford , R . S . , Sheppard , P . O . & O’Hara , P . J . Saposin - like proteins ( SAPLIP ) carry out diverse functions on a common backbone structure . J . Lipid Res . 36 , 1653 – 1663 ( 1995 ) . 37 . Kolter , T . & Sandhoff , K . Principles of lysosomal membrane digestion : stimulation of sphingolipid degradation by sphingolipid activator proteins and anionic lysosomal lipids . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 21 , 81 – 103 ( 2005 ) . 38 . Furst , W . & Sandhoff , K . Activator proteins and topology of lysosomal sphingolipid catabolism . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1126 , 1 – 16 ( 1992 ) . 39 . Mobius , W . , Herzog , V . , Sandhoff , K . & Schwarzmann , G . Intracellular distribution of a biotin - labeled ganglioside , GM1 , by immunoelectron microscopy after endocytosis in fibroblasts . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 47 , 1005 – 1014 ( 1999 ) . 40 . Burkhardt , J . K . et al . Accumulation of sphingolipids in SAP - precursor ( prosaposin ) - deficient fibroblasts occurs as intralysosomal membrane structures and can be completely reversed by treatment with human SAP - precursor . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 73 , 10 – 18 ( 1997 ) . 41 . Bradova , V . et al . Prosaposin deficiency : further characterization of the sphingolipid activator protein - deficient sibs . Multiple glycolipid elevations ( including lactosylceramidosis ) , partial enzyme deficiencies and ultrastructure of the skin in this generalized sphingolipid storage disease . Hum . Genet . 92 , 143 – 152 ( 1993 ) . 42 . Schnabel , D . et al . Simultaneous deficiency of sphingolipid activator proteins 1 and 2 is caused by a mutation in the initiation codon of their common gene . J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 3312 – 3315 ( 1992 ) . 43 . Cosma , M . P . et al . The multiple sulfatase deficiency gene encodes an essential and limiting factor for the activity of sulfatases . Cell 113 , 445 – 456 ( 2003 ) . 44 . Dierks , T . et al . Multiple sulfatase deficiency is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the human C α - formylglycine generating enzyme . Cell 113 , 435 – 444 ( 2003 ) . 45 . Bagshaw , R . D . , Mahuran , D . J . & Callahan , J . W . Lysosomal membrane proteomics and biogenesis of lysosomes . Mol . Neurobiol . 32 , 27 – 41 ( 2005 ) . 46 . Callahan , J . W . , Bagshaw , R . D . & Mahuran , D . J . The integral membrane of lysosomes : its proteins and their roles in disease . J . Proteom . 72 , 23 – 33 ( 2009 ) . 47 . Lubke , T . , Lobel , P . & Sleat , D . E . Proteomics of the lysosome . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1793 , 625 – 635 ( 2009 ) . 48 . Schroder , B . A . , Wrocklage , C . , Hasilik , A . & Saftig , P . The proteome of lysosomes . Proteomics 10 , 4053 – 4076 ( 2010 ) . 49 . Sleat , D . E . , Jadot , M . & Lobel , P . Lysosomal proteomics and disease . Proteomics Clin . Appl . 1 , 1134 – 1146 ( 2007 ) . 50 . Conner , S . D . & Schmid , S . L . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 422 , 37 – 44 ( 2003 ) . 51 . Doherty , G . J . & McMahon , H . T . Mechanisms of endocytosis . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 78 , 857 – 902 ( 2009 ) . 52 . Hansen , C . G . & Nichols , B . J . Molecular mechanisms of clathrin - independent endocytosis . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 1713 – 1721 ( 2009 ) . 53 . Sorkin , A . & von Zastrow , M . Endocytosis and signalling : intertwining molecular networks . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 609 – 622 ( 2009 ) . 54 . Katzmann , D . J . , Babst , M . & Emr , S . D . Ubiquitin - dependent sorting into the multivesicular body pathway requires the function of a conserved endosomal protein sorting complex , ESCRT - I . Cell 106 , 145 – 155 ( 2001 ) . 55 . Raiborg , C . & Stenmark , H . The ESCRT machinery in endosomal sorting of ubiquitylated membrane proteins . Nature 458 , 445 – 452 ( 2009 ) . 56 . Haglund , K . & Dikic , I . The role of ubiquitylation in receptor endocytosis and endosomal sorting . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 265 – 275 ( 2012 ) . 57 . Ohkuma , S . & Poole , B . Fluorescence probe measurement of the intralysosomal pH in living cells and the perturbation of pH by various agents . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 75 , 3327 – 3331 ( 1978 ) . 58 . Ohkuma , S . , Moriyama , Y . & Takano , T . Identification and characterization of a proton pump on lysosomes by fluorescein – isothiocyanate – dextran fluorescence . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 79 , 2758 – 2762 ( 1982 ) . 59 . Graves , A . R . , Curran , P . K . , Smith , C . L . & Mindell , J . A . The Cl − / H + antiporter ClC - 7 is the primary chloride permeation pathway in lysosomes . Nature 453 , 788 – 792 ( 2008 ) . 60 . Kasper , D . et al . Loss of the chloride channel ClC - 7 leads to lysosomal storage disease and neurodegeneration . EMBO J . 24 , 1079 – 1091 ( 2005 ) . 61 . Weinert , S . et al . Lysosomal pathology and osteopetrosis upon loss of H + - driven lysosomal Cl − accumulation . Science 328 , 1401 – 1403 ( 2010 ) . 62 . Mindell , J . A . Lysosomal acidification mechanisms . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 74 , 69 – 86 ( 2012 ) . 63 . Zhang , F . , Jin , S . , Yi , F . & Li , P . L . TRP – ML1 functions as a lysosomal NAADP - sensitive Ca 2 + release channel in coronary arterial myocytes . J . Cell . Mol . Med . 13 , 3174 – 3185 ( 2009 ) . 64 . Zhang , F . , Xu , M . , Han , W . Q . & Li , P . L . Reconstitution of lysosomal NAADP – TRP – ML1 signaling pathway and its function in TRP – ML1 − / − cells . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 301 , C421 – C430 ( 2011 ) . 65 . Calcraft , P . J . et al . NAADP mobilizes calcium from acidic organelles through two - pore channels . Nature 459 , 596 – 600 ( 2009 ) . 66 . Sahu , R . et al . Microautophagy of cytosolic proteins by late endosomes . Dev . Cell 20 , 131 – 139 ( 2011 ) . 67 . Ahlberg , J . , Marzella , L . & Glaumann , H . Uptake and degradation of proteins by isolated rat liver lysosomes . Suggestion of a microautophagic pathway of proteolysis . Lab . Invest . 47 , 523 – 532 ( 1982 ) . 68 . Cuervo , A . M . & Dice , J . F . A receptor for the selective uptake and degradation of proteins by lysosomes . Science 273 , 501 – 503 ( 1996 ) . 69 . Chiang , H . L . , Terlecky , S . R . , Plant , C . P . & Dice , J . F . A role for a 70 - kilodalton heat shock protein in lysosomal degradation of intracellular proteins . Science 246 , 382 – 385 ( 1989 ) . 70 . He , C . & Klionsky , D . J . Regulation mechanisms and signaling pathways of autophagy . Annu . Rev . Genet . 43 , 67 – 93 ( 2009 ) . Reviews the complex molecular mechanisms and pathways involved in the regulation of autophagy . 71 . Ravikumar , B . et al . Regulation of mammalian autophagy in physiology and pathophysiology . Physiol . Rev . 90 , 1383 – 1435 ( 2010 ) . 72 . Rodriguez , A . , Webster , P . , Ortego , J . & Andrews , N . W . Lysosomes behave as Ca 2 + - regulated exocytic vesicles in fibroblasts and epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 137 , 93 – 104 ( 1997 ) . 73 . Chavez , R . A . , Miller , S . G . & Moore , H . P . A biosynthetic regulated secretory pathway in constitutive secretory cells . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 1177 – 1191 ( 1996 ) . 74 . Coorssen , J . R . , Schmitt , H . & Almers , W . Ca 2 + triggers massive exocytosis in Chinese hamster ovary cells . EMBO J . 15 , 3787 – 3791 ( 1996 ) . 75 . Stinchcombe , J . C . & Griffiths , G . M . Regulated secretion from hemopoietic cells . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 1 – 6 ( 1999 ) . 76 . Andrews , N . W . Regulated secretion of conventional lysosomes . Trends Cell Biol . 10 , 316 – 321 ( 2000 ) . 77 . Jaiswal , J . K . , Andrews , N . W . & Simon , S . M . Membrane proximal lysosomes are the major vesicles responsible for calcium - dependent exocytosis in nonsecretory cells . J . Cell Biol . 159 , 625 – 635 ( 2002 ) . 78 . Stinchcombe , J . C . & Griffiths , G . M . Secretory mechanisms in cell - mediated cytotoxicity . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 23 , 495 – 517 ( 2007 ) . 79 . Logan , M . R . , Odemuyiwa , S . O . & Moqbel , R . Understanding exocytosis in immune and inflammatory cells : the molecular basis of mediator secretion . J . Allergy Clin . Immunol . 111 , 923 – 932 ( 2003 ) . 80 . Wesolowski , J . & Paumet , F . The impact of bacterial infection on mast cell degranulation . Immunol . Res . 51 , 215 – 226 ( 2011 ) . 81 . Ren , Q . , Ye , S . & Whiteheart , S . W . The platelet release reaction : just when you thought platelet secretion was simple . Curr . Opin . Hematol . 15 , 537 – 541 ( 2008 ) . 82 . Tulsiani , D . R . , Abou - Haila , A . , Loeser , C . R . & Pereira , B . M . The biological and functional significance of the sperm acrosome and acrosomal enzymes in mammalian fertilization . Exp . Cell Res . 240 , 151 – 164 ( 1998 ) . 83 . Rao , S . K . , Huynh , C . , Proux - Gillardeaux , V . , Galli , T . & Andrews , N . W . Identification of SNAREs involved in synaptotagmin VII - regulated lysosomal exocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 20471 – 20479 ( 2004 ) . 84 . Bossi , G . & Griffiths , G . M . CTL secretory lysosomes : biogenesis and secretion of a harmful organelle . Semin . Immunol . 17 , 87 – 94 ( 2005 ) . 85 . LaPlante , J . M . et al . Lysosomal exocytosis is impaired in mucolipidosis type IV . Mol . Genet . Metab . 89 , 339 – 348 ( 2006 ) . 86 . Medina , D . L . et al . Transcriptional activation of lysosomal exocytosis promotes cellular clearance . Dev . Cell 21 , 421 – 430 ( 2011 ) . The first demonstration that TFEB promotes cellular clearance in human disease . 87 . Dong , X . P . et al . Activating mutations of the TRPML1 channel revealed by proline - scanning mutagenesis . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 32040 – 32052 ( 2009 ) . 88 . Cadwell , K . et al . A key role for autophagy and the autophagy gene Atg16l1 in mouse and human intestinal Paneth cells . Nature 456 , 259 – 263 ( 2008 ) . 89 . DeSelm , C . J . et al . Autophagy proteins regulate the secretory component of osteoclastic bone resorption . Dev . Cell 21 , 966 – 974 ( 2011 ) . 90 . Ganesan , A . K . et al . Genome - wide siRNA - based functional genomics of pigmentation identifies novel genes and pathways that impact melanogenesis in human cells . PLoS Genet . 4 , e1000298 ( 2008 ) . 91 . Gerasimenko , J . V . , Gerasimenko , O . V . & Petersen , O . H . Membrane repair : Ca 2 + - elicited lysosomal exocytosis . Curr . Biol . 11 , R971 – R974 ( 2001 ) . 92 . Reddy , A . , Caler , E . V . & Andrews , N . W . Plasma membrane repair is mediated by Ca 2 + - regulated exocytosis of lysosomes . Cell 106 , 157 – 169 ( 2001 ) . 93 . Roy , D . et al . A process for controlling intracellular bacterial infections induced by membrane injury . Science 304 , 1515 – 1518 ( 2004 ) . 94 . Han , R . et al . Dysferlin - mediated membrane repair protects the heart from stress - induced left ventricular injury . J . Clin . Invest . 117 , 1805 – 1813 ( 2007 ) . 95 . Ferron , M . et al . A RANKL – PKC β – TFEB signaling cascade is necessary for lysosomal biogenesis in osteoclasts . Genes Dev . ( in the press ) ( doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 213827 . 113 ) . 96 . Laplante , M . & Sabatini , D . M . mTOR signaling in growth control and disease . Cell 149 , 274 – 293 ( 2012 ) . 97 . Sancak , Y . et al . Ragulator – Rag complex targets mTORC1 to the lysosomal surface and is necessary for its activation by amino acids . Cell 141 , 290 – 303 ( 2010 ) . 98 . Efeyan , A . et al . Regulation of mTORC1 by the Rag GTPases is necessary for neonatal autophagy and survival . Nature 493 , 679 – 183 ( 2013 ) . 99 . Ganley , I . G . et al . ULK1 . ATG13 . FIP200 complex mediates mTOR signaling and is essential for autophagy . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 12297 – 12305 ( 2009 ) . 100 . Hosokawa , N . et al . Nutrient - dependent mTORC1 association with the ULK1 – Atg13 – FIP200 complex required for autophagy . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 1981 – 1991 ( 2009 ) . 101 . Jung , C . H . et al . ULK – Atg13 – FIP200 complexes mediate mTOR signaling to the autophagy machinery . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 1992 – 2003 ( 2009 ) . 102 . Chan , E . Y . , Kir , S . & Tooze , S . A . siRNA screening of the kinome identifies ULK1 as a multidomain modulator of autophagy . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 25464 – 25474 ( 2007 ) . 103 . Hara , T . et al . FIP200 , a ULK - interacting protein , is required for autophagosome formation in mammalian cells . J . Cell Biol . 181 , 497 – 510 ( 2008 ) . 104 . Zoncu , R . et al . mTORC1 senses lysosomal amino acids through an inside – out mechanism that requires the vacuolar H + - ATPase . Science 334 , 678 – 683 ( 2011 ) . R E V I E W S 294 | MAY 2013 | VOLUME 14 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Identifies an amino acid sensing machinery that is located on the lysosomal surface and involves mTORC1 . This implicates the lysosome in signalling and cellular energy metabolism . 105 . Yu , L . et al . Termination of autophagy and reformation of lysosomes regulated by mTOR . Nature 465 , 942 – 946 ( 2010 ) . 106 . Cang , C . et al . mTOR regulates lysosomal ATP - sensitive two - pore Na + channels to adapt to metabolic state . Cell 152 , 778 – 790 ( 2013 ) . 107 . Zoncu , R . , Efeyan , A . & Sabatini , D . M . mTOR : from growth signal integration to cancer , diabetes and ageing . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 , 21 – 35 ( 2011 ) . 108 . Settembre , C . et al . A lysosome - to - nucleus signalling mechanism senses and regulates the lysosome via mTOR and TFEB . EMBO J . 31 , 1095 – 1108 ( 2012 ) . 109 . Rong , Y . et al . Spinster is required for autophagic lysosome reformation and mTOR reactivation following starvation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 7826 – 7831 ( 2011 ) . 110 . Rong , Y . et al . Clathrin and phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate regulate autophagic lysosome reformation . Nature Cell Biol . 14 , 924 – 934 ( 2012 ) . 111 . Rehli , M . , Den Elzen , N . , Cassady , A . I . , Ostrowski , M . C . & Hume , D . A . Cloning and characterization of the murine genes for bHLH - ZIP transcription factors TFEC and TFEB reveal a common gene organization for all MiT subfamily members . Genomics 56 , 111 – 120 ( 1999 ) . 112 . Medendorp , K . et al . Molecular mechanisms underlying the MiT translocation subgroup of renal cell carcinomas . Cytogenet . Genome Res . 118 , 157 – 165 ( 2007 ) . 113 . Ma , X . , Godar , R . J . , Liu , H . & Diwan , A . Enhancing lysosome biogenesis attenuates BNIP3 - induced cardiomyocyte death . Autophagy 8 , 297 – 309 ( 2012 ) . 114 . Palmieri , M . et al . Characterization of the CLEAR network reveals an integrated control of cellular clearance pathways . Hum . Mol . Genet . 20 , 3852 – 3866 ( 2011 ) . 115 . Cuervo , A . M . Cell biology . Autophagy’s top chef . Science 332 , 1392 – 1393 ( 2011 ) . 116 . Ma , D . , Panda , S . & Lin , J . D . Temporal orchestration of circadian autophagy rhythm by C / EBP β . EMBO J . 30 , 4642 – 4651 ( 2011 ) . 117 . Rzymski , T . et al . Regulation of autophagy by ATF4 in response to severe hypoxia . Oncogene 29 , 4424 – 4435 ( 2010 ) . 118 . Rouschop , K . M . et al . The unfolded protein response protects human tumor cells during hypoxia through regulation of the autophagy genes MAP1LC3B and ATG5 . J . Clin . Invest . 120 , 127 – 141 ( 2010 ) . 119 . van der Vos , K . E . et al . Modulation of glutamine metabolism by the PI ( 3 ) K – PKB – FOXO network regulates autophagy . Nature Cell Biol . 14 , 829 – 837 ( 2012 ) . 120 . Demontis , F . & Perrimon , N . FOXO / 4E - BP signaling in Drosophila muscles regulates organism - wide proteostasis during aging . Cell 143 , 813 – 825 ( 2010 ) . 121 . Zhao , J . et al . FoxO3 coordinately activates protein degradation by the autophagic / lysosomal and proteasomal pathways in atrophying muscle cells . Cell Metab . 6 , 472 – 483 ( 2007 ) . 122 . Mammucari , C . et al . FoxO3 controls autophagy in skeletal muscle in vivo . Cell Metab . 6 , 458 – 471 ( 2007 ) . 123 . Chauhan , S . et al . ZKSCAN3 is a master transcriptional repressor of autophagy . Mol . Cell ( 2013 ) . 124 . Calnan , D . R . & Brunet , A . The FoxO code . Oncogene 27 , 2276 – 2288 ( 2008 ) . 125 . Dephoure , N . et al . A quantitative atlas of mitotic phosphorylation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 10762 – 10767 ( 2008 ) . 126 . Cea , M . et al . Targeting NAD + salvage pathway induces autophagy in multiple myeloma cells via mTORC1 and extracellular signal - regulated kinase ( ERK1 / 2 ) inhibition . Blood 120 , 3519 – 3529 ( 2012 ) . 127 . Martina , J . A . , Chen , Y . , Gucek , M . & Puertollano , R . mTORC1 functions as a transcriptional regulator of autophagy by preventing nuclear transport of TFEB . Autophagy 8 , 903 – 914 ( 2012 ) . 128 . Pena - Llopis , S . et al . Regulation of TFEB and V - ATPases by mTORC1 . EMBO J . 30 , 3242 – 3258 ( 2011 ) . 129 . Roczniak - Ferguson , A . et al . The transcription factor TFEB links mTORC1 signaling to transcriptional control of lysosome homeostasis . Sci . Signal . 5 , ra42 ( 2012 ) . 130 . Martina , J . A . & Puertollano , R . Rag GTPases mediate amino acid - dependent recruitment of TFEB and MITF to lysosomes . J . Cell Biol . 200 , 475 – 491 ( 2013 ) . 131 . Settembre , C . et al . TFEB controls cellular lipid metabolism through a starvation - induced autoregulatory loop . Nature Cell Biol . 21 Apr 2013 ( doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2718 ) . 132 . Singh , R . & Cuervo , A . M . Autophagy in the cellular energetic balance . Cell Metab . 13 , 495 – 504 ( 2011 ) . Shows that lipid droplets are sequestered by autophagosomes for degradation and recycling to generate free fatty acids . 133 . Singh , R . et al . Autophagy regulates lipid metabolism . Nature 458 , 1131 – 1135 ( 2009 ) . 134 . Rodriguez - Navarro , J . A . & Cuervo , A . M . Dietary lipids and aging compromise chaperone - mediated autophagy by similar mechanisms . Autophagy 8 , 1152 – 1154 ( 2012 ) . 135 . Rodriguez - Navarro , J . A . et al . Inhibitory effect of dietary lipids on chaperone - mediated autophagy . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , e705 – e714 ( 2012 ) . 136 . Yang , L . , Li , P . , Fu , S . , Calay , E . S . & Hotamisligil , G . S . Defective hepatic autophagy in obesity promotes ER stress and causes insulin resistance . Cell Metab . 11 , 467 – 478 ( 2010 ) . 137 . Woloszynek , J . C . , Coleman , T . , Semenkovich , C . F . & Sands , M . S . Lysosomal dysfunction results in altered energy balance . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 35765 – 35771 ( 2007 ) . 138 . Du , H . , Duanmu , M . , Witte , D . & Grabowski , G . A . Targeted disruption of the mouse lysosomal acid lipase gene : long - term survival with massive cholesteryl ester and triglyceride storage . Hum . Mol . Genet . 7 , 1347 – 1354 ( 1998 ) . 139 . Finck , B . N . & Kelly , D . P . PGC - 1 coactivators : inducible regulators of energy metabolism in health and disease . J . Clin . Invest . 116 , 615 – 622 ( 2006 ) . 140 . Grove , C . A . et al . A multiparameter network reveals extensive divergence between C . elegans bHLH transcription factors . Cell 138 , 314 – 327 ( 2009 ) . 141 . O’Rourke , E . J . & Ruvkun , G . MXL - 3 and HLH - 30 transcriptionally link lysosomal lipolysis and autophagy to nutrient availability . Nature Cell Biol . 21 Apr 2013 ( doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2741 ) . 142 . Kaeberlein , T . L . et al . Lifespan extension in Caenorhabditis elegans by complete removal of food . Aging Cell 5 , 487 – 494 ( 2006 ) . 143 . Melendez , A . et al . Autophagy genes are essential for dauer development and life - span extension in C . elegans . Science 301 , 1387 – 1391 ( 2003 ) . 144 . Steingrimsson , E . , Tessarollo , L . , Reid , S . W . , Jenkins , N . A . & Copeland , N . G . The bHLH - Zip transcription factor Tfeb is essential for placental vascularization . Development 125 , 4607 – 4616 ( 1998 ) . 145 . Cuervo , A . M . & Dice , J . F . When lysosomes get old . Exp . Gerontol . 35 , 119 – 131 ( 2000 ) . 146 . Rubinsztein , D . C . , Marino , G . & Kroemer , G . Autophagy and aging . Cell 146 , 682 – 695 ( 2011 ) . 147 . Ballabio , A . & Gieselmann , V . Lysosomal disorders : from storage to cellular damage . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1793 , 684 – 696 ( 2009 ) . 148 . Cox , T . M . & Cachon - Gonzalez , M . B . The cellular pathology of lysosomal diseases . J . Pathol . 226 , 241 – 254 ( 2012 ) . 149 . Futerman , A . H . & van Meer , G . The cell biology of lysosomal storage disorders . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 554 – 565 ( 2004 ) . 150 . Schultz , M . L . , Tecedor , L . , Chang , M . & Davidson , B . L . Clarifying lysosomal storage diseases . Trends Neurosciences 34 , 401 – 410 ( 2011 ) . 151 . Vitner , E . B . , Platt , F . M . & Futerman , A . H . Common and uncommon pathogenic cascades in lysosomal storage diseases . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 20423 – 20427 ( 2010 ) . 152 . Walkley , S . U . Pathogenic cascades in lysosomal disease — why so complex ? J . Inherit . Metab . Dis . 32 , 181 – 189 ( 2009 ) . 153 . Lieberman , A . P . et al . Autophagy in lysosomal storage disorders . Autophagy 8 , 719 – 730 ( 2012 ) . 154 . de Pablo - Latorre , R . et al . Impaired parkin - mediated mitochondrial targeting to autophagosomes differentially contributes to tissue pathology in lysosomal storage diseases . Hum . Mol . Genet . 21 , 1770 – 1781 ( 2012 ) . 155 . Di Malta , C . , Fryer , J . D . , Settembre , C . & Ballabio , A . Astrocyte dysfunction triggers neurodegeneration in a lysosomal storage disorder . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , E2334 – E2342 ( 2012 ) . 156 . Fraldi , A . et al . Lysosomal fusion and SNARE function are impaired by cholesterol accumulation in lysosomal storage disorders . EMBO J . 29 , 3607 – 3620 ( 2010 ) . 157 . Settembre , C . et al . A block of autophagy in lysosomal storage disorders . Hum . Mol . Genet . 17 , 119 – 129 ( 2008 ) . 158 . Cox , T . M . in Lysosomal Storage Disorders : A Practical Guide ( ed . Atul Mehta , B . W . ) 153 – 165 ( Wiley - Blackwell , 2012 ) . 159 . Wong , E . & Cuervo , A . M . Autophagy gone awry in neurodegenerative diseases . Nature Neurosci . 13 , 805 – 811 ( 2010 ) . 160 . Harris , H . & Rubinsztein , D . C . Control of autophagy as a therapy for neurodegenerative disease . Nature Rev . Neurol . 8 , 108 – 117 ( 2012 ) . A comprehensive overview of how the modulation of autophagy can be a promising therapeutic strategy for neurodegenerative diseases . 161 . Jeong , H . et al . Acetylation targets mutant huntingtin to autophagosomes for degradation . Cell 137 , 60 – 72 ( 2009 ) . 162 . Cuervo , A . M . , Stefanis , L . , Fredenburg , R . , Lansbury , P . T . & Sulzer , D . Impaired degradation of mutant α - synuclein by chaperone - mediated autophagy . Science 305 , 1292 – 1295 ( 2004 ) . 163 . Winslow , A . R . et al . α - synuclein impairs macroautophagy : implications for Parkinson’s disease . J . Cell Biol . 190 , 1023 – 1037 ( 2010 ) . 164 . Orenstein , S . J . et al . Interplay of LRRK2 with chaperone - mediated autophagy . Nature Neurosci . 16 , 394 – 406 ( 2013 ) . 165 . Martinez - Vicente , M . et al . Cargo recognition failure is responsible for inefficient autophagy in Huntington’s disease . Nature Neurosci . 13 , 567 – 576 ( 2010 ) . 166 . Aharon - Peretz , J . , Rosenbaum , H . & Gershoni - Baruch , R . Mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gene and Parkinson’s disease in Ashkenazi Jews . N . Engl . J . Med . 351 , 1972 – 1977 ( 2004 ) . 167 . Sidransky , E . et al . Multicenter analysis of glucocerebrosidase mutations in Parkinson’s disease . N . Engl . J . Med . 361 , 1651 – 1661 ( 2009 ) . 168 . Brady , R . O . , Kanfer , J . N . & Shapiro , D . Metabolism of glucocerebrosides . II . Evidence of an enzymatic deficiency in Gaucher’s disease . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 18 , 221 – 225 ( 1965 ) . 169 . Mazzulli , J . R . et al . Gaucher disease glucocerebrosidase and α - synuclein form a bidirectional pathogenic loop in synucleinopathies . Cell 146 , 37 – 52 ( 2011 ) . Demonstrates how partial deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme β - glucocerebrosidase can be a major predisposing factor in Parkinson’s disease . 170 . Ramirez , A . et al . Hereditary parkinsonism with dementia is caused by mutations in ATP13A2 , encoding a lysosomal type 5 P - type ATPase . Nature Genet . 38 , 1184 – 1191 ( 2006 ) . 171 . Usenovic , M . & Krainc , D . Lysosomal dysfunction in neurodegeneration : the role of ATP13A2 / PARK9 . Autophagy 8 , 987 – 988 ( 2012 ) . 172 . Valente , E . M . et al . Hereditary early - onset Parkinson’s disease caused by mutations in PINK1 . Science 304 , 1158 – 1160 ( 2004 ) . 173 . Geisler , S . et al . PINK1 / Parkin - mediated mitophagy is dependent on VDAC1 and p62 / SQSTM1 . Nature Cell Biol . 12 , 119 – 131 ( 2010 ) . 174 . Narendra , D . , Tanaka , A . , Suen , D . F . & Youle , R . J . Parkin is recruited selectively to impaired mitochondria and promotes their autophagy . J . Cell Biol . 183 , 795 – 803 ( 2008 ) . 175 . Kitada , T . et al . Mutations in the parkin gene cause autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism . Nature 392 , 605 – 608 ( 1998 ) . 176 . Zimprich , A . et al . A mutation in VPS35 , encoding a subunit of the retromer complex , causes late - onset Parkinson disease . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 89 , 168 – 175 ( 2011 ) . 177 . Chartier - Harlin , M . C . et al . Translation initiator EIF4G1 mutations in familial Parkinson disease . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 89 , 398 – 406 ( 2011 ) . 178 . Lee , J . H . et al . Lysosomal proteolysis and autophagy require presenilin 1 and are disrupted by Alzheimer - related PS1 mutations . Cell 141 , 1146 – 1158 ( 2010 ) . An important example of lysosomal dysfunction associated with Alzheimer’s disease . 179 . Coen , K . et al . Lysosomal calcium homeostasis defects , not proton pump defects , cause endo – lysosomal dysfunction in PSEN - deficient cells . J . Cell Biol . 198 , 23 – 35 ( 2012 ) . 180 . Skibinski , G . et al . Mutations in the endosomal ESCRTIII - complex subunit CHMP2B in frontotemporal dementia . Nature Genet . 37 , 806 – 808 ( 2005 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 14 | MAY 2013 | 295 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 181 . Verhoeven , K . et al . Mutations in the small GTP - ase late endosomal protein RAB7 cause Charcot – Marie – Tooth type 2B neuropathy . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 72 , 722 – 727 ( 2003 ) . 182 . Saitsu , H . et al . De novo mutations in the autophagy gene WDR45 cause static encephalopathy of childhood with neurodegeneration in adulthood . Nature Genet . 45 , 445 – 449 ( 2013 ) . 183 . Yang , D . S . et al . Reversal of autophagy dysfunction in the TgCRND8 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease ameliorates amyloid pathologies and memory deficits . Brain 134 , 258 – 277 ( 2011 ) . 184 . Mueller - Steiner , S . et al . Antiamyloidogenic and neuroprotective functions of cathepsin B : implications for Alzheimer’s disease . Neuron 51 , 703 – 714 ( 2006 ) . 185 . Sun , B . et al . Cystatin C – cathepsin B axis regulates amyloid - β levels and associated neuronal deficits in an animal model of Alzheimer’s disease . Neuron 60 , 247 – 257 ( 2008 ) . 186 . Ravikumar , B . et al . Inhibition of mTOR induces autophagy and reduces toxicity of polyglutamine expansions in fly and mouse models of Huntington disease . Nature Genet . 36 , 585 – 595 ( 2004 ) . 187 . Menzies , F . M . et al . Autophagy induction reduces mutant ataxin - 3 levels and toxicity in a mouse model of spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 . Brain 133 , 93 – 104 ( 2010 ) . 188 . Rose , C . et al . Rilmenidine attenuates toxicity of polyglutamine expansions in a mouse model of Huntington’s disease . Hum . Mol . Genet . 19 , 2144 – 2153 ( 2010 ) . 189 . Tanaka , M . et al . Trehalose alleviates polyglutamine - mediated pathology in a mouse model of Huntington disease . Nature Med . 10 , 148 – 154 ( 2004 ) . 190 . Spampanato , C . et al . Transcription factor EB ( TFEB ) is a new therapeutic target for Pompe disease . EMBO Mol Med . 11 Apr 2013 ( doi : 10 . 1002 / emmm . 201202176 . 191 . Dehay , B . et al . Pathogenic lysosomal depletion in Parkinson’s disease . J . Neurosci . 30 , 12535 – 12544 ( 2010 ) . 192 . Tsunemi , T . et al . PGC - 1 α rescues Huntington’s disease proteotoxicity by preventing oxidative stress and promoting TFEB function . Sci . Transl . Med . 4 , 142ra97 ( 2012 ) . 193 . Pastore , N . et al . Gene transfer of master autophagy regulator TFEB results in clearance of toxic protein and correction of hepatic disease in α - 1 - anti - trypsin deficiency . EMBO Mol . Med . 5 , 397 – 412 ( 2013 ) . 194 . Bagshaw , R . D . , Mahuran , D . J . & Callahan , J . W . A proteomic analysis of lysosomal integral membrane proteins reveals the diverse composition of the organelle . Mol . Cell . Proteom . 4 , 133 – 143 ( 2005 ) . 195 . Kobayashi , T . et al . Separation and characterization of late endosomal membrane domains . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 32157 – 32164 ( 2002 ) . 196 . Andrejewski , N . et al . Normal lysosomal morphology and function in LAMP - 1 - deficient mice . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 12692 – 12701 ( 1999 ) . 197 . Nishi , T . & Forgac , M . The vacuolar ( H + ) - ATPases — nature’s most versatile proton pumps . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 94 – 103 ( 2002 ) . 198 . Marshansky , V . & Futai , M . The V - type H + - ATPase in vesicular trafficking : targeting , regulation and function . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 20 , 415 – 426 ( 2008 ) . 199 . Dong , X . P . et al . The type IV mucolipidosis - associated protein TRPML1 is an endolysosomal iron release channel . Nature 455 , 992 – 996 ( 2008 ) . 200 . Wong , C . O . , Li , R . , Montell , C . & Venkatachalam , K . Drosophila TRPML is required for TORC1 activation . Curr . Biol . 22 , 1616 – 1621 ( 2012 ) . 201 . Bargal , R . et al . Identification of the gene causing mucolipidosis type IV . Nature Genet . 26 , 118 – 123 ( 2000 ) . 202 . Bassi , M . T . et al . Cloning of the gene encoding a novel integral membrane protein , mucolipidin - and identification of the two major founder mutations causing mucolipidosis type IV . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 67 , 1110 – 1120 ( 2000 ) . 203 . Jentsch , T . J . , Poet , M . , Fuhrmann , J . C . & Zdebik , A . A . Physiological functions of CLC Cl − channels gleaned from human genetic disease and mouse models . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 67 , 779 – 807 ( 2005 ) . 204 . Cuervo , A . M . , Gomes , A . V . , Barnes , J . A . & Dice , J . F . Selective degradation of annexins by chaperone - mediated autophagy . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 33329 – 33335 ( 2000 ) . 205 . Nishino , I . et al . Primary LAMP - 2 deficiency causes X - linked vacuolar cardiomyopathy and myopathy ( Danon disease ) . Nature 406 , 906 – 910 ( 2000 ) . 206 . Lloyd - Evans , E . et al . Niemann – Pick disease type C1 is a sphingosine storage disease that causes deregulation of lysosomal calcium . Nature Med . 14 , 1247 – 1255 ( 2008 ) . 207 . Liu , B . , Du , H . , Rutkowski , R . , Gartner , A . & Wang , X . LAAT - 1 is the lysosomal lysine / arginine transporter that maintains amino acid homeostasis . Science 337 , 351 – 354 ( 2012 ) . 208 . Hrebicek , M . et al . Mutations in TMEM76 * cause mucopolysaccharidosis IIIC ( Sanfilippo C syndrome ) . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 79 , 807 – 819 ( 2006 ) . 209 . Fan , X . et al . Identification of the gene encoding the enzyme deficient in mucopolysaccharidosis IIIC ( Sanfilippo disease type C ) . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 79 , 738 – 744 ( 2006 ) . 210 . Durand , S . , Feldhammer , M . , Bonneil , E . , Thibault , P . & Pshezhetsky , A . V . Analysis of the biogenesis of heparan sulfate acetyl - CoA : α - glucosaminide N - acetyltransferase provides insights into the mechanism underlying its complete deficiency in mucopolysaccharidosis IIIC . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 31233 – 31242 ( 2010 ) . 211 . Efeyan , A . , Zoncu , R . & Sabatini , D . M . Amino acids and mTORC1 : from lysosomes to disease . Trends Mol . Med . 18 , 524 – 533 ( 2012 ) . 212 . Sancak , Y . et al . The Rag GTPases bind raptor and mediate amino acid signaling to mTORC1 . Science 320 , 1496 – 1501 ( 2008 ) . 213 . Bar - Peled , L . , Schweitzer , L . D . , Zoncu , R . & Sabatini , D . M . Ragulator is a GEF for the Rag GTPases that signal amino acid levels to mTORC1 . Cell 150 , 1196 – 1208 ( 2012 ) . 214 . Inoki , K . , Li , Y . , Xu , T . & Guan , K . L . Rheb GTPase is a direct target of TSC2 GAP activity and regulates mTOR signaling . Genes Dev . 17 , 1829 – 1834 ( 2003 ) . 215 . Tee , A . R . , Manning , B . D . , Roux , P . P . , Cantley , L . C . & Blenis , J . Tuberous sclerosis complex gene products , Tuberin and Hamartin , control mTOR signaling by acting as a GTPase - activating protein complex toward Rheb . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1259 – 1268 ( 2003 ) . Acknowledgements The authors thank T . Braulke , A . De Matteis , J . Irazoqui , D . Rubinsztein , D . Sabatini , P . Saftig and R . Zoncu for the helpful suggestions , G . Diez - Roux for helpful discussions and support during manuscript preparation and E . Abrams for manuscript editing . They acknowledge the support of the Italian Telethon Foundation ( TGM11CB6 , to C . S . and A . B ) , the Beyond Batten Disease Foundation ( to C . S . and A . B . ) , the European Research Council Advanced Investigator ( 250154 , to A . B . ) , March of Dimes ( # 6 - FY11 - 306 , to A . B ) and the US National Institutes of Health ( R01 - NS078072 , to A . B ) . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . FURTHER INFORMATION The Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine : www . tigem . it ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF R E V I E W S 296 | MAY 2013 | VOLUME 14 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved