As well as segregating duplicated genomes , the cell division process must ensure proper partitioning of cellular components between daughter cells . Cell divi - sion is traditionally subdivided into a series of steps — prometaphase , prophase , anaphase and telophase — according to the alignment of chromosomes and the cytoskeleton 1 ( Box 1 ) . The mitotic spindle mediates chromosome segregation and then condenses to form a midbody , which is severed during cytokinesis 2 in a process called cytokinetic abscission 3 . These steps are all regulated and executed with high spatial and tempo - ral control to ensure the correct segregation of genetic material between daughter cells . Each new daughter cell must be fully functional as soon as it completes division and must be able to process nutrients during metabolism to synthesize new proteins , DNA and other cellular components . New cells need to have functional signalling pathways to respond to inter - nal and external cues and must conduct various other tasks needed for survival and growth . Many of these functions occur in membrane - bound organelles , neces - sitating mechanisms to ensure their proper inheritance . De novo synthesis of organelles would be impractical in most cases as it requires considerable time and resources and could result in unequal complements of organelles across daughter cells . Nearly every cellular organelle is remodelled during division ( Fig . 1 ) through mecha - nisms that are less well understood than those medi - ating cytoskeletal and chromosomal dynamics during division . The dividing cell faces a formidable challenge partitioning its organelles , which can be large or small , exist in single or high copy numbers and be dynamic in shape and location . Some organelles such as the nuclear envelope and the Golgi fragment , and the pieces seg - regate aided in part by the cytoskeleton and then reas - semble after division . Other abundant organelles , such as mitochondria , change their morphology but cannot disassemble and reform , allowing some level of stochas - tic inheritance . The consequences of defective parti - tioning , and therefore the level of precision required , also vary between organelles . A cell lacking a functional Golgi , for example , will be unlikely to survive in the long term , whereas a cell that receives a smaller share of mitochondria than is optimal may well recover because mitochondria can divide and grow inde - pendently of the cell cycle 4 . An additional layer of com - plexity is added if the function of an organelle must be maintained for division to occur . These considerations mean that cells need individual mechanisms to segregate different organelles during division , dependent on and coordinated with the properties of the organelle . The crosstalk between cell division and organelle biology is further highlighted by the fact that numerous proteins are involved in both processes . For example , RNA interference screens for mitotic failure and prote - omic analyses of the midbody identified proteins that reside in membrane - bound organelles 5 – 10 , emphasizing the importance of these structures for division . To sys - tematically explore proteins at the interface of cell divi - sion and organelle biology , we created a list of proteins annotated as being resident in a membrane compartment and involved in cell division ( Supplementary Table 1 ; Mitotic spindle A cytoskeletal structure , consisting primarily of microtubules , built during division to enable the segregation of duplicated chromatids into daughter cells . Midbody A transient microtubule - rich structure in mammalian cells that forms from the condensed spindle and represents the final connection between daughter cells . Membrane and organelle dynamics during cell division Jeremy G . Carlton 1 , 2 * , Hannah Jones 1 , 2 and Ulrike S . Eggert 3 * Abstract | During division , eukaryotic cells undergo a dramatic , complex and coordinated remodelling of their cytoskeleton and membranes . For cell division to occur , chromosomes must be segregated and new cellular structures , such as the spindle apparatus , must be assembled . Pre - existing organelles , such as the nuclear envelope , endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus , must be disassembled or remodelled , distributed and reformed . Smaller organelles such as mitochondria as well as cytoplasmic content must also be properly distributed between daughter cells . This mixture of organelles and cytoplasm is bound by a plasma membrane that is itself subject to remodelling as division progresses . The lipids resident in these different membrane compartments play important roles in facilitating the division process . In recent years , we have begun to understand how membrane remodelling is coordinated during division ; however , there is still much to learn . In this Review , we discuss recent insights into how these important cellular events are performed and regulated . 1 School of Cancer and Pharmaceutical Sciences , King’s College London , London , UK . 2 The Francis Crick Institute , London , UK . 3 Randall Centre for Cell and Molecular Biophysics , School of Basic and Medical Biosciences and Department of Chemistry , King’s College London , London , UK . * e - mail : jeremy . carlton @ kcl . ac . uk ; ulrike . eggert @ kcl . ac . uk https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41580 - 019 - 0208 - 1 NaTure revIewS | MOLECuLaR CELL BiOLOGy R e v i e w s volume 21 | march 2020 | 151 Supplementary Figure 1 ) . This list includes many pro - teins familiar to cell division experts , albeit not yet studied extensively in the context of their association to membrane - bound structures . For many of these pro - teins there are little or no molecular details available , highlighting the need for further research in this area . In this Review , we compare the fates of different orga - nelles and membrane structures during cell division and highlight the many unsolved questions that relate to how partitioning occurs . We focus on events during mam - malian cell division but use examples from other organ - isms where appropriate , with an emphasis on events that occur during the later stages of division as these have not been extensively covered in the various excellent reviews that focus on individual aspects of mitosis 11 – 14 . When investigating the fate of membrane structures dur - ing division , it is helpful to consider organelle - specific issues as well as general principles and themes , keeping in mind that membrane structures do not rearrange in isolation but as part of a complex and coordinated pro - cess . First , we consider general themes in cell division , including the role of lipids and an analysis of the regula - tory roles of kinase and phosphatase activities in direct - ing mitosis and organelle inheritance . We then discuss how different structures separate , closing by analysing the midbody , where cleavage is mediated by several membrane - associated structures . Finally , we outline the many outstanding questions in this exciting and rapidly developing area of cell biology . The roles of lipids in cell division Most of our knowledge of membrane compartments is protein based , yet lipids make up the major proportion of membranes , with an estimated 50 – 100 lipid molecules per membrane protein 15 ( Box 2 ) . Although it is clear that cells express complex and diverse lipidomes 16 , it is not well understood why cells invest so much energy in creating and maintaining them or how the localization of lipids occurs at a molecular level . The lipid composition of dif - ferent organelles varies 17 , which may impact lipid – protein interactions and / or the physical properties of membranes ( like membrane fluidity or thickness ) 18 that could support organellar function . Lipids can also be exchanged between organelles through membrane contact sites , which are emerging as important functional hubs in cells 19 . Several lipids localize to division structures such as the cleavage furrow and the midbody 20 , 21 and may be involved in cell division . As discussed throughout this Review , many cell division proteins associate with membranes 15 ; some are integral membrane proteins that span the lipid bilayer and others associate with mem - branes peripherally , through lipid binding domains such as pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domains that bind to phosphoinositides . Finally , some cell division proteins are lipidated , meaning that they are post - translationally tagged with a lipid moiety . Dividing cells carefully regu - late their lipid composition and the localization of lipids within them ; for example , perturbation of sphingolipid biosynthesis results in cytokinesis failure 22 . The roles of phosphoinositides 23 in cell division are becoming clear , including their regulation of actin dynamics and par - ticipation in the maturation of the midbody . However , investigations into the involvement of other lipids are limited due to the practical and conceptual challenges in studying lipids ( Box 2 ) . Understanding how the regulation of proteins and lipids is coordinated during cell division will be a major challenge in future years . Cell cycle regulation of organelles The cell cycle consists of sequential phases driven by cyclin proteins in complex with cyclin - dependent kinases ( CDKs ) . In eukaryotes , division is initiated through Box 1 | Chromosomes and the cytoskeleton define the steps of cell division cell division , which includes the separation of chromosomes during mitosis and the physical cleavage of cells during cytokinesis , is a dynamic process defined by extensive morphological changes to the microtubule cytoskeleton ( see the figure ) . During prophase — the first step of mitosis — microtubules rearrange and begin to polymerize to form a bipolar spindle as DNa condenses into chromosomes . In prometaphase , nuclear envelope disassembly is completed and , during metaphase , chromosomes are aligned at the metaphase plate 1 , with each chromosome arm attached to kinetochores and connected via microtubules to opposite poles of the spindle . upon satisfaction of the spindle assembly checkpoint 252 , anaphase is triggered to activate chromatid segregation . as chromosomes separate and are moved towards opposing sides of the mitotic spindle , the spindle rearranges from a bipolar spindle to an array dominated by interzonal microtubules . as cells begin to exit division during telophase , microtubules condense into an intercellular bridge , or midbody , where separation of the daughter cells takes place . The rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton during division is coordinated with microtubules . rounding during mitotic entry is caused by changes to the actin cortex . During anaphase , a cleavage furrow , consisting of actin , myosin II and several other proteins , starts to form at the equator of the cell 2 . This ring then ingresses during telophase , with much of the required mechanical force provided by actomyosin contraction . The actin and microtubule cytoskeletons rearrange into a midbody through a series of carefully choreographed steps during cytokinesis . The final stage of separation — abscission — occurs in the intercellular bridge after the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons have been cleared . rho GTPase and aurora B kinase are key regulators of cytokinesis . Prophase Prometaphase Metaphase Anaphase Telophase Microtubule Mitoticspindle Chromosome Centrosome Actin Cleavagefurrow Midbody Cytokinetic abscission The terminal phase of cytokinesis , where the midbody is severed to produce two daughter cells . Phosphoinositides Also known as phosphatidy - linositol phosphates . Differentially phosphorylated signalling lipids with many roles , involved in defining the identities of different membrane compartments and vesicles . Cyclin proteins Cell cycle regulatory proteins , the levels of which vary in a cyclical fashion to enable specific biochemical events to occur in different phases of the cell cycle . Cyclin - dependent kinases ( CDKs ) . Protein kinases , the activity of which is strictly dependent upon association with a cyclin protein and is thus responsible for driving specific biochemical events in each phase of the cell cycle . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 152 | march 2020 | volume 21 2 Prophase 5 Anaphase / early telophase 6 Late telophase 1 Interphase Microtubules DNA Chromatid Golgi and Golgi - derived vesicles Centrosomes Endoplasmicreticulum Endosomes Mitochondria Nuclear pore complex 3 Prometaphase 4 Metaphase Fig . 1 | Overview of organelle dynamics during division . Major rearrangements in membrane - associated structures occur as cells progress from interphase ( 1 ) through prophase ( 2 ) , prometaphase ( 3 ) , metaphase ( 4 ) , anaphase / early telophase ( 5 ) and late telophase ( 6 ) . Cytokinesis begins during anaphase and ends after abscission . The plasma membrane undergoes major shape changes during mitosis . During prophase , the nuclear pore complex disassembles and the nuclear envelope disengages from the nucleus and merges with the endoplasmic reticulum . This organelle is then partitioned and inherited by daughter cells . The Golgi is disassembled during prometaphase into vesicles , which are segregated in metaphase and then reformed during telophase . Mitochondria are fused in interphase , fragment during mitotic entry in prophase and begin to re - fuse during anaphase . Recycling endosomes cluster at the spindle pole and a subset of endosomes ( Rab11 – FIP3 - positive and Rab35 - positive endosomes ) localize to the midbody prior to cytokinetic abscission . NaTure revIewS | MOLECuLaR CELL BiOLOGy R e v i e w s volume 21 | march 2020 | 153 activation of the key cell division kinase , CDK1 . Additional kinases , including Aurora A , Aurora B and polo - like kinase 1 ( PLK1 ) , help drive entry into , and pro - gression through , the division phase of the cell cycle . Targeted proteolysis of key cell cycle proteins ensures the unidirectionality of the cell cycle . As cells complete division , phosphatases are activated to revert the division state and allow cells to progress into interphase 24 , 25 . Spatiotemporal localization of kinases and phosphatases in cell division . While CDK1 is globally distributed , the dynamic localization of Aurora A , Aurora B and PLK1 contributes to the precise spatiotemporal regulation of cellular remodelling events during division . Additional regulatory kinases , including the Serine / threonine - protein kinases Haspin , MAST - L and MPS1 , contribute to the regulation of specific events at kinetochores . These kinases alter a variety of protein – protein interactions and activities that establish the mitotic state . Location - specific phosphorylation and dephosphorylation events can enhance the fidelity of division 26 . Organelle dynam - ics are also regulated by the localization of kinases dur - ing division ; for example , the localization of Aurora B to the spindle midzone creates a gradient of Aurora B activ - ity 27 , allowing substrates to be removed from Aurora B’s influence as the spindle elongates . Aurora B - dependent retention of condensins on lagging chromosomes allows persistent chromosome decondensation and nuclear regeneration in a ‘ruler - based’ model of mitotic exit 28 . A similar Aurora B gradient exists around centromeres 29 , suggesting that localized diffusion gradients might be a common contributor to the spatiotemporal regulation of mitotic events . During exit from cell division , protein phosphatases , typically PP1 and PP2A , remove mitosis - specific phos - phorylations , leading to the reversal of division - specific cytoskeletal and organellar rearrangements and recovery of interphase cell architecture 24 , 25 , 30 . The activities of PP1 and PP2A are suppressed during mitotic entry to allow establishment of the division state ; PP1 is inhibited by CDK1 phosphorylation and PP2A is inhibited follow - ing the MAST - L - dependent phosphorylation and acti - vation of the PP2A - inhibiting protein α - endosulfine , which is encoded by ENSA 31 – 33 . Our understanding of biological events regulated by these phosphatases has been hampered by the high number of regulatory subunits that act as adaptors for these enzymes ( > 200 PP1 targeting proteins 34 and 15 PP2A regulatory sub - units ( HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee ) at the European Bioinformatics Institute have been reported ) . PP1 adaptors , such as Ki67 and Repo - man , form PP1 holoenzymes that promote events during exit from cell division such as nuclear envelope reassembly and chro - matin remodelling 35 – 38 . The regulatory B - type subunits of PP2A — B55 and B56 — also appear to provide some specificity for mitotic exit 30 , 33 , 39 , allowing the regenera - tion of nuclei , the nuclear envelope and the Golgi . Kinase and phosphatase activities that regulate mitotic exit have been comprehensively reviewed elsewhere 40 – 42 . Regulated proteolysis in the control of cell division . Although levels of CDK activity govern transitions between cell cycle phases , unidirectional progression is ensured through regulated proteolysis of cyclins 43 , sister chromatid cohesion proteins 44 and major mitotic kinases 45 , 46 . Cell cycle - regulated ubiquitin ligases ensure the timely destruction of cell cycle regulators to main - tain forward progression , particularly the anaphase - promoting complex / cyclosome ( APC / C ) during division and the Skp , cullin , F - box - containing complex during the rest of the cell cycle 47 . Regulated proteolysis is required for chromatid separation and to exit the division state . Although there is evidence that organelle dynamics are indirectly regulated by proteolysis as a result of changes in the expression levels of kinases and phosphatases , direct evidence of a role of proteolysis in organelle inheri - tance is limited . The important role of APC / C in mitosis suggests its activity must be spatiotemporally regulated to ensure coordinated cellular reorganization 48 . APC / C can control mitotic levels of DRP1 ( reF . 49 ) , a key ubiqui - tin ligase required for mitochondrial fission , suggest - ing that it might control organellar proteostasis events linked to cell cycle progression . However , it is not clear if APC / C localizes to membrane - bound organelles , and details of any APC / C substrates on these organelles are largely unknown . Plasma membrane dynamics The plasma membrane in dividing cells is closely con - nected to the cortex and rearranges to support the expan - sion of cell surface area , adopt different curvatures and respond to mechanical stresses . Membrane dynamics respond to changes in cell volume and surface topology . During mitosis , cells alter their volume and surface topology rapidly 50 ( Fig . 1 ) . With little time for de novo membrane synthesis to accommodate these changes , cells instead require membrane shaping , delivery and removal . New membrane can be added from internal stores via trafficking events such as exo - cytosis or endocytic recyling 51 or by plasma membrane remodelling , for example , through membrane blebbing 52 . Box 2 | Lipids in biology lipids are critically important in many biological processes and make up a major proportion of membranes . lipids are much smaller than proteins and , except for sterols , usually consist of a polar head group that faces the exterior of the membrane and one or more hydrophobic carbon side chains that face the interior of the membrane’s lipid bilayer . lipid bilayers are rarely symmetric but display different lipids on their inner and outer leaflets . hydrocarbon side chains can vary in their length and saturation levels , which , in combination with different head groups , gives rise to complex and diverse lipidomes 16 . The lipid profile of cells reaches to many thousands of structurally distinct lipids , an order of diversity approaching that of proteins . cells pay a substantial energy cost to maintain such diverse lipidomes , synthesized and metabolized by hundreds of different proteins , many of which reside in the Golgi and the endoplasmic reticulum . lipids have many different cellular functions , including structural and signalling roles . They can define membrane structures by influencing physical properties such as stiffness or curvature , both throughout the cell and within specific nanoscopic locations . lipids associate with each other and with membrane or cytosolic proteins , which leads to the transmission of various signals , defining communication within and between cells . lipids are challenging to study because , unlike proteins or nucleic acids , they are not synthesized iteratively and therefore cannot be systematically removed or tagged 253 . lipid mass spectrometry has significantly improved in recent years , making lipid analysis more straightforward and therefore more broadly accessible 254 . Aurora A A mitotic serine / threonine protein kinase , the activity of which peaks during g2 – M transition and is essential for spindle formation . Aurora B A mitotic serine / threonine protein kinase that complexes with members of the chromo - some passenger complex and coordinates a number of events necessary for completion of cell division . Polo - like kinase 1 ( PLK1 ) . A mitotic serine / threonine protein kinase that plays important roles in triggering M - phase entry , activation of the APC / C and later cytokinetic events . Regulated proteolysis The intentional destruction of proteins through ubiquitylation and proteasomal or lysosomal degradation . Ubiquitin A small 8 . 6 kDa protein that can be post - translationally attached to lysine residues on proteins of interest by e3 ubiquitin ligases , often resulting in its recognition by the proteasome for degradation . Anaphase - promoting complex / cyclosome ( APC / C ) . A multiprotein e3 ubiquitin ligase that targets cell cycle proteins for proteasomal degradation . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 154 | march 2020 | volume 21 Expansion of the plasma membrane during anaphase helps to position the spindle correctly for symmet - ric division . The relationship between plasma mem - brane topology and spindle positioning appears to be reciprocal — perturbation of spindle positioning results in an effort to recentre the apparatus through asymmet - ric cortical membrane expansion , perhaps by mem - brane blebbing 52 . Conversely , polar membrane blebbing , coordinated by oscillatory movements along the cortex , contributes to the positioning of the cleavage furrow by relieving membrane tension caused by rapid shape changes at this stage of division 53 . In sea urchin embryos , polar membrane expansion may provide a pushing force to support furrow ingression 54 . These examples illustrate that different cell types may utilize different strategies for membrane expansion ; however , the internal sources of membranes added during division remain unclear . The plasma membrane and the endocytic network intersect . The plasma membrane is the entry point into the endocytic network . It has been debated whether endocytosis continues while cells divide : some groups found that endocytosis does not occur during division 55 , while others found that endocytic recycling can be a source of membrane for plasma membrane expansion 51 . The emerging consensus is that some degree of endocy - tosis persists throughout division , and specific endocytic cargoes that are important to the cell , such as growth fac - tor receptors , may be prioritized to allow their partition - ing during division 56 . In addition , different endocytic vesicles have important roles during later stages of cytokinesis ( see below ) . Effect of cell – cell interactions on division . Cell morphol - ogy during division is connected to , and can be depend - ent on , interactions with neighbouring cells or the extracellular environment 50 , 57 . The mechanical changes involved in mitotic rounding , cleavage furrow ingres - sion and sealing after abscission all require an input of force 58 ; for example , a release of membrane tension can induce abscission 59 . In epithelial monolayers , intercellu - lar tension decreases during mitotic entry , and traction forces applied by neighbouring cells and the extracel - lular matrix support cytokinetic progression , although excessive adhesive force can cause cytokinesis failure 60 , 61 . These data suggest that cells communicate with their environment and each other throughout division , per - haps coordinating their behaviour with neighbouring cells through mechanical signals or signalling cascades . Indeed , depletion of plasma membrane - resident pro - teins like specific g protein - coupled receptors can inhibit cell division 62 , 63 . The cell - surface proteomes of mitotic and interphase cells differ 64 and thus provide additional candidates for signals that control communication between the cell exterior and the cell division machinery . Connections between the cell cortex and the plasma membrane . The lipids and proteins of the plasma mem - brane are highly structured , organized and constrained by their interactions with the cortex 65 – 67 . These physi - cal constraints are functionally important ; for example , it has been proposed that a diffusion barrier exists in the cleavage furrow 68 , dependent on filament - forming septin proteins that bind to both membranes and the cytoskeleton . The plasma membrane in dividing cells is linked to the cell cortex through a variety of addi - tional membrane - binding adaptors 15 , including anil - lin 69 and the ezrin , radixin , moesin ( ERM ) proteins 70 . Key regulators of cytoskeletal dynamics , such as the small GTPase Rho and its effectors , also associate with the plasma membrane , and this association is essential for their function 70 – 73 . Other proteins that regulate the actin cytoskeleton , such as capping protein 74 , profilin 75 , cofilin 76 and myosin II 77 , all have lipid - binding domains . Interestingly , none of these key linker or effector proteins is an integral membrane protein ; instead , they associ - ate with the membrane through lipid modifications or through lipid - binding domains ( for example , Rho con - tains a geranylgeranyl group , and anillin and the septins contain PH domains ) . It is possible that reversible inter - actions between the membrane and the cortex aid the dividing cell in regulating and performing membrane rearrangements with high temporal and spatial preci - sion . Understanding the mechanisms controlling the coordinated remodelling of the plasma membrane and its links to the cortex in cultured cells and in 3D tissue environments will be a key challenge in coming years . ER and nuclear envelope The endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) forms an inter - connected network of membrane sheets and tubules that regulate the folding , processing and transport of secretory and transmembrane proteins , acts as a releas - able store for intracellular calcium and is a site for lipid biosynthesis . Structure of the ER and nuclear envelope . ER membranes surround and enclose the nucleus , forming the charac - teristic bi - membraned nuclear envelope that protects and structures the chromatin . Underlying this structure is a meshwork of intermediate filaments called lamins ( lamin A / C and lamin B ) that forms the nuclear lam - ina 11 , 78 ( Fig . 2a ) . This structure supports the nuclear enve - lope , helping to organize chromatin and provide the nucleus with mechanical rigidity 79 . Positioned through - out this bi - membraned structure are the nuclear pore complexes ( NPCs ) , large macromolecular structures that control transport across the nuclear envelope 80 , and the linker of nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton complex , which traverses the nuclear envelope and links the nucleus to the cytoskeleton 81 . Although the outer nuclear membrane is continuous with the ER , the inner nuclear membrane ( INM ) is biochemically distinct , with its own complement of proteins , retained at the INM through interactions with the lamina , histones and chromatin - associated proteins 82 , 83 . During interphase , the ER and nuclear enve - lope have distinct morphologies , with membranous sheets forming the nuclear envelope and a variety of morphometric proteins contributing to the cisternal and tubulo - reticular structure of the peripheral ER . These proteins include the Reticulon ( RTN1 – RTN4 ) and Receptor expression - enhancing proteins ( REEP1 – REEP6 ) , which stabilize highly curved ER tubules and Skp , cullin , F - box - containing complex ( SCF - containing complex ) . A multiprotein e3 ubiquitin ligase that targets cell cycle proteins for proteasomal degradation . Cortex An actin - rich layer immediately underneath the plasma membrane that plays important roles in cell shape control . Membrane blebbing The bulging of the cell membrane that protrudes into the extracellular environment when cortical connections are uncoupled . G protein - coupled receptors A receptor with seven transmembrane domains that can initiate intracellular signalling cascades in response to ligand binding . Septin proteins A group of filament - forming gTP - binding proteins that can function to recruit target proteins , scaffold complex assemblies or create diffusion barriers to restrict protein mobility . Lipid modifications Post - translational covalent attachment of a lipid group to specific residues within a protein , commonly to increase the affinity of the protein for membranes . Nuclear pore complexes ( NPCs ) . A multi - subunit protein complex comprised of nucleoporin proteins that spans the nuclear envelope and allows regulated exchange of material between the nucleoplasm and cytoplasm . Linker of nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton complex ( LiNC complex ) . A multi - subunit protein complex comprised of KASH and SUN domain proteins that spans the nuclear envelope and links the nuclear lamina to the cytoplasmic microtubule , actin and intermediate filament networks . Morphometric proteins A group of proteins that can shape organelles by inserting into , stabilizing or remodelling organellar membranes . NaTure revIewS | MOLECuLaR CELL BiOLOGy R e v i e w s volume 21 | march 2020 | 155 the curved edges of sheets 84 , 85 ; a family of dynamin - related GTPases called atlastins , which regulate homotypic fusion events 86 ; and lunapark protein ( LNP ) , which sta - bilizes three - way junctions of the tubular ER network 87 . The integral membrane protein CLIMP63 stabilizes ER sheets , and the transmembrane protein kinectin 1 , ribosomes and ribosome - binding proteins such as p180 contribute to cisternal architecture 88 . Further lev - els of morphological diversity , including ER matrices and dynamic nanoholes , have been revealed through super - resolution microscopy 89 , 90 . The interphase ER is also structured by the microtubule cytoskeleton , and a number of modifications take place during division to enable ER remodelling ; the mechanisms shaping the ER have been reviewed in detail elsewhere 91 , 92 . Nuclear envelope disassembly upon mitotic onset . CDK1 - dependent phosphorylation of INM - chromatin and INM - lamina tethers upon mitotic entry allows the nuclear envelope to disengage from chromatin and a Interphase b Mitotic entry EB1STIM1 Microtubule Lamin B receptor HP1 Lamin B Lamin A / C BAF LEM2 MAN1 Emerin LAP1 LINCcomplex NPC LAP2 β CLIMP63 Transmembranenucleoporin Nucleoporin Phosphate Lamin B Lamin A / C LAP1 LAP2 β LEM2 MAN1 Emerin Lamin B receptor Fig . 2 | Restructuring of the ER and nuclear envelope during cell division . a | During interphase , the nuclear envelope is anchored to chromatin and the nuclear lamina . This tethering occurs through interactions of LEM domain - containing inner nuclear membrane proteins such as MAN1 , LEM2 and Emerin with BAF , interaction of the lamin B receptor with heterochromatin protein 1 ( HP1 ) , as well as direct interaction of the lamin - associated peptide 1 ( L AP1 ) and L AP2 β with lamin A / C or lamin B . The outer nuclear membrane is continuous with the peripheral endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) , which is structured through contacts with the microtubule cytoskeleton via the STIM1 – EB1 complex or CLIMP63 and through the actions of ER morphometric proteins . The linker of nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton ( LINC ) complex spans the nuclear envelope and also aids in ER attachment to the cytoskeleton . The LINC complex is anchored through interaction of its SUN proteins with the lamina . Nuclear pore complexes ( NPCs ) traverse the nuclear envelope and allow regulated nucleo - cytoplasmic exchange . b | During mitosis , mitotic kinases phosphorylate a variety of proteins to enable the disengagement of the nuclear envelope from the lamina and chromatin , the release of cytoskeletal contacts and the dissolution of the nuclear lamina . Phosphorylation of NPC nucleoporin subunits causes NPC dissolution and distribution of nucleoporins into the ER membrane and the cytoplasm . During lamina dissolution , farnesylated lamin B remains in the mitotic ER , whereas non - farnesylated lamin A / C is released to the cytosol . Separate ER and nuclear envelope identities are lost during mitosis and only reformed upon exit from cell division , when the activity of phosphatases , including PP1 and PP2A , reverts the mitotic state and allows regeneration of the ER and the nuclear envelope . Dynamin A gTPase involved in membrane fission reactions . Part of a larger superfamily of dynamin - like proteins . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 156 | march 2020 | volume 21 nuclear envelope proteins to be redistributed into the mitotic ER 11 ( Fig . 2b ) . Phosphorylation of lamins by CDK1 and PKC disrupts the nuclear lamina , facil - itating the release of the nuclear envelope from the nucleus 93 – 97 . CDK1 - dependent phosphorylation of the inner nuclear membrane protein SUN1 helps the LINC complex disengage 98 from the lamina . Spatial control over phospholipid metabolism through inactivation of the phosphatidic acid phosphatase lipin restricts de novo ER membrane formation and contributes to nuclear envelope disassembly 99 . Following nuclear envelope breakdown , individual nuclear envelope and ER iden - tities are lost , and nuclear envelope proteins are parti - tioned into daughter cells alongside components of the ER . In Caenorhabditis elegans , reticulons aid nuclear envelope disassembly , suggesting that conversion of the sheet - like nuclear envelope into a more tubular morphology may assist demembranation 100 . The cyto - skeleton also plays a role in nuclear envelope disassem - bly , with pulling forces created by dynein contributing to demembranation through the generation of prophase nuclear envelope invaginations 101 – 104 . In starfish oocytes , transient polymerization of an F - actin shell at the nuclear periphery contributes to the physical disruption of the nuclear envelope 105 . However , the role of actin in media - ting nuclear envelope disassembly in mammalian cells is unclear and will be an important area of future study . The phosphorylation of nucleoporins ( NUPs ) leads to the rapid disassembly of NPCs upon mitotic onset 78 , 106 . Most NUPs are released into the cytoplasm , except for the transmembrane NUPs , which enter the mitotic ER 107 , 108 . Recent findings show that the transient locali - zation of PLK1 to NPCs facilitates nuclear pore break - down and the subsequent disassembly of the nuclear envelope in early mitosis . PLK1 acts with CDK1 to hyper - phosphorylate NUP98 and NUP53 , leading to the separation of key interconnecting NUPs and breakdown of the nuclear pore 106 , 109 – 111 . As such , phosphorylation - induced disengagement of inter - NUP interactions at mitotic onset is an important contributor to the break - down of nuclear compartmentalization and nuclear envelope disassembly . Morphometric changes to the ER during division . The interphase ER displays a variety of tubulo - reticular and cisternal subdomains ; however , the exact morphology of the mitotic ER is under debate . The existence of extended curvilinear membranes , as observed by live cell imaging in mitotic cells 112 , 113 , suggests that the ER mem - brane has a cisternal arrangement , whereas volume elec - tron microscopy approaches 114 , 115 show the formation of a tubulo - reticular and fenestrated sheet ER structure , with the ER - shaping proteins REEP3 and REEP4 con - tributing to tubular morphology during division 116 . The extent to which each morphology predominates may be cell - type dependent 115 . The peripheral ER in divid - ing cells is excluded from the spindle and might form a barrier to facilitate the exclusion of other organelles 117 . Mitotic phosphorylation of ER morphometric proteins can influence ER morphology by suppressing LNP mul - timerization 118 , 119 , CLIMP63 – microtubule interactions 120 and the dissociation of the ER resident protein stromal interaction molecule 1 ( STIM1 ) from the microtubule - binding protein EB1 ( reF . 121 ) . These events suppress the association of the ER with micro tubules and prevent the ER from interfering with spindle assembly 121 . REEP3 and REEP4 are also needed to focus the ER at spindle poles , preventing their premature association with chromatin and the resultant failure of cell division 122 . ER inheritance is governed by its association with spin - dle poles and astral microtubules 123 ; however , it will be important to understand how the spindle contributes to the inheritance of this organelle without letting these organelles interfere with chromosome segregation , espe - cially given that artificially tethering the ER membrane to metaphase chromatin produces severe mitotic defects 124 . Regenerating the nuclear envelope . In late anaphase and telophase , ER membranes engage and enclose daugh - ter nuclei to regenerate the nuclear envelope 11 , 125 , 126 . Elevated expression of ER tubule - shaping proteins can suppress this process , suggesting that the transition from tubule to sheet - like morphologies is a rate limit - ing step for nuclear envelope reassembly 127 . Importantly , ER membranes must enclose a singular nucleus , rather than individualized chromosomes , and recent work suggests that the chromatin - associated protein barrier - to - autointegration factor ( BAF ) helps construct a crosslinked chromatin surface upon which ER membranes are deposited 128 . As nuclear envelope reassembly requires the reversal of the mitotic state , PP1 and PP2A have important roles in coordinating nuclear reassembly and chromatin decondensation . The PP2A regulatory subunit B55α is needed for nuclear envelope reassem - bly during mitotic exit 30 , and PP1 , through its target - ing subunits PNUTS 129 , AKAP149 ( reF . 130 ) , Repo - Man 35 and Ki67 ( reFS 131 , 132 ) , ensures timely nuclear envelope regeneration , lamin reassembly , NPC reformation and the re - engagement of INM - chromatin tethers . The spin - dle can also play a role in controlling this process ; in Drosophila melanogaster neuroblasts , Aurora B can delay nuclear envelope regeneration around late - segregating chromosomes 133 , suggesting that the midzone Aurora B gradient can spatially control re - membranation . Aurora B - dependent spatial control of nuclear envelope regen - eration may also occur in human cells ; however , cur - rent research suggests that it regulates the presence of NPCs and the quality of the nuclear envelope rather than membrane formation itself 134 . During mitotic exit , disassembled NPCs are regen - erated . This can occur through their insertion into an already sealed nuclear envelope and via the assembly of the membrane around a pre - existing pore structure . Indeed , correlative live cell electron tomography revealed that small discontinuities in fenestrated nuclear enve - lope sheets dilate and acquire morphological features of NPCs as anaphase progresses 135 , suggesting that nuclear envelope assembly can occur at this point around a pre - existing pore . However , NPCs can also be incorporated into the core of the nuclear envelope as the nucleus expands , mimicking NPC incorporation in interphase . Tomographic approaches have revealed that NPCs can form here by extrusion of a pre - existing structure through the INM 136 , suggesting that both mechanisms Dynein A microtubule - based molecular motor that travels towards the minus end of microtubules . Nucleoporins ( NUPs ) . A family of proteins that help build the NPC . Barrier - to - autointegration factor ( BAF ) . A small 10 kDa chromatin - binding protein that binds LeM domain - containing inner membrane proteins and participates in nuclear , and nuclear envelope , regeneration . NaTure revIewS | MOLECuLaR CELL BiOLOGy R e v i e w s volume 21 | march 2020 | 157 of NPC incorporation operate during mitotic exit . Nucleoporins can also help structure the lamina and the INM proteins during mitotic exit ; for example , the NUP ELYS is essential for localizing the lamin B receptor and INM proteins emerin , lamina - associated polypeptide 2α ( LAP2α ) and BAF to differential regions of the envelope during its reformation 137 . The final event in nuclear regeneration is membrane fusion , which seals remaining holes in the nuclear enve - lope . Whereas point fusion of ER membranes allows nuclear envelope expansion to accommodate the decon - densing chromatin , a specialized fusion event is required to seal holes in the bi - layered nuclear envelope to sep - arate inner and outer nuclear membranes connected at these sites . This process , called annular fusion , is medi - ated through the recruitment of the endosomal sorting complex , eSCrT - iii 138 , 139 , which performs topologically equivalent membrane separation events in a variety of other cellular processes ( Box 3 ) . During annular fusion , CHMP7 , an ER - localized ESCRT - III component 140 , tran - siently assembles at target sites through interaction with the INM protein LEM2 ( reF . 141 ) and recruits ESCRT - III components , which close remaining holes in the nuclear envelope to allow nuclear compartmentalization 138 , 139 . Fenestrations in the nuclear envelope are formed when membranes surround spindle microtubules , and ESCRT - III can recruit the microtubule - severing enzyme spastin to coordinate microtubule disassembly with membrane sealing 139 ; it is not known how this process is coordinated with the mitotic reassembly of NPCs . The roles of ESCRTs in nuclear envelope regeneration have recently been reviewed in detail 142 – 144 . Golgi apparatus As the Golgi is a single - copy organelle it must be dis - assembled and reassembled in daughter cells during division to allow equal inheritance . Golgi structure . The Golgi is made from elongated stacked cisternae that form an interlinked ribbon - like structure ; these cisternae are organized to allow membrane and secretory cargo traffic to and through this complex ( Fig . 3a ) . The peripheral golgi reassembly and stacking proteins ( GRASPs ) GRASP55 and GRASP65 play important roles in structuring the Golgi 145 , 146 , and a family of coiled - coil proteins called golgins 147 capture vesicles through inter - action with tethering factors such as p115 ( reF . 148 ) . Golgins can also interact with GRASPs themselves to help struc - ture the Golgi . The Golgi is central to the proper function - ing of biosynthetic and endocytic trafficking pathways , and a highly regulated remodelling programme ensures its disassembly and regeneration during division . Golgi disassembly and suppression of transport activity . Golgi disassembly is initiated in late G2 - phase of the cell cycle . The C - terminal - binding protein 1 / brefeldin A ADP - ribosylated substrate ( CtBP1 / BARS ) separates connec - tions between cisternae stacks 149 , 150 , converting the Golgi ribbon into isolated ministacks ( Fig . 3b ) . CDK1 , PLK1 and MAP kinases can phosphorylate GRASPs during mitotic entry to suppress trans - oligomerization and aid Golgi ribbon unlinking 151 – 155 . GRASP65 also stabilizes microtubules , facilitating Golgi clustering in interphase ; its phosphorylation and inactivation upon mitotic entry contributes to ribbon unlinking by suppressing this link to the cytoskeleton 156 . Preventing Golgi ribbon unlink - ing stops the relocation of Aurora A to centrosomes 157 and blocks mitotic entry , suggesting that cells actively monitor the integrity of this organelle and only allow mitotic progression if accurate inheritance will be pos - sible 152 , 158 . This block suggests that stack unlinking might be an organelle - based mitotic entry checkpoint 159 , 160 . Following Golgi stack unlinking , Golgi cisternae are vesiculated through persistent budding mediated by the coatomer COPI . Suppression of vesicular fusion , through phosphorylation of golgins such as GM130 , which prevents interaction with p115 ( reFS 161 – 163 ) , drives a steady - state shift towards Golgi disassembly . Ubiquitin dynamics also regulate membrane fusion at the Golgi ; for example , ubiquitylation of the Golgi SNAre syntaxin 5 by the E3 ubiquitin ligase HACE1 suppresses inter action with its cognate SNARE BET1 and inhibits fusion events at the Golgi upon mitotic onset 164 , 165 . Fusion recovers upon VCIP135 - dependent deubiquitination of this ESCRT - III A membrane remodelling machinery that performs a topologically unique membrane fission activity called reverse topology membrane fission . See also Box 3 . Golgi reassembly and stacking proteins ( grASPs ) . Myristoylated peripheral membrane proteins that localize to golgi cisternae and trans - oligomerize to facilitate cisternal stacking . C - terminal - binding protein 1 / brefeldin A ADP - ribosylated substrate ( CtBP1 / BArS ) . A dual function protein that regulates both transcriptional repression in the nucleus and membrane fission reactions in the cytoplasm . Box 3 | The ESCRT complex and its roles in membrane remodelling organelles are remodelled through membrane fusion and membrane fission events , which are carried out by membrane binding proteins . The majority of remodelling events involve a membrane fission event to generate a vesicle through budding into the cytoplasm or involve the fusion of vesicles with a pre - existing membrane . cells also perform a more complicated membrane remodelling event whereby the membrane is deformed away from the cytoplasm and the budded structure is separated from the cytoplasm through ‘reverse topology membrane fission’ 144 . reverse topology membrane fission is performed by the eScrT machinery , an evolutionarily conserved multi - subunit membrane remodelling complex . eScrT proteins were originally identified for their role in endosomal sorting , where they pinch off vesicles within the endosomal lumen and sort cargo onto these vesicles . a division of labour is thought to occur where eScrT - I and eScrT - II subcomplexes perform cargo sorting on endosomes , and eScrT - III performs the reverse topology membrane fission required to release intra - endosomal vesicles into the endosomal lumen . This topology is observed in a number of other cellular situations , where a similar membranous channel connecting two membranes also needs to be severed through reverse topology membrane fission . These events are mediated by eScrT - III and include the release of enveloped viruses from the plasma membrane , cytokinetic abscission , the sealing of small holes in the bilayered nuclear envelope ( during exit from cell division and also in cases of interphase rupture ) , the closure of autophagosomes and the repair of endolysosomal and plasma membranes . The various roles for eScrT - III - mediated reverse topology membrane fission are summarized in the figure 142 – 144 . roles for eScrT - III in cell division are conserved in archaea 242 , pointing to this function as an ancestral role for this membrane remodelling machinery . Intra - endosomal vesicle formation Nuclear envelopesealing Endolysosomalrepair Autophagosomeclosure Cytokineticabscission Viralbudding Plasma membranerepair Nucleus www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 158 | march 2020 | volume 21 SNARE , an event that is blocked in mitosis owing to phosphorylation of VCIP135 and its subsequent inactiv - ation and dissociation from Golgi membranes 166 , 167 . Additionally , the ATPases NSF and valosin - containing protein ( VCP ) allow continual rounds of vesicular fusion events through the disassembly of trans - SNARE com - plexes . While NSF - mediated fusion is blocked by mitotic phosphorylation of GM130 ( reF . 162 ) , mitotic phosphory - lation of the VCP - adaptor p47 dissociates this protein from membranes 168 to block VCP - dependent membrane fusion in mitosis . Inhibition of membrane fusion leads to the formation of small tubulovesicular clusters referred to as a cytoplasmic Golgi ‘haze’ ; although this haze may partition into daughter cells by stochastic mecha - nisms , the presence of a mitotic spindle and GM130 – microtubule interactions assist the inheritance of these membranes 169 . An alternate hypothesis suggests that the block in transport leads to the redistribution of Golgi components into the ER , with Golgi inheritance being dependent upon the ER 170 – 172 . It is possible that elements of both models operate , with some Golgi components redistributing into the ER during mitosis ; arguments SNARE Membrane - embedded and soluble proteins that can oligomerize to mediate the fusion of vesicles with cellular membranes . CtBP1 / BARS a Interphase b Mitotic entry p115 GM130 GRASP55 GRASP65 ARF1 Phosphate cis trans cis trans Tubulin Transport vesicle Importin - α Importin - β TPX2 Nucleus Spindlemicrotubule Fig . 3 | Rearrangement of the Golgi during cell division . a | The interphase Golgi consists of stacked cisternae linked through the interactions of cisternal tethering proteins such as GRASP55 and GRASP65 , and supported by golgin proteins ( including GM130 and its adaptor p115 ) , which provide structure and help capture incoming transport vesicles . In its active form , the small GTPase ARF1 binds membranes and assists in the recruitment of the coatomer COPI ( not shown ) to aid in the generation of transport vesicles . b | During division , kinases activated in M - phase phosphorylate Golgi - localized targets , including GM130 , GRASP55 and GRASP65 . This phosphorylation disrupts the homodimerization of GRASPs and dissociates golgins , such as GM130 , from their interaction with both GRASPs and tethering factors such as p115 . These modifications lead to the unlinking and disassembly of Golgi stacks and contribute to the suppression of incident vesicular traffic . The membrane fission protein CtBP1 / BARS separates the Golgi into isolated ministacks , and the release of GTPases , such as ARF1 , suppresses Golgi structure , identity and function . A block in vesicle fusion leads to the formation of small tubulovesicular clusters , referred to as a Golgi haze , allowing Golgi membranes to be inherited through either stochastic mechanisms or through association with the mitotic spindle . GM130 on the mitotic Golgi also plays additional roles in directing spindle assembly through sequestering importin - α and releasing its inhibition of the spindle - assembly factor TPX2 . NaTure revIewS | MOLECuLaR CELL BiOLOGy R e v i e w s volume 21 | march 2020 | 159 for each mode of Golgi inheritance are outlined in a recent review 173 . Integrating Golgi disassembly with cellular remodel - ling events . Golgi disassembly during the G2 – M tran - sition occurs alongside global cellular reorganization events such as spindle assembly . Here , spindle assembly factors such as TPX2 target and activate Aurora A on microtubules to stimulate microtubule polymeriza - tion 174 , 175 . In interphase , assembly factors are inhib - ited through interaction of their nuclear localization sequences with importins 176 , 177 . Upon mitotic entry , phosphorylation of GM130 by CDK1 ( reF . 162 ) disrupts its interaction with p115 and exposes a nuclear localization signal within GM130 . This nuclear localization signal relocates importin - α to Golgi membranes and so relieves its suppression of TPX2 - dependent spindle assembly 169 . p115 , released from GM130 , can then associate with spindle poles and aid spindle assembly 178 . Thus , Golgi disassembly plays important roles in regulating the formation and maintenance of the mitotic spindle . Rebuilding the Golgi during mitotic exit . Golgi regener - ation occurs rapidly between anaphase and cytokinesis . Regeneration requires restoration of vesicular fusion to allow the reformation of Golgi cisterna , restacking of cisterna , and the congression and fusion of stacks to form ribbons . PP2A - dependent dephosphorylation of GM130 restores p115 - dependent vesicular tether - ing and fusion 179 , and dephosphorylation of VCIP135 restores its deubiquitinase activity , allowing p97 - mediated membrane fusion to recover 165 , 166 , 180 . In addi - tion , PP2A - mediated dephosphorylation of GRASP65 allows cisternal re - stacking 181 , 182 , and both tangential and radial microtubule - dependent movement helps re - establish a Golgi ribbon 183 . In telophase , ‘twin’ Golgis are generated in each daughter cell ; a smaller twin assembles near the cleav - age furrow and a larger twin assembles proximal to the centrosome 184 , 185 . During cytokinesis , the smaller twin migrates around the nucleus to coalesce with its sibling and regenerate a singular Golgi . The reason for this positioning is unclear , but it is possible that the smaller twin provides Golgi - derived vesicles to the midbody for abscission 186 . Migration and coalescence of these Golgi twins was recently shown to require degradation of the ARF1 guanine nucleotide exchange factor GBF1 ( reF . 187 ) , and impairing GBF1 degradation led to persistent Golgi membranes within the midbody , suggesting that spatio - temporal control of Golgi reassembly is a key aspect of mitotic exit . Mitochondria Mitochondria are double - membrane organelles that , as the main energy producers in cells , generate ATP via oxidative phosphorylation . Mitochondria undergo con - tinuous fusion and fission to adapt to the energy needs of the cell and can be transported to areas of the cell with high energy requirements by interactions with the actin and microtubule cytoskeleton 188 . Mitochondria are thought to have evolved from endosymbiotic bac - teria and , as such , unlike other organelles , have their own distinct genomes , which must be replicated in a dedicated growth and division cycle that can occur independently of the cell cycle 4 . The dividing cell must accomplish two tasks involving mitochondria : opti - mize energy production during division and distribute mitochondria between daughter cells . Mitochondrial fission and fusion . Mitochondria fuse dur - ing G1 - phase , elongate during S - phase , fragment during G2 – M transition and remain fragmented during divi - sion 4 ( Fig . 4 ) . Mitochondrial fission – fusion cycles are regulated by dynamin - related GTPase proteins ( DRPs ) . Fission , including the distribution of mitochondrial DNA , is mainly regulated by DRP1 and occurs at ER – mitochondria contact sites 188 . Fusion of the mito - chondrial outer membrane is controlled by the DRPs mitofusin 1 and mitofusin 2 ( MFN1 and MFN2 ) , and fusion of the mitochondrial inner membrane is con - trolled by the DRP OPA1 . During G2 – M , DRP1 is phos - phorylated and activated by Aurora A ( via the small GTPase RalA ) 189 and CDK1 , resulting in increased mito - chondrial fission 189 , 190 ( Fig . 4a ) , which may be accompa - nied by the ubiquitylation and degradation of MFN1 and MFN2 ( reF . 191 ) . During mitotic exit , DRP1 is sumoylated and ubiquitylated ( Fig . 4b ) , inducing its degradation and the recovery of mitochondrial fusion activity during cyto kinesis 49 , 190 ( Fig . 4c ) . Other pathways may also parti - cipate in regulating mitochondrial dynamics during divi - sion ; for example , DRP1 activity is inhibited by binding to phospholipids 192 . In addition , septin 2 , which also participates in cell division , binds to DRP1 and reduces its activity at some mitochondrial division sites 193 . The active segregation of mitochondria may also contribute to cell fate determination ; following the asymmetric division of stem cells , younger and presumably more active mitochondria are retained in the more stem - like daughter cell 194 . Mitochondrial inheritance and function during divi - sion . Mitochondrial fragmentation may aid stochastic mitochondrial inheritance during division ; for example , in Schizosaccharomyces pombe , mitochondria are pushed to the poles of dividing cells and redistributed just before division in proportion to the segregated cytoplasmic volume 195 . However , stochastic distribution is probably not the only factor contributing to mitochondrial seg - regation . Indeed , in mitosis , mitochondria are attached to microtubule tips through the centromere protein F ( CENPF ) and the mitochondrial GTPases MIRO1 and MIRO2 ( reF . 190 ) . Along with MIRO1 , the mitotic kinesin KIF5B ( a kinesin 1 family member ) employs astral microtubules to transport mitochondria to the furrow during mitotic exit 196 , and mitotic phosphorylation - induced decoupling of motor proteins from mitochon - dria aids symmetric inheritance of these organelles 197 . Studies in mouse embryos , in which the genes encod - ing MIRO1 and MIRO2 have been knocked out , sug - gest that MIRO1 and MIRO2 link the mitochondria to micro tubules and the actin cytoskeleton ; the latter of these links can occur via the non - processive myosin motor unconventional myosin - XIX ( encoded by MYO19 ) , which is located in the mitochondrial outer membrane 198 . Sumoylated A protein that has been post - translationally modified with a ubiquitin - like protein known as SUMo ( small ubiquitin - related modifier ) . SUMo alters the protein’s function rather than targeting it for degradation . Centromere protein F ( CeNPF ) . A protein that associates with kinetochores in the g2 phase of the cell cycle and then localizes to the spindle midzone and midbody during cytokinesis . Kinesin Members of a family of microtubule - based molecular motors that typically travel towards the plus end of microtubules . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 160 | march 2020 | volume 21 This protein is required for the symmetric distribution of mitochondria between daughter cells , and its loss leads to the accumulation of mitochondria at spindle poles during mitotic exit and , subsequently , cytokinesis failure 199 . The regulation of mitochondrial – cytoskeletal interactions during mitotic entry and exit warrants further study to understand how cytoskeletal targeting permits proper inheritance . A major outstanding question in cell division is how cells manage the supply of energy during this process . As the main energy producers of the cell , mitochondria could help cells to meet the high energy requirements during division 200 . The small GTPase RalA localizes to mitochondria upon activation by Aurora A and increases local concentrations of its effector RALBP1 and DRP1 , directly linking DRP1 to the cell cycle . Knockdown of RalA and RALBP1 leads to failure of mitochondrial fis - sion in mitosis , disruption of cytokinesis and a decrease in cellular ATP levels , suggesting a regulatory connec - tion between the division machinery and the powering of the cell 189 . Endosomes and other small organelles In addition to the major organelles described above , cells deploy many smaller membrane - bound structures , some with still - emerging biological roles . These small organelles are usually numerous and dynamic , suggest - ing that their inheritance may be less tightly controlled than that of large single copy organelles . The endolysosomal network . The endolysosomal net - work is responsible for sorting and distributing intra - cellular cargoes to a variety of subcellular destinations . The small size of these organelles suggests a stochastic model for their inheritance , although recycling endo - somes cluster around spindle poles ( Fig . 1 ) and help organize spindle structure 201 , which may aid their inher - itance 202 . Clathrin , more commonly ascribed to membrane trafficking roles in interphase , additionally supports mitotic spindle assembly 203 . In asymmetrically divid - ing sensory organ precursor cells in D . melanogaster , fate - determining endosomes are actively partitioned along midzone microtubules by kinesin motors , with asymmetric spindle disassembly governing endosomal inheritance 204 . Understanding the mechanisms under - lying symmetric versus asymmetric inheritance of endosomes will be a key area of future study . Endosomes are also required during mitotic exit . Inhibition of endosomal sorting by the small molecule prazosin causes cytokinesis failure 205 , and the mid - body contains a variety of endosome - like membranous tubulo vesicular structures 206 , 207 . Early studies implicated exocyst - dependent vesicular fusion as a mechanism to complete abscission 208 , but more recent evidence sug - gests that endosomes positive for the rab proteins Rab11 family - interacting protein 3 ( Rab11 – FIP3 ) 209 , 210 or Rab35 ( reF . 211 ) deliver proteins required for the completion of cytokinesis . The SNAREs syntaxin 2 , VAMP8 ( reF . 212 ) and syntaxin 16 ( reF . 213 ) have been implicated in regulating vesicular fusion within the intercellular bridge , with syn - taxin 16 driving the accumulation of both Rab11 – FIP3 - positive endosomes and ESCRT components 213 . The frequency of intra - midbody vesicles decreases as mid - bodies mature 206 , suggesting that the need for these fusion events decreases as cells approach abscission . However , both Rab11 – FIP3 - positive and Rab35 - positive endo - somes accumulate near the future abscission site 214 and are needed to generate an intra - midbody construction a Interphase b Mitosis c Cytokinesis Nucleus Microtubule Chromosome Mitochondrion ER DRP1 DRP1 AurA , CDK1 , RalA , RALBP1 MFN1 / 2 OPA1 SUMO G2 / M phase Mitoticexit Fusion Fission Fig . 4 | Mitochondrial dynamics during cell division . Mitochondria continuously undergo fusion – fission cycles that can be dependent and independent of the cell cycle . a | In interphase cells , many mitochondria are highly fused . As the cell enters mitosis , CDK1 and Aurora A ( AurA ) activate the fission protein DRP1 ( lower panel ) , which assembles at sites where the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) and mitochondria interact . RalA is activated by AurA and , together with its effector protein RALBP1 , is involved in localizing DRP1 to the fission site . DRP1 - mediated fission produces fragmented mitochondria . b | Fragmented mitochondria are distributed throughout the dividing cell . As the cell exits mitosis , mitochondria begin to re - fuse ( lower panel ) , driven by the fusion proteins mitofusin 1 and mitofusin 2 ( MFN1 and MFN2 ) located in the outer mitochondrial membrane and the dynamin - related GTPase OPA1 in the inner membrane . DRP1 is sumoylated and targeted for degradation to prevent subsequent fragmentation . c | During cytokinesis , mitochondria are mostly fused ( lower panel ) and are enriched at the cleavage furrow . Clathrin A lattice - like protein that forms a coat around vesicles during the endocytic budding process . Exocyst An octameric protein complex involved in tethering secretory vesicles to the plasma membrane . Rab proteins Members of the ras superfamily of small gTPases that are specifically involved in membrane trafficking events . NaTure revIewS | MOLECuLaR CELL BiOLOGy R e v i e w s volume 21 | march 2020 | 161 known as the secondary ingression , which specifies the final cut site 215 . Further details on intra - midbody vesicle trafficking can be found in reF . 216 . Autophagosomes . There has been some debate regarding whether autophagy is active during division 217 , 218 , and it seems logical that the cell would carefully regulate this process to avoid unplanned degradation of nuclear con - tent . After the cell completes division , it must remove and / or recycle post - abscission midbody remnants 219 . It has been proposed that this occurs through autophagy , although alternative data posits that this process is com - pleted by phagocytosis 220 . Further research is required to determine the precise roles for autophagy and the partitioning of autophagosomes during division . Lipid droplets . Lipid droplets are primarily storage orga - nelles for neutral lipids and cholesterol and are unique among membrane - bound organelles in that they are sur - rounded by a lipid monolayer , not a bilayer . Lipid drop - lets may act as reservoirs for membrane expansion and for energy generation , and their biogenesis and turnover is carefully regulated 221 . Although a recent report sug - gests that lipid droplet number and localization is cell - cycle regulated 222 , there does not yet seem to have been a systematic analysis as to their distribution or functions during division . Peroxisomes . Peroxisomes are oxidative organelles that break down long - chain fatty acids through β - oxidation and are involved in the synthesis of fatty acids and ether lipids . They can be formed de novo from the ER or can replicate by division . Peroxisomes cluster around spin - dle poles during mitosis to facilitate their symmetric inheritance 223 , 224 . In epidermal progenitor cells , loss of the peroxisomal protein PEX11B resulted in unequal peroxisome inheritance , misaligned mitotic spindles and abnormal division 225 . Using an optogenetic system to force PEX11B localization to inappropriate parts of the spindle also perturbed mitosis 225 , suggesting that these small organelles play an active part in mitotic progres - sion and that cells monitor and correct their segregation efficiency during cell division . Midbodies Cell division is completed during abscission , which occurs in the midbody and requires the cooperation of membrane and cytoskeletal remodelling activities 216 . Clearing actin and phosphoinositide from the midbody . Actin remodelling is essential for cortical ingression , the transition from a contractile ring to a midbody ring , and to prepare the abscission site . The lipid phosphati - dylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) is a critical regulator of actin dynamics and localizes to the cleav - age furrow 226 . However , PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 is consumed as cytokinesis proceeds , in a process necessary for furrow stability 226 . The PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 phosphatase OCRL is coordinated at the midbody by Rab35 ( reF . 227 ) and 27 kDa inositol polyphosphate phosphatase - interacting protein A ( IPIP27 ) 228 . Through hydrolysis of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , OCRL allows midbody actin to be cleared for successful abscission 227 . The product of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 hydro - lysis , phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 ) P ) , can coordinate PtdIns ( 4 ) P - binding proteins needed for cytokinesis , such as the Golgi - associated protein GOLPH3 ( reF . 229 ) , which helps target Rab11 - positive vesicles to the cleavage site . Thus , a phosphoinositide conversion cascade might act to spatiotemporally regu - late cyto kinesis . Rab35 also interacts with , recruits and activates the oxidoreductase MICAL1 , which depolym - erizes actin filaments and contributes to actin clear - ance 214 . Other MICAL family members help organize vesicles within the midbody ; MICAL - L1 transports Rab11 - positive endosomes 230 and MICAL3 tethers Rab8 - positive vesicles 231 , suggesting important roles for this family of proteins in coordinating cytokinetic events . Cytokinetic abscission . The midbody localization and functional requirements for ESCRT proteins in cyto - kinetic abscission ( Box 3 ) have driven our recent under - standing of how cytokinesis is completed . Here , MKLP1 , a component of the centralspindlin complex , recruits the centrosomal protein CEP55 to the midbody 232 . CEP55 in turn recruits the ESCRT - III machinery through direct interactions with upstream ESCRT components TSG101 and ALIX 233 – 236 . Polymerization of dynamic ESCRT - III filaments is thought to drive cytokinetic abscission 206 , 237 and super - resolution approaches have recently revealed that helical filaments of ESCRT - III extend to the abscis - sion site 238 . ESCRT - III is essential for cytokinesis in a variety of cell culture systems and in certain tissues , for example , in germline stem cells in D . melanogaster 239 , 240 , in mice 241 and in some crenarchaea 242 . This suggests an ancestral role for this machinery in cell division that has been co - opted for other membrane remodelling events as the complexity of organisms has increased . A double ring of membrane - bound septins at the midbody has recently been shown to direct orderly ESCRT assembly during cytokinesis 243 . Septins have important roles in yeast cytokinesis ; identification of links between sept - ins and regulators of cytokinesis in metazoans , such as Rab35 ( reF . 211 ) and GOLPH3 ( reF . 229 ) , suggest that this axis may be conserved . Conclusions and outlook Cells carefully choreograph the division of their genetic material and their physical separation , which are directed by the cytoskeleton and different signalling cascades . Although there are still outstanding questions , it is clear that the disassembly , separation and reassembly of larger organelles , such as the ER , Golgi and nuclear envelope , are also carefully regulated . Although smaller organelles such as mitochondria and the endolysosomal system were initially thought to partition stochastically , recent work suggests that they are also actively partitioned . Major challenges in the coming years will be to integrate this knowledge to understand how remodelling of differ - ent organelles is connected and how changes to organelle structure and function in turn regulate the cell division machinery . We outline below some key areas and devel - opments that we expect will be transformative in our understanding of this area and highlight the conceptual advances required to achieve these transformations . Secondary ingression A constriction generated in the midbody that specifies the site of cytokinetic abscission . Autophagy A catabolic process involving intentional sequestration of cytoplasm , organelles and / or foreign material and their targeting to the lysosome for proteolytic degradation and reutilization of cellular materials . Centralspindlin complex A protein complex involved in spindle assembly , microtubule bundling to form a midbody , cleavage furrow ingression , anchoring the midbody to the plasma membrane and recruitment of the eSCrT machinery to allow completion of cytokinesis . Super - resolution Forms of light microscopy that allow resolution to be achieved beyond the diffraction limit . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 162 | march 2020 | volume 21 Technological advances . Our ability to visualize and manipulate organelles and sub - organellar structures in high resolution and in a non - invasive manner will be critical for understanding their dynamic regulation during division . New technologies , such as lattice light sheet microscopy with adaptive optics , have allowed high - resolution live imaging of organelles during divi - sion 244 , and 4D imaging data have enabled the creation of a dynamic protein atlas of cell division 245 . The devel - opment of new imaging tools and organelle - specific probes , and the ability to accurately perturb division structures using novel techniques , such as optogenetics , promise new insights into the division process 246 – 248 . Although remodelling events have been mostly studied in symmetrically dividing cultured cells , the mecha nical environments in 3D and asymmetric con - texts might also be important for organelle inheritance and proper division . The development of improved models to investigate division in more physiologically relevant systems will enhance our understanding of these processes . Conceptual advances . A key conceptual challenge will be to integrate information from different lines of investi - gation . This is a complex and difficult task because key insights will likely be gained through working across disciplines and scales , ranging from the atomic interac - tions determining lipid function to organelle movement in dividing cells . For example , it is not well understood how the identity and molecular interactions of lipids and membrane proteins involved in organelle remod - elling affect organellar functions . Despite the need for membrane rearrangement discussed throughout this Review , few key cell division proteins are integral mem - brane proteins 15 , perhaps to allow better spatiotemporal control of the remodelling process . Moreover , although the biology of organellar contacts and lipid transfer at these sites has been studied in detail in recent years 19 , their roles in division are largely unknown . ER – plasma membrane contacts were shown recently to be reduced in mitosis , resulting in a decrease in STIM1 – Orai1 - mediated store - operated calcium entry 249 , yet what this means for the fidelity of the division process is unknown . The role of kinases in organellar disassembly and cellular rearrangements for mitotic entry is well described , but the molecular details and mechanisms by which these phosphorylations are reversed are relatively under - represented in the literature . A better understanding of the local roles for phosphatases in mitotic exit will be a key challenge in coming years . Finally , despite the expansion of literature studying the role of membrane - less organelles , such as splicing speckles , stress granules and centrioles in cell biology 250 , our understanding of the organization of these structures during division remains limited . Recent evidence suggests that the pro - tein kinase DYRK3 acts as a mitotic dissolvase to solu - bilize many of these structures , but why these structures are dismantled during division is presently unknown 251 . It is likely that other as yet undiscovered condensates participate in division . Understanding how they inter - face with membrane - bound organelles that are similarly defined by weak collective interactions within the mem - brane will be critical for characterizing membrane and organelle dynamics in cell division . Published online 7 February 2020 1 . Walczak , C . E . , Cai , S . & Khodjakov , A . Mechanisms of chromosome behaviour during mitosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 91 – 102 ( 2010 ) . 2 . Green , R . A . , Paluch , E . & Oegema , K . Cytokinesis in animal cells . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 28 , 29 – 58 ( 2012 ) . 3 . Mierzwa , B . & Gerlich , D . W . Cytokinetic abscission : molecular mechanisms and temporal control . Dev . Cell 31 , 525 – 538 ( 2014 ) . 4 . Mishra , P . & Chan , D . C . Mitochondrial dynamics and inheritance during cell division , development and disease . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 15 , 634 – 646 ( 2014 ) . 5 . Eggert , U . S . et al . Parallel chemical genetic and genome - wide RNAi screens identify cytokinesis inhibitors and targets . PLoS Biol . 2 , e379 ( 2004 ) . 6 . Echard , A . , Hickson , G . R . , Foley , E . & O ' Farrell , P . H . Terminal cytokinesis events uncovered after an RNAi screen . Curr . Biol . 14 , 1685 – 1693 ( 2004 ) . 7 . Kittler , R . et al . Genome - scale RNAi profiling of cell division in human tissue culture cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 1401 – 1412 ( 2007 ) . 8 . Sönnichsen , B . et al . Full - genome RNAi profiling of early embryogenesis in Caenorhabditis elegans . Nature 434 , 462 – 469 ( 2005 ) . 9 . Neumann , B . et al . Phenotypic profiling of the human genome by time - lapse microscopy reveals cell division genes . Nature 464 , 721 – 727 ( 2010 ) . 10 . Skop , A . R . , Liu , H . , Yates , J . III , Meyer , B . J . & Heald , R . Dissection of the mammalian midbody proteome reveals conserved cytokinesis mechanisms . Science 305 , 61 – 66 ( 2004 ) . 11 . Champion , L . , Linder , M . I . & Kutay , U . Cellular reorganization during mitotic entry . Trends Cell Biol . 27 , 26 – 41 ( 2017 ) . 12 . Jongsma , M . L . , Berlin , I . & Neefjes , J . On the move : organelle dynamics during mitosis . Trends Cell Biol . 25 , 112 – 124 ( 2015 ) . 13 . Gould , G . W . Animal cell cytokinesis : the role of dynamic changes in the plasma membrane proteome and lipidome . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 53 , 64 – 73 ( 2016 ) . 14 . Atilla - Gokcumen , G . E . , Castoreno , A . B . , Sasse , S . & Eggert , U . S . Making the cut : the chemical biology of cytokinesis . ACS Chem . Biol . 5 , 79 – 90 ( 2010 ) . 15 . Storck , E . M . , Özbalci , C . & Eggert , U . S . Lipid cell biology : a focus on lipids in cell division . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 87 , 839 – 869 ( 2018 ) . 16 . Harayama , T . & Riezman , H . Understanding the diversity of membrane lipid composition . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 19 , 281 – 296 ( 2018 ) . 17 . van Meer , G . , Voelker , D . R . & Feigenson , G . W . Membrane lipids : where they are and how they behave . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 112 – 124 ( 2008 ) . 18 . Sharpe , H . J . , Stevens , T . J . & Munro , S . A comprehensive comparison of transmembrane domains reveals organelle - specific properties . Cell 142 , 158 – 169 ( 2010 ) . 19 . Scorrano , L . et al . Coming together to define membrane contact sites . Nat . Commun . 10 , 1287 ( 2019 ) . 20 . Ng , M . M . , Chang , F . & Burgess , D . R . Movement of membrane domains and requirement of membrane signaling molecules for cytokinesis . Dev . Cell 9 , 781 – 790 ( 2005 ) . 21 . Atilla - Gokcumen , G . E . et al . Dividing cells regulate their lipid composition and localization . Cell 156 , 428 – 439 ( 2014 ) . 22 . Atilla - Gokcumen , G . E . , Bedigian , A . V . , Sasse , S . & Eggert , U . S . Inhibition of glycosphingolipid biosynthesis induces cytokinesis failure . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 133 , 10010 – 10013 ( 2011 ) . 23 . Echard , A . Phosphoinositides and cytokinesis : the “PIP” of the iceberg . Cytoskeleton 69 , 893 – 912 ( 2012 ) . 24 . Huguet , F . , Flynn , S . & Vagnarelli , P . The role of phosphatases in nuclear envelope disassembly and reassembly and their relevance to pathologies . Cells 8 , 687 ( 2019 ) . 25 . Nasa , I . & Kettenbach , A . N . Coordination of protein kinase and phosphoprotein phosphatase activities in mitosis . Front . Cell Dev . Biol . 6 , 30 ( 2018 ) . 26 . Combes , G . , Alharbi , I . , Braga , L . G . & Elowe , S . Playing polo during mitosis : PLK1 takes the lead . Oncogene 36 , 4819 – 4827 ( 2017 ) . 27 . Fuller , B . G . et al . Midzone activation of Aurora B in anaphase produces an intracellular phosphorylation gradient . Nature 453 , 1132 – 1136 ( 2008 ) . 28 . Afonso , O . et al . Feedback control of chromosome separation by a midzone Aurora B gradient . Science 345 , 332 – 336 ( 2014 ) . 29 . Wang , E . , Ballister , E . R . & Lampson , M . A . Aurora B dynamics at centromeres create a diffusion - based phosphorylation gradient . J . Cell Biol . 194 , 539 – 549 ( 2011 ) . 30 . Schmitz , M . H . et al . Live - cell imaging RNAi screen identifies PP2A - B55 α and importin - β 1 as key mitotic exit regulators in human cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 886 – 893 ( 2010 ) . 31 . Gharbi - Ayachi , A . et al . The substrate of Greatwall kinase , Arpp19 , controls mitosis by inhibiting protein phosphatase 2A . Science 330 , 1673 – 1677 ( 2010 ) . 32 . Mochida , S . , Maslen , S . L . , Skehel , M . & Hunt , T . Greatwall phosphorylates an inhibitor of protein phosphatase 2A that is essential for mitosis . Science 330 , 1670 – 1673 ( 2010 ) . 33 . Cundell , M . J . et al . The BEG ( PP2A - B55 / ENSA / Greatwall ) pathway ensures cytokinesis follows chromosome separation . Mol . Cell 52 , 393 – 405 ( 2013 ) . 34 . Bollen , M . , Peti , W . , Ragusa , M . J . & Beullens , M . The extended PP1 toolkit : designed to create specificity . Trends Biochem . Sci . 35 , 450 – 458 ( 2010 ) . 35 . Vagnarelli , P . et al . Repo - Man coordinates chromosomal reorganization with nuclear envelope reassembly during mitotic exit . Dev . Cell 21 , 328 – 342 ( 2011 ) . 36 . Wurzenberger , C . et al . Sds22 and Repo - Man stabilize chromosome segregation by counteracting Aurora B on anaphase kinetochores . J . Cell Biol . 198 , 173 – 183 ( 2012 ) . 37 . Qian , J . , Beullens , M . , Lesage , B . & Bollen , M . Aurora B defines its own chromosomal targeting by opposing NaTure revIewS | MOLECuLaR CELL BiOLOGy R e v i e w s volume 21 | march 2020 | 163 the recruitment of the phosphatase scaffold Repo - Man . Curr . Biol . 23 , 1136 – 1143 ( 2013 ) . 38 . Vagnarelli , P . et al . Condensin and Repo - Man - PP1 co - operate in the regulation of chromosome architecture during mitosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 8 , 1133 – 1142 ( 2006 ) . 39 . Grallert , A . et al . A PP1 - PP2A phosphatase relay controls mitotic progression . Nature 517 , 94 – 98 ( 2015 ) . 40 . Holder , J . , Poser , E . & Barr , F . A . Getting out of mitosis : spatial and temporal control of mitotic exit and cytokinesis by PP1 and PP2A . FEBS Lett . 593 , 2908 – 2924 ( 2019 ) . 41 . Gelens , L . , Qian , J . , Bollen , M . & Saurin , A . T . The importance of kinase - phosphatase integration : lessons from mitosis . Trends Cell Biol . 28 , 6 – 21 ( 2018 ) . 42 . Wurzenberger , C . & Gerlich , D . W . Phosphatases : providing safe passage through mitotic exit . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 , 469 – 482 ( 2011 ) . 43 . Glotzer , M . , Murray , A . W . & Kirschner , M . W . Cyclin is degraded by the ubiquitin pathway . Nature 349 , 132 – 138 ( 1991 ) . 44 . Uhlmann , F . , Lottspeich , F . & Nasmyth , K . Sister - chromatid separation at anaphase onset is promoted by cleavage of the cohesin subunit Scc1 . Nature 400 , 37 – 42 ( 1999 ) . 45 . Lindon , C . & Pines , J . Ordered proteolysis in anaphase inactivates Plk1 to contribute to proper mitotic exit in human cells . J . Cell Biol . 164 , 233 – 241 ( 2004 ) . 46 . Meghini , F . et al . Targeting of Fzr / Cdh1 for timely activation of the APC / C at the centrosome during mitotic exit . Nat . Commun . 7 , 12607 ( 2016 ) . 47 . Borg , N . A . & Dixit , V . M . Ubiquitin in cell - cycle regulation and dysregulation in cancer . Annu . Rev . Cancer Biol . 1 , 59 – 77 ( 2017 ) . 48 . Sivakumar , S . & Gorbsky , G . J . Spatiotemporal regulation of the anaphase - promoting complex in mitosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 16 , 82 – 94 ( 2015 ) . 49 . Horn , S . R . et al . Regulation of mitochondrial morphology by APC / CCdh1 - mediated control of Drp1 stability . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 , 1207 – 1216 ( 2011 ) . 50 . Ramkumar , N . & Baum , B . Coupling changes in cell shape to chromosome segregation . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 17 , 511 – 521 ( 2016 ) . 51 . Boucrot , E . & Kirchhausen , T . Endosomal recycling controls plasma membrane area during mitosis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 7939 – 7944 ( 2007 ) . 52 . Kiyomitsu , T . & Cheeseman , I . M . Cortical dynein and asymmetric membrane elongation coordinately position the spindle in anaphase . Cell 154 , 391 – 402 ( 2013 ) . 53 . Sedzinski , J . et al . Polar actomyosin contractility destabilizes the position of the cytokinetic furrow . Nature 476 , 462 – 466 ( 2011 ) . 54 . Gudejko , H . F . , Alford , L . M . & Burgess , D . R . Polar expansion during cytokinesis . Cytoskeleton 69 , 1000 – 1009 ( 2012 ) . 55 . Fielding , A . B . , Willox , A . K . , Okeke , E . & Royle , S . J . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis is inhibited during mitosis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 6572 – 6577 ( 2012 ) . 56 . Hinze , C . & Boucrot , E . Endocytosis in proliferating , quiescent and terminally differentiated cells . J . Cell Sci . 131 , jcs216804 ( 2018 ) . 57 . Dix , C . L . et al . The role of mitotic cell - substrate adhesion re - modeling in animal cell division . Dev . Cell 45 , 132 – 145 . e3 ( 2018 ) . 58 . Roubinet , C . , Tran , P . T . & Piel , M . Common mechanisms regulating cell cortex properties during cell division and cell migration . Cytoskeleton 69 , 957 – 972 ( 2012 ) . 59 . Lafaurie - Janvore , J . et al . ESCRT - III assembly and cytokinetic abscission are induced by tension release in the intercellular bridge . Science 339 , 1625 – 1629 ( 2013 ) . 60 . Uroz , M . et al . Regulation of cell cycle progression by cell - cell and cell - matrix forces . Nat . Cell Biol . 20 , 646 – 654 ( 2018 ) . 61 . Uroz , M . et al . Traction forces at the cytokinetic ring regulate cell division and polyploidy in the migrating zebrafish epicardium . Nat . Mater . 18 , 1015 – 1023 ( 2019 ) . 62 . Zhang , X . , Bedigian , A . V . , Wang , W . & Eggert , U . S . G protein - coupled receptors participate in cytokinesis . Cytoskeleton 69 , 810 – 818 ( 2012 ) . 63 . Zhang , X . & Eggert , U . S . Non - traditional roles of G protein - coupled receptors in basic cell biology . Mol . Biosyst . 9 , 586 – 595 ( 2013 ) . 64 . Özlu , N . et al . Quantitative comparison of a human cancer cell surface proteome between interphase and mitosis . EMBO J . 34 , 251 – 265 ( 2015 ) . 65 . Kusumi , A . et al . Dynamic organizing principles of the plasma membrane that regulate signal transduction : commemorating the fortieth anniversary of Singer and Nicolson ' s fluid - mosaic model . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 28 , 215 – 250 ( 2012 ) . 66 . Köster , D . V . & Mayor , S . Cortical actin and the plasma membrane : inextricably intertwined . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 38 , 81 – 89 ( 2016 ) . 67 . Trimble , W . S . & Grinstein , S . Barriers to the free diffusion of proteins and lipids in the plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 208 , 259 – 271 ( 2015 ) . 68 . Schmidt , K . & Nichols , B . J . A barrier to lateral diffusion in the cleavage furrow of dividing mammalian cells . Curr . Biol . 14 , 1002 – 1006 ( 2004 ) . 69 . Piekny , A . J . & Glotzer , M . Anillin is a scaffold protein that links RhoA , actin , and myosin during cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 18 , 30 – 36 ( 2008 ) . 70 . Kunda , P . , Pelling , A . E . , Liu , T . & Baum , B . Moesin controls cortical rigidity , cell rounding , and spindle morphogenesis during mitosis . Curr . Biol . 18 , 91 – 101 ( 2008 ) . 71 . Jordan , S . N . & Canman , J . C . Rho GTPases in animal cell cytokinesis : an occupation by the one percent . Cytoskeleton 69 , 919 – 930 ( 2012 ) . 72 . Lekomtsev , S . et al . Centralspindlin links the mitotic spindle to the plasma membrane during cytokinesis . Nature 492 , 276 – 279 ( 2012 ) . 73 . Kotýnková , K . , Su , K . C . , West , S . C . & Petronczki , M . Plasma membrane association but not midzone recruitment of RhoGEF ECT2 is essential for cytokinesis . Cell Rep . 17 , 2672 – 2686 ( 2016 ) . 74 . Terry , S . J . , Dona , F . , Osenberg , P . , Carlton , J . G . & Eggert , U . S . Capping protein regulates actin dynamics during cytokinetic midbody maturation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 115 , 2138 – 2143 ( 2018 ) . 75 . Giansanti , M . G . et al . Cooperative interactions between the central spindle and the contractile ring during Drosophila cytokinesis . Genes Dev . 12 , 396 – 410 ( 1998 ) . 76 . Kusano , K . , Abe , H . & Obinata , T . Detection of a sequence involved in actin - binding and phosphoinositide - binding in the N - terminal side of cofilin . Mol . Cell . Biochem . 190 , 133 – 141 ( 1999 ) . 77 . Liu , X . et al . Mammalian nonmuscle myosin II binds to anionic phospholipids with concomitant dissociation of the regulatory light chain . J . Biol . Chem . 291 , 24828 – 24837 ( 2016 ) . 78 . Güttinger , S . , Laurell , E . & Kutay , U . Orchestrating nuclear envelope disassembly and reassembly during mitosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 178 – 191 ( 2009 ) . 79 . de Leeuw , R . , Gruenbaum , Y . & Medalia , O . Nuclear lamins : thin filaments with major functions . Trends Cell Biol . 28 , 34 – 45 ( 2018 ) . 80 . Hampoelz , B . , Andres - Pons , A . , Kastritis , P . & Beck , M . Structure and assembly of the nuclear pore complex . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 48 , 515 – 536 ( 2019 ) . 81 . Chang , W . , Worman , H . J . & Gundersen , G . G . Accessorizing and anchoring the LINC complex for multifunctionality . J . Cell Biol . 208 , 11 – 22 ( 2015 ) . 82 . Ungricht , R . , Klann , M . , Horvath , P . & Kutay , U . Diffusion and retention are major determinants of protein targeting to the inner nuclear membrane . J . Cell Biol . 209 , 687 – 703 ( 2015 ) . 83 . Boni , A . et al . Live imaging and modeling of inner nuclear membrane targeting reveals its molecular requirements in mammalian cells . J . Cell Biol . 209 , 705 – 720 ( 2015 ) . 84 . Voeltz , G . K . , Prinz , W . A . , Shibata , Y . , Rist , J . M . & Rapoport , T . A . A class of membrane proteins shaping the tubular endoplasmic reticulum . Cell 124 , 573 – 586 ( 2006 ) . 85 . Hu , J . et al . Membrane proteins of the endoplasmic reticulum induce high - curvature tubules . Science 319 , 1247 – 1250 ( 2008 ) . 86 . Hu , J . et al . A class of dynamin - like GTPases involved in the generation of the tubular ER network . Cell 138 , 549 – 561 ( 2009 ) . 87 . Chen , S . , Novick , P . & Ferro - Novick , S . ER network formation requires a balance of the dynamin - like GTPase Sey1p and the Lunapark family member Lnp1p . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 707 – 716 ( 2012 ) . 88 . Shibata , Y . et al . Mechanisms determining the morphology of the peripheral ER . Cell 143 , 774 – 788 ( 2010 ) . 89 . Nixon - Abell , J . et al . Increased spatiotemporal resolution reveals highly dynamic dense tubular matrices in the peripheral ER . Science 354 , aaf3928 ( 2016 ) . 90 . Schroeder , L . K . et al . Dynamic nanoscale morphology of the ER surveyed by STED microscopy . J . Cell Biol . 218 , 83 – 96 ( 2019 ) . 91 . Westrate , L . M . , Lee , J . E . , Prinz , W . A . & Voeltz , G . K . Form follows function : the importance of endoplasmic reticulum shape . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 84 , 791 – 811 ( 2015 ) . 92 . Zhang , H . & Hu , J . Shaping the endoplasmic reticulum into a social network . Trends Cell Biol . 26 , 934 – 943 ( 2016 ) . 93 . Peter , M . , Nakagawa , J . , Dorée , M . , Labbe , J . C . & Nigg , E . A . Identification of major nucleolar proteins as candidate mitotic substrates of cdc2 kinase . Cell 60 , 791 – 801 ( 1990 ) . 94 . Heald , R . & McKeon , F . Mutations of phosphorylation sites in lamin A that prevent nuclear lamina disassembly in mitosis . Cell 61 , 579 – 589 ( 1990 ) . 95 . Torvaldson , E . , Kochin , V . & Eriksson , J . E . Phosphorylation of lamins determine their structural properties and signaling functions . Nucleus 6 , 166 – 171 ( 2015 ) . 96 . Goss , V . L . et al . Identification of nuclear β II protein kinase C as a mitotic lamin kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 19074 – 19080 ( 1994 ) . 97 . Mall , M . et al . Mitotic lamin disassembly is triggered by lipid - mediated signaling . J . Cell Biol . 198 , 981 – 990 ( 2012 ) . 98 . Patel , J . T . et al . Mitotic phosphorylation of SUN1 loosens its connection with the nuclear lamina while the LINC complex remains intact . Nucleus 5 , 462 – 473 ( 2014 ) . 99 . Bahmanyar , S . et al . Spatial control of phospholipid flux restricts endoplasmic reticulum sheet formation to allow nuclear envelope breakdown . Genes Dev . 28 , 121 – 126 ( 2014 ) . 100 . Audhya , A . , Desai , A . & Oegema , K . A role for Rab5 in structuring the endoplasmic reticulum . J . Cell Biol . 178 , 43 – 56 ( 2007 ) . 101 . Hebbar , S . et al . Lis1 and Ndel1 influence the timing of nuclear envelope breakdown in neural stem cells . J . Cell Biol . 182 , 1063 – 1071 ( 2008 ) . 102 . Beaudouin , J . , Gerlich , D . , Daigle , N . , Eils , R . & Ellenberg , J . Nuclear envelope breakdown proceeds by microtubule - induced tearing of the lamina . Cell 108 , 83 – 96 ( 2002 ) . 103 . Salina , D . et al . Cytoplasmic dynein as a facilitator of nuclear envelope breakdown . Cell 108 , 97 – 107 ( 2002 ) . 104 . Turgay , Y . et al . SUN proteins facilitate the removal of membranes from chromatin during nuclear envelope breakdown . J . Cell Biol . 204 , 1099 – 1109 ( 2014 ) . 105 . Mori , M . et al . An Arp2 / 3 nucleated F - actin shell fragments nuclear membranes at nuclear envelope breakdown in starfish oocytes . Curr . Biol . 24 , 1421 – 1428 ( 2014 ) . 106 . Laurell , E . et al . Phosphorylation of Nup98 by multiple kinases is crucial for NPC disassembly during mitotic entry . Cell 144 , 539 – 550 ( 2011 ) . 107 . Yang , L . , Guan , T . & Gerace , L . Integral membrane proteins of the nuclear envelope are dispersed throughout the endoplasmic reticulum during mitosis . J . Cell Biol . 137 , 1199 – 1210 ( 1997 ) . 108 . Daigle , N . et al . Nuclear pore complexes form immobile networks and have a very low turnover in live mammalian cells . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 71 – 84 ( 2001 ) . 109 . Linder , M . I . et al . Mitotic disassembly of nuclear pore complexes involves CDK1 - and PLK1 - mediated phosphorylation of key interconnecting nucleoporins . Dev . Cell 43 , 141 – 156 . e7 ( 2017 ) . 110 . Martino , L . et al . Channel nucleoporins recruit PLK - 1 to nuclear pore complexes to direct nuclear envelope breakdown in C . elegans . Dev . Cell 43 , 157 – 171 . e7 ( 2017 ) . 111 . de Castro , I . J . , Gil , R . S . , Ligammari , L . , Di Giacinto , M . L . & Vagnarelli , P . CDK1 and PLK1 coordinate the disassembly and reassembly of the nuclear envelope in vertebrate mitosis . Oncotarget 9 , 7763 – 7773 ( 2017 ) . 112 . Lu , L . , Ladinsky , M . S . & Kirchhausen , T . Cisternal organization of the endoplasmic reticulum during mitosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 3471 – 3480 ( 2009 ) . 113 . Lu , L . , Ladinsky , M . S . & Kirchhausen , T . Formation of the postmitotic nuclear envelope from extended ER cisternae precedes nuclear pore assembly . J . Cell Biol . 194 , 425 – 440 ( 2011 ) . 114 . Puhka , M . , Vihinen , H . , Joensuu , M . & Jokitalo , E . Endoplasmic reticulum remains continuous and undergoes sheet - to - tubule transformation during cell division in mammalian cells . J . Cell Biol . 179 , 895 – 909 ( 2007 ) . 115 . Puhka , M . , Joensuu , M . , Vihinen , H . , Belevich , I . & Jokitalo , E . Progressive sheet - to - tubule transformation is a general mechanism for endoplasmic reticulum www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 164 | march 2020 | volume 21 partitioning in dividing mammalian cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 23 , 2424 – 2432 ( 2012 ) . 116 . Kumar , D . , Golchoubian , B . , Belevich , I . , Jokitalo , E . & Schlaitz , A . L . REEP3 and REEP4 determine the tubular morphology of the endoplasmic reticulum during mitosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 30 , 1377 – 1389 ( 2019 ) . 117 . Schweizer , N . & Maiato , H . Membrane - based mechanisms of mitotic spindle assembly . Commun . Integr . Biol . 8 , e1112473 ( 2015 ) . 118 . Wang , S . , Powers , R . E . , Gold , V . A . & Rapoport , T . A . The ER morphology - regulating lunapark protein induces the formation of stacked bilayer discs . Life Sci . Alliance 1 , e201700014 ( 2018 ) . 119 . Wang , S . , Tukachinsky , H . , Romano , F . B . & Rapoport , T . A . Cooperation of the ER - shaping proteins atlastin , lunapark , and reticulons to generate a tubular membrane network . eLife 5 , e18605 ( 2016 ) . 120 . Vedrenne , C . , Klopfenstein , D . R . & Hauri , H . P . Phosphorylation controls CLIMP - 63 - mediated anchoring of the endoplasmic reticulum to microtubules . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 1928 – 1937 ( 2005 ) . 121 . Smyth , J . T . , Beg , A . M . , Wu , S . , Putney , J . W . Jr & Rusan , N . M . Phosphoregulation of STIM1 leads to exclusion of the endoplasmic reticulum from the mitotic spindle . Curr . Biol . 22 , 1487 – 1493 ( 2012 ) . 122 . Schlaitz , A . L . , Thompson , J . , Wong , C . C . , Yates , J . R . III & Heald , R . REEP3 / 4 ensure endoplasmic reticulum clearance from metaphase chromatin and proper nuclear envelope architecture . Dev . Cell 26 , 315 – 323 ( 2013 ) . 123 . Smyth , J . T . , Schoborg , T . A . , Bergman , Z . J . , Riggs , B . & Rusan , N . M . Proper symmetric and asymmetric endoplasmic reticulum partitioning requires astral microtubules . Open Biol . 5 , 150067 ( 2015 ) . 124 . Champion , L . , Pawar , S . , Luithle , N . , Ungricht , R . & Kutay , U . Dissociation of membrane - chromatin contacts is required for proper chromosome segregation in mitosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 30 , 427 – 440 ( 2019 ) . 125 . Schellhaus , A . K . , De Magistris , P . & Antonin , W . Nuclear reformation at the end of mitosis . J . Mol . Biol . 428 , 1962 – 1985 ( 2016 ) . 126 . Anderson , D . J . & Hetzer , M . W . Nuclear envelope formation by chromatin - mediated reorganization of the endoplasmic reticulum . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 1160 – 1166 ( 2007 ) . 127 . Anderson , D . J . & Hetzer , M . W . Reshaping of the endoplasmic reticulum limits the rate for nuclear envelope formation . J . Cell Biol . 182 , 911 – 924 ( 2008 ) . 128 . Samwer , M . et al . DNA cross - bridging shapes a single nucleus from a set of mitotic chromosomes . Cell 170 , 956 – 972 . e23 ( 2017 ) . 129 . Allen , P . B . , Kwon , Y . G . , Nairn , A . C . & Greengard , P . Isolation and characterization of PNUTS , a putative protein phosphatase 1 nuclear targeting subunit . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 4089 – 4095 ( 1998 ) . 130 . Steen , R . L . , Martins , S . B . , Tasken , K . & Collas , P . Recruitment of protein phosphatase 1 to the nuclear envelope by A - kinase anchoring protein AKAP149 is a prerequisite for nuclear lamina assembly . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 1251 – 1262 ( 2000 ) . 131 . Booth , D . G . et al . Ki - 67 is a PP1 - interacting protein that organises the mitotic chromosome periphery . eLife 3 , e01641 ( 2014 ) . 132 . Takagi , M . , Nishiyama , Y . , Taguchi , A . & Imamoto , N . Ki67 antigen contributes to the timely accumulation of protein phosphatase 1 γ on anaphase chromosomes . J . Biol . Chem . 289 , 22877 – 22887 ( 2014 ) . 133 . Karg , T . , Warecki , B . & Sullivan , W . Aurora B - mediated localized delays in nuclear envelope formation facilitate inclusion of late - segregating chromosome fragments . Mol . Biol . Cell 26 , 2227 – 2241 ( 2015 ) . 134 . Liu , S . et al . Nuclear envelope assembly defects link mitotic errors to chromothripsis . Nature 561 , 551 – 555 ( 2018 ) . 135 . Otsuka , S . et al . Postmitotic nuclear pore assembly proceeds by radial dilation of small membrane openings . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 25 , 21 – 28 ( 2018 ) . 136 . Otsuka , S . et al . Nuclear pore assembly proceeds by an inside - out extrusion of the nuclear envelope . eLife 5 , e19071 ( 2016 ) . 137 . Clever , M . , Funakoshi , T . , Mimura , Y . , Takagi , M . & Imamoto , N . The nucleoporin ELYS / Mel28 regulates nuclear envelope subdomain formation in HeLa cells . Nucleus 3 , 187 – 199 ( 2012 ) . 138 . Olmos , Y . , Hodgson , L . , Mantell , J . , Verkade , P . & Carlton , J . G . ESCRT - III controls nuclear envelope reformation . Nature 522 , 236 – 239 ( 2015 ) . 139 . Vietri , M . et al . Spastin and ESCRT - III coordinate mitotic spindle disassembly and nuclear envelope sealing . Nature 522 , 231 – 235 ( 2015 ) . 140 . Olmos , Y . , Perdrix - Rosell , A . & Carlton , J . G . Membrane binding by CHMP7 coordinates ESCRT - III - dependent nuclear envelope reformation . Curr . Biol . 26 , 2635 – 2641 ( 2016 ) . 141 . Gu , M . et al . LEM2 recruits CHMP7 for ESCRT - mediated nuclear envelope closure in fission yeast and human cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 114 , E2166 – E2175 ( 2017 ) . 142 . Campsteijn , C . , Vietri , M . & Stenmark , H . Novel ESCRT functions in cell biology : spiraling out of control ? Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 41 , 1 – 8 ( 2016 ) . 143 . Gatta , A . T . & Carlton , J . G . The ESCRT - machinery : closing holes and expanding roles . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 59 , 121 – 132 ( 2019 ) . 144 . Schöneberg , J . , Lee , I . H . , Iwasa , J . H . & Hurley , J . H . Reverse - topology membrane scission by the ESCRT proteins . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 18 , 5 – 17 ( 2017 ) . 145 . Barr , F . A . , Puype , M . , Vandekerckhove , J . & Warren , G . GRASP65 , a protein involved in the stacking of Golgi cisternae . Cell 91 , 253 – 262 ( 1997 ) . 146 . Shorter , J . et al . GRASP55 , a second mammalian GRASP protein involved in the stacking of Golgi cisternae in a cell - free system . EMBO J . 18 , 4949 – 4960 ( 1999 ) . 147 . Witkos , T . M . & Lowe , M . The golgin family of coiled - coil tethering proteins . Front . Cell Dev . Biol . 3 , 86 ( 2015 ) . 148 . Diao , A . , Frost , L . , Morohashi , Y . & Lowe , M . Coordination of golgin tethering and SNARE assembly : GM130 binds syntaxin 5 in a p115 - regulated manner . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 6957 – 6967 ( 2008 ) . 149 . Hidalgo Carcedo , C . et al . Mitotic Golgi partitioning is driven by the membrane - fissioning protein CtBP3 / BARS . Science 305 , 93 – 96 ( 2004 ) . 150 . Colanzi , A . et al . The Golgi mitotic checkpoint is controlled by BARS - dependent fission of the Golgi ribbon into separate stacks in G2 . EMBO J . 26 , 2465 – 2476 ( 2007 ) . 151 . Lin , C . Y . et al . Peripheral Golgi protein GRASP65 is a target of mitotic polo - like kinase ( Plk ) and Cdc2 . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 12589 – 12594 ( 2000 ) . 152 . Sütterlin , C . , Hsu , P . , Mallabiabarrena , A . & Malhotra , V . Fragmentation and dispersal of the pericentriolar Golgi complex is required for entry into mitosis in mammalian cells . Cell 109 , 359 – 369 ( 2002 ) . 153 . Wang , Y . , Seemann , J . , Pypaert , M . , Shorter , J . & Warren , G . A direct role for GRASP65 as a mitotically regulated Golgi stacking factor . EMBO J . 22 , 3279 – 3290 ( 2003 ) . 154 . Preisinger , C . et al . Plk1 docking to GRASP65 phosphorylated by Cdk1 suggests a mechanism for Golgi checkpoint signalling . EMBO J . 24 , 753 – 765 ( 2005 ) . 155 . Tang , D . , Yuan , H . , Vielemeyer , O . , Perez , F . & Wang , Y . Sequential phosphorylation of GRASP65 during mitotic Golgi disassembly . Biol . Open 1 , 1204 – 1214 ( 2012 ) . 156 . Ayala , I . , Crispino , R . & Colanzi , A . GRASP65 controls Golgi position and structure during G2 / M transition by regulating the stability of microtubules . Traffic 20 , 785 – 802 ( 2019 ) . 157 . Persico , A . , Cervigni , R . I . , Barretta , M . L . , Corda , D . & Colanzi , A . Golgi partitioning controls mitotic entry through Aurora - A kinase . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 , 3708 – 3721 ( 2010 ) . 158 . Guizzunti , G . & Seemann , J . Mitotic Golgi disassembly is required for bipolar spindle formation and mitotic progression . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 113 , E6590 – E6599 ( 2016 ) . 159 . Rabouille , C . & Kondylis , V . Golgi ribbon unlinking : an organelle - based G2 / M checkpoint . Cell Cycle 6 , 2723 – 2729 ( 2007 ) . 160 . Corda , D . , Barretta , M . L . , Cervigni , R . I . & Colanzi , A . Golgi complex fragmentation in G2 / M transition : an organelle - based cell - cycle checkpoint . IUBMB Life 64 , 661 – 670 ( 2012 ) . 161 . Levine , T . P . , Rabouille , C . , Kieckbusch , R . H . & Warren , G . Binding of the vesicle docking protein p115 to Golgi membranes is inhibited under mitotic conditions . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 17304 – 17311 ( 1996 ) . 162 . Lowe , M . et al . Cdc2 kinase directly phosphorylates the cis - Golgi matrix protein GM130 and is required for Golgi fragmentation in mitosis . Cell 94 , 783 – 793 ( 1998 ) . 163 . Nakamura , N . , Lowe , M . , Levine , T . P . , Rabouille , C . & Warren , G . The vesicle docking protein p115 binds GM130 , a cis - Golgi matrix protein , in a mitotically regulated manner . Cell 89 , 445 – 455 ( 1997 ) . 164 . Tang , D . et al . The ubiquitin ligase HACE1 regulates Golgi membrane dynamics during the cell cycle . Nat . Commun . 2 , 501 ( 2011 ) . 165 . Huang , S . , Tang , D . & Wang , Y . Monoubiquitination of syntaxin 5 regulates Golgi membrane dynamics during the cell cycle . Dev . Cell 38 , 73 – 85 ( 2016 ) . 166 . Zhang , X . & Wang , Y . Cell cycle regulation of VCIP135 deubiquitinase activity and function in p97 / p47 - mediated Golgi reassembly . Mol . Biol . Cell 26 , 2242 – 2251 ( 2015 ) . 167 . Zhang , X . , Zhang , H . & Wang , Y . Phosphorylation regulates VCIP135 function in Golgi membrane fusion during the cell cycle . J . Cell Sci . 127 , 172 – 181 ( 2014 ) . 168 . Uchiyama , K . et al . The localization and phosphorylation of p47 are important for Golgi disassembly - assembly during the cell cycle . J . Cell Biol . 161 , 1067 – 1079 ( 2003 ) . 169 . Wei , J . H . , Zhang , Z . C . , Wynn , R . M . & Seemann , J . GM130 regulates Golgi - derived spindle assembly by activating TPX2 and capturing microtubules . Cell 162 , 287 – 299 ( 2015 ) . 170 . Altan - Bonnet , N . , Phair , R . D . , Polishchuk , R . S . , Weigert , R . & Lippincott - Schwartz , J . A role for Arf1 in mitotic Golgi disassembly , chromosome segregation , and cytokinesis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 13314 – 13319 ( 2003 ) . 171 . Zaal , K . J . et al . Golgi membranes are absorbed into and reemerge from the ER during mitosis . Cell 99 , 589 – 601 ( 1999 ) . 172 . Altan - Bonnet , N . , Sougrat , R . & Lippincott - Schwartz , J . Molecular basis for Golgi maintenance and biogenesis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 , 364 – 372 ( 2004 ) . 173 . Valente , C . & Colanzi , A . Mechanisms and regulation of the mitotic inheritance of the Golgi complex . Front . Cell Dev . Biol . 3 , 79 ( 2015 ) . 174 . Bayliss , R . , Sardon , T . , Vernos , I . & Conti , E . Structural basis of Aurora - A activation by TPX2 at the mitotic spindle . Mol . Cell 12 , 851 – 862 ( 2003 ) . 175 . Wittmann , T . , Wilm , M . , Karsenti , E . & Vernos , I . TPX2 , a novel xenopus MAP involved in spindle pole organization . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 1405 – 1418 ( 2000 ) . 176 . Gruss , O . J . et al . Ran induces spindle assembly by reversing the inhibitory effect of importin α on TPX2 activity . Cell 104 , 83 – 93 ( 2001 ) . 177 . Giesecke , A . & Stewart , M . Novel binding of the mitotic regulator TPX2 ( target protein for Xenopus kinesin - like protein 2 ) to importin - α . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 17628 – 17635 ( 2010 ) . 178 . Radulescu , A . E . , Mukherjee , S . & Shields , D . The Golgi protein p115 associates with gamma - tubulin and plays a role in Golgi structure and mitosis progression . J . Biol . Chem . 286 , 21915 – 21926 ( 2011 ) . 179 . Lowe , M . , Gonatas , N . K . & Warren , G . The mitotic phosphorylation cycle of the cis - Golgi matrix protein GM130 . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 341 – 356 ( 2000 ) . 180 . Wang , Y . , Satoh , A . , Warren , G . & Meyer , H . H . VCIP135 acts as a deubiquitinating enzyme during p97 - p47 - mediated reassembly of mitotic Golgi fragments . J . Cell Biol . 164 , 973 – 978 ( 2004 ) . 181 . Tang , D . , Mar , K . , Warren , G . & Wang , Y . Molecular mechanism of mitotic Golgi disassembly and reassembly revealed by a defined reconstitution assay . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 6085 – 6094 ( 2008 ) . 182 . Tang , D . , Yuan , H . & Wang , Y . The role of GRASP65 in Golgi cisternal stacking and cell cycle progression . Traffic 11 , 827 – 842 ( 2010 ) . 183 . Miller , P . M . et al . Golgi - derived CLASP - dependent microtubules control Golgi organization and polarized trafficking in motile cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 , 1069 – 1080 ( 2009 ) . 184 . Shima , D . T . , Cabrera - Poch , N . , Pepperkok , R . & Warren , G . An ordered inheritance strategy for the Golgi apparatus : visualization of mitotic disassembly reveals a role for the mitotic spindle . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 955 – 966 ( 1998 ) . 185 . Gaietta , G . M . et al . Golgi twins in late mitosis revealed by genetically encoded tags for live cell imaging and correlated electron microscopy . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 17777 – 17782 ( 2006 ) . 186 . Goss , J . W . & Toomre , D . K . Both daughter cells traffic and exocytose membrane at the cleavage furrow during mammalian cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 181 , 1047 – 1054 ( 2008 ) . 187 . Magliozzi , R . et al . Inheritance of the Golgi apparatus and cytokinesis are controlled by degradation of GBF1 . Cell Rep . 23 , 3381 – 3391 . e4 ( 2018 ) . 188 . Labbé , K . , Murley , A . & Nunnari , J . Determinants and functions of mitochondrial behavior . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 30 , 357 – 391 ( 2014 ) . NaTure revIewS | MOLECuLaR CELL BiOLOGy R e v i e w s volume 21 | march 2020 | 165 189 . Kashatus , D . F . et al . RALA and RALBP1 regulate mitochondrial fission at mitosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 1108 – 1115 ( 2011 ) . 190 . Kanfer , G . & Kornmann , B . Dynamics of the mitochondrial network during mitosis . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 44 , 510 – 516 ( 2016 ) . 191 . Park , Y . Y . & Cho , H . Mitofusin 1 is degraded at G2 / M phase through ubiquitylation by MARCH5 . Cell Div . 7 , 25 ( 2012 ) . 192 . Adachi , Y . et al . Coincident phosphatidic acid interaction restrains Drp1 in mitochondrial division . Mol . Cell 63 , 1034 – 1043 ( 2016 ) . 193 . Pagliuso , A . et al . A role for septin 2 in Drp1 - mediated mitochondrial fission . EMBO Rep . 17 , 858 – 873 ( 2016 ) . 194 . Katajisto , P . et al . Stem cells . Asymmetric apportioning of aged mitochondria between daughter cells is required for stemness . Science 348 , 340 – 343 ( 2015 ) . 195 . Jajoo , R . et al . Accurate concentration control of mitochondria and nucleoids . Science 351 , 169 – 172 ( 2016 ) . 196 . Lawrence , E . J . , Boucher , E . & Mandato , C . A . Mitochondria - cytoskeleton associations in mammalian cytokinesis . Cell Div . 11 , 3 ( 2016 ) . 197 . Chung , J . Y . , Steen , J . A . & Schwarz , T . L . Phosphorylation - induced motor shedding is required at mitosis for proper distribution and passive inheritance of mitochondria . Cell Rep . 16 , 2142 – 2155 ( 2016 ) . 198 . López - Domenech , G . et al . Miro proteins coordinate microtubule - and actin - dependent mitochondrial transport and distribution . EMBO J . 37 , 321 – 336 ( 2018 ) . 199 . Rohn , J . L . et al . Myo19 ensures symmetric partitioning of mitochondria and coupling of mitochondrial segregation to cell division . Curr . Biol . 24 , 2598 – 2605 ( 2014 ) . 200 . Salazar - Roa , M . & Malumbres , M . Fueling the cell division cycle . Trends Cell Biol . 27 , 69 – 81 ( 2017 ) . 201 . Hehnly , H . & Doxsey , S . Rab11 endosomes contribute to mitotic spindle organization and orientation . Dev . Cell 28 , 497 – 507 ( 2014 ) . 202 . Takatsu , H . et al . Mitosis - coupled , microtubule - dependent clustering of endosomal vesicles around centrosomes . Cell Struct . Funct . 38 , 31 – 41 ( 2013 ) . 203 . Royle , S . J . , Bright , N . A . & Lagnado , L . Clathrin is required for the function of the mitotic spindle . Nature 434 , 1152 – 1157 ( 2005 ) . 204 . Derivery , E . et al . Polarized endosome dynamics by spindle asymmetry during asymmetric cell division . Nature 528 , 280 – 285 ( 2015 ) . 205 . Zhang , X . et al . Dopamine receptor D3 regulates endocytic sorting by a prazosin - sensitive interaction with the coatomer COPI . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 12485 – 12490 ( 2012 ) . 206 . Guizetti , J . et al . Cortical constriction during abscission involves helices of ESCRT - III - dependent filaments . Science 331 , 1616 – 1620 ( 2011 ) . 207 . König , J . , Frankel , E . B . , Audhya , A . & Muller - Reichert , T . Membrane remodeling during embryonic abscission in Caenorhabditis elegans . J . Cell Biol . 216 , 1277 – 1286 ( 2017 ) . 208 . Gromley , A . et al . Centriolin anchoring of exocyst and SNARE complexes at the midbody is required for secretory - vesicle - mediated abscission . Cell 123 , 75 – 87 ( 2005 ) . 209 . Wilson , G . M . et al . The FIP3 - Rab11 protein complex regulates recycling endosome targeting to the cleavage furrow during late cytokinesis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 849 – 860 ( 2005 ) . 210 . Fielding , A . B . et al . Rab11 - FIP3 and FIP4 interact with Arf6 and the exocyst to control membrane traffic in cytokinesis . EMBO J . 24 , 3389 – 3399 ( 2005 ) . 211 . Kouranti , I . , Sachse , M . , Arouche , N . , Goud , B . & Echard , A . Rab35 regulates an endocytic recycling pathway essential for the terminal steps of cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 16 , 1719 – 1725 ( 2006 ) . 212 . Low , S . H . et al . Syntaxin 2 and endobrevin are required for the terminal step of cytokinesis in mammalian cells . Dev . Cell 4 , 753 – 759 ( 2003 ) . 213 . Neto , H . , Kaupisch , A . , Collins , L . L . & Gould , G . W . Syntaxin 16 is a master recruitment factor for cytokinesis . Mol . Biol . Cell 24 , 3663 – 3674 ( 2013 ) . 214 . Frémont , S . et al . Oxidation of F - actin controls the terminal steps of cytokinesis . Nat . Commun . 8 , 14528 ( 2017 ) . 215 . Schiel , J . A . et al . FIP3 - endosome - dependent formation of the secondary ingression mediates ESCRT - III recruitment during cytokinesis . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 1068 – 1078 ( 2012 ) . 216 . Fremont , S . & Echard , A . Membrane traffic in the late steps of cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 28 , R458 – R470 ( 2018 ) . 217 . Eskelinen , E . L . et al . Inhibition of autophagy in mitotic animal cells . Traffic 3 , 878 – 893 ( 2002 ) . 218 . Li , Z . , Ji , X . , Wang , D . , Liu , J . & Zhang , X . Autophagic flux is highly active in early mitosis and differentially regulated throughout the cell cycle . Oncotarget 7 , 39705 – 39718 ( 2016 ) . 219 . Pohl , C . & Jentsch , S . Midbody ring disposal by autophagy is a post - abscission event of cytokinesis . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 , 65 – 70 ( 2009 ) . 220 . Crowell , E . F . , Gaffuri , A . L . , Gayraud - Morel , B . , Tajbakhsh , S . & Echard , A . Engulfment of the midbody remnant after cytokinesis in mammalian cells . J . Cell Sci . 127 , 3840 – 3851 ( 2014 ) . 221 . Walther , T . C . , Chung , J . & Farese , R . V . Jr . Lipid droplet biogenesis . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 33 , 491 – 510 ( 2017 ) . 222 . Cruz , A . L . S . et al . Cell cycle progression regulates biogenesis and cellular localization of lipid droplets . Mol . Cell Biol . 39 , e00374 – 18 ( 2019 ) . 223 . Kredel , S . et al . mRuby , a bright monomeric red fluorescent protein for labeling of subcellular structures . PLoS ONE 4 , e4391 ( 2009 ) . 224 . Knoblach , B . & Rachubinski , R . A . How peroxisomes partition between cells . A story of yeast , mammals and filamentous fungi . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 41 , 73 – 80 ( 2016 ) . 225 . Asare , A . , Levorse , J . & Fuchs , E . Coupling organelle inheritance with mitosis to balance growth and differentiation . Science 355 , eaah4701 ( 2017 ) . 226 . Wong , R . et al . PIP2 hydrolysis and calcium release are required for cytokinesis in drosophila spermatocytes . Curr . Biol . 15 , 1401 – 1406 ( 2005 ) . 227 . Dambournet , D . et al . Rab35 GTPase and OCRL phosphatase remodel lipids and F - actin for successful cytokinesis . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 981 – 988 ( 2011 ) . 228 . Carim , S . C . et al . IPIP27 coordinates PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 homeostasis for successful cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 29 , 775 – 789 . e7 ( 2019 ) . 229 . Sechi , S . et al . GOLPH3 is essential for contractile ring formation and Rab11 localization to the cleavage site during cytokinesis in Drosophila melanogaster . PLoS Genet . 10 , e1004305 ( 2014 ) . 230 . Reinecke , J . B . , Katafiasz , D . , Naslavsky , N . & Caplan , S . Novel functions for the endocytic regulatory proteins MICAL - L1 and EHD1 in mitosis . Traffic 16 , 48 – 67 ( 2015 ) . 231 . Liu , Q . et al . MICAL3 flavoprotein monooxygenase forms a complex with centralspindlin and regulates cytokinesis . J . Biol . Chem . 291 , 20617 – 20629 ( 2016 ) . 232 . Fabbro , M . et al . Cdk1 / Erk2 - and Plk1 - dependent phosphorylation of a centrosome protein , Cep55 , is required for its recruitment to midbody and cytokinesis . Dev . Cell 9 , 477 – 488 ( 2005 ) . 233 . Carlton , J . G . , Agromayor , M . & Martin - Serrano , J . Differential requirements for Alix and ESCRT - III in cytokinesis and HIV - 1 release . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 10541 – 10546 ( 2008 ) . 234 . Carlton , J . G . & Martin - Serrano , J . Parallels between cytokinesis and retroviral budding : a role for the ESCRT machinery . Science 316 , 1908 – 1912 ( 2007 ) . 235 . Morita , E . et al . Human ESCRT and ALIX proteins interact with proteins of the midbody and function in cytokinesis . EMBO J . 26 , 4215 – 4227 ( 2007 ) . 236 . Christ , L . et al . ALIX and ESCRT - I / II function as parallel ESCRT - III recruiters in cytokinetic abscission . J . Cell Biol . 212 , 499 – 513 ( 2016 ) . 237 . Mierzwa , B . E . et al . Dynamic subunit turnover in ESCRT - III assemblies is regulated by Vps4 to mediate membrane remodelling during cytokinesis . Nat . Cell Biol . 19 , 787 – 798 ( 2017 ) . 238 . Goliand , I . et al . Resolving ESCRT - III spirals at the intercellular bridge of dividing cells using 3D STORM . Cell Rep . 24 , 1756 – 1764 ( 2018 ) . 239 . Matias , N . R . , Mathieu , J . & Huynh , J . R . Abscission is regulated by the ESCRT - III protein shrub in Drosophila germline stem cells . PLoS Genet . 11 , e1004653 ( 2015 ) . 240 . Eikenes , A . H . et al . ALIX and ESCRT - III coordinately control cytokinetic abscission during germline stem cell division in vivo . PLoS Genet . 11 , e1004904 ( 2015 ) . 241 . Iwamori , T . et al . TEX14 interacts with CEP55 to block cell abscission . Mol . Cell . Biol . 30 , 2280 – 2292 ( 2010 ) . 242 . Samson , R . Y . , Obita , T . , Freund , S . M . , Williams , R . L . & Bell , S . D . A role for the ESCRT system in cell division in archaea . Science 322 , 1710 – 1713 ( 2008 ) . 243 . Karasmanis , E . P . et al . A septin double ring controls the spatiotemporal organization of the ESCRT machinery in cytokinetic abscission . Curr . Biol . 29 , 2174 – 2182 . e7 ( 2019 ) . 244 . Liu , T . L . et al . Observing the cell in its native state : imaging subcellular dynamics in multicellular organisms . Science 360 , eaaq1392 ( 2018 ) . 245 . Cai , Y . et al . Experimental and computational framework for a dynamic protein atlas of human cell division . Nature 561 , 411 – 415 ( 2018 ) . 246 . Xu , W . , Zeng , Z . , Jiang , J . H . , Chang , Y . T . & Yuan , L . Discerning the chemistry in individual organelles with small - molecule fluorescent probes . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 55 , 13658 – 13699 ( 2016 ) . 247 . Takakura , H . et al . Long time - lapse nanoscopy with spontaneously blinking membrane probes . Nat . Biotechnol . 35 , 773 – 780 ( 2017 ) . 248 . Zhang , H . et al . Optogenetic control of kinetochore function . Nat . Chem . Biol . 13 , 1096 – 1101 ( 2017 ) . 249 . Yu , F . et al . Remodeling of ER - plasma membrane contact sites but not STIM1 phosphorylation inhibits Ca 2 + influx in mitosis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 116 , 10392 – 10401 ( 2019 ) . 250 . Tiwary , A . K . & Zheng , Y . Protein phase separation in mitosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 60 , 92 – 98 ( 2019 ) . 251 . Rai , A . K . , Chen , J . X . , Selbach , M . & Pelkmans , L . Kinase - controlled phase transition of membraneless organelles in mitosis . Nature 559 , 211 – 216 ( 2018 ) . 252 . Musacchio , A . The molecular biology of spindle assembly checkpoint signaling Dynamics . Curr . Biol . 25 , R1002 – 1018 ( 2015 ) . 253 . Muro , E . , Atilla - Gokcumen , G . E . & Eggert , U . S . Lipids in cell biology : how can we understand them better ? Mol . Biol . Cell 25 , 1819 – 1823 ( 2014 ) . 254 . Brügger , B . Lipidomics : analysis of the lipid composition of cells and subcellular organelles by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 83 , 79 – 98 ( 2014 ) . Acknowledgements Work on membrane dynamics in the authors’ laboratories is funded by Wellcome Trust Investigator Award 110060 / Z / 15 / Z ( to U . E . ) and Wellcome Trust Senior Fellowship 206346 / Z / 17 / Z ( to J . G . C ) . The Francis Crick Institute receives core funding from Cancer Research UK ( FC001092 ) , the UK Medical Research Council ( FC001092 ) and the Wellcome Trust ( FC001092 ) . Author contributions J . G . C . and U . S . E . contributed to all aspects of the article . H . J . researched data for the article and contributed to the writing , reviewing and editing of the manuscript . Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . Supplementary information Supplementary information is available for this paper at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41580 - 019 - 0208 - 1 . © Springer Nature Limited 2020 RElaTEd links HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee : https : / / www . genenames . org / www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 166 | march 2020 | volume 21