JCB : Article The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 J . Cell Biol . Vol . 199 No . 6 969 – 984 www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201207047 JCB 969 Correspondence to Anthony Bretscher : apb5 @ cornell . edu Abbreviations used in this paper : EGFR , EGF receptor ; ERM , ezrin - radixin - moesin ; FERM , 4 . 1 ERM ; IBR , integrin - binding region ; LOK , lymphocyte - oriented kinase ; pERM , phospho - ERM . Introduction Essentially , all cells are functionally polarized , a property re - quiring compositionally distinct regions of the plasma mem - brane . Not only is the composition distinct , but the morphology can also be highly domain specific . The apical aspect of epithe - lial cells is characterized by the presence of abundant micro - villi , but how these are restricted to this domain is unknown . The F - actin membrane – linking protein ezrin functions specifi - cally at the apical domain to regulate microvilli . Here , we show how ezrin is regulated to bring about this domain specificity . Ezrin is the founding member of the ezrin - radixin - moesin ( ERM ) family of proteins and a functionally important compo - nent of microvilli ( Fehon et al . , 2010 ) . In support of this role , cultured epithelial cells with reduced ERM protein expression lack microvilli ( Takeuchi et al . , 1994 ; Bonilha et al . , 1999 ) , and microvilli in the ezrin knockout mouse are short and misformed ( Bonilha et al . , 2006 ) . The ERM proteins are conformationally regulated : in their closed , inactive state , the N - terminal 4 . 1 ERM ( FERM ) domain is tightly bound to the C - terminal tail ( Gary and Bretscher , 1995 ) . Upon the concerted action of the plasma membrane phospholipid phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate and kinases that phosphorylate a C - terminal threonine residue ( threonine 567 [ T567 ] ezrin / T564 radixin / T558 moesin ) , this intramolecular interaction is disrupted by electrostatic repulsion ( Hirao et al . , 1996 ; Nakamura et al . , 1996 ; Matsui et al . , 1998 ; Pietromonaco et al . , 1998 ; Simons et al . , 1998 ; Gautreau et al . , 2000 ; Pearson et al . , 2000 ; Fievet et al . , 2004 ) . In the open con - formation , binding sites for transmembrane - and membrane - associated proteins in the FERM domain and an F - actin binding site in the C - terminal tail become unmasked and thereby re - veal the membrane – cytoskeletal linking function of the protein ( Fehon et al . , 2010 ) . After the discovery of ERM C - terminal phosphorylation ( Nakamura et al . , 1996 ) , Rho - associated kinase was initially thought to phosphorylate ERMs in microvilli ( Matsui et al . , 1998 ) , but this has been questioned ( Matsui et al . , 1999 ) , and several other ERM kinases have since been proposed . These include the myotonic dystrophy kinase - related Cdc42 - binding kinase ( Nakamura et al . , 2000 ) and isoforms of protein kinase C ( Pietromonaco et al . , 1998 ; Ng et al . , 2001 ) in fibroblasts ; in epithelial cells , the Ste20 - like kinase 4 ( MST4 ; ten Klooster I n this paper , we describe how a dynamic regulatory process is necessary to restrict microvilli to the apical aspect of polarized epithelial cells . We found that local phosphocycling regulation of ezrin , a critical plasma membrane – cytoskeletal linker of microvilli , was required to restrict its function to the apical membrane . Proteomic approaches and ribonucleic acid interference knockdown identified lymphocyte - oriented kinase ( LOK ) and SLK as the relevant kinases . Using drug - resistant LOK and SLK variants showed that these kinases were sufficient to restrict ezrin function to the apical domain . Both kinases were enriched in microvilli and locally activated there . Unregulated kinase activity caused ezrin mislocalization toward the basolateral domain , whereas expression of the kinase regulatory regions of LOK or SLK resulted in local inhibition of ezrin phosphorylation by the endog - enous kinases . Thus , the domain - specific presence of mi - crovilli is a dynamic process requiring a localized kinase driving the phosphocycling of ezrin to continually bias its function to the apical membrane . Local phosphocycling mediated by LOK / SLK restricts ezrin function to the apical aspect of epithelial cells Raghuvir Viswanatha , Patrice Y . Ohouo , Marcus B . Smolka , and Anthony Bretscher Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics , Weill Institute for Cell and Molecular Biology , Cornell University , Ithaca , NY 14853 © 2012 Viswanatha et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the pub - lication date ( see http : / / www . rupress . org / terms ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported license , as described at http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 / ) . T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y on J u l y 16 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201207047 Supplemental material can be found at : JCB • VOLUME 199 • NUMBER 6 • 2012 970 Ezrin phosphocycling is necessary for ezrin localization to microvilli We next explored whether the T567E phosphomimetic mutant of ezrin or the T567A phosphodeficient mutant localizes ap - propriately . Numerous previous studies have used a C - terminal tag to follow expressed ezrin ( e . g . , Crepaldi et al . , 1997 ; Yonemura et al . , 1999 ; Gautreau et al . , 2000 ; Dard et al . , 2001 ; Coscoy et al . , 2002 ; Karagiosis and Ready , 2004 ) . However , as the C terminus makes important contacts with the FERM domain to maintain an inhibited conformation ( Pearson et al . , 2000 ) , we were concerned that a C - terminal tag might affect the regulation of the protein . We therefore explored the possibility of introducing an internal tag and chose a region between the  - helical ERM coiled coil and the tail that is not ordered in the x - ray structure and also poorly conserved within the ERM fam - ily ( Fig . S1 C ; Li et al . , 2007 ) . Expression of an ezrin construct in which the eight residues of the Flag epitope replaced eight residues in the disordered region colocalized precisely with endogenous radixin similarly to endogenous ezrin ( Fig . 2 A ) . We therefore used ezrin with this internal tag , ezrin - iFlag , for many of our subsequent experiments . Jeg - 3 cells that stably express wild - type ezrin - iFlag , phospho - deficient ezrin - T567A - iFlag , or the phosphomimetic ezrin - T567E - iFlag were generated . In all cases , the level of expression was about the same as endogenous ezrin ( Fig . S1 D ) . Ezrin - T567A - iFlag could not be detected in microvilli and showed dim fluorescence in the cytoplasm ( Fig . 2 A ) . Unexpectedly , ezrin - T567E - iFlag was poorly concentrated in microvilli , with the vast majority mislocalized all over the plasma membrane , including to the basolateral membrane , a site where wild - type ezrin is never enriched , and importantly without disturbing the apical localization of radixin ( Fig . 2 A ) . To see whether this is a general property of open ezrin mutants , we also explored the lo - calization of ezrin - 1 – 583 - iFlag and ezrin - 1 – 479 - Flag , in which the C - terminal tail of ezrin is truncated or deleted , and ezrin N mutant - iFlag , which is open because of a mutation in the FERM domain that blocks binding to its otherwise functional C - terminal tail ( Finnerty et al . , 2004 ; Chambers and Bretscher , 2005 ) . All constructs localized more generally to the plasma membrane than wild - type ezrin - iFlag , and none affected the lo - calization of radixin ( Fig . 2 B ) . To explore the effect of stable C - terminal threonine phos - phorylation of endogenous ezrin , we examined the localization of ezrin after brief calyculin A treatment . This resulted in the localization of ezrin not only in microvilli but also generally to the plasma membrane , including the basolateral membrane ( Fig . 2 C ) . Collectively , these results imply that phosphocycling of ezrin regulates its distribution by controlling its open state . Phosphoregulatory control of ezrin localization is necessary for microvilli formation As our data show that ezrin hyperphosphorylation resulting from phosphatase inhibition results in partial mislocalization , we wished to determine whether T567 phosphocycling is neces - sary for microvilli formation . Microvilli are found on 70 – 80 % of Jeg - 3 cells , and their presence is almost entirely dependent et al . , 2009 ; Fidalgo et al . , 2012 ) ; and in lymphocytes , the lymphocyte - oriented kinase ( LOK ; Belkina et al . , 2009 ) . This apparent complexity has hampered study of the contribution of individual kinases that regulate ERM protein function . In con - trast , in Drosophila melanogaster , the kinase Slik has been shown to phosphorylate the sole ERM orthologue moesin in tis - sue culture cells and in situ ( Hipfner et al . , 2004 ; Hughes and Fehon , 2006 ; Carreno et al . , 2008 ; Kunda et al . , 2008 ) . Here , we examine the dynamics of ezrin phosphorylation in human epithelial cells and show that cycling of T567 phos - phorylation is required to restrict ezrin function to the apical membrane . Using proteomic approaches , we identify the re - lated kinases LOK and SLK ( Ste20 - like kinase ) , homologues of Drosophila Slik , as the major contributors to ezrin activation in two epithelial cell lines . Moreover , we show that the kinases themselves are components of apical microvilli , and their local activation is required for the polarized distribution of ezrin . Results Ezrin undergoes rapid T567 phosphorylation cycling T567 is the major site of phosphorylation regulating ezrin activation , yet the fraction of the protein phosphorylated in epithelial cells has not been explored . Using Phos - tag gels ( Kinoshita et al . , 2006 ) , in which the mobility of phosphory - lated proteins is specifically retarded , ezrin from the microvilli - decorated Jeg - 3 epithelial cell line resolves into two species of approximately equal abundance ( Fig . 1 A ) . The slower migrat - ing band is selectively recognized by an antibody specific for ERM C - terminal threonine phosphorylation ( phospho - ERM [ pERM ] ) and is absent from expressed T567A ezrin ( Fig . S1 , A and B ) . The cell - permeable phosphatase inhibitor calyculin A is known to reduce ezrin dephosphorylation ( Chen et al . , 1995 ) , so we explored whether treatment enhances the relative abun - dance of ezrin T567 phosphorylation . 5 - min treatment with 1 µM calyculin A resulted in essentially complete ezrin phos - phorylation ( Fig . 1 A ) . These results show that about half of the ezrin is phosphorylated in these cells , and the other half can be rapidly phosphorylated in vivo in the absence of oppos - ing phosphatase activity . To explore the dynamics of phosphorylation of ezrin on T567 in more detail , we followed the extent of phosphoryla - tion as a function of time after adding either the general kinase inhibitor staurosporine ( 1 µM ) or calyculin A ( 1 µM ) . Of the ERM proteins , Jeg - 3 cells express ezrin and radixin , which have an identical sequence in the region of ezrin T567 , so the antibody detects the phosphorylated state of both proteins . In all experiments , the percentage of ezrin and radixin that is phosphorylated is similar , so we considered them together . Quantitative Western blotting with the pERM antibody was used to determine the degree of C - terminal threonine phos - phorylation . The lifetime of the dephosphorylated species in the presence of phosphatase inhibitor and that of the phos - phorylated species in the presence of kinase inhibitor were each  2 min ( Fig . 1 , B and C ) . The results show that ezrin and radixin undergo constant C - terminal phosphocycling in vivo . on J u l y 16 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 971 Localized kinases restrict ezrin apically • Viswanatha et al . T567A nor T567E in the context of ezrin - GFP rescued micro - villi , whereas siRNA - resistant wild - type ezrin - GFP rescued microvilli in the absence of endogenous ezrin ( Fig . S1 , E and F ) . We conclude that although ezrin - GFP may be partially activated relative to untagged ezrin , it still requires phospho - cycling to perform its function in microvillus biogenesis . Col - lectively , these results indicate that the precise spatial control of ezrin phosphocycling is necessary for microvilli . LOK and SLK are the major kinases involved in ezrin phosphorylation We used mass spectrometry of ezrin immunoprecipitates to identify the kinases in Jeg - 3 cells responsible for phosphory - lating ezrin . To identify transient ezrin - interacting kinases with high sensitivity , we used a cross - linking strategy together with the stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture proce - dure ( Ong et al . , 2002 ) to compare ezrin - iFlag immunoprecip - itates to control immunoprecipitates . Although > 18 kinases were identified , the four enriched more than twofold in ezrin - iFlag immunoprecipitates are shown in Fig . 4 A . The most highly enriched serine / threonine kinases were the evolutionary on ezrin and radixin ( unpublished data ) . Depletion of ezrin alone by siRNA reduces the number of cells expressing abun - dant microvilli to  45 % , with some microvilli remaining over regions of cell – cell contact ( Fig . 3 , A and B ) , as is also seen when the microvillar component EBP50 ( ERM - binding phos - phoprotein 50 kD ) is depleted ( Hanono et al . , 2006 ; Garbett et al . , 2010 ) . Therefore , this provides a system to ask whether phosphomimetic variants of ezrin can contribute to the forma - tion of microvilli . Jeg - 3 cells stably expressing siRNA - resistant untagged wild - type ezrin , ezrin - T567A , or ezrin - T567E at near - endogenous ezrin levels were generated , and all were found to have microvilli as seen by radixin staining . Endogenous ezrin was then depleted in these cells by siRNA treatment , and the presence of microvilli was scored ( Fig . 3 B ) . Whereas expression of wild - type ezrin completely restored the presence of microvilli , neither ezrin - T567A nor ezrin - T567E was able to bring back microvilli . We also examined the functionality of the widely used C - terminally tagged GFP constructs . In contrast to untagged or internally tagged ezrin - T567A , we found that ezrin - T567A - GFP is membrane - targeted , consistent with our concern that it might be slightly activated . Nonetheless , neither siRNA - resistant Figure 1 . Half of ezrin is phosphorylated , and phosphoezrin has a turnover time of  2 min . ( A ) A fivefold dilution series of lysates of Jeg - 3 cells treated as indicated was resolved by SDS - PAGE with or without Phos - tag and Western blotted for ezrin . The abundance of phosphorylated and nonphosphory - lated ezrin is nearly equal ; ezrin is nearly quantitatively phos - phorylated after treatment with calyculin A for 5 min . ( B ) Time course of treatment of cells with 1 µM staurosporine or 1 µm calyculin A on the level of phospho - ERM ( pERM ) and total ezrin as seen by Western blotting . ( C ) Quantification of data in B from three independent experiments . Means ± SD are shown . WB , Western blot . on J u l y 16 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 199 • NUMBER 6 • 2012 972 Figure 2 . Constitutively open ezrin loses apical versus basal polarity . ( A ) Jeg - 3 cells expressing ezrin - iFlag or its T567 phosphomutants ( Fig . S1 , C and D ) were stained using a Flag antibody , and the localization was compared with endogenous radixin and F - actin . For every sample , a maximum intensity projection of the apical surface en face as well as a vertical cross section is shown . ( B ) Cells stably expressing ezrin C - terminal truncation mu - tants or the N mutant ( Nm ) , all of which are known to be constitutively open , were processed and imaged as in A . Compromising the FERM – C terminus interaction in ezrin reduces ezrin - iFlag accumulation in microvilli , without affecting the polarized distribution of radixin . ( C ) Cells were treated with DMSO or 0 . 1 µM calyculin A for 5 min , and ezrin and F - actin were localized . Calyculin A treatment causes ezrin to mislocalize . Bars , 10 µm . Vertical sections were expanded fivefold in z for clarity . on J u l y 16 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 973 Localized kinases restrict ezrin apically • Viswanatha et al . T567 phosphorylation , but importantly , knocking down both LOK and SLK reduced ezrin T567 phosphorylation even fur - ther to  20 % of control levels ( Figs . 4 C and S2 C ) , implying that ezrin is a substrate of both LOK and SLK in these cells . Jeg - 3 cells also express MST4 and MINK1 , two kinases that phosphorylate ezrin ( ten Klooster et al . , 2009 ) , but validated siRNAs against these kinases had no effect on the level of ezrin phosphorylation ( Fig . S2 C ) . Furthermore , Rho - associated kinase inhibitor Y - 27632 and Cdk inhibitor roscovitine had no effect on T567 phosphorylation in Jeg - 3 cells ( unpublished data ) . Consistent with a major role for LOK , fewer cells knocked homologues LOK and SLK ( Delpire , 2009 ) . Immunoprecipita - tion of ezrin - iFlag coprecipitates some LOK - GFP ( Fig . 4 B ) and some endogenous LOK ( Fig . S2 B ) , thereby supporting the mass spectrometry results . If LOK and SLK are the relevant kinases for ezrin phos - phorylation , we would expect the level of T567 phosphoryla - tion to decrease when the level of LOK and / or SLK is reduced . Depletion of LOK by siRNA treatment resulted in about a 50 % decrease in T567 phosphorylation ( Fig . 4 C ) . This effect of LOK siRNA was corroborated with a second LOK - specific siRNA ( Fig . S2 C ) . SLK depletion had a minimal effect on Figure 3 . Phosphomimetic , activated ezrin cannot rescue microvilli when endogenous ezrin is depleted by RNAi . ( A ) Cells stably expressing the indicated ezrin protein or vector ( Vec ) control were treated for 3 d with siRNA to deplete endogenous ezrin , and microvilli were revealed by radixin and F - actin staining . ( B ) Quantification of the presence of microvilli as reported by radixin or F - actin staining . Wild - type ezrin but neither phosphodeficient nor phospho - mimetic ezrin restores microvilli after knockdown of endogenous ezrin . Data in B are means ± SD of four independent experiments , and > 150 cells were scored per treatment in each experiment . Bars , 10 µm . Cross sections were expanded fivefold vertically for clarity . WB , Western blot . on J u l y 16 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 199 • NUMBER 6 • 2012 974 Figure 4 . LOK and SLK are responsible for ezrin / radixin C - terminal phosphorylation in Jeg - 3 cells . ( A ) Enrichment statistics for top four kinases identi - fied by mass spectrometry analysis of ezrin - iFlag cross - linking immunoprecipitates . LOK and SLK were the most highly enriched serine / threonine kinases binding to ezrin - iFlag . ( B ) LOK - GFP was coexpressed with empty vector or ezrin - iFlag , and cells were subjected to cross - linking immunoprecipitation using anti - Flag ( Flag IP ) . LOK - GFP coimmunoprecipitates with ezrin - iFlag . ( C ) Cells were treated with the indicated combinations of validated siRNAs against LOK ( siLOK1 ) , SLK ( siSLK2 ) , or control ( siGL2 ) and Western blotted for LOK to measure knockdown efficiency . The level of phosphorylated ezrin and radixin was determined by Western blotting and quantified by densitometry . ( D ) Cells were treated with siLOK1 for 3 d and then fixed and stained for ezrin and F - actin . Knockdown of LOK causes loss of microvilli similar to the knockdown of ezrin ( Fig . 3 A ) . ( E ) The presence of microvilli on cells treated with the indicated siRNA was assessed after ezrin and F - actin staining . ( F ) Cells were treated with DMSO , staurosporine , or erlotinib at the indicated concentrations for 5 min at 37°C , and pERM levels were measured by Western blotting . ( G ) Cells treated as in F were fixed and stained for ezrin and F - actin . Erlotinib treatment causes a severe reduction in ezrin - containing microvilli . ( H ) GFP - Flag – tagged kinase constructs were immunoprecipitated using the Flag tag after expression in on J u l y 16 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 975 Localized kinases restrict ezrin apically • Viswanatha et al . our results show that LOK and SLK are functionally the major relevant kinases involved in the steady - state phosphorylation of ezrin in Jeg - 3 cells . LOK / SLK are the general epithelial cell ERM kinases We next asked whether LOK and SLK C - terminally phosphory - late ERMs in other epithelial cells in addition to their role in placentally derived Jeg - 3 cells , by examining ERM phosphory - lation in colon - derived Caco - 2 cells . Just as with Jeg - 3 , Caco - 2 cells express ezrin and radixin but no moesin . Interestingly , Caco - 2 cells express slightly more SLK and much less LOK than Jeg - 3 cells , but steady - state ezrin and radixin C - terminal phosphorylation is nearly identical ( Fig . 5 A ) . This suggests that SLK is more active than LOK in these cells . down for LOK exhibited microvilli on their apical surface ( Fig . 4 , D and E ) , an effect similar to that seen when ezrin is depleted by siRNA ( Fig . 3 ) . Erlotinib , a small molecule inhibitor of the EGF receptor ( EGFR ) tyrosine kinase , was recently shown to inhibit LOK and SLK when used at higher concentrations ( Yamamoto et al . , 2011 ) . A 5 - min treatment with 10 µM erlotinib resulted in the loss of ezrin phosphorylation and loss of microvilli from Jeg - 3 cells , similar to 1 µM of the general kinase inhibitor staurospo - rine ( Fig . 4 , F and G ) . Functional but not kinase - dead LOK or SLK kinase do - mains could each phosphorylate T567 in the context of the C - terminal domain of ezrin in vitro ( Fig . 4 H ) . Moreover , over - expression of LOK - GFP or SLK - GFP increased the phosphory - lation of cotransfected ezrin - iFlag in vivo ( Fig . 4 I ) . Collectively , HEK293T cells and then combined with purified GST - tagged ezrin C terminus in the presence of ATP , which was then subjected to pERM Western blotting . Both LOK and SLK kinase domains are able to phosphorylate the ezrin C - terminal tail in vitro . ( I ) Cells were cotransfected with an empty vector or GFP fusions of either LOK or SLK along with ezrin - iFlag . The cells were lysed , ezrin - iFlag was immunoprecipitated with anti - Flag , and the phosphorylation of ezrin - iFlag was detected by Western blotting . Both LOK - GFP and SLK - GFP overexpression cause an increase in the overall level of ezrin - iFlag phosphoryla - tion . Data in C , E , and F are means ± SD of three independent experiments . WB , Western blot ; Vec , vector . Bars , 10 µm . Figure 5 . LOK and SLK are necessary for ERM phosphorylation in Caco - 2 cells . ( A ) Western blots of equivalent numbers of Jeg - 3 or Caco - 2 cells for LOK , SLK , MST4 , pERM , and ezrin as indicated . ( B ) Caco - 2 cells transfected with indicated siRNAs were Western blotted for phospho - ERM ( pERM ) and total ezrin and quantified by densitometry . ( C ) Caco - 2 cells transfected with indicated siRNAs were fixed and stained for ezrin and F - actin . ( D ) Caco - 2 cells were scored for presence or absence of microvilli by F - actin stain . Data in B and D are means ± SD of three or four independent experiments . WB , Western blot . Bars , 10 µm . on J u l y 16 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 199 • NUMBER 6 • 2012 976 Figure 6 . Unregulated LOK causes ezrin depolarization . ( A ) Schematic of truncation constructs and chimeras used . ATH , AT1 - 46 homology . ( B ) LOK - RFP and truncations were localized relative to F - actin . LOK and the LOK C - terminal domain localize to microvilli , whereas the N - terminal kinase domain does not . For clarity , only a small region of the apical domain is shown , and the full cell is shown in the vertical cross section . ( C ) Cells were cotransfected with on J u l y 16 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 977 Localized kinases restrict ezrin apically • Viswanatha et al . raise the level of phosphorylated ezrin to a similar extent ( Fig . 6 C ) , this allowed us to explore the contribution of lo - calizing the kinase activity to ezrin distribution . Cells overex - pressing full - length LOK were unaffected : ezrin was still highly enriched in microvilli ( Fig . 6 D ) . In contrast , cells overexpress - ing a delocalized kinase ( LOK - 1 – 348 - RFP ) consistently ex - hibited mislocalized ezrin including on the basolateral plasma membrane below cell – cell junctions , a location at which ezrin is never normally enriched ( Fig . 6 , D and E ) . This effect is caused by the mislocalized kinase activity because overexpression of either the kinase domain harboring the K65R mutation ( LOK - 1 – 348 - K65R - RFP ) or full - length LOK never caused ezrin to localize basolaterally ( Fig . 6 , D and E ) . Kinase - dead LOK - RFP ( LOK - K65R - RFP ) has a mild dominant - negative effect , reduc - ing the number of cells with microvilli as discussed in the next section ( Fig . 8 C ) , but the remaining ezrin did not mislocalize to basolateral membranes , consistent with a requirement for kinase activity in order for LOK constructs to have this effect . Delocal - ized ezrin was caused by delocalized ERM phosphorylation as seen by examining pERM distribution in the transfected cells ( Fig . S3 B , top two rows ) . Overexpression of SLK or just the N - terminal kinase domain ( 1 – 353 aa ) gave equivalent results to those obtained with LOK and its derivatives ( Fig . S3 , C – E ) . Collectively , these data suggest that LOK and SLK kinase ac - tivity must be apically restricted via the C - terminal domain to maintain microvilli . We next asked whether intentionally mistargeting just the N - terminal kinase domain to a specific region of the basolat - eral membrane would cause ezrin to accumulate in that region . The C terminus of talin has been shown to bind integrins ( Xing et al . , 2001 ) , so we generated a construct containing the LOK kinase domain fused to talin’s integrin - binding region ( IBR ) . Cells expressing the kinase domain IBR chimera ( LOK - 1 – 348 - RFP - IBR ) mislocalized ezrin on the basal plasma membrane as well as to basal actin puncta to a significantly greater extent than those expressing the kinase domain alone ( LOK - 1 – 348 - RFP ; Fig . 6 , E [ quantification ] and F [ arrows ] ) . Therefore , ezrin enrichment coincides with the location of unregulated LOK activity . Consistent with this and our earlier data showing that phosphomimetic ezrin cannot support microvillus formation , overexpression of a delocalized , active LOK kinase domain ( LOK - 1 – 348 - RFP or LOK - 1 – 348 - RFP - IBR ) greatly reduced the number of microvilli , whereas overexpression of full - length Consistently , siRNA - mediated depletion of SLK alone causes a 50 % decrease in pERM level , whereas depletion of LOK has no measurable effect on its own ( Fig . 5 B ) ; however , combining LOK and SLK siRNAs revealed a marginal syn - ergy between them ( P < 0 . 05 ; Fig . 5 B ) . Depletion of MST4 , the ERM kinase in the single polarized Ls174T - W4 cells ( ten Klooster et al . , 2009 ) , had no effect on ezrin phosphorylation in Caco - 2 ( Fig . 5 B ) or Jeg - 3 cells ( Fig . S2 B , right ) . An ex - amination of Caco - 2 cultures knocked down for LOK and SLK revealed a reproducible twofold loss of microvilli - bearing cells , whereas no such loss was observed when MST4 was depleted ( Fig . 5 C ) . These results suggest that LOK and SLK are the general regulators of ERM phosphorylation in epithelial cells . LOK activity is localized and restricted apically via the C - terminal domain LOK has an N - terminal kinase domain and a C - terminal do - main predicted to be similar to the AT1 - 46 homology domain of SLK ( Figs . 6 A and S3 A ; Sabourin et al . , 2000 ) . To dissect the molecular organization of LOK , we constructed a series of truncation mutants as well as generating the K65R kinase - dead mutant previously shown to inhibit LOK activity ( Fig . 6 A ; Belkina et al . , 2009 ) . LOK has been shown to localize to the membrane of pe - ripheral blood lymphocytes ( Belkina et al . , 2009 ) , but a more precise location has not been reported . Although we were un - able to localize endogenous LOK , LOK - RFP is mostly apical but also partially basolateral ( Fig . 6 B ) . The N - terminal kinase domain failed to localize to any specific region , whereas low - level expression of the C - terminal domain localized specifically to apical microvilli ( Fig . 6 B ) . Thus , LOK is localized to micro - villi via the C - terminal domain . To determine whether LOK distribution is important for its activity toward ezrin in vivo , we expressed truncations of LOK and their kinase - dead derivatives along with ezrin - iFlag and measured the effect on ezrin - iFlag phosphorylation ( Fig . 6 C ) . Unexpectedly , we found that all constructs contain - ing the active N - terminal kinase domain—even those that did not contain the C - terminal domain necessary for localization to microvilli—yielded a similar increase in ezrin - iFlag phosphory - lation relative to constructs lacking kinase activity ( Fig . 6 C ) . Because the overexpression of either microvillus - localized LOK or the delocalized N - terminal kinase domain could both indicated RFP - tagged LOK constructs along with ezrin - iFlag . The cells were lysed , ezrin - iFlag was immunoprecipitated ( Flag IP ) , and phosphorylation of ezrin - iFlag was measured by quantitative Western blotting . The fold increase in ezrin phosphorylation as a result of each LOK truncation was normalized to the overexpression of full - length LOK . ( D ) Cells expressing the RFP - tagged LOK N - terminal kinase domain alone ( LOK - 1 – 348 - RFP ) were stained for ezrin and F - actin and presented as either an apical , basolateral , or side view , and cells transfected with full - length LOK - RFP ( bottom ) are presented in the side view . Cells expressing the LOK kinase domain alone exhibit delocalized ezrin staining , whereas cells expressing full - length LOK do not . ( E ) Cells expressing indicated LOK - RFP fusion proteins were stained as in D , and the ezrin depolarization phenotypes were quantified by confocal microscopy . Only when the LOK kinase domain is functional but unregulated does it cause ezrin to mislocalize . Note that although cells expressing LOK - K65R do not have mislocal - ized ezrin , fewer have microvilli , as reported in Fig . 8 C . ( F ) Cells overexpressing a fusion of the LOK kinase domain to the integrin - binding region ( IBR ) of talin were processed as in D . Arrows point to one F - actin – containing basal membrane – associated structure . When the kinase domain alone is intentionally mislocalized , ezrin is preferentially located around these structures . ( G ) Cell expressing full - length LOK fused to the IBR and stained for ezrin and F - actin . Even when intentionally mislocalized basally , full - length LOK does not cause ezrin to mislocalize , indicating that it is only active in the apical domain . ( H ) Cells expressing LOK - RFP and derivatives were stained with ezrin and F - actin , and the presence of microvilli was scored as in Figs . 3 B and 4 D . Active , mislocalized LOK constructs cause cells to lose microvilli . Data in B , E , and H are means ± SD of three or four independent experiments . Cross sections were expanded fivefold vertically for clarity , and yellow asterisks mark transfected cells . WB , Western blot . Bars : ( B , En face images ) 1 µm ; ( B [ main images ] , D , F , and G ) 10 µm . on J u l y 16 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 199 • NUMBER 6 • 2012 978 caused and accumulated in long protrusive F - actin – containing structures devoid of ezrin mostly emanating from the baso - lateral membrane , suggesting the possibility that it imparts additional defects ( Fig . 8 D ) . Expression of the equivalent region of SLK promoted a similar reduction in pERM as well as the loss of microvilli ( Fig . S3 , C and E , bottom ) . Surpris - ingly , expression of full - length kinase - dead LOK was much less efficient at reducing the number of cells with microvilli ( Fig . 7 C ) , suggesting that the strong inhibitory effect of the C - terminal domain is partially masked in the context of the full - length protein . At low levels of expression in the rare cells that have normal microvilli , the smaller fragment of the LOK C - terminal domain , LOK - 586 – 968 - GFP , localized preferentially to the distal ends of microvilli ( Fig . 8 E ) . In individual microvilli , the intensities of ezrin and LOK - 586 – 968 - GFP display a par - tially mutually exclusive relationship along microvilli ( Figs . 8 , E and F ; and S5 A ) . This phenomenon is not observed with full - length LOK ( Fig . S5 B ) and therefore appears to repre - sent targeted inhibition of ezrin accumulation in discrete re - gions . Furthermore , because LOK - 586 – 968 - GFP is typically more concentrated on the tip than at the base of microvilli ( Figs . 8 , E and F ; and S5 A ) , these results hint that endog - enous kinase activity may be directed toward the growing distal tip of microvilli . Discussion Functional polarity requires the targeting of appropriate mem - brane proteins to specific domains but also defining the mor - phology of the domain by cytoplasmic factors , about which little is known . Here , we uncover how ezrin function is restricted to the apical membrane . We first demonstrate that phosphocy - cling on T567 is critical . Second , we identify the relevant ki - nases in epithelial cells as LOK and SLK . Third , we show that the kinases are enriched in microvilli through their C - terminal domain . Fourth , we show that the kinases are locally activated in microvilli . Extensive characterization of the ERM phosphomimetic corresponding to ezrin T567D / E has shown that it reflects the activated form ( Matsui et al . , 1999 ; Polesello et al . , 2002 ; Speck et al . , 2003 ; Chambers and Bretscher , 2005 ; Charras et al . , 2006 ; Carreno et al . , 2008 ; Kunda et al . , 2008 ) . Earlier studies of epi - thelial cells suggested that overexpressing the ezrin phosphomi - metic can provide more numerous microvilli , but these studies were performed in the presence of endogenous ezrin ( Gautreau et al . , 2000 ; Fievet et al . , 2004 ) . In contrast , we show that expres - sion of the phosphomimetic in the absence of endogenous ezrin , unopposed phosphorylation of ezrin , or ezrin phosphorylated by a nonlocalized kinase all lead to its mislocalization to the basolateral membrane and the loss of its function . Our results are consistent with the finding in fly photoreceptor cells that re - expression of wild - type moesin restores apical microvilli after moesin gene disruption , whereas reexpression of phosphomi - metic T559D moesin does not ( Karagiosis and Ready , 2004 ) . We find that the normal ezrin phosphorylation cycle is  2 min , which is similar to the turnover rate as measured by LOK ( LOK - RFP ) did not ( Fig . 6 G ) . Kinase activity was also required , because kinase - dead versions of the delocalized ki - nases ( LOK - 1 – 348 - K65R - RFP or LOK - 1 – 348 - K65R - RFP - IBR ) also failed to reduce microvilli ( Fig . 6 G ) . Thus , the correct targeting and activation of LOK to microvilli by a mechanism involving its C - terminal domain is critical for the normal func - tion and distribution of ezrin . Overexpressed LOK was found to be partially mislocal - ized along basolateral membranes , but ezrin was never found associated with it ( Fig . 6 D ) . Furthermore , when the full - length kinase was fused to the IBR ( LOK - RFP - IBR ) , the chimera localized basolaterally to a greater extent , but ezrin remained strictly polarized in microvilli ( Fig . 6 I ) , and microvilli remained intact ( Fig . 6 H ) . Thus , in the context of the full - length protein , factors must exist that restrict LOK activity apically . Localized LOK / SLK activity is sufficient for microvillus formation To assess the importance of LOK and SLK in microvillus for - mation , we set out to generate erlotinib - resistant forms of the kinases . Erlotinib was first identified as an inhibitor of EGFR ( Pao et al . , 2005 ; Pao and Chmielecki , 2010 ) . T766 of EGFR becomes mutated to methionine in some erlotinib - resistant cancers and has been shown to cause the occlusion of erlotinib from the ATP binding site ( Pao et al . , 2005 ) . We asked whether the homologous mutation could be used to develop erlotinib - resistant LOK and SLK , which could then be used to test mi - crovilli formation in the absence of endogenous LOK / SLK activity . Structural analysis revealed that the homologues of T766 in EGFR are I110 in LOK ( Fig . S4 A ) and I108 in SLK . Expression of LOK - I110M - GFP and SLK - I108M - GFP , but not a kinase - dead derivative , completely abrogated the loss of microvilli induced by erlotinib treatment ( Figs . 7 , A and B ; and S4 B ) . Thus , LOK and SLK are each sufficient for local - ized ezrin phosphorylation leading to microvillus production . Strikingly , expression of just the erlotinib - resistant LOK kinase domain failed to rescue microvillus loss in the presence of erlotinib ( Fig . 7 , B and C ) , even though the kinase domain was still able to restore ezrin and radixin phosphorylation after erlotinib treatment in the transfected cells ( Fig . S4 C ) . Thus , regulation of LOK activity via the C - terminal domain is neces - sary for the presence of microvilli . The LOK C - terminal domain both localizes and regulates the N - terminal kinase domain To further investigate the localization of LOK activity , we ex - amined the effect of expressing either full - length constructs or the C - terminal domain alone ( Fig . 8 A ) . Low - level expression of the C - terminal domain of LOK ( Fig . 6 B ) or the equiva - lent region in SLK ( Fig . S3 B , middle images ) showed that it localizes preferentially to microvilli . Strikingly , however , high - level expression of the entire LOK C - terminal domain ( residues 310 – 968 ) or a smaller segment ( residues 586 – 968 ) caused a significant reduction in overall ezrin phosphoryla - tion ( Fig . 8 B ) and a nearly complete elimination of microvilli ( Fig . 8 C ) . In addition to accumulating at cell junctions and in the cytoplasm , expression of the LOK C - terminal domain on J u l y 16 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 979 Localized kinases restrict ezrin apically • Viswanatha et al . Figure 7 . Regulated LOK activity is necessary and sufficient for microvilli in the presence of erlotinib . ( A ) Cells expressing erlotinib - resistant mutants of LOK as indicated were treated with 20 µM erlotinib for 10 min . LOK - I110M - GFP – transfected cells ( or SLK - I108M - GFP – transfected cells ; Fig . S4 , B and C ) , but not neighboring untransfected cells , are protected from microvillus loss caused by erlotinib . Cells transfected with LOK - 1 – 348 - I110M - GFP have membrane - enriched depolarized ezrin but do not form microvilli . ( B ) Microvilli scoring of EBP50 - stained Jeg - 3 cells transfected with the indicated GFP - tagged protein or GFP - NLS as indicated and then treated with or without erlotinib . Data are means ± SD of three independent experiments . Bars , 10 µm . on J u l y 16 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 199 • NUMBER 6 • 2012 980 Figure 8 . Overexpression of the LOK C - terminal domain inhibits membrane association of ezrin , and this effect can be limited to extremely small regions within microvilli . ( A ) Schematic of tagged truncation constructs used . ATH , AT1 - 46 homology . ( B ) Cells were cotransfected with empty vector ( Vec ) or GFP or RFP fusions of LOK along with ezrin - iFlag . The cells were lysed , ezrin - iFlag was immunoprecipitated with anti - iFlag ( Flag IP ) , and phosphorylation on J u l y 16 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 981 Localized kinases restrict ezrin apically • Viswanatha et al . effect in colon epithelial Caco - 2 cells and kidney epithelial LLC - PK1 . CL4 cells ( unpublished data ) , suggesting that the mechanism by which LOK and SLK are regulated is general among epithelial cells . We have previously shown that phosphoezrin and - radixin are enriched toward the tip of the microvillus and suggested that ezrin is phosphorylated at the microvillus tip and then moves down with treadmilling actin ( Hanono et al . , 2006 ) . We now find a region within the LOK protein , which , when expressed at low levels , is often confined to the tip of micro - villi , as would be expected if it is the relevant kinase . We there - fore propose that some factor enriched at the microvillus tip recruits LOK and activates it there locally . Ezrin becomes phos - phorylated , and as it moves down the microvillus , it begins to become dephosphorylated by a cytoplasmic phosphatase and ultimately releases from the membrane and F - actin at the base . Interestingly , ERM anchorage has been invoked as a means for maintaining the protein composition of the apical domain in the absence of polarized membrane trafficking ( Meder et al . , 2005 ) . The phosphocycling mechanism we de - scribe , and thus polarized LOK / SLK , may therefore be a criti - cal component of this “preapical” polarity pathway . The work presented here has uncovered local regulation of ERM proteins by LOK and SLK through an unidentified micro - villar component . So far , no interactors of LOK are known , but several binding partners of SLK have been reported , including microtubules ( Wagner et al . , 2002 , 2008 ; Burakov et al . , 2005 ) , F - actin ( Sabourin et al . , 2000 ) , PDZ domain – containing pro - tein PDZK1 ( Gisler et al . , 2003 ) , and the transcription factors Lbd1 / 2 ( Storbeck et al . , 2009 ) . Our current efforts are aimed at determining whether these or other interactors are responsible for the polarized activity of LOK and SLK . Materials and methods Reagents , cDNAs , and siRNAs Phos - tag reagent ( Wako Chemicals USA ) was added at 50 µM to standard Tris - glycine - SDS polyacrylamide gels according to the manufacturer’s rec - ommendations . Calyculin A and staurosporine were obtained from Enzo Life Sciences . Erlotinib was obtained from Cayman Chemical . Ezrin antibodies were either a mouse antiezrin antibody ( CPCT - ezrin - 1 supernatant concentrate obtained from the Developmental Stud - ies Hybridoma Bank developed under the auspices of the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development and maintained by The University of Iowa Department of Biology ) used at 1 : 5 , 000 ( Western blot ) or 1 : 100 ( immunofluorescence ) or a previously characterized rabbit polyclonal antibody raised against full - length human ezrin ( Bretscher , 1989 ) and used at 1 : 5 , 000 ( Western blot ) or 1 : 300 ( immunofluorescence ) . Rabbit antiradixin ( raised against full - length , bacterially expressed radixin ; Shcherbina et al . , 1999 ) used at 1 : 50 ( immunofluorescence ) and rabbit anti - pERM ( raised against re - combinant phosphopeptide CRDKYK ( pT ) LRQIR ; Matsui et al . , 1998 ; FRAP of ezrin - GFP in the same cells ( Garbett and Bretscher , 2012 ) . Thus , our data imply that the apical membrane is a dynamic system of local ezrin phosphorylation . Because microvilli have been shown to undergo constant remodeling ( Gorelik et al . , 2003 ; Garbett and Bretscher , 2012 ) , phosphocycling ensures that acti - vated ezrin can be recruited into growing microvilli as needed . To identify the relevant kinases for ezrin T567 phosphory - lation , we used an unbiased proteomic approach , leading us to LOK and SLK , two evolutionary homologues , which we found are necessary and sufficient for microvilli formation by local - ized ezrin . LOK has previously been shown to regulate moesin in lymphocytes . However , mice with the LOK gene knocked out have reduced ERM phosphorylation and alterations in chemokine - stimulated lymphocyte migration and polarization , but the mice are viable ( Belkina et al . , 2009 ) . We suspect that in such knockout mice , SLK is providing a compensating func - tion , and predict that a double LOK and SLK knockout mouse would be inviable . Because the ERM kinase in Drosophila is Slik , the homologue of LOK and SLK , this implies that regula - tion of ERM proteins by this family of kinases has an ancient evolutionary origin . Earlier work has shown that in single epithelial Ls174T - W4 cells , a signal transduction pathway from LKB1 / Strad results in the activation of the kinase MST4 to phosphory - late ezrin necessary for morphological assembly of the apical domain ( ten Klooster et al . , 2009 ; Gloerich et al . , 2012 ) . More - over , these studies reported that phosphomimetic ezrin targets and restores microvilli in these MST4 knockdown cells , in ap - parent contradiction to our work . Although the expression level of phosphomimetic ezrin relative to endogenous ezrin was not reported , these results suggest that other mechanisms may exist under some circumstances to polarize ezrin apically . Further - more , ten Klooster et al . ( 2009 ) also reported that knockdown of MST4 in Caco - 2 cells induced defects in apical morphol - ogy ( ten Klooster et al . , 2009 ) . In contrast , we have found that knockdown of LOK and SLK , but not MST4 , in either Jeg - 3 or Caco - 2 results in reduced ezrin phosphorylation and loss of apical microvilli . We can offer no simple explanation for the difference in results between our and these studies . Although both LOK in mammalian lymphocytes and Drosophila Slik have been implicated in ERM phosphoryla - tion , it was not known how their function was restricted to a specific domain . We now show that the C - terminal region of both LOK and SLK target the kinase to apical microvilli and restrict their activity apically . Accordingly , overexpression of the LOK C - terminal domain uncoupled from the kinase do - main acts as a dominant negative to inhibit ERM phosphoryla - tion , leading to the destruction of microvilli . We find a similar of ezrin - iFlag was detected by Western blotting and quantified . When the LOK C - terminal domain is overexpressed without an active kinase domain , ezrin - iFlag phosphorylation is inhibited . ( C ) Cells expressing the indicated LOK - GFP or - RFP fusions were stained for ezrin and F - actin and assessed for the presence of microvilli . LOK fusions that cause decreased pERM also cause microvillus loss . ( D ) Cells expressing high levels of the LOK C - terminal domain ( LOK - 310 – 968 - GFP ) were stained for ezrin and F - actin . The overexpression of the LOK C - terminal domain causes the loss of microvilli and formation of F - actin – positive protrusions lacking ezrin . ( E ) Cells expressing a low level of the shorter region of the LOK C - terminal domain ( LOK - 586 – 968 - GFP ) were stained for ezrin and F - actin . Bottom images show an enlargement of the region boxed in the top right image . ( F ) Fluorescence intensity along the lines indicated in E of three microvilli from their proximal to distal ends as marked . The minimal overexpression of the LOK C - terminal region often causes a loss of ezrin staining from the distal ends of microvilli . Data in B and C are means ± SD of three independent experiments . Data in F are representative of three replicates . WB , Western blot . Bars , 10 µm . on J u l y 16 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 199 • NUMBER 6 • 2012 982 using the manufacturer’s protocol . In Fig . 5 B ( fourth lane ) , cells were trans - fected with a mixture of 15 nM LOK and 15 nM SLK siRNAs . In all but one case , cells were processed for immunofluorescence or lysis 3 d after transfection . In Fig . 4 C , cells were treated with the indicated first siRNA for 2 d , reseeded , and then , on the third day , transfected with the indicated second siRNA for an additional 3 d and processed on the sixth day . Immunoprecipitations and mass spectrometry LOK and SLK interaction was determined by cross - linking immunoprecipi - tation . In brief , before lysis , cells were treated with warm PBS containing 1 . 25 mM dithiobis ( succinimidylpropionate ) ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) , a cell - permeable , thiol - reversible cross - linking agent , for 2 min at 37°C . Excess cross - linker was quenched by extensive washing in TBS for 15 min at room temperature . Cells were then solubilized in cold immunoprecipi - tation buffer ( 25 mM Tris , pH 7 . 4 , 5 % glycerol , 150 mM NaCl , 50 mM NaF , 0 . 1 mM Na 3 VO 4 , 10 mM  - glycerol phosphate , 8 . 7 mg / ml parani - trophenylphosphate , 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 1 µM calyculin A , and prote - ase inhibitor tablet [ Roche ] ) and immunoprecipitated for 2 h using Flag M2 affinity gel ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . For Western blots , immunoprecipitates were extensively washed in immunoprecipitation wash buffer ( 25 mM Tris , pH 7 . 4 , 5 % glycerol , 150 mM NaCl , 50 mM NaF , and 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 ) and then eluted in 200 µg / ml 3×Flag peptide , denatured in Laemmli buffer , resolved by SDS - PAGE , transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride , and then interrogated with specific antibodies . For mass spectrometry , we followed a protocol adapted from Smolka et al . ( 2007 ) and Albuquerque et al . ( 2008 ) . In brief , immunoprecipitates were eluted in 50 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , and 1 % SDS and then precipitated with 49 . 9 % acetone , 50 % ethanol , and 0 . 1 % acetic acid . Proteins were digested with trypsin ( Promega ) and desalted in a C18 column ( Waters ) . After drying the peptides in a speed vac , the sample was dissolved in 80 % acetonitrile and 1 % formic acid and fractionated by hydrophilic interaction chromatography . Resulting fractions were dried , dissolved in 0 . 1 % trifluo - roacetic acid , and injected into a mass spectrometer ( Orbitrap XL ; Thermo Fisher Scientific ) . The data were analyzed using a Sorcerer system ( Sage - N ) running Sequest for protein identification and Xpress for peptide quantita - tion . Interacting proteins were limited to serine / threonine kinases for which at least three peptides were identified with a peptide probability score > 0 . 9 and a heavy versus light enrichment > 2 . 0 . For analysis of tagged ezrin phosphorylation , cells transfected with ezrin - iFlag plasmid plus LOK or SLK expression vector were rapidly boiled in 50 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , containing 1 % SDS . Lysates were then diluted 10 - fold with immunoprecipitation buffer and clarified , and the protein abundance was quantified and adjusted using the 660 - nm Protein Assay ( Thermo Fisher Scien - tific ) , and immunoprecipitated as described in the previous paragraph . Western blotting and densitometry Western blots were performed as previously described ( Hanono et al . , 2006 ) . For all densitometry , Western blotting was performed with a mix - ture of mouse CPCT - ezrin - 1 or mouse Flag and rabbit pERM antibodies , detected with infrared fluorescent secondary antibodies ( Invitrogen or LI - COR Biosciences ) . Membranes were imaged using a scanner ( Odyssey ; LI - COR Biosciences ) . On every membrane in this study , dilutions of lysate were run alongside the samples so that standard curves for both total ezrin and pERM could be generated in the Odyssey software . These were then used to determine the relative intensity of in - range pERM and ezrin or Flag signals from experimental lanes . These data were exported to Prism soft - ware ( GraphPad Software ) in which all further quantitative and statistical analyses were performed . Immunofluorescence and image analysis Cells grown on glass coverslips were fixed in 3 . 7 % formalin / PBS for 15 min at room temperature for all experiments except in Figs . S3 B and S4 C , in which cells were fixed in cold 10 % trichloroacetic acid for 15 min as previously described ( Hayashi et al . , 1999 ) . Cells were then washed with PBS and blocked with immunofluorescence buffer ( PBS + 0 . 5 % BSA + 0 . 5 % goat serum + 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 ) for 10 min . Primary and secondary antibodies were then applied in immunofluorescence buffer containing 1 % FBS . Alexa Fluor – conjugated phalloidin ( Invitrogen ) , to stain F - actin , was added to the secondary as required . The cells were mounted in Vectashield reagent ( Vector Laboratories ) , imaged using a spinning - disk microscope ( CSU - X ; Intelligent Imaging Innovations ) with spherical aberration correc - tion device , 63× , 1 . 4 NA objective on a microscope ( DMI6000 B ; Leica ) , acquired with either an electron - multiplying charge - coupled device cam - era ( QuantEM ; Photometrics ) or a charge - coupled device camera ( HQ2 ; Photometrics ) using SlideBook software ( Intelligent Imaging Innovations ) . Hanono et al . , 2006 ) used at 1 : 500 ( Western blot ) or 1 : 200 ( immuno - fluorescence ) have also been previously described . Rabbit anti - LOK used at 1 : 500 ( Western blot ) and rabbit anti - SLK used at 1 : 100 ( West - ern blot ) were purchased from Bethyl Laboratories , Inc . Mouse anti - Flag used at 1 : 5 , 000 ( Western blot ) or 1 : 100 ( immunofluorescence ) and mouse antitubulin used at 1 : 20 , 000 ( Western blot ) were obtained from Sigma - Aldrich . Mouse anti – E - cadherin used at 1 : 5 , 000 ( Western blot ) was obtained from BD . Rabbit anti - TagRFP used at 1 : 500 ( Western blot ) was purchased from Evrogen . Mouse anti - GFP used at 1 : 500 ( Western blot ) was obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . Mouse anti - MST4 used at 1 : 5 , 000 ( Western blot ) was obtained from Epitomics . To generate human ezrin cDNA resistant to siEzrin , four silent muta - tions ( c612t , t615c , c618t , and g621a ) were introduced into the ezrin ORF ( Gary and Bretscher , 1995 ) by inverse tailored PCR . T567E mutant ezrin was a gift from J . Thoms ( Cornell University , Ithaca , NY ) . For creation of stable cell lines , the pQCXIP vector ( BD ) was used . To generate pQCXIP / ezrin or pQCXIP / ezrin - iFlag and derivatives , ezrin cDNA was further mu - tated , and the eight - residue Flag tag ( Fig . S1 C ) was substituted by overlap - ping or inverse tailored PCR , respectively , and then subcloned into pQCXIP ( BD ) . Ezrin - iFlag truncations were generated by PCR and subcloned into pQCXIP . For ezrin - GFP expression , ezrin cDNA was first cloned into pEGFP - N2 , and then , the ezrin - GFP cassette was subcloned by tailored PCR into pQCXIP . The linking region between ezrin and GFP encoded the following peptide sequence : EFCSRRYRGPGIHRPVAT . LOK and trunca - tions thereof were generated by tailored PCR using whole cDNA , which was made using mRNA isolated from Jeg - 3 cells and the reverse tran - scriptase kit ( SuperScript III ; Invitrogen ) , a gift from J . Wayt ( Cornell Uni - versity , Ithaca , NY ) , and subcloned into pDONR221 by BP recombination ( Invitrogen ) . They were then transferred into modified pcDNA - DEST vectors ( Invitrogen ) encoding C - terminal EGFP , C - terminal TagRFP - T , or C - terminal TagRFP - T - talin - 1958 – 1241 by LR recombination ( Invitrogen ) . The linking region between the ORF and the tags encoded the following peptide se - quence : YPAFLYKVVRSR . Talin was cloned by PCR from Jeg - 3 cDNA . The murine long isoform of SLK and truncations thereof were amplified by PCR from EST no . BC131675 purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific and then cloned into pDONR223 by BP recombination . They were then transferred into the same set of modified pcDNA - DEST vectors by LR recombination , with one exception : SLK - 310 – 1233 was transferred into pcDNA - DEST53 ( Invitrogen ) , which adds an N - terminal ( rather than C - terminal ) GFP because this resulted in higher expression of this construct . Kinase - dead ( K65R for LOK and K63R for SLK ) mutations were generated using the mutagenesis kit ( QuikChange ; Agilent Technologies ) . For kinase assays , a C - terminal Flag tag was added to the 3  end by tailored PCR of LOK - GFP or SLK - GFP and derivatives , and the products were cloned into pQCXIP . GST - ezrin - 474 – 585 was previously described ( Gary and Bretscher , 1995 ) . siRNAs were Validated Silencer Select from Ambion with the following sequences : 5  - GGAAUCAACUAUUUCGAGAdTdT - 3  ( ezrin ) , 5  - GAAGAGCAUCGGAACCAGAdTdT - 3  ( LOK , sequence 1 ) , 5  - GGACU - ACACCAGGUUCCAAdTdT - 3  ( LOK , sequence 2 ) , 5  - GAUCGAUAUCUUU - ACAAGAdTdT - 3  ( SLK , sequence 1 ) , 5  - GCAGAAACAGACUAUCGAAdTdT - 3  ( SLK , sequence 2 ) , 5  - GCUUUACCACCGUACGAAAdTdT - 3  ( MST4 ) , and 5  - GAAUCCCGCUGACAAACCAdTdT - 3  ( MINK1 ) . siGL2 , targeting GL2 luciferase ( 5  - CGUACGCGGAAUACUUCGAdTdT - 3  ) , was previously described ( Hanono et al . , 2006 ) . Cell culture and cDNA / siRNA transfections Jeg - 3 cells ( American Type Culture Collection ) were maintained in a 5 % CO 2 humidified atmosphere at 37°C in MEM ( Invitrogen ) with 10 % FBS ( Invitrogen ) . Caco - 2 cells were maintained in MEM with 20 % FBS . All tran - sient plasmid DNA transfections used polyethylenimine reagent ( PolyPlus ) by forming complexes of DNA – polyethylenimine at a ratio of 2 . 5 : 1 and then adding 0 . 3 µg DNA to each centimeter squared of 30 – 50 % confluent Jeg - 3 cells ( Hanono et al . , 2006 ) . Phoenix - Ampho retrovirus producer cells ( American Type Culture Collection ) were cultured in DMEM ( Invitrogen ) with 10 % FBS . Retroviruses were prepared by transfecting the Phoenix - Ampho cell lined with pQCXIP and derivatives using Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) according to the manufacturer’s protocol . The recombinant retroviruses were used to transduce Jeg - 3 cells , which were then selected with 2 . 0 µg / ml puromycin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . For stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture , cells expressing ezrin - iFlag or empty vector were grown for ≥2 wk in MEM ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) containing dia - lyzed FBS ( Invitrogen ) and either C - 13 arginine and lysine or C - 12 argi - nine and lysine ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , respectively . All siRNAs were transfected at 30 nM into  25 % confluent cultures of Jeg - 3 cells or Caco - 2 cells using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX ( Invitrogen ) on J u l y 16 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 983 Localized kinases restrict ezrin apically • Viswanatha et al . rearrangement through ERM phosphorylation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 106 : 4707 – 4712 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0805963106 Bonilha , V . L . , S . C . Finnemann , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1999 . Ezrin pro - motes morphogenesis of apical microvilli and basal infoldings in reti - nal pigment epithelium . J . Cell Biol . 147 : 1533 – 1548 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 147 . 7 . 1533 Bonilha , V . L . , M . E . Rayborn , I . Saotome , A . I . McClatchey , and J . G . Hollyfield . 2006 . Microvilli defects in retinas of ezrin knockout mice . Exp . Eye Res . 82 : 720 – 729 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . exer . 2005 . 09 . 013 Bretscher , A . 1989 . Rapid phosphorylation and reorganization of ezrin and spectrin accompany morphological changes induced in A - 431 cells by epidermal growth factor . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 921 – 930 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 108 . 3 . 921 Burakov , A . V . , O . V . Kovalenko , E . S . Potekhina , E . S . Nadezhdina , and L . A . Zinovkina . 2005 . LOSK ( SLK ) protein kinase activity is necessary for microtubule organization in the interphase cell centrosome . Dokl . Biol . Sci . 403 : 317 – 319 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10630 - 005 - 0123 - 9 Carreno , S . , I . Kouranti , E . S . Glusman , M . T . Fuller , A . Echard , and F . Payre . 2008 . Moesin and its activating kinase Slik are required for cortical sta - bility and microtubule organization in mitotic cells . J . Cell Biol . 180 : 739 – 746 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200709161 Chambers , D . N . , and A . Bretscher . 2005 . Ezrin mutants affecting dimeriza - tion and activation . Biochemistry . 44 : 3926 – 3932 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / bi0480382 Charras , G . T . , C . K . Hu , M . Coughlin , and T . J . Mitchison . 2006 . Reassembly of contractile actin cortex in cell blebs . J . Cell Biol . 175 : 477 – 490 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200602085 Chen , J . , J . A . Cohn , and L . J . Mandel . 1995 . Dephosphorylation of ezrin as an early event in renal microvillar breakdown and anoxic injury . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 92 : 7495 – 7499 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 92 . 16 . 7495 Crepaldi , T . , A . Gautreau , P . M . Comoglio , D . Louvard , and M . Arpin . 1997 . Ezrin is an effector of hepatocyte growth factor – mediated migration and morphogenesis in epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 138 : 423 – 434 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 138 . 2 . 423 Coscoy , S . , F . Waharte , A . Gautreau , M . Martin , D . Louvard , P . Mangeat , M . Arpin , and F . Amblard . 2002 . Molecular analysis of microscopic ezrin dynamics by two - photon FRAP . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 99 : 12813 – 12818 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 192084599 Dard , N . , S . Louvet , A . Santa - Maria , J . Aghion , M . Martin , P . Mangeat , and B . Maro . 2001 . In vivo functional analysis of ezrin during mouse blas - tocyst formation . Dev . Biol . 233 : 161 – 173 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1006 / dbio . 2001 . 0192 Delpire , E . 2009 . The mammalian family of sterile 20p - like protein kinases . Pflugers Arch . 458 : 953 – 967 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00424 - 009 - 0674 - y Fehon , R . G . , A . I . McClatchey , and A . Bretscher . 2010 . Organizing the cell cortex : the role of ERM proteins . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 : 276 – 287 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm2866 Fidalgo , M . , A . Guerrero , M . Fraile , C . Iglesias , C . M . Pombo , and J . Zalvide . 2012 . Adaptor protein cerebral cavernous malformation 3 ( CCM3 ) medi - ates phosphorylation of the cytoskeletal proteins ezrin / radixin / moesin by mammalian Ste20 - 4 to protect cells from oxidative stress . J . Biol . Chem . 287 : 11556 – 11565 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M111 . 320259 Fievet , B . T . , A . Gautreau , C . Roy , L . Del Maestro , P . Mangeat , D . Louvard , and M . Arpin . 2004 . Phosphoinositide binding and phosphorylation act sequentially in the activation mechanism of ezrin . J . Cell Biol . 164 : 653 – 659 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200307032 Finnerty , C . M . , D . Chambers , J . Ingraffea , H . R . Faber , P . A . Karplus , and A . Bretscher . 2004 . The EBP50 - moesin interaction involves a binding site regulated by direct masking on the FERM domain . J . Cell Sci . 117 : 1547 – 1552 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 01038 Garbett , D . , and A . Bretscher . 2012 . PDZ interactions regulate rapid turnover of the scaffolding protein EBP50 in microvilli . J . Cell Biol . 198 : 195 – 203 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201204008 Garbett , D . , D . P . LaLonde , and A . Bretscher . 2010 . The scaffolding protein EBP50 regulates microvillar assembly in a phosphorylation - dependent manner . J . Cell Biol . 191 : 397 – 413 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201004115 Gary , R . , and A . Bretscher . 1995 . Ezrin self - association involves binding of an N - terminal domain to a normally masked C - terminal domain that includes the F - actin binding site . Mol . Biol . Cell . 6 : 1061 – 1075 . Gautreau , A . , D . Louvard , and M . Arpin . 2000 . Morphogenic effects of ezrin require a phosphorylation - induced transition from oligomers to mono - mers at the plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 150 : 193 – 203 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 150 . 1 . 193 Gisler , S . M . , S . Pribanic , D . Bacic , P . Forrer , A . Gantenbein , L . A . Sabourin , A . Tsuji , Z . S . Zhao , E . Manser , J . Biber , and H . Murer . 2003 . PDZK1 : I . a Maximum or summed intensity projections were assembled in SlideBook and exported to Illustrator software ( Adobe ) . For clarity , side projections were vertically expanded fivefold using Illustrator . The presence or absence of microvilli was scored as described pre - viously ( Hanono et al . , 2006 ; Garbett et al . , 2010 ; LaLonde et al . , 2010 ) . More than 200 cells per replicate were stained using the indicated anti - body or phalloidin and binned into three categories : microvilli , no micro - villi , or abnormal . As mentioned in the text , microvilli above cell – cell junctions were ignored in the scoring . Abnormal cells represented < 10 % of cells scored and did not change as a result of the experimental treatments in this study . For scoring of ezrin localization to the basolateral domain induced by delocalized LOK expression , the cell middle or cell base was identified by confocal microscopy using F - actin staining for 50 transfected cells per sample per trial , and the presence or absence of ezrin stain in transfected cells relative to surrounding nontransfected cells was reported . For line inten - sity analysis , a line was drawn along a single microvillus from base to tip ( the orientation was verified by scanning through multiple z sections ) , and the intensities of ezrin immunofluorescent staining , GFP , and F - actin were each calculated in SlideBook and exported into Excel software ( Microsoft ) . Ezrin and GFP were each divided by F - actin to minimize aberrations in mi - crovilli geometry , and the resulting data were plotted in Prism . Kinase assays Kinase assays were essentially as previously described ( Jackson and Dickson , 1999 ) . GST - ezrin - 474 – 585 was purified from Rosetta2 ( DE3 ) pLysS bacteria ( EMD Millipore ) onto glutathione agarose ( Sigma - Aldrich ) and then washed extensively in TBS . pQCXIP plasmids encoding kinase constructs were tran - siently transfected into Phoenix - Ampho cells for  18 h , cells were Flag immunoprecipitated in immunoprecipitation buffer for 2 h , and the resin was extensively washed in TBS . Immunoprecipitates were eluted in TBS con - taining 200 µg / ml 3×Flag peptide and quickly resolved by SDS - PAGE to verify purity and determine concentration . Approximately 0 . 2 µM GST - ezrin - 474 – 585 beads were added to  0 . 2 µM soluble kinase in kinase assay buffer ( 150 mM NaCl , 20 mM Tris , pH 7 . 4 , 50 mM MnCl 2 , 100 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 1 µM Na 3 VO 4 , 0 . 1 µM calyculin A , and 20 µM ATP ) , and the re - actions were incubated at 30°C for 1 h with agitation and then terminated by boiling in Laemmli buffer . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 further validates the specificity of ezrin T567 phosphorylation and the use of tagged ezrin . Fig . S2 shows that in Jeg - 3 cells , endogenous LOK can be coimmunoprecipitated with ezrin - iFlag and confirms that RNAi of LOK causes a reduction in ezrin phosphorylation with a second siRNA se - quence , whereas RNAi of MINK1 or MST4 has no effect . Fig . S3 examines phosphoezrin / radixin distribution in cells transfected with the LOK N - terminal kinase domain and also shows that identical effects to those shown in Figs . 6 and 8 with LOK truncations result from overexpression of SLK trunca - tions . Fig . S4 illustrates our rational design of erlotinib - resistant LOK and that resistant SLK protects cells from erlotinib - induced microvillus collapse and examines pERM distribution in such cells . Fig . S5 examines additional microvilli from cells transfected with LOK - 586 – 968 - GFP as well as microvilli from cells expressing full - length LOK - GFP . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 201207047 / DC1 . We are grateful to Dr . Abraham Hanono for the ezrin cross - linking immunopre - cipitation protocol , Dr . Julie Thoms for construction of ezrin phosphomutants , Jes - sica Wayt for Jeg - 3 cDNA , and Dr . Volker Vogt for advice regarding stable cell line creation . We also thank members of the Bretscher laboratory for critically reading this manuscript and Dr . Yuxin Mao for help with structural analysis . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grant GM - 036652 to A . Bretscher . R . Viswanatha and P . Y . Ohouo were partially supported by National Institutes of Health Training grant 5T32GM007273 . Submitted : 6 July 2012 Accepted : 6 November 2012 References Albuquerque , C . P . , M . B . Smolka , S . H . Payne , V . Bafna , J . Eng , and H . Zhou . 2008 . A multidimensional chromatography technology for in - depth phos - phoproteome analysis . Mol . Cell . Proteomics . 7 : 1389 – 1396 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / mcp . M700468 - MCP200 Belkina , N . V . , Y . Liu , J . J . Hao , H . Karasuyama , and S . Shaw . 2009 . LOK is a major ERM kinase in resting lymphocytes and regulates cytoskeletal on J u l y 16 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 199 • NUMBER 6 • 2012 984 SILAC , as a simple and accurate approach to expression proteomics . Mol . Cell . Proteomics . 1 : 376 – 386 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / mcp . M200025 - MCP200 Pao , W . , and J . Chmielecki . 2010 . Rational , biologically based treatment of EGFR - mutant non - small - cell lung cancer . Nat . Rev . Cancer . 10 : 760 – 774 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrc2947 Pao , W . , V . A . Miller , K . A . Politi , G . J . Riely , R . Somwar , M . F . Zakowski , M . G . Kris , and H . Varmus . 2005 . Acquired resistance of lung adenocarci - nomas to gefitinib or erlotinib is associated with a second mutation in the EGFR kinase domain . PLoS Med . 2 : e73 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pmed . 0020073 Pearson , M . A . , D . Reczek , A . Bretscher , and P . A . Karplus . 2000 . Structure of the ERM protein moesin reveals the FERM domain fold masked by an extended actin binding tail domain . Cell . 101 : 259 – 270 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 00 ) 80836 - 3 Pietromonaco , S . F . , P . C . Simons , A . Altman , and L . Elias . 1998 . Protein kinase C - theta phosphorylation of moesin in the actin - binding sequence . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 7594 – 7603 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . 273 . 13 . 7594 Polesello , C . , I . Delon , P . Valenti , P . Ferrer , and F . Payre . 2002 . Dmoesin con - trols actin - based cell shape and polarity during Drosophila melanogaster oogenesis . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 : 782 – 789 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb856 Sabourin , L . A . , K . Tamai , P . Seale , J . Wagner , and M . A . Rudnicki . 2000 . Caspase 3 cleavage of the Ste20 - related kinase SLK releases and activates an apoptosis - inducing kinase domain and an actin - disassembling region . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 : 684 – 696 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MCB . 20 . 2 . 684 - 696 . 2000 Shcherbina , A . , A . Bretscher , D . M . Kenney , and E . Remold - O’Donnell . 1999 . Moesin , the major ERM protein of lymphocytes and platelets , differs from ezrin in its insensitivity to calpain . FEBS Lett . 443 : 31 – 36 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0014 - 5793 ( 98 ) 01674 - 3 Simons , P . C . , S . F . Pietromonaco , D . Reczek , A . Bretscher , and L . Elias . 1998 . C - terminal threonine phosphorylation activates ERM proteins to link the cell’s cortical lipid bilayer to the cytoskeleton . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 253 : 561 – 565 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1006 / bbrc . 1998 . 9823 Smolka , M . B . , C . P . Albuquerque , S . H . Chen , and H . Zhou . 2007 . Proteome - wide identification of in vivo targets of DNA damage checkpoint kinases . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 104 : 10364 – 10369 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0701622104 Speck , O . , S . C . Hughes , N . K . Noren , R . M . Kulikauskas , and R . G . Fehon . 2003 . Moesin functions antagonistically to the Rho pathway to main - tain epithelial integrity . Nature . 421 : 83 – 87 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature01295 Storbeck , C . J . , S . Wagner , P . O’Reilly , M . McKay , R . J . Parks , H . Westphal , and L . A . Sabourin . 2009 . The Ldb1 and Ldb2 transcriptional cofactors interact with the Ste20 - like kinase SLK and regulate cell migration . Mol . Biol . Cell . 20 : 4174 – 4182 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E08 - 07 - 0707 Takeuchi , K . , N . Sato , H . Kasahara , N . Funayama , A . Nagafuchi , S . Yonemura , S . Tsukita , and S . Tsukita . 1994 . Perturbation of cell adhesion and micro - villi formation by antisense oligonucleotides to ERM family members . J . Cell Biol . 125 : 1371 – 1384 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 125 . 6 . 1371 ten Klooster , J . P . , M . Jansen , J . Yuan , V . Oorschot , H . Begthel , V . Di Giacomo , F . Colland , J . de Koning , M . M . Maurice , P . Hornbeck , and H . Clevers . 2009 . Mst4 and Ezrin induce brush borders downstream of the Lkb1 / Strad / Mo25 polarization complex . Dev . Cell . 16 : 551 – 562 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 01 . 016 Wagner , S . , T . A . Flood , P . O’Reilly , K . Hume , and L . A . Sabourin . 2002 . Association of the Ste20 - like kinase ( SLK ) with the microtubule . Role in Rac1 - mediated regulation of actin dynamics during cell adhesion and spreading . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 37685 – 37692 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M205899200 Wagner , S . , C . J . Storbeck , K . Roovers , Z . Y . Chaar , P . Kolodziej , M . McKay , and L . A . Sabourin . 2008 . FAK / src - family dependent activation of the Ste20 - like kinase SLK is required for microtubule - dependent focal ad - hesion turnover and cell migration . PLoS ONE . 3 : e1868 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0001868 Xing , B . , A . Jedsadayanmata , and S . C . Lam . 2001 . Localization of an integrin binding site to the C terminus of talin . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 44373 – 44378 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M108587200 Yamamoto , N . , M . Honma , and H . Suzuki . 2011 . Off - target serine / threonine kinase 10 inhibition by erlotinib enhances lymphocytic activity leading to severe skin disorders . Mol . Pharmacol . 80 : 466 – 475 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1124 / mol . 110 . 070862 Yonemura , S . , S . Tsukita , and S . Tsukita . 1999 . Direct involvement of ezrin / radixin / moesin ( ERM ) - binding membrane proteins in the organization of microvilli in collaboration with activated ERM proteins . J . Cell Biol . 145 : 1497 – 1509 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 145 . 7 . 1497 major scaffolder in brush borders of proximal tubular cells . Kidney Int . 64 : 1733 – 1745 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1046 / j . 1523 - 1755 . 2003 . 00266 . x Gloerich , M . , J . P . ten Klooster , M . J . Vliem , T . Koorman , F . J . Zwartkruis , H . Clevers , and J . L . Bos . 2012 . Rap2A links intestinal cell polarity to brush border formation . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 : 793 – 801 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb2537 Gorelik , J . , A . I . Shevchuk , G . I . Frolenkov , I . A . Diakonov , M . J . Lab , C . J . Kros , G . P . Richardson , I . Vodyanoy , C . R . Edwards , D . Klenerman , and Y . E . Korchev . 2003 . Dynamic assembly of surface structures in living cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 100 : 5819 – 5822 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1030502100 Hanono , A . , D . Garbett , D . Reczek , D . N . Chambers , and A . Bretscher . 2006 . EPI64 regulates microvillar subdomains and structure . J . Cell Biol . 175 : 803 – 813 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200604046 Hayashi , K . , S . Yonemura , T . Matsui , and S . Tsukita . 1999 . Immunofluorescence detection of ezrin / radixin / moesin ( ERM ) proteins with their carboxyl - terminal threonine phosphorylated in cultured cells and tissues . J . Cell Sci . 112 : 1149 – 1158 . Hipfner , D . R . , N . Keller , and S . M . Cohen . 2004 . Slik Sterile - 20 kinase regu - lates Moesin activity to promote epithelial integrity during tissue growth . Genes Dev . 18 : 2243 – 2248 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gad . 303304 Hirao , M . , N . Sato , T . Kondo , S . Yonemura , M . Monden , T . Sasaki , Y . Takai , S . Tsukita , and S . Tsukita . 1996 . Regulation mechanism of ERM ( ezrin / radixin / moesin ) protein / plasma membrane association : possible involve - ment of phosphatidylinositol turnover and Rho - dependent signaling path - way . J . Cell Biol . 135 : 37 – 51 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 135 . 1 . 37 Hughes , S . C . , and R . G . Fehon . 2006 . Phosphorylation and activity of the tumor suppressor Merlin and the ERM protein Moesin are coordinately regulated by the Slik kinase . J . Cell Biol . 175 : 305 – 313 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200608009 Jackson , D . I . , and C . Dickson . 1999 . Protein techniques . Immunoprecipitation , in vitro kinase assays , and western blotting . Methods Mol . Biol . 97 : 699 – 708 . Karagiosis , S . A . , and D . F . Ready . 2004 . Moesin contributes an essential struc - tural role in Drosophila photoreceptor morphogenesis . Development . 131 : 725 – 732 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / dev . 00976 Kinoshita , E . , E . Kinoshita - Kikuta , K . Takiyama , and T . Koike . 2006 . Phosphate - binding tag , a new tool to visualize phosphorylated proteins . Mol . Cell . Proteomics . 5 : 749 – 757 . Kunda , P . , A . E . Pelling , T . Liu , and B . Baum . 2008 . Moesin controls cortical rigidity , cell rounding , and spindle morphogenesis during mitosis . Curr . Biol . 18 : 91 – 101 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2007 . 12 . 051 LaLonde , D . P . , D . Garbett , and A . Bretscher . 2010 . A regulated complex of the scaffolding proteins PDZK1 and EBP50 with ezrin contribute to microvillar organization . Mol . Biol . Cell . 21 : 1519 – 1529 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E10 - 01 - 0008 Li , Q . , M . R . Nance , R . Kulikauskas , K . Nyberg , R . Fehon , P . A . Karplus , A . Bretscher , and J . J . Tesmer . 2007 . Self - masking in an intact ERM - merlin protein : an active role for the central alpha - helical domain . J . Mol . Biol . 365 : 1446 – 1459 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2006 . 10 . 075 Matsui , T . , M . Maeda , Y . Doi , S . Yonemura , M . Amano , K . Kaibuchi , S . Tsukita , and S . Tsukita . 1998 . Rho - kinase phosphorylates COOH - terminal threonines of ezrin / radixin / moesin ( ERM ) proteins and regulates their head - to - tail association . J . Cell Biol . 140 : 647 – 657 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 140 . 3 . 647 Matsui , T . , S . Yonemura , S . Tsukita , and S . Tsukita . 1999 . Activation of ERM proteins in vivo by Rho involves phosphatidyl - inositol 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase and not ROCK kinases . Curr . Biol . 9 : 1259 – 1262 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0960 - 9822 ( 99 ) 80508 - 9 Meder , D . , A . Shevchenko , K . Simons , and J . Füllekrug . 2005 . Gp135 / podoca - lyxin and NHERF - 2 participate in the formation of a preapical domain during polarization of MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 168 : 303 – 313 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200407072 Nakamura , F . , M . R . Amieva , C . Hirota , Y . Mizuno , and H . Furthmayr . 1996 . Phosphorylation of 558T of moesin detected by site - specific antibodies in RAW264 . 7 macrophages . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 226 : 650 – 656 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1006 / bbrc . 1996 . 1410 Nakamura , N . , N . Oshiro , Y . Fukata , M . Amano , M . Fukata , S . Kuroda , Y . Matsuura , T . Leung , L . Lim , and K . Kaibuchi . 2000 . Phosphorylation of ERM proteins at filopodia induced by Cdc42 . Genes Cells . 5 : 571 – 581 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1046 / j . 1365 - 2443 . 2000 . 00348 . x Ng , T . , M . Parsons , W . E . Hughes , J . Monypenny , D . Zicha , A . Gautreau , M . Arpin , S . Gschmeissner , P . J . Verveer , P . I . Bastiaens , and P . J . Parker . 2001 . Ezrin is a downstream effector of trafficking PKC - integrin com - plexes involved in the control of cell motility . EMBO J . 20 : 2723 – 2741 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / emboj / 20 . 11 . 2723 Ong , S . E . , B . Blagoev , I . Kratchmarova , D . B . Kristensen , H . Steen , A . Pandey , and M . Mann . 2002 . Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture , on J u l y 16 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m