JCB : Article The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 J . Cell Biol . Vol . 189 No . 4 739 – 754 www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200911091 JCB 739 N . C . Hubner and A . W . Bird contributed equally to this paper . Correspondence to Anthony Hyman : hyman @ mpi - cbg . de ; or Matthias Mann : mmann @ biochem . mpg . de Abbreviations used in this paper : AP , affinity purification ; APC , anaphase - promoting complex ; BAC , bacterial artificial chromosome ; FDR , false dis - covery rate ; IP , immunoprecipitation ; LC , liquid chromatography ; MS , mass spectrometry ; QUBIC , quantitative BAC - GFP interactomics ; SILAC , stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture ; TAP , tandem AP ; TREX , transcription / export ; WT , wild type . Introduction One of the challenges in modern cell biology is how to reveal proteomic changes that underlie cellular perturbations , e . g . , from gene mutation , RNAi , or chemical inhibition . Rapid iden - tification of the members of protein complexes in a quantitative manner would facilitate these types of experiments . Affinity purification ( AP ) of proteins in combination with mass spec - trometric detection of bound proteins ( AP mass spectrometry [ AP - MS ] ) identifies the components of protein complexes ( Gingras et al . , 2007 ; Köcher and Superti - Furga , 2007 ) . AP - MS has already been the basis of large - scale interaction mapping in Saccharomyces cerevisiae ( Gavin et al . , 2006 ; Krogan et al . , 2006 ) . However , it has suffered from two principal problems . First , it is difficult to distinguish true interactors from back - ground . Proteins binding nonspecifically to the antibodies or beads always copurify with the specific interactors . This either results in a high rate of false - positive interactions or it requires stringent purification , such as by tandem affinity tagging ( Rigaut et al . , 1999 ) , often leading to loss of weak and transient binders . Second , although the prey proteins are expressed under native conditions , in tissue culture , the tagged bait protein is usually overexpressed from a cDNA under a general promoter , poten - tially compromising interaction data . For example , it would be very interesting to study how multiple protein complexes change with phenotypic perturbation , but such data would be difficult to interpret when not expressing the bait under endog - enous control . Bacterial artificial chromosome ( BAC ) recombineering ( Zhang et al . , 1998 ) is an alternative method to create the bait proteins needed for interaction proteomics . In this study , a gene of interest in its genomic context is tagged with a construct con - taining , e . g . , GFP ( Kittler et al . , 2005 ) . The BAC transgene can then be stably transfected into mammalian cell lines of choice . This allows for expression of the tagged protein at endogenous levels and ensures cell type – specific processing and regulation . P rotein interactions are involved in all cellular pro­ cesses . Their efficient and reliable characterization is therefore essential for understanding biological mechanisms . In this study , we show that combining bac­ terial artificial chromosome ( BAC ) TransgeneOmics with quantitative interaction proteomics , which we call quanti­ tative BAC – green fluorescent protein interactomics ( QUBIC ) , allows specific and highly sensitive detection of inter­ actions using rapid , generic , and quantitative proce­ dures with minimal material . We applied this approach to identify known and novel components of well­studied complexes such as the anaphase­promoting complex . Furthermore , we demonstrate second generation inter­ action proteomics by incorporating directed mutational transgene modification and drug perturbation into QUBIC . These methods identified domain / isoform­specific inter­ actors of pericentrin­ and phosphorylation­specific inter­ actors of TACC3 , which are necessary for its recruitment to mitotic spindles . The scalability , simplicity , cost effec­ tiveness , and sensitivity of this method provide a basis for its general use in small­scale experiments and in mapping the human protein interactome . Quantitative proteomics combined with BAC TransgeneOmics reveals in vivo protein interactions Nina C . Hubner , 1 Alexander W . Bird , 2 Jürgen Cox , 1 Bianca Splettstoesser , 1 Peter Bandilla , 1 Ina Poser , 2 Anthony Hyman , 2 and Matthias Mann 1 1 Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction , Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry , 82152 Martinsried , Germany 2 Department of Microtubules and Cell Division , Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics , 01307 Dresden , Germany © 2010 Hubner et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the pub - lication date ( see http : / / www . rupress . org / terms ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported license , as described at http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 / ) . T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y on A ugu s t 17 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200911091 Supplemental material can be found at : JCB • VOLUME 189 • NUMBER 4 • 2010 740 precoupled monoclonal mouse anti - GFP antibody . We compared different ways to release bound interacting proteins , including specific enzymatic elution , unspecific elution with 8 M urea , and a newly developed , very efficient in - column digestion proce - dure with trypsin . We determined that specific protease cleav - age between bait and GFP tag worked efficiently for a subset of baits but poorly for others . For example , when purifying the transcription / export ( TREX ) complex with THOC3 as bait , most of the complex components were not identified with spe - cific protease cleavage ( PreScission ; GE Healthcare ; Fig . S1 B ) . We assume that in this case , the cleavage site was shielded by the complex . In contrast , direct enzymatic digests of proteins in the column provided high and uniform elution efficiency and allowed direct analysis of eluted peptides without pro - tein precipitation . We optimized all steps of the procedure using a variety of GFP - tagged cell lines . The combination of small magnetic beads with elution by in - column protease digestion of proteins helped to keep the entire pull - down procedure short ( 2 h including cell lysis ) . True interaction partners could be distinguished from background binders present in the immunoprecipitations ( IPs ) by their quantitative ratios . This also allowed the use of low stringency wash conditions , helping to retain weak interaction partners . We optimized LC gradients and the instrument method on our high resolution mass spectrometers for optimal peptide identification and quantitation of interaction partners . Our pro - tocol allows automated analysis of 10 pull - downs per day . We also developed bioinformatic analysis procedures for the statis - tical interpretation of the quantitative pull - down data on the basis of the publicly available MaxQuant package ( Cox and Mann , 2008 ) . We found that a 15 - cm dish , corresponding to  10 7 cells , provides sufficient material for QUBIC . This is at least a factor of 10 less than that commonly used in nonquantitative tandem AP ( TAP ) – MS . Unraveling the interactors of the TREX complex using SILAC - QUBIC We next applied these techniques to the characterization of the interaction network centered around the TREX complex ( Reed and Cheng , 2005 ) . Although mRNA export is similar in yeast and humans , the TREX complex is associated with the transcription apparatus in yeast and the splicing machinery in humans ( Reed and Hurt , 2002 ; Strässer et al . , 2002 ) . In humans , the TREX com - plex consists of a core called the THO complex that is comprised of six proteins ( THOC1 , THOC2 , THOC3 , THOC5 , THOC6 , and THOC7 ) and two adaptor proteins ( Aly / THOC4 and Bat1 / UAP56 ; Masuda et al . , 2005 ) . The human TREX complex was only recently characterized in 2005 , and this required ectopic ex - pression of several complex members , extensive purification , MS , and Western blotting ( Masuda et al . , 2005 ) . We reasoned that the QUBIC technology might be able to define the TREX complex and its interactions in a rapid and ro - bust manner . We performed GFP pull - downs of its six core mem - bers ( THOC1 – 3 and THOC5 – 7 ) and the coadaptor THOC4 / Aly from stable cell lines created by BAC TransgeneOmics . Immuno - precipitating the TREX complex is especially challenging because its function involves association with mRNA , which BAC TransgeneOmics has been streamlined and can be readily performed for large numbers of genes in parallel ( Sarov et al . , 2006 ; Poser et al . , 2008 ) . Furthermore , recombineering tech - nologies allow for the precise manipulation of BAC transgenes . For example , sites of protein modification can be mutated , and functional consequences can then be carefully analyzed in their native context when the endogenous protein is selectively de - pleted ( Bird and Hyman , 2008 ) . Quantitative interaction proteomics can efficiently dis - criminate between specific and background binders without re - sorting to stringent purification procedures ( Blagoev et al . , 2003 ; Ranish et al . , 2003 ; Vermeulen et al . , 2008 ) . We reasoned that combining this approach with the BAC recombineering technology would overcome most of the limitations currently associated with protein interaction screens . This strategy would avoid artifacts associated with overexpression but without the need to generate specific antibodies . Furthermore , by using GFP as the affinity tag , it would directly combine sophisticated imaging possibilities with quantitative proteomics technology ( Cheeseman and Desai , 2005 ; Trinkle - Mulcahy and Lamond , 2007 ; Poser et al . , 2008 ) . Using quantitative proteomics would efficiently discriminate against background binders while pre - serving weak interactions . We call this technique quantitative BAC - GFP interactomics ( QUBIC ) . Accurate quantification can be achieved by stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture ( SILAC ; Ong et al . , 2002 ; Mann , 2006 ) . However , QUBIC performs as efficiently in label - free format . We demonstrate the power of QUBIC in analyzing the changing nature of protein complexes and interactions by addressing the long - standing ques - tion in mitotic spindle assembly of how the spindle protein TACC3 is recruited to spindles through its phosphorylation . We identified clathrin as a phospho - dependent spindle - associated TACC3 interactor , thereby revealing a functional role of clathrin in mitosis . Results QUBIC is a rapid and efficient method to map protein complexes QUBIC builds on large - scale BAC TransgeneOmics and power - ful imaging technologies to which it adds an equally powerful quantitative protein interaction screening capability ( Fig . 1 ) . To create a platform for large - scale interaction studies in mamma - lian cells , we systematically engineered the various steps with a view to minimizing cost , time , and material while maximizing reproducibility and generic applicability without compromis - ing sensitivity . Early on , we found that single - step AP was suf - ficient to define specific interaction partners when coupled to SILAC - based quantitative proteomics performed with high res - olution liquid chromatography ( LC ) tandem MS ( LC - MS / MS ) on a mass spectrometer instrument ( LTQ Orbitrap ) . Small mag - netic beads in combination with a flow - through column system gave the best results for bait sequence coverage by MS , de - tection of interaction partners , and robustness while keeping background proteins at acceptable levels ( Fig . S1 A ) . The small beads provide a large surface to volume ratio and consequently favorable binding kinetics as well as short incubation times using on A ugu s t 17 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 741 Quantitative BAC interactomics • Hubner et al . is likewise a noncore TREX interactor . Aly / THOC4 , another adaptor protein , was identified in our pull - downs but not with a statistically significant ratio . It is a highly abundant nuclear pro - tein , often seen as background binder to beads , and is involved in many cellular processes , such as acting as a chaperone in the dimerization of transcription factors and mRNA processing and mRNA export from the nucleus ( Virbasius et al . , 1999 ; Reed and Cheng , 2005 ) . The pull - down with Aly - GFP led to only moderate enrichment of Aly itself because it binds to control beads as well . Nevertheless , THOC2 , - 5 , - 6 , and - 7 were enriched in the Aly pull - down ( Fig . 2 C ) . The strongest interaction was with THOC5 , with which it functionally and physically inter - acts independently of the TREX complex ( Fig . S2 E ; Katahira et al . , 2009 ) . Below the core and adaptor proteins , there is a cluster com - prising the entire T complex ( TRiC ) , a chaperone with a role in folding nascent , unfolded protein chains ( Fig . 2 C ) . As the T com - plex is only pulled down with THOC3 and THOC6 , we can ex - clude that it binds to the entire TREX complex . Instead , it is likely involved in correct folding of the two proteins before they are assembled into the TREX complex . Lastly , we combined the results of all forward and reverse pull - downs into a single graph ( Fig . 2 D ) . By grouping all for - ward and all reverse pull - downs on the individual components in turn associates with numerous RNA - binding proteins . This problem was minimized by the nucleic acid digestion step in the QUBIC lysis procedure , which prevents coprecipitation of mRNA and associated background proteins . SILAC pull - downs were performed in forward and reverse format , providing biological replicates and separating binders and background by their ra - tios in two dimensions ( Fig . 2 , A and B ; and Fig . S2 ) . The entire complex - mapping experiment required 16 single LC - MS / MS runs corresponding to 1 . 5 d of measurement . All THOC core components specifically retrieved all other THOC core components ( forward and reverse pull - down , P < 0 . 01 ) , reliably defining the core complex ( Fig . 2 , A and B ; and Fig S2 , A – D ) . GFP fluorescence microscopy was performed in parallel on the same cell lines , which verified nuclear localization with a characteristic speckled pattern . Fig . 2 C shows a two - way hierarchical clustering by ratio of significant TREX interactors ( P < 0 . 1 in forward and reverse , and a ratio > 2 for one of the baits ) . The TREX complex clusters at the top of the matrix , and the core members are separated from the known adaptor proteins , Bat1 , and ARS2 as a result of their somewhat lower ratios . ARS2 has been reported as a weak and substoichiometric interactor , easily lost during purification ( Masuda et al . , 2005 ) . POLDIP3 is a protein of unknown func - tion . Its similar pattern in the TREX pull - downs suggests that it Figure 1 . QUBIC : a method for mapping protein – protein interactions by combination of BAC TransgeneOmics and quantitative MS . ( A and B ) Two optimized AP - MS approaches of QUBIC are shown using either SILAC ( A ) or label - free ( B ) protein quantitation . ( A ) In SILAC experiments , the WT cell line without a BAC transgene is cultured in a medium containing the C 12 N 14 form of lysine , and the tagged cell line is cultured in a medium containing the C 13 N 15 form of lysine . Separate pull - downs using magnetic beads coupled to anti - GFP antibody are performed , and elutes merged directly after elution by in - column digestion . Peptides are identified by high resolution LC - MS / MS and quantified by directly compar - ing relative intensities of the light and heavy forms of each peptide present in the mass spectrum . Specific interaction partners show high H / L ratios , whereas background bind - ers have a ratio of 1 . ( B ) In label - free experi - ments , tagged and control cells are cultured in normal media , and separate pull - downs are performed . Eluates are not mixed but ana - lyzed separately by LC - MS / MS . Proteins are quantified with the label - free algorithm in Max - Quant software . on A ugu s t 17 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 189 • NUMBER 4 • 2010 742 Figure 2 . SILAC pull - downs of the TREX core components . ( A and B ) Results of THOC2 ( A ) and THOC6 ( B ) analysis are shown . The GFP - tagged protein , serving as bait , is indicated in the title . Annotated proteins marked by a black dot were more abundant in the pull - down of the tagged cell line , with P < 0 . 01 in both the forward and reverse experiments . Blue dots represent proteins that were not significant interaction partners . ( top left ) Fluorescence microscopy was performed on fixed samples of the indicated cell line with anti - GFP antibodies ( green ) ,  - tubulin antibodies ( red ) , and DAPI ( blue ) . ( bottom right ) Anti - GFP staining only is shown . ( C ) Two - way hierarchical clustering of specific TREX interactors . Proteins with a ratio > 2 and P < 0 . 1 in the forward and reverse experiments of one of the pull - downs served as dataset for clustering ( vertical direction ) . The color code represents the multiplied ratios of the forward and multiplied inverted ratios of the reverse experiment in log scale . Blue indicates proteins with a ratio < 1 or no ratio , and red indicates proteins with extremely high ratios . The first cluster represents the TREX complex , and adaptor proteins are separated from the core by the tree . The T complex clusters are shown below the TREX . Furthermore , several proteins binding to all TREX components , but with a lower ratio ( yellow ) , have been identified ( TREX - associated proteins ) . Proteins identified with very low ratios in only one of the IPs ( bottom of clustering ) are likely to be contaminants . ( D ) Pull - downs of all forward and reverse experiments have been treated as a single experiment , and forward were plotted against reverse experiments . TREX core and T complex are clear outliers as well as all TREX adaptors identified by the clustering . DDX39 , a known interactor of the TREX complex , also shows a signifi - cant ratio in the combined analysis ( Fig . S1 ) . Bars , 10 µm . on A ugu s t 17 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 743 Quantitative BAC interactomics • Hubner et al . separating binders from background in the fold change versus p - value plane ( Fig . 3 B ) . All detectable members of APC and the known adaptors CDC20 and FZR1 were clearly inside the accepted area with a false - positive rate < 0 . 001 . In addition , we found FBXO5 / EMI1 , a reported interactor of APC and of these adaptor proteins ( Miller et al . , 2006 ) . Inter - estingly , NEK2 , a serine / threonine protein kinase involved in mitotic regulation , was also a significant interactor . NEK2 con - tains a KEN box through which it is targeted for destruction by the APC ( Pfleger and Kirschner , 2000 ) . We were intrigued by two novel and completely uncharacterized APC binders , both quanti - fied with > 100 - fold ratios . C10orf104 / ANAPC16 ( 11 . 7 kD ) was detected with P = 1 . 4 × 10  5 , and C11orf51 ( 14 . 3 kD ) with P = 1 . 4 × 10  4 . They may have escaped detection by gel - based methods because of their small size . One of the proteins , C10orf104 / ANAPC16 , was identified in parallel studies as a genuine member of the APC core complex ( Hutchins et al . , 2010 ; Kops et al . , 2010 ) . C11orf51 was also identified by SILAC - QUBIC when using dou - ble labeling with arginine and lysine combined with tryptic diges - tion ( Fig . S3 ) . Furthermore , when we GFP tagged C11orf51 at both the N and C terminus , it showed a similar localization pattern to CDC23 in interphase ( Fig . 3 C ) . QUBIC uncovers proteins mediating phosphorylation - dependent targeting of TACC3 to the mitotic spindle We next used QUBIC to investigate an unsolved question in mitotic spindle assembly : how does the phosphorylation of TACC3 by aurora A kinase mediate TACC3 localization to spindles ? Aurora A regulates several mitotic processes ( Barr and Gergely , 2007 ) . However , how phosphorylation of specific proteins by aurora A facilitates the progression through mitosis is largely unknown . One relatively well - characterized target of aurora A is the protein TACC3 , a conserved protein that has established roles in mitosis and microtubule dynamics in a variety of organ - isms ( for review see Peset and Vernos , 2008 ) . TACC3 localizes into two single experiments , specific interactors of the complex are enhanced , whereas background binders are diminished . In - deed , all proteins annotated as TREX adaptors and several proteins annotated as TREX - associated proteins are clearly distinguished from background in this virtual pull - down experiment . For ex - ample , BAT1 , POLDIP3 , and ARS2 associate more closely with the core TREX complex than in the individual pull - downs . Fur - ther demonstrating the usefulness of this analysis , DDX39 pro - tein was revealed as a significant interactor , although it was not statistically significant in any single pull - downs . DDX39 is an RNA helicase , and through its interaction with THOC4 and Bat1 , is an already known interactor of the TREX complex ( Pryor et al . , 2004 ) . SILAC and label - free QUBIC of the anaphase - promoting complex ( APC ) Although SILAC quantification is accurate and reliable , this technique requires prior labeling of the cell line under study . Be - cause the ratios between preys binding to bait and control are generally large , we investigated whether label - free quantitation could identify complex members with the same confidence . For this study , we used the APC and performed , in addition to SILAC forward and reverse pull - downs , three pull - downs of unlabeled cells with CDC23 - GFP as bait . We compared the intensities of all proteins with three pull - downs with eluates from beads ex - posed to untransfected HeLa cell lysates . In contrast to a recently published method that uses spectral counting as a proxy for pep - tide abundance ( Sowa et al . , 2009 ) , we integrated total signal from all peptides from our high resolution MS measurements using the MaxQuant platform ( Cox and Mann , 2008 ; unpublished data ) . By far , the simplest and most robust method to assign statis - tical significance to pull - down results turned out to be a t test comparing the three IPs with the three controls . We accepted pro - teins based on a combination of this p - value and the observed fold change ( Tusher et al . , 2001 ) . A newly developed soft - ware package ( QUBIC validator ) calculates a significance curve , Figure 3 . SILAC and label - free pull - downs of CDC23 . ( A ) SILAC pull - down of CDC23 versus the untagged HeLa cell line . Annotated proteins were specific interaction partners of CDC23 with a p - value of ratio significance < 0 . 001 . APC core proteins are separated from APC adaptors ( CDC20 and FZR1 ) by intensity . ( B ) Volcano plot representing results of the label - free pull - down of CDC23 . The logarithmic ratio of protein intensities in the CDC23 / HeLa pull - downs were plotted against negative logarithmic p - values of the t test performed from triplicates . A hyperbolic curve separates specific CDC23 - interacting proteins marked in black ( red dotted line ) from background ( blue dots ) . The known components of the APC ( C10orf104 / ANAPC16 only recently char - acterized in parallel studies ) , several known APC adaptors , and one uncharacterized protein , C11orf51 , show a significant ratio in combination with high reproducibility ( positive log2 ratios ) . ( C ) Localization patterns of GFP - tagged CDC23 and the new component C11orf51 in interphase . Bars , 10 µm . on A ugu s t 17 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 189 • NUMBER 4 • 2010 744 Figure 4 . Label - free pull - downs of TACC3 and TACC3 interaction partners . ( A ) Live imaging of cells expressing GFP - tagged TACC3 and mCherry - tagged  - tubulin . DNA was stained with Hoechst . The RNAi - resistant TACC3 WT localizes to the spindles in mitosis after RNAi of endogenous TACC3 . ( left ) Chromo - some alignment and spindle morphology are shown . ( right ) The fluorescence signal of GFP - tagged TACC3 is shown . ( B – D ) Volcano plots representing results of the label - free pull - downs of GFP - tagged TACC3 , CLTC , and GTSE1 . The logarithmic ratios of protein intensities are plotted against negative logarithmic p - values of the t test performed from triplicates . The hyperbolic curve separates specifically interacting proteins marked in black ( red dotted line ) from background ( blue dots ) . Names of all proteins specifically interacting are reported in Table S1 . ( E ) Two - way hierarchical clustering of TACC3 and specific interactors CLTC , GTSE1 , and PIK3C2A . Proteins significant binding in one of the pull - downs served as dataset for clustering ( vertical direction ) . on A ugu s t 17 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 745 Quantitative BAC interactomics • Hubner et al . The rapid availability of BAC transgene cell lines allowed us to perform reverse IP experiments using CLTC , GTSE1 , and PIK3C2A as baits . This analysis revealed that these proteins all interact with each other and bind to several proteins that were ini - tially identified as TACC3 interaction partners , including ch - TOG , CLINT1 , and SEC16A ( Fig . 4 , C and D ; and Fig . S4 A ) . We clus - tered specific interaction partners according to their variability in the replicate experiments and the ratios between bait and control . This uncovered a putative novel complex consisting of clathrin heavy and light chain subunits CLTA , CLTB , and CLTC , as well as CLINT1 , SEC13 , SEC16 , PICALM , GTSE1 , PIK3C2A , and ch - TOG ( Fig . 4 E ) . In addition to a different cluster containing TACC3 - specific interactors ( Fig . 4 E , green ) , we found several proteins that interact with CLTC , GTSE1 , and PIK3C2A but not TACC3 ( Fig . 4 E , blue ) . Many of the proteins in the latter cluster are known to be located in clathrin - coated vesicles . This cluster likely represents clathrin - associated proteins present in vesi - cles in mitotic cells ( Fig . 4 F ) that do not interact with the spindle - associated clathrin directly . The BAC - GFP cell lines allowed us to analyze the mitotic localization of putative spindle - associated interactors by fluores - cence microscopy . We found that the clathrin ( CLTC ) and GTSE1 - GFP constructs indeed localize to mitotic spindles similar to TACC3 ( Fig . 4 F ) , which is consistent with an interaction . We next sought to determine through QUBIC whether any of the TACC3 interactors would fail to bind TACC3 when it is not phosphorylated by aurora A . Such proteins would be candidates for targeting TACC3 to spindles . We inhibited aurora A phos - phorylation of a GFP - tagged TACC3 construct through two complementary methods : treating wild - type ( WT ) TACC3 - GFP cells with the aurora A inhibitor MLN8054 and generating point mutations in conserved aurora A sites in the TACC3 - GFP pro - tein . For the latter , we additionally engineered three point muta - tions into the siRNA - resistant TACC3 WT construct in conserved serines previously shown in Xenopus laevis or human cells to be phosphorylated by aurora A ( S34A , S552A , and S558A [ TACC3 AAA ] ; Kinoshita et al . , 2005 ; LeRoy et al . , 2007 ) . The TACC3 WT construct was not associated with spindles after 5 h of treatment with 500 nM MLN8054 , which is in agree - ment with previous results ( Fig . 5 A , bottom ; LeRoy et al . , 2007 ) . In a complementary approach , we analyzed our phosphosite - mutated TACC3 AAA line . RNAi of endogenous TACC3 in the TACC3 WT line had no effect on TACC3 WT localization to the spin - dle , whereas RNAi of endogenous TACC3 in the TACC3 AAA line resulted in the loss of TACC3 AAA from the spindle , which is similar to MLN8054 treatment ( Fig . 5 B ) . This is consistent with previous data that a TACC3 cDNA transgene mutated at S558A does not target to mitotic spindles ( LeRoy et al . , 2007 ) . We additionally found that when TACC3 AAA was the only version of TACC3 expressed in cells , we observed perturbations in to the mitotic spindle and interacts and shares functions with the microtubule polymerase ch - TOG / CKAP5 ( Gergely et al . , 2000 , 2003 ; Cullen and Ohkura , 2001 ; Lee et al . , 2001 ) . TACC3 also interacts with aurora A , which phosphorylates TACC3 on spe - cific serine residues ( Giet et al . , 2002 ; Kinoshita et al . , 2005 ) . This phosphorylation regulates localization of TACC3 to the mitotic spindle , as depletion of aurora A or mutation of aurora A phosphorylation sites in TACC3 results in TACC3 mislocalization in several systems ( Giet et al . , 2002 ; Bellanger and Gönczy , 2003 ; Srayko et al . , 2003 ; Barros et al . , 2005 ; Kinoshita et al . , 2005 ) . Furthermore , inhibition of aurora A activity with an aurora A – specific small molecule inhibitor , MLN8054 ( Manfredi et al . , 2007 ) , also delocalizes TACC3 from spindles in human cells ( LeRoy et al . , 2007 ) . Despite the many studies on TACC3 and aurora A , it is still unknown how TACC3 is recruited to mitotic spindles and why phosphorylation by aurora A is required . To elucidate the molecular mechanisms responsible for aurora A – dependent TACC3 targeting to the spindle , we wished to identify the pro - teins that interact with TACC3 in mitosis and to determine which of these interactions was dependent on TACC3 phosphorylation . We initially performed QUBIC on a TACC3 - GFP cell line to identify interacting proteins . To validate the function of the TACC3 - GFP transgene , and to subsequently combine QUBIC with functional RNAi experiments , we first made an RNAi - resistant TACC3 - GFP BAC construct by recombineering based mutation of the region targeted by a 21mer siRNA . This con - struct , in addition to an mCherry –  - tubulin – expressing con - struct , was stably transfected into U2OS cells . The functionality of the TACC3 - GFP protein was verified by its correct localiza - tion to mitotic spindles and by the fact that it did not show any noticeable phenotype after RNAi of the endogenous TACC3 ( Fig . 4 A ) . We refer to this line as TACC3 WT . Because aurora A phosphorylates TACC3 during mitosis ( Kinoshita et al . , 2005 ) , we next immunoprecipitated TACC3 from mitotically arrested cells to identify interacting proteins . TACC3 itself is the most enriched protein in the pull - down ( Fig . 4 B ) , and the known interactors aurora A and ch - TOG also had significant p - values ( P < 0 . 01 ) . Multiple novel interactors were also identified by QUBIC . Interestingly , these included three clathrin subunits , CLTA , CLTB , and CLTC , as well as PIK3C2A , which associates with clathrins and is involved in mito - sis ( Gaidarov et al . , 2001 ; Didichenko et al . , 2003 ) . These results are consistent with the finding that clathrin concentrates at the spindle apparatus in mitosis and is involved in microtubule sta - bilization ( Okamoto et al . , 2000 ; Royle et al . , 2005 ) . The pro - tein GTSE1 was also recovered as a significant TACC3 - binding protein . GTSE1 has been reported to localize to interphase micro - tubules , but its known functions are related to p53 regulation ( Utrera et al . , 1998 ; Monte et al . , 2004 ) . The color code represents the normalized log2 of ratios multiplied with the negative logarithmic p - values of the t test . Blue fields represent values close to 0 , and the protein is therefore unlikely to be binding , whereas red fields represent highly specific binders in the distinct pull - down experiment . The first cluster represents a novel spindle - associated complex ( red ) . The second cluster represents TACC3 - specific interactors ( green ) . The cluster marked in blue mainly consists of proteins associated with clathrin - coated vesicles . ( F ) Fluorescence microscopy showing live GFP fluorescence of TACC3 , CLTC , and GTSE1 C - terminally tagged with GFP by the BAC TransgenOmics standard protocol . Both TACC3 interactors localize to the mitotic spindle . Bars , 10 µm . on A ugu s t 17 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 189 • NUMBER 4 • 2010 746 To confirm and expand the spindle localization dependen - cies of these proteins , we additionally performed RNAi of TACC3 , CLTC , and GTSE1 in CLTC - GFP and GTSE1 - GFP cell lines ( Fig . 6 ) . We found that depletion of neither GTSE1 nor TACC3 resulted in mislocalization of CLTC - GFP from spindles , which is consistent with our hypothesis that clathrin recruits TACC3 to spindles and suggesting that GTSE1 is re - cruited through clathrin as well . GTSE1 RNAi depleted protein levels to < 10 % , confirming the efficiency of the siRNA used ( un - published data ) . Conversely , individual RNAi of both TACC3 and CLTC displaced GTSE1 from spindles , suggesting that GTSE1 is recruited downstream of phospho - TACC3 to these spindles . These results support a mechanism in which clathrin is first recruited to spindles independently of aurora A . Aurora A phosphorylation of TACC3 then allows it to interact with clath - rin and to localize to spindles . In this study , phospho - TACC3 also recruits GTSE1 . For confirmation of this mechanism , we next analyzed the localization of these proteins after treat - ment with the aurora A inhibitor MLN8054 . Consistent with the aforementioned hypothesis , inhibition of aurora A activity re - sulted in the mislocalization of TACC3 - GFP ( Fig . 4 A , bottom ; LeRoy et al . , 2007 ) and GTSE1 - GFP from spindles but not of CLTC - GFP ( Fig . 6 ) . Interaction and localization analysis of pericentrin isoforms Pericentrin is a large ( > 350 kD ) conserved protein that localizes to centrosomes and the pericentriolar material and is required for centrosome function ( Doxsey et al . , 1994 ) . Mutations in the pericentrin gene ( PCNT2 ) , including stop , missense , and splice site mutations , are linked to the MOPD II and Seckel syndrome disorders , which are characterized by dwarfism and microcephaly spindle integrity and chromosome alignment ( Fig . 5 B ) . Thus , both methods of inhibiting aurora A phosphorylation of TACC3 led to mislocalization of TACC3 from spindles and defects in spindle assembly . We then used label - free QUBIC to investigate the under - lying proteomics changes associated with these phosphorylation events . We compared interaction partners of TACC3 WT with cells treated with aurora A kinase inhibitor or cells expressing the TACC3 AAA phosphomutant . When aurora A activity was inhibited by MLN8054 treatment , GTSE1 and CLINT1 bound much less to TACC3 , as did the three clathrin subunits ( CLTA , CLTB , and CLTC ; Fig . 5 C ) . PIK3C2A , ch - TOG , and SEC16A showed some reduced binding , although to a lesser extent , whereas other inter - actors exhibited no phospho - dependent binding . Comparing TACC3 AAA with TACC3 WT interactors confirmed a differential , phospho - dependent interaction of GTSE1 and the clathrin sub - units ( Fig . S4 D ) . Strikingly , all proteins that showed differen - tial binding to TACC3 upon aurora A kinase inhibitor treatment belong to the aforementioned novel complex ( Fig . 5 E ) , whereas proteins that did not change clustered separately as TACC3 - specific interactors in the initial pull - down . This suggests that members of this putative spindle - associated complex may either recruit TACC3 to mitotic spindles after its phosphorylation by aurora A or otherwise require this phosphorylation for local - ization to spindles . To test whether clathrin or GTSE1 was required to local - ize TACC3 to spindles , we performed RNAi of CLTC or GTSE1 in TACC3 WT cells that also stably expressed mCherry –  - tubulin . RNAi of CLTC but not GTSE1 delocalizes TACC3 from spin - dles ( Fig . 6 D ) . Thus , clathrin but not GTSE1 targets TACC3 to mitotic spindles , which is likely dependent on the phosphoryla - tion of TACC3 . Figure 5 . Label - free pull - downs of TACC3 untreated and treated with aurora A inhibitor . ( A and B ) Live imaging of cells expressing GFP - tagged TACC3 and mCherry - tagged  - tubulin . DNA was stained with Hoechst . ( top ) Chromo - some alignment and spindle morphology are shown . ( bottom ) The fluorescence signal of GFP - tagged TACC3 is shown . ( A ) TACC3 WT normally localizes to spindles in untreated cells ( left ) but is mislocalized away from spindles after treatment with the aurora A kinase inhibi - tor MLN8054 , similar to TACC3 AAA ( middle and right ) . Under both MLN8054 - treated and mutant TACC3 conditions , spindle morphology and chromosome alignment are compromised . ( B ) The RNAi - resistant TACC3 AAA mutant does not localize to spindles after RNAi of endog - enous TACC3 ( middle and right ) . ( C ) Volcano plot representing differential binding partners of TACC3 in dependence of treatment with aurora A kinase inhibitor . The logarithmic ratios of protein intensities are plotted against nega - tive logarithmic p - values of the t test performed from triplicates . Proteins binding specifically in either condition are marked in black and annotated . ( D ) Localization of TACC3 after RNAi of phospho - dependent interactors . Cells expressing TACC3 WT and mCherry –  - tubulin were transfected with control ( CON ) , CLTC , or GTSE1 siRNAs , and live cells were imaged after 72 h . TACC3 is mislocalized from spindles after CLTC but not GTSE1 RNAi . Bars , 10 µm . on A ugu s t 17 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 747 Quantitative BAC interactomics • Hubner et al . or Pc - 250 ; see Materials and methods ; Fig . 7 A ; Flory and Davis , 2003 ) . Live and fixed imaging of pericentrin long cells showed a localization of pericentrin to centrosomes throughout the cell cycle with increased abundance in mitosis ( Fig . 7 B , top ; Fig . S5 ; and Video 1 ; Doxsey et al . , 1994 ) . In contrast , pericentrin short localized to the cytoplasm in interphase , and as cells entered mitosis , it quickly accumulated at centrosomes , persisting through metaphase . The centrosomal signal then dropped off rapidly as cells completed mitosis . ( Fig . 7 B and Video 2 ) . We confirmed these results using fixed analysis ( Fig . 7 C , arrows ) . From these results , we conclude that centrosome localization in interphase depends on the C - terminal region of pericentrin that contains the PACT domain . Previous results have shown that dynein – dynactin sub - units bind to pericentrin . Triplicate pull - downs of both constructs , as well as of an untagged HeLa cell line , revealed common and distinct interaction partners by label - free QUBIC and showed that all identified dynein – dynactin subunits bound significantly ( Griffith et al . , 2008 ; Rauch et al . , 2008 ) . Our aim was to use QUBIC to identify potential differences in binding partners of two reported pericentrin splice isoforms , only one of which con - tains a C - terminal PACT domain that can localize to centrosomes ( Gillingham and Munro , 2000 ) . The PACT domain is lost in the truncated forms of pericentrin found in patients with MOPD II and Seckel syndrome ( Griffith et al . , 2008 ; Rauch et al . , 2008 ) , but it is still unclear how the PACT domain recruits pericentrin to centrosomes . We inserted a GFP tag directly before the stop codon of the largest and most commonly investigated pericentrin splice isoform ( frequently termed pericentrin B ) . We refer to this con - struct as pericentrin long . We engineered an additional pericentrin BAC construct , which we call pericentrin short , to express a protein - GFP construct in which the final 11 + exons ( 688 amino acids ) of the PCNT2 gene , including the PACT domain , are removed so that the mRNA product should be the same as a previously re - ported potential pericentrin splice isoform ( termed pericentrin A Figure 6 . Mitotic spindle localization interdependencies of CLTC , TACC3 , and GTSE1 by RNAi and after aurora A inhibition . ( A ) Live imaging of mitotic cells expressing GFP - tagged CLTC , TACC3 , or GTSE1 after RNAi ( 72 h ) . GTSE1 is mislocalized after CLTC or TACC3 RNAi , TACC3 is mislocalized after CLTC , but not GTSE1 RNAi , and CLTC is not mislocalized by either TACC3 or GTSE1 RNAi . Two images of representative cells are shown for each condition . ( B ) Live imaging of mitotic cells expressing GFP - tagged CLTC , TACC3 , or GTSE1 after treatment with the aurora A kinase inhibitor MLN8054 . Inhibition of aurora A activity mislocalizes GTSE1 but not CLTC from the mitotic spindle . Two images of representative cells are shown for each condition . CON , control . Bars , 10 µm . on A ugu s t 17 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 189 • NUMBER 4 • 2010 748 are already known to depend on each other ( Haren et al . , 2009 ) , our QUBIC experiment was the first evidence of a protein – protein interaction between these two centrosome proteins . Enhanced binding to the short form was surprising because the long form should have all domains of the short form . To investigate possi - ble further differences between the baits , we mapped all identi - fied pericentrin peptides to both forms ( Fig . 8 D ) . We identified 91 and 128 peptides from the pericentrin long and pericentrin short pull - downs , respectively . None of the peptides found in the pericentrin short pull - down mapped to the C - terminal 688 – amino acid more to pericentrin long ( Fig . 8 ) . PCM - 1 , a pericentriolar protein known to bind pericentrin ( Li et al . , 2001 ) and Fam133A , an uncharacterized protein of 30 kD , also bound preferentially to the pericentrin long construct ( ratio of 3 . 9 , P = 5 . 7 × 10  3 ; and ratio of 4 . 6 , P = 1 . 4 × 10  3 ) . Interestingly , one centrosomal protein , CDK5RAP2 / Cep215 ( Graser et al . , 2007 ; Fong et al . , 2008 ; Haren et al . , 2009 ) , was significantly enriched in the pull - down of the short construct ( 5 . 7 - fold ; P = 1 . 1 × 10  3 ; Fig . 8 , A and C ) . Although the centro - somal localization patterns of CDK5RAP2 / Cep215 and pericentrin Figure 7 . Fluorescence analysis of pericentrin long and pericentrin short cell lines . ( A ) Diagram of pericentrin long and pericentrin short BAC constructs . Pericentrin short lacks a 29 . 5 - kb region of genomic DNA present in pericentrin long , including the PACT domain ( red ) . The green and yellow box represents the GFP cassette . ( B ) Pericentrin long and pericentrin short show distinct cell cycle localizations . Still images from videos of GFP fluorescence are shown . ( top ) Pericentrin long localizes to centrosomes throughout the cell cycle . ( bottom ) Pericentrin short only shows centrosomal localization in mitosis . ( C ) Immunofluores - cence showing pericentrin short localization to centrosomes . Mitotic but not interphase centrosomes are stained by anti - GFP ( pericentrin short ) , whereas anti - pericentrin antibody labels all centrosomes . Arrows point to the location of interphase centrosomes . ( bottom ) Enlarged images of the above boxed regions are shown , containing two prophase / prometaphase centrosomes and one interphase centrosome . Cells are stained for  - tubulin , GFP ( pericentrin short ) , pericentrin , and DNA . Bars , 10 µm . on A ugu s t 17 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 749 Quantitative BAC interactomics • Hubner et al . beads , leading to favorable kinetics and therefore short incuba - tion times , increasing the interactor to background ratio . Elu - tion from the beads is performed by direct in - column enzymatic digestion . Among different quantification methods , we found that label - free quantification of high resolution MS data using the MaxQuant algorithms provided the best separation of back - ground and specific binders . High resolution MS is an integral part of the QUBIC procedure because it leads to accurate quan - titation of bait pull - down against control pull - down . This effi - ciently distinguishes specific binders from background proteins , even when the latter are of much higher abundance . The QUBIC technology has been applied on hundreds of baits in different projects in our laboratory and has proven extremely robust with - out requiring case - specific optimization . In Table I , we summarize different aspects of the three existing major AP - MS approaches , which are based on tagged cDNA with TAP purification ( Sowa et al . , 2009 ) , tagged cDNA with single - step purification ( Glatter et al . , 2009 ) , or purifica - tion of endogenous protein complexes using specific antibodies ( Trinkle - Mulcahy and Lamond , 2007 ) , and compare them with QUBIC . TAP has been the basis of some of the most successful work so far in yeast , but it clearly only works for very stable as - sociations . QUBIC only requires a small fraction of the large amounts of input material required in TAP - tagging approaches . Furthermore , the combination of high yields with short purifica - tion times minimizes the risk of losing weak interactions com - pared with TAP procedures . The cDNA approach inevitably involves ectopic expression of the gene , which can lead to incor - rect localization ( and therefore inappropriate binding ) and forced interactions that do not occur in vivo . For example , many cDNA baits are not naturally expressed at all in the system that is used region of pericentrin , confirming its absence from the expressed protein . Surprisingly , however , a second region of  500 amino acids , directly N terminal to this region , was well represented ( 25 peptides ) in the short form but absent in the long form . This was unexpected , as the published predominant cDNA , which shares the C terminus with the pericentrin long construct , contains these regions . Analysis of the genomic DNA of these cells con - firmed that the DNA encoding this region was present in both constructs . Therefore , we assume that the observed discrepancy is the result of cell type – specific splicing or processing events . The finding that pericentrin short contains a region not found in pericentrin long is the likely explanation of the preferential bind - ing of CDK5RAP2 / Cep215 to this construct . Discussion Recent developments in functional genomics using procedures such as RNAi have revolutionized the study of phenotype by scaling up the rate at which these experiments can be performed in a genome - wide manner . However , follow - up techniques , which map the proteomic changes underlying these phenotypic changes , have lagged behind these studies . With QUBIC , we have devel - oped an effective technology for studying cell biological ques - tions in the area of protein interactions , which addresses these challenges . Our study shows that modern techniques in MS to - gether with BAC - based recombineering and live cell imaging allow rapid and quantitative assessment of members of a protein complex and how they change in response to acute chemical or mutational perturbations . The QUBIC procedure described in this study has several attractive features . Interactors are captured on nanometer - sized Figure 8 . Pull - downs of pericentrin splice iso - forms . ( A – C ) Volcano plots representing results of the label - free pull - downs of GFP - tagged peri - centrin short and pericentrin long . The logarithmic ratio of protein intensities in the pericentrin / HeLa ( A and B ) and pericentrin long / pericentrin short ( C ) pull - downs were plotted against negative logarithmic p - values of the t test performed from triplicates . ( A and B ) The hyperbolic curve separates specific pericentrin - interacting proteins marked in black ( red dotted line ) from background ( blue dots ) . ( C ) Proteins binding specifically to either form of pericentrin are marked in black . The dotted line represents the ratio of pericentrin long / pericentrin short . ( D ) Plot - ted relative intensities of all peptides identified from pericentrin short ( blue ) and pericentrin long ( red ) . The N - terminal part of the protein was identified in both pull - downs , whereas there is a stretch of  500 amino acids unique to the pericentrin short form ( green box ) . The C terminus was deleted in pericentrin short , and therefore , peptides from this region were only identified in the pull - downs of pericentrin long ( brown box ) . on A ugu s t 17 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 189 • NUMBER 4 • 2010 750 rather than expressing a protein from an artificial cDNA construct . High resolution MS can then characterize the isoforms expressed as shown in this study . These applications demonstrate that QUBIC provides a versatile platform to accommodate second generation functional interaction experiments . Importantly , the quantitative nature of QUBIC makes it readily compatible with chemical inhibition or RNAi depletion , although these techniques often do not achieve full penetrance . Despite the broad capabilities and versatility of QUBIC , it can readily be performed by nonspecialist laboratories . For BAC TransgeneOmics , BACs can be ordered and processed , and stable cell lines were generated according to published pro - tocols ( Zhang et al . , 1998 ; Poser et al . , 2008 ) . All other steps similarly require only standard laboratory equipment or readily available reagents and only knowledge of common biochemical procedures . Costs per pull - down are very low . QUBIC does re - quire access to high resolution MS equipment coupled to high performance LC . However , such equipment is increasingly accessible , and the MS analyses themselves are relatively stan - dard . Data analysis can be performed using the freely avail - able MaxQuant software suite . Thus , any laboratory can select genes of interest and perform QUBIC on them in a wide variety of formats . To make it easy for the research community to perform QUBIC , we need to create the generic resources involved . This includes the genome - wide generation of BAC - based vectors consisting of the gene of interest fused 5  or 3  to the GFP - containing cassette . First , this set of DNA constructs should be available as a resource . Second , stable cell lines of at least one common model cell line should be generated with these con - structs and be available to the community . We have already streamlined the BAC TransgeneOmics process ( Sarov et al . , 2006 ; Poser et al . , 2008 ) . Based on our experience and the fact that we have so far created hundreds of stable cell lines , we pre - dict that scale up to the whole genome is entirely feasible . to study interactions . The second strategy of using antibodies against endogenous proteins is theoretically the best way to de - fine in vivo interactions . However , it is not scalable , and it com - pletely depends on the specificity of the antibody . QUBIC is the only approach that combines the advantages of endogenous gene processing and gene expression while still retaining scalability . Because it uses BAC - GFP technology , it already comes with several desirable features . These include a large reagent base , manipulation of the bait by BAC recombineer - ing , access to large genes that are not contained in cDNA libraries ( or that are corrupted in those libraries ) , and of course direct coupling to powerful microscopy methods such as 96 - well – based live cell imaging . The major conceptual advance in QUBIC is the extension of methods that were possible only in yeast to the mammalian system . In addition , QUBIC exemplifies how interaction proteomics can be used to rapidly study the proteomic changes underly - ing phenotypic perturbation . By inhibiting phosphorylation of TACC3 either by small molecule inhibition of its upstream kinase or by point mutation of conserved phosphorylation sites , we identified several proteins that preferentially bind aurora A – phosphorylated TACC3 , representing a novel complex associ - ated with spindles in mitosis . We have identified one member of this complex required for the interaction of phosphorylated TACC3 with spindles in clathrin heavy chain ( CLTC ) . Clathrin targeting of TACC3 to spindles suggests that reported mitotic phenotypes associated with clathrin RNAi and the observed role of clathrin in microtubule stability ( Royle et al . , 2005 ) are caused by the mislocalization of TACC3 . We also show that different forms of the protein pericentrin interact with different subsets of centrosomal proteins , which may explain their divergent localization patterns . Additionally , we found that the predominant pericentrin isoform expressed in these cells differs from the published cDNA sequence . This re - sult illustrates a major advantage of using BACs as transgenes in that they allow the cell to process the relevant splice isoforms Table I . Strengths and weaknesses of different AP - MS approaches Strength / weakness Tagged cDNA Specific antibodies c QUBIC Single - step purification a TAP purification b Endogenous gene expression level   + + Endogenous gene processing   + + Material required +  + + Transient interactors +  + /  + True quantification for background discrimination + /  + + /  + Objective statistical evaluation + /  + /  + /  + Sensitivity + + /   + Measurement time + /  +  + Standard protocol for all baits + /  + /   + Compatible with imaging methods + /  + /   + + , fulfilled ; + /  , partially fulfilled ;  , not fulfilled . Three common AP - MS strategies are summarized and compared with QUBIC . There are different aspects that facili - tate reliable and scalable results in MS - based interaction mapping . Before QUBIC , it is possible to meet some but not all of these requirements at the same time . a Sowa et al . , 2009 . b Glatter et al . , 2009 . c Trinkle - Mulcahy and Lamond , 2007 . on A ugu s t 17 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 751 Quantitative BAC interactomics • Hubner et al . ( Invitrogen ) , respectively . For SILAC labeling , HeLa cells were cultured for 2 wk in DME ( 4 . 5 g / L glucose ) without lysine and with methionine ( Invitro - gen ) containing 49 mg / ml light ( C 12 N 14 ) or heavy ( C 13 N 15 ) lysine ( Euriso - Top ) , 100 U / ml penicillin ( Invitrogen ) , 100 mg / ml streptomycin ( Invitrogen ) , and 10 % fetal bovine serum dialyzed with a cut off of 10 kD ( Invitro - gen ) at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 . The WT cell line was treated the same as a control . Cells were harvested using trypsin , washed once with PBS , and the pellet was shock frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at  80°C until used for IP . Specific cell culture of TACC3 cells for QUBIC For aurora A inhibitor experiments , triplicate experiments each using four 15 - cm dishes of GFP - tagged TACC3 and two 15 - cm dishes of U2OS con - trol cells were seeded to 60 % confluence and arrested in mitosis by adding 2 mM thymidine ( Sigma - Aldrich ) for 20 h . They were then washed with PBS , and fresh media were added . After 6 h , 100 ng / ml nocodazole was added , and after an additional 3 h , aurora A kinase inhibitor MLN8054 ( provided by J . Ecsedy , Millennium Pharmaceuticals , Cambridge , MA ) was added to two TACC3 dishes to a final concentration of 500 nM . 5 h later , all cells were harvested . For TACC3 RNAi of cells before QUBIC analysis , 10 7 cells for each condition were resuspended in 8 ml media without antibiotics . Transfection complexes containing of 1 . 8 nmol siRNA and 30 µl Oligofectamine were added to cells in a 50 - ml tube . Cells were incubated for 6 h at 37°C with occasional agitation and plated . 77 h after transfection , nocodazole was added to cells for 22 h , at which point cells were harvested for analysis . IP Cell pellets were thawed on ice and incubated for 30 min at room tempera - ture in 1 ml lysis buffer containing 150 mM NaCl , 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 , 5 % glycerol , 1 % IGEPAL - CA - 630 , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 200 U benzonase ( Merck ) , and EDTA - free complete protease inhibitor cocktail ( Roche ) . When study - ing phospho - dependent interactions , phosphatase inhibitors ( Roche ) were added as well . Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 4 , 000 g and 4°C for 15 min to remove remaining membrane and DNA , and the supernatant was incubated with 50 µl magnetic beads coupled to monoclonal mouse anti - GFP antibody ( Miltenyi Biotec ) for 15 min on ice . Because of the ex - tremely small size of the beads ( 50 nm ) , they are nonsedimenting and show fast reaction kinetics . Magnetic columns were equilibrated using 250 µl lysis buffer . Cell lysates were added to the column after incubation and washed three times with 800 µl ice - cold wash buffer I containing 150 mM NaCl , 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 , 5 % glycerol , and 0 . 05 % IGEPAL - CA - 630 , and two times with 500 µl of wash buffer II containing 150 mM NaCl , 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 , and 5 % glycerol . Purified proteins were predigested by add - ing 25 µl 2 M urea in 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 , 1 mM DTT , and 150 ng Endo - LysC ( Wako Chemicals USA , Inc . ) for SILAC experiments or 150 ng trypsin ( Promega ) for label - free experiments . After in - column digestion for 30 min at room temperature , proteins were eluted by adding two times 50 µl 2 M urea in 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 , and 5 mM chloroacetamide . In SILAC experi - ments , heavy and light eluates of transgenic cell line and the correspond - ing WT cell line were combined immediately after elution from the columns . Proteins were digested overnight at room temperature . The digestion was stopped by adding 1 µl trifluoroacetic acid , and peptides of each experi - ment were split and purified on two C18 Stage Tips and stored at 4°C ( Rappsilber et al . , 2007 ) . Pull - downs can be performed manually on a hand magnet . In our laboratory , pull - downs were performed on the automated liquid - handling platform ( Freedom EVO 200 ; Tecan ) in a fully automated manner . LC - MS / MS analysis Peptides were eluted from C18 Stage Tips with 2 × 20 µl solvent B ( 80 % acetonitrile and 0 . 5 % acetic acid ) . Acetonitrile was evaporated , and thereby , the volume reduced to 5 µl in a speed vacuum centrifuge . 10 µl solvent containing 2 % acetonitrile and 0 . 1 % trifluoroacetic acid was added . Peptides were separated on line to the mass spectrometer by using an easy nano - LC system ( Proxeon Biosystems ) . 5 µl samples were loaded with a constant flow of 700 nl / min onto a 15 - cm fused silica emitter with an inner diameter of 75 µm ( IntelliFlow ; Proxeon Biosystems ) packed in house with RP ReproSil - Pur C18 - AQ 3 µm resin ( Dr . Maisch ) . Peptides were eluted with a segmented gradient of 2 – 60 % ( for trypsin digest ) and 5 – 60 % ( for EndoLysC digest ) solvent B over 105 min with a constant flow of 250 nl / min . The nano - LC system was coupled to a mass spectrometer ( LTQ - Orbitrap ; Thermo Fisher Scientific ) via a nanoscale LC interface ( Proxeon Biosystems ) . The spray voltage was set to 2 . 1 kV , and the temperature of the heated capillary was set to 180°C . Materials and methods BAC constructs BACs containing the gene of interest were purchased from BACPAC Resources Center ( for detailed information see Supplemental data ) . A LAP tag cassette ( Poser et al . , 2008 ) was recombined at the C terminus of all TREX components , CDC23 , TACC3 , CLTC , GTSE1 , and PIK3C2A by Red E / T – based recom - bination ( Zhang et al . , 1998 ; Muyrers et al . , 2001 ) . Point mutations in TACC3 were introduced through recombineering using counter selection based on an RpsL - amp cassette ( Guo et al . , 2006 ; Bird and Hyman , 2008 ) as described in the Counter Selection BAC Modification kit ( Genebridges ) . For the pericentrin long construct , a GFP tag cassette was recombined at the C termi - nus of the PCNT2 gene , ending with the amino acid sequence QKIKQ . For the pericentrin short construct , a GFP tag cassette was recombined into the coding region of the PCNT gene to directly follow the amino acid sequence QKTLSK , while simultaneously deleting all of the following exons until the 3  UTR , so as to match the sequence in the 3  end of GenBank accession no . AY179559 . Cell culture and cell lines for BAC transfection U2OS , HeLa , and HeLa Kyoto cells were grown in DME containing 10 % fetal bovine serum , 2 mM L - glutamine , 100 U / ml penicillin , and 100 mg / ml streptomycin at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 . BAC constructs or an mCherry –  - tubulin plasmid were transfected into cells in 6 - cm dishes with 20 µl Effectene ( QIAGEN ) following the manufacturer’s protocol , and stable line popula - tions were selected on G418 ( BACs ) or puromycin . TACC3 constructs were used in U2OS cells , pericentrin constructs were used in HeLa cells , and CLTC , PIK3C2A , APC members , and TREX members were used in HeLa Kyoto cells . GTSE1 constructs for pull - downs were used in HeLa Kyoto cells , and for localization after RNAi and inhibitor treatment , were used in U2OS cells . For siRNA transfections , cells were added to prewarmed media , and transfection complexes containing 2 . 0 µl Oligofectamine ( Invitrogen ) and 80 pmol ( TACC3 and control ) or 40 pmol ( GTSE1 , CLTC , and control ) siRNA added immediately afterward in a total volume of 500 µl . Media were changed after 6 – 8 h . Control ( Silencer Negative Control # 3 ) , TACC3 ( 5  - GUUACCGGAAGAUCGUCUG - 3  ) , GTSE1 ( 5  - CGGCCUCUGUCA - AACAUCA - 3  ) , and CLTC ( 5  - GGUUGCUCUUGUUACGGAU - 3  ) siRNAs were purchased from Applied Biosystems . For MLN8054 experiments , cells were treated for 5 h with 500 nM MLN8054 . Antibodies The following antibodies were used for immunofluorescence : mouse anti –  - tubulin ( DM1  ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , rat anti –  - tubulin ( AbD Serotec ) , rabbit anti - pericentrin ( Abcam ) , mouse anti - GFP ( Roche ) , and goat anti - GFP ( Poser et al . , 2008 ) . Secondary antibodies used were donkey anti – mouse , – rabbit , or – rat conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 , 594 , or 647 ( Invitrogen ) . Immunofluorescence Cells on coverslips were fixed with PFA ( TREX and APC images ) or  20°C methanol ( pericentrin images ) . Cells were blocked with 0 . 2 % fish skin gela - tin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) in PBS . Cells were incubated with primary antibodies in 0 . 2 % fish skin gelatin in PBS for 20 min at 37°C , washed , and repeated with secondary antibodies . Coverslips were mounted with ProLong gold with DAPI ( Invitrogen ) overnight and sealed . Microscopy and image quantification Images of TREX and APC components were acquired using MetaMorph soft - ware ( version 7 . 1 . 2 . 0 ; MDS Analytical Technologies ) on a microscope ( Axio - plan 2 ; Carl Zeiss , Inc . ) with a 63× 1 . 40 NA oil differential interference contrast Plan Apochromat objective ( Carl Zeiss , Inc . ) and a camera ( CA 742 – 95 ; Hamamatsu Photonics ) at room temperature . All other fixed and live images were acquired using an imaging system ( Deltavision RT ; Applied Precision ) with an inverted microscope ( IX70 / 71 ; Olympus ) equipped with a charge - coupled device camera ( CoolSNAP HQ ; Roper Industries ) . Fixed images were acquired in 0 . 2 - µm serial z sections using a 100× 1 . 35 NA UPlanApo objec - tive at room temperature . Live cell videos were acquired in 1 . 5 - µm serial z sections at intervals of 3 ( pericentrin long ) or 15 min ( pericentrin short ) using a 60× 1 . 42 NA PlanApo N objective at 37°C . For live three - color still images of TACC3 - GFP mCherry –  - tubulin lines , 100 ng / ml Hoechst 33342 was added to the media 1 h before imaging . All live cell still images were acquired in 0 . 5 - µm serial z sections . For live cell imaging , cells were incubated in a CO 2 - independent medium ( Invitrogen ) . Datasets were deconvolved using Soft - Worx software ( Applied Precision ) . Cell culture for QUBIC experiments For all pull - downs ,  10 7 cells were used . Stably transfected HeLa and U2OS cells were cultured in media containing 400 µg / ml and 500 µg / ml geneticin on A ugu s t 17 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 189 • NUMBER 4 • 2010 752 for reverse hits and contaminants ( Processing – Filter – Filter category – Reverse = + and Contaminant = + ) . Positive intensity values were logarith - mized ( Processing – Transformation – LOG – Log2 ) . Signals that were originally zero were imputed with random numbers from a normal distribu - tion , whose mean and standard deviation were chosen to best simulate low abundance values below the noise level ( Processing – Imputation – Replace missing values by normal distribution – Width = 0 . 3 ; Shift = 1 . 8 ) . Signifi - cant interactors were determined by a volcano plot - based strategy , com - bining t test p - values with ratio information . The standard equal group variance t test was applied ( Processing – Testing – Two groups ) . Signifi - cance lines in the volcano plot corresponding to a given FDR were deter - mined by a permutation - based method ( Tusher et al . , 2001 ) . The pull - down was selected as Group1 and the control as Group2 . Threshold values ( = FDR ) were selected between 0 . 1 and 0 . 001 and SO values ( = curve bend ) between 0 . 5 and 2 . 0 . The resulting table was then exported ( Export – Tab separated ) . The second tab ( Table S1 and Table S2 ) was selected , and values saved with the same file name were supplemented with “ _ sup” ( e . g . , Exp . txt → Exp _ sup . txt ) . Results were then plotted using the open source statistical software R and the provided script QUBIC - LABELFREE . R . In the beginning of the script , Exp . txt and Exp _ sup . txt have to be re - placed with the real file names . Dynamic experiments were plotted using the script QUBIC - LABELFREE _ dynamic . R . Significant TREX and TACC3 interactors were clustered using Genesis ( Sturn et al . , 2002 ) . A detailed step by step protocol and the raw data and programs associated with this manuscript may be downloaded from https : / / proteomecommons . org / tranche , launching Tranche , choosing “Open By Hash” , and entering the following hash : iNYsECWFuN0KDV0Q8QoE 3uXxRGuBiCo5 + iwydOM7h29jlyPv + Xv4 + 1piRkFr + mcnsy + eErYIvmcRQf 9ZU / l5lxQYNQYAAAAAAABFCA = = Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows development of the QUBIC technology . Fig . S2 shows addi - tional SILAC pull - downs of the TREX complex components . Fig . S3 shows an additional SILAC pull - down of CDC23 . Fig . S4 shows additional label - free pull - downs of TACC3 . Fig . S5 shows that pericentrin long GFP colocal - izes with anti - pericentrin antibody throughout the cell cycle . Table S1 shows specific interaction partners of label - free pull - downs of TACC3 , CLTC , GTSE1 , and PIK3C2A . Table S2 shows links to the University of California , Santa Cruz genome browser for used BACs , BAC length , gene length , number , and name of additional genes . Video 1 shows that pericentrin long localizes to centrosomes throughout mitosis and the cell cycle . Video 2 shows that pericentrin short localizes to centrosomes in mitosis but not interphase . Supplemental data show step by step QUBIC protocol , QUBIC validator ( download at Tranche ) , and R scripts , including test datasets ( download at Tranche ) . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200911091 / DC1 . We thank Maximiliane Hilger , Michiel Vermeulen , and Trisha Davis for criti­ cal reading of the manuscript and Jennifer Yen for help with TACC3 mu­ tant characterization . This work was supported by the German National Genome Research Network ( From Disease Genes to Protein Pathways [ DiGtoP ] grant ) and PROS­ PECTS , a seventh framework program of the European Research Directorate . Submitted : 17 November 2009 Accepted : 14 April 2010 References Barr , A . R . , and F . Gergely . 2007 . Aurora - A : the maker and breaker of spindle poles . J . Cell Sci . 120 : 2987 – 2996 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 013136 Barros , T . P . , K . Kinoshita , A . A . Hyman , and J . W . Raff . 2005 . Aurora A activates D - TACC – Msps complexes exclusively at centrosomes to stabilize centrosomal microtubules . J . Cell Biol . 170 : 1039 – 1046 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200504097 Bellanger , J . M . , and P . Gönczy . 2003 . TAC - 1 and ZYG - 9 form a complex that promotes microtubule assembly in C . elegans embryos . Curr . Biol . 13 : 1488 – 1498 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0960 - 9822 ( 03 ) 00582 - 7 Bird , A . W . , and A . A . Hyman . 2008 . Building a spindle of the correct length in human cells requires the interaction between TPX2 and Aurora A . J . Cell Biol . 182 : 289 – 300 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200802005 Blagoev , B . , I . Kratchmarova , S . E . Ong , M . Nielsen , L . J . Foster , and M . Mann . 2003 . A proteomics strategy to elucidate functional protein - protein interactions applied to EGF signaling . Nat . Biotechnol . 21 : 315 – 318 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nbt790 Survey full - scan MS spectra ( m / z = 300 – 1 , 650 ) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60 , 000 at the theoretical m / z = 400 after accumulation of 1 , 000 , 000 ions in the Orbitrap . The most intense ions ( up to 10 ) from the preview survey scan delivered by the Orbitrap were sequenced by centromere identifier ( collision energy 35 % ) in the LTQ after accumulation of 5 , 000 ions concurrently to full scan acquisition in the Orbitrap ( TOP10 peptide sequencing ) . Maximal filling times were 1 , 000 ms for the full scans and 150 ms for the MS / MS . Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled , and all unassigned charge states as well as singly charged peptides were rejected . The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to a maximum of 500 entries with a maximum retention period of 90 s and a relative mass window of 5 ppm . Orbitrap measurements were performed with the lock mass option enabled for survey scans to improve mass accu - racy ( Olsen et al . , 2005 ) . Data analysis After processing raw files with the in house – developed software MaxQuant ( version 1 . 0 . 12 . 36 or 1 . 0 . 13 . 12 ; Cox and Mann , 2008 ) , data were searched against the human database concatenated with reversed copies of all sequences ( Peng et al . , 2003 ) and supplemented with frequently ob - served contaminants ( porcine trypsin , achromobacter lyticus lysyl endo - peptidase , and human keratins ) using MASCOT ( version 2 . 2 . 0 ; Matrix Science ) . For the analysis of pericentrin experiments , the mouse pericentrin sequence was added to the database . Carbamidomethylated cysteins were set as fixed , oxidation of methionine , and N - terminal acetylation as variable modification . Mass deviation of 0 . 5 D was set as maximum allowed for MS / MS peaks , and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed . Maximum false discovery rates ( FDRs ) were set to 0 . 01 both on peptide and protein levels . Minimum required peptide length was six amino acids . Quantification of proteins in SILAC experiments was performed using MaxQuant ( Cox and Mann , 2008 ) . Methionine oxidations and acetylation of protein N termini were specified as variable modifications and carbamido - methylation as fixed modification . Maximum peptide charge was set to 6 . SILAC settings were adjusted to doublets , and Lys0 and Lys8 were selected as light and heavy label , respectively . Peptide and protein FDRs were set to 0 . 01 . The maximum PEP was set to 1 , and six amino acids were required as minimum peptide length . Only proteins with at least two peptides ( thereof one uniquely assignable to the respective protein group ) were considered as reliably identified . Unique and razor peptides were considered for quantifi - cation with a minimum ratio count of 2 . Forward and reverse experiments were analyzed together and specified as QUBICH and QUBICL in the ex - perimentalDesign . txt . Ratios of the reverse experiment QUBICL were in - verted . Specific interaction partners in SILAC experiments were determined by a combination of ratio and ratio significance calculated by MaxQuant . The p - value for the significance of enrichment had to be < 0 . 01 in both the forward and reverse experiment . The provided R script QUBIC - SILAC . R was used to plot all identified proteins according to their ratios in the forward and reverse experiment and mark specific interaction partners ( http : / / www . r - project . org ) . Label - free quantification was performed with MaxQuant ( see Sup - plemental data ) . Methionine oxidations and acetylation of protein N ter - mini were specified as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation as fixed modification . Maximum peptide charge was set to 6 . SILAC set - tings were set to singlets . Peptide and protein FDRs were set to 0 . 01 . The maximum PEP was set to 1 , and six amino acids were required as minimum peptide length . Only proteins with at least two peptides ( thereof one uniquely assignable to the respective protein group ) were considered as reliably identified . Label - free protein quantification was switched on , and unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification with a minimum ratio count of 1 . Retention times were recalibrated based on the built - in non - linear time - rescaling algorithm . MS / MS identifications were transferred between LC - MS / MS runs with the “Match between runs” option in which the maximal retention time window was set to 2 min . The quantification is based on the extracted ion current and is taking the whole three - dimensional isotope pattern into account . At least two quantitation events were required for a quantifiable protein . Every single experiment / raw file was annotated as a separate experiment in experimentalDesign . txt . Control experi - ments were named Control1 , Control2 , and Control3 . Pull - downs were named with the specific bait name and the replicate number . Identification of specific interaction partners was determined using the MaxQuant - based program QUBIC validato r . The proteinGroups . txt file was loaded ( Load – Generic ) , and a group file template , Groups . txt , was generated ( Processing – Groups – Write group file template ) . Replicates were grouped using one unique name in Groups . txt . The file was then loaded into QUBIC validato r ( Processing – Groups – Load groups ) . Subsequently , results were cleaned on A ugu s t 17 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 753 Quantitative BAC interactomics • Hubner et al . transgenesis in mammalian tissue culture cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 102 : 2396 – 2401 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0409861102 Köcher , T . , and G . Superti - Furga . 2007 . Mass spectrometry - based functional proteomics : from molecular machines to protein networks . Nat . Methods . 4 : 807 – 815 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth1093 Kops , G . J . , M . van der Voet , M . S . Manak , M . H . van Osch , S . M . Naini , A . Brear , I . X . McLeod , D . M . Hentschel , J . R . Yates III , S . van den Heuvel , and J . V . Shah . 2010 . APC16 is a conserved subunit of the anaphase - promoting complex / cyclosome . J . Cell Sci . 123 : 1623 – 1633 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 061549 Krogan , N . J . , G . Cagney , H . Yu , G . Zhong , X . Guo , A . Ignatchenko , J . Li , S . Pu , N . Datta , A . P . Tikuisis , et al . 2006 . Global landscape of protein com - plexes in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Nature . 440 : 637 – 643 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature04670 Lee , M . J . , F . Gergely , K . Jeffers , S . Y . Peak - Chew , and J . W . Raff . 2001 . Msps / XMAP215 interacts with the centrosomal protein D - TACC to regu - late microtubule behaviour . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 : 643 – 649 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 35083033 LeRoy , P . J . , J . J . Hunter , K . M . Hoar , K . E . Burke , V . Shinde , J . Ruan , D . Bowman , K . Galvin , and J . A . Ecsedy . 2007 . Localization of human TACC3 to mitotic spindles is mediated by phosphorylation on Ser558 by Aurora A : a novel pharmacodynamic method for measuring Aurora A activity . Cancer Res . 67 : 5362 – 5370 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 07 - 0122 Li , Q . , D . Hansen , A . Killilea , H . C . Joshi , R . E . Palazzo , and R . Balczon . 2001 . Kendrin / pericentrin - B , a centrosome protein with homology to pericen - trin that complexes with PCM - 1 . J . Cell Sci . 114 : 797 – 809 . Manfredi , M . G . , J . A . Ecsedy , K . A . Meetze , S . K . Balani , O . Burenkova , W . Chen , K . M . Galvin , K . M . Hoar , J . J . Huck , P . J . LeRoy , et al . 2007 . Antitumor activity of MLN8054 , an orally active small - molecule inhibitor of Aurora A kinase . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 104 : 4106 – 4111 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0608798104 Mann , M . 2006 . Functional and quantitative proteomics using SILAC . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 : 952 – 958 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2067 Masuda , S . , R . Das , H . Cheng , E . Hurt , N . Dorman , and R . Reed . 2005 . Recruitment of the human TREX complex to mRNA during splicing . Genes Dev . 19 : 1512 – 1517 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 1302205 Miller , J . J . , M . K . Summers , D . V . Hansen , M . V . Nachury , N . L . Lehman , A . Loktev , and P . K . Jackson . 2006 . Emi1 stably binds and inhibits the anaphase - promoting complex / cyclosome as a pseudosubstrate inhibitor . Genes Dev . 20 : 2410 – 2420 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 1454006 Monte , M . , R . Benetti , L . Collavin , L . Marchionni , G . Del Sal , and C . Schneider . 2004 . hGTSE - 1 expression stimulates cytoplasmic localization of p53 . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 11744 – 11752 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M311123200 Muyrers , J . P . , Y . Zhang , and A . F . Stewart . 2001 . Techniques : recombinogenic engineering—new options for cloning and manipulating DNA . Trends Biochem . Sci . 26 : 325 – 331 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0968 - 0004 ( 00 ) 01757 - 6 Okamoto , C . T . , J . McKinney , and Y . Y . Jeng . 2000 . Clathrin in mitotic spindles . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 279 : C369 – C374 . Olsen , J . V . , L . M . de Godoy , G . Li , B . Macek , P . Mortensen , R . Pesch , A . Makarov , O . Lange , S . Horning , and M . Mann . 2005 . Parts per million mass accuracy on an Orbitrap mass spectrometer via lock mass injec - tion into a C - trap . Mol . Cell . Proteomics . 4 : 2010 – 2021 . doi : 10 . 1074 / mcp . T500030 - MCP200 Ong , S . E . , B . Blagoev , I . Kratchmarova , D . B . Kristensen , H . Steen , A . Pandey , and M . Mann . 2002 . Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell cul - ture , SILAC , as a simple and accurate approach to expression proteomics . Mol . Cell . Proteomics . 1 : 376 – 386 . doi : 10 . 1074 / mcp . M200025 - MCP200 Peng , J . , J . E . Elias , C . C . Thoreen , L . J . Licklider , and S . P . Gygi . 2003 . Evaluation of multidimensional chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectro - metry ( LC / LC - MS / MS ) for large - scale protein analysis : the yeast proteome . J . Proteome Res . 2 : 43 – 50 . doi : 10 . 1021 / pr025556v Peset , I . , and I . Vernos . 2008 . The TACC proteins : TACC - ling microtubule dynamics and centrosome function . Trends Cell Biol . 18 : 379 – 388 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2008 . 06 . 005 Pfleger , C . M . , and M . W . Kirschner . 2000 . The KEN box : an APC recognition sig - nal distinct from the D box targeted by Cdh1 . Genes Dev . 14 : 655 – 665 . Poser , I . , M . Sarov , J . R . Hutchins , J . K . Hériché , Y . Toyoda , A . Pozniakovsky , D . Weigl , A . Nitzsche , B . Hegemann , A . W . Bird , et al . 2008 . BAC TransgeneOmics : a high - throughput method for exploration of protein function in mammals . Nat . Methods . 5 : 409 – 415 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1199 Pryor , A . , L . Tung , Z . Yang , F . Kapadia , T . H . Chang , and L . F . Johnson . 2004 . Growth - regulated expression and G0 - specific turnover of the mRNA that encodes URH49 , a mammalian DExH / D box protein that is highly related to the mRNA export protein UAP56 . Nucleic Acids Res . 32 : 1857 – 1865 . doi : 10 . 1093 / nar / gkh347 Ranish , J . A . , E . C . Yi , D . M . Leslie , S . O . Purvine , D . R . Goodlett , J . Eng , and R . Aebersold . 2003 . The study of macromolecular complexes by quantita - tive proteomics . Nat . Genet . 33 : 349 – 355 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ng1101 Cheeseman , I . M . , and A . Desai . 2005 . A combined approach for the localization and tandem affinity purification of protein complexes from metazoans . Sci . STKE . 2005 : pl1 . doi : 10 . 1126 / stke . 2662005pl1 Cox , J . , and M . Mann . 2008 . MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates , individualized p . p . b . - range mass accuracies and proteome - wide protein quantification . Nat . Biotechnol . 26 : 1367 – 1372 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nbt . 1511 Cullen , C . F . , and H . Ohkura . 2001 . Msps protein is localized to acentrosomal poles to ensure bipolarity of Drosophila meiotic spindles . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 : 637 – 642 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 35083025 Didichenko , S . A . , C . M . Fragoso , and M . Thelen . 2003 . Mitotic and stress - induced phosphorylation of HsPI3K - C2alpha targets the protein for degra - dation . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 26055 – 26064 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M301657200 Doxsey , S . J . , P . Stein , L . Evans , P . D . Calarco , and M . Kirschner . 1994 . Pericentrin , a highly conserved centrosome protein involved in microtubule organiza - tion . Cell . 76 : 639 – 650 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 94 ) 90504 - 5 Flory , M . R . , and T . N . Davis . 2003 . The centrosomal proteins pericentrin and ken - drin are encoded by alternatively spliced products of one gene . Genomics . 82 : 401 – 405 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0888 - 7543 ( 03 ) 00119 - 8 Fong , K . W . , Y . K . Choi , J . B . Rattner , and R . Z . Qi . 2008 . CDK5RAP2 is a peri - centriolar protein that functions in centrosomal attachment of the gamma - tubulin ring complex . Mol . Biol . Cell . 19 : 115 – 125 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E07 - 04 - 0371 Gaidarov , I . , M . E . Smith , J . Domin , and J . H . Keen . 2001 . The class II phos - phoinositide 3 - kinase C2alpha is activated by clathrin and regulates clathrin - mediated membrane trafficking . Mol . Cell . 7 : 443 – 449 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1097 - 2765 ( 01 ) 00191 - 5 Gavin , A . C . , P . Aloy , P . Grandi , R . Krause , M . Boesche , M . Marzioch , C . Rau , L . J . Jensen , S . Bastuck , B . Dümpelfeld , et al . 2006 . Proteome survey reveals modularity of the yeast cell machinery . Nature . 440 : 631 – 636 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature04532 Gergely , F . , C . Karlsson , I . Still , J . Cowell , J . Kilmartin , and J . W . Raff . 2000 . The TACC domain identifies a family of centrosomal proteins that can interact with microtubules . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 97 : 14352 – 14357 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 97 . 26 . 14352 Gergely , F . , V . M . Draviam , and J . W . Raff . 2003 . The ch - TOG / XMAP215 protein is essential for spindle pole organization in human somatic cells . Genes Dev . 17 : 336 – 341 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 245603 Giet , R . , D . McLean , S . Descamps , M . J . Lee , J . W . Raff , C . Prigent , and D . M . Glover . 2002 . Drosophila Aurora A kinase is required to localize D - TACC to centrosomes and to regulate astral microtubules . J . Cell Biol . 156 : 437 – 451 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200108135 Gillingham , A . K . , and S . Munro . 2000 . The PACT domain , a conserved centro - somal targeting motif in the coiled - coil proteins AKAP450 and pericen - trin . EMBO Rep . 1 : 524 – 529 . Gingras , A . C . , M . Gstaiger , B . Raught , and R . Aebersold . 2007 . Analysis of protein complexes using mass spectrometry . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 : 645 – 654 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2208 Glatter , T . , A . Wepf , R . Aebersold , and M . Gstaiger . 2009 . An integrated work - flow for charting the human interaction proteome : insights into the PP2A system . Mol . Syst . Biol . 5 : 237 . doi : 10 . 1038 / msb . 2008 . 75 Graser , S . , Y . D . Stierhof , and E . A . Nigg . 2007 . Cep68 and Cep215 ( Cdk5rap2 ) are required for centrosome cohesion . J . Cell Sci . 120 : 4321 – 4331 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 020248 Griffith , E . , S . Walker , C . A . Martin , P . Vagnarelli , T . Stiff , B . Vernay , N . Al Sanna , A . Saggar , B . Hamel , W . C . Earnshaw , et al . 2008 . Mutations in pericentrin cause Seckel syndrome with defective ATR - dependent DNA damage signaling . Nat . Genet . 40 : 232 – 236 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ng . 2007 . 80 Guo , J . , Z . Yang , W . Song , Q . Chen , F . Wang , Q . Zhang , and X . Zhu . 2006 . Nudel contributes to microtubule anchoring at the mother centriole and is involved in both dynein - dependent and - independent centrosomal protein assembly . Mol . Biol . Cell . 17 : 680 – 689 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E05 - 04 - 0360 Haren , L . , T . Stearns , and J . Lüders . 2009 . Plk1 - dependent recruitment of gamma - tubulin complexes to mitotic centrosomes involves multiple PCM components . PLoS One . 4 : e5976 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0005976 Hutchins , J . R . , Y . Toyoda , B . Hegemann , I . Poser , J . K . Hériché , M . M . Sykora , M . Augsburg , O . Hudecz , B . A . Buschhorn , J . Bulkescher , et al . 2010 . Systematic analysis of human protein complexes identifies chromosome segregation proteins . Science . 328 : 593 – 599 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1181348 Katahira , J . , H . Inoue , E . Hurt , and Y . Yoneda . 2009 . Adaptor Aly and co - adaptor Thoc5 function in the Tap - p15 - mediated nuclear export of HSP70 mRNA . EMBO J . 28 : 556 – 567 . doi : 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2009 . 5 Kinoshita , K . , T . L . Noetzel , L . Pelletier , K . Mechtler , D . N . Drechsel , A . Schwager , M . Lee , J . W . Raff , and A . A . Hyman . 2005 . Aurora A phosphorylation of TACC3 / maskin is required for centrosome - dependent microtubule assembly in mitosis . J . Cell Biol . 170 : 1047 – 1055 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200503023 Kittler , R . , L . Pelletier , C . Ma , I . Poser , S . Fischer , A . A . Hyman , and F . Buchholz . 2005 . RNA interference rescue by bacterial artificial chromosome on A ugu s t 17 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 189 • NUMBER 4 • 2010 754 Rappsilber , J . , M . Mann , and Y . Ishihama . 2007 . Protocol for micro - purification , enrichment , pre - fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips . Nat . Protoc . 2 : 1896 – 1906 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2007 . 261 Rauch , A . , C . T . Thiel , D . Schindler , U . Wick , Y . J . Crow , A . B . Ekici , A . J . van Essen , T . O . Goecke , L . Al - Gazali , K . H . Chrzanowska , et al . 2008 . Mutations in the pericentrin ( PCNT ) gene cause primordial dwarfism . Science . 319 : 816 – 819 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1151174 Reed , R . , and H . Cheng . 2005 . TREX , SR proteins and export of mRNA . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 17 : 269 – 273 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2005 . 04 . 011 Reed , R . , and E . Hurt . 2002 . A conserved mRNA export machinery coupled to pre - mRNA splicing . Cell . 108 : 523 – 531 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 02 ) 00627 - X Rigaut , G . , A . Shevchenko , B . Rutz , M . Wilm , M . Mann , and B . Séraphin . 1999 . A generic protein purification method for protein complex char - acterization and proteome exploration . Nat . Biotechnol . 17 : 1030 – 1032 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 13732 Royle , S . J . , N . A . Bright , and L . Lagnado . 2005 . Clathrin is required for the function of the mitotic spindle . Nature . 434 : 1152 – 1157 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature03502 Sarov , M . , S . Schneider , A . Pozniakovski , A . Roguev , S . Ernst , Y . Zhang , A . A . Hyman , and A . F . Stewart . 2006 . A recombineering pipeline for functional genomics applied to Caenorhabditis elegans . Nat . Methods . 3 : 839 – 844 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth933 Sowa , M . E . , E . J . Bennett , S . P . Gygi , and J . W . Harper . 2009 . Defining the human deubiquitinating enzyme interaction landscape . Cell . 138 : 389 – 403 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2009 . 04 . 042 Srayko , M . , S . Quintin , A . Schwager , and A . A . Hyman . 2003 . Caenorhabditis elegans TAC - 1 and ZYG - 9 form a complex that is essential for long as - tral and spindle microtubules . Curr . Biol . 13 : 1506 – 1511 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0960 - 9822 ( 03 ) 00597 - 9 Strässer , K . , S . Masuda , P . Mason , J . Pfannstiel , M . Oppizzi , S . Rodriguez - Navarro , A . G . Rondón , A . Aguilera , K . Struhl , R . Reed , and E . Hurt . 2002 . TREX is a conserved complex coupling transcription with messen - ger RNA export . Nature . 417 : 304 – 308 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature746 Sturn , A . , J . Quackenbush , and Z . Trajanoski . 2002 . Genesis : cluster analysis of microarray data . Bioinformatics . 18 : 207 – 208 . doi : 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / 18 . 1 . 207 Trinkle - Mulcahy , L . , and A . I . Lamond . 2007 . Toward a high - resolution view of nuclear dynamics . Science . 318 : 1402 – 1407 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1142033 Tusher , V . G . , R . Tibshirani , and G . Chu . 2001 . Significance analysis of micro - arrays applied to the ionizing radiation response . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 98 : 5116 – 5121 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 091062498 Utrera , R . , L . Collavin , D . Lazarevic´ , D . Delia , and C . Schneider . 1998 . A novel p53 - inducible gene coding for a microtubule - localized protein with G2 - phase - specific expression . EMBO J . 17 : 5015 – 5025 . doi : 10 . 1093 / emboj / 17 . 17 . 5015 Vermeulen , M . , N . C . Hubner , and M . Mann . 2008 . High confidence deter - mination of specific protein - protein interactions using quantitative mass spectrometry . Curr . Opin . Biotechnol . 19 : 331 – 337 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . copbio . 2008 . 06 . 001 Virbasius , C . M . , S . Wagner , and M . R . Green . 1999 . A human nuclear - localized chaperone that regulates dimerization , DNA binding , and transcrip - tional activity of bZIP proteins . Mol . Cell . 4 : 219 – 228 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1097 - 2765 ( 00 ) 80369 - X Zhang , Y . , F . Buchholz , J . P . Muyrers , and A . F . Stewart . 1998 . A new logic for DNA engineering using recombination in Escherichia coli . Nat . Genet . 20 : 123 – 128 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 2417 on A ugu s t 17 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m