Chapman University Chapman University Digital Commons Business Faculty Articles and Research Business 10 - 2011 Testing the Waters : Using Collective Real Options To Manage the Social Dilemma Of Strategic Alliances Matthew McCarter Chapman University Joseph T . Mahoney University of Illinois Gregory B . Northcraft University of Illinois Follow this and additional works at : http : / / digitalcommons . chapman . edu / business _ articles Part of the Organizational Behavior and Theory Commons This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Business at Chapman University Digital Commons . It has been accepted for inclusion in Business Faculty Articles and Research by an authorized administrator of Chapman University Digital Commons . For more information , please contact laughtin @ chapman . edu . Recommended Citation Mccarter , Matthew W . , Joseph T . Mahoney , and Gregory B . Northcraft . " Testing the Waters : Using Collective Real Options to Manage the Social Dilemma of Strategic Alliances . " The Academy of Management Review 36 . 4 ( 2011 ) : 621 - 40 . DOI : 10 . 5465 / amr . 2009 . 0481 Testing the Waters : Using Collective Real Options To Manage the Social Dilemma Of Strategic Alliances Comments This article was originally published in The Academy of Management Review , volume 36 , issue 4 , in 2011 . DOI : 10 . 5465 / amr . 2009 . 0481 Copyright Academy of Management This article is available at Chapman University Digital Commons : http : / / digitalcommons . chapman . edu / business _ articles / 6 TESTING THE WATERS : USING COLLECTIVE REAL OPTIONS TO MANAGE THE SOCIAL DILEMMA OF STRATEGIC ALLIANCES MATTHEW W . MCCARTER Chapman University JOSEPH T . MAHONEY GREGORY B . NORTHCRAFT University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign We extend real options research by introducing the concept of collective real options and model how collective real options provide strategic alliances a mechanism to manage social uncertainty . Collective real options manage social uncertainty by producing relational small wins that develop trust . The amount of trust developed by acquiring a collective real option depends on the exposure of alliance partners . Alliance partner reputation also plays an important role in the impact of collective real options . Strategic alliances are “voluntary arrange - ments [ among two or more organizations ] in - volving the exchange , sharing , or co - develop - ment of products , technologies , or services” ( Gulati , 1998 : 293 ) and are a means for organiza - tions to achieve goals they could not attain in - dependently . Alliances create value through the pooling of resources to provide alliance partners with competitive advantages over rivals ( Das & Teng , 2000 ; Hardy , Phillips , & Lawrence , 2003 ) . However , alliances often fail to create their an - ticipated benefits ( Gottschalg & Zollo , 2007 ; Kale , Dyer , & Singh , 2002 ) . This article examines how the use of real options can influence the likelihood of alliance success . Two critical factors influencing alliance suc - cess are environmental uncertainty and social uncertainty . Environmental uncertainty stems from a lack of information about the market and task environment ( Bowman & Hurry , 1993 ; Das & Teng , 1996 ) . As a consequence of environmental uncertainty , alliance partners may fear that their pooled investments will not yield a suffi - ciently profitable return ( McCarter , Rockmann , & Northcraft , 2010 ) , and they may therefore pro - tect their own interests at the expense of the alliance ( Luo , 2007 ) . Social uncertainty stems from a lack of information about the intentions of alliance partners , and it impedes interfirm cooperation because alliance partners may fear they cannot trust each other to do what is best for the alliance ( Messick , Allison , & Samuelson , 1988 ; Park & Ungson , 2001 ) . This lack of trust pushes alliance partners to either underinvest defensively or not enter into the alliance alto - gether , thereby missing opportunities to capital - ize fully on alliance potential ( McCarter & North - craft , 2007 ) . For the past two decades , real options re - search on uncertainty in alliance governance ( Kogut , 1991 ) has focused on understanding how alliance partners use real options unilaterally to manage environmental uncertainty ( Folta , 1998 ; Reuer & Tong , 2005 ) . We develop a model of how real options can be used collectively to manage social uncertainty among alliance partners , thereby enhancing the likelihood of alliance success . The core logic of our model comes in five parts : ( 1 ) large - scale alliance cooperation represents a social dilemma requiring trust , ( 2 ) collective real options offer alliance partners the opportunity to achieve relational small wins that increase trust , ( 3 ) increased trust decreases the perceived vulnerability among alliance partners and , thus , fuels larger - scale alliance cooperation , ( 4 ) exposure ( the amount of re - sources put at risk by alliance partners to ac - quire the collective real option ) moderates the effect of a relational small win on trust develop - We express our appreciation to associate editor Jean Philippe - Bonardi and three anonymous reviewers for their input and suggestions . (cid:1) Academy of Management Review 2011 , Vol . 36 , No . 4 , 621 – 640 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amr . 2009 . 0481 621 CopyrightoftheAcademyofManagement , allrightsreserved . Contentsmaynotbecopied , emailed , postedtoalistserv , orotherwisetransmittedwithoutthecopyright holder’s express written permission . Users may print , download , or email articles for individual use only . ment , and ( 5 ) the reputations of alliance partners also play an important role in the impact of collective real options . Examining how collective real options influ - ence social uncertainty in alliances helps bridge the ( often independently studied ) struc - tural and motivational approaches to alliance governance . In doing so our conceptualization of real options highlights the importance of social uncertainty—and its management via the psy - chology of relational small wins—to alliance success . We begin by first reviewing essential ele - ments of the social dilemma paradigm . Next , we introduce the concept of collective real options as a hybrid approach to managing social uncer - tainty in alliances . We then propose a model capturing how collective real options influence trust formation in alliances . We conclude by dis - cussing the theoretical and managerial implica - tions of our model . STRATEGIC ALLIANCE SOCIAL DILEMMAS : A BRIEF REVIEW The social dilemma paradigm has proven very useful in helping understand how social uncertainty influences cooperation among alli - ance partners ( Zeng & Chen , 2003 ) . A social di - lemma , broadly defined , is a situation in which it appears that being uncooperative can be per - sonally beneficial at the collective’s expense— unless everyone else in the collective also chooses to be uncooperative , in which case no one benefits ( Liebrand , 1983 ) . In strategic alli - ances partners’ resources can be pooled to cre - ate a public good—that is , a resource that , once produced , is enjoyed by all alliance partners , whether they contributed or not ( Olson , 1965 ) . For instance , a group of firms may pool re - sources to identify more efficient recycling pro - cesses ( Tirole , 1996 ) . 1 When an alliance partner contributes private resources to further the alli - ance’s interest—such as contributing people or capital to identify more efficient recycling pro - cesses—this action is termed cooperation ( Dawes , 1980 ) . Defection occurs when an alli - ance partner fails to contribute ( or underinvests ) private resources toward alliance initiatives ( Dawes , 1980 ) . An alliance partner might underinvest in alli - ance initiatives for two reasons . First , an alli - ance partner may attempt to “free ride”—enjoy the created public good ( e . g . , more efficient re - cycling processes ) without contributing toward its creation . In other words , offensive defection occurs when an alliance partner attempts to en - joy the shared benefit without incurring much ( if any ) cost ( Zeng & Chen , 2003 ) . Alternatively , an alliance partner may defensively defect — underinvest or , in the extreme , not contribute at all—to avoid wasting resources if the alliance partner believes others also will underinvest ( Rockmann & Northcraft , 2008 ) . Unfortunately , if enough alliance partners underinvest , regard - less of whether offensively or defensively , the public good is not produced and no alliance partners benefit—for example , poor air quality abounds and alliance resources are wasted ( Messick & Brewer , 1983 ) . We focus on defensive defection here because even if measures are taken to make offensive defection impossible , an alliance partner may remain suspicious of other alliance partners’ intentions and thereby defect defensively to avoid wasting personal re - sources ( McCarter & Northcraft , 2007 ) . 2 1 Public goods come in two forms ( Cornes & Sandler , 1996 ) . Pure public goods are resources available to anyone in a society or similar large - scale collective—for example , a na - tion , community , or city . Examples of pure public goods include public radio , national defense , and lighthouses . Pri - vate public goods ( or club goods ) are resources available to anyone within a smaller - scale collective , such as a strategic alliance . Examples of private public goods include new technologies and processes developed in strategic alliances and generic advertising campaigns ( e . g . , “Got milk ? ” and “Beef , it’s what for dinner ! ” ) used in a particular industry . In this second instance the private public good is public to a smaller specified collective ( e . g . , alliance partners ) while being privatized from a larger specified collective ( e . g . , the entire populace of a city ) . While our propositions are not limited to either form of public good , in this article we refer to examples of private public goods , and we use the abbre - viated term public good to remain consistent with the types of public goods discussed in the literature on strategic alli - ances ( Agarwal , Croson , & Mahoney , 2010 ; McCarter & Northcraft , 2007 ; Zeng & Chen , 2003 ) . 2 The social dilemma paradigm is complementary to other game - theoretic – based paradigms , such as co - opetition and integrative negotiation . The similarity between the social dilemma paradigm and other game - theoretic paradigms is that value creation occurs through cooperative , collective action . The difference resides in the degree of exclusivity between cooperative and competitive actions . In social di - lemmas cooperation and defection are interdependent : an alliance partner cannot defect ( or cooperate ) without affect - ing the other alliance partners in negative ( or positive ) ways 622 October Academy of Management Review Structural and Motivational Approaches to Strategic Alliance Social Dilemmas The social dilemma paradigm offers two ap - proaches to managing social uncertainty in al - liances : structural and motivational ( Kollock , 1998 ; Zeng & Chen , 2003 ) . 3 Both approaches at - tempt to mitigate social uncertainty by increas - ing trust among alliance partners , because trust is a central critical factor determining partner investment in alliance initiatives ( McCarter & Northcraft , 2007 ) . The structural approach seeks to raise alli - ance partner trust by making defection more costly than cooperation ( Hennart , 1988 ) so that alliance partners will believe no partner has an incentive to defect . Classic structural solutions involve sanctions , such as threatening monetary fines or the spread of bad reputations for defect - ing alliance partners ( Das & Teng , 2002 ; Zeng & Chen , 2003 ) , and contracting , such as relation - ship - specific investments ( Parkhe , 1993 ) , credi - ble commitments ( Williamson , 1983 ) , and self - enforcing agreements ( Telser , 1980 ) . The motivational approach attempts to in - crease trust by altering how alliance partners perceive each other ( Dyer & Singh , 1998 ; Zaheer & Venkatraman , 1995 ) so that they will believe no partner is likely to defect , even if there ap - pears to be an incentive to do so . Traditional motivational solutions entail alliance partners’ communicating cooperative intent before joint investments are made ( Monge et al . , 1998 ) and encouraging alliance partners to consider each other’s needs ( Spekman , Isabella , MacAvoy , & Forbes , 1996 ) . For instance , future alliance part - ners may meet frequently to plan , discuss goals , and communicate intentions before contributing resources toward alliance initiatives ( Kanter , 1994 ; Murray & Mahon , 1993 ) . Limitations of Structural and Motivational Approaches Both structural and motivational solutions , in isolation , are limited in their ability to encour - age cooperation among alliance partners ( Lich - bach , 1996 ) . Structural solutions are unable to cover every possible free - riding loophole ( Wil - liamson , 1979 ) , are only effective “if [ they ] can be done cheaply enough” ( Telser , 1980 : 28 ) , and can negatively affect how alliance partners think about the alliance . Regarding this last point , contracting ( for example ) leads alliance part - ners to trust the contract rather than each other , leaving the relationship vulnerable when the contract is repealed or a weakness in the con - tract is found ( Malhotra & Murnighan , 2002 ; Sit - kin & Roth , 1993 ) . Along these lines , Malhotra and Lumineau’s ( in press ) field study on inter - firm contracting shows that when disputes arise , goodwill trust and willingness to continue collaboration among alliance partners decrease as the number of control provisions in the con - tract increase . As for sanctions , threatening punishment not only alters the payoffs associ - ated with cooperation and defection but also reframes how alliance partners perceive such behaviors . Tenbrunsel and Messick ( 1999 ) found that using sanctions to enforce cooperation di - verts alliance partner attention from the moral consequences of defection to the economic con - sequences of being caught defecting . This shift of consideration actually can increase defection . Motivational solutions alone have limitations as well because of their reliance on verbal re - assurances of alliance partner trustworthiness . Absent action , such verbal reassurance may be viewed as “cheap talk , ” leaving partners still suspicious of each other’s actual intent ( Craw - ford , 1998 ; Farrell & Rabin , 1996 ) . Further , alli - ance partners typically believe themselves to be more honest and more cooperative ( i . e . , more trustworthy ) than others , which also fuels suspi - cion of others and , hence , defensive defection ( Epley , Caruso , & Bazerman , 2006 ) . Indeed , re - ( Kaufman & Kerr , 1993 ; Kollock , 1998 ) . The co - opetition para - digm ( Brandenburger & Nalebuff , 1996 ) and integrative ne - gotiation paradigm ( Hoffman et al . , 1999 ) assume that coop - eration ( or creating value ) is independent of defection ( or claiming value ) : individuals acting in their own self - interests can lead to an outcome that is in everyone’s best interests . Thus , whereas co - opetition and integrative nego - tiation paradigms may be modeled using an invisible - hand game ( Miller , 1993 ) , social dilemmas are modeled using n - prisoners’ ( and assurance ) dilemma games ( Dawes , 1980 ; Liebrand , 1983 ) . 3 Other scholarship has used alternative typologies for grouping social dilemma solutions . For example , social psy - chology and operations management research codify social dilemma solutions as a function of whether solutions are unilateral or jointly implemented ( McCarter & Northcraft , 2007 ; Messick & Brewer , 1983 ) . To remain consistent with previous research applying the social dilemma paradigm to alliance management , we delineate solutions as to whether they change how alliance partners perceive either the struc - ture of the alliance or the other exchange partners in the alliance . 2011 623 McCarter , Mahoney , and Northcraft search on international alliances shows that trust is fostered only after alliance partners con - firm their intentions through investment in the alliance ( Robson , Katsikeas , & Bello , 2008 ) . These findings highlight that neither a struc - tural nor a motivational solution , indepen - dently , is sufficient to alleviate social uncer - tainty in strategic alliance social dilemmas , suggesting the need to identify a governance mechanism that incorporates elements of both solutions ( Foddy , Smithson , Schneider , & Hogg , 1999 ) . Research in strategic management sup - ports this conclusion ( Agarwal et al . , 2010 ) : a laboratory simulation of cooperation in alli - ances found that mutual cooperation was high - est when both economic incentives were aligned ( a structural solution ) and communica - tion was allowed among alliance partners ( a motivational solution ) . In this article we intro - duce collective real options as a hybrid solution that provides a more effective alternative than existing alliance governance mechanisms . REAL OPTIONS IN STRATEGIC ALLIANCES A real option is a right—without an obliga - tion—to invest resources ( e . g . , labor , money , time ) toward a course of action at a future point in time ( Dixit & Pindyck , 1994 ) . Because of the environmental uncertainty inherent in making any investment ( Hobfoll , 1998 ) , real options pro - vide an attractive “psychological hedge” in the minds of investors ( Bazerman & Gillespie , 1999 ; Malhotra , 2005 ) . Real options allow investors to feel less vulnerable to the negative effects of investment failure ( Meyerson , Weick , & Kramer , 1996 ) . Environmental uncertainty is mitigated because real options delay full investment until critical information about the environment ( such as market conditions , profitability of a potential investment , and entry of new competitors ) can be revealed over time ( Bowman & Hurry , 1993 ) . An example of how real options reduce environ - mental uncertainty is a university that is consid - ering adoption of a new technology , such as a campus phone system ( Ziedonis , 2007 ) . Prior to investing large amounts of resources to roll out the new phone system campus wide , the univer - sity can take the real option of field testing the system in one campus building . After the field test , environmental uncertainty is reduced be - cause the university has additional information about how the phone system works , along with the compatibility and benefits of the system . Real options change the structure of an invest - ment by separating resource allocation into a multistage process , with an option to exit at the conclusion of any stage ( Adner & Levinthal , 2004 ; Mu , 2006 ) . While real options take a variety of forms ( Trigeorgis , 1999 ) , the focus here is on “time - to - build” real options ( also called “growth” or “compound” options ) , in which an individual firm’s investments come in multiple stages ( Sing , 2002 ; Smit & Trigeorgis , 2004 ) . In the first stage the firm—facing high environ - mental uncertainty—acquires the real option by investing a small amount of resources , which provides the firm an opportunity to uncover ad - ditional information about the environment so as to make more informed later - stage invest - ment decisions . In the later stages the firm— having learned more about the environment— exercises the option of either investing additional resources or abandoning the venture . A pilot project represents a time - to - build real option ( Ziedonis , 2007 ) . A firm makes an initial investment in a small version of the venture ( a pilot project ) to see whether further investments might hold promise ; the firm then can exercise the real option created by the pilot project by making subsequent larger investments in the venture if the results from the pilot project are favorable ( Fawcett , Magnan , & McCarter , 2008 ; Kim & Sanders , 2002 ) . In making the initial smaller investment , the time - to - build real option is acquired . In making the subsequent larger investments , the time - to - build real option is ex - ercised ( Li , James , Madhaven , & Mahoney , 2007 ) . Collective Real Options A collective real option is an action under - taken jointly by alliance partners when all part - ners agree to make a small initial investment of resources to uncover environmental and social information about the possible success of a sub - sequent larger - scale alliance initiative . Envi - ronmental information refers to factors exoge - nous to the alliance ( such as market forces ) that influence the anticipated benefits of collective action ( such as revenues and enhanced reputa - tion ) . Social information refers to factors endog - enous to the alliance that influence the antici - pated benefits of collective action—specifically , the perceived trustworthiness of the alliance 624 October Academy of Management Review partners ( Gulati , 1998 ) , including their integrity , reliability , and commitment . Acquiring the col - lective real option occurs when the alliance partners jointly invest in the small - scale ( e . g . , pilot project ) initiative . This definition high - lights two key elements that separate collective real options from traditional conceptualizations of real options and related constructs . First , traditional research on real options typ - ically has examined how individuals ( or individ - ual firms ) acquire real options to reduce uncer - tainty when making investment decisions ( Bowman & Moskowitz , 2001 ; Folta & Miller , 2002 ) . However , as Li et al . ( 2007 ) suggest , real options may be acquired and exercised by col - lectives , such as an alliance . Although collec - tive real options are created by the collective ( e . g . , by an alliance ) , later they can be exercised independently by each member of the collective ( Pape & Schmidt - Tank , 2004 ) —that is , each mem - ber of the collective can decide independently whether to fulfill or decline the subsequent larger - scale investment . For example , the alli - ance partners might collectively choose to pref - ace a large - scale alliance initiative with a pilot project ( Fawcett et al . , 2008 ) , such as developing a new recycling process and pilot testing its effects on a select region prior to agreeing to jointly develop a national network of recycling plants . The focus on joint ( rather than unilateral ) implementation distinguishes collective real options from similar concepts , such as incre - mental risk taking ( Andriopoulos & Lowe , 2000 ) and reciprocal exchange ( Gouldner , 1960 ; Molm , Takahashi , & Petersen , 2000 ) . While both are additional paths to managing social uncer - tainty , incremental risk taking ( Dunbar , Neufeld , Libow , Cohen , & Foley , 1997 ) and reciprocal ex - change ( Komorita , Chan , & Parks , 1993 ) are ac - tions undertaken by an individual independent of other alliance partners . The acquisition of collective real options , in contrast , represents coordinated action among alliance partners , 4 and it is this coordinated action that provides the opportunity to reduce social uncertainty in the alliance . The second difference between collective real options and traditional real option concepts re - lates to the timing and benefits provided . Previ - ous theorizing on time - to - build real options pos - its that their benefits are not realized until after the pilot venture is completed and that these benefits entail mitigating environmental uncer - tainty ( Majd & Pindyck , 1987 ) . However , as sug - gested by Dixit and Pindyck ( 1994 ) and Li et al . ( 2007 ) , collective real options provide social in - formation as well as environmental information . Social information can surface prior to the com - pletion of the pilot venture . It is the uncovering of information about the intentions , reliability , and commitment of alliance partners during the pilot project that enables collective real options to change how alliance partners perceive each other . For example , empirical work on technol - ogy outsourcing shows that alliance partners jointly may make small initial investments to - ward alliance initiatives to uncover more infor - mation about each other’s intentions before committing large amounts of resources to the alliance ( van de Vrande , Vanhaverbeke , & Duys - ters , 2009 ) . This refocusing of the benefits of real options from managing environmental uncer - tainty to managing social uncertainty distin - guishes collective real options from similar con - cepts , such as contingency strategies ( Nielsen , 1988 ) and contingent contracts ( Bazerman & Gil - lespie , 1999 ) , both of which are concerned with managing environmental uncertainty ( Laak - sonen , Jarimo , & Kulmala , 2009 ) . Collective real options bridge structural and motivational approaches to create a hybrid so - 4 Reciprocial exchange can involve negotiated exchange , where exchange partners create an agreement that “speci - fies the benefits that each actor will receive from the ex - change” ( Molm , 2010 : 122 ) , and these benefits can flow bilat - erally ( Molm , 2003 ) . Negotiated exchange is complementary to collective real options . Resources are jointly invested into the relationship , strengthening the level of trust among the partners . However , what distinguishes collective real op - tions from a negotiated - exchange strategy is the presence of social uncertainty ( or risk of nonreciprocity ; Lawler , 2001 ; Molm , Collett , & Schaefer , 2007 ) . Similar to other traditional structural solutions ( such as contracting and self - enforcing commitments ) , negotiated exchange involves “agreements that are strictly binding . . . they automatically produce the benefits agreed upon” ( Molm et al . , 2007 : 209 ) , resulting in “the risk [ or perceived vulnerability ] of non - reciprocity [ be - ing ] eliminated” ( 2007 : 212 ) . Without social uncertainty , be - liefs about another’s motives and intentions ( i . e . , trustwor - thiness ) are difficult to form , leaving room for suspicion when the ability to enforce agreement ends or loopholes are discovered ( Malhotra & Lumineau , 2011 ; Malhotra & Mur - nighan , 2002 ) . Thus , the collective real option framework complements negotiated exchange ( and other structural so - lutions ) and offers an alternative avenue for alliance part - ners to increase mutual cooperation . 2011 625 McCarter , Mahoney , and Northcraft lution to alliance governance . As a structural solution , collective real options change the in - centives of alliance participation by lowering the costs of cooperation ( rather than by increas - ing the costs of defecting , as other structural solutions do ) : large - scale alliance participation is buffered by an initial less - costly ( pilot project ) initiative . As a motivational solution , collective real options reveal—through pilot project in - vestment behaviors—alliance partners’ integ - rity , reliability , and commitment . By credibly signaling intent in the pilot project , alliance partners influence how others perceive them through actions and not just words . Collective Real Options and Small Wins Using collective real options to manage social uncertainty can best be understood as an impor - tant opportunity for a relational small win . Small wins are “concrete , complete , imple - mented outcome [ s ] of moderate importance” ( Weick , 1984 : 43 ) , and they represent an opportu - nity for alliance partners to see ( preview ) the potential value of successful cooperation . The small wins framework derives from the observation that most organizing efforts—for ex - ample , alliance initiatives—are high in com - plexity and uncertainty about both the inten - tions of others and the outcomes of mutual cooperation ( Weick , 1984 ) . For instance , the com - plexity of alliance partner coordination and un - certainty about partner follow - through on prom - ised material and intellectual contributions are ever - present barriers to developing successful interfirm initiatives ( Wilson & Douglas , 2007 ) . The high complexity and uncertainty surround - ing large - scale collective investment can lead an alliance partner to be fearful about whether the other partners will cooperate . This fear often leads individuals to forgo cooperative initia - tives—to defensively defect ( Hobfoll , 1989 ) . The small wins framework suggests that breaking a large - scale collective effort up into multiple smaller collective efforts reduces the task’s com - plexity and perceived uncertainty ( Weick , 1984 ) . This , in turn , lowers the barrier for alliance part - ners to invest resources in an initial smaller collective effort . The smaller collective effort then provides the opportunity to achieve small wins . The smaller ( pilot project ) collective effort , in fact , can provide two kinds of small wins : a small win demonstrating the viability of the larger - scale cooperative effort ( i . e . , “proof - of - concept” ; McAdam , McAdam , Galbraith , & Miller , 2010 ) and a small win demonstrating the trustworthiness of alliance partners . Exploring the viability of a collective venture reduces en - vironmental uncertainty , while exploring the trustworthiness of alliance partners reduces so - cial uncertainty . Because the success of the small initial investment lowers the environmen - tal and social uncertainty barriers to subse - quent larger - scale alliance investments , the achievement of these small wins propels the exchange parties forward to invest in larger - scale collective efforts ( Reay , Golden - Biddle , & Germann , 2006 ) . Whereas traditional research on real options focuses on achieving small wins to mitigate environmental uncertainty , this arti - cle shifts the focus to understanding how collec - tive real options reduce social uncertainty by influencing the development of trust . Relational Small Wins and Trust Relational small wins encourage subsequent larger - scale cooperation in alliances by foster - ing trust and thereby reducing social uncer - tainty . Trust is an individual’s “expectations , as - sumptions or beliefs about the likelihood that another’s future actions will be beneficial , favor - able or at least not detrimental” to the individ - ual ( Robinson , 1996 : 576 ) , and it is formed through social interaction . When individuals in - teract , they bring with them values about what behaviors are appropriate in a relationship , along with expectations about behaviors they want from others , and they experience emotions based on how other individuals treat them ( Jones & George , 1998 ) . Through social interac - tion each individual attempts to ( 1 ) assess the perceived values of the other ( “Does the individ - ual have integrity ? ” ) , ( 2 ) know whether others have met his or her expectations ( “Did they co - operate or not ? ” ) , and ( 3 ) use his or her current emotions and moods as indicators to assess the quality of the relationships ( “How do I feel based on how others treated me ? ” ) . Research on trust in alliances references the real options research literature as holding promise in understanding how alliance partners build trust ( Das & Teng , 1998 ) . Trust evolves through interaction among individuals when values are perceived as congruent , positive ex - 626 October Academy of Management Review pectations are met , and positive emotions and moods are experienced based on how an indi - vidual has been treated by others ( Jones & George , 1998 ) . Applying this logic to strategic alliances , collective real options enable alli - ance partners to uncover information about the reliability , integrity , and commitment of one an - other . When the relational small wins are real - ized , alliance partners know that everyone else is reliable and committed to alliance success . As a consequence , the alliance partners become more trusting of one another . Lewicki , McAllister , and Bies ( 1998 ) suggest that trust should develop among alliance part - ners as a function of the nature of their experi - ence in acquiring the collective real option . How the alliance experience , when acquiring a col - lective real option , influences future cooperation can best be seen through the lens of vulnerabil - ity . Trust and Perceived Vulnerability Vulnerability has been defined variously as an individual’s biased assessment of a risky situation ( Cho & Lee , 2006 ) , composed of the de - gree of variability in the outcome of the pur - chase ( or investment ; Cox , 1967 ) and the amount of resources that can be lost ( Cunningham , 1967 ) ; as an individual’s assessed probability of an investment’s success and the confidence in that assessment ( Sitkin & Pablo , 1992 ; Sitkin & Weingart , 1995 ) ; and as a function of the social environment and the extent to which an individ - ual believes his or her resources are in danger of being exploited by others ( Meyerson et al . , 1996 ) . The recurring theme in these conceptual - izations is that vulnerability is an individual’s perception of risk subject to situational and so - cial influences . Here we define perceived vul - nerability as an individual’s assessment of un - certainty about the future behavior of others and / or the environment . Exposure is the amount an individual alliance partner must risk losing ( in proportion to that partner’s total wealth ) to achieve the benefits from the investment ( Cho & Lee , 2006 ; Cunning - ham , 1967 ) . For example , an alliance partner risking 90 percent of its total wealth toward the collective effort experiences relatively high ex - posure , while an alliance partner risking 10 per - cent of its total wealth toward the collective effort experiences relatively low exposure ( Lu - bell , 2004 ) . Thus , whereas perceived vulnerabil - ity is about the probability of failure of mutual cooperation in an alliance , exposure is con - cerned with how badly an alliance partner will be damaged if such a failure occurs . Exposure may be central to understanding how collective real options can impact trust formation even when mutual cooperation occurs in its acquisi - tion . In summary , collective real options enable al - liance partners to find out more information about the social and task environments before undertaking full investment in an alliance . When mutual cooperation is successful in the acquisition of the collective real option , the al - liance partners experience a relational small win . The achievement of a relational small win reduces the uncertainty inherent in how an alli - ance partner perceives its vulnerability in the alliance . MODELING REAL OPTIONS EFFECTS First we try , then we trust ! ( Sean Connery in the film Entrapment ) . As suggested by the above quotation , collec - tive real options enable alliance partners to “first try” to see if they can trust one another , prior to making full investments in the alliance . In this section we articulate a series of proposi - tions modeling how collective real options influ - ence trust formation in alliance relationships and , as a consequence , subsequent large - scale alliance investment . Propositions 1 through 3 constitute the base model . Successful mutual cooperation when the alliance acquires the real option provides a relational small win , thereby increasing trust among the alliance partners . The increase in trust among the alliance part - ners reduces the perceived vulnerability from social uncertainty , so ( as a consequence ) alli - ance partners should be more willing to cooper - ate by fully investing in the alliance . Proposi - tions 4 through 7 extend the core model by considering how characteristics of the collective real option ( i . e . , exposure ) and the alliance part - ners ( i . e . , reputation ) influence trust formation . Figure 1 provides a conceptual roadmap outlin - ing these relationships . Two boundary conditions are necessary to un - derstand the impact of collective real options 2011 627 McCarter , Mahoney , and Northcraft and the relational small wins they can produce . First , the attainment of a small win requires the external environment both to be promising and to provide the alliance partners a favorable re - turn on the real option ( assuming mutual coop - eration occurs ) . Otherwise , the firms have an incentive to exit the venture by not exercising the option of further investment ( Adner & Levinthal , 2004 ) . This first assumption stems from recent social dilemma research showing that social uncertainty and environmental influ - ence are distinct determinants of alliance coop - eration : individuals will defect in the presence of environmental uncertainty irrespective of how much they trust their alliance partners ( Mc - Carter et al . , 2010 ) . Second , our model is based on the psycholog - ical approach to trust ( see Lewicki , Tomlinson , & Gillespie , 2006 , for a review ) , which assumes that trust among individuals begins low ( at the conceptual level of zero ) and the first encounter among individuals acts as a validation opportu - nity regarding trustworthiness ( Jones & George , 1998 ) . If the encounter is positive , then trust in - creases as a function of the amount of the risk embedded in the encounter . The psychological approach also assumes that trust is not mono - lithic across the breadth of the relationship among alliance partners . Lewicki and col - leagues ( 1998 ) observed that relationships are complex and multifaceted . Thus , existing rela - tionships may be composed of individuals who trust each other on some matters but not others . As suggested by Hardin ( 1993 ) , individual A can trust individual B to do action X but not action Y , because either action Y is different from action X or because previous experience has shown that individual B cannot ( for whatever reason ) do action Y . This insight is illustrated in Larson’s ( 1992 ) case study of the formation of interfirm ties : although some alliance partners had con - siderable positive history with each other out - side the alliance context , they nevertheless un - dertook a “trial phase” to prove each other’s trustworthiness related to alliance activities . Drawing from this approach , our theorizing pos - its that , in relation to elements specific to the strategic alliance , prospective alliance partners begin with low trust . This assumption does not remove the possibility that the alliance partners share a positive history outside the alliance ( as will be discussed later ) ; it leaves room for the alliance partners to enlarge the breadth of their relationship through small wins germane to al - liance initiatives . Relational Small Wins of Mutual Cooperation and Trust Successful mutual cooperation increases trust among alliance partners . When alliance part - ners invest in the small - scale alliance initiative , they acquire an opportunity to experience suc - cessful mutual cooperation in the form of a col - FIGURE 1 A Conceptual Model of a Collective Real Options Approach to the Social Dilemma of Strategic Alliances 628 October Academy of Management Review lective real option . Significantly , acquiring a collective real option is not necessarily a one - time event . Agreeing to invest in an initial small - scale project must be followed up with fulfillment of promised capital , personnel , and commitment throughout the time period of the pilot project ( Robson et al . , 2008 ) . The real options research literature holds promise for understanding how “incremental re - source commitments” could increase trust among alliance partners ( Das & Teng , 1998 : 504 ) . An alliance’s successful mutual cooperation in acquiring a collective real option creates an ex - change history among the alliance partners ( Gulati , 1995a ) . This exchange history entails al - liance partners’ uncovering one another’s val - ues , expectations , and feelings about each other ( such as integrity , reliability , and commitment to the alliance ) —all of which influence the for - mation of trust ( Jones & George , 1998 ; Poppo , Zhou , & Sungmin , 2008 ) . As a result , the “predict - ability” of alliance partners’ future behavior in - creases ( Weick , 1984 ) and trust ( as a conse - quence ) is enhanced ( Sniezek , May , & Sawyer , 1990 ; Vangen & Huxham , 2003 ) : Proposition 1 : Alliances that experi - ence the relational small wins of mu - tual cooperation by successfully ac - quiring collective real options will experience higher trust compared to alliances that do not experience rela - tional small wins of mutual coopera - tion by successfully acquiring collec - tive real options . Trust and Perceived Vulnerability Trust is a critical psychological factor in de - termining the level of perceived vulnerability that an exchange partner experiences in an al - liance . When trust is high , social uncertainty about the future behavior of others is minimized ( Kollock , 1994 ) . A decrease in social uncertainty makes alliance partners less fearful that their investment will be lost because of free riding or defensive defection ( Schnake , 1991 ; Sniezek et al . , 1990 ) . Perceived vulnerability is therefore re - duced among alliance partners . Trust will me - diate the relationship between relational small wins of mutual cooperation in acquiring the col - lective real option and perceived vulnerability . Proposition 2a : As trust among alli - ance partners increases , perceived vulnerability experienced by those al - liance partners decreases . Proposition 2b : Trust mediates the re - lationship between relational small wins and perceived vulnerability of alliance partners . Vulnerability and Investment in Strategic Alliances Perceived vulnerability negatively affects an alliance partner’s willingness to contribute re - sources toward the alliance . In social dilemmas an individual experiences high perceived vul - nerability from uncertainty ( about others or the value of cooperation ) and the fact that resources must be risked . Resource conservation theories maintain that when individuals perceive that their resources are threatened with a potentially irreversible loss , they experience stress and therefore seek to avoid the threat by selecting a course of action that minimizes the likelihood their resources will be lost ( Hobfoll , 1998 ) . Con - sumer purchasing theories make a similar pre - diction about individuals facing risky invest - ments : high perceived risk ( vulnerability ) in an investment motivates individuals to engage in “risk reduction strategies”—one of which is avoiding the investment ( Cox , 1967 ) . In social dilemma terms , risk reduction likely equates to defecting ( or undercontributing ) toward the alli - ance public good . Proposition 3 : An alliance partner will be less likely to contribute toward the alliance’s initiatives when perceived vulnerability is higher . Exposure and Trust Development Recent research on trust development in alli - ances suggests that it is not the length of the history among alliance partners that develops trust but , rather , the quality of that history ( Gu - lati & Sytch , 2008 ; Lewicki et al . , 2006 ) . Exposure when acquiring the collective real option may have a direct effect on whether a relational small win is achieved and what impact that relational small win has on trust development among alliance partners . 2011 629 McCarter , Mahoney , and Northcraft High exposure in creating the collective real option may legislate against ever attempting a relational small win . Recent work on real op - tions and organizational learning maintains that if trial - and - error learning ( e . g . , via a pilot project ) is too risky ( i . e . , exposure is high ) , firms will be reluctant to invest in pilot projects ( Fich - man , 2004 ) . Similarly , if acquiring a collective real option requires high levels of exposure , al - liance partners may be particularly likely to ex - perience higher vulnerability from social uncer - tainty ( Cho & Lee , 2006 ; Hobfoll , 1998 ) . Experiencing heightened perceived vulnerabil - ity , alliance partners will be inclined to under - invest ( or not invest at all ) in the acquisition of the collective real option . As a consequence of this underinvestment , the opportunity for achieving the relational small win of mutual cooperation is less likely . The unsuccessful achievement of a relational small win when ac - quiring the collective real option will keep trust low among alliance partners . Trust will be low because the unsuccessful achievement of mu - tual cooperation will create a trust breach , de - creasing an alliance partner’s trust in the other partners’ intentions to support the alliance ( Lount , Zhong , Sivanathan , & Murnighan , 2008 ; Stout , 2008 ) . Considering the potential negative outcome of high exposure , an initial strategy to elicit cooperation among alliance partners may be to ask for small investments ( minimizing exposure ) when acquiring the collective real option . How - ever , low exposure when acquiring the collec - tive real option may undermine the develop - ment of trust , even when the relational small win of mutual cooperation is realized in acquir - ing the collective real option . Molm et al . note that “both structural risk and trustworthy behav - iors are necessary for the development of trust” ( 2007 : 212 ) . Indeed , extant trust research pro - poses that without “enough vulnerability” among exchange parties , trust cannot success - fully form ( Mayer , Davis , & Schoorman , 1995 ; Ribstein , 2000 ) . Empirical research on the “foot - in - the - door” technique supports this claim : get - ting individuals to make a small initial invest - ment increases the likelihood they will comply with larger requests in the future , and future compliance increases when the initial request is moderate rather than low ( Segilman , Bush , & Kirsch , 1976 ) . An explanation for this moderating effect of exposure on the relationship between relational small wins and trust can be found in attribution theory , which suggests that causal attributions for an individual’s compliance to a request are a function of the request’s perceived difficulty ( Heider , 1958 ; Kelley , 1973 ) . When alli - ance partners invest small amounts of resources toward the acquisition of a collective real op - tion , that cooperation is more likely to be attrib - uted to the low exposure of the request rather than to the commitment ( or trustworthiness ) of the alliance partners ( Malhotra & Murnighan , 2002 ) . Empirical results from experimental social psychology support this explanation of trust de - velopment . In the “trust game” Pillutla , Malho - tra , and Murnighan ( 2003 ) found that large offers from the sender are attributed by receivers as signals of high trust while low offers are not . In other words , the extent to which an alliance partner risks exposure influences how commit - ted to the alliance ( and , thus , trustworthy ) that alliance partner is perceived to be . Proposition 4a : As exposure in acquir - ing the collective real option de - creases , the likelihood of investment by alliance partners to realize a rela - tional small win of mutual coopera - tion increases . Proposition 4b : Exposure in acquiring the collective real option will moder - ate the relationship between rela - tional small wins and trust such that relational small wins of mutual coop - eration will have a less beneficial ef - fect on trust among alliance partners when exposure is low than when ex - posure is high . Partner Reputation and Trust Development The previous section considered how a char - acteristic of the collective real option—exposure required of alliance partners—influences an al - liance partner’s cooperation , when acquiring the collective real option , and trust formation . A characteristic of the alliance partners them - selves—reputation—also may impact both col - lective real option acquisition and its effects on trust development . Reputation refers to informa - tion about how an alliance partner performed previously in separate ventures ( Shane & Cable , 2002 ) . Reputational information is a powerful so - 630 October Academy of Management Review cial - structural element of alliance relationships ( Gulati , 1995b ) and can be acquired either first - hand , through direct social encounters ( Ander - son & Shirako , 2008 ) , or secondhand , through social networks ( Kogut , Shan , & Walker , 1992 ) . Reputation should directly influence coopera - tion in alliance initiatives because it provides alliance partners with information about one another’s values , expectations , and feelings ( Jones & George , 1998 ) and thereby signals alli - ance partners about the predictability of each other’s future behavior ( Bolton , Katok , & Ock - enfels , 2005 ; Kollock , 1994 ) , thus reducing so - cial uncertainty . Individuals who perceive one another as having a positive ( cooperative ) rep - utation are more likely to cooperate in situa - tions requiring trust ( Weber , Malhotra , & Mur - nighan , 2005 ) . Bohnet and Huck ( 2004 ) found that allowing participants to know their cur - rent partners’ history of cooperation with pre - vious partners ( and that the history was posi - tive ) increased their willingness to initially cooperate . This empirical finding suggests that other partners’ reputations should influ - ence an alliance partner’s willingness to ac - quire a collective real option . Proposition 5 : The positive reputations of other alliance partners increase the likelihood of investment by alliance partners to realize a relational small win of mutual cooperation . Reputation may also indirectly influence trust formation , when attempting relational small wins , by buffering the impact of real option suc - cess or failure on subsequent trust development and alliance partner investments in alliance ac - tivities . Kelley and Michela’s ( 1980 ) review of attribution theory is one of the first to suggest that an individual’s reputation can influence how others attribute the cause of the individu - al’s current behavior . Alliance partners may be buffered ( positively or negatively ) by their rep - utations , which may impact how they are per - ceived after small wins are attempted ( Jones , Jones , & Little , 2000 ) . Similar to our discussion about the moderating effect of exposure , collec - tive members often seek causal explanations for the outcomes of their collective efforts ( Stouten , De Cremer , & van Dijk , 2006 ; Weber , Camerer , Rottenstreich , & Knez , 2001 ) . If reputation among alliance partners is positive ( from a previous history of cooperative behavior ) , then successful achievement of relational small wins will more likely be treated as confirmation of the reliabil - ity and trustworthiness of the alliance partners . This should enhance trust more than if partners initially have little or no reputational informa - tion to draw on . Proposition 6 : Achieving relational small wins will have more of an effect on trust among alliance partners when reputations are positive than when there is no reputation information . What happens when alliance partners fail to achieve mutual cooperation ? Alliance partner reputation may act as a buffer between collec - tive failure and potential distrust among alli - ance partners . If an alliance partner has a pos - itive reputation ( history of being cooperative ) , defection would likely be attributed to an exter - nal cause , such as the riskiness or difficulty of cooperating , and the defecting alliance partner would less likely be viewed as untrustworthy by the other partner ( s ) . In support of this position , Lount et al . ( 2008 ) found that participants in an iterated prisoner’s dilemma who experienced partner defection after a history of partner coop - eration were more willing to continue to trust their partner , suggesting they attributed that de - fection to something external . Proposition 7 : Failure to achieve small wins will have less of an effect on trust among alliance partners when repu - tations are positive than when there is no reputation information . In summary , a collective real option creates the opportunity for alliances to achieve rela - tional small wins of mutual cooperation . These relational small wins build trust , and high trust increases an alliance partner’s willingness to contribute toward the alliance by lowering that partner’s perceived vulnerability . Exposure , when acquiring the collective real option , di - rectly affects the likelihood of mutual coopera - tion and also , when a small win is achieved , moderates the relationship between mutual co - operation and the development of trust among alliance partners . Reputation of the alliance partners directly affects the likelihood of mutual cooperation and also moderates the relation - ship between mutual cooperation success or failure and the development of trust among al - liance partners . 2011 631 McCarter , Mahoney , and Northcraft DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS Past research on real options has focused pri - marily on individual strategies for mitigating environmental uncertainty . Here we draw from the small wins literature and social dilemma literature to introduce the concept of collective real options , and we explore how collective real options may impact the management of social uncertainty in strategic alliance social dilem - mas . Theoretical Implications A real options approach to navigating strate - gic alliance social dilemmas provides an under - standing of how an alliance may be structured to manage not only how exchange partners think about the alliance but also how they think about each other ( Kollock , 1998 ; Zeng & Chen , 2003 ) . Collective real options enable alliance partners to hedge risk from the market environ - ment and to hedge risk from the social environ - ment by allowing them to “first try , then trust” each other on larger alliance initiatives . In try - ing , alliance partners credibly reveal their coop - erative intentions through actions ( i . e . , investing in the collective real option ) , and these actions affect how other alliance partners perceive them . Using collective real options to “test the wa - ters” of cooperating with alliance partners may be particularly useful in cases where intangible contributions will have a lot to say in determin - ing whether the alliance succeeds or fails . Re - lated governance approaches , such as negoti - ated exchange ( e . g . , Molm , 2010 ) , may be good at creating enforcement mechanisms for concrete alliance contributions that can be monitored and confirmed , but it is difficult to legislate try - ing hard and thinking hard . As suggested by Sesil , when it is “difficult to monitor effort , ” a mechanism that signals cooperative intent is helpful to increase trust and cooperation among alliance partners ( 2006 : 593 ) . For such resourc - es—and particularly when those resources will partly determine whether an alliance suc - ceeds—alliance partners may need the proof of a relational small win to feel comfortable going the distance with other alliance partners . Collective real options may also prove partic - ularly useful in revealing whether all alliance partners are on the same page in terms of what it means to fulfill one’s obligations to the alli - ance . Tenbrunsel and Northcraft ( 2010 ) note that not all defection in alliances need be inten - tional . Any partner brings to an alliance idio - syncratic views of what it means to be a “good partner” and may be fulfilling its own views even while not fulfilling what other alliance partners think is fair . Furthermore , although a “logic of appropriateness” typically governs so - cial exchanges ( e . g . , March , 1994 ; McCarter , Bu - descu , & Scheffran , 2011 ) , which logic of appro - priateness applies in a particular situation may differ among partners , depending on how they frame the alliance activity ( e . g . , as investing versus cooperating ) . For these reasons talk not only may be cheap but may also insufficiently reveal what is in the minds of alliance partners . Happily , collective real options may provide both an opportunity to reveal differences of opinion and perspective along these lines and a forum for reconciling those differences to form a more perfect union during any later , larger col - laboration . Given these concerns , it should not be surpris - ing that alliance research has discovered a pe - riod of “ambivalence” existing among partners in the early stages of an alliance ( Gulati & Sytch , 2008 ) . This period of ambivalence may well reflect a tension within alliance partners to approach the value creation opportunities alli - ances promise but to avoid the vulnerability that alliance cooperation inevitability entails . The attribution perspective on exposure and trust development explored here suggests that erring on the side of too much caution—by avoiding any vulnerability in early - stage alli - ance initiatives—may doom an alliance to never develop enough trust . Alliances that use collec - tive real options as a means to develop trust , therefore , must search out the happy medium whereby alliance partners are exposed enough to experience the development of trust , but not so much as to discourage investment in the col - lective real option . Because collective real op - tions reveal the true character of alliance part - ners , the very willingness of partners to acquire a collective real option—and thus risk revealing their character—suggests something about their intent to cooperate . This is not to suggest that a partner could not fake collaborative posture dur - ing a pilot venture with the intention of behav - ing more opportunistically later . However , the larger the exposure an alliance partner has in 632 October Academy of Management Review the pilot venture , perhaps the more likely that partner’s true character will be revealed . Our analysis of the impact of collective real options also offers a new perspective on the role of reputations in alliances . Previous research on trust and cooperation has highlighted the main effects of reputations on trust ( Bohnet & Huck , 2004 ; Das & Teng , 2001 ; Weber et al . , 2005 ) . Our arguments shift the focus of reputations to their indirect effects on partners’ interpretations of success and failure of pilot ventures . Specifi - cally , a positive reputation may serve to en - hance the impact of cooperative behaviors on trust development when relational small wins are achieved , and it may buffer an alliance part - ner from being viewed as untrustworthy when small wins are not achieved . Significantly , any discussion of reputations in alliances begs some interesting levels - of - analysis issues , such as whether alliances can trust , or whether trust is really the province of individual decision makers . This becomes particularly important when we contemplate the possibility that repu - tation within a multiple - actor partner may not be homogeneous or that any partner’s reputa - tion may not be homogeneously perceived within an alliance , or even within other partners ( Arend , 2009 ) . Although beyond the scope of this article , such questions bring numbers into the discussion—both the number of partners in the alliance and the number of actors within any “partner”—since trust becomes a harder nut to crack as group size increases ( e . g . , Huck & Lun - ser , 2010 ) , probably on both dimensions . Another critical contribution of this article is that it redirects scholarly conversation about al - liance governance , from managing opportunism to managing defensive perceptions . Previous re - search , such as game - theoretic and transaction cost approaches to alliance management , has emphasized governing alliances to avoid offen - sive ( opportunistic ) defection ( Heide & Miner , 1992 ; Parkhe , 1993 ) . Recent research on applying the social dilemma paradigm to alliances has echoed this emphasis by focusing on structural and motivational strategies that help protect “an overtrusting partner [ from being an ] easy target for exploitation by its greedy partners” ( Zeng & Chen , 2003 : 588 ) . This does not suggest that research on alliance social dilemmas ig - nores defensive defection . Indeed , Zeng and Chen ( 2003 ) encouraged trust building as a means of alleviating fear of opportunism . How - ever , McCarter and Northcraft ( 2007 ) suggest that even if an alliance is structured to remove offensive defection , such as by making all part - ners irreplaceable , an alliance partner may still doubt others’ ability and willingness to cooper - ate and defect defensively . This insight reminds us that alliance management is not only about reducing opportunism but also about a partner reducing other partners’ fear they will be made the “sucker” ( Schnake , 1991 ) . Whereas recent al - liance research considers perceptions when ex - amining alliance governance ( McCarter & Northcraft , 2007 ) , our model extends this think - ing by using real options to show one way to manage defensive perceptions among alliance partners . Rather than avoiding opportunism by others , the emphasis of this approach is avoid - ing missed opportunities to create value by low - ering the barriers to collective cooperation . Solutions to managing social uncertainty might be applicable to strategic alliances where offensive defection is either possible or not . Our model applies to both cases . If the alliance is structured to allow free riding , collective real options enable familiarity among alliance part - ners and the achievement of shared benefits , thereby reducing the temptation to opportunis - tically hurt others and potentially kill the golden goose ( Pruitt & Kimmel , 1977 ) . If an alliance structure makes free riding impossible , then col - lective real options enable alliance partners to garner trust and show both the motivation and the capability to cooperate as the stakes grow ( Chen , 1996 ) . This article also provides several contribu - tions to the study of real options . First , previous research has examined how real options man - age external market environments and mitigate environmental uncertainty to encourage alli - ance success ( Kogut , 1991 ) . Here we show how real options can manage and reduce social un - certainty among alliance partners , thereby an - swering the call from scholars to understand how real options affect the social , as well as the exogenous , environment ( Busby & Pitts , 1997 ; Foote & Folta , 2002 ) . In acquiring the collective real option , alliance partners may uncover each other’s intentions before significant investments are made . This insight redirects discussion of real options from managing the external market environment to navigating the internal social environment . 2011 633 McCarter , Mahoney , and Northcraft Second , the real options literature has primar - ily examined how firms individually use real options in investments ( Li et al . , 2007 ) . However , we emphasize that collective real options may be used strategically in collective efforts : alli - ance partners can jointly acquire a collective real option ( such as undertaking a pilot project ) while retaining the unilateral ability to exit should the future look relationally ( or environ - mentally ) grim . Indeed , collective real options can increase trust and foster cooperation by de - creasing perceived vulnerability among alli - ance partners , and thus lowering the barrier to at least try to cooperate . A third contribution to the real options litera - ture is challenging the premise that time - to - build real option benefits cannot be realized until after all stages of investment have been made and that these benefits are either finan - cial or physical in nature ( Majd & Pindyck , 1987 ) . This assumption may hold if the benefits of real options are only monetary ( Trigeorgis , 1999 ) . However , our model considers the relational benefits ( e . g . , information about other alliance partners’ cooperative intent ) —in addition to the economic benefits ( e . g . , monetary returns from the pilot project ) —that become available before full investment is required . Considering that with whom we invest can be just as important as in what we invest ( Adabor , 2006 ) , the relational benefits of collective real options should pro - vide decision makers invaluable information that influences both their social and investment behavior . This article advances the idea of small wins as well . While Weick’s ( 1984 ) seminal frame - work provides explanations for how large - scale alliance initiatives are achieved ( Reay et al . , 2006 ) , it gives little consideration to how the size of the small win makes a difference in motivating cooperation . Weick acknowledges that wins can be “arranged on a continuum” ( 1984 : 43 ) in different orders of magnitude . We expand on this observation , explaining how and why the size of the small win matters . If the small win is too small , then alliance part - ners may not be convinced that future cooper - ation will result in large - scale benefits ; if too large a small win is attempted , vulnerability may discourage prospective alliance partners from ever pursuing it . Managerial Implications This article also provides several implications for managers . Primarily , collective real options offer alternatives for alliance governance . Con - sider , for example , the often proposed remedy to reduce social uncertainty in alliance efforts : ex - ternal regulation ( e . g . , government regulation ) . While external regulators can increase cooper - ation ( Olson , 1965 ) , they also can introduce ad - ditional conflicts of interest and ulterior motives among collective partners that undermine the very cooperation these regulations were meant to create ( Crowe , 1969 ; Tenbrunsel & Messick , 1999 ) . A collective real options approach may be particularly attractive to collectives for address - ing social dilemmas because it retains control within the group and is self - perpetuating through small wins , while still avoiding the risks of unilateral cooperation . An example of an alliance seeking to avoid third - party intervention through the use of col - lective real options is the Suwannee River Part - nership in northern Florida , formed to encour - age Florida farmers to voluntarily cooperate to reduce water pollution and avoid government intervention . These farmers faced a social di - lemma since each farmer was tempted to defect by letting other neighboring farmers incur the costs of mitigating water pollution—but if ev - eryone chose this strategy , water pollution would continue and government sanctions would be imposed . To encourage cooperation among the hesitant farmers , the partnership or - ganized joint small - scale demonstration proj - ects to build trust among the farmers so that everyone would cooperate on a larger scale— that is , adopting best practices that would cost an individual farm hundreds of thousands of dollars to implement ( Dedekorkut , 2005 ) . The successful utilization of collective real options among the farmers meant farms and local orga - nizations retained control . A second managerial implication concerns what management scholars transfer to manage - ment practice ( Van de Ven , 2007 ) . For decades the discussion in business periodicals has been primarily about leveraging real options to re - duce environmental uncertainty ( Copeland & Tufano , 2004 ; Kogut & Kulatilaka , 1994 ) . While informative for managers , this myopic focus has been unfortunate , considering that social uncer - tainty is , perhaps , the most commonly discussed 634 October Academy of Management Review hazard to effective collective action ( Olson , 2002 ; Williamson , 1991 ) . This article suggests that not all small wins are created equal . Rather , the larger the small win , the greater the likelihood that individuals will push forward to achieve something greater . However , large small wins can only be achieved at the risk of higher levels of exposure , making alliance partners less likely to cooperate and more likely to suspect that their partners will not fully cooperate ei - ther . In short , there is an optimal mid range of risk that alliances must find to have enough exposure to garner trust but not too much to scare away prospective alliance partners . Future Directions The model and propositions offered here pro - vide several avenues for future research . This article addresses how collective real options in - fluence trust and cooperation in strategic alli - ance initiatives . An unaddressed issue that re - mains is what role alliance size ( number of alliance partners ) plays in the dynamics de - scribed in this model . When collective action entails a large number of partners ( often beyond two parties ) , unilateral strategies , such as direct reciprocal exchange and sanctioning , become difficult to implement because of increased monitoring costs and complexity ( Boyd & Rich - erson , 1988 ; Carpenter , 2007 ; Molm , 1994 ) . Using collective real options , in contrast , requires co - ordinated actions that allow partners to exit the alliance should large - scale collective action look grim . This contrast suggests that as the number of alliance partners increases , so should the likelihood of adopting a collective real options strategy . Understanding the effects of collective real options internal to the alliance raises the ques - tion , “What effects do collective real options have on external alliance relationships ? ” Our model focuses on outcomes directly related to the achievement of small wins and does not consider the potential indirect effects of ( not ) achieving a small win . This narrower focus may initially suggest that using a collective real op - tion is always the best approach in alliances , but this actually may not always be the case . For instance , what we experience in one in - stance can spill over into other similar instances ( Byrne & Clore , 1970 ; Messick , 1999 ) . If an alli - ance partner experiences a breach in trust with a set of partners using a collective real option , then that partner may carry that fear into other relationships with the same—or completely dif - ferent—alliance partners . Future research may consider whether trust breaches and successful trust building using collective real options carry over to other related cooperative ventures and how long these carryover effects persist . A third issue concerns how real options may be used to signal participants and outside ob - servers of alliances . Research has long focused on the role of signaling for fostering cooperation ( Kollock , 1998 ) . Signaling is important in cooper - ative efforts ( especially where verbal communi - cation is not possible ) because it reduces other individuals’ social uncertainty and breeds trust . While suggesting how collective real options can be a signaling mechanism , the current model is limited in terms of who is being sig - naled . The model focuses only on those directly involved in the social dilemma being signaled about the intentions of their alliance partners . Research on social movements ( a form of alli - ance ) reminds us that the composition of collec - tives facing social uncertainty is not static : new - comers often are solicited to join the cause or hold out until they become assured that large - scale cooperation is possible ( Whittier , 1997 ; Zald & McCarthy , 1987 ) . In future research schol - ars may wish to examine how using real options can serve as a mechanism for signaling and facilitating cooperation among active participa - tors and outside observers who are considering joining the cause . It has been said that “what we accomplish together will benefit many” ( Stewart , 2001 : 1 ) , and in many ways the fruits of collaboration are what separate the civilized from the savages . Unfortunately , the benefits of working together can be elusive , because alliances create social dilemmas in which individuals withhold coop - eration when they perceive themselves as po - tentially vulnerable to others’ opportunistic be - havior ( Williamson , 1991 ) , and there is rarely a “Leviathan” ( Hobbes , 1907 / 1651 ) handy to enforce cooperative intent . Drawing from the social di - lemma , real options , and small wins literature , this article presents a hybrid approach to miti - gating social uncertainty in alliance gover - nance . Collective real options provide alliance partners the opportunity to first try and then trust each other before undertaking large - scale ( and thus large - exposure ) cooperative initia - 2011 635 McCarter , Mahoney , and Northcraft tives . Using a collective real options approach enables us to explain and predict how an appro - priately sized small win is the first step in com - pleting the long journey toward having alliance partners successfully working together . REFERENCES Adabor , H . 2006 . The role of personal relationships in inter - firm alliances : Benefits , dysfunctions , and some sugges - tions . Business Horizons , 49 : 473 – 486 . Adner , R . , & Levinthal , D . 2004 . What is not a real option : Considering boundaries for the application of real op - tions to business strategy . Academy of Management Review , 29 : 74 – 85 . Agarwal , R . , Croson , R . , & Mahoney , J . T . 2010 . The role of incentives and communication in strategic alliances : An experimental investigation . Strategic Management Journal , 31 : 413 – 437 . Anderson , C . , & Shirako , A . 2008 . Are individuals’ reputations related to their history of behavior ? Journal of Personal - ity and Social Psychology , 94 : 320 – 333 . Andriopoulos , C . , & Lowe , A . 2000 . Enhancing organisational creativity : The process of perpetual challenging . Man - agement Decision , 38 : 734 – 742 . Arend , R . J . 2009 . Reputation for cooperation : Contingent benefits in alliance activity . Strategic Management Journal , 30 : 371 – 385 . Bazerman , M . H . , & Gillespie , J . J . 1999 . Betting on the future : The virtues of contingent contracts . Harvard Business Review , 77 ( 5 ) : 155 – 160 . Bohnet , I . , & Huck , S . 2004 . Repetition and reputation : Impli - cations for trust and trustworthiness when institutions change . American Economic Review , 94 : 362 – 366 . Bolton , G . E . , Katok , E . , & Ockenfels , A . 2005 . Cooperation among strangers with limited information about repu - tation . Journal of Public Economics , 89 : 1457 – 1468 . Bowman , E . H . , & Hurry , D . 1993 . Strategy through the option lens : An integrated view of resource investments and the incremental - choice process . Academy of Manage - ment Review , 18 : 760 – 782 . Bowman , E . H . , & Moskowitz , G . T . 2001 . Real options analy - sis and strategic decision making . Organization Sci - ence , 12 : 772 – 777 . Boyd , R . , & Richerson , P . J . 1988 . The evolution of reciprocity and sizable groups . Journal of Theoretical Biology , 132 : 337 – 356 . Brandenburger , A . M . , & Nalebuff , B . J . 1996 . Co - opetition . New York : Doubleday . Busby , J . S . , & Pitts , C . 1997 . Real options in practice . Man - agement Accounting Research , 8 : 169 – 186 . Byrne , D . , & Clore , G . L . 1970 . A reinforcement model of evaluative processes . Personality : An International Jour - nal , 1 : 103 – 128 . Carpenter , J . P . 2007 . Punishing free - riders : How group size affects mutual monitoring and the provision of public goods . Games and Economic Behavior , 60 : 31 – 51 . Chen , M . - J . 1996 . Competitor analysis and interfirm rivalry : Toward a theoretical integration . Academy of Manage - ment Review , 21 : 100 – 134 . Cho , J . , & Lee , J . 2006 . An integrated model of risk and risk - reducing strategies . Journal of Business Research , 59 : 112 – 120 . Copeland , T . , & Tufano , P . 2004 . A real - world way to manage real options . Harvard Business Review , 82 ( 3 ) : 90 – 99 . Cornes , R . , & Sandler , T . 1996 . The theory of externalities , public goods , and club goods ( 2nd ed . ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Cox , D . F . 1967 . Risk handling in consumer behavior : An intensive study of two cases . In D . F . Cox ( Ed . ) , Risk taking and information handling in consumer behavior : 34 – 81 . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Crawford , V . 1998 . A survey of experiments on communica - tion via cheap talk . Journal of Economic Theory , 78 : 286 – 298 . Crowe , B . L . 1969 . The tragedy of the commons revisited . Science , 166 : 1103 – 1107 . Cunningham , S . 1967 . The major dimensions of perceived risk . In D . F . Cox ( Ed . ) , Risk taking and information han - dling in consumer behavior : 82 – 108 . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Das , T . K . , & Teng , B . - S . 1996 . Risk types and the inter - firm alliance structures . Journal of Management Studies , 33 : 827 – 843 . Das , T . K . , & Teng , B . - S . 1998 . Between trust and control : Developing confidence in partner cooperation in alli - ances . Academy of Management Review , 23 : 491 – 512 . Das , T . K . , & Teng , B . - S . 2000 . A resource - based theory of strategic alliances . Journal of Management , 26 : 31 – 62 . Das , T . K . , & Teng , B . - S . 2001 . Trust , control , and risk in strategic alliances : An integrated framework . Organiza - tion Studies , 22 : 251 – 283 . Das , T . K . , & Teng , B . - S . 2002 . Alliance constellations : A social exchange perspective . Academy of Management Re - view , 27 : 445 – 456 . Dawes , R . M . 1980 . Social dilemmas . Annual Review of Psy - chology , 31 : 169 – 193 . Dedekorkut , A . 2005 . Suwannee River Partnership : Represen - tation instead of regulation ? In J . T . Scholz & B . Stiftel ( Eds . ) , Adaptive governance and water conflict : New in - stitutions for collaborative planning : 52 – 63 . Washington , DC : Resources for the Future . Dixit , A . , & Pindyck , R . 1994 . Investment under uncertainty . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Dunbar , J . M . , Neufeld , R . R . , Libow , L . S . , Cohen , C . E . , & Foley , W . J . 1997 . Taking charge : The role of nursing administrators in removing restraints . Journal of Nurs - ing Administration , 27 ( 3 ) : 42 – 48 . Dyer , J . H . , & Singh , H . 1998 . The relational view : Cooperative strategy and sources of interorganizational competitive 636 October Academy of Management Review advantage . Academy of Management Review , 23 : 660 – 679 . Epley , N . , Caruso , E . , & Bazerman , M . H . 2006 . When perspec - tive taking increases taking : Reactive egoism in social interaction . Journal of Personality and Social Psychol - ogy , 91 : 872 – 889 . Farrell , J . , & Rabin , M . 1996 . Cheap talk . Journal of Economic Perspectives , 10 ( 3 ) : 103 – 118 . Fawcett , S . E . , Magnan , G . , & McCarter , M . W . 2008 . Supply chain alliances and social dilemmas : Bridging the bar - riers that impede collaboration . International Journal of Procurement Management , 1 : 318 – 342 . Fichman , R . G . 2004 . Real options and IT platform adoption : Implications for theory and practice . Information Sys - tems Research , 15 : 132 – 154 . Foddy , M . , Smithson , M . , Schneider , S . , & Hogg , M . 1999 . Resolving social dilemmas : Dynamics , structural , and intergroup aspects . Philadelphia : Psychology Press . Folta , T . 1998 . Governance and uncertainty : The trade - off between administrative control and commitment . Stra - tegic Management Journal , 19 : 1007 – 1028 . Folta , T . B . , & Miller , K . D . 2002 . Real options in equity part - nerships . Strategic Management Journal , 23 : 77 – 88 . Foote , D . A . , & Folta , T . B . 2002 . Temporary workers as real options . Human Resource Management Review , 12 : 579 – 597 . Gottschalg , O . , & Zollo , M . 2007 . Interest alignment and com - petitive advantage . Academy of Management Review , 32 : 418 – 437 . Gouldner , A . W . 1960 . The norm of reciprocity : A preliminary statement . American Sociological Review , 25 : 161 – 178 . Gulati , R . 1995a . Does familiarity breed trust ? The implica - tions of repeated ties for contractual choice in alliances . Academy of Management Journal , 38 : 85 – 112 . Gulati , R . 1995b . Social structure and alliance formation patterns : A longitudinal analysis . Administrative Sci - ence Quarterly , 40 : 619 – 652 . Gulati , R . 1998 . Alliances and networks . Strategic Manage - ment Journal , 19 : 293 – 317 . Gulati , R . , & Sytch , M . 2008 . Does familiarity breed trust ? Revisiting the antecedents of trust . Managerial and De - cision Economics , 29 : 165 – 190 . Hardin , R . 1993 . The street - level epistemology of trust . Poli - tics & Society , 21 : 505 – 529 . Hardy , C . , Phillips , N . , & Lawrence , T . B . 2003 . Resources , knowledge and influence : The organizational effects of interorganizational collaboration . Journal of Manage - ment Studies , 40 : 321 – 347 . Heide , J . , & Miner , A . 1992 . The shadow of the future : Effects of anticipated interaction and frequency of contact on buyer - seller cooperation . Academy of Management Journal , 35 : 265 – 291 . Heider , F . 1958 . The psychology of interpersonal relations . New York : Wiley . Hennart , J . - F . 1988 . A transaction costs theory of equity joint ventures . Strategic Management Journal , 9 : 361 – 374 . Hobbes , T . 1907 . ( First published in 1651 . ) Leviathan . New York : Routledge and Sons . Hobfoll , S . 1989 . Conservation of resources : A new attempt at conceptualizing stress . American Psychologist , 44 : 513 – 524 . Hobfoll , S . 1998 . Stress , culture , and community . London : Ple - num Press . Hoffman , A . J . , Gillespie , J . J . , Moore , D . A . , Wade - Benzoni , K . A . , Thompson , L . L . , & Bazerman , M . H . 1999 . A mixed - motive perspective on the economics versus environ - mental debate . American Behavioral Scientist , 42 : 1254 – 1276 . Huck , S . , & Lunser , G . K . 2010 . Group reputations : An exper - imental foray . Journal of Economic Behavior & Organi - zation , 73 : 153 – 157 . Jones , G . H . , Jones , B . H . , & Little , P . 2000 . Reputation as reservoir : Buffering against loss in times of economic crisis . Corporate Reputation Review , 3 : 21 – 30 . Jones , G . R . , & George , J . M . 1998 . The experience and evolu - tion of trust : Implications for cooperation and teamwork . Academy of Management Review , 23 : 531 – 546 . Kale , P . , Dyer , J . H . , & Singh , H . 2002 . Alliance capability , stock market response , and long - term alliance success : The role of the alliance function . Strategic Management Journal , 23 : 747 – 767 . Kanter , R . 1994 . Collaborative advantage : The art of alli - ances . Harvard Business Review , 72 ( 4 ) : 96 – 109 . Kaufman , C . , & Kerr , N . 1993 . Small wins : Perceptual focus , efficacy , and cooperation in social dilemmas . Journal of Applied Social Psychology , 23 : 3 – 20 . Kelley , H . , & Michela , J . 1980 . Attribution theory and research . Annual Review of Psychology , 31 : 457 – 501 . Kelley , H . H . 1973 . The process of causal attribution . Ameri - can Psychologist , 28 : 107 – 128 Kim , Y . J . , & Sanders , G . L . 2002 . Strategic actions in infor - mation technology investment based on real option the - ory . Decision Support Systems , 33 : 1 – 11 . Kogut , B . 1991 . Joint ventures and the option to expand and acquire . Management Science , 37 : 19 – 33 . Kogut , B . , & Kulatilaka , N . 1994 . Options thinking and plat - form investments : Investing in opportunity . California Management Review , 36 ( 2 ) : 52 – 71 . Kogut , B . , Shan , W . , & Walker , G . 1992 . Competitive cooper - ation in biotechnology : Learning through networks ? In N . Nohria , & R . Eccles ( Eds . ) , Networks and organiza - tions : Structure , form , and action : 348 – 381 . Boston : Har - vard Business School Press . Kollock , P . 1994 . The emergence of exchange structures : An experimental study of uncertainty , commitment , and trust . American Journal of Sociology , 100 : 313 – 345 . Kollock , P . 1998 . Social dilemmas : The anatomy of coopera - tion . Annual Review of Sociology , 24 : 183 – 214 . Komorita , S . S . , Chan , D . K . , & Parks , C . 1993 . The effects of reward structure and reciprocity in social dilemmas . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 29 : 252 – 267 . 2011 637 McCarter , Mahoney , and Northcraft Laaksonen , T . , Jarimo , T . , & Kulmala , H . I . 2009 . Cooperative strategies in customer - supplier relationships : The role of interfirm trust . International Journal of Production Economics , 120 : 79 – 87 . Larson , A . 1992 . Network dyads in entrepreneurial settings : A study of the governance of exchange relationships . Ad - ministrative Science Quarterly , 37 : 76 – 104 . Lawler , R . J . 2001 . An affect theory of social exchange . Amer - ican Journal of Sociology , 107 : 321 – 352 . Lewicki , R . , McAllister , D . , & Bies , R . 1998 . Trust and distrust : New relationships and realities . Academy of Manage - ment Review , 23 : 439 – 458 . Lewicki , R . , Tomlinson , E . , & Gillespie , N . 2006 . Models of interpersonal trust development : Theoretical ap - proaches , empirical evidence , and future directions . Journal of Management , 32 : 991 – 1022 . Li , Y . , James , B . , Madhaven , R . , & Mahoney , J . T . 2007 . Real options : Taking stock and looking ahead . Advances in Strategic Management , 24 : 31 – 66 . Lichbach , M . I . 1996 . The cooperator’s dilemma . Ann Arbor : University of Michigan Press . Liebrand , W . 1983 . A classification of social dilemma games . Simulation & Games , 14 : 123 – 138 . Lount , R . , Zhong , C . , Sivanathan , N . , & Murnighan , J . 2008 . Getting off on the wrong foot : The timing of a breach and the restoration of trust . Personality and Social Psychol - ogy Bulletin , 34 : 1601 – 1612 . Lubell , M . 2004 . Collaborative watershed management : A view from the grassroots . Policy Studies Journal , 32 : 341 – 363 . Luo , Y . 2007 . Are joint venture partners more opportunistic in a more volatile environment ? Strategic Management Journal , 28 : 39 – 60 . Majd , S . , & Pindyck , R . 1987 . Time to build , option value , and investment decisions . Journal of Financial Economics , 18 : 7 – 27 . Malhotra , D . 2005 . The effect of real options on trust and trustworthiness : The relevance of irrelevant alternatives . Paper presented at the IACM 18th Annual Conference , Seville , Spain . Malhotra , D . , & Lumineau , F . In press . Trust and collabora - tion in the aftermath of conflict : The effects of contract structure . Academy of Management Journal . Malhotra , D . , & Murnighan , J . K . 2002 . The effects of contracts on interpersonal trust . Administrative Science Quar - terly , 47 : 534 – 559 . March , J . G . 1994 . A primer of decision making . New York : Free Press . Mayer , R . C . , Davis , J . H . , & Schoorman , F . D . 1995 . An inte - grative model of organizational trust . Academy of Man - agement Review , 20 : 709 – 734 . McAdam , M . , McAdam , R . , Galbraith , B . , & Miller , K . 2010 . An exploratory study of principal investigator roles in UK university proof - of - concept processes : An absorptive ca - pacity perspective . R & D Management , 40 : 455 – 473 . McCarter , M . W . , Budescu , D . V . , & Scheffran , J . 2011 . The give - or - take - some dilemma : An empirical investigation of a hybrid social dilemma . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 116 : 83 – 95 . McCarter , M . W . , & Northcraft , G . B . 2007 . Happy together ? : Insights and implications of viewing managed supply chains as a social dilemma . Journal of Operations Man - agement , 25 : 498 – 511 . McCarter , M . W . , Rockmann , K . W . , & Northcraft , G . B . 2010 . Is it even worth it ? The effect of loss prospects in the outcome distribution of a public goods dilemma . Orga - nizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 111 : 1 – 12 . Messick , D . M . 1999 . Alternative logics for decision making in social settings . Journal of Economic Behavior and Orga - nization , 39 : 11 – 28 . Messick , D . M . , Allison , S . , & Samuelson , C . 1988 . Framing and communication effects on group partners’ re - sponses to environmental and social uncertainty . In S . Maital ( Ed . ) , Applied behavioral economics , vol . 2 : 677 – 700 . New York : University Press . Messick , D . M . , & Brewer , M . 1983 . Solving social dilemmas . Review of Personality and Social Psychology , 4 : 11 – 44 . Meyerson , D . , Weick , K . , & Kramer , R . 1996 . Swift trust and temporary groups . In R . Kramer & T . Tyler ( Eds . ) , Trust in organizations : 166 – 195 . London : Sage . Miller , G . J . 1993 . Managerial dilemmas : The political econ - omy of hierarchy . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Molm , L . D . 1994 . Dependence and risk : Transforming the structure of social exchange . Social Psychology Quar - terly , 57 : 163 – 176 . Molm , L . D . 2003 . Theoretical comparisons of forms of ex - change . Sociological Theory , 21 : 1 – 17 . Molm , L . D . 2010 . The structure of reciprocity . Social Psychol - ogy Quarterly , 73 : 119 – 131 . Molm , L . D . , Collett , J . L . , & Schaefer , D . R . 2007 . Building solidarity through generalized exchange : A theory of reciprocity . American Journal of Sociology , 113 : 205 – 242 . Molm , L . D . , Takahashi , N . , & Petersen , G . 2000 . Risk and trust in social exchange : An experimental test of a classical proposition . American Journal of Sociology , 105 : 1396 – 1427 . Monge , P . R . , Fulk , J . , Kalman , M . E . , Flanagin , A . J . , Parnassa , C . , & Rumsey , S . 1998 . Production of collective action in alliance - based interorganizational communication and information systems . Organization Science , 9 : 411 – 433 . Mu , J . 2006 . Real options analysis . Hoboken , NJ : Wiley . Murray , E . A . , & Mahon , J . F . 1993 . Strategic alliances : Gate - way to the new Europe ? Long Range Planning , 26 : 102 – 111 . Nielsen , R . P . 1988 . Cooperative strategy . Strategic Manage - ment Journal , 9 : 475 – 492 . Olson , L . A . 2002 . Turning small wins into big victories . Information Week , January 28 : 98 . 638 October Academy of Management Review Olson , M . 1965 . The logic of collective action . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Pape , U . , & Schmidt - Tank , S . 2004 . Valuing joint ventures using real options . ESCP - EAP Working paper No . 7 , Eu - ropean School of Management , Paris . Park , S . H . , & Ungson , G . R . 2001 . Interfirm rivalry and man - agerial complexity : A conceptual framework of alliance failure . Organization Science , 12 : 37 – 53 . Parkhe , A . 1993 . Strategic alliance structuring : A game the - oretic and transaction cost examination of interfirm co - operation . Academy of Management Journal , 36 : 794 – 829 . Pillutla , M . , Malhotra , D . , & Murnighan , J . K . 2003 . Attribu - tions of trust and the calculus of reciprocity . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 39 : 448 – 455 . Poppo , L . , Zhou , K . Z . , & Sungmin , R . 2008 . Alternative origins to interorganizational trust : An interdependence per - spective on the shadow of the past and the shadow of the future . Organization Science , 19 : 39 – 55 . Pruitt , D . G . , & Kimmel , M . J . 1977 . Twenty years of experi - mental gaming : Critique , synthesis , and suggestions for the future . Annual Review of Psychology , 28 : 363 – 392 . Reay , T . , Golden - Biddle , K . , & Germann , K . 2006 . Legitimizing a new role : Small wins and microprocesses of change . Academy of Management Journal , 49 : 977 – 998 . Reuer , J . J . , & Tong , T . W . 2005 . Real options in international joint ventures . Journal of Management , 31 : 403 – 423 . Ribstein , L . 2000 . Law v . trust . Working paper No . 00 - 38 , George Mason University , Fairfax , VA . Robinson , S . L . 1996 . Trust and breach of the psychological contract . Administrative Science Quarterly , 41 : 574 – 599 . Robson , M . , Katsikeas , C . , & Bello , D . 2008 . Drivers and per - formance outcomes of trust in international strategic alliances : The role of organizational complexity . Orga - nization Science , 19 : 647 – 665 . Rockmann , K . , & Northcraft , G . B . 2008 . To be or not to be trusted : The influence of media richness on defection and deception . Organizational Behavior and Human De - cision Processes , 107 : 106 – 122 . Schnake , M . E . 1991 . Equity in effort : The “sucker effect” in co - acting groups . Journal of Management , 17 : 41 – 54 . Segilman , C . , Bush , M . , & Kirsch , K . 1976 . Relationship be - tween compliance in the foot - in - the - door paradigm and the size of the first request . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 33 : 517 – 520 . Sesil , J . C . 2006 . Sharing decision - making and group incen - tives : The impact on performance . Economic and Indus - trial Democracy , 27 : 587 – 607 . Shane , S . , & Cable , D . 2002 . Network ties , reputation , and the financing of new ventures . Management Science , 48 : 364 – 381 . Sing , T . F . 2002 . Time to build options in construction pro - cesses . Construction Management and Economics , 20 : 119 – 130 . Sitkin , S . B . , & Pablo , A . L . 1992 . Reconceptualizing the deter - minants of risk behavior . Academy of Management Re - view , 17 : 9 – 38 . Sitkin , S . B . , & Roth , N . L . 1993 . Explaining the limited effec - tiveness of legalistic “remedies” for trust / distrust . Orga - nization Science , 4 : 367 – 392 . Sitkin , S . B . , & Weingart , L . 1995 . Determinants of risky deci - sion - making behavior : A test of the mediating role of risk perceptions and propensity . Academy of Manage - ment Journal , 38 : 1573 – 1592 . Smit , H . T . J . , & Trigeorgis , L . 2004 . Strategic investment : Real options and games . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Sniezek , J . A . , May , D . , & Sawyer , J . 1990 . Social uncertainty and interdependence : A study of resource allocation decisions in groups . Organizational Behavior and Hu - man Decision Processes , 46 : 155 – 180 . Spekman , R . E . , Isabella , L . A . , MacAvoy , T . C . , & Forbes , T . 1996 . Creating strategic alliances which endure . Long Range Planning , 29 : 346 – 357 . Stewart , L . 2001 . Food pantry workers gives thanks . Daily Herald , November , 19 : A1 . Stout , L . A . 2008 . The investor confidence game . Research paper No . 02 - 18 , School of Law , UCLA . Stouten , J . , De Cremer , D . , & van Dijk , E . 2006 . Violating equality in social dilemmas : Emotional and retributive reactions as a function of trust , attribution , and honesty . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 32 : 894 – 906 . Telser , L . G . 1980 . A theory of self - enforcing agreements . Journal of Business , 53 : 27 – 44 . Tenbrunsel , A . E . , & Messick , D . M . 1999 . Sanctioning sys - tems , decision frames , and cooperation . Administrative Science Quarterly , 44 : 684 – 707 . Tenbrunsel , A . E . , & Northcraft , G . B . 2010 . In the eye of the beholder : Payoff structures and decision frames in so - cial dilemmas . In R . Kramer , A . E . Tenbrunsel , & M . H . Bazerman ( Eds . ) , Social decision making : Social dilem - mas , social values , and ethical judgments : 95 – 115 . New York : Psychology Press . Tirole , J . 1996 . A theory of collective reputation ( with appli - cations to the persistence of corruption and to firm qual - ity ) . Review of Economic Studies , 63 : 1 – 22 . Trigeorgis , L . 1999 . Real options : A primer . In J . Alleman & E . Naoam ( Eds . ) , Real options : The new investment theory and its implications for telecommunications economics : 3 – 34 . Boston : Kluwer Academic . Van de Ven , A . H . 2007 . Engaged scholarship : A guide for organizational and social research . New York : Oxford University Press . van de Vrande , V . , Vanhaverbeke , W . , & Duysters , G . 2009 . External technology sourcing : The effect of uncertainty on governance mode choice . Journal of Business Ventur - ing , 24 : 62 – 80 . Vangen , S . , & Huxham , C . 2003 . Nurturing collaborative re - lations . Journal of Applied Behavioral Science , 39 : 5 – 32 . 2011 639 McCarter , Mahoney , and Northcraft Weber , J . , Malhotra , D . , & Murnighan , J . K . 2005 . Normal acts of irrational trust : Motivated attributions and the trust development process . Research in Organizational Be - havior , 26 : 75 – 101 . Weber , R . , Camerer , C . , Rottenstreich , Y . , & Knez , M . 2001 . The illusion of leadership : Misattribution of cause in coordination games . Organization Science , 12 : 582 – 598 . Weick , K . 1984 . Small wins : Redefining the scale of social problems . American Psychologist , 39 : 40 – 49 . Whittier , N . 1997 . Political generations , micro - cohorts , and the transformation of social movements . American Soci - ological Review , 62 : 760 – 778 . Williamson , O . E . 1979 . Transaction - cost economics : The gov - ernance of contractual relations . Journal of Law and Economics , 22 : 233 – 261 . Williamson , O . E . 1983 . Credible commitments : Using hos - tages to support exchange . American Economic Review , 73 : 519 – 540 . Williamson , O . E . 1991 . Comparative economic organization . Administrative Science Quarterly , 36 : 269 – 296 . Wilson , J . , & Douglas , E . 2007 . Renewable energy gains still far off . Los Angeles Times , January 28 : C1 . Zaheer , A . , & Venkatraman , N . 1995 . Relational governance as an interorganizational strategy : An empirical test of the role of trust in economic exchange . Strategic Man - agement Journal , 16 : 373 – 392 . Zald , M . N . , & McCarthy , J . C . 1987 . Social movements in an organizational society . New Brunswick , NJ : Transac - tion . Zeng , M . , & Chen , X . - P . 2003 . Achieving cooperation in mul - tiparty alliances : A social dilemma approach to partner - ship management . Academy of Management Review , 28 : 587 – 605 . Ziedonis , A . A . 2007 . Real options in technology licensing . Management Science , 53 : 1618 – 1633 . Matthew W . McCarter ( mccarter @ chapman . edu ) holds the Wang - Fradkin Assistant Professorship and is an assistant professor of management at the Argyros School of Business and Economics , Chapman University . He received his Ph . D . in business administration from the University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign . His research interest is conflict management , which includes the study of social dilemmas , collab - oration , cooperation , coordination , and relationship repair . Joseph T . Mahoney ( josephm @ illinois . edu ) is the Caterpillar Chair in Business and director of graduate studies in the Department of Business Administration in the College of Business at the University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign . He received his Ph . D . in business economics from the Wharton School of Business at the University of Pennsylvania . His research interest is organizational economics , which includes transaction cost economics , resource - based and dynamic capabilities approaches , and property rights theory . Gregory B . Northcraft ( northcra @ illinois . edu ) is the Harry J . Gray Professor of Execu - tive Leadership and associate dean of faculty for the College of Business at the University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign . He received his Ph . D . in social psychol - ogy from Stanford University . His major research interests include collaboration in teams , conflict management , managerial decision making , and employee motivation and job design , particularly in high - technology manufacturing settings . 640 October Academy of Management Review