1 Arp2 / 3 complex - dependent actin regulation protects the survival of tissue - resident mast cells Lukas Kaltenbach , 1 , 2 , 3 Michael Mihlan , 1 Svenja Ulferts , 4 Mathias Müsken , 5 Katharina M . Glaser , 1 Gerhard Mittler , 1 Magda Babina , 6 , 7 Metello Innocenti , 8 Robert Grosse , 4 Theresia E . B . Stradal , 9 and Tim Lämmermann , 1 , 10 , * Affiliations : 1 Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics ; Freiburg , Germany . 2 International Max Planck Research School for Immunobiology , Epigenetics and Metabolism ( IMPRS - IEM ) ; Freiburg , Germany . 3 Faculty of Biology , University of Freiburg ; Freiburg , Germany . 4 Institute of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology , Medical Faculty , University of Freiburg ; Freiburg , Germany . 5 Central Facility for Microscopy , Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research ; Braunschweig , Germany . 6 Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin , Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt Universität zu Berlin , Institute of Allergology ; Berlin , Germany . 7 Fraunhofer Institute for Translational Medicine and Pharmacology ITMP , Immunology and Allergology IA ; Berlin , Germany . 8 Department of Biotechnology and Biosciences , University of Milan - Bicocca ; Milan , Italy . 9 Department of Cell Biology , Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research ; Braunschweig , Germany . 10 Institute of Medical Biochemistry , Center for Molecular Biology of Inflammation ( ZMBE ) , Medical Faculty , University of Münster ; Münster , Germany . * Correspondence to : Tim Lämmermann ( laemmermann @ uni - muenster . de ) 2 Abstract : Actin network dynamics are pivotal in governing the motility and effector functions of immune cells . The Arp2 / 3 complex is a key regulator of actin filament branching , with mutations in its subunits being linked with human immunodeficiencies . While known for its role in phagocytosis and cell migration , our study uncovers a critical role of the Arp2 / 3 complex in safeguarding the tissue residency of mast cells ( MCs ) , essential immune cells in allergies , venom detoxification and antigen - specific avoidance . Mechanistically , we show that MCs require Arp2 / 3 - regulated actin filament assembly to resist their integrin - mediated mechano - coupling with their tissue niche . Arp2 / 3 complex depletion directs MCs into cell cycle arrest and death , which can be rescued by inhibiting their mechanical interactions with extracellular matrix . Our findings underscore the Arp2 / 3 complex as a mechano - protective element for maintaining MC survival and longevity in tissues , highlighting the importance of actin regulation in preserving the homeostasis of a tissue - resident immune cell population . 3 One Sentence Summary : Arp2 / 3 complex protects the tissue homeostasis of resident mast cell networks 4 Main Text : INTRODUCTION Actin cytoskeleton remodeling drives the movement of immune cells , their interactions with other cells and the elimination of microbes . A steadily increasing number of rare primary immunodeficiencies arising from deleterious mutations in genes encoding actin - regulating proteins have been identified over recent years ( 1 , 2 ) . Actin nucleators and actin - binding proteins make up the machinery that governs the organization of actin filament networks , determining shape and dynamics of immune cells ( 3 , 4 ) . Most of our knowledge on the physiological roles of actin regulation in the immune system comes from immune cell subsets that traffic between organs through the blood and lymphatic system , including T cells , B cells , neutrophils , dendritic cells ( DCs ) and natural killer ( NK ) cells . Studies involving human patient material or mouse cells have elucidated critical functions of actin regulation during the adhesion of heavily trafficking immune cells to blood vessels , transmigration through the endothelium , movement through the interstitial tissue space , and interactions with pathogens or other immune cells ( 5 ) . However , the contribution of actin regulation to the homeostasis and tissue residency of sessile immune cells remains poorly understood . All tissues harbor resident immune cells , many of which capable of self - maintenance over extended time periods . Current concepts on long - term self - maintenance emphasize interactions between resident immune cells and stromal cells of the tissue microenvironment , which create “tissular niches” that mutually benefit both cell types ( 6 ) . These niches provide sessile immune cells a physical foundation to localize in the tissue and factors that regulate their development , survival and tissue - specific imprinting . While many of the critical growth and trophic factors for the tissue - residency of specific immune cell subsets have been identified , the impact of controlling physical interactions with the extracellular milieu on the long - term survival of resident immune cells in the tissue remains largely unclear . We recently showed that mast cells ( MCs ) , tissue - resident immune cells with important roles during allergic inflammation , anaphylaxis , venom detoxification , and food avoidance ( 7 - 11 ) , critically rely on adhesive interactions with the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) to organize their tissue homeostasis and distribution ( 12 ) . MCs utilize integrin receptors , the major family of adhesion receptors in mammals , to anchor themselves to extracellular components in connective tissue . Integrin - mediated adhesions generate cellular sites where actin 5 polymerization and actomyosin contraction transmit intracellular mechanical forces to the surrounding ECM ( 13 ) . In consequence , reciprocal force exchange can occur across integrin - based adhesion between the ECM and the cell . The strong mechanical coupling of MCs with ECM is unique among immune cells , standing in stark contrast to the low - adhesive nature and integrin - independent amoeboid migration of the above - mentioned heavily trafficking immune cell types ( 14 - 16 ) . Given the formation of prominent integrin - mediated adhesion sites , which connect intracellular actin filaments with the ECM , MCs may have adapted actin - network properties to withstand developing mechanical forces in the tissue . However , the role of actin regulation in maintaining the homeostasis and longevity of tissue - resident MCs has not been explored . Single cell RNA sequencing data hinted at actin filament branching as a potentially crucial cytoskeletal mechanism for adhesive MCs ( 12 ) . Comparison of WT and adhesion - deficient skin MCs revealed an upregulated transcript expression of Arpc2 , a component of the seven - subunit actin - related protein 2 / 3 ( Arp2 / 3 ) complex ( 17 ) . This complex acts as a dominant nucleator of branched actin networks , binding to the sides of existing actin filaments before initiating the growth of a new filament at a characteristic 70° angle ( 18 ) . Before exerting its actin - nucleating function , the Arp2 / 3 complex requires activation by nucleation - promoting factors of the WASP and WAVE family proteins ( 19 , 20 ) . Branched actin networks , consisting of short and cross - linked actin filaments , support important cellular functions , including the formation of the actin cortex to maintain cellular shape and the generation of pushing forces at the leading edge of crawling cells ( 21 , 22 ) . Previous work on immune cells has predominantly focused on the role of the Arp2 / 3 complex in regulating cell motility and immune cell effector functions . Genetic depletion of individual Arp subunits or pharmacological inhibition of the Arp2 / 3 complex altered the migration behavior of T cells , DCs , neutrophils , and macrophages ( 23 - 31 ) . Recent findings have also demonstrated the involvement of the Arp2 / 3 complex in nuclear actin filament polymerization in T cells ( 32 ) . Our investigation of the Arp2 / 3 complex in MCs reveals the essential role of branched actin networks in preserving the longevity of MCs in physiological tissues . We uncover a previously unknown function of the Arp2 / 3 complex for the survival of MCs in their native environment , highlighting the critical role of actin regulation in maintaining the homeostasis of tissue - resident immune cells that strongly interact with their tissue niches . 6 RESULTS Arp2 / 3 complex controls MC morphology and motility in 3D environments To understand the role of actin filament branching for MC biology , we aimed to deplete the major actin nucleator , the heptameric Arp2 / 3 complex . Of the seven subunits , ARP2 and ARP3 directly interact with actin filaments , while ARPC2 and ARPC4 form the structural core of the complex ( 17 ) . Therefore , we targeted the Arpc4 gene to deplete the entire Arp2 / 3 complex in mouse MCs ( 33 , 34 ) . We used bone marrow - derived MCs ( BMMCs ) that were differentiated toward a connective tissue - type MC ( CTMC ) phenotype from Mcpt5 - Cre + / – Arpc4 fl / fl ( Arpc4 ΔMC ) and control mice ( Fig . 1A ) . Mcpt5 - Cre transgenic mice express Cre recombinase in the CTMC compartment , enabling efficient conditional gene targeting ( 35 ) . BMMCs from Arpc4 ΔMC mice showed efficient ARPC4 depletion , leading to the downregulated expression of other Arp2 / 3 subunits as previously described ( figs . S1 , A to C ) ( 33 , 34 ) . Unaltered expression profiles of the cell surface markers c - KIT and FCER1 indicated normal MC differentiation of Arpc4 - deficient BMMCs ( fig . S1D ) . However , scanning electron microscopy revealed morphological differences between wild - type ( WT ) and Arpc4 - deficient cells . WT BMMCs displayed homogenous surfaces with sheet - like extensions , whereas Arpc4 – / – BMMCs showed ruffled extensions with finger - like protrusions ( Fig . 1B ) . When cells were embedded in 3D Matrigel , an artificial gel system that closely mimics MC dynamics of physiological tissues , clear differences in cell morphologies and migration behavior became apparent comparing control and knockout MCs ( Figs . 1 , C to G , and figs . S1 , E and F ) . The majority of Arpc4 – / – BMMCs displayed elongated and less circular cell bodies with needle - like protrusions at the leading cell edges in comparison to WT BMMCs ( Fig . 1C , and figs . S1 , E and F ) . When BMMCs in 3D Matrigel were imaged over 36 h , Arpc4 – / – cells moved faster and covered longer distances than control cells ( Figs . 1 , D and E , and movie S1 ) . To visualize filamentous ( F - ) actin organization of 3D migrating cells in more detail , BMMCs from control and Arpc4 ΔMC mice expressing a transgenic Lifeact - GFP reporter were used ( 36 ) . Using spinning - disk confocal microscopy of BMMCs in 3D Matrigel , we confirmed our previous findings that WT MCs form mesenchymal - like shapes with F - actin rich , small lamellopodial - like extensions at the leading edge ( Fig . 1F ) . Strikingly , ARPC4 depletion in MCs caused a very uncommon immune cell morphology . In contrast to WT cells , Arpc4 – / – MCs formed cylindrical cell protrusions covered with bleb - like structures ( Fig . 1G , and movie S2 ) . Live cell imaging could visualize that these blebs were occasionally shed as actin - containing fragments from the cell edges or cell bodies of Arpc4 – / – MCs ( Fig . 1H , fig . S1G and movie S3 ) . Overall , the cylindrical cell extensions were 7 most similar to previously reported lobopodial protrusions , the formation of which depends on the build - up of intracellular pressure by contractile forces to support the integrin - dependent 3D migration of fibroblasts ( 37 ) . In agreement with this , we found that Arpc4 – / – MCs adopted round morphologies ( Figs . 1 , I and J ) and showed stalled movement in 3D Matrigel ( Fig . 1K , and fig . S1H ) upon blockade of actomyosin contraction with the Rho kinase inhibitor Y - 27632 or the myosin II inhibitor blebbistatin . In contrast , WT MCs retained residual migration speeds , when they migrated as elongated cells in the absence of contractile forces ( Fig . 1K , and figs . S1 , H to J ) . Similar to WT cells ( Fig . 1M , and figs . S1 , K and L ) , Arpc4 – / – MCs rounded up and halted migration upon blockade of integrin b 1 engagement ( Figs . 1 , L and M , and fig . S1K ) , confirming the strict dependence of MC movement on integrin - dependent ECM anchoring . In summary , the absence of Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin filament branching led to substantial adaptations in the MC actin cytoskeleton , affecting MC morphology and motility over 36 h in 3D in vitro environments . Arp2 / 3 complex is critical for MC homeostasis in the skin of adult mice To understand the role of Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin regulation for resident MCs in real tissues , we studied the homeostatic ear skin of mice . Previous work has shown that embryonic skin hosts MCs of yolk - sac origin , which are gradually replaced by MCs originating from definitive hematopoiesis ( 38 ) . By six weeks of age , the dermal connective tissue is entirely populated by definitive MCs ( 39 ) . These long - lived MCs , with slow proliferation rates , establish tissue residency by maintaining themselves independently from the bone marrow ( 38 ) . To assess tissue homeostasis of endogenous skin MCs , we analyzed ear skin whole mount preparations of Arpc4 ΔMC and littermate control mice at different ages ( Fig . 2A ) . Fluorescence - conjugated avidin , which specifically binds to the intracellular MC granules , was utilized to detect MCs in tissues ( 40 ) . Comparison of dermal MC numbers and distribution in these animals revealed an unexpected phenotype . While WT mice maintained a stable MC network over 27 weeks , Arpc4 ΔMC mice gradually lost the dermal MC population with age , showing a substantial drop in tissue - resident MC numbers by 27 weeks ( Figs . 2 , B and C ) . Although MCs nearly disappeared in some tissue regions , the overall composition and geometry of stromal tissue elements remained unaffected ( fig . S2A ) . Thus , Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin regulation is critical for maintaining the tissue - resident MC population in adult skin . This highlights a major physiological role of the Arp2 / 3 complex in preserving MC homeostasis , demonstrating that actin regulation safeguards self - maintaining resident MCs . 8 Next , we aimed to identify whether a particular Arp2 / 3 upstream activator controls Arp2 / 3 complex function in MCs . Therefore , we analyzed mice with genetic deficiencies for the Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome protein ( WASP ) and the WAVE complex component hematopoietic protein 1 ( HEM1 ) , two proteins shown to play functional roles in other myeloid immune cells ( 41 - 43 ) . We analyzed ear skin whole mount tissues of constitutive WASP - deficient mice ( Was – / – ) and mice with CTMC - specific HEM1 - deficiency ( Mcpt5 - Cre Hem1 fl / fl , short : Hem1 ΔMC ) . Surprisingly , dermal MC numbers in ≥22 wks - old mice were only moderately affected in Was – / – mice , and not altered at all in Hem1 ΔMC mice ( Figs . 2 , D to G ) . Thus , depletion of either one of these two proteins could not replicate the strong physiological phenotype of Arpc4 ΔMC mice . In line with minor roles of these proteins in controlling MC actin filament organization , Was – / – and Hem1 – / – BMMCs showed no differences in their 3D morphologies or migration speed over 36 h in Matrigel ( figs . S2 , B and C ) . Arp2 / 3 complex protects MC proliferation and survival in 3D Matrigel , but not in suspension To investigate how Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin regulation protects the longevity of MCs , we adapted our 3D Matrigel model for live - cell imaging of BMMCs over several days . Cultivating WT cells in this environment led to cell growth and an increase in cell numbers over 7 days ( Figs . 3 , A and B ) . In contrast , 3D cultures of Arpc4 – / – cells exhibited a proliferation defect with a significant increase in dying cells over the same time period ( Figs . 3 , A to C , and movie S4 ) . Importantly , we did not observe any defects in cell growth or death when maintaining Arpc4 – / – BMMCs as regular suspension culture over 7 days ( Figs . 3 , D and E ) . Similar results were obtained when treating 3D cultured WT BMMCs with the specific Arp2 / 3 inhibitor CK666 ( figs . S3 , A to E ) . These experiments revealed a context - dependent function of Arp2 / 3 - mediated cell growth and protection from cell death , suggesting that actin filament branching is particularly important for MC survival when cells interact with the extracellular environment . Since we had observed that Arpc4 – / – BMMCs lost bleb - like cellular fragments in 3D short - term cultures ( Fig . 1H ) , we hypothesized that this phenomenon could contribute to the cell death phenotype in long - term cultures . To address this , we visualized the F - actin organization of BMMCs generated from Lifeact - GFP expressing control and Arpc4 ΔMC mice ( Fig . 3F ) after embedding them for 4 days in 3D Matrigel . Indeed , substantial increases of F - actin - containing cell fragments occurred around Arpc4 – / – cells , but not for WT BMMCs ( Figs . 3 , G and H ) . Y - 27632 - mediated inhibition of actomyosin contraction completely blocked this phenotype , showing that MC contractility causes fragment formation in the absence of Arp2 / 3 - controlled actin regulation ( Fig . 3H ) . To examine whether such MC fragments also occurred in real tissues , 9 we refined our Arpc4 ΔMC mouse model . While MC detection by fluorescent avidin staining provides strong signals for granule - rich MC bodies , it leaves cellular extensions often weakly stained . By crossing Arpc4 ΔMC mice to Ubow reporter transgenics ( 44 ) , we introduced a cell - specific , cytoplasmic expression of either cyan or yellow fluorescent protein ( CFP or YFP ) into Arpc4 – / – CTMCs , which allowed the visualization of both cell bodies and protrusions ( Fig . 3I ) . Careful examination of ear skin whole mount tissues revealed CFP / YFP - positive cell fragments around dermal MCs in Arpc4 ΔMC mice , which were only rarely visible in control mice ( Figs . 3 , I to K ) . Since fragments were only positive for cytoplasmic CFP / YFP and not stained by the granule marker avidin ( Figs . 3I and K , and fig . S3F ) , we could rule out that MC - released granules contributed to the shed cell fragments . Occasionally , we even detected dermal MCs with blebby lobopodia - like cell extensions , in agreement with our observations in vitro ( Fig . 3I , zoom - in ) . Together , our results show that Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin filament organization controls the cellular integrity of the MC actin cortex in vitro and in vivo . Several forms of cell - fragment shedding have previously been reported for migrating immune cells ( 45 - 48 ) . Hence , we wondered whether fragments released from Arpc4 – / – BMMCs related to any of those structures . To address this , we established protocols to purify MC fragments from Arpc4 – / – cells and analyze their composition with mass spectrometry ( figs . S3 , G to I ) . Functional annotations and top fifty protein hits revealed a very broad protein composition , which we could not relate to any known shed cell structure . In addition , we could not establish a clear connection between the detected proteins in MC fragments and the observed proliferation defect of Arpc4 – / – BMMCs ( figs . S3 , J and K ) . However , we ruled out that the bleb - like fragments of Arpc4 – / – MCs related to apoptotic blebs . When Matrigel - embedded MCs were starved to induce MC apoptosis , apoptotic blebs were not released and remained attached to cell bodies ( fig . S3L ) . Thus , Arp2 / 3 complex depletion causes the release of MC fragments , which appear unrelated to previously described migration - induced cell fragments , such as migrasomes ( 45 ) . Moreover , we addressed whether the cell death phenotype of Arpc4 – / – BMMCs was related to the process of cytothripsis , i . e . , migration - induced cell shattering , which had previously been described for T cells and DCs ( 47 , 48 ) . Tracking analysis confirmed our earlier results , showing that Arpc4 – / – BMMCs were more migratory than WT cells ( Fig . 1E ) , which also reflected in a higher fraction of moving cells , before they underwent cell death ( fig . S4A ) . However , we found only anecdotal evidence that migratory Arpc4 – / – BMMCs underwent shattering into pieces , which then resulted in cell death ( fig . S4B ) . The majority of dying Arpc4 – / – cells stopped movement as intact cells shortly before losing their membrane integrity ( movie S4 ) . Hence , the Arp2 / 3 complex prevents cell death , which appears unrelated to cytothripsis . 10 Given our findings on mouse MCs , we investigated whether Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin regulation similarly protects the survival of human MCs in 3D environments . Therefore , we used ( i ) primary MCs from human foreskin tissue ( Figs . 3 , L and M ) , and ( ii ) two human MC lines , which had initially been established from a patient with MC leukemia ( Figs . 3N and O , and figs . S4 , C and D ) , studying their behavior in 3D Matrigel . In agreement with our results on mouse MCs , human MCs displayed similar growth defects and substantial cell death in response to CK666 - induced Arp2 / 3 inhibition , which did not occur upon treatment with CK689 , the biologically inactive form of CK666 ( Figs . 3 , L to O , and figs . S4 , C and D ) . In summary , we unveil a previously unrecognized role of the Arp2 / 3 complex in immune cells , emphasizing the essential role of Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin filament branching in protecting the survival of mouse and human MCs , when cells anchor to surrounding 3D ECM . MCs require the Arp2 / 3 complex for cell cycle control in 3D Matrigel To gain a more detailed understanding of the proliferation defect observed in Arpc4 – / – MCs , we investigated the nuclear shapes of 3D - matrix embedded cells . Intriguingly , the majority of Arpc4 – / – BMMCs exhibited abnormal nuclear morphologies indicative of incomplete cell divisions , which was scarcely observed in control cells ( figs . S5 , A and B ) . This prompted us to explore the involvement of the Arp2 / 3 complex in cell cycle regulation . BMMCs were retrovirally transduced with the nuclear FastFUCCI reporter , distinguishing G1 / S ( red ) and G2 / M ( green ) cell cycle stages , and their behavior in 3D Matrigel imaged over seven days ( Figs . 4 , A and B , and movie S5 ) . Proliferating control MCs showed increased percentages of dividing cells ( Figs . 4 , C and D ) and increased numbers of cells transitioning between G1 / S and G2 / M ( Figs . 4 , E and F , and movie S5 ) . In contrast , Arpc4 – / – BMMCs in 3D cultures were mostly non - dividing , displaying reduced numbers in G1 / S and G2 / M cell cycle stages ( Figs . 4 , C to F ) . Treatment of WT BMMCs with the Arp2 / 3 complex inhibitor CK666 yielded similar effects on cell division and cell cycle stages , phenocopying the genetic model ( figs . S5 , C to G ) . Importantly , no discernable effects on cell cycle stages were observed when Arpc4 – / – and control BMMCs were grown in suspension ( Fig . 4G ) , underscoring the impact of the environmental context on the observed phenotype . Next , we performed single cell fate mapping analysis of Matrigel - cultured MCs , following randomly chosen cells over 96 h and determining their cell cycle stage every 3 h ( Fig . 4H ) . Control BMMCs required a lag time of 2 to 2 . 5 days before entering their full proliferative phase in 3D Matrigel conditions . Most cells then began to transition from G1 / S into G2 / M phase 11 and continued to divide in the following time period ( Fig . 4I and fig . S5H ) . Strikingly , Arpc4 – / – BMMCs were mostly found in G1 / S phase over the whole 96 h ( Figs . 4 , I and J ) . Although different cell fates of Arpc4 – / – BMMCs could be categorized ( Fig . 4K and movie S5 ) , the majority of knockout cells remained arrested in G1 / S phase with a substantial fraction of cells undergoing cell death over extended time periods ( Figs . 4 , I and J , and movie S5 ) . Thus , Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin filament branching plays a crucial role in controlling the transition into G2 / M phase , a critical process for proliferative MCs establishing their population size in a microenvironment that they strongly interact with . Since recent studies , mostly in non - immune cells , highlighted functional roles of the Arp2 / 3 complex in the nucleus ( 49 , 50 ) , we explored whether nuclear Arp2 / 3 might contribute to the MC phenotype . To block nuclear Arp2 / 3 complex function , we employed a previously established experimental strategy involving the expression and shuttling of Arpin protein , a natural inhibitor of the Arp2 / 3 complex , to the nucleus ( 51 ) . WT BMMCs were retrovirally transduced with mScarlet - Arpin - NLS or control mScarlet - NLS , which both localized to cell nuclei ( Fig . 4L ) . Similar to control BMMCs , Arpin - expressing BMMCs did neither show a proliferation defect nor increased cell death in 3D Matrigel or suspension cultures ( Figs . 4 , M to R ) . Thus , our results argue against an involvement of nuclear Arp2 / 3 in MC growth , survival and cell cycle progression . Instead , our combined findings point toward a critical role of cytoplasmic Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin filament branching in regulating G1 / S to G2 / M phase transitions of haptokinetic MCs . Arp2 / 3 complex is critical for MC proliferation and survival upon mechano - coupling Our previous findings consistently indicated a protective function of cytoplasmic Arp2 / 3 in sustaining the survival of proliferating MCs that mechanically couple to the ECM in 3D Matrigel or in vivo . Assessing the adhesion of Arpc4 – / – BMMCs to various ECM components coated on 2D culture dishes , we could not detect any gross changes in comparison to WT cells . Both BMMC genotypes adhered well to fibronectin , laminin and Matrigel , with the exception of collagen I due to the absence of collagen I - binding integrins ( Fig . 5A ) . Notably , Arpc4 – / – BMMC binding to fibronectin , the most adhesive ligand for MCs , increased the rate of dead cells after 48 h , a phenomenon not observed for control cells ( Fig . 5B ) . Hence , even the adhesive interaction with a planar surface led to a mild compromise in the survival of Arp2 / 3 complex - depleted MCs . 12 Based on our observations , we hypothesized that the adhesive coupling with the 3D matrix , rather than the 3D geometry itself , induced the death of Arpc4 – / – BMMCs in Matrigel . To test this hypothesis , we disrupted the mechanical coupling of WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMCs in two experimental setups . First , we embedded MCs in non - adhesive 3D collagen I matrices , where both WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMCs adopted round amoeboid - like shapes . Strikingly , Arpc4 – / – MCs proliferated as control cells in 3D collagen gels , without showing any signs of increased cell death over seven days ( Figs . 5 , C to E ) . Additionally , cell cycle stages measured by FastFUCCI expression remained unaltered between control and knockout cells ( Figs . 5 , F and G ) . Furthermore , Arpc4 – / – BMMCs , expressing Lifeact - GFP , released actin - containing cell fragments in non - adhesive collagen I gels ( fig . S6A ) , akin to what was observed in 3D Matrigel ( Figs . 3 , G and H ) . Thus , MCs can proliferate and survive in non - adhesive 3D environments without Arp2 / 3 - controlled actin filament regulation . The formation and release of bleb - like cell fragments in Arp2 / 3 complex - depleted MCs proved to be an epiphenomenon , which was functionally unrelated to the phenotypic cell cycle arrest and cell death . Second , we embedded MCs in adhesive 3D Matrigel in the presence of anti - b 1 integrin antibody to block integrin - mediated mechanic - coupling with the matrix . Functional integrin blockade switched cellular morphologies to amoeboid - like shapes , confirming the loss of integrin - mediated adhesion over the entire 7 days ( Fig . 5H ) . Under these conditions , both WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMC movement in Matrigel was halted ( fig . S6B ) . Importantly , integrin blockade enabled Arpc4 – / – BMMC to proliferate normally and protected MCs from cell death in Matrigel , rescuing the cellular phenotype of Arp2 / 3 - depleted MCs ( Figs . 5 , H to J , movie S6 ) . In summary , our study highlights the critical dependence of MCs on Arp2 / 3 - regulated actin networks to ensure proliferation and maintain their survival in the complex ECM . These results underscore that the Arp2 / 3 complex protects MCs while they adhere and are mechanically coupled to the surrounding environment via integrin receptors . Arp2 / 3 complex protects the tissue residency of mechano - coupled MCs in the skin Lastly , we aimed to elucidate whether the indispensable role of the Arp2 / 3 complex in preserving the tissue - resident MC pool within the adult mouse skin is directly tied to mechano - coupling in the physiological tissue . We hypothesized that an additional loss of integrin - mediated adhesion could rescue the depletion of Arpc4 - deficient MCs in the dermal connective tissue of Arpc4 ΔMC mice . Recently , we investigated mice with MC - specific conditional depletion of talin - 1 , the key regulator for the conformational switch of integrin receptors from the low - to the high - affinity state , which is required to mediate adhesion to ECM - ligands ( 52 ) . 13 This previous study demonstrated that endogenous MCs of Tln1 ΔMC mice lose their integrin - mediated adhesion in the ear skin dermis , leading to substantial changes in MC shape , migration and tissue positioning . However , MC numbers in the dermis remained unaltered in Tln1 ΔMC mice . Therefore , we crossed Tln1 fl / fl mice with Mcpt5 - Cre + / – Arpc4 fl / fl mice to generate Arpc4 / Tln1 ΔMC mice harboring MCs with double gene deficiency ( Fig . 6A ) . Comparisons of ear skin whole mount tissues from WT , Arpc4 ΔMC and Arpc4 / Tln1 ΔMC littermate mice revealed an astonishing in vivo phenotype : the loss of integrin - mediated mechanical coupling allowed Arpc4 - deficient MCs in Arpc4 / Tln1 ΔMC mice to establish a dermal MC pool comparable to that of control mice ( Figs . 6 , A and B ) . Further comparison to WT mice showed that Arpc4 / Tln1 ΔMC mice displayed slightly altered MC tissue distribution ( Fig . 6A ) , including decreased MC periarteriolar alignment and increased formation of MC clusters in interstitial spaces , which are phenotypes that we had previously reported for Tln1 ΔMC mice . In summary , our in vivo data establish Arp2 / 3 - regulated actin filament assembly is essential for the tissue residency of long - living MCs that are mechanically coupled to the ECM . Thus , actin network regulation emerges as a crucial mechanism for maintaining the homeostasis of tissue - resident immune cells , which strongly interact with their tissue niches . DISCUSSION Our current understanding of immune cell tissue residency underscores the intricate interactions between resident immune cells and their stromal niche environment . Crucial signaling pathways initiated by growth factors and regulated by transcription factors have been identified as key determinants in establishing and maintaining various immune cell populations within tissues . The development and survival of MCs are particularly contingent on stromal cell - derived KIT ligand , also known as stem cell factor ( SCF ) , which activates the receptor tyrosine kinase KIT ( 53 , 54 ) . Additionally , transcription factors GATA binding protein 2 ( GATA2 ) and Microphthalmia - associated transcription factor ( MITF ) play pivotal roles in MC differentiation . Mouse models deficient in either of these molecules exhibit a complete absence or substantial reduction of MCs in physiological tissues ( 53 - 56 ) . In this study , we shed light on the critical role of the actin filament network in governing the long - term maintenance of resident MC populations in vivo . Our research identified a previously unrecognized function of Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin network control in immune cell proliferation and cell cycle regulation , a phenomenon not yet reported for other immune cell types . Previous studies on neutrophils , macrophages , T cells , NK cells , and DCs highlighted the roles of 14 Arp2 / 3 - controlled actin network expansion in functions such as phagocytosis ( 30 , 57 , 58 ) , granule exocytosis ( 59 ) , lamellipodia formation at the cellular leading edge ( 24 , 26 , 28 - 30 ) , transendothelial migration ( 25 , 60 ) and space exploration in complex environments ( 23 , 27 , 31 , 61 , 62 ) . Further investigations emphasized roles of the Arp2 / 3 complex for perinuclear actin in immune cell migration ( 63 ) and nuclear actin in the process of T cell activation ( 32 ) . Genetic defects in individual components of the Arp2 / 3 complex , with a focus on ARPC1B and ARPC5 isoforms , have been associated with immune system disorders in humans . The reported defects , resulting in combined immunodeficiencies with severe inflammation and early - onset autoimmunity , inflammation , and mortality , highlight the clinical relevance of Arp2 / 3 complex dysfunction ( 64 - 66 ) . Notably , isoform diversity within the Arp2 / 3 complex may determine cell - specific phenotypes ( 67 , 68 ) , prompting further exploration of individual ARPC isoforms for MC biology . Our research emphasizes the pivotal role of Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin filament branching in safeguarding the survival of proliferating MCs , particularly when these cells adhere and are mechanically coupled to the surrounding ECM . Unlike many other immune cell types ( 15 ) , MCs anchor themselves to the tissue niche via b 1 - integrin receptors , stably connecting intracellular actin filaments with the external environment ( 12 ) . Surprisingly , MCs in the skin dermis or in adhesive Matrigel cannot tolerate the absence of the Arp2 / 3 - regulated actin networks , causing cell cycle arrest and death . However , this phenotype can be rescued by uncoupling MCs from the ECM through integrin blockade . Additionally , MCs exhibit normal proliferation in non - adhesive environments . Therefore , the protective role of the Arp2 / 3 complex in proliferating MCs appears functionally connected to the cells’ pronounced haptokinetic nature . In line with this notion , similar phenomena related to cell proliferation and death have not been reported for low - adhesive immune cell types lacking Arp2 / 3 complex function . Previous studies on non - immune cells have emphasized the critical roles of actin filament assembly in interphase and mitosis ( 69 ) . Our results identified a cell cycle block in G1 / S phase in MCs that bind to Matrigel components via integrin receptors in the absence of Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin filament branching . This suggested that perturbed integrin signaling could contribute to the proliferation arrest . In the vast majority of non - immune cells , integrin - mediated cell adhesion transmits signals to promote cell cycle progression through G1 phase , and loss of adhesion causes G1 cell cycle arrest ( 70 , 71 ) . However , unlike fibroblasts and other substrate - dependent cells , MCs do not depend on integrin signaling for their proliferation . MC 15 numbers remain consistent in mouse models with MC - specific integrin deficiencies , and MCs exhibiting compromised integrin function proliferate normally in 3D Matrigel cultures ( 12 ) . Therefore , it is unlikely that integrin signaling events play a role in Arp2 / 3 - regulated cell cycle progression . Previous in vitro evidence in fibroblasts suggested that actin filaments might be sensed inside the cell , delivering an essential " go " signal for DNA synthesis and cell growth during the cell cycle ( 72 , 73 ) . Disrupting actin filaments by cytochalasin treatment resulted in a G1 cell cycle block , which could be alleviated when p53 or Rb tumor suppressors were inactivated ( 74 , 75 ) . Knockdown of the Arp2 / 3 complex in fibroblasts also halted cell proliferation unless the cyclin - dependent kinase ( CDK ) inhibitor p16 was inactivated ( 76 ) . Based on these studies , a cell cycle checkpoint that senses branched actin networks and thus informs the cell about correct cytoskeleton dynamics , was speculated to provide essential signals for cell cycle progression ( 72 ) . Refined experiments with inducible depletion of the Arp2 / 3 complex in fibroblasts confirmed the G1 cell cycle block and emphasized that multiple nuclear and cytoplasmic signaling factors collaborate during the induction and maintenance of the proliferation arrest ( 77 ) . Analysis of Arp2 / 3 - depleted fibroblasts cultivated in conventional 2D in vitro systems highlighted multiple molecular consequences , including abnormal spindle actin and microtubule abnormalities , the formation of micronuclei after incomplete mitosis , DNA damage , p53 activation , CDK inhibitor p21 - mediated cell cycle arrest , cGAS / STING signaling , and cellular senescence ( 77 ) . Such detailed cellular and biochemical analyses are challenging for MCs embedded in 3D Matrigel . However , we hardly observed Arp2 / 3 - depleted MCs undergoing mitosis in live - cell imaging experiments over several days and found no evidence for the formation of micronuclei or DNA damage ( data not shown ) . In addition to biochemical signals , mechanical forces have emerged as crucial regulators of the G1 - S phase transition ( 70 , 78 ) . Since branched actin filament networks control the cell shape and cytoskeletal organization , the absence of the Arp2 / 3 complex might predominantly alter the biophysical force balance inside MCs . Studies in adhesive non - immune cells have demonstrated that intracellular tension controlled by actomyosin contractility is linked to cell cycle progression through G1 / S phase ( 79 - 81 ) . Due to ECM coupling , mechanical forces from the environment could readily transmit to MCs , which may experience additional mechanical tension from constant stretching and compression in the skin . The extent to which normal tissue movement requires MCs to withstand mechanical forces remains unclear . As cells experience tension , they can transmit mechanical forces from integrins to the nucleus through a contractile 16 actomyosin ( 82 ) . Perinuclear actin filaments connect to the nuclear envelope through the linker of nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton ( LINC ) complex , allowing force transmission to deform the nucleus ( 82 , 83 ) . Previous work on non - immune cells in 2D culture systems demonstrated that nuclear flattening , dependent on perinuclear actin filament assembly and actomyosin contraction , activated nuclear transcription factors to induce G1 - S transition ( 84 ) . Our results indicate that the absence of Arp2 / 3 - controlled actin filament branching causes shifts in the mechanical force balance within MCs . While Arp2 / 3 - depleted MCs remain adherent , they lack lamellipodial protrusions and actin cortex integrity . Instead , MCs adopt a different mode of contractility - driven protrusiveness , forming lobopodia and cell blebs , most likely due to reduced actin cortex tension ( 28 , 37 ) . These substantial shifts in cytoskeletal forces could interfere with mechanical force transmission along the membrane - cortex interface , the cytoplasm , the perinuclear space , or a combination thereof , potentially contributing to the observed cell cycle arrest in G1 / S phase and consequent cell death . Our data demonstrate that MC mechano - coupling to ECM requires the presence of Arp2 / 3 - regulated branched actin filament networks . Therefore , we speculate that the Arp2 / 3 complex acts as a mechano - protective element , which safeguards MCs from mechanical forces , arising from cell movement or tissue mechanics . Thus , the Arp2 / 3 complex maintains the integrin - dependent MC positioning and cellular network organization in physiological tissues , which is required to mount functional immune responses . In summary , our study emphasizes a significant physiological role of the Arp2 / 3 complex in preserving MC homeostasis in vivo , demonstrating that actin regulation is crucial for the survival and longevity of self - maintaining resident MCs . The maintenance of MC homeostasis necessitates not only continuous signaling through tissue - provided KIT ligand , but also Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin regulation to resist integrin - mediated mechanical interactions with the tissue environment . This study provides insights into how actin filament branching impacts on immune cell function , particularly in the context of cell cycle regulation and tissue residency . Furthermore , our findings highlight that MC behavior is controlled by mechanical signals , paving the way for future investigations into the detailed underlying molecular or biophysical mechanisms , thus expanding the emerging field of mechanoimmunology ( 85 ) . 17 MATERIALS AND METHODS Study design This study investigated the role of Arp2 / 3 complex - regulated actin filament branching for MC tissue residency . We generated conditional knockout mouse lines with MC - specific depletions for ARPC4 , HEM1 and ARPC4 in combination with talin - 1 . Additionally , mice with constitutive deletion of WASP were examined . Mouse strains carried fluorescent reporters to image MC shapes in vivo or MC actin dynamics in vitro . Bone marrow ( BM ) - derived MCs ( BMMCs ) were generated from mice for in vitro experiments . To study endogenous MCs in tissues , fixed ear skins of differently aged mice were imaged with confocal fluorescence microscopy . Electron microscopy was utilized to characterize cell morphologies of in vitro cultured MCs . To mimic MC tissue dynamics , time - lapse video - based microscopy was established to observe MC dynamics and culture growth in 3D Matrigel or collagen I gels over 4 to 7 days . Retroviral fluorescence constructs were implemented for in vitro experiments to define cell cycle stages and determine the role of nuclear Arp2 / 3 in more detail . Mouse Models Mouse breeding and husbandry were performed at the Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics , Freiburg , in accordance with the guidelines provided by the Federation of European Laboratory Animal Science Association and as approved by German authorities ( Regional Council of Freiburg ) . Mice were only used for organ removal after euthanasia by carbon dioxide exposure and thus not subject to experimental procedures and ethical approval according to § 4 ( 3 ) Tierschutzgesetz . Mice were maintained in a conventional animal facility with a light - dark cycle of 14 - 10 hours at a temperature of 22°C ± 2°C and a relative humidity of 60 % ± 5 % . Standard food was available ad libitum for all animals . Mcpt5 - Cre ( 35 ) , Arpc4 fl / fl ( 33 ) , Was – / – ( 86 ) , Hem1 fl / fl ( 43 ) , Tln1 fl / fl ( 87 ) , Tg ( Ubow ) ( 44 ) and Tg ( Lifeact - GFP ) ( 36 ) mouse strains have been described elsewhere . Mcpt5 - Cre Arpc4 fl / fl , Mcpt5 - Cre Hem1 fl / fl , Mcpt5 - Cre Arpc4 fl / fl Tln1 fl / fl mice and crosses with fluorescent reporter lines ( Tg ( Ubow ) , Lifeact - GFP ) were on a C57BL / 6J background . For all genotypes , age - and gender - matched female or male mice ( aged 3 to 27 weeks ) were used . Primary MC culture To obtain MCs with connective tissue type characteristics , we cultured BMMCs according to a published protocol ( 88 , 89 ) . BM was isolated by flushing tibiae and femora with cold PBS . Isolated BM cells were maintained at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 in DMEM ( 4 . 5 g / L glucose , Gibco ) supplemented with 10 % heat - inactivated fetal calf serum ( FCS ) , 10 U / ml penicillin , 10 µg / ml streptomycin , 2 mM L - glutamine , 25 mM HEPES , 1 mM sodium pyruvate , 1× non - essential amino acids ( Gibco ) , 50 µM 2 - mercaptoethanol and IL - 3 ( 5 % supernatant of murine IL - 3 - secreting WEHI - 3 cells ) . To promote BMMC differentiation with connective tissue type characteristics , stem cell factor ( SCF ; 5 % supernatant of murine SCF - secreting CHO transfectants ) and IL - 4 ( 1 ng / ml , PeproTech ) were added to the medium ( 89 ) . IL - 4 and SCF supplementation to the culture medium enhanced Mcpt5 - promoter activity and thus expression of CRE recombinase in BMMCs generated from Mcpt5 - Cre mouse strains . BMMCs were used for experiments after 10 weeks of cultivation . Full differentiation into mature MCs was confirmed by expression of lineage - specific c - KIT ( rat anti - CD117 FITC - conjugated , 1 : 200 , Invitrogen ) and FcεRI ( armenian hamster anti - FcεRIα Alexa Fluor 647 - conjugated , 1 : 200 , Biolegend ) measured by flow cytometry . BMMCs were passaged twice a week and kept at a concentration of 1 to 2 . 5 × 10 6 cells / ml as a suspension culture . To assess the cell growth rate of BMMCs in media , 0 . 5 × 10 6 viable cells were cultured as a suspension in untreated six well plates in 3 ml media supplemented with 10 % IL - 3 and 10 % SCF after dead cell removal 18 ( Miltenyi - Biotec ) . Cells were counted at day 3 , cultured in 10 ml fresh media with supplements and counted again at day 7 . IL - 3 , SCF and IgE production IL - 3 was produced by WEHI - 3 cells ( provided by R . Grosschedl , Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics ) . SCF ( KITLG ) was produced by CHO transfectants ( provided by G . Häcker , University of Freiburg ) . Anti - DNP IgE ( clone SPE7 ) was produced by SPE - 7 hybridoma NS1 cells ( provided by M . Schmidt - Supprian , Technical University of Munich ) . WEHI - 3 cells were cultured in DMEM ( 4 . 5 g / L glucose , 110 mg / L pyruvate ; Gibco ) supplemented with 10 % heat - inactivated FCS , 10 U / ml penicillin , 10 µg / ml streptomycin , 2 mM L - glutamine and 50 µM 2 - mercaptoethanol ( 90 ) . Cells were kept at a concentration of 10 5 cells / ml and medium was exchanged twice a week . For conditioned media production , cells were incubated for 3 to 4 days until the cell concentration reached 1 × 10 6 cells / ml . Supernatant was collected , centrifuged for 10 min at 350 × g , filtered through a 0 . 45 - μm filter ( Nalgene Rapid - Flow ) and kept at −20°C for long - term storage . CHO cells were kept at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 in OptiMEM TM with Glutamax TM ( Life Technologies ) supplemented with 10 % heat - inactivated endotoxin - low FCS , 10 U / ml penicillin , 10 µg / ml streptomycin and 30 µM 2 - mercaptoethanol . Cells were passaged twice a week and maintained as a confluent culture . For SCF production , cells were seeded at a concentration of 7 × 10 5 cells per 15 cm cell culture plate ( Greiner ) . When CHO cells reached 70 % confluency , supernatant was collected and replaced by fresh medium . CHO supernatant harvest was repeated 3 to 4 consecutive days . The supernatant was centrifuged for 5 min at 500 × g , filtered through a 0 . 2 - µm filter ( Stericup plastic filter flasks , 0 . 2 μm ) and kept at −20 °C . Human connective tissue MC and human MC lines Human MCs were obtained with written consent of the patients and approved by the ethics committee of the Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin ( protocol code EA1 / 204 / 10 , 9 March 2018 ) . Cutaneous MCs were isolated from human foreskin tissue ( 53 ) . Each MC culture originated from several ( two to ten ) donors . The experiments were conducted according to the Declaration of Helsinki principles . The skin was cut into strips and treated with dispase ( 24 . 5 mL per preparation , activity : 50 U / mL ; Corning ) at 4 °C overnight . The epidermis was removed , the dermis finely chopped and digested with 2 . 29 mg / mL collagenase ( activity : 255 U / mg ; Worthington ) , 0 . 75 mg / mL hyaluronidase ( activity : 1000 U / mg ; Sigma ) , and DNase I at 10 µg / mL ( Applichem ) . The cell suspension was filtered stepwise ( 100 µm , 40 µm , 30 µm strainers ) . To purify the MCs , anti - human c - Kit microbeads and an Auto - MACS separation device were used ( Miltenyi - Biotec ) , resulting in 98 – 100 % MCs . Isolated skin MCs were measured by flow cytometry ( double positive for c - KIT and FcεRI ) and acidic toluidine blue staining ( 0 . 1 % in 0 . 5 N HCl ) . Skin MCs were cultured at 0 . 5 × 10 6 cells / ml in basal Iscove´s medium supplemented with 10 % FCS , 1 % P / S , SCF ( 100 ng / mL ) and IL - 4 ( 20 ng / mL ) , freshly provided twice weekly . MCs were used for experiments after 2 . 5 to 4 . 5 weeks . Two variant sublines of the human mast cell line HMC - 1 were used ( 91 ) . Human MC lines HMC - 1 . 1 ( Merck ) and HMC - 1 . 2 ( Merck ) were cultured in IMDM media ( Sigma ) with 1 . 2 mM alpha - thioglycerol ( Merck ) , 10 % heat inactivated fetal calf serum ( Sigma ) and 1× penicillin / streptomycin . The cells were kept at a concentration of 1 - 1 . 5 × 10 6 cells / ml at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 and passaged twice a week . Flow cytometry analysis of MC maturation and cell death To confirm MC maturation , flow cytometric analysis was performed . 1 × 10 6 BMMCs per sample were used for staining and kept on ice . Antibodies and cells were diluted in PBS supplemented with 2 % heat - inactivated FCS and 2 mM EDTA ( FACS buffer ) . First , cells were blocked at 4°C for 15 min using anti - mouse CD16 / CD32 antibody ( 1 : 250 , BD Biosciences ) . 19 Next , cells were stained for 30 min at 4°C with Alexa Fluor 647 - conjugated anti - FcεRIα ( 1 : 200 ) , FITC - conjugated anti - cKIT ( 1 : 200 ) and washed with FACS buffer . MCs were resuspended in FACS buffer and analyzed using a LSRIII TM flow cytometer and FlowJo TM software ( BD Bioscience ) . Dead cells were excluded with DAPI staining . To monitor cell death during cultivation of WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMCs , 10 to 14 weeks old BMMCs were cleared from dead cells with a dead cell removal kit ( Miltenyi ) . Next , 0 . 5 × 10 6 viable BMMCs were cultured and stained with Propidium iodide ( 1 : 100 , Abcam ) or DAPI ( 1 : 2000 , Sigma ) at day 0 and day 7 to assess the percentage of dead cells with flow cytometry . Determination of protein depletion efficiencies To determine depletion efficiencies of Arpc4 and other Arp2 / 3 subunits in BMMC cultures , intracellular flow cytometry and western blot analysis were performed . For intracellular detection of ARPC2 protein expression by flow cytometry , 1 × 10 6 BMMCs were fixed and permeabilized ( Intracellular fixation kit , Cell Signaling Technology ) according to the manufactures protocol . Unspecific binding sites were blocked as described above and then stained with anti - ARPC2 ( 1 : 50 in permeabilization buffer , Abcam ) for 60 min at 4°C . Afterwards the cells were washed twice with permeabilization buffer and incubated with 488 - conjugated anti - rabbit antibody ( 1 : 500 , Invitrogen ) for 60 min at 4°C , followed by two subsequent washing steps with permeabilization buffer . Cells were resuspended in FACS buffer for flow cytometric analysis . For western blot analysis , 3 × 10 6 BMMCs were lysed in a 1 : 3 ratio with Laemmli buffer ( 83 mM Tris pH 6 . 8 , 13 . 3 % glycerol , 1 . 3 % SDS , 0 . 3 mg bromophenol blue , 0 . 47 M 2 - mercaptoethanol ) to ddH 2 O followed by 15 – 20 times of resuspension with a 23G needle ( Braun ) . The samples were incubated at 95°C for 5 min and centrifuged 10 min at 13000 × g . Proteins were applied to a 12 % gradient polyacrylamide gel , resolved by SDS - PAGE ( BioRad ) and transferred onto PVDF membranes ( Millipore ) via wet blot transfer . Nonspecific binding sites were blocked with block buffer ( 5 % skim milk powder in Tris - buffered saline ( TBS ) containing 0 . 1 % ( v : v ) Tween - 20 ) . Primary antibodies against the following proteins were incubated overnight in block buffer : ARPC4 ( 1 : 5000 , Everest Biotech ) , ARPC2 ( 1 : 5000 , Abcam ) , ARP3 ( 1 : 5000 , Abcam ) , ARPC1A ( 1 : 5000 , Abcam ) and actin ( 1 : 5000 , Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) . The membrane was washed three times in block buffer followed by a 1 h incubation with anti - goat / - rabbit HRP - conjugated secondary antibodies ( 1 : 5000 , Agilent Dako ) at RT . Proteins were visualized using Clarity Western ECL substrate ( BioRad ) and a ChemiDoc TM Touch Gel Imaging System ( Bio - Rad ) . Adhesion assay To measure MC adhesion to different ECM components , an absorbance - based adhesion assay was performed . The method was performed as previously described with slight modifications ( 12 ) . Microtiter plates ( Greiner ) were coated for 2 h at 37°C in triplicates with fibronectin ( 10 µg / ml , Sigma - Aldrich ) , Matrigel ( 50 µg / ml , Corning ) , laminin ( 5 µg / ml , Roche ) , bovine collagen I ( 30µg / ml , Advanced BioMatrix ) or BSA as control ( 250 µg / ml ) diluted in PBS . Plates were washed twice with PBS and blocked with 3 % BSA in PBS for 30 min at 37°C . BMMCs were incubated for 1 h at 37°C in adhesion buffer ( phenol red - free RPMI containing 10 mM HEPES , 0 . 25 % BSA , and 2 mM CaCl 2 ) . Cells were washed once with PBS and seeded at 5 × 10 5 cells / well in fresh adhesion buffer . Cells were allowed to settle for 10 min at 37°C , 5 % CO 2 and were then stimulated for 2 h with SCF ( 100 ng / ml ) . Next , plates were centrifuged upside down for 5 min at 60 × g to remove non - adherent cells . After washing once with pre - warmed PBS , plates were centrifuged again upside down . Adherent cells were fixed for 10 min with 4 % PFA , followed by a washing step with PBS . Plates were centrifuged 2 min at 500 × g and adherent cells were stained by incubation with crystal violet ( 5 mg / ml in 2 % ethanol ) for 10 min at RT . Following two washing steps with tap water , plates were drained upside down 20 and 1 % SDS ( in H 2 O ) was added . Plates were put on an orbital shaker for 30 min to solubilize the crystal violet dye from lysed cells . Finally , the absorbance of the lysate was measured at 590 nm on a Synergy4 plate reader ( Bio - Tek ) . Electron Microscopy 10 weeks old BMMCs were used for scanning electron microscopy . Dead WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMCs were removed with a dead cell removal kit ( Miltenyi - Biotec ) and the viable cells were cultured in fresh BMMC culture medium with supplements overnight . BMMCs were adjusted to a concentration of 1 × 10 6 cells / ml and fixed in suspension . Scanning electron microscopy was performed as described with slight modifications ( 43 ) . BMMCs were fixed in suspension by adding formaldehyde ( 5 % final concentration ) and glutaraldehyde ( 2 % final concentration ) into growth medium . Afterwards suspensions were incubated on poly - l - lysine pretreated , round 12mm coverslips and washed twice with TE buffer ( 20 mM Tris , 1 mM EDTA , and pH 6 . 9 ) . Dehydration with a graded series of acetone ( 10 % , 30 % , 50 % , 70 % , and 90 % ) was performed on ice for 10 min each , followed by two steps in 100 % acetone at RT . Afterwards , samples were critically point dried ( CPD 300 , Leica , Wetzlar ) , fixed on aluminum stubs with plastic conductive carbon cement and covered with a gold palladium film by sputter coating ( SCD 500 Bal - Tec , Liechtenstein ) . Examination was performed with a field emission scanning electron microscope Zeiss Merlin ( Zeiss , Oberkochen ) using both , the inlens SE ( 75 % ) and the Everhart Thornley HESE2 detector ( 25 % ) and an acceleration voltage of 5 kV . 3D Matrigel assay To assess MC migration and longterm survival in 3D fibrillar matrices , BMMCs were embedded in Matrigel™ ( Corning ) for several days . Matrigel was used according to the manufacturer’s protocol . Dead BMMCs were removed ( Miltenyi - Biotec ) and viable cells were treated with 1 µg / ml anti - DNP IgE for 30 min at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 . After washing with PBS , cells were suspended in BMMC culture medium with 5 % WEHI - 3 supernatant and 5 % SCF - containing CHO supernatant at a concentration of 0 . 4 × 10 6 cells / ml . Next , the BMMCs were mixed in a 1 : 1 ratio with Matrigel that was defrosted on ice for 24 h prior use . The mixture was gently resuspended for 60 sec and 50 µl were added in a 96 well image lock plate ( Sartorius ) on ice . The 96 well plate was centrifuged at 75 × g , 4°C for 3 min to enable a homogenous cell distribution and then incubated at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 for 30 min for Matrigel polymerization . Afterwards , 250 µl BMMC culture medium with 2 × concentrated growth factors ( 10 % IL - 3 - containing WEHI - 3 and 10 % SCF - containing CHO supernatant ) was added on top of the gel . Live cell imaging was performed using an Incucyte S3 live - cell analysis system ( Sartorius ) . Each well was imaged in a 15 min interval for up to 7 days with the image lock module and a 10× or 20× objective . Red and green fluorescent signals were acquired with the in - built dual color module 4614 . For cell death analysis sytox orange ( 1 : 1000 , Thermo Fisher ) was added to the medium on top of the polymerized gel . When required , anti - DNP IgE sensitized BMMCs were pre - incubated with inhibitors or blocking antibody : 50 µM Y - 27632 ( Merck ) , 50 µM blebbistatin ( Merck ) , 200 µM CK666 ( Merck ) and 5 µg / ml anti - ITGB1 ( BD Bioscience ) in BMMC culture media at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 for 30 min . As controls , cells were treated with DMSO for blebbistatin , H 2 O for Y - 27632 or with the inactive CK666 variant CK689 ( Merck ) . After chemical incubation , the cells were washed twice with PBS , resuspended in BMMC culture medium and embedded in Matrigel . The chemicals were also added in the culture medium on top of the gel to enable a stable concentration during the live cell imaging experiment . For cell starvation experiments , anti - DNP IgE sensitized BMMCs were washed with 1× PBS , resuspended in PBS followed by embedding in the Matrigel . After Matrigel polymerization , 250 µl PBS with sytox orange were added on top of the solidified gel . To obtain a higher magnification of cells in the Matrigel , live cell imaging with a confocal spinning - disc microscope ( Zeiss ) was performed and the Matrigel preparation procedure adapted . Anti - DNP 21 IgE sensitized BMMCs were adjusted to 1 × 10 6 cells / ml and if required treated with chemicals as described above . After washing , 25 µl of the cell suspension was mixed with 25 µl Matrigel on ice . 10 µl were loaded on an µ - angiogenesis slide ( Ibidi ) and incubated for 10 min at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 for gel polymerization . 45 µl BMMC media were added on top and the slide was kept in the incubator at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 overnight before imaging . For nucleus visualization , Hoechst ( 1 : 5000 , Merck ) was added to the BMMC medium on top of the gel and incubated at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 for 3 h before imaging . For imaging an EC Plan - Neofluar 40× / 1 . 30 Oil ( Zeiss ) or a Plan - Apochromat 63× / 1 . 40 Oil ( Zeiss ) objective was used and the cells were kept in a stage top incubator ( TokaiHit ) at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 to enable physiological conditions . In addition , a z - stack of 1 µm steps was set to ensure good imaging quality without causing phototoxicity . Live cell imaging intervals were between 1 – 3 min for 2 – 45 min imaging time in total . 3D collagen I gel assay To monitor MC dynamics and long - term survival in 3D collagen gels , BMMCs were embedded in bovine collagen I gels ( Advanced BioMatrix ) . Cells were prepared and imaged as described above for 3D Matrigel . After dead cell removal and anti - DNP IgE incubation , cells were adjusted to 0 . 8 × 10 6 cells / ml or 1 . 2 × 10 6 cells / ml ( 20× objective ) in supplemented BMMC culture media . To prepare the collagen I gel , pre - chilled NaHCO 3 , pre - chilled 10× MEM ( minimal essential medium , Sigma ) and pre - chilled bovine collagen I ( Advanced BioMatrix ) were mixed together with a final pH between 7 and 8 . The collagen suspension was mixed carefully with the cells in a ratio of 4 : 1 and 50 µl were added in a 96 well image lock plate ( Sartorius ) on ice . The centrifuged 96 well plate was incubated for 1 h at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 to solidify the collagen gel . The cells were imaged with an Incucyte S3 live - cell imaging system as described above . For confocal imaging , the cell concentration was adapted to 1 × 10 6 cells / ml and 10 µl of the cell suspension : collagen mix was added to an µ - angiogenesis slide . Ear skin whole mount immunofluorescence analysis Ears were cut at the base and subsequently split into ventral and dorsal halves . Ventral ear sheets were fixed in 1 % PFA overnight at 4°C on a shaker . Ear explants of Ubow mice were fixed for only 4 h in 1 % PFA at 4°C to reduce quenching of the weak CFP fluorescence signal . Ear slices were permeabilized with block buffer ( 0 . 25 % ( v / v ) Triton TM X - 100 in PBS with 1 % BSA ) and incubated for 1 h at 4°C while gently shaking . Next , immunofluorescence staining was performed at 4°C on a rocker at all steps . Between each step the samples were washed three times for 15 min in block buffer . Primary antibodies or directly fluorescent reagents were applied overnight at 4°C . If required , this was followed by a 4 to 6 h incubation at 4°C with fluorescently labeled secondary antibodies . Tissue samples were mounted onto glass slides and covered by glass cover slips ( the dermal side facing the cover slip ) with Fluoromount - G ( SouthernBiotech ) . The following antibodies were used : anti - ACTA2 Cy3 - conjugated ( 1 : 500 , Sigma - Aldrich ) , anti - collagen IV ( 1 : 500 , Abcam ) , Anti - rabbit Alexa Fluor 405 - conjugated . Avidin was used to visualize dermal MCs ( 1 : 10000 , FITC - conjugated ) To receive a more detailed morphology of cellular structures , the endogenous YFP and CFP signals of Ubow mice strains were amplified with Dylight™ 488 - conjugated anti - GFP antibody ( 1 : 1000 , Rockland ) . Z - stacks were acquired ( indicated in the respective analysis section and / or figure legend ) . Standard ear whole mount microscopy was performed using a LSM 780 microscope ( Zeiss ) . 2 × 2 tile images were acquired covering 30 – 44 µm thick z - stacks with a step size of 1 . 5 – 2 µm using a Plan Apochromat 20× / 0 . 8 air objective ( Zeiss ) with 0 . 6 scan zoom . Tiled images were stitched with 10 % overlap during post - processing with ZEN blue software ( Zeiss ) . For detailed morphology images of Ubow mice , a scan zoom of 1 was used with an Plan Apochromat 20× / 0 . 8 air objective ( Zeiss ) or a Plan Apochromat 40× / 1 . 4 Oil DIC M27 objective ( Zeiss ) . 22 Adhesion cell death assay Tissue culture treated 24 well plates were coated with fibronectin ( 10 µg / ml , Sigma ) and incubated for 30 min at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 . Each well was washed twice with PBS and filled with 150 µl BMMC culture media , supplemented with 10 % IL - 3 and 10 % SCF . Anti - DNP IgE sensitized BMMCs were adjusted to a cell concentration of 1 × 10 6 cells / ml in BMMC culture medium with supplements . 1 × 10 5 cells were added into each well and incubated at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 . Cell death measurements were performed after 24 h and 48 h . Therefore , cells were transferred in 1 . 5 ml tubes and adherent cells were detached with EDTA ( 2 mM in PBS ) for 30 sec at 37°C . The samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 240 × g . The pellets were resuspended in BMMC culture medium with propidium iodide ( PI ) ( 1 : 100 , Abcam ) and the cell death was quantified by counting PI positive cells using flow cytometry . Purification of cellular fragments , mass spectrometry , LC - MS and MS data analysis Details are provided in the Supplementary Materials . Retrovirus production and BMMC transduction For cell cycle analysis , the pBMN - FUCCI plasmid was generated by replacing the lentiviral backbone pBOB from the original plasmid with the retroviral pBMN - Z backbone . The original plasmid pBOB - EF1 - FastFUCCI - Puro was a gift from Kevin Brindle & Duncan Jodrell ( Addgene plasmid # 86849 ; RRID : Addgene _ 86849 ) ( 92 ) . For nuclear Arp2 / 3 inhibition , the pBMN - mScarlett - Arpin - NLS plasmid was provided by R . Grosse . For retrovirus production , 2 . 5 × 10 6 PlatE cells were plated on 10 cm tissue culture dishes in DMEM culture medium . The following day PlatE cells were transfected with pBMN - plasmids using a Lipofectamin 3000 kit ( Invitrogen ) according to the manufactures protocol . Retroviral supernatant was collected every 24 h for up to 4 days and stored at 4°C . For retroviral transduction , 9 to 12 days old BMMCs were adjusted to a cell concentration of 0 . 8 × 10 6 cells / ml , centrifuged and resuspended in retroviral supernatant with 5 % SCF and 10 µg / ml Polybrene . The cells were plated on a 6 well cell culture plate and centrifuged at 1500 × g and 35°C for 3 h . After centrifugation the cells were incubated at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 for 2 h , followed by an overnight incubation in BMMC culture medium with 5 % IL - 3 , 5 % SCF and 10 % viral supernatant . The next day , the cells were washed and resuspended in BMMC media with 5 % IL - 3 and 5 % SCF and cultured at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 until the transduced cells were sorted with a MoFlow sorter ( Beckmann Coulter ) by reporter expression . The sorted transduced BMMCs were further cultured and used for experiments at 10 weeks of age . Analysis of MC morphologies and migration in 3D Matrigel To assess the morphology of WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMCs in 3D Matrigel , n = 50 cells of each independent experiment were randomly selected and the area was manually measured with ImageJ ( V2 . 1 . 0 / 1 . 53c ) ( 93 ) . Circularity values per cell were analysed with the shape descriptor “circularity” = 4π × ( area / perimeter 2 ) . Live cell tracking of MCs in 3D Matrigel was performed using the manual tracking option of Imaris 9 . 1 . 2 ( Bitplane ) . Cells were randomly chosen and tracked manually through all time frames . The average cell speed was calculated by dividing the total track length by the total time of imaging in minutes . Calculation of MC density in tissues To determine the number of MCs in the mouse ear skin tissue , ear skin whole mounts of WT ( n = 3 ) and Arpc4 – / – ( n = 3 ) mice in age groups of 3 weeks , 11 – 13 weeks and 27 weeks were quantified . 2 × 2 tile images were acquired as described above . Three imaging fields of view , displayed as maximum intensity projection were analysed per mouse and the cell number was quantified with ImageJ ( V2 . 1 . 0 / 1 . 53c ) . Therefore , the avidin signal ( MCs ) was masked using the plugin morpholibJ ( 94 ) . The masked cells were automatically counted . Clustered cells were 23 manually counted and degranulated MCs were manually removed from the analysis . The MC density was displayed per analyzed tissue area in mm 2 . Cellular fragment quantification The number of fragments in 3D Matrigel and 3D collagen gel were quantified with ImageJ ( V2 . 1 . 0 / 1 . 53c ) and Imaris 9 . 5 . 1 . ( Bitplane ) . Therefore , 3 imaging fields of view of each independent experiment were quantified . A defined volume of 1 . 41 × 10 6 µm 3 was generated for all imaging fields of view with Imaris , the number of fragments were quantified with ImageJ and displayed per analyzed volume in mm 3 . To determine the number of cellular fragments in the ear skin tissue , ear skin whole mounts of Ubow WT ( n = 4 ) and Ubow Arpc4 – / – ( n = 4 ) mice in age groups of 18 - 21 weeks were quantified with Imaris . Images were acquired with a Plan Apochromat 20× / 0 . 8 air objective ( Zeiss ) with scan zoom 1 . Three imaging fields of view , displayed as maximum intensity projection were analyzed per mouse and the number of avidin positive and GFP ( Ubow ) positive fragments were quantified with the spot function . The number of fragments was displayed per analyzed tissue area in mm 2 . Determination of MC numbers , cell cycle stages and cell death in 3D Matrigel To quantify the cell number , cell death rate and cell cycle stages of BMMCs in Matrigel and collagen , snapshots of different time points were analyzed with ImageJ ( V2 . 1 . 0 / 1 . 53c ) . For the cell number quantification , the cells were both manually as well as automatically counted . Automatically , the cells were masked with the plugin morpholibJ , cell clusters were automatically separated by a watershed function and cells were counted . Automatic cell counting with cells expressing the arpin construct was performed only with the red fluorophore channel to exclude non - transduced cells from the analysis . To evaluate the number of dead cells , the phase contrast channel and the fluorophore channel displaying the cell death were merged and the dead cells were manually counted . To analyze the numbers of cell cycle stages in 3D , the phase contrast channel was merged with the fluorophore channels displaying the different cell cycle stages ( G1 / S in red , G2M in green ) . The numbers of cells in different cell cycle stages could be distinguished by colour and quantified manually . Cell division and single cell fate mapping analysis in 3D The percentage of dividing cells in 3D was analysed with ImageJ ( V2 . 1 . 0 / 1 . 53c ) . First , the total cell number per independent experiment was counted manually . Second , the number of cell divisions was evaluated manually by green nucleus colour and quantified as percent from the total cell number . For the cell fate mapping analysis in 3D Matrigel , 35 cells were randomly selected and manually followed over 96 h . Every 3 h the cell cycle stage was evaluated and displayed as a heatmap . Statistical analysis Analyses were performed using Prism software ( GraphPad Software , Inc . Version 9 . 3 . 1 ) . If not indicated otherwise , comparisons for two groups were evaluated using a two - tailed unpaired student’s t tests after confirming that samples fulfil the criteria of normality . The D’Agostino & Pearson normality test was performed for group sizes over 10 , for group sizes under 10 the Shapiro - Wilk normality test was performed . For in vitro experiments biological replicates were cell cultures generated from different mice and independent experiments were performed at different time points . For not - normally distributed data , non - parametric Mann - Whitney U tests were used . Stars indicate significance ( * P ≤ 0 . 05 , * * P ≤ 0 . 01 , * * * P ≤ 0 . 001 ) . NS indicates non - significant difference ( P > 0 . 05 ) . For further statistical details , see Supplementary Table S2 . 24 Supplementary Materials Materials and Methods Figs . S1 to S6 Tables S1 to S3 Legends to Movies S1 to S6 References 25 References and Notes 1 . L . Dupre , G . Prunier , Deciphering actin remodelling in immune cells through the prism of actin - related inborn errors of immunity . Eur J Cell Biol 102 , 151283 ( 2023 ) . 2 . E . G . G . Sprenkeler , S . D . S . Webbers , T . W . Kuijpers , When Actin is Not Actin ' Like It Should : A New Category of Distinct Primary Immunodeficiency Disorders . J Innate Immun 13 , 3 - 25 ( 2021 ) . 3 . T . D . Pollard , Actin and Actin - Binding Proteins . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 8 , ( 2016 ) . 4 . S . Tur - Gracia , N . Martinez - Quiles , Emerging functions of cytoskeletal proteins in immune diseases . J Cell Sci 134 , ( 2021 ) . 5 . A . Kamnev , C . Lacouture , M . Fusaro , L . Dupre , Molecular Tuning of Actin Dynamics in Leukocyte Migration as Revealed by Immune - Related Actinopathies . Front Immunol 12 , 750537 ( 2021 ) . 6 . M . Guilliams , G . R . Thierry , J . Bonnardel , M . Bajenoff , Establishment and Maintenance of the Macrophage Niche . Immunity 52 , 434 - 451 ( 2020 ) . 7 . E . B . Florsheim , N . D . Bachtel , J . L . Cullen , B . G . C . Lima , M . Godazgar , F . Carvalho , C . P . Chatain , M . R . Zimmer , C . Zhang , G . Gautier , P . Launay , A . Wang , M . O . Dietrich , R . Medzhitov , Immune sensing of food allergens promotes avoidance behaviour . Nature 620 , 643 - 650 ( 2023 ) . 8 . S . J . Galli , M . Tsai , IgE and mast cells in allergic disease . Nat Med 18 , 693 - 704 ( 2012 ) . 9 . M . Krystel - Whittemore , K . N . Dileepan , J . G . Wood , Mast Cell : A Multi - Functional Master Cell . Front Immunol 6 , 620 ( 2015 ) . 10 . K . Mukai , M . Tsai , P . Starkl , T . Marichal , S . J . Galli , IgE and mast cells in host defense against parasites and venoms . Semin Immunopathol 38 , 581 - 603 ( 2016 ) . 11 . T . Plum , R . Binzberger , R . Thiele , F . Shang , D . Postrach , C . Fung , M . Fortea , N . Stakenborg , Z . Wang , A . Tappe - Theodor , T . Poth , D . A . A . MacLaren , G . Boeckxstaens , R . Kuner , C . Pitzer , H . Monyer , C . Xin , J . V . Bonventre , S . Tanaka , D . Voehringer , P . Vanden Berghe , J . Strid , T . B . Feyerabend , H . R . Rodewald , Mast cells link immune sensing to antigen - avoidance behaviour . Nature 620 , 634 - 642 ( 2023 ) . 12 . L . Kaltenbach , P . Martzloff , S . K . Bambach , N . Aizarani , M . Mihlan , A . Gavrilov , K . M . Glaser , M . Stecher , R . Thünauer , A . Thiriot , K . Heger , K . Kierdorf , S . Wienert , U . H . von Andrian , M . Schmidt - Supprian , C . Nerlov , F . Klauschen , A . Roers , M . Bajenoff , D . Grün , T . Lämmermann , Slow integrin - dependent migration organizes networks of tissue - resident mast cells . Nat Immunol 24 , 915 - 924 ( 2023 ) . 13 . Z . Sun , S . S . Guo , R . Fassler , Integrin - mediated mechanotransduction . J Cell Biol 215 , 445 - 456 ( 2016 ) . 14 . T . Lämmermann , B . L . Bader , S . J . Monkley , T . Worbs , R . Wedlich - Söldner , K . Hirsch , M . Keller , R . Forster , D . R . Critchley , R . Fässler , M . Sixt , Rapid leukocyte migration by integrin - independent flowing and squeezing . Nature 453 , 51 - 55 ( 2008 ) . 15 . T . Lämmermann , R . N . Germain , The multiple faces of leukocyte interstitial migration . Semin Immunopathol 36 , 227 - 251 ( 2014 ) . 16 . T . Lämmermann , M . Sixt , Mechanical modes of ' amoeboid ' cell migration . Curr Opin Cell Biol 21 , 636 - 644 ( 2009 ) . 17 . E . D . Goley , M . D . Welch , The ARP2 / 3 complex : an actin nucleator comes of age . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 , 713 - 726 ( 2006 ) . 18 . R . D . Mullins , J . A . Heuser , T . D . Pollard , The interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high affinity pointed end capping , and formation of branching networks of filaments . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95 , 6181 - 6186 ( 1998 ) . 26 19 . P . Bieling , K . Rottner , From WRC to Arp2 / 3 : Collective molecular mechanisms of branched actin network assembly . Curr Opin Cell Biol 80 , 102156 ( 2023 ) . 20 . J . D . Rotty , C . Wu , J . E . Bear , New insights into the regulation and cellular functions of the ARP2 / 3 complex . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 14 , 7 - 12 ( 2013 ) . 21 . V . Papalazarou , L . M . Machesky , The cell pushes back : The Arp2 / 3 complex is a key orchestrator of cellular responses to environmental forces . Curr Opin Cell Biol 68 , 37 - 44 ( 2021 ) . 22 . K . Rottner , M . Schaks , Assembling actin filaments for protrusion . Curr Opin Cell Biol 56 , 53 - 63 ( 2019 ) . 23 . A . Georgantzoglou , H . Poplimont , H . A . Walker , T . Lämmermann , M . Sarris , A two - step search and run response to gradients shapes leukocyte navigation in vivo . J Cell Biol 221 , ( 2022 ) . 24 . B . R . Graziano , J . P . Town , E . Sitarska , T . L . Nagy , M . Fosnaric , S . Penic , A . Iglic , V . Kralj - Iglic , N . S . Gov , A . Diz - Munoz , O . D . Weiner , Cell confinement reveals a branched - actin independent circuit for neutrophil polarity . PLoS Biol 17 , e3000457 ( 2019 ) . 25 . L . Kempers , E . G . G . Sprenkeler , A . C . I . van Steen , J . D . van Buul , T . W . Kuijpers , Defective Neutrophil Transendothelial Migration and Lateral Motility in ARPC1B Deficiency Under Flow Conditions . Front Immunol 12 , 678030 ( 2021 ) . 26 . A . Leithner , A . Eichner , J . Muller , A . Reversat , M . Brown , J . Schwarz , J . Merrin , D . J . de Gorter , F . Schur , J . Bayerl , I . de Vries , S . Wieser , R . Hauschild , F . P . Lai , M . Moser , D . Kerjaschki , K . Rottner , J . V . Small , T . E . Stradal , M . Sixt , Diversified actin protrusions promote environmental exploration but are dispensable for locomotion of leukocytes . Nat Cell Biol 18 , 1253 - 1259 ( 2016 ) . 27 . H . D . Moreau , F . Lemaitre , K . R . Garrod , Z . Garcia , A . M . Lennon - Dumenil , P . Bousso , Signal strength regulates antigen - mediated T - cell deceleration by distinct mechanisms to promote local exploration or arrest . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112 , 12151 - 12156 ( 2015 ) . 28 . P . Obeidy , L . A . Ju , S . H . Oehlers , N . S . Zulkhernain , Q . Lee , J . L . Galeano Nino , R . Y . Kwan , S . Tikoo , L . L . Cavanagh , P . Mrass , A . J . Cook , S . P . Jackson , M . Biro , B . Roediger , M . Sixt , W . Weninger , Partial loss of actin nucleator actin - related protein 2 / 3 activity triggers blebbing in primary T lymphocytes . Immunol Cell Biol 98 , 93 - 113 ( 2020 ) . 29 . N . Paterson , T . Lämmermann , Macrophage network dynamics depend on haptokinesis for optimal local surveillance . Elife 11 , ( 2022 ) . 30 . J . D . Rotty , H . E . Brighton , S . L . Craig , S . B . Asokan , N . Cheng , J . P . Ting , J . E . Bear , Arp2 / 3 Complex Is Required for Macrophage Integrin Functions but Is Dispensable for FcR Phagocytosis and In Vivo Motility . Dev Cell 42 , 498 - 513 e496 ( 2017 ) . 31 . N . Ruef , J . Martinez Magdaleno , X . Ficht , V . Purvanov , M . Palayret , S . Wissmann , P . Pfenninger , B . Stolp , F . Thelen , J . Barreto de Albuquerque , P . Germann , J . Sharpe , J . Abe , D . F . Legler , J . V . Stein , Exocrine gland - resident memory CD8 ( + ) T cells use mechanosensing for tissue surveillance . Sci Immunol 8 , eadd5724 ( 2023 ) . 32 . N . Tsopoulidis , S . Kaw , V . Laketa , S . Kutscheidt , C . Baarlink , B . Stolp , R . Grosse , O . T . Fackler , T cell receptor - triggered nuclear actin network formation drives CD4 ( + ) T cell effector functions . Sci Immunol 4 , ( 2019 ) . 33 . R . van der Kammen , J . Y . Song , I . de Rink , H . Janssen , S . Madonna , C . Scarponi , C . Albanesi , W . Brugman , M . Innocenti , Knockout of the Arp2 / 3 complex in epidermis causes a psoriasis - like disease hallmarked by hyperactivation of transcription factor Nrf2 . Development 144 , 4588 - 4603 ( 2017 ) . 34 . Y . Zhao , B . Schoeps , D . Yao , Z . Zhang , K . Schuck , V . Tissen , C . Jager , A . M . Schlitter , R . van der Kammen , C . Ludwig , J . G . D ' Haese , S . Raulefs , N . Maeritz , S . Shen , X . Zou , 27 A . Kruger , J . Kleeff , C . W . Michalski , H . Friess , M . Innocenti , B . Kong , mTORC1 and mTORC2 Converge on the Arp2 / 3 Complex to Promote Kras ( G12D ) - Induced Acinar - to - Ductal Metaplasia and Early Pancreatic Carcinogenesis . Gastroenterology 160 , 1755 - 1770 e1717 ( 2021 ) . 35 . J . Scholten , K . Hartmann , A . Gerbaulet , T . Krieg , W . Muller , G . Testa , A . Roers , Mast cell - specific Cre / loxP - mediated recombination in vivo . Transgenic Res 17 , 307 - 315 ( 2008 ) . 36 . J . Riedl , K . C . Flynn , A . Raducanu , F . Gartner , G . Beck , M . Bosl , F . Bradke , S . Massberg , A . Aszodi , M . Sixt , R . Wedlich - Soldner , Lifeact mice for studying F - actin dynamics . Nat Methods 7 , 168 - 169 ( 2010 ) . 37 . R . J . Petrie , N . Gavara , R . S . Chadwick , K . M . Yamada , Nonpolarized signaling reveals two distinct modes of 3D cell migration . J Cell Biol 197 , 439 - 455 ( 2012 ) . 38 . S . L . Chia , S . Kapoor , C . Carvalho , M . Bajenoff , R . Gentek , Mast cell ontogeny : From fetal development to life - long health and disease . Immunol Rev 315 , 31 - 53 ( 2023 ) . 39 . R . Gentek , C . Ghigo , G . Hoeffel , M . J . Bulle , R . Msallam , G . Gautier , P . Launay , J . Chen , F . Ginhoux , M . Bajenoff , Hemogenic Endothelial Fate Mapping Reveals Dual Developmental Origin of Mast Cells . Immunity 48 , 1160 - 1171 e1165 ( 2018 ) . 40 . M . D . Tharp , L . L . Seelig , Jr . , R . E . Tigelaar , P . R . Bergstresser , Conjugated avidin binds to mast cell granules . J Histochem Cytochem 33 , 27 - 32 ( 1985 ) . 41 . E . Rivers , A . J . Thrasher , Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein : Emerging mechanisms in immunity . Eur J Immunol 47 , 1857 - 1866 ( 2017 ) . 42 . K . Rottner , T . E . B . Stradal , WASP stings into matrix to lead immune cell migration . J Cell Biol 221 , ( 2022 ) . 43 . S . Stahnke , H . Doring , C . Kusch , D . J . J . de Gorter , S . Dutting , A . Guledani , I . Pleines , M . Schnoor , M . Sixt , R . Geffers , M . Rohde , M . Musken , F . Kage , A . Steffen , J . Faix , B . Nieswandt , K . Rottner , T . E . B . Stradal , Loss of Hem1 disrupts macrophage function and impacts migration , phagocytosis , and integrin - mediated adhesion . Curr Biol 31 , 2051 - 2064 e2058 ( 2021 ) . 44 . C . Ghigo , I . Mondor , A . Jorquera , J . Nowak , S . Wienert , S . P . Zahner , B . E . Clausen , H . Luche , B . Malissen , F . Klauschen , M . Bajenoff , Multicolor fate mapping of Langerhans cell homeostasis . J Exp Med 210 , 1657 - 1664 ( 2013 ) . 45 . H . Jiao , D . Jiang , X . Hu , W . Du , L . Ji , Y . Yang , X . Li , T . Sho , X . Wang , Y . Li , Y . T . Wu , Y . H . Wei , X . Hu , L . Yu , Mitocytosis , a migrasome - mediated mitochondrial quality - control process . Cell 184 , 2896 - 2910 e2813 ( 2021 ) . 46 . K . Lim , Y . M . Hyun , K . Lambert - Emo , T . Capece , S . Bae , R . Miller , D . J . Topham , M . Kim , Neutrophil trails guide influenza - specific CD8 ( + ) T cells in the airways . Science 349 , aaa4352 ( 2015 ) . 47 . C . Schneider , C . Shen , A . A . Gopal , T . Douglas , B . Forestell , K . D . Kauffman , D . Rogers , P . Artusa , Q . Zhang , H . Jing , A . F . Freeman , D . L . Barber , I . L . King , M . Saleh , P . W . Wiseman , H . C . Su , J . N . Mandl , Migration - induced cell shattering due to DOCK8 deficiency causes a type 2 - biased helper T cell response . Nat Immunol 21 , 1528 - 1539 ( 2020 ) . 48 . Q . Zhang , C . G . Dove , J . L . Hor , H . M . Murdock , D . M . Strauss - Albee , J . A . Garcia , J . N . Mandl , R . A . Grodick , H . Jing , D . B . Chandler - Brown , T . E . Lenardo , G . Crawford , H . F . Matthews , A . F . Freeman , R . J . Cornall , R . N . Germain , S . N . Mueller , H . C . Su , DOCK8 regulates lymphocyte shape integrity for skin antiviral immunity . J Exp Med 211 , 2549 - 2566 ( 2014 ) . 49 . C . P . Caridi , C . D ' Agostino , T . Ryu , G . Zapotoczny , L . Delabaere , X . Li , V . Y . Khodaverdian , N . Amaral , E . Lin , A . R . Rau , I . Chiolo , Nuclear F - actin and myosins drive relocalization of heterochromatic breaks . Nature 559 , 54 - 60 ( 2018 ) . 28 50 . B . R . Schrank , T . Aparicio , Y . Li , W . Chang , B . T . Chait , G . G . Gundersen , M . E . Gottesman , J . Gautier , Nuclear ARP2 / 3 drives DNA break clustering for homology - directed repair . Nature 559 , 61 - 66 ( 2018 ) . 51 . J . Knerr , R . Werner , C . Schwan , H . Wang , P . Gebhardt , H . Grotsch , A . Caliebe , M . Spielmann , P . M . Holterhus , R . Grosse , N . C . Hornig , Formin - mediated nuclear actin at androgen receptors promotes transcription . Nature 617 , 616 - 622 ( 2023 ) . 52 . D . A . Calderwood , M . H . Ginsberg , Talin forges the links between integrins and actin . Nat Cell Biol 5 , 694 - 697 ( 2003 ) . 53 . K . Franke , M . Kirchner , P . Mertins , T . Zuberbier , M . Babina , The SCF / KIT axis in human mast cells : Capicua acts as potent KIT repressor and ERK predominates PI3K . Allergy 77 , 3337 - 3349 ( 2022 ) . 54 . M . Tsai , P . Valent , S . J . Galli , KIT as a master regulator of the mast cell lineage . J Allergy Clin Immunol 149 , 1845 - 1854 ( 2022 ) . 55 . Y . Li , B . Liu , L . Harmacek , Z . Long , J . Liang , K . Lukin , S . M . Leach , B . O ' Connor , A . N . Gerber , J . Hagman , A . Roers , F . D . Finkelman , H . Huang , The transcription factors GATA2 and microphthalmia - associated transcription factor regulate Hdc gene expression in mast cells and are required for IgE / mast cell - mediated anaphylaxis . J Allergy Clin Immunol 142 , 1173 - 1184 ( 2018 ) . 56 . E . Morii , K . Oboki , K . Ishihara , T . Jippo , T . Hirano , Y . Kitamura , Roles of MITF for development of mast cells in mice : effects on both precursors and tissue environments . Blood 104 , 1656 - 1661 ( 2004 ) . 57 . V . Jaumouille , A . X . Cartagena - Rivera , C . M . Waterman , Coupling of beta ( 2 ) integrins to actin by a mechanosensitive molecular clutch drives complement receptor - mediated phagocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 21 , 1357 - 1369 ( 2019 ) . 58 . R . C . May , E . Caron , A . Hall , L . M . Machesky , Involvement of the Arp2 / 3 complex in phagocytosis mediated by FcgammaR or CR3 . Nat Cell Biol 2 , 246 - 248 ( 2000 ) . 59 . A . F . Carisey , E . M . Mace , M . B . Saeed , D . M . Davis , J . S . Orange , Nanoscale Dynamism of Actin Enables Secretory Function in Cytolytic Cells . Curr Biol 28 , 489 - 502 e489 ( 2018 ) . 60 . A . Peterson , D . Bennin , M . Lasarev , J . Chini , D . J . Beebe , A . Huttenlocher , Neutrophil motility is regulated by both cell intrinsic and endothelial cell ARPC1B . J Cell Sci 137 , ( 2024 ) . 61 . F . Gaertner , P . Reis - Rodrigues , I . de Vries , M . Hons , J . Aguilera , M . Riedl , A . Leithner , S . Tasciyan , A . Kopf , J . Merrin , V . Zheden , W . A . Kaufmann , R . Hauschild , M . Sixt , WASp triggers mechanosensitive actin patches to facilitate immune cell migration in dense tissues . Dev Cell 57 , 47 - 62 e49 ( 2022 ) . 62 . P . Vargas , P . Maiuri , M . Bretou , P . J . Saez , P . Pierobon , M . Maurin , M . Chabaud , D . Lankar , D . Obino , E . Terriac , M . Raab , H . R . Thiam , T . Brocker , S . M . Kitchen - Goosen , A . S . Alberts , P . Sunareni , S . Xia , R . Li , R . Voituriez , M . Piel , A . M . Lennon - Dumenil , Innate control of actin nucleation determines two distinct migration behaviours in dendritic cells . Nat Cell Biol 18 , 43 - 53 ( 2016 ) . 63 . H . R . Thiam , P . Vargas , N . Carpi , C . L . Crespo , M . Raab , E . Terriac , M . C . King , J . Jacobelli , A . S . Alberts , T . Stradal , A . M . Lennon - Dumenil , M . Piel , Perinuclear Arp2 / 3 - driven actin polymerization enables nuclear deformation to facilitate cell migration through complex environments . Nat Commun 7 , 10997 ( 2016 ) . 64 . T . W . Kuijpers , A . T . J . Tool , I . van der Bijl , M . de Boer , M . van Houdt , I . M . de Cuyper , D . Roos , F . van Alphen , K . van Leeuwen , E . L . Cambridge , M . J . Arends , G . Dougan , S . Clare , R . Ramirez - Solis , S . T . Pals , D . J . Adams , A . B . Meijer , T . K . van den Berg , Combined immunodeficiency with severe inflammation and allergy caused by ARPC1B deficiency . J Allergy Clin Immunol 140 , 273 - 277 e210 ( 2017 ) . 29 65 . C . J . Nunes - Santos , H . Kuehn , B . Boast , S . Hwang , D . B . Kuhns , J . Stoddard , J . E . Niemela , D . L . Fink , S . Pittaluga , M . Abu - Asab , J . S . Davies , V . A . Barr , T . Kawai , O . M . Delmonte , M . Bosticardo , M . Garofalo , M . Carneiro - Sampaio , R . Somech , M . Gharagozlou , N . Parvaneh , L . E . Samelson , T . A . Fleisher , A . Puel , L . D . Notarangelo , B . Boisson , J . L . Casanova , B . Derfalvi , S . D . Rosenzweig , Inherited ARPC5 mutations cause an actinopathy impairing cell motility and disrupting cytokine signaling . Nat Commun 14 , 3708 ( 2023 ) . 66 . E . Sindram , A . Caballero - Oteyza , N . Kogata , S . Chor Mei Huang , Z . Alizadeh , L . Gamez - Diaz , M . R . Fazlollhi , X . Peng , B . Grimbacher , M . Way , M . Proietti , ARPC5 deficiency leads to severe early - onset systemic inflammation and mortality . Dis Model Mech 16 , ( 2023 ) . 67 . J . V . Abella , C . Galloni , J . Pernier , D . J . Barry , S . Kjaer , M . F . Carlier , M . Way , Isoform diversity in the Arp2 / 3 complex determines actin filament dynamics . Nat Cell Biol 18 , 76 - 86 ( 2016 ) . 68 . L . Sadhu , N . Tsopoulidis , M . Hasanuzzaman , V . Laketa , M . Way , O . T . Fackler , ARPC5 isoforms and their regulation by calcium - calmodulin - N - WASP drive distinct Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin remodeling events in CD4 T cells . Elife 12 , ( 2023 ) . 69 . M . C . Jones , J . Zha , M . J . Humphries , Connections between the cell cycle , cell adhesion and the cytoskeleton . Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 374 , 20180227 ( 2019 ) . 70 . S . Huang , D . E . Ingber , The structural and mechanical complexity of cell - growth control . Nat Cell Biol 1 , E131 - 138 ( 1999 ) . 71 . M . A . Schwartz , R . K . Assoian , Integrins and cell proliferation : regulation of cyclin - dependent kinases via cytoplasmic signaling pathways . J Cell Sci 114 , 2553 - 2560 ( 2001 ) . 72 . I . Dang , A . Gautreau , Evidence for a cell cycle checkpoint that senses branched actin in the lamellipodium . Bioessays 34 , 1021 - 1024 ( 2012 ) . 73 . N . Molinie , S . N . Rubtsova , A . Fokin , S . P . Visweshwaran , N . Rocques , A . Polesskaya , A . Schnitzler , S . Vacher , E . V . Denisov , L . A . Tashireva , V . M . Perelmuter , N . V . Cherdyntseva , I . Bieche , A . M . Gautreau , Cortical branched actin determines cell cycle progression . Cell Res 29 , 432 - 445 ( 2019 ) . 74 . O . D . Lohez , C . Reynaud , F . Borel , P . R . Andreassen , R . L . Margolis , Arrest of mammalian fibroblasts in G1 in response to actin inhibition is dependent on retinoblastoma pocket proteins but not on p53 . J Cell Biol 161 , 67 - 77 ( 2003 ) . 75 . S . N . Rubtsova , R . V . Kondratov , P . B . Kopnin , P . M . Chumakov , B . P . Kopnin , J . M . Vasiliev , Disruption of actin microfilaments by cytochalasin D leads to activation of p53 . FEBS Lett 430 , 353 - 357 ( 1998 ) . 76 . C . Wu , S . B . Asokan , M . E . Berginski , E . M . Haynes , N . E . Sharpless , J . D . Griffith , S . M . Gomez , J . E . Bear , Arp2 / 3 is critical for lamellipodia and response to extracellular matrix cues but is dispensable for chemotaxis . Cell 148 , 973 - 987 ( 2012 ) . 77 . E . L . Haarer , C . J . Theodore , S . Guo , R . B . Frier , K . G . Campellone , Genomic instability caused by Arp2 / 3 complex inactivation results in micronucleus biogenesis and cellular senescence . PLoS Genet 19 , e1010045 ( 2023 ) . 78 . V . K . Gupta , O . Chaudhuri , Mechanical regulation of cell - cycle progression and division . Trends Cell Biol 32 , 773 - 785 ( 2022 ) . 79 . B . W . Benham - Pyle , B . L . Pruitt , W . J . Nelson , Cell adhesion . Mechanical strain induces E - cadherin - dependent Yap1 and beta - catenin activation to drive cell cycle entry . Science 348 , 1024 - 1027 ( 2015 ) . 80 . S . Huang , C . S . Chen , D . E . Ingber , Control of cyclin D1 , p27 ( Kip1 ) , and cell cycle progression in human capillary endothelial cells by cell shape and cytoskeletal tension . Mol Biol Cell 9 , 3179 - 3193 ( 1998 ) . 30 81 . M . Uroz , S . Wistorf , X . Serra - Picamal , V . Conte , M . Sales - Pardo , P . Roca - Cusachs , R . Guimera , X . Trepat , Regulation of cell cycle progression by cell - cell and cell - matrix forces . Nat Cell Biol 20 , 646 - 654 ( 2018 ) . 82 . Y . A . Miroshnikova , S . A . Wickstrom , Mechanical Forces in Nuclear Organization . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 14 , ( 2022 ) . 83 . P . M . Davidson , B . Cadot , Actin on and around the Nucleus . Trends Cell Biol 31 , 211 - 223 ( 2021 ) . 84 . J . Aureille , V . Buffiere - Ribot , B . E . Harvey , C . Boyault , L . Pernet , T . Andersen , G . Bacola , M . Balland , S . Fraboulet , L . Van Landeghem , C . Guilluy , Nuclear envelope deformation controls cell cycle progression in response to mechanical force . EMBO Rep 20 , e48084 ( 2019 ) . 85 . H . Du , J . M . Bartleson , S . Butenko , V . Alonso , W . F . Liu , D . A . Winer , M . J . Butte , Tuning immunity through tissue mechanotransduction . Nat Rev Immunol 23 , 174 - 188 ( 2023 ) . 86 . J . Zhang , A . Shehabeldin , L . A . da Cruz , J . Butler , A . K . Somani , M . McGavin , I . Kozieradzki , A . O . dos Santos , A . Nagy , S . Grinstein , J . M . Penninger , K . A . Siminovitch , Antigen receptor - induced activation and cytoskeletal rearrangement are impaired in Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein - deficient lymphocytes . J Exp Med 190 , 1329 - 1342 ( 1999 ) . 87 . B . G . Petrich , P . Marchese , Z . M . Ruggeri , S . Spiess , R . A . Weichert , F . Ye , R . Tiedt , R . C . Skoda , S . J . Monkley , D . R . Critchley , M . H . Ginsberg , Talin is required for integrin - mediated platelet function in hemostasis and thrombosis . J Exp Med 204 , 3103 - 3111 ( 2007 ) . 88 . N . Gaudenzio , T . Marichal , S . J . Galli , L . L . Reber , Genetic and Imaging Approaches Reveal Pro - Inflammatory and Immunoregulatory Roles of Mast Cells in Contact Hypersensitivity . Front Immunol 9 , 1275 ( 2018 ) . 89 . K . Karimi , F . A . Redegeld , B . Heijdra , F . P . Nijkamp , Stem cell factor and interleukin - 4 induce murine bone marrow cells to develop into mast cells with connective tissue type characteristics in vitro . Exp Hematol 27 , 654 - 662 ( 1999 ) . 90 . J . C . Lee , A . J . Hapel , J . N . Ihle , Constitutive production of a unique lymphokine ( IL 3 ) by the WEHI - 3 cell line . J Immunol 128 , 2393 - 2398 ( 1982 ) . 91 . J . H . Butterfield , D . Weiler , G . Dewald , G . J . Gleich , Establishment of an immature mast cell line from a patient with mast cell leukemia . Leuk Res 12 , 345 - 355 ( 1988 ) . 92 . S . B . Koh , P . Mascalchi , E . Rodriguez , Y . Lin , D . I . Jodrell , F . M . Richards , S . K . Lyons , A quantitative FastFUCCI assay defines cell cycle dynamics at a single - cell level . J Cell Sci 130 , 512 - 520 ( 2017 ) . 93 . C . T . Rueden , J . Schindelin , M . C . Hiner , B . E . DeZonia , A . E . Walter , E . T . Arena , K . W . Eliceiri , ImageJ2 : ImageJ for the next generation of scientific image data . BMC Bioinformatics 18 , 529 ( 2017 ) . 94 . D . Legland , I . Arganda - Carreras , P . Andrey , MorphoLibJ : integrated library and plugins for mathematical morphology with ImageJ . Bioinformatics 32 , 3532 - 3534 ( 2016 ) . 31 Acknowledgments : We thank R . Wedlich - Söldner , K . A . Siminovitch , A . Roers , S . Monkley and D . Critchley for kindly providing mice for this study , K . Lucht for help with molecular biology work , members of the MPI Imaging Facility for assistance with imaging , the flow cytometry facility for cell sorting , I . Brentrop for EM sample preparation , and members of the Lämmermann lab for helpful discussions ; Funding : This work was supported by the Max Planck Society ( T . L . ) , IZKF , Medical Faculty , University of Münster ( T . L . ) , the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft DFG ( GR 2111 / 13 - 1 , R . G . ; BA - 3769 / 3 , BA - 3769 / 4 , M . B . ) ; the European Union—NextGenerationEU through the Italian Ministry of University and Research under PNRR—M4C2 - I1 . 3 Project PE _ 00000019 “HEAL ITALIA” , CUP H43C22000830006 of University of Milano Bicocca ( M . I . ) . The views and opinions expressed are those of the author only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European Commission . Neither the European Union nor the European Commission can be held responsible for them . Author contributions : LK : Conceptualization , Investigation , Methodology , Validation , Formal Analysis , Visualization , Writing – Original Draft , TEBS , MI , MB , SU , RG : Resources , Methodology , MMi , MMü , GM : Investigation , KMG : Visualization , TL : Conceptualization , Funding Acquisition , Project Administration , Supervision , Investigation , Visualization , Writing – original draft , all authors : Writing – review and editing ; Competing interests : Authors declare no competing interests . ; and Data and materials availability : All data is available in the main text or the supplementary materials . Mcpt5 CRE mice are available through Axel Roers ( Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg ) , Was - / - mice are available through Katherine A . Siminovitch ( University of Toronto ) , Hem fl / fl mice are available through Theresia E . B . Stradal ( Helmholtz Center for Infection Biology , Braunschweig ) . Fig . 1 : Arp2 / 3 complex controls MC morphology and motility in 3D environments . ( A ) Scheme for the generation of control ( WT ) and Arpc4 - deficient ( Arpc4 – / – ) bone marrow - derived mast cells ( BMMCs ) from mice . ( B ) Representative scanning electron microscopy images of WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMCs . ( C – E ) Comparative analysis of WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMC migration in 3D Matrigel . ( C ) Brightfield images show cell morphologies ( t = 36 h ) . ( D ) Trajectories of individual WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMC tracks over 36 h . ( E ) Quantification of average cell speeds . Dots in the upper graph are values of individuals cells ( N = 30 randomly chosen cells per genotype ) . Dots in the lower graph show the average cell speed of all cells ( n = 3 independent experiments from 2 biological replicates ) . Bars displays the mean ; * * P ≤0 . 01 , t test . ( F , G ) Spinning - disk confocal microscopy of Lifeact - GFP ( glow ) expressing WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMCs migrating in Matrigel . Zoom - ins show an exemplary lamellopodia - like protrusion ( WT , F ) and lobopodia - like protrusion of the ( Arpc4 – / – , G ) , focal z - plane . ( H ) Spinning - disk confocal microscopy showing the loss of a cellular fragment from the cell edge of a Lifeact - GFP expressing Arpc4 – / – BMMC in 3D Matrigel . A time sequence from live cell imaging over 45 min is displayed . ( I – M ) Testing the lobopodia - like nature of Arpc4 – / – BMMC protrusions in 3D gels . ( I , J , L ) Spinning - disk confocal images show representative morphologies of Lifeact - GFP expressing cells in 3D gels . To interfere with actomyosin contraction , Arpc4 – / – BMMCs were either treated with Y - 27632 ( I ) or blebbistatin ( J ) . To interfere with integrin β1 ( ITGB1 ) - mediated adhesion , Arpc4 – / – BMMCs were treated with anti - ITGB1 antibody ( L ) . ( K , M ) Comparative analysis of WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMC migration in fibrillar Matrigel upon functional interference . Quantification of the average cell speed is shown . Dots are values of individual cells ( N = 30 randomly chosen cells per condition ) . Bars display the median ; * * * P ≤0 . 0001 , Dunn´s multiple comparison ( posthoc Kruskal - Wallis test ) . Scale bars : 2 µm ( B ) , 50 µm ( C ) , 4 µm , 2 µm ( zoom - in ) ( F , G ) , 3 µm , 2 µm ( zoom - in ) ( H ) , 15 µm ( I , J , L ) . Fig . 2 : Arp2 / 3 complex is critical for MC homeostasis in the skin of adult mice . ( A , B ) Representative overview of MC distribution in the ear skin dermis of different mouse age groups . Immunofluorescence stainings of ear skin whole mount tissues from Arpc4 ΔMC and littermate controls . Dermal MCs were immuno - stained with fluorescent avidin ( yellow ) . Arterioles and venules were stained against α - smooth muscle actin ( ACTA2 , cyan ) . ( C ) Histological quantification of MC density in the ear skin dermis of Arpc4 ΔMC and littermate control mice at different ages . Each dot represents the average value of three imaging field of views from one mouse ( n = 3 mice per genotype ) . Bars display the mean ; ns , non - significant , * * * P ≤0 . 0001 , t test . ( D – G ) The functional contribution of the Arp2 / 3 upstream activators WASP and HEM1 for MC distribution in the ear skin dermis of adult mice was analyzed . Immunostainings and quantifications were performed as in B and C , respectively . ( E , G ) Each dot represents the average value of three imaging field of views from one mouse ( n = 2 - 3 mice per genotype ) . Bars display the mean ; * P ≤0 . 05 ( Was – / – ) , ns , non - significant ( Hem1 ΔMC ) , t test . Scale bars : 100 µm ( B , D , F ) . Fig . 3 : Arp2 / 3 complex protects MC proliferation and survival in 3D Matrigel , but not in suspension . ( A ) To mimic 3D aspects of the skin dermis in vitro , WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMCs were embedded in 3D Matrigel and their behavior monitored over seven days . Brightfield images of WT and Arpc4 – / – MCs in the presence of the cell death marker Sytox ( orange ) are shown ( t = 0 d , t = 7 d ) . ( B – E ) Cell proliferation and cell death of WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMCs was quantified in 3D Matrigel ( B , C ) or suspension culture ( D , E ) ( t = 0 d , t = 7 d ) . Each dot represents one independent experiment . Bars display the mean . Cell death in the Matrigel was assessed by quantification of Sytox positive BMMCs . Cell death in suspension was quantified by flow cytometric measurements of the percentage of propidium iodide ( PI ) positive cells . ( B , C ) n = 4 independent experiments from 3 biological replicates ; ns , non - significant , * * * P ≤0 . 001 ; t test . ( D , E ) n = 3 independent experiments from 2 biological cultures ; ns , non - significant , t test . ( F ) To visualize the actin cytoskeleton of BMMCs , Arpc4 ΔMC mice were crossed with Lifeact - GFP transgenics . ( G ) Spinning - disk confocal microscopy of Lifeact - GFP expressing Arpc4 – / – BMMCs embedded in 3D Matrigel over several days . Lifeact - GFP positive small actin particles accumulate around cells ( highlighted with arrow ) . ( H ) The number of individual actin particles were measured per defined volume . Y - 27632 was applied to interfere with actomyosin contraction . Each dot represents the average value of three imaging fields of view from one independent experiment ( n = 3 independent experiments from 2 biological replicates ) . The bars display the mean ; * * * P ≤0 . 001 , t test . ( I ) Arpc4 ΔMC and littermate control mice were crossed with Ubow transgenic mice , which leads to the expression of either YFP or CFP in dermal MCs . Immunofluorescence stainings of ear skin whole mount tissues from WT Ubow and Arpc4 ΔMC Ubow mice are shown . Dermal MCs were immuno - stained with fluorescent avidin ( purple ) and anti - GFP to amplify YFP and CFP signals . ( J , K ) Histological quantification of avidin - and Ubow - positive fragments in the dermis of ear skin whole mount tissues of WT Ubow and Arpc4 ΔMC Ubow mice . ( J ) Representative overview images of MCs ( orange ) in relation to collagen IV ( COL4 ) - expressing basement membrane structures ( blue ) . Fragments are highlighted as spots . ( K ) Each dot represents the average value of three imaging field of views from one mouse ( n = 4 mice per genotype ) . Bars display the mean ; * * P ≤0 . 01 ( Ubow ) , ns , non - significant , t test . ( L , M ) CK666 - mediated Arp2 / 3 complex inhibition on primary human MCs embedded in 3D Matrigel . ( L ) Representative brightfield images of MCs treated with CK666 or the biological inactive form CK689 in the presence of the cell death marker Sytox ( orange ) ( t = 0 d , t = 6 d ) . ( M ) Quantification of cell proliferation and cell death . Each dot represents one independent experiment ( n = 3 independent experiments from three different donor pools ) . Bars display the mean ; ns , non - significant , * * P ≤0 . 01 ( t = 6 d , growth ) , * P ≤0 . 05 ( t = 6 d , death ) , t test . ( N , O ) CK666 - mediated Arp2 / 3 complex inhibition on the human mast cell lines HMC1 . 1 ( N ) and HMC1 . 2 ( O ) embedded in 3D Matrigel . ( N ) Bars display the mean ; * * * P < 0 . 0001 ( t = 3 d , growth , death ) , t test . ( O ) Bars display the mean ; * * P < 0 . 01 ( t = 3 d , growth , death ) , t test . Scale bars : 80 µm ( A ) , 30 µm ( G ) , 5 µm , 2 µm ( zoom - in ) ( I ) , 50 µm ( J ) , 80 µm ( L ) . Fig . 4 : MCs require the Arp2 / 3 complex for cell cycle control in 3D Matrigel . ( A ) Cell cycle analysis of growing WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMCs in fibrillar 3D gels . WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMCs were transduced with FastFUCCI to differentiate cell cycle stages by nucleus color : G1 / S phase ( red ) , G2 / M phase ( green ) . ( B – F ) FastFUCCI transduced WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMCs were monitored in 3D Matrigel over seven days . ( B ) Representative brightfield and epifluorescence images are shown ( t = 0 d , t = 7 d ) . ( C ) Quantification of dividing and non - diving MCs over seven days . Percentages represent average values obtained from n = 3 independent experiments per genotype . ( D – F ) Quantification of cell proliferation and cell cycle stages ( t = 0 d , t = 7 d ) . Each dot represents one independent experiments ( n = 3 independent experiments per genotype ) . Bars display the mean ; ns , non - significant , * * * P < 0 . 0001 , * * P ≤0 . 01 , t test . ( G ) Comparative analysis of cell cycle stages of BMMCs in suspension . Reporter positivity was analyzed with flow cytometry . Each dot represents one independent experiment ( n = 4 independent experiments per genotype ) . Bars display the mean ; ns , non - significant , t test . ( H ) Single cell fate mapping analysis based on microscopic data on cell division and cell cycle stages was performed over 96 h for WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMCs in 3D Matrigel . ( I ) Visualization of cell cycle dynamics of WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMCs in 3D Matrigel by single cell fate mapping every 3 h . Each colored box represents a cell cycle stage , cross indicates cell death . A representative analysis of 1 WT cell and 35 Arpc4 – / – BMMCs is shown . ( J ) Quantification of cell cycle fates over time . For Arpc4 – / – BMMCs the percentage values derive from the mean value of three independent experiments per genotype , for WT BMMCs the percentage values derive from the mean value of one independent experiment . For each independent experiment 35 randomly chosen WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMCs were analyzed over 96 h . ( K ) Representative time - lapse sequences of cell fates of Arpc4 – / – BMMCs over time in 3D gel are shown . ( L ) The contribution of nuclear Arp2 / 3 on MC proliferation and survival in 3D Matrigel was analyzed . WT BMMCs were transduced with mScarlet - Arpin - NLS to specifically inhibit Arp2 / 3 in the nucleus . ( M ) Transduced control ( Ctrl ) and Arpin - expressing BMMCs were embedded in 3D Matrigel and monitored over six days . Representative images are shown ( t = 0 d , t = 6 d ) . ( N – R ) Cell growth and survival of Ctrl and Arpin BMMCs over 6 days in 3D Matrigel and suspension was analyzed . Each dot represents one independent experiment ( n = 3 independent experiments per genotype ) . ( N , O , Q , R ) Bars display the mean ; ns , non - significant , t test . Scale bars : 80 µm ( B ) , 20 µm ( H ) , 50 µm ( K ) , 80 µm ( M ) . Fig . 5 : Arp2 / 3 complex is critical for MC proliferation and survival upon mechano - coupling . ( A ) Adhesion assay of WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMCs to several ligands upon stimulation with KITLG . Bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) assessed background adhesion . Col1 ( collagen 1 ) , FN ( fibronectin ) . Bars display the average optical density ( OD ) value of adherent cells . Each dot represents an independent experiment ( n = 5 independent experiments from 3 biological replicates ) for each condition . Bars display the mean ; ns , non - significant ; t test . ( B ) The contribution of integrin - mediated adhesion on the death of WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMCs under 2D culture conditions was analyzed . WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMCs were kept on FN - treated dishes for 48 h . Flow cytometric quantification of the percentage of PI positive cells at different time points ( t = 24 h , t = 48 h ) . Each dot represents one independent experiment ( n = 3 independent experiments from 2 biological replicates ) . Bars display the mean ; ns , non - significant , * * P ≤0 . 01 , t test . ( C ) WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMCs were embedded in non - adhesive 3D collagen I gels and monitored over seven days . Brightfield images with the cell death marker Sytox ( orange ) are displayed ( t = 0 d , t = 7 d ) . ( D – G ) Quantification of cell proliferation , cell death and cell cycle stages of WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMCs in 3D collagen I gels . Bars display the mean ( D – F ) or the median ( G , 0 d ) . Each dot represents one independent experiment from n = 3 independent experiments per genotype . ns , non - significant , t test ( D – G , 7 d values ) , U test ( G , 0 d ) . ( H ) To rescue Arpc4 – / – BMMCs in adhesive 3D Matrigel , Arpc4 – / – BMMCs were treated with anti - ITGB1 antibody . Brightfield images of WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMCs with anti - ITGB1 treatment and the cell death marker Sytox ( orange ) are displayed ( t = 0 d , t = 7 d ) . ( I , J ) Quantification of cell proliferation and survival of WT and Arpc4 – / – BMMCs with anti - ITGB1 treatment in adhesive 3D Matrigel . Bars indicate the mean ; each dot represents one independent experiment ( n = 3 independent experiments per genotype ) . ( I ) ns , non - significant , * * P ≤0 . 01 , Tukey´s multiple comparison ( posthoc one - way Anova test for 7 d values ) . Scale bars : 80 µm ( C , H ) . Fig . 6 : Arp2 / 3 complex protects the tissue residency of mechano - coupled MCs in the skin . ( A , B ) Testing whether integrin - ECM interactions mediate the Arpc4 ΔMC phenotype of impaired MC homeostasis in native skin tissue . Arpc4 ΔMC mice were crossed with Tln1 fl / fl mice to generate Mcpt5 - Cre + / − Arpc4 fl / fl Tln1 fl / fl ( Arpc4Tln1 ΔMC ) mice , which have MC - specific functional interference of the Arp2 / 3 complex and integrin functionality . ( A ) Representative overview of MC distribution in the ear skin of 11 to 13 weeks old mice . Immunofluorescence stainings of ear skin whole mounts from Arpc4 ΔMC , Arpc4Tln1 ΔMC and littermate control mice . Dermal MCs were immuno - stained with fluorescent avidin ( yellow ) . Arterioles and venules were stained against α - smooth muscle actin ( ACTA2 , cyan ) . ( B ) Histological quantification of MC density in the ear dermis of Arpc4 ΔMC , Arpc4Tln1 ΔMC mice and littermate controls . Each dot represents the average value of three imaging field of views from one mouse ( n = 3 mice per genotype ) . Bars display the mean ; ns , non - significant , * * P ≤0 . 01 , * P ≤0 . 05 , Tukey´s multiple comparison test ( posthoc one - way Anova test ) . Scale bar : 100 µm ( A ) .