Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 17 , 3689 – 3704 , August 2006 Arf6 - independent GPI - anchored Protein - enriched Early Endosomal Compartments Fuse with Sorting Endosomes via a Rab5 / Phosphatidylinositol - 3 (cid:1) - Kinase – dependent Machinery □ D Manjula Kalia , * Sudha Kumari , * Rahul Chadda , * Michelle M . Hill , † Robert G . Parton , † and Satyajit Mayor * * National Centre for Biological Sciences , UAS - GKVK Campus , Bangalore 560065 , India ; and † Institute for Molecular Bioscience , University of Queensland , Queensland 4072 , Australia Submitted October 25 , 2005 ; Revised April 21 , 2006 ; Accepted May 25 , 2006 Monitoring Editor : Jean Gruenberg In the process of internalization of molecules from the extracellular milieu , a cell uses multiple endocytic pathways , consequently generating different endocytic vesicles . These primary endocytic vesicles are targeted to speciﬁc destinations inside the cell . Here , we show that GPI - anchored proteins are internalized by an Arf6 - independent mechanism into GPI - anchored protein - enriched early endosomal compartments ( GEECs ) . Internalized GPI - anchored proteins and the ﬂuid phase are ﬁrst visualized in GEECs that are acidic , primary endocytic structures , negative for early endosomal markers , Rab4 , Rab5 , and early endosome antigen ( EEA ) 1 . They subsequently acquire Rab5 and EEA1 before homotypic fusion with other GEECs , and heterotypic fusion with endosomes containing cargo from the clathrin - dependent endocytic pathway . Although , the formation of GEECs is unaffected by inhibition of Rab5 GTPase and phosphatidylinositol - 3 (cid:1) - kinase ( PI3K ) activity , their fusion with sorting endosomes is dependent on both activities . Overexpression of Rab5 reverts PI3K inhibition of fusion , providing evidence that Rab5 effectors play important roles in heterotypic fusion between the dynamin - independent GEECs and clathrin - and dynamin - dependent sorting endosomes . INTRODUCTION A cell uses multiple endocytic pathways for the uptake of molecules from the extracellular milieu ( Mukherjee et al . , 1997 ; Conner and Schmid , 2003 ) . The better characterized pathways are mediated by clathrin - and caveolae - coated endocytic invaginations and require dynamin activity to be severed from the plasma membrane ( Damke et al . , 1994 ; Hinshaw and Schmid , 1995 ; Henley et al . , 1998 ; Oh et al . , 1998 ) . There also seem to be one or more clathrin - indepen - dent pathways where dynamin is required , for example , the pathway for internalization of the interleukin ( IL ) - 2 receptor subunits ( Lamaze et al . , 2001 ) . In addition , there are a grow - ing number of dynamin - independent endocytic processes that serve as internalization routes for a number of cell surface proteins , including lipid - linked proteins , such as GPI - anchored proteins ( Lamaze and Schmid , 1995 ; Conner and Schmid , 2003 ; Nichols , 2003 ; Mayor and Riezman , 2004 ; Naslavsky et al . , 2004 ; Kirkham and Parton , 2005 ) . GPI - anchored proteins are internalized via a dynamin , caveolin , and clathrin - independent pathway that is also re - sponsible for the entry of a sizable fraction of the ﬂuid phase in a number of cell types ( Fivaz et al . , 2002 ; Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ; Guha et al . , 2003 ; Kirkham et al . , 2005 ) . GPI - anchored proteins and the ﬂuid phase enter the cell via tubular in - vaginations at the cell surface , into compartments termed GPI - anchored protein - enriched early endosomal compart - ments ( GEECs ) ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ; Kirkham et al . , 2005 ) . At early times , these structures are largely devoid of cargo from the clathrin - dependent pathway . Besides a re - quirement for the small GTPase cdc42 , very little is known about the molecular players that govern the formation and trafﬁcking of GEECs . Much less is known about the detailed endocytic itinerary of these pathways ( Lamaze and Schmid , 1995 ; Mayor and Riezman , 2004 ) . After internalization , endocytic vesicles derived from the plasma membrane seem to map out distinct fates . Clathrin - coated vesicles eventually fuse with sorting endosomes ( Mukherjee et al . , 1997 ) . Sorting endosomes are characterized by their ability to undergo small GTPase Rab5 - dependent homotypic fusion ( Zerial and McBride , 2001 ) . These endo - somes are also the site for sorting recycling cargo from lysosomally directed material ( Gruenberg and Maxﬁeld , 1995 ) . After internalization via GEECs , GPI - anchored proteins , such as the folate receptor ( FR - GPI ) and decay accelerating factor , eventually reach the pericentriolar recycling endoso - mal compartment in Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) cells ( Chatterjee and Mayor , 2001 ; Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) , sug - gesting that GEECs may fuse with sorting endosomes or at This article was published online ahead of print in MBC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E05 – 10 – 0980 ) on June 7 , 2006 . □ D The online version of this article contains supplemental material at MBC Online ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org ) . Address correspondence to : Satyajit Mayor ( mayor @ ncbs . res . in ) . Abbreviations used : EEA1 , early endosomal antigen ; GEEC , GPI - anchored protein - enriched early endosomal compartment ; PI3P , phosphatidylinositol 3 (cid:1) - phosphate ; PKC , protein kinase C ; WT , wortmannin . © 2006 by The American Society for Cell Biology 3689 least deliver their cargo to endosomes derived from the clathrin - mediated pathway . In baby hamster kidney ( BHK ) cells , GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to early endoso - mal antigen ( EEA ) 1 - positive endosomes , en route to late endosomes ( Fivaz et al . , 2002 ) . These trafﬁcking itineraries suggest there might be a cell type - dependent plasticity in intracellular destination of these proteins ( Mayor and Riez - man , 2004 ) . The pathways and molecular players involved in mediating these trafﬁcking steps are not known . Several factors can inﬂuence the exact nature of the path - way that GPI - anchored proteins follow ( Sharma et al . , 2002 ) . As reviewed recently , these pathways can be understood in terms of the nature of lateral associations that GPI - anchored proteins can make ( Mayor and Riezman , 2004 ) . The uptake of cross - linked ( usually by artiﬁcial means ) GPI - anchored proteins takes place via caveolae ( Anderson et al . , 1992 ; Parton et al . , 1994 ) . It also seems that speciﬁc lateral associ - ations of GPI - anchored proteins with other plasma mem - brane components could drastically inﬂuence their precise pathway of internalization . In the case of GPI - anchored prion proteins in neuronal cells , their amino - terminal do - main speciﬁes clathrin - pit localization , and this might be augmented by association of the prion protein with metal ions ( Pauly and Harris , 1998 ; Sunyach et al . , 2003 ) . In recent studies , it has been shown that GPI - anchored prion protein ( PrP C ) is enriched in caveolae at the plasma membrane , and a caveolar uptake mechanism for PrP C and its conversion to PrP sc was proposed . However , the study demonstrated that PrP C followed a different endocytic route than other GPI - anchored proteins , such as CD59 , which showed no enrich - ment in caveolae ( Peters et al . , 2003 ) . Other instances of such protein - speciﬁc modulation are binding of a complex of the urokinase - type plasminogen activator ( uPA ) and its GPI - anchored uPA receptor to the (cid:1) - 2 macroglobulin receptor / low - density lipoprotein receptor - related protein ( Nykjaer et al . , 1992 ; Conese et al . , 1995 ) ; and GPI - anchored CD14 , which interacts with bacterial lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) bound to the plasma - LPS - binding protein ( Poussin et al . , 1998 ; Tri - antaﬁlou et al . , 2001 ) . In the absence of lateral associations of the type described above , or cross - linking and internaliza - tion through the caveolar / raft - dependent pathway ( Nabi and Le , 2003 ) , GPI - anchored proteins seem to be selectively internalized through a dynamin - independent pathway ( Fivaz et al . , 2002 ; Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ; Guha et al . , 2003 ) . It has been recently shown that the nanoscale organization of GPI - anchored proteins on the plasma membrane also inﬂuences their endocytic pathways ( Sharma et al . , 2004 ) . In a variety of mammalian cell types ( Skretting et al . , 1999 ; Ricci et al . , 2000 ; Fivaz et al . , 2002 ) and in Drosophila hemo - cytes ( Guha et al . , 2003 ) , GPI - anchored proteins continue to be internalized even when dynamin activity is inhibited . GPI - anchored proteins are then delivered to Rab5 - negative GEECs . Recently , Nichols ( 2002 ) has shown some overlap of caveolin - 1 ( Cav1 ) - green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) with en - dogenous GPI - anchored protein CD59 - labeled structures and internalized 10K dextran ( Dex ) at relatively late times in structures called caveosomes . From these studies , however , it was not clear whether endocytosed GPI - anchored proteins were delivered to caveosomes . Furthermore , endocytic traf - ﬁcking of markers found in caveosomes ( e . g . , cholera toxin B ; CTxB ) was not affected when caveolin - 1 was depleted by RNAi treatment and so it is unlikely that Cav1 forms an essential component of the relevant membrane trafﬁcking machinery ( Nichols , 2002 ) . In this context , it is important to note that caveolin - coated vesicles seem to follow a distinct intracellular itinerary . Examining transport of the caveolar protein Cav1 and two cargo complexes , simian virus 40 ( SV40 ) and cholera toxin , investigators have shown that caveolin - coated vesicles are targeted to Rab5 - dependent early endosomes and form distinct and stable membrane domains ( Pelkmans et al . , 2004 ) . In early endosomes , the low pH selectively allowed the toxin to diffuse out of the caveo - lar domains into the surrounding membrane , whereas the virus remained trapped . Cholera toxin ﬁnally reaches the Golgi from the early endosome , whereas SV40 transits inde - pendently along microtubules to the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) ( Pelkmans et al . , 2004 ) . These two ligands , SV40 and cholera toxin , that are speciﬁc for the caveolar pathway , can also follow a caveolin - and dynamin - independent endocytic pathway in cells lacking caveolae and Cav1 and - 2 ( Damm et al . , 2005 ; Kirkham et al . , 2005 ) . Cholera toxin continues to be internalized via tubular carriers that are also enriched for GPI - anchored proteins ( Kirkham et al . , 2005 ) , whereas SV40 enters a pH - neutral compartment that does not fuse with sorting endosomes but transits onto the ER ( Damm et al . , 2005 ) . Many steps of the endocytic transport , such as vesicle formation , motility , tethering , and fusion , are tightly regu - lated by small GTPases such as Rab proteins , localized to distinct cellular compartments ( Simons and Zerial , 1993 ; Mellman , 1996 ; McLauchlan et al . , 1998 ; Simonsen et al . , 1998 ) . These proteins cycle between an active , GTP - bound , and an inactive , GDP - bound state , and engage molecular effectors to carry out their function ( Pfeffer , 2001 ; Zerial and McBride , 2001 ) . In addition to the Rab family of proteins , the Arf GTPases ( especially Arf6 ) have also been recently shown to play an important role in endocytic trafﬁcking ( Brown et al . , 2001 ; Donaldson , 2003 ) . Studies in HeLa cells suggest that Arf6 is a key player in regulating the endosome dynam - ics of a dynamin - independent pathway wherein GPI - an - chored proteins are internalized into Arf6 - labeled compart - ments , which also contain endocytosed membrane proteins , myosin heavy chain I ( MHCI ) , and Tac ( Naslavsky et al . , 2003 , 2004 ) . In this Arf6 - associated pathway , the GTP hy - drolysis cycle of Arf6 regulates internalization , fusion with sorting endosomes , and / or recycling of endosomes derived from this pathway ( Radhakrishna and Donaldson , 1997 ; Naslavsky et al . , 2003 ) without affecting the clathrin - depen - dent pathway . In this article , we have addressed three issues about the GEEC pathway : 1 ) the role of Arf6 in the generation of GEECs ; 2 ) pH and fusion capacity of earliest detectable GEECs ; and 3 ) the role of Rab5 and two effectors of the Rab5 subsystem , EEA1 and PI3K , in the formation and consumption of GEECs . MATERIALS AND METHODS Reagents , cDNAs , and Antibodies Unless otherwise mentioned all chemicals and reagents were obtained from Sigma - Aldrich ( Hyderabad , India ) . Folate - free Ham’s F - 12 ( F (cid:2) HF - 12 ) , and sodium ﬂuoride were obtained from Hi - Media ( Mumbai , India ) ; FuGENE 6 was from Roche Molecular Biochemicals ( Nicholas Piramal India , Mumbai , India ) . All ﬂuorescent reagents and probes were from Invitrogen ( Eugene , OR ) or GE Healthcare ( Little Chalfont , Buckinghamshire , United Kingdom ) and have been described previously ( Mayor et al . , 1998 ; Chatterjee et al . , 2001 ; Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) . Monoclonal antibodies against EEA1 and Rab5 were from Signal Transduction Laboratories ( Becton - Dickinson , Singapore ) . Anti - hemagglutinin ( HA ) antibodies were from Cell Signaling Technology ( Bev - erly , MA ) ; anti - GFP antibodies were from Bangalore Genei ( Bangalore , India ) . Goat anti - mouse Fc - speciﬁc secondary antibody was from Jackson Immu - noResearch Laboratories ( West Grove , PA ) and was coupled to either Alexa 488 or Alexa 568 according to manufacturer’s instructions . Wild - type ( wt ) - GFP - Rab5 , dominant - negative ( DN ) - GFP - Rab5 , dominant - active ( DA ) - GFP - Rab5 , and wt - GFP - Rab4 were a gift from Dr . Marino Zerial ( Max - Plank Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics , Dresden , Germany ) . HA - M . Kalia et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3690 and GFP - tagged Arf6 - DA , - ( DN ) , and - wt constructs were a gift from Dr . J . Donaldson ( National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD ) . Cell Labeling and Other Treatments CHO cells stably expressing GFP - GPI and monomeric cyan ﬂuorescent pro - tein ( CFP ) - GPI were generated as described previously and maintained in HF - 12 , 10 % serum ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) . All CHO cell lines were main - tained as described previously ( Mayor et al . , 1998 ) . Primary mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts ( MEFs ) were obtained from 13 . 5 - d - old embryos from either Cav1 knockout or wild - type mice ( Kirkham et al . , 2005 ) . Immortalization to produce Cav1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cell lines was achieved by passaging cells according to published procedures ( Razani and Lisanti , 2001 ) . MEFs , BHK , and HeLa cells were maintained in DMEM , 10 % serum . Cells were incubated with endocytic tracers for indicated times in labeling medium ( HF - 12 or DMEM , 10 % serum ) . For FR - GPI labeling , ﬂuorescent derivatives of folic acid , ﬂuorescein - conju - gated folic acid ( N (cid:1) - pteroyl - N (cid:2) - ( 4 (cid:1) - ﬂuorescein - thiocarbamoyl ) - l - lysine ; PLF ) , and a rhodamine - labeled analogue of folic acid ( N (cid:1) - pteroyl - N (cid:2) - ( 4 (cid:1) - rhoda - mine - thiocarbamoyl ) - l - lysine ; PLR ) were used . Fluorescently labeled Fab fragments of Mov18 , Fab fragments of anti - GFP antibody , and transferrin ( Tf ) were obtained as described previously ( Mayor et al . , 1998 ; Chatterjee et al . , 2001 ) , ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) - Dex or tetramethyrhodamine ( TMR ) - Dex ( 1 mg / ml ) was used to mark the ﬂuid phase . Fluorescently labeled CTxB was used at 2 (cid:3) g / ml . No difference in the endocytic properties and distribu - tion of CTxB was seen at a range of 0 . 5 – 10 (cid:3) g / ml . After incubation with labeled tracers , excess label was washed off with medium1 ( M1 ; Mayor et al . , 1998 ) . To visualize the endosomal distribution of the ﬂuorescent tracers , cells were cooled on ice , and cell surface label ( ﬂuorescently labeled Tf ) was removed by incubating cells in ice - cold ascorbate buffer pH 4 . 5 ; surface ﬂuorescence from labeled Fab fragments or intact antibody against GPI - anchored proteins was removed by phosphatidylinositol - speciﬁc phospho - lipase C treatment . Fluoresecently labeled CTxB was removed by washing with a low pH buffer ( 100 mM glycine , 10 mM magnesium acetate tetrahy - drate , and 50 mM potassium chloride 50 , pH 2 . 2 ) . Cells were ﬁxed with 2 % paraformaldehyde . To detect intracellular antigens they were permeabilized with 0 . 4 % Tween 20 in M1 / bovine serum albumin buffer and stained with appropriate primary and secondary antibodies . Cells were transiently trans - fected using FuGENE 6 according to manufacturer’s instructions . Transfected cells were identiﬁed by CFP , GFP ﬂuorescence or by immunostaining of epitope - tagged proteins expressed in cells using appropriate anti - epitope antibodies . Aluminum ﬂuoride treatment was carried out by treating cells with a mixture of 10 mM NaF and 10 (cid:3) M AlCl 3 for 30 min at 37°C . Measurement of pH in GEECs and Sorting Endosomes The estimation of the organelle pH was based on a ratiometric assay using ﬂuorescein as an indicator of pH ( Maxﬁeld , 1989 ) , FITC - Dex and TMR - Dex as ﬂuid phase probes , and Cy5 - Tf as a sorting endosomal marker . For this purpose , GEECs were identiﬁed as ﬂuid endosomes that are not colocalized with Cy5 - Tf , whereas the sorting endosomes were identiﬁed as endosomes that contain both ﬂuid and Tf . FITC - Dex at a concentration of 1 mg / ml is a reliable marker of GEECs in CHO cells ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) . That the compartments marked by endocytosed FITC - Dex represent GEECs was also independently ascertained for these experiments by examining colocalization with PLR ; colocalization between FITC - Dex and PLR was close to 90 % . After a 2 - min pulse , cells were incubated on ice with 10 (cid:3) M nigericin in different pH buffers ranging from 4 to 9 as indicated . The cells were left in this medium until imaging , and the ﬂuorescence ratio of FITC to TMR at different equili - brated pHs was calculated in individual endosomes . The mean and SE of the distribution of individual endosome ratios of FITC to TMR were obtained at different pHs and plotted to obtain a calibration curve . The pH of GEECs and sorting endosomes were estimated by comparing values obtained for the ﬂuorescence ratios of FITC to TMR in the respective compartments to the calibration curve . The experiment was repeated three times with similar results . The experiment was also performed after mild ﬁxation of cells ( 2 % paraformaldehyde for 2 min on ice ) and gave identical results . Endocytic Uptake Assays For quantitative measurements of endocytosis of ﬂuid phase , FR - GPI and Tf , cells were incubated with ﬂuorescently conjugated reagents for 2 , 5 , or 10 min and extensively washed before imaging . Endocytic uptake of all probes was quantiﬁed at low magniﬁcation ( 20 (cid:3) , 0 . 75 numerical aperture [ NA ] ) as de - scribed previously ( Chatterjee et al . , 2001 ) . High - Resolution Imaging and Image Processing High - resolution wide - ﬁeld images were collected using Nikon TE 200 in - verted microscope equipped with 60 (cid:3) , 1 . 4 NA objective , a mercury arc illuminator ( Nikon , Tokyo , Japan ) , and a cooled charge - coupled device ( CCD ) camera ( TEK - 512B CCD detector mounted in a MicroMax Camera , Princeton Instruments , NJ ) controlled by MetaMorph software ( Molecular Devices , Downingtown , PA ) . Optimized dichroics , excitation , and emission ﬁlters were used as described previously ( Chatterjee et al . , 2001 ) . Confocal imaging was carried out using Zeiss 510 Meta laser scanning microscope ( Carl Zeiss India Pvt . Ltd . , Bangalore , India ) . We found the high - resolution , wide - ﬁeld microscopy system best suited for quantiﬁcation and detection of a range of signals of endocytosed probes , compared with confocal detection systems , due to its high sensitivity . First , the high dynamic range ( 16 bit ; full depth , (cid:4) 12 bit working range for dimly labeled cells , after accounting for intrinsic autoﬂuorescence in cells ) afforded by the wide - ﬁeld system made it possible to collect images of endocytosed probes from both low - and high - expressing cells , with the same exposure settings . In the case of colocalization experiments , it is important to have access to the high dynamic range so that colocalization is not artiﬁcially reduced due to thresholding of signal from low signal levels . Second , confocal imaging in most cases reported artiﬁcially low colocalization indexes , due to the lack of sensitivity of the confocal detection system . However , in all cases the trends observed were preserved . For example , using this system we obtain average colocalization indices of 80 % using two color probes for the same receptors ; confocal imaging reports a much lower index , sometimes (cid:5) 40 % , if the intensities of the two probes were not matched . Quantitative Colocalization Analysis The quantiﬁcation of colocalization of endocytic markers in high - resolution wide - ﬁeld images was determined using established software routines “spots , ” capable of identifying and quantifying the intensity of each endo - somes , followed by “coloc” to determine the extent of colocalization of individual endosomes with identiﬁed endosomes in a reference image ( Dunn et al . , 1989 ; Mayor et al . , 1993 ; Ghosh et al . , 1994 ) . The criteria outlined below were applied to images obtained from CHO cells either untransfected or transfected with HA - Arf6 wt , GFP - Rab5 wt ; stained for EEA1 ; and / or labeled with endocytic tracers against FR - GPI and TfR for different time points at 37°C . High - resolution images of cells were obtained using a 60 (cid:3) 1 . 4 NA objective on a wide - ﬁeld microscope at a pixel resolution of 0 . 15 (cid:3) m / pixel . The images were corrected for background ﬂuorescence using the “Produce background correction image procedure” in MetaMorph image analysis soft - ware using the following parameters suitable for producing a local back - ground image and at the same time preserving the intensity of the endosomes ( box size (cid:6) 30 (cid:3) 30 pixels ; subsample ratio (cid:6) 10 ; percentile (cid:6) 0 . 2 ) . The background corrected images were then processed through spots to identify endosomes using parameters deﬁned by pixels above a threshold ( set by inspection for each image ) and area ( min (cid:6) 3 pixel , max (cid:6) no upper limit ) . A trimming procedure was applied to isolate and segregate individual endo - somes based on the inclusion of pixels with intensities greater than 0 . 3 of maximal intensity within a unit of connected pixels having intensity greater than the set threshold . This was achieved by an iterative procedure using a step size ( 0 . 01 ) for each iteration . This limits the number of iterations of the trimming procedure . The resultant image consists of a background subtracted image containing a set of well deﬁned spots or “endosomes” in terms of net intensity per spot and total pixel area per spot . The two spotted images of different ﬂuorophore - labeled endocytic tracers are matched up against each other to identify the endosomes wherein the two endocytic tracers are colocalized . Endosomes in a tracer image ( e . g . , FR - GPI - containing endosomes ) are compared with endosomes in a “reference image” ( e . g . , Tf - containing endosomes ) using coloc , and endosomes with 50 % or more area overlap are considered as colocalized . The resultant image displays all the spots that are colocalized using a particular “reference - tracer” image pair . Cellular outlines in this image were traced on the phase contrast image of the cell , and the net intensity of each ﬂuorophore per cell was calculated in the spotted as well as the coloc images using procedures outlined in MetaMorph . The colocalization index was then calculated as the ratio of the net intensity of a probe within a cell in the coloc image to the net intensity of the probe within the same cell in a spots image . Colocalization index was expressed as a percentage of the colocalized intensity to the total intensity of the probe in endosomes identiﬁed in each cell . Mean and SEM of the colocalization index were obtained from two to ﬁve independent experiments from at least 10 – 15 cells in each experiment , as described previously ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) . RESULTS Arf6 Is Not a Speciﬁc Marker for GEECs in CHO Cells Studies in HeLa cells have shown that ectopically expressed Arf6 outlines the clathrin - independent internalization path - way that operates on plasma membrane proteins that lack clathrin localization motifs , such as MHCI and IL - 2 receptor (cid:1) subunit ( Tac ) ( Naslavsky et al . , 2003 ) , as well as GPI - anchored proteins ( Naslavsky et al . , 2004 ) . Furthermore , in HeLa cells the tubular Arf6 recycling compartment is dis - tinct from the transferrin recycling endosome ; early endo - somes containing MHCI and CD59 ( GPI - anchored protein ) colocalize with overexpressed Arf6 , whereas endosomes Fusion of GEECs with Sorting Endosomes Vol . 17 , August 2006 3691 containing cargo from the clathrin pathway , such as Tf , do not ( Naslavsky et al . , 2004 ) . The effects and distribution of Arf6 seem to vary between cell types . In contrast to ectopically expressed Arf6 in HeLa cells , endogenous Arf6 seems to mark the clathrin - depen - dent endocytic pathway in CHO cells ( D’Souza - Schorey et al . , 1995 ) . Recently , studies have shown that Arf6 also plays a major role in clathrin - mediated endocytosis by directly controlling the assembly of the AP - 2 / clathrin coat ( Paleotti et al . , 2005 ; Tanabe et al . , 2005 ) . Arf6 has also been shown to be involved in recycling of endocytic membranes via the exo - cyst effector complex ( Prigent et al . , 2003 ) . It also regulates dynamin and clathrin - dependent endocytosis of E - cadherin at adherens junctions ( Palacios et al . , 2002 ) . In addition , Arf6 activity has been consistently associated with formation of actin - based plasma membrane protrusions ( Radhakrishna and Donaldson , 1997 ; Song et al . , 1998 ; Honda et al . , 1999 ) . Indeed , in CHO cells transfected with HA - tagged wild - type Arf6 ( HA - wtArf6 ) or HA - tagged constitutively inactive Arf6 ( T27N mutant , DN - Arf6 ) , Tf - containing endosomes show a high degree of colocalization with Arf6 ( Figure 1 , A , B , and D ) . Quantitatively , (cid:4) 45 % of Tf - containing endosomes were colocalized with Arf6 , 5 min postinternalization ( Fig - ure 1D , top ) . However , endosomes containing ﬂuid and GPI - anchored proteins internalized for short times ( 2 min ; Figure 1C ) were not associated with Arf6 - labeled structures . Less than 15 % of these structures colocalized with Arf6 as determined from a qualitative inspection of confocal images ( Figure 1C ) of (cid:7) 500 GPI - anchored protein - containing endo - somes in 20 cells . There was also no association of wt - Arf6 or DN - Arf6 with these endosomes at later times ( Figure 1 , A and B , respectively ) . GPI - anchored protein containing endo - somes that colocalized with Arf6 also contained Tf ( Figure 1 , A and D ) ; 80 % of Arf6 - positive GPI - anchored protein - con - taining endosomes were colocalized with Tf ( Figure 1D , shaded bars , bottom ) . This implies that Arf6 is detected on GPI - anchored protein - containing endosomes only after they acquire Tf internalized via clathrin - derived pathways . In HeLa cells , expression of constitutively active Arf6 ( DA - Arf6 Q67L mutant ) increases uptake of MHCI , Tac , and GPI - anchored proteins by almost twofold ( Naslavsky et al . , 2003 , 2004 ) , and these proteins accumulate in en - Figure 1 . Arf6 is not a speciﬁc marker of the GEEC pathway in CHO cells . CHO cells trans - fected with HA - tagged wt - Arf6 ( A and C ) or HA - tagged DN - Arf6 ( T27N ; B ) were given a 10 - min pulse ( A and B ) of Cy5 - labeled Fab - fragment of anti - folate receptor antibody Mov18 ( Cy5 - Fab - Mov18 ; red in A – C ) and Cy3 - Tf ( blue in A and B ) or a 2 - min pulse of Cy5 - Fab - Mov18 ( C ) , ﬁxed , and stained with Alexa 488 - labeled anti - Fc - fragment antibody against the HA - tag ( green ) . The cells were im - aged on a wide - ﬁeld microscope ( A and B ) or a confocal microscope ( C ) as described in text . Images are presented as gray scales for indi - vidual colors , and pseudocolored as indicated before being merged . Insets show a magniﬁed view of the region corresponding to the aster - isk ( * ) . Note that Tf - containing endosomes ex - hibit signiﬁcant colocalization with Arf6 ( pink structures ) , whereas the GPI - anchored pro - teins containing endosomes only show an oc - casional overlap with Arf6 in structures also containing Tf ( pinkish white ) . At 2 min , most of the GEECs are not in any Arf6 structures ( C ) . ( D ) Histogram showing extent of overlap between Arf6 and Tf endosomes ( top l ) , and Arf6 and FR - GPI endosomes ( bottom ) at dif - ferent pulse times ( 5P , 5 min ; and 10P , 10 min ) . The shaded area enclosed in the open bar in - dicates the fraction of Tf - positive endosomes ( D , top ) that colocalized with both Arf6 and FR - GPI , and of FR - GPI - positive endosomes ( D , bottom ) that colocalized with both Arf6 and Tf . Bar , 10 (cid:3) m and 5 (cid:3) m ( inset ) . M . Kalia et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3692 larged phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate - enriched vacu - oles ; there is an inhibition of fusion with clathrin cargo - containing endosomes , and further trafﬁcking of both membrane and ﬂuid is blocked in these cells ( Naslavsky et al . , 2003 ) . By contrast , trafﬁcking and degradation of mol - ecules endocytosed via the clathrin - mediated pathway are unaffected in HeLa cells expressing DA - Arf6 ( Naslavsky et al . , 2003 ) . In CHO cells , overexpression of wt - Arf6 , DA - Arf6 , or DN - Arf6 had no signiﬁcant effect on uptake of FR - GPI as well as the ﬂuid phase ( Supplemental Figure 1 ) . In contrast , DA - Arf6 inhibited Tf uptake ( Supplemental Figure 1 ) , con - sistent with previous studies ( D’Souza - Schorey et al . , 1995 , 1998 ; Tanabe et al . , 2005 ) . Expression of DA - Arf6 ( Q67L mutant ) generates actin - rich surface protrusions in CHO cells ( our unpublished data ) , and under these conditions DA - Arf6 decorates structures containing internalized GPI - anchored proteins , often coincident with the actin - rich pro - trusions ( Figure 2A ) . Frequently , these structures also con - tain internalized Tf , consistent with their identity as macropinocytic membrane engulfments carrying “nonspe - ciﬁc” membrane cargo ( our unpublished data ) . In contrast to HeLa cells ( Naslavsky et al . , 2003 ) , in CHO cells overexpressing DA - Arf6 , endocytosed GPI - anchored proteins continued to fuse with sorting endosomes and ac - quire endocytosed Tf cargo , and they are delivered to recy - cling endosomes with apparently unaltered kinetics ( Figure 2B ) . These observations suggest that Arf6 may not function to regulate internalization of proteins brought into the cell via the GEEC pathway in CHO cells . Furthermore , unlike in HeLa cells where DA - Arf6 prevents delivery of membrane components to the tubular recycling compartments and fu - sion with clathrin - derived endosomes , Arf6 inactivation is not required for delivery of GPI - anchored proteins to the tubular recycling compartment in CHO cells . Aluminum Fluoride ( AlF ) Inhibits the GEEC Pathway AlF treatment leads to acute activation of transfected Arf6 , resulting in protrusive structures , changes in cortical actin , and mimics DA - Arf6 mutant Q67L ( Radhakrishna et al . , 1996 ) . These AlF - induced membrane protrusions are sites of enhanced macropinocytosis in HeLa cells . There is a clear change in the pattern of uptake and recycling of membrane and ﬂuid within membrane protrusions in AlF - treated and Arf6 - transfected cells ( Radhakrishna et al . , 1996 ) . However , AlF treatment in untransfected HeLa cells did not seem to alter uptake of the pattern of ﬂuid phase ( Radhakrishna et al . , 1996 ) . In contrast , treatment of untransfected CHO cells with AlF leads to a signiﬁcant inhibition in uptake of ﬂuid and GPI - anchored proteins at concentrations where Tf up - take is unaffected ( Supplemental Figure 2 , A and C ) . In AlF - treated cells , only when Arf6 is ectopically overex - pressed , internalization of ﬂuid ( our unpublished data ) and GPI - anchored proteins ( Supplemental Figure 2B ) is ob - served . Under these conditions there is signiﬁcant colocal - ization between ectopically expressed Arf6 - and GPI - an - chored protein - containing endosomes ( Supplemental Figure 2B ) . Together , these results suggest that in the presence of AlF , overexpression of Arf6 may be activating a parallel pathway for internalization of GPI - anchored proteins and the ﬂuid phase , similar to that seen in Arf6 - transfected HeLa cells ( Radhakrishna et al . , 1996 ; Naslavsky et al . , 2003 ) . One explanation for these results may be a consequence of having two types of endocytic mechanisms for the internal - ization of nonclathrin pathway - targeted membrane compo - nents . Indeed , comparison of endocytosis in HeLa and CHO ( or BHK ) cells reveals that uptake of the ﬂuid phase and GPI - anchored proteins occur with different kinetics and ex - tents . Uptake of ﬂuid phase ( Supplemental Figure 3 ) and GPI - anchored proteins ( our unpublished data ) into GEECs devoid of Tf , seems more efﬁcient in CHO and BHK cells than in HeLa cells . Most of the ﬂuid - ﬁlled endosomes in HeLa cells overlap with endocytosed Tf at 2 min ; 60 – 80 % of ﬂuid - ﬁlled endosomes in HeLa cells colocalized with Tf , whereas 50 – 70 % of the endosomes in CHO and BHK cells were independent of Tf ( our unpublished data ) . GPI - anchored Proteins Are Internalized into Acidic Primary Endocytic Vesicles , before Fusion with Sorting Endosomes We next addressed the nature of the endocytic process re - sponsible for internalization of GPI - anchored proteins and the ﬂuid phase into GEECs . In CHO cells stably expressing GPI - anchored GFP ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) , newly internal - ized ﬂuid phase ( between 0 and 2 min ) is localized to endo - cytic vesicles that are almost exclusively marked by GFP - GPI but not endocytosed Tf ( Supplemental Figure 4 ) . This suggests that the process of GEEC formation is constitutive , bringing into the cell both ﬂuid phase and membrane cargo Figure 2 . DA - Arf6 does not block fusion between GEECs and sorting endosomes and allows delivery of GPI - anchored proteins to the recycling endosome . ( A ) CHO cells transfected with HA - tagged DA - Arf6 ( green ) were given a 10 - min pulse of Cy5 - Fab - Mov18 ( red ) . Endosomes containing FR - GPI show some overlap with membrane rufﬂes of DA - Arf6 , however a signiﬁcant fraction of Cy5 - Fab - Mov18 labeled endosomes are not colocalized with DA - Arf6 . ( B ) CHO cells transfected with GFP - DA - Arf6 ( outlined cell ) were given a 20 - min pulse of Alexa 568 - Tf ( green ) and Cy5 - MOv18 Fab ( red ) . Note fusion of endosomes of Tf and FR - GPI in the periphery of DA - Arf6 expressing cells . FR - GPI and Tf are also delivered to the pericentriolar recycling com - partment in transfected cells . Bar , 10 (cid:3) m . Fusion of GEECs with Sorting Endosomes Vol . 17 , August 2006 3693 without the requirement of ligand binding for stimulating uptake of the membrane cargo . To ascertain whether the earliest GEECs detected were formed by fusion between many primary endocytic events or whether the GEECs themselves had characteristics of primary endocytic vesicles , we examined the ability of newly formed GEECs ( 2 - min structures ) to access a second pulse of cargo from the cell surface . For this purpose , we ﬁrst delivered a short 2 - min pulse of FITC - Dex and followed this up with a second pulse of a differently tagged ﬂuid phase marker , TMR - Dex . We chose 2 min as the pulse time because at times shorter than 2 min , the only difference was that fewer endosomes were detected per cell . We then ex - amined colocalization between the two probes . As a control , when the probes are pulsed together , they seem completely colocalized ( Figure 3C ) . However , if there is a 30 - s gap between the two pulses , the ﬁrst pulse is almost completely segregated from the ﬁrst pulse ( Figure 3A ) . When the endo - cytosed probes are chased for an additional 2 min , there is signiﬁcant mixing between the two different - colored Dex - labeled endosomes ( Figure 3B ) . These results are consistent with GEECs being generated from detectable primary endo - cytic events that subsequently fuse with preexisting endo - somes inside the cell . Initially , the endosomes populated by the second pulse ( 2 min ) of endocytosed TMR - Dex label are segregated from Tf - containing sorting endosomes derived from the clathrin - dependent pathway . However , at this time there is signiﬁ - cant mixing of endosomes derived from the ﬁrst pulse ( FITC - Dex ) with endosomes carrying cargo ( Tf ) from the clathrin - dependent pathway ( Figure 3A ; also see Figures 5 – 7 and Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) . After the chase period when the two Dex pulses seem colocalized , these endosomes are positive for endocytosed Tf , suggesting an extensive mixing between the early endosomal organelles of these two endo - somal systems . To further characterize GEECs that were not fused with Tf - containing sorting endosomes , we measured the pH of Figure 3 . Acidic GEECs are formed from fusion of primary endocytic vesicles . ( A and B ) CHO cells were pulsed for 2 min at 37°C with FITC - Dex ( green ) followed by a 30 - s wash and a 2 - min pulse of TMR - Dex ( red ) , in the presence of Cy5 - Tf ( blue ) . Cells were either directly ﬁxed ( A ) or alternately washed and chased for another 2 min ( B ) before imaging . Note that the endosomes of FITC - Dex ( green , ﬁrst pulse ) are completely separate from those of TMR - Dex ( red , second pulse ) and are also not colocalized with Tf endosomes ( blue ; A ) . After a further chase , ﬂuid endosomes fuse with each other and also with Tf - containing sorting endosomes ( B ) . Insets show a magniﬁed view of the region corresponding to the asterisk ( * ) . Bar , 10 (cid:3) m and 5 (cid:3) m ( inset ) . ( C ) Measurement of endosomal pH . Cells were given a 2 - min pulse of FITC - Dex , TMR - Dex , and Cy5 - Tf . Note that ﬂuid endosomes that have fused with Tf - containing sorting endosomes ( arrow ) have a brighter green ﬂuorescence , indicating a higher pH of the endosome compared with ﬂuid endosomes that are not colocalized with Tf ( arrowheads ) . ( D ) pH calibration . Cell were pulsed for 2 min with a mixture of FITC - Dex and TMR - Dex to label early endosomes , and subsequently equilibrated with a range of different buffer pHs in the presence of 10 (cid:3) M nigericin to obtain a calibration of the ratio of FITC - Dex to TMR - Dex ﬂuorescence against buffer pHs . This is represented as the ratio of FITC - Dex to TMR - Dex ﬂuorescence normalized to the value at pH 9 . 0 . pH of GEECs ( ﬂuid endosomes not colocalized with Tf - containing endosomes ; data point in orange ) was close of 6 , whereas the pH of sorting endosomes ( ﬂuid endosomes fused with transferrin ; data point in green ) was close to 6 . 5 , indicating that GEECs are much more acidic than the sorting endosomes . The experiment was also performed after mild ﬁxation of cells ( 2 min on ice ) , with identical results ; pH of the GEECs in ﬁxed cells ( indicated by data point in red ) was also close to 6 . M . Kalia et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3694 these endosomes using a ratiometric method ( Dunn et al . , 1994 ) . Our data show that newly formed GEECs , which have not yet fused with sorting endosomes , are extremely acidic ( note orange endosomes in Figure 3C ) , spanning a range from 5 . 5 to 6 . 5 ( median (cid:4) 6 . 0 ) ; Dex - containing endosomes that are colocalized with endocytosed Tf are less acidic , with a median pH (cid:4) 6 . 5 ( note green endosomes in Figure 3C ) . To rule out the possibility that ﬂuid endosomes acquire late endosomal markers , the following experiments were per - formed . First , cells were mildly ﬁxed and the pH was then measured . The results were identical to those obtained in live cells . Second , a time course of overlap of GEECs with GFP - Rab7 showed that GEECs as marked by FITC - Dex ( 1 mg / ml ) are negative for Rab7 ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) . Pulse and chase experiments showed that ﬂuid phase - con - taining endosomes do not become Rab7 positive until a 20 - min chase ( our unpublished data ) . Thus , ﬂuid - phase con - taining compartments considered for pH measurement are GEECs and not late endosomes . The ﬂuorescence of com - partments accessed by endocytosed PLF - labeled FR - GPI at 2 min is signiﬁcantly enhanced ( (cid:4) 2 - fold ) upon neutralizing endosomal pH by treatment with 10 (cid:3) M nigericin , conﬁrm - ing that GPI - anchored proteins are also accessing the acidic milieu of these endosomes , soon after internalization ( our unpublished data ) . To rule out any resemblance of these GEEC with the pH - neutral caveosomes ( Pelkmans et al . , 2001 ) , we found that there was no overlap with either endogenous caveolin ( our unpublished data ) or with overexpressed caveolin in CHO cells at 2 min , and 5 min ( Supplemental Figure 5 ) , as also detailed previously ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) . Further - more , immortalized MEFs derived from mice that lack Cav - 1 form similar GEECs ( Kirkham et al . , 2005 ; Figure 9 ) . How - ever , we cannot rule out the possibility that a small fraction of GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to caveolin - marked compartments at late time points . GPI - anchored Proteins Are Internalized into GEECs , Largely Devoid of Early Endosome Markers Rab4 , Rab5 , and EEA1 We next characterized presence of markers of early endo - somes on GEECs in CHO ( Figures 4 and 5 ) and BHK cells ( Supplemental Figure 6 ) . As indicated above , after 2 - min pulse , internalized GPI - anchored proteins are ﬁrst detected Figure 4 . GPI - anchored proteins are inter - nalized into GEECs devoid of early endosome markers . Untransfected CHO cells ( A and C ) or GFP - Rab5 - transfected cells ( B ) were pulsed with Cy5 - Fab - Mov18 ( red ) and Cy3 - Tf ( blue ) for 2 min at 37°C , ﬁxed , and labeled with antibody against Rab4 ( green in A ) or EEA1 ( green in C ) or directly imaged for GFP - ﬂuo - rescence ( green in B ) . Images of anti - Rab4 , GFP - Rab5 , or anti - EEA1 ( green ) , FR - GPI ( red ) , Tf ( blue ) are presented as gray scale images and pseudocolored and color merged ( bot - tom ) . Insets show a magniﬁed view of the region corresponding to the asterisk ( * ) . Bar , 10 (cid:3) m and 5 (cid:3) m ( inset ) . Fusion of GEECs with Sorting Endosomes Vol . 17 , August 2006 3695 in GEECs , separate from Tf - containing sorting endosomes in a number of cell lines ( Figures 3A and 4 and Supplemental Figure 6A ; also see Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ; Kirkham et al . , 2005 ) . These structures did not colocalize with the endoge - nous sorting endosome marker Rab4 ( Figure 4A ) or exog - enously expressed GFP - Rab4 ( our unpublished data ) , which efﬁciently labeled the Tf - containing sorting endosomes at the same time ( Figure 4A ) . GEECs also lack Rab5 at this time ; there is very limited colocalization with GFP - Rab5 at 2 min after internalization ( Figure 4B ) , whereas (cid:4) 50 % of Tf - containing sorting endosomes are efﬁciently labeled with Rab5 at the same time point ( Supplemental Figure 10 ) . The majority of GEECs are also devoid of the early endosomal marker EEA1 in CHO ( Figure 4C ) and BHK cells ( Supple - mental Figure 6A ) . To address the question of whether internalization of GPI - anchored proteins and ﬂuid is dependent on the GT - Pase Rab5 , we overexpressed wt , DA ( Q71L mutant ) , and DN ( S19N mutant ) isoforms of GFP - Rab5 proteins ( Supple - mental Figure 7 ) . As expected , DN - GFP - Rab5 inhibits Tf uptake via the clathrin - mediated pathway ( our unpublished data ; Bucci et al . , 1992 ) . However , uptake of GPI - anchored proteins was not inhibited ( Supplemental Figure 4 ) . Indeed , there is occasionally an increase in uptake of GPI - anchored proteins in cells overexpressing DN - GFP - Rab5 ( Supplemen - tal Figure 7 ) , similar to conditions when dynamin function is inhibited ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ; Guha et al . , 2003 ) . These results strongly suggest that GEECs represent a separate endosomal population at the early time , whose biogenesis is independent of Rab4 or Rab5 activity . GEECs Acquire Early Endosomal Markers in a PI3K - dependent Manner In both CHO ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ; Figure 4 ) and BHK cells ( Supplemental Figure 6A ) , GEECs are mainly devoid of early endosomal markers . They subsequently acquire Rab5 and EEA1 ( Figure 5 and Supplemental Figure 6B ) . At 2 min , (cid:4) 20 % of the GEECs have EEA1 , which increases to (cid:7) 40 % by 10 min . After a 10 - min pulse , many more GEECs become positive for EEA1 ( Figure 6 , left ) . Similar kinetics is observed for GFP - Rab5 loading on the GEECs ( Figure 6 , right ) . The extent of colocalization of GEECs with Tf - containing struc - tures also increases with time ( Figure 8D ) . Similar results are obtained in BHK cells ( Supplemental Figure 6 ) . There could be two explanations for the loading of EEA1 and Rab5 on GEECs . One possibility is that GEECs acquire EEA1 ( and Rab5 ) after they fuse with early endosomal marker - positive Tf - containing sorting endosomes , and the other pos - sibility is that they acquire these proteins independent of fusion . Careful examination of GEECs that have not yet fused with Tf - containing sorting endosomes indicates that a signiﬁcant portion of these endosomes contain detectable EEA1 and Rab5 ( Figure 5 , A and B , insets , arrows ) . Quanti - tative analysis of the extent of colocalization of FR - GPI with Figure 5 . GEECs acquire Rab5 and EEA1 before fusion with sort - ing endosomes . ( A and B ) Untransfected CHO cells ( A ) or GFP - Rab5 - transfected cells ( B ) were incubated for 5 min ( A ) or 10 min ( B ) with Cy5 - Fab - Mov18 ( red ) and Cy3 - Tf ( blue ) at 37°C , ﬁxed , and labeled with antibody against EEA1 ( green in A ) or directly imaged for GFP ﬂuorescence ( green in B ) . Images were collected on a wide - ﬁeld microscope , pseudocolored , and color merged . Insets show a magniﬁed view of the regions corresponding to the asterisk ( * ) . Bar , 10 (cid:3) m and 5 (cid:3) m ( inset ) . Figure 6 . Kinetics of Rab5 and EEA1 loading on GEECs . FR - GPIs expressing cells were incubated with Cy5 - Fab - Mov18 and Cy3 - Tf and incubated at 37°C for different times ( 2P , 2 min ; 5P , 5 min ; and 10P , 10 min ) . Histogram shows quantitative extent of colocalization of Cy5 - Fab - Mov18 – positive endosomes with endogenous EEA1 ( left ) or GFP - Rab5 expressed in the same cells ( right ) . The shaded area enclosed in the open bar indicates the fraction of Cy5 - Fab - Mov18 – positive endosomes that colocalized with both EEA1 and Tf ( left ) and with both GFP - Rab5 and Tf ( right ) . M . Kalia et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3696 EEA1 and GFP - Rab5 shows that (cid:4) 70 % of the EEA1 - positive and 80 % of the GFP - Rab5 - positive FR - GPI endosomes con - tain endocytosed Tf ; the remaining 20 – 30 % may acquire EEA1 and Rab5 independently of detectable Tf ( Figure 6 ) . These results suggest that EEA1 and Rab5 may be directly loaded onto GEECs , before fusion . EEA1 is a key molecule involved in homotypic fusion between early endosomes ( Mills et al . , 1998 ; Simonsen et al . , 1998 ) . The C terminus of EEA1 contains a FYVE ﬁnger domain that binds to phosphatidylinositol - 3 - phosphate ( PI3P ) ( Mu et al . , 1995 ) . In addition , it has two binding sites for the GTP - bound form of Rab5 , one at the N - terminal zinc ﬁnger and one at the C terminus just up - stream of the FYVE domain . Because the PI3P binding FYVE domain is nested within the Rab5 binding site , both PI - 3 kinase and Rab5 activities are required for early endosome fusion . Studies have shown that Rab5 can re - cruit PI3Ks ( Christoforidis et al . , 1999b ) , including hVPS34 ( Schu et al . , 1993 ) , and generate PI3P on the endosomal membrane . Together , PI3P and active Rab5 - GTP syner - gize to generate a favorable environment for binding of EEA1 ( Zerial and McBride , 2001 ) . On the sorting endosome , EEA1 is rapidly released from endosomal membranes in response to inhibition of PI3K activity by wortmannin ( WT ) treatment ( Patki et al . , 1997 ) . WT is a fungal metabolite that speciﬁcally inhibits PI3K activity at low concentrations ( Wymann et al . , 1996 ) . Treatment of CHO cells with low concentration of WT ( 100 nM ) also prevents EEA1 loading on all early endo - somal compartments ; both Tf - containing sorting endo - somes ( our unpublished data ) and GEECs are devoid of EEA1 ( compare Figure 7 , A with B ) . WT pretreatment signiﬁcantly decreased the degree of colocalization be - tween the GPI - anchored proteins and Tf ( compare Figure 8 , A and B ; quantiﬁcation in Figure 8D ) in CHO and BHK ( Supplemental Figure 9 ) cells . However , internalization of the GPI - anchored protein FR - GPI and the ﬂuid phase was not affected by 100 nM WT - treatment ( our unpublished data ) . These results suggest that PI3K activity and poten - tially EEA1 loading on GEECs may be required for fusion between the two endosomal systems , the dynamin - indepen - dent GEECs and dynamin - dependent sorting endosomes . PI3K inhibition also seemed to alter the size distribution and localization of GEECs ; these endosomes remained more pe - ripheral and smaller than their untreated counterparts ( com - pare GEECs in Figure 7A with those in B , and Figure 8A with those in B ) . Furthermore , PI3K inhibition prevented homotypic fusion between GEECs ( Supplemental Figure 8 ) . However , WT treatment did not alter the acidic nature of these compartments . The ﬂuorescence of compartments ac - cessed by endocytosed PLF - labeled FR - GPI at 2 min in WT - treated cells was signiﬁcantly enhanced ( (cid:4) 2 - fold ) upon neu - tralizing endosomal pH by treatment with 10 (cid:3) M nigericin ( our unpublished data ) . These results conﬁrm that GPI - anchored proteins endocytosed into an acidic environment even under conditions where fusion with other endosomes is inhibited . These results suggest that the detection of early endoso - mal proteins , Rab5 , and its effectors , EEA1 , may have a functional signiﬁcance in addition to facilitating heterotypic fusion with the sorting endosomes . These molecular players , especially EEA1 and PI3Ks may also mediate homotypic fusion between GEECs . Figure 7 . EEA1 loading on GEECs is pre - vented by PI3K and Rab5 inhibition . CHO cells either untreated ( A ) or pretreated ( B ) with 100 nM WT for 30 min . Cells were given a 10 - min pulse of Cy5 - Fab - Mov18 ( red ) fol - lowed by ﬁxation , permeabilization and stain - ing for EEA1 ( green ) . ( C ) CHO cells , trans - fected with DN - GFP - Rab5 ( outlined cell in C , left ) were pulsed for 5 min with Cy5 - Fab - Mov18 ( red ) followed by ﬁxation , permeabili - zation , and staining for EEA1 ( green ) . Images were pseudocolored and color combined . Note EEA1 fails to load on 5 - or 10 - min struc - tures containing endocytosed GPI - anchored proteins . Insets show a magniﬁed view of the regions corresponding to the asterisk ( * ) . Bar , 10 (cid:3) m and 5 (cid:3) m ( inset ) . Fusion of GEECs with Sorting Endosomes Vol . 17 , August 2006 3697 GEEC Pathway in Cav1 (cid:1) / (cid:1) MEFs Recent studies have shown that a signiﬁcant fraction of the CTxB uptake in Cav1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) MEFs takes place via GEECs ( or CLICs ) in a caveolin - , clathrin - , and dynamin - independent pathway ( Kirkham et al . , 2005 ) . Ultrastructural identiﬁcation demonstrated tubular / ring - like structures that budded from the plasma membrane ( PM ) as the major carriers in - volved in nonclathrin , noncaveolar uptake of CTxB in Cav1 (cid:8) / (cid:8) and Cav1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) MEFs ( Kirkham et al . , 2005 ) . These tubular carriers were also found to be involved in endocy - tosis of GPI - anchored proteins . Here , we examined the ki - netics of the GEEC pathway in immortalized MEFs derived from caveolin null mice . We ﬁnd that the GEEC pathway functions similarly in both Cav1 (cid:8) / (cid:8) ( Figure 9A ) and Cav1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) MEFs ( Figure 9B ) . The extent of colocalization between GEECs marked by endocytosed antibodies to trans - fected CFP - GPI , and Tf is similar to that seen in CHO cells ( Figure 9D , left ) . Furthermore , fusion between GEECs and Tf - positive endosomes remained sensitive to inhibition by 100 nM WT . Consistent with previous studies ( Kirkham et al . , 2005 ) , a signiﬁcant fraction of CTxB uptake is colocalized with GEECs , and with Tf - containing endosomes ( Figure 9D , right ) . Approximately , 50 % of the endocytosed CTxB is in GEECs . This fraction decreases in WT - treated cells in Cav1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) MEFs ( Figures 8D and 9D , middle and right ) , identical to that observed in caveolin - positive cells ( Cav1 (cid:8) / (cid:8) MEFs ; our unpublished data ) . These results reiterate that both GPI - anchored protein and CTxB uptake via GEECs occurs in a similar manner in Cav1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells , and undergo subsequent fusion with sorting endosomes via a PI3K - dependent mechanism . These results do not imply that all CTxB uptake occurs via GEECs , but they substantiate earlier evidence that a signiﬁcant fraction ( (cid:4) 50 % ) of this toxin enters cells via GEECs ( Kirkham et al . , 2005 ) . Dominant - Negative Rab5 Inhibits Fusion between GEECs and Sorting Endosomes The mechanism of EEA1 recruitment on sorting endosomes is dependent on both active Rab5 and PI3P generation ( Christoforidis et al . , 1999b ) . The Rab5 GTPase forms a do - main by recruiting hVps34 , causing localized production of PI3P ( Christoforidis et al . , 1999a ) . EEA1 stabilization on the GEECs also requires active Rab5 ( Murray et al . , 2002 ) . In cells overexpressing the DN - GFP - Rab5 mutant , EEA1 did not load on either the GEECs ( Figure 7C ) or sorting endosomes Figure 8 . Inhibition of PI3K and Rab5 activ - ity block mixing between GEECs and sorting endosomes . Control CHO cells ( A ) , cells pre - treated with 100 nM WT ( B ) , or transfected with DN Rab5 ( outlined cell in C ) were pulsed for 10 min with Cy5 - Fab - Mov18 ( red ) and Cy3 - Tf ( green ) , ﬁxed , and imaged . Images were pseudocolored and color combined . In - sets show a magniﬁed view of the regions corresponding to the asterisk ( * ) . ( D ) The ex - tent of colocalization between Cy5 - Fab - Mov18 - containing ( GEECs ) and Tf - containing ( sorting ) endosomes was quantiﬁed at differ - ent pulse times ( 2P , 2 min ; 5P , 5 min ; and 10P , 10 min ) for the different treatments as indi - cated by colored bars ( untreated , purple ; 100 nM WT , olive green ; and DN - Rab5 , orange ) . Colocalization index between FR - GPI and Tf is signiﬁcantly different between cells treated with 100 nM WT and DN - Rab5 compared with control cells . * p (cid:5) 0 . 001 and * * p (cid:5) 0 . 003 , obtained from Student’s t test comparing dif - ferent data sets . Bar , 10 (cid:3) m and 5 (cid:3) m ( inset ) . M . Kalia et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3698 ( our unpublished data ) . These data indicate that Rab5 activ - ity is required for EEA1 stabilization on the early endosomes of the GEEC and the sorting endosomal pathway . In cells expressing DN - GFP - Rab5 , cargo from the two pathways also did not mix signiﬁcantly at early time points ( Figure 8C ; quantiﬁcation in D ) , suggesting that Rab5 activity and EEA1 stabilization is necessary for this fusion . In apparent contrast to WT - treated cells ( Figure 8B ) , in DN - Rab5 - expressing cells ( Figure 8C ) , GEECs consistently occur more perinuclear and are larger than their untreated counterparts ( Figure 8A ) at the same time . Overexpression of Rab5 Reverses WT - induced Inhibition of Fusion between GEECs and Sorting Endosomes by Recruiting EEA1 To further dissect the mechanism by which Rab5 and PI3P could mediate fusion between GEECs and sorting endo - somes , we overexpressed GFP - Rab5wt in cells and treated them with 100 nM WT . Overexpression of GFP - Rab5 , re - stores EEA1 loading on the Tf - containing endosomes ( Fig - ure 10A ) as well as on the GEECs ( Figures 10B and 11 ) . In this background , fusion between the GEECs and sorting Figure 9 . GEEC fuse with early sorting en - dosome with similar kinetics and in a PI3K - sensitive manner in Cav1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) mouse embry - onic ﬁbroblasts . Mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts with and without caveolin expression were transfected with CFP - GPI . A 5 - min pulse of Alexa 488 CTxB ( blue ) ; Alexa 568 - anti - GFP - Fab ( red ) , and Cy5 - Tf ( green ) was given to Cav (cid:8) / (cid:8) MEFs ( A ) , Cav (cid:2) / (cid:2) MEFs ( B ) , and Cav (cid:2) / (cid:2) MEFs ( C ) pretreated with 100 nM WT for 30 min . Images were pseudocolored , and color combined as described . Insets show a magniﬁed view of the regions corresponding to the asterisk ( * ) . ( D ) Histogram showing ex - tent of colocalization between GPI and Tf , CTxB and Tf , and CTxB and GPI . Note that a signiﬁcant fraction of endocytosed CTxB is in - ternalized with CFP - GPI . Bar , 10 (cid:3) m and 5 (cid:3) m ( inset ) . Fusion of GEECs with Sorting Endosomes Vol . 17 , August 2006 3699 endosomes can take place ( Figure 10C ; quantitation Figure 11 ) ; the extent of fusion between GEECs and sorting endo - somes were restored to levels indistinguishable from control levels ( Figure 11 ) . The results clearly indicate that in the presence of WT , increasing the level of Rab5 beyond endoge - nous levels can restore EEA1 loading on endosomes , and this correlates with restoration of fusion between these two endo - somal systems . Together , these results provide evidence that recruitment of both EEA1 and Rab5 on the GEECs is necessary for fusion with Tf - containing sorting endosomes . DISCUSSION Dynamin - independent pathways seem to be the main means by which GPI - anchored proteins and other membrane cargo that lack obvious localization signals are internalized . Al - though there are reports of internalization of GPI - anchored proteins via caveolae ( Nichols , 2002 ; Peters et al . , 2003 ) , our results show that the caveolar pathway does not seem to be the major pathway for endocytosis of a majority of GPI - anchored proteins in CHO and MEF cells , although the virus particle SV40 is internalized via a clathrin - , dynamin - , Arf6 - independent pathway in cells that do not express caveolae ( Damm et al . , 2005 ) . However , the virus does not colocalize Figure 10 . Overexpression of GFP - Rab5 can restore EEA1 loading and rescue fusion in WT - treated cells . CHO cells transfected with GFP - Rab5 ( green ) were pretreated with 100 nM WT for 30 min followed by pulse of Alexa 568 - Tf ( red in A , blue in C ) and Cy5 - Fab - Mov 18 ( red in B and C ) for 10 min . Cells were ﬁxed , stained for EEA1 ( blue in A and B ) , or directly imaged ( C ) . Images were pseudocol - ored and color merged as described . Insets show a magniﬁed view of the regions corre - sponding to the asterisk ( * ) . Figure 11 . GFP - Rab5 overexpression can rescue fusion between GEECs and sorting endosomes . Histogram shows the extent of colocalization between GEECs and sorting endosomes as described in Materials and Methods . Colocalization index between FR - GPI and Tf in cells transfected with wtRab5 , ( with and without WT treat - ment ) was not statistically different from control cells ; p values (cid:4) 0 . 3 , whereas treatment with WT alone was signiﬁcantly different from control or GFP - Rab5 expressing cells ( * p (cid:5) 0 . 0001 , obtained from Student’s t test by comparing the different data sets . Bar , 10 (cid:3) m and 5 (cid:3) m ( inset ) . M . Kalia et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3700 with EEA1 , or dextran and resides in a pH - neutral compart - ment . Therefore , the endosomes accessed by SV40 are likely to be distinct from the GEECs . Unlike dynamin - dependent processes , clathrin - and caveolin - coated pit - mediated path - ways , the itineraries of endocytosed cargo internalized with - out dynamin are yet to be characterized . In addition to providing a description of a pathway , the temporal and spatial dynamics of the endosomes involved provide an understanding of the mechanism underlying the generic processes of endosome biogenesis and consumption . Arf6 - independent GPI - anchored Protein Endocytosis The results presented here indicate that there are at least two types of dynamin - independent mechanisms , one type that is marked by Arf6 , as described by Donaldson and colleagues in HeLa cells ( Naslavsky et al . , 2003 , 2004 ) , and the other type Arf6 - independent . In contrast to the endocytic process involved in the uptake of GPI - anchored proteins ( and other membrane components ) in HeLa cells , we ﬁnd that neither activating nor inactivating mutants of exogenously ex - pressed Arf6 signiﬁcantly alter GPI - anchored protein and ﬂuid phase uptake in CHO cells . Furthermore , ectopically expressed Arf6 does not speciﬁcally label these endosomes , although it labels endosomes that contain cargo from the clathrin - mediated pathway ( Tf - positive endosomes ) as well as endosomes that contain both markers . Expression of DN - Arf6 had only a mild inhibitory effect on endocytosis in HeLa cells ( Radhakrishna et al . , 1996 ) but none in CHO cells , suggesting that neither Arf6 activation nor inactivation is es - sential for internalization and trafﬁcking through this pathway . HeLa cells exhibit a much slower endocytic uptake rate of GPI - anchored proteins and ﬂuid phase compared with CHO and BHK cells . This uptake in turn is up - regulated simply by overexpression of Arf6 ( Radhakrishna et al . , 1996 ) , unlike that seen in CHO cells . Another distinguishing feature of the endocytic mecha - nisms of GPI - anchored proteins between HeLa and CHO cells is the response to treatment of cells with AlF . In CHO cells , GPI - anchored protein and ﬂuid phase uptake is inhib - ited by treatment with AlF , whereas it seems unaffected in HeLa cells ( Radhakrishna et al . , 1996 ) . However , AlF treat - ment of cells overexpressing Arf6 causes stimulation of the uptake of GPI - anchored proteins and the ﬂuid phase cargo in both cell lines ( via endosomes that are now positive for Arf6 ) . Because AlF can activate many G proteins in inactive GDP - bound form ( Sternweis and Gilman , 1982 ) , this treat - ment is probably disturbing the GDP - GTP exchange cycle of several proteins , including ectopically expressed Arf6 . One explanation is that although Arf6 is present in CHO cells and can localize to certain types of endosomes ( Tf - containing sorting endosomes ) , endogenous machinery for Arf6 - dependent GPI - anchored protein endocytosis is ac - tively suppressed ; endogenous Arf6 activated in the pres - ence of AlF is also not sufﬁcient for stimulating this path - way . Thus , in CHO cells , GPI - anchored proteins are constitutively endocytosed by a mechanism that does not involve Arf6 . However , upon appropriate hyperactivation of Arf6 , Arf6 - dependent pathways can be made opera - tional in CHO cells . It is also possible that CHO cells lack an essential component of the Arf6 - dependent machinery . Nevertheless , CHO and BHK cells permit a dissection of a dynamin - independent pathway that does not use Arf6 function . GEEC Pathway Is Not a Conventional Macropinocytic Pathway The GEEC pathway accounts for a major portion of ﬂuid phase uptake in CHO cells but differs from conventional macropinocytosis . The pathway is cdc42 dependent and not Rac1 dependent ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) . Treatment with 100 (cid:3) M methyl isobutyl amiloride does not signiﬁcantly inhibit ﬂuid uptake ( Supplemental Figure 11 ) . Macropino - cytosis is dependent on activation of PI3K and protein ki - nase C ( PKC ) via epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) . CHO cells do not have endogenous EGFR and the possibility of epidermal growth factor - independent downstream acti - vation of PI3K and PKC is eliminated by the fact that the pathway is not blocked by inhibitors of PI3K ( our unpub - lished data ) and also by calphostin ( a general PKC inhibitor at both low [ 50 nM ] and high [ 1 mM ] concentrations ; our unpublished data ) . Phorbol esters have been shown to stimulate macropino - cytosis and solute ﬂow through macrophages ( Swanson , 1989 ) . Treatment of CHO cells with phorbol 12 - myristate 13 - acetate ( 10 – 100 nM ) and overexpression of dominant - active Rac1 increases ﬂuid uptake dramatically , suggesting that molecular machinery for PKC - induced macropinocyto - sis exists in CHO cells ( Supplemental Figure 11 ; Sabharanjak 2002 ; Sabharanjak and Mayor , unpublished data ) . These macropinosomes are large structures that contain both GPI - anchored proteins as well as Tf ( almost immediately after formation ( Sabharanjak 2002 ; Sabharanjak and Mayor , un - published data ) , suggesting that unlike GEECs , macropino - somes are not very selective for membrane components . GEECs Are Acidic Early Endosomes That Undergo WT - sensitive Fusion with Sorting Endosomes Ultrastructural identiﬁcation demonstrated tubular / ring - like structures that budded from the PM as the major carri - ers involved in nonclathrin , noncaveolar uptake of CTxB in Cav1 (cid:8) / (cid:8) and Cav1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) MEFs ( Kirkham et al . , 2005 ) and GFP - GPI in CHO cells ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) . Newly formed ﬂuid and GPI - anchored protein containing endo - somes are visualized as independent structures , strongly suggesting that these structures are primary endocytic ves - icles visualized in our electron micrscopy analysis . They subsequently undergo WT - sensitive homotypic fusion with each other to form the GEECs . GEECs then fuse with endo - somes carrying cargo from the clathrin - mediated pathway . In addition , the pH of all the endosomes ( primary endocytic structures and GEECs ) that are accessed by GPI - anchored proteins and the ﬂuid phase is remarkably acidic at 6 . 0 . This is (cid:4) 0 . 5 pH units lower than the corresponding value mea - sured for sorting endosomes ( Mukherjee et al . , 1997 ) and implies there is an efﬁcient acidiﬁcation mechanism existing for the GEECs . This could have functional implications , for example , in the facilitation of efﬁcient release of small mol - ecule ligands such as folates brought into GEECs by binding to GPI - anchored folate receptors ( Sabharanjak and Mayor , 2004 ) . Our results show that intracellular fusion of GEECs with sorting endosomes derived from clathrin - mediated endo - cytic pathways in CHO and BHK cells is regulated by Rab5 and its effectors . After formation , GEECs acquire both EEA1 and Rab5 in structures that are not yet positive for Tf . This seems to enable fusion of GEECs with sorting endosomes . But , the kinetics of Tf - containing sorting endosomes also suggests that there are two stages of early sorting endosome maturation ( Supplemental Figure 10 ) , one stage where en - dosomes have low or nonexistent GFP - Rab5 levels , and the Fusion of GEECs with Sorting Endosomes Vol . 17 , August 2006 3701 second stage where GFP - Rab5 levels are high . Indeed , Tf - containing endosomes show only a 40 % overlap with GFP - Rab5 from a 2 - min pulse , which increases to 55 % overlap at 10 min ( Supplemental Figure 10 ) . Of the Tf - containing en - dosomes only (cid:4) 30 % contain FR - GPI cargo at 2 min . How - ever , a majority of the colocalized endosomes ( (cid:4) 75 % ) were positive for GFP - Rab5 , suggesting that this endosomal pop - ulation have a distinct molecular identity . Overexpression of GFP - Rab5 increased colocalization of the two types of cargo , suggesting that Rab5 machinery is critical for fusion between GEECs and sorting endosomes . Consistent with this DN - Rab5 inhibits the mixing of GPI - anchored proteins with Tf . These results suggest that Rab5 is capable of regulating heterotypic fusion , i . e . , of mixing en - dosomes derived from different endocytic processes , in ad - dition to its function in homotypic fusion of endosomes derived from the clathrin pit - mediated endosomal system ( Bucci et al . , 1992 ; Simonsen et al . , 1998 ) . However , distinct from the role of Rab5 in the generation of sorting endosomes via regulating coated vesicle formation and fusion with sorting endosomes ( Bucci et al . , 1992 ) , inhibition of Rab5 function does not seem to have a role in the formation of GEECs . PI3K and Cellular Localization of GEECs PI3K is a potent Rab5 effector present on early endosomes , involved in building the feed - forward network necessary for generation of the putative Rab5 microdomain ( Christofori - dis et al . , 1999b ; Murray et al . , 2002 ) ; WT blocks homotypic fusion by inhibiting the generation of PI3P , thereby inhibit - ing the recruitment of FYVE - domain containing EEA1 to membranes . Fusion of GEECs with sorting endosomes is blocked by inhibition of PI3K activity by WT , but uptake of GPI - anchored proteins is quantitatively unaffected . These observations suggest that the role of Rab5 in heterotypic fusion is also to effect stabilization of the Rab5 - fusion effector EEA1 . Overexpression of Rab5 in WT - treated cells leads to a restoration of fusion , coincident with a stabilization of EEA1 on the endosomal membrane . These results suggest a mech - anism where the level of EEA1 recruitment is important for correct targeting during heterotypic fusion . Inhibition of PI3K activity also inhibits fusion between GEECs , suggest - ing that similar machinery may function in effecting fusion between GEECs . Zerial and coworkers ( Hoepfner et al . , 2005 ) have recently shown that PI3P generation is not only accompanied by the recruitment of EEA1 but also regulates the loading of the pleckstrin homology domain bearing Kinesin family protein KIF16B . KIF16B is a plus - end – directed motor and mediates transport of early endosomes along microtubules ; therefore , it regulates the steady - state distribution of early endosomes ( Ho - epfner et al . , 2005 ) . On treatment of cells with WT ( similar to RNA interference - mediated silencing of KIF16B ) , Tf - containing endosomes move to the perinuclear region , this relocation is mimicked by DN - Rab5 inhibition of PI3K activation on sorting endosomes . GEECs seem to respond differently to these treat - ments ; PI3K inhibition keeps ”unfused“ GEECs peripherally located , whereas DN - Rab5 expression seems to permit accel - erated perinuclear relocation . Given the role of PI3P in localiz - ing KIF16B , these observations would suggest that motors operating on the GEECs are under the control of other molec - ular players . Implications for Trafﬁcking via GEEC The results presented here suggest a simple model for acidic GEEC formation and consumption , consistent with all avail - able data . GEECs form via fusion between primary endocytic vesicles derived by a dynamin - independent mechanism , and occur as acidic ﬂuid - containing endosomes carrying special - ized membrane cargo . This occurs via a cdc42 - dependent pro - cess , independent of Arf6 function . GEECs then undergo het - erotypic fusion with sorting endosomes and potentially homotypic fusion with other GEECs by recruiting the famil - iar Rab5 fusion machinery . This involves Rab5 activation and EEA1 recruitment . Inhibition of fusion between sorting endosomes and the GEEC pathway conﬁrms previous observations that the two pathways indeed have very different cargo ; at most (cid:4) 10 % of internalized GPI - anchored proteins are found in Tf - contain - ing endosomes upon inhibition of PI3K . These results sug - gest that there is efﬁcient segregation of molecules internal - ized via the two endocytic systems at the cell surface ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) and that GPI - anchored proteins are predominantly internalized via GEECs . In untreated cells , even at 2 min there is a detectable enhancement in mixing of GPI - anchored proteins and Tf , indicating that fusion of GEECs with sorting endosomes must occur very soon after formation . These observations also raise the question about how such an efﬁcient segregation of GPI - anchored proteins is maintained in the face of the multitude of endocytic pathways available to membrane components at the cell surface . At the same time , several questions still remain regarding the formation and consumption of GEECs . Foremost in the context of this study are questions governing the recruit - ment machinery for the loading of Rab5 onto GEECs . In the clathrin - dependent pathway , it is thought that Rab5 is loaded at multiple steps by the availability Rab5 GEFs at all stages in the endocytic process , from endocytic vesicles to sorting endosomal structures ( Rubino et al . , 2000 ) . The gua - nine nucleotide exchange factors or membrane - associated recruitment factors that facilitate Rab5 loading onto GEECs are as yet undiscovered . Molecular regulators that effect Arf - 6 - independent , dynamin - independent pathways are also uncharacterized . Finally , understanding why ( and how ) different cell types such as CHO and BHK , after mixing their cargo from the dynamin - dependent and - independent path - ways , segregate the same , kinetically in recycling endo - somes in CHO ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) , and to late endo - somes in BHK cells ( Fivaz et al . , 2002 ) , also remains an open question . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank M . Zerial for Rab5 constructs ; J . Donaldson for Arf6 constructs , V . Sriram for valuable suggestions , Gagan Gupta for critically reading the manu - script , and other members of the Mayor laboratory for generous help . Con - focal microscopy was carried out in the Wellcome Trust - aided imaging facil - ity at National Centre for Biological Sciences ( Bangalore , India ) , supervised by H . Krishnamurthy . This work is supported by a Fast Track Fellowship for Young Scientists ( Department of Science and Technology [ DST ] , India ) to M . K . , a DST Swarnjayanti Fellowship ( India ) to S . M . , and an R01 grant from the National Institutes of Health ( United States ) to R . G . P . S . M . acknowledges M . I . Sanity , K . Belur , and F . F . Bosphorus for inspiration . REFERENCES Anderson , R . G . , Kamen , B . A . , Rothberg , K . G . , and Lacey , S . W . ( 1992 ) . Potocytosis : sequestration and transport of small molecules by caveolae . Science 255 , 410 – 411 . Brown , F . D . , Rozelle , A . L . , Yin , H . L . , Balla , T . , and Donaldson , J . G . ( 2001 ) . Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate and Arf6 - regulated membrane trafﬁc . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 1007 – 1018 . Bucci , P . , Parton , R . G . , Mather , I . H . , Stunnenberg , H . , Simons , K . , Hoﬂack , B . , and Zerial , M . ( 1992 ) . The small GTPase rab5 functions as a regulatory factor in early endocytic pathway . Cell 70 , 715 – 728 . M . Kalia et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3702 Chatterjee , S . , and Mayor , S . ( 2001 ) . The GPI - anchor and protein sorting . Cell Mol . Life Sci . 58 , 1969 – 1987 . Chatterjee , S . , Smith , E . R . , Hanada , K . , Stevens , V . L . , and Mayor , S . ( 2001 ) . GPI anchoring leads to sphingolipid - dependent retention of endocytosed proteins in the recycling endosomal compartment . EMBO J . 20 , 1583 – 1592 . Christoforidis , S . , McBride , H . M . , Burgoyne , R . D . , and Zerial , M . ( 1999a ) . The Rab5 effector EEA1 is a core component of endosome docking . Nature 397 , 621 – 625 . Christoforidis , S . , Miaczynska , M . , Ashman , K . , Wilm , M . , Zhao , L . , Yip , S . C . , Waterﬁeld , M . D . , Backer , J . M . , and Zerial , M . ( 1999b ) . Phosphatidylinositol - 3 - OH kinases are Rab5 effectors . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 249 – 252 . Conese , M . , Nykjaer , A . , Petersen , C . M . , Cremona , O . , Pardi , R . , Andreasen , P . A . , Gliemann , J . , Christensen , E . I . , and Blasi , F . ( 1995 ) . alpha - 2 Macroglob - ulin receptor / Ldl receptor - related protein ( Lrp ) - dependent internalization of the urokinase receptor . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 1609 – 1622 . Conner , S . D . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2003 ) . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 422 , 37 – 44 . D’Souza - Schorey C , Li , G . , Colombo , M . I . , and Sathl , P . D . ( 1995 ) . A regula - tory role for ARF6 in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Science 267 , 1175 – 1178 . D’Souza - Schorey , C . , van Donselaar , E . , Hsu , V . W . , Yang , C . , Stahl , P . D . , and Peters , P . J . ( 1998 ) . ARF6 targets recycling vesicles to the plasma membrane : insights from an ultrastructural investigation . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 603 – 616 . Damke , H . , Baba , T . , Warnock , D . , and Schmid , S . ( 1994 ) . Induction of mutant dynamin speciﬁcally blocks endocytic coated vesicle formation . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 915 – 934 . Damm , E . M . , Pelkmans , L . , Kartenbeck , J . , Mezzacasa , A . , Kurzchalia , T . , and Helenius , A . ( 2005 ) . Clathrin - and caveolin - 1 - independent endocytosis : entry of simian virus 40 into cells devoid of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 477 – 488 . Donaldson , J . ( 2003 ) . Multiple roles for Arf 6 , sorting , structuring and signal - ing at the plasma membrane . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 41573 – 41576 . Dunn , K . W . , Mayor , S . , Myers , J . N . , and Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1994 ) . Applications of ratio ﬂuorescence microscopy in the study of cell physiology . FASEB J . 8 , 573 – 582 . Dunn , K . , McGraw , T . , and Maxﬁeld , F . ( 1989 ) . Iterative fractionation of recycling receptors from lysosomally destined ligands in an early sorting endosome . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 3303 – 3314 . Fivaz , M . , Vilbois , F . , Thurnheer , S . , Pasquali , C . , Abrami , L . , Bickel , P . E . , Parton , R . G . , and van der Goot , F . G . ( 2002 ) . Differential sorting and fate of endocytosed GPI - anchored proteins . EMBO J . 21 , 3989 – 4000 . Ghosh , R . , Gelman , D . , and Maxﬁeld , F . ( 1994 ) . Quantiﬁcation of low density lipoprotein and transferrin endocytic sorting HEp2 cells using confocal mi - croscopy . J . Cell Sci . 107 , 2177 – 2189 . Gruenberg , J . , and Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1995 ) . Membrane transport in the endocytic pathway . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 7 , 552 – 563 . Guha , A . , Sriram , V . , Krishnan , K . S . , and Mayor , S . ( 2003 ) . shibire mutations reveal distinct dynamin - independent and dependent endocytic pathways in primary cultures of Drosophila hemocytes . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 3373 – 3386 . Henley , J . R . , Krueger , E . W . A . , Oswald , B . J . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 1998 ) . Dynamin - mediated internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 85 – 99 . Hinshaw , J . E . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1995 ) . Dynamin self - assembles into rings suggesting a mechanism for coated vesicle budding 374 , 190 – 192 . Hoepfner , S . , Severin , F . , Cabezas , A . , Habermann , B . , Runge , A . , Gillooly , D . , Stenmark , H . , and Zerial , M . ( 2005 ) . Modulation of receptor recycling and degradation by the endosomal kinesin KIF16B . Cell 121 , 437 – 450 . Honda , A . , et al . ( 1999 ) . Phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase alpha is a downstream effector of the small G protein ARF6 in membrane rufﬂe forma - tion . Cell 99 , 521 – 532 . Kirkham , M . , Fujita , A . , Chadda , R . , Nixon , S . J . , Kurzchalia , T . V . , Sharma , D . K . , Pagano , R . E . , Hancock , J . F . , Mayor , S . , and Parton , R . G . ( 2005 ) . Ultrastructural identiﬁcation of uncoated caveolin - independent early endo - cytic vehicles . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 465 – 476 . Kirkham , M . , and Parton , R . G . ( 2005 ) . Clathrin - independent endocytosis : new insights into caveolae and non - caveolar lipid raft carriers . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1745 , 273 – 286 . Lamaze , C . , Dujeancourt , A . , Baba , T . , Lo , C . G . , Benmerah , A . , and Dautry - Varsat , A . ( 2001 ) . Interleukin 2 receptors and detergent - resistant membrane domains deﬁne a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Mol . Cell 7 , 661 – 671 . Lamaze , C . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1995 ) . The emergence of clathrin - independent pinocytic pathways . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 7 , 573 – 580 . Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1989 ) . Measurement of vacuolar pH and cytoplasmic calcium in living cells using ﬂuorescence microscopy . Methods Enzymol . 173 , 745 – 771 . Mayor , S . , Presley , J . , and Maxﬁeld , F . ( 1993 ) . Sorting of membrane compo - nents from endosomes and subsequent recycling to the cell surface occurs by a bulk ﬂow process . J . Cell Biol . 121 , 1257 – 1269 . Mayor , S . , and Riezman , H . ( 2004 ) . Sorting GPI - anchored proteins . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 110 – 120 . Mayor , S . , Sabharanjak , S . , and Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1998 ) . Cholesterol - dependent retention of GPI - anchored proteins in endosomes . EMBO J . 17 , 4626 – 4638 . McLauchlan , H . , Newell , J . , Morrice , N . , Osborne , A . , West , M . , and Smythe , E . ( 1998 ) . A novel role for Rab5 - GDI in ligand sequestration into clathrin - coated pits . Curr . Biol . 8 , 34 – 45 . Mellman , I . ( 1996 ) . Membranes and sorting . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 8 , 497 – 498 . Mills , I . , Jones , A . , and Clague , M . ( 1998 ) . Involvement of the endosomal autoantigen EEA1 in homotypic fusion of early endosomes . Curr . Biol . 8 , 881 – 884 . Mu , F . - T . , Callaghan , J . M . , Steele - Mortimer , O . , Stenmark , H . , Parton , R . G . , Campbell , P . L . , McCluskey , J . , Yeo , J . - P . , Tock , E . P . C . , and Toh , B . - H . ( 1995 ) . EEA1 , an early endosome - associated protein . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 13503 – 13511 . Mukherjee , S . , Ghosh , R . N . , and Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1997 ) . Endocytosis . Physiol . Rev . 77 , 759 – 803 . Murray , J . T . , Panaretou , C . , Stenmark , H . , Miaczynska , M . , and Backer , J . M . ( 2002 ) . Role of Rab5 in the recruitment of hVps34 / p150 to the early endosome . Trafﬁc 3 , 416 – 427 . Nabi , I . R . , and Le , P . U . ( 2003 ) . Caveolae / raft - dependent endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 161 , 673 – 677 . Naslavsky , N . , Weigert , R . , and Donaldson , J . G . ( 2003 ) . Convergence of non - clathrin - and clathrin - derived endosomes involves Arf6 inactivation and changes in phosphoinositides . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 417 – 431 . Naslavsky , N . , Weigert , R . , and Donaldson , J . G . ( 2004 ) . Characterization of a nonclathrin endocytic pathway : membrane cargo and lipid requirements . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 3542 – 3552 . Nichols , B . J . ( 2002 ) . A distinct class of endosome mediates clathrin - indepen - dent endocytosis to the Golgi complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 374 – 378 . Nichols , B . J . ( 2003 ) . GM1 - containing lipid rafts are depleted within clathrin - coated pits . Curr . Biol . 13 , 686 – 690 . Nykjaer , A . , et al . ( 1992 ) . Puriﬁed alpha 2 - macroglobulin receptor / LDL re - ceptor - related protein binds urokinase plasminogen activator inhibitor type - 1 complex . Evidence that the alpha 2 - macroglobulin receptor mediates cellular degradation of urokinase receptor - bound complexes . J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 14543 – 14546 . Oh , P . , McIntosh , D . P . , and Schnitzer , J . E . ( 1998 ) . Dynamin at the neck of caveolae mediates their budding to form transport vesicles by GTP - driven ﬁssion from the plasma membrane of endothelium . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 101 – 114 . Palacios , F . , Schweitzer , J . K . , Boshans , R . L . , and D’Souza - Schorey , C . ( 2002 ) . ARF6 - GTP recruits Nm23 – H1 to facilitate dynamin - mediated endocytosis during adherens junctions disassembly . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 929 – 936 . Paleotti , O . , Macia , E . , Luton , F . , Klein , S . , Partisani , M . , Chardin , P . , Kirch - hausen , T . , and Franco , M . ( 2005 ) . The small G - protein Arf6GTP recruits the AP - 2 adaptor complex to membranes . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 21661 – 21666 . Parton , R . G . , Joggerst , B . , and Simons , K . ( 1994 ) . Regulated internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 1199 – 1215 . Patki , V . , Virbasius , J . , Lane , W . S . , Toh , B . - H . , Shpetner , H . S . , and Corvera , S . ( 1997 ) . Identiﬁcation of an early endosomal protein regulated by phosphatidyl - inositol 3 - kinase . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 7326 – 7330 . Pauly , P . C . , and Harris , D . A . ( 1998 ) . Copper stimulates endocytosis of the prion protein . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 33107 – 33110 . Pelkmans , L . , Burli , T . , Zerial , M . , and Helenius , A . ( 2004 ) . Caveolin - stabilized membrane domains as multifunctional transport and sorting devices in en - docytic membrane trafﬁc . Cell 118 , 767 – 780 . Pelkmans , L . , Kartenbeck , J . , and Helenius , A . ( 2001 ) . Caveolar endocytosis of simian virus 40 reveals a new two - step vesicular - transport pathway to the ER . Nat . Cell Biology 3 , 473 – 483 . Peters , P . J . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Trafﬁcking of prion proteins through a caveolae - mediated endosomal pathway . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 703 – 717 . Pfeffer , S . R . ( 2001 ) . Rab GTPases : specifying and deciphering organelle iden - tity and function . Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 487 – 491 . Fusion of GEECs with Sorting Endosomes Vol . 17 , August 2006 3703 Poussin , C . , Foti , M . , Carpentier , J . L . , and Pugin , J . ( 1998 ) . CD14 - dependent endotoxin internalization via a macropinocytic pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 20285 – 20291 . Prigent , M . , Dubois , T . , Raposo , G . , Derrien , V . , Tenza , D . , Rosse , C . , Camonis , J . , and Chavrier , P . ( 2003 ) . ARF6 controls post - endocytic recycling through its downstream exocyst complex effector . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 1111 – 1121 . Radhakrishna , H . , and Donaldson , J . G . ( 1997 ) . ADP - ribosylation factor 6 regulates a novel plasma membrane recycling pathway . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 49 – 61 . Radhakrishna , H . , Klausner , R . D . , and Donaldson , J . G . ( 1996 ) . Aluminum ﬂuoride stimulates surface protrusions in cells overexpressing the ARF6 GTPase . J . Cell Biol . 134 , 935 – 947 . Razani , B . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 2001 ) . Caveolin - deﬁcient mice : insights into caveolar function human disease . J . Clin . Investig . 108 , 1553 – 1561 . Ricci , V . , Galmiche , A . , Doye , A . , Necchi , V . , Solcia , E . , and Boquet , P . ( 2000 ) . High cell sensitivity to . Helicobacter pylori VacA toxin depends on a GPI - anchored protein and is not blocked by inhibition of the clathrin - mediated pathway of endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 3897 – 3909 . Rubino , M . , Miaczynska , M . , Lippe , R . , and Zerial , M . ( 2000 ) . Selective mem - brane recruitment of EEA1 suggests a role in directional transport of clathrin - coated vesicles to early endosomes . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 3745 – 3748 . Sabharanjak , S . , and Mayor , S . ( 2004 ) . Folate receptor endocytosis and traf - ﬁcking . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 56 , 1099 – 1109 . Sabharanjak , S . , Sharma , P . , Parton , R . G . , and Mayor , S . ( 2002 ) . GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endosomes via a distinct cdc - 42 regulated , clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway . Dev . Cell 2 , 411 – 423 . Schu , P . V . , Takegawa , K . , Fry , M . J . , Stack , J . H . , Waterﬁeld , M . D . , and Emr , S . D . ( 1993 ) . Phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase encoded by yeast VPS34 gene essential for protein sorting . Science 260 , 88 – 91 . Sharma , P . , Sabharanjak , S . , and Mayor , S . ( 2002 ) . Endocytosis of lipid rafts : an identity crisis . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 13 , 205 – 214 . Sharma , P . , Varma , R . , Sarasij , R . C . , Ira , Gousset , K . , Krishnamoorthy , G . , Rao , M . , and Mayor , S . ( 2004 ) . Nanoscale organization of multiple GPI - anchored proteins in living cell membranes . Cell 116 , 577 – 589 . Simons , K . , and Zerial , M . ( 1993 ) . Rab proteins and the road maps for intracellular transport . Neuron 11 , 789 – 799 . Simonsen , A . , Lippe , R . , Christoforidis , S . , Gaullier , J . - M . , Brech , A . , Cal - laghan , J . , Toh , B . - H . , Murphy , C . , Zerial , M . , and Stenmark , H . ( 1998 ) . EEA1 links PI ( 3 ) K function to Rab5 regulation of endosome fusion . Nature 394 , 494 – 498 . Skretting , G . , Torgersen , M . L . , van Deurs , B . , and Sandvig , K . ( 1999 ) . Endo - cytic mechanisms responsible for uptake of GPI - linked diphtheria toxin re - ceptor . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 3899 – 3909 . Song , J . , Khachikian , Z . , Radhakrishna , H . , and Donaldson , J . ( 1998 ) . Local - ization of endogenous ARF6 to sites of cortical actin rearrangement and involvement of ARF6 in cell spreading . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 2257 – 2267 . Sternweis , P . C . , and Gilman , A . G . ( 1982 ) . Aluminum : a requirement for activation of the regulatory component of adenylate cyclase by ﬂuoride . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 79 , 4888 – 4891 . Sunyach , C . , Jen , A . , Deng , J . , Fitzgerald , K . T . , Frobert , Y . , Grassi , J . , McCaf - frey , M . W . , and Morris , R . ( 2003 ) . The mechanism of internalization of glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored prion protein . EMBO J . 22 , 3591 – 3601 . Swanson , J . A . ( 1989 ) . Phorbol esters stimulate macropinocytosis and solute ﬂow through macrophages . J . Cell Sci . 94 , 135 – 142 . Tanabe , K . , Torii , T . , Natsume , W . , Braesch - Andersen , S . , Watanabe , T . , and Satake , M . ( 2005 ) . A novel GTPase - activating protein for ARF6 directly inter - acts with clathrin and regulates clathrin - dependent endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 1617 – 1628 . Triantaﬁlou , K . , Triantaﬁlou , M . , and Dedrick , R . L . ( 2001 ) . A CD14 - indepen - dent LPS receptor cluster . Nat . Immunol . 2 , 338 – 345 . Wymann , M . , Bulgarelli - Leva , G . , Zvelebil , M . , Pirola , L . , Vanhaesebroeck , B . , Waterﬁeld , M . , and Panayotou , G . ( 1996 ) . Wortmannin inactivates phospho - inositide 3 - kinase by covalent modiﬁcation of Lys - 802 , a residue involved in the phosphate transfer reaction . Mol . Cell Biol . 16 , 1722 – 1733 . Zerial , M . , and McBride , H . ( 2001 ) . Rab proteins as membrane organizers . Nat Rev Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 107 – 117 . M . Kalia et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3704