INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON ENGINEERING AND PRODUCT DESIGN EDUCATION 8 & 9 SEPTEMBER 2016 , AALBORG UNIVERSITY , DENMARK DESIGN BOARDS AS AN ALIGNMENT TOOL FOR CROSS - DISCIPLINARITY IN ENGINEERING Ulla Tanderup GADE Aalborg University , Denmark ABSTRACT Design boards are communication and ideation tools used by designers in a design process to create shared understanding and creativity either mutually or between designer and client . There are many opinions about how to create Design boards the right way . Therefore , relevant literature will be reviewed with focus on the different types of Design boards , their relation to each other , their content and the basic guidelines of creating them . At the engineering education in industrial design at Aalborg University Design boards are often used in the project work to align and establish creativity . Even though this is an engineering education and many of the students eventually end up working within the engineering sector , there has been found no examples of practical use of Design boards within this sector . Therefore , a pilot study has been set up in an engineering company to test if Design boards can be used as alignment tools between different departments . In the reviewed literature three fundamental ground structures of creating Design boards have been discovered . Likewise , an illustration has been created to structure the Design boards in relation to each other and in relation to a design process . In the pilot study it is indicated that there is a higher agreement between the sale / administration department and the development department compared to the before mentioned departments and the workshop . Furthermore , consideration on how Design boards are being taught to the students at Industrial design at Aalborg University will be pointed out and discussed throughout this paper . Keywords : Mood boards , Design boards , Inspiration boards , visual communication , cross - disciplinarily , Alignment , Likert scale , product development , Design education . 1 INTRODUCTION Design boards can be used in many parts of a development process as a tool to transmit a certain mind - set , vision or idea between different stakeholders [ 2 , 5 , 9 , 10 , 11 ] . It is a communication and idea development tool often used within the design sector to establish a common language when sharing views whether it is mutual or with clients [ 2 , 5 ] . All this combined , makes it a perfect tool to establish a shared understanding and alignment , meaning that everybody involved has the same understanding of the design task and agrees on the procedure . The basic knowledge used for this paper has been achieved through 5 years of study at the engineering education in industrial design at Aalborg University . At this education Design boards are used to achieve creativity , shared understanding , and alignment in teamwork . The education has an interdisciplinary approach to industrial design , with focus on both the technical and aesthetic details of product development . Due to this placement , in the crossover area between design and engineering , many of the students consider themselves as either technical minded or aesthetical minded , [ 4 ] which occasionally will lead to miscommunication . The use of Design boards is one of the first tools taught to the students simply because it is a simple and straightforward tool . It is introduced during the first semesters , after which it is up to each student to expand their knowledge , about Design boards , on their own . There are many opinions about how to create Design boards . At this education it is taught to be a tool mostly consisting of images , but it may also include : material samples , colour samples , drawings and physical objects fixed to a big foam board [ 2 , 9 , 10 ] . Likewise , the students are taught briefly about what kind of information that is meant for the various Design boards . The overall approach on how to construct the Design boards , is with different media that look alike and is seen as a whole [ 1 , 2 , 9 , 11 ] . In some cases , the media used by the students vary a lot and are arranged in other ways . Even though many of the students from this particular education , wind up within the engineering sector , there have been found no examples about practical use of Design boards within this sector . There are a number of other aspects and opinions on how to create Design boards . Therefore , relevant literature has been reviewed with focus on the Design boards’ content and relation to each other . This knowledge has been used to create a figure showing various Design boards in relation to a design process . Furthermore , a Style board and one Mood board , has been created to be tested in a pilot study as alignment tools between different departments in a small engineering company [ 7 ] . In the reviewed literature , many types of Design boards have been found . The most well - known type of Design board is a Mood board and therefore , the most literature is concerning this particular type of Design board . Likewise , it is noticed that the term Mood board occasionally is used as a common term for Design boards [ 1 , 10 ] . Subsequent , the common term for the identified boards , including Mood boards , will be Design boards [ 9 ] . The pilot study indicates a higher agreement between the sale / administration department and the development department compared to the before mentioned departments and the workshop . The following sections in this paper are composed as follows : Section 2 presents an overall description of Design boards , a figure with their relation to each other , content in keywords , and how Mood boards can be used as alignment tools . Section 3 addresses the pilot study and presents the approach to the study . Section 4 presents the results from the pilot study . Section 5 presents a discussion and conclusion concerning the different types of Design boards , how they are being taught at the engineering education in industrial design at Aalborg University and the pilot study . Section 6 reflect on future studies . 2 DESIGN BOARDS 2 . 1 The general aspects of Design boards Design boards are tools mostly consisting of images , but may also include : material samples , colour samples , drawings and physical objects fixed to a big foam board [ 2 , 9 , 10 ] . There are many views on how Design boards should be structured . A Design board can either be structured as a collection of images each representing something [ 6 , 11 ] , as a collection of images that look alike and is seen as a whole [ 1 , 2 , 9 , 11 ] or as a collection of images with one central image supported by the other images [ 11 ] . It is mainly a non - verbal tool , meaning that the media should be self - explanatory , but in some cases people add a few keywords on the Design boards in order to point out the focus [ 9 , 11 ] . This is the case at the engineering education in industrial design at Aalborg University , where some of the students use keywords on their Design boards to point out the focus in a specific image or material sample . Design boards are technically easy and simple to create ; it does not require any knowledge about computers or design software and can therefore be created by anyone . In some cases , Design boards will even be created by the client [ 9 ] . As an example , some types of Design boards are used by wedding planers as a tool for the bride to plan the big day . The bride will then collect images and material samples on a Mood / Style boards to align wedding planner and bride [ 3 ] . There are many types of Design boards that contribute to the different stages of a design process . Some of the boards contain abstract media and some boards contain literal media . These different Design boards will sometimes be mixed together and therefore it might be hard to distinguish between the different types of Design boards [ 1 ] . In the following sub - section , Figure 1 illustrates some of these Design boards . It gives an example of what type of media different Design boards content their relation to each other and their relation to a design process . 2 . 2 Design board relations and contents . After reviewing relevant literature , Figure 1 has been prepared as a result of the initial literature studies [ 1 , 2 , 10 , 11 ] . Figure 1 . Overview of design boards as a result of the initial literature studies . 2 . 3 Mood boards as an alignment tools In a preliminary study , it has been confirmed that Mood boards can be used as alignment tools internally between designers as well as between designer and client . In this study , the author has interviewed both industrial designers and fashion designers [ 2 ] . In the aligning process between designer and client , the creation of Mood boards is an ongoing process . They are created in collaboration between designer and client . The client shares undefined and rough ideas for a product or a service . On basis on the subjects discussed , the designer conducts research to define the designer’s own understanding of the subjects . This material is presented on Mood boards to align designer and client . At this stage , the Mood boards will function as a non - verbal medium that assists in the transmission of mind - sets and visions . The media used on the Mood boards work as triggers to help express views and ideas . A Mood board , as an alignment tool , can be used with numerous clients , stakeholders and decision - makers [ 2 , 9 ] . Earlier studies , also suggests that Mood boards can be used to evaluate emotions and is both gender and age neutral [ 6 , 9 ] . 3 THE APPROACH TO STUDY This pilot study is inspired by a study conducted by Yusuke Yamani , Jason S McCarley , and Deana McDonagh [ 6 ] . In their study , they compare the perception of images on a Mood board between two age groups . The participants are 12 young adults with an average age of 19 . 8 years and 12 elderlies with an average age of 74 . 8 years . The focus is whether the perception of Mood boards is age - neutral or not . The participants are asked to evaluate the images on the Mood boards individually . In this pilot study , 20 participants from the same small Danish engineering company [ 7 ] was asked to individually evaluate two Design boards by expressing their state of agreement to 21 statements on a Likert scale from 1 to 5 [ 8 ] . ( 1 . Strongly disagree , 2 . Disagree , 3 . Neither agrees nor disagree , 4 . Agree , 5 . Strongly agree . ) The statements are presented in Figure 3 . The participants were from three different departments : nine participants from the sales / administration department , seven participants from the development department and six participants from the workshop . The order in which the Design boards were viewed was : Board 1 , Board 2 . An Industrial design student studying at master - level at Aalborg University has created one Style board presented in Figure 2 ( to the left ) and one Mood board presented in Figure 2 ( to the right ) . Both Design boards are created as a collection of images that look alike and are meant to be seen as a whole . Afterwards , the data is analysed with the departments of the participants in focus , to investigate whether the departments has the same perception of the Design boards . The tests were conducted in the participants’ own offices where they were asked to answer the statements on their own computer shown in Figure 3 . The Design boards used in this pilot study contained 12 images , each image had the following dimensions 90 * 90mm . Each Design board was printed on A3 paper and glued to the cardboard . Figure 2 . The Design boards used in the pilot study . Figure 3 . The statements used for this pilot study . 4 RESULTS FROM THE PILOT STUDY To evaluate the data from the pilot study , the answers given for each Design board , is divided between the three departments . For each statement , the mean value and the standard deviation are calculated . This will indicate the factor of agreement internally in each department and the agreement between the departments . The data collected with the Style board is illustrated in Figure 4 and the data collected with the Mood board is illustrated in Figure 5 . The y - axis represents the factor of agreement , the x - axis represents the answers given from each department and the error bars represent the variation in the answers given . This applies to both Figure 4 and Figure 5 . Figure 4 . Data collected with the Style board . Figure 5 . Data collected with the Mood board . 5 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 5 . 1 Design boards Some general aspects on how to create Design boards have been found . The fundamental element used on Design boards are images and it is mainly considered a non - verbal tool . Three ground structures for Design boards has been identified . A Design board will either contain a collection of images each representing something [ 6 , 11 ] , a collection of images that look alike and is seen as a whole [ 1 , 2 , 9 , 11 ] or a collection of images with one central image supported by the other images [ 11 ] . There are many types of Design boards . The Design boards that have been identified in the literature reviewed for this paper are presented in Figure 1 . This illustration / tool can be used to select the right type of Design board in relation to the stage in the design process . When the type of Design board has been selected one of the three ground structures needs to be selected . Furthermore , the user also has to decide whether the Design board should only contain images or other media and if keywords should be used on the Design board . If these ground rules have not been settled , it could be compared to playing a board game where the players are playing with different sets of rules . 5 . 2 Design boards at educational level At the engineering education in industrial design at Aalborg University , learning about Design boards is an ongoing process throughout the education . The students are taught about the main themes and information meant to be communicated through the different Design boards . The students are only weakly taught about the basic principles of how to structure the media on the Design boards . Therefore , the students might not be aware of what ground structure they are using . This means that when Design boards are placed on a wall to be discussed the students might have different views of the content value and focus . Furthermore , some students use keywords on the Design boards and some do not . This will also affect the content value and focus . Therefore , the guidelines pointed out in the previous sub - section could be of great use for the students , but this will need further investigation . 5 . 3 Mood boards as an alignment tool Firstly , the internal perception of the Design boards within the departments has been found by calculating the standard deviation for each statement . The author has afterwards used the following as a guideline : If the standard deviation is 1 or above 1 , the disagreement is significantly high for the given statement . Secondly , the mean value given by each department for each statement has been found . The mean values have been compared and the following guideline has been set . If the difference between the mean values is 1 or above 1 , there is a significantly high disagreement between the departments . The internal perception of the Design boards in the departments has been found . There are no patterns that indicate a higher internal perception of the Design boards in one of the departments compared to the other . The reason for this could very well be the low amount of participants . A difference between the mean values has been found significantly higher for the following statements : Board 1 : 16 , 17 , 18 and 21 , Board 2 : 6 and 4 . All the disagreements found are between the workshop and the other two departments . This suggests that the highest alignment and shared understanding is found between the sales / administration department and the development department when using Design boards . During this pilot study , it was pointed out by a few participants that some of the statements could be understood in various ways . Therefore , a review of the statements is needed for further work . In this pilot study , the participants have evaluated the Design boards individually , but usually when using Design boards at the education in industrial design at Aalborg university , they will be evaluated by more people at the same time . This means that instead of calculating a mean value for each department , the participants could in cooperation state answers given for the department . The reason for not letting the departments evaluate each Design board together in this pilot study was to investigate the level of internal alignment within the departments . In this pilot study , only two types of Design boards have been tested ; a Mood board and a Style board . Therefore , it is difficult to state if all types of Design boards can be used as alignment tools . 6 FUTURE WORK For future work , other types of Design boards could be investigated with the same focus as in this paper . The figure presenting an overview of different Design boards could be tested in an educational context and a more detailed investigation of how the students at Aalborg university are using Design boards in their work could be done . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Cassidy , T . D . Mood boards : Current practice and teaching strategies and students’ understanding of the process in International Journal of Fashion Design , Technology and Education , 2008 , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , March 2008 , pp . 43 – 54 . [ 2 ] Lucero , A . Framing , Aligning , Paradoxing , Abstracting and Directing : How Mood Boards Work in Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference , ( DIS ' 12 ) , 2012 , pp . 438 - 447 [ 3 ] Anonymous . Style Me Pretty Introduces Inspiration Board Builder in Entertainment Close - Up , 2011 . [ 4 ] Ovesen , N . Accommodating Different Learning Styles : Bridging Math and Form . Design Education & Human Technology Relations : Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Engineering and Product Design Education , 2014 , pp . 714 - 719 [ 5 ] Murto , P . , Persom , O . , Ahola , M . Shaping the face of environmentally sustainable products : Imageboards and early consumer involvement in ship interior design in Journal of Cleaner Production . Vol . 75 , July 2014 , pp . 86 – 95 [ 6 ] Yamani , Y . , McCarley , J . S . and McDonagh , D . Transgenerational communication through affective imagery in mood boards in Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting , Vol . 54 ( 20 ) , 2010 , pp . 1762 - 1765 . [ 7 ] Culkin , N . and Smith , D . An emotional business : a guide to understanding the motivations of small business decision takers in Qualitative Market Research : An International Journal , Vol . 3 ( 3 ) , 2000 pp . 145 - 157 [ 8 ] Alphen , A . , Halfens , R . , Hasman , A . and Imbos , T . , Likert or Rasch ? Nothing is more applicable than good theory in Journal of Advanced Nursing , Vol . 20 ( 1 ) , 1994 pp . 196 - 201 [ 9 ] Chang , H . , Díaz , M . , Català , A . , Chen , W . and Rauterberg , M . Mood boards as a universal tool for investigating emotional experience in Design , User Experience and Usability , Vol . 8520 2014 , pp . 220 - 231 . [ 10 ] Storer , I . Mood Boards as a Design Catalyst and Researching and Under - Researched Area in The Design Journal , 2004 , 7 , 3 , 16 - 31 ( 16 ) . [ 11 ] Mcdonagh , D . and Denton , H . Exploring the degree to which individual students share a common perception of specific mood boards : observations relating to teaching , learning and team - based design in Journal of Design studies , Vol . 26 ( 1 ) , 2005 , pp . 35 - 53 .