Journal of English Language Teaching Volume 9 No . 1 Journal of English Language Teaching ISSN 2302 - 3198 Published by English Language Teaching Study Program of FBS Universitas Negeri Padang available at http : / / ejournal . unp . ac . id / index . php / jelt © FBS Universitas Negeri Padang THE USE OF “KAHOOT” ( ONLINE QUIZ APPLICATION ) IN TEACHING GRAMMAR FOR SECOND YEAR STUDENTS AT SMA PEMBANGUNAN LABORATORIUM UNP Rahaka Panji Prawira 1 , Mukhaiyar 2 English Department Faculty of Languages and Arts State University of Padang email : rahakads @ gmail . com mukhaiyar @ fbs . unp . ac . id Abstract This research is motivated by the lack of mastery of Grammar in students . This is because the practice in the learning process is still not varied , one example of an exercise that can be used is Kahoot . This study aims to determine the effectiveness of the use of Kahoot on the teaching of Grammar students in the second year of the SMA Pembangunan Laboratorium UNP . This research uses a quantitative with quasi - experimental methods “pre - test and post - test control group design” . The population in this study were second year students of SMA Pembangunan Laboratorium UNP who were registered in the June - December period of the 2019 / 2020 school year . The research sample was 20 students of class XI IBB as the experimental class and 22 students of class XI MIPA 1 as the control class . The data of this study are the scores of the final test results of Grammar teaching without and using Kahoot second year students of SMA Pembangunan Laboratorium UNP . The test scores were compared using the t - test formula to determine the effectiveness of using Kahoot in Grammar teaching . Based on the results of the t - test , it was concluded that learning using Kahoot was effective in the teaching of Grammar in the second year students of SMA Pembangunan Laboratorium UNP because t count > t table ( 4 . 75 > 1 . 68 ) at a significant level of 0 . 05 . So , it was concluded that the teaching of Grammar in the second year students of SMA Pembangunan Laboratorium UNP by using Kahoot was better than without using Kahoot . Key words : Grammar , Kahoot , Use . A . INTRODUCTION Nowadays , English is very important in human life in many aspects . Almost every aspect such as : technology , education , business and others use English as a media to communicate . If someone does not know about English , she or he will get difficulties in speaking with the foreigner , entering foreign school , using the technology , getting a job and also practicicing in English language teaching at school . In Indonesia , government has obligated that English must be learned start elementary school until senior high school . It is supported by the education curriculum used in Indonesia . The Use of Kahoot in Teaching Grammar – Rahaka Panji Prawira 1 , Mukhaiyar 2 391 As a foreign language , English is not easy for the students to learn and they need to study a lot of skills to master it . In teaching English process , teachers always deal with teaching two aspects , those are skills and component . There are four main practical language skills ; listening , speaking , reading and writing . For expanding the students’ skills , the curriculum of the teaching English also includes the language components like vocabulary , structure ( grammar ) and pronunciation ( in speech ) or spelling ( in writing ) ( Lado , 1983 : 168 ) . Grammar is an important language component that should be considered when learning English . Harmer ( 2001 : 1 ) states that grammar is , in part , a study of what forms ( or structures ) are possible in language . According to Beverly ( 2000 ) grammar is the sound , structure and meaning of language system . In learning English , students need to know how to create and combine words well enough to help them negotiate meaning in both spoken and written communication . Therefore grammar becomes the important component to be mastered in learning English . As Savignon ( 2002 : 7 ) states , communication can not take place in the unavailability of structure or grammar , a set of shared assumptions about how language works along with a willingness of participants to cooperate in the negotiation of meaning . In the other words , the use of grammar will influence the meanings which want to be negotiated in a communication . It is because every rules of grammar will present different meaning . Therefore , students need to know a different way of putting words together to make meaningful sentences by recognizing grammar . As stated by Baverly ( 2000 ) people who speak the same language are able to communicate because they intuitively know the grammar system of that language - that is the rules of making meaning . Based of Indonesian curriculum , grammar is not taught specifically is senior high school . Grammar , on the other hand , is very important to learn , because it is necessary to develop phrases to express an idea . But in fact , most of Indonesian students encounter difficulties in learning grammar or structure because the grammatical rules of Indonesian language are different from those of English . In order to reduce students ' mistakes in learning English , especially in grammar , teachers must be able to create a favorable situation in the teaching and learning process in order to make it easier for students to learn and use English . Hence , good mastery in grammar will enable students easily express information , feelings , and ideas in their thought to others because grammar will guide them to cluster words or sentences in delivering the meaning appropriately . Using suitable method , technique and media which are appropriate to main subject , learning can increase the students’ interest and motivation in studying English , so the students feel interested and pay attention to that subject . Teachers can taking advantage of the advancement of science and technology to create an attractive and pleasant learning process atmosphere . In addition to creating a pleasant atmosphere , teachers can use interesting media when evaluating learning to improve learning outcomes . Most of students , nowadays , own a mobile phone . According to data from the report " Smartphone users worldwide 2014 - 2020 , " the number of thousands of Smartphone users has increased significantly from 2014 to the current time . The number of Smartphone JELT Vol 9 No 1 March 2020 392 ISSN : 2302 - 3198 users is expected to increase from 2 . 1 billion in 2016 to around 2 . 5 billion in 2019 , with Smartphone penetration rates still rising . These mobile devices are equipped with a variety of applications that are not originally designed to learn a foreign language . However , some applications , such as Whatsapp , YouTube , Skype online conversations , or Google Hangouts , may be useful for learning a foreign language . However , there is an increasing number of applications in the media aimed at learning a foreign language , such as Edpuzzle , Memrise , Socrative or Kahoot , which will be used as a form of media in the English language teaching process in this research . Ramírez Montoya ( 2009 ) conceives mobile language learning as the integration of a number of features : it represents a direct descendant of e - learning , including any kind of learning supported by online tools and resources , and m - learning , using digital resources that are objectively accessed via mobile devices . Mobile learning permits students to increase the classroom learning by offering a flexible kind of learning which can benefit the classroom experience . Sharples ( 2005 ) perceives m - learning as a learning process in which students develop knowledge along with their peers and teachers while collaborating in the learning process . A more contemporary definition of mobile language learning is that of Crompton ( 2013 : 4 ) , who conceives m - learning as learning through multiple contexts through social and content electronic devices . Related to the idea of the industrial revolution 4 . 0 , this mobile language learning is the media that will be used in this learning activity as a manifestation of the progress and implementation of technology that has developed rapidly with new ways of learning processes ; the students need to develop critical thinking and complex problem solving and also learn how to be imaginative , creative , adaptable , flexible using media in learning process . Based on the phenomena above , the researcher tries to find the effective solution in teaching grammar by using “ Kahoot ” ( Online Quiz Application ) . Teachers should taking advantage of the development of science and technology to create an attractive and enjoyable learning system experience . In addition to creating a pleasant atmosphere , teachers can use interesting mobile learning as a media when evaluating learning to improve learning outcomes . The researcher will use Kahoot as a quiz gametification in teaching strategy to help the students in comprehending grammar . According to Klauer ( 1998 ) , a game is essentially a game based on rules . Gambling is an activity in which participants follow prescribed rules that differ from reality in the pursuit of a challenging goal . The reason of why the researcher chooses Kahoot as a strategy to teach Grammar is to change the traditional grammar teaching into the meaningful , communicative , fun and enjoyable learning and also most of the teachers in learning process has never used instructional media such as kahoot or others online platforms . The results of research conducted by Irawati ( 2018 ) showed that learning using Kahoot media showed good results on student learning outcomes . After being explored and interviewed by several English teachers at this school , the learning process never had to use instructional media such as kahoot or other online platforms , so Kahoot is one of the online media in the form of quizzes that can be used to teach grammar . The Use of Kahoot in Teaching Grammar – Rahaka Panji Prawira 1 , Mukhaiyar 2 393 According to Betty ( 1992 : 106 ) the study of grammar is and should be fun and engaging . So the teachers can create relaxing atmosphere in the class and arise student’s motivation by using kahoot . The students will more enjoy and active to participate in the teaching and learning process . They will participate in activities that involve them to use what they have been drilled on in a creative way . This will help them to acquire certain essential language skills . Based on the problems and the potentials of Kahoot application in teaching grammar , the researcher try to teach grammar through this application . Therefore , this study was essential for a second year student at the SMA Pembangunan Laboratorium UNP in order to enhance grammar skills in the learning and teaching process . B . RESEARCH METHOD The design of this research is experimental research . Experimental research is a study designed to test usefulness and efficiency of teaching and learning practices , processes , strategies or media whereas , if the results are good , they can be used in classroom teaching ( Sutedi , 2011 : 64 ) . This type of experiment is quasi - experimental . According to Sugiyono ( 2017 : 77 ) , quasi - experiments are the development of true experimental designs that are complicated to implement . This design has a control group , but it can not totally control external variables that affect the conduction of experiments . Cohen ( 2007 ) states that it sought to examine the efficiency of one variable towards another by isolating , monitoring and manipulating the variable in an actual - world setting . This research consists of two variables , namely independent variable and dependent variable . The independent variable is the use of Kahoot , whilst the dependent variable is teaching English grammar skill of second year students at SMA Pembangunan Laboratorium UNP . The design of this study are pre - test and post - test control group design . According to Arikunto ( 2010 : 212 ) , this design is a design that uses a group of research subjects from a specific population , then divided them into two groups , namely experimental class and control class . In this study , the experimental group would treat using Kahoot whilst the control group would treat using conventional method . The population in this research are the second year students at SMA Pembangunan Laboratorium UNP . There are 8 classes for grade XI , which the total 217 students . In the research study , it needed the samples which are the representative of the population . Gravetter ( 2012 ) states that sample is a set of people from the population that is typically intended to represent the population . In this scenario , the author had to take a few samples from the population of the research . The researcher usedsimple random sampling technique to select the sample of the research . According to Gay ( 2008 ) , simple random sampling is isued to select a sample from a huge population whenever a well - defined population has the same rights and the same capacity . This sampling method has two clear advantages , such as a fairly easy and quick way to obtain a large sample , and an individual could be measured in a group . JELT Vol 9 No 1 March 2020 394 ISSN : 2302 - 3198 The instrument used in this study was a test . According to Masidjo ( 1995 : 38 ) , the test is a tool to measure in the form of a series of questions which must be answered appropriately in a structured situation and which are intended to assess the ability and outcomes of individual or group learning . The objective test used in this research was a multiple - choice test . The Multiple Choice Test is an objective test in which each test element usually has more than two choices for responding . In this study , there are four choices of correct answer choices , namely ( a ) , ( b ) , ( c ) , ( d ) . Of all the choices available only one is rightly called the key answer . Another option is an answer that is incorrect or incorrect is called distractor . C . RESULT AND DISCUSSION 1 . Research Finding The data in this study were the results obtained from the teaching grammar skill tests for students in sample class . The test questions were objective in the form of 15 multiple - choice questions . After the tests were carried out , the data were obtained from the experimental class and the control class . 1 . 1 . Teaching Grammar skill using Kahoot for second year students at SMA Pembangunan Laboratorium UNP in experimental class of pre - test . The Grammar skill test was followed by 20 students of the experimental class . After scoring and evaluating , the detailed results of the pre - test experimental class students can be seen in the following table . Table 1 . Results of Pre - Test Teaching Grammar Skill of Class Experiments . Amount of Scores 87 , 8 Average 43 , 89 Standard Deviation 20 , 23 Maximum Score 85 , 8 Minimum Score 6 , 6 Based on table 1 above , the teaching Grammar skill of experimental class for pre - test questions was generally described based on the amount of scores , namely 87 . 8 , average 43 . 89 , standard deviation 20 . 23 , highest score 85 . 8 and lowest score 6 . 6 . . 1 . 2 . Teaching Grammar skill without Kahoot for second year students at SMA Pembangunan Laboratorium UNP in control class of pre - test . Teaching Grammar skill test was followed by 22 students of control class . After scoring and evaluating , the detailed results of pre - test control class can be seen in the following table . The Use of Kahoot in Teaching Grammar – Rahaka Panji Prawira 1 , Mukhaiyar 2 395 Table 2 . Results of Pre - Test Learning Grammar in Control Class in General . Amount of scores 937 . 2 Average 42 . 6 Standard Deviation 19 . 41 Maximum Score 85 . 8 Minimum Score 13 . 2 Based on table 2 above , the teaching Grammar skill in control class for the pre - test questions were described in general based on the number of scores , namely 937 . 2 , average of 42 . 6 , standard deviation 19 . 41 , the highest score of 85 . 8 and the lowest score of 13 . 2 . 1 . 3 . Teaching Grammar skill using Kahoot for second year students at SMA Pembangunan Laboratorium UNP in experimental class of post - test . Teaching Grammar skill test was followed by 20 students in the experimental class . After scoring and evaluating , the detailed results of the post - test results of the experimental class students can be seen in the following table . Table 3 . Results of Post - Test Teaching Grammar Skill in Experiments Class in General . Amount of Scores 1537 . 8 Average 76 . 89 Standard Deviation 18 . 82 Maximum Score 99 Minimum Score 46 . 2 Based on table 3 above , teaching Grammar skill of the experimental class students for the post - test questions was generally described based on the number of scores of 1537 . 8 , average of 76 . 89 , a standard deviation of 18 . 82 , the highest score of 99 and the lowest scores of 46 . 2 . 1 . 4 . Teaching Grammar skill without Kahoot for second year students at SMA Pembangunan Laboratorium UNP in control class of post - test . Teaching Grammar skill test was followed by 22 control class students . After scoring and evaluating , the detailed results of the post - test control class can be seen in the following table . Table 4 . Results of Post - Test Teaching Grammar Skill Test in Control Class Amount of Scores 1557 . 6 Average 70 . 8 Standard Deviation 18 . 01 Max Score 99 Min Score 39 . 6 JELT Vol 9 No 1 March 2020 396 ISSN : 2302 - 3198 Based on table 4 above , teaching Grammar skill of control class for post - test was generally described based on the number of scores of 1557 . 6 , average of 70 . 8 , the standard deviation of 18 . 01 , the max score of 99 and the min score of 39 . 6 . 1 . 5 . The influence of Kahoot in teaching Grammar skill for second year students at SMA Pembangunan Laboratorium UNP . Based on the post - test results table in the experimental and the control class , It could be seen that average scores of the experimental class was higher than the control class proved that mastery of the experimental class students was generally better than the control class students . The standard deviation of the Grammar learning post - test in the experimental class students was smaller than control class students . This showed that the post - test score of the experimental class was relatively similar and close to the average compared to the control class . 2 . Discussion Based on , the final results ( post - test ) obtained by the average score of each indicator increased significantly from the control and experimental class . In indicator 1 the average score of the control class is 76 while the average score of the experimental class is 81 . Indicator 2 the average score of the control class 65 while the average score of the experimental class 71 . Indicator 3 the average score of the control class is 68 while the average score of the experimental class is 77 . From the average score of each indicator , almost all indicators that have a significant increase in the average are indicators 1 , 2 and 3 . Indicator 1 increases significantly , based on the analysis of items on the calculation analysis of the level of difficulty that matter for the indicator 1 is still relatively easy . And based on the answer sheet from the control class and the experimental classes the score obtained was not much different . For indicator 2 has an average increase in score which is quite significant , the average in class control is 65 and the average in experiment is 71 . Based on the results of the research from the analysis of the difficulty level of the questions for indicator 2 questions are classified as moderate and based on the student answer sheet it does look an average increase after being given treatment in the experimental class . And for indicator 3 also had an average increase in score which is quite significant , the average in class control is 68 and the average in experiment is 77 . Based on the results of the analysis about the difficulty level of the indicator about 3 classified as moderate . From the steps of Kahoot implementation it was found that at the time the quiz began , students were more active than in answering various questions on the three indicators . In general , the final score after giving treatment with the Kahoot method in the experimental class and conventional method in the control class , obtained an average control class learning outcomes ( XI MIPA 1 ) is 70 . 8 with a standard deviation ( S ) 18 . 01 . While the average score of the class of experiments ( XI IBB ) are 76 , 8 with a standard deviation ( S ) 18 . 82 . From the results of the average post - test score of the experimental and the control classes it can be seen that the The Use of Kahoot in Teaching Grammar – Rahaka Panji Prawira 1 , Mukhaiyar 2 397 average score of the experimental class was better than the average score of the control class . So , from the analysis of the final data showed that the obtained T count = 4 , 75 while T table = t ( 0 . 05 ) ( 40 ) = 1 . 68 . Because T count > T table ( 4 , 75 > 1 . 68 ) , it was significant and the hypothesis proposed by the author could be accepted . This meant that the average score of learning outcomes in the experimental class was better or not the same as the learning outcomes of the control class . This result in accordance with the relevant research that states Kahoot effect on learning . The success of the learning process was also inseparable from the ability of teachers to develop learning models that were oriented to increasing the intensity of effective student involvement in the learning process . The development of an appropriate model basically aims to create learning conditions that enable students to learn actively and fun so that students can achieve optimal learning outcomes and achievements . The statement above is in accordance with the descriptive learning theory that has been put forward Uno ( 2011 : 109 ) as follows " If the contents of the field of study ( conditions ) are organized using the elaboration model , there will be increased learning outcomes " . In practice , this learning model is able to increase the cooperation of learning motivation , and collaboration between students so that an active learning atmosphere is created . With these active learning conditions , their learning outcomes can improve . This was in accordance with the opinion of Silberman ( 2002 : 1 - 2 ) reveals active learning as follows : What I hear , I forget What I hear , see and ask questions about or discuss with someone else , I begin to understand What I hear , see , discuss and do , I acquire knowledge and skills What teach to another , I master When all the above processes have been carried out , the students can master what they learn . This condition causes the learning outcomes of experimental class students to be higher than the control class student learning outcomes . So that the Kahoot method on Grammar material affects the learning outcomes of students in class XI IBB SMA Pembangunan Laboratorium UNP . This is seen from the results of the average post - test scores in the experimental class 70 . 8 and in the control class 76 . 8 . This shows that the application of the Kahoot method has a positive impact on student learning outcomes . In this study found factors that influence the learning process of students , namely those originating from within the students themselves in the form of interest and motivation . Great interest influence on learning . Even lessons that attract students ' interest will be easier to learn and store because they increase learning activities . If someone has a high interest in something , then he will continue to try to do so that what he wants can be achieved in accordance with his wishes . After the implementation of the method Kahoot to the motivation of learners to study a course in English increased because in the learning process students are more enthusiastic and enthusiastic in participating in learning . In JELT Vol 9 No 1 March 2020 398 ISSN : 2302 - 3198 learning , motivation is something that moves and encourages students to learn or master the subject matter that is being followed . According to Fathurrohman and Sulistyorini ( 2012 : 126 ) Motivation is an important factor in learning , because motivation is able to encourage a child in his learning activities . A student will succeed if he has the motivation to learn . Students who have the motivation to learn will appear through the seriousness to be involved in the learning process , among others visible through the activity of discussion , exploring , analyzing , concluding lessons , evaluating in accordance with the demands of learning . In addition , external factors are also found that also influenced the learning process , namely the character of the educator ( researcher ) and the condition of the class . After the application of the Kahoot method by researchers is very influential on the motivation of students to improve learning outcomes . This is because in the learning process students are excited and enthusiastic in participating in learning activities . Evidence of their enthusiasm is seen from their enthusiasm to answer all questions and continue to the next questions to compete for the highest score that will be displayed after each question is finished . The results of this study are relevant with the theory put forward by Uno ( 2011 : 109 ) which states that the use of models can improve learning outcomes in the sense of learning to be effective . In accordance with the theory and literature review were used to researchers , these results also indicate that the use of methods Kahoot effect on teaching grammar skill for second year students at SMA Pembangunan Laboratorium UNP . D . CONCLUSION AND SUGGESTIONS Based on the results of the study , it was concluded that the score of the final result after the implementation of the treatment with the method Kahoot in classroom experiments and learning conventional incontrol clas s , obtained the average result of experiment class ( XI IBB ) was 76 . 8 with a standard deviation ( S ) 18 . 82 . While the average score of the control class ( XI MIPA 1 ) is 70 . 8 with a standard d eviasi ( S ) 18 . 01 . From the results of the average score of the post - test experiment and control class seen that the score of the average of experiment class is good compared with the score of the average in control class . So that from the analysis of the data end of the show that obtained T count = 4 , 75 while T table = t ( 0 . 05 ) ( 40 ) = 1 . 68 . Because T count > T table ( 4 , 75 > 1 . 68 ) then significant and hypotheses were proposed by theauthors can b e accepted that the method Kahoot significant influence on teaching Grammar skill for second year students at SMA Pembangunan Laboratorium UNP for using Kahoot students are better and able to mastering Grammar material . Thus , it was concluded that the teaching Grammar skill method for second year students at SMA Pembangunan Laboratorium UNP using Kahoot method is better than without using Kahoot . The Use of Kahoot in Teaching Grammar – Rahaka Panji Prawira 1 , Mukhaiyar 2 399 Based on the conclusions obtained from the results of the study , the following suggestions were put forward . 1 ) For Students It is expected to be always active in participating in learning activities especially Grammar so that it can produce comprehensive , affective , psychomotor , and cognitive knowledge and prepare material to be studied first . 2 ) For Teachers To realize the learning objectives , it is recommended to English teachers to apply the use of kahoot in learning , especially Grammar . It aims to create a pleasant learning atmosphere and attract students ' attention in learning . 3 ) For Other Researchers It is expected that subsequent researchers conducting similar studies on the use of kahoot in other learning in English such as speaking , listening , writing and reading , so that they can use this research as a reference to strengthen the synthesis of theories and further collaborate to make it more interesting . BIBLIOGRAPHY Adab , Beverly . ( 2000 ) . “Discourse Analysis as Part of Translator Training : Does It Work ? How Do We Set About It ? A Response to Anna Trosborg . ” Current Issues In Language and Society 7 ( 3 ) : 245 – 248 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 13520520009615583 . Adrian , Sutedi . ( 2011 ) . Metode Penelitian Hukum . Sinar Grafika : Jakarta . Airasian , Peter & L . R . Gay . ( 2000 ) . Education Research : Competence for Analysis an Application ( 6thed . ) . New Jersey : Merrill Prentice Hall . Arikunto , S . ( 2010 ) . Prosedur Penelitian Suatu Pendekatan Praktik . Jakarta : Rineka Cipta . Azar , Betty Schrampfer . ( 1992 ) . Understanding and Using English Grammar , terj . London : Prentice - hall . Boddy , William . ( 2001 ) . Quiz Shows , In Glen Creeber ( Ed . ) . London : BFI . Cohen , L . , Manion , L . , & Morrison , K . ( 2007 ) . Research Methods in Education ( 6th ed . ) . London , New York : Routllege Falmer . JELT Vol 9 No 1 March 2020 400 ISSN : 2302 - 3198 Crompton , H . ( 2013 ) . A Historical Overview of Mobile Learning : Toward Learner - Centered Education . In Z L Berge & L Y Muilenburg ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Mobile Learning , Florence , KY Routledge , Italy , pp : 3 – 14 . Dewi , Kurnia C . ( 2018 ) . Pengembangan Alat Evaluasi Menggunakan Aplikasi Kahoot pada Pembelajaran Matematika Kelas X . UIN Raden Intan Lampung . http : / / repository . radenintan . ac . id / 4286 / 1 / SKRIPSI CAHYA KURNIA . pdf diakses pada tanggal 2 Maret 2019 . Dykes , Barbara . ( 2007 ) . Grammar for Everyone : Vivtoria : Acer Press . Gravetter , F . J . , & Forzano , L . B . ( 2012 ) . Research Methods for The Behavioral Sciences ( 4th ed . ) . Belmont , CA : Wadsworth . Greenbaum , Sidney and Gerald Nelson . ( 2002 ) . An Introduction to English Grammar . London : Longman . Harmer , Jeremy . ( 2001 ) . The Practice of English Language Teaching , 3rd Ed . New York : Pearson Education Limited . Huddleston , Rodney & Geoffrey . ( 2010 ) . The Cambridge Grammar of The English Language . New York : Cambridge Univesity Press . Huddleston , Rodney , & Pullum , Geoffrey K . ( 2005 ) . A Student ' s Introduction to English Grammar . New York : Cambridge University Press . Hughes , A . ( 2003 ) . Testing for Language Teachers . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Irawati , M . ( 2018 ) . Profil Minat dan Hasil Belajar Siswa dalam Pembelajaran Matematika Kelas VII I SMP Negeri 5 Yogyakarta pada Pokok Bahasan Penyajian Data dengan Menggunakan Media Pembelajaran Kahoot . ( Skripsi ) . Universitas Sanata Dharma . Klauer , P . ( 1998 ) . Building a Data Warehouse for Decision Support . Second edition . New Jersey : Prentice - Hall , Inc . Lado , R . ( 1957 ) . Linguistics Across Cultures : Applied Linguistics for Languange Teachers . Michigan : University Of Michigan . Lime . ( 2018 ) . Pemanfaatan Media Kahoot pada Proses Pembelajaran Model Kooperatif tipe STAD Ditinjau dari Kerjasama dan Hasil Belajar Siswa Kelas VIII - 1 SMP Negeri 5 Yogyakarta Tahun Ajaran 2017 / 2018 . Skripsi . Yogyakarta : FKIP USD . Masidjo . ( 1995 ) . Penilaian Pencapaian Hasil Belajar Siswa di Sekolah . Yogyakarta : Kanisius . The Use of Kahoot in Teaching Grammar – Rahaka Panji Prawira 1 , Mukhaiyar 2 401 Montoya , Peter . ( 2009 ) . The E - Learning Brand Called You . New York : McGrawHill . Patel and Praveen , M . Jain . ( 2008 ) . English Language Teaching . Jaipur : Sunrise . Penny Ur . ( 2012 ) . A Course in English Language Teaching . New York : Cambridge University Press . Savignon , Sandra J . ( 2002 ) . Interpreting Communicative Language Teaching : Contexts and Concerns in Teacher Education . New Haven : Yale University Press . Sharples , M . ( 2005 ) . Towards A Theory of Mobile Learning . New York : University of Birmingham . Sudjana , N . ( 2005 ) . Dasar - dasar Proses Belajar Mengajar . Bandung : Sinarbaru . Sugiyono . ( 2017 ) . Metode Penelitian Kuantitatif , Kualitatif , dan R & D . Bandung : Alfabeta . Suskie , L . A . ( 2009 ) . Assessing Student Learning : A Common Sense Guide . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass . Weirsberg , R . W . ( 2006 ) . Creativity : Understanding Innovation in Problem Solving , Science , Invention , and The arts . New jersey : John Wiley .