Desiging Social Play Things Christopher Frauenberger HCI Group , TU Wien Vienna , Austria christopher . frauenberger @ tuwien . ac . at Kay Kender HCI Group , TU Wien Vienna , Austria silvia - kay . kender @ tuwien . ac . at Laura Scheepmaker HCI Group , TU Wien Vienna , Austria laura . scheepmaker @ tuwien . ac . at Katharina Werner HCI Group , TU Wien Vienna , Austria katharina . werner @ tuwien . ac . at Katta Spiel HCI Group , TU Wien Vienna , Austria katta . spiel @ tuwien . ac . at ABSTRACT Social play is a key factor in children’s positive development . Chil - dren with different interactional styles , such as neurodivergent children , face challenges to create opportunities for playing with peers to practice and acquire complex social skills , putting their social and emotional wellbeing at risk . We report on the design of social play technologies that aim to scaffold and support , in non - normative ways , co - located play of heterogeneous , neurodiverse groups of children aged 6 to 8 . In three case studies we describe the participatory design processes that led to the development of three prototypical social play things . We report on the methodological challenges to design with these highly diverse groups and critically reflect on negotiating design decisions across abilities , agendas and conceptions of play within the process . Drawing on our successes and failures in these three cases , we synthesise design guidance for creating social play technologies for diverse groups of children . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Participatory design . KEYWORDS children , play , participatory design , social play , neurodiversity ACM Reference Format : Christopher Frauenberger , Kay Kender , Laura Scheepmaker , Katharina Werner , and Katta Spiel . 2020 . Desiging Social Play Things . In Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Shaping Expe - riences , Shaping Society ( NordiCHI ’20 ) , October 25 – 29 , 2020 , Tallinn , Estonia . ACM , NewYork , NY , USA , 12pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3419249 . 3420121 1 INTRODUCTION Social play is considered a key aspect of positive child development [ 12 ] , in which many of the vital inter - personal skills we rely on in later life are playfully acquired . Being excluded from opportunities for social play poses significant risks in terms of mental health Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspecificpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . NordiCHI ’20 , October 25 – 29 , 2020 , Tallinn , Estonia © 2020 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 7579 - 5 / 20 / 10 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3419249 . 3420121 and wellbeing . Children with different interaction styles , such as autistic children , who would benefit most from such opportunities to develop complex social skills in a self - motivated and experiential way , often find themselves isolated , and develop a preference for solitary , repetitive play behaviours [ 5 ] . This can lead to a dangerous spiral in which less opportunities for social play lead to fewer skills being developed , which , in turn , makes it more difficult to join in play with peers . While social skills interventions are a key factor in their support , they place the burden for breaking this cycle entirely on neurodivergent children . Further , such interventions run the risk of imposing normative adult assumptions on successful interaction or play behaviours and provide little opportunities for children to experiment with their peers in a self - driven manner . In the SocialPlayTechnologies project , we investigated how dig - ital technology may scaffold and mediate social play activities in co - located groups of neurodiverse children 1 , aged 6 to 8 years . Our goal was to develop interactive play things that are meaningfully engaging for a range of diverse children , robust in play , open ended in their interpretation , embedded in children’s individual play con - texts , extendable and non - normative in what successful play may look like . We take inspiration from the socio - technical concepts of boundary objects and infrastructures [ 40 ] and aim for such play things to offer both ambiguity and structure , to enable children to develop their own interpretation of play while being connected through a common play infrastructure [ 35 ] . Given the different ways of how neurodivergent and neurotypi - cal children make sense of their world [ 11 ] , a central challenge of designing such play things is creating interactive affordances that consider these multiple ways of sense - making . We argue that this can only be achieved by including neurodiverse children directly in the design process . Participatory design ( PD ) with these groups of children is challenging ; however , previous work has demonstrated that it is possible to include neurodiverse children meaningfully in creative design processes and that this leads to design outcomes that would be un - imaginable for neuro - typical adult researchers [ 18 ] . In this paper , we report on three long - term , participatory en - gagements with groups of neurodiverse children in which we co - designed social play technologies . Our contributions are twofold : firstly , we add methodological knowledge by systematically devel - oping and re - interpreting PD approaches for very heterogeneous 1 By neurodiverse , we refer to heterogeneous groups consisting of neurodivergent and neuro - typical children NordiCHI ’20 , October 25 – 29 , 2020 , Tallinn , Estonia Frauenberger , et al . groups of children , building on and extending the concept of a Handlungsspielraum [ 27 ] . Secondly , we critically reflect on the three cases and their successes and failures , and we offer concrete design guidance for creating social play technologies . In the following section , we review relevant literature , offering a working definition of social play , its importance in relation to the development of neurodiverse children and the current state - of - the - art in including this population in designing technology . We then describe the project context in more detail , before reporting on the three cases , showing how we engaged neurodiverse groups of children in the design of three different social play technologies . We then critically reflect on the methods we used and summarise our insights in the context of social play . Finally , we synthesise implications for the design of social play technologies to provide guidance for future work . 2 BACKGROUND 2 . 1 Social Play Playing is a key human activity across cultures and history [ 7 ] that contributes to the well - being , cognitive and social development of children and people of all ages [ 43 ] . There are several ( social ) play theories which attempt to define , analyse and categorise play behaviours of children [ 31 , 32 , 42 ] , however , the boundaries of what is considered play remain fuzzy and subjective . Commonly used qualifiers for child activities include that they are voluntary , intrinsically motivated , spontaneous and free from adult - imposed rules [ 46 ] . One prominent approach to categorise children’s play behaviour based on the their social participation was developed by Parten [ 31 ] . Classifiers range from unoccupied behaviour to solitary play , onlooker , parallel group activity , associative group play , and coop - erative play with the level of social involvement increasing from stage to stage . While it may be difficult to sharply distinguish social play from non - social play , Parten’s categories suggest that there is at least some social aspect involved from the level of onlooker onward . Another aspect we consider important are children’s own con - ceptions of play . Complementing traditional approaches to study play through observation , Wing reports on an interview study with children comparing their conception of play to that of work [ 45 ] . The results show that children view play as freely chosen and self - directed activity , that does not require finishing or approval seeking . Wing pointedly summarises , that children themselves characterise the key feature of play as something they “get to do” rather than “have to do” [ 45 ] . We follow these characterisations and in the remainder of this paper , when we use the term “social play” , we refer to a voluntary , intrinsically motivated and self - directed activity of children that involves any degree of social interaction with others . 2 . 2 Neurodivergence & Play Neurodivergent conditions include autism , ADHD or Dyslexia , among others , all of which are characterised by non - dominant cog - nitive styles that lead to differences in , e . g . , sensory processing and social interaction [ 22 ] . As one of the most prominent neurodiver - gent groups , we briefly review work in the area of autism . Autism Spectrum Conditions are a group of related neuro - developmental conditions which express themselves in the areas of social interac - tion , communication , and preferences for structured routines . Its prevalence is estimated to be above 1 % [ 21 ] . The differences between allistic 2 and autistic people in social interaction and communication have a profound , negative and sustained impact on an individual’s social and emotional well - being . Continuous miscommunication can lead to issues with making and maintaining friendships [ 23 ] , resulting in loneliness [ 25 ] , isolation [ 9 ] and a significantly increased likelihood of being bullied [ 8 ] . Over time , such experiences often negatively impact children’s mental health [ 44 ] , and their sense of self - worth and self - esteem [ 3 ] . Furthermore , autistic adults continue to report a sense of isolation , despite their desire to be more engaged with others [ 29 ] . Social play , as a key developmental stage in childhood , provides an opportunity in which children learn many important , but com - plex social skills in a self - motivated , experiential way [ compare 12 ] . At this stage autistic children often prefer solitary and repetitive play behaviours , while , conversely , they would benefit most from social play patterns that would allow them as much as their allistic peers to acquire and practice new skills [ 5 ] . Consequently , play concepts have been used as a basis for social - skill interventions , for example , with LEGO [ 24 ] . Early explorations into the intersection between autism , play and technology use , for example , Tobobo , a constructive assembly system with kinematic memory , found that it resulted in more collaborative play amongst autistic children , compared with passive construction blocks [ 15 ] . In a related study they found similar effects by using an augmented knights castle [ 14 ] . However , in a recent survey on inclusive play technologies , Sobel et al . conclude that this is a significantly under - explored area and argue for more research into technologies designed to support unstructured activities , such as play [ 37 ] . While there have been some investigations into the sociality of autistic children on a dedicated Minecraft server [ 33 ] , how to ( co - ) design such technologies remains an open research question . 2 . 3 Participatory Design and ( neurodiverse ) Children Participatory Design ( PD ) has a long history of involving vulner - able , disadvantaged or marginalised groups of people in design processes of technologies . Historically , PD started working with trade unions and workers [ 2 ] to involve them in creating alternative technological futures . Children were actively involved in design processes since the late 90’s with one of the first dedicated methods being Co - operative Inquiry [ 13 ] . The framework is based on three approaches : Inclusive contextual inquiry ( children are research part - ners and actively involved in every step of the design process ) , PD methods ( workshops , prototyping activities with low - tech mate - rials ) and Technology Immersion ( children explore the possibility space of novel technologies ) . Involving groups of neurodiverse children in design brings par - ticular challenges that require adaptations to participatory methods . Benton et al . have developed the IDEAS framework for involving neurodiverse children in design processes , focusing on empowering 2 We use the term allistic to mean not autistic as coined by [ 26 ] . Desiging Social Play Things NordiCHI ’20 , October 25 – 29 , 2020 , Tallinn , Estonia LightSpaces MusicPads PictureStage Leyla 8 , protects Attila , low frustration tolerance , learning differences Tony 7 , thoughtful , interested , left after year one , learning differences Aisha 9 , kindhearted , easy - going , cre - ative Leo 7 , left after year one , sensitive , at - tentative , ADHD Timur 8 , kindhearted , easily frustrated , learning differences Elli 9 , creative , calm , shy , needs en - couragement Asa 7 , loves drawing & the city’s un - derground system , autism Emir 8 , enthusiastic about maths , dif - ferences in social interactions , autism Jason 12 , left after year one , English speaking , imaginative , autism Attila 7 , friendly , sensitive , optimistic , self - blaming , autism Deniz 8 , full of ideas , dominating , autism Valerie 11 , active , strong sense for coop - eration Link 10 , joined in year two , interested in Super Mario , easily distracted , autism , ADHD Louisa 9 , avid reader , gets tired quickly , Down syndrome Asa 8 , switched from LightSpaces to PictureStage group in year two Jamila 9 , creative , self - confident , learn - ing differences Table 1 : Child participants ( all names changed ) in each of the three groups including age , characteristics and diagnosis where available . the children by 1 ) structuring the environment ( for example by hav - ing consistent session structures and routines to start activities and tailoring activities to individual needs and abilities ) and 2 ) offering additional supports ( such as team building activities ) [ 4 ] . Similarly , Guha et al . attempted to develop Co - operative inquiry to be more inclusive [ 20 ] . Other PD work with neurodiverse children includes work by Börjesson et al . in inclusive school settings [ 6 ] . We also draw methodologically on the wide range of work that specifically involved autistic children in designing technology , e . g . the early work by van Rijn and Stappers with minimally verbal children [ 41 ] , the work by Malinverni et al . that focused on empowerment of autistic children in co - designing an motion - based game [ 28 ] and our own work in long - term PD engagements with neurodiverse children [ 16 , 18 ] . The concept of a Handlungsspielraum [ 27 ] , was particularly use - ful in informing the development of our design activities . Makhaeva et al . , have developed the Handlungsspielraum as a tool - to - think with when designing PD activities with the focus to enable chil - dren to unfold their creative potential . To open up such a Hand - lungsspielraum ( a conceptual opportunity space for design ) , it is key to carefully balance freedoms and structures for participants to not be overwhelmed or over - constrained . Freedoms and struc - tures can be actualised through the materials used , the activities planned , the physical setting or the social roles that the researchers assume in the workshops . All these aspects can be used to provide or constrain the Handlungsspielraum , the scope of creative action , for participants . As they report , fine - tuning this balance is of par - ticular importance for neurodivergent children as they may require forms of structures , such as support roles or time - planning , that are specific to their cognitive styles . 3 DESIGNING PLAY THINGS 3 . 1 Project Context & Method The SocialPlayTechnologies project took place over the course of three years and directly built on our experiences in the OutsideThe - Box project [ 18 ] . We worked in two inclusive mainstream primary schools in the City of Vienna and engaged three groups of chil - dren aged 7 to 12 years . We worked with two of those groups in parallel in the first year , while engaging the third in the second year . The two schools followed different concepts of inclusion . In school one four to five neurodivergent children are part of a class of neurotypically developing children . These children are educated additionally by a dedicated teacher for a couple of hours a week and are the ones who also took part in our project , designing the MusicPads . School two is a school solely for children who are not accepted into mainstream schooling where children often switch classes according to their social and cognitive abilities . Here the groups ( LightSpaces and PictureStage ) were selected by their respec - tive class teachers 3 . After interviews with teachers , we started with a weekly or bi - weekly series of design workshops ( 50 in total across all three groups ) , which lasted for about one hour each . With all groups , the design work was followed by an evaluation phase in which we conducted controlled studies , comparing the children’s social play behaviours with or without the developed social play technology , as well as long - term studies focusing on the development of the groups’ use of the play technology during a period of five weeks . These evaluation studies are outside the scope of this paper and are in the process of being published elsewhere . At the start of the project , informed consent was obtained by the parents or legal guardians , as well as assent from the children themselves . During the project , the project team installed a mech - anism of ethical self - reflection to address any ethical questions that might arise over the course of the collaboration , following the concept of an In - Action Ethics [ 17 ] as well as being inspired by the discussions of Spiel et al . on Micro - Ethics [ 39 ] . Some team members also received specific training from special needs educators as part of the previous project and best practices ( e . g . dealing with conflict ) were passed on to other team members through an apprentice style model . Alas , at least two varying team members were present for every session , and wrote research diaries immediately afterwards , 3 While we use the names of the resulting prototype to designate the groups here , the groups were completely free in what they would design , i . e . children were not recruited for a particular prototype , but all concepts emerged from the groups NordiCHI ’20 , October 25 – 29 , 2020 , Tallinn , Estonia Frauenberger , et al . noting incidents of interest and salient insights , as well as verbal discussions post - workshop . In addition all workshops were video recorded for further analysis and reflection . All engagements followed the same blueprint : after setting up the logistics with teachers , we met the children regularly in an approximately fortnightly rhythm . In the beginning , our focus was on building rapport with the group and getting a sense of which activities the children considered to be playful . We then started with different technology immersion activities [ 13 ] that were designed to sensitise them to the possibilities provided by sensors and actuators . In the next phase , we regularly sought to inspire children by providing new input ( e . g . , through materials , narratives or interactive scenarios ) , while also iteratively narrowing the design space towards agreed upon concepts or ideas . As these became more concrete , we started to bring in or collaboratively create first prototypes , sometimes in between sessions , sometimes as part of the sessions . Towards the end of the design phase , the research team took more time to increase the level of maturity of prototypes and develop them into stable and robust research products [ 30 ] that could be used in the evaluation phase . In the progressive design of activities for the workshops , we were guided by the concept of the Handlungsspielraum [ 27 ] to sup - port the groups in unfolding their creative potentials by balancing appropriate structures and freedoms . We continuously extended our PD tool - box of method elements that was first established in the OutsideTheBox project [ 16 ] and sought to mix and blend these as required in the course of the design work . In the following , we detail how this overall strategy played out within the three cases . 3 . 2 LightSpaces The LightSpaces design team consists of six children ( see Table 1 ) . Their teacher Jane was not present during the sessions . Leo and Asa transferred to a different class or moved away after the first year , making it possible for Link to join the group . The sessions took place in a small room adjacent to the main classroom . The group of children all knew each other well and their pre - existing relationships , alliances or quarrels were frequently brought into the sessions . 3 . 2 . 1 Concept . The LightSpaces are a set of different coloured fab - rics in the size of one square meter each , and an interactive lightning system which is embedded in some of the fabrics . The fabrics can be connected with each other or furniture in the room with little mag - nets which are integrated in the edges of each fabric . Three fabrics have integrated LED lights which can be activated by squeezing an attached object which each is of a different shape and colour – yellow , red and blue – and made from crocheted textiles . Metaphor - ically , the children squeeze the corresponding colour into the lights . The intensity of the light is related to the force applied when squeez - ing the object . This function is implemented through an integrated pressure sensor connected to a microcontroller ( ESP32 4 ) which controls a ring of NeoPixels 5 output . The microcontrollers are also wirelessly connected to each other and whenever one object is squeezed , the change in colour effects all other lights , so that the output of all lights is a mixture of any colours activated ( see Figure 4 https : / / www . espressif . com / en / products / socs / esp32 / overview 5 NeoPixels are chained , multi - colour LEDs - https : / / www . adafruit . com / category / 168 Figure 1 : The LightSpaces Concept . The hand in the middle presses two colour coded pieces of fabric ( yellow and blue ) causing all lights to shine in green . All fabrics incorporate magnets to be easily attached to furniture in the children’s environment ( e . g . , tables ) . 1 ) . In addition , a “light snake” ( an NeoPixel strip wrapped in fabric ) starts glowing whenever all three objects are squeezed simultane - ously . The idea behind this concept is that the children build their own “play spaces” with the fabrics - by using the fabrics with existing infrastructures that are already available in their classrooms . If children choose to individually build separate spaces , they can use the lights to communicate with other children without necessarily having to be directly ( and literally ) “in their space” . The LightSpaces infrastructure also invites children to engage in role - playing activi - ties and pretend play . For example , we observed how the fabrics were also appropriated as costumes and props . 3 . 2 . 2 Design Process . We conducted 17 design workshops with the children over a period of 1 . 5 years . For most of the time each workshop took place at a small storage room next to the main class room . The last couple of workshops were held in a larger crafts room , which offered different and more spacious structures to build with . During the first workshops we started with creative activities where we got to know each other and bond with the children . We made , for example , a token puzzle and each child painted one piece . During design activities the children preferred to work under the tables instead of sitting around a table ( see also , Figure 2 , to the left ) . They used the furniture to build their own spaces . This inspired us to take extra materials like fabrics in the fifth design session to the design workshop so that the children could use them to build “play spaces” with . At the end of each design session , the children could play freely for a couple of minutes . Although the room was tiny , the children liked to play with the infrastructures ( tables , chairs ) and engaged in role - playing and pretend play activities . Popular scenarios were embedded in a narrative of “kings and dragons” ; often some of the children pretended to be animals . Leo and Asa found it often difficult to join in larger group activities and played alone . Desiging Social Play Things NordiCHI ’20 , October 25 – 29 , 2020 , Tallinn , Estonia Figure 2 : Playing with lights under the table ( left ) , structures ( middle ) and the final prototype ( right ) As part of the technology immersion phase [ 13 ] we introduced two technical toolkits : LittleBits 6 and Calliope 7 . With the toolkits , we explored different kinds of technologies ( such as sensors , motors , sound - producing technologies ) and possible combinations . The children were particularly interested in lights , so we took lamps to the next session which could be activated with a remote control and change colours . Attila and Leyla used the lamp as a mood light that could influence the atmosphere by changing colours . However , their main focus was still on the room structures and building their own spaces . In this group , no teacher was present during the workshop , so we became mediators for the children next to our role as researchers . Asa and Leo often had disagreements or tried to start a fight , while the other children excluded them from the shared play activities . Attila was the first child who used the fabrics to build his “private space” when he got irritated by the other children , and soon they would follow his example . At this point , we had the idea to use the fabrics and lights to mediate their play when the children had disagreements . With scaffolding from the researchers , Asa and Leo started to communicate with each other from separate LightSpaces by using the lights . They sent each other light messages and even - tually made amends and it was at this point in our collabortion that the fundamental concept of the LightSpaces was born . In the next workshops , we refined the fabrics and the embedded lights . We made three independent fabric units , each consisting of a sewn - on RGB LED ring in the centre . We attached to each LED ring a squeezable object , which was embedded later in different crocheted shapes ( a circular pad , a ball and a dumbbell , cf . Figure ? ? , right ) . When two or more light rings are activated at the same time , the colours of the LED rings mix . Otherwise they would light up in the colour of their connected squeezable object ( red , blue , yellow ) . The idea was that the children would be motivated to communicate with each other when they wanted “their” light to change or mix . To support the children in building their own places , we devel - oped a light - weight tube system the children could mount together as structures to attach the fabrics to ( see Figure ? ? , middle ) . Jamila and Leyla enjoyed connecting the tubes , even though the design was not refined and the children often struggled to mount them together . Asa and Leo became frustrated and found it more difficult than the other two to make constructions with the tubes . A second 6 https : / / www . littlebits . cc / welcome 7 https : / / calliope . cc / en problem with the tubes was that it took the children half an hour to set them up , so they had only very little time left to actually “play” . Hence , the children considered the building process not as a playful activity and required to have sufficient time left to play in the places they created with the fabrics . Subsequently , we decided to not use the tube system , instead , the children continued to use the furniture and objects already available in the room to attach the fabrics to . This shows how relevant it is to attend to children’s definition of “play” without overriding them with our own as to keep the voluntary aspect of social play intact . 3 . 3 MusicPads Five children were part of the MusicPads design team ( see Table 1 ) . In contrast to the other groups , we had the advantage here that Uma , the additional teacher of this class was present during all workshops and helped us mediating the group and understanding their reactions by providing us with the appropriate larger context . In this way , the design workshops became part of their regular , out of class activities . 3 . 3 . 1 Concept . The MusicPads are a set of ten interactive pads that trigger sounds or sound effects when activated . The pads can be placed and moved anywhere in the room and the children step on Figure 3 : The MusicPads Concept . The speaker system in the background and a foot stepping on one of the music pads which lights up , driving the speed , rhythm , intensity etc . of the shared sound . NordiCHI ’20 , October 25 – 29 , 2020 , Tallinn , Estonia Frauenberger , et al . Figure 4 : Playing with a Wizard of Oz prototype ( left ) , a miniaturized LEGO prototype ( middle ) and children involved in the making of a music pad . them to play music together . The embedded sensors capture if a child steps on the pad and measure the amount of pressure as well as the distribution on the pad , both parameters drive the sound generated . Integrated LED strips also give immediate feedback to the children if and where they pressed it . Again , ESP32 microcon - trollers were used with an array of pressure sensors and strips of NeoPixels . The music is played by the “base station” , a speaker connected to a microprocessor 8 which receives wireless signals from all pads ( via Open Sound Control messages ) to drive parameters of a Pure Data 9 sketch to generate sound . The base station has a large red button which randomises the mappings of each pad , i . e . the sounds and sound effects are randomly re - assigned to the pads after hitting the button . The surface of the pads is made from synthetic material so it is possible to write or draw on them with a whiteboard marker ( see also , Figure 3 ) . The children can , for example , write the kind of sound or sound effect on the pad or draw pictures to make their individual pad . 3 . 3 . 2 Design Process . Similar to the LightSpaces group , we started our design process , comprising overall 16 workshops , with team building and getting familiar with each other . The children were used to having 15 minutes of free play time after each lesson , so we could observe them play without our influence . Some children liked to play with building bricks and engaged in collaborative play , but Tony and Louisa preferred to play on their own . Other popular games are table soccer and playing with skittles . When we introduced technology kits to the children during the fifth workshops ( LittleBits and Calliope ) , the children were espe - cially interested in building musical instruments and generating sounds with the synth kit of the LittleBits 10 . In their free play time , the children continued to play music games . They were eager to play “stop dance” ( next to the play activities mentioned above ) , where players dance to different songs until the music stops and ev - eryone has to hold their last posture . Those who keep moving have lost and can only re - enter the game in the next round . The game combines anticipation , surprise , and gross motor skills as well as explorations of bodily movement . “Stop dance” was the first game 8 WeusedtheBelaplatformwhichisspecificallydesignedforinteractivesoundprojects - https : / / bela . io / 9 https : / / puredata . info / 10 https : / / sphero . com / products / synth - kit during which we observed that all children were playing together with the same aim and enthusiasm . We attribute the popularity of the game to the three aspects : First , the music the children enjoyed , second , the structured routine of the game and the third aspect is the possibility to move freely and expressing themselves in an intuitive , embodied way . Acting upon the interest of the children , we took tablets with DJ applications to the seventh workshop . The children enjoyed mixing music , but it was difficult for some of them to focus on the screen and they missed moving their bodies freely to the music . For the next workshop , we focused only on movements , the children , researchers , and Uma stood in a circle and performed in turn a series of movements ( for example , dance moves or yoga poses ) . Everyone else mimicked the movements . During the following sessions we continued exploring different technologies the children could use to make music with . For exam - ple , we designed wearables with Calliopes , and built a Wizard of Oz prototype with paper pads the children could step on while we played different sounds . The latter was the most enjoyable activity for the children , even though they suspected that we actively ac - tivated the music when they stepped on the paper pads . The next version of this concept was a miniature prototype : We embedded pressure sensors in pads made from cardboard and the children used LEGO figures to step on the pads , which were connected with cables to the Arduino activating a speaker playing different sounds and effects . When we tested this prototype with the children , we observed that they were curious about the working mechanisms and which pad was activating which kind of sound effect . Tony , who was usually not actively engaged in group activities , suggested a structured way of testing each pad by pressing only one by one , an activity that required a very high degree of social coordination , something Tony usually shied away from . The children were also interested in the inner workings of the pads and we ended up taking them apart together to reveal the embedded sensors and cables . From this point , we used a few workshops to scale up the pro - totype and refine the concept . The children were also actively in - volved in the actual making of pads . We used cardboard , tin foil and Velostat 11 , a pressure sensitive conductive sheet , to build pressure sensors embedded in cardboard pads . Every child designed their own individual MusicPad by choosing the shape and drawing on it . 11 https : / / www . adafruit . com / product / 1361 Desiging Social Play Things NordiCHI ’20 , October 25 – 29 , 2020 , Tallinn , Estonia Figure 5 : Individual pads created by the children ( left ) and the final MusicPads system ( right ) . At the end of this workshop , we connected all pads to the Arduino and the children could play their music game together . During this phase , the children especially enjoyed modifying the pads by draw - ing on them and had fierce discussions about how to play with the MusicPads . Each child had a different interpretation of the concept and how to play with the pads . Louisa enjoyed drawing on the pads , while Emir and Deniz wrote down the function of each pad . Sometimes pads were interpreted as a “stage " for dancing , at other times the children invented structured activities how to test the functionality of each pad . Reflecting on these different modes of engaging with the Music - Pads , we decided to introduce a “randomise” button which served two purposes : firstly , it allowed children to prolong their play when - ever they thought they had figured out which pad had which func - tion . Secondly , it also opened up a space for negotiation as the different modes could be disrupted by individual children . Emir , for example , very much enjoyed sneaking up to the base station and resetting the game by pressing the button . While this was not always met with content by the others , it created key opportuni - ties for practising some social skills , while the situation was still structured through the shared play experience . For the final prototype we focused on a robust design and made design decisions without involving the children , for example the choice of materials ( wood and plastic instead of cardboard ) and a technical re - design ( wireless communication , more accurate pres - sure sensors ) . We mounted a plastic plate on top of each pad , al - lowing the children to draw on them with whiteboard markers . We integrated a big , red “randomise " button , which switches the func - tions assigned to the pads . As discovering how the system worked was part of the gameplay , this button enables ( re - ) discovering as a form of intrinsically motivated play . The final MusicPads were tested and further refined after a three month break with the children . 3 . 4 PictureStage Four children were part of the initial PictureStage design team ( see Table 1 ) , with a fifth child , Aisha , joining when Jason left because his parents moved to a different city . The teacher , Carol , was not present during sessions , but engaged in the project peripherally by asking the children about the workshops and staying up to date . In the beginning , the workshops took place in the same well - lit crafts room we were using with the LightSpaces group . When another class started to use this room as their permanent class room , we moved to a crafts room in the cellar , which was challenging for some of our workshops due to its bad lighting conditions . 3 . 4 . 1 Concept . PictureStage is a platform composed of a tabletop reading lamp that was modified to contain a Raspberry Pi , running OpenCV and a camera capturing the illuminated area underneath . The output is connected to a projector on a stand that can be aimed at a wall or the floor . By drawing underneath the lamp or inserting objects with special tags , children can determine what gets pro - jected . The system , thus , affords two interconnected play spaces : one where children negotiate control over content under the lamp and one that is the scaled up play environment in which multiple children interact with the projections . The openness in terms of content enables a wide range of play activities , while the content duality of the platform and the reciprocity provides a basis for negotiating space and cooperative play . Beyond capturing the drawings , the camera recognises a series of special tags using the ArUco library [ 34 ] , which are printed on Figure 6 : The PictureStage Concept . The camera and the Raspberry Pi is located where the bulb would be in the desk - top lamp . It captures drawings as well as tagged cubes under - neath . A connected projector ( not visible ) projects the ren - dered video at scale onto the floor or any wall . NordiCHI ’20 , October 25 – 29 , 2020 , Tallinn , Estonia Frauenberger , et al . Figure 7 : Children’s paper theatre show ( left ) , preparing for the next game ( middle ) and the girls re - interpret Asa’s drawing as a board game ( right ) colour - coded cubes . Those cubes act as tokens that produce visual effects in the projection ( see Table 2 ) 3 . 4 . 2 Design Process . In total , 17 Participatory Design sessions were conducted with this group over the course of two academic years . We had contacted another teacher at the same school where we conducted the LightSpaces project and identified a group of pupils interested in working with us . With this group , we spent a lot of time getting to know each other and our preferences , which lead us to exploring a larger range of design concepts than with the other two . What was common , though , was the children’s interest in embodying and role - playing around super - power characters that al - lowed them to face challenges in their lives with self - determination . Another theme of self - guided play was using the blackboard to draw , note or explore forms and figures as well as process discussions . This design group presented a particular challenge in its lack of group cohesion - the only two children who considered themselves close friends , Jason and Asa , were prone to intense quarrels . One or more children would frequently break away from the group activities , instead choosing to draw on the blackboard . Aiming to work with perceived strengths of children , we centred the following sessions around a super - power theme , exploring the children’s image of themselves and others as well as role - play and cooperation . The children paired up to brainstorm which super - powers they would have individually as well as in combination with others . They experimented with wearable Calliopes that signified their super - powers , but emitted different LED - patterns and sounds when they were combined ( i . e . when their inputs were connected through touch or crocodile clips ) . This also informed us in establishing the children’s perception of and interest in digital technologies : Elli , for instance , told us she was scared of electricity and refused to touch the contacts on the calliope , while Asa was entirely uninterested in any technologies he did not know how to use already ( such as smartphones and tablets ) , showing little interest in any systems without immediate and obvious cause - effect connections and feedback . In contrast to the other two design groups , in the following sessions , we focused on using paper props and other non - digital placeholders , working with LEDs at most and concealing the technological components . After further two sessions , building on pretend and narrative play , the activities ultimately failed to provide a common basis for cooperative play and did not provide any clear design direction . We noticed that the children frequently broke away from the common activity that we had brought and started drawing on the blackboard . Consequently , we took a step back and re - shifted our focus onto drawing as a mode of play that the children seem to share . In the eleventh Session , we covered the floor and a wall in poster paper and handed out a loop of string and a pen of assorted colour to every child to create an embodied space to draw within . The children could enclose their personal drawing space by laying out their loop of string , or draw outside its confines in the common space . In the second half , we projected the drawings from a certain area of the floor onto the paper on the wall , enabling the children to interact with their drawings and change them . The relatively smooth negotiation of disagreements and the immersion of the children led us to continue along this path . Around this time , Jason left the group , as his parents moved to another country . We then started exploring the children’s interests further by prompting them to draw using pens and tablets in a shared online canvas , then creating a series of image - editing tags to get a feel of the embodied interaction with film / projection without the drawing component . A first working prototype enabled the children to draw directly into the projection with a “magic wand” ( a tag on a stick ) . The session in which this was applied highlighted issues that Elli and Asa had interacting with the abstract drawing mechanisms . This led to the development of the lamp , which maintains their familiar , lag - free and most importantly tangible drawing modes . We also gathered cues for fine - tuning improvement , and discarded several tags the children were not interested in . Aisha joined the group here , and while she was eager and motivated in designing , this led to a slight rift between Elli and Valerie , who suddenly became a cohesive unit , and Asa , who was almost impossible to motivate and usually required a team member’s undivided attention throughout the following workshops . However , the lamp provided a bridge between Asa , who preferred drawing , and the rest of the group , who on more than one occasion created games around the projections of his drawings ( see Figure 7 ) . Asa especially was only interested in drawing and the G - major tag , while Valerie and Elli equally enjoyed interacting with the projection . Since the tags were not used as frequently as the children could not tell them apart very well , in the final session , we let the children design the tag cubes according to their own ideas of what Desiging Social Play Things NordiCHI ’20 , October 25 – 29 , 2020 , Tallinn , Estonia Name Function Black / White Renders Video output in black and white Smiley Inserts a smiling emoji in the output instead of the tag G - Major Inverts output colours Kaleidoscope Creates a kaleidoscopic output that changes when turned Rotate Rotates the output image depending on the rotation of the cube Foto Takes a screenshot , saves it on disk and displays it for 5 seconds Freeze Freezes the output image as long as the tag is visible in the scene Table 2 : Projection effects caused by tagged cubes that can be placed in the scene Figure 8 : Combining superpowers with Calliope ( left ) , Asa running through the projection of drawings ( right ) was representative of their respective functions . In the same session , with the already working final prototype , the children created a story out of cut - out drawings which they performed to us as an audience , in which even Asa took part of his own accord , illustrating how we particularly focused on the self - directedness aspect of social play in this context . 4 INSIGHTS FOR DESIGN We have described the final concepts resulting from three PD pro - cesses , as well as illustrated incidents and sessions that were deci - sive in shaping material outcomes . In doing so , we have provided an overview of the participants , and related the main challenges encountered and decisions made in shaping the sessions themselves . While many , especially early , design decisions such as the overall direction of the play things ( e . g . music , light , movement , drawing ) were led by the children , and the children participated in shaping the final designs , certain attributes and functions were considered by the team throughout the entire process . In the following , we reflect on our insights and outline concepts that guided us in our decision - making . Control and Complexity In feedback sessions , the children usually want more control or functions . For instance , they ask to be able to control when the LightSpaces go on and off ( “Why does it turn off again ? ” ) , without having to continue squeezing the associated objects . The MusicPads group also appreciated and appropriated the functionality that they can turn the pads on and off individually . However , both they and the PictureStage group would have liked more sounds or more filters and functions respectively , although they were prone to be easily overwhelmed and frustrated when presented with increasing complexity . While handing over control to the children is one of the core paradigms of our work , as it em - powers them and encourages usage appropriation , designers often had to make decisions against the wishes of the children in terms of limiting the complexity levels in favour of easier or more intuitive control of the technologies ( echoing previous findings by , e . g . , [ 38 ] ) . For instance , the reduced number of tags was conducive to usage , since it was easier for the children to remember the functions and find their favourite tags . Balance of Openness and Structures Makhaeva et al . have established the concept of Handlungsspielraum [ 27 ] to describe the necessity of flexible configurations of structures and freedoms within PD processes : structures provide safety , guide participants , and offer stimuli , while freedoms allow participants to explore their visions and ideas . This duality applies to material and spatial structures as well as abstract elements such as tasks , narratives and rules [ 27 ] . We found playthings ( akin to how Sicart coined the term [ 36 ] ) that offered structures and ambiguity in similar ways to inspire creative interpretation and imagination . They had a similar effect on the creativity within play , e . g . , the different playful engagements children would come up with and the versatility of the playthings . Designing objects that are at the same time open and structured is somewhat paradoxical . However , we have found several approaches to address the issue of offering balance between freedoms and structures within our final prototypes . ( 1 ) Modularity : The LightSpaces and MusicPads both provide functional structures that can be interpreted in different ways and combined to spread out or enclose spaces , become mobile or immobile . Parts can be added , merged or omitted . ( 2 ) Manipulability : All Prototypes can be changed in one way or another . The children can fold the cloths , change the NordiCHI ’20 , October 25 – 29 , 2020 , Tallinn , Estonia Frauenberger , et al . sounds , turn on the lights , or fill the projection with the content of their choice . ( 3 ) Freedom with a frame : The PictureStage in itself is not modular and a very rigid spatial structure . However , it frames content entirely free from pre - defined structures : drawings and objects can be laid under the lamp , and the children are free to stand in front of the projector and interact with the contents in whichever way they envision . ( 4 ) Layers : The LightSpaces and MusicPads can be interpreted and implemented without necessarily making use of their technologies - the MusicPads still serve as stepping - stones , the fabrics additionally serve as disguises , building material or simply soft items that are safe to throw around . Allowing solitary detours within the group context In comparing LightSpaces to MusicPads and PictureStage , the two - component structure of the latter two revealed itself as a facilitator for detours within games . Emir and Link , who often temporarily ( intervals of usually 1 - 5 minutes ) leave cooperative or group play to self - regulate their emotions by dancing , jumping or pacing around , profit from structures that allow them to remain within the common play context as a form of “interactive stimming” [ 10 ] or re - enter it seamlessly . A unit that is separate and spatially apart from the main construction , but interacts with it and has an effect on the overall structure , also enables children whose play modes differ from the group - dominant modes of play . This is the case , for example , for Asa , who usually prefers solitary play and drawing to group and physically active play . With PictureStage , Asa can choose the level of engagement that feels safe and enjoyable at any given moment and join the group play in their own way . ImpulsestoInterpret Objectsthatdosomethingautonomously - the PictureStage constantly projecting the camera recording , a Mu - sicPad ( in this case without our intent ) playing a sound without anyone stepping on it - act as initiating agents to interact with . Often , impulses from objects triggered the creation of games or narratives among the children . The PictureStage , as soon as we turned on , beckoned almost all children to stand in front of the projector . Once we added a light for the drawing area , the children were also drawn to that space more frequently . This echoes previ - ous work deliberately using erroneous behaviour in virtual agents as a conversation starter [ 1 ] . Impact on the entire group Stepping onto a MusicPad or draw - ing under the PictureStage ’s lamp has an immediate impact on the space within which the group plays , often leading to discussions and negotiations , informing game rules or acting as narrative input ( see also , [ 19 ] ) . While playing with the LightSpaces , the group quickly established a common narrative that was repeated throughout ev - ery play session during the evaluation phase : there was a building phase , and then a playing phase . The trigger for the latter was clos - ing the curtains of the room , which was , like the LightSpaces , a light within a space - however , one that impacted the entire group and a larger area . The LightSpaces themselves , i . e . the augmented pieces of fabric , had little impact on social play : the children rarely used them without prompting , and they only sparked social interaction , discussion or collaboration on a handful of occasions . Limitations The main challenge in designing the final proto - types , were our limited resources to develop the prototypical con - cepts into stable and robust research products [ 30 ] , so that malfunc - tions such as lagging output , system crashes and a frequent need for at least minor repairs after sessions were common . While the effect of unstable prototypes on the children’s play is analysed in - depth in our forthcoming evaluation paper , it is necessary to note that , especially within the LightSpaces project , we may have obtained different results and insights had the prototypes been impeccably functional . Although sometimes leading to happy accidents , like the MusicPads being triggered without anybody stepping on them and inducing the children to initiate a scavenger hunt for the mal - functioning pad , these factors framed and shaped children’s play as much as the underlying design concepts . 5 CONCLUSION To date , little research has been done that addresses the intersection of participatory design of playful technologies with neurodiverse groups of children . We conducted and described three different cases in which we designed three distinct social play technologies with groups of neurodiverse children . Our work illustrates how long - term participatory design processes can lead to the develop - ment of a range of different design concepts some of which we actualised as prototypes , namely the LightSpaces , the MusicPads and the PictureStage , each of which provide different infrastruc - tures and boundary objects as playthings [ 35 ] to facilitate voluntary , intrinsically motivated and self - determined play in group settings . In our detailed description of the design processes , we traced and accounted for design decisions that shaped these prototypes . In doing so , we have aimed to critically reflect on how our shaping of the Handlungsspielraum in these collaborations , i . e . our facilitating of structures and freedoms within the design process , has impacted the nature of outcomes . The three cases reported on here offer rich descriptions of how the concept of Handlungsspielraum can guide designers in facilitating processes with heterogeneous groups of children . From these experiences , and across the three cases , we also identify a range of implications that may guide researchers and designers in facilitating similar processes . It is our hope , that this work will serve others as productive example and effective guid - ance in involving neurodiverse groups of children in the design of playthings . This may contribute to create more opportunities for children with different interactive or cognitive styles to playfully acquire complex social skills in self - driven and self - motivated ways . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ThisresearchisfundedbytheAustrianScienceFund ( FWF ) : [ P29970 - N31 ] “SocialPlayTechnologies” project . We would also like to thank our participating children , families , teachers , schools and the local government . Desiging Social Play Things NordiCHI ’20 , October 25 – 29 , 2020 , Tallinn , Estonia REFERENCES [ 1 ] Alyssa M Alcorn , Judith Good , and Helen Pain . 2013 . Deliberate system - side errors as a potential pedagogic strategy for exploratory virtual learning environ - ments . In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education . Springer , 483 – 492 . [ 2 ] Ditte Amund Basballe , Kim Halskov , and Nicolai Brodersen Hansen . 2016 . The Early Shaping of Participatory Design at PDC . In Proceedings of the 14th Par - ticipatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Interactive Exhibitions , Workshops - Volume 2 ( PDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 21 – 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2948076 . 2948078 [ 3 ] Nirit Bauminger , Cory Shulman , and Galit Agam . 2004 . The link between percep - tions of self and of social relationships in high - functioning children with autism . Journal of Developmental and Physical Disabilities 16 , 2 ( 2004 ) , 193 – 214 . [ 4 ] Laura Benton , Asimina Vasalou , Rilla Khaled , Hilary Johnson , and Daniel Gooch . 2014 . Diversity for Design : A Framework for Involving Neurodiverse Children in the Technology Design Process . In Proceedings of the 32Nd Annual ACM Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3747 – 3756 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557244 [ 5 ] Jill Boucher . 1999 . Interventions with children with autism - methods based on play . [ 6 ] Peter Börjesson , Wolmet Barendregt , Eva Eriksson , and Olof Torgersson . 2015 . Designing Technology for and with Developmentally Diverse Children : A Sys - tematic Literature Review . In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 79 – 88 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2771839 . 2771848 [ 7 ] Roger Caillois . 2001 . Man , Play , and Games . University of Illinois Press . [ 8 ] M Catherine Cappadocia , Jonathan A Weiss , and Debra Pepler . 2012 . Bullying experiences among children and youth with autism spectrum disorders . Journal of autism and developmental disorders 42 , 2 ( 2012 ) , 266 – 277 . [ 9 ] BrandtChamberlain , ConnieKasari , andErinRotheram - Fuller . 2007 . Involvement or isolation ? The social networks of children with autism in regular classrooms . Journal of autism and developmental disorders 37 , 2 ( 2007 ) , 230 – 242 . [ 10 ] Carmel Conn . 2015 . ‘Sensory highs’ , ‘vivid rememberings’ and ‘interactive stimming’ : children’s play cultures and experiences of friendship in autistic autobiographies . Disability & Society 30 , 8 ( 2015 ) , 1192 – 1206 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09687599 . 2015 . 1081094 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09687599 . 2015 . 1081094 [ 11 ] Hanne De Jaegher . 2013 . Embodiment and sense - making in autism . Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 7 ( 2013 ) , 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fnint . 2013 . 00015 [ 12 ] John Dewey . 1938 . Experience and Education . Kappa Delta Pi , USA . [ 13 ] Allison Druin . 1999 . Cooperative Inquiry : Developing New Technologies for Children with Children . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’99 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 592 – 599 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 302979 . 303166 [ 14 ] William Farr , Nicola Yuill , Eric Harris , and Steve Hinske . 2010 . In my own words : configuration of tangibles , object interaction and children with autism . In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC’10 ) . ACM , Barcelona , Spain , 30 – 38 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1810543 . 1810548 [ 15 ] William Farr , Nicola Yuill , and Hayes Raffle . 2010 . Social benefits of a tangible userinterfaceforchildrenwithAutisticSpectrumConditions . Autism 14 , 3 ( 2010 ) , 237 – 252 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1362361310363280 [ 16 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Julia Makhaeva , and Katta Spiel . 2017 . Blending Methods : Developing Participatory Design Sessions for Autistic Children . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 39 – 49 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3079727 [ 17 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Marjo Rauhala , and Geraldine Fitzpatrick . 2017 . In - Action Ethics . Interacting with Computers 29 , 2 ( March 2017 ) , 220 – 236 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / iwc / iww024 [ 18 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Katta Spiel , and Julia Makhaeva . 2019 . Thinking OutsideTheBox - Designing Smart Things with Autistic Children . International Journal of Human – Computer Interaction 35 , 8 ( May 2019 ) , 666 – 678 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447318 . 2018 . 1550177 [ 19 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Katta Spiel , Laura Scheepmaker , and Irene Posch . 2019 . Nurturing Constructive Disagreement - Agonistic Design with Neuro - diverse Children . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Fac - tors in Computing Systems ( Glasgow , Scotland Uk ) ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 271 , 11 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300501 [ 20 ] Mona Leigh Guha , Allison Druin , and Jerry Alan Fails . 2008 . Designing With and forChildrenWithSpecialNeeds : anInclusionaryModel . In IDC’08 : Proceedingsof the 7th international conference on Interaction design and children . ACM , Chicago , Illinois , 61 – 64 . https : / / doi . org / 1463689 . 1463719 [ 21 ] Stefan Hansen , Diana Schendel , and Erik Parner . 2015 . Explaining the increase in the prevalence of autism spectrum disorders : The proportion attributable to changes in reporting practices . JAMA Pediatrics 169 , 1 ( 2015 ) , 56 – 62 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1001 / jamapediatrics . 2014 . 1893 [ 22 ] Gregory Hollin . 2014 . Constructing a social subject : Autism and human sociality in the 1980s . History of the Human Sciences 27 , 4 ( 2014 ) , 98 – 115 . [ 23 ] MelissaH . Kuo , GaelI . Orsmond , EllenS . Cohn , andWendyJ . Coster . 2013 . Friend - ship characteristics and activity patterns of adolescents with an autism spectrum disorder . Autism 17 , 4 ( 2013 ) , 481 – 500 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1362361311416380 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1362361311416380 PMID : 22087043 . [ 24 ] Daniel B . LeGoff . 2004 . Use of LEGO© as a Therapeutic Medium for Improving Social Competence . Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 34 , 5 ( Oct . 2004 ) , 557 – 571 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10803 - 004 - 2550 - 0 [ 25 ] Jill Locke , Eric H . Ishijima , Connie Kasari , and Nancy London . 2010 . Loneliness , friendship quality and the social networks of adolescents with high - functioning autism in an inclusive school setting . Journal of Research in Special Educa - tional Needs 10 , 2 ( 2010 ) , 74 – 81 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1471 - 3802 . 2010 . 01148 . x arXiv : https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1111 / j . 1471 - 3802 . 2010 . 01148 . x [ 26 ] Andrew Main . 2003 . allism : an introduction to a little - known condition . http : / / www . fysh . org / ~ zefram / allism / allism _ intro . txt [ 27 ] Julia Makhaeva , Christopher Frauenberger , and Katta Spiel . 2016 . Creating Creative Spaces for Co - Designing with Autistic Children – The concept of a “Handlungsspielraum” . In Proceedings of the 14th Participatory Design Conference . ACM Press , Aarhus , Denmark , 51 – 60 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2940299 . 2940306 [ 28 ] Laura Malinverni , Joan MoraGuiard , Vanesa Padillo , MariaAngeles Mairena , AmaiaHervás , andNarcisPares . 2014 . ParticipatoryDesignStrategiestoEnhance the Creative Contribution of Children with Special Needs . In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 85 – 94 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2593968 . 2593981 [ 29 ] Eve Müller , Adriana Schuler , and Gregory B . Yates . 2008 . Social challenges and supports from the perspective of individuals with Asperger syndrome and other autism spectrum disabilities . Autism 12 , 2 ( 2008 ) , 173 – 190 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1362361307086664 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1362361307086664 PMID : 18308766 . [ 30 ] William Odom , Ron Wakkary , Youn - kyung Lim , Audrey Desjardins , Bart Hengeveld , and Richard Banks . 2016 . From Research Prototype to Research Product . ACM Press , 2549 – 2561 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858447 [ 31 ] M . B . Parten . 1932 . Social participation among pre - school children . The Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 27 , 3 ( 1932 ) , 243 – 269 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / h0074524 [ 32 ] Jean Piaget . 1962 . Play , dreams and imitation in childhood . Norton , New York . https : / / books . google . co . uk / books ? id = tc53r6LKcecC & pg = PA1 & source = gbs _ toc _ r & cad = 2 # v = onepage & q & f = false OCLC : 185376 . [ 33 ] Kathryn E . Ringland , Christine T . Wolf , Heather Faucett , Lynn Dombrowski , and Gillian R . Hayes . 2016 . “Will I Always Be Not Social ? ” : Re - Conceptualizing Sociality in the Context of a Minecraft Community for Autism . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( San Jose , California , USA ) ( CHI ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1256 – 1269 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858038 [ 34 ] Francisco J . Romero - Ramirez , Rafael Muñoz - Salinas , and Rafael Medina - Carnicer . 2018 . Speeded up detection of squared fiducial markers . Image and Vision Computing 76 ( Aug . 2018 ) , 38 – 47 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . imavis . 2018 . 05 . 004 [ 35 ] LauraScheepmaker , ChristopherFrauenberger , andKattaSpiel . 2018 . TheThings We Play with , Roles of Technology in Social Play . In CHI PLAY 2018 . ACM Press , Melbourne , QLD , Australia , 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3242671 . 3242695 [ 36 ] Miguel Sicart . 2014 . Play matters . MIT Press . [ 37 ] Kiley Sobel , Katie O’Leary , and Julie A . Kientz . 2015 . Maximizing children’s op - portunities with inclusive play : considerations for interactive technology design . ACM Press , 39 – 48 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2771839 . 2771844 [ 38 ] Katta Spiel , Emeline Brulé , Christopher Frauenberger , Gilles Bailly , and Geral - dine Fitzpatrick . 2018 . Micro - Ethics for Participatory Design with Marginalised Children . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Full Papers - Volume 1 ( Hasselt and Genk , Belgium ) ( PDC ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 17 , 12 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210586 . 3210603 [ 39 ] Katta Spiel , Emeline Brulé , Christopher Frauenberger , Gilles Bailley , and Geral - dine Fitzpatrick . 2020 . In the details : the micro - ethics of negotiations and in - situ judgements in participatory design with marginalised children . CoDesign 0 , 0 ( Feb . 2020 ) , 1 – 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2020 . 1722174 Publisher : Taylor & Francis _ eprint : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2020 . 1722174 . [ 40 ] Susan Leigh Star and Karen Ruhleder . 1994 . Steps towards an ecology of infras - tructure : complex problems in design and access for large - scale collaborative systems . In Proceedings of the 1994 ACM conference on Computer supported coop - erative work . ACM , 253 – 264 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 192844 . 193021 [ 41 ] Helma Van Rijn and Pieter Jan Stappers . 2008 . The puzzling life of autistic tod - dlers : design guidelines from the LINKX project . Advances in Human - Computer Interaction 2008 ( 2008 ) . [ 42 ] Lev S Vygotsky . 1967 . Play and its role in the mental development of the child . Soviet psychology 5 , 3 ( 1967 ) , 6 – 18 . [ 43 ] David Whitebread , Basilio , M . , Kuvalja , M . , and Verma , M . 2012 . The impor - tance of play : A report on the value of children’s play with a series of policy recommendations . Technical Report . Toy Industries of Europe , Brussels , Bel - gium . https : / / www . scribd . com / document / 193890745 / David - Whitebread - 2012 - the - Importance - of - Play NordiCHI ’20 , October 25 – 29 , 2020 , Tallinn , Estonia Frauenberger , et al . [ 44 ] Andrew J . O . Whitehouse , Kevin Durkin , Emma Jaquet , and Kathryn Ziatas . 2009 . Friendship , loneliness and depression in adolescents with Asperger’s Syndrome . Journal of Adolescence 32 , 2 ( 2009 ) , 309 – 322 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . adolescence . 2008 . 03 . 004 [ 45 ] LisaA . Wing . 1995 . Playisnottheworkofthechild : Youngchildren’sperceptions of work and play . Early Childhood Research Quarterly 10 , 2 ( Jan . 1995 ) , 223 – 247 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0885 - 2006 ( 95 ) 90005 - 5 [ 46 ] Pamela Wolfberg , Mila DeWitt , Gregory S . Young , and Thanh Nguyen . 2014 . Integrated Play Groups : Promoting Symbolic Play and Social Engagement with Typical Peers in Children with ASD Across Settings . Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 45 , 3 ( Sept . 2014 ) , 830 – 845 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10803 - 014 - 2245 - 0