RESEARCH ARTICLE SUMMARY ◥ ADVANCED IMAGING Extended - resolution structured illumination imaging of endocytic and cytoskeletal dynamics Dong Li , Lin Shao , Bi - Chang Chen , Xi Zhang , Mingshu Zhang , Brian Moses , Daniel E . Milkie , Jordan R . Beach , John A . Hammer III , Mithun Pasham , Tomas Kirchhausen , Michelle A . Baird , Michael W . Davidson , Pingyong Xu , Eric Betzig * INTRODUCTION : Various methods of super - resolution ( SR ) fluorescence microscopy have the potential to follow the dynamic nanoscale interactions of specific macromolecular assem - blies in living cells . However , this potential is often left unfulfilled , either owing to the method ’ s inability to follow these processes at the speeds dictated by nature or because they require intense light that can substan - tially perturb the very physiology one hopes to study . An exception is structured illumination microscopy ( SIM ) , which can image live cells far faster and with orders of magnitude less light than required for other SR approaches . However , SIM ’ s resolution is usually limited to only a twofold gain beyond conventional optical microscopes , or ~ 100 nm with visible light . RATIONALE : We endeavored to find ways to extend SIM to the sub - 100 - nm regime while re - taining , to the greatest extent possible , the advantages that make it the preferred SR meth - od for live - cell imaging . Our first solution used an ultrahigh numerical aperture ( NA ) lens and total internal reflection fluorescence ( TIRF ) to achieve 84 - nm resolution at subsecond acqui - sition speeds over hundreds of time points in multiplecolorsnearthebasalplasmamembrane . Our second exploited the spatially patterned activation of a recently developed , reversibly photoswitchable fluorescent protein to reach 45 - to 62 - nm resolution , also at subsecond ac - quisition , over ∼ 10 to 40 time points . RESULTS : We used high - NA TIRF - SIM to image the dynamic associations of cortical fila - mentous actin with myosin IIA , paxillin , or clathrin , as well as paxillin with vinculin and clathrin with transferrin receptors . Thanks to the combination of high spatial and temporal resolution , we were able to measure the sizes of individual clathrin - coated pitsthrough their initiation , growth , and internalization . Wewere also able to relate pit size to lifetime , identify and characterize localized hot spots of pit generation , and describe the interac - tion of actin with clathrin and its role in accelerat - ing endocytosis . With nonlinear SIM by use of patterned activation ( PA NL - SIM ) , we moni - tored the remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton and the dynamics of caveolae at the cell sur - face . By combining TIRF - SIM and PA NL - SIM for two - color imaging , we followed the dynamic association of actin with a - actinin in expand - ing filopodia and membrane ruffles and char - acterized shape changes in and the transport of early endosomes . Last , by combining PA NL - SIMwith latticelight sheet microscopy , we observed , in three dimensions and across the entire volume of whole cells , the dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton , the fusion and fission of mitochondria , and the trafficking of vesi - cles to and from the Golgi apparatus , each at axial resolution fivefold better than that of conventional widefield microscopy . In addition , through direct experimental comparisons , we demonstrated that the reso - lution for our methods is comparable with or better than other SR approaches yet allowed us to image at far higher speeds , and for far longer durations . To under - stand why this is so , we developed a detailed theoretical model showing that our methods transmit the infor - mationencodedinspatialfrequenciesbeyondthediffractionlimitwithmuch greater strength than do other alter - natives and hence require far fewer photons emitted from the specimen , using far less intense light . CONCLUSION : High - NA TIRF - SIM and PA NL - SIM fill an unmet need for minimally invasive tools to im - age live cells in the gap between the 100 - nm resolution traditionally as - sociated with SIM and the sub - 60 - nm regime of protein - specific structural imaging served by single - molecule localization microscopy . ▪ RESEARCH 944 28 AUGUST 2015 (cid:127) VOL 349 ISSUE 6251 sciencemag . org SCIENCE The list of author affiliations is available in the full article online . * Corresponding author . E - mail : betzige @ janelia . hhmi . org CitethisarticleasD . Li etal . , Science 349 , aab3500 ( 2015 ) . DOI : 10 . 1126 / science . aab3500 Two approaches for improved live - cell imaging at sub - 100 - nm resolution . ( Left ) Association of cortical actin ( purple ) with clathrin - coated pits ( green ) , the latter seen as rings ( inset ) at 84 - nm resolution via a combination of total internal reflection fluorescence and structured illumination microscopy at ultrahigh numerical aperture ( high - NA TIRF - SIM ) . ( Right ) Progression of resolution improvement across the actin cytoskeleton of a COS - 7 cell , from conventional , diffraction - limited TIRF ( 220 - nm resolution ) , to TIRF - SIM ( 97 - nm resolution ) , and nonlinear SIM based on the patterned activation of a reversibly photoswitchable fluorescent protein ( PA NL - SIM , 62 nm resolution ) . ( Left and right represent single frames from time - lapse movies over 91 and 30 frames , respectively . Scale bars , 2 m m ( left ) ; 3 m m ( right ) . ON OUR WEB SITE ◥ Read the full article at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . aab3500 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . RESEARCH ARTICLE ◥ ADVANCED IMAGING Extended - resolution structured illumination imaging of endocytic and cytoskeletal dynamics Dong Li , 1 Lin Shao , 1 Bi - Chang Chen , 1 * Xi Zhang , 2 , 3 Mingshu Zhang , 2 Brian Moses , 4 Daniel E . Milkie , 4 Jordan R . Beach , 5 John A . Hammer III , 5 Mithun Pasham , 6 Tomas Kirchhausen , 6 Michelle A . Baird , 5 , 7 Michael W . Davidson , 7 Pingyong Xu , 2 Eric Betzig 1 † Super - resolution fluorescence microscopy is distinct among nanoscale imaging tools in its ability to image protein dynamics in living cells . Structured illumination microscopy ( SIM ) stands out in this regard because of its high speed and low illumination intensities , but typically offers only a twofold resolution gain . We extended the resolution of live - cell SIM through two approaches : ultrahigh numerical aperture SIM at 84 - nanometer lateral resolution for more than 100 multicolor frames , and nonlinear SIM with patterned activation at 45 - to 62 - nanometer resolution for approximately 20 to 40 frames . We applied these approaches to image dynamics near the plasma membrane of spatially resolved assemblies of clathrin and caveolin , Rab5a in early endosomes , and a - actinin , often in relationship to cortical actin . In addition , we examined mitochondria , actin , and the Golgi apparatus dynamics in three dimensions . F luorescence microscopy continues to play a key role in elucidating structure and func - tionoflivingsystems , thankstoitsabilityto image specific proteins with single - molecule sensitivity , as well as its capacity to study in vivo dynamics in a minimally invasive man - ner . Itspowerhasgrownwiththeintroductionof super - resolution ( SR ) techniques ( 1 ) that extend its diffraction - limited spatial resolution [ ~ 200 nm for green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) ] by as much as an orderof magnitude . However , although the SR imaging of fixed specimens , the most com - mon modality , offers the highest resolution , it does so at the considerable risk of altering the very ultrastructure it hopes to reveal because of both the fixation process itself ( fig . S1 ) ( 2 ) and the extremely high density of fluorescent markers required to achieve such resolution ( 3 ) . Further - more , with the advent of genetically encoded markers for electron microscopy ( EM ) ( 4 , 5 ) , the continued preeminence of SR microscopy for protein - specific structural imaging at the nano - scale is no longer assured . A different situation emerges for in vivo im - aging , in which EM is too destructive and fixa - tion is not involved . However , although this would appear to be the ideal niche of SR micros - copy , SR techniques such as localization micros - copy ( 6 , 7 ) , stimulated emission depletion ( STED ) microscopy ( 8 , 9 ) , and reversible saturable op - tical fluorescence transitions ( RESOLFT ) micros - copy ( 10 , 11 ) place extraordinary demands on the photonbudget , representedbytheproductofthe numberoffluorescentmoleculesinthespecimenandthenumberofphotonseachcanemitbefore bleaching irreversibly ( fig . S2 ) ( 12 ) . They also re - quire specialized photoswitchable labels and ex - citation intensities of 10 3 to 10 8 W / cm 2 , which areordersofmagnitudegreaterthanthe0 . 1W / cm 2 under which life evolved ( fig . S3 ) . As a result , time - lapse measurements with these techniques rarely consist of more than a few frames , and phototoxic changes to cellular physiology can set in quickly even at the lower end of this range ( movie S1 ) . In addition , typical SR acquisition speeds of ~ 1 s to several minutes per frame are too slow to follow processes that move faster than ~ 1 to 50 nm / s without introducing motion - induced artifacts ( fig . S4 ) , whereas common res - olution metrics such as the Nyquist criterion for labeling density ( 6 , 7 ) or the width of an isolated feature ( 8 – 11 ) tend to substantially overestimate the true spatial resolution ( figs . S5 and S6 ) . A notable exception is structured illumination microscopy ( SIM ) , which in vivo ( 13 – 15 ) can image in multiple colors using conventional flu - orescent labels as fast as 11 frames / s ( 13 ) at in - tensities of only 1 to 100 W / cm 2 . Its primary limitation is that its resolution in vivo has been limitedto ~ 100nmforGFP , oronlytwicebeyond the diffraction limit . This has provided the mo - tivation for the development of other in vivo – compatible SR methods , but to date , all suffer from substantial limitations as noted above . Extending SIM resolution via high - numerical - aperture optics We extended the resolution of live - cell SIM by two independent means . In the first , we used the higher numerical aperture ( NA ) afforded by a commercially available 1 . 7 - NA objective to im - age at 84 - nm resolution ( for GFP ) ( fig . S7 ) . Al - though the total internal reflection fluorescence ( TIRF ) condition at this NA confines observa - tionstowithin ~ 50 to200nmofthebasalplasma membrane ( fig . S8 ) , it also restricts the excitation to only a small fraction of the cellular volume , further reducing phototoxicity , eliminating out - of - focus background , and leaving unaffected a potential reservoir of cytosolic target molecules that might be recruited to the plasma membrane at later time points . With this approach , termed high - NA TIRF - SIM , we could image dynamic as - sociations between proteins in a variety of sys - tems at sub - 100 - nm resolution , often for 80 to 100 time points , including filamentous actin ( mApple - F - tractin ) and enhanced GFP ( EGFP ) – myosin IIA ( Fig . 1 , A and B ; Movie 1 ; and fig . S9 ) ; mApple - f - Tractin and mEmerald - paxillin ( Fig . 1 , C and D , and movie S2 ) ; mEmerald - paxillin and mTagRFP - vinculin ( RFP , red fluorescent protein ) ( Fig . 1 , E and F ; Movie 2 ; and fig . S10 ) ; mEmerald - clathrin light chain b ( CLTB ) and Alexa 568 – tagged transferrin ( fig . S11 and movie S3 ) ; and mEmerald - CLTB and mCherry - Lifeact ( Fig . 2 , E to G ) ( 16 ) . Acquisition times were typically less than 1 s per color per frame , although the time interval between frames was adjusted in each case in order to match the dynamics of in - terest and to give the cell time to recover from the effects of the excitation applied during the acquisition . InthecaseofmEmerald - paxillinandmTagRFP - vinculin , we found that both proteins expanded inward for those focal adhesions near the periph - ery of an HFF - 1 cell ( Movie 2 and fig . S12 ) . mEmerald - paxillin dominated in the peripheral - facingendoftheseadhesions , whereasmTagRFP - vinculin increased in concentration toward the interior ( Fig . 1 , EandF , andfig . S10C ) . In contrast , for adhesions located far away from the periph - ery , mTagRFP - vinculin dominated ( fig . S10A ) , and there was little change in the distribution of either protein over time . The resolution of our data was comparable with that demonstrated by means of live - cell localization microscopy ( fig . S13 ) ( 6 ) . However , we could image in two colors at intensities of only 30 to 100 W / cm 2 in a total ac - quisition time of 1 . 67 s , versus a single color acquired at 1 kW / cm 2 in 25 s in the localization case . This represents a 90 to 97 % decrease in excitation intensity and a 15 - fold increase in imaging speed . RESEARCH SCIENCE sciencemag . org 28 AUGUST 2015 (cid:127) VOL 349 ISSUE 6251 aab3500 - 1 1 Janelia Research Campus , Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Ashburn , VA 20147 , USA . 2 Key Laboratory of RNA Biology and Beijing Key Laboratory of Noncoding RNA , Institute of Biophysics , Chinese Academy of Sciences , Beijing 100101 , China . 3 College of Life Sciences , Central China Normal University , Wuhan 430079 , Hubei , China . 4 Coleman Technologies , 5131 West Chester Pike , Newtown Square , PA 19073 , USA . 5 Cell Biology and Physiology Center , National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD 20892 , USA . 6 Department of Cell Biology and Pediatrics , Harvard Medical School and Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine , Boston Children ’ s Hospital , Boston , MA 02115 , USA . 7 National High Magnetic Field Laboratory and Department of Biological Science , Florida State University , Tallahassee , FL 32310 , USA . * Present address : Research Center for Applied Sciences , Academia Sinica , Taipei 11529 , Taiwan . † Corresponding author . E - mail : betzige @ janelia . hhmi . org For clathrin ( Fig . 2 ) , we saw that mature clathrin - coatedpits ( CCPs ) wereresolvedasrings ( fig . S14 and movie S4 ) , presumably because the distal end of each resides outside the evanescent excitation field . When imaged at 37°C , CCPs large andstableenoughtoberesolvedasaring at oneor more time points grew to a ~ 152 - nm median max - imum diameter ( Fig . 2B ) ( 17 ) in BSC - 1 cells ex - pressing EGFP - CLTA ( Fig . 2A and fig . S14 ) , with similarresultsinCOS - 7cellsexpressingmEmerald - CLTB ( Fig . 2F and fig . S15B ) , and persisted for on the order of 1 min ( Movie 3 and fig . S15A ) . Linear regression revealed a positive correlation of 0 . 20 nm / s between maximum ring diameter and lifetime ( Fig . 2C ) , which is consistent with previously observed correlations between lifetime and clathrin intensity or cargo size ( 18 ) . In BSC - 1 cells , most CCPs were isolated at any given time , butthesitesof theirinitiation didnot follow a Poisson distribution ( fig . S16 ) . Instead , whenthe1297initiationeventsoverthecourseofMovie3werebinnedinto0 . 32 - by 0 . 32 - m m sites , corresponding to a mean density of 0 . 29 events per site , 36 . 5 % of all events occurred at sites of one or more additional events , compared with 13 . 5 % expected if they were Poisson distributed at this mean density . Indeed , at 3 . 6 % of the sites , five or more CCPs were generated sequentially ( for example , one marked by green arrows at different time points in Fig . 2D ) , which would otherwise be a very rare event ( 0 . 0053 % ) assum - ing Poisson statistics . Although such “ hot spots ” havebeenobservedpreviously ( 19 , 20 ) , inourcase wefoundthattheseconsistedofsingle , persistent , subdiffractivepatchesofclathrin , fromwhichmul - tiple CCPs emerged ( Movie 4 ) like bubbles . In COS - 7 cells , mEmerald - CLTB appeared as both isolated rings and larger structures ( Fig . 2F , Movie 5 , figs . S17 and S18 , and movie S5 ) , the latter consisting of aggregates of rings ( fig . S19 ) . They may be related to clathrin plaques made of extended clathrin lattices of low curvature ( 20 ) , also referred to elsewhere as flat clathrin lattices ( 21 ) . Although they persisted far longer than iso - lated CCPs , individual rings would occasionally detach from these aggregates ( fig . S19 ) . In no in - stance did we observe large , homogenous patches of clathrin , as we might expect for the flatclathrin lattices common in EM images ( 22 ) . The role of actin in clathrin - mediated endocy - tosis in mammalian cells remains an area of some debate ( 17 , 23 – 26 ) . Our two - color imaging of COS - 7 cells by means of high - NA TIRF - SIM re - vealed that all aggregates of mEmerald - CLTB rings were associated with mCherry - Lifeact over at least part of their areas at all times ( fig . S19 ) . In contrast , approximately equal populations of individual CCPs completed endocytosis either with ( Fig . 2E and fig . S20 , A and B ) or without ( fig . S20 , C and D ) recruitment of Lifeact in the final five frames ( 20 s ) before internalization of thepit . Inbothcases , histogramsofCCPlifetimes were well described by single exponential fits , indicating constant probabilities of internaliza - tion per unit time ( fig . S15A ) . The 1 / e lifetimes of 56 . 4 ± 3 . 0 s for the Lifeact - associated CCPs and 67 . 2 ± 1 . 9 s for CCPs without Lifeact indicate that actin , when present , indeed increases the inter - nalization probability . Consistent with this , the median maximumclathrin ringdiameterforrings persisting over at least five frames was slightly smallerwiththanwithoutassociatedLifeact ( 160 versus 168 nm ) ( fig . S15B ) . LifeactassociatedwithCCPsusuallyapproached in a wave or filament ( Fig . 2E and fig . S20A ) . We also observed rings of Lifeact ( COS - 7 cells ) ( Fig . 2G and fig . S21 , C and D ) or F - tractin ( U2OS cell ) ( fig . S21 , A and B ) similar in size to the clathrin ones and having lifetimes of several minutes ( fig . S17B ) . However , Lifeact rings were not as numer - ous as clathrin ones and were coincident with theminonlya few instances ( fig . S22 ) . Although they might be associated with other forms of clathrin - independent endocytosis , their role re - mains unclear . Live - cell nonlinear SIM via patterned activation of photoswitchable fluorophores To achieve even higher resolution than that of high - NA TIRF - SIM , we turned to nonlinear SIM ( NL - SIM ) . The nonlinearity inherent in either the patterned saturation of fluorescence excita - tion at high intensity ( 27 , 28 ) or the patterned depletion of photoswitchable fluorophores ( fig . S23 ) ( 29 ) introducesadditionalharmonics H , which permit resolution extension at wavelength l via SIM to e l = ½ 2 NA ð H þ 1 Þ(cid:1) with H ≥ 2 , compared with H = 1 for the traditional linear form of SIM and H = 0 for diffraction - limited widefield aab3500 - 2 28 AUGUST 2015 (cid:127) VOL 349 ISSUE 6251 sciencemag . org SCIENCE Fig . 1 . High - speed live - cell imaging at 37°C of associations between pro - teins at sub - 100 - nm resolution . ( A ) Cytoskeletal proteins mApple - F - tractin ( purple ) and EGFP - myosin IIA ( green ) in a mouse embryonic fibroblast cell ( Movie 1 and fig . S9 ) . ( B ) Magnified view of the boxed region in ( A ) , show - ing bipolar myosin IIA filaments with clearly resolved opposed head groups ( for example , green arrowhead ) . ( C ) mApple - F - tractin ( purple ) and the fo - cal adhesion protein mEmerald - paxillin ( green ) in a U2OS cell ( movie S2 ) . ( D ) Magnified view of the boxed region in ( C ) , showing association of paxillin with smaller actin fibers fanning out from the ends of largerstressfibercables . ( E ) Focal adhesion proteins mTagRFP - vinculin ( purple ) and mEmerald - paxillin ( green ) in a HFF - 1 cell ( Movie 2 and figs . S10 and S13 ) . ( F ) Magnified view of the boxed region in ( E ) , showing a gradient of increased paxillin concentrationtowardthecellperiphery . Scalebars , 5 m m ( A ) , ( C ) , and ( E ) ; 1 m m ( B ) , ( D ) , and ( F ) . RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE imaging with uniform illumination ( fig . S24 , A and B ) . Resolution of ~ 50 nm has been demon - strated with both approaches , although not on living cells ; saturated excitation was used to im - age densely labeled fluorescent beads at the like - ly phototoxic peak intensity of 8 MW / cm 2 ( 28 ) , whereas saturated depletion ( SD ) imaged single fixed cells at 945 s / frame ( 29 ) — far too slow to follow most cellular processes . SD provides the basis of resolution enhance - ment in STED and RESOLFT as well as SD NL - SIM . Thedegreeofenhancementdependsonthe degree of saturation ( figs . S23 and S25 and movie S6 , part 3 ) , defined in multiples of the saturation factor ( SF ) for which 1 / e of the irradiated mol - ecules remain in the original activated or excited state . However , high SF s are very photon ineffi - cient ; only a fraction of the photobleaching - dictated number of switching cycles for any given molecule then contributes useful signal ( figs . S25 to S27 ) . Furthermore , high SF s require high intensities and / or long exposures ( fig . S28 ) , neither of which is compatible with fast , non - invasive live - cell imaging . We addressed these issues by using patterned activation ( PA ) followed with patterned excita - tion and readout of the green photoswitchable FP Skylan - NS ( fig . S29 and movie S6 , part 1 ) ( 30 ) , rather than SD , to generate H = 2 harmonics yielding 62 - nm resolution and subsecond acqui - sition times in TIRF for live cells ( Fig . 3 ) . This approach , termed PA NL - SIM , allowed us to achieve large amplitudes in both the first and second harmonics of the emission pattern ( fig . S29 , G and H ) , leading to SR images of high signal - to - noise ratio ( SNR ) , even at low activa - tion and excitation saturation factors SF act and SF exc obtained with low intensities and short exposures ( table S1 ) . Furthermore , by keeping SF act low , only a small fraction of the total molecular population needed to be activated for every raw image , and with H = 2 , only N = ( 2 H + 1 ) 2 = 25 such raw images needed to be acquired to reconstruct each SIM image frame ( fig . S30 ) . Consequently , we could acquire subs - tantially more frames at substantially higher SNR ( fig . S26 ) in far less time ( table S1 ) by means ofPA NL - SIM ( Movie6 ) thanSDNL - SIM ( movie S7 ) . PA NL - SIM of Skylan - NS - Lifeact ( Fig . 3 , A and B ; Movie 6 ; and movies S8 to S10 ) in living COS - 7 cells revealed considerably more detail than did TIRF - SIM ( Fig . 3B ) in dense , peripheral actin arcs and star - like junctions of single actin filaments . We were also able to resolve individual Lifeact rings once again , including rings too small to see clearlywithhigh - NATIRF - SIM ( fig . S21 , CandD , and movie S8 ) . Furthermore , we could follow the dynamics of the Lifeact - decorated actin cytoskel - eton for 30 image frames acquired in 1 . 2 s each ( Movie 6 ) . This is 1250× faster and used 20× lower intensity ( 100 W / cm 2 ) than was required for an image of phalloidin - labeled actin at the ventral surface of a fixed BSC - 1 cell obtained by means of dual - objective localization microscopy ( 31 ) , yet the level of detail seen by the two meth - ods was comparable ( fig . S31 ) , even though our 62 - nm resolution wasthreefold coarserthan that reported in the localization image . We also used PA NL - SIM to image keratin ( fig . S6 and movie S11 ) and caveolin ( Fig . 3 , C to F ; Movie 7 ; figs . S32 and S33 ; and movie S12 ) in living COS - 7 cells , each with Skylan - NS , at a resolution of 59 nm . In the latter case , this was sufficient to resolve numerous caveolae moving by less than their radii during the acquisition time as rings , which is consistent with their in - vaginated appearance by means of EM ( 32 ) . Such rings were not observed at caveolae in a HeLa cellimagedwithRESOLFT ( fig . S34 ) ( 33 ) , despite a similar reported resolution . Rings of Skylan - NS - caveolin were somewhat more abundant than CCPs ( figs . S17 and S18 ) , and although most were below100nminsize , theirdistributionwasbroader ( Fig . 3D ) than the 60 to 80 nm range observed with EM . However , some of the larger rings ( Fig . 3E ) may represent multiple caveolae clustered around surface - docked vesicles ( 34 ) . Caveolae also tended to loosely cluster in long narrow rib - bons , although we saw tighter aggregations of rings ( Fig . 3F ) as well , similar to those we saw in clathrin plaques ( fig . S19 ) . Our time - lapse imaging showed that most caveolae moved only a fraction of their size dur - ing the acquisition time , although more met this condition when slowed ( 35 ) by operating at 23°C ( Movie 7 and fig . S32 ) than when imaged at 37°C SCIENCE sciencemag . org 28 AUGUST 2015 (cid:127) VOL 349 ISSUE 6251 aab3500 - 3 Fig . 2 . Dynamics of clathrin - mediated endocytosis and the cortical actin cytoskeleton . ( A ) CCPs , resolved as rings ( fig . S14 and movie S4 ) and color - coded according to their age since initial formation , at one time point from a movie of CCPdynamics in a BSC - 1 cell at 37°Cstablyexpressing EGFP - clathrin light chain a ( Movie 3 ) . ( B ) Histogram of maximum diameter of each CCP over its lifetime . ( C ) Plot of CCP overall lifetime versus CCP maximum diameter . ( D ) Sequential production of multiple CCPs at a CCP - generating “ hot spot , ” identified with green arrowheads ( Movie 4 and fig . S16 ) . ( E ) Formation , growth , and dissolution of a single CCP ( right ) and its relationship to cortical f - actin ( left ) in a COS - 7 cell at 37°C transfected with mEmerald - clathrin light chain b and mCherry - Lifeact . Light blue arrowheads mark time points at which f - actin associates with the CCP . ( F ) Individual CCPs and clathrin plaques ( green ) and cortical f - actin ( red ) at one time point during their evolution in a COS - 7 cell ( Movie 5 , figs . S17 and S18 , and movie S5 ) . ( G ) Formation of a nanoscale ring of f - actin ( fig . S17B ) . Scale bars , 1 m m ( A ) and ( F ) ; and 200 nm ( D ) , ( E ) , and ( G ) . RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE ( fig . S33 and movie S12 ) . The smaller , laterally mobilefractionineachcaseappearedasdistorted , discontinuous rings or quasiperiodic patches ( fig . S35 ) . These morphologies are indicative of motion - induced artifacts and underscore the difficulty of live - cell SR imaging , by any method : Higher resolution must be accompanied by pro - portionally faster acquisition times to follow dynamic events of a given velocity , yet higher resolution also requires a quadratically increasing number of raw measurements for each two - dimensional ( 2D ) image frame . Even the com - parativelybrief0 . 35sweneededtoacquire N = 25 raw images for each PA NL - SIM image was insufficient to accurately depict caveolae mov - ing by much more than our 59 - nm resolution in this time . Nevertheless , by further increasing SF act we were able to saturate the fraction of molecules in the activated state near the maxima of the pat - ternedactivationlight ( movieS6 , part2 ) . Saturated PA NL - SIM generates an additional harmonic ( H = 3 ) strong enough ( fig . S29 ) to further extend the resolution to 45 nm ( figs . S36 and S37 ) and allowed us to identify even smaller Skylan - NS - caveolin rings unresolvable without the extra harmonic ( Fig . 3C ) . Using N = 35 rather than N = 49 raw images per frame , we balanced the re - sulting anisotropic resolution ( fig . S30 ) against the needs for rapid acquisition ( 0 . 49 s / frame ) and parsimonious use of the photon budget to im - age caveolin rings over 12 frames at 3 s intervals ( movie S13 ) . Two - color live imaging via combined TIRF - SIM and PA NL - SIM By combining linear SIM and PA NL - SIM , both in TIRF , we could study associations between fluorescent proteins , one conventional and one photoswtichable , in two colors at higher resolu - tion than by means of linear TIRF - SIM alone . Images ( Fig . 4 , A to C , and figs . S38 and S39 ) and movies ( Movie 8 and movie S14 ) of mCherry - Rab5a — a regulator of the formation , fusion , and transportofearlyendosomes ( EEs ) ( 36 ) — revealed irregularlyshaped , dynamicallyremodelingpatches of Rab5a ( fig . S39 , A and B ) consistent with the tubular / vesicular architecture of EEs seen in EM ( Fig . 4B ) ( 37 ) . Numerous patches also featured dark spots ( fig . S39C ) perhaps indicative of car - go or internal vacuoles depleted of Rab5a . Most patches moved randomly between successive 20 - s time intervals at velocities slow enough to avoid motion artifacts during each 0 . 34 - s acquisition . We also observed a subpopulation of slowly grow - ing Skylan - NS - Lifeact – associated Rab5a patches that were constrained for minutes at a time ( fig . S39D , arrows ) . At the other extreme , we occa - sionally observed streaks of Rab5a moving paral - lel to nearby actin filaments at velocities of 3 to 5 m m / s ( Fig . 4C and fig . S39E ) . These may repre - sent EEsactively transportedalong microtubules ( 38 ) parallel to the filaments . aab3500 - 4 28 AUGUST 2015 (cid:127) VOL 349 ISSUE 6251 sciencemag . org SCIENCE Fig . 3 . Live - cell non - linear structured illumi - nation microscopy based on patterned photoactivation . ( A ) Single time point from a movie of the evolution of cortical f - actin in a COS - 7 cell at 23°C transfected with Skylan - NS - Lifeact , seen at 62 - nm resolution ( Movie 6 , fig . S31 , and movie S8 ) . ( B ) Magnified view from a different cell at 37°C , comparing diffraction - limited TIRF microscopy ( top left ) , TIRF with deconvolution ( top right ) , TIRF - SIM ( bottom left ) , and non - linear TIRF - SIM with patterned activation ( PA NL - SIM , bottom right ) ( movies S9 and S10 ) . ( C ) Caveolae in a COS - 7 cell at 23°C trans - fected with Skylan - NS - caveolin , comparing TIRF with deconvolution ( top left , 220 - nm resolution ) , TIRF SIM ( top right , 97 - nm resolution ) , PA NL - SIM ( bottom left , 62 - nm resolution ) , and saturated PA NL - SIM ( bottom right , 45 - nm resolution ) . ( Insets ) A single caveolae pit even - tually resolved as a ring by saturated PA NL - SIM ( Movie 7 , figs . S34 to S37 , and movie S13 . ( D ) Diversity of caveolae ring diameters as seen by means of PA NL - SIM . ( E ) Larger rings that may represent surface - docked vesicles . ( F ) Clusters of caveolae reminiscent of clathrin plaques . ( D ) to ( F ) are from a different cell at 37°C ( fig . S33 and movie S12 ) . Scale bars , 3 m m ( A ) ; 1 m m ( B ) ; 200 nm ( C ) ; and 100 nm ( D ) , ( E ) , ( F ) , and ( C ) , inset . RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE We also used PA NL - SIM and TIRF - SIM , re - spectively , to study the association of Skylan - NS - Lifeact with mCherry - a - actinin ( Fig . 4 , D to F , and fig . S40 ) . Consistent with its role as an actin - bundling protein ( 39 ) , in COS - 7 cells we found a - actinin at the treadmilling edge of the lamelle - podiumand atthebasalsurfacein bothfilopodia and the leading edges of growing membrane ruffles ( Fig . 4F , Movie 9 , and movie S15 ) . We also observed concentrations of a - actinin along the sides ( Fig . 4E ) andatthebranchingendsofstress fibers thatlikelyattach to cell - substrate adhesions ( 40 ) . Last , a - actininwaspresentatdensejunctions of Lifeact - decorated filaments , and Skylan - NS - Lifeact rings as described above were colocalized in every instance with a mCherry – a - actinin ring of similar size ( fig . S41 ) . Septins , another class of actin - bundling proteins , have been shown ( 41 ) to produce f - actin rings in vitro ( albeit of larger size than here ) , so perhaps a - actinin not only aids in bundling actin filaments in nanometric rings but also contributes to their extreme curvature . 3D live - cell imaging with combined PA NL - SIM and lattice light sheet microscopy Although the ~ 50 - to 200 - nm extent of the eva - nescent excitation field we used in the examples above eliminated out - of - focus background and confined potentially phototoxic exposure to a minute fraction of the cellular volume , it also limited our observations to this subvolume and severely restricted the total photon budget avail - able for those targets unable to be replenished from the cytosol during the imaging interval . To extend our observations to the entire cell , we turned to live - cell 3D - SIM ( 14 , 15 ) . Unfortu - nately , traditional 3D - SIM with linear , widefield excitation brings limitations of its own : It is slow ( ~ 20 s acquisition for whole adherent HeLa cells ) , limited to thin specimens ( because of out - of - focus background ) , andrequireshighSNRforaccurate imagereconstruction . Itisalsopotentiallyphoto - toxic and bleaches specimens rapidly because of continuous whole - cell illumination . These prob - lems would all be greatly magnified in its direct extension to PA NL - SIM . Thus , to apply PA NL - SIM to living cells in three dimensions ( Fig . 5 ) , we used lattice light sheet microscopy ( 42 ) . In this technique , an exci - tation objective ( fig . S42A ) projects a thin sheet of light ( fig . S42A , blue ) through a specimen ( fig . S42A , orange ) , and the fluorescence generated in the illuminated plane is collected by a detection objective and imaged onto a camera . Repeating this process plane - by - plane through the specimen produces a 3D image . Restriction of the light to the detection focal plane eliminates out - of - focus background , increases the z axis resolution and greatlyreducesphotobleachingandphototoxicity . In cross - section , the light sheet has the 2D periodic structure of an optical lattice ( fig . S42B ) . Sweeping the sheet back and forth along the x axis produces time - averaged uniform illumina - tion , offering high speed and diffraction - limited xyz resolution of 230 by 230 by 370 nm , as seen in a volume - rendered image of the actin cyto - skeleton ( fig . S43A ) and itscorrespondingoverall optical transfer function ( OTF ) ( fig . S43D ) . Step - ping the sheet in x in five equal fractions of the lattice period and applying the algorithms of 3D - SIM to the resulting five raw images per plane extends the xyz resolution to 150 by 230 by 280 nm ( fig . S43 , B and E ) , but atthe cost of at least 5× longer acquisition times ( 42 ) . To further extend the 3D resolution via PA NL - SIM , wefirstphotoactivatedtargetmolecules fusedtoSkylan - NSusingahexagonallatticelight sheet of l = 405 nm wavelength having H = 2 harmonics ( fig . S43E ) . We then imaged the fluo - rescence from the activated region , exciting the fluorescencewithalatticelightsheetof l = 488nm wavelength having the same hexagonal sym - metry and period ( fig . S42B , bottom ) as the ac - tivationlattice . Foractivationwellbelowsaturation , the product of the activation and excitation pat - terns creates a fluorescence emission pattern within the specimen having H = 4 harmonics ( fig . S43F ) . Thus , we stepped the sheet in x in 2 H + 1 = 9 equal fractions of the lattice period while recording nine images . Repeating this pro - cess for every plane within the specimen , we then reconstructed a 3D PA NL - SIM volume - rendered image ( fig . S43C ) , with resolution extended to 118 by 230 by 170 nm . We used this approach to image mitochondria in COS - 7 cells ( Fig . 5A ) as well as the actin cyto - skeleton ( fig . S43 , A to C , and movie S16 ) and theGolgiapparatus ( Fig . 5B ) inU2OScells , allat 23°C so as to simplify the overlap of the activa - tion and excitation patterns . Time - lapse 3D im - ages ( Fig . 5A , bottom ) and movies ( Movie 10 ) of Skylan - NS – tagged translocase of outer mitochon - drial membrane 20 ( TOM20 ) revealed the mi - gration , constriction before fission , and fusion of individual mitochondria ( 43 , 44 ) , each clearly resolved as a hollow tubular structure . The 3D volume rendering and the widths of mitochon - drial membranes in individual xy orthoslices were both comparable with similar data from a fixed cell imaged with 3D localization micros - copy ( 45 ) at a reported xyz resolution of ~ 20 by 20 by 60 nm ( fig . S44 ) . A volume - rendered movie ( movie S17 ) of the Golgi - resident enzyme Mannosidase II ( MannII ) SCIENCE sciencemag . org 28 AUGUST 2015 (cid:127) VOL 349 ISSUE 6251 aab3500 - 5 Fig . 4 . Combined TIRF - SIM and PA NL - SIM of protein - pair dynamics in living cells . ( A ) Skylan - NS - Lifeact ( orange , PA NL - SIM ) and mCherry - Rab5a , a marker of early endosomes ( green , TIRF - SIM ) in a COS - 7 cell at 23°C ( Movie 8 , figs . S38 and S39 , and movie S14 ) . ( B ) Comparison of EM images of early endosomes ( 37 ) with similarly shaped Rab5a patches seen in ( A ) . ( C ) Magnified view at three successive time points , showing rapid transport of a Rab5a streak parallel to the cytoskeleton . ( D ) Skylan - NS - Lifeact ( green , PA NL - SIM ) and mCherry - a - actinin ( purple , TIRF - SIM ) in a COS - 7 cell at 23°C ( Movie 9 , figs . S40 and S41 , and movie S15 ) . ( E ) Magnified view from ( D ) , with Lifeact ( top ) , a - actinin ( middle ) , and overlay ( bottom ) showing paired association at focal adhesions and along the sides of large stress fibers . ( F ) Evolution of a membrane ruffle , showing a - actinin concentrated at the leading edge . Scale bars , 5 m m ( A ) , ( D ) ; 200 nm ( B ) ; 1 m m ( C ) and ( E ) ; and 500 nm ( F ) . RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE tagged with Skylan - NS in a U2OS cell as seen looking into the cis - face from the nucleus showed Mann II concentrated in a hollow sphere of cisternae having a cis - facing void . Time - lapse 3D data ( Fig . 5B and movie S18 ) color - coded for height showed the docking of small vesicles ( Fig . 5B , white arrows ) that may represent pre - Golgi intermediates ( 46 ) as well as the rapid export of Mann II in long , tubular post - Golgi carriers ( Fig . 5B , red arrows ) ( 47 ) . The volumetric resolution of 3D lattice light sheet PA NL - SIM at the 0 . 6 - NA excitation and 1 . 1 - NA detection we used here is comparable with the 105 - by 105 - by 369 - nm xyz resolution of widefield 3D - SIM at 1 . 2 NA . However , the lattice approach has twofold higher axial resolu - tionandfourfoldbetterthantraditionaldiffraction - limited microscopy . It is therefore better suited to problems in which its superior optical section - ing is essential , such as in resolving heterogene - ities in nuclear architecture , distinguishing events occurring at the dorsal or ventral plasma mem - brane , or as above , tracking vesicles through the secretory pathway . Whole - cell acquisition times ( 70 . 5 and 32 . 7 s in Fig . 5 , A and B , respectively ) are slow compared with PA NL - SIM in TIRF but similar to widefield 3D - SIM . However , thanks to theobliqueimaginggeometry ( fig . S42 ) , restricted xy fields of view can be imaged at proportion - ally faster speed through the entire thickness of the cell . Discussion The above results provide but a brief glimpse of the biology that might be uncovered with the live - cell – compatibleSRmethodsofhigh - NATIRF - SIM and PA NL - SIM . We have measured and correlated the diameters and lifetimes of CCPs , observed at high resolution different forms of CCP initiation , and shown that CCP internaliza - tion is aided by actin filaments in about half of all cases . We have seen that caveolin localizes not only to the 60 - to 80 - nm invaginated caveloae common in EM images , but also to much larger ring - like structures , and have followed dynamic changes in the shapes of early endosomes . Last , we have observed the nanoscale remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton in relation to clathrin and Rab5a , as well as cytoskeletal - related proteins such as myosin IIA , a - actinin , and paxillin . However , the above results also amply illus - trate the trade - offs inherent in live SR imaging : With high - NA TIRF - SIM at 1 . 7 NA , we could ac - quire up to 200 image frames in < 0 . 5 s each at intensities of 20 to 100 W / cm 2 and a resolution of 84 nm ( for GFP ) , whereas extending the reso - lution to 62 nm with PA NL - SIM restricted us to no more than 40 frames , and further extension to 45 nm with saturated PA NL - SIM required 490 W / cm 2 and produced only 12 frames at useful SNR . Inshort , evenmodestgainsinresolutioncome at substantial cost in terms of the other metrics important for live - cell imaging . These tradeoffs are not specific to SIM . In fact , our extensions of SIM are far more compatible with live imaging than any other form of SR fluorescence micros - copy of comparable resolution demonstrated to date . In part , this is because the OTF , which de - finesthedegreetowhichdifferentsamplespatialfrequencies ( representing differently sized struc - tures ) are passed to the image , is far stronger in the 100 - nm regime ( fig . S24B ) for high - NA TIRF - SIM at 1 . 7 NA than other linear methods such as confocal or image scanning microscopy ( ISM ) ( 48 – 50 ) , and far stronger in the 50 - to 100 - nm regime ( fig . S24C ) for PA NL - SIM than other nonlinear methods such as STED ( 8 , 9 ) , point - scanning ( PS ) RESOLFT ( 10 ) , orarray - basedwide - field ( WF ) RESOLFT ( 11 ) . As a result , far fewer photons need to be collected ( fig . S2 ) , and far less light ( fig . S3 ) needs to be applied to the specimen to see features in these regimes at acceptable SNR . Localization microscopy is also photon in - efficient , in that the density of localized molecules is nearly always more limiting to the resolution thanisthenumberofphotonsemittedperswitch - ing cycle , which dictates the localization preci - sion . For example , simulations ( 12 ) based on the theoretical OTFs suggest that to resolve an 85 - nm grating , PA NL - SIM requires ~ 80× fewer photons from the specimen per unit area than localiza - tionmicroscopy , ~ 200×fewerthanWF - RESOLFT , and ~ 15×fewerthan PS - RESOLFTorSTED , each at a depletion saturation factor of SF depletion = 10 ( fig . S2 ) . Anotherreasonforthegreatercompatibilityof high - NA TIRF - SIM and PA NL - SIM with living cells is that they require much lower peak inten - sities of applied light . High resolution withSTED or RESOLFT demands high factors of saturated depletion ( fig . S25 , A and C ) that are wasteful of thephoton budget ( fig . S25 , Band D ) and require enormous intensities and / or long exposures for activation ( fig . S45 ) , depletion ( fig . S28 ) , and read - out of the final signal ( fig . S3 ) . Localization mi - croscopy also requires high intensities to achieve high photon emission and photoswitching rates from single molecules . For example , extrapolat - ing from reported experimental values for live - cell imaging ( table S1 ) , the 0 . 8 - to 3 . 5 - W / cm 2 activation intensity used over the 45 - by 45 - m m fieldofviewinFig . 3Ain1 . 2sbymeansofPANL - SIM is 960 , 000 times weaker than that which would be required to image the same area in the same acquisition time by means of PS - RESOLFT ( 10 ) . Similarly , under the same parameters , the 100 - W / cm 2 read - out intensity used for PA NL - SIM shown in Fig . 3A is 200 times weaker than that which would be required for localization aab3500 - 6 28 AUGUST 2015 (cid:127) VOL 349 ISSUE 6251 sciencemag . org SCIENCE Fig . 5 . Live - cell 3D PA NL - SIM via lattice light sheet micros - copy . ( A ) ( Top ) Membrane marker Skylan - NS - TOM20 showing mitochondria in a COS - 7 cell at 23°C , color - coded for distance from the substrate . ( Bottom ) Evolution of individual mitochondria , showing fission and fusion events , the former preceded by mitochondrial con - striction ( Movie 10 and fig . S44 ) . ( B ) Time - lapse distribution of Golgi - resident enzyme Skylan - NS - Mann II in a U2OS cell at 23°C , showing centralized cisternae surrounded by vesicles . White arrowheads indi - cate a docking vesicle , and red arrowheads highlight rapid export of a long tubular vesicle ( movies S17 and S18 ) . Scale bars , 5 m m ( A ) , top ; 1 m m ( A ) , bottom ; and 3 m m ( B ) . RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE microscopy ( 6 , 7 ) and640 , 000 timeslessthanPS - RESOLFT ( 10 ) . Furthermore , STEDandRESOLFT require an additional depletion step not needed in PA NL - SIM , which would further expose the sample to peak intensities of 807 MW / cm 2 for STED ( 8 ) , 1 . 7 MW / cm 2 for PS - RESOLFT ( 10 ) , and 3kW / cm 2 forWF - RESOLFT ( 11 ) . Even over small image fields , nanoscopy with focused light such as PS - RESOLFT and STED uses intensities 10 5 - to 10 10 - fold larger than that of terrestrial solar flux and is thus ill - equipped to study live - cell dynamics noninvasively . Of course , despite these gains , no method of live - cellfluorescencemicroscopy , includinghigh - NA TIRF - SIM and PA NL - SIM , can claim to be completelynoninvasive , owingtopossiblephoto - induced physiological changes , protein over - expression , and / or label - induced perturbations . For example , the gradual development of curved filopodia and membrane ruffles after the start of imaging are shown in Movies 5 and 6 and movie S2 . These may reflect a response to the illumina - tion , although we have also commonly seen such structures under initial conditions when imaging with diffraction - limited TIRF ( fig . S46 ) . Another caveat is that all the cells except BSC - 1 in this work were transiently transfected , and hence , expression levels of the target proteins were un - controlled . Thiscouldaffecteithermorphologies , such as the sizes of Rab5a - labeled endosomes ( Fig . 4 , A to C , and figs . S38 and S39 ) ( 51 ) , or dynamic phenotypes , such as the growth rate of membranerufflesinmCherry – a - actinin – expressing cells ( Fig . 4E , Movie 9 , and movie S15 ) . Although endogenous expression levels can be achieved with genome editing ( 52 ) , even more light or longer exposures would be needed for cases in which these levels are lower than those used here . Thus , thebiologicalfindingsdescribedinthiswork should not be considered definitive . More exten - sive measurements across multiple cell lines with careful controls and targeted perturbation experi - ments will be needed to reach conclusive insights . The lesson is that when addressing any biolog - ical question by means of live - cell imaging , it is prudenttostartwithlessinvasive , lower - resolution methodssuchaswidefield , spinningdiskconfocal , orlatticelightsheetmicroscopyandmoveprogres - sively only as needed to more invasive , higher - resolution methods such as 3D - SIM , TIRF - SIM , PA NL - SIM , andlast , localizationmicroscopy . Seen from this perspective , the two extended - resolution methodsofhigh - NATIRF - SIMandPANL - SIMwe introduce here fill an important gap between the 100 - nm limit of traditional SIM and the macro - molecularleveloflocalizationmicroscopy . Together , they open the door to high - resolution , minimally invasive studies of dynamic processes , including endocytosis , exocytosis , signaltransduction , protein diffusion , vesicle trafficking , viral entry , cytoskeletal remodeling , interactions with the extracellular matrix , and the evolution of lipid rafts . Materials and methods Optical path of the TIRF - SIM system The schematic of TIRF - SIM system is presented in fig . S47A . The beam from a laser combiner equipped with 405 nm ( 250 mW , RPMC , Oxxius LBX - 405 - 300 - CIR - PP ) , 488 nm ( 500mW , Coher - ent , SAPPHIRE 488 - 500 ) , and 560 nm ( 1W , MPB Communications , 2RU - VFL - P - 1000 - 560 - B1R ) lasers is passed through an acousto - optic tunable filter ( AOTF ; AA Quanta Tech , AOTFnC - 400 . 650 - TN ) . The beam is then expanded to a 1 / e 2 diameter of 12 mm and sent to a phase - only modulator ( 13 ) consisting of a polarizing beam splitter , a achro - matic half - wave plate ( HWP ; Bolder Vision Optik , BVO AHWP3 ) , and a ferroelectric spatial light modulator ( SLM ; ForthDimensionDisplays , SXGA - 3DM ) . Light diffracted by the grating pattern displayed on SLM passes through a polarization rotator ( 15 ) consisting of a liquid crystal cell ( LC ; Meadowlark , SWIFT ) and an achromatic quarter - wave plate ( QWP ; Bolder Vision Optik , BVO AQWP3 ) , which rotates the linear polarization of the diffracted light so as to maintain the s - polarization necessary to maximize the pattern contrast for all pattern orientations . A mask con - sisting of a hollow barrel with slots for different pattern orientations ( 15 ) is driven by a galvano - metric scanner ( Cambridge Technology , 6230HB ) to filter out all diffraction orders created by the binary and pixelated nature of the SLM except for the desired ±1 diffraction orders . These are then imaged at the back focal plane of the ob - jective ( Olympus APON 100XHOTIRF 1 . 7 NA for high - NATIRF - SIM , Olympus , UAPON100XOTIRF 1 . 49 NA for PA NL - SIM at 23°C , or Zeiss Plan - Apochromat 100X Oil - HI 1 . 57 NA for high - NA PA - NL - SIM at 37°C ) as two spots at opposite sides of the pupil . After passage through the ob - jective , the two beams intersect at the interface between thecoverslip and thesample atan angle exceeding the critical angle for total internal re - flection . An evanescent standing wave penetrat - ing ~ 100nmintothesampleistherebygenerated , consisting of a sinusoidal pattern of excitation intensity that is a low - pass filtered image of the SLM pattern . The period , orientation , and rela - tive phase of this excitation pattern can be finely tuned by altering the corresponding pat - tern displayed on SLM . For each orientation and phase of the applied excitation pattern , the resulting fluorescence is collected by the ob - jective , focused by a tube lens at an interme - diate image plane , separated from excitation light by a dichroic mirror ( Chroma , ZT405 / 488 / 560tpc _ 22 . 5deg ) placed between two relay lenses , and reimaged onto a sCMOS camera ( Hamamatsu , Orca Flash 4 . 0 v2 sCMOS ) , where the structured fluorescence emission pattern is recorded . Calibration of pattern overlap for PA NL - SIM In order to maximize the amplitudes of the non - linear harmonics for PA NL - SIM to work efficient - ly , the sinusoidal patterns of 405 nm activation lightand488nmexcitationanddeactivationlightmustbealignedtopreciselyoverlaponeanother . As noted above , these patterns at the sample plane are created by displaying corresponding binary grating patterns on an SLM at a corre - sponding optically conjugate plane . In this case , the period p s at the specimen is related to the period p SLM at the SLM by p s = M l · p SLM ð 1 Þ where M is the demagnification factor between the two conjugate planes and is dictated to be the focal lengths of the relay lenses between the two planes . Unfortunately , chromatic aberration leads to slightly different focal lengths for even achromaticrelaylensesfordifferentwavelengthsoflight . In particular , in our system , M 405 and M 488 vary by ~ 2 % . Considering that the sinusoi - dal interference pattern is composed of hundreds of periods across our 45 - by 45 - m m 2 field - of - view ( FOV ) , even this 2 % difference results in sub - stantial drift in the relative phases of the 405 - and 488 - nmexcitationpatternsacrosstheFOV ( fig . S48 , A to C ) , leading to spatially variable ampli - tudesforthenonlinearharmonicsandcorrespond - ing spatially variable errors in the resulting SIM reconstructions . A straightforward way to compensate for chromatic aberration and achieve identical peri - ods p s , 405 = p s , 488 at the sample ( fig . S47B ) is to introduce a period difference D p SLM between the two corresponding patterns at the SLM ( fig . S47C ) . In fact , in order to compensate completely and achieve well - overlapped 405 - and 488 - nm excitation patterns over the whole FOV , we need to measure two parameters : the initial period differenceatthesample , D p i s ¼ D p i s ; 488 − D p i s ; 405 , when p SLM isthesameforbothwavelengths ; and thephasedifference , Df i s ¼ Df i s ; 488 − Df i s ; 405 , when p s is the same . Do to so , we used a sample con - sisting of a dense but submonolayer spread of green fluorescent beads excitable at both 405 and 488 nm and proceeded as follows . Step 1 Keeping p SLM constant , we acquired five images each of the sample under 405 - and 488 - nm sinus - oidal excitation , with the phase shifted by p SLM / 5 for each image at a given wavelength . We then ap - plied the structured illumination ( SI ) reconstruc - tion algorithm ( 53 ) to each set of five images , from which p i s ; 405 and p i s ; 488 emerged as measured outputs . For a given period p SLM , 488 used at the SLM for 488 - nm excitation , the corresponding period p SLM , 405 needed at the SLM for 405 - nm excitation to produce the same period p s at the sample for both wavelengths is then given by p SLM ; 405 ¼ p i s ; 488 p i s ; 405 ! p SLM ; 488 ð 2 Þ Step 2 After adjusting p SLM , 405 and p SLM , 488 to obtain the same period p s at the sample for both wave - lengths , a constant phase offset exists between the two sinusoidal illumination patterns across the FOV ( fig . S48 , D and E ) . We measured the phase f for each wavelength by applying the sinusoidal illumination for that wavelength and then recorded the position x n along the modu - lation direction and intensity I n for each of N beads scattered across the FOV . We then fit the SCIENCE sciencemag . org 28 AUGUST 2015 (cid:127) VOL 349 ISSUE 6251 aab3500 - 7 RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE function I ( x ) = I max [ 1 + sin ( 2 p x / p s + f ) ] / 2 to this datato find f ( fig . S48F ) . A phase shift Df = f 488 – f 405 was then applied the SLM pattern for the 405 - nm illumination so as to bring it into phase with the 488 - nm illumination at the specimen ( figs . S48 , G to I ) . Step 3 Last , weconfirmedthatboththeperiodandphase of the sinusoidal illumination patterns at the two wavelengths match across the entire FOV by remeasuring the periods p s , 488 , p s , 405 and the phases f 488 , f 405 as described above and con - firming that they are identical . SLM pattern generation We generated the sinusoidal illumination pat - terns using a binary ferroelectric SLM ( Forth Di - mension Displays , SXGA - 3DM ) because it has the submillisecond switching times needed to acquire the nine ( TIRF - SIM ) , 25 ( PA NL - SIM ) , or more ( saturated PA NL - SIM ) raw images of dif - ferent phase and orientation required to recon - structasingleSIMimageinasfastas100 to400ms . However , care must be taken to account for the finite pixel size of the SLM , especially considering thatsubpixeladjustmentaccuracyisnecessarytoachieveprecisepatternoverlapat405and488nm , as described in the previous section . The SLM pattern - generation algorithms used in previous work ( 13 – 15 ) do not provide such subpixel accu - racy . Thus , in this work , we developed a new algorithm that matches the two pattern periods to 0 . 02 % precision , leading to a phase error no greater than 1 . 8° over the 45 - m m FOV . In detail , a set of radial vectors { A n } define the desired orientations of the grating pattern at the SLM . The angular orientation of this radial set relative to the x and y axes defined by pixel rows and columns of the SLM is chosen so that each vector is at least 4° away from either axis . This is essential to achieve subpixel precision in the ad - justment of the period . For each orientation rep - resented by A n , we define a vector B n that is orthogonal to A n ( fig . S49 ) . Likewise , for every pixel of the SLM we define a pixel vector ( such as C1 or C2 in fig . S49 ) from the point O at the intersection of A n and B n to the pixel . We then calculate F = [ ( C · B ) mod p ] / p , the fraction of the period p by which the pixel extends beyond an integral number of periods on the SLM . For a pattern with a desired off fraction D per period ( D = 0 . 5 in 2D SIM ) , the pixel is set to 0 if F < D and set to 1 otherwise . Last , to define the pixel patterns required for the other N – 1 phases of the illumination for a given orientation , the point O is translated along B n in steps of p / N , and this processisrepeated withthenewvector C foreach pixel . Unlike the pixel assignment algorithm used previously for SIM ( 15 ) , this approach does not rely on unit - cell repetition and therefore does not succumb to error accumulation over the entire span of the SLM . Lattice light sheet PA NL - SIM system To extend PA NL - SIM to three dimensions , it is essential to minimize out - of - focus fluorescence emission that can cause the shot noise in the DC harmonic to completely overwhelm the weak signals in the nonlinear harmonics . To accom - plish this , we turned to the SIM mode of lattice light sheet microscopy ( 42 ) . Just as in the case of 2D - SIM , and for the same reasons , we choose to introduce the nonlinear harmonics through patterned activation ofSkylan - NS . Theexcitation objective ( Special Optics , 0 . 65 NA , 3 . 74 mm WD ) isplacedperpendicular tothedetectionobjective ( Nikon , CFI Apo LWD 25XW , 1 . 1 NA , 2 mm WD ) to confine the illumination to the proximity of the latter ’ s focal plane ( fig . S42A ) . The lattice pattern projected on the SLM ( Forth Dimension Displays , SXGA - 3DM ) is imaged onto the focal plane of the excitation objective , after the excita - tion is first spatially filtered by an annular mask ( Photo - Science ) and relayed by a pair of galva - nometers ( Cambridge Technology , 6215H ) that phase step the pattern in the x direction and scan the light sheet in z . Also as in 2D PA NL - SIM , we match the periods and phases of the 405 - and 488 - nm lattices to exactly match by measuring their excitation profilesacrosstheFOVusing fluo - rescent beads ( fig . S42B ) and adjusting accord - ingly . The fluorescence emission is collected by the detection objective and imaged by a tube lens onto a sCMOS camera ( Hamamatsu Orca Flash 4 . 0 v2 ) . A 3D image is formed by repeating this process as the sample is translated through the light sheet with a piezoelectric stage ( Physik Instrumente , P - 621 . 1CD ) along an axis s in the plane of the cover slip , and a 3D super - resolution NL - SIM image is reconstructed as described below . Data acquisition High - NA TIRF SIM All high - NA TIRF - SIM images were acquired with the Olympus 1 . 7 - NA objective under the physiological conditions of 37°C and 5 % CO 2 . At each timepoint , we acquired three raw images at successive phase steps of 0 , 1 / 3 , and 2 / 3 of the illumination period . We then repeated this pro - cess with the standing wave excitation pattern rotated ±120° with respect to the first orienta - tion , for a total of nine raw images . The phase stepping and pattern rotation were accomplished by rotating or translating the binary grating pat - terndisplayedontheSLM . Formulticolorimaging , we acquired nine raw images at each excitation wavelength before moving to the next and then repeated this series at successive time points . We couldadjusttheexcitationNA foreachwavelength bychangingtheperiodofthegratingpatternattheSLM . This allowed us to control penetration depth of the evanescent wave ( fig . S8 ) in order to ba - lance the number of excitable fluorescent mole - cules against the background fluorescence and possible physiological effects of the excitation . PA NL - SIM and saturated PA NL - SIM The high refractive index immersion oil required for the Olympus 1 . 7 - NA objective strongly ab - sorbs405 - nmlight , leadingtoasubstantialreduc - tion in the modulation depth we could achieve in the activation pattern at this wavelength . Conse - quently , forNL - SIMwefirstturnedtotheOlympus 1 . 49 - NA TIRF objective and imaged at room tem - perature ( 23°C ) with L15 medium , without phenol red having 10 % fetal bovine serum ( Life Technol - ogies ) . With this objective , we were able to achieve high modulation contrast while stably and pre - cisely overlapping the 405 - and 488 - nm standing waves over the whole FOV . An excitation NA of 1 . 44 was used for both 488 - and 560 - nm light in thiscase , leadingto62 - nmresolutionforPANL - SIM when using green - emitting FPs . Recently , how - ever , we found that the high refractive index im - mersion oil used for the Zeiss 1 . 57 - NA objective did not absorb 405 - nm light strongly and there - fore could be used to maintain precisely over - lapped 405 - and 488 - nm standing waves with high modulation contrast at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 . The excitation NA in this case was 1 . 52 for 488 - nm light , leading to 59 - nm resolution for PA NL - SIM when using green - emitting FPs . Theexposureprocedureforasinglephasestep inNL - SIMconsistsof ( i ) 405 - nmpatternedillumi - nation for 1 ms to activate the fluorescent mol - ecules ; ( ii ) 488 - nm patterned illumination for 5 to ~ 30 ms to read - out the activated molecules ; and ( iii ) 488 - nm uniform illumination for 2 to ~ 10 ms to read - out the remaining activated molecules and return the sample back to the original unactivated state . We collected the fluorescence from both steps ( ii ) and ( iii ) to reconstruct the SR image . Depending on the number of modulation har - monics H of non - negligible amplitude in the image ( H = 2 forPA - NL - SIMand H = 3orpossibly more for saturated PA NL - SIM ) , we repeated this sequence for 2 H + 1 raw images at each of 2 H + 1 angular orientations equally spaced around 360° for a total of ( 2 H + 1 ) 2 raw images at each NL - SIM timepoint . An exceptionwassaturatedPA - NL - SIM , for which to reduce the acquisition time , we often used only five orientations rather than seven . Intwo - colorimagingcombininglinearTIRF - SIM and PA NL - SIM ( Fig . 4 ) , at each time point we acquiredthePANL - SIMimageasdiscussedabove . However , we acquired the TIRF - SIM image with fiveinsteadofthreeorientations ( 15rawimagesfor the TIRF - SIM channel at every time point ) in order to match the orientations of the five - slot , galvanometer - driven barrel mask used to pick outthedesireddiffractionordersforthePANL - SIM acquisition . 3D PA NL - SIM with lattice light sheet microscopy Here , we used a hexagonal lattice having a period large enough to contain two harmonics for each of the 405 - nm activation and the 488 - nm excitation ( 42 ) — one harmonic just below the Abbe limit of the 0 . 65 - NA excitation objec - tive , and the other at twice this period . The product of these patterns created a fluorescence emission pattern containing H = 4 harmonics ( fig . S43F ) . However , with a single excitation ob - jective , we were limited to producing this pat - tern at only one orientation . Therefore , at each plane of the 3D stack , we acquired 2 H + 1 = 9 images , resulting inimproved resolution ( Fig . 5 ) aab3500 - 8 28 AUGUST 2015 (cid:127) VOL 349 ISSUE 6251 sciencemag . org SCIENCE RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE in both the lateral and axial directions of the pattern . Reconstruction of SIM images The raw image frames with patterned excitation were processed and reconstructed into the super - resolved images by means of a previously de - scribed algorithm ( 53 ) . In brief , for each pattern orientation with H modulation harmonics , 2 H + 1 raw images are collected and Fourier transformed into 2 H + 1 information components . These com - ponents are assembled by initially translating each in Fourier space by a distance equal to the am - plitudeoftheilluminationpatternvector nk 0 , where k 0 is the spatial frequency of the illumination pat - tern and n = – H to H . The pattern vector of each information component is then fine - tuned by finding the vector that maximizes the complex cross - correlation in the overlap region between successive components . The modulation ampli - tude of the harmonic and its starting phase are found through complex linear regression . In line with previous work ( 28 ) , the modulation ampli - tudesfor the highest harmonics aregenerally too low for this empirical approach to work well , so for these , the theoretical values of their complex amplitudes are used . After fine - tuning the posi - tionsandcomplexamplitudesoftheinformationcomponentsintheoverlapregions , a generalized Wiener filter is applied to this expanded transfer function to balance the amplitudes of the various spatial frequencies against the underlying noise . Next , an apodization function is applied to min - imizeringing artifacts when the resultisFourier - transformed back to real space . However , rather than the triangle apodization A ( k ) = 1 – k / k max normally used ( 53 ) , we applied a g apodization A ( k ) = 1 – ( k / k max ) g , usually with g = 0 . 4 , so that the higher spatial frequencies are not suppressed more than necessary . Furthermore , we strictly fol - lowed the azimuthally dependent support k max ( q ) of the expanded OTF ( figs . S7 and S30 ) to define the endpoint of the apodization function . This pro - vides additional suppression of ringing artifacts . For the time series data , we independently imple - mentthisreconstructionprocessforeachtimepoint . Cell culture , transfection , staining , and fixation BSC - 1 , COS - 7 , U2OS , and mouseembryonicfibro - blast ( MEF ) cells ( American Type Culture Collec - tion ) were grown to ~ 60 to 80 % confluency in Dulbecco ’ s modified eagle medium ( DMEM ) with high glucose and no phenol red supplemented with 15 % fetal bovine serum ( Life Technologies ) . BSC - 1 cells stably expressed EGFP - CLTA . Other cells were transiently transfected with an Amaxa Nucleofector 96 - well shuttle system ( Lonza ) with 1 m g DNA per 400 , 000 cells with nucleofection solution and a program optimized for each cell line per the manufactures instructions . Before imaging , 25 - mm or 5 - mm coverslips were coated with 10 m g / ml fibronection ( Millipore , FC010 ) for 24hoursbeforeplatingtransfectedcells . Imaging was performed in DMEM with HEPES if there is no CO 2 control containing no phenol red at tem - peratures specifically stated in each case . In two - color imaging of CCPs and transferrin receptors ( TfRs ) by means of high - NA TIRF - SIM , MEF cells expressing clathrin light chain B fused to the C terminal of mEmerald were incubated with DMEM medium containing 250 m g / mL TfR bound to human transferrin conjugated with Alexa 568 ( T23365 , Life Technologies ) for 15 min . Fixed cells were treated for 15 min with fixa - tion buffer containing 4 % paraformaldehyde , 0 . 1 % gluteraldehyde in PHEM buffer ( 25 mM HEPES , 10mMEGTA , 2mMMgCl 2 , and120mM PIPES in pH 7 . 3 ) . Tracking analysis of CCPs For each image frame , we segmented the CCPs using a watershed algorithm written in Matlab ( MathWorks , 2014a ) and measured their cent - roids individually . Subsequently , the centroid position was linked between timepointsusing u - track 2 . 1 ( 54 ) . This linking operation collected successive position information for each pit over the entire endocytic process ( Fig . 2E ) from ini - tiation to final internalization . It was then straight - forward to determine the lifetime ( Fig . 2A ) for each endocytic event . In order to precisely measure the pit diameter ( Fig . 2 , B and C ) , we first measured the system magnification to the camera by imaging a stan - dard fine counting grid ( 2280 - 32 , Ted Pella ) . The SIM image of each CCP was then deconvolved with the equivalent PSF of the SIM system to compensate for the broadening due to the finite resolution of the instrument . Last , we measured the diameter of each deconvolved pit using an intensity - weighted average radius relative to the centroid of the pit . In certain cases ( Fig . 2A and Movie 3 ) , pits were color - coded at each time point based on the time since their initiation to the current time point . One challenge in this analysis was how to identify isolated pits rather than aggregates and how to be sure that these represented true pits rather than noise or disorganized patches of nonassembled clathrin . To accomplish this , we set some conditions during the analysis , such as that a pit must start as a spot and then evolve into a ring at at least one time point . When ana - lyzing the correlation between pit lifetime and maximum diameter , we added the further con - straint of including only those pits formed after the first frame in order to insure that we could accurately measure the entire lifetime . Whenmeasuringtheassociationsofactinwith clathrin , we first implemented the tracking al - gorithm above to obtain time - lapse CCP images foreachendocyticevent . Wethencreatedamask for each CCP identified in each frame , equal to the CCP size plus an additional boundary of one pixel . Wethenappliedthesemasksto eachframe of Lifeact data and integrated the actin fluores - cence within each CCP - derived mask . If the actin signal integrated over the area of a given mask increased during the final five frames of the life of the associated CCP , it was decided that actin was recruited to the CCP during the final stage of endocytosis . REFERENCES AND NOTES 1 . L . Schermelleh , R . Heintzmann , H . Leonhardt , A guide to super - resolution fluorescence microscopy . J . Cell Biol . 190 , 165 – 175 ( 2010 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201002018 ; pmid : 20643879 2 . U . Schnell , F . Dijk , K . A . Sjollema , B . N . Giepmans , Immunolabeling artifacts and the need for live - cell imaging . Nat . Methods 9 , 152 – 158 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1855 ; pmid : 22290187 3 . R . P . Nieuwenhuizen et al . , Measuring image resolution in optical nanoscopy . Nat . Methods 10 , 557 – 562 ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2448 ; pmid : 23624665 4 . X . Shu et al . , A genetically encoded tag for correlated light and electron microscopy of intact cells , tissues , and organisms . PLOS Biol . 9 , e1001041 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1001041 ; pmid : 21483721 5 . J . D . Martell et al . , Engineered ascorbate peroxidase as a genetically encoded reporter for electron microscopy . Nat . Biotechnol . 30 , 1143 – 1148 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nbt . 2375 ; pmid : 23086203 6 . H . Shroff , C . G . Galbraith , J . A . Galbraith , E . Betzig , Live - cell photoactivated localization microscopy of nanoscale adhesion dynamics . Nat . Methods 5 , 417 – 423 ( 2008 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1202 ; pmid : 18408726 7 . S . H . Shim et al . , Super - resolution fluorescence imaging of organelles in live cells with photoswitchable membrane probes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 109 , 13978 – 13983 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1201882109 ; pmid : 22891300 8 . B . Hein , K . I . Willig , S . W . Hell , Stimulated emission depletion ( STED ) nanoscopy of a fluorescent protein - labeled organelle inside a living cell . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 105 , 14271 – 14276 ( 2008 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0807705105 ; pmid : 18796604 9 . V . Westphal et al . , Video - rate far - field optical nanoscopy dissects synaptic vesicle movement . Science 320 , 246 – 249 ( 2008 ) . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1154228 ; pmid : 18292304 10 . T . Grotjohann et al . , rsEGFP2 enables fast RESOLFT nanoscopy of living cells . eLife 1 , e00248 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 00248 ; pmid : 23330067 11 . A . Chmyrov et al . , Nanoscopy with more than 100 , 000 ‘ doughnuts ’ . Nat . Methods 10 , 737 – 740 ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2556 ; pmid : 23832150 12 . Materials and methods are available as supplementary materials on Science Online . 13 . P . Kner , B . B . Chhun , E . R . Griffis , L . Winoto , M . G . Gustafsson , Super - resolution video microscopy of live cells by structured illumination . Nat . Methods 6 , 339 – 342 ( 2009 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1324 ; pmid : 19404253 14 . L . Shao , P . Kner , E . H . Rego , M . G . Gustafsson , Super - resolution 3D microscopy of live whole cells using structured illumination . Nat . Methods 8 , 1044 – 1046 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1734 ; pmid : 22002026 15 . R . Fiolka , L . Shao , E . H . Rego , M . W . Davidson , M . G . Gustafsson , Time - lapse two - color 3D imaging of live cells with doubled resolution using structured illumination . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 109 , 5311 – 5315 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1119262109 ; pmid : 22431626 16 . J . Riedl et al . , Lifeact : A versatile marker to visualize F - actin . Nat . Methods 5 , 605 – 607 ( 2008 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1220 ; pmid : 18536722 17 . H . T . McMahon , E . Boucrot , Molecular mechanism and physiological functions of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 , 517 – 533 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3151 ; pmid : 21779028 18 . M . Ehrlich et al . , Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 118 , 591 – 605 ( 2004 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2004 . 08 . 017 ; pmid : 15339664 19 . I . Gaidarov , F . Santini , R . A . Warren , J . H . Keen , Spatial control of coated - pit dynamics in living cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 1 – 7 ( 1999 ) . pmid : 10559856 20 . S . Saffarian , E . Cocucci , T . Kirchhausen , Distinct dynamics of endocytic clathrin - coated pits and coated plaques . PLOS Biol . 7 , e1000191 ( 2009 ) . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1000191 ; pmid : 19809571 21 . J . Grove et al . , Flat clathrin lattices : Stable features of the plasma membrane . Mol . Biol . Cell 25 , 3581 – 3594 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E14 - 06 - 1154 ; pmid : 25165141 22 . J . Heuser , Effects of cytoplasmic acidification on clathrin lattice morphology . J . Cell Biol . 108 , 401 – 411 ( 1989 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 108 . 2 . 401 ; pmid : 2563729 23 . M . Kaksonen , C . P . Toret , D . G . Drubin , Harnessing actin dynamics for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 404 – 414 ( 2006 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm1940 ; pmid : 16723976 SCIENCE sciencemag . org 28 AUGUST 2015 (cid:127) VOL 349 ISSUE 6251 aab3500 - 9 RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE 24 . D . K . Cureton , R . H . Massol , S . Saffarian , T . L . Kirchhausen , S . P . Whelan , Vesicular stomatitis virus enters cells through vesicles incompletely coated with clathrin that depend upon actin for internalization . PLOS Pathog . 5 , e1000394 ( 2009 ) . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1000394 ; pmid : 19390604 25 . S . Boulant , C . Kural , J . C . Zeeh , F . Ubelmann , T . Kirchhausen , Actin dynamics counteract membrane tension during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 1124 – 1131 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2307 ; pmid : 21841790 26 . A . I . Shevchuk et al . , An alternative mechanism of clathrin - coated pit closure revealed by ion conductance microscopy . J . Cell Biol . 197 , 499 – 508 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201109130 ; pmid : 22564416 27 . R . Heintzmann , T . M . Jovin , C . Cremer , Saturated patterned excitation microscopy — a concept for optical resolution improvement . J . Opt . Soc . Am . A Opt . Image Sci . Vis . 19 , 1599 – 1609 ( 2002 ) . doi : 10 . 1364 / JOSAA . 19 . 001599 ; pmid : 12152701 28 . M . G . Gustafsson , Nonlinear structured - illumination microscopy : Wide - field fluorescence imaging with theoretically unlimited resolution . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 102 , 13081 – 13086 ( 2005 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0406877102 ; pmid : 16141335 29 . E . H . Rego et al . , Nonlinear structured - illumination microscopy with a photoswitchable protein reveals cellular structures at 50 - nm resolution . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 109 , E135 – E143 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1107547108 ; pmid : 22160683 30 . X . Zhang et al . , Development of a reversibly switchable fluorescent protein for super - resolution optical fluctuation imaging ( SOFI ) . ACS Nano 9 , 2659 – 2667 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1021 / nn5064387 ; pmid : 25695314 31 . K . Xu , H . P . Babcock , X . Zhuang , Dual - objective STORM reveals three - dimensional filament organization in the actin cytoskeleton . Nat . Methods 9 , 185 – 188 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1841 ; pmid : 22231642 32 . R . G . Parton , K . Simons , The multiple faces of caveolae . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 185 – 194 ( 2007 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2122 ; pmid : 17318224 33 . F . Lavoie - Cardinal et al . , Two - color RESOLFT nanoscopy with green and red fluorescent photochromic proteins . ChemPhysChem 15 , 655 – 663 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1002 / cphc . 201301016 ; pmid : 24449030 34 . R . G . Parton , M . Hanzal - Bayer , J . F . Hancock , Biogenesis of caveolae : A structural model for caveolin - induced domain formation . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 787 – 796 ( 2006 ) . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 02853 ; pmid : 16495479 35 . E . Boucrot , M . T . Howes , T . Kirchhausen , R . G . Parton , Redistribution of caveolae during mitosis . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 1965 – 1972 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 076570 ; pmid : 21625007 36 . M . Jovic , M . Sharma , J . Rahajeng , S . Caplan , Theearly endosome : A busy sorting station for proteins at the crossroads . Histol . Histopathol . 25 , 99 – 112 ( 2010 ) . pmid : 19924646 37 . J . Tooze , M . Hollinshead , In AtT20 and HeLa cells brefeldin A induces the fusion of tubular endosomes and changes their distribution and some of their endocytic properties . J . Cell Biol . 118 , 813 – 830 ( 1992 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 118 . 4 . 813 ; pmid : 1500425 38 . E . Nielsen , F . Severin , J . M . Backer , A . A . Hyman , M . Zerial , Rab5 regulates motility of early endosomes on microtubules . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 376 – 382 ( 1999 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / 14075 ; pmid : 10559966 39 . C . A . Otey , O . Carpen , Alpha - actinin revisited : A fresh look at an old player . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 58 , 104 – 111 ( 2004 ) . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 20007 ; pmid : 15083532 40 . C . K . Choi et al . , Actin and alpha - actinin orchestrate the assembly and maturation of nascent adhesions in a myosin II motor - independent manner . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 1039 – 1050 ( 2008 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1763 ; pmid : 19160484 41 . M . Mavrakis et al . , Septins promote F - actin ring formation by crosslinking actin filaments into curved bundles . Nat . Cell Biol . 16 , 322 – 334 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2921 ; pmid : 24633326 42 . B . C . Chen et al . , Lattice light - sheet microscopy : Imaging molecules to embryos at high spatiotemporal resolution . Science 346 , 1257998 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1257998 ; pmid : 25342811 43 . A . Legesse - Miller , R . H . Massol , T . Kirchhausen , Constriction and Dnm1p recruitment are distinct processes in mitochondrial fission . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 1953 – 1963 ( 2003 ) . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E02 - 10 - 0657 ; pmid : 12802067 44 . J . R . Friedman et al . , ER tubules mark sites of mitochondrial division . Science 334 , 358 – 362 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1207385 ; pmid : 21885730 45 . B . Huang , S . A . Jones , B . Brandenburg , X . Zhuang , Whole - cell 3D STORM reveals interactions between cellular structures with nanometer - scale resolution . Nat . Methods 5 , 1047 – 1052 ( 2008 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1274 ; pmid : 19029906 46 . J . F . Presley et al . , ER - to - Golgi transport visualized in living cells . Nature 389 , 81 – 85 ( 1997 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / 38891 ; pmid : 9288971 47 . K . Hirschberg et al . , Kinetic analysis of secretory protein traffic and characterization of golgi to plasma membrane transport intermediates in living cells . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 1485 – 1503 ( 1998 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 143 . 6 . 1485 ; pmid : 9852146 48 . C . J . R . Sheppard , Super - resolution in confocal imaging . Optik ( Stuttg . ) 80 , 53 ( 1988 ) . 49 . C . B . Müller , J . Enderlein , Image scanning microscopy . Phys . Rev . Lett . 104 , 198101 ( 2010 ) . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 104 . 198101 ; pmid : 20867000 50 . A . G . York et al . , Resolution doubling in live , multicellular organisms via multifocal structured illumination microscopy . Nat . Methods 9 , 749 – 754 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2025 ; pmid : 22581372 51 . R . L . Roberts et al . , Endosome fusion in living cells overexpressing GFP - rab5 . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 3667 – 3675 ( 1999 ) . pmid : 10523503 52 . J . D . Sander , J . K . Joung , CRISPR - Cas systems for editing , regulating and targeting genomes . Nat . Biotechnol . 32 , 347 – 355 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nbt . 2842 ; pmid : 24584096 53 . M . G . L . Gustafsson et al . , Three - dimensional resolution doubling in wide - field fluorescence microscopy by structured illumination . Biophys . J . 94 , 4957 – 4970 ( 2008 ) . doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 107 . 120345 ; pmid : 18326650 54 . K . Jaqaman et al . , Robust single - particle tracking in live - cell time - lapse sequences . Nat . Methods 5 , 695 – 702 ( 2008 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1237 ; pmid : 18641657 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank the Shared Resource teams at Janelia for their skill and dedication in specimen handling and preparation and the Instrument Design and Fabrication team for their manufacturing expertise . D . L . , L . S . , B . - C . C . , and E . B . are funded by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute ( HHMI ) . X . Z . , M . Z . , and P . X . are funded by the National Basic Research Program ( 973 Program ) of China ( 2013CB910103 ) , the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( 31370851 ) , and the Beijing Natural Science Foundation , China ( 7131011 ) . M . P . and T . K . were funded in part by NIH grant GM - 075252 . Skylan - NS is available from P . X . upon execution of a materials transfer agreement with the Institute of Biophysics . Other fluorescent protein constructs used in this work are from the Michael Davidson Collection and are available , along with sequence information , from Addgene ( www . addgene . org / fluorescent - proteins / davidson ) . Researchers can apply to access the microscope as visitors through the Advanced Imaging Center at Janelia ( www . janelia . org / open - science / advanced - imaging - center ) . Technical information for the construction of a copy of the microscope is available to nonprofit entities upon execution of a no - cost Research License with HHMI . Nonlinear SIM with patterned activation , in two or three dimensions , as described here is covered within U . S . provisional patent application 62 / 057 , 220 filed by E . B . and D . L . and assigned to HHMI . SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS www . sciencemag . org / content / 349 / 6251 / aab3500 / suppl / DC1 Supplementary Text Figs . S1 to S55 Table S1 and S2 References ( 55 – 68 ) Movies S1 to S18 15 April 2015 ; accepted 20 July 2015 10 . 1126 / science . aab3500 aab3500 - 10 28 AUGUST 2015 (cid:127) VOL 349 ISSUE 6251 sciencemag . org SCIENCE RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE