JUN WU & JUAN CARLOS IZPISUA BELMONTE P luripotency , defined as the ability of a cell to generate all cell types in the adult organism , is a transient feature of early embryonic development . Two distinct pluripotent cell types can be isolated from embryos and cultured in vitro 1 – 4 — naive cells , called embryonic stem cells , and those primed for differentiation , epiblast stem cells . Furthermore , a defined cocktail of transcrip - tion factors , called reprogramming factors , can reinstate pluripotency when introduced into mature cells , producing induced pluripotent stem cells ( iPSCs ) 5 – 7 . In addition to known pluripotent cell types 5 , 8 , iPSC generation yields a spectrum of distinct cell types , hinting at the existence of uncharacterized pluripotent states . A collection of five manuscripts ( two in this issue 9 , 10 and three in Nature Commu - nications 11 – 13 ) , now uncover and characterize an alternative pluripotent outcome of iPSC reprogramming : F - class cells ( Fig . 1 ) . These five manuscripts are part of an inter - national collaboration called Project Gran - diose , in which the researchers set out to reanalyse the process of iPSC reprogramming from an unbiased perspective . They reasoned that , by extensively documenting the molecu - lar and cellular transitions occurring at each stage of the process , they could provide both the first thorough roadmap for iPSC repro - gramming , and an explanation for the emer - gence during reprogramming of undefined pluripotent cell types , which have been mostly overlooked by previous studies . In the first paper , Tonge et al . 9 ( page 192 ) identify F - class cells — named because of their unusual , fuzzy - looking colony mor - phology — as a pluripotent cell type distinct from embryonic stem cells ( ES cells ) and epiblast stem cells . Maintenance of F - class cells depends on continuing high expression of reprogramming factors . In conventional reprogramming methods , the expression of introduced genes ( transgenes ) is silenced by factors that are expressed in the host cells once pluripotency is achieved , and thus F - class cells could not have been identified in those assays . The researchers’ use of a host - factor - independent reprogramming method bypasses transgene silencing and thereby allows sustained high - level expression of reprogramming factors 14 . Tonge and colleagues report that the fuzzy morphology of F - class cells arises from their low adhesiveness , which , along with their fast proliferation , makes these cells more amena - ble to large - scale production than ES cells . This is a desirable feature for cell - based therapies , which demand large quantities of specific cell types . For example , pancreatic β - cells , which store and release insulin , can be derived from pluripotent cells and might be used to treat people with diabetes 15 . However , F - class cells’ dependence on transgenes could be problematic for their safe clinical applica - tion , because mutations arising from either improper transgene insertion into the genome or incomplete inactivation of reprogramming factors when the cells begin differentiation might ultimately lead to tumour formation . One solution might be to stabilize the F - state independent of transgenes , using small mol - ecules . This strategy has been successful for stabilizing naive - like human pluripotent stem cells 16 , 17 . Tonge et al . show that ES - like cells convert to the F - state following forced expres - sion of reprogramming factors . Conversely , F - class cells can be converted to an ES - cell - like state using small molecules that inhibit the activity of a class of enzymes called histone deacetylases , which modulate gene expression by removing acetyl molecules from the histone proteins around which DNA is packaged . Such interconvertibility may lead to insights STEM CELLS A designer’s guide to pluripotency Pluripotent stem cells , which give rise to almost all cell types , can be engineered from mature cells . A thorough analysis of the process has led to the characterization of a new type of pluripotent cell . See Articles p . 192 & p . 198 E5 . 5 Embryo Stem - cell culture Mature - cell culture ES cells Low levels of reprogrammingfactors High levels of reprogrammingfactors EpiSCs E3 . 5 F - class cells ? ? ? Figure 1 | Different flavours of pluripotency . Two distinct types of pluripotent stem cell have been captured from early mouse embryos for culture in vitro — embryonic stem cells ( ES cells ) from embryos at three - and - a - half days old ( E3 . 5 ) , and epiblast stem cells ( EpiSCs ) from embryos at E5 . 5 . The pluripotent - cell populations in each embryo are shown in blue . These two cell types can also be induced from mature cells through cellular reprogramming using low levels of reprogramming factors . Five papers 9 – 13 from Project Grandiose investigate the molecular details of cellular reprogramming , and uncover a new type of pluripotent cell , dubbed F - class , which depends on sustained , high - level expression of reprogramming factors . This discovery hints at the potential that other , unidentified pluripotent states exist ( marked with a question mark ) , and might either be generated by engineering or be present in the early embryo . 1 7 2 | N AT U R E | V O L 5 1 6 | 1 1 D E C E M B E R 2 0 1 4 NEWS & VIEWS © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved ROHIT N . KARNIK T he two - dimensional material graphene is often depicted as a hexagonal mesh of carbon atoms , with plenty of space between its atoms . But in reality , the finite size of the carbon atoms leaves little room for anything to slip through . In 2008 , a classic experiment 1 revealed that pristine graphene is impermeable to helium and other gases at room temperature , making it the thinnest barrier known to science . The results logically extend to other two - dimensional materials , including hexagonal boron nitride ( hBN ) and molybdenum disulphide ( MoS 2 ) . By contrast , in a paper published in this issue ( page 227 ) , Hu et al . 2 present the unexpected finding that graphene and hBN — but not MoS 2 — are excellent conductors of protons across their two - dimensional structure . The authors measured the electric current across micrometre - sized flakes of graphene , hBN or MoS 2 sandwiched between two layers of a polymer that conducts protons when hydrated ( that is , in the presence of water ) . In the absence of other charge carriers , the measured current is a direct indicator of pro - ton transport . Hu and colleagues detected substantial current across graphene , and an even higher current across hBN , but no cur - rent across MoS 2 — indicating that graphene and hBN conduct protons , but MoS 2 does not . Any contribution to the proton conduc - tivity from defects in the two - dimensional materials can be ruled out , because the results were remarkably repeatable across differ - ent experiments and because the researchers carefully characterized the materials . The same conductivities were obtained when aqueous hydrochloric acid — a source of protons — was placed on either side of the materials , show - ing that the proton conductivity was a general effect and was not limited to the experiment with polymer layers . Hu and co - workers went on to show that bilayers and trilayers of hBN conduct protons , albeit with reduced conduc - tivity compared with mono layers . However , in the case of graphene , even one extra layer entirely obliterates proton conductivity , so that bilayer graphene is essentially impermeable . The observed proton conductivities — or lack thereof — can be explained by the electron - density distribution in the into how pluripotency is stabilized in distinct cellular contexts . In the second paper , Hussein et al . 10 ( page 198 ) define the different molecular routes to pluripotency by performing the most detailed analysis of reprogramming so far . Among other findings , the authors uncover key determinants for the emergence of ES - cell - like or F - class states . Emergence of the F - class state relies on repression of genes that are expressed in ES cells . This is achieved through a molecular modification associated with gene repression — the attachment of three methyl molecules to an amino - acid residue , lysine 27 , of histone H3 proteins . By contrast , the loss of the DNA methylation marks inherited from mature cells is necessary for cells to take on an ES - cell - like state , but some of these marks are retained in F - class cells . The remaining three studies complement Hussein and colleagues’ work by providing descriptive , in - depth analyses of the changes in molecular pathways en route to pluripo - tency , generating large data sets that are freely available at www . stemformatics . org . Lee et al . 11 interrogate the epigenetic changes ( those modifications to the genome that affect gene expression without altering DNA sequence ) that occur during the transition to pluripo - tency . They conclude that DNA methylation has a crucial role in iPSC reprogramming and acts as an epigenetic switch between F - class and ES - cell - like states . Clancy and colleagues 12 delineate the dynamic changes in small RNAs — post - transcriptional regula - tors of gene expression — during iPSC repro - gramming , and find that a distinct group of microRNAs supports the F - class pluripotency program . Finally , Benevento et al . 13 show that reorganization of protein expression occurs in two defined waves during cellular repro - gramming . The authors show that patterns of protein expression differ between ES - cell - like and F - class states . These five manuscripts mark the first steps towards understanding F - class pluripotency and thus towards making the most of their clinical potential . The molecular mechanisms underpinning the F - state warrant further investigation , as do the metabolic cues that contribute to sustaining F - class cells , because different pluripotent stem cells probably have distinct metabolic requirements 18 . Remaining questions include whether human F - class cells can be generated through cellular reprogram - ming , and if functional differentiated cells can be obtained from F - class cells . In embracing the inherent artificiality of iPSC reprogramming , Project Grandiose has opened up the field to fresh avenues of research . This work shows that a third pluripo - tent state can be engineered in vitro , and it may be that there are other pluripotent endpoints of reprogramming ( Fig . 1 ) . Moreover , there may be other pluripotent states in the developing embryo . If there are , it would be interesting to determine whether such states could be cap - tured and cultured in vitro . To investigate these avenues , an unbiased approach , such as that taken by Tonge et al . , will probably prevail . Looking ahead , customized stem cells designed for specific applications — such as large - scale expansion , or fast , synchronized differentiation — may soon become a reality . The existence of alternative pluripotent states adds another dimension to the potential of pluripotent stem cells in regenerative medi - cine . The results of Project Grandiose call for future work that catalogues myriad molecu - larly and functionally distinct pluripotent stem cells to harness their full potential . ■ Jun Wu and Juan Carlos Izpisua Belmonte are in the Gene Expression Laboratory , Salk Institute for Biological Studies , La Jolla , California 92037 , USA . e - mail : belmonte @ salk . edu 1 . Evans , M . J . & Kaufman , M . H . Nature 292 , 154 – 156 ( 1981 ) . 2 . Martin , G . R . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 78 , 7634 – 7638 ( 1981 ) . 3 . Brons , I . G . et al . Nature 448 , 191 – 195 ( 2007 ) . 4 . Tesar , P . J . et al . Nature 448 , 196 – 199 ( 2007 ) . 5 . Takahashi , K . & Yamanaka , S . Cell 126 , 663 – 676 ( 2006 ) . 6 . Shu , J . et al . Cell 153 , 963 – 975 ( 2013 ) . 7 . Montserrat , N . et al . Cell Stem Cell 13 , 351 – 350 ( 2013 ) . 8 . Han , D . W . et al . Nature Cell Biol . 13 , 66 – 71 ( 2010 ) . 9 . Tonge , P . D . et al . Nature 516 , 192 – 197 ( 2014 ) . 10 . Hussein , S . M . I . et al . Nature 516 , 198 – 206 ( 2014 ) . 11 . Lee , D . S . et al . Nature Commun . 5 , 5619 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms6619 ( 2014 ) . 12 . Clancy , J . L . et al . Nature Commun . 5 , 5522 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms6522 ( 2014 ) . 13 . Benevento , M . et al . Nature Commun . 5 , 5613 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms6613 ( 2014 ) . 14 . Woltjen , K . et al . Nature 458 , 766 – 770 ( 2009 ) . 15 . Pagliuca , F . W . et al . Cell 159 , 428 – 438 ( 2014 ) . 16 . Gafni , O . et al . Nature 504 , 282 – 286 ( 2013 ) . 17 . Theunissen , T . W . et al . Cell Stem Cell 15 , 471 – 487 ( 2014 ) . 18 . Zhou , W . et al . EMBO J . 31 , 2103 – 2116 ( 2012 ) . MATERIALS SCIENCE Breakthrough for protons The atomically thin material called graphene is impermeable to atoms as small as helium . The finding that protons can pass through it might enable new kinds of membrane to be developed and aid research into fuel cells . See Letter p . 227 1 1 D E C E M B E R 2 0 1 4 | V O L 5 1 6 | N AT U R E | 1 7 3 NEWS & VIEWS RESEARCH © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved