Mammalian twinﬁlin sequesters ADP - G - actin and caps ﬁlament barbed ends : implications in motility Emmanue ` le Helfer 1 , 3 , Elisa M Nevalainen 2 , 3 , Perttu Naumanen 2 , Ste´phane Romero 1 , Dominique Didry 1 , Dominique Pantaloni 1 , Pekka Lappalainen 2 , * and Marie - France Carlier 1 , * 1 Cytoskeleton Dynamics and Motility , LEBS , CNRS , Gif - sur - Yvette , France and 2 Institute of Biotechnology , University of Helsinki , Finland Twinﬁlins are conserved actin - binding proteins composed of two actin depolymerizing factor homology ( ADF - H ) domains . Twinﬁlins are involved in diverse morphological and motile processes , but their mechanism of action has not been elucidated . Here , we show that mammalian twinﬁlin both sequesters ADP - G - actin and caps ﬁlament barbed ends with preferential afﬁnity for ADP - bound ends . Twinﬁlin replaces capping protein and promotes motility of N - WASP functionalized beads in a biomimetic motility assay , indicating that the capping activity supports twinﬁ - lin’s function in motility . Consistently , in vivo twinﬁlin localizes to actin tails of propelling endosomes . The ADP - actin - sequestering activity cooperates with the ﬁlament capping activity of twinﬁlin to ﬁnely regulate motility due to processive ﬁlament assembly catalyzed by formin - func - tionalized beads . The isolated ADF - H domains do not cap barbed ends nor promote motility , but sequester ADP - actin , the C - terminal domain showing the highest afﬁnity . A structural model for binding of twinﬁlin to barbed ends is proposed based on the similar foldings of twinﬁlin ADF - H domains and gelsolin segments . The EMBO Journal ( 2006 ) 25 , 1184 – 1195 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . emboj . 7601019 ; Published online 2 March 2006 Subject Categories : cell & tissue architecture Keywords : actin ; ADF homology domains ; capping proteins ; motility ; twinﬁlin Introduction Twinﬁlin is an evolutionarily conserved actin - binding protein involved in motile and morphological processes from yeast to mammals . Twinﬁlin plays a nonessential regulatory role in turnover of cortical actin patches in Saccharomyces cerevisiae ( Goode et al , 1998 ) , is required for developmental processes in Drosophila ( Wahlstrom et al , 2001 ) , and is important in clathrin - mediated endocytosis and distribution of endocytic organelles in mammalian cells ( Pelkmans et al , 2005 ) . At least in yeast and mammals , twinﬁlin is a highly abundant protein and it localizes to regions of rapid actin dynamics in cells ( Vartiainen et al , 2000 , 2003 ; Palmgren et al , 2001 ) . Twinﬁlin is composed of two actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) homology ( ADF - H ) domains ( Paavilainen et al , 2002 ) . Like ADF , twinﬁlin shows preferential binding to ADP - actin , but at variance with ADF , it does not bind F - actin but instead makes a 1 : 1 complex with G - actin only ( Ojala et al , 2002 ) . Hence , twinﬁlin cannot act like ADF by accelerating ﬁlament treadmilling . Twinﬁlin inhibits actin polymerization , likely by sequestering G - actin ( Ojala et al , 2002 ) . Twinﬁlin also interacts with capping protein ( CP ) and at least in yeasts S . cerevisiae and Shizosaccharomyces pombe this interaction is essential for twinﬁlin’s localization to the cortical actin cytoskeleton , although binding of twinﬁlin leaves the func - tion of CP unchanged ( Vartiainen et al , 2003 ; Falck et al , 2004 ; Kovar et al , 2005 ) . However , G - actin sequestering and CP binding cannot satisfactorily explain how twinﬁlin con - tributes to actin dynamics and various motile processes in cells . Furthermore , the function of the N - terminal ADF - H domain of mammalian twinﬁlin has remained enigmatic , because both the CP binding and G - actin sequestering acti - vities were shown to reside at the C - terminal half of the protein ( Ojala et al , 2002 ; Falck et al , 2004 ) , while G - actin binding by other twinﬁlins requires both ADF - H domains . Here we analyze the effects of mammalian twinﬁlin on actin assembly dynamics in vitro and using biomimetic actin - based motility assays ( Loisel et al , 1999 ; Romero et al , 2004 ) . We demonstrate that it is by capping the barbed ends of ﬁlaments that mammalian twinﬁlin regulates motility , and show that both ADF - H domains are required for this activity . Our data also suggest that this property , which adds to the actin - sequestering activity of twinﬁlin , emerged at the vertebrate stage in evolution . Results Yeast , Drosophila and mouse twinﬁlins sequester ADP - G - actin in solutions of F - actin assembled at steady state in ATP All twinﬁlins bind ADP - G - actin with higher afﬁnity than ATP - G - actin ; however , in the ATP - rich physiological medium , the form of actin that is sequestered by twinﬁlin is not known . The following experiment demonstrates that essentially ADP - G - actin is sequestered by yeast or mouse twinﬁlin ( Figure 1 , the same result was established for Drosophila twinﬁlin in an independent experiment ) . Filament growth was seeded by gelsolin - actin seeds in the presence or absence of twinﬁlin or thymosin b 4 as a regular sequesterer of ATP - G - actin speciﬁ - cally ( Carlier et al , 1993 ) . Growth proceeded monotonously up to a steady - state plateau for actin alone and to a lower plateau in the presence of thymosin b 4 . In contrast , in the presence of twinﬁlin , the initial growth was followed by extensive depolymerization . This biphasic behavior is not compatible with sequestration of ATP - G - actin only . Since ATP Received : 30 June 2005 ; accepted : 2 February 2006 ; published online : 2 March 2006 * Corresponding authors . M - F Carlier , Dynamique du Cytosquelette , LEBS , CNRS , Gif - sur - Yvette F - 91198 , France . Tel . : þ 33 1 69 82 34 65 ; Fax : þ 33 1 69 82 341 29 ; E - mail : carlier @ lebs . cnrs - gif . fr or P Lappalainen , Institute of Biotechnology , University of Helsinki , Finland . Tel . : þ 358 9 191 59499 ; E - mail : Pelappal @ operoni . helsinki . ﬁ 3 These authors equally contributed to the work The EMBO Journal ( 2006 ) 25 , 1184 – 1195 | & 2006 European Molecular Biology Organization | All Rights Reserved 0261 - 4189 / 06 www . embojournal . org The EMBO Journal VOL 25 | NO 6 | 2006 & 2006 European Molecular Biology Organization EMBO THE EMBO JOURNAL THE EMBO JOURNAL 1184 is hydrolyzed as ﬁlament growth proceeds , the presence of dissociable ADP - actin during growth at ﬁlament pointed ends allows twinﬁlin to promote endwise depolymerization of ﬁlaments through tight binding and sequestration of ADP - G - actin . Actin is sequestered mainly in ADP - bound form because ( 1 ) twinﬁlin has B 10 - fold higher afﬁnity for ADP - than for ATP - actin ( Ojala et al , 2002 ) ; ( 2 ) nucleotide exchange is very slow in twinﬁlin - actin ( Goode et al , 1998 ; Vartiainen et al , 2003 ) ; ( 3 ) twinﬁlin does not dissociate fast enough from actin to recycle ATP - actin ( the dissociation rate constant for mouse twinﬁlin - 1 : ADP - G - actin complex under physiological ionic conditions at 20 1 C is 1 . 8s (cid:2) 1 ( Ojala et al , 2002 ) ; ( 4 ) twinﬁlin - ADP - actin , at variance with ADF - ADP - actin ( Carlier et al , 1997 ) , does not polymerize . Twinﬁlin caps ﬁlament barbed ends The effect of mouse twinﬁlin - 1 on actin dynamics at the two ends of actin ﬁlaments was analyzed . Twinﬁlin inhi - bited growth totally at either end in a saturation manner ( Figure 2A ) . Sequestering of ATP - G - actin by twinﬁlin well accounted for inhibition of pointed end growth . In addition , twinﬁlin showed a slight pointed end nucleation activity in the range of 0 to 1 m M . The data were consistent with the formation of a twinﬁlin - ATP - G - actin complex ( K T of about 2 – 3 m M ) that did not support pointed end growth . The value of K T is similar to the one derived from the two - fold increase in the ﬂuorescence of pyrenyl - labeled ATP - G - actin upon binding twinﬁlin ( Falck et al , 2004 ) . In contrast , twinﬁlin inhibited barbed end growth in a range of concentrations substoichiometric to G - actin . These data are not consistent with the sequestration of actin by twinﬁlin observed at pointed ends and suggest that twinﬁlin could inhibit ﬁlament growth by blocking barbed ends . Like other barbed end CPs , twinﬁlin inhibited dilution - induced depolymerization of F - actin at the barbed ends ( Figure 2B ) . The afﬁnity of twinﬁlin for barbed ends was one order of magnitude higher in the depolymerization ( K F ¼ 13nM ) than in the growth assay ( K F ¼ 0 . 1 – 0 . 3 m M with different preparations of twinﬁlin ) , indicating that twin - ﬁlin caps barbed ends with a higher afﬁnity when terminal F - actin subunits have bound ADP ( in depolymerizing regime ) than ATP or ADP - Pi ( growth regime ) . Consistently , dilution - induced depolymerization of AMPPNP - F - actin in an F buffer containing AMPPNP ( a non - hydrolyzable analog of ATP ) was inhibited by twinﬁlin with a 10 - fold lower afﬁnity ( K F ¼ 150nM , Figure 2B ) . The pointed end nucleating activity of twinﬁlin observed in growth assays ( Figure 2A ) is fully consistent with the barbed end capping activity of twinﬁlin . To evaluate the barbed end capping of twinﬁlin indepen - dently of its G - actin sequestering activity , we measured the effect of twinﬁlin on barbed end growth from proﬁlin - actin ( Figure 2C ) . Proﬁlin , which has a 20 - fold higher afﬁnity than twinﬁlin for ATP - G - actin , was used at a much larger concen - tration than twinﬁlin , so that all G - actin is proﬁlin - actin ( consistently , the data were identical in the presence of a twice larger amount of proﬁlin ) . The rate of barbed end growth from proﬁlin - actin is only 30 % lower than from G - actin ( Gutsche - Perelroizen et al , 1999 ) . Once normalized , the dependence of the growth rate on twinﬁlin concentration was almost identical in the absence or presence of proﬁlin , testifying that the capping activity of twinﬁlin accounts for about 80 % of the inhibition of barbed end growth . The data were analyzed ( see Materials and methods ) assuming that twinﬁlin caps barbed ends , and the twinﬁlin – ATP – G - actin complex does not assemble at either barbed or pointed ends . The best ﬁt was obtained for values of K T of 3 m M for binding of twinﬁlin to ATP - G - actin and K F of 0 . 2 m M for binding of twinﬁlin - actin to barbed ends . In the presence of an excess proﬁlin , the data were well ﬁtted assuming that twinﬁlin only caps barbed ends ( K F ¼ 0 . 6 m M ) . The effect of twinﬁlin on the steady state of actin assembly was measured when barbed ends were free or gelsolin - capped ( Figure 3A ) . Twinﬁlin caused a linear decrease in F - actin and eventually totally depolymerized F - actin . When barbed ends were free , the data showed an initial steep decline until they reached and superimposed the straight line observed for depolymerization of gelsolin - capped ﬁla - ments . A comprehensive interpretation of all data in Figures 1 – 3 is that twinﬁlin caps barbed ends ( the steep initial decline in F - actin is due to the increase in critical concentration ) and sequesters G - actin mainly in the ADP - bound form , thus resulting in identical depolymerization in the presence or absence of gelsolin . The effect of proﬁlin on F - actin at steady state in the presence of twinﬁlin was measured with free or capped barbed ends ( Figure 3B ) . When barbed ends were capped , proﬁlin and twinﬁlin sequestered G - actin in an additive manner . When barbed ends were free , addition of increasing amounts of proﬁlin failed to cause total depolymerization of F - actin , in the presence as well as in the absence of twinﬁlin . Instead , in the presence of twinﬁlin , F - actin was maintained by proﬁlin - actin at a steady - state concentration . The steady level of F - actin at saturation by proﬁlin decreased upon increasing the concentration of twinﬁlin ( data not shown ) . These data indicate that twinﬁlin fails to cap 100 % of the barbed ends . Hence , proﬁlin does not sequester G - actin . The Figure 1 All twinﬁlins sequester predominantly ADP - G - actin at steady state in solutions of F - actin containing ATP . Polymerization of actin ( 2 . 5 m M ) was seeded by gelsolin - actin ( 6nM ) , with the following additions : black : none ; blue : 5 m M thymosin b 4 ; red : 5 . 4 m M mammalian twinﬁlin ; green : 5 . 1 m M yeast twinﬁlin . Twinﬁlin caps actin ﬁlament barbed ends E Helfer et al & 2006 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 25 | NO 6 | 2006 1185 few barbed ends that remain free are maintained in a dyna - mic state by proﬁlin - actin . In other words , twinﬁlin and proﬁlin synergize in tuning the steady state of actin assembly . As will be explored in greater detail below , the maintenance of free barbed ends arises from the actin - sequestering activity of twinﬁlin . Role of twinﬁlin in actin - based motility The role of mammalian twinﬁlin in motility was addressed using a biomimetic motility assay . N - WASP - coated beads were placed in a motility mix ( Loisel et al , 1999 ) containing actin , Arp2 / 3 , a capping protein ( e . g . gelsolin ) , ADF and proﬁlin . These proteins are conﬁrmed to be essential in lamellipodium motility ( Rogers et al , 2003 ) . Twinﬁlin was added to the standard medium , or challenged for its ability to replace a component of the medium . Addidion of twinﬁlin to the optimized motility medium did not affect the rate of propulsion nor the morphology of actin tails ( Figure 4A and D ) . Twinﬁlin was unable to replace ADF in the motility mix , thus conﬁrming biochemical data ( Ojala et al , 2002 ) . In contrast , twinﬁlin replaced gelsolin or CP and induced actin - based propulsion of beads in a medium con - taining no capper , as efﬁciently as CP or gelsolin ( Figure 4B and C and Supplementary movie M1 ) . On addition of increas - ing amounts of twinﬁlin , as observed with gelsolin ( Pantaloni et al , 2000 ) , bead - associated actin structures changed from asters to actin tails with a ﬁshbone pattern , followed by regular actin tails and rapid movement ( Figure 4B ) . In the absence of both ADF and capper , only few beads ( 10 % ) moved very slowly ( 0 . 37 7 0 . 21 m m / min ) and the actin tails elongated without depolymerizing ; addition of either twin - ﬁlin or CP or gelsolin caused an identical slight increase in velocity ( Figure 4C ) . In summary , twinﬁlin behaves as a bona ﬁde barbed end capper in the above assays . Twinﬁlin is known to bind CP , but the functional signiﬁ - cance of the interaction is unknown . To address this issue , twinﬁlin was added to a motility medium containing sub - optimal amounts of either CP , gelsolin or CapG as standard cappers ( Figure 4D ) . Twinﬁlin supplemented the low levels of any one of the three cappers and enhanced motility with equal efﬁciency , demonstrating that the effect of twinﬁlin in motility is independent of its interaction with CP . Consistently , addition of either gelsolin or CP to a suboptimal amount of twinﬁlin increases velocity identically ( Figure 4E ) . At this point , the physiological signiﬁcance of the interaction between twinﬁlin and CP remains enigmatic . Barbed end capping and G - actin sequestering activities of mouse twinﬁlin ﬁnely tune formin - induced processive ﬁlament assembly Actin - based motile processes are also driven by formins , which catalyze rapid processive barbed end assembly of ﬁlaments . Capping proteins play different roles in N - WASP - Figure 2 Twinﬁlin inhibits actin assembly with different mechan - isms at barbed ends and pointed ends . ( A ) Barbed end growth ( closed circles ) and pointed end growth ( open circles ) were initiated with 2 . 5 m M G - actin ( 10 % pyrenyl - labeled ) and twinﬁlin as indi - cated . The initial rates were normalized to the value of 1 measured in the absence of twinﬁlin . Note that the observed inhibition is stronger than expected within this model in a range of low twinﬁlin concentration : all data points are below the dotted line that repre - sents sequestration expected if twinﬁlin bound G - actin with inﬁnite afﬁnity . The red line is consistent with barbed end capping by twinﬁlin with a value of K F of 0 . 2 m M and ATP - G - actin sequestration with a value of K T of 2 m M ( Equation ( 4 ) ) . In contrast , the effect of twinﬁlin at pointed ends is accounted for by nucleation of new pointed ends and sequestration of actin in a 1 : 1 complex with K T ¼ 2 – 3 m M . ( B ) Twinﬁlin inhibits dilution - induced depolymeriza - tion of F - ADP - actin ( closed circles ) or F - AMPPNP - actin ( open circles ) at barbed ends with high afﬁnity . Filaments ( 2 . 5 m M F - actin , 75 % pyrenyl - labeled ) were diluted 80 - fold in polymeriza - tion buffer containing twinﬁlin at the indicated concentrations . The line is the theoretical curve used to ﬁt the data with a model in which twinﬁlin caps ADP - bound barbed ends ( Equation ( 3 ) ) with K F ¼ 13nM , and AMPPNP - bound barbed ends with K F ¼ 150nM . ( C ) Barbed end capping by twinﬁlin inhibits barbed end growth from proﬁlin - actin . Barbed end growth was initiated by spectrin - actin seeds ( conditions as in Figure 1a ) in the presence of 3 m M G - actin with ( open circles ) or without ( closed circles ) 15 m M proﬁlin and twinﬁlin as indicated . The curve ﬁtting data in the absence of proﬁlin is calculated according to Equation ( 4 ) assuming that twinﬁlin caps barbed ends ( K F ¼ 0 . 2 m M ) and sequesters ATP - G - actin ( K T ¼ 4 m M ) . The curve ﬁtting data in the presence of proﬁlin is calculated according to Equation ( 6 ) assuming that twinﬁlin only caps barbed ends ( K F ¼ 0 . 6 m M ) . Twinﬁlin caps actin ﬁlament barbed ends E Helfer et al The EMBO Journal VOL 25 | NO 6 | 2006 & 2006 European Molecular Biology Organization 1186 Arp2 / 3 and formin machineries . They are essential for main - tenance of a densely branched actin network generated by WAVE - or N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 ( Wiesner et al , 2003 ) , but cause arrest of formin - induced movements by binding to barbed ends in competition with formins ( Higashida et al , 2004 ; Romero et al , 2004 ) . We addressed the role of twinﬁlin in formin - induced motility in comparison with CP , using the FH1 – FH2 domain of mDia1 ( Figure 5 ) . FH1 – FH2 - coated beads initiated processive ﬁlament assembly in a solution of actin and proﬁlin ( Romero et al , 2004 ) and displayed a high density of attached ﬁlaments after 2 h ( Figure 5A , left panel ) . When twinﬁlin was present , after 2h about 100 - fold less ﬁlaments were attached ( 6 7 3 ﬁlaments per bead , aver - age of 20 beads ) , while many ﬁlaments are present in the solution ( Figure 5A , right panel ) . The time course of ﬁlament dissociation from the bead after addition of twinﬁlin ( Figure 5B and Movie M2 ) conﬁrms that twinﬁlin caps ﬁlaments in competition with formin ; however , processive assembly of a small number of ﬁlaments ( 0 . 9 m m / min ) is still observed at late times . In a second experiment , FH1 – FH2 - coated beads moved rapidly in a solution of F - actin maintained at a steady state in the presence of proﬁlin and ADF . CP , like gelsolin ( Romero et al , 2004 ) , transiently enhanced propulsion , by increasing the steady - state concentration of G - actin linked to barbed end capping in the medium , and eventually caused arrest of movement due to capping of the formin - bound barbed ends . Addition of twinﬁlin also increased the rate of propul - sion , consistent with twinﬁlin capping the barbed ends of ﬁlaments in the medium ; however , movement was never arrested , even though the number of ﬁlaments that formed the actin tail decreased ( Figure 5C and D ) . The phenotype of maintained movement differentiates twinﬁlin from other barbed end capping proteins . On further increasing twinﬁlin up to concentrations that caused complete depolymerization of ﬁlaments in the medium , efﬁcient processive actin assem - bly from FH1 – FH2 beads resumed , large actin tails were again formed causing bead propulsion ( Figure 5C , bottom panel ) . A straightforward explanation for the above observations is derived from twinﬁlin’s additive ADP - actin sequestering and barbed end capping activities . The initial increase in velocity and concomitant decrease in the number of bead - attached ﬁlaments is consistent with the capping activity of twinﬁlin . In this experimental context , twinﬁlin additionally causes depolymerization of ﬁlaments present in the motility medium and increasingly sequesters ADP – G - actin . The sequestering activity of twinﬁlin buffers the concentration of free twinﬁlin and establishes a ‘ground level’ of free barbed ends , resulting in maintenance of active processive barbed end growth and motility of formin - coated beads . This effect is quantitatively modeled in Figure 5E ( see Materials and methods for model ) . When enough twinﬁlin has been added to totally depolymerize the ﬁlaments , which were initially maintained at a steady state in the motility medium , ADP - actin is not longer produced . ATP - G - actin then forms , it binds less tightly than ADP - actin to twinﬁlin and interacts with proﬁlin to feed rapid processive growth off the formin - coated beads . Both ADF - H domains of twinﬁlin are required for barbed end capping Twinﬁlin is composed of two actin - binding ADF - H domains separated by a short linker and followed by a 35 - residue C - terminal extension that binds CP ( Falck et al , 2004 ) . The strong G - actin binding and sequestering activity reside in twinﬁlin’s C - terminal ADF - H domain , whereas the N - term - inal domain has a relatively modest afﬁnity for G - actin ( Ojala et al , 2002 ) . Insight into the putative role of each of the two ADF - H domains in the barbed end capping activity of full - length mouse twinﬁlin was obtained by assaying the effect of each domain on actin dynamics at barbed and pointed ends . Figure 3 Combined effects of proﬁlin and twinﬁlin on actin assem - bly at barbed and pointed ends . ( A ) Effect of twinﬁlin on actin assembly at steady state with free or capped barbed ends . Actin ( 3 . 1 m M , 5 % pyrenyl - labeled ) was polymerized in the absence ( closed circles ) or presence ( open circles ) of gelsolin at a 1 : 300 gelsolin : actin molar ratio , and twinﬁlin as indicated . ( B ) Twinﬁlin and proﬁlin sequester actin in an additive manner when barbed ends are capped . In the absence of capping protein , the combined capping and sequestering activities of twinﬁlin allow proﬁlin to maintain barbed end dynamics . Actin ( 3 . 45 m M ) was assembled at steady state in the absence ( circles ) or in the presence ( triangles ) of gelsolin ( 10nM ) . Closed symbols : no twinﬁlin ; open symbols : 1 m M twinﬁlin . Twinﬁlin caps actin ﬁlament barbed ends E Helfer et al & 2006 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 25 | NO 6 | 2006 1187 Constructs used included the N - terminal ADF - H domain with the linker , and the C - terminal ADF - H domain with or without the linker . All three ADF - H constructs inhibited barbed and pointed end growth with almost identical efﬁciencies , consistent with sole ATP - G - actin sequestering activity and absence of barbed end capping activity . The N - terminal ADF - H domain showed about 10 - fold lower afﬁnity than the C - terminal ADF - H domains for ATP - G - actin ( Figure 6A ) . Steady - state measurements of F - actin conﬁrmed that both the N - terminal and C - terminal ADF - H domains caused depolymerization of F - actin ( Figure 6B and C ) . Consistent with the polymerization assays , neither the N - terminal nor the C - terminal ADF - H domains of twinﬁlin affected actin - based motility of N - WASP - coated beads in the standard motility assay , nor were they able to induce bead movement , at concentrations up to 2 m M , in a medium containing no CP ( Supplementary Figure S1 ) . Neither one was able to replace ADF in the motility assay . In conclusion , the isolated ADF - H domains of twinﬁlin possess the actin - sequestering but not the capping activity of twinﬁlin and fail to act like twinﬁlin in motility . Thus , the barbed end capping activity of twinﬁlin requires the two ADF - H domains and is essential in motile processes . Mouse twinﬁlin contributes to actin - dependent motility of endocytic vesicles In vivo experiments addressed the physiological conse - quences of the barbed end capping activity of twinﬁlin in motility . Twinﬁlin localizes to the regions of rapid actin dynamics such as the leading edge of motile cells , but its possible contribution to motile processes has not been demonstrated . Instead , RNAi studies on Drosophila S2 cells provided evidence that twinﬁlin is not crucial to actin - depen - dent lamella formation ( Rogers et al , 2003 ) . Because twinﬁlin regulates the motility of N - WASP - coated beads ( Figure 4 ) and because N - WASP is involved in actin - based vesicular trans - port ( Innocenti et al , 2005 ) , we examined twinﬁlin’s contri - bution to transferrin uptake . In NIH 3T3 cells , endogenous twinﬁlin was found in dot - like structures that co - localized with actin tails of transferrin - positive particles . Virtually , all ( 4 95 % ) transferrin particles that were positive for F - actin , labeled with twinﬁlin . In contrast , twinﬁlin was absent from transferrin particles that did not co - localize with F - actin , indicating that twinﬁlin is speciﬁcally associated with endo - somes that are driven by actin - based motility ( Figure 7A ) . Together with recent studies showing that subcellular distri - bution of endocytotic vesicles was severely defective in Figure 4 Mammalian twinﬁlin acts as a barbed end capping protein in motility . ( A ) Twinﬁlin does not change the morphology of actin tails when added to the optimized motility medium ( 90nM gelsolin ) . Bar ¼ 50 m m . ( B ) Twinﬁlin supplements for a capping protein when it is added to the gelsolin - free motility medium . In the absence of gelsolin , N - WASP - coated beads do not move and initiate asters . Beads move with polarized actin tails upon addition of mammalian twinﬁlin . ( C ) Twinﬁlin ( black ) or capping protein ( blue ) or gelsolin ( red ) are equally efﬁcient as barbed end cappers to promote bead movement in the absence ( bottom curve ) or presence ( top curve ) of 9 m M ADF . ( D ) Bead velocity is not affected by addition of twinﬁlin to the optimized motility medium containing 90nM gelsolin ( black circles ) , but equally supplements suboptimal amounts ( 20nM ) of either gelsolin ( red ) , capping protein ( blue ) , or CapG ( green ) . The maximum velocity of B 5 m m / min is reached upon addition of twinﬁlin . ( E ) Gelsolin ( red ) or capping protein ( blue ) equally supplement the suboptimal effect of twinﬁlin present at 150nM in the motility medium . Twinﬁlin caps actin ﬁlament barbed ends E Helfer et al The EMBO Journal VOL 25 | NO 6 | 2006 & 2006 European Molecular Biology Organization 1188 twinﬁlin knockdown cells ( Pelkmans et al , 2005 ) , these data suggest that twinﬁlin is involved in actin - driven internaliza - tion or motility of endocytic vesicles . To elucidate the speciﬁc role of twinﬁlin in endocytosis , we examined the effects of various twinﬁlin constructs on trans - ferrin uptake . Myc - tagged twinﬁlin constructs were trans - Figure 5 Twinﬁlin maintains formin - induced processive ﬁlament assembly and motility using its barbed end capping and ADP - actin sequestering activities . ( A ) Twinﬁlin inhibits processive ﬁlament assembly from proﬁlin - actin catalyzed by bead - bound formin . FH1 – FH2 - coated beads ( 6 m m in diameter ) were placed in 0 . 4 m M rhodamine - F - actin , 4 m M proﬁlin , in the absence ( left panel ) or in the presence of 310nM twinﬁlin ( right panel ) , incubated for 2h and observed in ﬂuorescence microscopy . Bar ¼ 6 m m . ( B ) Time - lapse recording of the same beads , in the conditions described in panel A . Filaments gradually dissociate from the bead due to the capping activity of twinﬁlin ; however , a small number of ﬁlaments remain bound and grow at late times . Arrows point to a growing individual ﬁlament . Time is in minutes , bar ¼ 6 m m . ( C ) Effect of twinﬁlin on FH1 – FH2 - coated bead motility . Beads ( 3 m m in diameter ) were incubated in 7 m M F - actin , 14 m M ADF , 4 m M proﬁlin without twinﬁlin or with 0 . 3 m M or 5 . 8 m M twinﬁlin . Movement is not arrested by twinﬁlin , but the density of actin tails ﬁrst decreases ( middle panel ) then increases ( bottom panel ) upon increasing twinﬁlin . ( D ) Capping protein ( blue ) and Twinﬁlin ( red ) concentration dependence of the velocity ( closed circles , continuous lines ) and time of arrest ( open circles , dotted line ) of FH1 – FH2 coated beads ( no arrest of movement occurs with twinﬁlin ) . Other conditions are as under panel C . ( E ) Modeling of the combined effects of ADP - G - actin sequestration and barbed end capping activities of twinﬁlin ( see Materials and methods ) . Free barbed ends with capping only ( red continuous line ) or capping and sequestration ( blue continuous line ) ; free twinﬁlin assuming capping only ( red dashed line ) or capping and sequestration of G - actin ( blue dashed line ) , and concentrations of sequestered ADP - actin ( DT w , blue circles ) and ATP - actin ( TT w , blue squares ) . Curves are calculated using K F ¼ 10nM ; K T ¼ 2 m M ; K D ¼ 10nM ; k þ B ¼ 10 m M (cid:2) 1 s (cid:2) 1 ; k (cid:2) B ¼ 0 . 8s (cid:2) 1 ; k (cid:2) P ¼ 10s (cid:2) 1 , k þ P ¼ 10 m M (cid:2) 1 s (cid:2) 1 . The high values of rate constants at pointed ends account for the effect of ADF . Twinﬁlin caps actin ﬁlament barbed ends E Helfer et al & 2006 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 25 | NO 6 | 2006 1189 fected to NIH 3T3 cells and expressed for 16h under CMV promoter . Based on immunoﬂuorescence experiments using an anti - myc antibody , all constructs were expressed at com - parable levels in cells . Overexpression of wild - type twinﬁlin did not signiﬁcantly affect transferrin uptake ( Figure 7C ) . However , overexpression of either twinﬁlin’s isolated N - terminal ADF - H domain or C - terminal half ( including the C - terminal ADF - H domain and the tail - region ) interfered with subcellular distribution of transferrin vesicles . Transferrin showed perinuclear accumulation in wild - type cells , but punctate cytoplasmic staining in cells overexpressing twin - ﬁlin’s N - terminal or C - terminal ADF - H domain . The efﬁ - ciency of transferrin uptake was also severely reduced in these cells as compared to cells overexpressing wild - type twinﬁlin ( Figure 7B and C ) . These data suggest that twin - ﬁlin’s isolated ADF - H domains , which do not cap barbed ends , inhibit endocytosis by depolymerizing F - actin to a detrimental extent , due to their actin monomer sequestering activity . In support to this view , the effect of the isolated domains on endocytosis is similar to the effect of Latrunculin A , which efﬁciently sequesters G - actin and inhibits endo - cytosis ( Fujimoto et al , 2000 ) . Twinﬁlin , in contrast , does not inhibit endocytosis when it is overexpressed , because it not only sequesters G - actin but also caps the ﬁlaments . While the failure to cap barbed ends like full - length twinﬁlin , and the known actin - sequestering activity of the isolated domains of twinﬁlin are sufﬁcient to account for the results , we cannot eliminate other not known effects of these domains . Yeast and Drosophila twinﬁlins sequester ADP - G - actin but do not cap ﬁlament barbed ends We examined whether the twinﬁlins of lower eukaryotes like S . cerevisiae or Drosophila also possess a weak barbed end capping activity in addition to their known G - actin seques - tering activity . S . cerevisiae and Drosophila twinﬁlins both failed to show the high - afﬁnity inhibition of barbed end growth and depolymerization that characterized the barbed end capping activity of mammalian twinﬁlin . Only low - afﬁnity sequestration of ATP - G - actin was measured in a range of 0 – 50 m M ( Table I ) . Finally , the yeast and ﬂy twinﬁlins did not induce actin - based motility of N - WASP - coated beads in the reconstituted motility assay in the absence of CP ( Supplementary Figure S2 ) . In steady - state measurements of F - actin assembled in the presence or absence of gelsolin , yeast twinﬁlin depolymerized actin by sequestration of ADP - actin , exactly as found for mouse twinﬁlin ( displayed in Figure 3 ) , and in agreement with data shown in Figure 1 . Discussion Twinﬁlin has unique original properties as compared to known actin binding proteins . All twinﬁlins , from yeast to mammals , sequester ADP - G - actin with high afﬁnity under physiological conditions , that is , when ﬁlaments are assem - bled in the presence of ATP . Mammalian twinﬁlin , in addi - tion , caps ﬁlament barbed ends with a higher afﬁnity for ADP - bound terminal subunits . The barbed end cappping activity develops in the range of physiological concentrations of twinﬁlin ( 1 – 5 m M , Vartiainen et al , 2003 ) . Using yeast twinﬁlin and the isolated ADF - H domains of mouse twinﬁlin as references that only sequester G - actin , we show that the barbed end capping activity of mouse twinﬁlin is essential for its role in motile processes . In vitro motility assays based on N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 show that twinﬁlin’s effect is mediated by its Figure 6 The N - terminal and C - terminal ADFH domains of twinﬁlin sequester actin but do not cap ﬁlaments . ( A ) The two ADF - H domains of twinﬁlin inhibit actin assembly at barbed and pointed ends by sequestering actin . Initial rates of barbed ( closed circles ) or pointed end ( open circles ) growth were measured as under Figure 1A in the presence of twinﬁlin N - terminal ADF - H domain ( black ) or C - terminal ADF - H domain ( blue ) or the C - terminal domain with the linker ( red ) . Note the 10 - fold higher afﬁnity of the C - terminal domain ( see Table I ) . ( B ) The N - terminal ADF - H domain of twinﬁlin pos - sesses only a G - actin sequestering function . The steady - state amount of F - actin ( 1 . 5 m M ) was measured in the absence ( closed circles ) or presence ( open circles ) of gelsolin and the N - terminal ADF - H domain as indicated . The two lines drawn through the data points are consistent with sequestration of ATP - actin by the N - terminal ADF - H domain , with K T ¼ 28 m M , because the slopes are consistent with the equation [ SA ] ¼ [ S 0 ] . Ac / ( Ac þ K T ) , with K T ¼ 28 m M , Ac ¼ 0 . 1 m M at barbed ends and Ac ¼ 0 . 6 m M at pointed ends . ( C ) The C - terminal ADF - H domain of twinﬁlin sequesters actin when barbed ends are capped or noncapped . Conditions as under panel B , 2 m M actin . Depolymerization at pointed ends is consistent with sequestration of ATP - G - actin and K T ¼ 2 . 6 m M , in agreement with barbed end growth data ( Frame A and Table I ) . Depolymeri - zation at barbed ends is slightly more efﬁcient , suggesting seques - tration of G - actin in small part in ADP bound form also occurs . Twinﬁlin caps actin ﬁlament barbed ends E Helfer et al The EMBO Journal VOL 25 | NO 6 | 2006 & 2006 European Molecular Biology Organization 1190 capping activity . Similarly , we show that twinﬁlin’s role in internalization / transport of vesicles , which is also N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 dependent ( Innocenti et al , 2005 ) , is consistent with a capping function . If twinﬁlin simply sequestered actin , the complex would be freely diffusable and twinﬁlin would not localize in actin tails of endocytic vesicles . Thus , twinﬁlin is associated to F - actin either by capping barbed ends itself or by binding CP at barbed ends . In the future , twinﬁlin mutants with speciﬁc defects in barbed end capping will have to be identiﬁed . These site - directed mutants can then be used in RNAi and rescue experiments to conﬁrm the role of twin - ﬁlin’s activities in motile processes . Figure 7 Twinﬁlin is involved in receptor - mediated endocytosis . ( A ) Endogenous twinﬁlin - 1 localizes to F - actin - rich transferrin particles ( examples indicated with arrowheads ) , but is absent from transferrin particles that are not associated with F - actin ( arrows ) . NIH 3T3 cells were incubated for 20min in 15 m g / ml rhodamine - transferrin ( upper right panel ) , and stained with phalloidin ( upper left panel ) , and anti - twinﬁlin - 1 antibody ( bottom left panel ) . A higher magniﬁcation overlay of twinﬁlin ( red ) and transferrin ( green ) from the boxed region is presented in the bottom right panel . Bar : 5 m m . ( B ) Overexpression of twinﬁlin’s N - terminal ADF - H domain results in defects in receptor - mediated endocytosis . After 20min incubation in 15 m g / ml transferrin , wild - type cells showed efﬁcient uptake and accumulation of transferrin to the perinuclear region . In contrast , the cells overexpressing twinﬁlin’s isolated ADF - H domain ( arrows ) showed punctate cytoplasmic staining and reduced transferrin uptake . Bar : 5 m m . ( C ) Intensity of rhodamine - transferrin ﬂuorescence was quantiﬁed by TINA software from 10 cells overexpressing wild - type twinﬁlin , N - terminal ADF - H domain , or C - terminal half of the protein and compared with the intensity of rhodamine ﬂuorescence of an adjacent wild - type cell from the same frame . The efﬁciency of transferrin uptake was reduced to approximately 30 and 40 % in cells overexpressing twinﬁlin’s C - terminal half and N - terminal ADF - H domain , respectively . Transferrin uptake in cells overexpressing full - length twinﬁlin was very similar as compared to wild - type cells . s . e . m . s are indicated in the graph . Twinﬁlin caps actin ﬁlament barbed ends E Helfer et al & 2006 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 25 | NO 6 | 2006 1191 The barbed end capping activity of twinﬁlin emerged late in evolution . However , this conclusion relies on results obtained with skeletal muscle actin . The possibility that yeast and Drosophila twinﬁlins cap the barbed ends of ﬁla - ments only when they are assembled from yeast or Drosophila actins , respectively , is not totally excluded . The evolution of twinﬁlin activity at the vertebrate stage corre - lates with the ability of isolated ADF - H domains of mouse twinﬁlin to sequester actin individually , while the two ADF - H domains of yeast twinﬁlin are required to sequester ADP - G - actin ( Goode et al , 1998 ; Palmgren et al , 2001 ) . Many barbed end CPs are involved in motile processes . Twinﬁlin adds up to the growing family of proteins that control actin dynamics at barbed ends . Eps8 caps barbed ends in a signal - controlled , spatially deﬁned manner , and formins switch from leaky capping to processive growth catalysis in a proﬁlin - dependent manner ( Disanza et al , 2004 ; Kovar and Pollard , 2004 ; Romero et al , 2004 ) . Twinﬁlin therefore is not essential , but may help adjust the extent of barbed end capping to the optimum level for motility . Identically cumulative capping properties are at work when twinﬁlin is added to suboptimal levels of either CP or CapG or gelsolin . Uniquely , twinﬁlin has both actin sequestering and barbed end capping activities , and it sequesters ADP - G - actin speciﬁ - cally . These distinctive properties have interesting func - tional consequences . First , the ADP - G - actin sequestering and barbed end capping activities develop concomitantly , which limits the extent of barbed end capping and buffers free barbed ends at a low level ( Figure 6 ) . Twinﬁlin thus allows the maintenance of a basal level of formin - based processive ﬁlament assembly in a biomimetic assay and of dynamic barbed ends in the presence of proﬁlin ( Figure 3B ) . This property is speciﬁc to twinﬁlin , is not observed with standard CPs and may have physiological relevance . Second , in sequestering ADP - G - actin speciﬁcally , twinﬁlin builds a pool of unassembled actin , hence decreases the average length of ﬁlaments . The size of this pool is not governed by the concentration of free ATP - G - actin at steady state , as in the case of b - thymosins , which sequester ATP - G - actin speciﬁcally ( Carlier et al , 1993 ) . Instead , the amount of ADP - G - actin sequestered by twinﬁlin at steady state depends on the number of ﬁlaments ( Pantaloni et al , 1984 ) . Hence , twinﬁlin promotes the maintenance of actin meshworks formed of many capped short ﬁlaments , thus regulating ﬁlament length . The structural mechanism of barbed end capping by twinﬁlin is an open issue . Assuming a single molecule of twinﬁlin caps a barbed end by binding to the terminal actin subunit , the two ADF - H domains of twinﬁlin , which when isolated bind G - actin in competition with ADF , must interact with different regions of this subunit . Remarkably , the two ADF - H domains of twinﬁlin display structural similarity to gelsolin domains ( r . m . s . d . value of 3 . 0A˚ for twinﬁlin’s N - terminal domain and gelsolin segment - 1 ) , although these proteins do not display detectable sequence homology to each other ( Figure 8 ) . The six structurally related domains of gelsolin are involved in actin ﬁlament severing and cap - ping through sequential interactions with distinct interfaces of actin ﬁlament subunits ( Choe et al , 2002 ; Burtnick et al , 2004 ) . Twinﬁlin may cap a barbed end by a similar mechan - ism to gelsolin S1 – S2 fragment ( reviewed in Weeds and Maciver , 1993 ) . Kinetic studies of binding of twinﬁlin and its isolated domains to G - actin ( Ojala et al , 2002 ) as well as the present data show that the C - terminal ADF - H domain has a higher afﬁnity for actin , and may bind actin like ADF . Our results thus suggest the following general model for barbed end capping by proteins that have repeated modules . The Table I Binding parameters of the different twinﬁlins for ATP - G - actin in physiological conditions Species S . cerevi - siae Drosophila MouseTwf1 MouseN - ter ADF - H Mouse C - ter ADF - H ( 7 linker ) K T 22 m M 2 m M 2 – 4 m M 25 m M 2 . 5 – 4 m M Figure 8 Twinﬁlin and gelsolin may cap ﬁlament barbed ends by structurally similar mechanisms . ( A ) Domain structures of twinﬁlin and gelsolin . Twinﬁlin is composed of two ( N terminal and C terminal ) ADF - H domains separated by a B 30 residue linker - region and followed by a B 35 residue C - terminal tail - region . Gelsolin is composed of six homologous domains ( segments 1 – 6 ) . ( B ) The ADF - H domains of twinﬁlin are structurally homologous to gelsolin domains . A comparison of the structures of twinﬁlin’s N - terminal ADF - H domain and gelsolin segment 1 ( McLaughlin et al , 1993 ; Paavilainen et al , 2002 ) . ( C ) The six domains of gelsolin interact with different sites of the three terminal subunits of an actin ﬁlament ( modiﬁed from Burtnick et al , 2004 ) . The two structurally homologous twinﬁlin domains may cap the ﬁlament barbed end by a structurally similar mechanism to S1 – S2 , which is the minimal capping unit of gelsolin . Twinﬁlin caps actin ﬁlament barbed ends E Helfer et al The EMBO Journal VOL 25 | NO 6 | 2006 & 2006 European Molecular Biology Organization 1192 N - terminal domain of twinﬁlin binds ﬁrst to the barbed face of actin subdomain 1 exposed at the end of the ﬁlament , thus allowing positioning of the C - terminal domain at the ADF / coﬁlin binding site at the outside of the ﬁlament ( Figure 8C ) . Structural analysis of twinﬁlin and its individual ADF - H domains in complex with actin ( manuscript in preparation ) should reveal the individual roles of the two ADF - H domains in barbed end capping . Whether other ADF - H containing proteins act at barbed ends like twinﬁlin is an issue of structural , functional and evolutional interest . Coactosin and Abp1p are the two other members of the ADF - H family . Coactosin consists of a single ADF - H domain that binds F - actin , shows a fold similar to gelsolin and villin ( Liu et al , 2004 ) and prevents binding of CPs to barbed ends ( Rohrig et al , 1995 ) . The binding of actin to the ADF - H domain of Abp1p is required for the Arp2 / 3 - dependent ﬁlament branching activity of Abp1p ( Goode et al , 2001 ) . The present data open a new perspective on the possible function of the ADF - H domain inserted in a modular protein . Materials and methods Proteins Actin was puriﬁed from rabbit muscle and pyrenyl - labeled ( Egile et al , 1999 ) . Recombinant S . cerevisiae and Drosophila twinﬁlins were puriﬁed ( Goode et al , 1998 ; Wahlstrom et al , 2001 ) . His - tagged full - length mouse twinﬁlin - 1 and its C - terminal ( Twf 169 – 350 and Twf 140 – 350 ) ADF - H domains were expressed in Escherichia coli and puriﬁed ( Vartiainen et al , 2003 ) , and its N - terminal ADF - H domain ( Twf 1 – 174 ) was expressed as GST - fusion protein , puriﬁed , GST was removed by thrombin digestion ( Ojala et al , 2002 ) . Recombinant human ADF , gelsolin ( Carlier et al , 1997 ) , CP ( Falck et al , 2004 ) and mDia1 FH1 – FH2 domain ( Romero et al , 2004 ) were puriﬁed as described . Proﬁlin was puriﬁed from bovine spleen ( Gutsche - Perelroizen et al , 1999 ) , Arp2 / 3 complex from bovine brain ( Egile et al , 1999 ) . Human his - tagged N - WASP was expressed in Sf9 cells . Actin polymerization assays Actin assembly was monitored by the increase in pyrenyl - actin ﬂuorescence ( excitation and emission wavelengths 366 and 407nm , respectively ) . Initial rates of barbed end growth were measured using spectrin - actin seeds ( Casella et al , 1986 ) . Gelsolin - actin complexes ( 0 . 4 m M gelsolin and 1 m M CaATP - G - actin mix ) were used to seed pointed end growth . Growth assays were monitored using 2 . 5 m M G - actin ( 5 % pyrenyl - labeled ) and twinﬁlin as indicated . Only fresh solutions of twinﬁlin were used , since the protein loses rapidly actin - binding activity upon storage on ice . The initial rate of ﬁlament growth was normalized to the value of 1 measured in the absence of twinﬁlin . Steady - state measurements of F - actin were carried out by measuring the ﬂuorescence of pyrenyl - labeled F - actin incubated overnight at 4 1 C with twinﬁlin , proﬁlin and gelsolin as indicated . Data modeling Barbed end growth assays . Data were analyzed using models in which twinﬁlin ( T w ) binds ATP - G - actin ( T ) in a 1 : 1 nonpolymeriz - able TT w complex with an equilibrium dissociation constant K T and caps barbed ends forming a FT w complex with an equilibrium dissociation constant K F . The following equations were used . The rate of ﬁlament growth from spectrin - actin seeds is V ¼ k B þ ½ F (cid:3)ð½ T 0 (cid:3) (cid:2) ½ TT w (cid:3) (cid:2) T BC Þ þ k P þ ½ F 0 (cid:3)ð½ T 0 (cid:3) (cid:2) ½ TT w (cid:3) (cid:2) T PC Þ ð 1 Þ where [ F ] and [ F 0 ] are the concentrations of free barbed and pointed ends , [ T 0 ] is the total concentration of ATP - G - actin . T CB and T CP are the critical concentrations at the barbed and pointed ends respectively . To simplify the resolution of the equation , we will assume below that T CB and T CP are negligible as compared to the total G - actin concentration [ T 0 ] , and that [ FT w ] is negligible as compared to free ( T w ) and G - actin - bound ( TT w ) twinﬁlin . The total concentrations of ﬁlaments and twinﬁlin are [ F 0 ] and [ T w0 ] . ½ T 0 (cid:3) ¼ ½ T (cid:3) þ ½ TT w (cid:3) ½ F 0 (cid:3) ¼ ½ F (cid:3) þ ½ FT w (cid:3) with K F ¼ ½ F (cid:3)½ T w (cid:3) = ½ FT w (cid:3) ½ T w 0 (cid:3) ¼ ½ T w (cid:3) þ ½ TT w (cid:3) with K T ¼ ½ T (cid:3)½ T w (cid:3) = ½ TT w (cid:3) Equation ( 1 ) can be written as V ¼ f k B þ ð½ F 0 (cid:3) (cid:2) ½ FT w (cid:3)Þ þ k P þ ½ F 0 (cid:3)Þgð½ T 0 (cid:3) (cid:2) ½ TT w (cid:3)Þ ð 2 Þ In the absence of twinﬁlin , the growth rate is V 0 : V 0 ¼ ð k B þ þ k P þ Þ½ F 0 (cid:3)½ T 0 (cid:3) ¼ k B þ ð 1 þ a Þ½ F 0 (cid:3)½ T 0 (cid:3) ð 3 Þ where k þ P ¼ a k þ B Equation ( 2 ) then becomes V ¼ V 0 f 1 = ð 1 þ a Þgfð½ T 0 (cid:3) (cid:2) ½ TT w (cid:3)Þ = ½ T 0 (cid:3)g (cid:4)f a þ K F = ð K F þ ½ T w 0 (cid:3) (cid:2) ½ TT w (cid:3)Þg ð 4 Þ where ½ TT w (cid:3) ¼ð 1 = 2 Þf½ T 0 (cid:3) þ ½ T w 0 (cid:3) þ K T (cid:2) ðð½ T 0 (cid:3) þ ½ T w 0 (cid:3) þ K T Þ 2 (cid:2) 4 ½ T 0 (cid:3)½ T w 0 (cid:3)Þ 1 = 2 g ð 5 Þ In the presence of proﬁlin in large amounts , twinﬁlin only caps barbed ends and no growth takes place at pointed ends . Then Equation ( 4 ) reduces to V ¼ V 0 K F = ð K F þ ½ T w 0 (cid:3)Þ ð 6 Þ Steady - state motility assays . The effect of twinﬁlin ( barbed end capping þ actin sequestration ) on the movement of formin - coated beads was accounted for by the combination of the ADP - G - actin sequestering and barbed end capping activities of twinﬁlin , as follows . The model stipulates that ﬁlaments treadmill rapidly , ADP - G - actin ( D ) is produced by rapid pointed end depolymerization due to the effect of ADF ( Carlier et al , 1997 ) , ATP - G - actin ( T ) is produced from ADP - actin via nucleotide exchange with rate constant k e , twinﬁlin ( T w ) sequesters ADP - and ATP - G - actin with equilibrium dissociation constants K D and K T , and caps barbed ends with equilibrium dissociation K F . F þ T w , FT w ; K F ¼ ½ F (cid:3)½ T w (cid:3) = ½ FT w (cid:3) D þ T w , DT w ; K D ¼ ½ D (cid:3)½ T w (cid:3) = ½ DT w (cid:3) T þ T w , TT w ; K T ¼ ½ T (cid:3)½ T w (cid:3) = ½ TT w (cid:3) D þ ATP , T þ ADP ; k e F þ T , F ; k B (cid:2) ; k B þ At steady state , ½ D SS (cid:3) ¼ k P (cid:2) ½ F 0 (cid:3) = k e ½ T SS (cid:3) ¼ ð k B (cid:2) ½ F (cid:3) þ k P (cid:2) ½ F 0 (cid:3)Þ = ð k B þ ½ F (cid:3) þ k P þ ½ F 0 (cid:3)Þ ; k P (cid:2) ; k P þ ½ T w 0 (cid:3) ¼ ½ T w (cid:3) þ ½ F 0 (cid:3) (cid:2) ½ F (cid:3) þ ½ DT w (cid:3) þ ½ TT w (cid:3) ½ F (cid:3) ¼ ½ F 0 (cid:3) = ð 1 þ ½ T w (cid:3) = K F Þ where k þ B , k þ P , k (cid:2) B , k (cid:2) P are the rate constants for association of ATP - actin to barbed ends of ADP - actin to pointed ends , dissociation of ATP - actin from barbed ends and dissociation of ADP - actin from pointed ends , respectively . Motility assays Motility assays were carried out as described ( Wiesner et al , 2003 ; Romero et al , 2004 ) . Carboxylated polystyrene microspheres ( 2 m m dia - meter , Polysciences Inc . , 2 % solids ) were incubated with either 400nM Twinﬁlin caps actin ﬁlament barbed ends E Helfer et al & 2006 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 25 | NO 6 | 2006 1193 N - WASP or 10 m M FH1 – FH2 in Xb buffer ( 10mM HEPES , pH 7 . 8 , 0 . 1M KCl , 1mM MgCl 2 , 1mM ATP , 0 . 1mM CaCl 2 , and 0 . 01 % NaN 3 ) for 1h on ice . BSA ( 10mg / ml ) was added for 15min . Beads were washed , stored on ice in Xb buffer with 1mg / ml BSA and used for 4 – 5 days . The standard motility medium for N - WASP - coated beads consisted of 7 m M F - actin in Xb buffer , 9 m M ADF , 2 . 4 m M proﬁlin , 90nM gelsolin , and 90nM Arp2 / 3 , except when indicated . The steady state of actin assembly was reached in 10min . In the absence of ADF , steady state was reached in 6h . Beads ( 0 . 02 % solids ﬁnal ) were added to the steady motility medium . The medium for FH1FH2 - coated beads consisted of 7 m M F - actin ( 5 % rhodamine - labeled ) ) , 14 m M ADF , 4 m M proﬁlin and twinﬁlin as indicated . Samples of 5 m l were placed between a slide and a coverslip . Valap - sealed samples were observed in phase contrast or ﬂuorescence microscopy ( AX70 , Olympus , equipped with a (cid:4) 20 phase objective ( NA 0 . 5 ) or a (cid:4) 100 objective ( NA 1 . 35 ) , a motorized stage ( Ma¨rzha¨user ) and a camera ( Cascade , Photometrics ) . Using Metamorph 6 . 0 ( Universal Imaging Corp . ) for microscope control and image acquisition , synchronous movies of up to ﬁve ﬁelds were recorded , following a dead time of about 10min for selecting observation ﬁelds and entering their positions in the recognition - based tracking program . About 10 moving beads were selected and tracked . Average velocities were calculated for each set of beads . Endocytosis assays Myc - tagged wild - type mouse twinﬁlin - 1 , the N - terminal ADF - H domain ( Twf 1 – 142 ) and the C - terminal half ( Twf 169 – 350 ) constructs were expressed in NIH 3T3 cells and detected by immunoﬂuores - cence microscopy using a polyclonal anti - myc - antibody ( Vartiainen et al , 2000 ) . The efﬁciency of receptor - mediated endocytosis in these cells was measured ( Bertling et al , 2004 ) . In co - localization experiments , F - actin and endogenous twinﬁlin were visualized using Alexa 488 - phalloidin ( Molecular Probes ) and polyclonal anti - twinﬁlin - 1 antibody ( Vartiainen et al , 2003 ) . Supplementary data Supplementary data are available at The EMBO Journal Online . Acknowledgements We thank Robert Robinson for sending the gelsolin - F - actin model . PL is supported by Academy of Finland and Emil Aaltonen Foundation . MFC is supported in part by the Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer ( e´quipe labellise´e ) and by a HFSP research grant RGP0072 / 2003 - C . SR is supported by a fellowship from the Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer . References Bertling E , Hotulainen P , Mattila PK , Matilainen T , Salminen M , Lappalainen P ( 2004 ) Cyclase - associated protein 1 ( CAP1 ) pro - motes coﬁlin - induced actin dynamics in mammalian nonmuscle cells . Mol Biol Cell 15 : 2324 – 2334 Burtnick LD , Urosev D , Irobi E , Narayan K , Robinson RC ( 2004 ) Structure of the N - terminal half of gelsolin bound to actin : role in severing , apoptosis and FAF . EMBO J 23 : 2713 – 2722 Carlier MF , Jean C , Rieger KJ , Lenfant M , Pantaloni D ( 1993 ) Modulation of the interaction between G - actin and thymosin beta 4 by the ATP / ADP ratio : possible implication in the regula - tion of actin dynamics . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90 : 5034 – 5038 Carlier M - F , Laurent V , Santolini J , Melki R , Didry D , Xia GX , Hong Y , Chua NH , Pantaloni D ( 1997 ) Actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF / coﬁlin ) enhances the rate of ﬁlament turnover : implication in actin - based motility . J Cell Biol 136 : 1307 – 1322 Casella JF , Maack DJ , Lin S ( 1986 ) Puriﬁcation and initial charac - terization of a protein from skeletal muscle that caps the barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments . J Biol Chem 261 : 10915 – 10921 Choe H , Burtnick LD , Mejillano M , Yin HL , Robinson RC , Choe S ( 2002 ) The calcium activation of gelsolin : insights from the 3A structure of the G4 – G6 / actin complex . J Mol Biol 324 : 691 – 702 Disanza A , Carlier M - F , Stradal TE , Didry D , Frittoli E , Confalonieri S , Croce A , Wehland J , Di Fiore PP , Scita G ( 2004 ) Eps8 controls actin - based motility by capping the barbed ends of actin ﬁla - ments . Nat Cell Biol 6 : 1180 – 1188 Egile C , Loisel TP , Laurent V , Li R , Pantaloni D , Sansonetti PJ , Carlier M - F ( 1999 ) Activation of the CDC42 effector N - WASP by the Shigella ﬂexneri IcsA protein promotes actin nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex and bacterial actin - based motility . J Cell Biol 146 : 1319 – 1332 Falck S , Paavilainen VO , Wear MA , Grossmann JG , Cooper JA , Lappalainen P ( 2004 ) Biological role and structural mechanism of twinﬁlin - capping protein interaction . EMBO J 23 : 3010 – 3019 Fujimoto LM , Roth R , Heuser JE , Schmid SL ( 2000 ) Actin assembly plays a variable , but not obligatory role in receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . Trafﬁc 1 : 161 – 171 Goode BL , Drubin DG , Lappalainen P ( 1998 ) Regulation of the cortical actin cytoskeleton in budding yeast by twinﬁlin , a ubiquitous actin monomer - sequestering protein . J Cell Biol 142 : 723 – 733 Goode BL , Rodal AA , Barnes G , Drubin DG ( 2001 ) Activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex by the actin ﬁlament binding protein Abp1p . J Cell Biol 153 : 627 – 634 Gutsche - Perelroizen I , Lepault J , Ott A , Carlier M - F ( 1999 ) Filament assembly from proﬁlin - actin . J Biol Chem 274 : 6234 – 6243 ( 2005 ) Higashida C , Miyoshi T , Fujita A , Oceguera - Yanez F , Monypenny J , Andou Y , Narumiya S , Watanabe N ( 2004 ) Actin polymerization - driven molecular movement of mDia1 in living cells . Science 303 : 2007 – 2010 Innocenti M , Gerboth S , Rottner K , Lai FP , Hertzog M , Stradal T , Frittoli E , Didry D , Polo S , Disanza A , Benesch S , Di Fiore PP , Carlier M - F , Scita G ( 2005 ) Abi1 regulates the activity of N - WASP and WAVE in distinct actin - based processes . Nat Cell Biol 7 : 969 – 976 Kovar DR , Pollard TD ( 2004 ) Insertional actin assembly of actin ﬁlament barbed ends in association with formins produces piconewton forces . Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 101 : 14725 – 14730 Kovar DR , Wu JQ , Pollard TD ( 2005 ) Proﬁlin - mediated competition between capping protein and formin Cdc12p during cytokinesis in ﬁssion yeast . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 2313 – 2324 McLaughlin P , Gooch JT , Mannherz HG , Weeds AG ( 1993 ) Structure of gelsolin segment 1 - actin complex and the mechanism of ﬁlament severing . Nature 364 : 685 – 692 Liu L , Wei Z , Wang Y , Wan M , Cheng Z , Gong W ( 2004 ) Crystal structure of human Coactosin - like protein . J Mol Biol 344 : 317 – 323 Loisel TP , Boujemaa R , Pantaloni D , Carlier M - F ( 1999 ) Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 : 613 – 616 Ojala PJ , Paavilainen VO , Vartiainen MK , Tuma R , Weeds AG , Lappalainen P ( 2002 ) The two ADF - H domains of twinﬁlin play functionally distinct roles in interactions with actin monomers . Mol Biol Cell 13 : 3811 – 3821 Paavilainen VO , Merckel MC , Falck S , Ojala PJ , Pohl E , Wilmanns M , Lappalainen P ( 2002 ) Structural conservation between the actin monomer - binding sites of twinﬁlin and actin - depolymeri - zing factor ( ADF ) / coﬁlin . J Biol Chem 277 : 43089 – 43095 Palmgren S , Ojala PJ , Wear MA , Cooper JA , Lappalainen P ( 2001 ) Interactions with PIP2 , ADP - actin monomers and capping protein regulate the activity and localization of yeast twinﬁlin . J Cell Biol 155 : 251 – 260 Pantaloni D , Carlier M - F , Coue´ M , Lal AA , Brenner SL , Korn ED ( 1984 ) The critical concentration of actin in the presence of ATP increases with the number of ﬁlaments and approaches the critical concentration of ADP - actin . J Biol Chem 259 : 6274 – 6283 Pantaloni D , Boujemaa R , Didry D , Gounon P , Carlier MF ( 2000 ) The Arp2 / 3 complex branches ﬁlament barbed ends : functional antagonism with capping proteins . Nat Cell Biol 2 : 385 – 391 Pelkmans L , Fava E , Grabner H , Hannus M , Habermann B , Krausz E , Zerial M ( 2005 ) Genome - wide analysis of human kinases in clathrin - and caveolae / raft - mediated endocytosis . Nature 436 : 78 – 86 Rogers SL , Wiedemann U , Stuurman N , Vale RD ( 2003 ) Molecular requirements for actin - based lamella formation in Drosophila S2 cells . J Cell Biol 162 : 1079 – 1088 Rohrig U , Gerisch G , Morozova L , Schleicher M , Wegner A ( 1995 ) Coactosin interferes with the capping of actin ﬁlaments . FEBS Lett 374 : 284 – 286 Twinﬁlin caps actin ﬁlament barbed ends E Helfer et al The EMBO Journal VOL 25 | NO 6 | 2006 & 2006 European Molecular Biology Organization 1194 Romero S , Le Clainche C , Didry D , Egile C , Pantaloni D , Carlier MF ( 2004 ) Formin is a processive motor that requires proﬁlin to accelerate actin assembly and associated ATP hydrolysis . Cell 119 : 419 – 429 Vartiainen M , Ojala PJ , Auvinen P , Pera¨nen J , Lappalainen P ( 2000 ) Mouse A6 / twinﬁlin is an actin monomer - binding protein that localizes to the regions of rapid actin dynamics . Mol Cell Biol 20 : 1772 – 1783 Vartiainen MK , Sarkkinen EM , Matilainen T , Salminen M , Lappalainen P ( 2003 ) Mammals have two twinﬁlin isoforms whose subcellular localizations and tissue distributions are differentially regulated . J Biol Chem 278 : 34347 – 34355 Wahlstrom G , Vartiainen M , Yamamoto L , Mattila PK , Lappalainen P , Heino TI ( 2001 ) Twinﬁlin is required for actin - dependent developmental processes in Drosophila . J Cell Biol 155 : 787 – 796 Weeds A , Maciver S ( 1993 ) F - actin capping proteins . Curr Opin Cell Biol 5 : 63 – 69 Wiesner S , Helfer E , Didry D , Ducouret G , Lafuma F , Carlier M - F , Pantaloni D ( 2003 ) A biomimetic motility assay provides insight into the mechanism of actin - based motility . J Cell Biol 160 : 387 – 398 Twinﬁlin caps actin ﬁlament barbed ends E Helfer et al & 2006 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 25 | NO 6 | 2006 1195