ISSO — The Institute for Space Systems Operations — ISSO Y2005 Annual Report University of Houston University of Houston - Clear Lake NASA - Johnson Space Center ISSO—Spring 2006 Cover—Student Researchers Y2005 Bin Lu Avinash Sridhar UH , Electrical and UHCL , Computer Computer Science Engineering ( M . S . Studies ) ( Ph . D . Studies ) Ashley Higgins UH , Mechanical Engineering ( M . E . Studies ) Tuan Anh Nguyen UHCL , Computer Information Systems ( M . S . Studies ) Steven Provence UH , Electrical and Computer Engineering ( Ph . D . Studies ) Chinmay Darne Shih - Ying Hsu Stuart M . C . Lee UH , Electrical and UH , Physics UH , Health and Computer ( Ph . D . Studies ) Human Engineering Performance ( Ph . D . Studies ) ( Ph . D . Studies ) CHALLENGER—Eugene A . Cernan , Commander , Apollo 17 salutes the ﬂag on the lunar surface during extravehicular activity ( EVA ) on NASA ' s ﬁnal lunar landing mission , December 1972 . The Lunar Module “Challenger” is in the left back - ground behind the Flag and the Lunar Roving Vehicle ( LRV ) also in background behind him . While astronauts Cernan and Schmitt descend - ed in the Challenger to explore the Taurus - Littrow region of the Moon , astronaut Ronald E . Evans , Command Module pilot , remained with the Command / Service Module ( CSM ) “America” in lunar - orbit . Photo courtesy NASA Headquarters . —GReatest Images of NASA ( GRIN ) Jie Fang UH , Physics ( Ph . D . Studies ) Matt McCurdy Baylor College of Medicine and Rice U ( M . D . / Ph . D . Studies ) Hrishikesh Nene UH , Electrical and Computer Engineering ( M . S . Studies ) Gustav Cardenas UH , Physics ( Ph . D . Studies ) Rajeev Rajan Pillai UH , Electrical and Computer Engineering ( Ph . D . Studies ) Joseph Joseph Chakkungal UHCL , Computer Engineering ( M . S . Studies ) ISSO Institute for Space Systems Operations University of Houston University of Houston - Clear Lake NASA - Johnson Space Center Y2005 Annual Report University of Houston Jay Gogue , Ph . D . Chancellor Donald J . Foss , Ph . D . Senior Vice - Chancellor / Vice - President for Academic Affairs and Provost Arthur Vailas , Ph . D . Vice - Chancellor of Research and Intellectual Property Management University of Houston - Clear Lake William A . Staples , Ph D . President Edward J . Hayes , Ph . D . Senior Vice - President and Provost The Institute for Space Systems Operations ( ISSO ) of the Houston Partnership for Space Exploration ( HPSE ) David R . Criswell , Ph . D . Director Phone : 713 743 - 9135 ; FAX : 713 743 - 3589 E - mail : dcriswell @ uh . edu The Institute for Space Systems Operations—ISSO 617 Science & Research Bldg 1 , Rm 629F University of Houston Houston , TX 77204 - 5005 Editorial Ofﬁces Irving N . Rothman , Ph . D . , Editor Debbie V . Bush Associate Editor and Design and Web Site Developer Matthew Dulin , Assistant Editor 504 Science & Research Bldg 1 University of Houston Houston , TX 77204 - 5006 Phone : 713 743 - 9138 ; FAX : 713 743 - 9134 E - mail : irothman @ uh . edu ; dbush @ uh . edu Photography—Irving N . Rothman EQUIPMENT DESIGN—Dr . Kejlian ( Allen ) Lan ( l . ) , research professor in the department of physics , designs equipment specified by UH researchers including Dr . Larry Pinsky ( r . ) . Equipment designed by Dr . Lan under project speciﬁcations is projected for study in laboratories in Japan in the spring of 2006 . BIOMEDICAL AT NASA—In the biomedical engineer - ing section at NASA - JSC , Stephanie Gaudiano ( l . ) , NASA Division Engineer , discusses radiation detector systems on board the International Space Station ( ISS ) with Kerry Lee ( c . ) and Fadi Riman ( r . ) , computer sys - tems design . Both Gaudiano and Riman are employed by Jacobs Sverdrup , NASA Division Engineering . GPS AT NASA—Newly developed GPS receiver designed to work in - orbit by R . Stephen Provence . DOWNTOWN HOUSTON CITYSCAPE—Downtown Houston within sight of the Alumni / Athletic Center and ISSO ofﬁces on the UH central campus . Table of Contents The Director’s Report—Y2005 • 6 David R . Criswell Research with Post - Doctoral Aerospace Fellows—PDAF Development of Micro Column Arrays ( MCA ) for Thermal Management Applications • 15 Abdelhak Bensaoula , Brian M . Mayeaux , Andenet Alemu , Angela Carreno UWB Tracking System Design with TDOA Algorithm for Space Applications • 19 Edward Dickerson , Dickey Arndt , Jianjun Ni The Effect of Modeled Microgravity on Microbial Gene Expression • 23 George E . Fox , Richard C . Willson , Duane L . Pierson , Viktor Stepanov Development of Quantum - Cascade Laser Based Biosensor Technology • 27 Thomas L . Harman , Frank K . Tittel , John C . Graf , Yury Bakhirkin Martian Soil Biosensors Based on Dielectric Spectroscopy • 33 John H . Miller , Jr . , Jaroslaw Wosik , David S . McKay , Jeffrey A . Jones , Fathi Karouia , David Warmflash , Dharmakeerthi Nawarathna NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 3 ISSO Mini - Grants Natural Language Interface Models for Fast Responsiveness Applications • 41 Hisham Al - Mubaid A Text - Mining Technique for Literature Proﬁling and Information Extraction from Biomedical Literature • 45 Hisham Al - Mubaid Investigation of III - Nitride Materials for Space - Based Solar Cells • 50 Abdelhak Bensaoula , Chris Boney Building and Verifying Fault - Tolerant Autonomous Real - Time Systems for Space Applications • 53 Albert M . K . Cheng Validation of a Novel Micro - Capillary Array Fluid Collection Technology for the Determination of Biomarkers of Bone Metabolism in Human Sweat • 58 Mark S . F . Clarke , Daniel L . Feeback Real - Time Active Loading of Piezoelectric Ultrasonic Motors for Simulating Space Robotics Applications • 61 James B . Dabney Early Origins of Genetic Systems • 64 George E . Fox A Unique High Speed Camera System for Studying the Pulsating Dynamics of Premixed Flames • 66 Michael Gorman The Effect of Martian Dust on Radiator Performance • 68 D . Keith Hollingsworth , Larry C . Witte , Ashley Higgins Contaminants Removal From Fuel Cells for Aerospace Applications • 72 Jack Y . Lu PWM Control of Formation Flying Space Vehicle • 73 Heidar Malki , Ho Jae Lee , Leang - San Shieh Electromagnetic Probes of Biological Molecular Motors • 76 John H . Miller , Jr . , William R . Widger , Dharmakeerthi Nawarathna Initiating the Detector Deployment for a Currently Planned NASA Accelerator Measurement • 80 Lawrence S . Pinsky Science and Invention in Literature—Divergent Views of Daniel Defoe and Jonathan Swift • 83 Irving N . Rothman Computational Methods in Non - Smooth Mechanics : Applications To Dry Friction Constrained Motions • 88 LieJune Shiau Magnetic Microscopy Studies of Magnetotactic Fossils on Martian Meteorite ALH84001 and Related Earthbound Analog Systems • 89 Jaroslaw Wosik , John H . Miller , Jr . , David S . McKay , David Warmflash , Maged Kamel , Chinmay Darne , Lian Xue , Li Zhong Director’s Research and Administrative Activities • 93 4 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA ISSO Follow - up Reports Micro Column Arrays ( MCA ) for Thermal Management of Spacecraft Environments • 99 Abdelhak Bensaoula Miniature Optical Sensors for Detection of Water and Air Contamination • 101 Abdelhak Bensaoula , David Starikov , Chris Boney A Recursive Application of a Support Vector Machine for Protein Spot Detection in 2 - Dimensional Gel Electrophoresis • 102 Gary D . Boetticher , Hisham Al - Mubaid , Karen Frasier - Scott The Impact of Chromosome Lineage upon Genetic Program Modeling • 102 Gary D . Boetticher , Kim Kaminsky Summary Reports on Previous 2003 and 2004 Projects • 103 George E . Fox A Theoretical Analysis of Vibrational Modes Aimed at Their Use as Measures of Bone Damage • 105 Gemunu Gunaratne Raman Scattering Test of Mechanical and Sensor Properties of Advanced Nanocomposites • 108 Viktor G . Hadjiev , Keesu Jeon Voluntary Muscle Contraction in Advance of Mechanical Foot Stimulation To Enhance Neuromuscular Reﬂex Responses • 109 Charles S . Layne , Katharine E . Forth A Neural - Network - Based Approach for Control of Vibration in a Black Hawk Helicopter • 115 Heidar A . Malki , Karolos Grigoriadis , José Canelon Low - Frequency Dielectric Spectroscopy of Martian Soil Samples • 116 John H . Miller , Jr . , Jaroslaw Wosik , David S . McKay , David Warmflash Use of FLUKA in the Analysis of the Mars Odyssey MARIE Experiment • 119 Lawrence S . Pinsky , Thomas L . Wilson , Victor Andersen High - Performance Martian Space Radiation Mapping • 121 Liwen Shih , Sergio J . Larrondo , Karthik Katikaneni , Ahmed Khan , Travis Gilbert , Shilpa Kodali , Arun Kadari An AC - DC - AC Converter with Smaller DC - Link Capacitor for Space Power Distribution Systems • 123 Wajiha Shireen , Srinivas Vanapalli Development of Wireless Stations for Distributed Field Operations • 125 T . Andrew Yang , Sadegh Davari Principal and Co - Principal Investigators • 128 ISSO Student Researchers • 135 UHCL FACILITIES—The new Student Services Building on the campus of the University of Houston - Clear Lake , adjacent to the Bayou Building , houses comput - er laboratories , the Intercultural and International Student Center , a Health Center , and a gymnasium . NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 5 The Director’s Report—2005 David R . Criswell Houston Partnership for Space Exploration [ HPSE ] T HE PURPOSE OF HPSE IS TO advance any aspect of aero­ space research , engineering , and applications through graduate and post - doctoral level programs at the University of Houston and the University of Houston - Clear Lake in cooperation with the NASA Johnson Space Center ( JSC ) , Texas universities and businesses , and other organizations . The legislature Dr . David R . Criswell of the State of Texas established the Houston Partnership for Space Exploration in 1991 . The Institute for Space Systems Operations ( ISSO ) is the operating agency for HPSE . UH and UHCL are also members of the Texas Space Grant Consortium ( TSGC ) . ISSO works through TSGC on a statewide level . Dr . David R . Criswell directs ISSO and is responsible for both UH and UHCL activi­ ties . HPSE is funded under a State of Texas Line Item that allo­ cated $ 287 , 962 in Y2005 to operations at the University of Houston . There was a one - time carry - over of $ 83 , 605 from Y2004 for a total Y2005 budget of $ 370 , 963 . The State of Texas Line Item allocated $ 81 , 050 to operations at the University of Houston - Clear Lake . As reported by the faculty in the following research articles , the Y2005 ISSO State of Texas funds were leveraged by a factor of 5 . 8 - to - 1 . ISSO projects have established solid professional links between NASA , JSC , the Houston aerospace community , and UH and UHCL . ISSO provides the flexibility and resources for UH and UHCL faculty to fully participate in the rapidly evolv­ ing national space program . Since 1991 , faculty supported by ISSO research funds have reported obtaining $ 19 , 500 , 000 of external funding and thus leveraged the research funds by 4 . 7 - to - 1 over the life of the program . The following section summarizes Y2005 accomplishments by ISSO - supported researchers . A short synopsis of each research activity is presented within six study areas . Seed - grants selected February 28 , 2006 are listed in the last section . Summary of the 2005 Program Primary activities of ISSO are the unique Post - Doctoral Aerospace Fellowship ( PDAF ) program between UH / UHCL and the NASA - Johnson Space Center and grants providing seed - level funds to UH and UHCL faculty for development of new aerospace research projects . Both PDAF and seed - grant projects are proposed to ISSO by UH and UHCL faculty and then select­ ed through a peer review . Peer reviewers are selected from UH , UHCL , and the JSC community . The PDAF program started in 1995 . It operated through a Memorandum of Understanding between JSC and the two uni­ versities . The MOU was converted to a Space Act Agreement in early 2006 . The PDAF program is currently completing the third set of post - doctoral fellows projects . Five fellowship projects were active in 2005 . ISSO will request proposals for the fourth set of fellowship projects in the spring of 2006 . Each Aerospace Fellow is selected and directed by a team consisting of at least one UH or UHCL faculty member and a research member of the Johnson Space Center . A fellowship appointment is for two years with a possible extension of a third and final year . In 2005 , ISSO provided $ 404 , 673 in research funds to 19 UH and UHCL faculty in support of 16 new seed - grant projects , five PDAF projects , the director’s research , and program documen­ tation . ISSO requires investigators to report results on projects for five years after completion of funding of a given project . In 2005 , faculty funded in prior years and currently funded UH and UHCL faculty reported submitting 31 proposals in application for $ 7 , 300 , 000 of external funding . They report obtaining $ 2 , 610 , 000 for these proposals and proposals submitted the prior year . The 2005 ISSO State of Texas funds were leveraged by a factor of ~ 6 . Leveraging of the 2005 funds will continue to increase as more proposals are submitted based on follow - up results of the 2005 projects . In 2005 , ISSO investigators report submitting 87 professional papers , delivering 56 professional presentations and interviews , and submitting four patent application and one disclosure . Ten undergraduates participated in the research activities . Twenty master’s level students and 28 doctoral students participated in ISSO research projects along with six post - doctoral fellows . Thirty - nine UH and UHCL faculty participated in ISSO research along with 17 professors from other universities , 13 NASA researchers , and 32 from other non - profit organizations and companies . In addition to JSC , 20 other organizations participated . • ESCG , Houston • Harbin Institute of Technology , China 6 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA CONSULTATION—Tuan Anh Nguyen ( l . ) , who earned his B . S . degree in science from the Hanoi University of Technology in Vietnam , discusses an article on “An Efﬁcient Scheme for Authenticating Public Keys in Sensor Networks” with Prof . T . Andrew Yang ( r . ) of the University of Houston - Clear Lake . • Integrated Micro Sensors , Inc . , Houston • Jet Propulsion Laboratory • L - 3 Communications - Titan Division • Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory • Polish Academy of Science Institute of Physics , Warsaw • Nasser Engineering , Houston • NASA - Langley Research Center • Rice U . Bioengineering , Electrical and Computer Engineering • Russian Academy of Sciences • Laser Institute , Moscow • Seisco • Texas Instruments • Tietronix , Houston • University of Neuchatel , Switzerland • University of Pennsylvania • University of Singapore • University of Texas Health Sciences Center • Diagnostic and Interventional Imaging , Houston • Yonsel University , S . Korea ISSO maintains a Web site of all reports and utilizes its Web site to announce proposals and fellowship opportunities . Searching “Institute for Space Systems Operations” returns more than 900 hits on Google . Search hits were also found for all principal investigators in this report . Using various combina­ tions of “last name , initials , ” “ISSO , ” “UH , ” and “UHCL” returned a total of ~ 1 , 800 relevant hits . ISSO cooperated at UH with four colleges and Deans J . Bear ( Natural Sciences & Mathematics ) , R . Flumerfelt ( Engineering ) , W . E . Fitzgibbons ( Technology ) , and R . K . Wimpelberg ( Education ) and with Dr . A . Ignatiev ( SVEC ) and the newly for­ mulated Center for Advanced Materials ( CAM ) . ISSO thanks them for their support in the research projects . At UHCL , ISSO worked primarily with the School of Science and Computer Engineering . Thanks are sincerely extended to Dean C . McKay . Summary of ISSO Research Projects Six major themes are the focus of 28 research projects funded in 2005 and the follow - up results of earlier projects : • Autonomous Operations • Devices and Materials • Natural and Induced Radiation • Search for the Origins of Life On and Beyond Earth • Biomedical Sciences in Space • Space Industrialization Autonomous Operations There is a great need for vehicles that can operate autonomous­ ly in space about facilities such as the International Space Station , in the milieu of asteroids and comets , and on planetary surfaces ( Moon , Mars , etc . ) . Autonomous vehicles can perform inspections , exploration , and , eventually , maintenance and repairs . The Post - Doctoral Aerospace Fellowship project of Prof . E . T . Dickerson ( UHCL ) , Dr . G . T . Arndt ( NASA - JSC ) , Dr . J . Ni ( Fellow ) “UWB Tracking System Design with TDOA Algorithm for Space Applications” focuses on radar and com­ puter systems that can enable autonomous navigation and con­ trol of a vehicle that can autonomously inspect the International Space Station and Space Shuttle . These systems employ an ultra - wideband ( UWB ) pulsed radar / receiver system to track the vehicle location and software that determine the time - difference of arrival ( TDOA ) of the UWB signals between the vehicle and transponders on the station or shuttle [ pp . 19 - 22 ] . NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 7 Professor Albert M . K . Cheng ( UH : Computer Science ) con­ ducted a 2005 seed - grant on “Building and Verifying Fault - Tolerant Autonomous Real - Time Systems for Space Applications” [ 53 - 57 , 95 ] . Autonomous systems and their soft­ ware must perform correctly for an extended period of time and make real - time decisions that meet both logical and timing requirements ; they must tolerate implementation and environ - ment - induced faults . This project focuses on ( 1 ) adding scalable fault - tolerance in the decision - making autonomy software of a real - time autonomous system and ( 2 ) augmenting the capability of formal verification strategies by providing an alternative based on scalable rule - base analysis to model checking and theorem prov­ ing . Tools and techniques are detailed and results summarized . Ms . Bin Lu based part of her dissertation research on this project . The project builds on 2004 and 2003 seed - grant projects that support­ ed part of the Ph . D . research of Yan Wang and the M . S . research of F . Zhou and two M . S . students—S . Fang and F . Shang . There is a long - standing and increasing need for multiple spacecraft that fly in formation about planets , moons , and other bodies as well as through deep space . Such formations can enable high resolution measurement of gravitational fields , res­ olution of space - time events in the solar wind , ultra - long base­ line interferrometry , and many other needs . Professors Heidar Malki ( UH : Engineering Technology ) , Leang - San Shieh ( UH : ECE ) , and H . J . Lee ( UH : ECE ) examined “PWM Control of Formation Flying Space Vehicles” through pulse - width - modu - lated ( PMW ) analog tracking systems and associated non - linear control systems . They examined the advantages of converting from analog to digitally - based control methods [ 73 - 75 ] . Professor Malki also provided a progress report on the 2004 ISSO seed - grant “A Neural - Network - Based Approach for Control of Vibration in a Black Hawk Helicopter” [ 115 ] . A major goal of computer science is for computers to under­ stand human language ( Natural Language ) and to respond accu­ rately to human speech . Professor H . Al - Mubaid ( UHCL : Computer Science ) received a 2005 seed - grant for “Natural Language Interface Models for Fast Responsiveness Applications . ” He focuses on computer tools that efficiently identify the ambiguities of human words in sentences using “word prediction” techniques [ 41 - 44 , 94 ] . Data sets from Reuters Wire Service , Medline , and Security and Exchange Commission filings were used to test the natural language interface . Professor Al - Mubaid also received a 2005 mini - grant for in - depth examination of “A Text - Mining Technique for Literature Profiling and Automatic Extraction of Information from Biomedical Literature” [ 45 - 49 ] . The project developed a new technique for term identification and classification . It was test­ ed against text abstracts in PubMed that contain over 14 million biomedical abstracts . Professors T . Andrew Yang and S . Davari ( UHCL : Computer Science and Mathematics ) report the results of new work on their 2004 ISSO seed - grant in the “Development of Wireless Stations for Distributed Field Operations” [ 125 ] . Four new pub­ lications have resulted from their on - going efforts to determine and test the key parameters and metrics for robost distributed wireless networks . Devices and Materials Professors T . L . Harman ( UHCL : Computer Engineering ) and F . K . Tittel ( Rice University : Electrical and Computer Engineering ) with Dr . J . C . Graf ( JSC : Crew and Thermal Systems ) completed a six - year program of joint research devot­ ed to the development and application of advanced laser tech­ nology for monitoring contaminants within air and water streams . In 2005 , Post - Doctoral Aerospace Fellow Dr . Y . Bakhirkin completed the joint UHCL - Rice University project “Development of Quantum - Cascade Laser Biosensor Technology . ” He focused on the development of new types of real - time gas sensors based on continuous wave and pulsed quantum cascade lasers . The lasers are used in systems for med­ ical diagnostics , environmental monitoring , and industrial process control [ 27 - 32 ] . Professor Harman focused on the soft­ ware needed for analysis of the data . The efficient absorption and / or radiation of heat is critical to the operation and lifetime of space systems . Passive heat - man - agement systems with low mass per unit of heat - flow are high­ ly desirable . Professor A . Bensaoula ( UH : Center for Advanced Materials ) and Dr . A . Carreno ( Aerospace Fellow ) report on the “Development of Micro - Column Arrays ( MCA ) for Thermal Management Applications” [ 15 - 18 ] . They coordinate the project with Dr . B . Mayeaux ( JSC : Materials and Process Branch ) , Dr . A . Alemu ( new Fellow ) , and Prof . R . Pillai ( UH : Electrical and Computer Engineering ) . They are creating metallic surfaces that are densely covered by tiny pyramids formed from the original surface materials . Laser beams are used to vaporize the original surface ; vacuum and temperature conditions are controlled so that the material reforms itself into arrays of pyramidal struc­ tures . The arrays produce a surface of low reflectance and high emission of thermal radiation . This work evolved from the 2004 ISSO mini - grant proposal “Micro - Column Arrays ( MCA ) for Thermal Management of Spacecraft Environments” [ 99 - 100 ] that produced a new externally funded grant from the Department of Defense in 2005 . Professor A . Bensaoula and Dr . Chris Boney also initiated a 2005 mini - grant project “Investigation of III - Nitride Materials for Space - Based Solar Cells” [ 50 - 52 ] . Mr . Joseph Clement con­ ducted a portion of his graduate degree work at UH on this research . The III - Nitride materials may enable solar cells that are extremely resistant to space radiation and provide higher lifetime conversion efficiency than other semiconductors . In particular , UH researchers are modeling solar cells based on Indium - Gallium - Nitride thin films formed under a range of growth and doping conditions . Fuel cells can chemically combine hydrogen and oxygen to output electric power . Conversely , solar cells can provide elec­ tric power to operate fuel cells in reverse and separate water into hydrogen and oxygen . It is critical that the internal membranes of fuel cells not become contaminated . Professor J . Y . Lu ( UHCL : Chemistry ) explores the development of new types of metal - organic framework ( MOF ) , composed , in part , of nano­ fibers , to remove contaminants from the working fluids of fuel cells . Refer to “Contaminants Removal from Fuel Cells for Aerospace Applications” [ 72 , 96 ] . 8 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Professors D . Keith Hollingsworth and L . Witte ( UH : Mechanical Engineering ) have developed a sys­ tem that speeds up the acquisition of data on thermal radiation from dust - coated surfaces in the atmosphere and also under vacuum conditions characteristic of the Moon and Mars [ 68 - 71 ] . “The Effect of Martian Dust on Radiator Performance” is a seed - grant project performed primarily within the Space Vacuum Chamber of the JSC - Energy Systems Branch . Mr . Ashley Higgins conducted a por­ tion of his graduate work under this project . An invention disclosure has been filed on a method to uniformly deposit dust on multiple test coupons within the vacuum chamber . Professor M . Gorman ( UH : Physics ) received an equipment grant in 2005 for a “Unique High Speed Camera System for Studying the Pulsating Dynamics of Premixed Flames . ” The funds were to replace a ruined micro - channel plate of a high - speed electronic camera . The new plate enables low - light patterns of unstable combustion of hydrocar - BIOCHEMISTRY—Johnathan Siefert , research bons mixed with air and oxygen to assistant in biological and biochemical labora - be captured at a frame - rate of 250 Hz tories , focuses study upon differences between [ 66 - 67 ] . strains of species in a research team headed by Professor J . B . Dabney ( UHCL : Dr . George Fox exploring species in outer space . Systems Engineering ) reports on the fifth year of seed - grant support for “Real - Time Active Loading of Piezoelectric Ultrasonic Motors for Simulating Space Robotics Applications” [ 61 - 63 ] . Piezoelectric ultrasonic motors have the potential of high - precision control of mechanical devices at low speed without the use of magnetic fields . However , there are the sun [ 119 - 20 ] . major control challenges at low - speed . NASA - JSC provided $ 100 , 000 of funding in 2004 for this research . Power conditioning equipment used in space vehicles con­ tributes to the total vehicle mass , reliability , and cost . Professor W . Shireen ( UH : Electrical / Electronics Technology ) received the 2004 ISSO seed - grant “An AC - DC - AC Converter with Smaller DC - link capacitor for Space Power Distribution Systems . ” Prof . Shireen and graduate student S . Vanapalli have demonstrated an experimental digital signal processor that enables the use of less massive DC - link capacitors for the same electric power output as traditional equipment [ 123 - 24 ] . Nano - materials are being explored as new additions to exist­ ing commercial products . Professor V . Hadjiev ( UH : Center for Advanced Materials ) provides an update to his 2004 seed - grant project “Raman Scattering Test of Mechanical and Sensor Properties of Advanced Nanocomposites” [ 108 , 127 ] . He contin­ ued his examination of the possibility of reinforcing cyanoacry­ late ( major component of Super Glue ) by the addition of single wall nanotubes . Dr . Keesu Jeon based a portion of his dissertation research on this project . Dr . Jeon is now a post - doctoral fellow at Florida State University in the Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering . Professor LieJune Shiau ( UHCL : Mathematics ) worked with Professor R . Glowinsky and NASA - JSC engi - neers on “Computational Methods in Non - Smooth Mechanics : Applica­ tions To Dry Friction Constrained Motions” [ 88 , 96 ] . Mathematical models and software are important to the control of large robotic arms and similar devices that must be con­ trolled to a high - level of position accuracy . A small business entity , Nasser Enginering , participated in the project . Natural and Induced Radiation The Mars Odyssey spacecraft carried an experiment , MARIE , that detected high speed particles emitted by the sun . MARIE was not fully calibrated before launch . Professor Lawrence Pinsky ( UH : Physics ) and Dr . T . L . Wilson ( JSC : Earth Sciences and Solar System Exploration ) have sig­ nificantly increased its post - flight level of calibration to energetic pro­ tons . They achieved this increase by applying a software package , FLUKA , developed at CERN to model the passage of high energy particles through matter . MARIA data can now be used to study the connections between solar wind proton events detected at Odyssey and their origin on Professor Pinsky also received a 2005 seed - grant to support acquisition of data on the interactions of carbon , aluminum , iron , and copper atoms over an energy range of 100 million to 5 billion electron volts per nucleon with matter . These data will allow higher calibration of a computer model ( FLUKA , devel­ oped at CERN ) used to predict the interactions of solar and galactic cosmic rays with structures and people in space . This work was carried out at the Alternating Gradient Synchrotron ( AGS ) at Brookhaven National Laboratory as part of the NASA – Space Radiation Shielding Measurement Consortium [ University of California – Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory , Brookhaven National Laboratory , UH , NASA - Marshall Space Flight Center ] . The preliminary report is titled “Initiating the Detector Deployment for a Currently Planned NASA Accelerator Measurement” [ 80 - 82 ] . Measurements utilized sili­ con strip detectors provided by Professor E . V . Hungerford ( UH : Physics ) . UH Physics graduate student N . Elkhayari is utilizing this data as a portion of his Ph . D . research . NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 9 Professor L . Shih ( UHCL : Computer Engineering ] provides a follow - up report “High - Performance Martian Space Radiation Mapping” [ 121 - 22 ] on recent results from an earlier seed grant described in the 2004 ISSO Annual Report . The NASA Langley Research Center uti­ lizes a computer code HZETRN ( high - Z and energy transport code ) to predict the radia­ tion environment induced at the surface of Mars by solar and galactic cosmic rays . HZERTN was origi­ nally created to oper­ ate in FORTRAN on a VAX computer and later run on Sun Sparc 5 systems . Professor Courtesy UH Physics Department BROOKHAVEN—Alternating Gradient Synchrotron ( AGS ) run last July at the Brookhaven National Lab in New York . Students involved in the project were Matt Lebourgeois ( l . ) , UH undergraduate student - at the time , now a gradu - ate student at the University of California - San Diego , and Anton ( Toni ) Empl ( r . ) , UH post - doctoral student , normally stationed at CERN . proteins or protein domains throughout the early develop­ ment of living cells . Professors Fox and R . C . Willson ( UH : Chemical Engineer­ ing ) , Dr . D . L . Pierson ( JSC : Micro­ biology Lab ) , and Dr . Viktor Stepanov ( UH : Fellow ) have com­ pleted two years of the post - doctoral project “The Effect of Modeled Micro­ gravity on Microbial Gene Expression” [ 23 - 26 ] . They grow bacteria , such as S . Typhimurium and E . coli MG1655 , in low shear rotating envi­ ronments that simu­ late some aspects of a zero - gravity environ­ ment . The cell - envelopes of bacteria Shih and colleagues are revising the software to operate much faster on modern computer clusters and Field Programmable Gate Arrays ( FPGA ) . A FPGA is a type of logic chip with thou­ sands of gates that can be programmed . A preliminary , non - opti - mized FPGA module showed a 200 - to - 600 time speed over the speed of equivalent HZETRN routines running on Sun Sparc 5 systems . NASA - LRC plans this year on transferring the revised software to a development version of the HZERTN code and soon , thereafter , to production software . The code may also be useful in accelerating FLUKA software . Search for the Origins of Life On and Beyond Earth I found the book Oxygen—the Molecule that Made the World ( Oxford UP , 2002 , 384pp . ) by Professor Nick Lane to be an exceptionally interesting review of the development of human understanding of oxygen , oxygen ' s history over geological time , the role of oxygen in the proliferation of life , and how life has resisted , from the first , the destructive actions of oxygen on the living cell . Professor Lane notes on page 157 that Woese and Fox ( G . E . Fox : UH : Biology and Biochemistry ) introduced “one of the great paradigm shifts in biology . ” He explains , “A little - known group of prokaryotes , most of which inhabited extreme environments such as hot springs and hypersaline lakes , confounded all expectations when their ribosomal RNA was analyzed . The analyses showed that they shared little more with the bacteria than the absence of a nucleus . ” Professor Fox con­ tinues this line of research in the 2005 ISSO seed - grant “Early Origins of Genetic Systems” [ 64 - 65 , 95 ] . Results illustrate a key role for the ribosomal machinery as a source and sink of useful are found to adjust to stagnant nutrient conditions that result from the low shearing of liquid about the cells that , under nor­ mal terrestrial gravity , would bathe the cells in new liquid . These deprived cells express different genes from normal conditions and from each other . The team received support from Professor Y . Folfanov ( UH : Computer Science ) and several students in performing the statistical analyses of the data from the microar­ rays used in these studies . Summaries may be found of addition­ al results of research conducted in the first year of the existing Post - Doctoral Aerospace Fellowship project along with results from two prior seed - grant projects in 2004 and 2003 [ 103 - 04 ] . A long - standing objective of NASA is to determine the exis­ tence or not of life on Mars . The two Viking crafts that landed on Mars in 1976 sampled soils and returned ambiguous data . A few meteors discovered on the Antarctic ice have been proven to be from Mars . In particular , Dr . David McKay and col­ leagues have argued that Allan Hills 84001 contains ancient fossilized nano - organisms . Dr . John H . Miller ( UH , Physics & TCSAM ) and Dr . D . S . McKay work with Dr . J . A . Jones ( JSC ) , Dr . J . Wosik ( UH , ECE and TCSUH ) , and Dr . David Warmflash ( PDA Fellow ) to develop new means of detecting life within Martian soils and rocks . The fellowship project “Martian Soil Biosensors Based on Dielectric Spectroscopy” is in its second year [ 33 - 38 ] . Dr . D . Nawarathna earned his Ph . D . degree in 2005 from the University of Houston under this program . F . Karouia ( JSC ) is now engaged in a Ph . D . program at UH . In 2005 , the group also completed a mini - grant project that con­ ducted “Low - Frequency Dielectric Spectroscopy of Martian Soil Samples” [ 116 - 18 , 126 ] . 10 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA The research group led by Dr . Miller also conducted the 2005 seed - grant project “Electromagnetic Probes of Biological Molecular Motors” [ 76 - 79 ] in direct support of reported fellow­ ship research . Electric fields across cell membranes vibrate in response to various physiological processes such as membrane pumps . New minimal invasive techniques are deployed to mon­ itor these vibrations from a few hertz to the order of 1 kHz . The ability to non - invasively monitor active physiological processes in vivo is of potential importance for biophysics , biomedicine , and pharmaceutical development . Professor J . Wosik ( UH : Computer & Electric Engineering ) is working with Professor J . Miller ( UH : Physics ) , Dr . D . S . McKay ( JSC ) , and Dr . D . Warmflash ( ISSO : Fellow ) on three new tech­ niques to characterize the magnetite crystals found in Martian meteorites . The 2005 ISSO seed - grant had been awarded for “Magnetic Microscopy Studies of Magnetotactic Fossils on Martian Meteorite ALH84001 and Related Earthbound Analog Systems” [ 89 - 92 ] . Microwave techniques include ( a ) an open con­ focal resonator , ( b ) a high - spatial resolution near - field microscopy probe , and ( c ) ferromagnetic resonance . These techniques can measure the permittivity , permeability , and conductivity of both solid state and biological samples at the microscopic level . Professor I . N . Rothman ( UH : English ) edits the ISSO Annual Report and also conducts research into the literature of the 17th and 18th centuries with a focus on the writings of Daniel Defoe . ISSO supported his investigation last year into “Science and Invention in Literature—Divergent Views of Daniel Defoe and Jonathan Swift” [ 83 - 87 ] . Dr . Rothman notes the contrasting atti­ tudes toward the emerging fields of science and the practical arts of Defoe and Swift . Defoe admired , analyzed , and promot­ ed these new human accomplishments and their potential for human advancement . Swift treated similar topics and their pro­ ponents with sarcasm and disdain . These contrasting approach­ es are evident today in public and literary response to efforts to explore and develop the resources of our solar system . Biomedical Sciences in Space It is well established that some aspects of human physiology change when a person lives under zero - gravity conditions in space . Professor G . Gunaratne ( UH : Physics ) provides a progress report on his 2004 ISSO seed - grant “A Theoretical Analysis of Vibrational Modes Aimed at their Use as Measures of Bone Damage” ( 105 - 07 , 126 ) . He conducted research with Chamith Rajapakse who completed his doctoral research at UH in 2005 and is now a post - doctoral fellow in the Department of Radiology at the University of Pennsylvania . They applied modern seismic techniques to deduce the existence of long micro - cracks in the trabecular portion of bones , the inner soft layer , that lead to fractures . Professor Gunaratne is collaborat­ ing with Professor M . Liebschner ( Rice U . : Bioengineering ) who is developing an instrument to measure bone structure . Professor C . S . Layne ( UH : Health and Human Performance ) directed a 2001 – 2003 Post - Doctoral Aerospace Fellowship project that was reported in the 2004 and 2005 ISSO annual reports . His report on “Voluntary Muscle Contractions in Advance of Mechanical Foot Stimulation To Enhance Neuromuscular Reflex Responses” summarizes the research , publications , and presentations since Y2004 [ 109 - 14 ] . Drs K . Forth and A . Abercromby both participated on this project and earned their doctoral degrees at the University of Houston . They now both work at NASA - JSC . Dr . Forth is as post - doctoral fel­ low in the Neurosciences Laboratory , and Dr . Abercromby is employed in the Anthropometrics Laboratory . They found that the application of mechanical foot stimulation can be used to elicit and enhance neuromuscular activity of the triceps surae muscles and thereby attenuate the neuromuscular degradation experienced during prolonged bedrest and during extended stays in microgravity . Professor Mark S . F . Clarke ( UH : Health and Human Performance ) and Dr . Daniel L . Feeback ( NASA - JSC ) conduct­ ed the 2005 ISSO seed - grant “Validation of a Novel Micro - Capillary Array Fluid Collection Technology for Determination of Biomarkers of Bone Metabolism in Human Sweat” [ 58 - 60 , 95 ] . This study contributed to their earlier Post - Doctoral Aerospace Fellowship project on the same general topic . Bone loss is associated with proteins released into the blood . Trace amounts of these proteins are present in sweat . Clarke and Feeback have identified methods to detect and quantify these microscopic quantities of tracer proteins within a day of their release . These techniques may well prove useful both in space and on Earth for clinical monitoring of bone loss . Professor G . D . Boetticher ( UHCL : Computer Science ) pro­ vides updates on the 2004 seed - grant project “A Recursive Application of a Support Vector Machine for Protein Spot Detection in 2 - Dimensional Gel Electrophoresis” [ 102 ] that enabled Mr . M . Sasika to obtain an M . S . degree in 2005 . Professor Boetticher also provides an update on the 2004 seed - grant project “Impact of Chromosome Lineage upon Genetic Program Modeling” [ 102 ] . The last project may lead to better techniques for mining of large databases in the aerospace and biomedical fields . Texas Space Grant Consortium ( TSGC ) The University of Houston is a charter member of the Texas Space Grant Consortium in assocation with The University of Texas at Austin and Texas A & M University at College Station . In acknowledgment of its national objectives , the UH Office of the Provost supported the UH charter membership . However , the Office of the Vice Provost of Research has directed ISSO and the Space Vacuum Epitaxy Center to pay the $ 30 , 000 of the annual membership for the University of Houston from State Line Item funds . This significantly reduces the ability of ISSO to fund UH seed - grants and Post - Doctoral Fellowship projects . The ISSO Director is an associate director of TSGC and on the Board of Directors . The UH campus representative in 2005 was the SVEC director . A faculty member of the University of Houston - Clear Lake represents that campus . In 2005 , TSGC awarded $ 31 , 000 to UH students and faculty in response to requests for fellowship and scholarship announcements and requests for research proposals . There were no awards to UHCL faculty or students . NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 11 MICROSCOPY—Dr . David Criswell ( l . ) , ISSO Director , stands at the scanning tip microwave microscope ( STMM ) devel - oped in the laboratory of Dr . Jarek Wosik ( r . ) , research pro - fessor in the Texas Center for Superconductivity ( TCSUH ) . The device has been developed to achieve micron - level res - olution combined with high sensitivity . It will allow the non - destructive testing and analysis of any surface that needs characterization of high spatial resolution impedence . TSGC Fellowships Geffert Sandra ( UH ) $ 5 , 000 Singh Cynthia Hanson ( UH ) $ 5 , 000 TSGC Scholarships Sardi Giancarlo ( UH ) $ 1 , 000 New Investigators Program Pradeep Sharma , assistant professor , ( UH : Mechanical Engineering and Physics ) “Novel Size - Effects in the coupled Mechanical Deformation and Opto - Electronic Behavior of Quantum Dots and Wires , ” $ 10 , 000 . Ji Chen , assistant professor , ( UH : Electrical and Computer Engineering ) for “An Efficient Full - Wave Framework for Future Micro and Nano Electronic Devices Modeling / Simulation , ” $ 10 , 000 . ( On - going ) Projects for Y2006 In January 2006 , ISSO received 29 seed - grant proposals from UH and UHCL faculty that requested $ 240 , 000 for UH and $ 108 , 500 for UHCL . An ISSO peer review panel of members from UH , UHCL , and NASA - JSC evaluated the 19 proposals from UH faculty and 10 from UHCL faculty . ISSO awarded the following four UH faculty members a total of $ 57 , 740 and five UHCL faculty $ 54 , 990 . Bensaoula , A . ( UH : Natural Sciences and Mathematics , Center for Advanced Materials ) Micro - Integrated Super Broadband Stellar Simulator Optical Calibration Source Cheng , A . ( UH : Natural Sciences and Mathematics , Computer Science ) Optimizing Quality - of - Service in Adaptive Optics Systems and Other ( m , k ) - Firm Real - Time Spacecraft Control Systems Dabney , J . B . ( UHCL : Science and Computer Engineering , Computer Engineering ) Prototype Micro - Manipulator for Space Robotics Applications Fox , G . ( UH : Natural Sciences and Mathematics , Biology and Biochemistry ) Bacillus pumilus SAFR - 032 : A Model for Planetary Protection Research Garrison , D . ( UHCL : Science and Computer Engineering , Physics ) Origin of Structure in the Early Universe from Gravitations Radiation Lu , J . Y . ( UHCL : Science and Computer Engineering , Chemistry ) Superior Adsorbents for Aerospace Applications Shiau , L . ( UHCL : Science and Computer Engineering , Chemistry ) Computational Methods in Non - Smooth Mechanics : Application to Dry Friction Constrained Motions Shih , L . ( UHCL : Science and Computer Engineering , Computing & Mathematics ) Efficient space radiation compu­ tation with parallel FPGA Song , G . ( UH : Engineering , Mechanical ) Innovative Intelligent Adaptive - Passive Damping of a Space Trus Using Fail - Safe Magneto Rheological ( MR ) Fluid Dampers Project funding must be complete by August 31 , 2006 . Each investigator is required to submit proposals for external funding and their first progress report by January 2007 . Those reports will appear in the 2006 ISSO Annual Report . They also commit to providing a short up - date for five years on all proposals , papers , presentations , students , collaborators , and organizations that participate in research welling out of the seed - grant funding . The Peer Review panel recommended another 10 projects , totaling $ 120 , 400 , they considered worthy of funding . However , sufficient funds were not available . ISSO anticipates announcing in March 2006 a new request for proposals from UH and UHCL faculty and JSC researchers for the fourth set of Post - Doctoral Aerospace Fellowship projects . The new projects could begin as soon as September 1 , 2006 . Invitation to Read the 2005 Report State of Texas funding of the Houston Partnership for Space Exploration enables extensive research among UH and UHCL researchers and researchers at the NASA - Johnson Space Center . UH and UHCL faculty leveraged this state funding by a factor of 5 . 8 in 2005 and a factor of 4 . 7 - to - 1 since the establishment of HPSE in 1991 . This document contains reports on all projects conducted in 2005 and provides results of reported work that ISSO has sup­ ported since 2001 . This report is also available online at < http : / / isso . uh . edu > . 12 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports ISSO PDAF Reports NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 13 Liftoff of the Endeavor Shuttle Kennedy Space Center Courtesy NASA Kennedy Space Center 14 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Development of Micro Column Arrays ( MCA ) for Thermal Management Applications Abdelhak Bensaoula , Brian M . Mayeaux , Andenet Alemu , Angela Carreno Abstract—Micro Column Arrays ( MCA ) have been formed on thin metal foils and semiconductor materials . The formation process is being refined to produce MCA structures tailored for different applications . As a part of the optimization , Finite Element Method ( FEM ) simulations of MCA struc­ tures have been used to study the influence of the MCA geometry on the resulting heat loss . FEM mod­ eling indicates that micro column arrays are very effective heat reducers compared to smooth metal surfaces . This finding has been experimentally verified by comparing the temperature of MCA - struc - tured and identical non - structured metals under resistive heating . T HERMAL MANAGEMENT OF spacecraft and space station environments is an impor­ tant issue in both manned and unmanned exploration of space . Transporting heat away from spacecraft components as well as bringing heat to other systems is often based on large , liquid - based heat exchange systems . Such active systems add extra weight to the spacecraft and rely on mechanical components which can malfunc­ tion , thus affecting the maximum Dr . Abdelhak Bensaoula payload and lifetime of a mission . A possible alternative is a passive cooling system in which thin coatings or foils would collect or remove heat by radiative absorption or emission . In order for a radiation - based system to be feasible , the foil or coating would have to have emissivity and / or absorbtance . Technology for the successful fabrication of Micro Column Arrays ( MCA ) on thin metal foils has recently been developed in conjunction with Integrated Micro Sensors , Inc . ( IMS ) of Houston , Texas . MCA consist of densely packed micro cones sep­ arated by cone - shaped micro cavities and exhibit low reflectance ( < 0 . 171 ) and high absorbtance ( > 0 . 978 ) over a wide spectral range in a very close approximation of blackbody behavior . 1 This project seeks to explore MCA structures from thin foils as possible passive cooling systems which would collect or remove heat by radiative absorption or emission though their near - blackbody nature . The study involves the formation and characterization of MCA samples as well as modeling of MCA sample performance though numerical simulation . Methodology MCA are produced by pulsed laser ablation of the substrate material combined with mechanical translation of the sample to create cone - shaped micro tips interdigitated with cone - shaped micro cavities . 2 , 3 The formation of cone - shaped micro - columns protruding above the surface by about 10 - 20 µ m is a result of re­ distribution of the surface material made molten by ablation with a sufficiently long sequence of laser pulses . The most important parameter in this process is the laser fluence , which should pro­ vide heating close or slightly above the solid melting threshold . The second parameter is the number of laser shots applied to the same surface spot , which should exceed a threshold value between 10 3 and 10 4 . For this project , MCA have been investi­ gated on SiC , Si , Ta , Ti , and stainless steel materials . We undertook computer simulation of MCA thermal proper­ ties in order to better understand the effect of MCA geometry— in particular , the aspect ratios—on heat loss properties . The thermal analysis was carried out using Comsol FemLab 1 soft­ ware , which is an environment for modeling and solving engi­ neering problems that are based on partial differential equations ( PDEs ) . The built - in physics models allow definition of physi­ cal parameters such as material properties , loads , constraints , sources , and fluxes , without defining the underlying equations . The software has several different modules , one of them being the heat transfer module , which has been used throughout this simulation and supports fundamental heat transfer mechanisms such as conduction , convection , and radiation . For radiative heat transfer , the software includes models for both surface - to - sur - face radiation and surface - to - ambient radiation . Equipment A Baasel LBI 6000 Nd : YAG Laser ( λ = 1064 nm ) and a NEAT computer - controlled XYZ Stage have been used to fabricate NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 15 Figure 1 . MCA samples fabricated in - house using an Nd : YAG laser . ( a ) and ( b ) are Si MCA under different processing conditions ; ( c ) titanium ; ( d ) stainless steel . ( water , ethanol , methanol ) . The chamber or the cuvette can be displaced under the laser beam by the same computer - driven X - Y - Z stage as used for in - air processing . Results and Discussion A significant portion of activity on this project has been to translate MCA fabrica­ tion parameters developed with a Cu vapor laser system at our Russian collaborator’s facilities to the Nd : YAG laser - based sys­ tem we have in - house . To date , we have successfully fabricated MCA in - house on Si , SiC , Ti , Ta , and stainless steels , exam­ ples of which are shown in Fig . 1 . For the computer modeling , MCA sam­ ples were assumed to have uniform spac­ ing and size with every micro - cone sur­ rounded by eight other cones . In a vacu­ um environment , each cone radiates heat to the ambient , but a certain portion of the radiated heat will be re - radiated onto adjacent cones . In this manner , the cone contributes not only to cooling the base surface , but also heating the adjacent sur­ faces . The combined effect of the surface - to - ambient radiation and the surface - to - surface radiation determines the efficien­ cy of the MCA in heat removal . Thus , a crucial simulation parameter is the aspect ratio of the structures which , for a con­ stant MCA density , can be defined as the ratio of the total extended surface area to the base area . A simple model consisting of a unit cell with four micro - cones interacting with each other was chosen for the simulations . The 3D diagram of the model with a more detailed picture for the unit cell is shown in Fig . 2 . In all simulations , the base of the samples was supplied with a constant uniform heat flux . The ambient tempera­ ture was set to 0 Kelvin ( considering space vacuum ) and the sides of the base were assumed to be insulated . The base in our simulations has a 10 µ m thickness , Figure 2 . Schematic of an array of micro - cones modeling an actual surface with but the simulations are irrespective of this MCA . The view includes a 3D schematic describing the boundary conditions for parameter since the calculated tempera - the model , indicating surface - to - surface radiation and surface - to - ambient radi - ture is the final steady - state temperature ation boundaries . and is , therefore , independent of the ther­ mal conductivity based upon the assump - MCA structures on several semiconductor and metal materials . tion that the sides of the base are insulated . In addition to the translation stage , we implemented a small pro - The first set of simulations summarized in Fig . 3 compares cessing chamber accessory , which will provide pumping to low the final steady state temperature of three 40 µ m × 40 µ m × 10 vacuum or purging with various gases , such as dry air or an inert µ m structures : a plain Ti sample ( base only ) , a base with rectan­ gas such as nitrogen or argon . We have also built a small liquid gular cross - section pin fins ( for comparison purposes ) , and an pumped cuvette for laser ablation of the samples in liquids MCA . The results of the simulation predict a substantial heat 16 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Figure 3 . Simulations of different extended surface structures on a 40 µ× 40 µ surface of Titanium showing the individual steady - state temperatures when subjected to a heat ﬂux of 4 W / cm 2 , with temperature decrease of 176 ° based on MCA and 265 ° based on the rectangular cross - section pin ﬁn arrays . reduction of the Ti for MCA structured surfaces . Based on a heat flux of 4 W / cm 2 , the steady state temperature of the plain Ti sub­ strate was found to be 1153 . 8 K . The rectangular pin fins yield­ ed a final temperature of 888 . 3K and the MCA a temperature to 977 . 8K , giving a temperature reduction of 265 ° for the pin fin model and 176 ° for the MCA model . To determine the influence of MCA geometry on the cooling of the samples , a second set of simulations was undertaken in which various aspect ratios ( AR ) were used for the MCA geom­ etry . The aspect ratios were calculated by taking the ratio of the total surface area of the MCA to the base area . This is achieved by increasing the cone height in the model . The results are detailed in Fig . 4 and show the steady state temperature varia­ tion as a function of input heat fluxes and aspect ratios . It is clear that higher aspect ratios result in better temperature reduc­ tion of the base surface in this model . A saturation regime is seen , however , for ratios greater than ~ 12 . This is most likely a consequence of the dominant effect of the surface - to - surface heating component . The temperature reduction predicted by our modeling has been experimentally verified . Two samples of a stainless steel alloy 321—one with fabricated MCA and one without—were resistively heated in a vacuum environment . The temperature at the center of each sample was measured by a thermocouple in contact with the back side . The temperature of the MCA - processed sample was approximately 20 - 25 % lower for a wide range of input heat fluxes compared to the un - textured sample ( Fig . 5 ) . The results are surprisingly close to those predicted and are a clear demonstration of the predicted heat loss due to increased radiative emission of the MCA samples . Conclusions Micro - column arrays exhibiting low reflectance and high emis­ sivity have been fabricated by pulsed laser ablation on several metals and semiconductor materials . We performed computer modeling of the heat loss behavior of MCA structures compared to un - textured materials and predicted substantial temperature reduction for the MCA samples . This result was experimentally verified on actual MCA materials . Further simulations highlight­ ed that the aspect ratio of the MCA was the critical parameter in Figure 4 . Simulations carried out on the MCA model for dif - ferent aspect ratios on Ti , showing temperature reduction of the base for a wide range of heat ﬂuxes at different aspect ratios . predicting the amount of heat loss , with the higher aspect ratios exhibiting increased temperature reduction . Based on these results , we believe that control of the aspect ratio will allow the temperature reduction capabilities of MCA to be widely tuned to meet a variety of thermal management applications . References 1 D . Starikov , C . Boney , R . Pillai , A . Bensaoula , G . A . Shafeev , and A . V . Simakin , “Spectral and Surface Analysis of Heated Micro - Column Arrays Fabricated by Laser - Assisted Surface Modification , ” Infrared Physics and Techonology 45 ( 2004 ) : 159 - 67 . 2 F . Sánchez , J . L . Morenza , R . Aguiar , J . C . Delgado , and M . Varela , “Whiskerlike Structure Growth on Silicon Exposed to ArF Excimer Laser Irradiation , ” Appl . Phys . Lett . 69 ( 1996 ) : 620 - 22 . 3 S . I . Dolgaev , S . V . Lavrishev , A . A . Lyalin , A . V . Simakin , V . V . Voronov , and G . A . Shafeev , “Formation of Conical NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 17 Figure 5 . Temperature comparison between a stainless steel foil and MCA textured foil of the same dimensions under different heat fluxes . A reduction of 20 - 25 % is seen between the two samples . Microstructures Upon Laser Evaporation of Solids , ” Appl . Phys . Lett . A 73 . 2 ( 2001 ) : 177 - 81 . Publications Adjim , M . , A . Saidane , R . Pillai , A . Bensaoula , C . Boney , and D . Starikov . “Thermal Analysis of Micro - Column Arrays for Precise Temperature Control in Space , ” ASME J . Heat Transfer . ( In process . ) Adjim , M . , A . Saidane , R . Pillai , and A . Bensaoula . “Transient 3D Heat Flow Analysis for Microchannel Heat Sinks Using the Transmission Line Matrix Method , ” ASME J . Heat Transfer . ( In process . ) Baburaj , E . G . , D . Starikov , J . Evans , G . A . Shafeev , and A . Bensaoula . “Enhancement of Adhesive Joint Strength by Laser Surface Modification , ” J . Adhes . Adhesives . ( In press . ) Starikov , D . , C . Boney , R . Pillai , A . Bensaoula , G . A . Shafeev , and A . V . Simakin . “Spectral and Surface Analysis of Heated Micro - Column Arrays Fabricated by Laser - Assisted Surface Modification , ” Infrared Phys . Technol . 45 ( 2004 ) : 159 - 67 . Presentations Bensaoula , A . , D . Starikov , N . Badi , N . Medelci , R . Pillai , I . Rusakova , P . V . Kazakevich , A . V . Simakin , and G . A . Shafeev . “Influence of Laser Parameters on the Properties of Nanoparticles Produced by Laser Ablation of Solid Targets in a Liquid Environment , ” Second Conf . on Nanoscale Devices and System Integration , Houston , TX , April 4 – 6 , 2005 . Funding and Proposals “High - Reliability Low - Resistance Inexpensive Ohmic Contacts to HgCdTe , ” DoD ( Army ) , IMS / CAM , $ 100 , 000 . ( Not funded . ) “Intelligent Ultra - Strong Adhesive Bonding of Dissimilar Materials , ” NASA , IMS / CAM , $ 70 , 000 . ( Not funded . ) “Ultra - Strong High - Temperature Bonding of Titanium to Ceramic Materials , ” DoD ( MDA ) , IMS / CAM , $ 100 , 000 . ADVANCED MATERIALS—Dr . Chris Boney ( l . ) , research sci - entist in physics , and Sidi Mohamed Behabib ( r . ) , a researcher and exchange scholar from the University of Tlemcen in Algeria , operate a spectroscopic ellipsometry instrument . They look at optical properties to an index of a fraction to determine ﬁlm thickness and alloy composition of heat samples . Their study focuses on how optical proper - ties change at elevated temperatures . REACTOR—Dr . Nacer Badi ( l . ) , research assistant professor in physics , works with Rajeev Rajan Pillai ( r . ) , at a multi - ele - ment coating reactor utilized for hardcoating MCA struc - tures at the Center for Advanced Materials ( CAM ) . Pillai is currently enrolled in the doctoral program in electrical and computer engineering . 18 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA UWB Tracking System Design with TDOA Algorithm for Space Applications Edward Dickerson , Dickey Arndt , Jianjun Ni Abstract—An ultra - wideband ( UWB ) tracking system design effort is underway for a free - flying video camera system to aid in inspection around the International Space Station and the Space Shuttle . This system can also be applied to tracking for Lunar / Mars rovers in early exploration phases where satel­ lite navigation systems ( such as GPS ) are not available . The SCOUT vehicle under development at JSC provides a testbed for the utilization of the UWB tracking system in such an environment . UWB tech­ nology is exploited to implement the tracking system with its properties , such as high data rate , fine time resolution , low power spectral density , and multipath immunity . A system design using commer­ cially available UWB products has been implemented . A tracking algorithm , TDOA ( Time Difference of Arrival ) , has been investigated . The performance analysis provides guidance to improve system design . Simulations show that the TDOA algorithm can achieve fine resolution with low noise data . Outdoor tests demonstrate the feasibility of UWB tracking . U LTRA - WIDEBAND ( UWB ) , also known as impulse or carrier - free radio technolo­ gy , is one promising new technolo­ gy . In February , 2002 , the Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) approved the deployment of this technology in the commercial sector under Part 15 of its regula - tions . 1 Rapid technological advanc­ es have made it possible to imple­ ment cost - effective UWB radar and UWB communication and tracking systems . Furthermore , array beamforming and space - time Dr . Dickey Arndt processing techniques promise further advancement in the oper­ ational capabilities of UWB technology to achieve long - range coverage , high capacity , and interference - free quality of recep - tion . 2 Hence , UWB technology is employed to implement the communications and tracking system design for space applica­ tions in this research effort . 3 One such application is for a robotic free - flying camera known as Mini - AERCam ( Autonomous Extra - vehicular Robotic Camera ) , which is being developed at the NASA Johnson Space Center ( JSC ) to assist in International Space Station ( ISS ) operations . Mini - AERCam is designed to provide astronauts and ground control real - time video for camera views of ISS . The system will assist ISS crewmembers and ground personnel to monitor ongoing operations and perform visual inspections of exterior ISS components without requiring extravehicular activity ( EVA ) . Mini - AERCam is also applicable to inspect the surface damage of the Space Shuttle to assure flight safety . This system can be readily applied to tracking for Lunar / Mars rovers in early exploration phases . After a Moon / Mars base has been established , it will be necessary to track a rover or an astronaut’s posi­ tion while working around the base . The UWB system with robust to multipath interference can co­ exist with other communication Dr . Jianjun Ni systems used by the landing vehi­ cle . The SCOUT testbed vehicle , a Moon rover prototype under development at JSC , is available to test the proposed UWB tracking system . Analysis of Tracking Algorithm The Time Difference of Arrival ( TDOA ) tracking algorithm cur­ rently used in the mini - AERCam tracking system is developed in Chan and Ho’s study of an efficient closed - form localization solution where the statistical properties of the algorithm are ana­ lyzed to some extent . 4 While the analysis presented is essential­ ly correct , it is also sketchy and incomplete , making a thorough performance evaluation of the algorithm problematic . To correct this deficiency , we performed a careful and complete analysis of the statistical properties of this algorithm in two dimensions . Assume that there is one transmitter located at an unknown NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 19 location ( x 0 , y 0 ) in two - dimensional space and M + 1 receivers located at positions { ( 0 , 0 ) , ( x 1 , y 1 ) , ( x 2 , y 2 ) , … , ( x M , y M ) } , which are assumed to be known precisely . Further , assume that measure­ ments of the relative time delays { d 1 , d 2 , … , d M } between the arrival of the transmitted signal at receiver ( 0 , 0 ) and each of the other locations ( x 1 , y 1 ) , … , ( x M , y M ) are available . If the propagation velocity of the signals is given by the constant c , then it can be shown that the following system of linear equations is satisfied : G 0 u 0 = h 0 , ( 1 ) where If the time delay measurements are not precisely correct , we have instead the system G 1 u 0 = h 0 − ( ∆ h 1 − G 1 u 0 ) , ( 2 ) where and δ = [ δ 1 δ 2 … δ M ] T represents the vector of errors in relative time delay measurements , which is assumed to be a zero - mean Gaussian random vector with covariance matrix Q = E { δδ T } . By going through three stages of the algorithm , we derive the final approximations for the bias vector and autocorrelation matrix of the algorithm . Due to space limitations , the results are not presented here . Instead , we derive and present the mean - squared - error ( MSE ) for a simple far - field example . In particu­ lar , we let M = 3 , Q = σ 2 I , and If we consider an orbit tracking in two - dimensional space ( r 0 is the radius of the orbit and r is radius of the area in which the receivers are placed ) , and let x 0 = r 0 cos θ , y 0 = r 0 sin θ , x i = r cos φ , y i = r sin φ i , and ri = r20 + r2 - 2r0rcos ( w - fi ) , then the total MSE is given by ( 3 ) where It is shown that MSE is a function of parameters σ , r 0 , r , ω and φ , and it is linear to the variance σ 2 of the TDOA estimates . Although the relation between MSE and r 0 ( or r ) is not obvious , given a receiver configuration region and a tracking area , there exists an optimal configuration of receivers that minimizes MSE . This optimization problem will be studied in the future . Simulation Results RMSE vs . TDOA Noise A set of two - dimensional orbit ( radius 100m ) tracking simula­ tions is implemented to analyze the factor of TDOA variance . The simulations give the root - mean - square - errors ( RMSE ) for the reference - centered configuration . The results are summa­ rized in Table 1 . Simulation results show that the tracking error is linear to the standard deviation of TDOA data , which coin­ cides with the analytical result in ( 3 ) . Static Reference vs . Dynamic Reference The TDOA algorithm used in this research effort requires one receiver as the reference located at the origin . Besides using the static reference , a scheme dynamically using different receiver as reference is studied . The simulation shows that the tracking resolution is improved from 1 . 7660m to 0 . 8762m at the TDOA noise level std = 0 . 01 by using the dynamic reference ( Fig . 1 ) . Table 1 . Error Analysis of Orbit Tracking with Different TDOA Noise Levels Standard Deviation ( std ) RMSE ( m ) 0 . 01 100 1 . 7660 0 . 001 100 0 . 1729 0 . 0001 100 0 . 0172 of TDOA ( ns ) Tracking Range ( m ) Prototype Design and Laboratory Experiment We have designed and implemented a prototype of the UWB tracking system and conducted a laboratory experiment to test the UWB tracking capability using the TDOA estimates in a gener­ al lab environment at JSC . In this section , some issues including design philosophy , key hard­ 20 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA ware , TDOA estimates , and experiment results will be discussed . Design Philosophy The extremely high fidelity of the UWB timing circuitry permits very precise measurements of propagation time while transmitting data . A key element of the system design philosophy was to avoid introduction of system components or structure that would in any way degrade the fine time resolution of the UWB sig­ nal since it is critical for precise tracking . In keeping with this goal , the TDOA technique was adopted for tracking in order to avoid the degradation in time res­ olution introduced by synchronization errors between the transmitter and receiv­ er . Similarly , to eliminate the complicated synchronization problem required when implementing the TDOA algorithm with four separate receivers , a four - element receiving antenna array was designed , which connects four antennas through a power combiner to one UWB receiver using low - loss , phase - aligned intercon­ nect cables with precisely calibrated delays . In this way , four delayed versions of the received UWB pulse are obtained at the receiver within a scanning window . Since the cable delays are known precise - Figure 1 . Error Analysis ( Static Reference vs . Dynamic Reference ) Figure 2 . UWB TDOA Tracking Experiment Set - up ly , it is straightforward to measure the TDOA estimates between the four antennas . The TDOA data are fed into the TSWLSS algorithm , and the transmitter position is computed and dis­ played in the tracking window . Key Hardware Time Domain Corporation UWB radios were chosen for this design effort . The Time Domain PulsON 200 UWB Evaluation Kit ( EVK ) allows product developers to examine the perform­ ance , capabilities , and properties of UWB technology . EVK radios can be configured for testing or utilized as elements of an application demonstration . The EVK has the following key features : • PRF ( Pulse Repetition Frequency ) : 9 . 6 MHz • 8 data rates : 75 kbps , 150 kbps , … , 4 . 8 Mbps , 9 . 6 Mbps • Center Frequency ( radiated ) : approximately 4 . 7 GHz • Bandwidth ( 10 dB radiated ) : 3 . 2 GHz • EIRP : - 11 . 5 dBm • Co - exists with all U . S . - based wireless systems ( including GPS ) • Superior multipath immunity as a result of UWB - physics • Fine resolution tracking • FCC Compliant—FCC 15 . 517 , 15 . 209 • Diamond Dipole Antenna • StrongARM ® Microprocessor for Embedded Applications Development The EVK radios can provide ten picosecond time resolution by using appropriate data extraction algorithms . Cross - Correlation plus Peak Detection ( CCPD ) method To estimate the time delay between pulses , a method called Cross - Correlation plus Peak Detection ( CCPD ) has been devel­ oped . Cable delays were chosen such that the four delayed ver­ sions of the signal from different antennas fit within a scanning window 100 nanoseconds in duration . A peak detector is first used to detect the direct - path arrival of each signal and separate it from later multipath arrivals . Cross correlation between the four direct - path arrivals is then employed to estimate the precise time delay between the signals . The maximum cross - correlation coefficient between any two of the arriving signals gives the optimal ( maximum - likelihood ) estimate of the time delay between the two . Laboratory Experiments The experiment set - up is as follows : ( Fig . 2 ) • EVK Radio : Two Time Domain PulsOn 200 EVK radios # 206 and # 209 ; Radio # 206 is set as transmitter and Radio # 209 is set as receiver . • Antenna : Four antennas mounted on tripods with known positions are connected with the receiver and the transmitter antenna also mounted on a tripod for mobility . • PC : Dell Latitude laptop running Waveform Scan software . NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 21 Figure 3 . Signals Recieved from Four Antennas at one Receiver Figure 4 . The Joint Tracking Test with • Hub : Two radios are connected to the PC through standard Ethernet cables just for radio configuration . The Pulse Repetition Frequency ( PRF ) of the EVK radio is 9 . 6 MHz ; that is , a single UWB pulse is transmitted every 104 nanoseconds . If the delays of the antenna interconnect cables are known , it is straightforward to measure the TDOA estimates from four antennas . Figure 3 shows four delayed versions of one received pulse with multipath components in a scanning window . A reference tag is used to calibrate the system to obtain the cable delays . Before operating the tracking system , a transmit­ ter is placed at a known position to act as a reference tag , and cable delays are computed based on the multiple arrivals from the reference transmitter position . Once the cable delays are known , the CCPD finds the time delays between signals . The TDOA estimates can be obtained from the above scan at the accuracy of ten picoseconds . TDOA data are fed into the TSWLSS algorithm coded in Matlab and the transmitter posi­ tion is calculated as the output . In the 15 - by - 15 foot lab environ­ ment , a tracking resolution of less than one foot is achieved . Outdoor Test Outdoor tests were conducted to test the UWB tracking capabil­ ity with extended range in an open environment . Due to the con­ servative FCC limit on the UWB emission power ( − 41 . 3dBm / MHz ) , the transmitting range is limited . In order to increase the tracking range , a low noise amplifier ( LNA ) was added at the receiving side after each receiving antenna . A joint tracking test was conducted with the SCOUT vehicle behind Building 14 at JSC ( Fig . 4 ) . One UWB radio was inte­ grated with the vehicle as the transmitter . The objectives of the test were to : 1 . Test the interference with other communication systems on the vehicle ( GPS ( 1 . 6 GHz ) , Video ( 5 . 8 GHz ) , Data Communication ( 2 . 4 GHz ) ) . 2 . Test the tracking capability for a moving target . The baseline radius was increased to 7 . 5 meters for this test . Tracking was tested at ranges from 100 to 200 feet within an azimuth range from − 60 degrees to + 60 degrees ( 0 degrees = boresight ) with the SCOUT vehicle running at normal speed ( 6­ 8 miles / hour ) . In order to test the real - time tracking capability of the system , several tracking trajectories were tested in the the SCOUT Vehicle tracking area . The tracking update rate for all trajectories was approximately 5 Hz . A laser range finder ( LIDAR ) was used to determine the range between the target and the center of the baseline . Observations from the outdoor test with the SCOUT vehicle are as follows . • The UWB tracking system can track the SCOUT vehicle in real - time with resolution less than 2 feet at a range of up to 200 feet . • The UWB tracking system does not interfere with the Video system . Other communication systems were not active . These will be tested in the future . • Some false localization results shown around the baseline area resulted from a defect in the current evaluation of the UWB radio . This seems to be caused by a partial power spectrum drop at the transmitter . Such false localization results would be filtered out in a fully operational system by integrating a motion model into the tracking system using a Kalman filter or similar technique . • Some signal strength decrease has been observed when the vehicle turns . This is due to the 3 dB loss when the omni­ antennas are in the edge - to - face orientation , as compared to the 0 - dB face - to - face orientation . The use of high gain horn antennas in the future can compensate for this loss and boost the received signal . Above all , this joint test with the SCOUT vehicle demonstrates that the UWB tracking system is capable of tracking the moving target and can co - exist with other RF communication systems on board . Conclusion UWB technology is exploited to design a tracking system for space applications . A system design using commercially avail­ able UWB products has been implemented . A tracking algo­ rithm TDOA has been investigated and the performance analy­ sis provides insight for system design . Simulations show that it can achieve fine resolution and that the dynamic reference scheme improves resolution . Outdoor tests demonstrate the UWB tracking feasibility . Advanced schemes to improve the tracking resolution and range will be investigated in the future . ( Continued on page 38 . ) 22 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA The Effect of Modeled Microgravity on Microbial Gene Expression George E . Fox , Richard C . Willson , Duane L . Pierson , Viktor Stepanov Abstract—The effect of low - shear modeled microgravity ( LSMMG ) on microbial gene expression and physiology is being examined using functional genomics , survival assays , and molecular techniques in Escherichia coli . Reproducible changes in transcription were seen but no direct response to changes in the gravity vector was identified . Instead , absence of shear and a randomized gravity vector appeared to cause local extra - cellular environmental changes , which elicited reproducible cellular responses . In minimal media , the majority of the significantly up - or down - regulated genes of known function were associated with the cell envelope . Comparison with earlier studies of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium conducted under similar growth conditions revealed essentially no similarity in genes , which were significantly up - or down - regulated . Given the substantial overlap in gene content between these closely related organisms , this result clearly demonstrates that different organisms may dramat­ ically differ in their responses to medically significant low - shear and space environments . The project is part of a larger effort to characterize the types of organisms that may inhabit space craft environ­ ments and to understand how they might be affected by the space environment . B ACTERIA ARE CAPABLE OF living in and adapting to a far larger range of environ­ mental conditions than are normal­ ly encountered in usual laboratory environments . Even with full knowledge of an organism’s gene content , it is currently impossible to predict how expression patterns will change in different situations . Thus , usual laboratory growth con­ ditions may not invoke key aspects of an organism’s potential response . Consequently , such studies may conceal behaviors that in a differ - Dr . George E . Fox ent environment may contribute to undesirable phenomena such as pathogenesis . One such case is the low - shear , low - turbulence environments present in utero , at the brush border microvilli of epithelial cells , and in other medically important host environ - ments . 1 Another example is the space environment characterized by microgravity and high background radiation . In this case , the absence of gravity also produces a low - shear environment , which likely results in microorganisms having difficulty remov­ ing themselves from immediate surroundings that have been nutrient depleted and that have received waste products . 2 In order to adapt to life in a low - shear world , bacteria likely express different combinations of genes than they do in more usual laboratory environments and may ultimately make evolutionary adaptations as well . Thus , a particu­ lar bacterium may exhibit properties such as antibiotic resistance , biofilm formation , or virulence that are not generally associated with it . It is therefore not certain which organ­ isms may be problematic . For ex­ ample , a recent study 3 showed that Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi­ murium grown under low - shear modeled microgravity ( LSMMG ) appeared to have increased viru - Dr . Victor Stepanov lence potential in a murine model system . A follow - up study 4 revealed that a significant number of the genes are transcriptionally regulated in response to LSMMG . Thus , there are two related objectives needing detailed study before embarking on detailed missions in space . The first is to better understand the effect of the microgravity environment on bacterial behavior . Second , given that organisms may behave in unanticipated ways , it will be important to develop technology to determine which organisms are causing an unanticipated problem without prior knowledge of what the causal organisms might be . The former is being directly addressed in the work supported here by ISSO and the latter in parallel efforts being conducted prima­ rily with other funding sources . NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 23 BIOANALYSIS—Dr . Don L . Tucker at NASA - Johnson Space Center laboratories utilizes the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer to distinguish slight differences between strains of species . Methodology Wild type E . coli MG1655 ( CGSC7740 ) was grown aerobically at 37 ° C in rich ( LB ) and minimal MOPS plus glucose medium in low - shear modeled microgravity ( LSMMG ) and in a normal gravity vector control environment . They were compared with each other as well as control experiments conducted with a nor­ mal gravity vector . Thirteen separate minimal MOPS and six­ teen LB medium growth experiments were performed . Total RNA was extracted from cells and , following removal of ribo­ somal RNA , radioactively labeled . Whole genome transcrip­ tional assays were performed using matched pairs of PCR - prod - uct DNA macroarrays ( Panorama E . coli Gene Arrays , Sigma - Genosys , Houston , TX ) . The hybridized membrane phosphor - images were imported into image analysis software . The data was normalized by reporting each spot as a percentage of the sum of intensities of all spots on the array image . Significant changes in gene expression were identified based on three pre­ viously documented criteria : ( 1 ) an overall p - value of < 0 . 05 which implies a 95 % probability that a change in expression between strains or media was significant , ( 2 ) a log ratio of gene expression which differed from the mean of the log ratios by > 3 . 0 standard deviations giving a 99 . 9 % confidence in gene expression , and ( 3 ) similar gene expression in all three biologi­ cal replicates . Online databases were used for gene nomenclature , gene location and orientation , putative co - transcription , product func­ tion , and presence in S . Typhimurium . The Colibiri WWW Server v3 . 1 < http : / / genolist . pasteur . fr / Colibri / genome . cgi > was used to determine individual gene locations and orientations in the E . coli genome as well as possible co - transcription with other expressed genes . EcoCyc ( Institute for Genomic Research , University of California ; San Diego , CA < http : / / eco cyc . org / > ) and EcoSearch ( University of Miami School of Medicine ; Miami , FL < http : / / bmb . med . miami . edu / search . htm > ) were used in determining gene names / synonyms and gene prod­ uct function . The coli Base Web site < http : / / colibase . bham . ac . uk / > was used to identify genes significantly expressed in this study that are present or have an orthologue in S . Typhimurium . Separately , following growth in the LSMMG environment , the cultures were subjected to antibiotic sensitivity and stress , resist­ ance studies to determine if their response had been changed by the exposure to the LSMMG environment . Antibiotics employed were ampicillin , kanamycin , polymyxin E , chloram­ phenicol and rifampicin . The stress conditions included acidic and basic conditions , oxidative stress , osmotic stress , alcohol stress , and heat shock . Culture survival was compared to con­ trols that had not been grown under LSMMG conditions . Equipment / Special Technology The project takes advantage of the high aspect rotating vessel ( HARV ) bioreactor which was originally developed by NASA scientists 5 to minimize fluid motion for tissue culture differenti­ ation , while maintaining culture aeration through a gas perme­ able membrane . The HARV’s rotation also has the effect of ran­ domizing the gravity vector by rotating in the plane of gravity producing the LSMMG environment . To obtain this environ­ ment , the HARV device is rotated at a speed sufficient to main­ tain cell suspension in the media and completely filled , thereby preventing gas bubbles from causing solution turbulence ( i . e . , shear ) . The HARV apparatus approximates the physiological and transcriptional changes occurring in space flight due to microgravity , while allowing Earth - based culturing . Used in conjunction with commercially available functional genomics technology ( Panorama Gene Arrays , Sigma - Genosys ) , the HARV makes it possible to study microbial gene expression on a genome - wide basis under LSMMG . Results Statistical analysis identified 19 up - regulated and 24 down - reg - ulated genes in LSMMG compared to the control during the mid - log phase of growth in minimal MOPS medium . Of these , 1 up - regulated and 12 down - regulated genes were coded for hypothet­ ical proteins . Among the up - regulated genes of known or puta­ tive function in LSMMG were genes involved in the E . coli acid tolerance response ( transcriptional regulator gadE , the putative chaperone hdeA and associated genes hdeB , hdeD and dctR , flg and fli genes involved in cell motility , chemotaxis regulating genes cheY , cheZ and tar , and the phage related gene ydfD ) . Among the MOPS LSMMG down - regulated genes were five genes involved in heavy metal efflux ( CusCFBA and copA ) . Other LSMMG down - regulated genes included five putative bacteriaphage lambda homologs , four genes involved in various stress responses , the drug resistance gene emrE , the acetylCoA carboxylase subunit accB , and the putative NAD ( P ) binding enzyme ybeM . Two of the MOPS LSMMG down - regulated genes ( cpxP and yfiA ) were regulators . CpxP serves as repressor of the Cpx envelope / extracytoplasmic toxicity stress response system , protects the cell from toxic , transitory stresses , is involved in adhesion and virulence of pathogenic E . coli , and may also act as a periplasmic chaperone . Yfia stabilizes 30S r RNA under cold shock conditions . Possible co - transcribed genes of putative operons were identified based on genomic location and orientation . Physical mapping of the LSMMG MOPS - regulated genes found 34 of 43 genes in four gene clus­ 24 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA ters . Similar analysis of the LB LSMMG cultures identified seven down - regulated genes in LSMMG . These genes were mostly involved in biosynthesis and energy utilization . No sig­ nificant change in response relative to the controls was seen with any of the antbiotics or stresses that were tested . Salmonella Typhimurium is a very close evolutionarily rela­ tive of E . coli , and its response to LSMMG had been studied previously . 4 In fact , the majority of the E . coli MG1655 LSMMG up - and down - regulated genes have homologues or orthologues in S . Typhimurium . We therefore reduced the statis­ tical stringency of our analysis so that a direct comparison could be made with the earlier Salmonella results . When individual genes were intercompared , it was abundantly clear that the vast majority of genes affected by LSMMG in E . coli MG1655 and S . Typhimurium were not affected in the same manner in the other organism . Discussion The primary differences between the LSMMG environment and the control are the randomized gravity vector and low shear present in LSMMG . In attempting to interpret the differences seen , one must consider that they might be due to either or both of these factors or as an indirect effect of one or both . In mini­ mal MOPS medium , E . coli chemotactic and flagellar genes as well as genes involved in the acid tolerance response were up - regulated in LSMMG . It is attractive to theorize that the LSMMG up - regulation of flagellar and chemotactic genes in minimal medium is related to a cellular requirement for reloca­ tion away from zones of local nutrient depletion and excreted waste hypothesized to occur in the low mixing environment of space . 6 The majority of minimal medium LSMMG down - regu - lated genes are involved in metal or drug transport , cell lysis , or in regulating cellular stress responses , which alludes to the importance of the cell envelope in regulating the LSMMG response in minimal medium grown E . coli MG1655 . More generally , all of the LSMMG up - regulated genes and a majority of the down - regulated genes of known function are present in or involved with regulation of the cellular envelope . This suggests that the cell envelope is superlative in sensing changes in its local environment and able to rapidly respond to the changes in a multifaceted way . Future time course studies of the LSMMG response to minimal media in cells preadapted to the HARV control environment may allow detailed study of how the genes involved are coordinated . S . Typhimurium appears to be responding to LSMMG by acti­ vating genes involved in associated adhesion in an attempt to promote colonization in the low - shear environment . These are the same genes usually associated with pathogenicity . In con­ trast , E . coli MG1655 is a commensal that lacks many of these genes ; hence , adhesion in preparation for colonization is appar­ ently not its preferred response to LSMMG . Conclusions Bacteria , having lived on the Earth for billions of years , have not typically encountered microgravity and , hence , it would seem unlikely that genes governing a direct response to varia­ tions in gravity would have evolved . With specific reference to NASA - JSC PI—Dr . Duane Pierson utilizes a device for identi - fying bacteria and determining antibiotic sensiblities . The technique determines the effectiveness of drugs in space . the LSMMG environment , then , we would anticipate that low - shear is more important in the bacterial transcriptional response than a direct effect of the randomized gravity vector . Experiments to date have confirmed this conclusion . In addi­ tion , our studies have reinforced the notion that the cell enve­ lope is superlative in sensing changes in its local environment and able to rapidly respond to the changes in a multifaceted way . Future time course studies of the LSMMG response to minimal media in cells preadapted to the HARV control environment may allow detailed study of how the genes involved are coordi­ nated . However , the dramatically different response to LSMMG that is observed between E . coli MG1655 and S . Typhimurium emphasizes that different species can respond to LSMMG in very different ways . This is a frustrating conclusion for those seeking to ascertain what the effect of exposure to low - shear or the space environment will be for microorganisms in general . Acknowledgments We would like to thank Dr . Yuriy Folfanov in the Department of Computer Science at the University of Houston for his advice and assistance in performing statistical analyses on the microar­ ray data . References 1 U . A . Stock and J . P . Vacanti , “Cardiovascular Physiology During Fetal Development and Implications for Tissue Engineering , ” Tissue Eng . 7 ( 2001 ) : 1 - 7 . 2 J . M . Jessup and N . R . Pellis , “NASA Biotechnology : Cell Science in Microgravity , ” In Vitro Cell Dev . Biol . Anim . 37 ( 2001 ) : 61 - 63 . 3 C . A . Nickerson , C . M . Ott , S . J . Mister , B . J . Morrow , L . Burns - Keliher , and D . L . Pierson , “Microgravity as a Novel Environmental Signal Affecting Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium Virulence , ” Infect . Immun . 68 ( 2000 ) : 3147 - 52 . 4 J . W . Wilson , R . Ramamurthy , S . Porwollik , M . McClelland , T . Hammond , P . Allen , C . M . Ott , D . L . Pierson , and C . A . NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 25 BIO—Dr . Mark Ott , NASA - M ANAGEMENT—Vic toria JSC PI , works on a universal Castro serves as Laboratory mutation detection system . Manager in the NASA - JSC Microbiology Lab . Nickerson , “Microarray Analysis Identifies Salmonella Genes Belonging to the Low - Shear Modeled Microgravity Regulon , ” Proc . , Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 99 ( 2002 ) : 13807 - 12 . 5 T . L . Prewett , T . J . Goodwin , and G . F . Spaulding , “Three - Dimensional Modeling of T - 24 Human Bladder Carcinoma Cell Line : A New Simulated Microgravity Culture Vessel , ” J . Tiss . Cult . Methods 15 ( 1993 ) : 29 - 36 . 6 P . Todd and D . M . Klaus , “Theories and Models on the Biology of Cells in Space , ” Adv . Space Res . 17 ( 1996 ) : 3 - 10 . Publications Chumakov , S . , C . Putoni , B . M . Pettitt , G . E . Fox , R . C . Willson , and Y . Fofanov . “Using Statistical Properties of Short Subsequences in Microbial Identification , ” Proc . , Intl . Conf . on Mathematics and Engineering Techniques in Medicine and Biological Sciences , Las Vegas , NV , June 2004 . 363 - 67 . Chumakova , S . , C . Bepapurkara , C . Putoni , T . B . Li , B . M . Pettitt , G . E . Fox , R . C . Willson , and Y . Fofanov . “Theoretical Basis for Universal Identification Systems for Bacteria and Viruses , ” J . Biol . Phys & Chem . 5 ( 2006 ) : 121 - 28 . Larios - Sanz , M . , K . E . Kourentzi , D . Warmflash , J . Jones , R . C . Willson , D . L . Pierson , and G . E . Fox . “16S r RNA Beacons for Bacterial Monitoring in Craft and Habitat Modules in Human Space Missions , ” Aviation . Sci . Environ . Med . ( In press . ) Putonti , C . , G . E . Fox , R . C . Willson , B . M . Pettitt , and Y . Fofanov . “DNA Microbial and Viral Identification Using Ultraspecific Probes ‘Blind’ to Host and Background DNA , ” Proc . , Interface , Baltimore , MD , 2004 . Tucker , D . L . , F . Karouia , J . Wang , Y . Luo , T . B . Li , R . C . Willson , Y . Fofanov , and G . E . Fox . “The Effect of an Artificial RNA Marker on Gene Expression in Escherichia coli , ” Appl . Environ . Microbiol . 71L ( 2005 ) : 4156 - 59 . Zhang , Z . , G . W . Jackson , G . E . Fox , and R . C . Willson . “Microbial Identification by Mass Cataloging , ” BMC - Bioinformatics . ( In press . ) Zhu , D . , Y . Fofanov , R . C . Willson , and G . E . Fox . “ProkProbePicker ( PPP ) : A Fast Program to Extract 16S r RNA - Targeted Probes for Prokaryotes , ” Proc . , Intl . Conf . on Mathematics and Engineering Techniques in Medicine and Biological Sciences , Las Vegas , NV , June 2005 . 41 - 47 . Presentations Fox , G . E . , G . W . Jackson , and R . C . Willson . “Identification of Unknown Bacteria by Mass Spectroscopy , ” Planetary Biology Workshop titled Mars Genetic Inventory of Spacecraft Analysis , JPL , Pasadena , CA , Feb . 28 – March 1 , 2006 . Jackson , G . W . , Z . Zhang , G . E . Fox , and R . C . Willson . “Rapid Microbial Identification by MALDI - TOF Mass Spectrometry of 16S Ribosomal RNA , ” 22nd Annual Meeting , Houston Society for Engineering in Medicine and Biology , Houston , TX , Feb . 11 , 2005 . Potty , A . , S . Balan , G . E . Fox , and R . C . Willson . “Neutral Additive Effects on Metal Affinity Adsorption of Nucleic Acids , ” 229th National Meeting American Chemical Society , San Diego , CA , March 13 – 17 , 2005 . Warmflash , D . , J . Miller Jr . , D . S . McKay , G . E . Fox , and N . Keerthi . “ In Situ Detection of Extant Microbial Life in Extraterrestrial Settings Using Dielectric Spectroscopy , ” Biennial Meeting of the NASA Astrobiology Institute , Univ . of Colorado , Boulder , CO , April 10 – 14 , 2005 . Astrobiology 5 . 2 ( 2005 ) : Abstract 641 . Zhu , D . , Y . Fofanov , R . C . Willson , and G . E . Fox . “ProkProbePicker ( PPP ) : a Fast Program to Extract 16S r RNA - Targeted Probes for Prokaryotes , ” Intl . Conf . on Mathematics and Engineering Techniques in Medicine and Biological Sciences , Las Vegas , NV , June 20 – 23 , 2005 . Funding and Proposals Fofanov , Y . , R . C . Willson , and G . E . Fox . “Tools for Ultraspecific Probe / Primer Design” Homeland Security Advanced Research Projects Agency , March 15 , 2005 – March 14 , 2006 , $ 286 , 000 . ( Current funding . ) Fox , G . E . “Chiral - Selective Planetary Chemistries as a Marker for Life . ” NASA - ASTID Program , Aug . 1 , 2005 – July 31 , 2007 , $ 429 , 920 . ( Current funding . ) Fox , G . E . and K . Venkateswaran . “Comparative Genome Analysis and the Resistance Properties of Various Bacillus Species , ” NASA - Planetary Protection Program , Feb . 1 , 2005 – Jan . 31 , 2008 , UH costs : $ 226 , 723 . Fox , G . E . and R . C . Willson . “Microorganisms in the Spacecraft Environment , ” NASA - Office of Exploration Research , June 7 , 2004 – Sept . 30 , 2006 , $ 904 , 809 . ( Current funding . ) Miller , J . H . , Jr . and G . E . Fox “Biosensors Based on Dielectric Response : A Non - Geocentric Approach for In Situ Life Detection , ” NASA - ASTEP Program , Jan . 1 , 2005 – Dec . 31 , 2008 , $ 794 , 864 . ( Not funded . ) 26 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Development of Quantum - Cascade Laser Based Biosensor Technology Thomas L . Harman , Frank K . Tittel , John C . Graf , Yury Bakhirkin Abstract—The development of new types of sensitive , selective , real - time gas sensors is based on con­ tinuous wave and pulsed quantum cascade lasers for various chemical sensing applications , such as medical diagnostics , environmental monitoring , and industrial process control . Tunable laser absorp­ tion spectroscopy in the mid - infrared spectral region is a sensitive analytical technique for trace gas quantification . During the past year a nitric oxide ( NO ) gas sensor was developed based on a novel ther­ moelectrically cooled , continuous wave , distributed feedback quantum cascade laser operating at 5 . 45 µ m ( 1835 cm - 1 ) and off - axis integrated cavity output spectroscopy ( OA - ICOS ) combined with a wave­ length modulation technique . Its purpose is to determine NO concentrations at the sub - ppbv levels that are essential for such applications . The sensor employs a 50 cm - long high - finesse optical cavity that provides an effective pathlength of ~ 700 m . A noise equivalent ( SNR = 1 ) minimum detection limit of 0 . 7 ppbv with a 1 second observation time was achieved . T HE DEVELOPMENT OF COM - pact optical sensors for nitric oxide detection is of interest for a number of applica­ tions , such as environmental moni - toring , 1 atmospheric chemistry , 2 industrial process control , 3 com­ bustion studies , 4 and medical diag - nostics . 5 , 6 NO is involved in many vital physiological processes in the human body . For example , an ele­ vated level of NO in exhaled breath is correlated with airway inflam­ mation in asthmatic patients . Dr . Thomas L . Harman Dr . Frank K . Tittel Knowledge of NO concentrations in the exhaled breath of these patients may allow health care providers to adjust therapeutic drug dosages . 7 , 8 For medical ppbv . 1 , 6 , 13 diagnostics purposes , it is essential to time - resolve the NO con - 1 A centration as a function of a breath cycle phase , because corre­ sponding air samples originate in the different parts of the res­ piratory tract . This application requires a sensor response time of ≤ 1 second and a NO minimum detection sensitivity of < 1 ppbv . Such high sensitivity , rapid response measurements are possible with laser absorption spectroscopy in the fundamental ( ICOS ) , 17 , 18 which also uses low - loss mirrors . absorption band of NO . Distributed feedback quantum cascade lasers ( DFB QCLs ) operating in a pulsed or continuous wave ( CW ) mode are prom­ ising spectroscopic sources because of their narrow linewidths , single mode operation , tunability , output power , reliability , and compactness . Until recently CW operation of QCLs was possi­ ble only at cryogenic temperatures , and room temperature ( RT ) opera­ tion was only realized with pulsed operation at low duty cycle . Recent developments in QCL technology now permit CW operation at room temperature . 9 , 10 A number of approaches utiliz­ ing QCLs for the optical sensing of trace NO have been reported . Background - free Faraday modula­ tion spectroscopy has been demon­ strated to be capable of measuring biogenic nitric oxide with a sensi­ tivity of a few ppbv . 11 , 12 Mid - infrared spectrometers based on a QCL and a multipass cell absorption platform achieve a minimum NO detection limit of ≤ technique based on Cavity Ringdown Spectroscopy ( CRDS ) reaches a noise equivalent sensitivity at the sub - ppbv level in several seconds using a comparatively small sample volume because of a long optical pathlength obtained with ultra - high reflectivity mirrors ( R ~ 99 . 99 % ) . 14 - 16 Another approach is integrated cavity output spectroscopy In 2001 , an ICOS - based biogenic NO sensor utilizing a quan­ tum cascade laser was reported by our group . 19 More recently , we demonstrated a noise equivalent sensitivity of 10 ppbv in 15 seconds for NO using a compact ( ~ 5 cm long , ≤ 80 cm 3 vol­ ume ) off - axis ( OA ) - ICOS cell and a liquid nitrogen ( LN 2 ) cooled CW DFB QCL , operated at ~ 5 . 2 µ m . 20 The OA - ICOS NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 27 Figure 1 . TEC - CW - DFB QCL based OA - ICOS sensor . MCT is a cryogenically - cooled photovoltaic HgCdTe detector , and MCZT is a thermoelectrically - cooled HgCdZnTe photodetec - tor ( Vigo System , Model PVMI - 10 . 6 ) . approach combined with a wavelength modulation ( WM ) tech­ nique showed a 5 - fold sensitivity enhancement with the same data acquisition time . M . L Silva et al . 21 obtained a minimum detection sensitivity of < 1 ppbv in 4 s for NO in human breath using an ICOS cell and a thermoelectrically cooled ( TEC ) pulsed QCL . In this work , we use a novel and now commercially available TEC , CW , DFB quantum cascade laser fabricated by our collab­ orating team from the University of Neuchatel , Switzerland . 9 DFB CW QCL characteristics , such as a narrow laser spectral width ( ≤ 3 MHz 16 ) , necessary for efficient laser - to - cavity cou­ pling and high average power , make CW TEC QC lasers more suitable than pulsed QCLs for ICOS - based sensor platforms for real world applications , avoiding the size and complications of liquid nitrogen cooling required by earlier QC lasers . The basic sensor platform is an OA - ICOS configuration with a 50 cm­ long optical cavity . A wavelength modulation technique ( har­ monic detection ) was implemented in order to reach sub - ppbv levels of NO detection sensitivity . Methodology and Equipment A schematic of the ICOS - based sensor is depicted in Fig . 1 . A TEC CW DFB QCL , operating at 5 . 45 µ m 9 , was installed in a compact evacuated QCL housing . The housing was equipped with a 25 mm diameter CaF 2 window and a single - stage ther­ moelectric cooler ( Melcor Corporation , Type UT8 - 12 - 40F1 ) that provides thermal control of the QC laser . A minimum QCL temperature of − 32 ° C can be achieved when the laser housing is at reduced pressures ( typically ~ 10 - 3 to 10 - 4 Torr ) and the hot side of TEC is actively water - cooled . A three - lens collimator ( see Fig . 1 ) was employed to achieve optimum coupling of the QCL radiation to the OA - ICOS cavity . The first lens after the QCL is a 25 mm diameter ZnSe aspherical lens with an antire­ flection coating , and a 12 . 7 mm effective focal length . This Figure 2 . HITRAN - based simulation of an absorption spec - trum for a NO ( N 2 mixture in the tuning range of a TEC CW DFB QCL operating at 5 . 45 µ m . The total pressure of the mixture is 200 Torr ; pathlength is 700 m ; a concentration of NO is 94 . 9 ppbv . The NO absorption line P 1 / 2 ( 11 . 5 ) at 1835 . 57 cm - 1 ( denoted by arrow ) was used for the concen - tration measurements reported in this work . reduces spherical aberration thereby improving the quality of the beam coupled to the OA - ICOS cell . An iris diaphragm in the focal point of the second lens serves as a spatial optical filter to minimize fringes caused by the collimator lenses and the laser housing output window and reduces back - reflection to the QCL by a factor of 5 . The second and third lenses also have diame­ ters of 25 mm and effective focal lengths of 500 mm and 63 mm , respectively . The collimated QCL beam incident on the OA - ICOS cavity has a diameter of 2 . 3 mm . Highly reflective 50 . 8 mm diameter concave mirrors ( 1 m radius of curvature ) separated by a 50 cm stainless steel spacer form the optical OA­ ICOS cavity . The same set of mirrors used in our previous study at a fre­ quency of 1920 cm - 1 ( 5 . 2 µ m ) 20 was employed in this work . The reflection coefficient for the ultra - low loss mirror set at 1920 cm - 1 was estimated to be R ≥ 99 . 975 % using a CDRS approach . 20 According to the mirror specifications , the reflection coefficient at a laser frequency of 1836 cm - 1 , which was used in the current study , is the same ( with a discrepancy of ± 0 . 005 % ) according to the manufacturer ( Los Gatos Research , Inc . ) . The longer cavity length of 50 cm was chosen in order to enhance the NO detection limit of the OA - ICOS technique . The cavity was aligned off - axis with respect to the laser beam provid­ ing improved cavity mode noise suppression . The suppression of cavity mode noise is the critical factor determining the sensitiv­ ity of the ICOS technique . 18 , 20 Further mode noise suppression sensitivity enhancement was obtained by averaging the cavity resonances by dithering the cavity length using an assembly of 3 piezo - electric actuators attached to one of the resonator mirrors ( See Fig . 1 ) . The mirror was moved back and forth with a fre­ quency of ~ 200 Hz and a maximum translation travel of ~ 15 µ m . 28 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA The CW QCL utilized in this work was a 3 mm long , 14 µ m wide , junction - up mounted DFB laser with a high reflection coating evaporated on its back facet . Spectral output , current and temperature tuning range , and rate of the QCL were evalu­ ated using : 1 ) a 10 cm reference cell filled with a calibration mixture of NO + N 2 ; 2 ) an air - spaced Fabry - Perot etalon , which consists of two wedged ZnSe windows ; and 3 ) HITRAN database simulated spectra , which were com­ pared with the experimental results . The laser operated at temperatures of up to + 20 ° C with a total tuning range from ~ 1827 cm - 1 ( + 20 ° C ) to ~ 1838 cm - 1 ( − 32 ° C ) . The temperature tuning rate was ~ 0 . 2 cm - 1 / K . A temperature controller ( Wavelength Electronics , Inc . , Model MPT - 10000 ) provides a long - term temperature stability δ T of about ≤ 0 . 01 ° C , limiting the spectral line shift to ≤ 0 . 002 cm - 1 which is negligi­ ble compared to the NO linewidth at 200 Torr ( 0 . 032 cm - 1 ) . At a fixed temperature of the laser thermal sink , the frequency of the output radiation can be tuned by varying the QCL current . A current driver ( Wavelength Electronics , Inc . , Model MPL - 2500 ) was used to operate the QCL . Temperature and current spectral tuning ranges of the QCL are depicted in Fig . 2 together with a HITRAN based simulated absorption spectrum of an NO − H 2 O − N 2 mixture . The combined NO absorption line P 1 / 2 ( 11 . 5 ) , which is a superposition of two lambda doubling components centered at 1835 . 57 cm - 1 , was selected for concentration meas­ urements as it is the most intense line in the QCL tuning range . A strong interference from H 2 O throughout the entire spectral output range of the QCL can be avoided by using commercially available Nafion dryer assembly ( Perma Pure LLC ) with an appropriate length and flow rate to meet breath analysis require­ ments . The P 1 / 2 ( 11 . 5 ) line was reached at a temperature of − 21 ° C and a current of ~ 778 mA . Two function generators ( Stanford Research Systems , Model DS345 ) were utilized for QCL current ramping and for frequency modulation in applying the wavelength modulation ( WM ) technique . The QCL ramp and WM frequencies were ~ 1 kHz and ~ 50 kHz respectively . The ICOS cavity output signal was focused onto a LN 2 cooled photovoltaic HgCdTe detector with a built - in transim­ pedance preamplifier ( Kolmar Technologies , Model KMPV8 - 1 - J1 / DC ) by means of an off - axis aluminum parabolic mirror . After additional amplification ( gain factor was 10 3 ) and filter­ ing ( low - pass filter was set to 1MHz ) by a low noise amplifier ( Stanford Research Systems , Model SR560 ) , the detector sig­ nal was fed into a lock - in amplifier ( Stanford Research Systems , Model SR 830 ) for second harmonic ( 2f ) processing . The output of the lock - in was acquired by a data acquisition card installed in a PC using LabView 7 . 1 . After further averag­ ing , the data were stored in preparation for fitting . Initial feasi­ bility NO concentration measurements with a long cell were made without the wavelength modulation technique . In this case , the amplified photodetector signal was directed straight to the data acquisition card . The QC laser linewidth estimated at ~ 35 ± 3 MHz was determined mainly by the current ripple on the QCL driver current source . Figure 3 . Measured OA - ICOS spectrum of a 94 . 9 ppbv NO : N 2 calibration mixture ﬁtted by a Voigt function . Fit parame - ters : Lorentzian linewidth is ~ 2 . 61 × 10 - 2 cm - 1 that is in a good agreement with a HITRAN predicted value of 2 . 63 × 10 2 cm - 1 , Gaussian ( Doppler ) width is ~ 0 . 41 × 10 - 2 cm - 1 . Minimum detectable NO concentration is 3 . 2 ppbv , obtained from the deviation of the area under absorption curve δ A . Time constant ( data acquisition time ) is 1 s . Experimental Activity , Results and Discussion A calibration mixture ( Scott Specialty Gases , Inc . ) of a 94 . 9 ppbv NO in N 2 as the balance gas was used for the evaluation of the QCL based NO sensor system . The NO concentration was certified by the supplier using a chemiluminescence technique ( NO analyzer by GE Analytical Instruments , formerly Sievers ) . A diluter was used to obtain up to 5 times lower NO concentra­ tion levels . Measurements were made at a constant flow rate of ~ 100 sccm as adhesion to the ICOS cavity walls may affect the precision and accuracy of the NO concentration measurements . Pressure levels were varied from 50 to 200 Torr . A gas flow sys­ tem described in detail in Bakhirkin et al . 20 was utilized for measurement pressure and flow control . Initial NO concentration measurements with the 50 cm - long ICOS cell were made without applying wavelength modulation . The QC laser output was scanned by current with a frequency of 1 KHz across the absorption line . The cavity output signal was sampled , averaged , and processed using a data acquisition card and PC . Results are depicted in Fig . 3 . The solid curve shows a 94 . 9 ppbv NO absorption line obtained from averaged ICOS signals . An absolute value of the absorption was obtained taking into account an offset resulting from the bimodal characteristic of the QCL . The number of acquired averages of spectra was 1000 and the typical data acquisition time 1 s . The dotted line represents a Voigt fit with parameters : Lorentzian width of ~ 2 . 61 × 10 - 2 cm - 1 that is in a good agreement with the HITRAN predicted value of 2 . 63 × 10 - 2 cm - 1 and a Gaussian linewidth of ~ 0 . 41 × 10 - 2 cm - 1 determined by the temperature of the gas . Comparison between fitted data and HITRAN simulated spec­ tra yielded an effective optical pathlength of 700 m provided NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 29 Figure 4 . Averaged measured ( 2f ) signal for a NO concentra - tion of 23 . 7 ppbv and ﬁtting curve , obtained using a gener - al linear ﬁtting procedure . 28 The standard deviation , σ , of the ﬁt coefﬁcients corresponds to 0 . 7 ppbv . that the line shape obeys a Voigt profile at 200 Torr . This is in a good agreement with our previous results for a compact 5 . 3 cm long cell obtained with the same set of mirrors that provided a 75 m effective optical pathlength . The effective optical pathlength scales with the physical length of the ICOS cavity . The discrep­ ancy between the measured ( ~ 700m ) and theoretical ( ~ 2000 m ) effective optical pathlength of the OA - ICOS derived from the cavity ringdown time is attributed to several factors , such as : ( 1 ) non - homogeneity of the reflectivity across the 2 inch diameter mirror surfaces and , therefore , an uncertainty of the cavity decay time , ( 2 ) a large number of higher order transverse modes that are involved in OA - ICOS based gas measurements with higher diffraction losses than for the TEM 00 mode which leads to a decrease of the effective optical pathlength , and ( 3 ) tilting of the PZT driven mirror which affects the OA - ICOS cavity alignment and , therefore , results in a decrease of the cavity finesse . In order to improve sensitivity toward the NO target limit of ≤ 1 ppbv required for breath analysis , wavelength modulation spectroscopy ( WMS ) 13 , 22 - 25 was added to the OA - ICOS - based sensor platform . In this case , the QCL current is modulated at a high frequency ν , and the wavelength is tuned slowly across the spectral line of interest by means of a current ramp with a fre­ quency Ω ( ν > > Ω ) . The detector output is processed by a lock - in amplifier referenced to the modulation frequency 1f or 2f ( first and second harmonic detection respectively ) . This type of detection results in a significant improvement in the signal - to - noise - ratio ( SNR ) . 22 The amplitude of a WMS - based signal scales linearly with gas concentration , 23 which facilitates cali­ bration and a quantitative gas concentration measurement . The OA - ICOS - based sensor can also benefit from applying WMS as reported in Refs . 20 , 26 , and 27 . In the present work , WMS parameters ( amplitude , modulation frequency and modu­ lation function ) and the gas pressure inside the ICOS cavity were optimized in order to maximize the signal . Sinusoidal modulation at ν together with a triangular ramp at Ω was found to result in the optimum SNR . The frequencies were Ω = 1 KHz and ν = 50 KHz , respectively . The lock - in amplifier output was averaged using a data acquisition card and LabView­ based software . A WMS signal for calibrated NO concentration was fitted using a general linear fit procedure , 28 as shown in Fig . 4 . A 1 σ devia­ tion if the amplitude as a fit result corresponds to 0 . 7 ppbv . Conclusions An OA - ICOS - based NO Dr . Yury A . Bakhirkin , Research sensor , which exploits Associate , conducts research with the recent availability of Dr . Frank K . Tittel and Dr . Harman . a CW TEC DFB QCL operating at 5 . 45 µ m and a 50 cm - long high finesse optical cav­ ity , demonstrated the feasibility of detecting and quantifying NO concentrations at a level of ≤ 1 ppbv in 1 s . The OA - ICOS tech­ nique yields a minimum NO detection sensitivity of ~ 3 ppbv in 1 s . A combination of OA - ICOS and a 2f WMS technique leads to minimum NO detection levels of ~ 0 . 7 ppbv . Additional improvement in sensitivity can be obtained by using a more powerful ( ~ 50 mW ) single frequency CW QCL 10 operating at 1900 . 1 cm - 1 ( optimum frequency for interference free NO detection 21 ) and recently available 50 ppm ultra - low loss mirrors ( instead of the 250 ppm mirrors used in this work ) . Acknowledgments We acknowledge the assistance of Dr . Anatoliy Kosterev and Prof . R . F . Curl in providing support and numerous useful dis­ cussions . The authors also acknowledge Prof . J . Faist of the Institute of Physics , University of Neuchatel , Switzerland for providing the TEC quantum cascade laser used in this work . Financial support of the work performed by the Rice group was provided by the Institute for Space Systems Operations ( ISSO ) , the National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) , the Texas Advanced Technology Program , the National Institute of Health via a sub contract from Physical Sciences , Inc . , and the Office of Naval Research via a sub - award from Texas A & M University and the Welch Foundation . References 1 D . D . Nelson , J . H . Shorter , J . B . McManus , and M . S . Zahniser , “Sub - Part - Per - Billion Detection of Nitric Oxide in Air Using a Thermoelectrically Cooled Mid - Infrared Quantum Cascade Laser Spectrometer , ” Appl . Phys . B 75 ( 2002 ) : 343 - 50 . 2 J . H . Steinfeld and S . N . Pandis , Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics : from Air Pollution to Climate Change , N . Y . : Wiley , 1998 . 30 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA MEDICINE—Matt McCurdy combines M . D . and Ph . D . studies at the Baylor College of Medicine and Rice University . 3 G . Wysocki , A . A . Kosterev , and F . K . Tittel , “Spectroscopic Trace - Gas Sensor with Rapidly Scanned Wavelengths of a Pulsed Quantum Cascade Laser for in situ NO Monitoring of Industrial Exhaust Systems , ” Appl . Phys . B 80 ( 2005 ) : 617 - 25 . 4 H . Gupta and L . - S . Fan , “Reduction of Nitric Oxide from Combustion Flue Gas by Bituminous Coal Char in the Presence of Oxygen , ” Ind . Eng . Chem . Res . 42 ( 2003 ) : 2536 - 43 . 5 C . Roller , K . Namjou , J . D . Jeffers , W . Potter , P . J . McCann , and J . Grego , “Simultaneous NO and CO 2 Measurement in Human Breath with a Single IV - VI Mid - Infrared Laser , ” Opt . Lett . 27 ( 2002 ) : 107 - 09 . 6 C . Roller , K . Namjou , J . D . Jeffers , M . Camp , A . Mock , P . J . McCann , and J . Grego , “Nitric Oxide Breath Testing by Tunable - Diode Laser Absorption Spectroscopy : Application in Monitoring Respiratory Inflammation , ” Appl . Opt . 41 ( 2002 ) : 6018 - 29 . 7 Breath Analysis for Clinical Diagnosis and Therapeutic Monitoring , Eds . A . Amann and D . Smith , Singapore : World Scientific , 2005 . 75 - 84 . 8 A . D . Smith and D . R . Taylor , “Is Exhaled Nitric Oxide Measurement a Useful Clinical Test in Asthma ? ” Current Opinion in Allergy and Clinical Immunology 5 ( 2005 ) : 49 - 56 . 9 S . Blaser , D . A . Yarekha , L . Hvozdara , Y Bonetti , A . Miller , M . Giovannini , and J . Faist , “Room - Temperature , Continuous - Wave , Single Mode Quantume - Cascade Lasers at λ ± 5 . 4 µ m , ” Appl . Phys . Lett . 86 , ( 2005 ) : 041109 - 1 . 10 S . Blaser , Y . Bonetti , L . Hvozdara , and A . Mueller , “Quantum - Cascade Lasers for TDLS , ” Proc . , 5th Intl . Conf . on Tunable Diode Laser Spectroscopy , Florence , Italy , July 11 – 15 , 2005 . 11 H . Ganser , W . Urban , and J . M . Brown , “The Sensitive Detection of NO by Faraday Modulation Spectroscopy with a Quantum Cascade Laser , ” Mol . Phys . 101 . 4 - 5 ( 2003 ) : 545 - 50 . 12 H . Ganser , M . Horstjann , C . V . Suschek , P . Hering , and M . Mürtz , “Online Monitoring of Biogenic Nitric Oxide with a QC Laser - Based Faraday Modulation Technique , ” Appl . Phys . B 78 ( 2004 ) : 513 - 17 . 13 W . H . Weber , T . J . Remillard , R . E . Chase , J . F . Richert , F . Capasso , C . Gmachl , A . L . Hutchinson , D . L . Sivco , J . N . Baillargeon , and A . Y . Cho , “Using a Wavelength - Modulation Quantum Cascade Laser to Measure NO Concentration in the Parts - per - Billion Range for Vehicle Emissions Certification , ” Appl . Spectrosc . 56 . 6 ( 2002 ) : 706 - 14 . 14 B . A . Paldus , C . C . Harb , T . G . Spence , R . N . Zare , C . Gmachl , F . Capasso , D . L . Sivco , J . N . Baillargeon , A . L . Hutchinson , and A . Y . Cho , “Cavity Ringdown Spectroscopy Using Mid - Infrared Quantum - Cascade Lasers , ” Opt . Lett . 25 ( 2000 ) : 666 - 68 . 15 B . A . Paldus , A . A . Kachanov , “Spectroscopic Techniques : Cavity - Enhanced Methods , ” in Atomic , Molecular , and Optical Physics Handbook , Part C : Molecules , Ed . G . W . F . Drake . Berlin : Springer Verlag , 2005 . Chap . 43 . 3 , 621 . 16 A . A . Kosterev , A . L . Malinovsky , F . K . Tittel , C . Gmachl , F . Capasso , D . L . Sivco , J . N . Baillargeon , A . L . Hutchinson , and A . Y . Cho , “Cavity Ringdown Spectroscopic Detection of Nitric Oxide with Continuous - Wave Quantum - Cascade Laser , ” Appl . Opt . 40 ( 2001 ) : 5522 - 29 . 17 A . O’Keefe , J . J . Scherer , and J . B . Paul , “cw Integrated Cavity Output Spectroscopy , ” Chem . Phys . Lett . 307 ( 1999 ) : 343 - 49 . 18 J . B . Paul , L . Larson , and J . G . Anderson , “Ultrasensitive Absorption Spectroscopy with a High - Finesse Optical Cavity and Off - Axis Alignment , ” Appl . Opt . 40 ( 2001 ) : 4904 - 10 . 19 L . Menzel , A . A . Kosterev , R . F . Curl , F . K . Tittel , C . Gmachl , F . Capasso , D . L . Sivco , N . J . Baillargeon , A . L . Hutchinson , A . Y . Cho , and W . Urban , “Spectroscopic Detection of Biological NO with a Quantum Cascade Laser , ” Appl . Phys . B 72 ( 2001 ) : 859 - 63 . 20 Y . A . Bakhirkin , A . A . Kosterev , C . Roller , R . F . Curl , and F . K . Tittel , “Mid - Infrared Quantum Cascade Laser based Off - Axis Integrated Cavity Output Spectroscopy for Biogenic NO Detection , ” Appl . Opt . 43 ( 2004 ) : 2257 - 66 . 21 M . L . Silva , D . M . Sonnenfroh , D . I . Rosen , M . G . Allen , and A . O’Keefe , “Integrated Cavity Output Spectroscopy Measurements of Nitric Oxide levels in Breath with a Pulsed Room - Temperature QCL , ” Appl . Phys . B 81 ( 2005 ) : 705 - 10 . 22 J . Reid and D . Labrie , “Second - Harmonic Detection with Tunable Diode Lasers—Comparison of Experiments and Theory , ” Appl . Phys . B 26 ( 1981 ) : 203 - 10 . 23 D . S . Bomse , A . C . Stanton , and J . A . Silver , “Frequency Modulation and Wavelength Modulation Spectroscopies : Comparison of External Methods Using a Lead - Salt Diode Laser , ” Appl . Opt . 31 ( 1992 ) : 718 - 31 . 24 K . Namjou , S . Cai , E . A . Whittaker , J . Faist , C . Gmachl , F . Capasso , D . L . Sivco , and A . Y . Cho , “Sensitive Absorption Spectroscopy with a Room - Temperature Distributed - Feedback Quantum - Cascade Laser , ” Opt . Lett . 23 ( 1998 ) : 219 - 21 . 25 E . L . Wilson and J . H . Miller , “Development of a Pulsed Sampling Probe for Time - Resolved Measurements in Flickering Flames , ” Meas . Sci . Technol . 12 ( 2001 ) : 1701 - 08 . 26 V . L . Kasyutich , C . E . Canosa - Mas , C . Pfrang , S . Vaughan , and R . P . Wayne , “Off - Axis Continuous - Wave Cavity - Enhanced NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 31 DISEASES—Dr . Yury A . Bakhirkin , UHCL Post - Doctoral Fellow , investigates high precision controls for interband cascade lasers in his laboratory at Rice University . Absorption Spectroscopy of Narrow - Band and Broadband Absorbers Using Red Diode Lasers , ” Appl . Phys . B 75 ( 2002 ) : 755 - 61 . 27 A . Zybin , Y . A . Kuritsyn , V . R . Mironenko , and K . Niemax , “Cavity Enhanced Wavelength Modulation Spectrometry for Application in Chemical Analysis , ” Appl . Phys . B 78 ( 2004 ) : 103 - 09 . 28 A . A . Kosterev , F . K . Tittel . , R . Köhler , C . Gmachl , F . Capasso , D . L . Sivco , A . Y . Cho , S . Wehe , and M . G . Allen , “Thermoelectrically - Cooled - Quantum - Cascade - Laser - Based Sensor for the Continuous Monitoring of Ambient Atmospheric Carbon Monoxide , ” Appl . Opt . 41 ( 2002 ) : 1169 - 73 . Publications Bakhirkin , Y . A . , A . A . Kosterev , R . Curl , F . K . Tittel , D . A . Yarekha , L . Hvozdara , M . Giovannini , and J . Faist . “Sub­ ppbv Nitric Oxide Concentration Measurements Using cw Thermoelectrically Cooled Quantum Cascade Laser - Based Integrated Cavity Output Spectroscopy , ” Appl . Phys . B 82 ( 2006 ) : 149 - 54 ; Online First ( Nov . 2005 ) . Kosterev , A . A . , Y . A . Bakhirkin , and F . K . Tittel . “Ultrasensitive Gas Detection by Quartz - Enhanced Photoacoustic Apectroscopy in the Fundamental Molecular Absorption Bands Region , ” A ppl . Phys . B 80 ( 2005 ) : 133 - 8 . Presentations Bakhirkin , Y . A . , and F K . Tittel . “Room - Temperature Continuous - Wave Quantum Cascade Laser Based Nitric Oxide Measurements using Integrated Cavity Output Spectroscopy , ” SPIE Optics East Conf . : Infrared to Terahertz Technologies for Health and the Environment , Boston , MA , Oct . 23 – 26 , 2005 . McCurdy , M . , S . So , G . Wysocki , Y . Bakhirkin , and F . K . Tittel . “A Versatile Breath Collection Device for Laser - Based Trace Gas Detection , ” 22nd Annual Houston Conf . on Biomedical Engineering Research , Houston , TX , Feb . 10 – 11 2005 . Tittel , F . K . , A . A . Kosterev , Y . Bakhirkin , G . Wysocki , and S . G . So . “Semiconductor Laser Based Trace Gas Sensor Technology Recent Aadvances and Applications , ” Mid - Infrared Coherent Sources , Barcelona , Spain , Nov . 6 – 11 , 2005 . Tittel , F . K . , A . A . Kosterev , Y . Bakhirkin , G . Wysocki , S . G . So , and R . F . Curl . “Recent Advances of Quantum and Interband Cascade Laser Based Trace Gas Sensor Technology , ” MIOMD - VII 2005 , Lancaster , UK , Sept . 12 – 14 2005 . Tittel , F . K . , A . A . Kosterev , Y . Bakhirkin , G . Wysocki , S . So , and R . F . Curl . “Ultra Sensitive Gas Detection by Quartz Enhanced Photoacoustic Spectroscopy , ” Gordon Research Conf . on Photoacoustic and Photothermal Phenomena , Trieste , Italy , June 26 – July 1 , 2005 . Tittel , F . K . , A . A . Kosterev , Y . Bakhirkin , S . G . So , G . Wysocki , and R . F . Curl . “Semiconductor Laser Based Trace Gas Sensor Technology : Advances and Challenges , ” Intl . Congress on Optics and Optoelectronics , Warsaw , Poland , Aug . 28 – Sept . 2 , 2005 . Tittel , F . K . , A . A . Kosterev , Y . Bakhirkin , G . Wysocki , T . Ajtai , and , S . So . “Recent Developments of Chemical Sensors Based on Quartz Enhanced Photoacoustic Spectroscopy : Fundamentals and Applications , ” SPIE Optics East Conf . : Infrared to Terahertz Technologies for Health and the Environment , Boston , MA , Oct . 23 – 26 , 2005 . Tittel , F . K . , A . A . Kosterev , Y . Bakhirkin , G . Wysocki , T . Ajtai , S . So , and R . F . Curl . “Trace Gas Sensing Based on Quartz Enhanced Photoacoustic Spectroscopy , ” Intl . Congress of Acoustics , Budapest , Hungary , Aug . 29 – Sept . 2 , 2005 . Funding and Proposals Tittel , F . K . “Development of Advanced Mid - Infrared Laser Based Gas Sensors , ” NASA - JSC - JPL , June 1 , 2003 – Dec . 31 , 2006 , $ 367 , 333 . — . “High Resolution Spectroscopy with Lasers , ” Welch Foundation , June 1 , 2003 – May 31 , 2006 . — , NASA - JSC Graduate Fellowship for Matt McCurdy , July 1 , 2005 – June 30 , 2006 , $ 24 , 000 . — . “Photonic Technologies for Early Detection of Human Disease , ” NASA - National Cancer Institute , Rice U . PI , April 1 , 2002 – June 30 , 2005 , $ 367 , 515 . — . “Quantum Cascade Laser Based Sensors for Chemical and Environmental Analysis , ” Texas Advanced Technology Program , Rice U . PI . , Jan . 1 , 2003 – Aug . 30 , 2006 . $ 187 , 380 . — . “Quantum Cascade Laser Photoacoustic Sensor for Chemical Warfare Agent Detection , ” Pacific Northwest National Laboratory , Rice U . PI , Jan . 3 , 2005 – Sept . 30 , 2006 , $ 210 , 000 . — . “Ultra - Sensensitive Detection of Aerosol Precursors Including Ammonia , ” Aculight , Botthell , WA , Sept . 9 , 2005 – March 26 , 2006 , $ 26 , 000 . 32 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Martian Soil Biosensors Based on Dielectric Spectroscopy John H . Miller , Jr . , Jaroslaw Wosik , David S . McKay , Jeffrey A . Jones , Fathi Karouia , David Warmflash , Dharmakeerthi Nawarathna Abstract—The goal is to investigate novel biosensing techniques , including dielectric spectroscopy and nonlinear harmonic response , which could ultimately be employed to develop instruments capable of detecting live organisms in samples from the outer terrestrial bodies of the solar system . Our previous results suggested that variable temperature dielectric spectroscopy can distinguish live organisms from nonliving complex macromolecules and may be suitable for in situ astrobiology studies on the surface of Mars or , eventually , in the liquid ocean beneath the ice of Europa . More recently , we have measured the frequency - and amplitude - dependent nonlinear harmonic responses of live cells , mitochondria , and chloroplasts , coupled with activator and inhibitor studies . Results provide compelling evidence that physiologically relevant processes in active macromolecular enzyme complexes are responsible for observed induced harmonics , thus providing additional signatures of live organisms . T HE POSSIBLE EXISTENCE OF life on Mars in the distant past or at present 1 has been of interest for well over a century . This issue has important scientific impli­ cations for the evolution of life on earth and the distribution of life in the cosmos . The Viking program , in 1976 , made the first attempt to detect evidence of living or fos­ silized organisms in Martian soil and yielded ambiguous , somewhat negative results . 2 More recent stud­ ies 3 of the Martian meteorite Allan Hills 84001 ( ALH84001 ) suggest Dr . John H . Miller , Jr . that microbial life existed on Mars about four billion years ago . Compelling evidence includes the presence of magnetite crystals ( Fe 3 O 4 ) found in carbonate globules and their associated rims in the meteorite . 4 About one fourth of these tens - of - nanometer sized magnetites are nearly identical to those produced by magnetotac­ tic bacteria on Earth and are not expected to be produced by abi­ otic means . It has , therefore , been argued that these Martian mag­ netite crystals are in fact magnetofossils , which , if true , would constitute evidence of the oldest life forms known . 5 Additional findings suggest that subsurface Martian life could potentially survive even today . 6 There is abundant geological evi­ dence that ice was once deposited in the regolith , where it should still be present above mid - latitudes . 7 This ice , which probably extends several kilometers below the surface , could be a source of liquid water near magmatic intrusions . 8 On Earth , the biomass of subterranean organisms may equal or exceed that at the surface . 9 These organisms can live in highly saline conditions at temperatures from 115°C to – 20°C . 10 , 11 Such conditions might prevail beneath the surface in an aquifer or in a hydrothermal sys­ tem . For these and other reasons , there is considerable interest in developing new techniques of detecting subsurface life on Mars . Moreover , the likelihood that oceans of liquid water exist below the icy surfaces of Europa and other Dr . David Warmﬂash moons makes these exciting candi­ dates for the existence of extraterrestrial life in our solar system . Goal of the Project The goal of this project is to investigate dielectric spec - troscopy 12 , 13 and related methods , especially nonlinear harmonic response , 14 for the detection of live organisms . Toward this end , the project aims to elucidate possible signatures of active macromolecular complexes unique to living biological systems . Potential signatures include unusual behavior , distinct from those of inanimate materials , in the frequency - and temperature - dependent dielectric response , and in the induced nonlinear har­ monic response as a function of frequency and amplitude . Methodology The previous report discussed the results of variable tempera - NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 33 Figure 1 . Four - electrode setup used to measure nonlinear harmonic response . ( a ) Experimental setup with external function generator and SR780 signal analyzer . ( b ) Planar , top view of the four - electrode sample cell showing the dimensions and geometry . The electrodes are 12 - carat gold pins , 7 mm in length ( cross - sections shown in ﬁgure ) . ture dielectric spectroscopy of live organisms and Martian soil simulants . Our experiments on linear dielectric response employed a Solartron Impedance Analyzer , which measures complex admittance at frequencies up to 32 MHz . In this report , we focus on a study of potential signatures in the nonlinear har­ monic response , which include signals produced by active molecular motors unique to live organisms . For measurements at kilohertz frequencies , we employ a four - electrode system , utilizing a Stanford Research SR780 signal analyzer that we operate as a spectrum analyzer . A function gen­ erator applies a sinusoidal signal to the outer electrodes , while the voltage difference between the inner electrodes is fed into Channel 1 of the SR780 , which records the induced harmonics . A reference spectrum is acquired using a supernatant , whose conductivity has been adjusted ( with distilled water , to compen­ sate for the volume fraction of the cells present in the sample ) to be identical to that of the sample at the frequency of the inter­ est . The supernatant typically consisted of an aqueous solution of ~ 1 - 10 mM NaCl . Two different types of control files are used , depending upon whether the reference is to be logged using the same set of electrodes or a separate matched reference cell . In either case , the logging , windowing , and Fourier Transform routines were identical , and provide a power spec­ trum of the reference cell , which is also recorded as a data file in the computer . Finally , the sample power spectrum obtained from the sample ( e . g . , cell suspension or soil sample ) of interest is divided by the reference power spectrum and also stored . The entire procedure is automated using LabVIEW data acquisition software . The power of this approach lay in allowing one to deconvolve the effects of nonlinearities within the electrochem­ ical system from those due to the biological cells themselves . Equipment and Special Technology A diagram of our four - electrode setup for nonlinear response , including the Stanford Research SR780 , is shown in Fig . 1 . This setup enables us to obtain the frequency - and amplitude - depend - ence of harmonics induced by the sample ( e . g . , cell suspension ) under investigation . At low frequencies , we employ a supercon­ ducting quantum interference device ( SQUID ) to directly probe the magnetic fields produced by the conduction and displace­ ment currents . This reduces spurious harmonics generated at the electrode - medium interface , which become especially problem­ atic at frequencies below 100 Hz . Details of this work have been 14 reported in our 2004 study in Applied Physics Letters . Results and Discussion We measured the nonlinear harmonic response of suspensions of budding yeast cells ( S . cerevisiae ) , mitochondria ( extracted from bovine heart and mouse liver cells ) , B . indicas ( a prokary­ otic relative of the mitochondrial ancestor ) , and chloroplasts ( extracted from spinach ) using the four - electrode setup shown in Fig . 1 , in which a sinusoidal voltage is applied across the two outer electrodes , while the spectrum of induced harmonics is recorded across the two inner electrodes using a spectrum ana­ lyzer . When a suspension of cells or extracted organelles is excited using a single - frequency sinusoidal voltage excitation , a series of harmonics is produced for sufficient ac field ampli­ tudes . Any background harmonics due to the electrode interface are subtracted out by measuring a reference medium with con­ ductivity matched to that of the cell suspension . When measuring the magnitudes of the induced second and third harmonic amplitudes vs . applied frequency for whole bud­ ding yeast cells , we observed two peaks that appeared to grow out of the background as cell concentration is increased . In addi­ tion , we found that rotenone , an inhibitor that affects complex I of the mitochondrial respiratory chain , reduces the amplitudes of the harmonics . We observed even more dramatic suppressing effects when adding potassium cyanide , a respiratory inhibitor that binds to the cytochrome c oxidase complex and essentially shuts down the entire electron transport chain on the mitochon­ drial inner membrane . Similar behavior is observed for B . indi­ cas , a relative of the mitochondrial ancestor . Respiratory inhibitors suppress the mitochondrial transmembrane potential , hence shutting off the ATP - synthase molecular turbine , and pre­ vents the production of ATP . Importantly , however , yeast cells are not killed by cyanide and remain capable of fermentation . In order to further study whether bioenergetic processes play a major role , we have performed similar measurements on isolat­ 34 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA ed mitochondria extracted from mammalian cells . Figure 2 shows the second harmonic response vs . applied fre­ quency for uncoupled mammalian mitochondria , in which com­ plex II has been activated through the addition of glutamate malate , whereas the ATP synthase complex is inactive due to the lack of a transmembrane potential and proton gradient . These results suggest that the peak in Fig . 2 may be attributed to elec - tron / proton transport processes occurring between complex II and complex IV of the electron transport machinery . Note that the inhibitor rotenone quenches the harmonic response , as shown in Fig . 2 . We also observe a higher frequency peak , appearing at applied frequencies of around 12 kHz in budding yeast cells and B . indicas , a relative of the mitochondrial ances­ ter . In both of these cases , the ATP synthase complex is active , suggesting that the high frequency peak in these organisms may result from coupling to the remarkable molecular turbine in the F 0 unit of ATP synthase . Photosynthetic organisms , including cyanobacteria and chloroplasts ( responsible for photosynthesis in plants ) , are potentially exciting organisms to study because they utilize light rather than chemical energy to establish electrochemical gradi­ ents , allowing for greater flexibility and precision in controlling experimental conditions . Figure 3 cites results obtained for chloroplasts , showing dramatic changes in harmonic response with the presence or absence of light . These results strongly indicate that the observed behavior is caused by , in this case , active processes due to photosynthesis , and provide increased confidence of the physiological relevance of harmonic response measurements . Note , however , that the frequency - dependence is rather different from that observed for yeast cells and mito­ chondria , and may incorporate responses from the light harvest­ ing complexes , reaction centers , and photosystems . Conclusions Our latest results suggest that ac electric fields , which capacitive­ ly couple through the plasma membrane , can interrogate bioen­ ergetic and other processes in internal cellular organelles and potentially identify signatures of life . Additional experiments are planned to study coupled mitochondria , which should enable fur­ ther confirmation of any signals arising from biological energy - transducing complexes . The observed unusual behavior , which in the case of chloroplasts is activated by light , provides signa­ tures unique to live organisms and could ultimately be applied to in situ astrobiology studies on the surface of Mars or , eventually , in the liquid ocean beneath the ice of Europa . Additional terres­ trial applications include fundamental research in biophysics , studies of the effects of drugs on live cells to aid in pharmaceu­ tical development , studies of cancer cells , and the development of medical diagnostic instrumentation . References 1 B . M . Jakosky and E . L . Shock , “The Biological Potential of Mars , the Early Earth , and Europa , ” J . Geophys . Res . 103 ( 1998 ) : 19 , 359 - 64 . 2 L . Margulis , P . Mazur , E . S . Barghoorn , H . O . Halvorson , T . H . Jukes , and I . R . Kaplan , “The Viking Mission : Implications for Life on Mars , ” J . Mol . Evol . 14 ( 1979 ) : 223 - 32 . Figure 2 . Second harmonic response vs . applied fundamen - tal frequency of uncoupled mitochondria , in which the elec - tron transport chain is active ( closed circles , before adding the inhibitor rotenone ) and inactive ( open circles , after adding rotenone ) , for an applied ﬁeld amplitude of 5 V / cm . In uncoupled mitochondria , the ATP synthase molecular turbine is inactive and a second , higher frequency ( ~ 12 kHz ) peak , seen in budding yeast and B . indicas , is absent in this case . Figure 3 . Second harmonic response vs . applied fundamen - tal frequency for chloroplasts , with light and without light , for an applied ﬁeld amplitude of 5 V / cm . 3 D . S . McKay , E . K . Gibson Jr . , K . L . Thomas - Keprta , H . Vali , C . S . Romanek , S . J . Clemett , X . D . F . Chillier , C . R . Maechling , and R . N . Zare , “Search for Past Life on Mars : Possible Relic Biogenic Activity in Martian Meteorite ALH84001 , ” Science 273 ( 1996 ) : 924 - 30 . 4 K . L . Thomas - Keprta , S . J . Clemett , D . A . Bazylinksi , J . L . Kirschvink , D . S . McKay , S . J . Wentworth , H . Vali , E . K . Gibson , Jr . , M . F . McKay , and C . S . Romanek , “Truncated Hexa - Octahedral Magnetite Crystals in ALH84001 : Presumptive Biosignatures , ” Proc . , Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 98 ( 2001 ) : 2164 - 69 . 5 K . L . Thomas - Keprta , S . J . Clemett , D . A . Bazylinksi , J . L . Kirschvink , D . S . McKay , S . J . Wentworth , H . Vali , E . K . Gibson , Jr . , and C . S . Romanek , “Magnetofossils from Ancient Mars : A Robust Biosigniture in the Martian Meteorite NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 35 INVERTED MICROSCOPE—Inside a copper low - level clean room to prevent contamination , Gustavo Cardena utilizes an inverted microscope—state - of - the - art equipment—which captures images from beneath . Cardenas , a doctoral student in physics , earned his baccalaureate degree at the Technology Institute of Monterey . ALH84001 , ” Appl . Environ . Microbiol . 68 ( 2002 ) : 3663 - 72 . 6 B . P . Weiss , Y . L . Yung , and K . H . Nealson , “Atmospheric Energy for Subsurface Life on Mars ? ” Proc . , Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 97 ( 2000 ) : 1395 - 99 . 7 M . T . Mellon and B . M . Jakosky , “Geographic Variations in the Thermal and Diffusive Stability of Ground Ice on Mars , ” J . Geophys . Res . 98 ( 1993 ) : 3345 - 64 . 8 M . H . Carr , Water on Mars , N . Y . : Oxford U . P . , 1996 . 9 W . B . Whitman , D . C . Coleman , and W . J . Wiebe , “Prokaryotes : The Unseen Majority , ” Proc . , Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 95 ( 1998 ) : 6578 - 83 . 10 K . H . Nealson , “The Limits of Life on Earth and Searching for Life on Mars , ” J . Geophys . Res . 102 ( 1997 ) : 23 , 675 - 86 . 11 J . C . Priscu , C . H . Fritsen , E . E . Adams , S . J . Giovannoni , H . W . Paerl , C . P . McKay , P . T . Doran , D . A . Gordon , B . D . Lanoil , and J . L . Pinckney , “Perennial Antarctic Lake Ice : An Oasis for Life in a Polar Desert , ” Science 280 ( 1998 ) : 2095 - 98 . 12 H . P . Schwan , “Electrical Properties of Tissue and Cell Suspensions , ” in Advances in Biological and Medical Physics , Vol . 5 , Eds . J . H . Lawrence and C . A . Tobias . N . Y . : Academic , 1957 . 147 - 209 . 13 K . Asami , “Characterization of Biological Cells by Dielectric Spectroscopy , ” J . Non - Crystaline Solids 305 ( 2002 ) : 268 - 77 . 14 D . Nawarathna , J . R . Claycomb , J . H . Miller , Jr . , and M . J . Benedik , “Nonlinear Dielectric Spectroscopy of Live Cells Using Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices , ” Appl . Phys . Lett . 86 ( 2004 ) : 023902 - 1 – 3 . Publications Miller , J . H . , Jr . , D . Nawarathna , D . Warmflash , F . A . Pereira , and W . E . Brownell . “Dielectric Properties of Yeast Cells Expressed with the Motor Protein Prestin , ” J . Biol . Phys . 31 . 3 - 4 ( 2005 ) : 465 - 75 . Miller , J . H . , Jr . , D . Nawarathna , V . Vajrala , J . Gardner , and W . R . Widger . “Electromagnetic Probes of Molecular Motors in the Electron Transport Chains of Mitochondria and Chloroplasts , ” J . de Physique IV ( France ) 131 ( 2005 ) : 363 - 66 . 36 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA PH . D . STUDENT—Shih - Ying Hsu earned her B . S . degree at the National Chung - Hsin University , China . SUSPENSIONS—Jie Fang studies electromagnetic proper - ties of live cells and proteins utililzing the inverted micro - scope . Engaged in doctoral study , she earned her baccalau - reate degree at the Central China Normal University . PUBLISHED STUDENTS—Students , such as Vijayanand Vajarala ( r . ) have the opportunity to publish their results in professional journals . Vajrala who earned his B . S . in physics at the University of Hyderabad , Indian , is now involved in doctoral study in physics at the University of Houston . Others involved in the study of liquid samples subjected to dielectric spectroscopy measurements are Dr . Dharmakeerthi Nawarathna ( l . ) , from the University of Peradeniya , Sri Lanka , and Gustavo Cardenas ( kneeling ) from Monterey , a doctoral student in physics . Nawarathna , D . , J . H . Miller , Jr . , J . R . Claycomb , G . Cardenas , and D . Warmflash . “Harmonic Response of Cellular Membrane Pumps to Low Frequency Electric Fields , ” Phys . Rev . Lett . 95 ( 2005 ) : 158103 – 1 - 4 . Nawarathna , D . , J . R . Claycomb , G . Cardenas , J . Gardner , D . Warmflash , J . H . Miller , Jr . , and W . R . Widger . “Harmonic Generation by Yeast Cells in Response to Low Frequency Electric Fields , ” Physical Review E . ( Submitted . ) Sanabria , H . , J . H . Miller , Jr . , A . Mershin , R . F . Luduena , A . A . Kolomenski , H . A . Schuessler , and D . V . Nanopoulos . “Impedance Spectroscopy of a - b Tubulin Heterodimer Suspensions , ” Biophysical J . ( Accepted for publication ) . Vajrala , V . , D . Nawarathna , J . R . Claycomb , and J . H . Miller , Jr . “Impedance Magnetocardiography Using High - T c SQUIDs , ” IEEE Trans . on Applied Superconductivity 15 . 2 ( 2005 ) : 680 - 83 . NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 37 Presentations Miller , J . H . , Jr . “Condensed Matter Physics Phenomena in Biological Systems , ” Texas Center for Superconductivity , University of Houston , April 21 , 2005 . ( Invited . ) — . “Electromagnetic Properties of Live Cells and Proteins , ” Los Alamos National Laboratory , National High Magnetic Field Laboratory , Los Alamos , NM , July 20 , 2005 . ( Invited . ) — . “Electromagnetic Sensors of Nanoscale Biological Motors , ” Associated Nanotechnology Congress , Strategic Partnership for Research in Nanotechnology , 3rd Annual SPRING Conf . , Rice U . , Houston , TX , Oct . 10 – 11 , 2005 . ( Invited . ) — . “Resonant Peaks in the Nonlinear Electromagnetic Responses of Live Cells and Mitochondria , ” Department of Bioengineering , Rice U . , Houston , TX , Feb . 7 , 2005 . ( Invited ) . Miller , J . H . , Jr . , D . Nawarathna , H . Sanabria , V . Vajrala , and J . R . Claycomb . “Nonlinear Harmonic Responses of Live Cells Using High - T c Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices , ” 24th Intl . Conf . on Low Temperature Physics , Orlando , FL , Aug . 10 – 17 , 2005 . Miller , J . H . , Jr . , D . Nawarathna , V . Vajrala , J . Gardner , and W . R . Widger . “Electromagnetic Probes of Molecular Motors in the Electron Transport Chains of Mitochondria and Chloroplasts , ” Intl Workshop on Electronic Crystals , Cargèse , France , Aug . 21 – 27 , 2005 . ( Invited for expanded presentation . ) Nawarathna , D . , D . Warmflash , J . H . Miller , Jr . , and J . Claycomb . “Noninvastive Probes of Mitochondrial Molecular Motors , ” Bull . Am . Phys . Soc . 50 ( 2005 ) : 1342 . Meeting of the American Physical Society , Los Angeles , CA , March 21 – 25 , 2005 . Nawarathna , D . , J . Gardner , G . Cardenas , J . R . Claycomb , J . H . Miller , Jr . , and W . R . Widger . “Electromagnetic Probes of Molecular Motors in the Electron Transport Chains of Mitochondria and Chloroplasts , ” Associated Nanotechnology Congress , Strategic Partnership for Research in Nanotechnology , 3rd Annual SPRING Conf . , Rice U . , Houston , TX , Oct . 10 – 11 , 2005 . Vajrala , V . , J . Claycomb , and J . Miller . “Modeling Studies of Induced Internal Transmembrane Potentials and Molecular Motors in Live Cells , ” Bull . Am . Phys . Soc . 50 ( 2005 ) : 1342 - 43 . Meeting of the American Physical Society , Los Angeles , CA , March 21 – 25 , 2005 . Funding and Proposals Miller , J . H . , Jr . “Dielectric Spectroscopy of Chemical and Biological Systems , ” Robert A . Welch Foundation , June 1 , 2004 – May 31 , 2007 , $ 165 , 000 . Miller , J . H . , Jr . and J . Wosik . “Dielectric Spectroscopy of Biological Agents , ” DARPA / Naval Surface Warfare Center , Sept . 26 , 2003 – Sept . 25 , 2005 , $ 250 , 000 . Miller , J . H . , Jr . , D . S . McKay , G . E . Fox , J . Wosik , and D . Warmflash . “Biosensors Based on Dielectric Response : A Non - Geocentric Approach for In Situ Life Detection , ” NASA - Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets Program . Requested for three years ( $ 793 , 197 for UH , $ 102 , 080 for NASA - JSC ) , $ 895 , 277 . ( Pending . ) In 2006 we intend to submit at least one NIH ( R01 or R21 ) proposal , likely in bio­ medical engineering or a related area , which will build on our recent results and pub­ lications on noninvasive electromagnetic biosensors . UWB Tracking System Design with TDOA Algorithm for Space Applications ( Continued from page 22 . ) References 1 FCC First Notice and Order , “Revision of Part 15 of the Commission’s Rules Regarding Ultra - Wideband Transmission Systems , ” ET - Docket , Feb . 2002 . 2 M . G . M . Hussain , “Principles of Space - Time Array Processing for Ultrawide Band Impulse Radar and Radio Communication , ” IEEE Trans . on Vehicular Tech . 51 ( 2002 ) : 393 - 403 . 3 J . Ni , D . Arndt , P . Ngo , C . Phan , J . Gross , and J . Dusl , “UWB Tracking System Design for Free - Flyers , ” AIAA Space 2004 Conf . and Exhibit , San Diego , CA , Sept . 28 – 30 , 2004 . 4 Y . T . Chan and K . C . Ho , “An Efficient Closed - Form Localization Solution from Time Difference of Arrival Measure­ ments , ” IEEE Intl . Conf . on Acoustics , Speech , and Signal Processing , April 1994 . 2 : 393 - 6 . 38 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA ANTENNA TESTING—The quality and range of antennae are tested in the NASA - JSC Anechoic Chamber . Antennas are mounted on towering cranes and rotated through angles of theta and pi to measure antenna gain . ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports ISSO Mini - Reports NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 39 View of the Moon ' s North Pole Courtesy NASA / JPL - Caltech 40 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Natural Language Interface Models for Fast Responsiveness Applications Hisham Al - Mubaid Abstract—A fast responsiveness system incurs minimum latency and produces high throughput and quick response . Interacting with these systems using friendly natural language interfaces requires nat­ ural language ( NL ) capability and an NL processing component . Examples of fast responsive systems include mission - critical systems like aerospace applications and real - time text messaging applications . The NL component constitutes an important part of the interface . We propose NL interface models for fast responsiveness systems with a language disambiguation component . The language disambiguation component is based on using supervised Machine Learning ( ML ) techniques . For that , we designed and implemented a number of language disambiguation techniques for word prediction to be used with such systems that require fast responsiveness . In the experimental evaluation , proposed techniques demonstrated impressive performance in prediction accuracy . A FAST RESPONSIVENESS SYS ­ tem is a system that incurs minimum latency and pro­ duces high throughput and quick responses . Interacting with such systems requires smart interfaces with capabilities to maintain and support fast responsiveness . The smart interfaces of these systems require natural language ( NL ) capabilities and a natural language processing ( NLP ) component . Examples of fast responsiveness systems include Virtual Reality ( VR ) training programs , real - time Dr . Hisham Al - Mubaid text messaging applications , mission - critical systems like aero­ space applications , and applications in which immediate responses are needed . 5 In general , fast responsiveness is partic­ ularly important for ( 1 ) mission critical , ( 2 ) real time , and ( 3 ) aerospace applications . The NLP component constitutes an important part of the interface , but it is the hard part since working with NL will lead to facing the difficult problem of NL ambiguity . In addition , having an efficient NL component is very appealing for fast responsiveness applications . We present efficient models of interfaces with NL capabilities for fast responsiveness systems . An important part of the interface is the language disambiguation component . The language disambiguation component is based on integrating adaptive and supervised Machine Learning ( ML ) techniques . ML techniques have demonstrated outstanding suc­ cess in many similar problems . 3 The basic structure of the pro - User Interface NL Component NL Disambiguation Module Figure 1 . Basic Structure of the Proposed Model posed design is shown in Fig . 1 . The language disambiguation module will be able to perform a number of tasks , including : • Predicting words and completing user input : the system completes a word being typed by the user ; thus , many key­ strokes can be saved and text entry delay reduced . • Correcting real word errors . • Suggesting words during text entry . To perform these tasks , we designed and implemented word disambiguation and prediction techniques to solve the NL ambiguity problem . The proposed techniques will allow for word prediction and completion in the NL interfaces of the fast responsiveness applications . Background and Related Work One of the major problems in developing robust Natural NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 41 Algorithm Algorithm training data applicationdata decision ( a ) ( b ) extracted knowledge extracted knowledge Machine Learning Machine Learning Figure 2 . Machine Learning : ( a ) the Training / Learning Phase ( b ) the Application Phase Language Processing ( NLP ) applications is the ambiguity of words and sentences . With the appeal of natural language inter­ faces , some researchers have argued that a language like English has too many ambiguities to be useful for communicat­ ing with computers . Typically , words and phrases have many meanings that can be inferred from the context , and these mean­ ings shift with the context . For example , in word disambigua­ tion , we would like to decide , in a given context , and from a given set of words ( confusion set ) which word is the most like­ ly one in the given context . The problem of word ambiguity recurs in many applications , and these applications will benefit greatly from an efficient and accurate word disambiguation system . A number of methods and systems have been developed for the word prediction problem in the past few decades . These methods can be classified as statistical methods that are based on statistical ( and probabilistic ) language models and syntactic methods in which syntactic information is extracted and exploit­ ed in a word prediction task . Fazly presents a comprehensive review of prior related work in word prediction . 4 An interesting method among related work is one presented by Even - Zohar and Roth . 7 Their approach attempts to learn the contexts in which a word tends to appear , using expressive and rich set of features . The features are introduced in a language as information sources . The method was tested in several experiments using for training and testing texts taken from a Wall Street Journal ( WSJ ) corpus . The Methods In NLP literature , most of the efficient and robust systems for processing natural language are designed and developed based on learning and training approaches . 4 Such learning approaches typically require training data and produce trained models that can subsequently be employed in the underlying task ; see Fig . 2 . This research investigates and explores the process of integrat­ ing supervised learning techniques for language disambiguation Table 1 . Three Confusion Sets Used in the Experiments to allow for , and assist in , developing effective and robust inter­ faces for fast responsiveness applications . Moreover , the devel­ oped learning models will be tested with smart interfaces with fast responsiveness . For example , one of the features of fast responsiveness is word prediction and completion feature . This research presents an effective method for word predic­ tion using machine learning and new feature extraction and selection techniques . We use feature selection techniques adapt­ ed from Mutual Information ( MI ) and Chi - square ( X 2 ) . These feature extraction and selection techniques , MI and X 2 , have been used successfully in information retrieval ( IR ) and text cat­ egorization ( TC ) . 10 - 12 Thus , the WP problem here is cast as a word classification task in which multiple candidate words are classified to determine the most correct one in the given context . For example , in this word prediction instance [ w n …… w 3 w 2 w 1 - ? - ] , we wish to predict and determine the word that follows the sequence [ … w 3 w 2 w 1 ( i . e . , the word in place of the “ - ? - ” ) ] . Example of confusion sets used in this research include : { quite­ quiet , peace - piece , passed - past , being - begin , than - then , raise - rise , site - sight } ( Table 1 ) . Now we can summarize the problem as follows . Let c = { w 1 , w 2 , …… , w n } be the context of the pre­ diction task , where n as an integer number represents the size of context window ( in this research we tested for n values 3 , 5 , or 10 ) . The words w 1 , w 2 , …… , w n are the words that appear immediately before the word to be predicted . Also let f = { w x , w y } be the confusion set for this case . Our method relies on machine learning to train word classifiers to classify ( predict ) whether w x or w y is the predicted correct word in that context . Each word in the confusion set is represented as a projection on the feature vector that is composed from the training data . One of the contributions of this work is in the way in which we extract and compute features from the training data . Feature Selection and Extraction Let a training text T be given . We extract from T all the occur­ rences of the confusion set words w x and w y . Each occurrence is extracted along with its context ( preceding n words ) to make Confusion set 1 Confusion set 2 Confusion set 3 advice - advise , weak - week , sea - see , lose - loose , … accept - except , affect - effect , begin - being , country - county , … site - sight , than - then , further - farther , raise - rise , … one training example of the form [ w n …… w 3 w 2 w 1 w x ] or [ w n …… w 3 w 2 w 1 w y ] . Thus , we have now two sets of train­ ing examples ; the training examples of w x and the training examples of w y , both extracted from T . We convert each exam­ 42 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA ple into a feature vector as follows . We select as features only Table 2 . Details of the Four Datasets Used in Experiments certain words with high “ discriminating ” capabilities between the two confused words ( e . g . , w x and w y ) . These features are used to represent each example in training and prediction . Let us first define the notions of a , b , c , and d , as follows . From the training examples , we calculate four numeric values a , b , c , and d for each context word w i ∈ W , as follows : a = number of occurrences of w i in C 1 b = number of occurrences of w i in C 2 c = number of examples of C 1 that do not contain w i d = number of examples of C 2 that do not contain w i …… ( 0 ) Then , the mutual information ( MI ) is defined as : N ⋅ a MI = ( 1 ) ( a + b ) ⋅ ( a + c ) where N is the total number of examples in C 1 and C 2 . Chi - Square ( X 2 ) is computed as : X 2 N ⋅ ( ad – cb ) 2 = ( 2 ) ( a + c ) ⋅ ( b + d ) ⋅ ( a + b ) ⋅ ( c + d ) To give more weight for the difference ( a – b ) and for the value a , we adapted from MI the following two techniques : MI _ 1 = MI ⋅ ( a – b ) ( 3 ) MI _ 2 = MI ⋅ a ⋅ ( a – b ) ( 4 ) Experiments and Results Datasets . We used four different text datasets to evaluate our method . Details of the datasets are in Table 2 . The datasets are as follows : • The Reuters is taken from the Reuters - 21578 benchmark dataset . 13 • The ACL dataset was obtained from the LDC - Linguistic data consortium ( < http : / / www . ldc . upenn . edu / > ) and includes news stories 1987 – 1991 from the WSJ . • The BioMed text is a corpus of biomedical articles taken 14 from Medline . • The 10 - K dataset contains financial text of 10 - K filings of U . S . corporations , taken from the U . S . Securities and Exchanges Commission ( SEC at < http : / / www . sec . gov / > ) . Dataset ( source ) Training text size Testing text size words words Reuters ( Reuters - 21578 ) 977 , 418 167 , 835 ACL ( LDC ) 761 , 730 451 , 407 Biomed text ( Medline ) 774 , 206 466 , 254 10 - K ( SEC ) 527 , 390 152 , 069 Confusion sets . We used three confusion sets in the experiments , shown in Table 2 . Evaluation and Discussion We used MI , MI _ 2 , and X 2 for feature selection and SVM for learning and prediction ; we also used the naïve Bayes algo­ rithm 15 as the baseline . For context size , we used preceding 3 , 5 , or 10 words . Furthermore , for size of the feature vectors , we tried 10 , 20 , and 30 features and found that the best performance resulted when using 20 features . We initially tested our method using three datasets Reuters , ACL , and BioMed ( Table 2 ) , and the three confusion sets ( Table 1 ) . The results are presented in Table 3 when using MI _ 2 for feature selection and in Table 4 when the X 2 feature selection technique was used . With a total of 19 , 438 , word prediction instances were tested in each exper­ iment ( Tables 3 and 4 ) . We noticed that MI _ 2 produces slightly better accuracy than X 2 . Moreover , to compare our method against the baseline method ( N . Bayes ) we ran all the testing prediction instances on the Bayesian method ; the results are in Table 5 . The Bayesian method produced slightly better accura­ cy than MI _ 2 only in the Reuters dataset , but the other two datasets , MI _ 2 and X 2 , outperform Bayesian significantly ( Table 5 ) . Furthermore , the micro - average accuracy on the three datasets demonstrates that MI _ 2 and X 2 outperform the baseline method , as shown in Table 5 . Finally , since the 10 - K dataset is very specialized set and is not as commonly used in NLP as the other datasets , we tested our method on it in a separate experiment using MI _ 2 and X 2 ; results in Table 6 . In this experiment , too , MI _ 2 with 91 . 42 % accuracy outperforms X 2 with 87 . 09 % accuracy . This experi­ ment also proves that our method can achieve impressive accu­ racies exceeding 91 % correct predictions ( Table 6 ) . Overall , this method of learning - classification - based word prediction is capable of achieving accuracy in the range of 87 % - 88 % correct Table 3 . Accuracy results using the three datasets and three confusion sets using MI _ 2 for feature selection , preceding three words for contexts , and top 20 features . Dataset Confusion set 1 Confusion set 2 Confusion set 3 Average num . of accuracy num . of accuracy num . of accuracy Accuracy tested tested tested instances instances instances Reuters 615 81 . 46 1481 89 . 80 941 95 . 21 89 . 79 ACL 2658 86 . 68 3149 83 . 39 2369 87 . 08 85 . 53 BioMed 2725 86 . 93 4313 88 . 73 1187 93 . 09 88 . 76 Total 5998 8943 4497 NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 43 Table 4 . Accuracy results using the three datasets and three confusion sets using X 2 for feature selection , preceding three words for contexts , and top 20 features . Dataset Confusion set 1 Confusion set 2 Confusion set 3 Average num . of accuracy num . of accuracy num . of accuracy Accuracy tested tested tested instances instances instances Reuters 615 81 . 46 1481 89 . 80 941 95 . 21 89 . 79 ACL 2658 86 . 68 3149 83 . 39 2369 87 . 08 85 . 53 BioMed 2725 86 . 93 4313 88 . 73 1187 93 . 09 88 . 76 Total 5998 8943 4497 Table 5 . Average accuracy on each method with each dataset ; accuracy here is the average of testing on all confu - sion sets . Dataset Num . of tested Accuracy instances N . Bayes MI _ 2 X 2 Reuters 3037 90 . 67 89 . 79 87 . 23 ACL 8176 80 . 12 85 . 53 85 . 12 BioMed 8225 81 . 28 88 . 76 87 . 37 Total 19 , 438 Micro . Avg 82 . 26 87 . 56 86 . 40 Table 6 . Accuracy Results for the 10 - K Dataset Dataset Num . of tested Accuracy instances MI _ 2 X 2 10 - K 2 , 610 91 . 42 87 . 09 predictions using only the three preceding words as context , which emphasizes the robustness of the feature selection tech­ niques and the learning method . Furthermore , experimental results proved that the method can achieve really high accuracies ; for example , the method pro­ duced accuracy of ~ 90 % using confusion set 2 and Reuter ( Table 4 ) , and the average accuracy on Reuters is approaching ~ 90 % ; BioMed , approaching ~ 89 % ( Table 3 ) . In addition , the method achieved accuracy of 95 . 2 % on the Reuters using con­ fusion set 3 ( Table 3 ) and 93 . 1 % on the BioMed dataset using confusion set 3 ( Table 4 ) . Conclusion This paper presents new word disambiguation and prediction techniques to solve the NL ambiguity problem . Proposed tech­ niques were evaluated extensively and demonstrated impressive performance in prediction accuracy . The proposed techniques will allow for word prediction and completion in the NL inter­ faces of the fast responsiveness applications . Thus , the resulting interface will have attractive features such as predicting and completing words during text entry , correcting real - word mis­ spellings typed by the user , and determining the correct word for a given sound in speech interface ( speech recognition ) . This will facilitate the interaction and interfacing with the system by effectively speeding up interaction with the computer . These features are highly appealing for mission - critical applications and domains where fast responsiveness is needed , as in aero­ space applications . Moreover , word prediction is a very impor­ tant task and has many significant applications . Besides regular users , a robust word prediction system can benefit able - bodied users by allowing higher text entry rates and minimizing num­ ber of typographical errors and misspellings . This aspect has been observed by the developers of the open - source word processor OpenOffice , 16 which provides , along with standard word processing features , word completion . References 1 H . Al - Mubaid and M . Siddiqui , “Automatic Text Categorization with Learning Logic , ” Proc . , 6th Intl . Conf . for Computer Applications in Industry and Engineering , Las Vegas , NV , Nov . 2003 . 2 H . Al - Mubaid , “Context - Based Word Prediction and Classification , ” Proc . , ISCA Intl . Conf . on Computers and Their Applications , 2003 . 3 H . Al - Mubaid and K . Truemper , “Learning To Find Context - Based Spelling Errors , ” in Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery Approaches Based on Rule Induction Techniques , Eds . E . Triantaphyllou and G . Felici . N . Y . : Kluwer Acad . Pub . , 2005 . 4 A . Fazly , “The Use of Syntax in Word Completion Utilities , ” Master’s thesis , U . of Toronto , Canada , 2002 . 5 C . I . Guinn and R . Jorge Montoya , “Natural Language Processing in Virtual Reality Training Environments , ” Modern Simulation and Training ( June 1998 ) : 44 - 55 . 7 Y . Even - Zohar and D . Roth , “A Classification Approach to Word Prediction , ” NAACL ( 2000 ) . 10 G . Forman , “An Extensive Empirical Study of Feature Selec­ tion Metrics for Text Classification , ” JMLR 3 ( 2003 ) : 1289 - 305 . 11 L . Galavotti , F . Sebastiani , and M . Simi , “Experiments on the Use of Feature Selection and Negative Evidence in Automated Text Categorization , ” Proc . , 4th European Conf . on Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries , 2000 . 12 Y . Yang , and J . P . Pedersen , “A Comparative Study on Feature Selection in Text Categorization , ” in The 4th Intl . Conf . on Machine Learning , Ed . Jr . D . H . Fisher , 1997 . 412 - 20 . 13 Reuters - 21578 Text Categorization Test Collection , May , 14 ( Continued on page 94 . ) 44 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA A Text - Mining Technique for Literature Proﬁling and Information Extraction from Biomedical Literature Hisham Al - Mubaid Abstract—Massive amounts of biomedical literature are readily available online in many forms . Huge amounts of valuable knowledge and relationships are embedded in these resources and need to be properly extracted , discovered , and utilized . Recognizing and classifying biomedical entity names and terms are important steps for developing efficient knowledge / information extraction techniques from these repositories . This research investigates and develops effective computational methods for litera­ ture profiling for the biomedical field . Specifically , this paper presents new techniques for biomedical term identification and classification . We utilize the advances in feature selection techniques ( e . g . , MI , X 2 ) in IR in this task to select the key features for term identification and classification . We evaluated the method using Genia 3 . 0 corpus with about 3 , 000 to more than 34 , 000 biomedical terms and entity names . The outcome of this project can be applied in various fields including the Aerospace domain . In the aerospace field , there is a great interest in discovering the relations between certain changes in the body of astronauts and changes in structure at the levels of genes , proteins , and bindings . M ASSIVE AMOUNTS OF BIO - medical literature are readily available online to researchers in many forms : text abstracts ( PubMed contains over 14 million biomedical abstracts 1 ) , full text research articles , databases of protein interactions , dictionaries of gene and protein names , and much more . Huge amounts of valu­ able knowledge and useful infor­ mation are embedded in these resources waiting to be properly extracted , discovered , and utilized . There is great need for computa - Dr . Hisham Al - Mubaid tional techniques to utilize and extract the useful knowledge from these resources . A number of systems and software tools have been developed to utilize these overwhelming resources . 2 - 6 Biomedical research has shown that text mining can be effective in this field , making text mining increasingly important and nec­ essary for biology and medicine . The purpose of this research is to investigate and design an effective computational method for literature profiling to extract and organize important information and relationships from bio­ medical literature . For that , we implemented new methods to identify and classify technical terms and entity names in bio­ medical texts . The methods are based on machine learning and can be viewed as a word classification task . We utilized feature extraction techniques like MI ( mutual information ) and X 2 ( Chi - square ) to select the key features in the contexts of the terms of interest . The methods were evaluated extensively with a large number of experiments . The outcome of this project can be applied in various fields including the Aerospace domain . In the field of aerospace , there is a great interest in discovering the relations between certain changes in the body of the astronauts ( due to radiation , reduced gravity , and isolation ) and the struc­ tural changes at the levels of genes , proteins , and bindings . Moreover , in aerospace , certain symptoms have need of being explained at the levels of gene or protein , so that the conse­ quences and future complications can be known and treated in a timely manner . Related Work In the biomedical domain , the majority of term identification and recognition techniques target certain specific entities and terms ( mostly gene and protein names ) ; this way term identifi­ cation and term classification are integrated as one task . 7 A num­ ber of machine learning and statistically - based approaches have been proposed for term identification and classification in the past . 7 - 9 For example , Morgan et al . 8 used HMMs based on local context and simple orthographic and case variations and report­ ed F - measure of 75 % for the recognition of Drosophila gene names . Moreover , Shen et al . 10 used POS tags and noun heads as features and achieved F - scores of 16 . 7 % to 80 % , depending on NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 45 Table 1 . Results of the JNLPBA - 2004 competition of Bio - Entity recognition : ( recall / precision / F - score ) results of each one of the participating systems and the baseline ( BL ) , taken from Kim et al . ( 2004 ) 9 1978 – 1989 set 1990 – 1999 set 2000 – 2001 set S / 1998 – 2001 set Total [ Zho04 ] 75 . 3 / 69 . 5 / 72 . 3 77 . 1 / 69 . 2 / 72 . 9 75 . 6 / 71 . 3 / 73 . 8 75 . 8 / 69 . 5 / 72 . 5 76 . 0 / 69 . 4 / 72 . 6 [ Fin04 ] 66 . 9 / 70 . 4 / 68 . 6 73 . 8 / 69 . 4 / 71 . 5 72 . 6 / 69 . 3 / 70 . 9 71 . 8 / 67 . 5 / 69 . 6 71 . 6 / 68 . 6 / 70 . 1 [ Set04 ] 63 . 6 / 71 . 4 / 67 . 3 72 . 2 / 68 . 7 / 70 . 4 71 . 3 / 69 . 6 / 70 . 5 71 . 3 / 68 . 8 / 70 . 1 70 . 3 / 69 . 3 / 69 . 8 [ Son04 ] 60 . 3 / 66 . 2 / 63 . 1 71 . 2 / 65 . 6 / 68 . 2 69 . 5 / 65 . 8 / 67 . 6 68 . 3 / 64 . 0 / 66 . 1 67 . 8 / 64 . 8 / 66 . 3 [ Zha04 ] 63 . 2 / 60 . 4 / 61 . 8 72 . 5 / 62 . 6 / 67 . 2 69 . 1 / 60 . 2 / 64 . 7 69 . 2 / 60 . 3 / 64 . 4 69 . 1 / 61 . 0 / 64 . 8 [ Rös04 ] 59 . 2 / 60 . 3 / 59 . 8 70 . 3 / 61 . 8 / 65 . 8 68 . 4 / 61 . 5 / 64 . 8 68 . 3 / 60 . 4 / 64 . 1 67 . 4 / 61 . 0 / 64 . 0 [ Par04 ] 62 . 8 / 55 . 9 / 59 . 2 70 . 3 / 61 . 4 / 65 . 6 65 . 1 / 60 . 4 / 62 . 7 65 . 9 / 59 . 7 / 62 . 7 66 . 5 / 59 . 8 / 63 . 0 [ Lee04 ] 42 . 5 / 42 . 0 / 42 . 2 52 . 5 / 49 . 1 / 50 . 8 53 . 8 / 50 . 9 / 52 . 3 52 . 3 / 48 . 1 / 50 . 1 50 . 8 / 47 . 6 / 49 . 1 BL 47 . 1 / 33 . 9 / 39 . 4 56 . 8 / 45 . 5 / 50 . 5 51 . 7 / 46 . 3 / 48 . 8 52 . 6 / 46 . 0 / 49 . 1 52 . 6 / 43 . 6 / 47 . 7 the class , and reported that POS tags proved to be among the most useful features . A number of approaches employed SVM for term identification and recognition . For example , Kazama et al . 11 used SVMs for multi - class classification . They annotated the training data class label with B , I , and O labels to indicate that a term is beginning , inside , or outside the term . 11 The JNLP - BA - 2004 competition 12 included eight systems for the Bio - Entity recognition task . 9 The competition was an open chal­ lenge , and the participants were allowed to use whatever tech­ niques and data resources they preferred . However , the systems were evaluated using a common evaluation methodology and a common dataset . Four types of classification models where used : SVM , HMM , MEMM , and CRFs . The overall results ( Table 1 ) showed the recall ranges from 50 . 8 % to 76 . 0 % , preci­ sion from 43 . 6 % to 69 . 4 % , and F - score from 47 . 7 % to 72 . 6 % . 9 , 12 The Techniques tion . A number of previous related methods utilized the words in terms of interest as features for term identification or classifica - 13 , 14 We also use word features to represent the biomedical terms , but the words in the context of the term are not used directly as features . Instead we select , as features , only those words having high ‘ discriminating ’ capabilities between the var­ ious classes of terms . These word features are used to represent each instance ( example ) of the terms in the training and testing . The method then employs machine learning ( SVMs ) to train clas­ sifiers with labeled ( training ) examples . So , some already labeled terms ( annotated with class labels ) are used as training examples . The classifiers will then be used to classify unseen and unlabeled examples ( term instances ) in the testing ( classifica­ tion ) phase . One of the main contributions of this work is the way we select features for learning and classification . Feature Selection Assume that we have two classes , C 1 and C 2 , of labeled exam­ ples extracted from biomedical texts . Let C 1 be examples of bio­ medical term instances and their contexts from one category ( C 1 ) , whereas C 2 includes examples with their contexts from another category ( C 2 ) . We want to classify terms from C 1 and C 2 into their correct classes . The term , which belongs to either C 1 or C 2 , is what is to be classified in this case , and the words preced­ ing and following the term are its context words . Consequently each example in the set C 1 or C 2 can be represented as : p n … p 3 p 2 p 1 < term > f 1 f 2 f 3 … f n , where the words p 1 , p 2 , p 3 , … , p n and f 1 , f 2 , f 3 , … , f n are the pre­ ceding and following words ( context words ) surrounding the term , and n is called the window size ( w ) . We extract all the con­ text words W = { w 1 , w 1 , … , w m } from the examples in the sets C 1 and C 2 . Now , each such context word w i ∈ W may occur in con­ texts from either C 1 or C 2 or both with different frequency dis­ tributions . We want to determine that if we see a context word w i in an ambiguous example the extent to which this occurrence of w i suggests that this example belongs to C 1 or C 2 . Thus , we select those words w i from W which are highly associated with either C 1 or C 2 ( the highly discriminating words ) as features . We utilize feature selection techniques like mutual information ( MI ) and chi - square ( X 2 ) 14 , 15 to select the highly discriminating words from W . We now explain how we implement and use MI and X 2 . Let us first define the notions of a , b , c , and d : From the train­ ing examples , we calculate a , b , c , and d for each context word w i ∈ W as follows : a = number of occurrences of wi in C 1 b = number of occurrences of wi in C 2 c = number of examples of C 1 that do not contain w i d = number of examples of C 2 that do not contain w i . Then , the mutual information ( MI ) is defined as : N ⋅ a , MI = ( a + b ) ⋅ ( a + c ) where N is the total number of examples in C 1 and C 2 . And Chi - Square ( X 2 ) is computed as : X 2 N ⋅ ( ad – cb ) 2 . = ( 2 ) ( a + c ) ⋅ ( b + d ) ⋅ ( a + b ) ⋅ ( c + d ) When using the MI technique for feature selection , we calcu­ late MI values for each w i ∈ W ; then we choose the top v words 46 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA w i ∈ W with the highest MI values as fea - Table 2 . 36 Terminal Classes of Genia 3 . 0 tures in this term’s feature vectors . In our experiments , we tested on v values of 10 , Class Names 20 , 30 , 50 , and 100 . For example , if v = DNA _ domain _ or _ region atom 10 , then each training example is repre - amino _ acid _ monomer DNA _ family _ or _ group carbohydrate sented by a vector size of 10 entries ( thus , peptide DNA _ molecule lipid v : vector size ) such that the first entry rep - protein _ N / A DNA _ substructure virus resents the word with the highest MI protein _ complex RNA _ N / A mono _ cell value , the second entry represents the protein _ domain _ or _ region RNA _ domain _ or _ region multi _ cell word with the second highest MI value , protein _ family _ or _ group RNA _ family _ or _ group body _ part and so on . Then for a given training protein _ molecule RNA _ molecule tissue example , the feature vector entry is set to protein _ substructure RNA _ substructure cell _ type “1” if the corresponding feature word protein _ subunit other _ organic _ compound cell _ component occurs in that training example and set to nucleotide “0” otherwise . polynucleotide organic cell _ line DNA _ N / A inorganic other _ name Learning and Classification We generate feature vectors from the training examples using Dataset the top words selected using MI or X 2 . Then , we use a well - Data for training and testing are taken from the Genia corpus established learning technique Support Vector Machines version 3 . 0 . 17 This corpus is used as benchmark in most of the ( SVM ) 16 to train classifiers with the training vectors . SVM is an biomedical term / entity name related problems . 9 , 12 The Genia inductive learning technique for two - class classification . corpus was developed at the University of Tokyo and construct - Significant theoretical and empirical justifications exist in the ed from Medline 1 by querying the terms ‘ human , ’ ‘ blood cells , ’ literature to support SVM . 16 We construct , for each class , one and ‘ transcription factors . ’ From this search process , 2 , 000 feature vector for each training example . Then we take two abstracts were selected for the corpus . The identified terms in classes at a time and apply SVM to train , and the classifier these selected documents were hand annotated with 36 ( model ) is produced . The classifier will then be used in the test - classes / types , these classes are shown in Table 2 . The corpus ing / classification phase to classify testing instances . We use contains a total of 75 , 108 term occurrences . SVM light ( < http : / / svmlight . joachims . org > ) with the default parameters except that we adjust the cost factor ( j parameter ) by Experimental design which training errors on positive examples outweigh errors on We selected for testing 30 pairs of classes from the classes in negative examples ( default j = 1 ) . Table 2 . For space constraints , Table 3 contains only part of these selected classes . We used five - fold cross validation , such Evaluation and Discussion that we divided the data into five equal folds and repeated each The proposed techniques have been evaluated with a large vari - experiment five times . Each time we leave one fold ( 20 % ) out ety of experiments using data from the Genia 3 . 0 corpus . In this for testing and use the remaining four folds ( 80 % ) for training . section , we describe the datasets , the experimental design , and In the text preprocessing step , the training and testing texts were then we discuss the results . preprocessed as follows : ( 1 ) We changed all the letters into lower case ; ( 2 ) Word stemming : all words converted to their Table 3 . Main Selected Class Pairs for Our Evaluations C1 C1 C2 C2 C1 + C2 Training Testing Instances Instances Instances 80 % 20 % amino _ acid _ monomer 780 protein _ domain _ or _ region 990 1770 1418 352 lipid 2357 virus 2117 4474 3580 894 lipid 2357 multi _ cell 1745 4102 3283 819 peptide 518 peptide 557 1075 861 214 DNA _ substructure 106 protein _ substructure 127 233 187 46 multi _ cell 1745 virus 2117 3862 3091 771 protein _ family _ or _ group 8247 virus 2117 10364 8292 2072 protein _ family _ or _ group 8247 tissue 678 8925 7141 1784 protein _ family _ or _ group 8247 lipid 2357 10604 8484 2120 cell _ line 3846 lipid 2357 6203 4963 1240 ……… . . … … … … … . . 142 , 638 30481 173119 138525 34594 NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 47 Table 4 . Results of the ﬁrst set of experiments using differ - Table 5 . Results of the main , larger datasets , using w = 5 , 10 , ent feature selection ( f . s . ) techniques , window size ( w ) , and v = 20 , 30 , and feature selection ( f . s ) is X 2 vector sizes ( v ) Experiment A P R F1 f . s . w v MI 3 3 3 10 20 30 54 . 63 55 . 86 57 . 23 26 . 39 56 . 84 81 . 48 41 . 37 44 . 08 47 . 12 32 . 22 49 . 65 59 . 71 X 2 3 3 3 10 20 30 69 . 07 71 . 93 75 . 17 70 . 79 73 . 71 76 . 09 69 . 83 70 . 36 75 . 01 70 . 31 72 . 00 75 . 55 MI 5 5 5 10 20 30 54 . 59 54 . 78 55 . 48 25 . 34 41 . 5 66 . 62 44 . 38 44 . 82 43 . 23 32 . 26 43 . 10 52 . 43 X 2 5 10 58 . 91 64 . 27 51 . 13 56 . 95 MI 10 10 10 10 20 30 54 . 66 55 . 02 55 . 09 28 . 12 55 . 55 60 . 54 44 . 55 45 . 37 45 . 52 34 . 48 49 . 95 51 . 97 X 2 10 10 10 10 20 30 57 . 66 52 . 57 53 . 96 66 . 08 67 . 26 72 . 74 46 . 63 9 . 15 11 . 72 54 . 68 16 . 11 20 . 19 stems using Porter’s stemming algorithm . 18 ( 3 ) Stopword removal : we removed all the function words ( stopwords ) like ‘ the ’ , ‘ of ’ , ‘ in ’ , ‘ for ’ , ‘ on ’ , …etc . For performance metrics , we use accuracy , precision , Recall , and F1 - score . Results First , we conducted a variety of experiments using feature selec­ tion techniques MI and X 2 to compare their performance . In these experiments , we changed window size w ( number of neighboring context words ) with varying vector size v as well . Consider the first class pair in Table 3 [ amino _ acid _ monomer , protein _ domain _ or _ region ] . The first class ( amino _ acid _ monomer ) includes 780 annotated terms from this class , where­ as the second class contains 990 annotated terms , and the total is 1 , 770 terms . Of these 1 , 770 instances , 80 % ( 1 , 418 instances ) were used for training , and the remaining 20 % ( 354 instances ) are used for testing . This step is repeated five times by changing the training / testing folds . We record accuracy , precision , and recall for each round , and then we take the average accuracy , precision , and recall of the five rounds . Finally , we take the microaverage of accuracy , precision , and recall for all of the 30 testing pairs . Table 4 shows the results of the first set of experiments in which we changed the window size w and vector size v with the two feature selection techniques MI and X 2 . In this table , we notice that using windows size w = 3 and vector of size v = 30 with X 2 for feature selection produces the highest accuracy ( 75 . 17 % ) and F 1 ( 75 . 55 % ) results , while the best precision ( 81 . 48 % ) was produced with MI when w = 3 and v = 30 . In the second set of experiments , we examined the perform­ ance after preprocessing steps . The results are in Table 6 when we applied the preprocessing steps one at a time . Table 7 contains the results when combinations of preprocessing steps were applied . Experiment A P R F1 f . s . w v X 2 5 5 10 10 20 30 20 30 84 . 53 85 . 07 82 . 87 84 . 30 85 . 20 85 . 67 84 . 28 85 . 54 94 . 25 95 . 33 92 . 56 93 . 08 89 . 50 90 . 24 88 . 23 89 . 15 Table 6 . Results of the main larger datasets , w = 5 , v = 20 , 30 , and feature selection ( f . s ) is X 2 with preprocessing steps Experiment A P R F1 Preprocessing w v Stemming 5 20 84 . 14 84 . 17 95 . 86 89 . 63 ( Porter’s ) 5 30 84 . 38 84 . 71 95 . 16 89 . 63 Stopword 5 20 83 . 85 85 . 22 92 . 42 88 . 67 removed 5 30 84 . 20 85 . 74 92 . 42 88 . 96 Convert to 5 20 84 . 07 87 . 37 90 . 37 88 . 85 lowercase 5 30 84 . 56 74 . 94 78 . 25 76 . 56 These results clearly demonstrate that our technique produces impressive performance results proven by a large number and variety of experiments . Moreover , we notice that the strength of the proposed method lies mostly in the feature selection tech­ niques and the learning / classification process . We have seen that the preprocessing steps ( Table 6 and Table 7 ) did not improve the performance results of Table 5 . Furthermore , we conclude that the best performance can be achieved when the X 2 feature selection is used . Conclusion Interest in bioinformatics and biotechnology is rising for many reasons , among which are the massive amounts of biomedical information and data and the significant knowledge embedded in them . The objective of this research is to devise effective computational techniques to extract and discover useful and sig­ nificant knowledge from the existing repositories of biomedical literature . This paper presents new techniques for biomedical terms and entity names identification and classification to consti­ tute an important component in an effective computational sys­ tem . Experimental results showed that the method is effective in dealing with ambiguous biomedical terms using few surrounding context words as features . The strength of the method lies in the way we select these context features . We borrowed from the IR and TC domains two successful feature selection techniques ( viz . mutual information and Chi - square ) and proved with a variety of experiments the effectiveness of the approach . The outcome of this research can be applied in various fields . For example , in the Aerospace domain , certain symptoms in the body of the astronauts need explanations at the level of gene or protein of the body , so that the consequences and future complications can be known and treated in a timely manner . 48 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Table 7 . Results of the third set of experiments using combi - nii . ac . jp / ~ collier / workshops / JNLPBA04st . htm > nations of preprocessing steps . In these experiments , win - 13 F . Ginter , J . Boberg , J . Jarvinen , and T . Salakoski , “New dow size w = 5 , vector size v = 20 , 30 , and f . s . is X 2 Techniques for Disambiguation in Natural Language and Their Application to Biological Text , ” JMLR 5 ( 2004 ) : 605 - 21 . Experiment A P R F1 Preprocessing v lowercase + stopword 20 84 . 34 86 . 27 93 . 18 89 . 59 removed 30 84 . 65 86 . 39 93 . 58 89 . 84 lowercase + word 20 84 . 17 84 . 19 95 . 83 89 . 63 stemming 30 84 . 33 84 . 66 95 . 16 89 . 60 stopword removed + 20 84 . 21 84 . 68 95 . 36 89 . 71 word stemming 30 84 . 36 84 . 89 95 . 20 89 . 75 lower case + stopword 20 84 . 19 84 . 82 95 . 09 89 . 66 removed + word 30 84 . 38 84 . 91 95 . 12 89 . 72 stemming Average 84 . 33 85 . 10 94 . 81 89 . 69 References 1 Medline : accessed using Entrez PubMed Interface < http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / entrez / query . fcgi > 2 D . Chaussabel and A . Sher , “Mining Microarray Expression Data by Literature Profiling , ” Genome Biology 3 . 10 ( 2002 ) : research0055 . 1 – 0055 . 16 . 3 C . Creighton and S . Hanash , “Mining Gene Expression Databases for Association Rules , ” Bioinformatics 19 . 1 ( 2003 ) : 79 - 86 . 4 E . M . Marcotte , I . Xenarios , and D . Eisenberg , “Mining Literature for Protein - Protein Interactions , ” Bioinformatics 17 . 4 ( 2001 ) : 359 - 63 . 5 Medminer , Genomics and Bioinformatics Group and SRA International Inc . < http : / / discover . nci . nih . gov / textmining / filters . html > 6 T . Ono , H . Hishgaki , A . Tanigami , and T . Takagi , “Automated Extraction of Information on Protein - Protein Interactions from the Biological Literature , ” Bioinformatics 17 . 2 ( 2001 ) : 155 - 61 . 7 M . Krauthammer and G . Nenadic , “Term Identification in the Biomedical Literature , ” J . Biomed . Info . 37 . 6 ( 2004 ) : 512 - 26 . 8 A . Morgan , A . Yeh , L . Hirschman , and M . Colosimo , “Gene Name Extraction Using FlyBase Resources , ” Proc . , of NLP in Biomedicine , ACL 2003 , Sapporo , Japan , 2003 . 1 - 8 . 9 J . - D . Kim , O . Tomoko , T . Yoshimasa , Y . Tateisi , and N . Collier , “Introduction to the Bio - Entity Recognition Task at JNLPBA , ” Proc . , Intl . Workshop on Natural Language Processing in Biomedicine and its Applications , 2004 . 10 D . Shen , J . Zhang , G . Zhou , J . Su , and C . Tan . , “Effective Adaptation of Hidden Markov Modelbased Named Entity Recognizer for Biomedical Domain , ” Proc . , NLP in Biomedicine , ACL 2003 , Sapporo , Japan , ( 2003 ) : 49 - 56 . 11 J . Kazama , T . Makino , Y . Ohta , and J . Tsujii , “Tuning Support Vector Machines for Biomedical Named Entity Recognition , ” Proc . , Workshop on NLP in the Biomedical Domain , ACL 2002 . 12 JNLPBA - 04 Workshop : < http : / / www . genisis . ch / ~ natlang / JNLPBA04 / > . Shared task homepage : < http : / / research . 14 L . Galavotti , F . Sebastiani , and M . Simi , “Experiments on the Use of Feature Selection and Negative Evidence in Automated Text Categorization , ” Proc . , 4th European Conf . on Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries , 2000 . 15 Y . Yang and J . P . Pedersen , “A Comparative Study on Feature Selection in Text Categorization , ” in The 4th Intl Conf . on Machine Learning , Ed . Jr . D . H . Fisher . San Francisco : Morgan Kaufman Pub . , 1997 . 412 - 20 . 16 V . Vapnik , The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory , N . Y . : Springer , 1995 . 17 J . - D . Kim , T . Ohta , Y . Tateisi , and J . Tsujii , “GENIA Corpus—A Semantically Annotated Corpus for Bio - Textmining , ” Bioinformatics 19 Suppl . 1 ( 2003 ) : i180 - 82 . 18 M . F . Porter , “An Algorithm for Suffix Stripping , ” Program 14 ( 1980 ) : 130 - 7 . 19 H . Al - Mubaid and M . Siddiqui , “Automatic Text Categorization with Learning Logic , ” Proc . , 16th Intl . Conf . for Computer Applications in Industry and Engineering , Las Vegas , NV , Nov . 11 – 13 , 2003 . 20 G . Boetticher , H . Al - Mubaid , and K . Frasier - Scott , “Automated Hybridization of Machine Learners for Recursive Spot Identification , Optimization , and Gel Matching of 2­ Dimensional Gel Electrophoresis , ” International Space Systems Annual Report , 2003 . Publications Al - Mubaid , H . “Context - Based Technique for Biomedical Term Classification , ” IEEE GrC - 06 . ( Submitted paper , 2006 . ) Al - Mubaid , H . and N . Ghaffari . “A New Gene Selection Technique Using Feature Selection Methodology Gene Selection , ” CATA - 2006 . ( Accepted paper . ) Presentations See “Natural Language Interface Models for Fast Responsiveness Applications” NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 49 Investigation of III - Nitride Materials for Space - Based Solar Cells Abdelhak Bensaoula , Chris Boney Abstract—Researchers are investigating the suitability of the material InGaN as a candidate for photo­ voltaic space power generation . The effect of growth parameters on the properties of the films is under study . Modeling of single junction In x Ga 1 - x T HERE IS AN INCREASING NEED for enhancing the power generation capacity in NASA space systems for long - term and complex missions like the International Space Station . For these applications , specific power ( W / kg ) , power stowed volume ( W / m 3 ) , and lifetime are of critical importance . It is well known that the theoretical efficiency of an ideal single junction solar cell is around 31 % , with real - world achievable values closer to 26 % . Dr . Abdelhak Bensaoula To achieve higher efficiencies , multiple layers with optimally chosen bandgap materials are required so that the device is sensitive to a larger fraction of the solar spectrum . Current technologies combine different materi­ al systems , such as the Group III - V and Group IV , into multiple junction ( MJ ) cells . Typically , the physical properties of differ­ ent material families can be radically different , causing issues in device fabrication , performance , and lifetime . There is one emerging material family that has the capability of covering almost all of the usable solar emission range ( 0 . 5 - 3 . 0 eV ) and that is the Group III - Nitrides , specifically the alloy InGaN . Based on the film composition , InGaN can cover a wide bandgap range from 0 . 70 eV up to 3 . 4 eV which would be ideal for high efficiency solar cell applications . In addition , it has recently been determined that the Nitride materials can offer exceptional radiation tolerance that is well beyond what can be achieved with conventional solar cell materials currently flown into space . 1 However , the Nitride materials are currently a much less mature technology than other III - V semiconductors and , therefore , will not likely have as high efficiency as their III - V counterparts . At the same time , however , they will degrade far less over the life of the mission . Therefore , a 32 % efficient Nitride solar cell with no degradation will be equivalent , if not superior , to a III - V cell which would start at 36 % efficiency but degrades to 30 % at end - of - life ( EOL ) . N solar cell properties has been performed for x < 0 . 50 . The goal of this ongoing project is to determine the feasibili­ ty of the InGaN material system for use in high efficiency sin­ gle and multijunction solar cells . Simulations of single junction InGaN solar cells were undertaken to predict the effect of struc­ tural defects on the performance of the devices . In order for InGaN to be a viable candidate , the layers must be of high struc­ tural quality with background doping levels in the low 10 17 cm - 3 range . A series of InGaN layers was fabricated under different growth conditions to reduce the background doping levels . Methodology Simulations of InGaN films in photovoltaic structures were per­ formed using in - house code written for Matlab ( MathWorks Inc . ) . The calculations involved simulating the response of a InGaN p - i - n device over an AM0 spectral range of 0 - 4 eV . In simulations , many of the material parameters of InGaN were estimated based on interpolation between parameters for GaN and InN , most of which are present in the literature . However , some parameters are not yet known , especially for InN , and , in those cases , values from materials were assumed . For interpola­ tion , either a linear or quadratic approximation based on the alloy composition was used . We have used radio frequency Molecular Beam Epitaxy ( MBE ) to fabricate In x Ga 1 - x N films under different growth con­ ditions . Important parameters included the substrate tempera­ ture , In / Ga ratio , total III / N ratio , and film growth rate . Photoluminescence has been used to estimate the bandgap of the InGaN layers , while capacitance - voltage measurements were used to determine the change in free carrier concentration as a function of growth conditions . Equipment The growth equipment employed in our investigations of III - N materials is a custom - made molecular beam epitaxy chamber . The sample holder is compatible with substrates up to 2” in diameter and operates at temperatures as high as 900ºC . Standard effusion cells are used for Group III and dopant flux delivery , which currently includes Ga , Al , In , Si , and Mg . Nitrogen atoms are generated by an EPI Uni - Bulb radio - fre - 50 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Figure 1 . Calculation of the internal quantum efﬁciency of an In 0 . 3 Ga 0 . 7 N device under illumination by an AM0 spectra from 0 - 4 eV . The aerial defect density present in the layer has a profound effect on overall efﬁciency . quency ( RF ) plasma source . In - situ characterization of the growth is carried out by reflection high - energy electron diffrac­ tion ( RHEED ) . The chamber is pumped with a turbomolecular pump with a pumping speed of 2200 L / s resulting in a base pres­ sure of 5 × 10 - 10 torr . Photoluminescence measurements were excited by the 325 nm emission from a Melles Griot Series 56 HeCd laser , the resulting luminescence was dispersed by a 0 . 32 m focal length Jobin Yvon - Spex Triax320 monochrometer and detected by a Hammamatsu R928 photomultiplier tube . Capacitance - voltage measurements were made using a Keithley Model 82 C - V system . Results and Discussion Our simulations have verified that a reasonable structural qual­ ity is necessary for InGaN to be a candidate for solar cell appli­ cations . Figure 1 illustrates the strong effect that dislocation density has on the overall efficiency of a photovoltaic structure . The internal quantum efficiency as a function of the solar flux available above the earth’s atmosphere ( AM0 spectra from 0 - 4 eV ) of an In 0 . 3 Ga 0 . 7 N ( bandgap = 1 . 69 eV ) structure is plotted for dislocation densities between 10 5 cm - 2 and 10 10 cm - 2 . The dramatic drop in efficiency stems from the scattering of the car­ riers in the film and results in a lowered minority carrier lifetime and , hence , lower diffusion length . Carriers generated in the depths of the structure can not successfully transport to the con­ tacts of the device before re - combining and , thus , do not con­ tribute to the photocurrent . At densities below approximately 10 6 cm - 2 , the dislocations do not have any effect because the dis­ tance between dislocations has become longer than the estimat­ ed intrinsic diffusion length in the In 0 . 3 Ga 0 . 7 N film . The overall internal quantum efficiency of the structure for each dislocation density is proportional to the area under the respective curves in Fig . 1 . For 10 7 cm - 2 , the total efficiency has dropped by 22 % rel­ ative to 10 5 cm - 2 , while for 10 8 cm - 2 , the total efficiency has Figure 2 . Calculation of the internal quantum efﬁciency for different compositions of InGaN photovoltaics under illumi - nation by an AM0 spectra from 0 - 4 eV . The QE for the In 0 . 5 Ga 0 . 5 N was chosen as the maximum scale for the other compositions . dropped to 55 % ; for 10 10 cm - 2 , total efficiency drops to 88 % . Similar simulations for In x Ga 1 - x N compositions ranging between 0 . 1 ≤ x ≤ 0 . 5 have been performed to predict the effi­ ciency as the bandgap of the material changes . As expected , the smaller bandgap materials ( higher “ x ” ) have better efficiencies due to the wider spectral response they provide . Changes in the intrinsic material parameters as a function of “ x ” , such as the effective mass of the carriers and the absorption coefficient near the bandgap , change the shape of the response curve slightly but do not have a strong effect on the final efficiencies . All compo­ sitions are essentially equally affected by the presence of a large number of dislocations . A graph summarizing the efficiencies of several In x Ga 1 - x N compositions for different dislocation densi­ ties is shown in Fig . 2 . The values for the internal quantum effi­ ciency have all been scaled relative to the material with the highest efficiency ( In 0 . 5 Ga 0 . 5 N ) that was simulated . A maximum of x = 0 . 5 was chosen based on our belief that this composition represents an upper limit in terms of being able to achieve a film of both reasonable structural and electrical properties using cur­ rent growth techniques . Growth of In x Ga 1 - x N films by MBE under different growth conditions—such as In / Ga ratio , total III / N ratio , and film growth rate—have been performed . To date , we have realized a maximum indium mole fraction of approximately 42 % for sin­ gle phase InGaN . Room temperature photoluminescence depict­ ing this range of materials is shown in Fig . 3 . The results of the bandgap based on the photoluminescence emission energy do not agree well with x - ray diffraction analysis of the film com­ position for high indium mole fractions . This is illustrated in Fig . 4 . Capacitance - voltage measurements of the films reveal that the layers continue to have a high background n - type carri­ er concentration despite our modifications to the growth process . The high number of carriers is likely causing band - fill - ing in the conduction band , which is altering the photolumines - NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 51 Figure 3 . Photoluminescence of In N over the composi - x Ga 1 - x tional range from 0 < x < 0 . 42 . The intensity of the lumines - cence has been normalized to highlight the shift of the emission peak . cence transition energies to values higher than the actual bandgap of the InGaN . The excess carriers can not be account­ ed for by defects within the layers or by the contributions from the controllable growth conditions . We therefore conclude that we have an unknown variable in our fabrication process , and experiments are underway to determine its identity . Conclusions InGaN remains a potential candidate for space - based solar cells . Improvement in the optical and electrical properties of our lay­ ers is continuing . We have performed modeling of single junc­ tion InGaN solar cells to determine the effects of structural defects on device performance . As expected , large numbers of defects dramatically reduce the efficiency of solar cell devices . However , at defect levels below approximately 10 6 cm - 2 , the efficiency is no longer affected . The fact that GaN templates for InGaN film growth are now becoming commercially available with defect densities below 5 × 10 7 cm - 2 means that the ultimate efficiency of InGaN photovoltaics will soon not be constrained by structural issues . References 1 J . W . Ager III , J . Wu , K . M . Yu , R . E . Jones , S . X . Li , W . Walukiewicz , E . E . Haller , H . Lu , and W . J . Schaff , “Group III - Nitride Alloys as Photovoltaic Materials , ” Proc . , SPIE 5530 ( 2004 ) : 308 - 15 . Publications Starikov , D . , C . Boney , R . Pillai , and A . Bensaoula . “Solar - Blind Dual - Band UV / IR Photodetectors Integrated on a Single Chip , ” J . Experimental Nanoscience . ( In preparation . ) Figure 4 . Discrepancy in the bandgap of In N as deter - x Ga 1 - x mined by x - ray diffraction and photoluminescence for val - ues of x ≥ 34 % . The photoluminescence is likely affected by band - ﬁlling effects due to the high carrier concentration in the ﬁlms . This results in transition energies well above the actual bandgap of the material . Presentations Starikov , D . , A . H . Bensaoula , and A . Bensaoula . “High - Temperature Multi - Band Optical Sensors for Early Fire and Hazardous Object Detection , ” TEFT Proposal Presentation , Houston Technology Center , Oct . 10 , 2005 . Starikov , D . , C . Joseph , M . Boukadoum , and A . Bensaoula . “Chip - Based Integrated Filterless Multi - Wavelength Optoelectronic Bio - Chemical Sensors , ” Sensors for Industry Conf . , Houston , TX , Feb . 8 – 10 , 2005 . Starikov , D . , N . Medelci , R . Pillai , A . Bensaoula , C . Joseph , and Z . Mouffak . “III Nitride - Based Optical Sensors Integrated with a TOF Mass Spectrometer for Aerosol Characterization , ” 51st AVS Intl Symposium , Anaheim , CA , Nov . 14 – 19 , 2004 . Funding and Proposals “High - Stability III Nitride Based Stellar Simulator Optical Sources for In - Flight Calibration in a Super Wide Range of the Spectrum , ” NASA NRA ASTID - 05 , ( CAM / IMS ) , 2006­ 2009 , $ 875 , 530 . ( Pending . ) “Integrated Broad - Band Optical Calibration Sources for Star Simulation , ” NSF Phase I SBIR project ( IMS / CAM ) , 2006 , $ 100 , 000 . “Solid - State High Temperature Jet Engine Fire Detector , ” DoD ( Air Force ) Phase I and Phase II SBIR projects ( IMS / CAM ) , 2004 – 2007 , $ 850 , 000 . 52 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Building and Verifying Fault - Tolerant Autonomous Real - Time Systems for Space Applications Albert M . K . Cheng Abstract—NASA missions require autonomous systems that perform correctly for an extended period of time . These systems must make real - time decisions in logical sequence that meet timing require­ ments . These systems must anticipate faults induced by environmental change , but it is difficult to anticipate the infinite variety of situations one must encounter for the design of robotic explorers , spacecraft , and systems necessary for the management of a mission . An Automated Reasoning program seeks to establish tolerances for change or alteration and seeks computational formulas for verifying scalable fault tolerances . A UTONOMOUS SYSTEMS AND their embedded autonomy software in many NASA missions must perform correctly for an extended period of time and make real - time decisions that meet both logical and timing require­ ments . Furthermore , autonomy software must tolerate implementa­ tion and environment - induced faults . Developing and verifying these systems are especially diffi­ cult because of the large ( and often infinite ) state space and execution sequences as well as the uncertain - Dr . Albert M . K . Cheng ties in the environment in which these systems operate . One focus of NASA’s Automated Reasoning thrust is to “enhance the autonomous decision - making capabilities of robotic explorers , spacecraft , and mission management systems . ” The objectives of this project are to address two key technology areas in the Automated Reasoning category : ( 1 ) adding scalable fault - toler - ance in the decision - making autonomy software of a real - time autonomous system and ( 2 ) augmenting the capability of formal verification strategies by providing an alternative based on scal­ able rulebase analysis to model checking and theorem proving . To evaluate our proposed fault - tolerance strategies under a variety of fault models , we needed a simulation platform . Therefore , we first studied a distributed real - time fault - tolerance Web monitoring system . The method of providing fault - tolerance is to schedule multiple copies of a task on different computer nodes in a distributed computing system . A fault - tolerant system automatically recovers from a specified number of failures . If the primary task cannot be completed because of a fault , the sched­ uled backup task is run and all tasks are assured to be completed . We use the Web to monitor the fault - tolerant behavior of a distributed system . A Web monitoring system is a convenient way to monitor remote tasks , both primary and backup . Our simulation results show that it is possible to set up a distributed real - time fault - tolerance Web monitoring system . To achieve our goal quickly , we used existing Ganglia network and RRDTool technology . We found that we can use the Ganglia system to set up a distributed real - time fault - tolerance Web monitoring system . The RRDTool is employed only for simula­ tion purposes . It is used to show the results of the simulation graphically , but it cannot accurately store the status data of the tasks . We use MySQL to store the status of real time tasks instead of the RRDTool in further research and to yield more accurate results within time constraints . We focused on the simulation of a distributed real - time fault - tolerance Web monitoring system . It is involved in the schedul­ ing of real - time tasks in a distributed computing system . The real - time system is based on multiple processors , which are dis­ tributed and connected by a local area network ; one way of pro­ viding fault - tolerance is to schedule multiple copies of a task on different computer nodes in the distributed system . A fault - tol - erant system automatically recovers from a specified number of failures . The two tasks , both primary and backup , are scheduled to start at the same time and execute concurrently on the two computers in the distributed system . If the primary task cannot be completed because of a fault , the scheduled backup task is run so that all tasks can be completed . To maintain the consis­ tency of the two tasks , we implemented the two tasks in soft­ ware mode . However , in our simulation , we input value 1 and value 2 to distinguish the primary task and backup task from the two different computers . We utilized the Web to monitor fault - tolerant behavior in the distributed system . Users always see fresh and consistent data for primary tasks ( value 1 ) or backup tasks ( value 2 ) . A real - time system is a system in which data on NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 53 the Web should be maintained fresh and tasks completed within specified deadlines . In this project , a real - time system is based on a distributed computing system through the internet . A Web monitoring sys­ tem is a convenient way to monitor remote tasks , both primary and backup . We assume two approaches . One approach is the primary task failure ; for example , some tasks communicate with a hardware device . If the hardware device fails , then we call it a task failure , and it is not easy to recover . In this way , the primary task must be permanently replaced by a backup task . According to our study and simulation , if a primary task fails , its duties will be assigned to a backup task in another computer node . Another approach is the case in which primary task failure is due to a processor failure . We can use another means for monitoring the backup processor through the backup Website , and guarantee the completion of all tasks . We add fault injection programs to test the fault - tolerance and robustness of the system . Our system simulates the occurrence of faults and the switching of the repli­ ca task in the distributed computing node . All activities are monitored through a Web report . The report presented here focuses on the visualization of the real - time fault - tolerance system information on the Web . Our goals are to study and simulate the following : ( 1 ) real - time response , ( 2 ) the distributed system , ( 3 ) fault - tolerance , and ( 4 ) Web monitoring . To achieve our goals quickly , we chose to use the existing Ganglia network and RRDTool technology . Ganglia System for Distributed Real - Time Fault Tolerance Systems A lot of existing network software targets distribution systems . A typical well - performing system for monitoring computer nodes information is the Ganglia distributed monitoring sys - tem , 6 , 7 which is an open - source system developed by a research group at UC Berkeley . Ganglia is a scalable distributed monitor­ ing system for high - performance computing systems such as clusters and grids . It is based on a hierarchical design targeted at federations of clusters . It relies on a multicast - based listen / announce protocol to monitor the state within clusters and uses a tree of point - to - point connections amongst representative cluster nodes to federate clusters and aggregate their state . It leverages widely used technologies . The implementation is robust and has been ported to an extensive set of operating sys­ tems and processor architectures . Because of its power , the Ganglia distributed monitoring system becomes the first selec­ tion for the Distributed Real - Time Fault - Tolerance System in this project . We have modified its programs to fit our system and set up its configuration . RRDTool for the Simulation and Visualization The RRDTool is for data storage and visualization . 6 , 7 It uses carefully engineered data structures and algorithms to achieve very low per - node overheads and high concurrency . We use it to simulate the faults occurring in the tasks and the replacement of the backup tasks from the backup system because of its effi­ ciency in using hardware space and quickly generating graphi­ cal representations . Methodology We first defined the following system model : 1 . The Linux Fedora Core 3 platform and the Ganglia system are installed into the computers , both primary and backup computers , which are connected through the Internet . 2 . Tasks are aperiodic . 3 . Each task has two versions , a primary copy and a backup copy . If the primary fails , its backup always succeeds . 4 . Tasks are non - preemptable ; when a task starts execution on a processor , it runs until its completion if the task does not fail . 5 . Tasks are parallelizable , which means that a task can be executed on both the primary processor and the backup processor . 6 . When the fault injection program aborts one of the tasks , the fault - detection mechanism detects task faults and then the scheduler will schedule the backup task . 7 . When a fault occurs , extra time is required during task execution to handle fault detection and to schedule the backup task or to switch from the backup task to the recov­ ered primary task . We assume that there are many tasks ; each task can be run on both the primary and the backup processors in a distributed sys­ tem . We also assume that the primary tasks are independent and run on the uniprocessor in a FIFO order . We concentrate only on the fault - tolerant scheduling of the non - preemptive tasks in the real - time system since faults need to be identified before sched­ uling the backup tasks on another computer node in the same distributed system . Tasks scheduled on this system are guaranteed to complete themselves if a task fails at any instant of time . We address the fault - tolerant scheduling problem by using a primary / backup approach . When a task arrives into the system , two copies , a pri­ mary and a backup , are scheduled on two different processors within the task’s window . The backup copy of a task executes only if the execution of the primary copy fault is detected and the backup is activated . Since we assume a dynamic system , it is possible to release resources reserved for backup copies of the tasks as soon as the primary copies finish executing . In this manner , we are able to better estimate the system’s available free time when new tasks are scheduled . The fault injection program provides test cases for our system software . These test cases are used to evaluate the performance or behavior of the newly designed software with the desired targets . Input faults to the system are in the form of a PHP script which implements Java programs , which simulate the tasks in the local computer . One program contains sequence representation of errors which abort the regularly running tasks . The fault injection is used to test the fault - tolerance and robustness of the system . It simulates the occurrence of faults and the switching of the repli - ca’s task in the distributed computing node . It also switches back to the original tasks if the original tasks have been repaired . Our monitoring system cannot be implemented without releasing the extra security layer with LINUX ( Fedora Core 3 ) . The first reason is that Selinux is set on by default . Selinux is an extra security layer . One can turn it off in / etc / selinux / config by setting SELINUX to “disabled” and rebooting . The second rea­ son is that our PHP programs call “exec” which invokes the 54 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Figure 1 . Components in green indicate additional components . Web components have been modified for this project . Blue and gray components represent the Ganglia system . “sh” command , which is not allowed by the “htppd deamon” under Selinux with the default policy . System Architecture Our system architecture is shown in Fig . 1 . Components in green indicate additional components . Web components have been modified for this project . Blue and gray components rep­ resent the Ganglia system . 8 The Gmetric command has to be wrapped into a shell program in order to execute in Java . Results Our simulation results show some unexpected results . We next describe several interesting major functions and drawbacks of the RRDTool . Data Acquisition We found that the interval between the primary task and the replaced backup tasks in our simulation is different because when monitoring the states of the real - time tasks , it is conven­ ient to have the status data of the tasks available at a constant interval . Unfortunately it is not always possible to fetch data at exactly the time one desires . Refer to Fig . 2 as an example . Therefore , the RRDTtool allows updating the log file at any time . It will automatically interpolate the value of the data - source at the latest official time - slot and write this value to the log . Refer to Fig . 3 . The value supplied is stored and is also taken into account when interpolating the next log entry . Consolidation Results show that not the same data are used as input to the data­ base , between the interval of the primary task and the replaced backup tasks in our simulation . Refer to Fig . 2 as an example . This is due to the fact that logging data with a fixed interval is not suitable to monitoring the development of the data over a long period because of the limited hardware space and the considera­ tion of increasing time of a large data set . The RRDtool offers a solution to this problem through its data consolidation feature . When setting up a Round Robin Database ( RRD ) , one can define NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 55 Figure 2 . This is our simulation result . The result shows that the space interval between the primary task and the replaced backup task is different . The result also shows that the data at interval are not the same data used as input to the They will all be maintained on the fly when new data are loaded into the RRD . Round Robin Archives The Round Robin Archive ( RRA ) is very efficient for storing data for a certain amount of time while using a known amount of storage space , but old data are automatically eliminated over time . Data values of the same consolidation setup are stored into the Round Robin Archive ( RRA ) . The use of RRA guarantees that the RRD does not grow over time and that old data are automatically eliminat­ ed . By using the consolidation feature , one can still keep the data for a very long time , while gradually reducing the resolu­ tion of the data along the time axis . Using different consolidation functions allows one to store exactly the type of informa­ tion that is actually of interest . Approximately one day later , the data database . Figure 3 . Interpolation of random time data into ﬁxed time steps ; Ganglia pull the data at ﬁxed intervals . Figure 4 . Space allocated for RRD consolidated data . The header holds the pointer information which points to the last value . the interval at which this consolidation should occur and which consolidation functions ( average , minimum , maximum , last ) should be used to build the consolidated values . One can define any number of different consolidation setups within one RRD . may become less accurate because of the consolidation stated above ; this is a negative side of the RRD . Refer to Fig . 4 . Discussion The Ganglia system and the RRDTool provide information that can help to better understand the fault - tolerance of a distributed system , and both provide real - time monitoring which makes it possible to monitor and respond to potential faults and to sched­ ule backup tasks . Simulation results give us further direction for implementing the distributed real - time fault - tolerance system and for using the Web to monitor real tasks . We will use MySQL to store the real status of real - time tasks instead of the RRDTool to yield more accurate results within time constraints . Conclusions Since our approach can transform subsets of the code into self - stabilizing equivalents with different code modifications depending on their syntactic / semantic forms , it is scalable to increasingly large and complex autonomy software systems . Coupled with the compositional analysis / verification strategy that identifies these syntactic / semantic code subsets ( described in the second half of the proposal ) , our overall approach further scales to deriving and verifying highly fault - tolerant autonomy software systems . Ongoing work evaluates this strategy on the modified Ganglia simulation platform . References 1 S . Balaji , L . Jenkins , L . M . Patnaik , and P . S . Goel , “Workload Redistribution for Fault Tolerance in a Hard Real - Time Distributed Computing System , ” IEEE Fault Tolerance Computing Symposium ( 1989 ) : 366 - 73 . 2 P . M . Melliar - Smith and L . E Moser , “Progress in Real - Time Fault Tolerance ; Reliable Distributed Systems , ” Proc . , 23rd IEEE Intl . Symposium ( 2004 ) : 109 - 11 . 3 I . Gupta , G . Manimaran , and C . Siva Ram Murthy , “Primary­ 56 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Backup Based Fault - Tolerant Dynamic Scheduling of Object - Based Tasks in Multiprocessor Real - Time Systems , ’’ in Dependable Network Computing . Ed . D . R . Avresky . Boston : Kluwer Academic Pub . , 1999 . 4 I . Gupta , G . Manimaran , C . Siva Ram Murthy , “Fault - Tolerant Dynamic Scheduling of Object - Based Tasks in Multiprocessor Real - Time Systems , ” Annual IEEE Workshop on Fault - Tolerant Parallel and Distributed Systems ( 1999 ) : 83 - 107 . 5 G . Manimaran and C . Siva Ram Murthy , “A Fault - Tolerant Dynamic Scheduling Algorithm for Real - Time Multiprocessor Systems and its Analysis , ” IEEE Trans . Parallel and Distributed Systems 9 . 11 ( 1998 ) : 1137 - 52 . 6 M . L . Massie . , B . N . Chun , and D . E . Culler , “The Ganglia Distributed Monitoring System : Design , Implementation , and Experience , ” Parallel Computing 30 ( 2004 ) : 817 - 40 . ( Pending . ) 7 Ganglia Monitoring System , Nov . 8 , 2005 < http : / / ganglia . sourceforge . net > . 8 F . D . Sacerdoti , M . J . Katz , M . L . Massie , and D . E . Culler , “Wide Area Cluster Monitoring wth Ganglia , ” San Diego Supercomputing Center and Univ . of California at Berkeley , 2004 < http : / / ganglia . sourceforge . net / papers / Sacerdoti03 Monitoring . pdf # search = ' ganglia % 20massie ' > Publications Andrei , S . , W . - N . Chin , A . M . K . Cheng , and M . Lupu . “Automatic Debugging of Real - Time Systems Based on Incremental Satisfiability Counting , ” IEEE Trans . on Computers , 2006 . ( To appear . ) Andrei , S . , W . - N . Chin , A . M . K . Cheng , and M . Lupu . “Incremental Automatic Debugging of Real - Time Systems Based on Satisfiability Counting , ” IEEE - CS Real - Time and Embedded Technology and Applications Symposium , San Francisco , CA , March 2005 . Andrei , S . , W . - N . Chin , A . M . K . Cheng , and Y . Zhu . “Runtime - Coordinated Scalable Incremental Checksum Testing of Combinational Circuits based on # SAT Problem , ” Proc . , 11th IEEE - CS Intl . Conf . on Embedded and Real - Time Computing Systems and Applications , Hong Kong , Aug . 17 – 19 , 2005 . Cheng , A . M . K . “A Survey of Formal Verification Methods and Tools for Embedded and Real - Time Systems , ” Intl . J . Embedded Systems 1 ( 2006 ) . Cheng , A . M . K . and F . Shang . “Priority - Driven Coding of Progressive JPEG Images for Transmission in Real - Time Applications , ” Proc . , 11th IEEE - CS Intl . Conf . on Embedded and Real - Time Computing Systems and Applications , Hong Kong , Aug . 17 – 19 , 2005 . Cheng , A . M . K . and S . Fang . “Study and Simulation of a Distributed Real - Time Fault - Tolerance Web Monitoring System , ’’ Proc . , IEEE - CS Real - Time Systems Symposium WIP Session , Miami , FL , Dec . 5 – 8 , 2005 . Zhang , W . , A . M . K . Cheng , B . Fang , and M . Hu . “An Adaptive Multisite Scheduling Algorithm for Parallel Jobs in Computational Grid Environments , ” Proc . , 3rd High - Performance Grid Computing Workshop , Intl . Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium , Rhodes Island , Greece , April 29 , 2006 . INTEL X - SCALE PXA255—Dr . Albert M . K . Cheng ( l . ) reviews with Bin Lu ( r . ) an embedded development platform he has researched to test embedded real - time applications . Lu earned her B . S . in electrical engineering at the Shanghai Jiao Tong University . She is currently enrolled in the doctor - al program in computer science . The design of the Intel X - scale PXA255 has applications in high - end cell phones and avionics controls . Presentations Cheng , A . M . K . “Applying Formal Specification and Verification Methods to Real - Time and Embedded Systems , ” Distinguished Lecture Presentation , University of Texas at Dallas , Sept . 2005 . — . “Software Engineering for Embedded Software : How Useful Are the Newer Paradigms ? ” 9th Intl . Workshop on Software and Compilers for Embedded Systems , Dallas , TX , Sept . 2005 . ( Invited panel speaker . ) Cheng , A . M . K . and F . Shang . “Priority - Driven Coding of Progressive JPEG Images for Transmission in Real - Time Applications , ” Proc . , 11th IEEE - CS Intl . Conf . on Embedded and Real - Time Computing Systems and Applications , Hong Kong , Aug . 17 – 19 , 2005 . Funding and Proposals “Faster and Stronger Schedulers for Real - Time Tasks on Heterogeneous Multiprocessors , ” NSF , $ 310 , 293 . ( Submitted . ) Update of ISSO 2004 Seed - Grant Project Optimizing System Reward in Battery - Powered Spacecrafts and Rovers ( ISSO 2004 Annual Report , 54 - 58 ) Albert M . K . Cheng Publications Cheng , A . M . K . and C . Feng . “Predictive Thermal Management for Hard Real - Time Tasks , ” ACM Special Interest Group on Embedded Systems Review 3 . 1 ( 2006 ) . ( Continued on page 95 . ) NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 57 Validation of a Novel Micro - Capillary Array Fluid Collection Technology for Determination of Biomarkers of Bone Metabolism in Human Sweat Mark S . F . Clarke , Daniel L . Feeback B ONE LOSS DURING SPACE flight is a well documented event that is a serious issue with regard to crew health and safety , especially on extended duration missions that involve physical activity in other than microgravity ( i . e . , Lunar and Mars exploration - class missions ) . To date , two approaches have been suggested to prevent bone loss dur­ ing space flight : physical stimula­ tion of the skeletal system ( i . e . , vibration or resistive loading ) or Dr . Mark S . F . Clarke pharmaceutical intervention ( i . e . , bisphosphonate drugs ) . Both approaches appear to successfully prevent at least some of the bone loss that occurs in ground - based models of space flight such as bed rest . However , the util­ ity of these approaches has yet to be fully tested and validated during space flight . One of the central challenges faced in the manned space pro­ gram is how to provide real - time biomedical monitoring of crew members in order to assess the efficacy and efficiency of coun­ termeasures designed to combat physical de - conditioning induced by extended space flight . This challenge is especially problematic in the case of bone loss , for the underlying physiol­ ogy of bone remodeling / bone loss , either during space flight or in diseases such as osteoporosis , considers loss over an extend­ ed period of time . The gold standard measurement for assessing bone mineral loss is dual X - ray absorptiometry ( DEXA ) , a method that requires bulky equipment , well - trained personnel , and an assessment period measured in months to years . This approach , although well accepted , does not lend itself to the space flight environment or to the real - time biomedical moni­ toring goal required to assess the efficacy or efficiency of coun­ termeasures employed to protect astronauts during extended space flight missions . A second approach gaining momentum in the clinical arena is the monitoring of biomarkers known to indicate the loss of bone mineral content during the earlier phases of bone remodeling / bone loss . These include the measurement of excreted calcium and collagen cross - links in urine or blood , both biomarkers of bone breakdown . This approach has been successfully used to mon­ itor patients undergoing treatment for osteoporosis in a terrestrial set­ ting . This type of measurement has also been shown to reflect bone loss in individuals undergoing bed rest as a ground - based model of space flight . In order to employ this approach to provide real - time biomedical monitoring of overall bone loss rates and the efficiency of in - flight countermeasures during space Dr . Daniel L . Feeback flight , it is essential that a miniatur­ ized , rapid , non - invasive , gravity - independent technique be developed for collection and analysis of these biomarkers . This project was designed to address one element of the use of such a technique based on the collection and analysis of sweat for subsequent analysis of calcium content . This technique utilizes a micro - fabricated array of capillary tubes arranged in disc form , manufactured from biocompatible material known as the Micro - fabricated Sweat Patch ( MSP ) . Sweat is collected as an unadulterated liquid by a gravity - independent means , specifi­ cally capillary action . Sweat is then recovered by centrifuging the sample out of the capillary array into a collection tube in preparation for analysis . Ionized calcium levels in normal human sweat have previous­ ly been reported to be in the micro - molar levels ( i . e . , 50 - 250 micro - molar ) as compared to the low milli - molar range for serum . 1 In addition , existing sweat collection technologies that collect sweat and its constituents by way of absorption / evapora - tion into a filter material ( i . e . , Osteopatch™ technology ) indicate that calcium loss from an area of skin similar to that covered by the MSP device is in the region of 20 - 30 µ g per 24 - hr period . Pre - existing biochemical analysis techniques ( colorimetric in nature ) normally used for clinical sample analysis of calcium are inappropriate because of their lack of sensitivity at this detection level . To overcome this limitation , we investigated the use of a stochiometric fluorescent dye , Calcium Green - 1 , for the determi­ nation of Ca 2 + in sweat . This dye has been utilized in cell biolo­ gy to measure free calcium levels in the 0 - 50 µ M range . 58 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA MUSCLE CELLS—Stuart Lee with a B . S . and M . S . from Virginia Tech is involved in the study of muscle cells for the pur - pose of maintaining muscle integrity in astronauts while in space . Lee is enrolled in the doctoral program in Health and Human Performance at UH . Project Goal The goal of this project was to determine ( 1 ) the volume of sweat that could be reproducibly recovered from the MSP device and ( 2 ) the appropriate analysis method capable of providing the level of sensitivity required for detection of excreted calcium in human sweat , with the ultimate goal being a means of moni­ toring bone loss . Results Gravimetric Determination of Fluid Collection Rates Micro - fabricated Sweat Patch ( MSP ) devices ( Fig . 1 ) were weighed using a Mettler Analytical Balance prior to satu - Figure 1 . Micro - Fabricated Sweat Patch . Diagrammatic representation shows individual components and the fully assembled device . Table 1 . Volumetric Testing of the MSP N Volume Collected ( g ) Volume Carry - Over ( g ) Sample Volume ( g ) Mean + / - SD Mean + / - SD Mean + / - SD 12 0 . 668 + / - 0 . 086 0 . 118 + / - 0 . 054 0 . 551 + / - 0 . 079 Table 2 . Calcium Recovery from MSP Devices Using the Fluorescent Calcium Dye , Calcium Green - 2 N Ca Concentration FU ( Pre ) FU ( post ) % Ca Recovery ( µ M ) Mean + / – SD Mean + / – SD 3 13 µ M 6 . 19 + / - 0 . 47 6 . 82 + / - 0 . 98 101 3 25 µ M 7 . 24 + / - 0 . 72 7 . 42 + / - 1 . 47 102 3 50 µ M 10 . 78 + / - 0 . 97 8 . 16 + / - 1 . 61 76 FU - Fluorescent Units ration with sweat stimulant after saturation and , again , after the sample was collected by centrifugation . These gravimetric values ( grams ) were used to determine the volume of total liquid collected , the volume of liquid collected by centrifugation from the MSP device ( i . e . , sample volume ) , and the amount of liquid that remained in the MSP device after centrifugation ( i . e . , carry - over volume ) ( Table 1 ) . Significant amounts of liquid remained in the MSP device after centrifuga­ tion ( approximately 17 % of the total volume collected ) . This may reflect incomplete removal of the liquid from the capillary array but is more likely associated with liquid being trapped at the edge of the secondary collection chamber edge . However , the volume collected for analysis was reproducible ( 550 microliters ) with a variance of approximately 14 % among MSP devices . NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 59 Calcium Determination Using Calcium Green - 2 Fluorescent Indicator Dye Sweat patches were saturated with sweat stimulant containing defined amounts of ionized calcium . Calcium recovery was assessed by determining fluorescent signal ( FU ) associated with the fluorescent calcium indicator Calcium Green - 2 ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) ( Fig . 2 ) in the samples before and after being collected in the MSP device and collected by centrifuga­ tion ( Table 2 ) . At higher concentrations of calcium , significant loss of calcium occurred , presumably associated with contact of the sample with the micro - fabricated device . However , it must be noted that the pre - and post - values are not significantly different and , as such , the lower calculated Ca 2 + recovery rate at the highest calcium concentration ( 50 µ M ) may be misleading . In addition , the fluorescent calcium dye , CG - 2 , becomes saturated at higher levels of Ca 2 + ( Fig . 2 ) and this saturation may have also led to the apparent reduction in calcium recovery at 50 µ M levels . Alternate Ca 2 + Analysis Approach in Unadulterated Sweat Collected Using the MSP Device Based on the results described above using CG - 2 to determine calcium concentration in sweat stimulant , the next stage of the project was to measure calcium contained in real sweat collect­ ed from an individual . The MSP device had previously been tested for the ability to collect sweat from the skin of an individ­ ual undergoing physical activity . After collection of several samples of unadulterated sweat from exercising individuals , researchers assessed calcium concentration using the CG - 2 pro­ tocol described above . However , all samples tested induced a saturation of the CG - 2 dye indicating a much higher concentra­ tion of calcium in sweat than had been anticipated . Utilizing a newly available commercial colorimetric calcium assay , we performed a series of experiments in order to deter­ mine the actual values of calcium present in unadulterated sweat . This assay is available from BioAssay Systems ( Hayward , CA ) and is sensitive to calcium in the 25 - 2000 µ g / ml ( 62 µ M - 50 mM range – Calcium atomic weight = 40 ) . It utilizes a binary reagent system and produces a colored product meas­ ured at 612 nm using a standard 96 - well plate reader . Testing was carried out using sweat collected from the fore­ arm of five separate subjects participating in physical activity . An MSP device was attached to the skin of the forearm with an adhesive patch after it had been washed with distilled water and then dried with a clean cotton towel . After 20 minutes of active sweat collection , the MSP device was removed and unadulterat­ ed liquid sweat was collected by centrifugation into a sample tube attached to the MSP device . Samples were then assayed for calcium content using the commercially available calcium assay based on a colorimetric end product described above . As seen in Table 3 , a wide range of calcium concentrations were detected in the sweat of several different individuals col­ lected using the MSP device , ranging from approximately 230 µ g / ml Ca 2 + to 1350 µ g / ml Ca 2 + ( 5 mM to 34 mM ) . This is in contrast to the amount of calcium in sweat previously reported 1 using a collection device known as the Osteopatch™ , which reported a daily loss of around 35 mg / day Ca 2 + in sweat or in an Figure 2 . Calcium Green - 2 ( CG - 2 ) Fluorescent Emission Spectra at Different Ca 2 + Concentrations Figure 3 . Representative Standard Curve for Colorimetric Determination of Calcium ( Ca 2 + ) in Sweat Samples Table 3 . Calcium ( Ca 2 + ) Concentration in Sweat Collected from Exercising Subjects Using MSP Devices SUBJECT MEAN Ca 2 + Standard Deviation ID ( µ g / ml ) A 432 52 B 751 31 D 378 33 E 235 17 G 1345 198 approximately 23 µ g Ca 2 + / 24 hr collection period recovered from a single Osteopatch™ . ( Continued on page 95 . ) 60 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Real - Time Active Loading of Piezoelectric Ultrasonic Motors for Simulating Space Robotics Applications James B . Dabney Abstract—Piezoelectric ultrasonic motors ( PUM ) offer dramatic improvements in a variety of space - based robotics applications if the problem of real - time torque control can be solved . This research enhanced the UHCL PUM laboratory apparatus by the integration of a magnetic particle brake to enable real - time control of an active torque load . The implementation of real - time active torque load control permits the modeling of a variety of space - based robotics applications . It enables expansion of the performance database to include steady - state load behavior . S PACE - BASED ROBOTS TYPICALLY require light - weight actua­ tors exhibiting high preci­ sion and simplicity . Piezoelectric ultrasonic motors ( PUM ) are well - suited to these requirements . PUM can achieve high precision as a result of low speed , the absence of gears and transmissions , and free­ dom from backlash . They are quite simple mechanically , consisting of a single moving part that provides the same functions as a motor , transmission , and brake in a con­ ventional motor - driven system . 1 Dr . James B . Dabney A typical piezoelectric ultrasonic motor ( Piezo Systems / Shinsei USR 30 , Fig . 1 ) 2 consists of a toothed piezoelectric disk ( stator ) in contact with a metal disk ( rotor ) . Time - varying elec­ tric fields applied to the piezoelectric stator induce a traveling wave which is mechanically rectified , causing the rotor to rotate ( Fig . 2 ) 3 . This mechanism produces relatively high torque at low rotor angular velocities , eliminating the need for gearing . The friction between rotor and stator provides a passive holding torque typically larger than the rotating torque , eliminating the need for mechanical brakes or active holding torque . These motors can be built in such a way that they neither produce nor are affected by magnetic fields , making them useful in highly magnetic environments and applications in which magnetic fields are harmful . The state - of - the - art of PUM control only partially exploits the potential of the motor for important applications . Good results have been achieved for applications requiring only speed regu­ lation . Existing controller technology is adequate for position­ ing applications traditionally served by stepper motors . Current PUM control technology does not address the many important potential PUM applications requiring pre­ cise torque control . Goals of the Project The ultimate goal of the PUM research being con­ ducted in the UHCL Systems Engineering Lab­ oratory is the develop­ ment of a PUM driver / controller unit that imple - Figure 1 . Piezo Systems Ultra - ments model - based real - sonic Motor ( Shinsei USR30 ) time torque control algo­ rithms . Research supported by ISSO this year entailed modify­ ing the PUM apparatus by the addition of a magnetic particle brake and integration of the brake driver into apparatus control circuitry and software . This enhancement to the apparatus per­ mits improved characterization of motor performance to include steady - state behavior and facilitates the modeling of a variety of realistic loading scenarios . Results A Placid Systems magnetic particle brake was integrated into the apparatus as illustrated in Fig . 3 . The brake was inserted in the apparatus between the flywheel and the laser encoder . The brake is mounted to the mechanical breadboard with a machined hang­ er bracket and drives the encoder by means of a flexible coupling . The magnetic particle brake produces a braking torque pro­ portional to the drive current and nearly independent of motor speed . The brake is driven by a Placid Systems magnetic parti­ cle brake driver ( Fig . 4 ) which is , in turn , controlled via the NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 61 Figure 2 . Traveling Wave Formation Figure 3 . Motor and Encoder Assembly Figure 4 . Magnetic Particle Brake Driver Figure 5 . Apparatus Schematic dSpace system in the laboratory personal computer . The driver produces brake drive current proportional to input signal volt­ age , permitting real - time control of the load torque . A system block diagram including the magnetic particle brake and driver is shown in Fig . 5 . The Simulink 4 real - time control software was modified to provide the brake control signal . A simple proportional - integral ( PI ) controller was implemented in the Simulink software to permit real - time control of motor speed by adjusting load torque . A dSpace graphical user inter­ face ( GUI ) was implemented ( Fig . 6 ) . That permits the operator to select motor speed control using the PI controller or brake torque control . Using the dSpace GUI , researchers conducted preliminary experiments to verify operation of controller software and the magnetic particle brake subsystem . A typical test case involves selecting a motor speed , initiating motor operation , and then varying the drive signal frequency to force the PI controller to vary brake torque so as to maintain the desired motor speed . A plot is shown in Fig . 7 of motor speed as drive signal frequency is varied . For this test case , commanded motor speed was approximately 41 RPM . At the initial drive signal frequency of 51 . 2 KHz , the motor speed was less than the commanded speed with no load ; therefore , the brake command voltage remained at zero . As the drive signal frequency was reduced , the motor speed increased to near the target speed , causing the controller to command brake torque to reduce motor speed . The prelimi­ nary PI controller response indicates the need for refinement of the controller , but the experiment demonstrates clearly that torque regulation is effective . The next phase of the project will entail improved characteriza­ tion of motor performance employing the torque controller . Using the improved characterization of motor performance , model - based control algorithms will be implemented in the Simulink software and demonstrated using the active load and torque sen­ sor . The enhanced apparatus will also be used to investigate implementation of a single degree - of - freedom haptic interface . Acknowledgments This work was partially supported by ISSO mini - grants for the summers of 2002 , 2003 , 2004 , and 2005 . Additional support was provided by the NASA Lyndon B . Johnson Space Center and by the UHCL Faculty Research Support Fund . A UHCL Systems Engineering Capstone team 5 implemented the con­ troller software . References 1 T . Sashida and T . Kenjo , An Introduction to Ultrasonic Motors . Oxford : Clarendon P . , 1993 . 2 Piezo Systems , Inc . , Operating Manual : Ultrasonic Rotary Motor and Driver , Cambridge , MA , 2001 . 3 N . W . Hagood and A . J . McFarland , “Modeling of a Piezoelectric Ultrasonic Motor , ” IEEE Trans . on Ultrasonics , Ferroelectrics , and Frequency Control 42 . 2 ( 1995 ) : 210 - 31 . 4 J . B . Dabney and T . L . Harman , Mastering Simulink . NJ : Prentice Hall , 2004 . 62 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Figure 6 . dSpace Interface with Load Torque Control Figure 7 . Measured Torque Compared to Computed Torque 5 C . Wagner , J . Arceneaux , and A . Vyvial , “Model - Based Torque Control of Piezoelectric Ultrasonic Motors , ” Capstone Project Report , UHCL Systems Engineering Laboratory , 2005 . Publications Dabney , J . B . and V . Tang . “Model - Based Torque Control of Piezoelectric Ultrasonic Motors , ” STTR Phase I Final Report , UHCL Systems Engineering Laboratory , 2005 . Dabney , J . B . , T . L . Harman , F . H . Ghorbel , C . Aswatharanayan , M . Randolph - Gips , and J . J . Chakkungal . “Dynamic Response Modeling of Piezoelectric Ultrasonic Motors , ” ASME Intl . Mechanical Engineering Conf . and Exhib . , Orlando , FL , Nov . 5 – 11 , 2005 . Presentations Wagner , C . , J . Arceneaux , and A . Vyvial . “Model - Based Torque Control of Piezoelectric Ultrasonic Motors , ” Capstone Project Report , UHCL Systems Engineering Laboratory , 2005 . Funding Dabney , J . B . “Model - Based Torque Control of Piezoelectric Ultrasonic Motors , ” Jan . 2005 , $ 600 , 000 . ( Not funded . ) — . “Robust Miniaturized Piezoelectric Motor Controller , ” Sept . 2005 . $ 100 , 000 . ( Not funded . ) Dabney , J . B . and T . L . Harman . “Low Cost Haptic Display Using Piezoelectric Ultrasonic Motors , ” Texas Advanced Research Program , Feb . 2006 , $ 66 , 000 . ( Pending . ) NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 63 Early Origins of Genetic Systems George E . Fox Abstract—Much of the early development of genetic machinery was accompanied by two - way exchange of components between early cellular systems possibly mediated in some cases by lateral gene transfer . A search for structural similarities between ribosomal proteins and other proteins revealed likely examples of such transfer . I T IS GENERALLY BELIEVED THAT living organisms , as we know them , likely emerged from an RNA world , first with an RNA based genetic system and later with DNA as the genetic material . 1 - 3 The development of sophisticated translation machinery and its inte­ gration with RNA level regulation of transcription may have been a major driving force in the early his­ tory of life . With these two core processes in place , early organisms could then have expanded their repertoire of capabilities leading to Dr . George E . Fox the discovery of improved information storage ( DNA ) followed by a second major addition of functionality . If this scenario is correct , it is likely that the initial period would have been fol­ lowed by a cross fertilization period that occurred after these central cellular processes were well established . Hence , we would expect to find that the earliest protein components of these processes might have been incorporated into later evolv­ ing cellular systems . In order to test this hypothesis , we focused our efforts on ribo­ somal proteins seeking to identify individual proteins or protein domains that may have been moved between and among the major cellular systems . Ribosomal machinery is ideal for such a study for two reasons . First , because crystals of the 30S and 50S ribosomal subunits have been studied , 4 - 7 the structures of most of the riboso­ mal proteins ( r - proteins ) associated with the protein synthesis machinery are now known at atomic resolution . Second , prior examination of the ribosome assembly process 8 and sequence con­ servation patterns suggests an early origin for certain proteins , e . g . , L2 , L3 , L4 , and L24 , etc . Therefore , the folds they contain are like­ ly to be among the oldest . Consistent with this , the core fold seen in L3 has also been found in EF - Tu , EF - G , initiation factors ( IF2 and eIF2 ) , riboflavin synthase , ferrodoxin reductase , NADPH - cytochrome p450 reductase , and L - fucose isomerase . Methodology In addition to the ribosomal proteins , the structure of many cel­ lular proteins including many of those involved in DNA replica­ tion has been studied at atomic resolution . There is an ongoing project known as SCOP 9 in which all known protein structures have been examined and classified by the folds they contain . This database is publicly available at < http : / / scop . mrc - lmb . cam . ac . uk / scop / > . In general , proteins that contain similar folds have a significant potential to be historically related whereas those that are not so similar are far less likely to be related . We use this database as a starting point to identify non - ribosomal proteins ( and other ribosomal proteins , as well ) that shared similar folds . We then compared these possible analogs . Results An initial examination of the distribution of ribosomal proteins in the SCOP database revealed that the mostly single domain ribosomal proteins , whose structures are known , fall into 46 dif­ ferent categories . Thus , it is clear that most of the ribosomal proteins do not share a common early history . There are , how­ ever , several examples of r - proteins that are related by insertion , fusion , and / or duplication events . In those cases , we are interest­ ed in which protein is the predecessor . Interest focuses on which proteins are recruited to the ribosome and which are recruited from the ribosome at different times . One key example is the very ancient protein L2 which has two domains . One has an OB fold and the other an SH3 fold . These folds differ by the insertion / deletion of a single alpha hel­ ical element . Thus , a likely scenario is that L2 began as a single domain protein with an SH3 fold which allowed it to interact with RNA . A subsequent duplication event followed by a sec­ ond insertion event would then create a new second domain . The resulting OB fold , which may have originated with L2 , is found in many modern membrane associated proteins . Another partial duplication event ( Wang and Fox , manuscript in preparation ) has been detected for L15 and L18e . The former is a universal protein and , therefore , likely to be older , since the latter is not found in bacteria . The two proteins share significant 64 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA sequence homology as well as structural similarity , but L15 has an extension missing in L18e . The binding site for L18e in the Archaeal ribosomal RNA includes an inserted loop that is not present in bacterial r RNAs . Hence , the newer protein interacts with an added / newer feature in the RNA . Among the most interesting findings is the observation that elongation factor G ( EF - G ) is largely a composite of several r - protein domains . EF - G has five structural domains . Domain II , which is also shared with EF - Tu , is seen in one of the oldest ribosomal proteins , L2 . Domains III and V have the same ferre - doxin - like fold seen in r - proteins S6 and S10 . Domain IV has an alpha / beta structure , as found in r - protein S9 and the central domain of r - protein S5 . EF - G is involved in GTP cleavage and is a key component of ribosomal bioenergetics . In its absence , the rate of translation is dramatically slowed but not eliminated . In total , the evidence suggests that it is a relatively recent addi­ tion to the ribosomal machinery . Given its dramatic role in the rate of protein synthesis , its introduction may have been a major transition in the history of living systems . Among proteins that have likely been recruited from else­ where to the ribosome are S6 and S10 which resemble the ferre­ doxins likely among the first proteins . Other recent additions are r - proteins that contain Zn - binding motifs . These include L337e , L37ae , L44e , and S27e . None of these proteins are universal . Discussion Although SCOP focuses exclusively on proteins whose three - dimensional structure is known , this does not exclude the inclu­ sion of other proteins in future work . Once folds are identified , they can be sought in proteins that have not yet been crystallized by looking for similar domains that can be identified at the pri­ mary sequence level or by comparing predicted secondary struc­ tures to known three - dimensional structures . Thus , for example , we examined 8 a fold known as the S1 domain ( originally discov­ ered in ribosomal protein S1 ) . Sequence comparisons resulted in the discovery of a similar fold in large numbers of proteins . The proteins containing S1 domains can be broadly grouped into three main functional groups : RNA processing , involvement in transcription or translation , and chromatin or septum regulation . Although the S1 motif is found in all three domains of life , only the IF - 1 / eIF1A types are universally distributed , suggesting that this might be the original source of the fold . It is likely that ribo­ somal protein S1 , itself , is a late addition to the ribosome , prob­ ably derived from the initiation machinery . This example and the earlier L3 example illustrate a common theme that may be largely unique to the earlier history of life on Earth , mainly the lateral transfer of domains between genes as opposed to the lat­ eral transfer of genes between genomes . Conclusions Results obtained here illustrate a key role for the ribosomal machinery as a source and sink of useful proteins or protein domains throughout early evolution . The immediate goal in the research effort will be to add DNA replication and repair pro­ teins to the analysis mix . Funding for this purpose will be sought from NASA’s Exobiology Program . References 1 G . J . Olsen , “The History of Life , ” Nat Genet . 28 ( 2001 ) : 197 - 98 . 2 J . K . Harris , S . T . Kelley , G . B . Spiegelman , and N . R . Pace , “The Genetic Core of the Universal Ancestor , ” Genome Res . 13 ( 2003 ) : 407 - 12 . 3 E . V . Koonin , “Comparative Genomics , Minimal Gene - sets and the Last Universal Common Ancestor , ” Nat . Rev . Microbiol . 1 ( 2003 ) : 127 - 36 . 4 N . Ban , P . Nissen , J . Hansen , P . B . Moore , and T . A . Steitz , “The Complete Atomic Structure of the Large Ribosomal Subunit at 2 . 4A Resolution , ” Science 289 ( 2000 ) : 905 - 20 . 5 J . Harms , F . Schluenzen , R . Zarivach , A . Bashan , S . Gat , I . Agmon , H . Bartels , F . Franceschi , and A . Yonath , “High Resolution Structure of the Large Ribosomal Subunit from a Mesophilic Eubacterium , ” Cell 107 ( 2001 ) : 679 - 88 . 6 D . E . Brodersen , W . M . Clemons , Jr . , A . P . Carter , B . T . Wimberly , and V . Ramakrishnan , “Crystal Structure of the 30 S Ribosomal Subunit from Thermus thermophilus : Structure of the Proteins and their Interactions with 16S RNA , ” J . Mol . Biol . 316 ( 2002 ) : 725 - 68 . 7 D . J . Klein , P . B . Moore , and T . A . Steitz , “The Roles of Ribosomal Proteins in the Structure Assembly , and Evolution of the Large Ribosomal Subunit , ” J . Mol . Biol . 340 ( 2004 ) : 141 - 77 . 8 G . E . Fox and A . K . Naik , “The Evolutionary History of the Ribosome , ” in The Genetic Code and the Origin of Life . Ed . L . Ribas de Poplana . Georgetown , TX : Landes Bioscience , 2004 . 92 - 105 . 9 A . Andreeva , D . Howorth , S . E . Brenner , T . J . P . Hubbard , C . Chothia , and A . G . Murzin , “SCOP Database in 2004 : Refinements Integrate Structure and Sequence Family Data , ” Nucl . Acid Res . 32 ( 2004 ) : D226 - 29 . Publications Hury , J . , U . Nagaswamy , M . Larios - Sanz , and G . E . Fox . “Ribosome Origins : The Relative Age of 23S r RNA Domains , ” Origins Life & Evol . Biosphere . ( In press . ) Presentations Dasgupta I . , Y . Liu , J . Wang , H . - C . Huang , U . Nagaswamy , and G . E . Fox . “Conservation and Clustering of Translation Related Genes , ” Cold Springs Harbor Meeting on Genome Informatics , Cold Springs Harbor , NY , Oct . 28 – Nov . 1 , 2005 . Fox , G . E . “EF - G , A Key Historical Advance in Early Genetic Systems , ” Origin of Life Gordon Conf . , Bates College , Lewiston , ME , July 23 – 28 , 2006 . ( Invited to speak . ) — . “Inferring Evolutionary History from Multiple Data Sets : Insights to the Origins of the Translation Machinery , ” Computational Molecular Biology : The Future , University of Houston , Houston , TX , April 4 , 2005 . ( Invited speaker . ) — . “Origins of the Translation Machinery , ” Planetary Protection Group , Jet Propulsion Laboratory , Pasadena , CA , Dec . 8 , 2005 . ( Invited seminar speaker . ) — . “Unraveling the History of the Ribosome , ” Houston Society for Engineering in Medicine and Biology 23rd Annual Conf . on Biomedical Engineering Research , Houston , TX , Feb . 9 – 10 , 2006 . ( Invited symposium speaker . ) ( Continued on page 95 . ) NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 65 A Unique High Speed Camera System for Studying Pulsating Dynamics of Premixed Flames Michael Gorman Abstract—A unique camera system , capable of high speeds ( 1KHz ) , is described for the study of pre­ mixed flame dynamics and other low light level , high - speed phenomena that emit visible electromag­ netic radiation . W HEN A SMALL PLANE reaches cruising altitude , the pilot adjusts the throttle , reducing the fuel until the engine makes a “putt - putt - putt” sound , indicating that the combus­ tion of the fuel - air mixture is oscil­ lating . The pilot then reduces the fuel until the sound becomes uni­ form . In making this adjustment , the pilot is setting the operating point just inside the lean - burn limit , where the combustion is most complete and where the Dr . Michael Gorman engine operates most efficiently . These pulsations are characteristic of most technologically interesting and important combustion systems , such as gas tur­ bine combustors or jet engines . It is a general property that a combustion system does not abruptly extinguish ; rather , it makes transitions from steady regimes to first , periodic , and , then , chaotic dynamics . Over the past 15 years , we have conducted experiments on instabilities in premixed flames stabilized on a circular porous plug burner in a glass combustion chamber at low pressure . Almost all of our studies have concentrated on the dynamics of cellular flames 1 in which the uniform flame front forms a circu­ lar pattern of rings of brighter , hotter cells that are separated by darker , cooler cusps and folds . The rings undergo transitions to states in which ( 1 ) entire rings 2 uniformly rotate , ( 2 ) entire rings undergo modulated rotation , ( 3 ) individual cells abruptly and sequentially change their angular position in a ring , 3 and ( 4 ) entire rings 4 rotate very slowly ( ~ 1 deg / sec ) , speeding up and slowing down with their own distinctive dynamics . The dynam­ ics are relatively slow ( < 7 Hz ) , and they can be analyzed using standard video techniques . The domain of cellular flames is heavy hydrocarbon / air mixtures . Although this system is scien­ tifically fascinating , it is not technologically interesting . Figure 1 . The camera body containing a 480 x 420 CCD array , made by Redlake Imaging . When air is replaced by oxygen , the cells no longer appear . Instead , the entire flame front pulsates in modes with their own distinctive spatial and temporal characteristics , much like those of a vibrating drumhead . The modes are analogous to oscillations in engines and combustors . Typical frequencies are 35 Hz , which is above both the flicker frequency of the eye ( ~ 13 Hz ) and the Nyquist frequency of videotape ( 15 Hz ) . The central problem in studying such dynamics in experiments on real engines and com­ bustors , which are technologically interesting , is the difficulty in obtaining optical access to the combustion region . The intensity of the flame front is reduced at low pressure in direct proportion to the number of molecules . It is further reduced near the extinction limits because the number of com­ bustion reactions diminishes . The intensity per frame is also reduced as the operating speed of the camera is increased . A frame rate of 250 Hz produces approximately seven frames per cycle , which is usually sufficient to identify the spatial charac­ teristics of the dynamics . We have constructed a unique camera system at a cost of $ 70 , 000 to study the dynamics of these pulsating modes . The 66 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA camera body , shown in Fig . 1 , contains a standard CCD array capable of speeds of 1 , 000 Hz . A micro - channel plate , shown in Fig . 2 , is coupled to the CCD through double - lens optics ( partially visible on the right ) . The array absorbs the incoming light from the collection lens which images the flame front on the array . A number of electrons pro­ portional to the intensity are emitted , and they are amplified and impinge on a phosphor . The chemiluminesce of a premixed flame front is primarily in the infrared , due to vibrational exci­ tations , and the blue / violet , due to electronic excitations . The emission spectrum of the phosphor is concentrated in the visible part of the spectrum where the CCD array has a greater efficien­ cy . This system can produce images of varying intensity by con­ tinuously adjusting the variable amplifier voltage of the micro - channel plate . The optical system has a maximum gain of 100K , with a typical loss of 40 percent in the coupling optics , resulting in a net gain of 60K . There are some , but relatively few , camera systems with image intensifiers attached . Our system obtains its uniqueness because it supports simultaneous , synchronized data collection from ( up to ) 16 differential or 32 single - ended electronic sen­ sors , shown in Fig . 3 , from National Instruments breakout boxes BNC 2110 and BNC 2115 . These sensors can be attached to flow meters , photo - detector outputs , electric field perturbations , and other features in need of measurement . This difficulty with synchronization is the principal reason that there have been only a handful of experiments in which video data are correlated with electronic data . Research support from ISSO enabled us to repair the micro - channel plate , which experienced a freak accident of unknown origin that shorted out the sensor and made the images unintel­ ligible . Our entire research project would have collapsed had not ISSO provided a substantial fraction of the $ 11 , 000 needed to make the appropriate repairs . We are now studying the dynamics of two - armed spirals on circular burners and counter - propagating hot spots on annular burners . References 1 M . Gorman , M . el - Hamdi , and K . A . Robbins , “Experimental - Observation of Ordered States of Cellular Flames , ” Combust . Sci . and Technol . 98 . 1 - 3 ( 1994 ) : 37 - 45 . 2 E . Stone , M . Gorman , M . el - Hamdi , and K . A . Robbins , “Identification of Intermittent Ordered Patterns as Heteroclinic Connections , ” Phys . Rev . Lett . 76 . 2 ( 1996 ) : 2061 - 64 . 3 M . Gorman , C . F . Hamill , M . el - Hamdi , and K . A . Robbins , “Rotating and Modulated Rotating States of Cellular Flames , ” Combust . Sci . and Technol . 98 . 1 - 3 ( 1994 ) : 25 - 35 . 4 M . Gorman , M . el - Hamdi , B . Pearson , and K . A . Robbins , “Ratcheting Motion of Concentric Rings in Cellular Flame , ” Phys . Rev . Lett . 76 . 2 ( 1996 ) : 228 - 31 . Publications Gorman , M . and R . Brockman . “Counter - Propagating Fronts , Hot Spots , and Other Dynamic Structures of Hydrocarbon - Oxygen Premixed Flames on an Annular Burner , ” Chaos . ( Submitted Feb . 2006 . ) Gorman , M . and R . Brockman . “Two - Armed Spiral States of Figure 2 . A micro - channel plate image intensiﬁer with part of the coupling optics visible on the right . A cable ( not shown ) connects the intensiﬁer to a power supply . Figure 3 . National Instruments breakout boxes for synchro - nized electronic data collection . Methane - Oxygen Flames on a Circular Burner , ” Chaos . ( Submitted Feb . 2006 . ) Gorman , M . and S . Perrollier . “Unusual Pulsating States of Hydrocarbon - Oxygen Premixed Flames on a Circular Porous Plug Burner , ” Chaos . ( Submitted Feb . 2006 . ) Funding and Proposals ( under consideration ) Welch Foundations , 3 years , $ 50 , 000 / yr . ; Petroleum Research Fund , 3 years . NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 67 The Effect of Martian Dust on Radiator Performance D . Keith Hollingsworth , Larry C . Witte , Ashley Higgins Abstract—Thermal radiators are a critical element for lunar or Martian habitation missions . Experiments by the University of Houston and NASA have demonstrated a dramatic degradation in radiator emittance due to the accumulation of a Martian dust simulant . An ISSO mini - grant funded the development of an automated facility that will lower operational costs for future tests . T HE PURPOSE OF THE ISSO mini - grant is to enhance an existing University of Houston / NASA Johnson Space Center effort to measure the radia­ tive emittance of thermal radiator coatings laden with simulated Martian or Lunar dust . This larger project , the “Mars Radiator Char­ acterization Experimental Pro­ gram , ” has received NASA funding in 2002 – 2004 and has produced measurements of the reduction in effective radiative emittance as ( simulated ) Martian dust accumu - Dr . D . Keith Hollingsworth lates on surfaces coated with high - emittance materials . This work is motivated by the expectation that radiators will be a critical element in the thermal control system for future robotic and human exploration missions to the moon and Mars . Radiator performance depends on the radiating surface area , the emittance and absorptance of the radiator surface , the opera­ tional temperature of the radiator , the effective sky temperature surrounding the radiator , solar radiation , and atmospheric irradi­ ation levels . Radiative properties of the surface are affected by dust accumulation and surface oxidation . Dust is expected to be a major contributor to the local envi­ ronmental conditions at the Martian surface and may also be a substantial problem for long - term equipment on the lunar sur­ face . The photos in Fig . 1 , recently made of the rovers Opportunity and Spirit on Mars , demonstrate dust accumulation on exposed surfaces . Opportunity has little dust accumulation while Spirit carries a substantial dust layer . These rovers have been on the Martian surface for the same length of time but operate in different sectors . A short description of the Mars Radiator Characterization Experimental Program 1 , 2 will help explain the objective of our ISSO project . An apparatus has been developed that allows the Courtesy NASA / JPL - Caltech Figure 1 . The same section of the radiator array is shown from the two current Martian rovers : Opportunity ( top ) shows little dust accumulation ; Spirit ( bottom ) shows signif - icant accumulation . 68 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Figure 2 . ( a ) Undusted coupons positioned in the chamber . In opposing pairs , starting at top and bottom center and mov - ing clockwise : NS - 43G white silicate paint , polished aluminum , Z - 93P white silicate paint , 10 mil silver Teﬂon ﬁlm ; ( b ) Results for T surface = 300 K . measurement of radiative emit­ tance of multiple test coupons in the JSC Energy Systems Vacuum Chamber . The chamber can pro­ duce a range of sky temperatures typical of Martian conditions . Eight radiator coupons were designed and fabricated with four different surface coatings . The Martian dust “simulant” used by NASA is Carbondale red clay . The coupon construction involves active guard heating that prevents heat loss from all surfaces other than the test surface of the coupon . Dr . Larry C . Witte The data acquisition system for the coupons includes a manual temperature control system ( student operated ) . An apparatus has been developed that deposits dust uniformly on multiple coupons in situ in the vacuum chamber . ( An inven­ tion disclosure has been filed through NASA - JSC and UH . ) Experiments were completed for seven temperature operating conditions under vacuum ( 10 - 6 torr ) . Figure 2 ( a ) shows the eight coupons arranged in the vacuum chamber prior to testing . An example of the data obtained for a test surface temperature of 300 K for a range of dust loadings and effective sky temperatures is shown in Fig . 2 ( b ) . The effect is dramatic : high - emittance sur­ faces see an approximately 50 percent reduction in emissive power as the surface emittance drops toward that of the dust sim­ ulant ( as shown by the polished aluminum coupon ) for an accu­ mulation of roughly 100 microns of dust at the highest loading . The operation of the facility when conducted by a trained and experienced operator would often require more than three hours to obtain stable operation at a single set of conditions . One of the controlling factors in this expensive use of vacuum chamber resources is the capability of the operator to adjust the 16 heaters necessary to establish the eight coupons at steady - state conditions . By replacing manual operation with an automatic controller , the time required for a single run of the apparatus can be reduced significantly . The goal of this mini - grant was to design and build an auto­ matic controller that would integrate into the existing digital data acquisition system . Such an improvement in the experi­ mental apparatus will allow more data to be collected during the same period of vacuum chamber operation and thereby improve future proposals to NASA that involve the use of this system . Methodology The system consists of eight test coupons that operate in a vac­ uum chamber . Each coupon is driven by two heaters : a main heater that provides the measured power to the radiator surface and a “guard” heater set to maintain the remainder of the coupon surface at the same temperature as the surface . The temperatures of the test surface and of the surrounding structure are measured by resistance temperature devices ( RTDs ) . The temperature of the vacuum chamber walls is controlled by a separate system operated by NASA staff . During operation , a radiator surface temperature is selected and the main heater power is set by trial and error to obtain that temperature . The guard heater power is also set by trial and error so that the structure surrounding the test surface is also at the desired temperature so that no heat loss occurs through the structure . Of course , because a change in one heater setting affects the other heater , the adjustments are non­ trivial and time - consuming . For all eight coupons there are a total of 16 RTDs to monitor and 16 heaters to adjust . An IoTech Daqbook data acquisition system monitors the temperature and power data while 16 precision DC power supplies provide man - ually - controlled current to the heaters . All the data from the IoTech are recorded on a laptop computer . The data acquisition system includes two RTD acquisition / conver - sion cards which were operated in three - wire mode to remove the lead resistance from the computation of the temperature . The complete RTD acquisition system was calibrated in a controlled - NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 69 Figure 3 . Heating of one coupon from room temperature to 320 K and cooling from 320 K to 305 K . For the heating case , the 95 % conﬁdence uncertainty during steady operation is ± 0 . 25 K , or 1 . 0 % of the difference between the target and ambient temperatures . For the cooling case , the uncertain - ty during steady operation is ± 0 . 13 K , or 1 . 3 % of the mean rise above ambient . temperature environment prior to use in the vacuum chamber . The ISSO mini - grant funded a conversion of this system to automatic control . The idea is that the measurements currently accessible would be used to compute an estimated set point for each heater . That set point would be communicated to the heater power supply electronically—so that manual adjustment via potentiometers of the heater power would be replaced by tran - sistor - gated control of the heater power . Both the main and guard heaters were automatically controlled so that the coupon arrives at the set point temperature with essentially a zero tem­ perature difference within the structure of the coupon . To implement automatic control , four IoTech digital - to - ana - log boards and associated power conditioning were added to the data acquisition system . The custom power supply for the coupon heaters was modified so that either transistor control or potentiometer - control ( manual operation ) could be switch - selectable . For automatic operation , a custom - written software controller in the laptop generates appropriate heater settings which are then converted to analog voltages by the D - to - A boards . Those voltages drive power transistors which generate a sufficient current to drive the heaters at the desired power level . The resulting actual heater voltages , along with the updated coupon and guard temperatures , are read by the data acquisition system , and the process repeats itself . A proportional integral ( PI ) control strategy was implemented in the same VisualBasic code that handles the data acquisition . An analytical model of the transient heat transfer between a coupon and the low - pressure vacuum chamber was created in MatLab to determine reasonable values for the constants that set the rate of approach and the integration time in the PI strategy . These values can be refined later during testing with the actual hardware . ROBOTICS—Jaime Hinke with a baccalaureate degree in mechan - ical engineering earned at the University of Houston studies robotics at NASA - JSC in the Robotics Group for Flight Control . Equipment The equipment purchased included : four IoTech Inc . digital - to - analog voltage output cards ( $ 1 , 600 ) , which were placed into an existing data acquisition system , a power supply to drive the cards ( $ 20 ) , and various switches and cables to complete the facility ( $ 90 ) . Results and Discussion To demonstrate the automatic control system , one coupon is exercised in room air in the laboratory . For these tests , the NASA vacuum chamber was not available ; however , operation of the system in room air is a more severe test of the control system than is operation in high vacuum . For the heating case shown in Fig . 3 , the coupon is initially set at room temperature and the sys­ tem given a target of 320 K . The coupon temperature traverses the 25 K difference in roughly nine minutes and is steady at an average of 319 . 8 K with a 95 % ( two - sigma ) single - sample vari­ ation of ± 0 . 25 K . This uncertainty is 1 . 0 % of the difference between the target and ambient temperatures and is on the order of the uncertainty produced by the measurement system . For the cooling example , the coupon is initially at 320 K and is allowed to cool by natural convection under automatic control to a target temperature of 305 K . The cooling process occurs over six minutes , and the system achieves a steady state at 305 . 0 ± 0 . 13 K . This uncertainty is 1 . 3 percent of the mean rise above ambient . In vacuum , the heat transfer rate from the coupons would be much lower and the transients longer ; however , we expect much faster response than the 2 - 3 hours - per - point typi­ cal of well - trained manual operation . The controller operates well at room temperature and standard pressure . However , the question of how well it will operate in a vacuum must await the renewal of funding for the operation of 70 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA PAINT SAMPLES—Ashley Higgins ( l . ) , master’s candidate in mechanical engi - neering , stands with Dr . D . Keith Hollingsworth ( r . ) with paint sample on metal coupons ( disks ) designed to test the effect of simulated martian dust on silicate paint , aluminum , and silver Teﬂon ﬁlm . the vacuum chamber at the NASA Johnson Space Center . A vol­ ume at high vacuum is a far more stable thermal environment than one at standard pressure . While this stability means slower transients , it also means that the controller will be challenged to a lesser degree than under the test conditions shown in Fig . 3 . Conclusions Automatic control has proven itself a successful and worthwhile addition to the system . A new proposal for $ 200 , 000 in funding for continued work featuring the strong potential of cost - savings produced by the improved system has been submitted to both the NASA Johnson Space Center Director’s Discretionary Fund and to the NASA Constellation / Exploration Program . References 1 D . K . Hollingsworth , L . C . Witte , J . Hinke , and K . Hurlbert , “Reduction in the Emittance of Thermal Radiator Coatings Caused by the Accumulation of Simulated Martian Dust , ” Applied Thermal Engineering ( 2006 ) . ( In press . ) 2 D . K . Hollingsworth , L . C . Witte , J . Hinke , and K . Hurlbert , “The Effect of Martian Dust on Radiator Performance , ” Proc . , ASME Summer Heat Transfer / Fluids Engineering Division Joint Conf . ( 2004 ) : ASME HT - FED04 - 56577 . 3 G . A . Landis , “Dust Obscuration of Mars Solar Arrays , ” Acta Astronaut . 38 ( 1996 ) : 885 - 91 . 4 P . P . Jenkins , G . A . Landis , and L . G . Oberle , “Materials Adherence Experiment—Technology , ” Proc . , 32nd Intersociety Energy Conversion Engineering Conf . 1 ( 1997 ) : 728 - 31 , ( IECEC - 97339 ) . 5 G . A . Landis , “Mars Dust Removal Technology , ” Proc . , 32nd Intersociety Energy Conversion Engineering Conf . 1 ( 1997 ) : 764 - 67 , ( IECEC - 97345 ) . 6 K . R . Johnson and D . E . Brinza , “The Mars Thermal Environment and Radiator Characterization Experiment , ” Proc . , 30th Intl . Conf . on Environmental Systems , ( 2000 ) : 001CES - 178 . Publications Hollingsworth , D . K . , L . C . Witte , J . Hinke , and K . Hurlbert . “The Effect of Martian Dust on Radiator Performance , ” Proc . , ASME Summer Heat Transfer / Fluids Engineering Division Joint Conf . ( 2004 ) : ASME HT - FED04 - 56577 . Hollingsworth , D . K . , L . C . Witte , J . Hinke , and K . Hurlbert . “Reduction in the Emittance of Thermal Radiator Coatings Caused by the Accumulation of Simulated Martian Dust , ” Applied Thermal Engineering ( 2006 ) . ( In press . ) Presentations Hollingsworth , D . K . “The Effect of Martian Dust on Radiator Performance , ” NASA Contamination and Coatings Workshop , Aug . 3 – 4 , 2005 . ( Invited paper . ) Funding and Proposals Hollingsworth , D . K . , L . C . Witte , G . Tuan , and K . Hurlbert . “Dust Impact of Radiator Test Stand , ” NASA Johnson Space Center Director’s Discretionary Fund , Nov . 2005 , 2 years , $ 200 , 000 . ( Not funded by JSC - CDDF . Currently submitted to NASA Constellation / Exploration Program , Level 2 . ) NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 71 Contaminants Removal From Fuel Cells for Aerospace Applications Jack Y . Lu Abstract—Research has been focused on the rational design and synthesis of new metal - organic fibers ( MOF ) materials for a polymer electrolyte membrane ( PEM ) FC fuel processing system in which the MOF material is an integral component and the key for contaminant removal in hydrocarbon or ammonia fuel processors . Design and synthesis of desirable MOF materials for uses in fuel processors will have immediate impact on a wide range of space applications . S YNTHESIS OF FUNCTIONAL materials represents one of the great challenges in cur­ rent research . Coordination poly­ mers have found a wide range of applications , such as molecular separation and pollution prevention in air , liquid , and water systems , where they can be used as ion exchangers and molecular sieves . The objective of the research is to design and develop robust metal - organic framework ( MOF ) materi­ als that may selectively remove Dr . Jack Y . Lu small molecule contaminant ( s ) produced by the fuel processing system of a fuel cell . Experimental Activity , Results and Discussion Among the metal - organic coordination polymers synthesized in our laboratory [ Cu ( BPY ) ( NO 3 ) 2 ] n ( BPY = 4 , 4 ′ - bipyridine ) 1 is a new metastable coordination polymer . It was further reacted with additional 4 , 4 ′ - bipy , resulting in a new self - assembled MOF featuring the first two - fold interpenetrating 3 - D 4 2 . 8 4 net­ work structure : { [ Cu ( BPY ) 2 ( H 2 O ) 2 ] [ Cu ( BPY ) 2 ( H 2 O ) ( NO 3 ) ] } ( NO 3 ) 3 ⋅ 12 H 2 O . 1 The two independent 3 - D networks in this com­ pound , when minimally interpenetrating , enable this 3 - D open - channel structure to accommodate a large amount of water mol­ ecules and nitrate anions . Such inclusion phenomena in inter­ penetrating open - frameworks are very suggestive of practical applications , especially in those open - channel structures with minimum interpenetrating frameworks ( Fig . 1 ) . The reactions of Cd ( NO 3 ) 2 ⋅ 4 H 2 O with imidazol - 4 , 5 - dicar - boxylic acid and 4 , 4 ′ - bipyridine under hydrothermal reaction conditions resulted in two new metal - organic polymers . 2 The hydrogen - bonding linked 3 - D structure of complex 2 composed of covalent pleated sheets . The pleated sheet conformation here is derived from the bonding - mode of the tetradentate HIDC 2­ Figure 1 . The Open Channel Structure Figure 2 . View of the Rectangular Grids in the Structure ligands and the rigid BPY spacers . The rectangular grids ( BPY - Cd - HIDC 2 - - Cd - HIDC 2 - - Cd - BPY - Cd - HIDC 2 - - Cd - HIDC 2 - - Cd ) in the 2 - D covalent pleated sheet conformation network have corner metal - to - metal distances of 13 . 564 × 11 . 754 Å ( Fig . 2 ) . ( Continued on page 96 . ) 72 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA PWM Control of Formation Flying Space Vehicle Heidar Malki , Ho Jae Lee , Leang - San Shieh Abstract—The concept of Multiple Spacecraft Formation Flying ( MSFF ) has witnessed the develop­ ment of a pulse - width - modulated control technique using optimal linear model - based digital redesign . M ULTIPLE SPACECRAFT FOR ­ mation flying ( MSFF ) is emerging as a methodol­ ogy for use in future space mis - sions . 1 MSFF control methodolo­ gies are designed to conduct good tracking of relative position trajec­ tories of a pair of spacecraft , a leader and follower . Surveying the current state of MSFF control , the utilization of the PWM control for MSFF systems is not fully developed . The principle of equivalent area 2 may be adopted Dr . Heidar Malki for pulse - width - modulating of an analog control signal . To virtually implement a pulse - width - modulator in this way , a control signal needs to be digitalized during a sampling period for eluding the non - causality between the principle of equivalent area and the pulse - width - modulator . However , as shown in Chang et al . , it is clear that control per­ formance is severely degraded when an analog control is digi­ talized by simply inserting an ideal sampler and a zero - order holder . 3 The proposed digital redesign ( DR ) technique can sig­ nificantly improve the performance of PWM control systems . To alleviate difficulties , we propose an alternative method— PWM control synthesis by using an optimal linearization model - based DR ( OLM - based DR ) technique . Simulation stud­ ies show the effectiveness of the proposed method . Methodology An Analog Nonlinear Control System and Its OLM Nonlinear MSFF dynamics can be represented as follows : 1 ( 1 ) ear model , even if the operating point is a system equilibrium . The following theorem can be used to optimally linearize Eqn . 1 on x op = x ( kT ) ∈ R n , k ∈ Z > 0 . Theorem 1 ( γ - stabilizable OLM ) If there exist matrices S k = S T k > 0 , Z k , X k , and Y k with appropriate dimensions , and a possibly small γ 1 > 0 such that the following minimization problem ( MP ) has solutions , ( A k , B k ) is OLM with guaranteed stabilizability on an operating point x op = x ( kT ) , where A k = S k - 1 Z k , B k = G ( x op ) , and ( • ) T denotes the transposed element . MP 1 : Minimize γ 1 subject to LMI - Based Digital Redesign Consider a linearized model given by Theorem 1 and an analog control : ( 2 ) u c = K c x c + E c r . ( 3 ) By introducing an ideal sampler and a zero - order holder between a plant and a control , a desired digitally controlled hybrid system is represented by ( 4 ) While Eqn . 1 admits nonlinearities for handling a wide class where u d = u d ( kT ) is a piecewise - constant control to be deter­ mined during the time interval [ kT , kT + T ) . In this study , the of dynamics , many useful analysis and synthesis methods rely redesigned digital control takes the form on linear models . However , the Taylor expansion - based lin­ earization approach usually results in an affine rather than lin - u d = K dk x d ( kT ) + E dk r ( kT ) ( 5 ) NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 73 Figure 1 . Time responses and controls by the proposed method for T = 0 . 5 h . for the time interval [ kT , kT + T ) . Equivalent digital implementa­ tion of Eqn . 3 in the form of Eqn 5 . can be done using the follow­ ing DR : Theorem 2 ( γ - Suboptimal DR for an OLM ) If there exist matrices P k = P T k > 0 , K dk , and E dk with appropriate dimensions and , possibly , small scalars γ i > 0 , i = 2 , 3 , such that the follow­ ing MP has solutions , the state x d ( kT ) of Eqn . 4 by Eqn . 5 close­ ly matches the state x c ( kT ) of the analogously controlled system ( Eqn . 2 ) and Eqn . 3 , and is exponentially stable . MP 2 : Minimize γ 2 + γ 3 subject to PWM Control by DR : The Main Result Now , we are interested in controlling the model by the PWM control mathematically represented by ( 6 ) ( 7 ) j where u j and u d are the j th component of u p and u d , respectively . p One easy way to design an equivalent PWM control is to determine the firing duration time T kj by using the principle of equivalent area . However , there is the non - causal relationship between Eqn . 7 and the principle of equivalent area . Our strate­ gy to resolve this problem is to use the DR : Find a digital con­ trol so that x c ( kT ) and x d ( kT ) are matched and identify T k - deci - sion logic so that x p ( kT + T ) in Eqn . 6 and Eqn . 7 is matched with x d ( kT + T ) in Eqn . 4 and Eqn . 5 , with guaranteed stability . Theorem 3 If the following T k - decision logic is equipped for ( 7 ) with a sufficiently small T > 0 satisfying the state x p ( kT ) of the PWM control system ( Eqn . 6 ) with Eqn . 7 closely matches the state x c ( kT ) of the analogously controlled system ( Eqn . 2 ) with Eqn . 3 , and is exponential stable , where is the absolute value of the largest eigenvalue . Results and Discussion We consider the dynamics of MSFF given by Queiroz et al . with the fractional placement errors of the on - off thruster nozzles . 1 The analog control gains for Eqn . 3 are designed by the standard linear quadratic regulation technique . A conventional direct dig­ ital implementation approach is also simulated for purposes of comparison . 74 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Figure 2 . Time responses and controls by the simple digital implementation of analog control T = 0 . 5 h . Dr . Leang - San Shieh The simulated time responses and applied controls by both methods for T = 0 . 5 are reported in Fig . 1 . The trajectory of the follower relative to the leader , after the digitally redesigned PWM control is applied , per­ fectly tracks the desired refer­ ence orbit . In comparison with the direct digital implementa­ tion approach without utilizing any DR techniques , the simulat­ ed time responses and applied controls are shown in Fig . 2 . Observe that tracking perform­ ances have been significantly degraded . Conclusion In this research , a new PWM control technology with the OLM - based DR technique has been presented for nonlinear MSFF . In the developed approach , the stabilizable OLM describing the local dynamic behavior of a nonlinear system is presented , which facilitates the application of the DR technique to nonlin­ ear systems . A digital output - tracking control is obtained by using the newly developed LMI - based DR method . The redesigned digital control is converted to the equivalent PWM control so that the state controlled by the PWM control closely matches the state controlled by the pre - designed analog control . Simulation results have shown that with the proposed method an effective PWM control can be constructed for high perform­ ance systems that require a relatively long sampling period . References 1 M . S . Queiroz , V . Kapila , and Q . Yan , “Adaptive Nonlinear Control of Multiple Spacecraft Formation Flying , ” J . Guidance , Control , and Dynamics 23 . 3 ( 2000 ) : 365 - 70 . 2 R . E . Andeen , “The Principle of Equivalent Areas , ” Trans . on AIEE 79 ( 1960 ) : 332 - 36 . 3 W . Chang , J . B . Park , Y . H . Joo , and G . Chen , “Design of Sampled - Data Fuzzy - Model - Based Control Systems by Using Intelligent Digital Redesign , ” IEEE Trans . on Circuits and Systems I 49 . 4 ( 2002 ) : 509 - 17 . 4 L . S . Shieh , I . C . Lin , and J . S . H . Tsai , “Design of PWM Controller for Sampled - Data System Using Digitally Redesigned PAM Controller , ” IEE Proc . , Control Theory and Applications 142 . 6 ( 1995 ) : 654 - 60 . Publications Lee , H . J . , R . S . Provence , L . - S . Shieh , and H . Malki . “Pulse - Width - Modulated Control of Nonlinear Multiple Spacecraft Formation Flying : Optimal Linearization Model - Based Digital Redesign Approach , ” J . Guidance , Control , and Dynamics . ( Submitted . ) Funding and Proposals Shieh , L . S . and H . A . Malki . “Adaptive Pulse - Width - Modulated Control of Multiple Spacecraft Formation Flying , ” NASA­ JSC , 2007 – 2009 , $ 150 , 000 . ( To be submitted Oct . 2006 . ) NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 75 Electromagnetic Probes of Biological Molecular Motors John H . Miller , Jr . , William R . Widger , Dharmakeerthi Nawarathna Abstract—Researchers are conducting measurements of harmonics generated by biological systems in response to applied sinusoidal electric fields . The frequency and amplitude - dependence of the induced harmonics exhibit features that correlate with physiological processes . For example , budding yeast cells ( S . cerevisiae ) produce numerous harmonics , the amplitudes of which depend strongly on frequen­ cy . Thus far , we have observed harmonics that appear to be generated by active molecular motors , such as membrane pumps , in the plasma membrane and in internal organelles , including mitochondria and tion , and τ m is a relaxation time . Thus , a field of only 5 V / cm modulates the normal membrane potential of a 10 - µ m radius cell by up to 7 . 5MV / m across a 10 - nm thick plasma membrane of a resting cell . Membrane proteins 3 are candidates for nonlinear behavior 4 since they cannot rotate within the membrane and dissipate energy through Debye - like relaxation and , also , since any trans­ membrane domains with dipole moments interact with the greatly amplified ac field . Modulated transmembrane potential drives membrane proteins to change their conformational states and can even induce pumps to transport ions . 5 , 6 This combina­ tion of protein conformational changes and ion translocation creates a nonlinear response manifested by the generation of harmonics . 7 , 8 An externally modulated membrane potential may , therefore , affect enzyme activity , transport , and conformational behavior . Cyclic processes , such as ion transport and ATP con­ sumption , are of special interest because they are likely to be sensitive to synchronization by an oscillatory field . Cation pumps known as P - type ATPases , 9 , 10 H + - ATPase in par­ ticular , have been reported to generate harmonics based on stud - chloroplasts ( for plant cells ) . A MONG THE FORCES OF nature , electromagnetic interactions play a domi­ nant role in biological processes . An applied low - frequency electric field , for example , polarizes live cells in suspension , resulting in an enormous dielectric response 1 and also modulates each cell’s mem­ brane potential by an amount given by , for a spherical cell , 2 U m ( ω , θ ) = 1 . 5 E c R cos θ [ 1 + i ωτ m ] - 1 , where E c is the external field amplitude , R is the cell radius , θ is the polar angle from the field direc - Dr . John H . Miller , Jr . ies 11 with mutant strains of S . cerevisiae . H + - ATPase shows non­ linear behavior due to its structural and mechanistic similarity to Na , K - ATPase , and is thus expected to transduce exogenous electric fields in a similar manner to that demonstrated by Tsong and colleagues . 12 The best understood P - type ATPase is Ca - ATPase , which exists in two main conformational states , E 1 and E 2 , while H + - ATPase and other P - type pumps are believed to be similar . The structure 13 is like that of a hand in a mitten that opens and closes . An oscillatory potential across the membrane can induce time - dependent conformational changes that alter the energy landscape seen by the cations . 14 Once the ions become trapped in the well , a conformational change facilitated by ATP hydrolysis or an external field takes place . The modulated poten­ tial U m affects the potential barrier seen by the ion , thus increas­ ing ( or decreasing ) the probability for the ion to hop into the adjacent well . Additional molecular motors of interest include ATP synthase and other complexes in the mitochondrial inner membrane , as discussed in a companion report . ( See p . 33 . ) Goal of the Project The goal of this project is to utilize nonlinear harmonic response to study active bio - molecular motors . Biological systems con­ tain numerous mobile charged particles , including cations , anions , electrons , and electrically charged proteins . Thus , when a sinusoidal electromagnetic field is applied , these charges react to yield a linear response that can be measured using impedance ( or dielectric ) spectroscopy and a nonlinear response , which can be probed by measuring induced harmonics , as done in the study reported here , or using related techniques ( e . g . , mixing or inter - modulation ) . Results A companion report discusses measurements of nonlinear har­ monic response produced by complexes in extracted mitochon­ dria and chloroplasts . Here we discuss harmonics of oscillatory 76 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Figure 1 . Induced third harmonic response of budding yeast ( S . cerevisiae , 10 8 cells / ml ) as a function of applied funda - mental frequency before ( closed circles ) and after ( open cir - cles ) adding 0 . 8 mM of the P - type ATPase inhibitor sodium metavanadate . The ﬁeld amplitude was ﬁxed at 3 V / cm . electric fields at low frequencies ( < 100 Hz ) , which appear to be generated by active membrane pumps in the plasma membrane of whole budding yeast cells . Frequencies well below 1 kHz are required to obtain suffi­ cient transmembrane field amplification should the nonlinear response be dominated by complexes in the plasma membrane . A problem that plagues measurements at low frequencies is the generation of harmonics by the electrical double layer at each electrode . 15 , 16 In order to reduce such spurious harmonics , we use only two electrodes to apply the electric field and employ a high - T c superconducting quantum interference device ( SQUID ) magnetometer to probe the time - dependent magnetic field gen­ erated by the resulting currents , while the output of SQUID electronics is fed into a spectrum analyzer . The SQUID magne­ tometer eliminates the need for additional measurement elec­ trodes and any resulting interface effects . Harmonics induced by the cell suspension are measured by applying a sinusoidal sig­ nal in the frequency range 10 - 100 Hz and field amplitude range 0 - 5 V / cm ; the response of a conductivity - matched reference medium is subtracted to further reduce any spurious harmonics . Further details , including the measurements and preparation of budding yeast suspensions ( S . cerevisiae , 10 8 cells / ml ) are described elsewhere . 17 For sufficient field amplitudes , a series of harmonics are observed , the largest of which , in the absence of glucose , are the odd harmonics . Figure 1 shows the measured third harmonic response vs . applied frequency for fixed amplitude of 3 V / cm , before and after adding 0 . 8 mM of sodium metavanadate , an inhibitor of P - type ATPases . Note that the inhibitor suppresses the third harmonic response for the same amplitude , consistent with previous observations . Figure 2 depicts the amplitude - dependent third harmonic response for a fixed applied frequen­ cy of 23 Hz , before ( closed circles ) and after ( open circles ) adding sodium metavanadate . The data before adding the inhibitor exhibit a prominent peak centered around 2 . 75 V / cm Figure 2 . Third harmonic response induced by budding yeast cells ( S . cerevisiae , 10 8 cells / ml ) as a function of applied ﬁeld amplitude before ( closed circles ) and after ( open circles ) adding sodium metavanadate . Here the fre - quency was ﬁxed at 23 Hz . amplitude and a major threshold field of around 2 . 2 V / cm , below which little response is observed except for a minor peak at around 1 . 4 V / cm . In addition , the sodium metavanadate appears to reduce this threshold field and greatly increases the third harmonic response for field amplitudes of around 1 . 8 V / cm , while the third harmonic response is suppressed some­ what for amplitudes in the range 2 . 5 - 3 . 5 V / cm . The observed increase in harmonic response at lower field amplitudes after adding sodium metavanadate is somewhat sur­ prising because previous studies with mutant strains of S . cere­ visiae strongly indicate that H + - ATPase is a dominant contribu­ tor to the nonlinear harmonic response of these organisms , and sodium metavanadate is an inhibitor that interacts selectively with the E 2 conformation of the enzyme . Vanadate is known to interact with the enzyme conformation in the absence of the cation ( e . g . , H + or Ca 2 + ) by acting as a phosphate group ( P i ) ana­ log . It has been suggested 18 that uncoupled ( e . g . , E 2 - E 2 ) cycles can occur in addition to the coupled E 1 - E 2 cycle . Thus , although ATP hydrolyzing reactions will be inhibited by vanadate , since it stabilizes the E 2 state , it may also enable an oscillatory field driven E 2 - E 2 cycle to take place . If the major threshold field for the E 1 - E 2 cycle was due to the energy barrier for driving cations from the potential well , then perhaps the threshold field for driving cations back - and - forth over the E 2 barrier in a field - driven E 2 - E 2 cycle might be reduced . Moreover , oscillatory fields can drive conformational state changes and cation trans­ port even in the absence of ATP . Since these measurements were done without glucose , it is likely that the E 1 - E 2 changes in a conformational state prior to adding vanadate were , indeed , field driven rather than driven by ATP . The potential energy bar­ rier to drive the E 1 - E 2 conformational change and cation trans­ port without ATP hydrolysis is likely larger than simply driving cation transport over the barriers in the E 2 conformation , which would lead to a larger threshold field in the absence of either vanadate or glucose . NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 77 The addition of glucose to yeast cells has been shown to cause a two - to three - fold increase in plasma membrane ATPase activ - ity . 19 In order to study the effects of glucose in real time , we automated the data acquisition so that specific harmonics could be plotted as a function of time . A companion report shows measured second and third harmonics as functions of time after adding D - glucose for a fixed frequency of 45 Hz and amplitude of 3 V / cm , where t = 0 represents the time when glucose was added . We find that , after several minutes , the second harmonic increases dramatically , by more than 400 percent after 10 min­ utes , but then reduces in amplitude after about 25 - 30 minutes as the glucose concentration becomes depleted . By contrast , the third harmonic actually reduces in amplitude over the same time period when the second harmonic is larger and then recovers to about its original size after 30 minutes . Several features of our harmonic generation experiments war­ rant explanation , including the strong frequency dependence , with threshold - like behavior in the amplitude dependence , and the observed increase of even harmonics when ATP production is taking place . In order to capture the essential behavior , we proposed a model 20 that explicitly introduces a threshold field , similar to those observed in density waves , where fields above threshold drive charge transport through an energy landscape with multiple wells , and in Coulomb blockade tunnel junctions , recently exploited to define the current standard . In our model , a P - type enzyme complex is represented as a junction , through which cation ( eg . H + or Ca 2 + ) transfer can be driven by a suffi­ ciently large voltage . First , the displacement current is taken to be zero when the modulated voltage across the membrane is in the range – V 2 ≤ V ≤ V 1 , where V 1 and V 2 are threshold voltages and V 2 > 0 . When V falls outside this range , the displacement current is assumed to persist for a time τ 1 , 2 reflecting the time for the system to change conformational states and for cation transfer to take place . The displacement current is taken to be ( 1 ) where v + = ( V – V 1 ) / V when V > V 1 , v – = ( | V | – V 2 ) / V 2 when V < – V 2 , and t ± = [ t – t ( V 1 , 2 ) ] / τ 1 , 2 is the normalized time period after the voltage crosses the threshold value in either the positive or the negative direction . We take f ( v ) to peak for a finite v , in this case using the simple form f ~ v exp [ – v ] Θ ( v ) , ( 2 ) where Θ ( v ) is the unit step function . In order to reflect the time required for conformational changes and cation transfer to take place and to avoid discontinuities , the function g ( t ± ) is taken to be g ~ { 1 – cos [ 2 π t ± ] } Θ ( t ± ) Θ ( 1 – t ± ) . ( 3 ) Finally , taking the voltage V ( t ) = V 0 sin ω t to be sinusoidal , the displacement current I ( t ) is determined using the above expres­ sions , and the various Fourier components of the current response are computed . We find that the dc current and all even harmonics are zero in this model , as expected , when the junction is perfectly symmet­ ric , i . e . , when V 1 = V 2 and τ 1 = τ 2 . However , the theoretical third harmonic response is found to be nonvanishing , exhibiting a threshold voltage in its amplitude dependence . We obtain theo­ retical plots ( see Ref . 20 ) qualitatively consistent with the experimental data shown in Figs . 2 and 3 . We also find that the predicted second harmonic response increases significantly as the asymmetry in time scales increases , suggesting that such an asymmetry is sufficient for an ac field to drive ion transport through a membrane pump . Similarly , asymmetry in threshold voltages , V 1 and V 2 , enables an ac field to induce both a second harmonic response and a dc current in our model . These results suggest that the production of ATP from glucose makes the pump more asymmetric by enabling ATP induced ion transport along a preferred direction . Conclusion The ability to noninvasively monitor active physiological processes in vivo is of potential importance for biophysics , bio­ medicine , and pharmaceutical development . For example , pro­ ton pump inhibitors are widely employed to treat acid reflux disease and related stomach disorders . In addition , we have recently observed , in the nonlinear harmonic responses at kilo­ hertz frequencies of whole cells , mitochondria , and chloroplas­ ts , evidence that the technique can monitor internal metabolic events that would be extremely difficult to study using invasive ( e . g . , patch clamp ) methods . These results are discussed in a companion report . ( See p . 116 . ) Clearly , this topic constitutes a potentially exciting field of study in biophysics . References 1 H . P . Schwan , “Electrical Properties of Tissue and Cell Suspensions , ” in Advances in Biological and Medical Physics , Vol . 5 , Eds . J . H . Lawrence and C . A . Tobias , N . Y . : Academic P , 1957 . 147 - 209 . 2 C . Grosse and H . P . Schwan , “Cellular Membrane Potentials Induced by Alternating Fields , ” Biophys . J . 63 ( 1992 ) : 1632 - 42 . 3 M . E . Van Der Rest , A . H . Kamminga , A . Nakano , Y . Anraku , B . Poolman , and W . N . Konings , “The Plasma Membrane of Saccharomyces cerevisiae : Structure , Function , and Biogenesis , ” Microbiol . Rev . 59 . 2 ( 1995 ) : 304 - 22 . 4 A . M . Woodward , A . Jones , X . - Z . Zhang , J . J . Rowland , and D . B . Kell , “Rapid and Non - Invasive Quantification of Metabolic Substrates in Biological Cell Suspensions Using Nonlinear Dielectric Spectroscopy with Multivariate Calibration and Artificial Neural Networks . Principles and Applications , ” Bioelectrochem . Bioenerg . 40 ( 1996 ) : 99 - 132 . 5 T . Y . Tsong and R . D . Astumian , “Absorption and Conversion of Electric Field Energy by Membrane Bound ATPases , ” Bioelectrochem . Bioenerg . 15 ( 1986 ) : 457 - 476 . 6 R . D . Astumian and I . Derényi , “Fluctuation Driven Transport and Models of Molecular Motors and Pumps , ” Eur . Biophys . J . 27 ( 1998 ) : 474 - 89 . 7 A . M . Woodward and D . B . Kell , “On the Nonlinear Dielectric Properties of Biological Systems : Saccharomyces cerevisiae , ” Bioelectrochem . & Bioenergetics 24 ( 1990 ) : 83 - 100 . 8 C . L . Davey , H . M . Davey , and D . B . Kell , “On the Dielectric 78 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Properties of Cell Suspensions at 19 P . Supply , A . Wach , and A . High Volume Fractions , ” Goffeau , “Enzymatic Properties Bioelectrochem . & Bioenergetics of the PMA2 Plasma Membrane­ 28 ( 1992 ) : 319 - 30 . Bound H ( + ) - ATPase of 9 W . Kühlbrandt , “Biology , Saccharomyces Cerevisiae , ” J . Structure , and Mechanism of P - Biol . Chem . 298 ( 1993 ) : 19753­ type ATPases , ” Nat . Rev . Mol . 59 . Cell Biol . 5 ( 2004 ) : 282 - 95 . 20 D . Nawarathna , J . H . Miller , 10 G . Scarborough , “Molecular Jr . , J . R . Claycomb , G . Cardenas , Mechanism of the P - type and D . Warmflash , “Harmonic ATPases , ” J . Bioenerg . Responce of Cellular Membrane Biomemb . 34 ( 2002 ) : 235 - 50 . Pumps to Low Frequency 11 A . M . Woodward and D . B . Electric Fields , ” Physical Kell , “Confirmation Using Review Lett . 95 ( 2005 ) : Mutant Strains that the 158103 – 1 - 4 Membrane - Bound H + - ATPase is the Major Source of Nonlinear Publications Dielectricity in Saccharomyces Miller , J . H . , Jr . , D . Nawarathna , cerevisiae , ” FEMS Microbiol . D . Warmflash , F . A . Pereira , and Lett . 84 ( 1991 ) : 91 - 96 . W . E . Brownell . “Dielectric 12 T . Y . Tsong and R . D . Properties of Yeast Cells Astumian , “How Transport Expressed with the Motor ATPases Use Electric Field Protein Prestin , ” J . Biol . Phys . Energy , ” Annu . Rev . Physiol . 50 31 . 3 - 4 ( 2005 ) : 465 - 75 . ( 1988 ) : 273 - 90 . Miller , J . H . , Jr . , D . Nawarathna , 13 C . Toyoshima , M . Nakasako , V . Vajrala , J . Gardner , and W . R . H . Nomura , and H . Ogawa , SPECTROSCOPY—Dr . John Miller is holding a liquid Widger . “Electromagnetic “Crystal Structure of the sample cell for dielectric spectroscopy measurements . Probes of Molecular Motors in Calcium Pump of Sarcoplasmic the Electron Transport Chains of Reticulum at 2 . 6 Å Resolution , ” Nature 405 ( 2000 ) : 647 - 55 . Mitochondria and Chloroplasts , ” Journal de Physique IV 14 R . D . Astumian , “Adiabatic Pumping Mechanism for Ion ( France ) 131 ( 2005 ) : 363 - 66 . Motive ATPases , ” Phys . Rev . Lett . 91 ( 2003 ) : 118102 – 1 - 4 . Nawarathna , D . , J . H . Miller , Jr . , J . R . Claycomb , G . Cardenas , 15 A . W . Woodward , E . A . Davies , S . Denyer , C . Olliff , and D . and D . Warmflash . “Harmonic Response of Cellular B . Kell , “Non - Linear Dielectric Spectroscopy : Antifouling and Membrane Pumps to Low Frequency Electric Fields , ” Phys . Stabilisation of Electrodes by a Polymer Coating , ” Rev . Lett . 95 ( 2005 ) : 158103 – 1 - 4 . Biolelectrochemistry 51 ( 2000 ) : 13 - 20 . 16 E . T . McAdams , A . Lackermeier , J . A . McLaughlin , D . Presentations Macken , and J . Jossinet , “The Linear and Non - Linear See companion reports “Martian Soil Biosensors Based on Electrical Properties of the Electrode - Electrolyte Interface , ” Dielectric Spectroscopy” and “Low - Frequency Dielectric Biosensors & Bioelectronics 10 . 1 - 2 ( 1995 ) : 67 - 74 . Spectroscopy of Martian Soil Samples . ” 17 D . Nawarathna , J . R . Claycomb , J . H . Miller , Jr . , and M . J . Benedik , “Nonlinear Dielectric Spectroscopy of Live Cells Funding and Proposals Using Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices , ” Appl . Proposals are under development for submission in 2006 . Phys . Lett . 86 ( 2004 ) : 023902 - 1 - 3 18 F . Fernandez - Belda , M . I . Fortea , and F . Soler , “Testing the Versatility of the Sarcoplasmic Reticulum Ca 2 + - ATPase Reaction Cycle when p - Nitrophenyl Phosphate Is the Substrate , ” J . Biol . Chem . 276 . 11 ( 2001 ) 7998 - 8004 . NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 79 Initiating the Detector Deployment for a Currently Planned NASA Accelerator Measurement Lawrence S . Pinsky Abstract—Investigators initiated critical efforts for the development of a proposal to NASA in response to NRA NNH042UU005N , which has been approved and for which funding is currently pending . Supported in part by ISSO funding , data were taken with C , Si , and Fe beams of 3 , 5 , and 10 GeV / A , each incident on C , Al , Fe , and Cu elemental targets . Preliminary results from the ongoing analysis of data are reported here . Seven grants totaling more that $ 2 , 400 , 000 have been awarded from proposals whose writing was enabled , in part , by current and prior ISSO support . In addition , ISSO support has resulted in the publication of more than 35 papers and presentations worldwide . I SSO FUNDING ENABLED D R . Lawrence S . Pinsky to initiate critical efforts that are the sub­ ject of funding now pending on a proposal submitted to NASA in response to NRA NNH04ZNH005N . This ISSO mini - grant enabled Dr . Pinsky to participate in measurements at the Alternating Gradient Synchrotron ( AGS ) facility in New York this past July ( 2005 ) by employing existing UH detectors . The increased measurement capability that the UH detectors offered was Dr . Lawrence S . Pinsky essential to the efficient use of the accelerator beam time . Data obtained will significantly expedite the development of the var­ ious transport codes . NASA created several physics - related consortia under the general moniker of Space Radiation Shielding Consortia . Two of these consortia are specifically charged with the measure­ ment and modeling of the heavy ion cross sections needed to simulate the transport of the constituents of the Space Radiation environment through shielding materials . Dr . Pinsky is a mem­ ber of the “Modeling” Consortium . Past ISSO funding has enabled Dr . Pinsky to successfully argue that NASA needs to support measurements of various heavy - ion interactions over a range of energies that span the region around 5 GeV / A . The essential problem for NASA in its quest to be able to accurately predict the nature of the radiation field within spacecraft and on the lunar and planetary surfaces is the need to accurately model any nucleus - nucleus collision over the range of all energies likely to be encountered in the space environment because of the presence of every element of the periodic table in the Galactic Cosmic Ray ( GCR ) spectrum . The problem is made somewhat more tractable by the fact that the abundance of all elements heavier than iron ( Fe ) is min­ imal . Even so , the number of potential target and projectile com­ binations is very large , more so when coupled with the need to model those interactions over the energy range from the thresh­ old for such reactions below 100 MeV / A up to about 10 GeV / A . The steepness of the energy spectrum is sufficient to make events above that energy statistically less important . The difficulty is that this range of energies spans the most important changes in relevant physics processes . At the lower limit , non - relativistic approximations remain valid ; near the upper limit , however , relativistic effects dominate . Over the same energy range , the relative importance of nuclear structure changes from a dominating effect at the lower energies to one of less importance simply because the total energy of each con­ stituent dominates the nuclear energy levels as the incident ener­ gy rises . Finally , this is also the energy range where the effects of major inelastic channels , such as the advent of meson produc­ tion and its resonant behavior , enter the picture and must be included in the models . Given these practical difficulties , it is not surprising that no acceptable general model of these interactions has been pro­ duced . In fact , the approach has been to develop multiple mod­ els , each of which is focused on representing the details of spe­ cific portions of the energy range . Current models employed by researchers to model this region have a crossover now arbitrar­ ily set to occur at 5 GeV / A . Unfortunately , the detailed kind of data on hand needed to develop and benchmark such models is also unfortunately very limited . To that end , NASA has seen fit to create a Space Radiation Shielding Measurement Consortium to make the needed measurements . That consortium is led by a 80 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA group from the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory ( LBL ) headed by Dr . Jack Miller . In the past , LBL researchers have focused on measurements at energies well below the 5 GeV / A region . Based in part on advocacy by Dr . Pinsky , NASA decided to pro­ vide beam time this past summer ( 2005 ) at the AGS facility at BNL to make a series of measurements at 3 , 5 , and 10 GeV / A . While this was a welcome step , the detectors that the BNL group had on hand were , unfortunately , quite limited , and there was no time for them to acquire more . The AGS is a unique facility in terms of its ability to deliver heavy - ion beams at these energies . Immediately after the opportunity this past summer , the machine with its experimental floor was to have entered a long , pre - planned period of rebuilding and reconfiguration . As such , Dr . Edward V . Hungerford , UH professor of physics , offered the use of some of his existing Si - Strip Detectors ( SSDs ) and proposed deploying these additional detectors in order to enhance the information that was to be taken during these AGS measurements . That offer was gratefully accepted by NASA and funding provided to support that effort under NRA NNH042UU005N . That proposal has been approved , but fund­ ing plans are still pending while NASA is currently engaged in a reorganization . Experimental Setup at the AGS All detectors were deployed in the horizontal laboratory plane with the UH detectors at about 50 cm downstream of the target and the ZDDS another 50 cm behind them . The neutron detec­ tors were arranged at a number of forward angles as well one backward angle at varying distances up to ~ 10 m downstream of the target . There was a single 1 cm 2 scintillator upstream of the target to define the beam location and acceptance . In order to address this discrepancy in an energy regime of importance to the assessment of dose effects from space radia­ tion , as noted previously , NASA sponsored the measurement of the reactions from heavy ion beams incident on thin elemental targets . Because of the planned imminent shutdown of the AGS experimental floor for an extensive and extended reconfigura­ tion program , NASA elected to have the measurement per­ formed with the detector systems that were readily on hand . As depicted in Fig . 1 , these included small scintillators and mono­ lithic Si detectors supplied by the LBL Group for use along the beam - line in the forward direction to measure the charge of the forward - going fragments with good resolution . These detector elements were deployed with respect to the target so as to cover the forward - most direction within three degrees of the beam - line . In addition , that group supplied five individual neutron detector systems , which were deployed in the horizontal lab frame at a variety of scattering angle locations in both forward and backward angles . The MSFC Group supplied the Zero - Degree Detector System ( ZDDS ) , which in this application is a bit of a misnomer . This detector consisted of an array of sixteen 8 cm × 8 cm Si pad detectors configured in a double layer with eight squares in each layer arranged in a 3 - by - 3 square pattern with the central square vacant to allow the beam particles to pass through . This detec­ tor system also included its own masking scintillator for trigger purposes . Each 8 cm × 8 cm square was itself further subdivid - Figure 1 . Detector Layout for AGS Measurements ed into sixty - four 1 cm × 1 cm individually read - out pads . The charge resolution of each pad was sufficient to resolve individ­ ual elements from protons through at least Fe . This detector sys­ tem was deployed sufficiently far downstream of the LBL beam - line detectors ( ~ 1 m downstream of the target ) so that the ZDDS central hole was just masked by the LBL detector accept­ ance , covering the laboratory scattering angle from ~ 3 degrees through ~ 9 degrees . Finally , the University of Houston Group provided eight 5 cm × 8 cm Si strip detectors , each with 144 strips running parallel to the 5 cm side . These were arranged into staggered arcs of four detectors each at ~ 50 cm downstream of the target . The inner edge of each arc began at ~ 3 degrees with the corresponding outer edge reaching ~ 45 degrees . These detectors were read - out with TDCs only , so that no charge information short of thresh­ old acceptance was available . Thus , only time and location information is available from this research . Because of a short­ age of TDC modules , the outer three detectors in each arc were multiplexed with each three successive contiguous channels being ganged together . The innermost detector in each arc had each individual strip read - out . The location of the arcs caused them to overlap the lateral acceptance of the ZDDS detector system so that the latter could be used to check the efficiency of the Si strip detectors as a function of particle charge . Given the separate nature of each system , each has its own data acquisition system . The ZDDS , having had its read - out electronics designed for balloon - flight payloads , had a very low maximum data rate ( ~ 100 Hz ) . LBL detectors were limited by their electronics to a maximum rate of several thousand Hz as a practical matter due to dead - time considerations . The UH detec­ tors were the fastest with an ability to sustain well upwards of 10 - 100 KHz continuously , with the added capability of multi - hit NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 81 Figure 2 . Raw data are shown in black for 5 GeV / A Si inci - dent on an Fe target . The FLUKA results , arbitrarily normal - ized , are shown in blue . Some noisy channels are clearly vis - ible and can be removed during the analysis . TDCs with 10 ns resolution during their active time . To simpli­ fy matters , LBL Detectors were set to trigger on each beam par­ ticle ( some runs were taken with this trigger pre - scaled to con­ trol dead - time effects on the ZDDS and neutron triggers ) . The existence of either a Neutron trigger or a ZDDS trigger was noted in scalars in both the LBL and UH read - out sequences . Two separate scalers were used in each system for synchroniza­ tion purposes . One scaler was reset at the beginning of each beam spill and the other only at the beginning of each run . A 1 KHz clock was fed to each scaler ; the run scaler also had a chan­ nel incremented at the beginning of each spill . Neutron and ZDDS triggers were noted in both scalers as well . Preliminary Results from the July Run Data were taken for common fixed beam rigidities at each nomi­ nal beam setting . In sequence , we took data at ~ 5 GeV / A , then at ~ 10 GeV / A , followed by the data at ~ 3 GeV / A . At each energy setting , a sequence of three different beams was supplied : C , Si , and Fe . Finally , the same sequence of elemental target materials was employed for each beam energy / species combination , and their thicknesses were adjusted to maintain ~ 0 . 5 interaction lengths in each case . The elemental targets consisted of C , Al , Fe , and Cu . These were chosen to provide both symmetric and asym­ metric reactions in a collection that would allow evaluation of the kinematic inverse of as many of the interactions as possible . Approximately 1 . 5 million beam triggers were taken at each beam energy / beam species / target species combination . In addi­ tion to these elemental targets , data were taken for each combina­ tion with several compound thick targets including polyethylene . This report provides only preliminary results from the initial quick - look analysis of the UH Si strip detectors . The analysis is ongoing and will eventually include the full exclusive event reconstruction of the data from all four detector systems . Figure 2 shows a plot of raw hits from the UH Si strip detec­ tors as a function of the scattering angle , as measured from the center of the target . Both the left and right detector arrays are shown separately . Also superimposed on the raw data is an arbi­ trarily normalized prediction from the current version of FLUKA . This simulation was done using FLUKA in its stan­ dard configuration wherein both of the event generators ( RQMD & DPMJET3 ) in the Monte Carlo runs were used as mutually exclusive alternatives randomly selected using a linear crossover scheme stretched over the 4 - 6 GeV / A range . In this scheme , RQMD starts out at 4 GeV / A being used 100 % of the time , linearly decreasing in probability to 0 % at 6 GeV / A , with DPMJET3 providing the opposite . Thus , in an event where a fragmentation of the initial beam particle occurs in the target and one or more of the fragments also has a subsequent interac­ tion , the first may have been evolved using one of the event gen­ erators with the subsequent interaction using the other being evident . Because these data do not yet include any timing cuts , some of the noise may be removable . The asymmetry is due to a slight offset in the detector . It is clear from the data in Fig . 2 that the Si - strip detectors were offset slightly to one side with respect to the beam centerline , as defined by the beam - trigger scintillator . The Monte Carlo was arbitrarily offset iteratively to approximate the asymmetry in the data . It is clear that the current event generators do a reasonable job of reproducing this preliminary angular distribution in shape , but with some slight observable differences . It is also clear that at least one of the cards was noisy . It is hoped that once the TDC information is used to cut the data , this noise will be reduced . From fundamental physics we know that the data must be symmetric , and , as such , we can use the combi­ nation of both sides to obtain a corrected angular distribution . We look forward to being able to produce separate angular distribu­ tions for selected fragmentation final states . Publications Pinsky , L . S . , et al . “FLUKA Status and Results from the High Energy AGS July Run , ” IEEE Proc . , of the Aerospace Conf . , Big Sky , MT , March , 2006 . ( To be published . ) Presentations Pinsky , L . S . , et al . “FLUKA Status and Preliminary Results from the High Energy AGS July Run , ” Workshop on Radiation Monitoring on the Intl . Space Station ( WRMISS­ 2005 ) , Chiba , Japan , Sept . 7 – 9 , 2005 . Funding and Proposals “Measurements of Fragmentation Cross Sections and Particle Spectra For Galactic Cosmic Ray - Like Nuclei between 3 and 10 GeV / nucleon at the BNL AGS , ” NASA , UH : $ 100 , 000 . ( Submitted . ) “Radiation Environment Model for the Inner Heliosphere , ” NASA , UH : $ 554 , 000 . ( Submitted . ) “Space Radiation Shielding , ” NASA , 2003 – 2006 , $ 687 , 000 . Thesis Elkhayari , E . “Measurement of Elemental Cross Sections for C , Si , and Fe at 3 , 5 , and 10 GeV / A , ” UH , Jan . 2005 – present . 82 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Science and Invention in Literature— Divergent Views of Daniel Defoe and Jonathan Swift Irving N . Rothman Abstract—The seventeenth and eighteenth centuries saw remarkable advances in science and technol­ ogy in the Copernican Revolution . Roger Bacon and John Locke gave new meaning to individual inves­ tigation and objective analysis of objects of perception . Science fostered the development of the tele­ scope to discover the truths of celestial bodies ; the invention of the microscope enabled researchers to delve into the structure and composition of natural organisms . Daniel Defoe , world - renowned as the author of Robinson Crusoe ( 1719 ) , wrote A General History of Discoveries and Improvements in Useful Arts ( Commerce , Navigation , and Plantation ) ( 1727 ) where he supported progress and invention . Jonathan Swift , author of Gulliver’s Travels ( 1726 ) , did not understand theoretical science and attacked modern invention in his satire . Philosophical Context T HE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY brought forth the inventions of the telescope and the microscope that were to confirm Baconian theoretics . The eigh­ teenth century saw the confirma­ tion of Lockean rationalistic prag­ matics . Both centuries advanced the hypotheses of Copernicus ( 1473 – 1543 ) who revolutionized world thought by the reduction of Earth from its centripetal seat in the Ptolemaic universe with the Photo by Debbie Bush earth as the center of the universe Dr . Irving N . Rothman to its orbital reductive as one among many planets circling the Sun . 1 Marjorie Nicolson in a series of essays from 1935 to 1940 provided the pathway to our understanding of these momentous changes in perception , imagination , and invention . 2 The rational controlled science . Circumstances , then , offered perceptions of space other than that of singular Man on an orbiting planet , unique though he might be , but now one amongst many . In the universal scheme , the Earth owned its special orbit and could perform to its poten­ tial in that single orbit—following the theory of plenitude , which allowed full expression and development within a single and limited sphere of influence—just as others in distant plan­ ets with like discrimination might project their own worlds . Daniel Defoe wrote that “Copernicus no sooner set up his Astronomical Lectures at Rome , but all the Virtuosi of that Age flockt to him , till…he taught them to be Wiser than himself , and they improv’d upon his schemes” in such areas as geography and arithmetic . 3 Thus , Francis Godwin’s narrative of Domingo Gonsales’ space flight in The Man in the Moon ( 1638 ) , Cyrano de Bergerac’s Histoire Comique des Etats et Empires de la Lune et due Soleil ( A Comical History of the States and Empires of the Sun and the Moon ) ( 1656 ) , Aphra Behn’s play The Emperor of the Moon ( 1687 ) , and Daniel Defoe’s fictional Consolidator ( 1704 ) , depicting the Man in the Moon , now had Galileo’s report of earth - like features as authority for their lunar inhabi­ tants . Theirs was a voice substantiated by scientific demonstra­ tion unlike primitive classical works such as Lucian’s Dialogue of Icaromenippus ( ca . A . D . 125 – 190 ) describing an ancient voy­ age to the Moon , which could only contemplate , but not actual­ ly see , earthly configurations in space . Baconian Empiricism The nature and context of the scientific revolution may be found in The Advancement of Learning ( 1605 ) by Francis Bacon ( 1561 – 1626 ) . Vickers identifies Bacon as the spirit of applied science : “Nearly everything that Bacon advocated concerning the advancement of learning was actuated by his belief that sci­ entific pursuits should lead to technological progress . ” 4 Bacon’s philosophical direction was to use scientific knowledge ( induc­ tive or deductive ) to improve mankind by achieving practical goals : “True and fruitful Natural Philosophy , ” he wrote , “has a double scale or ladder , ascendent and descendent , ascending from experiments to axioms and descending from axioms to the invention of new experiments . ” 5 Experimentation leads to the development of new inventions . Bacon seeks “‘a line and race of inventions that may in some degree subdue and overcome the necessities and miseries of humanity . ’” 6 Free access to new NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 83 ideas , novel experiments , and labor - saving or life - saving inven­ tions characterized the work of the Royal Society founded in 1660 and predicated upon meetings as early as 1645 of scientists engaged in the study of natural and experimental philosophy . 7 John Locke ( 1632 – 1704 ) in his Essay on Human Understanding ( 1690 ) 8 sought to understand the individuating capability of the mind as a perceptive organ . In Locke’s episte­ mology , humans identified their cosmos by witnessing each object of the primary imagination in multiple detail—by its shape , contour , gravity , passivity , weight , and extension . The multiplicity of detail translates into an “idea”—a chair , a win­ dow , a power plant—and humans give names to these ideas to enable communication . One abstracts these names into symbols and from the intellectual level of symbolization achieves notions that enable the employ of the secondary imagination— the ability to conceive spatially . Thus , researchers are able to develop hybrid automobile engines and space vehicles . Whether to look into the Heavens or to study the fundamental nature of the earth , seventeenth - century scientists nurtured the develop­ ment of our most important scientific inventions , the telescope and the microscope . Invention Nicolson finds classic reports of telescopic glasses to be primi­ tive in concept and design . The telescope , as we know it today , seemed to have arrived in 1608—with claims for its invention from scientists in Holland , Germany , France , and Italy . The modernism of the instrument lay in its design and use by Galileo Galilei ( 1564 – 1642 ) who reported the construction of the advanced instrument on August 29 , 1609 , that was to bring about “discoveries which were to transform human imagina - tion . ” 9 It may be an inexplicable curiosity to discover that two of the greatest inquiring and inventive minds of the world were born in the same year , 1564 , Galileo and William Shakespeare ( 1564 – 1616 ) . Or it may be reasonable to assert that they were born into a world that offered discoveries of such moment as to encourage imaginative expression . The invention of the microscope is a study of the history of the perception of small living creatures . Nicolson attributes to Robert Hooke ( 1635 – 1703 ) primary authority in England for the development of the microscope because of his observations on leeches and mould reported to a meeting of the Royal Society on April 22 , 1663 , and for his observations of a female gnat on May 6 ; also , his study of the head of an ant on May 20 , 1663 . 10 Hooke received authorization to publish his Micrographia in 1664 . 11 Nicolson attributes to the Dutchman Antony van Leeuwenhoek ( 1632 – 1723 ) , a manufacturer of microscopes and designer of microscope lenses , the most impressive and advanced uses of the microscope . In particular , Leeuwenhoek initiated modern biological research and comprehended medical applications with his discovery of “little animals” in water and his study of intestinal protozoa , reported in his “Letter on Protozoa” in 1676 . 12 Daniel Defoe and Jonathan Swift Two eighteenth - century authors demonstrate how differently writers understood the scientific revolution . Daniel Defoe , world - renowned as the author of Robinson Crusoe ( 1719 ) , wrote A General History of Discoveries and Improvements in Useful Arts ( 1727 ) where he lauded progress and invention in commerce , navigation , and agriculture . Jonathan Swift , author of Gulliver’s Travels ( 1726 ) , did not understand theoretical sci­ ence and attacked modern invention in his satire . Daniel Defoe published An Essay on Projects in 1697 which comments on new technology—fire engines , methods of casting guns from metal and boring them for greater accuracy , and the construction of water mills . A tradesman , himself , who went bankrupt in the brick - making industry and found himself in debt after trying to sell the musk of civet cats for perfume , Defoe reviews a number of innovations in business and industry in his General History of Discoveries and Improvements in Useful Arts ( 1727 ) . 13 This work is important as a celebration of new invention . Defoe offers to “show some Schemes of Improvement and some Discoveries , well worth the undertaking of those who have the most enterprising Genius ; ” ( 5 ) . He draws a distinction between ships that were brought to the Siege of Troy—”large open Boats , merely made for transporting their Soldiers , in the calm Weather channels of the Aegean Seas”— and modern ships designed with sophisticated equipment for all - weather sailing : sails , masts , rigging , anchors , rudders , and cables ( 53 ) . Defoe traces the improvement of military firepow­ er from Match - locks to Musquets ( 229 ) and notes improve­ ments in cannon such as mortars , howitzers , and hand grenades—“all perfectly new” ( 231 ) . He contrasts the world of the twelfth century with enterprise in his own lifetime—”They had Philosophy without Experiment , ” he wrote ( 233 ) . Voyagers of the past , he notes , had no compasses , no telescopes , no printing presses . Theirs was a world of “Chirugery [ surgery ] without Anatomy , and Physicians without the Materia Medica … [ who ] cur’d Agues without” modern medicines ( 234 ) . He celebrates the development of the magnet ( 250 - 63 ) . To the invention of the compass he attributes the growth of exploration . He would have been impressed but not surprised at man’s ability to navigate space as with the Stardust mission that collected materials from the tail of a comet during a seven - year journey which had a spacecraft travel 3 bil­ lion miles and return to Earth in January 2006 . 14 He devotes a number of chapters to commercial development in the Americas with “Discoveries in the Bay of St . Laurence , the Rivers of Canada and Mississipi , and…the Inland part of North America ” ( 301 ) resulting in “Furs from the Land , and Fish from the Sea , ” enriching the nations from whence came the explorers and the settlers . Daniel Defoe celebrates exploration , innovation , invention , and progress . On the other hand , Jonathan Swift ridicules modern science in Gulliver’s Travels . His characterization of scientific research in the Academy of Lagado maximizes his satire on science . Swift was not unfamiliar with research being conducted in the Royal Society , for he visited Gresham College on December 13 , 1710 . He read The Philosophical Transactions of the Society . Indications are that all or most of the experiments he ridicules may have had some analogue in ongoing research in laborato­ ries in London and Oxford . 15 In Book III , Gulliver meets a num­ ber of scientists in the Academy of Lagado who are engaged in 84 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 85 the most improbable of experi - ments . One seeks to extract food from excrement and restore it to its original state . 16 Another has spent eight years extracting sun - beams from cucumbers trying to store them in hermetically sealed vials so that he can harness the warmth of the sun in “raw inclement Summers” ( 151 ) . 17 He anticipates needing another eight years to complete his task . Modern Applications Transforming human waste Swift ridiculed these experi - ments because he had neither the scientific knowledge nor the pre - science to understand needs of the twenty - first century . Both experiments have been subjects of research in the twentieth cen - tury and are yet essential in achieving national goals for energy conservation and space research . In Gulliver’s Travels , the scientist conducting research in excrement receives one barrel per week of human ordure . His task is to separate “the Gall , mak - ing the Odour exhale , and scum - ming off the Saliva” ( 152 ) . Gulliver is offended by the stench of this scientist who embraces him , having had few occasions to Figure 1 . Gulliver meets the scientist trying to extract food from human excrement . ( Illustration by Luis Quintanilla , in Jonathan Swift , Gulliver’s Travels , introd . Jacques Barzun . N . Y . : Crown Publishers , 1947 , p . 205 ) . FROM EXCREMENT TO FOOD— ( Above ) The CELSS Concept with its plant growth unit , in Lunar Base Agriculture , p . 146 . ( Below ) The CELSS Initial Reference Conﬁguration , in The Lunar Base Handbook , p . 408 . SOLAR ENERGY PLANT—The Solar Power Plant Design Concept for the Southern California Edison Facility in Barstow , California . The plant was a cooperative effort of McDonnell Douglas , the UH Energy Laboratory , the California utility , and the U . S . Department of Energy . ( Energy Laboratory Newsletter 1 . 3 [ 1979 ] : 6 . ) welcome visitors during the course of his research . The problem is germane to NASA’s plans to establish colonies of human beings on the Moon and Mars . NASA estimates that “on a two - year trip to Mars , a crew of six humans will generate more than six tons of solid organic waste—much of it feces . ” 18 NASA - JSC and UH researchers are dealing with efforts to transfer the nutrients of human waste into beds that will grow crops for space populations . They have been long engaged in problems of waste utilization through the CELSS Project ( Controlled Ecological Life Support System ) . The CELSS con­ cept has the crew producing human waste ( urine and feces ) that is delivered to a physico - chemical waste processing system that extracts nutrients necessary for the growth of edible plants . The processed waste is next fed to a plant growth unit for the produc­ tion of food . The concept has been refined into Bioregenerative Life Support Systems ( BLSS ) The cycle is completed when the astronauts sit to a meal that includes plants grown through the process . 19 Swift’s isolated scientist had not yet developed the pro­ cessing system for separating waste from its nutrients . New technology will treat human waste to provide for pure drinking water , fertilizer , and electricity . Dr . Bruce Rittman , a professor and NASA Principal Investigator at Northwestern University , is currently developing a membrane microbial fuel cell to generate electricity that will obtain its electrons from organic waste . 20 Collecting sunbeams from cucumbers The projector at the Academy of Lagado who seeks to store sun­ beams from cucumbers in glass vials could not have envisioned thermal storage technology developed at the University of Houston . He was , however , well aware of three requisites— ( 1 ) the use of the sun as a source of energy , ( 2 ) a process for collect­ ing the sun’s energy , and ( 3 ) a method of storage . In 1969 - 1970 , physicist Dr . Alvin F . Hildebrandt and his colleagues developed their methodology for collecting and converting the energy of the sun on earth . By 1974 , Hildebrandt and Dr . Lorin Vant - Hull , UH physicists , had conceptualized and designed a Tower Top Point Focus Solar Energy Collector . In 1988 , Dr . Michel Izygon , French adjunct professor and computer software specialist , joined Hildebrandt and Vant - Hull in the Energy Laboratory to perfect heliostat controls and to develop more sophisticated technology for the storage of thermal energy so that the plant could operate at night or when sunshine was minimal . 21 In 1976 , H . William Prengle , Jr . , of the Chemical Engineering Department and colleagues developed a chemical storage sys­ tem utilizing a cycle based on the decomposition of ammonium hydrogen sulfate ( AHS ) to water , ammonia , and sulfur triox - ide . 22 By 1985 , an experimental facility—10 - Mwe Solar I— based upon the UH design was built at Barstow , California , con­ stituting an array of heliostats ( mirrors ) which collected the sun’s rays ( sunbeams ) and reflected them upon a central receiv­ er set on a 330 m tower . The central receiver was later com­ prised of heat pipes containing liquid sodium “for absorbing and conveying the collected solar energy . ” 23 UH scientists did not collect sunbeams from cucumbers ; theirs was a four - point system : “ ( 1 ) a solar concentrator which focuses solar energy on the heat pipe ; ( 2 ) the heat pipe with a selective optical coating ; ( 3 ) a heat - transfer loop connecting the heat pipe to a thermal storage unit ; and ( 4 ) a thermal storage unit which receives thermal energy from the transfer loop and releas­ es it to the power cycle working fluid , ” i . e . , to a generating plant . 24 The initial collection system consisted of designed heliostats ( mirrors on pedestals ) that included a sophisticated set of azimuth controls to align the heliostat along the sun’s passage . Jonathan Swift designed his projectors for the satirical pur­ pose of ridiculing the narrow focus and impossible aspirations of scientific experimentation—one collected human waste to restore its food value , and another collected sunbeams from cucumbers to retain heat . He would have done better to emulate 86 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA his contemporary , Daniel Defoe , who better understood the nature of invention and technical progress . Endnotes 1 Ptolemy ( Claudius Ptolemæus ) , Greek mathematician , astronomer , and geographer , served during the reigns of Hadrian and Antoninus Pius in Alexandria from A . D . 127 – 141 or 151 ( Liba Chai Taub , Ptolomey’s Universe : The Natural , Philosophical , and Ethical Foundations of Ptolomey’s Astronomy . Chicago : Open Court , 1993 ) . Copernicus ( Nicolaus Koppernigk ) ( 1473 – 1543 ) , Polish astronomer , placed the Sun at the center of celestial bodies of the universe and , overturning Ptolemaic theory , changed the perception of the physical world . A modernist , he anticipated new theories of perception . See Edward Rosen , Copernicus and the Scientific Revolution ( Melabor , Fl . : Krieger , 1984 ) . 2 Marjorie Nicolson , Science and the Imagination ( Ithaca : Cornell UP and London : Oxford UP , 1956 ) ; hereafter cited as Nicolson , Science . This collects her published essays : “The Telescope and Imagination , ” MP 32 ( 1935 ) , 233 - 60 ; “The ‘New Astronomy’ and English Imagination , SP 32 ( 1935 ) : 428 - 62 ; “Kepler , the Somnium , and John Donne” Journal of the History of Ideas 1 ( 1940 ) : 259 - 86 ; “Milton and the Telescope , ” ELH 2 ( 1935 ) : 1 - 32 ; “The Scientific Background of Swift’s Voyage to Laputa , ” Annals of Science 2 ( 1937 ) : 299 - 334 ; and The Microscope and English Imagination . Smith College Studies in Modern Languages ( 1935 ) . See Frederick N . Smith , “Scientific Discourse : Gulliver’s Travels and The Philosophical Transactions , ” in The Genres of Gulliver’s Travels . Ed . Frederick N . Smith . Newark : U of Delaware P and London and Toronto : Associate U Presses , 1990 . 139 - 62 ; Smith does not mention Gulliver’s meeting with the scientist studying methods of extracting food from human excrement . 3 Daniel Defoe , A General History of Discoveries and Improvements , in Useful Arts , Particularly in the Great Branches of Commerce , Navigation , and Plantation , in all Parts of the Known World . . . . To be continued Monthly . Numb . l for October . London : Printed for J . Roberts at the Oxford - Arms , in Warwick Lane . [ 1727 ] , pp . 225 - 26 . 4 Ilse Vickers , Defoe and the New Sciences ( Cambridge : Cambridge UP , 1996 ) , p . 12 . 5 Quoted by Vickers in “The Legacy of Francis Bacon , ” p . 13 , from Francis Bacon , Works , ed . J . Spedding . R . L . Ellis , and D . D . Heath . 14 vols . ( London : 1857 - 74 ) . Great Instauration , 4 : 343 . 6 Quoted by Vickers from Bacon , Works , 4 : 27 . 7 Thomas Sprat , The History of the Royal Society , ed . J . I . cope and H . W . Jones . St . Louis , MO : Publisher , 1959 . 8 John Locke , An Essay Concerning Human Understanding ( 1690 ) , ed . P . H . Nidditch ( Oxford : Oxford UP , 1979 ) . Locke 9 Nicolson , Science , 12 - 13 . 10 Nicolson , Science , 161 - 62 . 11 Nicolson , Science , 163 . 12 Nicolson , Science , 165 - 66 . 13 Daniel Defoe , A General History of Discoveries . See above . 14 Warren Leary , “After 3 Billion Miles , Craft Returns Sunday Bringing Cosmic Dust Older than the Sun , ” The New York Times , Jan . 10 , 2006 , Sec . F , p . 3 . 15 Nicolson , Science , 135 . See , also , Douglas Lane Patey , “Swift’s Satire on ‘Science’ and the Structure of Gulliver’s Travels . ” ELH 59 ( 1991 ) : 809 - 39 and Marjorie Nicolson and Nora Mohler , “The Scientific Background of Swift’s Voyage to Laputa , ” Annals of Science 2 ( 1937 ) : 299 - 334 . 16 Nicolson finds that the passage on excrement may have been borrowed from François Rabelais’ iconoclastic Gargantua and Pantagruel ( 1542 – 1546 ) , in Science 139 . William A . Eddy devotes a section to Rabelais’ influence on Swift in Gulliver’s Travels : A Critical Study ( 1923 ; rpt . N . Y . : Russell & Russell , Inc . , 1963 ) , 57 - 60 . See , also , Norman O . Brown , ” The Excremental Vision . ” Life Against Death : The Psychoanalytical Meaning of History . Middletown , CT : Wesleyan UP , 1959 . 179 - 201 . 17 Jonathan Swift , Gulliver’s Travels , ed . Albert J . Rivero . A Norton Critical Edition . N . Y . and London : W . W . Norton & Company , 2002 . 18 Karen Miller , “Harnessing the Power of Poop , ” May 19 , 2004 . Space . com . Jan . 9 , 2006 , from The Boston Business Journal , Nov . 12 , 2005 , p . 18 . < http : / / www . space . com / businesstechnology / astronaut _ electricity _ 040519 . html > . 19 Maurice M . Avner , “Controlled Ecological Life Support System , ” p . 146 , illus . 11 - 1 , in Lunar Base Agriculture : Soils for Plant Growth , ed . D . W . Ming and D . L . Henninger ( Madison , WI : American Society of Agronomy , Inc . , Crop Science Society of America , Inc . , and Soil Science Society of America , Inc . , 1989 ; also “BLSS” in The Lunar Base Handbook , ed . Peter Eckart . Space Technology Series . N . Y . : McGraw - Hill Companie , Inc . , 1999 , pp . 404 - 08 . 20 B . E . Rittman , M . Hausner , F . Löffler , N . G . Love , G . Muyzer , S . Okabe , D . B . Oerther , J . Peccia , L . Raskin , and M . Wagner , “A Vista for Microbial Ecology and Environmental Biotechnology , ” Env . Sci . & Tech . , Feb . 15 , 2006 , p . 1101 ; see , also , B . E Logan , “Simultaneous Wastewater Treatment and Biological Electricity Generation , ” Water Sci . Technol . 52 . 1 - 2 ( 2005 ) : 31 - 37 . 21 “Solar Energy , ” Van Nostrand’s Scientific Encyclopedia . 5th Edn . Ed . Douglas M . Considine . N . Y . , Cincinnati , London et al : Van Nostrand Reinhold Company , 1976 . 2032 - 33 , 2045 . 22 H . W . Prengle , Jr . , and E . C . - H . Sun , “Operational Chemical Storage Cycle for Utilization of Solar Energy To Produce Heat or Electrical Power , ” Solar Energy 18 ( 1976 ) : 561 ; see , also , H . W . Prengle , Jr . , “Chemical Storage of Solar Energy—The Ammonium Hydrogen Sulfate Cycle , ” Energy Laboratory Newsletter 11 ( 1985 ) : 31 - 33 . 23 Scientific Encyclopedia , 2033 . 24 Prengle , 32 . Grants Research and conference travel , and expenses . Martha Gano Houstoun Research Professor in Literature , UH English Department , 2004 – 2005 , $ 3 , 000 . Limited Grant - in - Aid . Visitation to the Hubbard Collection of Imaginary Voyages in the Special Collections Library of the University of Michigan and to the Trent Defoe Collection at the Boston Public Library . UH , 2005 – 2006 , $ 3 , 000 . Multicultural Literature . RIDF Grant . Development of a course in multicultural literature for Distance Learning . UH , 2005 – 2006 , $ 4 , 000 . “Stylometric Study of the Works of Daniel Defoe , ” Martha Gano Houstoun Foundation , UH English Department , 2005 – 06 , $ 1 , 200 . NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 87 Computational Methods in Non - Smooth Mechanics : Applications to Dry Friction Constrained Motions LieJune Shiau Abstract—Non - smooth mechanical models involving dry friction constrained motion are important in various applications and are essential in the design of high - fidelity software simulation used on the Space Shuttle and the International Space Station . UHCL researchers introduce new friction models implemented with robust , efficient , and accurate simulation methods to address various issues , partic­ ularly with velocities near zero . M OTIVATED BY THE NEED for real - time simulation of elasto - dynamical sys­ tems with friction , UHCL research­ ers consider the main goal of this project to mathematically analyze and numerically simulate the solu­ tion for non - smooth mechanical problems . Special attention is given to ( 1 ) the analysis of those differential equations and inequali­ ties modeling 1 - 3 elasto - dynamical systems with dry friction and ( 2 ) the analysis and study of a family of numerical schemes enhanced with Dr . LieJune Shiau the existence of a friction multiplier . A family of numerical schemes is subsequently engaged in solving the existence of the new friction multiplier and providing for solutions . Methodology Starting modestly , we initially modeled one degree - of - freedom for generalized systems . 4 Since higher degree models give a bet­ ter prediction of system behavior when velocities are near zero , our next step of study is to achieve a higher degree - of - freedom models . The methodology we successfully utilized in the study of one degree - of - freedom models is extended to the study of higher degree - of - freedom models by implementing more sophisticated friction models and computational techniques . Following our initial success on the one degree - of - freedom models , we have been continuously working on the higher degree - of - freedom models . In a previous article , 1 authors , including R . Glowinski and NASA engineers , investigated the use of multiplier techniques for a variety of dynamical systems with friction . We have extended such research by considering a more diverse nature of problems in elasto - dynamical systems . By incorporating inequalities modeling and dry - friction modeling , we can more precisely model the physical behavior of a system , particularly when the velocities are close to zero . We introduced and studied a family of numerical schemes enhanced with the existence of a friction multiplier . Indeed , the results obtained for two degrees - of - freedom models are very positive and were pub - lished 1 , 2 in a refereed journal . In the study of higher degree - of - freedom models , we also observed that the rate of convergence in the computing multiplier tends to grow accordingly . Through further thorough analysis and study by introducing penalty terms on a convex domain , we incorporated the friction part with Newton methodology to acquire a fast rate of convergence for solving the multiplier . The mathematical analysis has proven this promising improvement , and the next step is to carry through the procedure numerically with test problems . Results Our motivation to investigate such problems is driven by two main factors : the applications of such problems and the computa­ tional methodology necessary to solve such problems . Presently , practitioners have to use existing in - house software , which is fun­ damentally inadequate , to model and implement their simulation process . Hence , the research is intended to produce important results that are of great interest to various government agencies , especially NASA . We have published preliminary results of one - degree and two - degree of freedom generalized test systems pro­ posed by NASA engineers with promising results . 1 , 2 We have continued developing and studying more sophisticat­ ed models with more efficient numerical schemes . The results of test problems in two degree of freedom are also very encourag­ ing . The development and analysis of higher number degrees - of - freedom models , typically allowing 10 to 20 degrees - of - free - dom , and a subsequent evolution to beam - based flexible sys - ( Continued on page 96 . ) 88 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Magnetic Microscopy Studies of Magnetotactic Fossils on Martian Meteorite ALH84001 and Related Earthbound Analog Systems Jaroslaw Wosik , John H . Miller , Jr . , David S . McKay , David Warmflash , Maged Kamel , Chinmay Darne , Lian Xue , Li Zhong Abstract—Major objectives of this work are to further develop high frequency techniques for use in non - distractive characterization of magnetite crystals found in Martian meteorites and related earth­ bound simulant analog systems . These techniques are utilized mainly for the complex permittivity , per­ meability , and conductivity characterization of both solid - state and biological samples . Researchers at the University of Houston have made further progress in the development of three characterization tools : ( a ) we extended the frequency range up to mm - wavelengths using novel approaches , including an open confocal resonator technique , ( b ) developed a high - spatial resolution near - field microwave microscopy probe to provide a unique method of characterizing tiny magnetite samples with lateral dimensions of an order of 1 micron , and ( c ) demonstrated that the ferromagnetic resonance technique ( FMR ) can provide a rapid , easy - to - use method for detecting signatures of magnetic components of even very small samples . Tiny super paramagnetic particles used in medicine as magnetic resonance contrast agents were employed for these preliminary studies . M ICROWAVE TECHNIQUES OF material characterization have been used in a large number of nondestructive testing ( NDT ) applications , some of which could potentially be used for astro­ biology studies . In particular , microwave microscopy and related techniques could potentially be used to characterize the magnetite crystals found on Martian mete­ orite ALH84001 , 1 , 2 proposed to be of biological origin because of their unusual structure . Additional , Dr . Jaroslaw Wosik terrestrial applications range from large - scale remote sensing to detection of tumors or plaque in the human body . In general , these techniques can be classified as far - field , for well - defined resonance electromagnetic wave modes , or near - field , where an evanescent electromagnetic field is used . During the last ten years , considerable interest in such techniques has been expressed by the biophysics community . Our group , while working on characterization of magnetic , dielectric , and superconducting materials , has designed and fabri­ cated a variety radio frequency ( rf ) , microwave and mm wave resonators in the frame of several different projects . 3 - 6 These include lambda / 4 miniature resonators for intravascular plaque characterization ; cylindrical TE 011 copper cavities for microwave spectroscopy and Josephson junctions characterization ; normal metal or superconducting enclosure dielectric cavities for mag­ netic , dielectric , and superconducting materials characterization ; coaxial cavities ; split resonators for dielectrics ; and uniquely sen­ sitive Fabre - Perot ( confocal ) resonators for microwave and mm - wave characterization . In all these techniques the sample under investigation was placed at the point of maximum amplitude of the high frequency electric or magnetic fields . In addition , high - quality Q - factor , superconducting resonators enable one to meas­ ure magnetic susceptibility ( for highly insulating samples ) , dielectric permeability , and complex conductivity , depending on characteristics of the sample , by placing the sample inside the res­ onator and using the cavity perturbation technique . Confocal or dielectric resonator techniques are considered far - field techniques , which , while allowing quantitative large area sheet resistance imaging , are limited by wavelength to rel­ atively low resolution ( not smaller than 1 mm ) . Near - field microwave scanning microscopy was originally proposed by Ash and his colleagues in 1972 , when the ability to resolve metallic gratings , metallic images , cracks in planar metallic sur­ faces , and dielectric discontinuities was demonstrated . 7 Spatial resolution as small as λ / 2000 was shown . In 1987 , Gutmann and his colleagues demonstrated the capability of this technique to NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 89 Figure 1 . Normalized E - plane 78 . 163 GHz TEM007 theoreti - cal Ex . It is clear that seven standing half - waves are exited between two confocal mirrors . Red indicates the largest electric ﬁeld values , and blue indicates the smallest electric ﬁeld values . Figure 2 . An example is shown of measurements of anisotropic properties of the sample using a brass mirror W - band resonator . A single crystal sample , 0 . 51 mm thick GaAlO 3 , was selected for measurements of reflection response from the resonator versus electric ﬁeld and mate - rial - axes relative - orientation angle ( changing from 0 degrees to 90 degrees when the E - vector is parallel and per - pendicular to the c - axis , respectively ) . measure also depth profiles dopants with a resolution of a few microns . 8 Currently , because of recent development in near - field microwave microscopy , the resolution better than 1 µ m had already been demonstrated , 9 making microwave NTD very attractive for testing not only the surface of metals and super­ conductors but also other nonmetallic materials as well as bio­ logical samples . In recent years , researchers have published results of biological sample characterization using the microwave and mm - wave technique . It includes , for example , conductivity of DNA double helix measurements . 10 The objective of this work was to modify our confocal , coax­ ial line and split resonator techniques to render them specialized for characterization of magnetic and biological samples . ( See Fig . 1 . ) The ultimate goal of this work is to have both hardware and software used in these techniques modified , optimized , and fully tested for measurements related to astrobiology . Methodology Fabry - Perot Resonator Technique The Fabry - Perot or open resonator technique possesses a unique combination of advantages over the more prevalent closed - cav - ity and parallel - plate resonator methods for materials testing . 11 The focused energy allows raster scanning of the sample surface for which effective resolution can be improved using Fast Fourier Transform techniques . By mechanical translation of the substrate , a scanning open resonator can map surface morphol­ ogy . The open resonator has a relatively sparse mode spectrum . No mode degeneracy , however , at least five to ten distinct W - band ( 75 - 110 GHz ) fundamental modes , can be probed at each mirror separation distance . Open resonators have a particularly useful physical size at W - band frequencies where pillbox cavi­ ties become inconveniently small and wall conductivity losses begin to dominate Q . A final powerful advantage of an open resonator is that the two mirrors can be thermally independent , enabling each to be con­ structed of different metals at different temperatures . For exam­ ple , the planar mirror can be a thin - film HTS at 4 . 2 or 77 K in a windowed cryostat , while the curved mirror can be constructed of a normal metal at room temperature . More importantly , a curved mirror constructed of a low - temperature superconductor , for instance niobium , at 4 . 2 K produces a significant Q increase and greatly enhanced resonator sensitivity at W - band frequencies . Because of the predominantly linear field polarization of TEM 00 q modes , the open resonator is well - suited to diagnose anisotropic dielectrics and conductors . 12 In general , for any open resonator TEM 00 q - mode electric - field vector aligned with a principal axis in the plane of an anisotropic sample ( ε | | aligned , for instance ) , one resonant mode is observed . As the sample is rotated about the resonator longitudinal axis , a second uncoupled mode with the same mode number q appears at a different frequency and grows in intensity as the relative angle increases , while the intensity of the first mode decreases . At an angle of 90 ° from the initial orientation ( ε ⊥ aligned in this instance ) , the first mode will have disappeared completely , and the amplitude of the second mode will be at a maximum . To verify this finding , we measured the unloaded Q and fre­ quency of the brass resonator with a 0 . 51 mm thick NdGaO 3 sub­ strate inserted . In Fig . 2 , confirmation of such behavior is shown . In addition to the useful anisotropic permittivity measurement technique just discussed , it is expected that an open resonator can be used to measure anisotropic properties of biological sam­ ples biased by either electric or magnetic external fields . The sensitivity of this method can be increased even further by replacing a copper enclosure with a superconducting enclosure , while keeping the sample at room temperature . 90 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Microwave Microscopy A probe for a scanning tip microwave microscope ( STMM ) has been developed which achieves micron - level resolution combined with high sensitivity . This device will allow the non - destructive test­ ing and analysis of any surface that needs high spatial resolution impedance charac­ terization . It is already known that STMM has potential applications in non - contact , non - destructive imaging of surface resist - ance / dielectric constant profiles ; screen­ ing of material for desired characteristics including conductivity , superconductivi­ ty , dielectric properties , and ferroelectric­ ity ; ion - implanted wafers and other criti­ cal surfaces ; and the measurement of pro­ tein in microbiology research . The STMM built in our lab probe con­ sists of a high Q - factor transmission line ( with single crystal sapphire dielectric ) lambda / 2 resonator in which a sharp point tip extends over the inner conductor end . Resistivity or permittivity mapping can be made by measuring the reflection or transmission microwave signal from the probe ( Fig . 3b ) . Areas under develop­ ment that will use this design include feedback control of tip and sample dis­ tance and the integration of STMM with an anti - vibration table . The STMM may also be coupled with external electric and magnetic fields . For this project , a computer controlled X - Y scanning station was built with 1 Figure 3 . ( a ) Experimental set - up for near - ﬁeld microwave microscopy . ( b ) The photo shows a prototype of a coaxial transmission line probe that UH researchers designed . Figure 4 . An example of the electromagnetic response of a single dielectric - split resonator to x - y scanning over the whole resonator area with a 0 . 3 cubic mm of metallic particle . Shown are ( a ) the shift of the resonant frequency vs . x - y posi - tion of the scanning station and ( b ) a contour map of the frequency shift . micron step motors . The test of both mechanical parts and soft­ ware was accomplished by imaging a small metal particle x - y scanned inside of a split - dielectric resonator . As a result of measuring shifts of the resonator frequency versus x - y station position , an image of the microwave field distribution was extracted ( Fig . 3 ) . Ferromagnetic Resonance Technique Ferromagnetic resonance , on the other hand , measures the absorption by spin waves of microwaves incident on a magnet­ ic material . Ferromagnetic resonance ( FMR ) is a microwave spectroscopy technique for probing the magnetization of ferro­ magnetic materials . Basics of the FMR methods are very simi­ lar to nuclear magnetic resonance ( NMR ) except that FMR probes the magnetic moment of electrons whereas in NMR the magnetic moment of protons is probed . The basic setup for an FMR experiment is a microwave reso­ nant cavity placed inside an electromagnet . The resonant cavity is designed to work at a fixed frequency . A detector is placed at the end of the cavity to detect microwaves . The magnetic sam­ ple is placed between the poles of the electromagnet , and the dc magnetic field is swept while the absorption of the microwaves is measured . Typically , it is done as a function of angle , temper­ ature , and applied dc magnetic field . When the precession fre­ quency and the resonant cavity frequency are the same , absorp­ tion increases , as indicated by a decrease in intensity in the detector . We have tested this method for sensitivity and its abil­ ity to probe magneto - crystalline anisotropy . FMR can identify an anisotropy of the crystallites , which makes it a very power­ ful method . In experiments which will follow up our current system modifications and testing , we plan to study not only Martian soil simulants provided by our JSC collaborators , including David S . McKay , but we will also check the usability of our techniques for measurements of dielectric and magnetic properties of biological samples . References 1 P . McKay , E . I . Friedman , R . B . Frankel , and D . A . Bazylinski , “Magnetotactic Bacterias on Earth and on Mars , ” Astrobiology 3 . 2 ( 2003 ) : 263 - 70 . 2 B . P . Weiss , S . S . Kim , J . L . Kirschvink , R . E . Kopp , M . Sankaran , A . Kobayashi , and A . Komeili , “Ferromagnetic Resonance and Low - Temperature Magnetic Tests for Biogenic Magnetite , ” Earth Planet . Sci . Lett . 224 ( 2004 ) : 73 - 89 . NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 91 Figure 5 . ( a ) Plots of FMR spectra of superparamagnetic iron oxide nano parti - cles . Anisotropy as well as the evidence of existence of two different phases are seen . ( b ) Picture of TE 102 , 10 GHz microwave cavity , which was used for the FMR measurements in order to test the sensitivity of the method . The cavity shown here between the poles of the 1 Tesla electromagnet is a part of a Bruker 300 ES spectrometer . The sample is placed inside the cavity in the maximum of the rf ﬁeld ( center of the cavity ) . This photo shows the end of the quartz rod holding superparamagnetic nanoparticles used for MRI contrast in medical applications . MEDICAL ADVANCES—Chinmay Darne ( l . ) , a doctoral student in electrical and computer engineering , conducts research under the supervision of Dr . Jarek Wosik , research associate professor in the Texas Center for Superconductivity ( TCSUH ) . Mr . Darne completed his baccalaureate studies at Bombay University , India . 6 A . Raj , W . S . Holmes , and R . S . Judah , “Wide Bandwidth Measurements of Complex Permittivity of Liquids Using Coplanar Lines , ” IEEE Trans . on Instrumentation and Measurement 50 . 4 ( 2001 ) : 905 - 09 . 7 J . Ash and G . Nicholls , “Super - Resolution Aperature Scanning Micro­ scope , ” Nature 237 ( 1972 ) : 510 - 12 . 8 R . J . Gutman , S . M . Borrego , P . Chkrabarti , and M . - S . Wang , IEEE MTT­ S Digest ( 1987 ) : 281 . 9 M . Golosovski and A . Davidow , “Novel Millimeter - Wave Near - Field Resistivity Microscope , ” Appl . Phys . Lett . 68 ( 1996 ) : 1579 . 10 P . Tran , B . Alavi , and G . Gruner , “Charge Transport along the Lambda DNA Double - Helix , ” Phys . Rev . Lett . 85 ( 1999 ) : 1564 - 67 . 11 T . Harrington , J . Wosik , and S . A . Long , “The Field Pattern of the Confocal Resonator for Characterization of Anisotropic Dielectrics and HTS Thin Films , ” IEEE Trans . on Applied Super­ conductivity 7 . 2 ( 1997 ) . 12 T . Harrington , “Open Resonators for Superconducting and Dielectric Anisotro­ py Testing , ” University of Houston , 1997 . Presentations Wosik , J . “Superconducting Receiver Coil Array for Structural MRI of Trabecular Bone for Therapy Response Monitoring , ” U . of Pennsylvania Medical School , Nov . 2005 . Wosik , J . , M . Kamel , L . Xue , L . - M . Xie , K . Nesteruk , and J . Bankson . “Super - conducting Coil Array for Parallel Imaging , ” Proc . , 13th Annual Meeting of the Intl . Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine , Miami , FL , May 7 – 13 , 2005 . Xue , L . , M . Kamel , L . - M Xie , J . Wosik , 3 Z . Zhai , C . Kusko , N . Hakim , and S . Sridhar , “Precision Microwave Dielectric and Magnetic Susceptibility Measurements of Correlated Electronic Materials Using Superconducting Cavities , ” Review of Scientific Instruments 71 . 8 ( 2000 ) : 3151 - 60 . 4 J . Wosik , L . - M . Xie , M . Strikovski , and P . Przyslupski , “Characterization of Ferromagnetic Perovskites for Magnetically Tunable Microwave HTS Resonators , ” J . Appl . Phys . 91 ( 2002 ) 5384 - 90 . 5 J . Wosik and J . Krupka , “Superconducting Niobium Split - Post Sapphire Resonator for Characterization of Dielectric and Single - and Double - Sided HTS Thin Films , ” Applied Super­ conductivity Conf . , Virginia Beach , VA , Sept . 22 – 29 , 2000 . and P . Narayana “SNR Limit for Cryogenic Arrays , ” Proc . , 13th Annual Meeting of the Intl . Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine , Miami , FL , May 7 – 13 , 2005 . Funding and Proposals Wosik , J . “Structural MRI of Trabecular Bone for Therapy Response Monitoring , ” NIH ( Solicitation PAR - 04 - 023 , Bioengineering Research Partnership , F . Wherli University of Pennsylvania ) , Sept . 23 , 2005 – June 30 , 2010 , $ 456 , 000 for UH ; total proposal : $ 3 , 097 , 000 . ( Submitted . ) 92 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Director’s Research and Administrative Activities David R . Criswell D R . D AVID R . C RISWELL DIRECTS THE I NSTITUTE FOR S PACE Systems Operations at the University of Houston and the University of Houston - Clear Lake . His primary research interests are in industrial development of the Moon and the economic benefits on Earth of a sustainable global electric economy . He is also an associate director of the Texas Space Grant Consortium . He regularly attends the fall and spring monthly meetings of the Houston Chapter of the International Association of Energy Economists , the annual international Lunar and Planetary Science Conference , and the meeting of the Board of Directors of the Texas Space Grant Consortium and participates in national and international conferences related to economic development of the Moon . Dr . Criswell works extensively with Dr . Helen Lane ( Director of University Programs at the Johnson Space Center ) , Dr . Kamlesh P . Lulla ( University Program Officer ) , and Dr . Donn Sickorez ( University Affairs Officer ) coordinating the ISSO research program with primary program goals of NASA - JSC . Since April 2005 , he has provided scientific articles and inter­ views to members of the general and aerospace press . Presentations , Interviews , and Conferences / Workshops Wang , J . Interview with science reporter for Newsweek , April 17 , 2005 . Criswell , D . R . “Energy Support : Lunar Bases and Earth , ” ( Invited presentation , 13 pp . ) International Conference : Moon Base—A Challenge for Humanity , International Academy of Environmental Sciences , S . Elena , Venezia , Italy , May 24 – 28 , 2005 < http : / / www . moonbase - italia . org / > . Criswell , D . R . Participant in “Lunar Commerce Business Roundtable I , ” Southern Methodist University , Dallas , TX , June 24 , 2005 < http : / / www . lunarcommerceroundtable . com / > . Flintoff , J . - P . Telephone interview with science reporter of the Sunday Times ( London ) , June 30 , 2005 . Skytland , N . “Live interview with Dr . Criswell , ” Space Alumni . com , July 21 , 2005 < http : / / www . spacealumni . com / index . php ? option = com _ content & task = view & id = 209 & Itemi d = 9 & date = 2005 - 08 - 01 > . The History Channel . Two hour special , “Beyond the Moon , ” Described Lunar Solar Power ( LSP ) System in closing sec­ tion and gave technical credits to D . Criswell , Aug . 28 , 2005 . Greeb , M . Interview on LSP System for Wired News , Oct . 13 , 2005 . Available in archives for week of Oct . 17 , 2005 at < http : / / www . wired . com / > . Criswell , D . R . “Return on Investment ( ROI ) from ‘New Worlds & Lunar Solar Power , ’ ( 7pp . ) International Conference : Moon Base—A Challenge for Humanity , ” Washington Workshop : Jamestown on the Moon , Washington Academy of Sciences , Washington , D . C . , Oct . 12 , 2005 . Presentations and program available at < http : / / www . moonbase - italia . org > . Livingston , D . Interviewed D . Criswell concerning the LSP System on “The Space Show , ” Oct . 23 , 2005 . Available as podcast or download from < http : / / www . thespaceshow . com / > . Criswell , D . R . “Sustainable Human Prosperity : Earth , Moon , Sun , and Beyond , ” Poster No . 2001 and Panel Member : Solar Power Breakout Group . Lunar Exploration Working Group Conference , League City , TX and the Lunar Commerce Roundtable II , Oct . 26 – 27 , 2005 . Available online at < http : / / www . lunarcommerceroundtable . com / > . Ghenu , M . “Promising the Moon , ” The Varsity , Feb . 28 , 2006 . Interview on the LSP System with science editor for The Varsity of the University of Toronto , Canada , Oct . 28 , 2005 < http : / / www . thevarsity . ca / media / paper285 / news / 2006 / 02 / 28 / Science / Promising . The . Moon - 1641254 . shtml ? norewrite & sourcedomain = www . thevarsity . ca > . Pappalardo , J . Science writer for Smithsonian Air and Space magazine interview of D . Criswell on topic of techniques for disassembly of the sun and motivations as described in : Criswell , D . R . “Solar System Industrialization : Implications for Interstellar Migration , ” in Interstellar Migration and the Human Experience . Eds . B . R . Finney and E . M . Jones , U . Calif . Press , 1985 . 50 - 87 . Noted in “Book Reviews , ” by P . Morrison . Scientific American ( June 1986 ) : 28 - 29 . Noted in “Mother Sun , ” by Ed Regis , Omni ( Dec . 1983 ) : 125 - 27 . Sjöström , M . TV science producer , program on terrestrial and lunar - based solar power ( in Swedish ) , extensive interviews with D . Criswell , Swedish Educational Broadcasting Company , Stockholm Sweden , Dec . 2005 : A . Thirty - minute program available at < http : / / www . ur . se / wma _ redirect . php ? mapp = mediebiblioteket / tv / 300 & filnamn = 9990000511 _ 300 _ 320x240 . asf > . B . Complete D . Criswell interview available at < http : / / www . ur . se / vetenskap / 447 > . Spudis , P . “Why We’re Going Back to the Moon , ” Washington Post op - ed article , Dec . 2 , 2005 , that specifies the LSP System as a major reason for the United States to return to the Moon < http : / / www . washingtonpost . com / wp - dyn / content / article / 2005 / 12 / 26 / AR2005122600648 . html > . NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 93 Bell , T . E . “Warning : Dust Ahead , ” Astronomy ( March 2006 ) : 46 - 51 , interviewed D . Criswell for 1970s work on Surveyor observations of lunar dust motion associated with local sun­ set . Criswell provided a false - color image of several Surveyor horizon - glow photographs to the Astronomy technical editor F . Reddy ( listed source as “Doug” Criswell ) , in Rennilson , J . J . and D . R . Criswell . “Surveyor’s Observations of Lunar Horizon - Glow , ” The Moon 10 ( 1974 ) : 121 - 42 . ISSO Program Documents Criswell , D . R . ( Director ) , I . N . Rothman ( Editor ) , and D . V . Bush ( Associate Editor ) . Y2004 Annual Report of the Institute for Space Systems Operations of the University of Houston and the University of Houston - Clear Lake , 162pp . , Houston , TX , 2005 – 2006 . Criswell D . R . ( director ) and H . Lane ( JSC ) . Peer Review of proposals ( 29 ) submitted by University of Houston and University of Houston - Clear Lake faculty to ISSO for seed - grants by faculty and research staff from UH , UHCL , and NASA - Johnson Space Center , Feb . 28 , 2006 . Criswell , D . R . Worked with UH System Office of the General Counsel and NASA - JSC to renew the existing Memorandum of Understanding for the UH / UHCL - JSC Post - Doctoral Aerospace Fellowship Program and then ( Jan . 2006 to date ) convert it to a Space Act Agreement , Aug . to Dec . 2005 . Criswell , D . R . Provided two discussion documents to the UH Office of the Vice Provost for Research for a possible funds request to the U . S . Federal Government , Sept . 7 , 2005 : A . Systems - Based Gulf - Coast Emergency Responses & Mitigation Program B . Graduate Level Program for Sustainable Development of the Solar System Criswell , D . R . At the request of the UH Office of the Vice Provost of Research , ISSO stated the metrics to be used in eval­ uation of the ISSO program , Oct . 3 , 2005 . The metrics are those reported each year in the Director ' s Message of the ISSO Annual Report and the technical reports of all investigators . Criswell , D . R . At the request of the UH Office of the Vice Provost of Research , ISSO established a new ISSO Advisory Group of professors from University of Houston , University of Houston - Clear Lake , Rice University , a NASA - JSC pro­ gram scientist / manager , and a recently retired senior staff member of the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board , Oct . 3 , 2005 . COMET HALE - BOPP—Comet Hale - Bopp in the constellation Andromeda was photographed by George Shelton , pho - tographer for the Bionetics Corp . , at 8 : 14 p . m . on March 31 , 1997 , from Merritt Island , Florida , close to the Kennedy Space Center . During that 24 - hour period , Comet Hale - Bopp made its closest approach to the Sun . Natural Language Interface Models for Fast Responsiveness Applications ( Continued from page 44 . ) 2004 , David Lewis , Jan . 2006 < http : / / www . daviddlewis . com / resources / testcollections / reuters21578 / > . 14 Medline , accessed using Entrez PubMed Interface < http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / entrez / query . fcgi > . 15 C . D . Manning and H . Schütze , Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing . Cambridge : MIT Press , 1999 . 16 OpenOffice : A Multiplatform and Multilingual Office Suite and Open - Source Project , Sun Microsystems , 2000 < http : / / www . openoffice . org / > . Publications Al - Mubaid , H . “A Learning - Classification Based Approach for Word Prediction , ” IAJIT Journal , 2006 . ( Under review . ) — . “Context - Based Technique for Biomedical Term Classifica­ tion , ” IEEE GrC - 06 , 2006 . ( Submitted , under review . ) Al - Mubaid , H . and K . Truemper . “Learning To Find Context - Based Spelling Errors , ” in Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery Approaches Based on Rule Induction Techniques . Eds . E . Triantaphyllou and G . Felici . N . Y . : Kluwer Acad . Pub . , 2005 . Al - Mubaid , H . and R . Singh . “A New Text Mining Approach for Finding Protein - to - Disease Associations , ” Am . J . Biochem . Biotechnol . 2 . 2 ( 2005 ) . Presentations Al - Mubaid , H . “Context - Based Similar Words Detection and Its Application in Specialized Search Engines , ” Intl Conf . on Intelligent User Interfaces , San Diego , CA , 2005 . — . “Machine Learning Approach for Context Sensitive Error Detection , ” Intl . Conf . on Intelligent Computing and Information Systems , Cairo , Egypt , 2005 . Funding and Proposals “Integrating Supervised and Adaptive Learning to Improve Computer Accessibility , ” NSF , CIS , Information and Intelligent Systems IIS , request for two years , $ 164 , 000 . ( Submitted ) . 94 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Courtesy NASA - Kennedy Space Center Building and Verifying Fault - Tolerant Autonomous Real - Time Systems for Space Applications ( Continued from page 57 . ) Cheng , A . M . K . and C . Feng . “Predictive Thermal Management for Hard Real - Time Tasks , ” Proc . , IEEE - CS Real - Time Systems Symposium WIP Session , Miami , FL , Dec . 5 – 8 , 2005 . Presentations Cheng , A . M . K . and C . Feng . “Predictive Thermal Management for Hard Real - Time Tasks , ” Proc . , IEEE - CS Real - Time Systems Symposium WIP Session , Miami , FL , Dec . 5 – 8 , 2005 . Update of ISSO 2003 Seed - Grant Project Timing Analysis and Scheduling of the X - 38 Space Station Crew Return Vehicle and Other Space Vehicles ( ISSO 2004 Annual Report , 58 - 59 ) Albert M . K . Cheng Publications Andrei , S . , W . - N . Chin , A . M . K . Cheng , and M . Lupu . “Automatic Debugging of Real - Time Systems Based on Incremental Satisfiability Counting , ” IEEE Trans . on Computers , 2006 . ( To appear . ) Andrei , S . , W . - N . Chin , A . M . K . Cheng , and M . Lupu . “Incremental Automatic Debugging of Real - Time Systems Based on Satisfiability Counting , ” IEEE - CS Real - Time and Embedded Technology and Applications Symposium , San Francisco , CA , March 2005 . Andrei , S . , W . - N . Chin , A . M . K . Cheng , and Y . Zhu . “Runtime - Coordinated Scalable Incremental Checksum Testing of Combinational Circuits based on # SAT Problem , ” Proc . , 11th IEEE - CS Intl . Conf . on Embedded and Real - Time Computing Systems and Applications , Hong Kong , Aug . 17 – 19 , 2005 . Cheng , A . M . K . “A Survey of Formal Verification Methods and Tools for Embedded and Real - Time Systems , ” Intl . J . Embedded Systems 1 ( 2006 ) . Validation of a Novel Micro - Capillary Array Fluid Collection Technology for Determination of Biomarkers of Bone Metabolism in Human Sweat ( Continued from page 60 . ) Discussion Data presented above indicate that unadulterated liquid sweat contains a significantly higher amount of Ca 2 + than had been previously reported . In order to ensure adequate sweat sample production , all samples were collected from individuals partici­ pating in physical activity . This is recognized as a limitation of our study in that active sweating may produce more calcium than passive sweating in sedentary individuals , a phenomenon previously reported . 2 However , not withstanding this limitation , the use of unadulterated sweat for determining the absolute amount of calcium excreted in sweat appears to be a more accu­ rate method than collection of the non - aqueous components of sweat by evaporation as in the case of other collection technolo­ gies such as the Osteopatch™ . As such , the micro - fabricated sweat patch utilized in this study allows the rapid and accurate collection of approximately 650 micro - liters of unadulterated liquid sweat using a micro - fabricated array of capillary tubes located in the form of a plas­ tic disc . Further studies are warranted that compare the relative sweat calcium loss rate as detected in sweat samples collected using the Micro - Fabricated Sweat Patch ( MSP ) device with the Osteopatch™ in the same individual . References 1 N . Rianon , D . Feeback , R . Wood , T . Driscoll , L . Shackelford , and A . LeBlanc , “Monitoring Sweat Calcium Using Skin Patches , ” Calcif . Tissue Int . 72 ( 2003 ) : 694 - 97 . 2 J . Y . Chu , S . Margen , D . H . Calloway , and F . M . Costa , “Integumentary Loss of Calcium , ” Am . J . Clin . Nutr . 32 ( 1979 ) : 1699 - 1702 . Early Origins of Genetic Systems ( Continued from page 65 . ) Funding and Proposals Fox , G . E . “The Origins of Translation and Early Evolution of Life , ” NASA Exobiology Program , Aug . 15 , 2005 – Aug . 14 , 2008 , $ 288 , 268 . ( Funded . ) Travisano , M . T . , G . E . Fox , et al . “Shared Genomic Resources in Prokaryotic Evolution , ” NSF - Frontiers in Biology Program , Oct . 1 , 2005 – Sept . 30 , 2010 , $ 7 , 612 , 1140 . ( Not funded . ) NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 95 Contaminants Removal From Fuel Cell for Aerospace Applications ( Continued from page 72 . ) References 1 J . Y . Lu , W . A . Fernandez , Z . H . Ge , and K . A . Abboud , “A Novel Two - Fold Interpenetrating 3 - D 4 2 . 8 4 Network Self - Assembled from a New 1 - D Coordination Polymer , ” New J . Chem . 29 ( 2005 ) : 434 . 2 J . Y . Lu and Z . H . Ge , “Synthesis and Structures of Two New Metal - Organic Polymers Containing Imidazoldicarboxylate Ligands for Hydrogen Bonding Networks , One with a Covalent Pleated Sheet Conformation , ” Inorg . Chim . Acta 358 ( 2005 ) : 828 . Publications Lu , J . Y . and Z . H . Ge . “Synthesis and Structures of Two New Metal - Organic Polymers Containing Imidazoldicarboxylate Ligands for Hydrogen Bonding Networks , One with a Covalent Pleated Sheet Conformation , ” Inorg . Chim . Acta 358 ( 2005 ) : 828 . Lu , J . Y . , W . A . Fernandez , Z . H . Ge , and K . A . Abboud . “A Novel Two - Fold Interpenetrating 3 - D 4 2 . 8 4 Network Self - Assembled from a New 1 - D Coordination Polymer , ” New J . Chem . 29 ( 2005 ) : 434 . Computational Methods in Non - Smooth Mechanics : Applications to Dry Friction Constrained Motions ( Continued from page 88 . ) tems—some ODEs become PDEs—will undoubtedly be of more significance and bene­ fit to NASA’s needs and practices . Therefore , it is essential to ensure that the rate of con­ vergence on the multiplier is efficient . It will be the main focus of this proposed study . In the future , we will investigate theoretically the extension of the method in the first step to the simulation of visco - plastic particulate flow encountered in oil drilling technologies . The computer implementation of methods resulting from these investigations will be part of another project . Among consideration in the difficulties of these problems is the solution of 3 - dimensional non - smooth generalizations of the Navier - Stokes equations . References 1 E . J . Dean , R . Glowinski , Y . M . Kuo , and G . Nasser , “Multiplier Techniques for Some Dynamical System with Dry Friction , ” C . R . Acad . Sc . , Paris , T . 314 , Série I ( 1992 ) : 153 - 59 . 2 E . J . Dean , R . Glowinski , Y . M . Kuo , and G . Nasser , “On the Discretization of Some Second Order in Time Differential Equations - Applications to Nonlinear Wave Problems in Computational Techniques , ” in Identification and Control of Flexible Flight Structures . Ed . A . V . Balakrisknan . Los Angeles : Optimization Software , 1990 . 199 - 246 . 3 G . Duvaut and J . - L . Lions , Inequalities in Mechanics and Physics . Berlin : Springer - Verlag , 1976 . 4 R . Glowinski , L . J . Shiau , Y . M . Kuo , and G . Nasser , “The Numerical Simulation of Friction Constrained Motions ( I ) : One Degree of Freedom Models , ” Appl . Math . Lett . 17 . 7 ( 2004 ) : 801 - 07 . Publications Shiau , L . J . and R . Glowinski . “Operator Splitting Method for Friction Constrained Dynamical Systems , ” Proc . , AIMS ( 2006 ) . ( To appear . ) Glowinski , R . , L . J . Shiau , Y . M . Kuo , and G . Nasser . “On the Numerical Simulation of Friction Constrained Motions ( II ) : Multiple Degrees of Freedom Models , ” Appl . Math . Lett . 18 . 10 ( 2005 ) : 1108 - 15 . Funding and Proposals “Computational Methods in Non - Smooth Mechanics with Dry Friction Constrained Motions , ” Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board ( under ARP ) , $ 31 , 700 . 96 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Valles Marineris , the “Grand Canyon of Mars , ” in the movie Flight Through Mariner Valley ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports ISSO Follow - Up Reports Courtesy NASA / JPL / Arizona State University NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 97 p . 99 p . 101 p . 102 p . 115 p . 116 p . 119 • Simulated Microgravity on Microbial Gene Expression • Evolving Bacterial Populations • Unexpected Bacterial Pathogens p . 103 p . 121 p . 105 p . 108 p . 123 p . 125 p . 109 ISSO Five - Year Follow - up ➡ 98 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Micro Column Arrays ( MCA ) for Thermal Management of Spacecraft Environments Abdelhak Bensaoula Abstract—Investigation of Micro Column Arrays ( MCA ) for thermal management of spacecraft envi­ ronments has been continued in conjunction with a project employing a Post - Doctoral Aerospace Fellow on diverse thermal management applications . Finite element method ( FEM ) simulation of MCA structures has been used to study the influence of MCA aspect ratios on heat loss . E XPLORATION OF SPACE CALLS We have developed a technology for adaptations of manned for the successful fabrication of vehicles to ensure the com - Micro Column Arrays ( MCA ) on fort and survival of passengers and thin metal foils in conjunction with crew . Unmanned exploration is Integrated Micro Sensors , Inc . also concerned with the integrity ( IMS ) of Houston , TX . Micro and durability of spacecraft . Column Arrays consist of densely Reducing heat generated by space - packed micro cones separated by craft components requires a strate - cone - shaped micro cavities and gy no less than the need to heat exhibit low reflectance ( < 0 . 171 ) spacecraft systems . Conventional - and high absorbtance ( > 0 . 978 ) ly , liquid - based heat exchangers over a wide spectral range in a very are employed for this purpose . close approximation of blackbody Thermal systems increase the behavior . The project seeks to weight of space vehicles and con - explore MCA structures from thin tain parts that may malfunction . foils as a possible passive cooling Dr . Abdelhak Bensaoula Researchers seek to reduce the system which would collect or weight of thermal systems and simplify their mechanics to remove heat by radiative absorption or emission though their ensure longer periods of flight in space . near - blackbody nature . Figure 1 . Finite element method simulation of the steady state temperature under a constant heat ﬂux ( 5 × 10 6 W / m 2 ) for ( a ) un - structured and ( b ) MCA - structured silicon carbide . The MCA sample has a 13 . 5 % lower temperature . NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 99 Figure 2 . Simulations carried out on the MCA model of dif - ferent aspect ratios on Ti , showing temperature reduction of the base for a wide range of heat ﬂuxes at different aspect ratios . Saturation due to surface - to - surface radiation occurs for an aspect ratio ~ 12 . We undertook computer simulation of MCA thermal proper­ ties to better understand the effect of MCA geometry on heat loss properties . Thermal analysis was carried out using Comsol FemLab l software , which has a feature that applies a finite ele­ ment method ( FEM ) for solving complex multi - physics prob­ lems , including heat transfer due to conduction , convection , and radiation . This analysis allowed us to investigate the influence of MCA geometry on the resulting heat loss—in particular the aspect ratios . Results Initial FEM modeling indicated that MCA are very effective heat reducers compared to smooth metal surfaces . Shown in Fig . 1 is a FEM analysis of the temperature under a fixed heat flux of bare SiC and a SiC MCA . A 13 . 5 % reduction in temper­ ature was realized . In space applications , payload volume and weight are important design parameters . From that perspective , Ti has the lowest density ( 4 . 5 g / cm 3 ) when compared to other materials from which we have made MCA , such as Tantalum ( 16 . 4 g / cm 3 ) , Hastelloy C276 ( 8 . 94 g / cm 3 ) , and Alloy321 ( 7 . 92 g / cm 3 ) . Additionally , Ti is more stable in space and extreme environments than other lightweight metals such as Aluminum . As a result , we have used Ti as the base material for further FEM analysis . COATINGS—A multi - element coating reactor for hardcoat - ing MCA structures in the Center for Advanced Materials . Such state - of - the - art equipment allows new technologies providing for the successful fabrication of micro - column arrays . Researchers are led by Dr . Abdelhak Bensaoula . For a given density of the MCA , the crucial simulation param­ eter which determines the amount of heat loss is the aspect ratio of the structures . This can be defined as the ratio of the total extended surface area to the base area . Since heat loss through radiation is proportional to the area of the emitting surface , a large aspect ratio leads to increased heat loss from the MCA . At high aspect ratios , however , the increased surface area is offset by increased surface - to - surface radiation between individual columns . This is illustrated by Fig . 2 , which shows the tempera­ ture of titanium MCA with different aspect ratios for a variety of heat fluxes . The saturation of the heat loss begins near an aspect ratio of 12 . This knowledge will allow us to predict the heat loss behavior of the MCA so that we can tailor the structures for dif­ ferent applications in addition to providing optimal geometry information to refine the MCA formation process . Funding and Proposals “Ultra - Strong High - Temperature Bonding of Titanium to Ceramic Materials , ” DoD ( MDA ) , IMS / CAM , $ 100 , 000 . ( Funded . ) 100 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Miniature Optical Sensors for Detection of Water and Air Contamination Abdelhak Bensaoula , David Starikov , Chris Boney F ABRICATED SENSOR PROTOTYPES have been automated and neural net­ works implemented for contaminant classification . Sensitivities of the order of several ppb have been achieved using steady - state light measurements . Current work is focused on implementation of time - resolved measurements , which will result in significant improvement of the most important sensor parameters . The configuration of the optical sensor prototype utilizing arrays of LEDs as excitation sources and LEDs and / or pho­ todiodes as photodetectors is shown in Fig . 1 . Based on this approach , we fabri­ cated several prototypes . Improvements of characteristics measured from the three most recent sensor prototypes are shown in Table 1 . Based on our prelimi­ nary results , we identified problems that have yet to be resolved in new sensor Figure 1 . Optical Sensor Conﬁguration Table 1 . Detection Limit and Dynamic Range of the Three Most Recent Sensor Prototypes Parameter Detection limit ( ppm ) ~ 20 ~ 25 0 . 08 Dynamic range 1 . 25 20 25 Proto - 5 Proto - 6 Proto - 7 Table 2 . Main Features of the Optical Sensor Targeted by the Current Research designs , which will be our next step toward achieving the targeted features along with solutions that can be provided by various advanced technologies , as out­ lined in Table 2 . Such technologies are being investigat­ ed in a current project on the develop­ ment of integrated III nitride - based pho­ todiode structures for high - temperature jet engine fire detectors used in U . S . Air Force applications . Publications Starikov , D . , J . Clement , M . Bokadoum , E . Charlson , and A . Bensaoula . “Time - Resolved Optical Measurements Performed by Using a Miniature Portable Bio - chemical Optoelectronic Sensor , ” ( 2006 ) . ( In preparation . ) Feature / Capability Provided by Benefit Miniature size Chip - based design , RF MBE growth of III nitrides In situ , in - line operation High speed III nitrides , automated electronic control , ANN Real - time measurements High sensitivity Wide spectral range , time - resolved measurements Early hazardous material detection High specificity Multi - wavelength design , time - resolved measurements , ANN High classification rate , minimum false alarms Multifunctionality Wide spectral range , multi­ wavelength design , ANN Extended field of applications Ruggedness / strength III nitrides , solid - state design Applications in super ambient environments Low cost Solid - state chip - based multi - wavelength design Affordability , applicability , extended field of applications , disposable sensors Measuring the Concentration of Fluorophore Substances , ” Presentations Proc . , IEEE North East Workshop on Circuits and Systems , Boukadoum , M . , A . Bensaoula , and D . Starikov . “A Portable Montreal , Canada , June 2004 . Multi - Band Optoelectronic System for Identifying and ( Continued on page 126 . ) NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 101 A Recursive Application of a Support Vector Machine for Protein Spot Detection in 2 - Dimensional Gel Electrophoresis Gary D . Boetticher , Hisham Al - Mubaid , Karen Frasier - Scott T HE ANALYSIS OF LARGE COLLEC ­ tions of proteins has historically utilized two - dimensional polyacry­ lamide gel electrophoresis . Proteomic technology , however , needs less labor - intensive protein spot detection methodology . UHCL resarchers are studying techniques for recurseively apply­ ing a Support Vector Machine ( SVM ) in identifying protein . An SVM can be programmed to opti­ mize differences between classes , which correspond to the presence or absence of a protein . Dr . Gary D . Boetticher Publication List Boetticher , G . , H . Al - Mubaid , and K . Frasier - Scott . “Automated Hybridization of Machine Learners for Recursive Spot Identification , Optimization , and Gel Matching of 2­ Dimensional Gel Electrophoresis , ” J . Comp . Sci . ( 2005 ) . ( Accepted . ) Dasika , M . “A User Driven Protein Spot Detection Web Service On 2 - Dimensional Gel Electrophoresis , ” Master’s thesis , U . of Houston - Clear Lake , Houston , TX . Chair : Dr . Boetticher , 2005 . Funding and Proposals “Mucosal Biomarkers of Viral Induced CAP , ” SEPSIS and CAP : Partnerships for Diagnostics Development , National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , National Institutes of Health , involving the University of Texas Medical Branch ( UTMB ) , 5 years , $ 251 , 362 . ( Not funded . ) “Using Machine Learners To Predict Infant RSV Infections , ” National Heart Lung Blood Institute , Clinical Proteomics Programs , RFA - HL - 04 - 019 , National Institutes of Health , involving the University of Texas Medical Branch ( UTMB ) , 4 years , $ 199 , 282 . ( Not funded . ) The Impact of Chromosome Lineage upon Genetic Program Modeling Gary D . Boetticher , Kim Kaminsky O NE OF THE CHALLENGES IN DATA MINING IS PROVIDING SUFFICIENT coverage of the search space in order to produce an acceptable model . Traditionally , Genetic Programs consider all chromo­ somes within a population for breeding purposes . Considering the expanse of the search space , it is imperative to focus breed­ ing efforts in Genetic Programs in order to attain a better solu­ tion in less time . This research examines the lineage of Genetic Programs in order to identify any breeding patterns . Five sepa­ rate experiments are conducted where chromosomes are grouped into five classes . Lineage patterns are assessed for the best , mid­ dle , and worst - class parental chromosomes . Based upon the results , a new Genetic Programming ( GP ) process is proposed . The technique utilized in this study solves problems by genet­ rically breeding a population of individuals , or chromosomes , over a series of generations . Results The results are very promising from these experiments . We anticipate that the proposed approach will lead to significant improvements in genetic programming performance . Publications Boetticher , G . and K . Kaminsky . “Assessing the Impact of Chromosome Lineage in Genetic Program Modeling , ” Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery J . ( Submitted . ) 102 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Summary Reports on Previous 2003 and 2004 Projects George E . Fox Effects of Simulated Microgravity on Microbial Gene Expression S TUDIES OF THE EFFECTS OF SIMULATED MICROGRAVITY ON MICRO ­ bial gene expression are ongoing . Initial ISSO funding for the project was used to support postdoctoral fellow Dr . Gary Schultz . After the first year , he was replaced by Dr . Don Tucker . Dr . Tucker is currently a USRA Fellow working with Dr . Duane Pierson at NASA - JSC . Although the ongoing current research is a continuation of these earlier projects , it should be emphasized that the initial results obtained contributed to the successful effort by Dr . George E . Fox and Dr . Richard Willson to obtain major funding from the National Space Biomedical Research Institute ( NSBRI ) . That funding was responsible for multiple publications . Ongoing work on the current PDAF provided sig­ nificant additional preliminary results sufficient to obtain a cur­ rent award from the Office of Biological and Physical Research to Drs . Fox and Willson . Characterization of Evolving Bacterial Populations O NE OF THE MAJOR GOALS ON NASA’ S ASTROBIOLOGY ROADMAP is to understand how life evolves on the molecular , organismal , and ecosystem levels . Such knowledge , we believe , will provide a better understanding of how life might have evolved on plan­ ets other than Earth and how Earth life might respond to envi­ ronmental changes in the future . The capabilities of laboratories under the supervision of Dr . Michael Travisano and Dr . George E . Fox were combined to study morphological diversification in the bacterium Escherichia coli . The proposed plan demonstrates the feasibility of their approach , enabling submission of several grant proposals . Project Premises When propagated in a simple heterogeneous environment , E . coli populations founded from a single ancestral genotype undergo explosive morphological diversification . A striking fea­ ture of the evolved morphs is their niche specificity ; the ances­ tral SM morphs ( smooth morphology on agar plates ) colonize the broth phase . The evolved WS morphs ( wrinkled colony morphology on agar plates ) form a biofilm at the air - broth inter­ face , and the evolved FS morphs ( fuzzy colony morphology on agar plates ) colonize the vial bottom . The serendipitous corre­ spondence between colony morphology and niche preference per­ mits real - time ecological and evolutionary dynamics to be deter­ mined by scoring changes in the frequency of colony phenotype . Project Goals The proposed study was to have been divided into three distinct areas : long - term selection , phenotypic characterization , and genetic characterization of the selected cultures . The long - term selection would have involved daily propagation of replicate cul­ tures into one of two environments , with different treatments varying in spatial heterogeneity . During and subsequent to the selection , the cultures would have been assayed for phenotypic and genotypic changes . At interesting points in the selection , cul­ tures would have been subjected to gene expression profiling and , ultimately , DNA sequencing of relevant regions of the genome . Results Experimental systems were conceptualized and the assays established . Preliminary results of the project were included as part of a proposal to the NASA Astrobiology Center submitted in early 2003 but were not funded . Subsequent discussions of the project with Dr . Kasthuri Venkateswaran of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory led to two proposals in which we would have used the project’s underlying evolutionary approach to understand the source of the unusual resistance properties asso­ ciated with certain spores isolated from NASA’s spacecraft assembly facilities . These proposals were not funded , but a new effort is in the planning stages . Funding and Proposals Venkateswaran , K . and G . E . Fox . “Microbial Ecological Per­ spectives of Space - Exposed Microbes : A Genetic Approach , ” NASA - Human Support Technology , April 1 , 2005 – March 31 , 2008 , Total UH Costs : $ 120 , 000 . ( Not funded . ) Rapid Identiﬁcation of Unexpected Bacterial Pathogens in Space Environments C REW HEALTH IS A DOMINANT ISSUE IN MANNED SPACE FLIGHT . Microbiological concerns have , in the past , emerged as determi­ nants of flight readiness on at least two occasions , and biofilm problems have occurred on several long - duration missions . As mission duration and re - supply intervals increase further , it will be necessary to rely on advanced life support systems which NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 103 incorporate both biological and physical - chemical recycling methods for air and water that also provide food for the crew . It would be especially desirable if a microbial monitoring system were in place that could readily identify the problem with organ­ isms if an in - flight incident were to occur . Such a monitoring technology must detect many organisms of known concern as well as unanticipated problem organisms . The technology must also be subject to miniaturization , and it need be highly auto­ mated . It is widely believed that a microbial detection system cannot be designed without prior knowledge of what is to be detected . The proposed work would implement a novel approach to array design that can overcome this problem . Project Premises The project had two underlying premises . First , it was argued that 16S ribosomal RNA carries within its sequence sufficient information to determine the genetic affinity of any bacterium , whether novel or not , relative to known species and genera . Second , researchers hypothesized that this information would , in fact , be represented as a “signature” in collections of small sequence segments contained in the 16S r RNA . Project Goals Two alternative approaches were suggested for the use of signa­ ture information to rapidly characterize the phylogenetic posi­ tion ( i . e . , the identity ) of any unknown bacterium . The first of these would utilize a hybridization array approach . The signa­ ture implications of a large number of oligonucleotides , e . g . , all 10 - mers , would be needed . Thus , it was necessary to develop software that would allow us to determine for each 10 - mer which phylogenetic grouping ( e . g . , species , genera , etc . ) obtains the most meaningful signal . A set of the most discriminating sequences , which encompasses the entire phylogenetic scheme , would form the basis for array design . Results This project and the ISSO post - doctoral award contributed key preliminary results that together led to the successful National Space Biomedical Research Institute proposal ultimately renewed twice . It now remains funded as part of NASA’s Exploration Research Program . In addition , this work preceded several grant applications in the area of biodefense that Dr . Fox , Dr . Willson and Dr . Yuriy Folfanov have submitted . This effort includes a currently funded award from the Department of Homeland Security . The key research finding of the project , the existence of large numbers of 16S r RNA signature oligonu­ cleotides , resulted in a 2002 publication in Bioinformatics : Zhang , Z . , R . C . Willson , and G . E . Fox . “Identification of Characteristic Oligonucleotides in the 16S Ribosomal RNA Sequence Dataset , ” Bioinformatics 18 ( 2002 ) : 244 - 50 . Publications Warmflash D . , M . Larios - Sanz , J . Jones , G . E . Fox , and D . S . McKay . “Assessing the Biohazard Potential of Putative Martian Organisms for Exploration Class Human Space Missions , ” Aviation . Sci . Environ . Med . ( Accepted pending revision . ) PROTECTION—Dr . David Warmflash , Post - Doctoral Aerospace Fellow , is associated both with TCSUH and the Department of Biology and Biochemistry . He is investigat - ing potential biohazards one supposes may be found on Mars in anticipation of dangers or foreign substances that may affect spacecraft landing on Mars or ﬂying in the mar - tian atmosphere . NASA invests considerable research to protect instruments and human life from space biohazards . 104 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA A Theoretical Analysis of Vibrational Modes Aimed at Their Use as Measures of Bone Damage Gemunu Gunaratne Abstract—Extended exposure to microgravity reduces bone mass and degrades mechanical properties of bone tissue ; its most damaging consequence is the loss of bone strength . Unfortunately , the first signature of bone loss is the occurrence of a non - traumatic fracture . Such events can be reduced if there were a reliable and routinely available non - invasive diagnostic for bone strength . Bone density scans , the most routinely used clinical tool , are not sufficiently accurate for the purpose . We propose the use of vibrational assessment and the development of a conceptual framework to implement it as a diagnostic for bone strength . R EDUCTION IN BONE MASS with the resulting skeletal damage is one serious con­ sequence of extended exposure to microgravity . 1 - 3 Moreover , bone damage in microgravity is expect­ ed to be vastly different from that caused by aging ; hence , traditional diagnostics such as bone density scans and ultrasonic assessment may not provide reliable estimates for bone damage during space trav­ el . The principal issue of interest is whether damage incurred during Dr . Gemunu Gunaratne flight is permanent . If not , bone degradation can be reversed using rigorous exercise regimens following return to Earth . On the other hand , if the damage is irreversible , it is necessary to take steps during flight to reduce bone loss , such as the use of new powerful therapies . However , care must be taken in using such medications because of adverse side - effects caused by their indiscriminate use . 4 Hence , accurate methods for obtaining a comprehensive biomechanical profile of the skeleton are a pre - requisite for extended space travel including the proposed manned missions to Mars . Our research program is aimed at developing a prediction model for a comprehensive profile of biomechanical properties of bone using vibrational assessment . It will address one of the critical issues for the success of the program . Its completion will justify our approach and allow us to initiate experimental and in - vivo human studies . Structure of Bone Large bones consist of an outer solid segment ( cortex ) and an Figure 1 . Schematic of a Large Bone inner porous region ( trabecular architecture ) , as seen in Fig . 1 . The tissue forming bone is a composite consisting of “needles” of calcium phosphate and fibers of collagen . 5 Although the cor­ tex is the principal load carrier in children and young adults , it becomes brittle with aging because of the accumulation of long micro - fractures . Consequently , its load carrying ability is severely compromised . Extended exposure to microgravity is expected to make the trabecular elements thinner , and , occa­ sionally , to perforate them . These perforations are most alarm­ ing since lost connections are never regenerated naturally . In terrestrial environments , damage to trabecular bone is less than that on cortical bone ; both trabecular and cortical segments of NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 105 Figure 2 . Model Specimen of Bone on Which Computations Are Performed bone make important contributions to the strength of bone in middle - aged adults . The most commonly used surrogate for bone strength is the bone density , which is estimated using dual energy x - ray absorptiometry ( DEXA ) . The fact that the much lighter trabec­ ular bone plays a significant role in strength suggests that DEXA cannot provide reliable estimates for bone strength . Ultrasonic scans are also used to determine the need for thera­ py . However , scans cannot identify architectural changes because the velocity of ultrasound is unchanged unless material properties of bone tissue are modified . These measures cannot provide a comprehensive profile of the many different types of damage that can weaken bone . Such an assessment is critical during space travel because damage modalities are vastly differ­ ent from natural aging ; the latter is the only scenario where sur­ rogates have been tested and indexed . Vibrational Assessment We propose to develop vibrational assessment as a method to determine the need for therapeutic intervention to reduce the damage from bone loss . Sonic and ultrasonic techniques have found application in damage assessment in a wide range of structures including bridges and airplane components . Additional problems arise in structural analysis of bones : ( 1 ) bone has multiple components ( cortical and trabecular seg­ ments ) that are important in load transmission , ( 2 ) non - invasive tests can only be conducted on the whole bone , and ( 3 ) soft tis­ sue such as skin and muscle degrade the ultrasonic signal used to evaluate the response of bone . Goals of the Project The project has four overall goals : ( 1 ) Devise an algorithm to use vibrational response of the whole bone to estimate those of the cortical and trabecular bone . This will be done using advanced signal processing techniques . ( 2 ) Determine a scheme to estimate the strength of a specimen of trabecular bone from its response . ( 3 ) Develop a method to estimate the strength of a specimen of cortical bone from its linear response function . ( 4 ) Construct a portable instrument to capture the linear response functions of bone in - vivo . The instrument has been constructed by Prof . Michael Liebschner , Department of Bioengineering at Rice University , in collaboration with UH researchers . In addition , we expect to compare the reliability and ease of application of vibrational techniques with those currently in use , including bone density scans and the use of micro - computed tomography . Methodology Computational techniques will be developed using the simpli­ fied bone model shown in Fig . 2 . The model consists of a porous segment ( which is a digitized image of a specimen of human skeletal bone ) and a solid component . Its rear end is fixed and the outer boundary is subjected to vibrations at a fixed frequen­ cy Ω . The force F ( Ω ) needed to implement the motion Asin ( Ω t ) of the outer boundary is obtained from an integration of the appropriate set of ordinary differential equations , and the linear response function χ ( Ω ) is evaluated . This process is implement­ ed for a frequency sweep . Part ( 1 ) of the goals is to extract the linear response functions of the solid and the porous segments from χ ( Ω ) using techniques from inverse scattering , in particu­ lar the Lippman - Schwinger expansion . 6 In order to solve this inverse problem , we will assume that the model can be repre­ sented by a two - phase medium ; i . e . , we assume that the porous region can be represented by an “effective” uniform medium . Further , we assume that χ ( Ω ) is a smooth function of Ω and use a suitable basis expansion for interpolation . We expect that with this constraint , we will obtain the ( otherwise under - determined ) solution to the inverse problem ; the proposed calculation will give the linear response functions χ C ( Ω ) and χ T ( Ω ) for cortical and trabecular components . The next step is to estimate the strength of the trabecular bone specimen from χ T ( Ω ) . We note that , as a bone decays , it is only able to use a progressively smaller part of itself for stress trans­ mission . The cause of this inefficiency is the presence of ( occa­ sional ) long fractures ; they prevent large regions of the remain­ ing trabecular network ( in particular those immediately above and below the fracture ) from taking part in load transmission . 7 Analyses of model systems show that this inefficiency is the leading cause of reductions in bone strength . It is thus natural to assert that the strength of the trabecular bone is related to the fraction of elements belonging to the stress - carrying - backbone . We used this observation to introduce a new surrogate Γ for the strength of trabecular bone . It is the ratio of the elastic mod­ ulus of the specimen to its linear response function at resonance ; it can be obtained from χ T ( Ω ) . We have shown 7 , 8 that the frac­ tional reduction of strength τ ( i . e . , the ratio of current strength to peak strength during young adulthood ) is related to Γ by τ = A Γ + h ( Γ ) , where the constant A depends on very general properties of the specimen ( e . g . , its length , the fact that it is a cubic network , etc . ) 106 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA and h ( Γ ) is a nonlinear function that depends on more detailed ( and subject dependent ) characteristics of the specimen . We have shown how this relationship can be used to estimate the strength of a sample of trabecular bone ; the conclusions have been confirmed in computer models . 9 Figure 3 shows the rela­ tionship for computer models constructed from two samples of cadaveric bone . As they become weaker ( the case of interest ) , the curves are seen to coincide , as predicted theoretically . We propose to use a similar method to estimate the strength of the cortical segment of the bone from χ C ( Ω ) . Preliminary analysis has shown that our propositions are valid for this case . 10 Results We introduced a simple struts - and - nodes model to conduct pre­ liminary studies of trabecular bone and to identify non - destruc - tive measures that are appropriate to estimate the strength . This work is published in a series of papers . 8 , 7 The analysis showed that the ratio Γ is a reliable estimate for the loss of strength of trabecular bone . The conclusions were validated using compu­ tations on several models that were constructed from digitized images of human trabecular bone obtained by micro - computer tomography . 11 , 9 Like trabecular bone , the cortex experiences fractures due to daily activity . Typically , smaller fractures formed in the cortex are repaired on a time scale of about one to two months , while the longer ( and deeper ) ones are not . The principal mode of damage in cortical bone is the accumulation of long fractures . We conjectured that the ratio Γ reliably estimates loss of strength due to such fractures . These findings were recently val­ idated in a model system . 10 Discussions and Conclusions Extended exposure to microgravity reduces bone mass and degrades mechanical properties of bone tissue ; its most damag­ ing consequence is the loss of bone strength . Unfortunately , the first signature of loss of bone mass is the occurrence of a non - traumatic fracture . Such events can be reduced if there were a reliable and routinely available non - invasive diagnostic for bone strength . We propose that vibrational response be used for this purpose . The work proposed develops the conceptual framework to determine how vibrational methods can be used to reliably estimate bone strength . Successful completion of the tasks will provide a basis for experimental and clinical studies to provide the final validation prior to using the tools in clinical and low gravity settings . References 1 W . S . S . Jee , T . J . Wronsky , E . R . Morey , and D . B . Kimmel , “Effects of Spaceflight on Trabecular Bone in Rat , ” Am . J . Physiol . 244 ( 1983 ) : R310 - 314 . 2 V . S . Oganov , A . I . Grigor’ev , L . I . Voronin , A . S . Rakhmanov , A . V . Bakulin , V . S . Schneider , and A . D . LeBlanc , “Bone Mineral Density in Cosmonauts after Flights Lasting 4 . 5 - 6 Months on the Mir Orbital Station , ” Aviaskosmicheskaia I Ekologicheskaia Meditsina 26 ( 1997 ) : 20 - 24 . 3 E . Zerath , C . Nogues , M . Borne , and P . Sourdaine , “Bone Effects of 13 Days of Weightlessness on Rat and Monkey : Some Figure 3 . The Relationship between τ and Γ for Two Models Results on Biocosmos 1887 and Ground Simulations , ” Physiologist 33 ( 1990 ) : S94 - 95 . 4 R . S . Weinstein , “True Strength , ” J . Bone . Miner . Res . 15 ( 2000 ) : 621 - 25 . 5 Y . C . Fung , Biomechanics : Mechanical Properties of Living Tissue . New York : Springer - Verlag , 1993 . 6 T . - Y . Wu and T . Ohmura , Quantum Theory of Scattering . Englewood Cliffs , N . J . : Prentice - Hall , 1962 . 7 G . H . Gunaratne , “Estimating the Strength of Bone Using Linear Response , ” Phys . Rev . E . 66 ( 2002 ) : 061904 . 8 G . H . Gunaratne , K . K . Mohanty , and S . J . Wimalawansa , “A Model of Trabecular Bone and an Application to Osteoporosis , ” Physica A 315 ( 2002 ) : 98 - 104 . 9 M . A . K . Liebschner , R . Muller , C . S . Rajapakse , S . J . Wimalawansa , and G . H . Gunaratne , “Testing Two Predictions for Fracture Load Using Computer Models of Trabecular Bone , ” Biophysical J . 89 ( 2005 ) : 759 - 67 . 10 Y . Song and G . H . Gunaratne , “A Method for Vibrational Assessment of Solid Bone , ” Chaos . ( Submitted . ) 11 C . S . Rajapakse , J . S . Thomsen , J . S . Espinoza - Ortiz , S . J . Wimalawansa , E . N . Ebbesen , L . Mosekilde , and G . H . Gunaratne , “An Expression Relating Breaking Stress and Density of Trabecular Bone , ” J . Biomechanics 37 ( 2004 ) : 1241 - 49 . Publications Espinoza - Ortiz , J . S . and G . H . Gunaratne . “Current Distributions in Fused Electrical Networks , ” Brazilian J . Physics 33 ( 2003 ) : 368 - 75 . Liebschner , M . A . K . , R . Muller , C . S . Rajapakse , S . J . Wimalawansa , and G . H . Gunaratne . “Testing Two Predictions for Fracture Load Using Computer Models of Trabecular Bone , ” Biophysical J . 89 ( 2005 ) : 759 - 67 . Rajapakse , C . S . , J . S . Thomsen , J . S . Espinoza - Ortiz , S . J . ( Continued on page 126 . ) NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 107 Raman Scattering Test of Mechanical and Sensor Properties of Advanced Nanocomposites Viktor G . Hadjiev , Keesu Jeon T HE PROJECT , COMPLETED IN 2004 , constituted a study of the interfaces in single - wall carbon nanotube ( SWCNT ) com­ posites and nanoscale materials suitable for space flight applica­ tions . As a part of the project , we also assessed the possibility of reinforcement of cyanoacrylate ( CA ) adhesives with single wall carbon nanotubes . We report here some of the preliminary results . Cyanoacrylate adhesives are based on acrylic resins , which rap­ idly polymerize in the presence of Dr . Viktor G . Hadjiev trace amounts of moisture ( hydroxide ions ) , forming strong chains that join the bonded surfaces . Cyanoacrylates are persis­ tive adhesives particularly suitable for bonding non - porous materials in presence of traces of water . They are biocompati­ ble , very good at bonding body tissue , and largely exploited in sutureless surgery . Many cyanoacrylate adhesives are known under the commer­ cial name “Superglue , ” and such a product was used in our experiment . The Superglue used contained 99 . 5 percent ethyl - cyanoacrylate ( C 6 H 7 NO 2 ) . Nanocomposite samples were pre­ pared by mixing SWCNTs , as grown HiPCO material contain­ ing both semiconducting and metallic nanotubes , and cyano­ acrylate resin ( ~ 0 . 02 wt % of SWCNT in CA ) . The mixing was performed in a dry box and the uncured nanocomposite sonicat­ ed for seven hours . A drop of the nanocomposite adhesive was deposited on a copper slide , left to polymerize in air , and meas­ ured under the Raman microscope . Our approach to assess the strength of bonding of SWNTs to the cyanoacrylate matrix is based on Raman spectroscopic measurements of the nanotubes’ strain created either by shrink­ age of the CA matrix upon cure or with decreasing temperature below room temperature . 1 , 2 The Raman spectra of pure SWCNTs and SWCNT / CA nanocomposites at room temperature are presented in Fig . 1 . The figure shows an increase of ~ 3 . 2 cm - 1 in frequency of the G - peak at 1590 cm - 1 on - going from pure SWCNTs to those ( Continued on page 127 . ) Figure 1 . Tangential modes of Raman spectra for pure SWCNTs ( a ) , SWCNT / CA at room temperature ( b ) , and SWCNT / CA at 25 K ( c ) . The sharp peak at 1590 cm - 1 stems from the semiconducting SWCNT , whereas the broad effect emphasized by the broken line corresponds to the tangential vibrations in the metallic nanotubes in the nanocomposite . 108 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Voluntary Muscle Contractions in Advance of Mechanical Foot Stimulation To Enhance Neuromuscular Reﬂex Responses Charles S . Layne , Katharine E . Forth Abstract—Researchers seek to determine the modulating effect of background muscle activity on enhanced neuromuscular responses to mechanical foot stimulation . A small solenoid embedded within a platform provided non - noxious stimulation to the lateral portion of the sole for 100 ms at 3 mm pro­ trusion . Stimulation was applied during different contraction levels of the homonymous muscle and of remote , Jendrassik - like contractions . Root mean square electromyography was measured from the soleus and lateral gastrocnemius . Homonymous muscle contraction linearly increased the neuromus­ cular response to foot stimulation , although no effect was exhibited from remote contractions . The lev­ els of response to stimulation in all conditions were 80 - 100 percent of maximal contraction levels . Mechanical foot stimulation can be used to elicit and enhance neuromuscular activity of the triceps surae muscles , particularly when combined with preexisting “background” voluntary contractions . This activity could be used to attenuate neuromuscular degradation experienced during prolonged bedrest and during extended stays in microgravity . M USCLE ATROPHY IS A CON ­ cern for many popula­ tions , including the elder­ ly , bedridden patients , patients with injured spinal cords , and astronauts . Often the environments or circum­ stances surrounding these individu­ als do not facilitate exercise vol­ umes and / or magnitudes required to maintain muscle mass . Electrical stimulation , sensory stimulation and robotically driven movements are among the various stimulation techniques used in rehabilitation to counter muscle atrophy and unor - Dr . Charles S . Layne ganized neuromuscular activation patterns with the aim of facil­ itating normal neuromuscular activity and patterns . 1 , 2 Non - noxious cutaneous stimulation of the soles of the feet can also modify neuromuscular activity , alter lower limb activ - ity , 3 postural responses 4 , 5 and even restore anticipatory postural responses that vanish in microgravity . 6 , 7 Exhibiting a sensitivity to ground reaction forces , cutaneous afferents from the soles of the feet are thought to be included in the general category of load afferents . Load - detecting afferents are important for the existence and maintenance of postural and locomotion patterns in normal 8 , 9 and spinal cord injured patients . 2 , 10 Moreover , atten­ uation of muscle atrophy has been achieved with the application of non - noxious , dynamic mechanical stimulation to the hindfeet of rats in a hindlimb suspension model . 11 - 13 For example , Kyparos et al . 12 demonstrated complete attenuation of soleus muscle atrophy relative to controls in a rat hindlimb suspension protocol by providing low levels of intermittent mechanical stimulation to the plantar surface . For therapeutic use , a specialized “boot” that provides mechanical stimulation to the foot could be used to increase lower limb neuromuscular activation . The benefits would extend beyond muscle atrophy attenuation to include an elevat­ ed use of sensory and neural apparatus that otherwise degener­ ates with disuse . 14 Such foot stimulations could be tailored to the needs of the patient , including whether the “boot” is worn when passive or in combination with voluntary muscle activity . 15 To date , the primary methods used to counter neuromotor degradation during flight consist of modified exercises tradi­ tionally performed in 1 g . These include treadmills , bicycle ergometers , bungy cords , and modified resistance exercise devices . These exercise devices assist astronauts in maintaining cardiovascular and skeletal - musculature fitness . However , even in combination , these exercises are not completely effective in preventing the negative consequences of unloading on the neu­ romotor system . Additionally , performing these exercises is time - consuming , thereby preventing the crewmembers from completing important operational tasks . Before therapeutic cutaneous foot stimulation can be applied to humans , however , we need further understanding of the human NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 109 response to mechanical cutaneous stimulation . The integration of cutaneous stimulation into the motor system is widely accepted in the literature as being task - dependent and context specific . 16 , 17 Two fundamental differences between separate tasks are the muscles involved and the level to which they are contracted . Preexisting muscle contraction levels are a determining factor for the expression of cutaneous reflexes , for these reflexes are only present in actively contracting muscles . 16 , 18 As a result , research into cutaneous reflex responses often involves a main­ tained level of background voluntary contraction . 18 , 19 A variety of voluntary contraction levels have been previously used , rang­ ing from 1 - 2 % to 50 % maximum voluntary contraction ( MVC ) , although few investigators have varied the level of contraction within a study . Aniss et al . 18 compared single motor unit responses in ankle muscles elicited from cutaneous stimulation of the foot , during both weak and strong contractions , 5 % and 30 % MVC , respectively . At the level of the individual motor unit , a greater magnitude of response was measured for the higher contraction level . 18 Cutaneous reflexes from the studies referenced above were elicited following electrical stimulation to nerves radiating from areas of the feet . Mechanical foot stimulation to the soles of the feet has also generated facilitating effects during maximal back­ ground voluntary contractions . Agonist neuromuscular activity during seated maximal ankle dorsiflexion and plantar flexion was enhanced significantly when coupled with mechanical foot stimulation . 3 A passive response to mechanical foot stimulation has since been elicited by applying a 100 ms stimulation to the lateral side of the forefoot . 20 The response has been shown to be sensitive to static ankle angles , and inhibited by soleus stretch . 20 However , the relationship between the level of background vol­ untary contractions and subsequent response to mechanical foot stimulation is still unknown . Furthermore , most natural movements are not isolated to a single muscle contraction but often include multiple or even dis­ tant muscle groups , suggesting an integrated method of control . The Jendrassik maneuver is a widely researched set of remote isometric contractions of the upper body . The maneuver requires the hands to be interlocked and pulled against each other . The Jendrassik maneuver is often used as a clinical test because of its potentiating effect on the tendon tap reflex and H reflex , 21 , 22 both of which are considered “spinal reflexes . ” This potentiation has been attributed to the excitation of soleus motoneuron pools or reduction of presynaptic inhibition to enhance the reflex response . 23 - 25 Short latency neuromuscular responses observed with mechanical foot stimulation are also suggested to be of spinal origin . 20 Therefore , it is reasonable to suggest the Jendrassik maneuver might also facilitate neuro­ muscular responses to mechanical foot stimulation . Consequently , before mechanical foot stimulation can be incorporated into a therapeutic device that provides controlled stimulation and response , we must determine the effect of back­ ground muscle activity because the same stimulation may result in different responses if patients are performing different activ­ ities . This study investigated the changes in response to mechanical foot stimulation with different levels of voluntary local , i . e . , homonymous ( triceps surae ) and remote ( upper Figure 1 . A Typical Response of the SOL to a Single Lateral Foot Stimulation body ) contractions . We hypothesized that both local and remote background contractions would facilitate the neuromuscular response to mechanical foot stimulation . These findings will not only contribute to the development of a therapeutic device , but provide implications for use with individuals unable to reach contraction levels required to maintain muscle mass . Methods Dynamic Foot Stimulator ( DFS ) Protocol This study applied a non - noxious mechanical stimulus to the lateral portion of the sole of the foot during different levels of voluntary local , i . e . , homonymous ( triceps surae ) and remote ( upper body ) contractions . Neuromuscular responses were measured with surface electromyography of the soleus ( SOL ) and lateral gastrocnemius ( GA ) . This study was conducted in the Laboratory of Integrated Physiology , University of Houston , and performed by 15 right - handed healthy subjects aged between 18 and 35 years . All were free of any known muscular or neurological medical conditions . Subjects were recruited from the university community . They provided their informed consent to participate in this study , which was approved by the University of Houston’s Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects . Exclusion criteria included failure to respond to the stimulation while seated and passive . Only one potential subject failed to respond . Electrode sites were located and prepared and electrodes posi­ tioned over the belly of the SOL and GA ( see EMG collection procedure below ) . The experimental environment for all exper­ iments minimized external stimulation such as noise , light , and distractions . Lateral foot stimulation was applied after two seconds of maintained steady state of contraction at the appropriate level ( see foot stimulation and background activity levels for more details ) . Table 1 provides summary information about each con­ dition . The order of the conditions was randomized for each subject to eliminate any order affect . 110 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Table 1 . Experimental conditions Condition Position Contraction Contraction Level Base Seated None 0 % TS40 Seated Triceps surae 40 % TS80 Seated Triceps surae 80 % Jend40 Seated Jendrassik 40 % Jend80 Seated Jendrassik 80 % Both40 Seated Both 40 % Both80 Seated Both 80 % Foot Stimulation The DFS device contained one solenoid ( surface area 2 . 5 cm ) , controlled through customized software ( LabView , National Instrument Corp , Austin , Texas ) . The device was embedded within a custom - built wooden platform . Velcro straps , fed through narrow slits in the platform on either side of the foot , secured the foot in place . Each condition consisted of lateral sole stimulation applied for 100 ms at 20 psi , to 3 mm protrusion , 16 times within a 5 - minute period . A variable inter - stimulus interval with a two - minute rest period between each condition were used to prevent event anticipation and sensory receptor habituation . To avoid muscle fatigue , stimulations were delivered in series of 5 - 7 stimulations with rest periods in between . During stimula­ tions , subjects were required to read aloud a series of random numbers , to control mental attention . 26 The random numbers were displayed on paper , a meter in front of the subject at head height , which partially covered the computer screen . Background Muscle Activity The subjects performed isometric plantar flexion and Jendrassik­ like contractions at maximal contraction from which 40 and 80 percent of maximal effort contraction levels were calculated . SOL maximal contraction levels were determined with a mini­ mum of three isolated trials . A mean peak amplitude value was calculated from three peak amplitudes , each the peak amplitude of a separate 1 s sample of the maximal contractions . Triceps surae contraction levels were controlled by subjects through visual feedback of the EMG associated with their soleus contrac­ tion from an oscilloscope . In all conditions , EMG responses to foot stimuli were hidden from subjects as only a limited viewing portion was visible on the oscilloscope screen . Jendrassik - like contraction levels were determined with a modified use of a hand dynamometer ( Lafayette Instrument , Lafayette , IN ) . The right hand grasped the handle , and a glove was used on the left hand for comfort . Subjects were instructed to have the thumbs point­ ing up and not to squeeze the hand dynamometer in the hand , but , instead , to pull against the fingers , as an extension of force generated from the arms . Maintenance of background muscle levels was practiced at 40 % and 80 % of maximal effort levels with visual feedback of the hand dynamometer . Conditions involved subjects performing separate triceps surae and Jendrassik - like contractions , as well as simultaneous TS and Jendrassik - like contractions , at 40 % and 80 % . EMG Data Collection The skin was cleansed , abraised , and a silver - silver chloride pre­ amplifier electrode ( Therapeutics Unlimited , Iowa City , Iowa , USA ) attached to the site with electrode gel and double - sided adhesive tape . Surgical tape ensured that the electrode main­ tained its position on the skin over the belly of the respective muscle . The ground lead was placed just above the right ankle using an elastic strap . Sampling rates were preset to 1000 Hz . Both the EMG root mean squared data from the SOL and GA ( 5 . 5 ms time constant ) and solenoid activation signal were simultaneously collected by the Enhanced Graphics Acquisition and Analysis ( EGAA ) Board ( R . C . Electronics Inc . , Santa Barbara , CA ) , in order to synchronize stimulus and EMG data waveforms for the analysis . Data Analysis A custom Excel program ( Microsoft Corporation , Redmond , WA , USA ) identified a 300 ms period surrounding the stimula­ tion : 100 ms preceding stimulation , 100 ms during stimulation and 100 ms post - stimulation . Visual inspection of the 100 ms preceding stimulation identified a consistent baseline level prior to stimulation . A 200 ms window of analysis for each stimula­ tion was defined by the initiation of the stimulus and the follow­ ing 200 ms . For each condition , the first response waveform was disregarded to reduce a potential startle response , and the subsequent 15 response waveforms were averaged . The peak amplitude of the average waveform was next determined for each condition for each subject . This method ensured that the response peak amplitude was extracted rather than peaks asso­ ciated with voluntary contraction , for a clear response peak to the stimulus was easily identified . The data were transformed with a square root function to adjust for a mild distribution skew and to facilitate a normal distribution . Repeated measures analy­ sis was used to test for possible differences between peak ampli­ tude respsonses of experimental conditions . Two factors were included : “contraction type” and “level of contraction . ” Greenhouse - Geissner adjustments were made when the covari­ ance matrix circularity assumption was violated . A priori con­ trasts were used to test planned comparisons . Results Basic Neuromuscular Response In both the SOL and GA , the basic neuromuscular reflex response to lateral foot stimulation was consistent in pattern , duration , and latency . The response latency was ~ 50 ms , and continued for ~ 20 ms . The peak latency typically occurred at 60 ms ; however , the amplitude of the response was highly variable ( Fig . 1 ) . Peak Amplitude of Response Overall , greater local background contractions of the triceps surae elicited a greater neuromuscular reflex response to mechan­ ical stimulation of the sole in both the SOL and GA . The GA demonstrated a significant linear increase in reflex response with increasing voluntary triceps surae contraction levels ( p = 0 . 028 ) . The SOL reflex response approached significance exhibiting the same trend ( p = 0 . 074 ) ( Fig . 2 ) . NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 111 Conversely , the conditions involving a remote contraction from the upper body combined with no voluntary triceps surae activation ( jend40 and jend80 ) yielded no difference from the baseline neuromuscu­ lar reflex response of the SOL or GA to foot stimulation ( p > 0 . 05 ) . Additionally , Jendrassik - like contractions did not alter the response profile or amplitude when paired with background triceps surae contractions . There was no difference between “TS” and “both” conditions . Response vs . Maximum Contraction Peak reflex response amplitudes in the SOL reached similar levels as those measured during voluntary maximal con - Figure 2 . The linear increase in peak amplitude response with voluntary back - ground contraction levels of the TS and BOTH ( TS + Jendrassik ) : ( a ) SOL mean ( + SE ) amplitude response ; ( b ) GA mean ( + SE ) amplitude response . tractions in a seated position . Figure 5 represents the SOL reflex peak as a percentage of voluntary SOL maximal contrac­ tion . Contraction levels reached by the reflex response to mechanical stimulation of the sole were sufficient to create vis­ ible contractions of the SOL and GA and accompanying leg movement ( Fig . 3 ) . Inhibition For all conditions , including a voluntary background triceps surae contraction , an additional response waveform feature was observed : an inhibition for ~ 50 ms post - response . This inhibi­ tion is also maintained when a background Jendrassik contrac­ tion is added to the background triceps surae contraction . Discussion The aim of this study was to determine the modulating effect of background muscle activity on the neuromuscular response of the plantar flexor musculature upon mechanical foot stimula­ tion . Sensory stimulation generated by lateral foot stimulation elicited a similar sharp neuromuscular response in both passive and active triceps surae musculature . This suggests that a ther­ apeutic device incorporating mechanical foot stimulation to facilitate plantar flexor neuromuscular activity can be applied to patients with low mobility as well as to individuals during some form of physical activity . The temporal features of the responses remained constant across all conditions with variations only displayed in response peak amplitudes . A response with a latency as short as ~ 50 ms and duration of ~ 20 ms suggests an oligosynaptic pathway for this response to mechanical foot stimulation . The non - noxious lateral stimulus , which presented rapid contact with a 3 mm depression of the sole site , likely stimulated fast and slow adapt­ ing cutaneous mechanoreceptor units 27 and may also stimulate muscle spindles of intrinsic foot muscles . The mechanical stim­ ulation generated a response with a latency 20 ms shorter than cutaneous reflexes elicited electrically , 19 , 28 10 - 20 ms longer than short latency components , and 15 - 25 ms shorter than medium latency components of mechanically induced stretch reflexes . 29 Also , the response occurring when the triceps surae is electri­ cally silent is inconsistent with cutaneous reflexes elicited with Figure 3 . The level of SOL peak amplitude reﬂex response as a percentage of SOL voluntary maximum contraction peak amplitude ( + SE ) . The bold line represents maximal peak amplitude values . non - noxious electrical stimulation , which require an actively contracting muscle . 16 , 18 Regardless of the exact neurophysiological mechanisms , the presence of background voluntary contractions of the triceps surae produced a positive linear relationship between the level of background triceps surae contractions and the amplitude of the peak responses . Present findings are generally consistent with an increase in electrically elicited cutaneous responses with background contractions of the homonymous muscle from both non - noxious 18 and noxious foot stimulation . 30 The response to noxious stimulation with increasing background contractions demonstrated a linear trend until 30 - 40 % maximal contraction , after which the response was saturated . 30 For all conditions , including a condition when no voluntary background contraction was present , the SOL peak amplitudes reached with foot stimulation were at least 80 % of the maxi­ mum peak amplitude . Moreover , the conditions that included 80 % SOL contractions generated peak amplitude responses to an equal or higher level of maximum contractions . Although the variability between subjects for this comparison was substantial , the prevailing conclusion is that the peak magnitude of the SOL 112 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA reflex response to foot stimulation is comparable to moderate or upper level voluntary SOL contractions . This implies that dynamic mechanical foot stimulation has the ability to activate a substantial number of motor units of the plantar flexor muscu­ lature . Thus , these results support the use of mechanical foot stimulation for individuals that struggle to produce voluntary contractions of the lower limb , whether requisite for generating moderate level contractions in a passive muscle or for enhancing voluntary contractions to obtain higher peak amplitudes . Voluntary activation of the homonymous muscle is expected to facilitate the response observed in this study in two ways— First , by exciting the soleus motorneuron pool thresholds with descending commands , lowering thresholds , and creating an excited spinal environment for subsequent sensory inputs . This concept is in agreement with the attribution of greater cortical activity , creating larger long latency cutaneous reflex responses during voluntary muscle contractions rather than similar levels of posturally driven contractions . 19 Second , isometric voluntary contractions elevate muscle spindle output during a maintained contraction , 31 which may contribute to a facilitating spinal envi­ ronment for additional afferent input . In addition to the enhanced response to foot stimulation , another feature of the response waveform pattern was identified during the presence of background contractions , that being a post response inhibition period with a duration of ~ 55 ms . This inhibition may result from Ib inhibitory afferents or recurrent inhibition triggered from the initial response . Interestingly , visu­ al inspection of individual stimulations revealed the occasional stimulation that failed to produce a clear response but still exhibited notable inhibition . This suggests that the inhibition was not generated by negative feedback loops from the respond­ ing muscle , but rather from sensory afferents directly associat­ ed with the stimulation . Remote contractions in the form of Jendrassik - like contrac­ tions yielded no change to the neuromuscular response to foot stimulation ; nor did they affect the facilitated response created by the background triceps surae contraction when both local and remote contractions were simultaneously performed . This was unexpected because Jendrassik contractions provide a strong potentiation for stretch and H - reflexes . Thus , the results of this study suggest that a global excitation of the triceps surae motorneuron pools is not generated by a remote Jendrassik - like contraction , 25 for enhancement of the response to the stimulation would have been expected were this the case . This also indirect­ ly implies that Ia input is not a primary contributor to the mechanically - induced response from the plantar surface , as Ia afferents are potentiated by Jendrassik maneuvers . 25 Conclusion Overall , the findings in this study support the idea of dynamic foot stimulation as a viable method for creating and enhancing neuromuscular activity of the SOL and GA . The stimulation could be used in conjunction with guided movements to help insert a contraction - inhibition pattern that may otherwise be missing , or the simulation could be simply employed as a facil­ itator to achieve higher peak amplitude responses . Thus , mechanical foot stimulation could provide a rehabilitation approach for encouraging sensory motor interactions of the lower limbs , stimulating the spinal cord , and attenuating muscle atrophy and neuromuscular degradation . Individuals prone to muscle atrophy stand to benefit the most from such an approach , through both the treatment and attenuation of muscle atrophy . Independent of the potential use , however , this study demon­ strated the value of lateral foot stimulation as a non - invasive , non - noxious method for generating neuromuscular activity . References 1 L . A . Talbot , J . M . Gaines , S . M . Ling , and E . J . Metter , “A Home - Based Protocol of Electrical Muscle Stimulation for Quadriceps Muscle Strength in Older Adults with Osteoarthritis of the Knee , ” J . Rheumatol . 30 . 7 ( 2003 ) : 1571 - 78 . 2 G . Colombo , M . Wirz , and V . Dietz , “Effect of Locomotor Training Related to Clinical and Electrophysiological Examinations in Spinal Cord Injured Humans , ” Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 860 ( 1998 ) : 536 - 38 . 3 C . S . Layne , K . E . Forth , M . F . Baxter , and J . J . Houser , “Voluntary Neuromuscular Activation Is Enhanced when Paired with a Mechanical Stimulus to Human Plantar Soles , ” Neurosci . Lett . 334 . 2 ( 2002 ) : 75 - 78 . 4 A . Kavounoudias , R . Roll , and J . P . Roll , “Specific Whole - Body Shifts Induced by Frequency - Modulated Vibrations of Human Plantar Soles , ” Neurosci . Lett . 266 . 3 ( 1999 ) : 181 - 84 . 5 G . Wu and J . H . Chiang , “The Significance of Somatosensory Stimulations to the Human Foot in the Control of Postural Reflexes , ” Exp . Brain Res . 114 . 1 ( 1997 ) : 163 - 69 . 6 C . S . Layne , A . P . Mulavara , P . V . McDonald , C . J . Pruett , I . B . Kozlovskaya , and J . J . Bloomberg , “Foot Pressure To Maintain Neuromuscular Function During Long Duration Spaceflight , ” Space Technology and Applications International Forum , American Institute of Physics ( 2000 ) : 226 - 31 . 7 C . S . Layne , A . P . Mulavara , C . J . Pruett , P . V . McDonald , I . B . Kozlovskaya , and J . J . Bloomberg , “The Use of In - flight Foot Pressure as a Countermeasure to Neuromuscular Degradation , ” Acta Astronaut 42 . 1 - 8 ( 1998 ) : 231 - 46 . 8 V . Dietz and J . Duysens , “Significance of Load Receptor Input During Locomotion : A Review , ” Gait Posture 11 . 2 ( 2000 ) : 102 - 10 . 9 V . Dietz and G . Colombo , “Effects of Body Immersion on Postural Adjustments to Voluntary Arm Movements in Humans : Role of Load Receptor Input , ” J . Physiol . 497 . 3 ( 1996 ) : 849 - 56 . 10 K . Nakazawa , W . Kakihana , N . Kawashima , M . Akai , and H . Yano , “Induction of Locomotor - like EMG Activity in Paraplegic Persons by Orthotic Gait Training , ” Exp . Brain Res . 157 . 1 ( 2004 ) : 117 - 23 . 11 L . De - Doncker , F . Picquet , and M . Falempin , “Effects of Cutaneous Receptor Stimulation on Muscular Atrophy Developed in Hindlimb Unloading Condition , ” J . Appl . Physiol . 89 . 6 ( 2000 ) : 2344 - 51 . 12 A . Kyparos , D . L . Feeback , C . S . Layne , D . A . Martinez , and M . S . F . Clarke , “Mechanical Stimulation of the Plantar Foot Surface Attenuates Soleus Muscle Atrophy Induced by Hindlimb Unloading in Rats , ” J . Appl . Physiol . 99 . 2 ( 2005 ) : 739 - 46 . 13 M . Falempin and S . F . In - Albon , “Influence of Brief Daily Tendon Vibration on Rat Soleus Muscle in Non - Weight - Bearing NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 113 Situation , ” J . Appl . Physiol . 87 . 1 ( 1999 ) : 3 - 9 . 14 J . Duchateau and R . M . Enoka , “Neural Adaptations with Chronic Activity Patterns in Able - Bodied Humans , ” Am . J . Phys . Med . Rehabil . 81 . S11 ( 2002 ) : S17 - 27 . 15 R . Hernandez - Korwo , I . B . Kozlovskaya , Y . Kreydich , et al . , “Effect on Seven - Day Spaceflight on Structure and Function of Human Locomotor System , ” Kosmicheskaya Biologiya I Aviakosmicheskaya Meditsina 17 . 2 ( 1982 ) : 37 - 44 . 16 D . Burke , H . G . Dickson , and N . F . Skuse , “Task - Dependent Changes in the Responses to Low - threshold Cutaneous Afferent Volleys in the Human Lower Limb , ” J . Physiol . 432 ( 1991 ) : 445 - 58 . 17 A . Prochazka , “Sensorimotor Gain Control : A Basic Strategy of Motor Systems ? ” Prog . Neurobiol . 33 . 4 ( 1989 ) : 281 - 307 . 18 A . M . Aniss , S . C . Gandevia , and D . Burke , “Reflex Responses in Active Muscles Elicited by Stimulation of Low - Threshold Afferents from the Human Foot , ” J . Neurophysiol . 67 . 5 ( 1992 ) : 1375 - 84 . 19 J . Gibbs , L . M . Harrison , and J . A . Stephens , “Cutaneomuscular Reflexes Recorded from the Lower Limb in Man During Different Tasks , ” J . Physiol . 487 . 1 ( 1995 ) : 237 - 42 . 20 C . Layne , K . Forth , and A . Abercromby , “Spatial Factors and Muscle Spindle Input Influence the Generation of Neuromuscular Responses to Stimulation of the Human Foot , ” Acta Astronaut 56 ( 2005 ) : 809 - 19 . 21 J . E . Gregory , S . A . Wood , and U . Proske , “An Investigation of the Jendrassik Manoeuvre , ” Acta Physiol . Pharmacol . Bulg . 26 . 3 ( 2001 ) : 171 - 75 . 22 E . P . Zehr and R . B . Stein , “Interaction of the Jendrassik Maneuver with Segmental Presynaptic Inhibition , ” Exp . Brain Res . 124 . 4 ( 1999 ) : 474 - 80 . 23 B . Bussel , C . Morin , and E . Pierrot - Deseilligny , “Mechanism of Monosynaptic Reflex Reinforcement During Jendrassik Manoeuvre in Man , ” J . Neurol . Neurosurg . Psychiatry 41 . 1 ( 1978 ) : 40 - 44 . 24 E . Ribot - Ciscar , C . Rossi - Durand , and J . P . Roll , “Increased Muscle Spindle Sensitivity to Movement During Reinforcement Manoeuvres in Relaxed Human Subjects , ” J . Physiol . 523 . 1 ( 2000 ) : 271 - 82 . 25 J . E . Gregory , S . A . Wood , and U . Proske , “An Investigation into Mechanisms of Reflex Reinforcement by the Jendrassik Manoeuvre , ” Exp . Brain Res . 183 . 3 ( 2001 ) : 366 - 74 . 26 C . Rossi - Durand , “The Influence of Increased Muscle Spindle Sensitivity on Achilles Tendon Jerk and H - reflex in Relaxed Human Subjects , ” Somatosens Mot . Res . 19 . 4 ( 2002 ) : 286 - 95 . 27 P . M . Kennedy and J . T . Inglis , “Distribution and Behaviour of Glabrous Cutaneous Receptors in the Human Foot Sole , ” J . Physiol . 583 . 3 ( 2002 ) : 995 - 1002 . 28 J . D . Brooke , W . E . McIlroy , W . R . Staines , P . A . Angerilli , and G . F . Peritore , “Cutaneous Reflexes of the Human Leg During Passive Movement , ” J . Physiol . 518 . 2 ( 1999 ) : 619 - 28 . 29 M . J . Grey , B . Larsen , and T . Sinkjaer , “A Task Dependent Change in the Medium Latency Component of the Soleus Stretch Reflex , ” Exp . Brain Res . 145 . 3 ( 2002 ) : 316 - 22 . 30 A . Rossi , and B . Decchi , “Flexibility of Lower Limb Reflex Responses to Painful Cutaneous Stimulation in Standing Humans : Evidence of Load - Dependent Modulation , ” J . Physiol . 481 . 2 ( 1994 ) : 521 - 32 . 31 L . R . Wilson , S . C . Gandevia , and D . Burke , “Increased Resting Discharge of Human Spindle Afferents Following Voluntary Contraction , ” J . Physiol . 488 ( 1995 ) : 833 - 40 . Publications Forth , K . E . and C . S . Layne . “Background Muscle Activity Enhances the Neuromuscular Response to Mechanical Foot Stimulation” ( 2006 ) . ( In review . ) Presentations Forth , K . E . and C . S . Layne . “Neuromuscular Response to Context - Specific Foot Stimulation , ” Annual meeting of the Society for Neuroscience , Washington D . C . , Nov . 2005 . Kyparos , A . , D . L . Feeback , C . S . Layne , D . A . Martinez , and M . S . F . Clarke . “Dynamic Foot Stimulation as a Potential Countermeasure to Muscle Atrophy , ” 4th Symposium of Aerospace Medicine and Space Research , Oinouses , Chios , Greece , Sept . 2005 . Funding and Proposals Clarke , M . S . F . , C . S . Layne , and W . Boling . “Development of New Technologies for Assessing the Effects of Physical Activity on Skeletal Muscle Function and Physical Fitness in Field - Based Situations , ” Grants To Enhance and Advance Research , University of Houston , May 2003 , $ 23 , 284 . Incidentals During the previous reporting period , ISSO - supported student , Katharine E . Forth obtained her Ph . D . in Motor Control from the Department of Health and Human Performance , University of Houston . She is continuing in her role as a postdoctoral fellow in the Neurosciences Laboratory at NASA - Johnson Space Center . During the reporting period , Andrew Abercromby , who previ­ ously worked on the project ( see publications and presentations ) , obtained his Ph . D . degree in Motor Control from the Department of Health and Human Performance , University of Houston . Dr . Abercromby is now employed in the Anthropometrics Laboratory at the NASA - Johnson Space Center . 114 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA A Neural - Network - Based Approach for Control of Vibration in a Black Hawk Helicopter Heidar A . Malki , Karolos Grigoriadis , José Canelon F ACULTY IN THE C OLLEGE OF T ECHNOLOGY AND THE C ULLEN College of Engineering have devoted efforts to the development of a time - domain approach for control of the vibration in a Black Hawk helicopter in an ISSO project funded in 2004 . As a result of this grant , two papers have been published and one proposal submitted since the Y2004 report . Publications Bai , Y . , and K . M . Grigoriadis . “H - Infinity Collocated Control of Structural Systems : An Analytical Bound Approach , ” J . Dynamical Sys . Measurement and Control 28 . 5 ( 2005 ) : 850 - 54 . Canelon , J . I . , H . A . Malki , S . A . Jacklin , and L . S . Shieh . “An Adaptive Neural Network Model for Vibration Control in a Black Hawk Helicopter , ” J . Am . Helicopter Soc . ( Oct . 2005 ) . GPS RECEIVER—In the NASA Navigation Systems and Technology Lab , R . Steven Provence ( upper l . ) , a doctoral student in the UH Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering , holds in his hands the newly developed GPS receiver he designed to work on - orbit . It provides accurate measurements for navigation and docking . l . ) dis - Military photograph INTERNATIONAL COLLEAGUES—Dr . Heidar A . Malki ( cusses helicopter controls with Dr . Ho Jae Lee ( r . ) Visiting MILITARY MOBILITY—The UH 60 Black Hawk , a highly mobile Associate Professor in the Department of Electrical and aircraft manufactured by United Technologies ( Stratford , Electronic Engineering at Yonsei University in Seoul , Korea . CT ) and General Electric ( Lynn , MA ) for the U . S . army . NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 115 Low - Frequency Dielectric Spectroscopy of Martian Soil Samples John H . Miller , Jr . , Jaroslaw Wosik , David S . McKay , David Warmflash Abstract—Investigation concentrates on Martian soil simulants and live cell suspensions using low - fre - quency dielectric spectroscopy and related techniques , such as nonlinear harmonic response . Such methods hold tremendous potential in the development of sensors that could test for subsurface micro­ bial life on Mars with numerous additional applications . In previous work , UH and NASA - JSC researchers measured the low - frequency dielectric properties of soil samples known to be Mars ana­ logues , as well as known live cell suspensions . In this initial study , they tested common soil and JSC Mars - 1 , a sample of volcanic ash from Hawaii developed for use as a Mars regolith simulant . Biologically active , JSC Mars - 1 contains microorganisms and biomolecules equivalent to 10 6 - 10 7 cells / gram , less than common soils . More recently , researchers have focused on nonlinear harmonic response as a method of revealing potential signatures of live organisms . Recent investigations include studies of whole cells as well as extracted organelles , such as mitochondria and chloroplasts . T HE POSSIBLE EXISTENCE OF life on Mars , either in the past or at present , 1 has pro­ found scientific implications for the evolution of life on Earth and the distribution of life in the cos­ mos . The Viking Program , which made the first serious attempt to detect the presence of living or fos­ silized organisms in Martian soil , yielded ambiguous results . 2 More recent studies 3 of Martian meteorite Allan Hills 84001 ( ALH84001 ) suggest that microbial life existed on Mars about four billion years John H . Miller , Jr . ago . Compelling evidence includes the existence of magnetite ( Fe 3 O 4 ) crystals found within carbonate globules and their asso­ ciated rims in the meteorite . 4 About one fourth of these tens - of - nanometer - sized magnetites are nearly identical to those pro­ duced by magnetotactic bacteria on Earth and are not known or expected to be produced by abiotic means . It has , therefore , been argued that these Martian magnetite crystals are , in fact , magnetofossils , which , if true , would constitute evidence of the oldest life forms known . 5 Further evidence suggests that subsurface Martian life could potentially survive even today . 6 There is abundant geological evidence that ice was once deposited in the regolith , where it should still be present above mid - latitudes . 7 This ice , which probably extends several kilometers below the surface , could be a source of liquid water near magmatic intrusions . 8 On Earth , the biomass of subterranean organisms may equal or exceed that at the surface . 9 These organisms can live in highly saline conditions at temperatures from 115°C to – 20°C . 10 , 11 Such conditions might prevail beneath the surface in an aquifer or hydrothermal system . For these and other reasons , there is considerable interest in developing new techniques for detecting subsurface life on Mars . Moreover , the likelihood that oceans of liquid water exist below the icy surfaces of Europa and other moons make these exciting candidates for the existence of extraterrestrial life in our solar system . Therefore , there is a need to develop technologies that could lead to portable devices useful in robotic missions or for use by astronauts for the detection of extant life forms . Goals of the Project The goal of this project is to study possible techniques for the detection and characterization of live organisms , including dielectric spectroscopy 12 , 13 and related methods , such as nonlinear harmonic response . 14 One objective is to detect possible signa­ tures unique to live organisms that could be used to search for life elsewhere in the solar system . A challenge for astrobiologi­ cal investigation of Mars and other extraterrestrial bodies is to develop in situ instruments capable of distinguishing environ­ mental samples or extracts containing life forms from those that do not . At the same time , the life - detection technology must not be geocentric ; that is , it must not be targeted to characteristics that , although specific to life , may be limited to those life forms native to Earth . We are thus investigating dielectric spectroscopy ( DS ) as a life detection tool because life throughout the Cosmos , regardless of its biochemistry and the nature of its genetic mate­ rial , must utilize a variety of complex , charged macromolecules . 116 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Results Our Y2004 report discussed measurements of complex dielectric constant , which represents the linear response to an applied ac electric field . In those experiments , we employed a a liquid capacitor cell coupled to a Solartron Analytical Model 1260 Impedance Analyzer . This setup enabled us to obtain the complex dielectric response , with both the real and imaginary parts , where the imaginary part of the dielectric response is proportional to the conductivity divided by the frequency . We tested common soil and JSC Mars - 1 , volcanic ash from Hawaii , developed for use as a Mars regolith simulant . 15 Biologically active , JSC Mars - 1 con­ tains microorganisms and biomolecules equivalent to 10 6 - 10 7 cells / gram , less than common soils ( which can contain quantities of up to 10 9 cells / gram ) . Portions of each environmental sample were left untreated , while other portions were sterilized : auto­ claved for 60 minutes at 121°C , at 2 atm , then heated in an oven at 220° for 3 hours followed by exposure to ultraviolet light for 16 hours . Water extractions were then performed on sterilized and untreated soil and JSC Mars - 1 samples . Extracts of untreated soil and JSC Mars - 1 yielded multiple microbial strains when incubat­ ed on Luria - Bertani ( LB ) agar for 24 hours at three temperatures : 23°C , 30°C , and 37°C . Extracts of sterilized soil and JSC Mars - 1 showed no growth at any of these temperatures , indicating that the sterilization protocol had indeed destroyed all living forms within the environmental samples . Dielectric spectroscopy conducted on extracts showed that the dielectric constant and conductivity were higher for sterilized samples compared with untreated samples . We hypothesized that the sterilization protocol results in increased dielectric constant and conductivity due to lysis of cells and consequent release of charged molecules . Samples containing living cells may thus be distinguishable from those containing only macromolecules by performing dielectric spectroscopy at variable temperatures . We therefore performed measurements at two temperatures , 4°C and 37°C , where we tested a suspension of the bacterium , E . coli ( 2 . 5 × 10 9 cells / ml ) , as well as three examples of large , charged bio - molecules : deoxyribonucleic acid ( DNA ) , hemoglobin ( Hb ) , and bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) . At 10 Hz , dielectric constant for E . coli suspension increased by 70 % at 37° as compared to 4° , while dielectric constants for DNA , Hb , and BSA increased by 28 % , 17 % , and 49 % respectively . However , the DNA , Hb , and BSA used in this preliminary study were then found to be con­ taminated with microorganisms , and as in the case of E . coli , the effects of temperature on life may be the reason the dielectric dif­ ferences measured for these compounds . Therefore , we used fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) ( containing proteins , cell wall lipids , and other compounds ) , specially treated to eliminate all known or suspected life forms , including the controversial entities known as nanobacteria . 17 , 18 Results showed that at 10 Hz the dielectric constant for sterile FBS increases by only approxi­ mately 6 . 5 % for the FBS at 37°C vs . 4°C . More recently , we have been investigating nonlinear harmon­ ic response to probe signals produced by active enzyme com­ plexes unique to live organisms . Experimental setups employ a Stanford Research SR 780 Vector Signal Analyzer . A supercon­ ducting quantum interference device ( SQUID ) is used to direct­ ly probe the magnetic fields produced by the induced currents at Figure 1 . Induced 3 rd harmonic amplitude vs . applied fun - damental frequency ( 5 - V applied amplitude ) for three dif - ferent concentrations of S . cerevisiae , ( budding yeast ) . Note that two peaks , centered around 5 kHz and 12 kHz , appear to “grow” out of the background as the cell concentration is increased . These results on whole cells have led us to inves - tigate extracted organelles , including mitochondria and chloroplasts . ( See pp . 76 - 79 . ) frequencies below 100 Hz , while a four - electrode setup is used at kilohertz frequencies . ( See p . 33 . ) For example , we have dis­ covered resonant - like peaks in the frequency - dependent harmon­ ic responses of live yeast cell suspensions , as shown in Fig . 1 . Preliminary evidence suggested that this behavior may result from active molecular motor complexes unique to live organ­ isms , thus providing another tool for detecting life forms and for fundamental research in biophysics . Figure 1 shows the magni­ tudes of the induced harmonics ( across the inner two electrodes ) vs . applied fundamental frequency , for an applied voltage amplitude of 5 V across the outer two electrodes . Note that two peaks , centered around 5 kHz and 12 kHz , appear to “grow” out of the background as the cell concentration is increased . In addi­ tion , we find that potassium cyanide suppresses the observed peaks . Potassium cyanide ( KCN ) is a known respiratory inhibitor that binds to the cytochrome c oxidase complex . This enzyme is the fourth complex of the electron transport chain , which pumps protons ( H + ions ) across the mitochondrial inner membrane against the concentration gradient . As it does so , it oxidizes the electron carrier cytochrome c , and is responsible for 90 percent of the oxygen consumption by all living organ­ isms on the planet . Importantly , the yeast cells are not necessar­ ily killed by cyanide , and they remain capable of fermentation . These results led us to embark on a study of extracted organelles , particularly mitochondria and chloroplasts . Several highlights of this study are discussed on pp . 33 - 38 . In addition , using SQUIDs for low - frequency measurements , we continued studies of whole cells in which we investigated harmonic response signals that appear to be generated by active membrane pumps in the plasma membrane . For example , we found that the addition of glucose dramatically affects the NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 117 Figure 2 . Time dependent 2nd ( top ) and 3rd ( bottom ) har - monic responses of a yeast cell suspension ( 108 cells / ml ) after adding 0 . 1M of D - glucose . The glucose was added to the resting cell suspension a few minutes before the meas - urements ( Time = 0 minutes ) . H + - ATPase and other trans - porters apparently increase activity in the presence of glu - cose , as reﬂected by an increase in the 2nd harmonic response , and decreased ( by about 60 % ) in the 3rd harmon - ic response . After about 25 - 30 minutes , the 2nd harmonic drops signiﬁcantly while the 3rd harmonic increases back to its original value as the glucose concentration becomes depleted . The frequency and amplitude of the applied sig - nal was set to 45 Hz and 3 V / cm , respectively . The horizon - tal lines show the original 2nd and 3rd harmonic responses without any added glucose . observed induced harmonics at low frequencies , as shown in Fig . 2 , which provides an additional tool for studying behavior unique to live organisms . In conclusion , our results indicate that variable - temperature dielectric spectroscopy and nonlinear harmonic response meas­ urements may be useful for astrobiology studies and for numer­ ous terrestrial applications as well . References 1 B . M . Jakosky and E . L . Shock , “The Biological Potential of Mars , the Early Earth , and Europa . ” J . Geophys . Res . 103 ( 1998 ) : 19 , 359 - 64 . 2 L . Margulis , P . Mazur , E . S . Barghoorn , H . O . Halvorson , T . H . Jukes , and I . R . Kaplan , “The Viking Mission : Implications for life on Mars , ” J . Mol . Evol . 14 ( 1979 ) : 223 - 32 . 3 D . S . McKay , E . K . Gibson Jr . , K . L . Thomas - Keprta , H . Vali , C . S . Romanek , S . J . Clemett , X . D . F . Chillier , C . R . Maechling , and R . N . Zare , “Search for Past Life on Mars : Possible Relic Biogenic Activity in Martian Meteorite ALH84001 , ” Science 273 ( 1996 ) : 924 - 30 . 4 K . L . Thomas - Keprta , S . J . Clemett , D . A . Bazylinksi , J . L . Kirschvink , D . S . McKay , S . J . Wentworth , H . Vali , E . K . Gibson , Jr . , M . F . McKay , and C . S . Romanek , “Truncated Hexa - Octahedral Magnetite Crystals in ALH84001 : Presumptive Biosignatures , ” Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 98 ( 2001 ) : 2164 - 69 . 5 K . L . Thomas - Keprta , S . J . Clemett , D . A . Bazylinksi , J . L . Kirschvink , D . S . McKay , S . J . Wentworth , H . Vali , E . K . Gibson , Jr . , and C . S . Romanek , “Magnetofossils from Ancient Mars : A Robust Biosignature in the Martian Meteorite ALH84001 , ” Applied & Environmental Microbiology 68 ( 2002 ) : 3663 - 72 . 6 B . P . Weiss , Y . L . Yung , and K . H . Nealson , “Atmospheric Energy for Subsurface Life on Mars ? ” Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 97 ( 2000 ) : 1395 - 99 . 7 M . T . Mellon and B . M . Jakosky , “Geographic Variations in the Thermal and Diffusive Stability of Ground Ice on Mars , ” J . Geophys . Res . 98 ( 1993 ) : 3345 - 64 . 8 M . H . Carr , Water on Mars , N . Y . : Oxford UP , 1996 . 9 W . B . Whitman , D . C . Coleman , and W . J . Wiebe , “Prokaryotes : The Unseen Majority , ” Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 95 ( 1998 ) : 6578 - 83 . 10 K . H . Nealson , “The Limits of Life on Earth and Searching for Life on Mars , ” J . Geophys . Res . 102 ( 1997 ) : 23 , 675 - 86 . 11 J . C . Priscu , C . H . Fritsen , E . E . Adams , S . J . Giovannoni , H . W . Paerl , C . P . McKay , P . T . Doran , D . A . Gordon , B . D . Lanoil , and J . L . Pinckney , “Perennial Antarctic Lake Ice : An Oasis for Life in a Polar Desert , ” Science 280 ( 1998 ) : 2095 - 98 . 12 H . P . Schwan , “Electrical Properties of Tissue and Cell Suspensions , ” in Advances in Biological and Medical Physics . Vol . 5 . Eds . J . H . Lawrence and C . A . Tobias , N . Y . : Academic P , 1957 . 147 - 209 . 13 K . Asami , “Characterization of Biological Cells by Dielectric Spectroscopy , ” J . Non - Crystaline Solids 305 ( 2002 ) : 268 - 77 . 14 D . Nawarathna , J . R . Claycomb , J . H . Miller , Jr . , and M . J . Benedik , “Nonlinear Dielectric Spectroscopy of Live Cells Using Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices , ” Appl . Phys . Lett . 86 ( 2004 ) : 023902 : 1 - 3 . 15 C . C . Allen , R . V . Morris , K . M Jager , D . C . Golden , D . J . Lindstrom , M . M . Lindstrom , and J . P . Lockwood , “Martian Regolith Simulant JSC Mars - 1 , ” Proc . , 29th Annual Lunar and Planetary Science Conf . , NASA - Johnson Space Center , Houston , TX , March 16 – 20 , 1998 . 16 C . C . Allen , C . Griffin , A . Steele , N . Wainwright , and E . Stansbery , “Microbial Life in Martian Regolith Simulant JSC Mars - 1 , ” Proc . , 31st Lunar and Planetary Science Conf . , NASA - Johnson Space Center , Houston , TX , March 13 – 17 , 2000 . 17 E . O . Kajander , N . Ciftcioglu , K . Aho , and E . Garcia - Cuerpo , “Characteristics of Nanobacteria and Their Possible Role in Stone Formation , ” Urol . Res . 2 ( 2003 ) : 47 - 54 . 18 A . P . Sommer , H . I . Hassinen , and E . O . Kajander , “Light - Induced Replication of Nanobacteria : A Preliminary Report . ” J . Clin . Laser Med . Surg . 5 ( 2002 ) : 241 - 44 . ( Continued on page 126 . ) 118 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Use of FLUKA in the Analysis of the Mars Odyssey MARIE Experiment Lawrence S . Pinsky , Thomas L . Wilson , Victor Andersen Abstract—UH researchers have significantly improved the calibration of the MARIE by simulating its response to energetic protons using FLUKA . Analysis of MARIE data shows that the intensity of solar energetic particles depends strongly on how well the observation point is connected magnetically to the site at which the particles are accelerated . M ARIE IS A CHARGED PAR ­ ticle telescope aboard Mars Odyssey designed to detect energetic nuclei . The instru­ ment characterizes the radiation environment at Mars as an aid in planning eventual manned missions to the planet . In addition , the data , if properly calibrated , is also useful in the study of the transport of galactic cosmic rays and solar energetic par­ ticles in the inner heliosphere . Unfortunately , MARIE received rel­ atively little calibration before it was launched ; in order to completely cal - Dr . Lawrence S . Pinsky ibrate the data from MARIE , we must thus rely on detailed simu­ lations of the transport of particles through the instrument . Results MARIE consists of a stack of silicon detectors of different thickness . As energetic charged particles traverse the detectors , they deposit energy in the detectors . The amount of energy deposited depends on both the kinetic energy of the particle as well as its charge . Each silicon detector returns a measured volt­ age proportional to the energy deposited in that detector ; we cal­ ibrate the data by fitting a relation between the observed data and simulated data . A plot of raw data from two of MARIE’s detectors is shown in Fig . 1 . Simulated data for the same set of detectors is shown in Fig . 2 . Note the excellent correspondence between the actual and simulated data . With these simulations , we have been able to significantly improve the calibration of the MARIE data . A plot of the observed particle fluxes in MARIE’s A1 detec­ tor over an 18 - month period is shown in Fig . 3 ( lower panel ) compared to fluxes measured by the Solar Isotope Spectrometer ( SIS ) aboard ACE ( upper panel ) . Even a cursory examination of Fig . 3 shows that sometimes there is a good correlation between solar particle events ( SPEs ) observed with different instruments , Figure 1 . Raw data for a pair of MARIE detectors . The voltages have been converted to an arbitrary scale by an analog to dig - ital converter ( ADC ) . There are several features visible on the plot ; the diagonal line from upper right to lower left is due to higher energy nuclei of different species ; the line making the greater than symbol ( > ) is due to low energy protons , and the spray of points that covers the diagram is due to particles that have experienced a nuclear reaction in one of the detectors . Figure 2 . Simulations of low energy protons for the same pair of detectors plotted in Fig . 1 . NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 119 Figure 3 . A comparison of the ﬂux of energetic protons near Earth ( upper panel ) and near Mars ( lower panel ) . The times where the ﬂux increases rapidly indicate particles accelerat - ed by solar activity ; the persistent low level background is due to galactic comic rays . while at other times the conditions at the different locations seem completely independent of one another . This is a result of the way that the SPE particles propagate away from their accel­ eration sites . Particles are constrained to move along the solar magnetic field lines , which , roughly speaking , follows an Archimedian spiral outward from the Sun . 1 Thus , when Earth and Mars are connected to the same set of magnetic field lines , they see similar particle events ; if they are connected to signifi­ cantly different sets of field lines , the level of SPE particles can vary substantially . In fact , in the most extreme case where the field lines to which the two planets are connected are separated by 180 degrees , there is essentially no correlation between the fluxes observed . Figure 4 illustrates this point ; the SPEs observed at both Mars and Earth , as well as those that are observed at only Mars , are clustered around the solar longitude of best connection for Mars . On the other hand , those events observed only at Earth tend to originate in the quadrant diamet­ rically opposed to the longitude of best connection for Mars . References 1 A . Fasso , A . Ferrari , and P . R . Sala , “Electron - Photon Transport in FLUKA : Status , ” Proc . , Monte Carlo 2000 Conf . , Lisbon , Portugal , Oct . 23 – 26 , 2000 ; ( 2001 ) : 159 - 64 . 2 A . Fasso , A . Ferrari , J . Ranft , and P . R . Sala , “FLUKA : Status and Prospective for Hadronic Applications , ” Proc . , Monte Carlo 2000 Conf . , Lisbon , Portugal , Oct . 23 – 26 , 2000 ; ( 2001 ) : 955 - 60 . Thesis Lee , K . “Martian Radiation Environment Experiment ( MARIE ) , ” dissertation in progress , UH , Jan . 2001 – present . Funding obtained : $ 25 , 894 ( NAG9 - 1347 ) . Figure 4 . A plot of the solar longitude ( as seen from Mars ) from which SPEs originated as detected : Mars only ( trian - gles ) , Earth only ( squares ) , and both locations ( circles ) . The straight line at longitude of + 90 degrees indicates the nom - inal longitude of best magnetic connection for Mars , assuming a solar wind speed of 400 km / s . Note that the events detected at Earth , but not at Mars , originated from a range of longitudes 180 degrees opposed to the longitude of best connection for Mars ( i . e . , originated from longitudes centered around – 90 degrees ) . FRONT END BOARDS—Dr . Pinsky developes equipment designed to detect charged particles by which scientists are able to measure differences up to 1 nanosecond . 120 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA High - Performance Martian Space Radiation Mapping Liwen Shih , Sergio J . Larrondo , Karthik Katikaneni , Ahmed Khan , Travis Gilbert , Shilpa Kodali , Arun Kadari Abstract—To ensure safe operation of deep space missions , UHCL researchers performed a prelimi­ nary investigation to apply high - performance computer techniques to enable better space radiation analysis for Mars and other space missions . After study of the space radiation problem and methodol­ ogy in 2004 , the urgent need became apparent to modernize the NASA radiation code . Having obtained the HZETRN source code from NASA in 2005 , researchers are currently seeking support to restruc­ ture the computation to match the newly developed computer resource of the parallel , multithread net­ work cluster and reconfigurable parallel FPGA platforms . The top - down optimization will involve splitting up the task for parallel computation . As to the bottom - up optimization , the bottleneck func­ tions taking up 70 percent of the run - time are identified for porting to FPGA , which will work as a co­ processor with the rest of the non - bottleneck computation . Other optimization steps include modern­ ization to current computing platforms , design for ease of use , exploring sparse matrix opportunities in data , and increasing accuracy . The success of applying parallel techniques to enhance both comple­ menting deterministic HZETRN and stochastic FLUKA Monte Carlo radiation transport analysis / sim - ulation code used by NASA scientists will greatly enhance space radiation understanding which is also vital to safer nuclear energy , anti - aging programs , and cancer treatment . Space Radiation Modeling N ASA’ S MISSION TO M ARS with its Martian Radiation Environment Experiment ( MARIE ) project seeks to model the space radiation environment on Mars to determine when and where the astronauts can land safely . NASA scientists have used the HZETRN program for calculating transport of radiation particles . The HZETRN model has been devel­ oped as an accurate scientific model , but the implementation of Dr . Liwen Shih the model in FORTRAN code using VAX machines is inefficient . Radiation exposure is under­ estimated by 15 to 30 percent . In addition to underestimation , the code takes a considerable length of time to execute , about one day to analyze three days of data collection . High - Performance Space Radiation Computation Research is being performed to mathematically model high - energy particles as they pass through the walls of a spacecraft . This technology can also study high energy particles as they pass through parts of the human body . Data have been collected over the years on the effects of space radiation on humans , but to understand the effects for many different cases , a mathemat­ ical model needs to be created to simulate different conditions in space . The current execution mode is cumbersome in that the current HZETRN parameters in the source code have to be changed and recompiled between runs . The following statement summarizes the continuous diagnosis work of HZETRN . We are seeking support to explore ways to include parallel reconfig­ urable FPGA and cluster / Grid to modernize the NASA HZETRN code . High - Performance Space Radiation Analysis with FPGA Spring 2005 Before the actual HZETRN source code was available to us in Spring 2005 , an FPGA approach was attempted based on HZETRN documentation analysis to implement bottleneck interpolation and integration routines . Implementing the HZTERN bottleneck routines on an FPGA , we had the advan­ tage of its parallelism and its improvements of floating - point arithmetic to enhance the performance and efficiency of the HZETRN Program . In this project , we used the Digilent D2 - SB System Board as the FPGA and the Digilent DIO2 Peripheral Board to display results . The FPGA was programmed using the Xilinx Project Navigator ; the platform we were using was the VHDL . The bot­ tlenecks ( interpolation and integration ) were improved in order to improve the accuracy and speed of the HZTERN code . A pre - NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 121 Figure 1 . Runtime Analysis liminary , non - optimized FPGA module showed a 200 - to - 600 time speed above the speed of equivalent HZETRN routines running on Sun Sparc 5 systems . HZETRN Portability Check , Performance Profile , and Optimization Fall 2005 After the new NASA software release procedure was followed , the HZETRN source code was finally obtained for analysis from NASA Langley in April 2005 . In the past few months , the code was test - run on various platforms , and its performance was also detail - profiled by software tools . HZETRN code was found not portable to all systems tested . Only half of the six compilers would work with the code . Only two of the six machines tried would run the code . Only one machine seemed to get results . Software performance profiling tools confirmed previous hand analysis that one - third of the run time was spent on a PHI function that performs interpolation ( which is also used in inte­ gration ) . If the PHI routine could be updated , HZETRN execu­ tion time could be shortened by up to one third . Both logf and expf routines took another third of the run time . Both may also be updated with fast approaches such as FPGA or table “look­ up” within the specific parameter range used in HZETRN , if the extra memory access time is tolerable . HZETRN code has been evolved throughout the years . The code was not originally programmed with computer efficiency in mind , perhaps for readability reasons . After a preliminary effort cleaning out some redundant code and inefficient use of operations , HZETRN code was increased by about 10 percent in speed . After this detailed performance in the profiling and diag­ nosis of the HZETRN , we are planning to attack these bottle­ necks with the treatment of both top - down parallel grid comput­ ing approach among the particles tracking and the bottom - up FPGA approach in time - consuming routines . Photo provided by L . Shih RADIATION MAPPING— ( l . to r . ) Karthik Katikaneni , UHCL M . S . Computer Science ; Dr . Robert Singleterry , Jr . , NASA Administrator’s Fellow , Langley Research Center ; Dr . Liwen Shih , professor of computer engineering ( UHCL ) ; Sergio J . Larrondo , graduate student in computer engineering ( UHCL ) ; and Ahmed Khan , UHCL B . S . Computer Science , NSF Student Scholar , performed preliminary investigation and applied high - performance computer techniques to enable better space radiation analysis for Mars and other space missions . References L . Shih , T . Gilbert , A . Kadari and S . Kodali , “High - Performance Martian Space Radiation Mapping , ” ISSO Y2004 Annual Report ( 2005 ) : 145 - 49 . J . W . Wilson , F . F . Badavi , F . A . Cucinotta , J . Shinn , G . Badhwar , R . Silberberg , C . H . Tsao , L . W . Townsend , and R . Tripathi , “HZETRN : Description of a Free - Space Ion and Nucleon Transport and Shielding Computer Program , ” NASA Technical Paper 3495 , 1995 < http : / / techreports . larc . nasa . gov / ltrs / PDF / NASA - 95 - tp3495 . pdf > . Presentations Kodali , S . , A . Kadari , T . Gilbert , and L . Shih . “Space Radiation Analysis with FPGA , ” Master Capstone Project Report , University of Houston - Clear Lake < http : / / dcm . cl . uh . edu / c4230s4kodalis / FPGA / Index . html > . Funding “HZETRN , ” access to NASA Langley Space Radiation source code , April 2005 . ( Granted . ) “Partitioning Space Radiation Analysis / Simulation Code for High - Performance Execution with Parallel Computing Techniques , ” Support for Student RA , UHCL Faculty Research and Support Fund , June – Dec . 2005 , $ 7 , 200 . ( Funded . ) 122 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA An AC - DC - AC Converter With Smaller DC - Link Capacitor for Space Power Distribution Systems Wajiha Shireen , Srinivas Vanapalli Abstract—The power conditioning equipment used in a space power system contributes to the total system mass , reliability , and cost . The focus of this research was to reduce the weight and improve the reliability of an AC - DC - AC converter used in a large number of the power conditioning stages in a typ­ ical space power system . A POWER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM is designed to exchange electric power between the power source and the user load with maximum efficiency . The pri­ mary consideration in the selection of the power distribution in space power systems is minimization of the system mass and power losses , survivability , cost , reliability , and power quality . The power condi­ tioning stage between the source and distribution or between the dis­ tribution and the load efficiently interfaces various source types with Dr . Wajiha Shireen different distribution systems and a wide variety of load require­ ments in a typical space power system . In addition to providing flexible electric power of high quality , the power conditioning method and the associated equipment ( power converters , filters , etc . ) have a significant effect on the total power system mass , reliability , and cost in a space power system . This research seeks a method to reduce the weight and improve the reliability of an AC - DC - AC converter used in a large number of the power con­ ditioning stages used in a typical space power system . The DC link in any AC - DC - AC converter is normally equipped with an electrolytic capacitor , which provides decou­ pling between the rectifier and the inverter . However , the DC link capacitor is a large , heavy , and expensive component . Moreover , the DC bus capacitor is the prime factor of degrada­ tion of system reliability . This problem is well recognized by the industry . Manufacturers of low cost and high volume systems ( White Goods , HVAC equipment ) are looking for ways to reduce the size and cost of this electrolytic capacitor . However , a cost effective and efficient solution is not available yet . For space power distribution systems , the above problems prove to be even more critical . Figure 1 . A Closed Loop V / Hz Motor Drive System with the Proposed DSP Based Control This research project has attempted the development of a Digital Signal Processor ( DSP ) - based modified space vector pulse width modulation ( PWM ) technique that will allow the use of a smaller DC - link capacitor without affecting the output performance of the converter . The proposed method implement­ ed in AC - DC - AC converter applications will result in the fol­ lowing advantages : 1 . Reduced converter weight and volume . 2 . Significant improvement in system reliability by the use of a smaller link capacitor . 3 . Digital control by a DSP to provide fast transient response , high performance , and increased reliability . 4 . A digital controller insensitive to environment , offering stable operation under most operating conditions . Moreover , the DSP - based controller being programmable can also be easily upgraded or modified to meet specific system requirements . Results Figure 1 shows the block diagram of the experimental set - up NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 123 Figure 2 . Inverter output voltage magnitude when the DC bus voltage varies in the range of 25 V to 34 V ( with 47 µ F DC - link capacitor ) used to test and verify the requisite technique . The experimen­ tal prototype of the AC - DC - AC converter consists of a diode rectifier , DC - link , and a PWM inverter used in a closed loop V / Hz motor drive . The DSP - based controller ( TMS320F240 ) was used to implement the proposed technique , which allowed the use of a smaller DC - link capacitor without affecting the out­ put performance of the rectifier - inverter system . The use of a smaller link capacitor introduced a ripple on the dc - bus voltage . The DC - link voltage ripple was sensed and fed as an input to the DSP controller . Figure 2 shows a plot of the recorded experimental data of the inverter output voltage magnitude with the DC bus voltage varying in the range of 25 V to 34 V ( when the DC - link capac­ itor is 47 µ F ) , both with and without the proposed correction algorithm in effect . Without correction , the output voltage increases as the DC bus voltage is increased , but with the mod­ ified SVPWM correction in place , the output voltage magnitude is maintained constant ( at 12 V ) regardless of the DC bus volt­ age . Figure 3 shows a plot of the recorded experimental data when the DC bus voltage is manually varied over a wider range ( 55 V to 110 V ) . The plot in Fig . 3 shows that with modified SVPWM control in effect , the output voltage magnitude is maintained constant ( at 26 V ) even when the input DC voltage is varied over a wide range . Publications Shireen , W . , R . Kulkarni , and M . Arefeen . “Analysis and Minimization of Input Ripple Current in PWM Inverters for Designing Reliable Fuel Cell Power Systems , ” Proc . , IEEE Applied Power Electronics Conf . 1 ( 2005 ) : 97 - 102 . Shireen , W . , S . Vanapalli , and H . R . Nene . “A DSP - Based SVPWM Control for Utility Interactive Inverters Used in Alternate Energy Systems , ” Proc . , IEEE Applied Power Electronics Conf . ( 2006 ) . ( Accepted for publication . ) Figure 3 . Inverter output voltage magnitude when the DC bus voltage is varied in the range of 55 V to 110 V Presentations Shireen , W . “Analysis and Minimization of Input Ripple Current in PWM Inverters for Designing Reliable Fuel Cell Power Systems , ” IEEE Applied Power Electronics Conf . , Austin , TX , March 6 – 10 , 2005 . Funding and Proposals Shireen , W . “Development of a Modern DSP - Based Laboratory for Power Electronics Education , ” National Science Foundation , 2005 – 2006 , $ 73 , 996 . — . “Equipment Grant—Two F2812 EZDSP Kits , ” Texas Instruments University Program , $ 5 , 000 . — . “DSP - Based Inverter Control to Obtain Input Ripple Current Compensation for Reliable Fuel Cell Power Systems , ” National Science Foundation , $ 216 , 115 . ( Pending . ) 124 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Development of Wireless Stations for Distributed Field Operations T . Andrew Yang , Sadegh Davari D ISTRIBUTED FIELD OPERA ­ tions involve dispersed mobile units operating in a wide geographical area , such as battlefield operations or exploration on the moon . One or more wireless stations may be deployed for effec­ tive connectivity among the units . In this project , we investigate the security and performance issues of wireless stations in mobile ad hoc networks ( MANET ) , with a focus on the public key management sys­ tem using certificates . One of the main issues to consid - T . Andrew Yang er in a certificate - based scheme is the secure distribution of the public keys to all the nodes in the network . The Public Key Infrastructure ( PKI ) defines methods to handle public key man­ agement using X . 509 certificates . In a wired network , there exists a centralized certificate server which handles the creation , renew­ al , and revocation of certificates . This is not feasible in mobile ad hoc networks ( MANET ) , which are composed of mobile nodes that may be constantly moving in the geographical area and do not have a fixed infrastructure or centralized management . Besides , because of the dynamic topology of the network , frequent link fail­ ures may occur , resulting in issues such as re - authentication and timely communication with the certificate server . To devise a secure and effective certificate - based authentica­ tion scheme for mobile ad hoc networks , our immediate goal is evaluation of existing approaches by running network simula­ tions to compare their respective strengths and weaknesses . Our contribution so far includes the following : ( 1 ) We analyzed the requirements of a secure distributed authentication system for MANETs . ( 2 ) We surveyed some of the existing certificate - based authentication mechanisms by analyzing their features , including pros and cons , in the context of distributed authenti­ cation . ( 3 ) We designed a series of scenario - based simulation experiments and metrics to evaluate these features . In order to study the effectiveness of these mechanisms , we proposed a set of realistic “scenarios” for simulation . Before defining the scenarios , we first needed to define some parame­ ters : ( 1 ) The mobility model represents the realistic movements of nodes in the network . ( 2 ) Node Density also varies according to a particular scenario . ( 3 ) Traffic rates vary according to the node linkage failures , congestion , and mobility . Having defined the parameters for the scenarios , we further identified the following metrics , on which basis the authentica­ tion mechanisms can be evaluated : ( a ) Successful Certification Ratio ( µ ) measures the ratio of the number of successful certifi­ cation services ( including issuance , NC ISS , and renewal , NC REN , respectively ) to the total number of requests for such services ( NC TotIss and NC TotRen , respectively ) . ( b ) Settling time ( st ) meas­ ures the initial time taken for all the nodes in the network to be issued valid certificates . ( c ) Frequency of Certification ( f cert ) measures the number of certification services per time interval . ( d ) Average Certification Delay ( acd ) is measured as the time delay between the certificate service request ( CSReq ) and the cer­ tificate service reply ( CSRep ) averaged over the simulation time . Publications Sadasivam , K . , V . Changrani , and T . A . Yang . “Evaluation of Certificate - Based Authentication in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks , ” Eds . M . H . Hamza , P . Prapinmonkolkarn , T . Angkaew . Proc . , IASTED Intl . Multi - Conf . on Networks and Communication Systems , 2005 . Sadasivam , K . , V . Changrani , and T . A . Yang . “Scenario - Based Performance Evaluation of Secure Routing in MANETs , ” Proc . , 2nd Intl . Workshop on Mobile Ad Hoc Networks and Interoperability Issues , 2005 . Yang , T . A . , and Y . Zahur . “Security in WLANs , ” in Handbook of Wireless Local Area Networks : Applications , Technology , Security , and Standards . Eds . Mohammad Ilyas and Syed Ahson . N . Y . : CRC P . , 2005 . Yang , T . A . , K . Yue , M . Liaw , G . Collins , P . Chen , et al . “Design of a Distributed Computer Security Lab , ” J . Computing Sciences in Colleges 20 . 1 ( 2004 ) : 332 - 46 . SENSORS—Tuan Anh Nguyen ( l . ) and Duy Cao ( r . ) studying sensor networks . NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 125 Miniature Optical Sensors for Detection of Water and Air Contaminations ( Continued from page 101 . ) Boukadoum , M . , K . Tabari , A . Bensaoula , and D . Starikov . “Comparison of the Noise Immunity of a LED - Based Multi Band Optoelectronic Sensor when Using FDMA and CDMA to Code the Excitation Source , ” IEEE Asia - Pacific Conf . on Circuits and Systems , Tainan , Taiwan , Dec . 2004 . Starikov , D . , N . Medelci , R . Pillai , A . Bensaoula , C . Joseph , and Z . Mouffak . “III Nitride - Based Optical Sensors Integrated with TOF Mass Spectrometer for Aerosol Characterization , ” 51st AVS Intl . Symposium , Anaheim , CA , Nov . 14 – 19 , 2004 . Starikov , D . , C . Boney , R . Pillai , and A . Bensaoula . “Visible - Blind UV / IR Photodetectors Integrated on Si Substrates , ” 2006 MRS Spring Meeting , San Francisco , CA , April 17 – 21 , 2006 . ( Abstract submitted , oral presentation requested . ) Starikov , D . , Starikov , C . Boney , R . Pillai , and A . Bensaoula . “Solar - Blind Dual - Band UV / IR Photodetectors Integrated on a Single Chip , ” NSTI Nanotech 2006 , Boston , MA , May 7 – 11 , 2006 . ( Abstract submitted ; oral presentation requested . ) Patents Starikov , D . and A . Bensaoula . “Measuring Spectral Characteristics Using Filterless Solid State Semiconductor Components , ” U . S . Patent Application No . 10 / 621 , 545 , 2003 . ( Pending . ) Starikov , D . and A . Bensaoula . “Single - Chip Integrated Dual - Band Visible / Solar Blind Photodetectors with Resolved Sensitivities in UV and IR Bands and Method for Fabrication of the Same , ” U . S . Patent Application , Docket No . 09 . 002 . 02 , 2005 . ( Pending . ) Starikov , D . , I . Berishev , and A . Bensaoula . “One - Chip Micro - Integrated Optoelectronic Sensor , ” U . S . Patent No . 6 , 881 , 979 , April 19 , 2005 . Funding and Proposals See companion reports “Development of Micro Column Arrays ( MCA ) for Thermal Management Applications , ” pp . 15 - 18 , “Investigation of III - Nitride Materials for Space - based Solar Cells , ” pp . 50 - 52 , and “Micro Column Arrays ( MCA ) for Thermal Management of Spacecraft Environments , ” pp . 99 - 100 , for related publications , presentation , and proposals arising out of the 2001 – 2003 Post - Doctoral Aerospace Fellowship Project . A Theoretical Analysis of Vibrational Modes Aimed at their use as Measures of Bone Damage ( Continued from page 107 . ) Wimalawansa , E . N . Ebbesen , L . Mosekilde , and G . H . Gunaratne . “An Expression Relating Breaking Stress and Density of Trabecular Bone , ” J . Biomechanics 37 ( 2004 ) : 1241 - 49 . Song , Y . and G . H . Gunaratne . “A Method for Vibrational Assessment of Solid Bone , ” Chaos . ( Submitted . ) Song , Y . , M . A . K . Liebschner , and G . H . Gunaratne . “A Study of Age - Related Architectural Changes That Are Most Damaging to Bones , ” Biophysical J . 87 ( 2004 ) : 3642 - 47 . Funding and Proposals “Development of Analytical Tools for Vibrational Assessment of Bone , ” Joint NSF / NIH program for Mathematical Biology , $ 1 , 467 , 000 . ( Not funded ; will be resubmitted in June 2006 . ) “Vibrational Response as a Measure of Trabecular Bone Quality , ” NIH , $ 1 , 471 , 000 . ( Not funded ; will be resubmitted in June 2006 . ) Collaborators Graduate student Chamith Rajapakse received his Ph . D . in 2005 . He currently serves in the Department of Radiology , University of Pennsylvania as a post - doctoral researcher . Low - Frequency Dielectric Spectroscopy of Martian Soil Samples ( Continued from page 118 . ) Presentations Miller , J . , D . Nawarathna , D . Warmflash , F . Pereira , and W . Brownell . “Dielectric Properties of Live Yeast Cells Expressed with the Motor Protein Prestin , ” Bull . Am . Phys . Soc . 50 ( 2005 ) : 1340 ; March Meeting of the American Physical Society , Los Angeles , CA , March 21 – 25 , 2005 . 126 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Raman Scattering Test of Mechanical and Sensor Properties of Advanced Nanocomposites ( Continued from page 108 . ) embedded in the cyanoacrylate matrix . The fractional change of the G - peak position ∆ω G / ω G is related to the axial strain ε z of 1 SWCNTs as ∆ω G / ω G ≈ – γ ( 1 – ν t ) ε z , where γ is the Grüneisen parameter and ν t is the Poisson’s ratio of a SWCNT , with γ = 1 . 24 1 and ν t = 0 . 16 2 . Thus , estimated strain of SWCNTs due to cyanoacrylate shrinkage upon cure is – 0 . 2 % . Given the strain upon the nanotubes induced by the cyano­ acrylate matrix , one can assess the degree of adhesion of SWCNTs to a cyanoacrilate matrix , provided the shrinkage of the matrix upon cure is known . For instance , an indication of good bonding of the nanotubes has the matrix shrinkage close to the resulting nanotube strain . Although the shrinkage upon cure is important as an adhesives application parameter , it is usually not given in the technical specification datasheet for cyanoacry­ lates . To overcome this problem , we further analyzed the change of the G - peak position in the SWCNT / CA nanocomposite with decreasing temperature . Figure 1 ( c ) clearly shows a strong increase of the G - peak fre­ quency upon cooling the SWCNT / CA nanocomposite . The frac­ tional change of the G - peak position upon cooling the nanocom­ posite from room temperature to 25 K corresponds to 0 . 6 % compressive strain of the SWCNTs . On the other hand , given the coefficient of thermal expansion ( CTE ) 1 . 26 × 10 - 4 of cured cyanoacrylate and Young’s modulus 6 GPa , we calculate using the methodology presented in Ref . 2 that the strain on the nan­ otubes caused by the thermal shrinkage of the CA matrix is 0 . 63 % , provided the nanotubes are firmly bonded to the matrix . The calculated value for the strain is only 5 % higher than the one measured , and we conclude that the SWCNTs are very well coupled to the CA matrix . Reviewing the strain caused by the shrinkage upon cure , we believe that it is also close to the con­ traction of the cyanoacrylate resin during the polymerization . In summary , we briefly assessed the possibility of making the SWCNTs / cyanoacrylate nanocomposite . We find strong cou­ pling between the nanotubes and the CA matrix which should result in a carbon nanotubes reinforced Superglue , a claim that has yet to be proved also by mechanical tests . References 1 V . G . Hadjiev , M . N . Iliev , S . Arepalli , P . Nikolaev , and B . S . Files , “Raman Scattering Test of Single - Wall Carbon Nanotube Composite , ” Appl . Phys . Lett . 78 ( 2001 ) : 3193 . 2 V . G . Hadjiev , C . A . Mitchell , S . Arepalli , J . L . Bahr , J . M . Tour , and R . Krishnamoorti , “Thermal Mismatch Strains in Sidewall Functionalized Carbon Nanotubes / Polystyrene Nanocomposites , ” J . Chem . Phys . 122 . 12 ( 2005 ) : 124708 . NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 127 ISSO Principal and Co - Principal Investigators Dr . Hisham Al - Mubaid Assistant Professor Department of Computer Information Systems School of Science and Computer Engineering University of Houston - Clear Lake Houston , TX 77058 Phone : 281 283 - 3802 ; FAX : 281 283 - 3869 hisham @ cl . uh . edu Dr . Andenet Alemu Post - Doctoral Aerospace Fellow Center for Advanced Materials University of Houston , 704 S & R1 Houston , TX 77204 - 5004 Phone : 713 743 - 3621 ; FAX : 713 747 - 7724 andy @ svec . uh . edu Dr . Victor Andersen Post - Doctoral Aerospace Fellow Department of Physics University of Houston Houston , TX 77204 - 5005 Phone : 713 743 - 8666 ; FAX : 713 743 - 3589 vandersen @ uh . edu Dr . G . Dickey Arndt Co - Principal Investigator Avionics Systems Division NASA Johnson Space Center 2101 NASA Parkway , Code Houston , TX 77058 Phone : 281 483 - 1438 g . d . arndt1 @ jsc . nasa . gov Dr . Yury Bakhirkin Post - Doctoral Aerospace Fellow Computer Engineering Department School of Science and Computer Engineering University of Houston - Clear Lake Houston , TX 77058 - 1098 Phone : 713 348 - 2757 ; FAX : 713 348 - 5686 yubakh @ rice . edu Dr . Abdelhak Bensaoula Research Professor of Physics and Electrical and Computer Engineering Center for Advanced Materials ( CAM ) University of Houston , 731 S & R1 Houston , TX 77204 - 5004 Phone : 713 743 - 3621 ; FAX : 713 747 - 7724 bens @ svec . uh . edu Dr . Gary D . Boetticher Assistant Professor Division of Computing and Mathematics School of Science and Computer Engineering University of Houston - Clear Lake , D164 2700 Bay Area Blvd . Houston , TX 77058 - 1098 Phone : 281 283 - 3805 ; FAX : 281 283 - 3869 boetticher @ cl . uh . edu Dr . Chris Boney Research Scientist Department of Physics College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics University of Houston , SR 419A Houston , TX 77204 - 5004 Phone : 713 743 - 3621 ; FAX : 713 743 - 7724 cboney @ svec . uh . edu Debbie V . Bush Associate Editor , ISSO University of Houston , S & R1 510G Houston , TX 77204 - 5006 Phone : 713 743 - 9138 ; FAX : 713 743 - 9134 dbush @ uh . edu Dr . Angela Carreno Post - Doctoral Aerospace Fellow Center for Advanced Materials University of Houston , 735 S & R1 Houston , TX 77204 - 5004 Dr . Albert M . K . Cheng Associate Professor Department of Computer Science College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics University of Houston , PGH 534 Houston , TX 77204 - 3010 Phone : 713 743 - 3353 ; FAX : 713 743 - 3335 cheng @ cs . uh . edu 128 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Dr . Mark S . F . Clarke Associate Professor Department of Health & Human Performance College of Education University of Houston Houston , TX 77204 - 6015 Phone : 713 743 - 9854 ; FAX : 713 743 - 9860 mclarke @ mail . uh . edu Dr . David Criswell Director , ISSO University of Houston , 629F S & R1 Houston , TX 77204 - 5006 Phone : 713 743 - 9135 ; FAX : 713 743 - 3589 dcriswell @ uh . edu Dr . James B . Dabney Assistant Professor School of Science and Computer Engineering University of Houston - Clear Lake , D108 Houston , TX 77058 - 1098 Phone : 281 283 - 3852 ; FAX : 281 283 - 3707 dabney @ uhcl . edu Dr . Sadegh Davari Associate Professor and Chair Department of Computer Sciences and Mathematics University of Houston - Clear Lake , D171 Houston , TX 77058 - 1098 Phone : 281 283 - 3865 ; FAX : 281 283 - 3870 davari @ uhcl . edu Jennifer J . Chin - Davis Department Business Administrator Department of Physics Institute for Space System Operations Mission - Oriented Seismic Research Program University of Houston , 617 S & R1 Houston , TX . 77204 - 5005 Phone : 713 743 - 3524 ; FAX : 713 743 - 3589 jchindavis @ uh . edu Dr . Edward T . Dickerson Professor School of Science and Computer Engineering University of Houston - Clear Lake , D114 2700 Bay Area Blvd Houston , TX 77058 - 1098 Phone : 281 283 - 3809 ; FAX : 281 283 - 3870 dickerson @ uhcl . edu Matthew Dulin Assistant Editor , ISSO 1403 Maygrove Dr . Sugar Land , TX 77478 Phone : 281 491 - 1769 ; FAX : 713 743 - 9134 mdulin @ uh . edu STUDY GROUP—Dr . T . Andrew Yang ( UHCL ) meets with ( l . to r . ) Duy Cao and Tuan Anh Nguyen , master’s students in Computer Information Systems , and Avinash Sridhar , mas - ters program in computer science . Sridhar earned his B . E . in Computer Science and Engineering from the Peoples’ Education Society College of Engineering in India . Kathy Dupree Assistant Director Office of Sponsored Programs University of Houston - Clear Lake 2700 Bay Area Blvd , Box 44 Houston , TX 77058 Phone : 281 283 - 2141 ; FAX : 281 283 - 2143 dupree @ cl . uh . edu Dr . Daniel L . Feeback Director , Muscle Research Laboratory Human Adaptation and Countermeasure Office Space and Life Sciences Directorate NASA Johnson Space Center 2101 NASA Parkway , Code SK Houston , TX 77058 Phone : 281 483 - 7189 ; FAX : 281 483 - 2888 daniel . l . feeback1 @ jsc . nasa . gov Dr . Katharine E . Forth Post - Doctoral Fellow Department of Health and Human Performance College of Education Houston , TX 77204 - 5331 Phone : 713 743 - 9868 ; Fax : 713 743 - 9860 clayne2 @ uh . edu Dr . George E . Fox Professor Department of Biology and Biochemistry College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics University of Houston Houston , TX 77204 - 5001 Phone : 713 743 - 8363 ; FAX : 713 743 - 8351 fox @ uh . edu NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 129 ANTENNAE—G . Dickey Arndt , shown in the anechoic cham - ber at NASA , where new designs of antennas are tested . ISSO is involved in the design of an ultra - wideband tracking system for a free - ﬂying video camera system to aid in inspection around the International Space Station and the Space Shuttle . Dr . Karen Frasier - Scott Associate Professor Department of Biology School of Science and Computer Engineering University of Houston - Clear Lake Houston , TX 77058 Phone : 281 283 - 3744 ; FAX : 281 283 - 3869 frasier - scott @ uhcl . edu Dr . Michael Gorman Professor Department of Physics College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics University of Houston , 531B S & R1 Houston , TX 77204 - 5005 Phone : 713 743 - 3558 ; FAX : 713 743 - 3589 gorman @ uh . edu Dr . John C . Graf NASA - JSC Co - PI Crew and Thermal Systems NASA Johnson Space Center Houston , TX 77058 - 3696 Phone : 281 483 - 9226 ; FAX : 281 483 - 5060 john . graf - 1 @ nasa . gov Dr . Karolos Grigoriadis Professor Department of Mechanical Engineering Cullen College of Engineering University of Houston , ENG1 N206 Houston , TX 77204 - 4006 Phone : 713 743 - 4387 ; FAX : 713 743 - 5403 karolos @ uh . edu Dr . Gemunu Gunaratne Associate Professor Department of Physics College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics University of Houston , S & R1 629D Houston , TX 77204 - 5005 Phone : 713 743 - 3534 ; FAX : 713 743 - 3589 gemunu @ uh . edu Dr . Viktor Hadjiev Research Scientist Texas Center for Superconductivity at the University of Houston ( TCSUH ) University of Houston , UHSC 322 Houston , TX 77204 - 5002 Phone : 713 743 - 8442 ; FAX : 713 743 - 8201 vhadjiev @ uh . edu Dr . Thomas L . Harman Professor and Chair Computer Engineering Department School of Science and Computer Engineering University of Houston - Clear Lake , D104 Houston , TX 77058 - 1098 Phone : 281 283 - 3774 ; FAX : 281 283 - 3870 harman @ uhcl . edu Roberta Hohmann Office of Sponsored Programs University of Houston - Clear Lake 2700 Bay Area Boulevard , Box 44 Houston , TX 77058 - 1098 Phone : 281 - 283 - 3015 ; FAX : 281 - 283 - 2143 hohmann @ cl . uh . edu 130 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Dr . D . Keith Hollingsworth Associate Professor Department of Mechanical Engineering Cullen College of Engineering Engineering Building One , N - 217 University of Houston Houston , Texas , 77204 - 4006 Phone : 713 743 - 4534 ; FAX : 713 743 - 4503 hollingsworth @ uh . edu Dr . Hung - Chung Huang Post - Doctoral Research Associate Department of Biology and Biochemistry University of Texas at Dallas Richardson , TX 75083 Dr . Keesu Jeon Post - Doctoral Researcher Department of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering Florida State University Tallahassee , FL 32306 Dr . Jeffrey A . Jones , M . D . NASA - JSC Co - Investigator Space Medicine and Health Care Systems Medical Operations Division NASA Johnson Space Center 2101 NASA Parkway , SD2 Houston , TX 77058 Phone : 281 483 - 4418 ; FAX : 281 244 - 7947 jeffrey . a . jones @ nasa . gov Fathi Karouia UH / NASA - JSC Co - Investigator Department of Biology & Biochemistry College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics University of Houston Houston , TX 77204 - 5001 Phone : 713 743 - 8365 fkarouia @ uh . edu Dr . Helen W . Lane Manager , University Research and Affairs Office NASA Johnson Space Center 2101 NASA Parkway , Code AD2 Houston , TX 77058 Phone : 281 483 - 7165 ; FAX : 281 483 - 2086 helen . w . lane1 @ jsc . nasa . gov INVERTED MICROSCOPE—Inside a copper low - level clean room to prevent contamination , Gustavo Cardenas utilizes an Olympus 1X71 inverted microscope with a lens below the surface to allow microscopy phase contrast . Cardenas earned his baccalaureate at the Technological Institute of Monterey and is currently enrolled in the UH doctoral pro - gram in physics . Dr . Charles S . Layne Professor Department of Health and Human Performance College of Education University of Houston , HHP 5331 Houston , TX 77204 - 5331 Phone : 713 743 - 9868 ; FAX : 713 743 - 9860 clayne2 @ uh . edu Dr . Ho Jae Lee Visiting Assistant Professor Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering Cullen College of Engineering University of Houston Houston , TX 77204 - 4005 Phone : 713 - 743 - 4460 Dr . Jack Y . Lu School of Science and Computer Engineering University of Houston - Clear Lake , B3531 Houston , TX 77058 - 1098 Phone : 281 283 - 3780 ; FAX : 281 283 - 3707 lu @ uhcl . edu Dr . Kamlesh P . Lulla Deputy Manager University Research and Affairs Office AD2 NASA Johnson Space Center Houston , Texas 77058 Phone : 281 483 - 5066 kamlesh . p . lulla @ nasa . gov NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 131 NAVIGATION SYSTEMS—Sensors are being constantly improved in a vision based navigation system , with devel - opment at the JSC Navigation Systems and Technology Lab . Dr . Heidar A . Malki Professor Department of Engineering Technology College of Technology University of Houston , 309B T2 Houston , TX 77204 - 4022 Phone : 713 743 - 4075 ; FAX : 713 743 - 4032 malki @ uh . edu Dr . Brian M . Mayeaux NASA - JSC Co - PI Materials and Processes Branch NASA Johnson Space Center 2101 NASA Parkway , Code MV6 Houston , TX 77058 Phone : 281 244 - 5802 brian . mayeaux1 @ jsc . nasa . gov Dr . David S . McKay NASA - JSC Principal Investigator NASA Johnson Space Center 2101 NASA Parkway , Code KA Houston , TX 77058 Phone : 281 483 - 5048 david . s . mckay @ nasa . gov Dr . John H . Miller , Jr . Associate Professor Texas Center for Superconductivity and Advanced Materials ( TCSAM ) and Department of Physics College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics University of Houston Houston , TX 77204 - 5005 Phone : 713 743 - 8257 ; FAX : 713 743 - 8201 jhmiller @ uh . edu Dr . Nacer Badi Research Assistant Professor Center for Advanced Materials ( CAM ) University of Houston , SR1 419B Houston , TX 77204 - 5005 Phone : 713 743 - 3621 ; FAX : 713 747 - 7724 nbadi @ uh . edu Dr . David ( Jianjun ) Ni Post - Doctoral Aerospace Fellow NASA Johnson Space Center 2101 NASA Parkway , Code EV4 Houston , TX 77058 - 3691 Phone : 281 483 - 1467 ; FAX : 281 483 - 5830 Dr . Charles Ott Co - Principal Investigator Life Science Research Laboratory , Medical Science Division NASA Johnson Space Center 2101 NASA Parkway , Code SD3 / KI Houston , TX 77058 Phone : 281 483 - 7155 c . m . ott1 @ jsc . nasa . gov Dr . Duane L . Pierson Director , Microbiology Laboratory Life Sciences Research Laboratory NASA Johnson Space Center 2101 NASA Parkway , Code SD - 4 Houston , TX 77058 Phone : 281 483 - 7166 duane . l . pierson @ nasa . gov Dr . Lawrence S . Pinsky Professor and Chair Department of Physics College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics University of Houston , SR1 412 Houston , TX 77204 - 5005 Phone : 713 743 - 3552 ; FAX : 713 743 - 3589 pinsky @ uh . edu Dr . Irving N . Rothman Martha Gano Houstoun Research Professor in Literature , 2004 - 2005 Department of English College of Liberal Arts and Social Sciences University of Houston , 232B - C , 510 - G S & R1 Houston , TX 77204 - 3013 Phone : 713 743 - 2962 ; FAX : 713 743 - 3215 irothman @ uh . edu 132 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Dr . Liejune Shiau Associate Professor School of Science and Computer Engineering University of Houston - Clear Lake , B3521 Houston , TX 77058 Phone : 281 283 - 3724 ; FAX : 281 283 - 3707 shiau @ uhcl . edu Dr . Leang - San Shieh Professor Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering Cullen College of Engineering University of Houston Houston , TX 77204 - 4005 Phone : 713 743 - 4439 ; FAX : 713 743 - 4400 lshieh @ uh . edu Dr . Liwen Shih Associate Professor Computer Engineering Department School of Science and Computer Engineering University of Houston - Clear Lake , D117 2700 Bay Area Blvd . Houston , TX 77058 Phone : 281 283 - 3866 ; FAX : 281 283 - 3870 shih @ uhcl . edu Dr . Wajiha Shireen Associate Professor Department of Engineering Technology College of Technology University of Houston , 331 T2 Houston , TX 77204 - 4022 Phone : 713 743 - 4080 ; FAX : 713 743 - 4032 wshireen @ uh . edu Dr . Donn G . Sickorez University Affairs Officer 2101 NASA Parkway , Code AE2 Houston , TX 77058 Phone : 281 483 - 4724 ; FAX : 281 483 - 4876 donn . g . sickorez1 @ jsc . nasa . gov Dr . David Starikov Research Associate Professor Center for Advanced Materials ( CAM ) University of Houston , 733 S & R1 Houston , TX 77204 - 5002 Phone : 713 743 - 3621 ; FAX : 713 743 - 8201 dstarikov @ uh . edu NAVIGATION SYSTEMS AND TECHNOLOGY LAB AT NASA— Back bay doors open to allow testing of sensors for space ﬂight and experimental missions . Dr . Viktor Stepanov Post - Doctoral Aerospace Fellow Department of Biology and Biochemistry College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics University of Houston Houston , TX 77204 - 5001 Phone : 713 743 - 8364 ; FAX : 713 743 - 8351 Dr . Frank K . Tittel J . S . Abercrombie Professor in Electrical and Computer Engineering Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering Rice University Houston , TX 77251 - 1898 Phone : 713 348 - 4833 ; FAX : 713 348 - 5686 fkt @ rice . edu Dr . Don L . Tucker NASA Johnson Space Center 2101 NASA Parkway , Code SF24 Houston , TX 77508 Phone : 281 483 - 0507 ; FAX : 281 483 - 3396 don . l . tucker1 @ jsc . nasa . gov Dr . David Warmflash , M . D . Post - Doctoral Aerospace Fellow Texas Center for Superconductivity at the University of Houston ( TCSUH ) and Department of Biology and Biochemistry College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics University of Houston Houston , TX 77204 - 5002 david . m . warmflash1 @ jsc . nasa . gov NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 133 Dr . William R . Widger Associate Professor Department of Biology and Biochemistry University of Houston , 442 HSC Houston , TX 77204 - 5001 Phone : 713 743 - 8368 widger @ uh . edu Dr . Richard C . Willson Associate Professor Department of Chemical Engineering and Department of Biology and Biochemistry Cullen College of Engineering and the College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics University of Houston Houston , TX 77204 - 4004 Phone : 713 743 - 4308 ; FAX : 713 743 - 4323 willson @ uh . edu Dr . Thomas L . Wilson NASA - JSC Co - Investigator Earth Science and Solar System Exploration Division Space Science Branch NASA Johnson Space Center 2101 NASA Parkway , Code SN3 Houston , TX 77058 Phone : 281 483 - 2147 thomas . l . wilson1 @ jsc . nasa . gov Larry C . Witte Professor and Associate Dean of Graduate Studies Department of Mechanical Engineering Cullen College of Engineering Engineering Building One , N - 224 University of Houston Houston , Texas , 77204 - 4006 Phone : 713 743 - 4501 ; FAX : 713 743 - 4503 witte @ uh . edu Dr . Jaroslaw ( Jarek ) Wosik Research Professor Texas Center for Superconductivity at the University of Houston ( TCSUH ) and Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering Cullen College of Engineering University of Houston Houston , TX 77204 - 5002 Phone : 713 743 - 8237 ; FAX : 713 743 - 8201 jarek @ uh . edu Dr . T . Andrew Yang Associate Professor School of Science and Computer Engineering University of Houston - Clear Lake , D106 Houston , TX 77058 - 1098 Phone : 281 283 - 3835 ; FAX : 281 283 - 3870 yang @ uhcl . edu REVIEW—Duy Cao , who earned his B . S . in comput - er science in Ho Chi Minh City at the University of Technology , Vietnam , prepares for a powerpoint presentation treating sensor networks . Cao con - ducts his research at UHCL under the direction of Dr . T . Andew Yang in the development of wireless stations for distributed ﬁeld operations . 134 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA ISSO Student Researchers • Andrew Abercromby , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Health and Human Performance ( Kinesiology ) ; TCSUH [ UH , Dr . Layne ] • Sidi Benhabib , Ph . D . exchange student , Physics , University of Tlemcen , Algeria [ UH , Dr . Bensaoula ] • Duy Cao , M . S . student , Computer Information Systems [ UHCL , Dr . Yang ] • José Canelon , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Electrical and Computer Engineereing [ UH , Dr . Shieh , Dr . Malki ] • Gustavo Cardenas , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Physics [ UH , Dr . Miller ] • Joseph Joseph Chakkungal , M . S . Student , Dept . of Computer Engineering [ UHCL , Dr . Dabney ] • Chinmay Darne , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Electrtical and Computer Engineering [ UH , Dr . wosik ] • Indrani DasGupta , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Biology and Biochemistry [ UH , Dr . Fox ] • Najib Elkhayari , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Physics [ UH , Dr . Pinsky ] • Jie Fang , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Physics [ UH , Dr . Miller ] • Shaohong Fang , M . S . student , Dept . of Computer Science [ UH , Dr . Cheng ] • Wifredo A . Fernandez , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Chemistry [ UHCL , Dr . Lu ] • Noushin Ghaffari , M . S . student , Dept . of Computer Information Systems [ UHCL , Dr . Al - Mubaid ] • Travis Gilbert , M . S . student , Dept . of Computer Engineering [ UHCL , Dr . Shih ] • Ashley Higgins , M . S . student , Dept . of Mechanical Engineering [ UH , Dr . Hollingsworth , Dr . Witte ] • Shih - Ying Hsu , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Physics [ UH , Dr . Miller ] • Travis Johnson , M . S . student , Dept . of Health and Human Performance [ UH , Dr . Clarke , Dr . Layne ] • Clement Joseph , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Electrical and Computer Engineering [ UH , Dr . Bensaoula ] • Arun Kumar Kadari , M . S . student , Dept . of Computer Engineering [ UHCL , Dr . Shih ] • Maged Kamel , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Electrical and Computer Engineering [ UH , Dr . Wosik , Dr . Miller ] • Karthik Katikaneni , M . S . student , Dept . of Computer Sciences [ UHCL , Dr . Shih ] • Ahmed Khan , B . S . student , Dept . of Computer Sciences [ UHCL , Dr . Shih ] • Shilpa Kodali , M . S . student , Dept . of Computer Engineering [ UHCL , Dr . Shih ] • Raja Kolli , M . S . student , Dept . of Computer Information Systems [ UHCL , Dr . Al - Mubaid ] • Sergio Larrondo , M . S . student , Dept . of Computer Engineering [ UHCL , Dr . Shih ] • Kerry Lee , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Physics [ UH , Dr . Pinsky ] • Stuart M . C . Lee , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Health and Human Performance [ UH , Dr . Clarke , Dr . Layne ] • Bin Lu , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Computer Science [ UH , Dr . Cheng ] • Yi Luo , M . S . student , Dept . of Computer Science [ UH , Dr . Fox , Dr . Fofanov ] • M . Lupu , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Computer Science [ UH , Dr . Cheng ] • Matthew McCurdy , M . D . student , Baylor College of Medicine ; Ph . D . student , Rice University [ Baylor , Rice , Dr . Tittel ] • Adnan Mohammad , M . S . student , Dept . of Computer Science [ UHCL , Dr . Al - Mubaid ] • Dharmakeerthi Nawarathna , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Physics [ UH , Dr . Miller ] • Hriskesh Nene , M . S . student , Dept . of Electrical and Computer Engineering [ UH , Dr . Shireen ] • Tuan Anh Nguyen M . S . student , Dept . of Computer Information Systems [ UHCL , Dr . Yang ] • Rajeev Rajan Pillai , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Electrical and Computer Engineering [ UH , Dr . Bensaoula ] • R . Stephen Provence , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Electrical and Computing Engineering [ UH , Dr . Hsieh ] • Catherine Putonti , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Computer Science [ UH , Dr . Fox , Dr . Fofanov ] • Chamith Rajapakse , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Physics [ UH , Dr . Gunaratne ] • Fang Shang , M . S . student , Dept . of Computer Science [ UH , Dr . Cheng ] • Rajit K . Singh , M . S . student , Dept . of Computer Information Systems [ UHCL , Dr . Al - Mubaid ] • Avinash Sridhar , M . S student , Dept . of Computer Science [ UHCL , Dr . Yang ] • Vijayanand Vajrala , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Physics [ UH , Dr . Miller ] • Srinivas Vanapalli , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Electrical and Computer Engineering [ UH , Dr . Shireen ] • Jiachen Wang , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Biology and Biochemistry [ UH , Dr . Fox ] • Lian Xue , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Electrical and Computer Engineering [ UH , Dr . Wosik , Dr . Miller ] • Zhongcheng Zhang , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Chemistry [ UH , Dr . Fox ] • Li Zhong , M . S . student , Dept . of Electrical and Computer Engineering [ UH , Dr . Wosik , Dr . Miller ] • Dianhui Zhu , Ph . D . student , Dept . of Computer Science [ UH , Dr . Fox , Dr . Fofanov ] NASA / UHCL / UH - ISSO • 135 Notes 136 • ISSO - UH / UHCL / NASA Back Cover— Principal and Co - Principal Investigators Y2005 Dr . James B . Dr . Thomas Dr . Lijeune Dabney Harman Shiau UHCL , Computer UHCL , Computer UHCL , Mathematics Engineering Engineering Dr . Viktor Dr . Heidar A . Dr . Gemunu Hadjiev Malki Gunaratne UH , Texas Center for UH , Engineering UH , Physics Superconductivity Technology at the University of Houston ( TCSUH ) Dr . Abdelhak Dr . G . Dickey Dr . David Jianjun Bensaoula Arndt Ni UH , Center for NASA - JSC , Avionics NASA - JSC , Advanced Materials Systems Division Engineering and ( CAM ) Science Contract Group A NASA photo of the surface of the moon showing Earth in the distance . ISSO The Institute for Space Systems Operations University of Houston University of Houston - Clear Lake Houston , TX 77204 - 5005 Director—Phone : 713 743 - 9135 Editorial—Phone : 713 743 - 9138 E - mail : dcriswell @ uh . edu http : / / www . isso . uh . edu