Molecular Cell , Vol . 3 , 761 – 770 , June , 1999 , Copyright ª 1999 by Cell Press Functional Organization of Clathrin in Coats : Combining Electron Cryomicroscopy and X - Ray Crystallography Schmid , 1997 ) . AP - 1 adaptor complexes function pri - marily at the trans - Golgi network , and the related AP - 2 adaptors occur in plasma membrane – coated pits ( Rob - inson , 1987 ; Ahle et al . , 1988 ) . AP - 2s link endocytic re - ceptors ( for example , transferrin and EGF receptors ) to Andrea Musacchio , 1 , 6 , 7 Corinne J . Smith , 4 , 6 Alan M . Roseman , 4 Stephen C . Harrison , 1 , 2 Tomas Kirchhausen , 3 , 5 and Barbara M . F . Pearse 4 1 Children’s Hospital 2 Howard Hughes Medical Institute the clathrin coat and interact with components such Laboratory of Molecular Medicine as Eps15 , amphyphysin , and dynamin thought to be 3 Department of Cell Biology and needed for vesicle formation and closure ( Kirchhausen Center for Blood Research et al . , 1997 ; Wigge et al . , 1997 ; Benmerah et al . , 1998 ; Harvard Medical School Chen et al . , 1998 ; Cupers et al . , 1998 ) . There also appear Boston , Massachusetts 02115 to be more specialized adaptors ( for example , the non - 4 Medical Research Council Laboratory visual arrestins ) that bridge between G - coupled recep - of Molecular Biology tors and clathrin ( Goodman et al . , 1997 ) . Hills Road Purified clathrin coats exhibit a range of structures Cambridge CB2 2QH ( Crowther et al . , 1976 ) . Any closed - shell lattice based United Kingdom on a hexagonal net must have 12 pentagons , and one common design is the six - fold barrel , with hexagons at either pole , each surrounded by six pentagons , and with Summary six hexagons around the equator ( Figure 1A ) . The un - usual triskelion shape of the clathrin trimer ( Figure 1B ) , The sorting of specific proteins into clathrin - coated first revealed in rotary shadowed preparations ( Unge - pits and the mechanics of membrane invagination are wickell and Branton , 1981 ) , leads to a remarkably ex - determined by assembly of the clathrin lattice . Recent tended set of interactions within such a lattice ( Crowther structures of a six - fold barrel clathrin coat at 21 A˚ and Pearse , 1981 ) . A triskelion contains three identical , resolution by electron cryomicroscopy and of the 190 kDa heavy chains and three , approximately 30 kDa , clathrin terminal domain and linker at 2 . 6 A˚ by X - ray light chains , of which there are several related forms crystallography together show how domains of clathrin ( KirchhausenandHarrison , 1981 ; UngewickellandBran - interact and orient within the coat and reveal the ton , 1981 ; Jackson et al . , 1987 ; Kirchhausen et al . , strongly puckered shape and conformational variabil - 1987a , 1987b ) . ityofindividualtriskelions . The (cid:98) propellerofthetermi - Reconstitution of “cages” from purified clathrin and nal domain faces the membrane so that recognition of “coats” from clathrin plus adaptors under conditions segments from adaptor proteins can extend along its favoring formation of hexagonal barrels ( Pearse and lateral grooves . Clathrin legs adapt to different coat Robinson , 1984 ) provided specimens for study by elec - environments in the barrel by flexing along a segment tron cryomicroscopy . Reconstructions of tilted images at the knee that is free of contacts with other mole - showed that coats have three shells of density corre - cules . sponding respectively to the outer clathrin lattice , the heavy chain N - terminal domains , and an inner layer of adaptors ( Vigers et al . , 1986a , 1986b ) . Recently , a much Introduction improved reconstruction of a clathrin / AP - 2 coat , at 21 A ˚ resolution , has revealed details of how the proximal Clathrin organizes membrane vesiculation from the cell and distal legs form the polyhedral cage ( Smith et al . , surface and from some internal compartments , by form - 1998 ) . It also shows the terminal domains as hook - like ing coats together with adaptors , receptors , and other features linking the surface of the layer of adaptor com - membrane - associated proteins ( for reviews see Pearse plexes with the lattice of the barrel . and Robinson , 1990 ; Kirchhausen et al . , 1997 ; Robinson , Strategies for studying clathrin by X - ray crystallogra - 1997 ; Schmid , 1997 ) . Electron micrographs of sectioned phy have involved attempts to assemble uniform small cells capture images of coated pits and vesicles at vari - cages ( Sorger et al . , 1986 ) as well as efforts to dissect ous stages of budding into the cytoplasm ( Perry and the molecule into domains ( Kirchhausen and Harrison , Gilbert , 1979 ) , andrapidfreeze , deepetchpicturesofthe 1984 ) . The sequence of the 1675 amino acid residues cytoplasmic surface of fibroblasts reveal flat , hexagonal in a clathrin heavy chain , derived from the sequence of lattices as well as deeply invaginated buds with a mix - its cDNA , permitted mapping of defined cleavage points ture of hexagons and pentagons ( Heuser , 1980 ) . onto the contour of a triskelion leg ( Kirchhausen et al . , The regulation of clathrin assembly and uncoating 1987a ) . The globular N - terminal domain at the tip and and the selection of membrane proteins for inclusion in a segment linking it to the distal leg together comprise coated pits and vesicles require participation of adap - residues 1 – 500 ( approximately ) , and the three - fold ver - tor complexes ( reviewed in Kirchhausen et al . , 1997 ; tex contains the heavy chain C terminus . The crystal structure of a recombinant terminal domain – linker frag - 5 To whomcorrespondence shouldbe addressed ( e - mail : kirchhausen @ ment , reported recently , shows that the terminal domain crystal . harvard . edu ) . is a seven - blade (cid:98) propeller , similar to those formed by 6 These authors contributed equally to this work . WD repeats ( Ter Haar et al . , 1998 ) . Its grooved perimeter 7 Presentaddress : DepartmentofExperimentalOncology , European Institute of Oncology , via Ripamonti 435 , 20141 Milan , Italy . is likely to present interaction sites for various adaptor Molecular Cell 762 as well as part of the linker region ( Ter Haar et al . , 1998 ) . The conformations and relative orientations of the (cid:98) propeller terminal domain and the (cid:97) zigzag linker impart an overall hook - like shape to the fragment . Since the evidence that the hook - like features seen in the electron microscopy ( EM ) map ( Smith et al . , 1998 ) correspond to clathrin terminal domains is compelling , we extracted these features from the EM map and positioned the X - ray structure within them using a density correlation procedure described in Experimental Procedures . The resulting positions for each terminal domain on a pen - tagonal face are displayed in Figure 2 . The fit varies slightly among the nine independent domains , probably becauseofintrinsicnoiseintheEMmap , conformational variability of the domains within a cage , constraints im - posed by adaptor complexes , and variability among in - dividual particles in the preparation . A higher resolution EMmapis likelytohelpdistinguish amongthesefactors . Figure 1 . A Clathrin Triskelion and Its Position in a Barrel Coat ( A ) Diagram of the lattice of a clathrin barrel with one triskelion in Modeling Clathrin in the Image Reconstruction place . The barrel is oriented approximately with one of its two - fold from Electron Cryomicroscopy axes in the direction of the viewer , and it is slightly rotated about Electron microscopy of free clathrin shows that the legs another two - fold axis parallel to the page , to show the six - fold are relatively uniform rods ( Kirchhausen and Harrison , axis running through the polar hexagonal faces . The stars show 1981 , 1984 ; Ungewickell and Branton , 1981 ) . The 21 A˚ examples of the three symmetry - distinct vertices in this structure . cryoEM reconstructionhas sufficient clarity thatone can ( B ) Schematic representation of a clathrin triskelion , showing orien - tations of the heavy and light chains and the principal heavy chain follow the individual rod - like legs as they radiate from segments . The color scheme introduced here is used throughout the three - fold vertex of a triskelion , and a general de - this paper . Proximal legs are in red , knees in yellow , distal legs in scription of the course of a leg has been provided in green , and linker and terminal domain in gray . the paper on the reconstruction ( Smith et al . , 1998 ) . In order to analyze the packing and flexibility of clathrin more precisely , we have used features of the program proteins . The linker is a zigzag of (cid:97) helical segments , O ( Jones et al . , 1991 ) , as described in Experimental which stack to form a stiff , but not utterly rigid , rod . We Procedures , to build a model for clathrin triskelions in proposed that this (cid:97) zigzag extends along most or all the lattice ( Figures 3 and 4 ) . Elements of secondary or of the triskelion leg , and the structure of a segment from tertiary structure cannot , of course , be discerned at this the proximal leg , recently crystallized ( Ybe et al . , 1998 ) , resolution , and we have defined the course of each leg may soon clarify this point . as a set of points , connected sequentially along the We have now used the 2 . 6 A˚ resolution crystal struc - uninterrupted stretches of density clearly seen in the ture of the terminal domain and linker and an approximate map . molecular analysis of the 21 A˚ electron cryomicroscopy The barrel design for a clathrin lattice ( Figure 1A ) con - ( cryoEM ) reconstruction to study the orientation of the tains 36 triskelions or 108 individual legs ( Crowther et terminal domain within a coat and to analyze clathrin al . , 1976 ) . The symmetry of the structure dictates that packing in more detail . As described previously , a leg specifying three triskelions ( nine legs ) is sufficient to spans two edges of a polygon and ends in the hook - define the packing—all others are related to these three like feature identified as the terminal domain ( Smith et by symmetry operations ( see positions marked with al . , 1998 ) . The crystallographically determined model of stars in Figure 1A ) . We therefore traced nine legs inde - the terminal domain – linker gives a good fit to this den - pendently and reconstructed the complete barrel by sity . The “top” surface of the propeller faces the adaptor applying the appropriate rotations . The model for each cluster that lies within the clathrin lattice . Moreover , leg contains 125 points ( numbered sequentially from by constructing a triskelion representation that can be vertex—the C terminus of the clathrin heavy chain —to rotated and compared , we have been able to determine tip—the N terminus ) . Because they are represented in how a leg flexes at various positions in the barrel . In this O by (cid:97) carbons , the points are 3 . 8 A˚ apart . The overall commonly found structure , all three symmetry - distinct length of the trace is therefore approximately 475 A˚ , in triskelions have identical puckers at their vertices , and good agreement with the contour of a rotary shadowed most of the conformational variability is restricted to the triskelion . “knee . ” We discuss the implications of these findings The fit of our model to the reconstruction is shown in for control of clathrin assembly and for the formation of Figure 3 . The triskelion legs are represented as worm - larger coats and flat arrays . like rods of constant , arbitrary diameter , smoothly con - necting the 125 points used for the model ( Figures 3C Results and 3D ) . The thickness of a leg , as defined by contour levels in the reconstruction , does not appear to vary Orientation of Terminal Domains within a Coat significantly . Theproximallegslieoutsidethedistallegs , The crystal structure of a 55 kDa clathrin heavy chain and thus as one leg extends from the vertex of its triskel - ion , it gradually passes inward from the surface of the fragment includes the globular N - terminal domain and Clathrin in Three Dimensions 763 Figure 2 . Fit of the Crystallographically Derived Model for the Terminal Domain and Linker to the CryoEM Image Reconstruction ( A ) View through a pentagonal face , showing part of the triskelion model with its hook - like terminal domain . ( B ) Similar view with a backbone representation of the high - resolution X - ray crystallographic model inserted into the same region of the map . ( C ) Similar view with an electron density representation of the high - resolution X - ray model inserted into the hook - like terminal domains of the map . ( D ) Close - up of a side view , showing the fit of one terminal domain . The feature at the lower margin of the figure represents the core of adaptor complexes present in the coat . In the molecular models , the (cid:98) propeller is shown in yellow and the (cid:97) zigzag in red . barrel toward the interior ( Figures 4A and 4B ) . Each edge right of the red triskelion in the center can easily be followed as it spans two edges of a hexagon and finally of the coat contains two antiparallel proximal legs ( red ) and two antiparallel distal legs ( green ) . Over the central projects inward into the hook - like feature previously identified as the terminal domain . As described above , part of an edge , the proximal and distal legs pack at relatively constant center - to - center distances : about 25 the fit of the crystallographically determined model of the terminal domain – linker to this density confirms the A˚ laterally between proximal ( or distal ) segments , and 20 A˚ radially between a proximal segment and the distal assignment . The region around a vertex of the barrel contains a segment beneath it ( Figure 4C ) . Although the resolution of the reconstruction does not allow the leg segments complex pattern of interactions ( Smith et al . , 1998 ) . The reconstruction shows four clear layers in cross section to be resolved clearly at all positions along an edge , the fit shown in Figure 3 is the only one that preserves ( Figure 5 ) . These correspond respectively to the hub of the triskelion centered on that barrel vertex , the knees continuity of the trace without invoking physically im - possible crossovers . The knee , which is clearly resolved of triskelionscentered onthe threeneighboring vertices , and the distal legs and terminal domains from triskelions in the map ( Figures 4A and 4B ) , has a relatively gradual bend . It skirts the vertex region of the barrel , so that the centered on second nearest – neighbor vertices . There appears to be a small globular element facing inward proximal and distal segments it connects border the same face ( hexagon or pentagon ) of the cage . This path at the three - fold . Our model does not include any repre - sentation of this feature , which probably contains the is particularly clear in Figure 3D , where the leg on the Molecular Cell 764 Figure 3 . CryoEM Image Reconstruction of a Clathrin Barrel and Model for Triskelion Packing ( A and B ) The EM reconstruction viewed along the six - fold ( polar ) and two - fold ( equatorial ) axes , respectively . ( C and D ) Model of triskelions obtained as described in the text . Representatives of the three symmetry - independent triskelions are displayed in red , yellow , and green . The remaining triskelions , which were generated from these three by application of symmetry operations , are displayed in gray . The orientations of ( C ) and ( D ) correspond to the views in ( A ) and ( B ) , respectively . heavy chain C - terminal segments , known to be involved smoothly , with no sharp kinks , except at the boundary between linker and terminal domain ( the hook ) . The in trimerization ( Kirchhausen and Harrison , 1984 ; Lem - mon et al . , 1991 ; Nathke et al . , 1992 ; Pishvaee et al . , clathrin light chains are known to be associated with theproximalsegmentofthe heavychain ( Kirchhausenet 1997 ) . Beneath the hub , distal legs and linkers ( from triskelions centered two vertices away ) form a three - al . , 1983 ; Ungewickell , 1983 ; Kirchhausen and Toyoda , 1993 ) . They are probably extended (cid:97) helices where they way crossover , in which the center - to - center distance of the rods is about 20 A˚ . There appears to be a particu - attach to the heavy chain in defined regions , with disor - dered N - and C - terminal regions ( Kirchhausen et al . , larly tight interaction ( arrows in Figure 5 ) between points 82 – 84 in the distal leg ( about 315 A ˚ from the hub ) and 1987b ; Scarmato and Kirchhausen , 1990 ; Nathke et al . , 1992 ) . They are therefore unlikely to contribute signifi - points 93 – 95 in the linker ( about 355 A˚ from the hub ) . cantly tothe apparentfeatures ofthe reconstructedcoat at this resolution . The most striking characteristic of the Triskelions The model of a triskelion , excised from the coat , is excised clathrin trimer is its pucker at the three - fold . The vertex lies approximately 240 A˚ above the plane shown in Figures 6A and 6B . Each leg bends relatively Clathrin in Three Dimensions 765 Figure 5 . Appearance of the Model in the Region of a Barrel Vertex The outermost structure is the vertex of a triskelion , which is cen - tered on this vertex of the barrel . The contact - free zone of each leg near the triskelion vertex is in light red ; the rest of the proximal leg is in darker red . Beneath the triskelion vertex are the knees ( yellow ) Figure 4 . Fit of the Clathrin Triskelion Model to the EM Recon - of three triskelions centered at neighboring barrel vertices . At still struction smallerradiiarethedistallegs ( green ) andlinkers ( gray ) fromtriskeli - ( A ) View of an edge from outside the barrel ( cytosol to membrane ) . ons centered two vertices away . The terminal domains ( also gray ) The vertex - to - vertex distance is 185 A˚ . are at the innermost radii . ( B ) Sideviewofthesameedge , rotated90 (cid:56) relativetotheorientation ( A ) View from outside the barrel . in ( A ) . The upper part of the figure corresponds to the outside of ( B ) View at 90 (cid:56) from ( A ) . the barrel . ( C ) Slab - likecrosssectionthroughtheedge , centeredattheposition al . , 1995 ) , the expected position of residue 490 would indicated by the dashed line in ( B ) , showing the packing of proximal be point 87 in the model , about 1110 residues from and distal legs . The color scheme is described in the caption to Figure 1 . the C terminus of the heavy chain , within reasonable agreement of the observed position . This agreement strengthens our confidence in the fit of the crystallo - defined by the tips of the terminal domains . All three graphically derived model to the reconstructed density symmetry - independent trimers in the barrel have the in the coat . same pucker ( Figures 6C and 6D ) . In the computed cryoEM reconstruction , the terminal The fit of the terminal domain – linker fragment to the domains are somewhat weaker than the rest of the tri - hook - like feature in the image reconstruction places the skelion . We interpret the lower density of the terminal C terminus of the model ( residue 490 ) close to point 93 domain features to be a consequence of the lack of in all nine symmetry - independent legs . As discussed in constraints on the linker . Indeed , the point at which the detail in the report of the high - resolution X - ray structure , strength of the computed reconstruction decreases is the linear density of a clathrin leg is about three residues just where the linker emerges from passing under a per angstrom . If we allow 75 residues for the trimeriza - distal leg—the last point of clearly defined intermolecu - lar contact in the lattice ( arrows in Figures 5A and 5B ) . tion domain not included in our model for a leg ( Liu et Molecular Cell 766 Figure 6 . Three Dimensional View of a Single Triskelion and Superposition of Triskelions and Individual Legs from Different Positions in the Barrel ( A and B ) A triskelion , colored as described in Figure 1A , has been excised from the model of a coat . The side view in ( B ) emphasizes the significant pucker of the clathrin molecule . ( C and D ) Superpositions of the three unique triskelions in the barrel , colored as in Figure 3 . The legs align well in the proximal region , but they diverge at the knee . Small divergences propagate into quite substantial changes in the relative positions of the terminal domains . ( E – G ) Individual clathrin legs , aligned by superposition of their proximal segments . In ( E ) , two groups of legs can be identified , characterized by different curvatures at the knee . The distal segment of legs depicted in blue face hexagons , while those in light yellow face pentagons . In ( F ) is shown a side view of the aligned “blue” legs , after rotation of 90 (cid:56) about a horizontal axis relative to the view in ( E ) . In ( G ) is a side view of the “light yellow” legs , showing that there is a significant degree of divergence within this group , due to torsion of the rods . The coats contributing to the reconstruction were as - local curvature ) . Where in the clathrin molecule is the flexibility required by these properties of its assemblies ? sembled with AP - 2 complexes . There are substoichio - We have traced independently the nine legs of the three metric numbers of these complexes per barrel ( roughly clathrin trimers that compose an “asymmetric unit” of one adaptor complex per two triskelions ) ( Gallusser and the barrel , and we can therefore superpose the various Kirchhausen , 1993 ) , and the symmetry of the AP - 2 clus - legs in order to discern large scale differences in their ter near the center of the coat may not correspond to conformations . Some aspects of this analysis are shown thesymmetryoftheclathrinlattice . Therefore , differently in Figures 6C – 6G . From the superpositions in Figures oriented interactions of the clathrin terminal domains 6C and 6D , it is clear that the vertices and proximal legs with the hinge of AP (cid:98) chains ( the principal contact of thethree symmetry - independenttriskelions inthe six - between clathrin and adaptor complexes ) ( Dell’Angelica fold barrel are invariant in their conformations . More - et al . , 1998 ; A . Contreras and T . K . , unpublished data ) over , rotational superpositions show that the central could have pulled some of the terminal domains away portions of the trimers have essentially perfect three - from what would otherwise have been their equilibrium fold axes . That is , when individual trimers in Figures 6A positions , decreasing the effective occupancy of the or 6B are rotated by 120 (cid:56) or 240 (cid:56) about axes through majority positions . Even when unconstrained by AP in - their vertices , the proximal legs coincide closely ( data teractions , the linker may be somewhat more flexible notshown ) . Thus , thetrimerizationdomainsatthecenter than other parts of the leg . of the clathrin triskelion appear to have a fixed structure The 108 terminal domains in the complete barrel form within this type of cage , and the capacity of clathrin to a remarkably tight intermediate layer facing the AP clus - form pentagonal and hexagonal faces does not come ter . The “top” side of the (cid:98) propeller faces toward the from differences in interchain angle or pucker at the tri - center of the coat , and the grooves along the perimeter skelion vertex . Rather , significant variation is restricted of the propeller are radially aligned . Adaptor proteins to the knees and distal legs . In the discussion section , are therefore likely either to contact the top surface of we review evidence that the pucker of clathrin trimers the terminal domain or to have a segment of polypeptide in solution is very similar to the unique pucker we see chain that extends outward along one of the seven in the barrel lattice . We also point out that in larger cages grooves . and flat arrays , the pucker is likely to decrease , and we suggest how this change might occur . Triskelion Flexibility The flexibility within a leg is illustrated in Figures 6C – Clathrin lattices have both pentagonal and hexagonal 6E , which show superpositions based on the first 25 points ( about 95 A˚ ) of each leg . The chain conformations faces , and cages can also vary in radius ( and hence in Clathrin in Three Dimensions 767 cluster in two groups according to whether the leg bor - relatively symmetric images of trimers with a clockwise swirl ( Crowther and Pearse , 1981 ; Kirchhausen and Har - ders a hexagonal or a pentagonal face ( blue and light yellow , respectively , in Figures 6E – 6G ) . Chains in the rison , 1981 ; Kirchhausen et al . , 1986 ) had a narrow varia - tion in distances between terminal domains ( Kirch - second group further cluster in subgroups that appear to have torsional differences ( Figure 6G ) . At this resolu - hausen et al . , 1986 ) , consistent with the interpretation that they came from puckered molecules such as the tion , it is not possible to assess whether the divergence in direction of the distal legs originates from one or more one in Figure 6B , adsorbed initially to the grids through their terminal domains ( Kirchhausen et al . , 1986 ) . The discrete hinges or whether the observed flexibility is more continuously distributed . Superposition of the dis - average interterminal domain distance was about 450 A˚ , very similar to what we measure for the trimer models tal legs ( data not shown ) does indicate a close agree - ment inthis regionof themolecule , suggestingthat most in the present work . This value of the span is closest to what might be expected ( 430 A˚ ) from triskelions with all of the variation seen in this structure is concentrated in the knee . The unusual length of the clathrin legs makes their legs in one configuration ( the blue conformation in Figure 6 ) . Such a trimer might be the “ground state” of it easy for a small distortion at the knee to propagate into a major displacement of the terminal domain . clathrin , found in the absence of restraints from packing in a cage . By contrast with the clockwise images of mica - adsorbedclathrin , images havingananticlockwise Discussion swirl were often quite asymmetric , with widely varying distances ( generally larger than in the clockwise images ) Position and Orientation of the Terminal Domain between the tips of their legs ( Kirchhausen et al . , 1986 ) . The 108 terminal domains project inward , and they do These pictures probably derived from molecules that not appear to interact tightly with any other clathrin landed “vertex first , ” with subsequent splaying outward molecules . The first close contact that the linker makes of their legs against the mica surface . with another clathrin heavy chain is at around points It has been suggested that the clathrin light chains 82 – 84 , correspondingtoresidue537fromtheCterminus may govern the pucker of a triskelion and that this varia - ( arrows in Figure 5 ) . This fit to the reconstruction is tion may in turn control the formation of hexagons and consistent with the results of limited tryptic proteolysis pentagons ( Liu et al . , 1995 ; Pishvaee et al . , 1997 ; Pish - of clathrin cages , which leads to preferential cleavage vaee and Payne , 1998 ) . Two earlier lines of evidence of the heavy chain at a position very close to residues argue against this proposal . First , the overall pucker of K 507 or R 523 and to release of the terminal domain and free clathrin , revealed by electron microscopy as just linker without disruption of the lattice ( Kirchhausen and described , is the same whether or not light chains are Harrison , 1984 ; Kirchhausen et al . , 1987a ) . present ( Kirchhausen et al . , 1986 ) . Second , light chains The nine symmetry - independent terminal domains all do not affect the curvature of the structures that are lie with the top surface of the (cid:98) propeller facing the inner formed either in the presence or in the absence of adap - cluster of AP complexes . The propeller design has a set tors ( Winkler and Stanley , 1983 ; Lindner and Ungewick - of grooves on its lateral surface , suitable for interaction ell , 1991 ; Ungewickell and Ungewickell , 1991 ) . The data with different adaptor proteins , and there is evidence presented here are consistent with these observations : that (cid:98) - arrestin and arrestin - 3 , adaptors for the (cid:98) adren - the differences among legs in cages occur beyond the ergic receptor , indeed contact one of these grooves proximal segments with which light chains are known through extended , C - terminal tails ( Krupnick et al . , 1997 ; to associate . Ter Haar et al . , 1998 ; E . Ter Haar et al . , personal commu - We suggest instead that the clathrin legs are stiff but nication ) . The observed orientation of the terminal do - not rigid structures that can flex in response to packing main would allow a projecting peptide , such as this requirements . Within the barrel studied here , this flexion C - terminal tail , to access any of the seven grooves is concentrated in the knee . The (cid:97) zigzag structure of around the perimeter of the propeller , while presenting the linker between terminal domain and distal leg has the top surface for further contacts . The (cid:98) subunit of the characteristics necessary for a suitable compliant heterotrimeric G proteins , also a seven - blade (cid:98) propel - component ( Ter Haar et al . , 1998 ) . The packing dimen - ler , interacts with the (cid:97) subunit in this way : the top sions of the proximal and distal segments—about 20 – 25 surface of the propeller contacts the Ras - like domain of A˚ ( Figure 4C ) —are consistent with the proposal that the G (cid:97) , while one of the grooves accepts a helical projection (cid:97) zigzag is the basic structure of the entire clathrin leg . from the N terminus ( Wall et al . , 1995 ; Lambright et al . , The short helical hairpins in the clathrin linker (cid:97) zigzag 1996 ) . The likely orientation of the G protein (cid:98) subunit can rotate a bit with respect to each other and can also with respect to the membrane is different from what we part slightly . Thus , the interactions between successive see in the clathrin cage , however . hairpins permit both twist and bend , and these mechani - cal properties of an (cid:97) zigzag could impart to the knee Shape of a Triskelion and Flexibility along the Legs its required flexibility . The three symmetry - independent triskelions within the barrel have ( to the accuracy of the present analysis ) precise three - fold symmetry near their vertices and in - Variable Curvature of Clathrin Lattices Clathrin can form closed structures significantly larger variant pucker . Clathrin in free solution is likely to have a pucker quite similar to the one seen here , as shown than the barrel analyzed here , as well as extended hex - agonal arrays . This variation probably involves a change previously byelectron microscopy of triskelionsin nega - tive stain and also adsorbed onto mica and rotary shad - in the pucker at the triskelion vertex to a value appro - priate to the mean curvature of the shell rather than a owed after rapid freezing ( Kirchhausen et al . , 1986 ) . The Molecular Cell 768 change in noncovalent contacts along the legs between triskelions . Altered contacts would require the proximal legs to cross each other at a different angle ( looking tangentially , as in Figure 4B ) . The interactions extend over about 90 A˚ , and changing the crossing angle would involve major disruption and rearrangement . The struc - ture of a cage in the vicinity of a vertex and the evident deformability of a leg near the knee suggest a simple way in which the effective pucker can also vary when required . Like the knee , the proximal leg near the vertex is free of contacts in the lattice ( zone colored in lighter red in Figure 5 ) . The relatively smooth bend of the knee ensures that this lack of contact will also be true in larger cages and flat arrays . If the molecular architecture of the proximal leg resembles that of the knee , then the contact - free zone near the vertex will be stiff but de - formable ( compare Figure 6 ) , and relatively small forces will be able to open up the angle between the legs . Figure 7 . Schematic Representation of the Cross Section of an In - The equilibrium pucker of triskelions in solution ( simi - vaginated Clathrin - Coated Membrane to Illustrate the Relative Dis - lar , as discussed above , to that of triskelions in the position of Clathrin , Adaptors , and Cargo within the Clathrin Coat hexagonal barrel ) will determine a preferred curvature The main part of the clathrin lattice is in red , with the distal end on the legs including the (cid:98) propeller terminal domain and the (cid:97) zigzag or a range of curvatures for a lattice , as observed in linker projectingtoward the membrane . Receptorsin the membrane the modest size range of cages produced by in vitro contactadaptorproteins , whichinturninteractwithclathrinterminal assembly of purified clathrin ( Kirchhausen and Harrison , domains . Members of the family of nonvisual arrestins ( green ) serve 1981 ; Pearse and Crowther , 1982 ) . But , if contact - free as adaptors for a number of seven transmembrane – helix proteins segments of the leg are deformable , constraints such such as the (cid:98) 2 adrenergic receptor ( left ) . The AP - 1 and AP - 2 com - as assembly against a flat surface ( e . g . , where a cell plexes ( blue ) serve as adaptors for growth - factor receptors , trans - ferrin receptors , and many others ( center ) . adheres to a substrate ) or assembly around a large di - ameter cargo ( e . g . , an adenovirus particle ) can , ac - cording to our model , alter the curvature with relatively It has occasionally been suggested that hexagonal little free energy cost . Further adaptation can also occur arrays of clathrin might rearrange locally into curved at the knee . The actual trimer contacts at a clathrin structures ( Heuser , 1980 ) . While this is not possible in vertex need not change , only the flexing of the contact - the interior of the hexagonal lattice pinned down to a freeheavychainsegmentnearthetrimerizationelement . substrate , rapid disassembly and reassembly into curved The required range of bending is no greater than what structures at the edge of a flat array can cause it to we observe among the different states of the knee in appear to be feeding a growing coated pit . The ease of the barrel assembly itself . ( Notice , for example , what association and dissociation just described is compati - sort of deformation near the vertex would be required ble with these events . Indeed , the mechanism by which to make the left - hand leg in Figure 6B project horizon - curvature can vary , proposed in the previous section , tally , and compare it with the range of angles of knee leads naturally to such a process . If the flat array repre - bends in Figure 6C or 6E ) . The deformability of the linker sents a somewhat strained state of a triskelion , then (cid:97) zigzag , seen by comparing the three crystallographi - wherever the cell surface lifts away from the substrate , cally distinct copies of the terminal domain – linker ( Fig - disassembly from the hexagonal lattice and reassembly ure 7 in Ter Haar et al . , 1998 ) , would be adequate . The into a curved coat will be favored . Rapid equilibration essential feature of this model is that the contents of a between flat and curved structures is consistent with growing coat can help determine its curvature and pre - the known strength of clathrin association . Under physi - vent the abrupt termination of assembly that would oc - ological conditions , the stability of an assembled lattice cur if the lattice were to close off too tightly . is marginal , and coat formation in vitro requires interac - tion with adaptor complexes . Clathrin Assembly and Disassembly on Membranes Adaptors and other factors specify in vivo that clathrin The pictureof atriskelion thatemerges fromour analysis assembly will occur on a membrane and not free in is of a strongly puckered trimer with stiff legs and some - the cytosol . In this work , we have used purified AP - 2 what more flexibly linker terminal domains . How can adaptors , the plasma membrane – specific complex , to such an assembly unit rapidly form a clathrin lattice , as form coats . Similar coats can be formed using AP - 1 observed both in vivo and in vitro ? The packing illus - from the trans - Golgi network . A flexible hinge segment trated in Figure 3 allows a triskelion to add readily to from the adaptor (cid:98) chain extends away from the body the growing edge of a lattice without having to insert of the complex to interact with the clathrin terminal do - between closely spaced legs from other molecules . main . The orientation of the terminal domain in the lat - Imagine , for example , rotating the red triskelion in Figure tice , determined here , suggests that the hinge peptide 3D slightly clockwise about its vertex . Its legs will could insert into one of the seven grooves on the lateral smoothly disengage from their neighbors , and the entire surface of the (cid:98) propeller , probably with its amino end trimer will be free to dissociate outward . The reverse of near the “top” face of the domain and the carboxyl end this process can ensure rapid addition at any stage in near the “bottom” face . The schematic drawing in Figure 7 illustrates how coat assembly relates spatially to the the formation of a coated vesicle lattice . Clathrin in Three Dimensions 769 final positions of the terminal domains in the pentagonal face of the adaptor complexes and to the receptors that they in barrel were 0 . 68 , 0 . 68 , 0 . 73 , 0 . 69 , and 0 . 67 . The correlation coeffi - turn recruit into coated pits . The nonvisual arrestins , cient was 0 . 70 for the fit of the terminal domain in the hexagonal which act as specific adaptors for the (cid:98) adrenergic re - face on the six - fold symmetry axis of the barrel and 0 . 72 and 0 . 69 ceptor and related molecules , have a flexible carboxyl - for the terminal domains in the equatorial hexagonal face on the terminal peptide , which is known to interact in the two - fold symmetry axis . All approximate to 0 . 7 , a value similar to what would be found for an outstanding molecular replacement groove between propeller blades 1 and 2 . Its orientation , solution in X - ray crystallography . In these experiments , the hand of as it projects away from the membrane , is probably the the EM map chosen corresponds to the hand described for individ - same as that of the adaptor (cid:98) chain hinge and therefore ual triskelions ( Kirchhausen et al . , 1986 ) . likewise consistent with the arrangement shown in Fig - ure 7 . Other molecules , such as amphiphysin , AP180 , Acknowledgments and epsin , may also interact with clathrin , but the nature of their interacting segments and their orientation with The work was supported in part by NIH grant GM36548 ( T . K . ) . respect to clathrin have yet to be determined . A . M . was an Armenise Fellow ( Harvard Medical School Center for StructuralBiology ) andaSeniorPostdoctoralFellowoftheAmerican The prospects for obtaining higher resolution recon - Cancer Society ( Massachusetts Division ) . A . M . R . was supported structed images of clathrin assemblies by electron cryo - onanECTRANSNETgrant , BI04 - CT97 – 2119 . S . C . H . isanInvestiga - microscopy and the possibility of docking X - ray crystal torintheHowardHughesMedicalInstitute . WethankR . A . Crowther structures into those maps promise in the near future forhelpfuldiscussions . ThispaperisacontributionfromtheHarvard substantially more detailed pictures of clathrin coats Medical School Center for Structural Biology , with support from the and coated vesicles . Harvard - Armenise Foundation for Advanced Medical Research . Received March 8 , 1999 ; revised April 28 , 1999 . Experimental Procedures Analysis of the Path of a Clathrin Leg References To fit a set of points to the evident trace of a clathrin leg , we posi - tioned a set of “pseudoatoms , ” using the program O ( Jones et al . , Ahle , S . , Mann , A . , Eichelsbacher , U . , and Ungewickell , E . ( 1988 ) . 1991 ) . Wecreatedaninitialskeletonbygeneratingshortlineararrays Structural relationships between clathrin assembly proteins from of points with an ad hoc computer program and displaying these the Golgi and the plasma membrane . EMBO J . 7 , 919 – 929 . arrays ( about 10 – 20 pseudoatoms at an interatomic distance of 1 . 5 Benmerah , A . , Lamaze , C . , Begue , B . , Schmid , S . L . , Dautryvarsat , A˚ ) with O . The short stretches were positioned in the map for the A . , andCerfbensussan , N . ( 1998 ) . AP - 2 / Eps15interactionisrequired image reconstruction and edited until they produced a satisfactory for receptor - mediated endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 1055 – 1062 . fit . Theywerethenassembledintoacoordinatefile . Theinitialskele - Chen , H . , Fre , S . , Slepnev , V . I . , Capua , M . R . , Takei , K . , Butler , M . H . , ton consisted of nine chains , each composed of 330 pseudoatoms . Difiore , P . P . , andDecamilli , P . ( 1998 ) . EpsinisanEH - domain - binding Thechainswereeditedonachain - by - chainbasisinordertoimprove protein implicated in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nature 394 , their fit to the map . Differences in interatomic positions among 793 – 797 . chains that were introduced at this stage of model building were Collaborative Computational Project , Number 4 ( 1994 ) . The CCP4 later removed when a new model was built with the “baton” com - suite : programs for protein crystallography . Acta Crystallogr . D 50 , mand , using the initial model as a guide . Each new chain consisted 760 – 763 . of 125 pseudoatoms , at a fixed interatomic distance of 3 . 8 A˚ . Build - ing and all subsequent analyses were carried out with O . Crowther , R . A . , and Pearse , B . M . ( 1981 ) . Assembly and packing of clathrin into coats . J . Cell Biol . 91 , 790 – 797 . Fitting the Terminal Domain – Linker Structure Crowther , R . A . , Finch , J . T . , andPearse , B . M . ( 1976 ) . Onthestructure to the CryoEM Reconstruction of coated vesicles . J . Mol . Biol . 103 , 785 – 798 . It was first necessary to extract from the EM map the volume cov - Cupers , P . , Jadhav , A . P . , and Kirchhausen , T . ( 1998 ) . Assembly of ering the terminal domain and linker . An initial manual placement clathrin coats disrupts the association between Eps15 and AP - 2 of the coordinates at each of the nine symmetry - independent hook - adaptors . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 1847 – 1850 . like features in the map was made using O . A mask extending 20 Dell’Angelica , E . C . , Klumperman , J . , Stoorvogel , W . , andBonifacino , A ˚ around each atom in the PDB file was created using NCSMASK J . S . ( 1998 ) . Association of the AP - 3 adaptor complex with clathrin . in the CCP4 suite ( Collaborative Computational Project , 1994 ) . The Science 280 , 431 – 434 . relevantregionsofdensitywereextractedfromthemapusingmasks Frank , J . , Shimkin , B . , and Dowse , H . ( 1981 ) . SPIDER—a modular and procedures created using the SPIDER image processing pro - software system for electron image processing . Ultramicroscopy 6 , gram ( Frank et al . , 1981 , 1996 ) , which was also used for subsequent 343 – 358 . operations . The PDB file containing the mask was converted to a volume of density with the same pixel sampling as the EM map , Frank , J . , Radermacher , M . , Penczek , P . , Zhu , J . , Li , Y . H . , Ladjadj , and both maps were filtered to exclude features above a resolution M . , and Leith , A . ( 1996 ) . Spider and web—processing and visualiza - of 22 A˚ . A full six parameter search of orientation and position was tionofimagesin3delectronmicroscopyandrelatedfields . J . Struct . conducted to find the best fit of the density derived from the crystal Biol . 116 , 190 – 199 . structure and the density derived from the EM map . The three posi - Gallusser , A . , and Kirchhausen , T . ( 1993 ) . The (cid:98) 1 and (cid:98) 2 subunits tion parameters were found by 3D cross - correlation of the maps . of the AP complexes are the clathrin coat assembly components . All relative orientations of the two maps were explored by applying EMBO J . 12 , 5237 – 5244 . rotations corresponding to a set of angles that cover all angular Goodman , O . B . , Jr . , Krupnick , J . G . , Gurevich , V . V . , Benovic , J . L . , space with a sampling of better than 4 (cid:56) . Movements from the initial and Keen , J . H . ( 1997 ) . Arrestin / clathrin interaction . Localization of placement were within 15 A˚ and up to about 30 (cid:56) . the arrestin binding locus to the clathrin terminal domain . J . Biol . In seven of the nine cases , the orientation giving the best overall Chem . 272 , 15017 – 15022 . correlationcoefficientconformedtoknownconstraintsderivedfrom Heuser , J . ( 1980 ) . Three - dimensional visualization of coated vesicle the biochemistry of the molecules . In the remaining two cases , the formation in fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 84 , 560 – 583 . overall best fit corresponded to an orientation with N and C termini of the fragment reversed . Since this reversal was chemically unrea - Jackson , A . P . , Seow , H . F . , Holmes , N . , Drickamer , K . , and Parham , P . ( 1987 ) . Clathrin light chains contain brain - specific insertion se - sonable , the best correlation for a cone subtending 60 (cid:56) around the starting position was used to select the orientation of the fragment . quences and a region of homology with intermediate filaments . Na - ture 326 , 154 – 159 . The correlation coefficients between the X - ray and EM maps for the Molecular Cell 770 Jones , T . A . , Zou , J . - Y . , and Cowan , S . W . ( 1991 ) . Improved methods chain - heavy chain interactions using truncated mutants of rat liver light chain LCB3 . J . Biol . Chem . 265 , 3661 – 3668 . forbuildingproteinmodelsinelectrondensitymapsandthelocationoferrorsinthesemodels . Acta Crystallogr . A 47 , 110 – 119 . Schmid , S . L . ( 1997 ) . Clathrin - coated vesicle formation and protein sorting : an integrated process . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 66 , 511 – 548 . Kirchhausen , T . , and Harrison , S . C . ( 1981 ) . Protein organization in clathrin trimers . Cell 23 , 755 – 761 . Smith , C . J . , Grigorieff , N . , and Pearse , B . M . ( 1998 ) . Clathrin coats at 21 A˚ resolution : a cellular assembly designed to recycle multiple Kirchhausen , T . , and Harrison , S . C . ( 1984 ) . Structural domains of clathrin heavy chains . J . Cell Biol . 99 , 1725 – 1734 . membrane receptors . EMBO J . 17 , 4943 – 4953 . Sorger , P . K . , Crowther , R . A . , Finch , J . T . , and Pearse , B . M . ( 1986 ) . Kirchhausen , T . , and Toyoda , T . ( 1993 ) . Immunoelectron micro - scopic evidence for the extended conformation of light chains in Clathrin cubes : an extreme variant of the normal cage . J . Cell Biol . 103 , 1213 – 1219 . clathrin trimers . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 10268 – 10273 . Kirchhausen , T . , Harrison , S . C . , Parham , P . , and Brodsky , F . M . Ter Haar , E . , Musacchio , A . , Harrison , S . C . , and Kirchhausen , T . ( 1998 ) . Atomic structure of clathrin—a beta propeller terminal do - ( 1983 ) . Location and distribution of the light chains in clathrin tri - mers . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 80 , 2481 – 2485 . main joins an alpha zigzag linker . Cell 95 , 563 – 573 . Ungewickell , E . ( 1983 ) . Biochemical and immunological studies on Kirchhausen , T . , Harrison , S . C . , and Heuser , J . ( 1986 ) . Configuration of clathrin trimers : evidence from electron microscopy . J . Ul - clathrin light chains and their binding sites on clathrin triskelions . EMBO J . 8 , 1401 – 1408 . trastruct . Mol . Struct . Res . 94 , 199 – 208 . Kirchhausen , T . , Harrison , S . C . , Chow , E . P . , Mattaliano , R . J . , Rama - Ungewickell , E . , and Branton , D . ( 1981 ) . Assembly units of clathrin coats . Nature 289 , 420 – 422 . chandran , K . L . , Smart , J . , and Brosius , J . ( 1987a ) . Clathrin heavy chain : molecularcloningandcompleteprimarystructure . Proc . Natl . Ungewickell , E . , and Ungewickell , H . ( 1991 ) . Bovine brain clathrin Acad . Sci . USA 84 , 8805 – 8809 . light chains impede heavy chain assembly in vitro . J . Biol . Chem . 266 , 12710 – 12714 . Kirchhausen , T . , Scarmato , P . , Harrison , S . C . , Monroe , J . J . , Chow , E . P . , Mattaliano , R . J . , Ramachandran , K . L . , Smart , J . E . , Ahn , A . H . , Vigers , G . P . , Crowther , R . A . , and Pearse , B . M . ( 1986a ) . Location of and Brosius , J . ( 1987b ) . Clathrin light chains LCA and LCB are simi - the 100 kd - 50 kd accessory proteins in clathrin coats . EMBO J . 5 , lar , polymorphic and share repeated heptad motifs . Science 236 , 2079 – 2085 . 320 – 324 . Vigers , G . P . , Crowther , R . A . , andPearse , B . M . ( 1986b ) . Three - dimen - Kirchhausen , T . , Bonifacino , J . S . , and Riezman , H . ( 1997 ) . Linking sional structure of clathrin cages in ice . EMBO J . 5 , 529 – 534 . cargo to vesicle formation—receptor tail interactions with coat pro - Wall , M . A . , Coleman , D . E . , Lee , E . , Iniguez - Lluhi , J . A . , Posner , B . A . , teins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 9 , 488 – 495 . Gilman , A . G . , and Sprang , S . R . ( 1995 ) . The structure of the G protein Krupnick , J . G . , Goodman , O . B . , Jr . , Keen , J . H . , and Benovic , J . L . heterotrimer Gi alpha 1 beta 1 gamma 2 . Cell 83 , 1047 – 1058 . ( 1997 ) . Arrestin / clathrininteraction . Localizationoftheclathrinbind - Wigge , P . , Vallis , Y . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 1997 ) . Inhibition of recep - ing domain of nonvisual arrestins to the carboxy terminus . J . Biol . tor - mediated endocytosis by the amphiphysin SH3 domain . Curr . Chem . 272 , 15011 – 15016 . Biol . 7 , 554 – 560 . Lambright , D . G . , Sondek , J . , Bohm , A . , Skiba , N . P . , Hamm , H . E . , Winkler , F . K . , and Stanley , K . K . ( 1983 ) . Clathrin heavy chain , light andSigler , P . B . ( 1996 ) . The2 . 0A˚crystalstructureofaheterotrimeric chain interactions . EMBO J . 2 , 1393 – 1400 . G protein . Nature 379 , 311 – 319 . Ybe , J . A . , Greene , B . , Liu , S . H . , Pley , U . , Parham , P . , and Brodsky , Lemmon , S . K . , Pellicena Palle , A . , Conley , K . , and Freund , C . L . F . M . ( 1998 ) . Clathrin self - assembly is regulated by three - light chain ( 1991 ) . Sequence of the clathrin heavy chain from Saccharomyces residues controlling the formation of critical salt bridges . EMBO J . cerevisiae and requirement of the COOH terminus for clathrin func - 17 , 1297 – 1303 . tion . J . Cell Biol . 112 , 65 – 80 . Lindner , R . , and Ungewickell , E . ( 1991 ) . Light - chain - independent binding of adaptors , AP180 , and auxilin to clathrin . Biochemistry 30 , 9097 – 9101 . Liu , S . - H . , Wong , M . L . , Craik , C . S . , andBrodsky , F . M . ( 1995 ) . Regula - tion of clathrin assembly and trimerization defined using recombi - nant triskelion hubs . Cell 83 , 257 – 267 . Nathke , I . S . , Heuser , J . , Lupas , A . , Stock , J . , Turck , C . W . , and Brod - sky , F . M . ( 1992 ) . Folding and trimerization of clathrin subunits at the triskelion hub . Cell 68 , 899 – 910 . Pearse , B . M . , and Crowther , R . A . ( 1982 ) . Packing of clathrin into coats . Cold Spring Harb . Symp . Quant . Biol . 46 , 703 – 706 . Pearse , B . M . , andRobinson , M . S . ( 1984 ) . Purificationandproperties of100 - kdproteinsfromcoatedvesiclesandtheirreconstitutionwith clathrin . EMBO J . 3 , 1951 – 1957 . Pearse , B . , and Robinson , M . ( 1990 ) . Clathrin , adaptors , andsorting . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 6 , 151 – 171 . Perry , M . M . , and Gilbert , A . B . ( 1979 ) . Yolk transport in the ovarian follicle of the hen ( Gallus domesticus ) : lipoprotein - like particles at the periphery of the oocyte in the rapid growth phase . J . Cell Sci . 39 , 257 – 272 . Pishvaee , B . , and Payne , G . S . ( 1998 ) . Clathrin coats—threads laid bare . Cell 95 , 443 – 446 . Pishvaee , B . , Munn , A . , and Payne , G . S . ( 1997 ) . A novel structural model for regulation of clathrin function . EMBO J . 16 , 2227 – 2239 . Robinson , M . S . ( 1987 ) . 100 - kD coated vesicle proteins : molecular heterogeneity and intracellular distribution studied with monoclonal antibodies . J . Cell Biol . 104 , 887 – 895 . Robinson , M . S . ( 1997 ) . Coats and vesicle budding . Trends Cell Biol . 7 , 99 – 102 . Scarmato , P . , and Kirchhausen , T . ( 1990 ) . Analysis of clathrin light