a r X i v : 1302 . 7009v2 [ c ond - m a t . s o f t ] 25 J un 2013 Interpretation of Quasielastic Scattering Spectra of Probe Species in Complex Fluids George D . J . Phillies ∗ Department of Physics , Worcester Polytechnic Institute , Worcester , MA 01609 The objective of this paper is to correct an error in analyses of quasielastic scattering spectra . The error invokes a valid calculation under conditions in which its primary assumptions are incorrect , leads to misleading interpretations of spectra . Quasielastic scattering from dilute probes yields the incoherent structure factor g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) = h exp ( iq ∆ x ( t ) ) i , with q being the magnitude of the scattering vector q and ∆ x ( t ) being the probe displacement parallel to q during a time interval t . The error is a claim that g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) ∼ exp ( − q 2 h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i / 2 ) for probes in an arbitrary solution , leading to the incorrect belief that h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i of probes in complex ﬂuids can be inferred from quasielastic scattering . The actual theoretical result refers only to monodisperse probes in simple Newtonian liquids . In general , g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) is determined by all even moments h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 n i , n = 1 , 2 , 3 , . . . of the displacement distribution function P ( ∆ x , t ) . Correspondingly , h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i cannot in general be inferred from g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) . The theoretical model that ties g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) to h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i also quantitatively determines exactly how h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i / 2 ) must behave , namely h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i must increase linearly with t . If the spectrum is not a single exponential in time , g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) does not determine h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i . PACS numbers : 83 . 80 . Rs , 66 . 10 . cg , 66 . 30 . hk , 83 . 86 . Hf I . INTRODUCTION Quasielastic scattering of light , x - rays , and neutrons is a powerful experimental tool for the study of complex ﬂuids . For dilute solutions in simple liquids , quasielastic scattering has analytic applications for particle sizing [ 1 ] . In non - dilute and more complex systems , quasielas - tic scattering reveals consequences of intermacromolec - ular interactions . Four decades ago , Hallett and co - workers [ 2 , 3 ] made a major extension of quasielastic scat - tering methodology . To hyaluronic acid and dextran so - lutions , they added trace concentrations of polystyrene latex spheres . Quasielastic scattering revealed the dif - fusion of these probe spheres through the polymer solu - tions . The subsequent four decades have seen enormous extension of probe diﬀusion methods [ 4 ] , including stud - ies of probes in highly viscous simple liquids [ 5 ] , poly - mer melts [ 6 ] , chemically cross - linked gels [ 7 ] , surfactant solutions [ 8 ] , protein solutions [ 9 ] , and the interior of liv - ing cells [ 10 ] . More recently , quasielastic x - ray scattering has extended the range of distance scales over which dif - fusion can be observed [ 11 ] . Probe diﬀusion has also been studied by other phys - ical techniques , each sensitive to its own characteristic time and distance scales . For example , ﬂuorescence cor - relation spectroscopy [ 12 ] , which by varying the probe la - belling fraction can measure both the self diﬀusion coef - ﬁcient and the mutual diﬀusion coeﬃcient of the labeled species [ 13 , 14 ] , has in recent years been extensively ap - plied to tracer diﬀusion . Recent work using probe dif - fusion is sometimes termed microrheology , the term mi - crorheology referring to a particular model [ 15 ] for inter - preting scattering spectra . In some studies , probe diﬀu - sion is viewed as being of interest because it measures ∗ Electronic address : phillies @ wpi . edu , 508 - 754 - 1859 viscoelastic properties of the solution . In other studies , probe diﬀusion is viewed as being of interest because it measures solution properties that are diﬀerent from the viscoelastic properties of the solution . A valuable complement to diﬀusion studies is provided by measurements on probes being driven by external forces . The overwhelming majority of work on driven probe motion in complex ﬂuids relies on capillary elec - trophoresis . The emphasis of this work is on separating charged species . However , separations using , e . g . , neutral polymer solutions as support media , equally give infor - mation on the dynamics of the support medium [ 4 , 16 ] . A substantial literature exists on ultracentrifugal sedi - mentation in complex ﬂuids [ 17 , 18 ] . A few experiments used magnetic [ 19 , 20 ] or optical [ 21 ] tweezers to create oscillatory or other driving forces . Tweezer experiments are particularly interesting because the experimenter can separately control two of the three : drive force , drive fre - quency , and particle displacement . An alternative com - plement to probe diﬀusion is provided by probes in com - plex ﬂuids in which the ﬂuid itself performs driven mo - tion , e . g . , shear [ 22 ] . Quasielastic photon scattering is studied by measuring the intensity - intensity time correlation function S ( q , t ) = h I ( q , τ ) I ( q , τ + t ) i . ( 1 ) Here q is the magnitude of the scattering vector , I ( q , τ ) and I ( q , τ + t ) are the scattering intensities over short time intervals near τ and τ + t , and the brackets h· · · i represent an average . In cases of interest here , scatter - ing arises from probe particles surrounded by a complex medium . If the volume being observed is much larger than the volumes over which particle positions and dis - placements are correlated , quasielastic scattering corre - sponds as shown by Crosignani , et al . [ 23 ] to the inter - mediate structure factor ( or ﬁeld correlation function ) 2 g ( 1 ) ( q , t ) via S ( q , t ) = A | g ( 1 ) ( q , t ) | 2 + B . ( 2 ) In this equation A and B are constants determined by de - tails of the experimental apparatus ; these constants have no eﬀect on the time dependence . Homodyne rather than heterodyne detection of the scattered light is assumed . Crosignani , et al . [ 23 ] supply conditions under which the factorization is valid : The scattering occurs in a volume V , within which particle positions are correlated within volumes ≈ V s and particle motions are correlated within volumes ≈ V d . The factorization proceeds if V / V s and V / V d are both ≫ 1 . The factorization of S ( q , t ) into g ( 1 ) ( q , t ) is sometimes termed the “Gaussian approxima - tion” . This Gaussian approximation is not related to the Gaussian approximation for the particle displacements , as discussed below . The intermediate structure factor is in turn determined by the time - dependent positions of the scattering parti - cles via g ( 1 ) ( q , t ) = * N X i = 1 N X j = 1 exp ( ı q · ( r i ( t + τ ) − r j ( τ ) ) ) + ( 3 ) In this equation , sums on i and j proceed separately over all N particles in the system , while r i ( t + τ ) and r j ( τ ) are the locations of scatterers i and j at times t + τ and τ , respectively . In applying eq 3 , two particularly interesting exper - imental circumstances are described as measuring mu - tual diﬀusion or probe diﬀusion . Quasielastic scattering on a binary solvent : scatterer system measures the mu - tual diﬀusion coeﬃcient , which describes the motion of scatterers down a concentration gradient [ 24 , 25 ] . Tracer diﬀusion experiments examine ternary solvent : matrix : probe systems . The matrix component is substantially responsible for the system’s rheological properties , but is nearly optically inert . Conversely , the probe compo - nent is dilute , has virtually no eﬀect on the rheological properties of the system , but dominates scattering . If matrix scattering is not entirely negligible , there are es - tablished , reliable ways to isolate probe scattering , based on spectral subtraction at the level of the ﬁeld correlation function , as discussed in the Appendix . Probe particles very nearly do not interact with each other , so the ﬁeld correlation function for probes reduces ( up to normalization constants ) to the incoherent scat - tering function g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) = h exp ( ıq ∆ x ( t ) ) i . ( 4 ) with ∆ x ( t ) being the component parallel to q of ∆r ( t ) = r i ( t + τ ) − r i ( τ ) . Probe motions perpendicular to q do not contribute to g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) . In eq 4 , the superscript ”s” stands for ”self” . The term ”self” refers to the double sum in eq 3 , in which the i = j terms are the self terms that give rise to eq 4 . The i 6 = j terms are the ”dis - tinct” terms . In moving from eq 3 to eq 4 , terms of eq 3 in which i 6 = j were taken to average to zero , because the relative positions of dilute probes are uncorrelated . An expression formally identical to eq 4 describes dif - fusion measurements using pulsed - ﬁeld - gradient nuclear magnetic resonance , though with this method q has an entirely diﬀerent meaning , namely in the simplest case q = γδg , where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio , δ is a pulse width , and g = dB / dz is the ﬁeld gradient . Eqs 3 and 4 may formally be phrased as averages over displacement distribution functions such as P ( ∆ x , t ) , which gives the time - dependent probability that a scat - tering particle will displace through ∆ x during time t . Two previous papers [ 26 , 27 ] examined how g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) and g ( 1 ) ( q , t ) are actually related to the displacement distri - bution functions . Their extended derivations are not re - peated here . The two prior papers were primarily con - cerned with establishing formal relationships between dy - namic structure factors and probabilities for scatterer displacements . The signiﬁcance of these relationships for interpretating experiments was at most a secondary consideration . This paper focuses on interpreting exper - iments . Section II of this paper presents the correct general re - lationship between g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) and P ( ∆ x , t ) . Section III discusses the special case of probe particles in a purely Newtonian ﬂuid . Section IV notes experimental ﬁnd - ings bearing on the relative signiﬁcance of Sections II and III . Section V considers paths for interpreting probe diﬀusion spectra . Section VI treats the determination of P ( ∆ x , t ) , relationships between g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) and trap - ping / hopping behavior , and , to close on a positive note , several cases in which quasielastic scattering from dif - fusing probes , correctly interpreted , has given valuable information about complex ﬂuids and the objects diﬀus - ing in them . An Appendix discusses spectral subtraction at the ﬁeld correlation level . II . GENERAL CASE This section summarizes what g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) reveals about particle displacements . The self part of the intermedi - ate structure factor is determined by the normalized dis - placement distribution function P ( ∆ x , t ) , namely the av - erage in eq 4 is g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) = Z ∞ −∞ d ( ∆ x ) exp ( iq ∆ x ) P ( ∆ x , t ) . ( 5 ) On taking a Taylor series expansion of the exponential in powers of q , reﬂection symmetry , namely P ( ∆ x , t ) = P ( − ∆ x , t ) , eliminates all terms odd in q . As a result , g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) and its logarithm are necessarily power series in q 2 . The coeﬃcients of the q 2 n are generated by the even moments h ( ∆ x ) 2 n i of P ( ∆ x , t ) . The lead terms of the expansion for g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) are [ 26 ] g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) = N exp (cid:18) − 1 2 q 2 h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i + 1 24 q 4 ( h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 4 i 3 − 3 h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i 2 ) − O ( q 6 ) (cid:1) . ( 6 ) The complete expansion requires all even moments h ( ∆ x ) 2 n i . It was early shown that quasielastic scattering from a binary solvent : macromolecule system determines via g ( 1 ) ( q , t ) the mutual diﬀusion coeﬃcient [ 24 , 25 ] . Theo - retical approaches to computing g ( 1 ) ( q , t ) and the mutual diﬀusion coeﬃcient of non - dilute colloid solutions have historically followed routes very diﬀerent from routes based on the displacement distribution function . Only very recently [ 27 ] was a solution for g ( 1 ) ( q , t ) in terms of displacement distribution functions obtained . In this so - lution , the expansion of eq 3 was shown to require av - erages over two diﬀerent displacement distribution func - tions , namely P ( ∆ x , t ) and a new distribution function P 2 ( ∆ x , t , R 12 ) . P 2 is a two - particle conditional displace - ment distribution function , in which ∆ x is the displace - ment of particle 1 during ( 0 , t ) given that the vector R 12 from particle 1 to some particle 2 at time 0 has a given value . III . SPECIAL CASE : PROBES IN SIMPLE NEWTONIAN LIQUIDS The earliest quasielastic scattering experiments were performed on dilute suspensions of monodisperse scat - tering particles in simple Newtonian solvents . Cummins , et al . ’s results on polystyrene spheres in water [ 28 ] are the archetype . The resulting spectra were interpreted by in - voking a mechanical model for the motions of diﬀusing particles . The mechanical model was provided by the Langevin equation , which in one dimension is md 2 x ( t ) dt 2 = − f dx ( t ) dt + F x ( t ) . ( 7 ) Here x ( t ) is a coordinate of the diﬀusing particle , m is the particle mass , f is the particle’s drag coeﬃcient , and F x ( t ) is the random force , called random because in the Langevin model the values of F x ( t ) at diﬀerent instants in time are uncorrelated . Within the model , F x cannot be predicted beyond stating that F x has certain statistical properties . The canonical literature treatment of the Langevin model as applied to quasielastic light scattering is the volume by Berne and Pecora [ 29 ] , notably their Section 5 . 9 . Berne and Pecora show that the Langevin model is appropriate for polystyrene spheres in water , on the time and distances scales observed by quasielastic light scattering . From the Langevin model and the require - ment that the system remains in thermal equilibrium , a series of conclusions about the statistical properties of the particle motion follow . In particular : ( i ) The mean - square average value of F x ( t ) must be con - sistent – the ﬂuctuation - dissipation theorem – with the drag coeﬃcient f and the thermal energy k B T . ( ii ) The distribution of particle displacements during a time interval ∆ t is the same for all time intervals ( t , t + ∆ t ) . ( iii ) Velocity correlations are evanescent . For time steps appreciably longer than m / f , which for Brownian particles is actually a quite short time , particle dis - placements in a series of time steps are very nearly independent from each other . Conclusion ( ii ) corresponds to the statement that x ( t ) is the sum of a series of identically - distributed random variables . Conclusion ( iii ) corresponds to the indepen - dent statement that the time evolution of x ( t ) is de - scribed by a Markoﬀ process . In this very special case , the distribution of particle displacements is described by Doob’s Theorem [ 30 ] , which is closely related to the central limit theorem . Doob’s theorem treats random processes such as ∆ x ( t ) , while the central limit theorem treats random variables . For the Langevin model , Doob’s Theorem shows that the distribution of particle displace - ments is a Gaussian P ( ∆ x ) = (cid:0) 2 π h ( ∆ x ) 2 i (cid:1) − 1 / 2 exp ( − ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 / 2 h ( ∆ x ) 2 i ) , ( 8 ) and , separately , that successive displacements have a joint Gaussian distribution . For this special case , the incoherent scattering function reduces to g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) = exp ( − q 2 h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i / 2 ) . ( 9 ) Equation 9 is accurate for the systems considered by Berne and Pecora [ 29 ] , namely highly dilute solutions of monodisperse objects in simple Newtonian solvents . However , Berne and Pecora [ 29 ] , especially their Ap - pendix 5 . A and Section 5 . 9 leading to their eq 5 . 9 . 6 , also prove the other important consequence of the Langevin model and Doob’s theorem : The Langevin model de - termines the exact value of h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i . On time and distance scales accessible to quasielastic scattering , the Langevin model requires h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i = 2 Dt . ( 10 ) D = k B T / f is the diﬀusion constant , a quantity that does not depend on time . Time independence of D is forced by the calculation , because D results from a time integral over ( 0 ≤ t ≤ ∞ ) . Here k B is Boltzmann’s constant and T is the absolute temperature . Equations 9 and 10 come as a package ; they are equally consequences of the Langevin model . Correspondingly , Berne and Pecora show for diﬀusing monodisperse Brow - nian particles that the Langevin model requires that the ﬁeld correlation function is a simple exponential g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) = exp ( − q 2 Dt ) . ( 11 ) For unclear reasons – the literature error noted in the in - troduction – Berne and Pecora’s entirely correct Chapter 5 is being misread as proving that eq 9 is always correct , 4 even when the time relaxation of g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) is not a simple exponential . Berne and Pecora in fact prove exactly the opposite . The valid contrapositive of their valid result is : If the relaxation is not a single exponential , then the Langevin model must not be applicable to the system , and therefore invocation of the Langevin Model predic - tion eq 9 is invalid . Berne and Pecora’s discussion refers only to particle motions described by the Langevin equation , for which eqs 8 - 11 are all correct . Their discussion corresponds to many experiments that were of interest when they were writing , notably particle sizing studies [ 31 ] . For dilute monodisperse colloids , the t and q dependences of g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) are precisely as predicted by the Langevin model , in particular g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) ∼ exp ( − Γ t ) with Γ ∝ q 2 . If eq 8 and the Langevin equation described the par - ticle motions , then the spectrum would necessarily be a simple exponential in q 2 t . If the decay of the ﬁeld cor - relation function is not a simple exponential , then eq 8 and the Langevin model do not describe how the scatter - ing particles move . In systems in which the spectrum is more complex than a simple exponential , eq 9 is invalid . log ( g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) ) only reveals the mean - square displacement of the particles if g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) is a simple exponential in t . Why does eq 6 ever reduce to eq 9 ? If P ( ∆ x , t ) is a Gaussian in ∆ x , P ( ∆ x , t ) is entirely characterized by its second moment h ( ∆ x ) 2 i . For a Gaussian displacement distribution function , the higher moments of P ( ∆ x , t ) have values such that the coeﬃcients of the higher - order terms ( q 2 n for n ≥ 2 ) of eq 6 all vanish . For a Gaussian P ( ∆ x , t ) , the only non - zero part of eq 6 is eq 9 . This disappearance of the higher - order terms is unique to a Gaussian P ( ∆ x , t ) . For any other P ( ∆ x , t ) , the higher - order terms of eq 6 do not vanish . IV . EXPERIMENTAL FINDINGS What do experiments say about P ( ∆ x , t ) and g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) ? There are systems in which the Langevin model is adequate , namely dilute monodisperse particles suspended in simple Newtonian ﬂuids . For probe diﬀu - sion in complex ﬂuids , experiment provides a far more complex picture . Consider a few representative experi - ments : On relatively long time scales , P ( ∆ x , t ) is accessible via particle tracking , e . g . , experiments by Apgar , et al . [ 32 ] , Tseng and Wirtz [ 33 ] , and Xu , et al . [ 34 ] on probe dif - fusion in glycerol , actin solutions and gels , and gliadin solutions . These authors used video recording and com - puter image analysis to follow large numbers of particles simultaneously . They report P ( ∆ x , t ) and h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i in their systems . Probes in glycerol follow eqs 8 and 10 . For probes in complex ﬂuids , P ( ∆ x , t ) has decidedly non - Gaussian forms . Correspondingly , the mean - square dis - placement does not increase linearly in time . Experiment thus shows that eq 8 and 10 are not uniformly correct for probes in polymer solutions . Quasielastic scattering spectra of probes in poly - mer solutions are often markedly non - exponential . For polystyrene latex sphere probes in hydroxypropylcellu - lose : water , this author and Lacroix [ 35 ] found stretched exponentials in time g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) = a exp ( − θt β ) ≡ a exp ( − ( t / τ ) β ) . ( 12 ) Here β is a scaling exponent while θ and τ are prefac - tors . A series of papers by Streletzky and collaborators on the same chemical system ( most recently , ref . 36 ) es - tablished by viewing a much wider range of delay times that g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) is in general a sum of two stretched expo - nentials in time . For these systems , eqs 8 - 11 are inappli - cable . Finally , I note a very simple model system in which eqs 8 and 9 fail . The system is a dilute aqueous disper - sion of polystyrene spheres , in which the spheres are of two diﬀerent sizes . There are no sphere - sphere interac - tions . Each sphere individually performs Brownian mo - tion as described by the Langevin equation . Therefore , for each sphere in the mixture , P ( ∆ x , t ) is a Gaussian in ∆ x , and h ( ∆ x ) 2 i increases linearly in time . For the mix - ture as a whole , the weighted average over all particles of the mean - square displacement must also increase linearly with time . The appropriate weights are the intensities A 1 and A 2 of the light scattered by the two species , so that d h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i dt = 2 A 1 D 1 + A 2 D 2 A 1 + A 2 ( 13 ) Here D i is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of species i . For Rayleigh - Gans - Debye scattering , up to a constant the A i are A i = n i M 2 i P i ( q ) = c i M i P i ( q ) . ( 14 ) Here n i is the number density of scatterer i , M i is the molecular weight of scatterer i , c i is the mass concentra - tion of species i , and P i ( q ) is the static structure factor of species i [ 37 ] . If eq 9 were correct , one would have d h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i dt = − 2 q 2 d log ( g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) dt ( 15 ) We now calculate explicitly the RHS of this equation . To simplify the discussion , the larger spheres are identiﬁed as species 2 . The mixture’s ﬁeld correlation function is g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) = A 1 exp ( − D 1 q 2 t ) + A 2 exp ( − D 2 q 2 t ) . ( 16 ) The logarithmic derivative of eq 16 is − 2 q 2 d ln ( g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) ) dt = 2 A 1 D 1 exp ( − D 1 q 2 t ) + A 2 D 2 exp ( − D 2 q 2 t ) A 1 exp ( − D 1 q 2 t ) + A 2 exp ( − D 2 q 2 t ) ( 17 ) 5 At short times , exp ( − Dq 2 t ) ≈ 1 for both species and − 2 q 2 d ln ( g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) ) dt = A 1 D 1 + A 2 D 2 A 1 + A 2 . ( 18 ) The initial slope of eq 17 thus agrees with the initial slope of eq 13 . The long - time behavior of eq 17 is quite diﬀerent , as made clear by factoring an exp ( − D 2 q 2 t ) from its numer - ator and denominator , so − 2 q 2 d ln ( g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) ) dt = 2 A 1 D 1 exp ( − ( D 1 − D 2 ) q 2 t ) + A 2 D 2 A 1 exp ( − ( D 1 − D 2 ) q 2 t ) + A 2 ( 19 ) D 2 < D 1 ; the exponentials decay at large time . With increasing t , the fast relaxation ceases to contribute to g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) , so that lim t →∞ − 2 q 2 d ln ( g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) ) dt = 2 D 2 ( 20 ) At large times , only the larger spheres contribute to d ln ( g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) ) / dt . We have now calculated the rate of in - crease in the mean - square displacement as inferred from eq 9 . The general result is eq 17 . At short times , eq 9 leads to eq 18 , which is the correct result of eq 13 . The short - time result is the same as Koppel’s demonstra - tion for dilute particles that the ﬁrst time cumulant of the spectrum gives the average diﬀusion coeﬃcient [ 38 ] . However , at large times eq 9 leads to eq 19 . At large times , only the slower - moving species contributes to the d h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i / dt predicted by eq 9 . An experimenter who used eq 9 to interpret spectra on this binary sphere mix - ture would conclude that the diﬀusing particles moved more rapidly at early times , but slowed down at later times , the so - called ”sub - diﬀusion” phenomenon . Here sub - diﬀusion is an artifact . At long times , the smaller spheres continue to move , but they do not contribute to g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) . At long times , the contribution of the more rapidly - moving species to g ( 1 s ) is negligible , so the nom - inal mean - square displacement inferred from eq 9 is en - tirely determined by scattering from the slower spheres . Experiment thus demonstrates that neither eq 8 nor eq 11 is generally valid for probe diﬀusion in complex ﬂu - ids . Even in a Newtonian ﬂuid , a model system in which g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) does not decay exponentially in time does not follow eqs 9 and 17 , exactly as required by Doob’s theo - rem . Interpretations of quasielastic scattering spectra for probes in complex ﬂuids , based on the Gaussian approx - imation of eq 9 , are therefore incorrect . Interpretations of spectra of probes in complex ﬂuids , in terms of par - ticle displacements , are properly based on eq 6 , which correctly reﬂects the non - Gaussian displacement distri - bution function of real probes in these systems . V . INTERPRETATIONS OF QUASIELASTIC SCATTERING SPECTRA First , every physical g ( 1 s ) , viewed only as a function of t , corresponds to a system in which the mean - square par - ticle displacement increases linearly with time . However , the correspondence is not unique . The same g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) may also correspond to systems in which particle ther - mal motions are more complex . In consequence , from a g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) measured over a full range of times and a single q , one cannot infer how the particle displacement depends on time . This result has a purely mathematical basis , namely that the ﬁeld correlation function can always be repre - sented via a Laplace transform as g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) = Z ∞ 0 A ( Γ ) exp ( − Γ t ) . ( 21 ) Here Γ is a relaxation rate and A ( Γ ) is the contribu - tion of relaxations having decay rate Γ to g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) . So long as the system does not have relaxational modes with negative amplitudes , A ( Γ ) is everywhere positive or zero . In this case , there is always a system having the same g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) as the system of interest , and in which h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i increases linearly in time . The system can be physically constructed as a mixture of polystyrene spheres having all diﬀerent sizes . The composition of the mixture is determined by A ( Γ ) : One adds to the mixture just enough polystyrene spheres having diﬀusion coeﬃ - cient Γ / q 2 so that their contribution to the scattering spectrum is A ( Γ ) . For each sphere , h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i increases linearly in time , so therefore h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i of the mixture also increases linearly in time . Thus , an arbitrary ( ex - cept for the weak requirement A ( Γ ) ≥ 0 ∀ Γ ) form for A ( Γ ) corresponds as one non - unique possibility to a sys - tem in which h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i increases linearly in time . It has repeatedly been found that g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) decays in time as the stretched exponential of eq 12 . If one inter - preted this time dependence by applying eq 9 , one would conclude q 2 2 h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i = θt β . ( 22 ) In the common case β < 1 , from eq 22 one would infer that the mean - square particle displacement increases less rapidly at large times than at small times . The inference is incorrect . A more reasonable interpretation for β < 1 is that diﬀusion in the complex ﬂuid is created by modes having a range of relaxation times , some longer than oth - ers , the contribution of the slower modes to the spectrum becoming more important at longer times . It is not suggested that there does not exist subdif - fusive motion . Such motion has unambiguously been observed experimentally . Amblard , et al . , [ 21 ] studied probe motion in f - actin solutions using video microscopy . Small - bead motion was diﬀusive ; larger - bead diﬀusion was subdiﬀusive with β ≈ 3 / 4 . However , Amblard , et al . ’s work was not based on quasielastic scattering . Whenever particle motion is subdiﬀusive , the light scat - tering spectrum will not be a simple exponential . The scattering spectrum will follow eq 6 , showing that the re - lationship between g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) and h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i is a neither - way street . Just as one cannot in general calculate 6 h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i from g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) , so also one cannot in gen - eral calculate g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) from h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i . To calculate g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) , all higher moments of P ( ∆ x ) are needed . VI . DISCUSSION The primary objective of this paper was to correct a belief that that g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) can in general be used to deter - mine the mean - square displacement of probes in complex ﬂuids . The belief appears to have arisen from a misread - ing of Chapter 5 of Berne and Pecora’s excellent mono - graph , in which Berne and Pecora discuss the motions of monodisperse probe particles in simple Newtonian ﬂuids under the Langevin model . The spectra of monodisperse Langevin - model particles are necessarily single exponen - tials . The calculation in Berne and Pecora is correct , but does not refer to non - Newtonian ﬂuids or polydisperse scatterers . The actual functional form of P ( ∆ x , t ) can be inferred , at least approximately , from the angular dependence of g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) . Eq 5 shows that the correlation function g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) is the spatial Fourier transform of P ( ∆ x , t ) . If g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) is determined suﬃciently accurately over an adequate range of q , an inverse spatial Fourier transform takes the experimenter back from g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) to P ( ∆ x , t ) . To the author’s knowledge , this inversion has only been done for the ubiquitous polystyrene spheres in distilled water , for which g ( 1 s ) is a simple exponential exp ( − Γ t ) with Γ accurately linear in q 2 . P ( ∆ x , t ) in this system has the expected Gaussian form . Measurements of the q - dependence of g ( 1 s ) for probes in complex ﬂuids are less common , though note , e . g . , Streletzky and Phillies [ 39 ] on probes in hydroxypropylcellulose : water . Their solutions may be viewed as highly complex ﬂuids with issues aris - ing from among other things polydispersity , variations in substitution , a liquid - liquid crystal phase transition at larger concentration , and a pseudotheta transition with increasing temperature , not to mention that these so - lutions are viscous and viscoelastic . The probe spectra reﬂect the high complexity . These authors found spectra having multiple relaxational modes , some of which had relaxation rates that did not scale linearly in q 2 , proving that these modes did not correspond to Gaussian dis - placement distribution functions . Particle tracking is sometimes used to generate the simpliﬁed h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i , rather than the full P ( ∆ x , t ) . The simpliﬁcation is potentially hazardous . If one has not determined P ( ∆ x , t ) one does not know if the particle motion process corresponds to simple diﬀusion . Any physically reasonable P ( ∆ x , t ) has some second moment h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i , but if the form of P ( ∆ x , t ) is unknown , one cannot tell if it is meaningful to characterize P ( ∆ x , t ) by its second moment or by the corresponding nominal diﬀusion coeﬃcient D ( t ) = h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i / 2 t . ( 23 ) In a complex ﬂuid , characterization of probe motions via measurement of the second moment h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i may well be inadequate . The assertion that the central limit theorem guaran - tees that P ( ∆ x , t ) is a Gaussian in ∆ x is sometimes de - scribes as the ”Gaussian Approximation” . Experiments such as those summarized above prove that this asser - tion is incorrect . The central limit theorem ( for random variables ) and Doob’s theorem ( for random processes ) are well known . Where do their invocations go wrong ? The central limit theorem and Doob’s theorem are state - ments about the sum of a large number of identically distributed , independent random processes . As applied to the diﬀusion problem , the displacement ∆ x during ex - perimentally accessible times can be expressed as the sum of a large number of far smaller steps δx , each taken dur - ing a far smaller time interval δt . If a random variable ∆ x is the sum of a large number of identically distributed independent variables , i . e . , if δx ( t ) is a Markoﬀ process , it is in general the case that P ( ∆ x , t ) is a Gaussian in ∆ x . This rationale fails because it refers to a sum of independent random processes . The process that gener - ates δx for probes in a viscoelastic ﬂuid is not a Markoﬀ process , because the system has memory . The central limit theorem and Doob’s theorem are therefore not ap - plicable . For probes in complex ﬂuids , the processes gen - erating the steps δx are highly correlated , because the ”random” forces that determine the δx ( t ) are controlled by the shear modulus G ( t ) , which in a complex ﬂuid has a long correlation time . Correspondingly , the time correlation function of the random force hF x ( 0 ) F x ( t ) i is long - lived , not ∼ δ ( t ) . The friction force f ˙ x ( t ) of the Langevin equation is replaced with the memory function ∼ R ds hF x ( 0 ) F x ( s ) i ˙ x ( t − s ) of a Mori - Zwanzig equation , as discussed in Berne and Pecora . Even in a Newto - nian ﬂuid , the rationale leading to the Gaussian approxi - mation fails for polydisperse Brownian particles , because each particle has memory . It remembers how big it is . An alternative to the central limit theorem is the small - q approximation . The nominal idea in the small - q ap - proximation is that the rhs of eq 6 is a power series in q . If one went to suﬃciently small q , one might hope that the q 2 term in the exponential would become dominant , so that eq 9 would approach being valid . This hope is not met . For the simplest case of a mixture of diﬀusing particles , g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) is in fact a power series in q 2 t . If one goes to smaller q , in order to determine spectra equally accurately one needs to observe the same fractional de - gree of decay of g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) . One must therefore go out to longer times . At those longer times , the O ( q 4 ) terms are as signiﬁcant as they were at larger q and smaller t but the same q 2 t . Said diﬀerently , the coeﬃcients of the cor - rect Taylor series ( in q ) expansion of g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) are time - dependent . In order for the lead term of the expansion to be dominant , the expansion must be limited not only to small q but also to to small t . If t is large , no matter how small q has been made , the higher - order in q terms are as important as the lower - order terms . Only at small q and small t is a single - term small - q expansion valid . The 7 valid small - q expansion is 1 − q 2 h ( ∆ x ( t ) ) 2 i , which only describes the leading slope of g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) at small times . Consider spectra described by eq 12 . The exponen - tial in eq 6 scales as q 2 or is a power series in q 2 , so therefore θ should also be a power series in q 2 , perhaps simply by being linear in q 2 . Indeed , for probes in in some but not other aqueous hydroxypropylcellulose so - lutions , Streletzky [ 39 ] conﬁrmed experimentally θ ∼ q 2 over a wide range of q . If θ were replaced with τ − β , one would have τ ∼ q − 2 / β . ( 24 ) β is often in the range 0 . 5 - 1 . 0 , so τ often depends on q as q − 3 ± 1 . If one interpreted τ to be a relaxation time , the q - dependence from eq 24 would be strange indeed : The relaxation would occur more rapidly over large dis - tances ( small q ) than over short distances ( large q ) . This strange q - dependence is simply an artifact of way one has parameterized g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) , and the identiﬁcation of τ as a relaxation time . In terms of eq 12 , ( θ , β ) provides a natural parameterization while ( τ , β ) is less transparent . If mean relaxation times are inferred from the spectral time moments h T n i = Z ∞ 0 t n g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) dt ( 25 ) of g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) , the choice of parameterizations in eq 12 has no consequences . The two paramaterizations of g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) lead to the same h T n i . Spectra of diﬀusing probes showing two relaxations on very diﬀerent time scales are sometimes interpreted in terms of caging and hopping relaxations . The notion is that the medium supplies regions of low potential en - ergy within which probes are free to move ( ”caging” ) . The regions are separated by barriers of high potential energy , across which probes only pass on rare occasion ( ”hopping” ) . The short time - scale relaxation is said to correspond to caging , while the long time - scale relaxation is said to correspond to hopping . Computer simulation studies by Luo and Phillies and Luo , et al . , test the caging - hopping interpretation [ 40 , 41 ] . These simulations represented Brownian particles mov - ing through a square lattice or a random glass of Lennard - Jones force centers . The force centers were im - mobile . Probe motions were generated via the Metropolis algorithm . These studies diﬀered from some earlier work in that they determined not only time dependent mean - square displacements and eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃcients but also obtained P ( ∆ r , t ) and g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) . By varying the nominal temperature , trapping , hopping , and hindered diﬀusion behaviors were obtained . At low temperatures , probe particles explored the volume of their traps ; after a certain relaxation time h r 2 ( t ) i ceased to increase . At high temperatures , P ( ∆ r , t ) was nearly Gaussian , with h r 2 ( t ) i increasing linearly in time even at short times . Luo , et al . , evaluated g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) for q − 1 extending from a small fraction of the size of a single potential energy minimum out to distances substantially larger than a typical distance between force centers . At low and high temperatures , g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) showed nearly exponential relax - ations , though at small T and small q the relaxation fell to a non - zero baseline . The baseline was non - zero be - cause the particles were permanently trapped in small isolated volumes of the system . At intermediate temper - atures , relaxations were single - exponential at large q but double - exponential at small q . At the same intermediate temperatures , P ( ∆ r , t ) was radically non - Gaussian , with local maxima and minima created by local potential en - ergy minima , potential energy saddle points , and times required to traverse local energy maxima . Other , physically diﬀerent , systems also give bimodal spectra . In contrast to Luo , et al . ’s probes moving though a ﬁxed matrix , in which relaxations are only bimodal for some values of q , relaxations of dilute bidisperse sus - pensions are double - exponential at all q . An alternative model system in which monodisperse particles show sev - eral very diﬀerent classes of relaxation behavior is shown by Glotzer , et al . ’s [ 42 ] computer simulations of three - dimensional glasses , in which one ﬁnds distinct long - lived populations of slow and fast - moving particles , with the immobile particles in clumps and the rapidly moving par - ticles lying in thin ribbons . Thus , in order to distinguish between systems contain - ing species with two diﬀerent dynamic behaviors , and systems in which there is local trapping with escapes from the traps at longer times , it is experimentally necessary to study g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) over a wide range of q . Observations at ﬁxed q of double - exponential relaxations do not reveal whether one is seeing trapping with hopping , or whether the system is in some sense dynamically bidisperse . Fur - thermore , in the cases in which g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) was observed by Luo , et al . , to be very nearly the sum of two expo - nentials , P ( ∆ r , t ) on interesting distance scales had an elaborate dependence on r with multiple maxima and deep minima . The interpretation that a biexponential g ( 1 s ) ( q , t ) must correspond to a P ( ∆ r , t ) that is a sum of two Gaussians , each with a mean - square width increas - ing linearly in time , is disproved by Luo , et al . ’s results . These issues here have been discussed with respect to quasielastic scattering , but as noted above pulsed - ﬁeld - gradient NMR measures the same mathematical aspect of particle displacements , and may therefore have similar issues appropriate to its time and distance scales . Finally , the observation that quasielastic scattering does not determine the mean - square probe displacement certainly does not mean that probe diﬀusion is ineﬀec - tive . Probe diﬀusion measurements can certainly be used to obtain novel information about complex ﬂuids . The richness of the revealed information corresponds to the depth with which models for probe motion are con - structed . As a positive conclusion , two successful appli - cations of probe diﬀusion are noted : ( i ) A long - time question in the study of surfactant so - lutions is the determination of the aggregation number n of surfactant molecules in micelles . One of many ap - 8 proaches to this question has been to use quasielastic scattering to determine an eﬀective hydrodynamic radius of the micelles . Perhaps after some hydrodynamic mod - eling to account for micelle shape , spherical micelles be - ing the simplest case , the measured diﬀusion coeﬃcient can be transformed to an apparent hydrodynamic radius r H , to a hydrodynamic volume V h , and ( taking into ac - count the surfactant density and molecular weight ) ﬁ - nally to a nominal aggregation number . This procedure was criticized by Kratohvil [ 43 ] , who noted that the hy - drodynamic volume of the micelle might well include sol - vent molecules rather than being composed of pure sur - factant . Probe diﬀusion experiments prove that Kratovil was correct . The diﬀusion of probe particles through micellar solutions is retarded by hydrodynamic and di - rect interactions between the micelles and the probe par - ticles . The degree of retardation is determined by the volume fraction of micelles in the solution . By combin - ing quasielastic scattering measurements on surfactant solutions and on surfactant - probe mixtures , quasielastic scattering has been used to determine the size , volume fraction , and thus number density of micelles in solu - tion , leading to determinations of the micellar aggrega - tion number and , independently , the ( substantial ) degree of hydration of micelles , as seen in studies by Phillies and collaborators [ 44 ] . ( ii ) Diﬀusion of mesoscopic probe particles in polymer solutions is not Stokes - Einsteinian . D is not determined by the macroscopic viscosity η . Therefore , one cannot use the Stokes - Einstein equation for sphere diﬀusion D = k B T 6 πηR ( 26 ) ( where η is the solution viscosity , and R is the sphere radius ) to determine the size of probe particles in poly - mer solutions . However , by using probes of known size , Ullmann and Phillies [ 45 ] were able to quantitate the de - gree of failure of the Stokes - Einstein equation for their polymer solutions , allowing them to measure the size of unknown probe particles in the same solutions . This ap - proach permitted a quantitative study of the extent of polymer adsorption onto particles chosen for their abil - ity to bind polymers in solution . VII . APPENDIX : ISOLATION OF PROBE SCATTERING FROM PROBE - MATRIX SYSTEMS This Appendix discusses experimental approaches used to ensure that spectra of probe - matrix mixtures are cor - rectly interpreted . First , there is no substitute for checking that the sys - tem is not creating experimental artifacts . Spectra of polystyrene spheres in pure water , or monodisperse pure proteins in the presence of added salt ( say , 0 . 15 M ) should show close - to - single - exponential relaxations ( i . e . , nearly straight lines on semilog plots ) . The signal - to - noise ra - tio , the ratio of amplitude at delay time zero to the root - mean - square scatter of the measured spectrum to an adequate ﬁt , should be some number in the range 300 to 1000 , or larger . The data analysis software , no mat - ter what software is used , should conﬁrm that spectra of polystyrene spheres are very close to single exponen - tials . A ﬁnding that a polystyrene sphere spectrum in - stead has substantial contributions from relaxation rates diﬀering by 50 % or a factor of 2 indicates that something is wrong with the sphere preparation , the experimental equipment , or the data analysis procedure . There is no point in advancing further until matters are corrected . Second , there can always be a concern that quasi - stationary features in a complex ﬂuid act eﬀectively as local oscillators , so that detection is actually being made in heterodyne rather than the expected homodyne mode . The eﬀective test is to introduce a local oscillator into the system , so that one has indubitably transitioned from ho - modyne to heterodyne detection . An eﬀective scheme for doing this is to lower ever so slowly a screw - mounted nee - dle into the scattering volume , while carefully monitoring the scattering intensity to avoid overloading the detector , until scattering by the needle is much greater than scat - tering by the solution . If spectra were original obtained in homodyne mode , then when heterodyne conditions are obtained , the new S ( q , t ) will have the same time depen - dence as the g ( 1 ) ( q , t ) obtained before the local oscillator was inserted . Third , a rapid test checking if matrix scattering is signiﬁcant is made by using several substantially dif - ferent ( e . g . , three - fold diﬀerent ) probe concentrations , to see if spectral ﬁtting parameters are independent of probe concentration [ 46 ] . Some caution is needed . Exces - sive probe concentrations can lead to multiple scattering , which changes the time dependence of the spectrum . If spectral ﬁtting parameters are sensitive to matrix con - centration , recourse to subtraction at the ﬁeld correlation level is indicated . Finally , matrix scattering sometimes contaminates spectra of probes in probe - matrix systems . This issue is particularly diﬃcult if the matrix spectrum relaxes in whole or part part at shorter times than the probe spec - trum relaxes . In some systems , matrix scattering can be suppressed via spectral subtraction at the ﬁeld cor - relation function level . How is subtraction at the ﬁeld correlation level accomplished ? First , the actual correlation function is generated by breaking time into adjoining intervals of width τ , count - ing the number of photons received in each interval , and taking crossproducts , namely in the simplest case S ( q , jτ ) = N X i = 1 n i n i − j ( 27 ) Here n i and n i − j are the numbers of photons counted during time intervals labeled i and i − j , the sum goes over the number N of cycle times τ for which the correlator 9 is operated , j labels the correlator channels , and for cor - relators in which all channels have the same width τ the delay time for channel j is jτ . For multitau correlators , the relationship between channel widths and delay times is complex [ 47 ] . The actual S ( q , jτ ) is therefore a large integer . Some commercial correlators report spectra af - ter applying normalizations to S ( q , jτ ) . If normalizations are present , they must removed . Second , conﬁrm that measurements of g ( 1 ) ( q , t ) are sta - ble and reproducible . At large j , S ( q , jτ ) decays to a baseline B . There are several paths to determining B ; they should agree . g ( 1 ) ( q , t ) is then determined as g ( 1 ) ( q , t ) = ( S ( q , jτ ) − B ) ( 1 / 2 ) . ( 28 ) t = jτ is the delay time . A ﬁrst test of system stability is to repeat the measurement several times on the same real sample without changing the sample , laser power , iris and pinhole settings , or photomultiplier tube volt - age ; the g ( 1 ) ( q , t ) determined repeatedly should agree in amplitude to within experimental error . Also , ﬁtting pa - rameters determined by passing multiple spectra through the data analysis procedure should agree with each other . Having conﬁrmed that the experimental apparatus is stable , one measures S ( q , t ) of matrix solution / probe mixtures and also of probe - free matrix solutions . For a given matrix solution / probe combination , all experi - mental conditions must be the same in the presence and the absence of probes . It will usually be convenient to measure the spectrum of the probe - containing mixture ﬁrst , to ensure that photocount rates due to the probes are acceptable . Spectra of probe - matrix mixtures and of probe - free matrix solutions are measured , reduced to the corresponding ﬁeld correlation functions , and subtracted , yielding g ( 1 ) ( q , t ) of the probes . The same measurements are made several times , on the same system , in order to conﬁrm that the subtracted probe spectra are repro - ducible . At this point , several diﬀerent experimental outcomes are encountered : 1 . Sometimes refractive index matching of the ma - trix eliminates matrix scattering . Polyvinyl - methylether is index - matched by toluene [ 48 ] or orthoﬂuorotoluene [ 49 ] , as demonstrated and vig - orously exploited by Lodge and collaborators [ 50 ] . This approach requires that the ( perhaps mixed ) solvent simultaneously index - matches the matrix species , is compatible with the matrix species and with the probes , and corresponds to matrix and probe species that are highly monodisperse and available in a wide range of sizes . 2 . Sometimes matrix scattering is present but too weak to be signiﬁcant . Streletzky and collabora - tors observed polystyrene spheres in hydroxypropy - lcellulose : water [ 46 ] . Matrix scattering was much weaker than scattering by the spheres . Even with the smallest sphere studied , at the largest matrix concentrations examined , subtraction of the matrix g ( 1 ) ( q , t ) from the matrix / probe g ( 1 ) ( q , t ) had no ef - fect to within experimental error on spectral ﬁtting parameters . It was therefore not necessary to mea - sure separately and subtract the matrix g ( 1 ) ( q , t ) for every single probe : matrix combination ; a sam - pling showed that this correction was unimportant for the observed probes and matrix concentrations . In these systems , high - quality spectra of probe - free polymer solutions were obtained by increasing the laser power and the integration time . 3 . Sometimes subtraction is mandatory . For polystyrene spheres in solutions of Triton X - 100 and other surfactants , light scattering by micelles was signiﬁcant relative to probe scattering . Spec - tral subtraction of surfactant : water spectra was ab - solutely essential in order to obtain meaningful probe diﬀusion coeﬃcients [ 44 ] . 4 . Sometimes subtraction is impossible , because ma - trix scattering is too strong . Acknowledgments I must thank my referees for their suggestions . [ 1 ] G . D . J . Phillies , Analyt . Chem . 62 , 1049A ( 1990 ) . [ 2 ] F . R . Hallett and A . L . Gray , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 343 , 648 ( 1974 ) . [ 3 ] D . N . Turner and F . R . Hallett , Bioch . Biop . Acta 451 , 305 ( 1976 ) . [ 4 ] G . D . J . Phillies , Phenomenology of Polymer Solution Dynamics , ( Cambridge U . P . , Cambridge , 2011 ) , Ch . 9 . [ 5 ] G . D . J . Phillies , J . Phys . Chem . 85 , 2838 ( 1981 ) . [ 6 ] T . - H . Lin , Makromol . Chem . 187 , 1189 ( 1986 ) . [ 7 ] C . F . Schmidt , M . Baermann , G . Isenberg and E . Sack - mann , Macromolecules 22 , 3638 ( 1989 ) . [ 8 ] G . D . J . Phillies , J . Stott , and S . Z . Ren , J . Phys . Chem . 97 , 11563 ( 1993 ) . [ 9 ] K . Ullmann , G . S . Ullmann , and G . D . J . Phillies , J . Coll . Interf . Sci . , 105 , 315 ( 1985 ) . [ 10 ] K . Luby - Phelps , P . E . Castle , D . L . Taylor , and F . Lanni , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 84 , 4910 ( 1987 ) . [ 11 ] S . B . Dierker , R . Pindak , R . M . Fleming , I . K . Robinson , and L . Berman , Phys . Rev . Lett . 75 , 449 ( 1995 ) . [ 12 ] D . Magde , E . L . Elson , and W . W . Webb , Phys . Rev . Lett . 29 , 705 ( 1972 ) . [ 13 ] G . D . J . Phillies , Biopolymers 14 , 499 ( 1975 ) . [ 14 ] B . A . Scalettar , J . E . Hearst and M . P . Klein , Macro - molecules 22 , 4550 ( 1989 ) . [ 15 ] T . G . Mason , H . Gang , and D . A . Weitz , J . Mol . Struct . 383 , 180 ( 1996 ) 10 [ 16 ] G . D . J . Phillies , Electrophoresis 33 , 1008 ( 2012 ) . [ 17 ] T . C . Laurent , I . Bjork , A . Pietruszkiewicz , and H . Pers - son , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 78 , 351 ( 1963 ) ; T . C . Lau - rent and H . Persson , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 83 , 141 ( 1964 ) . [ 18 ] X . Ye , P . Tong , and L . J . Fetters , Phys . Rev . Lett . 31 , 6534 ( 1998 ) . [ 19 ] L . A . Hough and H . D . Ou - Yang , J . Nanoparticle Re - search 1 , 495 ( 1999 ) . [ 20 ] F . G . Schmidt , B . Hinner and E . Sackmann , Phys . Rev . E 61 , 5646 ( 2000 ) ; F . G . Schmidt , B . Hinner , E . Sackmann and J . X . Tang , Phys . Rev . E 62 , 5509 ( 2000 ) . [ 21 ] F . Amblard , A . C . Maggs , B . Yurke , A . N . Pargellis and S . Leibler , Phys . Rev . Lett . 77 , 4470 ( 1996 ) . [ 22 ] P . Tapadia and S . Q . Wang , Phys . Rev . Lett . 96 , 016001 ( 2006 ) . [ 23 ] B . Crosignani , P . DiPorto and M . Bertoleotti , Statistical Properties of Scattered Light ( New York , NY : Academic Press , 1975 ) . [ 24 ] G . D . J . Phillies , J . Chem . Phys . 60 , 976 ( 1974 ) [ 25 ] G . D . J . Phillies , J . Chem . Phys . 60 , 983 ( 1974 ) . [ 26 ] G . D . J . Phillies , J . Chem . Phys . 122 , 224905 ( 2005 ) . [ 27 ] G . D . J . Phillies , J . Chem . Phys . 137 , 124901 ( 2012 ) . [ 28 ] H . Z . Cummins , N . Knable , and Y . Yeh , Phys . Rev . Lett . 12 , 150 ( 1964 ) . [ 29 ] B . J . Berne and R . Pecora . Dynamic Light Scattering : With Applications in Chemistry , Biology and Physics . ( New York : Wiley , 1976 ) . [ 30 ] J . L . Doob , Ann . Math . 43 , 351 ( 1942 ) . [ 31 ] B . E . Dahneke , Measurement of Suspended Particles by Quasi - Elastic Light Scattering , Wiley : New York ( 1983 ) . [ 32 ] J . Apgar , Y . Tseng , E . Federov , M . B . Herwig , S . C . Almo , and D . Wirtz , Biophys . J . 79 , 1095 ( 2000 ) . [ 33 ] Y . Tseng and D . Wirtz . , Biophys . J . 81 , 1643 ( 2001 ) . [ 34 ] J . Xu , Y . Tseng , C . J . Carriere , and D . Wirtz , Biomacro - molecules 3 , 92 ( 2002 ) . [ 35 ] G . D . J . Phillies and M . Lacroix , J . Phys . Chem . B 101 , 39 ( 1997 ) . [ 36 ] G . D . J . Phillies , R . O’Connell , P . Whitford and K . A . Streletzky , J . Chem . Phys . 119 , 9903 ( 2003 ) . [ 37 ] C . Tanford , Physical Chemistry of Macromolecules , Wi - ley : New York ( 1961 ) , eq 17 . 32 and ﬁrst unnumbered equation following eq 18 . 19 . [ 38 ] D . E . Koppel J . Chem . Phys . 57 , 4814 ( 1972 ) [ 39 ] K . A . Streletzky and G . D . J . Phillies , J Polym . Sci . : Part B Polym . Phys . 36 , 3087 ( 1998 ) . [ 40 ] L . - S . Luo , G . D . J . Phillies , L . Colonna - Romano , and H . Gould , Phys . Rev . E 51 , 43 ( 1995 ) . [ 41 ] L . - S . Luo and G . D . J . Phillies , J . Chem . Phys . 105 , 598 ( 1996 ) . [ 42 ] S . Glotzer , V . N . Novikoﬀ , and T . B . Schroder , J . Chem . Phys . 112 , 509 ( 2000 ) . [ 43 ] J . P . Kratohvil , J . Colloid Interface Sci . 75 , 271 ( 1980 ) . [ 44 ] G . D . J . Phillies , J . Stott , and S . Z . Ren , J . Phys . Chem . 97 , 11563 ( 1993 ) ; K . Streletzky and G . D . J . Phillies , Langmuir 11 , 42 ( 1995 ) ; G . D . J . Phillies , R . H . Smith , K . Strang , and N . V . Sushkin , Langmuir , 11 , 3408 ( 1995 ) ; G . D . J . Phillies and J . Yambert , Langmuir 12 , 3431 - 3436 ( 1996 ) ; N . V . Sushkin , D . Clomenil , J . Ren , and G . D . J . Phillies , Langmuir 15 , 3492 ( 1999 ) . [ 45 ] G . S . Ullmann and G . D . J . Phillies , Macromolecules 16 , 1947 ( 1983 ) . [ 46 ] K . A . Streletzky and G . D . J . Phillies , J . Chem Phys . 108 , 2975 ( 1998 ) . [ 47 ] G . D . J . Phillies , Rev . Sci . Instr . 67 , 3423 ( 1996 ) . [ 48 ] D . B . Cotts , J . Polym . Sci . : Polym . Phys . Ed . 21 , 1381 ( 1983 ) . [ 49 ] T . P . Lodge , Macromolecules 16 , 1393 ( 1983 ) . [ 50 ] T . P . Lodge , P . Markland , and L . M . Wheeler , Macro - molecules 22 , 3409 ( 1989 ) .