Article Conﬁnement and Low Adhesion Induce Fast Amoeboid Migration of Slow Mesenchymal Cells Graphical Abstract Highlights d Physical conﬁnement and low adhesion induce the mesenchymal - amoeboid transition d A large range of slow mesenchymal cell types can display fast amoeboid - like migration d A fast mode ( A1 ) and a faster and more conserved contractile mode ( A2 ) were observed d A2 migration could be an ancestral migratory behavior shared among eukaryotes Authors Yan - Jun Liu , Mae¨l Le Berre , . . . , Raphae¨l Voituriez , Matthieu Piel Correspondence mael . leberre @ curie . fr ( M . L . B . ) , matthieu . piel @ curie . fr ( M . P . ) In Brief A large range of slow mesenchymal cells can switch to fast amoeboid - like migration under conditions of low adhesion and strong conﬁnement , suggesting that tumor cells may spontaneously escape primary tumors and invade tissues without any speciﬁc genetic alteration . No FAs A1 A2 Confine M M y o s i n II A c t i va t i on M y o s i n II I n h i b i t i o n Adhesion C o r t i ca l C on t r ac t ili t y Substrate Cell PDMS spacer PEG surface Confine V = 5 . 3±1 . 5 µm / min V = 1 . 7±0 . 4 µm / min V = 0 . 23±0 . 09 µm / min High Low Lo w H i gh B Vinculin - GFP ( Focal Adhesions , FAs ) LifeAct - mCherry ( Actin Filaments ) Liu et al . , 2015 , Cell 160 , 659 – 672 February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 01 . 007 Article Conﬁnement and Low Adhesion Induce Fast Amoeboid Migration of Slow Mesenchymal Cells Yan - Jun Liu , 1 , 6 Mae¨l Le Berre , 1 , 6 , * Franziska Lautenschlaeger , 1 , 3 Paolo Maiuri , 1 Andrew Callan - Jones , 5 Me´lina Heuze´ , 1 Tohru Takaki , 4 Raphae¨l Voituriez , 2 and Matthieu Piel 1 , * 1 Institut Curie , CNRS UMR 144 , 26 rue d’Ulm , 75005 Paris , France 2 Laboratoire Jean Perrin and Laboratoire de Physique The´orique de la Matie ` re Condense´e , CNRS / Universite´ Pierre et Marie Curie , 75005 Paris , France 3 Universita¨t des Saarlandes , Campus E2 6 , 3 . OG , Zi . 3 . 17 , 66123 Saarbru¨cken , Germany 4 Cancer Research UK London Research Institute , Clare Hall Laboratories , Blanche Lane , South Mimms , Hertfordshire EN6 3LD , UK 5 Laboratoire Matie ` re et Syste ` mes Complexes , CNRS / Universite´ Paris Diderot , UMR 7057 , 75204 Paris Cedex , France 6 Co - ﬁrst author * Correspondence : mael . leberre @ curie . fr ( M . L . B . ) , matthieu . piel @ curie . fr ( M . P . ) http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 01 . 007 SUMMARY The mesenchymal - amoeboid transition ( MAT ) was proposed as a mechanism for cancer cells to adapt their migration mode to their environment . While the molecular pathways involved in this transition are well documented , the role of the microenviron - ment in the MAT is still poorly understood . Here , we investigated how conﬁnement and adhesion affect this transition . We report that , in the absence of focal adhesions and under conditions of conﬁnement , mesenchymal cells can spontaneously switch to a fast amoeboid migration phenotype . We identiﬁed two main types of fast migration—one involving a local protrusion and a second involving a myosin - II - dependent mechanical instability of the cell cortex that leads to a global cortical ﬂow . Interestingly , transformed cells are more prone to adopt this fast migration mode . Finally , we propose a generic model that explains migration transitions and predicts a phase diagram of migration phenotypes based on three main control parameters : conﬁnement , adhe - sion , and contractility . INTRODUCTION The mechanisms individual cells use to migrate can be divided into two distinct types , known as mesenchymal migration and amoeboid migration . Cells migrating in a mesenchymal fashion typicallyadoptanelongated , spindle - likeshapeandexerttraction on their substrates via focal adhesions associated with actin rich protrusions , suchaslamellipodiaorﬁlopodia . Incontrast , cellsun - dergoing amoeboid migration adopt round or irregular shapes . They undergo cycles of expansion and contraction , which allow them to squeeze through gaps in the extracellular matrix . The ve - locity of amoeboid migration is often higher than that of mesen - chymal migration ( Pankova´ et al . , 2010 ) and it appears to involve a range of different sub - modes , such as bleb - based migration or gliding ( Paluch and Raz , 2013 ) . Consequently , it is not as well - deﬁned at the molecular level as mesenchymal migration , although it is thought to rely on an increased activity of the RhoA pathway , which activates formin - based actin nucleation and myosin II contractility ( Sanz - Moreno and Marshall , 2010 ) . Despiteanextensiveliteratureonthesubject , itremainsunclear whether the various modes of amoeboid migration are mechanis - ticallydistinctfromeachother , orwhethertheyrepresentacontin - uum of a single process . Recent work , however , has identiﬁed mechanisms common to several forms of amoeboid migration , supporting the continuum model . Several studies report , for example , that amoeboid migration is often based on a contractile cell rear inducing a retrograde ﬂow in the cell cortex ( Heuze´ et al . , 2013 ; Paluch and Raz , 2013 ; Poincloux et al . , 2011 ) . Others have shown that , in contrast with mesenchymal migration , amoeboid migration does not depend on a cell’s ability to form focal adhe - sions with its environment ( Bergert et al . , 2012 ; La¨mmermann et al . , 2008 ; Renkawitz et al . , 2009 ) . In the light of these studies , La¨mmermann and Sixt ( 2009 ) have proposed that three key pa - rameters modulate the mode of migration of cells , namely protru - sion , contractility , and adhesion . They further suggest that by altering the balance between these parameters , cells could adapt their mode of motility to different migration environments ( La¨m - mermann and Sixt , 2009 ) , allowing migrating cells to negotiate the topologies of the different tissues they encounter . Migration mode plasticity is an important factor for immune cells migration but also in cancer metastasis , as disseminating tumor cells have to navigate a range of extracellular matrix ge - ometries to escape their point of origin and spread to distant sites . Metastasizing cancer cells exhibit both mesenchymal and amoeboid modes of migration , and recent studies have shown that they can switch between the two , a phenomenon known as the mesenchymal - amoeboid transition ( MAT ) ( Friedl and Wolf , 2003 ; Pankova´ et al . , 2010 ; Taddei et al . , 2013 ; To - zluo (cid:1) glu et al . , 2013 ) . Importantly , non - migrating cells such as epithelial cells can ﬁrst undergo a transition to mesenchymal migration ( epithelial to mesenchymal transition or EMT ) , enabling them to develop collective and / or individual migratory behaviors associated with cancer cell dissemination ( Friedl and Wolf , 2003 ; Taddei et al . , 2013 ) . This suggests that , by going through sequential transitions , even epithelial cells , could eventually display amoeboid motility ( Giampieri et al . , 2009 ) . Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 659 Givenitsimportanceinmetastasis , theMAThasbeenthefocus of several recent studies . These have identiﬁed key parameters driving the transition : cell - intrinsic factors , such as intracellular signaling and contractility , and extrinsic , environmental factors , such as cell adhesion and the geometry of the extracellular ma - trix . Usingaproteaseinhibitormixtoinhibitthematrixremodeling ability of mesenchymal cells induces the MAT and is associated with a reduction in integrin expression ( Carragher et al . , 2006 ; Wolf et al . , 2003 ) . Tozluo (cid:1) glu et al . ( 2013 ) combined in vivo exper - iments and mathematical simulations to highlight cell conﬁne - ment as a crucial parameter affecting the efﬁciency of various migration modes . Invitrostudiesusingmicro - channelsalsopoint to an important contribution of conﬁnement in changing the requirements for efﬁcient locomotion ( Hung et al . , 2013 ) . Until now , however , no systematic quantitative study has been performed to understand the interplay between a cell’s environ - ment and its migration behavior . Here , we describe how we sys - tematically studied the effects of conﬁnement and adhesion on migration modes . Using a variety of cell types , we found that slow mesenchymal cells can switch to fast amoeboid - like migra - tion under conditions of low adhesion and high conﬁnement . We propose a simple generic physical model that produces a phase diagram of migration modes and depends on both the intrinsic properties of cells and environmental parameters . RESULTS Adhesion Decreases Speed but Increases Persistence in Non - Conﬁned Conditions To systematically investigate the effects of adhesion and conﬁnement on cell migration , we combined two methods ( Fig - ure 1 ) to control cell adhesion ( by quantitative controlling of the P L L - P E G - R G D x % P LL - PE G ( 100 - x ) % x = 0 x = 50 x = 100 Glass substrate Micro - spacers RGD Polystyrene substrate Controlled adhesion Controlled height Figure 1 . Schematic Diagram of Cell Migra - tion Assay Cell culture substrates were treated with various ratios of pLL - PEG and pLL - PEG - RGD to control adhesion of cells with their environment and PEG - treated slides containing micro - spacers were used to conﬁne cells at a ﬁxed height . See also Figure S1 . density of RGD peptides on the cell sub - strate ) ( Barnhart et al . , 2011 ) and to conﬁne cells plated on a 2D substrate ( Figure S1 ; Le Berre et al . , 2012 ) . Normal human dermal ﬁbroblast cells ( NHDF ) migrate in a mesenchymal fashion and so were chosen to study . We began by seeding NHDF cells on sur - faces coated with various concentra - tions of pLL - PEG - RGD , but without conﬁning them ( Figure 2A ) . As RGD den - sity decreased , cell spreading likewise decreased . Where RGD density dipped below 5 % , cells were unable to attach to the substrate when gently ﬂushed ( Fig - ures 2B and 2C ) . To quantify differences in migration behavior , trajectories of in - dividual cells ( Figure 2D ) were analyzed in terms of instantaneous speed ( S ) , persistence ( P ) and diffusivity ( D ) ( Figures 2E , S2D , and S2E ; Movie S1 ; see Extended Experimental Procedures for details on calculation ) . In agreement with previous work by others ( DiMilla et al . , 1993 ) , the long - term displacement of cells , which is characterized by their diffusion coefﬁcient , is maximal for an intermediate level of adhesion ( Figure 2F ) , due to an in - crease in persistence and a decrease in instantaneous speed with increasing adhesion ( Figures 2G and 2H ) . These observa - tions conﬁrmed the typical mesenchymal migration of these ﬁbroblasts . Conﬁnement Modiﬁes the Migration Behavior of NHDF Cells We introduced conﬁnement by covering cells ( cultured on surfaces of controlled adhesion ) with a non - adhesive surface ( Figure S1 ) . NHDF cells were 7 . 6 ± 0 . 36 m m high during inter - phase . We therefore chose to limit our investigation to heights of either 5 or 3 m m . At 5 m m ( low conﬁnement ) , the cell body was slightly deformed . At 3 m m ( high conﬁnement ) , both the cell body and the nucleus were deformed ( Le Berre et al . , 2012 ) . Cells tended to retract when conﬁned , forming fewer large la - mellipodial protrusions and more elongated pseudopodia ( Movie S2 ; Figure 3A for 5 m m , Figure S3A for 3 m m , and phenotype C in Figures 3B – 3E ) . This retraction of the cell margin was probably due to an increase in cell cortex contractility , which favors a more compact morphology ( Sahai and Marshall , 2003 ) . When adhesion was low ( % 15 % RGD ) and conﬁnement high , cells became totally round , mostly immobile , and often showed a continuous blebbing activity ( Movie S2 ; phenotype B in Figures 660 Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 3B – 3E , note in Figure S3 legend ) , further suggesting an increased level of contractility . Unexpectedly , a fraction of these rounded NHDF cells could polarize and move fast with an amoe - boid - like morphology ( Movie S2 ; phenotype A in Figures 3B – 3E ) . Further quantiﬁcation of the migration of spread cells ( pheno - type C or E ) showed that conﬁnement always reduced the instantaneous speed of such cells ( Figure 3E ) , but did not signif - icantly change their persistence ( Figure S3B ) . Cells that were more rounded did not move , except for a sub - fraction of cells that spontaneously polarized ( phenotype A ) . These cells showed a much higher diffusion coefﬁcient ( up to ten times higher ) , which was not observed under conditions of strong adhesion or without conﬁnement . The high diffusion coefﬁcient of cells showing an amoeboid - like behavior could be attributed to both an increase in instantaneous speed and an increase in persistence . This is reminiscent of the behavior of leukocytes , such as dendritic cells , which are known to migrate fast and independently of spe - ciﬁc integrin - based adhesion ( La¨mmermann et al . , 2008 ; La¨m - mermann and Sixt , 2009 ; Hawkins et al . , 2009 ; Heuze ´ et al . , 2013 ) . A B D F G H C E Figure 2 . Migration Behavior of NHDF Cells on Surfaces of Various Adhesive Levels ( A ) Representative phase contrast images of NHDF cells on surfaces containing various RGD densities . ( B and C ) Quantiﬁcation of the number of attached cells per mm 2 ( B ) and their spreading areas ( C ) for various RGD densities ( n R 20cells , N R 2 experiments for each point on the graph ) . ( D ) Representative trajectoriesof 60cells recorded over 24hrfor variousRGD densities . The starting positions of eachcellwere registeredtothe centerof the plot . ( E ) Schematic explaining measurements of cell displacement D ( t ) , mean instantaneous speed ( S ) , and persistence ( P ) of cells ( see Supplemental Information ) . ( F – H ) Graphs showing diffusion coefﬁcient ( F ) , mean instantaneous speed ( G ) , and persistence time ( H ) of NHDF cells for various RGD densities ( n > 100 cells for each point on the graph ) . In ( A ) – ( H ) , % corresponds to the percentage of pLL - PEG - RGD in both pLL - PEG and pLL - PEG - RGD solution , error bars indicate SEM , and scale bars represent 100 m m . See also Figure S2 and Movie S1 . Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 661 A B C E no low high high no low A B C D E Adhesion 10 20 30 40 50 050 100 050 100 050 100 Confinementheight Adhesion pLL - PEG - RGD ( % ) phenotype ( % ) No 5 µm 3 µm C - E A B C 0 % 5 % 15 % 100 % 50 % B A Confinement D E pLL - PEG - RGD ( % ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 D i ff u s i on c oe ff i c i en t ( μ m ² / m i n ) CBA C AB E 3 μm 5 μm 5 2 0 5 2 0 20 40 60 80 100 A B C E 20 40 60 80 100 pLL - PEG - RGD ( % ) 0 min 100 min 200 min 300 min 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 M ean i n s t an t an eou s s peed ( μ m / m i n ) Figure 3 . Migration Behavior of NHDF Cells in Response to Varying Conﬁnement Height and Adhesion Strength ( A ) Representative phase contrast images of NHDF cells under 5 m m conﬁnement and various RGD densities . Scale bar represents 100 m m . ( B ) Schematic showing the appearance of the observed phenotypes as a function of conﬁnement height and adhesion strength . Phenotypes are deﬁned as follows : A , round cell with a leading edge ; B , round cell ; C , cell with long and non - spread pseudopodia ; D , ﬂoating , round cell ; E , normally spread cell . ( C ) Portion of the different phenotypes observed under various conditions according to cell morphologies deﬁned in ( B ) . n R 100 cells for each conditions . ( D ) Toppanel : representativeimagesofcellsforeachphenotype . Conditionsofconﬁnement ( m m ) / adhesion ( % pLL - PEG - RGD ) areA : 5 / 2 % ; B : 3 / 15 % ; C : 3 / 75 % ; E : no / 100 % . Bottom panel : corresponding time lapse of the cell outline . The color of the outlines represents elapsed time after the ﬁrst outline . Scale bar rep - resents 50 m m . ( E ) Graph showing diffusion coefﬁcient ( top ) and instantaneous speed ( bottom ) of each NHDF phenotype on varying RGD densities and for different conﬁne - ments . Error bars indicate SEM . See also Figure S3 and Movie S2 . 662 Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . Altogether , these observations show that a fraction of typically mesenchymal NHDF cells migrating under conditions of high conﬁnement and low adhesion can switch to a fast amoeboid - like migration . Two Distinct Modes of Amoeboid - like Migration Can Be Induced , Depending on Cell Type To test whether this microenvironment - dependent switch in the mode of migration was restricted to NHDF cells , we investigated the migration behavior of 20 other cell types conﬁned by fully non - adhesive surfaces ( 100 % pLL - PEG ) . We chose a sample of cell types covering a large range of migratory and non - migra - tory cells , including normal and transformed epithelial cells ( pre - and post - EMT ) , normal and transformed mesenchymal cells , leukocytes ( typical amoeboid cells ) , and muscle cell precursors . For all cell types , with the exception of normal epithelial cells , we found a sub - fraction of spontaneously polarizing cells moving fast with an amoeboid - like morphology ( Figures 4A and 4B ) . Un - expectedly , we found two distinct types of fast - migrating cells ( Figures 4A and S4A – S4C ) . The ﬁrst type , which we named A1 , was similar to what was observed with NHDF cells : a round cell body and a small leading edge ( Movie S3 ) . The second , which we named A2 , had an elongated ellipsoid cell body with a large uropod and resembled a migrating neutrophil ( Figures S4A and S4B ; Movie S3 ) . Globally , A2 cells moved signiﬁcantly faster ( 5 . 3 ± 1 . 5 m m / min ) than A1 cells ( 1 . 7 ± 0 . 4 m m / min ) and they both moved much faster than mesenchymal controls ( 0 . 234 ± 0 . 09 m m / min ) ( see Figures 4C and 4D ) . Thetypeoffastmigration , A1orA2 , variedaccordingtothecell line under observation ( Figure 4D ) . For ﬁve cell types , the two modes could coexist in the same cell population , while most cell types preferentially switched to one migration mode or the other . Interestingly , different sub - clones of HeLa cells obtained from different labs ( see Supplemental Information for a descrip - tion of cell types ) could either preferentially switch to A1 or A2 ( Figure4D ) . Thissuggeststhatthesetwomigrationmodes , which are morphologically very different , can arise in very similar cell types , probably based on subtle molecular differences . Transformed Cells , as well as Leukocytes , Preferentially Display Fast A2 Migration under Conﬁnement Comparing different groups of cell types revealed general trends in the transition to amoeboid migration . Normal epithelial cells rarely displayed a transition to fast amoeboid migration ( Fig - ure 4D ) . This was due to the formation of large cell clusters that were mostly non - motile . At lower density , individual cells were able to display the A1 migratory phenotype . When we induced EMT in MDCK or MCF10A cells with TGF b , they no longer formed clusters and displayed fast A2 migratory phenotype . This was also true for tumor cell lines of epithelial origin from different tissues or in vitro transformed cell lines . Similarly , while normal mesenchymal cells tended to display mostly A1 migration under conﬁnement , transformed mesen - chymal cells often used in MAT studies displayed a high propor - tion of A2 migration mode when conﬁned in a non - adhesive environment . Surprisingly , even muscle cell precursors dis - played this fast migratory behavior under strong conﬁnement . As expected , all leukocytes displayed A2 - like migration , including monocytes , which showed no motility on 2D sub - strates due to lack of adhesion . This suggested that the fast A2 migration mode was typically adopted by amoeboid cells , such as leukocytes , and by transformed cells migrating individ - ually , independently of their tissue of origin . Altogether , these results show that most slow mesenchymal cells can spontaneously switch to a fast amoeboid - like mode of migration when they are conﬁned in a non - adhesive environment . The Switch to Amoeboid - like Migration Depends on the Absence of Focal Adhesions The switch to amoeboid migration was observed only for adhe - sion levels that did not allow cell binding to the substrate when no conﬁnement was applied ( Figures 2B and 3C ) . To check for the presence of focal adhesions , we imaged HeLa VL cells by to - tal internal reﬂection microscopy ( TIRFM ) ( Trache and Meininger , 2008 ) , on ﬁbronectin - coated substrates and on PEG - treated substrates . On ﬁbronectin , Vinculin - GFP displayed the expected pattern of focal adhesions , while on PEG , it was diffuse in the cytoplasm ( Figure S5A ) . This was true both with and without conﬁnement , showing that conﬁnement did not restore the ca - pacity of cells to form focal adhesions on PEG - treated surfaces . We then tested whether the ability of PEG - treated substrates to promote amoeboid migration relied on a lack of focal adhe - sions or on another surface effect of the PEG treatment . For this , we conﬁned HeLa VL on an adhesive ﬁbronectin surface and prevented formation of focal adhesions by knocking down the expression of Talin proteins with small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) or using the b 1 - integrin - blocking antibody 4B4 ( Figures 5 , S5B , and S5F ) . Under conﬁnement on a ﬁbronectin - coated surface , Talin knocked - down cells switched to A2 three times more often than cells treated with a non - targeting siRNA and as often as control cells on a non - adhesive PEG - treated substrate . Similarly , treating cells with 4B4 signiﬁcantly increased the proportion of cells switching to amoeboid migration . This conﬁrmed that the capacity to switch to amoeboid - like migration depended on the absence of focal adhesions and not on the chemical nature of the migration substrate or on a particular molecular perturba - tion of focal adhesion complexes . The Switch to Fast A2 Amoeboid - like Migration Depends on High Cell Contractility , whereas A1 Requires Low Contractility The comparison of a large number of cell types under two different levels of conﬁnement suggested that increasing conﬁnement led to a larger proportion of A2 migrating cells ( Fig - ure 4D ) . We conﬁrmed this effect using three different levels of conﬁnement for HeLa VL cells . While most migrating cells displayed A1 migration under low conﬁnement , only A2 was observed under high conﬁnement ( Figure 5B ) . To investigate the role of the myosin II motor protein in the behavior of conﬁned cells , we ﬁrst treated conﬁned HeLa VL cells with increasing doses of the phosphatase inhibitor calyculin A . This inhibits the dephosphorylation of myosin II , thereby increasing its activity ( Ishihara et al . , 1989 ) . Increasing calyculin A concentration increased the fraction of cells switching to A2 Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 663 A D C RPE1 HeLa 0’ 60’ 120’ 180’ 0’ 5’ 15’ 25’ S peed ( μ m / m i n ) B A1 A2 ) % ( no i t c a r F H eLa k y o t o H T 29 R P E 1 M E F M D A - M B 231 H E K N H D F 3 . 0 μm 0 20 40 H eLa F H eLa V L HOECHST HOECHST H eLa V L H eLa K y o t o N H D F R P E 1 M E F H T 29 N H D F R P E 1 M E F M D A - M B 231 H eLa F H E K H eLa F H E K H T 29 H eLa V L H eLa ky o t o 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 * * * * * A2 A1 E A1 A1 + A2 A2 3 μm 5 μm NHEK h p MDCK d i MCF10A h i RPE1 h i HEK h i MDA - MB231 h t HT29 h t HeLa Kyoto h t HeLa VL h t HeLa MYH9 h t HeLa F h t NHDF h p MEF m p HT1080 h t A375P h t A375M2 h t C2C12 m i Jurkat h t HL60 h t Mouse BMDC m p Human monocyte h p MDCK + TGFβ d i MCF10A + TGFβ h i Normal Transformed Transformed Normal Epithelial Mesenchymal Muscle Immune s pe c i e s o r i g i n ( legend on next page ) 664 Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . migration mode , up to 66 % of the total population ( Figures 5C and 5D ; Movie S4 ) . We also used siRNA to knock down the expression of MYPT1 ( Figure S5F ) , the PP1 partner targeting myosin II ( Feng et al . , 1999 ) . MYPT1 siRNA induced an increase in the volume and number of blebs ( Figure S5C ) and an increase in the fraction of cells switching to A2 ( Figures 5E and S5D ) , conﬁrming the role of myosin II - based contractility in this phenomenon . High - resolution imaging showed that the transition to A2 cor - responded to the formation of a large bleb where most of the cell cytoplasm , including the nucleus , was transferred ( Figure 5F ; Movie S5 ) , inducing a profound reorganization of the cytoskel - eton and resulting in a new stable shape with an elliptical cell body and a rear uropod . The formation of such large blebs occurred at a constant rate ( Figure S5E ) and more frequently when cells were treated with calyculin A or knocked - down for MYPT1 ( Figure S5E ) . Overall , this suggests that conﬁnement favors cell contractility and that high cell contractility favors fast A2 migration . To conﬁrm that hypothesis , we measured the contractility of cell populations displaying different fractions of A2 phenotype ( see Supplemental Information ) . We plated cells between two non - adhesive gels of known rigidity ( 1 kPa ) coated with ﬂuores - cent beads ( Figure S5H ) . Using 3D high - resolution imaging , we assessed the extent to which the cells deformed the gels and so deduced the ability of cells to push on their surroundings , as a measure of their relative level of cortical contractility ( Fig - ure S5I ) . This measure increased with increasing myosin II activ - ity ( Figures 5H and S5G ) , and stronger cells displayed a higher fraction of A2 migratory phenotype ( Figure 5H ) . We then assayed other cell types and found that cells displaying A2 migration were signiﬁcantly stronger than cells displaying A1 migration ( Fig - ure 5I ) . This conﬁrmed our hypothesis that A2 migration ap - peared above a certain threshold of contractility . Accordingly , treating cells with the ROCK inhibitor Y27632 reduced bleb formation and the proportion of cells switching to A2 . More generally treatment with blebbistatin prevented forma - tion of A2 migrating cells in all cell types tested . Unexpectedly , however , it did not prevent HeLa cells from moving and instead drastically increased the number of cells switching to the A1 amoeboid - like migration mode ( Figures 5C and 5G ; Movie S4 ) . Together , these experiments show that high contractility favored fast A2 migration mode , by increasing blebbing activity , eventually leading to the formation of large ‘‘stable blebs’’ comprising most of the cell content . Conversely , low contractility favored the formation of protrusive structures , leading to A1 migration . A2 Migration Mode Relies on a Fast and Global Cortical Retrograde Flow , whereas A1 Migration Relies on Local Actin Polymerization To characterize the migration mechanism of conﬁned non - adhe - sive cells , we imaged focal adhesions , actin , and myosin II using TIRFM . On the ﬁbronectin - coated surface , cells attached , spread , and formed focal adhesions and actin stress ﬁbers con - taining myosin II ( Figure 6A , upper panel ; Movie S6 ) . In A2 cells migrating under conﬁnement on a non - adhesive surface , Vincu - lin - GFP was homogeneously distributed in the cytoplasm , and no stress ﬁbers could be observed . Instead , actin ﬁlaments assembled into a ﬁbrous cortex that was absent from the cell front , but became progressively denser toward the cell rear at the uropod ( Figure 6A , middle panel ; Movie S6 ) . Myosin II formed patches in A2 cells , mostly on the rear part of the cell where the actin cortex was denser . Both actin ﬁlaments and myosin II patches showed a strong retrograde ﬂow in the central part of the cell ( 15 . 8 ± 3 . 7 m m / min SD n = 11 , measured in the reference frame of the cell ) , whereas almost no actin movement was observed in the rear of the cell and in the uropod ( Figure 6A bot - tom panel ; see also Movie S7 and Figure 6B for ﬂow visualization by particle image velocimetry ) . To assess whether A1 motility relied on a similar mechanism , we added 30 m M of the ROCK inhibitor Y27632 . As with the A2 cells , we found that motile single A1 cells displayed a fast retro - grade ﬂow ( 14 . 63 ± 0 . 9 m m / min ) . Unlike the A2 cells , however , the ﬂow was not global , from the front to the back of the cell . Instead , it was localized only in a small protruding region at the leading edge of the cell ( Figures S6A and S6B ; Movie S8 ) . The limited area of the retrograde ﬂow might explain why these cells were slower than A2 cells . Several studies have shown that such a retrograde ﬂow is responsible for cell movement independently of adhesion in amoeboid cells ( Bergert et al . , 2012 ; Renkawitz et al . , 2009 ) . To conﬁrm the role of the retrograde ﬂow in cell movement , we also compared retrograde ﬂow speed with cell speed and found a signiﬁcant correlation between these two parameters ( Fig - ure S6E ) . However , retrograde ﬂow was faster than the cell speed , indicating that a limited amount of friction occurs be - tween the ﬂowing cortex and the substrate surface ( Renkawitz et al . , 2009 ) . In A2 cells lacking a uropod , the cell could go as fast as the retrograde ﬂow ( Figure S6F ; Movie S8 ) , and on average , A2 cells were 1 . 84 time faster ( 1 . 32 – 2 . 58 at 95 % conﬁ - dence ) after being detached from their uropod ( see also Figures S6C and S6D ) . These results conﬁrmed that A2 cells moved via a coupling of a fast acto - myosin retrograde ﬂow with the substrate and that the uropod acted as a dragged passive body . Figure 4 . Strong Conﬁnement in a Non - Adhesive Environment Can Induce Two Distinct Modes of Amoeboid Migration ( A ) Time - lapse sequences of a typical amoeboid RPE1 ( left ) and HeLa VL ( right ) cell under 3 - m m conﬁnement on a non - adhesive PEG surface . Grey is phase contrast and blue is nuclear staining ( Hoechst ) . Time is in min ( 0 ) . Scale bar represents 20 m m . ( B ) Fraction ofeachphenotypeforvariouscelllinesunder 3 - m mconﬁnementonanon - adhesive surface ( n = 140 , 147 , 267 , 129 , 60 , 138 , 137 , 115 , and112cells ) . ( C ) Instantaneousmigrationspeedforvariouscelllinesdependingontheirmigratoryphenotype ( n = 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 , 22 , 6 , 10 , 11 , 10 , 2 , 9 , 3 , 10 , 46 , and11 ) . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 according to t test . ( D ) Comprehensivetableindicating thepresenceorabsenceofamoeboidphenotypesforvariouscelllines : blueindicatesRPE1 - like ( A1 ) , redindicatesHeLa - like ( A2 ) , purple indicates both ( A1 + A2 ) , and gray indicates none . Cells are sorted by their origins and state of transformation . Species are human ( h ) , mouse ( m ) , and dog ( d ) . Origins are primary ( p ) , immortalized ( i ) , and tumoral ( t ) . See also Figure S4 and Movie S3 . Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 665 D C E G Control 0 20 10 30 40 50 60 70 80 A C t r l . ( N T C ) T L N s i A1 A2 0 C t r l . F r a c t i on ( % ) Y 2 7632 0 10 20 50 100 [ Calyculin A ] ( nM ) A 2 c e ll s ( % ) 0 5 15 25 20 10 T L N s i C t r l . P E G ( N T C ) C t r l . F n ( N T C ) F n + 4 B 4 A b C t r l . P E G C t r l . F n A 2 c e ll s ( % ) F + Calyculin A + Y27632 C t r l . + 4 B 4 A b H A 2 c e ll s ( % ) Cortical contractility index ( h / d ) h d 1 kPa Gel 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 10 20 30 40 50 HeLa VL + Y27 HeLa VL HeLa VL + Cal . A HeLa Kyoto HeLa MYH9 HeLa F C t r l . C t r l . ( N T C ) 0 10 20 30 40 50 A 2 c e ll s ( % ) M Y P T 1 s i 1 M Y P T 1 s i 2 M Y P T 1 s i 3 B A1 A2 3 . 8 μ m 3 . 0 μ m 5 . 5 μ m HeLa VL ) % ( no i t c a r F 0 10 20 30 HOECHST MYH9 - GFP 20 40 10 30 50 A2 A1 p = 0 . 0091 p = 0 . 0025 H eLa M Y H 9 H eLa K y o t o H eLa V L A 375 P H T 29 H T 1080 H eLa F H E K M D A - M B 231 N H D F R P E 1 M E F 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 C on t r a c t ili t y i nde x I ( legend on next page ) 666 Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . In A2 Cells , the Stable and Global Retrograde Flow Is Induced by Myosin II Contractility and Asymmetrical Actin Turnover To better understand how global retrograde ﬂow could be main - tained and how actin was recycled in the cell , we calculated the polymerization dynamics of ﬁlamentous actin . We ﬁrst measured the 1D retrograde ﬂow of actin and myosin II along the length of cells ( see Extended Experimental Procedures for details ) . In individual cells , the mean rate of ﬂow ( in the reference frame of the moving cell ) was similar for both proteins ( Figure 6C ) . In terms of protein localization , however , myosin II patches ap - peared to lie further toward the back of the cell ( Figure 6D ; Movie S6 ) . Interestingly , we noticed that myosin II was localized where the actin retrograde ﬂow accelerated ( Figure 6D , bottom - right graph ) and that the gradient of speed of the actin ﬁlaments , which accounts for the actin network contraction , was similar to the mean myosin II density along the cell ( Figure 6D ) . This suggested a role for myosin II in accelerating the retrograde actin ﬂow . To produce a stable cortical ﬂow , cortical actin has to be re - cycled . According to the well - accepted model for actin ﬁlament turnover ( Wilson et al . , 2010 ) , new actin monomers are polymer - ized at the cell front and ﬁlamentous actin is severed at the back of the cell . As in Wilson et al . ( 2010 ) , we were able to use the mass conservation law to deduce the rate of polymerization of ﬁlamen - tous actin along the cell length ( see Supplemental Information for details ) . We foundthatactinpolymerized atthefrontat aconstant rate and depolymerized at the back ( Figure 6E ) . A similar analysis ofmyosin IIdynamicsshowed that recruitmentof thisproteinwas reduced toward the cell front , suggesting that it was rapidly captured by actin ﬁlamentsandmoved towardtherearofthecell . Based on these elements , a mathematical model can be pro - posed ( summarized in Figure 6H and Supplemental Information ) ( see also Ruprecht et al . [ 2015 ] in this issue of Cell ; Callan - Jones and Voituriez , 2013 ; Hawkins et al . , 2011 ) , which predicts appearance of a motile ‘‘stable bleb’’ state above a threshold of contractility of the acto - myosin cortex . To further test this model , we assessed the respective roles of actin turnover and myosin II contractility in A2 migrating cells . When cells were treated with low concentrations of jasplakino - lide , a drug that interferes with actin ﬁlament turnover , an increasing fraction of the actin ﬁlaments was found to accumu - late at the cell back ( Figure 6F ) . Above 250 nM , the proportion of A2 cells dropped ( Figure 6F ) . Treated cells also displayed an unstable and ﬂoppy front , showing that cortex turnover was essential for the stability of the A2 mode . To test the role of myosin II during steady - state migration , we introduced the drug into the device after the A2 cells had formed . After treat - ment , cells concomitantly lost their elongated shape to become round and stopped moving ( Figure 6G ) . Myosin II activity was thus not only required for spontaneous polarization , but also , together with actin ﬁlament turnover , to maintain the cortical ﬂow , the shape , and the motility of the A2 mode . All these observations are consistent with our model and are identical to the observations made on embryonic ﬁsh cells reported by Ruprecht et al . ( 2015 ) in this issue of Cell . This suggests a common generic mechanism for the migration of contractile conﬁned cells which are not able to form acto - myosin stress ﬁbers and instead form a contractile cortex . When a cell exceeds a certain level of contractile activity , its cor - tex can be destabilized by blebs and switch spontaneously to another stable state that induces a fast migration behavior ( Fig - ure 6I ) . Conversely , when a cell is only moderately contractile , its cortex is constantly being destabilized by blebs but does not switch to a new stable conﬁguration , leading to non - migrating , blebbing cells . When contractility is completely inhibited , the cortex is not destabilized , and a cell can develop more protru - sive activity , which eventually leads to the A1 type amoeboid - like migration . Figure 5 . Migratory Transitions Depend on Myosin II Activity and on the Presence of Focal Adhesions ( A ) Left panel : representative images of HeLa VL on a ﬁbronectin - treated substrate after treatments against adhesion : by Talins depletion ( TLN1 + TLN2 ) with siRNA compared with a non - targeting control ( NTC ) or by blocking b 1 integrins with the 4B4 antibody ( 30 m g / ml ) . Right panel : fraction of A2 cells after conﬁnement on a non - adhesive surface ( PEG ) or a ﬁbronectin - coated surface ( Fn ) with or without treatments against focal adhesions ( n = 482 , 313 , 687 , 240 , 424 , and 436 cells ) . Scale bar represents 50 m m . All conﬁned cells are under 3 - m m conﬁnement and error bars are either SEM for means or error margin for % . ( B ) Fraction of each phenotype for HeLa VL cells depending on conﬁnement level on a non - adhesive PEG surface ( n = 308 , 254 , and 140 cells ) . All conﬁned cells are under 3 - m m conﬁnement and error bars are either SEM for means or error margin for % . ( C ) Representative images of HeLa VL cells without and with 100 nM calyculin A or 30 m M Y27632 treatments under 3 - m m conﬁnement on a non - adhesive PEG surface . Scale bar represents 50 m m . All conﬁned cells are under 3 - m m conﬁnement and error bars are either SEM for means or error margin for % . ( D ) Fraction of A2 cells for various calyculin A concentrations , in HeLa VL cells ( n = 140 , 327 , 208 , 140 , and 185 cells ) . All conﬁned cells are under 3 - m m conﬁnement and error bars are either SEM for means or error margin for % . ( E ) Fraction of HeLa VL cells transitioning to the A2 phenotype after MYPT1 depletion with three distinct sequences of siRNAs or after a non - targeting control ( NTC ) treatment ( n = 664 , 637 , 408 , 211 , and 177 cells ) . All conﬁned cells are under 3 - m m conﬁnement and error bars are either SEM for means or error margin for % . ( F ) Time - lapse sequences of a HeLa Kyoto cell showing transition from a rounded blebbing cell ( phenotype B ) to A2 phenotype . Images are an overlay of phase contrast ( gray ) , MYH9 - GFP ﬂuorescence ( green , staining myosin II ) , and Hoechst nuclear staining ( red ) . Time is in hr : min . Scale bar represents 25 m m . ( G ) Fraction of HeLa VL cells transitioning to A1 and A2 phenotypes after 30 m M Y27632 treatment ( n = 140 and 191 cells ) . All conﬁned cells are under 3 - m m conﬁnement and error bars are either SEM for means or error margin for % . ( H ) For various HeLa clones or after treatment with Y27632 ( 30 m M ) or calyculin A ( 50 nM ) , fraction of A2 cells compared with the mean contractility index of cells < h / d > , which quantiﬁes the ability of detached cells to deform a soft non - adhesive polyacrylamide ( PA ) gel of 1 kPa . For each point : n > 200 cells on y axis and n > 15 on x axis . ( I ) Contractility index of various cell types showing either A1 or A2 migration ( n = 19 , 22 , 18 , 20 , 17 , 19 , 18 , 19 , 17 , 18 , 17 , and 15 ; p values are from a non - parametric Mann - Whitney test ) . See also Figure S5 and Movies S4 and S5 . Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 667 A C D E H F 0 10 20 30 0 10 20 MyoII density Actin density grad ( v ) x ( μm ) x ( μm ) x ( μm ) x ( μm ) c oun t : x ( μm ) R e t r og r ade F l o w ( μ m / m i n ) ( A U ) g r a d ( ρ v ) ( A U ) 0 10 0 00 0 m a x 30 10 20 20 10 10 5 10 15 20 MyoII Actin MyoII Actin 0 10 20 −40 −20 0 20 Actin MyoII 0 20 den s i t y : 0 m a x 0 30 10 20 LifeAct MYH9 LifeAct - mCherry ( Actin ) N o c on f . , F n 3 μ m , PE G T i m e MYH9 - GFP ( MyoII ) x x Vinculin - GFP a x a a I Speed : 0 max ξ k k p d ζ L Cell motion Myo II F - actin G - actin Increasingcontractility Retrograde cortical flow and actin gradient Polarized motile state Non polarized state ( blebs ) Static homogeneous cortex Ctrl . + Jasp ( 500 nM ) C t r l . 31 n M 62 n M 125 n M 250 n M 500 n M 1 μ M 0 10 20 30 A 2 c e ll s ( % ) Jasplakinolide G 0 min 10 min 20 min 30 min 40 min 0 min 60 min 0 1 2 3 4 5 A s pe c t r a t i o Aspect ratio Speed 0 2 4 6 8 S peed ( μ m / m i n ) + blebbistatin B a x Figure 6 . Motility of A2 Fast - Moving Phenotype Is Based on a Strong Actin Retrograde Flow ( A ) Representative TIRF microscopy images of HeLa cells expressing both Vinculin - GFP ( left ) and LifeAct - mCherry ( right ) ( HeLa VL ) , and HeLa cells expressing MYH9 - GFP ( middle ) under the following two conditions : on ﬁbronectin - coated adhesive surface without conﬁnement ( top panel ) and conﬁned under 3 m m on a non - adhesive PEG surface ( middle panel ) . Bottom images correspond to kymographs showing retrograde ﬂow in the cell body . Orange dashed lines show cell outlines , red dashed lines were used to generate kymographs . Horizontal bars are 10 m m and vertical bars are 2 min . ( legend continued on next page ) 668 Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . DISCUSSION A Phase Diagram of Cell Migration Can Be Drawn Based on Only Three Parameters Amoeboid migration has been described as a fast migration mode potentially independent of adhesion and involving a rounded cell shape . However , no consensus on its mechanism has been established . Here , we showed that physical conﬁne - ment and low adhesiveness could promote a mesenchymal - to - amoeboid transition across a range of cell types that have not been thought to be capable of amoeboid motility . In addition , cortical contractility determined the type of amoeboid migration , leading to a general phase diagram for single cell locomotion , based on only three main parameters : adhesion , conﬁnement , and contractility ( Figure 7B ) . Below , we discuss in more detail how these three parameters , either individually or in conjunction , might contribute to the migratory transitions that we observed . The Absence of Focal Adhesion Allows the Formation of a Cell Cortex and a Switch to a Rounded State An intriguing aspect of the transition to amoeboid migration modes is that , in all cases , it required the absence of focal ad - ( B ) Particleimagevelocity ( PIV ) ofactinﬂows ( bottomimage ) recordedonaTIRFmovie ( topimage ) . Dashedpartcorrespondstoareaswheresignalwastooweak for ﬂow calculation . Scale bar represents 10 m m . ( C ) Meanretrogradeﬂow alongthecell ( inthereferenceframeof thecell ) . Rightimagesshow speed distribution measured for 15minon anindividual celland left graph shows mean ﬂow averaged over several cells . x = 0 corresponds to the position of the neck . ( D ) Meanactin ( basedonLifeActstaining ) andmyosinIIdensityproﬁles . Rightimagesshow2Dmeandensitiesinthecellbodyaveragedfor15minonasinglecell and left graph shows mean density proﬁle for several cells . myosin II density colocalized with actin retrograde ﬂow gradient grad ( v ) . ( E ) Polymerization rates estimates along the cell body for myosin II and actin . Inferred from density and retrograde ﬂow proﬁles shown in ( C ) and ( D ) . ( F ) Left : actinlocalization ( invertedimageofLifeActﬂuorescence ) inaHeLaVLA2cellwithorwithoutjasplakinolide treatment . Right : fractionofA2cellfunctionof jasplakinolide concentration ( for each bar n > 278 cells , error bars are error margins ) . Scale bar represents 20 m m . ( G ) Time - lapse sequence of a A2 HeLa VL cell after a 150 m M blebbistatin treatment ( left ) and quantiﬁcation of the aspect ratio of the cell front and cell speed before and 60 min after treatment ( n = 7 cells , error bars are SEM ) ( right ) . 3 - m m conﬁnement , PEG . Scale bar represents 50 m m . ( H ) Schematic of the proposed model for cell motion ( see main text and Supplemental Information ) . ( I ) Mean cell shape : superposition of the outlines of 22 cells showing the reproducibility and stability of cell shape in mode A2 . Scale bar represents 10 m m . In ( C ) – ( E ) , n = 5 ( actin ) , six ( myosin II ) cells , error envelop is SEM and 0 on x axis corresponds to the neck position . Point a in ( A ) . See also Figure S6 and Movies S6 , S7 , and S8 . A2 A1 E B A dh e s i on w i t h en v i r on m en t Cortical Contractility Y27632 Cal . A MYPT1 si PEGTLN si 4B4 Ab ζ Contractility A dhe s i on «de w e tt i ng» li ne : s p r ead c e ll s non s p r ead c e ll s Amoeboid auto - polarized mode Amoeboid exo - polarisedmode Lamellipodialmode ξ B A C Increasing Decreasing Actin cortex Figure 7 . Schematic of the Proposed Model Describing Transitions between Modes of Cell Migration ( A ) Increasing cortical tension and decreasing cortex - surface interactionboth converge toward a round , ‘‘non - wetting’’ shape of the cell . ( B ) Summary of experimental observations . ( C ) Generic phase diagram resulting from models of cortical wetting and cortical stability . hesions . We found that when cells were still able to form focal adhesions , they formed persistent protrusions and stress ﬁbers , all of which prevented the formation of large - scale cortical ﬂows . This observation is consistent with previous reports that integrin expression inhibits amoeboid migration ( Carragher et al . , 2006 ) . Focal adhesions and the cell cortex might compete to re - cruit the acto - myosin contractile machinery , leading to either contractile stress ﬁbers or a contractile / ﬂowing cortex . In the absence of focal adhesions , cortical tension can trigger the mechanical delamination of remaining adhesive sites , leading to a rounded shape . To mathematically account for this tran - sition from a spread , adherent phenotype to a round shape at low adhesion and high contractility , we can draw an analogy with the dewetting of liquid droplets on ﬂat surfaces ( see Sup - plemental Information ) . This qualitatively accounts for the observed transition from phenotype E to B in Figure 7 . This analogy , although speculative at that stage , is useful to com - plete the theoretical framework recapitulating our observa - tions . It captures the importance of the balance between contractility and adhesion . Importantly , adhesion alone does not prevent the transition to amoeboid migration , but rather its association with the formation of stress ﬁbers . As a consequence , cell types that could adhere to particular matrix components without generating stress ﬁbers could also move with a ﬂowing cortex , leading to amoeboid migration even in the presence of a strong coupling between the actin cortex and the cell environment . This type of motility has been observed in leukocytes , in cancer cells invading a soft non - crosslinked matrix such as Matrigel ( Poincloux et al . , Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 669 2011 ) , and in embryonic cells from zebraﬁsh ( Ruprecht et al . [ 2015 ] in this issue of Cell ) . Conﬁnement Is Required for Transmission of Forces in the Absence of Adhesion , but It Also Increases Contractility When mesenchymal cells are prevented from forming focal ad - hesions , they cannot hold on to ﬁbronectin - or collagen - coated substrates . This automatically makes conﬁnement a require - ment for cell migration . This phenomenon has been termed ‘‘chimneying’’ ( Malawista et al . , 2000 ) , in reference to a tech - nique used by mountain climbers . Exactly how these frictional forces are transmitted from the acto - myosin cortex to the migra - tion substratum remains an open question . In addition , it has been proposed that conﬁnement , in more complex geometries , combined with blebbing activity and an intrinsic cell polarity , could allow complete non - frictional motion to occur ( Tozluo (cid:1) glu et al . , 2013 ) . In conclusion , the most direct function of conﬁne - ment is to enable force transmission in the absence of adhesions to the substrate . An unexpected effect of conﬁnement was to signiﬁcantly in - crease contractility , thus favoring blebbing and the A2 mode of migration . As this effect was immediate , it could not rely on the activation of a transcriptional program . Force - induced signaling via focal adhesions could not explain this effect either , as cells did not form adhesive structures . This suggests that the increase in contractility observed upon conﬁnement might be induced directly by cell and / or nuclear deformation through a yet - unknown mechanism . A Major Difference between A1 and A2 Migration Modes Is the Origin of the Polarization Process that Triggers Cell Movement An intrinsic polarization factor or process in the cell , or an extrinsic spatial cue can induce a local retrograde ﬂow in a pro - trusive structure ( Lorentzen et al . , 2011 ) . Indeed , we observed that cells switched to the A1 migration mode after making con - tact with cell debris or with other cells , or after a division . This indicated that this mode of migration only rarely appeared spon - taneously and relied on a polarization factor to locally trigger the retrograde ﬂow and thus the cell movement . Cell polarity can also be induced in the absence of a speciﬁc polarization signal , a phenomenon previously described in other studies ( Lorentzen et al . , 2011 ; Poincloux et al . , 2011 ) . We found that this spontaneous polarization of a contractile cell cortex , which is predicted by our minimal model based on active gel theory ( see Supplemental Information ) , can be nucleated randomly by the blebbing activity ( see also Ruprecht et al . [ 2015 ] in this issue of Cell ) . Following destabilization of the cor - tex and transfer of the cytoplasm to the large bleb , contractility remains concentrated at the back of the cell due to the global ﬂow , generating a stabilizing feedback . This can trigger an increase in pressure in the cell , a phenomenon reminiscent of lobopodial migration ( Petrie et al . , 2012 , 2014 ) . The movement of the global actin retrograde ﬂow can also be transmitted to the substratum . This phenomenon of a steady - state ﬂow based on actin ﬁla - ment turnover is essentially similar to the mechanism driving pro - trusive lamellipodial migration ( Wilson et al . , 2013 ) or A1 cell motility . But , importantly , while A1 motility requires an additional mechanism for polarization , in the case of high contractility ( A2 mode ) , we provided evidence , both theoretical and experi - mental , that a stable polarization and thus a persistent migration can occur spontaneously . A2 Migration : A Generic , Ancestral Mode of Cell Locomotion ? For all cell lines studied , the speed of amoeboid - like migration was much faster than the speed of the mesenchymal form and corresponded to values reported for amoeboid cell types ( several m m / min ) . This suggests that these typical speeds are rather linked to the mode of migration than to the type of cell , as a given cell type can adopt both types of migration and asso - ciated speed , depending on its migration environment . While we could observe two different types of fast amoeboid migration , the A2 mode appeared to be more general . Most cell types were able to adopt it , if contractile and sufﬁciently conﬁned . Strikingly , all cell lines displayed a unique shape and speed when in the A2 mode , resembling the shape of a migrating neutrophil , with a pronounced uropod and a smooth rounded leading edge and with a similar range of speed . This was inde - pendent of their tissue of origin , of their physiological function , and of the shape and speed they displayed when migrating on an adhesive substrate without conﬁnement . Importantly , embry - onic cells from zebraﬁsh could also display the same general shape and range of speed ( Ruprecht et al . [ 2015 ] in this issue of Cell ) . When we investigated the acto - myosin dynamics underlying the migration of these cells in more detail , the similarity appeared to be even more striking . Interestingly , the stereotypical ‘‘sausage’’ shape of the A2 / stable bleb migrating cells has also been reported for amoebae , with also a similar actin and myosin II distribution ( Yoshida and Inouye , 2001 ) . This suggests that the transition to the A2 , or ‘‘stable - bleb’’ fast amoeboid - like migra - tion might be a very general phenomenon , relevant not only for cultured cancer cells but also for primary embryonic cells , both in vitro and in vivo . From a mathematical point of view , the transition to A2 migration mode can be understood with a very generic mini - mal 1D theoretical model . The fact that such a simple and generic model can predict the transition to A2 / stable bleb migration suggests that this mode of locomotion could be viewed as a basic property of a dynamic and contractile actin cortex . Consistent with this view , we often observed cell frag - ments of various sizes , resulting from shedding of large blebs , moving with the same shape , speed , and actin dynamics as A2 cells . Taken together , the generality of the A2 / stable bleb migration mode , the strong conservation of its main features ( cell shape , cell speed , acto - myosin distribution , and dynamics ) across a variety of cell types and organisms ranging from amoebae to vertebrates , the generic aspect of the model describing it , and the key feature of spontaneous polarization , make it tempting to speculate that this mode of migration may be an ancestral locomotion mechanism for crawling cells , shared by eukaryotes . 670 Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . A2 Migration Mode Is Related to Cell Transformation An interesting result emerging from the comparison of various cell types ( Figure 4D ) , is that the capacity to display amoeboid motility seems to correlate with the transformed character of the cells assayed . This suggests an increased migration plas - ticity of cancer cells . Importantly , the various migration modes can be observed in a single cell line by slightly varying the conﬁnement level , adhesion , and contractility . As a consequence , some physical characteris - tics of the tumor environment , such as the conﬁnement imposed by the surrounding tissue on the growing tumor , might be enough to trigger a migratory switch toward a faster and more invasive modeofmigration . Suchanincreaseinthemigrationandinvasion capacity of tumor cells has been observed using encapsulated spheroids as a model for tumor growth under conﬁnement ( Alessandri et al . , 2013 ) . This phenomenon could also explain howinhibitionofmatrix - degradingenzymessuchas MMPscould directly promote a switch to amoeboid migration by increasing the conﬁnement of the growing tumor and / or of single migrating cells ( Wolf et al . , 2003 ) . In conclusion , our work demonstrates an unexpected plasticity of migration of transformed mesen - chymal - like cells when they are not in their physiological physical environment , suggesting that tumor cells could spontaneously adopt a large variety of strategies to escape primary tumors and invade tissues , without any speciﬁc genetic alteration . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES In brief ( see Supplemental Information for a detailed description of the methods ) , cellcultureandexperimentswereperformedincompletecellculture media adapted for each particular cell type . Drugs and RNAi treatments were performed following standard procedures . Cell conﬁnement was performed using a home - made device ( Le Berre et al . , 2012 ) consisting of a suction cup made in polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS , RTV615 , GE ) used to press a conﬁning coverslip bearing PDMS micro - spacers on top of the culture substrate platted with cells . Alternatively , a version of the cell conﬁner adapted to multi - well plates was used to perform multiple experiments in parallel . The molds for thePDMSmicro - spacerswerefabricatedfollowingstandardphotolithography procedures . The surface of the conﬁning side was always treated with non - adhesive pLL - PEG ( SuSoS ) , while the cell culture substrate was treated to obtain various degrees of cells adhesion using mixes of pLL - PEG and pLL - PEG - RGD . For automated cell tracking , cell nuclei were stained with Hoechst 33342 . Image acquisition and image analysis were performed on workstations of the PICT - IBiSA Lhomond Imaging facility of Institut Curie . All microscopes used for time - lapse recordings were equipped with an on - stage incubation chamber which maintained the temperature at 37 (cid:2) C and CO 2 concentration at5 % atalltimes . Image analysiswasperformedusing Image JorMetaMorph software ( Universal Imaging ) , or homemade routines under MATLAB ( Math - Works ) . Analysis of cell trajectories was based on standard methods for anal - ysisofpersistentrandomwalks . Tomeasuresinglecellcontractilityindex , cells were plated between two poly - acrylamide gels coated with beads and the cell dimensions as well as the gel deformation were measured by confocal micro - scopy . HeLa VL cells were always used as a reference for gel calibration . Aminimal1Dtheoreticalmodel , basedontheobservations oftheacto - myosin ﬂows analysis , was adapted from Callan - Jones and Voituriez ( 2013 ) and Hawkins et al . ( 2011 ) to predict the mesenchymal to amoeboid transition . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes Extended Experimental Procedures , six ﬁgures , and eight movies and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 01 . 007 . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Y . - J . L . designedandcarriedoutamajorityoftheexperiments , performeddata analysis , made the ﬁgures , and contributed to writing the paper . M . L . - B . car - riedoutexperiments , performedamajorityofthedataanalysis , supervisedthe work , and wrote the paper . F . L . performed some TIRF experiments . P . M . car - ried out some data analysis . M . H . and T . T . performed immunoblotting . A . C . J . and R . V . made the physical model . M . P . designed experiments , supervised the work , and wrote the paper . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS TheauthorsacknowledgetheNikonImagingCentreattheInstitutCurie - CNRS and Vincent Fraisier from the PICT - IBiSA Lhomond Imaging facility of Institut Curie for their help with the microscopy , and Timo Betz for kindly sharing his software for PIV analysis . We thank Ste´phanie Miserey - Lenkei and Nicolas Carpi for their help with western blots . Vivatech and ARC are acknowledged for their ﬁnancial support to Y . - J . L . and M . L . B . , ANR - 09 - PIRI - 0027 and InNaBioSante´ to R . V . and M . P . , and ERC 311205 - PROMICO to M . P . Received : May 2 , 2014 Revised : October 31 , 2014 Accepted : December 31 , 2014 Published : February 12 , 2015 REFERENCES Alessandri , K . , Sarangi , B . R . , Gurchenkov , V . V . , Sinha , B . , Kießling , T . R . , Fetler , L . , Rico , F . , Scheuring , S . , Lamaze , C . , Simon , A . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Cellular capsules as a tool for multicellular spheroid production and for investigating the mechanics of tumor progression in vitro . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 14843 – 14848 . Barnhart , E . L . , Lee , K . - C . , Keren , K . , Mogilner , A . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 2011 ) . An adhesion - dependent switch between mechanisms that determine motile cell shape . PLoS Biol . 9 , e1001059 . Bergert , M . , Chandradoss , S . D . , Desai , R . A . , and Paluch , E . ( 2012 ) . Cell mechanics control rapid transitions between blebs and lamellipodia during migration . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 14434 – 14439 . Callan - Jones , A . C . , and Voituriez , R . ( 2013 ) . Active gelmodel of amoeboid cell motility . New J . Phys . 15 , 025022 . Carragher , N . O . , Walker , S . M . , Scott Carragher , L . A . , Harris , F . , Sawyer , T . K . , Brunton , V . G . , Ozanne , B . W . , and Frame , M . C . ( 2006 ) . Calpain 2 and Src dependence distinguishes mesenchymal and amoeboid modes of tumour cell invasion : a link to integrin function . Oncogene 25 , 5726 – 5740 . DiMilla , P . A . , Stone , J . A . , Quinn , J . A . , Albelda , S . M . , and Lauffenburger , D . A . ( 1993 ) . Maximal migration of human smooth muscle cells on ﬁbronectin and type IV collagen occurs at an intermediate attachment strength . J . Cell Biol . 122 , 729 – 737 . Feng , J . , Ito , M . , Ichikawa , K . , Isaka , N . , Nishikawa , M . , Hartshorne , D . J . , and Nakano , T . ( 1999 ) . Inhibitory phosphorylation site for Rho - associated kinase on smooth muscle myosin phosphatase . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 37385 – 37390 . Friedl , P . , and Wolf , K . ( 2003 ) . Tumour - cell invasion and migration : diversity and escape mechanisms . Nat . Rev . Cancer 3 , 362 – 374 . Giampieri , S . , Manning , C . , Hooper , S . , Jones , L . , Hill , C . S . , and Sahai , E . ( 2009 ) . Localized and reversible TGFbeta signalling switches breast cancer cells from cohesive to single cell motility . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 , 1287 – 1296 . Hawkins , R . J . , Piel , M . , Faure - Andre , G . , Lennon - Dumenil , A . - M . , Joanny , J . F . , Prost , J . , and Voituriez , R . ( 2009 ) . Pushing off the walls : a mechanism of cell motility in conﬁnement . Phys . Rev . Lett . 102 , 058103 . Hawkins , R . J . , Poincloux , R . , Be´nichou , O . , Piel , M . , Chavrier , P . , and Voitur - iez , R . ( 2011 ) . Spontaneous contractility - mediated cortical ﬂow generates cellmigrationinthree - dimensionalenvironments . Biophys . J . 101 , 1041 – 1045 . Heuze´ , M . L . , Vargas , P . , Chabaud , M . , Le Berre , M . , Liu , Y . - J . , Collin , O . , Sol - anes , P . , Voituriez , R . , Piel , M . , andLennon - Dume´nil , A . - M . ( 2013 ) . Migrationof Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 671 dendritic cells : physical principles , molecular mechanisms , and functional implications . Immunol . Rev . 256 , 240 – 254 . Hung , W . - C . , Chen , S . - H . , Paul , C . D . , Stroka , K . M . , Lo , Y . - C . , Yang , J . T . , and Konstantopoulos , K . ( 2013 ) . Distinct signaling mechanisms regulate migration in unconﬁned versus conﬁned spaces . J . Cell Biol . 202 , 807 – 824 . Ishihara , H . , Martin , B . L . , Brautigan , D . L . , Karaki , H . , Ozaki , H . , Kato , Y . , Fuse - tani , N . , Watabe , S . , Hashimoto , K . , Uemura , D . , et al . ( 1989 ) . Calyculin A and okadaic acid : inhibitors of protein phosphatase activity . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 159 , 871 – 877 . La¨mmermann , T . , and Sixt , M . ( 2009 ) . Mechanical modes of ‘amoeboid’ cell migration . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 21 , 636 – 644 . La¨mmermann , T . , Bader , B . L . , Monkley , S . J . , Worbs , T . , Wedlich - So¨ldner , R . , Hirsch , K . , Keller , M . , Fo¨rster , R . , Critchley , D . R . , Fa¨ssler , R . , and Sixt , M . ( 2008 ) . Rapid leukocyte migration by integrin - independent ﬂowing and squeezing . Nature 453 , 51 – 55 . Le Berre , M . , Aubertin , J . , and Piel , M . ( 2012 ) . Fine control of nuclear conﬁne - ment identiﬁes a threshold deformation leading to lamina rupture and induc - tion of speciﬁc genes . Integr . Biol . ( Camb ) 4 , 1406 – 1414 . Lorentzen , A . , Bamber , J . , Sadok , A . , Elson - Schwab , I . , and Marshall , C . J . ( 2011 ) . An ezrin - rich , rigid uropod - like structure directs movement of amoe - boid blebbing cells . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 1256 – 1267 . Malawista , S . E . , de Boisﬂeury Chevance , A . , and Boxer , L . A . ( 2000 ) . Random locomotion and chemotaxis of human blood polymorphonuclear leukocytes from a patient with leukocyte adhesion deﬁciency - 1 : normal displacement in close quarters via chimneying . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 46 , 183 – 189 . Paluch , E . K . , and Raz , E . ( 2013 ) . The role and regulation of blebs in cell migra - tion . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 25 , 582 – 590 . Pankova´ , K . , Ro¨sel , D . , Novotny´ , M . , and Bra´bek , J . ( 2010 ) . The molecular mechanisms of transition between mesenchymal and amoeboid invasiveness in tumor cells . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 67 , 63 – 71 . Petrie , R . J . , Gavara , N . , Chadwick , R . S . , and Yamada , K . M . ( 2012 ) . Nonpolar - ized signaling reveals two distinct modes of 3Dcell migration . J . Cell Biol . 197 , 439 – 455 . Petrie , R . J . , Koo , H . , and Yamada , K . M . ( 2014 ) . Generation of compartmental - ized pressure by a nuclear piston governs cell motility in a 3D matrix . Science 345 , 1062 – 1065 . Poincloux , R . , Collin , O . , Liza´rraga , F . , Romao , M . , Debray , M . , Piel , M . , and Chavrier , P . ( 2011 ) . Contractility of the cell rear drives invasion of breast tumor cells in 3D Matrigel . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 1943 – 1948 . Renkawitz , J . , Schumann , K . , Weber , M . , La¨mmermann , T . , Pﬂicke , H . , Piel , M . , Polleux , J . , Spatz , J . P . , and Sixt , M . ( 2009 ) . Adaptive force transmission in amoeboid cell migration . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 , 1438 – 1443 . Ruprecht , V . , Wieser , S . , Callan - Jones , A . , Smutny , M . , Morita , H . , Sako , K . , Barone , V . , Ritsch - Marte , M . , Sixt , M . , Voituriez , R . , and Heisenberg , C . - P . ( 2015 ) . Cortical contractility triggers a stochastic switch to fast amoeboid cell motility . Cell 160 , this issue , 674 – 686 . Sahai , E . , and Marshall , C . J . ( 2003 ) . Differing modes of tumour cell invasion have distinct requirements for Rho / ROCK signalling and extracellular proteol - ysis . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 711 – 719 . Sanz - Moreno , V . , and Marshall , C . J . ( 2010 ) . The plasticity of cytoskeletal dy - namicsunderlyingneoplasticcellmigration . Curr . Opin . CellBiol . 22 , 690 – 696 . Taddei , M . L . , Giannoni , E . , Comito , G . , and Chiarugi , P . ( 2013 ) . Microenviron - ment and tumor cell plasticity : an easy way out . Cancer Lett . 341 , 80 – 96 . Tozluo (cid:1) glu , M . , Tournier , A . L . , Jenkins , R . P . , Hooper , S . , Bates , P . A . , andSahai , E . ( 2013 ) . Matrix geometry determines optimal cancer cell migration strategy and modulates response to interventions . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 , 751 – 762 . Trache , A . , and Meininger , G . A . ( 2008 ) . Total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy . In Current Protocols in Microbiology , R . Coico , T . Kowalik , J . Quarles , B . Stevenson , and R . Taylor , eds . ( John Wiley & Sons ) . Wilson , C . A . , Tsuchida , M . A . , Allen , G . M . , Barnhart , E . L . , Applegate , K . T . , Yam , P . T . , Ji , L . , Keren , K . , Danuser , G . , andTheriot , J . A . ( 2010 ) . MyosinIIcon - tributes to cell - scale actin network treadmilling through network disassembly . Nature 465 , 373 – 377 . Wilson , K . , Lewalle , A . , Fritzsche , M . , Thorogate , R . , Duke , T . , and Charras , G . ( 2013 ) . Mechanisms of leading edge protrusion in interstitial migration . Nat . Commun . 4 , 2896 . Wolf , K . , Mazo , I . , Leung , H . , Engelke , K . , von Andrian , U . H . , Deryugina , E . I . , Strongin , A . Y . , Bro¨cker , E . - B . , andFriedl , P . ( 2003 ) . Compensationmechanism in tumor cell migration : mesenchymal - amoeboid transition after blocking of pericellular proteolysis . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 267 – 277 . Yoshida , K . , andInouye , K . ( 2001 ) . MyosinII - dependentcylindricalprotrusions induced by quinine in Dictyostelium : antagonizing effects of actin polymeriza - tion at the leading edge . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 2155 – 2165 . 672 Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . Supplemental Information EXTENDED EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Reagents pLL ( 20 ) - g [ 3 . 5 ] - PEG ( 2 ) ( pLL - PEG ) and pLL ( 20 ) - g [ 3 . 5 ] - PEG ( 2 ) / PEG ( 3 . 4 ) - RGD ( pLL - PEG - RGD ) are from SuSoS . Hoechst 33342 , jas - plakinolide , blebbistatin , and calyculin A were purchased from Sigma - Aldrich , Y27632 from Calbiochem . Alex Fluo 488 and Alex Fluo 594 were purchased from Invitrogen . All other reagents were purchased from Sigma - Aldrich unless otherwise speciﬁed . Cell Culture , Staining , and Sample Preparation Normal Human Dermal Fibroblasts ( NHDF ) cells from human abdominal skin ( Biopredic ) and RPE1 ( Human , Retinal Pigment Epithe - lial ) cells expressing LifeAct - mCherry were cultured in DMEM / F - 12 medium ( GIBCO ) supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum ( FCS ; biowest ) , 2 mM glutamine ( GIBCO ) . Normal Human Epidermal Keratinocytes ( NHEK ) were cultured in EpiLife medium ( GIBCO ) com - plemented with HKGS Keratinocyte supplement ( GIBCO ) . MCF10A cells ( Human breast , epithelial ) were cultured in DMEM / F12 with 5 % Horse serum , 20 ng / mL EGF , 0 . 5 mg / mL Hydrocortisone , 100 ng / mL Cholera Toxin and 10 m g / mL insulin . HeLa VL ( Human , cer - vix ) expressing Vinculin - GFP and LifeAct - mCherry ( Riedl et al . , 2008 ) , HeLa Kyoto expressing MYH9 - GFP ( kindly provided by Ina Poser ( Poser et al . , 2008 ) ) , HeLa F cells ( fast moving HeLa subclone , kindly provided by Franck Perez ) , MEF ( Mouse Embryonic Fi - broblasts ) , MDA - MB231 ( Human breast adenocarcinoma , epithelial ) and HT29 ( Human colon adenocarcinoma , kindly provided by Danijela Vignjevic ) , A375P and A375M2 ( Human melanoma , kindly provided by Erik Sahai ) , HT1080 ( Human ﬁbrosarcoma ) , MDCK ( Dog , kidney , epithelial ) , C2C12 ( Mouse myoblast ) and HEK293 ( Human , embryonic kidney , transformed by adenovirus ) , were all cultured in DMEM / Glutamax ( GIBCO ) supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum ( FCS ; Biowest ) supplemented with antibiotics ( peni - cillin and streptomycin , PeSt ; GIBCO ) at 37 (cid:1) C in a humidiﬁed atmosphere containing 5 % CO 2 . All cells were cultivated with antibiotics ( 1 % penicillin and streptomycin mix ( PeSt ; GIBCO ) and cells expressing a plasmid were selected with G418 ( 0 . 5 mg / mL ) or puromy - cin ( 0 . 33 m g / mL ) ( Calbiochem ) . All cells were dissociated Trypsin - EDTA ( GIBCO ) or Tryspin express ( GIBCO ) . For typical mesenchymal NHDF migration behavior studies , NHDF cells were seeded at a density of 4 3 10 3 cells / cm 2 on 35 mm petri dishes with various percentages of pLL - PEG - RGD - functionalized bottom surfaces . Cells were allowed to attach overnight . To alter the density of the RGD peptides on a particular substrate , we altered the ratio of pLL - PEG - RGD to pLL - PEG in the solutions we applied to it , while maintaining the total concentration of both solutes constant ( 500 m g / mL in HEPES buffer , pH 7 . 4 ) . We checked the relative adsorption of these two molecules on the surface by ratiometric quantiﬁcation of Alex 488 - labeled pLL - PEG - RGD and Alex 594 - labeled pLL - PEG and found that the concentration of pLL - PEG - RGD on the surface correlated almost linearly with its concen - tration in the solution ( Figure S1C ) . Before experiments were carried out , non - attached cells and ﬂoating cells were removed by extensive washing with 1 3 PBS and attached cells nuclei were stained in DMEM / F - 12 cell culture medium containing 40 ng / mL Hoechst 33342 for 1 hr at 37 (cid:1) C . Cells were squeezed with the one - well cell conﬁner for NHDF with non - adhesive micro - structured slides bearing spacers of thicknesses ranging from 2 . 8 m m to 15 m m ( Figure S1A ) . For other experiments , all cell lines were either seeded at a high density ( 5 3 10 5 cells / well ) in multi - well plate with a glass bottom ( MatTek ) treated with pLL - PEG or seeded at a low density ( 4 3 10 3 cells / cm 2 ) on a surface treated with 25 m g / mL ﬁbronectin and squeezed with the multi - well plate cell conﬁner ( Figure S1B ) . Fabrication of the Cell Conﬁner Two cell conﬁners , one - well and multiple - well conﬁners , used in this work were developed in our lab ( Le Berre et al . , 2012 ) ( the method is described in detail in Le Berre et al . [ 2014 ] ) . The one - well cell conﬁner was composed of a suction cup and a structured conﬁning glass slide , and can be used on a standard 35 mm petri dish compatible with high resolution microscopy ( Figure S1A ) . Brieﬂy , a suction cup was made in a polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS , RTV615 , GE ) mixture ( 10 / 1 w / w PDMS A / crosslinker B ) in a custom - made mold and baked on an 80 (cid:1) C hot plate for 1h before unmolding . The conﬁning structure on the glass slide was made in PDMS from molds fabricated by standard photolithography . Brieﬂy , an SU8 2005 photoresist ( Microchem ) was used to fabri - cate the mold on a silicon wafer with a regular holes array ( diameter : 440 m m , 1 mm spacing ) , following the manufacturer’s protocol . The mold was treated with trimethylchlorosilane ( TMCS ) for 3 min by evaporation . Afterward , a drop of PDMS mixture ( 8 / 1 w / w PDMS A / crosslinker B ) was poured into the SU8 mold . Then , a 10 mm standard microscope coverslip , freshly activated for 2 min in a plasma chamber ( Harrick Plasma , Ithaca , NY , USA ) , was pressed on a PDMS drop to get a residual PDMS layer of minimal thickness . After baking at 95 (cid:1) C on a hot plate for 15 min , excess PDMS was removed . To peel off the glass slide with PDMS pillars , a drop of isopropanol was poured on the slide . Finally , the slide was gently raised by inserting a razor blade between the slide and the mold , allowing the conﬁning glass slides bound to the PDMS structures to be lifted away . A multi - well plate conﬁner was designed to conﬁne cells under various conditions in parallel ( Figure S1B ) . The modiﬁed cover lid of a multi - well plate was used to apply conﬁning slides to cells . In this case , large PDMS pillars were stuck on the cover lid of the multi - well plate to hold conﬁning slides . When the lid was closed , the pillars pushed the conﬁning slides onto the culture substrate and conﬁned the cells . Multiple wells can be processed simultaneously and a larger surface of conﬁning slides can be used . The process of fabrication and handling is as follows : ﬁrst , large PDMS pillars were fabricated by pouring a PDMS mixture ( A : B = 35 : 1 ) into a custom - made mold , removing bubbles under vacuum , baking overnight at 80 (cid:1) C , and getting the pillars out of the mold with the help of small amount of isopropanol . Due to the low ratio of component B in the PDMS mixture , the pillars were soft and sticky after unmolding and cleaning . Second , gel - ﬁlm sheets ( 100 m m thickness , Gel - Pak ) were positioned on the cover lid , and the large PDMS pillars were bound to the gel - ﬁlm sheet so they were Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . S1 positioned on top of the center of each well . Before squeezing the cells , the multi - well lid modiﬁed with large PDMS pillars was ster - ilized with 70 % ethanol ; conﬁning slides were coated with 0 . 5 mg / mL pLL - PEG for 1h in 10 mM pH 7 . 4 HEPES buffer , and then incu - bated in cell culture medium to equilibrate the PDMS . Labeling of pLL - PEG and pLL - PEG - RGD 1 mg of pLL - PEG or pLL - PEG - RGD was dissolved in 100 mM pH 8 . 5 NaHCO 3 buffer . 50 m l 1 mg / mL Alex - 594 and Alex - 488 were added in pLL - PEG and pLL - PEG - RGD solution respectively and reacted for 2h at room temperature under agitation . Solutions were then dialyzed for 48 hr at 4 (cid:1) C against 1 3 PBS to remove unreacted Alex - 594 or Alex - 488 ( Slide - A - Lyzer MWCO 3500 , Pierce ) . Drug and siRNA Treatment HeLa VL cells expressing Vinculin - GFP and LifeAct - mCherry were incubated with 10 - 100 nM calyculin A for 1 hr in cell culture me - dium before image acquisition , or treated with 30 m M Y27632 or 30 nM - 1 m M jasplakinolide all the time during image acquisition . For blebbistatin experiments ( Figure 6G ) , cells were recorded 10 min after 5 hr conﬁnement , then medium around the pillars was replaced 3 time consecutively with medium containing 150 m M blebbistatin . A high dose of blebbistatin was used since PDMS absorb the drug . For the RNAi experiments , cells were transfected with RNAiMAX ( Life Technologies ) using standard concentrations provided by the manufacturer for transfection mixes made in Optimem medium ( GIBCO ) . 40000 cells suspended in 250 m l of antibiotic - free medium were then mixed with 80 m l of transfection mix and seeded in a 12 - well plate coated with ﬁbronectin ( 25 m g / mL in PBS ) . After 48h incubation , cells were re - suspended in their standard medium and processed for the experiment . RNAi sequences were GGAAAUAACAGGGACCUUA for TLN1 , GGCCACAAUUGAAUGCAUA for TLN2 , according to Lancaster et al . ( 2013 ) and CGGAUUCCAUUUCUAGAUA for MYPT1 . Other MYPT1 siRNAs were Ref HSS181423 from Invitrogen ( # 2 ) and Ref D - 011340 from Dharmacon ( # 3 ) . To control for MYPT1 siRNA efﬁciency ( Figure S5E ) , cell extracts were prepared 48 hr after trans - fection with control siRNAs and MYPT1 . TLN [ 8D4 ] antibody ( ab11188 from Abcam ) , MYPT1 antibody ( sc - 25618 from Santa Cruz Biotech ) and GAPDH ( ab105428 from Abcam ) were used for detection on the western blot . For Phospho - MLC quantiﬁcation , cell were lysed at 4 (cid:1) C with a lysis buffer complemented with 2 % phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 ( P5726 , Sigma ) , then Myosin Light Chain 2 rabbit polyclonal Antibody ( Cell signaling # 3672 ) was used for total MLC staining and Myosin phospho S19 / phospho S20 rabbit polyclonal Antibody ( Rockland # 600 - 401 - 416 ) for Phospho - MLC staining . Cell Migration under 2D Conﬁnement on Controlled Adhesive Surface Height of cells was measured by ﬂuorescence microscopy after staining the cells with DiOC5 . For one - well cell conﬁner , 35 mm petri dishes were activated in a plasma chamber ( Harrick Plasma , Ithaca , NY , USA ) for 1 min under a weak ﬂow of clean dry air . Then , for preparation of the various densities of RGD - coated surfaces , the dishes were immedi - ately coated with different percentages of pLL - PEG - RGD for 1 hr at room temperature , followed by three washing steps with 1 3 PBS . 4 3 10 4 NHDF cells were seeded into petri dishes that had been coated with different percentages of pLL - PEG - RGD , and cultured overnight . Before being conﬁned , cells were stained with 40 ng / mL Hoechst 33342 in cell culture medium for 1 hr at 37 (cid:1) C and then washed with regular culture medium . The side of the 10 mm conﬁning glass slides bearing the PDMS pillars structures was cleaned with isopropanol , well - dried , treated with plasma for 1 min , and modiﬁed with 0 . 5 mg / mL pLL - PEG in 10 mM pH 7 . 4 HEPES buffer for 1h at room temperature . After washing three times with 1 3 PBS , these conﬁning slides were incubated in cell cul - ture medium plus 200 ng / mL Hoechst 33342 for 1h at 37 (cid:1) C . Before the cells were conﬁned , the petri dish was placed on the micro - scope . The suction cup device was carefully cleaned with 70 % ethanol , dried and plugged to a precise vacuum generator ( VG 1006 , Elveﬂow ) to control its internal pressure . The non - structured side of the PEG - coated conﬁning slides were cleaned and dried , and then stuck on the piston part of the suction cup . The device was carefully put over the cell culture substrate and a 3 kPa negative pressure was applied to maintain it over the cell culture substrate without conﬁning cells ( with such a pressure , the slide is maintained at 100 m m above the cells ) . To conﬁne cells , the pressure was slowly decreased to 10 kPa negative pressure to obtain the desired spacing between the slide and the cell culture substrate . For control experiments on NHDF cells , time - lapse images were recorded without conﬁnement under the same conditions . For the multiple - well cell conﬁner , the lid was placed on the multi - well plate and maintained with adhesive tape ( Scotch Magic Tape , 3M ) , while force was applied to the lid . During this step , it is important not to move the lid laterally , to avoid damaging the cells . Cell migration was tracked and recorded by regular transmitted light , epiﬂuorescence , or TIRF time - lapse microscopy . Contractility Index Measurement Method Thin layers of 1 kPa polyacrylamide ( PA ) gels were prepared on the bottom of a 35 mm thin glass bottom petri dish and on a 18 mm diameter coverslip . For gel fabrication , glass was ﬁrst treated with pure 3 - aminopropyltrimethoxysilane for 5 min , then 30 min with 400 m l of 0 . 5 % glutaraldhehyde in PBS . To obtain gel of 1kPa , a premix containing 2 m l of 200 nm blue ﬂuorescent beads ( FluoSpheres , F8805 , Invitrogen ) , 18 . 8 m l of 40 % acrylamide solution ( 161 - 0140 , Biorad ) , 12 . 5 m l of 2 % bis - acrylamide solution ( 161 - 0142 , Biorad ) in 250 m l PBS . Then , 2 . 5 m l of ammonium persulfate ( APS , Sigma , 10 % in water ) and 0 . 5 m l of tetramethylethyle - nediamine ( TMED , Sigma ) was added to the premix before a 9 m l drop of the mix was spread on the treated glass under a coverslip . After 40 min polymerization , the coverslip was removed in PBS , extensively rinsed and incubated overnight in PBS . Before experi - ment , the gel made on the coverslip was put on a 14 mm diameter , 2 cm high PDMS pad which was intended to apply a slight S2 Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . pressure on the coverslip with its own weight . Then , both gels were incubated 30 min in medium ( with a drug if used ) before cells were seeded in the petri dish at a concentration of 2 . 10 6 cells / mL . After the bottom gel in the petri dish was placed on the microscope stage , the PDMS pad holding the top gel was put on the cells seeded on the bottom gel , conﬁning cells between the two gels ( Fig - ure S5H ) . After 1h of adaptation , the height of cells was measured with beads by measuring the distance between gels with focus and diameter of cells were measure on phase contrast image ( Figure S5I ) . Contractility index was deﬁned as h / d . Importantly , as different gels might slightly differ in stiffness , each set of conﬁning gels was calibrated using a particular cell line ( HeLa VL ) , then rinsed and used to measure other cell types . s . d . between experiments performed with a same set of gels was below 5 % . Live - Cell Imaging Time - lapse recordings were acquired with 10 3 , 20 3 or 40 3 objectives using either an Eclipse Ti inverted microscope ( Nikon ) equip - ped with a Coolsnap HQ2 camera ( Roper Scientiﬁc ) controlled by MetaMorph software ( Universal Imaging ) or an Axio observer in - verted microscope ( Zeiss ) equipped with a Coolsnap HQ2 camera ( Roper Scientiﬁc ) controlled by Axio vision software ( Zeiss ) . Total internal Reﬂection ( TIRF ) microscopy was performed with an Eclipse Ti inverted microscope ( Nikon ) , a Roper laser bench ( laser 491 nm and 561 nm ) , and a Quantem 512 SC camera mounted on a dual view ( Photometrics ) controlled by MetaMorph software ( Universal Imaging ) . All microscopes were equipped with an on - stage incubation chamber which maintained the temperature at 37 (cid:1) C and CO 2 concentration at 5 % at all times . Image analysis was performed using Image J or MetaMorph software ( Universal Imaging ) , or homemade routines under Matlab ( Mathworks ) . Analysis of Cell Trajectories All trajectories were extracted and related parameters analyzed with a bespoke Matlab script ( MathWorks , USA ) . First , cell paths were automatically tracked from ﬂuorescence images of the Hoechst staining ( cell nuclei , see Figures S2A and S2B ) . Images were segmented using a watershed method and coordinates of nuclei were deﬁned as the center of mass of the detected nuclei sur - faces . Then , cell paths were tracked from one image to another using an optimization algorithm that selected the best links between images according to a set of parameters , such as the proximity and the morphological similarity of the detected nuclei ( Figure S2C ) . Tracks having a duration of less than 50 data points ( which corresponds to 2 . 5 hr . of migration ) were eliminated from the ﬁnal ana - lyses . For analyses of speciﬁc phenotypes , recordings of each tracked cell were extracted and cell tracks were clustered manually by visual inspection of cell morphology before further analysis . We calculated the mean Mean Square Displacement < MSD > using the overlapping intervals method ( average for all cells of the average of all pairs of time points in the tracks ( Dickinson and Tranquillo , 1993 ) ( Figure S2E ) . In all conditions , MSD was visually similar to what is expected for a Persistent Random Walk ( PRW ) , i . e . , persistent at short time ( < MSD > (cid:3) t 2 ) and random walker at longer time ( < MSD > (cid:3) t ) as expected for ﬁbroblasts according to the literature ( Gail and Boone , 1970 ) . It was therefore analyzed using the Furth formula for persistent random walks ( Stokes et al . , 1991 ) . However , at very short times ( i . e . , at high frequencies ) , the cell nuclei did not have a continuous motion ( persistent walk ) as ex - pected for a normal PRW , but jiggled randomly ( Figure S2D ) . This phenomenon was especially visible under non - conﬁned conditions and was not linked to a movement of the whole cell but rather to shape changes . We interpreted these motions as being the result of nucleus movements within the cell because they were linked to the movement of cytoskeletal structures . Because these movements biased the calculation of the instantaneous speed of the cell and made it difﬁcult to ﬁt MSD with a PRW model , we chose to ﬁlter them with a low pass ﬁlter . When considering the power spectral density of the track , we observed that nuclei moved following a white noise dominating the signal at frequencies higher than 0 . 05 min - 1 ( Figure S2D , inset ) . To remove this noise , we ﬁltered tracks with a bilinear low pass ﬁlter having a cutoff frequency of 0 . 05 min - 1 ( zero shift FIR ﬁlter having Gaussian impulse response with a width at mid - height of 15 min ) , which removed the high - frequency noise , but did not change the path shape at the timescale of the persis - tence time ( red line in Figure S2D ) . After ﬁltering , a PRW model ( Furth Model ) ( Stokes et al . , 1991 ; Selmeczi et al . , 2005 ) was ﬁtted on the new mean MSD ( t ) data with the following equation : MSD ( t ) = 2 . S . P ( t - P ( 1 - e - t / P ) ) , where S is the instantaneous speed ( which is ﬁxed here as the mean of the mean instantaneous speed of cells calculated between two time points ) , t is the time and P is the persistence , which is here the ﬁtted parameter ( Figure S2E ) . For more robustness on the persistence time calculation , we resampled the MSD ( t ) regularly ( 100 points ) along a log - log scale to give similar weight to all timescales . We chose to ﬁt only the persistence and not the instantaneous speed , which , we assumed , could not be the cause of discrepancies between the data and the model . In addition , we chose a least absolute residual robust ﬁt ( LAR ) weighted by the number of tracks accounted in the mean MSD ( t ) for each t . This allowed us to compensate for the error induced by the lower number of long tracks in the calculus of the mean MSD for large t . The diffusion coefﬁcient D was calcu - lated afterward with the relation D = S 2 P / 2 , according to the Furth Model ( Stokes et al . , 1991 ) . Analysis of Retrograde Flows and Density Proﬁles All kymographs were produced with a custom ImageJ macro and eventually cleaned for horizontal and vertical artifactual stripes us - ing ImageJ Fourier transform tools . 2D Particle Image Velocimetry ( PIV ) analysis in Figure 6B was performed as previously described ( Betz et al . , 2009 ) . Retrograde ﬂow distributions shown on Figure 6C have been calculated using registered timelapse recordings of TIRF images of a representative cell with a custom Matlab script . This script allowed us to accumulate the distribution of speed measured by a sub - pixel resolution Particle Image Velocimetry ( PIV ) algorithm along one dimension for all positions and frames of Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . S3 a recording . Velocity proﬁles shown on Figure 6C correspond to the histogram maxima . Density maps of actin and myosin shown in Figure 6D are cumulated ﬂuorescence intensities of TIRF imaging over all frames of a registered video . Density proﬁles shown on the graph correspond to the proﬁle at the central axis of the cell . The polymerization rate is given by the relation : p = div ( r v ) where r is the actin density and v is the retrograde ﬂow speed ( Wilson et al . , 2010 ) . Statistical Analysis All errors indicated in the text are SEM for quantitative values or error margin for percentages . Non parametric , two tailed , Mann - Whit - ney t test was performed to determine whether the difference between two groups was signiﬁcantly different in their mean value , or c 2 test in their portion ( using GraphPad Prism or Microsoft excel software ) . Linear regressions and relative conﬁdences were calculated with the Curve ﬁtting toolbox of Matlab ( MathWorks ) . Physical Modeling Cellular Dewetting Transition We suggest that the transition from a spread , adherent phenotype to a round shape one at low adhesion and high contractility can be qualitatively understood by analogy with dewetting of liquid droplets on ﬂat surfaces . With notations of Figure 7A , Young’s equation , which expresses the force balance of the contact line , can be written : g x = g 1 ð z Þ + g 2 ð z Þ cos q : Here g x denotes the adhesion strength ( in units of energy per unit area ) . Importantly , the cortical tension g 1 ( z ) in the adherent part of the cortex and the cortical tension g 2 ( z ) in the upper non - adherent part of the cortex increase with contractility z . As a result , the con - tact angle can be written : cos q = g x (cid:4) g 1 ð z Þ g 2 ð z Þ At the spread - to - round transition , the contact angle is such that cos q = (cid:4) 1 , which can be realized for small enough g x ( and therefore small friction x ) and large enough contractility z . This qualitatively accounts for the observed transition from phenotype E to B in Fig - ure 7A . Assuming a linear dependence g i ( z ) = a i + b i z , and g x = ax , the dewetting line in the plane ( z , x ) can be written ax = a 1 (cid:4) a 2 + z ð b 1 (cid:4) b 2 Þ ; which is the equation used in the phase diagram of Figure 7C . Minimal Model of Mesenchymal - to - Amoeboid Transition A minimal 1D theoretical model can be adapted from ( Callan - Jones and Voituriez , 2013 ; Hawkins et al . , 2011 ) to predict the mesen - chymal to amoeboid transition ( see also Ruprecht et al . , [ 2015 ] in this issue of Cell for more details on the model ) . The model treats the actin cortex as an active gel of density r ( x ) and linear extension L , which undergoes turnover : the depolymerization rate is denoted k d and the polymerization rate r 0 k d ( here r 0 can be interpreted as the density of a homogeneous cortex at steady state ) . Mass conser - vation can then be written v t r + v x ð r v Þ = (cid:4) k d ð r (cid:4) r 0 Þ ; where v denotes the velocity of cortical ﬂow in a ﬁxed reference frame ( the reference state is here an immobile cell ) . Force balance can be written v x ð s a (cid:4) P Þ = x v where the active stress s a = z r 2 / 2 accounts for actomyosin contractility ( z > 0 is here a phenomenological parameter modeling contractility ) , x is the friction coefﬁcient that is controlled by adhesion strength , and P = ( b / 3 ) r 3 (cid:4) g v x 2 r , where b > 0 , g > 0 is the osmotic pressure . This deﬁnes the dynamics of the problem . Looking for solutions of the form r ( x , t ) (cid:4) r 0 (cid:3) e l n t cos ( n p x / L ) , the line - arized dynamics yields the dispersion relation l n = (cid:4) k d + 1 x (cid:1) n p L (cid:3) 2 (cid:4) zr 20 (cid:4) br 3 (cid:4) (cid:1) n p L (cid:3) 2 g (cid:5) : S4 Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . This equation reveals that the balance of contractility and friction drives the linear instability of the gel , which is obtained when l n > 0 ; the mixing effect of ﬁlament depolymerization suppresses long wavelength modes , and the smoothing term proportional to g cuts off short wavelength modes . At sufﬁciently high contractility z , l 1 > 0 and an initially homogenous static cortex becomes unstable toward a polarized state with increased actin density at the rear and long - lived actin retrograde ﬂows sustained by contractility and turnover , as depicted in Figure 6H . As a result of friction between cortex and the conﬁning surfaces ( mediated by transmembrane proteins ) momentum is transferred and cell motility induced . The condition l 1 > 0 deﬁnes the region of amoeboid auto - polarized mode A2 in the phase diagram of Figure 7C . SUPPLEMENTAL REFERENCES Betz , T . , Koch , D . , Lim , D . , andKa¨s , J . A . ( 2009 ) . Stochasticactinpolymerizationandsteadyretrogradeﬂowdeterminegrowthconeadvancement . Biophys . J . 96 , 5130 – 5138 . Dickinson , R . B . , and Tranquillo , R . T . ( 1993 ) . Optimal estimation of cell movement indices from the statistical analysis of cell tracking data . AIChE J . 39 , 1995 – 2010 . Gail , M . H . , and Boone , C . W . ( 1970 ) . The locomotion of mouse ﬁbroblasts in tissue culture . Biophys . J . 10 , 980 – 993 . Lancaster , O . M . , LeBerre , M . , Dimitracopoulos , A . , Bonazzi , D . , Zlotek - Zlotkiewicz , E . , Picone , R . , Duke , T . , Piel , M . , andBaum , B . ( 2013 ) . Mitoticroundingalters cell geometry to ensure efﬁcient bipolar spindle formation . Dev . Cell 25 , 270 – 283 . LeBerre , M . , Zlotek - Zlotkiewicz , E . , Bonazzi , D . , Lautenschlaeger , F . , andPiel , M . ( 2014 ) . Methodsfortwo - dimensionalcellconﬁnement . MethodsCellBiol . 121 , 213 – 229 . Poser , I . , Sarov , M . , Hutchins , J . R . A . , He´riche´ , J . - K . , Toyoda , Y . , Pozniakovsky , A . , Weigl , D . , Nitzsche , A . , Hegemann , B . , Bird , A . W . , et al . ( 2008 ) . BAC Trans - geneOmics : a high - throughput method for exploration of protein function in mammals . Nat . Methods 5 , 409 – 415 . Riedl , J . , Crevenna , A . H . , Kessenbrock , K . , Yu , J . H . , Neukirchen , D . , Bista , M . , Bradke , F . , Jenne , D . , Holak , T . A . , Werb , Z . , etal . ( 2008 ) . Lifeact : aversatilemarker to visualize F - actin . Nat . Methods 5 , 605 – 607 . Selmeczi , D . , Mosler , S . , Hagedorn , P . H . , Larsen , N . B . , andFlyvbjerg , H . ( 2005 ) . Cellmotilityaspersistentrandommotion : theoriesfromexperiments . Biophys . J . 89 , 912 – 931 . Stokes , C . L . , Lauffenburger , D . A . , andWilliams , S . K . ( 1991 ) . Migrationofindividualmicrovesselendothelialcells : stochasticmodelandparametermeasurement . J . Cell Sci . 99 , 419 – 430 . Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . S5 0 20 40 60 80 100 PLL - PEG PLL - PEG - RGD 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 Confinementslide 6 - well plate Modified lid PDMSpillar Glass Cell PEG coated surface Glassbottom PDMS A B C Culture substrate Medium PDMSpiston Cells Rigid slide ( flatness ) Pillars ( control heigth ) Vacuum PDMS Polystyrene or glass substrate PDMSpiston PLL - PEG - RGD ( % ) F . I . ( a . u . ) Figure S1 . Set - Up of the Devices , Related to Figure 1 ( A ) Schematic of the cell conﬁnement apparatus ( modiﬁed from Le Berre et al . , 2012 ) . ( B ) Schematic of the modiﬁed 6 - well plate for cell conﬁnement ( modiﬁed from Le Berre et al . , 2014 ) . ( C ) Characterization of pLL - PEG - RGD - Alex - 488 density adsorbed on the surface by ﬂuorescence as a function of the percentage of pLL - PEG - RGD - Alex - 488 in both pLL - PEG - Alex - 594 and pLL - PEG - RGD - Alex - 488 solution used for coating . Fluorescence intensity was quantiﬁed by integrating the signal over a ﬁeld of view of a microscope equipped with the quantitative cooled CCD camera coolsnap HQ ( Photometrics ) . S6 Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 0 2 4 10 - 4 10 - 2 10 0 N o r m a li z ed PS D Frequency ( mHz ) OriginalFiltered M S D ( µ m ² ) C e ll nu m b e r ( n ) B a lli s t i c D i ff u s i v e x y MeasureMean nModel fit 10 0 10 1 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5 10 6 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5 10 6 10 2 10 3 Time ( min ) < D > = 2 . 7 µm² / min A D E B C Figure S2 . Cell Trajectories Analysis , Related to Figure 2 and Movie S1 ( A ) Typical phase contrast image extracted from a time - lapse recording of NHDF cells . ( B ) Corresponding ﬂuorescence image of the nuclei stained with HOECHST . ( C ) Migration trajectories overlaid on the image of nuclei at time 0 . ( D ) Typicalnonﬁltered ( blue ) andﬁltered ( red ) trajectoryofacellnucleus . Greencrosscorrespondstotheinitialpositionandredcircletotheﬁnalone . Insertshows the normalized power spectral density ( PSD ) of cell trajectories of the full experiment before and after ﬁltering . Arrows are 20 m m . ( E ) Meansquare displacement ( MSD ) ofindividualcells calculated withtheoverlapping intervalsmethod ( blue ) , mean for allcells ( red ) , ﬁtted withthe Furth model ( yellow ) and corresponding number of tracks used for the calculation of the mean ( gray ) . Black lines are visual guides showing the slope of the limit cases of ballistic and diffusive modes of migration . ( A - D ) corresponds to a non - conﬁned case on a 100 % pLL - PEG - RGD surface and ( E ) to a non - conﬁned case on 15 % pLL - PEG - RGD surface . All scale bars are 100 m m . Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . S7 P e r s i s t e n ce t i m e ( m i n ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 20 40 60 80 100 PLL - PEG - RGD ( % ) A B CBA C AB E 3 µm 5 µm Figure S3 . NHDF under Conﬁnement , Related to Figure 3 ( A ) NHDF cell morphology when plated on 100 % pLL - PEG - RGD and conﬁned with a 3 m m gap . Scale bar is 50 m m . ( B ) Persistence time measured on cell trajectories analyzed in Figure 3E . Note on blebbing under conﬁnement : 57 . 8 % ± 4 . 3 % of cells blebbing at 0 % RGD 5 m m conﬁnement and 27 % ± 3 . 7 % of cells blebbing at 75 % RGD 3 m m conﬁnement , whereas no cell showed blebs without conﬁnement or with weak conﬁnement ( 5 m m ) and strong adhesion . S8 Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . A B C D HeLa VL HeLa kyoto MCF10A + TGFbeta HT29 HT1080 HL60 Jurkat DC Monocyte A375P A375M2 MDCK + TGFbeta C2C12 HeLa F HEK HeLa MYH9 A 2 A 1 10 1 10 2 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5 10 6 10 7 Time ( min ) M S D ( µ m ² ) 10 −1 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 D i ff u s i on c oe ff i c i en t ( µ m ² / m i n ) 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 I n s t an t aneou s s peed ( µ m / m i n ) 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 P e r s i s t en c e t i m e ( m i n ) M M A2 fits A2 M A2 M A2 HT1080 NHDF RPE1 MDA - MB231 MEF C2C12 HeLa F HEK Figure S4 . Phenotypes for Different Cell Lines under 3 m m Conﬁnement , Related to Figure 4 ( A – C ) Phase contrast image showing representative cells of the A2 phenotype ( A ) , A2 - like phenotype of immune cells ( B ) and A1 phenotype ( C ) , for the different cell types tested . For all images , conﬁnement is 3 m m and surfaces are treated with PEG . Bars are 50 m m . Red arrows indicate the back of cells of interest . ( D ) Comparison of migration parameters for HeLa VL in their mesenchymal migration mode ( M ) on a ﬁbronectin - coated surface and in A2 amoeboid mode when conﬁned at 3 m m height on aPEG - coated surface . From left toright : Mean Square Displacement ( MSD ) and Furth model ﬁts ; Diffusion coefﬁcient , Instantaneous speed and Persistence . Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . S9 Ctrl . ( NTC ) Mypt1 siRNA C E F A B D 0 5 10 15 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 Time ( h ) S w i t c h i ng r a t i o ( % ) ControlMypt1 siRNA C t r l . ( N T C ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 R e l a t i v e b l eb s u r f a c e ( % ) * * * TLN siRNA Mypt1 siRNA # 1 + confinement ( 3 µm ) Ctrl . FN ( NTC ) Ctrl . FN + 4B4 Ab LifeAct - mCherry MYPT1 MLC Ab . Ponceau Phospho . MLC Ab . Ponceau GAPDH C on t r o l ( N T C ) C on t r o l ( N T C ) C on t r o l ( N T C ) M YP T 1 s i RN A 1 M YP T 1 s i RN A 2 M YP T 1 s i RN A 3 Talin 1 + 2 T L N 1 + 2 s i RN A G I H 1 kPa Gel 0 . 2 µm fluorescentbeads h d Phase Fluo M YP T 1 s i 1 MYPT1 ß - Tubulin ß - Tubulin kDa 2025 2025 C t r l . # 1 C t r l . # 2 + Y 27 + Y 27 + M L7 + C a l . A 0 1 2 3 NormalizedMLC phospho . MLC Total PDMSPad Petri dish Cells Gel Medium LifeAct - mCherry Vinculin - GFP F i b r on ec t i n P LL - P E G , Figure S5 . Control Data for siRNA Treatments , Related to Figure 5 ( A ) TIRF microscopy images of HeLa VL cells expressing both LifeAct - mCherry and vinculin - GFP ( left , right ) , under two conditions : on ﬁbronectin - coated ad - hesive surface without conﬁnement ( top ) and after 5h under mild conﬁnement ( 5 m m ) pushing the cell against a non - adhesive PEG surface ( bottom ) . Scale bar is 10 m m . ( B ) Characteristic images of cells conﬁned on an adhesive surface ( ﬁbronectin coated ) treated with a non - targeting control ( NTC ) siRNA , with a siRNA targeting TLN1 and TLN2 ( top panel ) , without treatment or with 4B4 antibody against b 1 integrins ( bottom panel ) . As expected , cells detached from the surface when they were not conﬁned , indicating that the siRNA was effective in preventing the formation of focal adhesions . Scale bar is 50 m m . ( C ) MYPT1siRNAtreated cells ( bottomleft image ) exhibitedmoreblebbing activity thancells treatedwithanNTCsiRNA ( upper leftimage ) . Rightgraph : measure of the surface of blebs ( dashed red area on the scheme ) relative to the total surface ( green on the scheme ) ( n = 17 cells for each condition ) . Scale bar is 20 m m . ( D ) Characteristic images of cells conﬁned on a non - adhesive surface ( pLL - PEG ) treated with a siRNA targeting MYPT1 . Scale bar is 50 m m . ( E ) Ratio of cells having switched toward an A2 mode of migration before a certain time . ( F ) Western blot control of TLN and MYPT1 siRNAs 48 hr after treatment . ( G ) QuantiﬁcationofPhosphorylatedMLCratio ( bottom ) . TheratioiscalculatedbydividingthenormalizedamountofphosphorylatedMLC ( Phospho . MLCAb ) by the normalized amount of total MLC ( MLC Ab . ) . Quantiﬁcations are normalized by the total amount of protein in the lane measured with a Ponceau S staining ( Ponceau Images are compressed vertically for the sake of visibility ) . ( H and I ) Schematic of the contractility index measurement method . Cells were conﬁned between two thin polyacrylamide gels of 1kPa stiffness containing 200 nm ﬂuorescent beads on their surface . The bottom gel was polymerized on a 35 mm thin glass bottom petri dish and the top gel was pressed on the ﬁrst gel withaPDMSweight . ( H ) Theheighthofthecelliscalculatedmeasuringthedistancebetweenplaneswherebeadsonthetopandunderthebottomofthecellsare in focus ( Fluo images on the ﬁgure ) . The diameter d of the cell is measured on the phase image . ( I ) The contractility index , deﬁned as h / d , corresponded to the ability of the cell to resist the gel pressure . Scale bar is 20 m m . S10 Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . E Cell speed ( µm / min ) R F s peed ( µ m / m i n ) 0 2 4 6 10 15 20 25 B D F A C 0 200 400 600 −0 . 2 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 Time ( min ) S peed ( µ m / m i n ) T0 T1 T2 T0 T1 T2 T1 T2 T0 K1 K1 K2 K2 T i m e x x MYH9 - GFP ( MyoII ) LifeAct T i m e T i m e A1 A2 Retrograde flow Actin F - Actin G - Actin Myosin Anterograde Pressure Continuous bleb MyosinIIinduces retrograde flow Uropod breaks the cell ( passive friction ) Retrograde flow friction propels the cell body ( active friction ) Reactive force induced by friction MyosinII recruitment Actin polymerisation G - actin / MyosinII release LifeAct ( actin ) x Figure S6 . Retrograde Flow Analysis , Related to Figure 6 and Movie S8 ( A ) Scheme illustrating the localization of the propulsive retrograde ﬂow in A1 and A2 modes of migration . ( B ) RepresentativeTIRFmicroscopyimagesofLifeAct - mCherryonHeLaVL ( left ) , andofMYH9 - GFPexpressingHeLaKyotocells ( right ) onA1movingcells . Cells wereconﬁnedunder3 m monanon - adhesivePEGsurface . Bottomimagescorrespondtokymographsshowingretrogradeﬂowintheprotrusivefront ( thedashed red line is a visual guide showing the retrograde ﬂow ) . White dashed line shows the cell outline on the myosin II image , yellow lines were used to generate kymographs and red arrows show the direction of cell motion . Horizontal bars are 10 m m and vertical bars are 2 min . ( C ) Migration behavior of a cell losing two fronts successively . The cell back ( pink arrow ) is tracked by the cell fronts ( yellow arrows ) . Two kymographs ( bottom images ) individually tracking cell fronts over the paths K1 and K2 : the cell back speed was highest with two leading blebs , intermediate when only one bleb was left ( after T1 ) , and stopped when both blebs were detached ( after T2 ) . The speed of the cell back , measured on the right kymograph is shown on the bottom right graph . Horizontal bars are 50 m m and vertical bar is 100 min . ( D ) Schematic summarizing the mechanisms underlying the motility of A2 cells . In A2 cells , we observed that the cell body , where the retrograde ﬂow was observed , was dragging the uropod , where actin was static ( in the reference frame of the cell ) . Indeed , in cases in which the neck between the cell front and the uropod ruptured , whichoften occurred , thecell moved faster and the uropod stopped . Thisobservation was even more striking in some rare cells displaying two large stable blebs ( C ) . In such cells , the speed of the uropod depended on the number of pulling blebs ( C ) . From these observations , we hypothesized that two oppositeforceswereactingonthecellbody ( D ) . Thecouplingoftheactinretrogradeﬂowtothesubstrate ( activefriction ) wasresponsibleforthecell’smotion . At the same time , the uropod was being dragged , producing passive friction and acting as a break , slowing the cell’s motion . ( E ) Correlation between the cell speed and the retrograde ﬂow speed ( in the reference frame of the cell ) . ( F ) TIRFmicroscopyimagesofaHeLaVLcellexpressingLifeAct - mCherryintheA2modeofmigrationafterlossofitsuropod ( rightimage , 3 m mconﬁnementona non - adhesive PEG surface ) . Left image is a kymograph showing the retrograde ﬂow in the fragment . Note the vertical lines showing that actin almost does not move relative to the substrate , suggesting that there is no slippage when the passive uropod is not being dragged by the cell . The white dashed line was used to generate the kymograph . Horizontal bars are 10 m m and vertical bar is 2 min . Cell 160 , 659 – 672 , February 12 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . S11