BB47CH05 _ Wu ARI 21 April 2018 9 : 6 Annual Review of Biophysics Imaging mRNA In Vivo , from Birth to Death Evelina Tutucci , 1 Nathan M . Livingston , 2 , 3 Robert H . Singer , 1 , 4 , 5 and Bin Wu 2 , 3 , 6 1 Department of Anatomy and Structural Biology , Albert Einstein College of Medicine , Bronx , New York 10461 ; email : evelina . tutucci @ einstein . yu . edu , robert . singer @ einstein . yu . edu 2 Center for Cell Dynamics , Johns Hopkins School of Medicine , Baltimore , Maryland 21205 3 Department of Biophysics and Biophysical Chemistry , Johns Hopkins School of Medicine , Baltimore , Maryland 21205 4 Gruss - Lipper Biophotonics Center , Albert Einstein College of Medicine , Bronx , New York 10461 5 Cellular Imaging Consortium , Janelia Research Campus , Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Ashburn , Virginia 20147 6 The Solomon H . Snyder Department of Neuroscience , Johns Hopkins School of Medicine , Baltimore , Maryland 21205 ; email : nliving5 @ jhmi . edu , bwu20 @ jhmi . edu Annu . Rev . Biophys . 2018 . 47 : 85 – 106 First published as a Review in Advance on January 18 , 2018 The Annual Review of Biophysics is online at biophys . annualreviews . org https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - biophys - 070317 - 033037 Copyright c (cid:2) 2018 by Annual Reviews . All rights reserved Keywords single - mRNA imaging , gene expression , single - molecule , kinetics , imaging , single - cell Abstract RNA is the fundamental information transfer system in the cell . The ability to follow single messenger RNAs ( mRNAs ) from transcription to degrada - tion with ﬂuorescent probes gives quantitative information about how the information is transferred from DNA to proteins . This review focuses on the latest technological developments in the ﬁeld of single - mRNA detection and their usage to study gene expression in both ﬁxed and live cells . By describing the application of these imaging tools , we follow the journey of mRNA from transcription to decay in single cells , with single - molecule resolution . We review current theoretical models for describing transcription and transla - tion that were generated by single - molecule and single - cell studies . These methods provide a basis to study how single - molecule interactions generate phenotypes , fundamentally changing our understating of gene expression regulation . 85 Click here to view this article ' s online features : • Download ﬁgures as PPT slides • Navigate linked references • Download citations • Explore related articles • Search keywords ANNUAL REVIEWS Further A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47CH05 _ Wu ARI 21 April 2018 9 : 6 Contents INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86 VISUALIZATION OF SINGLE mRNAs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86 Fixed - Cell Imaging : smFISH and Beyond . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87 Live - Cell Techniques : mRNA Movement and Expression in Space and Time . . . . . . 87 KINETIC REGULATION OF RNA EXPRESSION FROM BIRTH TO DEATH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89 Transcription Initiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91 Transcription Elongation and Cotranscriptional Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92 mRNA Export to the Cytoplasm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93 mRNA Translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94 mRNA Decay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95 QUANTITATIVE MODELS FOR GENE EXPRESSION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96 SINGLE - CELL ANALYSIS : NOISE IN GENE EXPRESSION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98 FUTURE DIRECTIONS : GENE EXPRESSION ANALYSIS IN SINGLE CELLS OVER TIME . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99 INTRODUCTION Methods to follow single - cell dynamics over long periods of time are critical to revealing rare , het - erogeneous , and dynamic cellular responses that can be confounded by ensemble measurements . Single - cell and multicellular organisms often rely on subtle changes in gene expression patterns to decide the fate of a single cell as a unit or as part of a multicellular network . However , because gene expression is a multistep process consisting of sequential stochastic single - molecule events , sporadic variations can be difﬁcult to distinguish by the intrinsic variations in gene expression or so - called noise ( 93 , 109 ) . In recent years , we have seen the development of imaging techniques to visualize messenger RNAs ( mRNAs ) and proteins with single - molecule resolution allowing the study of gene expression regulation with unprecedented temporal and spatial precision . This is due to major progress made in the ﬂuorescence microscopy ﬁeld and to the development of molecular probes used to label proteins and nucleic acids ( 96 , 108 ) . The combination of biochemical studies with imaging techniques in ﬁxed cells allows for the identiﬁcation of factors controlling gene expression and how variable this process is from cell to cell . However , lack of temporal resolution limits the study of the relationship of the compo - nents of transcription , processing , nuclear export , localization , translation , and degradation . The introduction of single - molecule imaging in living cells brings new insights and perspectives as to how these different steps of gene expression are dynamically interconnected . Development of theoretical models describing the kinetics of mRNA and protein production have clariﬁed how macroscopic output emerges from single - molecule interactions ( 69 , 143 ) . VISUALIZATION OF SINGLE mRNAs Multiple optical techniques have been implemented to visualize mRNA in situ . Studying the subcellular localization of mRNA in both ﬁxed ( 40 ) and live cells ( 8 ) has provided insights on the kinetics of transcription ( 31 , 150 ) , mRNA export ( 50 ) , and translation ( 143 ) . From ﬁxed to live 86 Tutucci et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47CH05 _ Wu ARI 21 April 2018 9 : 6 cells , this section explores the most recent methods in imaging the life of mRNA from cradle to grave . Fixed - Cell Imaging : smFISH and Beyond Single - molecule ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization ( smFISH ) has long been the standard in local - izing individual mRNAs in ﬁxed samples ( 40 ) . Detection of single transcripts relies on a robust , multivalent signal from an array of ﬂuorophore - tagged oligodeoxynucleotides ( ODNs ) hybridiz - ing to an mRNA of interest in single eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells ( Figure 1 a ) ( 39 , 40 , 105 ) . Signiﬁcant improvements to probe design and hybridization conditions have increased speed , sensitivity , and speciﬁcity to a point where individual allelic variants , single - nucleotide polymor - phisms , or RNA editing can be identiﬁed ( 57 , 84 , 115 ) . Branched DNAs also offer signiﬁcant signal ampliﬁcation by conjugating an array of secondary DNA probes to a primary ODN with a region of homology to the target gene ( Figure 1 b ) ( 5 ) . Improved tissue preparation techniques demonstrated that multiple genes can be monitored in whole - mount Drosophila melanogaster brains ( 78 , 147 ) , in intact mammalian liver , or in intestinal epithelium ( 53 , 87 ) . Simultaneous detection of multiple RNAs in the same cell through combinatorial barcoding ( multiplexed smFISH ) revealed global population heterogeneity in mRNA expression and that many mRNA species have speciﬁc localization patterns ( 72 , 80 ) . Combinatorial labeling plus sequential rounds of hybridization expanded the potential of multiplexed smFISH ( Figure 1 c ) ( 22 , 81 , 86 ) , and simultaneous imaging of over 1 , 000 RNA species in single cells has been achieved ( 22 ) . In particular , multiplexed error - robust FISH ( MERFISH ) mitigated the relatively high error rate associated with sequential hybridization by employing a novel error - correcting coding scheme and demonstrated the potential to cover the complete transcriptome proﬁle of a cell ( 22 , 86 ) . Interpretation of mRNA copy number and localization in smFISH experiments requires sig - niﬁcant computational analysis . Programs such as FISH - quant ( 91 ) and Airlocalize ( 75 ) avoid experimental bias by automatically scoring mRNA abundance in the nucleus or cytoplasm . How - ever , copy number and localization are not the only parameters for assessing mRNA functionality . Protein and mRNA interactions provide crucial insights into regulatory mechanisms . smFISH coupled with immunoﬂuorescence can identify the messenger ribonucleoparticles ( mRNPs ) char - acteristic of each stage in the lifetime of an mRNA ( 37 , 144 ) . Signiﬁcant improvement in the colocalization precision was achieved through the development of a superregistration method . This approach calibrates and corrects for chromatic aberrations to distinguish bona ﬁde RNA – protein interactions in situ ( 37 ) . Despite the wealth of information available using these ﬁxed - cell methods , live - cell techniques offer further information about the regulation of gene expression by adding the crucial time dimension . Live - Cell Techniques : mRNA Movement and Expression in Space and Time Live - cellimagingtechniquesallowthestudyofmRNAexpressiondynamicsinrealtime . Individual mRNA molecules can be visualized in living cells through probe hybridization to the endogenous transcript or through engineering of the target mRNA . Molecular beacons ( MBs ) are probes used to target endogenous transcripts ( 139 ) . These single - stranded DNA molecules fold into a native stem - loop structure connected to a complementary sequence to an RNA of interest ( Figure 1 d ) . One end of the stem - loops contains a ﬂuorescent molecule while the other contains a quencher ( 139 ) . Upon hybridization with high target sequence speciﬁcity , the ﬂuorescent moiety and quencher are separated and light is emitted . However , be - cause these probes do not penetrate cells , they require microinjection or introduction by some www . annualreviews . org • Imaging mRNA In Vivo 87 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47CH05 _ Wu ARI 21 April 2018 9 : 6 a smFISH A A . . . A A c Sequential hybridization smFISH A A . . . A A A A . . . A A A A . . . A A A A . . . A A A A . . . A A A A . . . A A A A . . . A A A A . . . A A A A . . . A A A A . . . A A A A . . . A A A A . . . A A f Stem - loop labeling A A . . . A A Coding region 1st round n th round d Molecular beacons A A . . . A A Coding region A A . . . A A Coding region Conditionallyfluorescent dyes e Spinach - like aptamers A A . . . A A b Branched DNA FISH A A . . . A A Fixed - cell methods Live - cell methods Figure 1 Methods in messenger RNA ( mRNA ) imaging . Fixed cells ( panels a – c ) versus living cells ( panels d – f ) . ( a ) Standard single - molecule ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization ( smFISH ) uses 20 - mer DNA probes with an amine - coupled ﬂuorescent dye to target an mRNA of interest . ( b ) Branched DNA ( bDNA ) probes increase the multiplicity of ﬂuorophore conjugation by having a homology sequence to both the mRNA and a common sequence on the probe . bDNA probes along with improved tissue clearing techniques have increased intensity to where smFISH can be performed on whole - mount tissues . ( c ) Sequential hybridization enables subsequent rounds of FISH to be performed within the same sample . The results of each round , through the use of barcoding techniques based on a simple Hamming code , can be aggregated to form a unique signature for many RNAs within the same cell . ( d ) Molecular beacons ( MBs ) offer reduced background by turning on ﬂuorescence after target hybridization . Complex and nonuniform loading techniques limit MBs’ application to image endogenous transcripts . ( e ) Spinach - based RNA aptamers form a secondary structure compatible with conditionally ﬂuorescent dyes , activated upon binding . ( f ) Stem - loop labeling using MS2 , PP7 , or other derivatives gives robust signal intensity for single - molecule tracking of mRNA . Extensive engineering of the stem - loop systems has allowed for live - cell study of all facets of the life of a transcript from transcription through degradation . 88 Tutucci et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47CH05 _ Wu ARI 21 April 2018 9 : 6 equally perturbativemethod , which limitsMB application . Mostrecently , RNA - targeting , ﬂuores - centlylabeleddCas9 ( catalyticallyinactiveCas9 ) moleculeshavebeenusedtovisualizeendogenous mRNAs in human cells ( 95 ) , but , to date , this method lacks deﬁnitive single - molecule resolution . Genetically encoded RNA aptamers have signiﬁcantly improved the ability to detect and track mRNAs in living cells . Aptamers have been engineered to bind to ﬂuorogenic dyes ( Figure 1 e ) . Spinach and its subsequent improvements Spinach2 ( 126 ) , Broccoli ( 42 ) , and RNA - Mango ( 35 ) function like a ﬂuorescent protein by conditionally generating a chromophore but still do not have adequate intensity for single - molecule visualization . Recently , Spinach arrays have shown promise in providing the multivalent signal necessary for single - molecule imaging ( 151 ) . The bacteriophage - derived MS2 stem - loop , and its complementary MS2 coat protein ( MCP ) , has become the standard in live - cell imaging of single - mRNA molecules ( 8 ) . A gene of interest tagged with an array of MS2 stem - loops ( usually 24 ) and an MCP – ﬂuorescent protein ( MCP – FP ) fusion are coexpressed in the same cell ( Figure 1 f ) . The MCP – FP binds an MS2 loop as a dimer , and the multivalent ﬂuorescence signal marks the RNA for single - molecule visualization and tracking . Expressing MS2 - tagged mRNAs and MCP – FP in bacteria , yeast , insect , and mammalian cells can be achieved through homologous recombination ( 12 , 48 , 61 , 138 ) , retroviral infection ( 143 ) , or plasmid transfection ( 8 , 31 ) . A homozygous knock - in mouse expressing an MS2 array in the 3 (cid:2) untranslated region of the β - actin locus and an MCP – GFP fusion has allowed for visualization of mRNA dynamics of an endogenously expressed gene ( 75 , 98 , 148 ) . In combination with the MS2 system , the orthogonal bacteriophage - derived PP7 stem - loop recognition system allows for speciﬁc dual - color labeling and simultaneous tracking of multiple RNA species in a single cell ( 19 , 61 , 74 ) . Moreover , PP7 stem - loops show more complete labeling by PP7 coat protein ( PCP ) than their MS2 counterpart , improving the signal - to - noise ratio without additional binding sites ( 69 , 142 ) . Other specialized stem - loop and coat - protein labeling systems such as Bgl stem - loops ( 21 ) , λ boxB RNA ( 67 ) , and U1A tagging ( 14 , 130 ) have further expanded the ability to multiplex mRNA tracking in live cells . Advancements in microscopy have also enabled more sensitive and quantitative measurements of mRNA – protein interactions in vivo using two - photon ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuation spectroscopy ( FFS ) ( 141 ) . This technique relies on excitation of a subfemtoliter volume to extract mRNA diffusion information and stoichiometry of interactions between RNA and proteins ( 142 ) . For instance , measurements of β - actin MCP – MS2 – labeled mRNA association with zipcode binding protein1 ( ZBP1 ) haveshownthatmRNAs’translatabilityisspatiallycontrolled ( 142 ) . Brighterand more stable ﬂuorophores ( reviewed in 77 and 108 ) have also increased the sensitivity of single - mRNA tracking in live cells . HaloTag ( 79 ) , a genetically encoded label derived from bacterial dehalogenase , can covalently bind bright , photostable , and cell - permeable ligands ( 49 ) . It offers a signiﬁcant improvement over intrinsically ﬂuorescent proteins . Methodsinbothﬁxed - andlive - cellimagingofindividualmRNAsprovideaframeworktostudy the biophysics of the mRNA life from transcription through degradation . The following sections discuss recent ﬁndings and gene expression models made possible by a spatial understanding of the life of an mRNA . KINETIC REGULATION OF RNA EXPRESSION FROM BIRTH TO DEATH The ability to visualize single - mRNA molecules in ﬁxed and living cells enables one to gain spatial and temporal information about gene expression in its natural context . To regulate the phases of gene expression , cells separate different functions into compartments . Isolation is achieved either through membrane separation ( e . g . , nucleus , mitochondria , lysosome , etc . ) or through www . annualreviews . org • Imaging mRNA In Vivo 89 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47CH05 _ Wu ARI 21 April 2018 9 : 6 a CYTOPLASM ONstate OFFstate b NPC scanning mRNA export RNA processing and polyadenylation NUCLEUS A A A A A A ( . . . ) Constitutive transcription Bursty transcription A A A A A A ( . . . ) A A A A A A ( . . . ) mRNA transport and local translation AAAAAA ( . . . ) Proteinimport UntranslatedmRNA Bursty translation AAAAAA ( . . . ) mRNA decay Deadenylation and exonucleolytic digestion c e d AAAAAA ( . . . ) 0 # mRNAs / cell 20 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 40 60 F r e q u e n c y ( % ) GAL1 DAPI GAL1 DAPI # mRNAs / cell 0 5 10 15 20 F r e q u e n c y ( % ) DOA1 DAPI DOA1 DAPI 5 µm 5 µm 5 µm ( Caption appears on following page ) 90 Tutucci et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47CH05 _ Wu ARI 21 April 2018 9 : 6 Figure 2 ( Figure appears on preceding page ) Following RNAs form birth to death using single - molecule RNA detection methods . Gene expression begins with transcription of RNAs ( panels a and b ) . Bursty transcription occurs when the gene transitions between the ON and OFF state with a measureable probability , and during the ON state , multiple initiation events take place , followed by periods of inactivity . Constitutive transcription characterizes genes always in the ON state , with constant initiation rate . By using ( a ) the MS2 system in living cells or ( b ) single - molecule ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization ( smFISH ) in ﬁxed cells , the mode of transcription of a gene is inferred . ( b , top ) Example of bursty gene expression : GAL1 smFISH in Saccharomyces cerevisiae shifted from a glucose - to a galactose - containing medium for 2 h . Upon GAL1 gene induction , less than 10 % of the cells express the GAL1 messenger RNA ( mRNA ) , the number of mRNAs per cell is described by a geometric distribution . ( b , bottom ) Example of constitutive gene expression : DOA1 smFISH in S . cerevisiae . All cells express the DOA1 mRNA , and the number of mRNAs per cell is ﬁtted by a Poisson distribution . smFISH = red ; DAPI ( 4 (cid:2) , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole stain ) = blue ( E . Tutucci , unpublished data ; smFISH for GAL1 and DOA1 were performed as in Reference 138 ) . During transcription , the RNA is processed and polyadenylated . ( c ) Simultaneous imaging of the β - actin mRNA with the MS2 system ( green ) and the nuclear pore complexes ( NPCs ) ( POM121 ; red ) ( adapted from Reference 50 with permission ) . The export - competent mRNP scans the nuclear pore before being exported into the cytoplasm . ( d ) Once exported , mRNAs either are translated in the cytoplasm or are localized to speciﬁc subcompartments where their translation is regulated . Visualization of single mRNA translation was achieved by combining the MS2 system to visualize the mRNA ( red ) with the SunTag system to visualize the nascent peptide ( green ) . Translated mRNAs appear as yellow spots ( yellow arrows ) , while untranslated mRNAs appear as red spots ( white arrow ) . Image in panel d adapted from Reference 143 with permission . ( e ) Decay is the latest step of the mRNA life and the ultimate step controlling the available amount of mRNA in the cell . Recent improvements of the MS2 system led to the development of a reporter system that can be used to faithfully report the life of unstable mRNA , such as cell - cycle mRNAs in S . cerevisiae . membraneless structures [ e . g . , the nucleolus , Cajal bodies , P - bodies ( processing bodies ) , stress granules , P granules ( Caenorhabditis elegans germ granules ) , etc . ] ( 118 ) . In its journey from the transcriptionsitetothecytoplasm , mRNAinteractssuccessivelywithdifferentcompartments , each associated with various RNA binding proteins , forming the mRNPs . The dynamic exchange of the mRNP wardrobe occurs during mRNA processing , export , translation , and decay , suggesting a tight interconnection among all steps ( 51 , 120 , 137 ) . In this section , we focus on what single - mRNA molecule imaging studies tell us about these major steps in the life of mRNA . Transcription Initiation Cells continuously adapt the transcriptional program in response to changes in cellular needs . In this process , transcription factors ( TFs ) act as a cellular sensor that interprets variations in the envi - ronment and controls transcription by binding to speciﬁc DNA sequences on promoters . By using single TF tracking methods , several studies demonstrated that TF density , chromatin structure , and higher - order nuclear architecture inﬂuence the search of TF binding sites ( reviewed in 20 , 92 , and 136 ) . Kinetic studies showed that TF binding , such as p53 or the glucocorticoid receptor , is very transient ( a few seconds on the DNA ) , with only a small fraction of TF engaged in productive binding ( ∼ 8 % ) ( 90 ) . These transient interactions only infrequently establish the transcriptional preinitiation complex ( PIC ) , explaining why only 13 % of the time RNA polymerase II ( RNAPII ) binding leads to transcription elongation ( 125 ) . smFISH or live - imaging measurements of nascent RNAsrevealedthatgenescanhavedifferentmodesoftranscription . Transcriptioninitiationcanbe described by either a one - state or a two - state model ( Figure 2 a , b ) ( 61 , 69 , 75 , 106 ) . The one - state model describes genes transcribed with a constant initiation rate and nascent transcript number described by a Poisson distribution ( 45 , 150 ) . In contrast , the two - state model describes so - called bursty genes that stochastically switch between an active and inactive state . The nascent and ma - ture RNAs produced by bursty genes are highly variable in a cell population ( 4 , 28 , 109 ) . The measured histogram can be ﬁtted to a negative binomial distribution ( 11 , 23 , 44 , 48 , 69 , 104 , 113 , 128 , 150 ) , and the dynamic parameters can be extracted from the ﬁtting . The number of nascent RNAs produced during the active state is called burst size , while the rate of switching between www . annualreviews . org • Imaging mRNA In Vivo 91 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47CH05 _ Wu ARI 21 April 2018 9 : 6 states is deﬁned as burst frequency . In eukaryotes and prokaryotes , transcription is predominantly bursty , but all genes seem to be characterized by different bursting properties , making transcrip - tional modeling very difﬁcult . Both the frequency and amplitude of bursts can be modulated , leading to expression heterogeneity . The implications of gene expression variability , or so - called noise , are further discussed in the section titled Single - Cell Analysis : Noise in Gene Expression . To date , the underlying causes of transcriptional bursting remain to be elucidated . Several nonmutually exclusive mechanisms have been proposed to explain the phenomena ( 71 ) . In bac - teria , during transcription by RNAPII , positive supercoiling builds up behind the polymerases , inducing a slowdown of transcription elongation and initiation ( 23 ) . The action of DNA gyrases , which are limiting in Escherichia coli , relieves the supercoiling and allows transcription to restart with a new burst . In Saccharomyces cerevisiae , genes are transcribed with either constitutive or bursty modes of transcription ( 150 ) . Comparison between these classes of genes revealed that the pro - moter architecture and chromatin remodeling are important . Bursty genes , such as the GAL gene cluster , have a TATA box in their promoter , and they are regulated by the SAGA ( Spt - Ada - Gcn5 - acetyltransferase ) transcriptional complex ( Figure 2 b ) ( 45 , 70 ) . It was previously shown in yeast that cis elements like AT - rich content can affect nucleosome positioning ( 63 ) , which in turn could regulate access to TF . Modulation of transcription factor binding can ultimately affect kinetics of transcription initiation in yeast ( 55 , 107 ) . In Drosophila , the enhancers’ positon , strength , and interactions with promoters govern burst characteristics , changing the probability of a gene being active ( 44 ) . Finally , in mammalian cells , gene bursting seems to be regulated by a combination of mechanisms , including chromosomal location , chromatin environment , or TF concentration ( 28 , 68 , 113 , 125 ) . Interestingly , Tantale et al . ( 133 ) recently showed using the MS2 system in mammalian cells that transcriptional bursts are generated by groups of closely spaced polymerase convoys . In addition , they showed that bursting can occur on different timescales and that short bursts ( i . e . , lasting minutes ) are controlled by the key transcriptional activator Mediator , while long bursts ( i . e . , lasting hours ) are controlled by the TATA - binding protein . These studies sug - gest that multiple ways exist to modulate transcription initiation , all relying on highly transient and dynamic interactions . Additional single - molecule studies are required for deciphering the mechanism modulating this process . Transcription Elongation and Cotranscriptional Processing The assembly of the PIC at promoters leads to the recruitment and positioning of the RNA poly - merases at the transcription start site . This process triggers the synthesis of RNA , a process called elongation . To study the dynamics of transcription , ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) of ﬂuorescently labeled RNA polymerases or nascent RNAs has been extensively used in living cells ( 31 , 36 , 125 ) . This revealed that the release efﬁciency of RNAPII from the promoter region to start elongation , promoter escape , is highly variable ( 31 , 125 , 152 ) . It has been recently proposed that the chromatin state inﬂuences promoter escape rates and that histone hypoacetyla - tion correlates with low escape efﬁciency ( < 10 % ) , while hyperacetylation correlates with higher efﬁciency ( > 90 % ) but also with higher variability ( 31 , 125 , 152 ) . Live imaging was used to mea - sure the elongation rate of RNA polymerases , with variable results ( 71 ) . In bacteria , transcription of a reporter gene tagged with the MS2 system was estimated to be 1 . 5 kb / min ( 48 ) . In mam - malian cells , RNAPII was reported to move at approximately 4 kb / min ( 31 , 133 ) . Measurements performed in S . cerevisiae showed that the elongation rate of its longest gene , MDN1 ( 14 . 7 kb ) , can be highly variable , going from 1 to 4 kb / min ( 61 , 69 ) . These studies suggest that RNAPII elongation may be less processive than previously thought and may be inﬂuenced by the chro - matin state or by cotranscriptional events involved in RNA processing leading to frequent RNAPII pausing . 92 Tutucci et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47CH05 _ Wu ARI 21 April 2018 9 : 6 The causes of RNAPII pausing are unclear , but they may be linked to cotranscriptional RNA processing , including 5 (cid:2) RNA capping , splicing , 3 (cid:2) RNA cleavage , and polyadenylation ( 2 ) . Recent studies used single - RNA imaging approaches in living human cells to infer the kinetics of cotranscriptional splicing ( 15 , 26 , 83 , 111 ) . MS2 , PP7 , or the λ B arrays were inserted into the intronic sequences of splicing reporters to measure ( by FFS ) the time spent by the intron at the transcription site . These studies concluded that intron splicing takes 20 – 267 s after transcription of the 3 (cid:2) splice site . The variability of the reported measurements is possibly due to the different type of imaging analysis used in these studies and differences in splicing reporters ( 3 (cid:2) cleavage and polyadenylation sites ) that can change the residence time of the nascent RNA at the transcription site and affect the splicing measurements . A causal link between splicing kinetics and transcription elongation remains to be established . Finally , before its release from the transcription site , the mRNA is endonucleolytically cleaved andpolyadenylated ( 120 ) . CompletionofthisstepregulatesnuclearexportandmRNAlocalization , translation , and decay . Live imaging of the dwell time of the mRNAs at the transcription site after elongation estimated that 3 (cid:2) - end processing takes between 70 and 100 s to complete ( 69 , 133 ) . Further work may elucidate whether the kinetics of transcription elongation and 3 (cid:2) - end processing are linked to the widespread phenomenon of alternative polyadenylation . mRNA Export to the Cytoplasm The formation of export - competent mRNAs starts with the cotranscriptional recruitment of the export machinery . The general mRNA export receptor NXF1 ( Mex67 in yeast ) interacts with members of the transcription - coupled complex ( THO / TREX ) and the exon junction complex deposited during splicing to transport the mRNAs through the nuclear pore complexes ( NPCs ) ( 59 , 137 ) . OnthebasisofquantiﬁcationofthenumberoftranscribedmRNAs ( 2 , 000 – 3 , 000 ) andthe number of nuclear pores present in the nuclear envelope of S . cerevisiae ( 50 – 200 ) , it was estimated that each nuclear pore transports on average 10 – 50 mRNAs per min ( 59 ) . Diffusion of the mRNPs in the nucleoplasm brings them to the nuclear periphery , where they scan multiple NPCs before reaching the cytoplasm ( 50 , 88 , 110 , 119 , 122 , 123 ) . mRNA - export visualization in yeast and mammalian cells using the MS2 / PP7 systems revealed that mRNAs take 200 – 500 ms to cross the nuclear membrane ( Figure 2 b ) ( 50 , 88 , 122 ) . Based on the kinetic analysis of mRNP export , the current three - step model encompasses the following phases : docking ( 80 ms ) , transport ( 5 – 20 ms ) , and release in the cytoplasm ( 80 ms ) ( 50 ) . This model suggests that two steps of mRNP remodeling may occur on the nuclear and cytoplasmic sides of the NPC ( Figure 2 c ) . The delay of the mRNP on the nuclear side could reﬂect quality - control steps checking whether the mRNA is correctly spliced and processed . The delay on the cytoplasmic side of the NPC is proposed to be caused by the remodeling of the mRNPs and dissociation of the export factors that are recycled in the nucleus ( 59 , 119 , 137 ) . Interestingly , it was observed that not all NPCs are available for transport ( 50 , 110 ) , suggesting that mRNP export may be hindered by concomitant bidirectional protein transport . Further work is required to extend these observations to other mRNAs to understand how the size of the mRNP inﬂuences export and how a putative quality - control mechanism could recognize mRNAs that are not export competent . Export of mRNAs in the cytoplasm may not exclusively occur through the NPCs . Experiments performed in Drosophila suggested that large mRNP cargos can exit the nucleus by budding off the nuclear envelope ( 124 ) . The mechanisms and the selectivity of this pathway have yet to be elucidated . Even though kinetic studies suggest that mRNA export is not a rate - limiting step during gene expression , recent investigations propose that this stage can be regulated ( 3 , 6 ) . By using a combination of smFISH and deep sequencing analysis of hundreds of mammalian mRNAs present in the nuclear versus cytoplasmic fractions , these studies suggested that mRNAs can be retained in www . annualreviews . org • Imaging mRNA In Vivo 93 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47CH05 _ Wu ARI 21 April 2018 9 : 6 the nucleus to buffer transcription variability . Although an intriguing possibility , no mechanism has been presented to explain how mRNA export could actively compensate for the stochastic expression of every mRNA . mRNA Translation Once in the cytoplasm , mRNAs can localize to speciﬁc cellular compartments where they are locally translated or they can freely diffuse in the cytoplasm to rapidly engage in translation . mRNA localization is a widespread mechanism to control protein expression in space and time , from prokaryotic to eukaryotic cells ( reviewed in 16 ) . The possibility of visualizing the mRNAs in intact cells , ﬁxed or live , was essential to discover localization and to hypothesize its role in protein synthesis organization ( 8 , 16 , 148 ) , but it wasn’t until recently that we could simultaneously visualize single mRNAs and their translational state . Translating RNA imaging by coat - protein knockoff ( TRICK ) distinguishes untranslated mRNA from transcripts that have already gone through the pioneer round of translation ( 54 ) . This reporter was successfully used to study the translation state of the oskar mRNA during Drosophila development and to conﬁrm that the mRNA is translationally repressed until its lo - calization to the posterior pole . TRICK detects only the pioneer round of translation , but Katz et al . ( 65 ) developed an approach that could be used to deduce the translation state of single ﬂuorescent mRNA at any given time . Comovement of MS2 - labeled β - actin mRNAs and the 60S large ribosome subunit ( L10A ) was analyzed in mouse ﬁbroblasts . Single - particle tracking anal - ysis revealed that β - actin mRNA translation mainly occurs at the leading edge of a migrating cell , near the focal adhesion complex . In addition , ribosome - associated translating mRNAs move slower and in a more corralled manner than untranslated mRNAs . Further analysis revealed that individual ribosome - associated β - actin mRNAs can switch between slower and faster diffusing states , implying variability in the translation rate , as previously observed for transcription . A fundamental improvement came with the development of imaging approaches allowing visualizationofnascentpeptidesproducedbysinglemRNAstaggedwiththeMS2 / PP7systems ( 89 , 140 , 143 , 146 ) . To image single proteins with a multivalent tag , the SunTag system ( 131 ) attaches multiple ﬂuorescently labeled antibodies to an array of epitopes added to a protein of interest ( Figure 2 d ) . Because the antibodies are already mature FPs , an N - terminal SunTag addition can rapidly label nascent peptides at the ribosome exit channel , making a single - molecule readout of translation possible ( 140 , 143 , 146 ) . Two seminal papers demonstrated that translation initiation is a stochastic process occurring in bursts , similar to transcription ( 89 , 143 ) . The switching between the active and inactive state can occur in a range between 15 min and 3 h ( burst frequency ) . On actively translating reporters , ribosomes initiate protein synthesis every 30 – 40 s ( burst size ) , traveling at a distance of 200 – 300 nucleotides and with an elongation rate of 3 – 10 amino acids / s . Finally , the use of the single - molecule imaging of nascent peptides ( SINAPs ) reporter described in Reference 143 directly demonstrated that mRNA localization inﬂuences translation rates . Live imagingofsingle - mRNAtranslationinneuronaldendritesshowsthatthepercentageoftranslating mRNAs decreases with the distance from the soma ( proximal ≈ 40 % , whereas distal ≈ 10 % ) . As observed by Katz et al . ( 65 ) , the SINAPs reporter conﬁrms that translating mRNAs move slower than untranslating mRNAs ; however , it also shows that even localizing mRNAs can be activelytranslatedwhiletraveling . Thankstoimprovinggenomeeditingtechnology , itwasrecently shown that a SINAPs - like approach can be used to image translation of an endogenously tagged POLR2A mRNA in human cell lines ( 103 ) . Interestingly , these novel approaches could be used to elucidate the coordination between RNA localization and local translation . The current view suggests that local RNA translation is mainly regulated by the localization of RNA at speciﬁc 94 Tutucci et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47CH05 _ Wu ARI 21 April 2018 9 : 6 cellular compartments . However , it was recently shown in intestinal cells that stimulation induced by feeding can lead to apical localization of the mRNAs encoding the translational machinery ( 87 ) . The local production of ribosomes boosts the translation of apically localized mRNAs favoring nutrient absorption ( 87 ) . These studies suggest that cells evolved multiple approaches to control polarized translation . mRNA Decay To precisely control gene expression , all eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells actively regulate the degradation of RNAs . RNA degradation destroys both RNAs that have reached the end of their useful life and defective RNAs that are recognized by surveillance mechanisms ( Figure 2 e ) . More broadly , degradation can be used by cells to counteract transcription to precisely control mRNA levels . Cytoplasmic mRNA degradation is a multistep process , initiated by the deadenylation of the mRNA followed by 3 (cid:2) - to - 5 (cid:2) or 5 (cid:2) - to - 3 (cid:2) exonucleolytic degradation . More frequently , the mRNAs are decapped and degraded via the 5 (cid:2) - to - 3 (cid:2) decay exonuclease Xrn1 ( 99 ) . Multiple factors inﬂuence the half - life of an mRNA . Increasing the length of the 3 (cid:2) UTR ( untranslated region ) and mutations in AT - rich sequences both correlate with destabilization of transcripts , possibly due to changes in 3 (cid:2) - end processing and polyadenylation and recruitment of decay factors ( 102 ) . In addition , the codon optimality and the presence of proteins or microRNA binding sites inﬂuence mRNA stability ( 58 ) . Besides cis - regulatory elements , like the mRNA sequence , other components working in trans , such as the promoter , regulate the stability of an mRNA ( 13 , 134 ) . Studies performed in yeast showed by smFISH that cell - cycle mRNAs undergo a switch in mRNA stability that induces their rapid degradation ( 134 ) . The information controlling decay of these mRNAs is encoded by the promoter , but to date , the signal remains elusive . The current model suggests that cotranscriptional recruitment of posttranslational modiﬁers ( kinases , methyltransferases ) leads to remodeling of the mRNPs , marking them for rapid degradation in the cytoplasm ( 51 , 85 ) . The process of degradation is tightly coupled to translation , and the decay machinery is proposed to directly compete to access the mRNAs cotranslationally ( 101 ) . The coordination between trans - lation and decay is particularly important for the identiﬁcation of mRNAs containing premature termination codons ( PTC ) , the signal triggering nonsense - mediated decay ( NMD ) ( 64 ) . Live imaging of a PTC - containing reporter revealed that mutated RNAs are identiﬁed cotranscrip - tionally , possibly by NMD factors ( 32 ) . This quality - control step is proposed to mark the RNA for rapid degradation , usually occurring within seconds from the export in the cytoplasm ( 135 ) . These initial studies have motivated the development of tools aimed at studying mRNA degra - dation in intact cells . The MS2 labeling system has been broadly applied to study all facets of the mRNA life cycle from transcription to mRNA trafﬁcking to translation ( 97 ) . This extensive use requires rigorous characterization of aberrations from canonical behavior of an unaltered tran - script . System optimization has become especially important in using MS2 to study degradation of transient mRNAs . MCP binding to MS2 loops has been shown to delay 5 (cid:2) - to - 3 (cid:2) degradation under normal and stress conditions in yeast ( 47 , 52 , 60 ) , leading to accumulation of MCP - bound MS2 loops misidentiﬁed as nondegraded transcripts . Recent optimization of the MS2 system allowed for more accurate visualization of the complete life cycle of unstable cell - cycle mRNAs in yeast , either in normal growing conditions or upon stress ( 138 ) . The substitution of a single nucleotide in the MS2 loop structure reduced MCP afﬁnity to a point where it no longer affects decay or labeling efﬁciency ( 138 ) . In an effort to increase our understanding of mRNA decay in mammalian cells , Chao and colleagues ( 62 ) recently described a novel MS2 - based reporter system that can measure degradation kinetics in both ﬁxed and live samples . These technologies will be valuable to extend our understanding of mRNA degradation regulation . www . annualreviews . org • Imaging mRNA In Vivo 95 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47CH05 _ Wu ARI 21 April 2018 9 : 6 QUANTITATIVE MODELS FOR GENE EXPRESSION The number of mRNAs and proteins is often modeled as a birth – death Markov process . The production of an mRNA or a protein is described by a coupled master equation with one or more rate - limiting steps ( Figure 3 a ) ( 100 ) . The detailed transcription and translation process is not taken into account and is modeled as a simple rate equation . Transcription and translation are AAAAAA TSS AUG UAG PolyA signal Initiation Elongation Termination Time # mRNA / cell F l u o r e s c e n c e 0 5 10 15 20 F r e q u e n c y ( % ) Time R e c o v e r y Time C o rr e l a t i o n F l u c t u a t i o n Time DNA RNA ( m ) ϕ ϕ Protein ( n ) R 1 R 2 ( m ) α β v 1 v N v 2 a b d e f g c 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 Figure 3 Quantitative model for transcription and translation . ( a ) The generative model for central dogma . The number of messenger RNAs ( mRNAs ) and proteins can be described by a chemical master equation . The rate [ R 2 ( m ) ] of protein production depends on the number of mRNAs ( m ) but not vice - versa ( R 1 ) ( m and n are the numbers of mRNA and proteins , respectively ; Φ is the degraded molecule ) . ( b ) Both transcription and translation are described by initiation , elongation , and termination processes . The nascent transcripts and peptides can be visualized by MS2 - or single - molecule imaging of nascent peptides – like systems , respectively . ( c ) The coarse - grained model of transcription and translation . The template has N sites . The process initiates with probability α , elongates with site - speciﬁc probability v , and terminates with probability β . ( d ) The ﬂuorescence intensity proﬁle while a single molecular machinery ( polymerase or ribosome ) travels through MS2 or SunTag motifs . Collectively , many machineries simultaneously reside on the template . ( e ) Statistical analysis is required to extract biophysical parameters from the histograms of ﬂuorescence intensity . ( f ) Single - molecule ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) or ( g ) correlation analysis of the transcription or translation sites recovers the dynamic information of initiation and elongation . To extract a biophysical model from a FRAP curve or correlation function , one needs to solve the quantitative model shown in panel c . Additional abbreviations : PolyA , polyadenylation ; TSS , transcription start site . 96 Tutucci et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47CH05 _ Wu ARI 21 April 2018 9 : 6 two essential but distinct phases to express a gene . They are carried out by different machineries , happen in different subcellular compartments , and are regulated by different factors . Despite these differences , there are strong similarities from a biophysical point of view ( Figure 3 b ) : A molecular machine travels along a template with deﬁned polarity and synthesizes a biopolymer by adding buildingblocksoneatatime . Inaddition , bothprocessesaredividedintoinitiation , elongation , and termination stages . There are sophisticated biophysical models to describe each process separately . We believe that the models that describe one process can be applied to the other . A simple coarse - grained model for both transcription and translation can be described as illustrated in Figure 3 c . A polymerase or ribosome travels along a template with N sites . For transcription , N is the total nucleotides of the gene , and for translation , N is the number of codons . The molecular machinery initiates at the start site with a certain probability α ( t ) . For constitutive transcription or translation , the initiation probability is a constant , which means that the waiting time between successive initiation events is exponentially distributed . More often than not , α ( t ) is time dependent . For a bursting gene , α ( t ) is modeled as a random telegraph signal in the simplest case . After initiation , the molecule travels along the template with a site - speciﬁc probability v i , which is related to the elongation speed . The assumption here is that the elongation speed depends only on the site and not on its neighbors . For translation , the elongation speed may depend on codon optimality and therefore be site speciﬁc . Finally , the molecule leaves the template with a probability β . Throughout this process , the molecule travels only in one direction , and if the next site is occupied , the molecule will not be able to move . In mathematics , this is called a totally asymmetric exclusion process ( TASEP ) ( 153 ) . If we further assume that the initiation and elongation speed are both constants , the model has been solved analytically at steady state : The probability of each conﬁguration , the molecular density at each site , the transport ﬂux , and the correlation function between different sites have been calculated ( 33 ) . Depending on the value of initiation and termination probability , the steady state has been described as three different phases : high density , low density , and maximum current ( 34 ) . Depending on which step is rate limiting , the molecular density at steady state has a nontrivial distribution along the template . TASEP has been usedtomodeltranslationandbeenstudiedextensivelyintheliterature . Lately , ithasbeenextended to take into account the size of the ribosome ( 117 ) , pausing because of nonoptimal codons ( 25 ) , mRNA looping ( 24 ) , and ﬁnite resources of ribosomes ( 127 ) . Recently , large - scale computational models have been developed using TASEP to describe the production of every mRNA , ribosome , and transfer RNA ( tRNA ) in a cell ( 116 , 127 ) . From these models , one can infer the rate - limiting steps on the basis of large - scale transcriptome and proteome data . For example , in healthy yeast cells , the protein production is typically limited by the availability of free ribosomes ( 116 ) . In bacteria , the elongation rate at most codons is not limited by the intracellular concentration of aminoacyl - tRNA but rather by the intraribosomal kinetic events ( 127 ) . We believe that many mathematical tools from TASEP could also be used to model transcription . For transcription , the detailed distribution of polymerases , such as the mutual exclusion of polymerase in TASEP , is often not taken into account . This simpliﬁed modeling , however , allows one to consider more complicated initiation events . For example , the birth process has often been modeled as bursting owing to DNA supercoiling , promoter architecture , transcription factor binding , or chromatin structure ( 23 , 104 , 109 , 150 ) . These models give simple explanations for the cell - to - cell heterogeneity revealed in the single - cell ﬂuorescence reporter assay . With smFISH , the distribution of mature and nascent mRNAs has been measured experimentally . Fitting the distribution to a biophysical model leads to measurement of initiation rate , elongation rate , and the bursting frequency ( Figure 3 d , e ) ( 104 , 150 ) . Although one can infer a lot of dynamic information from a snapshot of protein and mRNA distribution , it is highly desirable to directly observe the real - time transcription and translation dynamics directly in live cells . As previously www . annualreviews . org • Imaging mRNA In Vivo 97 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47CH05 _ Wu ARI 21 April 2018 9 : 6 discussed , the MS2 / PP7 systems together with SINAPs , FRAP ( Figure 3 f ) , and ﬂuctuation analysis ( Figure 3 g ) have been used to measure transcription and translation dynamics . To extract quantitative parameters from these experiments , a biophysical model to describe the dynamic events is needed . TASEP is the ﬁrst nontrivial coarse - grained model that incorporates the most basic ingredients of the polymerization process . However , the exact expression is cumbersome ( 153 ) and the analytical temporal dynamics are still not available . Currently , the transition probability between sites is approximated as a simple rate equation ( 31 , 69 ) , which leads to the analytical equation for the ﬂuorescence recovery or autocorrelation function . The approximation will break down when the rate of transcription or translation is high or there is a trafﬁc jam . Further theoretical work on the exact and approximate solution for TASEP is needed to describe the detailed nascent chain dynamics during transcription and translation . SINGLE - CELL ANALYSIS : NOISE IN GENE EXPRESSION During the early steps of animal development , the asymmetric expression of key pluripotency TF controls the differentiation of stem cells to give rise to more than 200 cell types ( 10 , 18 , 41 , 129 ) . Studies aimed at elucidating how cells establish gene expression asymmetry identiﬁed noise , generated by stochastic gene expression , as a major source of mRNA and protein variability ( 38 , 107 , 109 , 144 ) . Noise in gene expression is deﬁned as the standard deviation divided by the mean of the distribution of mRNAs or protein concentration , and it contains extrinsic and intrinsic components ( 38 ) . The ﬁrst component is produced by the ﬂuctuations of the proteins control - ling gene expression ( i . e . , transcription factors , polymerases , ribosomes , etc . ) , while the second component depends on the stochastic nature of each step during gene expression ( i . e . , promoter activation , transcription , translation , and mRNA and protein decay ) ( 38 ) . The use of single - cell organisms such as E . coli or S . cerevisiae enables the quantiﬁcation of intrinsic and extrinsic noise in isogenic populations . Substantial variability was demonstrated by using ﬂuorescent protein re - porters ( e . g . , CFP and YFP ) expressed by two identical alleles ( 38 , 107 ) or by different promoter variants ( 55 , 56 ) . These studies revealed that noise is gene speciﬁc and that unique combinations of regulatory sequences ( promoter , enhancers , insulators ) and transcriptional regulators ( TF ex - pression , frequency , or amplitude ) inﬂuence the ratio between intrinsic and extrinsic noise and , in turn , the mRNAs and protein levels . In eukaryotic cells , a substantial contribution to variability is attributable to transcriptional bursting ( 9 , 46 , 48 , 107 ) . smFISH or live - imaging experiments in bacteria , yeast , or mammalian cells were extensively used to estimate the mean and the variance of mRNAs in a population of cells ( 72 , 104 , 144 , 150 ) . This approach calculates the size and frequency of transcription bursts ( 48 , 69 , 104 , 121 , 145 , 150 ) and found a positive correlation between the burst size and the noise amplitude ( 45 , 104 , 113 , 114 , 128 , 150 ) . Gene expression noise is not restricted to transcription . mRNA translation is also a bursty pro - cess that must deal with highly variable amounts of mRNAs ( 17 , 89 , 143 , 146 ) . Studies performed in budding and ﬁssion yeasts revealed that cells express on average between 0 and 1 , 000 mRNA molecules per cell , per gene ( 61 , 82 , 150 ) . In addition , 75 % of genes have between 0 and 10 mRNA molecules ( 61 , 150 ) . These observations suggested the possibility that cells could adapt the translation rate to buffer mRNA concentrations ( 76 ) . Several studies , using a combination of RNA sequencing ( RNA - seq ) and ribosome proﬁling , came to suggest that there is no signiﬁcant com - pensation at the level of translation rate ( 1 , 7 , 94 ) , implying protein - level regulation relies on post - translational mechanisms controlling protein stability ( 45 ) . Consistent with this view , the absolute quantiﬁcationsofmRNAsandproteinsinmammaliancellsbyusingacombinationofRNA - seqand pSILAC ( pulsed stable isotope labeling by / with amino acids in cell culture ) ( 112 ) revealed that the 98 Tutucci et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47CH05 _ Wu ARI 21 April 2018 9 : 6 mRNA levels inﬂuence ∼ 84 % of the variance in protein levels , while the translation rate controls ∼ 9 % of the protein levels ( 73 , 112 ) . Despite the progress obtained in measuring mRNA and pro - tein levels in single cells , a few studies reported the simultaneous quantiﬁcation of both molecules in the same cells and at a large scale ( 30 , 132 ) . In contrast to the results obtained with global approaches , these studies revealed no correlation between mRNA and protein copy numbers in single cells . The work from Taniguchi et al . ( 132 ) simultaneously imaged 137 proteins and mRNAs in E . coli and found no signiﬁcant correlation . One possible explanation for this result is that the mRNAs (cid:2) half - life is shorter compared to that of the proteins . However , it is also possible that extrinsic noise during translation , due to translation factor availability or mRNA and protein decay , contributes to variability more than previously considered ( 27 , 29 ) . For instance , localization of mRNAs in discrete compartments can signiﬁcantly change the probability of mRNAs being translated ( 16 , 87 ) . The equilibrium between noise reduction and noise ampliﬁcation is a dynamic process that cells use to guarantee reproducibility of cellular responses and , in contrast , phenotypic diversity to survive in response to stressful conditions . A priority for future research is to develop tools that simultaneously measure mRNA and protein levels in single cells to understand the sources of noise and how they are coordinated to generate consistent phenotypes . FUTURE DIRECTIONS : GENE EXPRESSION ANALYSIS IN SINGLE CELLS OVER TIME To understand how rare and dynamic events during gene expression generate reproducible phe - notypes , developing methods that follow mRNAs and proteins in single cells over long peri - ods of time is essential . Substantial progress has been made in developing single - cell tools for measuring DNA , RNA , and proteins ( 37 , 143 , 149 ) , but we have yet to be able to perform si - multaneous in situ transcriptomic and proteomic analysis over several generations and in intact tissue . Current methods of gene expression analysis combined with lineage tracing are mainly per - formed in ﬁxed cells ( 43 ) . Even with high resolution , ﬁxed methods remain indirect approaches to study gene expression dynamics . As previously described , RNA labeling methods like the MS2 or the PP7 systems have proven to be efﬁcient for visualizing and quantifying single - mRNA molecules in living cells , but they have been restricted to speciﬁc , genetically labeled mRNAs . New methods are needed to label many endogenous mRNAs in living cells , preferably without genetically engineering the cells , so that multiple native mRNAs can be examined simultaneously . Continuous long - term imaging of single - mRNA molecules ( for several cell divisions ) remains challenging in both living cells and tissues . Several problems limit this kind of approach : lim - ited ﬂuorophore brightness and photostability , phototoxicity and the capability of keeping cells , and tissues and organs in physiological conditions for long periods of time ( 66 , 77 ) . We pre - dict that these limitations represent the future challenges to advancing the ﬁeld of quantitative biology . DISCLOSURE STATEMENT Robert H . Singer and Evelina Tutucci have submitted a provisional application to the US Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce ( no . 62 / 487 , 058 ) for a new MS2 system for the visualization of single mRNA ( described in this review and Reference 138 ) . It has not been licensed to any corporation , and the authors ( Robert H . Singer , Evelina Tutucci , and Maria Vera ) are the sole inventors . www . annualreviews . org • Imaging mRNA In Vivo 99 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47CH05 _ Wu ARI 21 April 2018 9 : 6 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by NIH Grant GM57071 to R . H . S . E . T . was supported by Swiss National Science Foundation Fellowships P2GEP3 _ 155692 and P300PA _ 164717 . N . M . L . was supported by NIH Training Grant T32 GM007445 . LITERATURE CITED 1 . Albert FW , Muzzey D , Weissman JS , Kruglyak L . 2014 . Genetic inﬂuences on translation in yeast . PLOS Genet . 10 : e1004692 2 . Alpert T , Herzel L , Neugebauer KM . 2017 . Perfect timing : splicing and transcription rates in living cells . WIREs RNA 8 : e1401 3 . Bahar Halpern K , Caspi I , Lemze D , Levy M , Landen S , et al . 2015 . Nuclear retention of mRNA in mammalian tissues . Cell Rep . 13 : 2653 – 62 4 . Bahar Halpern K , Tanami S , Landen S , Chapal M , Szlak L , et al . 2015 . Bursty gene expression in the intact mammalian liver . Mol . Cell 58 : 147 – 56 5 . Battich N , Stoeger T , Pelkmans L . 2013 . Image - based transcriptomics in thousands of single human cells at single - molecule resolution . Nat . Methods 10 : 1127 – 33 6 . Battich N , Stoeger T , Pelkmans L . 2015 . Control of transcript variability in single mammalian cells . Cell 163 : 1596 – 610 7 . Battle A , Khan Z , Wang SH , Mitrano A , Ford MJ , et al . 2015 . Genomic variation . Impact of regulatory variation from RNA to protein . Science 347 : 664 – 67 8 . Bertrand E , Chartrand P , Schaefer M , Shenoy SM , Singer RH , Long RM . 1998 . Localization of ASH1 mRNA particles in living yeast . Mol . Cell 2 : 437 – 45 9 . Blake WJ , KÆrn M , Cantor CR , Collins JJ . 2003 . Noise in eukaryotic gene expression . Nature 422 : 633 – 37 10 . Boiani M , Sch¨oler HR . 2005 . Regulatory networks in embryo - derived pluripotent stem cells . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 6 : 872 – 84 11 . Bothma JP , Garcia HG , Esposito E , Schlissel G , Gregor T , Levine M . 2014 . Dynamic regulation of eve stripe 2 expression reveals transcriptional bursts in living Drosophila embryos . PNAS 111 : 10598 – 603 12 . Bothma JP , Garcia HG , Ng S , Perry MW , Gregor T , Levine M . 2015 . Enhancer additivity and non - additivity are determined by enhancer strength in the Drosophila embryo . eLife 4 : e07956 13 . Bregman A , Avraham - Kelbert M , Barkai O , Duek L , Guterman A , Choder M . 2011 . Promoter elements regulate cytoplasmic mRNA decay . Cell 147 : 1473 – 83 14 . Brodsky AS , Silver PA . 2002 . Identifying proteins that affect mRNA localization in living cells . Methods 26 : 151 – 55 15 . Brody Y , Neufeld N , Bieberstein N , Causse SZ , Bohnlein EM , et al . 2011 . The in vivo kinetics of RNA polymerase II elongation during co - transcriptional splicing . PLOS Biol . 9 : e1000573 16 . Buxbaum AR , Haimovich G , Singer RH . 2015 . In the right place at the right time : visualizing and understanding mRNA localization . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 16 : 95 – 109 17 . Cai L , Friedman N , Xie XS . 2006 . Stochastic protein expression in individual cells at the single molecule level . Nature 440 : 358 – 62 18 . Chambers I , Silva J , Colby D , Nichols J , Nijmeijer B , et al . 2007 . Nanog safeguards pluripotency and mediates germline development . Nature 450 : 1230 – 34 19 . Chao JA , Patskovsky Y , Almo SC , Singer RH . 2008 . Structural basis for the coevolution of a viral RNA – protein complex . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 15 : 103 – 5 20 . Chen H , Larson DR . 2016 . What have single - molecule studies taught us about gene expression ? Genes Dev . 30 : 1796 – 810 21 . Chen J , Nikolaitchik O , Singh J , Wright A , Bencsics CE , et al . 2009 . High efﬁciency of HIV - 1 genomic RNA packaging and heterozygote formation revealed by single virion analysis . PNAS 106 : 13535 – 40 22 . Chen KH , Boettiger AN , Mofﬁtt JR , Wang S , Zhuang X . 2015 . RNA imaging . Spatially resolved , highly multiplexed RNA proﬁling in single cells . Science 348 : aaa6090 100 Tutucci et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47CH05 _ Wu ARI 21 April 2018 9 : 6 23 . Chong S , Chen C , Ge H , Xie XS . 2014 . Mechanism of transcriptional bursting in bacteria . Cell 158 : 314 – 26 24 . Chou T . 2003 . Ribosome recycling , diffusion , and mRNA loop formation in translational regulation . Biophys . J . 85 : 755 – 73 25 . Chou T , Lakatos G . 2004 . Clustered bottlenecks in mRNA translation and protein synthesis . Phys . Rev . Lett . 93 : 198101 26 . Coulon A , Ferguson ML , de Turris V , Palangat M , Chow CC , Larson DR . 2014 . Kinetic competition during the transcription cycle results in stochastic RNA processing . eLife 3 : e03939 27 . DacheuxE , MalysN , MengX , RamachandranV , MendesP , McCarthyJEG . 2017 . Translationinitiation events on structured eukaryotic mRNAs generate gene expression noise . Nucleic Acids Res . 45 : 6981 – 92 28 . Dar RD , Razooky BS , Singh A , Trimeloni TV , McCollum JM , et al . 2012 . Transcriptional burst fre - quency and burst size are equally modulated across the human genome . PNAS 109 : 17454 – 59 29 . Dar RD , Razooky BS , Weinberger LS , Cox CD , Simpson ML . 2015 . The low noise limit in gene expression . PLOS ONE 10 : e0140969 30 . DarmanisS , GallantCJ , MarinescuVD , NiklassonM , SegermanA , etal . 2016 . Simultaneousmultiplexed measurement of RNA and proteins in single cells . Cell Rep . 14 : 380 – 89 31 . Darzacq X , Shav - Tal Y , de Turris V , Brody Y , Shenoy SM , et al . 2007 . In vivo dynamics of RNA polymerase II transcription . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 14 : 796 – 806 32 . de Turris V , Nicholson P , Orozco RZ , Singer RH , Muhlemann O . 2011 . Cotranscriptional effect of a premature termination codon revealed by live - cell imaging . RNA 17 : 2094 – 107 33 . Derrida B . 1998 . An exactly soluble non - equilibrium system : the asymmetric simple exclusion process . Phys . Rep . 301 : 65 – 83 34 . Derrida B , Domany E , Mukamel D . 1992 . An exact solution of a one - dimensional asymmetric exclusion model with open boundaries . J . Stat . Phys . 69 : 667 – 87 35 . Dolgosheina EV , Jeng SCY , Panchapakesan SSS , Cojocaru R , Chen PSK , et al . 2014 . RNA Mango aptamer - ﬂuorophore : a bright , high - afﬁnity complex for RNA labeling and tracking . ACS Chem . Biol . 9 : 2412 – 20 36 . Dundr M , Hoffmann - Rohrer U , Hu Q , Grummt I , Rothblum LI , et al . 2002 . A kinetic framework for a mammalian RNA polymerase in vivo . Science 298 : 1623 – 26 37 . Eliscovich C , Shenoy SM , Singer RH . 2017 . Imaging mRNA and protein interactions within neurons . PNAS 114 : E1875 – 84 38 . Elowitz MB , Levine AJ , Siggia ED , Swain PS . 2002 . Stochastic gene expression in a single cell . Science 297 : 1183 – 86 39 . Femino AM , Fay FS , Fogarty K , Singer RH . 1998 . Visualization of single RNA transcripts in situ . Science 280 : 585 – 90 40 . Femino AM , Fogarty K , Lifshitz LM , Carrington W , Singer RH . 2003 . Visualization of single molecules of mRNA in situ . Methods Enzymol . 361 : 245 – 304 41 . Filipczyk A , Marr C , Hastreiter S , Feigelman J , Schwarzﬁscher M , et al . 2015 . Network plasticity of pluripotency transcription factors in embryonic stem cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 : 1235 – 46 42 . Filonov GS , Moon JD , Svensen N , Jaffrey SR . 2014 . Broccoli : rapid selection of an RNA mimic of green ﬂuorescent protein by ﬂuorescence - based selection and directed evolution . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 136 : 16299 – 308 43 . Frieda KL , Linton JM , Hormoz S , Choi J , Chow K - HK , et al . 2017 . Synthetic recording and in situ readout of lineage information in single cells . Nature 541 : 107 – 11 44 . Fukaya T , Lim B , Levine M . 2016 . Enhancer control of transcriptional bursting . Cell 166 : 358 – 68 45 . Gandhi SJ , Zenklusen D , Lionnet T , Singer RH . 2011 . Transcription of functionally related constitutive genes is not coordinated . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 18 : 27 – 34 46 . Garcia HG , Tikhonov M , Lin A , Gregor T . 2013 . Quantitative imaging of transcription in living Drosophila embryos links polymerase activity to patterning . Curr . Biol . 23 : 2140 – 45 47 . Garcia JF , Parker R . 2015 . MS2 coat proteins bound to yeast mRNAs block 5 (cid:2) to 3 (cid:2) degradation and trap mRNA decay products : implications for the localization of mRNAs by MS2 - MCP system . RNA 21 : 1393 – 95 www . annualreviews . org • Imaging mRNA In Vivo 101 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47CH05 _ Wu ARI 21 April 2018 9 : 6 48 . Golding I , Paulsson J , Zawilski SM , Cox EC . 2005 . Real - time kinetics of gene activity in individual bacteria . Cell 123 : 1025 – 36 49 . Grimm JB , English BP , Choi H , Muthusamy AK , Mehl BP , et al . 2016 . Bright photoactivatable ﬂuo - rophores for single - molecule imaging . Nat . Methods 13 : 985 – 88 50 . Grunwald D , Singer RH . 2010 . In vivo imaging of labelled endogenous β - actin mRNA during nucleo - cytoplasmic transport . Nature 467 : 604 – 7 51 . Haimovich G , Choder M , Singer RH , Trcek T . 2013 . The fate of the messenger is pre - determined : a new model for regulation of gene expression . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1829 : 643 – 53 52 . Haimovich G , Zabezhinsky D , Haas B , Slobodin B , Purushothaman P , et al . 2016 . Use of the MS2 aptamer and coat protein for RNA localization in yeast : a response to “MS2 coat proteins bound to yeast mRNAs block 5 (cid:2) to 3 (cid:2) degradation and trap mRNA decay products : implications for the localization of mRNAs by MS2 - MCP system . ” RNA 22 : 660 – 66 53 . Halpern KB , Shenhav R , Matcovitch - Natan O , Toth B , Lemze D , et al . 2017 . Single - cell spatial recon - struction reveals global division of labour in the mammalian liver . Nature 542 : 352 – 56 54 . Halstead JM , Lionnet T , Wilbertz JH , Wippich F , Ephrussi A , et al . 2015 . An RNA biosensor for imaging the ﬁrst round of translation from single cells to living animals . Science 347 : 1367 – 671 55 . Hansen AS , O’Shea EK . 2013 . Promoter decoding of transcription factor dynamics involves a trade - off between noise and control of gene expression . Mol . Syst . Biol . 9 : 704 56 . Hansen AS , O’Shea EK . 2015 . Limits on information transduction through amplitude and frequency regulation of transcription factor activity . eLife 4 : e06559 57 . Hansen CH , van Oudenaarden A . 2013 . Allele - speciﬁc detection of single mRNA molecules in situ . Nat . Methods 10 : 869 – 71 58 . Hanson G , Coller J . 2018 . Codon optimality , bias and usage in translation and mRNA decay . Nat Rev Mol . Cell Biol . 19 : 20 – 30 59 . Heinrich S , Derrer CP , Lari A , Weis K , Montpetit B . 2017 . Temporal and spatial regulation of mRNA export : Single particle RNA - imaging provides new tools and insights . BioEssays 39 : 1600124 60 . Heinrich S , Sidler CL , Azzalin CM , Weis K . 2017 . Stem - loop RNA labeling can affect nuclear and cytoplasmic mRNA processing . RNA 23 : 134 – 41 61 . Hocine S , Raymond P , Zenklusen D , Chao JA , Singer RH . 2013 . Single - molecule analysis of gene expression using two - color RNA labeling in live yeast . Nat . Methods 10 : 119 – 21 62 . Horvathova I , Voigt F , Kotrys AV , Zhan Y , Artus - Revel CG , et al . 2017 . The dynamics of mRNA turnover revealed by single - molecule imaging in single cells . Mol . Cell 68 : 615 – 25 . e9 63 . Jansen A , Verstrepen KJ . 2011 . Nucleosome positioning in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 75 : 301 – 20 64 . Karousis ED , Nasif S , M¨uhlemann O . 2016 . Nonsense - mediated mRNA decay : novel mechanistic in - sights and biological impact . WIREs RNA 7 : 661 – 82 65 . Katz ZB , English BP , Lionnet T , Yoon YJ , Monnier N , et al . 2016 . Mapping translation ‘hot - spots’ in live cells by tracking single molecules of mRNA and ribosomes . eLife 5 : e10415 66 . Laissue PP , Alghamdi RA , Tomancak P , Reynaud EG , Shroff H . 2017 . Assessing phototoxicity in live ﬂuorescence imaging . Nat . Methods 14 : 657 – 61 67 . Lange S , Katayama Y , Schmid M , Burkacky O , Brauchle C , et al . 2008 . Simultaneous transport of different localized mRNA species revealed by live - cell imaging . Trafﬁc 9 : 1256 – 67 68 . LarsonDR , FritzschC , SunL , MengX , LawrenceDS , SingerRH . 2013 . Directobservationoffrequency modulated transcription in single cells using light activation . eLife 2 : e00750 69 . Larson DR , Zenklusen D , Wu B , Chao JA , Singer RH . 2011 . Real - time observation of transcription initiation and elongation on an endogenous yeast gene . Science 332 : 475 – 78 70 . Lenstra TL , Coulon A , Chow CC , Larson DR . 2015 . Single - molecule imaging reveals a switch between spurious and functional ncRNA transcription . Mol . Cell 60 : 597 – 610 71 . Lenstra TL , Rodriguez J , Chen H , Larson DR . 2016 . Transcription dynamics in living cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 45 : 25 – 47 102 Tutucci et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47CH05 _ Wu ARI 21 April 2018 9 : 6 72 . Levsky JM , Shenoy SM , Pezo RC , Singer RH . 2002 . Single - cell gene expression proﬁling . Science 297 : 836 – 40 73 . Li JJ , Bickel PJ , Biggin MD . 2014 . System wide analyses have underestimated protein abundances and the importance of transcription in mammals . PeerJ 2 : e270 74 . Lim F , Downey TP , Peabody DS . 2001 . Translational repression and speciﬁc RNA binding by the coat protein of the Pseudomonas phage PP7 . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 22507 – 13 75 . Lionnet T , Czaplinski K , Darzacq X , Shav - Tal Y , Wells AL , et al . 2011 . A transgenic mouse for in vivo detection of endogenous labeled mRNA . Nat . Methods 8 : 165 – 70 76 . Liu Y , Beyer A , Aebersold R . 2016 . On the dependency of cellular protein levels on mRNA abundance . Cell 165 : 535 – 50 77 . Liu Z , Lavis LD , Betzig E . 2015 . Imaging live - cell dynamics and structure at the single - molecule level . Mol . Cell 58 : 644 – 59 78 . Long X , Colonell J , Wong AM , Singer RH , Lionnet T . 2017 . Quantitative mRNA imaging throughout the entire Drosophila brain . Nat . Methods 14 : 703 – 6 79 . Los GV , Encell LP , McDougall MG , Hartzell DD , Karassina N , et al . 2008 . HaloTag : a novel protein labeling technology for cell imaging and protein analysis . ACS Chem . Biol . 3 : 373 – 82 80 . Lubeck E , Cai L . 2012 . Single - cell systems biology by super - resolution imaging and combinatorial labeling . Nat . Methods 9 : 743 – 48 81 . Lubeck E , Coskun AF , Zhiyentayev T , Ahmad M , Cai L . 2014 . Single - cell in situ RNA proﬁling by sequential hybridization . Nat . Methods 11 : 360 – 61 82 . Marguerat S , Schmidt A , Codlin S , Chen W , Aebersold R , Bahler J . 2012 . Quantitative analysis of ﬁssion yeast transcriptomes and proteomes in proliferating and quiescent cells . Cell 151 : 671 – 83 83 . Martin RM , Rino J , Carvalho C , Kirchhausen T , Carmo - Fonseca M . 2013 . Live - cell visualization of pre - mRNA splicing with single - molecule sensitivity . Cell Rep . 4 : 1144 – 55 84 . Mellis IA , Gupte R , Raj A , Rouhanifard SH . 2017 . Visualizing adenosine - to - inosine RNA editing in single mammalian cells . Nat . Methods 14 : 801 – 4 85 . Messier V , Zenklusen D , Michnick SW . 2013 . A nutrient - responsive pathway that determines M phase timing through control of B - cyclin mRNA stability . Cell 153 : 1080 – 93 86 . Mofﬁtt JR , Hao J , Bambah - Mukku D , Lu T , Dulac C , Zhuang X . 2016 . High - performance multi - plexed ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization in culture and tissue with matrix imprinting and clearing . PNAS 113 : 14456 – 61 87 . Moor AE , Golan M , Massasa EE , Lemze D , Weizman T , et al . 2017 . Global mRNA polarization regulates translation efﬁciency in the intestinal epithelium . Science 357 : 1299 – 303 88 . Mor A , Suliman S , Ben - Yishay R , Yunger S , Brody Y , Shav - Tal Y . 2010 . Dynamics of single mRNP nucleocytoplasmic transport and export through the nuclear pore in living cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 : 543 – 52 89 . Morisaki T , Lyon K , DeLuca KF , DeLuca JG , English BP , et al . 2016 . Real - time quantiﬁcation of single RNA translation dynamics in living cells . Science 352 : 1425 – 29 90 . Morisaki T , M¨uller WG , Golob N , Mazza D , McNally JG . 2014 . Single - molecule analysis of transcrip - tion factor binding at transcription sites in live cells . Nat . Commun . 5 : 4456 91 . Mueller F , Senecal A , Tantale K , Marie - Nelly H , Ly N , et al . 2013 . FISH - quant : automatic counting of transcripts in 3D FISH images . Nat . Methods 10 : 277 – 78 92 . Mueller F , Stasevich TJ , Mazza D , McNally JG . 2013 . Quantifying transcription factor kinetics : at work or at play ? Crit . Rev . Biochem . Mol . Biol . 48 : 492 – 514 93 . Munsky B , Neuert G , van Oudenaarden A . 2012 . Using gene expression noise to understand gene regulation . Science 336 : 183 – 87 94 . Muzzey D , Sherlock G , Weissman JS . 2014 . Extensive and coordinated control of allele - speciﬁc expres - sion by both transcription and translation in Candida albicans . Genome Res . 24 : 963 – 73 95 . Nelles DA , Fang MY , O’Connell MR , Xu JL , Markmiller SJ , et al . 2016 . Programmable RNA tracking in live cells with CRISPR / Cas9 . Cell 165 : 488 – 96 96 . Paige JS , Wu KY , Jaffrey SR . 2011 . RNA mimics of green ﬂuorescent protein . Science 333 : 642 – 46 97 . ParkHY , BuxbaumAR , SingerRH . 2010 . SinglemRNAtrackinginlivecells . MethodsEnzymol . 472 : 387 – 406 www . annualreviews . org • Imaging mRNA In Vivo 103 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47CH05 _ Wu ARI 21 April 2018 9 : 6 98 . Park HY , Lim H , Yoon YJ , Follenzi A , Nwokafor C , et al . 2014 . Visualization of dynamics of single endogenous mRNA labeled in live mouse . Science 343 : 422 – 24 99 . Parker R . 2012 . RNA degradation in Saccharomyces cerevisae . Genetics 191 : 671 – 702 100 . Paulsson J . 2004 . Summing up the noise in gene networks . Nature 427 : 415 – 18 101 . Pelechano V , Wei W , Steinmetz LM . 2015 . Widespread co - translational RNA decay reveals ribosome dynamics . Cell 161 : 1400 – 12 102 . P´erez - Ort´ın JE , Alepuz P , Ch´avez S , Choder M . 2013 . Eukaryotic mRNA decay : methodologies , path - ways , and links to other stages of gene expression . J . Mol . Biol . 425 : 3750 – 75 103 . Pichon X , Bastide A , Saﬁeddine A , Chouaib R , Samacoits A , et al . 2016 . Visualization of single endoge - nous polysomes reveals the dynamics of translation in live human cells . J . Cell Biol . 214 : 769 – 81 104 . Raj A , Peskin CS , Tranchina D , Vargas DY , Tyagi S . 2006 . Stochastic mRNA synthesis in mammalian cells . PLOS Biol . 4 : e309 105 . Raj A , van den Bogaard P , Rifkin SA , van Oudenaarden A , Tyagi S . 2008 . Imaging individual mRNA molecules using multiple singly labeled probes . Nat . Methods 5 : 877 – 79 106 . Raj A , van Oudenaarden A . 2008 . Nature , nurture , or chance : stochastic gene expression and its conse - quences . Cell 135 : 216 – 26 107 . Raser JM , O’Shea EK . 2004 . Control of stochasticity in eukaryotic gene expression . Science 304 : 1811 – 14 108 . Rodriguez EA , Campbell RE , Lin JY , Lin MZ , Miyawaki A , et al . 2017 . The growing and glowing toolbox of ﬂuorescent and photoactive proteins . Trends Biochem . Sci . 42 : 111 – 29 109 . Sanchez A , Golding I . 2013 . Genetic determinants and cellular constraints in noisy gene expression . Science 342 : 1188 – 93 110 . SarouﬁmMA , BensidounP , RaymondP , RahmanS , KrauseMR , etal . 2015 . Thenuclearbasketmediates perinuclear mRNA scanning in budding yeast . J . Cell Biol . 211 : 1131 – 40 111 . SchmidtU , BasyukE , RobertMC , YoshidaM , VilleminJP , etal . 2011 . Real - timeimagingofcotranscrip - tional splicing reveals a kinetic model that reduces noise : implications for alternative splicing regulation . J . Cell Biol . 193 : 819 – 29 112 . Schwanhausser B , Busse D , Li N , Dittmar G , Schuchhardt J , et al . 2011 . Global quantiﬁcation of mammalian gene expression control . Nature 473 : 337 – 42 113 . Senecal A , Munsky B , Proux F , Ly N , Braye FE , et al . 2014 . Transcription factors modulate c - Fos transcriptional bursts . Cell Rep . 8 : 75 – 83 114 . Sepulveda LA , Xu H , Zhang J , Wang M , Golding I . 2016 . Measurement of gene regulation in individual cells reveals rapid switching between promoter states . Science 351 : 1218 – 22 115 . Shaffer SM , Wu M - T , Levesque MJ , Raj A . 2013 . Turbo FISH : a method for rapid single molecule RNA FISH . PLOS ONE 8 : e75120 116 . ShahP , DingY , NiemczykM , KudlaG , PlotkinJB . 2013 . Rate - limitingstepsinyeastproteintranslation . Cell 153 : 1589 – 601 117 . Shaw LB , Sethna JP , Lee KH . 2004 . Mean - ﬁeld approaches to the totally asymmetric exclusion process with quenched disorder and large particles . Phys . Rev . E 70 : 021901 118 . Shorter J . 2016 . Membraneless organelles : phasing in and out . Nat . Chem . 8 : 528 – 30 119 . Siebrasse JP , Kaminski T , Kubitscheck U . 2012 . Nuclear export of single native mRNA molecules observed by light sheet ﬂuorescence microscopy . PNAS 109 : 9426 – 31 120 . Singh G , Pratt G , Yeo GW , Moore MJ . 2015 . The clothes make the mRNA : past and present trends in mRNP fashion . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 84 : 325 – 54 121 . Skinner SO , Sepulveda LA , Xu H , Golding I . 2013 . Measuring mRNA copy number in individual Escherichia coli cells using single - molecule ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization . Nat . Protoc . 8 : 1100 – 13 122 . Smith CS , Lari A , Derrer CP , Ouwehand A , Rossouw A , et al . 2015 . In vivo single - particle imaging of nuclear mRNA export inbuddingyeastdemonstratesan essential role forMex67p . J . Cell Biol . 211 : 1121 – 30 123 . Smith CS , Preibisch S , Joseph A , Abrahamsson S , Rieger B , et al . 2015 . Nuclear accessibility of β - actin mRNA is measured by 3D single - molecule real - time tracking . J . Cell Biol . 209 : 609 – 19 124 . Speese SD , Ashley J , Jokhi V , Nunnari J , Barria R , et al . 2012 . Nuclear envelope budding enables large ribonucleoprotein particle export during synaptic Wnt signaling . Cell 149 : 832 – 46 104 Tutucci et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47CH05 _ Wu ARI 21 April 2018 9 : 6 125 . Stasevich TJ , Hayashi - Takanaka Y , Sato Y , Maehara K , Ohkawa Y , et al . 2014 . Regulation of RNA polymerase II activation by histone acetylation in single living cells . Nature 516 : 272 – 75 126 . Strack RL , Disney MD , Jaffrey SR . 2013 . A superfolding Spinach2 reveals the dynamic nature of trinu - cleotide repeat - containing RNA . Nat . Methods 10 : 1219 – 24 127 . Subramaniam AR , Zid BM , O’Shea EK . 2014 . An integrated approach reveals regulatory controls on bacterial translation elongation . Cell 159 : 1200 – 11 128 . Suter DM , Molina N , Gatﬁeld D , Schneider K , Schibler U , Naef F . 2011 . Mammalian genes are tran - scribed with widely different bursting kinetics . Science 332 : 472 – 74 129 . Takahashi K , Yamanaka S . 2006 . Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse embryonic and adult ﬁbroblast cultures by deﬁned factors . Cell 126 : 663 – 76 130 . Takizawa PA , Vale RD . 2000 . The myosin motor , Myo4p , binds Ash1 mRNA via the adapter protein , She3p . PNAS 97 : 5273 – 78 131 . Tanenbaum ME , Gilbert LA , Qi LS , Weissman JS , Vale RD . 2014 . A protein - tagging system for signal ampliﬁcation in gene expression and ﬂuorescence imaging . Cell 159 : 635 – 46 132 . Taniguchi Y , Choi PJ , Li G - W , Chen H , Babu M , et al . 2010 . Quantifying E . coli proteome and tran - scriptome with single - molecule sensitivity in single cells . Science 329 : 533 – 38 133 . Tantale K , Mueller F , Kozulic - Pirher A , Lesne A , Victor JM , et al . 2016 . A single - molecule view of transcription reveals convoys of RNA polymerases and multi - scale bursting . Nat . Commun . 7 : 12248 134 . Trcek T , Larson DR , Moldon A , Query CC , Singer RH . 2011 . Single - molecule mRNA decay measure - ments reveal promoter - regulated mRNA stability in yeast . Cell 147 : 1484 – 97 135 . Trcek T , Sato H , Singer RH , Maquat LE . 2013 . Temporal and spatial characterization of nonsense - mediated mRNA decay . Genes Dev . 27 : 541 – 51 136 . Tsai A , Muthusamy AK , Alves MR , Lavis LD , Singer RH , et al . 2017 . Nuclear microenvironments modulate transcription from low - afﬁnity enhancers . eLife 6 : e28975 137 . Tutucci E , Stutz F . 2011 . Keeping mRNPs in check during assembly and nuclear export . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 : 377 – 84 138 . TutucciE , Vera M , BiswasJ , Garcia J , ParkerR , SingerRH . 2018 . AnimprovedMS2systemforaccurate reporting of the mRNA life cycle . Nat . Methods 15 : 81 – 89 139 . Tyagi S , Kramer FR . 1996 . Molecular beacons : probes that ﬂuoresce upon hybridization . Nat . Biotechnol . 14 : 303 – 8 140 . Wang C , Han B , Zhou R , Zhuang X . 2016 . Real - time imaging of translation on single mRNA transcripts in live cells . Cell 165 : 990 – 1001 141 . Wu B , Buxbaum AR , Katz ZB , Yoon YJ , Singer RH . 2015 . Quantifying protein - mRNA interactions in single live cells . Cell 162 : 211 – 20 142 . Wu B , Chao JA , Singer RH . 2012 . Fluorescence ﬂuctuation spectroscopy enables quantitative imaging of single mRNAs in living cells . Biophys . J . 102 : 2936 – 44 143 . Wu B , Eliscovich C , Yoon YJ , Singer RH . 2016 . Translation dynamics of single mRNAs in live cells and neurons . Science 352 : 1430 – 35 144 . Xu H , Sepulveda LA , Figard L , Sokac AM , Golding I . 2015 . Combining protein and mRNA quantiﬁ - cation to decipher transcriptional regulation . Nat . Methods 12 : 739 – 42 145 . Xu H , Skinner SO , Sokac AM , Golding I . 2016 . Stochastic kinetics of nascent RNA . Phys . Rev . Lett . 117 : 128101 146 . Yan X , Hoek TA , Vale RD , Tanenbaum ME . 2016 . Dynamics of translation of single mRNA molecules in vivo . Cell 165 : 976 – 89 147 . Yang L , Titlow J , Ennis D , Smith C , Mitchell J , et al . 2017 . Single molecule ﬂuorescence in situ hy - bridisation for quantitating post - transcriptional regulation in Drosophila brains . Methods 126 : 166 – 76 148 . Yoon YJ , Wu B , Buxbaum AR , Das S , Tsai A , et al . 2016 . Glutamate - induced RNA localization and translation in neurons . PNAS 113 : E6877 – 86 149 . Yuan GC , Cai L , Elowitz M , Enver T , Fan G , et al . 2017 . Challenges and emerging directions in single - cell analysis . Genome Biol . 18 : 84 150 . Zenklusen D , Larson DR , Singer RH . 2008 . Single - RNA counting reveals alternative modes of gene expression in yeast . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 15 : 1263 – 71 www . annualreviews . org • Imaging mRNA In Vivo 105 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47CH05 _ Wu ARI 21 April 2018 9 : 6 151 . Zhang J , Fei J , Leslie BJ , Han KY , Kuhlman TE , Ha T . 2015 . Tandem Spinach array for mRNA imaging in living bacterial cells . Sci . Rep . 5 : 17295 152 . Zhao R , Nakamura T , Fu Y , Lazar Z , Spector DL . 2011 . Gene bookmarking accelerates the kinetics of post - mitotic transcriptional re - activation . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 : 1295 – 304 153 . Zia RKP , Dong JJ , Schmittmann B . 2011 . Modeling translation in protein synthesis with TASEP : a tutorial and recent developments . J . Stat . Phys . 144 : 405 – 28 106 Tutucci et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47 _ FrontMatter ARI 11 April 2018 12 : 42 Annual Review of Biophysics Volume 47 , 2018 Contents Structural Basis for G Protein – Coupled Receptor Signaling Sarah C . Erlandson , Conor McMahon , and Andrew C . Kruse (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 1 Collapse Transitions of Proteins and the Interplay Among Backbone , Sidechain , and Solvent Interactions Alex S . Holehouse and Rohit V . Pappu (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 19 Measuring Entropy in Molecular Recognition by Proteins A . Joshua Wand and Kim A . Sharp (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 41 Assembly of COPI and COPII Vesicular Coat Proteins on Membranes Julien B´ethune and Felix T . Wieland (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 63 Imaging mRNA In Vivo , from Birth to Death Evelina Tutucci , Nathan M . Livingston , Robert H . Singer , and Bin Wu (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 85 Nanodiscs : A Controlled Bilayer Surface for the Study of Membrane Proteins Mark A . McLean , Michael C . Gregory , and Stephen G . Sligar (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 107 The Jigsaw Puzzle of mRNA Translation Initiation in Eukaryotes : A Decade of Structures Unraveling the Mechanics of the Process Yaser Hashem and Joachim Frank (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 125 Hemagglutinin - Mediated Membrane Fusion : A Biophysical Perspective Sander Boonstra , Jelle S . Blijleven , Wouter H . Roos , Patrick R . Onck , Erik van der Giessen , and Antoine M . van Oijen (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 153 Cryo - EM Studies of Pre - mRNA Splicing : From Sample Preparation to Model Visualization Max E . Wilkinson , Pei - Chun Lin , Clemens Plaschka , and Kiyoshi Nagai (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 175 Structure and Dynamics of Membrane Proteins from Solid - State NMR Venkata S . Mandala , Jonathan K . Williams , and Mei Hong (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 201 The Molecular Origin of Enthalpy / Entropy Compensation in Biomolecular Recognition Jerome M . Fox , Mengxia Zhao , Michael J . Fink , Kyungtae Kang , and George M . Whitesides (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 223 v A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47 _ FrontMatter ARI 11 April 2018 12 : 42 Modeling Cell Size Regulation : From Single - Cell - Level Statistics to Molecular Mechanisms and Population - Level Effects Po - Yi Ho , Jie Lin , and Ariel Amir (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 251 Macroscopic Theory for Evolving Biological Systems Akin to Thermodynamics Kunihiko Kaneko and Chikara Furusawa (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 273 Photoreceptors Take Charge : Emerging Principles for Light Sensing Tilman Kottke , Aihua Xie , Delmar S . Larsen , and Wouter D . Hoff (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 291 High - Resolution Hydroxyl Radical Protein Footprinting : Biophysics Tool for Drug Discovery Janna Kiselar and Mark R . Chance (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 315 Dynamic Neutron Scattering by Biological Systems Jeremy C . Smith , Pan Tan , Loukas Petridis , and Liang Hong (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 335 Hydrogel - Tissue Chemistry : Principles and Applications Viviana Gradinaru , Jennifer Treweek , Kristin Overton , and Karl Deisseroth (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 355 Serial Femtosecond Crystallography of G Protein – Coupled Receptors Benjamin Stauch and Vadim Cherezov (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 377 Understanding Biological Regulation Through Synthetic Biology Caleb J . Bashor and James J . Collins (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 399 Distinct Mechanisms of Transcription Initiation by RNA Polymerases I and II Christoph Engel , Simon Neyer , and Patrick Cramer (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 425 Dynamics of Bacterial Gene Regulatory Networks David L . Shis , Matthew R . Bennett , and Oleg A . Igoshin (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 447 Molecular Mechanisms of Fast Neurotransmitter Release Axel T . Brunger , Ucheor B . Choi , Ying Lai , Jeremy Leitz , and Qiangjun Zhou (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 469 Structure and Immune Recognition of the HIV Glycan Shield Max Crispin , Andrew B . Ward , and Ian A . Wilson (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 499 Substrate - Induced Formation of Ribosomal Decoding Center for Accurate and Rapid Genetic Code Translation Michael Y . Pavlov and Ma˚ns Ehrenberg (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 525 The Biophysics of 3D Cell Migration Pei - Hsun Wu , Daniele M . Gilkes , and Denis Wirtz (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 549 Single - Molecule View of Small RNA – Guided Target Search and Recognition Viktorija Globyte , Sung Hyun Kim , and Chirlmin Joo (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 569 vi Contents A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB47 _ FrontMatter ARI 11 April 2018 12 : 42 Behavioral Variability and Phenotypic Diversity in Bacterial Chemotaxis Adam James Waite , Nicholas W . Frankel , and Thierry Emonet (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 595 Mechanotransduction by the Actin Cytoskeleton : Converting Mechanical Stimuli into Biochemical Signals Andrew R . Harris , Pamela Jreij , and Daniel A . Fletcher (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 617 The Physical Properties of Ceramides in Membranes Alicia Alonso and F´elix M . Go˜ni (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 633 The Physics of the Metaphase Spindle David Oriola , Daniel J . Needleman , and Jan Brugu´es (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 655 Indexes Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors , Volumes 43 – 47 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 675 Errata An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Biophysics articles may be found at http : / / www . annualreviews . org / errata / biophys Contents vii A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2018 . 47 : 85 - 106 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g A cce ss p r ov i d e d by Y e s h i v a U n i v e r s it y - A l b e r t E i n s t e i n C o ll e g e o f M e d i c i n e on 07 / 09 / 18 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y .