Acta Mech . Sin . ( 2017 ) 33 ( 2 ) : 222 – 233 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10409 - 016 - 0628 - 5 RESEARCH PAPER Growing actin networks regulated by obstacle size and shape Bo Gong 1 · Ji Lin 1 · Jin Qian 1 Received : 1 September 2016 / Revised : 17 November 2016 / Accepted : 22 November 2016 / Published online : 6 January 2017 © The Chinese Society of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics ; Institute of Mechanics , Chinese Academy of Sciences and Springer - Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2017 Abstract Growing actin networks provide the driving force for the motility of cells and intracellular pathogens . Based on the molecular - level processes of actin polymerization , branching , capping , and depolymerization , we have devel - oped a modeling framework to simulate the stochastic and cooperative behaviors of growing actin networks in pro - pelling obstacles , with an emphasis on the size and shape effects on work capacity and ﬁlament orientation in the grow - ing process . Our results show that the characteristic size of obstacles changes the protrusion power per unit length , with - out inﬂuencing the orientation distribution of actin ﬁlaments in growing networks . In contrast , the geometry of obstacles has a profound effect on ﬁlament patterning , which inﬂu - ences the orientation of ﬁlaments differently when the drag coefﬁcient of environment is small , intermediate , or large . We also discuss the role of various parameters , such as the aspect ratio of obstacles , branching rate , and capping rate , in affecting the protrusion power of network growth . Keywords Actin network · Growth dynamics · Monte Carlo simulation · Size effect · Shape effect 1 Introduction The growth of actin networks is believed to drive cell motil - ity , which is an essential physiological function in various biological processes such as wound healing , cancer metasta - B Jin Qian jqian @ zju . edu . cn 1 Department of Engineering Mechanics , Key Laboratory of Soft Machines and Smart Devices of Zhejiang Province , Zhejiang University , Hangzhou 310027 , China sis , and immune response [ 1 , 2 ] . The unidirectional growth of actin networks against a barrier is pivotal in many dif - ferent biological scenarios , such as lamellipodia protrusion of crawling cells [ 2 ] . Direct observations have indicated that actin assembly is concentrated at the leading edge of lamellipodia for different cell types . Actin - based extension is also crucially important for the intracellular motility of propelling pathogens , for example Listeria [ 2 – 5 ] . Signiﬁ - cant progress has been made in identifying the key proteins and reactions involved in the growth dynamics of actin networks against obstacles . For example , individual actin ﬁlaments can elongate from their plus end through a poly - merization process , pushing against plasma membranes or pathogens ( such as Listeria ) in the direction of movement . Activated by Wiscott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) or bacterial actin assembly - inducing protein ( ActA ) , the nucleation - promoting factor called Arp2 / 3 complex binds to the side of preexisting ﬁlaments and initiates the branching of nascent actin ﬁlaments angled at ∼ 70 ◦ to the original ﬁl - aments [ 2 , 3 , 6 ] . Capping proteins can bind to the plus end of actin ﬁlaments and terminate their growth [ 7 , 8 ] . In the rear of actin networks , actin depolymerization factor ( ADF ) or coﬁlin promotes depolymerization of the minus end , pro - viding fresh actin monomers for polymerization at the front [ 1 , 6 , 9 ] . One of the most essential functions of such actin net - work growth is to provide propulsion force for physiological activity of pathogens , cells , tissues , or organisms , which are considered obstacles in general . The force – velocity relation - ship is a key measurement for the power and effectiveness of the process . Many experiments have been conducted to explore the force – velocity curve of growing actin networks [ 6 , 10 – 14 ] , in which both concave and convex force – velocity relationships have been observed . Despite increasing num - 123 Growing actin networks regulated by obstacle size and shape 223 bers of experiments on actin network growth , the precise mechanisms by which the collective processes in a growing actin network give rise to both convex and concave force – velocity relationships remain elusive . Schreiber et al . [ 15 ] developed a numerical model to simulate the concave force – velocity curve , with excluded volume effects that limit the density of actin ﬁlaments . Smith and Liu [ 16 ] explored the mechanisms of the appearance of both concave and con - vex force – velocity curves and explained the phenomenon as actin network remodeling caused by growth resistance , which is favored by branching and limited by capping . Lee andLiu [ 17 ] simulatedtheforce – velocitycurvetounderstand the phenomenon of force generation using the Brownian dynamic method . The distribution of ﬁlament orientations behind the lead - ing edge of crawling cells is another important property of actin networks , which in turn determines the structure of assembled networks , the exerted contraction to cell - matrix adhesions [ 18 , 19 ] , and the resultant adhesion lifetime [ 20 , 21 ] . MalyandBorisy [ 22 ] proposedatheoreticalmodelbased on the assumption of dendritic nucleation , with the predic - tion that two orientation patterns , ± 35 ◦ and − 70 ◦ / 0 ◦ / 70 ◦ , might exist . Schaus et al . [ 9 ] developed a computational model to simulate the stochastic self - organization of actin ﬁlaments , with the results that a ± 35 ◦ pattern is dominant and a − 70 ◦ / 0 ◦ / 70 ◦ pattern is only possible for the scenar - ios of long ﬂexible ﬁlaments and a low polymerization rate . Weichsel and Schwarz [ 23 , 24 ] studied the orientation dis - tribution with different obstacle shapes using a mean - ﬁeld approach , suggesting that both of the competing patterns , ± 35 ◦ and − 70 ◦ / 0 ◦ / 70 ◦ , are stable . This work focuses on the role of obstacle size and shape in quantitatively affecting the growth dynamics of actin networks against obstacles , which has not been con - vincingly addressed in previous studies . Stochastic network simulations based on microscopic rate processes have been performed , with quantitative results showing that the work - ing power per unit length of actin networks decreases with an increasing size of obstacles . The size of obstacles has a negligible effect on the orientation pattern of ﬁlaments in actin networks , and the aspect ratio of obstacles affects the orientation of ﬁlaments differently depending on whether the drag coefﬁcient of the environment is small , intermediate , or large . 2 Model Considering the fact that the lamellipodium of crawling cells is very ﬂat , here we theoretically model the interplay of actin polymerization , branching , capping , anddepolymerizationin a two - dimensional conﬁguration . Without loss of generality , we let the network grow in the vertical direction immediately below a rigid wall that represents the surface of an obstacle . Periodic boundaries are maintained in the horizontal direc - tion . The present modeling is essentially in two parts : the collective stochastic dynamics of individual reactions within actin networks , and the interaction between the growing actin networks and obstacles due to proximal contact . Figure1 shows the key processes involved in actin network growth , which will be described in what follows . 2 . 1 Polymerization Polymerization occurs at the leading edge of actin networks and generates driving forces in moving obstacles forward . Polymerization is possible for all the plus ends of uncapped ﬁlaments and takes place by adding an actin monomer to the plus end of an existing ﬁlament . Consequently , the ﬁlament increases its length by δ = 2 . 7 nm , which is the effective size of a single monomer . Because individual actin ﬁlaments usually have a persistence length of 10 − 17 µ m [ 15 , 16 , 25 – 27 ] , much larger than the contour length of ﬁlaments in the present study , wetreat eachﬁlament as astraight andrigidrod for simplicity . The effective polymerization rate of individual uncapped ﬁlaments is denoted by K on / c a = 11 . 6 ( µ M · s ) − 1 , where c a is the concentration of actin monomers in the sur - roundings . Taking a typical value of c a = 10 µ M [ 28 ] , we estimate that K on ≈ 116 s − 1 ( Table1 ) . 2 . 2 Branching New ﬁlaments are able to branch from existing ﬁlaments in our model . In the literature , a dendritic - nucleation model and an autocatalytic branching model have been proposed to describe the generation of nascent actin ﬁlaments through branching [ 29 ] . Here , we use the former description by assuming that the Arp2 / 3 complex nucleates new daughter ﬁlaments from preexisting mother ﬁlaments , and the branch - ing rate is constant and independent of existing ﬁlaments , which is actually a description of a zero - order reaction . As mounting evidence from numerous experiments shows [ 16 , 23 , 29 – 31 ] , the branching angle relative to mother ﬁla - ments is chosen randomly from a Gaussian distribution with the mean θ br = 70 ◦ and standard deviation σ = 5 ◦ in our model . For the scenario of unidirectional growth , the orien - tation angles of all branching ﬁlaments must fall into a range between − 90 ◦ and 90 ◦ relative to the vertical direction in the present setup [ 16 , 30 , 31 ] . It is generally believed that the Arp2 / 3 complex is acti - vated by a WASP or ActA . Based on this understanding , branching is only allowed in the vicinity of an obstacle , where WASP and ActA are concentrated . In our model , the branching only takes place within a range of 10 δ behind the obstacle , δ being the size of actin monomers , which is consis - tent with the range of branching zones in earlier studies [ 16 ] . 123 224 B . Gong , et al . Table 1 Parameters used in Monte Carlo simulations Parameter Physical meaning Value Source δ Length of actin monomer 2 . 7nm [ 15 , 16 , 23 ] k B T Thermal energy 4 . 11pN · nm [ 29 ] K on Polymerization rate 116s − 1 [ 28 ] K br Branching rate 100s − 1 [ 16 , 23 ] K cap Capping rate 0 . 2s − 1 [ 15 , 30 ] K off Depolymerization rate 8s − 1 [ 9 ] f 0 Maximum protrusion force of single monomers 1pN [ 32 ] d Length of branching zone 10 δ [ 16 , 33 ] θ br Average branching angle 70 ◦ [ 16 , 23 , 30 ] σ Standard deviation of branching angle 5 ◦ [ 9 , 16 , 22 , 23 ] Moreover , new ﬁlaments can only be created at least ﬁve monomers away behind the plus ends of uncapped ﬁlaments within the branching zone at a constant rate K br , and capped ﬁlaments cannot branch in our simulations [ 16 ] . A repre - sentative value of K br is given in Table1 . To initiate our simulations , 200 ﬁlament seeds are nucleated behind the wall ofobstacleswithrandomlocationandorientation , andtheini - tial length of the ﬁlament seeds is set at ﬁve actin monomers . 2 . 3 Capping Capping proteins can bind to the plus ends of growing ﬁl - aments to prevent them from growing further . The capping rate of each existing ﬁlament is denoted by K cap ( Table1 ) , which is assumed to be a constant for all existing ﬁlaments that are currently uncapped . We also consider the capping process irreversible , meaning that once the plus end of a ﬁl - ament is capped , it remains capped forever in the simulation [ 16 , 33 , 34 ] . 2 . 4 Depolymerization Depolymerization is assumed to be able to occur at the minus ends of actin ﬁlaments , on the condition that the minus ends are not attached to other ﬁlaments . If depoly - merization takes place , an actin monomer is removed from the minus end of a ﬁlament at a constant rate K off . A repre - sentative value of K off is given in Table1 . 2 . 5 Interaction between actin networks and obstacles As polymerization occurs , growing ﬁlaments may impinge on the surface of obstacles , which can generate propulsion forces and drive the motion of obstacles . Peskin et al . [ 35 ] described the force - generation mechanism using the Brow - nian ratchet model , in which thermal ﬂuctuations produce a gap between networks and obstacles for ﬁlament growth . Mogilner and Oster [ 28 ] improved the model by propos - ing an elastic Brownian ratchet model , in which the elastic bending of actin ﬁlaments produces more space for actin monomers to be inserted in . Later , Mogilner and Oster [ 36 ] further extended the description to include the effects of a so - called tethered ratchet , based on the experimental ﬁnding that some actin ﬁlaments are actually attached to the surface of an obstacle . Dickinson and Purich [ 37 ] proposed another mechanism to account for force generation between growing actin networks and obstacles , called the clamped - ﬁlament elongation model . In the present work , we postulate that the growth of ﬁl - aments’ plus ends is possible by inserting actin monomers , even when the gap between the plus ends of actin ﬁlaments and an obstacle’s surface is smaller than the length of a single monomer , which tends to push the obstacle away . This description is consistent with the pioneering work of Mogilner and Oster [ 28 , 36 ] , and we adopt an effective poten - tial to describe the protrusive force f ﬁl corresponding to the insertion of one monomer , namely , f ﬁl = (cid:2) f 0 ( δ − r ) / δ , r (cid:2) δ , 0 , r > δ , ( 1 ) where δ = 2 . 7 nm is the size of single actin monomers , r denotes the gap distance between plus end and obstacle surface in the direction of ﬁlament orientation , and f 0 is the maximum force that one monomer insertion can pro - duce . Clearly , f 0 should be lower than the force threshold that causes single ﬁlaments to buckle [ 32 ] , and we choose f 0 = 1 pN in the following analyses . It should be noted that the effective force propelling an obstacle in the direction of network growth should be f p ﬁl = f ﬁl cos θ , with θ being the angle between ﬁlament direction and the moving direction of the obstacle . It is well known that obstacle propulsion by growing actin networks usually takes place in an aqueous environment , 123 Growing actin networks regulated by obstacle size and shape 225 where a signiﬁcant drag force may arise when the obsta - cle moves . We account for this viscous effect by considering an overdamped situation , where the drag force is determined by the formula ζ V , with ζ being the drag coefﬁcient and V the moving velocity of the obstacle . In our simulations , ζ is varied over a wide range to achieve different levels of viscous resistance from the environment . The total protrusion force on the obstacle can be calculated by summing up the contribution of all ﬁlament impinge - ments . The force balance between ﬁlament protrusion and environmental resistance leads to F = (cid:3) f pﬁl = ζ V , ( 2 ) where the summation goes over all the ﬁlaments that are in the proximity of the obstacle surface within a threshold δ = 2 . 7 nm . 3 Monte Carlo simulations The growth of actin networks is simulated from a start - ing conﬁguration by setting 200 ﬁlament seeds immediately behind the obstacle surface . For physiological relevance , the lateral width of the obstacle is selected as L = 1 µ m in our simulations , and the amplitude A is used to represent different obstacle shapes , with reference to Fig . 1 . Periodic boundary conditions are maintained at the two edges along the growth direction . At each time step , all the microscopic reactions in Sect . 2 may occur simultaneously , which are ran - domly sampled using the Monte Carlo method according to the probabilities determined by prescribed reaction rates . In Fig . 1 Schematic of actin network growth against an obstacle , with microscopic rate processes of polymerization , branching , capping , and depolymerization the following simulations , we adopt the reaction rates listed in Table1 unless stated otherwise . Whether or not individual reactions actually take place is determined using Gillespie’s algorithm [ 38 , 39 ] , as per - formed by Schaus et al . [ 9 ] and Smith and Liu [ 16 ] . The basic idea of such simulations is to cast stochastic trajecto - ries for network evolution in accordance with the previously described reaction rates and average over many independent trials to obtain useful statistical information . At any instant during network evolution , random numbers are generated to determine which reaction will occur next and how long it will take . In our model of network growth , it is also necessary to determine where the next reaction event should occur . As described in Sect . 2 , each existing ﬁlament , labeled as the i - th ﬁlament , has four possible reaction events , and we can use a vector to denote the reaction rates of this ﬁlament , namely , [ K on , K br , K cap , K off ] i . For those reactions that are impossi - ble , for example , the polymerization of a capped ﬁlament , we can always make the corresponding reaction rates extremely small . For the entire network with N ﬁlaments , we construct a matrix of reaction rates , with the i - th row referring to the reaction rates of the i - th ﬁlament . The row number of this matrix of reaction rates is equal to the instantaneous num - ber of actin ﬁlaments , which changes over time . The column number of the reaction matrix is always 4 , corresponding to the number of reaction types . We employ the so - called ﬁrst reaction method [ 38 – 41 ] of Gillespie’s algorithm by generating a matrix of independent random numbers that are uniformly distributed over the inter - val [ 0 , 1 ] . This matrix of random numbers should have the same dimension as the matrix of reaction rates . The time for the next reaction is chosen to be the smallest among an array : d t = min (cid:4) − ln R ij K ij (cid:5) , ( 3 ) where R ij and K ij represent the random number and the reaction rate at row i and column j , respectively . The location for the next event is identiﬁed as the reaction site where d t is chosen , and at the same time , the obstacle is advanced by an increment V d t . Any change in actin networks requires an update of the two matrices , which are used to determine the subsequent reactions . This coupling proceeds until the prescribed simulation time is reached . 4 Simulation results 4 . 1 Working capacity of growing actin networks : size effect We ﬁrst simulate the growth of an actin network propelling a ﬂat obstacle . Figure2 shows several representative snapshots 123 226 B . Gong , et al . Fig . 2 ( Color online ) Snapshots of a growing actin network while propelling a ﬂat obstacle at the indicated time points , where the growing and capped ﬁlaments are shown in green and red , respectively . The simulation is performed using the parameters in Table1 Fig . 3 ( Color online ) Viscosity dependence of actin network growth in propelling a ﬂat obstacle with width L . a Simulation snapshot . b Relation of velocity V to time t in liquid environment with different drag coefﬁcients ζ . c Steady - state velocity V st and working power per unit width P of network protrusion as a function of resistance force F , with V st being normalized by a reference velocity V 0 = 313 . 2nm / s that corresponds to a ﬁlament elongation of 116 actin monomers per second . d Power per unit width P inﬂuenced by size of ﬂat obstacle of the network structure in the dynamic growth process . With elapsing time t ( from the accumulation of d t ) , we record the instantaneous velocity V of the moving obstacle according to Eq . ( 2 ) , as well as the total resisting force F from the environment . Figure3a shows a steady - state snapshot of the growing network . It is observed in Fig . 3b that the obstacle velocity ﬂuctuates around a plateau value after a certain time , called the steady - state velocity ( V st ) . When the obstacle is pushed forward against a liquid environment with distinct values of the drag coefﬁcient ζ , different steady - state velocities will be achieved , as indicated in Fig . 3b . Three different steady states are achieved when the drag coefﬁcient ζ is 0 . 25 , 0 . 8 , and 3 pN · s / nm . Additionally , we can calculate the total resistance force F ( or protrusion force ) whenever the viscous drag coef - ﬁcient ζ is speciﬁed . Figure3c plots the steady - state velocity V st as a function of resisting force F in different environ - ments . As mentioned earlier , the total resisting force is equal 123 Growing actin networks regulated by obstacle size and shape 227 to the summation of the propulsion force provided by indi - vidual ﬁlaments that are in close contact with the obstacle surface . On the other hand , the working power of the grow - ing actin network is simply the product of the velocity and total propulsion force . Figure3c shows the power of actin networks per unit width as a monotonically increasing func - tion of the drag coefﬁcient of the liquid , which leads to an increasing protrusion force as well . These force – velocity and force – power relations are in very close agreement with the data obtained in experiments [ 11 ] . At the leading edge of lamellipodia , a growing actin net - work might interact with the membrane portion of different sizes . Pathogens like Listeria monocytogenes or Vacccinia viruses might also be different with respect to characteris - tic size . It is therefore interesting to investigate the effect of obstacle size on the protrusion power of actin networks and the orientation pattern of ﬁlaments behind obstacles . Our simulation results show that the working power per unit length of growing actin networks diminishes as the width of ﬂat obstacles increases ( Fig . 3d ) . 4 . 2 Orientation pattern of ﬁlaments The distribution of ﬁlament orientation within growing actin networks is important in quantifying the network organiza - tion . In our simulations , we analyzed it through statistics on the ﬁlament orientation angles relative to the vertical direc - tion ( i . e . , growth direction ) . The snapshots in Fig . 4a – c show that the structure of actin networks at steady state is strongly affected by the drag coefﬁcient of the environment : when the drag coefﬁcient ζ varies over regions of small ( Fig . 4a ) , intermediate ( Fig . 4b ) , and large values ( Fig . 4c ) , two distinct kinds of orientation pattern are exhibited . A − 70 ◦ / 0 ◦ / 70 ◦ distribution is observed when the drag coefﬁcient is very small or very large ( Fig . 4d , f ) , whereas a ± 35 ◦ distribution is exhibited for the intermediate range of drag coefﬁcient ( Fig . 4e ) . These results are in excellent agreement with the experimental ﬁndings of Weichsel and Schwarz [ 23 ] . To investigate how the obstacle size might affect the orienta - tion distribution of ﬁlaments in the network , we consider cases with several intermediate values of drag coefﬁcient ( ζ = 0 . 02 pN · s / nm for Fig . 5a – c ; ζ = 0 . 06 pN · s / nm for Fig . 5d – f ; ζ = 0 . 1 pN · s / nm for Fig . 5g – i ) , which indicate that the orientation pattern of ﬁlaments is insensitive to the change in the obstacle size when the drag coefﬁcient is ﬁxed . To quantify the orientation pattern of actin ﬁlaments , we can deﬁne an order parameter Θ according to [ 24 ] Θ = N 0 ◦ − N 35 ◦ N 0 ◦ + N 35 ◦ ∈ [ − 1 , + 1 ] , ( 4 ) where N 0 ◦ and N 35 ◦ denote the number of actin ﬁlaments whose orientation angle is around 0 ◦ and 35 ◦ , respectively . For a perfect − 70 ◦ / 0 ◦ / 70 ◦ orientation pattern , the order parameter approaches + 1 , in contrast to the opposite ± 35 ◦ pattern with an order parameter of − 1 . The transition points between the two patterns can be determined by where the order parameter changes its sign . Figure6 plots a phase diagram that exhibits the orientation distribution of actin ﬁl - aments at different values of drag coefﬁcient . Two transition points between the two patterns are observed as the drag coefﬁcient varies over a wide range . It is also noticed that the change of order parameter is stepwise around these two crit - ical points , implying that the network structure can achieve a sharp transition between − 70 ◦ / 0 ◦ / 70 ◦ and ± 35 ◦ patterns as the environmental viscosity changes . 4 . 3 Shape effect Pathogens like Listeria monocytogenes or Vacccinia viruses usually adopt an ellipsoidal shape , which is quite different from the ﬂat obstacles studied in the preceding sections . Now we use a sinusoidal function to describe the geom - etry of curved obstacles , with the aspect ratio deﬁned as the amplitude - to - width ratio ( A / L ) of the shape . Figure7a shows a representative snapshot of a growing actin net - work propelling an obstacle with such a curved shape . Figure7b shows that the protrusion power per unit width of the actin networks is insensitive to the variation in the aspect ratio . We also investigate the shape effect of curved obstacles on the orientation distribution of actin ﬁlaments in our stochastic simulations . As discussed earlier for ﬂat obstacles , multiple steady states can be achieved for different drag coefﬁcients of a liquid environment in the presence of curved obstacles . When the drag coefﬁcient ζ is small ( ζ = 0 . 001 pN · s / nm , for example ) , it is found that the orientation pattern of actin ﬁlaments is not affected by the aspect ratio A / L , with a slightly increased portion of ﬁlaments around 0 ◦ as the aspect ratio increases ( Fig . 8a – c ) . This result is similar to the sit - uation of ﬂat obstacles . However , Fig . 8d – f and g – i shows various situations when the drag coefﬁcient is intermediate or large ( ζ = 0 . 1 pN · s / nm and ζ = 6 pN · s / nm , respec - tively ) , and it is observed that the characteristic pattern of ﬁlament orientation changes dramatically as the aspect ratio varies . For aspect ratios as low as 0 . 1 , the trend of the orientation pattern is similar to the case of ﬂat obstacles . As the aspect ratio increases to 0 . 3 , the ﬁlament orientation becomes irreg - ularly distributed among all angles and evolves back into three main peaks as the aspect ratio further increases to 0 . 8 , similar to the − 70 ◦ / 0 ◦ / 70 ◦ pattern . We should point out that the orientation patterns for curved obstacles are not as symmetric as those for ﬂat obstacles owing to the stochastic effects . 123 228 B . Gong , et al . Fig . 4 ( Color online ) Representative snapshots of actin network growth against a ﬂat obstacle when the drag coefﬁcient is a small ( ζ = 0 . 001pN · s / nm ) , b intermediate ( ζ = 0 . 1pN · s / nm ) , and c large ( ζ = 20pN · s / nm ) , respectively . d – f The normalized distributions of ﬁlament orientation corresponding to the scenarios of a – c , respectively . The orientation pattern is − 70 ◦ / 0 ◦ / 70 ◦ in d , f , and ± 35 ◦ in e 5 Discussion Our model considers the squeezing interaction between growing actin networks and obstacles because of monomer insertion , and a convex force – velocity curve is always observed in our simulations . We notice that both concave and convex force – velocity curves were found in earlier experi - ments and simulations [ 6 , 10 – 14 ] . For example , Smith and Liu [ 16 ] proposed that branching and capping might deter - mine the shape of a force – velocity curve . Lee and Liu [ 17 ] obtained a force – velocity curve with three regions—convex , force - insensitive , and concave ones—and they argued that the convex and concave shapes observed in experiments mightcorrespondtodifferentregionsoftheirresults . Ameso - scopic hybrid model by Zhu and Mogilner [ 42 ] predicted that the two different shapes of force – velocity curves are rooted in the distinct time scales of two scenarios . In the models proposed by Weichsel and Schwarz [ 23 ] , as well as Smith 123 Growing actin networks regulated by obstacle size and shape 229 Fig . 5 Orientation pattern of ± 35 ◦ , corresponding to intermediate drag coefﬁcient , insensitive to the size of the ﬂat obstacle ( drag coefﬁcient : ζ = 0 . 02pN · s / nm for panels a – c , ζ = 0 . 06pN · s / nm for panels d – f , and ζ = 0 . 1pN · s / nm for panels g – i ; obstacle size : L = 200nm for panels a , d , g , L = 600nm for panels b , e , h , and L = 1000nm for panels c , f , i ) Fig . 6 Order parameter Θ of ﬁlament orientation distribution depend - ing on drag coefﬁcient ζ and Liu [ 16 ] , the growth velocity of single actin ﬁlaments is based on a deterministic rate , which can promote the abil - ity of ﬁlament protrusion in growing actin networks , thereby affecting the force – velocity relation . As evident from these studies , the current understanding on the issue is contradic - tory , and the actual mechanism that determines the shape of the force – velocity relation remains to be explored . We will continue to investigate the force – velocity relation with more sophisticated treatments of the network – obstacle interaction and microscopic processes within networks . In our computational model of stochastic reactions , the orientation angle of actin ﬁlaments is limited to a range of [ − 90 ◦ , + 90 ◦ ] [ 16 ] , as in protruding lamellipodia against the leading edge [ 43 ] . In cases where a growing actin network is driving a ﬂat obstacle , our simulation results demonstrate that the − 70 ◦ / 0 ◦ / 70 ◦ distribution pattern emerges in the steady state when the drag coefﬁcient is small or large , in contrast to the ± 35 ◦ distribution pattern when the drag coef - ﬁcient is intermediate . These results on actin network growth behind ﬂat obstacles agree well with the experimental results of Weichsel and Schwarz [ 23 ] and the theoretical work of Maly and Borisy [ 22 ] predicting that the ﬁlament organiza - 123 230 B . Gong , et al . Fig . 7 a Snapshot of actin network growth against a curved obstacle , where the obstacle has width L = 1000nm and amplitude A = 300nm . b Working power per unit width P of network protrusion , which is insensitive to the aspect ratio ( A / L ) of the obstacle . These results are obtained when ζ = 0 . 25pN · s / nm Fig . 8 The role of an obstacle’s aspect ratio in determining the orientation pattern , in three different regions of drag coefﬁcient . a – c Small ( ζ = 0 . 001pN · s / nm ) , d – f intermediate ( ζ = 0 . 1pN · s / nm ) , and g – i large drag coefﬁcient ( ζ = 6pN · s / nm ) , with the aspect ratio A / L being 0 . 1 , 0 . 3 , and 0 . 8 , respectively tion at steady state results in the dominance of either a ± 35 ◦ pattern or a − 70 ◦ / 0 ◦ / 70 ◦ pattern . The remaining question is why the stationary ﬁlament distribution switches from the − 70 ◦ / 0 ◦ / 70 ◦ state in the fast - growth region ( corresponding to the small drag coefﬁcient in Fig . 6 ) , through the ± 35 ◦ orientation pattern in the medium growth region ( i . e . , intermediate drag coefﬁcient ) , and back to another − 70 ◦ / 0 ◦ / 70 ◦ distribution in the slow - growth region ( i . e . , largedragcoefﬁcient ) . Tounderstandthis switch - ing between the two dominant patterns , let us deﬁne a 123 Growing actin networks regulated by obstacle size and shape 231 Fig . 9 Protrusion power per unit width of growing networks regulated by a the branching rate K br and b the capping rate K cap , for both ﬂat and curved obstacles . L = 1000nm for the ﬂat obstacle and L = 1000nm , A = 500nm for the curved obstacle . The drag coefﬁcient is ﬁxed at ζ = 0 . 25pN · s / nm for both ﬂat and curved obstacles critical angle θ c = arccos ( v network / v ﬁlament ) , with v network and v ﬁlament being the network growth velocity and ﬁlament elongation velocity , respectively . It is easy to envision that single ﬁlaments with their orientation angle larger than θ c cannot follow network advances and will be out of the steady - state pattern . For fast network growth , v network / v ﬁlament → 1 and the critical angle θ c is close to zero . In this case , actin ﬁla - ments with larger orientations are suppressed , so that the dominant orientation is close to zero with two side angles around ± 70 ◦ . Once the network growth velocity changes to the medium region , resulting in a point where the critical angle θ c is sufﬁciently large to allow ﬁlaments at ± 35 ◦ to exist in the network , the ± 35 ◦ orientations dominate the pat - tern . As the network growth velocity is further reduced , the critical angle θ c increases above 70 ◦ , and the − 70 ◦ / 0 ◦ / 70 ◦ pattern resumes again . Weichsel and Schwarz [ 24 ] proposed in their work that the shape of obstacles might only affect the ﬁlaments around par - ticular orientations , namely , 0 ◦ , ± 35 ◦ , ± 70 ◦ . In our model , the geometry of obstacles under propulsion is approximated by sinusoidal functions , and the aspect ratio of sinusoidal obstacles is shown to change the ﬁlament orientation pat - tern signiﬁcantly when the drag coefﬁcient is intermediate or large . When the drag coefﬁcient is very small , the ori - entation distribution of ﬁlaments retains the − 70 ◦ / 0 ◦ / 70 ◦ pattern , similar to the case where obstacles are ﬂat . In the − 70 ◦ / 0 ◦ / 70 ◦ pattern for either ﬂat or curved obstacles , the number of actin ﬁlaments that are in contact with an obsta - cle’s surface and contributing to protrusion is small at any instant , meaning that more ﬁlaments lag behind the obstacle surface and are susceptible to capping and depolymerization , which might result in a reduced protrusion speed . Branching and capping rates are two critical parameters in our stochastic model ; they govern the dynamic evolution and resultant properties of growing actin networks . The reac - tion rate of branching can increase the number of ﬁlaments in growingactinnetworks . Assuch , moreﬁlamentsareinvolved and contribute to propelling obstacles against environmental resistance . Thus , the branching rate can enhance the work - ing ability of growing actin networks regardless of the shape of obstacles , as demonstrated in Fig . 9a . In contrast , a cap - ping rate that inhibits further growth of ﬁlaments is expected to reduce the working ability of growing actin networks , as conﬁrmed in Fig . 9b . 6 Conclusion We have developed a computational framework of actin network growth against obstacles with different sizes and shapes , based on key fundamental processes of actin poly - merization , branching , capping , and depolymerization . A two - dimensional strip conﬁguration of actin networks grow - ing against both ﬂat and curved walls was investigated , in mimicking the scenarios of lamellipodia protrusion of crawling cells and propulsion of pathogens . We used sim - ple yet generic descriptions of monomer - level reactions and network – obstacle interaction to explore the growth dynamics of actin networks in propelling obstacles in a viscous envi - ronment . A convex force – velocity relation was observed in the simulations , and the power of protrusion and orientation patterns of ﬁlaments were investigated with respect to obsta - cle size and shape . The increasing size of ﬂat obstacles can reduce the working power per unit length of actin networks without affecting the distribution pattern of ﬁlament orien - tation . The aspect ratio of curved obstacles has a negligible effect on protrusion power , but it can regulate the orientation pattern of ﬁlaments dramatically . Several critical assumptions are made in the present model . First , both actin networks and obstacle surfaces are considered to be rigid structures that do not deform in the 123 232 B . Gong , et al . protrusion process , which is approximately true for ﬁla - ments with a resultant length far less than their persistence length . Continuous attention will be paid to deformable networks with semiﬂexible ﬁlaments [ 44 , 45 ] , as well as obstacle elasticity , in affecting the growth process . More - over , ﬁlament – ﬁlament cross linking and ﬁlament – substrate interactions are neglected in our model of actin dynamics , and we also neglect the excluded volume effects related to ﬁlament packing , which may result in signiﬁcant swelling of actin networks and thereby contribute to network protru - sion . More sophisticated treatments of these issues will be pursued in exploring the size and shape effects of growing actin networks in propelling obstacles . Acknowledgements The project was supported by the National Nat - ural Science Foundation of China ( Grants 11321202 , 11672268 ) and the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China ( Grant LR16A020001 ) . References 1 . Pollard , T . D . , Cooper , J . A . : Actin , a central player in cell shape and movement . Science 326 , 1208 – 1212 ( 2009 ) 2 . Dickinson , R . B . : Models for actin polymerization motors . J . Math . Biol . 58 , 81 – 103 ( 2009 ) 3 . Loisel , T . P . , Boujemaa , R . , Pantaloni , D . , et al . : Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 , 613 – 616 ( 1999 ) 4 . Lin , Y . , Shenoy , V . B . , Hu , B . , et al . : A microscopic formulation for the actin - driven motion of listeria in curved paths . Biophys . J . 99 , 1043 – 1052 ( 2010 ) 5 . Lin , Y . : Mechanics model for actin - based motility . Phys . Rev . E 79 , 021916 ( 2009 ) 6 . Marcy , Y . , Prost , J . , Carlier , M . F . , et al . : Forces generated during actin - based propulsion : a direct measurement by micromanipula - tion . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 101 , 5992 – 5997 ( 2004 ) 7 . Pollard , T . D . , Blanchoin , L . , Mullins , R . D . : Molecularmechanisms controllingactinﬁlamentdynamics innonmuscle cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 29 , 545 – 576 ( 2000 ) 8 . Fletcher , D . A . , Mullins , D . : Cell mechanics and the cytoskeleton . Nature 463 , 485 – 492 ( 2010 ) 9 . Schaus , T . E . , Taylor , E . W . , Borisy , G . G . : Self - organization of actin ﬁlament orientation in the dendritic - nucleation / array - treadmilling model . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 104 , 7086 – 7091 ( 2007 ) 10 . Heinemann , F . , Doschke , H . , Radmacher , M . : Keratocyte lamel - lipodial protrusion is characterized by a concave force - velocity relation . Biophys . J . 100 , 1420 – 1427 ( 2011 ) 11 . McGrath , J . L . , Eungdamrong , N . J . , Fisher , C . I . , et al . : The force - velocity relationship for the actin - based motility of listeria mono - cytogenes . Curr . Biol . 13 , 329 – 332 ( 2003 ) 12 . Parekh , S . H . , Chaudhuri , O . , Theriot , J . A . , et al . : Loading history determines the velocity of actin - network growth . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 1219 – 1223 ( 2005 ) 13 . Prass , M . , Jacobson , K . , Mogilner , A . , et al . : Direct measurement ofthelamellipodialprotrusiveforceinamigratingcell . J . CellBiol . 174 , 767 – 772 ( 2006 ) 14 . Zimmermann , J . , Brunner , C . , Enculescu , M . , et al . : Actin ﬁlament elasticity and retrograde ﬂow shape the force - velocity relation of motile cells . Biophys . J . 102 , 287 – 295 ( 2012 ) 15 . Schreiber , C . H . , Stewart , M . , Duke , T . : Simulation of cell motility that reproduces the force - velocity relationship . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 107 , 9141 – 9146 ( 2010 ) 16 . Smith , D . B . , Liu , J . : Branching and capping determine the force - velocity relationships of branching actin networks . Phys . Biol . 10 , 016004 ( 2013 ) 17 . Lee , K . C . , Liu , A . J . : Force - velocity relation for actin - polymerization - driven motility from brownian dynamics simula - tions . Biophys . J . 97 , 1295 – 1304 ( 2009 ) 18 . Xu , G . K . , Yang , C . , Du , J . , et al . : Integrin activation and internal - izationmediatedbyextracellularmatrixelasticity : abiomechanical model . J . Biomech . 47 , 1479 – 1484 ( 2014 ) 19 . Jiang , H . Y . , Qian , J . , Lin , Y . , et al . : Aggregation dynamics of molecular bonds between compliant materials . Soft Matter 11 , 2812 – 2820 ( 2015 ) 20 . Li , D . C . , Ji , B . H . : Predicted rupture force of a single molecular bond becomes rate independent at ultralow loading rates . Phys . Rev . Lett . 112 , 078302 ( 2014 ) 21 . Li , D . C . , Ji , B . H . : Crucial roles of bond rebinding in rupture behav - iors of single molecular bond at ultralow loading rates . Int . J . Appl . Mech . 7 , 1550015 ( 2015 ) 22 . Maly , I . V . , Borisy , G . G . : Self - organization of a propulsive actin network as an evolutionary process . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 98 , 11324 – 11329 ( 2001 ) 23 . Weichsel , J . , Schwarz , U . S . : Two competing orientation patterns explain experimentally observed anomalies in growing actin net - works . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 107 , 6304 – 6309 ( 2010 ) 24 . Weichsel , J . , Schwarz , U . S . : Mesoscopic model for ﬁlament orien - tation in growing actin networks : the role of obstacle geometry . N . J . Phys . 15 , 035006 ( 2013 ) 25 . Mogilner , A . , Rubinstein , B . : The physics of ﬁlopodial protrusion . Biophys . J . 89 , 782 – 795 ( 2005 ) 26 . Schaus , T . E . , Borisy , G . G . : Performance of a population of inde - pendent ﬁlaments in lamellipodial protrusion . Biophys . J . 95 , 1393 – 1411 ( 2008 ) 27 . Gardel , M . L . , Shin , J . H . , MacKintosh , F . C . , et al . : Elastic behavior of cross - linked and bundled actin networks . Science 304 , 1301 – 1305 ( 2004 ) 28 . Mogilner , A . , Oster , G . : Cell motility driven by actin polymeriza - tion . Biophys . J . 71 , 3030 – 3045 ( 1996 ) 29 . Carlsson , A . E . : Growth velocities of branched actin networks . Bio - phys . J . 84 , 2907 – 2918 ( 2003 ) 30 . Mullins , R . D . , Heuser , J . A . , Pollard , T . D . : Theinteractionofarp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high afﬁnity pointed end capping , and formation of branching networks of ﬁlaments . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 95 , 6181 – 6186 ( 1998 ) 31 . Schafer , D . A . , Jennings , P . B . , Cooper , J . A . : Dynamics of capping protein and actin assembly in vitro : uncapping barbed ends by polyphosphoinositides . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 169 – 179 ( 1996 ) 32 . Schaub , S . , Meister , J . J . , Verkhovsky , A . B . : Analysis of actin ﬁlamentnetworkorganizationinlamellipodiabycomparingexper - imental and simulated images . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 1491 – 1500 ( 2007 ) 33 . Carlsson , A . E . : Growth of branched actin networks against obsta - cles . Biophys . J . 81 , 1907 – 1923 ( 2001 ) 34 . Chaudhuri , O . , Parekh , S . H . , Fletcher , D . A . : Reversible stress soft - ening of actin networks . Nature 445 , 295 – 298 ( 2007 ) 35 . Peskin , C . S . , Odell , G . M . , Oster , G . F . : Cellularmotionsandthermal ﬂuctuations – the brownian ratchet . Biophys . J . 65 , 316 – 324 ( 1993 ) 36 . Mogilner , A . , Oster , G . : Force generation by actin polymerization II : the elastic ratchet and tethered ﬁlaments . Biophys . J . 84 , 1591 – 1605 ( 2003 ) 37 . Dickinson , R . B . , Purich , D . L . : Clamped - ﬁlamentelongationmodel for actin - based motors . Biophys . J . 82 , 605 – 617 ( 2002 ) 38 . Gillespie , D . T . : Exact stochastic simulation of coupled chemical - reactions . J . Phys . Chem . 81 , 2340 – 2361 ( 1977 ) 123 Growing actin networks regulated by obstacle size and shape 233 39 . Gillespie , D . T . : A general method for numerically simulating the stochastictimeevolutionofcoupledchemicalreactions . J . Comput . Phys . 22 , 403 – 434 ( 1976 ) 40 . Qian , J . , Wang , J . , Gao , H . : Lifetime and strength of adhesive molecular bond clusters between elastic media . Langmuir 24 , 1262 – 1270 ( 2008 ) 41 . Zhang , W . L . , Lin , Y . , Qian , J . , et al . : Tuning molecular adhesion via material anisotropy . Adv . Funct . Mater . 23 , 4729 – 4738 ( 2013 ) 42 . Zhu , J . , Mogilner , A . : Mesoscopicmodelofactin - basedpropulsion . PLoS Comput . Biol . 8 , e1002764 ( 2012 ) 43 . Mogilner , A . : Mathematicsofcellmotility : havewegotitsnumber ? J . Math . Biol . 58 , 105 – 134 ( 2009 ) 44 . Lin , Y . , Wei , X . , Qian , J . , et al . : A combined ﬁnite element - Langevin dynamics ( FEM - LD ) approach for analyzing the mechanical response of bio - polymer networks . J . Mech . Phys . Solids 62 , 2 – 18 ( 2014 ) 45 . Wei , X . , Zhu , Q . , Qian , J . , et al . : Response of biopolymer networks governed by the physical properties of cross - linking molecules . Soft Matter 12 , 2537 – 2541 ( 2016 ) 123