Cellular invasion into matrix beads : localization of ft integrins and fibronectin to the invadopodia SUSETTE C . MUELLER and WEN - TIEN CHEN * Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology , Georgetown University School of Medicine , 3900 Reservoir Rd , N . W . , Washington , DC 20007 , USA * Author for correspondence Summary We have examined the contribution of adhesion mechanisms to cell invasiveness by growing chicken embryo fibroblasts ( CEF ) or Rous sarcoma virus - transformed cells ( RSVCEF ) on fibronectin - coated crosslinked gelatin beads ( FN - beads ) . RSVCEF at - tached more readily and spread more rapidly on FN - beads than CEF , suggesting an increase in the adhesion - related motility of the transformed cells . In addition , RSVCEF invaded the FN - beads , but CEF did not , by extending specialized cell surface pro - trusions called invadopodia at sites of cell invasion . FN removal by RSVCEF cultured on prelabeled fluorescent FN - beads ( FL - FN ) was evident at sites of invadopodia , and internalized FL - FN occurred in vacuoles near the ventral membrane of cells at sites of FN removal . The precise distribution of FN and integrins in cells invading FN - beads was determined by immunofluorescence and immunoelectron mi - croscopy of frozen thin - sections . In both CEF and RSVCEF , ft integrins and FN occupied separate intracellular compartments during the early stage of spreading on FN - beads . Later , ft integrins were largely localized at the ventral cell surface of both CEF and RSVCEF . Polyclonal anti - integrin antibody recognizing ft and several a chains , however , labeled both ventral and dorsal cell surfaces . During in - vasion by RSVCEF , ft integrins were concentrated at extended invadopodia and also colocalized with internalized FL - FN material in phagocytic vesicles . Furthermore , secreted FN was deposited by RSVCEF at the base of invadopodia colocalizing with ft integrin . Both FL - FN matrix removal and formation of the invadopodia were found to be resistant to treatment with GRGDS at concentrations that inhibit the interaction between cells and FN - beads . Thus , the localization of ft integrins to the plasma membrane contacting immobilized FN re - sults in an extremely tight cellular adherence to the matrix bead , that stabilizes invadopodia and also mediates endocytic clearance of degraded FN - matrix material . Key words : fibronectin , integrin , invasion . Introduction The ability of cells to invade the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) represents an important component in the response of animals to injury and pathogen infection and during cancer metastasis . In cancer , this process involves cell motility , adhesion , and degradation as demonstrated in a number of different tumor cell types ( Liotta , 1986 ) . Similar aspects of adhesion and motility also play an important role in cell migration during development ( Trinkaus , 1987 ) . It therefore seems likely that cell invasion might share many of the molecular mechanisms used in migration , in coordination with localized proteo - lytic activity on the cell surface of highly invasive cells ( Chen et al . 1984 ; Chen , 1989 ) . Although it has been shown that cell adhesion molecules are centrally important in cell migration , it is not clear precisely how these adhesion systems might contribute to the invasion process . Intensive study of integrin receptors has elucidated many adhesion systems having binding affinities for adhesive proteins including fibronectin ( FN ) , laminin and collagen ( see recent reviews by Akiyama et al . 1990 ; Buck and Horwitz , 1987 ; Hemler , 1988 ; Hynes , 1987 ; Juliano , Journal of Cell Science 99 , 213 - 225 ( 1991 ) Printed in Great Britain © The Company of Biologists Limited 1991 1987 ; Ruoslahti and Pierschbacher , 1987 ) . Earlier studies suggest that the FN receptor family of integrins is involved in cell migration through a process of motility - driven adhesion . FN promotes cell migration in culture ( Ali and Hynes , 1977 ; Rovasio et al . 1983 ) and is present in the embryo associated with many different cell migrations ( Critchley et al . 1979 ; Kurkinen et al . 1979 ) . The avian TN receptor complex ' , a class of molecules that probably includes more than one member of the ft integrin family , was also shown to be important for embryonic cell migration ( Bronner - Fraser , 1985 ; Chen et al . 1985a , 1986a ; Duband et al . 1986 ; Darribere et al . 1988 ; Jaffredo et al . 1988 ; Hynes et al . 1989 ) . Recently , ft integrins have also been implicated in human tumor cell migration ( Akiyama et al . 1990 ; Yamada et al . 1990 ) . However , it is less clear at present what roles the integrins and FN play in cell invasion . In vitro invasion studies using polyclonal antibodies against integrins appear to implicate some integrin ( s ) in one or more aspects of the invasion process ( Guirguis et al . 1987 ; Kramer et al . 1989 ) . Similarly , adhesion inhibitory synthetic peptides such as GRGDS , when added along with cells , produce striking competitive inhibition in in 213 vitro invasion assays using amniotic basement mem - branes ( Savagner et al . 1986 ; Gehlsen et al . 1988 ) and in experimental animal metastasis models ( Humphries et al . 1986 ) . It is possible that the transmembrane interaction of integrins with FN and the cytoskeleton can initiate motility - related adhesion events . The organization of integrins in transformed cells was found to be altered to a pattern similar to that found in highly motile cells , a diffuse surface distribution ( Chen et al . 19866 ; Roman et al . 1989 ; Akiyama et al . 1990 ) . Highly motile cells bind to immobilized FN and other ECM components by localiz - ation of Pi integrins and talin at sites of membrane - ECM contacts , which might account for the motility - driven adhesion necessary for cell migration and invasion ( Mueller et al . 1989 ) . To examine in greater detail the parallel between adhesive events required for migration and those required for invasion , we use a recently developed crosslinked matrix bead system ( Mueller et al . 1989 ) as a model for studying the early events of cellular invasion into the ECM . This in vitro invasion assay provides a model system that can differentiate at the cellular level between adhesion , migration and degradation . Second , this method provides an assessment of the relative contributions of adhesion molecules , their membrane receptors , and sur - face - associated degradative activity to cell invasion . Finally , this method allows a precise definition of cell surface structures responsible for invasion . Cell surface extensions are commonly observed in membranes free of contact with the ECM such as ruffles , microspikes and lamellipodia ( Trinkaus , 1984 ) , as well as in the mem - branes of transformed or tumor cells contacting ECM components ( Chen et al . 1984 ; Guirguis et al . 1987 ; Kramer et al . 1989 ; Chen , 1989 ) . These cytoskeletal - linked mem - brane extensions are the basis for cellular movement . Here , we discovered that cell surface extensions called invadopodia are induced upon contact of transformed cells , but not CEF cells , with FN - beads ( fibronectin - coated crosslinked gelatin beads ) . We also found that ft integrin - containing heterodimers are localized at ventral mem - branes and in the invadopodia , but are not concentrated in membrane extensions free of contact with the ECM . Furthermore , ft integrin heterodimers are involved in the clearance of degraded matrix material via endocytic processes and in the stabilization of invadopodial exten - sions by adhesive interactions with cellularly deposited FN . We propose that motility - driven invasion involves integrin - mediated adhesive events in combination with localized cell surface degradative activity , and that both are required for the expression of cell invasiveness . Materials and methods Cell culture on crosslinked gelatin beads Chicken embryonic fibroblasts ( CEF ) and CEF transformed by Rous sarcoma virus ( RSVCEF ) were cultured as described ( Chen et al . 1984 ; Olden and Yamada , 1977 ) . Crosslinked gelatin beads were prepared as previously described ( Mueller et al . 1989 ) with the modification that larger beads were selected by discarding a 1 g , 5 min pellet , and collecting beads sedimenting during a 30 s spin on setting no . 2 of the Beckman microfuge in a 1 . 5 ml microfuge tube . A 50 / / I bead pellet obtained after glutaraldehyde fixation as previously described ( Mueller et al . 1989 ) was incubated with 50 ( < g labeled human plasma FN for lh at 4°C . Human plasma FN was a gift from Dr Steve Akiyama , National Institute of Dental Research , NIH , Bethesda , and was labeled with dichlorotriazinylaminofluorescein dihydrochloride ( DTAF ) or tetramethylrhodamine isothiocyanate ( TRITC ) as described by the manufacturer ( Research Organics , Inc . , Cleveland , OH ) . FN - beads were recovered by centrifugation and resuspended by sonication in medium , and they were either used immediately or stored at - 20°C in a 1 : 1 ( v / v ) mixture of glycerol and medium . Cells were seeded onto beads at subconfluent density in non - tissue culture treated plastic Petri dishes , cultured at 37 °C in a CO 2 incubator for the indicated times , washed , and fixed by the addition of 9 % paraformaldehyde in PBS ( 10 DOM phosphate buffer , pH7 . 4 , 130 mM NaCl ) to a final concentration of 3 % according to a previously described procedure ( Mueller et al . 1989 ) . To examine the effects of an inhibitor of cell adhesion on invasion , RSVCEF ( V . OxlO ' cellsmr 1 ) were preincubated for 30 min at 37 °C with beads and then with GRGDS by adding the peptide to a final concentration of 0 . 2 or l . Omgml " 1 for 6h or overnight culture . GRGDS peptide was a kind gift from Dr Kenneth Yamada , National Institute of Dental Research , NIH , Bethesda . Trypsin was added to cultures of cells attached on planar FN - bead substratum for up to 30 min at a final concentration of 2 . 5mgml ~ 1 in Hank ' s balanced salt solution minus Ca 2 + and Mg 2 " 1 " . Frozen thin sectioning and immunofluorescence microscopy Fixed cells bound to protein - crosslinked beads were embedded in 5 % gelatin , and processed as 0 . 5 fim or 0 . 1 / on frozen thin - sections and for immunofluorescence or immunoelectron microscopy as previously described ( Chen et al . 1985a , 1986a ) , except that for both 0 . 5 and 0 . 1 / on sections , aggregates were infused with 2 . 3 M sucrose and sections were made on a Reichert Ultracut E43 ultramicrotome equipped with FC4D Low - Temperature Section - ing system . For immunoelectron microscopic experiments , 0 . 1 / an frozen thin - sections were labeled indirectly first with rabbit antibody directed against bovine FN , and then with 10 nm colloidal gold conjugates of goat antibody to rabbit IgG ( Janssen Life Sciences Products , Janssen Biotech N . V . , Olen , Belgium ) . For integrin labeling , sections were first labeled with ES238 , then with 5 nm colloidal gold conjugates of goat antibody to rat IgG ( Janssen Life Sciences Products ) , ft integrin was detected using rat monoclonal antibody ES238 , directed against an extracellular epitope of ft ( Mueller et al . 1988 ) . In the case of integrin - FN double labeling at the light level , anti - 140K rabbit polyclonal antibody was used to stain integrin ( Chen et al . 19856 ) and FL - goat anti - chicken FN ( a gift from Dr Kenneth Yamada ) was used to stain FN . Labeled sections were observed with a JEOL 1200EX trans - mission electron microscope operated at 60 kV or with phase - contrast and immunofluorescence microscopy ( Chen et al . 1985a , b ) using a Zeiss Photomicroscope m . Results Fate of integrin and FN in CEF and RSVCEF in response to contact with FN - beads In this study , we modified the bead binding experiments used previously ( Mueller et al . 1989 ) to study the invasive activity of RSVCEF . Cells were incubated in suspension using serum - containing medium with large FN - coated gelatin beads ( more than 40 / . an in diameter ) to prevent phagocytosis of the beads and to maintain the cells in overnight culture . Fluorescently labeled FN was coated on the beads so that matrix degradation sites could be detected ( Chen et al . 1984 ) . And , non - tissue culture - treated Petri dishes were used for culture to reduce cell attachment to the plastic . In freshly suspended CEF or RSVCEF , FN is lost from the cell surface but is present intracellularly , whereas its receptor , integrin , is localized almost exclusively at the cell surface ( data not shown ) . Both CEF and RSVCEF make an initial adhesive interaction with FN - coated gelatin beads by mobilizing integrin and intracellular 214 S . C . Mueller and W . - T . Chen talin to sites of cell - bead contact ( Mueller et al . 1989 ) . In addition , ft integrin was redistributed to a prominent intracellular pool of vesicles and to the ventral cell surface after 10 min of contact with FN - beads ( Mueller et al . 1989 ) . Within 1 h of coculture with FN beads , both CEF ( Fig . 1 ) and RSVCEF ( Fig . 2 ) spread on the FL - FN ( fluorescently labeled fibronectin ) bead , retain the intracellular pool of integrin , and localize cell surface integrin at bead contact sites . Some of the intracellular vesicles in both CEF and RSVCEF were large enough for the unstained vesicular lumen to be seen ( for example , Fig . 1A arrow ) . However , the rate of response to contact with FN - beads differs in normal and transformed cells . CEF ( Fig . 1 ) attach to FN - beads less readily , are less well spread , and show more prominent intracellular integrin but less ventral cell surface integrin than RSVCEF ( Fig . 2 ) . In addition , the initial formation of invadopodia was detected only in RSVCEF after lh culture ( Fig . 2 , arrows ) , at sites labeled intensively for ft integrin ( Fig . 2 , arrows ) . After 6h of culture , the intracellular labeling for integrin became less apparent ( data not shown ) , and by 1 day integrins were localized primarily at the ventral cell surface ( see below ) . Thus , the localization of ft integrin to sites of cell contact is associated with the degree of cell spreading on FN . Intracellular pools of FN and integrins were examined by double - label immunoelectron microscopy to visualize vesicles labeled by antibodies directed against ft integrin and FN ( Fig . 3 ) . Integrins were found in a range of sizes of vesicles including large vacuoles as well as in smaller vesicles near sites of cell contact with FN - beads . Large vacuoles ( up to ~ 1 . 5 / mi diameter ) were commonly found in both CEF and RSVCEF that contained high levels of integrins associated with the vacuolar membrane ( Fig . 3A ) . Other smaller vesicles near the plasma mem - brane were also intensely labeled for ft integrin ( Fig . 3B , C ) . Labeling of FN was commonly found in ER - like membranes and small vesicles at areas distinct from membranes containing ft integrin ( Fig . 3A ) . Immunoflu - orescence light microscopy of sections double - labeled with Fig . 1 . Normal embryonic cells spread on the FL - FN - bead during 1 h of culture , retain a prominent intracellular pool of integrin , and have cell surface integrin localized at bead contact sites . The 0 . 5 - ^ m frozen sections of CEF grown on large FL - FN - beads for 1 h were stained with rat mAb ES238 . Inft : distribution of ft integrin in CEF is resolved by immunofluorescence . The majority of ft integrin labeling is intracellular or associated with the ventral membrane attached to the bead ( arrowheads ) . Very little integrin labeling can be seen on plasma membrane not attached to the bead . Intracellular vesicles and large vacuoles label positively for ft integrin ( arrow ) . Fn : labeled FN coated on the bead is seen as a continuous line . The cell contains no exogenous FL - FN ( arrow ) . Ph : the phase - contrast image of the section shows cell morphology . CEF are not well spread and the plasma membrane attached to the bead is relatively limited ( arrowheads ) as compared to free cell surface ( arrow ) . Bar , 10 / an . Cell invasion into matrix beads 215 Fig . 2 . Transformed cells are well spread on FL - FN beads , possess a less prominent intracellular pool of integrin , and extend protrusions into beads during the 1 h culture . The 0 . 5 - fnn frozen sections of RSVCEF grown on large FL - FN - beads for 1 h were stained with rat mAb ES238 . The staining patterns for two different cells are shown in columns A and B . Fn + : the phase - contrast image of the section is superimposed with the fluorescent image of FN coating . Fine protrusions are seen at the indentation sites of the FL - FN - coated beads ( arrows ) . Inft : the distribution of ft integrin subunit is resolved by rhodamine immunofluorescence . Small ventral protrusions become apparent on ventral RSVCEF membranes ( arrows ) , ft integrin is concentrated in and around these protrusions ( arrows ) but not in the plasma membrane or membrane extension on the free surface ( arrowheads ) . The intracellular pool of integrin is less prominent in RSVCEF than in CEF ( compare with Fig . 1 ) . Inft + : the rhodamine image of ft integrin labeling is superimposed with the phase - contrast image . RSVCEF cultured on FL - FN - beads were consistently more well spread than CEF after 1 h ( compare with Fig . 1 ) . Differences in the brightness of the FL - FN layer are due to the angle of sectioning . Bar , 10 / an . anti - FN and anti - integrin also showed that the majority of intracellular labeling for FN is found in different areas from that for integrin ( data not shown ) . Thus , / 5 t integrin complex and FN occupied separate vesicular compart - ments during the early stage of cell spreading on FN substratum . Invadopodia and phagocytic vesicles in cellular invasion We examined the ability of CEF or RSVCEF to invade the FN beads with a combination of frozen thin - sectioning and fluorescence microscopy ( Figs 4—6 ) or immunoelectron microscopy ( Figs 7 - 8 ) . When normal or transformed cells were cultured on FL - FN - beads , fluorescent FN remained an even layer on the smooth bead surface under most cells ( Figs 1 , 2 , 4B and 5B ) . However , after 6h ( not shown ) or overnight culture of RSVCEF , a striking pattern of discontinuous FL - FN was observed , underneath some transformed cells in very localized areas ( Figs 4 , 5C , D and 6 ) . At the level of immunoelectron microscopy , sites of invasion were seen that formed a pitted bead surface under RSVCEF ( Figs 7A and 8 ) . In contrast , the bead surface under the ventral cell surface of CEF cultured overnight is undisturbed and the 10 nm gold labeling for FN is more or less continuous on the bead surface ( Fig . 7B ) . RSVCEF cultured for only 30min also demon - strate an undisturbed FN layer at the bead surface ( Fig . 7C ) . As early as lh after seeding RSVCEF on the FL - FN bead , small membrane protrusions were seen on ventral membrane surfaces that contained localized integrin ( Fig . 2 ) . Specialized plasma membrane extensions , the invadopodia , were observed , underneath invasive trans - formed cells in very localized areas after 1 day ( Figs 4 , 5C , D and 6 ) but never occurred in normal cells or in some transformed cells ( Figs 1 , 2 , 4B and 5A ) . By counting cells 216 S . C . Mueller and W . - T . Chen 1 In Vac t Fn Fn In Fn In In In Bead In Fig . 3 . Intracellular ft integrins accumulate in a separate vesicular compartment from that occupied by FN . CEF cultured on FN - beads at 37°C for 30min were fixed and frozen for ultrathin frozen sections ; 0 . 1 - / an frozen thin sections were double labeled with anti - ft integrin mAb ES238 followed by 5 nm gold anti - rat antibody and with anti - FN polyclonal antibody followed by 10 nm gold anti - rabbit antibody . ( A ) Integrin ( In , 5 nm gold ) is found in a range of sizes of vesicles including large vacuoles ( Vac ) as well as in smaller vesicles near cell contact sites with the bead surface ( the lower right corner ) . In the large vacuoles , ft integrin labeling is found on the membrane and on electron - dense material in the lumen . Intracellular FN labeling ( Fn , 10 nm gold ) does not colocalize with integrin but is found in the lumen of tubular compartments ( Fn , 10 nm gold ) . ( B ) and a higher magnification view in ( C ) : integrin ( In , 5 nm gold ) is found in smaller vesicles near cell contact sites with the bead surface ( Bead ) . FN label covers the surface of the bead . Bars , 200 nm . on frozen thin - sections , roughly 40 % of RSVCEF formed invadopodia . In some cells , invasion was more extensive and invadopodia were prominent after staining for ft integrin ( Fig . 5C , arrows ) . Immunoelectron microscopy of the invasive leading edge of transformed cells identified the invadopodia as fine protrusions from the cell extending into the bead ( Figs 7 - 8 ) . The invadopodia of these cells are up to at least 3 ^ m in length and are less than 0 . 2 / an in width . TEM of ultrathin plastic sections revealed that invadopodia contain only a meshwork of microfilaments ( not shown ) . Invading transformed cells also internalize FL - FN - gelatin fragments in vesicles closely associate ' ' with the invadopodia , particularly noticeable in eel ' > r over - night culture with the FN beads ( Figs 4 - f ' leads ) . These vesicles containing FL - FN - gelatin f 3 were colocalized with integrins ( Figs 4 - 5 , arrowheads ) . Most RSVCEF in the 1 day culture showed low intracellular labeling for integrins except those invading cells that phagocytosed fragments of partially digested material ( Fig . 4 , arrowheads ) . Invadopodia are seen at sites of FN removal ( Fig . 4 , arrows ) and phagocytosed FL - FN ma - terial also colocalizes with integrin label in vesicles near areas of active FN removal from the bead ( Fig . 4 , arrowheads ) . In the invading cells intracellular phase - dark vesicles ( arrowheads in the inset to Fig . 5D ) were seen to be colocalized with ft integrin labeling and internalized FL - FN . The vesicles at the bases of invadopo - dia , doubly labeled for integrin ( 5 nm gold ) and FN ( 10 nm gold ) ( Figs7A , 8A , B ) or singly labeled for anti - 140K ( 10 nm gold ) ( Fig . 8C , D ) , demonstrate a spatial association of phagocytic vesicles with the invadopodia . Cell invasion into matrix beads 217 Fig . 4 . Integrin distribution in transformed cells invading into FL - FN - beads . The 0 . 5 - / on sections of RSVCEF cultured overnight on FL - FN - beads were labeled with monospecific polyclonal antibody directed against avian integrin complex . The staining patterns for two different sections are shown in columns A and B . In : the cells were well spread and the integrin labeling was prominent on the overall plasma membrane particularly at areas adjacent to the invadopodia ( arrows ) . Most cells in the 1 day culture showed low intracellular labeling for integrins except those invading cells that phagocytosed fragments of partially digested material ( arrowheads ) . Fn : the distribution of FL - FN on coated beads was resolved by direct epifluorescence . Sites of FL - FN removal occur on the bead surface ( arrows ) and nearby such sites phagocytic vesicles containing FL ^ FN appear ( arrowheads ) . Fn + : the rhodamine image of FN coating of the beads was superimposed with the phase - contrast image . The local degradation of matrix beads occurs under the invading cells but not non - invading cells ( the cell in the center of the field of column B ) . Invadopodia are seen at sites of FN removal ( arrows ) and internalized FL - FN is also seen in an invading cell ( arrowheads ) . The invadopodia colocalize with integrin label on the ventral cell surface ( arrows ) . Phagocytosed FL - FN material also colocalizes with integrin label in vesicles near areas of active substratum removal from the bead ( arrowheads ) . Bar , 3 / an . The role of FN and integrins in cellular invasion To examine whether FN or FN binding integrins continue to be involved in the adhesion of invadopodia , we analyzed the precise distribution of FN and integrins in the vicinity of the invadopodia . Invadopodia extend well into the bead matrix at sites where exogenous FL - FN ( Figs 4—5 ) is absent at the bead surface . Adjacent to sites where invadopodia extend into the bead , cellular FN had been deposited by the transformed cells as shown in double - labeled sections of invading RSVCEF with FL - goat anti - chicken FN ( Fig . 6A , B ) and polyclonal rabbit anti - 140K antibody ( Fig . 6C ) . The polyclonal anti - chicken FN anti - body labels secreted chicken FN , since the anti - chicken FN antibody reacts minimally with mammalian FN . The intense labeling for FN at the base of invadopodia indicates that invading RSVCEF secrete FN that binds to newly exposed gelatin surfaces adjacent to invadopodia , whereas ECM degradation occurs at the tips of invadopo - dia . After overnight culture with the FN beads , ft integrin labeling was located almost entirely at the ventral cell surface in CEF ( Fig . 5A . B ) and RSVCEF ( Fig . 5C , D ) which colocalized with FN immobilized on the bead surface . Double - label immunoelectron microscopy also showed the colocalization of integrin ( 5 nm gold ) with FN ( 10 nm gold ) at the ventral surface in both CEF ( Fig . 7B ) and RSVCEF ( Fig . 7C ) . However , in cells immunostained with polyclonal anti - 140K antibody against integrin ( Chen et al . 19856 ) , ventral and dorsal labeling were equivalent ( Fig . 4 and see also Fig . 6C ) . Since anti - 140K polyclonal antibody recognizes ft integrin , and several a chains ( Chen et al . 19856 ) , the pronounced ventral localization of ft integrin by ES238 implies that ft integrins are involved in FN - mediated adhesion . This notion is supported by the fact that anti - ft integrin adhesion - inhibiting antibody JG22E stains similarly as ES238 ( not shown ) . In addition , ES238 antibody was raised against the purified 140K integrin complex isolated 218 S . C . Mueller and W . - T . Chen Fig . 5 . ft integrin is localized in the plasma membranes of both CEF and RSVCEF that interact with FN during cell spreading and invasion . The 0 . 5 - / zm frozen sections of CEF or RSVCEF grown on large FL - FN beads for 1 day were stained with rat mAb ES238 specific for ft integrin . ( A , Inft ) and ( B , Fn ) : integrin ft distribution ( A ) in CEF revealed by fluorescein immunofluorescence is compared to the underlying FL - FN coating ( B ) on the bead resolved by rhodamine epifluorescence . CEF are very well spread on an undisturbed FL - FN layer , and integrin is localized at the plasma membrane in patches in contact with the bead surface . ( C , Inft ) and ( D , Fn ) : ft integrin distribution ( C ) in RSVCEF revealed by fluorescein immunofluorescence is compared with the underlying FL - FN coating ( D ) on the bead resolved by rhodamine epifluorescence . Insets are highlighted areas indicated by arrows and arrowheads , and show the superimposed picture of the phase - contrast image and the FL - FN image ( Fn + ) and the phase - contrast image alone ( Ph ) . In RSVCEF , integrin is localized to the ventral cell surface ( C ) revealing a very rough membrane profile at sites of FL - FN removal ( D ) . The invadopodia ( arrows in the inset to C ) extend into the bead at sites where FL - FN has been removed ( arrows in D ) , and ft integrin labeling is concentrated in plasma membranes adjacent to the invadopodia ( arrows in C ) . Intracellular ft integrin labeling ( arrowheads in C ) colocalize with phase - dark vesicles ( arrowheads in the inset to D ) containing internalized FL - FN material ( arrowheads in D ) . Bar , 10 / an . Cell invasion into matrix beads 219 Fig . 6 . Deposition of cellular FN at invasion sites by transformed cells . The 0 . 5 - / an frozen sections of RSVCEF cocultured with unlabeled FN - beads overnight were stained in pairs with rabbit anti - 140K integrin antibody followed by rhodamine goat anti - rabbit antibody , and then fluorescein - conjugated goat anti - chicken FN antibody . ( A , Fn + ) The phase - contrast image of RSVCEF invading the bead is superimposed with the immunofluorescent distribution of cellular FN . Numerous invadopodia form at sites of the invasion of RSVCEF into the matrix bead ( fine arrows ) . A portion of a transformed cell shown in the center of the field has invaded the bead , and the bead surface at this area has accumulated a high concentration of cellular FN . ( B , Fn ) Direct immunofluorescence labeling by goat anti - chicken FN shows the low level of cellular FN in RSVCEF and the extensive deposition of FN on the surface of the bead . Labeling of FN with the anti - chicken antibody detects areas of FN deposition associated with invadopodia ( arrows in A ) , that often extend well into the bead ( arrows at the lower right of A ) . The secreted FN gives a fuzzier labeling pattern than the sharper image obtained for exogenous FN when it is prelabeled and coupled to the bead prior to culture ( Figs 1 , 4 and 5 , for examples ) . ( C , In ) The avian integrin complex appears to be distributed evenly on the plasma membrane and is perhaps more concentrated on the free cell surface . The integrin seen at the invasion sites colocalizes with secreted chicken FN that is deposited along the channels formed by invadopodia that often extend well into the bead ( arrows , at lower right in A ) . Bar , 10 / an . by immunoaffinity chromatography using the adhesion - inhibiting antibody JG22E ( Mueller et al . 1988 ) . ES238 labels / 3i integrin from JG22E - purified chicken embryo integrin on immunoblots identically with another anti - / ^ integrin antibody , ES186 , and colocalizes in permeabilized chicken cells with ES186 ( Mueller et al . 1988 ) . Thus , the labeling of dorsal membrane by anti - 140K antibody can be interpreted in any one of several ways . This polyclonal antibody may recognize other / 3 subunits that comigrate on blots in positions masked by known P and a subunits . 220 S . C . Mueller and W . - T . Chen Vac m Bead 7A > > . * Fig . 7 . Distribution of ft integrin and FN in individual invadopodia . The 0 . 1 - jon frozen sections of RSVCEF or CEF cultured with FN - beads for 1 day were labeled with rat mAb ES238 and rabbit anti - FN followed by 5 nm gold anti - rat and 10 nm gold anti - rabbit secondary antibodies . ( A ) Integrin ( 5 nm gold ) is found in the plasma membrane of the invadopodia ( open arrows and the lower right inset ) , near where FN ( 10 nm gold ) is deposited on the bead surface . The invadopodial extensions have tubular profiles . Vacuoles ( Vac ) , labeled by anti - ft integrin , are associated with the base of the invadopodia . Integrin labeling colocalizes with FN label on the invadopodia near its base ( open arrows , and inset right ) but is also found at the tips of invadopodia where FN label is less apparent ( arrow , and inset left ) . The tip of an invadopodium intensely labeled for ft integrin was caught in cross - section ( arrow , and inset left ) . ( B ) The ventral surface of CEF is smooth and the integrin labeling ( 5nm gold ) colocalizes with a continuous layer of FN ( 10 nm gold ) . ( C ) Where the ventral surface of a RSVCEF is smooth , the ft integrin labeling ( 5 nm gold ) colocalizes with a continuous layer of labeling for FN ( 10 nm gold ) , ft integrin labeling ( 5nm gold ) of the ventral membrane colocalizes with FN label in CEF ( arrow in B ) and RSVCEF ( arrows in C ) . Bars , 200 nm . Cell invasion into matrix beads 221 t 8A Bead B Vac Pm Pm Vac y Vac Bead Fig . 8 . Distribution of ft integrin and FN in invading transformed cells . The 0 . 1 - / an frozen sections of RSVCEF cultured overnight with FN - beads were labeled with rat mAb ES238 and rabbit anti - FN followed by 5 nm gold anti - rat and 10 nm gold anti - rabbit secondary antibodies ( A , B ) - Alternatively , sections were single - labeled with polyclonal anti - 140K integrin antibody followed by 10 nm gold anti - rabbit secondary antibody ( C , D ) . A and C are higher magnification views of the areas indicated by brackets in B and D . ( A , B ) FN at the surface of the bead is detected adjacent to the invadopodia . FN and ft integrin appear to colocalize in the vesicles ( Vac ) and the plasma membrane ( Pm ) near the invadopodia ( A ) . ( C , D ) Vacuoles labeled with anti - integrin ( Vac ) are associated with the base of invadopodia . A higher magnification view of two invadopodia that are labeled with anti - 140K is shown in the inset to D . Bars ( A , C ) , 200 nm ; ( B , D ) , 500 nm . Alternatively , since immunoblots from different cell fractionation protocols stain identically for ft integrin using either ES238 or anti - 140K ( Mueller and Chen , data not shown ) , the difference in staining observed on frozen thin - sections may be attributed to differences in protein conformation , i . e . after SDS denaturation , differences between ES238 and anti - 140K labeling are no longer apparent ( except the recognition of a subunits by anti - 140K ) . Experiments are in progress to isolate ventral membranes from dorsal membranes so as to compare their composition biochemically with that of known markers . Invadopodial membranes stain positively for ft inte - grin , with intense labeling in some areas ( Fig . 7A , 5 nm gold labeling ) . The tip of an invadopodium appears to have been included in the section ( Fig . 7 A , arrow and inset ) so that ft integrin labeling is seen over the en face view of the invadopodium . Colocalization of FN and integrin is often seen at the bases of some of the invadopodia extending into the bead ( Figs 7A , 8A , open arrows ) . Thus , strong adhesion sites containing ft integrin—FN complexes encircle the base of the invadopodia and anchor it despite nearby degradative activity . Since we showed previously that the initial attachment of cells on FN - beads was sensitive to both the FN cell - binding peptide GRGDS and the adhesion inhibiting , anti - receptor mAb JG22E ( Mueller et al . 1989 ) , we studied the inhibition of invasion processes of cells already attached on FN - beads by the GRGDS peptide , and by exogenous proteases that cleave FN . Both CEF and RSVCEF were detached from the tissue culture dish and from each other in the presence of 0 . 2 - lmgmr 1 GRGDS or 2 . 5mgml " 1 trypsin ( Chen et al . 19856 ) . However , after initial contact 222 S . C . Mueller and W . - T . Chen with FN - beads ( 30min after co - culture ) , both normal and transformed cells remained attached to FN - beads in the presence of lmgml " 1 GRGDS overnight . Cells grown on FN - gelatin substratum were resistant to detachment by 2 . 5mgml ~ 1 trypsin . Furthermore , immunofluorescent labeling of cells demonstrated no differences in ft integrin distribution on ventral membrane profiles as well as the appearance of invadopodia in the presence of up to l . Omgmr 1 GRGDS ( data not shown ) . These results suggest that pre - existing strong adhesion sites formed between ft integrin complex and FN preclude the effect of inhibitors on the activity of invadopodia . Discussion Previously , we showed that ft integrin - containing recep - tors ( including the FN receptor ) and the cytoskeletal protein talin aggregate at the membrane of CEF or RSVCEF in contact with FN - beads within 10 min ( Mueller et al . 1989 ) . In this paper , we examine changes of integrin distribution in the cell as a consequence of the attachment of CEF or RSVCEF to FN - beads at the level of light and electron microscopy using immunomicroscopy of frozen thin - sections . We found that both RSVCEF and CEF make similar adhesive interactions with immobilized FN - beads . However , RSVCEF , but not CEF , express the invasive phenotype and invade FL - FN - beads . The FN - bead method allows us to identify precisely the invadopodia , the membrane structures that are responsible for the initial stage of invasion . Our data show that ft integrin - containing heterodimers are important for the adhesion of invadopodial membranes to FN that is deposited during invasion . Integrin - containing membranes also mediate the clearance of degraded matrix material via endocytic processes . It remains unclear at present how invadopodia are induced after contact of transformed cells with FN - beads , and how ft integrin - containing heterodimers are localized to the invadopodia . Since the invadopodia were only present in transformed cells , the invasion process may depend upon the activity of the oncogene product , pp60 v " 8rc tyrosine kinase . We found that RSVCEF attached more readily and were consistently more spread on FN - beads than CEF ( Figs 1 - 2 ) . It is possible that the tyrosine phosphorylation of cellular proteins may increase in - vasion - related motility in the transformed cells to extend invadopodia following the mobilization of cytoskeletal proteins such as vinculin and talin to the plasma membrane at sites of invasion ( Chen et al . 19866 ; Burn et al . 1988 ; Mueller et al . 1989 ) . RSVCEF degrade exogenous FN at localized sites underneath the transformed cell ( Chen et al . 1984 ; Chen , 1989 ) . The data from this study suggest that RSVCEF internalize exogenous FL - FN matrices by a process closely coupled to proteolytic degradation , since CEF do not degrade FL - FN - beads and do not internalize FL - FN ( Fig . 5 ) . The internalized FL - FN is found in integrin - containing vesicles and vacuoles , and integrin labeling is intense on invadopodial membranes ( Figs 4 - 5 ) . At the electron - microscopic level ( Figs 7 - 8 ) , vacuoles appear at the base of individual invadopodia , and both invadopodia and associated vacuoles often label strongly for integrin . These vacuoles represent either integrin in transit to invadopodia or integrin from the invadopodia internalized via phagocytosis . It is likely that integrin and the cell surface proteases responsible for FN degradation are localized in close physical proximity , probably in the membranes of invadopodia . Binding of integrins to FN would facilitate degradation of FN and its associated ECM by membrane - associated proteases ( Chen and Chen , 1987 ; Aoyama and Chen , 1990 ) and result in its subsequent endocytosis . The possibility of protease - integrin interac - tion during invasion is intriguing , particularly since it has been shown that proteolytic fragments of laminin and FN , and an antibody against integrin , stimulate cellular production of collagenases ( Turpeenniemi - Hujanen et al . 1986 ; Werb et al . 1989 ) . Invasive cells appear to utilize concomitantly extracellular degradation and the phago - cytic machinery to clear paths for invasion . A common critical stage of cell migration and invasion appears to be motility - driven adhesion that involves the direct adhesive interaction between cells and the ECM . In this study , we have used an anti - ft integrin antibody ( Mueller et al . 1988 ) that recognizes possibly more than one FN receptor , as well as heterodimers that bind collagen and laminin ( Hynes et al . 1989 ; Ogle et al . 1989 ) . The ft integrins are present in extending invadopodia and are concentrated at the base of invadopodia but are absent from membrane extensions free of contact with the FN - beads ( compare Figs 4 and 6 with 2 and 5 ) , suggesting an active role for ft - containing heterodimers in adhesion of individual invadopodia to FN substrata , ft integrin - containing heterodimers are translocated to the ventral cell surface of CEF and RSVCEF following adhesion and spreading on FN - beads . During invasion , localized FN secretion may be coupled with integrin - mediated adhesion at invadopodia . RSVCEF secrete FN that is retained on newly exposed gelatin surfaces along the invasion path ( Fig . 6 ) . Subsequently , the modified surface of the gelatin bead would allow invadopodia to re - form strong integrin - mediated adhesions to the substratum . The staining patterns that we have observed may be evidence of a highly dynamic process involving waves of FN secretion and integrin - mediated adhesion , followed by ECM degra - dation and integrin - mediated phagocytosis that results in the observed non - uniform distribution of integrin in the membranes of invadopodia ( Figs 7 - 8 ) . In addition to FN receptors , collagen binding integrins might also mediate invadopodial membrane adhesion to the matrix beads directly , bypassing FN , and contribute to the pattern of localized ft integrin staining of the invasive ventral membrane . Consistently , inhibitory GRGDS pep - tides have an apparent effect on adhesion of migratory cells to the ECM as shown in several in vitro invasion assays using GRGDS peptides and monoclonal antibodies against human ft integrin ( Akiyama et al . 1989 , 1990 ; Yamada et al . 1990 ) . Similarly , adhesion - inhibitory syn - thetic peptides have been shown to inhibit the penetration of embryonic cells and tumor cells through amniotic basement membranes ( Savagner et al . 1986 ; Gehlsen et al . 1988 ) and block metastasis in an experimental model ( Humphries et al . 1986 ) . The lack of effect of GRGDS on RSVCEF invasion into FN - beads compared to the effects seen in the above mentioned studies may be due to the extensive crosslinking between integrin localized in the contact membrane and the high local concentrations of FN immobilized on the bead surface ( derived from both exogenous and endogenous FN ) that maintains the stability of invadopodial membranes . It may also differ because of an increased requirement for degradation relative to migration for invasion into FN - beads . Alterna - tively , other non - RGD binding receptors participate during RSVCEF invasion into matrix beads . As shown for Cell invasion into matrix beads 223 mammalian integrins , & heterodimers that are insensit - ive to RGDS peptides include those containing a - chains 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 ( Wayner and Carter , 1987 ; Wayner et al . 1988 ; Kramer and Marks , 1989 ) . It seems likely that the combination of a tightly adherent membrane possessing protrusive activity , local - ized degradative activity and phagocytosis of released matrix material results in the formation of invasive channels into the matrix bead . This process is related to motility - driven adhesion and we propose that it be referred to as motility - driven invasion . This distinguishes this localized type of invasion observed in RSVCEF from other types that might depend on secreted , diffuse proteolytic activity . Motility - driven . invasion probably contributes significantly to the efficiency by which cells invade through ECM barriers and might be a general feature of highly invasive cell types . We thank Maozheng Dai and Haining Dai for ultrathin frozen sectioning , Yunyun Yeh and Robert Delsite for cell culture , and Tom Kelly for critical review of the manuscript . This investi - gation was supported by USPHS grant number R01 CA - 39077 and R01 HL - 33711 to W . - T . C , and an AHA Grant - in - Aid to S . C . M . References AKIYAMA , S . K . , NAGATA , K . AND YAMAHA , K . M . ( 1990 ) . Cell surface receptors for extracellular matrix proteins . Biochim . biophys . Acta 1031 , 91 - 100 . AKIYAMA , S . K . , YAMADA , S . S . , CHEN , W . - T . AND YAMADA , K . M . ( 1989 ) . Analysis of fibronectin receptor function with monoclonal antibodies : roles in cell adhesion , migration , matrix assembly , and cytoskeletal organization . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 863 - 875 . ALI , I . U . AND HYNES , K . O . ( 1977 ) . Effects of cytochalasin B and colchicine on attachment of a major surface protein of fibroblasts . Biochim . biophys . Acta ill , 16 - 21 . AOYAMA , A . AND CHBN , W . - T . ( 1990 ) . A 170 - kDa membrane - bound protease is associated with the expression of invasiveness by human malignant melanoma cells . Proc . natn Acad . Sci . U . S - A . 87 , 8296 - 8300 . BBONNXB - FBASER , M . E . ( 1985 ) . Alterations in neural crest migration by a monoclonal antibody that affects cell adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 101 , 610 - 617 . BOCK , C A . AND HOBWITZ , A . F . ( 1987 ) . Cell surface receptors for extracellular matrix molecules . A . Rev . Cell Biol . 3 , 179 - 205 . BURN , P . , KUPFER , A . C . AND SINGER , S . J . ( 1988 ) . Dynamic membrane - cytoskeletal interactions , specific association of integrin and talin arises in vivo after phorbol ester treatment of peripheral blood lymphocytes . Proc . natn . Acad . Sci . U . S - A . 86 , 497 - 501 . CHEN , J . M . AND CHBN , W . - T . ( 1987 ) . Fibronectin - degrading proteases from the membranes of transformed cells . Cell 48 , 193 - 203 . CHEN , W . - T . ( 1989 ) . Proteolytic activity of specialized surface protrusions formed at rosette contact sites of transformed cells . J . exp . Zool . 251 , 167 - 186 . CHKN , W . - T . , CHEN , J . - M AND MUELLER , S . C . ( 1986a ) . Coupled expression and colocalization of 140K cell adhesion molecules fibronectin and laminin during morphogenesis and cytodifferentiation of chick lung cells . J . Cell Biol . 103 , 1073 - 1090 . CHKN , W . T . , GREVB , J . M . , GOTTLIEB , D . I . AND SINGER , S J . ( 1985a ) . The immunocytochemical localization of 140 Kd cell adhesion molecules in cultured chicken fibroblasts , and in chicken smooth muscle and intestinal epithelial tissues . J Histochem . Cytochem . 33 , 576 - 586 CHEN , W . - T . , HASEGAWA , E . , HASEOAWA , T . , WEINSTOCK , C . AND YAMADA , K . M . ( 19856 ) . Development of cell surface linkage complexes in cultured fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 100 , 1103 - 1114 . CHEN , W . - T . , OLDEN , K . , BERNARD , B . A . AND CHU , F . - F . ( 1984 ) . Expression of transformation - associated proteased ) that degrade flbronectin at cell contact sites . J . Cell Biol . 98 , 1546 - 1555 . CHEN , W . - T . , WANG , J . , HASEOAWA , T . , YAMADA , S . S . AND YAMADA , K . M . ( 19866 ) . Regulation of fibronectin receptor distribution by transformation , exogenous fibronectin , and synthetic peptides . J . Cell Biol . 103 , 1649 - 1662 . CRITCHLEY , D . R . , ENGLAND , M . A . , WAXBLY , J . AND HYNES , R . O . ( 1979 ) . Distribution of fibronectin in the ectoderm of gastrulating chick embryos . Nature 280 , 498 - 500 . DARRIBERB , T . , YAMADA , K . M , JOHNSON , K . E . AND BOUCAUT , J . C . ( 1988 ) . The 140 - kDa fibronectin receptor complex is required for mesodermal cell adhesion during gastrulation in the amphibian Pleurodeles waltlii . Devi Biol . 128 , 182 - 194 . DUBAND , J . L . , ROCHEH , S . , CHEN , W . - T . , YAMADA , K . M . AND THIERY , J . P . ( 1986 ) . Cell adhesion and migration in the early vertebrate embryo : location and possible role of the putative fibronectin receptor complex . J . Cell Biol . 102 , 160 - 178 . GEHLSEN , K . R . , ARGRAVES , W . S . , PIEBSCHBACHBR , M . D . AND RUOSLAHTI , E ( 1988 ) . Inhibition of in vitro tumor cell invasion by Arg - Gly - Asp - containing synthetic peptides . J . Cell Biol . 106 , 925 - 930 . GUIRGUIS , R . , MARGULTSS , I . , TARABOLETTI , G . , SCHIFFMANN , E . AND LIOTTA , L . ( 1987 ) . Cytokine - induced pseudopodial protrusion is coupled to tumour cell migration . Nature 329 , 261 - 263 . HEMLBR , M . E . ( 1988 ) . Adhesive protein receptors on hematopoietic cells . Immun . Today 9 , 109 - 113 . HUMPHRIES , M . J . , OLDEN , K . AND YAMADA , K . M . ( 1986 ) . A synthetic peptide from flbronectin inhibits experimental metastasis of munne melanoma cells . Science 233 , 467 - 470 . HYNES , R . O . ( 1987 ) . Integrins : a family of cell surface receptors . Cell 48 , 649 - 564 . HYNES , R . O . , MARCANTONIO , E . E . , STEPP , M . A . , URRY , L . A . AND YEE , G . H . ( 1988 ) . Integrin heterodimer and receptor complexity in avian and mammalian cells . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 409 - 420 . JAFFREDO , T . , HoRwrrz , A . F . , BUCK , C . A . , RONG , P . M . AND DIETEBLEN - LIEVRE , F . ( 1988 ) . Myoblast migration specifically inhibited in the chick embryo by grafted CSAT hybridoma cells secreting an anti - integrin antibody . Development 103 , 431 - 446 . JULLANO , R . L . ( 1987 ) . Membrane receptors for extracellular matrix macromolecules : relationship to cell adhesion and tumor metastasis . Biochim . biophys . Acta 907 , 261 - 278 . KRAMER , R . H . AND MARKS , N . ( 1989 ) . Identification of integrin collagen receptors on human melanoma cells . < / . 6ioZ . Chem . 264 , 4684 - 4688 . KRAMER , R . H . , MCDONALD , K . A . , CROWLSY , E . , RAMOS , D . M . AND DAMSKY , C . H . ( 1989 ) . Melanoma cell adhesion to basement membrane mediated by integnn - related complexes . Cancer Res . 49 , 393 - 402 . KURKINEN , M . , ALJTALO , K . , VAHERI , A . , STENMAN , S . AND SAXEN , L . ( 1979 ) . Fibronectin in the development of embryonic chick eye . Devi Biol . 69 , 589 - 600 . LIOTTA , L . A . ( 1986 ) . Tumor invasion and metastases - role of the extracellular matrix : Rhoads Memorial Award lecture . Cancer Res . 46 , 1 - 7 MUELLER , S . C , HASEGAWA , T . , YAMADA , S . S . , YAMADA , K . M . AND CHEN , W . - T . ( 1988 ) . Transmembrane orientation of the fibronectin receptor complex ( integrin ) demonstrated directly by a combination of immunocytochemical approaches . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 36 , 297 - 306 . MUELLER , S . C , KELLY , T . , DAI , M . , DAI , H . AND CHEN , W . - T . ( 1989 ) . Dynamic cytoskeleton - integrin associations induced by cell binding to immobilized fibronectin . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 3465 - 3464 . OGLE , R . C , POTTS , A . , YACOE , M . AND LITTLE , C . D . ( 1989 ) . Embryonic chicken fibroblast collagen binding proteins : distribution , role in substratum adhesion , and relationship to integrins . J . Cell Sci . 94 , 361 - 369 . OLDEN , K . AND YAMADA , K . M . ( 1977 ) . Mechanism of the decrease in the major cell surface protein of chicken embryo fibroblasts after transformation . Cell 11 , 957 - 969 . ROMAN , J . , LACHANCK , R . M . , BROEKELMANN , T . J . , KENNEDY , C . J . R . , WAYNER , E . A . , CARTER , W . G . AND MCDONALD , J . A . ( 1989 ) . The fibronectin receptor is organized by extracellular matrix fibronectin : implications for oncogenic transformation and for cell recognition of fibronectin matrices . J . Cell Biol . 108 , 2629 - 2543 . ROVASIO , R . A . , DELOUVEK , A . , YAMADA , K . M . , TIMPL , R . AND THIERY , J . P . ( 1983 ) . Neural crest cell migration : requirements for exogenous flbronectin and high cell density . J . Cell Biol . 96 , 462 - 473 . RUOSLAHTI , E . AND PIKRSCHBACHER , M D . ( 1987 ) . New perspectives in cell adhesion - RGD and integrins . Science 238 , 491 - 497 . SAVAGNER , P . , IMHOF , B . A . , YAMADA , K . M . AND THIERY , J . P . ( 1986 ) . Homing of hemopoietic precursor cells to the embryonic thumus : characterization of an invasive mechanism induced by chemotactic peptides . J . Cell Biol . 103 , 2716 - 2727 . TRINKAUS , J . P . ( 1984 ) . Cells into Organs . The Forces that Shape the Embryo , 2nd edn . Prentice Hall , Inc . , New York . TRINKAUS , J . P . ( 1987 ) . Preface . J . Cell Sci . Suppl . 8 , i - iv . TURPEENNIUEMI - HUJANEN , R . , THOROEIRSSON , U . P . , RAO , C . N . AND LIOTTA , L . A . ( 1986 ) . Laminin increases the release of type IV collagenase from malignant cells . J . biol . Chem . 281 , 1883 - 1889 . WAYNER , E . A . AND CARTER , W . G . ( 1987 ) . Identification of multiple cell adhesion receptors for collagen and fibronectin in human fibrosarcoma cells possessing unique alpha and common beta subunits . J . Cell Biol . 105 , 1873 - 1884 . WAYNER , E . A . , CARTER , W . G . , PIOTROWICZ , R . S . AND KUNICKI , T . J . ( 1988 ) . The function of multiple extracellular matrix receptors in 224 S . C . Mueller and W . - T . Chen mediating cell adhesion to extracellular matrix : Preparation of YAMAHA , K . M . , KENNEDY , D . W . , YAMADA , S . S . , GRALNICK , H . , CHEN , monoclonal antibodies to the fibronectin receptor that specifically W . - T . AND AKIYAMA , S . K . ( 1990 ) . Monoclonal antibody and synthetic inhibit cell adhesion to fibronectin and react with platelet peptide inhibitors of human tumor cell migration . Cancer Res . 80 , glycoprotein Ic - Ila . J . Cell Biol . 107 , 1881 - 1891 . 4485 - 4496 . WERB , Z . , TREMBLE , P . M . , BKHRCNDTSKN , L . , CROWLEY , E . AND DAMSKY , C . H . ( 1989 ) . Signal transduction through the fibronectin receptor induces collagenase and stromelysin gene expression . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 877 - 889 . ( Received 17 January 1991 - Accepted 8 March 1991 ) Cell invasion into matrix beads 225