Participatory design with children in the development of a support system for patient - centered care in pediatric oncology Cornelia M . Ruland a , b , c , * , Justin Starren c , Torun M . Vatne a a Center for Shared Decision Making and Nursing Research , Rikshospitalet Medical Center , Forskningsveien 2b , 0027 Oslo , Norway b Department of Medicine , University of Oslo , Norway c Department of Biomedical Informatics , Columbia University , NY , USA Received 4 July 2007 Available online 13 November 2007 Abstract Developing software for children with severe illness poses a number of design challenges . In this paper we describe participatory design methods used in the development of SISOM , a support system for children with cancer age 7 – 12 to help children elicit and report their symptoms / problems in a child - friendly , age - adjusted manner , and to assist clinicians at the point of care in addressing and integrat - ing children’s reported symptoms and problems in patient care . The particular design challenges in the development of a clinical support tool for seriously ill children are described , followed by the participatory design techniques we used to meet these challenges . Healthy children and children with cancer participated actively in diﬀerent stages of the design process . We describe how children contributed to the graphical design of the system’s interface ; selection of understandable , child - friendly terms used in the system ; iconic and graphical representations ; and its usability . The methods applied helped us to signiﬁcantly improve and adapt SISOM to children’s cognitive and emotional developmental stage . Working with children as partners in the design also provided important insights into the role children can play in participatory design that may be helpful for other system developers who wish to design support applications for ill children . Children had very creative design ideas that considerably improved the software . However , system development for seriously ill children also requires psychological and pedagogical insights and design and usability expertise . This limits the role children can play as full design partners . (cid:2) 2007 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Keywords : Participatory design ; User – computer interface ; Decision support ; Children ; Cancer 1 . Introduction Children diagnosed with cancer experience many com - plex physical , functional , psychosocial and behavioral problems during the course of their illness . Treatment usu - ally involves multiple hospitalizations , and interference with the child’s normal development , activities and social interactions over a long time . There are also large varia - tions in symptom characteristics and distress that cannot be explained by the underlying cancer diagnosis [ 1 ] . There - fore , clinicians cannot automatically anticipate what prob - lems children are experiencing and consequently , what care is in their best interest . Children are particularly vulnerable because they lack the personal resources or life experiences that help them cope and make sense of the many problems associated with cancer . Less developed verbal skills , par - ents’ and clinicians’ communication styles and attitudes toward the child might also prevent children from ade - quately communicating about distressing symptoms with their clinicians [ 2 ] . Also , children are less likely than adults to report and engage in communication about their symp - toms with their health care providers . For example , von Dulmen [ 3 ] reported that in 36 % of the pediatric consulta - 1532 - 0464 / $ - see front matter (cid:2) 2007 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jbi . 2007 . 10 . 004 * Corresponding author . Address : Center for Shared Decision Making and Nursing Research , Rikshospitalet Medical Center , Forskningsveien 2b , 0027 Oslo , Norway . Fax : + 47 23075450 . E - mail address : cornelia . ruland @ rr - research . no ( C . M . Ruland ) . www . elsevier . com / locate / yjbin Available online at www . sciencedirect . com Journal of Biomedical Informatics 41 ( 2008 ) 624 – 635 tions the child did not participate at all verbally . Children are therefore , at a particular risk that their symptoms and problems remain under - diagnosed and treated . To overcome these problems , children with cancer and their care providers could beneﬁt from support systems that help children to eﬀectively elicit and report their symptoms and problems to their clinicians , and thereby help clinicians to provide individually tailored patient care . Therefore , we developed SISOM 1 , an interactive communication tool for use on a touch - sensitive , portable computer at the point of care to provide children with a ‘‘voice . ’’ SISOM is designed to help children age 7 – 12 with cancer to elicit and report their symptoms / problems in a child - friendly , age - adjusted manner , and assist clinicians ( nurses and phy - sicians ) in addressing and integrating children’s reported symptoms and problems in patient care . The application builds on a similar system for adult cancer patients called Choice , that has been successfully used by in - and outpa - tients to report their symptoms , problems and preferences for care , and that has repeatedly shown in randomized clin - ical trials ( RCTs ) to signiﬁcantly increased congruence between patients’ reported symptoms / problems and patient care [ 4 , 5 ] . Children with cancer may have even more to gain from similar support , but so far no such systems had been developed for pediatric oncology . Developing a support system such as SISOM for seri - ously ill children poses a number of speciﬁc design chal - lenges , diﬀerent from those associated with systems for adults or healthy children . SISOM is unique compared to other computer applications developed for children that are mainly computer games or designed for informational or educational purposes . Such systems deliver primarily information or interactions to children . Unlike other appli - cations , the purpose of SISOM is to elicit personal infor - mation from children . In the development of the application we therefore , had to address a set of unique design issues . In this paper we describe : ( 1 ) the particular design chal - lenges in the development of a clinical support tool for seri - ously ill children such as SISOM ; ( 2 ) the participatory design techniques we used , involving healthy and ill chil - dren in diﬀerent stages of the design process ; and ( 3 ) chil - dren’s contributions that helped us adapt the application to children’s cognitive and emotional developmental stage . 2 . Design challenges 2 . 1 . Developmental factors Children have very diﬀerent perceptions of the world and ways to make sense of it than adults . A useful appli - cation needs to be adjusted to children’s cognitive and emotional developmental stage and speciﬁc age group . Older children think and express things diﬀerently than younger children , and there are clear gender diﬀerences in ways children like to interact with computers and what features they prefer [ 6 ] . Because smaller children cannot read and write ﬂuently , a system such as SISOM should allow them to navigate it with the help of intuitively meaningful metaphors and pictures . This may include the use of spoken text , sound , animations etc . Children with cancer may , as a result of their illness experience , be more knowledgeable and mature in some aspects than healthy children , but more immature in other aspects due to dealing with a life - threatening illness , treatment pro - cesses , disruptions from normal life activities and their dependency on others . The value of including potential users as part of the design team is well recognized , and participatory design is an essential aspect of good design practice for adults and children alike [ 14 ] . We therefore , considered it critical to involve children in the design process of SISOM . Chil - dren can play important roles in creating new technologies for other children . As designers we can learn from them what they like and understand , and what makes computer systems appealing to use . 2 . 2 . Valid data capturing The purpose of SISOM is to help children with cancer elicit and report their experienced symptoms and problems as means to support patient - centered patient – provider communication and individually tailored patient care . Therefore , it is crucial that the system can reliably obtain valid information about symptoms and problems experi - enced by children . Previous studies have found that health status data can be reliably and validly obtained directly from children above the age of six [ 7 ] and that children from 12 years of age can use adult assessment tools . There - fore , we deﬁned age 7 – 12 as the target age group for SISOM . Validity is a required property of all instruments , and the development of SISOM is being followed by a sub - sequent research study with a suﬃciently large sample to test its validity and reliability in clinical practice . However , the focus of this study is to describe the design process of the application . Results from the clinical testing will be pre - sented in a subsequent paper . The purpose of most technology designed for ill children so far is to help them manage and cope with their illness through educational material and play . For example , Aoki et al . [ 8 ] developed an ‘‘edutainment’’ tool for type - 1 dia - betic children to help them learn how to achieve better con - trol of their blood glucose levels . Other systems designed for supporting children’s care through symptom assess - ments have generally focused on obtaining information from parents rather than the sick children . For example , Porter et al . [ 9 ] built an asthma kiosk within a hospital’s emergency department so that parents can provide the crit - ical information on symptoms in order to drive guideline - based care for pediatric asthma . 1 SISOM is the Norwegian acronym for Si det SOM det er , meaning : ‘‘Tell it as it is’’ , or Selvrapportering Innen Symptomer Og Mestring , meaning : self - reporting on symptoms and management . C . M . Ruland et al . / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 41 ( 2008 ) 624 – 635 625 SISOM is diﬀerent from these types of applications , as it asks children themselves to specify their own symptoms and degree of bother . Thus the application needs to bal - ance an engaging , child - friendly interface with the ‘‘seri - ous’’ nature of the task and should not be perceived as a game . For example , the system should not tempt children to select symptoms because their pictures or interactions are fun to watch , if they do not reﬂect the child’s actual symptom experience . On the other hand , the system still needs to be engaging , so the child wants to use it . 2 . 3 . Seriously ill children as primary users Because children with cancer can be very ill , the system should be easy to use , and not too cognitively or emotion - ally demanding . Studies by Bers and colleagues [ 10 , 11 ] pro - vide some guidelines and lessons learned that apply to our work on SISOM . Their work concerned the use of story - telling applications to help young cardiac and hemodialysis patients cope with a life - threatening disease . They report that designs for seriously ill children must be ﬂexible when presenting content so that children are not forced to con - front the life - threatening nature of their illness when they are not ready for it . On the other hand , an application such as SISOM provides a unique opportunity to allow children to report troublesome symptoms and worries that they otherwise may be reluctant to disclose face - to face . For example , children can wish to protect their parents from being worried about them , and therefore , keep troublesome problems to themselves . That reporting symptoms and problems to a computer application can make it easier for children to be more ‘‘honest’’ about their actual experi - ences than a face - to - face interview , has been supported by other researchers [ 12 , 13 ] . 2 . 4 . Adjustment to setting and users A system such as SISOM needs to be adapted into the practices and work ﬂow of the clinical practice . SISOM is designed to be used at the point of in - and outpatient care . There are therefore , a deﬁned set of requirements due to the nature and context of the application . The technology must be portable because children move within the hospi - tal , and children should be able to operate the system while wearing an I . V . In designing SISOM we therefore , explored diﬀerent input mechanisms , such as pen - devices . SISOM also has two types of users , children who enter the informa - tion , and clinicians who use the resulting assessment sum - mary to support them in their communication with the child . Thus the assessment summary needs to be meaning - ful to the child and clinician alike . 2 . 5 . Challenges in involving sick children in participatory design Druin and colleagues have pioneered work on involving children within the design team . Their methods have been successfully applied in the design of story board software , digital libraries for children , computer games as well as educational software [ 14 , 15 ] . Druin deﬁnes several roles children can play in the pro - cess : user , tester , informer and partner [ 14 ] . As users , chil - dren are observed using technology in order to test design concepts for future editions of existing software or to observe the process of learning . When children are testers , they use prototypes of software designed by adults and are asked for feedback such as , ‘‘What did you like ? ’’ , ‘‘What was boring ? ’’ or ‘‘What was too hard ? ’’ As informants , children begin participating in the design process before any prototypes are built . They might be observed using dif - ferent types of technology , asked to come up with sugges - tions for the design , or asked for their feedback on paper sketches . Children as informants participate in the design process whenever researchers feel that children will provide some needed information . When children are design part - ners they participate in similar ways as informants , how - ever , they contribute at all stages , from the initial idea to the ﬁnal product . Participatory design usually implies that the user partic - ipants are as similar as possible as the system’s future users . However , when designing an application for seriously ill children , this is only partially possible . Participatory design involves repeated meetings of 1 – 2 h over an extended per - iod of time [ 14 ] . This would pose an impossible burden on children undergoing cancer treatment . We therefore , used the ‘‘next best’’ alternative . Although this is a devia - tion from what is considered the ‘‘ideal’’ of user participa - tion , the ethical problem involved in asking seriously ill children to participate in such a demanding made this an unfeasible approach . In our study we therefore , worked with healthy children as informers and partners during the more time consuming and demanding parts of the design process , while children with cancer participated in less demanding steps of the design . Healthy children have still have the aspect of being children in common with children with cancer . However , healthy children are not the end - users of SISOM . Also , the degree to which healthy children can put themselves into the shoes of sick children and can serve as proxy design participants is not been suﬃciently understood . Therefore , we explored in the design process of SISOM the contributions and limitations of healthy children as informers , partners and testers . 3 . Participatory design techniques and methods 3 . 1 . Preceeding work : The adult application SISOM builds on a similar system for adult cancer patients called Choice that is contained and administered on a touch - pad , tablet computer . It asks patients to identify their symptoms and health problems along physical , psy - chosocial , or behavioral dimensions , including symptom distress and priorities for care . Similar to SISOM , the sys - 626 C . M . Ruland et al . / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 41 ( 2008 ) 624 – 635 tem creates an assessment summary to be used by patients and clinicians for shared care planning that is transferred semi - automatically into the Electronic Health Record and accessible for subsequent care planning through the patient portal . The adult Choice application has been successfully used by in - and outpatients and has repeatedly shown to signiﬁcantly improve patient - centered care [ 4 , 5 ] . While the underlying purpose of Choice and SISOM are similar—to help patients verbalize and communicate their symptoms and problems and improve patient – provider communication and patient - centered care , transferring a tailored assessment tool for adults to a pediatric popula - tion without major adjustments is not a viable solution for several reasons : First , in the adult version , users need to be able to read . Second , symptom are described in adult language that children may have diﬃculty to understand ; thirdly , children are less mature and at a diﬀerent cognitive and emotional developmental stage and thus experience the illness diﬀerently . Fourthly , while some symptoms and problems are the same for children and adults with cancer , there are also distinct diﬀerences , such a problems related to disruptions in social interactions , school related activi - ties and learning , managing treatment , and impact on daily life . Therefore , SISOM’s content and interface was espe - cially developed for children . 3 . 2 . Developing the textual content of SISOM Prior to the development of the SISOM application , the participatory design sessions were preceded by the develop - ment of the list of symptoms to be contained in SISOM . First , we conducted a critical review according to a set of inclusion criteria from the scientiﬁc literature to identify symptoms and problems that can be experienced by chil - dren with cancer during the course of their illness along physical , psychosocial and behavioral dimensions . Of 1094 titles identiﬁed , 98 articles met inclusion criteria and were included in the review . Sixty - seven were research - based and 31 were reviews of the literature . A preliminary list of symptoms and problems were abstracted from the literature for potential inclusion . Next , we conducted a set of focus groups with clinical specialists in pediatric oncology ( physicians , nurses , psychologists , social work - ers ) who critically reviewed the preliminary symptom list for relevance , comprehensibility , completeness , and level of detail and speciﬁed it based on expert opinion . The focus groups resulted in some revisions of the list that was there - after reviewed by six parents of children with cancer . In addition to being asked to evaluate the symptom list according to the same criteria as the clinicians described above , parents were also asked to pay particular attention to whether or not the symptoms and problems on the list were expressed in simple , understandable , non - medical lay language that children could understand . They were also asked what terms and expressions children used when communicating about symptoms / symptoms with them . This resulted in some further revisions speciﬁcally of symp - tom wordings . The resulting symptom list consisted of 78 symptoms / problems and was used in the design and con - tent evaluation of SISOM described below . 3 . 3 . Recruitment and sample For all methods described in this paper that involved children , IRB approval was obtained . To recruit children to participate in the design process , the Principal of a nearby elementary school in Oslo , Norway , was contacted and ask to send letters prepared by us to parents of 4th and 6th graders . The letter invited their children to participate in the design of SISOM which purpose was explained ; that this would take approximately 2 h one afternoon a week , up to 6 weeks in total . Answers from parents who con - sented were forwarded to our research team , granting us permission to contact them directly . The response was overwhelming . Fifty children ( 17 boys and 33 girls ) responded with interest in participating . As this was far more than needed , we selected ﬁnal partici - pants based on a phone conversation with their parents , where we screened children based on the following : whether the child ( 1 ) feels comfortable with and is usually active in group activities , ( 2 ) uses computers as an educa - tional tool and to play games , ( 3 ) is creative , e . g . likes to draw or enjoys building things ; and ( 4 ) if there was a par - ticular reason for why the child wanted to participate . The ﬁnal group that participated in the design of the graphical user interface consisted of 12 children in two separate design groups : one group of six 4th graders ( four 9 - year - old girls and two boys ) and one group of six 6th graders ( three 11 - year - old boys and three girls ) . Other children who also had volunteered did participate in other tasks described below . 3 . 4 . Procedures Design sessions were held at the ‘‘Adolescent Club Room’’ at the pediatric department at Rikshospitalet Med - ical Center , that provides a child / adolescent - friendly atmo - sphere . Both groups attended four sessions after school over a period of 2 months . Each session lasted 2 h . Chil - dren were given a star in a book for each session they par - ticipated and a gift certiﬁcate worth NOK 500 after the last session . Two of the design sessions were pilot tested with four children of hospital employees ( two 9 - year - old boys , two 11 - year - old girls ) . Ideas that emerged from the pilot ses - sions were included in the analysis of design ideas . In the design of SISOM we adapted participatory design methods as outlined by Druin [ 14 ] to our project . In addi - tion to the children , four adults who where trained as par - ticipant or observer participated in each session . Sessions proceeded as an iterative process and a mutual learning experience where both children and adults were considered experts . The children contributed design ideas , explained which aspects of computer interfaces they found appealing , C . M . Ruland et al . / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 41 ( 2008 ) 624 – 635 627 and gave reasons for why they thought some interfaces were better than others . Adults also helped to form design ideas according to the purpose of the system and its rami - ﬁcations as outlined in the section on ‘‘Design Challenges’’ above . Adults were responsible for showing interface and navigation examples and helping the children understand what is technically feasible . Our techniques included role play and scenarios , low - tech prototyping , observation , video - taping and note taking . Both age groups followed the same procedures . Between sessions the adult team met with our graphical designer on the team , discussed ideas and observations from the previous session , monitored progress , summa - rized what we learned , and adjusted , when necessary , the agenda for the next session . The graphical designer drew out children’s ideas in Adobe Illustrator that were given back to the children for evaluation and further elaboration in the next session . In addition , a group of master students from the Computer Science Department at the University of Oslo developed simple animation prototypes in parallel using Macromedia Flash . 3 . 5 . Design sessions The ﬁrst session consisted of three tasks . After introduc - ing each another , and informing the children about the project purpose and plans for the next couple of weeks , children were asked to work in pairs to test four computer programs or games each for about 30 min . In this task , children assumed the role of tester . Each pair had an adult facilitator and an observer who took notes . The purpose was to : ( a ) learn what interface features and aspects chil - dren like in computer applications ; ( b ) show children diﬀer - ent features and interactions that are possible , in order to stimulate their ideas for SISOM ; and ( c ) as a warm - up . Children were asked to think aloud during this task and comment on what they liked / disliked about each applica - tion , whether it was easy / diﬃcult , engaging / boring and why . They were also asked to describe their favorite com - puter application and explain why it was their favorite . In the next task , children were read a scenario about a child that was experiencing a set of ﬂu - like symptoms , and had to go to the hospital . Children were asked to tell us and role play what these symptoms felt like . We choose a stomach ﬂu rather than cancer in this scenario because we anticipated that children were more likely to have had a real - life experience with ﬂu rather than with cancer . We also felt that having a detailed scenario dealing with cancer could make children worry or frighten them . Described symptoms were , however , contained in the SISOM symptom list , such as nausea , fatigue , and feeling sad . The story ended with a nurse coming to the hospitalized child , handing her a tablet computer that the child could use to report its symptoms , problems and worries , so the doctor and nurse could help . The children were asked to start designing a system that could help children report their symptoms and problems in a child - friendly manner , based on the scenario they had just heard about , and draw or build what it could look like and how it would behave . Children were provided with a large table equipped with low - tech prototype material , including paper in diﬀerent colors , crayons , pencils , card - board , cartoons , lego , glue , etc . , and asked to work on the task in groups of 2 – 3 . Towards the end of each session , each sub - group was asked to summarize their ideas to the rest of the group that provided feedback . Sessions two to four focused on continuing to draw and discuss diﬀerent aspects of the interface , either in pairs or as a whole group . In these tasks children assumed the role of informer and to some degree as partner . According to Druin , a full partner role entails also note taking and observing , which children in our study did not do . All ses - sions were videotaped , and notes were taken by adult observers . Because our school children participants were not end - users of SISOM , we made particular eﬀorts to help them understand the purpose and context of the application . Therefore , all sessions started with a story of an ill child that the children could recognize or easily imagine . Addi - tional physical , psychosocial and functional symptoms and problems were introduced successively , again from the SISOM symptom list . In the third session , the children role - played an actual hospital scene where they took turns being dressed in a hospital gown , and put into bed with a pretend I . V . line . The other children played the role of doc - tor , nurse or worried parent . The ‘‘sick’’ and bandaged child in bed tested diﬀerent computer types and input devices and was asked for feedback . They also tested the equivalent adult application for cancer symptom assess - ment that has been successfully used by cancer patients over the last years . Children found the adult version easy - to - use , but its interface boring . The material obtained from the design sessions consists of the low - tech prototypes that were developed , observa - tion notes and 22 h of videotape . This material was ana - lyzed and discussed by our team of health professionals , a child psychologist , child educational therapist , program - mers and designers to explore children’s contributions , ideas , roles and interactions in this process . Videos and observation notes were annotated and organized according to content , such as ideas for background , help , navigation , animation , graphics , rewards , age and gender speciﬁc con - tent , as well as additional material . Ideas were evaluated in terms of their congruence with the goals of SISOM , the design challenges outlined above , pedagogical principles , and usability criteria for children as outlined by Gilutz [ 6 ] . Based on these analyses , decisions were made as to which ideas to implement . 4 . Children’s contributions 4 . 1 . Graphical interface Children contributed a total of 161 unique design ideas as summarized in Table 1 above . They had many excellent 628 C . M . Ruland et al . / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 41 ( 2008 ) 624 – 635 and creative suggestions that the design team would not have thought of alone . Fig . 1 shows an example drawn by two 11 - year - old girls that depicts their idea of how SISOM could help children report where it hurts . The left side displays the children’s original drawing in which the body is split up into sections to click on where it hurts . When a draft of the picture was given back to the children in the next session , they elaborated on it , and the possibility to exactly point to places where it hurts was added as shown in the middle picture . This was further elaborated on , and the right side shows how this looks like in the ﬁnal version of SISOM . Here the child can select a brush from the appropriate bucket on the left side and paint on the body exactly where it hurts , itches , bleeds or bruises . The body can also turn around . However , not all of the children’s ideas were workable . For example , when designing an interface for younger chil - dren who cannot read , one group suggested that a voice could be activated by clicking a button where : ‘‘Click here if you cannot read’’ is written on it . Or a group of boys sug - gested shooting at the body picture with a gun to mark where it hurts . Among many design ideas that emerged for the main theme of SISOM , the idea that was endorsed by boys and girls in both age groups was a ‘‘sailing from island - to - island’’ navigation theme . The children suggested that symptoms be placed on islands and that children could sail from place to place with the help of a self - selected ﬁgure . The designers created models of the ideas that were elabo - rated on in the following sessions . Figs . 2 – 7 below show the ﬁnal version of the island - to - island navigation theme . 4 . 2 . Children’s evaluations of graphical representations In SISOM each symptom is represented with a picture . Graphical elements function best when they are metaphor - ically meaningful and correctly represent the concept in question [ 16 ] . Therefore , we conducted evaluation sessions with ﬁve children age 9 – 11 ( 3 boys , 2 girls ) , to learn if they could correctly recognize the symptoms based on the graphical representations . These children were recruited from the list of children who had volunteered to participate in the development of SISOM , but had not been selected to participate in the design sessions . These children were invited to come to a 1 – 1 . 5 h session at our research center after school to complete the task . Children were presented with one symptom picture at a time without providing them with any labels , or island headings under which they belonged . This is a rather strict approach because in SISOM , symptoms are displayed in a context background that provides additional cues what they mean , most of them are animated , and have also text labels that can be heard by clicking on an icon depicting an ear if the child cannot read . A facilitator conducted the interviews and an observer took notes . Sessions lasted on average 45 min . For each picture children were asked what symptom they thought it depicted , and why . Their explanations helped us identify which parts or cues in the picture that made the symptom recognizable . If children did not recognize the symptom , we provided them with the island label under which it belonged . If they still not recognized it or thought it dis - played a diﬀerent symptom , we told them what the symp - tom was supposed to display , and for their ideas to revise it . Children were provided with colored pencils to revise the pictures or draw new ones . Table 1 Type of children’s design ideas Design ideas Count Age / gender - speciﬁc user choices 4 Animations , colors , graphics 19 Background scene 11 Interactions 30 Sound , text , voice 27 Main characters , avatar 16 Navigation 27 Help functions 11 Input 10 Likes , dislikes , experience 6 All 161 Fig . 1 . From original idea to ﬁrst draft to interface of ﬁnal version : Children’s conceptualizations of how to report pain . C . M . Ruland et al . / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 41 ( 2008 ) 624 – 635 629 Pictures were grouped into four categories : ( A ) the symptom was correctly recognized immediately ; ( B ) was recognized after knowing the island name under which it belongs ; ( C ) knowing the symptom , the picture is a good representation ; ( D ) the picture does not represent the symptom well . Sixty - one percent of the symptoms were immediately recognized by all children . Fig . 8 displays a picture of the symptom ‘‘Nightmare’’ that was immediately recognized by all children . However , 12 % of the pictures were considered not a good symptom representation and revised . Children pro - vided a number of excellent ideas for revisions that we used . Fig . 9 diplays one of these pictures and how it was revised based on the evaluations . 4 . 3 . Children’s contributions to child - friendly terms To ensure that children could understand the symptom and problem terms contained in the SISOM symptom list , we interviewed 14 children ( eight school children and six with cancer . Healthy children were recruited from our list of the 50 volunteers from the local school , the 4th and 6th graders described above . These were four boys and four girls , age 9 – 11 , who had not participated in other design sessions . Fig . 2 . The child has started its journey into the Island world in a boat from the lighthouse where it has selected the appearance of the child that comes along on the journey . The child chooses the island it wants to visit ﬁrst by touching it with its ﬁnger or a pen . The beam from the lighthouse points to that island . The helper , the little ﬁgure dipping in the water on the life raft in the right corner , follows along through the whole program and can be asked for oral advice by touching her . Fig . 3 . In this example the child has chosen the island where it can tell about diﬃculty managing things . The child goes ashore , touches the section it wants to tell about , e . g . things that are diﬃcult to manage in daily life . 630 C . M . Ruland et al . / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 41 ( 2008 ) 624 – 635 Children with cancer were recruited from the local hos - pital . Inclusion criteria were 7 - to 12 - year - olds and under - going or having received treatment for cancer during the last 2 years . Twenty - one possible participants were identi - ﬁed from the electronic health record . The 10 ﬁrst children were selected consecutively from this list and received a let - ter addressed to their parents about the study from their paediatrician , asking for participation . Eight consented . One interview could not be completed because the child was unable to concentrate and one boy was not interviewed because of travelling distance . The total number of cancer children participating was six , four girls and two boys , age 8 – 12 . Four were treated for leukemia , two for soft tissue tumors . Ten interviews were completed in the children’s homes after school , three at the pediatric ward and one at the interviewer’s oﬃce . The interview time ranged from 1 to 2 h , and included one 15 - min break . During two of the interviews with children with cancer parents were present , but were asked to give as little verbal input as possible . To prevent the interview from becoming too personal in nature , the child was asked to create a ﬁctive person with the same age and sex as him - / herself and in the same life situation , and give him or her a name . We presented them Fig . 4 . When the child enters the Daily Life section , it enters a room where each object represents a problem that the child can select . This opens a new animated picture that illustrates the problem in more detail ( inset ) . A touch on the magnifying glass to the right highlights all objects in the room that have not yet been selected . Fig . 5 . Each symptom / problem is represented with a picture , in the example : Trouble sleeping . On the left side a scale is displayed where the child can denote how much of the problem this is . If the child cannot or does not want to read the text , it can click on the ear , and the text is read out loud . C . M . Ruland et al . / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 41 ( 2008 ) 624 – 635 631 with one symptom at a time from the symptom list in ran - dom order and asked children about ( 1 ) their understand - ing of the symptom term and ( 2 ) alternative expression . The child was asked questions from the ﬁctive child’s per - spective , and each symptom / bodily sensation was intro - duced in the following manner : ‘‘Anne ( the ﬁctive child ) has a head ache . . . . . ’’ ‘‘Do you know what it means when I say ( e . g . headache ? ) ’’ ( b ) ‘‘What would ( the ﬁctive child , e . g . Anne ) say if he / she were to tell anyone that she has this problem ? ( headache ) ’’ . Interviews were audio - taped , transcribed and analyzed . Symptom / problem terms were coded into : ( a ) clearly understandable terms ; ( b ) ambiguous terms ; ( c ) does not know what the term means ; and ( d ) understands the term but assigns a diﬀerent meaning to it . Terms that were not clearly understandable were revised . Children provided several excellent suggestions for meaningful child - friendly terms that were implemented in SISOM . 4 . 4 . Children as usability testers We performed several usability tests with four healthy school children and six ill children at diﬀerent stages of the development process . The school children were recruited from our list of 50 volunteers who had not partic - ipated in any of the other tasks and therefore , no prior knowledge of SISOM . These children came to our usability lab for testing . Usability tests with children with cancer ( 2 Fig . 6 . When the child has visited all the islands , a child - friendly report that summarizes the child’s reported problems is displayed and can be printed . This report can be used by health professionals together with the child during consultations to tailor patient care to each child individually . Fig . 7 . In addition , SISOM creates also a report of all things the child has identiﬁed as NOT being the problem . This is because we do not want to focus only on the things that the child perceives as diﬃcult , but also give the child a sense of mastery and focus on things that go well . 632 C . M . Ruland et al . / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 41 ( 2008 ) 624 – 635 boys , 4 girls , age 7 – 11 ) were done with portable equipment at the hospital . None of them had participated in any of the other design tasks . These children were suggested by nurses at the unit where they were admitted , and who considered them feeling well enough and potentially interested to par - ticipate . Parents were asked for informed consent before the child was asked for assent . For those consenting , an appointment was made at the child’s and parents’ conve - nience . We felt that asking these children to be usability testers was ethically defensible . Several of the children expressed explicitly that they thought it was fun to test a new technology which broke some of the boredom of long days in the hospital , and gave them a sense of contributing to something important . Also , usability testing is not much diﬀerent from using the actually application that will be used in the same patient group . Usability testing encompasses a range of methods for identifying how users actually interact with a prototype or a complete system . It is an iterative process that involves testing the system and then using the test results to change it to better meet users’ needs . The best process is to try out a prototype with a few users , ﬁx it , and test it again [ 9 ] . Children who participated in usability testing were asked to use the system and select a set of symptoms . They were prompted to think aloud during the task which was videotaped . Morae (cid:3) software was used for automatic recording and analysis of all events on the screen , such as when the user clicked on an object , hit a button , etc . Usability testing showed that the children were com - puter savvy , and had no problem understanding and using the software . All children liked the ability to select the main ﬁgure , and the metaphor of sailing through the island world that provided them with a sense of a voyage or dis - covery . All children created the main ﬁgure looking alike themselves as much as possible . Children became very absorbed in the task of using SISOM , and did not want to ﬁnish before they had been through all islands . This sug - gests that it is engaging . Almost all of the children deviated from the assigned list of symptoms they were asked to select and used SISOM according to own personal experiences . During these tasks we made a number of interesting observations : the system can evoke very diﬀerent associa - tions in children with the experience of a life threatening ill - ness than in healthy children . For example , in an early prototype , when the user was done with a symptom and zoomed out of the picture a spark appeared , the main char - acter disappeared and did not re - appear before the child had clicked on another picture . One of the ill children Fig . 8 . Graphic representation of ‘‘Nightmare’’ recognized immediately by all children . Fig . 9 . This is an example of a graphical representation that children did not recognize at ﬁrst : ‘‘Afraid of catching an infection’’ and that was changed based on children’s evaluations and input . The ﬁrst symptom representation is displayed on the left side : bugs were placed close to the child’s head . This picture evoked a number of interesting associations , but not the right one . Through discussions with the children about how one may get infected we learned that most children know that this can happen if someone who is ill breathes on them . Who this person is , is not always known however , so one may not notice when and how one gets infected . Therefore , the symptom was changed to be represented by a ghost that is breathing on a child without its notice . Children who participated later in usability tests had no problems recognizing the problem correctly . The picture to the right shows how it is represented in the ﬁnal version . C . M . Ruland et al . / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 41 ( 2008 ) 624 – 635 633 thought that the main ﬁgure exploded ( = died ) . This made him very uncomfortable . Thus transitions between pictures were subsequently changed so that the child ﬁgure now walks quietly out of the picture when done . The healthy kids had no such associations and thought that the spark feature was cool . Another example is the island to tell ‘‘Things one can be afraid of’’ where at ﬁrst thunder and lighting appeared when the child was approaching the island by boat . Some of the ill kids did not like this because it was too scary . It became clear that sick children who are the end - users are crucial as usability testers , and healthy children cannot serve as their proxies in this task . 5 . Discussion We can summarize several important observations from children’s participations in the design of SISOM . In our project children were involved in a number of tasks . In the role of testers , children were very articulate and told us what they liked / disliked about computer applications and why . Children also did very well as informers . Based on the tasks we gave them , children made signiﬁcant con - tributions to the system’s graphical interface , child - friendly terms , iconic and graphical representations , and usability . They were able to contribute very useful ideas that the adult designers would not have thought of and that consid - erably improved the software . It was also crucial that they participated in usability evaluations of the system . However , children have also limitations . They are not professional designers and do not always have a good grasp of logical design . Good design for ill children requires knowledge , and pedagogical , psychological and clinical insights children don’t have . In our work we had to make sure to meet the goals of SISOM and a set of pre - deﬁned criteria . Especially , we had to ensure to design software that could help children to report their symptoms and problem experiences , without being too time - consum - ing and challenging . Not all of the children’s ideas were therefore , feasible . Our children participants often sug - gested fun and time - consuming aspects , such as funny noises along with vivid animations for a symptom such as throwing up . In spite of reminders that we were not designing a game , the children had the tendency to slip back into a ‘‘game mode’’ . Also , children could spend con - siderable time on ﬁne details and lose sight of the overall purpose . For example , they could spend a whole session on drawing ﬂowers in a background landscape or on ways to choose eye and hair color for the main ﬁgure in the sys - tem . Thus the knowledge of professional designers is cru - cial when it comes to ﬁnal decisions about which ideas to implement . Comparing the contributions of 9 - to 11 - year - olds , we did not see any signiﬁcant diﬀerences . Both did well in per - forming the tasks and suggested creative design ideas that could be used with children in their own age group . Work - ing with two age groups in parallel was very valuable . Older children in our group were very sensitive to not cre - ating a system that appeared childish . Smaller children had diﬃculty coming up with ideas suited for an older age group . Our experiences also conﬁrm that having children work in pairs is a highly eﬀective way to engender interac - tion [ 14 ] . Groups of three worked also well together as long as they were of the same gender . We observed considerable gender diﬀerences . Boys’ ideas included a lot of action , guns , rockets , a race course , shooting etc . While not com - pletely free of action , girls’ ideas contained more ﬂowers , animals , and ‘‘softer’’ eﬀects . Groups of three with mixed gender did therefore , not work so well . The gender that had group majority had the tendency to dominate and ignore the other . Therefore , it would have been interesting to examine more systematically the inﬂuences of age and gender on children’s design ideas , but this would have required a much larger number of design participants that was beyond the scope of this study : to explore and demon - strate the viability of including children as design partners in such project at all . A challenge in the design of SISOM was to balance par - ticipation of healthy and ill children . The burden and time required for some of the task prevented us from asking children with cancer to participate in all tasks , e . g . in design sessions focusing on the graphical user interface . Although working with sick children would be been theo - retically ideal from a participatory design perspective , given their limited stamina , it was not felt to be ethically defensible . This however , raises the question whether healthy children can conceptualize what it is like to be suf - fering from a serious illness , and thus the degree to which they can serve as proxies in participatory design and eval - uations . Our experience is that this is only partially possi - ble . Role play and scenarios certainly helped to increase healthy children’s understanding of the purpose of SISOM . Still it was diﬃcult for them to grasp the context in full . We made however an interesting observation . One of the 9 - year - olds had a cousin with lymphoma and thus had been exposed to cancer in her close family . While we have no other empirical data to support this , this child appeared to have a more mature grasp of the system . Her knowledge of some aspects of cancer , through her life experiences with her cousin , may have caused her to have more focused ideas . Thus personal experience may be an important fac - tor for valuable design contributions . The limitation of healthy children may be partially compensated through extensive usability testing where participation of ill children as end - users is imperative . This will allow us to discover weaknesses in the design where ill children can contribute ideas for improvement . While we have demonstrated the feasibility of involving children in designing software that can help seriously ill children to voice their symptoms and problems , a number of other important design issues remained unexplored . For example , children from diﬀerent cultural and geographical backgrounds may respond diﬀerently to the same events or representations in SISOM . Our child participants were all white and ethnically Norwegian . While the main ﬁgure that 634 C . M . Ruland et al . / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 41 ( 2008 ) 624 – 635 children can select can have diﬀerent skin and hair color , this alone is not suﬃcient to make the application cultur - ally sensitive . Thus , an important next step is to reﬁne and adjust SISOM to children from diﬀerent backgrounds . Furthermore , while participatory design methods were crucial for designing SISOM as an engaging child - friendly application , this is not suﬃcient to ensure that it also is a valid and reliable instrument . To establish its validity and reliability requires another line of methodological and clin - ical research . Therefore , important next steps that are cur - rently ongoing are two larger clinical studies to test : ( 1 ) the validity and reliability of SISOM with a suﬃciently large sample size and ( 2 ) its eﬀects on patient care and patient – provider communication in natural clinical practice . Results of these studies will be published later in clinically oriented journals . 6 . Conclusions We can conclude that in the design of software for ill children , children can contribute considerably in the role as testers , informers and to some extent as partners . Chil - dren have very creative design ideas that can considerably improve the software . It is likewise important that they participate in the evaluation of ideas as the design process goes along . However , decisions about which ideas to ﬁnally implement need to be done by the research team . Such decisions require psychological and pedagogical insights and design and usability expertise . This limits the role chil - dren can play as full design partners in all aspects of the design . Acknowledgments This study is supported by grants from the Norwegian Research Council Grant No . 175389 / V50 ; the Norwegian Nurses’ Association , Rikshospitalet’s Research Fund , and Medinnova Research Fund . For their valuable contributions to this project , the authors thank : Roar Andersen , Tone Bratteteig , Glenys Hamilton , Simon Hjelle , Yizhak Itzchaki , Anders Kluge , Birgitte Kolbeinsen , Elisabeth Moe , Denis Pototylyuk , Valemon Sinding and Laura Slaughter . References [ 1 ] Streisand R , Braniecki S , Tercyak KP , Kazak AE . Childhood illness - related parenting stress : the pediatric inventory for parents . J Pediatric Psychol 2001 ; 26 ( 3 ) : 155 – 62 . [ 2 ] Tates K , Meeuwesen L . Doctor – parent – child communication . A ( re ) view of the literature . Social Science & Medicine 2001 ; 52 ( 6 ) : 839 – 51 . [ 3 ] van Dulmen AM . Children’s contributions to pediatric outpatient encounters . Pediatrics 1998 ; 102 ( 3 ) : 563 – 8 . [ 4 ] Ruland CM . Handheld technology to improve patient care : evalu - ating a support system for preference - based care planning at the bedside . J Am Med Inform Assoc 2002 ; 9 ( 2 ) : 192 – 201 . [ 5 ] Ruland CM , White T , Stevens M , Fanciullo G , Khilani SM . Eﬀects of a computerized system to support shared decision making in symptom management of cancer patients : preliminary results . J Am Med Inform Assoc 2003 ; 10 ( 6 ) : 573 – 9 . [ 6 ] Gilutz S . Usability of websites for children : 70 design guidelines based on usability studies with kids . Fremont , CA : Nielsen Norman Group ; 2003 . [ 7 ] Riley AW , Forrest CB , Rebok GW , Starﬁeld B , Green BF , Robertson JA , et al . The Child Report Form of the CHIP—Child Edition : reliability and validity . Med Care 2004 ; 42 ( 3 ) : 221 – 31 . [ 8 ] Aoki N , Ohta S , Masuda H , Naito T , Sawai T , Nishida K , et al . Edutainment tools for initial education of type - 1 diabetes mellitus : initial diabetes education with fun . MedInfo 2004 ; 11 ( 2 ) : 855 – 9 . [ 9 ] Porter SC , Kohane IS , Goldmann DA . Parents as partners in obtaining the medication history . J Am Med Inform Assoc 2005 ; 12 ( 3 ) : 299 – 305 . [ 10 ] Bers MU , Ackermann E , Cassell J , Donegan J , Gonzales - Heydrich J , DeMaso DR , et al . Interactive storytelling environments : coping with cardiac illness at Boston’s Children’s Hospital . In : ACM conference on human factors in computing systems . Los Angeles , CA : ACM Press ; 1998 . p . 603 – 10 . [ 11 ] Bers MU , Gonzales - Heydrich J , DeMaso DR . Identity construction environments : supporting a virtual therapeutic community of pedi - atric patients undergoing dialysis . In : SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . Seattle , WA : ACM Press ; 2001 . p . 380 – 7 . [ 12 ] Metzger DS , Koblin B , Turner C , Navaline H , Valenti F , Holte S , et al . Randomized controlled trial of audio computer - assisted self - interviewing : utility and acceptability in longitudinal studies . HIV - NET vaccine preparedness study protocol team . Am J Epidemiol 2000 ; 152 ( 2 ) : 99 – 106 . [ 13 ] Turner CF , Ku L , Rogers SM , Lindberg LD , Pleck JH , Sonenstein FL . Adolescent sexual behavior , drug use , and violence : increased reporting with computer survey technology . Science 1998 ; 280 ( 5365 ) : 867 – 73 . [ 14 ] Druin A . The design of children’s technology . San Francisco , CA : Morgan Kaufmann Publishers ; 1999 . [ 15 ] Scaife M , Rogers Y , Aldrich F , Davies M . Designing for or designing with ? Informant design for interactive learning environments . In : CHI‘97 proceedings ; ACM Press ; 1997 . p . 343 – 50 . [ 16 ] Learn about usability testing . US Department of Health and Human Service ; 2007 . Available from : http : / / www . usability . gov / reﬁne / learnusa . html . C . M . Ruland et al . / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 41 ( 2008 ) 624 – 635 635