CrowdMuse : An Adaptive Crowd Brainstorming System Victor Girotto 1 Erin Walker 1 Winslow Burleson 2 1 School of Computing , Informatics , and Decision Systems Engineering Arizona State University Tempe , AZ , USA 2 Rory Meyers College of Nursing New York University New York , NY , USA wb50 @ nyu . edu ABSTRACT Online crowds , with their large numbers and diversity , show great potential for creativity , particularly during large - scale brainstorming sessions . Research has explored different ways of augmenting this creativity , such as showing ideators some form of inspiration to get them to explore more categories or generate more ideas . The mechanisms used to select which inspirations are shown to ideators thus far have been focused on characteristics of the inspirations rather than on ideators . This can hinder their effect , as creativity research has shown that ideators have unique cognitive structures and may therefore be better inspired by some ideas rather than others . We introduce CrowdMuse , an adaptive system for supporting large scale brainstorming . The system models ideators based on their past ideas and adapts the system views and inspiration mechanisms accordingly . An evaluation of this system could inform how to better individually support ideators . Author Keywords Creativity ; brainstorming ; crowd ; adaptive systems . ACM Classification Keywords • Information systems ➝ Collaborative and social computing systems and tools • Human - centered computing ➝ Collaborative and social computing systems and tools INTRODUCTION & RELATED WORK Online crowds show great potential for creativity in great part due to their large numbers and diversity [ 4 , 5 ] . However , simply recruiting large numbers of ideators is not enough to ensure a creative output , and therefore research has attempted to support crowd brainstorming through different kinds of inspirations , such as employing expert facilitators [ 3 ] , showing ideators a diverse set of ideas [ 8 ] , or by leveraging analogies [ 9 ] . These attempts share a focus on the inspirations themselves rather than on the ideators , who have their own cognitive structures during brainstorming [ 2 , 7 ] . This means that each ideator is more likely to focus on some areas ( i . e . idea categories ) than others . An inspiration strategy that doesn’t take that into consideration may be missing out on leveraging an ideator’s unique strengths for idea generation . For example , if an ideator is more familiar with ideas in category A than those in B , showing ideas in category B may not effectively inspire him or her to come up with new ideas . The overarching research question for this research then is : “ How can we adapt inspirations to ideators in order to maximize their effect ? ” THE CROWDMUSE SYSTEM To explore this question , we built the CrowdMuse system 1 , which models ideators based on the categories of ideas they develop and adapts its views and inspiration mechanism 1 http : / / www . crowdmuse . io Figure 1 The CrowdMuse System has two main views : the idea workspace ( 1 ) allows users to view and manipulate ideas by hovering over them ( 2 ) ; and the solution space ( 3 ) provides an overview of the density of ideas developed for each tag . Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the Owner / Author . UIST ' 18 Adjunct , October 14 – 17 , 2018 , Berlin , Germany © 2018 Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5949 - 8 / 18 / 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3266037 . 3266112 Poster Session UIST ' 18 Adjunct , October 14 – 17 , 2018 , Berlin , Germany 93 accordingly . Figure 1 depicts the system’s main interface , comprised of two main views . The first is the idea workspace ( # 1 ) , whose purpose is to allow users to explore and manipulate existing ideas . It has options for loading the current user’s ideas or ideas a user marked as favorite . Ideas can be expanded by hovering the mouse over them ( # 2 ) , which presents the options for refining ( adding more information ) the idea or marking it as favorite . The second is the solution space ( Figure 1 , # 3 ) , whose purpose is to provide an overview of which categories have been thoroughly explored and , conversely , those which are yet to be explored . It is an n x n matrix in which the rows and columns correspond to the idea categories developed so far . The darkness of the cell indicates how many ideas have been developed at the intersection of two categories . Clicking a cell will open all ideas at that category intersection in the idea workspace . Ideas can be added by clicking the “new idea” button at the top of the UI . When adding a new idea , the user is prompted to pick at most two categories for the idea , or to suggest new ones . To the right of the new idea button is an inspiration button , which when clicked presents three ideas along with a small microtask on each ( e . g . “rate the idea” ) . The microtasks are used to increase the attention to ideas , following our previous work [ 6 ] . Adaptations The system’s purpose is to enhance idea generation by prioritizing categories that could be inspiring to an ideator . This is done through two forms of adaptation : 1 ) explicit inspirations and 2 ) an ongoing adaptation of the solution space . Explicit inspirations are shown when the user clicks the inspiration button , at which point the system selects and shows three ideas from other ideators ( along with the microtask for each ) . This intervention is designed to strongly draw the ideator’s attention to the idea s [ 6 ] . The selected ideas prioritize the categories that are likely to curb failures in generating new ideas within a category or in choosing a new category for idea generation [ 7 ] . Therefore , the system shows ideas in three categories : 1 ) the user’s current category . We expect this to extend idea generation within that category ; 2 ) an adjacent category , that is , a category that the ideator has previously transitioned to from his current category . We expect this to incentivize users to revisit previous categories ; and 3 ) an inferred category , which is a category the user has not yet visited but the system deems it as potentially useful ( as described in the user modeling section ) . We expect this to increase the total number of visited categories . The system also performs an adaptation of the solution space by ordering its rows and columns . This reordering happens every time the user submits a new idea . Since the goal for the solution space is to give users an overview of all developed ideas , the purpose for adapting this view is to guide users’ attentions to the most relevant categories when exploring the solution space . The prioritization employed follows the same logic as the one used for the explicit inspirations : 1 ) current category ; 2 ) adjacent categories ; 3 ) inferred new categories ; 4 ) other previously visited categories , but that are not adjacent ; 5 ) any other category that has not yet been visited . While explicit adaptations demand more attention ( and therefore may have a stronger effect ) , subtle adaptations carry the advantages of retaining user agency ( they choose which categories to explore ) and of giving the user access to more information ( by showing more than just three ideas when a cell is clicked ) . User Modeling The adaptations described above are powered by an underlying user model . This model is inferred based on a user’s behavior within the system : whenever an ideator adds an idea , she is asked to choose one or two categories for her idea . This selection is done through a list of existing categories , which the system uses to update the user’s model . The model’s purpose is to answer the question : which ideas should the system show to an ideator in order to improve their performance ? At the most basic level , the system stores the user’s current categories , that is , the categories of their last idea . But based on the categories used by one ideator , the system also generates a transition graph : a directed , weighted graph , in which each node represents a category . When the user adds an idea , the system creates an edge between the categories for the latest idea and the preceding one . The weight of the edge increases as that transition repeats . This is how the system determines the adjacent categories . Finally , the system also keeps track of a user’s category vector . This vector contains the quantity of ideas per category for each user . Drawing from collaborative filtering techniques [ 1 ] , this vector is used to infer new potential categories based on the most similar users . In other words , this functions as a category recommender system for each user . This allows the system to suggest categories other than those that have already been explored by a given user . CONCLUSION Ideators differ among themselves in which idea categories they may be more fluent . We built the CrowdMuse system to personalize creativity support to each individual ideator . It keeps track of an ideation model , and adapts the system based on that model . These adaptations have been designed to intervene in failures known to curb ideation performance . Our hypothesis is that through these adaptations , users can explore categories in greater depth , as well as greater breadth by exposing them to categories that have been useful to similar ideators . We are currently running pilots to test the system , both face - to - face and online . The purpose for these pilots is to ensure that the system is usable , while collecting data that will be used to power the adaptations in the actual studies . By evaluating this system , we expect to better understand how to support individuals based on their past brainstorming performance . Poster Session UIST ' 18 Adjunct , October 14 – 17 , 2018 , Berlin , Germany 94 REFERENCES 1 . J . Bobadilla , F . Ortega , A . Hernando , and A . Gutiérrez . 2013 . Recommender systems survey . Knowledge - Based Systems 46 : 109 – 132 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . knosys . 2013 . 03 . 012 2 . Vincent Brown , Michael Tumeo , Timothy S . Larey , and Paul B . Paulus . 1998 . Modeling Cognitive Interactions During Group Brainstorming . Small Group Research 29 , 4 : 495 – 526 . 3 . Joel Chan , Steven Dang , and Steven P . Dow . 2016 . Improving Crowd Innovation with Expert Facilitation . 4 . Alan R . Dennis and Mike L . Williams . 2003 . Electronic Brainstorming : Theory , Research , and Future Directions . In Group creativity : Innovation through collaboration . Oxford University Press . 5 . Gerhard Fischer . 2005 . Distances and diversity : sources for social creativity . 128 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1056224 . 1056243 6 . Victor Girotto , Erin Walker , and Winslow Burleson . 2017 . The Effect of Peripheral Micro - tasks on Crowd Ideation . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 7 . Bernard A . Nijstad and Wolfgang Stroebe . 2006 . How the group affects the mind : A cognitive model of idea generation in groups . Personality and social psychology review 10 , 3 : 186 – 213 . 8 . Pao Siangliulue , Kenneth C . Arnold , Krzysztof Z . Gajos , and Steven P . Dow . 2015 . Toward Collaborative Ideation at Scale : Leveraging Ideas from Others to Generate More Creative and Diverse Ideas . 937 – 945 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675239 9 . Lixiu Yu , Aniket Kittur , and Robert E . Kraut . 2014 . Distributed analogical idea generation : inventing with crowds . 1245 – 1254 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557371 Poster Session UIST ' 18 Adjunct , October 14 – 17 , 2018 , Berlin , Germany 95