On the Foundations of Measurement Jonathan Barzilai Dalhousie University Halifax , Nova Scotia , Canada 1 . Introduction This paper relates new theories of one - dimensional measurement and scale type to earlier theories . See a companion paper in this volume , Barzilai [ 2 ] , for definitions , notation , and further details regarding these new theories . 2 . The Inadequacy of the Homomorphic Model A new theory of one - dimensional measurement is presented in Barzilai [ 2 ] . Earlier theories ( e . g . Krantz et al . [ 12 ] and Roberts [ 20 ] ) are founded on the axiomatization of measurement of Ztzgth ( see Helmholtz [ 9 ] and Holder [ IO ] ) based on Euclid’s theory of proportions and its extensions by Scott and Suppes [ 21 ] and Suppes and Zinnes [ 25 ] . For formal definitions and details concerning the homomorphic model see Barzilai [ q . We describe this model informally and demonstrate it with the measurement of Ztzgth A property of a set A of objects under measurement is characterized by empirical relations and operations involving this property . A mathematical model ( denoted L , ) of these empirical relations and operations is con - structed and it is proved that the model L , can be mapped into a suitable model L , in a manner that preserves the structure ofthe empirical relations ( ct Krantz et al . [ 12 , 51 . 2 . 2 ] ) . In the case of measurement of Ztzgth , the empirical system is L , = [ A , 0 , > ] where c = a o b means that the object c is obtained by “concatenating” the objects CI and 6 , i . e . , by laying a and b end to end in a straight line . The empirical relation a 3 8 means that the object a is longer than b . In this framework , a scale is defined as a structure - preserving mapping and such mappings are called homomorphisms . We say that there exists a homo - morphism from the system L , to the system L , or 0 - 7803 - 7087 - 2 / 0 1 / $ 10 . 00 0 200 1 IEEE 40 1 that L , can be mapped homomorphically into L , ( or that L , is a homomorphic image of L , ) . For Zength , it is proved that under suitable conditions on the empirical system L , = [ A , o , 31 , it is homomorphic to the system L , = [ % , + , 21 where 3 denotes the set of real numbers . In this case , a mapping s is a structure - preserving scale ( homo - . morphism ) if it satisfies the conditions s ( c ) = s ( a ) + s ( b ) ifand only if c = a o b ( implying s ( a o 6 ) = $ ( a ) + s ( b ) ) and s ( a ) 2 s ( b ) if and only if a > 6 . The typical existence theorem in the literature ( e . g . Theorem 4 of Krantz et al . [ 12 , p . 451 ) lists ( mathe - matical ) conditions on the empirical system L , and states that under these conditions L , can be mapped homomorphically into a suitable system L , . Uniqueness theorems characterize the multi - plicity , i . e . degree of uniqueness , of such mappings . The homomorphic model is underspecified : if L , is characterized and shown to be homomorphic to L , , it is possible to construct infinitely many sys - tems that are homomorphic to L , and therefore to L , . In other words , if a set of conditions character - izes the system L , and is sufficient for L , to be a homomorphic image of L , , it is also sufficient for infinitely many other systems to be homomorphic images of L , - this scheme yields an infinite family of scale sets . These scale sets cannot be distin - guished from one another and the scheme provides no means for selecting one of them over the others . Returning to the example of Zength , if L , is homo - morphic to the numerical system [ % , + , > ] so that s ( a o 6 ) = s ( a ) + s ( 6 ) , it is also homomorphic to the numerical system [ % + , . x , > I meaning that the length of ao 6 is the product of the lengths of a and 6 : s ( a o 6 ) = s ( a ) x s ( 14 ) . This does not corre - spond to the intuitive notion of length and , further - more , there are infinitely many other operations that are homomorphic images of concatenation . Krantz et al . [ 12 , p . 91 state that ‘A representation theorem asserts that if a given relational structure satisfies certain axioms , then a homomorphism into a certain numerical relational structure can be con - structed . ” What has not been recognized is that if a representation theorem asserts that a given rela - tional structure satisfies certain axioms , then inznitely many homomorphisms into infinitely many dzf2tent numerical relational structures can be con - structed . We conclude that this scheme cannot serve as a foundation for a satisfactory theory of measure - ment . 3 . Terminology and Notation Stevens’s terminology of difference , ratio , and inter - val scales ( see Stevens [ 22 ] ) is inconsistent . Stevens’s observation [ 23 , p . 231 : There was also an obvious need for improved terminology” and “Like some other authors , I had tried to redefine these terms . . . but had succeeded only in compounding confusion” seems as relevant now as at the time he made it . More recently , Luce has been using the term mho scales to describe & ih % scales in a field that is derived from the real numbers through the exponential transformation . As a result , the term ratio scales is too ambiguous for use in formal analy - sis . The term “concatenation” has also become too vague for use in formal analysis - see $ 5 below . We use the notation 0‘ , ax , and a’’ to denote additive , multiplicative and additive / multipl icat ive scale sets in one - dimensional measurement ( see Bamilai [ 2 ] ) . In the special case of the ordmd real straight line , we use the notation 0 , a’ , and ( corresponding to shifting the origin , stretch - ing the unit , or both ) , respectively ( cf Barzilai [ 6 ] ) . 0 @ O / I 4 . Scale Type We classified scale sets corresponding to one - dimensional measurement by the operations ( addi - tion and multiplication ) of the underlying field ( see Barzilai [ 2 ] ) . In the case of the ordered straight line over the field of real numbers , this classification cor - responds to Stevens’s “interval , ” “difference , ” and “ratio” classification . This straight line is important because it is the ordered straight line over the only complete ordered field . Earlier classifications of scale sets are not satisfac - tory . For example , Roberts’s statement [ 20 , p . 641 that the class of admissible transformations “can be used to define” scale type is not a proper definition . The inadequacy of the homomorphic definition of scales and the resulting problems in type classifica - tion are evident in Roberts [ 20 ] ( see e . g . p . 69 ) . As can be expected from the discussion above , classifi - cations that are derived from the underspecified homomorphic model exhibit deficiencies related to this underspecification ( see Barzilai [ 5 , $ 51 ) . Luce et al . [ 16 , Chapter 201 classifj . scale type by properties of the automorphism group of the rela - tional system L , . This classification is inadequate . In addition to the deficiencies related to the under - specification of the homomorphic model ( as we saw , in the case of length it does not distinguish between additive , multiplicative , and other types ) , it is unrelated to one - dimensional measurement . in some of the most important cases . The set of admissible transformations ( mappings from one scale to another ) in a given scale set is not closed under hnctional composition - and is not a group - when the set A of objects under measurement is finite . Moreover , the automorphism group does not exist Furthermore , since this classification is limited to “homogeneous and unique” structures , it excludes the common and very important case of multiplica - tive scale sets of type QX and its order - restricted subset ( Stevens’s ratio type ) . It also introduces an extraneous type - see Luce et al . [ 16 , Theorem 5 , p . 1201 - which does not correspond to any of the three one - dimensional scale types . No explanation is provided for this extraneous scale type . More importantly , since Luce’s scale types do not correspond to one - dimensional types , necessary conditions for one - dimensional measurement ( cK Bamilai [ 5 ] ) are lost in his classification . For exam - ple , based on his classification , Luce [ 14 ] incorrectly claims that an absolute zero is not a necessary con - 402 dition for ratio scales ( cf : von Neumann and Mor - genstern [ 18 , p . 231 ) . An examination reveals that : The classificatibn is limited to scales that are homogeneous . Since homogeneous scales can - not have an absolute zero , Luce’s statement is a statement about the classification rather than about scale sets . This does not mean that ratio scales do not have an absolute zero but that his classification is inadequate . There is no definition of ratio scales in Luce et al . [ 16 ] . Luce has modified the term ratio scales to describe the addrive scales in the field obtained from the real numbers by exponentiation . This does not contribute to clarity . Note that the specification of the onedimensional measurement hnctions presented in Barzilai [ 2 ] involves both the domain and range sets and the two operations of the underlying field ( which appear in the consistency conditions ) . In contrast , in their 1990 analysis , Luce et al . [ 16 , 520 . 1 . 21 consider groups of transformations “of crucial importance” and criticize Stevens’s 1946 classification for not recognizing the need for isolating the empirical ( “qualitative” ) structures from numerical ones . That is , their classification depends on the system L , only , and ignores the system L , . As we have shown , models that ignore L , are inadequate , and groups of transformations are not an appropriate tool for the analysis of scale type . In his 1992 paper [ 15 , p . 801 , Luce acknowledges the inadequacy of this analysis and states : “Every - body involved in this research has been aware all along that the class of homogeneous structures fails to include a number of scientifically important examples of classical physical measurement and , quite possibly , some that are relevant to the behav - ioral sciences . ” Regrettably , all those involved in this research who have been aware all along that this classification excludes one of the most important scale types ( the multiplicative Stevens’s ratio scales ) , failed to inform their readers of this deficiency . Furthermore , the amendments proposed in Luce [ 15 ] fail to recognize the inadequacy of the homo - morphic model and do not address the fact that this classification introduces an extraneous type . Having excluded Stevens’s ratio scales from this classifica - tion , no more than two of the three types in Luce’s classification ( see Theorem 5 in Luce et al . [ 16 , p . 1201 ) can correspond to the remaining two one - dimensional types . In other words , according to Luce , all those who were involved in this research have not realized that a simple counting argument shows that this classification introduces an extrane - ous scale type and that it does not correspond to one - dimensional measurement . The amendment in Luce [ 15 ] is inadequate and it does not address these issues . 5 . “Concatenation” and Hiilder’s Axioms The empirical operation of “concatenation” can be defined in specific cases such as the measurement of length and mass . A general definition that applies to any empirical property under measurement in terms of empirical relations is not possible . The obvious mathematical definition for concatenation is simply any empirical operation that can be mapped homo - morphically into addition . We will use the term concatenation in this sense , but it should be noted that recent “generalizations” have made this term equivocal ( e . g . Luce et al . [ 16 , 519 . 21 ) . Note that concatenation models may be underspecified regardless of which definition of concatenation is used . Concatenation models are limited in some ways . By definition , concatenation is a binary operation ( there are two operands in c = a o b ) . Concatena - tion models require the operation to be closed : if a , b c A then c = a o b c d . As a result , they do not apply to the very important and common case where the set A of objects under measurement is finite . In addition , models that are based on concatenation as a single operation do not correspond to one - dimensional measurement over a field ( which requires two operations - cf : Barzilai [ 2 ] ) . It may not be obvious , but such models are not a generali - zation of Holder’s axiomatic structure . Holder’s axi - oms are expressed in terms of an additive operation and the first step in his construction is a definition of a multiplication operation . Holder’s framework involves two field operations and it does constitute one - dimensional measurement . Moreover , concatenation models obscure the issues and impose restrictions that are not necessary . Specifically , an ordered replication structure is suffi - 403 cient to model the measurement of length and simi - lar properties . By a redication operation we mean the following . Given the set A of objects under measurement and the set N of natural numbers , b = n o n ( where n E N and a EA ) is obtained by replicating the object a ( copying or concatenating it with itself ) n times . Denoting by B the set of all replicates of the objects in the set A , it is easy to see that if B is ordered and the order on B satisfies standard condi - tions , then a multiplicative measurement function over the set A into the real numbers exists . Note that , in this model , the set A of objects under mea - surement may be finite and that the concatenation of distinct objects need not be defined . Note also that the role ofreal numbers in this construction is explicit : the natural numbers explicitly enter the replication operation ; the order relation on B induces a correspondence into the rational numbers through the pairs of natural numbers in the relation m o a I n o 6 ; and Dedekind cuts on the rationals form the values ( real numbers ) of the measurement function . Replication structures result in two field operations and constitute one - dimensional mea - surement . 6 . Foundations of Decision Theory Decision theory does not describe or explain how decisions are made nor does it prescribe how deci - sions should be made . The subject of decision the - ory is the analysis and construction of mathematical models based on the measurement of the preference of a decision maker . Thus , decision theory is a spe - cial case of the theory of measurement . Not surpris - ingly , they share some misconceptions . The historical roots of decision theory ( as well as many important ideas of measurement theory ) can be found in von Neumann and Morgenstern’s utility theory [ 18 , pp . 15 - 31 ] . We will refer to the axioms in [ 18 , $ 3 . 6 . 11 as von Neumann and Morgenstern’s axioms . ( What is now commonly called von Neu - mann and Morgenstern’s axioms refers to modified axiom sets that are not equivalent to this set . ) Of interest to us are the following observations : - When von Neumann and Morgenstern’s axioms are satisfied and their “utilities” exist , the prop - erty under measurement is pr $ mnce ( cf . the title of [ 18 , 53 . 11 or see Luce and Raiffa [ 17 , 52 . 51 ) 0 / 1 and the scale type is 4 , ( Stevens’s “interval” scales ) . Because the resultin6 scale sets depend only on the scale type , the range set , the set of objects , and the property under measurement , utility and value functions ( as well as preference , priorities , etc . ) are synonyms for the same math - ematical object ( see Barzilai [ 2 ] ) . Whenever von Neumann and Morgenstern’s axioms are satisfied , a preference function of type 4 , ”’ exists . The converse is not true - the axioms are sufficient but not necessary condi - tions for existence of utilities . Using common terminology informally , we can say that if a deci - sion maker does not satisfy the expected utility assumption , he does not satisfy the von Neu - mann and Morgenstern’s axioms , yet a utility hnction may exist in this case . If a decision maker does satisfy the expected utility assump - tion , his utility function exists and it agrees with his value ( or priority or preference or any other synonym ) function . It follows that von Neumann and Morgenstern’s axioms are sufficient but not necessary conditions for existence of a pference @ nction and that this function , when it exists , can be constructed without reference to probabilities , expected values , gambles , or lotteries . Let b be the lottery with prizes a and c and probabilities p and 1 - p , respectively . Then von Neumann and Morgenstern’s expected utility conditions imply that s ( b ) = ps ( a ) + ( 1 - p ) s ( c ) and p = ( s ( 6 ) - s ( a ) ) / ( s ( c ) - s ( a ) ) . Using the notation of Barzilai [ 2 ] , we have p = m ( b , a , c , a ) meaning that the values of the underlying measure - ment function can be determined from indifference probabilities on lotteries . As explained above , other interpretations - including deterministic ones - of scale values are also possible . I . e . , the values of the measurement function may be determined in ways that do or do not involve probabilistic elicitation . While the utility fiamework is of historical signifi - cance , other frameworks are more suitable para - digms for the construction of preference or utility functions . Although this fundamental fact is not rec - ognized in the literature of the last four decades , it has been recognized by Stevens . In 1959 [ 23 , p . 491 , he asked : “if the subject is really being asked about the equality of intervals on his scale of subjective value , why do we not ask him to judge the intervals directly ? Why introduce the complicating factor of 404 risk and probability ? ” In addition , he notes [ 23 , p . 601 that utility elicitation questions are difficult to answer and concludes : “Since the answer is difficult , it is probably wrong . ” The answer may not neces - sarily be wrong , but the un - intuitive probabilistic context of utility theory tends to increase measure - ment error . In Barzilai [ 2 ] we defined a scale s from the set A to the set B as a hnction s : A - + B and we stated Basic Principles concerning the representation of a property under measurement of the objects in the set A by a set S = { s } of scales into a given range set B . Because of its role in the foundations of deci - sion theory , we restate the following as an addi - tional Basic Principle . Basic Principle 5 : ’Re representation of a property under measurement by a set of scales S depends only on the set of objects under measurement A , the target set B , the scale type indicating the multiplic - ity or degree of uniqueness of the set S , and the property under measurement . Luce [ 13 ] claims that utili @ and vdue “stand to each other just as do , for example , physical velocity and rapidity in the special theory of relativity . They are non - linearly related , but each preserves the same preference order . ” Despite decades of research , a proof of this fascinating claim is not to be found in the three volumes of Foundations of Measurement [ 12 , 24 , and 161 or elsewhere in the literature . This is not surprising since , by Basic Principle 5 , this claim is false ( see Barzilai [ 2 ] ) . UfzZii5 , and value rep - resent the same underlying property - pr @ rence - and they have the same scale type - 0 Note that the claim that utili & differs from value implies that the scale sets in question depend on some element of measurement in addition to those specified in Basic Principle 5 . The existence of such an element has not been established in the measure - ment literature . More remarkably , Basic Principle 5 has not been studied in earlier theories of measure - ment . 0 / I . If the scale sets S , and S , represent the “utility” and “value” of the same attribute and decision maker for the same set of objects then SI = S , . The only difference is in huw preference is measured in these two cases . Moreover , as Stevens recog - nized , the utility elicitation procedure leads to larger measurement errors . In addition , since both utility and value are synonyms for preference , Keeney and Raiffa’s [ ll , g5 . 1 . 11 notion of “utility of value” ( denoted U [ v ( x ) J ) has no meaning . Group Decision Making . Arrow’s “Impossibility Theorem” ( see [ l ] ) has been described in the litera - ture of decision theory as “saying very negative things” ( Roberts [ 19 , p . 437 ] ) , having “disturbing” ( Keeney and Raiffa [ ll , 910 . 2 . 11 ) consequences , being “an unpleasant and startling result” ( French [ 8 , § 8 . 3 ] ) , etc . Supposedly , it implies that “rational” group decision making is not possible . A more logi - cal conclusion is that Arrow proved that the mathe - matical conditions stated in this theorem do not constitute a proper model of group decision mak - ing . In other words , this theorem is a statement about Arrow’s model rather than about “rational” group decision making . Proper mathematical mod - eling of group decision making is possible . 7 . Notes Earlier theories of measurement have been based on deficient models and miss the most elementary and important facts that are part of a proper theory of measurement including the Basic Principles pre - sented in Barzilai [ 2 ] and this paper . These theories do not provide the tools - in particular , necessary conditions for restricting one - dimensional measure - ment scale sets to types @ + and ax - needed to analyze common measurement procedures ( cf ; Barzilai [ 3 ] where we invalidated the Analytic Hier - archy Process ) . Furthermore , it has not been recognized that since these conditions do not hold in the case of measure - ment of subjective ( psychological ) variables , one - dimensional measurement of such variables cannot be carried out through pairwise comparisons ( see Barzilai [ 5 ] for details ) . In fact , one - dimensional measurement has not been analyzed in the context of one - dimensional spaces in the measurement liter - ature . These and other difficulties are addressed in the framework of one - dimensional measurement hnctions presented in Barzilai [ 2 ] . This framework has been extended by relaxing the conditions on the availability of one - dimensional measurement hnc - tions in Barzilai [ 6 ] and by relaxing the consistency requirement in Barzilai [ 4 ] . 405 Acknowledgment Research supported in part by NSERC . @ le O & ectva , Wiley , 1976 . [ I11 R . L . Keeney and H . Raiffa , Decisions with Mul - References KJ . Arrow , Sonizl Choice and indkvdual Vdua , Wiley , 1951 . J . Barzilai , “Basic Principles of Measurement , ” Proceedings of the IEEE htemtional Conference on System , Man , and Cybmebks , 2001 . J . Barzilai , “Notes on the Analytic Hierarchy Process , ’’ Pmceedngs of the NSF Des @ and Manufactunng Reseaxh Conf & - ence , Tampa , Florida , pp . 1 - 6 , 2001 . J . Barzilai , “A New Methodology for Dealing with Conflicting Engineering Design Criteria , ” Proceedngs of i % e 18th Annul Meeting of the Amenkan Sone / for Engineenng Managemen4 J . Barzilai , “Theory of Measurement for Volt - age and Affine Variables , ” Pmceedings of th IEEE hmational Confmnce on System , Man , and Cybernetics , pp . 636 - 640 , 2000 . J . Banilai , “Decision Theory Misconceptions and Remedies : Implications for Decision - Based Design , ” Proceedings of i % e 3rd Intenutrond Con - jirence on Engzneenng Desi & and Automatron , Vancouver , B . C . , pp . 767 - 773 , 1999 . J . Barzilai , “Measurement Foundations for Pref - erence Function Modelling , ” Pmceedings of fhe IEEE International Confeeme on System , Man , and Cybernetics , pp . 4038 - 4044 , 1998 . S . French , Deckon Vzeoy , Ellis Horwood , 1988 . H . von Helmholtz , “Ziihlen und Messen erkenntnis - theoretisch betrachet , ” in Phihso - phirche Au $ atze , Fues’s Verlag , pp . 17 - 52 , 1887 . English translation by C . L . Bryan , Counting andMeasunng van Nostrand , 1930 . pp . 73 - 79 , 1997 . [ 12 ] D . H . Krantz , R . D . Luce , P . Suppes and A . Tversky , Founhtions of Measuremenll : Vol . 1 , Academic Press , 1971 . [ 13 ] R . D . Luce , Private Communication , 1999 . [ 14 ] R . D . Luce , Private Communication , 2000 . [ lS ] R . D . Luce , “Singular Points in Generalized Concatenation Structures that Otherwise are Homogeneous , ” Mathematical S o d Snenca , [ 16 ] R . D . Luce , D . H . Krantz , P . Suppes and A . Tversky , Founaktions of Measuremen4 Vol . 3 , Academic Press , 1990 . [ U ] R . D . Luce and H . Raiffa , Gama and Deniions , Wiley , 1957 . [ 18 ] J . von Neumann and 0 . Morgenstern , Vzeoty of Games and Economic Behior , Princeton University Press , 1944 . [ 19 ] F . S . Roberts , Dhxete Mai % emab ? al Modeh , Prentice - Hall , 1976 . [ 20 ] F . S . Roberts , Measurement Vzeory , Addison - Wesley , 1979 . [ 21 ] D . Scott and P . Suppes , “Foundational Aspects of Theories of Measurement , ” Journal OfSym - boZicLog - ic , Vol . 23 , No . 2 , pp . 113 - 128 , 1958 . [ 22 ] S . S . Stevens , “On the Theory ofscales ofMea - surement , ” Snknce , Vol . 103 , pp . 677 - 680 , 1946 . [ 23 ] S . S . Stevens , ”Measurement , Psychophysics and Utility , ” in C . W . Churchman and P . Ratoosh ( Eds . ) , Meamrment : Dejnitions and Vzeonkv , Wiley , pp . 18 - 63 , 1959 . [ 24 ] P . Suppes , D . H . Krantz , R . D . Luce , and A . Tversky , Founhtions of Measuremm4 Vol . 2 , Academic Press , 1989 . U251 P . Suppes and J . L . Zinnes , ”Basic Measure - Vol . 24 , pp . 79 - 103 , 1992 . [ - . ‘lo ] 0 . Holder , “Die Axiome der Quantitat und die Lehre vom Mass , ” Bet : Vmh . Kgl . Sachis . , Ges . Wirs . Leapa & Math . - Phys . Clme , Vol . 53 , pp . 1 - 64 , 1901 . English translation in J o u d of Mafiematical Pychology : Part I , Vol . 40 , pp . 237 - 250 , 1996 ; Part 11 , Vol . 41 , pp . 346 - 356 , 1997 . ment Theory , ” in R . D . Luce , R . K . Bush and E . Galanter ( Eds . ) , Handbook of MathmabkaZ Py - chology , Vol . 1 , Wiley , pp . 1 - 76 , 1963 . 406