EB2002 featured topic Ventilator - induced lung injury : in vivo and in vitro mechanisms MICHAEL A . MATTHAY , 1 SUNITA BHATTACHARYA , 2 DONALD GAVER , 3 LORRAINE B . WARE , 4 LINA H . K . LIM , 5 OLGA SYRKINA , 6 FABIEN EYAL , 7 AND ROLF HUBMAYR 8 1 Departments of Medicine and Anesthesia , Cardiovascular Research Institute , University of California , San Francisco , California 94143 - 0130 ; 2 Lung Biology Laboratory , Columbia University , New York , New York 10019 ; 3 Biomedical Engineering , Tulane University , New Orleans , Louisiana 70118 ; 4 Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine , Vanderbilt University , Nashville , Tennessee 37232 ; 5 Johns Hopkins Asthma and Allergy Center , Baltimore , Maryland 21224 ; 6 Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine , Massachusetts General Hospital , Boston , Massachusetts 02114 ; 7 Department of Pediatrics , University of South Alabama , Mobile , Alabama 36604 ; and 8 Pulmonary and Critical Care Division , Mayo Clinic , Rochester , Minnesota 55905 Matthay , Michael A . , Sunita Bhattacharya , Donald Gaver , Lor - raine B . Ware , Lina H . K . Lim , Olga Syrkina , Fabien Eyal , and Rolf Hubmayr . Ventilator - induced lung injury : in vivo and in vitro mech - anisms . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 283 : L678 – L682 , 2002 ; 10 . 1152 / ajplung . 00154 . 2002 . —A lung - protective ventilator strategy signiﬁ - cantly reduces mortality in patients with acute lung injury . Substantial progress has been made in understanding how mechanical stress can injure the lung , both in terms of alterations in barrier properties of the pulmonary endothelium and epithelium as well as in stimulating proinﬂammatory responses of macrophages and neutrophils . acute lung injury ; macrophages ; neutrophils AT THE EXPERIMENTAL BIOLOGY 2002 MEETING in New Or - leans , LA , a featured topic presentation was devoted to mechanisms of ventilator - induced and ventilator - asso - ciated lung injury . This area has become an important focus of pulmonary research largely because of the compelling clinical evidence that lung protective ven - tilatory strategies reduce mortality in patients with clinical acute lung injury ( 1 , 4 , 10 , 14 ) . ALVEOLAR EPITHELIAL PLASMA MEMBRANE STRESS FAILURE 1 The role of alveolar epithelial plasma membrane stress failure and repair was discussed as an important basic mechanism responsible for mediating mechanical stretch - induced injury in the lung . Cells experience plasma membrane stress failure when the matrix to which they adhere undergoes large deformations . In the lung , such a mechanism may help to explain me - chanical ventilation - associated cell injury . There are a number of mechanisms that help preserve plasma membrane tension of deformed cells below lytic levels ( 11 ) ( Fig . 1 ) . Vlahakis and Hubmayr ( 11 ) have shown that deformation induces lipid trafﬁcking ( DILT ) to the plasma membrane of alveolar epithelial cells , thereby accommodating the required increase in cell surface area . DILT was shown to be a temperature - and energy - dependent process that involves vesicular membrane trafﬁcking . Conditions associated with inhibition of DILT include cold temperature , low cholesterol , and impaired cytoskeletal assembly and disassembly ( 13 ) . In keeping with a possible cytoprotective role for DILT , Vlahakis et al . ( 13 ) recently demonstrated that strain - induced cell wounding is signiﬁcantly increased when DILT is inhibited . Because the association between inhibition of DILT ( a remodeling response ) and injury is preserved across the entire spectrum of cell mechan - ical properties ( 7 ) , we hypothesized that cell remodel - Address for reprint requests and other correspondence : M . A . Matthay , Univ . of California at San Francisco , 505 Parnassus Ave . , M - 917 , San Francisco , CA 94115 - 0624 ( E - mail : mmatt @ itsa . ucsf . edu ) . 1 Presented by Rolf Hubmayr . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 283 : L678 – L682 , 2002 ; 10 . 1152 / ajplung . 00154 . 2002 . 1040 - 0605 / 02 $ 5 . 00 Copyright © 2002 the American Physiological Society http : / / www . ajplung . org L678 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m ing was more important for cytoprotection against stress failure than are the strength and connectivity of the cell’s stress - bearing elements . These observations have been taken from reduced culture systems back to the intact lung and have dem - onstrated that mechanical ventilation at injurious set - tings is associated with reversible plasma membrane stress failure . Figure 2 shows confocal images of sub - pleural alveoli of rat lungs ventilated at injurious set - tings ( tidal volume (cid:1) 40 ml / kg ) . The lungs were per - fused with a membrane - impermeant label [ propidium iodide ( PI ) ] either during or after injurious mechanical ventilation . When PI enters a cell through a membrane defect , it interchelates with DNA and emits a red ﬂuorescence . The image on the left in Fig . 2 was taken from a lung labeled during injurious mechanical ven - tilation and shows many injured cells ( red nuclei ) , whereas the image on the right in Fig . 2 was labeled after the injurious stress was removed and shows no injured cells . This ﬁnding suggests that many of the injured cells had resealed and could no longer be la - beled with PI . In summary , plasma membrane stress failure is a central feature of mechanical lung injury . Active re - modeling such as DILT is an important cytoprotective response to deforming stress and deserves to be con - sidered in the search for agents that protect the lung against ventilator - associated injury . HIGH TIDAL VOLUME - MEDIATED LUNG INJURY MAY BE ATTRIBUTABLE IN PART TO TYROSINE P - DEPENDENT ENDOTHELIAL CELL PROCESSES 2 Evidence was presented showing that high tidal vol - ume - mediated lung injury may be attributable , in part , to tyrosine P - dependent endothelial cell processes that promote lung leukocyte sequestration ( 15 ) . In the stud - ies performed , rats were initially ventilated with either a 6 - or 12 - ml / kg tidal volume ventilation for 2 h . Mi - crovascular endothelial cells were then isolated from the lung . Immunoﬂuorescence labeling of the fresh lung endothelial cells revealed aggregation and colocal - ization of focal adhesion kinase and the (cid:2) V (cid:3) 3 - integrin . This result suggested that the higher tidal volume ventilation induces focal adhesions . Immunoprecipita - tion studies revealed that high tidal volume mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of the focal adhesion protein paxillin . There was also greater expression of P - selec - tin in the freshly isolated lung endothelial cells . There was an association of paxillin with the immunoprecipi - tated P - selectin that suggested participation of this focal adhesion protein in the P - selectin expression . Interestingly , genistein , a tyrosine kinase inhibitor , inhibited the high tidal volume - mediated P - selectin expression as well as the coassociation of paxillin with P - selectin . Extravascular lung water content was not different in the lungs ventilated with 6 vs . 12 ml / kg , indicating that the proinﬂammatory signaling had not yet reached the point where it would alter lung ﬂuid balance . Also , depletion of the lung perfusate of leuko - cytes blunted the high tidal volume - induced endothe - lial cell tyrosine phosphorylation . These studies pro - vide new insights into the very early phase of proinﬂammatory signaling that may occur in lung en - dothelium with high tidal volume ventilation . 2 Presented by Sunita Bhattacharya . Fig . 1 . Schematic of plasma membrane ( PM ) responses to deforming stress . [ From Vlahakis and Hubmayr ( 11 ) . ] Fig . 2 . Propidium iodide labeling - based cell injury assessment in a rat model of ventilator - induced lung injury . Differences in labeling during vs . after inju - rious ventilation are attributed to plasma mem - brane resealing . VT , tidal volume ; ZEEP , zero end expiratory pressure . ( O . Gajic and J . H . Lee , unpub - lished observations . ) L679 EB2002 FEATURED TOPIC AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 283 (cid:127) OCTOBER 2002 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m LUNG EPITHELIAL CELL INJURY 3 Evidence was presented explaining how lung epithe - lial cell injury may occur using an in vitro model ( 3 ) . In these studies , Bilek et al . ( 3 ) evaluated the stresses that may occur with airway reopening . Because me - chanical stress is hypothesized to be associated with airway reopening , which could cause cellular trauma , reopening conditions were generated using a ﬂuid - occluded parallel plate chamber with lung epithelial cells cultured on a small region of one wall . A column of air was infused that cleared the occlusion . Cellular trauma was assessed using ﬂuorescent exclusion dyes . The controls showed very few injured cells while bub - ble progression produced signiﬁcant increases in the density of injured cells for saline - occluded channels . Interestingly , in this model , the injurious stress is not a shear stress , but , rather , a stress that acts normally to the cell layer . For a surfactant - free system , the normal stress gradient introduces a fore - aft pressure difference along the cell of (cid:4) 350 dyn / cm 2 . This pres - sure difference appears to be sufﬁcient to cause short - term cell membrane disruption . This pressure was reduced substantially with pulmonary surfactant , which appeared to protect the epithelial cells from damage . The authors ( 3 ) concluded that this model could be used to further investigate the airway reopen - ing injury mechanisms and the potential efﬁcacy of speciﬁc surfactant replacements . KERATINOCYTE GROWTH FACTOR CAN ENHANCE ALVEOLAR EPITHELIAL REPAIR BY NONMITOGENIC MECHANISMS 4 Evidence was presented showing that keratinocyte growth factor ( KGF ) can enhance alveolar epithelial repair by nonmitogenic mechanisms ( 2 ) . In these stud - ies , rats were given intratracheal KGF ( 5 mg / kg ) 48 h before alveolar epithelial type II cells were isolated for in vitro alveolar epithelial repair studies . KGF - treated cells have markedly increased epithelial repair com - pared with control cells . KGF - treated cells also have increased cell spreading and migration at the wound edge but no increase in their in vitro proliferation capacity . KGF - treated cells were also more adherent to extracellular matrix proteins and to polystyrene . Inhi - bition of the epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor with tyrosine kinase inhibitors abolished the KGF ef - fect on alveolar epithelial repair . In summary , in vivo administration of KGF augments the epithelial repair rate of alveolar epithelial cells by altering cell adher - ence , spreading , and migration through stimulation of the EGF receptor . These results provide new insights into the nonmitogenic effects of KGF on alveolar epi - thelial cells , which may be important in alveolar epi - thelial repair and may help to explain why KGF treat - ment ameliorates experimental acute lung injury . IN VIVO AIRWAY STRETCH CAN INDUCE LOCAL INFLAMMATORY CELL TRAFFICKING 5 Evidence was presented showing that in vivo airway stretch can induce local inﬂammatory cell trafﬁcking in the rat microcirculation ( 8 ) . For these studies , the inves - tigators developed a new application of intravital micros - copy in anesthetized , mechanically ventilated rats that provided direct observation of leukocyte trafﬁcking in the tracheobronchial circulation . In these experiments , nor - mal ventilation was maintained at 80 breaths / min with 6 ml / kg tidal volume and 0 cmH 2 O positive end - expiratory pressure ( PEEP ) . Increased lung stretch was induced by increasing PEEP to 8 cmH 2 O at different time intervals . Normal ventilation did not alter leukocyte rolling velocity or the number of adherent cells . In contrast , the in - creased level of PEEP for 1 h induced a sharp decrease in blood pressure , which recovered to baseline by 30 min . A 3 Presented by Donald Gaver . 4 Presented by Lorraine B . Ware . 5 Presented by Lina H . K . Lim . Fig . 3 . Rate of pulmonary edema forma - tion , measured as excess extravascular lung water / h , was signiﬁcantly lower with lower tidal volume ventilation [ * P (cid:5) 0 . 05 compared with the 3 - ml / kg group , † P (cid:5) 0 . 05 compared with the 6 - ml / kg group , ‡ P (cid:5) 0 . 05 compared with the 12 - ml / kg positive end - expiratory pres - sure ( PEEP ) 5 - cmH 2 O group ] . All acid - injured rats ( solid bars ) had a signiﬁ - cantly more extravascular lung water than did ventilated control rats instilled with saline instead of acid ( open bars ; P (cid:5) 0 . 001 by ANOVA correction for mul - tiple comparisons ) . Excess lung water did not differ among the control groups ( P (cid:6) 0 . 05 ) . Sample water did not differ among the control groups ( P (cid:6) 0 . 05 ) . Sample sizes : 12 ml / kg PEEP 10 cmH 2 O , n (cid:1) 4 ; 12 ml / kg PEEP 5cm H 2 O , n (cid:1) 8 ; 6 ml / kg PEEP 10 cmH 2 O , n (cid:1) 13 ; 3 ml / kg PEEP 10 cmH 2 O , n (cid:1) 12 . Data are means (cid:7) SD . [ From Frank et al . ( 6 ) . ] L680 EB2002 FEATURED TOPIC AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 283 (cid:127) OCTOBER 2002 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m time - dependent reduction in leukocyte rolling velocity occurred that remained reduced even after the excessive PEEP was removed . However , the number of adherent cells reached a maximum a t 1 h ofobservation and returned to baseline by 2 h , suggesting that the endothe - lium was not irreversibly activated with sustained lung stretch . The authors ( 8 ) speculate that leukocyte recruit - ment is a direct result of excessive lung stretch leading to the local release of inﬂammatory mediators and the acti - vation of the airway endothelium . To support this hy - pothesis , data were presented that lung stretch failed to alter leukocyte trafﬁcking in the rat mesentery , despite similar reductions in blood pressure . The data support the hypothesis that excessive lung stretch during me - chanical ventilation may have deleterious effects in pa - tients with airway disease . N - ACETYLCYSTEINE DECREASES LUNG NEUTROPHIL INFLUX 6 Evidence was presented showing that N - acetylcysteine ( NAC ) , an antioxidant , decreased lung neutrophil inﬂux in a rat model of ventilator - induced lung injury ( 9 ) . Rats were ventilated with a tidal volume of either 7 or 21 ml / kg with or without 40 mg / kg of NAC . The animals were ventilated for 2 h and then allowed to recover for 2 h . The NAC - treated animals had a reduced concentra - tion of neutrophils and myeloperoxidase in bronchoalveo - lar lavage . The authors ( 9 ) concluded that lung stretch induces oxidant injury that may play an important role in ventilator - induced lung injury . 6 Presented by Olga Syrkina . Fig . 4 . Light photomicrographs of rat lungs ventilated with 3 ml / kg PEEP 10 cmH 2 O ( A ) ; 6 ml / kg PEEP 10 cmH 2 O ( B ) ; 12 ml / kg PEEP 5 cmH 2 O ( C ) ; and 12 ml / kg PEEP 10 cmH 2 O ( D ) after lung acid injury . There was signiﬁcantly more interstitial and alveolar edema after higher tidal volume ventilation . Lung injury scores based on edema , hyaline membranes , septal thickening , inﬂammatory cell inﬁltration , and small airway epithe - lial injury were signiﬁcantly higher in rats ventilated with 12 ml / kg PEEP 10 cmH 2 O , although injury was patchy in all groups ( original magniﬁcation , (cid:8) 40 ; he - matoxylin - eosin ) . [ From Frank et al . ( 6 ) . ] L681 EB2002 FEATURED TOPIC AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 283 (cid:127) OCTOBER 2002 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m ALVEOLAR MACROPHAGES MAY PLAY A CENTRAL PATHOGENIC ROLE IN VENTILATOR - INDUCED LUNG INJURY AND PULMONARY EDEMA 7 Evidence was presented showing that alveolar mac - rophages may play a central pathogenic role in venti - lator - induced lung injury and pulmonary edema ( 5 ) . Rats were ventilated for 15 min either at a pressure of 45 cmH 2 O without PEEP or with a noninjurious ven - tilatory strategy . Tracheal instillation of liposomes en - capsulated with clodronate eliminates alveolar macro - phages . Some rats were also treated with pyrrolidine dithiocarbonate , an inhibitor of nuclear factor ( NF ) - (cid:9) B - dependent activation . The data showed that macro - phage depletion was accomplished and that static lung compliance was improved with either treatment . Ex - travascular lung water was also reduced signiﬁcantly with either treatment . Thus neutralization of alveolar macrophages appears to be an effective experimental method for reducing ventilator - induced lung injury , suggesting that alveolar macrophages and possibly NF - (cid:9) B - dependent activation may also be an important mechanism for mediating the injury . IN VIVO STUDIES IN VENTILATED RATS 8 Finally , the results were presented of in vivo studies in ventilated rats , the results of a recent study pub - lished by Frank et al . ( 6 ) . In these studies , acid - induced lung injury was created in ventilated , anesthetized rats ventilated with a noninjurious ventilation protocol for 2 h . Rats were then randomized to 12 , 6 , or 3 ml / kg of tidal volume ventilation . As expected , the 12 - ml / kg ventilation resulted in a markedly increased extravas - cular lung water after 4 h . The 6 - ml / kg tidal volume ventilation , similar to the lung protective strategy used in the National Institutes of Health clinical protocol ( 10 ) , markedly reduced lung edema . The 3 - ml / kg tidal volume strategy further reduced pulmonary edema ( Fig . 3 ) . There was evidence that the additional protec - tive effect of 3 ml / kg was explained by further protec - tion against alveolar epithelial injury , based on both biochemical studies of the alveolar epithelial type I cell antigen as well as better preserved gene expression of surfactant protein C and a nearly normal capacity for alveolar ﬂuid transport . Histology showed less edema and inﬂammation with the low tidal volume strategies ( Fig . 4 ) . Thus there was a protective effect of both ventilatory strategies in reducing injury to the lung endothelium , but the additional protective effect of the lowest tidal volume strategy appears to be explained by limiting injury to the alveolar epithelium . In summary , the spectrum of issues discussed at this featured topic session illustrates the importance of both in vitro and in vivo studies to understand the basic mechanisms that mediate ventilator - induced and ventilator - associated lung injury . It is apparent from this session as well as other work in the ﬁeld that there are several important mechanisms that explain the beneﬁcial effect of lung protective ventilatory strate - gies . REFERENCES 1 . Amato MB , Barbas CS , Medeiros DM , Magaldi RB , Schet - tino GP , Lorenzi - Filho G , Kairalla RA , Deheinzelin D , Munoz C , Oliveira R , Takagaki TY , and Carvalho CR . Effect of a protective - ventilation strategy on mortality in the acute respiratory distress syndrome . N Engl J Med 338 : 347 – 354 , 1998 . 2 . Atabai K , Ishigaki M , Geiser T , Ueki I , Matthay MA , and Ware LB . Keratinocyte growth factor can enhance alveolar epithelial repair by nonmitogenic mechanisms . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 283 : L163 – L169 , 2002 . 3 . Bilek AM , Dee KC , and Gaver DP . Lung epithelial cell injury in an in vitro model of airway reopening . FASEB J 16 : A409 , 2002 . 4 . Brower RC , Ware LB , Berthiame Y , and Matthay MA . Treatment of the acute respiratory distress syndrome . Chest 120 : 1347 – 1367 , 2001 . 5 . Eyal FG , Hamm CR , Coker - Flowers P , Stober M , and Parker JC . The neutralization of alveolar macrophages reduces barotrauma - induced lung injury . FASEB J 16 : A410 , 2002 . 6 . Frank JA , Gutierrez JA , Jones K , Allen L , Dobbs L , and Matthay MA . Low tidal volume reduces epithelial and endothe - lial injury in acid - induced rat lungs . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 165 : 242 – 249 , 2002 . 7 . Gajic O , Lee JH , Doerr CH , and Hubmayr RD . Assessment of ventilator - induced plasma membrane wounding and repair in the intact lung . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 165 : A783 , 2002 . 8 . Lim LHK , Bochner BS , and Wagner EM . Airway stretch in vivo induces local inﬂammatory cell trafﬁcking in the rat tra - cheal microcirculation . FASEB J 16 : A409 , 2002 . 9 . Syrkina OL , Quinn DA , Moufarrej R , and Hales CA . N - ace - tylcysteine ( NAC ) , an antioxidant , decreased lung neutrophil inﬂux in a rat model of ventilator - induced lung injury ( VILI ) . FASEB J 16 : A410 , 2002 . 10 . The Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Network . Ven - tilation with lower tidal volumes compared with traditional tidal volumes for acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress syndrome . N Engl J Med 342 : 1301 – 1308 , 2000 . 11 . Vlahakis NE and Hubmayr RD . Plasma membrane stress failure in alveolar epithelial cells . J Appl Physiol 89 : 2490 – 2496 , 2000 . 12 . Vlahakis NE , Schroeder MA , Pagano RE , and Hubmayr RD . Deformation - induced lipid trafﬁcking in alveolar epithelial cells . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 280 : L938 – L946 , 2001 . 13 . Vlahakis NE , Schroeder MA , Pagano RE , and Hubmayr RD . The role of the cytoskeleton in deformation - induced alveolar epithelial wounding and repair . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 165 : A379 , 2002 . 14 . Ware LB and Matthay MA . The acute respiratory distress syndrome . N Engl J Med 342 : 1334 – 1349 , 2000 . 15 . Yiming MT , Patel R , and Bhattacharya S . High tidal vol - ume - mediated lung endothelial signaling is leukocyte - depen - dent . FASEB J 16 : A408 , 2002 . 7 Presented by Fabien Eyal . 8 Presented by Michael A . Matthay . L682 EB2002 FEATURED TOPIC AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 283 (cid:127) OCTOBER 2002 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m