The Immunoglobulin - Like Cell Adhesion Molecule hepaCAM Modulates Cell Adhesion and Motility Through Direct Interaction With the Actin Cytoskeleton MEI CHUNG MOH , QIFENG TIAN , TING ZHANG , LAY HOON LEE , AND SHALI SHEN * Department of Physiology , Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine , National University of Singapore , Singapore , Singapore Previously , we reported the identiﬁcation of a novel immunoglobulin - like cell adhesion molecule hepaCAM that promotes cell – extracellular matrix ( ECM ) interactions including cell adhesion and motility . Cell – ECM interactions are known to be directed by the actin cytoskeleton . In this study , we examined the association of hepaCAM with the actin cytoskeleton . We found that hepaCAM was partially insoluble in Triton X - 100 and colocalized with the actin cytoskeleton on the plasma membrane . Disruption of F - actin decreased the detergent insolubility and disturbed the subcellular localization of hepaCAM . Coimmunoprecipitation and F - actin cosedimentation assays revealed that hepaCAM directly bound to F - actin . In addition , we constructed three N - and C - terminal domain - deleted mutants of hepaCAM to determine the actin - binding region as well as to evaluate the effect of the domains on the biological function of hepaCAM . Detergent solubility assays showed that the cytoplasmic domain of hepaCAM might be required for actin association . However , deletion of either the extracellular or the cytoplasmic domain of hepaCAM abolished actin coprecipitation as well as delayed cell – ECM adhesion and cell motility . The data suggest that an intact hepaCAM protein is critical for establishing a stable physical association with the actin cytoskeleton ; and such association is important for modulating hepaCAM - mediated cell adhesion and motility . J . Cell . Physiol . 219 : 382 – 391 , 2009 . (cid:1) 2009 Wiley - Liss , Inc . Previously , we have reported the identiﬁcation of a novel gene hepaCAM in liver . Mapped to the human chromosome 11q24 , the gene encodes a cell adhesion molecule of the immunoglobulin ( Ig ) superfamily . The molecule of 416 amino acids contains an extracellular domain with two Ig loops , a transmembrane segment and a cytoplasmic tail ( Moh et al . , 2005a ) . Through biochemical analyses , we have demonstrated that hepaCAM is glycosylated on its extracellular domain , phosphorylated and forms cis - homodimer on cell surface ( Moh et al . , 2005b ) . The gene is widely expressed in normal human tissues and is frequently silenced in a variety of tumor types ( Mohetal . , 2005a , 2008 ) . Re - expressionofhepaCAMinHepG2 ( Moh et al . , 2005a ) and MCF7 ( Moh et al . , 2008 ) cells signiﬁcantly inhibits cell colony formation and delays cell growth . In addition , hepaCAM induces MCF7 cells to undergo cellular senescence through the p53 / 21 pathway ( Moh et al . , 2008 ) . Together , the results suggest a role of hepaCAM in tumor suppression . The expression of hepaCAM also promotes cell – ECM adhesion and cell motility ( Moh et al . , 2005a , b ) . Consistent with our ﬁndings , Favre - Kontula et al . ( 2008 ) have recently isolated GlialCAM , a protein identical to hepaCAM , from the central nervous system and implicated the molecule in migration , guidance , and myelination of oligodendrocytes . It is well established that the actin cytoskeleton is the key structure that participates in the maintenance of cell integrity and shape , in the movement of cells , as well as in the adhesion of cells to other cells or to the ECM ( Chong et al . , 1987 ; Lauffenburger and Horwitz , 1996 ; Keely et al . , 1998 ; Ridley et al . , 2003 ) . An increasing number of cell adhesion molecules have been reported to be associated with the actin cytoskeleton , either directly or indirectly . For example , integrins , themajorclassofmigration - promotingreceptors , are indirectly linked to the actin cytoskeleton via connections with adaptor proteins such as a - Actinin , Vinculin , Talin , and Paxillin ( Otey et al . , 1990 ; Yamada and Geiger , 1997 ; Liu et al . , 1999 ; Critchley , 2004 ) , while CEACAM1 , a cell – cell adhesion molecule , directly binds to the actin cytoskeleton ( Schumann et al . , 2001 ) . The underlying molecular mechanism of cell adhesion and motility mediated by hepaCAM is unknown . Nevertheless , the involvement of hepaCAM in cell – ECM interactions suggests a possible association of the molecule with the actin cytoskeleton . In this study , we investigated the association of hepaCAM with the actin cytoskeleton at both cellular and biochemical levels . We also constructed N - and C - terminal domain - deleted mutants of hepaCAM to determine the actin - binding region as well as to evaluate the inﬂuence of the domains on the biological function of hepaCAM . Contract grant sponsor : Biomedical Research Council of Singapore ; Contract grant number : R - 185 - 000 - 047 - 305 . Contract grant sponsor : National University of Singapore Academic Research Fund ; Contract grant numbers : R - 185 - 000 - 112 - 112 , R - 185 - 000 - 169 - 112 . Contract grant sponsor : Singapore Millennium Foundation Postdoctoral Fellowship . * Correspondence to : Shali Shen , Department of Physiology , Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine , National University of Singapore , 2 Medical Drive , Singapore 117597 , Singapore . E - mail : phsssl @ nus . edu . sg Received 19 August 2008 ; Accepted 2 December 2008 Published online in Wiley InterScience ( www . interscience . wiley . com . ) , 13 January 2009 . DOI : 10 . 1002 / jcp . 21685 ORIGINAL ARTICLE 382 Journal of Journal of CellularPhysiologyCellularPhysiology (cid:1) 2 0 0 9 W I L E Y - L I S S , I N C . Materials and Methods Cell culture , plasmids , and transfection Human breast cancer MCF7 cells and murine ﬁbroblast NIH3T3 cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection ( Manassas , VA ) and maintained in the recommended conditions . The construction of V5 - tagged hepaCAM plasmid ( hepaCAM - V5 ; hepaCAM cDNA cloned into pcDNA6 / V5 - His vector ) was previously described ( Moh et al . , 2005a ) . The cDNAs of hepaCAM - truncated mutants were generated from hepaCAM - V5 plasmid by PCR ampliﬁcation and inserted into the pcDNA6 / V5 - His vector ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) ( Fig . 5A ) . The sequences of the recombinant plasmids were veriﬁed by sequencing . Transient and stable transfections were carried out using the reagent of Lipofectamine Plus ( Invitrogen ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . Cells were harvested 48 h after transient transfection . Stable MCF7 cell lines were established by selection in 10 m g / ml of blasticidin ( Invitrogen ) for 2 weeks and cloned . Preparation of P100 fractions Transfected cells were scraped in hypotonic buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors . The cell lysate was incubated on ice for 10 min prior to 20 – 40 strokes of Dounce homogenization at 4 8 C . The cell homogenate was centrifuged at 13 , 000 rpm for 10 min to removenuclei , celldebris , andunbrokencells . Thesupernatantwas centrifuged for 1 h at 100 , 000 g in an SW55Ti rotor ( Beckman , Krefeld , Germany ) at 4 8 C . The pellet thus obtained ( P100 fraction ) contained cellular membrane and cytoskeletal components . Detergent solubility assay Transfected cells or P100 fractions were extracted for 10 min on ice with cold 1 % Triton X - 100 in PBS containing protease inhibitors . Wherever indicated , 1 M potassium iodide ( KI ; Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) was added into the extraction buffer to depolymerize F - actin . The detergent - insoluble materials were pelleted by centrifugation and resuspended in 2 (cid:1) Laemmli sample buffer . Equal volumes of the soluble and insoluble fractions were analyzed by Western blotting . Quantiﬁcation of the detergent - soluble and - insoluble hepaCAM bands was performed with Adobe Photoshop software ; and the ratio between detergent - insoluble and - soluble hepaCAM was calculated . Immunoﬂuorescence Cells were cultured on coverslips . Wherever indicated , the cells were pre - treated with 10 m M of cytochalasin B for 90 min to disrupt F - actin . The cells were then ﬁxed with 3 . 7 % paraformaldehyde , permeabilized with 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 , and labeled with 1 m g / ml of tetramethylrhodamine isothiocyanate ( TRITC ) - conjugated phalloidin ( Sigma ) for 1 h . Protein expression ofhepaCAMconstructswasdetectedwithmouseanti - V5antibody ( Invitrogen ) , followed by Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti - mouse IgG antibody ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) . Cell ﬂuorescence was visualized by confocal or ﬂuorescence microscopy . Coimmunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis Thetransfectedcellswerelysedinradioimmunoprecipitationassay ( RIPA ) buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors unless otherwise indicated . For coimmunoprecipitation , cell lysates were pre - cleared with protein A agarose ( Sigma ) for 1 h at 4 8 C . Goat anti - actin antibody ( Santa Cruz , Santa Cruz , CA ) or normal goat IgG ( Santa Cruz ) and protein A agarose were added to the pre - cleared lysates and incubated overnight at 4 8 C . The immunoprecipitates were collected and washed four times with RIPA buffer , resuspended in 2 (cid:1) Laemmli sample buffer and boiled for 10 min . Protein samples were resolved by sodium dodecyl sulfate – polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( SDS – PAGE ) and transferred onto polyvinylidene diﬂuoride membranes ( Biorad , Richmond , CA ) . After blocking with 5 % milk , the membranes were incubated with either mouse anti - V5 or goat anti - actin antibody . Bound antibodies were visualized by horseradish peroxidase - conjugated secondary antibodies ( Santa Cruz ) and enhanced chemiluminescence ( Pierce , Rockford , IL ) . In vitro transcription / translation and F - actin cosedimentation assay In vitro transcription / translation was performed non - radioactively usingtheSTP3 ( T7 ) kit ( Novagen , Madison , WI ) . Onemicrogramof plasmid was used as template in the in vitro transcription / translation reactions . F - actin cosedimentation assays were performed using the Actin - Binding Protein Biochem kit ( Cytoskeleton , Denver , CO ) , with slight modiﬁcations to the manufacturer’s instructions . Brieﬂy , 10 m l of cell lysates or in vitro translated proteins were incubated with 10 m g of freshly polymerizedF - actinstockfor1hatroomtemperature . TheF - actin and associated proteins were pelleted at 150 , 000 g for 1 . 5 h in a TLA - 100 rotor ( Beckman ) . After solubilization of the pellet fractions , equal volumes of the pellet and supernatant fractions were analyzed by SDS – PAGE and Coomassie blue staining or Western blotting . a - Actinin and BSA were included as positive and negative controls , respectively . The intensity of bands was quantiﬁed with a GS - 800 densitometer and QuantityOne software ( Biorad ) . The percentage of hepaCAM protein in the pellet was calculated by dividing the band intensity in the pellet from the sum of intensities in the pellet and supernatant . Cell spreading assay Cells were seeded on coverslips coated with 10 m g / ml of ﬁbronectin ( Santa Cruz ) or 40 m g of matrigel ( Clontech , Palo Alto , CA ) and incubated under standard culture conditions . Unspread cells were deﬁned as roundcells , while spread cells weredeﬁned as cells with extended processes ( Richardson et al . , 1997 ) . The number of cells demonstrating spread morphology was quantiﬁed in six randomly selected ﬁelds . Wound healing assay Conﬂuent monolayers of cells were wounded with a sterile plastic 200 m l micropipette tip . The wounds were viewed under a light microscope immediately after wounding and representative wound sites were marked on the culture plates . The marked areas were observed at the indicated time and photographed . The percentage of wound ﬁlling was calculated by measuring the remaining gap space on the pictures . Statistical analysis All statistical analyses were performed with the software InStat 3 . 0 ( GraphPad , San Diego , CA ) . Analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) test was performed to compare the differences among more than two means . Mann – Whitney test was used to compare two means of samples with small sample size . P < 0 . 05 was considered signiﬁcant . ResultshepaCAM is partially insoluble in Triton X - 100 Insolubility in non - ionic detergents such as Triton X - 100 and Nonidet P - 40 is a well - accepted indicator of cytoskeletal association . Cytoskeletal proteins , such as actin and spectrin as well as tightly associated integral membrane proteins interacting and / or associated with the cytoskeleton , are retained in the detergent - insoluble fractions . Proteins that are not connected with the cytoskeleton are found in the detergent - soluble fractions ( Tarone et al . , 1984 ; Neame and Isacke , 1993 ; Sadekova et al . , 2000 ; Stickney et al . , 2004 ) . To investigate the possible interaction of hepaCAM with the cytoskeleton , detergent solubility assays were performed on MCF7 and NIH3T3 cells transfected with hepaCAM ( Fig . 1A ) . JOURNAL OF CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGY h e p a C A M D I R E C T L Y I N T E R A C T S W I T H F - A C T I N 383 P100 fractions containing cellular membranes and cytoskeletal elements were extracted from the transfected cells and resuspended in cold 1 % Triton X - 100 . The detergent - soluble and - insolublefractionswereanalyzedbyWesternblotting . The result showed that hepaCAM was partially resistant to detergent extraction , suggesting that a portion of hepaCAM interacts with the cytoskeleton . Detergent solubility of hepaCAM is inﬂuenced by F - actin integrity One of the key structural components of the cytoskeleton is microﬁlaments . Microﬁlaments are composed mainly of actin either in monomeric ( G - actin ) or ﬁlamentous ( F - actin ) form ( Gottlieb et al . , 1991 ; Kunze and Rustow , 1993 ) . G - actin is soluble in non - ionic detergents while F - actin is generally resistant to detergent solubilization ( Ueda et al . , 1997 ; Patterson et al . , 1999 ; Geiger et al . , 2005 ; Waschke et al . , 2005 ) . We examined the relationship between hepaCAM and the microﬁlament network in hepaCAM - transfected MCF7 and NIH3T3 cells ( Fig . 1A , B ) . P100 fractions were extracted from the cells and resuspended in cold 1 % Triton X - 100 in the presence or absence of 1 M potassium iodide ( KI ) . KI was added to depolymerize F - actin ( Yuan et al . , 2002 ; Stickney et al . , 2004 ) . The soluble and insoluble fractions were separated and analyzed by Western blotting . Consistent with studies reporting that proteins associated with F - actin are released from the Triton X - 100 - insoluble pellet by depolymerizing actin ( Yuan et al . , 2002 ; Stickney et al . , 2004 ) , depolymerization of F - actin by KI in both MCF7 and NIH3T3 cells resulted in an increased solubility along with a concomitant decreased insolubility of hepaCAM in 1 % Triton X - 100 ( P ¼ 0 . 0286 ) . Notably , a small portion of hepaCAM remained detergent - insoluble after F - actin disruption . The data indicate a possible association between hepaCAM and F - actin . Subcellular localization of hepaCAM requires F - actin as scaffolding We examined the localization of hepaCAM and F - actin in MCF7 cells transfected with hepaCAM ( Fig . 2 ) . The cells were double - stained with anti - V5 antibody and TRITC - conjugated phalloidin to detect hepaCAM and F - actin , respectively . Confocal microscopy showed colocalization of hepaCAM with F - actin predominantly on the plasma membrane , particularly at areas of cell – cell contact . To elucidate whether the subcellular localization of hepaCAM required F - actin as scaffolding , we disrupted the actin cytoskeleton with cytochalasin B ( MacLean - Fletcher and Pollard , 1980 ; Bonder and Mooseker , 1986 ) before staining . Not only was the actin cytoskeletal network disorganized , the distribution of hepaCAM on the plasma membrane was also affected . Translocated from the plasma membrane , aggregates of hepaCAM and disrupted Fig . 1 . Possible interaction of hepaCAM with the actin cytoskeleton . A : DetergentinsolubilityofhepaCAMisdependentonF - actin . MCF7 ( top part ) and NIH3T3 ( bottom part ) cells were transiently transfected with hepaCAM - V5 . Post - transfection , P100 fractions were extracted fromthecellsandresuspendedin1 % TritonX - 100 ( TX ) withorwithout 1 M potassium iodide ( KI ) to depolymerize F - actin . Equal volumes of soluble ( S ) andinsoluble ( I ) fractionsfromeachtreatmentwereanalyzed by Western blotting ( IB ) with anti - V5 and anti - actin antibodies . B : The bar graph represents the ratio between the Triton X - 100 - insoluble and - solubleportionsofhepaCAMproteininthepresenceandabsenceof KI . Data shown are mean W SD of three independent experiments . M P U 0 . 0286 as assessed by Mann – Whitney test . Fig . 2 . Colocalization of hepaCAM with F - actin . MCF7 cells transientlytransfectedwithhepaCAM - V5wereeitheruntreated ( left part ) or treated ( right part ) with 10 m M cytochalasin B for 90 min to depolymerize F - actin . The cells were then ﬁxed , permeabilized , and immunostained with anti - V5 antibody ( hepaCAM ; top row ) . F - actin waslabeledwithTRITC - conjugatedphalloidin ( middlerow ) . Confocal images of hepaCAM and F - actin were merged ( bottom row ) . Arrows indicate colocalization of hepaCAM and F - actin . Scale bar , 20 m m . [ Color ﬁgure can be viewed in the online issue , which is available at www . interscience . wiley . com . ] JOURNAL OF CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGY 384 M O H E T A L . F - actin appeared clustered in the cytoplasm . The results indicate that the localization of hepaCAM at the sites of cell – cell contact is maintained by polymerized F - actin . hepaCAM coimmunoprecipitates with F - actin Coimmunoprecipitation assay was performed to determine whether hepaCAM formed a complex with actin in cells . The whole cell lysate prepared from hepaCAM - transfected MCF7 cells was assayed by immunoprecipitation with anti - actin antibody ( Fig . 3A ) . Western blot analysis of the immunoprecipitate with anti - V5 and anti - actin antibodies conﬁrmed an association between hepaCAM and actin . We further investigated if hepaCAM could coimmunoprecipitate with G - actin ( Fig . 3B ) . The Triton X - 100 - soluble fraction ( containing G - actin ) of hepaCAM - transfected MCF7 cells was extracted and incubated with anti - actin antibody . The immunoprecipitate was analyzed by Western blotting . Coimmunoprecipitation failed to detect any association between hepaCAM and G - actin , indicating that hepaCAM complexes to F - actin but not to G - actin . hepaCAM binds directly to F - actin To determine whether hepaCAM bound directly or indirectly to F - actin , F - actin cosedimentation assay was performed using in vitro translated hepaCAM protein ( Fig . 4A ) . In the absence of Fig . 3 . Coimmunoprecipitation of hepaCAM with F - actin . MCF7 cells were transfected with hepaCAM - V5 . Forty - eight hours after transfection , the cells were lysed in either RIPA buffer ( A ) or 1 % Triton X - 100 ( B ) . After centrifugation , both the RIPA lysate and Triton X - 100 - soluble fraction ( containing G - actin ) were pre - cleared and subjected to immunoprecipitation ( IP ) with anti - actin antibody . Immunoprecipitation with IgG served as control against non - speciﬁc binding . TheimmunoprecipitateswereanalyzedbyWesternblotting ( IB ) using anti - V5 and anti - actin antibodies . S , Triton X - 100 - soluble fraction . Fig . 4 . Direct association of hepaCAM with F - actin . In vitro - translated hepaCAM protein ( A ) andcelllysate preparedfrom MCF7 cells transiently transfected with hepaCAM - V5 ( B ) were used in the F - actin cosedimentation assays . The proteins were incubated in the presence or absence of F - actin and then separated into supernatant ( S ) and pellet ( P ) fractions . An equal volume of each fraction was analyzed by Western blotting ( IB ) using anti - V5 and anti - actin antibodies . Percentage of hepaCAM protein in pellet is indicated . C : Puriﬁed a - ActininandBSAwereincubatedwithF - actintoserveas positive and negative controls , respectively . After cosedimentation , the control samples were resolved by SDS – PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue . Arrows on the right indicate the positions of a - Actinin , BSA and actin . JOURNAL OF CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGY h e p a C A M D I R E C T L Y I N T E R A C T S W I T H F - A C T I N 385 F - actin , majority of hepaCAM resided in the supernatant fraction . However , a portion of hepaCAM ( 26 . 8 % ) was detectable in the pellet without F - actin , possibly a result of self - aggregation and / or protein precipitation . In the presence of F - actin , the amount of hepaCAM in the pellet rose to 89 . 4 % along with a concomitant decrease of the protein in the supernatant . After subtracting the background sedimentation ( without F - actin ) , 62 . 6 % of hepaCAM was revealed to cosediment with F - actin . When F - actin cosedimentation was carried out using cell lysate prepared from hepaCAM - transfected MCF7 cells , coprecipitation of hepaCAM with F - actin was also detected , although to a lesser extent than the in vitro translated hepaCAM protein ( Fig . 4B ) . The percentage of pelleted hepaCAM increased from 15 . 2 % ( in the absence of F - actin ) to 32 . 2 % ( in the presence of F - actin ) . The small increase in cosedimentation ( 17 . 0 % ) can be accounted for by the presence Fig . 5 . EffectofhepaCAMdeletiononactinassociation . A : Schematicrepresentationofwild - typeanddomain - deletedhepaCAM . Themutants wereconstructedfromwild - typehepaCAMandclonedintopcDNA6 / V5 - Hisvector . EachoftheconstructswasexpressedasaV5 - taggedprotein . SP , signalpeptide ; Ig , immunoglobulindomain ; TM , transmembranedomain ; CT , cytoplasmicdomain . Numbersindicatethepositionsofamino acidresidues . MCF7cellsweretransientlytransfectedwiththerecombinantplasmidsandsubjectedtothefollowingassays . B : Detergentsolubility assays . The transfected cells were extracted in 1 % Triton X - 100 . Equal volumes of Triton X - 100 - soluble ( S ) and - insoluble ( I ) fractions were subjectedtoWesternblotanalysis ( IB ) usinganti - V5andanti - actinantibodies . Positionsofthemolecularsizemarkersareshownontheleftpart . C : F - actin cosedimentation assays . Cell lysates prepared from the transfected MCF7 cells were incubated with or without F - actin . After centrifugation , equal volumes of the supernatant ( S ) and pellet ( P ) fractions were analyzed by Western blotting using anti - V5 and anti - actin antibodies . Percentage of hepaCAM protein in pellet is indicated . D : Coimmunoprecipitation assays . The cell lysates were immunoprecipitated ( IP ) withanti - actinantibody . ImmunoprecipitationwithIgGservedascontrol . Theimmunoprecipitates ( leftblot ) andtotalcelllysates ( rightblot ) were analyzed by Western blotting using anti - V5 antibody . Positions of the molecular size markers are shown on the left part of each blot . JOURNAL OF CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGY 386 M O H E T A L . of suboptimally folded hepaCAM proteins that are unable to directly coprecipitate with F - actin . a - Actinin and BSA were used as positive and negative controls in the F - actin cosedimentation assay , respectively ( Fig . 4C ) . Taken together , the results indicate that the linkage between hepaCAM and F - actin is direct . An intact hepaCAM is needed to establish a stable interaction with F - actin To identify the actin - binding domain on hepaCAM , we constructed N - and C - terminal domain - deleted mutants of hepaCAM ( Fig . 5A ) . The constructs including hCAM D 1st Ig ( deletion of the 1st Ig domain from residues 33 – 145 ) , hCAM D 2nd Ig ( deletion of the 2nd Ig domain from residues 155 – 227 ) , and hCAM - tailless ( deletion of the entire cytoplasmic domain from residues 264 – 416 ) were cloned into the pcDNA6 / V5 - His vector . The recombinant plasmids were transfected into MCF7 cells and the solubility of the expressed proteins to 1 % Triton X - 100 was assessed . As shown in Figure 5B , a fraction of hCAM D 1st Ig was insoluble in Triton X - 100 . Deletion of the 2nd Ig domain of hepaCAM rendered mostofthe protein resistanttodetergent solubilization . Onthe other hand , removal of the cytoplasmic domain almost completely abolished detergent insolubility of hepaCAM . The result suggests that the cytoplasmic domain of hepaCAM is important for associating with the actin cytoskeleton , and this association may be regulated by hepaCAM’s extracellular domain . F - actin cosedimentation assays were performed on transfected MCF7 cell lysates to evaluate the binding of hepaCAM - truncated mutants to F - actin ( Fig . 5C ) . We comparedthepercentageoftheexpressedconstructpresentinthepelletwithandwithoutF - actin . Unexpectedly , no obvious coprecipitation of the mutants with F - actin was detected . Notably , a signiﬁcant amount of hCAM D 1st Ig ( 44 . 0 % ) was found to sediment in the absence of F - actin . The non - speciﬁc sedimentation is possibly due to the formation of self - aggregates or the protein is susceptible to precipitation under the conditions of F - actin cosedimentation . Unlike wild - type hepaCAM , which showed an increased sedimentation in the presence of F - actin , no increase in sedimentation of hCAM D 1st Ig with F - actin was observed . Similarly , no enhanced sedimentation of hCAM D 2nd Ig and hCAM - tailless was detected when we compared the respective protein band intensity in the pellet with and without F - actin . The lack of association between the mutant proteins and F - actin was conﬁrmed by coimmunoprecipitation ( Fig . 5D ) . A possible explanation is that the interaction between the mutants and actin is weak and / or transient . Overall , the data indicate that the cytoplasmic domain of hepaCAM is required for actin - binding . However , only in the presence of an intact hepaCAM can a stable physical association with the actin cytoskeleton be established . An intact hepaCAM is required to modulate cell – ECM adhesion and cell motility MCF7cellsstablyexpressingpcDNA6 / V5 - Hisvector , wild - type hepaCAM , hCAM D 1st Ig , hCAM D 2nd Ig , or hCAM - tailless were established and cloned . Western blot analysis revealed that the stable clones expressing the different constructs had dissimilar protein expression levels ( Fig . 6A ) . Wild - type hepaCAM and hCAM - tailless were expressed at a higher level than hCAM D 1st Ig and hCAM D 2nd Ig . The same observation was routinely made during transfection studies . Therefore , the differences in expression efﬁciency of the hepaCAM constructs may be due to the intrinsic nature of the molecules and not experimental artifacts . Immunoﬂuorescence analysis conﬁrmed the homogeneity of the cloned cells ( Fig . 6B ) . Noteworthily , exceptforhCAM D 1stIg , theproteinsexpressed by the hepaCAM constructs were distributed predominantly to the plasma membrane . Using the stably transfected cell clones , we evaluated the adhesive property of wild - type and truncated hepaCAM on ﬁbronectin ( Fig . 7A , B ) and matrigel ( Fig . 7C ) by cell spreading assays . In comparison to pcDNA6 vector and hepaCAM mutants , wild - type hepaCAM signiﬁcantly increased cell spreading on both ﬁbronectin and matrigel matrices at 30 and 120 min of observation ( P < 0 . 001 ) . Deletion of the 1st Ig domain , 2nd Ig domain , or cytoplasmic domain clearly diminished the adhesive effect of hepaCAM . Cells expressing hCAM - tailless spread at a similar rate as the control cells . On the other hand , cells expressing hCAM D 1st Ig or hCAM D 2nd Ig spread moderately faster than the control cells . In addition , we assessed cell motility modulated by wild - type and truncated hepaCAM through wound healing assays . Conﬂuent monolayers of stable MCF7 cells expressing pcDNA6 vector , wild - type or mutant hepaCAM were wounded and allowed to heal ( Fig . 8 ) . Cells were observed at the indicated time points . In comparison to cells expressing vector or hepaCAM - truncated mutants , cells expressing hepaCAM displayed the fastest wound closure ( P < 0 . 001 ) . Taken together , the data showed that deletion of hepaCAM domains considerably abolished hepaCAM’s role in cell – ECM adhesion and cell motility , thus indicating that the expression of an intact hepaCAM protein is critical to its function . Discussion Cell adhesion molecules are responsible for adhesion of cells to neighboring cells or to the ECM components in the extracellular environment . These molecules are essential for the development and maintenance of tissue architecture . In addition , adhesion molecules function as receptors critical in modulating signal transduction vital for the regulation of cellular adhesion , migration , proliferation , angiogenesis , apoptosis , and differentiation ( Gumbiner , 1996 ; Bischoff , 1997 ; Cavenagh et al . , 1998 ) . In our previous work , we reported the identiﬁcation of a novel Ig - like cell adhesion molecule , hepaCAM , which participates in cell – ECM interactions ( Moh et al . , 2005a , b ) . Interactions between cell adhesion molecules and the actin cytoskeleton are important for mediating cell adhesion and cell motility ( GiancottiandRuoslahti , 1999 ; BrakebuschandFassler , 2003 ) . In this study , we provide several lines of evidence demonstrating that hepaCAM is directly associated with the actin cytoskeleton . Firstly , hepaCAM is relatively insoluble in the non - ionic detergent Triton X - 100 . The distribution of hepaCAM to the Triton X - 100 - insoluble cytoskeletal fraction is markedly reduced when F - actin is disassembled by potassium iodide , rendering hepaCAM highly extractable with Triton X - 100 . Notably , a small portion of hepaCAM protein remains in the detergent - insoluble fraction after F - actin depolymerization , suggesting an interaction of the adhesion molecule with lipid rafts . Lipid rafts are cholesterol - and sphingolipid - enriched microdomains that serve as platforms for signal transduction . Similar to the actin cytoskeleton , lipid rafts are insoluble in cold non - ionic detergents . However , they can be distinguished from the cytoskeleton by their low buoyant density ( Brown and Rose , 1992 ; Simons and Ikonen , 1997 ; Brown and London , 1998 ; Simons and Toomre , 2000 ) . We are currently investigating the distribution of hepaCAM in the lipid rafts . Secondly , hepaCAM colocalizes with F - actin predominantly on the plasma membrane , particularly at areas of cell – cell contact . Upon disruption of F - actin with cytochalasin B , hepaCAM is redistributed into polymerized actin - containing clusters in the cytoplasm . The results suggest that the subcellular localization of hepaCAM relies on the integrity of the actin cytoskeleton . JOURNAL OF CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGY h e p a C A M D I R E C T L Y I N T E R A C T S W I T H F - A C T I N 387 Finally , coimmunoprecipitation and F - actin cosedimentation assays indicate that hepaCAM directly binds to F - actin . Adhesion molecules like CD44 ( Camp et al . , 1991 ) have been implicated to bind either directly or indirectly to actin . We do not exclude the possibility that a portion of hepaCAM may be indirectly coupled to the actin cytoskeleton through adaptor proteins . Using coimmunoprecipitation assays , we have evaluated the association of hepaCAM with a - actinin and ezrin , the cytoskeletal adaptors for adhesion molecules EpCAM ( Balzar et al . , 1998 ) and CD44 ( Yonemura et al . , 1998 ) , respectively . However , none of the adaptor proteins tested is linked to hepaCAM ( data not shown ) . The protein sequence of hepaCAM does not contain any consensus actin - binding sites such as the LKXXES / T motif ( Prekeris et al . , 1996 ; Howard et al . , 1998 ) and I / LWEQ module ( McCann and Craig , 1997 ) . To identify the actin - binding region in hepaCAM , we have constructed three domain - deleted mutants of hepaCAM . Deletion of the cytoplasmic domain eliminates the detergent - insoluble property of hepaCAM , suggesting that the cytoplasmic domain is required for cytoskeletal association . The cytoplasmic domains of many adhesion molecules regulate their properties through interactions with the cytoskeleton ( Nagafuchi and Takeichi , 1988 ; Gumbiner , 1996 ; Lauffenburger and Horwitz , 1996 ) . The cytoplasmic domains of E - cadherin and CEACAM1 - L have been demonstrated by detergent solubility assays to be linked to the actin cytoskeleton ( Nagafuchi and Takeichi , 1988 ; Sadekova et al . , 2000 ) . Interestingly , deletion of either the extracellular or the cytoplasmic domain of hepaCAM abolishes actin coprecipitation . The absence of physical association between hepaCAM mutants and actin may be caused by weak and / or transient protein – protein interactions between the proteins , possibly due to changes in the protein conformation and / or post - translational modiﬁcations of the mutants . Together , the data demonstrate that although the cytoplasmic domain of hepaCAM may be required for actin - binding , an intact hepaCAM is critical for establishing a stable interaction with the actin cytoskeleton . A stable interaction between hepaCAM and the cytoskeletal actin is important to the biological function of hepaCAM , as revealed by cell spreading and wound healing assays . In comparison to cells expressing vector or hepaCAM mutants , which fail to physically associate with the actin cytoskeleton , cells expressing wild - type hepaCAM exhibit accelerated wound Fig . 6 . Establishment of stable MCF7 cell lines expressing wild - type or mutant hepaCAM . MCF7 cells were stably transfected with the recombinant plasmids . Cells transfected with pcDNA6 / V5 - His vector ( pcDNA6 ) alone served as control . The cells were selected for 2 weeks in 10 m g / ml of blasticidin and cloned . A : The stable cell clones were subjected to Western blot analysis ( IB ) with anti - V5 antibody to assess protein expression . Actin was included as loading control . Positions of the molecular size markers are shown on the left part . B : Immunoﬂuorescence staining of the cells with anti - V5 antibody . Cells were visualized by ﬂuorescence microscopy . Microscopic photos were taken under 320 T magniﬁcation . JOURNAL OF CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGY 388 M O H E T A L . Fig . 7 . Effectofwild - typeandmutanthepaCAMoncellspreading . A : StableMCF7cellsexpressingpcDNA6vector , hepaCAMormutantswere allowed to spread on ﬁbronectin - coated coverslips for 30 or 120 min at 37 - C . At the indicated time point , the cells were photographed under 320 T magniﬁcation . B : Thenumberofspreadcellsonﬁbronectinwascountedinsixrandomlyselectedﬁelds . Bargraphdepictstheaveragenumber of spread cells per ﬁeld . Data shown are mean W SD ( n U 6 ) from one of three representative experiments . MM P < 0 . 001 as assessed by ANOVA test . C : The stable cells were also allowed to spread on matrigel - coated coverslips for 30 or 120 min at 37 - C . The number of spread cells was countedinsixrandomlyselectedﬁelds . Bargraphrepresentstheaveragenumberofspreadcellsperﬁeld . Datashownaremean W SD ( n U 6 ) from one of three representative experiments . MM P < 0 . 001 as assessed by ANOVA test . JOURNAL OF CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGY h e p a C A M D I R E C T L Y I N T E R A C T S W I T H F - A C T I N 389 closure and cell spreading on matrices ﬁbronectin and matrigel . We have earlier reported that the cytoplasmic domain of hepaCAM is essential to its function on cell – matrix interaction and cell motility ( Moh et al . , 2005b ) . However , the present study shows that apart from the intracellular domain , both the extracellular Ig domains are also needed for hepaCAM to function efﬁciently . In conclusion , we have demonstrated that hepaCAM is directly bound to the F - actin cytoskeleton . An intact hepaCAM protein is critical for establishing a stable hepaCAM - actin interaction , which plays a critical role in modulating the biological function of hepaCAM . Acknowledgments We thank Miss Asha Reka Das for her administrative assistance . Literature Cited Balzar M , Bakker HA , Briaire - de - Bruijn IH , Fleuren GJ , Warnaar SO , Litvinov SV . 1998 . Cytoplasmictailregulatestheintercellularadhesionfunctionoftheepithelialcelladhesionmolecule . Mol Cell Biol 18 : 4833 – 4843 . Bischoff J . 1997 . Cell adhesion and angiogenesis . J Clin Invest 100 : S37 – S39 . Bonder EM , Mooseker MS . 1986 . Cytochalasin B slows but does not prevent monomer addition at the barbed end of the actin ﬁlament . J Cell Biol 102 : 282 – 288 . BrakebuschC , FasslerR . 2003 . Theintegrin - actinconnection , aneternalloveaffair . EMBOJ 22 : 2324 – 2333 . Fig . 8 . Effect of wild - type and mutant hepaCAM on wound healing . Conﬂuent monolayers of stable MCF7 cells expressing pcDNA6 vector , hepaCAMormutantswerescratchedbyapipettetipandwoundclosurewasevaluated . A : At0 , 6 , 24 , and48htimepoints , microscopicphotoswere taken under either 100 T ( 0 , 24 , and 48 h ) or 320 T magniﬁcation ( 6 h ) at six marked sites . Note : After 6 h of incubation , cell protrusions were observedincellsexpressingwild - typehepaCAMbutwerenotapparentincellsexpressingvectororhepaCAMmutants . B : Bargraphrepresentsthe averagepercentageofwoundclosure . Datashownaremean W SD ( n U 6 ) fromoneofthreerepresentativeexperiments . MM P < 0 . 001asassessedby ANOVA test . JOURNAL OF CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGY 390 M O H E T A L . Brown DA , London E . 1998 . Structure and origin of ordered lipid domains in biological membranes . J Membr Biol 164 : 103 – 114 . Brown DA , Rose JK . 1992 . Sorting of GPI - anchored proteins to glycolipid - enriched membrane subdomains during transport to the apical cell surface . Cell 68 : 533 – 544 . Camp RL , Kraus TA , Pure´ E . 1991 . Variations in the cytoskeletal interaction and posttranslational modiﬁcation of the CD44 homing receptor in macrophages . J Cell Biol 115 : 1283 – 1292 . CavenaghJD , CahillMR , KelseySM . 1998 . Adhesionmoleculesinclinicalmedicine . CritRev Clin Lab Sci 35 : 415 – 459 . ChongAS , ParishCR , CoombeDR . 1987 . Evidencethatthecytoskeletonplaysakeyrolein cell adhesion . Immunol Cell Biol 65 : 85 – 95 . Critchley DR . 2004 . Cytoskeletal proteins talin and vinculin in integrin - mediated adhesion . Biochem Soc Trans 32 : 831 – 836 . Favre - KontulaL , RollandA , BernasconiL , KarmirantzouM , PowerC , AntonssonB , Boschert U . 2008 . GlialCAM , animmunoglobulin - likecelladhesionmoleculeisexpressedinglialcells of the central nervous system . Glia 56 : 633 – 645 . GeigerRC , WatersCM , KampDW , GlucksbergMR . 2005 . KGFpreventsoxygen - mediated damage in ARPE - 19 cells . Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 46 : 3435 – 3442 . Giancotti FG , Ruoslahti E . 1999 . Integrin signaling . Science 285 : 1028 – 1032 . GottliebAI , LangilleBL , WongMK , KimDW . 1991 . Structureandfunctionoftheendothelial cytoskeleton . Lab Invest 65 : 123 – 137 . Gumbiner BM . 1996 . Cell adhesion : The molecular basis of tissue architecture and morphogenesis . Cell 84 : 345 – 357 . Howard PL , Klamut HJ , Ray PN . 1998 . Identiﬁcation of a novel actin - binding site within the Dp71 dystrophin isoform . FEBS Lett 441 : 337 – 341 . KeelyP , PariseL , JulianoR . 1998 . IntegrinsandGTPasesin tumourcellgrowth , motilityand invasion . Trends Cell Biol 8 : 101 – 106 . KunzeD , RustowB . 1993 . Pathobiochemicalaspectsofcytoskeletoncomponents . EurJClin Chem Clin Biochem 31 : 477 – 489 . Lauffenburger DA , Horwitz AF . 1996 . Cell migration : A physically integrated molecular process . Cell 84 : 359 – 369 . Liu S , Thomas SM , Woodside DG , Rose DM , Kiosses WB , Pfaff M , Ginsberg MH . 1999 . Binding of paxillin to alpha4 integrins modiﬁes integrin - dependent biological responses . Nature 402 : 676 – 681 . MacLean - Fletcher S , Pollard TD . 1980 . Mechanism of action of cytochalasin B on actin . Cell 20 : 329 – 341 . McCann RO , Craig SW . 1997 . TheI / LWEQ module : A conserved sequencethat signiﬁes F - actin binding in functionally diverse proteins from yeast to mammals . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94 : 5679 – 5684 . MohMC , LeeLH , ShenS . 2005a . CloningandcharacterizationofhepaCAM , anovelIg - likecell adhesionmoleculesuppressedinhumanhepatocellularcarcinoma . JHepatol42 : 833 – 841 . MohMC , ZhangC , LuoC , LeeLH , ShenS . 2005b . Structuralandfunctionalanalysesofanovel ig - likecelladhesionmolecule , hepaCAM , inthehumanbreastcarcinomaMCF7cells . JBiol Chem 280 : 27366 – 27374 . Moh MC , Zhang T , Lee LH , Shen S . 2008 . Expression of hepaCAM is downregulated in cancers and induces senescence - like growth arrest via a p53 / p21 - dependent pathway in human breast cancer cells . Carcinogenesis 29 : 2298 – 2305 . Nagafuchi A , Takeichi M . 1988 . Cell binding function of E - cadherin is regulated by the cytoplasmic domain . EMBO J 7 : 3679 – 3684 . Neame SJ , Isacke CM . 1993 . The cytoplasmic tail of CD44 is required for basolateral localizationinepithelialMDCKcellsbutdoesnotmediateassociationwiththedetergent - insoluble cytoskeleton of ﬁbroblasts . J Cell Biol 121 : 1299 – 1310 . OteyCA , PavalkoFM , BurridgeK . 1990 . Aninteractionbetweenalpha - actininandthebeta1 integrin subunit in vitro . J Cell Biol 111 : 721 – 729 . Patterson RL , van Rossum DB , Gill DL . 1999 . Store - operated Ca2 þ entry : Evidence for a secretion - like coupling model . Cell 98 : 487 – 499 . PrekerisR , MayhewMW , CooperJB , TerrianDM . 1996 . Identiﬁcationandlocalizationofan actin - bindingmotifthatisuniquetotheepsilonisoformofproteinkinaseCandparticipates in the regulation of synaptic function . J Cell Biol 132 : 77 – 90 . Richardson A , Malik RK , Hildebrand JD , Parsons JT . 1997 . Inhibition of cell spreading by expression of the C - terminal domain of focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) is rescued by coexpression of Src or catalytically inactive FAK : A role for paxillin tyrosine phosphorylation . Mol Cell Biol 17 : 6906 – 6914 . RidleyAJ , SchwartzMA , BurridgeK , FirtelRA , GinsbergMH , BorisyG , ParsonsJT , Horwitz AR . 2003 . Cell migration : Integrating signals from front to back . Science 302 : 1704 – 1709 . Sadekova S , Lamarche - Vane N , Li X , Beauchemin N . 2000 . The CEACAM1 - L glycoprotein associateswiththeactincytoskeletonandlocalizestocell – cellcontactthroughactivation of Rho - like GTPases . Mol Biol Cell 11 : 65 – 77 . Schumann D , Chen CJ , Kaplan B , Shively JE . 2001 . Carcinoembryonic antigen cell adhesion molecule 1 directly associates with cytoskeleton proteins actin and tropomyosin . J Biol Chem 276 : 47421 – 47433 . Simons K , Ikonen E . 1997 . Functional rafts in cell membranes . Nature 387 : 569 – 572 . Simons K , Toomre D . 2000 . Lipid rafts and signal transduction . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 1 : 31 – 39 . Stickney JT , Bacon WC , Rojas M , Ratner N , Ip W . 2004 . Activation of the tumor suppressor merlin modulates its interaction with lipid rafts . Cancer Res 64 : 2717 – 2724 . Tarone G , Ferracini R , Galetto G , Comoglio P . 1984 . A cell surface integral membrane glycoproteinof85 , 000molwt ( gp85 ) associatedwithtritonX - 100 - insolublecellskeleton . J Cell Biol 99 : 512 – 519 . Ueda H , Saga S , Shinohara H , Morishita R , Kato K , Asano T . 1997 . Association of the gamma12 subunit of G proteins with actin ﬁlaments . J Cell Sci 110 : 1503 – 1511 . Waschke J , Curry FE , Adamson RH , Drenckhahn D . 2005 . Regulation of actin dynamics is critical for endothelial barrier functions . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 288 : H1296 – H1305 . Yamada KM , Geiger B . 1997 . Molecular interactions in cell adhesion complexes . Curr Opin Cell Biol 9 : 76 – 85 . YonemuraS , HiraoM , DoiY , TakahashiN , KondoT , TsukitaS , TsukitaS . 1998 . Ezrin / radixin / moesin ( ERM ) proteins bind to a positively charged amino acid cluster in the juxta - membrane cytoplasmic domain of CD44 , CD43 , and ICAM - 2 . J Cell Biol 140 : 885 – 895 . YuanH , TakeuchiE , SalantDJ . 2002 . Podocyteslit - diaphragmproteinnephrinislinkedtothe actin cytoskeleton . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 282 : F585 – F591 . JOURNAL OF CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGY h e p a C A M D I R E C T L Y I N T E R A C T S W I T H F - A C T I N 391