PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . LGBTQ Futures and Participatory Design : Investigating Visibility , Community , and the Future of Future Workshops JEAN HARDY , Michigan State University , Dept . of Media & Information , USA CAITLIN GEIER , Michigan State University , Dept . of Media & Information , USA STEFANI VARGAS , Northern Michigan University , USA RILEY DOLL , Michigan State University , Dept . of Media & Information , USA AMY LYN HOWARD , Michigan Technological University , USA This paper presents the findings from a series of participatory design workshops with LGBTQ people living in the rural Midwestern United States . Using future workshops as a method , we seek to understand contemporary problems facing rural LGBTQ people and leverage design exercises to facilitate community members to come up with creative solutions . What we find are people grappling with the complexities of visibility , safety , and resource access in their rural communities ; people who wanted to be able to use and create sociotechnical solutions that could help them navigate these complexities . Drawing on these findings , we argue for further exploration of design that experiments with the tension between visibility and safety for LGBTQ people . Further , we argue that future workshops and participatory design are well - positioned for continued work with marginalized communities , but that we need to maintain political orientations towards liberation and justice . CCS Concepts : • Human - centered computing → Human - computer interaction ( HCI ) → Empirical studies in HCI Additional Key Words and Phrases : Rural , LGBTQ , participatory design , future workshops ACM Reference format : Jean Hardy , Caitlin Geier , Stefani Vargas , Riley Doll , and Amy Howard . 2022 . LGBTQ Futures and Participatory Design : Investigating visibility , community , and the future of future workshops . In Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , CSCW2 , Article 525 ( November 2022 ) , 25 pages , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3555638 1 INTRODUCTION Walking down the sidewalk of a downtown area that could belong to any small town in the Midwestern United States , past a brewery , a historic movie theater , and a local tourist trap , a group of visibly queer and trans young people turn and enter a storefront covered in rainbow flags . The storefront is in the center of town , occupying what had long been a vacant building . The town itself is at the center of a region that once thrived from the local iron mines , most of which have long been closed . A three - and - a - half - hour drive through dense forests away from the nearest metropolitan area ( and gay bar ) , this group of young gender rebels are hoping to spend their evening in a cat café , or maybe an LGBT bookstore , or maybe even on the dance floor of a gay club . Gathering in the dark entryway , the group stand in f ront of a large black kiosk glowing with the words , “Pick your room . ” Each of member of the group take turns giving their pitch as to how the group should start their evening out before they settle Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . 2573 - 0142 / 2022 / November – Art 525 $ 15 . 00 © Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3555638 525 525 : 2 Jean Hardy et al . PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . on visiting a cat café . Swiping through the kiosk’s interf ace , past images of a disco ball and a tennis racket , they stop on an image of a kitten sitting in a teacup . The kiosk changes , “Please wait patiently while we prepare your room . ” A few minutes later the kiosk shifts again , “Please enter . ” A glowing pink door appears to their left and the group quickly filters through . At first glance , the large room they find themselves in is half empty and completely devoid of decoration . A few chairs are scattered here and there around a couple of coffee tables . Coffee cups and an espresso machine sit on a long bar along one wall . Hanging on the wall next to the door are headsets and gloves . Without needing instruction , the group start putting on the equipment . The first to finish putting on their headset turns around and squeals , running across the room to one of the coffee tables . They kneel quickly and start making petting motions a foot above the coffee table . As the rest of the group finishes putting on their headsets , they break into two smaller groups . One joins the first friend to huddle around the coffee table petting air , the other taking everyone’s orders and working at the espresso machine . “It’s so realistic , I can feel her purring ! ” “I’ll take a decaf Americano . ” “I’m naming the orange one Ariana Grande ! ” “They don’t have oat milk ! ? What do they think we are , heterosexuals ? ! ” The room this group of friends enjoys is embedded with augmented and virtual reality technology . The headset populates the field of vision with additional surroundings , such as virtual cats and lavish decorations . The headset and gloves work together to provide stimuli to the user , such as the vibrations one feels when petting a virtual cat that is purring . Sensors are embedded around the room to detect presence and movement , activating new stimuli and experiences as the friends wander around the room , enjoying their evening together . This fictional vision of an alternative social space , enhanced by augmented and virtual reality , was one of the ideas that came out of The LGBTQ Futures Project , a series of participatory design workshops conducted with lesbian , gay , bisexual , transgender , and queer ( LGBTQ ) people living in the rural Midwestern United States . The vignette reflects the needs and desires of the LGBTQ people that lived in this community : a flexible social space that allowed for LGBTQ people to come together and enjoy a night out with their friends without the worries of getting harassed by the homophobes and transphobes they frequently run into in other local social spaces and bars . Visibility and community - building are complex processes for LGBTQ people living in rural places , where they often don’t have the population to sustain safe physical spaces or public life . To work around issues of visibility and community building in their rural location , LGBTQ people turn to the Internet and social technologies . Yet existing social technologies for LGBTQ people are frequently designed for urban locations rather than rural ones [ 33 ] , and are often over - sexualized , alienating some and making it difficult to find friends for others [ 1 ] . What the vignette reflects is the purpose of the LGBTQ Futures Project , to better understand the social and resource - focused needs of rural LGBTQ people through the lens of social technologies . From participatory design’s roots in developing democratic design processes in the workplace [ 14 ] to its contemporary focus on equity , social justice , and expanding our understanding of participation , participatory design ( PD ) has long been a space for developing knowledge and practice that places people at the center . This is particularly prescient as PD , as well as human - computer interaction as a discipline more broadly , evolves to account for the everyday experiences of people , particularly the experiences of those who are marginalized through systemic and institutional bias and violence because of their identities . Particularly important for this paper is the growing body of work at CSCW and adjacent SIGCHI communities that use participatory design methods to understand the technological needs and experiences of LGBTQ people [ 30 , 35 ] and the real impacts that social technologies have had on their lives . LGBTQ Futures and Participatory Design 525 : 3 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . The LGBTQ Futures Project reflects this desire to best understand the technological needs of LGBTQ people . The project and this paper seek to situate these needs within the context of rural geography , a context that adds complexity to both LGBTQ and technological experiences , especially when we think of the promises of technology to address resource disparities between urban and rural areas [ 34 , 36 ] . To explore this situatedness , we came together in 2018 as academic and rural community partners in a remote and rural region of the Upper Midwestern United States to form the LGBTQ Futures Project . As a team , we conducted a series of participatory design workshops and interviews with LGBTQ community members across the region . What is presented in this paper represents an attempt at garnering a foundational understanding of the concerns of the rural LGBTQ people in our fieldsite , and how they conceptualize future technologies that could help to address problems they face in their everyday lives . To guide our research , we first asked , what are the problems facing rural LGBTQ people ? Second , how do participants creatively solve for those problems through a lens of design and technology ? And third , how are experiences at the intersection of rurality and LGBTQ identity reflected in the designs and mock - ups created by participants in the workshops ? What we find are LGBTQ people grappling with the complexities of visibility , safety , and resource access in their rural communities who want to be able to use and create technological solutions that can help them navigate these complexities . We suggest that embracing the tension between visibility and safety for LGBTQ people leads to new opportunities for design that go beyond obscuring or hiding visible social media traces . Further , results of these workshops led us to question the role of futurity in the future workshop method when participants largely wanted to envision solutions for the immediate present . Through an engagement with the origin of the future workshop method , we share the pragmatic history of the method and join recent PD research [ 30 , 37 ] in calling for design that focuses on liberation and justice for marginalized communities to retain its pragmatic and deeply political history . We argue that when addressing the multi - faceted issues facing marginalized communities today , especially within the context of future liberation and justice , participatory design research needs to remain pragmatic and deeply political . 2 LITERATURE REVIEW 2 . 1 LGBTQ HCI Research on LGBTQ people in HCI is expansive , covering topics such as discrimination and bias embedded into social technologies ( e . g . , [ 10 , 33 , 45 , 55 ] ) , support seeking and community building ( e . g . , [ 20 , 27 ] ) , LGBTQ activism and social movements ( e . g . , [ 4 , 11 ] ) , and data collection methods ( e . g . , [ 15 , 54 ] ) . This paper focuses primarily on how our LGBTQ research participants conceptualized challenges and solutions for identity - and geography - based issues through their participation in future workshops . While the future , and future workshops , were our tools through which to explore these issues , the results of the workshops revolved primarily around the present - day roles of visibility and empowerment for LGBTQ people living in rural places , and how visibility and safety are connected to information and resource seeking behavior . We therefore focus here on previous literature which explores visibility and processes of information and resource seeking for LGBTQ people . 2 . 1 . 1 LGBTQ visibility and social technology Much existing research on LGBTQ people in HCI focuses on understanding the role of visibility and identity disclosure for LGBTQ people on social technologies . Early research in this area focused 525 : 4 Jean Hardy et al . PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . primarily on LGBTQ specific technologies , such as location - based apps like Grindr [ 9 , 22 ] , but the focus has expanded considerably to consider the complexity and nuances of visibility and disclosure on broader social media platforms [ 11 , 16 , 19 , 28 , 51 ] . The salience of identity visibility in social media activity ( e . g . , posts , profiles ) has been of particular concern in previous HCI research on LGBTQ people . For example , Haimson and colleagues have written extensively about the various ways that trans people navigate the visibility of their gender transition through social media disclosures [ 27 , 28 ] , highlighting transition itself as a highly visibl e experience in a trans person’s life [ 26 ] . Many scholars have advocated for more nuance in the kinds of visibility afforded through social media [ 16 , 20 , 27 ] , including advocating for increased visibility in some cases of LGBTQ advocacy and activism [ 52 ] . The concept of “selective visibility” is one that appears prominently in the LGBTQ HCI research . As Carrasco and Keren describe in their 2018 paper [ 16 ] , selective visibility is key for LGBTQ people on social media who want “to be ‘out’ on their own terms” ( p . 250 ) and control when they are seen as LGBTQ and by whom . Dym et al . [ 20 ] extend this concept to focus on the role of selective visibility in online communities to understand “how visible an entire community is and how that visibility affects that community’s safety and ability to function as a support space for marginalized people like the LGBTQ community” ( p . 154 ) . Hardy and Lindtner [ 33 ] describe how using location - based apps in rural areas reinforced a sense of visibility in their small communities and raised privacy concerns , but as a perceived LGBTQ - only space , the apps supported feelings of safety through that familiarity . The tension between privacy or safety and visibility is of a particular concern when thinking about designing technology that prioritizes users who hold marginalized identities . Pinter et al . [ 51 ] draw from trans theory to articulate a tension in trans visibility in that visibility often results in a loss of safety and therefore violence . As Haimson et al . [ 29 ] articulate , though designing identify - safe spaces , such as trans only online communities , may improve safety , doing so does not guarantee that users are going to be free from harassment and harm . In crafting more visible , but simultaneously more safe spaces , Haimson et al . [ 29 ] highlight the importance of boundary management between the special group of users and others . A particular opportunity for more exploration that we see in this literature is , except for [ 30 ] , an overwhelming focus on digital spaces and online communities as spaces for selective and complex visibility . 2 . 1 . 2 Information seeking in LGBTQ community Research on community building among LGBTQ people has found that users deploy selective visibility to create supportive digital communities which help them navigate issues of stigma and outness [ 20 ] . Social media can also be incredibly important sources of information and resources when addressing resource and information disparities [ 2 , 27 , 30 , 32 , 46 ] . For example , with respect to access to health resources , Augustaitis et al . [ 2 ] explore how trans people seek health information online , and along with [ 46 ] make recommendations for how to best design and moderate online health platforms for queer and trans people . From a community perspective , much of the LGBTQ research in HCI has focused primarily on online information access on health websites and social media platforms , yet LGBTQ community and experience is often felt at a local level , with those in proximate identity - based communities . Haimson et al . [ 30 ] highlight a handful of future technologies that emerged from their participatory design workshops with trans people that focused on proximate relationships and information , such as “buddy finding technology” and a “Trans Yelp” that would help trans people find nearby resources . Hardy [ 32 ] highlights the importance of considering both “online” and “offline” information seeking practices to best understand queer experiences of information and how LGBTQ Futures and Participatory Design 525 : 5 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . information literacy is achieved from a queer identity perspective . As this paper will explore in more detail , a geographic focus on experiences in local and regional LGBTQ communities adds an additional layer of complexity for how LGBTQ people navigate visibility and information / resource seeking while building community . 2 . 2 Rurality , LGBTQ identity , & information It is impossible to separate identity from geographic location , and this is particularly salient for LGBTQ people living in rural places . As sociologist Emily Kazyak [ 42 ] argues , instead of their rurality being something separate from identity , rural LGBTQ people draw from rural / urban differences to situate their gay identity within their locale . Similarly , drawing from geographer Doreen Massey’s treatise that “the social is inexorably also spatial” [ 48 ] , Mary Gray [ 25 ] argues that ‘place’ is a defining feature of queer subjectivity : “ . . . for the people who live in them , rural communities are more than backdrops or landscapes to late - modern queer subjectivities…we cannot examine the social relations of power that produce the meaning of LGBTQ identities without a careful consideration of how locations , rural locales in this case , matter to those relations” ( p . 89 ) . Given the realities of rural life , there are strategies that rural LGBTQ people deploy to find others like them and gain information about their identities . Drawing from Howard’s [ 39 ] historical work on LGBTQ people in Mississippi in the mid - twentieth century , Gray argues that without access to a “sustained infrastructure of visibility , ” rural LGBTQ people “make up for their lack of local numbers and gay - owned spaces by using a strategy of circulation rather than congregation” [ 25 ] . In trying to make sense of these temporary spaces through which the queer youth circulate , Gray proposed the concept of “boundary publics” as “iterative , ephemeral experiences of belonging that circulate across the outskirts and through the centers of a more recognized and validated public sphere” [ 25 ] . In other words , circulation is how LGBTQ people are able to access temporary moments of visibility in rural areas , allowing them to be together with other LGBTQ people publicly and to embrace their identities , as well as providing them with a unique web of LGBTQ information and resources that might otherwise be invisible [ 32 ] . ICTs have become essential to that web of relations and information and are embedded into the geography of LGBTQ experience in rural places [ 32 , 33 ] . As Hardy argues in his work on queer information literacies , by paying attention to how LGBTQ people access information and the networks of circulation that information is a part of , we come to better understand how LGBTQ identity and subjectivity is formed [ 32 ] . Rural LGBTQ people not only provide a unique lens into understanding visibility and community among a marginalized group , but can also provide a distinctly unique view of what technology offers for the future . This , alongside much of the literature above , shows us how important it is to engage in participatory and community - centered approaches to computing research . 2 . 3 Participatory design & the future Participatory design has been an essential tool in computing research that seeks to democratize approaches to working with identity - based and / or marginalized communities . During the 1990s and 2000s , concerns for gender and identity came to the forefront of many feminist scholars in participatory design , and HCI and design more broadly [ 5 , 12 ] . But the turn away from the workplace during the third wave of HCI also meant that scholars and designers started to incorporate PD into research on identity and marginalization in computing . We briefly summarize the PD research on 525 : 6 Jean Hardy et al . PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . identit y and marginalization here before turning to how PD’s framing of “future” adds particular complexity to this work . Participatory design research related to identity and marginalization has thus far been primarily concerned with understanding the challenges facing participants , as well as better understanding the place of identity within the research itself . For example , in research with autistic children , PD scholars have argued that it’s necessary to center the experiences of the children in the PD process [ 23 , 56 ] . Further , due to the tightly coupled nature of researcher and participant , identity related to gender and disability “shape relationships between researchers and marginalized children” [ 15 ] . Prior research using PD methods has also sought to understand how design workshops can be utilized for understanding LGBTQ people’s technological needs [ 24 , 30 , 35 , 50 ] . Some of this research used future workshops to think about pressing challenges in unique ways , empowering LGBTQ people to design from their own experiences [ 30 , 35 ] . Lastly , recent PD research with African Americans utilized design workshops to provide platforms and legitimization for their concerns [ 37 , 38 ] . Scholars have noted , however , that the “blue sky thinking” and fantastical elements of PD workshops were at times misaligned with the pragmatism of understanding and attempting to solve for the challenges faced by marginalized people [ 37 ] . The complex history and framing of the future as the center of future workshops is of particular importance for this paper . The future workshop , and its formulation through fantasy , is essential to the foundational center of PD . Hailing from European activist circles in the 1960s , Robert Jungk originally devised the method to “help people to develop creative ideas and projects for a better society” [ 41 ] . Finn Kensing [ 43 ] notes in his article that introduced the method to the world of design as a possible tool for visioning in systems development : “The objective of a Future Workshop is to make it possible for resource - weak groups to participate in the political process , to work out suggestions for their ideas of future developments , and to encourage t hem to constructive thinking” ( p . 292 ) . Further work by Kensing and Madsen [ 44 ] noted that the fantasy phase of workshop “allows participants the freedom to imagine ‘what if’ the workplace could be different” ( p . 157 ) . In its earliest formulation is that future workshops were intended to balance the pragmatics of real - world solutions with tools ( i . e . , the fantasy phase of the workshop ) to think otherwise , particularly within the context of workplace democracy and the role of the worker in determining technological futures in the workplace . Despite the practicality of this approach , many now conflate design workshops associated with PD with the “blue sky thinking” and the design - without - resource - constraint philosophy associated with design thinking and other overly corporate design initiatives [ 18 , 37 , 47 ] . This is unfortunate given the origin of future workshops in civic activism , yet we believe this reflects broader shifts in ICT design away from the workplace and into everyday life . Following Bødker and Kyng’s [ 13 ] call to work towards bigger issues with participatory d esign , we believe it’s possible to “rescue” and “remediate” the future of future workshops from the corporate offices of Silicon Valley . 3 METHODS To address our research questions , we devised a study relying on data collection methods from PD , with a broader study infrastructure driven by a community - based participatory research ( CBPR ) approach . We see PD as a natural partner to CBPR , more prevalent in fields such as public health , which seeks to incorporate community members as co - researchers and co - developers of projects to reflect the lived realities of research populations [ 57 ] . Based on prior ethnographic research with LGBTQ people in the region [ 32 ] , the first author drew on existing connections and community LGBTQ Futures and Participatory Design 525 : 7 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . interest in the topic to form a research team with two community members who served as Co - PIs on the project and who were essential to every element of the study ( the third and fifth authors ) . At the time of data collection , the community Co - PIs were both members of the primary organizations serving the LGBTQ community in the study region . The team collectively devised the research questions and study methods to reflect both academic inquiry and the data needs of community organizations . All data collection tools were workshopped with community members from the study region to ensure their representativeness , and initial results were workshopped with key interlocutors from the study region prior to publication . Our data collection methods included a pre - survey , a participatory design workshop in the style of a future workshop , and post - workshop interviews with select participants . Pre - surveys were deployed to all workshop participants 72 hours before their workshop began and gathered data about demographics , social technology use , and perceived support of LGBTQ community in their region . Interviews were conducted with select workshop participants upon completion of each workshop . The interviews sought to expand on participants’ responses about c ommunity support and geography from the pre - survey , to gather feedback about the workshops , and to better understand how and why participants use social technology . Interviews were conducted by one or two research team members in a place of the participant ’s choosing and were recorded and transcribed . In total we conducted six workshops with 37 participants and nine follow - up interviews . 3 . 1 Future workshops The design of the future workshops we conducted was adapted from descriptions in foundational PD literature on the method [ 43 , 44 , 49 ] . 1 According to Muller [ 49 ] , future workshops consist of three phases , each of which has a different purpose : Phase 1 , critiquing the present ; Phase 2 , envisioning the future ; and Phase 3 , implementing or moving from the present to the future . In going through each of these phases , researchers “involve participants in new perspectives on their work , and help to develop new concepts and new initiatives” ( p . 1067 ) . Further , as Kensing and Madsen [ 44 ] describe , future workshops are “a technique meant to shed light on a common problematic si tuation , to generate visions about the future , and to discuss how these visions can be realized” ( p . 156 ) . Our version of the future workshop was developed iteratively and incorporated feedback from LGBTQ community members in the study region . This included testing the workshop throughout its development and conducting a pilot workshop with a group of community stakeholders who were familiar with the research . While traditional PD often utilized participants themselves as active co - researchers to develop and revise research parameters throughout the design process , this phase of the LGBTQ Futures Project was primarily a process of design inquiry rather than working towards the design of a particular artifact to be used in the community at the end of the workshops . This meant that rather than participants themselves acting as co - researchers , we relied heavily on the experiences of the research team embedded in the community and the smaller group of community stakeholders who helped advise on the pilot workshop . This approach is common in CBPR . Our workshops were structured in two halves corresponding with the three phases of future workshops . In the first half of the workshop , participants were given the opportunity to collectively understand how identity is shaped through media and the role of rural geography in access to 1 While creating the workshops , we did not have access to any examples of other researchers ' source material , so we largely deduced what we could from the foundational texts cited here and workshopped the protocols as we progressed with other design researchers and community members . In future work we intend to make our materials open source and available to the public . 525 : 8 Jean Hardy et al . PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . identity information . We used activities such as cognitive mapping and group discussion to understand what participants’ LGBTQ - focused communities looked like and where they existed . We also used the first half of the workshop to elicit actionable problems that participants wanted to change about their LGBTQ community . In the second half of the workshops , participants worked in small groups of two to three people to brainstorm and create low - fidelity mock - ups of future technologies that sought to address at least one of the community issues that arose in the first half . Groups were given access to material such as Legos , paper , markers , and Play - Doh to build their mock - ups . Each group presented their mock - up at the end of the workshop and answered a series of questions about the purpose , inspiration , audience , and design features of their ideas . Two members of the research team were present at all workshops , one acting as workshop facilitator and one as observer . Workshops were audio recorded and transcribed verbatim . An observation protocol was developed by the research team and used by the observer in each workshop to take in - depth notes , documenting group dynamics and interactions as well as conversations and asides that might not be captured by the audio recordings . Photos were taken throughout the workshops , including of each of the mock - ups . Workshop participants were given writing material at the beginning of the workshop and encouraged to use it throughout . All writing materials were collected and photographed for ease of analysis . 3 . 2 Fieldsite & participants The research was conducted in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan ( the UP ) , a rural region of Michigan which contains one - third of the landmass of the state but only 3 % of its population . The region’s economy and history revolved primarily around logging and mining until the second half of the 20 th century . Most of the larger towns in the region were originally established as shipping ports for resource extraction but are now home to regional universities and hospitals . The first author began conducting ethnographic fieldwork in the UP in 2015 . The third and fifth authors are higher - education professionals who have lived in the region at length . We held six workshops in three communities , though participants attended from throughout the region . See Table 1 for a description of the workshops . In identifying our approach to questions of rurality , identity , and the importance of social technologies , we leveraged prior research and experiences of the co - researchers to identify knowledge gaps in the target population [ 32 , 33 ] . We found that there was a large generational and educational disconnect between the information sources , technology use , and identity construction of LGBTQ community members . This was also a concern brought forward by the community Co - PIs , who thought that existing tension between an “on - campus , ” primarily student population , and an “off - campus , ” primarily non - student population , might negatively impact the workshops . Due to both the perceived difference in information practices among our target population , and the concerns of community Co - PIs , we made the decision to hold separate workshops with student and non - student populations . Participants were recruited utilizing regional Facebook groups for LGBTQ people , through university and community organizations’ list servs , and through the personal networks of the research team . Our participants were a near - even mix of students ( n = 20 ) and non - students ( n = 17 ) . By students , we mean people who attend the local universities in the two college towns where we held some workshops . These participants were primarily recruited from LGBTQ student organizations . Some of the students were from the study region , but the majority were from outside the study region and had moved there to attend college . LGBTQ Futures and Participatory Design 525 : 9 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . Table 1 . Workshop locations and details Location Location description Workshop # Date Number and type of participants Marquette A college town of ~ 20 , 000 people . The largest city in the UP 1 March 25 , 2018 8 student participants 2 March 25 , 2018 4 student participants 6 August 25 , 2018 4 non - student participants Houghton A college town of ~ 8 , 000 people 3 May 10 , 2018 8 student participants 4 May 24 , 2018 11 non - student participants Escanaba An industrial town of ~ 12 , 000 people 5 July 17 , 2018 2 non - student participants By non - students , we mean people who live and work in the region but were not college students at the time of data collection . These people often grew up in the region , and many held jobs at the local universities . In keeping student and non - student populations separate , we were also able to better understand the impact that attending the local college had on access to information and resources ( see Section 4 . 3 for the most prominent evidence of this ) . We had diverse ages , ranging from 18 to 66 . With respect to racial identity , 33 participants identified as white , two identified as black , two identified as Asian or Pacific Islander , two identified as mixed race , and one identified as Latino . While racial diversity was low , it reflects the high proportion of white people regionally . Due to the target population , identities related to gender and sexuality were very diverse . 3 . 3 Analysis Analysis for the workshops began immediately following the workshops when a member of the research team would write an in - depth reflective memo [ 21 ] recounting the workshop and its outcomes . Those memos were shared at a debriefing meeting following each workshop where feedback and additional reflections were provided by other team members . Using qualitative coding software , three members of the research team conducted first cycle open coding [ 53 ] to identify quotes from the transcripts that represented emergent themes . These themes were utilized to develop a codebook that was then used for a second cycle of focused coding in which two members of the research team went line by line through transcripts . At different points during our analysis , academic members of the research team held check - in meetings with the community - based co - researchers , whose feedback was essential for guiding the analysis and the resulting findings . While coding transcripts , we also constructed data maps in order to display and link visual data together , including the handwritten notes taken by workshop participants and the photos taken of the low - fidelity mock - ups / prototypes created during the workshops . These data maps were a novel analytical tool which we developed in order to link image - based data ( e . g . photos of cognitive maps and future technology mock - ups ) with relevant participants and workshop sessions and the corresponding transcript data . 2 We coded the visual data in the maps using the existing codebook , treating the visual material as a contextual data source that provided nuance and supplemented 2 The data maps that we created for our analysis were inspired by Adele Clark’s situational maps [ 17 ] , yet we found limitations in Clarke’s maps given their focus on concepts , themes , an d actors , rather than on more minute research data points . Because of this , we developed our own approach that we describe here . 525 : 10 Jean Hardy et al . PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . what was said by workshop participants . The visual mapping of data allowed us to more easily identify workshop - specific themes as well as themes which were relevant to participants more broadly . Once all the transcripts and data maps were coded , we created an analysis table in order to organize salient aspects of the mock - ups developed by participants , including the problems each mock - up was attempting to solve , the participants’ proposed design solutions , and our analysis of how those solutions were specific to rural LGBTQ people and communities . We used the table to identify commonalities across the mockups and to identify key findings in accordance with our research questions . 3 . 4 Author contribution & disclosure The first author , who has researched rural LGBTQ communities extensively since 2014 , was the PI on the project and was involved in research design , data collection , analysis , and writing . The second author , who has a background as a User Experience ( UX ) professional and takes a feminist perspective on computing and technology , contributed to data cleaning , analysis , and writing . The third author , a higher - education professional and rural LGBTQ community organizer , contributed to research design , data collection , and preliminary analysis . The fourth author , a Masters student research assistant on the project and currently a UX professional , contributed to data cleaning and analysis . The fifth author , a higher - education professional and rural LGBTQ activist , contributed to research design and data collection . The majority of the team identify as being part of the LGBTQ community . The first , third , and fifth authors have lived extensively in the study region and are committed to improving LGBTQ lives in rural regions through research and activism . 4 FINDINGS In what follows , we explore themes related to finding others , visibility , safety , and information seeking . Across these themes , we draw directly from the experiences of our participants within complex perspectives of geography and community that are central to rural LGBTQ life . We recognize that we took a deficit - based approach to our resear ch from the perspective of “problems” and “solutions” rather than “assets , ” and in doing so framing these experiences of rurality partially in a negative light [ 36 ] . We use this framing due to our commitment to future workshops and its problem - solving intent . 4 . 1 Making meaningful connections with others A primary goal of many mock - ups created by participants was to envision an easier way to find other LGBTQ people in their area . Rural areas in the U . S . are typified by large swaths of land with proportionally low population density . Finding other LGBTQ people , for friendship or for romantic reasons , is therefore much harder for those who live in rural areas . As one participant noted , “when [ LGBTQ people ] live up here , they may not realize there are other people like them that actually live up here too . ” 3 Notab le in many participants’ designs is an explicit focus on finding others for purposes of friendship , a goal which multiple participants noted is not typically supported by the existing apps they use , such as Tinder and Grindr . Few technological solutions currently exist which help LGBTQ people in rural areas find others like them . Multiple participants mentioned dating - focused apps like Tinder as imperfect solutions : 3 Some participant quotes are edited for clarity . LGBTQ Futures and Participatory Design 525 : 11 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . imperfect in part because they were designed with a primarily heterosexual audience in mind . Multiple solutions proposed by participants imagined technologies specific to LGBTQ audiences . One solution , named They Baby by its creators , was an app based on Tinder but with non - binary and gender non - conforming individuals in mind as its primary audience . The creators noted that other LGBTQ people were already hard to find in the area , and non - binary people , as a subset , were much more difficult to find . The app would then serve the purpose of helping non - binary people find one another in a way that is near impossible given current technologies . Other solutions focused on map - based interfaces as a means of finding others nearby . A design called Gay Maps used a mix of a map - based interface , profiles for users , and filtering options to allow LGBTQ users to more easily find others like them nearby . A participant introduced the app , “the purpose of it is to be able to reach out and find people who you either identify with or may have shared experiences with … like meeting other bisexual people , or meeting ot her gay people , or other nonbinary people , or gender fluid people , or other trans people . ” The focus , as with They Baby , was to help people find others who are relatable not only because they identify broadly as LGBTQ , but because they share very specific identities and experiences which fall under the LGBTQ umbrella . People wanted to connect with others in a real and personal way as a means of forming deeper connections and friendships . These types of connections , often shared by our participants as being explicitly non - sexual in nature , were perceived as not supported by the dating - focused apps ( most notably Tinder and Grindr ) which multiple participants mentioned attempting to use for this purpose . Multiple solutions in workshops , in fact , focused either partly or entirely on helping users find and develop meaningful friendships . Friendr , a gaydar - style app which allowed users to use different types of devices to be able to locate other LGBTQ people nearby , was focused on fostering connections between others based on similar identities and interests . 4 Its creators recognized how difficult it was to find friends on existing services , like Grindr , as many of the users on these services at the time were explicitly focused on making romantic and / or sex - based connections . Other mock - ups like They Baby and Gay Maps which included elements based on dating service apps also specifically included features for finding and developing friendships . Another proposed solution , a matching survey , operated very similarly to a traditional dating service in that it would request information from users about their interests and social habits with the intent of matching them with another person with similar preferences . This solution also included a physical location – a queer café – for users to meet at which focused on providing a safe place to meet . One creator noted in their description of the café , “All gay spaces seem to be gay bars or clubs , so this allows people to meet friends in a non - sexualized area . ” A number of parti cipants across multiple workshops , and particularly younger participants , expressed a desire for meeting opportunities and spaces which were not sexualized , in part as a means of being more inclusive for LGBTQ people who are not looking for or interested in sexual relationships , such as those who identify on the asexual spectrum . Many of these mock - ups focused on creating friendship possibilities focused on connecting people based on similar interests , not just similar identities . The Rainbow Identity app allowed users to input their personal interests as part of their profile and to filter the profiles of other users based on common interest . As an example , one of the creators explained , “if you are interested in going to a rock concert , and you really want to find friends to go to a rock concert with , you can do that . ” The creators identified this as a gap in the existing technology : “There’s not really anything dedicated specifically in terms of queer centric that is hey , we’re interested in the same thing . ” 4 Multiple ideas from the workshops were creative plays on “gaydar , ” a portmanteau of the words “gay” and “radar , ” which is used to refer to the ability to identify if someone else is gay without explicit disclosure . 525 : 12 Jean Hardy et al . PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . Fig . 1 . The Rainbow Identity app allows users to find others based on common interests A key focus of many of these solutions was to provide a means for people not only to make connections with others , but to use technology to facilitate connections which could then be made in person . Multiple participants expressed a marked preference for forming connections and meeting with others in person . As one participant put it , “social media is great , don ' t get me wrong … but I ' m one to actually want to sit down and interact face to face with somebody that I ' m trying to bring into my community . … Texting is good , but I value being in person more . ” This is perhaps why apps like Tinder , Grindr , and apps with map - based interfaces were often cited as inspiration for participants’ designs : because they focused on helping users find others based on physical proximity rather than on creating a purely online community . 4 . 2 Walking the line between visibility and safety Participants wanted to connect with others like them in person but were also deeply concerned about staying safe in the process . Rural areas in the U . S . are socially conservative relative to urban LGBTQ Futures and Participatory Design 525 : 13 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . areas , which sometimes manifests in discrimination and violence against LGBTQ people . As a result , many LGBTQ people in these areas are careful about how they present themselves in public spaces . Likewise , some participants thought local businesses and organizations who showed outward support of LGBTQ people might result in a loss of business . Many solutions proposed by participants therefore focused on making both LGBTQ people and supportive businesses and organizations more visible to people within the LGBTQ community while also allowing them to hide in plain sight amongst the general public . 4 . 2 . 1 Safety & discretion for users Multiple mock - ups responded to this need for discretion using the idea of gaydar : that is , they combined an exclusively LGBTQ user base with proximity - based technology which allows users to “see” other users of the technology who are near by . This took many forms : Rainbow Glass were augmented reality ( AR ) glasses which highlighted other LGBTQ people visible to the wearer . Friendr also allowed users to physically see other LGBTQ people via an AR display built into glasses , as well as through other means , like notifications sent to smartwatches or to headphones . The Rainbow Identity app provided app - based notifications when another registered user was nearby . Another design , a gaydar bracelet , was a discrete wearable which vibrated on the user ’s wrist when another LGBTQ person was nearby . All of these solutions would have been less practical in urban areas due to the relative density of LGBTQ people : a user in a rural area may get a few notifications a week , whereas someone in a densely populated city would be getting constant notifications . In rural spaces , even if users chose not to act on the notifications they receive , participants noted that the notifications would at least serve to remind them they are not alone . Fig . 2 . The gaydar bracelet notifies users of nearby others by vibrating . Many designs also incorporated features with the aim of protecting the safety of users both on the platform and in the real world . In most cases , the technology was designed to be discrete : users of the gaydar bracelet , for example , could choose to show a rainbow flag or similar on their bracelet’s display , or could leave it looking like a normal , nondescript bracelet . Both the creators of Rainbow Glass and the creators of the gaydar bracelet also recognized that users may not want to be visible 525 : 14 Jean Hardy et al . PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . to others on the service at all times . With Rainbow Glass , users were given the option to opt - in to the locational gaydar service , rather than it being turned on by default . Users of the gaydar bracelet could turn the visibility of their own location to others on and off at will . This ability for discretion has multiple uses , as the creators describe : “say you’re a person who is not out , but you’re interested in seeing who else might be open and using this app in your community . So , you turn on this tracker , but you can turn off your own ping . So , for example , if somebody was walking around you , they won’t get a ping from you , but you might get one from them . ” This option of being a user of the system while remaining invisible within it does open up possibilities for abuse , which the creators of this design did not address . However , many participants were cognizant of how such LGBTQ - focused technologies could be abused by others . Multiple designs were pitched with an exclusive audience in mind so that users of the service could be assured that both the platform itself and the people they meet through it were safe and accepting of LGBTQ people . For some mock - ups , this involved instituting a process to check that users of the app were either part of the LGBTQ community or were allies . The creators of the Rainbow Identity app introduced this as “some sort of vetting process in order to be able to use it . . . that way everybody feels safe on there . ” Gaypedia , a wiki designed specifically for LGBTQ people with the aim of fostering community in an area , also included a process for vetting users for allyship , who would then be sent a “gay rocket ship logo” sticker as a displayable symbol of safety : “When you see ou r symbol that person is safe . They have been properly vetted and can be trusted when you need a friend . ” Part of Gaypedia’s pitch was as a platform where people new to the LGBTQ community could learn and grow in a safe space and to provide more experienced members with the option of mentoring less experienced members . It was therefore doubly important to its creators to make sure that safety and acceptance was signaled to Gaypedia’s users in a visible and tangible way . Fig . 3 . The creators of Gaypedia designed a logo using Lego which incorporated LGBTQ pride flag designs to be distributed as a sticker to vetted users as a means of signaling safety . 4 . 2 . 2 Finding and creating LGBTQ - friendly spaces The visibility of safe spaces for LGBTQ people in the area was also a recurring issue . For example , some participants in the workshops felt that supportive businesses in their rural region were less LGBTQ Futures and Participatory Design 525 : 15 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . likely to engage in visible supportive behavior , like putting a rainbow sticker in their shop window , as it might negatively impact their business in more conservative areas . As a result , they said , it can be difficult for LGBTQ people in rural areas to know if business owners are allies . Multiple prototypes addressed this by providing directories of LGBTQ - owned or LGBTQ - friendly businesses and organizations in the region . AskQ , a chatbot program , maintained a listing of LGBTQ - friendly spaces which users could view on a map - based interface . Because LGBTQ - friendliness was conveyed through an app interface accessible only by LGBTQ people , businesses therefore could remain discrete in their support . Lavender Pages Mobile was a prototype which also connected LGBTQ people with LGBTQ - friendly businesses and resources . Businesses could ask to have themselves listed , and users could make notes and create Yelp - style reviews about businesses in the listing . One creator noted that this virtual listing of businesses “would also give the option for the business that if they’re in an area where they don’t feel comfortable slapping a rain bow on their window as a way to say hey , I’m okay with [ LGBTQ ] clients . ” Another set of design ideas noted the lack of visible LGBTQ - friendly spaces in the region and sought to fill that gap by creating businesses which had permanent physical locations . One such prototype proposed a business called “Inclusive Bike Rides” which specifically catered to LGBTQ and LGBTQ - friendly patrons who wanted to connect with others in the community over the enjoyment of exercise and of experiencing the beauty of the region . Its primary purpose as a space , according to its creators , was to “enable LGBTQ people to find each other more easily , ” but with the added draw of attracting tourists and other people in the area who view the region as a destination . Participants , though they wanted to have spaces specifically for them , recognized the economic constraints involved in maintaining such spaces . Another design idea , the customizable VR room from the paper introduction , utilized VR technology to make a single storefront into a viable business which would serve multiple community wants and needs . This flexibility would create staying power , as one of the prototype’s creators explained : Fig . 4 . The VR storefront gives local LGBTQ people a flexible , sustainable , and openly supportive hangout location . 525 : 16 Jean Hardy et al . PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . “I think if there was like an LGBT bookstore that opened that it would be really popular at first , but I don’t know if in this area it would stay around long enough for them to actually make money and make a profit . So , having it be anything you want it to be , I think creates a staying power where it wouldn’t go away , and it would be like a constant place for the community . ” As with the inclusive bike shop , the customizable VR room would also be open to anyone in the area to utilize , not only members of the LGBTQ community , thereby expanding its patronage and making it more economically viable for a rural area . However , the prototypes which proposed physical locations in which to foster LGBTQ community generally did not address the safety issues which come with visibility . Nor do they address the issue of distance : a physical space in one town may be a drive of multiple hours from the next major town , and access would therefore be largely restricted to those who had the means to travel such distances . Two prototypes addressed this by utilizing VR technology and holograms to bridge the distance gap between people while also maintaining a safe space . The creators of Yoop Place proposed a hologram system which would allow users to project themselves into another location while simultaneously being able to view the holograms of distant others . One creator described a scenario in which small groups of LGBTQ people in different towns could meet as one big group using the technology . He e laborates , “We’re a very large geographic area . This would allow different communities to really get together more often , maybe feel a little more intimate in that way . ” Similarly , G - Span used VR technology to allow participants to attend educational discussion groups and events from remote areas , bypassing the need to travel . Fig . 5 . Yoop Place uses hologram technology so users can more readily bridge distance and keep themselves safe . The participants who created Yoop Place and G - Span also viewed their technological solutions as being a means of creating a safe space for LGBTQ people to have discussions about identity - based LGBTQ Futures and Participatory Design 525 : 17 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . topics while also allowing non - LGBTQ people access to the discussions . Many participants felt that the straight people in their areas needed more education about LGBTQ issues , with the hope that doing so would lead to fewer experiences of violence and discrimination . But attempting to educate others often puts LGBTQ people in a place of vulnerability . The creators of Yoop Place proposed that virtual solutions for having educational discussions “would give the opportunity to have that discussion back and forth , and the straight people could ask questions in a safe way as well . … [ I ] n case somebody gets upset , you know , you can just end the session , and that’s it , versus a lot of times I feel like things can get confrontational if it’s in person . ” The physical distance imposed by using VR solutions to meet and talk would in turn make it easier for LGBTQ people to remain physically safe while having potentially uncomfortable conversations with others . Notably , there was a generational difference between the participants who proposed prototypes involving physical locations and those who proposed virtual solutions to the problems of meeting with others in person in rural areas . The participants whose designs involved physical locations were all college students , a few of whom had not grown up in rural areas . The participants behind the prototypes G - Span and Yoop Place , however , were community members who had lived and worked in the region for years , and perhaps better understood the realities of rural life and were more cognizant of issues of safety than the student participants . 4 . 3 Local resources & information Many participants mentioned problems with finding local LGBTQ - focused resources and information in their region . The lack of LGBTQ - specific spaces often found in urban areas , such as an LGBTQ community center , meant there was no one - stop - shop for local LGBTQ - focused resources . The college student participants generally noted that there were university offices which had campus - based resources for LGBTQ students , but these centers were limited in their services and knowledge . Non - student participants relied much more on personal connections made in the community as a means of sharing information and resources . Younger participants frequently turned to the internet for LGBTQ - focused information , particularly if they were in the process of exploring their own identities or learning about LGBTQ issues . However , the information they got from internet - based resources and communities was not locally focused , nor did it provide them with good options for mentorship from more experienced members of the LGBTQ community . The Gaypedia mock - up primarily functioned as a locally focused wiki in which new community members could learn about being LGBTQ and connect with more experienced members in a mentorship capacity . The wiki was focused on a particular college town in the region and included a crowdsourced listing of local resources which were useful for LGBTQ students and community members . Lavender Pages Mobile , AskQ , Gay Maps , and another prototype called Super Queer went a step further and focused in part on collecting and showing users resources throughout the region which were verified as being LGBTQ - friendly . Services such as counseling , legal services , and healthcare providers were provided as examples of the kinds of resources which LGBTQ people needed but often had trouble finding locally . Gay Maps incorporated Yelp - like reviews for services so that users could give feedback as to whether a particular service was friendly to LGBTQ people or not . The creators of Lavender Pages Mobile proposed creating a curated list of local resources that community members and visitors to the region could reference when they needed a particular resource . AskQ and Super Queer incorporated numerous filter options so that users could find resources more easily based on their immediate needs . All four of these prototypes incorporated a 525 : 18 Jean Hardy et al . PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . map - based interface so that users could find resources close to them and gauge how far they would have to travel for a particular resource . Fig . 6 . The app Super Queer includes a map and filter options that allow users to find resources , meetups , and more . In many cases , the app - and web - based solutions that participants proposed incorporated a large number of features and services . The creators of Super Queer , as an example , called their prototype a “super app” in that it served many purposes which they felt were needed by the local LGBTQ community . Super Queer not only highlighted local resources for users , but also local businesses and LGBTQ - friendly spaces , events and meetup groups . Users could also view a directory of other users who had opted into the service and could form personal connections with local community members through the app . Most mock - ups developed as part of these workshops attempted to tackle a variety of issues all at once , which is expected given the scope and variety of issues that rural LGBTQ people face . 4 . 4 Summary Our goals for this project were to use future workshops to understand the problems faced by rural LGBTQ people and to understand how they currently created and supported their communities using both local resources and social technologies . By framing the workshops in terms of design and technology , we came to understand how current technologies did not and could not support the needs of LGBTQ people in sparsely populated , resource - poor rural areas . The findings here show major gaps in rural LGBTQ people’s abilities to find others like them in their region , to find safe spaces in which to meet , and to find local resources to support their needs . The mock - ups created by participants in these workshops showed glimpses into an alternate present in which existing technologies could be used to fill those gaps . That these technologies don’t currently exist LGBTQ Futures and Participatory Design 525 : 19 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . speaks to fact that both LGBTQ people and people who live in rural areas are largely not valued audiences in the design of social technologies . 5 DISCUSSION While we began our series of workshops expecting hyper - fantastical visions of high - tech queer futures , the proposed solutions were largely pragmatic in nature . In other words , the vast majority were immediate solutions to the contemporary problems participants faced , and most were technologically feasible at the time of the workshop . Here we briefly turn our discussion to implications for Queer HCI research more broadly , especially as it pertains to issues of safety and visibility , which we follow with implications for the future and politics of participatory design . 5 . 1 Designing for tension : visibility and safety in rural LGBTQ communities While our participants provided us with a rich and deeply nuanced dataset to better understand the community and technological needs of rural LGBTQ people , we focus here on the tension that is ever - present for LGBTQ people : that of balancing the need for safety with the need for visibility . As is evident above , many of the technologies proposed in our workshops had to navigate issues of access . For example , a handful of the technologies required some kind of “vetting” process that would maintain the LGBTQ - only sanctity of the new platforms . This is necessary because of the long history of homophobia and transphobia that permeates LGBTQ experience . As Pinter et al . remind us [ 51 ] , visibility is complicated for queer and trans people because the act of being visible in public can also result in violent consequences due to the intense discrimination prevalent in many areas of society . This tension , between the benefits of being visible as a member of the LGBTQ community member and the potential negative impacts of that visibility is the tension that we center here . Returning to the work of Carrasco and Kerne as well as Dym and colleagues , selective visibility not only allows LGBTQ people to be out on their own terms [ 16 ] , but helps us understand how LGBTQ communities navigate visibility and safety more broadly [ 20 ] . While prior research in this space has focused on obscuring disclosures and trace data in designing for the privacy concerns of LGBTQ people , much of what we present here instead focuses on new ways to make visible rather than to hide . There is always a tension between being visible as a queer person and being safe as a queer person , and many of our participants thought constructively about being visible in different ways that reflected their geography . From new businesses that use AR / VR technology to create malleable and multipurpose spaces to a multitude of wearables that enabled discrete ( or not ) connections with LGBTQ others , our research participants found inspiration and necessity in conflicting and multi - faceted visibilities . These are especially important things to think about when we remember that much of a person’s sociotechnical experiences are deeply embedded in their local community . As we highlighted earlier in our literature review with Haimson et al . ’s work with designing trans technology [ 30 ] and Hardy’s work on queer information literacies [ 32 ] , adding a geographic layer to information seeking , community building , visibility , and the nexus of the three introduce increasing complexity . Rather than thinking about who can see what kinds of information that might pop up in their social media feeds , the focus in ou r participatory design workshops was on “How do I make myself visible to other LGBTQ people around me using technology ? ” This is particularly salient for rural LGBTQ people given not only the complexities of visibility , but the unique landscape in which they have to 525 : 20 Jean Hardy et al . PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . navigate resource access and community , one which is often taken for granted in large metropolitan areas . Looking to the experiences of rural LGBTQ people , we can understand how designing for selective visibility looks differently when we think about embodied , hybrid physical - digital spaces . So much of what came out of the future workshops was oriented towards digital connections mediating in - person , face - to - face connections . Like the Gaydar bracelet that notified the wearer of other users nearby , we may take inspiration from concepts like boundary publics [ 25 ] to think differently about what planes of visibility LGBTQ people exist in . Instead of designing for a visibility that is concerned with obscuring , what does it look like to design for an LGBTQ presence that is hyper - visible , but only to those in the know ? Future work can explore embracing , rather than ameliorating , the tension between visibility and safety for LGBTQ people . 5 . 2 The future of future workshops for marginalized communities In recent work with low - income , African American older adults on their health concerns , Harrington et al . [ 37 ] critiqued the blue sky thinking of design workshops and design thinking as not being pragmatic enough to reflect the needs of marginalized communities . Both Harrington et al . [ 37 ] and Haimson et al . [ 30 ] advocate for a return to pragmatism and maintaining a community - embedded approach to PD . Yet the foundations of future workshops were both deeply pragmatic and embedded in low - income communities [ 41 ] , and meant to enhance democracy among workers once the method made it to PD [ 14 ] . So what has happened to the image of design workshops recently and how do we reimagine a future that is pragmatic , creative , and socially just ? We speculate that much of the change in the perception of design workshops from a method for empowerment and pragmatism to one of unrealistic , shiny object chasing is found in the appropriation and corporatization of participatory design methods that have come to be rematerialized as design thinking and human - centered design . As others before us have argued [ 3 , 40 , 58 ] , the materialization of design thinking around institutions and organizations such as the Stanford d . School , IDEO , and other design consulting firms resulted in a valorization of particular kinds of privilege and dominant standpoints . As Avle et al . [ 3 ] argue , this becomes “understood across different interests , cultural norms and regions as representative of ‘the right way’ to do cutting - edge design and contemporary technology innovation” perpetuated through a standardized set of material that “shape the design process” ( p . 472 ) . Future workshops are in fact perfectly positioned , we would argue , at the intersection of design and community - based methods , if done appropriately . In our case , the workshops we ran were not about technosolutionism or solving well - defined design problems . Rather , our aim was to understand community - based problems from community perspectives , and in the process to give people space to creatively envision solutions through a lens of technology and design . Centering problems and solutions through this lens gave both researchers and participants a hopeful way to look at the problems faced by rural LGBTQ people . Building off of Harrington et al . [ 37 ] and Haimson et al . [ 30 ] , we would argue that design workshops have never left their pragmatic and community - based foundations . Rather , we need to continually remind ourselves of the appropriation of participatory design methods for corporate interests and embrace the roots of future workshops , not only in pragmatism , but in the exploration of the near future for understanding and supporting marginalized communities . LGBTQ Futures and Participatory Design 525 : 21 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . 5 . 3 Emergent anti - capitalist critique & the politics of PD In fact , many of the problems facing the people and communities represented in our workshops are largely problems that could be solved in the immediate present . Many of the technologies designed by participants in our workshops could technically be available on smart phones right now . But why aren ' t they ? Beyond societal issues such as transphobia , homophobia , white supremacy , and ageism , there are additional economic concerns at play here . Hardy [ 31 ] argues that issues of scale and profitability inherent to capitalism are central to understanding why specifically rural issues are not designed for in the world of social technology . Technologies like the Super Queer prototype and other mock - ups from our workshops were designed to explicitly to serve rural LGBTQ people and do not exist already because rural queer communities are not profitable . Multiple PD scholars have already articulated [ 6 – 8 ] that the disengagement of PD researchers from the explicitly political is problematic and symbolizes a loss of liberatory opportunity for PD . We think that the time is ripe for PD to encourage even more investigation into questions of economy and labor once again , especially in our pragmatic and near - future work with marginalized communities as noted in the previous section . As Robert Jungk and Norbert Müllert [ 41 ] once wrote : “The future belongs to everybody . But where are the opportunities for those wishing to articulate their feelings and aspirations , to express them so loudly and clearly that , although they started out feeling alienated and off guard , they come to see themselves as effective fellow - architects of a world in which they and their children wish to live ? ” ( p . 9 ) 6 CONCLUSION This paper presents the findings from a series of participatory design workshops with LGBTQ people living in the rural Midwestern United States . Using future workshops as a method , we sought to understand the contemporary problems facing rural LGBTQ people and leveraged design exercises and create space so community members could come together to come up with creative solutions . What we found were people grappling with the complexities of visibility , safety , and resource access in their rural communities ; people who wanted to be able to use and create sociotechnical solutions that could help them navigate these complexities . Drawing on these findings , we suggest different ways to think about designing for the tension between visibility and safety for LGBTQ people . We argue that future workshops and participatory design are well - positioned for continued work with marginalized communities , but that we need to further embrace their origin in pragmatism , liberation , and justice . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We would like to thank Kedzie Stark and Betsy Lehman for their assistance during data collection , the Queer STS Reading Group at University of Michigan for assisting in testing the workshop protocols , as well as Silvia Lindtner , Tawanna Dillahunt , and Tiffany Veinot for their feedback at various points in data collection . This research was funded by the Gadawski - Callam Project Grant from the University of Michigan Spectrum Center and the University of Michigan School of Information’s Initiative for Information Impact . 525 : 22 Jean Hardy et al . PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Joel R . Anderson , Elise Holland , Yasin Koc , and Nick Haslam . 2018 . iObjectify : Self - and other - objectification on Grindr , a geosocial networking application designed for men who have sex with men . Eur . J . Soc . Psychol . 48 , 5 ( 2018 ) , 600 – 613 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / ejsp . 2350 [ 2 ] Laima Augustaitis , Leland A . Merrill , Kristi E Gamarel , and Oliver L . Haimson . 2021 . Online Transgender Health Information Seeking : Facilitators , Barriers , and Future Directions . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’21 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445091 [ 3 ] Seyram Avle , Silvia Lindtner , and Kaiton Williams . 2017 . How Methods Make Designers . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 472 – 483 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025864 [ 4 ] Jeffrey Bardzell , Guo Freeman , Shaowen Bardzell , and Pei - Ying Chen . 2020 . Join . Love : A Sociotechnical Genealogy of the Legalization of Same - Sex Marriage . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’20 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376603 [ 5 ] Shaowen Bardzell . 2010 . Feminist HCI : taking stock and outlining an agenda for design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’10 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1301 – 1310 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753521 [ 6 ] Ditte Amund Basballe , Kim Halskov , and Nicolai Brodersen Hansen . 2016 . The early shaping of participatory design at PDC . In Proceedings of the 14th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Interactive Exhibitions , Workshops - Volume 2 ( PDC ’16 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 21 – 24 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2948076 . 2948078 [ 7 ] Eevi Beck . 2002 . P for Political : Participation is Not Enough . Scand . J . Inf . Syst . 14 , 1 ( 2002 ) . Retrieved from https : / / aisel . aisnet . org / sjis / vol14 / iss1 / 1 [ 8 ] Birgitta Bergvall - Kåreborn and Anna Ståhlbrost . 2008 . Participatory design : one step back or two steps forward ? In Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 ( PDC ’08 ) , Indiana University , USA , 102 – 111 . [ 9 ] Jeremy Birnholtz , Colin Fitzpatrick , Mark Handel , and Jed R . Brubaker . 2014 . Identity , identification and identifiability : the language of self - presentation on a location - based mobile dating app . In Proceedings of the 16th international conference on Human - computer interaction with mobile devices & services ( MobileHCI ’14 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 3 – 12 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2628363 . 2628406 [ 10 ] Rena Bivens and Oliver L . Haimson . 2016 . Baking Gender Into Social Media Design : How Platforms Shape Categories for Users and Advertisers . Soc . Media Soc . 2 , 4 ( November 2016 ) . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 2056305116672486 [ 11 ] Lindsay Blackwell , Jean Hardy , Tawfiq Ammari , Tiffany Veinot , Cliff Lampe , and Sarita Schoenebeck . 2016 . LGBT Parents and Social Media : Advocacy , Privacy , and Disclosure During Shifting Social Movements . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 610 – 622 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858342 [ 12 ] Susanne Bødker and Joan Greenbaum . 1992 . Design of Information Systems : Things versus People . DAIMI Rep . Ser . 21 , 387 ( March 1992 ) . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7146 / dpb . v21i387 . 6620 [ 13 ] Susanne Bødker and Morten Kyng . 2018 . Participatory Design That Matters — Facing the Big Issues . ACM Trans Comput - Hum Interact 25 , 1 ( February 2018 ) , 4 : 1 - 4 : 31 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3152421 [ 14 ] Sussane Bødker . 1996 . Creating Conditions for Participation : Conflicts and Resources in Systems Development . Human – Computer Interact . 11 , 3 ( September 1996 ) , 215 – 236 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15327051hci1103 _ 2 [ 15 ] Emeline Brulé and Katta Spiel . 2019 . Negotiating Gender and Disability Identities in Participatory Design . In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Communities & Technologies - Transforming Communities ( C & amp ; T ’19 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 218 – 227 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3328320 . 3328369 LGBTQ Futures and Participatory Design 525 : 23 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . [ 16 ] Matthew Carrasco and Andruid Kerne . 2018 . Queer Visibility : Supporting LGBT + Selective Visibility on Social Media . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173824 [ 17 ] Adele E . Clarke and Carrie Friese . 2017 . Grounded Theorizing Using Situational Analysis . In SAGE Handbook of Grounded Theory , Antony Bryant and Kathy Charmaz ( eds . ) . SAGE Publications , 363 – 397 . [ 18 ] Ashni Devan Shah , Milene Gonçalves , and Ingrid Mulder . 2020 . Design research for participatory policies : Paradoxes , Themes , Futures . In Proceedings of the 16th Participatory Design Conference 2020 - Participation ( s ) Otherwise - Volume 2 ( PDC ’20 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 82 – 86 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3384772 . 3385144 [ 19 ] Michael Ann DeVito , Ashley Marie Walker , and Jeremy Birnholt z . 2018 . “Too Gay for Facebook” : Presenting LGBTQ + Identity Throughout the Personal Social Media Ecosystem . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 2 , CSCW ( November 2018 ) , 44 : 1 - 44 : 23 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274313 [ 20 ] Brianna Dym , Jed R . Brubaker , Casey F iesler , and Bryan Semaan . 2019 . “Coming Out Okay” : Community Narratives for LGBTQ Identity Recovery Work . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 3 , CSCW ( November 2019 ) , 154 : 1 - 154 : 28 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359256 [ 21 ] R . M . Emerson , R . I . Fretz , and L . L Shaw . 2011 . Writing Ethnographic Fieldnotes . University of Chicago Press , Chicago , Illinois . [ 22 ] Colin Fitzpatrick , Jeremy Birnholtz , and Jed R . Brubaker . 2015 . Social and Personal Disclosure in a Location - Based Real Time Dating App . In Proceedings of the 2015 48th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ’15 ) , IEEE Computer Society , USA , 1983 – 1992 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / HICSS . 2015 . 237 [ 23 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Julia Makhaeva , and Katta Spiel . 2016 . Designing Smart Objects with Autistic Children : Four Design Expos & # xe8 ; s . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 130 – 139 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858050 [ 24 ] Cally Gatehouse , Matthew Wood , Jo Briggs , James Pickles , and Shaun Lawson . 2018 . Troubling Vulnerability : Designing with LGBT Young People’s Ambivalence Towards Hate Crime Reporting . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( C HI ’18 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173683 [ 25 ] Mary Gray . 2009 . Out in the Country : Youth , Media , and Queer Visibility in Rural America . NYU Press , New York . [ 26 ] Oliver Haimson . 2018 . Social Media as Social Transition Machinery . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 2 , CSCW ( November 2018 ) , 63 : 1 - 63 : 21 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274332 [ 27 ] Oliver L . Haimson , Jed R . Brubaker , Lynn Dombrowski , and Gillian R . Hayes . 2015 . Disclosure , Stress , and Support During Gender Transition on Facebook . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’15 ) , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1176 – 1190 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675152 [ 28 ] Oliver L . Haimson , Jed R . Brubaker , Lynn Dombrowski , and Gillian R . Hayes . 2016 . Digital Footprints and Changing Networks During Online Identity Transitions . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2895 – 2907 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858136 [ 29 ] Oliver L . Haimson , Justin Buss , Zu Weinger , Denny L . Starks , Dykee Gorrell , and Briar Sweetbriar Baron . 2020 . Trans Time : Safety , Privacy , and Content Warnings on a Transgender - Specific Social Media Site . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 4 , CSCW2 ( October 2020 ) , 124 : 1 - 124 : 27 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3415195 [ 30 ] Oliver L . Haimson , Dykee Gorrell , Denny L . Starks , and Zu Weinger . 2020 . Designing Trans Technology : Defining Challenges and Envisioning Community - Centered Solutions . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’20 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376669 525 : 24 Jean Hardy et al . PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . [ 31 ] Jean Hardy . 2019 . How the Design of Social Technology Fails Rural America . In Companion Publication of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2019 Companion ( DIS ’19 Companion ) , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 189 – 193 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3301019 . 3323906 [ 32 ] Jean Hardy . 2021 . Queer information literacies : social and technological circulation in the rural Midwestern United States . Inf . Commun . Soc . 24 , 1 ( January 2021 ) , 102 – 117 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1369118X . 2019 . 1635184 [ 33 ] Jean Hardy and Silvia Lindtner . 2017 . Constructing a Desiring User : Discourse , Rurality , and Design in Location - Based Social Networks . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( CSCW ’17 ) , Association for Computing Ma chinery , New York , NY , USA , 13 – 25 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998181 . 2998347 [ 34 ] Jean Hardy , Chanda Phelan , Morgan Vigil - Hayes , Norman Makoto Su , Susan Wyche , and Phoebe Sengers . 2019 . Designing from the rural . Interactions 26 , 4 ( June 2019 ) , 37 – 41 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3328487 [ 35 ] Jean Hardy and Stefani Vargas . 2019 . Participatory Design and the Future of Rural LGBTQ Communities . In Companion Publication of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2019 Companion ( DIS ’19 Companion ) , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 195 – 199 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3301019 . 3323894 [ 36 ] Jean Hardy , Susan Wyche , and Tiffany Veinot . 2019 . Rural HCI Research : Definitions , Distinctions , Methods , and Opportunities . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 3 , CSCW ( November 2019 ) , 196 : 1 - 196 : 33 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359298 [ 37 ] Christina Harrington , Sheena Erete , and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Deconstructing Community - Based Collaborative Design : Towards More Equitable Participatory Design Engagements . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 3 , CSCW ( November 2019 ) , 216 : 1 - 216 : 25 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359318 [ 38 ] Christina N . Harrington , Katya Borgos - Rodriguez , and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Engaging Low - Income African American Older Adults in Health Discussions through Community - based Design Workshops . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 15 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300823 [ 39 ] John Howard . 1999 . Men like that : A southern queer history . University of Chicago Press , Chicago . [ 40 ] Lilly Irani . 2018 . “Design Thinking” : Defending Silicon Valley at the Apex of Global Labor Hierarchies . Catal . Fem . Theory Technoscience 4 , 1 ( May 2018 ) . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 28968 / cftt . v4i1 . 243 . g322 [ 41 ] Robert Jungk and Norbert Müllert . 1987 . Future Workshops : How to Create Desirable Futures . Institute for Social Inventions , London . [ 42 ] Emily Kazyak . 2011 . Disrupting Cultural Selves : Constructing Gay and Lesbian Identities in Rural Locales . Qual . Sociol . 34 , 4 ( December 2011 ) , 561 – 581 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11133 - 011 - 9205 - 1 [ 43 ] Finn Kensing . 1987 . Generation of Visions in Systems Developpment : A supplement to the Tool Box . In Proceedings of the IFIP TC 9 / WG 9 . 1 Working Conference on System Design for Human Development and Productivity : Participation and Beyond , Berlin , GDR , 285 – 301 . Retrieved September 30 , 2021 from https : / / interlib . lib . msu . edu / remoteauth / illiad . dll ? Action = 10 & Form = 75 & Value = 1328948 [ 44 ] Finn Kensing and Kim H . Madsen . 1991 . Generating Visions : Future Workshops and Metaphorical Design . In Design at work : cooperative design of computer systems , Joan M . Greenbaum and Morten Kyng ( eds . ) . L . Erlbaum Associates , Hillsdale , N . J , 155 – 168 . [ 45 ] Os Keyes . 2018 . The Misgendering Machines : Trans / HCI Implications of Automatic Gender Recognition . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 2 , CSCW ( November 2018 ) , 88 : 1 - 88 : 22 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274357 [ 46 ] Calvin A . Liang , Katie Albertson , Florence Williams , David Inwards - Breland , Sean A . Munson , Julie A . Kientz , and Kym Ahrens . 2020 . Designing an online sex education resource for gender - diverse youth . In Proceedings of the Interaction Design and Children Conference ( IDC ’20 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 108 – 120 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3392063 . 3394404 [ 47 ] Thomas Lind , Åsa Cajander , Annika Björklund , and Bengt Sandblad . 2020 . The Use of Scenarios in a Vision Seminar Process : The Case of Students Envisioning the Future of Study - Administration . In Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Shaping Experiences , Shaping LGBTQ Futures and Participatory Design 525 : 25 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 525 , Publication date : November 2022 . Society ( NordiCHI ’20 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 8 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3419249 . 3421242 [ 48 ] Doreen Massey . 1992 . Politics and Space / Time . New Left Rev . 196 , ( 1992 ) , 65 – 84 . Retrieved October 14 , 2021 from https : / / www . proquest . com / docview / 1301903230 / citation / 539BFF60907F47FAPQ / 1 [ 49 ] Michael J . Muller . 2007 . Participatory Design : The Third Space in HCI . In The Human - Computer Interaction Handbook : Fundamentals , Evolving Technologies and Emerging Applications ( 2nd ed . ) , Andrew Sears and Julie A . Jacko ( eds . ) . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , New York and London , 1061 – 1081 . [ 50 ] Guilherme Colucci Pereira and Maria Cecilia Calani Baranauskas . 2018 . Codesigning emancipatory systems : a study on mobile applications and lesbian , gay , bisexual , and transgender ( LGBT ) issues . SBC J . Interact . Syst . 9 , 3 ( December 2018 ) , 80 – 92 . Retrieved September 29 , 2021 from https : / / www . seer . ufrgs . br / jis / article / view / 80234 [ 51 ] Anthony T . Pinter , Morgan Klaus Scheuerman , and Jed R . Brubaker . 2021 . Entering Doors , Evading Traps : Benefits and Risks of Visibility During Transgender Coming Outs . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 4 , CSCW3 ( January 2021 ) , 272 : 1 - 272 : 27 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3434181 [ 52 ] Cassidy Pyle , Lee Roosevelt , Ashley Lacombe - Duncan , and Nazanin Andalibi . 2021 . LGBTQ Persons’ Pregnancy Loss Disclosures to Known Ties on Social Media : Disclosure Decisions and Ideal Disclosure Environments . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’21 ) , Associa tion for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 17 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445331 [ 53 ] Johnny Saldaña . 2016 . The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers ( Third ed . ) . SAGE , Los Angeles . [ 54 ] Morgan Klaus Scheuerman , Aaron Jiang , Katta Spiel , and Jed R . Brubaker . 2021 . Revisiting Gendered Web Forms : An Evaluation of Gender Inputs with ( Non - ) Binary People . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’21 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 18 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445742 [ 55 ] Morgan Klaus Scheuerman , Jacob M . Paul , and Jed R . Brubaker . 2019 . How Computers See Gender : An Evaluation of Gender Classification in Commercial Facial Analysis Services . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 3 , CSCW ( November 2019 ) , 144 : 1 - 144 : 33 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359246 [ 56 ] Katta Spiel , Christopher Frauenberger , Eva Hornecker , and Geraldine Fitzpatrick . 2017 . When Empathy Is Not Enough : Assessing the Experiences of Autistic Children with Technologies . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2853 – 2864 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025785 [ 57 ] Kim M . Unertl , Chris L . Schaefbauer , Terrance R . Campbell , Charles Senteio , Katie A . Siek , Suzanne Bakken , and Tiffany C . Veinot . 2016 . Integrating community - based participatory research and informatics approaches to improve the engagement and health of underserved populations . J . Am . Med . Inform . Assoc . JAMIA 23 , 1 ( January 2016 ) , 60 – 73 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / jamia / ocv094 [ 58 ] Eitan Y . Wilf . 2018 . Creativity on Demand : The Dilemmas of Innovation in an Accelerated Age . University of Chicago Press , Chicago , Illinois . Received : January 2022 , Revised : April 2022 , Accepted : August 2022 .