Published as _ Perspective in On _ Culture : The Open Journal for the Study of Culture ( ISSN 2366 - 4142 ) T HE WISDOM OF CROWDS H UBERTUS K OHLE hubertus . kohle @ gmail . com < http : / / www . kunstgeschichte . uni - muenchen . de / personen / professoren _ innen / kohle / in - dex . html > Hubertus Kohle studied art history , Italian , and philosophy in Bonn , Florence and Paris . He wrote his dissertation on Diderot’s art theory ( 1987 ) . After journalistic work for the Italian newspaper “LaRepubblica” , he became assistant teacher in Bochum , where he wrote his habilitation on Adolph Menzel’s Frederician paintings ( 1996 ) ; afterwards he became assistant professor at the university of Cologne , and then full professor for art history at the university of Munich in 2000 ; he published on German and French 18th to 20th century painting , mainly on problems of political iconography and the social history of art and was one of the early adopters of digital methods in the field . K EYWORDS art history , digital humanities , crowdsourcing , realism P UBLICATION DATE Issue 1 , 30 May , 2016 H OW TO CITE Hubertus Kohle . “The wisdom of crowds . ” On _ Culture : The Open Journal for the Study of Culture 1 ( 2016 ) . < http : / / geb . uni - giessen . de / geb / volltexte / 2016 / 12072 / > . Permalink URL : < http : / / geb . uni - giessen . de / geb / volltexte / 2016 / 12072 / > URN : < urn : nbn : de : hebis : 26 - opus - 120728 > On _ Culture : The Open Journal for the Study of Culture Issue 1 ( 2016 ) : Emergence / Emergency www . on - culture . org http : / / geb . uni - giessen . de / geb / volltexte / 2016 / 12072 / 2 The wisdom of crowds Emergence can be defined as a network effect , and it is little wonder that the concept plays a vital role in the theory of net - based media art . 1 The aim of this essay is to show that emergence can also be observed in research processes , even when the scholarly aspect might , at first glance , not be readily apparent . Crowdsourcing is often introduced in situations of scholarly need where huge amounts of data have to be processed and where the task is too great for unavailable specialists . 2 In order to proceed , the problems must be subdivided in smaller parts , so that they can be approached even by laypersons . This can prove difficult ; at other times , it is relatively simple . Artigo is a crowdsourcing game that invites people interested in works of art to as - sign them descriptive annotations . These annotations are validated and registered in a database as soon as at least two people submitted them . Such a method helps to avoid deliberately false input . Within the last eight years , 9 million descriptions have been collected . Most of these annotations , also called tags , making Artigo part of what is generally defined as social tagging , are very simple concepts that in no way seem to correspond to sophisticated scientific descriptions . On _ Culture : The Open Journal for the Study of Culture Issue 1 ( 2016 ) : Emergence / Emergency www . on - culture . org http : / / geb . uni - giessen . de / geb / volltexte / 2016 / 12072 / 3 Fig . 1 : Franz Marc’s Yellow Cow ( 1911 ) , in Munich’s Lenbachhaus Franz Marc’s famous Yellow Cow ( 1911 ) , for example , has received tags like WALD PFLANZEN BLAUER REITER EXPRESSIONISMUS MALEREI WOL - KEN RIND SPRUNG ÖL FARBE GEMÄLDE NACHT TANZEN WEIDE OHREN FARBEN BRAUN BEWEGUNG ROSA MARC EUTER KUH ORANGE SCHWARZ FRANZ KÜHE FARBIG ROT TIER KAMPF TIERE HÖRNER HIM - MEL LILA GELB FLECKEN KALB OCHSE HORN SCHWANZ FRANZ MARC BLAU FORMEN FLECK HUF RINDER HUFE BÄUME GELBE KUH STIER SPRINGEN SIGNATUR GRÜN BUNT Several of them are somewhat advanced , like “dancing , ” and others show art histor - ical knowledge in identifying the artist’s name and the movement to which he belongs ( “Expressionism” ) . Most of the annotations , however , are simply descriptions of the colors and objects present in the painting . The appropriateness of the descriptions im - plies that the method to collect them is also appropriate . Taken together , the tags demonstrate a wisdom not present in any single word , but only in the collection . The whole is more than the sum of its parts : that is also the definition of emergence . On _ Culture : The Open Journal for the Study of Culture Issue 1 ( 2016 ) : Emergence / Emergency www . on - culture . org http : / / geb . uni - giessen . de / geb / volltexte / 2016 / 12072 / 4 Such an insight , whose importance for any form of historical thinking cannot be overestimated , became clear to me when I wanted to find out about painters similar to Adolph Menzel , a nineteenth - century German realist . What is similarity ? Of course , we have a generic idea of what similarity can mean ; in his latest book , Douglas Hofstadter defines the analogy , which is nothing but a similarity , as “fuel and fire of thinking . ” 3 In art history we would call , say , François Boucher and Jean - Honoré Fragonard similar painters , since both work in the Rococo style , and Boucher and Jacques - Louis David as dissimilar ones , since David belongs to the Neoclassical movement , commonly defined as a rejection of Rococo . Fig . 2 : François Boucher , The Toilet of Venus ( 1751 ) , in New York , Metropolitan Museum of Art Fig . 3 : Jean - Honoré Frago - nard , The Swing ( 1767 ) , in London , Wallace Collection Fig . 4 : Jacques - Louis David , Saint Roch and the Virgin ( 1780 ) , in Marseille , Musée des Beaux - Arts We do so because art historians have an idea of the relationships between historical styles , and because we see different and sometimes opposed painterly aspects in works of art , e . g . , in the looseness of brush stroke or in the intensity of color . But we could also try to find a more ‘objective’ way of defining the similarity of painters , possibly based on mathematical reasoning , and that is what the data collected in Artigo allows us to do . On _ Culture : The Open Journal for the Study of Culture Issue 1 ( 2016 ) : Emergence / Emergency www . on - culture . org http : / / geb . uni - giessen . de / geb / volltexte / 2016 / 12072 / 5 We can take all the annotations attributed to different paintings and compare them . This has the advantage that many eyes might see more than two . Tens of thousands of players have contributed to Artigo over the years ; the more identical tags are shared between two works of art , the more similar those works can be called . The following illustration shows the degree of similarity between Adolph Menzel and various other artists 4 : Fig . 5 : Similarity search in Artigo with reference to Menzel The closer other painters are to Menzel , the more their artworks resemble his , based on their shared crowd - sourced tags . Conversely , other painters from , say , the seventeenth - century are further removed from Menzel and someone from earlier periods may actu - ally be positioned outside the frame of the diagram . Consequently , all those represented in the diagram have a very high degree of similarity . Looking more closely at these artists , one can see that , with a few exceptions , they are all from the nineteenth - century , and mostly naturalistic , as opposed to academic , painters . This corresponds to what we know about Menzel . Of course , there are excep - tions , such as Albrecht Dürer , who was working around 1500 . Dürer could be close to Menzel because of the bourgeois and realist character of some of his works , which is also true for William Hogarth , an eighteenth - century English genre painter . The case of Dürer is especially difficult to explain and renders the results somewhat doubtful . On _ Culture : The Open Journal for the Study of Culture Issue 1 ( 2016 ) : Emergence / Emergency www . on - culture . org http : / / geb . uni - giessen . de / geb / volltexte / 2016 / 12072 / 6 All in all , however , the conclusiveness of the procedure seems convincing : Simple phenomenological descriptions of artworks produced by laypersons can say a lot about their historical and aesthetic character . In order to be even more convincing , a larger study of a more extensive group of artists would be necessary . In addition to measuring the similarity of artists , it could also be fruitful to investigate the similarity of artworks themselves . 5 What is the added value of such research , especially considering that the results are not a hundred percent convincing ? Like many other projects in digital humanities re - search , they can serve as recommender systems for analyzing huge amounts of data . The enormity of art historical databases means that researchers are in need of tools to help them find the pieces relevant to their work among tens of millions of entries . Searching for similarities thus helps researchers to find paintings close to the ones they are studying . Such methods do not solve any scholarly problems , but they inspire researchers by allowing them to encounter items chosen not at random , but on the grounds of historical evidence . If , among the first 50 artworks retrieved in a search , 30 can stimulate the research process instead of only five , this is a clear improvement in efficiency . Even if a Dürer comes up , he does not distort the bigger picture . _ Endnotes 1 Cf . Hubertus Kohle , “Kunst als Vernetzung : Visionen des neuen Menschen in der elektronischen Interaktivität , ” in Der Frankenstein - Komplex : Kulturgeschichtliche Aspekte des Traums vom künst - lichen Menschen , ed . Rudolf Drux ( Frankfurt : Suhrkamp , 1999 ) , 138 – 150 . 2 Daren C . Brabham , Crowdsourcing ( Cambridge / MA : MIT Press Essential Knowledg , 2013 ) . 3 Douglas Hofstadter , Surfaces and Essences : Analogy as the Fuel and Fire of Thinking ( New York : Basic Books , 2013 ) . 4 Many thanks to Linus Kohl for his analysis . 5 Adolph Menzel’s “Hochkirch Battle” resulted in a series of battle paintings .