The 8th International Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work in Design Proceedings Cooperation for Creativity in Design Adriana Vivacqua ' , Jan0 de Souza 1 , 2 COPPE - Graduate School of Engineering , Computer Science Program ' DCC / IM - Institute of Mathematics UFRJ - Federal University of Rio de Janeiro Rio de Janeiro , Brazil ( avivacqua , jano ] @ cos . ufij . br 1 Abstract Creativity has become an important asset in todayS fast changing environment . It is especially important in design , which demands innovative solutions for every project . We believe that creativity can and should be encouraged in work groups . In this paper , we propose a framework for supporting creativity in problem solving . Through the use of problem , domain and user models and information retrieval and agent technology , we hope to support creative cooperative work . 1 . Introduction In recent years , creativity . has become more important , gaining strength along with knowledge management and organizational intelligence techniques . With current technological advances and changes in global economy , companies have become more competitive than ever . To succeed , companies must be able to quickly adapt to new technology and changes in the economic environment , keeping in step with their competition . As a result , companies are organizing their internal knowledge and looking for creative individuals , ones who are able to quickly adapt to whatever changes may come and to help keep the company more dynamic . Their efforts involve not only hiring these individuals , but also creating environments conducive to creative work and extensive knowledge bases of previous work , in an attempt to encode as much knowledge as possible . In addition , decentralization and restructuring have brought cooperative work into the spotlight . Companies now need tools and methods to support group work , which may not be colocated . Besides , some activities are inherently creative , such as architecture , product design , writing or the arts . Companies working in these domains must be even more creative to remain competitive . We acknowledge the overall importance of creativity and believe that it is necessary to create environments to foster and support creativity in work groups . We also believe creativity can and should be stimulated through computer tools . We would like to enhance group work in such a way as to allow more discussion and opportunities for creativity . We do that through focused knowledge exchange , in an effort to increase the quantity and quality of ideas generated . With this in mind , we have envisioned an environment that favors the introduction of external information in workgroups , with the objective of generating new solution alternatives . Our chosen domain area is design , since it is an inherently creative activity , where individuals have to generate new solutions for each problem . Our main focus is to provide an environment to stimulate creativity . In the following sections , we present our approach to creative cooperative work . We begin with some related work in section 2 . In section 3 , we discuss the interplay between design , cooperation and creativity , followed by a description of our approach in section 4 and a closing discussion in section 5 . 2 . Related Work This study relates to studies in different areas , most notably Psychology , CSCW and Design . In this section we present the most relevant work for our research . 2 . 1 Creativity Models Many authors have tried to create models to map the creative process . It remains , however , an elusive topic . There are theories and studies on creative processes and factors leading to creative solutions to problems . Some models and computer systems have been proposed to assist in the performance of creative work and certain application areas have been identified . Csikszentmihalyi [ 11 emphasizes the social aspect of creative work , describing an individual working within a domain and presenting his work to the gatekeepers of that domain , who will judge whether it should be accepted to the domain as a creative contribution . He stresses the benefits of consultations with other domain experts and the necessity for dissemination within the field . The existence of a social aspect of creativity has become largely agreed upon and Csikszentmihalyi ' s approach has been widely accepted , as scientists recognize their own research methods and the workings of their social research networks and domain areas . He 0 - 7803 - 7941 - 1 / 03 / $ 17 . 0002003 IEEE . 113 proposes that there are three important components of a creative system : the individual , the domain ( cultural or symbolic ) and the field ( social or interactive ) [ 2 ] . The individual transforms the knowledge in the domain , and the field experts evaluate the transformation to determine its value . Shneiderman [ 3 ] proposes a creative cycle that takes into account the social aspects of the creative process proposed by Csikszentmihalyi : he defines a framework for generating excellence ( GENEX ) , which contains the following four phases of creative work . Collect - Learn from previous works stored in libraries , the Web and other resources . Relate - Consult with peers and mentors at early , middle and late stages . Create - Explore , compose and evaluate possible solutions . Donate - Disseminate the results , contributing to libraries , the Web and other sources . These phases are not linear , a group may cycle through them at different stages of the problem solving activity . This framework is founded on the beliefs that : new khowledge is built on previous knowledge ; powerful tools can support creativity ; refinement is a social process ; and creative work is not complete until it is disseminated . 2 . 2 Influences on Creativity Most researchers recognize the importance of preexisting domain knowledge when solving a problem and the introduction of new , external knowledge when generating innovative solutions . In her research , Smith [ 4 ] points out a number of deterrents to creativity . One is the effect of prior knowledge , where two effects are observed : fixation ( inability to switch from an inappropriate solution to a more productive one ) and structured imagination ( tendency to stick with what is known ) . Another issue is the early critique . Too much criticism early on can hinder the production and exploration of new ideas . In their study , Teigland and Wasko [ 5 ] established that reliance on colocated colleagues resulted on less creativity , while participation in electronic communities led to higher creativity . This was due to the fact that these electronic communities allowed the individuals to communicate with other like - minded individuals , with whom they had “weak ties” and acquaintances that weren’t necessarily closely related to their work . According to them , knowledge exchanged in these situations is that which is not available from strong tie connections or formal documentation and may add different views to the problem . 2 . 3 Creativity Support Systems Some creativity support systems revolve around the management of existing knowledge and introduction of new knowledge during problem resolution , such as the 114 following two . Others automate creativity techniques , such as brainstorming or lateral thinking . Shibata and Hori [ 6 ] propose a personal creativity system , to support long - term idea - generation in daily life . Their system is essentially a knowledge management system on a Palm , which allows the user to store and retrieve ideas when they are spontaneously generated . There is a subsystem for idea and problem management and a personal information system to store notes , memos , papers , etc . When storing information on problems or ideas , related information pops up on the user’s screen , suggesting relations between the information . With this related information , the authors promote idea generation . In a similar vein , Nakakoji et al . [ 7 ] , have built a computational system that retrieves information that is useful for producing creative insight . Their system delivers images to the designers in hopes they will produce cognitive leaps and generate creative work . 2 . 4 Creative Design Research Design is widely considered a creative activity . Dorst [ SI points out that design problems are considered hard problems because they are underdetermined ( but also not completely free ) , which creates a rift between the design problem and the design solution . It also means that designers have some leeway in exploring solutions , and can introduce their own ideas , constraints or suggestions , in an effort to better solve the problem . Research by Fischer [ 9 ] suggests that , when dealing with experts from different areas , one’s ignorance in relation to another’s domain of expertise can be used as a stimulus to creativity . This has been referred to as symmetry of ignorance . Bringing different points of view together and trying to create a shared understanding among all stakeholders can lead to new insights , ideas and artifacts . This implies that work groups can be chosen so as to best leverage each person’s strengths and weaknesses and introduce different points of view on the problem . This point is often overlooked , as most groups are formed at random or based on other criteria ( such as friendship or personal relations ) , when different configurations might have generated better ( and more creative ) results . In more diverse workgroups , it becomes necessary for individuals to instruct each other about their areas of expertise , externalizing their tacit knowledge . Externalization causes a person to move from vague mental conceptualizations of an idea to a more concrete representation of it , providing a means for others to interact with , react to , negotiate around and build upon it . It also provides an opportunity for the creation of a common language of understanding between parties . Cross studied the design processes of three designers , in an attempt to better understand it [ lo ] . He found that all three designers kept clear track of basic principles that govern the domain and the application ( such as physical laws and functionality ) . This points to a need , in a creativity - focused environment , to keep track of + e . initial problem and unavoidable constraints . Furthermore , all three designers tried to frame the problem following a basic , personal perspective , to stimulate . This indicates the introduction of background knowledge and personal preferences and motivations , which are individual to each designer . Finally , Cross also pointed out that creative designs seemed to arise when there was a conflict to be resolved , between the designer’s basic problem goals and the client’s criteria for an acceptable solution , which indicates that individuals are more creative when they need to resolve conflicts and find an acceptable solution to a problem , given a number of constraints . 3 . Design , Cooperation and Creativity Studies indicate that there is a certain amount of knowledge involved in the creative process . In most cases , problem - solvers need to have extensive domain knowledge and a clear understanding of the problem . However , the introduction of external knowledge can also be beneficial , generating new ideas . What seems particularly fruitful is the introduction of external consultants , individuals with a different perspective that will be able to provide a fresh outlook on the problem , and opening avenues that haven’t been explored yet . The introduction of these individuals would force the externalization of ideas and concepts , which would help the individuals to better formulate the problems in their own minds . Presenting the problem and ideas to others leads to reflection on the process , problem and ideas . Thus , an environment for group creativity should support the following activities : Idea generation and management , branching from one idea to the next or generating unrelated ideas and saving alternatives , Exploration , discussion , extension and study of each idea , 0 Evaluation , analysis and critique of ideas and proposed solutions ( at a later stage ) , 0 Decision - making on the final solution . Additionally , it should not be too restrictive , so as not to cause early dismissal of potentially good ideas . Ideas should be explored before they are turned down . The environment should also keep a history of the evolution of ideas , including branches and final decisions . These histories could be consulted and referenced back to when solving new problems . Information that can inform the solution generation process should be provided , such as the problem statement , requirements , deadlines , etc . It is important to note that , since design problems are ill defined and usually have several free dimensions , these can change evolve with time . The following knowledge bases should be kept and used to inform the problem solving process . Individual Knowledge : each individual will bring in his or her personal background and knowledge acquired through experience ( work , hobbies or training ) . This refers 0 115 only to the user and should not be shared with the group unless the user explicitly chooses to do so . It can , however , be mined for information and presented to the user in an attempt to induce new ideas . Domain Knowledge : is related more closely to the problem area , concerns the problem itself , similar applications and previous solutions , related research , etc . This helps establish what type of problem this is and domain - related information on which the solution should be based . Field Knowledge : is more generic , keeps information related to the field experts , who are able to evaluate the solution as a whole or consult on the problem . This may include the client , if there is one . External Knowledge : is knowledge of a domain not directly related to the problem . This knowledge should be introduced by the individuals in the group , through interaction and externalization of concepts and ideas . Also includes information on the experts of these external fields , so they can be consulted during the problem solving process and bring other views into the process . Task or Problem Information : problem description , project goals and objectives . Should be kept at reach of the group at all times . Information on specific requirements , deadlines , breakpoints , etc . should be clearly in view of the group at all times , to keep them on track . This information evolves with time : group members may add or remove new requirements or constraints . They may also determine that some requirements have been fulfilled by one of the solutions . One important item to note is that the creative process does not go on forever . It is important to keep participants focused on the task ( and sometimes bring them back to the objectives ) , not letting them spin new ideas endlessly . There is a moment of searching for a solution and exploring alternatives and then there is a moment when all of these ideas must converge into one final solution . 4 . Proposed Approach We believe forming interdisciplinary groups to handle complex problems will potentially lead to more creative solutions . This point has been argued in [ I I ] , where the author sustains that outsiders bring fresh insight and methodology to the problem at hand , and that many complex problems can only be tackled by pooling together resources from a number of different disciplines . This points towards the introduction of knowledge from different fields when solving complex problems . We propose to do that by bringing in experts in different fields to participate in the problem solving process . Of course , the introduction of this external individual needs to be supported by appropriate tools , so that he or she may understand the problem at hand and make a contribution . When introducing a person of a different field , communication problems , already kequent in cooperative work , may become more serious , given that this person does not “speak the same language” as the others . We thus find that there is a need for tools to support interdisciplinary work groups , where individuals’ interactions are mediated to promote mutual understanding . 4 . 1 System Description We have envisioned a peer - to - peer ( P2P ) system , where individuals have their own basic peers and agents to assist them throughout the process . In this fashion , each user will have his or her own knowledge base and personal history , parts of which may be made available to others during the problem solving process . There should also be problem and domain - specific knowledge bases , which should be available to all in the group . For that , we have created a “phantom peer” , a peer that exists solely to hold the relevant knowledge bases and make it available to the users . These phantom’ peers can be included in the group , as knowledge sources . In the system , agents would manage and synchronize the information being distributed and worked on by the group , making sure each ‘user has the most up - to - date version of work being produced . Agents take care of the replication and distribution of information , maintaining versions and mining knowledge bases for information . Agents can also scout for information in the knowledge bases or peers who might have something to add to the project and keep track of the main project goals and constraints ( such as deadlines , requirements , etc . ) It is important that the system allow the introduction of knowledge not directly related to the problem at hand , so that interdisciplinarity can be fostered and a history kept . However , deciding what knowledge to introduce is tricky . In interdisciplinary groups , group members bring their own diverse background into play and share knowledge from their personal knowledge bases , thus enriching the problem solving process . We propose a layered approach with these elements : Knowledge Bases : these keep information on the problem domain and on the individuals involved and descriptions of the problem , so that the group may keep track of its objectives . Some are shared among group members and some are individual . Some are local to the problem and some are general . Problem Solving History : this is the group’s history of interactions on one given problem . This is shared by all ( it is the group’s history ) and may be consulted so that users may verify what decisions have been made . Agent Layer : agents are particularly useful , since they can work pro - actively in the background , scouting for information the user might need , bringing in and organizing external information and helping a user frame the problem with a different viewpoint . Agents can also take care of distribution and synchronization , making sure all parties have the necessary knowledge and help the group maintain focus on the problem and ( assist with the convergence moment ) . Additionally , agents can find external individuals with whom group members could consult , bringing extra knowledge into play . Within this framework , there are two “working spaces” : the individual user’s space and the problem - solving ( shared ) space . The user space contains each individual’s knowledge and allows the user to visualize the problem in the light of his or her own context . From there , the user may choose to contribute suggestions to the problem and bits of information from his or her personal context , so as to help others understand and work within that context , exploring new possibilities . Contributions become part of the shared space , which holds information about the problem ( problem statement , deadlines and requirements ) , solutions explored , domain knowledge and information that has been volunteered by group members . Agents work within these spaces , retrieving and presenting information . However , information doesn’t cross boundaries unless the user specifically determines . In this fashion , we maintain a reasonable amount of privacy in the system . In our conception , information shared with the group becomes the properly of the group , and cannot be shared unless the group agrees to do so . This avoids situations where an individual might take partial information from the group and place it elsewhere , where it might be misinterpreted . 4 . 2 Forming Groups Having a coherent group is key in any group problem solving activity . To induce creative work and discussion , it is important to have the right blend of people . In addition to having a number of individuals with the appropriate domain knowledge , it is important to have some individuals from other domains , but with an interest in contributing to the project . Agents search among peers for individuals with required knowledge and profiles for the project at hand and suggest them to the group’s manager if there is one . We are looking at ways to choose individuals based on the potential for synergy with other group members . It is important that each group have some objective and task - centered individuals , appropriate leadership and enough space for all to contribute . 116 It is equally important that the environment be open , so that many ideas and alternate solutions may be generated during the initial discussions , and that these be explored before being discarded . 4 . 3 Handling Interdisciplinarity When dealing with groups of individuals working together , communication is often a major issue . One must make sure that individuals understand each other so as to be able to exchange information and interact in a productive fashion . According to Clark [ 12 ] , Common Ground is a fimdamental aspect of cooperative work . Common ground is the information shared by all group members , shared knowledge , beliefs and assumptions , which make communication and coordination possible . The grounding process is continuous and interactive and ensures a person’s messages are understood by the others and . that they inform the first ones of their understanding . A user’s background , as established by schooling , work experience , hobbies , etc . is of interest to us as a potential source of diversity . These differences also mean that each user will have a personal interpretation of the world and of the problem at hand . This is what we call a user’s personal context : not only what work the user is doing at the moment or where he or she is ( in the case of mobile applications ) , but the user’s background , beliefs , and upbringing , since these determine how he or she looks at the problem at hand . The differences between individuals complicate the grounding process . When people of different socio - cultural backgrounds work together , many of their beliefs and assumptions might be different and the grounding process will take longer and involve more explanations that in focused domain groups , that already share lots of knowledge and have a history of interaction . This information is private , so we do not plan on sharing it among users , but on using it to help users better understand each other . Instead , we use the individual’s personal model to frame the problem , in an attempt to place the problem or possible solutions in a different context , one personal to the user . This will allow each individual to relate to the problem in different terms , and to draw on knowledge from outside the problem domain . Users can then add their insights and suggestions stemming from this framing to the shared exploration space . In this fashion , we enable the introduction of external ( but related ) knowledge and views existent in users’ models into the problem - solving environment . However , given that we will be working in interdisciplinary groups , it will probably be necessary to allow the introduction of some external information into the shared space , to provide grounding to the participants . Users will have to externalize and explain their line of thought and add bits of information to enable others to better understand what they mean . At certain stages in the process , agents may suggest external consultants be brought in to give their opinions on a project . This helps consolidate ideas ( as there will be a need for group externalization ) and the experts can help evaluate solutions and shed new light on the problem . These experts will be found by looking at a user’s contact lists and suggesting to the user that this contact is brought in . A user may decide whether or not to accept the agent’s suggestion and send it to the group . In this fashion , privacy is preserved , as the user must first analyze the suggestion and then bring it to the group , as opposed to having the agent automatically send information on a certain person directly to the group . 4 . 4 Inducing Convergence Agents keep project timeframes and schedules , as well as lists of project requirements , issues and objectives . As users get closer to a deadline , the agent should remind them and press them into deciding . It does seem that deadlines are a powerful way of getting work done . It is important to remember that design problems , being fairly open , may evolve , changing with time . Designers may add new requirements or constraints to help the work on finding a solution . The system must keep track of these changes and the evolution of the problem statement , so that individuals may remain focused on solving the problem . Additionally , it would be beneficial to provide a way of linking requirements to items that fulfill them in the current solution . In this fashion , users can better manage the problem and determine how far they are from a solution . The agent will not choose the solution for the group , but there are some indicators as to how close users are to reaching a consensus . At a first stage , users should be asked to elect a number of candidate solutions . As users explore and detail certain solution alternatives , some will be more carefully studied and others will fall by the wayside . The ones most users seem to have agreed on should be the candidate solutions . Users can focus more closely on these , exploring and detailing them further . Time and effort invested in a solution determine the commitment of the group to this solution . The agent can suggest that a certain solution be further detailed , but this doesn’t mean that users aren’t free to choose other paths or to completely change the solution at the last minute . Agents keep records of which solutions are being explored and which requirements have been fulfilled by each of the alternate solutions and how . Issues that have arisen during the process must also be solved . After a certain point in time , agents will periodically ask users to evaluate their solutions in face of the problem requirements , trying to bring the group back into focus and drive the discussion towards more , I17 practical issues and away from the more fiee - form brainstorming phase . 5 . Discussion’ With this approach we expect to better support creative work in interdisciplinary design groups . This is especially valuable for large projects and the conceptual design phase , where individuals have more freedom to explore alternative solutions before settling on one in particular . However , as noted by Csikszentmihalyi [ 13 , creativity isn’t only having good ideas ( or lots of ideas ) , but choosing which ones to carry through and then to seeing them to creation , implementing , testing , building and going back to the drawing board if necessary . With our framework , we attempt to support the Collect / Relate / Create / Donate framework suggested by Shneiderman [ 3 ] , but we are currently focusing on the “Relate” and “Create” steps . We work with the notion of decontextualization of a problem ( or framing it in a different way ) , which should introduce new views into the problem - solving environment . These views and ideas can be shared with the group and discussed , promoting externalization and enabling others to see the problem in different ways as well . We support problem redefinition and management , which is important for open - ended problems such as design problems . Starting from the base problem statement , the group should be able to introduce new requirements or constraints as the problem - solution definition evolves , and to keep track of which issues have been solved by which parts of the proposed solutions . The system will be built on top of COPPEER , a P2P framework under development at our department . Currently , COPPEER is well under construction . It functions as a microkernel with components that plug - in to it to form applications . Agents also plug - in to the microkernel , and have access to some of the other components ( such as the knowledge bases ) . Its first application is a cooperative ontology construction tool , which allows sharing and reuse of ontologies . Specific user and domain models are currently undergoing definition . We will be extracting information for personal user models from these ontologies , which form the basis of COPPEER applications . Initial tests will be conducted with students during certain graduate university courses , where they will be asked to use the system for generating solutions to problems proposed in class . With creativity , as with many other areas , evaluation is a complicated issue . We expect that , with appropriate system support , the number of ideas generated will grow and the group will be able to better choose between them , providing innovative solutions to problems proposed . In the spirit of Csikszentmihalyi’s ideas , we will have students evaluate each other’s solutions . 6 . Acknowledgements This work is partially supported by CAPES and CNPq . References Csikszentmihalyi , M . ; Creativity : Flow and the Psychology of Discovery and Invention ; Harper Collins Pubs . , NY , 1996 Csikszentmihalyi , M . ; Implications of a Systems Perspective for the Study of Creativity , in R . J . Sternberg ( ed . ) , Handbook of Creativity , Cambridge University Press , 1999 Shneiderman , B . ; Creating Creativity : User Interfaces for Supporting Innovation ; ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , vol 7 n . 1 , March 2000 Smith , D . , Paradice , D . & Smith , S ; Prepare you Mind for Creativity . Communications of the ACM , July 2000 Teigland , R . & Wasko , M . ; Creative Ties and Ties that Bind : Examining the Impact of Weak Ties on Individual Performance , Proceedings of the 2 1 st International Conference on Information Systems , 2000 . Shibata , H . & Hori , K . ; A System to Support Long - term Creative Thinking in Daily Life and its Evaluation ; Proc . Creativity and Cognition 4 , 2002 Nakakoji , K . , Yamamoto , Y . & Ohira , M . ; A Framework that Supports Collective Creativity in Design using Visual Images . Proc . Creativity and Cognition , 1999 . Dorst , K . ; The Problem of Design Problems . Design Thinking Research Symposium 6 , Expertise in Design , 2003 . Fischer , G . ; Symmetry of Ignorance , Social Creativity , and Meta - Design ; Proc . of Creativity and Cognition , 1999 Cross , N . ; Creative Cognition in Design : Processes of Exceptional Designers . Proc . of Creativity & Cognition 4 , Loughborough , UK , 2002 Nissani , M . ; Ten Cheers for Interdisciplinarity : A Case for Interdisciplinary Knowledge and Research . Social Science Journal 34 ( # 2 ) , pg . 201 - 216 , 1997 Clark , H . & Brennan , S . ; Grounding in Communication . In Resnick , Levine & Teasley ( eds . ) Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition pg 127 - 149 . American Psychological Association , Washington , 1991 . 118