Infection with Mycobacterium avium subsp . paratuberculosis Results in Rapid Interleukin - 1 (cid:1) Release and Macrophage Transepithelial Migration Elise A . Lamont , a Scott M . O’Grady , c William C . Davis , d Torsten Eckstein , e and Srinand Sreevatsan a , b Department of Veterinary Population Medicine , a Department of Veterinary Biomedical Science , b and Department of Animal Science , c University of Minnesota , St . Paul , Minnesota , USA ; Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology , Washington State University , Pullman , Washington , USA d ; and Department of Microbiology , Immunology and Pathology , Colorado State University , Fort Collins , Colorado , USA e Pathogen processing by the intestinal epithelium involves a dynamic innate immune response initiated by pathogen - epithelial cell cross talk . Interactions between epithelium and Mycobacterium avium subsp . paratuberculosis have not been intensively studied , and it is currently unknown how the bacterium - epithelial cell cross talk contributes to the course of infection . We hypothesized that M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis harnesses host responses to recruit macrophages to the site of infection to ensure its survival and dissemination . We investigated macrophage recruitment in response to M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis using a MAC - T bovine macrophage coculture system . We show that M . avium subsp . para - tuberculosis infection led to phagosome acidiﬁcation within bovine epithelial ( MAC - T ) cells as early as 10 min , which re - sulted in upregulation of interleukin - 1 (cid:1) ( IL - 1 (cid:1) ) at transcript and protein levels . Within 10 min of infection , macrophages were recruited to the apical side of MAC - T cells . Inhibition of phagosome acidiﬁcation or IL - 1 (cid:1) abrogated this response , while MCP - 1 / CCL - 2 blocking had no effect . IL - 1 (cid:1) processing was dependent upon Ca 2 (cid:2) uptake from the extracellular me - dium and intracellular Ca 2 (cid:2) oscillations , as determined by EGTA and BAPTA - AM [ 1 , 2 - bis ( 2 - aminophenoxy ) ethane - N , N , N = , N = - tetraacetic acid tetrakis ( acetoxymethyl ester ) ] treatments . Thus , M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis is an oppor - tunist that takes advantage of extracellular Ca 2 (cid:2) - dependent phagosome acidiﬁcation and IL - 1 (cid:1) processing in order to efﬁciently transverse the epithelium and enter its niche—the macrophage . T he intestinal epithelium is the largest surface area on humans and animals and acts as a primary barrier against pathogens ( 40 ) . It is composed of a myriad of various cell types and commen - sal microorganisms that function together as a unique but non - separable part of the host ( 22 ) . Intestinal pathogens must over - come several mechanisms employed by the epithelium , such as mucus , secretory IgA , antimicrobial peptides , tight junctions , and the glycocalyx , to establish and promote their survival within the host ( 14 , 15 , 53 ) . Therefore , intestinal pathogens have developed several strategies to circumvent , stun , and even manipulate the innate responses of the intestinal epithelium ( 4 , 23 , 30 , 31 , 39 , 48 ) . The initial interaction between intestinal pathogens and the epithelia sets the stage for ensuing infections and may determine success , as deﬁned by establishment , survival , and dissemination . Therefore , it is of interest to elucidate epithelium - pathogen inter - actions with Mycobacterium avium subsp . paratuberculosis , the causative agent of Johne’s disease ( JD ) in ruminants ( 18 , 51 ) . My - cobacterium avium subsp . paratuberculosis is thought to mainly interface with macrophages despite the fact that the natural route of infection occurs via the intestinal tract ( 10 ) . Like other intra - cellular pathogens , such as Yersinia spp . , Salmonella enterica sero - var Typhimurium , and Shigella spp . , M . avium subsp . paratuber - culosis infects M cells due to their lack of hydrolytic enzymes and inability to form mature phagosomes ( 6 , 27 , 28 , 41 , 42 , 44 ) . How - ever , further investigations have revealed that M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis is also capable of invading enterocytes and under - goes epithelium processing and subsequent inﬁltration into the Peyer’s patches ( 7 , 43 , 45 ) . Studies by Patel et al . have shown that processing of M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis by bovine mam - mary epithelial cells ( MAC - T cells ) results in enhanced phagocy - tosis during secondary infection ( 34 ) . M . avium subsp . paratuber - culosis entrance into Madin - Darby bovine kidney cells ( MDBK ) , a surrogate for intestinal epithelia , increases expression of an oxi - doreductase gene ( MAP3464 ) to regulate the Cdc42 pathway ( 2 ) . The Cdc42 pathway is also initiated by other intracellular patho - gens to form ﬁlopodia and consequent cytoskeleton rearrange - ment ( 26 , 33 , 58 ) . Research utilizing the closely related bacterium Mycobacterium avium subsp . avium indicates that intestinal my - cobacteria have developed several mechanisms , such as upregula - tion of genes related to fatty acid and membrane protein synthesis , to invade epithelium cells by a proposed regulatory role in GTP binding and modulation of bacterial cell wall structure ( 32 ) . We have recently shown that M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis tran - scriptomes obtained from the ilea and mesenteric lymph nodes of naturally infected cattle have distinct proﬁles in comparison to those obtained from bovine macrophage infection ( 20 ) . This di - chotomy may be due to the various cell types present within the ileum and mesenteric lymph node , which further highlights the Received 16 December 2011 Returned for modiﬁcation 1 February 2012 Accepted 27 June 2012 Published ahead of print 9 July 2012 Editor : J . L . Flynn Address correspondence to Srinand Sreevatsan , sreev001 @ umn . edu . Supplemental material for this article may be found at http : / / iai . asm . org / . Copyright © 2012 , American Society for Microbiology . All Rights Reserved . doi : 10 . 1128 / IAI . 06322 - 11 The authors have paid a fee to allow immediate free access to this article . September 2012 Volume 80 Number 9 Infection and Immunity p . 3225 – 3235 iai . asm . org 3225 on J une 12 , 2015 b y UN I V O F N E W O R L EA N S h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m importance of cell - cell cross talk during natural infection . It is likely that M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis encountered by lam - ina propria macrophages is signiﬁcantly altered from its original state due to epithelium processing . Therefore , current research initiatives solely utilizing M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis from broth culture to infect bovine macrophages may not capture the full complexity of host - pathogen interactions and may therefore have limited utility in deciphering mycobacterial pathogenesis . In the present study , we developed a MAC - T – bovine mono - cyte - derived macrophage ( MDM ) coculture model to investigate innate immune responses to M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis in - fection . Weshowthatphagosomeacidiﬁcationof M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis in MAC - T cells leads to rapid processing of inter - leukin - 1 (cid:1) ( IL - 1 (cid:1) ) . IL - 1 (cid:1) production was determined to be criti - cal for recruitment of MDMs to the site of M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis infection . Phagosome acidiﬁcation and IL - 1 (cid:1) transcript and protein levels were dependent upon an extracellu - lar calcium inﬂux . We propose that M . avium subsp . paratubercu - losis takes advantage of phagosome acidiﬁcation enlistment of IL - 1 (cid:1) at the site of infection in order to efﬁciently transverse the epithelium and arrive at its ﬁnal niche—the macrophage . MATERIALS AND METHODS Ethics statement . All animal work was conducted in accordance with the recommendations in the institutional guidelines and approved animal care and use committee ( IACUC ) protocols at the University of Minne - sota ( approval number 1106A01161 ) . All other experiments were carried out in accordance with the University of Minnesota’s Institutional Bio - safety Committee ( IBC ) approved protocol number 0806H36901 . Bacterial culture . M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis strains K - 10 and K - 10 ( pWes4 ) expressing green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) were main - tained in Middlebrook ( MB ) 7H9 medium containing 10 % glycerol , 1 % oleic acid - dextrose - catalase ( OADC ) and mycobactin J ( 2 . 0 mg / liter ) ( Al - lied Monitor , Fayette , MO ) at 37°C at 120 rpm . Bacteria were subcultured at 1 / 10 the original culture volume once logarithmic growth was obtained ( optical density at 600 nm [ OD 600 ] (cid:2) 1 . 0 ) . Mammalian cell culture . Monocyte - derived macrophages ( MDMs ) from two JD - free dairy cows ( 253 and 2170 ) were elutriated and matured as described previously ( 13 , 19 ) . Brieﬂy , blood was collected from the jugular vein into a gas - sterilized vacuum container ( Paragon Medical , Pierceton , IN ) containing an equal volume of acid - citrate dextrose to inhibit coagulation . Blood was divided into 40 - ml aliquots and centri - fuged for 20 min at 2 , 200 rpm at room temperature . Buffy coats were collected , resuspended in 1 (cid:3) Dulbecco’s phosphate - buffered saline ( D - PBS ) , and layered on a 58 % Percoll gradient ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) . The monocyte layer was obtained , washed four times in 1 (cid:3) D - PBS , and matured in Teﬂon wells containing RPMI 1640 with 20 % autologous serum at 37°C in a humidiﬁed chamber ( 5 % CO 2 ) for 4 days . Cells were later seeded for coculture experiments . Bovine mammary epithelial cells ( MAC - T ) were maintained in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle medium ( DMEM ) containing 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) at 37°C in a humidi - ﬁed chamber ( 5 % CO 2 ) . Conjugation of mycobacterial cell wall lipoglycans to ﬂuorescent polystyrene beads . M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis - speciﬁc mannosy - lated lipoarabinomannan ( ManLAM ) was obtained from Eckstein ( Col - orado State University ) ( 5 ) . The following reagents were obtained throughtheNIHBiodefenseandEmergingInfectionsResearchResourcesRepository , NIAID , NIH : Mycobacterium tuberculosis strain H37Rv puri - ﬁed lipomannan ( LM ) ( NR - 14850 ) and Mycobacterium smegmatis puri - ﬁed non - mannose - capped lipoarabinomannan ( AraLAM ) ( NR - 14849 ) . Lipoglycans were puriﬁed using a previously reported method ( 5 ) . Ap - proximately 0 . 5 mg of ManLAM , LM , and AraLAM was separately mixed with 50 mM 2 - ( N - morpholino ) ethanesulfonic acid hydrate , 4 - morpho - linoethanesulfonic acid ( MES hydrate ) buffer ( pH 6 . 0 ) ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) , and 200 (cid:4) l of an aqueous suspension of ﬂuorescein iso - thiocyanate ( FITC ) - labeled 0 . 1 - (cid:4) m carboxylate - modiﬁed microspheres ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) and incubated for 15 min at room tem - perature . Forty mg of 1 - ethyl - 3 - ( 3 - dimethylaminopropyl carbodiimide ) ( EADC ) ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) was added to the microsphere sus - pension , and the pH was adjusted to 6 . 5 using 0 . 1 N sodium hydroxide ( NaOH ) . The reaction mixture was placed on a rocker and incubated overnight at room temperature . Lipoglycan - microsphere suspensions were quenched with 100 mM glycine , incubated for 30 min at room tem - perature , and washed three times using 50 mM phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) containing 0 . 9 % sodium chloride ( NaCl ) at 3 , 000 (cid:3) g . Lipoglycan - bound microspheres were resuspended in 5 . 0 ml of 50 mM PBS contain - ing 1 % BSA and 2 mM sodium azide and stored at 4°C until use in inva - sionassays . Allmicrospheresweretestedforsuccessfullipoglycanbinding by heating microspheres to 95°C for 10 min and subjecting the superna - tants to Western blot analysis using a rabbit polyclonal antibody against whole - cell lysates of M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis ( data not shown ) . MAC - T – macrophage coculture and M . avium subsp . paratubercu - losis invasion assay . Approximately 2 . 0 (cid:3) 10 4 MAC - T cells were seeded onto the apical side of a 3 . 0 - (cid:4) m - pore - size Snapwell insert ( Transwell permeable support ; Corning , Lowell , MA ) and incubated for 4 days in DMEM containing 10 % FBS at 37°C in a humidiﬁed chamber containing 5 % CO 2 . Once semiconﬂuence was reached , the Snapwell insert was in - verted and 2 . 0 (cid:3) 10 4 bovine MDMs were seeded onto the new apical side . MDMswereallowedtoadherefor2hat37°C , andtheSnapwellinsertwas inverted again to its original orientation , such that MAC - T cells and MDMs were located on the apical and basolateral sides of the Snapwell insert , respectively . Transwells were examined by phase - contrast micros - copy to conﬁrm macrophage adherence . Subcultured M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis ( either K - 10 or GFP - expressing K - 10 ) was grown to an OD 600 of 0 . 5 ( equivalent to 1 . 0 (cid:3) 10 6 cells / ml ) and assessed for the number of live and dead cells using a Baclight kit ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) based on the manufacturer’s in - structions and a reported protocol ( 25 ) . M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis culture was pelleted at 3 , 000 rpm for 10 min and washed three times in sterile PBS . The pellet was resuspended , vortexed for 5 min , and repeat - edly drawn through a sterile 21 - gauge needle in DMEM containing 10 % FBS such that a 10 : 1 multiplicity of infection ( MOI ) was achieved . The 10 : 1 MOI reﬂected over 90 % live M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis cells . Resuspended M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis wasincubatedfor5minat room temperature to sediment any bacterial clumps , and the upper two - thirds of the resuspended culture was used for the invasion assay . M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis was applied to the apical chamber and al - lowed to infect the coculture system fo r 3 h at37°C in a humidiﬁed cham - ber containing 5 % CO 2 followed by three washings with 1 (cid:3) D - PBS to remove any nonadherent bacteria . The bovine MAC - T – MDMs coculture was further incubated at 37°C in a humidiﬁed chamber for 10 , 30 , 60 , and 120 min postinfection ( p . i . ) . The coculture was later washed using 1 (cid:3) D - PBS and further processed for RNA extraction , confocal imaging , or ﬂow cytometry . Blocking assays . The following reagents were purchased for use in blocking assays : baﬁlomycin A1 ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) , bovine 9 . 1 IL - 1 (cid:1) blocking antibody ( provided by William C . Davis ) , recombinant bo - vine IL - 1 (cid:1) ( Thermo Scientiﬁc , Rockford , IL ) , human monocytic chemoat - tractant protein - 1 / CCL - 2 ( MCP - 1 ) ( EMD Chemicals , Gibbstown , NJ ) , and MCP - 1 / CCL - 2 blocking antibody ( Novus Biologicals , Littleton , CO ) . In or - der to access the role of phagosome acidiﬁcation and IL - 1 (cid:1) production , the coculture infection assay was conducted as previously stipulated with the exception of a preincubation period with either baﬁlomycin A1 ( 25 nM ) , 9 . 1 IL - 1 (cid:1) blocking antibody ( 250 ng / ml or 500 ng / ml ) , or MCP - 1 / CCL - 2 - blocking antibody ( 250 ng / ml or 500 ng / ml ) fo r 1 h at37°C in a humidiﬁed chamber containing 5 % CO 2 followed by three 1 (cid:3) D - PBS washes . InordertoconﬁrmMCP - 1 / CCL - 2blocking , alipopolysaccharide ( LPS ; 1 . 0 (cid:4) g / ml ) ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) control was included Lamont et al . 3226 iai . asm . org Infection and Immunity on J une 12 , 2015 b y UN I V O F N E W O R L EA N S h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m ( seeFig . S1inthesupplementalmaterial ) . IL - 1 (cid:1) ( 200ng / ml ) wasaddedto each coculture well in a separate baﬁlomycin A1 experiment to rescue MDM recruitment . MCP - 1 / CCL - 2 ( 5 . 0 ng / ml ) was added to uninfected cocultures to serve as a positive control and comparison for M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis invasion and blocking assays . All blocking assays were conducted three separate times , and the assay at each p . i . time point was performed in triplicate . Calcium signaling assays . The following reagents were purchased for calcium signaling assays : 1 , 2 - bis ( 2 - aminophenoxy ) ethane - N , N , N = , N = - tetraacetic acid tetrakis ( acetoxymethyl ester ) ( BAPTA - AM ) ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) , ethyleneglycol bis ( aminoethylether ) tetraacetic acid ( EGTA ) ( MP Biomedicals , Solon , OH ) , calcium - free DMEM ( Invit - rogen , Carlsbad , CA ) , and UTP ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) . The MAC - T – macrophage coculture invasion assay was conducted as stated above , with the addition of either DMEM containing BAPTA - AM ( 25 nM ) or EGTA ( 4 mM ) - treated calcium - free DMEM alone or with UTP ( 25 (cid:4) M ) at p . i . time points . All calcium signaling assays were conducted foratotalofthreeseparateexperimentsusingbiologicaltriplicatesperp . i . time point . RNA extraction and quantitative real - time PCR . Upon completion of p . i . time points , MAC - T cells were washed three times in 1 (cid:3) D - PBS , gently mixed with 1 . 0 ml TRIzol Reagent ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) , and incubated for 5 min at room temperature to ensure successful lysing . All RNA work was conducted on RNase Away ( Molecular Bioproducts , San Diego , CA ) - treated work surfaces . RNA was extracted per the manufac - turer’s instructions ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) and was later treated with Turbo DNase ( Ambion , Austin , TX ) at 37°C for 30 min . The RNA reac - tion was inactivated using phenol - chloroform for 2 min at room temper - ature . RNA purity was assessed by measuring the 260 / 280 ratio obtained by NanoDrop ND - 1000 ( NanoDrop Products , Wilmington , DE ) and the absence of ampliﬁcation of the (cid:1) - actin gene with direct PCR . RNA used for quantitative real - time PCR ( qRT - PCR ) had a minimum 260 / 280 ratio of 1 . 9 . qRT - PCR of selected genes ( Table 1 ) was conducted using a Quan - tifast SYBR green one - step qRT - PCR kit ( Qiagen , Valencia , CA ) and a Roche Light cycler 480II ( Roche NimbleGen Inc . , Madison , WI ) with corresponding software . The following program was used : 50°C for 10 min , 95°C for 5 min , 95°C for 10 s , and 60°C for 30 s for 40 cycles . Primers were designed using Primer 3 ( http : / / frodo . wi . mit . edu / primer3 / ) . Fold change was calculated using the (cid:5)(cid:5) C T method and the value for the housekeepinggene , the (cid:1) - actingene , whichwasnormalizedtouninfected MAC - T cells . Products were examined on a 2 % agarose gel . All samples wereconductedinbiologicaltriplicatesandduplicatetechnicalreplicates . Westernblotanalysis . Supernatantsfrom M . avium subsp . paratuber - culosis invasion assays were collected at 10 and 30 min p . i . , ﬁltered with a 0 . 2 - (cid:4) m Millex syringe - driven ﬁlter unit ( Millipore , Billerica , MA ) , and concentrated using a Speedvac . The following controls were included in Western blot analysis : human pro - IL - 1 (cid:1) ( Sino Biological Inc . , Beijing , China ) , mouse IL - 1 (cid:1) ( Abcam , Cambridge , MA ) , and bovine IL - 1 (cid:1) ( Pierce , Rockford , IL ) . Twenty (cid:4) lofeachsamplewasseparatelycombined with 5 . 0 (cid:4) l of Laemmli buffer ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) , denatured at 95°C , and loaded onto a Precise 4 - to - 20 % Tris - HEPES gradient precast gel ( Pierce , Rockford , IL ) . The gel containing processed samples was elec - trophoretically transferred onto a 0 . 2 - (cid:4) m - pore - size nitrocellulose mem - brane ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) for 2 h ( 60 V ) at 4°C . The membrane was blocked overnight in 5 % nonfat dried milk in 1 (cid:3) Tris - Tween 20 ( Tris - T20 ; 0 . 1 % Tween 20 [ vol / vol ] ) buffer at 4°C . Next , the membrane was washed5timesin1 (cid:3) Tris - T20in5 - minincrementsandincubatedfor1h with a 1 : 1 , 000 dilution of anti - rabbit IL - 1 (cid:1) polyclonal antibody ( Abcam , Cambridge , MA ) with shaking at room temperature and further washed as previously described . The membrane was incubated with a 1 : 10 , 000 dilution of horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ; R & D Systems , Minneapolis , MN ) - conjugatedrabbitIgG ( heavypluslightchain ) withslightshakingat room temperature for 1 h , washed , and developed using a Western Light - ning Ultra kit ( PerkinElmer , Waltham , MA ) per the manufacturer’s in - structions . ThemembranewasvisualizedusingSimple _ Biochemi _ Acqui - sition from LabWorks 4 . 6 software ( LabWorks Inc . , Costa Mesa , CA ) . Enzyme - linked immunosorbent assay ( ELISA ) . Cell supernatants from both M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis invasion assays and LPS ( 1 . 0 (cid:4) g / ml ; control ) stimulation at 10 and 30 min p . i . were analyzed for pro - IL - 1 (cid:1) levels using a mouse IL - 1 (cid:1) proform ELISA Ready - SET - Go ! kit ( Ebioscience , SanDiego , CA ) perthemanufacturer’sinstructions . Astan - dard curve was included using 2 - fold dilutions of mouse pro - IL - 1 (cid:1) . The optical density was read at 450 nm with a wavelength correction of 570 nm . All samples were loaded into triplicate wells . ELISA was repeated twice . Dot blot analysis . Supernatants from M . avium subsp . paratuberculo - sis invasion and blocking assays with and without calcium were saved in 1 . 0 - ml aliquots , ﬁltered with 0 . 2 - (cid:4) m Millex syringe - driven ﬁlter units ( Millipore , Billerica , MA ) , dried via Speedvac , and resuspended in 250 (cid:4) l of 1 (cid:3) D - PBS without calcium and magnesium . One (cid:4) l of each superna - tant was spotted in duplicate technical replicates on a 0 . 45 - (cid:4) m - pore - size nitrocellulose membrane using the Minifold I dot blot apparatus ( GE Healthcare , North America ) per the manufacturer’s instructions . The ni - trocellulose membrane was blocked in 5 % nonfat dried milk in 1 (cid:3) PBS - Tween 20 ( PBS - T20 ; 0 . 1 % T20 [ vol / vol ] ) for 2 h at room temperature with subtle shaking , washed ﬁve times in 1 (cid:3) PBS - T20 at 5 - min intervals , and incubated with rabbit anti - bovine IL - 1 (cid:1) polyclonal antibody ( AbD Serotec , Raleigh , NC ) fo r 1 h atroom temperature . Next , the membrane was washed as described above , incubated with goat anti - rabbit IgG - HRP ( R & Dsystems , Minneapolis , MN ) , andfurtherwashedwith1 (cid:3) PBS - T20 . The nitrocellulose membrane was developed using a Western Lightning Ultra kit ( PerkinElmer , Waltham , MA ) per the manufacturer’s instruc - tions and imaged under Simple _ Biochemi _ Acquisition from LabWorks 4 . 6 software ( LabWorks Inc . , Costa Mesa , CA ) . Raw density values were collected and converted to ng / ml . Concentrations were calculated based on the concentration curve for recombinant bovine IL - 1 (cid:1) protein ( Thermo Scientiﬁc , Rockford , IL ) . Lactate dehydrogenase cytotoxicity assay . A lactate dehydrogenase ( LDH ) cytotoxicityassaywasperformedonMAC - Tcellsinfectedwith M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis as stipulated by the manufacturer ( Clon - tech , Mountain View , CA ) . Brieﬂy , 100 (cid:4) l containing 4 . 0 (cid:3) 10 5 MAC - T cells / ml in DMEM with 1 % BSA was seeded into an optically clear 96 - well microtiter plate and allowed to adhere overnight at 37°C in a humidiﬁed chamber containing 5 % CO 2 . Medium was removed , and all cells were washed three times with 1 (cid:3) D - PBS to remove spontaneously released LDH . M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis invasion of MAC - T cells was per - formed as described above with the exception of 1 % BSA in placement of 10 % FBS . The following controls were included : background ( medium alone ) , lowLDHrelease ( uninfectedcellsinmedium ; spontaneousrelease of LDH ) , high LDH release ( 2 % Triton X - 100 ) , M . avium subsp . paratu - berculosis alone , and LPS ( 1 . 0 (cid:4) g / ml ) . Optical density was recorded at 490 nm with an applied correction at 600 nm . Optical density readings were converted to LDH microunits based on a generated standard curve . As - says at all time points were conducted in triplicate . The LDH assay was repeated a total of three times . Cell staining and confocal microscopy . All cells were allowed to ad - here to glass coverslips ( no . 1 . 5 thickness ) in 24 well plates . Phagosome acidiﬁcation staining was based in part on a previously reported protocol ( 25 ) . Upon the ﬁnal 30 min after infection of MAC - T cells , 25 nM Lyso - TABLE 1 Primers used in this study Gene product and direction Sequence ( 5 = – 3 = ) IL – 1 (cid:1) , F CAATAACAAGCTGGAATTTGAGTC IL – 1 (cid:1) , R TGCTTGAGAGGTGCTGATGT MCP – 1 , F CCCTCCTGTGCCTGCTACT MCP – 1 , R ATCTGGCTGAGCGAGCAC (cid:1) – actin , F TCCTCCCTGGAGAAGAGCTA (cid:1) – actin , R GTAGAGGTCCTTGCGGATGT M . avium Transepithelial Migration September 2012 Volume 80 Number 9 iai . asm . org 3227 on J une 12 , 2015 b y UN I V O F N E W O R L EA N S h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Lamont et al . 3228 iai . asm . org Infection and Immunity on J une 12 , 2015 b y UN I V O F N E W O R L EA N S h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Tracker blue ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) was added to culture medium and incubated at 37°C in a humidiﬁed chamber with 5 % CO 2 . After the designated p . i . time point was completed , culture medium was decanted andcellswerewashedthreetimesin1 (cid:3) D - PBS . MAC - Tcellswerestained in prewarmed ( 37°C ) Deep Red CellMask plasma membrane stain ( 2 . 5 (cid:4) g / ml ) ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) for 5 min and washed three times in 1 (cid:3) D - PBS . Coverslips were removed , and cells were immediately ﬁxed in absolute methanol for 5 min at (cid:6) 20°C followed by two washes with ice - cold 1 (cid:3) D - PBS . In a separate experiment examining Rab7 expression , MAC - Tcellswereﬁxedin2 % paraformaldehydeat37°Cfor5min , rinsed in PBS containing 0 . 01 % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) , permeabilized in ice cold methanol at (cid:6) 20°C for 5 min , and blocked with PBS containing 1 % BSAfor1hatroomtemperature . MAC - Tcellswerefurtherincubated with 1 : 500 anti - mouse Rab7 monoclonal antibody ( Abcam , Cambridge , MA ) for 1 h at37°C in a humidiﬁed chamber containing 5 % CO 2 , rinsed three times in PBS , and stained with 1 : 1 , 000 Alexa Fluor 405 goat anti - mouse IgG ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) for 1 h atroom temperature in the dark . Coverslips were mounted on glass slides using Prolong gold reagent ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) and sealed with nail polish . All slides were stored at 4°C until confocal imaging . Coculture Transwells were preprocessed by a method similar to the Rab7 staining in MAC - T cells . Transwells were incubated with a 1 : 500 dilution of rabbit anti - bovine CD11b ( Abcam , Cambridge , MA ) and mouse anti - bovine cytokeratin ( Abcam , Cambridge , MA ) fo r 2 h at37°C in a humidiﬁed chamber ( 5 % CO 2 ) . Subsequently , cells were washed three times with 1 (cid:3) D - PBS , incubated with 1 : 1 , 000 dilutions of Alexa Fluor 405 goat anti - mouse IgG and Alexa Fluor 680 donkey anti - rabbit IgG ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) fo r 1 h atroom temperature in the dark , and rinsed three times in 1 (cid:3) D - PBS . Transwells were removed by scoring the support circumference with an 18 . 5 - gauge needle , mounted on glass coverslips , and stored as described above . Thesupernatantfromtheapicalchamberwassavedandtransferredto 24 - well plates containing glass coverslips in order to recover any recruited macrophages . Macrophages were incubated in RPMI 1640 containing amikacin ( 200 (cid:4) g / ml ) ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) for 2 h at37°C in a humidiﬁed chamber ( 5 % CO 2 ) to remove extracellular bacteria and sub - sequently stained and ﬁxed using the CellMask protocol described above . All slides were imaged using the Olympus Fluoview 1000 upright con - focalmicroscope ( Olympus , South - end - on - sea , Essex , UnitedKingdom ) . The following lasers were used to visualize cells : Alexa Fluor 405 , FITC , Cy5 , and / or DAPI ( 4 = , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ) . A Z series for each slide was collected in 1 . 0 - (cid:4) m steps and stacked to render a complete image . Three ﬁelds per slide were visualized . Fluorescence - activatedcellsortinganalysis . Uponcompletionofp . i . timepointsfrom M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis invasionassays , super - natants were collected from the apical chamber , centrifuged at 1 , 200 rpm , and washed three times using sterile PBS . The pelleted cells were resus - pended in 500 (cid:4) l of PBS , blocked using 1 (cid:3) PBS containing 1 % BSA for 1 h on ice , and immediately washed three times with PBS . Cells were incu - bated separately with 1 : 500 dilutions of phycoerythrin ( PE ) - conjugated anti - human CD14 ( R & D Systems , Minneapolis , MN ) and anti - bovine CD11b - FITC ( Raybiotech Inc . , Norcross , GA ) primary antibodies or ap - propriate isotype controls ( R & D Systems , Minneapolis , MN ) for 1 h on ice and washed three times with PBS between stainings . Flow - cytometric analysis was conducted using a FACSCanto equipped with FACSDiva software ( BD Biosciences , San Jose , CA ) . Bovine MDMs were deﬁned as CD11b hi ( FITC hi ) and CD14 hi ( PE hi ) . Cell population was recorded at 10 , 000 events . Experiments were conducted three times using triplicate biological samples ( per p . i . time point ) . Graphs and statistical analyses . Percent colocalization of Lyso - Tracker staining and FITC was examined and calculated based on 20 randomly selected ﬁelds using the overlapping coefﬁcient in Fluoview 1000software ( Olympus , South - end - on - sea , Essex , UnitedKingdom ) . All graphs were generated using GraphPad Prism software ( GraphPad Soft - ware , La Jolla , CA ) . Means and standard errors of the means ( SEM ) were calculated . qRT - PCR and dot blot results were analyzed using a two - way analysisofvariance ( ANOVA ) withBonferronicorrection . P valuesofless than 0 . 01 were considered statistically signiﬁcant . RESULTS M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis phagosome acidiﬁcation leads to interleukin - 1 (cid:1) secretion at the epithelial interface not duetocelldeath . Inordertoassesstheinnateresponseinducedby epithelium - M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis interaction , we in - fected MAC - T cells with a GFP - expressing strain of M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis K - 10 and imaged the cells using confocal microscopy . M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis K - 10 infection re - sulted in early phagosome acidiﬁcation within 10 min p . i . and reached peak LysoTracker ﬂuorescence intensity by 30 min ( Fig . 1A ) . This is in stark contrast to ManLAM , a mycobacterial cell wall lipoglycan responsible for phagosome maturation arrest , which did not display LysoTracker staining throughout the infec - tion ( see Fig . S2 in the supplemental material ) ( 9 ) . Phagosome acidiﬁcation was sustained in AraLAM - , LM - , and carboxylate - modiﬁed microsphere controls , while M . avium subsp . paratuber - culosis - guided phagosome acidiﬁcation dissipated by 1 h p . i . ( see Fig . S2A and B ) . Phagosome acidiﬁcation was validated by stain - ing for the late endosomal marker Rab7 during the infection pro - cess ( Fig . 1B ) . This observation is surprising , as pathogenic myco - bacteria have developed several strategies to shut off the acidiﬁcation process ( 9 , 21 , 47 , 54 , 55 , 56 ) . It is important to note that these previous studies were conducted with macrophages ; therefore , a different cell type , like the epithelium , may function differently in response to mycobacteria . We found that IL - 1 (cid:1) transcription in MAC - T cells showed a 50 - fold upregulation com - pared to uninfected controls by 10 min p . i . , which corresponded to M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis - induced phagosome acidiﬁ - cation ( Fig . 1C ) . IL - 1 (cid:1) transcript levels were validated for activa - tion by Western blot analysis and the absence of pro - IL - 1 (cid:1) ( see Fig . S3 ) . IL - 1 (cid:1) protein concentration was also determined via im - munoblotting . MAC - T cells show maximum IL - 1 (cid:1) production ( (cid:7) 200 ng / ml ) by 30 min p . i . that also coincides with peak Lyso - Tracker intensity ( Fig . 1D ) . Although IL - 1 (cid:1) has been reported to be an integral component for host defense , it may also serve as a chemoattractant for macrophages and has previously been iden - tiﬁed to be an integral cytokine in granuloma formation during mycobacteriosis ( 29 , 35 , 57 ) . Therefore , M . avium subsp . paratu - berculosis may take advantage of the epithelium IL - 1 (cid:1) response to FIG 1 M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis ( MAP ) induces phagosome acidiﬁcation and IL - 1 (cid:1) processing at the epithelium interface . ( A ) Confocal microscopy of phagosome acidiﬁcation in MAC - T cells . MAC - T cells were assessed for phagosome acidiﬁcation at 10 , 30 , and 60 min after infection with M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis using LysoTracker blue . Approximately 60 % of MAC - T cells contained M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis . M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis inducedphagosomeacidiﬁcationat10and30minpostinfectionbutceasedat60minpostinfection . ( B ) Rab7stainofMAC - Tcellsinfectedwith M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis 30 min postinfection . LysoTracker staining was validated with indirect staining for the late endosomal marker Rab7 . Infected MAC - T cells were positive for Rab7 . ( C ) qRT - PCR of uninfected and infected MAC - T cells at 10 min postinfection . In stark contrast to uninfected cells , M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis - infectedMAC - Tcellsshoweda50 - foldupregulationofIL - 1 (cid:1) . ( D ) IL - 1 (cid:1) proteinlevelsinuninfectedandinfectedMAC - Tcells . InfectedMAC - T cells reached peak IL - 1 (cid:1) expression at 30 min postinfection . * * , P (cid:8) 0 . 01 ; * * * , P (cid:8) 0 . 001 . M . avium Transepithelial Migration September 2012 Volume 80 Number 9 iai . asm . org 3229 on J une 12 , 2015 b y UN I V O F N E W O R L EA N S h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Lamont et al . 3230 iai . asm . org Infection and Immunity on J une 12 , 2015 b y UN I V O F N E W O R L EA N S h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m recruit macrophages to the site of infection to ensure its survival and dissemination . Phagosome acidiﬁcation and IL - 1 (cid:1) production are neces - sary for macrophage transepithelial migration and M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis escape from the epithelium . We next investigated macrophage recruitment during M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis infection in a MAC - T – bovine MDM coculture system . MAC - T cells and MDMs adhered to the apical and baso - lateral sides of Transwells , respectively . If MDM recruitment to the site of infection was induced by M . avium subsp . paratubercu - losis , MDMs should permeate the Transwell pores and reside within the apical chamber of the coculture system ( Fig . 2 ) . MDM recruitment was assessed by ﬂow cytometry of apical - chamber supernatants . M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis infection in MAC - T cells led to recruitment of MDMs ( 5 , 000 cells / 10 , 000 re - corded events ) into the apical chamber within 10 min ( Fig . 2A , B , And C ) . The entire MDM cell population permeated into the api - cal chamber by 120 min and was comparable to extravasation in the MCP - 1 control treatment ( Fig . 2A ) . Confocal microscopy conﬁrmed M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis escape from MAC - T cells and phagocytosis into MDMs during the migration process ( Fig . 2B and C ) . Next , we sought to determine the role of phago - some acidiﬁcation in the M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis pro - moted macrophage transepithelial migration . We pretreated MAC - T cells prior to M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis infection with baﬁlomycin A1 , an established inhibitor of vacuolar ATPases , to block the acidiﬁcation process ( Fig . 2D ) . Baﬁlomycin A1 treatment resulted in a complete abrogation of MDM recruit - ment ( Fig . 2A ) . Furthermore , baﬁlomycin A1 treatment pre - vented the production of IL - 1 (cid:1) and was comparable to transcript levels in uninfected MAC - T cells ( Fig . 2D ) . Since the production of IL - 1 (cid:1) may be critical to macrophage transepithelial migration , we supplemented the baﬁlomycin A1 treatment with the exact concentration of IL - 1 (cid:1) secreted during normal infection . Addi - tion of IL - 1 (cid:1) restored MDM migration to the apical chamber in cell numbers comparable to those seen with M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis infection alone ( Fig . 2A ) . Furthermore , inhibi - tion of IL - 1 (cid:1) by a blocking antibody abrogated macrophage re - cruitment ( Fig . 2A and E ) . Despite the apparent macrophage re - cruitment reliance on IL - 1 (cid:1) , an alternative may be that another chemoattractant induced IL - 1 (cid:1) production and is actually re - sponsible for transepithelial migration . For example , Gavrilin et al . have shown that MCP - 1 upregulates IL - 1 (cid:1) expression in monocytes ( 17 ) . Therefore , we included an MCP - 1 - blocking an - tibody pretreatment to M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis infection in the coculture system . MCP - 1 did not affect macrophage re - cruitment or IL - 1 (cid:1) transcript and protein levels ( Fig . 2A , E , And F ) . Although the above data implicated IL - 1 (cid:1) recruitment of mac - rophages , they did not rule out the possibility that this was a direct effect . In other words , the potential remained that IL - 1 (cid:1) was a result of M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis - induced cytotoxicity , which may have led to the destruction of the MAC - T monolayer integrity and removed a barrier for the macrophages to cross . In order to determine the potential for cell death caused by M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis infection , we analyzed cell culture super - natants 10 and 30 min p . i . In contrast to the results obtained with treatment with 2 % Triton X - 100 , lactate dehydrogenase ( LDH ) release in M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis - infected cells was not elevated compared to the uninfected control ( see Fig . S4B in the supplemental material ) . LDH data determined that IL - 1 (cid:1) pres - ence in cell culture supernatants was not a result of cell content release due to necrosis but is indicative of secretion from viable MAC - T cells . Taken together , these data indicate that phagosome acidiﬁcation promotes IL - 1 (cid:1) expression , which is the critical component leading to macrophage transepithelial migration . Phagosome acidiﬁcation and IL - 1 (cid:1) expression are depen - dent upon an extracellular calcium ﬂux . Phagosome maturation into the lysosome requires calcium oscillations ; therefore , we asked whether this ﬂux originated from the extracellular milieu or intracellular stores . It is also important to note that transepithelial migration is also dependent upon calcium signaling ( 11 ) . We treated MAC - T cells with BAPTA - AM , a chelator of calcium from intracellular and extracellular sources , during M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis infection . BAPTA - AM treatment abolished both phagosome acidiﬁcation and upregulation of IL - 1 (cid:1) ( Fig . 3A and B ) . Removal of calcium from the extracellular environment using EGTA - treated calcium - free medium also blocked phagosome acidiﬁcation and IL - 1 (cid:1) expression ( Fig . 3B , C , And D ) . Further - more , UTP supplementation restored phagosome acidiﬁcation in the calcium - free EGTA medium treatment , which indicates that intracellular stores were still functional ( Fig . 3E ) . Thus , M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis preferentially utilizes an extracellular cal - ciumﬂuxinordertocompletephagosomeacidiﬁcationandIL - 1 (cid:1) production . DISCUSSION The intestinal epithelium serves as a gatekeeper that allows for nutrient absorption and luminal sampling but blocks microbial ( both commensal and pathogen ) passage ( 40 ) . Therefore , intra - cellular pathogens that target host cells within the gastrointestinal tract , particularly those cells that reside within the lamina propria , have developed exquisite and complex mechanisms to overcome this barrier ( 32 , 48 ) . The deﬁning features of M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis infection in ruminants are lesions and noncase - ating granulomas present in the intestinal wall ; however , there remains a paucity of studies investigating how M . avium subsp . FIG 2 M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis ( MAP ) enlistment of IL - 1 (cid:1) - recruited macrophages to the initial site of infection . ( A ) FACS analysis of macrophage recruitment in response to M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis infection in the epithelium - bovine macrophage coculture system . M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis infection readily recruits macrophages to the apical chamber . Macrophage recruitment was abolished when phagosome acidiﬁcation was blocked with baﬁlo - mycin A1 or IL - 1 (cid:1) expression was prevented . Recruitment was rescued in baﬁlomycin A1 treatment with the addition of recombinant IL - 1 (cid:1) protein . MCP - 1 blocking did not impact macrophage recruitment . ( B and C ) Confocal microscopy of a coculture infection with M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis . ( B ) Macro - phages are readily recruited to the apical chamber , as the Transwell contained only MAC - T cells . ( C ) Macrophages were found only in the apical chamber . Recruited macrophages contained M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis . ( D ) Baﬁlomycin A1 treatment abrogated phagosome acidiﬁcation and IL - 1 (cid:1) transcription ( qRT - PCR ) . ConfocalmicroscopyofbaﬁlomycinA1treatedcellsandvehiclecontrol ( DMSO ) ( top ) . BaﬁlomycinA1treatmentblockedIL - 1 (cid:1) transcription , and results are indistinguishable from those of uninfected controls ( bottom ) . ( E ) qRT - PCR of infected MAC - T cells treated with IL - 1 (cid:1) blocking antibody or MCP - 1 blocking antibody . MCP - 1 blocking does not impact IL - 1 (cid:1) expression . ( F ) IL - 1 (cid:1) dot blot . Cell supernatants were collected during M . avium subsp . paratuber - culosis infection of MAC - T cells . The addition of the MCP - 1 blocking antibody did not inﬂuence IL - 1 (cid:1) protein levels . * * * , P (cid:8) 0 . 001 . M . avium Transepithelial Migration September 2012 Volume 80 Number 9 iai . asm . org 3231 on J une 12 , 2015 b y UN I V O F N E W O R L EA N S h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m paratuberculosis interacts with the epithelium . Given that the in - testinal epithelium is the ﬁrst host tissue that M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis comes into contact with , it is likely that the intes - tinal epithelium might play an important role in facilitating infec - tion ( 10 , 18 ) . For example , in a 1996 study , Alzuherri et al . re - ported monocyte / macrophage inﬁltration into the intestinal mucosa of M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis - infected Scottish Blackface ewes as well as elevated levels of IL - 1 (cid:1) ( 3 ) . To our knowledge , this is the ﬁrst study to elucidate the mechanism be - hind Alzuherri and colleagues’ observations utilizing a novel MAC - T – bovine macrophage coculture system during M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis infection . This is also the ﬁrst report to deﬁne M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis - directed macrophage re - cruitment to the infection site due to phagosome acidiﬁcation and FIG 3 M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis - induced phagosome acidiﬁcation and IL - 1 (cid:1) processing is dependent upon an extracellular calcium ﬂux . ( A ) Confocal microscopy of BAPTA - AM - treated MAC - T cells during M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis infection . BAPTA - AM abolished LysoTracker staining . ( B ) qRT - PCR of infected MAC - T cells treated with BAPTA - AM and calcium - free EGTA medium . BAPTA - AM and calcium - free medium prevented IL - 1 (cid:1) transcription . ( C ) Confocal microscopy of infected MAC - T cells treated with calcium - free EGTA medium 10 and 30 min postinfection . Calcium - free EGTA medium abrogated LysoTracker staining . ( D ) IL - 1 (cid:1) dot blot of infected MAC - T cells treated with calcium - free EGTA medium . The addition of calcium - free EGTA medium prevented IL - 1 (cid:1) expression at all postinfection time points . ( E ) Confocal microscopy of combined UTP and calcium - free treatment in infected MAC - T cells 10 min and 30 min p . i . The addition of UTP to calcium - free treatment restored phagosome acidiﬁcation . Therefore , intracellular calcium stores remained functional . * * * , P (cid:8) 0 . 001 . Lamont et al . 3232 iai . asm . org Infection and Immunity on J une 12 , 2015 b y UN I V O F N E W O R L EA N S h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m IL - 1 (cid:1) production . The MAC - T – bovine macrophage coculture system not only takes advantage of epithelium processing of M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis but also takes into account the nu - ances of cell - to - cell cross talk that takes place during infection . This novel mechanism of host establishment may also explain transepithelial migration observed in other phagosomal bacteria , such as Brucella spp . For instance , Ackermann et al . noted trans - epithelial migration of Brucella abortus into neutrophils and mac - rophages in a calf ligated ileal loop model ( 1 ) . This dynamic process at the epithelium interface may ultimately determine pathogen success . Although epithelium - M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis in - teractions may seem a bedlam of host and pathogen signals , the results of the present study suggest that these signals are or - chestrated and synchronized in a manner that promotes patho - gen establishment and survival . Previous studies have shown that M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis exposure to a hyperos - molar environment , like that found within epithelial cells , en - hances phagocytosis during secondary infection ( 34 ) . Further - more , M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis entrance into the epithelium mirrors that of other intestinal pathogens in that there appears to be an upregulation of pathways involved in cytoskeleton rearrangement ( 2 ) . The closely related pathogen Mycobacterium avium subsp . avium has been reported to up - regulate a number of genes related to fatty acid and membrane protein synthesis in HEp - 2 cells ( 32 ) . Therefore , it is likely that M . avium subsp paratuberculosis has developed certain signal - ing mechanisms to survive within the intestinal epithelium . We show that infection with M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis in MAC - T cells leads to phagosome acidiﬁcation and rapid IL - 1 (cid:1) expression from viable cells . Phagosome acidiﬁcation may seem to be a contradiction to M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis ’ major goal of survival , as it is well documented that pathogenic mycobacteria employ numerous mechanisms to inhibit the acidiﬁcation process ( 37 , 50 , 52 , 56 ) . However , a recent report by Koo et al . suggests that phagosome acidiﬁcation may actu - ally serve as an effective survival and dissemination strategy ( 24 ) . Koo et al . have shown that phagosome acidiﬁcation aids in IL - 1 (cid:1) processing during lysosomal disruption ( 24 ) . Further - more , IL - 1 (cid:1) may serve as a chemoattractant for macrophages and is also reported to be a necessary cytokine in granuloma formation and maintenance ( 29 , 35 , 36 , 57 ) . We propose that the intestinal epithelium represents a transition cell for M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis based on data indicating that M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis replicates inefﬁciently within this tissue ( 7 , 34 ) . M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis temporar - ily resides within the epithelium while macrophage recruit - ment is elicited by phagosome acidiﬁcation and IL - 1 (cid:1) expres - sion and release by the epithelium . Once macrophages arrive at the site of infection , M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis enters the cells and begins proliferation and dissemination to other locations within the host . We show that M . avium subsp . para - tuberculosis infection causes MDM recruitment to the primary site of infection ( MAC - T cells ) in a coculture system . Macro - phage transepithelial migration requires phagosome acidiﬁca - tion and IL - 1 (cid:1) expression , and these two events are not mutually exclusive . IL - 1 (cid:1) is the true chemoattractant agent responsible for this mechanism , since blocking of a previously reported linked chemoattractant , MCP - 1 / CCL - 2 , failed to ab - rogate macrophage recruitment and IL - 1 (cid:1) processing . Transepithelial migration may also be an important survival and establishment strategy in other pathogenic mycobacteria . Bermudez et al . developed a two - layer Transwell system contain - ing A549 alveolar epithelial cells and endothelial cells to investi - gate monocyte translocation during infection with M . tuberculosis H37Rv , M . avium 101 , and Mycobacterium bovis BCG strain Pas - teur ( 8 , 34 ) . Passage through alveolar epithelial cells increased M . tuberculosis translocation across the bilayer compared to direct endothelial infection , which indicates that exposure to alveolar epithelial cells allowed the emergence of an M . tuberculosis inva - sive phenotype ( 8 ) . Mycobacterial invasion in alveolar epithelial cells also enhanced monocyte migration across the bilayer ( 8 ) . One brieﬂy mentioned observation was the decrease in trans - membrane resistance ( TER ) , which may have inﬂuenced mono - layer integrity . Interestingly , reduction in the TER has been ob - served in intestinal epithelium cells infected with Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium and Shigella ﬂexneri ( 23 , 39 ) . The diminished TER is a result of dephosphorylated occludin and deg - radation of zona occludens 1 , which promoted the migration of neutrophils to the apical side of the epithelium . It is possible that the TER reduction observed by Bermudez et al . may be due to a similar mechanism of tight junction protein degradation . One limitation of our study is that MAC - T cells form low resistance or diffuse tight junctions . These tight junctions presumably offered less of an impediment for macrophages to transverse the mono - layer into apical chamber . Ongoing studies in our laboratory are using a bovine intestinal epithelial ( BIE ) cell line , which forms higher - resistance junctions , to determine if the reduction in TER noted by Bermudez et al . also occurs with M . avium subsp . para - tuberculosis infection ( 8 ) . Phagosome acidiﬁcation and IL - 1 (cid:1) expression were found to be dependent on an extracellular calcium inﬂux . Calcium plays a dual role as it aids in phagolysosome fusion and is necessary for the development of pro - IL - 1 (cid:1) into its mature form ( 16 , 38 ) . Ad - ditionally , calcium ﬂuxes are necessary for leukocyte and macro - phage transepithelial migration ( 11 , 12 ) . The epithelium responds to M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis infection by preferentially in - ducing a calcium inﬂux from the extracellular medium . Targeting of the transport mechanism responsible for calcium inﬂux by an appropriate blocker may provide a novel prophylactic for Johne’s disease . It is likely that functional disruption of this transport pathway will prevent IL - 1 (cid:1) expression by the host during M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis infection and consequently macro - phage recruitment to the epithelium . For example , P2X receptors have been linked to calcium inﬂux from the extracellular milieu and are currently under consideration as potential therapeutic targets for inﬂammation - based neurodegenerative disorders ( 46 , 49 ) . Also , the connection between extracellular calcium , phago - some maturation , IL - 1 (cid:1) , and macrophage recruitment may be exploited in M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis vaccine candidate screening . Attenuation may be detected and candidates worthy of future experimentation identiﬁed by the abrogation of calcium inﬂux and phagosome acidiﬁcation at the epithelium interface . More importantly , our MAC - T – MDM coculture model provides a useful system to investigate M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis vaccine candidates . In conclusion , we demonstrate that M . avium subsp . paratu - berculosis infection promotes a cooperative self - destruction state in the host epithelium , which entails maturation of the phago - some and IL - 1 (cid:1) production that is dependent upon extracellular M . avium Transepithelial Migration September 2012 Volume 80 Number 9 iai . asm . org 3233 on J une 12 , 2015 b y UN I V O F N E W O R L EA N S h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m calcium . IL - 1 (cid:1) in turn is available to act as a chemoattractant for macrophages , which supply an escape route for M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis . Although these results were identiﬁed in an in vitro system , they may also be applied to natural infection . Ongo - ing studies in our laboratory seek to deﬁne which M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis effector molecules may play a role in phagosome acidiﬁcation and escape from the epithelium . Thus , IL - 1 (cid:1) , which is most widely known as a critical cytokine for control of patho - genic mycobacteria , may paradoxically promote pathogen estab - lishment and dissemination within the host . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Raul G . Barletta ( University of Nebraska - Lincoln ) and Luiz E . Bermudez ( Oregon State University ) for their generous gifts of GFP - ex - pressing M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis strain K - 10 and MAC - T cells , respectively . We thank John P . Bannantine ( U . S . Department of Agricul - ture ) for providing the rabbit polyclonal antibody against M . avium subsp . paratuberculosis . We acknowledge the help of the University of Minnesota’s bovine blood collection service . This study was supported by USDA - CRIS ( MIN - 62 - 027 ) , USDA - CSREES NRI ( 2005 - 35204 - 16106 ) , and University of Minnesota College of Veterinary Medicine Agriculture Research Station ( 1802 - 11646 - AES0062027 ) grants awarded to S . S . REFERENCES 1 . Ackermann MR , Cheville NF , Deyoe BL . 1988 . Bovine ileal dome lym - phoepithelial cells : endocytosis and transport of Brucella abortus strain 19 . Veterinary Pathol . 25 : 28 – 35 . 2 . Alonso - Hearn M , Patel D , Danelishvili L , Meunier - Goddik L , Bermu - dez LE . 2008 . The Mycobacterium avium subsp . paratuberculosis MAP3464 gene encodes an oxidoreductase involved in invasion of bovine epithelial cells through the activation of host cell Cdc42 . Infect . Immun . 76 : 170 – 178 . 3 . Alzuherri HM , Woodall CJ , Clarke CJ . 1996 . Increased intestinal TNF - alpha , IL - 1 beta and IL - 6 expression in ovine paratuberculosis . Vet . Im - munol . Immunopathol . 49 : 331 – 345 . 4 . Ashida H , et al . 2010 . Shigella deploy multiple countermeasures against host innate immune responses . Curr . Opin . Microbiol . 5 . Basler T , et al . 2010 . TNF - expression in RAW264 . 7 macrophages in - fected with pathogenic mycobacteria : evidence for an involvement of li - pomannan . J . Leukocyte Biol . 87 : 173 . 6 . Baumler AJ , Tsolis RM , Valentine PJ , Ficht TA , Heffron F . 1997 . Synergistic effect of mutations in invA and lpfC on the ability of Salmo - nella typhimurium to cause murine typhoid . Infect . Immun . 65 : 2254 – 2259 . 7 . Bermudez LE , Petrofsky M , Sommer S , Barletta RG . 2010 . Peyer’s patch - deﬁcient mice demonstrate that Mycobacterium avium subsp . paratuberculosis translocates across the mucosal barrier via both M cells and enterocytes but has inefﬁcient dissemination . Infect . Immun . 78 : 3570 – 3577 . 8 . Bermudez LE , Sangari FJ , Kolonoski P , Petrofsky M , Goodman J . 2002 . TheefﬁciencyofthetranslocationofMycobacteriumtuberculosisacrossabilayerofepithelialandendothelialcellsasamodelofthealveolarwallisaconsequenceoftransportwithinmononuclearphagocytesandinvasionofalveolarepithelialcells . Infect . Immun . 70 : 140 – 146 . 9 . Briken V , Porcelli SA , Besra GS , Kremer L . 2004 . Mycobacterial lipoara - binomannan and related lipoglycans : from biogenesis to modulation of the immune response . Mol . Microbiol . 53 : 391 – 403 . 10 . Chacon O , Bermudez LE , Barletta RG . 2004 . Johne’s disease , inﬂamma - tory boweldisease , andMycobacteriumparatuberculosis . Annu . Rev . Mi - crobiol . 58 : 329 – 363 . 11 . Chun J , Prince A . 2009 . Ca2 (cid:9) signaling in airway epithelial cells facili - tates leukocyte recruitment and transepithelial migration . J . Leukoc . Biol . 86 : 1135 – 1144 . 12 . Chun J , Prince A . 2009 . TLR2 - induced calpain cleavage of epithelial junctional proteins facilitates leukocyte transmigration . Cell Host Mi - crobe 5 : 47 – 58 . 13 . Coussens PM , Colvin CJ , Wiersma K , Abouzied A , Sipkovsky S . 2002 . Gene expression proﬁling of peripheral blood mononuclear cells from cattle infected with Mycobacterium paratuberculosis . Infect . Immun . 70 : 5494 – 5502 . 14 . Derache C , et al . 2009 . Differential modulation of beta - defensin gene expression by Salmonella Enteritidis in intestinal epithelial cells from re - sistant and susceptible chicken inbred lines . Dev . Comp . Immunol . 33 : 959 – 966 . 15 . Eckmann L , Kagnoff MF . 2005 . Intestinal mucosal responses to microbial infection . Springer Semin . Immunopathol . 27 : 181 – 196 . 16 . Feldmeyer L , et al . 2007 . The inﬂammasome mediates UVB - induced activation and secretion of interleukin - 1beta by keratinocytes . Curr . Biol . 17 : 1140 – 1145 . 17 . Gavrilin MA , Deucher MF , Boeckman F , Kolattukudy PE . 2000 . Mono - cyte chemotactic protein 1 upregulates IL - 1beta expression in human monocytes . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 277 : 37 – 42 . 18 . Hines ME , II , Kreeger JM , Herron AJ . 1995 . Mycobacterial infections of animals : pathology and pathogenesis . Lab . Anim . Sci . 45 : 334 – 351 . 19 . Janagama HK , Jeong K , Kapur V , Coussens P , Sreevatsan S . 2006 . CytokineresponsesofbovinemacrophagestodiverseclinicalMycobacte - rium avium subspecies paratuberculosis strains . BMC Microbiol . 6 : 10 . 20 . Janagama HK , et al . 2010 . Primary transcriptomes of Mycobacterium avium subsp . paratuberculosis reveal proprietary pathways in tissue and macrophages . BMC Genomics 11 : 561 . 21 . Kang PB , et al . 2005 . The human macrophage mannose receptor directs Mycobacterium tuberculosis lipoarabinomannan - mediated phagosome biogenesis . J . Exp . Med . 202 : 987 – 999 . 22 . KeshavS . 2006 . Panethcells : leukocyte - likemediatorsofinnateimmunity in the intestine . J . Leukoc . Biol . 80 : 500 – 508 . 23 . Kohler H , et al . 2007 . Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium regu - lates intercellular junction proteins and facilitates transepithelial neutro - phil and bacterial passage . Am . J . Physiol . Gastrointest Liver Physiol . 293 : G178 – 187 . 24 . Koo IC , et al . 2008 . ESX - 1 - dependent cytolysis in lysosome secretion and inﬂammasomeactivationduringmycobacterialinfection . CellMicrobiol . 10 : 1866 – 1878 . 25 . Lamont EA , Sreevatsan S . 2010 . Paradigm redux—Mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis - macrophage interactions show clear variations between bovine and human physiological body temperatures . Microb . Pathog . 48 : 143 – 149 . 26 . Lim KB , et al . 2008 . The Cdc42 effector IRSp53 generates ﬁlopodia by coupling membrane protrusion with actin dynamics . J . Biol . Chem . 283 : 20454 – 20472 . 27 . Marchetti M , Sirard JC , Sansonetti P , Pringault E , Kerneis S . 2004 . Interaction of pathogenic bacteria with rabbit appendix M cells : bacterial motility is a key feature in vivo . Microbes Infect . 6 : 521 – 528 . 28 . Martinoli C , Chiavelli A , Rescigno M . 2007 . Entry route of Salmonella typhimurium directs the type of induced immune response . Immunity 27 : 975 – 984 . 29 . Mayer - Barber KD , et al . 2010 . Caspase - 1 independent IL - 1beta produc - tion is critical for host resistance to mycobacterium tuberculosis and does not require TLR signaling in vivo . J . Immunol . 184 : 3326 – 3330 . 30 . Meixenberger K , et al . 2010 . Listeria monocytogenes - infected human peripheral blood mononuclear cells produce IL - 1beta , depending on list - eriolysin O and NLRP3 . J . Immunol . 184 : 922 – 930 . 31 . Michail SK , Halm DR , Abernathy F . 2003 . Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli : stimulating neutrophil migration across a cultured intestinal epithe - lium without altering transepithelial conductance . J . Pediatr . Gastroen - terol . Nutr . 36 : 253 – 260 . 32 . Miltner E , et al . 2005 . Identiﬁcation of Mycobacterium avium genes that affectinvasionoftheintestinalepithelium . Infect . Immun . 73 : 4214 – 4221 . 33 . Nobes CD , Hall A . 1995 . Rho , rac , and cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress ﬁbers , lamellipodia , and ﬁlopodia . Cell 81 : 53 – 62 . 34 . Patel D , et al . 2006 . The ability of Mycobacterium avium subsp . paratu - berculosistoenter bovineepithelialcellsisinﬂuencedbypreexposuretoa hyperosmolarenvironmentandintracellularpassageinbovinemammaryepithelialcells . Infect . Immun . 74 : 2849 – 2855 . 35 . Pawlinski R , Setkowicz Z , Malodzinska K , Janeczko K . 1999 . Interleu - kin - 1 beta affects the macrophage recruitment and proliferation in the injured brain of 6 - day - old rat . Acta Neurobiol . Exp . ( Warsaw ) 59 : 271 – 278 . 36 . Rohrlich P , et al . 1995 . Interleukin - 6 and interleukin - 1 beta production in a pediatric plasma cell granuloma of the lung . Am . J . Surg . Pathol . 19 : 590 – 595 . Lamont et al . 3234 iai . asm . org Infection and Immunity on J une 12 , 2015 b y UN I V O F N E W O R L EA N S h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 37 . Rumsey J , Valentine JF , Naser SA . 2006 . Inhibition of phagosome mat - uration and survival of Mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculo - sis in polymorphonuclear leukocytes from Crohn’s disease patients . Med . Sci . Monit . 12 : BR130 – BR139 . 38 . Russell DG , Vanderven BC , Glennie S , Mwandumba H , Heyderman RS . 2009 . The macrophage marches on its phagosome : dynamic assays of phagosome function . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 9 : 594 – 600 . 39 . Sakaguchi T , Kohler H , Gu X , McCormick BA , Reinecker HC . 2002 . Shigella ﬂexneri regulates tight junction - associated proteins in human intestinal epithelial cells . Cell Microbiol . 4 : 367 – 381 . 40 . Sanderson IR ( ed ) . 1999 . Development of the gastrointestinal tract . Pmph USA Ltd . , Shelton , CT . 41 . Sansonetti PJ . 2001 . Microbes and microbial toxins : paradigms for mi - crobial - mucosalinteractionsIII . Shigellosis : fromsymptomstomolecular pathogenesis . Am . J . Physiol . Gastrointest . Liver Physiol . 280 : G319 – G323 . 42 . Secott TE , Lin TL , Wu CC . 2001 . Fibronectin attachment protein ho - mologue mediates ﬁbronectin binding by Mycobacterium avium subsp . paratuberculosis . Infect . Immun . 69 : 2075 – 2082 . 43 . Secott TE , Lin TL , Wu CC . 2002 . Fibronectin attachment protein is necessary for efﬁcient attachment and invasion of epithelial cells by My - cobacterium avium subsp . paratuberculosis . Infect . Immun . 70 : 2670 – 2675 . 44 . Secott TE , Lin TL , Wu CC . 2004 . Mycobacterium avium subsp . paratu - berculosis ﬁbronectin attachment protein facilitates M - cell targeting and invasion through a ﬁbronectin bridge with host integrins . Infect . Immun . 72 : 3724 – 3732 . 45 . Sigurdardottir OG , Bakke - McKellep AM , Djonne B , Evensen O . 2005 . Mycobacterium avium subsp . paratuberculosis enters the small intestinal mucosa of goat kids in areas with and without Peyer’s patches as demon - strated with the everted sleeve method . Comp . Immunol . Microbiol . In - fect . Dis . 28 : 223 – 230 . 46 . Sluyter R , Shemon AN , Wiley JS . 2004 . Glu496 to Ala polymorphism in the P2X7 receptor impairs ATP - induced IL - 1 beta release from human monocytes . J . Immunol . 172 : 3399 – 3405 . 47 . Souza CD , Evanson OA , Sreevatsan S , Weiss DJ . 2007 . Cell membrane receptors on bovine mononuclear phagocytes involved in phagocytosis of Mycobacterium avium subsp paratuberculosis . Am . J . Vet . Res . 68 : 975 – 980 . 48 . Srikanth CV , et al . 2010 . Salmonella pathogenesis and processing of secreted effectors by caspase - 3 . Science 330 : 390 – 393 . 49 . SunSH . 2010 . RolesofP2X7receptoringlialandneuroblastomacells : the therapeutic potential of P2X7 receptor antagonists . Mol . Neurobiol . 41 : 351 – 355 . 50 . Sweet L , et al . 2010 . Mannose receptor - dependent delay in phagosome maturation by Mycobacterium avium glycopeptidolipids . Infect . Immun . 78 : 518 – 526 . 51 . Veterinary Record . 2008 . Johne’s disease continues to be the most com - mon cause of bovine enteric disease . Vet . Rec 163 : 171 – 174 . 52 . Wagner D , et al . 2005 . Elemental analysis of Mycobacterium avium - , Mycobacterium tuberculosis - , and Mycobacterium smegmatis - containing phagosomes indicates pathogen - induced microenviron - ments within the host cell’s endosomal system . J . Immunol . 174 : 1491 – 1500 . 53 . Walker WS , IR . 2007 . TLRs in the gut . Am . J . Physiol . Gastrointest . Liver Physiol . 292 : G6 – G10 . 54 . Weiss DJ , Evanson OA , Souza CD . 2005 . Expression of interleukin - 10 and suppressor of cytokine signaling - 3 associated with susceptibility of cattle to infection with Mycobacterium avium subsp paratuberculosis . Am . J . Vet . Res . 66 : 1114 – 1120 . 55 . Welin A , et al . 2008 . Incorporation of Mycobacterium tuberculosis li - poarabinomannan into macrophage membrane rafts is a prerequisite for the phagosomal maturation block . Infect . Immun . 76 : 2882 – 2887 . 56 . Woo S , Heintz JA , Albrecht R , Barletta RG , Czuprynski CJ . 2007 . Life and death in bovine monocytes : The fate of Mycobacterium avium subsp . paratuberculosis . Microb . Pathog . 43 : 106 – 113 . 57 . Yamada H , Mizumo S , Horai R , Iwakura Y , Sugawara I . 2000 . Protective roleofinterleukin - 1inmycobacterialinfectioninIL - 1alpha / betadouble - knockout mice . Lab . Invest . 80 : 759 – 767 . 58 . Zamudio - Meza H , Castillo - Alvarez A , Gonzalez - Bonilla C , Meza I . 2009 . Cross - talkbetweenRac1andCdc42GTPasesregulatesformationof ﬁlopodia required for dengue virus type - 2 entry into HMEC - 1 cells . J . Gen . Virol . 90 : 2902 – 2911 . M . avium Transepithelial Migration September 2012 Volume 80 Number 9 iai . asm . org 3235 on J une 12 , 2015 b y UN I V O F N E W O R L EA N S h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m