Patient - Centered Design 291 Patient - Centered Design : Interface Personalization for Individuals with Brain Injury Elliot Cole Institute for Cognitive Prosthetics Bala Cynwyd , PA 19004 - 0171 , USA ecole @ brain - rehab . com Abstract : This paper explores patient - centered design ( PCD ) as a methodolo - gy for personalization of software used in rehabilitation of cognitive disabili - ties . This methodology serves scenarios where clinical priorities , expertise , and services can be factored into socio - technical software design decisions and cli - nicians explicitly included in the process . The clinical context anticipates the patient’s progress toward at least partial recovery and justifies clinical services . PCD builds on and integrates user - centered design ( UCD ) and participatory de - sign ( PD ) . Case studies come from work in traumatic brain injury rehabilita - tion . Keywords : user interface , user - centered design , participatory design , patient - centered design , cognitive disabilities , cognitive assistive technology , assistive technology . 1 Introduction Patient - centered design ( PCD ) is a methodology for personalizing software used to help individuals with cognitive disabilities . There is evidence that , for indi - viduals with traumatic brain injury ( TBI ) , specially designed computer software can partially restore cognitive abilities [ 10 , 11 , 12 , 25 , case study 2 below ] , as well as serve as cognitive assistive technology ( CAT ) . This methodology serves scenarios where clinical priorities , expertise , and services can be explicitly factored into socio - technical software design decisions . PCD places the user in a clinical context , with its focus on the individual , nuances of the condition , and prospects for treatment and recovery . PCD builds on and integrates user - centered design ( UCD ) and participatory design ( PD ) . PCD is significant in that it can focus attention on clinical goals in ad - dressing application functionality while achieving significant gains in both cognitive abilities and cognitive functioning . PD is a key element because of the key role of the user interface ( UI ) coupled with the user’s ability to fine - tune the UI . Studies of individuals with TBI show the UI to be particularly sensitive , with small changes having a disproportionate impact on UI performance , suggesting that the UI is the principal design issue [ cf . 10 ] . Furthermore , users , even those with profound cogni - tive disabilities , can guide UI design to produce highly efficient interfaces for their software . This methodology also promotes user engagement , which can have sub - stantial clinical impact . This methodology comes out of our work with CAT and with therapists’ treatment tools known as computer - based cognitive prosthetics ( CBCP ) and telerehabilitation delivery system [ 10 ] . Elliot Cole 292 1 . 2 Background This line of research began as the design of CAT for individuals with cogni - tive disabilities arising from TBI . These individuals had completed cognitive rehabil - itation , were dependent on caregivers , and evoked no medical expectation of a gain in cognitive abilities . There are an estimated 3 . 1 million people in the United States with cognitive disabilities from TBI [ 3 ] . The CDC reports that 1 . 7 million TBIs ( in - cluding concussions ) per year receive some attention , with 275 , 000 hospitalizations [ 9 ] . TBI cognitive rehabilitation typically has poor outcomes [ 4 ] . CAT can increase cognitive functioning by addressing an individual’s actual activities in the setting where they are performed . CAT uses a computer placed in the individual’s home for frequent use in performing everyday activities . The ability to highly customize soft - ware led therapists to try to treat patients with these techniques . Personal productivity tools [ 13 ] have long been known to increase the cogni - tive productivity of individual users , particularly knowledge workers . These tools work at the level of subtasks and activities , which are contextual artifacts of cognitive functioning , not of cognitive dimensions themselves . In the 1980s , in pioneering what would become CAT , our research questions were : Can this software have simi - lar results with an individual who has suffered a decrease in cognitive functioning , such as from TBI ? Can software be designed that will partially restore that individu - al’s level of cognitive productivity ? Could assistive technology ( AT ) , which increases personal productivity and level of functioning without expectation of providing a cure , be designed for individuals with cognitive disabilities ? TBI cognitive rehabilitation is an attractive vehicle for approaching these questions . Within TBI cognitive rehab , functional rehabilitation can focus on helping the individual perform everyday activities [ 25 ] , providing a direct fit with personal productivity software tools . Also , the WHO definition of disability is the inability to perform everyday activities , due to pathology and other factors [ 22 ] . TBI produces diffuse damage across the brain , which leaves each individual with a unique pattern of damage across cognitive dimensions . Individuals who share a diagnosis have very different presentations of injury – activity tasks and subtasks that are affected – especially at finer granularity . These individuals are a heterogene - ous population with unique disabilities from a shared diagnosis [ 4 , 25 ] . Diagnosing a TBI is done at a coarse level of granularity [ 4 , 25 ] . The basic question is whether there is evidence of brain injury pathology , along with sugges - tions of which global areas of cognitive functioning may be affected . Cognitive reha - bilitation is largely an outpatient service , with patients coming to the clinic to see therapists at the clinic . Therapy activities themselves are based on generic everyday activities . Unfortunately , TBI patients typically have difficulty applying abstract lessons from exemplar activities ( e . g . , baking brownies to learn planning and organi - zation ) to their own activities ; they do much better with the concrete situations of their everyday life . Seeing a patient in the clinic makes it extremely difficult for ther - apists to use the patient’s actual activities as the context of therapy . Rehabilitation tools have continued to be based on manual tools like 3 - ring binders , Post - its , generic flashcards , and forms . While computers are widely availa - ble in rehab clinics , computer software is rarely designed to be a therapist’s tool . Computation appears ideally suited to addressing the cognitively disabled individual’s Patient - Centered Design 293 everyday activities , and supporting Functional Rehabilitation . As CAT , computation lets the patient deal with concrete instances of activities . Its applications can be high - ly customized to each individual’s needs . TBI presents an opportunity and challenge for a computational approach to support rehabilitation . The opportunity arises from decades of experience in supporting cognitive activities of users . The challenge is that the cognitive deficits that produce disabilities in everyday activities can also impair the ability to use computer software . Also , a software solution must not be so burdensome as to require substantial therapy time . An early model of interface performance may be helpful in understanding the challenge presented by disability , adapted from Card , Moran , and Newell [ 7 ] . See figure 1 . There are 3 clusters of independent variables : ( 1 ) user characteristics , which include cognitive functioning and disabilities , ( 2 ) task characteristics , and ( 3 ) system characteristics , which include UI design and functionality . These clusters then predict ( 1 ) state - to - state transition time , ( 2 ) work time per unit , ( 3 ) length of produc - tive working time , ( 4 ) number of errors , ( 5 ) ease of error recovery , ( 6 ) training time per feature , and ( 7 ) training information remembered . Figure 1 . Performance measures and predictor variables used in evaluating interface designs Performance is a function of user , system , and task characteristics . Systems are designed for people with a certain level of assumed abilities . If the individual’s characteristics are lower ( U ↓ ) and performance levels are to be maintained , then the system design needs to fit the user better ( S ↑ ) , e . g . , through a better - fitting UI . This means that for individuals with U ↓ , a higher quality UI is required and more emphasis needs to be placed on UI design . As we will see below , for individuals with cognitive disabilities , i . e . , U↓ , the UI is extremely sensitive to even small changes in UI design . In the case of an individual with a unique set of deficits and abilities , a better - fit sys - tem design requires personalization . The task component suggests that different tasks may require different designs for functionality or interface or both . The model doesn’t provide guidance on how to achieve a better fit , but the model does provide a means of evaluating an interface design and comparing designs . 2 The Patient - Centered Design Model in the Brain Injury Context PCD derives from our work on TBI rehabilitation treatment of cognitive dis - abilities where one - of - a - kind software systems have provided substantial independ - User Characteristics System Characteristics Task Characteristics Performance Measures • te to state transition time • Training timtae per feature • Training info remem - bereSd • Number of Errors • Ease of error recovery • Work time per unit • Productive working time Performance Measures • State - to - state transition time • Work time per unit • Productive working time • Number of errors • Ease of error recovery • Training time per feature • Training info remembered • Elliot Cole 294 ence to the individual [ see 10 ] . PCD incorporates some features of UCD and of PD and also addresses clinical issues . In PCD , the focus is on the individual patient , on rehabilitation treatment plan objectives , on the skills of the therapist in treating the patient , and on using the patient’s abilities . There are 3 types of actors who participate in PCD : clinicians , individuals with cognitive disabilities , and software designers . In our implementation of PCD , clinicians apply functional rehabilitation , which uses everyday activities as the con - text of therapy . Patients are treated in their homes via computer workstations with a TBI telerehab delivery system combining CBCP software and videoconferencing . The first step in the design process involves UCD in the selection of patient priority activities , which become the context for cognitive rehabilitation therapy . These are activities that have required caregiver support since the injury . A therapist elicits a set of priority activities and upcoming events from the patient . The clinician evaluates the activities for their therapeutic appropriateness , including their relation - ship to upcoming events , and selects one for the initial intervention . A criterion for the initial intervention is that the patient be able to achieve success within a week or 2 , unusually fast for rehabilitation . The Initial Intervention centers on a particular concrete activity that can be well specified , and simplified , in contrast to a generic activity that involves many contingencies . UCD uses patient participation and en - gagement in therapy sessions and in the setting of target activities as major motivators and elements of rehabilitation . Both UCD and PD involve observation of the present system to establish us - er requirements . This is done in the user’s setting because few users can communi - cate with the necessary accuracy and level of detail . In addition , the analyst will no - tice artifacts that provide useful information . In the case of PCD , observing the cur - rent system helps identify tasks and subtasks that the individual cannot – and can – perform , giving clinicians an inventory of contextualized abilities . When a computer is used to help perform an activity , the analyst will observe the individual’s use of the software and identify failures . From this data will come user requirements , consisting of required functional features and insights into interface design . The individual generally feels successful when able to perform subtasks , and for that reason , PCD excludes those subtasks from the user requirements . There is a 2 - pronged strategy for collapsing the time needed to train the pa - tient in use of the software . The first strategy is to strip down functionality to what is needed this therapy session only and was inspired by Carroll’s training wheels con - cept [ 8 ] ; Leung et al . [ 16 ] use multilayer interfaces to reduce learning time . Fewer features mean ( 1 ) fewer commands necessary and ( 2 ) reduced application and inter - face complexity . Also , with unnecessary functionality removed , the individual is freed from learning how to use features that will not be needed until later . The second strategy is to make the interface intuitive to that individual user , by using PD to allow the user to design the interface , especially the details . In this strategy , the user’s men - tal model is factored into the UI , making it intuitive to that individual . Usability testing is a key component of PCD and comes from PD . Our stud - ies – and clinical work – have shown that the UI is the key design component of the application . Small changes in a UI , seemingly innocuous , can make the difference between what can be successfully used and what cannot . Patient - Centered Design 295 Usability testing procedures are modified for the individual cognitively im - paired user rather than a panel of users [ 10 ] . There is a structured testing session to obtain quantitative data and then an unstructured testing session , which provides the most valuable information . Here the user can make design suggestions at both a gross and fine level of detail . The individual shapes the UI to overcome specific cognitive disabilities . The need to refine the UI was found across the range of deficits , from profound to high - functioning , and frankly was surprising . What was equally surpris - ing was the ability of profoundly impaired individuals to make key suggestions for the design of their UI [ 11 ] . They seem to have excelled at fine - tuning the UI . The result - ing designs exceeded the capabilities of highly trained designers . As one observes a patient making suggestions for the UI , it is not always clear exactly what the patient is optimizing , and the patient may not be able to articulate it . What is clear is that some - thing is being optimized . Results of the usability testing are cycled into the next itera - tion , which undergoes usability testing again . This process greatly increases the design effort in the UI . The rationale for this effort is the degree of users’ cognitive impairment , typically several standard deviations from the mean of several cognitive dimensions ordinarily involved in UI use . The justification for the effort rests in the outcome of the intervention . Roll - out involves installing the system in the patient’s home , on the patient’s desk . The therapist and the patient ( and perhaps a family member ) will have selected a clinically appropriate place in the home for the patient’s desk and workstation . After the patient begins using the application , it is likely that some additional changes will be necessary or desirable . Although the software underwent usability testing , the testing was not performed under real operational and workflow conditions . PCD requires enhancements . CBCPs have stripped - down functionality . The patient , realizing that additional features could be valuable , asks the therapist to have the features added . The CBCP software suite offers extensive functionality , so in all likelihood the functionality for any given feature merely needs to be activated , alt - hough case study 2 below involves new applications . However , the feature’s inter - face must be designed . The patient and therapist develop the UI for the feature , and how it fits into the existing interface , perhaps in consultation with a UI designer . 2 . 1 Case Study 1 : Essence of Text Editor The patient was high functioning , competitively employed , and looking for another job . He continued to have deficits in memory , attention , concentration , rea - soning , and problem solving ; cognitive rigidity ; and reduced frustration tolerance that sometimes led to outbursts . He also had handwriting problems . He was trying to write a short cover letter for his resume in response to a help wanted ad . He would write out a draft and start editing it , and the paper would tear as he tried to erase a word ; an outburst would ensue . College - educated , he had been a professional in a government agency before his accident , and he knew how to touch - type . User requirements The immediate task was to compose , edit , and print a single cover letter . The functionality needed was default font and line spacing , and a print command . The user needed to be able to insert and delete words , both of which would rely on cursor Elliot Cole 296 control . Inserting words could be accomplished by keeping the keyboard in insert mode . Deleting words could be accomplished by backspacing . User interface design Because of the user’s cognitive rigidity , a decision was made to mimic type - writer mode : Courier font , 12 point , single space . It was also proposed to implement the print command ( “Print this page” ) with a color - coded function key . The print command would give feedback to the user in a text box that would appear on the screen . The user would design the function - key print command and the confirmation text box in the unstructured phase of usability testing . The results of the design ses - sion would be added to the application and undergo another cycle of usability testing . Results User training took about 10 minutes and mainly involved use of the cursor . This intervention succeeded in the first hour of use . The therapist worked with the patient in creating and revising the letter . The patient was able to make inserts and deletions as he wanted , and he was able to print the product . He kept a hard copy of the letter for his files . He went on to write additional letters , using the previous letter as a template and printing out hard copies . Shortly afterward , he asked to have a multiple - document text editor ; save and retrieve features and interface were added . This application served clinically important goals and was a major success despite its limited functionality . It served the patient’s initial and important goal and is thus an excellent example of PCD . Note that the patient solved the problem of how to write additional letters by deleting and inserting . From a software design perspec - tive this approach would be considered inadequate by most standards , but as a therapy tool for that patient , it was exactly what was needed . This application also made the patient active in the rehabilitation process . It addressed what he saw as a priority activity , he helped to design the UI , and he made requests for added functionality . His comments revealed pride and ownership in the application and system . That application served as a gateway to other applications and increased the individual’s self - sufficiency . 2 . 2 Case Study 2 : Patient and Therapist Contributions to Design This case study focuses on several aspects of patient involvement in design and novel use of software . This case study is also important for its outcome , which was considered extraordinary by the rehabilitation professionals who had treated the patient in the rehabilitation hospital . This college senior suffered a traumatic brain injury when struck by an au - tomobile . Serious medical complications further reduced her cognitive abilities . She had cognitive rehabilitation as an inpatient and outpatient . It was expected that she would need daily caregiver support , and work in a sheltered workshop was anticipat - ed . Return to college seemed impossible despite her supportive family . Early on , the patient needed scheduling software to remind her of daily activ - ities , but she tended to forget an event even if she had looked at the calendar earlier and had a reminder displayed on the monitor . Therapist and patient asked if a re - minder could be sent to her . This involved a major modification of the scheduling Patient - Centered Design 297 application , including a store - and - forward message system because none was availa - ble from pager carriers . User requirement The initial user requirement was to have a feature added to each calendar en - try whereby a message composed by the patient would be transmitted at a specific time to an alphanumeric pager that she would carry . In discussions with the patient , it was decided that the messaging would be part of the appointment - scheduling form . A widget would activate several fields for the message , including the text of the mes - sage and the time for delivering the message . User interface design Operationalizing the notification time involved several options , including a specific time and a time offset ( minutes before the event ) from the appointment time ; the patient chose the offset time . The UI testing let the patient specify the field labels and field placement ; she chose a check - box to activate the function . Several alphanumeric pagers were obtained for testing . Results The patient quickly became proficient in clicking the check - box and in com - posing the message with considerable care , often editing it several times . Unfortu - nately , the approach failed for 2 main reasons . First , the paging service was not suffi - ciently reliable , and messages could take minutes to an hour for transmission . More important , the pager was multimodal with soft keys , which meant that the function of a specific key changed depending on the active mode of the device at the time . None of the pagers would allow modification of the user interface . The patient had difficul - ty reading multipage messages and also had difficulty finding the message list . Basi - cally , the interface failed because of both the number of errors and the inability of the user to recover from the error condition . User requirement – redesign The message - sending concept seemed sound , but the equipment was clearly inadequate . Cell phones could provide an immediate connection and so seemed more promising . A cell phone message could be transmitted either as text - to - speech or as a sound file recorded in the patient’s voice . The patient found the idea of sending her - self a reminder in her own voice very attractive and engaging . None of the communication carriers had a store - and - forward audio file capa - bility . Fortunately , our application designed for pagers could be easily adapted for delivering sound files via cell phone . An added feature would be recording the mes - sage composed in the text box . In design / testing sessions , the functionality would involve recording , reviewing , rerecording , and saving the audio file . User interface design The UI was dual : the user’s interaction with the on - screen form and with the cell phone . The user phrased the labels for commands . On testing , we were able to Elliot Cole 298 incorporate the commands easily . She was also able to record , revise , and save the sound files . However , the sound files often had a pause at the beginning and end of the recording , which the user disliked . Rather than placing the burden on the user to coordinate speaking and recording , it was decided to automatically edit the recording , removing the silences at the beginning and end of the file . The patient approved of this solution . As for the cell phone component , the patient decided that it was satis - factory to answer the phone and press a key to begin playing the recording . Results Use of the cell phone feature allowed the patient to remind herself , rather than having a family member remind her , with 2 important results . First , the family could see that she no longer needed their reminders . Second , the patient appreciated hearing the reminder in her own voice . Epilogue The cognitive rehabilitation therapy provided with this technology increased both the patient’s cognitive abilities and her level of cognitive functioning with the supportive technology . It was decided that a return to college was a reasonable goal to attempt but would require passing several academic - achievement exams . The therapist and patient proposed a multimodal concept - learning application that would combine tactile , visual , and audio components . The application was built , and refined both before and after rollout . It proved successful in helping her relearn academic material . She was readmitted for her senior year , which she successfully completed in a year , and graduated . Her therapist provided cognitive rehabilitation in the form of academic support during both periods . The therapist was certain that the recovery would have been impossible without the use of the software and its design . 3 Discussion Cognitive technologies as catalysts of clinical gains in cognitive abilities Cognitive technologies for individuals with disabilities seem to have 2 modes of action . The first is like a power wheelchair , bridging deficits so that the individual can use existing abilities to increase level of function . The second increas - es cognitive abilities , producing actual clinical gain . Merzenich et al . exploited brain plasticity in developing software to treat an auditory processing disorder [ 18 ] ; repeti - tion and patient engagement were both factors in patient success . In case study 2 , a former college student headed for a sheltered workshop was able to graduate from college with a combination of intensive therapy and cognitive technology . Similar results were achieved in physical and cognitive dimensions in a young stroke patient [ 12 ] and to a lesser extent before brain plasticity had entered the neurorehabilitation clinical literature [ 11 ] . The ability to produce clinical gains suggests that some cogni - tive technologies would benefit from clinical expertise , both with therapy and with involvement in the personalization of software . Case study 1 shows how the most Patient - Centered Design 299 limited functionality was able to advance therapy goals . PCD can promote clinical gains . This focuses attention on clinical goals and expertise . Contributions of TBI patients to the design of their UIs The UI seems to be the key design issue for individuals with TBI , predicted by the diffuse cognitive damage caused by TBI , and the cognitive load of learning new interfaces . PD has been widely used for developing CAT functionality and con - tributes to UI design with older populations [ 1 , 16 , 23 , 24 ] , developmental disabilities [ 5 ] , aphasia [ cf , 19 ] , and autism [ cf , 17 ] . To be useful , UI design for TBI requires personalization . Clinicians and UI designers lacked fine - granularity cognitive - performance data to inform UI design . Fortunately , TBI patients were particularly adept in identifying problems in a proposed UI design , and especially at fine - tuning their own UIs . In our implementation of PCD , the individual with a brain injury could best inform UI design , and was given that responsibility . Promoting user engagement Cognitive rehabilitation aims to increase and restore cognitive activity . User engagement aims at increasing cognitive activity as well . The implementation of PCD discussed in this paper is designed to promote patient engagement in several ways . Patients become engaged because their priority activities are the context of cognitive rehabilitation . Patients become engaged because their software contains ideas they individually have proposed , especially the UI , the most visible part of an application . Users are encouraged to suggest additional functionality to help deal with an activity in their near future . The engaged user also often develops personal new uses for applications , evidence of expanding cognitive activity . These uses of the software that haven’t been taught constitute invention on a personal scale . This per - sonal invention helps increase the individual’s level of cognitive functioning and activity . Both help reduce the level of disability – especially in priority areas – and help the individuals get back into their lives . Madsen et al . [ 17 ] encouraged autistic adolescents to develop new uses of a technology tool , and Morris et al . [ 20 ] cleverly used interface design to engage autistic children by incorporating objects of their obsession into software with therapeutic goals . The abilities of individuals with severe and profound disabilities PCD can be a powerful tool , providing the opportunity to see a range of be - haviors . Often PCD will provide a view of behavior opposite from conventional wisdom . Disabilities are typically easy to see , but abilities may not show themselves very often . Too frequently a disabled individual lives down to the level of people’s expectations . PCD provides the opportunity for individuals with disabilities to be themselves , and for people who work with them to understand that many dimensions are uncorrelated or poorly correlated with each other . Our initial ( and first computer science ) study in cognitive disabilities [ 11 ] reports an individual with several pro - found deficits , coupled with substantial abilities . Case Study 2 reports on a person with some severe and moderate cognitive deficits . Both were involved in developing the UI , as well as developing new uses for her software . An individual with profound disabilities is limited , as were our expectations of ability to do PD . However , we were surprised at the ability to provide instructions that made the UI virtually intui - Elliot Cole 300 tive . We were also surprised at her ability to develop new uses for the application , e . g . , to check the accuracy of information stored in her new computer because the information in her previous computer was corrupted . 4 References 1 . Baecker , Ron . “Designing Technology to Aid Cognition , ” ASSETS 20 08 . 3 . Brain Injury Assn of America . www . biausa . org / bia - media - center . htm 4 . Brookes , N . Closed Head Injury . Oxford University Press , 1984 . 5 . Carmien , Stefan ; and Fischer , Gerhard . “Design , Adoption , and Assessment of a Socio - Technical Environment Supporting Independence for Persons with Cognitive Disabilities , ” CHI 2008 , 598 – 606 . 6 . Carmien , Stefan ; and Koene , Randal . “Distributed Intelligence and Scaffolding in Support of Cognitive Health , ” HCII 2009 . 7 . Card , S . K . ; Moran , T . P . ; and Newell , Alan . The Psychology of Human - Computer Interac - tion . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , 1983 . 8 . Carroll , J . ; and Carrithers , C . “Training wheels in a user interface” , CACM , 27 : 800 - 6 ( 1984 ) . 9 . Centers for Disease Control & Prevention www . cdc . gov / traumaticbraininjury / statistics . html 10 . Cole , Elliot . “Cognitive Prosthetics : Overview of a Method of Treatment , ” NeuroRehabili - tation , 12 : 39 - 51 ( 1999 ) . 11 . Cole , Elliot ; and Dehdashti , Parto . “Interface design as a prosthesis for an individual with a brain injury , ” SIGCHI Bulletin , 22 ( 1 ) : 28 - 32 , 1990 . 12 . Cole , Elliot ; Petti , Linda ; Matthews , Michael ; Dehdashti , Parto . “Rapid functional im - provement and generalization in a young stroke patient following computer - based cognitive prosthetic intervention . ” NIH Neural Prosthesis Workshop , October 19 - 21 , 1994 . ( www . brain - rehab . com / pdf / NIH _ Neural _ ProsthesisWKSHP . pdf ) 13 . Cole , Elliot ; and Dehdashti , Parto . “Computer - Based Cognitive Prosthetics : Assistive Technology for the treatment of traumatic brain injury , ” ASSETS 98 : 11 - 18 . 14 . Engelbart , Douglas . Augmenting Human Intellect : A Conceptual Framework . SRI , October 1962 . ( See www . dougengelbart . org / pubs / augment - 3906 . html ) 15 . Fischer , Gerhard . “End - user development and meta - design : Foundations for cultures of participation , ” J Organizational and End User Computing 22 : 52 - 82 ( 2010 ) . 16 . Leung , R . ; Findlatper , L . ; McGrenere , J . ; and Graf , P . “Multi - layered interfaces to improve older adults’ initial learnability of mobile applications , ” ACM Tran Access Comp , 3 : 1 - 30 . 17 . Madsen , M . ; el Kaliouby , R . ; Eckhardt , M . ; Hoque , M . ; Goodwin ; and Picard , R . “Lessons from participatory design with adolescents on the autism spectrum . ” CHI 2009 : 3835 - 3840 . 18 . Merzenich , Michael ; Jenkins , Wiliam ; Johnson , Paul ; Schreiner , Christoph ; Miller , Steven ; and Tallal , Paula . “Temporal processing deficits of language - learning impaired children ameliorated by training . ” Science , 271 : 77 - 81 , 1996 . 19 . Moffaat , Karyn ; and Davies , Rhian . “The Aphasia Project : Designing technology for and with individusals who have aphasia . ” Accessibility and Computing 80 : 11 - 17 ( 2004 ) . 20 . Morris , R ; Kirschbaum , C ; and Picard , R . “Broadening accessibility through special inter - ests : A new approach for software customization . ” ASSETS 2010 : 171 - 178 . 22 . World Health Organization www . who . int / classifications / icf / en / . 23 . Wu , Mike ; Baecker , Ronald ; Richards , Brian . “Field Evaluation of a collaborative memory aid for persons with amnesia and their families . ” ASSETS 2010 : 51 - 58 Orlando , Oct 25 - 27 . 24 . Wu , M . ; Birnholtz , J . ; Baecker , R . M . ; Richards , B . ; and Massimi , M . “Collaborating to remem - ber : A distributed cognition account of families coping with memory impairments , ” CHI 2008 , 825 - 834 . 25 . Zasler , Nathan D . ; Katz , Douglas I . ; and Zafonte , Ross D . Brain Injury Medicine , 2007 , Damos Medical Publishing , New York .