a r X i v : q - b i o / 0702031v1 [ q - b i o . S C ] 14 F e b 2007 Cooperative Gating and Spatial Organization of Membrane Proteins through Elastic Interactions Tristan Ursell 1 , Kerwyn Huang 2 , Eric Peterson 3 and Rob Phillips 1 , 4 ∗ Departments of 1 Applied Physics and 3 Physics , California Institute of Technology , Pasadena , CA 91125 , USA 4 Kavli Nanoscience Institute , Pasadena , CA 91125 , USA 2 Department of Molecular Biology , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ 08544 , USA Submitted to PLoS Computational Biology February 7 , 2008 Biological membranes are elastic media in which the presence of a transmembrane protein leads to local bilayer deformation . The energetics of deformation allow two membrane proteins in close proximity to inﬂuence each other’s equilibrium conformation via their local deformations , and spatially organize the proteins based on their geometry . We use the mechanosensitive channel of large conductance ( MscL ) as a case study to examine the implications of bilayer - mediated elastic interactions on protein conformational statistics and clustering . The deformations around MscL cost energy on the order of 10 k B T and extend ∼ 3nm from the protein edge , as such elastic forces induce cooperative gating and we propose experiments to measure these eﬀects . Additionally , since elastic interactions are coupled to protein conformation , we ﬁnd that conformational changes can severely alter the average separation between two proteins . This has important implications for how conformational changes organize membrane proteins into functional groups within membranes . Introduction Biological membranes are active participants in the function and spatial organization of membrane proteins [ 1 , 2 , 3 ] . At the simplest level , the membrane positions proteins into a two - dimensional space , where they are of - ten laterally organized into groups . These groups can serve speciﬁc purposes on the cell surface and within organelles , such as sensing , adhesion and transport [ 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 ] . Electrostatic and van der Waals forces help drive lateral organization [ 10 ] , however there is an additional class of purely bilayer - mediated elastic forces that can facilitate the formation of complexes of membrane proteins . Conformational changes of membrane proteins result from a wide range of environmental factors including tem - perature , pH , ligand and small molecule binding , mem - brane voltage , and membrane tension . Likewise , confor - mational state is often tightly coupled with function ( e . g . for ion channels ) [ 11 , 12 , 13 ] . In this work , we demon - strate how elastic interactions can communicate informa - tion about protein conformation from one neighboring pro - tein to another coupling their conformational state . Ad - ditionally , we ﬁnd that these interactions lead to spatial ∗ corresponding author : phillips @ pboc . caltech . edu organization within the bilayer that is strongly dependent on protein conformation . We suggest that elastic forces play a role in the func - tion and spatial organization of many membrane proteins across many cell types , given the generically high areal density of membrane proteins [ 14 ] and the strength of these interactions . We use the mechanosensitive channel of large conductance ( MscL ) from E . coli as the model protein for this study . MscL is a transmembrane homo - pentamer found in the plasma membrane of E . coli ( and many other bacteria ) serving as an emergency relief valve under hypo - osmotic shock [ 11 , 15 , 16 ] . As membrane ten - sion increases , this non - selective ion channel changes con - formation from a closed state to an open state , releasing water and osmolytes [ 17 , 18 ] . Though several substates have been identiﬁed in this gating transition , the relatively short dwell - times in these substates as compared to the fully open or fully closed states , allows us to approximate the protein as a simple two - state system [ 17 , 19 ] . Crys - tal and electron - paramagnetic - resonance structures sug - gest the bilayer - spanning region is nearly cylindrical in both the open and closed conformations [ 15 , 20 , 21 ] , mak - ing MscL particularly amenable to mechanical modeling . Electrophysiology of reconstituted channels allows mea - surement of the state of one or more of these proteins with excellent temporal and number resolution . Therefore , the - oretical predictions for how elastic interactions change the gating behavior of a MscL protein can be readily tested us - ing electrophysiology and other experimental techniques . Following earlier work , we use continuum mechanics to break down the deformation caused by a cylindrical trans - membrane protein into a term penalizing changes in bi - layer thickness and a term penalizing bending of a bilayer leaﬂet [ 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 ] , and we introduce a third term that preserves bilayer volume under deformation [ 27 ] . Due to its structural symmetry , MscL can be characterized by its radius and bilayer - spanning thickness in its two con - formations ( i . e . open and closed ) , neglecting any speciﬁc molecular detail ( see Figure 1 ) . As these geometric pa - rameters change with conformation , the bilayer - mediated interaction between two channels is altered . Using the in - teraction potentials in each combination of conformations , 1 we explore how both the single - channel and interacting en - ergetics aﬀect the spatial and conformational behavior of two channels . In the ﬁrst section we cover the physical principles behind bilayer deformation due to the presence of mem - brane proteins . In the second section we explore the diﬀerences in gating behavior of two MscL proteins when held at a ﬁxed separation . In the third section we explore the conformational and spatial behavior of diﬀusing MscL proteins as a function of areal density . Finally , in the fourth section we discuss the relevance of these forces as compared to other classes of bilayer - mediated forces and support our hypotheses with results from previous experiments . Results Elastic Deformation Induced by Membrane Pro - teins The bilayer is composed of discrete lipid molecules whose lateral diﬀusion ( D ∼ 10 µ m 2 / s ) [ 28 ] is faster than the diﬀusion of transmembrane proteins ( D ∼ 0 . 1 − 1 µ m 2 / s ) [ 29 , 30 , 31 ] . In the time it takes a transmem - brane protein to diﬀuse one lipid diameter , many lipids will have exchanged places near the protein to average out the discreteness of the lipid molecules . Addition - ally , the transition time for protein conformational change ( ∼ 5 µs ) [ 32 ] is slow compared to lipid diﬀusion . Hence , we argue the bilayer can be approximated as a continuous material in equilibrium with well - deﬁned elastic proper - ties [ 33 ] . Further , we choose to formulate our analysis in the language of continuum mechanics , rather than lat - eral pressure proﬁles [ 34 ] . In particular , each leaﬂet of the bilayer resists changes in the angle between adjacent lipid molecules , leading to bending stiﬀness of the bilayer [ 22 , 35 ] . Likewise , the bilayer has a preferred spacing of the lipid molecules in - plane and will resist any changes in this spacing due to external tension [ 36 ] . Finally , ex - periments suggest that the volume per lipid is conserved [ 37 , 38 ] such that changes in bilayer thickness are accom - panied by changes in lipid spacing [ 2 , 33 ] . Transmembrane proteins can compress and bend a bi - layer leaﬂet via at least two mechanisms . The protein can force the bilayer to adopt a new thickness , matching the hydrophobic region of the protein to the hydrophobic core of the bilayer . Additionally , a non - cylindrical protein can induce a slope in the leaﬂet at the protein - lipid interface [ 25 , 39 ] . For transmembrane proteins like MscL , that can be ap - proximated as cylindrical , symmetry dictates that the de - formation energy of the bilayer is twice the deformation energy of one leaﬂet . Presuming the protein does not de - form the bilayer too severely , we can write the bending and compression ( thickness change ) energies in a form analo - gous to Hooke’s law , and account for external tension with a term analogous to PV work . We denote the deformation of the leaﬂet by the function u ( r ) , which measures the de - viation of the lipid head - group from its unperturbed height as a function of the position r ( see Figure 1 ) . In all the calculations that follow the physical parameters chosen are representative of a typical phosphatidylcholine ( PC ) lipid bilayer and the number of lipids in this model bilayer is ﬁxed . The energy penalizing compression of the bilayer is G comp = K A 2 Z (cid:18) u ( r ) l (cid:19) 2 d 2 r , ( 1 ) where K A is the bilayer area stretch modulus ( ∼ 58 k B T / nm 2 , k B T is the thermal energy unit ) and l is the unperturbed leaﬂet thickness ( ∼ 1 . 75 nm ) [ 36 ] . The bending energy of a leaﬂet is G bend = κ b 4 Z ( ∇ 2 u ( r ) − c o ) 2 d 2 r , ( 2 ) where κ b ( ∼ 14 k B T ) is the bilayer bending modulus , c o is the spontaneous curvature of the leaﬂet [ 33 , 36 , 40 ] , and ∇ 2 = ∂ 2 / ∂x 2 + ∂ 2 / ∂y 2 is the Laplacian operator . Coupling external tension to bilayer deformations is more subtle than the previous two energetic contributions . We note that the bilayer is roughly forty times more resis - tant to volume change than area change [ 37 , 38 ] , hence if a transmembrane protein locally thins the bilayer , lipids will expand in the area near the protein to conserve volume . Likewise , if the protein locally thickens the bilayer , lipids near the protein will condense ( see Figure 1 ) . Therefore , the area change near the protein is proportional to the compression u ( r ) , and the work done on the bilayer is the integrated area change multiplied by tension G ten = τ Z u ( r ) l d 2 r , ( 3 ) where τ is the externally applied bilayer tension . Slightly below bilayer rupture , and near the expected regime of MscL gating , τ ≃ 2 . 6 k B T / nm 2 [ 17 , 36 ] . In total , the bilayer deformation energy is G = 1 2 Z K A (cid:18) u l + τ K A (cid:19) 2 + κ b (cid:0) ∇ 2 u − c o (cid:1) 2 ! d 2 r , ( 4 ) where we have made use of the constant bilayer area to elucidate the interplay between tension and compression 1 . To obtain the length and energy scales of these defor - mations , we non - dimensionalize the bilayer deformation energy , G . We scale both the position r and displacement u ( r ) by λ = ( κ b l 2 / K A ) 1 / 4 ≃ 1 nm , the natural length scale of deformation , to give the new variables ρ and η ( ρ ) re - spectively , where ρ = r / λ and η ( ρ ) = u ( r ) / λ . Then G can be written as G = κ b 2 Z (cid:16) ( η + χ ) 2 + (cid:0) ∇ 2 η − ν o (cid:1) 2 (cid:17) d 2 ρ , ( 5 ) 1 Speciﬁcally , we added a constant proportional to membrane area and τ 2 , which is identically zero when calculating diﬀerences in free energy . 2 Figure 1 : Schematic of Bilayer Deformations due to MscL . Mismatch between the hydrophobic regions of the lipid bilayer and an integral membrane protein gives rise to bending and compression deformations in each leaﬂet of the bilayer . The largest deformations occur at the protein - lipid interface , and over the scale of a few nanometers the bilayer returns to its unperturbed state . MscL is shown schematically at zero tension in its closed and open states with relevant dimensions . The red region of the protein indicates the hydrophobic zone . The hydrophobic mismatch at the protein - lipid interface is denoted by u o . The deformation proﬁle , denoted by u ( r ) , is measured with reference to the unperturbed leaﬂet thickness ( l ) from the protein center at r = 0 . where ν o = λc o is the dimensionless spontaneous curvature and χ = τl / K A λ is the dimensionless tension , which is ≃ 0 . 09 in the regime of MscL gating . The energy scale is set by the bending modulus , κ b . Using the standard Euler - Lagrange equation from the calculus of variations [ 41 ] , the functional for the deforma - tion energy can be translated into the partial diﬀerential equation 2 ∇ 4 η + η + χ = 0 . ( 6 ) The deformation proﬁle u ( r ) that solves this partial dif - ferential equation depends on four boundary conditions . In the far - ﬁeld , we expect the bilayer to be ﬂat and slightly thinner in accordance with the applied tension , i . e . | ∇ u ( ∞ ) | = 0 and u ( ∞ ) = − τl / K A , respectively . At the protein - lipid interface ( r = r o ) the hydrophobic re - gions of the protein and the bilayer must be matched , i . e . u ( r o ) = u o ( see Figure 1 ) , where u o is one - half the mis - match between the hydrophobic region of the protein and the hydrophobic core of the bilayer . Finally , the slope of the bilayer at the protein - lipid interface is set to zero ( i . e . | ∇ u ( r o ) | = 0 ) . The motivation for this last boundary con - dition is subtle and will be examined in more detail in the 2 With no loss of generality , the equation that governs deformation can also be written in the parameter free form ∇ 4 η + η = 0 , with all parametric sensitivity absorbed into the boundary conditions . Discussion . To understand how the deformation energy scales with hydrophobic mismatch ( u o ) , protein size ( r o ) , and tension ( τ ) , we solve Eq . 6 analytically for a single cylindrical pro - tein . The deformation energy is G single = πκ b Z ∞ ρ o (cid:16) ( η + χ ) 2 + (cid:0) ∇ 2 η − ν o (cid:1) 2 (cid:17) ρ d ρ , ( 7 ) where ρ o = r o / λ is the dimensionless radius of the protein . The bilayer deformation around a single protein is a linear combination of zeroth order modiﬁed Bessel functions of the second kind ( K 0 ) [ 25 , 26 ] . For proteins such as MscL with a radius larger than λ ( i . e . 1 nm ) the deformation energy is well - approximated by G single = πκ b (cid:18) u o λ + τ K A l λ (cid:19) 2 (cid:16) 1 + √ 2 r o λ (cid:17) . ( 8 ) The deformation energy scales linearly with protein ra - dius and depends quadratically on the combination of hy - drophobic mismatch ( u o ) and tension ( τ ) . This makes the overall deformation energy particularly sensitive to the hy - drophobic mismatch , and hence leaﬂet thickness l . The deformation energy is fairly insensitive to changes in K A ( i . e . most terms in the energy are sublinear ) , and gener - ally insensitive to changes in the bending modulus since G ∝ κ 1 / 4 b . Using our standard elastic bilayer parameters and the dimensions of a MscL channel ( see Figure 1 ) , the change in deformation energy between the closed and open states is ∆ G single ≃ 50 k B T . The measured value for the free energy change of gating a MscL protein , including inter - nal changes of the protein and deformation of surrounding lipids is ≃ 51 k B T [ 19 ] . This close correspondence does not indicate that bilayer deformation accounts for all of the free energy change of gating [ 42 ] , but does suggest that it is a major contributor . The gating energy of two channels in close proximity is a complex function of their conformations and the distance between them . As two proteins come within a few nanome - ters of each other ( i . e . a few λ ) , the deformations which extend from their respective protein - lipid interfaces begin to overlap and interact . The bilayer adopts a new shape ( i . e . a new u ( r ) ) , distinct from the deformation around two independent proteins , and hence the total deforma - tion energy changes as well . This is the physical origin of the elastic interaction between two bilayer - deforming proteins [ 23 , 24 ] . Each protein imposes its own local boundary conditions on the bilayer , that vary with conformation , hence the de - formation around a pair of proteins is a function of their in - dividual conformation and the distance between them . A MscL protein has two distinct conformations , hence there can be pairwise interactions between two closed channels , an open and a closed channel , or two open channels ( see Figure 2 ) . Tension also aﬀects the deformations . The hy - drophobic mismatch can be either positive or negative ( i . e . 3 Figure 2 : Elastic Potentials between Two MscL Proteins . To minimize deformation energy , two transmembrane proteins ex - ert elastic forces on each other . MscL has three distinct interac - tion potentials between its two distinct conformations . Exter - nal tension weakens the interaction between two open channels ( V oo ) and strengthens the interaction between two closed chan - nels ( V cc ) , but has almost no eﬀect on the interaction between an open and closed channel ( V oc ) . The open - open and closed - closed interactions are both more strongly attracting than the open - closed interaction , indicating that elastic potentials favor interactions between channels in the same state . The ‘hard core’ distance is where the proteins’ edges are in contact . the protein can be thicker or thinner than the bilayer ) , thus tension will strengthen the interaction of proteins that are thicker than the bilayer ( e . g . the closed - closed interac - tion of two MscL proteins ) and weaken the interaction of proteins that are thinner than the bilayer ( e . g . the open - open interaction ) . This eﬀect is demonstrated in Figure 2 . The interactions due to leaﬂet deformations have been explored before [ 23 , 24 ] , but our model elucidates the role that these interactions can play in communicating confor - mational information between proteins . Additionally , in our model , tension can play an important role in deter - mining the overall deformation energy around a protein . In a one - dimensional model , the interaction potentials can be solved for analytically . For two identical proteins in close proximity ( e . g . closed - closed and open - open inter - actions ) , the approximate shape of the potential is linearly attractive κ b ( u o / λ ) 2 ( d / 2 λ − √ 2 ) . Between two dissimilar proteins in close proximity ( e . g . open - closed interaction ) the potential is approximately κ b λu 2 o π 4 / 4 d 3 , where in both cases d is measured from the edges of the proteins . This illustrates the general principle that two similar proteins attractively interact , while two dissimilar proteins tend to repel each other . In a two - dimensional bilayer , however , the geometry of the two proteins makes it diﬃcult to solve for the interaction analytically , thus numerical techniques were used ( see Materials and Methods ) . This theoretical framework provides a strong foun - dation for understanding how protein geometries and lipid properties give rise to elastic interactions . With this , we can investigate how elastic forces change the conformational statistics of a two - state protein population . Gating Behavior of Two Interacting Channels To probe the range of separations over which elastic interactions aﬀect the gating of two MscL proteins , we need to account for the non - interacting energetics of gat - ing a single channel in addition to the interactions be - tween two channels . The non - interacting energy is the sum of three eﬀects . First , there is some energetic cost to deform the surrounding membrane , which we already calculated as ∆ G single . Second , there is some cost to change the protein’s internal conformation , independent of the membrane . Together , these ﬁrst two eﬀects are the gating energy ∆ G gate ≃ 51 k B T for MscL [ 19 ] . Finally , there is an energetic mechanism that overcomes these costs and opens the channel as tension increases . This mecha - nism is provided by the bilayer tension working in con - cert with the conformational area change of the protein ( ∆ A ≃ 20 nm 2 for MscL [ 19 ] ) . Given the experimentally determined values for ∆ G gate and the area change during gating , the critical tension , deﬁned by ∆ G gate = τ c ∆ A , is τ c = 2 . 6 k B T / nm 2 . In our thermodynamic treatment we need to keep track of the conformations of each protein in a population in a way that allows us to tabulate the non - interacting and in - teracting contributions to the free energy . To this end , we assign a state variable , s i , to each channel indicating the conformational state of a protein , where s i = 0 indicates that the i th channel is closed and s i = 1 indicates that the i th channel is open . The non - interacting energy for two channels is then H non ( s 1 , s 2 ; τ ) = ( ∆ G gate − τ ∆ A ) ( s 1 + s 2 ) . ( 9 ) If both channels are closed ( s 1 = s 2 = 0 ) the free energy is deﬁned to be zero . If one channel is open and the other closed ( s 1 = 1 , s 2 = 0 or s 1 = 0 , s 2 = 1 ) this counts as the cost to gate one channel working against the beneﬁt at a particular tension to opening the channel . Likewise , this counts twice if both channels are open ( s 1 = s 2 = 1 ) . We will measure all energies that follow in units of k B T ( ≃ 4 . 14 × 10 − 21 J ) . As we alluded to earlier , the interacting component of the free energy between two channels is a function of their states ( s 1 and s 2 ) , their edge separation ( d ) , and the ten - sion . Using a numerical relaxation technique to minimize the functional in Eq . 5 ( see Materials and Methods ) , we calculated the interaction potentials H int ( s 1 , s 2 , d ; τ ) for a range of tensions and separation distances ( see Figure 2 ) . The total energy , H non + H int , is used to derive the Boltz - mann weight for the three possible conﬁgurations of the two - channel system , z ( s 1 , s 2 ) = e − ( H non ( s 1 , s 2 ; τ ) + H int ( s 1 , s 2 , d ; τ ) ) . ( 10 ) 4 The probability that the system has two closed channels is P 0 = z ( 0 , 0 ) Z , ( 11 ) where the partition function Z is the sum of the Boltzmann weights for all possible two - channel conﬁgurations , Z = 1 X s 1 , s 2 = 0 z ( s 1 , s 2 ) = z ( 0 , 0 ) + 2 z ( 0 , 1 ) + z ( 1 , 1 ) . ( 12 ) Likewise , the probabilities for the system to have exactly one or two open channels are P 1 = 2 z ( 0 , 1 ) Z and P 2 = z ( 1 , 1 ) Z , ( 13 ) respectively . Finally , the probability for any one channel in this two channel system to be open is P open ( τ , d ) = z ( 0 , 1 ) + z ( 1 , 1 ) Z . ( 14 ) If the distance between two channels is much greater than λ , they will behave independently . As the channels get closer ( d . 5 λ ) they begin to interact and their conforma - tional statistics are altered . P open as a function of tension for certain ﬁxed separations is shown in Figure 3 . The open - open interaction is the most energetically favorable for most separations , hence the transition to the open state generally shifts to lower tensions as the distance between the two proteins is decreased . Interactions also aﬀect channel ‘sensitivity’ , deﬁned as the derivative of P open with respect to tension , which quan - tiﬁes how responsive the channel is to changes in tension . The full - width at half maximum of this peaked function is a measure of the range of tension over which the channel has an appreciable response . The area under the sensitiv - ity curve is equal to 1 , hence increases in sensitivity are always accompanied by decreases in range of response , as demonstrated by the eﬀects of the beneﬁcial open - open interaction on channel statistics ( see Figure 3 ) . In summary , we ﬁnd that elastic interactions between two proteins have signiﬁcant eﬀects when the protein edges are closer than ∼ 5 nm . At these separations the elastic interactions alter the critical gating tension and change the tension sensitivity of the channel ( see Figure 3 ) . The critical gating tension and sensitivity are the key properties which deﬁne the transition to the open state , and are analogs to the properties which deﬁne the transition of any two - state ion channel . Hence we have shown that elastic interactions can aﬀect channel function at a fundamental level . Interactions between Diﬀusing Proteins With an understanding of how two proteins will inter - act at a ﬁxed distance , we now study the conformational statistics of two freely - diﬀusing MscL proteins allowed to Figure 3 : Conformational Statistics of Interacting MscL Proteins . Interactions between neighboring channels lead to shifts in the probability that a channel will be in the open state ( dashed lines ) . The sensitivity and range of response to tension , d P open / d τ , are also aﬀected by bilayer deforma - tions ( solid lines ) . P open and d P open / d τ are shown for sepa - rations of 0 . 5 nm ( red ) and 1 . 5 nm ( green ) with reference to non - interacting channels at d = ∞ ( blue ) . Interactions shift the critical gating tension for the closest separation by ∼ 12 % . Additionally , the peak sensitivity is increased by ∼ 90 % from ∼ 5nm 2 / k B T to ∼ 9 . 5nm 2 / k B T , indicating a Hill coeﬃcient of ∼ 2 . interact via their elastic potentials . In biological mem - branes , transmembrane proteins that are not rigidly at - tached to any cytoskeletal elements are often free to dif - fuse throughout the membrane and interact with various lipid species as well as other membrane proteins . On av - erage , the biological areal density of such proteins is high enough ( ∼ 100 − 1000 nm 2 / protein [ 14 ] ) that elastic in - teractions should alter the conformational statistics and average protein separations . We expect that if two MscL proteins are diﬀusing and interacting , the open probability will be a function of their areal density as well as the tension . It then follows that for a given areal density , elastic interactions will couple conformational changes to the average separation between the proteins . To calculate the open probability of two diﬀusing MscL proteins , the Boltzmann weight for these proteins to be in the conformations s 1 and s 2 must be summed at every possible position , giving h z ( s 1 , s 2 ) i = e − H non Z Z e − H int d 2 r 1 d 2 r 2 , ( 15 ) where h . . . i indicates a sum over all positions . The dis - tance between the proteins is measured center - to - center as | r 1 − r 2 | and only the absolute distance between the two proteins determines their interaction , hence we can rewrite the integrand as a function of r = | r 1 − r 2 | . We then change the form of the integrand to e − H int ( s 1 , s 2 , r ; τ ) = 1 + f 12 ( r ) , ( 16 ) which allows us to separate the interacting eﬀects from 5 the non - interacting eﬀects ( the function f 12 is often called the Mayer - f function ) . Thus , the position - averaged Boltz - mann weights are h z ( s 1 , s 2 ) i = e − H non (cid:18) 1 + 2 π A Z ∞ 0 f 12 ( r ) r d r (cid:19) , ( 17 ) where A is the total area occupied by the two proteins . Following our previous calculations , the probability that any one channel is open in this two - channel system is P open ( τ , α ) = h z ( 0 , 1 ) i + h z ( 1 , 1 ) i h Z i , ( 18 ) where α is the area per protein ( i . e . α = A / 2 ) and h Z i = P s 1 , s 2 h z ( s 1 , s 2 ) i . In Figure 4a , we plot P open ( τ , α ) over a wide range of areal density , from the area of ∼ 100 lipids up to ar - eas on the whole - cell scale . The more beneﬁcial open - open interaction tends to shift the transition to the open state to lower tensions , with the most pronounced ef - fect when the two proteins are most tightly conﬁned . For the estimated biological membrane protein density of ∼ 10 2 − 10 3 nm 2 / protein [ 14 ] , the gating tension is de - creased by ∼ 13 % , the sensitivity is increased by ∼ 85 % and the range of response is decreased by ∼ 55 % . For the in vivo expression of MscL of ∼ 10 5 − 10 6 nm 2 / protein [ 43 ] the gating tension is reduced by ∼ 7 % , the sensitivity is increased by ∼ 70 % and the range of response is de - creased by ∼ 40 % . These changes in gating behavior are accessible to electrophysiological experiments where MscL proteins can be reconstituted at a known areal density ( ∼ 10 5 − 10 7 nm 2 / protein ) , and the open probability can be measured as a function of tension . In addition to lowering the critical tension and augment - ing channel sensitivity , the conformational states of chan - nels are tightly coupled by their interaction . The proba - bility that exactly one channel is open ( P 1 ) decreases dra - matically as areal density increases . For tensions above the critical tension , interacting channels ( ∼ 10 3 nm 2 / protein ) are nearly three orders of magnitude less likely to gate as single channels than their non - interacting counterparts ( ∼ 10 9 nm 2 / protein ) , as shown in Figure 4b . Additionally , the tension at which it is more likely to have both channels open , rather than a single channel , is signiﬁcantly lower for interacting channels , signaling that gating is a tightly cou - pled process . In addition to altering the open probability of two channels , the favorable open - open interaction pro - vides an energetic barrier to leaving the open - open state . Based on a simple Arrhenius argument , the average open lifetime of two channels that are both open and interact - ing will be orders of magnitude longer than two open but noninteracting channels . Having shown conformational coupling over a range of areal densities , it is reasonable to expect that elastic inter - actions will aﬀect the separation between the two proteins . We ask , how do interactions aﬀect the average separation between proteins ? How often will we ﬁnd the two proteins Figure 4 : Elastic Interactions Lower Open Probability Tran - sition and Couple Conformation Changes . Two MscL proteins in a square box of area A diﬀuse and interact via their elas - tic potentials . a ) At high area per protein , the response to tension is the same as an independent channel . As the area per protein decreases , the more beneﬁcial open - open interac - tion ( see Figure 2 ) shifts the open probability to lower tensions and decreases the range of response ( dashed lines ) while in - creasing the peak sensitivity , indicating that areal density can alter functional characteristics of a transmembrane protein . b ) The probability for exactly one channel to be open ( P 1 - solid lines ) is shown at a high ( red ) and low ( blue ) area per protein . For tensions past the critical tension , interacting channels are ∼ 1000 times less likely to gate individually . The probability for both channels to be open simultaneously ( P 2 - dashed lines ) is shown for high ( red ) and low ( blue ) area per protein . The tension at which two simultaneously open channels are favored is signiﬁcantly lower for interacting channels . Together these facts signify a tight coupling of the conformational changes for two interacting channels . 6 separated by a distance small enough that we can consider them ‘dimerized’ ? From Eqs . 15 and 16 it follows that the Boltzmann weight for the two proteins to be separated by a distance r is z ( s 1 , s 2 , r ) = e − H non 2 π A ( 1 + f 12 ) r . ( 19 ) The probability that the proteins are separated by a dis - tance r , regardless of their conformation , is P ( r ) = Z ( r ) h Z i = P s 1 , s 2 z ( s 1 , s 2 , r ) h Z i , ( 20 ) from which we calculate the average separation h r i = 1 h Z i Z Z ( r ) r d r ( 21 ) = 1 h Z i X s 1 , s 2 e − H non (cid:18) δ π 6 √ A + 2 π A Z ∞ 0 f 12 r 2 d r (cid:19) . This equation is valid as long as the area does not conﬁne the proteins so severely that they are sterically forced to interact . The constant δ is an order - one quantity that de - pends on the actual shape of the surface 3 ; for a square box , δ ≃ 1 , and for a circle , δ ≃ √ 2 . The average separation of two MscL proteins as a function of tension is plotted for various areal densities in Figure 5 . Note that for certain densities , elastic interactions couple the conformational change from the closed to open state with a decrease in the average separation by more than two orders of magnitude . Our estimates of biological membranes yield fairly high membrane - protein densities ( ∼ 100 − 1000 nm 2 / protein ) [ 14 ] which corresponds to the most highly conﬁned con - ditions on the Figures 4 , 5 and 6 . In the native E . coli plasma membrane , MscL , with a copy number of ∼ 5 [ 43 ] , is present at a density of ∼ 10 5 − 10 6 nm 2 / protein , which means that even membrane proteins expressed at a low level are subject to the eﬀects of elastic interactions . To quantify the eﬀects of interaction on the spatial or - ganization of two channels , we deﬁne a ‘dimerized’ state by the maximum separation below which two channels will favorably interact with an energy greater than k B T ( i . e . H int ( s 1 , s 2 , τ , r ) < − 1 ) . This deﬁnes a critical separation , r c ( s 1 , s 2 , τ ) , which depends on the conformations of each protein and the tension . The probability that the two pro - teins are found with a separation less than or equal to r c is P dimer ( τ , α ) = 1 h Z i X s 1 , s 2 e − H non (cid:18) πr 2 c A + 2 π A Z r c 0 f 12 r d r (cid:19) . ( 22 ) This ‘dimerization probability’ is plotted as a function of tension and areal density in Figure 6 . 3 On a surface , S ( A ) , the average separation has an entropic com - ponent given by R R S ( A ) | r 1 − r 2 | d 2 r 1 A d 2 r 2 A = δ π 6 √ A . The shape of the surface applies non - trivial bounds on this integral . Figure 5 : Average Separation between Proteins Drops Sig - niﬁcantly due to Elastic Interactions . The average separation between two diﬀusing MscL proteins in a box of area A is plot - ted as a function of tension for a range of areal densities , each shown as a diﬀerent line color . The grey region roughly in - dicates when gating is occurring . At low areal density ( most blue ) the conformational change does not draw the proteins sig - niﬁcantly closer together . As the areal density increases , the conformational change is able to draw the proteins up to ∼ 100 times closer than they would otherwise be . At the highest areal density ( most red ) the steric constraint of available area intrin - sically positions the proteins close to one another regardless of their conformation . The average separation begins to increase again as higher tension weakens the open - open interaction . At low tension and low area per protein , the channels are closed and near enough that the closed - closed inter - action can dimerize them a fraction of the time . Keeping the area per protein low , increasing tension strengthens the closed - closed interaction and the dimerization proba - bility increases until tension switches the channels to the open state , where the signiﬁcantly stronger open - open in - teraction dimerizes them essentially 100 percent of the time . When the area per protein increases to moderate levels , as denoted by the white dashed lines in Figure 6 , the dimerization is strongly correlated with the conforma - tional change to the open state . The zero tension sepa - ration between the two proteins for this one - to - one cor - relation is ∼ 40 nm to ∼ 2 . 2 µ m . Finally , when the area per protein is very large , entropy dominates , and neither the closed - closed , nor the open - open interaction is strong enough to dimerize the channels . In summary , we have shown that over a broad range , areal density plays a non - trivial role in allowing two chan - nels to communicate conformational information . This communication can lead to large changes in the average separation between two proteins and the probability that they will be found together in a dimerized state . This may have implications for how conformational changes of transmembrane proteins in biological membranes are able 7 Figure 6 : Elastic Interactions Tightly Couple Conformational Change with Protein Dimerization . Diﬀusing MscL proteins are considered dimerized when they are close enough that they attract with an energy greater than k B T . At low area per protein , the net attractive closed - closed interaction is suﬃcient to dimerize the two channels part of the time . As the area per protein increases , the closed - closed interaction is not strong enough to dimerize the two channels − now dimerization only happens at higher tensions after both channels have switched to the open conformation . As the area per protein grows even larger , the open - open interaction is no longer strong enough to overcome entropy . This loss of dimerization is ampliﬁed by the fact that the open - open interaction is weaker at higher tensions ( see Figure 2 ) . The white dashed lines roughly indicate the range of areal densities for which dimerization probability and open channel probability are equal to each other ( see Figure 4 ) . to facilitate the formation of functional groups of speciﬁc proteins . Discussion In this section , we will perform a brief survey of other bilayer - mediated forces between proteins and make a com - parison of their relative length and energy scales . We will also address some of the ﬁner details of our model and how boundary conditions can aﬀect deformation energy around a protein . Finally , we will suggest experiments using MscL to observe the predicted changes in conformational statis - tics , as well as provide evidence from previous experiments that leaﬂet interactions lead to signiﬁcant changes in con - formational statistics . There are at least two other classes of purely bilayer - mediated forces between membrane proteins . The ﬁrst is a diﬀerent type of bilayer deformation that bends the mid - plane of the bilayer . This arises from transmembrane proteins with a trapezoidal shape that impose a bilayer slope at the protein - lipid interface [ 39 , 44 ] . If the protein does not deform the bilayer too severely , the mid - plane deformation energy of a bilayer is G mid = Z (cid:16) τ 2 ( ∇ h ( r ) ) 2 + κ b 2 ( ∇ 2 h ( r ) ) 2 (cid:17) d 2 r , ( 23 ) where h ( r ) is the deviation of the height of the mid - plane from a ﬂat conﬁguration [ 26 , 35 ] . These kinds of interac - tions have been calculated for a variety of bilayer curva - ture environments and protein shapes at zero tension [ 44 ] . Using a bilayer bending modulus of ∼ 100 k B T , attrac - tive interactions of order ∼ 1 − 5 k B T were found when the proteins were separated by 1 - 2 protein radii ( which we estimate to be 5 − 10 nm measured center - to - center for a typical transmembrane protein ) . If we adjust the energy scale to be consistent with a PC bilayer bending modu - lus of ∼ 14 k B T this lowers the interaction energetics to ∼ 0 . 4 − 2 k B T . Hence , although the length scale of ap - preciable interaction for mid - plane deformation is longer than for leaﬂet deformation , the interaction energies from leaﬂet deformation can be 10 times greater depending on protein geometry . The deformation ﬁelds h ( r ) and u ( r ) exert their eﬀects independent of one another [ 26 ] , sug - gesting that while energetically weaker than leaﬂet defor - mation , mid - plane deformation probably also contributes to the spatial organization and conformational communi - cation between transmembrane proteins . However , for the resting tension of many biological membranes [ 45 ] , the in - teraction due to midplane deformation has a length - scale ( p κ b / τ ≃ 50 nm ) longer than the nominal spacing of pro - teins ( ≃ 10 − 30 nm [ 14 ] ) . Thus , one protein can shield other proteins from feeling the deformation of a neighbor - ing protein , and hence interactions are not ( in general ) pairwise additive . In fact , this is a general feature for both leaﬂet and midplane elastic interactions - they can be shielded by the presence of other proteins , and non - speciﬁc protein interactions can couple to conformation and position within the membrane in the same manner as the speciﬁc interactions we have explored in the previous sections . The second class of bilayer - mediated forces is a prod - uct of the thermal ﬂuctuations of the bilayer . There is a small thermal force due to the excluded volume between two proteins , calculated via Monte Carlo methods to have a favorable ∼ 2 k B T interaction [ 46 ] . This force only exists when the proteins are separated by a fraction of the width of a lipid molecule . There is also a long - range thermal force , due to the surface ﬂuctuations of the bilayer , which tends to drive two rigid proteins closer together [ 10 , 47 ] . This force is proportional to 1 / r 4 and is generally attrac - tive . Estimates using this power law indicate that the in - teraction is ∼ 1 k B T when the center - to - center separation is roughly 2 protein radii . Though elegant , the derivation of this force is only valid in the far - ﬁeld , thus how this force might contribute to conformational communication between proteins in close proximity is not entirely clear . To gauge the overall importance of leaﬂet interactions , 8 the virial coeﬃcient used in Eq . 17 , C V = 2 π Z ∞ 0 f 12 ( r ) r d r , ( 24 ) quantiﬁes how the combination of length and energy scales leads to a deviation from non - interacting behavior ; it is ex - ponentially sensitive to the energy but only quadratically sensitive to the length - scale . One can interpret the virial coeﬃcient as the area per particle that makes the com - peting eﬀects of entropy and interaction equivalent . Using this measure , we estimated the virial coeﬃcients for all of these bilayer - mediated forces and found that leaﬂet defor - mations , while having a short length scale , actually lead to the most signiﬁcant deviation from non - interacting behav - ior , due to their high energy scale . We estimate the virial coeﬃcients from leaﬂet interactions to be ∼ 10 4 − 10 6 nm 2 , while mid - plane bending interactions are ∼ 10 3 nm 2 , and the thermal forces ∼ 10 2 nm 2 . Examining our elastic model in greater detail , we have assumed that the slope of the leaﬂet at the protein - lipid interface is zero , which eliminates any dependence on the spontaneous and Gaussian curvatures of the leaﬂet . In a more general continuum - mechanical theory , the slope would be left as a free parameter with respect to which the energy could be minimized [ 25 ] . We examined this possi - bility and found that , at most , the energy was reduced by a factor of two . Spontaneous curvature couples to the slope of the leaﬂet at the protein - lipid interface , how - ever the spontaneous curvature of bilayer forming lipids , such as phosphatidylcholines , is small [ 48 ] . In addition , for proteins whose radius is larger than λ , if we assume the modulus associated with Gaussian curvature is of the same magnitude as the mean curvature modulus ( κ b ) [ 49 ] , the Gaussian contribution to the deformation energy is a second - order eﬀect . We also examined the possibility of a term proportional to ( ∇ u ) 2 ; using the interfacial tension ( ∼ 5 k B T / nm 2 ) as a modulus for this term ; these eﬀects were also second - order . Finally , we imposed the ‘strong hydrophobic matching’ condition at the protein - lipid in - terface , assuming that the interaction of lipids with the hydrophobic zone of the protein is very favorable . Relax - ing this condition would result in a decrease in the magni - tude of the hydrophobic matching condition , u o , and hence an overall decrease in energetics [ 26 ] . There are also experimental and mechanical reasons to believe the boundary slope on a cylindrical protein is small . The membrane protein gramicidin was used to comment on this so - called ‘contact angle’ problem of lipid - protein boundary conditions [ 22 , 50 ] . It was found that in - deed the slope was nearly zero . From a mechanical stand - point , if the lipids are incompressible , a positive boundary slope that deviates signiﬁcantly from zero would corre - spond to the creation of an energetically costly void at the protein - lipid interface when the protein is shorter than the bilayer . Conversely , lipid would have to penetrate the core of the protein to produce a negative slope when the protein is taller than the bilayer , again a very costly proposition . We examined a roughly cylindrical protein and demon - strated the interesting eﬀects elastic interactions would have in such cases . However , the scope of possible ef - fects increases when non - cylindrical proteins are consid - ered . Most notably , non - cylindrical cross - sections allow for orientational degrees of freedom in the interaction , hence such proteins do not just attract or repel each other , but would have preferred orientations in the membrane with respect to each other . Measuring the changes in conformational statistics of two MscL proteins held at a ﬁxed separation would al - low for quantitative veriﬁcation of our predictions . Elec - trophysiology is a common tool used to probe the con - formation of ion channels , and is routinely used to mea - sure the open probability of a single MscL protein in vitro [ 17 , 19 , 51 ] . Cysteine point mutations on the outer edges of two MscL proteins [ 20 ] could be covalently linked [ 52 , 53 , 54 , 55 ] by a polymer with a speciﬁc length ( ∼ 0 . 5 − 10 nm ) to control the separation distance [ 56 , 57 ] . Linking stoichiometry could be controlled genetically [ 58 ] to ensure one channel interacts with only one other chan - nel . Similar experiments have been performed using grami - cidin A channels [ 59 ] . The conducting form of gramicidin A is a cylindrical transmembrane protein which , like MscL , tends to compress the surrounding bilayer [ 22 , 33 , 60 ] and hence have a beneﬁcial interaction . Electrophysiology of polypeptide - linked gramicidin channels [ 59 ] qualitatively supports our hypothesis that the beneﬁcial interaction of the deformed lipids around two gramicidin channels sig - niﬁcantly increases the lifetime of the conducting state . As another example , recent FRET studies showed that oligomerization of rhodopsin is driven by precisely these kinds of elastic interactions , and exhibits a marked de - pendence on the severity of the deformation as modulated by bilayer thickness [ 61 ] . Additionally , recent experimen - tal work has shown that the bacterial potassium channel KscA exhibits coupled gating and spatial clustering in ar - tiﬁcial membranes [ 62 ] . In summary , we have demonstrated that leaﬂet defor - mations are one of the key mechanisms of bilayer - mediated protein - protein interactions . We provided support for our choice of boundary conditions at the protein - lipid interface , and suggested that extensions of our model have exciting possibilities for the speciﬁcity of elastic interac - tion . Finally , we suggested how one might measure the predicted changes in conformational statistics and drew an analogy to previous gramicidin channel experiments . Conclusion We have described the important role of an elastic bi - layer in the function of , and communication between , membrane proteins . Over a wide range of areal densi - ties , transmembrane proteins can communicate informa - tion about their conformational state via the deformations they cause in the surrounding bilayer . We demonstrated with a model protein , the tension - sensitive channel MscL , 9 how deformations lead to elastic forces and result in coop - erative channel gating . Additionally , we found that elastic interactions strongly correlate conformational changes to changes in spatial organization , aggregating two channels even at low areal densities , bringing them together over very large distances relative to their size . The elastic theory presented here can be easily ex - panded to include more complex deformation eﬀects ( such as spontaneous curvature ) and protein shapes . Our calculations for the conformational statistics , average separation , and dimerization are insensitive to the actual stimulus triggering the conformational change . Hence , we suggest that elastic interactions are likely to play a role in the function and organization of many membrane proteins which respond to environmental stimuli by forming functional groups of multiple membrane proteins . Recent work suggests chemotactic receptors in E . coli function by precisely this kind of spatially clustered and conformationally coupled modality [ 63 ] . Materials and Methods To compute the pairwise elastic potentials in Figure 2 , we discretize the bilayer height , η ( ρ ) , and minimize the deforma - tion energy in Eq . 5 using a preconditioned conjugate gradi - ent approach . A separate minimization with the aforemen - tioned boundary conditions , including the zero - slope bound - ary condition , was computed for each combination of chan - nel conﬁgurations , protein - protein separation , and bilayer ten - sion . Except in the regions of the bilayer nearby a protein at position ( x o , y o ) , we use a Cartesian grid with spacing dx = dy = 0 . 1 λ = 0 . 093 nm . However , since deformations in the bilayer are largest at the circular membrane - protein in - terface , we interpolate between a polar grid at the interface at r = r o and a Cartesian grid along the square S deﬁned by | x − x o | < ∆ , | y − y o | < ∆ , where ∆ is chosen to be an in - tegral multiple of dx . This interpolation ensures an accurate estimate of the elastic deformation energy of a single protein and preserves the symmetry of the protein in its immediate vicinity . The lines connecting the grid points along S deﬁne n θ angu - lar grid points θ i ( i = 1 , . . . , n θ ) , and n r + 1 grid points within the interpolation region are deﬁned by the polar coordinates ( r ij , θ i ) = ( r o + δr i j / n r , θ i ) , where r o is the radius of the pro - tein and the distance from the center of the protein to S along θ i is r o + δr i ( e . g . , for θ i = 0 , δr i = ∆ − r o ; for θ i = π / 4 , δr i = ∆ √ 2 − r o . For a protein in the open or closed conﬁgura - tion , ∆ was chosen such that n θ = 320 or 224 , respectively . The deformation energy determined using this numerical relaxation method is converged with respect to dx , ∆ and the overall dimensions of the bilayer ( 18 . 5 nm × 37 . 1 nm ) , and reproduces the analytic results for a single protein given by Eq . 8 . The elastic potentials were determined over the relevant range of channel separations from 0 to ∼ 8 nm ( measured from protein edge to protein edge ) , and for a range of bilayer tensions from 0 to 3 . 4 k B T / nm 2 . Supporting Information Accession Numbers The primary accession numbers ( in parentheses ) from the Protein Data Bank ( http : / / www . pdb . org ) are : mechanosen - sitive channel of large conductance ( 2OAR ; formerly 1MSL ) , gramicidin A ion channel ( 1GRM ) , bacterial potassium ion channel KscA ( 1F6G ) , and bovine rhodopsin ( 1GZM ) . Acknowledgments We would like to thank Doug Rees , Olaf Andersen , Pierre Sens , Sergei Sukharev , Nily Dan , Jennifer Stockdill , and Ned Wingreen for their thoughtful comments on the manuscript , Chris Gandhi for his input into possible experiments and Ben Freund for useful discussion . Author contributions . TU conceived of the experiment and performed the analytical calculations . TU , EP and KH performed numerical simulations . TU , KH , EP and RP ana - lyzed the data and wrote the paper . Funding . RP acknowledges the support of the National Science Foundation Award No . CMS - 0301657 . TU and RP acknowledge the support of the NSF CIMMS Award No . ACI - 0204932 and NIRT Award No . CMS - 0404031 as well as the Na - tional Institutes of Health Director’s Pioneer Award . EP was supported by the Department of Homeland Security Graduate Fellowship program and the NIH Director’s Pioneer Award . KH was supported by the NIH Award No . A1K25 GM75000 . Part of this work took place at the Kavli Institute for Theo - retical Physics , Santa Barbara , CA and the Aspen Center for Physics , Aspen , CO . References [ 1 ] Mouritsen OG , Bloom M ( 1993 ) Models of lipid - protein in - teractions in membranes . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct , 22 : 145 – 71 . [ 2 ] Lee AG ( 2003 ) Lipid - protein interactions in biological mem - branes : a structural perspective . Biochim Biophys Acta , 1612 ( 1 ) : 1 – 40 . [ 3 ] Jensen MO , Mouritsen OG ( 2004 ) Lipids do inﬂuence pro - tein function - the hydrophobic matching hypothesis revisited . Biochim Biophys Acta , 1666 ( 1 - 2 ) : 205 – 26 . [ 4 ] Bray D , Levin MD , Morton - Firth CJ ( 1998 ) Receptor clus - tering as a cellular mechanism to control sensitivity . Nature , 393 ( 6680 ) : 85 – 8 . [ 5 ] Sourjik V ( 2004 ) Receptor clustering and signal processing in E . coli chemotaxis . Trends Microbiol , 12 ( 12 ) : 569 – 76 . [ 6 ] Gibbs KA , Isaac DD , Xu J , Hendrix RW , Silhavy TJ , The - riot JA ( 2004 ) Complex spatial distribution and dynamics of an abundant Escherichia coli outer membrane protein , LamB . Mol Microbiol , 53 ( 6 ) : 1771 – 83 . [ 7 ] Douglass AD , Vale RD ( 2005 ) Single - molecule microscopy reveals plasma membrane microdomains created by protein - protein networks that exclude or trap signaling molecules in T cells . Cell , 121 ( 6 ) : 937 – 50 . [ 8 ] Shenoy VB , Freund LB ( 2005 ) Growth and shape stability of a biological membrane adhesion complex in the diﬀusion - mediated regime . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 102 ( 9 ) : 3213 – 8 . [ 9 ] Engelman DM ( 2005 ) Membranes are more mosaic than ﬂuid . Nature , 438 ( 7068 ) : 578 – 80 . [ 10 ] Goulian M , Pincus P , Bruinsma R ( 1993 ) Long - range forces in heterogenous ﬂuid membranes . Europhys Letters , 22 ( 2 ) : 145 – 50 . [ 11 ] Sukharev SI , Blount P , Martinac B , Kung C ( 1997 ) Mechanosensitive channels of Escherichia coli : the MscL gene , protein , and activities . Annu Rev Physiol , 59 : 633 – 57 . 10 [ 12 ] Clapham DE , Runnels LW , Strubing C ( 2001 ) The TRP ion channel family . Nat Rev Neurosci , 2 ( 6 ) : 387 – 96 . [ 13 ] Barry PH , Lynch JW ( 2005 ) Ligand - gated channels . IEEE Trans Nanobioscience , 4 ( 1 ) : 70 – 80 . [ 14 ] Mitra K , Ubarretxena - Belandia I , Taguchi T , Warren G , Engel - man DM ( 2004 ) Modulation of the bilayer thickness of exocytic pathway membranes by membrane proteins rather than choles - terol . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 101 ( 12 ) : 4083 – 8 . [ 15 ] Chang G , Spencer RH , Lee AT , Barclay MT , Rees DC ( 1998 ) Structure of the MscL homolog from Mycobacterium tuber - culosis : a gated mechanosensitive ion channel . Science , 282 ( 5397 ) : 2220 – 6 . [ 16 ] Pivetti CD , Yen MR , Miller S , Busch W , Tseng YH , Booth IR , Saier MH Jr . ( 2003 ) Two families of mechanosensitive chan - nel proteins . Microbiol Mol Biol Rev , 67 ( 1 ) : 66 – 85 , table of contents . [ 17 ] Sukharev SI , Sigurdson WJ , Kung C , Sachs F ( 1999 ) Ener - getic and spatial parameters for gating of the bacterial large conductance mechanosensitive channel , MscL . J Gen Physiol , 113 ( 4 ) : 525 – 40 . [ 18 ] Sukharev S , Betanzos M , Chiang CS , Guy HR ( 2001 ) The gating mechanism of the large mechanosensitive channel MscL . Nature , 409 ( 6821 ) : 720 – 4 . [ 19 ] Chiang CS , Anishkin A , Sukharev S ( 2004 ) Gating of the large mechanosensitive channel in situ : estimation of the spatial scale of the transition from channel population responses . Biophys J , 86 ( 5 ) : 2846 – 61 . [ 20 ] Perozo E , Kloda A , Cortes DM , Martinac B ( 2001 ) Site - directed spin - labeling analysis of reconstituted MscL in the closed state . J Gen Physiol , 118 ( 2 ) : 193 – 206 . [ 21 ] Perozo E , Cortes DM , Sompornpisut P , Kloda A , Martinac B ( 2002 ) Open channel structure of MscL and the gating mecha - nism of mechanosensitive channels . Nature , 418 ( 6901 ) : 942 – 8 . [ 22 ] Huang HW ( 1986 ) Deformation free energy of bilayer mem - brane and its eﬀect on gramicidin channel lifetime . Biophys J , 50 ( 6 ) : 1061 – 70 . [ 23 ] Dan N , Pincus P , Safran S ( 1993 ) Membrane - induced interac - tions between inclusions . Langmuir , 9 : 2768 – 71 . [ 24 ] Aranda - Espinoza H , Berman A , Dan N , Pincus P , Safran S ( 1996 ) Interaction between inclusions embedded in membranes . Biophys J , 71 ( 2 ) : 648 – 56 . [ 25 ] Nielsen C , Goulian M , Andersen OS ( 1998 ) Energetics of inclusion - induced bilayer deformations . Biophys J , 74 ( 4 ) : 1966 – 83 . [ 26 ] Wiggins P , Phillips R ( 2005 ) Membrane - protein interactions in mechanosensitive channels . Biophys J , 88 ( 2 ) : 880 – 902 . [ 27 ] Markin VS , Sachs F ( 2004 ) Thermodynamics of mechanosensi - tivity . Phys Biol , 1 ( 1 - 2 ) : 110 – 24 . [ 28 ] Kahya N , Scherfeld D , Bacia K , Poolman B , Schwille P ( 2003 ) Probing lipid mobility of raft - exhibiting model mem - branes by ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy . J Biol Chem , 278 ( 30 ) : 28109 – 15 . [ 29 ] Doeven MK , Folgering JH , Krasnikov V , Geertsma ER , van den Bogaart G , Poolman B ( 2005 ) Distribution , lateral mobility and function of membrane proteins incorporated into giant unil - amellar vesicles . Biophys J , 88 ( 2 ) : 1134 – 42 . [ 30 ] Gambin Y , Lopez - Esparza R , Reﬀay M , Sierecki E , Gov NS , Genest M , Hodges RS , Urbach W ( 2006 ) Lateral mobility of proteins in liquid membranes revisited . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 103 ( 7 ) : 2098 – 102 . [ 31 ] Guigas G , Weiss M ( 2006 ) Size - dependent diﬀusion of mem - brane inclusions . Biophys J , 91 ( 7 ) : 2393 – 8 . [ 32 ] Shapovalov G , Lester HA ( 2004 ) Gating transitions in bacte - rial ion channels measured at 3 µ s resolution . J Gen Physiol , 124 ( 2 ) : 151 – 61 . [ 33 ] Harroun TA , Heller WT , Weiss TM , Yang L , Huang HW ( 1999 ) Theoretical analysis of hydrophobic matching and membrane - mediated interactions in lipid bilayers containing gramicidin . Biophys J , 76 ( 6 ) : 3176 – 85 . [ 34 ] Cantor RS ( 1999 ) Lipid composition and the lateral pressure proﬁle in bilayers . Biophys J , 76 ( 5 ) : 2625 – 39 . [ 35 ] Helfrich W ( 1973 ) Elastic properties of lipid bilayers : theory and possible experiments . Z Naturforsch [ C ] , 28 ( 11 ) : 693 – 703 . [ 36 ] Rawicz W , Olbrich KC , McIntosh T , Needham D , Evans E ( 2000 ) Eﬀect of chain length and unsaturation on elasticity of lipid bilayers . Biophys J , 79 ( 1 ) : 328 – 39 . [ 37 ] Tosh RE , Collings PJ ( 1986 ) High pressure volumetric mea - surements in dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine bilayers . Biochim Biophys Acta , 859 ( 1 ) : 10 – 4 . [ 38 ] Seemann H , Winter R ( 2003 ) Volumetric properties , compress - ibilities and volume ﬂuctuations in phospholipid - cholesterol bi - layers . Zeitschrift fur physikalische Chemie , 217 : 831 – 46 . [ 39 ] Dan N , Safran SA ( 1998 ) Eﬀect of lipid characteristics on the structure of transmembrane proteins . Biophys J , 75 ( 3 ) : 1410 – 4 . [ 40 ] Niggemann G , Kummrow M , Helfrich W ( 1995 ) The bending rigidity of phosphatidylcholine bilayers : Dependences on exper - imental method , sample cell sealing and temperature . J Phys II France , 5 : 413 – 25 . [ 41 ] Arfken GB , Weber HJ ( 2001 ) Mathematical Methods for Physi - cists . Harcourt Academic Press , 5th edition 1200 p . [ 42 ] Yoshimura K , Batiza A , Schroeder M , Blount P , Kung C ( 1999 ) Hydrophilicity of a single residue within MscL correlates with increased channel mechanosensitivity . Biophys J , 77 ( 4 ) : 1960 – 72 . [ 43 ] Stokes NR , Murray HD , Subramaniam C , Gourse RL , Louis P , Bartlett W , Miller S , Booth IR ( 2003 ) A role for mechanosen - sitive channels in survival of stationary phase : regulation of channel expression by RpoS . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 100 ( 26 ) : 15959 – 64 . [ 44 ] Chou T , Kim KS , Oster G ( 2001 ) Statistical thermodynam - ics of membrane bending - mediated protein - protein attractions . Biophys J , 80 ( 3 ) : 1075 – 87 . [ 45 ] Morris CE , Homann U ( 2001 ) Cell surface area regulation and membrane tension . J Membr Biol , 179 ( 2 ) : 79 – 102 . [ 46 ] Sintes T , Baumgartner A ( 1997 ) Protein attraction in mem - branes induced by lipid ﬂuctuations . Biophys J , 73 ( 5 ) : 2251 – 9 . [ 47 ] Park JM , Lubensky TC ( 1996 ) Interactions between membrane inclusions on ﬂuctuating membranes . J Phys I France , 6 : 1217 – 35 . [ 48 ] Boal D ( 2002 ) Mechanics of the Cell . Cambridge University Press , 1st edition 406 p . [ 49 ] Siegel DP , Kozlov MM ( 2004 ) The Gaussian curva - ture elastic modulus of n - monomethylated dioleoylphos - phatidylethanolamine : relevance to membrane fusion and lipid phase behavior . Biophys J , 87 ( 1 ) : 366 – 74 . [ 50 ] Elliott JR , Needham D , Dilger JP , Haydon DA ( 1983 ) The eﬀects of bilayer thickness and tension on gramicidin single - channel lifetime . Biochim Biophys Acta , 735 ( 1 ) : 95 – 103 . [ 51 ] Perozo E , Kloda A , Cortes DM , Martinac B ( 2002 ) Physical principles underlying the transduction of bilayer deformation forces during mechanosensitive channel gating . Nat Struct Biol , 9 ( 9 ) : 696 – 703 . [ 52 ] Karlin A , Akabas MH ( 1998 ) Substituted - cysteine accessibility method . Methods Enzymol , 293 : 123 – 45 . [ 53 ] Wilson G , Karlin A ( 2001 ) Acetylcholine receptor channel struc - ture in the resting , open , and desensitized states probed with the substituted - cysteine - accessibility method . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 98 ( 3 ) : 1241 – 8 . 11 [ 54 ] Hastrup H , Sen N , Javitch JA ( 2003 ) The human dopamine transporter forms a tetramer in the plasma membrane : cross - linking of a cysteine in the fourth transmembrane segment is sensitive to cocaine analogs . J Biol Chem , 278 ( 46 ) : 45045 – 8 . [ 55 ] Bogdanov M , Zhang W , Xie J , Dowhan W ( 2005 ) Transmem - brane protein topology mapping by the substituted cysteine ac - cessibility method ( SCAM ( tm ) ) : application to lipid - speciﬁc membrane protein topogenesis . Methods , 36 ( 2 ) : 148 – 71 . [ 56 ] Haselgrubler T , Amerstorfer A , Schindler H , Gruber HJ ( 1995 ) Synthesis and applications of a new poly ( ethylene glycol ) derivative for the crosslinking of amines with thiols . Bioconjug Chem , 6 ( 3 ) : 242 – 8 . [ 57 ] Blaustein RO , Cole PA , Williams C , Miller C ( 2000 ) Tethered blockers as molecular ’tape measures’ for a voltage - gated K + channel . Nat Struct Biol , 7 ( 4 ) : 309 – 11 . [ 58 ] Sukharev SI , Schroeder MJ , McCaslin DR ( 1999 ) Stoichiometry of the large conductance bacterial mechanosensitive channel of E . coli . A biochemical study . J Membr Biol , 171 ( 3 ) : 183 – 93 . [ 59 ] Goforth RL , Chi AK , Greathouse DV , Providence LL , Koeppe RE 2nd , Andersen OS ( 2003 ) Hydrophobic coupling of lipid bilayer energetics to channel function . J Gen Physiol , 121 ( 5 ) : 477 – 93 . [ 60 ] Lundbaek JA , Andersen OS ( 1999 ) Spring constants for channel - induced lipid bilayer deformations . estimates using gramicidin channels . Biophys J , 76 ( 2 ) : 889 – 95 . [ 61 ] Botelho AV , Huber T , Sakmar TP , Brown MF ( 2006 ) Curvature and hydrophobic forces drive oligomerization and modulate ac - tivity of rhodopsin in membranes . Biophys J , 91 ( 12 ) : 4464 – 77 . [ 62 ] Molina ML , Barrera FN , Fernandez AM , Poveda JA , Renart ML , Encinar JA , Riquelme G , Gonzalez - Ros JM ( 2006 ) Clus - tering and coupled gating modulate the activity in KcsA , a potassium channel model . J Biol Chem , 281 ( 27 ) : 18837 – 48 . [ 63 ] Skoge ML , Endres RG , Wingreen NS ( 2006 ) Receptor - receptor coupling in bacterial chemotaxis : evidence for strongly coupled clusters . Biophys J , 90 ( 12 ) : 4317 – 26 . 12