Trafﬁc2011 ; 12 : 313 – 329 © 2011 John Wiley & Sons A / S doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2010 . 01146 . x Electron Tomography of RabA4b - and PI - 4K β 1 - Labeled Trans Golgi Network Compartments in Arabidopsis Byung - Ho Kang 1 , 2 , ∗ , † , Erik Nielsen 3 , ∗ , † , Mary Lai Preuss 4 , David Mastronarde 1 and L . Andrew Staehelin 1 1 DepartmentofMolecularCellularandDevelopmentalBiology , UniversityofColorado - Boulder , Boulder , CO 80309 , USA 2 DepartmentofMicrobiologyandCellScience & InterdisciplinaryCenterforBiotechnologyResearch , UniversityofFlorida , Gainesville , FL32611 , USA 3 DepartmentofMolecularCellularandDevelopmentalBiology , UniversityofMichigan , AnnArbor , MI48109 , USA 4 DepartmentofBiologicalSciences , WebsterUniversity , St . Louis , MO63119 , USA * Corresponding author : Byung - Ho Kang , bkang @ uﬂ . edu orErikNielsen , nielsene @ umich . edu † Theseauthorscontributedequallytothiswork . The trans Golgi network ( TGN ) of plant cells sorts and packages Golgi products into secretory ( SV ) and clathrin - coated ( CCV ) vesicles . We have analyzed of TGN cisternae in Arabidopsis root meristem cells by cell fractionation and electron microscopy / tomography to establish reli - able criteria for identifying TGN cisternae in plant cells , and to deﬁne their functional attributes . Transforma - tion of a trans Golgi cisterna into a Golgi - associated TGN cisterna begins with cisternal peeling , the for - mation of SV buds outside the plane of the cisterna and a 30 – 35 % reduction in cisternal membrane area . Free TGN compartments are deﬁned as cisternae that have detached from the Golgi to become independent organelles . Golgi - associated and free TGN compart - ments , but not trans Golgi cisternae , bind anti - RabA4b and anti - phosphatidylinositol - 4 kinase ( PI - 4K ) antibodies . RabA4b and PI - 4K β 1 localize to budding SVs in the TGN and to SVs en route to the cell surface . SV and CCV release occurs simultaneously via cisternal fragmenta - tion , which typically yields ∼ 30 vesicles and one to four residual cisternal fragments . Early endosomal markers , VHA - a1 - green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) and SYP61 - cyan ﬂuorescent protein ( CFP ) , colocalized with RabA4b in TGN cisternae , suggesting that the secretory and endo - cytic pathways converge at the TGN . pi4k β 1 / pi4k β 2 knockout mutant plants produce SVs with highly variable sizes indicating that PI - 4K β 1 / 2 regulates SV size . Key words : Arabidopsis , electron tomography , endocyto - sis , phosphatidylinositol kinase , Rab GTPase , transGolgi network Received 6 October 2010 , revised and accepted for publication 3 December 2010 , uncorrected manuscript published online 7 December 2010 , published online 7 January 2011 A fundamental aspect of plant growth and development is the synthesis , sorting and proper delivery of a wide range of plant polysaccharides and proteins to the plant cell wall . While cellulose and callose are synthesized at the plasma membrane , the remaining hemicelluloses , pectins and structural cell wall proteins are synthesized and modiﬁed within the plant Golgi apparatus and then subsequently packaged into secretory vesicles ( SVs ) for targeting to sites of new cell wall deposition ( 1 ) . Despite the importance of these processes to plant growth and development , little is known about the molecular mech - anisms by which cell wall molecules are sorted and packaged or about the organization of the membrane compartments responsible for these events . The membrane compartment on the trans side of Golgi stacks responsible for the sorting and packaging of cargo molecules for delivery to the plasma membrane and to vacuoles is known as the trans Golgi network ( TGN ) ( 2 ) . In mammalian cells , the TGN localizes to the trans side of a continuous Golgi ribbon that is organized around the juxtanuclear centrosome ( 3 ) . In plants , the Golgi appara - tus consists of many independent mobile stacks that are dispersed throughout the cytoplasm , and whose num - bers vary from ∼ 35 in Arabidopsis meristem cells ( 4 ) to 500 – 1000 in tobacco BY - 2 cells ( 5 ) . Furthermore , each Golgi stack appears to have its own tubulovesicular TGN - like cisternal compartment , which produces both SVs and clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCVs ) ( 6 , 7 ) . However , due to the highly variable morphology of these TGN - like compartments and the absence of well - deﬁned , correl - ative biochemical markers ( 7 , 8 ) , a clear - cut deﬁnition of what constitutes a TGN compartment in plant cells has remained elusive ( 9 ) . Further confusing the issue have been reports that , in suspension cultured cells that exhibit rapid cytoplasmic streaming , up to 50 % of the Golgi stacks lack a distinctive , Golgi - associated TGN type of cisterna ( 10 ) . Another TGN variable relates to the ratio of SVs to CCVs that are formed on TGN cisternae . Whereas most plant cells typically produce TGN cisternae that give rise to a preponderance of SVs ( 6 ) , some produce mostly CCVs ( 11 , 12 ) . Interestingly , even in a single meristematic root tip cell , adjacent Golgi stacks can simultaneously give rise to SV - rich and CCV - rich TGN cisternae ( 13 ) . CCV - rich TGN cisternae are also known as partially coated retic - ulum ( 11 ) and SV - rich TGN cisternae have recently been termed SV clusters ( 14 ) . The proximity of the TGN compartments to Golgi stacks is highly variable , with some being closely associated with a stack and others located at a distance ( 6 , 12 , 15 – 17 ) . Based on the predictions of the cisternal maturation model of Golgi trafﬁcking ( 18 ) , the variable distances www . trafﬁc . dk 313 Kang et al . of TGN cisternae from their originating Golgi stacks reﬂect the transformation of trans Golgi cisternae into TGN cisternae that are sloughed from the stack and become free TGN compartments capable of indepen - dent movement in the cytoplasm ( 13 , 18 – 20 ) . The mobility of free TGN compartments has been characterized in tobacco BY - 2 cells expressing a ﬂuorescently labeled SCAMP2 fusion protein , a putative marker for SVs ( 14 ) , and in elongating Arabidopsis root and hypocotyl cells expressing several transGolgi , TGN and endocytic marker proteins ( 17 ) . Mounting evidence suggests that the TGN is involved not only in the exocytotic pathway of plants but also in the endocytic pathway ( 9 , 21 , 22 ) . Several studies using different types of endocytic marker molecules , such as electron - dense markers ( 23 , 24 ) , ﬂuid - phase ﬂuorescent markers , such as FM4 - 64 , and ﬂuorescently tagged pro - teins ( 25 , 26 ) indicate that endocytosed molecules are delivered to TGN - type compartments and that the TGN functions as an early endosome . Based on live - cell imag - ing of etiolated Arabidopsishypocotyl cells , it was recently suggested that the TGN is a semipermanent independent organelle that cycles onto and off of the transside of Golgi stacks ( 17 ) . We previously showed that in Arabidopsis thaliana the Rab GTPase , RabA4b , preferentially localizes to mem - branes that accumulate in the tips of elongating root hair cells ( 27 ) , which are major sites of new cell wall deposi - tion . By immuno - electron microscopy ( EM ) , we showed that antibodies against RabA4b labeled budding proﬁles and vesicles that appeared to emerge from tubulovesicular structures often found in the vicinity of Golgi stacks ( 28 ) . Furthermore , insertional knockout mutants of the RabA4b effector proteins , phosphatidylinositol 4 - kinase β 1 and β 2 ( PI - 4K β 1 and PI - 4K β 2 ) , displayed defects in these tubulovesicular structures , and fewer budding proﬁles were observed to emerge from these structures ( 28 ) . Together , these observations raised the possibility that the RabA4b - labeled compartments may represent trafﬁcking intermediates containing cell wall components that have emerged from the TGN for subsequent delivery to the plasma membrane . In this study , we have employed a combination of electron tomography , immunogold EM / tomography and cell frac - tionation experiments to investigate the three - dimensional ( 3 - D ) structure of the TGN - type cisternal compartments , as well as the roles of RabA4b and its effector protein , PI - 4K β 1 , in the formation of cell wall polysaccharide - containing SVs in Arabidopsisroot meristem cells . Based on this new information , we have developed a set of structural and compositional criteria for distinguish - ing trans Golgi cisternae from TGN cisternae , and have shown that the early endosomal markers , VHA - a1 - green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) and SYP61 - cyan ﬂuorescent protein ( CFP ) ( 25 , 29 ) , colocalize with RabA4b in TGN cisternae . Results RabA4blabelsTGN - likecompartmentsandsecretory vesiclesthatfusewiththeplasmamembrane The similarity of Arabidopsis RabA4b to Rab GTPases from yeast and animals , which are known to function in post - Golgi sorting and recycling pathways , indicated that it too may be involved in membrane - trafﬁcking events at the TGN ( 30 ) . To characterize the identity of RabA4b - labeled compartments at a higher level of detail than available from light microscopy , we examined root tip cells of wild - type Arabidopsis and Arabidopsis stably expressing EYFP - RabA4b by immuno - EM . The anti - RabA4b antibod - ies speciﬁcally labeled tubulovesicular , TGN - type mem - brane compartments on the trans side of Golgi stacks ( Figure 1A , B ) , which were also labeled with antibodies that recognize the complex cell wall polysaccharide , xyloglucan ( Figure 1C , D ) . Although many of the anti - RabA4b - labeled compartments and vesicles were observed in the vicinity of Golgi stacks , some were located at greater distances and closer to the plasma membrane ; occasional vesicles were seen fusing with the plasma membrane ( Figure 1G ) . Antibodies raised against the lipid kinase PI - 4K β 1 , an effector of RabA4b ( 27 ) , are also bound to the same TGN - type post - Golgi compartments as the anti - RabA4b and the CCRC - M1 ( an anti - xyloglucan monoclonal antibody from the Complex Carbohydrate Research Center , Univer - sity of Georgia , GA ) antibodies ( Figure 1E ) . RabF2a ( also known as RHA1 ) is another Arabidopsis small GTPase that has been localized to multivesicular bodies ( MVBs ) in Arabidopsis ( 31 ) . In root tip cells , MVBs were often juxtaposed with the TGN . In such TGN / MVB complex structures , RabF2a immunogold particles were always associated with MVBs , and never with TGN cisternae ( Figure 1F ) , indicating that RabA4b and RabF2a are found in different membrane compartments . The immunolabel - ing experiments conﬁrm that RabA4b and its effector , PI - 4K β 1 , are biochemical markers of TGN cisternae in Ara - bidopsisand suggest that these proteins could be involved in the assembly of SVs . RabA4bcosedimentswithmembranefractions containingplantcellwallpolysaccharides Based on the observations that anti - RabA4b antibodies labeled xyloglucan - containing budding structures on TGN cisternae , as well as SVs in the process of fusing with the plasma membrane , we hypothesized that this membrane compartment was involved in trafﬁcking of secretory car - goes enrouteto the plasma membrane . If this were the case , isolated RabA4b - labeled vesicles should also con - tain cell wall polysaccharides . Several different monoclonal antibodies that recognize diagnostic epitopes on complex carbohydrates ( Carbosource Inc . ) were used to identify the membrane fractions on sucrose density gradients , which contained these cell wall polysaccharides ( Figure 1H ) . Odd numbered fractions were analyzed by SDS – PAGE and immunoblot analysis to detect the presence of RabA4b , while even numbered fractions were used for the polysac - charide analysis . To identify the polysaccharides in these 314 Trafﬁc2011 ; 12 : 313 – 329 Electron Tomography Analysis of the Plant TGN A B C D E G H F Figure 1 : Colocalization of RabA4b with xyloglucan , and TGN association of PI - 4K β in Arabidopsis root cells . A and B ) Immunolocalization of RabA4b on thin sections of high - pressure frozen / freeze - substituted meristem cells of wild - type ( WT ) Arabidopsis roots . The 15 - nm gold particles are associated exclusively with the TGN compartments on the trans side of the Golgi ( G ) stacks . GA - TGN : Golgi - associated TGN . C and D ) Same sample as in ( A ) , but double immunolabeled with anti - RabA4b ( 15 nm gold ) and anti - xyloglucan ( 5 nm gold ) ( CCRC - M1 ) antibodies . RabA4b and XG colocalize to the same subdomains of the TGN . E ) Same type of sample as in ( A ) immunolabeled with antibodies ( 5 nm gold ) against lipid kinase PI - 4K β 1 , the effector protein of RabA4b . This antibody also labels budding vesicle proﬁles on the TGN . F ) Immunogold labeling of RabF2a in a TGN / MVB complex structure . RabF2a immunogold particles ( 15 nm ) are localized speciﬁcally to MVBs . G ) An Arabidopsis root peripheral cell stably expressing EYFP - RabA4b immunolabeled with anti - RabA4b antibodies . The section shows two TGN cisternae at a distance from the Golgi , and in the process of fragmentation . A labeled vesicle in the process of fusing with the plasma membrane is marked by an arrowhead . Scale bars : 200 nm . H ) RabA4b cofractionates with membranes containing plant cell wall polysaccharides . Membranes were isolated and separated by sucrose density gradient fractionation ( 20 – 60 % w / v ) . Fractions were collected from the top ( fraction 1 ) to the bottom ( fraction 24 ) and proteins were analyzed by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting with a speciﬁc anti - RabA4b antibody . To detect cell wall polysaccharides , even numbered fractions were detergent solubilized , spotted onto nitrocellulose membranes for immunoblotting with the anti - polysaccharide antibodies M1 , M7 , M8 and JIM7 . Positive controls for the presence of cell wall polysaccharides , 100 mL of gum arabic ( 500 mg / mL ) , gum tragacanth ( 500 mg / mL ) and puriﬁed methyl - esteriﬁed pectin ( 500 mg / mL ) were also spotted onto the nitrocellulose . fractions , the membranes present in even numbered fractions were reisolated by sedimentation , detergent solubilized , spotted onto nitrocellulose membranes and immunoblotted with monoclonal antibodies CCRC - M1 , - M7 , - M8 and JIM7 . The fractionation patterns observed depended upon the presence of membrane - bounded vesicles , because if detergent was added prior to sedi - mentation of membranes through the sucrose gradient , polysaccharides were only detected in early ( top of the gradient ) fractions ( not shown ) . Also , the speciﬁcity of the Trafﬁc2011 ; 12 : 313 – 329 315 Kang et al . antibodies was conﬁrmed by the detection of polysaccha - ride epitopes on gum arabic ( CCRC - M8 ) , gum tragacanth ( CCRC - M1 and - M8 ) and puriﬁed methyl - esteriﬁed pectin ( CCRC - M7 , - M8 , JIM7 , but not CCRC - M1 ) . The CCRC - M1 antibodies primarily recognize terminally fucosylated xyloglucan ( 32 ) , which was present at highest concentrations in fractions 18 – 22 . This pattern essen - tially parallels the distribution of RabA4b in the protein fractions ( Figure 1H ) and is consistent with immuno - goldlabeling results that localized xyloglucans to trans Golgi and TGN cisternae , and to SVs ( Figures 1C , D ; 10 ) . The CCRC - M7 antibodies , which recognize the β ( 1 , 6 ) - galactose chain of rhamnogalacturonan - I ( 32 ) , and the CCRC - M8 antibodies , which recognize a distinct epitope on rhamnogalacturonan - I ( Carbosource Inc . ) , displayed broader fractionation proﬁles with signiﬁcant quantities of binding observed in fractions 12 – 22 ( Figure 1H ) . The JIM7 antibody binding , which signals the presence of methyl - esteriﬁed pectins ( 33 ) , was highest in fractions 12 – 14 , with a second peak in fraction 20 . These results indicate that vesicular structures containing both RabA4b and xyloglucan represent major fractions of membranes containing either of these two components . In addition , the observation that RabA4b - containing membranes most closely matched the sedimentation proﬁles of xyloglucan - containing membranes is consistent with earlier observa - tions that the glucan backbone and terminal fucosylation of this class of polysaccharides occurs in transGolgi and TGN cisternae , while pectic polysaccharides are gener - ated by enzymes located in late cis - , medial - and trans Golgi cisternae ( 10 ) . Golgi - associatedTGNcisternaeattachedtothetrans sideofGolgistacksarestructurallydistinctfrom detached , freeTGNcisternae Using immuno - EM techniques , we showed that RabA4b labels TGN compartments closely associated with Golgi stacks ( Figure 1A , C and G ) , as well as structurally related compartments at variable distances from Golgi stacks ( Figure 1B , D and G ) . In confocal micrographs , compart - ments ﬂuorescently labeled with TGN markers have been seen to be paired with Golgi stacks or spatially sepa - rated from any Golgi stacks ( 34 ) . To determine the extent to which Golgi - associated and detached , free TGN cis - ternae / compartments share common structural features , we have characterized their 3 - D architecture by elec - tron tomography analysis of high - pressure frozen and freeze - substituted cells . The 3 - D resolution of EM tomog - raphy is ∼ 4 nm in the x - and y - axes and 6 – 8 nm in the z - axis ( 35 ) . This is a 50 - to 100 - fold improvement in resolution compared to regular confocal laser scanning microscopy , which has a resolution of ∼ 200 nm in the x - and y - axes and 500 – 800 nm in the z - axis ( 36 ) . In this study , we have exploited the higher resolution of electron tomography to structurally distinguish transGolgi cisternae ( Figures 2 – 5 ) , Golgi - associated TGN cisternae ( Figures 2 – 5 ) , free TGN cisternae ( Figures 2 and 3 ) and fragmenting free TGN cisternae in the process of releasing their SVs and CCVs ( Figure 3 ) . In addition , due to the quan - tiﬁable nature of the digital electron tomography datasets , we have been able to follow the changes in membrane surface area as thetransGolgi cisternae are converted ﬁrst to Golgi - associated and then to free TGN compartments ( Figure 4 ) . Finally , by combining electron tomography anal - ysis and immunolabeling of serial thin sections , we have shown that the transformation of a trans Golgi cisterna into a TGN cisterna coincides with the binding of RabA4b and PI - 4K β 1 proteins to subdomains of the TGN cisternae that give rise to SVs but not to CCVs ( Figure 5 ) . Transformation of a trans - most Golgi cisterna into a RabA4b - associated TGN cisterna is accompanied by three structural changes : ( i ) proliferation of round , secretory - type vesicle buds along the periphery that are not conﬁned to the plane of the original transGolgi cisterna ( Figures 2 and 5 ) , ( ii ) a 30 – 35 % reduction in cisternal membrane area ( Figure 4 ) and ( iii ) the presence of a ﬂattened mem - brane domain that corresponds to the site of attachment of the TGN cisterna to the trans - most Golgi cisterna ( Figure 2 ) . SVs , CCVs and coat protein Ib ( COPIb ) - type vesicles ( Figures 2 and 3 ) were distinguished by the struc - tural criteria detailed by Donohoe et al . ( 37 ) . The formation of budding SVs that are not conﬁned to the plane of the membrane appears to be tightly correlated with the cis - ternal peeling process ( Figure 2B ) . CCV buds are seen often , but not always , on Golgi - associated TGN cister - nae ( Figures 2B and 3H ) . In contrast , free TGN cisternae always possess CCVs and typically have more CCVs than do the Golgi - associated TGN cisternae ( Figure 3B , H ) . Free TGN cisternae also have more budding SVs than Golgi - associated TGN cisternae ( Figures 2E and 3B ) . Fur - thermore , as the free TGN cisternae continue to mature and become more grape like in appearance , the form - ing SVs become more numerous , more clearly deﬁned and more darkly stained ( Figures 2E , G and H and 3A , B ) . They also become smaller , with the budding SVs on free TGN cisternae measuring 52 – 88 nm in diameter versus 83 – 107 nm for the SVs on Golgi - associated TGN cister - nae . In contrast , we did not detect any differences in diameters of the budding CCVs ( ∼ 35 nm ) . COPIb - type vesicles , which can be identiﬁed based on their size ( ∼ 45 nm ) and the dark staining of their con - tents ( 37 ) , are also seen in close proximity to Golgi - associated TGN cisternae ( Figure 2F ) , but not around free TGN cisternae . A functional role of these COPIb vesicles in recycling membrane from Golgi - associated TGN to trans Golgi cisternae is suggested by the ﬁnding that the forma - tion of Golgi - associated TGN cisternae from trans - most Golgi cisternae involves a 30 – 35 % reduction in surface area ( Figure 4 ) . In contrast , no consistent reduction in the surface area of the free TGN cisternae was observed . Another variable in free TGN architecture relates to the ratio of SVs to CCVs ( Figure 3B , H ) . In meristematic root tip 316 Trafﬁc2011 ; 12 : 313 – 329 Electron Tomography Analysis of the Plant TGN A B E G H C D F Figure 2 : Electron tomography analy - sis of TGN cisternae . A – C ) Tomographic slice ( A ) and 3 - D model images of a Golgi stack ( B ) and a Golgi - associated ( GA - ) TGN cisterna ( c ) in an Arabidopsis meristem cell . B ) Side view of the Golgi and TGN cis - ternae shown in ( A ) . C ) Face - on view ofthe TGN cisterna shown in ( B ) . Secretory vesi - cle buddingsiteschosen bythe IMODCURVA - TURE program are colored in green . Clathrin cages of budding CCVs are colored in blue . D and E ) Tomographic slice image ( D ) and 3 - D model ( E ) of a Golgi stack in which the GA - TGN cisterna is shown in aqua , the free TGN cisterna in red and the interme - diate TGN cisterna in silver . The free TGN cisterna ( red ) has completely separated from the Golgi / TGN complex . F ) Tomo - graphic slice image through a trans Golgi and TGN cisternal region . Note the pres - ence of a COPIb - type vesicle between the Golgi and cisternae of the TGN , suggest - ing retrograde transport from the GA - TGN cisterna to the trans Golgi cisterna ( see also data in Figure 4 ) . G and H ) Cis side ( G ) and transside ( H ) views of a GA - TGN cisterna ( aqua ) , a free TGN compartment ( red ) and an intermediate compartment ( silver ) . The ﬂattened membrane domain of the GA - TGN cisterna ( arrow ) marks the membrane region where the cisterna was attached to the Golgi stack . During mat - uration of the free TGN compartments , the number of budding vesicle proﬁles increases . Scale bars : 200 nm . cells of Arabidopsis , the SV to CCV ratio can vary from 5 : 1 to 1 : 4 , even on free TGN compartments within the same cell . SV - rich free TGN cisternae are seen more frequently than CCV - rich cisternae inArabidopsisroot meristem cells . The former resembles TGN cisternae which have been described previously ( 6 ) , whereas the CCV - rich free TGN cisternae resemble structures known as a ‘partially coated reticulum’ ( 11 , 12 ) . RabA4bpreferentiallylabelssecretory vesicle - formingsitesonTGNcisternae RabA4b antibodies label both Golgi - associated and free TGN compartments to similar extents , but they do not label trans Golgi cisternae ( Figures 1A – D , 5 and 6 ) . To further characterize the TGN structures to which the anti - RabA4b antibodies bind , immunogold - labeled serial thin sections were analyzed by electron tomography . Figure 5 ( A – G ) depicts tomographic slice images of three consec - utive anti - RabA4b - labeled sections . In these images , the TGN membranes are clearly resolved and a majority of the immunogold particles are seen close to SV - type budding domains that possess an ∼ 5 - nm thick , darkly staining coat ( arrowheads in Figures 5D – G and S1 ) . This coat resem - bles the coat of SVs described by Donohoe et al . ( 37 ) , but the staining pattern differs slightly due to the effects of the presence or absence of osmium tetroxide in the Trafﬁc2011 ; 12 : 313 – 329 317 Kang et al . A B D E H I J K F C G Figure 3 : Formation and release of SVs and CCVs from TGN cisternae . A – F ) Tomographic slice ( A ) and 3 - D model ( B ) images of a Golgi stack , Golgi - associated ( GA - ) TGN cisterna and fragmenting free TGN compartment . The free TGN cisterna is completely separated from the Golgi / TGN complex ( B ) and is in the process of fragmenting and releasing its SVs and CCVs ( D and E ) . This free TGN cisterna also contains a small residual fragment of a branched TGN cisterna with a collapsed lumen ( asterisk in C ) . The residual membrane ( res . membrane ) is shown as a stippled model in ( D – F ) . G – K ) Tomographic slice ( G ) and 3 - D model ( H ) images of a Golgi stack , GA - TGN cisterna and fragmenting free TGN compartment . Note that the fragmenting free TGN shown in ( H ) consists mostly of CCVs in contrast to the free TGN shown in ( B ) in which most of the vesicles are SVs . I – K ) Views of residual membrane ( stippled model ) in combination with SVs ( I ) and CCVs ( J ) . Scale bars : 200 nm . 318 Trafﬁc2011 ; 12 : 313 – 329 Electron Tomography Analysis of the Plant TGN A B C Figure 4 : Reduction in the surface area of trans Golgi cisternae during their transformation to Golgi - associated ( GA - ) TGN cisternae . A – C ) Three tomographic models of Golgi stacks and their TGN cisternae as seen in transside , face - on views of the stacks . The GA - TGN cisternae are shown in blue and the trans - most Golgi cisternae in pink . The C number denotes the position of the cisterna within the stack . Note the reduced size of the blue cisternae compared to the pink cisternae . The histogram under each model provides quantitative information on the surface area changes in the last two trans - most Golgi cisternae and the emerging GA - TGN cisternae . In all three models , the reduction in surface area of the GA - TGN cisternae is 30 % or greater . freeze - substitution medium , and to the variable effects of different embedding media on membrane staining . For ultrastructural studies , the specimens are typically ﬁxed / stained with osmium tetroxide and embedded in Epon resin . For the immunolabeling experiments shown here , osmium tetroxide was omitted and Lowicryl HM20 resin was used ( 38 ) . To conﬁrm that the RabA4b molecules are associated with budding SVs , we have employed a new IMOD software program called IMODCURVATURE to identify poten - tial SV - forming TGN membrane domains based on their 3 - D membrane curvature . Budding SVs on TGN cisternae of root apical meristem cells of Arabidopsis have diame - ters ranging from 52 to 107 nm ( average 69 . 0 ± 12 . 1 nm ; Figure S2A ) . In the 3 - D model images of the TGN cister - nae shown in Figure 5 , the computer - selected membrane domains with radii of 26 – 53 nm ( half the SV diameters ) are colored green , and 14 of the 25 anti - RabA4b immunogold particles are seen in close proximity to these green mem - brane domains . Three additional TGN cisternae analyzed in the same manner yielded 65 out of 110 immunogold par - ticles ( i . e . ∼ 60 % ) adjacent to green membrane - budding domains , with the remaining particles being associated with TGN membrane regions that possessed more variable curvatures . In contrast , the central ﬂat mem - branes of early TGN cisternae as well as the membrane domains of forming CCVs were rarely labeled . Together , these results indicate that RabA4b was preferentially asso - ciated with SV - forming sites on TGN membranes , and are consistent with the colocalization of RabA4b with the xyloglucan polysaccharide epitope ( Figure 1C , D and H ) . TheearlyendosomalmarkerproteinsVHA - a1 - GFP andSYP61 - CFPcolocalizewithRabA4bonTGN cisternae Based on a number of recent microscopy studies of several types of plant cells , the TGN has been postulated to function not only in the secretory pathway but also as an early endosomal compartment ( 21 , 22 , 25 , 39 , 40 ) . The demonstration that RabA4b marks TGN cisternae as well as SVs that contain secretory cargo ( Figures 1 and 5 ) has provided us a means for testing this hypothesis by using double immunogold labeling experiments with the early endosomal marker proteins VHA - a1 - GFP ( 25 ) and SYP61 - CFP ( 29 ) . To this end , we have probed root meristem Trafﬁc2011 ; 12 : 313 – 329 319 Kang et al . A B C D H I J K L M N E F G Figure 5 : Immunoelectron tomographic localization of RabA4b . A – C ) Tomographic slice images of the surfaces of three serial sections of an Arabidopsis Golgi / TGN immunolabeled with anti - RabA4b antibodies . D – G ) Higher magniﬁcation views of the boxed areas in ( A ) to ( C ) showing TGN membranes and associated RabA4b immunogold particles . These immunogold particles preferentially mark the secretory vesicle - forming regions of the TGN membranes ( arrowheads ) , which in ( H – N ) correspond to the green membrane domains in the 3 - D models identiﬁed by the IMODCURVATURE program . H – J ) 3 - D model images of the Golgi / TGN membranes in the serial thin sections ( A – C ) . Most of the gold particles ( yellow dots ) are seen to be associated with the green , secretory vesicle - forming domains ( arrowheads ) of the TGN models . K – N ) Higher magniﬁcation views of the 3 - D Golgi / TGN model showing details of the TGN regions in ( D – G ) . G ) Golgi stack . Scale bars : 100 nm . cell samples from Arabidopsis expressing VHA - a1 - GFP or SYP61 - CFP with an anti - GFP / CFP antibody . GFP / CFP - speciﬁc immunogold particles were seen associated with TGN - type compartments , but not with Golgi cisternae nor MVBs . When double labeled with the anti - RabA4b antibody , the GFP / CFP - speciﬁc and the RabA4b - speciﬁc gold particles labeled the same TGN compartments ( Figures 6 and S3 ) . Quantitative analyses of the labeling 320 Trafﬁc2011 ; 12 : 313 – 329 Electron Tomography Analysis of the Plant TGN B A Figure 6 : Double immunogold labeling with the anti - RabA4b antibody and an anti - GFP antibody in Arabidopsisroot meristem cells expressing VHA - a1 - GFP ( A ) and SYP61 - CFP ( B ) . RabA4b - speciﬁc immunogold particles ( 10 nm ) colocalize with GFP / CFP - speciﬁc immunogold particles ( 15 nm ) in the Golgi - associated ( GA - ) and the free TGN cisternae . No immunogold particles are seen over the Golgi stacks nor over the MVBs . Arrows and arrowheads mark 10 - nm RabA4b immunogold particles and 15 - nm GFP / CFP immunogold particles , respectively . Scale bars : 200 nm . patterns indicated that ∼ 70 % of the VHA - a1 - GFP detected by anti - GFP immunolabeling was associated with free TGN cisternae in the vicinity of Golgi stacks and only 30 % with the Golgi - associated TGN cisternae in the VHA - a1 - GFP cell line ( Figures 6A and S3A , B ) . Such differential labeling was not noticed for SYP61 - CFP in the SYP61 - CFP line of root meristem cells ( Figures 6B and S3C , D ) . LossofPI - 4K β 1 / β 2activityresultsindramatic alterationsinplantTGNstructure The observation that RabA4b is selectively recruited to emerging SVs on plant TGN compartments ( Figure 5 ) suggests an important regulatory role for RabA4b in the formation and budding of SVs . Examination of transferred DNA ( T - DNA ) inserted mutants of RabA4b and of several of the most closely related RabA GTPases did not lead to the identiﬁcation of plants with obvious developmental defects , perhaps because of the extreme size of the RabA GTPase family in plants , which contains 26 members ( 28 , 30 ) . However , the loss of function of the RabA4b effector protein , PI - 4K β 1 , and of the highly similar PI - 4K β 2 , resulted in plants with reduced stature and altered root hair morphology , and these changes were associated with defects in TGN compartments ( 28 ) . To further characterize the nature of these defects , we have analyzed high - pressure frozen cells of the pi4k β 1 / pi4k β 2double knockout mutant of Arabidopsisby means of EM tomography . Consistent with our earlier observations ( 28 ) , the TGN cisternae displayed fewer SV - type budding proﬁles , but the SV buds that were formed were typically larger and more variable in size ( Figure 7A , B , B (cid:3) and C ) . Wild - type SVs had diameters of 52 – 107 nm , approximately 20 % of the vesicles in cell from the mutant had diameters > 110 nm ( Figures 7 and S2B ) . Budding SV proﬁles that were larger than normal were observed on both Golgi - associated and on free TGN compartments ( Figure 7B , B (cid:3) and C ) . In contrast , neither the structure nor the average number of CCV buds was affected in mutant plants ( Figure 7C ) . To determine if the anatomical defects in the pi4k β 1 / pi4k β 2 double mutants might be caused by a change in cargo content of the SVs , we analyzed the com - position of the cell wall polysaccharide cargo molecules in the SVs using the anti - xyloglucan ( CCRC - M1 ) antibody ( Figure 7D – I ) . In contrast to wild - type cells ( Figures 1C , D and 7D ) , the anti - xyloglucan - labeled compartments and vesicles of the mutants were , on average , not only much larger but also bound more gold particles ( Figure 7E , F ) . Furthermore , the large SVs were still capable of delivering their cell wall cargo molecules to the cell wall , as evi - denced by the wall labeling with the anti - xyloglucan anti - bodies ( Figure 7F , H and I ) . Taken together , these results indicate that the loss of PI - 4K β 1 and PI - 4K β 2 activities results in pronounced changes in early and late TGN mor - phology , and in an apparent loss of control over SV size . Roottissuesofpi4k β 1 / pi4k β 2doublemutantplants displaydefectsincellexpansionandcytokinesis As mentioned earlier , the pi4k β 1 / pi4k β 2 double mutant plants exhibited both a dwarfed growth phenotype and defects in root hair cell expansion , despite the apparent ability of the SVs to deliver their polysaccharide cargo molecules to the cell walls ( Figure 7I ) . To identify the cellular origins of these deﬁciencies , we examined the anatomy of the root tissues and the ultrastructure of root cells of the mutant plants in greater detail . In wild - type roots , the cells are organized into regular , concentric layers and are rectangularly shaped ( Figure 8A and C ) , whereas in the pi4k β 1 / pi4k β 2 double mutant the tissue Trafﬁc2011 ; 12 : 313 – 329 321 Kang et al . A B B 1 C D E F G H I J K Figure 7 : Golgi / TGN complexes , secretory vesicles and cell walls of the pi4k β 1 / pi4k β 2 double mutant of Arabidopsis . A ) Electron micrograph of a Golgi stack and TGN cisterna in a pi4k β 1 / pi4k β 2double mutant root meristem cell . The mutation affects the size of the secretory vesicles produced by the TGN , with many vesicles being unusually large ( arrowhead ) . B and B (cid:3) ) Two tomographic slice images of a Golgi - associated ( GA - ) TGN and a free TGN compartment . Slice ( B ) is 150 nm below the ( B (cid:3) ) slice . C ) 3 - D model of the Golgi / TGN complex illustrated in ( B ) and ( B (cid:3) ) . Both TGN cisternae exhibit large bulging domains that correspond to the swollen membrane structures seen in ( B ) and ( B (cid:3) ) ( arrowheads ) . D – F ) Electron micrographs of Golgi / TGN complexes in wild - type ( D ) and pi4k β 1 / pi4k β 2 double mutant ( E and F ) root cells immunolabeled with the anti - xyloglucan antibody , CCRC - M1 . In contrast to the wild - type TGN cisterna in which 2 – 4 immunogold particles are seen over each budding vesicle , the large budding TGN vesicles ( arrowheads ) of the mutant cells have 12 – 23 immunogold particles . G ) Thin - section electron micrograph of a pi4k β 1 / pi4k β 2 double mutant root cell depicting a large ( ∼ 170 nm in diameter ) secretory vesicle ( arrowhead ) . H and I ) Examples of large secretory vesicles and cell walls of mutant root cells immunolabeled with the anti - xyloglucan antibody ( arrowheads ) . CW , cell wall ; PD , plasmodesma . J and K ) Incomplete cell walls ( arrows ) in root cells of the pi4k β 1 / pi4k β 2double mutant . N , nucleus . Scale bars in ( A – I ) are 200 nm and in ( J and K ) are 2 . 0 μ m . 322 Trafﬁc2011 ; 12 : 313 – 329 Electron Tomography Analysis of the Plant TGN A B C D Figure 8 : Effects of the pi4k β 1 / pi4k β 2 knockout mutation on root architecture and cytokinesis . A and B ) Longitudinal views of wild - type ( A ) and mutant ( B ) roots stained brieﬂy with propidium iodide to delineate cell walls . The wild - type root is composed mostly of rectangular cells in uniform ﬁles , whereas in the pi4k β 1 / pi4k β 2 mutant , the cells are more trapezoidal and are organized into irregular ﬁles . The inset in B shows incomplete cell walls ( arrows ) . C and D ) Electron micrographs of longitudinal thin sections through the root cap regions of wild - type ( C ) and pi4k β 1 / pi4k β 2mutant ( D ) plants . The columella cells of the mutant lack the clear three - tier organization characteristic of wild - type roots . arrangement is irregular due to the trapezoidal shape and the variable sizes of the cortical , endodermis and columella cells ( Figure 8B and D ) . In addition to the differences in cell expansion , we also observed defects in cytokinesis that resulted in the formation of disrupted walls and of cell wall stubs ( Figure 7J , K and Figure 8B , insets ) . Based on these results , we conclude that while transport of cell wall components to forming or expanding cell walls is not completely abolished , the loss of the RabA4b effector protein activity results in defects in the delivery of cell wall molecules to cell plates and cell walls . Presumably , these defects eventually lead to improper cell division and perturbed cell wall expansion . Discussion TheplantTGNcanbedeﬁnedbymeansofasetofmolecularandstructuralcriteria The TGN was ﬁrst deﬁned in animal cells as the ’last Golgi compartment . . . a tubular reticulum on the trans side of the stack’ ( 2 ) . Functionally , this compartment was viewed as the ’exit compartment of the Golgi complex’ in which secretory and lysosomal proteins were sorted and pack - aged into SVs and CCVs , respectively . In addition , it was postulated to contain the enzymes responsible for carry - ing out the ﬁnal steps of Golgi - mediated post - translational modiﬁcations . In animal cells , TGN compartments can also be reached by a limited subset of endocytic cargoes , indi - cating a role in the recycling of molecules associated with the endocytic pathway ( 41 – 43 ) . The TGN termi - nology was subsequently adopted for Golgi - associated membrane compartments that serve equivalent functions in non - animal systems such as yeast ( 44 ) and plants ( 6 ) , despite differences in morphology . In contrast to animal cells , in which the Golgi are clustered in the vicinity of the microtubule organizing center ( 45 ) , plant Golgi stacks are dispersed throughout the cytoplasm . Individual plant Golgi stacks are almost always associated with a TGN , leading to the idea that each Golgi – TGN structure serves as a functionally independent unit ( 46 ) . However , the structural variability of the Golgi stacks and TGN cisternae ( 6 ) has made it difﬁcult to establish a formal deﬁnition of TGN compartments in plants . Accordingly , a number of distinct structures have been identiﬁed as pos - sible TGN compartments , from trans Golgi cisternae , to tubulovesicular structures in close proximity to individual Golgi stacks , and to independent TGN cisternae that have also been called either partially coated reticulum ( 6 , 11 , 12 ) or SV clusters ( 14 ) . Based on the ﬁndings of this study , we have developed a set of molecular and structural characteristics that can be used to positively identify plant TGN compartments , and to distinguish plant TGN compartments from trans Golgi cisternae . Consistent with the Golgi cisternal mat - uration model , we postulate that the trans - most Golgi cisterna is ﬁrst converted into a TGN - type compartment that is still tightly associated with the Golgi stack and is contained within the Golgi matrix ( 46 ) . This transformation appears to be coupled to the recruitment of RabA4b and its effector protein PI - 4K β 1 to the Golgi - associated TGN cis - ternae ( Figures 1 and S1 ) , and for this reason we consider these two molecules as identiﬁers , i . e . molecular markers , of both Golgi - associated ( and free ) TGN compartments . Further analysis of the RabA4b - and PI - 4K β 1 - labeled TGN compartments showed that these marker molecules were preferentially recruited to SV buds containing complex polysaccharides , and to a lesser extent to the connecting membrane domains , but were absent from budding CCVs ( Figure 5 ) . Transformation of thetrans - most Golgi cisterna into a TGN cisterna was accompanied by three structural changes : ( i ) the onset of the separation of the trans - most cisterna from the stack by a peeling type of mechanism , ( ii ) a 30 – 35 % reduction in cisternal membrane area and ( iii ) the formation of round , SV buds that are not conﬁned to the plane of the original trans Golgi cisterna . In contrast , Trafﬁc2011 ; 12 : 313 – 329 323 Kang et al . the formation of CCV buds is not a reliable marker for Golgi - associated TGN cisternae , because such buds often arise only on more mature , free TGN cisternae . The late development of CCV buds on TGN cisternae is consistent with electron tomography studies in both mammalian normal rat kidney ( 47 ) and yeast ( Pichia pastoris ) ( 20 ) . We propose that these molecular and structural criteria provide a reliable means for identifying both forming and mature TGN compartments in plants . The discovery that the transformationof atrans - most Golgi cisterna into a Golgi - associated TGN cisterna involves a 30 – 35 % reduction in surface area is novel , and has potential implications for understanding the process of retrograde Golgi trafﬁcking in plants . In particular , the 30 – 35 % value for the amount of membrane surface area that is removed from forming TGN cisternae provides a ﬁrst measure of how much membrane could be involved in the recycling of the enzymes of each Golgi cisterna during the process of cisternal maturation . Although we cannot rule out that some of the surface area reduction associated with the formation of Golgi - associated TGN cisternae could be because of the release of individual SVs , our tomographic reconstructions and the presence of COPIb - type vesicles ( Figure 2F ) around Golgi - associated , but not free TGN cisternae suggest that most of the membrane loss is likely because of COPIb - type vesicle formation . Based on the COPIb vesicle size reported in that article , 30 % of the surface area of an average trans - most Golgi cisterna in an Arabidopsis root meristem cell would correspond to ∼ 30 COPIb - type vesicles . The SV : CCV bud ratio on individual TGN cisternae varies tremendously , ranging from 5 : 1 to 1 : 4 ( 13 ) . In most plant cells , the SV buds outnumber the CCV buds , reﬂect - ing the predominance of cell wall polysaccharide - type cargo molecules , although a higher ratio of CCV buds was sometimes detected in root meristem cells . The variability attests to the inherent ﬂexibility of the sorting and packag - ing systems of TGN cisternae . It may also reﬂect a unique aspect of trafﬁcking through Golgi in plants , in that the ratio of secretory to vacuolar proteins that each indepen - dent plant Golgi stack may take up at a given ER export site ( 48 ) can be highly variable , reﬂecting the composition of the mRNAs that were translated by membrane - bound polysomes in the vicinity of that particular site . Golgi - associatedTGNcisternaematureintofree , physicallyindependent , TGNcompartments Based on our analysis of the conversion of trans - most Golgi cisternae into TGN compartments , we present a model for the formation of two types of TGN compart - ments , ’Golgi - associated’ and ’free’ ( Figures 1 , 2 and 3 ) . The Golgi - associated TGN compartments , which have also been called ’early’ TGN cisternae ( 13 ) , correspond to trans - most Golgi cisternae that have begun to bind RabA4b and PI - 4K β 1 , and have started the structural pro - cesses of cisternal peeling ( away from the trans side of the Golgi stack ) and the formation of SVs and CCVs . Once a Golgi - associated TGN compartment has lost its planar cisternal membrane adhesion domain and has sep - arated from the Golgi stack , it becomes an independent organelle , and is referred to as a free or ’late’ ( 13 ) TGN compartment . Free TGN cisternae continue to mature , as evidenced by the increase in the number of SV and CCV buds ( Figure 2E , G and H ) and the decrease in the average size of the SVs . Similarly to Golgi - associated TGN cisternae , the free TGN cisternae are also surrounded by a ribosome - excluding matrix ( 13 ) , which likely contributes to the mechanical stability of these independent membrane structures . In addition to the molecular and structural criteria listed above for distinguishing transGolgi cisternae from Golgi - associated TGN cisternae , both Golgi - associated and free TGN cisternae have been shown to respond differently to the ionophore monensin than do the trans Golgi cis - ternae ( 49 ) . In particular , the compartments that we now deﬁne as Golgi - associated and as free TGN swelled more rapidly than the transGolgi cisternae did when sycamore suspension cultured cells were exposed to monensin . ThelifespanofafreeTGNcisternaendswithcisternalfragmentation Uncertainty surrounding the fate of free TGN cisternae is reﬂected in the recent formulation of two hypotheses . The ﬁrst ( 14 ) postulates that SV - rich , free TGN cisternae , termed ’SV clusters’ , travel intact to the cell surface where they fuse with the plasma membrane to release their cargo molecules into localized areas of the cell wall . This hypothesis predicts that large , TGN membrane ghosts should be seen fused to the plasma membrane . To the best of our knowledge , no plasma membrane appendages of this kind have been reported in the literature . Furthermore , in a detailed freeze - fracture study of vesicle - mediated secretion in cryoﬁxed sycamore and carrot suspension cultured cells , in which thousands of secretory events were analyzed , only single SV fusion structures were observed ( 50 ) . This suggests that the SVs are released from the free TGN cisternae prior to their fusion with the plasma membrane . A unique feature of the second hypothesis by Viotti et al . ( 17 ) is the postulate that the TGN / early endosome ( EE ) compartments of plant cells are semistable organelles that move independently and cycle , in a functionally rel - evant manner , on and off the trans side of Golgi stacks . In the model presented by Viotti et al . ( 17 ) , the authors postulate that free TGN cisternae may be able to reasso - ciate with the transside of Golgi stacks . Considering the maturational changes in TGN structure that we were able to observe using the high levels of resolution provided by the EM tomography technique ( Figures 2G , H and 4 ) and the presence of an extended Golgi matrix around the TGN cisternae ( 13 ) , it is difﬁcult to envision the mechanism by which free TGN cisternae could become structurally and functionally reassociated to the transside of a Golgi stack . It is also unclear whether the light microscopy images 324 Trafﬁc2011 ; 12 : 313 – 329 Electron Tomography Analysis of the Plant TGN Figure 9 : Schematic diagram of Golgi / TGN complexes in wild - type and pi4k β 1 / pi4k β 2 double mutant cells in Ara - bidopsis . During TGN cisternal fragmentation , the mutant cells produce secretory vesicles that vary greatly in size compared to the more uniformly sized vesicles of wild - type plants . The for - mation of CCVs and of residual cisternal membrane fragments during TGN fragmentation is unaffected by the mutation . of the transient association of the free TGN / EE cisterna with a Golgi stack shown in the article by Viotti et al . ( 17 ) would provide sufﬁcient levels of resolution to discriminate between non - speciﬁc associations due to random proxim - ity and functionally relevant , physical interactions between independent TGN cisternae and the newly forming , Golgi - associated TGN cisternae on the transside of stacks . The TGN model that is most consistent with our data is illustrated in Figure 9 . This model is based on the cisternal maturation model of Golgi trafﬁcking ( 18 ) , and postulates a sequence of TGN maturation events that includes cister - nal fragmentation , a process whereby the majority of the membrane surface area of a fully mature cisterna breaks down into its component parts . Based on the calcula - tions of our EM tomographic reconstructions , this would result in ∼ 30 SVs and CCVs for each newly forming early TGN cisterna . Fragmentation of ’mature dictyosome cis - ternae’ in chemically ﬁxed plant cells was ﬁrst reported by Mollenhauer ( 15 ) . This model is also supported by stud - ies on Golgi trafﬁcking in the yeast P . pastoris , in which free TGN cisternae were shown to arise via cisternal peeling ( 20 ) , and where individual , freely moving TGN cis - ternae were followed in living cells until their ﬂuorescence signal suddenly faded , presumably as a result of cisternal fragmentation ( 51 ) . Our data showing that the endosomal markers VHA - a1 - GFP and SYP61 - CFP are present both in Golgi - associated TGN and in free TGN cisternae ( Figure 6 ) suggest that endocytosed molecules can be delivered to TGN cister - nae at both early and later stages of maturation . From our observations , we are unable to determine whether inde - pendent , mature TGN compartments undergo homotypic fusion . However , if this happens it would result in a TGN with signiﬁcantly larger surface area . Because unusually large TGN structures were not observed in the vicinity of Golgi stacks , it is unlikely that homotypic fusion events occur between Golgi - associated TGN compartments . TGN fragmentation into SVs and CCVs was typically accompa - nied by appearance of membrane fragments . An intriguing possibility is that these membrane fragments may also be capable of fusing with endocytosed cargo to create new endosome - type compartments . Alternatively , these fragments may become precursors of MVBs ( 52 ) . RabA4bandPI - 4K β 1regulatetheformation ofsecretoryvesiclesonTGNcisternae In this article , we show that RabA4b and its effector PI - 4K β 1 are among the earliest molecular markers associ - ated with the transformation of trans - most Golgi cisternae into TGN cisternae . In particular , we show that these two proteins are selectively recruited to budding SV pro - ﬁles ( Figures 5 and S1 ) . This selective recruitment raises intriguing possibilities relating to the functions of RabA4b and / or PI - 4K β 1 in the sorting of cargo molecules and the formation of SVs in plants . Although Rab GTPases have been postulated to regulate a number of membrane - trafﬁcking steps , most of the data published to date have pointed toward regulatory func - tions associated with late steps of vesicle transport and membrane fusion ( 53 ) . However , there is some prece - dence for the involvement of a Rab GTPase in early cargo sorting and in vesicle - budding events . In animal cells , Rab5 GTPase functions are required for CCV formation during endocytosis at the plasma membrane ( 54 , 55 ) . Fur - thermore , Rab9 has been shown to interact with TIP47 ( Tail Interacting Protein of 47kD ) , which plays important roles in cargo selection during recycling of lysosomal transport receptors from late endosomes back to Golgi membranes ( 56 , 57 ) . As shown by the effects of the pi4k β 1 / pi4k β 2 knock - out mutant on SV formation at the TGN ( Figure 7A – I ) , PI - 4K β 1 also seems to play critical roles in this process . Indeed , based on the variable sizes of the SVs in the knockout mutant , PI - 4K β 1 and PI - 4K β 2 appear to func - tion in the control of SV size , which likely secondarily affects secretion , cell wall formation and tissue devel - opment in Arabidopsis root tissues . These effects are interesting as they may help describe the mechanism by which defects in cell division occur when the func - tions of other members of the RabA GTPase family are inhibited ( 39 ) . Disruption of the orthologs in yeast ( Pik1p ) and mammalian ( PI4KIII β ) cells has also been reported to interfere with the release of secretory cargo molecules from Golgi compartments ( 58 – 61 ) . Evidence that Golgi - localized Rab GTPases interact with these PI - 4K orthologs in yeast and in mammals likely underlines a common mechanism of regulation of PI - 4K by Rab GTPases in these Trafﬁc2011 ; 12 : 313 – 329 325 Kang et al . compartments ( 62 , 63 ) . It will be interesting to determine to what extent the differences in organization of late Golgi cisternae and TGN compartments in these distinct sys - tems will be reﬂected by the differences in the regulation of cargo sorting and vesicle budding by Rab GTPases and their associated effector proteins . Thesecretoryandtheendocyticpathwaysconverge attheTGNinplantcells VHA - a1 - GFP and SYP61 - CFP are considered to be endo - cytic pathway marker proteins , because they localize to internal membrane compartments that rapidly accumu - late a bulk - ﬂow endocytosis tracer , FM4 - 64 ( 22 , 25 ) . The ﬁnding that VHA - a1 - GFP and SYP61 - CFP also colocalize with RabA4b in TGN structures ( Figure 6 ) shows that both secretory and endocytic pathways converge at the TGN , i . e . that the TGN also doubles as an early endosomal compartment in plant cells . In functional terms , this con - vergence implies that endocytic cargo that is delivered to the TGN can be recycled back to the cell surface in SVs , or packaged into CCVs for transport to MVBs ( late endo - somes ) and lytic vacuoles . This convergence of endocytic and secretory trafﬁcking at the TGN obviates the need for two independent sorting and packaging compartments , one for secretion and one for endocytosis . As shown by Dhonukshe et al . ( 64 ) , endocytosed tracer molecules such as FM4 - 64 accumulate in cell plates of dividing cells . This observation can now be explained by the ﬁnding that TGN cisternae also function as early endosomes . Thus , once FM4 - 64 reaches the TGN it can be partitioned into forming SVs which , during cell plate formation , are delivered to the cell plate to build the new cross wall ( 65 ) . The discovery that the density of anti - VHA - a1 - GFP labeling is much higher over free TGN cisternae than over Golgi - associated TGN cisternae ( Figures 6 and S3 ) suggests that most of the early endosomal compartments identiﬁed in light microscopic studies ( 25 , 39 ) correspond to free TGN rather than to Golgi - associated TGN compartments . This interpretation and the ﬁnding that most CCVs are formed on free TGN cisternae ( Figure 2H ) support the postulate that CCV - rich partially coated reticulum - type TGN cister - nae also serve as early endosomal compartments ( 66 ) . RabA4b GTPase - labeled SVs at the growing tips of root hairs have not been found to be signiﬁcantly labeled with FM4 - 64 when examined by confocal microscopy ( 27 , 67 ) . The delayed emergence of early endosomal characteris - tics during TGN maturation , together with the distinctive distribution of SVs in the growing root hair , may provide an explanation for this observation . In the growing root hair tip , numerous SVs accumulate at the apical dome of the tip , while Golgi stacks are located in the subapical zone ( 68 ) . Upregulated SV production and spatial separa - tion of SVs from the Golgi in the root hair tip may accelerate SV sorting away from TGN compartments , reducing the level of overlap between the exocytic and endocytic path - ways . Alternatively , growing root tip cells may recycle excess plasma membrane by mechanisms that largely exclude the FM4 - 64 dye molecules . For example , a recent electron tomography study of growing tip regions of high - pressure frozen Chararhizoids has shown that these tips contain six different types of vesicles , each of which displays a distinctive distribution within the tip region . Among these vesicles , a novel , uncharacterized and very small ( ∼ 25 nm in diameter ) vesicle type appears to be the prime candidate for membrane recycling ( 69 ) . This ﬁnding highlights the need for further studies to better deﬁne how TGN maturation , SV production , endocytosis and membrane recycling are organized in the tip regions of tip growing plant and algal cells . Materials and methods Reagents , plantmaterialandgrowthcondition Arabidopsis thaliana ecotype Columbia ( Wt Co ) were grown on half - strength Murashige and Skoog ( MS ) solid medium ( 0 . 6 % phytoagar , 1 % sucrose , pH 5 . 9 ) at 22 ◦ C under continuous light before high - pressure freezing . Unless speciﬁed , reagents were purchased from Sigma . High - pressurefreezing , freezesubstitutionandresin embedding Root tips were excised from 5 - day - old A . thalianaseedlings in a 150 m M sucrose solution and transferred to a B - type aluminum planchette ( Tech - notrade International ) . The root tip samples were then covered with the ﬂat side of another B - type planchette and were rapidly frozen in a Bal - Tec HPM 010 high - pressure freezer ( Boeckeler Instruments ) . After freeze sub - stitution for 5 days at − 80 ◦ C in anhydrous acetone containing 2 % OsO 4 , the samples were warmed up to room temperature over 2 days ( 24 h from − 80 ◦ C to − 20 ◦ C , 20 h from − 20 ◦ C to 4 ◦ C , 4 h from 4 ◦ C to 20 ◦ C ) . After washing 3 × with anhydrous acetone , the root tips were embedded in a graduated Epon resin ( Ted Pella Inc . ) dilution in acetone ( 5 , 15 , 25 , 50 , 75 and 100 % ) over 3 days . After polymerization in a 60 ◦ C oven for 24 h , root tips were sectioned and post - stained with aqueous2 % uranyl acetate ( UA ) and Reynolds lead citrate ( LC ) solution . For immunolabeling experiments , high - pressure frozen A . thalianaroot tips were freeze substituted in anhy - drous acetone containing 0 . 1 % UA and 0 . 25 % glutaraldehyde at − 90 ◦ C for 96 h . The temperature of the freeze - substitution medium was then increased from − 90 ◦ C to − 50 ◦ C over 30 h and were then washed with anhydrous acetone 3 × at − 50 ◦ C . Lowicryl HM20 ( Electron Microscopy Sciences ) resin embedding was performed by a stepwise increase in resin concentrationfrom0 , 33 , 66 to 100 % over 48 h at − 50 ◦ C . HM20resin was polymerizedunderultraviolet ( UV ) lightfor24 hat − 50 ◦ C . Oncecompletely polymerized , the samples were slowly warmed from − 50 ◦ C to 20 ◦ C over 4 h . Freeze substitution and Lowicryl resin embedding were carried out in the Leica AFS machine ( LeicaUSA ) . Membranefractionation Wild - type ( Columbia ecotype ) A . thalianawere used for membrane frac - tionation . Seedlings were grown in liquid culture ( 1 / 4 × MS ) on a shaker under continuous light conditions for 2 – 3 weeks . Root cell membranes were isolated and prepared as described by Sanderfoot et al . ( 70 ) , except that 20 % w / v sucrose was used in the grinding buffer . Clear , postnuclear supernatant was layered over a 20 – 60 % continuous sucrose gradient and centrifuged for 16 h in an SW41 swinging bucket rotor at 20 000 g at 4 ◦ C . Twenty - four 0 . 5 - mL fractions were collected from the top of the gradient . Odd numbered fractions were precipitated with methanol , solubilized in SDS sample buffer , separated on SDS – PAGE and transferred to nitrocel - lulose blots for immunodetection with speciﬁc antibodies against RabA4b . Membranes present in even numbered fractions were reisolated by sedi - mentation , detergentsolubilizedinTriton - X - 100 , spottedontonitrocellulose membranes and immunoblotted with monoclonal antibodies M1 , M7 , M8 andJIM7 ( CarbosourceInc . ) . Controlpolysaccharidefractionscomposedof gum arabic , gum tragacanth and pectin were obtained from Sigma - Aldrich . 326 Trafﬁc2011 ; 12 : 313 – 329 Electron Tomography Analysis of the Plant TGN Microscopicimaging To visualize cells inA . thalianaroots , seedlingswere grown in liquid culture ( 1 / 4 × MS ) on a shaker under continuous light conditions for 7 – 10 days . Seedlings were stained with 0 . 1 mg / mL propidium iodide in distilled H 2 0 for5 – 15 minatroomtemperaturepriortoimaging . Imagingwasperformed on a confocal microscope ( Zeiss LSM 510 ) with a 40 × apochromat lens ( numerical aperture 1 . 2 ) using appropriate ﬂuorescent ﬁlters . Immunogoldlabeling Eighty - to 120 - nm thick sections of Lowicryl HM20 - embedded A . thaliana root tip samples were mounted on gold slot grids coated with formvar ( Electron Microscopy Sciences ) . The sections were blocked with 2 % non - fat dried milk and 0 . 2 % Tween - 20 in PBS for 30 min . After blocking , the sections were probed with antibodies ( RabA4b , PI - 4K β , CCRC - M1 and RabF2a , which were diluted 1 : 50 , 1 : 20 , 1 : 25 and 1 : 50 in PBS with 1 % non - fat milk and 0 . 2 % Tween - 20 , respectively ) for 1 h at room temperature . After washing thoroughly in PBS with 1 % non - fat milk and 0 . 2 % Tween - 20 , the sections were incubated with the secondary antibody [ anti - rabbit immunoglobulin G ( IgG ) or anti - mouse IgG , diluted 1 : 25 in PBS with 0 . 5 % non - fat milk and 0 . 2 % Tween - 20 ] conjugated to 15 - nm gold particles ( Ted Pella ) for 1 h . For double immunogold labeling of GFP / CFP with RabA4b , GFP antibody ( monoclonal mouse antibody , catalogue number SC9996 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) was used ; according to the product manual , this antibody detects GFP and other GFP variants . The antibody dilutions were 1 : 50 for both RabA4b and GFP / CFP . The primary antibodies were labeled with anti - rabbit IgG ( 10 nm ) and anti - mouse IgG ( 15 nm ) secondary antibody conjugated to gold particles . The immunolabeled sections were post - stained with 2 % UA and Reynolds lead citrate , coated with a layer of formvar ﬁlm and observed with a Philips CM10 or Hitachi H - 7000 electron microscope operated at 80 or 100 kV . Electrontomographyandanalysisof3 - Dmodels Sample sectioning , post - staining and acquisition of tilting series images were performed as described by Segui - Simarro et al . ( 65 ) . In brief , 250 - nm thick sections of Epon - embedded samples or 120 - nm thick immunogold - labeled HM20 - embedded samples were post - stained with UA and LC , and tilting series images of the sections were taken either at 15 400 × or at 17 000 × from + 60 ◦ to − 60 ◦ with 1 . 5 ◦ increments using a Gatan Megascan 795 digital camera ( Gatan ) around two orthogonal axes . Tomograms were reconstructed using the etomo interface of the IMOD software package ( Boulder Laboratory of 3D Electron Microscopy of the Cell , University of Colorado at Boulder ) . Tomogram analysis and 3 - D model reconstruction were performed with the 3dmod graphic module of the IMOD software package . Vesicle diameter measurement was carried out as described in Donohoe et al . ( 37 ) . The surface areas of trans Golgi and early TGN cisternae were determined from their 3 - D models using the imodinfo command of the IMOD software package . SVbuddingsitedeterminationby IMODCURVATURE TGN membranes with 3 - D curvatures in the range of 26 – 53 nm were identiﬁed and differentiated by the imodcurvature command . The default parameters of the command were used with the exceptions of the RadiusCriterion ( 26 – 53 nm ) , ZrangeToFit ( 35contours ) andWindowLength ( 80 pixels ) . Detailed explanations of imodcurvature can be found in the IMOD command list posted in http : / / www . bio3d . colorado . edu / imod / doc / program _ listing . html . Acknowledgments We thank the members of the Staehelin laboratory and the members of the Boulder Laboratory for 3D Electron Microscopy for discussion and technical support . We are grateful to Dr Karin Schumacher ( University of Heidelberg ) and Dr Glenn Hicks ( University of California - Riverside ) for sharing their VHA - a1 - GFP line and the SYP61 - CFP line , respectively . We alsothankJiyoungPark ( UniversityofFlorida ) forherassistanceinmodeling Golgi stacks . This work was supported by NIH grant GM61306 to L . A . S . and DOE grant DE - FG02 - 03ER15412 to E . N . D . M . was supported by NIH - NCRR grant P41RR00592 to A . Hoenger ( University of Colorado ) . Supporting Information Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article : Figure S1 : A – D ) Gallery of TGN cisternae of Arabidopsis root meristem cells immunogold labeled with the RabA4b antibody . The RabA4b immunogold particles are associated with budding vesicle proﬁles on TGN membranes ( arrowheads ) . Note the absence of RabA4b immunogold particles adjacent to the multivesicular body in ( D ) . G , Golgi stack . Scale bars : 200 nm . Figure S2 : A and B ) Histograms of secretory vesicle / bud diameters in Arabidopsis root meristem cells . Note the widespread in vesicle diameter of thepi4k β 1 / pi4k β 2double mutant cells ( B ) compared with that of the wild - type cells ( A ) . Figure S3 : Double immunogold labeling with the anti - RabA4b antibody and an anti - GFP antibody in Arabidopsis root meristem cells Cells in A and B express VHA - a1 - GFP whereas cell in C and D express SYP61 - CFP . RabA4b - speciﬁc immunogold particles ( 10 nm ) and GFP / CFP - speciﬁc immunogold particles ( 15 nm ) are associated with both the Golgi - associated ( GA - ) and the free TGN cisternae . Scale bars : 200 nm . Please note : Wiley - Blackwell are not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting materials supplied by the authors . Any queries ( other than missing material ) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article . References 1 . Nebenf¨uhr A , Staehelin LA . Mobile factories : Golgi dynamics in plant cells . Trends Plant Sci 2001 ; 6 : 160 – 167 . 2 . Grifﬁths G , Simons K . The trans Golgi network : sorting at the exit site of the Golgi complex . Science 1986 ; 234 : 438 – 443 . 3 . Rabouille C , Clermont Y . Three - dimensional structure of the Golgi apparatus in mammalian cells , 1st edn . In : Berger E , Roth J , editors . The Golgi Apparatus . Zurich : Birkhauser ; 1997 , pp . 37 – 63 . 4 . Segui - Simarro JM , Staehelin LA . Cell cycle - dependent changes in Golgi stacks , vacuoles , clathrin - coated vesicles and multivesicular bodies in meristematic cells of Arabidopsis thaliana : a quantitative and spatial analysis . Planta 2006 ; 223 : 223 – 236 . 5 . Nebenf¨uhr A , Gallagher LA , Dunahay TG , Frohlick JA , Mazurkiewicz AM , Meehl JB , Staehelin LA . Stop - and - go movements of plant Golgi stacks are mediated by the acto - myosin system . Plant Physiol 1999 ; 121 : 1127 – 1142 . 6 . Staehelin LA , Giddings TH Jr , Kiss JZ , Sack FD . Macromolecular differentiation of Golgi stacks in root tips of Arabidopsis and Nicotiana seedlings as visualized in high pressure frozen and freeze - substituted samples . Protoplasma 1990 ; 157 : 75 – 91 . 7 . Pavelka M , Robinson DG . The Golgi apparatus of mammalian and higher plant cells : comparison . In : Robinson DG , editor . The Golgi Apparatus and the Plant Secretory Pathway . Oxford : Blackwell ; 2003 , pp . 16 – 35 . 8 . Hawes C . Cell biology of the plant Golgi apparatus . New Phytol 2005 ; 165 : 29 – 44 . 9 . Foresti O , Denecke J . Intermediate organelles of the plant secretory pathway : identity and function . Trafﬁc 2008 ; 9 : 1599 – 1612 . 10 . Zhang GF , Staehelin LA . Functional compartmentation of the Golgi apparatus of plant cells : immunocytochemical analysis of high - pressure frozen - and freeze - substituted sycamore maple suspension culture cells . Plant Physiol 1992 ; 99 : 1070 – 1083 . 11 . Pesacreta TC , Lucas WJ . Presence of a partially - coated reticulum in angiosperms . Protoplasma 1985 ; 123 : 173 – 184 . 12 . Hillmer S , Freundt H , Robinson DG . Thepartiallycoatedreticulumand its relationship to the Golgi apparatus in higher plant cells . Eur J Cell Biol 1988 ; 47 : 206 – 212 . Trafﬁc2011 ; 12 : 313 – 329 327 Kang et al . 13 . Staehelin LA , Kang BH . Nanoscale architecture of endoplasmic reticulum export sites and of Golgi membranes as determined by electron tomography . Plant Physiol 2008 ; 147 : 1454 – 1468 . 14 . Toyooka K , Goto Y , Asatsuma S , Koizumi M , Mitsui T , Matsuoka K . A mobile secretory vesicle cluster involved in mass transport from the Golgi to the plant cell exterior . Plant Cell 2009 ; 21 : 1212 – 1229 . 15 . Mollenhauer HH . Fragmentation of mature dictyosome cisternae . J Cell Biol 1971 ; 49 : 212 – 214 . 16 . Rensing KH , Samuels AL , Savidge RA . Ultrastructure of vascular cambial cell cytokinesis in pine seedlings preserved by cryoﬁxation and substitution . Protoplasma 2002 ; 220 : 39 – 49 . 17 . Viotti C , Bubeck J , Stierhof YD , Krebs M , Langhans M , van den Berg W , van Dongen W , Richter S , Geldner N , Takano J , Jurgens G , de Vries SC , Robinson DG , Schumacher K . Endocytic and secretory trafﬁc in Arabidopsis merge in the trans - Golgi network / early endosome , an independent and highly dynamic organelle . Plant Cell 2010 ; 22 : 1344 – 1357 . 18 . Glick BS , Nakano A . Membrane trafﬁc within the Golgi apparatus . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2009 ; 25 : 113 – 132 . 19 . Schnepf E . Golgi apparatus and slime secretion in plants : the early implications and recent models of membrane trafﬁc . Protoplasma 1993 ; 172 : 3 – 11 . 20 . Mogelsvang S , Gomez - Ospina N , Soderholm J , Glick BS , Staehe - lin LA . Tomographic evidence for continuous turnover of Golgi cis - ternae in Pichiapastoris . Mol Biol Cell 2003 ; 14 : 2277 – 2291 . 21 . Otegui MS , Spitzer C . Endosomal functions in plants . Trafﬁc 2008 ; 9 : 1589 – 1598 . 22 . Robinson DG , Jiang L , Schumacher K . The endosomal system of plants : charting new and familiar territories . Plant Physiol 2008 ; 147 : 1482 – 1492 . 23 . Tanchak MA , Fowke LC . The morphology of multivesicular bodies in soybean protoplasts and their role in endocytosis . Protoplasma 1987 ; 138 : 173 – 182 . 24 . Galway ME , Rennie PJ , Fowke LC . Ultrastructure of the endocytotic pathway in glutaraldehyde - ﬁxed and high - pressure frozen / freeze - substituted protoplasts of white spruce ( Picea glauca ) . J Cell Sci 1993 ; 106 : 847 – 858 . 25 . Dettmer J , Hong - Hermesdorf A , Stierhof YD , Schumacher K . Vac - uolar H + - ATPase activity is required for endocytic and secretory trafﬁcking in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 2006 ; 18 : 715 – 730 . 26 . Lam SK , Siu CL , Hillmer S , Jang S , An G , Robinson DG , Jiang L . Rice SCAMP1 deﬁnes clathrin - coated , trans - Golgi - locatedtubular - vesicular structures as an early endosome in tobacco BY - 2 cells . Plant Cell 2007 ; 19 : 296 – 319 . 27 . Preuss ML , Serna J , Falbel TG , Bednarek SY , Nielsen E . The Ara - bidopsis Rab GTPase RabA4b localizes to the tips of growing root hair cells . Plant Cell 2004 ; 16 : 1589 – 1603 . 28 . Preuss ML , Schmitz AJ , Thole JM , Bonner HK , Otegui MS , Nielsen E . A role for the RabA4b effector protein PI - 4Kbeta1 in polarized expansion of root hair cells in Arabidopsis thaliana . J Cell Biol 2006 ; 172 : 991 – 998 . 29 . Robert S , Chary SN , Drakakaki G , Li S , Yang Z , Raikhel NV , Hicks GR . Endosidin1 deﬁnes a compartment involved in endocytosis of the brassinosteroid receptor BRI1 and the auxin transporters PIN2 and AUX1 . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008 ; 105 : 8464 – 8469 . 30 . Vernoud V , Horton AC , Yang Z , Nielsen E . Analysis of the small GTPase gene superfamily of Arabidopsis . Plant Physiol 2003 ; 131 : 1191 – 1208 . 31 . Haas TJ , Sliwinski MK , Martinez DE , Preuss M , Ebine K , Ueda T , Nielsen E , Odorizzi G , Otegui MS . The Arabidopsis AAA ATPase SKD1 is involved in multivesicular endosome function and interacts with its positive regulator LYST - INTERACTING PROTEIN5 . Plant Cell 2007 ; 19 : 1295 – 1312 . 32 . Puhlmann J , Bucheli E , Swain MJ , Dunning N , Albersheim P , Darvill AG , Hahn MG . Generationof monoclonalantibodiesagainst plantcell - wall polysaccharides . I . Characterizationof a monoclonal antibodyto a terminal alpha - ( 1 – > 2 ) - linked fucosyl - containing epitope . Plant Physiol 1994 ; 104 : 699 – 710 . 33 . Knox JP , Linstead P , King J , Cooper C , Roberts K . Pectinesteriﬁcation is spatially regulated both within cell walls and between developing tissues of root apices . Planta 1990 ; 181 : 512 – 521 . 34 . Crowell EF , Bischoff V , Desprez T , Rolland A , Stierhof YD , Schu - macher K , Gonneau M , Hofte H , Vernhettes S . Pausing of Golgi bodies on microtubules regulates secretion of cellulose synthase complexes in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 2009 ; 21 : 1141 – 1154 . 35 . Donohoe BS , Mogelsvang S , Staehelin LA . Electron tomography of ER , Golgi and related membrane systems . Methods 2006 ; 39 : 154 – 162 . 36 . Jacobs S . High resolution imaging of live mitochondria . Biochim Biophys Acta 2006 ; 1763 : 561 – 575 . 37 . Donohoe BS , Kang BH , Staehelin LA . Identiﬁcation and characteriza - tion of COPIa - and COPIb - type vesicle classes associated with plant and algal Golgi . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007 ; 104 : 163 – 168 . 38 . Kang B . Electron microscopy and high - pressure freezing of Arabidop - sis . In : Mueller - Reichert T , editor . Electron Microscopy of Model Systems . Oxford : Elsevier ; 2010 , pp . 259 – 283 . 39 . Chow CM , Neto H , Foucart C , Moore I . Rab - A2 and Rab - A3 GTPases deﬁne a trans - Golgi endosomal membrane domain in Arabidopsisthat contributessubstantiallytothecellplate . Plant Cell2008 ; 20 : 101 – 123 . 40 . Lam SK , Tse YC , Robinson DG , Jiang L . Tracking down the elusive early endosome . Trends Plant Sci 2007 ; 12 : 497 – 505 . 41 . Keller P , Simons K . Post - Golgi biosynthetic trafﬁcking . J Cell Sci 1997 ; 110 : 3001 – 3009 . 42 . Johannes L , Goud B . Surﬁng on a retrograde wave : how does Shiga toxin reach the endoplasmic reticulum ? Trends Cell Biol 1998 ; 8 : 158 – 162 . 43 . Ghosh RN , Mallet WG , Soe TT , McGraw TE , Maxﬁeld FR . An endocy - tosed TGN38 chimeric protein is delivered to the TGN after trafﬁcking through the endocytic recycling compartment in CHO cells . J Cell Biol 1998 ; 142 : 923 – 936 . 44 . Holthuis JC , Nichols BJ , Dhruvakumar S , Pelham HR . Two syntaxin homologues in the TGN / endosomal system of yeast . EMBO J 1998 ; 17 : 113 – 126 . 45 . Rambourg A , Clermont Y . Three - dimensional structure of the Golgi apparatus in mammalian cells , 1st edn . In : Berger E , Roth J , editors . The Golgi Apparatus . Zurich : Birkhauser ; 1997 , pp . 37 – 63 . 46 . Staehelin LA , Moore I . Theplant Golgi apparatus : structure , functional organizationandtrafﬁckingmechanisms . AnnuRevPlantPhysiolPlant Mol Biol 1995 ; 46 : 261 – 288 . 47 . Ladinsky MS , Mastronarde DN , McIntosh JR , Howell KE , Staehe - lin LA . Golgi structure in three dimensions : functional insights from the normal rat kidney cell . J Cell Biol 1999 ; 144 : 1135 – 1149 . 48 . Kang BH , Staehelin LA . ER - to - Golgi transport by COPII vesicles in Arabidopsis involves a ribosome - excluding scaffold that is transferred with the vesicles to the Golgi matrix . Protoplasma 2008 ; 234 : 51 – 64 . 49 . Zhang GF , Driouich A , Staehelin LA . Effect of monensin on plant Golgi : re - examination of the monensin - induced changes in cisternal architecture and functional activities of the Golgi apparatus of sycamore suspension - cultured cells . J Cell Sci 1993 ; 104 : 819 – 831 . 50 . Staehelin LA , Chapman RL . Secretion and membrane recycling in plant - cells - novel intermediary structures visualized in ultrara - pidly frozen sycamore and carrot suspension - culture cells . Planta 1987 ; 171 : 43 – 57 . 51 . Bevis BJ , Hammond AT , Reinke CA , Glick BS . De novo formation of transitional ER sites and Golgi structures in Pichiapastoris . Nat Cell Biol 2002 ; 4 : 750 – 756 . 52 . Otegui MS , Herder R , Schulze J , Jung R , Staehelin LA . The prote - olytic processingof seed storage proteinsin Arabidopsisembryo cells starts in the multivesicular bodies . Plant Cell 2006 ; 18 : 2567 – 2581 . 53 . Grosshans BL , Ortiz D , Novick P . Rabs and their effectors : achieving speciﬁcity in membrane trafﬁc . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006 ; 103 : 11821 – 11827 . 54 . Galperin E , Sorkin A . Visualization of Rab5 activity in living cells by FRET microscopy and inﬂuence of plasma - membrane - targeted Rab5 on clathrin - dependent endocytosis . J Cell Sci 2003 ; 116 : 4799 – 4810 . 55 . McLauchlan H , Newell J , Morrice N , Osborne A , West M , Smythe E . A novel role for Rab5 - GDI in ligand sequestration into clathrin - coated pits . Curr Biol 1998 ; 8 : 34 – 45 . 56 . Carroll KS , Hanna J , Simon I , Krise J , Barbero P , Pfeffer SR . Role of Rab9 GTPase in facilitating receptor recruitment by TIP47 . Science 2001 ; 292 : 1373 – 1376 . 57 . Diaz E , Pfeffer SR . TIP47 : a cargo selection device for mannose 6 - phosphate receptor trafﬁcking . Cell 1998 ; 93 : 433 – 443 . 58 . Audhya A , Foti M , Emr SD . Distinct roles for the yeast phosphatidyli - nositol 4 - kinases , Stt4p and Pik1p , in secretion , cell growth , and organelle membrane dynamics . Mol Biol Cell 2000 ; 11 : 2673 – 2689 . 328 Trafﬁc2011 ; 12 : 313 – 329 Electron Tomography Analysis of the Plant TGN 59 . Hama H , Schnieders EA , Thorner J , Takemoto JY , DeWald DB . Direct involvement of phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate in secre - tion in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Biol Chem 1999 ; 274 : 34294 – 34300 . 60 . Godi A , Di Campli A , Konstantakopoulos A , Di Tullio G , Alessi DR , Kular GS , Daniele T , Marra P , Lucocq JM , De Matteis MA . FAPPs control Golgi - to - cell - surface membrane trafﬁc by binding to ARF and PtdIns ( 4 ) P . Nat Cell Biol 2004 ; 6 : 393 – 404 . 61 . Godi A , Pertile P , Meyers R , Marra P , Di Tullio G , Iurisci C , Luini A , Corda D , De Matteis MA . ARF mediates recruitment of PtdIns - 4 - OH kinase - beta and stimulates synthesis of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 on the Golgi complex . Nat Cell Biol 1999 ; 1 : 280 – 287 . 62 . Sciorra VA , Audhya A , Parsons AB , Segev N , Boone C , Emr SD . Syntheticgenetic array analysis of the PtdIns 4 - kinase Pik1p identiﬁes components in a Golgi - speciﬁc Ypt31 / rab - GTPase signaling pathway . Mol Biol Cell 2005 ; 16 : 776 – 793 . 63 . de Graaf P , Zwart WT , van Dijken RA , Deneka M , Schulz TK , Geijsen N , Coffer PJ , Gadella BM , Verkleij AJ , van der Sluijs P , van Bergen en Henegouwen PM . Phosphatidylinositol 4 - kinasebeta is critical for functional association of rab11 with the Golgi complex . Mol Biol Cell 2004 ; 15 : 2038 – 2047 . 64 . Dhonukshe P , Baluska F , Schlicht M , Hlavacka A , Samaj J , Friml J , Gadella TW Jr . Endocytosis of cell surface material mediates cell plate formation during plant cytokinesis . Dev Cell 2006 ; 10 : 137 – 150 . 65 . Segui - Simarro JM , Austin JR II , White EA , Staehelin LA . Electron tomographic analysis of somatic cell plate formation in meristematic cells of Arabidopsis preserved by high - pressure freezing . Plant Cell 2004 ; 16 : 836 – 856 . 66 . Hillmer S , Bush DS , Robinson DG , Zingen - Sell I , Jones RL . Barley aleurone protoplasts are structurally and functionally similar to the walled cells of aleurone layers . Eur J Cell Biol 1990 ; 52 : 169 – 173 . 67 . Szumlanski AL , Nielsen E . The Rab GTPase RabA4d regulates pollen tube tip growth in Arabidopsisthaliana . Plant Cell 2009 ; 21 : 526 – 544 . 68 . Galway ME , Heckman JW Jr , Schiefelbein JW . Growth and ultra - structure of Arabidopsis root hairs : the rhd3 mutation alters vacuole enlargement and tip growth . Planta 1997 ; 201 : 209 – 218 . 69 . Limbach C , Staehelin LA , Sievers A , Braun M . Electron tomographic characterization of a vacuolar reticulum and of six vesicle types that occupydifferentcytoplasmicdomainsintheapexoftip - growingChara rhizoids . Planta 2008 ; 227 : 1101 – 1114 . 70 . Sanderfoot AA , Ahmed SU , Marty - Mazars D , Rapoport I , Kirch - hausen T , Marty F , Raikhel NV . A putative vacuolar cargo receptor partially colocalizes with AtPEP12p on a prevacuolar compartment in Arabidopsis roots . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998 ; 95 : 9920 – 9925 . Trafﬁc2011 ; 12 : 313 – 329 329