2011 ; 3 : a004697 originally published online May 31 , 2011 Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol Kai Simons and Julio L . Sampaio Membrane Organization and Lipid Rafts References http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / content / 3 / 10 / a004697 . full . html # ref - list - 1 This article cites 96 articles , 43 of which can be accessed free serviceEmail alerting click here box at the top right corner of the article or Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the Subject collections ( 20 articles ) The Biology of Lipids (cid:149) Articles on similar topics can be found in the following collections http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / site / misc / subscribe . xhtml go to : Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology To subscribe to Copyright © 2011 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ; all rights reserved Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 24 , 2011 - Published by cshperspectives . cshlp . org Downloaded from Membrane Organization and Lipid Rafts Kai Simons and Julio L . Sampaio Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics , 01307 Dresden , Germany Correspondence : simons @ mpi - cbg . de Cell membranes are composed of a lipid bilayer , containing proteins that span the bilayer and / or interact with the lipids on either side of the two leaﬂets . Although recent advances in lipid analytics show that membranes in eukaryotic cells contain hundreds of different lipid species , the function of this lipid diversity remains enigmatic . The basic structure of cell membranes is the lipid bilayer , composed of two apposing leaﬂets , forming a two - dimensional liquid with fascinating properties designed to perform the functions cells re - quire . To coordinate these functions , the bilayer has evolved the propensity to segregate its constituents laterally . This capability is based on dynamic liquid – liquid immiscibility and underlies the raft concept of membrane subcompartmentalization . This principle combines the potential for sphingolipid - cholesterol self - assembly with protein speciﬁcity to focus and regulate membrane bioactivity . Here we will review the emerging principles of membrane architecture with special emphasis on lipid organization and domain formation . A ll cells are delimited by membranes , which confer them spatial identity and deﬁne the boundary between intracellular and extra - cellular space . These membranes are composed of lipids and proteins . The propensity of the hydrophobic moieties of lipids to self - associate and the tendency of the hydrophilic moieties to interact with aqueous environments and with each other is the physical basis of the spontane - ous formation of the lipid bilayer of cell membranes . This principle of amphipathicity of lipids is the chemical property that enables the cells to segregate their internal constituents from the external environment . This same principle acts at the subcellular level to assemble the membranes surrounding each cellular organelle . About one - third of the genome encodes membrane proteins , and many other proteins spend part of their lifetime bound to membranes . Membranes are the sites where many cellular machineries carry out their function . This remarkable liquid with its amphipathic constituents is attracting increasing attention not only by biologists but also by physicists because of its fascinating properties . Membrane research has picked up speed in recent years . An increasing number of atomic structures of membrane proteins are being solved , the ﬁeld of lipid research is exploding , and the prin - ciples of membrane organization are being overhauled . New insights into the staggering capability of cell membranes to subcompart - mentalize have revealed how membranes sup - port intracellular membrane trafﬁcking and parallel processing of signaling events . Editor : Kai Simons Additional Perspectives on The Biology of Lipids available at www . cshperspectives . org Copyright # 2011 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ; all rights reserved ; doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a004697 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2011 ; 3 : a004697 1 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 24 , 2011 - Published by cshperspectives . cshlp . org Downloaded from Here we will review the emerging principles of membrane architecture with special emphasis on lipid organization and domain formation . LIPIDS Lipids are amphipathic in nature containing a hydrophobic domain , a “water - fearing” or apo - lar end and a hydrophilic domain , which readily interacts with water . The basic premise of the hydrophobic effect is that the hydrocarbon domains of lipids distort the stable hydrogen bonded structure of water by inducing cage - like structures around the apolar domains . Self - association of the hydrophobic domains mini - mizes the total surface that is in contact with water resulting in an entropy - driven relaxation of water structure and an energy minimum for the self - associated molecular organization . The polar domains of lipids interact with water and other head groups and are therefore ener - getically stable in an aqueous environment ( Vance and Vance 2008 ) . At physiologically relevant lipid concentra - tions ( well above the critical micellar concentra - tion ) the hydrophobic effect and the shape of amphipathic molecules deﬁne three supra - molecular structural organizations ( phases ) of lipids in solution ( Fig . 1 ) ( Seddon et al . 1997 ; Mouritsen 2005 ) . The overall structures reﬂect the optimal packing of amphiphilic molecules at an energy minimum by balancing the hydro - phobic effect and the repulsive force of close head group association . This ability of lipids to assemble into different structural associa - tions is referred to as lipid polymorphisms ( Fig . 1 ) ( Frolov et al . 2011 ) . Schematic representations of membranes give the wrong idea that biological membranes are usually planar . Cell membranes can form very complex membranous structures , as seen in the myelin sheet or in the inner membrane of a mitochondrion . Different organelles have speciﬁc lipid compositions , which are impor - tant in determining their shape . Many of the lipids of eukaryotic cells are not cylindrical in shape so they , in theory , would not support the formation of a membrane bilayer ( Mourit - sen 2005 ) . However , biological membranes are mostly lamellar , implying that lipids are arranged both with each other and with pro - teins ( e . g . , through selective macromolecular assemblies , speciﬁc bilayer asymmetries ) to make the lamellar state more favorable . THE BILAYER The basic structure of all cell membranes is the lipid bilayer , the oldest still valid molecular model of cellular structures ( Gorter and Gren - del 1925 ) . It is important to emphasize that cellular membranes are not dominated by the lipids but are packed with intercalated trans - membrane proteins ( Engelman 2005 ; Jacobson et al . 2007 ; Coskun and Simons 2010 ) . Thus , cellular membranes are crowded two - dimen - sional solutions of integral membrane proteins in a lipid bilayer solvent . This ﬂuid also has interactions with extrinsic membrane proteins . Both the membrane proteins and the lipids have bilateral compositional asymmetry , an Molecular Shapes Organization Lamellar Inverted cone Cylindrical Micellar Cubic Conical Figure 1 . Lipid shape and supramolecular organiza - tion ( polymorphism ) . Phospholipids can be classi - ﬁed as cylinders ( e . g . , PC ) , cones ( e . g . , PE ) , and inverted cones ( e . g . , lysophosphatidylcholine ) , depending on the relative volumes of their polar head groups and fatty acyl chains . The supramolecu - lar organization of such molecules generates the widespread bilayer ( or lamellar ) structure , and the nonlamellar micellar and cubic phases . K . Simons and J . L . Sampaio 2 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2011 ; 3 : a004697 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 24 , 2011 - Published by cshperspectives . cshlp . org Downloaded from important property that for the lipids consumes considerable amounts of ATP to maintain ( van Meer 2011 ) . Although it is possible to form a lipid mem - brane that could act as a physical barrier from a single lipid component , the cell invested sig - niﬁcant resources in generating a zoo of lipids to inhabit its membranes ( Shevchenko and Simons 2010 ; Wenk 2010 ) . Eukaryotic mem - brane lipids are glycerophospholipids , sphingo - lipids , and sterols . Mammalian cell membranes contain mainly one sterol , namely cholesterol , but a variety of hundreds of different lipid spe - cies of the ﬁrst two classes . The head group of glycerophospholipids can vary , as can the bonds linking the hydrocarbon chains to glycerol , as can the fatty acids , which differ in length and degree of saturation . Also , the sphingolipids have the combinatorial propensity to create diversity by different ceramide backbones and , above all , more than 500 different carbohydrate structures , which make up the head groups of the glycosphingolipids ( Futerman and Hannun 2004 ) . Sterols were probably introduced to the lipidome later than phospholipids and sphin - golipids . The advent of sterols in evolution coincided with the introduction of increasing concentrations of oxygen around 2 . 5 billion years ago , when eukaryotic life emerged ( Mour - itsen and Zuckermann 2004 ) . Sterol synthesis requires about 30 enzymes , and the steps after generating squalene are dependent on oxygen . Eukaryotic cells spend considerable energy to synthesize this molecule that can be toxic under certain conditions , so tight mechanisms are required to regulate sterol concentrations ( Ye and Debose - Boyd 2011 ) . The reasons for the lipid complexity are manifold . One role of the compositional diver - sity is to ensure a stable and robust assembly that remains impermeable , even when compo - sition , osmolarity , or pH are locally changed because of physiological or pathological events . In single - component systems , slight changes in local conditions easily lead to perturbation or even disruption of the bilayer . However , these transformations are much less likely to occur in a complex system speciﬁcally designed to buffer perturbations . Lipids also have to ﬁll the holes at the protein – lipid interfaces that result from the construction of membrane - spanning domains , and it is possible that lipid diversity is indeed needed to complement trans - membrane domain diversity , so that membrane leakage can be prevented by exact matching . Noteworthy is the direct correlation be - tween membrane “architectural” sophistication and lipid diversity ( Table 1 ) . An obvious example to illustrate this principle is the com - parison between prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells , the latter possessing multiple membrane compartments , the organelles . This increase in membrane morphological complexity is re - ﬂected in their lipidomes . Prokaryotic cells have only a hundred or so different lipid species , whereas eukaryotic organisms possess up to thousands . Contributing to this increase in lipid complexity in eukaryotic cells is the presence of two very important lipid categories that are exclusive to eukaryotes , sterols , and a great vari - ety of sphingolipids . Noteworthy is the growing body of evidence that these categories are key players in membrane trafﬁcking , a phenom - enon inherently exclusive to eukaryotic cells . The preferential association between sterols , sphingolipids , and speciﬁc proteins bestows cell membranes with lateral segregation poten - tial , which can be used for vesicular trafﬁcking . The increasing complexity of the cellular architecture of eukaryotic cells also raises demands on lipid functionalities . The mem - branes surrounding cellular organelles have different and characteristic lipid compositions . One emerging area of membrane research is the study of how different lipids interact with membrane proteins to modulate their functions ( Contreras et al . 2011 ) . All these structural and functional features of membranes require a broad spectrum of lipid structures . Although there are a few emerging principles , this area is still in its infancy and we have a long way to go to understand the nature and consequences of lipid compositional complexity . In the next sections , we will exam - ine how sterols and sphingolipids contribute to the organization of the biosynthetic pathway from the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) to the plasma membrane ( PM ) . Membrane Organization and Lipid Rafts Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2011 ; 3 : a004697 3 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 24 , 2011 - Published by cshperspectives . cshlp . org Downloaded from ROLE OF STEROLS IN BIOSYNTHETIC TRAFFIC FROM THE ER TO THE GOLGI One important principle in trans - membrane protein – lipid interaction is the matching of the length of the hydrophobic protein trans - membrane domain ( TMD ) with the thickness of the lipid bilayer ( Mouritsen 2011 ) . Studies by Munro and Bretscher revealed that TMDs of plasma membrane proteins are in general longer than those of the ER and the Golgi complex ( Bretscher and Munro 1993 ) . This was recently conﬁrmed by a large dataset from both fungi and vertebrates ( Sharpe et al . 2010 ) . The physical mechanism for increasing membrane thickness derives from the increase in sterol content from the ER ( around 5 mol % ) to the PM , which is more than 40 mol % sterol with the Golgi complex having intermedi - ate values . Cholesterol is known to increase the thickness of lipid bilayers , but both theoretical and recent experimental studies show that it is not only bilayer thickness but also its stiffness which increases with cholesterol content , and that both of these parameters may be important for interaction with membrane proteins . By thickening and stiffening the membranes , cho - lesterol potentiates the intrinsic sorting of mis - matched systems ( Lundbæk et al . 2003 ) . Recent experiments showed that the shorter ( Golgi ) TMD peptides segregated from longer ( PM ) TMD peptides when cholesterol concentration was increased in bilayers where fatty acid length was shorter than the length of the longer peptide . These data show experimentally that cholesterol content can induce protein sorting ( HJ Kaiser , A Orlowsky , T Rog , et al . unpubl . ) . Altogether , these studies suggest that the cholesterol gradient plays an important role in organizing the biosynthetic pathway . In the ER , newly synthesized proteins of various TMD lengths would be incorporated into the cholesterol - poor—therefore , more adapt - able—membrane of the ER , where they would remain mixed until sorting before departure to the cis - Golgi . In the Golgi complex , cho - lesterol concentration increases toward the trans - side , promoting sorting of shorter Golgi proteins from longer TMD proteins , which proceed toward the PM . Table 1 . Correlation between lipid compositional complexity and cellular architecture and function Bacteria Yeast Higher Organisms Lipid composition Mainly PE and PG 4 SPs , GPs , and sterols GPs , sterols , and tissue - specific SPs Membrane properties RobustDifferent shapes Robust Different shapes Complex organelle morphology RobustDifferent shapes Complex organelle morphology Complex and specific cellular architecture Functionalities Membrane protein incorporation Membrane protein incorporationMembrane budding Vesicular trafficking Membrane protein incorporation Membrane budding Vesicular trafficking Specific functions depending on the cell type Sphingolipids ( SPs ) and sterols enable eukaryotic cellular membranes with the property of vesicular trafﬁcking important for theestablishmentandmaintenanceof distinctorganelles . Tissue - speciﬁcSPs in higherorganisms enablethegenerationof speciﬁc architecture and function K . Simons and J . L . Sampaio 4 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2011 ; 3 : a004697 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 24 , 2011 - Published by cshperspectives . cshlp . org Downloaded from ROLE OF STEROL AND SPHINGOLIPIDS IN POST - GOLGI TRAFFIC In the secretory pathway , sorting of not only proteins but also of lipids has to occur before exit from the trans - Golgi network . The exis - tence of separate pathways emanating from the Golgi complex implies that hydrophobic matching and mismatching cannot be the only principle involved . It is well known that coat / adaptor - mediated sorting involves cyto - plasmic determinants present in trans - mem - brane cargo proteins , which target speciﬁc proteins to endosomes for further delivery to their cellular destination ( e . g . , the basolateral plasma membrane of epithelial cells ) . The in - creasing concentration of sterols and sphingo - lipids is enhanced by retrograde COPI - mediated transport in the Golgi complex . Retrograde COPI transport vesicles have been shown to be depleted in cholesterol and sphingomyelin , increasing the content of sterols and sphingo - lipids toward the trans - side of the Golgi complex ( Brugger et al . 2000 ) . Studies in yeast and epithelial Madin – Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cells show that there are pathways from the trans - Golgi , distinct from the well - described coat - mediated routes , which show the capacity to sort membrane lipids . Yeast Two cell surface delivery pathways have been identiﬁed in yeast and one of these is a direct TGN to PM route ( Harsay and Bretscher 1995 ; Gurunathan et al . 2002 ) . This latter route has been shown to transport trans - membrane pro - teins that are resistant to extraction by detergent at 4 8 C ( Bagnat et al . 2000 ) . Using one such pro - tein as a probe , yeast mutants , for sterol and sphingolipids biosynthesis were identiﬁed as critical for post - Golgi transport in a genome - wide screen ( Proszynski et al . 2005 ) . These lipid mutants led to impaired exit from the TGN . Using an elaborate immuno - isolation protocol , the post - Golgi transport vesicles , carrying the same protein probe that was employed in the genetic screen , were isolated ( Klemm et al . 2009 ) . Lipidomic analysis of the puriﬁed carriers convincingly showed that sterol and all yeast sphingolipid species were dramatically enriched when compared to the isolated donor organelle . These ﬁndings unequivocally showed that lipid sorting occurs in the TGN , enhancing the enrichment of sterols and sphingolipids in the PM . Recent studies have extended these studies to other PM proteins . They are all sorted into transport carriers that are similarly en - riched in sterols and sphingolipids ( M Surma , C Klose , K Simons , unpubl . ) . MDCK Cells Epithelial cells also have two ( at least ) pathways to the cell surface ( Schuck and Simons 2004 ; Rodriguez - Boulan et al . 2005 ) . These are directed to the apical and basolateral PM domains , respectively . The apical membrane mediates many of the functions speciﬁc to epi - thelial cells . This PM domain is exposed to the external world and forms a robust barrier that protects the intestine , kidney , and other tissues against the hostilities of the outside environ - ment . The unusual robustness of the apical membrane is largely because of its speciﬁc lipid composition . It is strongly enriched in glyco - sphingolipids , which together with cholesterol form a rigid membrane barrier ( Kawai et al . 1974 ; Sampaio et al . 2010 ) . Early evidence in epithelial MDCK cells suggested that sorting of glycosphingolipids takes place in the TGN and that these lipids are preferentially sorted to the apical membrane ( Simons and Van Meer 1988 ) . Apical membrane proteins were shown to become detergent resistant afterenter - ing the Golgi complex ( Skibbens et al . 1989 ; Brown and Rose 1992 ; Fiedler et al . 1993 ) . Moreover , decreasing cellular cholesterol led to impairment of apical protein transport whereas basolateral transport was unaffected ( Keller and Simons 1998 ) . Finally , sphingolipid integrity was also shown to be required for the apical transport machinery by inhibitor studies ( Mays et al . 1995 ) . Recent studies have implicated a lectin , galectin - 9 , as a critical factor in apical mem - brane biogenesis ( Mishra et al . 2010 ) . When galectin - 9 was knocked down by RNAi , the Membrane Organization and Lipid Rafts Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2011 ; 3 : a004697 5 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 24 , 2011 - Published by cshperspectives . cshlp . org Downloaded from MDCK cells failed to polarize and establish apical - basolateral polarity . Importantly , this lectin was shown to be apically secreted by a mechanism that bypasses the ER and the Golgi complex ( Friedrichs et al . 2007 ) . Strikingly , when exogenous galectin - 9 was introduced to depolarized MDCK cells depleted of endoge - nous galectin - 9 , the cells repolarized to form an asymmetric cell layer . The lectin was found to bind the Forssman glycolipid and became endocytosed . After reaching the TGN , the galec - tin recycled back to the apical membrane . This lectin - Forssman glycolipid circuit may be instrumental in maintaining apical transport in MDCK cells ( Mishra et al . 2010 ) . The signiﬁcance of the galectin – glycolipid interaction was underpinned by a comprehen - sive lipid analysis of the changes occurring during polarization of the MDCK cells from the contact - naive unpolarized state to the ﬁnal epithelial sheet ( Sampaio et al . 2010 ) . The most striking changes occurring during polar - ization were that the sphingolipids became lon - ger , more hydroxylated , and more glycosylated than their counterparts in the unpolarized cells . Conversely , the glycerolipids acquired , in gen - eral , longer but more unsaturated fatty acids . Most importantly , the Forssman glycosphingo - lipid was practically absent in the unpolarized MDCK cells and became the major sphingoli - pid in the fully polarized state . When the MDCK cells depolarized toward the mesenchy - mal state , the lipids changed back to that of the contact - naive cells . Thus , the ﬁnding that galectin - 9 interacts with the Forssman glyco - lipid could be key to understanding the mecha - nism of protein and lipid sorting in the TGN of MDCK cells . A similar galectin - glycolipid cir - cuit has been unveiled in epithelial HT29 cells , where galectin - 4 binds to sulfatide and becomes part of the apical sorting machinery ( Delacour et al . 2005 ) . LIPID RAFTS AS A MEMBRANE - ORGANIZING PRINCIPLE The lipid raft concept was introduced to explain the generation of the glycolipid - rich apical membrane of epithelial cells ( Simons and Van Meer 1988 ) . The hypothesis matured and was later generalized as a principle of membrane subcompartmentalization , functioning not only in post - Golgi trafﬁcking , but also in endo - cytosis , signaling , and many other membrane functions ( Simons and Ikonen 1997 ) . Presently , membrane rafts are deﬁned as dynamic nano - scale sterol , sphingolipid - enriched , ordered assemblies of speciﬁc proteins , in which the metastable resting state can be activated to co - alescebyspeciﬁc lipid – lipid , protein – lipid , and protein – protein interactions ( Hancock 2006 ; Lingwood and Simons 2010 ; Simons and Gerl 2010 ) . The lipids in these assemblies are thought to be enriched in saturated and longer hydrocarbon chains and hydroxylated ceramide backbones . The studies on post - Golgi membrane trafﬁc to the PM described in the previous section conform to what would be expected for a sphin - golipid / sterol - based raft transport mechanism . Yeast lipid mutants that caused impaired Golgi exit involved ergosterol and sphingolipid synthesis ( Proszynski et al . 2005 ) . The two strongest phenotypes observed in sphingo - lipid - related mutants affected the elongation of the ceramide fatty acid from C22 to C26 ( elo3 ) and hydroxylation of the sphingosine moiety ( sur2 ) . These molecular attributes have been implicated not only in the formation of liquid - ordered L o phases ( Heberle and Feigen - son 2011 ; Mouritsen 2011 ) but also in the coupling the two membrane leaﬂets in the rafts by interdigitation of the very long chain fatty acid from the exoplasmic into the underlying cytoplasmic leaﬂet ( elo3 ) and by augmenting hydrogen bonding in sphingolipid - sterol or sphingolipid – sphingolipid interactions ( sur2 ) , respectively . Although lipid extracts from control yeast cells possess an inherent self - organization potential , resulting in liquid - disordered ( L d ) / liquid - ordered ( L o ) phase coexistence in giant unilamellar vesicles at lowered temperature , lipid extracts from the elo3 and sur2 mutant cells failed to phase separate ( Klose et al . 2010 ) . Surpris - ingly , these seemingly small changes in lipid structure in the yeast mutants have dramatic effects on the thermodynamics of yeast mem - brane organization . K . Simons and J . L . Sampaio 6 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2011 ; 3 : a004697 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 24 , 2011 - Published by cshperspectives . cshlp . org Downloaded from Our working hypothesis is that the increase in raft lipids , ergosterol , and sphingolipids pro - motes a raft coalescence process induced by clustering of raft components ( e . g . , by lectins ) that could lead to selective raft protein and lipid segregation in TGN membranes ( Fig . 2 ) . The immiscibility of the two liquid phases in the membrane bilayer introduces an energetic pen - alty that promotes membrane bending because of increased thickness and order of the raft do - main compared to the more disordered vicin - ity ( Schuck and Simons 2004 ; Klemm et al . 1 2 3 4 Figure 2 . Raft clustering and domain - induced budding . Before clustering , proteins associate with rafts ( red ) to various extents ( 1 ) . Clustering is induced , forexample , by the binding of a dimerizing protein ( green ) to a trans - membrane raft protein ( 2 ) . The scaffolded raft - associated proteins coalesce into a raft cluster . Growth of the clustered raft domain beyond a critical size induces budding ( 3 ) . Finally , a transport container consisting of raft components pinches off from the parent membrane by ﬁssion at the domain boundaries . Additional protein machinery will facilitate and regulate the budding process ( 4 ) . Membrane Organization and Lipid Rafts Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2011 ; 3 : a004697 7 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 24 , 2011 - Published by cshperspectives . cshlp . org Downloaded from 2009 ) . This bulk sorting of proteins and lipids is ﬁne - tuned byspeciﬁcsorting , aided byaccessory proteinsthat bind to raft cargo , such asthe Ast1p protein that facilitatesthe deliveryof Pma1p , the proton ATPase to the cell surface ( Bagnat et al . 2001 ) . Protein machinery involved in bending and release would also be required to bud the membrane domaininto atransport vesicle , lead - ing to regulated protein and lipid sorting at the exit from the TGN . The apical membrane of epithelial cells has in two studies been shown to behave like a large raft membrane . Measuring long - range diffusion of several membrane proteins by FRAP in the apical membrane of MDCK cells as compared with the same protein in the PM of a ﬁbroblast , the conclusion was that the apical membrane behaved as a percolating ( continuous ) phase at 25 8 C , in which raft proteins freely diffused whereas nonraft proteins were dispersed into isolated domains ( Meder et al . 2006 ) . Also , the apical brush border membrane of small intes - tinal cells was described as behaving as a large super - raft domain stabilized by galectin - 4 and another lectin , intelectin ( Danielsen and Han - sen 2008 ) . These ﬁndings ﬁt well with the data ob - tained in the lipidomic study of the polarized MDCK cell . The changes that accompanied cell polarization were what would be expected when an apical membrane is introduced into the cell during polarization ( Sampaio et al . 2010 ) . The remodeling of the lipidome conforms to the creation of a robust and impermeable barrier , composed of coalescing rafts . Complex glycosphingolipids like the Forssman pentasac - charide glycolipid could , together with choles - terol , generate a hydrogen - bonded network in the outer leaﬂet of the apical membrane that helps to protect the cell against the harsh external environment . At the same time , the proposed continuous recycling of galectin - 9 and the Forssman lipid could serve the role of creating foci for raft domain coalescence in the TGN to facilitate apical transport carrier formation . Future studies are needed to analyze how the lectin could function as the postulated nucleation device for generating the apical carrier and to identify the other proteins that participate in the process . THE DYNAMIC ORGANIZATION OF THE PLASMA MEMBRANE An enormous challenge to the ﬁeld was to develop methodology to study the dynamic organization of cell membranes . The concept of sphingolipid - sterol - protein rafts that were smaller than the resolution of the optical microscope stimulated the search for novel methodologies . Recent studies using different imaging and spectroscopic methods have revealed interesting glimpses of how the lipids and proteins behave in the crowded bilayer ( Sezgin and Schwille 2011 ) . These studies have conﬁrmed the existence of cholesterol - dependent nanoscale assemblies of sphingo - lipids and GPI - anchored proteins in the plasma membrane of living cells . Also , atomic force measurements have been employed to show that GPI - anchored proteins reside in nanoscale rafts that are stiffer than the surrounding mem - brane ( Roduit et al . 2008 ) . The lifetime of the nanoscale assemblies seems to vary with the method used to do the measurements , as so does the spatial scale of the assemblies . Obvi - ously , the state of these assemblies is easily in - ﬂuenced by the methods used to observe them . Although Kusumi et al . ( 2004 ) concluded from their single molecule imaging studies that the lifetime of the nanoscopic rafts is in the millisecond range , Brameshuber et al . ( 2010 ) observed with their special photobleaching pro - tocol long - lived nanoplatforms that remained together for seconds . There are different views to explain the existence of nanoscale rafts . Recent studies sug - gest that the composition of plasma mem - branes is tuned close to a critical miscibility point ( Honerkamp - Smith et al . 2009 ) . Critical points are deﬁned in simple model membranes by special compositions and temperatures in the phase diagrams in which the coexisting L o / L d phases approach identity and exist as interconverting ﬂuctuations ( Veatch et al . 2007 ) . Critical behavior was observed in giant plasma membrane vesicles ( plasma membrane K . Simons and J . L . Sampaio 8 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2011 ; 3 : a004697 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 24 , 2011 - Published by cshperspectives . cshlp . org Downloaded from preparations cooled to phase separate into two liquid phases following membrane blebbing from cells by chemical treatment ) ( Veatch et al . 2008 ) . This astonishing ﬁnding implies that the large compositional ﬂuctuations observed at room temperature could be equated with nanoscale rafts at physiological temperature . These results raise the intriguing possibility that the composition of plasma membranes is tuned to reside close to a critical point , facil - itating membrane subcompartmentalization at little energetic cost . Another interpretation is that the nanoscale rafts in cell membranes are analogous to micro - emulsions , in which ﬂuctuations arise like in a ternary ﬂuid mixture that contains an interfa - cially active agent ( Hancock 2006 ; Brewster et al . 2009 ; Scha¨fer and Marrink 2010 ) . Brewster and Safran ( 2010 ) have suggested that lipids that have one fully saturated chain and one par - tially unsaturated chain could function as a surface - active component , a hybrid lipid or a linactant . The linactants would lower the line tension between domains by occupying the interface , having the saturated anchor prefer - ring the raft and the unsaturated fatty acid fac - ing the less ordered lipid environment . In this way , ﬁnite - sized assemblies , stabilized by these hybrid lipids , could form as equilibrium struc - tures ( Brewster et al . 2009 ) . Perhaps also pro - teins could act as linactants . Several protein structures would be ideally suited for this pur - pose . For instance , proteins that have both a GPI anchor and a trans - membrane domain have been identiﬁed , in which the GPI anchor could be raft - associated with the trans - membrane domain facing the nonraft bilayer ( Kupzig et al . 2003 ) . Another protein is the inﬂuenza virus M2 protein , which has been postulated to occupy the perimeter of the raft domain , formed when the virus buds out of the plasma membrane ( Schroeder et al . 2005 ; Rossman et al . 2010 ) . Also , N - Ras has been pro - posed to act as a linactant in the cytosolic leaﬂet of a raft ( Weise et al . 2009 ) . Another issue that will be important for understanding the dynamics of plasma membrane organization is the inﬂuence of the underlying cytocortex and the actin cytoskeleton ( Viola and Gupta 2007 ; Andrews et al . 2008 ; Chichili and Rodgers 2009 ) . High spatial and temporal resolution FRET micro - scopy has revealed a nonrandom distribution of nanoclusters of GPI - anchored proteins , dependent on cholesterol and actin ( Goswami et al . 2008 ) . The authors postulated that these clusters are nucleated by dynamic actin ﬁlaments using myosin - like motors . The same group also analyzed the nanoscale organiza - tion of Hedgehog , a well - studied signaling protein ( Vyas et al . 2008 ) . Hedgehog is anchored to the membrane by a cholesterol moiety and by palmitoylation . The FRET studies revealed that Hedgehog forms nano - scale oligomers that could be concentrated into visible clusters , capable of signaling . The lipid modiﬁcations were found to be impor - tant for the nanoscale organization . However , the role of actin in this process was not yet studied . Kusumi et al . have pioneered a picket - fence model controlling lateral diffusion of mem - brane proteins and lipids ( Ritchie et al . 2003 ) . In this model , actin ﬁlaments apposed to the cytosolic side of the membrane would form hurdles impeding diffusion . A further sugges - tion is that trans - membrane proteins become transiently anchored to the actin ﬁlaments , acting as a row of pickets slowing the diffusion of other proteins and even of lipids . The picket lines could be observed by single molecule imaging at 25 - m sec time resolution , showing that proteins and lipids are undergoing short - term conﬁned diffusion before they “hop” over the barrier through a “hole” in the fence every 1 – 100 msec ( Fujiwara et al . 2002 ; Murase et al . 2004 ; Morone et al . 2006 ) . Other investigators using different methods failed to observe the hop diffusion of lipids ( Sahl et al . 2010 ) . Recent studies have thus unveiled a bewil - dering plethora of behaviors that characterize the nanoscale organization or raft proteins and lipids . Clearly , different methods empha - size different characteristics of these dynamic structures that can only be reconciled by fur - ther work ( for a discussion , see Brameshuber et al . 2010 ) . Membrane Organization and Lipid Rafts Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2011 ; 3 : a004697 9 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 24 , 2011 - Published by cshperspectives . cshlp . org Downloaded from FUNCTIONALIZATION OF NANOSCALE RAFTS In living cells , raft assemblies can be stabilized by speciﬁc oligomerization of raft proteins or lipids with little energy input ( Figs . 2 and 3 ) . In this way , larger and more stable rafts are gen - erated containing predominantly proteins that are brought into a speciﬁc raft domain by liga - tion and / or scaffolding . Raft afﬁnity can be further enhanced by oligomerization ( Dietrich et al . 2001 ; Sengupta et al . 2008 ; Levental et al . 2010b ) . The merger of speciﬁc nanoscale rafts into larger and more stable platforms represents the functionalization of speciﬁc rafts in mem - brane trafﬁcking both in the biosynthetic and the endocytic pathways as well as in signal trans - duction and other raft - associated processes ( Fig . 3 ) ( Simons and Toomre 2000 ; Hancock 2006 ; Lingwood and Simons 2010 ; Simons and Gerl 2010 ) . The merger of rafts can also be induced experimentally by artiﬁcial means . Early studies showed that large raft domains could be induced by cross - linking raft components with antibodies ( Fig . 3 ) . The size of the resulting raft domain was determined by the extent of cross - linking . These studies led to the erroneous conclusion that raft markers such as GPI - anchored proteins or lipids such as GM1 should be enriched in rafts . However , considering the widely varying spatial scale of raft domains between cross - linked rafts compared to ﬂuctu - ating nanoscale assemblies in living cells , it becomes obvious that the inclusion of so - called “raft markers” is likely to be dependent on the state of the “rafts” being studied . In the ﬂuctu - ating nanoscale rafts , the likelihood of speciﬁc raft proteins being together depends on their interactions with each other and with speciﬁc raft lipids . Most raft proteins will reside in indi - vidual spatially distinct nanoscopic rafts . Addi - tionally , it is important to note that raft size and composition will depend on the cell membrane environment . For instance , resting state rafts in the apical membrane of an epithelial cell ( Meder et al . 2006 ) will be different from those in the plasma membrane of a ﬁbroblast or an immunocyte . Functionalization of resting state rafts will lead to yet another organization , depending on the how the merger of spe - ciﬁc nanoscale rafts is mediated ( Simons and Toomre 2000 ; Hancock 2006 ) . One open issue is the mechanism of cou - pling between the two leaﬂets in rafts ( Kiessling et al . 2006 ; Collins and Keller 2008 ) . It has been observed that cytosolic proteins , lipidated with two saturated fatty acyls localize underneath coalescing rafts ( Harder et al . 1998 ; Gri et al . 2004 ) . However , the mechanism of this cou - pling of the exoplasmic leaﬂet with the cytosolic leaﬂet remains unknown . One possibility is that the long fatty acids present in many sphingo - lipids could intercalate into the inner leaﬂet . An ordered outer leaﬂet would bring order into the underlying inner leaﬂet lipid species . Also how the lipid composition of the cytosolic leaﬂet in rafts is composed and regulated is yet to be explained . PHASE SEPARATION IN PLASMA MEMBRANES In model membranes containing simple lipid mixtures , microscopic phase separation can easily be induced by adjusting the composition and temperature of lipid bilayers ( Heberle and Feigenson 2011 ) . Such phase separation was not thought to be possible in complex mixtures , like those in cell membranes . However , recent studies surprisingly show that composition - ally complex plasma membranes can also be induced to phase segregate into two ﬂuid do - mains . Baumgart et al . ( 2007 ) showed that cells treated with paraformaldehyde and dithiothrei - tol produced membrane blebs that could be iso - lated as giant plasma membrane vesicles . When chilled below room temperature , these mem - branes phase separated into L o - like and L d - like phases . The temperature and cholesterol de - pendence of this phase separation resembled that of simple model systems ( Levental et al . 2009 ) . Other studies of plasma membranes blown up into giant spheres using a swelling procedure that separated the membranes from the inﬂuence of cytoskeletal and membrane traf - ﬁcking processes showed cholesterol - dependent coalescence into micrometer - scale phases on K . Simons and J . L . Sampaio 10 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2011 ; 3 : a004697 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 24 , 2011 - Published by cshperspectives . cshlp . org Downloaded from P Oligomerizing ligand Cytoplasmic scaffolding protein Acylated transmembrane raft protein Doubly acylated protein GPI - anchored protein Nonraft domain Large raft cluster P P P P P P P P Activated , clustered rafts Resting state 6 7 8 2 3 4 5 1 Sphingolipid - cholesterol raft domain in exoplasmic leaflet Ordered lipid domain in cytoplasmic leaflet Phosphorylated transmembrane raft protein Two different nonraft transmembrane proteins Transmembrane raft protein that binds glycosphingolipid Transmembrane protein that changes its conformation upon partitioning into rafts Figure3 . The tunable states of rafts . Resting - state rafts are dynamic , nanoscopic assemblies of raft lipids and pro - teins that are metastable ( i . e . , persist for a certain time [ top ] ) . The coupling between the outer and the inner leaﬂet is not well understood . Most raft proteins are either solely lipid - anchored ( GPI - anchored in the exoplas - mic [ 1 ] or doubly acylated in the cytoplasmic leaﬂet [ 2 ] ) , or they contain acyl chains in addition to their TMD ( 3 ) . A fourth group could undergo a conformational change when partitioning into rafts ( 4 ) or following bind - ing to glycosphingolipids ( 5 ) . Following oligomerization of raft proteins by multivalent ligands ( 6 ) or cytoplas - mic scaffolds ( 7 ) , thesmall raftdomainscoalesceandbecome more stable . They maynowcontain morethan one family of raft proteins . These small raft clusters would still have a size below the limits of light microscopic res - olution , but could already function as signaling platforms . Large raft clusters are probably only assembled when protein modiﬁcations like phosphorylation increase the numberof protein – protein interactions , leading to the coalescence of small clusters into larger domains on the scale of several hundred nanometers ( 8 ) . Membrane Organization and Lipid Rafts Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2011 ; 3 : a004697 11 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 24 , 2011 - Published by cshperspectives . cshlp . org Downloaded from clustering of the ganglioside GM1 by cholera toxin at 37 8 C ( Lingwood et al . 2008 ) . Most astonishing and different from the behavior in the PM blebs , trans - membrane PM proteins that have been predicted to associate with rafts by detergent resistance and other assays , partitioned into the phase containing the gan - glioside GM1 ( cross - linked by the cholera toxin ) . The selective lateral reorganization of PM proteins and lipids in the phase separated PM spheres correlated with their predicted afﬁnity for raft domains . In contrast , in the PM blebs formed after treatment with parafor - maldehyde and dithiothreitol , raft trans - mem - brane proteins were excluded from the L o - like phase ( Sengupta et al . 2008 ; Levental et al . 2010b ) . Another remarkable analogy between the behavior of simple model systems and the plasma membranes that are composed of hundreds of lipids and proteins is that cholera toxin - induced phase separation has also been observed in ternary lipid mixtures of unsatu - rated PC , sphingomyelin , and cholesterol ( con - taining the ganglioside GM1 ) ( Hammond et al . 2005 ) . Importantly , this induction is only observed when the lipid mixture in the model system is positioned compositionally close to a phase boundary , implying that the protein and lipid composition of the plasma membrane is also positioned close to a phase boundary . Altogether , these and other studies ( Ayuyan and Cohen 2008 ) show that plasma membrane composition is poised for selective coalescence at physiological temperature . They highlight the inherent capability of the PM to phase sepa - rate while stressing that in the living cell this capacity is strictly controlled by the lipid and protein composition of the membrane as well as by the fact that cell membranes are not at equilibrium , being continuously perturbed by exchange events and membrane trafﬁcking . It is also important to point out that in all phase - separated PMs , the actin cytoskeleton has been removed , probably resulting from PIP2 hydroly - sis . This facilitates the formation of large micro - meter domains unimpeded by actin barriers . These exciting ﬁndings also emphasize that the coalescence of a micrometer raft phase can only be brought about by the merger of small ( nanoscale ) rafts composed of lipids and pro - teins already present in the plasma membrane . Obviously , the lipid and protein composition has to be such that the merger into micrometer raft domains becomes energetically possible . LIPID – PROTEIN INTERACTIONS IN RAFTS The analogy with phase - separating simple model systems of ternary lipids and sphingo - lipid - and sterol - containing cell membranes breaks down when it comes to the partitioning behavior of raft trans - membrane proteins . These are usually excluded from the L o phase in reconstituted proteoliposomes ( Sengupta et al . 2008 ; Levental et al . 2010b ) . Cell mem - branes are crowded with proteins that have different afﬁnities for raft domains . How is this afﬁnity controlled ? What makes a trans - membrane protein raftophilic ? Previous studies on this issue were based on detergent - resistance . The indirect and controversial nature of these experiments limited their applicability in assigning raft afﬁnity . With the advent of phase - separated PMs , the analysis of raftophilicity is becoming more straightforward . By ﬂuores - cently tagging trans - membrane proteins and expressing them in cells , their partitioning in phase - separated PMs can be measured quanti - tatively by confocal microscopy . In this way , Levental et al . ( 2010b ) showed that palmitoyla - tion plays an important role in regulating raft afﬁnity . The reason for the exclusion of the raft proteins from the raft phase in the chemi - cally induced blebs was the use of dithiothreitol , which led to depalmitoylation by thioester reduction . Because cysteine palmitoylation is the only posttranslational lipid modiﬁcation of proteins that has been shown to be reversible regulated , these data suggest a role for palmi - toylation as dynamic raft targeting mechanism for trans - membrane proteins ( Resh 2006 ) . However , it is important to point out that pal - mitoylation is deﬁnitely not sufﬁcient for raft association . There are many palmitoylated pro - teins that are not raft - associated , including the generally used nonraft marker , the transferrin receptor . Both TMD length and amino acid K . Simons and J . L . Sampaio 12 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2011 ; 3 : a004697 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 24 , 2011 - Published by cshperspectives . cshlp . org Downloaded from sequence will be involved in deﬁning raftophi - licity ( Fig . 4A ) ( Scheiffele et al . 1997 ; Barman and Nayak 2000 ; Engel et al . 2010 ) . Another lipid known to promote raft associ - ation is the GPI anchor . There are different chemical types of GPI anchors not all of which necessarily raftophilic , though the different an - chors have not yet been analyzed for raft afﬁnity ( Ferguson et al . 2009 ) . Levental et al . used both depalmitoylation by dithiothreitol treatment and removal of GPI anchors by a GPI - speciﬁc phospholipase to determine the percentage of PM proteins that were partitioning into the raft phase of phase segregated PMs ( Levental et al . 2010b ) . About 65 % of the PM proteins were in the nonraft phase , whereas 12 % of the in - tegral proteins required palmitoylation for raft phase inclusion . About 11 % were GPI - anchored intheraftphaseandanother11 % wassensitiveto neither treatment ; therefore the mechanism of raft association remained unassigned ( Fig . 4B ) . This group of proteins could be bound to raft lipids such as cholesterol or sphingolipids ( Contreras et al . 2011 ) . Thus , there will be several means for associating proteins with sphingo - lipids - sterol rafts . Elucidating how proteins be - come lubricated to achieve raft afﬁnity , and how this raft afﬁnity could regulate protein func - tion , will be an issue for future research . For example , binding to a speciﬁc raft lipid has recently been shown to allosterically change the conformation of the human epidermal growth factor receptor ( Coskun et al . 2011 ) . Thus , the functional association of proteins with rafts would not only compartmentalize the mem - brane - bound process but also induce conforma - tional changes that modulate protein function . CONCLUDING REMARKS The increasing insights into the dynamics of cell membrane organization have highlighted the need for the regulation of the compositional diversity of membrane lipid . The pioneering work of Brown and Goldstein showed that the transcription of genes controlling cholesterol level is directly regulated by the concentration of cholesterol in the ER of mammals ( Brown and Goldstein 2009 ) . Sensors in the elaborate SREBP pathway lead to tight control of choles - terol homeostasis . Similarly , glycerolipids have been shown to be regulated by multiple feed - back mechanisms that link synthesis and degra - dation of these lipids to their cellular levels GPI - anchored Sterol - linked Extracellular Cytoplasm Palmitoylated intracellular Prenylated Raftproteins B A Other11 . 6 ± 7 . 8 % Palmitoylated12 . 4 ± 6 . 6 % GPI - anchored 11 . 2 ± 2 . 8 % 64 . 5 ± 2 . 3 % Nonraftproteins NONRAFT RAFT Palmitoyl - dependent raft partitioning TM Figure 4 . Lipid modiﬁcations of proteins as determinants of raft association . ( A ) Examples of lipid modiﬁcation ofproteins . Various lipidanchors play important roles inproteintrafﬁcking , membrane partitioning andproper function , likely mediatedby theirafﬁnity forlipidrafts . Thegeneralparadigmisthatanchoring bysaturatedfatty acids and sterols targets proteins to the more tightly packed environment of lipid rafts , whereas unsaturated and branched hydrocarbon chains tend to favor the less restrictive nonraft membranes . Palmitoylation of proteins can regulate raft partitioning . ( A , Adapted from Levental et al . 2010a ; reprinted with permission from the Amer - ican Chemical Society # 2010 . ) ( B ) Quantiﬁcation of raft protein abundance following removal of palmitoy - lated TM proteins by DTTor GPI - anchored proteins by GPI - speciﬁc phospholipase in GPMVs ( average þ SD from three independent experiments ) . ( B , Adapted from Levental et al . 2010b ; reprinted with permission from The National Academy of Sciences # 2010 . ) Membrane Organization and Lipid Rafts Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2011 ; 3 : a004697 13 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 24 , 2011 - Published by cshperspectives . cshlp . org Downloaded from ( Nohturfft and Zhang 2009 ) . Recent studies are also giving insights into how the sphingolipids are regulated ( Vacaru et al . 2009 ; Breslow and Weissman 2010 ) . There is also an increasing body of evidence that sterol and sphingolipid metabolism are closely coordinated ( Hannich et al . 2011 ) . Thus , there is a need for sensors that can measure levels of different lipids and provide feedback into the control systems that regulate lipid homeostasis . Interestingly , recent ﬁndings have showed that a bacterial protein can work as a thermometer and detect changes in environmental temperature by physically measuring membrane thickness ( Cybulski et al . 2010 ) . Obviously , if the composition of the plasma membranes of ﬁbroblasts and other cells has been positioned close to a phase boundary or to a critical immiscibility point , then the pro - tein and lipid composition needs to be strictly ﬁne - tuned . Nutritional research has stressed the importance of the right distribution of fatty acids in lipid molecules . For instance , the levels of fatty acids with omega - 3 unsaturation have been suggested to be important for health ( Riediger et al . 2009 ) . Until now , no lipidomic studies have been performed analyzing the full diversity of lipidomes with respect to the inﬂu - ence of fatty acid content of the diet . Obviously , the diet can in the long run lead to imbalances and modulate the ﬁne - tuning of lipid levels such that disease is caused , for instance myocar - dial infection through atherosclerosis ( Puska 2009 ) . Here is an interesting new area of research that will proﬁt from the enormous advances in lipid analyses by mass spectrometry ( Schwudke et al . 2011 ) . Inbuilt into the func - tions of the compositional diversity of all mem - branes , there must also be feedback mechanisms introducing robustness so that the structure and function of cellular membranes is maintained despite varying lipid intake . These are areas of research that can now be explored by multidis - ciplinary approaches . What is emerging from recent cell mem - brane research is a fascinating two - dimensional liquid equipped with remarkable properties . Most intriguing is the concept of collectives of lipids and proteins that work together to make cell membranes such incredible matrices for supporting and facilitating cellular function . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Hermann - Josef Kaiserand Ilya Leven - tal for reading the paper and the Simons lab for continuous critical input . We also thank Doris Meder , especially for drawing Figure 3 . This work was supported by DFG “Schwerpunkt - programm1175” Grant no . SI459 / 2 - 1 , DFG “Transregio 83” Grant no . TRR83 TP02 , BMBF “ForMaT” Grant no . 03FO1212 , ESF “LIPIDPROD” Grant no . SI459 / 3 - 1 , and the Klaus Tschira Foundation . REFERENCES Andrews NL , Lidke KA , Pfeiffer JR , Burns AR , Wilson BS , OliverJM , LidkeDS . 2008 . ActinrestrictsFc 1 RIdiffusion and facilitates antigen - induced receptor immobilization . Nat Cell Biol 10 : 955 – 963 . AyuyanAG , CohenFS . 2008 . Raftcompositionatphysiolog - ical temperature and pH in the absence of detergents . Biophys J 94 : 2654 – 2666 . Bagnat M , Chang A , Simons K . 2001 . Plasma membrane proton ATPase Pma1p requires raft association for sur - face delivery in yeast . Mol Biol Cell 12 : 4129 – 4138 . Bagnat M , Keraenen S , Shevchenko A , Shevchenko A , Simons K . 2000 . Lipid rafts function in biosynthetic delivery of proteins to the cell surface in yeast . Proc Natl Acad Sci 97 : 3254 – 3259 . Barman S , Nayak DP . 2000 . Analysis of the transmembrane domainof inﬂuenzavirusneuraminidase , atypeIItrans - membrane glycoprotein , for apical sorting and raft asso - ciation . J Virol 74 : 6538 – 6545 . Baumgart T , Hammond AT , Sengupta P , Hess ST , Holowka DA , Baird BA , Webb WW . 2007 . Large - scale ﬂuid / ﬂuid phase separation of proteins and lipids in giant plasma membrane vesicles . Proc Natl Acad Sci 104 : 3165 – 3170 . Brameshuber M , Weghuber J , Ruprecht V , Gombos I , Horva´t I , Vigh Ls , Eckerstorfer P , Kiss E , Stockinger H , Schu¨tz GJ . 2010 . Imaging of mobile long - lived nanoplat - forms in the live cell plasma membrane . J Biol Chem 285 : 41765 – 41771 . Breslow DK , Weissman JS . 2010 . Membranes in balance : Mechanisms of sphingolipid homeostasis . Mol Cell 40 : 267 – 279 . Bretscher MS , Munro S . 1993 . Cholesterol and the Golgi apparatus . Science 261 : 1280 – 1281 . Brewster R , Safran SA . 2010 . Line active hybrid lipids deter - mine domain size in phase separation of saturated and unsaturated lipids . Biophys J 98 : L21 – L23 . Brewster R , Pincus PA , Safran SA . 2009 . Hybrid lipids as a biological surface - active component . Biophys J 97 : 1087 – 1094 . K . Simons and J . L . Sampaio 14 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2011 ; 3 : a004697 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 24 , 2011 - Published by cshperspectives . cshlp . org Downloaded from BrownDA , RoseJK . 1992 . SortingofGPI - anchoredproteins to glycolipid - enriched membrane subdomains during transport to the apical cell surface . Cell 68 : 533 – 544 . Brown MS , Goldstein JL . 2009 . Cholesterol feedback : From Schoenheimer’s bottle to Scap’s MELADL . J Lipid Res 50 : S15 – S27 . Brugger B , Sandhoff R , Wegehingel S , Gorgas K , Malsam J , Helms JB , Lehmann WD , Nickel W , Wieland FT . 2000 . Evidence for segregation of sphingomyelin and choles - terol during formation of COPI - coated vesicles . J Cell Biol 151 : 507 – 518 . Chichili G , Rodgers W . 2009 . Cytoskeleton – membrane interactions in membrane raft structure . Cell Mol Life Sci 66 : 2319 – 2328 . CollinsMD , KellerSL . 2008 . Tuninglipidmixturestoinduce or suppress domain formation across leaﬂets of un - supported asymmetric bilayers . Proc Natl Acad Sci 105 : 124 – 128 . Contreras F - X , Ernst AM , Wieland F , Bru¨gger B . 2011 . Speciﬁcityof intramembrane protein – lipid interactions . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 3 : a004705 . Coskun U¨ , Simons K . 2010 . Membrane rafting : From apical sorting to phase segregation . FEBS Lett 584 : 1685 – 1693 . Coskun U , Grzybek M , Dreschsel D , Simons K . 2011 . Allo - steric regulation of human EGF receptor by lipids . Proc Natl Acad Sci ( in press ) . Cybulski LE , Martı´n M , Mansilla MC , Ferna´ndez A , de MendozaD . 2010 . Membranethicknesscueforcoldsens - ing in a bacterium . Curr Biol 20 : 1539 – 1544 . Danielsen E , Hansen G . 2008 . Lipid raft organization and function in the small intestinal brush border . J Physiol Biochem 64 : 377 – 382 . Delacour D , Gouyer V , Zanetta J - P , Drobecq H , Leteurtre E , Grard G , Moreau - Hannedouche O , Maes E , Pons A , Andre´ S , et al . 2005 . Galectin - 4 and sulfatides in apical membrane trafﬁcking in enterocyte - like cells . J Cell Biol 169 : 491 – 501 . Dietrich C , Volovyk ZN , Levi M , Thompson NL , Jacobson K . 2001 . Partitioning of Thy - 1 , GM1 , and cross - linked phospholipid analogs into lipid rafts reconstituted in supported model membrane monolayers . Proc Natl Acad Sci 98 : 10642 – 10647 . Engel S , Scolari S , Thaa B , Krebs N , Korte T , Herrmann A , Veit M . 2010 . FLIM - FRET and FRAP reveal association of inﬂuenza virus haemagglutinin with membrane rafts . Biochem J 425 : 567 – 573 . Engelman DM . 2005 . Membranes are more mosaic than ﬂuid . Nature 438 : 578 – 580 . Ferguson M , Kinoshita T , Hart G . 2009 . Glycosylphosphati - dylinositol anchors . In Essentials of glycobiology , 2nd ed . ( ed . Varki A , et al . ) . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , Cold Spring Harbor , NY . Fiedler K , Kobayashi T , Kurzchalia TV , Simons K . 1993 . Glycosphingolipid - enriched , detergent - insoluble com - plexes in protein sorting in epithelial cells . Biochemistry 32 : 6365 – 6373 . Friedrichs J , Torkko JM , Helenius J , Teraevaeinen TP , Fuellekrug J , Muller DJ , Simons K , Manninen A . 2007 . Contributions of Galectin - 3 and - 9 to epithelial cell ad - hesion analyzed by single cell force spectroscopy . J Biol Chem 282 : 29375 – 29383 . Frolov VA , Shnyrova AV , Zimmerberg J . 2011 . Lipid poly - morphisms and membrane shape . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a004747 . Fujiwara T , Ritchie K , Murakoshi H , Jacobson K , Kusumi A . 2002 . Phospholipids undergo hop diffusion in compart - mentalized cell membrane . J Cell Biol 157 : 1071 – 1082 . FutermanAH , HannunYA . 2004 . Thecomplexlifeofsimple sphingolipids . EMBO 5 : 777 – 782 . Gorter E , Grendel F . 1925 . On bimolecular layers of lipoids onthechromocytesoftheblood . JExpMed 41 : 439 – 443 . Goswami D , Gowrishankar K , Bilgrami S , Ghosh S , Raghu - pathy R , Chadda R , Vishwakarma R , Rao M , Mayor S . 2008 . Nanoclusters of GPI - anchored proteins are formed by cortical actin - driven activity . Cell 135 : 1085 – 1097 . GriG , MolonB , ManesS , PozzanT , ViolaA . 2004 . Theinner side of T cell lipid rafts . Immunol Lett 94 : 247 – 252 . Gurunathan S , David D , Gerst JE . 2002 . Dynamin and clathrin are required for the biogenesis of a distinct class of secretory vesicles in yeast . EMBO J 21 : 602 – 614 . Hammond AT , Heberle FA , Baumgart T , Holowka D , Baird B , Feigenson GW . 2005 . Crosslinking a lipid raft compo - nent triggers liquid ordered - liquid disordered phase separation in model plasma membranes . Proc Natl Acad Sci 102 : 6320 – 6325 . Hancock JF . 2006 . Lipid rafts : Contentious only from sim - plistic standpoints . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 : 456 – 462 . Hannich JT , Umebayashi K , Riezman H . 2011 . Distribution and functions of sterols and sphingolipids . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a004762 . Harder T , Scheiffele P , Verkade P , Simons K . 1998 . Lipid domain structure of the plasma membrane revealed by patching of membrane components . J Cell Biol 141 : 929 – 942 . Harsay E , Bretscher A . 1995 . Parallel secretory pathways to the cell surface in yeast . J Cell Biol 131 : 297 – 310 . Heberle FA , Feigensen GW . 2011 . Phase separation in lipid membranes . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 3 : a004630 . Honerkamp - Smith AR , Veatch SL , Keller SL . 2009 . An introduction to critical points for biophysicists ; obser - vations of compositional heterogeneity in lipid mem - branes . Biochim Biophys Acta 1788 : 53 – 63 . Jacobson K , Mouritsen OG , Anderson RGW . 2007 . Lipid rafts : At a crossroad between cell biology and physics . Nat Cell Biol 9 : 7 – 14 . Kawai K , Fujita M , Nakao M . 1974 . Lipid components of two different regions of an intestinal epithelial cell membrane of mouse . Biochim Biophys Acta 369 : 222 – 233 . Keller P , Simons K . 1998 . Cholesterol is required for surface transport of inﬂuenza virus hemagglutinin . J Cell Biol 140 : 1357 – 1367 . Kiessling V , Crane JM , Tamm LK . 2006 . Transbilayer effects of raft - like lipid domains in asymmetric planar bilayers measured by single molecule tracking . Biophys J 91 : 3313 – 3326 . Klemm RW , Ejsing CS , Surma MA , Kaiser HJ , Gerl MJ , Sampaio JL , de Robillard Q , Ferguson C , Proszynski TJ , Shevchenko A , et al . 2009 . Segregation of sphingolipids and sterols during formation of secretory vesicles at the trans - Golgi network . J Cell Biol 185 : 601 – 612 . Membrane Organization and Lipid Rafts Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2011 ; 3 : a004697 15 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 24 , 2011 - Published by cshperspectives . cshlp . org Downloaded from Klose C , Ejsing CS , Garcia - Saez AJ , Kaiser HJ , Sampaio JL , Surma MA , Shevchenko A , Schwille P , Simons K . 2010 . Yeast lipids can phase - separate into micrometer - scale membrane domains . J Biol Chem 285 : 30224 – 30232 . Kupzig S , Korolchuk V , Rollason R , Sugden A , Wilde A , Banting G . 2003 . Bst - 2 / HM1 . 24 is a raft - associated apical membrane protein with an unusual topology . Trafﬁc 4 : 694 – 709 . Kusumi A , Koyama - Honda I , Suzuki K . 2004 . Molecular dynamics and interactions for creation of stimulation - induced stabilized rafts from small unstable steady - state rafts . Trafﬁc 5 : 213 – 230 . LeventalI , GrzybekM , SimonsK . 2010a . Greasingtheirway : Lipid modiﬁcations determine protein association with membrane rafts . Biochemistry 49 : 6305 – 6316 . Levental I , Byﬁeld FJ , Chowdhury P , Gai F , Baumgart T , Janmey PA . 2009 . Cholesterol - dependent phase separa - tion in cell - derived giant plasma - membrane vesicles . Biochem J 424 : 163 – 167 . Levental I , Lingwood D , Grzybek M , Coskun U , Simons K . 2010b . Palmitoylation regulates raft afﬁnity for the majority of integral raft proteins . Proc Natl Acad Sci 107 : 22050 – 22054 . Lingwood D , Simons K . 2010 . Lipid rafts as a membrane - organizing principle . Science 327 : 46 – 50 . Lingwood D , Ries J , Schwille P , Simons K . 2008 . Plasma membranes are poised foractivation of raft phase coales - cence at physiological temperature . Proc Natl Acad Sci 105 : 10005 – 10010 . Lundbæk JA , Andersen OS , Werge T , Nielsen C . 2003 . Cholesterol - induced protein sorting : An analysis of energetic feasibility . Biophys J 84 : 2080 – 2089 . Mays RW , Siemers KA , Fritz BA , Lowe AW , van Meer G , Nelson WJ . 1995 . Hierarchy of mechanisms involved in generating Na / K - ATPase polarity in MDCK epithelial cells . J Cell Biol 130 : 1105 – 1115 . Meder D , Moreno MJ , Verkade P , Vaz WL , Simons K . 2006 . Phase coexistence and connectivity in the apical mem - brane of polarized epithelial cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci 103 : 329 – 334 . Mishra R , Grzybek M , Niki T , Hirashima M , Simons K . 2010 . Galectin - 9 trafﬁcking regulates apical - basal polar - ity in Madin – Darby canine kidney epithelial cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci 107 : 17633 – 17638 . Morone N , Fujiwara T , Murase K , Kasai RS , Ike H , Yuasa S , Usukura J , Kusumi A . 2006 . Three - dimensional re - construction of the membrane skeleton at the plasma membrane interface by electron tomography . J Cell Biol 174 : 851 – 862 . Mouritsen OG . 2005 . Life—As a matter of fat . The emerging science of lipidomics , pp . 1 – 78 . Springer - Verlag , Hei - delberg . MouritsenO , ZuckermannM . 2004 . What’ssospecialabout cholesterol ? Lipids 39 : 1101 – 1113 . Mouritsen OG . 2011 . Model answers to lipid membrane questions . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a004622 . Murase K , Fujiwara T , Umemura Y , Suzuki K , Iino R , Yama - shita H , Saito M , Murakoshi H , Ritchie K , Kusumi A . 2004 . Ultraﬁne membrane compartments for molecular diffusion as revealed by single molecule techniques . Biophys J 86 : 4075 – 4093 . Nohturfft A , Zhang SC . 2009 . Coordination of lipid metab - olism in membrane biogenesis . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 25 : 539 – 566 . Proszynski TJ , Klemm RW , Gravert M , Hsu PP , Gloor Y , Wagner J , Kozak K , Grabner H , Walzer K , Bagnat M , et al . 2005 . A genome - wide visual screen reveals a role for sphingolipids and ergosterol in cell surface delivery in yeast . Proc Natl Acad Sci 102 : 17981 – 17986 . Puska P . 2009 . Fat and heart disease : Yes we can make a change—The case of North Karelia ( Finland ) . Ann Nutr Metab 54 : 33 – 38 . Resh MD . 2006 . Palmitoylation of ligands , receptors , and intracellular signaling molecules . Sci STKE 2006 : re14 . RiedigerND , OthmanRA , Suh M , Moghadasian MH . 2009 . A systemic review of the roles of n - 3 fatty acids in health and disease . J Am Diet Assoc 109 : 668 – 679 . Ritchie K , Iino R , Fujiwara T , Murase K , Kusumi A . 2003 . The fence and picket structure of the plasma membrane of live cells as revealed by single molecule techniques . Mol Membr Biol 20 : 13 – 18 . Rodriguez - Boulan E , Kreitzer G , Musch A . 2005 . Organiza - tion of vesicular trafﬁcking in epithelia . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 6 : 233 – 247 . Roduit C , van der Goot FG , De Los Rios P , Yersin A , Steiner P , Dietler G , Catsicas S , Lafont F , Kasas S . 2008 . Elastic membrane heterogeneity of living cells revealed by stiff nanoscale membrane domains . Biophys J 94 : 1521 – 1532 . Rossman JS , Jing X , Leser GP , Lamb RA . 2010 . Inﬂuenza virus M2 protein mediates ESCRT - independent mem - brane scission . Cell 142 : 902 – 913 . Sahl SJ , Leutenegger M , Hilbert M , Hell SW , Eggeling C . 2010 . Fast molecular tracking maps nanoscale dynamics of plasma membrane lipids . Proc Natl Acad Sci 107 : 6829 – 6834 . SampaioJL , GerlMJ , KloseC , EjsingCS , BeugH , SimonsK , ShevchenkoA . 2010 . Membranelipidomeofanepithelial cell line . Proc Natl Acad Sci 108 : 1903 – 1907 . Scha¨fer LV , Marrink SJ . 2010 . Partitioning of lipids at domain boundaries in model membranes . Biophys J 99 : L91 – L93 . Scheiffele P , Roth MG , Simons K . 1997 . Interaction of inﬂu - enzavirus haemagglutinin with sphingolipid - cholesterol membrane domains via its transmembrane domain . EMBO J 16 : 5501 – 5508 . Schroeder C , Heider H , Mo¨ncke - Buchner E , Lin T - I . 2005 . The inﬂuenzavirus ion channel and maturation cofactor M2 is a cholesterol - binding protein . Eur Biophys J 34 : 52 – 66 . Schuck SSimons K . 2004 . Polarized sorting in epithelial cells : Raft clustering and the biogenesis of the apical membrane . J Cell Sci 117 : 5955 – 5964 . Schwudke D , Schuhmann K , Herzog R , Bornstein SR , Schevchenko A . 2011 . Shotgun lipodomics on high resolutionmassspectrometers . ColdSpring HarbPerspect Biol 3 : a004614 . Seddon JM , Templer RH , Warrender NA , Huang Z , Cevc G , Marsh D . 1997 . Phosphatidylcholine – fatty acid mem - branes : Effects of headgroup hydration on the phase K . Simons and J . L . Sampaio 16 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2011 ; 3 : a004697 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 24 , 2011 - Published by cshperspectives . cshlp . org Downloaded from behaviour and structural parameters of the gel and inverse hexagonal ( H II ) phases . Biochim Biophys Acta 1327 : 131 – 147 . Sengupta P , Hammond A , Holowka D , Baird B . 2008 . Structural determinants for partitioning of lipids and proteins between coexisting ﬂuid phases in giant plasma membrane vesicles . Biochim Biophys Acta 1778 : 20 – 32 . Sezgin E , Schwille P . 2011 . Fluorescence techniques to study lipid dynamics . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a009803 . Sharpe HJ , Stevens TJ , Munro S . 2010 . A comprehensive comparison of transmembrane domains reveals organ - elle - speciﬁc properties . Cell 142 : 158 – 169 . Shevchenko A , Simons K . 2010 . Lipidomics : Coming to grips with lipid diversity . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 : 593 – 598 . Simons K , Gerl MJ . 2010 . Revitalizing membrane rafts : New tools and insights . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 : 688 – 699 . Simons K , Ikonen E . 1997 . Functional rafts in cell mem - branes . Nature 387 : 569 – 572 . Simons K , Toomre D . 2000 . Lipid rafts and signal transduc - tion . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 1 : 31 – 39 . SimonsK , VanMeerG . 1988 . Lipidsortinginepithelialcells . Biochemistry 27 : 6197 – 6202 . Skibbens JE , Roth MG , Matlin KS . 1989 . Differential extractability of inﬂuenza virus hemagglutinin during intracellular transport in polarized epithelial cells and nonpolar ﬁbroblasts . J Cell Biol 108 : 821 – 832 . Vacaru AM , Tafesse FG , Ternes P , Kondylis V , Hermans - son M , Brouwers JFHM , Somerharju P , Rabouille C , Holthuis JCM . 2009 . Sphingomyelin synthase - related protein SMSr controls ceramide homeostasis in the ER . J Cell Biol 185 : 1013 – 1027 . VanceJ , VanceD , ed . 2008 . Biochemistryoflipids , lipoproteins and membranes , pp . 1 – 39 . Elsevier , Amesterdam . van Meer G . 2011 . Dynamic transbilayer lipid asymmetry . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 3 : a004671 . Veatch SL , Cicuta P , Sengupta P , Honerkamp - Smith A , HolowkaD , BairdB . 2008 . Criticalﬂuctuationsinplasma membrane vesicles . ACS Chem Biol 3 : 287 – 293 . Veatch SL , Soubias O , Keller SL , Gawrisch K . 2007 . Critical ﬂuctuationsindomain - forminglipidmixtures . ProcNatl Acad Sci 104 : 17650 – 17655 . Viola A , Gupta N . 2007 . Tether and trap : Regulation of membrane - raft dynamics by actin - binding proteins . Nat Rev Immunol 7 : 889 – 896 . Vyas N , Goswami D , Manonmani A , Sharma P , Ranganath HA , VijayRaghavan K , Shashidhara LS , Sowdhamini R , Mayor S . 2008 . Nanoscale organization of hedgehog is essential for long - range signaling . Cell 133 : 1214 – 1227 . Weise K , Triola G , Brunsveld L , Waldmann H , Winter R . 2009 . Inﬂuence of the lipidation motif on the partition - ing and association of N - Ras in model membrane subdomains . J Am Chem Soc 131 : 1557 – 1564 . Wenk MR . 2010 . Lipidomics : New tools and applications . Cell 143 : 888 – 895 . Ye J , DeBose - Boyd RA . 2011 . Regulation of cholesterol and fatty acid synthesis . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 3 : a004754 . Membrane Organization and Lipid Rafts Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2011 ; 3 : a004697 17 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on October 24 , 2011 - Published by cshperspectives . cshlp . org Downloaded from