Classroom Dandelions : Visualising Participant Position , Trajectory and Body Orientation Augments Teachers’ Sensemaking Gloria Milena Fernandez - Nieto University of Technology Sydney Sydney , Australia gloria . m . fernandeznieto @ student . uts . edu . au Pengcheng An Southern University of Science and Technology Shenzhen , China anpc @ sustech . edu . cn Jian Zhao University of Waterloo Waterloo , Canada jianzhao @ uwaterloo . ca Simon Buckingham Shum University of Technology Sydney Sydney , Australia Simon . BuckinghamShum @ uts . edu . au Roberto Martinez - Maldonado Monash University Melbourne , Australia Roberto . MartinezMaldonado @ monash . edu Figure 1 : Dandelion diagrams of teachers’ positioning data in a physics lab ( left ) and nursing students in a simulated ward ( right ) . ABSTRACT Despite the digital revolution , physical space remains the site for teaching and learning embodied knowledge and skills . Both teachers and students must develop spatial competencies to effectively use classroom spaces , enabling fluid verbal and non - verbal interaction . While video permits rich activity capture , it provides no support for quickly seeing activity patterns that can assist learning . In con - trast , position tracking systems permit the automated modelling of spatial behaviour , opening new possibilities for feedback . This pa - per introduces the design rationale for " Dandelion Diagrams " that integrate participant location , trajectory and body orientation over a variable period . Applied in two authentic teaching contexts ( a sci - ence laboratory , and a nursing simulation ) we show how heatmaps showing only teacher / student location led to misinterpretations that were resolved by overlaying Dandelion Diagrams . Teachers Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM mustbehonored . Abstractingwithcreditispermitted . Tocopyotherwise , orrepublish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA © 2022 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9157 - 3 / 22 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517736 also identified a variety of ways they could aid professional devel - opment . We conclude Dandelion Diagrams assisted sensemaking , but discuss the ethical risks of over - interpretation . CCS CONCEPTS • Applied computing → Learning management systems ; • Human - centered computing → Walkthrough evaluations . KEYWORDS Learning analytics , Indoor positioning , Teamwork , Multimodal , Teaching ACM Reference Format : Gloria Milena Fernandez - Nieto , Pengcheng An , Jian Zhao , Simon Bucking - ham Shum , and Roberto Martinez - Maldonado . 2022 . Classroom Dandelions : Visualising Participant Position , Trajectory and Body Orientation Augments Teachers’ Sensemaking . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’22 ) , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 17 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517736 1 INTRODUCTION The term ‘spatial competency’ refers to the capacity that humans have to identify and understand spatial relations among objects , people and the environment [ 45 ] . This competency enables indi - viduals to navigate the environment and exploit its affordances to CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Fernandez - Nieto , et al . complete their tasks . In education , teachers and students demon - strate this competency in the form of spatial behaviours : the ways they make use of and behave in physical learning spaces [ 46 ] . Obser - vational studies have investigated how teachers’ spatial behaviours , in relation to the classroom architectural design and their physical proximity to students , can strongly influence learning ( see review in [ 60 ] ) For example , researchers have explored the role of proxim - ity between teachers and students in improving students’ written work [ 73 ] ; reducing misbehaviour [ 32 ] ; and increasing the effec - tiveness of student - teacher interactions [ 84 ] , motivation [ 25 ] and engagement [ 22 ] . The excessive presence of teachers by students can negatively affect their self - efficacy and sense of ownership of their own work [ 27 ] , while studies of student seating arrangements all report inconsistent results [ 29 , 35 ] . However , the study of student spatial behaviour is much more complex in dynamic learning spaces , often with authentic activities requiring students to move around different spaces in the classroom to interact with various resources and people ( e . g . , see classrooms in Figure 1 ) . This is the case with simulation - based learning in professional fields such as healthcare , where students are expected to develop specific spatial competencies that are required of reg - istered practitioners . These include having the ability to position themselves around the patient to timely accomplish a specific pro - cedure [ 97 ] ; knowing how and when to maintain close proximity to the patient [ 69 ] and other team members [ 58 ] ; and forming particular spatial arrangements to enable collaboration with team members [ 34 ] . The development of analogous spatial competencies is required in other areas such as emergency response [ 62 ] and firefighting [ 1 ] . Spatial behaviours are ephemeral , making them hard to reflect on in detail , meaning more attention is given to other aspects of the tasks that teachers , students or trainees have to accomplish [ 67 ] . Key spatial competencies can be developed while the activity un - folds ( Schön’s notion of reflection - in - action [ 77 ] ) as has been demon - strated in teaching , healthcare and team training [ 5 , 79 , 97 ] . How - ever , Schön also emphasises the importance of reflection - on - action to recognise how our knowing - in - action may have contributed to unexpected outcomes or how it can contribute to the further development of competencies to be demonstrated in future events . For example , teachers commonly reflect on evidence after a class to understand how their actions may have impacted student’s learn - ing [ 75 ] . Paper - based checklists can support reflection on spatial behaviours , such as whether they were in continuous movement , standing in a specific area of the classroom or keeping close proxim - ity to most students ( e . g . , [ 56 ] ) . Some teaching guides ( e . g . , [ 9 , 38 ] ) suggest that teachers should circulate through the classroom fol - lowing various patterns and keeping specific distances to students . Unfortunately , most of these tools do not refer to the evidence used to prescribe such strategies , and they do not provide teachers with feedback about their own performance . The same happens with teachers and students in simulation - based learning activities . Al - though healthcare practitioners have dedicated debriefs after the simulation sessions to reflect on their actions [ 42 ] , they rarely have evidence about spatial behaviours . Whilst these sessions may be video - recorded , in practice , teachers and students often do not have the time to watch full videos [ 65 ] . It is in this regard that emerging sensing and computer vision technologies could improve the timeliness and fidelity of feedback loops , as their capabilities to accurately and inexpensively track people and objects in indoor spaces improves [ 43 ] . Such technolo - gies are now being used in educational settings to track teachers and learners in learning spaces such as makerspaces [ 16 ] , lecture halls [ 11 ] , specialised classrooms [ 51 ] , collaborative classrooms [ 26 ] and schools [ 94 ] . In simulation - based contexts , such as healthcare education , there has also been a growing interest in using wearable devices to track how nurses move about training spaces . Yet , with a few exceptions [ 5 , 50 , 76 ] , most of these works have focused on insights for researchers , and not provided visual mechanisms to support educational stakeholders’ reflection . Critically , a key limita - tion to previous efforts to help teachers and students visualise their spatial activity is the assumption that close proximity ( e . g . to class - room resources or other people ) is a reasonable proxy for interaction . However , theoretical foundations in proxemics [ 71 ] challenge this assumption , since the body orientation of people strongly indicates the focus of their attention in the space [ 10 ] . Information about body orientation of teachers and students is key to detect what are termed f - formations : spatial patterns used by people to arrange themselves so that they can have easy and preferential access to one another during social interactions [ 81 ] . This paper investigates the extent to which granular informa - tion about teachers’ and students’ positioning and body orientation can be integrated and visualised effectively , thus mapping from low - level sensor traces to higher - order , contextualised spatial be - haviours . An innovative visualisation technique called the Dan - delion Diagram was used to visualise digital traces of the body’s movement trajectory , position and orientation ( see examples in Fig - ure 1 ) . The design goal was to augment positional heatmaps with trajectory and body orientation cues , without losing the intuitive , engaging attributes of heatmaps . These visualisations are evolv - ing prototypes to generate a deeper understanding about teachers’ sensemaking of their classroom activity and the kind of questions that they would be able to respond based on positioning and body orientation data . In - depth interviews were conducted with teachers in two authentic studies involving ( i ) collaborative teaching in a science lab , and ( ii ) teamwork simulation in nursing . Teachers were presented with visualisations of their own positioning data , and of other teachers and students . A thematic analysis of the reactions and reflections of teachers was conducted to determine the poten - tial added value of the dandelion diagrams to ( i ) support reflection , ( ii ) envisage pedagogical uses of these visual representation and ( iii ) identify potential risks associated with bias and possible over - interpretation . In sum , this paper contributes to the growing body of evidence concerning the value of spatial learning analytics , by documenting teachers’ perceptions of such visualisations , from which we derive a set of practical implications for professional development . 2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 2 . 1 Foundations of Proxemics Proxemics is the study of communicative features of space such as how people consciously and unconsciously maintain physical Classroom Dandelions CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA distance during interpersonal interaction , how people arrange them - selves in the space while performing a task , territoriality , crowding , and how the physical environment is culturally perceived [ 33 ] . A number of proxemics constructs have been used to study and give meaning to people’s spatial behaviours . For example , the concept of interactional space refers to how people mutually adjust their bodies to enable close proximity and mutual attention for verbal interactions to unfold fluidly [ 57 ] . Although the exact distances that have been used as a proxy of the interactional spaces vary across cultures , most interpersonal interactions with acquaintances tend to occur under 1 . 5m [ 86 ] . Another key construct that is related to the body orientation of people is the notion of f - formations ( facing - formations ) . These refer to the ways people cluster so that they can have direct and equal access to each another [ 39 ] . An f - formation can be identified by analysing people’s proximity and bodies orien - tations when they establish conversation groups ( e . g . , side - by - side , face - to - face / vis - a - vis , circular or L - shapes ) while standing close to each other [ 82 ] . The analysis of these f - formations has been key in the study of collaboration in contexts such as decision making [ 49 ] and healthcare [ 54 ] . In sum , proxemics has been used as a lens to analyse spatial behaviours in several areas of study . In this paper , we build on the proxemics constructs described above to report and give meaning to teachers’ perceptions of visual representations of x - y positions and body orientation of teachers and students in the classroom . 2 . 2 Classroom Analytics The term classroom analytics has been proposed as a lens to connect proxemics , pedagogy , data and educational space design [ 52 ] . Under this umbrella , indoor positioning and computer vision have been proposed as promising technologies that can enable new ways to study educational processes in physical learning spaces . Several attempts to scale up direct classroom observations have been developed using video analysis . For example , Raca [ 68 ] applied tracking algorithms to investigate the impact of the teacher’s posi - tion on the level of attention of a large audience . A similar goal was set by Watanabe et al . [ 91 ] by tracking lecturers’ and students’ faces from video data , while Bosch et al . [ 11 ] tracked teachers , gestures and slide transitions by analysing subtle changes between video frames in lecture presentations . Ahuja et al . [ 2 ] applied similar tracking algorithms using a multi - camera setup to detect teachers’ and students’ head and body orientations and gestures . The assump - tion in all cases is that teachers deliver a class from the ’front’ of the classroom ( hence , the tracking is restricted to a section of the room ) while students remain seated . Yet , from K - 12 to higher education , novel classroom design approaches ( such as open learning spaces [ 70 ] , flexible classrooms [ 87 ] ) are challenging lecture - style prac - tices . As a result , new analytics approaches are needed to generate a deeper understanding of the spatial behaviours in such dynamic classroom spaces . To summarise , firstly , none of these previous works provided accurate positioning traces and distances among people and classroom resources . Secondly , while video permits rich activity capture , it provides no support for quickly seeing activity patterns that need to be understood by learners ( whether students , or teachers in a professional development context ) . It is in this respect that there has been growing interest in us - ing micro - location " wearables " in education . For example , beacon - enabled proximity sensors ( i . e . , triangulating the position of peo - ple’s mobile devices or electronic tags ) have been used for students to register class attendance [ 36 ] or to receive contextualised infor - mation while navigating a university campus [ 30 ] . Chng et al . [ 16 ] used a number of depth cameras to track inter - personal distances and characterise the types of social interactions occurring among students in a maker - space . Riquelme et al . [ 72 ] used beacons to au - tomatically identify how students interacted with others and with bookshelves in a library . Echeverria et al . [ 23 ] used wearable loca - tion sensors to visually analyse teamwork strategies of students in healthcare . Yan et al . [ 94 ] scaled up the analysis of social networks formed by students at a school level through a longitudinal posi - tioning study . Finally , Fernandez - Nieto et al . [ 26 ] proposed three techniques to model indoor positioning data captured from team training contexts using social network analysis and detectors of f - formations . This is notably the only work to include f - formations , but in common with the other approaches cited , did not evaluate the visualisations with stakeholders . Besides the work by Shapiro and Garner [ 83 ] who proposed min - imalistic visualisations of unidimensional positioning of teachers in a classroom over time ( i . e . , considering only the ’y’ coordinate ) , only heatmaps have been used by other researchers as the main visualisation technique to explore how teachers can make sense of x - y positioning data . For example , Saquib et al . [ 76 ] presented a system that enabled school teachers to interact with heatmaps to observe what parts of the classroom they visited more and which students they interacted longer with . To achieve this , small trackers were embedded into furniture and students’ shoes . An et al . [ 5 ] presented a set of tangible lamps that can be located on students’ desks that would change their colour to reflect the amount of time a teacher has spent in close proximity to some groups . Similar work was presented by Martinez - Maldonado [ 50 ] who provided a hand - held device showing a heatmap of the locations of groups of students in the classroom . 2 . 3 Movement Visual Analytics As a related realm , movement visual analytics [ 6 , 7 ] has been con - cerned with questions related to the representation of movement , and more broadly of spatial and temporal data . A series of studies have explored aggregating different types of data or representa - tions as additions to location data ( e . g . GPS or in - door positioning data ) . For example , Flower Diagrams [ 6 ] have been used to rep - resent spatiotemporal events at the scale of a city . Hyougo et al . [ 37 ] presented the Amoeba visualisation to portray people’s move - ment between metro stations . Many more spatial - temporal analyses of geographic scaled data have been presented [ 8 , 88 ] . The sport visualisation literature also tackled the question of representing movement , orientations , and spatial relationships between people [ 64 ] . For example , Vleugels et al . [ 90 ] used trajectories to assess team strategies in ice hockey . SoccerStories [ 63 ] supported analysts to better understand soccer data , e . g . , player’s position , passes and goal attempts . Other tools , such EagleView [ 13 ] have been used to tack people’s interactions in video using proxemic dimensions , such as distance and orientation . Classroom Dandelions CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA At the scale of indoor spaces , positioning data are most often used in analysing people’s spatial patterns ( e . g . [ 24 , 41 ] ) . Meanwhile , trajectories have also been frequently studied to understand crowd behaviors in shopping centres [ 93 ] and museums [ 44 ] . However , people’s body orientation is rarely separated from their moving directions in indoor movement analytics , since existing research mostly concerns people’s location , movement , or trajectory pat - terns rather than their attention patterns [ 21 ] ( i . e . , which directions they attend to ) . All previous work on proxemics is a motivation to explore their application and usefulness in educational . In terms of classroom proxemics , teachers’ rotation data is as important as their location and movement data [ 5 ] : without rotation data , it is unclear which adjacent students the teacher is facing , and whether a teacher seems to under - or over - attend to certain directions . In the case of nursing students , rotation is important to validate aspects such interpersonal interactions , where the majority of intensive and delicate interpersonal transactions occurs [ 17 ] , or to identify facing - formations ( f - formations ) , which indicate the ways people cluster so that they can have direct and equal access to one another ( for example in side - by - side , face - to - face , in a circle or L - shapes ) . F - formation analysis has enabled HCI and CSCW research to un - derstand how teams coordinate and communicate to achieve tasks including collaborative information - seeking [ 49 ] , healthcare [ 54 ] , and even cooking [ 61 ] . 2 . 4 Information Visualisation and Sensemaking Sensemaking is a term used in several literatures , providing com - plementary perspectives on how people grapple with information overload , ambiguity and the need to make high stakes decisions under pressure . For instance , Weick [ 92 ] draws attention to the ways in which professional teams ( e . g . in emergency response ) con - struct " plausible narratives " given dynamic environments ; Dervin [ 19 ] studied information seekers’ responses when their goals are obstructed in some way ; within the CHI and InfoVis communities , Russell et al . [ 74 ] studied intelligence and business analysts , high - lighting the central role of evolving representations to organise data to augment the limitations of human reasoning . Emerging from the latter work , a key HCI vision was summarised by Card [ 15 ] in a 2004 keynote address : " [ . . . ] the purpose of information visualization is insight , or more particularly , a larger process that might be called sensemaking . [ . . . ] sensemaking systems combining visualization ( the mind’s eye ) with semantic content analysis and sensemaking operations ( the mind’s muscle ) . " Our work addresses this challenge , seeking to demonstrate how visualisations summarising complex , multimodal activity data can be better designed to give educators and students insights . 2 . 5 Research Questions To summarise , thus far , significant advances have been made in the design of ( proxemics ) theory - based infrastructure for classroom analytics , but a key feature of human spatial behaviour has been missing to date — location integrated with body orientation — and the very limited analytics work on this has not been empirically evaluated with teachers . Furthermore , in the absence of sound vi - sualisation design that can be shown to aid sensemaking , enriching activity data with such attributes adds no value to stakeholders seeking insights . We therefore pose the following two applied re - search questions , concerning the potential for sensemaking that dandelion diagrams offer by adding body orientation cues to spatial visualisations : • RQ1 : To what extent do dandelion diagrams enable teachers’ sensemaking of classroom spatial behaviours ? • RQ2 : To what extent might dandelion diagrams help improve teaching practice ? 3 EDUCATIONAL CONTEXTS This section describes the two learning contexts ( A and B ) this paper focuses on and the tracking system used . Campos et al . [ 14 ] suggest that it is critical to understand the variations in interpreta - tions of learning analytics visualisations depending on the different roles an educator plays . In Context A , the teachers play the role of reflective practitioners [ 77 ] regarding their own practice and that of other teachers , while in Context B , teachers reflect on their students’ performance and spatial behaviours . The contexts are in widespread use internationally , and as such , provided representa - tive test - beds to evaluate the classroom analytics . Context A focuses on co - teaching in a laboratory classroom and Context B focuses on student teamwork in healthcare simulation . This illustrates the technical feasibility of visualising the spatial behaviours of the two main active educational stakeholders in most regular classrooms : teachers and students [ 20 ] . Moreover , in both educational contexts the development of spatial competencies is especially crucial for professional development ( e . g . , refer to [ 47 ] and [ 89 ] for contexts A and B , respectively ) . 3 . 1 Learning Context A : Co - teaching in the Science Lab The first learning context involves weekly 2½ hour laboratory classes ( labs ) of a first - year undergraduate Science unit at University of Technology Sydney , in which students run physics experiments . The lead teacher and a teaching assistant co - teach each lab with typically 30 - 40 students working in 10 - 13 teams of 2 - 3 students each . Positioning data of both teachers was captured from eighteen labs randomly chosen ( 1 - 18 ) . All labs were conducted in the same 16 . 8m x 10m classroom ( see Figure 2 , top ) equipped with work - benches , a lectern , a whiteboard , and multiple laboratory tools . A limited number of photos were shot during the classroom sessions . 3 . 2 Learning Context B : Teamwork in Nursing Simulation The second learning context involves 11 classes taught in an un - dergraduate Nursing unit at University of Technology Sydney . Ap - proximately 25 students typically attended , organised in teams of 4 - 6 students , each performing a simulation ( average duration 1 . 09 hours , std = 14 . 35 ) around a patient bed in a training ward ( see Figure 2 , bottom ) . One team of the five in each class volunteered to be video - recorded and have their positioning data recorded . Students are expected to learn how to work effectively as a team when a CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Fernandez - Nieto , et al . Figure 2 : Learning contexts from which positioning data was captured . Top : A Science Lab . Bottom : A Nursing Simulation Classroom . patient is experiencing an allergic reaction . Students are asked to play different roles , namely : a ) the team leader , b ) registered nurses ( Nurses 1 and 2 ) , c ) a scribe nurse ( Nurse 3 , who documents all the procedures performed ) , and d ) the patient ( enacting the voice of the patient manikin ) . In addition , one teacher in each class played the role of the main doctor in the ward , moving around to observe the nursing teams . 3 . 3 Positioning Tracking System The x - y coordinates and body orientation data of the two teach - ers in each Science Lab ( Context A ) and the Nursing teacher and five students of the tracked team ( Context B ) were automatically recorded through wearable sensors located inside a waist pack worn on the front of their bodies . The sensors were part of the Pozyx ultra - wideband ( UWB ) system . The cost of this tracking system was 1 , 500 EUR . The system can be installed and calibrated by edu - cational stakeholders with basic technology literacy ( i . e . , capable of following technical instructions ) . The system captures positioning data at a 2Hz average sampling rate ( with an error rate of 10 cm as reported by the vendor ) . Eight anchors were temporarily affixed to the classroom walls to estimate the positions of the sensors . Each data point included the x - y positioning coordinates ( in millimeters ) , and the body orientation ( measured as an angle ) with respect to an arbitrary point in the room . For Learning Context A , given the large number of teams in each lab ( 10 - 12 ) , the positions of students’ experiments were captured by an observer using a tablet - based observation tool . 4 DESIGN AND ANALYSIS This section presents : 1 ) the design of the dandelion visualisation diagrams , 2 ) details about the participants involved in the evaluation study , 3 ) the study protocol , and 4 ) the analysis process . 4 . 1 Dandelion Diagrams The dandelion diagram is a positioning visualisation technique that aggregates positioning and orientation data , and thereby can depict both the whereabouts and heading directions of a person at differ - ent points in time . Dandelion diagrams also visualise the trajectory of people across the physical space , which can reveal their mobil - ity patterns . Moreover , it uses color codes to communicate extra information , such as to differentiate the data points representing multiple actors in a collaborative process . The visualisation is agnos - tic to the underlying positioning tracking system . The input data for dandelion diagrams should be formatted continually in equal time - frames ( e . g . , 1 data point per second as described below ) . Each data point should include both location ( i . e . , x - y cartesian coordinates ) , and orientation ( in radians or degrees ) . The dandelion diagrams feature the following four visualisation design components : ( 1 ) Spotlight metaphor . The position and orientation of an actor in a given point of time are represented in a triangular shape , following the metaphor of “spotlight” ( see Figure 3 , 1 ) . The farthest vertex indicates the x - y location of the actor , and its opposite side shows the direction the actor is facing to . This representation is commonly used in video games and navigation systems , and can intuitively depict an entity’s location and orientation . ( 2 ) Trajectory . The trajectories of an actor are delineated by con - necting every two consecutive position coordinates , which shows any change in location and orientation over the visu - alised period of time ( see Figure 3 , 2 ) . ( 3 ) Density stacking . Based on the metaphor of the heatmap , each spotlight shape is semi - transparent , and multiple shapes can stack on one another to increase the density of the colour , which reflects that the actor was cumulatively staying in a location ( see Figure 3 , 3 ) . Classroom Dandelions CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Figure 3 : Top : Illustrations of four major design components of the Dandelion Diagram . Bottom : Embodiment of these design components in data visualisations using data from the two learning contexts . ( 4 ) Colour coding . The different colours of the spotlight shapes represent different actors in the practice context , to help the audience differentiate multiple roles in a collaborative process ( Figure 3 , 4 ) . Alternatively , this colour coding feature can also be used to represent other types of information ( e . g . , in a prior iteration [ 4 ] , it was used to differentiate data points from different activities or periods of time ) . 4 . 2 Participants The study presented in this paper focuses on the perspectives of teachers involved in the design , delivery or evaluation of the two units of study described in section 3 . For Context A , the unit coor - dinator ( physics teacher 1 - PT1 - who designed the learning tasks and did not teach any class ) ; a main teacher and a secondary teacher ( PT2 and PT3 , respectively , who taught a total of 14 classes in pairs ) participated in the study . All of the participants were experienced teachers in each of their roles ( males : 3 , average years teaching : 11 . 3 ) . For Context B , 5 nursing teachers ( NT1 - 5 ) inspected students’ positioning data ( females : 4 , average years teaching : 12 . 6 ) . NT1 - 4 delivered the 11 simulation classes and NT5 is a nursing researcher who assesses nursing education programs at the hosting university . 4 . 3 Study Design Inspired by theoretical foundations of information visualisation de - sign [ 55 , 78 ] , and sensemaking with data visualisations [ 14 , 15 , 66 ] , we used a set of dandelion diagrams as evolving prototypes to inves - tigate the relationship between teachers and the positioning data , beyond learning about the specific visualisation technique . For this , the eight teachers in both learning contexts were interviewed with the purpose of documenting their perceptions of the dandelion diagrams about themselves ( in Context A ) and their students ( in Context B ) . Each interview was recorded using an online video conferencing platform ( i . e . , Zoom ) and had an approximate dura - tion of 60 minutes . Before each interview , the four major design components of the dandelion diagrams were explained to the teach - ers using examples such as the ones depicted in Figure 3 . They were also invited to ask clarification questions regarding the design of the visualisations during the rest of the interview . Following a semi - structured format , the interview had two parts : Part 1 . A think - aloud protocol was followed to document how teachers explored the positioning data in order to address RQ1 ( sensemaking of spatial behaviours ) . These data were presented to teachers as digital indoor maps corresponding to critical classroom events of the classes relevant to them in two ways : i ) by visualising x - y coordinates only , and ii ) using dandelion diagrams . The x - y coordinates were presented in the form of regular heatmaps as in previous classroom studies reported in Section 2 . 2 [ 50 , 76 ] . The same data was made available through the dandelion diagrams . The maps were generated by normalising the positioning data to 1Hz to make them comparable . The critical classroom events presented to teachers were selected based on previous work . For Context A , results from a previous qualitative study [ 51 ] emphasised the importance of understanding how teachers interact with ( i ) classroom resources , ( ii ) students and ( iii ) each other in co - teaching scenarios , which is aligned to contem - porary literature on the materiality of the classroom environment [ 96 ] . Each class was segmented into three phases by the unit co - ordinator . Phase 1 includes the main teacher of the class giving instructions ( average duration 13 ±8 minutes ) . Phase 2 corresponds to the period in which all students start working on the experi - ment ( s ) in small teams ( 1 . 5 hours ±18 min ) . Phase 3 corresponds to the time when some teams complete their experiments and start leaving the class ( 33 ±22 min ) . The analysis of this paper focuses on Phase 2 , which enables comparison across the classes considered . Phase 2 was further segmented into quartiles of the same duration . A total of five critical events were selected by the research team from the resulting quartiles , displaying events identified by the teachers who participated in the previous study as examples of potential interactions of teachers with classroom resources ( 2 in - stances ) , with students ( one instance ) and between themselves ( 2 instances ) . Details of these five critical events , and the extent to which each is representative of the dataset , are provided in the next section . For Context B , the critical events were closely related to the learn - ing design of the team activity created by the unit coordinator . High effective teams should go thrugh the following events : ( i ) perform CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Fernandez - Nieto , et al . an initial set of vital signs measurements ; ( ii ) prepare / administer the intravenous fluid - IV antibiotics ; ( iii ) perform another set of vital signs measurements after the patient complains of chest tightness ; ( iv ) stop the IV antibiotic ; ( v ) perform an ECG ; and ( vi ) call the doc - tor after stopping the IV antibiotic . In this case , the research team randomly selected instances from this critical moments , focusing on events iv and v , which are the most critical events identified by the unit coordinator . All the teachers within each context inspected the same set of visualisations . Part 2 . Then , teachers were asked to respond to two main ques - tions ( and trigger sub - questions ) to elicit their perceptions of the dandelion diagrams in terms of sensemaking ( RQ1 ) and potential to support teaching practice ( RQ2 ) . ( 1 ) Does the information displayed in the dandelion diagrams enable the sensemaking of classroom spatial behaviours ? If so , How ? Trigger questions : • What differences does it make to add rotation / trajectory information to the positioning data maps , if any ? • Could you name some examples from your experiences in which the heading information can help us identify what was happening in the classroom from the positioning data ? • Can you envisage any risk in showing the diagrams with or without body orientation information ? ( 2 ) To what extent can the information in the dandelion dia - grams can contribute to improve teaching practice ? • Do you think such visualisations can support or hinder teachers’ reflections upon their practice ? Why ? • Do you think such dandelion diagrams could also support professionalisation of researchers / experts in doing their research or training teachers ? Why and How ? • How do you envisage teachers can use the diagrams to support reflection and teaching over time ? 4 . 4 Analysis The interviews were fully transcribed using a professional service . In qualitative studies , notions of generalisability and reliability are usually replaced by validity , rigour and attention to the quality in the research process [ 18 ] . To achieve this , we used data triangula - tion ( various sessions with teachers in two contexts ) , triangulation of sources of evidence ( think - aloud recordings , video data , and in - terview responses ) , and analysis triangulation ( three researchers in the analysis process ) . Informed by best practices of qualitative research in HCI [ 53 ] , we analysed the interviews as follows . Analysis of Part 1 : Vignette analysis . This involved three re - searchers independently screening the video recordings of the in - terviews looking for how teachers talked about spatial behaviours based on the visualisations of x - y coordinates and the dandelion diagrams . Then the researchers discussed each particular moment , selecting vignettes that could potentially point to insights and con - tradictions across teachers inspecting the same visualisations . The researchers discussed their independent analyses to reach an agree - ment . Results from this analysis are reported in Section 5 . 1 by describing the critical classroom event , and a summary of teachers’ perceptions on them . Footage from the classroom sessions was ad - ditionally used to confirm teachers’ interpretations of the diagrams they explored . Analysis of Part 2 : Interview analysis . Given the direct alignment between the interview protocol and the research questions , state - ments of interest were jointly identified by three researchers . These were thematically coded [ 12 ] by one researcher . Resulting coded statements were double - coded by other two researchers until full agreement was reached . Next , researchers had several discussions to identify and group emerging themes in alignment to the inter - view questions , which are reported in Section 5 . 3 . 5 RESULTS 5 . 1 Vignettes from the co - teaching context ( A ) 5 . 1 . 1 Vignette A1 : Proximity to Classroom Resources . This vignette focuses on two critical classroom events in which teachers were in close proximity to key classroom resources . Previous studies looking at classroom proximity traces have assumed that the teacher may be interacting with classroom resources if they are within arm’s reach [ 51 ] ( e . g . , while giving an explanation to students ) . The two classroom maps on the left of Figure 4 , illustrate two instances where the secondary teacher ( red data points ) is very close to the classroom whiteboard ( see Points A and B ) and the main teacher ( in blue ) is at a bench where there are no students ( Point C ) for an approximate period of 22 . 5 minutes . When teachers explored the visualisations of only x - y coordinates ( Figure 4 , left ) , they confirmed the assumption is that close proxim - ity to a classroom resource most commonly means that teachers may be using it . The unit coordinator ( PT1 ) explained this as follows " It is unusual to stand at the whiteboard not using the whiteboard unless there are students standing in front of him or her " . The main teacher who was in the room in both sessions ( PT2 ) also assumed that the auxiliary teacher in red ( PT3 ) was " probably explaining some theoretical points , using the whiteboard " . Yet , PT3 confirmed that he was scanning all the tables to see if all students were maintain - ing self regulation " in session 1 ( top ) , and " just standing there and seeing if anyone needed help " in session 4 ( bottom ) . This teacher also explained that for Point C , that teacher was " most likely using the bench to write on the lab sheet , indicating who did which experiment , and who attended " . However , when the same teachers looked at the dandelion dia - grams ( Figure 4 , centre ) , all of them changed their minds about the spatial behaviours in both situations . For example , PT1 indicated that PT3 spent most of the time supervising and did not consider this behaviour adequate if extended for a long period of time ( see Point A ) : " the [ red ] teacher seems to be just watching the crowd . This should not really happen unless you use a whiteboard , which obviously is not the case " . This was confirmed through a snapshot of the classroom footage ( see Figure 4 , top - right ) . Regarding the blue dandelion at Point C ( Figure 4 , bottom - centre ) , he suggested a particular behaviour where the ’spotlight’ remains at a specific angle as follows : " it’s not like a swiveling over like watching people . So I suspect that teacher in blue is either idle or explaining something to students " . PT2 , after looking at his own data , explained : " It seems I was just deeply looking to the class , because there are dense dots . It is near the bench , so I was probably explaining something to some group of students there gathered around me " . PT3 confirmed that in Session 1 ( Point A ) he was " facing the students , changing [ his ] orientation from left to right , trying to scan the whole classroom to see if there Classroom Dandelions CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Figure 4 : Visualisations over 22 . 5mins approximately , of the main teacher ( blue ) and the secondary teacher ( red ) in close proximity to the classroom whiteboard ( see points A and B ) and an auxiliary bench ( C ) . Left : x - y coordinates only . Centre : dandelion diagrams . Right : video footage of the critical events . were any problems or safety regulations that needed attention " . Yet , he corrected himself as he could see through the dandelion diagram that his body orientation in Point B was towards the whiteboard , explaining this as follows : " I was writing on the whiteboard or ex - plaining a formula written on the whiteboard to some student " ( see Figure 4 , bottom - right ) . In sum , the added information contained in the dandelion dia - grams enabled teachers to understand the situation more in detail . This also demonstrates that it is not sufficient to simply use the proximity distance as a proxy to identify if certain classroom re - sources are being used by the teachers . Importantly , teachers could differentiate important spatial behaviours , such as scanning the classroom when the spotlight is swiveling versus the dense stacking indicating that the body was oriented towards a fixed point for longer periods of time ; these look identical in an x - y heatmap . The next vignette focuses on spatial behaviours when teachers are close to students . 5 . 1 . 2 Vignette A2 : Proximity to Students . This vignette is focused on a critical classroom event that is representative of 20 - 40 instances that occurred in each class ( avg = 30 ; std = 10 . 3 ) : teachers standing in close proximity ( within 1 metre ) to teams of students working on their experiments . An instance was selected based on a previous study [ 51 ] in which 3 clusters of teachers’ positioning data points are surrounded by 4 students’ experimental setups . Figure 5 depicts the selected instance visualised by plotting x - y coordinates ( left ) and dandelion diagrams ( right ) . Teachers were asked to comment on what they thought PT3 ( in red ) was doing in close proximity to team 4 ( Point X ) and what PT2 ( in blue ) was doing near team 7 ( clusters in Points Y and Z ) for a period of 23 minutes approximately . This instance was selected because the body orientation data in Figure 5 ( right ) appears to help disambiguate which team of students is being attended to ( i . e . „ although the teacher at Point Y is closer to team 7 , his attention was in fact on team 6 working further away on the lab bench ) . Similar to the vignette A1 , when teachers explored the x - y data plot ( Figure 5 , left ) , they confirmed that the assumption is that being in close proximity to students means that they may be interacting with that team . PT1 explicitly explained this , by considering the details of the learning design ( i . e . , " Because this is a very concentrated experiment , you have to be in close proximity to the students to talk to them " ) , as follows : " Just looking at the obvious proximity , we have teams 4 and 6 for Point X . For Point Y , we have team 7 , and 5 possibly . This is the principal teacher so for Point Z may also be close to the PC checking information . " . The other two teachers ( whose data was represented in the diagrams ) followed the same rationale ( e . g . , PT2 stated : " At Point X I was attending team 4 because I was closer to them , and so on . " . Yet , when teachers explored the dandelion diagrams ( Figure 5 , right ) , they had to revisit how they initially interpreted the data . For example , PT3 ( in red ) explained how the information about his body orientation and that of the other teacher , could help him confirm how they used the space to support students , as follows ; " From position X I was facing team 4 so I was like helping them . From Y , maybe [ the other teacher ] was [ walking ] from [ position Z ] and maybe was monitoring team 6 from afar " . PT2 ( in blue ) also corrected himself and could describe the situation by looking at the dandelion diagrams representing his own data : " So I said in X I was attending number 7 . But my conclusion was wrong because I was oriented towards group 6 . But it is too far away from this group unless there is some student from this team maybe asking some question . Looks like definitely from point Z I was explaining something to team 7 . Awesome ! " In sum , the added body orientation information enabled teachers to get a richer picture of the classroom situation they experienced . The next vignette explores two cases in which both teachers were providing close attention to only one team at a time , which we refer to as instances of co - teaching . CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Fernandez - Nieto , et al . Figure 5 : Visualisations over approximately 23 mins . of the main teacher ( blue ) and the secondary teacher ( red ) in close prox - imity to students’ lab experiments ( see points X , Y and Z ) . Left : x - y coordinates only . Right : dandelion diagrams . 5 . 1 . 3 Vignette A3 : Instances of Co - teaching and F - formations . This vignette is focused on two critical classroom events that are repre - sentative of the 3 - 10 instances that occurred in each class ( avg = 5 . 6 ; std = 4 ) : both teachers standing in close proximity ( within 1 metre ) to the same team partially at the same time . Two instances were selected to illustrate two different f - formations displayed by the spatial behaviours of the teachers approximately 22 . 5 minutes apart . The classroom maps at the top of Figure 6 illustrate an instance of a face - to - face f - formation of both teachers near team 1 , and the maps at the bottom illustrate a side - by - side formation [ 39 ] , where both teachers faced team 2 . Both moments were extracted from the same class session to enable comparison . When teachers inspected the maps showing only x - y coordinates , the teachers did not have much evidence to reflect on . Both maps in Figure 6 ( left ) look similar . PT1 wondered if " maybe the ( red ) teacher sort of sought some extra help from the ( blue ) teacher to support team 1 " . The other two teachers explained that having two teachers in close proximity to the same team may be a sign of students needing to " solve a problem " ( PT2 ) or to " debug the experiment or explaining to students what they needed to do " ( PT3 ) . Yet , teachers did not explain much about their own team dynamics as a teaching team when attending the same group of students . When looking at the dandelion diagrams ( Figure 6 , right ) , for both cases , they all reflected about the strategies that could poten - tially be illustrated through these examples in terms of socio - spatial behaviours . For example , PT1 explained that , in the case of the face - to - face f - formation ( Figure 6 , top - right ) , " even though they may have attended the same team a few minutes apart , what it actually shows is that team 1 requires quite some attention because there’s a fair concentration of both teachers , the red and the blue . " PT1 also explained that the body orientation gave him clues about the kinds of interactions that may have occurred : " If the blue is talking to you , or the other way around , they would be facing each other . The main teacher might as well talk to one of the students who is engaged in that experiment because is facing to the other direction . The red one is engaged with these students at the bench . You see ? The red is much , much more concentrated " . In the case of the side - by - side f - formation ( Figure 6 , bottom - right ) , the dandelion diagrams helped PT3 to recall exactly what happened , and he reflected on his collaboration strategies as follows : " So , the clear difference is that in the [ face - to - face formation ] the main teacher commonly talks to the [ secondary ] teacher ; and in the [ side - by - side formation ] we usually are giving instructions to students " . PT3 also explained in more detail how the information about their body orientation helped him reflect on their social dynamics . He explained : " face - to - face situations would be when we are both having a discussion so that we can both work on the same project . But the side - by - side was the situation when one tutor was actually explaining to the group and the other is standing there . So , you see ? like the fans [ spotlights ] actually intersect " . The next set of vignettes illustrate new aspects yet to be discussed related to social dynamics , since it focuses on the Nursing teams of 5 students engaging with their teacher . 5 . 2 Vignettes from the teamwork contect ( B ) 5 . 2 . 1 Vignette B1 : Teacher Monitoring or Intervening . This vignette is focused on a critical event when one of the teams of nurses is at - taching the 3 - lead electrocardiogram device ( ECG ) to the simulated patient . During this procedure , nurses around the bed attach the ECG directly to the patient’s chest . This vignette illustrates nurses’ embodiment of this task in the classroom space for a period of one minute ( one point per second ) . This instance was selected because the teacher was in close proximity to the team ( see grey data points in Figure 7 ) . When nursing teachers ( NT1 - 5 ) where asked to explain the sit - uation using Figure 7 ( left ) , four out of five interpreted that the role of the teacher was actively involved in helping and guiding nurses through the process ( performing an intervention , for exam - ple , to provide feedback to the students ) by focusing on Point A in the figure . For instance , NT3 mentioned that " in this situation [ nurses ] commonly don’t realise what is going to happen so they may need a little bit of guidance and reassurance from the teacher " . NT5 more strongly assumed that " the teacher must have been explaining something specific or nurses asked for some kind of clarification " . NT2 ( whose data was being inspected ) admitted that he could not remember what may have been happening without having further information . However , when presented with Figure 7 ( right ) , all the teachers changed their initial interpretations . Three out of five teachers Classroom Dandelions CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Figure 6 : Visualisations approximately 22 . 5 mins . apart , of the main teacher ( blue ) and the secondary teacher ( red ) while both attending to the same team of students . Left : x - y coordinates only . Right : dandelion diagrams face - to - face ( above ) and side - by - side ( bottom ) . Figure 7 : Visualisations over one minute of a teacher , and four student nurses playing different roles in a team simulation during a critical event : attaching an ECG device . Left : x - y coordinates only . Right : dandelion diagrams . pointed at the teacher’s trajectory ( Point B ) , which was interpreted as the teacher just monitoring the team and then moving away to the next bed . NT1 indicated " I can see the teacher was moving away to the next bed [ pointing at the trajectory ] " . NT2 this time commented " So you can see that I was standing off to the side just looking , and I might have come over to briefly say something to the team leader [ referring to Point C ] . I didn’t invade their space for some particular reason " . This monitoring behaviour was confirmed through the video footage . This vignette illustrates that visualising the trajectories and the body orientation of the teacher and students contributed to charac - terising how the teacher’s classroom tasks ( e . g . , monitoring versus intervening students ) were enacted . This may be helpful to train novice teachers for them to learn how to work in the classroom space . 5 . 2 . 2 Vignette B2 : Spatial Team Dynamics . This vignette focuses on the spatial behaviours of two teams ( 3 and 5 ) during the most critical event of their team simulation : noticing the patient’s ad - verse reaction to an antibiotic and stopping its intravenous ( IV ) administration ( located at the top right hand side of the bed in all diagrams in Figure 8 ) . In the simulation illustrated in this vignette , there is commonly one student ( Nurse 3 in Team 3 and the team leader in Team 5 ) asking questions to the student enacting the voice CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Fernandez - Nieto , et al . of the patient ( student sitting next to the bed whose data is depicted in yellow ) . According to the teachers , the spatial behaviours of Team 3 were more effective compared to Team 5 . Based on the x - y coordinates ( Figure 8 , left ) , teachers did not perceive major differences between both teams . NT1 , NT2 , NT4 and NT5 explained , using similar words , that in both teams Nurses 1 and 2 performed the critical actions . Regarding Team 3 , NT2 explained : " . . . so , nurse 1 and nurse 2 have identified the incident . They realised that the adverse event probably is related to the antibiotic being delivered and therefore they are around the IV fluids " ( Point A in Figure 8 , top - left ) . Similarly , NT5 explained the following for Team 5 : " I think that nurses 1 and 2 took a very active approach . And probably nurse 1 was who was stopping the IV fluid ( signalling Point B ) " . The teachers also inferred some differences between the behaviours of students across both teams ( e . g . asking questions to the patient or checking the IV machine ) by noticing which students were close to each other or to the patient . For example , the team leaders in both groups behaved differently during the critical event . The team leader in Team 3 was effectively positioned according to her role . This was confirmed by NT4 as follows : " It looks like the team leader of team 3 is at the base of the bed ( Point C ) from where she can notice if something is wrong with the patient " . In contrast , in Team 5 the team leader was standing at an unexpected position during the adverse event : " Oh look ! [ signalling Point D ] , it looks like the team leader is in a different position here , because usually they are at the end of the bed . So it looks like she / he is actually asking the patient " - NT1 . In contrast , when teachers inspected the dandelion diagrams ( Figure 8 , centre ) , they identified certain spatial behaviours accord - ing to nurses’ roles . For the case of Team 3 ( top - centre ) , teachers used the body orientation of the students as a potential marker of interaction with the patient or with other team members . For example , NT4 said : " everybody was facing the patient " . NT1 further interpreted the information about body orientation in terms of team dynamics , as follows : " You can see nurse 3 is focused on the patient ( see Point E ) and you can see nurses 1 and 2 have gone and stopped the IV antibiotic ( Point F ) " . NT5 added : " it is clearer here that the leader had a kind of communication with nurse 1 " ( signalling Point G ) . However , for the case of Team 5 ( bottom - centre ) , teachers highlighted some potential areas for improvement . For example , although NT1 effectively recognised team leader’s behaviour from his spatial traces ( i . e . , " I can see here that the team leader may be doing the patient’s assessment ( signalling Point H " ) , NT2 explained this may be related to some problems faced by this team as follows : " I’m not happy with the team , I think the team leader should not be doing the procedure . It should be [ nurse 1 ] or another nurse allocated to this task " . Similarly , NT4 explained this in terms of a leadership problem , as follows : " . . . the team leader is doing everything and not delegating . Nurse 3 has done nothing ( see Point I ) . Nurses 2 and 3 seem to be waiting for direction and taking no initiative " . In sum , with the x - y heatmaps , teachers could not differentiate the two teams , but with the dandelion diagrams , they were able to identify key behaviours related to the effective execution of the team task ( by Team 3 ) , in comparison to a team showing potential leadership and communication issues ( Team 5 ) . The next section presents additional insights from the rest of the teacher interviews . 5 . 3 Thematic results This subsection presents reflections externalised by teachers dur - ing the interviews . Questions asked were organised according to our two research questions under the themes : added value of the dandelion diagrams ( RQ1 ) and envisaged integration into teach - ing practice ( RQ2 ) . A third theme emerged concerning potential challenges , risks and limitations . 5 . 3 . 1 Added Value of the Dandelion Diagrams . We identified two sub - themes in this regard : Advantages over representations of x - y coordinates . The first subtheme that emerged addresses the benefits of incorporat - ing the representation of body orientation in the visualisation , in comparison to existing tools that only depict coordinates , e . g . , a heatmap , or point cloud visualisation . As NT2 experienced , when there were only dots ( x - y data ) on the visualisation , the audience would not have complete insights into the situation : " you’re only going to see part of the information , you might not see everything . " In contrast , with the dandelion diagrams , " when you see more of that directional information you can then put together what is actually happening " . As stated by PT2 , " if only the dots [ are shown ] , it just says that you spent more time in a certain location . But when you add a cone ( body orientation ) you will see exactly where the teacher was facing to and you could attach some explanation to those dots " . Correspondingly , the teachers provided examples about how the dots - only visualisation can lead to more misinterpretations of the situation . For instance , PT3 explained : " Teachers may not be facing the group at all . They may be facing the other way . So it may be easy to interpret that they were actually helping the group because they were somewhat close to them , but it was something else in reality " . More examples could also be found in the vignette review sections ( i . e . , subsection 5 . 1 . 2 ) . Hence , as NT4 explained , " the points [ alone ] can be misleading when you try to read them " . A similar perception was shared by other teachers . This recurrent opinion confirmed that one major added value of the dandelion diagram is the aggregation of x - y position and body orientation , which help teachers to better interpret the classroom situations at critical moments . Potential complement to video analysis . Another emerging subtheme concerns how the dandelion diagrams can serve as a complement or alternative to video analysis , to save teachers’ time and efforts in professional training . In current contexts , video has been widely adopted as a learning tool to promote practitioners’ reflection on their performance . For example , in a training session , teachers might need to watch and analyse classroom recordings of peers or their own , and discuss different aspects of practice . A similar approach has also been followed in the training of nurses . Despite being effective , this video analysis approach can be time - consuming for practitioners who already have busy routines . As experienced by our teachers , they suggested that the dandelion diagrams may serve as objective summaries or episodic indexes to help professionals intuitively analyse the depicted incidents , or quickly retrieve a relevant video clip . As NT5 explained , " for me as a teacher , it will save a lot of time , because I won’t need to go to the video as a source of information . I can just use this visualisation to explain what is going on , and I know that it will be accurate . " Correspondingly , another similar explanation was offered by PT2 : " it can work as a kind of summary for reflection because I don’t think Classroom Dandelions CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Figure 8 : Visualisations over one minute of teams 3 ( top ) and 5 ( bottom ) . Left : x - y coordinates only . Centre : dandelion diagrams . Right : footage of the critical event : stopping the IV fluid on time . any teacher is going to go through the video recording of one hour or two hours to see how to do the teaching . " In addition , NT2 pinpointed another potential advantage of dandelion diagram as an alternative to the video approach , " I think it gets away from the whole issue around privacy . " 5 . 3 . 2 EnvisagedIntegrationintoTeachingPractice . Underthistheme we summarise the teachers’ opinions on how the dandelion dia - grams could be integrated into existing practice of professional learning and teaching . The first three subthemes address what the dandelion diagram could be potentially used for to facilitate the pro - cess of professionalisation , whereas the last subtheme summarises when and where professionals might use the visualisation as a tool . Enabling evidence - based reflection . All teachers in both con - texts believed that dandelion diagrams can support practitioners’ reflection both individually and collectively , by summarising evi - dence from their own practice . For example , in the context of the physics labs , PT2 believed that the dandelion diagrams could serve as a reflection of how teachers have helped their students and mo - tivate them to “think about what needs to be changed before the next class” . PT3 said that this visualisation tool , as a more objective data portrayal , could help them identify “unconscious bias” in their spatial performance and thereby “promote learning better” . In the nurse training context , NT2 believed that the visualisations could be used not only for “self - reflection” , but also for “group reflection” , in which a team of nursing students could reflect on “what worked well and what didn’t work well and what was going on here and what would they should do differently the next time” . Similarly , NT5 envis - aged that the dandelion diagrams could offer students clues to help them identify surprising or unwanted patterns , which provoked reflective questions such as “what happened to me in this situation ? Why ? How can I improve it ? What can I do to avoid it in the next simulation ? ” . Facilitating example - based learning . The teachers also high - lighted the promises of dandelion diagrams in helping professionals learn from others’ ( good or bad ) practices . For instance , NT2 con - sidered them potentially beneficial in professional learning , if the visualisation technique is used to curate and compare examples of ’good’ and ’bad performance’ : “here’s some examples about [ . . . ] really good interaction using this visualisation , compared to another example where someone was facing in the opposite direction or away from the patient most of the time " . NT3 proposed using anonymised visualisations for peer case analyses , e . g . , to help nurse trainees to discuss opportunities for improvement from others’ cases . More - over , NT4 believed that the dandelion diagram visualisations could serve as concrete demonstrations for novice professionals to un - derstand ideal practice patterns in certain situations : “that is a good way to sort of introduce new teachers [ . . . ] what pattern we think is probably more suitable or the best to use in those various circum - stances” . She gave an example about how this would work better than only providing abstract instructions to novice professionals : “the visualisation helps , certainly , because just talking about roaming around [ is not enough ] . What does roaming around mean ? And , you know , the dandelion diagram can be used to illustrate that” . Augmenting feedback provided to students . Several teach - ers also pinpointed the potential of the dandelion diagram in terms of supporting instructors to generate more personalised , concrete feedback for learners . For example , as NT1 explained : “I think it would definitely give more support in regards to teachers giving stu - dent feedback . ” She first argued that the visualisation tool could CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Fernandez - Nieto , et al . help teachers assess the performances of students in detail : “you see the visualisation and you say , well , sometimes the students do what they’re expected to do , and sometimes they don’t , or sometimes they might be slow to react to what’s happening” . She also explained how such insights could help the teacher to give more pertinent feedback to the students : “then you could base your feedback on that as well . You would actually say to them : I can see that you were in this direction , in this particular position , could you tell me a little bit more about what you were doing during that time ? ” Moreover , NT2 pointed out that the dandelion diagrams could help teachers to generate relevant feedback in their own professional develop - ment : “very useful information that could come of that [ the dandelion diagram ] for the teachers in terms of the feedback in debriefing in professional situations” . When to use the Dandelion Diagram . In terms of supporting learners’ reflection and instructors’ feedback , the teachers recog - nised that the debriefing session ( or a quick feedback session ) after an episode of practice ( i . e . , a class ) , would be a good occasion to integrate the visualisation tool : e . g . , “when we’re debriefing with the students . We could show them this visualisation” ( NT3 ) . NT2 emphasised that it would be particularly beneficial if the debriefing session took place in “relatively real time , after the scenario . ” This would make sure that the practitioners still retain fresh memories about the practice session , “so they would not need to see the video as well” . In terms of supporting learners’ example - based learning , some ad - hoc training sessions were considered suitable occasions to utilise the dandelion diagrams , e . g . , to curate examples of good and bad practices ( NT2 , PT1 ) , and peer case studies ( NT3 ) . More - over , PT2 suggested that the visualisation could also be integrated “with a journal for teachers to reflect on the decisions they took” . NT3 suggested using the visualisation as an awareness tool to help teachers “in trying to maintain professionalism” . PT1 mentioned the possibility of using the visualisation as a long - term interven - tion in professionalisation to see how it would promote iteration and evolution in professionals’ practice . In addition , PT2 specifi - cally proposed using the dandelion diagram together with video , in which the visuals could be “useful to give a summary for certain periods” , and help practitioners “navigate to a specific video section and then figure out what happened there” . 5 . 3 . 3 Challenges , Risks and Limitations . This theme collates the teachers’ opinions about the potential challenges , risks and limita - tions of using the dandelion diagrams in practice , which has led to some detailed considerations in designing and implementing this new tool . The first challenge refers to how to represent absolute time duration in addition to the relative proportion of time in the visualisation . Each frame of the dandelion diagram depicts spa - tial data within a certain period of time , thereby , its color density represents the relative proportion of time rather than an absolute duration . Yet , as recognised by PT2 , practitioners sometimes may be interested to know “exactly how much time a blue cone represents” . To resolve this need , we propose that future diagrams could add extra annotations to indicate the absolute duration of a specific data cluster . These annotations could be either auto - generated or based on manual labels . PT3 raised another challenge which is about the over - saturation of the color density which might cause certain data points being " washed out " . This could be avoided by dynamically configuring the amount of color density based on the time - frame of the whole visualised session : i . e . , the longer the session , the weaker each accumulation of color density will be . NT2 noted that the position of the tracking sensor on the body should also be carefully considered , to maximally guarantee the accuracy of the data in terms of body orientation : " there’s probably some [ . . . ] considerations about how to best position [ . . . ] " . He envisioned that the sensor unit might be integrated into a smart vest or glasses in the near future . Apart from these design challenges and considerations , NT3 also pointed out two concerns in implementing this visualisation in practice . The first is the potential " embarrassment " it might bring to teams of students who did not perform well , and this implies that extra thought would be needed regarding who to share the diagrams with and when to anonymise them . A second concern was about how effective this tool would be in regard to changing professional behaviours . While agreeing with the opportunities that can be created for professional learning and reflection , she also emphasised that more evidence would be needed to assess " whether it would actually contribute to changing behaviours " . 6 DISCUSSION In this section we summarise the key findings of the study , share our critical reflections , consider the broader literature , and note the limitations of this work . 6 . 1 Implications for Supporting Sensemaking and Improving Teaching Practice The key role that data may have on teachers’ sensemaking is a rapidly growing topic of interest in the emerging field of learning analytics [ 14 ] . However , turning human activity and behaviour into data points does not guarantee that educational stakeholders will be able to do anything practical with it [ 80 ] . Spatial data bring additional challenges for sensemaking because the vast amounts of sensor data can be both overwhelming , and stripped of valu - able contextual cues . As suggested by Campos et al . [ 14 ] , there is a timely need for HCI and learning analytics communities to explore a broader range of instructional contexts and jointly enrich the typology of teachers’ sensemaking of various learning data . Moti - vated by this , our study explored teachers’ sensemaking of spatial data in a physics lab and a simulated hospital ward : two different educational contexts that both involve dynamic , embodied practice and require educators’ reflection and analysis on spatial behaviors . The responses we have been able to make to the first research question take the form of the vignette analyses presented in sec - tion 5 . 1 . These demonstrate how the dandelion diagrams enabled teachers to differentiate classroom interactions whose differences were invisible in x - y heatmaps lacking body orientation cues . For example , the analysis associated with the data vignette related to proximity to classroom resources ( section 5 . 1 . 1 ) illustrated how the dandelion diagrams aided teachers’ reflection , but could also be used to inform learning spaces research and development . Thus , the dandelion diagram could be a key resource for designers , re - searchers and developers interested in the assessment of material features of emerging classroom spaces [ 96 ] . This suggests that class - rooms could also be a meaningful application context for visual Classroom Dandelions CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA analytics of movement [ 6 , 7 ] which has been predominantly focus - ing on studying geographic patterns ( e . g . , [ 6 , 8 , 37 , 88 ] ) or sports performances [ 63 , 64 , 90 ] from spatiotemporal data . The dandelion diagram could also be used to characterise effec - tive ways to approach students ( see vignettes in sections 5 . 1 . 2 , 5 . 1 . 3 and 5 . 2 . 1 ) . This is important since it has been reported that teachers are often encouraged to co - teach in large open learning spaces without having developed the capabilities to collaborate with peers and use the space effectively [ 48 ] . The detection of f - formations and visualisation of the spatial data from teams of students looking after a simulated patient were useful to identify effective team workflows . With such analytics in place , it becomes possible to identify the patterns that characterise high effective teams in critical situations , as illustrated in the vignette presented in section 8 , and as suggested in emerging literature [ 65 ] . The thematic analysis presented in section 5 . 3 showed how teach - ers benefited from the additional orientation cues to disambiguate the interpretation of the spatial behaviours . This surfaces a signifi - cant value of aggregating orientation data with the x - y positioning data : enabling the understanding of attention patterns . Existing visual analytics of spatiotemporal data have mainly focused on peo - ple’s location , movement and trajectory patterns [ 21 ] , for example , how crowds travel between metro stations [ 37 ] , how players move in a soccer game [ 63 ] , or how a visitor move across different spots of a museum [ 44 ] . Due to their analysis interest , orientation has been rarely represented separately from moving direction . Whereas , in this study , key design features of the dandelion diagrams , namely the spotlight metaphor and the density stacking , enabled teachers to characterise spatial ( attentional ) behaviours of the teachers such as monitoring or " scanning " the classroom versus remaining focused on a classroom resource or small groups of students . Teachers also envisaged how they could appropriate the visualisation tool into their regular teaching practice , mainly as a resource for self - inquiry and to train novice teachers . This is of particular importance in higher education where lecturers and teaching assistants often lack basic pedagogical training [ 31 ] . 6 . 2 The Risk of Over - Interpretation As illustrated in the previous section , teachers generally perceived the exploration of dandelion diagrams as a positive experience . However , weidentified severalinstancesof potentialover - interpretation of the classroom situations based on the positioning data . Although teachers were often reminded that they were seeing only indoor positioning data , they attributed other meanings to these data in terms of the task or social aspects . This mainly occurred in Con - text B where teachers expect students to communicate effective in teams . For example , for the cases of the teams presented in Vignette B2 ( section 8 ) , teachers often interpreted the angle of spotlight as evidence of verbal communication with other people , instead of simple body orientation . For instance , NT1 often verbalised expres - sions such as : " You can see nurse 3 is again ’communicating’ with nurse 2 here and you can see there’s a lot of ’collaboration and ’com - munication’ between nurse 1 , 2 and 3 . These two statements were refuted after inspecting the video footage . On other occasions teach - ers’ over - interpretations did coincide with what actually happened , based on the video , because students are meant to communicate and collaborate according to the learning task , and it is expected that they do so especially when they stand face - to - face for some time . However , the problem of over - interpretation is not exclusive of the dandelion diagrams as it occurred also while teachers inspected the x - y coordinates and it has been reported as a widespread concern in the sector of learning analytics [ 3 , 80 ] . It follows that if dandelion di - agrams are to be embedded as either a teaching support tool , or for professional development , it is critical ( as with all instruments ) to clarify their scope : positioning data depicts only spatial behaviours , and verbal or video data are needed to make stronger inferences about collaboration or effective communication . We discuss under future work how such modalities could be added . 6 . 3 Ethics and the Risk of Harmful Surveillance Cathy O’Neil [ 59 ] has documented the damage to teachers’ em - ployment conditions from automated assessments based on both poor data and black - box algorithms . The use of data in education should start from the premise that such data is commonly incom - plete [ 40 ] . Therefore , we caution in the strongest terms against using visualisations of the sort presented here , with the purpose of summatively assessing the performance of teachers or students . In another study , teachers explicitly stated that positioning data about themselves should be shared with peers for the purpose of helping others’ to learn from mistakes or ’good’ practice [ 51 ] , and this coincides with the uses of the dandelion diagrams envisaged by the teachers in our study , presented in section 5 . 3 . Related to the risk of over - interpretation presented above , there are also poten - tial concerns with further and unintended uses of sensor data for making decisions that can affect students , teachers or the broader educational systems . In that same study [ 51 ] , teachers were against the use of positioning data to measure their performance , because the data can be easily misinterpreted by others who may not be aware of the context and other sources of evidence that are needed to gain a rich understanding of the complexity of classroom prac - tices . In line with this and the present study , we encourage other researchers interested in the dandelion diagrams to use them only for supporting teachers , and for professional development purposes . Similarly , the surveillance of activities and the collection of class - room data must not harm student progress [ 85 ] . Our own future work is aimed at generating a deeper understanding regarding to what extent sensor data can complement the sensemaking process of classroom activity , and finding ways in which these data can be effectively used to support teaching and learning with integrity . 6 . 4 Limitations and Future Work Our study presents some limitations . First , although the position - ing data of teachers and students was captured in - the - wild ( from authentic classroom settings ) , the exploration of the dandelion diagrams by the teachers was conducted under more controlled conditions . Future work should focus on exploring how teachers may use these visualisations as a regular part of their teaching practice either in real - time ( in the classroom ) or during authentic debrief sessions . CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Fernandez - Nieto , et al . Second , our qualitative study focused on a small sample of au - thentic classes ( i . e . , two educational contexts featuring two class - room architectural designs ) . Future work can explore the capa - bilities of the dandelion diagrams to support reflection in other educational disciplines ( beyond Health and Science education ) and educational levels ( e . g . , primary or secondary schools ) , and for other classroom architectures . Third , in our study , the dandelion diagrams were always ex - plored by teachers after exploring the x - y coordinates data plots . The rationale was that given the qualitative nature of the study , we wanted to identify variations in the sensemaking process by dis - closing body orientation data after the coordinates ) . We recognise , however , that the process of comparing the dandelion diagrams with a visualisation of data points , and asking open questions about them , could have reduced the opportunities for design innovation along new trajectories , as argued by Greenberg and Buxton [ 28 ] . Moreover , with a larger sample and a different study design , it would be possible to explore variations in the dandelion diagram features or other visualisation techniques representing the body orientation data for the purpose of usability evaluation . This further exploration goes beyond the scope of this paper , but is an avenue for future work to refine the design concepts introduced here . Fourth , the positioning tracking system we used is just one of several alternative solutions that have been identified in the area of multimodal learning analytics ( e . g . , using video - based systems or beacons ) , indoor positioning tracking systems are rapidly evolv - ing and dropping in price [ 95 ] . Therefore , further development work can focus on embedding the dandelion diagrams into a visual interface that teachers can directly interact with in real - time or for post - hoc reflection , regardless of the underlying positioning hardware used . Moreover , adding interactivity to the visualisations opens up new possibilities for focusing on subsets of data , for in - stance , how a particular student has interacted with others , while the addition of animation could show movement unfolding over time to clarify how f - formations grow and change . Finally , as argued above , positioning and body orientation are just two features of many other ways in which people interact in physical learning spaces . Although in most teaching it remains im - practical to replay the entire video recording of classroom activity , these clearly contain rich information not captured in dandelion diagrams , including the content of verbal interactions , body lan - guage , gaze and the actions students and teachers perform . These enable deeper reflection on higher - order competencies that go be - yond the analysis of positioning behaviours ( e . g . , effective teaching , teamwork and leadership ) . Our future work envisages new ways to make more effective use of video recordings by using summary visual representations of classroom data , such as the dandelion diagrams , to navigate around , and highlight clips within , relevant video episodes to aid reflection . 7 CONCLUDING REMARKS In this paper , we built on concepts underpinning classroom prox - emics as the design rationale for a novel visualisation technique , the Dandelion Diagram , to visualise digital traces of the x - y positions , movement trajectories and body orientations of teachers and stu - dents in physical learning spaces . Through our qualitative analysis of teachers’ feedback on these representations , drawn from two authentic learning contexts we addressed two research questions concerning the visualisation’s support for teachers’ sensemaking of their own and students’ spatial behaviours , and the potential contribution of the visualisation technique for improving teaching practice . We conclude that teachers envisaged multiple potential uses of such data ( i ) for them to reflect on their own teaching ; ( ii ) to support the development of teaching skills of novice teachers and teaching assistants without strong pedagogical training ; ( iii ) the provision of feedback to students engaged in developing spa - tial capabilities in healthcare ; and ( iv ) to support further research assessing the design of learning spaces , and in identifying effective workflows in both teacher and student teamwork . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Gloria Fernandez Nieto gratefully acknowledges the University of Technology Sydney for PhD Scholarship support . Roberto Martinez - Maldonado’sresearchispartly fundedbyJacobsFoundation . Pengcheng An and Jian Zhao’s research is supported in part by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada ( NSERC ) . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Anouck Adrot and Marie Bia Figueiredo . 2019 . “Lost in Digitization” : A Spatial Journey in Emergency Response and Pragmatic Legitimacy . In Materiality in Institutions , de Vaujany FX . , Adrot A . , Boxenbaum E . , and Leca B . ( Eds . ) . Springer , 151 – 181 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 97472 - 9 _ 6 [ 2 ] Karan Ahuja , Dohyun Kim , Franceska Xhakaj , Virag Varga , Anne Xie , Stanley Zhang , Jay Eric Townsend , Chris Harrison , Amy Ogan , and Yuvraj Agarwal . 2019 . EduSense : Practical classroom sensing at Scale . Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive , Mobile , Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 3 , 3 , Article 71 ( Sept . 2019 ) , 26 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3351229 [ 3 ] Sakinah SJ Alhadad . 2016 . Attentional and cognitive processing of analytics visualisations : Can design features affect interpretations and decisions about learning and teaching . Show Me The Learning . Proceedings ASCILITE ( 2016 ) , 20 – 32 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 18608 / jla . 2018 . 52 . 5 [ 4 ] Pengcheng An , Saskia Bakker , Sara Ordanovski , Chris L . E . Paffen , Ruurd Taconis , and Berry Eggen . 2020 . Dandelion Diagram : Aggregating Positioning and Orien - tation Data in the Visualization of Classroom Proxemics . In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI , USA ) ( CHI EA ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3334480 . 3382795 [ 5 ] Pengcheng An , Saskia Bakker , Sara Ordanovski , Ruurd Taconis , Chris L . E . Paf - fen , and Berry Eggen . 2019 . Unobtrusively Enhancing Reflection - in - Action of Teachers through Spatially Distributed Ambient Information . In Proceed - ings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300321 [ 6 ] Gennady Andrienko , Natalia Andrienko , Peter Bak , Daniel Keim , and Stefan Wrobel . 2013 . Visual analytics focusing on spatial events . In Visual analytics of movement . Springer , 209 – 251 . [ 7 ] Natalia Andrienko and Gennady Andrienko . 2006 . Exploratory analysis of spatial and temporal data : a systematic approach . Springer Science & Business Media . [ 8 ] Natalia Andrienko and Gennady Andrienko . 2010 . Spatial generalization and aggregation of massive movement data . IEEE Transactions on visualization and computer graphics 17 , 2 ( 2010 ) , 205 – 219 . [ 9 ] Richard Arends . 2014 . Learning to teach . McGraw - Hill Higher Education , New York , USA . [ 10 ] JeffBezemer . 2008 . Displayingorientationintheclassroom : Students’multimodal responses to teacher instructions . Linguistics and Education 19 , 2 ( 2008 ) , 166 – 178 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . linged . 2008 . 05 . 005 [ 11 ] Nigel Bosch , Caitlin Mills , Jeffrey D Wammes , and Daniel Smilek . 2018 . Quan - tifying classroom instructor dynamics with computer vision . In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education . Springer , 30 – 42 . [ 12 ] V . Braun and V . Clarke . 2012 . Thematic analysis . In APA handbook of research methods in psychology , Vol . 2 . , H . Cooper , P . Camic , D . Long , A . Panter , D . Rind - skopf , and K . Sher ( Eds . ) . American Psychological Association , Washington , USA , 57 – 71 . [ 13 ] Frederik Brudy , Suppachai Suwanwatcharachat , Wenyu Zhang , Steven Houben , and Nicolai Marquardt . 2018 . EagleView : A Video Analysis Tool for Visualising Classroom Dandelions CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA and Querying Spatial Interactions of People and Devices . In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM International Conference on Interactive Surfaces and Spaces ( Tokyo , Japan ) ( ISS ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 61 – 72 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3279778 . 3279795 [ 14 ] Fabio C Campos , June Ahn , Daniela K DiGiacomo , Ha Nguyen , and Maria Hays . 2021 . Making Sense of Sensemaking : Understanding How K – 12 Teachers and Coaches React to Visual Analytics . Journal of Learning Analytics ( 2021 ) , 1 – 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 18608 / jla . 2021 . 7113 [ 15 ] Stuart Card . 2004 . Keynote Address : From Information Visualization to Sense - making : Connecting the Mind’s Eye to the Mind’s Muscle . In IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization . xii – xii . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / INFVIS . 2004 . 44 [ 16 ] Edwin Chng , Mohamed Raouf Seyam , William Yao , and Bertrand Schneider . 2020 . Using motion sensors to understand collaborative interactions in digital fabrication labs . In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education . Springer , 118 – 128 . [ 17 ] T Matthew Ciolek . 1983 . The proxemics lexicon : A first approximation . Journal of Nonverbal Behavior 8 , 1 ( 1983 ) , 55 – 79 . [ 18 ] John W Creswell . 2014 . A concise introduction to mixed methods research . SAGE publications . [ 19 ] Brenda Dervin . 1998 . Sense - making theory and practice : an overview of user interests in knowledge seeking and use . Journal of Knowledge Management 2 , 2 ( 1998 ) , 36 – 46 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / 13673279810249369 [ 20 ] Pierre Dillenbourg , Guillaume Zufferey , Hamed Alavi , Patrick Jermann , Son Do - Lenh , QuentinBonnard , SébastienCuendet , andFrédéricKaplan . 2011 . Classroom orchestration : The third circle of usability . In Proceedings of the international conference on computer - supported collaborative learning . International Society of the Learning Sciences , 510 – 517 . [ 21 ] Somayeh Dodge , Robert Weibel , and Anna - Katharina Lautenschütz . 2008 . To - wards a taxonomy of movement patterns . Information visualization 7 , 3 - 4 ( 2008 ) , 240 – 252 . [ 22 ] Zhe Dong , Haiyan Liu , and Xinqi Zheng . 2021 . The influence of teacher - student proximity , teacher feedback , and near - seated peer groups on classroom en - gagement : An agent - based modeling approach . Plos one 16 , 1 ( 2021 ) , e0244935 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0244935 [ 23 ] VanessaEcheverria , RobertoMartinez - Maldonado , TamaraPower , CarolynHayes , and Simon Buckingham Shum . 2018 . Where is the nurse ? Towards automatically visualising meaningful team movement in healthcare education . In International conference on artificial intelligence in education . Springer , 74 – 78 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 93846 - 2 _ 14 [ 24 ] Jeppe Benterud Eriksen . 2015 . Visualization of crowds from indoor positioning data . Master’s thesis . NTNU . [ 25 ] Amanda Careena Fernandes , Jinyan Huang , and Vince Rinaldo . 2011 . Does Where A Student Sits Really Matter ? - The Impact of Seating Locations on Student Classroom Learning . International Journal of Applied Educational Studies 10 , 1 ( 2011 ) . [ 26 ] Gloria Fernandez - Nieto , Roberto Martinez - Maldonado , Vanessa Echeverria , Kirsty Kitto , Pengcheng An , and Simon Buckingham Shum . 2021 . What Can An - alytics for Teamwork Proxemics Reveal About Positioning Dynamics In Clinical Simulations ? Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 5 , CSCW1 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3449284 [ 27 ] Michael F Giangreco , Susan W Edelman , Tracy Evans Luiselli , and Stephanie ZC MacFarland . 1997 . Helping or hovering ? Effects of instructional assistant prox - imity on students with disabilities . Exceptional children 64 , 1 ( 1997 ) , 7 – 18 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 001440299706400101 [ 28 ] Saul Greenberg and Bill Buxton . 2008 . Usability evaluation considered harmful ( some of the time ) . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . 111 – 120 . [ 29 ] MariolaCGremmen , YvonneHMVandenBerg , ChristianSteglich , RenéVeenstra , and Jan Kornelis Dijkstra . 2018 . The importance of near - seated peers for elemen - tarystudents’academicengagementandachievement . JournalofAppliedDevelop - mental Psychology 57 ( 2018 ) , 42 – 52 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . appdev . 2018 . 04 . 004 [ 30 ] Sion Griffiths , Man Sing Wong , Coco Yin Tung Kwok , Roy Kam , Simon Ching Lam , Lin Yang , Tsz Leung Yip , Joon Heo , Benedict Shing Bun Chan , Guanjing Xiong , et al . 2019 . Exploring bluetooth beacon use cases in teaching and learning : Increasing the sustainability of physical learning spaces . Sustainability 11 , 15 ( 2019 ) , 4005 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / su11154005 [ 31 ] Daniel Z Grunspan , Michelle Ann Kline , and Sara E Brownell . 2018 . The lec - ture machine : A cultural evolutionary model of pedagogy in higher education . CBE—Life Sciences Education 17 , 3 ( 2018 ) , es6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1187 / cbe . 17 - 12 - 0287 [ 32 ] Philip L Gunter , Richard E Shores , Susan L Jack , Shirley K Rasmussen , and Julia Flowers . 1995 . On the move using teacher / student proximity to improve students’ behavior . Teaching Exceptional Children 28 , 1 ( 1995 ) , 12 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 004005999502800103 [ 33 ] Edward T . Hall . 1966 . Proxemic Theory . CSISS Classics ( 1966 ) . https : / / escholarship . org / uc / item / 4774h1rm [ 34 ] Jon Hindmarsh and Alison Pilnick . 2007 . Knowing Bodies at Work : Embodiment and Ephemeral Teamwork in Anaesthesia . Organization Studies 28 , 9 ( sep 2007 ) , 1395 – 1416 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0170840607068258 [ 35 ] Sok Chul Hong and Jungmin Lee . 2017 . Who is sitting next to you ? Peer effects inside the classroom . Quantitative Economics 8 , 1 ( 2017 ) , 239 – 275 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3982 / QE434 [ 36 ] Yun Huang , Yisi Sang , Qunfang Wu , and Yaxing Yao . 2019 . Higher education check - ins : Exploring the user experience of hybrid location sensing . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 1 – 26 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359168 [ 37 ] Yuuki Hyougo , Kazuo Misue , and Jiro Tanaka . 2014 . Directional aggregate visualization of large scale movement data . In 2014 18th International Conference on Information Visualisation . IEEE , 196 – 201 . [ 38 ] Fredric H . Jones , Patrick Jones , and Jo Lynne Jones . 2007 . Fred Jones tools for teaching : Discipline , instruction , motivation . Fredric H Jones & Assocs , Santa Cruz , CA , USA . [ 39 ] Adam Kendon . 1976 . The F - formation system : The spatial organization of social encounters . Man - Environment Systems 6 , 01 ( 1976 ) , 1976 . [ 40 ] Kirsty Kitto , Simon Buckingham Shum , and Andrew Gibson . 2018 . Embracing imperfection in learning analytics . In Proceedings of the 8th international con - ference on learning analytics and knowledge . 451 – 460 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3170358 . 3170413 [ 41 ] Hans - Kristian Seem Koren . 2016 . Visualizing Large Indoor Positioning Data Sets in Web Browsers . Master’s thesis . Norwegian University of Science and Technology , Trondheim , Norway . [ 42 ] Kiron Koshy , Christopher Limb , Buket Gundogan , Katharine Whitehurst , and Daniyal J . Jafree . 2017 . Reflective practice in health care and how to reflect effectively . International Journal of Surgery Oncology 2 , 6 ( jul 2017 ) , e20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1097 / ij9 . 0000000000000020 [ 43 ] Jayakanth Kunhoth , AbdelGhani Karkar , Somaya Al - Maadeed , and Abdulla Al - Ali . 2020 . Indoor positioning and wayfinding systems : a survey . Human - centric Computing and Information Sciences 10 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 41 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s13673 - 020 - 00222 - 0 [ 44 ] Joel Lanir , Tsvi Kuflik , Julia Sheidin , Nisan Yavin , Kate Leiderman , and Michael Segal . 2017 . Visualizing museum visitors’ behavior : Where do they go and what do they do there ? Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 21 , 2 ( 2017 ) , 313 – 326 . [ 45 ] M Powell Lawton . 1977 . An ecological theory of aging applied to elderly housing . Journal of architectural education 31 , 1 ( 1977 ) , 8 – 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10464883 . 1977 . 11102585 [ 46 ] Vicky Leighton . 2021 . Envisaging Teacher Spatial Competency Through the Lenses of Situated Cognition and Personal Imagination to Reposition It as a Professional Classroom Practice Skill . Springer Singapore , Singapore . 249 – 275 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 981 - 15 - 7497 - 9 _ 21 [ 47 ] Fei Victor Lim , Kay L O’Halloran , and Alexey Podlasov . 2012 . Spatial pedagogy : Mapping meanings in the use of classroom space . Cambridge journal of education 42 , 2 ( 2012 ) , 235 – 251 . [ 48 ] JulieMackey , NeillO’Reilly , JoFletcher , andChrisJansen . 2017 . Whatdoteachers and leaders have to say about co - teaching in flexible learning spaces ? Journal of Educational Leadership , Policy and Practice ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 21307 / jelpp - 2017 - 009 [ 49 ] Paul Marshall , Yvonne Rogers , and Nadia Pantidi . 2011 . Using F - Formations to Analyse Spatial Patterns of Interaction in Physical Environments . In Proceedings of the ACM 2011 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( Hangzhou , China ) ( CSCW ’11 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 445 – 454 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1958824 . 1958893 [ 50 ] RobertoMartinez - Maldonado . 2019 . " ISpentMoreTimewiththatTeam " Making Spatial Pedagogy Visible Using Positioning Sensors . In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Learning Analytics & Knowledge . 21 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3303772 . 3303818 [ 51 ] RobertoMartinez - Maldonado , KaterinaMangaroska , JurgenSchulte , DougElliott , Carmen Axisa , and Simon Buckingham Shum . 2020 . Teacher Tracking with Integrity : What Indoor Positioning Can Reveal About Instructional Proxemics . Proc . ACM Interact . Mob . Wearable Ubiquitous Technol . 4 , 1 , Article 22 ( March 2020 ) , 27 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3381017 [ 52 ] R . Martinez - Maldonado , L . Yan , J . Deppeler , M . Phillips , , and D . Gašević . 2021 . Classroom Analytics : Telling Stories about Learning Spaces using Sensor Data . In Hybrid Learning Spaces , E . Gil , Y . Mor , Y . Dimitriadis , and C . Köppe ( Eds . ) . Springer , Cham , Switzerland , In Press . [ 53 ] Nora McDonald , Sarita Schoenebeck , and Andrea Forte . 2019 . Reliability and inter - rater reliability in qualitative research : Norms and guidelines for CSCW and HCI practice . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 1 – 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359174 [ 54 ] Helena M Mentis , Kenton O’Hara , Abigail Sellen , and Rikin Trivedi . 2012 . Interaction proxemics and image use in neurosurgery . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 927 – 936 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208536 [ 55 ] Miriah Meyer and Jason Dykes . 2019 . Criteria for rigor in visualization design study . IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics 26 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 87 – 97 . CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Fernandez - Nieto , et al . [ 56 ] MO - SW - PBS . 2019 . Missouri Schoolwide Positive Behavior Support - Tier 1 Team Workbook . Technical Report . University of Missouri : Missouri Department of Elementary and Secondary Education . [ 57 ] Lorenza Mondada . 2013 . Interactional space and the study of embodied talk - in - interaction . Space in language and linguistics : Geographical , interactional and cognitive perspectives ( 2013 ) , 247 – 275 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / 9783110312027 . 247 [ 58 ] Jane Moore , Dawn Prentice , and Maurene McQuestion . 2015 . Social Interaction and Collaboration among Oncology Nurses . Nursing research and practice 2015 ( 2015 ) , 248067 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1155 / 2015 / 248067 [ 59 ] CathyO’Neil . 2016 . Weaponsofmathdestruction : Howbigdataincreasesinequality and threatens democracy . Crown . [ 60 ] Sue C O’Neill and Jennifer Stephenson . 2014 . Evidence - Based Classroom and Behaviour Management Content in Australian Pre - Service Primary Teachers’ Coursework : Wherefore Art Thou ? . Australian Journal of Teacher Education 39 , 4 ( 2014 ) , n4 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 14221 / ajte . 2014v39n4 . 4 [ 61 ] Jeni Paay , Jesper Kjeldskov , Mikael B . Skov , and Kenton O’Hara . 2013 . F - Formations in Cooking Together : A Digital Ethnography Using YouTube . In Human - Computer Interaction – INTERACT 2013 , Paula Kotzé , Gary Marsden , Gitte Lindgaard , Janet Wesson , and Marco Winckler ( Eds . ) . Springer Berlin Hei - delberg , Berlin , Heidelberg , 37 – 54 . [ 62 ] Shiva Pedram , Stephen Palmisano , Richard Skarbez , Pascal Perez , and Matthew Farrelly . 2020 . Investigating the process of mine rescuers’ safety training with immersive virtual reality : A structural equation modelling approach . Computers & Education 153 ( 2020 ) , 103891 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2020 . 103891 [ 63 ] Charles Perin , Romain Vuillemot , and Jean - Daniel Fekete . 2013 . SoccerStories : A Kick - off for Visual Soccer Analysis . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 19 , 12 ( 2013 ) , 2506 – 2515 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2013 . 192 [ 64 ] Charles Perin , Romain Vuillemot , Charles D Stolper , John T Stasko , Jo Wood , and Sheelagh Carpendale . 2018 . State of the art of sports data visualization . In Computer Graphics Forum , Vol . 37 . Wiley Online Library , 663 – 686 . [ 65 ] Andrew Petrosoniak , Rodrigo Almeida , Laura Danielle Pozzobon , Christopher Hicks , Mark Fan , Kari White , Melissa McGowan , and Patricia Trbovich . 2019 . Tracking workflow during high - stakes resuscitation : the application of a novel clinicianmovementtracingtoolduringinsitutraumasimulation . BMJSimulation and Technology Enhanced Learning 5 , 2 ( apr 2019 ) , 78 – 84 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1136 / bmjstel - 2017 - 000300 [ 66 ] Peter Pirolli and Stuart Card . 2005 . The sensemaking process and leverage points for analyst technology as identified through cognitive task analysis . In Proceedings of international conference on intelligence analysis , Vol . 5 . McLean , VA , USA , 2 – 4 . [ 67 ] Luis P Prieto , Paul Magnuson , Pierre Dillenbourg , and Merike Saar . 2020 . Re - flection for action : Designing tools to support teacher reflection on everyday evidence . Technology , Pedagogy and Education 29 , 3 ( 2020 ) , 279 – 295 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1475939X . 2020 . 1762721 [ 68 ] Mirko Raca . 2015 . Camera - based estimation of student’s attention in class . Techni - cal Report . ÉCOLE POLYTECHNIQUE FÉDÉRALE DE LAUSANNE , EPFL . [ 69 ] Mikael Rask and David Brunt . 2007 . Verbal and social interactions in the nurse - patient relationship in forensic psychiatric nursing care : a model and its philo - sophical and theoretical foundation . Nursing inquiry 14 , 2 ( jun 2007 ) , 169 – 76 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1440 - 1800 . 2007 . 00364 . x [ 70 ] Sabine Reh , Kerstin Rabenstein , and Bettina Fritzsche . 2011 . Learning spaces without boundaries ? Territories , power and how schools regulate learning . Social & Cultural Geography 12 , 01 ( 2011 ) , 83 – 98 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14649365 . 2011 . 542482 [ 71 ] Martin S Remland , Tricia S Jones , and Heidi Brinkman . 1995 . Interpersonal distance , body orientation , and touch : Effects of culture , gender , and age . The Journal of social psychology 135 , 3 ( 1995 ) , 281 – 297 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00224545 . 1995 . 9713958 [ 72 ] Fabián Riquelme , Rene Noel , Hector Cornide - Reyes , Gustavo Geldes , Cristian Cechinel , Diego Miranda , Rodolfo Villarroel , and Roberto Munoz . 2020 . Where are you ? Exploring micro - location in indoor learning environments . IEEE Access 8 ( 2020 ) , 125776 – 125785 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ACCESS . 2020 . 3008327 [ 73 ] Gary N Rubin . 1972 . A naturalistic study in proxemics : seating arrangement and its effect on interaction , performance , and behavior . Ph . D . Dissertation . Bowling Green State University . [ 74 ] Daniel M . Russell , Mark J . Stefik , Peter Pirolli , and Stuart K . Card . 1993 . The Cost Structure of Sensemaking . In Proceedings of the INTERACT ’93 and CHI ’93 Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Amsterdam , The Netherlands ) ( CHI ’93 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 269 – 276 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 169059 . 169209 [ 75 ] TomRussell . 2003 . Criticalattributesofareflectiveteacher : Isagreementpossible ? In Conceptualising reflection in teacher development . Routledge , 150 – 159 . [ 76 ] Nazmus Saquib , Ayesha Bose , Dwyane George , and Sepandar Kamvar . 2018 . Sensei : sensing educational interaction . Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive , Mobile , Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 1 , 4 ( 2018 ) , 1 – 27 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3161172 [ 77 ] DonaldASchon . 1983 . Thereflectivepractitioner : howprofessionalsthinkinaction . Ashgate , Aldershot , England . [ 78 ] Michael Sedlmair , Miriah Meyer , and Tamara Munzner . 2012 . Design study methodology : Reflections from the trenches and the stacks . IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics 18 , 12 ( 2012 ) , 2431 – 2440 . [ 79 ] Charlott Sellberg , Oskar Lindwall , and Hans Rystedt . 2021 . The demonstration of reflection - in - action in maritime training . Reflective Practice 22 , 3 ( 2021 ) , 319 – 330 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14623943 . 2021 . 1879771 [ 80 ] Neil Selwyn and Dragan Gašević . 2020 . The datafication of higher education : discussing the promises and problems . Teaching in Higher Education 25 , 4 ( 2020 ) , 527 – 540 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 13562517 . 2019 . 1689388 [ 81 ] Francesco Setti , Chris Russell , Chiara Bassetti , and Marco Cristani . 2015 . F - formationdetection : Individuatingfree - standingconversationalgroupsinimages . PloS one 10 , 5 ( 2015 ) , e0123783 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0123783 [ 82 ] Francesco Setti , Chris Russell , Chiara Bassetti , and Marco Cristani . 2015 . F - Formation Detection : Individuating Free - Standing Conversational Groups in Images . PLOS ONE 10 , 5 ( may 2015 ) , e0123783 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0123783 [ 83 ] Ben Rydal Shapiro and Brette Garner . 2021 . Classroom interaction geography : vi - sualizingspace & timeinclassroominteraction . JournalofResearchonTechnology in Education ( 2021 ) , 1 – 15 . [ 84 ] RichardEShores , PhilipLGunter , andSusanLJack . 1993 . Classroommanagement strategies : Are they setting events for coercion ? Behavioral disorders 18 , 2 ( 1993 ) , 92 – 102 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 019874299301800207 [ 85 ] Sharon Slade and Paul Prinsloo . 2013 . Learning analytics : Ethical issues and dilemmas . American Behavioral Scientist 57 , 10 ( 2013 ) , 1510 – 1529 . [ 86 ] Agnieszka Sorokowska , Piotr Sorokowski , Peter Hilpert , Katarzyna Cantarero , Tomasz Frackowiak , Khodabakhsh Ahmadi , Ahmad M Alghraibeh , Richmond Aryeetey , Anna Bertoni , Karim Bettache , et al . 2017 . Preferred interpersonal distances : a global comparison . Journal of Cross - Cultural Psychology 48 , 4 ( 2017 ) , 577 – 592 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0022022117698039 [ 87 ] Sharon Thompson . 2012 . The applications of proxemics and territoriality in de - signing efficient layouts for interior design studios and a prototype design studio . Ph . D . Dissertation . California State University , Northridge . [ 88 ] Christian Tominski , Heidrun Schumann , Gennady Andrienko , and Natalia An - drienko . 2012 . Stacking - based visualization of trajectory attribute data . IEEE Transactions on visualization and Computer Graphics 18 , 12 ( 2012 ) , 2565 – 2574 . [ 89 ] Tom Van Haute , Eli De Poorter , Pieter Crombez , Filip Lemic , Vlado Handziski , Niklas Wirström , Adam Wolisz , Thiemo Voigt , and Ingrid Moerman . 2016 . Per - formance analysis of multiple Indoor Positioning Systems in a healthcare envi - ronment . International journal of health geographics 15 , 1 ( 2016 ) , 1 – 15 . [ 90 ] Robbe Vleugels , Ben Van Herbruggen , Jaron Fontaine , and Eli De Poorter . 2021 . Ultra - Wideband Indoor Positioning and IMU - Based Activity Recognition for Ice Hockey Analytics . Sensors 21 , 14 ( 2021 ) , 4650 . [ 91 ] EijiWatanabe , TakashiOzeki , andTakeshiKohama . 2018 . Analysisofinteractions between lecturers and students . In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Learning Analytics and Knowledge . 370 – 374 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3170358 . 3170360 [ 92 ] Karl E Weick . 1995 . Sensemaking in organizations . Vol . 3 . Sage . [ 93 ] AviYaeli , PeterBak , GuyFeigenblat , SimaNadler , HaggaiRoitman , GiladSaadoun , Harold J Ship , Doron Cohen , Omri Fuchs , Shila Ofek - Koifman , et al . 2014 . Un - derstanding customer behavior using indoor location analysis and visualization . IBM Journal of Research and Development 58 , 5 / 6 ( 2014 ) , 3 – 1 . [ 94 ] Lixiang Yan , Roberto Martinez - Maldonado , Beatriz Gallo Cordoba , Joanne Dep - peler , Deborah Corrigan , Gloria Fernandez Nieto , and Dragan Gasevic . 2021 . Footprintsat School : Modelling In - classSocialDynamics fromStudents’Physical PositioningTraces . In LAK21 : 11thInternationalLearningAnalyticsandKnowledge Conference . 43 – 54 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3448139 . 3448144 [ 95 ] Lixiang Yan , Linxuan Zhao , Dragan Gasevic , and Roberto Martinez - Maldonado . 2022 . Scalability , Sustainability , and Ethicality of Multimodal Learning Analytics . In Proceedings of the international conference on learning analytics and knowledge . in press . [ 96 ] Pippa Yeoman and Stephanie Wilson . 2019 . Designing for situated learning : Understanding the relations between material properties , designed form and emergent learning activity . British Journal of Educational Technology 50 , 5 ( 2019 ) , 2090 – 2108 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / bjet . 12856 [ 97 ] Zhan Zhang and Aleksandra Sarcevic . 2015 . Constructing Awareness Through Speech , Gesture , Gaze and Movement During a Time - Critical Medical Task . In ECSCW 2015 : Proceedings of the 14th European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 19 - 23 September 2015 , Oslo , Norway . Springer International Publishing , Cham , 163 – 182 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 20499 - 4 _ 9