Non - equilibration of hydrostatic pressure in blebbing cells Guillaume T . Charras 1 , Justin C . Yarrow 1 , Mike A . Horton 2 , L . Mahadevan 1 , 3 , 4 & T . J . Mitchison 1 Current models for protrusive motility in animal cells focus on cytoskeleton - based mechanisms , where localized protrusion is driven by local regulation of actin biochemistry 1 – 3 . In plants and fungi , protrusion is driven primarily by hydrostatic pressure 4 – 6 . For hydrostatic pressure to drive localized protrusion in animal cells 7 , 8 , it would have to be locally regulated , but current models treating cytoplasm as an incompressible viscoelastic continuum 9 or viscous liquid 10 require that hydrostatic pressure equilibrates essentially instantaneously over the whole cell . Here , we use cell blebs as reporters of local pressure in the cytoplasm . When we locally perfuse blebbing cells with cortex - relaxing drugs to dis - sipate pressure on one side , blebbing continues on the untreated side , implying non - equilibration of pressure on scales of approxi - mately 10 m m and 10 s . We can account for localization of pressure by considering the cytoplasm as a contractile , elastic network inﬁltrated by cytosol . Motion of the ﬂuid relative to the network generates spatially heterogeneous transients in the pressure ﬁeld , and can be described in the framework of poroelasticity 11 , 12 . Blebs are large , approximately spherical deformations of the cell surface that form and disappear on a timescale of tens of seconds . Although less studied than lamellipodial or ﬁlopodial protrusion , blebbing is a common phenomenon during apoptosis 13 , cytokin - esis 14 , 15 and cell movement 16 , 17 . Blebs are thought to be initiated by rupture of the plasma membrane from the underlying cytoskeleton ( Supplementary Fig . 3 ) , followed by inﬂation of the detached membrane by intracellular ﬂuid ﬂow 18 , 19 . Subsequent bleb retraction is driven by assembly and contraction of a cortex within the newly formed bleb . Blebbing requires non - uniform behaviour of the membrane and cortex that must reﬂect either a globally uniform hydrostatic pressure combined with local nucleation of membrane detachment from the cytoskeleton , or non - uniform pressure leading to local rupture of membrane – cytoskeleton attachments in regions of high pressure . To distinguish these possibilities , we studied the effect of local disruption of cortical contraction or integrity induced by drug perfusion over part of a cell , in a ﬁlamin - depleted melanoma cell line ( M2 ) that blebs extensively and continuously 20 . We ﬁrst conﬁrmed that the cell volume stays approximately constant during blebbing ( Supplementary Data , Supplementary Video 12 and Supplementary Fig . 4 ) 18 , implying that blebbing is driven primarily by ﬂow of ﬂuid within the cell rather than water crossing the plasma membrane . We then conﬁrmed that bleb inﬂation represents ballooning out of the plasma membrane when it detaches from the actin cortex by simultaneously imaging the cortex and the cell membrane ( Supplementary Fig . 3 ) . During bleb inﬂation , green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) - tagged actin was not enriched at the bleb surface compared to its interior , implying lack of a cytoskeleton in the bleb ( Fig . 1a , t ¼ 0 and 22 s ) . As inﬂation slowed , a cortical cytoskeleton assembled underneath the bleb membrane , evidenced by a rim of actin ﬂuorescence ( Fig . 1a , t ¼ 62 s ) ; simultaneously , the cortex at the base of the bleb dis - assembled ( Supplementary Fig . 3 ) . As the bleb retracted , its actin rim became more pronounced , and often wavy or buckled , suggesting that the cortexcontracts as the bleb shrinks ( Fig . 1a , t ¼ 72s ) 19 . GFP – myosin II regulatory light chain ( MRLC ) was recruited to the newly forming cortex of the bleb simultaneous with actin ( Fig . 1b ; see also Supplementary Video 10 ) 13 , 21 , consistent with myosin II driving contraction . Increasing extracellular osmolarity made blebs smaller , whereas decreasing it made them larger 22 ( Fig . 1 ; see also Supplemen - tary Video 1 ) . Increasing membrane rigidity by crosslinking the glycocalix polysaccharides with wheat germ agglutinin ( WGA ) 23 inhibits blebbing ( Supplementary Video 2 ) . These observations , together with drug studies discussed below , support the following qualitative model for bleb dynamics 19 . Cortical acto - myosin con - tracts ( Supplementary Videos 10 and 11 ) , generating hydrostatic pressure that causes a patch of plasma membrane to tear free from its attachment to the cortical cytoskeleton . This patch of cytoskeleton - free membrane rapidly inﬂates as cytosol ﬂows in , with its base enlarging by further tearing ( Supplementary Fig . 3 ) . Later , inﬂation slows and a mesh of actin and myosin II assembles in the bleb to form a contractile cortex attached to the plasma membrane ( Fig . 1b ) . Finally , contraction of this cortical mesh causes the bleb to shrink , driving the extruded cytosol back into the cell body . To ﬁnd inhibitory small molecules , we screened a library of known biologically active compounds for rapid inhibition of blebbing . After characterizing their effects in bath treatment , selected drugs and osmolytes were applied locally to cells by injecting medium contain - ing inhibitor via a micropipette into a laminar ﬂuid ﬂow 24 , 25 . The treated region was visualized by adding a ﬂuorescent tracer to the pipette medium , whereas blebbing was observed using differential interference contrast ( DIC ) microscopy . During local perfusion , we typically bathed 20 – 33 % of the cell area . We conﬁrmed local application by visualizing local deposition of a ﬂuorescent lectin ( WGA – Alexa 488 ; Fig . 2a , t ¼ 430 s ) . For each drug , local perfusion experiments were repeated until one of the following behaviours was observed reproducibly ( N $ 5 ) : ( 1 ) local perfusion of drug inhibited blebbing locally ; ( 2 ) local perfusion had both a local and global effect on blebbing ; ( 3 ) local perfusion did not inhibit blebbing but whole - cell treatment did . The effect of local perfusion could be classiﬁed into three cat - egories . The ﬁrst is treatments that locally inhibited blebbing but allowed the untreated part of the cell to bleb normally ( Fig . 2 ; see also Supplementary Table 1 and Supplementary Videos 3 – 6 ) . As expected , agents that increased membrane rigidity ( WGA ) or osmo - tic pressure ( sucrose ) had this effect ( Fig . 2a , b ) . These agents locally increase the physical forces that oppose blebbing . Notably , drugs that block generation of contractile force also had local inhibitory effects , including inhibitors of myosin II ( blebbistatin 21 ) and ROCK1 ( Y - 27632 and 3 - ( 4 - pyridyl ) indole 26 ) , a kinase that activates LETTERS 1 Department of Systems Biology , Harvard Medical School , Boston , Massachusetts 02115 , USA . 2 London Centre for Nanotechnology , University College London , London WC1E 6JF , UK . 3 Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences , and 4 Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology , Harvard University , Cambridge , Massachusetts 02138 , USA . Vol 435 | 19 May 2005 | doi : 10 . 1038 / nature03550 365 © 2005 Nature Publishing Group myosin II ( Fig . 2c , d ) . The second category is treatments that caused a combination of local and global effects , as seen with the F - actin - disrupting agents cytochalasin D and latrunculin B ( Fig . 3a ; see also Supplementary Video 7 ) . Within seconds of local drug application , there was a global increase in bleb size ( Fig . 3a , t ¼ 75 s ) . Then , blebbing ceased in the treated area and existing blebs were not retracted , whereas blebbing continued in the untreated area at a slower rate than before drug application ( Fig . 3a , t ¼ 315 s ) . The third category is treatments that only had an effect when the whole cell was treated . Inhibitors of several other protein kinases had this effect ( Fig . 3b , c ; see also Supplementary Videos 8 and 9 ) . For local perfusion to perturb the cytoplasm locally , membrane crossing must be fast compared with intracellular diffusion of the drug or drug – target complex 27 . Thus , failure to see a local effect of a drug cannot be interpreted in terms of local versus global action of its target . The local effects of myosin - II - inhibiting drugs ( Fig . 2c , d ) show that the acto - myosin cortex acts locally to promote blebbing . This could be because contraction locally nucleates blebs , while hydro - static pressure is uniform , or because pressure generated by contrac - tion only acts locally to extrude blebs , implying that it does not globally equilibrate . Local inhibition of blebbing by actin - depolymerizing drugs ( Fig . 3a ) favours the latter hypothesis . If pressure equilibrated across the cell , the drug - treated side , where the cortex is softer , should swell preferentially , inhibiting blebbing on the untreated side . Because this does not happen , we conclude that hydrostatic pressure does not equilibrate across single M2 cells on time - and length - scales relevant to motility . Current models of the cytoplasm 9 , 10 cannot account for spatio - temporally localized variations in hydrostatic pressure . We therefore propose a new description of the cytoplasm based on poro - elasticity 11 , 12 . We consider the cytoplasm to be composed of a porous , activelycontractile , elastic network ( cytoskeletal ﬁlaments , organelles and ribosomes ) , inﬁltrated with an interstitial ﬂuid ( that is , the cytosol , comprising water , ions and soluble proteins ) , similar to a ﬂuid - ﬁlled sponge . Contraction of the acto - myosin cortex creates a compressive stress on the cytoskeletal network , leading to a spatially localized increase in hydrostatic pressure ( Fig . 4a ) . In response , the cytosol ﬂows out of the network , and if it ﬁnds a region where the membrane is weakly attached to the cortex ; the resulting pressure can lead to membrane detachment and bleb inﬂation ( Fig . 4b ; see also Supplementary Fig . 3 ) . With a poroelastic description of the cyto - plasm , hydrostatic pressure does not instantaneously propagate through the network . Instead , it diffuses over a length x < ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ Dt p during a time t , with the diffusion constant D ¼ kK f determined by an appropriately deﬁned elastic bulk modulus K , the hydraulic per - meability of the network k , and the local volume fraction of ﬂuid f ( see Supplementary Information ) . The diffusion constant D dictates the time needed for the effect of a local contractile force to be felt in Figure 1 | Localization of GFP – actin and GFP – MRLC in blebs shows that expansion is a passive process and retraction an active process necessitating actin and MRLC . All images were acquired by confocal microscopy . Scale bar , 5 m m . a , GFP – actin - transfected cell . During bleb expansion , the bleb rim does not appear to be enriched in GFP – actin compared to the bleb interior ( t ¼ 0s and t ¼ 22s ) . Once expansion has halted , an actin - rich rim forms at the bleb surface ( t ¼ 62s , arrowhead ) and retraction begins . As retraction proceeds , the actin rim becomes wavy , suggesting that the cortex contracts as the bleb shrinks ( t ¼ 72s ) . b , GFP – MRLC - transfected cell . Just after expansion has stopped , the bleb surface does not appear to be enriched in GFP – MRLC ( t ¼ 0s ) . MRLC then accumulates in discrete foci ( t ¼ 34s ) and retraction starts ( t ¼ 69s ) . As retraction ends , MRLC forms a continuum along the bleb rim ( t ¼ 92s ) . c , Kymograph of the expansion and retraction of the bleb in b ( dashed line ) . As the bleb expands , there is no accumulation of MRLC at the bleb apex . As retraction proceeds , MRLC accumulates at the bleb . Bleb extension ( r ) is on the y axis . d , Graph of the bleb extension and bleb velocity as a function of time for the bleb shown in c . The maximal bleb extension is approximately 3 . 5 m m ( maximal speed of expansion about 0 . 35 m ms 2 1 , speed of retraction about 0 . 1 m ms 2 1 ) . LETTERS NATURE | Vol 435 | 19 May 2005 366 © 2005 Nature Publishing Group other parts of the cell . Using a typical timescale for bleb inﬂation of t < 10 s and realistic values for the various parameters ( Supplemen - tary Information ) , we ﬁnd x < 15 – 30 m m . Hence , hydrostatic press - ure can be strongly non - equilibrated in cells on a timescale of approximately 10 s and a length scale of about 10 m m—scales that are relevant to a variety of motile behaviours . Bleb formation reduces this length scale by allowing the ﬂuid to ﬂow , with less resistance , into the blebs instead of through the network . Local inhibition of blebbing is possible because opposite sides of the cells are effectively isolated from each other with respect to equilibration of pressure on a timescale of seconds . Our poroelastic model could have important implications for other types of cell motility , because it implies that hydrostatic pressure can be generated and used locally to power shape change in animal cells . Leading - edge protrusion is typically coupled to actin polymerization 1 – 3 , but hydrodynamic force could work together with polymerization force to power protrusion 7 , 8 , and ﬂuid ﬂow could drive actin subunits forwards at a faster rate than that predicted by pure diffusion 28 . Localized hydrostatic pressure transients could be generated locally near the front of polarized cells by local recruitment and activation of myosin II as in blebbing , or of plasma membrane ion transporters ( such as NHE1 ( ref . 29 ) ) that can trigger swelling through inﬂux of an osmolyte ( such as Na þ ) . Overall , our work shows that cytosolic ﬂuid dynamics must be integrated with protein dynamics if we are to really understand cell motility . METHODS Local perfusion . Local perfusion was performed by injecting medium with the desired concentration of drug into a laminar ﬂuid ﬂow via a glass micropipette with a 1 – 2 - m m diameter . Thin - walled borosilicate micropipettes ( 0 . 9 - mm inner diameter ) were pulled on a Sutter P87 pipette puller ( Sutter instrument company ) . Coverslips on which cells had been cultured were afﬁxed onto the bottom of the laminar ﬂuid ﬂow chamber ( blueprint available upon request ) with a 1 : 1 : 1 mix of vaseline , lanolin and parafﬁn . Laminar ﬂow was created by feeding medium into the ﬂow chamber at a constant rate of 30mlh 2 1 with a syringe pump . A constant ﬂuid level was maintained by aspirating the super - natant via a vacuum pump . The ﬂow chamber consisted of a reservoir with a small opening ( 0 . 7mm ) that enables medium to enter the open part of the chamber and delivers a ﬂow of approximately 30 m ms 2 1 in the vicinity of this entrance . For the ﬂow to be sufﬁciently rapid to carry drug away , the target cells needed to be chosen within 200 m m of the reservoir opening . All experiments were performed at room temperature in Leibovitz - L15 medium with 10 % 80 : 20 mix of donor calf serum : fetal calf serum . The microinjected solution was made up of medium with the desired concentration of drug and 0 . 1 m M of tetra - methylrhodamine - isothiocyanate ( TRITC , used as a ﬂuorescent tracer ) and ﬁltered using a centrivac tube ( Millipore ) . The micropipettes were backﬁlled with the solution and mounted onto a pipette holder attached to a three - axis oil hydraulic micromanipulator ( Narishige ) . Apressureregulator ( Eppendorf5242 , Eppendorf AG ) set between 40 and 80hPa was used to control ﬂow from the micropipette . Time - lapse video microscopy of the local perfusion experiments was performed as described in Supplementary Methods , except that in addition to DIC images , ﬂuorescence images were also acquired ( TRITC ﬁlters to visualize ﬂow lines and ﬂuorescein - isothiocyanate ( FITC ) ﬁlters to visualize WGA – Alexa Figure 2 | Local perfusion can locally inhibit blebbing . In all cases , before application of treatment the cells blebbed profusely around their periphery . Within 2 – 3min of application , blebbing ceases in the area of application but continues undisturbed in the rest of the cell . In some cases , when the local perfusion was halted ( t off ¼ 350s in all cases ) , cells recovered and blebbed normally . a , Local perfusion of WGA – Alexa 488 . WGA – Alexa 488 was only incorporated in the region of the cell that was exposed to ﬂow from the micropipette . b , Local perfusion of 300mM sucrose solution . Vacuoles form in the vicinity of the perfused region . c , Local inhibition of myosin II ATPase by local perfusion of blebbistatin . d , Local inhibition of ROCKI by 3 - ( 4 - pyridyl ) indole . Black lines delineate the ﬂow out of the micropipette . On each image , timing relative to local application of treatment is given . The normalized blebbing indices ( right ) show the evolution over time of blebbing in the region exposed to inhibitor and in the free region . Error bars show the standard deviation . Asterisks denote signiﬁcant changes in the blebbing index when compared with the initial blebbing index . Scale bars , 10 m m . Vol 435 | 19 May 2005 | NATURE LETTERS 367 © 2005 Nature Publishing Group Figure 3 | Compounds with dual or global effects on blebbing . a , Local perfusion with latrunculin B has a dual effect . When latrunculin B is applied locally , bleb size increases globally ( t ¼ 75s ) , and bleb dynamics cease in the treated area ( t ¼ 75s and t ¼ 315s ) . Elsewhere , expansion and retraction continue . b , Global perfusion of staurosporine is necessary to inhibit blebbing . Before perfusion ( t ¼ 2 175s ) and after 395s of local perfusion with staurosporine , blebbing is unperturbed throughout the cell . When staurosporine is applied to the whole cell ( white text , t ¼ 445s ) , blebbing ceases . c , Global perfusion of HA - 1077 is necessary to inhibit blebbing . After 340s of local HA - 1077 application , blebbing is unperturbed . When the whole cell is exposed to inhibitor ( t ¼ 230s , white text ) , blebbing ceases . When perfusion is halted , blebbing is restored ( t ¼ 535s , white text ) . Black lines delineate the ﬂow coming out of the micropipette . Black text gives time relative to local application ; white text gives time relative to global application . The normalized blebbing indices show the evolution over time of blebbing in the region exposed to inhibitor and in the free region . Error bars show the standard deviation . Asterisks denote signiﬁcant changes in the blebbing index when compared with the initial blebbing index . Scale bars , 10 m m . Figure 4 | Poroelastic description of blebbing . In all drawings , the actin cortex is drawn in red , the membrane is mauve and the cytoskeletal meshwork is green . a , In blebbing cells , a local contraction of myosin II ( black arrows ) associated with the actin cortex leads to a shortening of the corticalperipheryandthereforetoacompressionofthecytoskeletalnetworkthatﬁllsthecell . The cytoskeletal network is porous and has an average pore size y . The compression of the cytoskeletal meshwork creates a hydrostatic pressure in the vicinity of the region of contraction and can lead to bleb nucleation and expansion . b , Contraction of the actin cortex leads to a compression of the cytoskeletal network ( the dashed mauve line indicates the original position of the cell surface ) and drives ﬂow of cytosol in the opposite direction ( blue arrows ) . If there is a local defect in membrane – cytoskeleton attachment , a bleb is extruded . Bleb expansion is opposed by two forces : extracellular osmotic pressure and membrane tension . LETTERS NATURE | Vol 435 | 19 May 2005 368 © 2005 Nature Publishing Group 488 ) . Exposure times were approximately 200ms for DIC images , 600ms for TRITC images and about 250ms for FITC images . Images were acquired every 5swith a £ 20objective usingMetamorph ( Universal ImagingCorp . ) . Duringa typical local perfusion experiment , about 30 images ( approximately 150s ) were acquired before drug exposure . Then , the cell was exposed to drug for about 70 images ( approximately350s ) , ﬁnallythecellwasallowedtorecoverfor20frames ( about100s ) . Whennolocalinhibitionwasobserved , awhole - celltreatmentwas performed . This time , the cell was observed for 30 frames to ensure that it still blebbed , the whole cell was exposed to drug for 70 frames , and recovered for 20 frames . Initial concentrations of drug in the microinjected ﬂuid were chosen to be two to three times those needed in bulk solution 25 . When no inhibition was observedwhen the wholecellwas exposed to drug , the drug concentrationin the micropipette was increased . When whole - cell inhibition was observed with only local perfusion , the drug concentration was decreased . Post - hoc ﬂow lines were superimposed onto the DIC images using Meta - morph . The ﬂuorescence images were assigned a threshold and intensities of 25 % of the maximum intensity were converted to a binary image that was inverted and superimposed onto the DIC image using an AND operator . Analysis and quantiﬁcation of local perfusion assays . Each cell was divided into two regions : the treated region where local perfusion was applied , and the control untreated region . Each experiment was divided into different periods : ( 1 ) before the application of drug ; ( 2 ) during local application of drug ; ( 3 ) after application of drug ; and , if need be , ( 4 ) during whole - cell treatment . The numberof blebs occurring in each region foreach period was counted manually . A blebbing index was computed for each region as follows : B ¼ N blebs Lt , where N blebs is the number of blebs observed during a given period t over a given perimeter L . These blebbing indices were used to compare the treated region to the untreated region before application of inhibitor , and the blebbing in either region during and after application of inhibitor to the blebbing in that region before application . Populations were compared with a Student’s t - test and the level of signiﬁcance was taken to be P , 0 . 01 . For graphic output ( Figs 2 and 3 ) , the evolution of the blebbing indices was normalized to their values before application of local perfusion . In all cases , the blebbing index in the treated and untreated region was not signiﬁcantly different before application of inhibitor ( P . 0 . 3 ) . Received 19 January ; accepted 15 March 2005 . 1 . Mahadevan , L . & Matsudaira , P . Motility powered by supramolecular springs and ratchets . Science 288 , 95 – - 100 ( 2000 ) . 2 . Rafelski , S . M . & Theriot , J . A . Crawling toward a uniﬁed model of cell mobility : spatial and temporal regulation of actin dynamics . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 73 , 209 – - 239 ( 2004 ) . 3 . Mogilner , A . & Oster , G . Polymer motors : pushing out the front and pulling up the back . Curr . Biol . 13 , R721 – - R733 ( 2003 ) . 4 . Messerli , M . A . & Robinson , K . R . Ionic and osmotic disruptions of the lily pollen tube oscillator : testing proposed models . Planta 217 , 147 – - 157 ( 2003 ) . 5 . Money , N . P . & Harold , F . M . Extension growth of the water mold Achlya : interplay of turgor and wall strength . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 89 , 4245 – - 4249 ( 1992 ) . 6 . Harold , F . M . Force and compliance : rethinking morphogenesis in walled cells . Fungal Genet . Biol . 37 , 271 – - 282 ( 2002 ) . 7 . Tilney , L . G . & Inoue , S . Acrosomal reaction of the Thyone sperm . III . The relationship between actin assembly and water inﬂux during the extension of the acrosomal process . J . Cell Biol . 100 , 1273 – - 1283 ( 1985 ) . 8 . Condeelis , J . Life at the leading edge : the formation of cell protrusions . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 9 , 411 – - 444 ( 1993 ) . 9 . Boal , D . H . Mechanics of the Cell ( Cambridge Univ . Press , Cambridge , UK , 2002 ) . 10 . Drury , J . L . & Dembo , M . Hydrodynamics of micropipette aspiration . Biophys . J . 76 , 110 – - 128 ( 1999 ) . 11 . Biot , M . General theory of three - dimensional consolidation . J . Appl . Phys . 12 , 155 – - 164 ( 1941 ) . 12 . Wang , H . Theory of Linear Poroelasticity with Applications to Geomechanics and Hydrogeology ( Princeton Univ . Press , Princeton , New Jersey , 2000 ) . 13 . Mills , J . C . , Stone , N . L . , Erhardt , J . & Pittman , R . N . Apoptotic membrane blebbing is regulated by myosin light chain phosphorylation . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 627 – - 636 ( 1998 ) . 14 . Fishkind , D . J . , Cao , L . G . & Wang , Y . L . Microinjection of the catalytic fragment of myosin light chain kinase into dividing cells : effects on mitosis and cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 114 , 967 – - 975 ( 1991 ) . 15 . Burton , K . & Taylor , D . L . Traction forces of cytokinesis measured with optically modiﬁed elastic substrata . Nature 385 , 450 – - 454 ( 1997 ) . 16 . Trinkaus , J . P . Surface activity and locomotion of Fundulus deep cells during blastula and gastrula stages . Dev . Biol . 30 , 69 – - 103 ( 1973 ) . 17 . Friedl , P . & Wolf , K . Tumour - cell invasion and migration : diversity and escape mechanisms . Nature Rev . Cancer 3 , 362 – - 374 ( 2003 ) . 18 . Albrecht - Buehler , G . Does blebbing reveal the convulsive ﬂow of liquid and solutes through the cytoplasmic meshwork ? Cold Spring Harb . Symp . Quant . Biol . 46 , 45 – - 49 ( 1982 ) . 19 . Cunningham , C . C . Actin polymerization and intracellular solvent ﬂow in cell surface blebbing . J . Cell Biol . 129 , 1589 – - 1599 ( 1995 ) . 20 . Cunningham , C . C . et al . Actin - binding protein requirement for cortical stability and efﬁcient locomotion . Science 255 , 325 – - 327 ( 1992 ) . 21 . Cheung , A . et al . A small - molecule inhibitor of skeletal muscle myosin II . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 83 – - 88 ( 2002 ) . 22 . Dai , J . & Sheetz , M . P . Membrane tether formation from blebbing cells . Biophys . J . 77 , 3363 – - 3370 ( 1999 ) . 23 . Evans , E . & Leung , A . Adhesivity and rigidity of erythrocyte membrane in relation to wheat germ agglutinin binding . J . Cell Biol . 98 , 1201 – - 1208 ( 1984 ) . 24 . Popov , S . , Brown , A . & Poo , M . M . Forward plasma membrane ﬂow in growing nerve processes . Science 259 , 244 – - 246 ( 1993 ) . 25 . O’Connell , C . B . , Warner , A . K . & Wang , Y . Distinct roles of the equatorial and polar cortices in the cleavage of adherent cells . Curr . Biol . 11 , 702 – - 707 ( 2001 ) . 26 . Yarrow , J . C . , Totsukawa , G . , Charras , G . T . & Mitchison , T . J . Screening for cell migration inhibitors via automated microscopy reveals a rho - kinase inhibitor . Chem . Biol . 12 , 385 – - 395 ( 2005 ) . 27 . Takayama , S . et al . Selective chemical treatment of cellular microdomains using multiple laminar streams . Chem . Biol . 10 , 123 – - 130 ( 2003 ) . 28 . Zicha , D . et al . Rapid actin transport during cell protrusion . Science 300 , 142 – - 145 ( 2003 ) . 29 . Baumgartner , M . , Patel , H . & Barber , D . L . Na ( þ ) / H ( þ ) exchanger NHE1 as plasma membrane scaffold in the assembly of signaling complexes . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 287 , C844 – - C850 ( 2004 ) . Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at www . nature . com / nature . Acknowledgements The authors would like to acknowledge the Nikon Imaging Centre at Harvard Medical School and , in particular , J . Waters . The authors would also like to acknowledge J . Horn at the HMS machine shop for manufacturing the perfusion chamber . G . T . C . was in receipt of a Wellcome Trust Overseas Fellowship . M . A . H . is supported by a Programme Grant from the Wellcome Trust . L . M . was supported by NSF - MRSEC at Harvard University . This work was supported by a grant from the NIH to T . J . M . Author Information Reprints and permissions information is available at npg . nature . com / reprintsandpermissions . The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interests . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to G . T . C . ( gcharras @ hms . harvard . edu ) . Vol 435 | 19 May 2005 | NATURE LETTERS 369 © 2005 Nature Publishing Group Material and Methods Supplementary Theory Here , we give a simple theoretical interpretation of the experimental observations . On length - scales large compared to the pore size ( Figure 4A ) , we can treat the cytoplasm as a fluid - solid composite medium with an important difference from traditional continuum models : there can be relative motion between the network and the fluid . However , since the Reynolds number of the flow is negligible and the deformations of the network are very slow , we ignore inertial effects . Here we treat this limit at the level of scaling laws in a one - dimensional geometry for conceptual simplicity , leaving a more complete description to the future ( for a brief description of the derivation of the theory and some implications in confined geometries , see Skotheim and Mahadevan 1 ) . Stress balance in a one - dimensional slice of the network yields (cid:0) ! x " + f = 0 where (cid:0) ! = K " x u # $ p is the one - dimensional stress in a composite linear elastic network bathed in a viscous fluid with K the drained bulk modulus of the network , p the fluid pressure , and f the body force due to the contractile motors in the gel . Here , the pressure is the dominant contribution from the fluid stress due to the large disparity between pore size and system size ( the cell ) . Assuming incompressibility of the constituent fluid and the material of the network , continuity demands that the average velocity of the fluid relative to the solid network (cid:0) ! v = " ( 1 " ! ) # t u , where u is the displacement of the network , and ϕ is the local fluid volume fraction . Darcy’s law applied to a poroelastic continuum yields a relation between the macroscopic pressure gradient (cid:0) ! x p and the relative fluid velocity (cid:0) ! ( v " # t u ) = " k # x p , with k the hydraulic permeability of the cytoskeleton . Using the equation of continuity in Darcy’s law and substituting the result into the stress balance yields a diffusion equation for the displacement ( and hence the stress ) in the network : (cid:0) D ! xx u + kf = ! t u , with the diffusion constant (cid:0) D = kK ! determined by the elastic and hydraulic properties of the network . Ignoring the detailed solution of the resulting initial boundary value problem for now , here we focus on the scaling aspects of the solution . We see that following an impulsive contractile stress due to the motors , say , the stress does not instantaneously propagate through the cytoskeleton , but instead diffuses through it over a length Dt x ! during a time t . For a fluid - saturated porous medium with a small fluid volume fraction , the hydraulic permeability is (cid:0) k ! " 2 µ # 1 / 3 where (cid:0) ! is the pore size , and (cid:0) µ the viscosity of the cytosol . Using an experimentally measured elastic modulus K ~ 2 kPa ( Supplemental data ) , a cytosolic viscosity (cid:0) µ ~ 5 . 10 - 2 Pa . s based on the diffusion of molecules up to 100Å ( in particular G - actin , which diffuses into blebs to recreate the actin cortex ) 1 - 3 , a pore size (cid:0) ! ~ 10 - 20 nm derived from examination of electron micrographs of the cell line and size - exclusion experiments 4 - 6 , a fluid fraction (cid:0) ! ~ 0 . 2 7 , and a typical time - scale for bleb extrusion of t ~ 10s , we find x ~ 15 - 30 (cid:0) µ m . Hence , hydrostatic pressure can be strongly non - equilibrated in cells on a time - scale of ~ 10s and a length - scale of ~ 10 (cid:0) µ m : scales that are relevant to a variety of motile behaviors . Experimental determination of the pore size ξ will be essential as it is a key parameter in setting the diffusion length , since it is a crucial determinant of both the hydraulic permeability and the elasticity of the network . Bleb formation reduces this length - scale by allowing the fluid to flow , with less resistance , into the blebs instead of through the network . Local inhibition of blebbing is possible because the compressive stress applied by local contraction of the actino - myosin cortex is dissipated over a length - scale of a few microns . When the cells are locally treated with actin depolymerising drugs , bleb sizes increase globally . Actin depolymerisation leads both to an increase in pore size and a decrease in bulk elasticity 8 , 9 , which are competing effects in the expression of D . An increase in D would mean that stresses diffuse faster and have an effect further away from their initiation . This would lead to a global increase in bleb size even though the treatment is local . It is important to note that our poroelastic description points towards a new treatment of all cytoplasmic mechanical behavior that involves rapid relative motions of its constituent fluid and solid components . Starting with this picture for stress generation , the critical area of membrane detachment from the cytoskeleton needed for a bleb to start growing can be estimated . The free energy for the detachment of a small area of membrane of diameter d from the cortex , is (cid:0) U ! Pd 2 " # Jd 2 # T " 2 where P is the given hydrostatic pressure , (cid:0) ! the membrane deflection , J the membrane - cytoskeleton adhesion energy , and (cid:0) T the membrane tension . For small deflections , the membrane unwrinkles as it detaches , and can flow in the plane to accommodate blebbing . Therefore , the membrane tension is relatively uniform as the bleb starts forming , hence constant 0 ! ! T T . In this limit , solving (cid:0) ! U ! d = ! U ! " = 0 yields the critical bleb size (cid:0) d c ~ ( T 0 J P 2 ) 1 / 2 above which a bleb will grow catastrophically in a pressure controlled situation ; however , the limited volume of fluid available prevents this . Equating this critical size to the average distance between cytoskeletal - membrane anchors yields the minimum pressure for bleb growth . With J ~ 10 - 4 J . m - 2 10 , (cid:0) T 0 ~ 10 - 2 mN . m - 1 11 , and P ~ 300 Pa ( Figure S1 ) , we get a nucleation size d c ~ 100nm . Finally , during retraction , myosin heads moving along actin filaments bring the bleb back towards the cell body forcing the cytosol back in . Assuming a constant pressure within the bleb because it only consists of cytosol , Darcy’s law implies that the cortex must exert a pressure (cid:0) ! P " vd k with v the retraction speed , d the stress diffusion length , and k the hydraulic permeability of the cytoskeleton . Applying the Laplace law , the cortical tension T c due to actino - myosin contraction is (cid:0) T c ~ ! P . R b ~ vdR b k . Assuming a homogeneous distribution of myosin motors in the hemispherical cortical shell , this implies that the force generated by the motors scales as (cid:0) F ~ T c R b . Therefore , the number of working motors is roughly (cid:0) N ~ vdR b 2 kf myo ! myo where f myo ~ 1 . 5 pN 12 , 13 is the force per myosin motor per cycle , ω myo ~ 25 Hz 14 is the myosin motor cycle frequency . With d ~ 8 µm , v ~ 0 . 1 µm . s - 1 ( Figure 1D and S2 ) , k ~ 3 . 4 10 - 15 m 4 . N - 1 . s - 1 and R b ~ 5 µ m , we get N ~ 350 myosin heads . This is a realistic number in view of the estimated number of myosins within a cell N total > 10 4 15 . Supplementary results Blebbing is an isochoric phenomenon Maintenance of cell volume during blebbing was assessed by measuring the volume of blebbing cell fragments over time . Cell fragments ( microplasts ) are capable of autonomous behaviours , and in particular blebbing 16 ( Supplementary video 12 ) . Whereas blebs represent at most 0 . 5 % of the cell volume in a blebbing cell , in microplasts they represent up to 15 % of the fragment volume . Therefore , we chose to assess volume fluctuations over time in microplasts rather than in whole cells . The amplitude of volume fluctuations of blebbing microplasts were on average 6 . 8±2 . 6 % ( N = 12 microplasts , 16 measurements , Supplementary figure S4 ) , not significantly different from the resolution of our measurement method ( p = 0 . 54 ) . In contrast , the relative volume increase expected , if blebbing were due to an increase in volume , was on average 17 . 5±11 . 2 % , which was significantly larger than the estimated measurement errors ( 7 . 65±4 . 0 % , p < 0 . 001 ) . Hence , blebbing is not accompanied by an increase in cell volume , in agreement with previous work 3 . Supplementary Methods Cell Culture Cells were cultured in MEM with Earle’s salts ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) with Penicillin Streptomycin , 0 . 01 M HEPES , and 10 % 80 : 20 mix of donor calf serum : foetal calf serum . For local perfusion assays , the cells were trypsined , plated on 40x22 mm # 1 glass coverslips and cultured overnight in an incubator . High - Throughput Screen High - throughput screening for known bioactive inhibitors of blebbing was performed as described in 17 . Briefly , cells were plated in 384 well plates at a volume of 40 µl per well and a concentration of 2 . 10 5 cells . ml - 1 and cultured in an incubator for 2h prior to screening . The effects of a library of 489 known bioactive compounds was examined ( List available at iccb . med . harvard . edu / screening / compound _ libraries / bioactives _ collection1 . htm ) . Chemical compounds ( 20 or 40 nl ) were transferred into wells of the plate using a steel pin array . The plates were then transferred to the incubator and the inhibitors were left to act for 10 min . The cells were then fixed by addition of a solution of MEM containing 2 % formaldehyde and 0 . 1 % glutaraldehyde for 15 min . The cells were washed twice in TBS and stained for 15 min with NHS - ester ( a general protein marker ) in TBS with 0 . 1 % Triton X . The cells were then washed twice and stained with the nucleic acid stain Hoechst - 33342 ( Sigma , St - Louis , MO ) for 1 min . The cells were washed in TBS one final time . Automated imaging was performed on a NikonTE300 ( Nikon corp . , Tokyo , Japan ) inverted fluorescence microscope with filter wheel ( Sutter Lamda10 - 2 , Sutter instrument company , Novato , CA ) , x - y stage ( Prior H107N300 , Prior scientific , Rockland , MA ) , and piezoelectric - motorized objective holder ( Physik Instrumente P - 723 . 10 , Physik intrumente , Karlsruhe , Germany ) . Images were captured on a CCD camera ( Hamamatsu OrcaER , Hamamatsu , Hamamatsu city , Japan ) and transferred to a PC running Metamorph software ( Universal Imaging Corporation , Downingtown , PA ) that allows coordination of software - based auto - focusing , movement between wells , imaging , and image evaluation . Images were acquired using a 10x objective with 2x2 binning . All experiments were performed in duplicate for two different concentrations ( 20 or 40 nl of compound transferred ) . The images were examined in double - blind and graded for efficacy . Compounds that inhibited blebbing were reordered from the suppliers . Bulk inhibitor treatment After the screen had been effected , the minimal concentration needed for each compound to inhibit blebbing was determined by dilution series and time - lapse DIC microscopy . During a typical experiment , ~ 30 images ( ~ 150s ) were acquired prior to drug exposure to ensure that the cells did bleb . The cells were then exposed to drug for ~ 70 images ( ~ 350s ) , and allowed to recover for 20 frames ( ~ 100s ) . Time - lapse microscopy of the experiments was performed on a NikonTE300 inverted fluorescence microscope with filter wheel . Images were acquired every 5s with a 20x objective on a CCD camera with a 2x2 binning and transferred to a PC computer running Metamorph software . Exposure times were ~ 200 ms for DIC images . All experiments were performed at 37ºC in Leibovitz - L15 medium with 10 % 80 : 20 mix of donor calf serum : foetal calf serum . Osmolarity series and data processing For treatment with sucrose to increase osmolarity , cells ( N = 8 ) were exposed to increasing concentrations of sucrose in the following order : Control , 1 , 5 , 10 , 50 , 100 , 150 , and 300 mM . For the hypotonic series , the cells ( N = 7 ) were exposed to increasingly dilute solutions in the following order : 5 , 10 , 20 , 30 , 40 , and 50 % dH 2 0 . The cells were exposed to each condition for 150s and images were taken every 5s . Bleb diameters were measured using Metamorph . For each sucrose concentration , bleb sizes were measured after the cells were given 50s to adapt to the change in osmolarity . Bleb diameters and frequency were normalised to the control diameters and frequency for each cell . The increase in osmotic pressure relative to the original solution was calculated as P osm = [ Sucrose ] . R . T with R the universal gas constant R = 8 . 314 J . mol - 1 . K - 1 , and T = 300K . For hypotonic series , the decrease in osmotic pressure was calculated as P osm = P 0 ( 1 - % H 2 O ) . Plasmids and transfection Actin localization was visualized by transfecting the cells with an adenovirus containing GFP - tagged human beta actin . For myosin localization , the cells were transfected with GFP or RFP - tagged Xenopus myosin II regulatory light chain ( MRLC ) ( a kind gift from Dr . Aaron Straight ) . The membrane was visualized by transfecting the cells with the PH domain of phospholipase - C δ tagged with GFP or RFP ( a kind gift from Dr . Tamas Balla ) . GFP - C1 ( Clontech ) was used as a cytoplasmic marker in volume fluctuation experiments . Plasmid transfections were effected using lipofectamine Plus ( Invitrogen ) . Microscopic examination of transfected cells and image processing Transfected cells were examined on a Nikon TE2000 inverted microscope equipped with a Prior scientific motorised stage interfaced to an Ultraview Perkin - Elmer spinning disk confocal microscope . Images were captured on a Hamamatsu Orca ER CCD camera and acquired on a PC using Metamorph software . Images of the cells were acquired at 2s intervals for several minutes . Microplast preparation , volume fluctuation assessment , and relative bleb volume estimation Microplasts were prepared as described previously 16 , except that they were transfected with GFP to act as a cytoplasmic marker . On the day of the experiment , the cells were then incubated with 5 µg . ml - 1 cytochalasin D for 1h at 37ºC . The cells were then broken into fragments by harsh pipetting , washed twice with medium , and left to reheal for 30 min . They were then trypsined and replated onto coverglasses for 1h prior to examination . This yielded cell fragments ranging in size from 4 - 10 µm that blebbed extensively ( Figure S4B ) . The volume of the GFP transfected microplasts was estimated by taking multiple confocal slices ( N ≥ 5 ) through the microplast at intervals of 0 . 5 to 1 µm , the area of each optical slice was estimated , and the sum of the areas was multiplied by the thickness of an optical section to obtain an estimated of the volume . To measure the area of a given slice , a histogram plot of the intensities was generated , and a gaussian was fit to the histogram . The main peak in any image represented the background pixels . Pixels whose intensity was superior to the value of the peak of the gaussian plus eight standard deviations were considered signal . The volume evolution was computed and normalised to the average volume of the first five time points . Photobleaching of GFP was apparent from the time - lapse movies due to the the small volume of the microplasts and was accounted for by fitting a straight line to the volume evolution . The volume fluctuations were taken to be the difference between the experimental volume curve and the line - fit . For each microplast , the volume of a representative bleb was estimated by measuring its radius and assuming it was a sphere . The bleb volume relative to the measured microplast volume was computed . The number of simultaneously growing blebs was determined from visual inspection of the videos . Finally , the relative volume of growing blebs was compared the largest amplitude of volume fluctuation measured . Measurement errors were estimated as follows . For the top slice or the bottom slice , the average error was taken to be ! ! " A dz dx Adz 2 2 2 4 + # with A the area , dz the depth of the confocal slice , dx the resolution in x and y . There are two contributions to the average error . The first is the underestimation of the volume because of a dz / 2 incertitude in the location of the cell boundary . This error is counted only once for the top and bottom slice yielding , on average , a ¼ factor . The second contribution is the error commited on the location of the cell boundary due to the limited resolution in x and y ( 0 . 13 µm ) , and the optical section thickness in z . To estimate this , we assumed that the cell was circular with an area A in any given optical section . For intermediate slices , only the second term contributes to the average error . Measurement errors decreased with increasing numbers of optical slices and with increasing volume . Only microplasts with expected volume increases larger than the estimated measurement error were analysed because they are the only ones for which we could hope to reliably observe a volume increase . The expected volume changes were compared to the measured volume fluctuation amplitude and error estimates . The measured volume fluctuation amplitude was compared to the error estimate . Two tailed t - tests were used for all statistical comparisons and the significance level was taken to be 0 . 01 . Network Elasticity Measurement Elasticity measurement were performed by Atomic force microscope ( AFM ) micro - indentation and analysed as described in 18 . All of the measurements were effected on cells incubated in L15 medium with 10 % 80 : 20 mix of donor calf serum : foetal calf serum and 300 mM sucrose . The hypertonic conditions for the measurements were selected to reduce the impact of cytosol on the apparent elasticity . Briefly , four force - distance curves were collected at the four apices of a 1x1 µm square on the top of the cell using a Thermomicroscopes Explorer AFM ( Veeco instruments , Woodbury , NY ) . The measurements were carried out using a soft V - shaped cantilever with a pyramidal tip ( k = 0 . 067 N . m - 1 , calibrated in air prior to experimentation , model MCL - XT - A , Veeco ) . For each curve , the cellular material properties were evaluated as described in 19 . The cell was assumed to be a homogenous half space and the AFM tip conical . The force F needed to produce an indention of depth δ in a half - plane with an elastic modulus E is 20 : 2 2 ) tan ( ) 1 ( 2 ! " # $ % = E F conical With α the opening angle of the conical tip and ν the local Poisson ratio . Knowing the cantilever stiffness and by fitting the theoretical curve to the experimental data , the elastic modulus can be deduced 19 . The cellular Poisson ratio was assumed to be 0 . 5 , and the conical tip opening was taken to be 30º . The average elastic modulus derived from these experiments was K = 2137±1277 Pa . Supplementary Table 1 Drugs used in local perfusion experiments . The drug target was determined from the existing literature and vendor catalogs . The bulk concentration is the concentration needed to inhibit blebbing when the whole cell was bathed in medium with inhibitor . The concentration in the pipette refers to the concentration needed in the micropipette to observe inhibition of blebbing when the whole cell is treated by local drug perfusion . Local effect refers to whether a drug can locally inhibit blebbing or not . Global effect describes the effect observed when the cell is treated in bulk . Abbreviations : PKA , PKC , PKG : protein kinase A , C , G ; MLCK : myosin light chain kinase ; CamK : calmodulin kinase Treatment Target Concentration in bulk Concentration in pipette Global effect Local effect References ( Global effect ) Supplier Blebbistatin Myosin II ATP - ase 50 µM 100 µM Arrests bleb protrusion Yes 21 Tocris 3 - ( 4 - pyridyl ) indole Rho - kinase 50 µM 200 µM Arrests bleb protrusion Yes 22 ICCB Y - 27632 Rho - kinase 1 µM 12 . 5 µM Arrests bleb protrusion Yes 23 Calbiochem Sucrose Osmotic pressure 300 mM 300 mM Decreases bleb size Yes 24 JT Baker WGA Membrane bending rigidity 0 . 1 mg . ml - 1 0 . 1 mg . ml - 1 Arrests bleb protrusion Yes 25 Molecular Probes Dilute solution Osmotic pressure 50 % dH 2 O 50 % dH 2 O Increases bleb size Yes 24 Latrunculin B F - actin 7 . 5 µM 7 . 5 µM Increases bleb size , arrests bleb protrusion , arrests retraction Yes Calbiochem Cytochalasin D F - actin 5 µM 10 µM Increases bleb size , arrests bleb protrusion , arrests retraction Yes 26 Calbiochem Staurosporine PKA , PKC , PKG , CamK , MLCK 1 µM 5 µM Arrests bleb protrusion No Calbiochem HA - 1077 Ca 2 + antagonist , PKA , PKG , PKC , MLCK , ROCK 5 µM 10 µM Arrests bleb protrusion No Tocris H - 9 PKA , PKC , PKG 10 µM 50 µM Arrests bleb protrusion No Tocris H - 89 PKA , PKC , CamK , MLCK 20 µM Arrests bleb protrusion No Calbiochem Supplementary Video 1 - Bath treatment of cells with high concentration sucrose This video shows the treatment of a cell with increasing concentrations of sucrose . As the concentration increases , bleb size decreases until finally blebbing ceases and the cell switches to ruffling . Supplementary Video 2 - Bath treatment of cells with WGA This video shows the treatment of a cell with increasing concentrations of WGA . As the concentration of WGA in the medium increases , blebs become rarer until blebbing finally stops . Supplementary Video 3 – Local perfusion of WGA This video shows the time course of the experiment depicted in Figure 2A . Prior to application of treatment , the cells blebbed profusely around their periphery . Within 2 - 3 min of application , blebbing ceases in the area of application but continues undisturbed in the rest of the cell . Solid black lines delineate the flow out of the micropipette . Supplementary Video 4 – Local perfusion of Sucrose This video shows the time course of the experiment depicted in Figure 2B . Prior to application of treatment , the cells blebbed profusely around their periphery . Within 2 - 3 min of application , blebbing ceases in the area of application but continues undisturbed in the rest of the cell . Solid black lines delineate the flow out of the micropipette . Supplementary Video 5 – Local perfusion of Blebbistatin This video shows the time course of the experiment depicted in Figure 2C . Prior to application of treatment , the cells blebbed profusely around their periphery . Within 2 - 3 min of application , blebbing ceases in the area of application but continues undisturbed in the rest of the cell . Solid black lines delineate the flow out of the micropipette . Supplementary Video 6 – Local perfusion of 3 - ( 4 - pyridyl ) indole This video shows the time course of the experiment depicted in Figure 2D . Prior to application of treatment , the cells blebbed profusely around their periphery . Within 2 - 3 min of application , blebbing ceases in the area of application but continues undisturbed in the rest of the cell . Solid black lines delineate the flow out of the micropipette . Supplementary Video 7 – Local perfusion of Latrunculin This video shows the time course of the experiment depicted in Figure 3A . Prior to application of treatment , the cells blebbed profusely around their periphery . When Latrunculin B is applied locally , bleb size increases globally . Within 2 - 3 min of application , blebbing ceases in the area of application but continues undisturbed in the rest of the cell . Solid black lines delineate the flow out of the micropipette . Supplementary Video 8 – Local perfusion of Staurosporine This video shows the time course of the experiment depicted in Figure 3B . Prior to application of treatment , the cells blebbed profusely around their periphery . Prior to perfusion and after 395 s of local perfusion with Staurosporine , blebbing is unperturbed throughout the cell . When Staurosporine is applied to the whole cell , blebbing ceases . Solid black lines delineate the flow out of the micropipette . Supplementary Video 9 – Local perfusion of HA 1077 This video shows the time course of the experiment depicted in Figure 3C . Prior to application of treatment , the cells blebbed profusely around their periphery . After 340s of local HA - 1077 application , blebbing is unperturbed . When the whole cell is exposed to inhibitor , blebbing ceases . When perfusion is halted , blebbing is restored . Solid black lines delineate the flow out of the micropipette . Supplementary Video 10 – Colocalisation of actin and myosin II at the cell cortex This video shows a time course of a blebbing cell transfected with actin - GFP and MRLC - RFP . The colours have been inverted on the video to render viewing easier . Actin is in red , and MRLC in green . Colocalisation appears in yellow and can clearly be observed at the cortex . Frames are 5s apart . Supplementary video 11 – MRLC localisation during blebbistatin treatment This video shows the localisation of MRLC during blebbistatin treatment . After 150s , 100 µM blebbistatin is applied to the cell . Blebbistatin treament causes MRLC to detach from the cortex and relocalise to the cell membrane . Supplementary video 12 – Blebbing microplast This video shows the time course of a blebbing GFP transfected microplast from Supplementary Figure S4 . Frames are 5s apart . Supplementary Figure 1 – Dose response of bleb diameter and frequency with increasing osmotic pressure Normalized bleb diameter and bleb frequency decrease with increasing osmotic pressure . The normalized bleb diameter shows a rapid decrease with increasing osmotic pressure from ~ 100 Pa ; whereas bleb frequency stays unaffected until pressures of ~ 300 Pa . When cells are exposed to hypoosmotic medium , bleb size increases and bleb frequency decreases . The error bars denote the standard deviation of each measurement . The dotted line indicates the control osmolarity . Supplementary Figure 2 – Distribution of maximum bleb expansion velocities and minimum bleb retraction velocities . A . Retraction velocities followed a normal distribution with a maximum peak for 0 . 1 µm . s - 1 . B . Expansion velocities followed a normal distribution with a maximum peak for 0 . 4 µm . s - 1 . Supplementary Figure 3 – Dissassembly of the actin cortex posterior to bleb expansion Time course of the plasma membrane and actin cortex during bleb expansion . The plasma membrane ( in red ) and actin ( in green ) were visualized by transfecting the cells with actin - GFP and PH - PLC δ - RFP . Scale bar = 2µm . Originally , the plasma membrane lies in close proximity to the actin cortex ( t = 0s ) . As bleb expansion proceeds , the membrane detaches from the cortex , which appears to remain intact ( t = 6s and t = 12s ) . Once expansion is halted , the cortex is disassembled and a new cortex is reformed underneath the bleb membrane ( t = 24s ) . Supplementary Figure 4 – Volume Fluctuations in a blebbing microplast A - Volume fluctuations ( in % ) over time for the microplast shown in Supplementary Video 12 . The maximal amplitude of fluctuations was 4 . 5 % . The estimated error on the volume measurement was 5 . 9 % . Up to 2 expanding blebs appear simultaneously , with a representative diameter of 4 µm . The volume represented by those two blebs was 17 % of the microplast volume . This is clearly larger than the observed fluctuations . B - Projection image of the GFP transfected microplast from A and supplementary video 12 . Supplementary Figure 1 Supplementary Figure 2 Supplementary Figure 3 Supplementary Figure 4 References 1 . Skotheim , J . and Mahadevan , L . , Dynamics of poroelastic filaments . Proc . R . Soc . Lond ( A ) , 460 , 1995 - 2020 ( 2004 ) . 1 . Mastro , A . M . & Keith , A . D . Diffusion in the aqueous compartment . J Cell Biol 99 , 180s - 187s ( 1984 ) . 2 . Kao , H . P . , Abney , J . R . & Verkman , A . S . Determinants of the translational mobility of a small solute in cell cytoplasm . J Cell Biol 120 , 175 - 84 ( 1993 ) . 3 . Albrecht - Buehler , G . Does blebbing reveal the convulsive flow of liquid and solutes through the cytoplasmic meshwork ? Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 46 Pt 1 , 45 - 9 ( 1982 ) . 4 . Flanagan , L . A . et al . Filamin A , the Arp2 / 3 complex , and the morphology and function of cortical actin filaments in human melanoma cells . J Cell Biol 155 , 511 - 7 ( 2001 ) . 5 . Luby - Phelps , K . , Castle , P . E . , Taylor , D . L . & Lanni , F . Hindered diffusion of inert tracer particles in the cytoplasm of mouse 3T3 cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 84 , 4910 - 3 ( 1987 ) . 6 . Weiss , M . , Elsner , M . , Kartberg , F . & Nilsson , T . Anomalous subdiffusion is a measure for cytoplasmic crowding in living cells . Biophys J 87 , 3518 - 24 ( 2004 ) . 7 . Alexopoulos , L . G . , Erickson , G . R . & Guilak , F . A method for quantifying cell size from differential interference contrast images : validation and application to osmotically stressed chondrocytes . J Microsc 205 , 125 - 35 ( 2002 ) . 8 . Rotsch , C . & Radmacher , M . Drug - induced changes of cytoskeletal structure and mechanics in fibroblasts : an atomic force microscopy study . Biophys J 78 , 520 - 35 ( 2000 ) . 9 . Charras , G . T . & Horton , M . A . Single cell mechanotransduction and its modulation analyzed by atomic force microscope indentation . Biophys J 82 , 2970 - 81 ( 2002 ) . 10 . Moy , V . T . , Jiao , Y . , Hillmann , T . , Lehmann , H . & Sano , T . Adhesion energy of receptor - mediated interaction measured by elastic deformation . Biophys J 76 , 1632 - 8 ( 1999 ) . 11 . Dai , J . , Sheetz , M . P . , Wan , X . & Morris , C . E . Membrane tension in swelling and shrinking molluscan neurons . J Neurosci 18 , 6681 - 92 ( 1998 ) . 12 . Molloy , J . E . , Burns , J . E . , Kendrick - Jones , J . , Tregear , R . T . & White , D . C . Movement and force produced by a single myosin head . Nature 378 , 209 - 12 ( 1995 ) . 13 . Tyska , M . J . et al . Two heads of myosin are better than one for generating force and motion . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96 , 4402 - 7 ( 1999 ) . 14 . Howard , J . Mechanics of Motor Proteins and the cytoskeleton ( Sinauer associates , 2001 ) . 15 . Evans , E . , Leung , A . & Zhelev , D . Synchrony of cell spreading and contraction force as phagocytes engulf large pathogens . J Cell Biol 122 , 1295 - 300 ( 1993 ) . 16 . Albrecht - Buehler , G . Autonomous movements of cytoplasmic fragments . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 77 , 6639 - 43 ( 1980 ) . 17 . Yarrow , J . C . , Feng , Y . , Perlman , Z . E . , Kirchhausen , T . & Mitchison , T . J . Phenotypic screening of small molecule libraries by high throughput cell imaging . Comb Chem High Throughput Screen 6 , 279 - 86 ( 2003 ) . 18 . Charras , G . T . & Horton , M . A . Determination of cellular strains by combined atomic force microscopy and finite element modeling . Biophys J 83 , 858 - 79 ( 2002 ) . 19 . Radmacher , M . Measuring the elastic properties of biological samples with the AFM . IEEE Eng Med Biol Mag 16 , 47 - 57 ( 1997 ) . 20 . Johnson , K . L . Contact Mechanics ( Cambridge University Press , 1985 ) . 21 . Cheung , A . et al . A small - molecule inhibitor of skeletal muscle myosin II . Nat Cell Biol 4 , 83 - 8 ( 2002 ) . 22 . Yarrow , J . C . , Totsukawa , G . , Charras , G . T . & Mitchison , T . J . Screening for cell migration inhibitors using automated microscopy reveals a new rho - kinase inhibitor . Manuscript in preparation ( 2004 ) . 23 . Mills , J . C . , Stone , N . L . , Erhardt , J . & Pittman , R . N . Apoptotic membrane blebbing is regulated by myosin light chain phosphorylation . J Cell Biol 140 , 627 - 36 ( 1998 ) . 24 . Dai , J . & Sheetz , M . P . Membrane tether formation from blebbing cells . Biophys J 77 , 3363 - 70 ( 1999 ) . 25 . Evans , E . & Leung , A . Adhesivity and rigidity of erythrocyte membrane in relation to wheat germ agglutinin binding . J Cell Biol 98 , 1201 - 8 ( 1984 ) . 26 . Cunningham , C . C . Actin polymerization and intracellular solvent flow in cell surface blebbing . J Cell Biol 129 , 1589 - 99 ( 1995 ) .