IST - Africa 2018 Conference Proceedings Paul Cunningham and Miriam Cunningham ( Eds ) IIMC International Information Management Corporation , 2018 ISBN : 978 - 1 - 905824 - 60 - 1 Copyright © 2018 The authors www . IST - Africa . org / Conference2018 Page 1 of 9 Community Climate Services for Small - Scale Farmers in Tanzania Jaakko HELMINEN , Ville MYLLYNPÄÄ , Mikko APIOLA , Moammar DAYOUB , Tomi WESTERLUND , and Erkki SUTINEN University of Turku , Department of Future Technologies , Turku , Finland , [ jaakko . a . helminen ; ville . myllynpaa , moammar . dayoub , tomi . westerlund , erkki . sutinen ] @ utu . fi , and mikko . apiola @ ieee . org Abstract : Climate variability affects small scale farming in the Global South , with serious worldwide implications . Unreliable information has been found as one factor that contributes negatively to farming success . The issue of unreliable information has become ever more pressing with climate change . In the future , technology can contribute positively to farming success , if implemented well . In this paper , we present our results from initial data collection : the System Action Design Research Framework ( SADR ) and Epistemic Implementation Delphi Panel ( EIM ) models , and present first prototypes for a mobile holistic climate service , to be piloted in Morogoro region , Tanzania . Our results show high importance in inclusive and participatory approaches in project implementation , which aligns well with observations from related research . Keywords : m - Agriculture , small scale farming , mobile technology . 1 . Introduction Climate variability is one of the most complex problems the world faces . It especially affects the most vulnerable people in the Global South . The changing climate has an extreme impact on small scale farmers . Small scale farming is an important way of generating income and employment for a large number of people . Together small - scale farmers produce an incredible 70 % of the world’s food [ 1 ] . Smallholder farmers often live in conditions of poverty , marginalisation and reliance on natural resources [ 2 ] . It is common that farming practices are passed on from generation to the next . However , this indigenous knowledge has become partly invalid under current conditions [ 2 ] . Farmers commonly lack the knowledge to prepare for and deal with the impacts of changing conditions [ 3 , 4 , 5 ] . Climate knowledge [ 7 ] is one key element in the whole food production chain . Responses to climate change need to encompass several levels , including crop and farm - level adaptations , national - level agriculture and supporting policies and investments , and regional and global policies and investments . Thus , it is important to develop methods to increase farmers’ climate knowledge and increase their adaptability to new and changing conditions . The aim of this project is to design and develop climate information solutions for small scale farmers and other interest groups such as government officials and decision makers to adapt to the effects of climate change in food production . The planning and implementation relies on our Systems Action Design Research ( SADR ) model , which is an extension of Hevner’s [ 6 ] Design Science Research framework as well as Epistemic Implementation Delphi ( EID ) model . The basis for these models was gathered by surveying local readiness for developing holistic climate services , in separate initiatives conducted in Mozambique and Kenya , which included surveys , discussions , data collection , and workshops with local collaborators . Copyright © 2018 The authors www . IST - Africa . org / Conference2018 Page 2 of 9 The emphasis of this project is in co - designing a community climate service . The shared climate knowledge , which is based on climate and weather data , aims to provide knowledge about new farming techniques , best practices and adaptation measures to local farmers . The new information services may help farmers to make better informed decisions in regards of choosing crops and seeds , selecting growing methods , and deciding sowing and harvesting times . The to - be - developed technology artefact can also include additional features , such as insurance against drought , market platform for selling extra harvest , and even a funding possibility to allow farmers to invest into new growing techniques . The service will be implemented as a technology artefact that will be designed in a participatory way , following co - design principles , so to match the information demand of the local farmers and involve them in the entire development process . It will also be built by taking into account the local changing climate patterns and will emphasize the need to utilize climate - smart agricultural practices . The application development will also have a strong emphasis on financial sustainability , which will guarantee the continuity of the service after the project has ended , as recommended by [ 4 , 8 , 9 ] . 2 . Background 2 . 1 Learnings from the Previous m - Agriculture Initiatives Based on the previous research done on m - Agriculture applications , few key points can be raised up , which have affect to the success and acceptability of the m - Agriculture applications in developing markets . Firstly , application development should be based on bottom - up model and be “tailor made” , in order to truly fit into the local conditions [ 9 , 4 ] . More effort should be made into understanding the potential end users and their needs , since the lack of such understanding has been named as one of the biggest challenges in developing applications and sustainable business models . For instance , it is still rare to see m - Agriculture developers working together with the intended end - users , in order to really understand their living conditions and daily challenges [ 10 ] . Information , which is provided through these applications , should be timely , and relevant [ 4 ] . Applications should also provide services and information on a wide range of matters ; such as soils , seeds , weather and various financial services ( for instance , insurances , microfinance and savings ) [ 11 ] . Most importantly , applications should be designed to be user - friendly , which is presumed to result in better user acceptance , and finally to empower farmers to be more successful and knowledgeable in their farming activities [ 5 ] . Also , importance of connections and co - operation with local organisations , such as research institutes and NGO´s cannot be undervalued [ 12 , 10 ] . 2 . 2 Participatory Design In the past , mainstream rural development efforts have focused on technical innovations delivered to farmers in a top - down model [ 14 ] . However , many studies have found that such interventions , often conducted by formal research institutions , do not necessarily provide farmers with more secure access to new technologies or improve their livelihoods [ 13 , 14 , 15 ] . In particular , agricultural interventions in Africa have failed to provide useful outputs to poor small - scale producers [ 16 , 17 ] . One possible reason for this failure of diffusion of technologies through formal institutions is that the technologies are in some cases not developed based on farmers’ needs or constraints . Thus , too many newly introduced technologies have been inappropriate for poor farmers in marginal , rain - fed areas [ 18 , 14 ] . Participatory research is a “collaborative process of research , education , and action that is explicitly oriented towards social transformation” [ 19 ] . Participatory approaches to design and research are now widely accepted because they are focused not only on Copyright © 2018 The authors www . IST - Africa . org / Conference2018 Page 3 of 9 improving farming practices but focus also on empowerment . They recognize the importance of all stakeholders in the generation and dissemination of knowledge , contrary to approaches where the needs and preferences of the main beneficiaries are ignored [ 20 ] . In technology projects , it is crucial to understand local sociocultural practices , decision making processes , and role hierarchies [ 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 ] . Soft skills play an important role in building trust , building protocols of communication , and co - designing with local communities . The need for participatory design ( PD ) , action research ( AR ) , and design research ( DR ) to complement software development process models , such as Agile development is often emphasized [ 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 ] . In general , it has become well agreed that technology projects need to be geared with research in order to understand what to implement , how to implement , and for evaluating impact . At least the four broad stages suggested for constructive ICT4D projects need to be addressed : 1 ) how to analyse a context , 2 ) how to represent the resources of a context as inputs for a computational artifact , 3 ) how to design and build an artifact , and 4 ) how to evaluate the artefact [ 26 ] . A common guideline in inclusive innovation and participatory design is that the ownership of projects should be local : local African technology solutions are designed for local African challenges [ 27 ] . 3 . Previous work 3 . 1 Surveying Local Readiness As the first step , we explored the local readiness and demands to develop holistic grass - root mobile climate services for local farmers in Chokwe Region , Gaza Province , Mozambique in 2011 - 2012 and in Marigat Region , Baringo County , Kenya in 2014 - 2015 . At the former location , our objective was to clarify the existing baseline for sustainable development work , whereas in Kenya we focused on climate services to help replacement actions of aggressively spreading deep root tree species by optional deep root tree species . At the end workshop of our project in Chokwe Region , the local farmers presented the idea of developing local holistic grass root mobile climate services . Our latter assignment in Kenya was part of a larger bilateral international mobility program between Kenya and Finland . At the beginning , the task was to replace one originally locally planted deep root species , Prosopis juliflora , to prevent farther desertification in semi - arid areas , like Marigat Region . However , this tree spreads aggressively and deteriorates pastures . Hence , local partners and community members nodded at first that the replacement of Prosopis juliflora was an idea to be sustained . We proceeded with the idea to develop appropriate augmentary mobile climate services to local farmers in two selected communities . We were planning to make the general interviews and a part of the expert interviews ; however , our time ran out and the project ended . Even if the two projects did not lead to the best possible outcomes , the grass root interviews indicated unanimous motivation and demand to develop holistic mobile climate services for farming . It has given to us the impetus to consider the fundaments of a feasible holistic climate service concept . 3 . 2 System Action Design Research Framework ( SADR ) Our prior experiments led us to develop the modified DSR framework , adapted from Hevner [ 6 ] , which is presented in Figure 1 , and explained below . Copyright © 2018 The authors www . IST - Africa . org / Conference2018 Page 4 of 9 Figure 1 : Systems Action Design Research ( SADR ) Framework as a modified Design Science Research ( DSR ) Framework of Hevner [ 6 ] . First , we start with the environment and in it with people ( see Figure 1 ) . In our coming prototype project , we have three groups of people : the local farmers of the communities ( LCG ) , the various kinds of local experts extending from the community to the national level ( LNG ) , and the supervisors from the foreign development aid party ( SFG ) . Regarding roles with reference to the General Theory of Consistency ( GTC ) of Kuusi [ 28 , pages 247 - 255 ] we divide LCG people in every community for the field into two groups : non - learning beings and learning beings . Here not - learning beings typically trust on the use of traditional tacit knowledge whereas learning beings are willing to learn and use advised modern methods and practices . In addition , we expect to find from LCG , LNG and SFG experts in various invariances ( climate , cultivation etc . ) as well as human and social behaviour , from LNG and SFG experts in decision - making and from all three groups experienced synthesizers . The business needs / demands will be elaborated thoroughly in discussions and interviews guided by the twelve questions set of the Critical Systems Heuristics ( CSH ) [ 29 , page 244 ] . Second , in regards of knowledge base ( see Figure 1 ) , with the HGMCSs and holistic views in mind , we need to take into account pertinent aspects of human and social behavior . Hence , we need in the knowledge base knowledge of social behavior , methods to make , video - record and process interviews [ 30 , 31 ] . Here an essential part of the collected data consists of compiled and video - recorded interviews . Third , in regards of IS Research and the Design Cycle ( see Figure 1 ) , we have added to the Justify / Evaluate Box syntheses , because in our framework development considerations we need also to make syntheses of their pertinent characteristics . As an outcome of our framework considerations we ended up to develop a new Systems Action Design Research ( SADR ) Framework with the Epistemic Implementation Delphi ( EID ) as its entry artifact . SADR together with EID allow for concurrent interactions of several systems . This is pertinent to our HGMCSs . Copyright © 2018 The authors www . IST - Africa . org / Conference2018 Page 5 of 9 3 . 3 Epistemic Implementation Delphi Model ( EID ) Figure 2 : Allocating the stages of SADR on the EID chain ( adapted from [ 32 ] ) We understood that our HGMCSs comprise several concurrently interacting systems , such as temperature , precipitation , soil moisture , and farming ( sowing , fertilization , follow - up of growth , harvesting ) . This led us first to discuss SADR in terms of its stages and the needed EID artifact along the ideas presented by Extended Action Design Research ( EADR ) Framework [ 32 ] In Figure 2 , we present the stages of SADR on the continuum of the trans - disciplinary EID artifact . The stages of SADR resemble the stages of EADR . In the first stage of SADR we have modified its heading to read “Problem identification and encountering” and listed as the items : define problem and relevance . In the case of developing countries encountering means that the primary idea of the project should come up from the local grass - root discussions and preferably from local farmers . More generally the primary idea of the project should be presented by end - users . The inclusion of end - users as experts of their own conditions is complementary if not contradictory to conventional development projects where the motivation to set up a project is based on demands that are usually explicated by external experts . Before we present EID artefact of SADR at the lower row of Figure 2 , it is important to recognize that the epistemic base of EID is GTC [ 28 , pages 247 - 255 ] . At the first stage , “Encountering stage” of EID , we encounter the local farmers and experts of local national institutes . We make the general interviews and surveys , after which we negotiate the expert and management teams that include also qualified members from the end - user communities . Under the second stage the established EID expert team looks for possible rational action artifacts during the opening stage and leaves them all available for the process . In case of considerable uncertainties , like in the development of HGMCSs , the EID expert team together with the SADR completion team recommends the conditions of a sufficient solution in terms of both utility and fitness . The final decision on these conditions is made by the SADR completion team . In the argumentation stage the EID , expert and management teams discuss thoroughly the suggested rational action artifacts . As an outcome of the discussions , SADR gets the list Copyright © 2018 The authors www . IST - Africa . org / Conference2018 Page 6 of 9 of accepted rational action lines with the recommended order of preference of implementation . In the concluding stage of EID , the management team implements the recommended rational action artifacts within SADR iteration cycle . The completion team of SADR together with the expert and management teams of EID evaluates the implemented artifact to check , whether this artifact meets the utility and fitness criteria of sufficiency . If so , then the concluding stage of EID is accomplished and SADR proceeds to the communication stage . In case the outcome of the implemented artifact is not sufficient , the completion team of SADR returns the process back to the design and development stage to pick up the artifact option next on the recommendation list for implementation . This iteration is executed in as many loops as needed to find a sufficient outcome or all available artifacts being scrutinized . Only in case we have achieved a sufficient solution SADR completes the communication stage with appropriate scholarly and professional publications . 4 . Project Implementation In this section we introduce plans for project implementation . The implementation follows the EID Chain - model ( see Figure 2 in Section 3 . 3 ) , and SADR , which together provide an impressive arsenal of methods . The project is currently iterating between the problem identification and encountering - stage , and the objectives of a solution - stage . This means that the project researchers are currently ideating and investigating multiple possibilities for innovations ( e . g . [ 33 , 34 ] ) , gaining more understanding about the situation [ 35 ] , and looking at other alternative approaches for ideas and inspiration [ 36 ] . Current ideas for gaining relevant data include using soil moisture measurements and weather services from meteorological institutions . Initial ideas for building a protocol of communicating decision - making information to local farmers include co - designing [ 37 ] decision - tree - based icons [ 36 ] . More understanding is expected to evolve from field experiments , starting from qualitative data collection and prototyping to be conducted in April 2018 . 4 . 1 Context : Tanzania In Tanzania , small scale farming is the main form of crop production , and employment in agriculture is being increasingly challenged by the effects of the climate change [ 35 ] . On the other hand , Tanzania has an estimated 19 million mobile internet users [ 38 ] , and mobile use in Tanzania is among the cheapest in Africa [ 39 ] . However , a meaningful technology innovation could also be applicable in other places , where smallholder agriculture is the norm , and which have an adequate digital infrastructure , including 3G / 4G / Wi - Fi - coverage and availability of smartphones . Examples of such countries are Kenya , Uganda and Rwanda . There are only few active climate services that make effective use of smartphones . Typically such services are based on IVR or SMS technology [ 40 ] and therefore their usability and functionality is limited by technical restrictions . 4 . 2 Encountering and Opening The first field visit will take place in the beginning of this April , in a village of Tambuu , close to the city of Morogoro , Tanzania . This two - weeks period will consist of two parts . Firstly , qualitative data will be collected . The qualitative data collection will help in defining the problem and its relevance from the local farmers’ perspective . This will follow the SADR - ideology , which shows that the primary idea of a project should come from local grass - root discussions . Secondly , a first prototyping experiment will be conducted . This means that local farmers will be introduced to smartphones , preinstalled with an initial prototype , in order to introduce the participants to the technology and familiarize them with the idea of co - developing a climate service . A total of six smartphones will be used . The participants will be divided to six groups , with three participants each , to generate initial Copyright © 2018 The authors www . IST - Africa . org / Conference2018 Page 7 of 9 ideas about how weather - , and decision information can be presented . Several days will be reserved for symbol design , in regards of how to represent floods , winds , and other weather events . In regards of SADR ( Figure 1 ) , this phase falls under the category of field study in IS Research , uses video recordings , interview processing techniques from the Knowledge Base , and builds the relevance of the to - be - designed service by building understanding about the Environment , which , in this case , is Tambuu village . 4 . 3 Design and Development The first field visit is followed by qualitative data analysis , analysis of the results and experiences gained from field , and technology design and development efforts . This includes strengthening co - operation with meteorological and agricultural institutions to improve the weather data and other needed measurement techniques and data flows , such as soil moisture sensors , and improving access to weather data servers . In addition , this phase involves improving the protocol of presenting relevant data for effective decision making to farmers , including design of contextually meaningful icons . This phase also includes planning of testing periods . It is possible that smartphones will be given to local villages for periods of time for accessing weather forecasts , and other relevant agriculture information , and for providing assistance in decision making . SADR and EID also allow the use of a video diary technique similar to what was done in the Sauti ya Wakulima - project ( http : / / sautiyawakulima . net ) . 4 . 4 Evaluation The SADR and EID are rich in available methods for each phase of the project . If the project’s previous stages succeed as expected , and the co - creation activities result in a meaningful and usable technology artefact , the next phase is to evaluate the artefact in practice . After extensive usability tests are complete and there is general agreement that the artefact is accepted by the local community and is beneficial to farming activities , it becomes possible to administer an experimental research setup , where a population of farmers are divided to groups who use the artefact in their farming activities ( learning beings ) , and those who use traditional means in their farming activities ( non - learning beings ) . Variables to be measured in such experimental research setting would include costs of farming inputs , amount of working hours , and most importantly , the farm yield . The preliminary plan is to begin evaluation at the end of 2018 , but the schedule depends on the success of previous stages in project implementation . 5 . Discussion and Conclusions We recommend using the participatory co - design methods , which we assume to be helpful together with a multi - disciplinary viewpoint . Also , it is importance to steer the design and development processes with rigorous research methodology , including qualitative and quantitative methods . Using a standard software development process model would probably not work well . Besides our initial connections to local universities , we are open to form new partnerships to other African research institutes and universities . We see that topics of agriculture , ICT ( especially co - design process with users , application development ) and business model research would be suitable areas of cooperation . Based on several years of interviews , panels , teacher exchanges , and discussions with diverse stakeholders in various African agricultural contexts , we have derived a model for co - designing a community climate service that would support small scale farmers to cope with the changing climate . The approach combines a design science based research approach to an extended version of Delphi panel . To allow for co - design with limited resources , the model divides the design process into two main parts : ( 1 ) building an open mock - up for the service based on the data collected from the local stakeholders , and ( 2 ) Copyright © 2018 The authors www . IST - Africa . org / Conference2018 Page 8 of 9 tuning ( and possibly re - designing ) the open mock up and implementing its functional prototype within the real user communities as a close and intense co - design loop . The open mock - up as the result of phase 1 comes with questions that need to be elaborated with local users in phase 2 . We expect that the introduced model would lead to satisfactory climate services and other applications that would not mimic the use of technology in the Global North but provide solutions that would revolutionize their application areas . In the era of ever worsening and unpredictable effects of climate change , addressing climate change must be number one priority . Technology can play a big part here , if implemented well . References [ 1 ] Wolfenson , K . D . ( 2013 ) . Coping with the food and agriculture challenge : smallholders’ agenda . Preparations and outcomes of the 2012 United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development ( Rio + 20 ) by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations . [ 2 ] Misaki , E . , Apiola , M . , Gaiani , S . ( 2016 ) Technology for Small Scale Farmers in Tanzania : A Design Science Research Approach . The Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries , 74 ( 4 ) , 1 - 15 . [ 3 ] African Youth Foundation ( AYF ) and Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation ( CTA ) . ( 2014 ) . Youth Sustaining family farming through ICTs . [ 4 ] CTA , 2014 . ICTs for Agriculture - Making it happen . [ 5 ] Danes , M . H . G . I . , Jellema , A . , Janssen , S . J . C . and Janssen , H . ( 2014 ) . Mobiles for Agricultural Development - Exploring trends , challenges and policy options for the Dutch government . Available at : http : / / edepot . wur . nl / 297683 [ 6 ] Hevner , A . R . , March , S . T . , Park , J . , and Ram , S . ( 2004 ) Design Science in Information Systems Research . MIS Quarterly 28 : 75 - 105 . [ 7 ] Meinke , H . , Nelson , R . , Kokic , P . , Stone , R . , Sevalraju , R . and Baethgen , W . ( 2006 ) . Actionable climate knowledge : from analysis to synthesis . Climate Research , 33 , 101 - 110 ( open access article ) . [ 8 ] Crandall , A . and Kieti , J . , 2013 . Startup Business Models and Challenges for East African mAgriculture Innovations [ 9 ] OXFAM , 2013 . Incorporating the use of ICTs into Oxfam’s markets - based livelihoods programmes : A guidance paper1 , s . l . : s . n . [ 10 ] Omwansa , T . , Crandall , A . and Waema , T . , 2013 . The Gab between Mobile Application Developers and Poor Consumers : Lessons from Kenya [ 11 ] Namisiko , P . and Aballo , M . , 2013 . Current Status of e - Agriculture and Global Trends : A Survey Conducted in TransNzoia County , Kenya [ 12 ] Awuor , F . , Kimeli , K . , Rabah , K . and Rambim , B . , 2013 . ICT Solution Architecture for Agriculture [ 13 ] Van de Fliert , E . , and Braun , A . R . ( 2002 ) : Conceptualizing integrative , farmer participatory research for sustainable agriculture : From opportunities to impact . Agriculture and Human Values 19 , 25 - 38 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1023 / A : 1015081030682 [ 14 ] Waters - Bayer , A . , van Veldhuizen , L . , Wettasinha , C . and Wongtschowski , M . ( 2004 ) : Developing partnerships to promote local innovation . The Journal of Agricultural Education and Extension 10 , 143 - 150 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 13892240485300211 . [ 15 ] Hoffmann , V . , Probst , K . and Christinck , A . ( 2007 ) : Farmers and researchers : How can collaborative advantages be created in participatory research and technology development ? Agriculture and Human Values 24 , 355 - 368 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10460 - 007 - 9072 - 2 . [ 16 ] Sumberg , J . and Reece , D . ( 2004 ) : Agricultural research through a ‘new product development’ lens . Experimental Agriculture 40 , 295 - 314 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0014479704002030 . [ 17 ] Breisinger , C . , Diao , X . , Thurlow , J . and Hassan , R . M . A . ( 2011 ) : Potential impacts of a green revolution in Africa - the case of Ghana . Journal of International Development 23 , 82 - 102 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jid . 1641 [ 18 ] Hall , A . and Nahdy , S . ( 1999 ) : New methods and old institutions : The “systems context” of farmer participatory research in national agricultural research systems . The case of Uganda . Network Paper No . 93 . London : Agricultural Research and Extension Network . [ 19 ] Kindon , S , Pain , R & Kesby , M 2007 , ‘Connecting people , participation and place’ in eds . S . Kindon , R . Pain & M Kesby , Participatory Action Research Approaches and Methods : connection people , participation and place , Routledge , New York , pp . 1 - 5 . [ 20 ] Ajeigbe , HA & Dashiell , K 2010 , Participatory research extension approach : N2 Africa extension method , International Institute of Tropical Agriculture ( IITA ) , Ibadan . [ 21 ] Blake , E . ( 2010 ) Software Engineering in Developing Communities . Proceedings of the 2010 ICSE Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software Engineering ( CHASE ' 10 ) , pp . 1 - 4 . Copyright © 2018 The authors www . IST - Africa . org / Conference2018 Page 9 of 9 [ 22 ] Winschiers - Theophilusa , H . , Bidwellb , N . , Blakec , E . ( 2012 ) Altering participation through interactions and reflections in design . CoDesign , Vol 8 , no 2 - 3 , 163 - 182 . [ 23 ] Zewge , A . , Dittrich , Y . , Bekele , R . ( 2014 ) Software designing methodology for ICT4D domain . in Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference ( PDC ) . Pages 237 - 241 . [ 24 ] Peters , A . , Winschiers - Theophilus , H . , Awori , K . , Bidwell , N . , Blake , E . , Kumar , A . , Chuvuno - Kuria , S . ( 2014 ) . Collaborating with communities in Africa : a Hitchhikers Guide . in CHI ' 14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1969 - 1974 . [ 25 ] Doerflinger , J . , Dearden , A . ( 2013 ) . Evolving a Software Development Methodology for Commercial ICTD Projects . Information Technologies & International Development , 9 ( 3 ) : pp . 43 - 60 . [ 26 ] Sutinen , E . , & Tedre , M . ( 2010 ) . ICT4D : A computer science perspective . Volume 6060 of the series Lecture Notes in Computer Science ( Algorithms and Applications ) , . Springer Berlin Heidelberg . pp . 221 - 231 . [ 27 ] Gomera , W . G . , Oreku , G . S . , Apiola , M . , Suhonen , J . ( 2017 ) Mobile Training in Micro Business : Design Science Research for Frugal Innovation . In Cornish , D . R . ( Ed ) , Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE Science Technology & Innovation for Africa Conference ( AFRICON2017 ) - Advancing Technology for Humanity , IEEE , pp . 501 - 506 . [ 28 ] Kuusi , O . ( 1999 ) Expertise in the Future Use of Generic Technologies – Epistemic and Methodological Considerations Concerning Delphi Studies . VATT - Research Reports , 59 , VATT Institute for Economic Research , Helsinki , Finland . Open access at www . vatt . fi / en / publications / latestPublications / publication / Publication _ 1345 _ id / 221 [ 29 ] Ulrich , W . and Reynolds , M . ( 2010 ) Critical systems heuristics . In : Reynolds , M . and Holwell , S . ( eds ) Systems Approaches to Managing Change : A Practical Guide . ( eds . ) Springer , London , UK , pp . 243 - 292 . Link to the chapter http : / / oro . open . ac . uk / 21299 / 1 / systems approaches . [ 30 ] Afitska , O . ( 2009 ) Review of Transana 2 . 30 . Language Documentation & Conservation 3 : 226 - 235 . ( See also https : / / www . transana . com ) [ 31 ] Silver , C . and Lewins , A . ( 2014 ) Using Software in Qualitative Research : A Step - by - Step Guide ( 2nd edition ) . Sage Publications , London , UK . [ 32 ] Mullarkey , M . T . and Hevner , A . R . ( 2015 ) Entering Action Design Research . In : Donnellan , B . , nnnn ( eds . ) Desrist 2015 . LNCS , vol . 9073 . Springer , Heidelberg , Germany , pp . 121 - 134 . doi [ 33 ] Dinesh , D . , Campbell , B . , Bonilla - Findji , O . , Richards , M . ( eds ) . ( 2017 ) 10 best bet innovations for adaptation in agriculture : A supplement to the UNFCCC NAP Technical Guidelines . CCAFS Working Paper no . 215 . Wageningen , The Netherlands : CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change , Agriculture and Food Security ( CCAFS ) . Available online at : www . ccafs . cgiar . org [ 34 ] Pretty , J . , Toulmin C , Williams S . ( 2011 ) Sustainable intensification in African agriculture . [ 35 ] Government of Tanzania . ( 2014 ) Tanzania Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan , 2014 – 2019 [ 36 ] Vitos M , Altenbuchner J , Stevens M , Conquest G , Lewis J , Haklay M . ( 2017 ) Supporting Collaboration with Non - Literate Forest Communities in the Congo - Basin . The 20th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing [ 37 ] Sander E . B . - N . and Stappers P . J . ( 2008 ) Co - Creating and the New Landscapes of Design . [ 38 ] Tanzanian Communication . ( 2017 ) Quarterly communications statistics report - October - December 207 [ 39 ] ResearchICTAfrica . org . ( 2016 ) OTT - threat or opportunity for African Telcos ? [ 40 ] Tall , A . , Hansen , J . , Jay , A . , Campbell , B . , Kinyangi , J . , Aggarwal , P . B . , and Zougmoré , R . ( 2014 ) Scaling up climate services for farmers : Mission Possible Learning from good practice in Africa and South Asia . CCAFS Report No . 13