A Longitudinal Study of the Relation of Vision and Vision Communication to Venture Growth in Entrepreneurial Firms J . Robert Baum Ivan C . Dutterer , Inc . 115 Ann Street Hanover , Pa . 17331 ph ( 717 ) 637 8977 fx ( 717 ) 6374780 jrbaum @ aol . com Edwin A . Locke University of Maryland at College Park College of Business and Management College Park , Maryland 20742 Shelley A . Kirkpatrick The American Institutes for Research 3333 K Street , N . W . Washington , D . C . 20007 Abstract The relationships among vision attributes , vision content , vision communication , and venture growth were explored in one industry using a longitudinal design . Charismatic leadership , entrepreneurship , and business strategy theory guided the formation of hypotheses that were tested with data collected from 183 entrepreneur / CEO and employee pairs . Visions were evaluated for 7 attributes that were derived from the literature and for content . Structural modeling confirmed that vision attributes and vision content affect subsequent venture growth , both directly and through verbal and written communication . A Longitudinal Study of the Relation of Vision and Vision Communication to Venture Growth in Entrepreneurial Firms A recent focus in the leadership literature has been on charismatic ( alternatively called transformational , visionary , or inspirational ) leadership . A review of seven leadership theories that address charisma in some form ( Bass , 1985 ; Bennis & Nanus , 1985 ; Conger & Kanungo , 1987 ; House , 1977 ; Kouzes & Posner , 1987 ; Locke et al . , 1991 ; Tichy & Devanna , 1986 ) reveals that there are three core components that are common across the theories : ( a ) communicating a vision , ( b ) possessing a charismatic ( e . g . , forceful , animated , confident ) personality style , and ( c ) taking various actions intended to implement the vision ( e . g . , serving as a role model , intellectually stimulating followers , and building followers ' confidence ) . Each theory makes similar predictions , namely , that a charismatic leader will have positive effects on both organizational and follower outcomes . Our review of the literature , however , found only two empirical studies which examined the effects of charismatic leadership on business unit performance ( Barling , Weber , & Kelloway , 1996 ; Howell & Avolio , 1993 ) . Both studies reported significant relationships between charismatic leadership and business - unit performance . With respect to follower outcomes , Shamir , House , and Arthur ( 1993 ) reviewed more than 20 studies that found charismatic or transformational leadership to be positively associated with followers ' performance , attitudes , and perceptions . Another set of 15 studies , reviewed by Bass and Avolio ( 1993 ) , and a meta - analysis by Lowe , Kroeck , and Sivasubramaniam ( 1996 ) of 38 studies that used the Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire reported equally positive findings . Previous studies have typically examined charismatic leadership as a blend of various charismatic leadership components ; however , an experimental laboratory study by Howell and Frost ( 1989 ) found that the combination of two components - - vision and charismatic personality - - had strong , positive effects on follower performance and attitudes . Following this , a laboratory study by Kirkpatrick and Locke ( 1996 ) empirically separated these two components , and found that vision was far more potent than charismatic personality in terms of its direct and indirect effects on follower performance and attitudes . In the entrepreneurship and business strategy literatures , the importance of vision and its effects on organization level performance has also been stressed in theoretical discussions ( e . g . , Bird , 1992 ; Filion , 1988 ; Isenberg , 1987 ; Maccoby , 1981 ; Mendall & Gerguoy , 1984 ; Peters , 1988 ; Slater , 1993 ; Timmons , Smollen , & Dingee , 1990 ) and in empirical research ( e . g . , Filion , 1991 ; Kotter , 1990 ; Larwood , Falbe , Kriger , & Miesing , 1995 ; Westley & Mintzberg , 1989 ) . For example , case studies by Westley and Mintzberg ( 1989 ) and Kotter ( 1990 ) suggest that vision is important for strategic change in mature organizations . Filion ( 1988 ) used interviews with entrepreneurs and found that new venture vision content included imagery about products , markets , and organization that were a function of the stage of venture development . He determined that vision process depended upon the entrepreneur ' s values and energy . Larwood et al . , ( 1995 ) published the first large sample empirical study of vision content . They asked executives to describe their vision in one sentence and to evaluate them along 26 content dimensions . The executives ' self - ratings formed seven independent factors , including vision formulation ( strategic emphasis ) , implementation ( successful communication ) , and innovative realism ( responsiveness to change ) . Vision content ratings appeared in different clusters that associated with degree of executive control , the rate of organizational change , and type of industry . Their study did not , however , relate the vision attributes to organizational effectiveness . Given that : ( a ) vision is a core component across charismatic leadership theories , ( b ) empirical studies have confirmed that it has significant effects on follower outcomes , and ( c ) theory and research conducted in the entrepreneurship and business strategy literatures have found that vision may have an impact on organizational outcomes , the present study focused on the vision component in entrepreneurial firms . Furthermore , this is the first study to examine the effects of vision on the performance of the organization as a whole . In addition to examining the direct effect of vision on organizational performance , the present study examined one process through which vision could affect organizational performance : vision communication . Some theorists further specify the process as one through which leaders link followers ' self - concepts to the leader ' s vision or align followers ' needs and values with a collective vision ( Bass & Avolio , 1993 ; House & Shamir , 1993 ) . However , charismatic leadership theories tend to focus on follower - level effects rather than organizational - level effects . In addition , they do not specify the role that communication plays ( e . g . , is it in the causal path or does it change the causal relationship between vision and performance ? ) . However , all seven charismatic leadership theories emphasize the importance of communicating the vision . Accordingly , the role of vision communication in the vision - organizational performance relationship was examined . Vision House and Shamir ( 1993 ) define vision as an ideal that represents or reflects the shared values to which the organization should aspire . Similar definitions are found throughout the charismatic leadership literature . For example , Bennis and Nanus ( 1985 ) define it as the projected mental image of the products , services , and organization that a business leader wants to achieve ; and Kouzes and Posner ( 1987 ) define it as " an ideal and unique image of the future . " In this study we examined vision as the leader defined it , because it was the leader ' s actual vision which guided their choices and actions . However , as explained below we used theoretically derived attributes for measuring vision . Vision Attributes Two foci of the present study are " Does vision significantly affect organizational performance , and if so , what are the attributes of an effective vision ? " . A comprehensive review of leadership , business strategy , and entrepreneurship theories identified seven attributes that are said to be necessary for a vision to be effective ( that is , to significantly affect organizational performance ) : ( a ) brevity ( Locke et al . , 1991 ) , ( b ) clarity ( Jacobs & Jaques , 1990 ; Nanus , 1992 ) , ( c ) abstractness ( Locke et al . , 1991 ) , ( d ) challenge ( Nanus , 1992 ; Sashkin , 1988 ; Sims & Lorenzi , 1992 ) , ( e ) future - orientation ( Collins & Lazier , 1992 : Jacobs & Jaques , 1990 ) , ( f ) stability ( Locke et al . , 1991 ) , and ( g ) desirability or ability to inspire ( Sashkin , 1988 ; Sims & Lorenzi , 1992 ) . Despite the focus in the literature on attributes of an effective vision , there is no empirical research which relates any of these attributes to outcomes . The present study examined the predictive validity of these attributes . ( As explained in the Method section below , the present study examined venture growth as the indicator of organizational performance . ) Hypothesis 1 : The vision attributes of brevity , clarity , abstractness , challenge , future - orientation , stability , and desirability will be significantly related to subsequent venture growth . Vision Content A second aspect of vision is the actual content . For example , the content of one vision could be concerned with market share while another vision could be concerned with producing quality products . To properly test for the effects of vision on organizational performance , there should be correspondence between the focus of the vision content and the dependent measure of interest . We chose growth as the dependent measure in this study because growth is a key focus of entrepreneurial firms ( Bird , 1992 ; Carriere , 1989 ; Gartner , Bird , & Starr , 1992 ; Hood & Young , 1993 ; Kirzner , 1985 ; Timmons et al . , 1990 ) . Indeed , entrepreneurship researchers focus on business growth because of the entrepreneur ' s leading role in job creation and product market growth ( Kuratko & Welsch , 1994 ; Timmons , Smollen , & Dingee , 1990 ) . Thus , we predict that organizations will grow faster when the leader ' s ( who , in this study , were entrepreneurs ) vision is focused on growth . Hypothesis 2 : Vision growth imagery will be significantly associated with subsequent venture growth . Vision Communication Each of the seven charismatic leadership theories stressed the importance of communicating the vision . House ( 1977 ) notes that leaders who communicate their vision affect follower outcomes . Bennis and Nanus ( 1985 ) discuss the importance of getting the organization to accept and support the vision by communicating it in a variety of ways , both in writing and orally . Bass ( 1985 ) and Tichy and Devanna ( 1986 ) refer to the importance of the leader ' s inspiring followers through speeches and pep talks that get them to work toward the vision . Kouzes and Posner ( 1987 ) state that the vision must be communicated to others , both through written statements as well as through personal communication , in order to convince them to support it . Conger and Kanungo ( 1987 ) , as well as Locke et al . ( 1991 ) , propose that leaders must use their personal communication skills , including speaking as well as listening skills , to articulate the vision to followers . Strategic management researchers , drawing upon case studies , find that top managers can inspire workers with communicated vision ( Westley & Mintzberg , 1989 ) . Furthermore , entrepreneurship theorists point to the importance of communication of the entrepreneur ' s vision to new venture teams and , ultimately , to the management team that supervises venture growth ( Bird , 1989 ) . Thus , the importance of vision communication must be empirically tested rather than taken for granted ; we predict that : Hypothesis 3 : The vision - venture growth relationship will show indirect effects through vision communication . Method Research Model and Controls The three hypotheses are the basis for the research model depicted in Figure 1 . Causal paths are shown from vision attributes and vision content directly to venture growth ( H1 and H2 ) and indirectly to venture growth through vision communication ( H3 ) . Industry effects were controlled by studying a single industry . Three additional control variables were measured : ( a ) organization size , ( b ) organization age , and ( c ) past venture growth . Although Larwood et al . ( 1995 ) found no organization size effects in their analysis of vision content , organization size and age were controlled because researchers report strong relationships between these variables and organization process and performance ( Pugh , Hickson , Hinings , & Turner , 1968 ; Quinn , 1980 ) . Past venture growth was controlled to provide a baseline for analysis of the effects upon the performance variable . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Insert Figure 1 about here _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Pilot Study Thirty - one ( 31 ) structured interviews were conducted with practicing business founders and buyers ( entrepreneur / CEOs ) who intended to grow their businesses . The purpose of the interviews was to : ( a ) determine whether they were aware of what a vision is , ( b ) evaluate whether they could write their vision in an open - ended questionnaire , and ( c ) discover vision attributes that had not been mentioned by leadership theorists . Twenty - two ( 22 ) of the 31 interviewees were entrepreneur / CEOs from the architectural woodwork industry , which provided the population for this study ( The other interviewees were entrepreneur / CEOs from York County , PA . manufacturing companies ) . The questions about vision included : " Do you have a vision for your firm ? Can you summarize it ? Do you tell your employees about it ? Does it matter for firm performance ? What are the attributes of a good vision ? " Twenty - two participants ( 71 % ) were able to summarize their vision . Nineteen ( 61 % ) said that they had communicated their vision to employees , and eleven ( 35 % ) said that visions were part of their firm ' s formal motivation program . The interviews exposed a high level of awareness of the advertised value of vision - setting . Although a few participants expressed the view that formal vision - setting programs were " just another management fad " , nearly all of the entrepreneurs felt that it was useful to hold a personal mental picture of what they want their company to be . Over 90 % ( 28 of 31 ) of the interviewees felt that most businesses benefit from having a clear , well communicated vision . Among the array of concepts that were discussed , participants considered it second in importance only to self - efficacy as a cause of high venture performance . None of the interviewees added to , or disagreed with , the list of seven attributes that were previously identified by leadership theorists ( brevity , clarity , abstractness , challenge , future - orientation , stability , and desirability or ability to inspire ) . Population and Respondents A questionnaire was constructed to gather data for statistical analysis of the research model . The survey population was the 849 architectural woodwork industry companies in the United States . The population was identified in member lists from the Architectural Woodwork Institute , Centreville , Va . , and customer lists from three major suppliers of raw material to the industry . The industry manufactures high - end custom wood products ( stairs , moldings , entries , and cabinets ) for residential , commercial , and industrial buildings . A letter to each CEO , an advertisement in a trade journal , and a presentation at an architectural woodwork industry convention introduced the study . Each communication stressed that the questionnaire responses , which included performance data , would be mailed to , summarized by , and kept confidential by an independent data service which produces annual cost comparisons for industry members . Members were guaranteed that the authors could not link responses with specific companies . CEOs were asked to return a response card if they were willing to participate and they were asked to identify a subordinate , with whom they worked directly , who may also be willing to participate . We mailed questionnaires to the CEO and employee - participant ( EP ) separately . To be consistent with the practice of entrepreneurship researchers ( Carland & Carland , 1993 ; Gartner et al . , 1992 ) , participation in the study was constrained to include owner / founders and owner / buyers who had actively managed their businesses ( CEOs ) for fewer than 12 years and who reported that they had intended to grow their businesses beyond " income substitution " levels when they founded or purchased . Responses from companies with fewer than 5 employees were excluded , as were responses from companies with an EP who had worked with the entrepreneur / CEO for fewer than 2 years . The CEO ' s vision and reports from EPs about vision communication , demographic information about the entrepreneur / CEOs and EPs , organization size and age , and 1991 and 1992 performance data ( sales , employment , profits , and net worth ) were collected in 1993 . Performance data for 1994 ( sales , employment , and profits ) were collected in 1995 utilizing the same data collection practices that were used in 1993 . Three - hundred seventy - four ( 374 ) entrepreneur / CEOs ( 44 % of the population of organizations ) and 183 EPs ( 21 % of the population ) met the criteria for our sample , including complete vision and complete 1991 and 1992 performance data . Since we used a dual source methodology ( each observation required information from both the entrepreneur / CEO and the EP ) our sample size was limited by the number of qualified EPs to 183 . Among the 183 paired entrepreneur / CEOs and EPs , visions were reported by 127 entrepreneur / CEOs . The average qualified entrepreneur / CEO respondent had 25 employees and $ 2 . 3M sales in 1992 . The typical EP was a manager of sales , production , or administration ; all EPs reported directly to the entrepreneur / CEO . The average EP had 14 years experience in the industry and had worked for the entrepreneur / CEO for 7 years . To test whether the sample of 183 qualifying companies was representative of the population of 849 companies , and to determine whether the sample had significant statistical bias , we compared the population and sample means with respect to three known characteristics . There were no significant differences between : ( a ) mean employment levels ( z = . 32 ; p < . 38 ) , ( b ) percent distribution of companies by U . S . region ( Northeast , z = . 89 , p < . 19 ; S , z = . 47 , p < . 32 ; Central , z = . 49 , p < . 31 ; and West , z = . 89 , p < . 19 ) ; and ( c ) proportion of industry trade association members ( z = 1 . 4 ; p < . 09 ) . Measures Vision Attributes . The questionnaire asked participants if they had a company vision ( Yes / No ) and , if so , whether it was written and / or spoken . If the participants did not have , or did not know about , a company vision they were instructed to leave the open - ended vision item blank . If a company vision existed in any format , the respondent was asked to write it down or enclose a copy ; these visions were the basis for analysis . While some of the reported visions may not qualify as visions under some definitions of " vision " ( they may be missions , strategies , or goals ; or , they may be unintelligible ) , we treated all responses as worthy of study because this study ' s purpose was to determine whether venture growth could be affected by whatever CEOs identified as their operative vision . Further , our acceptance of whatever was reported as a vision was intended to produce sufficient variability in the vision measure to test the hypotheses . The first author and a research assistant rated visions according to the seven attributes that had been extracted from the review of leadership theory ( a ) brevity , ( b ) clarity , ( c ) abstractness , ( d ) challenge , ( e ) future - orientation , ( f ) stability , and ( g ) desirability or ability to inspire . Each rater practiced rating seven vision prototypes that contained extremes of each attribute ( Collins & Lazier , 1992 ; Collins & Porras , 1991 ; Locke et al . , 1991 ) and referred to the prototypes during the rating of the actual visions . Each dimension was scored along a ten - point scale from 0 to 10 . For example , 0 was used when the attribute was absent , 5 when the attribute was present at a moderate level , and 10 when the attribute was present at a high level . If the participant indicated that they had no company vision , vision attributes were scored as " 0 " and included in the test data . Appendix A includes typical visions and their ratings . A principal - components factor analysis of the average scores of the two raters yielded only one factor with an eigenvalue larger than 1 . 00 ( E = 5 . 18 ) ; all loadings exceeded . 64 , and seventy - four per cent ( 74 . 1 % ) of the variance was explained . Thus , we formed a single " vision attributes " score for each respondent ( for each rater ) by summing the seven attribute scores . Rater reliability for the total scores was shown by a correlation between raters of r = . 78 ( p < . 001 ) , and Table 1 shows that the composite reliability ( " overall R2 " ) for the vision attributes was . 96 , which exceeds guidelines for good reliability ( > . 80 ; Fornell & Larcker , 1981 ) . Vision Content . The entrepreneur / CEO visions were coded blind for growth imagery by two authors using an eleven - point scale . Visions that referred directly to high growth of profits , sales , employment , facilities , market share , financial strength , or product offerings were rated as " 8 " , " 9 " , or " 10 " ( For example , see Appendix A , vision statement # 3 . ) . Visions with implications of growth or references to moderate growth were given mid - range ratings of " 4 " , " 5 " , " 6 " , or " 7 " ( For example , see Appendix A , vision statements # 1 , # 2 , and # 4 . ) . Low ratings ( " 0 " , " 1 " , " 2 " , or " 3 " ) were given for visions with no implications of , or references to , growth ( For example , see Appendix A , vision statement # 5 . ) The correlation between the two raters was r = . 77 ( p < . 001 ) , and the composite reliability for the " vision content " latent variable was . 88 as shown on Table 1 ; thus , the latent variable was indicated reliably . TABLE 1 Measurement Model Reliabilities Latent Variable Measure Parameter Coefficient ( LAMBDA ) a Reliability ( Squared Mult . Corr . ) b Composite c Reliability Vision Attributes . 96 Vision Attributes Rater 1 . 99 * . 98 Vision Attributes Rater 2 . 92 * . . 85 Vision Content . 88 Vision Content Rater 1 99 * . 98 Vision Content Rater 2 . 77 * . 59 Vision Communication . 81 Written Vision . 78 * . 61 Explained Vision . 88 * . 77 Venture Growth . 85 Sales Growth 1 . 00 * 1 . 00 Employment Growth . 88 * . 77 Profit Growth . 53 * . 28 Organization Size 1 . 00 Organization Age 1 . 00 Past Venture Growth . 88 Sales Growth . 96 * . 92 Employment Growth . 92 * . 85 Profit Growth . 61 * . 37 a The parameter coefficient , LAMBDA , indicates the strength of the reflection of the latent variable in the measure . b The squared multiple correlation coefficient is the item reliability . c Composite reliability , an indication of internal consistency , is the sum of the square roots of the item squared multiple correlations , squared , and divided by the same quantity plus the sum of the error variances ( Werts , Linn , & Joreskog , 1974 ) * Parameter estimate / standard error > 2 . 0 Vision Communication . Vision communication was measured with EPs ' responses to two items : ( a ) Does your company have a written vision ? and ( b ) Has your CEO talked about a vision for the company ( yes = 1 ; no = 0 ) ? As shown in Table 1 , the vision communication items had a composite reliability of . 81 . Venture Growth . Three measures of venture growth were developed . Sales growth was measured as the difference between 1992 and 1994 sales , divided by 2 , to equal average annual sales growth for the period . Similar calculations produced the second and third measures : average annual employment growth and average annual profit growth . Similarly , the " past venture growth " control variable was measured with the difference between 1991 and 1992 ( a ) sales , ( b ) employment , and ( c ) profits . Five ( 5 ) companies had closed by 1994 for unknown reasons . Companies could have been bankrupt or could have been liquidated for a gain . Although it is unlikely that successful firms were liquidated , we adopted a conservative approach . Analysis of the research model was conducted with alternative assumptions about the appropriate value for 1994 performance for closed companies : ( a ) the five cases with missing 1994 performance data were deleted ( thus , n = 178 for this alternative solution ) , ( b ) zero percent ( 0 % ) was assigned , and ( c ) minus one - hundred percent ( - 100 % ) was assigned . Results were robust across all of these assumptions . Accepting the notion that the closing of a company was a performance result worthy of inclusion in the study , we included these five closed companies in the analysis . We took the least extreme alternative and reported results herein using zero percent ( 0 % ) as the average annual venture growth from 1992 to 1994 for closed companies . The reliability of the raw performance data reported in the questionnaire was evaluated by checking the agreement of a random sample of 30 of the entrepreneur / CEO responses with Dun and Bradstreet , Inc . ( D & B ) ( 1993 ) reports . We were able to find D & B information for 26 of the 30 cases . Results of the correlation and t - tests are shown in Table 2 . TABLE 2 Performance Data Reliability ( Correlation and Means Difference t - tests of Company - reported and Credit Service - reported Data for 26 Randomly Selected Companies ) Measure Correlation " t " of Means Difference D . F . Significance PERFORMANCE : 1992 Sales . 99 58 24 p < . 57 1992 Employment . 94 65 24 p < . 52 1992 Profit . 97 1 . 14 24 p < . 26 1992 Net Worth . 94 2 . 60 24 p < . 02 The correlations among the self - reported and D & B performance measures were high and significant in all cases . The accuracy of the absolute level of the data was checked with t - tests of means . While the self - reports about sales , employment , and profits were not significantly different than the D & B reports , the net worth data were significantly different ( for 1992 , t ( 24 ) = 2 . 60 , p < . 02 ) . Thus , net worth data were deleted as a measure . It may be that owners of small closely - held companies treat company resources as if they were personal resources . Thus , equity may not be a good basis for indicating performance ; accordingly , net worth data were not collected in 1995 . As shown in Table 1 , the three indicators of venture growth ( sales growth , employment growth , and profit growth ) developed composite reliability of . 85 ; this is sufficient ( > . 80 ) to support the position that the three growth measures reflect the underlying latent variable reliably ( Fornell & Larcker , 1981 ) . We also found that the mean reported sales , employment , and profit growth for the sample companies was 3 % per year during the 1991 control year and 10 % per year during the 1992 and 1993 study period ; these results are consistent with industry reports that 1992 and 1993 were years of " recovery " . Controls . Organization size was indicated by the number of employees . Log transformation was not used because the size range was not large and the distribution was not highly skewed . Organization age was measured as the number of years since founding or transfer of ownership to the entrepreneur / CEO . Past venture growth was measured as the difference between 1991 and 1992 sales , employment , and profit . In summary , the measurement model exhibited reliable measurement of the latent variables ( all composite reliabilities > . 80 ) . As shown in Figure 2 below , all of the measure coefficients ( LAMBDAs ) were significant ( t > 2 . 0 ; p < . 05 ) ; thus , the measurement model had convergent validity . Discriminant validity was verified by determining for each latent variable that the average variance extracted by the latent variable ' s measures was larger than the latent variable ' s shared variance with any other latent variable ( Fornell & Larcker , 1981 ) . Thus , each latent variable had more in common with its measures than with other latent variables . Results Descriptive Statistics The means and standard deviations of the study variables and the correlations between them are shown in Table 3 . The means are the average of the multiple measures and pooled standard deviations are reported . TABLE 3 Means , Standard Deviations , and Correlations Measure Mean s . d . 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 Vision Attributes 23 . 77 21 . 22 2 Vision Content 3 . 44 3 . 10 . 16 * 3 Communication . 41 . 47 . 36 * * * . 25 * * 4 Venture Growth . 10 . 29 . 37 * * * . 30 * * * . 33 * * * 5 Organization Size 25 . 00 14 . 09 . 11 . 06 - . 10 - . 06 6 Organization Age 8 . 45 2 . 55 . 06 . 11 . 04 . 07 . 07 7 Past Venture Growth . 03 . 33 . 05 . 05 . 04 . 12 - . 03 - . 01 N = 183 * p < . 05 * * p < . 01 * * * p < . 001 Analytical Design The relationship among the independent and dependent variables was explored with solutions of an array of structural equation models that were alternative configurations of this study ' s research model . The initial path model , a direct effects model , had paths to venture growth from vision attributes ( VA ) , vision content ( CNT ) , vision communication ( COM ) , and the three control variables . An indirect effects model was configured with additional paths from VA and CNT through COM to venture growth . Direct Effects Model Figure 2 shows the direct effects model for vision attributes , vision content , and communication to venture growth . Both vision attributes and vision content had significant paths to venture growth which supports hypotheses 1 and 2 . Additionally , vision communication _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Insert Figure 2 about here _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ had a significant relationship with venture growth ; the control variable coefficients were not significant . We used the following indices and interpretations to indicate structural equation " fit " ( Breckler , 1990 ; Browne and Cudeck , 1993 ; Joreskog & Sorbom , 1993 ; Wheaton , 1987 ) : ( a ) Although it is highly sensitive to sample size , the 2 probability should be larger than < . 05 for a model to be identified as a " good fit " ; ( b ) The goodness of fit index ( GFI ) and adjusted goodness of fit index ( AGFI ) should be near or better than . 90 ; ( c ) The parsimony normed fit index ( PNFI ) should be greater than . 50 ; ( d ) The root mean square residual ( RMR ) should be less than . 100 ; and ( e ) the root mean square error of approximation ( RMSEA ) should be less than . 080 . The fit index results for the direct effects model were : 2 ( 36 ) = 72 . 44 , p < . 00 ; GFI = . 92 ; AGFI = . 87 ; PNFI = . 43 ; RMR = . 041 ; and RMSEA = . 054 . Thus , 2 for the structural equation model was significant , which is not unusual for confirming models with more than 100 cases . GFI , RMR , and RMSEA indicate that the model is a good fit of the data ; however , AGFI and PNFI are not good . Indirect Effects Model Figure 3 shows the results of the solution using an indirect effects model . Vision attributes affect venture growth indirectly through their effect upon vision communication . Similarly , vision content significantly affects venture growth indirectly through vision communication , although significant direct effects persist for both vision variables . Utilizing standardized data , the indirect effects model had a higher coefficient for the indirect path through vision communication ( . 30 ) than for the direct paths ( . 18 and . 19 ) . The indirect effects model showed significant improvements in all fit statistics compared with the direct effects model . Indeed , all fit statistics were good : 2 ( 23 ) = 65 . 87 , p < . 00 ; GFI = . 95 ; AGFI = . 90 ; PNFI = . 47 ; RMR = . 040 ; and RMSEA = . 054 . The overall coefficient of determination was . 30 . These results partly support Hypothesis 3 . In summary , vision attributes and vision content were _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Insert Figure 3 about here _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ directly related to venture growth , but they were also strongly related to venture growth through their effect on vision communication . Alternative Scoring of Vision Thirty - one percent ( 31 % ) of the entrepreneur / CEOs reported that they did not have a vision , and in these cases we assigned 0 as the score for vision attributes , vision content , and vision communication . It could be argued that reported relationships among the independent variables and their measures may be inflated with the full data set ( n = 183 ) as compared to the data set that included only those cases which reported a vision ( n = 127 ) . However , since this study focused on the effects of vision upon venture growth , the absence of a vision may have an important effect on the dependent variable . If vision matters for venture growth , one would expect the " no vision " companies to have lower growth than the companies with vision , and therefore the " no vision " companies should be included . The average growth of those 127 companies with a vision ( 12 . 4 % ) was significantly higher than those 56 companies reporting no vision ( 5 . 5 % ) , t = 2 . 37 , p < . 02 . However , we also performed a more conservative test , where we deleted the " no vision " cases and repeated the structural equation tests of the indirect effects model in Figure 3 . The fit of the model to the data was slightly lower but still " good " : 2 ( 23 ) = 72 . 08 , p < . 00 ; GFI = . 92 ; AGFI = . 89 ; PNFI = . 46 ; RMR = . 042 ; and RMSEA = . 054 . The significance of the path coefficients still supported our finding that vision attributes ( VA ) and vision content ( VC ) are significantly associated with venture growth ( VG ) and that vision communication is in a significant indirect path between VA and VG and between VC and VG . Moderator Analysis and Sole - source Data Analysis Although it was not predicted , we considered the possibility that vision communication might moderate the effects of vision on growth . We conducted structural equation and regression tests of moderation models and found no evidence of any moderator effects . We also conducted structural equation tests of the indirect effects model with data from CEOs alone . That is , we substituted vision communication responses from CEOs for the EP responses that we report in this study ; the results were not significantly different . However , we believe that the " mixed " ( CEO and EP ) model is the most logical since EP reports should reflect whether any CEO communications were actually received . Discussion This quantitative , longitudinal field study was the first to find vision and vision communication to have positive effects upon organization - level as opposed to unit - level or individual - level performance . Significant direct effects were found for vision as well as indirect effects through vision communication . This study lends support for the seven charismatic leadership theories which propose that vision is a core antecedent of organizational performance . Like the laboratory studies of Howell and Frost ( 1989 ) and Kirkpatrick and Locke ( 1996 ) and the study of presidential personality and charisma by House , Spangler , and Woycke ( 1991 ) , the present longitudinal study was able to provide evidence of the causal direction between vision and outcome measures . Many previous charismatic leadership studies could not because they used concurrent designs ( e . g . Avolio , Waldman , & Einstein , 1988 ; Podsakoff , MacKenzie , Morrman , & Fetter , 1990 ; Seltzer & Bass , 1990 ) . Although one cannot take for granted that business and presidential performance are affected by the same factors , our results plus those of House et al . ( 1991 ) suggest that vision is important in both realms . It is encouraging that significant effects were found despite the brief two - year interval of this study . While substantive causal theory and structural equation interpretations of causal models can be supported to a degree even with concurrent data ( Breckler , 1990 ; Hayduk , 1989 ) , the full effect of vision - setting and communication may not be experienced in so short a time . In addition , some visions may have been in place for years before the 1992 venture growth control period . In these cases , the actual effects may have been conservatively estimated by our methods . Different causal relationships may exist between vision characteristics and performance than those that were studied here . High organizational performance itself may cause vision - setting which , in turn , may affect organization performance , and so on . Nevertheless , the directional effects found in this study suggest that vision is causal in its own right . Our results suggest that both vision attributes and vision content are important . Recall that visions were scored in two different ways : ( a ) in terms of possessing attributes that were recommended in the leadership literature and supported by practitioners and ( b ) in terms of having content pertaining to the desire to grow . The attributes measure of vision could be regarded as a measure of vision quality or clarity , whereas the growth measure focused on quantity or challenge ( degree of emphasis on growth ) . The two scores were significantly correlated ( Table 3 ) but not very highly ( r = . 16 , p < . 05 ) . Thus , they seemed to be getting at different aspects or dimensions of vision , as intended . Our results confirmed the finding of Larwood et al . ( 1995 ) that there are distinct attributes of vision that can be reliably isolated and quantified . Some visions were high in both attributes and content . One high growth company ( which also had a high attribute score ) reported that it wanted " to grow rapidly to become a company that is known nationally as the manufacturer of leading edge , highly technical , and deeply designed artistic architectural woodwork . " One CEO ' s vision of his high growth company indicated that he wanted it to become one that Chicago contractors , architects , and customers automatically think of when they require the highest quality architectural woodwork . The vision statement elaborated , " We will achieve this by rapidly expanding our market and products , continuously improving our process , training our people , and developing long - term relationships with those we serve and who serve us . " The visions supplied by many entrepreneur / CEOs incorporated various mixtures of mission , strategy , values , and goals . Indeed , the concept of vision may be useful because it is a way that organization leaders integrate all these elements into a form which guides future action . Some reported visions were personal goals , such as : " I want to pay off my debt . " or " I want to pay my workers well , and sell out at a profit . " It might be asked what the relationship is between vision and goals . Kirkpatrick and Locke ( 1996 ) argued that a vision was akin to a general goal and found that in their laboratory simulation it motivated the setting of task specific goals ( Locke & Latham , 1990 ) which , in turn , affected performance . However , in small firms the two types of goals may merge together in the CEO ' s vision ; results - focused company goals may become the equivalent of task specific goals ( e . g . , " We want to double our sales in 2 years " - - see Appendix A , # 3 ) . The amount of growth imagery may reflect goal difficulty and the goal attribute score may reflect , at least in part , goal clarity . While two - thirds of the visions received a score of 7 ( out of 10 ) or higher for brevity , clarity , and desirability , only one - third received these high scores for abstractness , challenge , or future orientation . It would be interesting to determine what effect leadership training would have on the ability of CEOs to formulate effective visions and on their subsequent performance ( e . g . , see Barling et al . , 1996 ) . Furthermore , some CEOs may have visions which they find hard to articulate ; thus , future studies may enhance leadership theory by trying to find out what implicit definitions and attributes leaders use . Although , we rated vision statements for growth imagery , the statements may include other imagery that relates to performance . For example , McClelland ' s ( 1961 ) need for achievement syndrome ( n ach : improvement focus , future time perspective , assumption of personal responsibility , initiative , acceptance of moderate risk , etc . ) has been claimed to show a significant positive relation with entrepreneurial success ( McClelland & Winter , 1969 ) . Indeed , definition of the motive was derived from observation of entrepreneurship situations ( Miner , 1980 ) , which involve anticipation of future possibilities ( McClelland , 1961 ) . Thus , it might be useful in future studies to also code written vision statements in other ways , including scoring for achievement imagery . Our model showing indirect effects of vision through vision communication explained our data best . While there was a significant direct effect of vision on venture growth , the indirect effects through vision communication were more important . In other words , while a vision affects performance directly , it is more likely to impact performance if employees know about it and understand it ( Locke et al . , 1991 ) . This is not to say that simply having and communicating a well - formulated vision is enough to guarantee results ; many leaders and many companies fail to " walk the talk . " The persistence of direct effects in the indirect model suggests , however , that vision does not axiomatically work only through verbal and / or written communication . This result supports theorists who suggest that leaders can also reinforce the values inherent in the vision nonverbally , such as through dramatic gestures , role modeling , and the way they select , train , and reward employees ( Bandura , 1986 ; Locke , et al . , 1991 ; Kouzes & Posner , 1987 ) . Implementation behaviors such as structuring the organization , setting the organizations agenda ( Conger & Kanungo , 1987 ; House , 1977 ; Locke et al . , 1991 ) , and feedback and information management ( Bass , 1985 ) may also appear in indirect paths between vision and performance . Furthermore , employee responses , such as changes in self - concepts and alignment of personal goals with organization goals may be indirect determinants of performance ( House & Shamir , 1993 ) . Thus , future studies may want to explore the non - verbal mechanisms and implementation behaviors through which leader visions affect organization performance . The finding that direct effects between vision and venture growth exist whether or not the vision is verbally communicated may be limited to companies that enjoy a high degree of direct CEO control . That is , in entrepreneurial companies , such as the ones in this sample , the link between vision and growth may be more direct than in other organizations due to : ( a ) fewer layers of authority , ( b ) one - on - one contact between the entrepreneur / CEO and customers , employees , and suppliers , and ( c ) the relative ease with which the entrepreneur / CEO can directly execute strategies , monitor events and control outcomes on a daily basis . Indeed , Larwood et al . ( 1995 ) found that executives who had high control in their organizations reported that their vision was better understood than executives with low control . It should be noted that it was control , not organization size , that made a difference in the Larwood et al . ( 1995 ) study . Similarly , we did not find organization size effects in our sample ; however , future studies may yet reveal size effects , because both studies sampled within a narrow range of sizes . We found significant direct and indirect effects on performance whether those who did not have a company vision were included or not . However , CEOs with no vision performed significantly worse than those with visions . Thus , not only are the attributes and content of the vision important , but having a vision as opposed to no vision is important . Of course some leaders may hold their visions implicitly ( subconsciously ) which could make it hard to communicate to others and this may reduce their effectiveness . In conclusion , we found that vision significantly affects organization - level performance , and vision affects performance directly , as well as indirectly through vision communication . These results support charismatic leadership theorists who consider vision as a key element of charismatic leadership theory ( House & Shamir , 1993 ) . Furthermore , we found that entrepreneur / CEOs are able to report their vision , and that theoretically - based attributes can be used to obtain a quantitative measure of vision . Hopefully , these findings will encourage further research about vision . References Avolio , B . J . , Waldman , D . A . , & Einstein , W . O . ( 1988 ) . Transformational leadership in a management simulation game . Group and Organization Studies , 13 , 59 - 80 . Bandura , A . ( 1986 ) . Social foundations of thought and action : A social cognitive theory . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Barling , J . , Weber , T . , & Kelloway , E . K . ( 1996 ) . Effects of transformational leadership training on attitudinal and financial outcomes : A field experiment . Journal of Applied Psychology , 81 , 827 - 832 . Bass , B . M . ( 1985 ) . Leadership and performance beyond expectations . New York : Free Press . Bass , B . M . , & Avolio , B . J . ( 1993 ) . Transformational leadership : A response to critiques . In M . M . Chemers & R . Ayman ( Eds . ) , Leadership theory and research : Perspectives and directions , 49 - 80 . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Bennis , W . G . , & Nanus , B . ( 1985 ) . Leaders : The strategies for taking charge . New York : Harper & Row . Bird , B . ( 1989 ) . Entrepreneurial behavior . Glenview , IL : Scott Foresman & Company . Bird , B . ( 1992 ) . The operation of intentions in time : The emergence of the new venture . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 17 , 11 - 20 . Breckler , S . J . ( 1990 ) . Applications of covariance structure modeling in psychology : Cause for concern ? Psychological Bulletin , 107 , 260 - 273 . Browne , M . W . , & Cudeck , R . ( 1989 ) . Single sample cross - validation indices for covariance structures . Multivariate Behavioral Research , 24 : 445 - 455 . Carland , J . A . C . , & Carland , J . W . ( 1993 ) . The role of personality in new venture creation . Entrepreneurship , Innovation , and Change , 2 , 129 - 140 . Carriere , J . B . ( 1989 ) . Strategic vision : An empirical study . Paper presented at the fourth annual conference of the International Council for Small Business , Windsor , Ontario , Canada . Collins , J . C . , & Lazier , W . C . ( 1992 ) . Beyond entrepreneurship . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Collins , J . C . , & Porras , J . ( 1991 ) . Organizational vision and visionary organizations . California Management Review , 34 , 30 - 52 . Conger , J . A . , & Kanungo , R . N . ( 1987 ) . Toward a behavioral theory of charismatic leadership in organizational settings . Academy of Management Review , 12 , 637 - 647 . Dun and Bradstreet , ( 1993 & 1995 ) . Business Credit Services . 3 Sylvan Way , Parsippany , NJ . Filion , L . J . ( 1988 ) . The strategy of successful entrepreneurs in small business : Vision , relationships and anticipatory learning . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , University of Lancaster , England . Filion , L . J . ( 1991 ) . Vision and relations : Elements for an entrepreneurial metamodel . International Small Business Journal , 9 , 112 - 131 . Fornell , C . , & Larcker , D . ( 1981 ) . Evaluating structural equation models with unobservable variables and measurement error . Journal of Marketing Research , 18 , 39 - 50 . Gartner , W . B . , Bird , B . J . , & Starr , J . ( 1992 ) . Acting as if : Differentiating entrepreneurial from organizational behavior . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 16 , 13 - 30 . Hayduk , L . A . ( 1989 ) . Structural equation modeling with LISREL , Baltimore , MD : Johns Hopkins University Press . Hood , J . N . , & Young , J . E . ( 1993 ) . Entrepreneurship ' s requisite areas of development : A survey of top executives in successful entrepreneurial firms . Journal of Business Venturing , 8 , 115 - 135 . House , R . J . ( 1977 ) . A 1976 theory of charismatic leadership . In J . G . Hunt and L . L . Larson ( Eds . ) , Leadership : The cutting edge : 189 - 207 . Carbondale , IL : Southern Illinois University Press . House , R . J . , & Shamir , B . ( 1993 ) . Toward the integration of transformational , charismatic and visionary theories of leadership . In M . Chemers & R . Ayman ( eds . ) , Leadership theory and research : Perspectives and directions , 81 - 107 . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . House , R . J . , Spangler , W . D . , & Woycke , J . ( 1991 ) . Personality and charisma in the U . S . Presidency : A psychological theory of leadership effectiveness . Administrative Science Quarterly , 36 , 364 - 396 . Howell , J . M . , & Avolio , B . J . ( 1993 ) . Transformational leadership , transactional leadership , locus of control , and support for innovation : Key predictors of consolidated business - unit performance . Journal of Applied Psychology , 78 , 891 - 902 . Howell , J . M . , & Frost , P . J . ( 1989 ) . A laboratory study of charismatic leadership . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 43 , 243 - 269 . Isenberg , D . J . ( 1987 ) . The tactics of strategic opportunism . Harvard Business Review , March , 92 - 97 . Jacobs , T . O . , & Jaques , E . ( 1990 ) . Military executive leadership . In K . E . Clark & M . B . Clark ( Eds . ) , Measures of leadership , 281 - 295 . West Orange , NJ : Leadership Library of America . Joreskog , K . G . , & Sorbom , D . ( 1993 ) . LISREL 8 : User ' s reference guide . Chicago , IL : Scientific Software International . Kirkpatrick , S . A . , & Locke , E . A . ( 1996 ) . Direct and indirect effects of three core charismatic leadership components on performance and attitudes . Journal of Applied Psychology , 81 , 36 - 51 . Kirzner , I . M . ( 1985 ) . Discovery and the capitalist process . Chicago : The University of Chicago Press . Kotter , J . P . ( 1990 ) . A force for change : How leadership differs from management . New York : Free Press . Kouzes , J . M . , & Posner , B . Z . ( 1987 ) . The leadership challenge : How to get extraordinary things done in organizations . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Kuratko , D . F . , & Welsch , W . P . ( 1994 ) . Entrepreneurial strategy : Text and cases . Fort Worth : Dryden Press . Larwood , L . , Falbe , C . M . , Kriger , M . P . , & Miesing , P . ( 1995 ) . Structure and meaning of organizational vision . Academy of Management Journal , 38 , 740 - 769 . Locke , E . A . , Kirkpatrick , S . , Wheeler , J . K . , Schneider , J . , Niles , K . , Goldstein , H . , Welsh K . , & Chah , D . O . ( 1991 ) . The essence of leadership . New York : Lexington Books . Locke , E . A . , & Latham , G . P . ( 1990 ) . A theory of goal setting and task performance . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Lowe , K . B . , Kroeck , K . G . , & Sivasubramaniam , N . ( 1996 ) . Effectiveness correlates of transformational and transactional leadership : A meta - analytic review of the MLQ literature . Leadership Quarterly , 7 , 385 - 425 . Maccoby , M . ( 1981 ) . The leader . New York : Simon and Schuster . McClelland , D . C . ( 1961 ) . The achieving society . Princeton : Van Nostrand . McClelland , D . C . , & Winter , D . G . ( 1969 ) . Motivating economic achievement . New York : Free Press . Mendall , J . S . , & Gerguoy , H . G . ( 1984 ) . Anticipatory management or visionary leadership : A debate . Management Planning , November - December , 28 - 31 . Miner , J . B . ( 1980 ) . Theories of organizational behavior . Hinsdale , Ill : Dryden Press . Nanus , B . ( 1992 ) . Visionary leadership . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Peters , T . ( 1988 ) . Thriving on chaos . New York : Harper and Row . Podsakoff , P . M . , MacKenzie , S . B . , Morrman , R . H . , & Fetter , R . ( 1990 ) . Transformational leader behaviors and theory effects on followers ' trust in leader , satisfaction , and organizational citizenship behaviors . Leadership Quarterly , 1 , 107 - 142 . Pugh , D . S . , Hickson , D . J . , Hinings , C . R . , & Turner , C . ( 1968 ) . An empirical taxonomy of structures of work organizations . Administrative Science Quarterly , 14 , 115 - 126 . Quinn , J . B . ( 1980 ) . Strategies for change . Homewood , IL : Richard D . Irwin . Sashkin , M . ( 1988 ) . The visionary leader . In J . A . Conger & R . N . Kanungo ( Eds . ) , Charismatic leadership : The elusive factor in organizational effectiveness , 122 - 160 . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Seltzer , J . , & Bass , B . M . ( 1990 ) . Transformational leadership : Beyond initiation and consideration . Journal of Management , 16 , 693 - 703 . Shamir , B . , House , R . J . , and Arthur , M . B . ( 1993 ) . The motivational effect of charismatic leadership : A self - concept based theory . Organization Science , 4 , 577 - 594 . Sims , H . P . , Jr . , & Lorenzi , P . ( 1992 ) . The new leadership paradigm : Social learning and cognition in organizations . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Slater , R . ( 1993 ) . The new GE : How Jack Welch revived an American institution . Homewood , Ill : Business One Irwin . Tichy , N . M . , & Devanna , M . A . ( 1986 ) . The transformational leader . New York : Wiley . Timmons , J . A . , Smollen , L . E . , & Dingee , A . L . M . , Jr . , ( 1990 ) . New venture creation : Entrepreneurship in the 1990s ( 3d ed . ) . Homewood , Ill : Richard D . Irwin . Vesper , K . H . ( 1990 ) . New venture strategies . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Werts , C . E . , Linn , R . L . , & Joreskog , K . G . ( 1974 ) . Interclass reliability estimates : Testing structural assumptions . Educational and Psychological Measurement , 34 , 25 - 33 . Westley , F . , & Mintzberg , H . ( 1989 ) . Visionary leadership and strategic management . Strategic Management Journal , 10 , 17 - 32 . Wheaton , B . ( 1987 ) . Assessment of fit in overidentifiied models with latent variables . Social Methods Research , 16 : 118 - 154 . APPENDIX A Typical Visions from Architectural Woodwork Entrepreneur / CEOs A research assistant ' s vision attributes total score ( VA ) and an author ' s vision content score ( VC ) are shown in parentheses for each typical vision . The VA score is the sum of the individual ratings ( 1 to 10 ) for each of 7 vision attributes ( brief , clear , abstract , challenging , future - oriented , stable , and desirable ) . The VC score is the growth content rating ( 0 is low growth imagery ; 5 is moderate , and 10 is high ) . 1 ) I want _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Architectural Millwork , Inc . to be recognized before the new century for high craftsmanship in headlines in the " business section " of The Washington Post for completion of woodwork in a nationally famous building . ( VA = 68 ; VC = 4 ) . 2 ) To be one of the top 5 premium grade architectural woodwork companies in the United States for overall performance , price , and quality . ( VA = 59 ; VC = 6 ) 3 ) We want to double our sales in 2 years . ( VA = 49 ; VC = 9 . 4 ) To become the authority on architectural woodwork in central Iowa . You already know about our competition , you should know more about theirs . ( VA = 42 ; VC = 5 ) . 5 ) To provide fine quality millwork and make a living at it . ( VA = 21 , VC = 0 ) AUTHOR NOTES J . Robert Baum , Ivan C . Dutterer , Inc . , Hanover , Pa . Edwin A . Locke , College of Business and Management , University of Maryland at College Park Shelley A . Kirkpatrick , The American Institutes for Research , Washington , D . C . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to J . Robert Baum , Ivan C . Dutterer , Inc . , 115 Ann Street , Hanover , Pa . 17331 . Electronic mail may be sent via Internet to jrbaum @ aol . com .