Team and Members’ Contribution to Inventions : Diversity from Individual and Team Taro Daiko , Yuya Kajikawa Department of Innovation Science , School of Environment & Society , Tokyo Institute of Technology , Japan Abstract — Effective team building is widely considered to be an essential factor of research and development . The purpose of this paper is to explore how team profiles and individual profiles affect team performance , respectively . We focus on technological diversities as a vital profile of both teams and individuals . We examine the relationship between diversity and team performance using patent bibliographic data and patent citation analysis on U . S . patents . Our results show that both interpersonal diversity and generalist inclusion affect teams’ inventive performance . From the perspective of team construction , the result indicates that management could flexibly apply interpersonal diversity or generalist inclusion . We hope that our findings could be helpful for team management and human resource in research and development . I . I NTRODUCTION What is the crucial team profile to accomplish huge success ? Why are some teams more creative than others ? These questions have been tried to answer by past studies [ 1 , 2 ] . Teams have received much attention in management , operation , human resources and coaching [ 3 ] . Successful teams have been considered valuable ; they are creative , profitable , organized , and synergetic . Myriads of literature have mentioned the importance of team building for creating outstanding outputs [ 4 , 5 ] . Especially in the field of R & D , teams are expected to create novel products and demonstrate high productivity [ 6 ] . Team science attracts many interests in social science and innovation management [ 7 ] . Collaborative research has become an essential form in the science field [ 8 ] . R & D managers should consider team composition by assuming team size , skills , and knowledge [ 9 ] . Among various team profiles , the team size effect on teams’ innovative performance has been reported in innovation and management literature [ 7 – 10 ] . However , little literature shows how team diversity generates novel and impactful outputs by both individuals and teams . In order to address this question , this study introduces two types of diversity views . The first is the generalist - inclusion view ; individuals with technologically broad knowledge in teams play an essential role in achieving novel team output . This view partly relies on the myth of a lone inventor , a genius , and a generalist [ 10 ] . The second view is the interpersonal diversity view . Team members can share their expertise , knowledge , experience , and mental model [ 11 ] . As opposed to a lone inventor , team members are not necessary to become generalists to utilize broad technological knowledge . Instead , teams can combine specialized members’ knowledge and create novel technology and product . Researchers have not clearly answered whether interpersonal diversity or generalist inclusion can lead to impactful invention . Generalist literature asserts that the generalist originates novel and creative performance [ 10 , 12 ] . By contrast , specialist literature claims that specialized knowledge and experience can find and solve unknown problems of existing technologies [ 13 ] . Therefore , specialist literature sees a team as a combination of specialists . This paper examines how generalist inclusion and interpersonal diversity can create impactful output , respectively . In order to systematic analysis , we examine the relationship between inventor team composition and invention impact on subsequent inventions . To do so , we measure the profile of inventor teams using patent data filed with the United States Patent and Trademark Office ( USPTO ) between 1980 and 2010 . Our results show that both interpersonal diversity and generalist inclusion of teams positively affect teams’ inventive performance . From the perspective of team construction , the result indicates that management could flexibly apply interpersonal diversity or generalist inclusion . This study has gone some way toward enhancing our understanding of the way technological diversity works in teams . II . B ACKGROUND A . Technological Diversity and Innovation Impact Researchers have mentioned that novelty derives from the recombination of existing knowledge [ 14 ] . In such a view , the recombination of existing knowledge significantly impacts subsequent technologies if the knowledge gap among existing knowledge is diverse and distant [ 13 ] . Diverse and distant knowledge sources are vital for finding diverse perspectives and opinions [ 15 ] to improve performance during nonroutine tasks [ 16 ] . Novel and breakthrough technologies require a broad search for knowledge and recombination of different technological elements [ 17 ] . When recombining technological knowledge , it is necessary to focus on the diversity of technological aspects from knowledge domains [ 18 ] to avoid cognitive lock - in . Technological diversity derived from knowledge , experience , and expertise is vital in solving a complex problem and creating impactful inventions [ 19 , 20 ] . Team diversity has a mixed impact on the innovative outcome . Teams are considered as a knowledge pool constructed from individuals having different knowledge . Team processes can support innovative creation by task orientation and effective communication [ 21 ] . The trend toward team solutions’ preference in science is observed in recent decades 2022 Proceedings of PICMET ' 22 : Technology Management and Leadership in Digital Transformation - Looking Ahead to Post - COVID Era ©2022 PICMET . Manuscript received Aug 31 , 2021 ; accepted Jan 15 , 2022 [ 7 , 22 ] . One possible reason is that advanced science and specialized technology are highly complex and multidisciplinary [ 7 ] . Compared to sole author or inventor , teams can achieve a breakthrough by gathering different specialties [ 22 ] . A team can also effectively introduce external networks to acquire required knowledge [ 23 ] . On the other hand , diversified teams generate conflicts caused by their difference in value , attitude , and belief [ 24 ] . Team conflict may hinder team projects and teams’ outcomes [ 25 ] . Furthermore , a diverse team may be inefficient in terms of learning [ 26 ] . Common technological background enables team members to communicate efficiently . Shared common knowledge may facilitate group activities , but it is also necessary for each team member to recognize other members’ knowledge range [ 27 ] . Therefore , members’ technological distance caused by team diversity may make members’ mutual understanding inefficient and problematic . B . Interpersonal Diversity Team diversity has been investigated from two aspects , interpersonal and intrapersonal [ 28 ] . Interpersonal diversity is preferable when a team needs broad knowledge . Interpersonal diversity refers to variety derived from members’ non - overlapping knowledge sources . Interpersonal diversity promotes collaboration to gather members’ specialties to solve complex problems [ 29 ] . This specialist coordination can overcome the limitations of individual knowledge . However , interpersonal diversity also has a negative aspect . Knowledge utilization is affected by an individual’s environment and communications in teams [ 30 ] . Since heterogeneity among team members can bring about the lack of mutual understanding about technologies [ 31 ] , it can cause coordination failures . For example , when team members feel the cultural and cognitive distance between other members , their communication and mutual trust may decrease , and their conflict undermines team performance . Although the team’s negative aspect of technological diversity , we expect that diverse teams overcome such negative elements and lead to creative and innovative outcomes . Especially in the science and technology field , novelty is essential to achieve massive success [ 32 ] . In this point of view , the broadness of recombined technological knowledge can be crucial . Interpersonal diversity has an advantage in both the coverage of technology and the effectiveness of recombination because teams can contain diverse members having different backgrounds . Hence , we hypothesize that : H1 : Patents invented by technologically diverse teams are more likely to have an impact than those invented by less diverse teams . C . Generalist inclusion Compared to interpersonal diversity , intrapersonal diversity is not thoroughly investigated in terms of the relationship with innovative performance . A few studies in the management literature have focused on the intrapersonal diversity of top management [ 33 ] , business unit management [ 34 ] , and employee [ 35 ] . Bunderson [ 34 ] uses the term intrapersonal functional diversity to refer to the extent to which individuals in teams have either specialized knowledge or general understanding . This view focuses on the individuals in a team . Past literature has attempted to examine the importance of intrapersonal diversity empirically . For example , team managers’ experiences brought by job rotation are positively related to the salary and promotion [ 36 ] , but intrapersonal diversity of managers may produce imperception [ 37 ] . The mechanism of the benefit of knowledge diversity of an individual is lowering the barrier to external knowledge and facilitating communication with stakeholders [ 38 ] , and promoting problem - solving [ 39 ] . The broadness of individual knowledge measures intrapersonal diversity . Bogers et al . [ 40 ] theorized that knowledge diversity of individuals is associated with their ability to identify and absorb external knowledge , which induced firm - level openness . They also found that individual educational diversity had a positive impact on firm - level openness . Although studies have analyzed intrapersonal diversity , few studies are focusing on the team in science . In the context of research and development , it is unclear whether broad or narrow knowledge leads to breakthrough innovation in teams [ 41 ] . There is a tradeoff relationship between general knowledge and specialized knowledge . On the one hand , literature on innovation has reported that general knowledge increases the chance of recombination and leads to novel and beneficial technology [ 42 ] . On the other hand , broad knowledge sacrifices the advantage of specialized knowledge . Specialized knowledge is the source of competitive advantage . A specialist can select , retain and assimilate new knowledge in a specific field . Those who have deep knowledge can identify anomalies of existing technologies and can create creative solutions . Comparing merits and demerits of the intrapersonal diversity of knowledge , we argue that generalists , having intrapersonal diversity , are critical to creating impactful team performance . When diverse members exchange and compensate for unfamiliar knowledge in teams , generalists can facilitate communication among diverse members , integrate a broad range of technological knowledge elements , and act as gatekeepers to an external knowledge source . Hence , we hypothesize that : H2 : Patents invented by teams having a technologically diverse individual are more likely to have an impact than those invented by teams not having such an individual . III . M ETHOD A . Data In order to test our hypotheses , we use patent bibliographic and citation data . To identify the profile of the inventor team , we collect the patent data provided by the USPTO PatentsView data download site . The data consists of granted patents that have been filed with the USPTO . This data includes inventor and assignee information , address , patent classification , and citation information among U . S . patents . These data have advantages for analysis for some reasons . First , patent data allow systematic comparison across technology domains , firms , and periods . Second , forward citations counted by patent data are a well - established measurement of technological impact on successive 2022 Proceedings of PICMET ' 22 : Technology Management and Leadership in Digital Transformation - Looking Ahead to Post - COVID Era technologies . Third , the longitudinal data enable us to observe a long - term tendency and changes of team profiles across periods . After collecting data from the PatentsView website , we construct a database for this analysis . We identified U . S . patents filed in the USPTO during 1980 - 2010 . To analyze team profiles , we mainly use inventor information in patents . The dataset has the name and address of inventors and also provides disambiguated inventor ids . Disambiguated inventor ids are necessary to construct variables of team profiles because raw inventor information has name spelling inconsistency or mis - spellings . Regarding this dataset , disambiguation is conducted by discriminative hierarchical coreference . First , we identify U . S . patents that have disambiguated inventor ids . Then , we exclude U . S . patents having single inventors because our analysis focuses on teams , not inventors themselves . Finally , only patents having inventors with unique inventor ids are selected . Because of the feature of our data set , not all inventors are assigned unique ids . After all , we use U . S . patents filed from 1980 to 2010 with inventor information , including unique inventor ids , names , and addresses . The assignee information provided by the PatentsView dataset is also disambiguated . This study investigates the relationship between technological diversity and inventive performance . For measuring technological diversity , we use CPC , Cooperative Patent Classification . CPC is a classification system adopted by the USPTO , EPO , and many other I . P . Offices . CPC follows the classification system of International Patent Classification ( IPC ) . Patent classification systems are assigned from a technology perspective by patent examiners . B . Dependent variable To measure the technological impact on the successive technology , the number of citations is used except self - citations . The number of citations , called forward citation , is commonly used as the index of quality of invention [ 43 ] . The number of forward citations is highly correlated with market value [ 20 ] . Thus , highly cited patents may have technological and economical impact on other citing patents . While forward citation is a significant proxy of technological impact , there are some limitations . First , not all highly cited patents have technological and economic impacts . Second , firms’ citation behavior depends on the operational and strategic characteristics of firms . Third , the citation behavior may also be affected by the time of patent filing . We take these firm and year effects into account in our control variables . To count the number of forward citations equally among patents filed in different years , the 5 - year citation window is applied following the past study [ 8 ] . The 5 - year citation window means a 5 - year forward citation measures the technological impact of a focal patent on subsequent patents filed in the following 5 years . C . Independent Variables Interpersonal diversity Based on the patent classifications of the patents filed in the past five years , we calculate interpersonal diversity . First , the number of times inventors have been involved in each patent classification in the past five years is aggregated . Next , we aggregate the calculated number of times per patent classification for each inventor by patent unit . Then , we calculate the diversity of patents based on patent classification , following the approach of a past study [ 13 ] . They use patent classes in the prior arts cited by a focal patent to measure technological diversity . We use four - digit classes to calculate this variable . 𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑑𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦 (cid:3036) = 𝑛 (cid:3036) 𝑛 (cid:3036) − 1 × (cid:4684)1 − (cid:3533)𝑠 (cid:3036)(cid:3037)(cid:2870) (cid:3041) (cid:3284) (cid:3037) (cid:4685) where n i is the number of distinct patent classifications of patent i and s ij donates the percentage of citations made by patent i to patents in class j out of n i patent classes . Generalist inclusion We calculate generalist inclusion as follows . First , the number of unique patent classifications by inventors is calculated based on the inventors’ patents in the past five years . Second , we calculate the rank of the inventors in order of the number of unique patent classifications by year and organization . Third , we flag inventors if inventors rank in the top 10 % . Finally , we aggregate the results by patent unit , and if any of the inventors related to the patent has the flag , we assign the generalist inclusion dummy to these patents . We exclude patents filed by organizations having less than 10 unique inventors in a given filing year . D . Control variables Centrality The network centrality in the inventor network measures the extent to which an inventor is connected to other inventors [ 44 ] . An inventor connecting many inventors can efficiently access the necessary knowledge . Therefore , patents invented by inventors with high network centrality are likely to promote knowledge recombination and thus invent technologies with high impact . This study constructs the inventor network based on the co - invention relationship in the past five years . We take the average of the network centrality by patents . As the network centrality , we adopted degree centrality , representing the number of direct connections among inventors . High career inclusion In a team , the more year of experience a member has in an organization , the more expertise and know - how he or she possesses . Therefore , patents that include such members with long careers in the invention team are expected to produce more impactful results through knowledge sharing and team education rooted in expertise . The following procedure creates the variable . First , we identify inventors whose organization has at least ten unique inventors per year . Second , we calculate the rank of the inventors in order of career by year and organization . Third , we flag inventors if inventors rank in the top 10 % . Next , we exclude the inventors who have at least three years of experience . Finally , we set the high career inclusion dummy if a patent has at least one inventor with the flag . 2022 Proceedings of PICMET ' 22 : Technology Management and Leadership in Digital Transformation - Looking Ahead to Post - COVID Era Nonpatent literature citation It has been reported that patents that cite non - patent documents have more citations [ 45 ] . Patents that cite non - patent literature , such as scientific and technical papers , as prior art are likely to be patents that relate to fundamental technology , as they are the ones that are connected to basic science . Such patents related to a more fundamental technology will have more citations because they influence subsequent patents in a broader area . To create a variable for the number of nonpatent citations , we calculate how many nonpatent documents each inventor has cited in the past five years . Then , we take the average of citations to non - patent literature of the inventors by patents . Team size The number of inventors in a given patent is measured as team size [ 8 ] . The inventor’s disambiguated ids provided by PatentsView allow us to count team size directly by using ids . The number of inventors may affect team management because human resources of research and development are crucial . Large firms tend to possess many and diverse researchers , and firms can have various options in terms of team building . On the other hand , small or start - up firms are few options to build teams . We control this tendency by calculating the number of inventors in a firm by year on the filing year base . Experience We expect that the more inventors with experience in inventing , the more efficiently they invent . To create this experience variable , we count the number of times each inventor has applied for a patent in the past five years and take the average value per patent . Number of inventors in a firm The number of inventors in an organization may affect team management . Large firms tend to possess many and diverse researchers , and firms can have various options in terms of team building . On the other hand , small or start - up firms are few options to build teams . We control this tendency by calculating the number of inventors in a firm by year . Accordance with organization The technological distance between the pattern of technological search of an individual inventor and the technological search of the organization likely affects the technological impact of inventor teams . To measure this technological distance between an individual and an organization , we add up the number of patents per patent class that the inventor has invented for the past five years , including the year of analysis , calculated by the following procedure . First , the number of times for each patent class is added up for each organization . Then , the cosine similarity is calculated from the number of times per patent category of the inventor and per patent category of the organization . The cosine similarity is calculated by year . Finally , the average value of the similarity of each inventor to the organization is calculated for each patent . E . Analysis We employ a negative binomial model to examine our hypothesis because our dependent variable is non - negative count data with overdispersion [ 46 ] . The analysis directs on patents having at least two inventors . We have missing observations in patents where inventor ids do not exist in our dataset . To capture any overall factors to patent citations , we include year and applicant fixed effects . We also exclude the inventors who are not associate with an organization . IV . R ESULT Table 1 shows a descriptive analysis of our key variables and correlation coefficients . The correlation coefficients of each pair of independent variables are small . We examine the effect of interpersonal diversity and generalist inclusion on invention impact in Table 2 . First , the only control variables are included in model 1 . Then , we combine the main independent variables of interpersonal diversity in model 2 and generalist inclusion in model 3 . Finally , model 4 includes all variables . Model 2 reports the significant positive effect of interpersonal diversity on the patent citation ; that result supports H1 . Model 3 also reports a significant positive effect . Thus , the result supports H2 . Finally , Model 4 shows the significant positive estimates both of interpersonal diversity and general inclusion . Next , the estimates for control variables show some findings . Team size positively affects the patent citation , which is consistent in past research . Centrality and nonpatent literature citation also have positive coefficients . On the other hand , high career inclusion , experience , number of inventor , and organizational similarity show negative effects on a patent citation . 2022 Proceedings of PICMET ' 22 : Technology Management and Leadership in Digital Transformation - Looking Ahead to Post - COVID Era V . D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION Our objective for this study was to investigate two sides of team diversity in creating innovative impact . To do this , we look at the effect of individual inventors’ diversity and teams’ diversity on innovative performance by measuring patent citations . We introduce interpersonal diversity and generalists inclusion by measuring each inventors’ past patenting activities in each technological domain . This measurement allows us to analyze inventors’ technological scope systematically across the whole dataset . Our approach is based on the literature that patents should be valuable data examined by inventors , patent attorneys , examiners , and third parties , including subsequent inventors [ 43 , 47 ] . Thus , patent citation implies technological relatedness , inventions’ impact , and precursor of technologies’ economic success . In addition , patent information includes patent classification , which provides detail technological information . The literature on team diversity regarding interpersonal and intrapersonal aspects has not fully revealed the detailed mechanism on the patent citation . Individual - level diversity has mixed perspectives such as multi - function , manager’s task , academic background , and cultural context . Especially , technological diversity of individuals and technological diversity of teams can have different mechanisms to create an innovative performance . Our findings based on patent data show that technological diversity in teams positively affects patent citation both in the interpersonal diversity view and the generalist inclusion view . Distinguishing individuals and teams are essential . To create high - impact performance , building an effective team is one of the crucial but challenging managerial . What makes effective team building difficult is the lack of understanding of the mechanism of relationship team diversity and team innovative performance . The consistent results for interpersonal diversity and generalist inclusion provide some implications . These findings may imply different mechanisms of internal communication in teams . As we expected , there was a positive correlation between generalist inclusion and innovative performance . This association can imply that generalist inclusion may promote internal communication in teams by gatekeeping function [ 48 ] . They promote information exchange internally and externally . Generalists also adjust the stereotype biases of specialists of specific technology domains [ 12 ] . Interpersonal diversity also works well to achieve high - impact invention . The great advantage of interpersonal diversity is team members’ coverage of the technology domain . A team member can access diverse technological knowledge within teams , leading to a search for new technological knowledge quickly and effectively . From the viewpoint of exploration and exploitation , interpersonal diversity can explore external knowledge and exploit very specialized knowledge in teams . These findings are also consistent with the tendency of a large team in science and technology . There can be both specialists and generalists in the same team in large teams to achieve team ambidexterity . Including members who explore external knowledge plays a vital role in acquiring and assimilating new knowledge . Generalists also contribute to teamwork by translating new knowledge . Individual who has broad experience can have unbiased cognitive toward new things . Thus , they can fairy judge new knowledge to create novel products . The practical implication from our study is that both interpersonal diversity and generalist inclusion work effectively to enhance teams’ innovative outcomes , which are consistent with previous results [ 49 ] . This result means management can be flexible to the team composition . Not all projects have enough resources to gather talents having diverse specialties . In such a case , a generalist can work as a knowledge source . The result from control variables also gives some implications . The positive impact caused by team size is in line with previous studies . Firms tend to invest budgets and human resources on essential projects , which are likely to succeed on the technology or market side . Centrality also shows positive impacts on innovative performance . This result supports previous findings in the literature on innovation networks . Individuals connected with others in the organization may access internal knowledge effectively . To access necessary knowledge , searching knowledge within the team is effective . However , searching beyond team boundaries within the organizational boundary is also an alternative way of effective search . In large 2022 Proceedings of PICMET ' 22 : Technology Management and Leadership in Digital Transformation - Looking Ahead to Post - COVID Era organizations , people with diverse backgrounds work for different departments or projects . Getting support and advice from them is much faster and more cost - effective than searching for novel knowledge beyond the organization . One unanticipated finding was the negative effects of high career inclusion and experience . Members with much experience in a particular field or same organization may tend to stick to fixed ideas or thinking patterns . Thus , designing team composition may include the perspective of members’ experience . The strategy of firms may also affect the team composition . If firms put stress on exploiting profit from their own technology , firms prefer large teams . In this case , our results would seem to imply that excluding too much - experienced members is a preferable option . There are some limitations to this paper . For example , inventors in patent data are not perfectly disambiguated . In addition , our findings cannot be simply applied to all industries . There are significant differences in team composition across sectors . Furthermore , our method deals with each domain classified by patent classification so that we cannot consider the heterogeneity of the technology domain . Finally , our study does not focus on team learning and knowledge sharing in teams ; both perspectives are essential on the theoretical and practical sides . As the focus of the study was on team composition extracted from patent data , we could not illustrate the team’s learning or knowledge - sharing activities . Future research should focus more on the differences in each technological domain regarding the relationship between team profiles and performance and clarify the optimal team characteristics according to the technological domain . In addition , as an analysis method , new data and methods to measure team characteristics that cannot be captured by patent analysis are desired . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] Lee Y - N , Walsh JP , Wang J . Creativity in scientific teams : Unpacking novelty and impact . Res Policy . 2015 ; 44 : 684 – 697 . [ 2 ] Wuchty S , Jones BF , Uzzi B . The increasing dominance of teams in production of knowledge . Science . 2007 ; 316 : 1036 – 1039 . [ 3 ] Hackman JR , Wageman R . A Theory of Team Coaching . AMRO . 2005 ; 30 : 269 – 287 . [ 4 ] Klein C , DiazGranados D , Salas E , Le H , Burke CS , Lyons R , et al . Does team building work ? Small Group Research . 2009 ; 40 : 181 – 222 . [ 5 ] Buller PF . The Team Building - Task Performance Relation : Some Conceptual and Methodological Refinements . Group & Organization Management . 1986 ; 11 : 147 – 168 . [ 6 ] Reagans R , Zuckerman EW . Networks , Diversity , and Productivity : The Social Capital of Corporate R & D Teams . Organization Science . 2001 ; 12 : 502 – 517 . [ 7 ] Wu L , Wang D , Evans JA . Large teams develop and small teams disrupt science and technology . Nature . 2019 ; 566 : 378 – 382 . [ 8 ] Breitzman A , Thomas P . Inventor team size as a predictor of the future citation impact of patents . Scientometrics . 2015 ; 103 : 631 – 647 . [ 9 ] Banerjee PM , Campbell BA . Inventor bricolage and firm technology research and development . R and D Management . 2009 ; 39 : 473 – 487 . [ 10 ] Singh J , Fleming L . Lone Inventors as Sources of Breakthroughs : Myth or Reality ? Manage Sci . 2010 ; 56 : 41 – 56 . [ 11 ] Hsu JSC , Chang JYT , Klein G , Jiang JJ . Exploring the impact of team mental models on information utilization and project performance in system development . Int J Project Manage . 2011 ; 29 : 1 – 12 . [ 12 ] Melero E , Palomeras N . The Renaissance Man is not dead ! The role of generalists in teams of inventors . Res Policy . 2015 ; 44 : 154 – 167 . [ 13 ] Kaplan S , Vakili K . The double - edged sword of recombination in breakthrough innovation . Strategic Manage J . 2015 ; 36 : 1435 – 1457 . [ 14 ] Cohen WM , Levinthal DA . Absorptive Capacity : A New Perspective on Learning and Innovation . Adm Sci Q . 1990 ; 35 : 128 – 152 . [ 15 ] Henderson RM , Clark KB . Architectural Innovation : The Reconfiguration of Existing Product Technologies and the Failure of Established Firms . Adm Sci Q . 1990 ; 35 : 9 – 30 . [ 16 ] Stewart GL . A meta - analytic review of relationships between team design features and team performance . J Manage . 2006 ; 32 : 29 – 55 . [ 17 ] Stasser G . Information salience and the discovery of hidden profiles by decision - making groups : A “thought experiment . ” Organ Behav Hum Decis Process . 1992 ; 52 : 156 – 181 . [ 18 ] Jehn KA , Northcraft GB , Neale MA . Why differences make a difference : A field study of diversity , conflict , and performance in workgroups . Adm Sci Q . 1999 ; 44 : 741 . [ 19 ] Ahuja G , Morris Lampert C . Entrepreneurship in the large corporation : A longitudinal study of how established firms create breakthrough inventions . Strategic Manage J . 2001 ; 22 : 521 – 543 . [ 20 ] Hall B , Jaffe A , Trajtenberg M . The NBER Patent Citations Data File : Lessons , Insights and Methodological Tools . 2001 ; 1 – 74 . [ 21 ] Taylor A , Greve HR . Superman or the fantastic four ? Knowledge combination and experience in innovative teams . Academy of Management Journal . 2006 ; 49 : 723 – 740 . [ 22 ] Huo D , Motohashi K , Gong H . Team diversity as dissimilarity and variety in organizational innovation . Res Policy . 2019 ; 48 : 1564 – 1572 . [ 23 ] Crescenzi R , Nathan M , Rodríguez - Pose A . Do inventors talk to strangers ? on proximity and collaborative knowledge creation . Res Policy . 2016 ; 45 : 177 – 194 . [ 24 ] Hülsheger UR , Anderson N , Salgado JF . Team - level predictors of innovation at work : a comprehensive meta - analysis spanning three decades of research . J Appl Psychol . 2009 ; 94 : 1128 – 1145 . [ 25 ] Fortunato S , Bergstrom CT , Börner K , Evans JA , Helbing D , Milojević S , et al . Science of science . Science . 2018 ; 359 . [ 26 ] Harrison DA , Klein KJ . What’s the Difference ? Diversity Constructs as Separation , Variety , or Disparity in Organizations . Acad Manage Rev . 2007 ; 32 : 1199 – 1228 . [ 27 ] Van Knippenberg D , De Dreu CKW , Homan AC . Work group diversity and group performance : An integrative model and research agenda . J Appl Psychol . 2004 ; 89 : 1008 – 1022 . [ 28 ] van der Vegt GS , Bunderson JS , Oosterhof A . Expertness diversity and interpersonal helping in teams : Why those who need the most help end up getting the least . Acad Manage J . 2006 ; 49 : 877 – 893 . [ 29 ] March JG . Exploration and Exploitation in Organizational Learning . Organization Science . 1991 ; 2 : 71 – 87 . [ 30 ] Grant RM . Toward a knowledge - based theory of the firm . Strategic Manage J . 1996 ; 17 : 109 – 122 . [ 31 ] Lovelace K , Shapiro DL , Weingart LR . Maximizing cross - functional new product teams’ innovativeness and constraint adherence : A conflict communications perspective . Acad Manage J . 2001 ; 44 : 779 – 793 . [ 32 ] Nooteboom B , Van Haverbeke W , Duysters G , Gilsing V , van den Oord A . Optimal cognitive distance and absorptive capacity . Res Policy . 2007 ; 36 : 1016 – 1034 . [ 33 ] Cannella AA , Park J - H , Lee H - U . Top Management Team Functional Background Diversity and Firm Performance : Examining The Roles of Team Member Colocation and Environmental Uncertainty . AMJ . 2008 ; 51 : 768 – 784 . [ 34 ] Bunderson JS , Sutcliffe KM . Comparing Alternative Conceptualizations of Functional Diversity in Management Teams : Process and Performance Effects . AMJ . 2002 ; 45 : 875 – 893 . [ 35 ] Corritore M , Goldberg A , Srivastava SB . Duality in Diversity : How Intrapersonal and Interpersonal Cultural Heterogeneity Relate to Firm Performance . Adm Sci Q . 2020 ; 65 : 359 – 394 . [ 36 ] Campion MA , Cheraskin L , Stevens MJ . Career - Related Antecedents and Outcomes of Job Rotation . AMJ . 1994 ; 37 : 1518 – 1542 . 2022 Proceedings of PICMET ' 22 : Technology Management and Leadership in Digital Transformation - Looking Ahead to Post - COVID Era [ 37 ] Beyer JM , Chattopadhyay P , George E , Glick WH , Ogilvie D , Pugliese D . The Selective Perception Of Managers Revisited . AMJ . 1997 ; 40 : 716 – 737 . [ 38 ] Ancona DG , Caldwell DF . Demography and Design : Predictors of New Product Team Performance . Organization Science . 1992 ; 3 : 321 – 341 . [ 39 ] Gino F , Argote L , Miron - Spektor E , Todorova G . First , get your feet wet : The effects of learning from direct and indirect experience on team creativity . Organ Behav Hum Decis Process . 2010 ; 111 : 102 – 115 . [ 40 ] Bogers M , Foss NJ , Lyngsie J . The “human side” of open innovation : The role of employee diversity in firm - level openness . Res Policy . 2018 ; 47 : 218 – 231 . [ 41 ] Nagle F , Teodoridis F . Jack of all trades and master of knowledge : The role of diversification in new distant knowledge integration . Strategic Manage J . 2020 ; 41 : 55 – 85 . [ 42 ] Hargadon A , Sutton RI . Technology brokering and innovation in a product development firm . Adm Sci Q . 1997 ; 716 – 749 . [ 43 ] Trajtenberg M . A penny for your quotes : patent citations and the value of innovations . Rand J Econ . 1990 ; 21 : 172 – 187 . [ 44 ] Nerkar A , Paruchuri S . Evolution of R & D capabilities : The role of knowledge networks within a firm . Manage Sci . 2005 ; 51 : 771 – 785 . [ 45 ] Ribeiro LC , Ruiz RM , Bernardes AT , Albuquerque EM . Matrices of science and technology interactions and patterns of structured growth : Implications for development . Scientometrics . 2010 ; 83 : 55 – 75 . [ 46 ] Hausman J , Hall B , Griliches Z . HausmanHallGriliches E84 . pdf . Econometrica . 1984 ; 52 : 909 – 938 . [ 47 ] Squicciarini M , Dernis H , Criscuolo C . Measuring Patent Quality : Indicators of Technological and Economic Value . OECD Science , Technology and Industry Working Papers . 2013 ; 70 . [ 48 ] Tushman ML , Katz R . External Communication and Project Performance : An Investigation into the Role of Gatekeepers . Manage Sci . 1980 ; 26 : 1071 – 1085 . [ 49 ] Verhoeven D . Potluck or Chef de Cuisine ? Knowledge Diversity in Teams and Breakthrough Invention . 2020 . Available at SSRN : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 2629602 . 2022 Proceedings of PICMET ' 22 : Technology Management and Leadership in Digital Transformation - Looking Ahead to Post - COVID Era