Gephi : An Open Source Software for Exploring and Manipulating Networks Mathieu Bastian and Sebastien Heymann Gephi , WebAtlas Paris , France { mathieu . bastian , sebastien . heymann } @ gephi . org Mathieu Jacomy WebAtlas founding member R & D at TIC - Migrations program in Fondation Maison des Sciences de l’Homme mathieu . jacomy @ gmail . com Abstract Gephi is an open source software for graph and network analysis . It uses a 3D render engine to display large networks in real - time and to speed up the exploration . A ﬂexible and multi - task architecture brings new pos - sibilities to work with complex data sets and produce valuable visual results . We present several key features of Gephi in the context of interactive exploration and interpretation of networks . It provides easy and broad access to network data and allows for spatializing , ﬁl - tering , navigating , manipulating and clustering . Finally , by presenting dynamic features of Gephi , we highlight key aspects of dynamic network visualization . Visualization and Exploration of Large Graphs In the aim of understanding networks , the visualization of large graphs has been developed for many years in many successful projects ( Batagelj 1998 ; Shannon 2003 ; Adar 2006 ) . Visualizations are useful to leverage the percep - tual abilities of humans to ﬁnd features in network structure and data . However this process is inherently difﬁcult and requires exploration strategy ( Perer 2006 ) . As well as being technically accurate and visually attractive , network explo - ration tools must head toward real - time visualizations and analysis to improve the user’s exploratory process . Inter - active techniques have successfully guided domain experts through the complex exploration of large networks . We can identify some main requirements for a network exploration tool : high quality layout algorithms , data ﬁlter - ing , clustering , statistics and annotation . In practice these requirements must be included in a ﬂexible , scalable and user - friendly software . Focusing on analysis clarity and on modern user interface , the Gephi project brings better net - work visualization to both experts and uninitiated audience . Inspired by WYSIWYG editors like Adobe Photoshop , we develop modules set around a center visualization window . The Gephi Software Gephi is an open source network exploration and manip - ulation software . Developed modules can import , visual - Copyright c (cid:2) 2009 , Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( www . aaai . org ) . All rights reserved . ize , spatialize , ﬁlter , manipulate and export all types of net - works . The visualization module uses a special 3D render engine to render graphs in real - time . This technique uses the computer graphic card , as video games do , and leaves the CPU free for other computing . It can deal with large network ( i . e . over 20 , 000 nodes ) and , because it is built on a multi - task model , it takes advantage of multi - core proces - sors . Node design can be personalized , instead of a classical shape it can be a texture , a panel or a photo . Highly con - ﬁgurable layout algorithms can be run in real - time on the graph window . For instance speed , gravity , repulsion , auto - stabilize , inertia or size - adjust are real - time settings of the Force Atlas algorithm , a special force - directed algorithm de - veloped by our team . Several algorithms can be run in the same time , in separate workspaces without blocking the user interface . The text module can show labels on the visualiza - tion window from any data attribute associated to nodes . A special algorithm named Label Adjust can be run to avoid label overlapping ( Figure 1 ) . Figure 1 : Label Adjust algorithm avoid label overlapping The user interface ( Figure 2 ) is structured into Workspaces , where separate work can be done , and a pow - erful plugin system is currently developed . Great attention has been taken to the extensibility of the software . An al - gorithm , ﬁlter or tool can be easily added to the program , with little programming experience . Sets of nodes or edges can be obtained manually or by using the ﬁlter system . Fil - ters can select nodes or edges with thresholds , range and other properties . In practice ﬁlter boxes are chained , each box take in input the output of the upper box . Thus , it is easy to divide a bi - partite network or to get the nodes that have an in - degree superior to 5 and the property ”type” set to ”1” . Because the usefulness of a network analysis often comes from the data associated to nodes / edges , ordering and clustering can be processed according to these values . With 361 Proceedings of the Third International ICWSM Conference ( 2009 ) Figure 2 : A screenshot of Gephi beta version 0 . 6 sets of nodes , graphical modules like Size Gradient , Color Gradient or Color clusters can then be applied to change the network design . Graphical modules take a set of nodes in input and modify the display parameters , like colors or size , to corroborate understanding of the network structure or content . Though networks can be explored in an interactive way with the visualization module , it can also be exported as a SVG or PDF ﬁle . The vectorial ﬁles can then be shared or printed . A powerful SVG exporter named Rich SVG Export is included in Gephi . Many options are offered to users to set the design of nodes , edges and labels . Techniques are developed to increase networks clarity and readability . Spe - cial care is taken about fonts and labels . For instance , small labels can be drawn on edges to immediately see the neigh - bours of a node . The Figure 3 shows the brain network of the C . Elegans worm ( Watts 1998 ) exported from Gephi . Figure 3 : SVG File exported from Gephi The current studies of network dynamics has brought some very interesting case study . Dynamic network visu - alization offer possibilities to understand structure transition or content propagation ( Moody 2005 ) . Exploring dynamic networks in an easy and intuitive way has been incorpo - rated in Gephi from the beginning . The architecture supports graphs whose structure or content varies over time , and pro - pose a timeline component where a slice of the network can be retrieved . From the time range of the timeline slice , the system queries all nodes and edges that match and update the visualization module . Hence a dynamic network can be played as movie sequences . The dynamic module can get network data from either a compatible graph ﬁle or from external data sources . When running , a data source can send network data to the dynamic controller at any time and immediately see the results on the visualization module . For instance a web - crawler can be connected to Gephi in order to see the network construction over time . The architecture is interoperable and data source can be created easily to communicate with existing software , third parties databases or web - services . Future work Though the core of the software already exists , further work is required for the development of new features , especially ﬁlters , statitics and tools . A special focus is made on clus - tering and hierarchical networks . Improvements will be in - tegrated to the data structure to support grouping and navi - gation within a network hierarchy . As for spatialization al - gorithms , a framework will be able to host various classiﬁ - cation algorithms . As we continue to receive feedbacks , we are looking for - ward to better adapt the user interface to users’ need . Gephi has been successfully used for Internet link and semantic network case studies . It is also frequently used for SNA . An effort has been made to speed up the analysis process , from data import to map export . Gephi is developed toward supporting the whole process with only user interface ma - nipulation . The developement of dynamic features are also one of the top priorities . Availability Gephi is available at http : / / gephi . org References Adar , E . 2006 . Guess : a language and interface for graph exploration . In CHI ’06 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI con - ference on Human Factors in computing systems , 791 – 800 . Batagelj , M . 1998 . Pajek - program for large network anal - ysis . Connections 21 : 47 – 57 . Moody , McFarland , B . - d . 2005 . Dynamic network visual - ization . American Journal of Sociology 110 ( 4 ) : 1206 – 1241 . Perer , S . 2006 . Balancing systematic and ﬂexible ex - ploration of social networks . Visualization and Computer Graphics , IEEE Transactions on 12 ( 5 ) : 693 – 700 . Shannon , Markiel , O . e . a . 2003 . Cytoscape : a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular inter - action networks . Genome Res 13 ( 11 ) : 2498 – 2504 . Watts , S . 1998 . Collective dynamics of ’small - world’ net - works . Nature 393 ( 6684 ) : 440 – 442 . 362