Mobility in geometrically confined membranes Yegor A . Domanov a , Sophie Aimon a , Gilman E . S . Toombes a , Marianne Renner b , François Quemeneur a , Antoine Triller b , Matthew S . Turner c , and Patricia Bassereau a , 1 a Institut Curie , Centre de Recherche , Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique , Unité Mixte de Recherche 168 , Physico - Chimie Curie , Université Pierre et Marie Curie , 75248 Paris , France ; b Institut de Biologie , Ecole Normale Supérieure , Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U1024 , Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique , Unité Mixte de Recherche 8197 , 75005 Paris , France ; and c Department of Physics , University of Warwick , Coventry CV4 7AL , United Kingdom Edited by Tom C . Lubensky , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA , and approved June 16 , 2011 ( received for review February 17 , 2011 ) Lipid and protein lateral mobility is essential for biological function . Our theoretical understanding of this mobility can be traced to the seminal work of Saffman and Delbrück , who predicted a logarith - mic dependence of the protein diffusion coefficient ( i ) on the in - verse of the size of the protein and ( ii ) on the “ membrane size ” for membranes of finite size [ Saffman P , Delbrück M ( 1975 ) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 72 : 3111 — 3113 ] . Although the experimental proof of the first prediction is a matter of debate , the second has not previously been thought to be experimentally accessible . Here , we construct just such a geometrically confined membrane by forming lipid bilayer nanotubes of controlled radii connected to giant liposomes . We followed the diffusion of individual molecules in the tubular membrane using single particle tracking of quantum dots coupled to lipids or voltage - gated potassium channels KvAP , while changing the membrane tube radius from approximately 250 to 10 nm . We found that both lipid and protein diffusion was slower in tubular membranes with smaller radii . The protein diffu - sion coefficient decreased as much as 5 - fold compared to diffusion on the effectively flat membrane of the giant liposomes . Both lipid and protein diffusion data are consistent with the predictions of a hydrodynamic theory that extends the work of Saffman and Delbrück to cylindrical geometries . This study therefore provides strong experimental support for the ubiquitous Saffman – Delbrück theory and elucidates the role of membrane geometry and size in regulating lateral diffusion . C ell membrane fluidity is crucial for living cells . Lateral trans - port and mixing take molecular components from where they are delivered onto the membrane to where they are needed . Dif - fusion is thought to be the primary mechanism for this transport and is therefore central to a variety of fundamental biomolecular processes ( 1 ) including signaling , transport , and self - assembly ( 2 ) . Whether the changes in molecular mobility alone can provide a regulatory pathway in cellular processes is one of the recurring questions in membrane biophysics . It is well established that the protein lateral mobility depends on membrane fluidity and on the size of the diffusing species and can be further modified by molecular crowding ( 3 – 5 ) as well as interactions with membrane microdomains ( 6 ) and the cytoskeleton ( 6 , 7 ) . Our aim is to study experimentally how membrane geometry and , in particular , mem - brane area confinement can affect the diffusion of lipids and membrane proteins . We will do this by studying tracer diffusion on membrane tubes , rather than in the more usual membrane geometry of nearly planar sheets ( large - radius vesicles ) . In this paper , we restrict our attention to membrane diffusion in perfectly mixed , single fluid phase membranes so as to study the role of membrane geometry on diffusion , without needing to consider additional contributions from membrane phase or mo - lecular ordering . Although curvature of a membrane can lead to changes in membrane thickness or ordering , these effects can be neglected when the smallest radius of curvature for the surface , R ( in our case the radius of the cylindrical membrane tether ) , is much larger than the membrane thickness , h ( 8 ) . Recent theore - tical work has suggested that membrane geometry should influ - ence diffusion in a particular way ( 9 ) , with the diffusion constant of tracer particles becoming smaller as the radius of a membrane tube is reduced . The area of membrane ( per unit length ) in a tube should affect the local diffusion constant because the movement of any particle embedded in the membrane creates a shear gra - dient that is proportional to the particle velocity and inversely related to the tube size . When , for instance , the particle moves along the tube axis , the membrane on the opposite side to the particle actually flows in the opposite direction , and here R tube is the relevant length over which the shear gradient extends ( 10 ) . According to the fluctuation dissipation theorem ( 11 ) , the larger force / velocity ratio corresponds to a smaller mobility and hence a reduced diffusion constant . These arguments can be rigorously formalized . The first pa - pers on the subject by Saffman and Delbrück ( 12 , 13 ) are seminal . These authors analyzed the low Reynolds number hydrodynamics of an embedded disk diffusing in a quasi two - dimensional mem - brane . Later refinements include analyzing the effect of flows in a surrounding fluid ( 13 , 14 ) . Saffman and Delbrück predicted that the diffusion constant on a membrane of finite area should depend logarithmically on the ratio of the size of the membrane ( frame ) to the radius of the diffusant particle r . Experimental ver - ification of this important prediction was , for many years , elusive . Very recently , experimental evidence for the logarithmic depen - dence on the size of the diffusant particle r has been reported ( 5 ) , although some debate remains ( 15 , 16 ) . No possible experimental test of the corresponding logarithmic dependence on the size of the membrane frame has previously been identified . We report on just such a test in the present work . Daniels and Turner ( 9 ) have shown that for membranes in a tubular geometry , which we study here , the role of effective membrane ( frame ) size R memb introduced by Saffman and Delbrück is played by the radius of the membrane tube R tube and not , for example , by its length . More recently , Henle and Levine ( 10 ) have presented a compre - hensive analysis of the membrane flows and particle mobilities in spherical and tubular membranes ; their solution for longitudinal mobility in the limit of thin tubes coincides with the logarithmic dependence obtained by Daniels and Turner . In the present work we report on measurements of tracer dif - fusion on membrane tubes with carefully controlled radii . These tubes were pulled from giant unilamellar vesicles ( GUVs ) by combining micropipette aspiration and optical trapping ( 17 , 18 ) . Diffusion of lipid and membrane proteins was measured by single particle tracking ( SPT ) of quantum dots ( QDs ) linked either to lipids or proteins detected with a fast and sensitive camera ( 19 ) . Our primary results are that membrane geometry can signifi - cantly affect tracer diffusion and that this is consistent with a logarithmic dependence on the tube radius R tube . This therefore Author contributions : A . T . , M . S . T . , and P . B . designed research ; Y . A . D . , S . A . , M . R . , and F . Q . performedresearch ; Y . A . D . andG . E . S . T . analyzeddata ; andY . A . D . , S . A . , G . E . S . T . , M . R . , F . Q . , A . T . , M . S . T . , and P . B . wrote the paper . The authors declare no conflict of interest . This article is a PNAS Direct Submission . 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : patricia . bassereau @ curie . fr . This article contains supporting information online at www . pnas . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1102646108 / - / DCSupplemental . www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1102646108 PNAS ∣ August 2 , 2011 ∣ vol . 108 ∣ no . 31 ∣ 12605 – 12610 A PP L I E D P H Y S I C A L S C I E N C E S B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y represents experimental verification of the corresponding predic - tions of Saffmann and Delbrück . Results Our experiments were aimed at determining how the diffusion rates of membrane components in cylindrical synthetic bilayer membrane depend upon the tube radius . We first prepared GUVs with the desired lipid and protein composition . We then used a micropipette to hold and manipulate the GUVs in the microscopy chamber ( Fig . 1 B ) . The presence of a trace amount of biotinylated lipids or proteins in the membrane provided a way to attach the GUV to streptavidin - coated polystyrene bead trapped by optical tweezers , and this bead was used to pull a thin bilayer tube away from the GUV ( Fig . 1 B ) . This experimental setup is particularly convenient ( 18 ) because it allows us to con - trol the membrane tension σ while measuring the pulling force f exerted by the bead , thereby determining the radius of the tether : R tube ¼ f ∕ 4 πσ ( for leaflet - symmetric , one - phase membranes ) . In a typical experiment , we made stepwise changes to the tube ra - dius by changing the aspiration pressure in the micropipette and measured lateral mobility using fast SPT of streptavidin - coated QDs attached to biotinylated lipids or transmembrane proteins ( Fig . 1 and Movie S1 ) . Lipid Diffusion in Vesicles and Tubes . We first analyzed a simple sys - tem consisting of a lipid tracer diffusing in a pure lipid membrane . Because of the relatively large size of the GUVs used in our experiments ( radius > 10 μ m ) , we can consider the surface of the vesicle to be quasi planar and use diffusion measurements on the vesicle as a control experiment providing a reference value for a planar membrane . In the egg phosphatidylcholine ( EPC ) and egg phosphatidic acid ( EPA ) ( 9 ∶ 1 , mol ∕ mol ) membrane , we obtained D planar ¼ 3 . 3 μ m 2 ∕ s ( SD ¼ 1 . 73 μ m 2 ∕ s , SEM ¼ 0 . 20 μ m ∕ s , approximately 8 , 000 trajectories on 12 vesicles ) . This value is generally lower than the coefficients obtained earlier in similar systems ( 20 , 21 ) , which can be attributed to possible multi - valent labeling of lipids in our experiments and / or the contribu - tion from the viscous drag experienced by the QD in the aqueous phase ( see below ) . Next , we measured the lipid diffusion coefficients on the tub - ular membrane as a function of its radius ( Fig . 2 ) . We engineered sufficiently thin membrane nanotubes ( R tube ¼ 10 – 250 nm ) so that the whole tube could sit within the depth of field of the epi - fluorescence microscope . Thus , when the tube is well aligned in the focal plane , one obtains QD trajectories exploring the whole surface of the membrane tube . To avoid geometrical artefacts re - lated to the projection of these 3D trajectories to the focal plane , we limited our analysis to the displacement components that are parallel to the tube axis ( see Materials and Methods and ref . 22 ) . The Inset in Fig . 2 shows that on wider tubes with R tube ≈ 200 nm , the diffusion coefficients are scattered close to the value mea - sured on the planar membrane ( dashed horizontal line in Fig . 2 Inset ) . As we reduced the tube radius by increasing the aspiration pressure in the micropipette , the lipid mobility decreased signif - icantly , with the most pronounced changes occurring for tube radii below 50 nm . For the thinnest tubes that we were able to obtain ( R tube ≈ 10 nm ) we observed more than a 3 - fold reduction of the diffusion coefficient as compared to the planar membrane KvAP QD PEG - linker 5 µm lipid nanotube A C D B 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 8 9 10 11 Longitudinal coordinate ( pixel ) ) l e x i p ( e t an i d r oo c l a s r e vs na r T 0 10 20 30 40 50 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 Time interval ( ms ) ) ² m µ ( t ne m e c a l p s i d e r auq s - nae M Fig . 1 . Experimental approach to diffusion measurements on tubular mem - branes . ( A ) Schematic of the tracer molecule ( KvAP in this case ) embedded in the tubular membrane and labeled with QD . ( B ) Fluorescence of individual QD - labeled molecules diffusing on the lipid nanotube ( center ) and the par - entvesicle ( left ) . The nanotubeis pulled using amicropipette ( dotted lines on the left ) holding the vesicle and an optically trapped bead ( dotted circle on the right ) attached at the distal tube end . ( C ) Example of trajectory obtained on a membrane tube . One pixel is 160 nm . ( D ) Averaged MSD plot for the longitudinal components of the tracer displacements obtained from multiple trajectories . Fig . 2 . Lipid lateral mobility on tubular membranes . Semilogarithmic plot of the diffusion coefficients calculated from longitudinal MSDs of the lipid - anchored QDs . The lipid composition was EPC / EPA ( 9 ∶ 1 , mol ∕ mol ) with addi - tional 0 . 01 mol % of biotin - phosphatidylethanolamine for QD binding and tube pulling . Cumulative data from eight measurement series providing a total of 50 data points ; each point represents a mean diffusion coefficient obtained from 3 to 126 individual trajectories ; the error bars correspond to SEM . The weighted fit by Eq . 2 ( blue solid line ) yields membrane viscosity η ¼ 5 . 5 · 10 − 10 Jm − 2 s and effective lipid size R lipid ¼ 0 . 7 nm . ( Inset ) The same data in linearcoordinates . Themobilitymeasuredonflatmembrane isshown for comparison ( green dashed line ; D planar ¼ 3 . 3 μ m ∕ s ) . 12606 ∣ www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1102646108 Domanov et al . ( Fig . 2 ) . The geometrical reduction in the local membrane area ( per length ) in thin tubes thus appears to induce a significant reduction of lipid mobility . Although the statistical distribution of the diffusion coefficients obtained from different trajectories in the same experiment may appear to be wide , this is typical for SPT experiments . The width of the distributions can be explained , for the most part , by stochas - tic variability intrinsic to the analysis of single particle trajectories rather than the lack of experimental precision . Given the SPT parameters used here ( see Materials and Methods ) , the standard deviation of D predicted by statistical analysis is approximately 35 % ( 23 , 24 ) . Some additional variation of tracer mobility , inde - pendent of the tube radius , might also result if multivalent lipid labeling occurs , in which two or more lipid molecules bind a single tracer particle ( 25 ) . In our experiments , this effect would affect the lipid diffusion data more strongly than KvAP ( a bacterial voltage - gated K þ channel ) data , because the large size of KvAP makes it less likely that one QD could bind multiple proteins . To ensure that there was no bias in our tracking algorithm , we systematically checked the mean - square displacement ( MSD ) curves and mobility histograms for all experiments . The histo - grams did not show large fractions of immobile particles , and the averaged longitudinal MSD curves were predominantly linear , implying Brownian diffusion in all our samples ( Fig . S1 ) . In sum - mary , despite the relatively wide distribution of diffusion coeffi - cients obtained by SPT , the mean values revealed a clear trend as a function of tube radius with the overall reduction of the lipid mobility significantly exceeding the experimental uncertainties . Transmembrane Protein Diffusion . To understand how the tubular geometry affects mobility of a membrane component that is much larger than the size of lipid molecules , we performed SPT on a transmembrane protein reconstituted into artificial membranes . We used the KvAP , expressed in prokaryotic cells , purified follow - ing ( 26 ) , and then reconstituted into GUVs using a protocol de - veloped in our laboratory . Its close resemblance to the neuronal Kv channels ( 27 ) makes it a good model protein for studying the effect of membrane size on diffusion in structures similar in dimensions and shape to neurites and neuronal spines ( 28 ) . The structure of KvAP and its conformation in the membrane are known ( 27 ) , which allowed us to estimate the area occupied by the channel in the membrane and to calculate the effective radius of the tetramer to be R prot ≈ 4 nm . For the SPT measurements , the protein was labeled with maleimide - PEG - biotin anchor covalently attached to the protein ( Fig . 1 A ) Protein density in the GUV membranes varied in the range of 50 – 1 ; 000 proteins ∕ μ m 2 , but only a small fraction of the total number of proteins were labeled with QDs . No biotinylated lipid was included in vesicles containing reconstituted biotiny - lated KvAP . The protein diffusion coefficient on the flat membrane was D planar ¼ 2 . 3 μ m 2 ∕ s ( SD ¼ 0 . 7 μ m 2 ∕ s , SEM ¼ 0 . 14 μ m 2 ∕ s ) as calculated from a total of 3 , 000 trajectories on eight vesicles . This value is lower than the lipid self - diffusion coefficient given above , which is consistent with the hydrodynamic theory prediction that the lateral mobility decreases with the inclusion size . When the KvAP diffusion was measured on tubular mem - branes as a function of tube radius ( Fig . 3 ) , we observed a pro - gressive decrease of the protein lateral mobility as the tube radius was reduced , similar to the lipid - only membranes . In wider tubes ( R tube ≈ 200 nm ) the lateral mobility was close to that found on planar membrane ( dashed horizontal line in Fig . 3 Inset ) , but dif - fusion decreased rapidly in thinner ones ( R tube ¼ 10 – 50 nm ) , with up to a 5 - fold overall retardation of the protein diffusion in the thinnest tubes studied . This pronounced change of protein mobility in the 10 - to 200 - nm range of tube radii confirms our earlier conclusion that lateral mobility on narrow membrane tubes decreases as the area of membrane in the tube becomes smaller . This retardation is stronger for a large transmembrane protein as compared to a lipid ( Fig . 2 ) , as expected for a hydro - dynamic effect . Discussion Compatibility with Hydrodynamic Models . Hydrodynamic models of diffusion in lipid membranes treat the bilayer as a quasi two - dimensional sheet of viscous fluid of thickness h ( 9 , 10 , 12 ) . This is a continuum approach , and so it necessarily neglects the molecular structure and finite size of the lipids . Transmembrane proteins are modeled as cylinders of radius r , here rather larger than R lipid . Because the membrane flow is effectively incompres - sible , the flow around a moving disk can be computed by solving Laplace ’ s equation for a velocity potential in two dimensions ( 29 ) . The mobility contains a logarithmic term , such as commonly arises in two dimensions ( e . g . , electrostatics ) . This gives rise to effects attributed to Stokes ’ paradox ( 29 ) . Saffman and Delbrück ( 12 ) proposed solutions for specific cases in which these logarithmic terms appear at leading order in the expression for the diffusion constant ; first , for a planar membrane of finite area ( e . g . , on a circular frame ) in a surround - ing fluid of negligible viscosity : D ¼ k B T 4 πμ h ln R memb r ; [ 1 ] where k B is the Boltzmann constant , T is the absolute tempera - ture , μ is the viscosity of the membrane , h is the membrane thick - ness , R memb is the radius of the membrane frame , and r is the radius of a disk - like tracer particle , such as a protein or lipid molecule , with R memb ≫ r . They then extended this to the case where the membrane has infinite area but surrounding fluid has nonvanishing viscosity μ bath ( 12 ) . A new length scale emerges in the second case equal to μ h ∕ μ bath ( 12 ) . Because of the high viscosity of the membrane , this can be of the scale of half a micron or more . It can therefore be thought of as providing a cutoff to Eq . 1 : The finite membrane area appears directly unless it is lar - ger than μ h ∕ μ bath , in which case the three - dimensional flows in the bulk fluid effectively screen out the logarithmic divergence arising from the purely two - dimensional membrane flow . Fig . 3 . KvAP channel mobility in membrane nanotubes . Semilogarithmic plot of longitudinal diffusion coefficient as a function of the tube radius . Protein density in the membrane varied between 50 – 1 , 000 proteins per μ m 2 . Cumulative data from seven measurement series providing a total of 43 data points ; each point represents a mean diffusion coefficient obtained from 4 to 161 individual trajectories ; the error bars correspond to SEM . Weighted fitting by Eq . 2 ( blue solid line ) yields membrane viscosity η ¼ 7 . 3 · 10 − 10 Jm − 2 sandproteinradius R prot ¼ 3 . 0 nm . ( Inset ) Thesamedatainlinear coordinates . The mobility measured on flat membrane is shown for compar - ison ( green dashed line ; D plane ¼ 2 . 2 μ m 2 ∕ s ) . Domanov et al . PNAS ∣ August 2 , 2011 ∣ vol . 108 ∣ no . 31 ∣ 12607 A PP L I E D P H Y S I C A L S C I E N C E S B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y The concept of a planar membrane of finite area ( e . g . , existing on a planar frame ) can seem rather artificial . Daniels and Turner ( 9 ) instead analyzed the geometry of a tubular bilayer ( as well as spherical membrane geometries ) . They found that the diffusion constant for tracers on a membrane tube is given by an equation identical to Eq . 1 , except that R memb is replaced by R tube , which then plays the role of the effective membrane size : D ¼ k B T 4 πμ h (cid:1) ln R tube r (cid:2) : [ 2 ] Importantly , the length scale μ h ∕ μ bath ≫ R tube for all of the ex - perimental data we present here . This means that flows in the embedding fluid can be safely neglected throughout and that we expect the diffusion constant to be given by Eq . 2 . We first compared this hydrodynamic model to our measure - ments of lipid diffusion ( Fig . 2 ) . We applied the Saffman – Delbrück model ( 12 ) to D planar ¼ 3 . 3 μ m 2 ∕ s obtained on GUVs assuming μ bath ¼ 1 . 25 × 10 − 3 Pa·s and r ¼ R lipid ¼ 0 . 5 nm ( 30 ) . We thus arrive at a 2D membrane viscosity η ≡ μ h ¼ 6 . 5 × 10 − 10 Jm − 2 s [ divided by h ¼ 4 . 5 nm ( 30 ) , it gives 3D visc - osity μ ¼ 1 . 4 P ( poise ) or 0 . 14 Pa·s ] , which agrees well with the literature data for similar lipid compositions ( 31 ) . We then fitted data for the diffusion constant of lipid tracers on a tube using Eq . 2 . During the fitting procedure , the data points ( points in Fig . 2 ) were assigned weights inversely proportional to the var - iance for each averaged value of D in order to account for differ - ences in the experimental distributions of D . The logarithmic theoretical prediction ( solid line in Fig . 2 ) closely follows the data points . Using both η and R lipid as adjustable parameters in the fit , we obtained η ¼ ð 5 . 5 (cid:1) 0 . 8 Þ × 10 − 10 J m − 2 s ( equivalent to 1 . 2 P or 0 . 12 Pa·s ) and R lipid ¼ 0 . 73 (cid:1) 0 . 36 nm ; i . e . , membrane viscos - ity similar to the value calculated for the planar membrane above and the lipid size that is very close to the expected value ( 30 ) . Similarly , if we fixed R lipid at 0 . 5 nm and adjusted the viscosity only , we would obtain η ¼ 6 . 1 × 10 − 10 J m − 2 s ; i . e . , the fitting parameters are well defined and consistent irrespective of the fit - ting procedure . Remarkably , the measurements are directly com - patible with this simple physical model , using literature values of R lipid and η , with no need for any empirical / artificial adjustable parameters . This is the first confirmation that Eq . 2 is consistent with our data on lateral diffusion on the tubular membrane . Additionally , the lipid diffusion constants on planar and tubular membranes are mutually consistent : The lipid mobility on the thickest tubes convincingly approaches that measured on almost planar membranes ( Fig . 2 Inset ) . As a result , the measure - ments are consistent with both the Saffman – Delbrück model for planar membranes ( 12 ) and the Daniels – Turner model for tubes with very similar membrane viscosities ( Eq . 2 ) . Moreover , our lipid diffusion data seem to agree rather well with the continuous hydrodynamic models , even though the size of the diffusing species in this case is comparable to the size of the “ solvent ” ( lipid ) particles . Strictly speaking , this represents the edge of the regime of universal validity of such continuum the - ories ( 31 , 32 ) . The diffusion of large transmembrane proteins , such as KvAP used here , is more clearly in the hydrodynamic regime . Assuming that the effective radius of KvAP in the mem - brane is R prot ¼ 4 nm ( 27 ) we can then use the Saffman – Delbrück model ( Eq . 1 ) to relate the D planar value of KvAP , mea - sured on the GUV surface , to obtain the 2D membrane viscosity η ¼ 6 . 7 × 10 − 10 J m − 2 s . It is most reassuring that this value is close to the viscosity extracted from the diffusion of lipid tracers in lipid - only membranes , estimated above . For the KvAP proteins , we also obtained a good fit of the tube diffusion data ( Fig . 3 ) by the predicted logarithmic dependence ( Eq . 2 ) with η ¼ ð 7 . 3 (cid:1) 0 . 5 Þ × 10 − 10 Jm − 2 s and r ¼ 3 . 0 (cid:1) 0 . 5 nm . As in the case of lipid diffusion , the data appear to be consistent with the theoretically predicted logarithmic relationship ( solid line in Fig . 3 ) . Fig . 3 presents the data and the theoretical curve in semilogarithmic coordinates to emphasize the logarithmic relationship between the protein mobility and the size of the tubular membrane . The membrane viscosity deduced from this dependence is in good agreement with the estimate calculated from the protein diffusion on flat membranes as well as our ear - lier estimates for pure lipid membranes . Moreover , the estimate of r is close to the value R prot ¼ 4 nm derived from the KvAP structure ( 27 ) . This is the second confirmation that Eq . 2 is valid and that hydrodynamic models correctly describe lateral diffusion in confined membranes . Other Possible Factors Affecting the Data . In this paper , we show that hydrodynamic effects in tubular membranes with small radii can lead to changes of the mobility of membrane components . Several other effects can potentially affect diffusion in our sys - tem . We consider them in detail in this subsection . The QDs used here to trace the movements of membrane com - ponents are relatively large , and hence the viscous drag experi - enced by the QD itself as it moves through the aqueous solvent might affect the overall mobility measured in our experi - ments . Assuming that the radius of QD625 is R QD ¼ 10 nm , we calculated the 3D diffusion coefficient of the QD using Stokes – Einstein equation . For room temperature and the buffer viscosity of 1 . 2510 − 3 Pa·s , the diffusion coefficient is 19 . 6 μ m 2 ∕ s , which is more than five times faster than the lipid or protein diffusion coefficients reported above . This means that the viscous drag on the tethered QD is dominated by the drag on the anchor ( lipid or protein ) moving through the membrane . The contribution of the nonnegligible drag on the QD can be approximated by adding the QD friction coefficient in the numerator of Eq . 2 and using this modified equation to fit the diffusion data . Following this procedure , we obtained equally good fit ( or even slightly better for the lipid diffusion data ) and parameters very close to those before the correction : η ¼ 4 . 5 × 10 − 10 J m − 2 s and r ¼ 0 . 84 nm for the lipid diffusion , and η ¼ 6 . 3 × 10 − 10 J m − 2 s and r ¼ 3 . 4 nm for the protein diffusion . Therefore , this effect does not affect our conclusions about the dependence of mobility on the tube radius ; the addition of the QD friction only results in a slight vertical shift of the whole curve in Figs . 2 and 3 . Although the relatively large QDs are outside the membrane tube , both KvAP and PEG lipids in the inner leaflet protrude into the inside of the membrane tube . However , these should not act as steric obstructions to dif - fusion because the estimated size of these protrusions ( 2 – 5 nm ) is considerably smaller than the internal diameter of even the smallest tubes ( 13 nm ) . In these experiments , changes in tube radius were accompa - nied by changes in membrane tension and curvature . Could mem - brane tension or curvature directly affect diffusion coefficients ? The free area theory predicts that the diffusion coefficient should increase when the membrane is stretched to effectively increase the area of “ voids ” between lipids ( 32 ) . In a control experiment , we have measured D on the surface of GUVs for different mem - brane tensions in the range of 10 − 6 – 10 − 4 N ∕ m , covering the range of values used in our tube experiments ( Fig . S2 ) . We found no statistically significant change of D , confirming that the effects that we measure in our tube experiments are only related to the tube radius and not to the membrane tension . Much higher tensions ( σ > a few 10 − 4 N ∕ m ) corresponding to the “ stretching regime ” ( 33 ) might be necessary for a noticeable effect on the diffusion . Although NMR measurements of acyl chain dynamics revealed only limited effects for even the largest membrane curvatures used in this study ( 34 ) , it is important to consider how membrane curvature could alter membrane structure and dynamics . In our experimental measurements of lipid diffusion , we selectively label the lipids in the outer leaflet . The positive curvature of the outer leaflet is expected to decrease the lateral packing density at the head - group level ( 35 ) . Provided that mem - 12608 ∣ www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1102646108 Domanov et al . brane viscosity is determined mainly by interactions at this level ( 36 ) , increased curvature would speed up diffusion in the outer leaflet . Thus , if tube curvature significantly affected lipid diffu - sion , one would expect faster diffusion in tubes with smaller radii , which is contrary to our observations . Furthermore , membrane curvature should affect lipids in the outer leaflet and a trans - membrane object such as KvAP differently , yet both follow the logarithmic dependence predicted by Saffman – Delbrück . In sum - mary , for this range of membrane curvatures , there is no clear evidence for a direct effect of membrane curvature on diffusion coefficients . We also remark on the role of interleaflet flows . These have been shown to result in significant dynamical effects in cases when the membrane geometry is changing ( 37 , 38 ) , particularly during tube extension ( 38 ) . It is important to note that our system is rather different in that the geometry is fixed and our tube is assumed to be fully equilibrated . The role of interleaflet friction in our system can be analyzed by writing down separate Stokes equations for the two leaflets that include an interlayer coupling , which is simply proportional to the velocity difference across the two leaflets but which , by Newton ’ s third law , has a different sign on each leaflet . Importantly , these two equations can be added together to obtain an equation for the mean flow , which has the form assumed here , and used in refs . 9 , 12 , and 14 , up to cor - rections that are quadratically small in the ratio of the leaflet thickness to the tube radius ( i . e . , a few percent ) . Changes in the average membrane viscosity , associated with changes in molecu - lar ordering , could enter at the same order . A detailed analysis of these corrections is beyond the scope of the present work . Finally , molecular crowding in the membrane can slow down the dynamics of the membrane components . At high protein den - sities , both protein and lipid mobility decrease because of steric hindrances imposed by large molecules . This has been predicted theoretically ( 39 ) and shown experimentally both in model membranes ( 3 ) and live cells ( 4 ) . Recent data for three integral proteins with R prot ¼ 2 – 4 nm ( 5 ) suggest that this effect becomes noticeable when the protein density exceeds around 1 ; 000 proteins ∕ μ m . The densities of KvAP in our experiments were in the range of 50 – 1 ; 000 proteins ∕ μ m ; i . e . , most of our mea - surements fall in the safe range . Even if the crowding effects are not negligible , they will not compromise our conclusions because they will affect diffusion rates in tubes of different radii to the same degree . However , if the high membrane curvature affects the protein redistribution between the GUVand the tube causing relative enrichment of protein in thin tubes , the crowding effects can be selectively amplified for small tube radii . The study of such curvature - induced protein sorting in thin tubes is currently underway in our laboratory . Nevertheless , the mutual consistency between lipid and protein diffusion constants implies that the principal source of the mobility changes is hydrodynamic in origin and is not related to protein crowding . In conclusion , the observed diffusion of a lipid and a trans - membrane protein in tubular membranes are both consistent with the effect of confinement on the Saffman – Delbrück model . Although the role of other effects cannot be completely excluded and other mathematical functions , different from a logarithmic dependence , could be used to fit the data , these results provide strong support for the use of hydrodynamic models to describe lateral diffusion in confined membranes . Role in Cellular Processes . As described above , our experimental results represent a direct test of predictions of the hydrodynamic theory for geometrically confined membranes , thus contributing to the important debate on biophysical modeling of membrane dynamics . At the same time , these findings can provide insight into a possible regulatory role of bilayer geometry in various cellular contexts . Indeed , the problem is relevant to a number of physiological processes taking place in tubular membranes such as cell – cell communication via tunneling nanotubes ( 22 ) , mobility and redistribution of membrane components in endoplasmic re - ticulum and Golgi apparatus ( 40 ) , or receptor diffusion in neur - ites and neuronal spines ( 28 , 41 ) . The spines , representing thin protrusions on dendrite membrane that form synaptic connec - tions to other neurones , are particularly interesting because they have tubular necks with radii in the range of 25 – 250 nm , and the changes of their morphology are known to correlate with synaptic plasticity ( 42 ) . Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching mea - surements in live neurones have shown that the diffusion is slower in the spine neck region ( 28 ) . At the same time , it is well known that many receptors in cytoplasmic membranes have intracellular domains that interact with the underlying cytoskeletal structure ; in such cases , the drag with the cytoskeleton can decrease diffu - sion rates by orders of magnitude and effectively mask the more subtle hydrodynamic effects ( 43 ) . To test whether the membrane confinement effects can man - ifest themselves in intact biological membranes , we reproduced our SPT measurements on neurites of live hippocampal neurons in culture . We used three tracer molecules with different sizes of the transmembrane segment and obtained their diffusion coef - ficients as a function of the neurite width ( Fig . S3 ) . Not surpris - ingly , the experimental data were even more scattered than those for the model nanotubes ( Figs . 2 and 3 ) because of possible in - homogeneities in the neurite membrane , deviations from tubular shape , interactions with cytoskeleton , dimerization / oligomeriza - tion , etc . Nevertheless , in all three cases we observed reduction of the mobility in thinner neurites that was similar to that found for model membrane tubes . Fitting these data with a simple hydrodynamic model ( Eq . 2 ) did not yield expected sizes of the tracers ( Table S1 ) , reflecting the complex nature of the neurite biomembranes . However , the inverse dependence of the protein mobility on the neurite diameter suggests that hydrodynamic in - teractions in geometrically confined membranes may affect the diffusion of membrane components in living cells . To conclude , our data suggest that membrane morphology may have a direct effect on the lateral mobility of membrane proteins in living systems and could be involved in regulatory circuitry of the cell . Materials and Methods Preparation of Lipid Vesicles , QD Labeling , and Pulling Nanotubes . GUVs were prepared by electroformation on indium - tin oxide coated glass slides ( 44 ) using a mixture of chicken EPC and chicken EPA in a 9 ∶ 1 molar ratio , com - plemented with 0 . 01 % of 1 , 2 - distearoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphoethanolamine - N - [ biotinyl ( polyethylene - glycol ) - 2000 ] [ DSPE - PEG ( 2000 ) - biotin ] . The vesicles were in a sucrose solution with an osmolarity of 200 mOsm . Prior to the SPT experiments , the GUV suspension was diluted with a buffer solution of matching osmolarity containing approximately 10 pmol of QD625 - strep - tavidinconjugate . After1 – 2minofincubation , thevesicleswerewashedwith the same buffer solution using a minicentrifuge . QD - labeled GUVs were transferred to the microscopy observation chamber pretreated with casein solution and aspirated in a glass micropipette using a micromanipulator and a custom - made hydraulic system . The bilayer tube ( tether ) was pulled by pushing the GUV against a streptavidin - coated polystyrene bead ( ϕ ¼ 3 . 3 μ m ) held with a custom - made fixed optical trap ( 18 ) and then gently moving the vesicle away from the bead . Purification andReconstitution of KvAP . KvAPwas purifiedand labeledusing a protocol modified from ref . 26 . The wild - type KvAP plasmid was generously provided by R . MacKinnon ( The Rockefeller University , New York ) . KvAP was expressed in Escherichia coli solubilized in decylmaltopyranoside ( DM ; Affy - metrix ) and then purified using a His - tag affinity nickel column followed by size exclusion chromatography . The protein was labeled for 2 to 4 h at room temperature in 600 μ M of EZ - Link maleimide - PEO11 - biotin ( Pierce ) . The la - beled protein was then mixed with small unilamellar vesicles ( SUVs ) of EPC : EPA ( 9 ∶ 1 molar ratio ) presolubilized with DM . The free label and deter - gent were removed by dialysis . GUVs were made using an electroformation protocol adapted from ref . 45 . SUVs containing proteins were mixed with pure EPC / EPA SUVs to achieve a final lipid / protein weight ratio between 8 and 200 . Droplets of the SUV mixture ( 3 to 10 mg ∕ mL of lipid ) were spread Domanov et al . PNAS ∣ August 2 , 2011 ∣ vol . 108 ∣ no . 31 ∣ 12609 A PP L I E D P H Y S I C A L S C I E N C E S B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y onplatinum wires and partially dehydrated fortypically 20min . Lipid - protein films were rehydrated in a solution containing 200 mM sucrose , 100 mM KCl , 10 mM Hepes , pH ¼ 7 . 4 , while keeping the platinum wires under sinusoidal voltage of 1 . 8 V ( peak - to - peak ) at 500 Hz for 4 to 12 h . The resulting GUVs were then labeled with QDs using the protocol described in the previous sub - section . QD Imaging and Analysis . The high - speed imaging of single QDs attached to tracer molecules was made using an epifluorescence microscope equipped with back - thinned electron - multiplying CCD camera ( iXon DU - 897 , Andor Technology ) . For each tube , at a given diameter a sequence of 1 , 000 or 2 , 000 images was obtained with 1 - or 4 - ms exposure time and electron multi - plication gain of 200 . In a typical experiment , we would have between 2 – 10 individual QDs on a membrane tube of 20 – 50 μ m in length . Tracking of in - dividual QDs was performed with the MATLAB software developed in the groupofMaximeDahanattheÉcoleNormaleSupérieure ( Paris , France ) , with modifications . Only the trajectories that were at least 30 points long were kept for further analysis . For the calculation of diffusion coefficients on the tubular membranes , we rotated the coordinate plane to precisely align the tube axis with the x axis of the coordinate planem and we only used the longitudinal ( along the x axis ) displacements of the particles to calculate the MSD to avoid geometrical artifacts due to curved geometry ( 22 ) . The diffu - sion coefficient D was calculated by fitting the points 2 to 5 of the MSD plot versus time with MSD ð t Þ ¼ 2 Dt þ b ; , where b is the variable offset used to account for limited localization accuracy ( 46 ) . For each tube radius , we typi - cally obtained 20 – 100 trajectories . The MSD and D were calculated for each trajectory and then averaged . For the trajectories obtained on the GUV sur - face , both x and y displacements were analyzed . In this case , the MSD and diffusion coefficients were calculated using conventional formulas for two dimensions . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . P . B . and Y . A . D . thank S . Morlot and A . Roux for the use of their microscope setup , B . Sorre for initial experimental tests , M . Dahan ( Ecole Normale Supérieur ) for expert advice , and J . - F . Joanny for stimulating discussions and carefully reading the manuscript . The project was funded by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche , Grants Neur - 043 - 02 and BLAN - 0282 - 02 . Y . D . was supported by a fellowship from the Fondation Pierre - Gilles de Gennes and by a European Reintegration Grant from the European Com - mission ( Marie Curie Actions ) . S . A . thanks D . Schmidt and R . MacKinnon ( Rockefeller ) for help with protein purification . G . E . S . T . was supported by a Marie Curie Incoming International Fellowship from the European Commis - sion . M . S . T . thanks the Gulliver lab and Pierre Sens at Ecole Supérieure de Physique et de Chimie Industrielles ( ESPCI ) Paris for a Joliot - Curie visiting fel - lowship and the UK ESPCI for a Leadership Fellowship , Grant EP / E501311 / 1 . P . B . ’ s group belongs to the French research consortium ‘‘ CellTiss . ’’ 1 . Axelrod D ( 1983 ) Lateral motion of membrane proteins and biological function . J Membr Biol 75 : 1 – 10 . 2 . Alberts B , et al . ( 2002 ) Molecular Cell Biology of the Cell ( Garland Science , New York ) , 4th Ed . 3 . PetersR , CherryRJ ( 1982 ) Lateralandrotationaldiffusionofbacteriorhodopsininlipid bilayers : ExperimentaltestoftheSaffman – Delbruckequations . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 79 : 4317 – 4321 . 4 . Frick M , Schmidt K , Nichols BJ ( 2007 ) Modulation of lateral diffusion in the plasma membrane by protein density . Curr Biol 17 : 462 – 467 . 5 . Ramadurai S , et al . ( 2009 ) Lateral diffusion of membrane proteins . J Am Chem Soc 131 : 12650 – 12656 . 6 . Lenne PF , et al . ( 2006 ) Dynamic molecular confinement in the plasma membrane by microdomains and the cytoskeleton meshwork . EMBO J 25 : 3245 – 3256 . 7 . KusumiA , SakoY , YamamotoM ( 1993 ) Confinedlateraldiffusionofmembranerecep - tors as studied by single particle tracking ( nanovid microscopy ) . Effects of calcium - induced differentiation in cultured epithelial cells . Biophys J 65 : 2021 – 2040 . 8 . Safran SA ( 2003 ) Statistical Thermodynamics of Surfaces , Interfaces , and Membranes ( Westview Press , Boulder , CO ) . 9 . Daniels DR , Turner MS ( 2007 ) Diffusion on membrane tubes : A highly discriminatory test of the Saffman - Delbruck theory . Langmuir 23 : 6667 – 6670 . 10 . Henle ML , Levine AJ ( 2010 ) Hydrodynamics in curved membranes : The effect of geo - metry on particulate mobility . Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 81 : 011905 . 11 . Einstein A ( 1905 ) Über die von der molekularkinetischen theorie der wärme geforderte bewegung von in ruhenden flüssigkeiten suspendierten teilchen [ On the movement of small particles suspended in a stationary liquid demanded by the molecular - kinetic theory of heat ] . Ann Phys 322 : 549 – 560 . 12 . Saffman PG , Delbrück M ( 1975 ) Brownian motion in biological membranes . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 72 : 3111 – 3113 . 13 . Saffman PG ( 1976 ) Brownian motion in thin sheets of viscous fluid . J Fluid Mech 73 : 593 – 602 . 14 . Stone HA , Ajdari A ( 1998 ) Hydrodynamics of particles embedded in a flat surfactant layer overlying a subphase of finite depth . J Fluid Mech 369 : 151 – 173 . 15 . Gambin Y , et al . ( 2006 ) Lateral mobility of proteins in liquid membranes revisited . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 2098 – 2102 . 16 . Naji A , Levine AJ , Pincus PA ( 2007 ) Corrections to the Saffman – Delbruck mobility for membrane bound proteins . Biophys J 93 : L49 – L51 . 17 . HochmuthRM , WilesHC , EvansEA , McCownJT ( 1982 ) Extensionalflowoferythrocyte membrane from cell body to elastic tether . II . Experiment . Biophys J 39 : 83 – 89 . 18 . Sorre B , et al . ( 2009 ) Curvature - driven lipid sorting needs proximity to a demixing point and is aided by proteins . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 : 5622 – 5626 . 19 . Dahan M , et al . ( 2003 ) Diffusion dynamics of glycine receptors revealed by single - quantum dot tracking . Science 302 : 442 – 445 . 20 . Doeven MK , et al . ( 2005 ) Distribution , lateral mobility and function of membrane proteins incorporated into giant unilamellar vesicles . Biophys J 88 : 1134 – 1142 . 21 . Przybylo M , et al . ( 2006 ) Lipid diffusion in giant unilamellar vesicles is more than 2 times faster than in supported phospholipid bilayers under identical conditions . Langmuir 22 : 9096 – 9099 . 22 . WieserS , SchutzGJ , CooperME , StockingerH ( 2007 ) Singlemoleculediffusionanalysis on cellular nanotubules : Implications on plasma membrane structure below the dif - fraction limit . Appl Phys Lett 91 : 233901 – 233903 . 23 . Saxton MJ ( 1997 ) Single - particle tracking : The distribution of diffusion coefficients . Biophys J 72 : 1744 – 1753 . 24 . Qian H , Sheetz MP , Elson EL ( 1991 ) Single particle tracking . Analysis of diffusion and flow in two - dimensional systems . Biophys J 60 : 910 – 921 . 25 . Lee GM , Ishihara A , Jacobson KA ( 1991 ) Direct observation of brownian motion of lipids in a membrane . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88 : 6274 – 6278 . 26 . Ruta V , Chen J , MacKinnon R ( 2005 ) Calibrated measurement of gating - charge argi - nine displacement in the KvAP voltage - dependent K þ channel . Cell 123 : 463 – 475 . 27 . Lee SY , Lee A , Chen J , MacKinnon R ( 2005 ) Structure of the KvAP voltage - dependent K þ channel and its dependence on the lipid membrane . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102 : 15441 – 15446 . 28 . Ashby MC , Maier SR , Nishimune A , Henley JM ( 2006 ) Lateral diffusion drives consti - tutive exchange of AMPA receptors at dendritic spines and is regulated by spine morphology . J Neurosci 26 : 7046 – 7055 . 29 . Lamb H ( 1997 ) Hydrodynamics ( Cambridge Univ Press , New York ) . 30 . Nagle JF , Tristram - Nagle S ( 2000 ) Structure of lipid bilayers . Biochim Biophys Acta 1469 : 159 – 195 . 31 . Vaz WLC , Goodsaid - Zalduondo F , Jacobson K ( 1984 ) Lateral diffusion of lipids and proteins in bilayer membranes . FEBS Lett 174 : 199 – 207 . 32 . Almeida PFF , VazWLC ( 1995 ) Lateraldiffusion inmembranes . StructureandDynamics ofMembranes — FromCellstoVesicles ( HandbookofBiologicalPhysics ) , edsRLipowsky and E Sackmann ( Elsevier , Amsterdam ) , Vol 1 , pp 305 – 357 . 33 . EvansE , RawiczW ( 1990 ) Entropy - driventensionandbendingelasticityincondensed - fluid membranes . Phys Rev Lett 64 : 2094 – 2097 . 34 . Lepore LS , Ellena JF , Cafiso DS ( 1992 ) Comparison of the lipid acyl chain dynamics between small and large unilamellar vesicles . Biophys J 61 : 767 – 775 . 35 . Risselada HJ , Marrink SJ ( 2009 ) Curvature effects on lipid packing and dynamics in liposomes revealed by coarse grained molecular dynamics simulations . Phys Chem Chem Phys 11 : 2056 – 2067 . 36 . Venable RM , Zhang YH , Hardy BJ , Pastor RW ( 1993 ) Molecular - dynamics simulations of a lipid bilayer and of hexadecane — An investigation of membrane fluidity . Science 262 : 223 – 226 . 37 . YeungA , EvansE ( 1995 ) Unexpecteddynamicsinshapefluctuationsofbilayervesicles . J Phys II 5 : 1501 – 1523 . 38 . EvansE , YeungA ( 1994 ) Hiddendynamicsinrapidchangesofbilayershape . ChemPhys Lipids 73 : 39 – 56 . 39 . Abney JR , Scalettar BA , Owicki JC ( 1989 ) Self diffusion of interacting membrane proteins . Biophys J 55 : 817 – 833 . 40 . Polishchuk RS , Capestrano M , Polishchuk EV ( 2009 ) Shaping tubular carriers for intra - cellular membrane transport . FEBS Lett 583 : 3847 – 3856 . 41 . RennerM , ChoquetD , TrillerA ( 2009 ) Controlofthepostsynapticmembraneviscosity . J Neurosci 29 : 2926 – 2937 . 42 . Yuste R , Bonhoeffer T ( 2001 ) Morphological changes in dendritic spines associated with long - term synaptic plasticity . Annu Rev Neurosci 24 : 1071 – 1089 . 43 . Evans E , Sackmann E ( 1988 ) Translational and rotational drag coefficients for a disk moving in a liquid membrane - associated with a rigid substrate . J Fluid Mech 194 : 553 – 561 . 44 . Angelova MI , Soléau S , Méléard P , Faucon JF , Bothorel P ( 1992 ) Preparation of giant vesicles by externalAC electricfields . Kinetics andapplications . Prog ColloidPolym Sci 89 : 127 – 131 . 45 . Méléard P , Bagatolli LA , Pott T ( 2009 ) Giant unilamellar vesicle electroformation : From lipid mixtures to native membranes under physiological conditions . Methods in Enzymology , ed D Nejat ( Academic , London ) , Vol 465 , pp 161 – 176 . 46 . Savin T , Doyle PS ( 2005 ) Static and dynamic errors in particle tracking microrheology . Biophys J 88 : 623 – 638 . 12610 ∣ www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1102646108 Domanov et al .