Review Extracellular matrix components associated with remodeling processes in brain U . Rauch Department of Experimental Pathology , University Hospital , 22185 Lund ( Sweden ) , Fax + 46 46 158202 , e - mail : uwe . rauch @ pat . lu . se Received 29 January 2004 ; received after revision 25 March 2004 ; accepted 2 April 2004 Abstract . In the central nervous system , various extra - cellular matrix components have been identified which are strongly expressed during development and in most areas of the brain down - regulated during maturation . Examples are tenascin - C , neurocan and hyaluronan . While tenascin - C is well known to be associated with morphogenic events and the active contribution of hyaluronan to various phys - iological processes is increasingly acknowledged , neuro - can belongs to a class of molecules thought to be generally more associated with barrier functions : chondroitin sulfate CMLS , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 61 ( 2004 ) 2031 – 2045 1420 - 682X / 04 / 162031 - 15 DOI 10 . 1007 / s00018 - 004 - 4043 - x © Birkhäuser Verlag , Basel , 2004 CMLS Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences proteoglycans . Consideration of these and related mole - cules and their processing in the context of the general or - ganization of the brain extracellular matrix , their changes during brain maturation and their implication in different types of remodeling processes in adult brain , like normal and pathological synaptic plasticity , inflammatory and de - mentia - associated diseases and gliomas , may indicate that components of the extracellular matrix could provide valu - able early information about the pathological state of the brain . Key words . Extracellular matrix ; hyaluronan ; tenascin ; neurocan ; lectican ; link protein ; matrix metalloproteinase ; cerebrospinal fluid . Introduction The structural plasticity of tissues is mainly evident during their development and maturation , and also during remodeling processes in adulthood . In most cases exten - sive remodeling of a mature tissue is a consequence of pathological and repair processes , although in certain organs , for example bone and in the mammary gland , tis - sue remodeling is part of their normal physiology . In the adult hippocampus , synaptic plasticity in association with memory formation can be considered a prerequisite for the normal function of this part of the brain . However , it can also be a consequence of neuronal death caused by me - tabolic perturbations . Various insults and diseases , some of them associated with inflammatory processes , have been shown or are likely to trigger remodeling of neural tissue . Remodeling of adult tissues may reactivate molecular mechanisms utilized during their initial development . In such situations , one would expect the respective devel - opment - associated molecules to be up - regulated or reexpressed . In the central nervous system , various extracellular matrix components have been identified which are strongly expressed during development , and in most areas of the brain , down - regulated during matura - tion . Examples of such components are tenascin - C , an oligomeric glycoprotein [ 1 ] , neurocan , a chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan [ 2 ] and also the polysaccharide hyaluronan [ 3 ] . Tenascin - C is known to be associated with a large variety of morphogenic events in different tissues , and its expres - sion increases whenever tissue regeneration or remodeling occur , as in healing wounds and during oncogenesis [ 4 ] . The analysis of various human brain tumors indicates a negative correlation between tenascin - C expression and the survival time of patients , and several groups have started treating patients with multiforme glioblastomas using radi - olabeled anti - tenascin - C antibodies [ 5 ] . An association of hyaluronan with tumors has also been observed [ 6 ] . Having for some time been mainly considered as a passive space - filling material rendering the tissue more permissive to cel - lular migrations and complex remodeling events , the active contribution of hyaluronan to a variety of physiological processes , like the development of an immune response , is increasingly acknowledged [ 7 ] . Neurocan can interact with both tenascin - C and hyaluronan , and unless it is specifi - cally proteolytically processed by MMP - 2 , it can connect them . As a chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan , neurocan be - longs to a class of molecules thought to be generally asso - ciated with barrier functions and thus , inhibitory for tissue plasticity [ 8 – 10 ] . Neurocan is , for example , one of the first molecules up - regulated after spinal cord injury [ 11 ] , and treatment of lesion sites with chondroitinase ABC , an enzyme digesting the glycosaminoglycan side chains of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans , enhances axonal growth and functional recovery after such injury [ 12 ] . This review will look at these and related molecules and their processing in the context of the general organization of the brain extracellular matrix and changes during brain maturation and in different types of remodeling processes in adult brain , such as normal and pathological synaptic plasticity , inflammatory and dementia - associated diseases , gliomas and angiogenesis . In addition , perineuronal nets , structures composed of extracellular matrix molecules and observed to be inhibitory for tissue plasticity , will be discussed . Work on the human brain and its most accessi - ble component , cerebrospinal fluid , may well indicate that components of the extracellular matrix could give valu - able early information about the pathological state of the brain . The brain extracellular matrix In the central nervous system , the extracellular space represents a developmentally decreasing compartment . Its volume fraction of the brain condenses from about 40 % at early developmental stages to about 20 % in adulthood [ 13 ] . This space is occupied by a quite unique extracellular matrix [ 14 ] , whose structural organization is mainly based on hyaluronan , a linear polysaccharide . Hyaluronan can aggregate chondroitin sulfate proteogly - cans to lampbrush - like superstructures [ 15 ] ( fig . 1 ) . The prototype of such aggregates was identified in cartilage , where it is composed of hyaluronan , the chondroitin sul - fate proteoglycan aggrecan and link protein . Cartilage link protein is a small glycoprotein able to bind to both other components , hyaluronan and aggrecan [ 16 ] . Due to the negatively charged hyaluronan polymer and the dense substitution of aggrecan with strongly negatively charged chondroitin sulfate chains , these aggregates have a strong tendency to become hydrated and to ex - 2032 U . Rauch Extracellular matrix remodeling in brain Figure 1 . Schematic presentation of the molecules of the lectican family , and their interaction with hyaluronan and tenascins . Proteo - glycans and tenascins are presented according to rotary shadowing electron micrographs . The proteoglycans are characterized by two ( in aggrecan , three ) domains with a globular shape connected by fil - amentous extended regions , which are highly glycosylated ( mucin - like ) and provide the attachment sites for the glycosaminoglycan chains . The depicted sizes of brevican and versican variants reflect the number of amino acids within their central region in compari - son to neurocan , which extends over 60 – 90 nm [ 160 ] . Tenascins are characterized by their oligomeric structure [ 35 , 161 ] . ( a ) Schematic presentation of cartilage - hyaluronan - aggrecan aggregates , consist - ing of aggrecan , hyaluronan and cartilage link protein . ( b ) Devel - opmental changes in the expression of lecticans , tenascins and link proteins in brain . Characteristic molecules of the early developing brain are versican V1 , neurocan , tenascin - C and cartilage link pro - tein . Characteristic molecules of the mature brain are versican V2 , brevican , aggrecan , tenascin - R and brain link proteins . Due to their polyvalency , tenascins are able to interconnect and cross - link lectican - hyaluronan aggregates . Note that in cartilage but not in brain , aggrecan is additionally modified with keratan sulfate chains [ 162 ] . pand in volume in aqueous solution . In cartilage , the ex - pansion of the volume is restrained by a rigid network of fibrillar collagens . These counteracting biophysical forces are responsible for the special elastic properties of cartilage [ 17 ] . Although the relative volume occupied by the extracellu - lar matrix in cartilage is much larger than in brain , the ba - sic organization of brain extracellular matrix is likely to follow the same principles [ 18 , 19 ] . However , in contrast to aggrecan , other hyaluronan - binding proteoglycans pre - sent in the extracellular matrix of the brain are less densely modified with chondroitin sulfate chains [ 20 , 21 ] . This reduces their capacity to become hydrated , and consequently the tendency of the aggregates to expand . Considering , in addition , that any expansion of the brain tissue would be restrained by the skull , a counteracting network of collagen fibrils would not be necessary and , indeed , does not exist in brain . The three hyaluronan - binding proteoglycans homologous to aggrecan , which could be involved in the generation of aggregates in the brain , are versican , neurocan and brevi - can [ 20 ] ( fig . 1 ) . Together , the four molecules represent the lectican family of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans . Except for distinct splice variants , like the versican V3 form and a GPI - linked brevican variant , all four lecticans have a similar shape with terminal globular domains sep - arated by an elongated , highly glycosylated central re - gion . More recently , three additional link proteins have been identified , two of them specifically in the brain [ 22 – 24 ] . The modular composition of the four link pro - teins is identical , and identical to the hyaluronan - binding N - terminal globular domains of the four lecticans . They consist of two hyaluronan - binding link modules and one module of the immunoglobulin type . The C - terminal globular ends of the lecticans have been shown to bind to glycolipids and to various glycoproteins [ 20 , 25 ] . Several of these glycoproteins have an oligomeric molecular organization and , thus , a polyva - lent character . Observations by rotary shadowing elec - tron microscopy show that fibulin - 2 , a dimeric glyco - protein , can interact with the C - terminal end of versican , thereby cross - linking two versican molecules [ 26 ] . Oligomeric glycoproteins of the tenascin family ( fig . 1 ) appear to be especially suitable for cross - linking hyaluronan aggregates in the central nervous system . In - teractions of the C - terminal domains of lecticans with tenascin - R and tenascin - C have been analyzed and found to be highly promiscuous , but not completely redundant ; tenascin - C , for example , can interact avidly with the C - terminal domain of neurocan , but barely with that of bre - vican , while tenascin - R interacts most strongly with the C - terminal domain of brevican [ 27 – 29 ] . Interactions of a recently identified additional member of this family , tenascin - N [ 30 ] , with particular lecticans appear likely , but have not yet been reported . During maturation of the central nervous system , charac - teristic changes in the composition of the molecules of the extracellular matrix have been observed [ 22 , 31 , 32 ] . Many molecules , however , appear to be replaced by mem - bers of the same protein family , permitting the mainte - nance of the overall structural organization . Typical mol - ecules in the developing rodent brain are neurocan , the versican V1 splice variant , tenascin - C and cartilage link protein , while their homologues brevican , the somewhat shorter versican V2 splice variant , and tenascin - R are ma - jor components of the adult rodent brain ( fig . 1 ) [ 33 – 35 ] . Also predominantly expressed in the mature nervous sys - tem are aggrecan , tenascin - N and brain link proteins [ 22 , 24 , 30 , 31 , 36 ] . Estimating the quantitative contribu - tion of these latter components is difficult , because re - sults of preparative purifications of these molecules from adult brain tissue have not yet been presented . On the basis of their abundance , close temporal expres - sion and avid physical interaction , brevican and tenascin - R can be considered as a representative pair of mature brain matrix molecules . Both molecules are only ex - pressed in the central nervous system . Similarly , neuro - can and tenascin - C can be considered as representatives of juvenile brain matrix , both proteins decreasing signif - icantly in brain after the first postnatal week [ 37 , 38 ] . During the same period , an increasing fraction of neuro - can is proteolytically processed in a manner which sepa - rates the hyaluronan - binding from the tenascin - binding part of the molecule . The extent to which this cleavage compromises the overall biological activity of neurocan is uncertain , since the generated fragments are , for exam - ple , still able to interact with neural cell adhesion mole - cules and inhibit homophilic interactions between them [ 2 ] . Neurocan and tenascin - C have also been observed outside the central nervous system . While tenascin - C has been found to be associated with a large variety of re - modeling events in different tissues [ 4 ] , neurocan expres - sion outside the nervous system appears to be rather re - stricted , to activated T lymphocytes , lymph nodes and the developing avian heart [ 23 , 39 , 40 ] . However , activated T lymphocytes can enter almost any part of the body . Thus , in principle , neurocan could participate in inflammation - associated remodeling processes in any tissue infiltrated by these cells . Evidence for an association of typical juvenile matrix components , especially neurocan and tenascin - C , with remodeling processes in adult brain Normal brain - function - related structural plasticity Synaptic plasticity reflects activity - dependent changes in the efficacy of synaptic transmission . An activity - depen - dent enhancement of the synaptic transmission , termed long - term potentiation ( LTP ) , which can be experimen - CMLS , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 61 , 2004 Review Article 2033 tally assessed in hippocampal slice cultures , is commonly considered to function as a cellular mechanism for learn - ing and memory [ 41 ] . The persistent lack of direct proof may reflect the difficulty to extrapolate from massive experimentally induced activation to the sparse activity found in vivo which may , in addition , create radically dif - ferent spatial patterns of postsynaptic activation [ 42 ] . LTP is differentiated , based on the temporal characteris - tics , into a transient enhancement or early phase - LTP ( E - LTP ) , lasting less than 1 – 2 h and a longer - lasting late phase , L - LTP , lasting more than 1 – 2 h . L - LTP , but not E - LTP , is associated with synthesis of new proteins and recruitment of new sites of synaptic transmission [ 43 ] . Thus , L - LTP represents a synaptic remodeling process . The involvement of extracellular matrix molecules in this normal brain - function - related remodeling event has been recently comprehensively reviewed [ 44 ] . An analysis of hippocampal slices of mice deficient in the chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan neurocan showed a normal initial E - LTP , while L - LTP was impaired [ 45 ] . In - terestingly , pretreatment of hippocampal slices from wild - type mice with chondroitinase ABC that completely re - moved chondroitin sulfate from the extracellular matrix compromised E - LTP , mediating a twofold reduction in potentiation [ 46 ] . Thus , in the context of synaptic plastic - ity , the absence or reduction of chondroitin sulfate ap - pears to be inhibitory . Chondroitin sulfate chains present in inter - or perisynaptic spaces might sequester basic pro - teins like pleiothrophin , which has been shown to bind to the chondroitin sulfate chains of neurocan and to interfere with hippocampal LTP [ 47 ] . In tenascin - C knockout mice also , where only measurements of E - LTP were reported , these were found to be reduced [ 48 ] . In addition , induc - tion of LTP in vivo was found to be associated with an in - crease in hippocampal tenascin - C expression [ 49 ] . Apart from the hippocampus , tenascin - C has been reported to be present in another region exhibiting structural plastic - ity in adult brain , the neurohypophysis [ 50 ] . Here , remod - eling of the glial coverage of neuronal elements occurs in a secretory - activity - dependent fashion . These observations in rodent brains confirm a role of tenascin - C , but also indicate an involvement of neurocan in normal brain - function - related structural plasticity . Con - sistently , in human brain , moderate to strong tenascin - C immunopositivity was observed in the CA - 1 to CA - 2 sec - tors and perforant path of the temporal lobe , whereas only low to moderate immunopositivity was evident in white matter , extending weakly into the first layer of the gray matter . No immunopositivity was noticed in other areas [ 5 ] . Pathological synaptic and structural plasticity Hippocampal remodeling processes are , apart from their important role in normal brain function , observed in re - sponse to pathological and repair processes such as pa - thological loss of hippocampal pyramidal neurons . Such a loss of neurons can be induced by toxic or pharmaco - logical insults , or may be a consequence of a pathologi - cally increased excitability of those neurons , which is ob - served in cases of epilepsy . Long - term ethanol intake ( 20 % ethanol in drinking water ) in rats led after 30 weeks to a notable loss of hippocampal pyramidal cells , for example , a decrease of 19 % and 18 % in the CA1 and CA3 subdivisions , respectively . Surpris - ingly , despite this neuronal loss , the total number of synapses between mossy fibers and the CA3 pyramids was unaffected . This observation suggests that in a synap - tic - remodeling process , new signal - transmitting contacts were formed between the surviving neurons [ 51 ] . Synap - tic reorganization with functional connectivity in the hip - pocampal CA1 field was observed electrophysiologically in isolated CA1 areas after neuronal loss due to kainate - treatment - induced epilepsy [ 52 ] . Kainate - induced epilep - tic seizures have been shown to increase the deposition of neurocan in the hippocampal CA1 field [ 53 ] . Newly de - posited neurocan was found to be present in its complete , proteolytically unprocessed form . Kainate treatment also increased the hippocampal deposition of tenascin - C [ 54 ] . After a different kind of metabolic insult , focal cerebral is - chemia , tenascin was found to be among the early up - reg - ulated genes in the periinfarctional area [ 55 ] ( table 1 ) . 2034 U . Rauch Extracellular matrix remodeling in brain Table 1 . Alterations in the expression / deposition of juvenile matrix molecules and matrix metalloproteinases related to brain pathology . Injury / Matrix molecule Matrix disease metalloproteinase Epileptic tenascin - C up [ 54 ] MMP - 9 up [ 85 ] seizures neurocan up [ 53 ] ADAMTS - 1 / 4 up [ 86 ] MS , acute ( EAE ) tenascin - C down [ 65 ] MMP - 9 up [ 98 ] center neurocan down [ 64 ] edge neurocan up [ 64 ] MS , chronic tenascin - C up [ 65 ] MMP - 2 up [ 98 ] neurocan down [ 64 ] Alzheimer’s ( activated astrocytes ) * ADAMTS - 4 up [ 90 ] disease Glioma hyaluronan up [ 101 ] MMP - 2 up [ 93 ] tenascin - C up [ 77 ] ( TGF - beta up ) ‡ Ischemic tenascin - C mRNA up MMP - 9 up [ 97 ] injury , stroke [ 55 ] Denervation - tenascin - C up [ 57 ] induced axonal sprouting neurocan up [ 56 ] Physical injury tenascin - C up [ 11 ] neurocan up [ 11 ] * Activated astrocytes have been shown to express neurocan [ 59 ] and tenascin - C [ 57 ] . ‡ TGF - beta has been shown to induce neurocan [ 59 ] and tenascin - C [ 76 ] expression . Expression of neurocan and tenascin - C by reactive astro - cytes was observed in association with axonal sprouting in the molecular layer of the dentate gyrus . This remodeling process in adult brain was induced by denervation of the respective layer via a lesion of the entorhinal cortex [ 56 , 57 ] . Increased expression of both neurocan and tenascin - C could also be observed after direct mechanical insults , like cortical stab wounds [ 53 , 58 – 60 ] , transection of the postcommissural fornix [ 61 ; C . Stichel and U . Rauch , unpublished observation ] and spinal cord injury [ 11 ] . Un - fortunately , these observations , mostly derived from inde - pendent investigations , do not distinguish whether the in - duction of these two molecules occurred in a coordinated or merely parallel fashion . Inflammation and dementia - associated diseases Multiple sclerosis ( MS ) is a progressive inflammatory disease driven by a proinflammatory T cell response against myelin components [ 62 ] . In the initial stage of the disease , the inflammation occurs episodically and even - tually leaves residual neurological damage by remodeling myelinated axonal tracts into glial scar tissue , which is in - hospitable to axonal regrowth and regeneration [ 63 ] . Thus , two consecutive changes occur in the tissue : first , an active inflammatory lesion , followed by a chronic in - active lesion . Experimentally , T cell infiltration into the central nervous system leading to demyelination can be induced by immunization with a myelin - derived protein or peptide . Such animal models of MS , termed experi - mental autoimmune encephalomyelitis ( EAE ) , are used to study the onset and initial events of the disease . In MS - affected human brains , prominent neurocan depo - sition was observed at the edge of active lesions , while less neurocan than in adjacent unaffected white matter was apparent in the center of active lesions and in chronic inactive lesions [ 64 ] . In contrast , there was a striking loss of tenascin - C in acute lesions up to the edge and even ex - tending 1 – 2 mm further into adjacent macroscopically normal - appearing white matter , while in chronic lesions , tenascin - C staining was at levels equal to or greater than those seen in adjacent white matter [ 65 ] . Thus , during MS - associated remodeling processes , the deposition of neurocan and tenascin - C is affected , but not in parallel as in many other instances . Neurocan deposition was in - creased in regions where active remodeling of the matrix was ongoing , while tenascin - C became a more static structural component of the resulting resident gliotic scar tissue . No indication of a significant alteration in neurocan or tenascin - C expression was evident in a study in which cDNA libraries , either derived from human MS plaques or from control areas , were compared by a large - scale sequencing approach [ 66 ] . However , the deposition of extracellular matrix molecules does not necessarily cor - relate with the abundance of their mRNA . In brevican knockout mice , for example , an increased deposition of neurocan without noticeable differences in neurocan mRNA levels was observed [ 67 ] . For other extracellular matrix molecules , the large - scale sequencing approach revealed only a significant up - regulation of osteopontin and amyloid beta precursor - like protein 1 ( APLP - 1 ) , a transmembrane molecule with an extensive extracellular domain . Elevation of osteopontin , a phosphorylated acidic glycoprotein of about 40 kDa , is also seen in EAE . Osteo - pontin has been implicated in the regulation of inflam - mation , tissue remodeling and cell survival in various other conditions [ 68 ] . After focal stroke , for example , os - teopontin mRNA induction and protein deposition was observed in the matrix of ischemic brain [ 69 ] . Although osteopontin is not likely to represent a major structural extracellular matrix component , it could influence the structure and organization of the hyaluronan - linked extra - cellular matrix via an integrin - aided activation of CD44 , a cellular hyaluronan receptor [ 70 ] . Interestingly , for not fully clarified reasons , antibodies to CD44 are able to prevent the development of EAE [ 71 ] . Alzheimer’s disease , the prototype of dementia , is also as - sociated with an inflammatory cytopathology thought to represent an innate immune response to the accumulation of extracellular deposits of amyloid . The amyloid plaques consist mainly of a 40 - to 42 - amino - acid peptide , A - beta , derived from a transmembrane protein , amyloid beta pre - cursor protein ( APP ) . Interestingly , APP is a homologue of APLP - 1 , which is up - regulated in MS . Typical for an in - nate immune response , the A - beta plaque areas show little or no lymphocytes or monocytes , but contain activated microglia cells and astrocytes [ 62 ] . The presence of juve - nile brain ECM molecules in such plaque areas has not been established . However , their involvement could be assumed , since in other instances ( see above ) reactive as - trocytes have been shown to express neurocan and tenas - cin - C [ 56 , 57 , 59 ] . The extracellular portion of the APP molecule itself might be considered as a juvenile matrix constituent . It can be shed from the cell surface and is highly expressed during early developmental stages [ 72 ] . APP shows in - creased expression levels during reactive processes . At - tenuation of gliosis , which could be achieved by an inhi - bition of costimulatory interactions of the immunoregu - latory molecule CD40 , led to a marked decrease in beta - amyloid pathology [ 73 ] . This decrease was charac - terized by a reduced amyloidogenic processing of APP and increased circulating levels of beta - amyloid pep - tides . These observations could indicate that the ability of A - beta peptides to aggregate , a crucial event in Alz - heimer pathogenesis , might depend on the composition of the local extracellular matrix , which , in turn , is deter - mined by the secretion products of the associated gliotic cells . CMLS , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 61 , 2004 Review Article 2035 Gliomas and angiogenesis Malignant glioma cells and sprouting endothelial cells at - tracted by tumor - derived factors are among the limited types of cells which can migrate within adult brain tissue . Although the mechanisms glioma cells have acquired to mediate their migration might differ from case to case , an important factor in their strategies is assumed to be the re - modeling of the extracellular matrix [ 74 ] . Malignant gliomas are often associated with an increased expression of transforming growth factor - beta ( TGF - beta ) , considered as a mechanism to escape immune sur - veillance [ 75 ] , but also shown to enhance expression of neurocan and tenascin - C [ 59 , 76 ] . Glioma - associated perivascular and cyst wall depositions of tenascin - C ap - pear to correlate with glioma malignancy [ 5 , 77 – 79 ] , and are likely to interfere with the maintenance of the blood - brain barrier [ 80 ] . No association of neurocan with brain tumors or tumor - induced angiogenesis has yet been re - ported . However , perivascular neurocan deposits have been found in association with aberrant vessels in dys - trophic rat retinas [ 81 ] , and vessels associated with active MS lesions in humans [ 64 ] . Other extracellular matrix components involved in remodeling processes Proteases Tenascin - C has been implicated in the induction and acti - vation of matrix metalloproteinases ( MMPs ) [ 4 ] , which , like other types of extracellular proteases , can participate in matrix remodeling processes [ 82 ] . On the involvement of proteases in LTP , attention has fo - cused on two serine - type proteolytic systems , the plasmi - nogen activator / plasmin system and neuropsin , and their suggested substrates , laminin and fibronectin , respec - tively [ 83 ] . While the activity of both systems appears to support the manifestation of L - LTP , a loss of the plas - minogen activator / plasmin system was observed to pro - tect against excitotoxin - induced epileptic seizures , while a loss of neuropsin renders mice more susceptible to ex - citotoxic insults . The neuroprotective effect of plasmino - gen activator or plasminogen deficiency was attributed to the maintenance of interstitial depositions of laminin , which has recently been specified as laminin - 10 [ 84 ] . The observation of an excitotoxin - protective effect in the absence of just the plasminogen activator / plasmin system is surprising , since metalloproteinases were found to be up - regulated by excitotoxic insults , in particular MMP - 9 , ADAMTS1 and ADAMTS4 [ 85 , 86 ] . ADAMTS1 and ADAMTS4 are proteases involved in the proteolytic pro - cessing of aggrecan , brevican and the versican V2 vari - ant , prominent constituents of the adult brain extracellu - lar matrix [ 87 , 88 ] . These proteases recognize a defined cleavage site in their central region , creating essentially an N - terminal hyaluronan - binding glycoprotein fragment and a C - terminal proteoglycan fragment ( fig . 2 ) . Interest - ingly , a similar motif is also present and recognized by these proteases in the versican V1 variant [ 89 ] ( fig . 2 ) . The observation that ADAMTS - 4 is transcriptionally in - duced in beta - amyloid - treated rat astrocytes indicates that the proteolytic degradation of aggrecan , brevican and versican might also be involved in matrix - remodeling processes in Alzheimer’s disease [ 90 ] . Production and proteolytic processing of brevican by ADAMTS - 4 have been associated with increased infil - trative activity of gliomas [ 87 ] . Interestingly , rather than the secretion of the entire molecule , the secretion of just the hyaluronan - binding region of brevican increases the infiltrative capacity of glioma cells [ 91 ] . Other pro - teinases implicated in glioma progression and related cross - activation events are MMP - 2 , membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase ( MT1 - MMP ) and the plasmino - gen activator / plasmin system [ 92 , 93 ] . Neurocan , whose proteolytic processing increases during rat development [ 37 ] , is a designated substrate of MMP - 2 , whose activity in adult rat brain is moderate , but constitutive [ 94 ] . MMP - 2 has been identified as the neurocan - processing enzyme by a comparison of the amino acid sequence sur - rounding the processing site in rat brain with an MMP cleavage site database ( fig . 2 ) [ 95 , 96 ] . Consistently , in Western blots of human glioma tissue , neurocan frag - ments could be identified with an antiserum raised against the neoepitope which is generated by this pro - cessing event [ E . Englund and U . Rauch , unpublished ob - servation ] . However , since neurocan is constitutively processed in rat brain , and no healthy human control tis - sue was analyzed , the pathobiological significance of this observation is not clear . In the kainate - treated rat hip - pocampus , neurocan was up - regulated and found to be 2036 U . Rauch Extracellular matrix remodeling in brain Figure 2 . Proteolytic cleavage of lecticans by metalloproteinases . Aggrecan , brevican and the versican V1 and versican V2 splice variant are cleaved by ADAMTS - 1 or ADAMTS - 4 . This cleavage generates hyaluronan - binding fragments not modified with gly - cosaminoglycan chains . Neurocan is cleaved by MMP - 2 in a more central position and both generated fragments are modified with glycosaminoglycan chains . Note that the sequences of the entire ex - tended regions of the versican V1 and V2 variants are different and , therefore , also the sites recognized by the protease . deposited in its complete , proteolytically unprocessed form [ 53 ] . This impairment of an immediate proteolytic processing of newly deposited neurocan might be related to the lack of concomitant up - regulation of MMP - 2 by this treatment , in marked contrast to the kainite - induced upregulation of hippocampal MMP - 9 [ 85 ] . Similarly , in the hippocampus , a strong immediate up - regulation of MMP - 9 was observed after transient global cerebral is - chemia , while a significant up - regulation of MMP - 2 was noticed after a delay of 3 days [ 97 ] . MMP - 9 is further prominently up - regulated in acute MS lesions , whereas MMP - 2 is more likely to participate in the remodeling of the extracellular matrix in chronic dis - ease states [ 98 ] . Therefore , one can speculate whether the prominent deposition of neurocan but lack of tenascin - C at the edges of active MS lesions might be related to differences in their susceptibility to MMP - 9 cleavage . MMP - 9 is also up - regulated in EAE and other inflamma - tory neurological diseases [ 92 ] . Other metalloproteinases found to be up - regulated in inflamed human central ner - vous system tissue include ADAM - 10 and ADAM - 17 [ 99 ] . During EAE , in addition to the increase in metallo - proteinases , a coordinated induction of the plasminogen activator system , with upregulation of tissue and uroki - nase - type plasminogen activator ( tPA and uPA ) , PA inhi - bitor and uPA receptor was observed [ 100 ] . Hyaluronan , hyaluronidase and hyaluronan - binding molecules In normal adult rodent brain , 85 % of the hyaluronan is in - soluble in water , while only 10 % of the hyaluronan in brains of 1 - week - old rats is not water extractable [ 32 ] . This indicates that in adult brain hyaluronan is mostly present as a central filament of aggregates , associated with hyaluronan - binding proteins and proteoglycans ( fig . 1 ) . Increased hyaluronan deposition has been impli - cated in glioma progression [ 101 , 102 ] , although an in - creased production of hyaluronan alone does not seem to be sufficient , unless it is associated with concomitant hyaluronidase expression [ 103 ] . Increased expression of hyaluronan is likely to change the ratio between the number of hyaluronan - binding proteoglycans and link proteins on the one hand , and the number of potential docking places for these proteins along the hyaluronan molecules on the other . This would render hyaluronan less substituted with those proteins and a better target for hyaluronidase digestion . Voluminous hyaluronan proteo - glycan aggregates could be efficiently converted to smaller aggregates or just single proteoglycans with a small hyaluronan fragment bound to them ( fig . 3 ) . This could make extracellular matrix constituents more easily acces - sible to the endocytotic degradation pathway . An effect similar to a combination of increased hyaluronan and hyaluronidase secretion could be expected from an ap - plication of short hyaluronan fragments . Such fragments have been shown to enhance angiogenesis [ 104 ] . A crucial prerequisite for angiogenesis is the migration of endothe - lial cells . Migrating endothelial cells have recently been reported to express the versican V3 variant , a versican glycoprotein variant lacking the glycosaminoglycan - sub - stituted domain of the molecule [ 105 ] ( fig . 3 ) . These mol - ecules might compete with proteoglycans for hyaluronan docking sites , converting voluminous proteoglycan ag - gregates into thin protein filaments ( fig . 3 ) . Experimental evidence that such a conversion is indeed occurring has been obtained with smooth muscle cells overexpressing the versican V3 variant [ 106 ] . These cells display in - creased adhesiveness in conjunction with a decreased dis - tance between the membrane of the cell and the culture dish . Increased adhesiveness was also observed for HEK 293 cells expressing only the N - terminal , hyaluronan - binding domain of neurocan [ 107 ] . By analogy , the same effect could be caused by the hyaluronan - binding N - ter - CMLS , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 61 , 2004 Review Article 2037 Figure 3 . Potential effects of hyaluronan fragments , the versican V3 splice variant or N - terminal fragments of lecticans on hyaluro - nan aggregates . The versican V3 variant has no extended central region and is not modified with chondroitin sulfate chains . This molecule could compete with versican proteoglycans for link pro - tein supported hyaluronan docking sites . As a consequence , the vol - ume taken up by hyaluronan proteoglycan aggregates could be con - siderably reduced . Proteoglycans ( versican V1 and V2 variants ) , which are not able to participate in aggregate formation , either by being competed out by versican V3 or by binding to small hyaluro - nan fragments , are prone to endocytosis and degradation . While the versican V3 variant could be involved in the modulation of aggre - gates in a variety of tissues , in brain , the hyaluronan - binding do - main of brevican could compete with full - size brevican molecules for docking sites in hyaluronan aggregates . Moreover , in brain , hyaluronan - binding domains could also interfere with interactions of the GPI - linked brevican variant and hyaluronan , thereby weak - ening or breaking the binding of hyaluronan to the cell surface . minal brevican fragment . The secretion of this molecule has been shown to enhance the infiltrative capacity of gliomas much more efficiently than the secretion of the complete brevican proteoglycan [ 91 ] ( fig . 3 ) . In the ma - ture brain , such competition could be particularly effec - tive , because brevican can also be expressed as a GPI - linked variant and bind hyaluronan to the surface of cells directly [ 108 ] ( fig . 3 ) . An increased turnover of brevican has been suggested as the basis for glioma progression in a tissue disruption model [ 74 ] . Interestingly , these views are contradicted by observations made in an artificial en - vironment , matrigel , a mixture of basement membrane components . In this environment , the overexpression of the hyaluronan - binding domain of brevican inhibits glioma cell invasion [ 109 ] . As noted in this study , malignant forms of glioblastoma rarely metastasize to distant sites . Such a process would require the transition through base - ment membranes and other different environments . Thus , properties required for glioma cells to migrate might be most efficient in brain tissue . The studies presented above indicate that the expression of hyaluronan - binding molecules with the ability to com - pete with full - length proteoglycans for docking sites on hyaluronan molecules is likely to change the biophysical properties of the matrix in general and enhance the mi - gratory ability of cells especially in brain . However , the effect of the individual hyaluronan - binding domains of the lecticans could still have a tissue - specific component , since the four link proteins with distinct tissue expression patterns which have been identified [ 23 ] might have dif - ferent preferences in supporting the hyaluronan - binding ability of the four lectican proteoglycans . Cartilage link protein , the best - characterized of the four link proteins , does evidently support the hyaluronan - binding ability of aggrecan [ 15 , 16 , 110 ] . Consistently , aggrecan is strongly decreased in cartilage of cartilage link protein knockout mice [ 111 ] . Cartilage link protein also supports the hyaluronan binding ability of neurocan [ 112 ] . Brain link protein 1 colocalizes with versican at the nodes of Ran - vier in white - matter tracts [ 113 ] . Moreover , in the brains of brevican knockout mice , a decrease in brain link pro - tein 2 was observed [ 24 ] , despite an increased deposition of neurocan which was also noticed in the brains of bre - vican knockout mice [ 67 ] . This points to a specific inter - dependence of brain link protein 2 and brevican . Thus , in - terference of the N - terminal brevican fragment with the formation of hyaluronan - proteoglycan aggregates might be most effective in a tissue where brain link protein 2 is also expressed . However , the specificity of support of each link protein for the binding of the individual lecti - cans to hyaluronan appears to be more complex than a simple one - to - one relationship and remains to be further elucidated . The above points are not likely to explain adequately the entire influence of hyaluronan on cell motility . Cellular receptors , like CD44 , LYVE - 1 , RHAMM and Toll - like receptor 4 have the potential to sense hyaluronan or de - rived oligosaccharides and , in addition , to interact with the cytoskeleton or activate cells via signaling cascades [ 114 – 116 ] . Those interactions can be further modulated by third components , for example osteopontin [ 70 ] . In - terestingly , in cultured cells , CD44 can bind to MT1 - MMP , a membrane protease with the potential to activate MMP - 2 , and to mediate the transport of MT1 - MMP to the migration front [ 117 ] . Taken together , these observa - tions could imply a scenario where osteopontin - activated CD44 directs MMP - 2 activating MT1 - MMP close to hyaluronan - bound neurocan molecules , thereby eventu - ally triggering their proteolytic processing ( fig . 4 ) . How the interaction of hyaluronan with soluble binding pro - teins and proteoglycans influences the interaction with cellular receptors and consecutive cellular signaling cas - cades , extracellular proteolytic activity and the general behavior of cells in a three - dimensional environment is a challenging question . Brain structures inhibitory for remodeling processes Hyaluronan and all lecticans , or their respective N - termi - nal part , have been identified as components of perineu - ronal nets [ 36 , 118 – 122 ] . Tenascin - R also appears to be an important structural component , since these structures are less developed in tenascin - R knockout mice [ 121 , 123 ] . In mature brain perineuronal nets , which are com - plexes of extracellular matrix molecules interposed be - tween a meshwork of glial processes , surround neuronal 2038 U . Rauch Extracellular matrix remodeling in brain Figure 4 . Possible scenario of hyaluronan - associated interactions involved in remodeling processes . Osteopontin binds to alphaV beta3 integrin and to CD44 , thereby increasing the concentration of hyaluronan - binding CD44 molecules on the cell surface . Both inte - grin and CD44 can interact with the cytoskeleton and , thereby , be directed to particular regions of the cell , like the migratory front . MT1 - MMP can bind to CD44 and , thereby , be localized to the same region . CD44 can bind hyaluronan and eventually position MT1 - MMP in the vicinity of extracellular neurocan - hyaluronan aggre - gates . There , MT1 - MMP activates pro - MMP - 2 into the proteolytic active form of MMP - 2 . cell bodies and proximal dendrites in a net - like structure that interdigitates with synaptic contacts [ 124 ] . These structures have been implicated in the stabilization of synapses and maintenance of cellular relationships in the adult brain , while impeding novel formation of synaptic contacts [ 124 ] . Some protective role of perineuronal - net - associated proteoglycans has been suggested , since a neg - ative correlation with the susceptibility of neurons to Alzheimer’s disease , indicated by the presence of neuro - fibrillary tangles , has been noticed [ 10 , 125 ] . The cortical distribution of neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer’s dis - eased brains matches the pattern of neurons that retain their capacity for plastic remodeling [ 126 ] . Thus , per - ineuronal nets appear to be inhibitory for plastic remod - eling . The probability of this conclusion has recently been directly demonstrated by a reactivation of ocular domi - nance plasticity in the adult visual cortex of rats by treat - ment of inhibitory perineuronal nets with chondroitinase ABC [ 127 , 128 ] . During physiological remodeling pro - cesses , mechanisms like those discussed in the previous sections , proteolysis and ‘hyaluronolysis , ’ could impair the structural integrity and interfere with the plasticity - in - hibitory activity of perineuronal nets . In Alzheimer’s dis - ease , aggrecan , brevican and versican might be prone to proteolytic processing by ADAMTS - 4 ( fig . 2 ) , which is transcriptionally induced in beta - amyloid - treated rat astrocytes [ 90 ] . A destruction of perineuronal nets or down - regulation of their elementary components might , in addition , occur in parallel with or precede the up - regu - lation of more juvenile matrix components . Whether the assembly of perineuronal nets in general represents mainly an active process coordinated by local cells or , rather , the lack or down - regulation of mechanisms which are in - hibitory for their deposition , appears to be an interesting question for further investigations . An inverse relationship to the distribution of neurofibril - lary tangles in Alzheimer’s diseased cortex has also been observed for areas of myelogenesis [ 129 ] , indicating that white - matter tracts are also inhibitory for plastic remod - eling . Interestingly , the content of hyaluronan in white - matter tracts was found to be higher than in gray matter [ 118 ] . Typical hyaluronan locations in white matter are the nodes of Ranvier , where versican and brain link pro - tein 1 have also been observed [ 113 , 118 ] . Proteoglycan - hyaluronan aggregates may prevent axons from sprouting collaterals at these locations . Brevican is also present in white - matter tracts [ 130 ] , while neurocan staining disap - pears from unmyelinated cerebellar fiber tracts after myelination [ 37 ] . In marked contrast to its association with perineuronal nets , no association with white - matter tracts has been reported for aggrecan [ 36 ] . Differences in the composition of plasticity - inhibitory hyaluronan ag - gregates between gray and white matter , as well as spatial and biochemical extracellular matrix heterogeneities within the gray matter , are likely to reflect differences in tissue architecture and to contribute to the functional spe - cialization of those brain regions . Distinct remodeling strategies might be required for their modification or pen - etration by migrating cells . Matrix components in human brain and cerebrospinal fluid Unfortunately , at least for neuroscientists , the composi - tion of the extracellular matrix in normal human brain re - mains poorly characterized . Histochemical analysis of extracellular matrix molecules has mainly focused on glycosaminoglycan structures , like those of hyaluronan and chondroitin sulfate [ 118 , 125 , 131 – 133 ] . The supe - rior histochemical availability of these structures might be related to a longer resistance to degradation in post - mortem tissue . The protein component of proteoglycans endocytosed by human fibroblasts , for example , is de - graded 10 – 15 times more rapidly than the glycosamino - glycan moiety [ 134 ] . Assuming that the results of a recent study with antibodies against protein epitopes do not merely reflect spatial differences in degradation , the tem - poral lobe seems to have the highest tenascin - C levels in the mature human brain [ 5 ] , possibly reflecting a more ju - venile matrix composition , which is more permissive for remodeling events than other parts . In patients with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy , markedly increased chon - droitin sulfate levels and increased hyaluronan levels have been observed in the dissected tissue [ 135 , 136 ] . Changes in the composition of the extracellular matrix might precede or even be causally involved in cellular de - generation and death . Therefore , extracellular matrix molecules could represent important early markers of dis - ease . The least invasive way to obtain significant , although limited information about the status of extracellular matrix in human brain is the analysis of cerebrospinal fluid ( CSF ) . In principle , extracellular matrix molecules should be able to reach the CSF by passive diffusion through the extracellular space , unless they are se - questered by immobile ligands or trapped by dense mol - ecular networks , like basement membranes . Interestingly , in the periventricular zone , basement membranes appear truncated , terminating in expansions , named fractones [ 137 ] . This may help even large extracellular matrix com - ponents , like reelin , tenascin - C and proteoglycans to gain access to the ventricle . The levels of reelin , or rather ma - jor fragments of reelin , in CSF were found to be altered in patients with frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease [ 138 ] , although the observation of reelin in CSF appears surprising , since in mammals , no reelin - positive cells were detected in the vicinity of the telencephalic ventricular zone [ 139 ] . Less surprising is the observation of proteolytic fragments of reelin , since several proteases , CMLS , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 61 , 2004 Review Article 2039 such as MMP - 2 , MMP - 9 , [ 98 , 140 – 142 ] and ADAM - 17 [ 99 ] have been identified in CSF . Their activity might be balanced by protease inhibitors , such as TIMP - 1 and TIMP - 2 , which were observed in CSF as well [ 98 , 140 – 142 ] . Other extracellular matrix molecules identified in CSF by immuno - or affinity - chemical detection methods are soluble uPA receptor [ 143 ] , glycosaminoglycans [ 136 , 144 ] , tenascin - C [ 145 ] , TGF - beta 1 [ 146 ] , cartilage glycoprotein - 39 [ 147 ] , the entire soluble ectodomain or the beta - amyloid peptide of APP [ 148 ] and major prote - olytic fragments of neurocan [ A . Grubb and U . Rauch , unpublished observation ] , while only small proteolytic peptides derived from testican and osteopontin were found [ 149 ] . The concentration of many of these substances has been correlated to certain pathological incidences , like epilepsy ( chondroitin sulfate , hyaluronan ) , multiple sclero - sis ( MMP - 9 , ADAM - 17 ) , meningitis ( suPA , hyaluronan , MMP - 9 , cartilage glycoprotein - 39 ) , encephalitis ( hyalu - ronan ) , cerebral infarction ( hyaluronan ) , hydrocephalus ( TGF - beta , hyaluronan ) , neurodegenerating diseases ( re - elin , A - beta peptide , TIMP - 1 ) or tumors ( suPA , tenascin - C ) . Thus , various pathological insults and associated re - modeling events are reflected by changes in the extracel - lular matrix components in CSF and could provide valuable information about the pathological state of the brain . The analysis of CSF proteins has therefore been considered as a promising topic in proteomic research [ 150 ] . Interestingly , a high - resolution separation of hu - man CSF and subsequent identification of about 500 spots revealed only one of the molecules mentioned above , cartilage glycoprotein - 39 [ 151 ] . This observation might indicate some limitations of the proteomic approach with respect to the identification of structural extracellu - lar matrix compounds , which are often considerably post - translationally modified , although this is not impossible , as demonstrated by the identification of fibulin - 1 [ 152 ] . Concluding remarks There is ample evidence that brain remodeling processes are characterized by an up - regulation of extracellular ma - trix components , which are otherwise mainly expressed during early develomental stages . Interestingly , one of them , neurocan , belongs to a class of molecules , chon - droitin sulfate proteoglycans , generally thought to be in - hibitory for tissue plasticity . Treatment of inhibitory sites with chondroitinase ABC enhances axonal growth and functional recovery after spinal cord injury [ 12 ] and re - stores ocular dominance plasticity in the adult visual cor - tex of rats [ 127 ] . However , although present and useful as a marker , neurocan does not seem to be essential for the generation of plasticity - inhibitory structures like per - ineuronal nets , since those are also evident in neurocan knockout mice [ 153 ] . Moreover , neurocan appears to enhance synaptic plasticity . Thus , the functional rele - vance of the presence of neurocan in plasticity - inhibitory structures is not clear and remains to be investigated . In the absence of neurocan , the gross anatomical develop - ment of mouse brains is normal [ 45 ] , although on closer inspection , alterations in the spatial arrangement of hip - pocampal pyramidal cells can be noticed [ U . Rauch , un - published observation ] . Careful inspection and elaborated test paradigms were necessary to detect alterations in tenascin - C knockout mice [ 48 , 154 – 156 ] . While no splice variants of neuro - can have been described , the structural and functional properties of tenascin - C can change due to multiple alter - natively spliced exons [ 157 ] . Apart from the obvious steric effect , increasingly convincing evidence for other particular functions of variable regions , like interactions with other molecules [ 158 ] , and neurite - outgrowth - pro - moting activities [ 159 ] are emerging . This might render even minor proteolytic fragments of this apparently pri - marily structural matrix molecule biologically active and might draw more attention to the identification of the par - ticular tenascin - C splice variant . In summary , the evidence compiled in this review sug - gests that like tenascin - C , neurocan , although a chon - droitin sulfate proteoglycan , might , rather , be considered as a component of an extracellular matrix permissive for remodeling events . In perspective , neurocan might be useful as a marker or target molecule for diseases involv - ing tissue remodeling of the central nervous system . Acknowledgements . The author thanks Drs A . Grubb and E . Eng - lund for biological material , Drs M . Dictor , B . Holmquist and E . Gustafsson for critically reading the manuscript , and the Alfred Österlunds stiftelse , the H och J Forssmans fond , the Greta och Johan Kocks stiftelser , the Crafoordska stiftelsen and the Swedish Research Council for financial support . I would also like to thank the reviewers for their suggestions . References 1 Jones F . S . and Jones P . L . ( 2000 ) The tenascin family of ECM glycoproteins : structure , function , and regulation during em - bryonic development and tissue remodeling . Dev . Dyn . 218 : 235 – 259 2 Rauch U . , Feng K . and Zhou X . H . ( 2001 ) Neurocan : a brain chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 58 : 1842 – 1856 3 McDonald J . and Hascall V . C . ( 2002 ) Hyaluronan minireview series . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 4575 – 4579 4 Jones P . L . and Jones F . S . ( 2000 ) Tenascin - C in development and disease : gene regulation and cell function . Matrix Biol . 19 : 581 – 596 5 Leins A . , Riva P . , Lindstedt R . , Davidoff M . S . , Mehraein P . and Weis S . ( 2003 ) Expression of tenascin - C in various human brain tumors and its relevance for survival in patients with as - trocytoma . Cancer 98 : 2430 – 2439 6 Knudson W . ( 1996 ) Tumor - associated hyaluronan : providing an extracellular matrix that facilitates invasion . Am . J . Pathol . 148 : 1721 – 1726 2040 U . Rauch Extracellular matrix remodeling in brain 7 Termeer C . , Sleeman J . P . and Simon J . C . ( 2003 ) Hyaluronan – magic glue for the regulation of the immune response ? Trends Immunol . 24 : 112 – 114 8 Fitch M . T . and Silver J . ( 1997 ) Activated macrophages and the blood - brain barrier : inflammation after CNS injury leads to increases in putative inhibitory molecules . Exp . Neurol . 148 : 587 – 603 9 Davies S . J . , Fitch M . T . , Memberg S . P . , Hall A . K . , Raisman G . and Silver J . ( 1997 ) Regeneration of adult axons in white matter tracts of the central nervous system . Nature 390 : 680 – 683 10 Rhodes K . E . and Fawcett J . W . ( 2004 ) Chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans : preventing plasticity or protecting the CNS ? J . Anat . 204 : 33 – 48 11 Tang X . , Davies J . E . and Davies S . J . ( 2003 ) Changes in dis - tribution , cell associations , and protein expression levels of NG2 , neurocan , phosphacan , brevican , versican V2 , and tenascin - C during acute to chronic maturation of spinal cord scar tissue . J . Neurosci . Res . 71 : 427 – 444 12 Bradbury E . J . , Moon L . D . F . , Popat R . J . , King V . R . , Bennett G . S . , Patel P . N . et al . ( 2002 ) Chondroitinase ABC promotes functional recovery after spinal cord injury . Nature 416 : 636 – 640 13 Nicholson C . and Sykova E . ( 1998 ) Extracellular space struc - ture revealed by diffusion analysis . Trends Neurosci . 21 : 207 – 215 14 Novak U . and Kaye A . H . ( 2000 ) Extracellular matrix and the brain : components and function . J . Clin . Neurosci . 7 : 280 – 290 15 Morgelin M . , Heinegard D . , Engel J . and Paulsson M . ( 1994 ) The cartilage proteoglycan aggregate : assembly through com - bined protein - carbohydrate and protein - protein interactions . Biophys . Chem . 50 : 113 – 128 . 16 Neame P . J . and Barry F . P . ( 1993 ) The link proteins . Experi - entia 49 : 393 – 402 17 Knudson C . B . and Knudson W . ( 2001 ) Cartilage proteogly - cans . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 12 : 69 – 78 18 Ruoslahti E . ( 1996 ) Brain extracellular matrix . Glycobiology 6 : 489 – 492 . 19 Rauch U . ( 1997 ) Modeling an extracellular environment for axonal pathfinding and fasciculation in the central nervous system . Cell Tissue Res . 290 : 349 – 356 20 Yamaguchi Y . ( 2000 ) Lecticans : organizers of the brain extra - cellular matrix . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 57 : 276 – 289 21 Bandtlow C . E . and Zimmermann D . R . ( 2000 ) Proteoglycans in the developing brain : new conceptual insights for old pro - teins . Physiol . Rev . 80 : 1267 – 1290 22 Hirakawa S . , Oohashi T . , Su W . D . , Yoshioka H . , Murakami T . , Arata J . et al . ( 2000 ) The brain link protein - 1 ( BRAL1 ) : cDNA cloning , genomic structure , and characterization as a novel link protein expressed in adult brain . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 276 : 982 – 989 23 Spicer A . P . , Joo A . and Bowling R . A . , Jr . ( 2003 ) The missing links : a hyaluronan binding link protein gene family whose members are physically linked adjacent to chrondroitin sulfate proteoglycan core protein genes . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 21083 – 21091 24 Bekku Y . , Su W . D . , Hirakawa S . , Fassler R . , Ohtsuka A . , Kang J . S . et al . ( 2003 ) Molecular cloning of Bral2 , a novel brain - specific link protein , and immunohistochemical colocaliza - tion with brevican in perineuronal nets . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 24 : 148 – 159 25 Miura R . , Aspberg A . , Ethell I . M . , Hagihara K . , Schnaar R . L . , Ruoslahti E . et al . ( 1999 ) The proteoglycan lectin domain binds sulfated cell surface glycolipids and promotes cell ad - hesion . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 11431 – 11438 26 Olin A . I . , Morgelin M . , Sasaki T . , Timpl R . , Heinegard D . and Aspberg A . ( 2001 ) The proteoglycans aggrecan and versican form networks with fibulin - 2 through their lectin domain binding . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 1253 – 1261 27 Rauch U . , Clement A . , Retzler C . , Frohlich L . , Fassler R . , Gohring W . et al . ( 1997 ) Mapping of a defined neurocan bind - ing site to distinct domains of tenascin - C . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 26905 – 26912 28 Aspberg A . , Miura R . , Bourdoulous S . , Shimonaka M . , Heine - gard D . , Schachner M . et al . ( 1997 ) The C - type lectin domains of lecticans , a family of aggregating chondroitin sulfate pro - teoglycans , bind tenascin - R by protein - protein interactions in - dependent of carbohydrate moiety . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 : 10116 – 10121 29 Day J . M . , Olin A . I . , Murdoch A . D . , Canfield A . , Sasaki T . , Timpl R . et al . ( 2004 ) Alternative splicing in the aggrecan G3 domain influences binding interactions with tenascin - C and other extracellular matrix proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 12511 – 12518 30 Neidhardt J . , Fehr S . , Kutsche M . , Lohler J . and Schachner M . ( 2003 ) Tenascin - N : characterization of a novel member of the tenascin family that mediates neurite repulsion from hip - pocampal explants . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 23 : 193 – 209 31 Milev P . , Maurel P . , Chiba A . , Mevissen M . , Popp S . , Yama - guchi Y . et al . ( 1998 ) Differential regulation of expression of hyaluronan - binding proteoglycans in developing brain : aggre - can , versican , neurocan , and brevican . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 247 : 207 – 212 32 Margolis R . U . , Margolis R . K . , Chang L . B . and Preti C . ( 1975 ) Glycosaminoglycans of brain during development . Biochemistry 14 : 85 – 88 33 Yamaguchi Y . ( 1996 ) Brevican : a major proteoglycan in adult brain . Perspect . Dev . Neurobiol . 3 : 307 – 317 34 Schmalfeldt M . , Dours - Zimmermann M . T . , Winterhalter K . H . and Zimmermann D . R . ( 1998 ) Versican V2 is a major ex - tracellular matrix component of the mature bovine brain . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 15758 – 15764 35 Pesheva P . , Spiess E . and Schachner M . ( 1989 ) J1 - 160 and J1 - 180 are oligodendrocyte - secreted nonpermissive substrates for cell adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 1765 – 1778 36 Matthews R . T . , Kelly G . M . , Zerillo C . A . , Gray G . , Tiemeyer M . and Hockfield S . ( 2002 ) Aggrecan glycoforms contribute to the molecular heterogeneity of perineuronal nets . J . Neu - rosci . 22 : 7536 – 7547 37 Rauch U . , Gao P . , Janetzko A . , Flaccus A . , Hilgenberg L . , Tekotte H . et al . ( 1991 ) Isolation and characterization of de - velopmentally regulated chondroitin sulfate and chon - droitin / keratan sulfate proteoglycans of brain identified with monoclonal antibodies . J . Biol . Chem . 266 : 14785 – 14801 38 Dorries U . and Schachner M . ( 1994 ) Tenascin mRNA iso - forms in the developing mouse brain . J . Neurosci . Res . 37 : 336 – 347 39 Oleszewski M . , Beer S . , Katich S . , Geiger C . , Zeller Y . , Rauch U . et al . ( 1999 ) Integrin and neurocan binding to L1 involves distinct Ig domains . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 24602 – 24610 40 Mishima N . and Hoffman S . ( 2003 ) Neurocan in the embry - onic avian heart and vasculature . Anat . Rec . 272A : 556 – 562 41 Bliss T . V . and Collingridge G . L . ( 1993 ) A synaptic model of memory : long - term potentiation in the hippocampus . Nature 361 : 31 – 39 42 Rosenzweig E . S . and Barnes C . A . ( 2003 ) Impact of aging on hippocampal function : plasticity , network dynamics , and cog - nition . Prog . Neurobiol . 69 : 143 – 179 43 Bolshakov V . Y . , Golan H . , Kandel E . R . and Siegelbaum S . A . ( 1997 ) Recruitment of new sites of synaptic transmission dur - ing the cAMP - dependent late phase of LTP at CA3 - CA1 synapses in the hippocampus . Neuron 19 : 635 – 651 44 Dityatev A . and Schachner M . ( 2003 ) Extracellular matrix molecules and synaptic plasticity . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 4 : 456 – 468 45 Zhou X . H . , Brakebusch C . , Matthies H . , Oohashi T . , Hirsch E . , Moser M . et al . ( 2001 ) Neurocan is dispensable for brain development . Mol . Cell Biol . 21 : 5970 – 5978 CMLS , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 61 , 2004 Review Article 2041 46 Bukalo O . , Schachner M . and Dityatev A . ( 2001 ) Modifica - tion of extracellular matrix by enzymatic removal of chon - droitin sulfate and by lack of tenascin - R differentially affects several forms of synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus . Neu - roscience 104 : 359 – 369 47 Amet L . E . , Lauri S . E . , Hienola A . , Croll S . D . , Lu Y . , Lev - orse J . M . et al . ( 2001 ) Enhanced hippocampal long - term po - tentiation in mice lacking heparin - binding growth - associated molecule . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 17 : 1014 – 1024 48 Evers M . R . , Salmen B . , Bukalo O . , Rollenhagen A . , Bosl M . R . , Morellini F . et al . ( 2002 ) Impairment of L - type Ca 2 + chan - nel - dependent forms of hippocampal synaptic plasticity in mice deficient in the extracellular matrix glycoprotein ten - ascin - C . J . Neurosci . 22 : 7177 – 7194 49 Nakic M . , Manahan - Vaughan D . , Reymann K . G . and Schach - ner M . ( 1998 ) Long - term potentiation in vivo increases rat hippocampal tenascin - C expression . J . Neurobiol . 37 : 393 – 404 50 Langle S . L . , Poulain D . A . and Theodosis D . T . ( 2002 ) Neu - ronal - glial remodeling : a structural basis for neuronal - glial interactions in the adult hypothalamus . J . Physiol . Paris 96 : 169 – 175 51 Lukoyanov N . V . , Brandao F . , Cadete - Leite A . , Madeira M . D . and Paula - Barbosa M . M . ( 2000 ) Synaptic reorganization in the hippocampal formation of alcohol - fed rats may compen - sate for functional deficits related to neuronal loss . Alcohol 20 : 139 – 148 52 Smith B . N . and Dudek F . E . ( 2001 ) Short - and long - term changes in CA1 network excitability after kainate treatment in rats . J . Neurophysiol . 85 : 1 – 9 53 Matsui F . , Kawashima S . , Shuo T . , Yamauchi S . , Tokita Y . , Aono S . et al . ( 2002 ) Transient expression of juvenile - type neurocan by reactive astrocytes in adult rat brains injured by kainate - induced seizures as well as surgical incision . Neuro - science 112 : 773 – 781 54 Nakic M . , Mitrovic N . , Sperk G . and Schachner M . ( 1996 ) Kainic acid activates transient expression of tenascin - C in the adult rat hippocampus . J . Neurosci . Res . 44 : 355 – 362 55 Lu A . , Tang Y . , Ran R . , Clark J . F . , Aronow B . J . and Sharp F . R . ( 2003 ) Genomics of the periinfarction cortex after focal cerebral ischemia . J . Cereb . Blood Flow Metab . 23 : 786 – 810 56 Haas C . A . , Rauch U . , Thon N . , Merten T . and Deller T . ( 1999 ) Entorhinal cortex lesion in adult rats induces the expression of the neuronal chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan neurocan in re - active astrocytes . J . Neurosci . 19 : 9953 – 9963 57 Deller T . , Haas C . A . , Naumann T . , Joester A . , Faissner A . and Frotscher M . ( 1997 ) Up - regulation of astrocyte - derived tenascin - C correlates with neurite outgrowth in the rat dentate gyrus after unilateral entorhinal cortex lesion . Neuroscience 81 : 829 – 846 58 McKeon R . J . , Jurynec M . J . and Buck C . R . ( 1999 ) The chon - droitin sulfate proteoglycans neurocan and phosphacan are expressed by reactive astrocytes in the chronic CNS glial scar . J . Neurosci . 19 : 10778 – 10788 59 Asher R . A . , Morgenstern D . A . , Fidler P . S . , Adcock K . H . , Oohira A . , Braistead J . E . et al . ( 2000 ) Neurocan is upregu - lated in injured brain and in cytokine - treated astrocytes . J . Neurosci . 20 : 2427 – 2438 60 Di Prospero N . A . , Zhou X . R . , Meiners S . , McAuliffe W . G . , Ho S . Y . and Geller H . M . ( 1998 ) Suramin disrupts the gliotic response following a stab wound injury to the adult rat brain . J . Neurocytol . 27 : 491 – 506 61 Lips K . , Stichel C . C . and Muller H . W . ( 1995 ) Restricted ap - pearance of tenascin and chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans after transection and sprouting of adult rat postcommissural fornix . J . Neurocytol . 24 : 449 – 464 62 Weiner H . L . and Selkoe D . J . ( 2002 ) Inflammation and thera - peutic vaccination in CNS diseases . Nature 420 : 879 – 884 63 Sobel R . A . ( 2001 ) The extracellular matrix in multiple scle - rosis : an update . Braz . J . Med . Biol . Res . 34 : 603 – 609 64 Sobel R . A . and Ahmed A . S . ( 2001 ) White matter extracellu - lar matrix chondroitin sulfate / dermatan sulfate proteoglycans in multiple sclerosis . J . Neuropathol . Exp . Neurol . 60 : 1198 – 1207 65 Gutowski N . J . , Newcombe J . and Cuzner M . L . ( 1999 ) Tenascin - R and C in multiple sclerosis lesions : relevance to extracellular matrix remodelling . Neuropathol . Appl . Neuro - biol . 25 : 207 – 214 66 Chabas D . , Baranzini S . E . , Mitchell D . , Bernard C . C . , Rit - tling S . R . , Denhardt D . T . et al . ( 2001 ) The influence of the proinflammatory cytokine , osteopontin , on autoimmune de - myelinating disease . Science 294 : 1731 – 1735 67 Brakebusch C . , Seidenbecher C . I . , Asztely F . , Rauch U . , Matthies H . , Meyer H . et al . ( 2002 ) Brevican - deficient mice display impaired hippocampal CA1 long - term potentiation but show no obvious deficits in learning and memory . Mol . Cell Biol . 22 : 7417 – 7427 68 Denhardt D . T . , Noda M . , O’Regan A . W . , Pavlin D . and Berman J . S . ( 2001 ) Osteopontin as a means to cope with environmental insults : regulation of inflammation , tissue re - modeling , and cell survival . J . Clin . Invest . 107 : 1055 – 1061 69 Wang X . , Louden C . , Yue T . L . , Ellison J . A . , Barone F . C . , Solleveld H . A . et al . ( 1998 ) Delayed expression of osteopon - tin after focal stroke in the rat . J . Neurosci . 18 : 2075 – 2083 70 Gao C . , Guo H . , Downey L . , Marroquin C . , Wei J . and Kuo P . C . ( 2003 ) Osteopontin - dependent CD44v6 expression and cell adhesion in HepG2 cells . Carcinogenesis 24 : 1871 – 1878 71 Brocke S . , Piercy C . , Steinman L . , Weissman I . L . and Vero - maa T . ( 1999 ) Antibodies to CD44 and integrin alpha4 , but not L - selectin , prevent central nervous system inflammation and experimental encephalomyelitis by blocking secondary leuko - cyte recruitment . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 : 6896 – 6901 72 Small D . H . , Clarris H . L . , Williamson T . G . , Reed G . , Key B . , Mok S . S . et al . ( 1999 ) Neurite - outgrowth regulating func - tions of the amyloid protein precursor of Alzheimer’s disease . J . Alzheimers Dis . 1 : 275 – 285 73 Tan J . , Town T . , Crawford F . , Mori T . , DelleDonne A . , Cres - centini R . et al . ( 2002 ) Role of CD40 ligand in amyloidosis in transgenic Alzheimer’s mice . Nat . Neurosci . 5 : 1288 – 1293 74 Nutt C . L . , Matthews R . T . and Hockfield S . ( 2001 ) Glial tumor invasion : a role for the upregulation and cleavage of BEHAB / brevican . Neuroscientist 7 : 113 – 122 75 Weller M . and Fontana A . ( 1995 ) The failure of current im - munotherapy for malignant glioma : tumor - derived TGF - beta , T - cell apoptosis , and the immune privilege of the brain . Brain Res . Brain Res . Rev . 21 : 128 – 151 76 Pearson C . A . , Pearson D . , Shibahara S . , Hofsteenge J . and Chiquet - Ehrismann R . ( 1988 ) Tenascin : cDNA cloning and induction by TGF - beta . EMBO J . 7 : 2977 – 2982 77 Zagzag D . , Friedlander D . R . , Dosik J . , Chikramane S . , Chan W . , Greco M . A . et al . ( 1996 ) Tenascin - C expression by an - giogenic vessels in human astrocytomas and by human brain endothelial cells in vitro . Cancer Res . 56 : 182 – 189 78 Jallo G . I . , Friedlander D . R . , Kelly P . J . , Wisoff J . H . , Grumet M . and Zagzag D . ( 1997 ) Tenascin - C expression in the cyst wall and fluid of human brain tumors correlates with angio - genesis . Neurosurgery 41 : 1052 – 1059 79 Herold - Mende C . , Mueller M . M . , Bonsanto M . M . , Schmitt H . P . , Kunze S . and Steiner H . H . ( 2002 ) Clinical impact and functional aspects of tenascin - C expression during glioma progression . Int . J . Cancer 98 : 362 – 369 80 Rascher G . , Fischmann A . , Kroger S . , Duffner F . , Grote E . H . and Wolburg H . ( 2002 ) Extracellular matrix and the blood - brain barrier in glioblastoma multiforme : spatial segregation of tenascin and agrin . Acta Neuropathol . ( Berl . ) 104 : 85 – 91 81 Zhang Y . , Rauch U . and Perez M . T . ( 2003 ) Accumulation of neurocan , a brain chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan , in associ - ation with the retinal vasculature in RCS rats . Invest . Oph - thalmol . Vis . Sci . 44 : 1252 – 1261 2042 U . Rauch Extracellular matrix remodeling in brain 82 Stamenkovic I . ( 2003 ) Extracellular matrix remodelling : the role of matrix metalloproteinases . J . Pathol . 200 : 448 – 464 83 Tomimatsu Y . , Idemoto S . , Moriguchi S . , Watanabe S . and Na - kanishi H . ( 2002 ) Proteases involved in long - term potentia - tion . Life Sci . 72 : 355 – 361 84 Indyk J . A . , Chen Z . L . , Tsirka S . E . and Strickland S . ( 2003 ) Laminin chain expression suggests that laminin - 10 is a major isoform in the mouse hippocampus and is degraded by the tis - sue plasminogen activator / plasmin protease cascade during excitotoxic injury . Neuroscience 116 : 359 – 371 85 Szklarczyk A . , Lapinska J . , Rylski M . , McKay R . D . and Kaczmarek L . ( 2002 ) Matrix metalloproteinase - 9 undergoes expression and activation during dendritic remodeling in adult hippocampus . J . Neurosci . 22 : 920 – 930 86 Yuan W . , Matthews R . T . , Sandy J . D . and Gottschall P . E . ( 2002 ) Association between protease - specific proteolytic clea - vage of brevican and synaptic loss in the dentate gyrus of kainate - treated rats . Neuroscience 114 : 1091 – 1101 87 Matthews R . T . , Gary S . C . , Zerillo C . , Pratta M . , Solomon K . , Arner E . C . et al . ( 2000 ) Brain - enriched hyaluronan binding ( BEHAB ) / brevican cleavage in a glioma cell line is mediated by a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospon - din motifs ( ADAMTS ) family member . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 22695 – 22703 88 Westling J . , Gottschall P . E . , Thompson V . P . , Cockburn A . , Perides G . , Zimmermann D . R . et al . ( 2004 ) ADAMTS4 ( ag - grecanase - 1 ) cleaves human brain versican V2 at Glu405 - Gln406 to generate glial hyaluronate binding protein . Bio - chem . J . 377 : 787 – 795 89 Sandy J . D . , Westling J . , Kenagy R . D . , Iruela - Arispe M . L . , Verscharen C . , Rodriguez - Mazaneque J . C . et al . ( 2001 ) Ver - sican V1 proteolysis in human aorta in vivo occurs at the Glu441 - Ala442 bond , a site that is cleaved by recombinant ADAMTS - 1 and ADAMTS - 4 . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 13372 – 13378 90 Satoh K . , Suzuki N . and Yokota H . ( 2000 ) ADAMTS - 4 ( a dis - integrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs ) is transcriptionally induced in beta - amyloid treated rat astro - cytes . Neurosci . Lett . 289 : 177 – 180 91 Gary S . C . , Kelly G . M . and Hockfield S . ( 1998 ) BEHAB / bre - vican : a brain - specific lectican implicated in gliomas and glial cell motility . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 8 : 576 – 581 92 Yong V . W . , Power C . , Forsyth P . and Edwards D . R . ( 2001 ) Metalloproteinases in biology and pathology of the nervous system . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 2 : 502 – 511 93 Le D . M . , Besson A . , Fogg D . K . , Choi K . S . , Waisman D . M . , Goodyer C . G . et al . ( 2003 ) Exploitation of astrocytes by glioma cells to facilitate invasiveness : a mechanism involving matrix metalloproteinase - 2 and the urokinase - type plasmino - gen activator - plasmin cascade . J . Neurosci . 23 : 4034 – 4043 94 Planas A . M . , Sole S . and Justicia C . ( 2001 ) Expression and activation of matrix metalloproteinase - 2 and - 9 in rat brain af - ter transient focal cerebral ischemia . Neurobiol . Dis . 8 : 834 – 846 95 Rauch U . , Karthikeyan L . , Maurel P . , Margolis R . U . and Mar - golis R . K . ( 1992 ) Cloning and primary structure of neurocan , a developmentally regulated , aggregating chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan of brain . J . Biol . Chem . 267 : 19536 – 19547 . 96 Turk B . E . , Huang L . L . , Piro E . T . and Cantley L . C . ( 2001 ) Determination of protease cleavage site motifs using mix - ture - based oriented peptide libraries . Nat . Biotechnol . 19 : 661 – 667 97 Lee S . R . , Tsuji K . and Lo E . H . ( 2004 ) Role of matrix metal - loproteinases in delayed neuronal damage after transient global cerebral ischemia . J . Neurosci . 24 : 671 – 678 98 Avolio C . , Ruggieri M . , Giuliani F . , Liuzzi G . M . , Leante R . , Riccio P . et al . ( 2003 ) Serum MMP - 2 and MMP - 9 are elevated in different multiple sclerosis subtypes . J . Neuroimmunol . 136 : 46 – 53 99 Kieseier B . C . , Pischel H . , Neuen - Jacob E . , Tourtellotte W . W . and Hartung H . P . ( 2003 ) ADAM - 10 and ADAM - 17 in the in - flamed human CNS . Glia 42 : 398 – 405 100 Teesalu T . , Hinkkanen A . E . and Vaheri A . ( 2001 ) Coordinated induction of extracellular proteolysis systems during experi - mental autoimmune encephalomyelitis in mice . Am . J . Pathol . 159 : 2227 – 2237 101 Delpech B . , Maingonnat C . , Girard N . , Chauzy C . , Maunoury R . , Olivier A . et al . ( 1993 ) Hyaluronan and hyaluronectin in the extracellular matrix of human brain tumour stroma . Eur . J . Cancer 29A : 1012 – 1017 102 Sadeghi N . , Camby I . , Goldman S . , Gabius H . J . , Baleriaux D . , Salmon I . et al . ( 2003 ) Effect of hydrophilic components of the extracellular matrix on quantifiable diffusion - weighted imaging of human gliomas : preliminary results of correlating apparent diffusion coefficient values and hyaluronan expres - sion level . Am . J . Roentgenol . 181 : 235 – 241 103 Enegd B . , King J . A . , Stylli S . , Paradiso L . , Kaye A . H . and Novak U . ( 2002 ) Overexpression of hyaluronan synthase - 2 re - duces the tumorigenic potential of glioma cells lacking hyaluronidase activity . Neurosurgery 50 : 1311 – 1318 104 Montesano R . , Kumar S . , Orci L . and Pepper M . S . ( 1996 ) Synergistic effect of hyaluronan oligosaccharides and vascu - lar endothelial growth factor on angiogenesis in vitro . Lab . In - vest . 75 : 249 – 262 105 Cattaruzza S . , Schiappacassi M . , Ljungberg - Rose A . , Spes - sotto P . , Perissinotto D . , Morgelin M . et al . ( 2002 ) Distribution of PG - M / versican variants in human tissues and de novo ex - pression of isoform V3 upon endothelial cell activation , mi - gration , and neoangiogenesis in vitro . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 47626 – 47635 106 Lemire J . M . , Merrilees M . J . , Braun K . R . and Wight T . N . ( 2002 ) Overexpression of the V3 variant of versican alters arterial smooth muscle cell adhesion , migration , and prolifer - ation in vitro . J . Cell Physiol . 190 : 38 – 45 107 Talts U . , Kuhn U . , Roos G . and Rauch U . ( 2000 ) Modulation of extracellular matrix adhesiveness by neurocan and identifi - cation of its molecular basis . Exp . Cell Res . 259 : 378 – 388 108 Seidenbecher C . I . , Richter K . , Rauch U . , Fassler R . , Garner C . C . and Gundelfinger E . D . ( 1995 ) Brevican , a chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan of rat brain , occurs as secreted and cell surface glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored isoforms . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 27206 – 27212 109 Ward J . A . , Huang L . , Guo H . , Ghatak S . and Toole B . P . ( 2003 ) Perturbation of hyaluronan interactions inhibits malig - nant properties of glioma cells . Am . J . Pathol . 162 : 1403 – 1409 110 Matsumoto K . , Shionyu M . , Go M . , Shimizu K . , Shinomura T . , Kimata K . et al . ( 2003 ) Distinct interaction of versican / PG - M with hyaluronan and link protein . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 41205 – 41212 111 Watanabe H . and Yamada Y . ( 1999 ) Mice lacking link protein develop dwarfism and craniofacial abnormalities . Nat . Genet . 21 : 225 – 229 . 112 Rauch U . , Hirakawa S . , Oohashi T . , Kappler J . and Roos G . ( 2004 ) Cartilage link protein interacts with neurocan , which shows hyaluronan binding characteristics different from CD44 and TSG - 6 . Matrix Biol . 22 : 629 – 639 113 Oohashi T . , Hirakawa S . , Bekku Y . , Rauch U . , Zimmermann D . R . , Su W . D . et al . ( 2002 ) Bral1 , a brain - specific link pro - tein , colocalizing with the versican V2 isoform at the nodes of Ranvier in developing and adult mouse central nervous sys - tems . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 19 : 43 – 57 114 Turley E . A . , Noble P . W . and Bourguignon L . Y . ( 2002 ) Sig - naling properties of hyaluronan receptors . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 4589 – 4592 115 Slevin M . , Kumar S . and Gaffney J . ( 2002 ) Angiogenic oligosaccharides of hyaluronan induce multiple signaling pathways affecting vascular endothelial cell mitogenic and wound healing responses . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 41046 – 41059 CMLS , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 61 , 2004 Review Article 2043 116 Termeer C . , Benedix F . , Sleeman J . , Fieber C . , Voith U . , Ahrens T . et al . ( 2002 ) Oligosaccharides of hyaluronan acti - vate dendritic cells via toll - like receptor 4 . J . Exp . Med . 195 : 99 – 111 117 Mori H . , Tomari T . , Koshikawa N . , Kajita M . , Itoh Y . , Sato H . et al . ( 2002 ) CD44 directs membrane - type 1 matrix metallo - proteinase to lamellipodia by associating with its hemopexin - like domain . EMBO J . 21 : 3949 – 3959 118 Delpech B . , Delpech A . , Bruckner G . , Girard N . and Main - gonnat C . ( 1989 ) Hyaluronan and hyaluronectin in the ner - vous system . In : The Biology of Hyaluronan , Ciba Foundation Symp . 143 pp . 208 – 232 , Evered D . and Whelan J . ( eds ) Wiley , Chichester 119 Matsui F . , Nishizuka M . , Yasuda Y . , Aono S . , Watanabe E . and Oohira A . ( 1998 ) Occurrence of a N - terminal proteolytic frag - ment of neurocan , not a C - terminal half , in a perineuronal net in the adult rat cerebrum . Brain Res . 790 : 45 – 51 120 Hagihara K . , Miura R . , Kosaki R . , Berglund E . , Ranscht B . and Yamaguchi Y . ( 1999 ) Immunohistochemical evidence for the brevican - tenascin - R interaction : colocalization in perineu - ronal nets suggests a physiological role for the interaction in the adult rat brain . J . Comp . Neurol . 410 : 256 – 264 121 Bruckner G . , Grosche J . , Schmidt S . , Hartig W . , Margolis R . U . , Delpech B . et al . ( 2000 ) Postnatal development of per - ineuronal nets in wild - type mice and in a mutant deficient in tenascin - R . J . Comp . Neurol . 428 : 616 – 629 122 Bruckner G . , Grosche J . , Hartlage - Rubsamen M . , Schmidt S . and Schachner M . ( 2003 ) Region and lamina - specific distrib - ution of extracellular matrix proteoglycans , hyaluronan and tenascin - R in the mouse hippocampal formation . J . Chem . Neuroanat . 26 : 37 – 50 123 Weber P . , Bartsch U . , Rasband M . N . , Czaniera R . , Lang Y . , Bluethmann H . et al . ( 1999 ) Mice deficient for tenascin - R dis - play alterations of the extracellular matrix and decreased ax - onal conduction velocities in the CNS . J . Neurosci . 19 : 4245 – 4262 124 Celio M . R . , Spreafico R . , De Biasi S . and Vitellaro - Zuc - carello L . ( 1998 ) Perineuronal nets : past and present . Trends Neurosci . 21 : 510 – 515 125 Bruckner G . , Hausen D . , Hartig W . , Drlicek M . , Arendt T . and Brauer K . ( 1999 ) Cortical areas abundant in extracellular ma - trix chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans are less affected by cytoskeletal changes in Alzheimer’s disease . Neuroscience 92 : 791 – 805 126 Arendt T . , Bruckner M . K . , Gertz H . J . and Marcova L . ( 1998 ) Cortical distribution of neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer’s disease matches the pattern of neurons that retain their capac - ity of plastic remodelling in the adult brain . Neuroscience 83 : 991 – 1002 127 Pizzorusso T . , Medini P . , Berardi N . , Chierzi S . , Fawcett J . W . and Maffei L . ( 2002 ) Reactivation of ocular dominance plas - ticity in the adult visual cortex . Science 298 : 1248 – 1251 128 Berardi N . , Pizzorusso T . , Ratto G . M . and Maffei L . ( 2003 ) Molecular basis of plasticity in the visual cortex . Trends Neu - rosci . 26 : 369 – 378 129 Braak H . and Braak E . ( 1996 ) Development of Alzheimer - re - lated neurofibrillary changes in the neocortex inversely reca - pitulates cortical myelogenesis . Acta Neuropathol . ( Berl . ) 92 : 197 – 201 130 Ogawa T . , Hagihara K . , Suzuki M . and Yamaguchi Y . ( 2001 ) Brevican in the developing hippocampal fimbria : differen - tial expression in myelinating oligodendrocytes and adult astrocytes suggests a dual role for brevican in central nervous system fiber tract development . J . Comp . Neurol . 432 : 285 – 295 131 Bertolotto A . , Rocca G . , Canavese G . , Migheli A . and Schif - fer D . ( 1991 ) Chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan surrounds a subset of human and rat CNS neurons . J . Neurosci . Res . 29 : 225 – 234 132 Yasuhara O . , Akiyama H . , McGeer E . G . and McGeer P . L . ( 1994 ) Immunohistochemical localization of hyaluronic acid in rat and human brain . Brain Res . 635 : 269 – 282 133 Belichenko P . V . , Miklossy J . and Celio M . R . ( 1997 ) HIV - I in - duced destruction of neocortical extracellular matrix compo - nents in AIDS victims . Neurobiol . Dis . 4 : 301 – 310 134 Hoppe W . , Rauch U . and Kresse H . ( 1988 ) Degradation of en - docytosed dermatan sulfate proteoglycan in human fibrob - lasts . J . Biol . Chem . 263 : 5926 – 5932 135 Perosa S . R . , Porcionatto M . A . , Cukiert A . , Martins J . R . , Passeroti C . C . , Amado D . et al . ( 2002 ) Glycosaminoglycan levels and proteoglycan expression are altered in the hip - pocampus of patients with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy . Brain Res . Bull . 58 : 509 – 516 136 Perosa S . R . , Porcionatto M . A . , Cukiert A . , Martins J . R . , Amado D . , Nader H . B . et al . ( 2002 ) Extracellular matrix com - ponents are altered in the hippocampus , cortex , and cere - brospinal fluid of patients with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy . Epilepsia 43 ( suppl . 5 ) : 159 – 161 137 Mercier F . , Kitasako J . T . and Hatton G . I . ( 2002 ) Anatomy of the brain neurogenic zones revisited : fractones and the fibrob - last / macrophage network . J . Comp . Neurol . 451 : 170 – 188 138 Saez - Valero J . , Costell M . , Sjogren M . , Andreasen N . , Blen - now K . and Luque J . M . ( 2003 ) Altered levels of cerebrospinal fluid reelin in frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s dis - ease . J . Neurosci . Res . 72 : 132 – 136 139 Tissir F . and Goffinet A . M . ( 2003 ) Reelin and brain develop - ment . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 4 : 496 – 505 140 Leppert D . , Ford J . , Stabler G . , Grygar C . , Lienert C . , Huber S . et al . ( 1998 ) Matrix metalloproteinase - 9 ( gelatinase B ) is selectively elevated in CSF during relapses and stable phases of multiple sclerosis . Brain 121 : 2327 – 2334 141 Leppert D . , Leib S . L . , Grygar C . , Miller K . M . , Schaad U . B . and Hollander G . A . ( 2000 ) Matrix metalloproteinase ( MMP ) - 8 and MMP - 9 in cerebrospinal fluid during bacterial meningi - tis : association with blood - brain barrier damage and neuro - logical sequelae . Clin . Infect . Dis . 31 : 80 – 84 142 Lorenzl S . , Albers D . S . , LeWitt P . A . , Chirichigno J . W . , Hilgen - berg S . L . , Cudkowicz M . E . et al . ( 2003 ) Tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases are elevated in cerebrospinal fluid of neurodegenerative diseases . J . Neurol . Sci . 207 : 71 – 76 143 Garcia - Monco J . C . , Coleman J . L . and Benach J . L . ( 2002 ) Soluble urokinase receptor ( uPAR , CD 87 ) is present in serum and cerebrospinal fluid in patients with neurologic diseases . J . Neuroimmunol . 129 : 216 – 223 144 Laurent U . B . , Laurent T . C . , Hellsing L . K . , Persson L . , Hart - man M . and Lilja K . ( 1996 ) Hyaluronan in human cere - brospinal fluid . Acta Neurol . Scand . 94 : 194 – 206 145 Yoshida J . , Wakabayashi T . , Okamoto S . , Kimura S . , Washizu K . , Kiyosawa K . et al . ( 1994 ) Tenascin in cerebrospinal fluid is a useful biomarker for the diagnosis of brain tumour . J . Neu - rol . Neurosurg . Psychiatry 57 : 1212 – 1215 146 Kitazawa K . and Tada T . ( 1994 ) Elevation of transforming growth factor - beta 1 level in cerebrospinal fluid of patients with communicating hydrocephalus after subarachnoid hem - orrhage . Stroke 25 : 1400 – 1404 147 Ostergaard C . , Johansen J . S . , Benfield T . , Price P . A . and Lundgren J . D . ( 2002 ) YKL - 40 is elevated in cerebrospinal fluid from patients with purulent meningitis . Clin . Diagn . Lab . Immunol . 9 : 598 – 604 148 Hock C . , Golombowski S . , Muller - Spahn F . , Naser W . , Beyreuther K . , Monning U . et al . ( 1998 ) Cerebrospinal fluid levels of amyloid precursor protein and amyloid beta - peptide in Alzheimer’s disease and major depression – inverse corre - lation with dementia severity . Eur . Neurol . 39 : 111 – 118 149 Stark M . , Danielsson O . , Griffiths W . J . , Jornvall H . and Jo - hansson J . ( 2001 ) Peptide repertoire of human cerebrospinal fluid : novel proteolytic fragments of neuroendocrine proteins . J . Chromatogr . B Biomed . Sci . Appl . 754 : 357 – 367 2044 U . Rauch Extracellular matrix remodeling in brain 150 Rohlff C . ( 2000 ) Proteomics in molecular medicine : applica - tions in central nervous systems disorders . Electrophoresis 21 : 1227 – 1234 151 Sickmann A . , Dormeyer W . , Wortelkamp S . , Woitalla D . , Kuhn W . and Meyer H . E . ( 2002 ) Towards a high resolution separation of human cerebrospinal fluid . J . Chromatogr . B An - alyt . Technol . Biomed . Life Sci . 771 : 167 – 196 152 Yuan X . and Desiderio D . M . ( 2003 ) Proteomics analysis of phosphotyrosyl - proteins in human lumbar cerebrospinal fluid . J . Proteome . Res . 2 : 476 – 487 153 Murakami T . and Ohtsuka A . ( 2003 ) Perisynaptic barrier of proteoglycans in the mature brain and spinal cord . Arch . His - tol . Cytol . 66 : 195 – 207 154 Mackie E . J . and Tucker R . P . ( 1999 ) The tenascin - C knockout revisited . J . Cell Sci . 112 : 3847 – 3853 155 Garcion E . , Faissner A . and ffrench - Constant C . ( 2001 ) Knock - out mice reveal a contribution of the extracellular matrix molecule tenascin - C to neural precursor proliferation and mi - gration . Development 128 : 2485 – 2496 156 Cifuentes - Diaz C . , Faille L . , Goudou D . , Schachner M . , Rieger F . and Angaut - Petit D . ( 2002 ) Abnormal reinnervation of skeletal muscle in a tenascin - C - deficient mouse . J . Neurosci . Res . 67 : 93 – 99 157 Joester A . and Faissner A . ( 1999 ) Evidence for combinatorial variability of tenascin - C isoforms and developmental regula - tion in the mouse central nervous system . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 17144 – 17151 158 Rigato F . , Garwood J . , Calco V . , Heck N . , Faivre - Sarrailh C . and Faissner A . ( 2002 ) Tenascin - C promotes neurite out - growth of embryonic hippocampal neurons through the alter - natively spliced fibronectin type III BD domains via activa - tion of the cell adhesion molecule F3 / contactin . J . Neurosci . 22 : 6596 – 6609 159 Meiners S . , Nur - e - Kamal M . S . and Mercado M . L . ( 2001 ) Identification of a neurite outgrowth - promoting motif within the alternatively spliced region of human tenascin - C . J . Neu - rosci . 21 : 7215 – 7225 160 Retzler C . , Wiedemann H . , Kulbe G . and Rauch U . ( 1996 ) Structural and electron microscopic analysis of neurocan and recombinant neurocan fragments . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 17107 – 17113 161 Taylor H . C . , Lightner V . A . , Beyer W . F . Jr , McCaslin D . , Briscoe G . and Erickson H . P . ( 1989 ) Biochemical and struc - tural studies of tenascin / hexabrachion proteins . J . Cell . Bio - chem . 41 : 71 – 90 162 Fryer H . J . , Kelly G . M . , Molinaro L . and Hockfield S . ( 1992 ) The high molecular weight Cat - 301 chondroitin sulfate pro - teoglycan from brain is related to the large aggregating pro - teoglycan from cartilage , aggrecan . J . Biol . Chem . 267 : 9874 – 9883 CMLS , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 61 , 2004 Review Article 2045