E xpe r i m en t a l P h y s i o l o g y Exp Physiol 97 . 4 ( 2012 ) pp 455 – 461 455 Symposium Report Symposium Report Breathing and vocal control : the respiratory system as both a driver and a target of telencephalic vocal motor circuits in songbirds Marc F . Schmidt 1 , Judith McLean 2 and Franz Goller 3 1 Department of Biology , Neuroscience Graduate Group and 2 Department of Biology , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA , USA 3 Department of Biology , University of Utah , Salt Lake City , UT , USA The production of vocalizations is intimately linked to the respiratory system . Despite our understanding of neural circuits that generate normal respiratory patterns , very little is understood regarding how these pontomedullary circuits become engaged during vocal production . Songbirdsofferapotentiallypowerfulmodelsystemforaddressingthisrelationship . Songs dramatically alter the respiratory pattern in ways that are often highly predictable , and songbirds have a specialized telencephalic vocal motor circuit that provides massive innervationtoabrainstemrespiratorynetworkthatsharesmanysimilaritieswithitsmammalian counterpart . In this review , we highlight interactions between the song motor circuit and the respiratory system , describing how both systems are likely to interact to produce the complex respiratory patterns that are observed during vocalization . We also discuss how the respiratory system , through its bilateral bottom - up projections to thalamus , might play a key role in sending precisely timed signals that synchronize premotor activity in both hemispheres . ( Received 29 June 2011 ; accepted after revision 5 October 2011 ; ﬁrst published online 7 October 2011 ) Correspondingauthor M . F . Schmidt : 312 Leidy Labs , Department of Biology , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA 19104 - 6018 , USA . Email : marcschm @ sas . upenn . edu Control of respiration is an autonomous function of the vertebrate brain . While the rhythm - generating circuits are located in the pontomedullary regions of the brain - stem , respiration needs to be integrated with other physiological and behavioural functions through carefully orchestrated interactions between numerous different brain circuits and the respiratory system . Song production in songbirds is a particularly interesting example of such interactions because it requires co - ordination between respiratory circuits and the telencephalic vocal motor areas that control production of this learned vocal behaviour ( Wild , 2004 ; Schmidt & Ashmore , 2008 ) . The neural mechanisms of this integration are still largely unknown , but initial work suggests that the respiratory system interacts with these vocal motor circuits both as their driver and target . Although avian brains do not contain a neocortex , which is a term that deﬁnes the layered outer cortex of mammals , birds have a highly developed dorsal telencephalon ( pallium ) , whose organization is in many ways functionally similar to the mammalian cerebral cortex ( Butler et al . 2011 ; Wang et al . 2010 ) . Song production involves the co - ordinated activity of multiple motor systems ( respiration , vocal organ and upper vocal tract structures ; e . g . Suthers et al . 1999 ; Goller & Cooper 2008 ; Suthers & Zollinger , 2008 ) . Respiratory patterns underlying song production are characterized by stereotyped sequences of expiratory and inspiratory pulses that determine many aspects of the often complex temporal pattern of sound and silence within a song . In some species , sound pulses and silent periods are repeated ( phrases ) and different phrases are strung together into songs , which then contain multiple different respiratory rhythms ( Fig . 1 ) . Because respiratory patterns underlie this complex temporal structure of song , song motor control areas must interact with respiratory pattern generators to produce these rhythms . Sound production in songbirds is driven mostly , but not exclusively , by expiratory airﬂow ( an active process in birds ) through the vocal organ , the syrinx , which C (cid:2) 2012 The Author . The Journal of Physiology C (cid:2) 2012 The Physiological Society DOI : 10 . 1113 / expphysiol . 2011 . 058669 ) at UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA on April 23 , 2012 ep . physoc . org Downloaded from Exp Physiol ( 456 M . F . Schmidt and others Exp Physiol 97 . 4 ( 2012 ) pp 455 – 461 in songbirds is a bipartite structure . The mechanical properties of each half of this muscular vocal organ can be independently controlled , allowing it to operate as two separate sound sources . In many songbirds , individual syllables generated during song can therefore be produced from the left side , the right side or both sides simultaneously ( e . g . Suthers & Zollinger , 2008 ) . A remarkable feature of many songbirds is their ability to switch rapidly between contributions from the left and right half of the syrinx . One important characteristic of the interaction between telencephalic vocal motor centres and the respiratory system in avian song control is that the respiratory system , rather than simply being driven by these higher - order areas in a top - down manner , is also likely to play a direct active role in driving motor activity in these areas by way Figure 1 . Modulation of the respiratory rhythm in two different songbird species Amplitude and temporal pattern of respiratory pressure ( P ; horizontal line indicates ambient pressure ) during vocalization ( illustrated as spectrogram in top panel ) change markedly from that during normal , silent respiration . Top panels show that zebra ﬁnch song consists of a repetition of a motif composed of four ( in this example ) distinct pressure pulses ( top ) , which is repeated four times in the depicted song bout . A distance call precedes the song bout . Bottom panels show that canary song is generated with a series of pressure pulses that give rise to different trills . Each sound of the various trills corresponds to an air sac pressure peak , either during a sustained expiratory pressure pulse ( ﬁrst pulse of song ) or during rapid alterations between expiration and inspiration ( minibreaths ) . Song is a series of different trill patterns , each generated by a series of stereotyped respiratory pulses . The respiratory pattern of song therefore contains a sequence of different respiratory rhythms . C (cid:2) 2012 The Author . The Journal of Physiology C (cid:2) 2012 The Physiological Society ) at UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA on April 23 , 2012 ep . physoc . org Downloaded from Exp Physiol ( Exp Physiol 97 . 4 ( 2012 ) pp 455 – 461 Respiratory system as driver and target of vocal motor circuits 457 of its ‘thalamocortical’ projections ( Schmidt & Ashmore , 2008 ) . The bottom - up role has the respiratory control centres acting as protagonist in the generation of key timing signals that drive the generation of vocal motor sequences . Additionally , because of the bilateral nature of theseprojectionsandbecausebirdslackacorpuscallosum , these signals might also be involved in the co - ordination of vocal motor activity between hemispheres ( Schmidt , 2008 ) . Brainstem respiratory networks in mammals and birds share many similarities , both in their overall anatomical organization and in neuron types . The well - deﬁned interaction between specialized vocal motor circuits in the forebrain that control song production and the respiratory system , coupled with the precise manner with which song can be studied in birds , make the avian song system an outstanding model for studying how the respiratory system interacts with the telencephalon both as a target and as a driver of these vocal motor circuits . The respiratory system is linked to a specialized vocal control circuit in songbirds The specialized circuit of interconnected brain nuclei that control vocal production in songbirds is known as the ‘song system’ ( Nottebohm et al . 1976 ; Schmidt , 2009 ) . The motor component of this circuit is made up of nuclei HVC ( used as proper name ) and RA ( robust nucleus of the arcopallium ) . Although there is no known structure homologous to RA in mammals , the expression of genes in RAthatarealsoselectiveforlayer 5neuronsofmammalian motor cortex suggests that RA is functionally equivalent to the output layer of motor cortex ( Dugas - Ford , 2009 ) . The RA innervates the motor neurons of the hypoglossal nucleus that drive the syrinx . It also sends a dense network of projections to respiratory nuclei in the medulla ( Fig . 2 ) . Two of the primary respiratory targets of RA are nuclei PAm ( nucleus paraambigualis ) and RAm ( nucleus retroambigualis ) in the ventrolateral medulla . Anatomically , these nuclei are thought to be homologous to the caudal ( RAm ) and rostral portions ( PAm ) of the ventral respiratory group and innervate motor neurons in the spinal cord that respectively drive expiration and inspiration ( Wild , 2008 ) . An additional major target of RA is the midbrain nucleus DM ( dorsomedial nucleus of the intercollicular complex ) . Based on comparative and hodological arguments ( Wild , 1997 ) , DM has been suggested to be very much akin to the lateral and ventrolateral regions of periaqueductal grey , which in mammals seems to co - ordinate some of the respiratory changes that are associated with vocalizations ( Holstege , 1989 ; Subramanian et al . 2008 ) . The DM plays a central role in producing innate vocalizations ( Potash , 1970 ; Vicario & Simpson , 1995 ) and , based on its dense interconnectivity with the respiratory brainstem , is likely to be intimately involved in respiratory control during vocal production ( Wild , 2008 ) . In addition to these primary respiratory targets , RA also projects to RVL ( ventrolateral nucleus of the rostral medulla ) and the IOS ( nucleus infra - olivarus superior ) , which might be avian homologues of the B¨otzinger complex ( B¨otC ) and the retrofacial nucleus ; however , a strict comparison with B¨otC is complicated because birds do not possess a functional diaphragm or a phrenic nucleus . The pontine nucleus parabrachialis ventrolateralis ( PBvl ) does not receive a direct input from RA but is nevertheless likely to play an important role in vocal respiratory control . Based on its anatomical location and connectivity , it is a likely to be homologue of the mammalian K¨olliker – Fuse complex , which is necessary in determining respiratory timing , both in terms of the inspiration - to - expiration switch ( Dutschmann et al . 2004 ) , but also in the co - ordination and learning of breathing patterns during vocalization ( Smotherman et al . 2006 ; Dutschmann et al . 2009 ) . The avian song motor circuit receives robust inputs from higher - order auditory areas . During vocal learning , auditory feedback signals relayed through these pathways play a major role in shaping many of the properties of HVC and RA ( Mooney , 2009 ) . Critical to this process is a specialized basal ganglia – thalamocortical loop that receives a major input from HVC and terminates in RA , the ﬁnal common output of the song motor system ( Fee & Scharff , 2010 ) . Thesongmotorcircuitalsoreceivesafferent feedback information from pressure and chemosensitive receptors in the air sacs and lungs . These are relayed into the song motor system through afferent connections from a part of the nucleus of the solitary tract ( nTS ) to both PAm and PBvl ( Wild , 2004 b ) . The exact role of these inputs in song production and learning remains poorly understood , but preliminary ﬁndings involving unilateral transectionsofthevagusnervesuggestthattheseinputsarenecessaryforcertainaspectsofvocalproduction ( Mendez et al . 2010 ) Top - down drive of respiratory network As respiratory patterns of song are distinctly different in amplitude and temporal structure from those of silent respiration , a major question of song motor control is how HVC and RA exert control over the respiratory pattern - generating circuits . Investigation of this question is facilitated by an easily quantiﬁed behavioural output ( song ) , whose temporal structure reﬂects the underlying respiratory patterns . Potential mechanisms for forebrain control of respiration during song are bracketed by two opposing hypotheses . The integration hypothesis postulates that motor instruction signals from HVC and RA interact with C (cid:2) 2012 The Author . The Journal of Physiology C (cid:2) 2012 The Physiological Society ) at UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA on April 23 , 2012 ep . physoc . org Downloaded from Exp Physiol ( 458 M . F . Schmidt and others Exp Physiol 97 . 4 ( 2012 ) pp 455 – 461 the respiratory circuits to give rise to the stereotyped sequences of song . Such an integrative model was used to explain the respiratory patterns of song in the canary ( Serinus canaria ; Trevisan et al . 2006 ) . A simple non - linear network ( composed of excitatory and inhibitory neurons , presumably located in the respiratory premotor nuclei RAm and PAm ) could explain the stereotyped respiratory patterns of all syllable types observed in canaries . Most importantly , the input into this non - linear network ( from HVC and RA ) does not have to contain all temporal information that emerges in the respiratory output . Simple linear changes in amplitude and frequency of the driving instructions can produce qualitatively different respiratory patterns underlying different syllables . If such an integrative mechanism is used in song motor control , it provides a simple mechanism for motor diversity . Forebrain control of respiration for large repertoires of different song syllables would therefore require only small changes in the instructive signal , rather than precise information containing all temporal aspects . As these Figure 2 . Avian song system and its link to the respiratory system Schematic illustration of the avian song system ( shown in blue ) and its anatomical relationship with pontomedullary respiratory areas ( shown in green ) , which receive direct sensory input from putative mechano - and chemosensitive receptors in the lungs and air sacs ( red ) via parts of the nucleus of the solitary tract ( nTS ) . The song motor system also receives auditory input ( purple ) by way of nucleus HVC . The inspiratory nucleus PAm ( likely homologue to mammalian rostral Ventral Respiratory Group ) and DM ( likely homologue to mammalian lateral periaqueductal grey ) receive a strong projection from RA and project bilaterally back to thalamus ( Uva ) , which itself projects directly back to HVC . The circular arrow in each hemisphere symbolizes the recurrent nature of the song motor circuit . For simplicity , many of song system nuclei are not shown in the right hemisphere . Note also the direct connections between the respiratory areas ( PAm and RAm ) and tracheosyringeal portion of the hypoglossal motor nucleus ( nXIIts ) , which contains the motor neurons that innervate the syrinx . All respiratory areas are deﬁned in the main text . The one structure that does not receive direct projections from RA but is intimately tied with the structures of the respiratory brainstem is PBvl ( nucleus parabrachialis ventrolateralis ) , which is the likely avian homologue to the K¨olliker – Fuse nucleus . AFP , anterior forebrain pathway . C (cid:2) 2012 The Author . The Journal of Physiology C (cid:2) 2012 The Physiological Society ) at UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA on April 23 , 2012 ep . physoc . org Downloaded from Exp Physiol ( Exp Physiol 97 . 4 ( 2012 ) pp 455 – 461 Respiratory system as driver and target of vocal motor circuits 459 changes in input are processed by the respiratory control circuits , distinctly different respiratory patterns emerge from the non - linear properties . Another hypothesis postulates that all temporal information contained in the behavioural output , the song , originates from higher - order motor instructions originating in the telencephalon . Sparse ﬁring patterns of RA - projecting HVC neurons in the zebra ﬁnch ( Taeniopygia guttata ) are considered , at every time scale , to be instructing neurons in RA to relay this temporal information to the respiratory control circuits ( Hahnloser et al . 2002 ) . Support for this hypothesis was derived from experiments in which the temperature of either HVC or RA was experimentally manipulated , and cooling of the former caused a stretching of the song , whereas the same effect was not achieved by cooling of RA ( Long & Fee , 2008 ) . This ‘music box model’ suggested a mechanism in which respiratory circuits simply follow , rather than interact with , instructions from the cortical song control centres ( Fee et al . 2004 ; Schmidt & Ashmore , 2008 ) . Experimental testing of these hypotheses is difﬁcult during song production . However , by stimulating HVC and RA in awake birds and monitoring respiratory output , the basic processing of forebrain input by the respiratory network can be investigated . With this approach , the respiratory pattern showed entrainment in the predicted patterns of various stimulation rhythms , and respiratory output reﬂected the combined input to the left and right song control areas . Interestingly , effects of the same stimulation regimes on respiratory patterns were different in awake and anaesthetized birds , suggesting a strong role of inhibitory processes ( J . M . Mendez , G . B . Mindlin & F . Goller , unpublished observations ) . Although this experimental model of stimulating telencephalic areas during quiet respiration cannot mimic activation during song production , it is likely that this illustrated integration of RA input by the respiratory network also plays a role during respiratory control of song . Bottom - up drive and hemispheric co - ordination by respiratory network During singing , each half of the syrinx is controlled by six separate muscles . These are innervated exclusively by motor neurons in the ipsilateral hypoglossal nucleus , which , in the zebra ﬁnch , is almost exclusively innervated by the ipsilateral RA ( Suthers & Zollinger , 2008 ) . Muscles on each syringeal half therefore receive motor commands generated by ipsilateral song control nuclei . The exquisite co - ordination between each syringeal half during the production of many syllables implies a tight co - ordination between the motor commands generated in each hemisphere . Support for this idea comes from simultaneous recordings from left and right HVC , where the onset of premotor activity for each syllable in the song is perfectly synchronized between sides as if premotor activity in each HVC were synchronized by a common timing signal ( Schmidt , 2003 ) . As songbirds lack direct connections between song control nuclei in each hemisphere , this synchronizing signal must come from a common source projecting to both the right and the left HVC . Unilateral lesions of the small thalamic relay nucleus uvaeformis ( Uva ) , which sends a direct ipsilateral projection to HVC , causes a desynchronization of premotor activity in the left and right HVC ( Coleman & Vu , 2000 ) . It also prevents birds from producing normal syllable sequences ( Coleman & Vu , 2005 ) . Based on recordings in singing birds , neurons in Uva appear to produce precisely timed bursts of action potentials at the onset of each syllable , suggesting that these action potentials might serve as the neural correlate of the timing signals that drive HVC activity during key transitions , such as syllable onset , in the song ( Williams & Vicario , 1993 ; Aronov and Fee , 2007 ) . As PAm ( indirectly ) and DM ( directly ) are connected to each other across the mid - line and send a bilateral projection to Uva , both of these structures are anatomically well situated for synchronizing hemispheres during vocal production ( Wild , 2004 a ) . This anatomical argument is supported by physiological evidence showing that activation of PAm ( or DM ) can drive activity in both ipsilateral and contralateral HVC ( or RA ) in a Uva - dependent manner ( i . e . lesions of Uva abolish stimulus - evoked responses ; Ashmore et al . 2008 ) . Therefore , stimulation of PAm , a nucleus which drives the motor neurons of inspiration and receives massive inputs from the song motor nucleus RA , is also able to activate , with very short latencies , the same song motor areas ( HVC and RA ) from which it receives the song motor commands . The PAm is therefore a critical component of a recurrent loop for song production and may play a key role in generating the timing signals for hemispheric synchronization during singing . Neurons in PAm share similarities with mammalian rostral Ventral Respiratory Group , with a few interesting exceptions Given its proposed dual role in driving inspiratory behaviour and in synchronizing premotor activity in both hemispheres , we were interested in characterizing the types of neurons found in PAm and comparing them with those found in the mammalian rostral Ventral Respiratory Group ( rVRG ; J . McLean , S . Bricault & M . F . Schmidt , unpublished observations ) . We therefore recorded extracellular units in anaesthetized adult zebra ﬁnches in combination with air sac pressure to monitor respiratory activity and assigned neurons to a category based on their discharge patterns ( augmenting or C (cid:2) 2012 The Author . The Journal of Physiology C (cid:2) 2012 The Physiological Society ) at UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA on April 23 , 2012 ep . physoc . org Downloaded from Exp Physiol ( 460 M . F . Schmidt and others Exp Physiol 97 . 4 ( 2012 ) pp 455 – 461 decrementing ) andthephaseoftheirresponsewithrespect to the respiratory cycle . In mammals , the respiratory rhythm consists of three phases ( Richter , 1982 ) , and at least six different types of respiratory neurons have been described throughout the ventral respiratory column , and the majority of these cell types have been postulated to be necessary for the generation of this respiratory rhythm ( Smith et al . 2007 ) . We found that the ﬁring patterns of most neurons , out of a total of 130 , matched one of six categories of neurons that have previously been described in the mammalian respiratory brainstem ( Bianchi et al . 1995 ) . The majority of these cells were inspiratory - related neurons ( ∼ 48 % ) , as previously reported ( Reinke & Wild , 1998 ; Ashmore et al . 2008 ) ; however , we also found expiratory - related neurons ( ∼ 15 % ) and phase - spanning neurons ( ∼ 22 % ) . In addition to these major classes of neurons , we recorded from neurons whose ﬁring pattern was modulated with the respiratory rhythm , but ﬁring patterns did not match any of the categories described above ( ∼ 10 % ) . Finally , we also recorded from neurons ( ∼ 5 % ) that did not show any phase locking to the respiratory rhythm . This last type of neuron , which often could be recorded at the same electrode tip as respiratory neurons , showed phasic patterns of bursting that were identical to those described previously ( Ashmore et al . 2008 ) . When recorded simultaneously with the contralateral RA , activity in these ‘non - respiratory bursting’ neurons was highly correlated with the bursting pattern recorded in RA of anaesthetized birds ( Ashmore et al . 2008 ) . While we do not know the projection pattern of this class of neuron , their correlated activity with RA suggests they might form part of a subpopulation of neurons in PAm that , during singing , sends the precisely timed signals that synchronize premotor activity in both hemispheres . Conclusion Respiratory control circuits play an important role in song production . On the one hand , this observation is trivial , because the respiratory pattern of song production must accommodate the physiological needs of gas exchange . On the other hand , the speciﬁc mechanisms by which the respiratory network integrates descending ‘cortical’ motor commands and sensory input from the periphery to produce the complex respiratory patterns associated with singing is of great interest . The discussed evidence , while illustrating the potential of the songbird system for studying interactions between the forebrain and respiratory circuits , indicates the need for future research . Although we can make a strong case for interactive connectivity , it is largely unclear how song motor control areas direct the respiratory control network . Here we propose that intrinsic properties of the respiratory network interact with telencephalic vocal motor instructions to generate the respiratory diversity that gives rise to temporal structure of the acoustic signals ( songs ) . This model suggests that temporal complexity and diversity are the products of intrinsic properties of the respiratory circuitry and the higher - order inputs that impinge upon it during singing . We also propose that the respiratory control network serves an important function by providing input to the forebrain song control centres . Information from the respiratory centres is necessary to inform the song control network about the physiological state of respiratory homeostasis ( feedback ) and provide phase information . This latter role indicates that the respiratory network is a suitable component of the song control circuit for providing synchronizing information to the left and right HVC at the onset of and during the song sequence . The speciﬁc mechanisms of how feedback and timing information are sent to and processed in HVC are exciting research areas , with the possibility for providing insight into cortical motor control in general . References Aronov D & Fee MS ( 2007 ) . Recordings of antidromically identiﬁed projection neurons in motor thalamic nucleus uvaeformis ( Uva ) of the songbird . Program no . 430 . 5 / LLL1 . 2007 Neuroscience Meeting Planner . Society for Neuroscience , San Diego , CA , 2007 . Online . Ashmore RC , Renk JA & Schmidt MF ( 2008 ) . Bottom - up activation of the vocal motor forebrain by the respiratory brainstem . J Neurosci 28 , 2613 – 2623 . Bianchi AL , Denavit - Saubie M & Champagnat J ( 1995 ) . Central control of breathing in mammals : neuronal circuitry , membrane properties , and neurotransmitters . Physiol Rev 75 , 1 – 45 Butler AB , Reiner A & Karten HJ ( 2011 ) . Evolution of the amniote pallium and the origins of mammalian neocortex . Ann NY Acad Sci 1225 , 14 – 27 . Coleman MJ & Vu ET ( 2000 ) . Neural activity in HVc of adult zebra ﬁnches during the song recovery following unilateral lesions of nucleus uvaeformis . Society of Neuroscience Abstracts 26 , 2031 . Coleman MJ & Vu ET ( 2005 ) . recovery of impaired songs following unilateral but not bilateral lesions of nucleus uvaeformis of adult zebra ﬁnches . J Neurobiol 63 , 70 – 89 . Dugas - Ford JB ( 2009 ) . A comparative molecular study of the amniote dorsal telencephalon . PhD Thesis . University of Chicago . Dutschmann M , M¨orschel M , Kron M & Herbert H ( 2004 ) . Development of adaptive behaviour of the respiratory network : implications for the pontine K¨olliker - Fuse nucleus . Respir Physiol Neurobiol 143 , 155 – 165 . Dutschmann M , M¨orschel M , Rybak IA & Dick TE ( 2009 ) . Learning to breathe : control of the inspiratory – expiratory phase transition shifts from sensory - to central - dominated during postnatal development in rats . J Physiol 587 , 4931 – 4948 . C (cid:2) 2012 The Author . The Journal of Physiology C (cid:2) 2012 The Physiological Society ) at UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA on April 23 , 2012 ep . physoc . org Downloaded from Exp Physiol ( Exp Physiol 97 . 4 ( 2012 ) pp 455 – 461 Respiratory system as driver and target of vocal motor circuits 461 Fee MS , Kozhevnikov AA & Hahnloser RH ( 2004 ) . Neural mechanisms of vocal sequence generation in the songbird . Ann NY Acad Sci 1016 , 153 – 170 . Fee MS & Scharff C ( 2010 ) . The songbird as a model for the generation and learning of complex sequential behaviors . ILAR J 51 , 362 – 377 . Goller F & Cooper BG ( 2008 ) . Peripheral sensorimotor mechanisms and the control of song . In The Neuroscience of Birdsong , ed . Zeigler HP & Marler P , pp . 99 – 114 . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . Hahnloser RH , Kozhevnikov AA & Fee MS ( 2002 ) . An ultra - sparse code underlies the generation of neural sequences in a songbird . Nature 419 , 65 – 70 . Holstege G ( 1989 ) . Anatomical study of the ﬁnal common pathway for vocalization in the cat . J Comp Neurol 284 , 242 – 252 . Long MA & Fee MS ( 2008 ) . Using temperature to analyse temporal dynamics in the songbird motor pathway . Nature 456 , 189 – 194 . M´endez JM , Dall’As´en AG & Goller F ( 2010 ) . Disrupting vagal feedback affects birdsong motor control . J Exp Biol 213 , 4193 – 4204 . Mooney R ( 2009 ) . Neural mechanisms for learned birdsong . Learn Mem 16 , 655 – 669 . Nottebohm F , Stokes TM & Leonard CM ( 1976 ) . Central control of song in the canary , Serinus canaria . J Comp Neurol 165 , 457 – 486 . Potash LM ( 1970 ) . Vocalizations elicited by electrical brain stimulation in Coturnix coturnix japonica . Behaviour 3 , 149 – 167 . Reinke H & Wild JM ( 1998 ) . Distribution and connections of inspiratory premotor neurons in songbirds and budgerigar . J Comp Neurol 391 , 147 – 163 . Richter DW ( 1982 ) . Generation and maintenance of the respiratory rhythm . J Exp Biol 100 , 93 – 107 . Schmidt MF ( 2003 ) . Pattern of interhemispheric synchronization in HVc during singing correlates with key transitions in the song pattern . J Neurophysiol 90 , 3931 – 3949 . Schmidt MF ( 2008 ) . Using both sides of your brain : the case for rapid interhemispheric switching . PLoS Biol 6 , e269 . Schmidt MF ( 2009 ) . Neural Control of Birdsong . In : Encyclopedia Of Life Sciences . John Wiley & Sons , Ltd , Chichester , UK . Schmidt MF & Ashmore R ( 2008 ) . Integrating breathing and singing : forebrain and brainstem mechanisms . In Neuroscience of Birdsong , ed . Zeigler HP & Marler P , pp . 115 – 135 . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . Smith JC , Abdala AP , Koizumi H , Rybak IA & Paton JF ( 2007 ) . Spatial and functional architecture of the mammalian brain stem respiratory network : a hierarchy of three oscillatory mechanisms . J Neurophysiol 98 , 3370 – 3387 . Smotherman M , Kobayasi K , Ma J , Zhang S & Metzner W ( 2006 ) . A mechanism for vocal – respiratory coupling in the mammalian parabrachial nucleus . J Neurosci 26 , 4860 – 4869 . Subramanian HH , Balnave RJ & Holstege G ( 2008 ) . The midbrain periaqueductal gray control of respiration . J Neurosci 28 , 12274 – 12283 . Suthers RA , Goller F & Pytte C ( 1999 ) . The neuromuscular control of birdsong . Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 354 , 927 – 939 . Suthers RA & Zollinger SA ( 2008 ) . From brain to song : the vocal organ and vocal tract . In Neuroscience of Birdsong , ed . Zeigler HP & Marler P , pp . 78 – 98 . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . Trevisan MA , Goller F & Mindlin GB ( 2006 ) . Nonlinear model predicts diverse respiratory patterns of birdsong . Phys Rev Lett 96 , 058103 . Vicario DS & Simpson HB ( 1995 ) . Electrical stimulation in forebrain elicits learned vocal patterns in songbirds . J Neurophysiol 73 , 2602 – 2607 . Wang Y , Brzozowska - Prechtl A & Karten HJ ( 2010 ) . Laminar and columnar auditory cortex in avian brain . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 , 12676 – 12681 . Wild JM ( 1997 ) . Projections of the dorsomedial nucleus of the intercollicular complex ( DM ) in relation to respiratory - vocal nuclei in the brainstem of pigeon ( Comlumba livia ) and zebra ﬁnch ( Taeniopygia guttata ) . J Comp Neurol 377 , 392 – 413 . Wild JM ( 2004 a ) . Functional neuroanatomy of the sensorimotor control of singing . Ann NY Acad Sci 1016 , 438 – 462 . Wild JM ( 2004 b ) . Pulmonary and tracheosyringeal afferent inputs to the avian song system . In Seventh Congress of the International Society for Neuroethology . Nyborg , Denmark . Wild JM ( 2008 ) . Birdsong : anatomical foundations and central mechanisms of sensorimotor integration . In Neuroscience of Birdsong , ed . Zeigler HP & Marler P , pp . 136 – 152 . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . Williams H & Vicario DS ( 1993 ) . Temporal patterning of song production : participation of nucleus uvaeformis of the thalamus . J Neurobiol 24 , 903 – 912 . C (cid:2) 2012 The Author . The Journal of Physiology C (cid:2) 2012 The Physiological Society ) at UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA on April 23 , 2012 ep . physoc . org Downloaded from Exp Physiol (