Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 A Cross - Cultural Comparison of GSS and Non - GSS Consensus and Satisfaction Levels Within and Between the U . S . and Mexico Roberto Mejias College of Business Administration , University of Oklahoma : Norman , Oklahoma 7301 9 Litva Lazenm , Alvaro Rico , Ana Torres Instituto Tecnologico y de Estudious Superiores de Monterrey ( ITESM ) ; Monterrey , Nuevo Leon , Mexico Douglas Vogel Karl Eller Graduate School of Management , University of Arizona : Tucson , Arizona , 85721 Morgan Shepherd College of Business , University of Colorado , Colorado Springs , Colorado , 80933 Abstract Relatively few studies have considered cultural dimensions in their analysis of Group Support Systems ( GSQ and even f w e r have employed empirical data to test their hypotheses . A cross - culturalfleld experiment was used to measure the effects of " national culture " ( U . S . andMexican ) upon group consensus levels and individual satisfaction levels in GSS environments and non - GS ; S environments . Experimental results indicate that within the US . culture , there were no signijkant differences in consensus levels between GSS and Manual groups in the ranking of ideas , but that US . GSS groups reported greater changes in consensus levels . Results within the Mexican culture , reported higher ranking consensus levels for manual groups , but greater changes in consensus ieveis for GSS - supportedgmups . With regard to satisfaction levels , while US . groups reported no dgferences between treatments , Mexican GSS groups reported higher satisfaction levels than Mexican manual groups . While US . groups reported no differences in perceived participation equity , Mexican GSS groups reported higher participation equity than Mexican manual groups . There were no dyferences in perceived participation equity between GSS and non - GSS groups reported within either the US . or Mexico . However , in comparing US . with Mexican groups there were signijkant differences in satisfaction and perceivedparticipation equity between both cultures across all experimental treatments . Introduction Modem organizations are increasingly confronted with a competitive and often hostile business environment . Corporate executives , particularly fiom multinational Corporations ( MNCs ) , are often faced with the complex task of integrating their operations , frequently across nationally and culturally diverse environments . Managers and employees are subsequently spending an increasing portion of their work day ( 30 % - 80 % ) attending a broad spectrum of meetings and working with a wide range of cross - hctional , multi - national and cross - cultural work groups ( Mmtzberg , 1983 ) . Making the most effective and & cient use of these group meetings has clearly , become a high priority for executives . Organizations have increasingly looked to the information technologies ( IT ) , particularly electronic support systems such as Group Support Systems ( GSS ) , to maximize the effectiveness and quality of group meetings . Globally , GSS have increasingly been used by industrialized nations and to a lesser degree , by developing nations to support numerous decision making activities . However , the conceptual and themetical foundations supporting the applicability of current GSS designs have based upon North American concepts of . " desirable " group goals and " desirable " group behavior . The vast majority of empirical research regarding GSS meeting technology and its effects on group decision - making has been confined to U . S . subjects within U . S . organizations and envinmments . Few studies have considered cultural dimensions in their analysis of electronic support systems and even fewer have employed empirical data to test their hypotheses . In view of the signiscant developments in information technology and the prolifdon of teleC0 " unication systems on a global basis , this has been a disappointing shortcoming of current IT research . This study is a cross - cultural field experiment that measured the effects of " national culture " ( U . S . and Mexican ) upon consensus levels and satisfaction levels in environments using computer mediated support ( Group Support Systems ) and non - GSS n m a l environments . The field study was conducted at two research sites : the University of Arizona , in Tucson , Arizona representing the U . S . national culture and ITESM ( Instituto Tecnologico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey ) in Monterrey , Nuevo Leon , Mexico representing the Mexican national culture . The study included an analysis of consensus and satisfaction levels both within and between cultures as respective groups were exposed to three experimental treatments ( GSS - Anonymous , GSS - Identified and Manual - Identified ) . Background In an empirical study of 53 countries , which included over 116 , 000 respondents , Hofstede ' s ( 1 980 , 1991 ) model of cultural 408 1060 - 3425196 $ 5 . 00 0 1996 IEEE Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 differentiation described four dimensions of national culture along which value systems may vary . These specific dimensions were termed Power - Distance , Uncertainty - Avoidance , Individualism - Collectivism , and Masculinity - Femininity . Power Distance describes the relative distance and relationship between a supervisor and a subordinate . Power distance is the extent to which a particular national culture accepts and recognizes the unequal distribution of power and influence in institutions and organizations . Countries that score high on power distance appear to emphasize autocratic or paternalistic , while countries that score low on power distance favor participative management relations and the use of ' equal rights " and legitimate power over coercive power . Uncertainty Avoidance is the extent to which members of a particular national culture feel uncomfortable or threatened by uncertain or unknown outcomes ( Hofstede , 1991 ) . Countries that scored high on the Uncertainty Avoidance dimension tended to have a low tolerance for uncertainty a greater need for formal rules . Additionally , countries with strong ( h ~ gh ) Uncertainty Avoidance scores also had less tolerance for people or groups with deviant ideas or behavior and were more likely to resist innovative ideas ( Hofstede , 1991 ) . Countries with weak or low Uncertainty Avoidance scores were inclined to take more risks and were more likely to tolerate deviant behavior and innovative ideas when making group decisions ( Hofstede , 1980 ) . Individualistic - Collectivistic refers to the relationship between the individual and his or her larger organization . Individualistic countries are cultures which are self - reliant and are expected to look after only themselves and their immediate families ; relationships or links between outside individuals are usually not very strong . Collectivistic countries are cultures with a preference for cohesive and tightly knit social frameworks . Collectivistic cultures strive to maintain harmony and avoid dontation or disagreement among group members ( Watson , Ho , Raman ; 1994 ) . The MusculinityFemininity dimension indicates the relative trade - off between an assertive environment versus a supportive or nurturing environment . High Masculinity - Femininity scores indicate an emphasis on power , assertiveness and individual achievement . Cultural systems with low scores on the Masculinity - Femininity dimension indicate a greater emphasis on people , quality of life , providing nurturing support and collective cooperation . Prior GSS research Nearly all the empirical research in GSS literature has adopted an input - output perspective and compared group outcomes of GSS groups with traditional face - to - face or manual groups ( Ho , Raman , Watson ; 1994 ) . Traditional manual interactive techniques such as the Delphi method and the Nominal Group technique have been shown to improve group performance with idea generation and decision making tasks ( Delbecq , Van de Ven , and Gustafson , 1975 ) while the addition of a discussion leader or " facilitator " has been shown to improve the perfanmance of some groups with " intellective " tasks ( Maier and Solem , 1952 ) . However , while these manual , interactive p u p techniques have been shown to be useful , past research has repeatedly shown that GSS technology has tremendous potential for improving group performance and productivity ( Valacich , et al . , in press ) . Since the exchange of information among participants is the principle activity in group meetings , the main interest to researchers has been whether or not electronic support technology ( e . g . , GSS ) can improve group meeting communication and enhance face - to - face groups to be more productive and efficient . Prior GSS literature , however has traditionally been directed at understanding how new information technologies are diffused within and across U . S . fms ( Straub , 1994 ) . Few studies have been directed at learning how firms select , adopt and utilize new IT within cross - cultural environments and even fewer studies have advanced a theoretical perspective on possible cultural effects ( Straub , 1994 ) . The moderating effect of culture and nationality upon the behavior and attitudes of employees in foreign operatives has been well established by many researchers in early cross cultural studies on psychological need perceptions and need satisfactions ( ( Porter , 1963 ; Zurcher , 1963 ; Richman , 1965 ; Zurcher , Meadow and Zurcher , 1965 ; Simonetti and Weitz , 1967 ; Ivancevich and Baker , 1969 ; Slocum , 197 1 ; Mejias , 1980 ) . For example , in a comparative study of American managers located in the United States and American managers located in Europe , Ivancevich and Baker ( 1 969 ) found that culture had a si @ icant influence even ifthe respondent was not of that culture . Prior research has found that cultural differences between Asiatic and Western - English speaking cultures can be pronounced ( Ho , Raman , Watson ; 1989 ) . For example , while U . S companies exploit the advantages of email , Japanese firms do not use email as extensively . The Japanese , however , do utilize FAX more often than U . S . fms ( Straub , 1994 ) . The differences between these contrasting uses of IT may be attributed to cultural diff ' erences ( Straub , 1994 ) . Some researchers believe that preference for even the " type " of analysis may Mer among different cultures ( Sauter , 1992 ) . For example , Europeans and Japanese seem to prefer more ' analytical " solutions and normative models while Americans prefer ' heuristics ' and descriptive models ( Watson et al . , 1994 ) . Clearly , if differences in design preferences for certain models exist among different cultures , one would expect observable differences in the design of any electronic support system or GSS within cross cultural environments . Research hypotheses Based upon the foregoing discussion and Hofstede ' s model of cultural differentiation , we postulated a set of hypotheses that 409 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 soughtto predict the behaviors of U . S . and Mexican groups both within their respective cultures and compared across both cultures . Since the experimental study was divided into two major areas of analysis , ( i . e . , the analysis of GSS vs non - GSS performance and perceptions within each national culture and a comparison of GSS performance and perceptions between U . S . and Mexican groups ) , two groups of hypotheses are proposed . Hypothesis Group A : ( Analysis W i h Each Culture ) Hypothesis A - 1 : The levels of consensus generated with regard to the ranking of idea categories will be higher in non - GSS ( Manual ) groups than in GSS groups within both U . S . and Mexican national cultures . Hypothesis A - 2 - The change in the levels of consensus with regard to the ranking of idea categories will be higher in non - GSS groups than in GSS groups within both U . S . and Mexican national cultures . Hypothesis A - 3 - Participants fkom GSS groups will express more satisfaction with their group ' s decisions than participants from non - GSS groups within both U . S . and Mexican national cultures . Hypothesis A - 4 - Participants & om GSS groups will express more participation eauity with the GSS process than participants from non - GSS groups within both U . S . and Mexican national cultures . Hypothesis Group B : ( Analysis Comparing Cultures ) Hypothesis B - l - Mexican GSS groups , across all experimental treatments , ( GSS and non - GSS ) will experience higher levels of consensus than US . GSS groups . Hypothesis B - 2 - The change in the levels of consensus with regard to the ranking of idea categories will be higher for Mexican GSS groups than for U . S . GSS groups . Hypothesis B - 3 - Participants fiom Mexican GSS groups will expres higher levels of satisfaction with their ~ O U D ' S decisions than participants fiom U . S GSS groups . Hypothesis B - 4 - Participants from Mexican GSS groups will express more participation ecluitv with the overall GSS process than participants from U . S . GSS groups . Hypothesis A - 1 and A - 2 are based upon research findings from previous GSS experimental research . The concept of consensus may be interpreted differently within dissimilar cultural settings . For example , in high " collectivistic " countries , like Singapore consensus is given a hgh priority to further national goals ( Watson , Ho , Raman , 1994 ) . Mexicans , like Singaporeans may view dissent and non - consensus as something to be minimized so that the host wuntry may be viewed as politically and socially stable and thereby , attractive to foreign investment ( Watson et al . , 1994 ) . On the other hand , in high " individualistic " societies like the United States , Watson et a1 . , ( 1994 ) cites U . S . Senator Fulbright in stating that the presence of consensus is fine , insofar as it represents an open and genuine reconciliation of differences . Clearly , the role and relationship of consensus in socially interactive environments , like group meetings , are si & icantly M x n t for collectivistic ( e . g . , Mexico ) and individualistic ( e . g . , U . S . ) cultures . In general , there seems to be mixed research findings regarding group consensus levels and relative changes in consensus levels . Several studies state that GSS technology may actually reduce consensus levels ( Gallupe , DeSanctis , Dickson , 1988 ) . Still other studies report no change in consensus levels ( Watson , DeSanctis , Poole , 1988 ) . Only a few studies ( Turloff and Hiltz , 1982 ; Stevik , 1987 ) report that GSS technology increased group consensus levels . It has been suggested that the anonymity feature of GSS removes the identity of group members from their respective input and therefore , reduces the level of commitment ( Javenpaa et al . 1988 ) . On the whole , empirical studies seem to be consistent with the findings of lower consensus levels for GSS - assisted groups than for non - GSS groups ( Ho et . al , 1989 ) . It is therefore , predicted that GSS groups across both U . S . and Mexican cultures would generate lower co " s levels than non - GSS ( i . e . , manual ) groups as the level of identity proportionately decreased . Specifically , as the identity level of the group participants decreases fkom Manual ( Identified ) to GSS ( Identified ) to GSS ( Anonymous ) , the level of group consensus would be correspondingly lower . With regard to changes in consensus levels , since the role and relationship of consensus is different between high " individualistic " countries like the U . S . and high " collectivistic " ( or low " individualistic " ) countries like Mexico ( Hofstede , 1980 , 1991 ) , instructing a group to reach consensus may be interpreted differently within each society ( Watson et al . , 1994 ) . Clearly , GSS and its supporting decision making technology , reduces the traditional social cues found in conventional meetings and thereby increases social distance among members which may lead to a lower levels of group consensus ( Jarvenpaa , Rao and Huber , 1988 ) . Consequently , both U . S . and Mexican GSS groups may have fewer social cues and interactive opportunities that are fkquently utilized by face - to - face manual groups to sway or persuade members to " reconsider " their position ( e . g . ranking ) and possibly change their vote ( e . g . second ranking ) on some topic ( e . g . ranking of idea categories ) . As a result , it is predicted that electronically unaided groups ( e . g . , Manual groups ) , will have the ability to generate greater changes in ranking consensus than electronically aided groups ( e . g . , GSS groups ) . Although thm has been sparse research on GSS satisfaction and perception levels in a cross - cultural setting , the GSS features of equal and parallel procesSing , anonymous communication , and structured group processes are predicated to have similar positive perception results in the Mexican national culture as work groups have previously experienced in the U . S . Specifically , groups using GSS technology within each national culture would be predicted to be more satisfied with their group ' s 410 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 decision ( y . pothesis A - 3 ) and perceive more equal participation ( Hypothesis A - 4 ) within GSS supported environments than traditional manual technology . The predictions for Hypotheses B - 1 , B - 2 , B - 3 , and B - 4 , which compare consensus levels and perceptions levels between different national cultures are based upon the sparse cross - cultural GSS research presented to date and Hofstede ' s model of cultural differentiation which depicts Latin American countries , ( e . g . , Mexico ) as ideological opposites to the U . S . culture . Since the U . S . is characterized by high individualism and low power distance , U . S . individuals tend to see themselves as " I " and strive for self - actualization ( Watson , Ho , Raman , 1994 ) . The Mexican culture is characterized by low individualism ( or " high collectivism " ) and high power distance and see themselves as part of " we " and will strive for belongingness and the good of the interest ( Hofstede , 1980 , 1991 ) . This almost bipolar difference in cultural dimensions result in less cultural pressure on US . groups to reach agreement because U . S . society places a higher value on individualism . Subsequently , Mexican groups as a whole , were predicted to generate higher group consensus levels than U . S . groups as a whole . With regard to the comparison of changes in consensus levels between the U . S . and Mexico , as the Mexican culture possesses a higher " collectivistic " cultural index than the U . S . culture , there would be more pressure on Mexican groups to reach agreement or at least achieve a higher level of consensus than US . groups . Additionally , since GSS technology removes some of the social cues and therefore reduces or neutralizes some of the " high power distance " effects existent within the Mexican culture , we predicted that Mexican groups would , generate greater changes in consensus levels than U . S . groups . With regard to satisfaction and perception , since Mexicans generate a possess a higher ' kollectivism " score than the U . S . and are more concerned with making a decision for the good of the collective group , it was predicted that not only would Mexicans generate a higher consensus level than an individualistic culture ( e . g . , U . S . ) , but that Mexican participants may express more satisfaction with their group ' s decision that their U . S . GSS counterparts . Additionally , the " collectivistic " group - supporting features of GSS technology will reduce many of the high power distance barriers that have been traditionally present in face - to - face meeting such that Mexican will experience and perceive more " participation equity " than U . S . groups , who normally take " equal participation " in most group setting for granted . Research methodology The research study was composed of two separate , but closely interrelated areas of analysis . The first area of analysis investigated the effects of GSS supported meetings upon group performance and individual perceptions within the Mexican national culture and within the U . S . national culture . Each national experiment therefore , was a 2 x 2 " within subjects " factorial design study where supporting technology ( GSS Vs . non - GSS ) and identification features ( anonymous Vs . identified ) constituted the two independent variables . The second area of analysis represented a cross - cultural comparison of GSS technology upon group consensus levels and perceptions between the U . S . and Mexican national cultures . This area of analysis therefore , constituted a 2 x 2 x 2 factorial design where supporting technology ( GSS Vs . non - GSS ) , identification features ( anonymous Vs . identified ) , and national culture ( U . S . & Mexican ) represented the three independent variables in this cross - cultural field experiment . The particular emphasis however , throughout this research study was on national culture and its relative effect on group performance and the perceptions of their respective group members . Ideally , this 2 x 2 x 2 design would create eight cells , but because of the perceived artificiality of an " anonymous communication " treatment within the Manual group treatment , two ( 2 ) of the cells were not considered appropriate or realistic for experimentation . Specifcally , most organizations would not employ an " anonymous " generation of ideas and an " anonymous " discussion of their viewpoints within a traditional face - to - face meeting environment . Therefore , this left a total of 6 experimental treatment cells in the final research design . Research sites Several Mexican research sites were considered for the current cross - cultural field experiment . After several field visits and considerations of several potential sites , the Instituto Technologico y de Estudious Superiores de Monterrey ( ITESM ) in Monterrey , Nuevo Leon , Mexico proved to be the best match for the U . S . site ( University of Arizona , Tucson , Arizona ) in terms of similar academic programs , relative emphasis on research and teaching and similar equipped electronic meeting " s . Additionally , the ITESM campus at Monterrey used the identical DOS version of Ventana Groupsystems software that was used at the University of Arizona research site . The use of identical groupware software was especially critical so that differences recorded within each culture and across both cultures would could not be attributed to differences in software interfaces . Subjects The U . S . national culture sample consisted of 22 work groups , or 230 upper division production management and business administration undergraduate college students . The Mexican national culture sample consisted of 20 work groups , or 239 upper division business administration and industrial enpeering college students . Both national samples were divided into three experimental treatments : GSS - Anonymous , GSS - Identified , and Manual - Identified . There were 6 - 7 groups 411 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 for each of the three experimental treatments , for each culture , for a total of 42 groups . Task and experimental procedures The field experiment across both cultures was composed of seven ( 7 ) identical phases for group participants from each national culture ( e . g . , U . S . and Mexican ) 1 . Explanation and Purpose of Experiment to Participants 2 . Idea Brainstorming 3 . Categorization of Brainstormed Ideas into " Idea Categories " 4 . 1 st Ranking of Idea Categories in Order of Importance 5 . Discussion of 1 st Ranking 6 . 2nd Ranking of Categories 7 . Completion of Perceptions Questionnaire Before the experimental session actually was underway , facilitators at both research sites explained the nature and purpose of the experiment . The experimental task questions was displayed via a prepared overhead transparency or by Writing the " task question " on a white board . Additionally , three examples of appropriate ideas or answers to the task question were also given to the group along with the explanation that there were really no " right " or ' ' Wrong ' ' ideas that could be submitted . Depending on the what experimental treatment a group was assigned , participants were asked to either submit their real name ( for the GSS - Identified and Manual treatments ) or " anonymous pseudonym " ( for the GSS - Anonymous ) for tracking and matching purposes . Participants will then asked to submit ( either manually or electronically ) as many ideas or comments as possible in an idea " brainstorming " type fashion for exactly 15 minutes . During the idea brainstorming session , facilitators simultaneously ( i . e . , ' ' on the fly " ) created a list of " idea categories " of similar ideas . After the 15 minute brainstorming session , the group participants reviewed the list of " idea categories " generated by the group facilitator and were asked if the idea list accurately reflected their ideas and comments . Participants were allowed to add categories to the list ( in the event that the facilitator may have omitted some ideas ) , combine similar categories , andlor correct the wording of the idea categories list . Both GSS - supported and Manual group members were then sent a " ballot " with the list of the categories generated during the session . Participants were then asked to rank , from " most important " to " least important " , each of the idea categories . AU ranking for all experimental treatment groups was done electronically , even for the manual groups . After all group members had submitted their individual rankings , a group ' ' concordance level " statistic ( e . g . 35 % , 41 . 5 % , 62 . 8 % ) was generated by the supporting software along with a graphic distribution of individual rankings for each of the idea categories and was displayed on a large screen in front of the group . The facilitator then earmarked for discussion those particular idea categories whose standard deviation was high with the purpose of encouraging the group to come to a higher consensus or level of agreement in their rankings of various categories . Group participants were allowed to raise their hands and argue why some idea category should or should not have been ranked as highlyAowly as was displayed on the screen . After ten minuta of verbal discussion , group members were sent a second ballot with the same list of idea categories that they had previously ranked before , ( but now , in random order ) and asked to again rank , in order of importance , the list of idea categories , based on the past discussion . After ranking , the group then viewed the results along with a new higher or lower group consensus level . After 1 - 2 minutes of discussion , each group members was asked to fill out a post - test questionnaire ( GSS Group Perceptions Questionnaire ) that asked them to rate their individual satisfaction with the group process and various other group process gains and process losses . Dependent Variables and Measures There were four ( 4 ) dependent variables for this cross - cultural field experiment . Level of Consensus , was the degree of group agreement or " concordance " among group members regarding the relative ranking of importance of the various ideas or idea categories generated by the group . Change in Level of Consensus , is the degree of change in the level of concordance fiom the group ' s first ranking to the second ranking of the idea categories . The relative change in rankings was recorded by the supporting software in each of the experimental rooms . Satisfaction with the Group ' s Decision , is the satisfaction of group members with the final rankings of the idea categories . Satisfaction levels were recorded from a 63 item perceptions questionnaire that used a 1 to 7 Likert Scale . Participation Equity is the opportunity for equal participation among group members in a meeting . Perceived participation equity was recorded from a 63 item perceptions questionnaire that used a 1 to 7 Likert Scale . Experimental results The results from this study were divided into two sections : the analysis within each national culture ( Hypothesis Group A ) and the analysis between or comparing cultures ( Hypothesis Group B ) . For both analysis , a si @ icant level of 0 . 05 was used for hypothesis testing . Detailed tables of results are available from the lead author . For the analysis comparing results within each national culture , t tests and one - factor ANOVAS for the three experimental levels in this field study ( GSS - Anonymous , GSS - Identitid , Manual - Identified ) were used to test the hypotheses in Group A . The one - factor ANOVA helped to determine if observed dflerences between the means of the dependent variables were due to the particular combination effects ( i . e . , 4 12 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 413 support technology with I . D . features ) of the different treatments used within each national culture . The t test was used for planned contrasts of the means of the dependent variables as a priori comparison within each culture under each of the experimental treatments . For the analysis between national cultures , t tests and a two - factor ANOVAS were utilized to test for main effects and possible interaction effects in the comparison of national cultures under each of the three experimental treatments ( GSS - Anonymous , GSS - Identified , Manual - Identified ) for the hypotheses in Group " B " . The t tests for the planned contrasts were also used to spes @ a priori comparisons among combined means across both cultures for the dependent variables under each of the three independent variables and each of the experimental treatments . Whin Culture Analysis Consensus - The data experimented indicate that manual groups both within the United States and Mexico generated higher levels of ranking consensus than GSS - supported groups ( e . g . , GSS - Anonymous and GSS - Identified ) across all experimental treatments . However , these differences were only signifieant at the p < 0 . 06 level for the Mexican groups . With regard to changes in cx " us levels , results indicate that within the U . S . culture , greater changes ( i . e . increases ) in consensus levels were observed when groups used GSS - supported environments rather than traditional manual environments ( p < 0 . 05 ) . The same pattern was observed within the Mexican sample as GSS - supported groups generated greater improvements in group consensus levels that Mexican manual groups ( p < 0 . 05 ) . Perception - With regard to perception levels , the experimental data indicate that there were no significant differences in between GSS - assisted environments and manual environments for U . S . groups with regard to " satisfaction with the group ' s decision " and perceived " participation equity " . However , within the Mexican sample , GSS - Identified group participants reported significantly higher satisfaction with their groupk decision than Manual group participants ( p 4 . 04 ) . There were , however no si @ cant differences between Mexican GSS - Anonymous and Mexican manual groups . Between Cultures Analysis Consensus - When U . S . and Mexican groups were compared with regard to consensus and perception levels , the experimental data indicate interesting contrasts and similar patterns between national cultures . With regard to differences in group ' s two ranking of idea categories , t tests , which compared group rankings under each experimental treatment , reported no si @ icant differences between U . S . and Mexican experimental groups , However , a two - factor ANOVA test revealed a interesting main effect for the three experimental treatments in the study . The experimental data indicates that as the level of identity of the individuals within each experimental treatment increased ( fiom electronic anonymous to manual identified ) the level of ranking consensus increased . This trend held true across both national cultures for both rankings . Perception - With regard to perception levels , the experimental data indicates highly si @ icant differences between U . S . and Mexican groups due to the main effects of the culture variable . Mexican groups across nearly all experimental treatments , recorded significantly higher levels of satisfaction and participation equity than U . S . groups ( p < 0 . 001 ) . Mexican groups reported si @ icantly higher levels of satisfaction with their group ' s decision than U . S . groups across all three experimental treatments ( p 4 . 001 ) . A two - factor ANOVA revealed that these differences were due to the main effects of culture ( F = 132 . 77 , p < 0 . 001 ) and not to differences in experimental treatments ( F = 0 . 49 , p < 0 . 61 ) . Mexican groups also repotted higher levels of perceived participation equity than U . S . groups for each of the GSS - supported treatments : GSS - p < 0 . 00 ) . Although Mexican Manual groups recorded higher levels ofperceived participation than US . Manual groups , these dBerences were not si @ icant at the p < 0 . 05 level . As in the previous case , a two - factor ANOVA revealed that these differences in perceived " participation equity " were due to the main effects of culture ( F = 26 . 64 , p < 0 , 001 ) and not to differences in experimental treatments ( F = 0 . 7 1 , p < 0 . 49 ) . Anonymous ( tz - 4 . 27 , p < 0 . 001 ) and GSS - Identified ( t = - 3 . 95 , Discussion Hypothesis Group " A " : Analysis Whin Cultures : Experimental groups across both cultures using GSS technology , generated lower levels of consensus than groups using traditional manual meeting technology , but these differences were only significant at the p c 0 . 10 level for the Mexican sample ' s first consensus ranking Rao and Jarvenpaa ( 1 989 ) suggest that the anonymity feature of GSS may reduce the " commitment " of group members toward their input . This could explain why identifed treatment groups ( i . e . , Manual - Identified and GSS - Identified ) across both cultures demonstrated higher comasus levels than the anonymous treatment group ( i . e . , GSS - Anonymous ) . It appears that the removal of identification ( and therefore , the removal of commitment ) is an important factor for groups solving certain convergent tasks ( e . g . , voting , ranking , choosing alternatives ) because it obliges members to defend their ideas for consensus fomulation ( Rao and Jarvenpaa , 1989 ) . These results provide support for the commitment theory and may explain why the " identified " groups in this experiment generated higher consensus levels than the anonymous group . Within the Mexican sample , differences in consensus ranking levels were especially pronounced between GSS - Identifed and Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 the Manual - Identified groups ( F = 3 . 25 , p < 0 . 06 ) . This difference may be partially explained by the " collectivistic " nature of Mexican groups where there may be more face - to - face pressure to reach agreement and less tolerance for dissenting opinions . In contrast , face - to - face US . groups , demonstrate more " individualistic " tendencies where there is more emphasis on individual expression and less pressure to reach any level of agreement . ( Hofstede , 1980 , 1991 ) . With regard to changes in consensus levels , GSS - supported groups across both cultures and contrary to our predictions , generated greater changes in ranking consensus levels than manual groups ( p < 0 . 05 ) . Since GSS technology apparently removes some of the social and interactive cues found in traditional manual meetings , a possible explanation of these results may be that GSS also reduced some of the power distance effects present in manual meetings for both cultures , while at the same time encouraged some " collectivistic " behavior by groups to arrive at a higher level of agreement . In any event , these experimental results clearly indicate that greater changes in consensus levels , across both cultures , were generated by the GSS supported groups and not the manual groups as predicted by the literature . While no differences in " satisfaction with the groups ' s decision " between GSS and Manual group participants were reported for the U . S . sample , the Mexican sample reported significant differences between GSS - Identified groups and Manual - Identified groups . Although there is very little theory concerning decision satisfaction and computer - mediated communication ( George et al . 1990 ) empirical evidence seemed to weigh more towards increased satisfaction for GSS - supported groups ( George et al . 1990 ) ) . U . S . based studies by Steeb and Johnson ( 1981 ) , Nunamaker , Applegate and Konsynski ( 1 987 , 1988 ) indicated that GSS groups were more satisfied with the decision making process than non - GSS groups . However in the aforementioned studies , subjects were involved in ' ; Dlanning " tasks where groups did not have to resolve conflict to reach consensus . This may explain more why " non - conflict " resolving groups may have recorded more satisfaction with GSS technology than the current study ' s groups who did use GSS for conflict resolution . With regard to perceived participation equity , there were no reported differences across both cultures between GSS - supported groups and manual groups . Because GSS technology is expected to contribute to the achievement of group goals by reducing communication barriers , it was predicted that GSS participants across both U . S . and Mexican cultures , would experience more process gains ( e . g . , participation equity ) and fewer process losses ( e . g . , domination by one member ) than non - GSS participants . Although the Mexican sample reported a Merence in perceived " participation equity " at only the p < 0 . 10 level ( F = 2 . 33 ) , these results may demonstrate , via this exploratory study , that the egalitarian features of GSS may have a greater effect on high Power Distance cultures like Mexico more than low Power Distance cultures like the United States . Additionally , within the Mexican culture , GSS technology may have encouraged group members to participate and exert themselves more often , possibly reducing the high Power Distance effects of " evaluation apprehension " , " dominance " " superior - subordinate intimidation " often manifested in traditional manual meeting environments . Hypothesis Group " B " : Analysis Between Cultures Although Mexican groups generated higher levels of ranking consensus than U . S . groups for nearly all experimental treatments , these differences were not significant at the p < 0 . 05 level . There were also no differences in changes in consensus levels between U . S . and Mexican groups . These results were contrary our expectations to the culture predictions of Hofstede ' s model . Since the U . S . was characterized as a high individualism and low power distance culture , while Mexico was a characterized as a low individualism ( or " high collectivism " ) and high power distance culture , a larger difference between ranking c " sus levels was expected since it appeared that the U . S . and Mexico were indeed , bipolar opposites ( Hofstede 1980 , 1991 ) . However , differences between U . S . and Mexican groups were only sigmficant at the p < 0 . 10 level for the second ranking consensus level . Of interest , however was the comparison of relative changes in consensus levels generated within Mexican GSS groups . Within the Mexican sample , sieicant changes in consensus levels were generated for all three experimental treatments : Mexican GSS - Anonymous groups ( p < 0 . 04 ) Mexican GSS - IdenMied groups ( p < 0 . 01 ) and Mexican manual Groups ( p < 0 . 06 ) . This " across the board " generation of signrficant changes in consensus levels reflects the intemal Mexican " collectivistic " cultural trait of assigning great importance of " coming to agreement " on some particular issue . Apparently , there may have been more cultural pressure among Mexican groups to reach agreement or at least achieve a higher level of consensus than U . S . groups . Mexican participants expressed higher levels of " satisfaction with the group ' s decision " than US . groups across all experimental treatments ( p < 0 . 001 ) . Additionally , for all experimental treatments except the Manual - Identified group , Mexican group participants perceived more " participation equity " than U . S . group participants ( p < 0 . 001 ) . This expressed higher " satisfaction with the group ' s decision " for Mexican groups , may be explained by Hofstede ' a characterization of the Mexican culture as " high Power Distance " and low " uncertainty avoidance " ( Hofstede , 1980 , 1991 ) . Clearly , the supporting technology of GSS is compatible to Mexicols high " collectivisitic " cultural tendencies of high group agreement and consensus . Additionally , the high Uncertainty Avoidance index ( i . e . , need for more information and certainty ) expressed within the Mexican culture ( Hofstede , 1980 , 1991 ) may have been satisfied by the data generation and data retrieval features of GSS 4 14 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 technology such that Mexican GSS groups supported by GSS technology will express more satisfaction ( e . g . , less uncertainty ) than their U . S . GSS counterparts . As Mexico is both a low Individualistic ( i . e . , " collectivistic " ) and a high Power Distance country , it was hypothesized that the collectivistic nature of Mexican groups would be enhanced by GSS technology while GSS simultaneously reduced the process losses associated with high Power distance index . Additionally , it was predicted that Mexican participants would experience more process gains ( participation equity ) and fewer process losses ( domination , evaluation apprehension ) than low Power Distance and High Individualistic values groups like the United States . As Mexicans are from a traditional non - egalitarian culture ( Hofskde 1990 ) , Mexican groups may have also perceived more participation equity via GSS technology than what they are normally accustomed to and more relative participation equity than what U . S . participants experience . Conversely , the high " individualistic " and low " power distance " nature of U . S . culture could have created an environment where equal participation is normal and often taken for granted . Another explanation regarding Merences in perceived participation equity lies in the observation that Mexican participants tended to be more expressive , commenting on the opinions of other group participants , more than their U . S . counterparts . In conventional meeting environments , face - to - face discussion of ideas transmit social and contextual information through eye - contact , facial expressions , body orientation , voice inflection and other verbal and paraverbal cues that cannot be transmitted with computer mediated Communication ( Daly , 1993 ) . However , transmission of these cues may have both positive and negative effects on group performance ( Daly , 1993 ) . Communication and process barriers to effective group interaction are often cultural norms that usually result in the domination of meetings by higher status individuals and the intimidation of ( and subsequent non - contribution by ) lower status members of the group ( Steiner , 1972 ) . In high Power Distance cultures such as Mexico , face - to - face discussion may have traditionally inhibited frank discussion and cause inequalities with regard to member influence and participation . Morales et al . ( 1995 ) state that GSS tends to " level the playing field " allowing more equal Mexican participation without the pressing concern for what their superiors or " patrons1 ' are thinking . In a survey conducted by Morales et al . 1995 , 96 % of the Mexican GSS respondents believed the quality of their results were good and felt that they were able to express themselves fully in a GSS environment . Implications of Study and Conclusion This empirical cross - cultural study in the applications of GSS has several important conclusions and implications . First , culture will affect group outcomes and the adoption of information technology and therefore , must be considered in the design and exportation of any new information technology . Watson et al . , ( 1994 ) point out that this echoes the early findings of Attewell and Rule ( 1984 ) that the impact of organization culture greatly influence technological effects . Groups , like organizations , use technology to accomplish certain objectives and are strongly fashioned by the sun - ounding cultural norms of behavior of that particular group . In our present study , group norms were formed by the history , tradition and cultural propensities of the national cultures of the U . S . and Mexico . At the same time , even though culture may be resistant to change , technology can be an even more overwhelming force , given certain sociological and economic conditions ( Watson , et al . 1994 ) . Secondly , the design and implementation of GSS meeting technology , other than the culture in which it was designed ( e . g . , North American culture ) must be sensitive to the particular norms of the host country with regard to group interaction protocols and group meeting traditions . The fairly recent introduction of GSS technology into Mexican business operations represents a new mode of interaction for a traditional culture where power distances between superior and subordinate and " collectivistic " group behavior is widely accepted and has been so for centuries . The ability of GSS technology to mitigate age - old power distance meeting protocols and enhance the constructive exchange of information must be analyzed with caution so that GSS may be viewed as a " facilitating technology " and not a faddish intrusion that seeks to destroy traditional social and group norms ( Mejias , 1991 ) . Finally , as this cross - cultural experimental study has pointed out , though different cultures may possess different meeting formats and protocols , the common feature of problem - solving groups remains the exchange of information ( Watson , et . al . , 1994 ) . Subsequently , an effective GSS platform must be flexible so that its assortment of information exchanging tools may be arranged and rearranged to operate within different cultural environments ( Watson et . al . , 1994 ) . For example , as this study illustrates , the anonymity feature of GSS within Mexican meeting environments may be appropriate for the ranking and voting of various alternatives , but should not be utilized when the group is discussing the relative merits of each idea and alternative prior to group member voting . A GSS technology that is restrictive with its communication features may impose a culturally determined model ( e . g . , North American model of group behavior ) that is inappropriate for certain cultures ( Watson , et al . , 1994 ) . Within today ' s global market environment , cross - cultural studies of GSS technology are particularly relevant as international and multi - cultural work teams negotiate with each other for limited resources and the exchange of information to maintain a " competitive advantage . While the strategic importance of information technology has steadily increased for both developed and underdeveloped nations , the conspicuous and 415 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 416 surprising scarcity of cross - cultural studies in the area of GSS technology has been a disappointing shortcoming of current IT research and a motivation for the current experimental study . It is hoped that this exploratory research provides a direction and an encouragement for researchers and organizations endeavoring to determine the effects of IT diffusion , particularly , GSS technology as it is implemented into other cultures . References Attewell P . , and Rule J . " Computing and Organizations : What we Know and What We Don ' t Know " , Communications of the ACM , Vol . 12 , Dec . 1984 . Brislin , Richard . Understanding Culture ' s Influence on Behavior ; Harcourt Brace College , Publishers , Orlando Florida , 1993 . Daly , Bonita L . , " The Influence of Face - to - Face Versus Computer - Mediated Communications Channels on Collective Induction " , Accounting . Management and Information Technolog , Vol . 3 , NO . 1 , 1993 . Delbecq , A . L . , Van de Ven , A . H . , and Gustafson , D . H . ; ; Group Techniques for Program Planning ; Scott Foresman : Glencoe , IL , , 1975 . Dennis , A . R . , Nunmaker , J . F . , and Vogel , D . R . " A Comparison of Laboratory Experiments and Field Studies in the Study of Electronic Meeting Systems , " Journal of Management Information Svstems , Winter 1990 - 91 , 107 - 135 . DeSmctis , G . , and RB . Gallupe . " A Foundation for the Study of Group Decision Support Systems , " Management Science , May , 1987 , pp . 589 - 609 . George , Joey F . , George K . Easton , J . F . Nunamaker , Jr . , and Gregory Northcratl . " A Study of Collaborative Group Work With and Without Computer - Based Support , " Information Svstems Research , Vol . 1 , No . 4 , December , 1990 . Ho , T . H . , Raman K . S . , and Watson R . T . ; " Group Decision Support Systems : The Cultural Factor " ; Proceedings of the I 0th Annual International Conference on Information Systems ; pp 119 - 129 ; 1989 . Hofstede , Geert . Culture ' s Consecluences : International Differences in Related Values , Sage Publications , Beverly Hills , CA . , 1980 . Hofstede , Geert . , Culture and Organizations : Software of the Mind , McGraw - Hill Book Company , London , 1991 . Hofstede , Geat Uncommon Sense About Organizations : Cases , and Field Observations , Sage Publications , Thousands Oaks , 1994 . Ivancevich , J . M . and J . C . Baker . " The Job Satisfaction of American Managers Overseas " , MSU Business Topics , 1969 . Jarvenpaa , Sirkka , V . Srinivasan Rao , and George P . Huber . " Computer Support for Meetings of Groups Working on Unstructured Problems : A Field Experiment " , MIS Ouarterly , December , 1988 . Kraemer K . L . , and Pinonneault A . ; ' I The Implication of Group Support Technologies : An Evaluation of the Empirical Research " ; The Proceedings of the Twenty Second Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( iT - IICSs ) , Hawaii , 1989 . Maier N . F , and A . R . Solem ; " The Contribution of a Discussion Leader to the Quality of Group Thdung : The Effective Use of Minority Opinion " , Human Relations , Vol . 5 , pp . 277 - 288 ; 1952 . Mejias , Roberto J . ; " A Cross Cultural Studv of Blue Collar Emdovee Need Perception Among Mexican and American Operatives " , unpublished M . S . thesis , University of Arizona , Tucson , Arizona , 1980 . Mejias , Roberto J . ; " Computinp in South America : The Idormation Technologies in Urumay " . Working Paper , Dept . of Management Idormation Systems , University of Arizona , 1 99 1 . Morales , B . ; H . Moriera , and D . Vogel , " Group Support for Regional Development in Mexico " , Proceedings of the 28th Hawaii Intemational Conference on System Sciences , 1995 Minkberg , Henry . The Nature of Managerial Work , Harper and Row , New York , 1983 . Nunamaker , J . F . Jr . , L . M . Applegate , and B . R . Konsynski . " Facilitating Group Creativity with GDSS , " Journal of Management Information Systems , Spring , 1987 , pp . 5 - 1 9 . Porter L . W . and E . E . Lawler . " Properties of Organizational Structure in Relation to Job Attitudes and Job Behavior , " Psychological Bulletin > Vol . 64 , 1965 , pp . 23 - 51 . Richman , Barry , " Si & icance of Cultural Variables " , Academy of Manapement Journal , Vol . 8 , 1965 , 292 - 309 . Sauter , Vicki " Cross Cultural Aspects of Model Management Needs in a Transnational Decision Support System " , Chapter 15 from the text , The Global Issues of Information Technoloq Management , by Pavlia , Pavlia and Zigli , the Idea Group Publishing , Harrisburg , PA . , 1992 , pp . 332 - 350 . Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 Simmonetti . S . H . , and Joseph Weitz . " Job Satisfaction : Some Non - Cultural Effects " , Personnel Psvcholow , Vol . 5 , 1967 . Slocum , John , P . M . Topichak and D . Kuhn . " A Cross - Cultural Study of Need Satisfaction and Need Importance for Operative Employees " , Personnel PWCkiOlo ~ , Vol . 24 , 197 1 Steeb , R , and S . C . Johnston . " A Computer - Based Interactive System for Group Decision Suppcrt System , " IEEE Transaction on Svstem . Man . and Cybernetics ( SMC - 1 1 : 8 ) , August , 1981 . Steiner , I . D . Grout , Process and Productivity , Academic Press : New York , 1972 . Stefik , M . , " Beyond the Chalkboard " : Computer support for Collaboration and Problem - Solving Meetings ; , Communications of the ACM , Vol . 30 , l ; Jan . 1987 . Straub , Detmar " The Effect of Culture on IT Diffusion : Email and FAX in Japan and the United States " , Information Svstems Research , March , 1994 . Turoff , M . , and S . R . Hilt ? , , " Computer Support for Group Versus Individual Decisions " , IEEE Transactions on Communication , 30 , January , 1982 , 82 - 91 . Valacich J . , Dennis A . R . , Connolly T . ; " Idea Generation in Computer Based Groups : A New Ending to an Old Story " ; Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , in press ) . Van de Ven , A . H . and Delbecq , A . L . " The Effectiveness of Nominal , Delphi , and Interacting Group Decision Making Processes , " Academy of Management Journal , December 1974 . Watson , Richard , Teck Hua Ho , and K . S . Raman , " Culture : A Fourth Dimension of Group Support Systems " , Communications of the A . C . M . , October , 1994 . Watson , R . G . , DeSanctus , and M . S . Poole . " Using a GDSS to Facilitate Group Consensus : Some Intended and Unintended Consequences , " MIS Quarterly , Sept . , 1988 , pp . 463 - 478 . Zurcher , Louis , Jr . , " Particularism and Organization Position : A Cross Cultural Analysis " , Journal of ADplied Psvcholoa , Vol . 21 , 1968 . Zurcher , Louis , Jr . , A . Meadow , and Susan Zurcher . " Value Orientation , Role Conflict . , and Alienation from Work " , A Cross - Cultural Study " , American Sociological Review , Vol . 30 1965 . 4 17