Ultra - High Resolution Imaging by Fluorescence Photoactivation Localization Microscopy Samuel T . Hess , * y Thanu P . K . Girirajan , yz and Michael D . Mason y * Department of Physics and Astronomy , y Institute for Molecular Biophysics , and z Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering , University of Maine , Orono , Maine ABSTRACT Biological structures span many orders of magnitude in size , but far - ﬁeld visible light microscopy suffers from limited resolution . A new method for ﬂuorescence imaging has been developed that can obtain spatial distributions of large numbers of ﬂuorescent molecules on length scales shorter than the classical diffraction limit . Fluorescence photoactivation localization microscopy ( FPALM ) analyzes thousands of single ﬂuorophores per acquisition , localizing small numbers of them at a time , at low excitation intensity . To control the number of visible ﬂuorophores in the ﬁeld of view and ensure that optically active molecules are separated by much more than the width of the point spread function , photoactivatable ﬂuorescent mole - cules are used , in this case the photoactivatable green ﬂuorescent protein ( PA - GFP ) . For these photoactivatable molecules , the activation rate is controlled by the activation illumination intensity ; nonﬂuorescent inactive molecules are activated by a high - frequency ( 405 - nm ) laser and are then ﬂuorescent when excited at a lower frequency . The ﬂuorescence is imaged by a CCD camera , and then the molecules are either reversibly inactivated or irreversibly photobleached to remove them from the ﬁeld of view . The rate of photobleaching is controlled by the intensity of the laser used to excite the ﬂuorescence , in this case an Ar 1 ion laser . Because only a small number of molecules are visible at a given time , their positions can be determined precisely ; with only ; 100 detected photons per molecule , the localization precision can be as much as 10 - fold better than the resolution , depending on background levels . Heterogeneities on length scales of the order of tens of nanometers are observed by FPALM of PA - GFP on glass . FPALM images are compared with images of the same molecules by wideﬁeld ﬂuorescence . FPALM images of PA - GFP on a terraced sapphire crystal surface were compared with atomic force microscopy and show that the full width at half - maximum of features ; 86 6 4 nm is signiﬁcantly better than the expected diffraction - limited optical resolution . The number of ﬂuorescent molecules and their brightness distribution have also been determined using FPALM . This new method suggests a means to address a signiﬁcant number of biological questions that had previously been limited by microscope resolution . INTRODUCTION Although biological structures span many orders of magni - tude in length scale ( 1 ) , resolution in many types of bio - logical light microscopy is limited . The limit on resolution of point sources imposed by the ﬁnite size of the diffraction - limited illumination volume in a far - ﬁeld optical system ( 2 ) is quantiﬁed by the Rayleigh criterion ( 3 ) : r R ¼ 0 : 61 3 l = NA ; where l is the wavelength of the detected photons and NA is the numerical aperture of the lens system . To adequately visualize structure , most ﬂuorescence imaging methods rely on observation of a large number of molecules simulta - neously , which is inherently limited because the distance between observed molecules is much less than r R . New imaging methods such as 4Pi microscopy ( 4 – 9 ) , patterned illumination microscopy ( 10 , 11 ) , stimulated emission deple - tion ( STED ) microscopy ( 12 – 14 ) , and other types of revers - ible saturable optical ﬂuorescence transition ( RESOLFT ) microscopies ( 15 ) can increase resolution by reducing the size of the observation volume or , correspondingly , by in - creasing the accessible Fourier space and therefore increasing the number of accessible spatial frequencies . 4Pi microscopy ( 6 , 9 ) provides a signiﬁcant increase in axial resolution ( ; 100 nm ) , but its advantages are more difﬁcult to apply toward examination of thick or scattering samples , or lateral molecular distributions such as in biological membranes . Although STED does not rely on image deconvolution as 4Pi and patterned illumination microscopy do , both STED and 4Pi depend on nonlinear excitation under high - intensity pulsed illumination . Furthermore , they typically derive their information from large numbers of molecules observed sim - ultaneously , and therefore may obscure crucial behavior that is only discernable at the single - molecule level . Nonlinear structured illumination microscopy ( 10 ) has so far achieved resolution ( full width at half - maximum ( FWHM ) of the point spread function ( PSF ) ) of 50 nm and can in principle be improved further , but is limited by the photobleaching properties of the ﬂuorophore , and uses excitation intensities near saturation , where photobleaching may be more pro - nounced than at low intensity ( 10 ) . Near - ﬁeld scanning op - tical microscopy is also capable of spatial resolution better than the classical diffraction limit , but is typically used to image surfaces and is difﬁcult to use to image in aqueous Submitted June 12 , 2006 , and accepted for publication August 28 , 2006 . Address reprint requests to Prof . Samuel T . Hess , Dept . of Physics and Astronomy , University of Maine , Orono , ME 04469 . Tel . : 207 - 581 - 1036 ; Fax : 207 581 - 3410 ; E - mail : sam . hess @ umit . maine . edu . (cid:2) 2006 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 06 / 12 / 4258 / 15 $ 2 . 00 doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 106 . 091116 4258 Biophysical Journal Volume 91 December 2006 4258 – 4272 solution ( 16 ) . Fluorescence resonance energy transfer can access the molecular length scale , but has a limited range of distances over which it is sensitive and depends on a large number of variables , including molecular orientation and distance , dielectric constant , spectral overlap , and excited - state lifetime ( 17 – 19 ) . Other single - molecule methods can resolve multiple ﬂuorescent objects at distances longer than those accessible to ﬂuorescence resonance energy transfer and closer than r R , but only in limited numbers , and only if a very large number of photons is collected per object ( e . g . , 10 4 photons to resolve two objects separated by 10 nm ) ( 20 ) . Thus , even the most advanced ﬂuorescence microscopy and spectroscopy methods continue to be limited in their range of accessible length scales . Fluorescent speckle microscopy ( FSM ) ( 21 – 24 ) provides an additional means to image subdiffraction objects such as actin and microtubules by localizing single molecules as they intermittently emit ﬂuorescence . FSM also exploits ( typically stochastic ) intermittency of those single molecules , which allows large numbers of molecules ( . 10 5 ) to be visualized , but does not allow direct control over the number of ﬂuo - rescent molecules within the ﬁeld of view . In FSM , the number of visible particles must be controlled by changing the concentration or density per unit area of the ﬂuorophore - labeled molecules themselves , which in the case of green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) - transfected cells may not be a trivial proposition , especially if the desired density is low . Instead , in ﬂuorescence photoactivation localization micros - copy ( FPALM ) , the number of active ﬂuorophores , as will be explained , can be increased or decreased photophysically by changing the rates of photoactivation and photobleaching , even if the density of ﬂuorophore - labeled molecules is much higher than one ﬂuorophore per m m 2 . We present a novel method by which ﬂuorescence micros - copy may be performed to obtain an image with greatly enhanced ability to resolve large numbers of ﬂuorescent molecules . Unlike previous approaches , this method does not suffer from the standard resolution limits because it does not exclusively rely on resolution for visualization of mul - tiple molecules . Rather , single molecules are localized in modest numbers , allowing position localization , which is far more precise than the resolution limit . We demonstrate this principle using photoactivatable green ﬂuorescent protein ( PA - GFP ) molecules that are initially found in a dark ( weakly ﬂuorescent ) state , can be either reversibly or irreversibly ac - tivated by one excitation wavelength , and then can be vi - sualized by excitation with a second wavelength . A small number of stochastically photoactivated molecules , which are spatially separated from each other ( on average ) by several times the resolution , are then localized using single - molecule detection methods , in this case a high - quantum efﬁciency charge - coupled device ( see Fig . 1 ) . After a ( stochastically determined ) number of photons has been collected from the molecule , the readout cycle ends by photobleaching of that particular molecule , and the process is repeated until the total number of localized molecules is very large . The positions of readout ( observed and localized ) molecules are then tabulated and plotted to construct a two - dimensional map ( image ) . The acquisition of this single - molecule information also permits determination of the ﬂuorescence brightness and mean molec - ular velocity during the acquisition time . In principle , this method can be used for any photoac - tivatable molecular species whose photophysical properties are sufﬁcient under the following ﬁve photoactivation ex - citation and detection conditions . 1 . The spontaneous interconversion rates into and out of the activated ( ﬂuorescent ) state must be low compared to the light - controlled activation rate . 2 . For irreversible photoactivation , the photobleaching quantum yield must be ﬁnite and , when multiplied by FIGURE 1 Fluorescence photoactivation localization microscopy ( FPALM ) . An area containing photoactivatable molecules ( here , PA - GFP ) is illuminated simulta - neously with two frequencies of light , one for readout ( here , an Ar 1 ion laser , its spatial illumination proﬁle shown in A ) , and a second one for activation ( here , a 405 - nm diode laser , its proﬁle superimposed in B ) . Within the region illuminated by the acti - vation beam , inactive PA - GFPs ( small dark blue circles ) are activated ( C ) ( small green circles ) and then localized ( D ) . After some time , the active PA - GFPs ( E ) photobleach ( red Xs ) and ( F ) become irreversibly dark ( black circles ) . Additional molecules are then activated , localized , and bleached until a sufﬁcient number of molecules have been analyzed to construct an image . ( G ) The experimental geometry shows the 405 - nm activation laser ( X405 ) , which is reﬂected by a dichroic ( DM1 ) to make it collinear with the Ar 1 readout laser . A lens ( L1 ) in the back port of an inverted ﬂuorescence microscope is used to focus the lasers , which are reﬂected upward by a second dichroic mirror ( DM2 ) , onto the back aperture of the objective lens ( OBJ ) . The sample , supported by a coverslip ( CS ) , emits ﬂuorescence which is collected by the objective , transmitted through DM2 , ﬁltered ( F ) , and focused by the tube lens ( TL ) to form an image on a camera ( CCD ) . Photoactivation Localization Microscopy 4259 Biophysical Journal 91 ( 11 ) 4258 – 4272 the excitation rate at saturation , must give a photo - bleaching rate equal to or greater than the activation rate . 3 . For reversible photoactivation , the light - controlled deac - tivation plus photobleaching rate must be equal to or greater than the activation rate . 4 . The average number of detected photons per molecule before photobleaching must be large enough to provide the desired resolution enhancement . 5 . The ﬂuorescence of the inactive state must be low com - pared to that of the active state under the given detection conditions ; that is , the contrast ratio ( 25 ) must be large . THEORY The spatial precision of localization of single ﬂuorescent objects has been studied extensively ( 16 , 20 , 26 – 29 ) . Thomp - son et al . calculate the localization precision s x for point - like objects imaged in two dimensions by ﬂuorescence micros - copy to be s 2 x ¼ r 20 1 q 2 = 12 N 1 8 p r 40 b 2 q 2 N 2 ; ( 1 ) where r 0 is the standard deviation of the point spread function , N is the total number of photons collected , q is the size of an image pixel , and b is the background noise per pixel . From Eq . 1 , it is clear that molecular localization may be sig - niﬁcantly more precise than the optical resolution by a factor of as much as ﬃﬃﬃﬃ N p . Thus , the number of detected photons will be crucial to the enhancement of localization precision compared to resolution , as stated by condition 4 . For a single molecule capable of emitting ; 10 5 visible photons ( e . g . , emission wavelength ; 500 nm ) before photobleaching , the position localization could be as precise as ; 500 nm / ( 10 5 ) 0 . 5 ora few nanometers . Considering the ﬁnitedetection efﬁciency ( typically , 5 % ) of modern single - molecule ﬂuorescence microscopes , an estimate of the number of collected photons is N coll ¼ f det = F B , where F B is the photobleaching quantum yield for the molecule and f det is the detection efﬁciency , and the two - dimensional localization precision becomes s 2x ¼ r 20 1 q 2 = 12 N coll 1 8 p r 40 b 2 q 2 N 2coll ¼ F B ð r 20 1 q 2 = 12 Þ f det 1 8 p r 40 b 2 F 2B q 2 f 2det : ( 2 ) Since an increased b will increase s 2 x , it is crucial that background be minimized , including background from in - activeproteinmolecules ( condition5 ) . Consider , now , N photo - activatable molecules subdivided into inactive ( I ) , active ( A ) , and bleached ( B ) states , with interconversion rates as follows : I k A F A 1 k 0 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) ! (cid:3) k BC A k x F B (cid:3)(cid:3) ! B ; ( 3 ) where k A is the activation excitation rate , F A is the activation quantum yield , k 0 is the spontaneous activation rate , k BC is the spontaneous and light - dependent inactivation rate , k x is the ﬂuorescence excitation rate , and F B is the photobleaching quantum yield . These rate equations are similar to those shown to describe reversible photoconversion kinetics in related GFP mutants in the absence of photobleaching ( 30 ) . Here , consid - ering photobleaching and photoactivation , three linear coupled ﬁrst - order differential equations then describe A , B , and I , the numbers of molecules in each state , respectively : dI dt ¼ (cid:2) I ð k A F A 1 k 0 Þ 1 k BC A ( 4A ) dA dt ¼ (cid:2) Ak x F B 1 I ð k A F A 1 k 0 Þ (cid:2) k BC A ( 4B ) dB dt ¼ Ak x F B : ( 4C ) Alternatively , one of the three equations ( 4A – 4C ) could be replaced by the constraint that A 1 B 1 I ¼ Const . Considering Eqs . ( 4A – 4C ) , k A and k x can be chosen such that A , the number of active molecules within the illuminated region , is sufﬁciently sparse to allow simultaneous resolution and localization of those active molecules , and dAdt ¼ 0 . The steady - state condition results in A ¼ I k A F A 1 k 0 k x F B 1 k BC (cid:4) (cid:5) ¼ r I ; ( 5 ) where r ¼ k A F A 1 k 0 k x F B 1 k BC describes a characteristic ratio of photo - activation to ( reversible and irreversible ) photobleaching that should span as wide a range of values as possible for maximum control over molecular readout . It should be pointed out that performing FPALM does not strictly require dA / dt ¼ 0 , since it will be possible to localize molecules as long as they are sparse enough to not have overlap in their point spread functions , but estimation of the conditions that yield an appropriate density of molecules ( i . e . , a certain favorable value for A ) will be easier if dA / dt ; 0 during the measurement . Typically , to control ( limit ) the number of active molecules at a given time ( under irreversible photo - activation ) , the rate of photobleaching and spontaneous inactivation should be equal to or larger than the rate of activation , or r (cid:3) 1 . At saturation , where k x is at or near maximum , the denominator of r will be maximum , and so r will be at its minimum ( at a given activation rate ) , and that minimum r must be , 1 ( condition 2 ) . Under this condition , if the number of inactive molecules I is approximately constant because dAdt 3 t m (cid:3) I ( which should be satisﬁed anyway if dA / dt ¼ 0 ) , if k 0 (cid:3) k A F A , and k BC (cid:3) k B F B ( condition 1 ) , the ratio A / I can be adjusted over a wide range of values . The value of k BC is expected to be very small for PA - GFP , since its activation process is irreversible ( 25 , 31 ) . Considering reversible photoactivation , it will be neces - sary under some condition for k BC (cid:4) k x F B , so that the dominant path for limiting the number of activated mole - cules is by reversible deactivation rather than photobleach - ing . Also , to limit the number of active molecules , the deactivation plus photobleaching rate k BC 1 k x F B needs to 4260 Hess et al . Biophysical Journal 91 ( 11 ) 4258 – 4272 be equal to or larger than the activation rate , which is again equivalent to r (cid:3) 1 , or condition 3 . We may estimate the desired value of A ( the number of active molecules ) by considering the area / molecule in com - parison to the expected area of the molecule given by the 1 / e 2 radius of the point spread function ( r 0 ) and the area covered by molecular ( assuming nondirected ) diffusion during the molecular readout time t m : S A (cid:4) r 20 1 4 Dt m ; ( 6 ) where D is the diffusion coefﬁcient , the FWHM of the PSF is f 0 ; 0 : 55 l m NA ( 32 ) , and r 0 ; f 0 ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 2ln2 p , l m is the emission wavelength , NA is objective numerical aperture , and S is the area of the illuminated region . To ensure that Eq . 6 is satisﬁed by a constant dimension - less factor g (cid:4) 1 , where g is approximately the ratio of the area / molecule to the area of the PSF ( e . g . , g ; 16 for mole - cules to be separated by approximately an average distance of four times the size of their image on the relevant time - scale ) , let the limit for straightforward simultaneous resolu - tion and localization of particles require that S A ¼ g ð r 20 1 4 Dt m Þ ( 7 ) or , A ¼ S g ð r 20 1 4 Dt m Þ : ( 8 ) From Eqs . 5 and 8 , it follows that r I ¼ S g ð r 20 1 4 Dt m Þ ( 9A ) and r ¼ S I g ð r 20 1 4 Dt m Þ : ( 9B ) Similarly , an estimate of x , the maximum range of r , yields x ¼ r max r min ¼ k maxA F A 1 k 0 k BC (cid:5) k maxx F B 1 k BC k 0 ; ( 10 ) which reﬂects the degree of control over the photoactivation readout and should be maximized experimentally . Thus , minimizing both k BC and k 0 is essential for optimization of photoactivation readout . It also follows that in cases where k maxA F A (cid:4) k 0 and k maxx F B (cid:4) k BC ( i . e . , the spontaneous rates are small compared to the light - induced rates ) , maximization of the quantum yield for activation is helpful for control of the number of active molecules . Furthermore , a nonzero photobleaching quantum yield is also necessary , since other - wise the number of active molecules will become too large for resolution and localization . However , a large photo - bleaching yield will also reduce the total number of photons that can be detected per molecule and therefore reduce localization precision . Estimation of imaging requirements for 80 - nm and 20 - nm localization precision Using the theoretical model described above , the desired properties for a candidate PA - GFP and the parameters of the imaging system can be summarized . Consider now two cases : 1 ) , imaging immobilized molecules at the demonstrated localization precision of 80 nm , and 2 ) , imaging molecules mobile in two dimensions with D ; 0 . 08 m m 2 / s such as for inﬂuenza hemagglutinin ( 33 ) with a goal of ; 20 nm precision . Case 1 . To have a representative sampling of molecules within a structure of size ; 80 nm , one would roughly require ; 100 molecules per 80 nm 3 80 nm region within the image . For molecules uniformly distributed over a 10 m m 3 10 m m area , this would require localization of 1 . 6 3 10 6 molecules . However , typical confocal images of cells contain highly heterogeneous distributions of molecules , and in many cases large regions of the image do not contain signiﬁcant concentrations of ﬂuorophore . Thus , estimating that a fraction of the image ( e . g . , 10 % ) contains labeled features of interest , the number of molecules needed N tot is effectively lower ( N tot ; 1 . 6 3 10 5 molecules ) . Now , to estimate the acquisition timescale for such a number of immobile molecules , we employ the theory section derived previously in the text . Given that the image is ; 10 m m 3 10 m m , but ; 10 % of the image contains the majority of molecules , the area in which the molecules are effectively distributed is ; 0 . 1 3 100 m m 2 ¼ 10 m m 2 . To ensure that molecules are separated by 4 3 r 0 on the average , we choose g ¼ 16 ( Eqs . 7 and 8 ) , which yields ( from simula - tions ) an ; 9 . 7 % chance of having two molecules within r 0 of each other . Using Eq . 8 , g ¼ 16 , and r 0 ¼ 0 . 281 m m , one estimates that A ; 8 molecules / frame within the 10 m m 2 area should be activated . If one is willing to discard any molecules that are within r 0 of each other , the number of frames then is equal to N tot / A ; 2 3 10 4 frames . The next crucial factor determining time resolution is the imaging frame rate . The upper limit on frame rate is dictated by detected photon rate per molecule ( h ) and the photobleaching rate of molecules . The photobleaching rate should be optimized by using an excitation laser intensity where the photobleaching time is close to the image ac - quisition time ( photobleaching times of (cid:3) 1 s are achieved routinely using high - intensity laser beams ) . The most obvious limitation in this case would be laser power at the readout wavelength . Second , the value of h at saturation for the ﬂuorophore is crucial . Given a background noise estimated from measurements on coverslips to be b ; 1 . 02 photons / frame / pixel ( including readout noise ) , and pixel size q ¼ 0 . 121 m m , one can solve Eq . 2 to ﬁnd that one needs N coll ; 49 detected photons / molecule to achieve Photoactivation Localization Microscopy 4261 Biophysical Journal 91 ( 11 ) 4258 – 4272 80 nm localization precision . For EGFP , h EGFP ; 4 3 10 4 photons / s / molecule detected is typical at saturation in ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy measurements ( S . Hess , unpublished ) . Using the detected h for EGFP , it should be possible to detect 49 photons within a time of ; 1 . 2 ms . Allowing for PA - GFP to have even a 10 - fold lower saturating emission rate ( h PAGFP ; 4 3 10 3 photons / s / molecule including average brightness reduction due to ﬂicker ) , 12 ms / frame should be enough to collect sufﬁcient photons for the desired localization precision . Thus , the total acquisition time for 2 3 10 4 frames will be ; 240 s . In the case of the sapphire sample , estimating a twofold higher background yields a N coll ; 90 photons , an ac - quisition frame time of 22 . 5 ms , and a total acquisition time of 450 s , which is the same order of magnitude as the actual acquisition time of 500 s . Note that this calculation assumes that the optimum ( saturating ) detected photon emission rate is achieved by the excitation ( readout ) laser . Thus , for a goal of 80 nm localization precision , the fol - lowing parameters should be sufﬁcient : q ¼ 0 . 121 m m , h . 4 3 10 3 photons / s (cid:5) molecule , b , 2 photons / s (cid:5) pixel , frame acquisition time of . 20 ms , and a total number of detected photons before photobleaching of N coll ¼ f det / F B . 100 ( i . e . , F B , 2 3 10 (cid:2) 4 using f det ; 2 % ) . In practice , a num - ber of parameters of the photoactivatable protein ﬂuoro - phore , such as ﬂuorescence quantum yield , extinction coefﬁcient , ﬂuorophore emission spectrum , ﬂicker , and photobleaching properties , will affect the number of pho - tons that are emitted . Detector quantum efﬁciency , objec - tive numerical aperture , dichroic mirror and emission ﬁlters , and excitation laser intensity will also determine the number of emitted and detected photons . Case 2 . Now , to resolve features on ; 20 nm length scales ( i . e . , s x , 20 nm ) in samples with molecules randomly diffusing in two dimensions with D ¼ 0 . 08 m m 2 / s , N tot increases to 2 . 5 3 10 6 for 10 % coverage of a 100 m m 2 area at a density of 100 activated molecules within each area of 20 nm 3 20 nm . Reading out the same number of molecules per frame ( ; 8 ) , the number of frames increases to ; 3 3 10 5 frames . Given a background level of 2 . 0 photons / s (cid:5) pixel , the required number of detected photons per molecule increases to N coll ; 440 , which will then require 110 ms / frame if the molecules are immobile , and an acquisition time of 3 . 3 3 10 4 s , or . 9 h . If the molecules are mobile , an acquisition time of 0 . 2 s will be required because the molecular image will be spread by diffusion at D ; 0 . 08 m m 2 / s such that 4 Dt m ; 0 . 064 m m 2 ( from Eq . 6 ) , which effectively blurs the image from a 1 / e 2 radius of r 0 ; 0 . 281 m m to a larger radius r 1 ¼ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ r 20 1 4 Dt m p ¼ 0 . 38 m m , and requires an increase of N coll to ; 800 photons , yielding a total acquisition time of ; 17 h . Thus , such measurements will require that the number of emitted photons before photobleaching ( with detection efﬁciency f det ; 2 % ) to be 4 3 10 4 , which will require F B , 2 . 5 3 10 (cid:2) 5 , not a trivial constraint . METHODS Sample preparation Samples of PA - GFP were prepared from stocks kindly provided by Dr . George Patterson ( National Institute of Child Health and Human Devel - opment ) , by dilution 1 : 100 , 1 : 400 , or 1 : 1000 in high - purity water ( HPLC grade , Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) for a ﬁnal concentration of ; 400 nanomolar . A single one - microliter droplet of diluted PA - GFP solution was deposited on a No . 1 . 5 glass coverslip ( Corning Life Sciences , Corning , NY ) and allowed to slowly evaporate . The sample was then placed on the micro - scope stage and illuminated from below by the objective lens . Illumination , photoactivation , and detection Fig . 1 illustrates the principle of the method . Photoactivatable molecules ( initially in an inactive , nonﬂuorescent state ) are illuminated continuously by the ‘‘readout light’’ , in this case an Ar 1 ion laser . Next , the ‘‘activation light’’ , a 405 - nm diode laser , is turned on , which causes some of the inactive molecules ( presumably a stochastically determined subset ) to become active , but only a small enough number that they can all be resolved from one another . After those active molecules have been imaged for some time , they will spontaneously photobleach and become ( permanently ) nonﬂuorescent ( or , in the case of reversibly photoactivatable molecules , they will be inac - tivated by the readout light ) . Images taken of the molecules as a function of time are then used to individually localize each ﬂuorescent molecule and , after sufﬁcient numbers have been analyzed , to construct an image at higher resolution than diffraction would ordinarily allow . Fig . 1 G shows the key features of the experimental geometry . An Argon ion laser ( 10 W Innova 310 , Coherent , Santa Clara , CA ) was directed by steering mirrors through a dichroic mirror DM1 ( 435 EFLP EM XF12 , Omega Optical , Brattleboro , VT ) and into a focusing lens L1 ( f ¼ 120 mm ) which was located in the rear port of an inverted microscope ( IX71 , Olympus America , Melville , NY ) at one focal length from the back aperture of a 60 3 1 . 2 NA inﬁnity - corrected water - immersion objective ( UPLA - PO60XW , Olympus ) . A second beam from a diode - pumped solid - state laser at 405 nm ( BCL - 405 - 15 , low noise model , Crystalaser , Reno , NV ) was directed onto DM1 to ( upon reﬂection ) be approximately colinear with the Argon ion laser beam . After passing through L1 , both laser beams struck a second dichroic mirror DM2 ( Z488RDC , Chroma Technology , Rock - ingham , VT ) and reached a focus at the objective back aperture . Measured ( unattenuated ) power levels at the sample were 3 . 50 6 0 . 04 mW of total Ar 1 ion laser power ( 24 . 8 % at 476 . 5 nm , 72 . 0 % at 496 . 5 nm , and ; 3 . 2 % at , 470 nm ) and 0 . 197 6 0 . 005 mW at 405 nm . Illumination by the 405 - nm laser was controlled using a motorized ﬁlter wheel with RS232 interface and PC software ( FW - 102 , Thorlabs , Newton , NJ ) , which was rotated into a completelytransmitting ( open ) positionfor10 . 0 6 0 . 7s , followedbyreturnto a completely opaque position . The illumination intensity proﬁle was approximately two - dimensional Gaussian with 1 / e 2 radii r ð 405 Þ 0 ; 29 . 3 6 0 . 5 m m and r ð Ar 1 Þ 0 ¼ 41 . 6 6 0 . 5 m m for the 405 - nm and Ar 1 lasers , respectively . Emitted ﬂuorescence was collected by the same objective , ﬁltered by DM2 and an emission ﬁlter ( HQ535 / 50 , Chroma ) . Spectroscopy Fluorescence was focused by the tube lens and reﬂected out the left side port into an optical ﬁber with 1 - mm diameter , then detected by a PC - controlled spectrometer ( USB2000FL , Ocean Optics , Dunedin , FL ) . Raw spectra were recorded every 100 ms unless otherwise noted , without boxcar or averaging , background - subtracted using a blank spectrum determined under the same conditions , then smoothed by boxcar with full width 4 nm . Photoactivation microscopy Fluorescence was focused by the tube lens and reﬂected out the right side port onto a CCD camera ( Quantiﬁre , Indigo Scientiﬁc , Baldock , Herts , UK ) 4262 Hess et al . Biophysical Journal 91 ( 11 ) 4258 – 4272 interfaced by ﬁrewire to a PC . Images were collected by the CCD at 1 . 003 frames / s , gain of 11 . 4 , and no binning ( 1 3 1 ) unless otherwise noted , then saved in raw ( BMP or uncompressed TIF ) format and analyzed using MATLAB scripts designed for particle recognition and localization . In brief , the algorithm searches for all pixels within the image above a threshold , assigning a single square region of interest ( which in width is ; 3 times the FWHM of the measured PSF ) for each such pixel above the threshold , excluding all pixels within any other region of interest ( ROI ) closer than ; 1 . 7 times the box half - width from any other ROI . The total number of pixels above a second threshold within each ROI is then determined . Those ROIs with at least 20 pixels above the second threshold are analyzed to determine the background - subtracted centroid . Only those pixels within the ROI that were above the second threshold are used to calculate the centroid . Because comparison of various algorithms for single - particle localization reveals that the centroid algorithm is susceptible to offset bias and degraded localization accuracy even at modest signal / noise ratios ( S / N ; 5 ) ( 28 ) , the center of mass coordinates are then used as the initial guess for a least - squares Gaussian ﬁt of the image of the ﬂuorescent object ( 26 ) : I ð x ; y Þ ¼ B 1 I 0 e (cid:2) 2 ½ð x (cid:2) x 0 Þ 2 1 ð y (cid:2) y 0 Þ 2 (cid:6) = r 20 ; ( 11 ) where B is the background pixel value , I 0 is the peak pixel value , x 0 and y 0 are estimated coordinates of the center of the ﬂuorescent object , and r 0 is the 1 / e 2 radius of the point spread function . Although the PSF of a high nu - merical aperture lens is not strictly Gaussian ( 34 , 35 ) , for distances less than the 1 / e 2 radius , a Gaussian is a reasonable approximation of the PSF , and is frequently used to ﬁt the image of a point - like ﬂuorescent object ( 16 , 26 , 27 ) . The overall magniﬁcation of the optical system results in a pixel size of 0 . 121 m m , which is within a factor of 2 of the standard deviation of the PSF ( ; 0 . 20 m m ) recommended for optimal localization precision in the presence of background ( 27 ) . Analysis of mean pixel value as a function of the variance of the pixel value under the binning ( 1 3 1 ) and gain ( 11 . 4 ) settings used to obtain images yielded a slope of 11 . 7 6 0 . 4 pixel values per photon and an intercept of (cid:2) 1 . 8 6 3 . 3 ( i . e . , zero within uncertainty ) . In practice , when the sample is ﬁrst visualized , a number of molecules may already be activated by exposure to room light or spontaneous activation processes . The density of molecules may be higher than is optimal for localization of individual molecules , but as photobleaching progressively decreases the number of active molecules ( in the absence of the activation laser ) , the density approaches a more manageable level and acquired frames can be analyzed to determine molecular positions . As the density drops below the desired value ( e . g . , 0 . 8 molecules / m m 2 ) , the activation laser is pulsed at high intensity or turned on continuously at low intensity ( such that the total dose per frame is between 4 and 40 J / cm 2 ) . From that point on , frames are acquired until the majority of activatable molecules have been read out and photobleached . The density of molecules that are already acti - vatedatthebeginningoftheexperiment ( i . e . , accidentallyactivated ) depends largely on the age of the PA - GFP sample and whether it has been exposed to room light or left in buffer at room temperature for a signiﬁcant time ( i . e . , days ) . Frozen protein stocks appear to last for approximately months without signiﬁcant spontaneous activation ( data not shown ) . Simulations Forsimulations , moleculeswerepositionedrandomly ( 100atatime ) withina 512 3 512 - pixel region by generating a ﬂoating - point random number for both x and y coordinates of the molecule ( not rounded off to the nearest integer ) . The image of the molecules was generated to include shot noise by stochastically distributing 1000 photons / molecule using a random number generator to determine whether a given pixel would receive a photon . The probability of detecting a photon at a given position was given by the point spread function ( in this case a Gaussian centered at the x , y coordinates of the molecule , with 1 / e 2 radius of 1 . 6 pixels ) . Each pixel in the image then had a pixel value equal to the number of photons from the given distribution of molecules . Background of 10 6 3 photons at each pixel was also added by a randomnumbergeneratortothephotonsthatformtheimageofthemolecules . Calibration sample A 1 cm 3 1 cm 3 0 . 5 - mm wafer of single - crystal sapphire ( Princeton Scientiﬁc , Princeton , NJ ) within 0 . 05 (cid:3) of R - cut was cleaned with acetone , isopropanol , then water , then annealed in air at 1700 (cid:3) C for 10 h , cooled to room temperature , then cleaned again by the same procedure . A 1 - m L drop of PA - GFP ( original stock diluted 1 : 100 in high - purity water ) was then deposited on the surface and allowed to dry in air at room temperature in a darkened room . After drying , the sample was inverted and placed on top of a No . 1 . 5 coverslip ( crystal surface with PA - GFP facing down ) and was imaged from below by the objective . The sample was then imaged by FPALM as described above , using a Z496 / 10 3 laser cleanup ﬁlter ( Chroma ) to limit the excitation from the Ar 1 ion laser to just the 496 . 5 - nm line , yielding a power of 1 . 60 mW at the sample ( 496 . 5 nm line only ) , or an intensity of ; 105 W / cm 2 . Activation was achieved by an initial 2 - s pulse of illumination at 405 nm with intensity ; 40 W / cm 2 and by continuous illu - mination at 405 nm with ; 4 W / cm 2 after the molecular density had reduced due to photobleaching ( ; 500 s later ) ; ; 1000 frames were acquired at ; 0 . 999 frames / s with an integration time of 0 . 983 s , gain of 11 , and 2 3 2 - pixel binning . The latter 500 frames were analyzed to determine the presented distribution of PA - GFP molecules . Atomic force microscopy was performed using a JPSA ( Manchester , NH ) XE - 100 microscope in contact mode on the same sapphire sample in various 1 . 5 m m 3 1 . 5 m m areas of 256 3 256 pixels ( not necessarily the same areas imaged by FPALM ) with a stage with 50 m m travel , 1 line / s ( 256 s / image ) rate , a new tip ( radius , 10 nm ) with aluminum reﬂective coating ( Budget Sensors , Soﬁa , Bulgaria ) , in air at room temperature . RESULTS Fluorescence photoactivation and emission under 405 nm and Ar 1 ion laser illumination Fig . 2 shows emission spectra from PA - GFP molecules dried on a glass coverslip and illuminated continuously by ; 4 . 5 m W of power from the Ar 1 ion laser and for brief ( 10 - s ) pulses of ; 197 m W of 405 nm illumination . Negligi - ble ﬂuorescence was observed on coverslips without PA - GFP illuminated under the same conditions . During and after 405 nm illumination , the ﬂuorescence emission within the detected wavelength range 510 – 565 nm signiﬁcantly in - creased ( Fig . 2 , C and D ) . The observed emission maximum at 518 6 2 nm ( not corrected for detection or ﬁlter trans - mission efﬁciency ) , matches the expected emission of PA - GFP of 517 nm ( 25 ) . The increase in ﬂuorescence after 405 nm illumination indicates that a signiﬁcant fraction of pre - viously inactive PA - GFP molecules were activated . Under continuous Ar 1 illumination in the absence of 405 nm activation , the PA - GFP ﬂuorescence photobleached at a rate of 0 . 046 6 0 . 002 s (cid:2) 1 . Successive activation attempts became less effective as a larger fraction of the original molecules had already been activated or photobleached . The ﬂuores - cence visible before application of the ﬁrst 405 - nm pulse ( Fig . 2 B ) indicates that a small fraction of the PA - GFP had already been activated . Fluorescence microscopy of immobilized PA - GFP Fig . 3 shows a typical time series of ﬂuorescence images of a glass coverslip coated with a 1 - m L drop of 1 nM PA - GFP , Photoactivation Localization Microscopy 4263 Biophysical Journal 91 ( 11 ) 4258 – 4272 activated previously by 10 s of illumination at 405 nm at an intensity of 7 . 3 W / cm 2 ( ; 197 m W at the sample ) . The sample was excited continuously by 64 W / cm 2 of Argon ion laser illumination ( 3 . 5 mW at the sample , including both the 476 . 5 - nm and 497 . 5 - nm lines ) and imaged by CCD using ; 1 - s exposures ( Fig . 3 A ) . The discrete on - off behavior of various spots as a function of time ( Fig . 3 , B – F ) , and their FWHM of typically 0 . 30 6 0 . 06 m m , which is consistent with the expected FWHM of 0 . 55 l m / NA ; 0 . 237 m m ( 32 ) at the maximum emission wavelength l m ¼ 517 nm , indicates that the observed spots are single ﬂuorescent molecules . Localization of single molecules Simulation results Fig . 4 A shows results from the algorithm for identiﬁcation and localization of bright spots in ﬂuorescence images of PA - GFP molecules . Brieﬂy , pixels within the image with intensity above a threshold ( pixel value 30 ) are identiﬁed and marked with an ROI of 7 3 7 pixels ( 0 . 85 3 0 . 85 m m 2 ) . Any ROI which was , 0 . 73 m m ( 6 / 7 times the full width of the box ) from any other ROI was excluded ( distance measured center to center ) . ROIs are further selected for those with at least 20 pixels above a second threshold ( pixel value 3 ) after background subtraction . Selected boxes are analyzed for cen - troid ( Fig . 4 A , blue lines ) and the centroid coordinates are then used as an initial guess for an unweighted Gaussian least - squares ﬁt of the intensity within the box using Eq . 11 and a ﬁxed r 0 ¼ 1 . 6 pixels ¼ 193 nm . Fig . 4 B compares the precision of the localization rou - tine using simulated images and either a 1 ) , centroid - after - threshold - and - background - subtraction algorithm , or 2 ) , Gaussian - ﬁt - after - threshold - and - background - subtraction algorithm with initial position guess given by the centroid . The histograms of position deviation are shown for 19 , 706 total simulated molecules arranged randomly in a 512 3 512 image with 1000 photons each and PSF 1 / e 2 width of 1 . 6 pixels . The distribution of deviations for the centroid show signiﬁcantly ( . 20 - fold ) larger systematic offset 0 . 0273 6 0 . 004 pixels compared to 0 . 00116 6 0 . 00012 pixels for the same objects localized by Gaussian ﬁt . The 1 / e 2 width of the distribution of deviations ( 0 . 088 pixels for centroid and 0 . 105 pixels for Gaussian ﬁt ) was similar , consistent with the high signal / noise ratio of the simulated particle images . The values are slightly higher than the expected 1 / e 2 width of 2 = ﬃﬃﬃﬃ N p ¼ 0 . 063 pixels in the ideal case without background and indicate that the algorithms can certainly be improved , but also reﬂect additional sources of noise such as pixelization . FIGURE 2 Fluorescence emission before and after photoactivation of PA - GFP . ( A ) Fluorescence emission spectra were measured as a function of time as PA - GFP molecules immobilized on a glass coverslip were illuminated continuously with an Ar 1 ion laser ( time dependence shown by long , light blue bar along time axis ) , and intermittently with a 405 - nm laser ( short , dark blue bars just above the axis ) . The background - subtracted integrated area under the ﬂuorescence spectrum is plotted as a function of time ( blue curve a ) . Downward red arrows indicate movement of the sample to a new area that had not been illuminated previously . Under continuous illumination at 488 nm , the ﬂuorescence intensity increased signiﬁcantly during illumination with the 405 - nm laser . The emission spectra at various times before activation ( b and c ) , during ( d ) , and after ( e – k ) correspond to curves shown in B – D . The downward black arrow in D indicates that the emission intensity was decreasing with time . 4264 Hess et al . Biophysical Journal 91 ( 11 ) 4258 – 4272 Fig . 5 shows the results of a simulated distribution of molecules placed along periodic vertical strips 60 . 5 nm wide separated by regions 60 . 5 nm wide without molecules . Although such a structure would be difﬁcult to resolve using standard light microscopy , the periodicity is visible in the plot of localized molecular positions . Experimental results An FPALM image of a drop of PA - GFP dried on a coverslip , obtained after brief 405 - nm illumination and acquired under continuous Argon ion laser illumination is shown in Fig . 6 . After an initial period of intense ﬂuorescence emission from a relatively large number of activated molecules , photo - bleaching reduced the number of ﬂuorescent molecules to yield a low enough density for resolution and localization of between 50 and 200 molecules per acquired ( ; 1 - s ) frame . Fig . 6 A shows the tabulated and plotted positions of 48 , 746 PA - GFP molecules localized during a continuous illumina - tion and image acquisition of 399 s ( 400 frames ) . Presen - tation of these positions at successively higher zoom is shown in Fig . 6 , B – D . Fig . 7 , A – C , presents the molecular positions as dark circles on a light background and zooms in on a dif - ferent region . Fig . 7 D overlays the position of each localized molecule with a circle equal in radius to r 0 , the calculated 1 / e 2 radius of the point spread function for the 1 . 2 - NA objective and a 520 - nm emission wavelength . Note that many of the spots due to single molecules are closer together than r 0 and would be difﬁcult to resolve if they were emitting simultaneously . Note also the nonuniform distribution of molecules on the coverslip surface , which presumably results from the evaporation pattern of the water droplet containing FIGURE 4 Single particle localization algo - rithm . Simulated images containing single particles were analyzed to compare the accuracy and precision of the centroid algorithm and Gaussian least - squares ﬁt methods for particle localization . The simulated image ( A ) was processed to ﬁnd pixels above a threshold and assign a nonoverlap - ping ROI for each one ( minimum center - to - center ROI separation was 0 . 86 times the box full width ) . Centroid analysis was performed on ROIs with . 20 pixels above a second threshold , and those coordinates ( inset , dashed blue lines ) were used as an initial guess for a Gaussian least - squares ﬁt with the image using Eq . 11 ( coordinates from the Gaussian best ﬁt are shown in red ) . ( B ) Tabulation of the localization error for randomly positioned simulated molecules shows that the centroid algorithm has similar precision ( curves shown are ﬁts to a Gaussian distribution ) but has a systematic bias . The Gaussian algorithm has less systematic bias and similar or better precision ( particularly at low signal / noise ratio ) ( 28 ) and was therefore used for subsequent analysis of the experimental images . FIGURE 3 Imaging single molecules ofPA - GFP . ( A ) Singleframe ( 1 - sacqui - sition ) from a time series of images of PA - GFP molecules at low density on a glass coverslip illuminated continu - ously by an Ar 1 ion laser and activated by brief pulses from a 405 - nm diode laser . Fluorescence was detected from 510 – 560 nm . ( B – D ) Three successive 1 - s frames in the same series showing discrete on - off behavior expected for a single ﬂuorophore . All images had the same constant offset subtracted and all pixels were multiplied by a second com - mon constant for display purposes . ( E ) Collageofimagesfromalongertimese - ries of a 5 3 5 - pixel region ( ; 0 . 6 m m 3 0 . 6 m m ) imaged at 0 . 998 frames / s for 200 s ( images are arranged from left to right , in rows of ; 20 s each ) . ( F ) Count rate within the 5 3 5 region as a func - tion of time shows discrete behavior . The dashed box in F highlights the time dependence of thecountrate in the series of images in the white dashed box in E . Photoactivation Localization Microscopy 4265 Biophysical Journal 91 ( 11 ) 4258 – 4272 the PA - GFP . Features and structures much smaller than the diffraction - limited resolution ( r 0 ; 0 . 61 l / NA ¼ 264 nm ) are clearly visible , especially in the higher zoom panels . Molecular positions in Fig . 6 are plotted on top of the sum of all wideﬁeld images obtained during the acquisition . The summed image is essentially equivalent to the wideﬁeld image of the same measured distribution of molecules if they had all been ﬂuorescent simultaneously , and were imaged using the same laser illumination proﬁle . As expected , much of the structure observed by ﬂuorescence photoactivation localization microscopy is lost when the images are summed . Fig . 8 shows a plot of measured molecular positions of PA - GFP dried on an annealed sapphire crystal surface that contained terraces spaced by 200 – 630 nm , as imaged by atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) . The terraces in most cases consisted of a vertical step of ; 0 . 33 nm , which is close to the expected step thickness for single atomic monolayers in sapphire in this crystal orientation , followed by a gradual linear decline in height , which when repeated over many micrometers resembles a sawtooth pattern . The PA - GFP was observed to often localize along periodic arrays of parallel lines , which can be seen in Fig . 8 A . Note also the asymmetry of the distribution on either side of the ridges , which demon - strates a higher molecular density approaching the ridge from one side and a lower density on the other side of the ridge . The scale of the AFM image inset is the same scale as the plotted molecular positions . Analysis of the distribution of molecular positions along the direction perpendicular to the ridges ( Fig . 8 B ) reveals the width of the step , as resolved by FPALM , to have a FWHM of 86 6 4 nm , which is signiﬁcantly less than the FWHM of ; 238 nm that would be observed by wideﬁeld microscopy with the same nu - merical aperture ( NA ¼ 1 . 2 ) and emission wavelength ( l m ; 520 nm ) . PA - GFP molecules were observed to activate slowly ( with an ; 5 - to 10 - s timescale ) under continuous unattenuated Ar 1 laser illumination , in the absence of 405 nm illumina - tion . The wavelength intensity spectrum of the Ar 1 laser measured at the sample was found to contain a small fraction ( , 3 % ) of its intensity at l , 470 nm , which presumably causes activation in the absence of 405 nm illumination . Activation was not observed in the absence of 405 nm light when a cleanup ﬁlter ( Z496 / 10 3 ) was included in the Ar 1 laser path that passed only the 496 . 5 nm line . A portion of the PA - GFP was found to be activated before we illu - minated it with the 405 - nm laser ( data not shown ) , which contributed to the initially large number of molecules in the ﬁeld of view . FIGURE 5 Simulated FPALM resolves a subdiffraction - scale structure . Simulated photoactivatable ﬂuorescent molecules were distributed in periodic narrow vertical strips 60 . 5 nm wide , separated by 60 . 5 - nm gaps . The molecules were activated stochastically in small numbers ( ; 50 ) per frame and simulated to emit photons , 1000 of which were detected . The simulated PSF was 200 nm wide ( FWHM ) . Molecules were localized by the Gaussian algorithm described in Methods and in Fig . 4 . A plot of 30 , 659 molecular positions determined by the algorithm demonstrates the ability of the technique to resolve structures smaller than the PSF . The histogram of particles observed within horizontally - spaced bins , each spanning a 10 nm range in x - coordinates only ( shown directly below the plotted position ) , also reveals the subdiffraction periodicity of the simulated sample . FIGURE 6 MeasuredFPALMimagesofPA - GFPonaglasscoverslip . ( A – D ) Measured positions of 48 , 746 localized molecules are plotted in yellow , weighted by the peak intensity at the center of the molecule , obtained from a GaussianﬁtoftheimageusingEq . 11 . ThemolecularpositionsfromFPALM areplottedontopofthesumofallthewideﬁeldﬂuorescenceimagesobtained during the acquisition ( sum image shown in green ) to illustrate the signiﬁcantly greater resolution of FPALM compared to wideﬁeld ﬂuores - cencemicroscopy . Thesequencefrom A to D progressestowardhigherzoom , where the dotted box shows the region being expanded ( e . g . , the dotted red box in B shows the same region as all of C ) . In C and D , heterogeneity on length scales shorter than the classical diffraction limit is clearly visible . 4266 Hess et al . Biophysical Journal 91 ( 11 ) 4258 – 4272 In addition to high - resolution imaging of the molecular distribution , FPALM can be used to quantify other single - molecule properties of the ﬂuorophores , which are inacces - sible to standard wideﬁeld ﬂuorescence microscopy . Fig . 9 shows the brightness distribution of localized molecules and the time dependence of the number of localized molecules . Under continuous Ar 1 illumination , the number of ﬂuores - cent particles decayed as a single exponential with a 1 / e time of 125 6 3 s . DISCUSSION FPALM is capable of imaging entire cells or multiple cells , with localization precision of the order of tens of nanometers , and potential for even better precision . The experimental setup consists of a ﬂuorescence microscope , a CCD camera , and two commercially available CW lasers . Images can be acquired with modest alignment and setup time . Single mole - cules are localized individually , allowing their position and brightness to be measured and analyzed to extract spatial and kinetic information that is inaccessible when large numbers of molecules are observed simultaneously . Unlike other sin - gle molecule imaging methods , the maximum labeling density suitable for localization can be orders of magnitude larger than the ; 1 ﬂuor / m m 2 ( for each nonoverlapping spec - troscopic channel ) dictated by the optical Rayleigh criterion . This allows for a much more complete picture of the spatial distribution of the species of interest , while still providing single - molecule sensitivity . In principle , position analysis of a given molecule as a function of time can be achieved to estimate the velocity . FPALM does not require scanning either the beam or the sample , as is necessary in RESOLFT ( including STED ) , 4Pi , and standard confocal microscopy ( 6 , 13 , 15 ) . Furthermore , the sample is illuminated by a rela - tively low intensity ( , 100 W / cm 2 ) compared to that used in confocal microscopy ( i . e . , ; 10 4 to 10 5 W / cm 2 ) , reducing the deleterious affects of unwanted photobleaching and cell damage . FPALM has been demonstrated as a means of imaging structures on subdiffraction length scales , which has been conﬁrmed by atomic force microscopy . The distribution of FIGURE 7 Second representation of measured molecular positions obtained by FPALM . ( A – C ) Blue dots indicate the location of a single PA - GFP molecule , determined by FPALM , of the same acquisition series shown in Fig . 6 . ( D ) After zooming in . 30 - fold from A to C , the positions are replotted as yellow dots surrounded by a blue disk , approximating the lateral extent of the observation PSF , to emphasize the difﬁculty one would have in resolving these molecules simultaneously by standard wideﬁeld microscopy . FIGURE 8 FPALM image of an R - cut single - crystal wafer of sapphire an - nealed at high temperature to produce atomic terraces , labeled with PA - GFP . ( A ) The positions of PA - GFP molecules localized over a period of 500 s are plotted ( blue points ) and compared with an atomic force microscope ( AFM ) image ( inset ) of the same sample ( not necessarily the same area ) . Atomic step dislocations spaced laterally by 200 – 630 nm are visible by both tech - niques , because the PA - GFP has localized to those dislocations upon drying . Scale bar ( 1 m m ) applies to both the FPALM and the AFM images . Note the gradient in particle density across the dislocations shown by FPALM . The red dotted box corresponds to the proﬁle in B . ( B ) Analysis oftheproﬁleofa dislocation . Thehistogramofmolecularpositions ( blackpoints ) asafunction of distance perpendicular to the dislocation reveals the width of the feature as visualized by FPALM . Fitting the proﬁle with a Gaussian ( red line ) yielded a 1 / e 2 half - width of 73 6 3 nm , and an FWHM of 86 6 4 nm . Photoactivation Localization Microscopy 4267 Biophysical Journal 91 ( 11 ) 4258 – 4272 molecular positions at the edge of a terrace shows a 1 / e 2 width of ; 73 6 3 nm , or a FWHM of 86 6 4 nm , which is signiﬁcantly less than the diffraction limit in normal wide - ﬁeld microscopy . AFM imaging revealed that the sharp side of the vertical steps from terrace to terrace occurred over a lateral distance of 79 6 9 nm , in good agreement with the value determined by FPALM . Although the above FWHM shows that subdiffraction features can be resolved , the FWHM is also degraded by background from the sapphire , which was higher than in the samples of PA - GFP on coverslips , and therefore the ultimate resolution of FPALM may be much better than has been shown here . Nonetheless , the proﬁle of the features and their spacing as determined by FPALM are consistent with AFM results , conﬁrming that the method can be used to visualize structures on length scales shorter than the diffraction limit . The time dependence of the ﬂuorescence emission of sin - gle ﬂuorophores can complicate localization analysis ( 26 ) . Due to the relatively long ( ; 1 - s ) integration times in the FPALM results presented here , the ﬂicker and blinking that occur on the microsecond and millisecond timescales is averaged over , and therefore not directly observed . How - ever , some blinking on longer timescales ( Fig . 3 ) is still observed . In addition , long integration times will allow for signiﬁcant movement to occur if the molecules are mobile . When random molecular diffusion occurs on timescales shorter than the integration time per frame ( here ; 1 s ) , the image of the molecule will be blurred , with fewer detected photons per pixel distributed over a larger number of pixels . Molecules moving in three dimensions during the acquisi - tion time will be extremely difﬁcult to localize by the current implementation of FPALM . On the other hand , consider molecules constrained to move in two dimensions ( i . e . , within the focal plane of the microscope ) . In this case , under random diffusion , the mean position of each molecule is expected to remain unchanged , whereas the variance is expected to increase according to r 20 1 4 Dt m , where r 0 is the 1 / e 2 radius of the diffraction - limited PSF ( see also Eqs . 6 – 8 ) . Because of the larger variance and reduced signal / noise and signal / background ratios per pixel , the ability to determine the mean position will be signiﬁcantly diminished . In the special case of random two - dimensional motion with a very small diffusion coefﬁcient ( D , 10 (cid:2) 10 cm 2 / s ) , localization may in principle still be possible . If signiﬁcant nonrandom motion occurs during the acqui - sition time , the image of a given molecule will no longer appear circular , also making analysis much more difﬁcult ; new methods of analysis will likely need to be developed . Although this complicates the determination of the mean position within a single image , successive images can be analyzed to determine molecular velocities ( as is done in FSM ) , which is certainly of biological relevance ( 21 – 24 ) . FPALM is particularly well - suited to the study of proteins and other structures in ﬁxed cells , and is possibly applicable to a subset of membrane proteins in living cells , if their lateral mobilities are at least two orders of magnitude smaller ( 33 ) than those of soluble ( i . e . , cytosolic ) GFP - tagged proteins ( 36 – 38 ) . Successful examples of single - molecule total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence ( TIRF ) detection with high signal / noise ratio in agarose ( 39 ) and membranes ( 40 ) offer a promising complement to single - particle tracking FIGURE 9 Additionalinformation , notavailabletoensembleﬂuorescence microscopy methods that image large numbers of molecules ( (cid:4) 100 ) simul - taneously , is obtained by FPALM . ( A ) The number of molecules ﬂuctuates and decays with time as FPALM frames are acquired . The number of ﬂuo - rescent molecules within the observation volume in a wideﬁeld or confocal ﬂuorescence microscope is difﬁcult to determine without a calibration stan - dard , but is obtained for every image in FPALM . A single exponential time constant ( t ¼ 125 6 3 s ) described the decay of the number of molecules observed , consistent with depletion of a single reservoir of inactivated PA - GFP molecules . ( B ) The distribution of single - molecule ﬂuorescence inten - sities is determined by FPALM andconvertedintothedetectedphotoncount rate at the center of the diffraction - limited image of the molecule . All amplitudes had a constant subtracted to account for background . Such information is useful in determining the degree of heterogeneity within a population of molecules and is typically difﬁcult to obtain from measure - ments that sample large numbers of molecules simultaneously . 4268 Hess et al . Biophysical Journal 91 ( 11 ) 4258 – 4272 measurements that have revealed time - dependent lateral heterogeneities in biological membranes ( 41 , 42 ) . The power offered by genetic manipulation of ﬂuorescent proteins ( 43 – 46 ) is a signiﬁcant advantage for FPALM , since any protein of interest can be labeled by splicing the gene for that protein into a PA - GFP or other photoactivatable ﬂuore - scent protein ( PAFP ) construct . Multiple labeling is possible using combinations of photoactivatable proteins with differ - ent activation and emission spectra . Labeling of other cel - lular species , such as lipids , will rely on development of conjugates with photoactivatable organic dyes , PAFP - tagged antibodies , or lipid binding proteins such as the pleckstrin homology domain that binds PIP 2 ( 47 ) . As the variety of available PAFPs increases ( 31 ) , multi - color labeling exper - iments using FPALM will become even more ﬂexible . Mutagenesis of existing PAFPs can also be used to reduce blinking and undesirable types of spectral switching that complicate the use of many types of ﬂuorophores , such as quantum dots , in single - molecule imaging . The quantum yield of PA - GFP ( 0 . 79 ) is already quite high in comparison to most other PAFPs ( 25 , 31 ) . Comparison of ﬂuorescence intermittency of PA - GFP mutants by ﬂuorescence correla - tion spectroscopy has shown signiﬁcant variation in the degree to which these proteins ﬂicker , which can limit the number of photons emitted per second per molecule ( S . Hess and G . Patterson , unpublished results ) . Improvement of the photophysical properties of PAFPs to reduce intermittency and increase photon emission rate will allow even greater localization precision to be achieved . The irreversible photobleaching that ﬂuorophores inevi - tably undergo is advantageous in FPALM since it helps control the number of ﬂuorescent molecules in the ﬁeld of view during each image frame ( time point ) . Although it is expected that photobleaching will lead to the production of chemically reactive species that could be toxic to living cells , the number of bleached molecules produced is of the same order of magnitude as those produced in confocal micros - copy experiments ( it is not uncommon for a signiﬁcant por - tion of the ﬂuorophore to be bleached during the acquisition of a z - stack with frame averaging , for example ) . The time required by a ﬂuorophore to be photoactivated ( the ‘‘settling time’’ mentioned by Hoffman et al . ) can also limit imaging rate in scanning photoactivation microscopy ( 15 ) but is not as signiﬁcant an impediment in FPALM because the entire ﬁeld is imaged at once , and each frame is acquired over a timescale of seconds or fractions of a second , rather than the typical microsecond voxel dwell time in confocal and other scanning microscopies . Also , under some conditions in other types of photoactivation microscopy , it becomes difﬁcult to increase the activation rate past a certain point ( 15 ) . In comparison , activation rates for PA - GFP much larger than the frame rate ( . 10 s (cid:2) 1 ) have been achieved with modest activation laser intensities ( ; 100 W / cm 2 , data not shown ) and since it is not anticipated that the frame rate would need to exceed ; 10 2 s (cid:2) 1 , the same kind of limitation for FPALM using PA - GFP may not exist . Further study of the activation rate as a function of activation laser intensity is needed , since the activation rate and photobleaching rate can limit the acquisition frame rate . Although many ﬂuorescent proteins are known to spon - taneously aggregate , point mutations such as L221K can be introduced into PA - GFP ( which is of the family of green ﬂuorescent proteins and is less susceptible to aggregation , with K d ; 0 . 11 mM ) to raise ( improve ) the K d to ; 9 mM ( 48 ) . Recent work in single - molecule ﬂuorescence microscopy has focused on improving the ability to resolve multiple ﬂuorophores by spectral separation ( 16 ) ; nanoparticles such as quantum dots offer somewhat narrower emission spectra and therefore can be ‘‘packed’’ in larger numbers into the same range of visible wavelengths ( 49 ) . However , in com - parison to ﬂuorescent proteins , quantum dots have so far proven to be more difﬁcult to target to some intracellular compartments , especially the nucleus ( 50 ) . FPALM obviates the need for multiple detection channels by controlling the number of particles that are ﬂuorescent at a given time , such that even at high inactive probe concentrations , the distance between active ( ﬂuorescent ) molecules is on the average much larger than the resolution . It should be noted that ex - tending this technique to multiple spectral channels is pos - sible , and would result in a modest increase in the possible labeling density , proportional to the number of spectral chan - nels , but a much more signiﬁcant advantage of labeling with multiple , spectrally distinct photoactivatable species is sim - ply to be able to visualize multiple species at high resolution . Estimated signal / noise ratio We use the deﬁnition of signal / noise ratio S / N ¼ ( I 0 (cid:2) I B ) / d , where d is a representative noise level and I 0 (cid:2) I B is the difference in mean intensity between the object and the background ( Cheezum et al . ) , to obtain for the molecule in Fig . 3 E : I 0 (cid:2) I B ; 161 photons and d ; 25 . 6 photons , for S / N ; 6 . 3 , which is high enough to allow localization with distance precision . 100 nm using a Gaussian algorithm , but not necessarily with other algorithms ( Cheezum et al . ) . The expected excitation rate k x ¼ s I , where s is the one - photon excitation cross section and I is the excitation intensity in photons / unit area / s , can be estimated theoretically consider - ing the excitation laser ( Ar 1 ) power ( 6 . 7 mW ) in the back aperture , the objective transmission coefﬁcient ( ; 0 . 5 ) for the appropriate wavelengths ( 476 . 5 nm and 496 . 5 nm ) , the 1 / e 2 radius of the illuminated area ( 41 . 6 6 0 . 5 m m ) , the resulting intensity ; 46 W / cm 2 at 496 . 7 nm and ; 16 W / cm 2 at 476 . 5 nm , the energy per photon , and the estimated ex - tinction coefﬁcient at 476 . 5 nm and 496 . 7 nm ( using e ¼ 17 , 400 M (cid:2) 1 cm (cid:2) 1 at 504 nm and wavelength dependence from Patterson et al . ( 25 ) ) , to obtain excitation rates k ð 497 Þ x ; 6 . 2 3 10 3 s (cid:2) 1 and k ð 477 Þ x ; 1 . 3 3 10 3 s (cid:2) 1 . The expected detected photon count rate per molecule ( h ) is estimated by Photoactivation Localization Microscopy 4269 Biophysical Journal 91 ( 11 ) 4258 – 4272 h ¼ u fl k ð 497 Þ x 1 k ð 477 Þ x (cid:6) (cid:7) f det , where f ﬂ ¼ 0 . 79 is the ﬂuores - cence quantum yield , and f det is the overall detection efﬁciency , estimated as 2 % , to yield the ; 120 photons / s expected , which compares fairly well with the average ( measured ) collected photon rate of ; 40 – 180 s (cid:2) 1 estimated from the histogram of detected molecular count rates ( Fig . 9 B ) and the FWHM of the PSF . The average time before photobleaching , t B ; ( k x F B ) (cid:2) 1 , is calculated using esti - mated photobleaching quantum yield , F B ; 5 3 10 (cid:2) 5 , slightly higher than for EGFP ( 25 ) to obtain t B ; 2 . 7 s , which is consistent with our observation of PA - GFP molecules for a few frames before photobleaching . For simplicity we use the same photobleaching yield at both 477 nm and 497 nm , although experimental results do show some dependence of F B on excitation wavelength in EGFP ( 51 ) . Constraints on activation and deactivation rate constants Given that we need to activate molecules at a rate of ; 0 . 8 / m m 2 per frame ( for sufﬁcient spatial separation ) , using Eq . 4B , the number of activated molecules / m m 2 / s in the imaging area S will be 1 S dAdt , which should roughly equal 0 . 8 / m m 2 times the frame acquisition rate . For example , for a 50 - Hz frame rate , one would need 1 S dAdt ; 40 / m m 2 s . Since observed activa - tion times of less than a few milliseconds in PA - GFP have been reported in a confocal geometry ( 25 ) , it will usually be possible to meet the desired rate by adjusting the excitation laser power . In contrast , ensuring that the rate of activation is low enough is more difﬁcult due to the possibility of a spontaneous activation rate ( k 0 ) and readout - beam - induced activation , which could become particularly signiﬁcant when a large reservoir of inactive molecules is present . The product of k 0 3 I / S (cid:3) 0 . 8 / m m 2 will ensure that most activated molecules are separated by more than the diffraction - limited radius of the PSF . As the inactive reservoir is depleted , the activation laser intensity could be increased to keep the number of activated molecules per frame constant ( 8 in this case ) , which will minimize delay in readout of a sufﬁcient number of molecules . Although the spontaneous deactivation rate is expected to be very low in PA - GFP due to irreversible decarboxylation of the chromophore during photoactivation ( 25 ) , further study of deactivation rates in photoactivatable proteins using single - molecule methods and ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy would likely be useful . Comparison to other high - resolution ﬂuorescence methods Methods such as nanometer localized multiple single - molecule ﬂuorescence microscopy can resolve and localize multiple ( . 5 ) molecules within close proximity , but the pre - cision of localization will degrade as larger numbers of mole - cules fall within the same diffraction - limited spot . FPALM is able to localize in principle a very large number of molecules within a diffraction - limited region as long as they are acti - vated and localized in small numbers at a time . For example , PA - GFP molecules were localized ( within one region ) at a density of 83 spots within a 0 . 1 m m 3 0 . 12 m m area ( Fig . 6 ) , or ; 6900 / m m 2 . The acquisition rate so far ( ; 50 , 000 molecules localized in ; 400 s ) is slow compared to confocal microscopy , but comparable to other ‘‘super - resolution’’ techniques such as 4Pi and nanometer localized multiple single - molecule ( 6 , 16 ) . In principle , the localization precision can be signiﬁcantly improved . Demonstrated precisions in the range of 2 nm have been realized ( 52 , 53 ) . One of the current limitations with this work ( using PA - GFP ) is the number of detected photons be - fore photobleaching , and the background generated by ﬂuore - scenceoftheinactiveformoftheprotein ( amongmanysources ) . Because of the low excitation intensities used in FPALM compared to STED , there is no need to engineer complex optics to align a stimulated emission beam intensity null with the center of the focus of another beam . Power levels similar to those described in ‘‘low - power’’ RESOLFT - type micros - copies can be used . A short photoactivation time ( less than the pixel dwell time ) is important in scanning RESOLFT - type microscopies ( 15 ) whenever photoactivation or other relevant photo - physics must occur during the pixel dwell time . Although the photoactivation time can be long ( . 1 s ) in FPALM , since it is not a scanning method , rapid molecular readout followed by rapid inactivation or photobleaching is important because it limits the temporal resolution of the method , which can inﬂuence spatial resolution . For example , if molecules are moving nonrandomly , then the localization algorithm will have trouble determining the center of the image of the molecule and therefore the precision of position determina - tion will be reduced . However , if the molecules are diffusing randomly in two dimensions , they can still be localized with the same algorithm and their positions determined with pre - cision higher than the diffraction - limited resolution . A fur - ther constraint to such a procedure is that the mean - squared distance between ﬂuorescent ( active ) molecules still must exceed ( by a large factor ) the resolution - squared plus the mean - squared displacement due to diffusion during the acquisition time per molecule ( i . e . , the time per frame ) . Activation and readout by a single ( Ar 1 ) laser beam is advantageous because it obviates the need for alignment of multiple excitation sources ( simplifying alignment ) , but it also reduces the degree of control over relative intensities of the activation and readout illumination , and therefore reduces the degree of control over the number of active molecules visible at a given time . The inactive form of PA - GFP absorbs from , 350 nm to ; 450 nm ( 54 ) , and activation at 435 nm by one photon has been observed ( 54 ) , suggesting that activation is possible using wavelengths other than 405 or 413 nm . These results and the rapidly developing ﬁeld of nonlinear subdiffraction microscopies point to a need for ﬂuorescent probes with nonlinear properties ( i . e . , strong STED or strong photoconversion ) . The conditions for effective FPALM also 4270 Hess et al . Biophysical Journal 91 ( 11 ) 4258 – 4272 reveal a need for minimal spontaneous photoconversion rates in PA - FPs , as well as for RESOLFT microscopies that use PA - FPs ( 15 ) . FPALM is much more straightforward for two - dimen - sional imaging of molecular distributions , where the mole - cules of interest are all located between two planes separated by d (cid:3) z 0 , and z 0 is the depth of ﬁeld ( axial extent of the point spread function ) . FPALM does not come close to the time resolution offered by three - dimensional single - particle tracking ( 29 ) but could potentially be extended to three - dimensional distributions . STED offers improved axial reso - lution compared to this form of FPALM , but it is interesting to consider a modiﬁed FPALM that uses TIRF or 4Pi ( two - photon ) excitation to improve axial resolution and conﬁne activation . Such a method would be ideal for studies of membrane protein distributions where lateral resolution is crucial and reduced background ( e . g . , due to out - of - focus contributions ) is highly desirable . Additionally , STED and TIRF could be used in combination to spatially control the excitation proﬁle ( 13 , 55 ) . The procedures for velocity and position analysis of large numbers of single molecules ( ; 10 5 ) already developed for use with FSM and TIR - FSM ( 21 , 22 ) could be used to analyze FPALM images as well . The authors thank Dr . David Clark for the spectrometer , Thomas Tripp for professional machining , and Drs . Joshua Zimmerberg and Paul Blank for the Argon ion laser . Special thanks to Dr . George Bernhardt , Patrick Swinney , and Prof . Scott Collins for production and atomic force micro - scopy of the sapphire sample for calibration . The authors are grateful to Dr . George Patterson for providing PA - GFP samples and unpublished data . S . T . H . was supported by National Institutes of Health grant 1 - K25 - AI65459 - 01 and startup funds from the Ofﬁce of the Vice President for Research at the University of Maine . At the time of publication , a related work by E . Betzig et al . had recently appeared online in the journal Science ( 56 ) . REFERENCES 1 . Alberts , B . 2002 . Molecular Biology of the Cell . Garland Science , New York . 2 . Richards , B . , and E . Wolf . 1959 . Electromagnetic diffraction in optical systems . 2 . Structure of the image ﬁeld in an aplanatic system . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . A Math . Phys . Sci . 253 : 358 – 379 . 3 . Born , M . , and E . Wolf . 1997 . Principles of Optics : Electromagnetic Theory of Propagation , Interference and Diffraction of Light . Cam - bridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . 4 . Hell , S . W . , M . Schrader , and H . T . van der Voort . 1997 . Far - ﬁeld ﬂuo - rescence microscopy with three - dimensional resolution in the 100 - nm range . J . Microsc . 187 : 1 – 7 . 5 . Schrader , M . , and S . W . Hell . 1998 . Three - dimensional super - resolu - tion with a 4Pi - confocal microscope using image restoration . J . Appl . Phys . 84 : 4033 – 4042 . 6 . Hell , S . , and E . H . K . Steltzer . 1992 . Properties of a 4Pi confocal ﬂuorescence microscope . J . Opt . Soc . Am . A . 9 : 2159 – 2167 . 7 . Egner , A . , and S . W . Hell . 2005 . Fluorescence microscopy with super - resolved optical sections . Trends Cell Biol . 15 : 207 – 215 . 8 . Egner , A . , S . Jakobs , and S . W . Hell . 2002 . Fast 100 - nm resolution three - dimensional microscope reveals structural plasticity of mitochon - dria in live yeast . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 99 : 3370 – 3375 . 9 . Egner , A . , S . Verrier , A . Goroshkov , H . D . Soling , and S . W . Hell . 2004 . 4Pi - microscopy of the Golgi apparatus in live mammalian cells . J . Struct . Biol . 147 : 70 – 76 . 10 . Gustafsson , M . G . 2005 . Nonlinear structured - illumination micros - copy : wide - ﬁeld ﬂuorescence imaging with theoretically unlimited resolution . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 102 : 13081 – 13086 . 11 . Hanser , B . M . , M . G . Gustafsson , D . A . Agard , and J . W . Sedat . 2004 . Phase - retrieved pupil functions in wide - ﬁeld ﬂuorescence microscopy . J . Microsc . 216 : 32 – 48 . 12 . Klar , T . A . , E . Engel , and S . W . Hell . 2001 . Breaking Abbe’s diffraction resolution limit in ﬂuorescence microscopy with stimulated emission depletion beams of various shapes . Phys . Rev . E . 64 : 066613 . 13 . Klar , T . A . , S . Jakobs , M . Dyba , A . Egner , and S . W . Hell . 2000 . Fluorescence microscopy with diffraction resolution barrier broken by stimulated emission . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 97 : 8206 – 8210 . 14 . Westphal , V . , and S . W . Hell . 2005 . Nanoscale resolution in the focal plane of an optical microscope . Phys . Rev . Lett . 94 : 143903 . 15 . Hofmann , M . , C . Eggeling , S . Jakobs , and S . W . Hell . 2005 . Breaking the diffraction barrier in ﬂuorescence microscopy at low light inten - sities by using reversibly photoswitchable proteins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 102 : 17565 – 17569 . 16 . Lacoste , T . D . , X . Michalet , F . Pinaud , D . S . Chemla , A . P . Alivisatos , and S . Weiss . 2000 . Ultrahigh - resolution multicolor colocalization of single ﬂuorescent probes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 97 : 9461 – 9466 . 17 . Lakowicz , J . R . 1983 . Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy . Plenum Press , New York . 18 . Forster , T . 1948 . Zwischenmolekulare Energiewanderung Und Fluo - reszenz . Annalen Der Physik . 2 : 55 – 75 . 19 . Fung , B . K . , and L . Stryer . 1978 . Surface density determination in mem - branes by ﬂuorescence energy transfer . Biochemistry . 17 : 5241 – 5248 . 20 . Michalet , X . , and S . Weiss . 2006 . Usingphotonstatistics to boostmicro - scopy resolution . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 103 : 4797 – 4798 . 21 . Ponti , A . , M . Machacek , S . L . Gupton , C . M . Waterman - Storer , and G . Danuser . 2004 . Two distinct actin networks drive the protrusion of migrating cells . Science . 305 : 1782 – 1786 . 22 . Ponti , A . , A . Matov , M . Adams , S . Gupton , C . M . Waterman - Storer , and G . Danuser . 2005 . Periodic patterns of actin turnover in lamel - lipodia and lamellae of migrating epithelial cells analyzed by quanti - tative Fluorescent Speckle Microscopy . Biophys . J . 89 : 3456 – 3469 . 23 . Waterman - Storer , C . , A . Desai , and E . D . Salmon . 1999 . Fluorescent speckle microscopy of spindle microtubule assembly and motility in living cells . Methods Cell Biol . 61 : 155 – 173 . 24 . Waterman - Storer , C . M . , A . Desai , J . C . Bulinski , and E . D . Salmon . 1998 . Fluorescent speckle microscopy , a method to visualize the dy - namics of protein assemblies in living cells . Curr . Biol . 8 : 1227 – 1230 . 25 . Patterson , G . H . , andJ . Lippincott - Schwartz . 2002 . AphotoactivatableGFP for selective photolabeling of proteins and cells . Science . 297 : 1873 – 1877 . 26 . Aubry , R . , C . Dua , J . C . Jacquet , F . Lemaire , P . Galtier , B . Dessertenne , Y . Cordier , M . A . DiForte - Poisson , and S . L . Delage . 2004 . Tempera - ture measurement by micro - Raman scattering spectroscopy in the active zone of AlGaN / GaN high electron - mobility transistors . Eur . Phys . J . Appl . Phys . 27 : 293 – 296 . 27 . Thompson , R . E . , D . R . Larson , and W . W . Webb . 2002 . Precise nano - meter localization analysis for individual ﬂuorescent probes . Biophys . J . 82 : 2775 – 2783 . 28 . Cheezum , M . K . , W . F . Walker , and W . H . Guilford . 2001 . Quantita - tive comparison of algorithms for tracking single ﬂuorescent particles . Biophys . J . 81 : 2378 – 2388 . 29 . Albota , M . , D . Beljonne , J . L . Bredas , J . E . Ehrlich , J . Y . Fu , A . A . Heikal , S . T . Hess , T . Kogej , M . D . Levin , S . R . Marder , D . McCord - Maughon , J . W . Perry , H . Rockel , M . Rumi , C . Subramaniam , W . W . Webb , X . L . Wu , and C . Xu . 1998 . Design of organic molecules with large two - photon absorption cross sections . Science . 281 : 1653 – 1656 . 30 . Hess , S . T . , A . A . Heikal , and W . W . Webb . 2004 . Fluorescence pho - toconversion kinetics in novel green ﬂuorescent protein pH sSensors . J . Phys . Chem . B . 108 : 10138 – 10148 . Photoactivation Localization Microscopy 4271 Biophysical Journal 91 ( 11 ) 4258 – 4272 31 . Lukyanov , K . A . , D . M . Chudakov , S . Lukyanov , and V . V . Verkhusha . 2005 . Innovation : photoactivatable ﬂuorescent proteins . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 6 : 885 – 891 . 32 . Pawley , J . B . 1995 . Handbook of Biological Confocal Microscopy . Plenum Press , New York . 33 . Shvartsman , D . E . , M . Kotler , R . D . Tall , M . G . Roth , and Y . I . Henis . 2003 . Differently anchored inﬂuenza hemagglutinin mutants display distinctinteractiondynamicswithmutualrafts . J . CellBiol . 163 : 879 – 888 . 34 . Sandison , D . R . , D . W . Piston , R . M . Williams , and W . W . Webb . 1995 . Quantitative comparison of background rejection , signal - to - noise ratio , and resolution in confocal and full - ﬁeld laser - scanning micro - scopes . Appl . Opt . 34 : 3576 – 3588 . 35 . Sandison , D . R . , and W . W . Webb . 1994 . Background rejection and signal - to - noise optimization in confocal and alternative ﬂuorescence microscopes . Appl . Opt . 33 : 603 – 615 . 36 . Kenworthy , A . K . , B . J . Nichols , C . L . Remmert , G . M . Hendrix , M . Kumar , J . Zimmerberg , and J . Lippincott - Schwartz . 2004 . Dynamics of putative raft - associated proteins at the cell surface . J . Cell Biol . 165 : 735 – 746 . 37 . Lippincott - Schwartz , J . , E . Snapp , and A . Kenworthy . 2001 . Studying protein dynamics in living cells . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 : 444 – 456 . 38 . Swaminathan , R . , C . P . Hoang , and A . S . Verkman . 1997 . Photo - bleaching recovery and anisotropy decay of green ﬂuorescent protein GFP - S65T in solution and cells : Cytoplasmic viscosity probed by green ﬂuorescent protein translational and rotational diffusion . Biophys . J . 72 : 1900 – 1907 . 39 . Peterman , E . J . G . , S . Brasselet , and W . E . Moerner . 1999 . The ﬂuorescence dynamics of single molecules of green ﬂuorescent protein . J . Phys . Chem . A . 103 : 10553 – 10560 . 40 . Schutz , G . J . , G . Kada , V . P . Pastushenko , and H . Schindler . 2000 . Properties of lipid microdomains in a muscle cell membrane visualized by single molecule microscopy . EMBO J . 19 : 892 – 901 . 41 . Fujiwara , T . , K . Ritchie , H . Murakoshi , K . Jacobson , and A . Kusumi . 2002 . Phospholipids undergo hop diffusion in compartmentalized cell membrane . J . Cell Biol . 157 : 1071 – 1081 . 42 . Nakada , C . , K . Ritchie , Y . Oba , M . Nakamura , Y . Hotta , R . Iino , R . S . Kasai , K . Yamaguchi , T . Fujiwara , and A . Kusumi . 2003 . Accumu - lation of anchored proteins forms membrane diffusion barriers during neuronal polarization . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 : 626 – 632 . 43 . Chalﬁe , M . , and S . Kain . 1998 . Green Fluorescent Protein : Properties , Applications , and Protocols . Wiley - Liss , New York . 44 . Patterson , G . H . , S . M . Knobel , W . D . Sharif , S . R . Kain , and D . W . Piston . 1997 . Use of the green ﬂuorescent protein and its mutants in quantitative ﬂuorescence microscopy . Biophys . J . 73 : 2782 – 2790 . 45 . Tsien , R . Y . 1998 . The green ﬂuorescent protein . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 67 : 509 – 544 . 46 . Shaner , N . C . , P . A . Steinbach , andR . Y . Tsien . 2005 . Aguidetochoosing ﬂuorescent proteins . Nat . Methods . 2 : 905 – 909 . 47 . Kwik , J . , S . Boyle , D . Fooksman , L . Margolis , M . P . Sheetz , and M . Edidin . 2003 . Membrane cholesterol , lateral mobility , and the phos - phatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate - dependent organization of cell actin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 100 : 13964 – 13969 . 48 . Zacharias , D . A . , J . D . Violin , A . C . Newton , and R . Y . Tsien . 2002 . Partitioning of lipid - modiﬁed monomeric GFPs into membrane micro - domains of live cells . Science . 296 : 913 – 916 . 49 . Chan , W . C . , D . J . Maxwell , X . Gao , R . E . Bailey , M . Han , and S . Nie . 2002 . Luminescent quantum dots for multiplexed biological detection and imaging . Curr . Opin . Biotechnol . 13 : 40 – 46 . 50 . Michalet , X . , F . F . Pinaud , L . A . Bentolila , J . M . Tsay , S . Doose , J . J . Li , G . Sundaresan , A . M . Wu , S . S . Gambhir , and S . Weiss . 2005 . Quantum dots for live cells , in vivo imaging , and diagnostics . Science . 307 : 538 – 544 . 51 . Heikal , A . A . , S . T . Hess , and W . W . Webb . 2001 . Multiphoton molecular spectroscopy and excited - state dynamics of enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein ( EGFP ) : acid - base speciﬁcity . Chem . Phys . 274 : 37 – 55 . 52 . Yildiz , A . , J . N . Forkey , S . A . McKinney , T . Ha , Y . E . Goldman , and P . R . Selvin . 2003 . Myosin V walks hand - over - hand : single ﬂuorophore imaging with 1 . 5 - nm localization . Science . 300 : 2061 – 2065 . 53 . Yildiz , A . , M . Tomishige , R . D . Vale , and P . R . Selvin . 2004 . Kinesin walks hand - over - hand . Science . 303 : 676 – 678 . 54 . Chen , Y . , P . J . MacDonald , J . P . Skinner , G . H . Patterson , and J . D . Muller . 2006 . Probing nucleocytoplasmic transport by two - photon activation of PA - GFP . Microsc . Res . Tech . 69 : 220 – 226 . 55 . Cragg , G . E . , and P . T . C . So . 2000 . Lateral resolution enhancement with standing evanescent waves . Opt . Lett . 25 : 46 – 48 . 56 . Betzig , E . , G . H . Patterson , R . Sougrat , O . W . Lindwasser , S . Olenych , J . S . Bonifacino , M . W . Davidson , J . Lippincott - Schwartz , and H . F . Hess . 2006 . Imaging intracellular ﬂuorescent proteins at nanometer resolution . Science . 313 : 1642 – 1645 . 4272 Hess et al . Biophysical Journal 91 ( 11 ) 4258 – 4272