Nuclear compression - mediated DNA damage drives ATR - dependent Lamin expression and mouse ESC differentiation Tanusri Roy 1 , Niyati Piplani 1 , Lakshmi Kavitha Sthanam 1 , Swetlana Ghosh 1 , Niharika Tiwary 2 , Sayak Dhar 1 , W . Chingmei Wangsa Konyak 1 , Santosh Surendra Panigrahi 1 , Priya Singh 2 , Divya Tej Sowpati 2 , Sreelaja Nair 1 , Sushil Kumar 1 , P . Chandra Shekar 2 , Shamik Sen 1 * 1 Department of Biosciences & Bioengineering , IIT Bombay , Mumbai , India 2 Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology , Hyderabad , India * Correspondence : shamiks @ iitb . ac . in Abstract : Embryonic stem cells ( ESCs ) which are susceptible to DNA damage depend on a robust and highly efficient DNA damage response ( DDR ) mechanism for their survival . However , the implications of physical force - mediated DNA damage on ESC fate remains unclear . We show that stiffness - dependent spreading of mouse ESCs ( mESCs ) induces DNA damage through nuclear compression , with DNA damage causing differentiation through early induction of Lamin A / C expression . Interestingly , differentiation is associated with rescue of DNA damage and activation of the DDR factor ATR . While ATR is typically known to play roles in DDR pathway , its role during stiffness - mediated nuclear compression and mESC differentiation is unknown . Nuclear enrichment of activated ATR on stiff substrates and reduction of Lamin A / C expression upon ATR inhibition suggests that mESC differentiation is driven by nuclear compression - mediated DNA damage and involves ATR - dependent modulation of Lamin A / C . Keywords : ESCs , stiffness , Lamin A / C , ATR , nuclear compression , DNA damage , differentiation . Introduction Embryonic stem cells ( ESCs ) isolated from the inner cell mass of a late blastocyst of a developing embryo 1 , serve as an important tool for studying pluripotency and development apart from stem cell - based therapies and genetic engineering 2 . Due to their high rate of proliferation and a shorter G1 phase 3 , 4 , ESCs are particularly susceptible to DNA damage , and depend on a robust and highly efficient DNA damage response ( DDR ) mechanism to maintain their self - renewability and pluripotency 5 . ATM ( Ataxia telangiectasia mutated ) and ATR ( ATM and Rad3 - related ) are key players entailed during DDR which are not only activated by DNA damage signals but also implicated in oxidative stresses 6 , 7 , and metabolic processes 8 , 9 . The dynamic stem cell microenvironment or the stem cell niche regulates stem cell fate through chemical ( secretory ) as well as physical cues necessary for survival and proliferation 10 – 15 . Force transmission to the nucleus through the linker of nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton ( LINC ) complex modulates expression of mechanosensitive genes through chromatin reorganization 16 – 18 that directs stem cell differentiation 19 through extracellular matrix ( ECM ) stiffness 14 and topography 15 [ NO _ PRINTED _ FORM ] . Lamin A / C – a critical component of the LINC complex , not only plays an important role in maintenance of genome integrity 20 – 23 but also controls and contributes to nuclear mechanotransduction and stem cell fate determination 24 – 27 . Extreme nuclear deformation has been shown to cause nuclear membrane rupture leading to genomic instability 28 – 30 . Beyond their canonical DNA repair functions in somatic cells , recent studies have documented ATM / ATR activation in cells subjected to mechanical stresses 31 – 34 . While alterations in ATR can cause nuclear envelope breakdown and aberrant chromatin organization 31 , 32 , loss in ATM triggers nuclear deformation and reduced Lamin A levels thus regulating nuclear stiffness and mechanics 35 . Given the association between extracellular matrix ( ECM ) stiffness and chromosomal instability in mouse ESCs ( mESCs ) 36 , in this study , we have probed the inter - relationships between ECM stiffness , DNA damage , DNA repair and mESC fate . By culturing mESCs on substrates of increasing stiffness , we show stiffness - dependent mechanoadaptation induces DNA damage through increased nuclear compression . This DNA damage in turn triggers stiffness dependent induction of Lamin A / C expression and early differentiation . Similar induction of DNA damage and Lamin A / C expression during chemical factor induced differentiation suggests DNA damage as an early event in the differentiation cascade . We further identify ATR as the regulator of Lamin A / C expression . Collectively , our study establishes stiffness - induced nuclear compression that mediates early ESC differentiation and ATR - dependent modulation of Lamin A / C expression . Materials & Methods Cell Culture & Reagents : Tg2a mouse embryonic stem cells ( mESCs ) were cultured on 0 . 1 % porcine gelatin ( Sigma ) coated dishes in presence of KO - DMEM ( Gibco ) and supplemented with 10 % KO - Serum replacement ( Gibco ) , 1X Glutamax ( Gibco ) , IX non - essential amino acids ( NEAA ) ( Gibco ) and 1X antibiotic - antimycotic ( Gibco ) . These cells were supplemented with 10ng / ml leukemia inhibitory factor ( LIF ) and 0 . 1mM 2 - mercaptoethanol ( Gibco ) to maintains pluripotency . Mouse embryonic fibroblasts were cultured in DMEM ( Gibco ) supplemented with 10 % Fetal Bovine Serum ( FBS ) of South American origin ( Gibco ) and 1X antibiotic - antimycotic ( Gibco ) . Both mESCs and MEFs were maintained at 37 0 C and 5 % CO 2 concentration ( NUAIRE incubator ) . For experiments , cells were dislodged with 1X TrypLE Express ( Gibco ) and seeded on glass or MEFDMs or polyacrylamide hydrogels ( PA gels ) coated with either 5µg / cm fibronectin ( Merck ) or 10µg / cm 2 collagen - I ( Sigma ) without LIF . mESCs were treated with etoposide ( ETO ) ( 2µM , Sigma ) , Blebbistatin ( Blebb ) ( 5µM , Sigma ) , MnCl 2 ( 0 . 5 mM ) , N - acetyl cysteine ( NAC ) ( 5 mM , Sigma ) , Retinoic acid ( RA ) ( 1µM , Sigma ) , Ascorbic acid ( AA ) ( 50µM , Sigma ) , KU - 55933 ( 10µM , Sigma ) and VE - 821 ( 5µM , Sigma ) 37 for a period of 24 hours . Fabrication of Polyacrylamide ( PA ) gels : PA hydrogels of varying stiffness of 0 . 6 kPa , 4 kPa and 33 kPa were fabricated by mixing varying ratios of 40 % Acrylamide ( Bio - Rad ) and 2 % Bis - Acrylamide ( Bio - Rad ) with milliQ water as described elsewhere 38 , 39 . Gels were polymerized on either 12mm , 18mm or 60mm glass coverslips for immunostaining , comet assay and western blotting / flow cytometry experiments respectively . Gels were coated with either 10µg / cm² rat - tail collagen - I ( Sigma ) or 5µg / cm 2 human - plasma fibronectin ( Merck ) overnight in 4°C , post functionalization using Sulfo - SANPAH ( Pierce ) . Fabrication of MEF derived matrix ( MEFDM ) : MEFDMs were generated by seeding WT MEFs ( on 1 % gelatin coated dishes ( Porcine gelatin , Sigma ) at a density of 4 . 6 x 10 5 / cm 2 as described elsewhere in 36 . Immunostaining and Microscopy : For immunostaining , cells were fixed after 3 hours , 6 hours , 24 hours or 72 hours of culture using 4 % PFA ( Sigma ) in PBS for 15 minutes , permeabilized with 0 . 1 % TritonX - 100 ( Sigma ) in PBS for 10 minutes , and then incubated with one or more primary antibodies overnight at 4°C post blocking with 5 % FBS for 1 hr in room temperature . Primary antibodies used for immunostaining were against pMLC2 - Ser19 ( 1 : 250 , Cell Signaling Technologies ) , γ - H2AX ( 1 : 500 , Cell signaling Technologies ) , Lamin A / C ( 1 : 400 , Cell Signaling Technologies ) , Lamin B1 ( 1 : 500 , Abcam ) , 53BP1 ( 1 : 2500 , Invitrogen ) , pATM - Ser1981 ( 1 : 500 , Invitrogen ) and pATR - Thr1989 ( 1 : 500 , Invitrogen ) . The following day , cells were washed with PBS and then incubated with one or more secondary antibodies at room temperature for 2 hours . Secondary antibodies used were Alexa - fluor 488 anti - mouse IgG ( 1 : 1000 , Invitrogen ) , Alexa - fluor 555 anti - rabbit IgG ( 1 : 1000 , Invitrogen ) . Cells were then stained with fluorescently labeled wheat - germ agglutinin ( 1 : 1000 , Invitrogen ) to stain lectin and nuclei were labeled with DAPI ( 1 : 2000 , Sigma ) . Cells were imaged at 120X magnification using either an inverted fluorescent microscope ( Olympus , IX83 ) or at 63X magnification using Spinning Disc Confocal Microscope ( Zeiss , CSU - X1 ) for greater resolution . Cell spreading area , DNA damage foci , mean intensities , nuclear enrichment and nuclear height were quantified using Fiji ImageJ software while nuclear volumes were quantified using Imaris X64 8 . 3 . 1 . Stiffness and time - dependent Lamin A / C distributions were generated based by normalizing raw intensity values with the maximum value across all conditions and time - points . The normalized intensities ( 𝐼 𝑁 ) on a given stiffness gel ( 𝑔 ) were categorized as low ( Lo ) , Moderate ( Mo ) and High ( Hi ) based on the following criteria : Lo : 𝐼 𝑁 ≤ 𝜇 𝑔 − 𝜎 𝑔 , Mo : 𝜇 𝑔 − 𝜎 𝑔 < 𝐼 𝑁 ≤ 𝜇 𝑔 + 𝜎 𝑔 , Hi : 𝐼 𝑁 > 𝜇 𝑔 + 𝜎 𝑔 , where 𝜇 𝑔 and 𝜇 𝑔 correspond to the mean and the standard deviation of normalized intensity observed at the 3 hr time - point . The frequency curves were generated using Origin 2021 . The percentage of Lo , Mo and Hi cells were calculated thereafter . Alkaline Comet Assay : To quantify the level of DNA damage in mESCs , alkaline comet assay was performed . For this , mESCs were cultured on PA gels of varying stiffnesses . Post 24 hours , these cells were isolated from the gels using TrypLE Express ( Gibco ) . 10⁵ cells per ml were suspended in PBS and were mixed with 1 % low melting agarose ( GeneI ) cooled to 37°C at a 1 : 10 v / v cell solution to agarose ratio . Approximately 50µl of the cell - agarose mixtures were evenly spread and incubated on comet slides ( Trevigen ) at 37°C for 5 - 10 minutes , and then transferred to 4°C in dark for 30 minutes until the agarose polymerized . The slides were then dipped in ice cold lysis solution ( Trevigen ) kept in a coplin jar and incubated overnight at 4°C . The next day , the lysis solution was removed and the slides dipped in freshly prepared alkaline unwinding solution ( 300mM NaOH , 1mM EDTA , pH > 13 ) for 1 hour at 4°C in dark . Slides were then placed in a horizontal electrophoresis apparatus and run at 330 mA for 30 minutes in the presence of ice - cold alkaline electrophoresis solution ( 300mM NaOH , 1mM EDTA , pH > 13 ) . Slides were removed from the electrophoresis solution and washed twice with distilled water for 5 minutes prior to dipping in 70 % ethanol for 5 minutes . Samples were air dried for 20 - 30 minutes at RT . 50 - 100 µl of SYBR green dye ( 1 : 10 , 000 , Invitrogen ) diluted in TE buffer ( 100mM tris - HCl , 1mM EDTA , pH 7 . 5 ) was added on top of the sample containing cells and incubated at RT in dark for 30 minutes . Excess SYBR green solution was removed by tapping the slides and rinsed briefly in distilled water . Slides were allowed to dry completely at 37°C before visualizing them under the microscope at 10X magnification . Comets were analyzed by feeding tif images into the OpenComet plugin in ImageJ Fiji software . Extent of DNA damage was quantified by comparison of the olive tail moment of mESCs on varying substrate stiffnesses . AFM : Cell stiffness was measured using an Atomic Force Microscope ( MFP3D , Asylum ) . Cells were probed with 10 kHz soft , pyramidal silicon nitride probes ( Olympus ) of nominal stiffness 20 pN / nm . The exact cantilever stiffness was determined using the thermal calibration method . Estimates of cell stiffness were obtained by fitting the first 500 nm of experimental force - indentation curves with Hertz model 40 . Similarly , the stiffness of gels was estimated by fitting the first 1000 nm of the experimental force - indentation curves as described elsewhere 39 . Western Blotting : mESC protein samples were isolated from mESC pellets using ice - cold RIPA buffer ( Sigma ) in the presence of freshly added 1 % protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail ( Invitrogen ) . Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 12 , 000 rpm for 15 minutes at 4°C . Protein concentration was determined by Lowry method . 60 µg of total protein sample was loaded into each well and resolved by SDS - PAGE on gradient acrylamide - bisacrylamide gels ( 6 % to 15 % ) . Samples were transferred on to 0 . 2 μ m PVDF membranes ( Bio - Rad ) . Membranes were blocked with 5 % BSA in TBST for 1 hour at RT and then incubated one or more of the following primary antibodies overnight at 4°C : Lamin A / C ( 1 : 1000 , CST ) , Lamin B1 ( 1 : 1000 , Abcam ) , γH2AX ( 1 : 1000 , CST ) , H2AX ( 1 : 500 , CST ) , pMLC2 - Thr18 / Ser19 ( 1 : 700 , CST ) , MLC2 ( 1 : 700 , Abcam ) , Oct3 / 4 ( 1 : 1000 , Abcam ) , Nanog ( 1 : 1000 , CST ) , pATM - Ser1981 ( 1 : 1000 , Invitrogen ) , pATR - Thr1989 ( 1 : 1000 , Invitrogen ) , ATM ( 1 : 1000 , CST ) , ATR ( 1 : 1000 , CST ) , RAD51 ( 1 : 1000 , Abcam ) , GATA4 ( 1 : 1000 , Invitrogen ) , Brachyury ( 1 : 1000 , Invitrogen ) , Otx2 ( 1 : 1000 , Invitrogen ) and GAPDH ( 1 : 1000 , CST ) . The following day , after washing with TBST , membranes were incubated with HRP conjugated secondary antibody ( 1 : 10 , 000 , Invitrogen ) for 2 hours at RT . Subsequently , membranes were washed again with TBST and developed using ECL detection kit ( Advansta ) and ultra - sensitive chemiluminescent substrate ( Cynagen ) . Images were captured using a chemidoc imaging system ( Bio - Rad ) . RNA Sequencing ( RNASeq ) and heat map generation : Total RNA from bulk cells was isolated using TRIzol ( Ambion ) according to instructions from the manufacturer . The concentration and purity of samples was checked using the Nanodrop 2000 spectrophotometer . Ribo - Zero Plus stranded library preparation kit ( Illumina ) was used to generate libraries from a total of 1 µ g RNA for each sample . Library concentration was estimated using Qubit dsDNA High Sensitivity Assay Kit ( Invitrogen ) . The libraries were sequenced on the Illumina NovaSeq 6000 platform to a depth of 50 million paired - end reads . The quality assessment of sequenced reads was evaluated using FASTQC ( v0 . 12 . 0 ) followed by mapping them to the Mus _ musculus . GRCm39 . cdna reference cDNA transcriptome using Kallisto ( v0 . 45 . 0 ) for estimating transcript abundance . Data annotation was carried out using AnnotationHub and genes exhibiting a Counts Per Million ( CPM ) value of less than 1 in at least three samples were excluded from further analysis . The resulting filtered count matrix was then normalized by Trimmed Mean of M - values ( TMM ) method using edgeR package , and was subsequently log2 - transformed to mitigate data heteroskedasticity . Principal Component Analysis ( PCA ) was performed using the Scikit - learn library of python and a 3D PCA plot generated . Heatmaps were generated using Count matrix values followed by normalizing the data against + LIF control and then applying z - score normalization across each row to get relative gene expression values . The representative matrices were sorted based on gene expression value of average of 72 - hour samples . Gene Ontology Analysis : Differential gene expression analysis conducted with the PyDESeq2 package identified upregulated and downregulated genes across stiffness conditions at 72 hours , using + LIF as a reference and applying a log2 fold change threshold of ≥1 and an adjusted p - value of ≤0 . 01 . Following gene identification , gene ontology analysis via the gprofiler2 library was utilized to enrich transcription factor pathways . Subsequently , common transcription factor pathways upregulated across three stiffness conditions were identified . Prevalence of genes associated with endoderm , mesoderm , ectoderm and extraembryonic ectoderm lineage specification within each identified transcription factor pathway was quantified and sorted based on this occurrence frequency . The top 20 pathways were ranked based on their p - values and visually represented in a grouped bar chart format . Flow cytometry : For cell - cycle analysis , mESCs were pelleted down using TrypLE Express ( Gibco ) and fixed using 0 . 25 % PFA for 15 minutes on ice followed by permeabilization with 70 % methanol in 4°C for at least 1 hour . Cell pellets were washed with PBS to remove residual methanol and then 50µg / ml Propidium Iodide ( Himedia ) was added to each condition before acquisition for cell cycle measurements on BD FACS Aria Fusion . Gating was done with respect to pluripotent mESCs using FlowJo software . For apoptosis assay , mESC pellets were incubated with FITC conjugated Annexin V and Propidium Iodide in 1X binding buffer as per manufacturer’s protocol ( BD Pharmingen ) . 10 , 000 events were acquired per sample . Gating was done with respect to unstained control using FlowJo software . Pharmacological inhibition assays using zebrafish embryos : Tg ( cmlc2 ) : mCherry embryos were raised in embryo medium at 28 O C till 24 hours post fertilization ( hpf ) . At 24 hpf , embryo medium was replaced with embryo medium containing 10µM KU55933 or 10µM VE821 . Embryos were kept in the inhibitors for 24 hours at 28 O C . The next day , the medium was replaced with fresh embryo medium without inhibitors and embryos were left to grow for another day . Heart phenotypes were quantitated and imaged at 48 hpf ( 24 hours of exposure to inhibitor ) and at 72 hpf ( 24 hours of exposure to inhibitor , followed by 24 hours of recovery ) . Live images were obtained using Olympus MVX10 and processed using CellSens and ImageJ softwares . Statistical Analysis : For statistical analysis , raw data were processed in Origin 2021 . The normality of the data was first checked using the Kolmogorov - Smirnov normality test . Based on these results , either parametric or nonparametric tests were subsequently performed . Statistical significance was assessed using unpaired t - tests for comparing two parametric datasets . One - way or two - way ANOVA tests were performed for parametric datasets with multiple conditions , followed by Tukey’s post - hoc test to compare the means . For multiple non - parametric datasets , Kruskal - Wallis ANOVA followed by Dunn’s post - hoc test while Mann - Whitney test for comparing means between two non - parametric datasets were performed . p < 0 . 05 being considered as statistically significant . Results Stiffness - mediated mechanoadaptation is associated with DNA damage in mESCs Long - term culture of mESCs on stiff gelatin - coated coverslips have been shown to accumulate greater aneuploidy compared to that on mouse embryonic fibroblast ( MEF ) derived matrices , which are much softer 36 . To probe the link between stiffness - mediated mechanoadaptation and genomic integrity , we cultured mESCs on collagen ( Col ) and fibronectin ( FN ) coated 0 . 6 kPa , 4 kPa and 33 kPa PA gels that span a physiologically relevant stiffness range ( Fig . S1 ) . As mESCs exhibited greater spreading and focal adhesion intensities on FN coated gels compared to that on Col coated gels , indicative of a more robust mechanoadaptation response on FN coated gels ( Fig . S 1A , B ) , all subsequent experiments were performed on FN coated substrates up to 72 hrs in culture . While mESCs spread minimally on the softest 0 . 6 kPa gels , spreading increased substantially on the 4 and 33 kPa gels ( Fig . 1Ai , ii ) . Increased spreading on 4 and 33 kPa gels was associated with increased cytoskeletal organization as assessed by active actomyosin contractility ( phosphorylated myosin light chain , pMLC ) ( Fig . 1Bi , ii , Fig . S 2Ai ) and cortical stiffness ( Fig . 1Ci , ii ) . Interestingly stiffness - mediated mechanoadaptation was associated with stiffness - dependent increase in the extent of DNA damage assessed by counting the number of γH2AX foci in individual cells ( Fig . 1Di , ii ) , total protein levels assessed using westerns ( Fig . 1Diii , Fig . S 2Aii ) , as well as in comet assay where longer comet tails were observed in cells cultured on stiffer gels ( Fig . 1Ei , ii ) . Together , these results establish a direct relationship between stiffness - dependent mechanoadaptation and DNA damage in mESCs . DNA damage is induced by mechanoadaptation - mediated nuclear compression To test if stiffness - induced DNA damage was ROS dependent , DNA damage was assessed by quantifying γH2AX foci in cells cultured in the presence and absence of the ROS scavenger N - acetyl cysteine ( NAC ) . Insensitivity of DNA damage to NAC suggests that mechanoadaptation - mediated DNA damage in mESCs is ROS independent ( Fig . 2Ai , ii ) . Contractility - mediated nuclear compression has been shown to induce nuclear envelope rupture and DNA damage in cancer cells cultured on rigid glass coverslips 29 . To check the link between DNA damage and nuclear compression , we captured transverse sections of Lamin B1 - stained nuclei of mESCs cultured on different gels and quantified nuclear height . Increased DNA damage on stiffer substrates was associated with increased nuclear compression observed as early as 3 hrs ( Fig . 2Bi , ii ) . In comparison , nuclear volume increased marginally with time , but remained unchanged across different gels ( Fig . 2Biii ) . Based on these results , we propose that increased spreading and cytoskeletal organization on stiffer substrates induces DNA damage by nuclear compression through increased nucleo - cytoplasmic coupling . To test this , the extent of nuclear compression was perturbed by modulating cell spreading , and its impact on DNA damage assessed . While cells were treated with MnCl 2 on 0 . 6 kPa gels to increase cell spreading via increased integrin association 41 – 43 , on 33 kPa gels , cells were treated with the contractility inhibitor blebbistatin ( Blebb ) ( Fig . 2Ci ) . On 0 . 6 kPa gels , MnCl 2 treatment led to increased spreading ( Fig . 2 Cii , iii ) , decreased nuclear height ( Fig . 2 Cii , iv ) and increased γH2AX foci ( Fig . 2 Di , ii ) . Conversely , on the stiff 33 kPa gels , treatment with Blebb led to decreased cell spreading ( Fig . 2 Cii , iii ) , increase in nuclear height ( Fig . 2 Civ ) and reduction in the extent of DNA damage ( Fig . 2 Di , ii ) . Western blotting of total cell lysates revealed increased pMLC and decreased γH2AX levels in MnCl 2 - treated cells , and the opposite in Blebb - treated cells ( Fig . 2 E , Fig . S 2 B ) . Collectively , these results demonstrate that mechanoadaptation - mediated DNA damage in mESCs is a consequence of nucleo - cytoplasmic coupling - induced nuclear compression . DNA damage induces loss of pluripotency and Lamin A / C expression at early time - points Lamin A / C is an integral part of the nuclear membrane that plays a key role in nuclear mechanics as well as in genome protection . ECM stiffness has been shown to drive differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells ( MSCs ) with induction of stiffness - dependent Lamin A / C expression 14 , 15 and affect ESC differentiation 44 , 45 . However , the importance of stiffness - induced DNA damage in this context remains unclear . Interestingly , increase in Lamin A / C levels on 4 kPa and 33 kPa gels and drop in pluripotency markers Oct3 / 4 and Nanog suggests that DNA damage and early differentiation may be closely related ( Fig . 3Ai , Aii , Fig . S 2 C ) . To test this , experiments were performed wherein DNA damage was induced with low doses of the topoisomerase II inhibitor – etoposide ( ETO ) and its impact on pluripotency and Lamin A / C expression assessed . Remarkably , ETO treatment led to robust increase in Lamin A / C levels across all the gels with corresponding loss in Oct3 / 4 and Nanog expression , suggesting that low doses of DNA damage also induce loss in pluripotency and induction of Lamin A / C expression ( Fig . 3 Bi , Bii , Fig . S 2 D ) . To next probe if chemical factor induced differentiation also involves DNA damage , mESCs were cultured on the softest 0 . 6 kPa gels—where mechanoadaptation and DNA damage were lowest—in the presence of the neuronal differentiation factor retinoic acid ( RA ) and the osteogenic differentiation factor ascorbic acid ( AA ) while tracking DNA damage and Lamin A / C levels at 3 and 24 hr time - points . RA and AA treatments led to increased levels of the neuronal marker , β - III tubulin at the 24 hr time - point ( Fig . S 2 E ) . Strikingly , both RA and AA treatment led to increase in γH2AX and Lamin A / C levels , and loss in Oct3 / 4 levels at the early 3 hr time - point ( Fig . 3 Ci , ii , Fig . S 2 F ) . Though Nanog was unchanged at the 3 hr time - point , near complete loss in its expression was observed at 24 hrs indicative of differentiation . Surprisingly , at this timepoint both γH2AX and Lamin A / C levels dropped to baseline levels . In comparison , no change in Lamin B1 levels was observed . To further probe the occurrence of DNA damage during mESC differentiation on more in - vivo mimetic conditions , we cultured mESCs on mouse embryonic fibroblast ( MEF ) derived matrices ( MEFDMs ) which induce mESC differentiation 46 ( Fig . 3Di , ii ) . In comparison to mESCs cultured on gelatin - coated glass coverslips in the absence of LIF ( serving as controls , CTL ) , in mESCs cultured on MEFDMs for 24 hrs , increase in γH2AX , loss in Oct3 / 4 levels and induction of Lamin A / C was observed ( Fig . 3 Diii , iv , Fig . S 2 G ) . While Nanog levels remained unchanged , surprisingly , loss in Lamin B1 was observed . In MEFs which possess high levels of Lamin A / C , no DNA damage was observed . Collectively , our results establish DNA damage as an early event in mESC differentiation that induces loss of pluripotency and Lamin A / C expression . Temporal loss of pluripotency is associated with mechanoadaptation mediated differentiation in mESCs Stimulation by differentiation factors cause pluripotent mESCs to differentiate into either endoderm , ectoderm or mesoderm layers . To probe how mechanoadaptation mediated loss in pluripotency and induction of Lamin A / C expression influences mESC fate , these cells were cultured up to 72 hrs on the PA gels and RNA sequencing ( RNAseq ) performed at 3 , 6 , 24 and 72 hr time - points . Principal Component Analysis ( PCA ) plot shows a clear time dependent clustering of mESCs , with no prominent stiffness dependence ( Fig . 4 A ) . Though DNA damage and Lamin A / C induction was also seen in ETO treated cells , this point did not co - cluster with any of the other time - points . Compared to pluripotent controls ( + LIF ) , temporal RNAseq profiling revealed stemness genes including Pou5f1 47 , 48 , Sox2 49 , Nanog 50 , 51 and Klf4 52 were maintained till 6 hrs , but were lost completely at the 24 hr time - point ( Fig . 4 B ) . Similar trend was also observed in western blots of Oct3 / 4 and Nanog ( Fig . 4 C , Fig . S 4 A ) . Concomitant with loss in pluripotency , several known lineage - specific markers were upregulated at the 72 hr time point . These included endoderm markers such as Cldn6 53 , 54 , Gata4 55 , Sox17 56 and Foxa2 57 , 58 , mesoderm markers such as Tbx6 59 , 60 , Twist1 61 – 63 and Snai1 64 , 65 , and ectoderm markers such as Nes 66 and RunX2 67 ( Fig . 4 B , Fig . S 3 A ) . Intriguingly , expression of extraembryonic ectodermal markers such as Krt8 68 , Wnt7b 69 and Gata3 70 was also observed . While these results are indicative of heterogeneous differentiation , quantification of the average Z - score values across the three stiffnesses revealed most prominent induction of mesoderm lineage ( 0 . 4 ) , and weaker induction of endoderm ( 0 . 14 ) and ectoderm ( 0 . 1 ) lineages , indicating a shift towards mesodermal lineage . Protein level expression of one marker from each lineage – Gata4 for endoderm , Brachyury ( T ) for mesoderm and Otx2 for ectoderm – showed similar trend with RNAseq profiles ( Fig . 4 D ) . In addition , gene ontology analysis revealed lineage specification is mediated by activation of several common transcription factors such as Zf5 , E2F , SP3 , Kaiso , Pax4 , Foxn1 ( Fig . S 3 B ) . Temporal RNAseq profiling of Lamin genes across the 4 time - points revealed an increase in Lmna gene but drop in Lmnb1 and Lmnb2 genes as expected in differentiating stem cells ( Fig . 4 Ei ) . Although Lamin A / C is known to enhance differentiation of MSCs 26 , surprisingly however , protein level analysis shows a gradual decline in both Lamin A / C and Lamin B1 across all the gels , prominently at the 72 hr time - point ( Fig . 4 Eii , Fig . S 4 Bi ) with considerable heterogeneity in Lamin A / C expression in each condition ( Fig . 4 Fi , Red arrowhead : Lamin A / C high ; Yellow arrowhead : Lamin A / C low ) . Lamin A / C intensity distribution revealed an increase in the fraction of Lamin A / C low ( Lo ) cells at 72 hrs across all the gels ( Fig . 4 Fii , iii ) , with ~ 60 % , 80 % and 40 % Lamin A / C low cells at 72 hrs on 0 . 6 kPa , 4 kPa and 33 kPa gels respectively ( Fig . 4 Fiii ) . However , long term culture of mESCs upto 7 days on the stiff 33 kPa gels , exhibited a recovery of Lamin A / C levels after its initial decline at 72 hrs ( 3 days ) ( Fig . S 4 Bii ) , consistent with previous findings that shows that Lamin A / C loss primes mESCs towards cardiac - specific gene expression 27 , 71 . Since , LMNA deficient embryonic hearts have been shown to exhibit cell cycle perturbations during DNA damage 72 , we next went on to evaluate the cell cycle distribution of mESCs on the PA gels at different time - points . Quantitative analysis showed that sub - G1 phase significantly increased with time – from < 20 % cells in + LIF mESCs to ~ 40 % cells at 72 hrs and ~ 80 % upon ETO treatment ( Fig . S 5 Ai , ii ) . The Sub - G1 cells at 72 hrs may correspond to that of low Lamin A / C expressing mESCs at the same time - point on 33 kPa gels ( Fig . 4 F i - iii ) , suggesting that transient Lamin A / C loss affects mESC cell cycle distribution on PA gels . Furthermore , quantification of cell survival using Annexin V - PI staining revealed ~ 60 % live mESCs at 72 hr time - points on all the gels compared to ~ 85 % live cells in presence of LIF ( Fig . S 5 Bi , ii ) . While temporal RNASeq profiling revealed activation of few apoptosis genes ( Casp8 , Casp6 , Casp7 ) at 72 hrs time - point ( Fig . S 5 C ) , Annexin - PI staining shows no significant increase in apoptotic cells but % necrotic cells were dramatically increased at 72 hr time - point and upon ETO treatment ( Fig . S 5 Bi , ii ) . Since embryogenesis is mediated by cell - matrix adhesions and mechanical forces 73 that control complex mechano - signaling cascades via integrins 74 , we examined the temporal profile of several genes involved in mechanoadaptation . RNAseq profiles show clear upregulation of several such genes at 72 hrs such as integrin subunits – ItgaV , Itga3 , Itga11 , Itgb1 , Itgb3 , Itgb5 , Itgb8 , integrin like kinase ( Ilk ) , genes involved in integrin mediated cell adhesion – Tln1 , Vcl , Gsn , Tsn2 , Parva , Parvb , Acta1 , Acta2 , Actg1 , myosin genes – Mylk , Myl6 , Myl9 , Myl12a , Myl12b , along with Cdh1 and Cdh2 ( Fig . S 4 C ) . Few LINC complex genes were also upregulated at 72 hrs such as Sun2 , Syne2 and Lmna ( Supp . Fig . 4 C ) , thus implicating an integrin dependent mechanoadaptation response that mediates mESC differentiation at 72 hrs . Together , these results suggest that loss in pluripotency in mESCs is associated with transient loss of Lamin A / C protein expression leading to early differentiation ( 72 hrs ) into all three germ layers ( with a prominent shift towards mesodermal lineage ) through activation of mechano - signaling pathways . mESC differentiation is associated with ATR activation While mESCs have a robust DNA damage response ( DDR ) mechanism to counter intrinsic and extrinsic assaults to the genome , compared to their differentiated counterparts 75 , accumulation of DNA damage can cause apoptosis and differentiation to eradicate them from the stem cell pool 76 , 77 . We propose that differentiation is triggered via activation of DDR pathways and DNA repair . Consistent with this notion , temporal immunostaining and quantification of γH2AX foci on mESCs displays a steady level upto 24 hrs and then a sharp decline at the 72 hr time - point ( Fig . 5 Ai , ii ) . Similarly , 53BP1 quantification shows a significant increase at 6 hrs which then notably diminished at the 72 hr time - point ( Fig . 5 Bi , ii ) , indicative of a temporal resolution of DNA damage . To further confirm our observations , immunoblotting of mESCs also revealed a significant drop in γH2AX as well as pRPA2 ( Single strand break marker ) levels at the 72 hr time - point . ( Fig . 5 C , Fig . S 6 Ai , ii ) . RNAseq profiles of early responders of DNA damage revealed upregulation of ATR and RAD50 , downregulation of ATM , Mre11a , MDC1 , Trp53bp1 , RPA1 , RPA2 , Atrip , and upregulation of downstream DNA repair genes including Brca2 and Rbbp8 at 72 hr time - point . ( Fig . 5 D ) . These observations motivated us to investigate the functional roles of ATM and ATR during stiffness mediated mechanoadaptation in regulating lamin levels . No phosphorylated ATM ( pATM , Ser1981 ) bands were detected on 33 kPa gels across the different time - points , notwithstanding the fact that ATM levels remained unchanged across these conditions when compared to + LIF condition ( Fig . 5 E , Fig . S 6 B ) . However , pATM was detected in immunostained images of mESCs cultured on 33 kPa gels ( Fig . 5 Fi , ii ) , and exhibited uniform spatial distribution ( Fig . 5 Fiii ) . In contrast to ATM , phosphorylated ATR ( pATR , Thr1989 ) was detected from 3 hr onwards ( Fig . 5 E , Supp . Fig . 6 B ) . Furthermore , quantification of nuclear to cytosolic ( N / C ) ratio revealed increased nuclear localization of pATR across all time - points ( Fig . 5 Fiii ) with greater nuclear enrichment on the stiffer 33 kPa gels ( Fig . S 6 C ) . Near complete loss in RAD51 levels at the 72 hr time - point ( Fig . 5 D , E , Supp . Fig . 5 B ) may correspond to resolution of DNA damage and mESC differentiation ( Fig . 5 A , B and C ) . Taken together , these results suggest that DNA damage - induced differentiation is associated with ATR mediated DDR activation followed by DNA repair . Furthermore , since RNAseq analysis of mESCs revealed an upregulation of mesodermal genes , we analyzed the effect of inhibiting DNA repair on development of the heart , a mesodermal organ , which is also mechanically active during its formation . The zebrafish heart forms as a tube and develops into a two - chambered contractile organ by 24 hours post fertilization ( hpf ) . The heart then undergoes morphogenetic movements resulting in a left - ward ventricle and right - ward atrium and chamber ballooning by ~ 72 hpf 78 . Zebrafish embryos exposed to ATM and ATR inhibitors ( KU55933 and VE821 respectively ) for 24 hours showed mild body curvature defects at 48 hpf ( Fig . S 6 Di , ii , n = 71 for KU and n = 73 embryos for VE ) and defects in chamber size and ballooning ( Fig . S 6 Dii ) . Following 24 hours exposure to inhibitors , larvae were allowed to recover in inhibitor - free medium for another 24 hours . However , the defects in heart morphogenesis worsened by 72 hpf , wherein the ventricle and atrium failed to attain their characteristic ballooning and left - right positioning in the larvae ( Fig . S 6 Diii , n = 35 for KU and n = 44 embryos for VE , Supp . movies S1 to S3 ) . Interestingly , in several embryos cardiac contractility was absent at 72 hpf ( 7 / 35 for KU and 2 / 44 for VE ) . These results suggest that ATM and ATR function is required for normal morphogenesis of the developing zebrafish heart and inhibition of ATM / ATR during cardiac morphogenesis causes inability of embryos to recover from the damage . ATR modulates Lamin expression Since both ATM and ATR have been linked to regulation of nuclear envelope integrity and lamin levels 31 , 35 , 79 , we probed the impact of ATM and ATR perturbations on lamin levels . To check whether downstream DDR pathway is blocked post KU and VE treatments , we assessed the γH2AX foci post 24 hrs of treatment and observed significant drop in γH2AX foci counts upon both ATM and ATR inhibition as compared to untreated controls ( Fig . 6 A and B ) , suggesting that early response to mechanoadaptation mediated DNA damage in mESCs is activated by both ATM and ATR . However , while ATM inhibition led to no significant reduction in Lamin A / C and Lamin B1 , both the lamins were significantly reduced upon ATR inhibition ( Fig . 6 A , C , Fig . S 6 E ) . Taken together , our observations suggests that during mechanoadaptation , lamin levels in mESCs are modulated through activation and nuclear localization of ATR and not ATM . Discussion Genome integrity has been associated with transmission of physical forces to the nucleus leading to nuclear envelope deformation , blebbing and rupture in cancer cells 28 , 29 . Lamin A / C is a crucial component of the nuclear envelope with Lamin A / C deficiency causing laminopathies and 80 , increased DNA damage 23 , 81 , 82 , and defective mechanotransduction 25 . Here , using FN coated PA gels of varying stiffness , we report stiffer matrices trigger greater DNA damage in mESCs through induction of nucleo - cytoplasmic coupling and nuclear compression . We show that DNA damage brings about loss in pluripotency and Lamin A / C induction at early time - points , thus functioning as a mediator of early differentiation . Differentiation of mESCs at the 72 hr time - point was associated with early induction of DNA damage response factors ( γH2AX , 53BP1 and pRPA2 ) and downstream DNA repair factors ( RAD51 ) . Of the two DNA damage response ( DDR ) factors ATM and ATR , we establish a role for ATR in modulating Lamin A / C and Lamin B1 expression . Collectively , our results demonstrate how stiffness - dependent DNA damage drives differentiation through ATR - dependent Lamin regulation ( Fig . 6 E ) . Stem cell maintenance and differentiation are regulated by several components of the stem cell niche . Cell - ECM interactions are known to regulate stem cell self - renewability and differentiation 83 . While collagen - I ( Col - I ) has been reported to maintain mESC self - renewability 84 , fibronectin ( FN ) has been associated with self - renewability as well as differentiation 85 – 87 . MEFDMs of different composition , organization and stiffness have been shown to induce distinct mESC germ layer commitment 46 . In addition to its association with stem cell self - renewability and lineage commitment 14 , 26 , 45 , 88 , matrix stiffness has also been implicated in regulating genomic integrity ( ploidy ) of mESCs 36 . Our findings establish a direct link between stiffness mediated mechanoadaptation and DNA damage in mESCs on FN coated PA gels . While MSCs and cancer cells undergo nuclear compression , DNA damage and nuclear envelop rupture during confined migration 28 , 29 , 89 , 90 , we show for the first time that DNA damage in mESCs is attributed to stiffness - dependent nuclear compression . Increase in nuclear compression and DNA damage upon MnCl 2 treatment on the softest gels and decrease in nuclear compression and DNA damage upon Blebb treatment on the stiffest gels suggests that despite lacking a prominent acto - myosin network 91 , 92 , nucleocytoplasmic coupling is sufficient to induce DNA damage in mESCs . Consistent with a previous study where Lamin A / C was shown to have a direct correlation with tissue stiffness and MSC differentiation 26 , our results show a matrix stiffness dependent increase in Lamin A / C expression which is triggered by stiffness dependent DNA damage induction at 24 hr time - point . Similar loss of pluripotency factors and induction of Lamin A / C was observed in cells treated with ETO at 24 hrs . Remarkably , induction of DNA damage and Lamin A / C as early as 3 hrs in cells cultured in the presence of differentiating agents RA and AA suggests that DNA damage and induction of Lamin A / C expression are early events in mESC differentiation . Even in mESCs cultured on ~ 2 kPa MEFDMs wherein cells lose pluripotency within 24 hrs , DNA damage and higher Lamin A / C levels were observed . Drop in both DNA damage and Lamin A / C in RA / AA treated cells at 24 hrs suggests that Lamin A / C induction is DNA damage - dependent and temporal . Literature reports have documented opposite effects of DNA damage in inducing differentiation . While genotoxic DNA damaging agents have been shown to disrupt myogenic differentiation 93 , physiological DNA damage induced by caspase 3 has been shown to promote differentiation 94 . Moreover , confined migration has been reported to cause impaired cell cycle and delayed differentiation in myoblasts 95 . LIF maintains in - vitro mESC self - renewability through the STAT3 pathway 96 , and has been implicated as a mechano - inhibitor 36 . In mESCs , LIF withdrawal triggers an exit from pluripotency and induction of apoptosis 97 . However , mESCs on soft substrates maintain pluripotency even in absence of LIF by downregulation of traction forces 45 . Using RNA sequencing analysis and western blotting we show temporal downregulation of most stemness markers accompanied by upregulation of differentiation genes involved in germ layer commitment , in the absence of LIF . In line with previous observations 97 , 98 , temporal cell survivability assay on mESCs show ~ 40 % dead cells at 72 hr time - point . These observations suggests that a proportion of mESCs undergo cell death which could be triggered due to LIF withdrawal for longer duration . Since we also observed time dependent impairment of cell cycle and loss in mESC survivability with ~ 60 % Sub - G1 cells , the cells undergoing mixed lineage differentiation at the 72 hr time - point likely correspond to the surviving cells where DNA damage in resolved . Consistent with this , expression of the DNA repair protein RAD51 reduced at 72 hrs . Though there was loss of Lamin A / C at Day 3 , Lamin A / C levels were subsequently recovered on Day 7 . This is consistent with previous findings 27 , 71 illustrating the role of Lamin A / C oscillations in mESC differentiation . Interestingly , immuno - staining images revealed heterogenous Lamin A / C expression across all time - points . Analysis of Lamin A / C heterogeneity revealed 40 % Lamin A / C low cells at 72 hr time - point that correlates with the % dead cells from flow cytometric analysis of Annexin - PI . We speculate that restoration of lamin A / C levels also restores cell viability and constitutes the differentiating mESC population . Thus , matrix stiffness mediated DNA damage induces early Lamin A / C expression and loss in pluripotency at 24 hrs but a time - dependent Lamin A / C loss and restoration is required for non - aberrant mESC fate and differentiation . Early DNA damage response ( DDR ) factors – ATM and ATR – have been extensively linked to nuclear envelope integrity , regulation of lamins and mechanosensitivity 31 – 33 , 35 , 79 . Our experiments in zebrafish embryos also show that ATM and ATR function is required for normal morphogenesis of the mechanically contractile zebrafish heart during critical stages of cardiac development . In mESCs , while pATM Ser1981 is uniformly present in nucleus and cytosol , here we show a temporal ATR activation and localization to the nucleus on stiff gels and its selective inhibition leading to lamin loss , thus illustrating the spatio - temporal role of pATR Thr1989 in modulation of both Lamin A / C and Lamin B1 in mESCs . However , apart from their canonical roles in regulation of DNA damage response , the DDR kinases , ATM and ATR have been reported to play roles in nuclear mechanotransduction and nuclear envelope ( NE ) integrity during cancer migration and invasion 31 , 32 , 34 , 35 , 79 . While ATM has been claimed to be activated by cell stretching 34 , ATR is activated by nuclear compression during interstitial migration 31 . Here , we report that the ATR kinase is activated upon matrix stiffness induced nuclear compression - mediated DNA damage that leads to modulation of lamin levels in mESCs . Taken together , our results indicate a novel role of matrix stiffness induced nuclear compression that triggers DNA damage in mediating ESC differentiation and ATR activation to the nucleus . In conclusion , our results illustrate the role of matrix stiffness in mediating nucleo - cytoplasmic coupling induced nuclear compression in mESCs leading to DNA damage . Our results also show that such DNA damage not only drives early differentiation and Lamin A / C induction but also activates and localizes ATR to the nucleus , indicative of the role of ATR in determination of lamin expression in mESCs during mechanoadaptation . Author contributions Conceptualization : T . R . , S . K . , S . N . , C . S . P . , S . S . ; Methodology : T . R . , N . P . , S . D . , N . T . , C . W . K . , S . S . P . , P . S . , S . G . , L . K . S . , D . T . S . , S . N . , C . S . P . , S . K , S . S . ; Software : T . R . , S . D . , N . T . , C . W . K . , P . S . , D . T . S . , C . S . P . , S . N . , S . K . , S . S . ; Validation : S . S . ; Formal analysis : T . R . , S . D . , N . T . , C . S . P . , S . K . , S . S . ; Investigation : T . R . , S . K . , S . N . , S . S . ; Resources : S . S . ; Data curation : T . R . , N . P . , S . D . , N . T . ; S . S . P . ; C . S . P . ; S . K . , S . S . ; Writing - original draft : T . R . , S . S . ; Writing - review & editing : T . R . , N . P . , S . D . , C . W . K . , N . T . , C . S . P . , S . N , S . K . , S . S . ; Visualization : T . R . , S . S . ; Supervision : S . S . ; Project administration : S . S . ; Funding acquisition : S . S . Acknowledgements Authors acknowledge financial support from the Department of Biotechnology ( Govt . of India ) ( Grant # BT / PR34522 / MED / 31 / 417 / 2019 ) and intramural funds provided by IIT Bombay . TR was supported by a CSIR fellowship ( Grant # 09 / 087 ( 0927 ) / 2017 - EMR - I ) ( Govt . of India ) . Authors would also like to thank IRCC , IIT Bombay for providing Bio - AFM , confocal microscopy and FACS facilities . Declaration of Interests The authors declare no competing interests . Figure Legends Figure 1 : Association of mechanoadaptation and DNA damage in mouse embryonic stem cells ( mESCs ) : ( Ai , ii ) Representative lectin - stained images of mESCs on fibronectin ( FN ) - coated polyacrylamide ( PA ) gels of varying stiffness post 3 , 6 , 12 , 24 hours and 72 hours of seeding and quantification of cell spreading ( 𝑛 ≥ 60 cells per condition across N = 3 independent experiments ) . Scale Bar = 10 µm . Error bars represent SD . Two - way ANOVA with Tukey’s test was used for comparing means ( * * 𝑝 - value ≤ 0 . 01 , * * * * 𝑝 - value ≤ 0 . 0001 ) . ( Bi , ii ) Assessment of pMLC expression in mESCs cultured on PA gels for 24 hours based on immunofluorescence and western blotting . GAPDH served as loading control . Scale Bar = 10 µm . ( Ci - iii ) Measurement of mESC cortical stiffness using atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) after 24 hrs in culture . Cells were probed with a soft pyramidal probe and first 500 nm of the raw force - indentation curves were fitted with Hertz model to estimate cortical stiffness ( 𝑛 ≥ 60 cells per condition across N = 3 independent experiments ) . One - way ANOVA with Tukey’s test was used for comparing means ( * * * * 𝑝 - value ≤ 0 . 0001 ) . ( Di - iii ) Quantification of DNA damage in mESCs cultured on PA gels for 24 hrs . DNA damage was assessed by co - staining cells with DAPI and γH2AX and counting γH2AX foci per nucleus ( 𝑛 ≥ 50 nuclei per condition across N = 3 independent experiments ) and western blotting of whole cell lysates . Error bars represent SEM . One - way ANOVA with Tukey’s test was used for comparing means ( * * * * 𝑝 - value ≤ 0 . 0001 ) . ( Ei , ii ) Representative images of mESC comet assay on PA gels ( Insets show single comets ) and quantitative analysis of olive tail moment ( 𝑛 ≥ 30 cells per condition across N = 3 independent experiments ) . One - way ANOVA with Tukey’s test was used for comparing means ( * 𝑝 - value ≤ 0 . 05 , * * 𝑝 - value ≤ 0 . 01 , ns = non - significant p - value > 0 . 05 ) . See also Figure S1 and Figure S 2 A . Figure 2 : Mechanoadaptation mediated nuclear compression induces DNA damage in mESCs : ( Ai , Aii ) Representative images of mESC nuclei co - stained with γH2AX on PA gels of varying stiffnesses after 24 hrs in culture in presence and absence of the ROS inhibitor , N - acetyl cysteine ( NAC ) and quantification of DNA damage ( 𝑛 ≥ 60 cells per condition across N = 3 independent experiments ) . Scale Bar = 5 µm . Error bars represent SEM . Student t - test was used for comparing means between control and NAC treated samples on each PA gel ( ns = non - significant 𝑝 - value > 0 . 05 ) . ( Bi - Biii ) Representative images showing transverse sections of mESC nuclei immunostained with Lamin B1 on PA gels of varying stiffness post 3 , 6 , 12 and 24 hours of seeding and quantification of nuclear height and nuclear volume ( 𝑛 ≥ 60 cells per condition across N = 3 independent experiments ) . Scale Bar = 5 µm . Error bars represent SD . Two - way ANOVA with Tukey’s test was used for comparing means ( * * * * 𝑝 - value ≤ 0 . 0001 , ns = non - significant p - value > 0 . 05 ) . ( Ci - Civ ) Schematic and representative lectin - stained images of mESCs on PA gels of 0 . 6 kPa in presence and absence of MnCl 2 and 33 kPa in presence and absence of Blebbistatin and quantification of cell spreading post 24 hrs of treatment . Representative images showing transverse sections of mESC nuclei stained with Lamin B1 on PA gels of 0 . 6 kPa in presence and absence of MnCl 2 and 33 kPa in presence and absence of Blebbistatin and quantification of nuclear height ( 𝑛 ≥ 50 cells per condition across N = 3 independent experiments ) . Scale Bar = 5 µm . Student t - test was used for comparing means between control and treated samples on each PA gel ( * * 𝑝 - value ≤ 0 . 01 , * * * * 𝑝 - value ≤ 0 . 0001 ) . ( Di , Dii ) Assessment of extent of DNA damage of mESCs on PA gels of 0 . 6 kPa in presence and absence of MnCl 2 and 33 kPa in presence and absence of Blebbistatin . Quantification of γH2AX foci co - stained with DAPI ( n ≥ 40 cells per condition across N = 3 independent experiments ) . Scale Bar = 5 µm . Error bars represent SEM . Student t - test was used for comparing means between control and treated samples on each PA gel ( * * * 𝑝 - value ≤ 0 . 001 , * * * * 𝑝 - value ≤ 0 . 0001 ) . ( E ) Representative immunoblots showing pMLC and γH2AX levels in ESCs cultured on 0 . 6 kPa gels in presence and absence of MnCl 2 and 33 kPa gels in presence and absence of Blebbistatin . GAPDH served as loading control . See also Figure S 2 B . Figure 3 : DNA damage induces Lamin A / C expression in a temporal manner : ( Ai , Aii ) Representative images of mESC nuclei immunostained with Lamin A / C on PA gels of varying stiffnesses post 24 hrs of culture . Scale Bar = 5 µm . Representative immunoblots of Lamin A / C expression and pluripotency ( Oct3 / 4 and Nanog ) of mESCs on varying stiffnesses post 24 hrs culture . ( Bi , Bii ) Representative images of Lamin A / C expression and DNA damage in presence of 2µM etoposide ( ETO ) post 24 hrs treatment on mESCs by immunofluorescence . Scale Bar = 5 µm . Representative immunoblots of Lamin A / C expression , pluripotency levels and γH2AX of whole cell mESC lysates in presence and absence of ETO post 24 hrs treatment . ( Ci , Cii ) Representative immunofluorescence images of Lamin A / C and γH2AX on mESCs post 3 hrs and 24 hrs of retinoic acid ( RA ) and ascorbic acid ( AA ) treatment on 0 . 6 kPa PA gels . Scale Bar = 5 µm . Representative immunoblots of Lamin A / C , Lamin B1 , Oct3 / 4 , Nanog and γH2AX of whole cell mESC lysates post treatment of RA and AA on 0 . 6 kPa PA gels . ( Di - iii ) Schematic representation of MEF derived matrices ( MEFDMs ) preparation from MEFs and mESC seeding . Representative immunofluorescence image of MEFDM stained with NHS - ester ( Scale Bar = 50 µm ) . Representative immunofluorescence images of Lamin A / C and γH2AX of mESCs on gelatin coated glass coverslips and on MEFDMs compared to differentiated MEFs . Scale Bar = 5 µm . Representative immunoblots of Lamin A / C , Lamin B1 , Oct3 / 4 , Nanog , γH2AX and H2AX of whole cell mESC lysates isolated from gelatin coated dishes ( CTL ) and from MEFDM compared to MEF whole cell lysates . For all blots , GAPDH served as loading control . See also Figure S 2 C - G . Figure 4 : Germ layer differentiation is associated with loss in Lamin A / C : ( A ) 3 - D PCA plot representing clusters of mESCs in + LIF condition , Etoposide ( ETO ) and varying stiffness post 3 hrs , 6 hrs , 24 hrs and 72 hrs of culture based on RNAseq profiles . ( B ) Heatmaps showing temporal evolution of mESC RNAseq profiles of genes involved in pluripotency , endodermal , mesodermal and ectodermal lineage across different stiffnesses and in ETO - treated cells on 0 . 6 kPa gels . Normalization was carried out with respect to + LIF condition . ( C ) Representative immunoblots of Oct3 / 4 and Nanog in mESCs cultured in the presence of LIF and in the absence of LIF on PA gels across different time - points . ( D ) Representative immunoblots of endodermal marker ( GATA4 ) , mesodermal marker ( Brachyury , T ) and ectodermal marker ( Otx2 ) in mESCs cultured on PA gels across different time - points . ( Ei ) Heatmaps showing RNAseq profiles of Lamin genes ( LMNA , LMNB1 and LMNB2 ) in mESCs cultured on PA gels across different time - points as well as in ETO treated cells on 0 . 6 kPa gels . Normalization was carried out with respect to + LIF condition . ( Eii ) Representative immunoblots of Lamin A / C and Lamin B1 in mESCs cultured on PA gels across different time - points . ( Fi - Fiii ) Representative immunofluorescence images of Lamin A / C co - stained with DAPI in mESCs cultured on PA gels across different time - points showing heterogenous expression of Lamin A / C ( red arrowhead : high expression ; yellow arrowhead : low expression ) ( 𝑛 ≥ 50 cells per condition across N = 3 independent experiments ) . Scale Bar = 20 µm . Lamin A / C heterogeneity was captured by plotting the normalized Lamin A / C distribution across different time - points . Normalization was done wrt the maximum intensity observed across all conditions and timepoints ( 𝑛 ≥ 50 cells per condition across N = 3 independent experiments ) . Assessment of percentage of low ( Lo ) , moderate ( Mo ) and high ( Hi ) Lamin A / C expression across different conditions ( see Materials & Methods for details ) . For all blots , GAPDH served as loading control . See also Figure S 3 - S 5 . Figure 5 : Differentiation involves DNA repair through ATR activation and nuclear enrichment : ( Ai , Aii ) Representative images of temporal evolution of mESCs immunostained for γH2AX co - stained with DAPI on varying stiffness and quantification of γH2AX foci count per nucleus ( 𝑛 ≥ 60 cells per condition across N = 3 independent experiments ) . Scale Bar = 5 µm . Error bars represent SD . Two - way ANOVA with Tukey’s test was used for comparing means ( * * 𝑝 - value ≤ 0 . 01 , * * * * 𝑝 - value ≤ 0 . 0001 ) . ( Bi , Bii ) Representative images of temporal evolution of mESCs immunostained for DDR factor , 53BP1 , co - stained with DAPI on varying stiffness and quantification of 53BP1 foci count per nucleus ( 𝑛 ≥ 60 cells per condition across N = 3 independent experiments ) . Scale Bar = 5 µm . Error bars represent SD . ( * * * p - value ≤ 0 . 001 , * * * * 𝑝 - value ≤ 0 . 0001 , ns = non - significant 𝑝 - value > 0 . 05 ) . ( C ) Immunoblots representing temporal expression of DDR factors , γH2AX / H2AX and pRPA2 of mESCs on varying stiffness . GAPDH served as loading control . ( D ) Heatmaps showing temporal evolution of mESC RNAseq profiles of genes involved in DNA damage response ( DDR ) factors and DNA repair across different stiffnesses and in ETO - treated cells on 0 . 6 kPa gels . Normalization was carried out with respect to + LIF condition . ( E ) Immunoblots representing temporal expression of DDR factors ( pATM / ATM , pATR / ATR ) and DNA repair factor ( RAD 51 ) in the presence of LIF and in the absence of LIF on 33 kPa PA gels . ( Fi , ii ) Representative pATM - Ser1981 / pATR - Thr1989 / DAPI stained images of mESCs across different timepoints on 33 kPa gels . Scale Bar = 5 µm . Representative intensity profiles along white dotted lines depict nuclear / cytoplasmic localization of pATM ( green ) and pATR ( red ) . ( Fiii ) Quantification of nuclear to cytoplasmic ( N / C ) ratio of pATM ( green ) and pATR ( red ) ( 𝑛 ≥ 50 cells per condition across N = 3 independent experiments ) . Error bars represent SD . One - way ANOVA with Tukey’s test was used for comparing means ( ns = non - significant 𝑝 - value > 0 . 05 ) . See also Figure S 6 A - D and Movies S 1 - 3 . Figure 6 : ATR regulates Lamin expression : ( A , B ) Representative immunostained images of γH2AX co - stained with DAPI and Lamin A / C on mESCs cultured in the presence and absence of KU - 55933 and VE - 821 on 33 kPa gels . Bar plots show quantification of γH2AX foci per nucleus in these conditions ( 𝑛 ≥ 30 cells per condition across N = 3 independent experiments ) . Scale Bar = 5 µm . Error bars represent SEM . Student t - test was used for comparing means between control and treated samples ( * * * * 𝑝 - value ≤ 0 . 0001 ) . ( C ) Representative immunoblots showing Lamin A / C and Lamin B1 expression of mESCs on 33 kPa gels in the presence and absence of KU - 55933 and VE - 821 . For all blots , GAPDH served as loading control . See also Figure S 6 E . References 1 . Martin , G . R . ( 1981 ) . Isolation of a pluripotent cell line from early mouse embryos cultured in medium conditioned by teratocarcinoma stem cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 78 . 10 . 1073 / pnas . 78 . 12 . 7634 . 2 . Doss , M . X . , Koehler , C . I . , Gissel , C . , Hescheler , J . , and Sachinidis , A . ( 2004 ) . Embryonic stem cells : A promising tool for cell replacement therapy . Preprint at Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine , 10 . 1111 / j . 1582 - 4934 . 2004 . tb00471 . x 10 . 1111 / j . 1582 - 4934 . 2004 . tb00471 . x . 3 . Kapinas , K . , Grandy , R . , Ghule , P . , Medina , R . , Becker , K . , Pardee , A . , Zaidi , S . K . , Lian , J . , Stein , J . , van Wijnen , A . , et al . ( 2013 ) . The abbreviated pluripotent cell cycle . Preprint , 10 . 1002 / jcp . 24104 10 . 1002 / jcp . 24104 . 4 . Ahuja , A . K . , Jodkowska , K . , Teloni , F . , Bizard , A . H . , Zellweger , R . , Herrador , R . , Ortega , S . , Hickson , I . D . , Altmeyer , M . , Mendez , J . , et al . ( 2016 ) . A short G1 phase imposes constitutive replication stress and fork remodelling in mouse embryonic stem cells . Nat Commun 7 . 10 . 1038 / ncomms10660 . 5 . Vitale , I . , Manic , G . , De Maria , R . , Kroemer , G . , and Galluzzi , L . ( 2017 ) . DNA Damage in Stem Cells . Preprint at Cell Press , 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2017 . 04 . 006 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2017 . 04 . 006 . 6 . Guo , Z . , Kozlov , S . , Lavin , M . F . , Person , M . D . , and Paull , T . T . ( 2010 ) . ATM Activation by Oxidative Stress . Science ( 1979 ) 330 , 517 – 521 . 10 . 1126 / science . 1192912 . 7 . Guo , Z . , Deshpande , R . , and Paull , T . T . ( 2010 ) . ATM activation in the presence of oxidative stress . Cell Cycle 9 , 4805 – 4811 . 10 . 4161 / cc . 9 . 24 . 14323 . 8 . Schneider , J . G . , Finck , B . N . , Ren , J . , Standley , K . N . , Takagi , M . , Maclean , K . H . , Bernal - Mizrachi , C . , Muslin , A . J . , Kastan , M . B . , and Semenkovich , C . F . ( 2006 ) . ATM - dependent suppression of stress signaling reduces vascular disease in metabolic syndrome . Cell Metab 4 , 377 – 389 . 10 . 1016 / j . cmet . 2006 . 10 . 002 . 9 . Ditch , S . , and Paull , T . T . ( 2012 ) . The ATM protein kinase and cellular redox signaling : beyond the DNA damage response . Trends Biochem Sci 37 , 15 – 22 . 10 . 1016 / j . tibs . 2011 . 10 . 002 . 10 . Morrison , S . J . , and Spradling , A . C . Stem cells and niches : mechanisms that promote stem cell maintenance throughout life . 11 . Pennings , S . , Liu , K . J . , and Qian , H . ( 2018 ) . The stem cell niche : Interactions between stem cells and their environment . Preprint at Hindawi Limited , 10 . 1155 / 2018 / 4879379 10 . 1155 / 2018 / 4879379 . 12 . Xie , T . , and Li , L . ( 2007 ) . Stem cells and their niche : An inseparable relationship . In Development , pp . 2001 – 2006 . 10 . 1242 / dev . 002022 . 13 . Reinwald , Y . , Bratt , J . , and El Haj , A . ( 2016 ) . Pluripotent Stem Cells and Their Dynamic Niche . In Pluripotent Stem Cells - From the Bench to the Clinic ( InTech ) . 10 . 5772 / 62671 . 14 . Engler , A . J . , Sen , S . , Sweeney , H . L . , and Discher , D . E . ( 2006 ) . Matrix Elasticity Directs Stem Cell Lineage Specification . Cell 126 , 677 – 689 . 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2006 . 06 . 044 . 15 . Sthanam , L . K . , Saxena , N . , Mistari , V . K . , Roy , T . , Jadhav , S . R . , and Sen , S . ( 2019 ) . Initial Priming on Soft Substrates Enhances Subsequent Topography - Induced Neuronal Differentiation in ESCs but Not in MSCs . ACS Biomater Sci Eng 5 , 180 – 192 . 10 . 1021 / acsbiomaterials . 8b00313 . 16 . Dos Santos , Á . , and Toseland , C . P . ( 2021 ) . Regulation of nuclear mechanics and the impact on dna damage . Int J Mol Sci 22 , 1 – 18 . 10 . 3390 / ijms22063178 . 17 . Shah , P . , Wolf , K . , and Lammerding , J . ( 2017 ) . Bursting the Bubble – Nuclear Envelope Rupture as a Path to Genomic Instability ? Preprint at Elsevier Ltd , 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2017 . 02 . 008 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2017 . 02 . 008 . 18 . Chalut , K . J . , Höpfler , M . , Lautenschläger , F . , Boyde , L . , Chan , C . J . , Ekpenyong , A . , Martinez - Arias , A . , and Guck , J . ( 2012 ) . Chromatin Decondensation and Nuclear Softening Accompany Nanog Downregulation in Embryonic Stem Cells . Biophys J 103 , 2060 – 2070 . 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2012 . 10 . 015 . 19 . Pagliara , S . , Franze , K . , McClain , C . R . , Wylde , G . W . , Fisher , C . L . , Franklin , R . J . M . , Kabla , A . J . , Keyser , U . F . , and Chalut , K . J . ( 2014 ) . Auxetic nuclei in embryonic stem cells exiting pluripotency . Nat Mater 13 , 638 – 644 . 10 . 1038 / nmat3943 . 20 . Gonzalo , S . ( 2014 ) . DNA damage and lamins . Adv Exp Med Biol 773 , 377 – 399 . 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4899 - 8032 - 8 _ 17 . 21 . Gonzalez - Suarez , I . , Redwood , A . B . , Perkins , S . M . , Vermolen , B . , Lichtensztejin , D . , Grotsky , D . A . , Morgado - Palacin , L . , Gapud , E . J . , Sleckman , B . P . , Sullivan , T . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Novel roles for A - type lamins in telomere biology and the DNA damage response pathway . EMBO Journal 28 , 2414 – 2427 . 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2009 . 196 . 22 . Graziano , S . , Coll - Bonfill , N . , Teodoro - Castro , B . , Kuppa , S . , Jackson , J . , Shashkova , E . , Mahajan , U . , Vindigni , A . , Antony , E . , and Gonzalo , S . ( 2021 ) . Lamin A / C recruits ssDNA protective proteins RPA and RAD51 to stalled replication forks to maintain fork stability . Journal of Biological Chemistry 297 , 101301 . 10 . 1016 / j . jbc . 2021 . 101301 . 23 . Gibbs - Seymour , I . , Markiewicz , E . , Bekker - Jensen , S . , Mailand , N . , and Hutchison , C . J . ( 2015 ) . Lamin A / C - dependent interaction with 53BP1 promotes cellular responses to DNA damage . Aging Cell 14 , 162 – 169 . 10 . 1111 / acel . 12258 . 24 . Zhang , B . , Yang , Y . , Keyimu , R . , Hao , J . , Zhao , Z . , and Ye , R . ( 2019 ) . The role of lamin A / C in mesenchymal stem cell differentiation . Preprint at Springer Netherlands , 10 . 1007 / s13105 - 019 - 00661 - z 10 . 1007 / s13105 - 019 - 00661 - z . 25 . Lammerding , J . , Schulze , P . C . , Takahashi , T . , Kozlov , S . , Sullivan , T . , Kamm , R . D . , Stewart , C . L . , and Lee , R . T . ( 2004 ) . Lamin A / C deficiency causes defective nuclear mechanics and mechanotransduction . Journal of Clinical Investigation 113 , 370 – 378 . 10 . 1172 / JCI200419670 . 26 . Swift , J . , Ivanovska , I . L . , Buxboim , A . , Harada , T . , Dingal , P . C . D . P . , Pinter , J . , Pajerowski , J . D . , Spinler , K . R . , Shin , J . W . , Tewari , M . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Nuclear lamin - A scales with tissue stiffness and enhances matrix - directed differentiation . Science ( 1979 ) 341 . 10 . 1126 / science . 1240104 . 27 . Sehgal , P . , Chaturvedi , P . , Kumaran , R . I . , Kumar , S . , and Parnaik , V . K . ( 2013 ) . Lamin A / C Haploinsufficiency Modulates the Differentiation Potential of Mouse Embryonic Stem Cells . PLoS One 8 , e57891 . 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0057891 . 28 . Denais , C . M . , Gilbert , R . M . , Isermann , P . , McGregor , A . L . , Te Lindert , M . , Weigelin , B . , Davidson , P . M . , Friedl , P . , Wolf , K . , and Lammerding , J . ( 2016 ) . Nuclear envelope rupture and repair during cancer cell migration . Science ( 1979 ) 352 . 10 . 1126 / science . aad7297 . 29 . Lammerding , J . , and Wolf , K . ( 2016 ) . Nuclear envelope rupture : Actin fibers are putting the squeeze on the nucleus . Journal of Cell Biology 215 . 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201609102 . 30 . Lim , S . , Quinton , R . J . , and Ganem , N . J . ( 2016 ) . Nuclear envelope rupture drives genome instability in cancer . Preprint at American Society for Cell Biology , 10 . 1091 / mbc . E16 - 02 - 0098 10 . 1091 / mbc . E16 - 02 - 0098 . 31 . Kidiyoor , G . R . , Li , Q . , Bastianello , G . , Bruhn , C . , Giovannetti , I . , Mohamood , A . , Beznoussenko , G . V . , Mironov , A . , Raab , M . , Piel , M . , et al . ( 2020 ) . ATR is essential for preservation of cell mechanics and nuclear integrity during interstitial migration . Nat Commun 11 . 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 020 - 18580 - 9 . 32 . Kumar , A . , Mazzanti , M . , Mistrik , M . , Kosar , M . , Beznoussenko , G . V . , Mironov , A . A . , Garrè , M . , Parazzoli , D . , Shivashankar , G . V . , Scita , G . , et al . ( 2014 ) . ATR mediates a checkpoint at the nuclear envelope in response to mechanical stress . Cell 158 , 633 – 646 . 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 05 . 046 . 33 . Li , F . , Lo , T . Y . , Miles , L . , Wang , Q . , Noristani , H . N . , Li , D . , Niu , J . , Trombley , S . , Goldshteyn , J . I . , Wang , C . , et al . ( 2021 ) . The Atr - Chek1 pathway inhibits axon regeneration in response to Piezo - dependent mechanosensation . Nat Commun 12 , 3845 . 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 021 - 24131 - 7 . 34 . Bastianello , G . , Porcella , G . , Beznoussenko , G . V . , Kidiyoor , G . , Ascione , F . , Li , Q . , Cattaneo , A . , Matafora , V . , Disanza , A . , Quarto , M . , et al . ( 2023 ) . Cell stretching activates an ATM mechano - transduction pathway that remodels cytoskeleton and chromatin . Cell Rep 42 , 113555 . 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2023 . 113555 . 35 . Shah , P . , McGuigan , C . W . , Cheng , S . , Vanpouille - Box , C . , Demaria , S . , Weiss , R . S . , and Lammerding , J . ( 2022 ) . ATM Modulates Nuclear Mechanics by Regulating Lamin A Levels . Front Cell Dev Biol 10 . 10 . 3389 / fcell . 2022 . 875132 . 36 . Sthanam , L . K . , Barai , A . , Rastogi , A . , Mistari , V . K . , Maria , A . , Kauthale , R . , Gatne , M . , and Sen , S . ( 2017 ) . Biophysical regulation of mouse embryonic stem cell fate and genomic integrity by feeder derived matrices . Biomaterials 119 , 9 – 22 . 10 . 1016 / j . biomaterials . 2016 . 12 . 006 . 37 . Ahuja , A . K . , Jodkowska , K . , Teloni , F . , Bizard , A . H . , Zellweger , R . , Herrador , R . , Ortega , S . , Hickson , I . D . , Altmeyer , M . , Mendez , J . , et al . ( 2016 ) . A short G1 phase imposes constitutive replication stress and fork remodelling in mouse embryonic stem cells . Nat Commun 7 . 10 . 1038 / ncomms10660 . 38 . Tse , J . R . , and Engler , A . J . ( 2010 ) . Preparation of hydrogel substrates with tunable mechanical properties . Preprint , 10 . 1002 / 0471143030 . cb1016s47 10 . 1002 / 0471143030 . cb1016s47 . 39 . Das , A . , Monteiro , M . , Barai , A . , Kumar , S . , and Sen , S . ( 2017 ) . MMP proteolytic activity regulates cancer invasiveness by modulating integrins . Sci Rep 7 . 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 14340 - w . 40 . Mackay , J . L . , and Kumar , S . ( 2013 ) . Cell Imaging Techniques . 931 , 313 – 329 . 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 62703 - 056 - 4 . 41 . Dormond , O . , Ponsonnet , L . , Hasmim , M . , Foletti , A . , and Rüegg , C . ( 2004 ) . Manganese - induced integrin affinity maturation promotes recruitment of αVβ3 integrin to focal adhesions in endothelial cells : evidence for a role of phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase and Src . Thromb Haemost 92 , 151 – 161 . 10 . 1160 / TH03 - 11 - 0728 . 42 . Cluzel , C . , Saltel , F . , Lussi , J . , Paulhe , F . , Imhof , B . A . , and Wehrle - Haller , B . ( 2005 ) . The mechanisms and dynamics of αvβ3 integrin clustering in living cells . J Cell Biol 171 , 383 – 392 . 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200503017 . 43 . Lu , F . , Zhu , L . , Bromberger , T . , Yang , J . , Yang , Q . , Liu , J . , Plow , E . F . , Moser , M . , and Qin , J . ( 2022 ) . Mechanism of integrin activation by talin and its cooperation with kindlin . Nat Commun 13 , 2362 . 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 30117 - w . 44 . Evans , N . , Minelli , C . , Gentleman , E . , LaPointe , V . , Patankar , S . , Kallivretaki , M . , Chen , X . , Roberts , C . , and Stevens , M . ( 2009 ) . Substrate stiffness affects early differentiation events in embryonic stem cells . Eur Cell Mater 18 , 1 – 14 . 10 . 22203 / eCM . v018a01 . 45 . Chowdhury , F . , Li , Y . , Poh , Y . C . , Yokohama - Tamaki , T . , Wang , N . , and Tanaka , T . S . ( 2010 ) . Soft substrates promote homogeneous self - renewal of embryonic stem cells via downregulating cell - matrix tractions . PLoS One 5 . 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0015655 . 46 . Sthanam , L . K . , Roy , T . , Patwardhan , S . , Shukla , A . , Sharma , S . , Shinde , P . V . , Kale , H . T . , Chandra Shekar , P . , Kondabagil , K . , and Sen , S . ( 2022 ) . MMP modulated differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells on engineered cell derived matrices . Biomaterials 280 . 10 . 1016 / j . biomaterials . 2021 . 121268 . 47 . Nichols , J . , Zevnik , B . , Anastassiadis , K . , Niwa , H . , Klewe - Nebenius , D . , Chambers , I . , Schöler , H . , and Smith , A . ( 1998 ) . Formation of Pluripotent Stem Cells in the Mammalian Embryo Depends on the POU Transcription Factor Oct4 . Cell 95 , 379 – 391 . 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 00 ) 81769 - 9 . 48 . Niwa , H . , Miyazaki , J . , and Smith , A . G . ( 2000 ) . Quantitative expression of Oct - 3 / 4 defines differentiation , dedifferentiation or self - renewal of ES cells . Nat Genet 24 , 372 – 376 . 10 . 1038 / 74199 . 49 . Avilion , A . A . , Nicolis , S . K . , Pevny , L . H . , Perez , L . , Vivian , N . , and Lovell - Badge , R . ( 2003 ) . Multipotent cell lineages in early mouse development depend on SOX2 function . Genes Dev 17 , 126 – 140 . 10 . 1101 / gad . 224503 . 50 . Mitsui , K . , Tokuzawa , Y . , Itoh , H . , Segawa , K . , Murakami , M . , Takahashi , K . , Maruyama , M . , Maeda , M . , and Yamanaka , S . ( 2003 ) . The Homeoprotein Nanog Is Required for Maintenance of Pluripotency in Mouse Epiblast and ES Cells . Cell 113 , 631 – 642 . 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 03 ) 00393 - 3 . 51 . Chambers , I . , Colby , D . , Robertson , M . , Nichols , J . , Lee , S . , Tweedie , S . , and Smith , A . ( 2003 ) . Functional Expression Cloning of Nanog , a Pluripotency Sustaining Factor in Embryonic Stem Cells . Cell 113 , 643 – 655 . 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 03 ) 00392 - 1 . 52 . Li , Y . , McClintick , J . , Zhong , L . , Edenberg , H . J . , Yoder , M . C . , and Chan , R . J . ( 2005 ) . Murine embryonic stem cell differentiation is promoted by SOCS - 3 and inhibited by the zinc finger transcription factor Klf4 . Blood 105 , 635 – 637 . 10 . 1182 / blood - 2004 - 07 - 2681 . 53 . Anderson , W . J . , Zhou , Q . , Alcalde , V . , Kaneko , O . F . , Blank , L . J . , Sherwood , R . I . , Guseh , J . S . , Rajagopal , J . , and Melton , D . A . ( 2008 ) . Genetic targeting of the endoderm with claudin - 6CreER . Developmental Dynamics 237 , 504 – 512 . 10 . 1002 / dvdy . 21437 . 54 . Enikanolaiye , A . , Larivière , N . , Troy , T . - C . , Arabzadeh , A . , Atasoy , E . , and Turksen , K . ( 2010 ) . Involucrin – claudin - 6 tail deletion mutant ( CΔ206 ) transgenic mice : a model of delayed epidermal permeability barrier formation and repair . Dis Model Mech 3 , 167 – 180 . 10 . 1242 / dmm . 002634 . 55 . Soudais , C . , Bielinska , M . , Heikinheimo , M . , MacArthur , C . A . , Narita , N . , Saffitz , J . E . , Simon , M . C . , Leiden , J . M . , and Wilson , D . B . ( 1995 ) . Targeted mutagenesis of the transcription factor GATA - 4 gene in mouse embryonic stem cells disrupts visceral endoderm differentiation in vitro . Development 121 , 3877 – 3888 . 10 . 1242 / dev . 121 . 11 . 3877 . 56 . Spence , J . R . , Lange , A . W . , Lin , S . - C . J . , Kaestner , K . H . , Lowy , A . M . , Kim , I . , Whitsett , J . A . , and Wells , J . M . ( 2009 ) . Sox17 Regulates Organ Lineage Segregation of Ventral Foregut Progenitor Cells . Dev Cell 17 , 62 – 74 . 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 05 . 012 . 57 . Levinson - Dushnik , M . , and Benvenisty , N . ( 1997 ) . Involvement of Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 3 in Endoderm Differentiation of Embryonic Stem Cells . Mol Cell Biol 17 , 3817 – 3822 . 10 . 1128 / MCB . 17 . 7 . 3817 . 58 . Lee , C . S . , Friedman , J . R . , Fulmer , J . T . , and Kaestner , K . H . ( 2005 ) . The initiation of liver development is dependent on Foxa transcription factors . Nature 435 , 944 – 947 . 10 . 1038 / nature03649 . 59 . Chapman , D . L . , and Papaioannou , V . E . ( 1998 ) . Three neural tubes in mouse embryos with mutations in the T - box gene Tbx6 . Nature 391 , 695 – 697 . 10 . 1038 / 35624 . 60 . Takemoto , T . , Uchikawa , M . , Yoshida , M . , Bell , D . M . , Lovell - Badge , R . , Papaioannou , V . E . , and Kondoh , H . ( 2011 ) . Tbx6 - dependent Sox2 regulation determines neural or mesodermal fate in axial stem cells . Nature 470 , 394 – 398 . 10 . 1038 / nature09729 . 61 . Thisse , B . , Messal , M . El , and Perrin - Schmitt , F . ( 1987 ) . The twist gene : isolation of a Drosophila zygotic gene necessary for the establishment of dorsoventral pattern . Nucleic Acids Res 15 , 3439 – 3453 . 10 . 1093 / nar / 15 . 8 . 3439 . 62 . Ota , M . S . , Loebel , D . A . F . , O’Rourke , M . P . , Wong , N . , Tsoi , B . , and Tam , P . P . L . ( 2004 ) . Twist is required for patterning the cranial nerves and maintaining the viability of mesodermal cells . Developmental Dynamics 230 , 216 – 228 . 10 . 1002 / dvdy . 20047 . 63 . Soo , K . , O’Rourke , M . P . , Khoo , P . - L . , Steiner , K . A . , Wong , N . , Behringer , R . R . , and Tam , P . P . L . ( 2002 ) . Twist Function Is Required for the Morphogenesis of the Cephalic Neural Tube and the Differentiation of the Cranial Neural Crest Cells in the Mouse Embryo . Dev Biol 247 , 251 – 270 . 10 . 1006 / dbio . 2002 . 0699 . 64 . Murray , S . A . , and Gridley , T . ( 2006 ) . Snail family genes are required for left – right asymmetry determination , but not neural crest formation , in mice . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103 , 10300 – 10304 . 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0602234103 . 65 . Ashraf , S . I . , Hu , X . , Roote , J . , and Ip , Y . T . ( 1999 ) . The mesoderm determinant Snail collaborates with related zinc - finger proteins to control Drosophila neurogenesis . EMBO J 18 , 6426 – 6438 . 10 . 1093 / emboj / 18 . 22 . 6426 . 66 . Lobo , M . V . T . , Arenas , M . I . , Alonso , F . J . M . , Gomez , G . , Bazán , E . , Paíno , C . L . , Fernández , E . , Fraile , B . , Paniagua , R . , Moyano , A . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Nestin , a neuroectodermal stem cell marker molecule , is expressed in Leydig cells of the human testis and in some specific cell types from human testicular tumours . Cell Tissue Res 316 , 369 – 376 . 10 . 1007 / s00441 - 003 - 0848 - 4 . 67 . Zou , L . , Kidwai , F . K . , Kopher , R . A . , Motl , J . , Kellum , C . A . , Westendorf , J . J . , and Kaufman , D . S . ( 2015 ) . Use of RUNX2 Expression to Identify Osteogenic Progenitor Cells Derived from Human Embryonic Stem Cells . Stem Cell Reports 4 , 190 – 198 . 10 . 1016 / j . stemcr . 2015 . 01 . 008 . 68 . Nahaboo , W . , Eski , S . E . , Despin‐Guitard , E . , Vermeersch , M . , Versaevel , M . , Saykali , B . , Monteyne , D . , Gabriele , S . , Magin , T . M . , Schwarz , N . , et al . ( 2022 ) . Keratin filaments mediate the expansion of extra‐embryonic membranes in the post‐gastrulation mous e embryo . EMBO J 41 . 10 . 15252 / embj . 2021108747 . 69 . Kemp , C . , Willems , E . , Abdo , S . , Lambiv , L . , and Leyns , L . ( 2005 ) . Expression of all Wnt genes and their secreted antagonists during mouse blastocyst and postimplantation development . Developmental Dynamics 233 , 1064 – 1075 . 10 . 1002 / dvdy . 20408 . 70 . Ralston , A . , Cox , B . J . , Nishioka , N . , Sasaki , H . , Chea , E . , Rugg - Gunn , P . , Guo , G . , Robson , P . , Draper , J . S . , and Rossant , J . ( 2010 ) . Gata3 regulates trophoblast development downstream of Tead4 and in parallel to Cdx2 . Development 137 , 395 – 403 . 10 . 1242 / dev . 038828 . 71 . Wang , Y . , Elsherbiny , A . , Kessler , L . , Cordero , J . , Shi , H . , Serke , H . , Lityagina , O . , Trogisch , F . A . , Mohammadi , M . M . , El - Battrawy , I . , et al . ( 2022 ) . Lamin A / C - dependent chromatin architecture safeguards naïve pluripotency to prevent aberrant cardiovascular cell fate and function . Nat Commun 13 . 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 34366 - 7 . 72 . Cho , S . , Vashisth , M . , Abbas , A . , Majkut , S . , Vogel , K . , Xia , Y . , Ivanovska , I . L . , Irianto , J . , Tewari , M . , Zhu , K . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Mechanosensing by the Lamina Protects against Nuclear Rupture , DNA Damage , and Cell - Cycle Arrest . Dev Cell 49 , 920 - 935 . e5 . 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2019 . 04 . 020 . 73 . Muncie , J . M . , Ayad , N . M . E . , Lakins , J . N . , Xue , X . , Fu , J . , and Weaver , V . M . ( 2020 ) . Mechanical Tension Promotes Formation of Gastrulation - like Nodes and Patterns Mesoderm Specification in Human Embryonic Stem Cells . Dev Cell 55 , 679 - 694 . e11 . 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2020 . 10 . 015 . 74 . Mamidi , A . , Prawiro , C . , Seymour , P . A . , de Lichtenberg , K . H . , Jackson , A . , Serup , P . , and Semb , H . ( 2018 ) . Mechanosignalling via integrins directs fate decisions of pancreatic progenitors . Nature 564 , 114 – 118 . 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 018 - 0762 - 2 . 75 . Nagaria , P . , Robert , C . , and Rassool , F . V . ( 2013 ) . DNA double - strand break response in stem cells : Mechanisms to maintain genomic integrity . Preprint , 10 . 1016 / j . bbagen . 2012 . 09 . 001 10 . 1016 / j . bbagen . 2012 . 09 . 001 . 76 . Lin , T . , Chao , C . , Saito , S . , Mazur , S . J . , Murphy , M . E . , Appella , E . , and Xu , Y . ( 2005 ) . p53 induces differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells by suppressing Nanog expression . Nat Cell Biol 7 , 165 – 171 . 10 . 1038 / ncb1211 . 77 . Qin , H . , Yu , T . , Qing , T . , Liu , Y . , Zhao , Y . , Cai , J . , Li , J . , Song , Z . , Qu , X . , Zhou , P . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Regulation of Apoptosis and Differentiation by p53 in Human Embryonic Stem Cells . Journal of Biological Chemistry 282 , 5842 – 5852 . 10 . 1074 / jbc . M610464200 . 78 . Staudt , D . , and Stainier , D . ( 2012 ) . Uncovering the Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms of Heart Development Using the Zebrafish . Annu Rev Genet 46 , 397 – 418 . 10 . 1146 / annurev - genet - 110711 - 155646 . 79 . Kovacs , M . T . , Vallette , M . , Wiertsema , P . , Dingli , F . , Loew , D . , Nader , G . P . de F . , Piel , M . , and Ceccaldi , R . ( 2023 ) . DNA damage induces nuclear envelope rupture through ATR - mediated phosphorylation of lamin A / C . Mol Cell 83 , 3659 - 3668 . e10 . 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2023 . 09 . 023 . 80 . Bonello - Palot , N . , Simoncini , S . , Robert , S . , Bourgeois , P . , Sabatier , F . , Levy , N . , Dignat - George , F . , and Badens , C . ( 2014 ) . Prelamin A accumulation in endothelial cells induces premature senescence and functional impairment . Atherosclerosis 237 , 45 – 52 . 10 . 1016 / j . atherosclerosis . 2014 . 08 . 036 . 81 . Liu , B . , Wang , J . , Chan , K . M . , Tjia , W . M . , Deng , W . , Guan , X . , Huang , J . , Li , K . M . , Chau , P . Y . , Chen , D . J . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Genomic instability in laminopathy - based premature aging . Nat Med 11 , 780 – 785 . 10 . 1038 / nm1266 . 82 . Graziano , S . , Kreienkamp , R . , Coll - Bonfill , , Nuria , and Gonzalo , S . ( 2018 ) . Causes and consequences of genomic instability in laminopathies : Replication stress and interferon response . Nucleus 9 , 289 – 306 . 10 . 1080 / 19491034 . 2018 . 1454168 . 83 . Hayashi , Y . , Furue , M . K . , Okamoto , T . , Ohnuma , K . , Myoishi , Y . , Fukuhara , Y . , Abe , T . , Sato , J . D . , Hata , R . - I . , and Asashima , M . ( 2007 ) . Integrins Regulate Mouse Embryonic Stem Cell Self - Renewal . Stem Cells 25 , 3005 – 3015 . 10 . 1634 / stemcells . 2007 - 0103 . 84 . Suh , H . N . , and Han , H . J . ( 2011 ) . Collagen I regulates the self - renewal of mouse embryonic stem cells through α2β1 integrin - and DDR1 - dependent Bmi - 1 . J Cell Physiol 226 , 3422 – 3432 . 10 . 1002 / jcp . 22697 . 85 . Kang , Y . , Georgiou , A . I . , MacFarlane , R . J . , Klontzas , M . E . , Heliotis , M . , Tsiridis , E . , and Mantalaris , A . ( 2017 ) . Fibronectin stimulates the osteogenic differentiation of murine embryonic stem cells . J Tissue Eng Regen Med 11 , 1929 – 1940 . 10 . 1002 / term . 2090 . 86 . Brafman , D . A . , Phung , C . , Kumar , N . , and Willert , K . ( 2013 ) . Regulation of endodermal differentiation of human embryonic stem cells through integrin - ECM interactions . Cell Death Differ 20 , 369 – 381 . 10 . 1038 / cdd . 2012 . 138 . 87 . Pimton , P . , Sarkar , S . , Sheth , N . , Perets , A . , Marcinkiewicz , C . , Lazarovici , P . , and Lelkes , P . I . ( 2011 ) . Fibronectin - mediated upregulation of α5β1 integrin and cell adhesion during differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells . Cell Adh Migr 5 , 73 – 82 . 10 . 4161 / cam . 5 . 1 . 13704 . 88 . Zhu , Y . , Li , X . , Janairo , R . R . R . , Kwong , G . , Tsou , A . D . , Chu , J . S . , Wang , A . , Yu , J . , Wang , D . , and Li , S . ( 2019 ) . Matrix stiffness modulates the differentiation of neural crest stem cells in vivo . J Cell Physiol 234 , 7569 – 7578 . 10 . 1002 / jcp . 27518 . 89 . Xia , Y . , Ivanovska , I . L . , Zhu , K . , Smith , L . , Irianto , J . , Pfeifer , C . R . , Alvey , C . M . , Ji , J . , Liu , D . , Cho , S . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Nuclear rupture at sites of high curvature compromises retention of DNA repair factors . Journal of Cell Biology 217 , 3796 – 3808 . 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201711161 . 90 . Shah , P . , Hobson , C . M . , Cheng , S . , Colville , M . J . , Paszek , M . J . , Superfine , R . , and Lammerding , J . ( 2021 ) . Nuclear Deformation Causes DNA Damage by Increasing Replication Stress . Current Biology 31 , 753 - 765 . e6 . 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2020 . 11 . 037 . 91 . Xia , S . , Lim , Y . B . , Zhang , Z . , Wang , Y . , Zhang , S . , Lim , C . T . , Yim , E . K . F . , and Kanchanawong , P . ( 2019 ) . Nanoscale Architecture of the Cortical Actin Cytoskeleton in Embryonic Stem Cells . Cell Rep 28 , 1251 - 1267 . e7 . 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2019 . 06 . 089 . 92 . Boraas , L . C . , Pineda , E . T . , and Ahsan , T . ( 2018 ) . Actin and myosin II modulate differentiation of pluripotent stem cells . PLoS One 13 , e0195588 . 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195588 . 93 . Puri , P . L . , Bhakta , K . , Wood , L . D . , Costanzo , A . , Zhu , J . , and Wang , J . Y . J . ( 2002 ) . A myogenic differentiation checkpoint activated by genotoxic stress . Nat Genet 32 , 585 – 593 . 10 . 1038 / ng1023 . 94 . Larsen , B . D . , Rampalli , S . , Burns , L . E . , Brunette , S . , Dilworth , F . J . , and Megeney , L . A . ( 2010 ) . Caspase 3 / caspase - activated DNase promote cell differentiation by inducing DNA strand breaks . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 , 4230 – 4235 . 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0913089107 . 95 . Smith , L . R . , Irianto , J . , Xia , Y . , Pfeifer , C . R . , and Discher , D . E . ( 2019 ) . Constricted migration modulates stem cell differentiation . Mol Biol Cell 30 , 1985 – 1999 . 10 . 1091 / mbc . E19 - 02 - 0090 . 96 . Raz , R . , Lee , C . - K . , Cannizzaro , L . A . , d’Eustachio , P . , and Levy , D . E . ( 1999 ) . Essential role of STAT3 for embryonic stem cell pluripotency . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 96 , 2846 – 2851 . 10 . 1073 / pnas . 96 . 6 . 2846 . 97 . Duval , D . , Malaisé , M . , Reinhardt , B . , Kedinger , C . , and Boeuf , H . ( 2004 ) . A p38 inhibitor allows to dissociate differentiation and apoptotic processes triggered upon LIF withdrawal in mouse embryonic stem cells . Cell Death Differ 11 , 331 – 341 . 10 . 1038 / sj . cdd . 4401337 . 98 . Duval , D . , Trouillas , M . , Thibault , C . , Dembelé , D . , Diemunsch , F . , Reinhardt , B . , Mertz , A . L . , Dierich , A . , and Bœuf , H . ( 2006 ) . Apoptosis and differentiation commitment : Novel insights revealed by gene profiling studies in mouse embryonic stem cells . Cell Death Differ 13 , 564 – 575 . 10 . 1038 / sj . cdd . 4401789 . Figure 1 Figure 2 Figure 3 Figure 4 Figure 5 Figure 6