Protein Allostery and Conformational Dynamics Jingjing Guo † and Huan - Xiang Zhou * , ‡ † School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering , Henan Normal University , Xinxiang , Henan 453007 , People ’ s Republic of China ‡ Department of Physics and Institute of Molecular Biophysics , Florida State University , Tallahassee , Florida 32306 , United States ABSTRACT : The functions of many proteins are regulated through allostery , whereby e ﬀ ector binding at a distal site changes the functional activity ( e . g . , substrate binding a ﬃ nity or catalytic e ﬃ ciency ) at the active site . Most allosteric studies have focused on thermodynamic properties , in particular , substrate binding a ﬃ nity . Changes in substrate binding a ﬃ nity by allosteric e ﬀ ectors have generally been thought to be mediated by conformational transitions of the proteins or , alternatively , by changes in the broadness of the free energy basin of the protein conformational state without shifting the basin minimum position . When e ﬀ ector binding changes the free energy landscape of a protein in conformational space , the change a ﬀ ects not only thermodynamic properties but also dynamic properties , including the amplitudes of motions on di ﬀ erent time scales and rates of conformational transitions . Here we assess the roles of conformational dynamics in allosteric regulation . Two cases are highlighted where NMR spectroscopy and molecular dynamics simulation have been used as complementary approaches to identify residues possibly involved in allosteric communication . Perspectives on contentious issues , for example , the relationship between picosecond − nanosecond local and microsecond − millisecond conformational exchange dynamics , are presented . CONTENTS 1 . Introduction A 2 . Approaches for Characterizing Allosteric Com - munication C 2 . 1 . NMR Relaxation and Conformational Dy - namics C 2 . 2 . Path and Community Analysis E 3 . Case Studies of Dynamic E ﬀ ects in Allosteric Regulation G 3 . 1 . Pin1 G 3 . 2 . Imidazole Glycerol Phosphate Synthase I 4 . Perspectives J Author Information K Corresponding Author K Notes K Biographies K Acknowledgments K References K 1 . INTRODUCTION The functions of many proteins are regulated through allostery , whereby e ﬀ ector binding at a distal site changes the functional activity ( e . g . , substrate binding a ﬃ nity or catalytic e ﬃ ciency ) at the active site ( Figure 1a ) . Since the introduction of the word “ allosteric ” by Monod and Jacob 1 in 1961 , allosteric studies have mainly focused on thermodynamic properties , in particular , substrate binding a ﬃ nity . Changes in substrate binding a ﬃ nity by allosteric e ﬀ ectors have generally been thought to be mediated by conformational transitions of the proteins ( Figure 1b , left ) , as illustrated by Monod , Wyman , and Changeux ( MWC ) using the T to R quaternary conformational transition of hemoglobin . 2 An alternative idea , considered by Wyman and Allen 3 as early as 1951 and popularized by Cooper and Dryden , 4 is that an allosteric e ﬀ ector may simply change the broadness of the free energy basin of the protein conformational state , rather than shifting the basin to a distinctly di ﬀ erent region in conformational space ( Figure 1b , right ) . This type of allostery , known as entropically driven , has gained considerable attention , as many allosteric proteins show only subtle structural di ﬀ erences before and after binding e ﬀ ectors ( see ref 5 for a reappraisal of such structural di ﬀ erences ) . Recently a change in the broadness ( as opposed to the minimum position ) of the free energy basin of the ligand - binding domain was proposed to underlie the partial agonism of a ligand - gated ion channel . 6 , 7 When e ﬀ ector binding changes the free energy landscape of a protein in conforma - tional space , the change a ﬀ ects not only thermodynamic properties but also dynamic properties , including the amplitudes of motions on di ﬀ erent time scales ( Figure 1c ) and rates of conformational transitions . Whereas the functional consequences ( e . g . , an increase in substrate binding a ﬃ nity ) of allosteric binding can be directly measured , the mechanisms of action are concluded with the help of inference and simpli ﬁ cation . Allosteric mechanisms have been delineated by two types of pathways . The ﬁ rst type , referred to as transition pathway here , connects the end states of an allosteric transition , for example , a conformational change upon allosteric binding ( Figure 2 ) . In the induced - ﬁ t pathway , 8 Special Issue : Protein Ensembles and Allostery Received : October 7 , 2015 Review pubs . acs . org / CR © XXXX American Chemical Society A DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . chemrev . 5b00590 Chem . Rev . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX the allosteric transition proceeds with the e ﬀ ector ﬁ rst binding loosely to the protein in the apo conformation and the protein then switching to the bound conformation . Alternatively , in the conformational - selection ( also known as population - shift ) pathway , 9 , 10 the apo protein ﬁ rst switches to the bound conformation and the e ﬀ ector then binds . There has been much debate about transition pathways in de ﬁ ning allosteric mechanism . 11 , 12 However , the historical debate between the MWC model 2 and the model of Koshland , Nemethy , and Filmer ( KNF ) , 13 though sometimes presented as representing conformational selection and induced ﬁ t , respectively , is not really about transition pathways . Rather , this debate is about the origin of binding cooperativity in hemoglobin ( and other oligomeric proteins ) . MWC attributed the free energy of cooperation to a concerted change in quaternary structure but KNF to sequential changes in tertiary structures that a ﬀ ect intersubunit physical interactions . Another point of contention is whether the detection of a minor population of conformations characteristic of the e ﬀ ector - bound form when the protein is free of the e ﬀ ector can be taken as proof of the conformational - selection pathway . As has been argued , 11 , 14 every conformation has an equilibrium probability according to the Boltzmann distribution ; whether bound conformations can be detected depends on the sensitivity of the experimental probe and therefore should not dictate the mechanism of allosteric transition . In any event , strictly speaking , transition pathways are irrelevant when thermodynamic properties of allostery are considered . That is because , fundamentally , thermodynamic properties depend only on end states , not on transition pathways connecting them . By contrast , kinetic properties do depend on transition pathways . 15 In particular , the relative contributions of induced - ﬁ t and conformational - selection pathways to the rate of protein − e ﬀ ector binding can be measured . 14 , 16 The relative contributions of the two pathways depend on both intrinsic factors , in particular the rates of conformational transition , 14 , 17 and extrinsic factors , in particular e ﬀ ector concentration . 14 , 16 With increasing rates of conforma - tional transition or e ﬀ ector concentration , the induced - ﬁ t pathway becomes dominating . The second type of pathway concerns the communication between the allosteric site and the active site ( Figure 2 ) . Perutz 18 presented an early model of communication pathway for hemoglobin , based on structure comparison and structure − function correlation . In this model , oxygen binding to the T conformation triggers movement of the iron into the heme plane , realignment of the neighboring helices , and breakage of intersubunit salt bridges , thereby shifting the quaternary equilibrium toward the R conformation ( in line with the MWC model ; see refs 19 and 20 for subsequent development Figure 1 . Conformational and dynamic e ﬀ ects of allosteric binding . ( a ) Binding of an e ﬀ ector at the allosteric site primes the binding of the substrate at the active site , and consequently the thermodynamic or kinetic properties of the latter binding are di ﬀ erent from those in the absence of the e ﬀ ector . ( b ) Allosteric binding may result in a change in ( left ) conformational state , as signi ﬁ ed by the movement of the corresponding free energy basin from one region to another region in conformational space , or ( right ) broadness of the free energy basin . ( c ) Conformation dynamics may be changed as well , for example , from uncorrelated , fast ( e . g . , subnanosecond ) motions in the apo form to correlated , slow ( e . g . , > microsecond ) motions in the e ﬀ ector - bound form . Internal motions are represented by double - headed arrows . Figure 2 . Transition pathways connecting the end states of allosteric binding and communication pathways from the allosteric site to the active site . The allosteric transition illustrated here is a conformational change , with apo and bound conformations represented by gray and blue shading , respectively . Transition pathways , indicated by brown arrows , are mainly concerned with kinetic intermediates : the induced - ﬁ t pathway passes through the intermediate in which the e ﬀ ector is loosely bound with the protein in the apo conformation , whereas the conformational - selection pathway passes through the intermediate in which the apo protein adopts the bound conformation . Communica - tion pathways , indicated by green arrows , are concerned with intermediate residues through which the allosteric site is coupled with the active site . The two types of pathways thus di ﬀ er in their emphases but are not orthogonal to each other . In the induced - ﬁ t transition pathway , the conformational change initiated by loose e ﬀ ector binding propagates to the active site while the e ﬀ ector consolidates its binding . In the conformational - selection pathway , stabilization of the bound conformation starts at the allosteric site and propagates to the active site . Chemical Reviews Review DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . chemrev . 5b00590 Chem . Rev . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX B of allosteric models for hemoglobin ) . Many workers ( though with notable exceptions ) 21 presume that networks of residues that exhibit spatial correlations in conformations or temporal correlations in motions mediate the communication between allosteric and active sites . One may identify these communi - cation pathways by comparing residue - speci ﬁ c di ﬀ erences in conformations and dynamics between the apo form , e ﬀ ector - bound form , and ternary complex with both e ﬀ ector and substrate bound . NMR spectroscopy has now been established as a powerful tool for characterizing allosteric communication , due to its ability to provide atomic - level information on chemical environment and on picosecond − nanosecond local ( backbone or side chain ) and microsecond − millisecond conformational exchange dynamics . 22 − 28 In principle , long molecular dynamics simulations can provide all the details regarding the communication between allosteric and active sites , and simulations longer than a microsecond are beginning to shed light on communication mechanisms . 29 − 31 Computational studies are still mostly based on submicrosecond simulations or on contact analysis or elastic network modeling of static crystal structures . 32 Notably , allosteric communication has been assumed to involve evolutionarily conserved 33 or positionally correlated 34 networks of residues . The complementarity of computational and experimental approaches , NMR spectroscopy in particular , in studying allostery can be easily appreciated . In recent years there has been intense interest in the potential roles of conformational dynamics in allosteric regulation . In referring to entropically driven allostery , a number of workers have used the word dynamic ( e . g . , ref 4 ) , but what was really meant is just that proteins are not static but , under equilibrium ﬂ uctuation , can sample an ensemble of conformations . 20 , 35 The extent of conformational sampling in a ( meta ) stable state is measured by conformational entropy , which , like all thermodynamic properties , is microscopically determined by the shape of the free energy basin in conformational space . Beyond thermodynamic properties , dynamic properties characterizing time - dependent processes are also observables , including the time scales , amplitudes , and spatial − temporal correlations of internal motions as well as rates of conformational transitions . Microscopically , dynamic properties are governed by the equations of motion and are dictated by not only free energy basins but also barriers , along with dynamic parameters ( e . g . , e ﬀ ective di ﬀ usion coe ﬃ cients ) . Given the latter strict sense of the word dynamic , there may be three views on conformational dynamics as it relates to allostery . The ﬁ rst view is that allosteric regulation should be limited to thermodynamic properties only ; any e ﬀ ect on conformational dynamics is a mere byproduct . 36 For example , an allosteric e ﬀ ector may increase the substrate binding a ﬃ nity by reducing side - chain ﬂ exibility , leading to a lower conforma - tional entropic cost or preorganization of the active site . 25 , 37 As a consequence , the amplitudes of the picosecond − nanosecond orientational dynamics of the side chains may also be reduced . The second view is that , even if conformational dynamics does not dictate the ﬁ nal thermodynamic outcome , character - izing it can lead to a fuller understanding of allosteric regulation . 38 As already noted , the rates of conformational transitions are a key determinant of transition pathways . Conformational dynamics may also be involved in mediating allosteric communication . 24 , 25 , 39 Absent such involvement , conformational dynamics may still be helpful in identifying communication pathways , as illustrated by the residues with suppressed subnanosecond side - chain dynamics in the last example . The third view is that allosteric regulation also extends to kinetic properties , and surely conformational dynamics is a determinant of these properties . In particular , enzyme kinetics is characterized by two parameters , the turnover number k cat and the Michaelis constant K M . These parameters in turn are determined by the rate constants of the three basic steps of the enzyme - catalyzed reaction : substrate binding , chemical trans - formation of substrate into product , and product release . Allosteric e ﬀ ectors have been suggested to a ﬀ ect millisecond time scale dynamics implicated in these basic steps and thereby modulate the corresponding rate constants . 40 − 43 In this review we aim to assess the roles of conformational dynamics in allosteric regulation . We highlight two proteins for which NMR spectroscopy and molecular dynamics simulation have been used as complementary approaches to identify residues possibly involved in allosteric communication , for example , by following e ﬀ ector - induced changes in dynamic properties or positional correlations . We also present our perspectives on several contentious issues , such as the relationship between picosecond − nanosecond local and micro - second − millisecond conformational exchange dynamics , and on future developments , including designing molecular dynamics simulations to test ideas about allosteric communi - cation . 2 . APPROACHES FOR CHARACTERIZING ALLOSTERIC COMMUNICATION E ﬀ ector - induced changes in conformational dynamics and positional correlations , probed by NMR spectroscopy and molecular dynamics simulation , respectively , are often used to characterize allosteric regulation . Below we give some basic ideas behind these experimental and computational approaches , hopefully to allow the reader better appreciation of the results to be covered in section 3 . 2 . 1 . NMR Relaxation and Conformational Dynamics Di ﬀ erent types of NMR relaxation experiments can report conformational dynamics on di ﬀ erent time scales . 44 The magnetization arising from nuclear spins can be decomposed into a longitudinal component ( i . e . , parallel to the static magnetic ﬁ eld B 0 ) and a transverse component . In two classical experiments , one observes time - dependent recovery of the equilibrium value of the longitudinal component and time - dependent decoherence of the transverse component . The main mechanisms that contribute to longitudinal and transverse relaxation for a nuclear spin S ( e . g . , backbone 15 N ) involve magnetic dipole − dipole interaction ( e . g . , with backbone amide 1 H , referred to as spin I ) and chemical shift anisotropy ( CSA ) of the S spin . 45 These act as time - dependent ( due to stochastic molecular motions ) perturbations to the Hamiltonian of the S spin . The dipolar contribution depends on the magnitude ( r IS ) and direction of the internuclear vector , whereas the CSA contribution depends on the magnitude ( Δ σ S ) of the CSA and orientation of the CSA tensor . For a backbone amide 15 N − 1 H spin pair , the 15 N CSA tensor is usually nearly axially symmetric and the symmetry axis is nearly collinear with internuclear vector . Here we assume axial symmetry and collinearity along a unit vector n . Because of stochastic molecular motions , n is a randomly ﬂ uctuating variable , but the correlation ⟨ n ( t ) · n ( 0 ) ⟩ , between n at a given moment and n a time interval t later , upon averaging Chemical Reviews Review DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . chemrev . 5b00590 Chem . Rev . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX C over the time course of the molecule and also over an ensemble of molecules , is a smooth , generally decaying function of t . Both the dipolar and CSA contributions to NMR relaxation can be expressed in terms of the spectral density function , which is a Fourier transform of another time - correlation function of the vector n : ∫ ω ω = · ∞ J P t t t n n ( ) 2 5 [ ( ) ( 0 ) ] cos ( ) d 0 2 ( 1 ) where P 2 ( x ) = ( 3 x 2 − 1 ) / 2 . The resulting longitudinal and transverse relaxation rates are ω ω ω ω ω ω = − + + + + R d J J J c J ( / 4 ) [ ( ) 3 ( ) 6 ( ) ] ( ) 1 2 I S S I S 2 S ( 2 ) ω = + + + R R d J J c J / 2 ( / 4 ) [ 2 ( 0 ) 3 ( ) ] ( 2 / 3 ) ( 0 ) 2 1 2 I 2 ( 3 ) where d = ( μ 0 / 4 π ) ℏ γ I γ S ⟨ r IS − 3 ⟩ and c = Δ σ S ω S / √ 3 , with μ 0 denoting the vacuum permeability , ℏ denoting reduced Planck ’ s constant , and γ X and ω X ( = γ X B 0 ) denoting the gyromagnetic ratio and Larmor frequency , respectively , of spin X . Backbone 15 N R 1 and R 2 measurements thus mainly probe orientation dynamics of the NH bond vector and the peptide plane , which typically occur on the picosecond − nanosecond time scale . In a hypothetical situation where the protein is a rigid body , orientation dynamics of the unit vector n is solely due to the overall rotational tumbling of the protein ( Figure 3a ) . The time - correlation function is then ⟨ · ⟩ = τ − P t n n [ ( ) ( 0 ) ] e t 2 / c ( 4 ) where τ c = 6 D is the rotational correlation time , typically on the order of 10 ns , and D is the overall rotational di ﬀ usion coe ﬃ cient ( assumed to be isotropic ) . Generally the unit vector also experiences local orientational dynamics ( Figure 3b ) , which often is much faster than and consequently can be decoupled from the overall rotation , resulting in a time - correlation function 46 ⟨ · ⟩ = − + τ τ − − P t n n [ ( ) ( 0 ) ] e [ ( 1 ) e ] t t 2 / 2 / 2 c e (cid:58) (cid:58) ( 5 ) where τ e is the e ﬀ ective correlation time for local orientational dynamics and 2 (cid:58) , known as the order parameter , re ﬂ ects the fact that , in the body - ﬁ xed reference frame , the local orientational dynamics may not completely randomize the direction of n . Upon removing the overall rotation , the time - correlation function decays not to zero but to θ ϕ = ∑ | ⟨ ⟩ | = ∑ ⟨ ⟩ π α β α β = − Y n n ( , ) ( 6a ) ( 6b ) m m 2 4 5 2 2 2 2 3 2 , 2 (cid:58) where Y 2 m ( θ , ϕ ) are spherical harmonics and θ , ϕ , and n α are the polar and azimuthal angles and Cartesian components , respectively , of the unit vector n in the body - ﬁ xed frame . By using eq 5 to ﬁ t R 1 and R 2 data , one obtains information on the time scale ( i . e . , t e ) and amplitude ( i . e . , − 1 2 (cid:58) ) of the fast local dynamics . The order parameter can also be directly calculated from molecular dynamics simulations according to eq 6b . 47 , 48 As illustration ( Figure 3b ) , consider the local orientational dynamics that is modeled as di ﬀ usion in a cone spanning a polar angle θ 0 . Evaluation of eq 6a leads to 46 θ θ = + ( cos cos ) / 2 2 0 0 (cid:58) ( 7 ) The conformational entropy associated with motion in the cone is θ = − S k ln ( 1 cos ) B 0 ( 8 ) By eliminating cos θ 0 , one can directly relate the order parameter to conformational entropy 49 , 50 = − + S k ln ( 3 1 8 ) B (cid:58) ( 9 ) where k B is Boltzmann ’ s constant . Summing the entropies derived from order parameters at di ﬀ erent sites in the protein provides a measure of the total conformational entropy . If these calculations are done for the apo and e ﬀ ector - bound forms , the di ﬀ erence can be interpreted as the e ﬀ ector - induced change in protein conformational entropy . 51 If the S spin can stochastically exchange between two chemical environments ( labeled 1 and 2 ) , as occurs when the protein switches between two conformations , the exchange will contribute to dephasing of the transverse magnetization and hence enhance R 2 , because spins in the two environments have di ﬀ erent precession frequencies ( Figure 3c ) . Relative to the di ﬀ erence Δ ν between the resonance frequencies ν 1 and ν 2 in Figure 3 . Di ﬀ erent types of conformational dynamics . ( a ) Overall rotational di ﬀ usion . Unit vector n is assumed to be rigidly attached to the protein , represented by a sphere with blue shading . ( b ) Local orientational dynamics of n , illustrated here as di ﬀ usion in a cone , in the body - ﬁ xed frame . ( c ) Conformational exchange between a major state ( shaded blue ) and a minor state ( shaded green ) . The magnetization ( green arrow ) precesses at di ﬀ erent frequencies in the two states , resulting in dephasing . ( d ) Conformational sampling on di ﬀ erent time scales . Submicrosecond molecular dynamics simulations sample local ﬂ uctuations within a single conformational state ( or substate therein ) . Transitions between conformational states require nonlocal correlated motions and cross high free energy barriers , typically occurring on the microsecond − millisecond time scale . Chemical Reviews Review DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . chemrev . 5b00590 Chem . Rev . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX D the two environments , the exchange rate k ex ( sum of forward and backward transition rates k 1 and k 2 ) falls into three regimes . In the fast - exchange regime ( i . e . , k ex ≫ 2 π Δ ν ≡ Δ ω ) , the NMR spectrum of spin S has a single peak , positioned at the population average of ν 1 and ν 2 . With enhancement by chemical exchange , the transverse relaxation rate becomes ω = ̅ + Δ R R p p k / 2 20 1 2 2 e x ( 10 ) where R ̅ 20 is the population average of the transverse relaxation rates in the two environments when exchange is absent and p 1 and p 2 are equilibrium population fractions in the two environments . In the slow - exchange regime ( i . e . , k ex ≪ Δ ω ) , the NMR spectrum of spin S has two peaks , positioned at ν 1 and ν 2 , and the transverse relaxation rates in the two environments are increased by k 1 and k 2 , respectively . In the intermediate - exchange regime , the two peaks coalescence , with a broadened line shape . This exchange broadening can often lead to loss of NMR signal . Hence , just like R 2 values that are higher than can be accounted for by overall rotational tumbling and local orientational dynamics , broadened line shapes and unobserved resonances are often interpreted as indicating microsecond − millisecond conformational exchange . However , spin relaxation experiments are generally not suited for quantitative characterization of conformational exchange kinetics ( i . e . , determination of transition rates ) . Although the di ﬀ erent precession frequencies at the two environments lead to dephasing of the transverse magnetization ( Figure 3c ) , a 180 ° radio frequency pulse applied in a transverse direction has the e ﬀ ect of rephasing , and thereby suppressing , exchange - mediated transverse relaxation . This is the essence of a Carr − Purcell − Meiboom − Gill relaxation dispersion ( CPMG RD ) experiment , where one employs a pulse sequence in which 180 ° pulses are separated by periods ( of duration 2 τ cp ) during which relaxation occurs . 52 , 53 By varying τ cp , one observes a range of e ﬀ ective transverse relaxation rates ( R 2 , eff ) , and only when τ cp → ∞ is the e ﬀ ect of chemical exchange fully exhibited . That is , R 2 , eff is dispersed or spread out as a function of τ cp ( or its inverse ) . In particular , in the fast - exchange regime , R 2 , eff approaches the value given by eq 10 when τ cp → ∞ but approaches R ̅ 20 when τ cp → 0 . A formula that bridges these two limits of τ cp in the fast exchange regime is 54 τ ω τ τ = ̅ + Δ − ⎡ ⎣⎢⎢ ⎤ ⎦⎥⎥ R R p p k k k ( ) 1 tanh ( ) 2 , eff cp 20 1 2 2 ex ex cp ex cp ( 11 ) Fitting the dependence of observed R 2 , eff on τ cp to eq 11 yields k ex and p 1 p 2 Δ ω 2 . The conformational exchange that is of practical interest is one between a major state and a minor state ( i . e . , p 1 ≫ p 2 ) . A general formula , valid in all three exchange regimes , has been derived for R 2 , eff ( τ cp ) of the major state . 55 , 56 Fitting experimental data can yield the transition rates k 1 and k 2 ( and hence the population fraction of the minor state ) as well as Δ ω . The latter is equivalent to the di ﬀ erence in chemical shift between the major and minor states and thus contains structural information about the minor state ( chemical shifts in the major state are directly observable ) . In favorable cases , this information can be used to validate structural models of the minor state . 42 However , the nature of the conformational changes from the major state to the minor state is often poorly de ﬁ ned by CPMG RD experiments , although the millisecond time scale of k ex suggests that the conformational changes must be more than local ( Figure 3d ) . 2 . 2 . Path and Community Analysis To model protein stability and function in general and allosteric communication in particular , terminologies , ideas , and methods from graph theory 57 have been extensively borrowed and expanded . Typically the protein ( composed of N residues ) is mapped to a weighted graph , in which each node represents a residue ( Figure 4 ) . Two graph properties of interest are the shortest path between two nodes and the partitioning of the graph into communities . Earlier graph models used the static crystal structure of the protein to specify the weights between nodes . In the simplest version , 58 two nodes were assumed to form an edge and assigned a weight 1 if the distance between two representative atoms of the corresponding residues was within a cuto ﬀ ; otherwise the weight was 0 . ( For later reference , the edges in a protein comprise the contact map . ) In graph theory , 57 these internode weights de ﬁ ne the adjacency matrix : = = = i j i j i j 1if and are linked by an edge 0 if or and are not linked ij ij (cid:40) (cid:40) ( 12 ) The sum of the i th row ( or column ) elements of (cid:40) is the degree , that is , the number of edges formed by node i . Denoting the diagonal matrix of degrees as (cid:43) , the di ﬀ erence = − (cid:51) (cid:43) (cid:40) ( 13 ) is known as the Laplacian matrix , which , upon multiplying by a spring constant , happens to coincide with the Hessian matrix of the Gaussian network model 59 ( a form of elastic network model ) . If a value of 1 for the path length of each edge is assumed here , then the total length of a path along connected edges is just the number of edges involved . Any two nodes can Figure 4 . A protein represented as a weighted graph . ( a ) Shortest path between two nodes 1 and 7 , composed of three connected edges shown in blue . Each edge ( indicated by a line between two nodes ) is assigned a path length ( e . g . , eq 16 or 17 ) . The path lengths of the three blue edges are shown . Summing over the individual path lengths , the total length of the shortest path is 3 . 0 . ( b ) The nodes are partitioned into two communities , one with green nodes inside a lime oval and one with red nodes inside a pink oval . An edge between nodes 5 and 6 links the two communities ; these nodes are known as critical nodes . Chemical Reviews Review DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . chemrev . 5b00590 Chem . Rev . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX E be connected by multiple paths ; the shortest paths between residues in the allosteric site and residues in the active site may be especially important for allosteric communication . Atilgan et al . 58 calculated the average of shortest path lengths of a given residue to other residues in a protein and found that average shortest path lengths are highly correlated with amplitudes of residue position thermal ﬂ uctuation predicted by the Gaussian network model . Intuitively , hub residues ( i . e . , those with high degrees ) should have both small average shortest path lengths and low amplitudes of thermal ﬂ uctuation . Instead of directly using a cuto ﬀ in interresidue distance for specifying edges , Brinda and Vishveshwara 60 used the interresidue interaction strength = n n n / ( ) ij ij i j 1 / 2 (cid:48) ( 14 ) where n ij is the number of atom − atom contacts between residues i and j within a distance cuto ﬀ and n i and n j are normalization factors . An edge is formed if ij (cid:48) exceeds a threshold min (cid:48) . ( If a molecular dynamics simulation is run , one can further stipulate that an edge is formed only if this condition is satis ﬁ ed over a speci ﬁ ed fraction of the simulation time . 61 ) At very high min (cid:48) , nodes are disconnected from each other ; at very low min (cid:48) , all nodes become interconnected ; at intermediate min (cid:48) , nodes segregate into disconnected commun - ities . A recommended min (cid:48) is one that results in the largest community containing approximately half the residues in the protein . Chennubhotla and Bahar 62 used eq 14 as the de ﬁ nition of the adjacency matrix . Following graph theory , 57 they assigned the normalized element ∑ = / ij ij j ij (cid:52) (cid:48) (cid:48) ( 15 ) as the probability that a random walker through the graph makes a jump from node i to node j . The resulting stationary probabilities of the random walker on the nodes were used to ﬁ nd the probabilities for partitioning each node into di ﬀ erent communities . The latter probabilities were further used to de ﬁ ne the entropy for partitioning of the node . Nodes with high entropies are shared with high probabilities among multiple communities . These “ messenger ” nodes may be critical for intercommunity communication in allosteric regulation . For the chaperonin GroEL − GroES complex , these nodes also had small amplitudes in the lowest - frequency mode ( i . e . , global mode ) of the Gaussian network model ; the latter occur in hinge regions for interdomain global motions . It remains to be determined whether messenger nodes coincide with another group of residues , also proposed for allosteric communication ; the latter residues are identi ﬁ ed by a large response in a normal mode of interest when the spring constants for the edges from these residues are perturbed . 63 For path length , rather than a constant value of 1 for each edge , Chennubhotla and Bahar 62 introduced the de ﬁ nition = − l log ( ) ij ij (cid:52) ( 16 ) such that high transition probability corresponds to short path length and vice versa . Sethi et al . 34 took a major step by using information from molecular dynamics simulations to de ﬁ ne the contact map and the path lengths of edges . An edge was formed between two residues , i and j , when the distance between their heavy atoms was below a cuto ﬀ for a speci ﬁ ed fraction of the simulation time . More importantly , the path lengths of the edges were de ﬁ ned by the ( normalized ) covariance matrix of the residue positions : = − | | l log ( ) ij ij (cid:42) ( 17 ) in analogy to eq 16 . The covariance matrix itself is given by = ⟨ · ⟩ ⟨ · ⟩ ⟨ · ⟩ x x x x x x ij i j i i i j 1 / 2 1 / 2 (cid:42) ( 18 ) where x i = r i − ⟨ r i ⟩ are displacements from mean residue positions . When residues i and j are highly correlated in displacement from their mean positions , | | → 1 ij (cid:42) and , according to eq 17 , the path length l ij → 0 . Conversely , when the two residues have totally uncorrelated displacements , | | → 0 ij (cid:42) and l ij → ∞ . The total length of a path along connected edges is the sum of the path lengths of the individual edges ( Figure 4a ) ; the shortest path between nodes i and j is the path that has the minimum total length among all possible paths connecting i and j . 64 Sethi et al . 34 used the Girvan − Newman algorithm 65 to partition the graph into communities , within which edges are dense but between which edges are sparse ( Figure 4b ) . The Girvan − Newman algorithm uses edge betweenness , de ﬁ ned as the number of shortest paths that cross a particular edge , for partitioning . The betweenness of an intercommunity edge is high because all the intercommunity shortest paths must cross it ( or any small number of other such edges ) . In contrast , the betweenness of an intracommunity edge is low because many other neighboring edges can provide alternatives for shortest paths . The Girvan − Newman algorithm is an iterative procedure , in which the edge with the highest betweenness is cut and the betweennesses of the remaining edges are recalculated , until every node becomes isolated and hence a community of its own . The partitioning ﬁ nally chosen is the one with optimal modularity , where the fraction of intra - community edges maximally exceeds the expected value if the edges are randomly placed between nodes in the graph . Nodes linked by intercommunity edges are termed critical , since all the intercommunity shortest paths cross these edges ( Figure 4b ) . Critical nodes serve a similar role as the messenger nodes of Chennubhotla and Bahar . 62 Rivalta et al . 66 took the approach of Sethi et al . 34 but rede ﬁ ned the edge path lengths in terms of a generalized correlation matrix introduced by Lange and Grubmuller , 67 = − − − ( 1 e ) ij MI 2 / 3 1 / 2 ij (cid:42) (cid:49) ( 19 ) where ij (cid:49) are the mutual information . The latter , ∫ = p p p p x x x x x x x x ( , ) ln ( , ) ( ) ( ) d d ij i j i j i i j j i j (cid:49) ( 20 ) measures the deviation of the joint probability density p ( x i , x j ) of displacements x i and x j from the product p i ( x i ) p j ( x j ) of the two marginal probabilities , which is the expected probability density if x i and x j are totally uncorrelated . ij MI (cid:42) reduces to ij (cid:42) if p ( x i , x j ) is Gaussian . When x i and x j are perpendicular , = 0 ij (cid:42) even if the displacements are highly correlated . This correlation is captured by ij M I (cid:42) . Chemical Reviews Review DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . chemrev . 5b00590 Chem . Rev . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX F We remark that the covariance matrix and its generalization measure residue − residue positional correlation during equili - brium ﬂ uctuation . Mutual information , expressed in terms of a probability density in conformational space , can be easily recognized as an equilibrium property . The covariance matrix is similarly an equilibrium property , not a dynamic property , even though sometimes it is referred to as the dynamic cross - correlation matrix . Calculation of ij (cid:42) from molecular dynamics trajectories , by averaging over snapshots , may give it a dynamic appearance , but the time sequence of the snapshots has no e ﬀ ect : the result is the same if the snapshots are scrambled . Likewise , even though path and community analysis based on residue − residue positional correlation is referred to as dynamical network analysis , 32 , 34 , 66 , 68 strictly speaking , no dynamical information is involved . Given that molecular dynamics simulations used to prepare for path and community analysis typically are submicrosecond in length , and therefore cannot sample microsecond − millisecond conformational ex - changes , the information supplied is only quasi - equilibrium . That is , the average is limited to a single conformational state ( or a substate therein ; Figure 3d ) . It is of interest to note that exchange between conforma - tional states has recently been investigated by building Markov state models from molecular dynamics simulations . 30 , 31 , 69 In these models , microstates are obtained by clustering snapshots according to structural similarity , and transition probabilities between microstates are estimated from molecular dynamics trajectories . 3 . CASE STUDIES OF DYNAMIC EFFECTS IN ALLOSTERIC REGULATION As noted in the preceding section , allosteric communication is generally thought to be mediated by groups of residues that exhibit e ﬀ ector - induced changes in conformational dynamics or positional correlations . The two types of residues can be identi ﬁ ed by NMR spectroscopy and molecular dynamics simulation , respectively . Information from the two approaches can be combined to develop allosteric mechanisms , as illustrated below . 3 . 1 . Pin1 Pin1 is a peptidyl − prolyl cis / trans isomerase ( PPIase ) that acts on phosphoSer / Thr - Pro [ p ( S / T ) P ] motifs present in mitotic phosphoproteins , 70 thereby controlling their fates . 71 The full - length Pin1 consists of an N - terminal WW domain ( residues 1 − 39 ) and the C - terminal PPIase domain ( residues 50 − 163 ) ( Figure 5a ) . Both domains can selectively bind p ( S / T ) P - containing substrate motifs , but only the PPIase domain can isomerize the peptidyl − prolyl bond , 72 , 73 at a catalytic site lined by three loops ( labeled as catalytic loop , β 5 - α 4 , and β 6 - β 7 in Figure 5a ) . In addition to other roles , several lines of evidence suggest that substrate − WW binding allosterically regulates the PPIase activity . First , the substrate a ﬃ nity and catalytic activity of the isolated PPIase domain are di ﬀ erent from those of the full - length protein . 26 , 72 , 73 Second , crystal structures of Pin1 show that the two domains are tightly packed against each other , although the linker between them is disordered ( Figure 5a ) . 74 − 76 Third , NMR studies showed that binding of both substrates and a nonpeptidic ligand [ poly ( ethylene glycol ) ] to the WW domain resulted in tighter coupling between the two domains . 77 , 78 The allosteric communication in Pin1 has been investigated in recent studies based on NMR spectrosco - py 26 , 79 − 81 and molecular dynamics simulations . 37 , 82 Namanja et al . 26 , 79 obtained the order parameters ( axis2 (cid:58) ) for methyl symmetry axes from measurements of methyl 2 D relaxation rates . They found that binding of two substrates , one with sequence FFpSPR and the other a pTP - containing peptide from the mitotic phosphatase Cdc25C , both resulted in increases in axis2 (cid:58) in three regions ( Figure 5b ) : WW − PPIase interface , interface of α 1 helix with PPIase core , and catalytic site . Namanja et al . proposed that these residues , with Figure 5 . Structure and allosteric communication of Pin1 . ( a ) Structure of Pin1 with FFpSPR bound at the WW site . The catalytic site of the PPIase domain is lined by the three loops labeled as catalytic loop , β 5 - α 4 , and β 6 - β 7 . ( b ) Two clusters of paths connecting the WW domain to the catalytic - site loops . The cluster shown as light blue arrows preexists in apo Pin1 , but the paths in the second cluster , shown as pink arrows , are broken in the apo form and are completed only in the FFpSPR - bound form . ( c , d ) Community analysis results for apo and FFpSPR - bound Pin1 . The communities are shown in di ﬀ erent colors as cartoon structures ( left ) or as ovals ( middle ) . Intercommunity connections are shown as lines , with width proportional to the cumulative betweenness of intercommunity edges ( middle ) . ( Right ) Dynamic model for allostery . A spring depicts a representative internal coordinate from each of communities 1 , 2 , and 3 that is modeled as undergoing di ﬀ usive motion in a harmonic potential . The internal coordinates are weakly coupled in apo Pin1 and become strongly coupled in the FFpSPR - bound form . Chemical Reviews Review DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . chemrev . 5b00590 Chem . Rev . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX G suppressed subnanosecond methyl orientational dynamics , formed a hydrophobic conduit for interdomain allosteric regulation . Other methyls also exhibited compensatory decreases in axis2 (cid:58) upon peptide binding , with unknown functional implications ; more such methyls were found in Cdc25C - bound Pin1 than in FFpSPR - bound Pin1 . It should be noted that less than a third of Pin1 residues contain methyls . To gain a sense of the e ﬀ ect of peptide binding on microsecond - millisecond dynamics , Namanja et al . 26 , 79 meas - ured methyl 13 C longitudinal and transverse relaxation rates and looked for residues with high values for their product , R 1 ; 13 C R 2 ; 13 C , which may indicate contributions from conforma - tional exchange . Upon FFpSPR binding , the number of residues exhibiting R 1 ; 13 C R 2 ; 13 C increases was more than that for decreases , 83 implicating enhancement of exchange dynam - ics . Residues with increased R 1 ; 13 C R 2 ; 13 C map to the WW − PPIase interface and to the interface of α 1 and α 2 helices with the PPIase core . However , the nature of the minor state with which the major state exchanges remains elusive , if the elevated R 1 ; 13 C R 2 ; 13 C indeed re ﬂ ects conformational exchange . For Cdc25C , the trend in R 1 ; 13 C R 2 ; 13 C changes was apparently reversed , with more decreases than increases . Recent CPMD RD data provided validation of reduced exchange dynamics upon binding Cdc25C and were interpreted as re ﬂ ecting weakened interdomain contact . 81 To gain detailed insight into allosteric communication in Pin1 , we carried out molecular dynamics simulations of Pin1 in apo form as well as bound with several peptides , either at the WW site or the catalytic site or both sites . 37 , 82 In the 100 ns simulations , FFpSPR binding at the WW site resulted in decreases in root - mean - square ﬂ uctuation ( RMSF ) , indicating suppression of subnanosecond local dynamics , in the three loops lining the catalytic site , to the level exhibited when a trans - locked alkene isostere of FFpSPR was bound to both WW and catalytic sites . The FFpSPR - induced reduction in RMSF for the catalytic - site loops is a clear indication of allosteric communication between the two binding sites . The commu - nication evidently was unidirectional , as a cis - locked alkene isostere bound only at the catalytic site did not produce loss in ﬂ exibility in the WW domain . We used the graph - partitioning method of Brinda and Vishveshwara , 60 which is based on residue − residue physical proximity , to identify allosteric pathways . The partitioning produced two clusters of paths for FFpSPR - bound Pin1 . The ﬁ rst emanates from the WW backside and propagates through the interdomain interface and the PPIase domain core to the β 5 - α 4 and β 6 - β 7 loops ; the second emanates from the WW front pocket and propagates through the bound peptide , the α 1 helix , and the latter ’ s interface with the PPIase core to the catalytic loop . The ﬁ rst cluster of paths preexists in apo Pin1 , but the second cluster is broken as the gap between the α 1 helix and the WW front pocket is too wide without the bound peptide ( Figure 5b ) . In essence , the bound peptide serves as a bridge to complete the second cluster of paths from the WW site to the catalytic site . We also applied the community analysis method of Sethi et al . , 34 which is based on both physical proximity and positional correlation . The overall conclusion was the same , but new insight emerged . The WW front pocket , β 5 - α 4 loop , and β 6 - β 7 and catalytic loops are located in three di ﬀ erent communities ( numbered 1 , 2 , and 3 , respectively , in Figure 5c , d , left and middle ) . In apo Pin1 , community 1 is not directly linked to either community 2 or 3 . In FFpSPR - bound Pin1 , community 1 is enlarged to include the whole WW domain and the N - terminal region of the peptide . It is now directly linked to community 3 , with the N - terminal residues of the peptide providing critical nodes for linkage . Moreover , the enlarged community 1 becomes directly and strongly linked to community 2 . The strengthened coupling between these communities thus explains the allosteric communication . The foregoing analyses suggested that FFpSPR elicits allosteric e ﬀ ects by serving as a bridge to connect the α 1 helix and the WW domain . To test this idea , we carried out simulations in which subsets of residues in di ﬀ erent regions of apo Pin1 were arti ﬁ cially restrained to limit conformational ﬂ uctuations and monitored the RMSF of catalytic - site loops . The RMSF was hardly changed with restraint of the WW domain or within the PPIase core , and only partially reduced with restraint of the PPIase core and α 1 helix interface , but RMSF was fully reduced when four residues from the WW domain were added into the restraint . Importantly , the reference conformation in these restraints was taken from the simulation of apo Pin1 . So these restrained simulations directly demonstrated the idea 4 that merely restricting the ﬂ uctuations around a mean structure can generate allosteric e ﬀ ects , while also showing that restrictions in di ﬀ erent regions of a protein are not equally e ﬀ ective . Our followup study 82 showed that , compared to FFpSPR , Cdc25C more tightly interacted with the WW domain but less so with the α 1 helix and the PPIase core . As a result , community 1 lost direct linkage to communities 2 and 3 ( as in apo Pin1 ) , and the suppression of subnanosecond local dynamics ( as indicated by RMSF ) was not as e ﬀ ective , in line with NMR studies . 26 , 79 NMR 80 and molecular dynamics simulation 37 studies of the I28A mutant , within the WW − PPIase interface , provided additional evidence that weakened intercommunity coupling leads to reduced suppression of subnanosecond local dynamics . Note that when the cis - locked alkene isostere is bound at the PPIase catalytic site , the bridge between the α 1 helix and the WW domain is missing , and hence communication from PPIase to WW domain is ine ﬀ ective . This provides a simple explanation for the apparent unidirectionality of allosteric communication between WW and catalytic sites . Why should the amplitude of subnanosecond local dynamics be related to intercommunity coupling , which is based on physical proximity and positional correlation ? To illustrate this point , let us consider the local dynamics of the unit vector n , shown in Figure 3a , b , in two extremes . In one extreme , local dynamics is fully quenched , with the unit vector rigidly attached to the protein so that the order parameter 2 (cid:58) is 1 . Of course this unit vector would be fully correlated with any other such unit vector since they both follow the same overall tumbling of the protein . The correlation time of n is that of overall tumbling , that is , τ c , which is on the order of 10 ns . In the other extreme , the local dynamics completely randomizes the orientation of n , resulting in = 0 2 (cid:58) . Obviously n would be totally uncorrelated with any other such unit vector . Now the correlation time of n ( see eq 5 with = 0 2 (cid:58) ) is τ c τ e / ( τ c + τ e ) ≈ τ e , since τ c ≫ τ e , which is subnanosecond . So in this example , increased intercommunity coupling is correlated with quench - ing of fast , subnanosecond dynamics and emergence of slower , 10 ns dynamics . Chemical Reviews Review DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . chemrev . 5b00590 Chem . Rev . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX H To further explore the relationship between intercommunity coupling and dynamics on fast and slow time scales , we introduced a dynamic model of allostery ( Figure 5c , d , right ) . This model was inspired by the molecular dynamics simulation and community analysis results for Pin1 summarized above ( Figure 5c , d , left and middle ) but highly simpli ﬁ ed . We modeled a representative internal coordinate from each of communities 1 , 2 , and 3 as undergoing di ﬀ usive motion in a harmonic potential . The strength of coupling between the internal coordinates was tunable , from very weak for apo Pin1 to very strong for the FFpSPR - bound form . This model predicts that , with weak coupling , the internal coordinates have a single - exponential time - correlation function with a short correlation time ( e . g . , subnanosecond ) . However , with strong coupling , the time - correlation function is a double exponential ; one exponential has a short correlation time and a small amplitude , while the second exponential has a long correlation time ( e . g . , microsecond − millisecond ) and a large amplitude . That is , with increasing intercommunity coupling , the fast motion is suppressed and replaced by slow motion . Internal coordinates from the di ﬀ erent communities also become highly correlated . The slow motion may represent conformational exchange , insofar as the latter requires intercommunity correlated motions ( Figure 3d ) . Our model suggests that , with strengthened intercommunity coupling , suppression of fast local dynamics may be expected along with initiation of slow conformational exchange dynamics . The NMR results summarized above provide some support . With FFpSPR , axis2 (cid:58) data indicated suppression of local dynamics , whereas R 1 ; 13 C R 2 ; 13 C data indicated enhanced conformational exchange . With Cdc25C , both e ﬀ ects were moderated . It appears that allosteric activators like FFpSPR , by strengthening intercommunity coupling , in particular through providing critical nodes , may elicit disparate dynamic responses on fast and slow time scales . 3 . 2 . Imidazole Glycerol Phosphate Synthase Imidazole glycerol phosphate synthase ( IGPS ) is a bifunctional enzyme with active sites located in two separate domains named HisH and HisF ( which are associated noncovalently in bacteria but are covalently linked in eukaryotes ; Figure 6 ) . HisH catalyzes the hydrolysis of glutamine into glutamate and ammonia , using a conserved catalytic triad consisting of Cys84 , His178 , and Glu180 ( Thermotoga maritima IGPS numbering ) , located ∼ 10 Å away from the HisH − HisF interface . This reaction starts with thioester bond formation between glutamine and Cys84 , with the resulting oxyanion tetrahedral intermediate stabilized by the backbone amide of Val51 , part of a conserved PGVG motif . The ammonia product then travels down a 20 Å hydrophobic tunnel formed by the β strands of the HisF ( β / α ) 8 barrel to the second active site at the bottom , where it combines with metabolite N ′ - [ ( 5 ′ - phosphoribulosyl ) - formimino ] - 5 - aminoimidazole - 4 - carboxamide ribonucleotide ( PRFAR ) to yield two products that enter the histidine and purine biosynthetic pathways . Coordination of the two reactions is achieved through PRFAR serving as an allosteric e ﬀ ector . Binding of PRFAR to the HisF active site enhances the k cat of HisH by ∼ 5000 - fold . 84 The long PRFAR molecule , with the two ends near residues Val100 and Leu222 , respectively , bisects the bottom of the HisF ( β / α ) 8 barrel with β 1 / α 1 , β 2 / α 2 , and β 3 / α 3 on one side and β 5 / α 5 , β 6 / α 6 , and β 7 / α 7 on the other side ( referred to as side R and side L , respectively ) . 66 The allosteric e ﬀ ects of PRFAR binding were studied by both NMR spectroscopy and molecular dynamics simula - tions . 28 , 40 , 66 , 68 From CPMG RD experiments on backbone 15 N and alanine methyl 13 C , Lipchock et al . 40 found no evidence of HisF exchange dynamics in apo IGPS . Methyl - 13 C RD data on isoleucines , leucines , and valines ( ILV ) showed signs of conformational exchange for 17 of 116 assigned resonances from HisF , mostly on side R . Upon PRFAR binding , 63 backbone amide resonances from HisF were broadened beyond detection , indicative of the intermediate exchange regime , mostly on side R . Backbone 15 N and ILV methyl - 13 C RD data together identi ﬁ ed 68 HisF residues as undergoing millisecond conformational exchange , and the active ILV residues spread to the entire central β barrel and the β / α interface . On the other hand , 1 H − 1 H dipolar cross - correlated relaxation rates of HisF ILV residues did not indicate a signi ﬁ cant overall change in subnanosecond dynamics upon PRFAR binding . It was unknown whether PRFAR had any e ﬀ ect on fast dynamics of other side chains or the protein backbone . In the crystal structure of apo IGPS , the peptide plane between Gly50 and Val51 of HisH is in an orientation opposite to what would provide stabilization to the oxyanion tetrahedral intermediate , with the Gly50 carbonyl oxygen instead of the Val51 amide proton pointing to the negatively charged oxygen atom of the would - be tetrahedral intermediate . 85 The Val51 amide instead hydrogen - bonds to the carbonyl of Pro10 . The 1 H , 15 N NMR spectrum of Lipchock et al . 40 for HisH in apo IGPS showed a sharp cross peak for Gly50 , which was broadened beyond detection upon titration with PRFAR . This observation showed that PRFAR - stimulated millisecond exchange dynamics extended across the HisF − HisH interface and into the active site of HisH . Lipchock et al . 40 proposed that this exchange dynamics allowed the Gly50 − Val51 peptide Figure 6 . Structure of IGPS . Side L and side R are shown in light orange and magenta , respectively , for HisF and in gray and green , respectively for HisH . HisF side L consists of residues 101 − 220 , and HisH side R consists of β 1 − β 4 strands , α 1 , α 2 , α 2 ′ , and α 4 helices , and Ω - loop . The bound PRFAR in HisF is shown as cyan spheres , and the catalytic triad and PGVG motif are labeled , as are some secondary structure elements ( α 1 − α 3 and loop1 in HisF and α 1 , α 2 , α 2 ′ , and Ω - loop in HisH ) . Chemical Reviews Review DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . chemrev . 5b00590 Chem . Rev . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX I plane to ﬂ ip and thus present the stabilizing amide proton of Val51 . Rivalta et al . 66 reported 100 ns molecular dynamics simulations of apo and PRFAR - bound IGPS . PRFAR binding resulted in an overall decrease in RMSF in HisF , especially its loop 1 ( residues 16 − 30 ) , but not in HisH . The decrease in RMSF means that the amplitudes of local subnanosecond dynamics were suppressed . The PRFAR - induced changes in positional correlation , as captured by the generalized correlation matrix calculated from mutual information , were heterogeneous . Positional correlations were reduced in HisF side L ( residues 101 − 220 ) and in the HisH catalytic triad and surrounding residues , including the PGVG motif . However , correlations were enhanced within and between HisF side R ( including loop1 , α 2 and α 3 helices , and β 3 strand ) and HisH elements on the same side ( including β 1 − β 3 strands , α 1 helix , and intervening Ω - loop ) ( Figure 6 ) . Using the generalized correlation matrix to de ﬁ ne edge pass lengths , Rivalta et al . 66 carried out community analysis . One of the most notable changes induced by PRFAR binding was the strengthened coupling between a community in HisF and a community in HisH , both on side R ( Figure 6 ) . The HisF community included β 2 / β 3 strands and α 2 / α 3 helices ; the HisH community included β 1 − β 4 strands , α 1 , α 2 , α 2 ′ , and α 4 helices , and Ω - loop . The two communities were linked by edges between residues in HisF α 2 / α 3 helices and in HisH α 1 helix and Ω - loop . The strengthened intercommunity coupling was in line with the increased positional correlations between these elements . In these molecular dynamics simulations , the HisH Val51 − Pro10 hydrogen bond was stable in apo IGPS but unstable in the PRFAR - bound form . Concomitantly , the Gly50 − Val51 peptide plane partially rotated , which the authors suggested as an early sign of an anticipated full ﬂ ip of the peptide plane in the millisecond time scale . The foregoing NMR and computational results appear to be qualitatively consistent with the predictions of our simple dynamic model of allostery ( Figure 5c , d , right ) . That is , upon PRFAR binding , the coupling between two communities across the interdomain interface was strengthened , while the amplitudes of subnanosecond local dynamics were suppressed ( as indicated by reduced RMSF ) and millisecond exchange dynamics was stimulated ( as revealed by NMR spectroscopy ) . However , instead of the disparate responses of fast and slow dynamics that we emphasize , Rivalta et al . 28 , 66 appear to suggest that fast and slow dynamics go hand in hand . According to them , disruptions of residue − residue interactions on the nanosecond time scale “ may represent the initial loosening of the protein core that precedes the wholesale enhancement of ms motions observed by solution NMR . ” Clearly , the nature of millisecond exchange dynamics , although beyond the scope of submicrosecond molecular dynamics simulations , deserves further studies . Vanwart et al . 68 also carried out molecular dynamics simulations and community analysis for apo and PRFAR - bound IGPS . Their focus was how di ﬀ erent representatives of residues positions , for example , C α atom versus residue center of mass , a ﬀ ected community partitioning . The latter representative was recommended . 4 . PERSPECTIVES We have assessed the potential roles of conformational dynamics in the allosteric regulation of two proteins . From NMR spectroscopy , a hydrophobic conduit was proposed for interdomain communication in Pin1 , based on suppressed side - chain subnanosecond dynamics upon e ﬀ ector binding ; 26 , 79 e ﬀ ector - stimulated millisecond conformational exchange dy - namics was proposed to allow for a peptide plane ﬂ ip anticipated for IGPS activation . 40 From molecular dynamics simulation and community analysis , e ﬀ ector binding was found to strengthen the coupling between communities across the interdomain interfaces in both Pin1 37 , 82 and IGPS . 66 It is clear that characterizing the conformational dynamics in these proteins has led to better understanding of their allosteric regulation . It is also clear that NMR spectroscopy and molecular dynamics simulation are highly complementary in developing allosteric mechanisms . Much remains to be learned . One contentious issue is the relationship between fast local dynamics and slow conforma - tional exchange dynamics . One view is that stimulation of the slow dynamics may be accompanied by suppression of the fast dynamics , both of which are related to strengthening of intercommunity coupling . 82 An opposite view is that disruptions of residue − residue interactions , mediated by strong fast dynamics , may precedes enhancement of slow exchange dynamics . One can fault the ﬁ rst view for the simplicity of the theoretical model used to predict it and the second view for making inference across 6 orders of magnitude in time . It might be possible to settle this issue through theoretical models that have more molecular ingredients . Many workers have invoked the term allosteric signal . If there is such a signal , can one experimentally measure its speed of propagation ? A recent experiment on a ligand - gated ion channel has the appearance of such a measurement , in which a brief application of an agonist was followed by single - channel recordings of currents through the transmembrane channel . 86 The delayed response in currents might be construed as indicating the time needed for propagating an allosteric signal from the ligand - binding domain to the transmembrane channel . However , following the common practice in single - channel electrophysiology , the current response was ﬁ t to a kinetic model , with rate constants for agonist binding and unbinding and for conformational transitions of the multidomain channel protein ( including opening and closing of the transmembrane channel ) . It certainly is more insightful to interpret the delay in current response as due to events including agonist binding and channel closed - to - open transition than as due to the propagation of some allosteric signal . Pump − probe molecular dynamics simulations , in which selected atoms are pumped by oscillating forces , 87 and time - resolved femtosecond crystallog - raphy enabled by X - ray free electron lasers 88 , 89 might be able to shed light on issues surrounding allosteric signal . From the apo form to the ternary complex , the same free energy change is accumulated whether e ﬀ ector binding is followed by substrate binding or vice versa . Accordingly , the change in free energy for substrate binding by the prebinding of an e ﬀ ector is the same as the change in free energy of e ﬀ ector binding by prebinding of the substrate ( both equal to the free energy of cooperation ) . This thermodynamic reciprocity implies that allosteric communication is always bidirectional . Our molecular dynamics simulations evidently showed unidirectional allosteric communication in Pin1 : while substrate binding to the WW domain resulted in suppression of local dynamics in the PPIase catalytic - site loops , substrate binding to the PPIase did not produce suppression of the local dynamics in the WW domain . Note that this unidirectionality does not Chemical Reviews Review DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . chemrev . 5b00590 Chem . Rev . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX J violate thermodynamic reciprocity because the former concerns only the events of binding a single ligand ( at either the WW or catalytic site ) , whereas the latter involves simultaneous occupation of both sites . This unidirectionality in Pin1 comes about because the WW - bound substrate serves as a bridge to strengthen interdomain communication , whereas this bridge is missing when the substrate is bound to the PPIase . Unidirec - tional allosteric communication was also seen in molecular dynamics simulations of sortase A , where allosteric activation appears to be mediated by the disorder - to - order transition of a long loop . 90 Yet another example was revealed by NMR spectroscopy for communication between the two cAMP binding sites ( named A and B ) in the RI α subunit of protein kinase A . 91 , 92 Upon site A binding , spectral changes spread to the whole protein , but upon site B binding , spectral changes were con ﬁ ned to the B domain only . Examples like these can serve as important test cases for validating ideas about allosteric communication . Are allosteric proteins endowed with special structural , energetic , or dynamic properties , or can any protein potentially be allosteric ? The latter view , argued by Gunasekaran et al . , 93 seems to have support . For example , dynamic and conforma - tional changes in response to Val to Ala mutations in a small protein , eglin c , previously not known to be allosteric , were detected at sites as far as 16 Å away . 94 Moreover , screening with compound libraries identi ﬁ ed secondary binding sites on many proteins , and binding of small molecules to these newly identi ﬁ ed sites modulated protein functions . 95 On the other hand , not all dynamic and conformational changes in an allosteric protein are equal in mediating allosteric communica - tion . It is important to design control systems to validate proposed mechanisms of allosteric communication . Such validation can be very e ﬀ ectively done by designed molecular dynamics simulations . Our simulations with arti ﬁ cial restraints on Pin1 o ﬀ ered a glimpse into the potential of this approach . To make our idea about the critical importance of the α 1 − WW bridge experimentally testable , we introduced an α 1 − WW cross - link , and our molecular dynamics simulations of this construct indeed showed suppression of fast dynamics for the catalytic - site loops , similar to the e ﬀ ect induced by substrate − WW binding . 82 This predicted e ﬀ ect on fast dynamics awaits experimental test . On another front , a method called accelerated molecular dynamics , designed to arti ﬁ cially reduce free energy barriers , has already met with success in exploring the roles of microsecond − millisecond time - scale dynamics in allosteric communication . 43 While this review has focused on structured proteins , allostery in intrinsically disordered proteins and proteins with intrinsically disordered regions is emerging as an exciting frontier . 90 , 96 , 97 Conformational dynamics in these proteins can be anticipated to play even greater roles in allosteric communication , although they are only starting to be appreciated . 90 AUTHOR INFORMATION Corresponding Author * E - mail hzhou4 @ fsu . edu . Notes The authors declare no competing ﬁ nancial interest . Biographies Jingjing Guo received her Ph . D . in medicinal chemistry from Lanzhou University ( China ) in 2015 under the supervision of Professor Huanxiang Liu . From 2013 to 2015 , she studied as a visiting student with Professor Huan - Xiang Zhou at Florida State University , conducting research on protein allostery . She is now a lecturer at Henan Normal University ( China ) . Huan - Xiang Zhou received his Ph . D . from Drexel University in 1988 . He did postdoctoral work at the National Institutes of Health with Attila Szabo . After faculty appointments at Hong Kong University of Science and Technology and Drexel , he moved in 2002 to Florida State University , where he is now Distinguished Research Professor . He has served on a number of grant review panels and journal editorial boards . His group currently does theoretical , computational , and experimental research on protein association , on crowding and emergent properties of cellular environments , on structures and functional mechanisms of ion channels and other membrane proteins , and on self - assembly of peptides . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by Grant GM0585187 from the National Institutes of Health . REFERENCES ( 1 ) Monod , J . ; Jacob , F . General Conclusions : Telenomic Mechanisms in Cellular Metabolism , Growth , and Differentiation . Cold Spring Harbor Symp . Quant . Biol . 1961 , 26 , 389 − 401 . ( 2 ) Monod , J . ; Wyman , J . ; Changeux , J . - P . On the Nature of Allosteric Transitions : A Plausible Model . J . Mol . Biol . 1965 , 12 , 88 − 118 . ( 3 ) Wyman , J . ; Allen , D . W . The Problem of the Heme Interactions in Hemoglobin and the Basis of the Bohr Effect . J . Polym . Sci . 1951 , 7 , 499 − 518 . ( 4 ) Cooper , A . ; Dryden , D . T . Allostery without Conformational Change . A Plausible Model . Eur . Biophys . J . 1984 , 11 , 103 − 109 . ( 5 ) Nussinov , R . ; Tsai , C . J . Allostery without a Conformational Change ? Revisiting the Paradigm . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 2015 , 30 , 17 − 24 . ( 6 ) Dai , J . ; Zhou , H . X . Reduced Curvature of Ligand - Binding Domain Free - Energy Surface Underlies Partial Agonism at NMDA Receptors . Structure 2015 , 23 , 228 − 236 . ( 7 ) Dai , J . ; Wollmuth , L . P . ; Zhou , H . X . Mechanism - Based Mathematical Model for Gating of Ionotropic Glutamate Receptors . J . Phys . Chem . B 2015 , 119 , 10934 − 10940 . ( 8 ) Koshland , D . E . Application of a Theory of Enzyme Specificity to Protein Synthesis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 1958 , 44 , 98 − 104 . ( 9 ) Burgen , A . S . Conformational Changes and Drug Action . Fed . Proc . 1981 , 40 , 2723 − 2728 . ( 10 ) Ma , B . ; Kumar , S . ; Tsai , C . J . ; Nussinov , R . Folding Funnels and Binding Mechanisms . Protein Eng . , Des . Sel . 1999 , 12 , 713 − 720 . ( 11 ) Formaneck , M . S . ; Ma , L . ; Cui , Q . Reconciling the ″ Old ″ and ″ New ″ Views of Protein Allostery : A Molecular Simulation Study of Chemotaxis Y Protein ( Chey ) . Proteins : Struct . , Funct . , Genet . 2006 , 63 , 846 − 867 . ( 12 ) Boehr , D . D . ; Nussinov , R . ; Wright , P . E . The Role of Dynamic Conformational Ensembles in Biomolecular Recognition . Nat . Chem . Biol . 2009 , 5 , 789 − 796 . ( 13 ) Koshland , D . E . , Jr . ; Nemethy , G . ; Filmer , D . Comparison of Experimental Binding Data and Theoretical Models in Proteins Containing Subunits . Biochemistry 1966 , 5 , 365 − 385 . ( 14 ) Greives , N . ; Zhou , H . X . Both Protein Dynamics and Ligand Concentration Can Shift the Binding Mechanism between Conforma - tional Selection and Induced Fit . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2014 , 111 , 10197 − 10202 . Chemical Reviews Review DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . chemrev . 5b00590 Chem . Rev . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX K ( 15 ) Hammes , G . G . ; Wu , C . W . Kinetics of Allosteric Enzymes . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Bioeng . 1974 , 3 , 1 − 33 . ( 16 ) Hammes , G . G . ; Chang , Y . C . ; Oas , T . G . Conformational Selection or Induced Fit : A Flux Description of Reaction Mechanism . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2009 , 106 , 13737 − 13741 . ( 17 ) Zhou , H . - X . From Induced Fit to Conformational Selection : A Continuum of Binding Mechanism Controlled by the Timescale of Conformational Transitions . Biophys . J . 2010 , 98 , L15 − L17 . ( 18 ) Perutz , M . F . Stereochemistry of Cooperative Effects in Haemoglobin . Nature 1970 , 228 , 726 − 739 . ( 19 ) Eaton , W . A . ; Henry , E . R . ; Hofrichter , J . ; Bettati , S . ; Viappiani , C . ; Mozzarelli , A . Evolution of Allosteric Models for Hemoglobin . IUBMB Life 2007 , 59 , 586 − 599 . ( 20 ) Cui , Q . ; Karplus , M . Allostery and Cooperativity Revisited . Protein Sci . 2008 , 17 , 1295 − 1307 . ( 21 ) Wrabl , J . O . ; Gu , J . ; Liu , T . ; Schrank , T . P . ; Whitten , S . T . ; Hilser , V . J . The Role of Protein Conformational Fluctuations in Allostery , Function , and Evolution . Biophys . Chem . 2011 , 159 , 129 − 141 . ( 22 ) Volkman , B . F . ; Lipson , D . ; Wemmer , D . E . ; Kern , D . Two - State Allosteric Behavior in a Single - Domain Signaling Protein . Science 2001 , 291 , 2429 − 2433 . ( 23 ) Yan , J . ; Liu , Y . ; Lukasik , S . M . ; Speck , N . A . ; Bushweller , J . H . CBFbeta Allosterically Regulates the Runx1 Runt Domain Via a Dynamic Conformational Equilibrium . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 2004 , 11 , 901 − 906 . ( 24 ) Popovych , N . ; Sun , S . ; Ebright , R . H . ; Kalodimos , C . G . Dynamically Driven Protein Allostery . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 2006 , 13 , 831 − 838 . ( 25 ) Petit , C . M . ; Zhang , J . ; Sapienza , P . J . ; Fuentes , E . J . ; Lee , A . L . Hidden Dynamic Allostery in a PDZ Domain . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2009 , 106 , 18249 − 18254 . ( 26 ) Namanja , A . T . ; Wang , X . J . ; Xu , B . ; Mercedes - Camacho , A . Y . ; Wilson , K . A . ; Etzkorn , F . A . ; Peng , J . W . Stereospecific Gating of Functional Motions in Pin1 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2011 , 108 , 12289 − 12294 . ( 27 ) Ruschak , A . M . ; Kay , L . E . Proteasome Allostery as a Population Shift Between Interchanging Conformers . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2012 , 109 , E3454 − 3462 . ( 28 ) Manley , G . ; Rivalta , I . ; Loria , J . P . Solution NMR and Computational Methods for Understanding Protein Allostery . J . Phys . Chem . B 2013 , 117 , 3063 − 3073 . ( 29 ) Dror , R . O . ; Green , H . F . ; Valant , C . ; Borhani , D . W . ; Valcourt , J . R . ; Pan , A . C . ; Arlow , D . H . ; Canals , M . ; Lane , J . R . ; Rahmani , R . ; et al . Structural Basis for Modulation of a G - Protein - Coupled Receptor by Allosteric Drugs . Nature 2013 , 503 , 295 − 299 . ( 30 ) Malmstrom , R . D . ; Kornev , A . P . ; Taylor , S . S . ; Amaro , R . E . Allostery through the Computational Microscope : cAMP Activation of a Canonical Signalling Domain . Nat . Commun . 2015 , 6 , No . 7588 . ( 31 ) Pontiggia , F . ; Pachov , D . V . ; Clarkson , M . W . ; Villali , J . ; Hagan , M . F . ; Pande , V . S . ; Kern , D . Free Energy Landscape of Activation in a Signalling Protein at Atomic Resolution . Nat . Commun . 2015 , 6 , 7284 . ( 32 ) Feher , V . A . ; Durrant , J . D . ; Van Wart , A . T . ; Amaro , R . E . Computational Approaches to Mapping Allosteric Pathways . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 2014 , 25 , 98 − 103 . ( 33 ) Suel , G . M . ; Lockless , S . W . ; Wall , M . A . ; Ranganathan , R . Evolutionarily Conserved Networks of Residues Mediate Allosteric Communication in Proteins . Nat . Struct . Biol . 2003 , 10 , 59 − 69 . ( 34 ) Sethi , A . ; Eargle , J . ; Black , A . A . ; Luthey - Schulten , Z . Dynamical Networks in tRNA : Protein Complexes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2009 , 106 , 6620 − 6625 . ( 35 ) Motlagh , H . N . ; Wrabl , J . O . ; Li , J . ; Hilser , V . J . The Ensemble Nature of Allostery . Nature 2014 , 508 , 331 − 339 . ( 36 ) Wand , A . J . ; Kern , D . On the Dynamic Origins of Allosteric Activation . Science 2001 , 293 , 1395 . ( 37 ) Guo , J . ; Pang , X . ; Zhou , H . X . Two Pathways Mediate Interdomain Allosteric Regulation in Pin1 . Structure 2015 , 23 , 237 − 247 . ( 38 ) Tzeng , S . R . ; Kalodimos , C . G . Protein Dynamics and Allostery : An NMR View . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 2011 , 21 , 62 − 67 . ( 39 ) Zhuravleva , A . ; Gierasch , L . M . Substrate - Binding Domain Conformational Dynamics Mediate Hsp70 Allostery . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2015 , 112 , E2865 − 2873 . ( 40 ) Lipchock , J . M . ; Loria , J . P . Nanometer Propagation of Millisecond Motions in V - Type Allostery . Structure 2010 , 18 , 1596 − 1607 . ( 41 ) Srivastava , A . K . ; McDonald , L . R . ; Cembran , A . ; Kim , J . ; Masterson , L . R . ; McClendon , C . L . ; Taylor , S . S . ; Veglia , G . Synchronous Opening and Closing Motions Are Essential for cAMP - Dependent Protein Kinase a Signaling . Structure 2014 , 22 , 1735 − 1743 . ( 42 ) Oyen , D . ; Fenwick , R . B . ; Stanfield , R . L . ; Dyson , H . J . ; Wright , P . E . Cofactor - Mediated Conformational Dynamics Promote Product Release from Escherichia Coli Dihydrofolate Reductase Via an Allosteric Pathway . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2015 , 137 , 9459 − 9468 . ( 43 ) Gasper , P . M . ; Fuglestad , B . ; Komives , E . A . ; Markwick , P . R . ; McCammon , J . A . Allosteric Networks in Thrombin Distinguish Procoagulant vs . Anticoagulant Activities . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2012 , 109 , 21216 − 21222 . ( 44 ) Palmer , A . G . , III . NMR Characterization of the Dynamics of Biomacromolecules . Chem . Rev . 2004 , 104 , 3623 − 3640 . ( 45 ) Pervushin , K . ; Riek , R . ; Wider , G . ; Wuthrich , K . Attenuated T 2 Relaxation by Mutual Cancellation of Dipole - Dipole Coupling and Chemical Shift Anisotropy Indicates an Avenue to NMR Structures of Very Large Biological Macromolecules in Solution . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 1997 , 94 , 12366 − 12371 . ( 46 ) Lipari , G . ; Szabo , A . Model - Free Approach to the Interpretation of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Relaxation in Macromolecules . 1 . Theory and Range of Validity . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 1982 , 104 , 4546 − 4559 . ( 47 ) Showalter , S . A . ; Bruschweiler , R . Validation of Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Biomolecules Using NMR Spin Relaxation as Benchmarks : Application to the Amber99SB Force Field . J . Chem . Theory Comput . 2007 , 3 , 961 − 975 . ( 48 ) Maragakis , P . ; Lindorff - Larsen , K . ; Eastwood , M . P . ; Dror , R . O . ; Klepeis , J . L . ; Arkin , I . T . ; Jensen , M . O . ; Xu , H . F . ; Trbovic , N . ; Friesner , R . A . ; et al . Microsecond Molecular Dynamics Simulation Shows Effect of Slow Loop Dynamics on Backbone Amide Order Parameters of Proteins . J . Phys . Chem . B 2008 , 112 , 6155 − 6158 . ( 49 ) Yang , D . ; Kay , L . E . Contributions to Conformational Entropy Arising from Bond Vector Fluctuations Measured from NMR - Derived Order Parameters : Application to Protein Folding . J . Mol . Biol . 1996 , 263 , 369 − 382 . ( 50 ) Li , Z . ; Raychaudhuri , S . ; Wand , A . J . Insights into the Local Residual Entropy of Proteins Provided by NMR Relaxation . Protein Sci . 1996 , 5 , 2647 − 2650 . ( 51 ) Wand , A . J . The Dark Energy of Proteins Comes to Light : Conformational Entropy and Its Role in Protein Function Revealed by NMR Relaxation . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 2013 , 23 , 75 − 81 . ( 52 ) Carr , H . Y . ; Purcell , E . M . Effects of Diffusion on Free Precession in Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Experiments . Phys . Rev . 1954 , 94 , 630 − 638 . ( 53 ) Meiboom , S . ; Gill , D . Modified Spin - Echo Method for Measuring Nuclear Relaxation Times . Rev . Sci . Instrum . 1958 , 29 , 688 − 691 . ( 54 ) Luz , Z . ; Meiboom , S . Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Study of Protolysis of Trimethylammonium Ion in Aqueous Solution - Order of Reaction with Respect to Solvent . J . Chem . Phys . 1963 , 39 , 366 − 370 . ( 55 ) Carver , J . P . ; Richards , R . E . General Two - Site Solution for Chemical Exchange Produced Dependence of T 2 Upon Carr - Purcell Pulse Separation . J . Magn . Reson . 1972 , 6 , 89 − 105 . ( 56 ) Baldwin , A . J . An Exact Solution for R 2 , Eff in CPMG Experiments in the Case of Two Site Chemical Exchange . J . Magn . Reson . 2014 , 244 , 114 − 124 . ( 57 ) Chung , F . R . K . Spectral Graph Theory ; CBMS Regional Conference Series in Mathematics , Number 92 ; American Mathemat - ical Society Publications , 1997 . Chemical Reviews Review DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . chemrev . 5b00590 Chem . Rev . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX L ( 58 ) Atilgan , A . R . ; Akan , P . ; Baysal , C . Small - World Communication of Residues and Significance for Protein Dynamics . Biophys . J . 2004 , 86 , 85 − 91 . ( 59 ) Bahar , I . ; Atilgan , A . R . ; Erman , B . Direct Evaluation of Thermal Fluctuations in Proteins Using a Single - Parameter Harmonic Potential . Folding Des . 1997 , 2 , 173 − 181 . ( 60 ) Brinda , K . V . ; Vishveshwara , S . A Network Representation of Protein Structures : Implications for Protein Stability . Biophys . J . 2005 , 89 , 4159 − 4170 . ( 61 ) Seeber , M . ; Felline , A . ; Raimondi , F . ; Muff , S . ; Friedman , R . ; Rao , F . ; Caflisch , A . ; Fanelli , F . Wordom : A User - Friendly Program for the Analysis of Molecular Structures , Trajectories , and Free Energy Surfaces . J . Comput . Chem . 2011 , 32 , 1183 − 1194 . ( 62 ) Chennubhotla , C . ; Bahar , I . Markov Propagation of Allosteric Effects in Biomolecular Systems : Application to Groel - Groes . Mol . Syst . Biol . 2006 , 2 , 36 . ( 63 ) Zheng , W . ; Brooks , B . R . ; Thirumalai , D . Allosteric Transitions in the Chaperonin GroEL Are Captured by a Dominant Normal Mode That Is Most Robust to Sequence Variations . Biophys . J . 2007 , 93 , 2289 − 2299 . ( 64 ) Floyd , R . W . Algorithm - 97 - Shortest Path . Commun . ACM 1962 , 5 , 345 − 345 . ( 65 ) Girvan , M . ; Newman , M . E . Community Structure in Social and Biological Networks . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2002 , 99 , 7821 − 7826 . ( 66 ) Rivalta , I . ; Sultan , M . M . ; Lee , N . S . ; Manley , G . A . ; Loria , J . P . ; Batista , V . S . Allosteric Pathways in Imidazole Glycerol Phosphate Synthase . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2012 , 109 , E1428 − 1436 . ( 67 ) Lange , O . F . ; Grubmuller , H . Generalized Correlation for Biomolecular Dynamics . Proteins : Struct . , Funct . , Genet . 2006 , 62 , 1053 − 1061 . ( 68 ) Vanwart , A . T . ; Eargle , J . ; Luthey - Schulten , Z . ; Amaro , R . E . Exploring Residue Component Contributions to Dynamical Network Models of Allostery . J . Chem . Theory Comput . 2012 , 8 , 2949 − 2961 . ( 69 ) Vanatta , D . K . ; Shukla , D . ; Lawrenz , M . ; Pande , V . S . A Network of Molecular Switches Controls the Activation of the Two - Component Response Regulator NtrC . Nat . Commun . 2015 , 6 , 7283 . ( 70 ) Lu , K . P . ; Hanes , S . D . ; Hunter , T . A Human Peptidyl − Prolyl Isomerase Essential for Regulation of Mitosis . Nature 1996 , 380 , 544 − 547 . ( 71 ) Liou , Y . C . ; Zhou , X . Z . ; Lu , K . P . Prolyl Isomerase Pin1 as a Molecular Switch to Determine the Fate of Phosphoproteins . Trends Biochem . Sci . 2011 , 36 , 501 − 514 . ( 72 ) Lu , P . - J . ; Zhou , X . Z . ; Shen , M . ; Lu , K . P . Function of Ww Domains as Phosphoserine - or Phosphothreonine - Binding Modules . Science 1999 , 283 , 1325 − 1328 . ( 73 ) Zhou , X . Z . ; Kops , O . ; Werner , A . ; Lu , P . - J . ; Shen , M . ; Stoller , G . ; Ku ̈ llertz , G . ; Stark , M . ; Fischer , G . ; Lu , K . P . Pin1 - Dependent Prolyl Isomerization Regulates Dephosphorylation of Cdc25c and Tau Proteins . Mol . Cell 2000 , 6 , 873 − 883 . ( 74 ) Ranganathan , R . ; Lu , K . P . ; Hunter , T . ; Noel , J . P . Structural and Functional Analysis of the Mitotic Rotamase Pin1 Suggests Substrate Recognition Is Phosphorylation Dependent . Cell 1997 , 89 , 875 − 886 . ( 75 ) Verdecia , M . A . ; Bowman , M . E . ; Lu , K . P . ; Hunter , T . ; Noel , J . P . Structural Basis for Phosphoserine - Proline Recognition by Group IV WW Domains . Nat . Struct . Biol . 2000 , 7 , 639 − 643 . ( 76 ) Zhang , M . ; Wang , X . J . ; Chen , X . ; Bowman , M . E . ; Luo , Y . ; Noel , J . P . ; Ellington , A . D . ; Etzkorn , F . A . ; Zhang , Y . Structural and Kinetic Analysis of Prolyl - Isomerization / Phosphorylation Cross - Talk in the Ctd Code . ACS Chem . Biol . 2012 , 7 , 1462 − 1470 . ( 77 ) Jacobs , D . M . ; Saxena , K . ; Vogtherr , M . ; Bernado , P . ; Pons , M . ; Fiebig , K . M . Peptide Binding Induces Large Scale Changes in Inter - Domain Mobility in Human Pin1 . J . Biol . Chem . 2003 , 278 , 26174 − 26182 . ( 78 ) Matena , A . ; Sinnen , C . ; van den Boom , J . ; Wilms , C . ; Dybowski , J . N . ; Maltaner , R . ; Mueller , J . W . ; Link , N . M . ; Hoffmann , D . ; Bayer , P . Transient Domain Interactions Enhance the Affinity of the Mitotic Regulator Pin1 toward Phosphorylated Peptide Ligands . Structure 2013 , 21 , 1769 − 1777 . ( 79 ) Namanja , A . T . ; Peng , T . ; Zintsmaster , J . S . ; Elson , A . C . ; Shakour , M . G . ; Peng , J . W . Substrate Recognition Reduces Side - Chain Flexibility for Conserved Hydrophobic Residues in Human Pin1 . Structure 2007 , 15 , 313 − 327 . ( 80 ) Wilson , K . A . ; Bouchard , J . J . ; Peng , J . W . Interdomain Interactions Support Interdomain Communication in Human Pin1 . Biochemistry 2013 , 52 , 6968 − 6981 . ( 81 ) Wang , X . ; Mahoney , B . J . ; Zhang , M . ; Zintsmaster , J . S . ; Peng , J . W . Negative Regulation of Peptidyl - Prolyl Isomerase Activity by Interdomain Contact in Human Pin1 . Structure 2015 , 23 , 2224 − 2233 . ( 82 ) Guo , J . ; Zhou , H . X . Dynamically Driven Protein Allostery Exhibits Disparate Responses for Fast and Slow Motions . Biophys . J . 2015 , 108 , 2771 − 2774 . ( 83 ) Namanja , A . T . Molecular Basis for Signal Transduction in the Bimodular Cell - Cycle Enzyme Pin1 . Ph . D . Dissertation , University of Notre Dame , 2009 . ( 84 ) Myers , R . S . ; Jensen , J . R . ; Deras , I . L . ; Smith , J . L . ; Davisson , V . J . Substrate - Induced Changes in the Ammonia Channel for Imidazole Glycerol Phosphate Synthase . Biochemistry 2003 , 42 , 7013 − 7022 . ( 85 ) Douangamath , A . ; Walker , M . ; Beismann - Driemeyer , S . ; Vega - Fernandez , M . C . ; Sterner , R . ; Wilmanns , M . Structural Evidence for Ammonia Tunneling across the ( βα ) 8 Barrel of the Imidazole Glycerol Phosphate Synthase Bienzyme Complex . Structure 2002 , 10 , 185 − 193 . ( 86 ) Kazi , R . ; Dai , J . ; Sweeney , C . ; Zhou , H . X . ; Wollmuth , L . P . Mechanical Coupling Maintains the Fidelity of NMDA Receptor - Mediated Currents . Nat . Neurosci . 2014 , 17 , 914 − 922 . ( 87 ) Sharp , K . ; Skinner , J . J . Pump - Probe Molecular Dynamics as a Tool for Studying Protein Motion and Long Range Coupling . Proteins : Struct . , Funct . , Genet . 2006 , 65 , 347 − 361 . ( 88 ) Tenboer , J . ; Basu , S . ; Zatsepin , N . ; Pande , K . ; Milathianaki , D . ; Frank , M . ; Hunter , M . ; Boutet , S . ; Williams , G . J . ; Koglin , J . E . ; et al . Time - Resolved Serial Crystallography Captures High - Resolution Intermediates of Photoactive Yellow Protein . Science 2014 , 346 , 1242 − 1246 . ( 89 ) Barends , T . R . ; Foucar , L . ; Ardevol , A . ; Nass , K . ; Aquila , A . ; Botha , S . ; Doak , R . B . ; Falahati , K . ; Hartmann , E . ; Hilpert , M . ; et al . Direct Observation of Ultrafast Collective Motions in CO Myoglobin Upon Ligand Dissociation . Science 2015 , 350 , 445 − 450 . ( 90 ) Pang , X . ; Zhou , H . X . Disorder - to - Order Transition of an Active - Site Loop Mediates the Allosteric Activation of Sortase A . Biophys . J . 2015 , 109 , 1706 − 1715 . ( 91 ) Byeon , I . J . ; Dao , K . K . ; Jung , J . ; Keen , J . ; Leiros , I . ; Doskeland , S . O . ; Martinez , A . ; Gronenborn , A . M . Allosteric Communication between cAMP Binding Sites in the RI Subunit of Protein Kinase a Revealed by NMR . J . Biol . Chem . 2010 , 285 , 14062 − 14070 . ( 92 ) McNicholl , E . T . ; Das , R . ; SilDas , S . ; Taylor , S . S . ; Melacini , G . Communication between Tandem cAMP Binding Domains in the Regulatory Subunit of Protein Kinase A - I α as Revealed by Domain - Silencing Mutations . J . Biol . Chem . 2010 , 285 , 15523 − 15537 . ( 93 ) Gunasekaran , K . ; Ma , B . Y . ; Nussinov , R . Is Allostery an Intrinsic Property of All Dynamic Proteins ? Proteins : Struct . , Funct . , Genet . 2004 , 57 , 433 − 443 . ( 94 ) Clarkson , M . W . ; Gilmore , S . A . ; Edgell , M . H . ; Lee , A . L . Dynamic Coupling and Allosteric Behavior in a Nonallosteric Protein . Biochemistry 2006 , 45 , 7693 − 7699 . ( 95 ) Ludlow , R . F . ; Verdonk , M . L . ; Saini , H . K . ; Tickle , I . J . ; Jhoti , H . Detection of Secondary Binding Sites in Proteins Using Fragment Screening . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2015 , 112 , 15910 − 15915 . ( 96 ) Hilser , V . J . ; Thompson , E . B . Intrinsic Disorder as a Mechanism to Optimize Allosteric Coupling in Proteins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2007 , 104 , 8311 − 8315 . ( 97 ) Ferreon , A . C . ; Ferreon , J . C . ; Wright , P . E . ; Deniz , A . A . Modulation of Allostery by Protein Intrinsic Disorder . Nature 2013 , 498 , 390 − 394 . Chemical Reviews Review DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . chemrev . 5b00590 Chem . Rev . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX M