Protein diﬀusion on membrane domes , tubes and pearling structures R . Rojas Molina 1 , S . Liese 1 , and A . Carlson 1 , * Abstract Diﬀusion is a fundamental mechanism for protein distribution in cell membranes . These membranes often exhibit complex shapes , which range from shallow domes to elongated tubular or pearl - like structures . Shape complexity of the membrane inﬂuences the diﬀusive spreading of proteins and molecules . Despite the importance membrane geometry plays in these diﬀusive processes , it is challenging to establish the dependence between diﬀusion and membrane morphology . We solve the diﬀusion equation numerically on various curved shapes representative for experimentally observed membrane shapes . Our results show that membrane necks become diﬀusion barriers . We determine the diﬀusive half time , i . e . , the time that is required to reduce the amount of proteins in the budded region by one half and ﬁnd a quadratic relation between the diﬀusive half time and the averaged mean curvature of the membrane shape . Our ﬁndings thus help to estimate the characteristic diﬀusive time scale based on the simple measure for membrane morphology . Signiﬁcance statement Diﬀusion is an integral process for distributing proteins throughout biological membranes . These membranes can have complex shapes and structures , often featuring elongated shapes such as tubes and like a necklace of pearls . The diﬀusion process on these shapes is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the well studied planar substrate . We use numerical simulations to understand how the characteristic diﬀusion time is a function of membrane shape , where we ﬁnd the diﬀusion of proteins on strongly curved shapes is signiﬁcantly slower than on planar membranes . Our results provide a simple relationship to estimate the characteristic diﬀusion time of proteins on membranes based on its mean and Gaussian curvature . 1 Introduction Diﬀusion is a fundamental transport mechanism that plays a key role in many biological processes ( 1 ; 2 ) . Diﬀusion is the main mechanism for transport and mixing of components in primitive cells ( 3 ) , it facilitates the formation of protein oligomers and lipid - protein assemblies associated with the metabolism and signaling in cells ( 4 ; 5 ; 6 ) . It also allows the formation of protein gradients needed to establish cell polarity and trigger morphogenesis ( 7 ) . The transport of proteins and other molecules often occurs in membranes with complex shapes , which can be the result of biological process that require membrane deformation , such as endo / exocytosis ( 8 ) and communication pathways for material transport between the Golgi apparatus and the endoplasmic reticulum , requiring the formation of tube networks ( 9 ) . Many eﬀects can slow down the diﬀusion on biological membranes , e . g , cytoskeletal barriers and molecular crowding , among others ( 10 ; 11 ) . In addition , it has been shown that the shape of the membrane itself aﬀects how proteins or molecules move along it . Experiments reveal that the radius and length of tubes inﬂuences the time required to distribute proteins ( 12 ) . The same observation was made by a theoretical approach where the diﬀusion equation is solved on tubular shapes , which shows agreement with the equilibration time found in experiments ( 13 ) . However , biological membranes may exhibit a variety of shapes that diﬀer signiﬁcantly from a cylindrical tube : e . g , membranes form pits in early stages of endocytosis , and nearly spherical vesicles joined with the surrounding membrane by a narrow neck at later stages ( 14 ; 15 ) . In addition , membranes can also form concatenated buds joined by narrow bridges or necks ( 16 ; 17 ; 18 ) . Numerical simulations of diﬀusion on pearled structures have shown that the pearl geometry , together with diﬀusion barriers created by certain proteins are responsible for the sequestration of cargo in the buds ( 16 ) . These results suggest that the membrane geometry has an important eﬀect on the lateral diﬀusion of molecules and proteins ( 19 ; 20 ; 21 ) . The diﬀusion process on a curved two - dimensional surface depends on the local curvature and is thus more complex than diﬀusion on a ﬂat surface . For small membrane deformations , theoretical studies have shown that an eﬀective 1 diﬀusion coeﬃcient can be derived in terms of the surface curvature ( 22 ) . A generalized theoretical treatment of the diﬀusion on an arbitrary surface gives a solution of the diﬀusion equation as an expansion around the solution on a ﬂat surface . The coeﬃcients are highly complex functions of the curvature , only simpliﬁed in cases where the surfaces have constant Gaussian curvature ( 23 ) , which in general is not the case for biological systems . In addition , a curvature - dependent diﬀusion coeﬃcient can be obtained assuming that the membrane curvature induces changes of the membrane thickness ( 24 ) , introducing corrections to the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of membrane inclusions predicted by the Saﬀman - Delbruck theory ( 25 ) , which relates the diﬀusion coeﬃcient with the viscosity of the surrounding media and the membrane thickness . However , these results can not be generalized to strongly curved membrane shapes such as tubes or pearl - structures . The wide range of shapes of biological membranes makes it challenging to obtain a generalized analytical solution for the diﬀusion equation on a generic surface . To understand how proteins diﬀuse on complex membrane shapes such as domes , tubes and pearling structures we develop a mathematical model for their diﬀusive dynamics on these static shapes . The model is solved numerically , where the numerical simulations allow us to describe the characteristic time it takes to diﬀuse away from a curved region and discuss the implications of the Gaussian and the mean curvature in terms of the half - time i . e . , the time for the protein density to reduce by one half in the budded region . 2 Methods 2 . 1 Parameterization of the membrane The membrane shapes that we consider here are shown in Fig . 1 : an Ω shape ( Fig . 1a ) , a dome shape ( Fig . 1b ) , pearled structures with diﬀerent number n ∈ [ 2 , 3 , 4 ] of pearls ( Fig . 1c ) and cylindrical tubes caped by a half sphere ( Fig . 1d ) . Each shape contains a budded region with non - zero mean curvature at the center . We denote the area of the budded region as A bud . The budded region continuously transitions into the outer region with zero mean curvature . A detailed description of the diﬀerent shapes are presented in the Supplementary Material ( SM ) . All shapes are parametrized by the arc - length S measured along the curved surface and the tangent angle φ as shown in Fig . 1a . In this geometry , the variables R , Z and the membrane area A satisfy the following diﬀerential equations : R (cid:48) = cos φ ( 1 ) Z (cid:48) = sin φ ( 2 ) A (cid:48) = 2 πR ( 3 ) where ( ) (cid:48) ≡ ddS . The mean curvature H of the membrane in the arc - length parametrization is given by ( 26 ) : H = 1 2 (cid:18) φ (cid:48) + sin φ R (cid:19) ( 4 ) To generate the diﬀerent shapes , a piecewise constant curvature radius is deﬁned a long the membrane surface . 2 . 2 The diﬀusion equation We assume now that the density of a generic protein or molecule is described by a continuous ﬁeld ˜ σ that depends on the arc - length S and the time t , ˜ σ ≡ ˜ σ ( S , t ) . The ﬁeld ˜ σ ( S , t ) follows the diﬀusive dynamics on the diﬀerent shapes shown in Fig . 1 . The diﬀusion equation in the absence of sources , under axial symmetry is given by ( 26 ) : ∂ ˜ σ ∂t − D R ( R ˜ σ (cid:48) ) (cid:48) = ∂ ˜ σ ∂t − D ˜ σ (cid:48)(cid:48) − D S ˜ σ (cid:48) + D ˜ σ (cid:48) (cid:18) 1 S − cos φ R (cid:19) = 0 ( 5 ) where D is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient and assumed to be constant . On a ﬂat membrane , with φ = 0 and R = S , Eq . 5 is written as ∂ ˜ σ∂t − D ˜ σ (cid:48)(cid:48) − DS ˜ σ (cid:48) = 0 . On a curved surface the diﬀusion equation ( Eq . 5 ) contains an additional term D ˜ σ (cid:48) (cid:16) 1 S − cos φR (cid:17) , which depends both on the local curvature and the gradient of the protein density . Diﬀusion on a curved surface is as such diﬀerent from the diﬀusion on a ﬂat surface and the combined eﬀect of curvature and protein distribution can in general not be captured in a single eﬀective diﬀusion constant . We write the diﬀusion equation ( Eq . 5 ) in dimensionless form using the square root of the area of the budded region of the membrane , √ A bud ( see the SM ) as a characteristic length . Then the time scale is given by τ = A bud / D and the 2 ( a ) Ω . ( b ) Dome . ( c ) Pearl with two buds . ( d ) Tube . Figure 1 : ( a ) I ) A membrane with an Ω shape . The colorbar represents the scaled protein density σ ( s , t = 0 ) . II ) The membrane surface parametrization in axisymmetric coordinates , where S is the arc - length measured along the membrane , R ( S ) is the radial coordinate , φ ( S ) is the angle that the curved membrane forms with respect to the horizontal R - axis and Z is the height of the membrane . The angle θ is the rotation around the symmetry axis . ( b ) - ( d ) Diﬀerent membrane shapes considered here : ( b ) a dome shape , ( c ) a pearl structure with two buds and ( d ) a tube . Initially the total protein density m tot is the same for all shapes . The shapes are axially symmetric and represent shapes commonly observed in biological membranes . dimensionless variables are ¯ t = tτ , s = S √ A bud , r = R √ A bud , z = Z √ A bud , a = AA bud and σ = A bud ˜ σ . By introducing these scaling relations into Eq . 5 we obtain : ∂σ ∂ ¯ t − 1 r ( rσ (cid:48) ) (cid:48) = 0 ( 6 ) As an initial protein density , we consider σ ( s , t = 0 ) = c ( 1 − tanh [ 5 ( a ( s ) − a 0 ) ] ) for all membrane shapes , where there is a one - to - one correspondence between the arc - length s and the area a ( s ) , given by Eq . 3 . The constants c and a 0 are chosen such that σ ( a ( s = 0 ) ) = 0 . 5 and m tot = 0 . 24 , with m tot = (cid:82) ∞ 0 σda the total amount of proteins . As shown in Fig . 1 , we consider an initial protein distribution that is nearly homogeneous in the center of the membrane and that vanishes at the outer , ﬂat membrane region . As time proceeds , this initial density will diﬀuse over the entire membrane surface . The boundary condition imposed on the diﬀusion equation is such that there is no ﬂux of protein at the boundaries of the spatial domain , i . e , σ (cid:48) ( s = 0 ) = 0 and σ (cid:48) ( s → ∞ ) = 0 . In this case , the total quantity of protein m tot is conserved over time , as the proteins cannot escape from or ﬂow through the membrane boundaries . Eq . 6 is integrated numerically in time with a time step dt = 5 × 10 − 3 to obtain the spatio - temporal density proﬁle on the membrane , using a implicit time discretization and a centered diﬀerence scheme to solve the spatial derivative of the protein density . 3 Results In Fig . 2 , the protein density σ is shown as a function of the membrane area a at diﬀerent points in time , ¯ t = [ 1 , 50 , 100 , 500 ] dt . These density proﬁles exhibit notable qualitative diﬀerences . The Ω shape and the pearl - like shapes exhibit a staircase - like protein proﬁle in the budded region ( a < 1 ) , where the protein density approaches a nearly homogeneous distribution within the individual pearls . In contrast , neither the dome nor the tubular shape show a step - like protein distribution at any point in time . Comparing , dome / tubular shapes and Ω / pearl - like shapes at the latest time point , we ﬁnd for the latter that the protein density in the budded region is much higher , indicating that the presence of narrow necks slows the diﬀusion of the proteins . 3 ( a ) Ω . ( b ) Dome . ( c ) Tube . ( d ) Pearl , n = 2 . ( e ) Pearl , n = 3 . ( f ) Pearl , n = 4 . Figure 2 : Density proﬁles as a function of the membrane area a at diﬀerent times , ¯ t = [ 1 , 50 , 100 , 500 ] dt , for ( a ) an Ω shape , ( b ) a dome shape , ( c ) a tube , and ( d ) - ( f ) pearling structures with diﬀerent number of pearls . As time proceeds , the initial protein density spreads over the membrane area , where the proﬁles are qualitatively diﬀerent . In the case of the Ω ( a ) and the pearling shapes ( ( d ) - ( f ) ) the protein density has a staircase - like proﬁle , along each of the pearls , indicating that the narrow necks prevents the proﬁle of having a smoother transition . The overall eﬀect of the membrane necks on the diﬀusion on buds and pearls is to slow down the exit of proteins from the budded structure . In all simulation , the initial density is given by σ ( s , ¯ t = 0 ) = c ( 1 − tanh ( 5 ( a ( s ) − a 0 ) ) ) , where c and a 0 are such that σ ( a ( s = 0 ) , ¯ t = 0 ) = 0 . 5 and m tot = 0 . 24 . To characterize the eﬀect of the membrane shape on the diﬀusive dynamics by a single parameter , we deﬁne the amount of proteins in the budded region m bud = (cid:82) 1 0 σda and determine how m bud evolves in time . In Fig . 3a we show the time evolution of m bud on the pearling structure with n = 2 , the Ω shape , the tube and the dome shape . Our simulations show that , in accordance with the qualitative discussion of the density proﬁles in Fig . 2 , the amount of proteins in the budded region decreases faster in shapes that do not have narrow necks , such as the dome shape and the tube , while m bud decreases slower on the Ω shape and the pearling structure . In addition , Fig . 3b shows m bud ( t ) for the diﬀerent pearl - like structures , with n = 2 , 3 , 4 , where we see that m bud decreases slower with larger number of pearls . The results in Fig . 3 highlight that the membrane shape inﬂuences both the temporal and spatial evolution of the protein distribution . To characterise the diﬀusion process by a single quantity , we deﬁne ˜ t as the half - time , i . e , the time it takes for the total amount of proteins in the budded region to be reduced by 50 % . On a ﬂat membrane the half - time is denoted as ˜ t flat . The ratio ˜ t / ˜ t flat > 1 on all budded membranes , indicating that diﬀusion on a ﬂat surface is faster compared to diﬀusion on a curved surface . We aim at relating ˜ t to the characteristics of the membrane shape where we consider the Gaussian curvature K averaged over the budded area ˜ K = (cid:82) 1 0 Kda , the Gaussian curvature in the membrane neck , K min , i . e . , where the membrane radius is minimal and the mean curvature averaged over the budded area , ˜ H = (cid:82) 1 0 Hda . In Fig . 4a we plot ˜ t / ˜ t flat as a function of ˜ K , and observe that ˜ t is not clearly correlated to the averaged Gaussian curvature ˜ K . ˜ K is similar for the tubes and the single bud , but their ˜ t is diﬀerent . All the pearled structures , on the other hand , have a similar ˜ K , but ˜ t is also clearly diﬀerent diﬀerent and up to ﬁve times larger with respect to ˜ t in the tubes and in the single vesicle . ˜ K for the dome is clearly diﬀerent from the ˜ K of the tubes and the pearls . However , the diﬀusion time of buds is similar to tubes . Fig . 4b shows ˜ t / ˜ t flat as a function of the minimum value of the Gaussian curvature , K min , which corresponds to the point along the arc - length s where the neck is smallest . The pearling shapes with a large number of vesicles have a smaller K min . In contrast , the shapes where the neck regions are absent , as in the domes and the tubes , have a smaller and close to zero K min . Fig . 4b indicates that ˜ t increases as the membrane have more constricted regions , which creates a clogging eﬀect . In Fig . 5 ˜ t / ˜ t flat is shown as a function of the averaged mean curvature ˜ H in logarithmic axis . We ﬁnd an approximately 4 ( a ) ( b ) Figure 3 : The total protein density on the budded region m bud = (cid:82) 1 0 σ ( s , ¯ t ) da as a function of time for diﬀerent membrane geometries . ( a ) m bud ( ¯ t ) on the dome , tube , Ω and pearl - like ( n = 2 ) shape . ( b ) The eﬀect of the number of pearls on the pearl - like structure on m bud ( ¯ t ) . The proteins exit the pearled region slower if the number of pearls , n , increases . ( a ) ( b ) Figure 4 : ( a ) The ratio ˜ t / ˜ t flat as a function of the averaged Gaussian curvature ˜ K = (cid:82) 1 0 Kda . There is not a clear dependence between ˜ t and ˜ K across all the shapes considered . The tubes and the Ω - shape have a similar ˜ K , which is larger than the ˜ K of the pearled structures . The time ˜ t , however , is clearly diﬀerent , specially in the pearled structures , which also have a similar ˜ K . ( b ) The ratio ˜ t / ˜ t flat as a function of the minimum value of the Gaussian curvature along the arc - length , K min , for all the shapes considered . K min corresponds to the point where the neck joining the pearl with the surrounding ﬂat membrane is minimal , in the case of the pearls and the Ω - shape . In the tubes , K min corresponds to the tube rim , and in the dome K min is the point beyond which the mean curvature vanishes . quadratic relation between ˜ t / ˜ t flat and ˜ H , where the diﬀusion on tubular shapes is slightly faster , i . e . lower ˜ t , compared to pearling structures . An analytic expression for ˜ t / ˜ t flat can in general not be derived . However , we can compare the eﬀective diﬀusion constant on simpler shapes , namely on an inﬁnite cylinder and a sphere with our numerical results , which capture the main characteristics of the diﬀusion process . Holyst et al . found the following expression for the eﬀective diﬀusion constant D eﬀ of a single particles diﬀusing on an inﬁnite cylinder and a sphere , respectively , D cyleff = D 2 + R 2 2 t ( 1 − e − Dt / R 2 ) and D spheff = R 2 2 t ( 1 − e − 2 Dt / R 2 ) ( 27 ) , with R the radius of the cylinder or the sphere . The eﬀective diﬀusion constant is deﬁned as D eff = < x 2 ( t ) > / 4 t , with < x 2 ( t ) > the mean squared displacement of the particle . In both cases the diﬀusion constant is time - dependent and decreases over time . Furthermore , the diﬀusion process is slowed down , i . e . D eff < D , for both the cylinder and the sphere , and the eﬀective diﬀusion constant on a sphere is always smaller then the eﬀective diﬀusion constant on a cylinder , given that both shapes exhibit the same radius . These analytical results indicate that the eﬀective diﬀusion on a cylinder is faster than in a sphere as time proceeds 5 and help to understand why ˜ t is smaller in the tubes than in the dome and the pearled structures , as shown in Fig . 5 . As shown in Fig . 5 , the radius of the tube ( and hence the mean curvature ˜ H ) is correlated to ˜ t , indicating that the tube radius has an eﬀect on the exit of protein from the tubular region towards the ﬂat surface ( 13 ) as a result of the steep change in the derivative of r , as it passes from being r (cid:48) = 0 ( r constant ) in the ﬂat region of the tube to an increasing function of the arc - length s ( r (cid:48) = 1 ) . This sharp transition is more abrupt when the tube radius is smaller , causing a larger ˜ t when the mean curvature of the tube increases . In the case of the dome and the pearls , the diﬀusion is not limited to a single sphere , as the proteins are free to diﬀuse outside each bud , though the process is slowed signiﬁcantly . Finally , ˜ t is a time scale at which all the eﬀects mentioned above play an important role on the diﬀusion of proteins from the diﬀerent shapes , as a signiﬁcant part of the initial protein density have exit the deformed regions and gone thought the obstacles imposed by the membrane geometry . Figure 5 : The ratio ˜ t / ˜ t flat as a function of the averaged mean curvature ˜ H for each of the shapes considered , in logarithmic scale . The blue dashed line represents a ﬁt ˜ t ∼ H m , where m = 2 . 03 is the average of the slopes of the logarithmic relation between ˜ H and ˜ t , indicating that the exit time follows approximately a quadratic relation with respect to ˜ H . However , some of the pearled structures do not follow the quadratic ﬁt . This diﬀerence can be rationalized qualitatively associating the tubes with a cylinder of inﬁnite height and the shapes with spherical buds with a sphere . In these simpler geometries , the diﬀusion equation can be solved analytically , and an eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃcient D eff can be deﬁned . On a cylinder with the same radius of a sphere , D eff is larger as time proceeds , indicating than in cylindrical geometries the diﬀusion is faster . Here , we observe that in general , ˜ t is smaller in the tubes , indicating a faster diﬀusion with respect to the pearls and the Ω - shape . However , there are other eﬀects that play an important role on the diﬀusion from these structures , such as the obstacles produced by the neck regions in the Ω - shape and the pearled structures , and also the obstacles to diﬀusion in the region joining the budded structure with the surrounding , ﬂat membrane . 4 Conclusions In this work we study the inﬂuence of characteristic shapes found in biological membranes ; Ω - shaped buds , pearls , domes and tubes , on the diﬀusion of a protein density ﬁeld . The shapes considered have a strong inﬂuence on the density proﬁles obtained as time proceeds , and also inﬂuence the characteristic time after which the proteins exit the budded region : the presence of narrow necks ( pearls , Ω - shaped buds ) prevents a fast decay of the total density on the budded structure , as compared to the shapes where such necks are absents ( tubes , domes ) . To characterize more precisely the eﬀect of the shape on diﬀusion , we have determined the averaged Gaussian and mean curvature for each shape . The time associated with proteins leaving the budded structures , ˜ t , does correlate with the mean curvature , but not with the Gaussian curvature : while ˜ t follows a quadratic relation with respect to ˜ H , it does not show a clear dependence with respect to ˜ K . However , a larger ˜ t is associated with a smaller Gaussian curvature K min , in the neck region . This indicates that constricted regions indeed delay the exit of proteins from curved membranes . The relations between ˜ t , ˜ H and K min can help to estimate relevant time scales related to the diﬀusive motion of proteins on complex membrane shapes . Our results suggest that the exit of proteins is strongly aﬀected in elongated shapes , such as the tubes and the pearled structures . These structures are observed in diﬀerent biological contexts and in some cases can be reproduced by diﬀerent experimental techniques . In addition , photobleaching provides a powerful technique to investigate the mobility of proteins inside cells ( 28 ) and in the membrane surface ( 29 ) . This technique have 6 allowed to corroborate experimentally the recovery time predicted theoretically in tubular geometries ( 13 ) , and motivates the use of theoretical models to predict diﬀusive behavior of proteins and molecules in more generic shapes . References [ 1 ] T . K¨uhn , T . O . Ihalainen , J . Hyv¨aluoma , N . Dross , S . F . Willman , J . Langowski , M . Vihinen - Ranta , and J . Timonen , “Protein diﬀusion in mammalian cell cytoplasm , ” PLOS ONE , vol . 6 , no . 8 , pp . 1 – 12 , 2011 . [ 2 ] P . Cicuta , S . L . Keller , and S . L . Veatch , “Diﬀusion of liquid domains in lipid bilayer membranes , ” The Journal of Physical Chemistry B , vol . 111 , no . 13 , pp . 3328 – 3331 , 2007 . [ 3 ] J . T . Mika and B . Poolman , “Macromolecule diﬀusion and conﬁnement in prokaryotic cells , ” Current Opinion In Biotechnology , vol . 22 , no . 1 , pp . 117 – 126 , 2011 . [ 4 ] M . Javanainen , H . Martinez - Seara , R . Metzler , and I . Vattulainen , “Diﬀusion of integral membrane proteins in protein - rich membranes , ” Journal Of Physical Chemistry Letters , vol . 8 , no . 17 , pp . 4308 – 4313 , 2017 . [ 5 ] J . A . Dix and A . S . Verkman , “Crowding eﬀects on diﬀusion in solutions and cells , ” Annual Review Of Biophysics , vol . 37 , no . 1 , pp . 247 – 263 , 2008 . [ 6 ] A . Verkman , “Solute and macromolecule diﬀusion in cellular aqueous compartments , ” Trends In Biochemical Sci - ences , vol . 27 , no . 1 , pp . 27 – 33 , 2002 . [ 7 ] C . Fradin , “On the importance of protein diﬀusion in biological systems : The example of the Bicoid morphogen gradient , ” Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta - Proteins And Proteomics , vol . 1865 , no . 11 , B , SI , pp . 1676 – 1686 , 2017 . [ 8 ] L . - G . Wu , E . Hamid , W . Shin , and H . - C . Chiang , “Exocytosis and endocytosis : modes , functions and coupling mechanisms , ” Annual Review of Physiology , vol . 76 , no . 1 , pp . 301 – 331 , 2014 . [ 9 ] C . Waterman - Storer and E . Salmon , “Endoplasmic reticulum membrane tubules are distributed by microtubules in living cells using three distinct mechanisms , ” Current Biology , vol . 8 , no . 14 , pp . 798 – 806 , 1998 . [ 10 ] J . Blum , G . Lawler , M . Reed , and I . Shin , “Eﬀect of cytoskeletal geometry on intracellular diﬀusion , ” Biophysical Journal , vol . 56 , no . 5 , pp . 995 – 1005 , 1989 . [ 11 ] J . Lippincott - Schwartz , E . Snapp , and A . Kenworthy , “Studying protein dynamics in living cells , ” Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology , vol . 2 , no . 6 , pp . 444 – 456 , 2001 . [ 12 ] Y . A . Domanov , S . Aimon , G . E . S . Toombes , M . Renner , F . Quemeneur , A . Triller , M . S . Turner , and P . Bassereau , “Mobility in geometrically conﬁned membranes , ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol . 108 , no . 31 , pp . 12605 – 12610 , 2011 . [ 13 ] C . J . S . Klaus , K . Raghunathan , E . DiBenedetto , and A . K . Kenworthy , “Analysis of diﬀusion in curved surfaces and its application to tubular membranes , ” Molecular Biology Of The Cell , vol . 27 , no . 24 , pp . 3937 – 3946 , 2016 . [ 14 ] M . Lampe , S . Vassilopoulos , and C . Merriﬁeld , “Clathrin coated pits , plaques and adhesion , ” Journal of Structural Biology , vol . 196 , no . 1 , pp . 48 – 56 , 2016 . [ 15 ] O . Avinoam , M . Schorb , C . J . Beese , J . A . G . Briggs , and M . Kaksonen , “Endocytic sites mature by continuous bending and remodeling of the clathrin coat , ” Science , vol . 348 , no . 6241 , pp . 1369 – 1372 , 2015 . [ 16 ] R . A . Buono , A . Leier , J . Paez - Valencia , J . Pennington , K . Goodman , N . Miller , P . Ahlquist , T . T . Marquez - Lago , and M . S . Otegui , “ESCRT - mediated vesicle concatenation in plant endosomes , ” Journal of Cell Biology , vol . 216 , no . 7 , pp . 2167 – 2177 , 2017 . [ 17 ] I . Tsafrir , Y . Caspi , M . Guedeau - Boudeville , T . Arzi , and J . Stavans , “Budding and tubulation in highly oblate vesicles by anchored amphiphilic molecules , ” Physical Review Letters , vol . 91 , no . 13 , p . 138102 , 2003 . [ 18 ] Y . Yu and S . Granick , “Pearling of lipid vesicles induced by nanoparticles , ” Journal Of The American Chemical Society , vol . 131 , no . 40 , pp . 14158 + , 2009 . 7 [ 19 ] V . M . Sukhorukov and J . Bereiter - Hahn , “Anomalous diﬀusion induced by cristae geometry in the inner mitochon - drial membrane , ” PLOS ONE , vol . 4 , no . 2 , pp . 1 – 14 , 2009 . [ 20 ] R . Kusters , L . C . Kapitein , C . C . Hoogenraad , and C . Storm , “Shape - induced asymmetric diﬀusion in dendritic spines allows eﬃcient synaptic AMPA receptor trapping , ” Biophysical Journal , vol . 105 , no . 12 , pp . 2743 – 2750 , 2013 . [ 21 ] M . J . Byrne , M . N . Waxham , and Y . Kubota , “The impacts of geometry and binding on CaMKII diﬀusion and retention in dendritic spines , ” Journal Of Computational Neuroscience , vol . 31 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 12 , 2011 . [ 22 ] J . Faraudo , “Diﬀusion equation on curved surfaces . I . Theory and application to biological membranes , ” Journal Of Chemical Physics , vol . 116 , no . 13 , pp . 5831 – 5841 , 2002 . [ 23 ] J . Balakrishnan , “Spatial curvature eﬀects on molecular transport by diﬀusion , ” Physical Review E , vol . 61 , no . 4 , B , pp . 4648 – 4651 , 2000 . [ 24 ] N . Gov , “Diﬀusion in curved ﬂuid membranes , ” Physical Review E , vol . 73 , no . 4 , 1 , p . 041918 , 2006 . [ 25 ] Saﬀman , Pg and Delbruck , M , “Brownian - motion in biological - membranes , ” Proceedings Of The National Academy Of Sciences Of The United States Of America , vol . 72 , no . 8 , pp . 3111 – 3113 , 1975 . [ 26 ] A . Agrawal and D . J . Steigmann , “A model for surface diﬀusion of trans - membrane proteins on lipid bilayers , ” Zeitschrift Fur Angewandte Mathematik Und Physik , vol . 62 , no . 3 , pp . 549 – 563 , 2011 . [ 27 ] R . Ho(cid:32)lyst , D . Plewczy´nski , A . Aksimentiev , and K . Burdzy , “Diﬀusion on curved , periodic surfaces , ” Phys . Rev . E , vol . 60 , no . 1 , pp . 302 – 307 , 1999 . [ 28 ] J . White and E . Stelzer , “Photobleaching GFP reveals protein dynamics inside live cells” , journal = ”Trends in Cell Biology , ” vol . 9 , no . 2 , pp . 61 – 65 , 1999 . [ 29 ] J . Yguerabide , J . Schmidt , and E . Yguerabide , “Lateral mobility in membranes as detected by ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching , ” Biophysical Journal , vol . 40 , no . 1 , pp . 69 – 75 , 1982 . 5 Supplementary Material 5 . 1 Membrane shape geometry Each shape contains two regions , the inner budded region and the outer region with zero mean curvature . We deﬁne the second principle curvature in the inner region as follows : Dome and Ω shape : φ (cid:48) = 1 R c if S ≤ R c φ max , ( 7 ) with φ max = π / 3 for the dome shape ( Fig . 6b ) and φ max = 5 π / 6 for the Ω shape ( Fig . 6a ) . In case of a dome shape we consider the region with non - zero mean curvature as the budded region . In case of an Ω - shape we denote the membrane portion above the minimal neck radius as the budded region . The radius R c is adjusted such that the area of the budded region is equal to 1 . Pearl ( n = 2 ) : φ (cid:48) =   1 R c if S ≤ S 1 − 1 R neck if S 1 < S ≤ S 2 1 R c if S 2 < S ≤ S 3   , ( 8 ) where S 1 = R c φ max , S 2 = S 1 + ( 2 φ max − π ) R neck and S 3 = S 2 + ( 2 φ max − π ) R c and φ max = 9 π / 10 ( Fig . 7a ) . The ratio between R c and R neck is set to R neck = R c / 4 . More pearls can be added to the shape by deﬁning additional neck and pearl regions . 8 ( a ) Ω . ( b ) Dome . Figure 6 : ( a ) A schematic representation of the Ω shape ( a ) and dome shape ( b ) . The value of the coordinate S at which the radial distance to the symmetry axis R is minimal , S bud deﬁnes the neck of the Ω shape . The neck of the dome shape is deﬁned at S dome . In the outer region the membrane has a vanishing mean curvature , H = 0 Tube : φ (cid:48) tube = (cid:26) 1 R c if S ≤ πR c 2 0 if πR c 2 < S ≤ L tube + πR c 2 (cid:27) ( 9 ) The length L tube are adjusted such that the adimensional area of the budded region is equal to 1 . In the outer region , the second principle curvature is given by : φ (cid:48) = − sin φ R ( 10 ) for all shapes to achieve a vanishing mean curvature . ( a ) Pearl . ( b ) Tube . Figure 7 : ( a ) A schematic representation of a pearled structure . It is assumed that the bud and the neck have radius of curvature R and R neck , respectively , over regions spanned by the angle φ max and 2 φ max − π . In the region outside the pearl , the membrane has vanishing mean curvature , H = 0 , which means it approaches a ﬂat surface outside the budded region . The coordinate S pearl deﬁnes the area of the budded structure and corresponds to the minimal radial distance R joining the pearl with the rest of the membrane . ( b ) A schematic representation of a tubular structure . The hemisphere region at the top of the tube has a radius of curvature R c , spanned by the angle φ = π 2 . The tube has a height L tube measured from the bottom of the hemisphere to the tube rim . In the region outside the tube , the membrane has vanishing mean curvature , H = 0 . 5 . 2 Conservation of the total protein density We consider a diﬀusive process where the boundary conditions are such that there is no ﬂux of proteins at the boundaries of the spatial domain . This means that there are not proteins entering or leaving the membrane . Under these conditions , the total amount of proteins m tot = (cid:82) σda , must be constant in time . In our simulations , we have set as m tot = 0 . 24 at ¯ t = 0 . In Fig . 8 we show m tot as function of time , where , as predicted , m tot is constant over time on the bud . Exactly the same plot is obtained on all the other shapes considered , and for the sake of brevity we do not show all of them . 9 Figure 8 : The total amount of proteins m tot on the bud as a function of time . Consistent with the zero ﬂux boundary condition imposed to solve the diﬀusion equation on the diﬀerent shapes , m tot is conserved over time . 5 . 3 Sensitivity to diﬀerent initial density proﬁles As mentioned in the main section , we have chosen a initial density proﬁle of the form σ ( a ( s ) , ¯ t = 0 ) = c ( 1 − tanh ( 5 ( a ( s ) − a 0 ) ) ) , where c is adjusted in such a way that the value of σ ( a = 0 , ¯ t = 0 ) = 0 . 5 and a 0 is adjusted to give a total amount of proteins m tot = 0 . 24 . However , diﬀerent values of σ max ≡ σ ( a = 0 , ¯ t = 0 ) yield diﬀerent values of a 0 , so we can consider various initial density proﬁles that gives the same m tot . In Fig . 9 we show diﬀerent initial density proﬁles , σ ( a ( s ) , ¯ t = 0 ) ∼ 1 − tanh ( 5 ( a ( s ) − a 0 ) ) and the density proﬁles obtained with each of these initial conditions at later time steps on the Ω shape ( Figs . 9b and 9c ) , the dome ( Figs . 9e and 9f ) , the pearl structure with n = 3 buds ( Figs . 9h and 9i ) and the tube ( Figs . 9k and 9l ) showing that as time proceeds the eﬀect of having diﬀerent initial condition vanishes , as the density proﬁles tend to become equal regardless of the chosen initial proﬁle . In the case of the pearl structure , a longer time is needed for the proﬁles to become equal . Diﬀerent initial conditions lead to diﬀerent density proﬁles during the ﬁrst time steps of the simulations , as shown in Fig . 9 , but the initial conditions have no eﬀect on the amount of proteins in the budded region m bud as time evolves , as shown in Fig . 10 , indicating that the diﬀusion of proteins away from the budded region does not depend on the initial condition . 10 ( a ) ¯ t = 0 ( b ) ¯ t = 10 dt ( c ) ¯ t = 50 dt ( d ) ¯ t = 0 ( e ) ¯ t = 10 dt ( f ) ¯ t = 50 dt ( g ) ¯ t = 0 ( h ) ¯ t = 10 dt ( i ) ¯ t = 200 dt ( j ) ¯ t = 0 ( k ) ¯ t = 10 dt ( l ) ¯ t = 50 dt Figure 9 : Three diﬀerent initial protein proﬁles , σ ( a , ¯ t = 0 ) proﬁles with σ max = 0 . 5 , 0 . 75 , 1 . 0 , that yield the same total amount of proteins m tot = 0 . 24 , for diﬀerent shapes : ( ( a ) − ( c ) ) Ω - shape , ( ( d ) - ( f ) ) dome , ( ( g ) - ( i ) ) pearl with n = 3 buds and ( ( j ) - ( l ) ) a tube . At later times ( ¯ t = 50 dt ) the density proﬁles in the Ω - shape , the dome and the tube tend to become equal , regardless of the chosen initial condition , but in the case of the pearl structure , a longer time ( ¯ t = 200 dt ) is needed for the proﬁles to become equal . 11 ( a ) ¯ t = 0 ( b ) ¯ t = 10 dt ( c ) ¯ t = 50 dt ( d ) ¯ t = 10 dt Figure 10 : The total amount of proteins in the budded region m bud as a function of time , for the initial conditions shown in Fig . 9a and for diﬀerent shapes : ( a ) Ω - shape , ( b ) dome , ( c ) pearl with n = 3 and ( d ) a tube . These initial conditions have no eﬀect on the time evolution of the protein density on the budded region , as the diﬀerent curves are overlapping . 12