Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition 1989 , Vol . 15 , No . 3 , 432 - 442 Copyright 1989 by the American Psychological Association , Inc . 0278 - 7393 / 89 / 500 . 75 Cryptomnesia : Delineating Inadvertent Plagiarism Alan S . Brown and Dana R . Murphy Southern Methodist University Cryptomnesia , or inadvertent plagiarism , was experimentally examined in three investigations . Subjects were required to generate category exemplars , alternating with 3 other subjects in Experiments 1 and 2 or with a standardized , written list in Experiment 3 . After this generation stage , subjects attempted to recall those items which they had just generated and an equal number of completely new items from each category . Plagiarism of others ' generated responses occurred in all three tasks ( generation , recall own , and recall new ) in each experiment , despite instructions to avoid such intrusions . The amount of plagiarism was greater under more complex generation sequences and for items produced from orthographic relative to semantic categories . The most likely source of plagiarized responses was the person who had responded just before the subject in the generation sequence . Directions for future research are discussed . The topic of plagiarism is of universal interest to scholar / teachers because of occasional incidents encountered either with colleagues or students . Although intentional plagiarism is clearly an anathema to all professionals , there are situations where duplication occurs inadvertently . This uninlentional plagiarism , or cryptomnesia , is the focus of the present article . In the technical definition , cryptomnesia is " . . . the presence of phenomena in normal consciousness which objectively are memories , but subjectively are not recognized as such . " ( Tay - lor , 1965 , p . 1111 ) . Cryptomnesia refers to generating a word , an idea , a song , or a solution to a problem , with the belief that it is either totally original , or at least original within the present context . In actuality , the item is not original , but one which has been produced by someone else ( or even oneself ) at some earlier time . A number of anecdotal discussions of cryptomnesia exist . Some of these recount public scandals where prominent in - dividuals such as Nietzsche ( Jung , 1905 / 1957 ) and Helen Keller ( Bowers & Hilgard , 1986 ) have been accused of copying portions of other person ' s works . Freud ( 1901 / 1960 ) related that when he was developing his theory on original bisexuality , Fliess ( a friend and professional colleague ) reminded Freud that he had given Freud the idea several years earlier . At that time , Freud rejected his claim but later recalled the earlier incident . There also exist less dramatic stories of cryptomnesia . For instance , Daniels ( 1972 ) admitted , in a printed apology , to inadvertent plagiarism after being informed by colleagues that significant portions of his book duplicated the work of others . He noted , " I have certainly been aware that I had an extraor - dinary ability to remember material when I wanted to , but I have never before realized that I did it unconsciously . " ( p . 125 ) Other incidents involve the duplication of one ' s own I would like to express my gratitude to Lyle Bourne , Larry Jacoby , David Mitchell , and Daniel Schacter for their helpful comments on die manuscript . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Alan S . Brown , Department of Psychology , Southern Methodist University , Dallas , Texas 75275 . scholarly ideas by others ( Reed , 1974 ) or by oneself at a later time ( Skinner , 1983 ; Taylor , 1965 ) . As Skinner ( 1983 ) noted , " . . . one of the most disheartening experiences of old age is discovering that a point you have just made—so significant , so beautifully expressed—was made by you in something you published a long time ago " ( p . 242 ) . Although cryptomnesia has not been directly investigated in a laboratory setting , the related phenomenon of source amnesia has been examined . Investigations of source amnesia involve a multistage paradigm . After being provided with certain few facts , subjects are given a cued recall test involving these new facts mixed in with other general information items . As a last step , subjects are asked to identify where they learned each fact which they just recalled . If they fail to identify the experimental context as the source of the new facts , then subjects are said to exhibit source amnesia . Source amnesia is similar to cryptomnesia in that information concerning the " context " in which the fact was first experienced has been forgotten . However , with cryptomnesia the recalled informa - tion is perceived as original , whereas with source amnesia it is not . The incidence of source amnesia has been examined with three types of subjects : hypnotized , amnesic , and normal . Within the clinical realm , practitioners have noted that when hypnotized subjects are provided information , they may oc - casionally remember the information in the posthypnotic state but forget that they learned it while under hypnosis ( Thorn , 1960 ) . A number of investigators have examined this phenomenon by giving subjects unique facts while under hypnosis ( i . e . , " How many moons does Venus have ? " ; An - swer : none ) and then repeating those same questions posthyp - notically , accompanied by distractor items . If a subject re - members the answer but forgets that he or she learned it under hypnosis , then this is evidence of source amnesia . A small , but reliable , percentage of hypnotized subjects ( 10 % - 15 % ) exhibit source amnesia posthypnotically ( Evans , 1979 ; Evans & Thorn , 1966 ; Thorn , 1960 ; Cooper , 1966 ) . Furthermore , Evans and Thorn ( 1966 ) found that fact recall and source identification were independent of each other ( nonsignificant correlations ) . 432 CRYPTOMNESIA 433 Source amnesia has also been demonstrated to accompany certain types of organic memory disorders . When Schacter , Harbluk , and McLachlan ( 1984 ) presented amnesics with made - up " facts , " subjects had difficulty identifying the exper - iment as the source of the information when tested only a few seconds after input . This was true whether or not the amnesics recalled the fact . Even when they did correctly identify the experimental context as the source , they were only at chance levels at recognizing which of two experimenters provided the information . Shimamura and Squire ( 1987 ) also discovered similar effects with transient amnesia states resulting from electroconvulsive therapy and noted that source amnesia and fact memory are independent of each other : Subjects with high or low rates of source errors showed equivalent levels of fact recall . Finally , Mitchell , Hunt , and Schmitt ( 1986 ) dis - covered that persons with Alzheimer ' s disease showed a rea - sonable level of cued recall for items experienced earlier , although they were only at chance level in discriminating between sources ( self or other ) . A different form of source memory has been investigated with normal subjects . Johnson and Rave ( 1981 ) set the frame - work for this line of research in their seminal article on reality monitoring , or how we differentiate memories for our internal experiences ( ruminations , reflections , and fantasy ) from ones that are external ( perceptual ) in origin . Although this line of research resembles investigations of source amnesia , a major distinction exists : Studies on reality monitoring have focused primarily on source forgetting rather than source amnesia . As Schacter et al . ( 1984 ) pointed out , source forgetting is failure to recognize which of multiple experimental sources provided the item , whereas source amnesia is failure to recognize that the item was even experienced within the recent experimental context . Several reality monitoring studies that use source alterna - tion are germane to the topic of cryptomnesia . Rave and Johnson ( 1980 ) had pairs of subjects alternate in orally gen - erating free or constrained responses to various cues . Addi - tional individuals were present , some of whom simply listened to the responses , and others of whom recorded the responses as they were spoken . Generators performed better than lis - teners or recorders on a later source identification test ( who produced which items ? ) , with no difference between listeners and recorders . Thus , active participation in the generation process seems measurably to enhance source memory . A similar paradigm was used by Voss , Vesonder , Post , and Ney ( 1987 ) . Rather than requesting semantic retrieval of restricted associates ( Raye & Johnson , 1980 ) , they employed an episodic task where pairs of subjects alternated in the oral recall of a previously presented list of words . Individuals were better at later recognizing ( as old ) items they had initially produced , compared with words generated by their partner ; this result supported the generation effect ( Slamecka & Graf , 1978 ) . Surprisingly , however , there was no difference in source identification accuracy ( who said this ? ) for words generated by themselves versus those generated by the partner . Again , the fact that there appears to be an independence of source memory from episodic memory supports Evans and Thorn ( 1966 ) as well as Shimamura and Squire ( 1987 ) . The purpose of the present investigation is to examine cryptomnesia within a controlled generation context . The format of each of three investigations involved the same three - task sequence : Subjects ( a ) took turns generating members of specific categories , then ( b ) recalled their own generated in - stances , and finally ( c ) generated additional new exemplars . Although this research resembles investigations of source amnesia and source forgetting , our experimental model is closer to cryptomnesia . The critical distinction is that source amnesia occurs when subjects generate an acknowledged old response but forget its origin , whereas cryptomnesia occurs when subjects unintentionally generate an old response but think that it is new . In a sense , cryptomnesia is an extreme form of source amnesia . Within the present research design , cryptomnesia will be defined as the production of an item in the category genera - tion task which is then repeated by another subject either later in the same generation task or in either of two subsequent recall tasks ( recalling their own responses or recalling new responses ) . Although the term plagiarism has acquired pejo - rative connotations , it is used in this article in the neutral , descriptive sense . Experiment Method Subjects . Twenty - four undergraduate students at Southern Meth - odist University participated in the investigation . The study was part of a laboratory exercise in a course on human memory , and subjects were unaware of the purpose of the investigation prior to participa - tion . Procedure . Subjects were randomly assigned to one of six separate 4 - person groups at the start of a class period , and each group was tested in a separate room by a different experimenter . The procedure was divided into three parts : oral group generation , written recall of own responses , and written retrieval of new items . Prior to the group generation task , each subject was randomly as - signed to one of four seats in a row . Subjects were informed that they would be taking turns generating exemplars aloud from four different categories , completing one category at a time . The conceptual cate - gories of sports , musical instruments , clothing , and four - legged ani - mals were selected because they were sufficiently large ( Battig & Montague , 1969 ) and required no obvious temporal ( e . g . , Presidents ) or spatial ( e . g . , states ) strategy in the retrieval process . In the generation task , each subject produced aloud one additional new member of the current category , going in order down the row of four seats . At the end of the row , the cycle started again at the beginning of the row . This sequence was repeated four times , enabling each subject to generate four members of that particular category ( one per cycle ) . Thus , a total of 16 items were generated from each category by the group . Subjects were instructed to provide a new exemplar each turn and not to repeat one that had been produced previously . After each category , the 4 subjects were reassigned seat positions according to a Latin - square format , so that each subject was in a different position in the output sequence for each category . The order of the four categories was randomly determined separately for each of the six groups . The experimenter wrote down the generated ex - emplars as they were produced , and he tape recorded the session as a backup . 434 ALAN S . BROWN AND DANA R . MURPHY After the group generation stage , subjects were handed a recall sheet with four category labels and eight blank spaces under each label . The subjects were instructed to first write down the four exemplars which they had generated during the group session , and then to generate four completely new items from each category . The subjects were given as much time as necessary to complete this task and were required to write something on each blank . Results and Discussion The appropriate control comparison for the occurrence of cryptomnesia is somewhat ambiguous . Because subjects are specifically instructed not to repeat any previous responses , one could argue that any repetition is sufficient evidence of cryptomnesia . On the other hand , subjects may have momen - tary lapses of attention and miss hearing certain responses , making the duplication of an earlier response coincidental generation rather than conversational plagiarism . One possible control comparison is the probability with which subjects ordinarily repeat their own previously gener - ated responses during an oral free - recall task . Bousfield and Rosner ( 1970 ) presented subjects with a list of 20 unrelated words ( 3 s per item ) and allowed 80 s for oral recall . They found that on the first recall trial , 2 . 6 % of the recalled items were repeats of earlier recalled words . This estimate , however , may be too high . Gardiner , Thompson , and Maskarinec ( 1974 ) pointed out that the majority of repeated items in such a free - recall task are those from short - term memory , which are minimally processed and " dumped " early in the recall protocol In fact , when Gardiner and Klee ( 1976 ) exaggerated this recency bias by instructing subjects to recall the last list items first , the repetition rate rose to 5 . 7 % . At the other extreme , when Klee and Gardiner ( 1976 ) instructed subjects to recall in serial order , minimizing the recency item effect , they discovered that the repetition probability dropped to 1 . 6 % . In a direct examination of this difference , Gardiner , Pass - more , Herriot , and Klee ( 1977 ) compared recall of items from each third of the input list and discovered repetition proba - bilities remarkably similar to those found by Gardiner and Klee ( 1976 ) and Klee and Gardiner ( 1976 ) : 5 . 7 % of the recalled recency items were repeated later in free recall , whereas only 1 . 4 % of primacy items were repeated ( percent - ages derived from Gardiner et al . , 1977 , Figure 1 , p . 48 , and Table 1 , p . 49 ) . A repetition rate of 1 . 5 % , averaging Gardiner et al . ' s ( 1977 ) 1 . 4 % and Klee and Gardiner ' s ( 1976 ) 1 . 6 % , appears to be an appropriate reference point for the present investigation because our task also requires retrieval from long - term memory . One discrepancy between these studies and the present investigation is that they used an episodic task with restricted category size . In a task more similar to ours , Gruenewald and Lockhead ( 1980 ) had subjects orally generate as many items as they could from a single semantic memory category ( birds , foods , etc . ) for 15 min and found an average of 1 . 6 % repeti - tion errors . This repetition percentage is liberal because Gru - enewald and Lockhead ' s ( 1980 ) subjects ( a ) generated consid - erably more exemplars ( range of 31 to 263 ) than did subjects in the present study ( 16 ) ; ( b ) they had to remember their previously generated items for up to 15 min , compared with about 10 min in the present study ; and ( c ) they were given no admonition to avoid repetitions , whereas we explicitly told the subjects not to repeat previously uttered items . Although Gruenewald and Lockhead ' s estimate may be high , we will use it as a reasonable reference point because it is comparable to those percentages found in the previously cited episodic studies . Technically , there are two types of plagiarism—copying others and copying oneself . The first type is the most common variety and will be the primary focus of this series of studies . For descriptive simplicity , when the term plagiarism is used in this article , it will refer to copying others ' responses . Later duplication of one ' s own previous responses will be labeled self - plagiarism . Generation . During the generation task , 41 . 7 % ( 10 of 24 ) of the subjects repeated an item produced by someone else . The 13 plagiarized responses represented 3 . 4 % of all items produced . Adjustment for total repetition opportunities ( elim - inating the first item generated in the series ) increased this to 3 . 6 % . The incidence of repetition intrusions is higher than chance . The 3 . 6 % rate is significantly above the oral self - repetition rate of 1 . 6 % ( Gruenewald & Lockhead , 1980 ) , using a one - sample test , / ( 23 ) = 2 . 26 . In this and all subsequent statistical tests , an alpha level of . 05 is used . There were no self - plagiarisms in the generation task . Recall own . In the second stage of the experiment , subjects were asked to recall the four responses that they had previously generated in each category ( 16 items total ) . If a subject had already duplicated a response from another subject during the group generation stage , then that particular response was counted as correct if it was recalled during the recall - own test . In other words , a response was counted as plagiarized only once . For this task , 75 . 0 % of the subjects ( 18 of 24 ) intruded at least one item that someone else had given during the group generation stage . These subjects produced 28 plagiarized re - sponses , comprising 7 . 3 % of the total number of responses across all subjects . Compared with the chance level of 1 . 6 % ( Gruenewald & Lockhead , 1980 ) , this obtained percentage was significant , t ( 23 ) = 4 . 14 . Another comparison for " random " intrusions is the num - ber of new responses which subjects inadvertently produced during this task . There were 29 . 2 % of the subjects ( 7 of 24 ) who recalled a total of nine new items , which comprised 2 . 3 % of the total responses generated during this task . The differ - ence between plagiarized and new intrusions was significant , r ( 23 ) = 3 . 59 , suggesting that the items experienced recently are intruding at a higher than chance rate into the subjects 1 recall of their own responses . Recall new . When asked to generate four new items from each category , 70 . 8 % of the subjects ( 17 of 24 ) intruded at least one item that had been generated by someone else during the generation task . There were 33 intruded words , accounting for 8 . 6 % of the total produced by all subjects . This was significantly different from chance ( 1 . 6 % ; Gruenewald & Lockhead , 1980 ) , r ( 23 ) = 3 . 65 . There were only two self - plagiarisms ( from different subjects ) during this task . CRYPTOMNESIA 435 Combined analyses . A number of " global " analyses were performed comparing plagiarized responses across tasks . In the first , an analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) revealed a significant difference in the rate of plagiarism across the three tasks , F \ 2 , 46 ) = 3 . 70 , MS e - 1 . 22 . A Newman - Keuls pairwise test showed that the rate was lower in the generation task than under either recall - own or recall - new tasks , with no difference between the latter two tasks . The second global analysis addressed the question of whether the plagiarisms were produced by the same subset of individuals or whether this error was distributed across all subjects . If a subset of subjects accounts for all the cryptom - nesia in each task , then the generality of the phenomenon would be limited . To test this , the number of plagiarized responses was correlated across subjects for each pair of tasks . All three correlations ( generate vs . recall own , generate vs . recall new , and recall own vs . recall new ) were nonsignificant and ranged from — . 32 to . 10 . Therefore , the probability of individuals plagiarizing responses is apparently independent across tasks . The third global analysis addressed the source of the intru - sions , or where the originator was sitting with respect to the plagiarizing individual . Combining the results across tasks , 38 intrusions originated from the preceding person , 22 from the succeeding person , and 14 from the nonadjacent person . There was a significant difference among sources , F ( 2 , 44 ) = 4 . 91 , MS * = 1 . 35 . A Newman - Keuls pairwise test revealed that intrusions from the preceding person were significantly greater than both of the other positions , with no significant difference between the succeeding and nonadjacent positions . A final analysis addressed the normative frequency of pla - giarized responses . The median ordinal rank of all items generated was 11 ( Battig & Montague , 1969 ) , while the me - dian rank for plagiarized responses was 7 . Only plagiarism from the recall - own and recall - new tasks was included . In the generation task , a bias exists towards plagiarizing high - fre - quency items because they occur relatively earlier in the output and therefore have more opportunities to be duplica - ted . For the statistical test , the mean plagiarized item rank of 8 . 83 was compared with an expected value of 11 . Substituting the mean for the median was necessary for the statistical test and actually provided a conservative test of the difference . This difference was significant , / ( 60 ) = 2 . 07 , suggesting that subjects selectively plagiarized those exemplars that were higher in normative frequency . The outcome from Experiment 1 suggests that the phenom - enon of cryptomnesia occurs reliably across samples of con - ceptual categories ( four ) , tasks ( oral and written ) , and time frames ( from several seconds to 10 min later ) . Subjects rarely repeat their own earlier responses : No self plagiarisms oc - curred during the generation task , and only two occurred during the recall - new task . Thus , it appears that subjects monitor self - generated and other - generated information in different ways ; this is consistent with the generation effect ( Slamecka & Graf , 1978 ) and reality monitoring studies ( Johnson & Raye , 1981 ; Raye & Johnson , 1980 ; Voss et al . , 1987 ) . Furthermore , we found that ( a ) the rate of plagiarism was higher in the written tasks than in the oral generation task , ( b ) the most likely person to be plagiarized is the one preceding the subject , and ( c ) subjects tend to plagiarize relatively higher frequency responses . Added control group . Although the comparisons with rou - tine repetition frequencies from previous investigations have provided evidence of cryptomnesia , we decided to test a control group that was more comparable to the present design . We randomly selected 8 additional students from an Experi - mental Psychology class . Each subject was tested individually and told that he or she would be generating 16 exemplars from each of four different semantic categories . After a cate - gory name was announced , the subject orally produced 16 different instances from that particular category while the experimenter recorded the responses . These categories were the same ones used in Experiment 1 , and the order of category generation was balanced by using a Latin - square technique in such a way that within the first 4 ( and the second 4 ) subjects tested , each category occurred in each ordinal position one time . Out of the total of 512 items generated by the 8 subjects , there were only two repeated items . After adjustment for repetition opportunities ( eliminating the first item in the output ) , the repetition percent was 0 . 4 . The cryptomnesia percentage during the generation stage in the present study ( 3 . 6 ) is nine times that expected by this chance measure ( 0 . 4 ) . These data were reanalyzed by creating two " pseudogroups " of 4 subjects each . Their output was analyzed as if it were generated in an interactive , rather than an independent fash - ion . For instance , Subject A ' s responses were selected from Positions 1 , 5 , 9 , and 13 ; Subject B ' s responses from Positions 2 , 6 , 10 , and 14 ; Subject C ' s responses from Positions 3 , 1 , 11 , and 15 ; and Subject D ' s responses from Positions 4 , 8 , 12 , and 16 . In this manner , a " continuous " string of 16 responses was artificially created . For both groups of 4 sub - jects , four different hypothetical output orders were used so that each subject was in Seat 1 across all four categories , then in Seat 2 across all four categories , and so forth . This analysis allowed each item to be compared against " previous " ones to determine the chance level of overlap . This , in turn , gave an estimate of what the repetition frequency should be if subjects were not paying any attention to previous responses . This " repetition rate " was 17 . 5 % , suggesting that subjects in Experiment 1 were attending to other subjects ' output . Because the actual repetition rate of 3 . 6 is between the two extremes represented by full monitoring ( 0 . 4 % ) and no mon - itoring ( 17 . 5 % ) , subjects were able to avoid duplication better than chance but unable to do this as well as when generating by themselves . Three other aspects of these contrived duplications argue that the repetitions in Experiment 1 are qualitatively different from chance overlap . First , source individuals were equally distributed across preceding , succeeding , and nonadjacent positions in the control group ( as one would expect ) , whereas this was not true for the experimental groups . Second , the output position ( out of 16 ) when the repetition occurred was much later for experimental subjects ( mean = 11 . 95 ) than for control subjects ( mean = 8 . 80 ) . This difference was signifi - cant , f ( l6 ) = 2 . 89 . Finally , there were no instances where 436 ALAN S . BROWN AND DANA R . MURPHY duplications occurred during the first round of four responses for the experimental subjects , whereas more than a quarter of the repetitions for the control group occurred during this portion of the output . Experiment 2 Experiment 2 was designed to extend the examination of cryptomnesia to a broader range of stimulus conditions . One goal was to determine whether increases in task monitoring difficulty would lead to increases in the rate of cryptomnesia . Gardiner et al . ( 1977 ) found that having subjects listen to white noise during oral recall increased the number of repe - tition errors , compared with a control group with no white noise . In order to vary monitoring difficulty , subjects either generated items in one block of 16 ( as in Experiment 1 ) , in four temporally separate blocks of 4 , or one at a time in a continuous mix of all four categories . A second motivation for this manipulation was to provide a more realistic analogue to natural conversation . Cryptomnesia occurs frequently in ongoing conversations ( cf . Taylor , 1965 ) which rarely proceed as a series of discrete and nonoverlapping topics , but rather as an intermixing of various conversational threads . In addition to semantic categories , we added orthographic categories . Because people usually process conversation at a semantic level , we assumed that orthographically based gen - eration would be more difficult and would result in more cryptomnesia . However , there is some research which suggests the opposite . Johnson , Raye , Foley , and Foley ( 1981 ) com - pared conditions where subjects generated responses related to the stimulus by meaning ( semantic ) or by first letter ( or - thographic ) . Although recall and recognition were better in the semantic condition , differentiation between items heard and generated was more accurate under the orthographic condition . In Experiment 2 , we also investigated subjects ' confidence in their correct versus incorrect ( plagiarized ) responses pro - duced during the two written tasks . Finally , we added a different type of control comparison . Instead of generating items in isolation , as in Experiment 1 , these control subjects generated responses from only one category but alternated with 3 other subjects generating from their own categories . Method Subjects . Sixty - four subjects from sections of Introductory Psy - chology at Southern Methodist University were tested in the investi - gation . Participation was voluntary , with extra course credit given as an incentive . Design . A 2 x 4 between - subjects design was employed , with independent variables of type of materials ( two levels ) and generation pattern ( four levels ) . For the materials variable , subjects generated items from either semantically or orthographically defined categories . The generation pattern variable consisted of four levels : whole , quarter , single , and control . In the whole groups , all 16 members of each category were generated consecutively . In the quarter groups , only four ( of 16 ) members of a category were generated consecutively , before switching to another category . Therefore , items from each category were generated in four separate blocks , with the four different categories alternating throughout the production sequence . For the single and control groups , category members were not produced consecutively , but rather interspersed among items from other categories . For the single groups , subjects did not know before each turn which category they would be generating from . In contrast , subjects in the control groups generated items only from their own category assigned at the start of the session . Materials . The four semantic categories were the same as in Experiment 1 . The four orthographic categories were defined as words beginning with the letter pairs BE , FO , MA , and 77 / . These combi - nations were among the most frequently occurring letter pairs at the start of written words , according to the Mayzner and Tresselt ( 1965 ) norms . Procedure . Experiment 2 used the same task sequence as in Experiment 1 : generate , recall own , and recall new . Four subjects participated in each generation group , and two separate groups were tested under each of the eight conditions of the design , yielding 16 different groups of subjects . The groups were randomly assigned to condition , with the restriction that within the first and second block of eight groups tested , each of the eight conditions of the experiment was represented one time . The 4 subjects in each group were randomly assigned to one of the four seat positions . In the whole groups , the generation procedure was identical to that in Experiment 1 . For the quarter groups , subjects generated items from a different category on each " cycle . " Prior to each pass down a row , the experimenter read aloud the name of one of the four categories . After four complete passes , four items from each of the four categories had been produced , at which point the subjects were reassigned chair positions . Each category occurred once in each of the four ordinal positions across the four seating rotations . In the single groups , each successive item generated was from a different one of the four categories . Before each subject spoke , the experimenter indicated the category by turning over a card with a category name printed on it . The order of categories was counterbal - anced by using a Latin - square arrangement , so that within each seating rotation ( four times down a row of subjects ) , a member of each category was generated once by each subject . Thus , each subject generated four members from each category across the four seating rotations . For the control groups , each of the 4 subjects was randomly assigned one of the four categories at the start of the experiment and generated items exclusively from that category throughout the group generation procedure . All other aspects of the generation task were the same as in the whole groups . To summarize the generation procedure , subjects in the whole , quarter , and single groups generated a total of four members for each of the four conceptual categories , but in different production patterns . Control group subjects generated 16 members of one category and listened while the other 3 subjects produced 16 items from each of the three other categories . Subjects in all groups switched seat posi - tions after each four cycles ( 16 responses ) . The experimenter wrote down each word generated and taped each session as a backup . After the generation stage , all subjects performed the recall - own and recall - new tasks . These were identical to Experiment 1 , except that subjects indicated their confidence in the correctness of each response produced by circling a letter next to it : P = positive , SS = somewhat sure , and G = guess . Results and Discussion The percentages of error responses produced during Exper - iment 2 are displayed in Table 1 , separately for each task , generation pattern , and item type . Next to each percentage is the number of subjects , out of eight , who made that type of error . In addition to plagiarisms , two other types of errors are CRYPTOMNESIA 437 Table 1 Percent Incorrect ( % Inc . ) Responses and Number of Subjects Exhibiting Each Type of Error ( No . , out of 8 ) in Experiment 2 Group WholeQuarterSingleControl WholeQuarter Single Control Others % Inc . 5 . 0 3 . 3 12 . 5 5 . 0 7 . 5 19 . 2 Generation Plagiarism No . 438 67 7 Self % Inc . 0 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 81 . 6 6 . 3 9 . 4 No . 0000 1256 Recall own Plagiarism . . fi New others % Inc . No . % Inc . Semantic categories 5 . 5 3 1 . 6 4 . 7 4 2 . 4 9 . 4 6 4 . 7 7 . 1 Orthographic categories 13 . 3 6 14 . 1 12 . 5 8 15 . 6 16 . 4 7 15 . 6 18 . 0 No . 1355 7787 Others % Inc . 10 . 9 5 . 5 13 . 3 21 . 1 10 . 2 16 . 4 18 . 0 16 . 4 Recall new Plagiarism No . 8478 58 6 7 Self % Inc . 0 . 8 0 . 0 0 . 0 2 . 3 0 . 8 2 . 3 2 . 3 0 . 8 No . 1002 1221 presented in Table 1 : self - plagiarisms ( in the generate and recall - new tasks ) and new - response intrusions ( in the recall - own task ) . Generation . Subjects in the control groups were excluded from this analysis because there was no person to plagiarize from ( they were the only persons generating from their cate - gory ) . An ANOVA revealed a significant difference in the plagiarism percentage across generation pattern , F { 2 , 42 ) = 7 . 34 , but not for the item type , F ( [ , 42 ) = 1 . 91 , or for the interaction of generation pattern with item type , F ( 2 , 42 ) = 1 . 02 , MS C — 11 . 09 . A Newman - Keuls pairwise test applied to the generation pattern main effect revealed that the single group was significantly higher than both of the other groups , with no difference between whole and quarter groups . There - fore , jumping from category to category elicited more plagia - risms than did blocking category generations by 4 or 16 items . The overall intrusion rate of 8 . 8 % across the experimental groups ( whole , quarter , and single ) was significantly higher than the chance rate of 1 . 6 % ( Gruenewald & Lockhead , 1980 ) ; ( 47 ) = 4 . 75 . This deviation from chance was also significant for both the semantic ( 6 . 9 % ; f [ 23 ] = 3 . 54 ) and orthographic ( 10 . 6 % ; t [ 21 ] = 3 . 47 ) conditions . No self - plagiarism errors were made by subjects in the semantic condition during the generation task . However , there were a number of self - plagiarisms in the orthographic conditions , which differed significantly across generation pat - terns , F ( 3 , 28 ) = 4 . 62 , MS C = 0 . 73 . A Newman - Keuls test revealed significant pairwise differences only between the control and whole groups and between the control and quarter groups . A comparison of self - plagiarisms and other plagia - risms for orthographic subjects revealed a significantly greater number of other plagiarisms , F ( \ , 21 ) = 9 . 16 , which did not interact with generation pattern , F ( 2 , 21 ) = 1 . 06 , M & = 2 . 74 . Recall own . Data are not presented for the control groups in the recall - own task because they could emit only self - plagiarisms . The rate of plagiarism was higher in orthographic than semantic conditions . F ( [ , 42 ) = 8 . 85 , but there was no difference across the three generation patterns , F ( 2 , 42 ) = 1 . 08 , and no interaction of generation pattern with item type , F < 1 , MS C = 4 . 37 . The plagiarism probability , across all three experimental groups , was 10 . 3 % , which was significantly greater than chance ( 1 . 6 % ; Gruenewald & Lockhead , 1980 ) , t [ 47 ] — 4 . 47 . This difference from chance was significant within both semantic ( 6 . 5 % ; / [ 23 ] = 3 . 54 ) and orthographic ( 14 . 1 % ; t [ 23 ] = 6 . 33 ) conditions . New - response intrusions showed the same pattern as pla - giarisms . These errors were significantly more frequent in the orthographic than semantic conditions , F ( l , 56 ) = 28 . 04 , but there was no effect of generation pattern , F < 1 , nor any interaction of generation pattern with item type , F < I , MS e = 2 . 07 . A direct comparison of new - response errors versus plagiarisms revealed a significant difference for semantic groups , . F ( l , 21 ) = 5 . 49 , MS t = 1 . 78 , but not for orthographic groups { F < 1 ) . In summary , the new - response errors were more frequent with orthographic than with semantic mate - rials , and plagiarisms exceeded new - response errors in seman - tic but not orthographic conditions . An additional analysis addressed a possible alternative to cryptomnesia in the recall - own task . Suppose that when sub - jects recall their own responses , they have completely forgot - ten items produced by others during the generation task . Rather than plagiarizing items , they are selecting " new " items from their long - term memory store , some of which happen to duplicate those produced earlier by other subjects . To check this possibility , the control groups were used to establish chance probabilities for coincidental overlap . For each control subject , new response errors from the recall - own task were compared with generated items from each of the three experimental groups . Three scores were computed for each control subject , indicating the probability of an erro - neous new response duplicating a response produced by sub - jects in the whole , in the quarter , or in the single groups during the generation task . Excluding 4 control subjects who exhibited no intrusions , these resulting chance overlap prob - abilities were . 26 , . 29 , and . 23 for comparisons with the whole , quarter , and single groups , respectively . In contrast , for the 438 ALAN S . BROWN AND DANA R . MURPHY experimental group subjects , the proportion of total errors accounted for by plagiarisms was . 54 , . 49 , and . 56 for the whole , quarter , and single groups , respectively . In other words , about half ( . 53 ) of the error responses in the experimental groups consisted of plagiarisms , while only a quarter ( . 26 ) of the control groups ' error responses represent potential pla - giarisms . This difference in overall proportions was signifi - cant , z = 3 . 79 . The final analysis of the recall - own data concerns the mean confidence ratings . As shown in Table 2 , the preponderance of intruded items ( plagiarized and new ) was given a low confidence rating ( guess ) , whereas the vast majority of correct items was given a high confidence rating ( positive ) . After a numerical conversion of the confidence ratings ( P = 1 , SS ~ 2 , G = 3 ) , statistical tests revealed significant differences between plagiarized and correct responses , / ( 28 ) = 9 . 51 , as well as between new and correct responses , / ( 25 ) = 6 . 50 . A direct test between the plagiarized and new items was not performed because there was an insufficient number of sub - jects who exhibited both types of errors . However , the per - centages indicate that subjects ' confidence in repeated and new responses is very similar . Recall new . Control group subjects were included in the analysis of plagiarisms in the recall - new task because they had the opportunity to plagiarize items generated by the other subjects . An ANOVA indicated no significant effect of item type ( F < 1 ) , generation pattern , F ( 3 , 56 ) = 1 . 66 , or their interaction , F ( 3 , 56 ) = 1 . 24 , MS e - 3 . 82 . The overall plagia - rism probability of 14 . 0 % was significantly higher than chance Table 2 Percent of Items in Each Confidence Rating Category for the Recall - Own and Recall - New Tasks in Experiments 2 and 3 Task Recall own Correct ( own ) items Plagiarized items New items Recall new Correct ( new ) items Plagiarized items Recall own Correct ( old ) items Plagiarized items New items Recall new Correct ( new ) items Plagiarized items Confidence rating Somewhat Positive Experiment 2 94 . 4 25 . 3 24 . 5 89 . 8 51 . 4 Experiment 3 90 . 4 0 . 0 10 . 4 83 . 8 30 . 3 sure 4 . 4 26 . 6 19 . 4 8 . 3 38 . 7 8 . 2 0 . 0 20 . 6 11 . 6 45 . 5 Guess 1 . 2 48 . 1 56 . 1 1 . 9 9 . 9 1 . 4 100 . 0 69 . 0 4 . 6 24 . 2 ( 1 . 6 % ; Gruenewald & Lockhead , 1980 ) , ; [ 63 ] = 7 . 92 , and this deviation from chance was also significant within the semantic ( 12 . 7 % ; / [ 31 ] = 5 . 30 ) and orthographic ( 15 . 3 % ; t [ 3l ] = 5 . 04 ) conditions . There were some self - plagiarisms in the recall - new task . As in the generation task , the semantic subjects were less likely to make this type of error than were orthographic subjects . Because of the small number of items and subjects involved , a statistical test was not performed . The mean confidence ratings for correct versus plagiarized items produced in the recall - new task were presented in Table 2 ( there was an insufficient number of self - plagiarisms to warrant inclusion in this table ) . As in the recall - own task , subjects were significantly more confident in correct com - pared with plagiarized responses , t ( 45 ) = 5 . 57 . Interestingly , the mean confidence rating of plagiarized responses was sig - nificantly higher in the recall - new than in the recall - own task , t ( 29 ) = 6 . 17 , on the basis of the 30 subjects ( out of 48 ) in the three experimental groups who plagiarized in both tasks . Combined analyses . As in Experiment 1 , several global comparisons were made across tasks . In the first one , the rate of plagiarism was examined by using a 3 ( task ) x 2 ( item type ) x 3 ( generation pattern ) ANOVA . Although the probabil - ity of plagiarism increased across task , this difference was not significant , F { 2 , 84 ) = 2 . 37 , MS * = 1 . 18 . There was an overall difference due to item type , F ( \ , 42 ) = 7 . 68 , MS e ~ 3 . 37 , with the plagiarism rate higher with orthographic ( 13 . 2 % ) com - pared with semantic ( 7 . 8 % ) materials . Finally , there was a significant difference across generation pattern , F ( 2 , 42 ) = 4 . 75 , MSe = 3 , 37 , and a Newman - Keuls test revealed that the single group ( 14 . 8 % ) was significantly different from both the whole ( 8 . 3 % ) and quarter ( 8 . 3 % ) groups . The second analysis examined correlations between the number of plagiarized responses in each pair of tasks . Corre - lations were computed separately for semantic and ortho - graphic groups of subjects . None of the correlations within either subgroup of subjects was significant ; they ranged from - . 01 to . 25 . That this was the same as that found in Experi - ment 1 again suggests an independence across tasks in pla - giarism probabilities . The third analysis addressed the source of plagiarized re - sponses . Combining the results across the three tasks , 110 words originated from the preceding person , 86 from the succeeding person , and 73 from the nonadjacent person . There was a significant difference among position , F { 2 , 84 ) = 6 . 49 , MS e = 0 . 96 , and a Newman - Keuls test revealed that the preceding position was significantly different from each of the other two , with no difference between succeeding and non - adjacent positions . This replicated the outcome of Experiment 1 . The last analysis examined the normative frequency of plagiarized responses . Only semantic groups were considered because no association norms exist for orthographic cate - gories . The median normative rank for all generated responses was 11 , while the median rank for plagiarized responses was 8 ( from recall - own and recall - new tasks only ) . The mean rank of 8 . 87 for plagiarized responses was significantly different from the expectation of 11 , r ( 59 ) = 2 . 29 . As in Experiment 1 , CRYPTOMNESIA 439 subjects selectively plagiarized responses with a relatively higher normative frequency . Experiment 3 Experiments 1 and 2 demonstrated that individuals were susceptible to inadvertent plagiarism in a social context , while generating oral responses in alternation with others . Will subjects also plagiarize information presented in a visual mode ? In Experiment 3 , subjects interjected their own , origi - nal responses at certain points in a series of visually presented exemplars . Method Subjects . Twenty - one subjects from Introductory Psychology classes at Southern Methodist University participated in the study on a voluntary basis , with extra course credit given as an incentive . Materials . The same semantic categories from Experiments 1 and 2 were used again . The subjects were shown 12 exemplars from each category , which represented the odd - numbered frequency ranks between 1 and 23 , inclusive , from the Battig & Montague ( 1969 ) norms . The odd - ranked items were selected in order to provide the subjects with a sufficient pool of " missing " members ( even - ranked exemplars ) to fill in during their turns at generation . Procedure . Subjects were tested individually . They received a stack of 3 x 5 cards at the start of the experiment and were told that the stack contained 12 members from each of four different cate - gories , with all members from a category appearing consecutively . Each category block was preceded by the category name on a separate card . Only one member of a category appeared on each card . After the first three members of a category , there was a blank card on which the subjects were instructed to write their own , original exemplar . The subjects were instructed to turn over the cards one at a time , placing them face down in front of them . After writing a response , they were to continue turning over cards , one at a time , and to write another new exemplar on the next blank card they encountered . They were also told not to look forward or backward to check items and to avoid generating an exemplar that had already been presented . For each category , every fourth card was blank . Within each category , items were presented in order of decreasing normative frequency ( increasing normative rank ) in order to simulate a natural emission order and to reduce the probability that the presented items would duplicate those generated earlier by the sub - jects . The order of the four categories in the pack of cards was randomly determined for each subject . Immediately after the subject finished , the cards were removed , and a recall sheet was provided . As with Experiment 2 , each subject recalled his or her own four responses , as well as four new responses , for each category . Subjects rated their confidence in each response by using the same scale used in Experiment 2 . All tasks were self - paced . Results and Discussion Generation . Ten subjects ( out of 21 ) plagiarized responses from the presented items . The 13 repetitions accounted for 3 . 9 % of the total number of responses , across all subjects . The rate of cryptomnesia is significantly different from chance ( 1 . 6 % ; Gruenewald & Lockhead , 1980 ) , £ ( 20 ) = 2 . 25 , and is close to that found with similar materials and procedure in Experiment 1 ( 3 . 6 % ) and Experiment 2 ( 5 . 0 % , semantic groups only ) . This is in marked contrast to what Gardiner et al . ( 1977 ) discovered in their comparison of oral ( 1 . 4 % ) versus written ( 0 . 3 % ) repetition rates in an episodic task . There was only one self - plagiarism produced across all subjects . Recall own . When recalling their own responses , 9 of 21 subjects plagiarized list items , producing a total of 13 re - sponses , or 3 . 9 % of all responses . This was significantly dif - ferent from chance , t ( 20 ) = 2 . 15 . Fifteen subjects intruded new exemplars while attempting to recall their own , for a total of 29 responses , or 8 . 6 % of the total responses . This difference between plagiarized and new responses was significant , t ( 20 ) = 2 . 69 , and the opposite of that found in Experiments 1 and 2 . The confidence ratings , in Table 2 , mirror that found in Experiment 2 . Subjects were considerably more confident in the accuracy of their correctly recalled responses compared with either plagiarized items , / ( 8 ) = 5 . 95 , or new items , / ( 14 ) - 3 . 05 . Recall new . For the recall - new task , 16 of 21 subjects plagiarized at least one of the responses from the initial list . They generated a total of 33 plagiarized responses , or 9 . 8 % of all responses across subjects . This plagiarism percentage was greater than expected by chance , £ ( 20 ) = 4 . 09 . Subjects were significantly more confident in the accuracy of their correct ( new ) responses compared with their incorrect ( intrusion ) responses , £ ( 15 ) = 2 . 45 . Furthermore , subjects who produced plagiarized responses in both the recall - own and recall - new tasks ( N = 7 ) were significantly more confident in the accuracy of those produced during the recall - new task , t ( 6 ) = 3 . 31 ; this result is similar to that found in Experiment 2 . Combined analyses . In the global analyses , the difference in plagiarism across tasks was significant , F { 2 , 40 ) = 7 . 19 , MS * = 0 . 93 , and a Newman - Keuls test confirmed that the recall - new task was higher than each of the other two . The correlations of the subjects ' cryptomnesia rates comparing each pair of tasks were all nonsignificant , ranging from . 02 to . 26 . As in Experiments 1 and 2 , there appears to be independ - ence across tasks in the rate of plagiarism . With respect to the frequency level of plagiarized responses , the overall median frequency rank of items provided to the subjects was 12 . Those items plagiarized in the recall - own and recall - new tasks had a median rank of 8 . The mean rank of 9 . 48 differed significantly from 12 , f ( 46 ) = 2 . 45 , suggesting that subjects plagiarize items that are relatively higher in normative frequency . General Discussion The outcome of this series of investigations clearly supports the existence of unconscious plagiarism and shows that it is persistent across a variety of tasks , contexts , materials , and generation conditions . Recently experienced information can be inadvertently plagiarized shortly after the initial experience . The percentage of plagiarized responses consistently ex - ceeded the repetition percentages of 1 . 4 ( Klee & Gardiner , 1976 ) and 1 . 6 % ( Gardiner et al . , 1977 ) for episodic recall tasks , as well as the 1 . 6 % ( Gruenewald & Lockhead , 1980 ) and 0 . 4 % ( Experiment 1 , control group ) for semantic recall 440 ALAN S . BROWN AND DANA R . MURPHY tasks . Cryptomnesia occurred whether the information was absorbed in an oral ( Experiments 1 and 2 ) or a written ( Experiment 3 ) format ; this supports informal reports of cryptomnesia in both auditory ( Jacoby & Kelley , 1987 ; Reed , 1974 ; Taylor , 1965 ) and written ( Daniels , 1972 ; Meerloo , 1964J domains . Cryptomnesia is more prevalent when sub - jects generate from orthographic compared with semantic categories ( Experiment 2 ) , which is contrary to Johnson et al / s ( 1982 ) finding that subjects have better source memory for orthographically based ( first - letter ) than semantically based associations . The proportion of plagiarized items generally increased across the three successive tasks in each experiment . It is impossible to tell whether this increase is due to time or task because the two are confounded . Perhaps items experienced during the generation task retain residual activation in seman - tic memory , while their episodic tag fades rapidly . The fact that subjects ' confidence of the correctness of plagiarized responses increases from the recall - own to the recall - new tasks in both Experiments 2 and 3 supports this speculation . The most likely source of a plagiarized item is the individual speaking immediately before the subject , compared with per - sons in the succeeding and nonadjacent positions ( Experi - ments 1 and 2 ) . This selective plagiarism probably results from a moment of diminished attention just prior to the subject ' s participation . In research on the " next - in - line " phe - nomenon ( Brenner , 1973 ; Brown & Oxman , 1978 ) , subjects are required to take turns reading ( not generating ) items in a large group setting . Although subjects recall the items they read better than ones they didn ' t , confirming the generation effect ( Slamecka & Graf , 1978 ) , subjects 1 recall of items produced immediately preceding their own turn is especially poor . This deficit is most likely due to the impoverished processing of incoming information as one anticipates his or her impending participation . In support of this , Brown and Oxman ( 1978 ) discovered that the retrograde amnesia oc - curred only under conditions where subjects knew when they would be generating a response . When subjects didn ' t know if or when they would be asked to generate a response , no retrograde amnesia occurred for the preceding item . A similar effect may occur in the present design , where a word heard just before one ' s own generation is activated in semantic memory ( Collins & Loftus , 1975 ) but does not register well in episodic memory because of the distraction prior to partic - ipation . Perhaps the magnitude of cryptomnesia would be decreased if the subjects did not know ahead of time exactly when they would participate . The normative frequency of plagiarized words is relatively higher than the entire set of generated items for all three experiments . Johnson et al . ( 1981 ) found a similar effect with respect to source confusion . Subjects were significantly less accurate at identifying the correct source ( experimenter or self ) of high frequency , compared with low - frequency , exem - plars . This also relates to the word - frequency effect in episodic memory ( Underwood & Freund , 1970 ) : High - frequency words are better recalled but more poorly recognized than are low - frequency words . This recall / recognition disparity may underlie cryptomnesia , in that subjects find the higher fre - quency category exemplars easier to generate ( recall ) but are less able to discriminate that these words have been experi - enced previously in the present context ( recognition ) . Previous studies on source amnesia indicate that it is espe - cially likely to occur in situations of diminished information processing ability , including temporary or permanent amnesia ( Schacter et al . , 1984 ; Shimamura & Squire , 1987 ) , senile dementia of the Alzheimer ' s type ( Mitchell et al . , 1986 ) , slight cerebrovascular accident ( Meerloo , 1964 ) , normal aging ( Mclntyre & Craik , 1987 ) , or white noise distraction ( Gardi - ner et al . , 1977 ) . In Experiment 2 , we found that increasing the difficulty of the monitoring task through either materials ( orthographic categories ) or generation procedure ( one cate - gory exemplar at a time ) increased the rate of plagiarism . The single groups showed overall higher levels of cryptomnesia than did either the whole or quarter groups . Similarly , the orthographic conditions resulted in more cryptomnesia than did semantic conditions . Cryptomnesia is similar to certain implicit memory phe - nomena ( Schacter , 1987 ) , where an initial experience with a word results in a long - term activation . This shows up as improved performance on such tasks as word identification , reading speed , or fragment completion , even when subjects fail to explicitly remember earlier encounters with the partic - ular words . In an implicit memory investigation related to the present study , Gardner , Boiler , Moreines , and Butters ( 1973 ) had subjects first study a list of categorized words and then generate associates to category cues . They discovered that items studied in the first list intruded later as responses in the second task , even when subjects could not consciously recall those items from the earlier list . Jacoby and Kelley ( 1987 ) have attempted to interpret cryp - tomnesia within the framework of the distinction between memory as a tool and memory as an object . Memory as a tool is used to carry out current tasks such as typing a letter or talking about the weather . Memory as an object , on the other hand , is used to reinstate a previous experience . Jacoby and Kelley speculate that trying to make memory serve both functions simultaneously is very difficult and may result in cryptomnesia . For example , with routine conversation there are numerous occasions where " . . . a word used by a person with whom we are conversing ' creeps ' into our own com - ments . We do not notice the word as a repetition , rather , the word simply comes to mind more readily " ( p . 315 ) . To avoid inadvertent plagiarism would require using memory as object , continually scanning the immediately preceding verbal output so as to avoid duplication . This would obviously restrict our use of memory as tool and would make the smooth retrieval of words for the generation of conversational prose much more difficult . Cryptomnesia has practical implications , particularly in the areas that demand the output of creative products . One such area is the generation of research ideas . Because of the social nature of scientific investigation , there are occasions where an idea shared informally with a colleague is inadvertently generated later by that person and claimed to be original ( Bowers & Hilgard , 1986 ; Freud , 1901 / 1961 ; Jung , 1905 ; Meerloo , 1964 ; Taylor , 1965 ) . Another area of creative en - deavor in which cryptomnesia apparently occurs is music . Reed ( 1974 ) cites a personal experience where , as a young CRYPTOMNESIA 441 boy , he excitedly jumped out of bed one morning with a tune running through his head . After working for hours picking it out on the piano and transcribing it , he suddenly recognized it was the " Blue Danube Waltz . " Musical cryptomnesia may account for a portion of copyright infringement cases involv - ing songs . One of the most famous legal suits involved George Harrison of the Beatles . The song " My Sweet Lord , " written by George Harrison , bore such a strong resemblance to the earlier song " He ' s So Fine , " recorded by the Chiffons in 1962 , that a lawsuit was brought against Harrison . During the trial , Harrison admitted that he had heard the earlier recording but denied that he intentionally copied it . However , " Judge Owen held that Harrison ' s work did infringe through what the courts felt must have been unintentional copying of what was in Harrison ' s subconscious memory " ( Dannay , 1980 , p . 681 ) . The court acknowledged the possibility of unintentional copy - right violation , or cryptomnesia , but held that persons are legally responsible for their own cryptomnesia . Future research on cryptomnesia could follow a number of different directions . One pertinent dimension is the type of participation . All of the subjects in the present experiment were participants in the generation procedure . Would cryp - tomnesia occur when subjects simply observed the generation procedure ? This question is intriguing in light of the discrep - ancy between the results of Brown and Oxman ( 1978 ) , who found that observers recalled responses better than did gen - erators , and the results of Raye and Johnson ( 1980 ) , who discovered that observers had poorer source memory than did generators . This suggests that recall and source memory may be independent of each other , but recall and source identifi - cation need to be compared within one design . Subjects ' certainty of performance could also be manipu - lated in future investigations . In the present study , it was always very predictable . Brown and Oxman ( 1978 ) noted that as the subjects ' ability to predict if and when they would be called upon to generate a response decreased , their recall of information generated also decreased . Cryptomnesia may covary with participation certainty in a similar manner . One final dimension is the length of the retention interval . Johnson et al . ( 1981 ) found that source identification accuracy dropped substantially after a week to 10 days , although it was still above chance . Similarly , Schacteret al . ( 1984 ) discovered that source forgetting increased after a 1 - week ' s delay but that source amnesia did not significantly change from retention tests given immediately ( 3 % ) to 1 week later ( 6 % ) . With source amnesia being a closer parallel to cryptomnesia , one might expect that cryptomnesia would not change across time . But the apparent floor effect in Schacter et al . ' s study makes such projections problematic . Although we found an increase in cryptomnesia across three tasks , it is indeterminate whether the increase was due to task or time . Certainly , an extension of the retention interval would create a better analogue of naturally occurring cryptomnesia , which may often involve months or years between a particular input and the subse - quent , inadvertent " creativity . " References Battig , W . F . , & Montague , W . E . ( 1969 ) . Category norms for verbal items in 56 categories : A replication and extension of the Connect - icut category norms . Journal of Experimental Psychology Mono - graph , 80 ( 3 , Pt . 2 ) . Bowers , K . S . , & Hilgard , E . { 1986 ) . Some complexities in understand - ing memory . In H . M . Pettinati ( Ed . ) , Hypnosis and memory ( pp . 3 - 18 ) . New York : Guilford Press . Brenner , M . ( 1973 ) . The next - in - line effect . Journal of Verbal Learn - ing and Verbal Behavior , 12 , 320 - 323 . Brown , A . S . , & Oxman , M . ( 1978 ) . Learning through participation : Effects of involvement and anticipation of involvement . American Journal of Psychology , 91 , 461 - 472 . Bousfield , W . A . , & Rosner , S . R . ( 1970 ) . Free vs . uninhibited recall . Psychonomic Science , 20 , 75 - 76 . Collins , A . M , & Loftus , E . F . ( 1975 ) . A spreading - activation theory of semantic processing . Psychological Review , 82 , 407 - 428 . Cooper , L . M . ( 1966 ) . Spontaneous and suggested posthypnotic source amnesia . The International Journal of Clinical and Experi - mental Hypnosis , 14 , 180 - 193 . Daniels , G . H . ( 1972 ) . Acknowledgement . Science , 175 , 124 - 125 . Dannay , R . ( 1980 ) . Current developments in copyright law . New York : Practicing Law Institute . Evans , F . J . ( 1979 ) . Contextual forgetting : Posthypnotic source am - nesia . Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 88 , 556 - 563 . Evans , F . J . , & Thorn , W . A . F . ( 1966 ) . Two types of posthypnotic amnesia : Recall amnesia and source amnesia . The International Journal of Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis , 14 , 162 - 179 . Freud , S . ( 1960 ) . The psychopathology of everyday life . In J . Strachey ( Ed . and Trans . ) , The standard edition of the complete works of Sigmund Freud ( Vol . 6 ) . London : Hogarth Press . ( Original work published in 1901 ) Gardiner , J . M . , & Klee , H . ( 1976 ) . Memory for remembered events : An assessment of output monitoring in free recall . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 15 , 277 - 233 . Gardiner , J . M , Passmore , C , Herriot , P . , & Klee , H . ( 1977 ) . Memory for remembered events : Effects of response mode and response - produced feedback . Journal of Verbal Learning and Ver - bal Behavior , 16 , 45 - 54 . Gardiner , J . M . , Thompson , C . P . , & Maskarinec , A . S . ( 1974 ) . Negative recency in initial free recall . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 103 , 71 - 78 . Gardner , H . , Boiler , F . , Moreines , J . , & Butters , N . ( 1973 ) . Retrieving information from Korsakoff patients : Effects of categorical cues and reference to the task . Cortex , 9 , 165 - 175 . Gruenewald , P . J . , & Lockhead , G . R . ( 1980 ) . The free recall of category examples . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Learning and Memory , 6 , 225 - 240 . Jacoby , L . L . , & . Kelley , C . M . ( 1987 ) . Unconscious influences of memory for a prior event . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , U 314 - 336 . Johnson , M . K . , & Raye , C . L . ( 1981 ) . Reality monitoring . Psycho - logical Bulletin , 88 , 67 - 85 . Johnson , M . K . , Raye , C . L . , Foley , H . J . , & Foley , M . A . ( 1981 ) . Cognitive operations and decision bias in reality monitoring . Amer - ican Journal of Psychology , 94 , 37 - 64 . Jung , C . G . ( 1957 ) . Cryptomnesia . In Collected works ( Vol . 1 , 95 - 106 ) . Princeton : Princeton University Press . ( Original work pub - lished in 1905 ) Klee , H . , & Gardiner , J . M . ( 1976 ) . Memory for remembered events : Contrasting recall and recognition . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 15 , 471 - 478 . Mayzner . M . S . , & Tresselt , M . E . ( 1965 ) . Tables of single - letter and digram frequency counts for various word - length and letter - posi - tion combinations . Psychonomic Monograph Supplements , / ( Whole No . 2 ) , 13 - 32 . Mclntyre , J . S . , & Craik , F . I . M . ( 1987 ) . Age differences in memory for item and source information . Canadian Journal of Psychology , 442 ALAN S . BROWN AND DANA R . MURPHY 41 , 175 - 192 . Meerloo , J . A . M . ( 1964 ) . Plagiarism and identification . Archives of General Psychiatry , 11 , 421 - 424 . Mitchell , D . B . , Hunt , R . R . , & Schmitt , F . A . ( 1986 ) . The generation effect and reality monitoring : Evidence from dementia and normal aging . Journal of Gerontology , 41 , 79 - 84 . Raye , C . L . ; & Johnson , M . K . ( 1980 ) . Reality monitoring vs . discriminating between external sources of memories . Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society , 15 , 405 - 408 . Reed , G . ( 1974 ) . The psychology of anomalous experience . Boston : Houghton Mifflin . Schacter , D . L . ( 1987 ) . Implicit memory : History and current status . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cog - nition , 13 , 501 - 5 \ $ . Schacter , D . L . , Harbluk , J . L . , & McLachlan , D . R . ( 1984 ) . Retrieval without recollection : An experimental analysis of source amnesia . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 23 , 593 - 611 . Shimamura , A . P . , & Squire , L . R . ( 1987 ) . A neuropsychological study of fact memory and source amnesia . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 13 , 464 - 473 . Skinner , B . F . ( 1983 ) . Intellectual self - management in old age . Amer - ican Psychologist , 38 , 239 - 244 . Slamecka , N . J . , & Graf , P . ( 1978 ) . The generation effect : Delineation of a phenomenon . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Learning and Memory , 4 , 592 - 604 . Taylor , F . K . ( 1965 ) . Cryptomnesia and plagiarism . British Journal of Psychiatry , 111 , 1111 - 1118 . Thorn , W . A . F . ( 1960 ) . A study of the correlates of dissociation as measured by posthypnotic amnesia . Unpublished honors thesis , University of Sydney , Sydney , Australia . Underwood , B . J . , & Freund , J . S . ( 1970 ) . Word frequency effect and short - term recognition memory . American Journal of Psychology , 83 , 343 - 351 . Voss , J . F . , Vesonder , G . T . , Post , T . A . , & Ney , L . G . ( 1987 ) . Was the item recalled and if so by whom ? Journal of Memory and Language , 26 , 466 - 479 . Received July 27 , 1987 Revision received June 7 , 1988 Accepted June 22 , 1988 •