Cell , Vol . 102 , 325 – 334 , August 4 , 2000 , Copyright ª 2000 by Cell Press Developmental Control of Endocytosis in Dendritic Cells by Cdc42 peripheral tissues where they act as sentinels awaiting the arrival of infectious agents or other foreign antigens . These immature DCs are highly endocytic and thus Wendy S . Garrett , * †‡ Li - Mei Chen , § Ruth Kroschewski , * †‡ # Melanie Ebersold , * †‡ Shannon Turley , * †‡ Sergio Trombetta , * †‡ efficient at antigen capture . However , they are poor Jorge E . Gala´n , § and Ira Mellman * †‡ k APCs , because they retain most of their MHC molecules * Department of Cell Biology intracellularlyandareunabletoformpeptide – MHCclass † Section of Immunobiology II ( MHC II ) complexes ( Cella et al . , 1997b ; Pierre et al . , ‡ Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research 1997 ) . Inflammatory stimuli , such as LPS and TNF - a , § Section of Microbial Pathogenesis trigger DC maturation resulting in the generation of pep - Yale University School of Medicine tide – MHC complexes , and the upregulation of surface New Haven , Connecticut 06520 MHC I , MHC II , CD40 , and CD86 . Maturation thus con - vertsimmature DCsfromcellsadapted forantigenaccu - mulation to cells specialized for the processing and pre - Summary sentation of previously encountered antigens to T cells ( Cella et al . , 1997a ; Mellman et al . , 1998 ) . DC maturation is accompanied by carefully orches - Dendritic cells ( DCs ) developmentally regulate antigen trated alterations in membrane traffic . A number of novel uptake by controlling their endocytic capacity . Imma - mechanisms have been identified for controlling the ex - ture DCs actively internalize antigen . However , mature pression of individual proteins at the plasma membrane , DCs are poorly endocytic , functioning instead to pre - particularly in the case of MHC II molecules ( Cella et al . , sent antigens to T cells . We have found that endocytic 1997b ; Pierre et al . , 1997 ; Pierre and Mellman , 1998 ; downregulation reflects a decrease in endocytic activ - Driessen et al . , 1999 ) . In immature DCs , MHC II - invariant ity controlled by Rho family GTPases , especially ( Ii ) chain complexes are targeted from the Golgi to endo - Cdc42 . Blocking Cdc42 function by Toxin B treatment somes and then to lysosomes due to inefficient Ii chain or injection of dominant - negative inhibitors of Cdc42 cleavage in endosomes by the cysteine protease ca - abrogates endocytosis in immature DCs . In mature thepsin S ( Pierre and Mellman , 1998 ; Driessen et al . , DCs , injection of constitutively active Cdc42 or micro - 1999 ) . In mature DCs , cathepsin S activity is activated bial delivery of a Cdc42 nucleotide exchange factor following the downregulation of an endogenous specific reactivates endocytosis . DCs regulate endogenous inhibitor of cathepsin S ( cystatin C ) , resulting in more levels of Cdc42 - GTP with activated Cdc42 detectable efficient Ii chain cleavage . This releases MHC II from Ii onlyinimmaturecells . WeconcludethatDCsdevelop - chain and thus its lysosomal targeting signal , allowing mentally regulate endocytosis at least in part by con - for the subsequent delivery of ab dimers to the plasma membrane . Maturing DCs also possess a novel mecha - trolling levels of activated Cdc42 . nism to recover previously synthesized MHC II mole - cules from lysosomes . Here , maturation appears to acti - Introduction vate aselective sorting event involvingthe accumulation of MHC II - peptide into distinctive nonlysosomal trans - Dendritic cells ( DCs ) are the most professional of all port vesicles ( Turley et al . , 2000 ) . antigen presenting cells ( APCs ) , uniquely able to stimu - Maturation also induces a dramatic inhibition of endo - late even immunologically naı¨ve T lymphocytes ( Cella cytosis . While immature DCs actively carry out macropi - et al . , 1997a ; Banchereau and Steinman , 1998 ; Mellman nocytosis and phagocytosis , in mature DCs these activi - et al . , 1998 ) . Their efficiency stems not only from the ties are barely detectable ( Inaba et al . , 1993 ; Sallusto et high levels of major histocompatability complex ( MHC ) al . , 1995 ; Austyn , 1996 ) . The loss of endocytic capacity molecules they express , but also from their capacity to greatlyattenuatestheabilityofmatureDCstointernalize produce peptide – MHC complexes from minute quanti - antigen , thus limiting the range of antigens DCs will be ties of almost any antigen . In addition , DCs display high able to present . Virtually nothing is known about the levels of plasma membrane proteins such as CD86 and mechanisms that control endocytosis during DC matu - CD40 , which act together with MHC – peptide complexes ration . It is increasingly clear , however , that actin and in signaling T cell activation . its regulation by Rho family GTPases play important DCs exhibit a host of other cell biological specializa - roles in mediating phagocytosis and macropinocytosis . tionswhichfurthercontributetotheirefficiencyasAPCs . Engagement of phagocytic receptors induces the acti - Among the most striking is their capacity to internalize vation of Rho GTPases ( Cox et al . , 1997 ; Caron and Hall , large quantities of soluble or particulate antigen in a 1998 ; Massol et al . , 1998 ) . Interestingly , a number of highly regulated fashion ( Sallusto etal . , 1995 ) . DCs regu - important pathogens , such as Salmonella typhimurium late virtually all aspects of antigen processing and pre - and Shigella flexneri , drive their own internalization by sentation in a fashion that accounts for the distinct func - activating Rho GTPases , using a novel type III secretion tions they serve at different stages of their life cycle . apparatus to “inject” specific guanine nucleotide ex - Derived from bone marrow precursors , DCs reside in change factors into the cytoplasm of their intended host cells ( Chen et al . , 1996 ; Watarai et al . , 1997 ; Hardt et al . , 1998 ; Nhieu and Sansonetti , 1999 ) . We have found k To whom correspondence should be addressed ( e - mail : ira . that mouse DCs may make use of a similar strategy , mellman @ yale . edu ) . controlling levels of activated Cdc42 to developmentally # Present address : Institut fu¨r Biochemie , ETH - Zentrum / CHN C - 76 , CH - 8092 Zurich , Switzerland . regulate their capacity for endocytosis . Cell326 little was internalized found its way to perinuclear vesi - cles , shown to be lysosomes by lamp - 1 staining ( not shown ) . In mature DCs , FITC - OVA uptake was not de - tectable . Essentially the same results were obtained when the kinetics of FITC - OVA or lucifer yellow ( LY ) endocytosis were measured quantitatively by flow cytometry ( Figure 1B ) . Uptake of FITC - OVA by immature cells increased continuously for at least 30 min , although LY accumula - tion appeared to plateau by this time , perhaps reflecting theonsetofmaturationintheculturesusedinthisexper - iment ( maturation can be induced simply by physical manipulation of the cultures ) . Developmentally synchro - nized cultures of intermediate DCs internalized . 5 - fold less of these probes over a 30 min time course and , again , uptake of either FITC - OVA or LY was not detected inmatureDCs . Thus , thereceiptofamaturationstimulus appeared to rapidly inhibit endocytosis , with intermedi - ate DCs already exhibiting a marked decrease in uptake of two fluid phase markers . DC Maturation Does Not Decrease Plasma Membrane Clathrin Coated Pits and Vesicles Having established that maturation induces a rapid inhi - bition of endocytosis , we next asked if DCs selectively inhibited any particular form of endocytosis . To deter - Figure 1 . Endocytosis Is Rapidly Downregulated during Dendritic Cell Development mine if maturation affected the clathrin coated vesicle pathway , we measured whether maturation decreased ( A ) Cluster - purified , synchronized cultures ( Pierre et al . , 1997 ) of immature , intermediate , and mature DCs on glass coverslips were plasma membrane coated pits ( CPs ) and coated vesi - pulsed with FITC - OVA for 30 min , and labeled with anti - MHC II b cles ( CVs ) . As above , synchronized populations of im - chain rabbit polyclonal antibody and a Texas red conjugated sec - mature and mature DCs were generated ( intermediate ondary goat anti - rabbit antibody . FITC - OVA and MHC II were then DCs were not used ) , fixed , and processed for electron detected by confocal microscopy . microscopy . Random sections were photographed and ( B ) The developmentally synchronized cell populations were pulsed subjected to stereological analysisto calculate the num - in suspensionculture for the indicatedtimes with FITC - OVA orLY at ber of CPs and CVs per section profile for each popula - 2 mg / ml . Flow cytometry was used to quantify tracer internalization . tion . We normalized these values by calculating the unit Mean fluorescence intensities representing internalized tracer are plotted against tracer pulse time for each population . Data points plasma membrane length in each sample ( Pypaert and represent the average of three experiments and each point repre - Warren , 1992 ) . sents a minimum of 50 , 000 events . Abundant CPs and CVs were easily observed in both immature and mature DCs ( Figure 2 ) . Immature DCs exhibited an average of 2 . 67 6 0 . 83 clathrin coated pits Results and vesicles per section profile as compared to an aver - age of 3 . 60 6 0 . 73 for mature DCs . When normalized Endocytosis Is Rapidly Downregulated to plasma membrane length , there continued to be no during DC Development significant differences between mature and immature DC maturation exhibits three morphologically distinct cells ( 0 . 0275 m m 2 1 6 0 . 013 and 0 . 018 m m 2 1 6 0 . 006 , stages exhibited over a time course of z 20 hr : immature respectively ) . Thus , DC maturation did not result in a ( MHC II enriched in lysosomes ) , intermediate ( MHC II reduction of the number of clathrin coated structures . in peripheral non - lysosomal vesicles and on the cell Mature DCs have previously been shown to internalize surface ) , and mature ( MHC II on the cell surface ) ( Pierre the cell surface lectin DEC - 205 via clathrin coated pits et al . , 1997 ; Mellman et al . , 1998 ) . Although it has already ( Jiang et al . , 1995 ) , and will internalize transferrin , a li - been demonstrated that endocytosis is downregulated gandwellcharacterizedasenteringviacoatedpitswhen upon maturation of human monocyte derived DCs ( Sal - infected with a transferrin receptor expressing recombi - lusto et al . , 1995 ) , we wished to determine if endocytosis nant adenovirus ( W . S . G . and I . M . , unpublished data ) . was similarly regulated in mouse bone marrow derived DCs , and if so , if it occurred early or late in the develop - mental sequence . Developmentally synchronized popu - C . difficile Toxin B , an Inhibitor of Rho GTPases , Inhibits Endocytosis in Immature DC lationsofmaturingDCswerepreparedfrommousebone marrow , exposed to fluorescent endocytic tracers for The ability of immature DCs to internalize large volumes of extracellular fluid appears to reflect a marked capac - 5 – 60 min at 37 8 C , then examined by fluorescence mi - croscopy and flow cytometry to determine their endo - ity for continuous macropinocytosis ( Sallusto et al . , 1995 ; Norbury et al . , 1997 ; West et al . , 1999 ) . Indeed , cytic capabilities . As shown in Figure 1A , immature DCs internalized the accumulation of mannose receptor ligands such as FITC - OVA was only partially ( z 35 % ) inhibited by excess significant amounts of FITC - ovalbumin ( FITC - OVA ) which was partially localized to MHC II - positive lysosomes yeast mannan ( not shown ) , suggesting that the bulk of such ligands are internalized in the fluid phase and not within just 30 min . By contrast , in intermediate DCs , relatively little FITC - OVA was taken up , although what by receptor - mediated endocytosis , at least in immature Control of Endocytosis in Dendritic Cells by Cdc42 327 cell - associated FITC - Tfn . Fluorescence microscopy con - firmed the internalization of the FITC - Tfn by immature DCs ( not shown ) . The Toxin B sensitivity of endocytosis in immature DCs suggested that endocytosiswas dependent on Rho family GTPase regulated macropinocytosis . Since the activation of Cdc42 and Rac induces macropinocytosis and phagocytosis in a variety of systems , we reasoned these GTPases might be potential sites for regulation of endocytosis in DCs . S . typhimurium Reactivates Macropinocytosis in Mature DC While C . difficile secretes Toxin B that inactivates Rho GTPases , other microbes secrete proteins that exert the opposite effect , thus stimulating macropinocytosis at sites ofbacterial attachment . These factorsare secreted directly into the host cell cytoplasm via a specialized , needle - like assembly termed a type III secretion appara - tus ( Kubori et al . , 1998 ) . In the case of S . typhimurium , one of its effectors , SopE , activates Rho family GTPases by functioning as a guanine nucleotide exchange factor ( GEF ) for Cdc42 and Rac1 ( Chen et al . , 1996 ; Hardt et al . , 1998 ; Rudolph et al . , 1999 ) . We then asked if S . Figure 2 . Dendritic Cell Maturation Does Not Decrease Plasma typhimurium might reactivate macropinocytosis in ma - Membrane Clathrin Coated Pits and Vesicles ture DCs . Mature and immature DCs were fixed and processed for electron Mature and immature DCs were exposed to wild - type microscopy . The number of clathrin coated pits and vesicles per cell profile and the number of clathrin coated pits and vesicles per bacteriaortoanisogenicmutant inv A , whichisdefective surface length of plasma membrane per cell profile were quantified in type III secretion and thus unable to secrete factors as described in the text . Micrographs ( 34 micrographs per triplicate suchasSopE ; inv Amutantbacteriahave failedtoinduce pellet ) were scored for immature DCs and for mature DCs . Both macropinocytosis in a wide variety of cultured cells ( Ga - studentttestsandpairedttestsdemonstratednostatisticallysignif - la´n et al . , 1992 ; Chen et al . , 1996 ) . When examined by icant differences between the values obtained for immature and fluorescencemicroscopy , immatureDCswerefoundca - maturecells . Shownhereisarepresentativemicrographofamature pableofinternalizingbothwild - typeandmutantbacteria DC . Clathrin coated pits and vesicles are denoted by arrows . ( Figure 4A ) . This result was expected since immature DCs constitutively exhibit macropinocytosis and phago - cytosis , and therefore internalize even inert particles . In cells . Like phagocytosis , macropinocytosis is an actin - contrast , when cultures of mature DCs were challenged , dependent process regulated by one or more members only wild - type bacteria were capable of gaining entry of the Rho GTPases family ( Chen et al . , 1996 ; Caron and ( Figure 4A ) . Thus , only S . typhimurium capable of in - Hall , 1998 ; Hardt et al . , 1998 ) . To address the possible jecting the Cdc42 - and Rac1 - specific GEF SopE , were involvement of these GTPases in DC endocytosis , we able to reactivate macropinocytosis in mature DCs . We first asked if Toxin B ( from Clostridium difficile ) might quantified our fluorescence microscopy results and block uptake in immature DCs . Toxin B irreversibly inac - found that immature and mature DC internalized wild - tivates many Rho family GTPases by glucosylation , type S . typhimurium with equal efficiency , however , whichblockstheircapacityfornucleotideexchange ( Ak - while almost 100 % of immature DC internalized the inv A tories , 1997 ) . mutant , 0 % of mature DC internalized inv A ( Figure 4B ) . As shown in Figure 3 , Toxin B greatly inhibited the We confirmed these results using a well established internalization of three fluorescent tracers in immature assay that takes advantage of the fact that internalized DCs . Importantly , Toxin B treatment did not induce mat - bacteria are protected from killing by the antibiotic gen - urationsincetheDCsstillexhibitedtheimmaturepheno - tamicin added to the culture media ( Gala´n et al . , 1992 ) . type , as indicated by immunofluorescence and flow cy - Protected , i . e . , internalized , bacteria were quantified by tometry ( MHC II molecules found predominantly in plating lysed DCs onto bacterial plates and counting lysosomes , not shown ) . Using LY , FITC - OVA , and FITC - the number of colonies that grew . The results from these dextran ( the latter two also bind to mannose receptor ) , experiments clearly showed that wild - type but not inv A Toxin B greatly reduced the number and intensity of bacteria were capable of gaining entry into mature DCs fluorescent endosomes / lysosomes following a 10 min ( Figure 4C ) . Mature DCs were markedly less efficient incubation in each tracer ( Figure 3A ) . These data were at accumulating inv A S . typhimurium than mature DCs quantified by flow cytometry which showed that Toxin challenged with wild - type bacteria , or immature DCs B decreased accumulation of the tracers by up to 3 . 5 - challenged with either mutant or wild - type S . typhi - fold ( Figure 3B ) . murium . Although Toxin B reduced the largely fluid phase up - take of LY , FITC - OVA , and FITC - dextran , it did not affect the receptor - mediated endocytosis of FITC - transferrin Microinjection of Rho GTPases Modulates Endocytosis in Developing DC ( Tfn ) ( Figure 3C ) . We verified that Tfn uptake was recep - tor mediated by incubating cells with FITC - Tfn in the The results of the previous experiment strongly imply that wild - type S . typhimurium can trigger entry into ma - presence of a 15 - fold excess of unlabeled Tfn , under which conditions flow cytometry revealed no detectable ture DCs by activating Cdc42 or Rac via SopE . Since Cell328 Figure 3 . C . difficile Toxin B , an Inhibitor of Rho GTPases , Inhibits Endocytosis in Imma - ture Dendritic Cells After 5 days in culture , immature DCs were pretreated with Toxin B ( 1 ng / ml ) for 18 hr and kept in the presence of Toxin B for the duration of the experiment . Day 6 , immature DCs were cluster purified and incubated for 10 min at 37 8 C with lucifer yellow ( LY ) , FITC - dextran , or FITC - OVA . DCs were then washed , and the internalization of each endocytic tracer assayed by fluorescence microscopy or flow cytometry . ( A ) Fluorescence microscopy of immature DCs which were either treated ( right panels ) or not treated ( left panels ) with Toxin B , and then exposed to FITC - dextran , LY , or FITC - OVA . Toxin B reduced the uptake of all three endocytic tracers . ( B ) Immature DCs treated as in ( A ) were ana - lyzed quantitatively for FITC - dextran , LY , or FITC - OVA uptake by flow cytometry . Shown are the mean fluorescence intensities for treatedversusnontreatedsamples . Datarep - resents the average of 3 experiments ; error bars denote standard error of the mean . ( C ) Immature DCs were treated with Toxin B as above and then incubated on ice for 1 hr with FITC - Tfn in the presence or absence of 15 - fold excess unlabeled Tfn . The cells were then washed to remove unbound Tfn , warmed to37 8 Cfor1hr , andanalyzedbyflowcytome - try . As shown , Toxin B did not affect the uptake of prebound Tfn . FITC - Tfn was not detected in cells incubated with excess unla - beled Tfn , indicating that internalization was due to receptor - mediated uptake . Cells kept at 0 8 C for 1 hr after ligand binding did not exhibit any cell - associated FITC - Tfn , due to rapiddissociationoftheligandfromnoninter - nalized surface receptors . Fluorescence mi - croscopy ( not shown ) confirmed that cell - associated Tfn at 37 8 C was intracellular . these bacteria inject a variety of gene products into of Cdc42 and Rac1 by injection of dominant negative Cdc42 , Rac1 , or WASP mutants inhibited endocytosis their intended hosts , it remained possible that additional factors might play a role . To address whether Rho in immature DCs . We next asked if we could restore endocytosis in GTPases directly modulate endocytosis in DCs , we mi - croinjected purified recombinant Cdc42 and Rac1 pro - mature DCs by injecting constitutively activated Cdc42 or Rac1 . Cells were injected and assayed for endocyto - teins . We first attempted to inhibit endocytosis in immature sis by a 5 min incubation in HEL to reduce the chances for secondary effects of these proteins . As shown in DC by inactivating endogenous Cdc42 or Rac1 by mi - croinjecting their respective dominant - negative mutant Figure 5B , both Cdc42 - L61 and Rac1 - L61 resulted in HEL internalization in mature DCs . Importantly , injection forms , Cdc42 - N17 and Rac1 - N17 ( Ridley et al . , 1992 ) . As shown in Figure 5A , injection of Cdc42 - N17 or Rac1 - of purified SopE , the S . typhimurium Cdc42 / Rac1 gua - ninenucleotideexchangefactor , alsoinducedHELinter - N17 blocked endocytosis of hen egg lysozyme ( HEL ) ( green ) by immature DCs . A similar result was obtained nalization in mature cells . All three proteins reactivated endocytosis in up to 50 % of the cells injected , although by injecting an N - terminal fragment of the Wiskott - Ald - rich syndrome protein ( WASP 201 – 321 ) corresponding Cdc42 - L61 was most effective ( Figure 5B , bottom ) . In contrast , neither Cdc42 nor GST alone induced endocy - to its Cdc42 / Rac1 binding ( “CRIB” ) domain . The WASP 201 – 321 fragment can be expected to sequester endog - tosis in mature DCs ( Figure 5B ) ; injections of these pro - teins or activated Cdc42 or Rac1 into immature DCs enousCdc42andRac1 . Neithermockinjectionnorinjec - tionofaconstitutivelyactiveCdc42 - L61mutantreduced had no effect on their already active levels of endocyto - sis . The amounts of uptake observed in the reactivated the ability of immature DCs to internalize HEL , showing that microinjection per se did not reduce endocytosis cells were similar to that observed in immature DCs in a similar 5 min endocytosis assay ( not shown ) . ( Figure 5A ) . Quantification of these data revealed that cells injected with Cdc42 - N17 ( n 5 554 ) , Rac1 - N17 ( n 5 The ability of both Cdc42 - L61 and Rac1 - L61 to acti - vate endocytosis in mature DCs suggested that Cdc42 420 ) , or the N - terminal WASP fragment ( n 5 312 ) did not internalize detectable HEL ( Figure 5A ) . Similar re - might act via Rac1 , or vice versa . To test this possibility , weinjectedCdc42 - L61togetherwithdominant - negative sultswereobtainedifFITC - OVA , FITC - dextran , orbacte - ria were used as endocytic tracers . Thus , inactivation Rac1 - N17 . As shown in Figure5B , Rac1 - N17 was unable Control of Endocytosis in Dendritic Cells by Cdc42 329 Figure 4 . S . typhimurium Reactivates Mac - ropinocytosis in Mature Dendritic Cells ( A ) Immature ( left ) and mature ( right ) DCs were incubated with either wild - type ( upper panels ) or its isogenic variant mutant inv A S . typhimurium ( lower panels ) for 20 min . Cells were then processed for immuno - fluores - cence microscopy using anti - class II and anti - Salmonella antibodies . Multiple optical sections using a Zeiss Axiophot microscope were taken to determine if individual bacteria were intracellular . MHC II is stained in green , S . typhimurium in red . ( B ) Random fields of cells from the above experiment were counted and scored for in - ternalization . Mean percentages of internal - ization were determined for each condition . Errorbars denotestandarderrorof themean . ( C ) Internalized S . typhimurium were quanti - fied using a gentamicin protection assay . Im - mature and mature DCs were gently washed in antibiotic - free media and infected with ei - ther wild - type or its isogenic variant mutant inv A S . typhimurium at an MOI of 10 . Follow - inginfection , DCswereincubatedwithgenta - micin , washed extensively , lysed in Triton X - 100 , and cell lysates were plated on agar with antibiotics . The percentage of bacteria that were protected from gentamicin killing is shown . Error bars denote standard error of the mean from at least three separate deter - minations . to block Cdc41 - L61 - induced HEL uptake . Similarly , In addition , we monitored the activation state of Rac2 , a closely related isoform expressed by many immune Rac1 - N17 failed to block endocytosis induced by the cells ( Didsbury et al . , 1989 ) . nulceotide exchange factor SopE ( Figure 5B ) , sug - We determined the levels of GTP - bound Cdc42 , Rac1 , gesting that activation of endogenous Cdc42 in mature and Rac2 in immature and mature DCs by assaying the DCs also elicited HEL uptake in a Rac1 - independent abilityof theendogenousGTPasesto bindp21activated fashion . On the other hand , the ability of the active Rac1 - kinase ( PAK ) . This well established assay is based on L61 mutant to induce endocytosis was inhibited by coin - the fact that PAK will only bind Cdc42 or Rac in their jection of Cdc42 - N17 , raising the possibility that the activated , GTP - bound forms ( Taylor and Shalloway , action of Rac1 on HEL internalization was indirect , re - 1996 ; Bagrodia et al . , 1998 ) . DC lysates were incubated quiring activatable Cdc42 . As before , identical results with GST - PAK coupled to Sepharose beads and the were obtained regardless of whether HEL , FITC - OVA , resultingeluates wereprobed forCdc42 orRac byWest - FITC - dextran , or bacteria were used as endocytic ern blot . The total levels of Cdc42 , Rac1 , and Rac2 were tracers . also measured in total cell lysates of both immature and Together , these data demonstrate that Cdc42 or Rac1 mature DCs . could itself control the endocytic potential of immature Although immature and mature DCs expressed similar and mature DCs , however , the coinjection experiments amounts of Cdc42 protein ( Figure 6A , lanes 1 and 2 ) , suggest that Cdc42 may be the more likely effector pro - only immature DCs contained detectable Cdc42 - GTP tein . Since active Cdc42 was effective at reactivating bound to PAK - Sepharose beads ( Figure 6A ) . Cdc42 - macropinocytosis in otherwise quiescent mature DCs , GTP could not be detected in lysates of mature DCs . these findings also suggest that the components re - Moreover , when mature and immature DC lysates were quired for macropinocytosis downstream from Cdc42 coincubated with the GST - PAK beads , activated Cdc42 are relatively unaffected by DC maturation . was detected in the mixed sample at a level comparable to that of immature DCs , indicating that the mature DC Dendritic Cells Regulate Endocytosis by Regulating lysates did not contain an activity which hydrolyzed or the Activation of Cdc42 destroyed Cdc42 - GTP ( not shown ) . The fact that microinjection of mutant alleles of Cdc42 This pattern of regulation was not observed for either and Rac1 reversed the distinctive endocytic capacities Rac1 or Rac2 . Although comparable levels of Rac pro - ofimmatureandmatureDCssuggestedthatthismecha - tein were detected in both immature and mature DCs , nism might actually be used to control endocytosis dur - similar amounts of GTP - bound Rac1 and Rac2 also ing maturation . Therefore , we next asked if there were bound to GST - PAK beads ( Figures 6B and 6C ) . Thus , differences in the levels of activated ( i . e . , GTP - bound ) unlike Cdc42 , neither Rac1 nor Rac2 activation was de - velopmentally regulated , suggesting that the ability of Cdc42 and Rac1 between immature and mature DCs . Figure 5 . Microinjection of Rho GTPases Modulates Endocytosis in Developing Den - dritic Cells DCs were microinjected with purified recom - binantCdc42andRac1proteins ( withorwith - outGST - fusion ) . Injectedcellswereidentified by coinjection of Texas red dextran ( 10 , 000 MW ) orbyananti - GSTantibody . After20min , cells were pulsed with HEL ( green ) for 5 min and processed for immuno - fluorescence mi - croscopy . ( A ) Immature DCs were injected with the fol - lowing : Texas red dextran , Cdc42L61 - GST , Cdc42N17 , Rac1N17 , andWASP201 – 321aa . The number of injected cells ( red ) that inter - nalized HEL ( green ) was quantified visually and plotted as a percentage of the total num - berof injectedcells . Thetotal numberofcells counted is shown from a total of three sepa - rate experiments . ( B ) Mature DCs were injected with the follow - ing : GST ( not shown ) , Cdc42 WT - GST , Cdc42L61 - GST , Rac1L61 - GST , SopE - GST , SopE - GST / Rac1N17 - GST , Cdc42L61 - GST / Rac1N17 - GST , and Rac1L61 - GST / Cdc42N7 - GST ( notshown ) . Thenumberofinjectedcells ( red ) thatinternalizedHEL ( green ) wasquanti - fied visually and plotted as a percentage of the total number of injected cells . The total numberofcellscountedisshownfromatotalofthreeseparateexperiments . Control of Endocytosis in Dendritic Cells by Cdc42 331 It was striking that maturation caused a selective de - crease in levels of Cdc42 - GTP and not of Rac1 - or Rac2 - GTP . The functions of these Rho family GTPases can be difficult to distinguish , particularly when assaying activities such as membrane ruffling or phagocytosis following microinjection or transfection ( Hall , 1998 ) . In - deed , based on our own microinjection experiments , Cdc42 was at best only slightly more effective than Rac1 in its ability to activate or inactivate endocytosis in ma - ture or immature DCs , respectively . This result might reflect redundancy in function between endogenous Cdc42 and overexpressed Rac1 , or that Rac1 acts downstream from Cdc42 . However , the observation that Rac1 - N17 failed to block the activation of endocytosis by Cdc42 - L61 in mature DCs suggested that Cdc42 function was not dependent on Rac1 . Dependence on Figure 6 . Dendritic Cells Regulate Endocytosis by Regulating the Rac2 also seemed unlikely given that DCs from Rac2 Activation of Cdc42 knockout mice did not exhibit alterations in endocytosis To observe the total endogenous levels of Cdc42 , Rac1 , and Rac2 , ( W . S . G . and I . M . , unpublished data ) . lysates of immature or mature DCs ( 5x10 5 cells ) were probed by The precise mechanism by which Cdc42 acts to regu - Western blot using antibodies to Cdc42 ( lanes 1 and 2 in [ A ] ) , Rac1 late endocytosis in DCs or other cells remains to be ( lanes 1 and 2 in [ B ] ) , and Rac2 ( lanes 1 and 2 in [ C ] ) . The active determined . However , Cdc42 does not act by simply ( GTP - bound ) forms of the same GTPases were examined in lysates controlling membrane ruffling . Using video microscopy , of immature or mature DCs ( 1 . 5x10 8 cells ) by the ability to bind GST - we have found that both immature and mature DCs PAK coupled to glutathione - Sepharose beads in vitro : Cdc42 ( lanes appeared to exhibit comparable ruffling activity while 3 and 4 in [ A ] ) , Rac1 ( lanes 3 and 4 in [ B ] ) , and Rac2 ( lanes 3 and only immature cells were capable of simultaneously ac - 4 in [ C ] ) . cumulating extracellular FITC - dextran ( W . S . G . and I . M . , unpublished data ) . Cdc42 exists in the cytosol in DCs to downregulate endocytosis upon maturation re - the GDP form bound to Rho - GDI ( guanine nucleotide flects the selective regulation of Cdc42 - GTP . dissociation inhibitor ) and is recruited to membranes where its GDP is exchanged for GTP due to the action Discussion of one or more GEFs . Although much of the membrane - associated Cdc42 in resting cells is associated with the Our results strongly suggest that the ability of DCs to Golgi complex ( Erickson et al . , 1996 ; Kroschewski et al . , 1999 ) , a variety of signals can cause its redistribution to dramatically downregulate their capacity for endocyto - peripheral membranes often accompanied by a marked sis upon maturation reflects , at least in part , an ability polymerization of actin ( Hall , 1998 ) . Cdc42 - GTP binds to selectively regulate levels of activated Cdc42 . Four to the linker protein WASP ( or to the ubiquitously ex - distinct lines of evidence support this general conclu - pressed N - WASP ) which in turn binds the Arp 2 / 3 com - sion : 1 ) the ability of Toxin B , a specific inhibitor of plex triggering actin filament formation ( Ma et al . , 1998 ; Cdc42 and Rac , to inhibit endocytosis in immature DCs ; Abdul - Manan et al . , 1999 ; Mott et al . , 1999 ) . This series 2 ) the ability of S . typhimurium , a bacterium which in - of events could provide the force required to form duces its own uptake by activating Cdc42 in its intended membrane extensions required for macropinosome or host , to enter mature DCs ; 3 ) the finding that microinjec - phagosome formation . It also might promote the actin - tion of active or inactive mutants of Cdc42 ( and Rac1 ) dependent motility of intracellular vesicles which are either activated or abolished endocytosis in mature and recruited at areas of high membrane activity ( Bajno et immature DCs , respectively ; and most importantly , 4 ) al . , 2000 ; Taunton et al . , 2000 ) . Cdc42 might even propel the finding that endogenous levels of Cdc42 - GTP are newly formed macropinosomes to the interior of the cell markedly reduced in mature versus immature DCs . ( Merrifield et al . , 1999 ) . In this context , it is worth noting Thus , DCs would appear to control endocytosis by mak - that DCs from WASP - deficient mice fail to show abnor - ing use of Cdc42 as a regulatory switch controlling an malities in endocytosis or MHC II trafficking ( W . S . G . actin - dependent event . Perhaps not coincidentally , the and I . M . , unpublished data ) . However , DCs also express same switch is targeted for activation by pathogens N - WASP , which can be presumed to provide a compen - such as S . typhimurium and Shigella flexnerii , whose satory function . ability to trigger endocytosis is for them a matter of life Regardless of the role played by Cdc42 , a key un - and death ( Gala´n , 1999 ; Nhieu and Sansonetti , 1999 ) . known is the mechanism targeted by developing DCs Injection of Cdc42 - L61 was effective at reactivating to regulate its activation . One attractive possibility is endocytosis in z 50 % of injected mature DCs , indicating that the regulation is exerted at the level of GEFs , which that the machinery necessary for macropinocytosis and facilitate exchange of GDP for GTP . The exchange rate phagocytosis downstream of Cdc42 remains largely in - influences the biological output of a small GTPase , e . g . , tact after maturation . Although other factors probably active macropinocytosis when there is a high rate of exist which also regulate endocytosis in DCs , it is likely exchange or the cessation of macropinocytosis when that the inability of the activated mutant to completely exchange rates decrease . DC maturation may turn off restore endocytosis reflected its inability to reproduce a signal required for the activation or localization of a the normal Cdc42 cycle . Certainly , wild - type S . typhimu - Cdc42 GEF , altering the rate of GDP – GTP exchange . rium induced entry into almost all of the mature DCs Conceivably , such signals could be generated by recep - with which it came in contact , presumably by activating tors that detect maturation stimuli ( e . g . , lipopolysaccha - ride ) . An alternative might be that maturation induces a endogenous Cdc42 - GDP . Cell332 further purified by unit gravity sedimentation on 6 ml 50 % FCS factor which sequesters or inactivates Cdc42 , although columns ( Inaba et al . , 1992 ) . mixing experiments show that mature DCs do not con - tain an activity which reduces the level of Cdc42 - GTP Antibodies and Immunocytochemistry in lysates from immature DCs . However , it remains pos - Immuno - fluorescence patterns were visualized with fluorescent or sible that a downstream effector of Cdc42 might be confocal microscopy as described ( Pierre et al . , 1997 ) . Mouse I - A regulated such that it binds Cdc42 - GTP without trig - was detected using an affinity purified rabbit polyclonal antibody , gering GTP hydrolysis or interfering with the recycling “Rivoli” , directed against the conserved MHC II I - A b chain cyto - of Cdc42 - GDP . Indeed , other DC populations which dif - plasmic tail peptide ( KGPRGPPPAGLLQ ) ; mouse Lamp - 1 using the fer in lineage or function may make use of distinct strate - rat anti - mouse monoclonal ( Pierre and Mellman , 1998 ) ; mouse MHC gies to regulate endocytosis . Splenic DCs , for example , II using TIB120 , a rat monoclonal ; and GST fusion proteins using a rabbitpolyclonalanti - GSTantibody ( Sigma ) . Arabbitpolyclonalanti - may also rely on mechanisms downstream to that pro - seraagainstsero - groupB Salmonella wasusedtodetectSB136and vided by Cdc42 ( C . Watts , personal communication ) . SB300 S . typhimurium . HEL was detected using 1B12 , a mouse Given that S . typhimurium acts by regulating Cdc42 monoclonal ( provided by Dr . P . Allen , Washington University , St . and Rac activity at the level of nucleotide exchange ( by Louis , MO ) . injecting the GEF SopE ) , the idea of a developmentally regulated exchanger is , we feel , the most appealing . A Endocytosis Assays variety of endogenous GEFs have been identified that Flow Cytometry Assay are specific for the Rho GTPases . In yeast , the GEF Endocytic tracer was either added directly to DC culture dishes Cdc24 is selective for Cdc42 , with the closest mamma - or to DC populations harvested in polypropylene tubes and then lian homolog of Cdc24 being the proto - oncogene Dbl incubated for the prescribed time . For immature DC fed in culture ( Cerione and Zheng , 1996 ; Whitehead et al . , 1997 ; Stam dishes , the DC clusters were cluster purified on ice as described ( Inabaetal . , 1992 ) . Afterthecellswerepulsed withendocytictracer , and Collard , 1999 ) . The expression of some of these Dbl cells were transferred to pre - cooled tubes and washed 4X with PBS GEFfamilymembersisevenrestrictedtolymphoidcells . 2 % FCS in the cold . ( Sallusto et al . , 1995 ) Following the washes , Given that nucleotide exchange assays in vitro can be cells were stained with either phyco - erythrin anti - MHC II ( anti I - Ak , somewhat promiscuous in terms of their GTPase speci - anti - I - Ab , d ) or phyco - erythrin anti - CD86 antibody ( Pharmingen ) , ficity , it remains to be determined which , if any , of these washed , and then evaluated on a FACSCalibur . MHC II and CD86 GEFs represent the best candidate in DCs . staining allowed for further identification and staging of the DC Although DC maturation provides one of the most populations . Uptake of the fluoresceinated endocytic tracer was dramatic examples of endocytosis downregulation yet measured inthe FL1channel . Backgroundcontrol cells werepulsed observed , what is the significance of this event for DC on ice with endocytic tracer , washed , and processed as above . Immuno - fluorescence Assay function in antigen presentation and the immune re - For time course experiments assessing fluid phase endocytosis , sponse ? One function might be to ensure the longevity DC were harvested , plated on Alcian Blue coated coverslips , and of peptide – MHC II complexes at the cell surface ( Cella inverted onto a 40 m l droplet of endocytic tracer in RPMI 5 % FCS etal . , 1997b ) . Inaddition , downregulationofendocytosis at 37 8 C . Coverslips were washed in cold PBS with FCS 2 % 4 3 , may be a factor in determining the spectrum of antigens cold PBS 2 3 , and then fixed in 4 % PFA . For receptor mediated presented to T cells . This , in turn , may help determine endocytosis experiments , DC were harvested , cooled , and incu - whether DCs help induce immunity to foreign antigens bated on ice with the ligand for up to 2 hr . Cells were then washed or tolerance to self antigens . We have recently found in the cold with PBS 2 % FCS 4X , plated on Alcian Blue coverslips that actual loading onto MHC class II molecules of im - in the absence of serum for 20 min at 37 8 C , and then fixed in 4 % PFA . Concentrations for endocytic tracers were as follows : Lucifer munogenic peptides derived from these antigens is also Yellow potassium salt 2 . 5 mg / ml , FITC - ovalbumin 2mg / ml , FITC - tightly regulated : peptide loading can only occur after bovine serum albumin 2 mg / ml , FITC - dextran 40 , 000 molecular the receipt of a maturational stimulus ( Inaba et al . , 2000 ; weight lysine fixable 2 mg / ml ( Molecular Probes ) , HEL 2 mg / ml , Turley et al . , 2000 ) . By synchronizing the cessation of FITC - Tfn 2 mg / ml , holo - Tfn 30 mg / ml ( Sigma ) , Salmonella typhimu - endocytosis with the activation of peptide loading onto rium SB300 wt streptomycin resistant 10 – 100 / cell , S . typhimurium MHC II molecules , DCs limit their presentation activity SB136 invA kanamycin resistant 10 – 100 / cell . to those antigens encountered prior to or concomitant with an inflammatory stimulus . In any event , it is clear Electron Microscopy that the mechanism of DC maturation demonstrates the Sample Preparation role of Cdc42 as an important element in the normal DC were harvested from their culture dishes and an equal volume control of endocytosis . of 2X fixative ( 5 % glutaraldehyde , 200mM Na cacodylate , pH 7 . 4 ) was added to the cells in suspension . The suspension was gently inverted and incubated for 15 min . Cells were spun at 200 3 g for Experimental Procedures 5 min , fixative was aspirated , cells were resuspended in 1 3 fixative , transferred to a 1 . 5 ml tube , and incubated for 30 min . Cells were Mouse DC Culture Male BDF1 , C3H , C3H / HeJ , 4 – 6 week - old mice were purchased spun in an microfuge at 3000 rpm for 1 min , resuspended in 1M sodium phosphate ( pH 7 . 0 ) , and incubated for 10 min . Cells were from Jackson Laboratories or ( if available ) from Charles River Labo - ratories and bone marrow – derived DCs were cultured as previously spun as before , washed , pelleted , treated with 2 % OsO 4 for 1 hr , dehydratedusingagradedethanolseriesandacetone , andpelleted described ( Inaba et al . , 1992 , 2000 ) . Recombinant mouse GM - CSF was produced as culture supernatant from J558L cells transfected before embedding in Epon for sectioning . Three pellets of immature DCandmatureDCwerepreparedandquantificationwasperformed with the mouse GM - CSF cDNA ( a gift of Dr . D . Gray , London , UK ) . Cells were cultured in RPM1 , 5 % FCS , 50 m m b - mercaptoethanol , on sections from the triplicate pellets . Quantification andrecombinantmouseGM - CSF . Nonadherentcellswereremoved carefully and fresh media was added every two days . At day 6 , DC Thirty - four micrographs were taken randomly from each triplicate sample of immature and mature cells . Clathrin coated ( CC ) vesicles clusters , which were of the “immature phenotype” , were dislodged . For intermediate phenotype DC , dislodged DC clusters were disag - were scored according to the following criteria : presence of a struc - ture with a fuzzy coat , z 100 nm in diameter , and within one vesicle gregated and replated for 8 – 12 hr . For mature phenotype DC , dis - lodged DC clusters were disaggregated and replated with 100 ng / diameter of the plasma membrane ( PM ) . CC pits were scored based on the presence of the characteristic CC on the PM . The number ml LPS from S . typhimurium ( Sigma ) for 36 – 72 hr . DC clusters were Control of Endocytosis in Dendritic Cells by Cdc42 333 of CC pits and vesicles per unit of PM was calculated as described loaded on 12 . 5 % acrylamide gels . Gels were transferred to nitrocel - lulose and probed with a mouse monoclonal anti - Cdc42 ( Transduc - in Pypaert and Warren ( 1992 ) . Briefly , the number of PM intersec - tions with the horizontal lines of a 1 cm 3 1 cm grid were counted tion Laboratories ) , with a mouse monoclonal anti - Rac1 ( Transduc - tionLaboratories ) , orwitharabbitpolyclonalanti - Rac2 ( agiftofGary ( I ) . The exact magnification of the negatives was calculated by cali - brating the EM with a special replica plate and then the distance Bokoch , ScrippsInstitute , LaJolla , CA ) andhorseradishperoxidase - coupledsecondaryAbs ( JacksonImmunoResearch ) . Blotswerevis - between the grid lines at the negative magnification was obtained ( D ) . The relative PM length is 2I / D . ualized using West Pico Chemiluminescent Reagent ( Pierce ) . Standard deviations were calculated for the mean number of CC pits and vesicles per sample , the mean PM length , and the mean Acknowledgments number of CC pits and vesicles per mean PM length . Two sample t tests and paired t tests were performed on the above data from The authors would like to thank members of the Mellman / Warren immature and mature cells . laboratory , especially A . J . Lee , H . Chang , M . Hull , D . Sheff , H . Holcombe , K . Cannon , H . Zwickey , L . Pelletier , and J . Seemenn . We thank Ralph Steinman for support , advice , and discussion . We are Gentamicin Protection Assay also indebted to Mark Pypaert and Graham Warren for advice con - Wild - type streptomycin resistant S . typhimurium strain SB300 and cerning quantitative analysis of electron micrographs . We thank its isogenic invA mutant strain SB136 were grown under conditions Dennis Noe for statistical assistance , Scott Snapper for his WASP that stimulate the expression of the invasion - associated type III knockoutmice , RichardFlavellforRac2knockoutmice , andAgnies - secretionsystem ( Gala´netal . , 1992 ; Chenetal . , 1996 ) . Day6cultures zka Czopik for assistance . This work was supported by grants from were gently washed with antibiotic free media 3 times and then the NIH ( AI - 34098 , GM - 29765 , and CA - 46128 to I . M . ; GM - 52543 immature DC clusters were purified . Mature DCs were washed with and AI - 46953 to J . E . G . ) . W . S . G . is supported by the Medical antibiotic freemedia threetimes . DCpopulations were infectedwith Scientist Training Program . I . M . is a Member of the Ludwig Institute either wild - type or invA S . typhimurium at an MOI of 10 per cell for for Cancer Research . 90min . Cellswereharvestedandthenwashedwithmedia . Gentami - cin ( 10 m g / ml ) was added for 90 min . Cells were washed three times withmediaandthenlysedin1 % TritonX - 100inPBS . Serialdilutions Received March 16 , 2000 ; revised June 8 , 2000 . of cell lysates were made in PBS and lysates were plated on LB plateswiththeappropriateantibiotic . Plateswereincubatedat37 8 C References for 24 hr and then colonies were counted . Abdul - Manan , N . , Aghazadeh , B . , Liu , G . A . , Majumdar , A . , Ouerfelli , O . , Siminovitch , K . A . , and Rosen , M . K . ( 1999 ) . Structure of Cdc42 Toxin B Treatment Toxin B isolated from Clostridium difficile was a gift of Patrice Bou - in complex with the GTPase - binding domain of the ‘Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome’ protein . Nature 399 , 379 – 383 . quet . Toxin B ( final concentration of 1 ng / ml ) was added to DC cultures on day 5 . Cells were pretreated for 18 – 24 hr and then Aktories , K . ( 1997 ) . Bacterial toxins that target Rho proteins . J . Clin . immature DCs were harvested and their endocytic activity was as - Invest . 99 , 827 – 829 . sessed using both flow cytometry and immuno - fluorescence Austyn , J . M . ( 1996 ) . New insights into the mobilization and phago - assays . cytic activity of dendritic cells . J . Exp . Med . 183 , 1287 – 1292 . Bagrodia , S . , Taylor , S . , Jordon , K . A . , Van Aelst , L . , and Cerione , Microinjection R . A . ( 1998 ) . A Novel Regulator of p21 - activated Kinases . J . Biol . DCs were plated on poly - L - lysine coverslips for 20 min in the ab - Chem . 273 , 23633 – 23636 . sence of FCS , nonattached cells were aspirated , and RPM1 con - Bajno , L . , Peng , X . R . , Schreiber , A . D . , Moore , H . P . , Trimble , W . S . , taining 20 mM HEPES and 5 % FCS was added back to the dishes andGrinstein , S . ( 2000 ) . FocalexocytosisofVAMP3 - containingvesi - containingthecoverslips . Wherenoted , proteinorpeptides ( 0 . 3mg / cles at sites of phagosome formation . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 697 – 706 . ml ) were mixed with Texas red dextran MW 10 , 000 ( 10 mg / ml final concentration ) ( Sigma ) and injected into the cytoplasm of z 500 Banchereau , J . , and Steinman , R . M . ( 1998 ) . Dendritic cells and the cells over a period of , 20 min using an Eppendorf injection system control of immunity . Nature 392 , 245 – 252 . mounted on a Zeiss Axiovert microscope with a 37 8 C heated stage . Caron , E . , and Hall , A . ( 1998 ) . Identification of two distinct mecha - The endocytic capacity of injected and control injected cells was nismsofphagocytosiscontrolledbydifferentRhoGTPases . Science assessed by inverting injected coverslips onto a prewarmed droplet 282 , 1717 – 1721 . of endocytic tracer for 5 min , washing the coverslip with PBS 2 % Cella , M . , Sallusto , F . , and Lanzavecchia , A . ( 1997a ) . Origin , matura - FCS 4 3 , PBS 2 3 , and fixing with PFA 4 % . Cells were then stained tion and antigen presenting function of dendritic cells . Curr . Opin . for class II as described ( Pierre et al . , 1997 ) . Immunol . 9 , 10 – 16 . Cella , M . , Engering , A . , Pinet , V . , Pieters , J . , and Lanzavecchia , A . Protein Purification ( 1997b ) . Inflammatory stimuli induce accumulation of MHC class II PGEX - PAK binding domain ( PBD ) - GST , PGEX - Cdc42N17 - GST , complexes on dendritic cells . Nature 388 , 782 – 787 . PGEX - Cdc42L61 - GST , PGEX - Rac1N17 - GST , PGEXRac1L61 , PGEX - Cerione , R . A . , and Zheng , Y . ( 1996 ) . The Dbl family of oncogenes . N - WASp201 – 321 , and PGEX - SopE - GST were purified as described Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 8 , 216 – 222 . ( Guan and Dixon , 1991 ) . Bacterial cell lysates were subsequently incubated with gluthathione - Sepharose and washed . When indi - Chen , L . M . , Hobbie , S . , and Gala´n , J . E . ( 1996 ) . Requirement of cated , GSTwascleavedwithathrombincleavagecapturekit ( Nova - CDC42 for Salmonella - induced cytoskeletal and nuclear responses . gen ) . We have injected GST fusions , thrombin cleaved GST fusions , Science 274 , 2115 – 2118 . and commercially purified preparations ( Cytoskeleton Company ) Cox , D . , Chang , P . , Zhang , Q . , Reddy , P . G . , Bokoch , G . M . , and and observed no differences in their effects on endocytosis . Greenberg , S . ( 1997 ) . Requirements for both Rac1 and Cdc42 in membrane ruffling and phagocytosis in leukocytes . J . Exp . Med . PAK Assay 186 , 1487 – 1494 . Affinity precipitation with GST - PAK Cdc42 / Rac binding domain Didsbury , J . , Weber , R . F . , Bokoch , G . M . , Evans , T . , and Snyderman , ( GST - PBD ) was as described ( Bagrodia et al . 1998 ) . Eighty microli - R . ( 1989 ) . rac , a novel ras - related family of proteins that are botuli - ters of freshly prepared GST - PBD glutathione beads was added to num toxin substrates . J . Biol . Chem . 264 , 16378 – 16382 . 0 . 5 ml of the cell lysate and rocked at 4 8 C for 25 min . Recombinant Driessen , C . , Bryant , R . A . , Lennon - Dumenil , A . M . , Villadangos , J . A . , constitutivelyactivemutant proteinswereusedas apositivecontrol Bryant , P . W . , Shi , G . P . , Chapman , H . A . , and Ploegh , H . L . ( 1999 ) . and recombinant dominant - negative mutant proteins were used as Cathepsin S controls the trafficking and maturation of MHC class a negative control in the PAK assay . The beads were pelleted in a II molecules in dendritic cells . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 775 – 790 . microfuge and washed 3 times with lysis buffer . SDS sample buffer was added to the beads , samples were boiled for 3 min , and then Erickson , J . W . , Zhang , C . , Kahn , R . A . , Evans , T . , and Cerione , R . A . Cell334 ( 1996 ) . Mammalian Cdc42 is a brefeldin A - sensitive component of Watts , C . ( 1997 ) . Constitutive macropinocytosis allows TAP - depen - dentmajorhistocompatibilitycomplexclassIpresentationofexoge - the Golgi apparatus . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 26850 – 26854 . nous soluble antigen by bone marrow - derived dendritic cells . Eur . Gala´n , J . E . ( 1999 ) . Interaction of Salmonella with host cells through J . Immunol . 27 , 280 – 288 . the centisome 63 type III secretion system . Curr . Opin . Microbiol . Pierre , P . , andMellman , I . ( 1998 ) . Developmentalregulationofinvari - 2 , 46 – 50 . ant chain proteolysis controls MHC class II trafficking in mouse Gala´n , J . E . , Ginocchio , C . , and Costeas , P . ( 1992 ) . Molecular and dendritic cells . Cell 93 , 1135 – 1145 . functional characterization of the Salmonella invasion gene invA : Pierre , P . , Turley , S . J . , Gatti , E . , Hull , M . , Meltzer , J . , Mirza , A . , Inaba , homology of InvA to members of a new protein family . J . Bacteriol . K . , Steinman , R . M . , andMellman , I . ( 1997 ) . Developmentalregulation 174 , 4338 – 4349 . of MHC class II transport in mouse dendritic cells . Nature 388 , Guan , K . L . , and Dixon , J . E . ( 1991 ) . Eukaryotic proteins expressed 787 – 792 . in Escherichia coli : an improved thrombin cleavage and purification Pypaert , M . , and Warren , G . ( 1992 ) . Morphological studies of forma - procedure of fusion proteins with glutathione S - transferase . Anal . tion of coated pits and coated vesicles in broken cells . Methods Biochem . 192 , 262 – 267 . Enzymol . 219 , 212 – 222 . Hall , A . ( 1998 ) . Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton . Science Ridley , A . J . , Paterson , H . F . , Johnston , C . L . , Diekmann , D . , and Hall , 279 , 509 – 514 . A . ( 1992 ) . The small GTP - binding protein rac regulates growth fac - Hardt , W . D . , Chen , L . M . , Schuebel , K . E . , Bustelo , X . R . , and Gala´n , tor - induced membrane ruffling . Cell 70 , 401 – 410 . J . E . ( 1998 ) . S . typhimurium encodes an activator of Rho GTPases Rudolph , M . G . , Weise , C . , Mirold , S . , Hillenbrand , B . , Bader , B . , that induces membrane ruffling and nuclear responses in host cells . Wittinghofer , A . , and Hardt , W . D . ( 1999 ) . Biochemical analysis of Cell 93 , 815 – 826 . SopE from Salmonella typhimurium , a highly efficient guanosine Inaba , K . , Inaba , M . , Romani , N . , Aya , H . , Deguchi , M . , Ikehara , nucleotide exchange factor for RhoGTPases . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , S . , Muramatsu , S . , and Steinman , R . M . ( 1992 ) . Generation of large 30501 – 30509 . numbers of dendritic cells from mouse bone marrow cultures sup - Sallusto , F . , Cella , M . , Danieli , C . , and Lanzavecchia , A . ( 1995 ) . Den - plementedwith granulocyte / macrophagecolony - stimulating factor . dritic cells use macropinocytosis and the mannose receptor to con - J . Exp . Med . 176 , 1693 – 1702 . centrate macromolecules in the major histocompatibility complex Inaba , K . , Inaba , M . , Naito , M . , and Steinman , R . M . ( 1993 ) . Dendritic class II compartment : down regulation by cytokines and bacterial cell progenitors phagocytose particulates , including bacillus Cal - products . J . Exp . Med . 182 , 389 – 400 . mette - Guerin organisms , and sensitize mice to mycobacterial anti - Stam , J . C . , andCollard , J . G . ( 1999 ) . TheDHproteinfamily , exchange gens in vivo . J . Exp . Med . 178 , 479 – 488 . factors for Rho - like GTPases . Prog . Mol . Subcell . Biol . 22 , 51 – 83 . Inaba , K . , Turley , S . , Yamaide , F . , Iyoda , T . , Mahnke , K . , Inaba , M . , Taunton , J . , Rowning , B . A . , Coughlin , M . L . , Wu , M . , Moon , R . T . , Pack , M . , Subklewe , M . , Sauter , B . , Sheff , D . , et al . ( 1998 ) . Efficient Mitchison , T . J . , and Larabell , C . A . ( 2000 ) . Actin - dependent propul - presentationofphagocytosedcellularfragmentsonthemajorhisto - sion of endosomes and lysosomes by recruitment of N - WASP . J . compatibility complex class II products of dendritic cells . J . Exp . Cell Biol . 148 , 519 – 530 . Med . 188 , 2163 – 2173 . Taylor , S . J . , and Shalloway , D . ( 1996 ) . Cell cycle - dependent activa - Inaba , K . , Turley , S . J . , Iyoda , T . , Yamaide , F . , Shimoyama , S . , Reis tion of Ras . Curr . Biol . 6 , 1621 – 1627 . e Souza , C . , Germain , R . , Mellman , I . , and Steinman , R . M . ( 2000 ) . The Formation of immunogenic MHC class II - peptide ligands in Turley , S . J . , Inaba , K . , Garrett , W . S . , Ebersold , M . , Unterhnaehrer , lysosomalcompartmentsofdendriticcellsisregulatedbyinflamma - J . , Steinman , R . M . , and Mellman , I . ( 2000 ) . Transport of peptide - tory stimuli . J . Exp . Med . 191 , 927 – 936 . MHC class II in developing dendritic cells . Science 288 , 522 – 527 . Jiang , W . , Swiggard , W . J . , Heufler , C . , Peng , M . , Mirza , A . , Steinman , Watarai , M . , Kamata , Y . , Kozaki , S . , and Sasakawa , C . ( 1997 ) . Rho , R . M . , and Nussenzweig , M . C . ( 1995 ) . The receptor DEC - 205 ex - a small GTP - binding protein , is essential for Shigella invasion of pressed by dendritic cells and thymic epithelial cells is involved in epithelial cells . J . Exp . Med . 185 , 281 – 292 . antigen processing . Nature 375 , 151 – 155 . West , M . A . , Antoniou , A . N . , Prescott , A . R . , Azuma , T . , Kwiatkowski , Kroschewski , R . , Hall , A . , and Mellman , I . ( 1999 ) . Cdc42 controls D . J . , andWatts , C . ( 1999 ) . Membraneruffling , macropinocytosisand secretory and endocytic transport to the basolateral plasma mem - antigen presentation in the absence of gelsolin in murine dendritic brane of MDCK cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 8 – 13 . cells . Eur . J . Immunol . 29 , 3450 – 3455 . Kubori , T . , Matsushima , Y . , Nakamura , D . , Uralil , J . , Lara - Tejero , M . , Whitehead , I . P . , Campbell , S . , and Rossman , K . L . and Der , C . J . Sukhan , A . , Gala´n , J . E . , and Aizawa , S . I . ( 1998 ) . Supramolecular ( 1997 ) . Dbl family proteins . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1332 , F1 – 23 . structure of the Salmonella typhimurium type III protein secretion system . Science 280 , 602 – 605 . Li , G . , D’Souza - Schorey , C . , Barbieri , M . A . , Cooper J . A . , and Stahl , P . D . ( 1997 ) . Uncouplingofmembranerufflingandpinocytosisduring Ras signal transduction . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 10337 – 10340 . Ma , L . , Rohatgi , R . , andKirschner , M . W . ( 1998 ) . TheArp2 / 3 complex mediates actin polymerization induced by the small GTP - binding protein Cdc42 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 15362 – 15367 . Massol , P . , Montcourrier , P . , Guillemot , J . C . , andChavrier , P . ( 1998 ) . Fc receptor - mediated phagocytosis requires CDC42 and Rac1 . EMBO J . 17 , 6219 – 6229 . Mellman , I . , Turley , S . J . , and Steinman , R . M . ( 1998 ) . Antigen pro - cessingforamateursandprofessionals . TrendsCellBiol . 8 , 231 – 237 . Merrifield , C . J . , Moss , S . E . , Ballestrem , C . , Imhof , B . A . , Giese , G . , Wunderlich , I . , and Almers , W . ( 1999 ) . Endocytic vesicles move at the tips of actin tails in cultured mast cells . Nat . Cell . Biol . 1 , 72 – 74 . Mott , H . R . , Owen , D . , Nietlispach , D . , Lowe , P . N . , Manser , E . , Lim , L . , and Laue , E . D . ( 1999 ) . Structure of the small G protein Cdc42 bound to the GTPase - binding domain of ACK . Nature 399 , 384 – 388 . Nhieu , G . T . , andSansonetti , P . J . ( 1999 ) . MechanismofShigellaentry into epithelial cells . Curr . Opin . Microbiol . 2 , 51 – 55 . Norbury , C . C . , Chambers , B . J . , Prescott , A . R . , Ljunggren , H . G . , and