Social Dynamics of Science Xiaoling Sun 1 , 2 , Jasleen Kaur 2 , Stasˇa Milojevic´ 3 , Alessandro Flammini 2 & Filippo Menczer 2 1 Department of Computer Science and Technology , Dalian University of Technology , China , 2 Center for Complex Networks and Systems Research , School of Informatics and Computing , Indiana University , Bloomington , USA , 3 School of Library and Information Science , Indiana University , Bloomington , USA . The birth and decline of disciplines are critical to science and society . How do scientific disciplines emerge ? No quantitative model to date allows us to validate competing theories on the different roles of endogenous processes , such as social collaborations , and exogenous events , such as scientific discoveries . Here we propose an agent - based model in which the evolution of disciplines is guided mainly by social interactions among agents representing scientists . Disciplines emerge from splitting and merging of social communities in a collaboration network . We find that this social model can account for a number of stylized facts about the relationships between disciplines , scholars , and publications . These results provide strong quantitative support for the key role of social interactions in shaping the dynamics of science . While several ‘‘science of science’’ theories exist , this is the first account for the emergence of disciplines that is validated on the basis of empirical data . U nderstanding the dynamics of science as a human endeavor — the birth , evolution , and decline of disciplines — is of critical importance for allocating resources and planning toward positive societal impact . For example , the emergence of new fields such as bioinformatics , nanophysics , quantum com - puting , and data science promises ‘‘converging technologies’’ with unparalleled potential to influence our lives . Efforts to describe , explain and predict different aspects of science have intensified in recent years 1 – 3 spanning a wide range of theoretical , mathematical , statistical and computational approaches . This paper is about modeling the dynamic evolution of scientific disciplines . Definitions of scientific discipline encompass complex mixtures of bodies of knowledge , norms , methods , and organizations . Correspondingly , these shared elements emerge from the collaborations among groups of scholars in a discipline . What drives the birth of these communities ? Quantitative work on modeling the emergence of disciplines is lacking to date , owing in part to the difficulty of formally defining the notion of scientific field , and the consequent sparsity of data to inform and validate models . Many theories have been inspired by Kuhn’s seminal notion of paradigm shifts triggered by unexplained observations 4 . Some models of science dynamics have attributed the evolution of fields to branching , caused by growth and new discoveries 5 , 6 or specialization and fragmentation 7 . Examples of this kind of branching include nanophysics and molecular biology . Other models focus on the synthesis of elements of preexisting disciplines 8 , as in bioinformatics and quantum computing . All of these models point to the self - organizing development of science exhibiting growth and emergent behavior 9 – 11 . No matter the cause or specific dynamics leading to the birth of a new discipline , such an event isreflected in the social community of scholars 12 . New journals emerge , new collaborations are established , and new departments are created . Some theories emphasize the formation of social groups of scientists as the driving force behind the evolution of disciplines 13 – 15 . Here we offer a first quantitative model to describe the various dynamics of discipline evolution independently of their underlying causes . We assume a purely social dynamics of science , without explicit references to exogenous events such as scientific discoveries , technological advances , and availability of new data or methods . In our model , agents represent scholars who choose their collaborators , while groups of collaborating scholars represent scientific disciplines 16 . The key idea behind our model is that new scientific fields emerge from splitting and merging of these social communities . Splitting can account for branching mechanisms such as specialization and fragmentation , while merging can capture the synthesis of new fields from old ones . The birth and evolution of disciplines is thus guided mainly by the social interactions among scientists . The proposed approach falls within the class of agent - based models 17 . While agent - based models have been used to study science dynamics 18 – 20 , the focus was primarily on coauthorship , publication , and citation behavior rather than the emergence of disciplines . A key advantage of agent - based models is the capability to generate macroscopic predictions from micro - level mechanisms guiding the behavior of individuals , thus providing testable hypotheses about the emergence of disciplines . The social model of science proposed here will be SUBJECT AREAS : SCIENTIFIC DATA COMPUTATIONAL SCIENCE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY STATISTICS Received 6 October 2012 Accepted 2 January 2013 Published 15 January 2013 Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to F . M . ( fil @ indiana . edu ) SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1069 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / srep01069 1 validated against independent empirical datasets about the relation - ships between disciplines , scholars , and publications . Results The critical assumption of our model is the correspondence between the social dynamics of scholar communities and the evolution of scientific disciplines . To illustrate this intuition , let us look at the coauthorship network for papers published by the American Physical Society ( APS ) . Using journals as proxies for scholarly com - munities , we can track the changes in community structure over time . Fig . 1 plots the modularity 21 of the partition induced by the journals ; higher values indicate a more clustered structure ( see Methods ) . To gauge the significance of the network modularity , we construct a null model by shuffling the edges of the co - authorship network in such a way that the degree sequence of the network is preserved . We observe noticeable changes in modularity around the intro - duction of new journals . Some of these changes suggest a scenario in which a new field emerges ( e . g . , quantum mechanics in the late 1920’s ) , and a new journal captures the corresponding scholar com - munity , leading to an increase in modularity . Interdisciplinary inter - actions across established areas lead to a decrease in modularity ( e . g . , prior to the introduction of Physical Review E in the 1990’s ) . Note that the modularity baseline of the shuffled network is significantly lower , and does not display clear spikes in proximity of the intro - duction of new journals . This suggests that the birth of new scholar communities reflects the introduction of new journals and cannot be explained solely by the increased number of nodes and edges . An alternative , suggestive visualization of the emergence of topics can be obtained by tracking communities over time in the citation net - work 22 . These observations motivate the use of community detection algorithms in a model of discipline evolution . Model description . In the proposed model , which we call SDS ( So - cial Dynamics of Science ) , we build a social network of collaborations whose nodes represent scholars , linked by coauthored papers as illustrated in Fig . 2 ( a ) . Each scholar is represented by a list of disci - plines indicating the scientific fields they have been working on , and every discipline has a list of papers . Similarly , each link is represented by a list of disciplines with associated papers describing the colla - borations between two scholars . The social network starts with one scholar writingone paper in one discipline . The network then evolves as new scholars join , new papers are written , and new disciplines emerge over time . At every time step , a new paper is added to the network . Its first author is chosen uniformly at random , so that every scholar has the same chance to publish a paper . In modeling the choice of collabora - tors , we aim to capture a few basic intuitions : ( i ) scholars who have collaborated before are likely to do so again ; ( ii ) scholars with com - mon collaborators are likely to collaborate with each other ; ( iii ) it is easier to choose collaborators with similar than dissimilar back - ground ; and ( iv ) scholars with many collaborations have higher probability to gain additional ones 23 , 24 . We model these behaviors through a biased random walk 25 , illustrated in Fig . 2 ( b ) . The random walk traverses the collaboration network starting at the node corres - ponding to the first author . At each step , the walker decides to stop at Figure 1 | ModularityQof APS journal - induced scholar communities ( solid blue line ) . For each year t , we build a collaboration network based on the papers published in the 5 - year time interval between t 2 2 and t 1 2 . Such a network snapshot consists only of active scholars , who published at least one paper in that time window . If a scholar published papers in more than one journal , we select the first journal in that period . The grey areas correspond to the introduction of major new journals . The dashed red line plots the modularity obtained from a shuffled version of the collaboration network that preserves the degree of every node . Figure 2 | ( a ) Illustration of the social network structure . Nodes and edges represent scholars and their collaborations . They are annotated with lists of ( co ) authoredpapersgroupedbyscientificfields . Forexample , scholar b hasfivepapersincludingfourincomputerscience ( CS ) andoneinMath . Papers1 and 2 are coauthored with a , papers 5 and 6 with c , and paper 5 with d . Paper 4 is authored by b alone . ( b ) Illustration of the random walk mechanism to selectauthors . Forthenew paper7 , thefirstauthor a ischosenrandomly andthenwalksto b and c , stopping at d . Thesefourauthors becomeconnected to eachotheriftheyhavenotcollaboratedbefore ; forexample , newedgesconnect a to c and d . Paper7acquirestopicsCS , MathandPhysics ( Phy ) . Themain ( majority ) field of the paper , CS , diffuses across the collaborators , including d who joins this discipline as a result . www . nature . com / scientificreports SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1069 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / srep01069 2 the current node i with probability p w , or to move to an adjacent node with probability 1 – p w . In the latter case a neighbor j is selected according to the transition probability P ij ~ w ij (cid:2)P k w ik where w ij is the weight of the edge connecting scholars i and j , that is , the number of papers that i and j have coauthored . Each visited node becomes an additional collaborator . Note that the walk may result in a single author . Each paper is characterized by one main topic and possibly addi - tional , secondary topics . The discipline that is shared by the majority of authors is selected as the main topic of the paper . Each coauthor acquires membership in this main topic , to model exposure of scho - lars to new disciplines through collaboration . Additionally , a paper with authors from multiple disciplines inherits the union of these disciplines as topics . This choice is motivated by a desire to capture highly multidisciplinary efforts that are likely to lead to the emer - gence of new fields . This mechanism could be modified to reflect a more conservative notion of discipline by adopting a stricter rule for discipline inheritance . At every time step , with probability p n , we also add a new scholar to the network . The parameter p n regulates the ratio of papers to scholars . The new scholar is the first author of the paper created at that time step . To generate other collaborators , an existing scholar is first selected uniformly at random as the first coauthor . Then the random walk procedure is followed to pick additional collaborators . The new scholar acquires the main topic of the paper . We introduce a novel mechanism to model the evolution of dis - ciplines by splitting and merging communities in the social collab - oration network . The idea , motivated by the earlier observations from the APS data , is that the birth or decline of a discipline should correspond to an increase in the modularity of the network . Two such events may occur at each time step with probability p d . The process is illustrated in Fig . 3 . For a split event we select a random discipline with its collaborator network and decide whether a new discipline should emerge from a subset of this community . We partition the collaboration network into two clusters ( see Methods ) . If the modularity of the partition is higher than that of the single discipline , there are more collabora - tions within each cluster than across the two . We then split the smaller community as a new discipline . For papers labeled with the discipline corresponding to the smaller community in the split , this discipline label may be updated ; all other labels remain unchanged . In particular , the papers whose authors are all in the new community are relabeled to reflect the emergent discipline . Borderline papers with authors in both old and new disciplines are labeled according to the discipline of the majority of authors . Some authors may as a result belong to both old and new discipline . For a merge event we randomly select two disciplines with at least one common author . If the modularity obtained by merging the two groups is higher than that of the partitioned groups , the collabora - tions across the two communities are stronger than those within each one . The two are then merged into a single new discipline . In this case , all the papers in the two old disciplines are relabeled to replace the old discipline with the new one ; other labels of those papers remains unchanged . Empirical validation . To evaluate the predictive power of the SDS model we consider a number of stylized facts , i . e . , broad empirical observations that describe essential characteristics of the dynamic relationships between disciplines , scholars , and publications . Our model provides an explanation for the evolution of scientific fields if it can reproduce these empirical observations . The complex interactions of a changing group of scientists , their artifacts , and their disciplinary aggregations can be captured by the broad empirical distributions of six quantitative descriptors : the number of authors per paper A P ( collaboration size ) ; the number of papers per scholar P A ( scholar productivity ) ; the number of scholars per discipline A D ( discipline popularity ) ; the number of disciplines per scholar D A ( scholar interdisciplinary effort ) ; the number of papers per discipline P D ( discipline productivity ) ; and the number of disciplines per paper D P ( publication breadth ) . To validate the SDS model , one would ideally require a single real - world dataset mapping the three - way relationships between scholars , publications , and disciplines . Unfortunately , no such dataset is available to date . One possibility would be to use a dataset such as those derived from Web of Science or Scopus , and attempt to infer associations between subjects , papers , and authors based on the subject categories of the journals in which the papers are published . However , such an inference approach is necessarily arbitrary . A less biased validation approach is to trade off the single dataset in exchange for multiple ones that capture the desired associations explicitly . We therefore adopt three large datasets that each map a binary projection of the three - way rela - tionships : NanoBank 26 to validate the relationship between scho - lars and papers , Scholarometer 27 to study the relationship between scholars and disciplines , and Bibsonomy 28 to analyze the relation - ship between papers and disciplinary topics . The datasets are described in the Methods section . The parameters p n , p w , and p d of our model are tuned to fit the quantitative descriptors of each dataset ( see Methods ) . Fig . 4 presents a compelling fit between the real data and the predictions of our model . SDS reproduces the stylized facts about the relationships between scholars , publications , and disciplines , characterized by these six distributions . These results focus on the relationships between disciplines , scho - lars , and papers , for which there is little prior quantitative analysis . The collaboration network , on the other hand , has been studied extensively in the past 29 , 30 . As shown in Fig . 5 , the SDS model gen - erates collaboration networks whose long - tailed degree distributions are consistent with the empirical data , as well as with those in the literature . Figure 3 | Discipline evolution . ( a ) The collaboration network of discipline D 1 is split into two disciplines D 2 and D 3 . The modularity increases from Q 5 0 to Q 5 0 . 4 . The dashed line indicates the partition of thenetworksuggestedbythecommunitydetectionalgorithm . Somenodes inthenewdiscipline D 3 havealsopublishedpaperswithscholarsin D 2 , and therefore belong to both disciplines . ( b ) Two collaboration networks of disciplines D 4 and D 5 are merged into new discipline D 6 . For scholars in both original disciplines , we pick one based on the number of papers published in each discipline . The dashed line shows the resulting partition , with very low modularity Q 5 2 0 . 1 . The merged community D 6 has still low , but higher mudularity Q 5 0 . www . nature . com / scientificreports SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1069 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / srep01069 3 Discussion The match between the predictions of our model and the empirical distributions describing the relationships between scholars , publica - tions , and disciplines ( Fig . 4 ) deserves further discussion . The expo - nential distribution of A P is captured by the random walk process . The broad distribution of scholar productivity P A is well accounted for by the bias in the random walk , which incorporates a kind of preferential attachment mechanism regulated by prior collabora - tions . The distributions of discipline popularity A D and productivity P D also display heavy tails , which cannot be attributed to a specific mechanism in the model ; they emerge from the non - trivial interac - tions between ( i ) merging and splitting of the discipline communities and ( ii ) knowledge diffusion from the collaborations . The distri - bution of publication D P shows that there is a continuum in the breadth of papers , rather than a sharp separation between disciplin - ary and interdisciplinary work . The prediction is not as good for D A : our model produces a rela - tively large number of highly interdisciplinary scholars . One could correct this effect , for example , by requiring more than one paper in a discipline as a condition for membership . However , this would require an additional parameter and thus a more complicated model . Another possible modification of the model would be to alter the random walk process with occasional jumps , allowing scholars to go beyond their close collaborators with a finite probability . Such a mechanism could facilitate interdisciplinary papers by creating shortcuts across different fields . While we leave this extension for future work , we do not expect significant changes in the results as far as the jumps are not too common , given the small diameter of the co - authorship network . For high jump probability , the weaker locality would lead to a more random and therefore inherently less clustered network . By definition one would still find and possibly split com - munities , but the resulting clusters would be much less meaningful . In summary , we introduced an agent - based model to simulate the evolution of science as a process driven only by social dynamics . Our model captures for the first time major stylized facts about the com - plex socio - cognitive interactions of a changing group of scholars , publications , and scientific communities . The model is relatively simple when one considers the complexity of the science dynamics process being studied , yet powerful in its capability to reproduce the emergence of patterns similar to those observed in three real datasets about scientific production and fields . The SDS model provides us with strong quantitative support for the key role of social dynamics in shaping the birth , evolution , and decline of scientific disciplines . Future ‘‘science of science’’ studies will have to gauge the role of scientific discoveries , technological advances , and other exogenous events in the emergence of new dis - ciplines against this purely social baseline . Methods Modularity . Modularity 21 measures the strength of a network partition into clusters of nodes . It compares the number of edges falling within groups with the expected number in an equivalent network from a null model with the same degree sequence butshufflededges . Largervaluesindicatestrongercommunitystructure . ForFig . 1we consider the weighted extension of modularity . Let w ij be the weight of an edge ( numberofcoauthoredpapers ) betweennodes i and j , and W ij itsexpectedvalue . The weighted modularity is defined as Q ~ 1 2 m X ij w ij { W ij (cid:3) (cid:4) d g i , g j (cid:5) (cid:6) ð 1 Þ where d ( g i , g j ) 5 1 if g i 5 g j ( i and j are in the same group ) and 0 otherwise ; m is the sum of all edge weights in the network . W ij is computed as W ij ~ s i s j 2 m ð 2 Þ where s i is the strength or weighted degree of node i , s i ~ P j w ij . When splitting and merging disciplines in the model , we compare the merged and splitpartitionsandselecttheoptionwithhighermodularity . Althoughthemodularity measure does not allow to detect very small communities 31 , the advantages of this simple and intuitive approach outweigh those of more sophisticated algorithms . In practice , we use the leading eigenvector method 32 based on the ( non - weighted ) modularity matrix , as an efficient and effective algorithm to split a collaboration network into two groups . Datasets . The APS dataset ( Fig . 1 ) was made available by the American Physical Society ( publish . aps . org / datasets / ) . We consider the papers appearing in eight journals during the period of 1913 – 2000 : Physical Review ( PR ) 1913 – 1955 , Review of Modern Physics ( RMP ) 1929 – 2000 , Physical Review Letters ( PRL ) 1958 – 2000 , Physical Review A , B , C , D ( PRA - D ) 1970 – 2000 , and Physical Review E ( PRE ) 1993 – 2000 . The SDS model is validated against three datasets : NanoBank ( version Beta 1 , released on May 2007 ) 26 , 33 is a digital library of bibliographic data on articles , patents and grants related to nanotech - nology . Articles in NanoBank were selected from the Science Citation Index Expanded , Figure 4 | Stylized facts characterizing relationships between scholars , papers , anddisciplines . Weplotthedistributions of ( a ) authorsperpaper , ( b ) papers per scholar , ( c ) scholars per discipline , ( d ) disciplines per scholar , ( e ) papers per discipline , and ( f ) disciplines per paper . Circles represent the SDS predictions , while other symbols represent the empirical data from the three datasets . The results of the model are averaged over 10 runs . Figure 5 | Degree distribution of the collaboration network generated by the SDS model , compared to the empirical distribution from the Bibsonomy dataset . A few papers with more than 100 authors were excluded as they generate an anomaly in the tail ; each such paper generates at least 100 nodes with degree at least 100 . A similar match is also observed for other datasets . www . nature . com / scientificreports SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1069 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / srep01069 4 Social Sciences Citation Index , and Arts and Humanities Citation Index producedbytheInstituteforScientificInformation ( ISI , nowThomsonReuters ) . Unlike most disciplinary datasets that are selected by subject categories of journals and are therefore rather narrow in their focus , NanoBank was constructedbyselectingarticlescontainingalargenumberofterms . Thisresulted in a database that is very multidisciplinary in nature 34 , containing articles belongingto226outof245ISIJCRsubjectcategories , fromhumanitiesandsocial science to core nano subjects such as the applied physics and material science . In that respect the database has enough variety to cover a wide range of authoring practices , from mostly single - authored papers inhumanities and mathematics to extremely large teams in biosciences and physics , including high - energy physics . We used this dataset to validate the relationship between authors and papers . Scholarometer ( scholarometer . indiana . edu ) is a social tool for scholarly services developed at Indiana University , with the goal of exploring the crowdsourcing approach for disciplinary annotations and cross - disciplinary impact metrics 35 , 27 . Usersprovidedisciplineannotations ( tags ) forqueriedauthors , whichinturnare used to compare scholar impact across disciplinary boundaries . The annotations of an author must include at least one discipline from a predefined list ( ISI JCR subject categories ) , and may include any additional free - style tags . This accom - plishes a tradeoff between quality and flexibility of disciplinary annotations . The data collected by Scholarometer is available via an open API . We use this data to study the relationship between scholars and disciplines . Bibsonomy ( www . bibsonomy . org ) is a system for sharing bookmarks and literature lists 28 . Users freely annotate papers with tags , resulting in a folksonomy , or emergent ontology . To deal with the noise inherent in these annotations , we removed the tags associated with fewer than 3 papers or more than 6 , 000 papers , amounting to 4 % of the tags and 2 . 5 % of the annotations . These thresholds were selected manually to maximize the signal to noise ratio . The data is publicly available for research purposes . We analyze the relationship between papers and disciplines from a dataset including data until 2012 - 01 - 01 . Model calibration . The SDS model hasthree parameters . The value of p n is setto the empirical ratio of scholars to papers . The value of p w is set by matching the expected length of the random walk to the empirical average number of authors per paper ; in doing so weassume that therandom walk does not visitthe same node twice . Finally , p d isthefrequencyofnetworksplitandmergeevents . Sinceourdifferentdatasetsrely on different notions of disciplines , we explore a range of values for p d and select the one yielding the best match to the empirical number of disciplines for each dataset . Note that , even if we used a fixed ontology of disciplines , such as APS PACS or PubMed MeSH , one could select different granularity levels yielding different numbers of disciplines ; each level of granularity would require a different value of p d . Table 1 reports the main properties of the three empirical datasets and the model parameters used to generate predictions from numerical simulations of the model . For each dataset we run the simulations until the empirical number of papers or scholarsisreached ( showninbold ) . AsshowninTable2 , theSDSmodeliscapableof approximating the basic statistics of the empirical data . 1 . Bo¨rner , K . & Scharnhorst , A . Visual conceptualizations and models of science . J . Informetrics 3 , 161 – 172 ( 2009 ) . 2 . Bo¨rner , K . , Gla¨nzel , W . , Scharnhorst , A . & den Besselaar , P . V . Modeling science : studyingthe structureand dynamicsofscience . Scientometrics 89 , 347 – 348 ( 2011 ) . 3 . Scharnhorst , A . , Borner , K . & Besselaar , P . Models of Science Dynamics : Encounters Between Complexity Theory and Information Sciences ( Springer Verlag , 2012 ) . 4 . Kuhn , T . S . The structure of scientific revolutions ( University of Chicago Press , 1996 ) . 5 . Price , D . Little science , big science ( Columbia University Press , 1986 ) . 6 . Mulkay , M . Three models of scientific development . The Sociological Review 23 , 509 – 526 ( 1975 ) . 7 . Dogan , M . & Pahre , R . Creative marginality : Innovation at the intersections of social sciences ( Westview Press , 1990 ) . 8 . Etzkowitz , H . & Leydesdorff , L . The dynamics of innovation : from national systems and ‘‘Mode 2’’ to a Triple Helix of university - industry - government relations . Research Policy 29 , 109 – 123 ( 2000 ) . 9 . Noyons , E . C . M . & van Raan , A . F . J . Monitoring scientific developments from a dynamic perspective : Self - organized structuring to map neural network research . Journal of the American Society for Information Science 49 , 68 – 81 ( 1998 ) . 10 . van Raan , A . F . J . Fractal dimension of co - citations . Nature 347 , 626 ( 1990 ) . 11 . van Raan , A . F . J . On growth , ageing , and fractal differentiation of science . Scientometrics 47 , 347 – 362 ( 2000 ) . 12 . Bettencourt , L . M . , Kaiser , D . I . & Kaur , J . Scientific discovery and topological transitions in collaboration networks . Journal of Informetrics 3 , 210 – 221 ( 2009 ) . 13 . Crane , D . Invisible colleges : Diffusion of knowledge in scientific communities ( University of Chicago Press , 1972 ) . 14 . Guimera , R . , Uzzi , B . , Spiro , J . & Amaral , L . Team assembly mechanisms determine collaboration network structure and team performance . Science 308 , 697 – 702 ( 2005 ) . 15 . Wagner , C . The new invisible college : Science for development ( Brookings Institution Press , 2008 ) . 16 . Palla , G . , Barabasi , A . & Vicsek , T . Quantifying social group evolution . Nature 446 , 664 – 667 ( 2007 ) . 17 . Payette , N . Agent - based models of science . Models of Science Dynamics 127 – 157 ( 2012 ) . 18 . Gilbert , N . Asimulationofthestructureofacademicscience . SociologicalResearch Online 2 ( 1997 ) . 19 . Bo¨rner , K . , Maru , J . & Goldstone , R . The simultaneous evolution of author and paper networks . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 5266 – 5273 ( 2004 ) . 20 . Watts , C . & Gilbert , N . Does cumulative advantage affect collective learning in science ? An agent - based simulation . Scientometrics 89 , 437 – 463 ( 2011 ) . 21 . Newman , M . E . J . Modularity and community structure in networks . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 8577 – 8582 ( 2006 ) . 22 . Lancichinetti , A . & Fortunato , S . Consensus clustering in complex networks . Scientific Reports 2 , 336 ( 2012 ) . 23 . Merton , R . The Matthew effect in science . Science 159 , 56 – 63 ( 1968 ) . 24 . Baraba´si , A . & Albert , R . Emergence of scaling in random networks . Science 286 , 509 – 512 ( 1999 ) . 25 . Lova´sz , L . Randomwalksongraphs : Asurvey . Combinatorics , PaulErdosisEighty 2 , 1 – 46 ( 1993 ) . 26 . Zucker , L . G . & Darby , M . R . Nanobank data description , release 1 . 0 ( betatest ) . UCLA Center for International Science , Technology , and Cultural Policy and Nanobank ( 2007 ) . 27 . Kaur , J . et al . Scholarometer : A Social Framework for Analyzing Impact across Disciplines . PLoS ONE 7 , e43235 ( 2012 ) . 28 . Benz , D . et al . The social bookmark and publication management system bibsonomy . The VLDB Journal 19 , 849 – 875 ( 2010 ) . 29 . Newman , M . E . J . The structure of scientific collaboration networks . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 404 – 409 ( 2001 ) . 30 . Newman , M . E . J . Coauthorship networks and patternsofscientificcollaboration . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 5200 – 5205 ( 2004 ) . 31 . Fortunato , S . & Barthelemy , M . Resolution limit in community detection . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 36 – 41 ( 2007 ) . 32 . Newman , M . E . J . Finding community structure in networks using the eigenvectors of matrices . Physical Review E 74 , 036104 ( 2006 ) . 33 . Zucker , L . , Darby , M . , Furner , J . , Liu , R . & Ma , H . Minerva unbound : Knowledge stocks , knowledge flows and new knowledge production . Research Policy 36 , 850 – 863 ( 2007 ) . 34 . Milojevic´ , S . Multidisciplinary cognitive content of nanoscience and nanotechnology . Journal of Nanoparticle Research 14 , 1 – 28 ( 2012 ) . 35 . Hoang , D . T . , Kaur , J . & Menczer , F . Crowdsourcing scholarly data . In Proc . Web Science Conference : Extending the Frontiers of Society On - Line ( WebSci ) ( 2010 ) . Acknowledgements TheworkpresentedinthispaperwasperformedwhileXiaolingSunwasvisitingtheCenterforComplexNetworksandSystemsResearch ( cnets . indiana . edu ) attheIndianaUniversity Table 1 | Dataset properties and SDS model parameters . For each dataset , we focus on the properties that our model aims to repro - duce . Properties that are irrelevant for our model , or that cannot be measured directly , are omitted . The parameters are tuned indepen - dently for each dataset . Note that for NanoBank , we set p d 5 0 . 001 , however in this case the parameter is irrelevant , because we do not use this dataset to validate relationships involving disciplines NanoBank Scholarometer Bibsonomy Number of papers 2 . 7 3 10 5 — 2 . 9 3 10 5 Number of scholars 2 . 9 3 10 5 2 . 2 3 10 4 — Number of disciplines — 1 . 1 3 10 3 4 . 4 3 10 4 p n 0 . 90 0 . 04 0 . 80 p w 0 . 28 0 . 35 0 . 71 p d 0 . 00 0 . 01 0 . 50 Table 2 | Basic statistics of empirical datasets compared with SDS model predictions . Averages and standard deviations are obtained by 10 realizations of the model Quantity Dataset Empirical SDS A P NanoBank 4 . 006 4 . 011 6 0 . 001 P A NanoBank 3 . 666 4 . 456 6 0 . 005 A D Scholarometer 45 60 6 10 D A Scholarometer 2 . 2 3 . 5 6 0 . 4 P D Bibsonomy 24 22 6 1 D P Bibsonomy 3 . 6 3 . 3 6 0 . 2 www . nature . com / scientificreports SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1069 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / srep01069 5 School of Informatics and Computing . Thanks to Diep Thi Hoang , Mohsen JafariAsbagh , and Lino Possamai for Scholarometer system development and helpful discussions ; to Emilio Ferrara and John McCurley for comments and editing assistance ; and to two anonymous referees for their constructive suggestions . We acknowledge support from Hongfei Lin at Dalian University of Technology , the China Scholarship Council , the Lilly Endowment , and NSF ( award IIS - 0811994 ) for funding the computing infrastructure that hosts the Scholarometer service . Author contributions Allauthorscontributedtoempiricalanalysis , modeldesignandevaluation , andmanuscript preparation . XS implemented the model and produced the figures . Additional information Competing financial interests : The authors declare no competing financial interests . License : This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution - NonCommercial - NoDerivs 3 . 0 Unported License . To view a copy of this license , visit http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - nd / 3 . 0 / How to cite this article : Sun , X . , Kaur , J . , Milojevic´ , S . , Flammini , A . & Menczer , F . Social Dynamics of Science . Sci . Rep . 3 , 1069 ; DOI : 10 . 1038 / srep01069 ( 2013 ) . www . nature . com / scientificreports SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1069 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / srep01069 6