Feature Selection in Crowd Creativity Lixiu Yu and Yasuaki Sakamoto Howe School of Technology Management , Stevens Institute of Technology , USA { lyu3 , ysakamot } @ stevens . edu Abstract . Crowdsourcing is emerging as a wellspring of creative designs . This paper examines the mechanisms that support collective design . A sequential combination system is described : one crowd generates designs , and another crowd combines these designs . Previous experiments showed that the combined designs were judged more creative than the initial designs . The current work extends this previous research by examining the combination process of the designs more closely , looking at how features of the designs were selected and integrated into later designs . Participants preferred atypical features to typical ones for integration , and given a choice , selected practical but less atypical features over impractical but more atypical features . We conclude that crowds attend to both novelty and practicality of the features , and that the presence of atypical yet practical features contributes to the increased creativity of the combined designs . Keywords : Crowdsourcing , collective creativity , combination , feature selection 1 Introduction Creativity has been studied in a variety of domains from two perspectives . First , who can perform creative activities ? Second , what is the underlying process of creative thought ? Traditionally , creativity has been regarded as unexplainable , an ability possessed only by a small number of talented people ( e . g . , [ 1 ] ) . In recent years , however , web - enabled technology has allowed non - experts to contribute to collective creative activities [ 2 - 4 ] . Specifically , crowdsourcing makes it possible to generate creative ideas by assembling large numbers of workers in a short amount of time [ 5 , 6 ] . Our work has been examining how such crowds can be assembled and organized to generate creative ideas [ 7 , 8 ] . In particular , we have developed and tested a sequential combination system : A crowd generates designs , and another crowd combines these designs . This past work has shown that combined ideas become more creative than the initial ideas , enabling crowds to improve the designs . The current work extends our past work by systematically studying the combination process : how feature selection in the combination process contributes to creative designs . By better understanding the combination process , we seek to improve the design of our system . Our focus on the combination process is based on the popular conjecture that combination is a key process underlying creativity . For example , a Darwinian perspective considers combination as part of creativity by through an analogy to 2 natural selection ; ideas are combined at random , and some of them lead to discoveries ( e . g . , [ 9 ] ) . Following the spirit of the Darwinian view , management researchers explain innovation in terms of recombination of existing knowledge [ 10 , 11 ] . Similarly , cognitive scientists claim that the process of conceptual combinations , in which separate ideas or concepts are merged , underlies much of creativity [ e . g . , 12 - 14 ] . Past experiments have examined how the nature of idea pairs , such as the similarity of ideas to be combined , influences creativity [ 15 - 18 ] , and how the superimposition of two images affects the creation of art [ 19 ] . Nevertheless , little is known about which features people will choose to integrate , and how this selection contributes to the creativity of the design . To address this issue , we conduct two experiments that examine which features people integrate . We make predictions based on schema research in cognitive psychology ( e . g . , [ 20 ] ) . By performing these experiments , and by better understanding the combination process , we extend the combinatorial conjecture of creativity . Furthermore , our results will help us fine - tune the design of our combination system . Continued work along this line will augment collective creativity , and may one day enable crowds to solve many challenging design problems . In the remainder of the paper , we first introduce the sequential combination system and describe previous work on the combination process of crowd creativity . Then we present two experiments . 2 Background The current work is built on Yu and Nickerson’s past work , which showed that atypical features from the initial ideas are preserved in the combined ideas [ 7 ] . Before detailing this result , we describe the sequential combination system . 2 . 1 The Sequential Combination System In our sequential combination system , crowds generate , evaluate , and combine visual designs in sequence , as summarized in Figure 1 . The system uses the idea of a genetic algorithm [ 21 , 22 ] , implemented with humans [ 23 ] : The computers manage the process of finding pairs of designs to combine , based on crowds’ evaluations of the designs , and the crowds perform the actual combining of the designs . In the design community , a variety of computer - based and human - assisted genetic algorithms have been tried , with some success [ 23 ] . Recently , other researchers have successfully conducted large - scale experiments using crowds , in which humans perform tasks as if they were computers [ e . g . 4 , 24 , 25 ] . In our system , one crowd creates a first generation of designs , and then other crowds create successive generations by combining the designs made by previous crowds . In between , different crowds evaluate the designs from each generation . A pair of designs for combination is selected using tournament selection [ 26 ] : two ideas are randomly selected , and the 3 one receiving a higher evaluation score by the crowd wins ; this procedure is repeated to find another winner , and these two winners are chosen to form a pair of parents . This organizational process is integrated with Amazon’s Mechanical Turk [ 27 , 28 ] and the Google Docs drawing application [ 29 ] . The solicitation and management of participants are handled through Mechanical Turk . All participants receive nominal compensation . When participants engage in design generation , they are directed to a Google drawing page . This same page , in later generations , presents the designs to be combined . The drawing tool provides many menu choices including a freehand sketch option , a vector line , text , and pull - down shape palette . Fig . 1 . The generations of the experiment . 2 . 2 Test of the Sequential Combination System The system was tested on two design problems . The first was an open - ended problem , designing a chair for children . Figure 2 shows the solutions to this problem and the combination process . The second problem , the design of alarm clocks , was more tightly specified : constraints of cost and safety were added . Figure 3 shows the solutions to this problem and the combination process . In total , 1207 participants were involved in designing the chair , and 540 participants were involved in designing the clock [ 7 ] . Participants were asked to present their design ideas through sketches . One crowd solved the design problem by producing sketches independently , another crowd evaluated the sketches , and yet another crowd combined the design sketches generated by the previous crowd . Both of the design problems were run through three generations . The creativity of the combined designs from Generation 3 was compared to the creativity of the initial designs from Generation 1 , using the method explained in [ 7 ] . Generation 3 had about twice as many creative designs as Generation 1 for both problems . To find out why the combination process led to increased creativity , Yu and Nickerson took a closer look at the combination process in the chair experiment . What they found was that the number of atypical features increased almost three times in the later combined designs . From this observation , Yu and Nickerson concluded that people selected atypical features during combination , and that the selection of 4 atypical features contributed to the increased creativity of the combined designs . Here we systematically test the idea that people select atypical features for combination . We draw on schema research from cognitive psychology to build our hypotheses . Fig . 2 . Examples of chair designs . The chair on the bottom is combined from the chairs above . Fig . 3 . Examples of clock designs . The clock on the bottom is combined from the clocks above . 2 . 2 Schema Effects A central issue in the schema research is how people process schema - consistent and schema - inconsistent information . A schema is a general knowledge structure that provides a set of expectations based on prior experience [ 30 - 32 ] . For example , a schema for a chair might include straight legs and a square back ; that is , it might look like a dining room chair in your house . Schema - consistent information is information that fits one’s existing schema ; schema - inconsistent information is information that violates one’s schema . For the chair schema , for example , a square back is schema - consistent ; a flower back is schema - inconsistent . A strong finding in the schema research is that people are attracted to schema - inconsistent information [ 33 - 35 ] . For example , if you see a chair with a flower back in your office , you will sit on it , play with it , or at least remember it . This effect is a special case of novelty effects , in which people attend to unfamiliar and surprising events and objects [ 36 ] . Based on this work , we hypothesize that people select atypical features to use in their designs . However , the schema research predicts that not all atypical features will be entertained ; people tend to ignore information irrelevant to the schema . Thus , people will stay away from atypical features , if they are not relevant to the schema . For designing chairs , features of the chair are irrelevant to the chair if they lack practicality ; for example , a back of the chair that cannot support the person sitting on the chair is irrelevant to the chair in the sense that it cannot be used . Thus , we hypothesize that people will not select impractical features , even if they are atypical . 5 3 Method and Results To explore the pattern of feature selection in the combination process , two experiments were conducted . In both experiments , participants were recruited from Mechanical Turk . In the preference experiment , participants were asked to judge which of the three chairs is most atypical ( preference experiment A ) , and to select which of the three types of chair backs they would like to incorporate in their design ( preference experiment B ) . In the production experiment , participants were asked to produce designs by combining two given designs . 3 . 1 Preference Experiment In the preference experiment , three chairs were designed that differ only with respect to their backs : an often - seen chair with a typical square back , an atypical and practical flower back , and an atypical but impractical back composed of sharp triangles . Figure 4 shows the chairs used in the preference experiment . The position of the chairs was randomized in the experiments . Altogether 80 participants took part in preference experiment A . Their ages ranged from 20 to 61 , with a mean of 32 . Sixty - three percent of participants were males . In preference experiment A , the crowd was asked : Which chair is most atypical ? There were also 80 participants in preference experiment B . Their ages ranged from 21 to 57 , with a mean of 33 . Sixty percent of participants were males . In preference experiment B , a different crowd was asked : The chairs below are designs from your fellow workers . If you are designing a new chair , which back of the chairs would you like to incorporate in your design ? Our two hypotheses were ( 1 ) the participants would select atypical features ( 2 ) but only when those features were practical . Thus , we predict that the atypical , practical back will be preferred to the typical back and preferred to the atypical , impractical back . We first checked to make sure that chair backs differ in typicality . When asked to choose the most atypical chair in experiment A , 42 participants picked the atypical , impractical chair ; 26 chose atypical , practical chair ; and 12 selected typical chair , χ 2 ( 2 , N = 80 ) = 16 . 90 , P < 0 . 01 . More people thought the atypical , impractical chair was more atypical compared to the atypical , practical chair . Then , if people select features based only on novelty , the atypical , impractical back should be chosen more often . Our main interest was the crowd’s responses in experiment B . Out of 80 participants , 53 participants picked the atypical , practical back , 10 picked the atypical , impractical back , and 17 picked the typical back , χ 2 ( 2 , N = 80 ) = 39 . 93 , P < 0 . 01 . 6 Figure 5 shows the proportions of participants for the three options . As predicted , the crowd selected atypical features that are also practical , even though more people thought the atypical , impractical chair was more atypical than the atypical , practical chair . Thus , the crowd values both novelty and practicality . Typical feature Atypical practical feature Atypical impractical feature P r opo r t i on 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 Fig . 4 . Chairs presented in the preference experiment , left to right : the chair with the typical back , the chair with the atypical , practical back and the chair with the atypical , impractical back Fig . 5 . The proportions of the selected features . 3 . 2 Production Experiment In the production experiment , we examine whether the atypical , practical features will be integrated into the combined designs when participants are asked to recreate their own designs . We are also interested in whether the combined designs with atypical , practical features are judged more creative than designs with only typical features . Two chairs were designed . Each chair consisted of both atypical , practical features and typical features . The two atypical practical features were a flower back and rocking chair legs . The two typical features were a square back and straight legs with crossing bars . Figure 6 shows the chairs presented in the production experiment . Fig . 6 . The two chairs used in the production experiment as parents : on the left is parent chair 1 , with a flower back and straight legs with crossing bars ; on the right is parent chair 2 with a square back and rocking chair legs . Overall 94 participants took part in the experiment , and 94 sketches were collected . Among 94 participants , the ages ranged from 18 to 59 with a mean of 30 . Fifty - two percent of the participants were males . 7 In the production experiment , two chairs were presented on the right side of the drawing interface . The participants were asked to design a chair for children by combining the presented chairs . Our prediction was that the atypical , practical features—the flower back and the rocking chair legs—would be integrated more often into the combined chairs than the typical features—the square back and the straight legs with crossing bars . We also predicted that the designs with atypical , practical features would be judged more creative than the designs with only typical features . Figure 7 shows four examples of the combined chairs . Most combined chairs conformed to the features of the initial two chairs , but some incorporated new features that were not present in the initial chairs . The coding of typical features and atypical features was performed by two raters : they counted the number of square backs , straight legs with crossing bars , flower backs , and rocking chair legs in the combined chairs . Inter - rater reliability , measured by a Kappa score , was 0 . 71 . As predicted , atypical features were integrated more often in the combined designs than typical features , χ 2 ( 1 , N = 40 ) = 22 . 50 , P < 0 . 01 . Figure 7a shows a combination of the atypical feature from each parent : the flower back from parent chair 1 and rocking chair legs from parent chair 2 . Figure 7b shows an example of a combination of the typical features of the initial two chairs : the square back and the straight legs with crossing bars . There were two other types of combination : a new chair consisting of a mix of atypical and typical features as shown in Figure 7c , and a new chair with new features added as shown in Figure 7d . Chair Legs Chair Back Atypical Feature Typical Feature P r opo r t i on o f f ea t u r e s 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 7a 7b 7c 7d Fig . 7 . Examples of combined chairs . Fig . 8 . Proportion of typical features and atypical features . In order to test the hypothesis that atypical , practical features are selected more often than typical features , the occurrences of typical features were compared to those of atypical , practical features . As shown in Figure 8 , the atypical , practical features were selected much more often than the typical ones , χ 2 ( 1 , N = 94 ) = 23 . 21 , P < 0 . 01 for the chair back , and , χ 2 ( 1 , N = 94 ) = 28 . 30 , P < 0 . 01 for the chair legs . We then examined whether combined chairs with only atypical features ( atypical chairs ) were judged more creative than the combined chairs with only typical features ( typical chairs ) . Out of 94 combined chairs , 31 chairs were classified as atypical 8 chairs and five chairs were composed of typical chairs . Two raters coded the classification , and inter - rater reliability , measured by a Kappa score , was 0 . 96 . A standard measure of creativity is a count of the number of original ideas that pass a threshold on the practicality dimension : Only ideas that are considered practical should be given credit for originality [ 7 , 37 ] . A crowd of 400 participants was asked to evaluate the chairs on originality and practicality . We used the approximate mean value of the ratings across all designs , 4 . 0 , as the threshold . The number of creative designs was four among atypical chairs and there were no creative designs in typical chairs . Although this result was consistent with our hypothesis , the count was too small to draw conclusions from . In summary , the results from preference and production experiments show that the atypical features are more likely to be selected and integrated into the new combined designs , but only when they are also practical . The presence of atypical features might contribute to the creativity of the designs . In contrast , the typical features , which were judged low in originality , were dropped during the combination process . Therefore , the combination process plays a role in enhancing originality while maintaining practicality . The crowd’s affinity for atypical , practical features is a source of creativity in the sequential combination system . 4 Discussion and Conclusions Everyone can be creative [ 38 ] , and crowdsourcing systems can facilitate an individuals’ ability to generate creative solutions . The previous and present work investigated how such augmentation might happen . Previous work demonstrated that the crowd was able to generate creative designs through a combination process . The current work performed an analysis on the initial and combined designs , and investigated how features of designs propagated through the combination process . The main finding was that atypical , practical features were favored in the combination process . These features are both novel and useful , which should improve the creativity of the combined designs . The contributions of the findings are two fold . Theoretically , they provide experimental evidence to the combinatorial conjecture of creativity : Creative designs emerge through the combination of two discrete designs . The special role of the atypical features in the combination process provides insight into the crowd’s creative thought . Practically , the findings suggest a way of designing a crowdsourcing system that can perform creative tasks : the system can be designed to encourage the generation of more diverse ideas which in turn might increase the number of atypical ideas . It can also incorporate a process to favor the atypical and practical ideas for selection and integration . The present work describes a large space that deserves future study . First , the reported studies were performed within a population consisting mostly of novices . Experts might have different opinions on how to integrate features in designs and may assess the creativity of the designs differently . Thus , experts might be invited to test the external validity of the crowd’s creativity . Second , the present analyses only looked at the combined features clearly present in the parent designs . However , we 9 noticed a large number of emergent features in the combined designs that could not be traced back to any features of the parent designs . It is possible that these emergent features were somehow primed by the features in the parent designs . Since we observed that the most creative designs tended to have such emergent features , the emergence of these features in crowd designs deserves more attention . In conclusion , the experiments open a door to crowd creativity . The combination system , and its output , provides a way to study collective intelligence , and in particular how and why it occurs . The crowd is able to perform creative work by infusing diverse ideas , filtering out ordinary ideas , and then integrating unique ideas . Acknowledgement Funding for this research was provided by the National Science Foundation , awards IIS - 0855995 and IIS - 0968561 . We thank our colleague Jeffrey V . Nickerson for his ideas . This paper is taken from a dissertation to be submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Ph . D . degree at Stevens Institute of Technology . References 1 . Koestler , A . : The Act of Creation , Penguin , Arkana , UK ( 1964 ) . 2 . Benkler , Y . : The Wealth of Networks : How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom . Yale University Press , New Haven , CT , USA ( 2006 ) . 3 . Kittur , A . : Crowdsourcing , collaboration and creativity . XRDS : Crossroads , December ( 2010 ) . 4 . Little , G . , Chilton , L . B . , Goldman , M . , Miller , R . C . : Exploring iterative and parallel human computation processes . ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Human Computation , 68 - 76 ( 2010 ) . 5 . Maher , M . L . : Design Creativity Research : From the Individual to the Crowd . Design Creativity ( 2010 ) . 6 . Quinn , A . J . , Bederson , B . B . : Human Computation : A Survey and Taxonomy of a Growing Field . CHI . ACM Press , ( 2011 ) 7 . Yu , L . , Nickerson , J . V . : Crowd creativity through combination , in Proceedings of CHI 2011 , ACM 2011 . 8 . Nickerson , J . V . , Sakamoto , Y . : Crowdsourcing Creativity : Combining Ideas in Networks . Workshop on Information in Networks . NYU ( 2010 ) . 9 . Campbell , D . T . : Blind variation and selective retention in creative thought as in other knowledge processes . Psychological Review , 67 , 380 – 400 ( 1960 ) . 10 . Fleming , L . : Recombinant uncertainty in technological search , Management Science . 47 ( 1 ) : 117 - 132 ( 2001 ) . 11 . Nelson , R . R . , Winter S . G . : An evolutionary theory of economic change . Cambridge : Belknap Press / Harvard University Press ( 1982 ) . 12 . Simonton , D . K . : Creativity in science : Chance , Logic , Genius and Zeitgeist , New York : Cambridge University Press ( 2004 ) . 13 . Thagard , P . : Conceptual revolutions . New Jersey : Princeton University Press ( 1992 ) . 14 . Thagard , P . , Stewart , T . C . : The AHA ! experience : Creativity through emergent binding in neural networks . Cognitive Science , 35 , 1 - 33 ( 2011 ) . 10 15 . Ward , T . B . Cognition , creativity and entrepreneurship . Journal of Business Venturing , 19 , 173 - 188 ( 2004 ) . 16 . Estes , Z . C . , Ward , T . B . : The emergence of novel attributes in concept modification . Creativity Research Journal , 14 , 149 - 156 ( 2002 ) . 17 . Kunda , Z . , Miller , D . T . , Claire , T . : Combining social concepts : the role of causal reasoning . Cognitive Science , 14 , 551 - 577 ( 1990 ) . 18 . Wilkenfeld , M . J . , Ward , T . B . : Similarity and emergence in conceptual combination . Journal of Memory and Language , 45 , 21 - 38 ( 2001 ) . 19 . Sobel , R . S . , Rothenberg , A . : Artistic creation as stimulated by superimposed versus separated visual images . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 39 ( 5 ) , 953 - 961 ( 1980 ) . 20 . Bower , G . H . , Black , J . B . , Turner , T . J . : Scripts in memory for text . Cognitive Psychology , 11 , 177 – 220 ( 1979 ) . . 21 . Goldberg , D . E . : Genetic Algorithms in Search , Optimization and Machine Learning . Kluwer Academic Publishers , Boston , MA , USA ( 1989 ) . 22 . Holland . J . H . : Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems . University of Michigan Press , Ann Arbor ( 1975 ) . 23 . Kosorukoff , A . : Human based genetic algorithm . In Proc . IEEE Conference on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics , 3464 - 3469 ( 2001 ) . 24 . Kittur , A . : Crowdsourcing , collaboration and creativity . XRDS : Crossroads , December ( 2010 ) . 25 . Raykar , V . C . , Yu , S . , Zhao , L . H . , Valadez , G . H . , Florin , C . , Bogoni , L . , Moy , L . : Learning from crowds . Journal of Machine Learning Research . 11 , 7 ( 2010 ) , 1297 - 1322 . 26 . Fogel D . : Evolutionary Computation : Towards a New Philosophy of Machine Intelligence . IEEE Press , Piscataway , NJ ( 1996 ) . 27 . Kittur , A . , Chi , E . H . , Suh , B . : Crowdsourcing user studies with Mechanical Turk . In Proc . CHI 2008 , ACM Press , 453 - 456 ( 2008 ) . 28 . Amazon Mechanical Turk . https : / / www . mturk . com / mturk / welcome . 29 . Google Docs Drawing Application . http : / / docs0 . google . com / demo / edit ? id = scACRQaIm3t83kVISWPhWfrqx # drawing . 30 . Graesser , A . C . , Nakamura , G . V . : The impact of a schema on comprehension and memory . In Bower , G . H . ( Ed . ) , The psychology of learning and motivation , 16 , New York : Academic Press , 59 – 109 ( 1982 ) 31 . Brewer , W . F . , Treyens , J . C . : Role of schemata in memory for places . Cognitive Psychology , 13 ( 2 ) , 207 – 230 ( 1981 ) 32 . Taylor , S . E . , Crocker , J . : Schematic bases of social information processing . In E . T . Higgins , C . P . Herman , M . P . Zanna ( Eds . ) , Social cognition : The Ontario symposium ( Vol . 1 , pp . 89 – 134 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum ( 1981 ) . 33 . Bower , G . H . , Black , J . B . , Turner , T . J . : Scripts in memory for text . Cognitive Psychology , 11 , 177 – 220 ( 1979 ) 34 . Goodman , G . S . : Picture memory : How the action schema affects retention . Cognitive Psychology , 12 , 473 – 495 ( 1980 ) 35 . Hastie , R . , Kumar , P . A . : Person memory : Personality traits as organizing principles in memory for behaviors . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 37 , 25 – 38 ( 1979 ) . 36 . von Restorff , H . : Analyse von Vorgängen in Spurenfeld : I . Über die Wirkung von Bereichsbildungen im Spurenfeld [ Analysis of processes in the memory trace : I . On the effect of group formations on the memory trace ] . Psychologische Forschung , 18 , 299 - 342 ( 1933 ) 37 . Finke , R . , Smith , S . , Ward , T . : Creative Cognition : Theory , Research , and Applications , MIT Press Cambridge , MA , USA ( 1996 ) . 38 . Bohm , D . : On Creativity , London and New York : Routledge ( 1998 ) .