Supporting Browsing - Speciﬁc Information Needs : Introducing the Citation - Sensitive In - Browser Summariser Stephen Wan a , C´ecile Paris a , Robert Dale b a ICT Centre , CSIRO , Sydney , Australia b Centre for Language Technology , Faculty of Science , Macquarie University , Australia Abstract Practitioners and researchers need to stay up - to - date with the latest advances in their ﬁelds , but the continual growth in the amount of literature available makes this task increasingly diﬃcult . In this article , we describe the Citation - Sensitive In - Browser Summariser ( CSIBS ) , a new research tool to help manage the literature browsing task . The design of CSIBS was based on a user requirements analysis which identiﬁed the information needs that biomedical researchers commonly encounter when browsing through academic literature . CSIBS supports researchers in their browsing tasks by presenting both a generic and a tailored preview about a citation at the point at which they encounter it . This information is aimed at helping the reader determine whether or not to invest the time in exploring the cited article further , thus alleviating information overload . Feedback from biomedical researchers indicates that CSIBS facilitates this relevancy judgement task , and that the interface and previews are easy to use and informative . Key words : Text Summarisation , User - centric Design 1 . Introduction Researchers regularly browse through large repositories of online academic literature , often to update their exist - ing knowledge or to quickly familiarise themselves with a new topic . However , with a near exponential growth in available publications and scientiﬁc material , the task of browsing through and staying up - to - date with academic literature is a particularly challenging one , especially for the increasingly time - poor researcher . Given that a sig - niﬁcant amount of research time is dedicated to the task of gathering and reviewing information ( Hersh et al . [ 4 ] suggests as much as 18 % ) , there is a need to develop new tools to support researchers in this task . The work presented in this paper caters to situations in which the researcher , who is already reading an article , wishes to browse through the related cited material . Typ - ically , we expect to ﬁnd additional important information by this browsing task . Indeed , in a survey of biomedical researchers , we found that two thirds of researchers regu - larly browsed scientiﬁc literature in this manner . In this scenario , as one reads a document ( the citing document ) , a large number of citations may be encoun - tered . Each citation points to a cited document and is em - bedded within a citation context . Some tools can already help with the straightforward task of automatically down - loading cited documents . For example , reference managers Email addresses : stephen . wan @ csiro . au ( Stephen Wan ) , cecile . paris @ csiro . au ( C´ecile Paris ) , rdale @ science . mq . edu . au ( Robert Dale ) such as JabRef 1 and Sente 2 can perform this ‘blind down - loading’ . However , this does not address the question of document relevancy at the time of reading the citing docu - ment . When relying on just these tools , the original read - ing context explaining why the document is potentially relevant is typically lost . We propose that , to make relevance judgements , infor - mation about the cited document is needed most when the citation context is ﬁrst encountered . That is the moment at which the researcher’s curiosity in the cited document is ﬁrst triggered . Given the potentially large number of possibly interesting citations , this results in the follow - ing browsing - speciﬁc problem : how can we help a user quickly determine whether the cited document is indeed worth downloading , perhaps paying for , and reading ? To address this problem , we present the Citation - Sensitive In - Browser Summariser ( CSIBS ) , a tool developed as part of the Elsevier Grand Challenge . 3 CSIBS supports read - ers in deciding which cited documents they should read . We designed the tool in consultation with potential users , researchers in the biomedical domain , from the intended demographic so that CSIBS could facilitate their day - to - day research activities . Over the course of the semi - ﬁnal and ﬁnal rounds , feedback from users was used to focus re - search and development , the outcome of which is the focus of this paper . We ﬁrst began with a user requirements analysis , which 1 jabref . sourceforge . net 2 www . thirdstreetsoftware . com 3 www . elseviergrandchallenge . com Preprint submitted to Elsevier November 10 , 2009 revealed two prominent tasks : appraising the cited docu - ment , and relating the citation context to speciﬁc content in the cited document . Ultimately , in performing these two actions , the reader is trying to decide whether or not to read the cited document in full . It is this overall task that CSIBS strives to facilitate . CSIBS provides researchers with information which is useful at the point at which citations are encountered . The application provides information about the cited document to the user , based on his or her current reading context , within the same browser in which the citing document is being viewed ( for example , Adobe Acrobat Reader or a web browser ) , thus avoiding an interruption to the pri - mary reading activity . The key observation here is that the reading context can indicate why the reader might be interested in the cited document . In addition to meta - data about the cited document and its abstract , CSIBS therefore shows a contextualised preview . This contextu - alised preview contains important sentences from the cited document that are related to the reading context . Our hypothesis is that the content of a citation context enables CSIBS to determine what information in the cited document will be of most value , given what has just been read by the reader in the citing document . This portion of the preview is built using automatic text summarisa - tion methods that exploit the links and anchor texts in hypertext documents [ 15 ] . The preview is shown as a pop - up text box within the document browser . An example showing the pop - up , as viewed using a web browser , is presented in Figure 1 . CSIBS previews can also be viewed in PDF documents using Adobe Acrobat , as presented in Figure 2 . The inte - gration of this support into the browser , overlaying sum - maries on top of the citing document , enables readers to maintain their focus of attention while providing relevant snippets tailored to their information needs . CSIBS thus helps the reader avoid following less relevant citations , by indicating whether or not additional information about the citation context exists in the cited document . The present paper is structured as follows . We ﬁrst present related work in Section 2 . Section 3 brieﬂy de - scribes the user study we carried out to determine the pri - mary information needs of readers as they encounter cita - tions ; this study was carried out in the biomedical domain . Section 4 describes the design and implementation of the CSIBS system , based on the results of our user study . Sec - tion 5 discusses our preliminary evaluation study . Finally , Section 6 presents our current on - going and future research interests . Concluding remarks are provided in Section 7 . 2 . Related Work The ways in which technology can help readers of aca - demic texts have been scoped by Shotton et al . [ 12 ] , who describe what might be possible in the future of academic publishing . Our work in automatically generating pre - views is related but focuses on the provision of information Figure 1 : A sample pop - up with an automatically generated preview . This pop - up appears in a web browser when the user mouses over the citation . Words that match the citation context are coloured and emboldened . The ﬁgure also illustrates the presentation of rele - vant section titles , used to group extracted sentences . This grouping provides a better organisation of the citation - sensitive preview . about cited documents . The tasks of users in academia , speciﬁcally in the humanities [ 2 ] and in mathematics [ 17 ] , have been studied previously , revealing a number of teach - ing and research activities that might be supported by technology . Task - based analyses in the biomedical domain have been carried out by Bartlett and Neugebauer [ 1 ] , and by Tran et al . [ 14 ] . Their analyses , like ours , use qualita - tive studies to uncover the underlying uses of information . However , the tasks outlined in these related works are fo - cused on a speciﬁc set of information needs in a research area : for example , the determination of a functional anal - ysis of gene sequences . Our work diﬀers in that we wish to take a higher - level view in order to elicit information needs that occur in scientiﬁc research more broadly , at least in the domain of the biomedical sciences . Li et al . [ 5 ] analysed the usage of scientiﬁc text , specif - 2 Figure 2 : A preview pop - up available within a PDF document . The image on the right is a magniﬁed version of the pop - up . It contains an automatically generated preview which is made available by double - clicking the citation in Adobe Acrobat . This pop - up interface allows the researcher to select and copy the text in the preview . ically focusing on the types of queries made when search - ing over large - scale scientiﬁc literature repositories . Our analysis diﬀers in that we seek to understand the infor - mation needs and the underlying tasks being performed by researchers in the context of browsing , as opposed to searching , through the literature . To facilitate these tasks , we investigate technologies that are able to locate and present useful information from within scientiﬁc documents . Other research has addressed similar goals : the extraction of tabular information from within scientiﬁc documents has been explored by Liu et al . [ 6 ] ; and key phrases from scientiﬁc publications are identi - ﬁed by Nguyen and Kan [ 9 ] , who do so by taking account of document structure . In this paper , we are interested in extracting sentences that justify the citation context , thus helping the reader make a relevance judgement about the cited document . Sentence - related extraction technologies have been ex - plored within the ﬁeld of automatic text summarisation , although with a diﬀerent application perspective than ours . The detection of sentences containing citation information has been studied in the context of ﬁnding patent informa - tion in Japanese text [ 7 ] . In earlier work by Nanba et al . , such sentences were used to automatically compile survey articles [ 8 ] . Using co - citation information for summarisation has also been explored . An overview is provided in Elkiss et al . [ 3 ] ; in that work , the authors analyse the similarity between citation contexts for a particular document . Sim - ilarly , approaches for summarising an academic document based on the citations of that document found in the lit - erature at large have been studied [ 10 ] . Citation contexts have also been classiﬁed according to the rhetorical role that they play in the document that is currently being read [ 13 ] . Given this classiﬁcation , cited documents are summarised by showing sentences that sup - port the speciﬁc rhetorical role . These approaches are similar to ours in that they exploit the use of citations between documents as linkages . However , except in the case of Teufel et al . [ 13 ] , these approaches only produce summaries that are independent of the reading context , while our approach deliberately tailors a preview to the citation context that has just been read . Our work diﬀers from that of Teufel et al . [ 13 ] in that we tailor the pre - view to the content of the citation context and not to the rhetorical role of the citation . There are also a number of commercial products that address the needs of users in academia . Knowledge extrac - 3 tion systems focusing on biomedical text , such as BioMed Experts , 4 Illumin8 , 5 and ConceptWeb , 6 can automatically extract facts or highlight linkages ( for example , by using clustering approaches ) between researchers and published research . Often these tools provide improved search in - terfaces by suggesting ways in which to expand a query . These tools are complementary to browsing - oriented tools like CSIBS , which focuses on the under - explored browsing scenario . For example , once a document is retrieved via one of these search engines , a researcher can use CSIBS to navigate further through the space of document citations . 3 . User Requirements Analysis To determine what readers of scientiﬁc literature re - quire of cited documents , we conducted a user require - ments analysis . We focused on users of biomedical lit - erature because we had access to an extensive corpus of material in this domain as participants in the Elsevier Grand Challenge . However , our study and the questions we asked of participants were not speciﬁc to this domain . We began by interviewing subjects from an appropriate user demographic and recording their verbal descriptions about a real scenario situated in their day - to - day activi - ties . Following this , we designed a questionnaire for wider participation which presented scenario - based questions at - tempting to uncover participants’ information needs and tasks . Participants were asked to provide free text an - swers . The responses were then collated and analysed for commonalities , bringing to the fore those issues that were salient across the participants . We recruited 24 users with a background in biomedical life sciences . All 24 partici - pants started the questionnaire , and 18 completed it . Of the 24 participants , two - thirds indicated that they browsed through academic literature at least once a week . The main section of the questionnaire consisted of a series of questions , corresponding to the issues we wanted to ex - plore . Principally , we wanted to know what information needs researchers have of a cited document , and what spe - ciﬁc tasks this information serves . We analysed the free - text responses , checking for repeated terms and concepts that could form the basis of clustering . Salient informa - tion needs were matched to corresponding tasks . The most salient groupings of responses revealed the following : 7 1 . There were two main types of information needs , met respectively by meta - data and content - oriented in - formation . These correspond to the two tasks of ap - praising the cited document ( making a value judge - ment about it ) and relating content in the cited doc - ument to the citation context , a general task referred 4 www . biomedexperts . com 5 www . illumin8 . com 6 www . wikiprofessional . org 7 A paper describing the full details of the user requirements anal - ysis was published in [ 16 ] . to here as the citation - focused task . Speciﬁc exam - ples of the latter include : explaining why a document was cited ; selecting new baselines for the design of new experiments ; advancing one’s understanding of the topic of the citation context ; investigating the details of the citation context further ; and justify - ing the citation context . The underlying content - oriented information need is triggered by the text that the participant has just read . Both the ap - praisal and the content - focused tasks serve to help make a relevance judgement about the cited docu - ment . 2 . The main diﬃculty that participants reported was in performing citation - focused tasks . Intuitively , this accords with one’s expectations given that , ordinar - ily , a citation - focused task would require manually scanning through the full cited document to search for speciﬁc information . 3 . Searches within the cited document to ﬁnd passages of text that match the citation can be automated , guided by key words from the citation context , pro - vided that the results are presented in such a way that makes the reasons for information selection un - derstandable and transparent to the user . 4 . Citation - Sensitive In - Browser Summarisation We took the three main outcomes of the user require - ments analysis and used them ( 1 ) to decide what kinds of information to present in the pop - up preview , and ( 2 ) to determine what interface issues were pertinent in this scenario . In this section , we provide an overview of the outcome , CSIBS . Speciﬁcally , we focus on how the pre - view is generated and delivered on multiple presentation media . 4 . 1 . The CSIBS System Our system architecture is presented in Figure 3 . CSIBS produces a preview - annotated version of a published aca - demic document , rendered either as an Adobe Portable Document Format ( PDF ) document or a HyperText Lan - guage ( HTML ) web page . The annotated document is a modiﬁed version of the original article with CSIBS pre - views inserted into the appropriate citation contexts . With the annotated document , the reader can activate the pre - views with mouse interactions in the appropriate browser . We now describe the process involved in generating the annotated document using data retrieved from databases maintained by Elsevier , including the full text of the cited documents . CSIBS is ﬁrst provided with an identiﬁer for the document that the reader has requested . This infor - mation is easily obtained from portals housing scientiﬁc data , such as ScienceDirect . 8 The system retrieves the 8 www . sciencedirect . com 4 Figure 3 : A system architecture diagram . CSIBS produces preview - annotated PDF documents and HTML web pages . XML version of this document . 9 All citation instances are identiﬁed in the XML representation ; these are then ex - tracted and matched with the full references at the end of the document . Meta - data for each of the cited docu - ments is retrieved from the EMBASE web service . 10 This provides , amongst other things , the Elsevier - speciﬁc Pub - lication Item Identiﬁer ( PII ) , which is used to retrieve the XML representation of each cited document from the El - sevier XML Repository . 11 Each citation instance , its meta - data and the XML for the corresponding cited document is then passed to the summarisation engine , which computes the contents of the pop - up . The resulting contextualised preview contains a subset of the meta - data for appraising the cited docu - ment , the abstract , and a citation - sensitive preview con - sisting of sentences extracted from the cited document that match the citation context . The meta - data corresponds to a generic view of the cited document and is independent of the citation context , while the citation - sensitive preview will diﬀer depending on what is said about the cited doc - ument in the citation context . Finally , the preview is in - serted into the appropriate place in the annotated version of the published article by inserting dynamically - produced JavaScript code at each citation point . To facilitate the researcher’s literature browsing activ - ities , CSIBS can be deployed as a web service attached to an existing publications portal ( provided that appropriate permissions to databases are in place ) , so that the portal 9 While the functionality of CSIBS can be ported to other docu - ment collections , the current system assumes the availability of XML data . 10 www . embase . com 11 http : / / labs - repo . elsevier . com / repo can provide the preview - annotated documents . 4 . 2 . Meta - Data Information CSIBS coordinates the retrieval of diﬀerent meta - data , returned from queries to an online publications databases . This currently includes : • The full reference : This is useful in providing readers with information about the publication . • Author information : CSIBS includes data to help the reader establish a level of trust in the citation , primarily focusing on the author’s aﬃliation . • The citation count for the cited document : This is extracted to help users appraise the citation . These pieces of information were commonly identiﬁed as useful in helping readers make value judgements about the cited work . For example , having the full reference allows the reader to make informal judgements based on infor - mation about the host journal , such as its impact factor . We found that such judgements were frequently made in the biomedical domain . 4 . 3 . Citation - Sensitive Previews The module that generates the citation - sensitive pre - view requires , as input , the citation context and the text from the cited document . The latter is obtained by ex - tracting the text from the XML representation of the doc - ument and performing sentence segmentation . As output , the module produces a short list of sentences that helps the reader perform the citation justiﬁcation task . These 5 are extracted based on locating matching words . The pro - cess of ﬁnding matching words excludes stop words , words with minimal content including , for example , prepositions , determiners and auxiliary verbs . We cap the number of ex - tracted sentences at a predeﬁned limit , n , currently set to four . To select sentences , we represent the citation context and each sentence in the cited document as a vector , where each dimension represents a term in the vocabulary , and the value for that position in the vector is the term fre - quency . We use vector space methods [ 11 ] to ﬁnd the best n sentences that match the citation context , based on the cosine similarity metric . This metric measures the cosine of the angle between two vectors : one representing a sen - tence and the other representing the citation context . If the vectors are orthogonal , the cosine will be zero , which is interpreted as indicating that the sentence is unrelated to the citation context . The attractiveness of this approach lies in its speed and simplicity . This is a crucial design point for an application which we intend to be used over the web . For such applica - tions , interaction times must be suﬃciently low . Previews can be computed in approximately 0 . 03 seconds , making the process amenable to batch processing of multiple doc - uments or , in the future , live generation of previews at runtime . The vector space approaches were chosen as they allow a precise matching of words in the citation context , thus minimising the risk of exacerbating any existing informa - tion overload problems by further burdening the reader with poorly matching sentences . To help the user , word matches are highlighted , allowing the reader to understand why particular sentences were extracted . Users are thus able to determine which retrieved sentences are useful . Of course , false positives are always possible . However , with this interface , users can see when sentences are only marginally related , given the lack of informative words that are highlighted , and thus they can ignore any false positives that do occur . In our user requirements analysis ( see Finding 3 in Section 3 ) , we found transparency in de - termining results to be a desirable trait for an automated system . Relevant section headings from the cited document are also provided as a means of grouping extracted sentences to improve the organisation of the citation - sensitive pre - view . When a sentence is chosen , we locate the inner - most section to which it belongs and retrieve the section heading . Section headings are then used to group multi - ple sentences belonging to the same section . Sections and their sentences are presented in the same order in which they appear in the cited document . The structure of the cited document was also reported by participants in the user study as being useful , since it provides a snapshot of the relevant parts of a document and allows readers to ascertain the scope of relevant material ‘at a glance’ . One key feature of the contextualised preview is that the information presented should diﬀer depending on the underlying information need represented by the citation context . Intuitively , one would expect that a preview of an article cited in the “introduction” section should be diﬀer - ent from a preview triggered by a citation in the “methods and materials” section , for example . Figure 4 presents two citation - sensitive previews side by side , each generated for the same cited document but triggered by diﬀerent citation contexts . These examples are taken from a published arti - cle , for which a preview - annotated ScienceDirect webpage version was created by CSIBS . Since the citation contexts are diﬀerent — coming from the “methods and materi - als” and “discussion” sections , respectively — the resulting citation - sensitive preview changes to adapt to the context . In this example , the preview on the left presents in - formation relating to a method , speciﬁcally the procedure which is not documented in the citing document . The sec - ond preview on the right presents information about the conclusions drawn from the work described in the cited document , which is more relevant to the discussion at the end of the citing document , where this second citation oc - curs . 5 . The Utility of CSIBS We provide here a brief overview of a preliminary quali - tative evaluation . The goal of this evaluation was to exam - ine how participants would react to the pop - up previews . The feedback allows us to further clarify our analysis and subsequent development . Three biomedical researchers , all of whom had taken part in our original user require - ments analysis , participated in the evaluation . Each par - ticipant was shown nine diﬀerent passages containing a ci - tation context , each situated in a diﬀerent FEBS Letters 12 publication ( which was also presented in full to the partici - pants ) . Subjects were asked to make relevance judgements on the cited document given the citation context and a pre - view . In this evaluation , the actual judgements are not as important as the self - reported levels of conﬁdence which we asked the participants to provide , on a 3 - point Likert scale . The small sample size does not permit hypothesis test - ing . However , we are encouraged by the positive gains in self - reported conﬁdence scores when participants were shown the CSIBS previews , compared to simply show - ing the full reference , which is currently the only citation information available to researchers . Since both the ab - stract and citation - sensitive previews evoked comparable positive gains in self - reported conﬁdence ( + 1 . 2 and + 2 . 2 , respectively ) , we assume that these types of information facilitated the relevance judgements . Participants also re - ported that , for the citation - sensitive preview , two thirds sentences were found to be useful on average . The participant feedback also indicated support for the CSIBS interface and the preview information presented . 12 The Journal of the Federation of Europeans Biochemical Soci - eties . 6 Figure 4 : Although both pop - ups display citation - sensitive previews for the same cited document , the contents are not the same because the citation contexts , displayed underneath each pop - up , are diﬀerent . One participant made some particularly interesting ob - servations regarding the selected sentences and the struc - ture of the cited document . Speciﬁcally , useful sentences tended to be located deeper in the cited document , for example in the methods sections . This participant sug - gested that , for an expert user , showing sentences from the earlier sections of a publication was not useful ; for the same reason , the abstract might be too general and not helpful in justifying a citation . Finally , one participant remarked that , in those situations where each document downloaded from a proprietary repository incurs a fee , the citation - sensitive previews would be very useful in deciding whether to download the document . In a subsequent evaluation , we tested CSIBS with 26 biomedical researchers who had not participated in our user requirements studies . We found that results again supported the utility of CSIBS . Due to space constraints , we focus on the reactions of the participants to the in - terface , as represented by their feedback comments . Note that a recurrent theme is the usefulness of preview infor - mation , which participants described as helping the rele - vancy task they were asked to perform : • “The ability to preview RELEVANT [ sic ] informa - tion contained in references is brilliant and would be an enormous help for my work . Easy access to such a tool in combination with easy access to the refer - ences in the citations would certainly change the way I would read papers . ” ( Researcher ) • “I think the preview is a great idea , it would save a lot of time in terms of looking up entire articles to determine their relevance . ” ( PhD Student ) • “The preview information was informative , and helps one to decide whether or not the cited article is worth reading . ” ( Post - Doctoral Researcher ) The following comments about the citation - sensitive preview show that our interface decisions in presenting in - formation ( for example , using structural information ) were found to be eﬀective : • “The preview information which was presented in a structured way , with subtitles , paras etc was good and easier to understand . ” ( Post - Doctoral Researcher ) 7 • “In general it gave you a snap shot of what to ex - pect in the article . Often this would be enough to know whether the article was worth reading . ” ( Post - Doctoral Researcher ) Preview information was found to be useful not only for the relevancy task but also to help researchers acquire new knowledge : • “In some cases , the preview gave a useful expansion of the highlighted sentence . This feature would be particularly helpful when learning about a new re - search area . ” ( Post - Doctoral Researcher ) 6 . Future Work In future work , we will research methods for further improving the tailoring of citation - sensitive previews to the context . Additionally , in our work to date , we have demonstrated CSIBS on one scientiﬁc discipline , that of biomedicine . We aim to apply the techniques to other dis - ciplines ; we expect the transfer to other scientiﬁc domains to be straightforward given the domain - independent de - sign of CSIBS . 7 . Conclusion We presented a new research tool aimed at support - ing researchers as they acquire knowledge through the pe - rusal of scientiﬁc literature . The Citation - Sensitive In - Browser Summariser ( CSIBS ) was designed and developed by taking into account real tasks and information needs of academic researchers , particularly biomedical researchers . CSIBS helps readers determine whether or not a cited doc - ument is worth reading further , addressing two types of ac - tivities : article appraisal and citation - focused tasks . These tasks are facilitated by providing readers with documents annotated with previews . Our evaluations of CSIBS in - dicated that the preview information is helpful for mak - ing relevance judgements , and that the CSIBS interface is useful and intuitive . We conclude that the contextual pre - views naturally complement the document’s own abstract , given that generated previews can present detailed infor - mation from the body of the cited document that is more relevant to the speciﬁc citation context . 8 . Acknowledgments We would like to thank the participants in our user studies for their time and insightful comments . We would also like to thank Elsevier for permitting access to their data via the Elsevier Grand Challenge . Finally , we would like to thank Julien Blondeau , Michael Muthukrishna and Ilya Anisimoﬀ for their eﬀorts in performing engineering tasks and HCI studies . References [ 1 ] J . C . Bartlett , T . Neugebauer , A task - based information re - trieval interface to support bioinformatics analysis , in : IIiX ’08 : Proceedings of the second international symposium on Informa - tion interaction in context , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2008 . [ 2 ] N . J . Belkin , Design principles for electronic textual resources : Investigating users and uses of scholarly information , in : Cur - rent Issues in Computational Linguistics : In Honour of Donald Walker . Kluwer , Kluwer , 1994 . [ 3 ] A . Elkiss , S . Shen , A . Fader , G . Erkan , D . States , D . Radev , Blind men and elephants : What do citation summaries tell us about a research article ? , J . Am . Soc . Inf . Sci . Technol . 59 ( 1 ) ( 2008 ) 51 – 62 . [ 4 ] W . R . Hersh , Information Retrieval : A Health and Biomedical Perspective , Springer , 2008 . [ 5 ] H . Li , W . - C . Lee , A . Sivasubramaniam , C . Giles , Workload analysis for scientiﬁc literature digital libraries , International Journal on Digital Libraries 9 ( 2 ) ( 2008 ) 139 – 149 . [ 6 ] Y . Liu , K . Bai , P . Mitra , C . L . Giles , Tableseer : automatic table metadata extraction and searching in digital libraries , in : JCDL ’07 : Proceedings of the 7th ACM / IEEE - CS joint conference on Digital libraries , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2007 . [ 7 ] H . Nanba , N . Anzen , M . Okumura , Automatic extraction of citation information in japanese patent applications , Interna - tional Journal on Digital Libraries 9 ( 2 ) ( 2008 ) 151 – 161 . [ 8 ] H . Nanba , N . Kando , M . Okumura , Classiﬁcation of research papers using citation links and citation types : Towards auto - matic review article generation , in : The 11th SIG Classiﬁca - tion Research Workshop , Classiﬁcation for User Support and Learning , 2000 . 11 , in Chicago , USA , The American Society for Information Science ( ASIS ) , 2000 . [ 9 ] T . Nguyen , M . - Y . Kan , Keyphrase extraction in scientiﬁc publi - cations , in : Asian Digital Libraries . Looking Back 10 Years and Forging New Frontiers , 2007 . [ 10 ] V . Qazvinian , D . R . Radev , Scientiﬁc paper summarization us - ing citation summary networks , in : The 22nd International Conference on Computational Linguistics ( COLING 2008 ) , Machester , UK , 2008 . [ 11 ] G . Salton , M . J . McGill , Introduction to modern information retrieval , McGraw - Hill , New York , 1983 . [ 12 ] D . Shotton , K . Portwin , G . Klyne , A . Miles , Adventures in semantic publishing : exemplar semantic enhancements of a research article . , PLoS computational biology 5 ( 4 ) ( 2009 ) e1000361 + . [ 13 ] S . Teufel , M . Moens , Summarizing scientiﬁc articles : experi - ments with relevance and rhetorical status , Computional Lin - guistics 28 ( 4 ) ( 2002 ) 409 – 445 . [ 14 ] D . Tran , C . Dubay , P . Gorman , W . Hersh , Applying task anal - ysis to describe and facilitate bioinformatics tasks , Studies in Health Technology and Informatics 107107 ( Pt 2 ) ( 2004 ) 818 – 22 . [ 15 ] S . Wan , C . Paris , In - browser summarisation : Generating elab - orative summaries biased towards the reading context , in : Pro - ceedings of ACL - 08 : HLT , Short Papers , Association for Com - putational Linguistics , Columbus , Ohio , 2008 . [ 16 ] S . Wan , C . Paris , M . Muthukrishna , R . Dale , Designing a citation - sensitive research tool : An initial study of browsing - speciﬁc information needs , in : Proceedings of the 2009 Work - shop on Text and Citation Analysis for Scholarly Digital Li - braries , Association for Computational Linguistics , Suntec City , Singapore , 2009 . [ 17 ] J . Zhao , M . - Y . Kan , Y . L . Theng , Math information retrieval : user requirements and prototype implementation , in : JCDL ’08 : Proceedings of the 8th ACM / IEEE - CS joint conference on Dig - ital libraries , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2008 . 8