McKellips is Executive Vice President of the Foundation for Biomedical Research in Washington , DC . back to see his surgeon for the routine post - op exam . He anticipated receiving a lecture for not adhering to the doctor’s exact recuperation orders . There were , of course , fraternity parties to attend , books to be carried across campus to classes and miles that needed to be driven . But instead of a lecture , my son—and then I—got a gut - punch . The pathology report from an appendectomy is supposed to be a non - issue . It’s supposed to be routine . It’s not supposed to be… cancer . Cancer doesn’t happen to 22 - year - olds . Cancer doesn’t happen to my son . But it turned out that my son had a neuroendocrine tumor ( NET ) of low malignant potential , which was removed serendipitously during his laparoscopic surgery ( thanks to George Kelling and his dogs ) even though it was not the cause of his acute appendicitis . Had this carcinoid NET not been discovered and removed now , a slow - growing cancer would have reared its ugly head 20 years from now with potentially catastrophic consequences . I’ve run my mouth 313 times to more than 21 , 000 people over the last 2 , 190 days , telling anyone who will listen that in order to explain the need for lab animal research we must start with the patient experience . Until we understand the panic and desperation of a diagnosis , we can’t fully explain the need for more basic research . And I must confess , until I received a phone call that started with a routine doctor’s visit and ended with the word cancer , I didn’t fully understand the patient experience . Someday all of us will hear that knock on the door or ring of the telephone . Today , I’m thanking George Kelling and his dogs for the innovative idea that inspired him 112 years ago . Tomorrow , someone may be thanking you and your animals and innovations . I arrived at my son’s bedside about an hour after he came out of surgery . I was amazed at how well he felt and I was thrilled to see how ‘minimally invasive’ his laparoscopic surgery turned out to be . Insurance booted him out of the hospital 12 hours later , and he spent another day recovering in a quiet hotel room next to me before I turned him loose back to his fraternity house . Driving home to Virginia two days after his surgery , at substantially slower speeds and wearing much dirtier clothing , I assumed that this medical innovation of laparoscopic surgery most certainly would have seen its origins on experiments with animals . I was correct . In 1902 , one George Kelling of Dresden , Germany , performed the first laparoscopic procedures in dogs . In 1910 , Hans Christian Jacobaeus of Sweden reported the first procedure in humans . In the more than 100 ensuing years since that pioneering work , the research community has introduced computer television chips , improved instruments and even robotic laparoscopic procedures . Patients like my son now enjoy a reduced risk of hemorrhaging and smaller incisions that minimize pain and recovery time while also reducing potential infections due to exposure of other internal organs to external contaminants . Two weeks after my son’s surgery , and three days after his 22nd birthday , he went During the past six years , I have traveled throughout the US , Canada and Europe delivering multimedia presentations to the lab animal community at universities , corporations and government agencies . At last count , I’ve bored 313 audiences and more than 21 , 000 people . In each presentation—whether it was “Rise Up” in years gone by or “The Miracle” in 2014— I’ve encouraged lab animal workers to start with the patient’s experience when trying to explain why the humane and responsible use of animals in research is necessary . Until we fully understand and can relate to the human conditions of pain , suffering and desperation , we can’t possibly put lab animal research into a proper context for those who oppose the use of animals in the process of medical discovery . Scientists may prefer to let the data speak for itself , but when the conversation turns toward animal research , emotion trumps reason . I remind every audience that none of us is immune to the knock on the door or the telephone call that we all dread . Sooner or later , every one of us and our loved ones will get a diagnosis that turns our lives upside down with very little warning and even less hope . As I’ve said before , none of us is getting out alive . It was a typical cold Sunday afternoon in Alexandria , Virginia , this past February when I got a telephone call . My son was in the emergency room at a hospital near his university . A surgeon whom I had never met was telling me that she needed to do an emergency appendectomy on a boy I had loved unconditionally for almost 22 years . I spoke with the surgeon on my cell phone as I ran to my car and started the 500 - mile drive without even packing . With apologies to State Troopers in three states , Knock , knock… by Paul McKellips None of us is immune to the knock on the door or the telephone call that we all dread . www . labanimal . com 174 Volume 43 , No . 5 | MAY 2014 outreach n p g © 201 4 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d .