Heparin increases the infectivity of Human Papillomavirus Type 16 independent of cell surface proteoglycans and induces L1 epitope exposure Carla Cerqueira , 1 Yan Liu , 2 Lena Kühling , 1 Wengang Chai , 2 Wali Hafezi , 3 Toin H . van Kuppevelt , 4 Joachim E . Kühn , 3 Ten Feizi 2 and Mario Schelhaas 1 * 1 Emmy - Noether Group ‘Virus Endocytosis’ , Institutes of Molecular Virology and Medical Biochemistry , University of Münster , Münster , Germany . 2 Glycosciences Laboratory , Imperial College London , London , UK . 3 University Hospital Münster , Institute of Medical Microbiology – Clinical Virology , Münster , Germany . 4 Department of Biochemistry , Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences , Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre , Nijmegen , The Netherlands . Summary Human Papillomaviruses ( HPVs ) are the etiological agents of cervical cancer , and HPV - 16 is the most prevalent type . Several HPVs require heparan sulfate proteoglycans ( HSPGs ) for cell binding . Here , we analyse the phenomenon that preincuba - tion of HPV - 16 with increasing concentrations of heparin results in partial restoration rather than more efficient inhibition of infection . While cor - roborating that the HSPGs are cell - binding recep - tors for HPV - 16 , heparin - preincubated virus bound to the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) via laminin - 332 . Furthermore , the interaction of virions with heparin , a representative of the highly sulfated S - domains of heparan sulfate ( HS ) chains of HSPGs , allowed HPV - 16 infection in the absence of cell surface HSPGs . Therefore , we concluded that speciﬁc glycan moieties but not speciﬁc HSPG protein backbones are required for infection . The increased binding of an epitope - speciﬁc antibody to the viral capsid after heparin binding suggested that initial conformational changes in the HPV - 16 virion occur during infection by interaction with ‘heparin - like’ domains of cellular HSPGs . We propose that HS sequences with speciﬁc sulfation patterns are required to facilitate HPV - 16 infection . Introduction Human Papillomaviruses ( HPVs ) are small , non - enveloped DNA viruses . Several HPV types cause ano - genital cancers , mostly cervical cancers . Among the cancerogenic types , HPV - 16 is the most prevalent ( Bosch and de Sanjose , 2003 ) . The icosahedral ( T = 7 ) HPV capsid is formed by 72 pentamers of the major structural protein , L1 , and 12 – 72 molecules of the minor structural protein , L2 ( Klug and Finch , 1965 ; Baker et al . , 1991 ; Buck et al . , 2008 ) . Despite recent advances in the discov - ery of cellular interaction partners of HPVs , many details of the interactions during cell entry are still not well understood . Infectious entry of HPVs occurs in the basal cells of the epithelium , whereas replication and assembly depend on differentiation of infected keratinocytes into spinuous and granular cells ( Longworth and Laimins , 2004 ) . Hence , propagation of HPVs in vitro is difficult and laborious . To study antibody neutralization , cell binding and entry , effi - cient surrogate systems have been developed that use either virus - like particles ( VLPs ) or so - called pseudovi - ruses ( PsVs ) . PsVs are composed of L1 / L2 capsids con - taining marker plasmids expressing reporter proteins such as the green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) ( Buck et al . , 2005 ; Buck and Thompson , 2007 ) . The PsVs are antigenically and structurally indistinguishable from viruses derived from warts or organotypic raft cultures ( Buck et al . , 2004 ; 2005 ; McLaughlin - Drubin and Meyers , 2005 ) . Virus entry into target cells starts with receptor binding . HPVs of various types seem to use mostly heparan sulfate proteoglycans ( HSPGs ) for binding to cells ( Joyce et al . , 1999 ; Combita et al . , 2001 ; Giroglou et al . , 2001 ; Shafti - Keramat et al . , 2003 ; Johnson et al . , 2009 ; Kines et al . , 2009 ) . Heparin oligosaccharides bind to multiple sites on HPV - 16 or - 18 L1 pentamers . These sites are located at the top rim and the side of the pentamer ( Dasgupta et al . , 2011 ) . In addition to binding to HSPGs on cells , several HPV types bind also to the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , and this Received 22 June , 2012 ; revised 20 March , 2013 ; accepted 11 April , 2013 . * For correspondence . E - mail schelhaas @ uni - muenster . de ; Tel . ( + 49 ) ( 0 ) 251 83 57182 ; Fax ( + 49 ) ( 0 ) 251 83 57184 . Cellular Microbiology ( 2013 ) 15 ( 11 ) , 1818 – 1836 doi : 10 . 1111 / cmi . 12150 First published online 6 May 2013 © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd cellular microbiology interaction is required for infection of mouse vaginal tissue ( Culp et al . , 2006a , b ; Day et al . , 2007 ; Johnson et al . , 2009 ; Broutian et al . , 2010 ) . In vitro studies suggest that not only HSPGs but also laminin - 332 ( formerly laminin - 5 ) contribute to ECM binding from cultured human cells ( Culp et al . , 2006b ; Selinka et al . , 2007 ; Broutian et al . , 2010 ) , whereas in a mouse vaginal challenge model , pre - dominantly HSPGs are used for binding to the basement membrane ( Johnson et al . , 2009 ; Kines et al . , 2009 ) . After binding , the HPV particles undergo structural changes that seem to culminate in transfer to an unknown secondary receptor ( Giroglou et al . , 2001 ; Selinka et al . , 2003 ; 2007 ) . These changes are likely the ﬁrst steps in the uncoating programme and include the exposure of the N - terminus of L2 , which is originally buried within the capsid structure by the peptidylprolyl isomerase cyclophi - lin B ( Day et al . , 2008a ; Bienkowska - Haba et al . , 2009 ) . Subsequently , furin cleavage of a conserved consensus site within the exposed N - terminus of L2 is required for infection , which most likely occurs on the cell surface and is followed by transfer of the virus to a putative secondary receptor ( Richards et al . , 2006 ; Selinka et al . , 2007 ; Day et al . , 2008a , b ) . Several candidates have been suggested as secondary receptor molecules including alpha6 - integrin , annexin A2 heterotetramer , and growth factor receptors ( Evander et al . , 1997 ; McMillan et al . , 1999 ; Yoon et al . , 2001 ; Surviladze et al . , 2012 ; Woodham et al . , 2012 ) . Their role is still unclear or disputed ( Florin et al . , 2012 ) . Interest - ingly , virus that is released from cells after binding in a complex with HSPGs and growth factors by the action of metalloproteases appears to be able to infect cells inca - pable of producing sulfated HSPGs ( Surviladze et al . , 2012 ) . Although it is well established that HSPGs act as primary attachment factors for several HPV types , and that co - administration of viral particles and sulfated polysaccharides of various origins block infection ( Combita et al . , 2001 ; Giroglou et al . , 2001 ; Christensen et al . , 2001b ; Buck et al . , 2006 ; Roberts et al . , 2007 ; Johnson et al . , 2009 ) , it is unclear whether binding requires interaction with a speciﬁc proteoglycan , or whether binding to a variety of sulfated glycosaminogly - cans ( GAGs ) sequences would support infection . The complex heparan sulfate ( HS ) chains of cell surface HSPG consist of different domains that vary in the extent of modiﬁcation by sulfation and epimerization . There are heavily sulfated iduronic acid ( IdoA ) - rich heparin - like ‘S - domains’ and the less sulfated glucuronic acid ( GlcA ) - rich ‘NA - domains’ ( Jastrebova et al . , 2010 ) . In this study , we used heparin and HS as representative of the NS - and NA - domains , respectively , together with other GAG polysaccharides including chondroitin sulfate ( CS ) A , B and C , and hyaluronic acid ( HA ) to investigate the speciﬁcity of the interaction of HSPG and HPVs . In par - ticular , we described and analysed the phenomenon that preincubation of HPV - 16 with increasing concentrations of heparin resulted in restoration rather than further reduc - tion of infection . Results Preincubation of HPV - 16 with high concentrations of heparin partially restores infection Preincubation of several different HPV types with heparin in a variety of cell lines led to reduced infectivity and / or binding , which suggested that many HPV types bind to HSPGs ( Joyce et al . , 1999 ; Combita et al . , 2001 ; Johnson et al . , 2009 ; Kines et al . , 2009 ) . We corroborated these ﬁndings by preincubating HPV - 16 PsVs followed by infec - tion of human keratinocytes . A clear reduction in infection was observed using heparin at 0 . 01 mg ml - 1 ( Fig . 1A ) . However , we noticed that high concentrations of heparin inhibited infection of HaCaT cells or primary human kerati - nocytes ( PHK ) less efficiently than did lower concentra - tions . This was consistently observed , and in effect , corresponded to a partial restoration of infection ( Fig . 1A ) . This was surprising as more polysaccharide molecules would be predicted to occupy the HSPG binding sites on the virus surface to a higher , or at least to a similar extent . Partial restoration of infection is caused by virus - bound heparin One possible explanation might be that excess heparin present in the inoculum but not bound to virions would stimulate keratinocytes to allow more efficient infection . Harvima et al . ( 2004 ) observed that addition of very low concentrations of heparin ( 2 m g ml - 1 ) reduced keratinoc - yte proliferation , whereas higher concentrations did not affect keratinocyte growth ( Harvima et al . , 2004 ) . Since HPV infection requires cell cycle progression ( Pyeon et al . , 2009 ) , we tested whether cell cycle progression or cell proliferation was affected by heparin addition at the concentrations used in our study . Cell cycle stages were determined by the content of cellular DNA by propidium iodide staining of cells treated with heparin combined with ﬂow cytometric analysis . However , heparin did not cause any signiﬁcant changes in the proportion of cells observed with a certain DNA content , i . e . within certain cycle stages ( Fig . S1A ) . In addition , cell growth was unaffected during the experimentation in HaCaT cells , as determined by counting the size of cell populations of heparin - treated and untreated cells ( Fig . S1B ) . To rule out any further effects of heparin on cells that might have affected infec - tion , we pretreated HaCaT cells with heparin immediately prior to infection . The pretreatment of cells did not affect Interactions of HPV - 16 with GAGs 1819 © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Cellular Microbiology , 15 , 1818 – 1836 1820 C . Cerqueira et al . © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Cellular Microbiology , 15 , 1818 – 1836 infectivity of HPV - 16 suggesting that the cells were neither activated nor inhibited for infection by different concentra - tions of heparin ( Fig . S1C ) . To analyse whether restora - tion of infection after heparin preincubation is more generally observed in HaCaT cells , we infected cells with Herpes Simplex Virus type 1 ( HSV - 1 ) , another epithelio - tropic DNA virus that uses HSPGs for infection ( WuDunn and Spear , 1989 ) . However , preincubation of HSV - 1 with heparin inhibited infection most efficiently at the highest concentrations ( Fig . S1D ) suggesting heparin does not generally activate HaCaT cells for infection by DNA viruses . To further exclude that excess heparin caused the partial restoration of HPV - 16 infection , heparin was removed from the inoculum by sedimentation of preincu - bated virus onto an optiprep cushion ( Fig . S1E ) . When HaCaT cells were infected with the heparin - cleared inocu - lum , virus particles incubated with 0 . 01 mg ml - 1 heparin were effectively inhibited for infection , whereas virus par - ticles incubated with 1 mg ml - 1 heparin exhibited the partial restoration of infection observed in Fig . 1A ( Fig . 1B ) . As heparin at higher concentration restored infection , any effect caused by interaction of heparin with virus would be predicted to result from increased and / or differential interaction between virus and heparin at increasing concentrations . When HPV - 16 PsVs were incubated with increasing heparin concentrations , velocity centrifugation showed a shift towards lower sedimentation coefficients ( Fig . 1C ) . This decreased sedimentation is consistent with an increased resistance to sedimentation induced by increased binding of heparin chains sticking out of the virus . To more directly determine whether increased heparin binding to virions at higher concentra - tions would occur and would thus correlate with the res - toration effect , HPV - 16 was incubated with increasing concentrations of biotinylated heparin , separated from free heparin by sedimentation as before , incubated with horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) - conjugated streptavidin , and the amount of bound heparin was determined in a substrate - based absorbance assay . Based on the change of absorbance after the catalysed reaction with an HRP substrate , HPV - 16 bound about sixfold more heparin at high ( 1 mg ml - 1 ) when compared with low ( 0 . 01 mg ml - 1 ) concentrations ( Fig . 1D ) . Collectively , our experiments indicated that the partial restoration of infection was due to heparin bound to virions , rather than excess heparin in the inoculum . HPV - 16 binds to a variety of sulfated GAG oligosaccharides in vitro To understand whether other GAGs would have a similar ability for restoration of infection , we ﬁrst analysed HPV - 16 PsV binding to a range of GAG oligosaccharide sequences that were immobilized on microarrays ( arrayed as neoglycolipids ) . The GAGs encompassed 22 size - deﬁned oligosaccharide fractions derived from HA , CSA , CSB , CSC , HS , and heparin ( Table S1 ) . The GAG oli - gosaccharide arrays were overlaid with biotinylated HPV - 16 PsVs at different concentrations ( Fig . 1E ) . HPV - 16 bound exclusively to the sulfated GAG oligosac - charides but not to the non - sulfated HA probes ( Fig . 1E ) , in line with previous observations for several HPV types on the inhibitory effect of sulfated polysaccharides ( Joyce et al . , 1999 ; Giroglou et al . , 2001 ; Christensen et al . , 2001b ; Buck et al . , 2006 ) . The intensities of HPV - 16 binding to oligosaccharides of the same chain length ( e . g . the 16mers ) were prominent for CSB and CSC although about 50 % lower than those obtained with heparin ( Fig . 1E ) . Although longer chain HS oligosaccharides were not included , the results clearly indicated that HPV - 16 binding to HS - 6 / 8mers were comparable with CSB - and CSC - 6mers but less than with the heparin 6mer . Binding generally increased with longer chain length , which supports a model in which cooperative binding to several distinct binding sites on the viral struc - ture has been suggested previously ( Knappe et al . , 2007 ; Dasgupta et al . , 2011 ) . Fig . 1 . Differential interactions of HPV - 16 PsVs with sulfated poly - and oligosaccharides . A . HPV - 16 PsVs were preincubated with the indicated concentrations of heparin or mock incubated . Subsequent infection of HaCaT cells or primary human keratinocytes ( PHK ) was determined by ﬂow cytometry and normalized to mock incubated virus . Depicted is the median of at least three independent experiments (cid:2) SD ( HaCaT ) , or the median of triplicates (cid:2) SD ( PHK ) . B . HPV - 16 PsVs were preincubated with the indicated concentrations of heparin or mock incubated . Viruses were separated from free heparin on an Optiprep step gradient ( 5 % / 39 % ) . HaCaT cells were infected with the inoculum cleared from free heparin , infection was determined by ﬂow cytometry and normalized to buffer - incubated virus . Depicted is the median of at least three independent experiments (cid:2) SD . C . HPV - 16 PsVs preincubated with heparin or buffer ( untreated ) were analysed by analytical ultracentrifugation on a linear ( 25 – 39 % ) Optiprep gradient . Fractions were analysed by Western blotting detecting L1 . Depicted is the bottom half of the gradient as Western blot ( left ) and densitometric quantiﬁcation by ImageJ ( right ) . D . Viruses were preincubated with biotinylated heparin and separated as in ( B ) . Heparin bound to HPV - 16 was detected using HRP - conjugated streptavidin and normalized to the extent of virus binding to plates as described in Experimental procedures . E . Biotinylated HPV - 16 PsVs were overlaid at the indicated concentrations onto microarrays of oligosaccharide probes of differing chain lengths ( 6 , 12 , 16 or 18 mers as indicated ) derived from sulfated GAGs and HA ( non - sulfated ) . Binding was detected using Alexa - Fluor 647 - labelled streptavidin . Fluorescence signals are given in arbitrary units and are the means of duplicate spots of oligosaccharide probes . F and G . HPV - 16 PsVs were preincubated with the indicated concentrations of CSA , CSB , CSC , or HA and HS respectively . Infection and analysis as in ( A ) . Interactions of HPV - 16 with GAGs 1821 © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Cellular Microbiology , 15 , 1818 – 1836 Restoration of infection exclusively occurs with heparin but not other GAGs To assess whether HPV - 16 would exhibit restored infec - tivity after preincubation with the GAGs , which were able to bind HPV - 16 in vitro , we similarly preincubated HPV - 16 with CSA , CSB , or CSC and tested infection of HaCaT cells . The infectivity was reduced to a lesser extent than with heparin and no restoration could be observed ( Fig . 1F ) . Similar results were obtained with a preparation of HS from bovine kidney ( Fig . 1G ) . As a non - sulfated control , HA was used ; and this did not affect infection ( Fig . 1G ) . A more detailed comparison can be found in Fig . S2 for infection of HaCaT and HeLa cells , where we also included carrageenans , sulfated marine polysaccha - rides , which were previously shown to block HPV - 16 binding and have been suggested for use as an anti - viral agent ( Buck et al . , 2006 ; Roberts et al . , 2007 ) . Carra - geenans were potent inhibitors of virus infection , and similar to the other GAGs no restoration of infection was observed . Of note , the partial restoration of infection with heparin - preincubated virus was not observed when HeLa cells were used , indicating the involvement of a HaCaT speciﬁc cofactor for restoration ( Fig . S2 ) . Binding of HPV - 16 to cells requires HSPGs to support infection Previous reports indicated reduced binding of HPV to cells after preincubation of virus with GAG polysaccha - rides or after their removal using GAG lyases ( Joyce et al . , 1999 ; Johnson et al . , 2009 ; Schowalter et al . , 2011 ) . To investigate whether the reduced and partially restored infectivities observed above are the result of differential binding , we used lyase treatment of cells fol - lowed by binding of ﬂuorescently labelled HPV - 16 PsVs . In addition , viruses were preincubated with different GAG polysaccharides and tested for binding . The labelled PsVs retain their infectivity completely indicating no steric inﬂu - ences of the ﬂuorophores ( Schelhaas et al . , 2008 ) . Binding of the labelled particles was assessed both by microscopy and ﬂow cytometry . Incubation of HaCaT or HeLa cells with heparinase I removed HS to a large extent as indicated by a 70 % reduction in immunoﬂuorescence intensity ( Fig . S3A ) . Removal of CS in HeLa cells using chondroitinase ABC resulted in a loss of ﬂuorescence by 80 % ( Fig . S3B ) . CS could not be detected on HaCaT cells by immunostaining ( not shown ) . Removal of HS blocked binding , whereas removal of CS did not affect binding ( Fig . 2A ) . In line with the effect on binding , infection of heparinase treated HaCaT or HeLa cells was reduced to a similar extent as HS staining , whereas removal of CS in HeLa cells did not affect infection ( Fig . 2B ) . Combined treatment of cells with chondroitinase and heparinase I gave no further reduction in infection as compared with the treatment with heparinase I alone , which suggested that any residual infection was a result of binding to remaining HS rather than to CS chains ( Fig . 2B ) . Since CS could not be detected on HaCaT cells , and since removal of CS in HeLa cells did not affect infection or binding to cells , we concluded that HSPG - but not CS proteoglycan binding is required for HPV - 16 infection despite the fact that HPV - 16 bound to CSB and CSC oligosaccharides in the microarray analysis . We observed reduced binding to HaCaT cells after heparin and CS preincubation , but not to any signiﬁcant extent with HA ( Fig . 2C and D ) . This is consistent with an occupation of HSPG binding sites by GAGs after preincu - bation thus leading to reduced infectivity by heparin and CS ( compare Fig . 1F and G , Fig . S2 ) . However , incuba - tion of virus with high concentrations of heparin blocked binding to cells almost completely when analysed by ﬂow cytometry suggesting that heparin preincubated virus was unable to bind directly to cells even at high concentra - tions . This suggested that restored infectivity did not occur by restored binding to cells . Interestingly , residual binding was observed at the cell rim by microscopy , which was reminiscent of binding to the ECM . GAG - preincubated HPV - 16 binds to the ECM The question then arose as to how heparin - preincubated HPV - 16 could infect cells in the absence of cell binding . HPV - 16 can bind to the ECM and to cells ( Culp et al . , 2006a , b ; Selinka et al . , 2007 ; Broutian et al . , 2010 ) . In fact , in vivo studies in mice suggested that binding to the basal lamina is the primary mode of interaction in vaginal epidermal tissue ( Johnson et al . , 2009 ; Kines et al . , 2009 ) . Since we observed some residual binding of heparin - preincubated virus by microscopy , which was reminiscent of binding to secreted ECM ( Fig . 2D ) , we tested whether GAG - preincubated HPV - 16 would bind efficiently to ECM . A layer of secreted keratinocyte ECM or ECM patches were prepared by incubating conﬂuent or subconﬂuent HaCaT cells , respectively , with a PBS - based buffer con - taining 10 mM EDTA to remove cells ( Culp et al . , 2006b ) . The resulting ECM was incubated with ﬂuorescently labelled HPV - 16 PsVs and binding was analysed by ﬂuo - rescent microscopy . No signiﬁcant difference in binding was observed between viral particles preincubated with different GAG polysaccharides ( Fig . 3 , A – C ) . Clearly , virions preincubated with the polysaccharides bound to the ECM as efficiently as untreated particles , indicating the virus binding to the ECM was unlikely to be GAG - mediated . As heparin - preincubated viruses did not bind to cells , we also concluded that infection from these PsVs particles occurred via binding to the ECM . 1822 C . Cerqueira et al . © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Cellular Microbiology , 15 , 1818 – 1836 Heparin preincubation activates HPV - 16 for infection of HSPG - deﬁcient cells We then tested whether GAG preincubated HPV - 16 would be infectious after binding to ECM derived from HaCaT cells irrespective of the polysaccharide used for preincu - bation . For this , we seeded HaCaT cells on top of ECM that had bound either polysaccharide - preincubated or untreated virus . Subsequently , the cells were analysed for infection . As infection of cells requires binding to a cellular receptor , the amount of infection would indicate the effi - ciency of transfer of ECM - bound virus to the cell . When the virus was preincubated with HS or CSB , infection was reduced ( Fig . 4A ) . As GAG preincubation blocked binding to cell surface HSPGs , this ﬁnding is consistent with a failed transfer of ECM bound virus to cellular HSPGs . Preincubation of virus with HA did not affect infection , consistent with the fact that HA preincubation did not block binding to cellular HSPGs ( Fig . 4A , compare Fig . 2 ) . Interestingly , when high concentrations of heparin were used for preincubation , the resulting infection was increased compared with control , which indicated that the Fig . 2 . Heparan sulfate is a HPV - 16 cell surface interaction partner . A . HeLa or HaCaT cells were treated with buffer ( untreated ) , chondroitinase ABC or heparinase I prior to addition of AF - labelled virus . Virus binding was analysed and normalized to untreated samples . B . HeLa or HaCaT cells were treated with buffer ( untreated ) , chondroitinase ABC , heparinase I , or with a combination of both , and subsequently infected . Infection was scored as in ( A ) , and depicted as the amount of infected cells relative to buffer treated cells . The average of three independent experiment (cid:2) SD is shown . C . AF - labelled HPV - 16 PsVs were preincubated with the indicated concentrations of polysaccharides and bound to HaCaT cells . Cells were detached using 10 mM EDTA , and cell binding was analysed by ﬂow cytometry . Represented results were normalized to mock incubated virus . Results of ( A ) to ( C ) correspond to the mean of at least three independent experiments (cid:2) SD . D . AF - labelled HPV - 16 PsVs were preincubated with 10 mg ml - 1 of the indicated polysaccharides and HaCaT cells were infected . 1 h p . i . HaCaT cells were ﬁxed . Actin was stained with rhodamine - coupled phalloidin . Images were acquired by confocal microscopy . Depicted is a single focal plane . Scale bars correspond to 10 m m . n . d . , not determined . Interactions of HPV - 16 with GAGs 1823 © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Cellular Microbiology , 15 , 1818 – 1836 virus was efficiently transferred to cells and activated for infection ( Fig . 4A ) . Also , CSC allowed infection indicative of a successful transfer to cells ( Fig . 4A ) . To test whether heparin or CSC - bound viruses were transferred to cellular HSPGs or whether they acted in lieu of HSPGs , we bound GAG - preincubated virus to ECM and superseeded HaCaT cells that were treated with NaClO 3 , a treatment that effectively prevents sulfation of the HS chains of the proteoglycans ( Humphries and Silbert , 1988 ; Safaiyan et al . , 1999 ) , and that renders cells unable to support infection of HPV - 16 ( Schelhaas et al . , 2012 ) . NaClO 3 treatment reduced HS antibody binding by about two thirds ( Fig . S6A ) , and reduced HSV - 1 infection , which also requires binding to sulfated HS chains ( Akhtar and Shukla , 2009 ) , to background levels ( Fig . S6B ) , suggesting that the treatment was effective . When GAG - preincubated HPV - 16 was bound to ECM and NaClO 3 - treated HaCaT cells were superseeded and subsequently Fig . 3 . GAG polysaccharide - preincubated HPV - 16 binds to human ECM . A . AF - labelled HPV - 16 PsVs were preincubated with 10 mg ml - 1 of heparin or HS . Preincubated PsVs were allowed to bind to ECM as described in Experimental procedures . For visualization of the ECM , laminin - 332 was stained by immunodetection . Depicted are representative images of HPV - 16 ﬂuorescence ( upper panel ) or the merge of HPV - 16 signal and laminin - 332 staining ( lower panel ) . Rows on the right represent ECM produced by conﬂuent HaCaT , whereas rows on the left represent ECM produced by subconﬂuent HaCaT cells . Scale bar corresponds to 10 m m . B . AF - labelled HPV - 16 were preincubated with 10 mg ml - 1 HA , CSB or CSC and subsequently allowed to bind to ECM as in ( A ) . Depicted are images obtained by ﬂuorescent microscopy . Scale bar corresponds to 10 m m . C . For quantiﬁcation of HPV - 16 PsV binding to ECM the number of HPV - 16 particles was determined with respect to the ECM staining as described in Experimental procedures . The results were normalized for binding relative to mock - incubated virus and correspond to the mean values of three independent experiments (cid:2) SD . 1824 C . Cerqueira et al . © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Cellular Microbiology , 15 , 1818 – 1836 analysed for infection , only virus preincubated with heparin , but not with HS , CSB , CSC or HA , successfully infected NaClO 3 - treated cells ( Fig . 4B ) . In fact , higher amounts of heparin clearly increased infection of NaClO 3 - treated cells as compared with infection of untreated cells and virus ( Fig . 4B ) . If HSV - 1 instead of HPV - 16 was used , under no circumstances infection was observed , which suggested that no pleiotrophic effects for a generalized transfer of virus to NaClO 3 - treated cells were observable under seedover conditions ( Fig . S6C ) . As infection by heparin - preincubated virus occurred in NaClO 3 - treated cells , we concluded that heparin supported infection inde - pendent of virus transfer to cellular HSPGs and heparin but not other GAG molecules was able to activate the virus for infection . Binding of GAG - preincubated virus occurs via laminin - 332 HPV binding to the ECM of human cells can occur via laminin - 332 and HSPGs ( Culp et al . , 2006b ; Selinka et al . , 2007 ; Broutian et al . , 2010 ) , whereas binding to mouse basal lamina occurs exclusively by HSPGs ( Johnson et al . , 2009 ) . As the HSPG binding sites on the virus were occupied by heparin , we surmised that binding to the ECM occurred via direct binding to laminin - 332 . Alternatively , laminin - 332 or other heparin - binding pro - teins might bind to an accessible part of the virus - bound heparin polysaccharide . Binding to the ECM and subsequent infection of untreated virus was unaffected after lyase treatment , con - ﬁrming the presence of a GAG - independent binding receptor in the ECM ( Fig . S3C , Fig . S4 ) . HaCaT cell - derived ECM was then incubated with heparin to saturate the binding sites of heparin - binding proteins prior to binding of preincubated virus ( Fig . 5A ) . GAG - preincubated virus bound to heparin - treated ECM effi - ciently ( Fig . 5B ) , which suggested that binding to the ECM did not occur by an interaction between ECM proteins and the accessible part of the virus - bound heparin polysac - charide . However , when the ECM was preincubated with an anti - laminin - 332 antibody ( Fig . 5A ) , HPV - 16 bound Fig . 4 . Heparin triggers infection . HPV - 16 PsVs were preincubated with the indicated concentrations of polysaccharides and allowed to bind to HaCaT - derived ECM . Subsequently , untreated HaCaT cells or PHK ( A ) or NaClO 3 - treated cells ( B ) were seeded over ECM - bound viruses . Infection was analysed by ﬂow cytometry and normalized to infection with mock - incubated virus in untreated cells . Depicted are the mean of at least three independent experiments (cid:2) SD ( HaCaT ) , or the mean of triplicates (cid:2) SD ( PHK ) . Interactions of HPV - 16 with GAGs 1825 © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Cellular Microbiology , 15 , 1818 – 1836 Fig . 5 . HPV - 16 binds to laminin - 332 and HS on the ECM . A . The experimental strategy for blocking experiments is schematically depicted : ECM obtained from HaCaT cells was treated with heparin , CSB , the indicated antibodies or left untreated . HPV - 16 PsVs preincubated with 10 mg ml - 1 heparin were allowed to bind to ECM for 1 h at 37°C , and binding was analysed by LI - COR imaging after imunoﬂuorescence staining of HPV - 16 L1 . B . ECM was blocked with indicated concentrations of CSB or heparin and analysed for virus binding . Results correspond to the mean values of three independent experiments (cid:2) SD normalized to mock treated ECM for B and C . C . ECM blocked with indicated amounts of a control antibody ( ﬁbronectin ) or laminin - 332 antibody and analysed as in ( A ) . D and E . HPV - 16 PsVs were incubated with heparin or mock incubated and bound to ECM derived from HaCaT cells , laminin - 332 deﬁcient cells ( laminin - 332 - ) or the corresponding reverted cell line ( laminin - 332 + ) . D . HaCaT cells were seeded on ECM and infection was analysed by ﬂow cytometry . Results were normalized to parallel experiment using HaCaT ECM . Depicted is the mean of at least three independent experiments (cid:2) SD . E . Microscopy pictures of HPV - 16 binding to ECM of the different cell lines . The upper panels show the HPV - 16 signal . ECM was visualized by ﬁbronectin staining . In addition , a laminin - 332 staining is given , highlighting the absence of laminin - 332 for ECM from laminin - 332 deﬁcient cells . Scale bar corresponds to 10 m m . 1826 C . Cerqueira et al . © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Cellular Microbiology , 15 , 1818 – 1836 less efficiently to ECM as compared with when a control antibody directed against ﬁbronectin was used ( Fig . 5C ) . For veriﬁcation , we analysed whether heparin - preincubated virus bound to ECM derived from human keratinocytes deﬁcient in laminin - 332 ( Miquel et al . , 1996 ) . In addition , we tested the ECM derived from the revertant cell line ( Gagnoux - Palacios et al . , 1996 ) . No binding occurred with heparin - preincubated virus when the laminin - 332 - deﬁcient ECM was used ( Fig . 5D and E ) . Consequently , no infection by preincubated virus was observed in HaCaT cells that were seeded on top of the respective ECM preparations ( Fig . 5D ) . However , binding and infection of untreated virus occurred to a small extent also with the laminin - 332 deﬁcient ECM , which indicated some binding of the untreated virus to HSPGs in the ECM . In contrast , binding and infection were unaffected when the ECM of the laminin - 332 revertant cells was provided ( Fig . 5D and E ) . These results indicate that binding of heparin - preincubated HPV - 16 PsVs to ECM occurred through laminin - 332 , and that heparin preincubated virus could cause infection after binding to ECM . It is interesting to note that when ECM produced by mouse keratinocytes was used , there was no detectable binding of heparin - but HA - preincubated HPV - 16 ( Fig . S5A and B , Yuspa et al . , 1980 ) . Consequently , super - seeded mouse keratinocyte cells were not infected by heparin - preincubated HPV - 16 ( Fig . S5C ) . These ﬁndings supported previous data from the mouse vaginal chal - lenge model where binding to basement membrane seemed to occur exclusively via HSPGs ( Johnson et al . , 2009 ) . Taken together , we concluded that HPV - 16 bound only to human but not mouse laminin - 332 . Heparin - activated viruses do not internalize more efficiently or synchronously Finally , we investigated how heparin - preincubated viruses bound to ECM might have been activated for infection as compared with untreated viruses . Entry of HPVs is a slow process mainly due to the asynchronous internalization ( Schelhaas et al . , 2012 ) . As heparin - preincubated virions bypassed the requirement for cellular HSPGs , one poten - tial explanation is that infection occurred more synchro - nously by increased or faster interaction with the putative secondary receptor , and that this led to a detection of higher infectivity . For analysis , viruses treated with heparin or with buffer only were bound to ECM . Subse - quently , HaCaT cells were seeded on top . At different time points after seeding , a brief alkaline wash was carried out that destabilizes surface bound virus and effectively renders them non - infectious ( Schelhaas et al . , 2012 ) . Infection is exclusively caused by virus that was already internalized at the time of alkaline wash . Both , untreated and heparin - preincubated virus , were infectiously inter - nalized at the same rate ( Fig . 6A ) . This suggested that kinetic effects did not contribute to a higher infectivity of heparin preincubation , and that interaction of viruses with HS chains was not rate limiting for internalization . Thus , it is unlikely that heparin preincubation increases virus inter - action with the putative secondary receptor . Nevertheless , we pursued a particular interesting candidate that may have allowed for activation . A recent study shows that HPV - 16 released from cells , which are decorated with HSPGs and complexed with growth factors ( mainly EGF ) , can infect HS - deﬁcient cells ( Surviladze et al . , 2012 ) . The proposed model involves the virus binding to growth factor receptors through the complexed growth factors . Growth factor receptor ( GFR ) signalling appears to be induced with binding of the virus ( Surviladze et al . , 2012 ) , and growth factor ( GF ) signal - ling , EGF receptor ( EGFR ) signalling in particular , is required for infection and internalization ( Schelhaas et al . , 2012 ; Surviladze et al . , 2012 ) . To address whether heparin - preincubated particles would require growth factor signalling or used an alternate route , we tested whether infection was still sensitive to iressa , an inhibitor of EGFR signalling ( Schelhaas et al . , 2012 ) . Since infec - tion of both , NaClO 3 - treated and untreated cells , was equally sensitive to iressa irrespective of heparin - preincubation ( Fig . S7 ) , the viruses required GFR signal - ling irrespective of preincubation of virus with heparin or NaClO 3 - treatment of cells . It is conceivable that heparin chains bound to the virus after preincubation complexed with EGF or other growth factors present in the medium , and , in turn , allowed binding to the EGFR or other GFRs . This interaction would circumvent the need of binding to HSPGs or other receptor molecules and would allow infection of NaClO 3 - treated cells . To test whether this interaction occurred under our experimental conditions , we ﬁrst incubated the virus with heparin alone , heparin plus EGF , or heparin plus FCS , and analysed subsequent binding to HaCaT cells . However , the virus did not bind to cells in any combination that involved preincubation with heparin ( Fig . 6B ) , although EGF could be found in a complex with heparin and virus ( not shown ) . Thus , the EGF / GF found in complex with heparin - preincubated virus did not confer enough affinity to bind to cells in line with the inhibited binding of heparin - preincubated virus shown in Fig . 2A . In addition , we observed that virus infectivity was unchanged irrespective of whether virus was preincu - bated with EGF or FCS and heparin or just heparin alone and irrespective of whether cells were NaClO 3 - treated or not ( Fig . 6C , data not shown ) . Taken together , the enhanced infectivity of heparin - preincubated virus likely did not result from binding to GFR after complex formation of heparin - preincubated virus with EGF or GF under the experimental conditions . Interactions of HPV - 16 with GAGs 1827 © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Cellular Microbiology , 15 , 1818 – 1836 Heparin binding induces L1 epitope exposure in the viral capsid As our results do not favour a model , where heparin - preincubation stimulates any receptor interactions that lead to more efficient or more synchronous internalization , we surmised that heparin binding modiﬁed the virus struc - turally for a later step during entry such as uncoating . To assess a potential conformational change in virions , the accessibility of L1 epitopes of untreated PsVs was com - pared with capsids preincubated with heparin or , as a control , with CSB . For this , a number of monoclonal anti - bodies that recognize speciﬁc epitopes within the L1 sequence were employed ( Table S2 ) . The neutralizing antibody H16 . V5 , which recognizes a conformational epitope located at the top of the pentamer ( Christensen et al . , 1996a ; 2001a ; Modis et al . , 2002 ) , exhibited strong binding to virions in the dot blot ( Fig . 7A ) . ELISA meas - urements conﬁrmed this observation . In agreement with previous studies ( Broutian et al . , 2010 ) , the affinity of the antibody to the virions did not change signiﬁcantly as observed by dot blot or ELISA measurements irrespective of preincubation with or without GAGs ( Fig . 7A and B ) . Most of the other antibodies tested exhibited low levels of binding to untreated virions in the dot blot and failed to show any signiﬁcant differences in affinity ( Fig . 7A and B Fig . 6 . HPV - 16 activation does not occur by faster internalization or decoration with growth factors . A . HPV PsVs were preincubated with 10 mg ml - 1 heparin or mock incubated . Subsequently , viruses were allowed to bind to ECM , after which HaCaT cells were superseded . At the indicated timepoints post seeding , cells were treated with pH 10 . 5 for 90 s to inactivate extracellular virus . Infection was analysed by ﬂow cytometry and normalized to samples without pH wash . Depicted are the mean values for at least three independent experiments (cid:2) SD . B and C . HPV - 16 was preincubated with heparin and / or with EGF , FCS as indicated and described in detail in Experimental procedures . HaCaT cells were infected with the preincubated virus and analysed for binding ( B ) or infection ( C ) by ﬂow cytometry as described for Fig . 2B and Fig . 1 respectively . Results were normalized to infection without heparin . Depicted is the mean of three independent experiments (cid:2) SD . Fig . 7 . Heparin preincubation induces a structural change in virions . A . HPV - 16 PsVs were preincubated with buffer ( U ) , 10 mg ml - 1 heparin ( H ) or CSB ( C ) and spotted on nitrocellulose membranes . Dot blots were developed using the indicated antibodies . Shown are representative dot blots . B . Viruses were treated as in ( A ) but analysed by ELISA and normalized to the extent of virus binding to plates as detailed in Experimental procedures . Results correspond to the average of at least three independent experiments (cid:2) SD . 1828 C . Cerqueira et al . © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Cellular Microbiology , 15 , 1818 – 1836 for H16 . D9 , and not shown ) . In contrast , H16 . B20 ( spe - ciﬁc for the epitope composed by amino acids 396 – 415 , Christensen et al . , 1996a ) bound rather poorly to virions that were preincubated with CSB or that were untreated , but exhibited strongly increased affinities to virions incu - bated with heparin in both , dot blot and ELISA measure - ments ( Fig . 7A and B ) . This ﬁnding indicated H16 . B20 epitope exposure in the HPV - 16 capsid upon heparin binding . Discussion The results from this study indicate that the interaction of HPV - 16 with highly sulfated S - domains of HS chains is required and is sufficient to facilitate infectious entry into keratinocytes deﬁcient in HSPGs . In fact , heparin - preincubated virions showed increased infection of HSPG - deﬁcient cells . This effect was dependent on the GAG type and degree , and possibly the pattern of sulfa - tion but appeared to be independent of the protein cores of cell surface HSPGs . In addition , infection of HSPG deﬁcient cells was clearly dependent on the presence of laminin - 332 , as heparin - preincubated viral particles bound to laminin - 332 in the ECM but not to cells . Heparin - preincubation led to competing effects : ( i ) a block of virus binding to HSPGs on cells and ( ii ) an enhanced infectivity of virus that bound to laminin - 332 in the ECM . Thus , heparin preincubation did not entirely block infection but rather led to a small but signiﬁcant restoration of infection when higher amounts of heparin were used . In addition , we deduced that heparin preincubation induced exposure of amino acids 396 – 415 for antibody binding , which is indicative of a structural change . In the context of infec - tion , the virus appears to require the interaction with highly sulfated forms , likely the S - domains of the HS chains irrespective of a speciﬁc HSPG protein . In agreement with previous reports ( Joyce et al . , 1999 ; Combita et al . , 2001 ; Johnson et al . , 2009 ; Kines et al . , 2009 ) , HPV - 16 binding to cells occurred through interac - tion with HSPGs , which was blocked by preincubation of virus with heparin . In contrast , GAG - preincubated virus bound efficiently to the ECM derived from keratinocytes . Efficient binding and infection of untreated HPV - 16 was supported by ECM in the absence of HS and / or CS , which suggested the exist - ence of additional binding partner other than GAGs . This is likely to be laminin - 332 or an associated cofactor as indicated by the blocking experiments with antibodies or the use of laminin - 332 deﬁcient ECM . Hence , we corrobo - rated that HPV - 16 can , like HPV - 11 and - 45 , bind to laminin - 332 ( Culp et al . , 2006b ; Selinka et al . , 2007 ; Broutian et al . , 2010 ) . As heparin - preincubated virus required the presence or accessibility of laminin - 332 for infection , binding occurred via laminin - 332 . HeLa cells secrete considerably less laminin - 332 than HaCaT cells ( not shown ) and this may explain why heparin - preincubated virus did not result in any restoration of infectivity in HeLa cells . Heparin - preincubation of HPV - 16 particles permitted infection and this implies that the viruses went through all the necessary steps of their entry process that starts with receptor binding ( Schelhaas , 2010 ) . Beside the primary receptor HSPGs , an unknown secondary receptor has been proposed ( Selinka et al . , 2007 ) . To access the primary receptor on cells , GAG - preincubated virus may have exchanged the bound polysaccharides to more highly sulfated HSPGs on the cell surface . However , infection was blocked when the virus was preincubated with ‘low affinity’ HS , so clearly any exchange did not occur . We conclude that GAG - preincubated virus was not transferred from laminin - 332 to cellular HSPGs . Rather , heparin acted in lieu of HSPGs to allow eventually sec - ondary receptor binding and internalization . As heparin could act in lieu of HSPGs on cells , there may not be an absolute requirement for a speciﬁc HSPG receptor for HPV - 16 such as syndecan - 1 as recently suggested ( Surviladze et al . , 2012 ) . HPV - 11 can use syndecan - 1 , - 4 or glypican - 1 promiscuously for binding and infection sup - porting this conclusion ( Shafti - Keramat et al . , 2003 ) . This also means that there is no requirement for a speciﬁc HSPG protein backbone for binding and infection of HPV - 16 , unlike the mode of interaction for many cellular ligands with HSPGs ( Tumova et al . , 2000 ) . Cells that did not support HSPG - mediated binding and infection were most efficiently infected by virus preincu - bated with heparin . This strengthened our conclusion that heparin acted in lieu of HSPGs . Importantly , these effects were also observed in PHK highlighting the importance of our ﬁndings for infection in vivo . Infection was not supported by preincubation with other sulfated GAG polysaccharides ( CSA , CSB and HS ) or only to a minimal extent ( CSC ) . This indicated a GAG - speciﬁc activation of the virion structure for infection of HSPG - negative cells . The speciﬁcity for activation is likely to be conferred by particular structural features of the GAG chain . Binding of virus to oligosaccharides was facilitated by a high degree of sulfation ( Table S1 , Fig . 1E ) . In con - trast , only two polysaccharides supported virus activation for infection of HSPG - deﬁcient cells ( heparin , CSC , compare Fig . 5A and B ) . As CSC activated viruses only to a minor degree , we hypothesize that for activation a ( - IdoA - GlcNAc - ) disaccharide repeat which occurs on heparin is favourable over ( - GlcA - GalNAc - ) present in CSC . This could be due to , at least in part , to the greater conformational ﬂexibility of IdoA residues than GlcA resi - dues ( Capila and Linhardt , 2002 ) . Notably , heparin and HS are structurally related molecules but only the heavily sulfated heparin , not the HS that we tested , activated Interactions of HPV - 16 with GAGs 1829 © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Cellular Microbiology , 15 , 1818 – 1836 the virions . In addition , heparin - preincubation led to increased infectivity when compared with untreated virus bound to HSPGs on cells . These ﬁndings raise the pos - sibility that the IdoA - rich heparin - like S - domains of HSPGs play a role in activating the virions . Variations have been observed in the pattern and the degree of sulfation of HSPGs in different tissues and during devel - opment ( Dietrich et al . , 1983 ; Dierker et al . , 2009 ) . Based on these ﬁndings , it is tempting to speculate that a cell tropism for virus activation may exist based on the sul - fation pattern of GAGs . This may also explain why heparin could activate the virus better than HSPGs on HaCaT keratinocytes , as they may display speciﬁcally sulfated HS sequences that would be found in a tissue context but not in cultured cells . Future experiments will aim to verify this hypothesis . Transfer from the ECM to the putative secondary recep - tor on HSPG - deﬁcient cells of heparin - preincubated virus could be explained by two models existing in the ﬁeld , both of which are not mutually exclusive . For one , ECM - bound , heparin - incubated virus could undergo the reported structural changes induced by cyclophilin B and furin ( Richards et al . , 2006 ; Bienkowska - Haba et al . , 2009 ) , which may be sufficient to allow secondary recep - tor binding . Alternatively , heparin - preincubated virus may complex with GFs and bind to the GFRs on cells , as proposed recently for released GF – HSPG – virus com - plexes ( Surviladze et al . , 2012 ) . As GF – heparin – virus complexes did not bind to cells under our experimental conditions , the latter model seems to be less favourable . In any case , both models do not immediately explain , why the speciﬁc infectivity of virus preincubated with heparin was increased over untreated virus . It has been reported that heparin / HS binding can induce conformational changes of proteins or viruses , e . g . for Tau and adenoassociated virus 2 , indicating the feasi - bility of this concept ( Paudel and Li , 1999 ; Levy et al . , 2009 ) . The occurrence of a structural change in HPV - 16 may be inferred by the ﬁnding that preincubation of HPV - 16 with heparin but not CSB leads to the increased binding of a monoclonal antibody to virions recognizing the amino acids 396 – 415 in the HPV16 L1 protein . Exist - ing structural insights into the interaction between HPV virions and GAGs were derived from modelling , co - crystallography of viral pentamers and oligosaccha - rides , and viral mutants ( Dasgupta et al . , 2011 ) . Interac - tions have been mapped to four sites in the virions that are composed of 2 or 3 of the loops on the top and the a 4 - loop on the side wall of the pentamer ( Dasgupta et al . , 2011 ) . One model for the induction of a conformational change would be the cooperative binding of heparin to 2 – 4 sites on the virion simultaneously . If the GAG would bind to a side and top site simultaneously , the polysac - charide would be under a lot of bending strain . The strain combined with salt bridges between the sulfates of heparin / HS and the virion may thus provide the activation energy for a conformational change in the virion . This model may also explain why no structural changes have been observed so far , as only short oligosaccharides have been used for structural analysis . Although our results clearly indicated an activation of HPV - 16 mediated by highly sulfated HS chains , the nature and consequences of this activation remain speculative . Future work will aim to address these issues . In addition , investigations into the degree and patterns of sulfation on the HS chains of HSPGs in different epidermal tissues are warranted . Experimental procedures Cells , polysaccharides , virus and antibodies HeLa and HaCaT cells ( human ) from ATCC , and PAM212 ( mouse keratinocytes , Yuspa et al . , 1980 ) were kept in DMEM supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum . PHK ( Pro - moCell ) were kept in keratinocyte growth medium 2 ( Promo - Cell ) . LSV5 cells ( termed laminin - 332 - , human keratinocytes derived from junctional epidermolysis bullosa tissue lacking expression of laminin - 332 ) and LSV5rev cells ( termed laminin 332 + , LSV5 cells exogeneously expressing laminin - 332 ) were maintained as described ( Gagnoux - Palacios et al . , 1996 ; Miquel et al . , 1996 ) . Polysaccharides and GAG lyases were from Sigma ; these included i - carrageenan ( C4014 ) ; l - carrageenan ( 22049 ) , k + l - carrageenan ( C1013 ) ; CSA ( C6737 ) , CSB ( C3788 ) , CSC ( C4384 ) , heparin ( H4784 ) , heparin - biotin ( B9806 ) , HS ( H7640 ) , HA ( H7630 ) , heparinase I ( H2519 ) , heparinase II ( H6512 ) , hepa - rinase III ( H8891 ) , and chondroitinase ABC ( C3667 ) . HPV - 16 PsVs containing a GFP reporter plasmid were pro - duced as described ( Buck and Thompson , 2007 ) . Brieﬂy 293TT cells were transfected with pCIneo - GFP ( reporter plasmid ) and p16sheLL . Forty - eight - hour post - transfection cells were har - vested ; PsVs were matured for 24 h further at 37°C in the pres - ence of Plasmid Safe DNase ( Epicentre Biotechnologies ) and Benzonase ( Roche ) . PsVs were puriﬁed on a 25 – 39 % linear Optiprep gradient ( Sigma ) . HPV - 16 ﬂuorophore labelling ( Alexa Fluor , Invitrogen ) was performed as described ( Schelhaas et al . , 2008 ) . Brieﬂy , HPV - 16 PsVs were incubated 1 h at room tem - perature with 10 - fold excess of an Alexa Fluor ( AF ) succinimidyl ester over HPV - 16 L1 . Labelled viruses were separated from free dye by size exclusion chromatography . Recombinant HSV - 1 expressing GFP ( originally named HSV - 1 17 CMV - IEproEGFP , here HSV - 1 - GFP ) under control of the CMV immediate early promoter was prepared as described ( Hafezi et al . , 2012 ) . Antibodies used in this study were : anti - laminin - 332 ( ab14509 , AbCam ) , anti - CS ( CS - 56 , AbDSerotec ) , anti - ﬁbronectin ( F3648 , Sigma ) and anti HPV - 16 L1 CAMVIR - 1 ( sc - 47699 , both Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) , anti - VSV ( V5507 , Sigma ) , Alexa Fluor labelled ( AF - labelled ) secondary antibodies ( Invitrogen ) , IRDye 800CW secondary antibody ( LI - COR ) , HRP conjugated second - ary antibody ( GE Heathcare / Amersham ) The antibody against HS coupled to the VSV glycoprotein for immunodetection 1830 C . Cerqueira et al . © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Cellular Microbiology , 15 , 1818 – 1836 ( AO4B08 ) has been described ( Jenniskens et al . , 2000 ; Kurup et al . , 2007 ) . H16 . V5 , H16 . B20 and H16 . H5 antibodies were a kind gift of Dr Neil Christensen . GAG oligosaccharide microarrays and analyses GAG oligosaccharides were prepared by partial depolymerization of the polysaccharides using lyases and size - fractionated by gel ﬁltration chromatography as described ( Chai et al . , 1998 ; 2001 ; 2002 ) . The oligosaccharide fractions were analysed by negative - ion electrospray ionization mass spectrometry after conversion into their ammonium salts for determination of the chain lengths of the major components in the fractions ( Chai et al . , 1998 ) . For arraying , the oligosaccharides were converted into neoglycolipids by reductive - amination ( Chai et al . , 2003 ) for CS and HA and by oxime - ligation ( Liu et al . , 2007 ) for HS and heparin oligosaccha - rides . The neoglycolipid probes were puriﬁed , analysed and quantiﬁed before robotically printed onto nitrocellulose - coated 16 - pad glass slides at 2 and 7 fmol per spot in duplicates ( Palma et al . , 2006 ) . Microarray analyses of the biotinylated HPV - 16 PsVs were performed as described for plant lectins ( Liu et al . , 2007 ) . In brief , the arrayed slides were blocked with 3 % bovine serum albumin , BSA ( w / v ) in 10 mM Hepes buffer , pH 7 . 4 , containing 150 mM NaCl , 2 mM CaCl 2 and overlaid for 2 h at ambient temperature with biotinylated HPV - 16 PsVs at the indicated concentrations . The binding was detected with Alexa Fluor 647 - labelled strepta - vidin . Data analysis was performed with dedicated software developed by Mark S . Stoll of the Glycosciences Laboratory ( Stoll and Feizi , 2010 ) . Virus preincubation with polysaccharides HPV - 16 GFP PsVs ( 40 – 80 ng ) , AF - labelled PsVs ( 400 – 800 ng ) , or HSV - 1 ( 0 . 3 – 0 . 6 plaque forming units cell - 1 ) were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with GAG polysaccharides at indicated concentrations or with solvent ( mock ) prior to addition to cells . Virus preincubation with polysaccharides and growth factors Heparin ( 10 mg ml - 1 ) was incubated for 1 h at room temperature with 100 ng ml - 1 EGF and / or 20 % FCS . HPV - 16 ( GFP or AF - labelled PsVs ) were added to the samples and incubated for an additional hour at room temperature prior to addition to cells . Quantiﬁcation of infection HeLa , HaCaT , PHK , or PAM212 cells were seeded 16 h prior to experimentation . Cells were incubated for 2 h at 37°C with HPV - 16 PsVs in growth medium or , if lyase treated , in growth medium containing 20 m g ml - 1 cycloheximide to result in 20 % infection of untreated virus . The inoculum was exchanged 2 h post - infection ( p . i . ) and cells were trypsinized and ﬁxed in 4 % ( w / v ) paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) 48 h p . i . For HSV - 1 infection , viruses were bound to cells after preincubation for 1 h at 4°C in growth medium . The inoculum was exchanged by fresh growth medium and samples incubated further 5 h at 37°C . Cells were trypsinized and ﬁxed with PFA . The number of GFP expressing ( infected ) cells was deter - mined by ﬂow cytometry ( FACS Calibur , Beckton Dickson ) and normalized relative to untreated virus controls . Separation of free heparin from heparin - bound virus HPV - 16 was preincubated with heparin or solvent as described . Viruses were separated from free heparin by centrifugation at 310 000 rcf for 5 h at 16°C on a Optiprep step gradient ( 5 % / 39 % ) . Virus was collected from the interface between the two Optiprep concentrations and added to HaCaT cells . HPV - 16 binding to the cell surface or ECM To analyse HPV - 16 binding to cells , the cells were incubated for 1 h with AF - labelled PsVs . After ﬁxation in PFA , cells were ana - lysed by confocal microscopy using a Zeiss 510meta laser scan - ning microscope . Alternatively , cells were detached using 25 mM EDTA , ﬁxed in 4 % paraformaldehyde ( w / v ) , and the amount of cell - associated ﬂuorescence was determined by ﬂow cytometry . To analyse virus binding to ECM , HaCaT or PAM212 cells were grown for 48 h on coverslips to reach conﬂuency . ECM was obtained as previously described in ( Culp et al . , 2006b ) . Brieﬂy , cells were removed using 10 mM EDTA . The remaining ECM was washed with PBS to remove cellular debris prior to binding of AF - labelled PsVs . After binding for 1 h at 37°C , samples were ﬁxed in PFA . ECM was visualized by laminin - 332 or ﬁbronectin immunoﬂuorescence staining . The samples were analysed by ﬂuorescence microscopy using a Zeiss Axiovert 200 M inverted microscope . For quantiﬁcation , the relative amount of ECM was determined based on the ﬂuorescence signals derived from laminin - 332 / ﬁbronectin immunodetection . The number of virus particles was determined by thresholding . Given are particle numbers relative to the amount of ECM out of 10 ﬁelds of view / sample / experiment . For analysis , ImageJ was used . Removal of GAG chains from cells / ECM by lyases Heparinase I was dissolved in heparinase resuspension buffer [ 10 mM KCl , 130 mM NaCl , 20 mM Hepes , 1 mM CaCl 2 , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mg ml - 1 glucose , 0 . 5 % BSApH 7 . 4 ( Culp et al . , 2006b ) ] . Chondroitinase ABC was dissolved in chondroitinase resuspen - sion buffer ( 20 mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 , 50 mM NaCl , 4 mM CaCl2 and 0 . 01 % BSA ) . HeLa , HaCaT cells or ECM were washed once with PBS and treated for 1 h at 37°C with lyases in the following concentrations prior to virus challenge : heparinase I ( 16 . 67 mIU ml - 1 ) , heparinase cocktail ( each 16 . 67 mIU ml - 1 ) , or chon - droitinaseABC ( 5 . 56 mIU ml - 1 ) in digestion buffer ( 150 mM NaCl , 4 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 1 % BSA , 20 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 5 and 20 m g ml - 1 cycloheximide ) prior to virus addition . Quantiﬁcation of HS and CS on cells and ECM To quantify the amount of remaining HS or CS after lyase treat - ment , the relative immunoﬂuorescence signals for the respective GAG were quantiﬁed . HS were stained as previously described by ( Wittrup et al . , 2009 ) . Brieﬂy cells or ECM were incubated 30 min on ice with the AO4B08 antibody , followed by incubation 30 min on ice with anti - VSV antibody . After HS and VSV antibody Interactions of HPV - 16 with GAGs 1831 © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Cellular Microbiology , 15 , 1818 – 1836 staining samples were incubated 30 min at room temperature with AF - labelled secondary antibody . Staining of CS was per - formed by incubating samples 1 h at room temperature with CS - 56 antibody and 1 h with AF - labelled secondary antibody . After each antibody incubation , samples were washed trice with PBS containing 1 % BSA . For microscopy , incubation times were increased to 2 h for primary antibodies and 1 h for AF - labelled secondary antibodies . Samples were analysed by ﬂow cytometry or microscopy and the relative amount of cell or ECM associated ﬂuorescence was determined using CellQuest Pro or ImageJ respectively . Seedover experiments ECM of HaCaT , PAM212 , LSV5 or LSV5rev was prepared as above . Virus samples were added and incubated for 1 h at 37°C . After removal of the inoculum , the ECM was washed twice with PBS to remove unbound virus . NaClO 3 - treated ( 50 mM , over - night ) , iressa - treated , simultaneously iressa - and NaClO 3 - treated , or untreated cells were seeded on virus - bound ECM , and cells were incubated in the absence or presence of 50 mM NaClO 3 for 48 h for HPV - 16 or 5 h for HSV - 1 . For iressa experi - ments , NaClO 3 - treated ( 50 mM , overnight ) or untreated cells were seeded on ECM - bound virus in the presence of iressa at indicated concentrations . Twelve hours after seeding , the iressa - containing medium was exchanged for medium with 20 mM NH 4 Cl ( 10 mM Hepes ) and infection continued for further 36 h . Subsequently , infection was scored by ﬂow cytometry . ECM blocking experiments HaCaT cells were seeded in 96 - well optical bottom plates and ECM obtained as above . The ECM was incubated for 2 h at 37°C with the indicated concentrations of laminin - 332 antibody , control antibody ( anti - ﬁbronectin ) , heparin , CSB , or buffer . ECM was washed excessively with PBS to remove unbound reagents . HPV - 16 PsVs were bound as before and unbound virus was removed by washing with PBS . After ﬁxation with cold ethanol HPV - 16 L1 was stained using the CAMVIR - 1 antibody and the IRDye 800CW secondary antibody . Fluorescence signals were recorded using the Odyssey imager ( LI - COR ) and the amount of ﬂuorescence was quantiﬁed using ImageJ as mean intensity / well . Internalization kinetics PsVs were preincubated as before and bound to HaCaT derived ECM . At different timepoints after seeding HaCaT cells on the ECM , external PsV were inactivated by a brief high pH wash ( 0 . 1 M CAPS in PBS , pH 10 . 5 ) as previously described ( Schelhaas et al . , 2012 ) . Forty - eight hours post cell seeding , infection was scored as before . Virus sedimentation Virus were preincubated with the indicated concentrations of heparin as before , and sedimented at 310 000 rcf for 5 h at 16°C on a linear 25 – 39 % Optiprep gradient , and fractions were analysed by Western blotting with an L1 speciﬁc antibody ( CAMVIR - 1 ) . Dot blot and ELISA For dot blots , HPV - 16 was preincubated with GAGs as described before . Samples were spotted onto nitrocellulose membranes and processed as for Western blotting . For ELISA , HPV - 16 ( 50 ng ) was preincubated as described with GAGs or buffer . The ELISAprocedures have been described previously ( Christensen et al . , 1990 ) . In modiﬁcation to the described protocols , virions were adsorbed to the plate overnight at 4°C , samples were blocked with 5 % BSA in PBS containing 0 . 2 % Tween 20 ( PBST ) , a TMB substrate was used and absorb - ance was measured at 450 nm using a Biotek Epoch plate reader . For detection , H16 . V5 , H16 . B20 or H16 . H5 antibodies were diluted 1 : 50 in 5 % BSA PBST and incubated 1 h at 37°C ( Christensen et al . , 1996b ) . To account for differences in virus binding to plates after preincubation with different oligosaccha - rides , samples were denatured after binding to the plate using 0 . 2 M Na 2 CO 3 containing 0 . 01 M DTT and virus amount quanti - ﬁed as described previously ( Favre , 1975 ; Christensen et al . , 1996a ) . Quantiﬁcation of heparin binding to virions For heparin detection , HPV - 16 was preincubated with bioti - nylated heparin and heparin - bound virus was separated from free heparin by sedimentation as described above . Viruses col - lected from the interface of the two gradients were bound to an ELISA plate overnight at 4°C and the amount of heparin was analysed using HRP - conjugated streptavidin ( Pierce N - 100 ) . The amount relative heparin binding was determined by absorbance readings of reacted HRP - substrate ( TMB ) , substraction of the blank , and normalization to relative virus binding to plates . The extent of virus binding to plates was determined by the same procedure described for ELISA . Propidium iodide staining for cell cycle analysis HaCaT cells were incubated with heparin for 2 h at 37°C , medium was exchanged with fresh medium and incubated for 24 h . Cells were trypsinized and ﬁxed overnight at 4°C in 70 % ethanol . Cells were treated 5 min at room temperature with 0 . 5 U RNase A , 20 U RNase T1 ( Ambion ) and incubated 30 min at room tempera - ture with 40 m g ml - 1 propidium iodide . Samples were analysed by ﬂow cytometry . Acknowledgements The authors would like to acknowledge Dr S . H . Yuspa ( NCI , Bethesda , USA ) and Drs . G . Meneguzzi / L . Gagnoux - Palacios ( INSERM , Nice , France ) for the kind gift of the PAM212 cell line and LSV5 cells respectively . We extend our thanks to Dr N . Christensen ( PSU College of Medicine , Hershey , USA ) for kindly providing monoclonal antibodies against HPV - 16 L1 . We thank members of the Glycosciences Laboratory for their collaboration in the establishment of the neoglycolipid based microarray system , and Dr . B . Mulloy ( NIBS , UK ) for expert review and suggestions for the manuscript . MS and CC were supported by the German Science Foundation ( DFG , Emmy - Noether Grant SCHE 1552 / 2 - 1 ) and by the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology ( PhD Grant SFRH / BD / 45921 / 2008 ) respectively . 1832 C . Cerqueira et al . © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Cellular Microbiology , 15 , 1818 – 1836 Work at the Glycosciences Laboratory was supported by UK Research Councils’ Basic Technology Initiative ‘Glycoarrays’ ( GRS / 79268 ) , EPSRC Translational Grant ( EP / G037604 / 1 ) , Wellcome Trust ( WT093378MA ) , and NCI Alliance of Glycobiol - ogists for Detection of Cancer and Cancer Risk ( U01 CA128416 ) . References Akhtar , J . , and Shukla , D . ( 2009 ) Viral entry mechanisms : cellular and viral mediators of herpes simplex virus entry . FEBS J 276 : 7228 – 7236 . Baker , T . S . , Newcomb , W . W . , Olson , N . H . , Cowsert , L . M . , Olson , C . , and Brown , J . C . ( 1991 ) Structures of bovine and human papillomaviruses . Analysis by cryoelectron micros - copy and three - dimensional image reconstruction . Biophys J 60 : 1445 – 1456 . Bienkowska - Haba , M . , Patel , H . D . , and Sapp , M . ( 2009 ) Target cell cyclophilins facilitate human papillomavirus type 16 infection . PLoS Pathog 5 : e1000524 . Bosch , F . X . , and de Sanjose , S . ( 2003 ) Chapter 1 : Human papillomavirus and cervical cancer – burden and assess - ment of causality . J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 31 : 3 – 13 . Broutian , T . R . , Brendle , S . A . , and Christensen , N . D . ( 2010 ) Differential binding patterns to host cells associated with particles of several human alphapapillomavirus types . J Gen Virol 91 : 531 – 540 . Buck , C . B . , and Thompson , C . D . ( 2007 ) Production of papillomavirus - based gene transfer vectors . Curr Protoc Cell Biol Chapter 26 : Unit 26 21 . Buck , C . B . , Pastrana , D . V . , Lowy , D . R . , and Schiller , J . T . ( 2004 ) Efficient intracellular assembly of papillomaviral vectors . J Virol 78 : 751 – 757 . Buck , C . B . , Thompson , C . D . , Pang , Y . Y . , Lowy , D . R . , and Schiller , J . T . ( 2005 ) Maturation of papillomavirus capsids . J Virol 79 : 2839 – 2846 . Buck , C . B . , Thompson , C . D . , Roberts , J . N . , Muller , M . , Lowy , D . R . , and Schiller , J . T . ( 2006 ) Carrageenan is a potent inhibitor of papillomavirus infection . PLoS Pathog 2 : e69 . Buck , C . B . , Cheng , N . , Thompson , C . D . , Lowy , D . R . , Steven , A . C . , Schiller , J . T . , and Trus , B . L . ( 2008 ) Arrangement of L2 within the papillomavirus capsid . J Virol 82 : 5190 – 5197 . Capila , I . , and Linhardt , R . J . ( 2002 ) Heparin - protein interac - tions . Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 41 : 391 – 412 . Chai , W . , Luo , J . , Lim , C . K . , and Lawson , A . M . ( 1998 ) Characterization of heparin oligosaccharide mixtures as ammonium salts using electrospray mass spectrometry . Anal Chem 70 : 2060 – 2066 . Chai , W . , Beeson , J . G . , Kogelberg , H . , Brown , G . V . , and Lawson , A . M . ( 2001 ) Inhibition of adhesion of Plasmodium falciparum - infected erythrocytes by structurally deﬁned hyaluronic acid dodecasaccharides . Infect Immun 69 : 420 – 425 . Chai , W . , Beeson , J . G . , and Lawson , A . M . ( 2002 ) The structural motif in chondroitin sulfate for adhesion of Plasmodium falciparum - infected erythrocytes comprises disaccharide units of 4 - O - sulfated and non - sulfated N - acetylgalactosamine linked to glucuronic acid . J Biol Chem 277 : 22438 – 22446 . Chai , W . , Stoll , M . S . , Galustian , C . , Lawson , A . M . , and Feizi , T . ( 2003 ) Neoglycolipid technology : deciphering information content of glycome . Methods Enzymol 362 : 160 – 195 . Christensen , N . D . , Kreider , J . W . , Cladel , N . M . , Patrick , S . D . , and Welsh , P . A . ( 1990 ) Monoclonal antibody - mediated neutralization of infectious human papillomavirus type 11 . J Virol 64 : 5678 – 5681 . Christensen , N . D . , Dillner , J . , Eklund , C . , Carter , J . J . , Wipf , G . C . , Reed , C . A . , et al . ( 1996a ) Surface conformational and linear epitopes on HPV - 16 and HPV - 18 L1 virus - like particles as deﬁned by monoclonal antibodies . Virology 223 : 174 – 184 . Christensen , N . D . , Reed , C . A . , Cladel , N . M . , Hall , K . , and Leiserowitz , G . S . ( 1996b ) Monoclonal antibodies to HPV - 6 L1 virus - like particles identify conformational and linear neutralizing epitopes on HPV - 11 in addition to type - speciﬁc epitopes on HPV - 6 . Virology 224 : 477 – 486 . Christensen , N . D . , Cladel , N . M . , Reed , C . A . , Budgeon , L . R . , Embers , M . E . , Skulsky , D . M . , et al . ( 2001a ) Hybrid papil - lomavirus L1 molecules assemble into virus - like particles that reconstitute conformational epitopes and induce neu - tralizing antibodies to distinct HPV types . Virology 291 : 324 – 334 . Christensen , N . D . , Reed , C . A . , Culp , T . D . , Hermonat , P . L . , Howett , M . K . , Anderson , R . A . , and Zaneveld , L . J . ( 2001b ) Papillomavirus microbicidal activities of high - molecular - weight cellulose sulfate , dextran sulfate , and polystyrene sulfonate . Antimicrob Agents Chemother 45 : 3427 – 3432 . Combita , A . L . , Touze , A . , Bousarghin , L . , Sizaret , P . Y . , Munoz , N . , and Coursaget , P . ( 2001 ) Gene transfer using human papillomavirus pseudovirions varies according to virus genotype and requires cell surface heparan sulfate . FEMS Microbiol Lett 204 : 183 – 188 . Culp , T . D . , Budgeon , L . R . , and Christensen , N . D . ( 2006a ) Human papillomaviruses bind a basal extracellular matrix component secreted by keratinocytes which is distinct from a membrane - associated receptor . Virology 347 : 147 – 159 . Culp , T . D . , Budgeon , L . R . , Marinkovich , M . P . , Meneguzzi , G . , and Christensen , N . D . ( 2006b ) Keratinocyte - secreted laminin 5 can function as a transient receptor for human papillomaviruses by binding virions and transferring them to adjacent cells . J Virol 80 : 8940 – 8950 . Dasgupta , J . , Bienkowska - Haba , M . , Ortega , M . E . , Patel , H . D . , Bodevin , S . , Spillmann , D . , et al . ( 2011 ) Structural basis of oligosaccharide receptor recognition by human papillomavirus . J Biol Chem 286 : 2617 – 2624 . Day , P . M . , Thompson , C . D . , Buck , C . B . , Pang , Y . Y . , Lowy , D . R . , and Schiller , J . T . ( 2007 ) Neutralization of human papillomavirus with monoclonal antibodies reveals different mechanisms of inhibition . J Virol 81 : 8784 – 8792 . Day , P . M . , Gambhira , R . , Roden , R . B . , Lowy , D . R . , and Schiller , J . T . ( 2008a ) Mechanisms of human papillomavirus type 16 neutralization by l2 cross - neutralizing and l1 type - speciﬁc antibodies . J Virol 82 : 4638 – 4646 . Day , P . M . , Lowy , D . R . , and Schiller , J . T . ( 2008b ) Heparan sulfate - independent cell binding and infection with furin - precleaved papillomavirus capsids . J Virol 82 : 12565 – 12568 . Dierker , T . , Dreier , R . , Migone , M . , Hamer , S . , and Grobe , K . ( 2009 ) Heparan sulfate and transglutaminase activity are required for the formation of covalently cross - linked hedge - hog oligomers . J Biol Chem 284 : 32562 – 32571 . Interactions of HPV - 16 with GAGs 1833 © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Cellular Microbiology , 15 , 1818 – 1836 Dietrich , C . P . , Nader , H . B . , and Straus , A . H . ( 1983 ) Structural differences of heparan sulfates according to the tissue and species of origin . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 111 : 865 – 871 . Evander , M . , Frazer , I . H . , Payne , E . , Qi , Y . M . , Hengst , K . , and McMillan , N . A . ( 1997 ) Identiﬁcation of the alpha6 integrin as a candidate receptor for papillomaviruses . J Virol 71 : 2449 – 2456 . Favre , M . ( 1975 ) Structural polypeptides of rabbit , bovine , and human papillomaviruses . J Virol 15 : 1239 – 1247 . Florin , L . , Sapp , M . , and Spoden , G . A . ( 2012 ) Host - cell factors involved in papillomavirus entry . Med Microbiol Immunol 201 : 437 – 448 . Gagnoux - Palacios , L . , Vailly , J . , Durand - Clement , M . , Wagner , E . , Ortonne , J . P . , and Meneguzzi , G . ( 1996 ) Func - tional Re - expression of laminin - 5 in laminin - gamma2 - deﬁcient human keratinocytes modiﬁes cell morphology , motility , and adhesion . J Biol Chem 271 : 18437 – 18444 . Giroglou , T . , Florin , L . , Schafer , F . , Streeck , R . E . , and Sapp , M . ( 2001 ) Human papillomavirus infection requires cell surface heparan sulfate . J Virol 75 : 1565 – 1570 . Hafezi , W . , Lorentzen , E . U . , Eing , B . R . , Muller , M . , King , N . J . , Klupp , B . , et al . ( 2012 ) Entry of herpes simplex virus type 1 ( HSV - 1 ) into the distal axons of trigeminal neurons favors the onset of nonproductive , silent infection . PLoS Pathog 8 : e1002679 . Harvima , I . T . , Lappalainen , K . , Hirvonen , M . R . , Matto , M . , Kivinen , P . K . , Hyttinen , M . , et al . ( 2004 ) Heparin modulates the growth and adherence and augments the growth - inhibitory action of TNF - alpha on cultured human keratino - cytes . J Cell Biochem 92 : 372 – 386 . Humphries , D . E . , and Silbert , J . E . ( 1988 ) Chlorate : a revers - ible inhibitor of proteoglycan sulfation . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 154 : 365 – 371 . Jastrebova , N . , Vanwildemeersch , M . , Lindahl , U . , and Spill - mann , D . ( 2010 ) Heparan sulfate domain organization and sulfation modulate FGF - induced cell signaling . J Biol Chem 285 : 26842 – 26851 . Jenniskens , G . J . , Oosterhof , A . , Brandwijk , R . , Veerkamp , J . H . , and van Kuppevelt , T . H . ( 2000 ) Heparan sulfate het - erogeneity in skeletal muscle basal lamina : demonstration by phage display - derived antibodies . J Neurosci 20 : 4099 – 4111 . Johnson , K . M . , Kines , R . C . , Roberts , J . N . , Lowy , D . R . , Schiller , J . T . , and Day , P . M . ( 2009 ) Role of heparan sulfate in attachment to and infection of the murine female genital tract by human papillomavirus . J Virol 83 : 2067 – 2074 . Joyce , J . G . , Tung , J . S . , Przysiecki , C . T . , Cook , J . C . , Lehman , E . D . , Sands , J . A . , et al . ( 1999 ) The L1 major capsid protein of human papillomavirus type 11 recombinant virus - like particles interacts with heparin and cell - surface gly - cosaminoglycans on human keratinocytes . J Biol Chem 274 : 5810 – 5822 . Kines , R . C . , Thompson , C . D . , Lowy , D . R . , Schiller , J . T . , and Day , P . M . ( 2009 ) The initial steps leading to papillomavirus infection occur on the basement membrane prior to cell surface binding . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 : 20458 – 20463 . Klug , A . , and Finch , J . T . ( 1965 ) Structure of viruses of the papilloma - polyoma type . I . Human wart virus . J Mol Biol 11 : 403 – 423 . Knappe , M . , Bodevin , S . , Selinka , H . C . , Spillmann , D . , Streeck , R . E . , Chen , X . S . , et al . ( 2007 ) Surface - exposed amino acid residues of HPV16 L1 protein mediating inter - action with cell surface heparan sulfate . J Biol Chem 282 : 27913 – 27922 . Kurup , S . , Wijnhoven , T . J . , Jenniskens , G . J . , Kimata , K . , Habuchi , H . , Li , J . P . , et al . ( 2007 ) Characterization of anti - heparan sulfate phage display antibodies AO4B08 and HS4E4 . J Biol Chem 282 : 21032 – 21042 . Levy , H . C . , Bowman , V . D . , Govindasamy , L . , McKenna , R . , Nash , K . , Warrington , K . , et al . ( 2009 ) Heparin binding induces conformational changes in Adeno - associated virus serotype 2 . J Struct Biol 165 : 146 – 156 . Liu , Y . , Feizi , T . , Campanero - Rhodes , M . A . , Childs , R . A . , Zhang , Y . , Mulloy , B . , et al . ( 2007 ) Neoglycolipid probes prepared via oxime ligation for microarray analysis of oligosaccharide - protein interactions . Chem Biol 14 : 847 – 859 . Longworth , M . S . , and Laimins , L . A . ( 2004 ) Pathogenesis of human papillomaviruses in differentiating epithelia . Micro - biol Mol Biol Rev 68 : 362 – 372 . McLaughlin - Drubin , M . E . , and Meyers , C . ( 2005 ) Propaga - tion of infectious , high - risk HPV in organotypic ‘raft’ culture . Methods Mol Med 119 : 171 – 186 . McMillan , N . A . , Payne , E . , Frazer , I . H . , and Evander , M . ( 1999 ) Expression of the alpha6 integrin confers papillo - mavirus binding upon receptor - negative B - cells . Virology 261 : 271 – 279 . Miquel , C . , Gagnoux - Palacios , L . , Durand - Clement , M . , Marinkovich , P . , Ortonne , J . P . , and Meneguzzi , G . ( 1996 ) Establishment and characterization of cell line LSV5 that retains the altered adhesive properties of human junctional epidermolysis bullosa keratinocytes . Exp Cell Res 224 : 279 – 290 . Modis , Y . , Trus , B . L . , and Harrison , S . C . ( 2002 ) Atomic model of the papillomavirus capsid . EMBO J 21 : 4754 – 4762 . Palma , A . S . , Feizi , T . , Zhang , Y . , Stoll , M . S . , Lawson , A . M . , Diaz - Rodriguez , E . , et al . ( 2006 ) Ligands for the beta - glucan receptor , Dectin - 1 , assigned using ‘designer’ micro - arrays of oligosaccharide probes ( neoglycolipids ) generated from glucan polysaccharides . J Biol Chem 281 : 5771 – 5779 . Paudel , H . K . , and Li , W . ( 1999 ) Heparin - induced conforma - tional change in microtubule - associated protein Tau as detected by chemical cross - linking and phosphopeptide mapping . J Biol Chem 274 : 8029 – 8038 . Pyeon , D . , Pearce , S . M . , Lank , S . M . , Ahlquist , P . , and Lambert , P . F . ( 2009 ) Establishment of human papillomavi - rus infection requires cell cycle progression . PLoS Pathog 5 : e1000318 . Richards , R . M . , Lowy , D . R . , Schiller , J . T . , and Day , P . M . ( 2006 ) Cleavage of the papillomavirus minor capsid protein , L2 , at a furin consensus site is necessary for infection . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 1522 – 1527 . Roberts , J . N . , Buck , C . B . , Thompson , C . D . , Kines , R . , Bernardo , M . , Choyke , P . L . , et al . ( 2007 ) Genital trans - mission of HPV in a mouse model is potentiated by nonoxynol - 9 and inhibited by carrageenan . Nat Med 13 : 857 – 861 . Safaiyan , F . , Kolset , S . O . , Prydz , K . , Gottfridsson , E . , Lindahl , U . , and Salmivirta , M . ( 1999 ) Selective effects of sodium 1834 C . Cerqueira et al . © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Cellular Microbiology , 15 , 1818 – 1836 chlorate treatment on the sulfation of heparan sulfate . J Biol Chem 274 : 36267 – 36273 . Schelhaas , M . ( 2010 ) Come in and take your coat off – how host cells provide endocytosis for virus entry . Cell Microbiol 12 : 1378 – 1388 . Schelhaas , M . , Ewers , H . , Rajamaki , M . L . , Day , P . M . , Schiller , J . T . , and Helenius , A . ( 2008 ) Human papillomavi - rus type 16 entry : retrograde cell surface transport along actin - rich protrusions . PLoS Pathog 4 : e1000148 . Schelhaas , M . , Shah , B . , Holzer , M . , Blattmann , P . , Kuhling , L . , Day , P . M . , et al . ( 2012 ) Entry of human papillomavirus type 16 by actin - dependent , clathrin - and lipid raft - independent endocytosis . PLoS Pathog 8 : e1002657 . Schowalter , R . M . , Pastrana , D . V . , and Buck , C . B . ( 2011 ) Glycosaminoglycans and sialylated glycans sequentially facilitate Merkel cell polyomavirus infectious entry . PLoS Pathog 7 : e1002161 . Selinka , H . C . , Giroglou , T . , Nowak , T . , Christensen , N . D . , and Sapp , M . ( 2003 ) Further evidence that papillomavirus capsids exist in two distinct conformations . J Virol 77 : 12961 – 12967 . Selinka , H . C . , Florin , L . , Patel , H . D . , Freitag , K . , Schmidtke , M . , Makarov , V . A . , and Sapp , M . ( 2007 ) Inhibition of trans - fer to secondary receptors by heparan sulfate - binding drug or antibody induces noninfectious uptake of human papil - lomavirus . J Virol 81 : 10970 – 10980 . Shafti - Keramat , S . , Handisurya , A . , Kriehuber , E . , Meneguzzi , G . , Slupetzky , K . , and Kirnbauer , R . ( 2003 ) Different heparan sulfate proteoglycans serve as cellular receptors for human papillomaviruses . J Virol 77 : 13125 – 13135 . Stoll , M . S . , and Feizi , T . ( 2010 ) Software tools for storing , processing and displaying carbohydrate microarray . In Glyco - Bioinformatics : Bits ‘n’ Bytes of Sugars . Hicks , M . G . , and Kettner , C . ( eds ) . Potsdam , Germany : Proceedings of the Beilstein Symposium on Glyco - Bioinformatics , pp . 123 – 140 . Surviladze , Z . , Dziduszko , A . , and Ozbun , M . A . ( 2012 ) Essential roles for soluble virion - associated heparan sul - fonated proteoglycans and growth factors in human papil - lomavirus infections . PLoS Pathog 8 : e1002519 . Tumova , S . , Woods , A . , and Couchman , J . R . ( 2000 ) Heparan sulfate chains from glypican and syndecans bind the Hep II domain of ﬁbronectin similarly despite minor structural dif - ferences . J Biol Chem 275 : 9410 – 9417 . Wittrup , A . , Zhang , S . H . , ten Dam , G . B . , van Kuppevelt , T . H . , Bengtson , P . , Johansson , M . , et al . ( 2009 ) ScFv antibody - induced translocation of cell - surface heparan sulfate pro - teoglycan to endocytic vesicles : evidence for heparan sulfate epitope speciﬁcity and role of both syndecan and glypican . J Biol Chem 284 : 32959 – 32967 . Woodham , A . W . , Da Silva , D . M . , Skeate , J . G . , Raff , A . B . , Ambroso , M . R . , Brand , H . E . , et al . ( 2012 ) The S100A10 subunit of the annexin A2 heterotetramer facilitates L2 - mediated human papillomavirus infection . PLoS ONE 7 : e43519 . WuDunn , D . , and Spear , P . G . ( 1989 ) Initial interaction of herpes simplex virus with cells is binding to heparan sulfate . J Virol 63 : 52 – 58 . Yoon , C . S . , Kim , K . D . , Park , S . N . , and Cheong , S . W . ( 2001 ) alpha ( 6 ) Integrin is the main receptor of human papillomavirus type 16 VLP . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 283 : 668 – 673 . Yuspa , S . H . , Hawley - Nelson , P . , Koehler , B . , and Stanley , J . R . ( 1980 ) A survey of transformation markers in differen - tiating epidermal cell lines in culture . Cancer Res 40 : 4694 – 4703 . Supporting information Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article at the publisher’s web - site : Fig . S1 . Heparin does not affect cell growth or susceptibility for infection . A . HaCaT cells were incubated with the indicated concentrations of heparin for 2 h , after which unbound heparin was washed away . 24 h after heparin addition , cells were stained with propid - ium iodide , and the DNAcontent was analysed by ﬂow cytometry . Depicted is the proportion of cells with a DNA content reﬂecting G1 phase ( DNA = 1 ) , S phase ( DNA = 1 – 2 ) , and G2 / M phase ( DNA = 2 ) . Results correspond to the mean of three independent experiments (cid:2) SD . B . HaCaT cells were treated with heparin as for ( A ) 24 h post addition of heparin , the cell populations were counted and nor - malized for buffer treated cells . Shown are the mean values of three independent experiments (cid:2) SD . C . HaCaT cells were preincubated with the indicated concentra - tions of heparin . Unbound heparin was washed away and cells were infected with HPV - 16 PsVs . Infection was quantiﬁed by ﬂow cytometry and normalized to buffer treated cells . Results represent the mean values for at least three independent experiments (cid:2) SD . D . Recombinant HSV - 1 expressing GFP under the CMV pro - moter was preincubated with heparin . HaCaT cells were infected with preincubated virus and infection was determined by ﬂow cytometry . Results were normalized for buffer - treated virus and depicted as the mean values for three independent experiments (cid:2) SD . E . 1 mg ml - 1 biotinylated heparin was separated on a Optiprep step gradient ( 5 % / 39 % ) . Fractions were collected from the inter - face between the two Optiprep concentrations and from the top of the gradient . Presence of heparin was analysed by ELISA using HRP - conjugated streptavidin . Shown is the mean of triplicates (cid:2) SD . Fig . S2 . Preincubation with sulfated polysaccharides inhibits infection . HPV - 16 PsVs were preincubated with the indicated concentrations of polysaccharides followed by infection of HaCaT ( top row ) and HeLa ( bottom row ) cells . Infection was analysed as in Fig . 1A . Shown are the median values for at least three inde - pendent experiments (cid:2) SD . Fig . S3 . Lyase efficiency for removal of HS and CS from cells and ECM . A . HaCaT or HeLa cells were treated with buffer ( untreated ) , heparinase I , chondroitinase or both , chondroitinase and hepari - nase I . Cells were immunostained for HS as described in Experi - mental procedures . Depicted are microscopy pictures of HaCaT cells ( left ) with HS ( green ) and nuclear signal ( blue ) . For quanti - ﬁcation of HS removal by lyases ( right ) , cells were removed using EDTA and immunostained for HS . HS ﬂuorescence / cell was ana - lysed by ﬂow cytometry and normalized to untreated ( buffer treated ) cells . Results correspond to the mean of at least three Interactions of HPV - 16 with GAGs 1835 © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Cellular Microbiology , 15 , 1818 – 1836 independent experiments (cid:2) SD . n . d . , not determined . Scale bar correspond to 10 m m . B . Experiments were carried out as in ( A ) , but cells were immu - nostained for CS and not treated with a combination of chondroi - tinase and heparinase . Depicted are microscopy pictures of HeLa cells ( left ) with CS ( green ) and nuclear signal ( blue ) . Since HaCaT cells did not exhibit detectable CS signal ( not shown ) , the quantiﬁcation of CS removal by lyases ( right ) was carried out for HeLa cells only . C . ECM derived from HaCaT cells was treated with buffer ( untreated ) or heparinase I and stained for HS as in ( A ) . Depicted are images obtained by epiﬂuorescence microscopy . Scale bars correspond to 10 m m . Fig . S4 . HPV - 16 can bind to heparinase treated ECM . A . ECM coated coverslips were treated with buffer ( untreated ) or heparinase I and subsequently infected with AF - labelled HPV - 16 PsV . For ECM detection , a laminin - 332 staining was used . Given are ﬂuorescence microscopy pictures of a representative area . Scale bar corresponds to 10 m m . B . Quantiﬁcation of virus binding after heparinase diges - tion . Depicted is the mean for at least three independent experiments (cid:2) SD . C and D . ECM obtained from HaCaT cells was treated with buffer ( untreated ) , chondroitinaseABC , heparinase I , a mixture of hepa - rinase I and III ( cocktail ) or double digested with chondroitinase ABC and heparinase cocktail . HPV - 16 PsVs were allowed to bind to the treated ECM . Subsequently , HaCaT cells were seeded onto ECM bound virus . Infection was analysed by ﬂow cytometry . Depicted are the mean values (cid:2) SD of three independent experi - ments normalized to untreated ECM . Fig . S5 . Heparin reduces ECM binding on mouse - derived ECM . A . AF - labelled PsVs were preincubated with heparin or HA ( both 10 mg ml - 1 ) . Viruses were bound to ECM derived from mouse keratinocytes . The upper panels show the HPV - 16 signal . For ECM visualization , laminin - 332 staining was performed . Scale bar corresponds to 10 m m . B . Quantiﬁcation of virus binding to mouse - derived ECM for the given concentrations of heparin and HA . The results correspond to the mean values of three independent experiments (cid:2) SD , and were normalized to mock incubated virus . C . HPV - 16 PsVs were preincubated with the indicated concen - trations of polysaccharides and bound to mouse - derived ECM . Mouse keratinocytes were seeded on top , and infection analysed by ﬂow cytometry 48 h post cell seeding . Depicted are the mean values for at least three independent experiments (cid:2) SD . Fig . S6 . NaClO 3 reduces sulfation of HSPG . HaCaT cells ( treated overnight with 50 mM NaClO 3 ) were ﬁxed and stained using an heparan sulfate antibody that recognizes certain sul - fated HS patterns ( A ) or were infected with HSV - 1 ( B ) . Quantiﬁ - cation of HS signal as in Fig . S3 . Quantiﬁcation of HSV - 1 infection as described in Experimental procedures . Shown are the mean values for at least three independent experiments (cid:2) SD , normalized for untreated cells . C . HSV - 1 preincubated with heparin or buffer were bound to ECM produced by HaCaT cells . HaCaT cells treated with NaClO 3 or not ( untreated ) were seeded on top of the ECM - bound virus were seeded . Cells were ﬁxed and infection was analysed by ﬂow cytometry as described in Fig . 5 . Represented are the mean of three independent experiments (cid:2) SD , normalized for infection of buffer incubated virus of untreated HaCaT cells . Fig . S7 . Heparin preincubated virus are susceptible to inhibiton of growth factor receptors . HPV - 16 PsVs were preincubated with 10 mg ml - 1 or buffer treated . Preincubated viruses were bound to ECM and HaCaT cells were seeded on top of the ECM - bound virus . Cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of iressa ( A ) or treated with 50 mM NaClO 3 and the indicated con - centrations of iressa ( B ) . Samples were analysed by ﬂow cytom - etry and normalized as described for Fig . 5 . Table S1 . GAG oligosaccharide probes investigated in the microarrays . Table S2 . Antibodies directed against HPV - 16 L1 used in ELISA and dot blot experiments ( compare Fig . 7 ) . 1836 C . Cerqueira et al . © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Cellular Microbiology , 15 , 1818 – 1836