A Model of Knowledge Activation and Insight in Problem Solving MATTHEW A . CRONIN Graduate School of Industrial Administration , Carnegie Mellon University , Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania 15213 Received July 2 , 2003 ; revised February 24 , 2004 ; accepted February 24 , 2004 This article presents a model of insight that offers predictions on how and when insights are likely to occur as an individual solves problems . This model is based on a fundamental trade - off between the conscious cognition that underlies how people decide among alternatives and the unconscious cognition that underlies insight . I argue that the attention controls how much thought ( i . e . , knowledge activation ) goes to conscious cognition , and whatever activation is left over will go to ﬁnding an insight . I validate this model by replicating the common pattern of insight in problem solving ( preparation—impasse—incubation—veriﬁcation ) . The model implies that 1 ) one should be able to increase the frequency of insight by lessening the demand for conscious cognition , 2 ) impasse is not necessary for insight , and 3 ) incubation time increases if a person engages in any activity with a high demand on attention . Understanding how insight occurs during problem solving provides practical suggestions to make people and groups more creative and innovative ; it also provides avenues for future research on the cognitive dynamics of insight . © 2004 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . Complexity 9 : 17 – 24 , 2004 Key Words : creativity ; insight ; problem solving ; unconscious thought T his article presents a predictive model of insight in prob - lem solving . This model is validated using the pattern of insight ( preparation—impasse—incubation—veriﬁca - tion ) that has been reliably documented in research on insight [ 1 ] . The model advances the theory of insight by offering predictions about how and why insights occur during problem solving ; the current theory only describes insights ex post . Insight underlies innovation and discovery [ 2 , 3 ] , so by under - standing how insight occurs , we can understand how to make people and groups more creative and innovative . Insight is the “Aha ! ” sensation that occurs when without foreseeable warning a person discovers a new conceptual - ization of the problem ( i . e . , problem representation ) , result - ing in a new and better approach to solving it [ 4 , 5 ] . Insights are important because they are usually associated with im - portant breakthroughs such as scientiﬁc discoveries [ 6 ] as well as innovative business practices and product changes [ 7 ] . Insights can also provide small but signiﬁcant changes in particular processes [ 8 ] . Unfortunately the theory on insight is underdeveloped . Much work has gone into verifying commonalities in the sequence of events before and after an insight occurs [ 9 – 12 ] . The widely replicated pattern is that an insight arises when a person is working on a problem and he or she comes to an impasse : a place where he or she cannot think of what else to do to progress on the problem . After a period of © 2004 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . , Vol . 9 , No . 5 C O M P L E X I T Y 17 incubation , where the person is presumably unconsciously thinking about the problem , the solution appears in an all - at - once ﬂash , at which point the person goes back and applies the insight to the problem [ 9 ] . Applying this knowl - edge usually makes some fundamental change in the way the problem is understood , resulting in new possibilities for the problem that the person could not have predicted be - fore the insight [ 10 ] . Although the description and ordering of events sur - rounding an insight is widely accepted , the theory has lim - ited practical value . First , it offers no predictions about this process other than the sequence . For example , it does not describe the relationship between the length of impasse and the probability of an insight ( Does it increase ? Is it Pois - son ? ) , or even whether an impasse is necessary for an in - sight ( e . g . , inventions often come about even though the current method of solving the problem is sufﬁcient ) . Sec - ond , researchers pay little attention to the interaction be - tween insight and the rest of problem solving , even though insight occurs in a larger context of problem solving [ 13 ] . The work on insight uses problems where the only difﬁculty is ﬁnding the insight [ 14 ] . Even the studies on scientiﬁc discovery focus on the insight itself to the exclusion of the other incremental processes that led up to it ( e . g . [ 3 ] but for an exception , see [ 6 ] ) . Conversely , most problem - solving studies use well - structured problems where the representa - tion is set and deﬁned [ 15 ] ; these problems have little space for insight . Thus , a model of insight should describe how insight interacts with the more incremental processes that make up the bulk of problem solving . It should also offer predictions about when insights are more or less likely to occur . This model should be able to produce problem - solving se - quences that ﬁt with the existing knowledge about insight . By modeling the process , it helps understand the underlying cognition surrounding insight in problem solving . Increasing our understanding of insight will help to un - derstand creativity and innovation . Creativity and innova - tion are widely recognized as important [ 16 – 19 ] . Creativity is deﬁned as leading to the generation of novel and appro - priate ideas , processes or solutions ( [ 18 ] , p . 90 ) . Creativity is thus important because it can lead to successful product innovation [ 7 , 20 ] , scientiﬁc discovery [ 6 ] , competitive ad - vantage [ 17 ] , or efﬁciency boosts [ 8 ] . Understanding how insight works in an individual can also inform how people manage and construct work groups . One may be able to specialize and coordinate individuals’ cognitive functions in order to maximize insight output [ 21 ] . This would provide practical advice for designing groups to make them more creative without losing productivity . This information should advance the state of theory about group effectiveness and may shed light on why groups are often less effective than their best individual member [ 22 , 23 ] . This information has important practical implications be - cause organizations increasingly use groups to accomplish tasks [ 24 , 25 ] . I ﬁrst present the basic cognitive theory for problem solving . I then present the model of mental energy that underlies how insight occurs during problem solving . Next , I provide evidence for this model and then propositions derived from the model . Finally , I review the theoretical and practical contributions , the limitations , and avenues for fu - ture research . By building a model of the process that re - creates data observed from experiments , we can better un - derstand the interplay of the factors and make novel predictions about insight . THINKING IN PROBLEM SOLVING A problem is any situation in which people seek to achieve objectives ( the goal state ) that are not currently being met . Solving a problem involves two thinking processes , model - ing the problem , and using the model to solve the problem [ 13 ] . Because a task environment is often complex , people develop a simpliﬁed model of the problem that encom - passes the goals , assumptions , and operators 1 called the problem representation . The problem representation can be thought of as the “tools and plan” for solving the problem . Once people have a representation , they will use the goals , assumptions , and operators to select moves . Moves are ac - tions that modify the state of the problem [ 13 , 26 ] , prefer - ably bringing one closer to the goal . For example , suppose I want a higher salary . There may be many ways to achieve this objective ( talk to my boss , go to human resources , threaten to leave , etc . ) . I cannot simul - taneously pursue all these options , so I will need to create a simpler model of the problem . Let us say I decide to nego - tiate with my boss ; this becomes the problem representa - tion ( i . e . , the problem of getting a raise is about a negotia - tion with my boss ) . The representation makes me see the problem a certain way ( e . g . , I should not reveal information , the outcome is win / lose , I have to act tough ) . These beliefs will guide the moves I make ( e . g . , I may automatically reject any offers to appear tough ) . Using the representation to guide the moves I select , I will try to get to the goal I desire . The representation is a simpliﬁed model of the task environment , so it may have varying levels of optimality [ 26 – 29 ] . As such , during the course of problem solving , people will sometimes change the representation as they notice better ways to conceptualize the problem [ 4 , 5 , 13 ] . Using the above negotiation example , I may realize that it is more productive to think of the task as a dilemma that my boss and I should solve together , rather than a win / lose negotiation . Changing the representation changes the be - liefs I have about the problem ( e . g . , I may try to share 1 Operators are rules for applying knowledge to the problem in order to modify it . 18 C O M P L E X I T Y © 2004 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . information as opposed to withholding it ) , and this can lead to new moves that may in turn yield better solutions . Thus , problem solving encompasses the reciprocal thinking processes of using knowledge to represent the problem , and using knowledge to make moves . As people make moves , they may notice new knowledge that makes them revise their representation , thus giving them a new set of options that they did not previously have . Insight corre - sponds to this event [ 5 ] . However , activating knowledge that changes the representation is a qualitatively different cog - nitive process than activating knowledge that will lead to the next move . Contrasting these two processes will be important for understanding how insight and move selec - tion interact . Move Selection Move selection is most of what happens during problem solving . In move selection , one uses the knowledge in work - ing memory to analyze and compare the effects of applying different combinations of operators ( i . e . , moves ) . One then selects the move that brings one closest to the goal . Move selection tends to lead to small predictable steps toward the goal . Note that the entire move selection process is con - scious . A person will be able to articulate the candidate moves , the judgment criteria , and how he or she will analyze the candidate moves . A person is also able to look ahead and predict the outcome of the moves as well as the relative distance from the goal [ 10 ] . Insight Insight is a much less frequent event in problem solving . Insight is the “Aha ! ” sensation that occurs when without foreseeable warning a person discovers a new way of look - ing at the problem , resulting in a new and better approach to solving it [ 11 ] . The person is then able to make moves that were not previously recognized [ 10 ] and achieve solu - tions that were previously thought to be impossible [ 30 ] . Sometimes the trigger event is that a person cannot get to a solution using the current representation . Sometimes a per - son will just notice something that makes them better able to solve the problem . In either case , the person is able to work on the problem in ways that they could not conceive before the change . Commonalities and Distinction between Insight and Move Selection Both move selection and insight involve the application of knowledge to the problem ( e . g . , applying the knowledge g (cid:1) 9 . 8 m / s 2 to the problem of determining the speed of a falling object after 3 s ) . Knowledge should be envisioned as a network of multiply linked concepts ; the links represent different categorical relations [ 31 ] . For example , pie is linked to chart by a “graph” categorical link and pizza by a “food” categorical link ( as well as others ) . Knowledge emerges as connections between concepts become active , resulting in propositions ( cause - effect relationships ) that can be applied to a problem . Thus , the search for knowledge can be thought of as the process of activating concepts and partic - ular connections to other concepts [ 32 ] . Knowledge can exist at various levels of activation . Con - scious knowledge is active to the point of awareness [ 32 ] . One could also say that this knowledge was in working memory . Because we sense more than we perceive [ 33 ] , some knowledge will be subconscious ; that is , active ( and so more easily retrievable ) but not to the point of conscious - ness . Most knowledge is inactive , or essentially dormant in long - term memory . For example , a childhood experience that one has not thought about in years may be dormant . The primary difference between move selection and in - sight is how knowledge is activated . During move selection , a person can direct knowledge activation using his or her attention , but the activation can be directed only among the knowledge that is in working memory and consistent with the representation . For example , a person could reconﬁgure knowledge in working memory using the current operators or could scan the environment for new knowledge . In either case , this activation will ﬂow over the links that are consis - tent with the category of the representation . With insight , the spread of activation is not controllable [ 32 ] . Mental activation spreads from currently active knowl - edge to proximal inactive knowledge , but this activation can spread over any connections , not just the representationally consistent ones [ 34 ] . In these cases , the knowledge becomes conscious once the activation reaches a certain threshold , usually after a connection to problem objectives is made [ 35 , 36 ] . Once knowledge becomes active , it can be manip - ulated in relation to the problem . MODEL General Functioning I assume that thinking is the process of activating knowl - edge . People are constantly thinking , and thus people are always activating knowledge . 2 That is , in time period t a person will produce a quantity of activation ( A t ) , to be allocated among the pieces of knowledge ( k 1 , k 2 , … , k i ) in the person’s memory . Knowledge activated above a certain threshold ( k i (cid:1) (cid:2) ) brings it into consciousness [ 32 ] where it can be applied to the problem . Thinking more about how knowledge applies to the problem will activate knowledge 2 I assume that each person’s rate of activation is relatively constant , although it may change with various physiological conditions ( fatigue , mood , intoxication , etc . ) . Note that how constant the rate of activation is for a person does not change the conclusions of my model . © 2004 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . C O M P L E X I T Y 19 further ( I assume no upper bound on activation ) . Alter - nately , knowledge may be active but unconscious ( 0 (cid:2) k i (cid:2) (cid:2) ) . The knowledge itself is embedded in a network of con - cepts connected together by links that represent relations between the knowledge [ 31 ] . Each piece of knowledge can have multiple links , representing the different ways to in - terpret that knowledge . It is important to remember that the way a person represents a problem determines which of the kinds of links become active ( e . g . , calling a problem a “ne - gotiation” activates the “negotiation” links ) As one thinks , activation spreads along these links ( according to certain rules ) and becomes allocated among the conscious and unconscious knowledge . The main control for this allocation is people’s attention ( Figure 1 ) . In practice , this means attention essentially has the “right of ﬁrst refusal” for activation . However , there are two constraints on how attention allocates activation . The ﬁrst is that attention can only allocate activation to the knowledge that is conscious or across links that are consis - tent with the representation of the problem . Hence , con - scious direction of activation is controllable but limited . The second is that attention is an imperfect allocation mecha - nism , so some activation will go to irrelevant conscious thought , and some will go to activating unconscious knowl - edge . Attention uses the activation in proportion to the num - ber of open moves in the problem . The more potentially good but unexplored moves exist , the more attention will use activation to pursue these moves . Note that this is still a conscious decision . A person faced with many choices does not have to explore all , or even any , of them . This is just the natural tendency . Activation that does not go to conscious knowledge will ﬂow to unconscious knowledge . Here activation ﬂows from already active nodes to proximal inactive nodes [ 32 ] . The activation still spreads over the links , but the types of links over that it will spread are not constrained . If the right connection of nodes and links ( i . e . , the right knowledge ) becomes active above (cid:2) , they will pop into consciousness , thereby producing an insight . Evidence A primary assertion is that conscious move selection pro - cesses have precedence over unconscious insight processes . There are many studies that show how engaging in con - scious processes has been shown to detract from simulta - neous unconscious processes such as pattern learning [ 37 , 38 ] , judgment [ 39 ] , and incubation in insight [ 40 ] or idea generation [ 41 ] . This decrement occurred whether or not the conscious activity was related , unrelated , or even sup - posedly helpful to the unconscious activity [ 37 , 42 ] . Re - searchers have concluded that few cognitive processes are independent of attention effects [ 43 ] . The second assertion is that one can control how much activation move selection gets , but not perfectly . To assert that one can control how much attention goes to conscious problem solving is simple . All it requires is a thought exper - iment where you have an open problem in front of you . You can decide which parts of the problem to think about or to not think about the problem at all . Evidence that uncon - scious processes always gets some activation can also be assessed from the same thought experiment . No matter where you direct your attention , random ideas still pop into consciousness . More serious proof was obtained by Cronin , who found that people who were told ( and accepted ) not to be creative in their problem solving and to concentrate on move selection had as many insights as people who were free to do either [ 21 ] . The idea that less engagement in conscious processing allows more engagement in unconscious processing is con - sistent with the observation that insights happen during an impasse [ 1 ] . Impasse describes a situation in which people have run out of viable moves to make using the current representation . At this point , there would theoretically be more mental energy available to devote to unconscious knowledge activation because there is no new ( productive ) way to process the current conscious knowledge . After the necessary unconscious operations have taken place , one has the insight ( i . e . , illumination ) , which changes the rep - resentation in some way ; this opens new avenues , allowing problem solving to progress . Speciﬁcation My model is a stock and ﬂow model created using Vensim . At each time period , a given quantity of activation energy is generated ( A tot (cid:1) a quantity of activation per unit time ) , represented by the “activation” arrow in Figure 1 . This quantity , A tot , ﬂows into a stock ( attention in Figure 1 ) , where it will be allocated to either conscious or unconscious knowledge . Attention distributes a portion of A tot to move selection ( i . e . , modifying conscious knowledge ) based on FIGURE 1 Model of activation ﬂow in problem solving . 20 C O M P L E X I T Y © 2004 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . how many untried but potentially beneﬁcial moves there are minus a small and random amount of mental energy ( (cid:3) ) . This random amount goes to unconscious processes . 3 Thus the equation for how much mental energy goes to conscious problem solving ( directed activation in Figure 1 ) is as fol - lows : A CS (cid:1) ( A tot (cid:3) (cid:3) ) ( Attention demand ) . ( 1 ) Attention demand is a function of the number of moves one wants to try ( beneﬁcial moves ) in relation to how many moves one can execute in a given time period ( actionable moves ) . This is given as follows : Attention demand (cid:4) MIN (cid:4) beneficial moves , actionable moves (cid:5) / actionable moves . (cid:6) 2 (cid:7) The mental energy that remains after what is allocated to conscious problem solving ( leftover activation in Figure 1 ) will ﬂow to unconscious knowledge . That equation is as follows : A UCS (cid:1) A tot (cid:3) A CS ( 3 ) . Equation 2 implies that when there are more potentially good moves than one has the capacity to execute in a span of time , attention demand (cid:1) 1 . In this case , all activation except for a small random component ( (cid:3) ) will be used by conscious problem - solving processes . Once there are fewer good moves than one could make in a time period , however , attention demand approaches zero , leaving most activation to ﬂow to unconscious knowledge . My model of insight replicates the typical preparation— impasse—incubation—veriﬁcation sequence ( Figure 2 ) . During time 1 to about time 30 ( preparation ) , most activa - tion goes to exploring the problem space . That is , there are many open paths and potentially beneﬁcial moves . At about time 31 , progress begins to slow as most of the problem space ( under the current representation ) has been explored . At this point one a person had reached an impasse , and there will be few , if any , potentially beneﬁcial moves to try . Once one stops having a plethora of moves to test , the incubation period would start . Here the person will seem - ingly make no progress on the problem , yet the activation of unconscious knowledge will happen more rapidly . By time 52 , the insight has occurred ( unconscious activation 3 This ensures that there is always some unconscious though occurring with conscious thought . This would also explain why irrelevant ideas sometimes pop into one’s head while they are working . FIGURE 2 Simulation validation data . The black line represents the percentage of the problem space that has been explored . The gray line represents unconscious activity . © 2004 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . C O M P L E X I T Y 21 reached the critical level for the new and useful piece of knowledge ) . After the insight , the problem space is rede - ﬁned using a new representation , 4 and new exploration begins as the insight is veriﬁed using the moves that are now possible under the new representation . Because there are now new unexplored paths , the number of potentially ben - eﬁcial moves will again exceed the capacity of an individu - al’s actionable moves . Thus the cycle starts again . Figure 2 demonstrates how the model works if the prob - lem space is a certain size and the insight is a certain distance away from the initial representation of the prob - lem . The length of incubation as well as the time to impasse would change if these two parameters changed . Changes in these parameters would not change the fundamental me - chanics of the model , however . The key ﬁnding of this model is the trade - off between move selection and insight . Theoretical Contributions A number of propositions follow directly from this model . Research suggests that people cannot control the paths over which activation unconsciously spreads [ 32 ] . This model suggests , however , that people may be able to increase the rate at which activation spreads by lessening the amount of conscious processing they do . Cronin , Kotovsky , and others corroborate this claim . They found that directing people away from conscious processes resulted in greater output from unconscious processes . This was true for insight as well as idea generation [ 21 , 41 ] . P1 . Lessening Conscious Demand Will Increase the Rate of Unconscious Output The second proposition follows directly from the ﬁrst : in - sights do not have to follow an impasse . One may be able to create new insights as people are still working productively on a problem . The reason this does not usually happen is that attention draws the majority of activation to move selection , which still seems productive until most of the representation has been explored . However , if one were to deliberately stop thinking about moves , thereby reducing the conscious demand on one’s thinking , more activation could ﬂow to unconscious knowledge , thereby increasing the chance of an insight before there is no other alternative . P2 . Impasse Is Not Necessary for Insight The third proposition is that the time of incubation length - ens if , when a person stops thinking about the problem , then he or she does something else that requires attention . For example , incubation time would be lengthened if one started solving a different problem or even did something passive but engaging like watching television . Incubation time should be minimized if people allow themselves to engage in a very routinized or mindless activity after ceasing to work on the problem . P3 . Incubation Time will Lengthen in Proportion to the Conscious Demand of Non - problem - related Activities Practical Contributions By understanding the trade - off between move selection and insight , one can derive some prescriptions for how to make individuals more creative . One is to keep some people in a work team from the process of move selection [ 21 ] . This ensures that their extra attention may be devoted to catch - ing insights that would otherwise be missed until progress slowed dramatically . Another suggestion is to make use of routine tasks , such as showering , driving , or waiting for a meeting as times to think about one’s open problems . His - tory has many examples of great insights that came while people were performing tasks with a low attention demand ( e . g . , Archimedes discovered water displacement getting into the tub , Poincare´ conceived of the Fuchsian function while getting on a bus [ 3 ] ) . People perform routine tasks as a matter of going about their day . These should be viewed as opportunities for insight . From P2 , we can infer that unless people receive a clear signal that progress on a problem is not as good as it should be , they will keep incrementally plodding along via move selection . Thus , small achievements may delay further in - sight . People who seem to be steadily increasing their pro - ductivity via move selection may put all their resources into move selection . Under these conditions , it does not seem attractive to engage in blind search for innovation . This is the dilemma expressed by March between exploration and exploitation [ 44 ] . Assigning a person to search for insights and keeping them from move selection when solving a problem may be one possible remedy to this dilemma . In the search for innovation , it is important to recognize that not knowing what to do ( impasse ) makes one naturally send more activation to unconscious processes . This may mean that one should make problems more constrained , not less , to increase creativity . This suggestion ﬁts with the adage “necessity is the mother of invention . ” However , it runs contrary to what is recommended in much of the popular literature , which says that creative people need complete freedom to create [ 45 ] . The above suggestions have external issues that should not be ignored . For example , some level of engagement with the problem is likely to be necessary for continued uncon - scious work on the problem ; otherwise , people could just sleep their way to solutions . Removing a person from pro - duction so that he or she may search for insight imposes a cost ; this cost would need to be assessed against the poten - 4 Because I model a real problem , not an insight lab problem , the insight does not signal the end of the problem , only the further exploration of new parts of the space . 22 C O M P L E X I T Y © 2004 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . tial gains from insight on a per problem basis . Making problems harder may make people more creative , but it may also make them more frustrated , which can have sec - ondary effects on creative output , especially in a group . These and other issues may be addressed with future re - search . Future Research In addition to verifying the validity of the propositions and the practical contributions , the model presented in this article has other proﬁtable research areas . One avenue for research has to do with how much conscious engagement in a problem is necessary to keep the insight processes on track . If the answer is “very little , ” then one may have the interesting possibility that insights should be most likely to come from the least productive member of a team . 5 Pre - sumably , he or she would have more activation ﬂowing to unconscious processes , provided they are not thinking about other problems ( e . g . , what to do this weekend ) . Another question is whether it is possible to overtax the unconscious processes . Gobet and Simon have shown that increasing the cognitive load tremendously for a person who uses unconscious recognition processes to solve a problem has little effect on subsequent performance [ 46 ] . However , my model would imply that the limiting factor to unconscious processes is the amount of activation a person puts out in a time period . This may be more than enough for an expert to allocate to the few heuristics that he or she executes to recognize a known opportunity . However , when activation spreads in search of insight , multiple unresolved problems ( on which the unconscious is working ) may lead to longer incubation times for any single insight . 5 I thank Scott Page for this idea . A ﬁnal question is whether the activation potential of knowledge is only a function of its structure in the network . Anderson and Piriolli claim that unconscious spread of ac - tivation is equal across the total number of links connecting to a node , and thus time to activation is a function only of distance from the active to the inactive node [ 32 ] . Yet , Smith demonstrated how certain stimuli can block the activation of the correct answer , even when the concepts are quite proximal to the intended answer [ 12 ] . Blocking is a common phenomena in conscious retrieval [ 47 ] , so it should have effect in unconscious retrieval . Understanding how the con - tent of knowledge helps or hinders activation may provide further instruction on the types of activity one can proﬁt - ably engage in while in the incubation period ( e . g . , it may be better to listen passively to a seminar on a vaguely related concept than to sit alone in a quiet room ) . CONCLUSION I have presented a model of insight that describes how insight interacts with the incremental processes of move selection , thus synthesizing a more complete model of thinking in problem solving than either the insight literature [ 1 ] or standard problem solving research [ 26 ] provide alone . This model produces the problem - solving sequences that ﬁt with the existing knowledge about insight . It also offers predictions about when insights are more or less likely to occur . Because it is a simulation based on a synthesis of ﬁndings from different literatures , it requires further valida - tion by direct tests using human subjects . Nonetheless , this model should provide a solid foundation for exploring the dynamics of the insight process that underlies creativity , innovation , and discovery . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I thank Scott Page , John Miller , and Ken Kotovsky for their guidance and insight in pursuing this model . REFERENCES 1 . Sternberg , R . E . ; Davidson , J . E . The Nature of Insight ; MIT Press : Cambridge , MA , 1995 . 2 . Dunbar , K . Concept discovery in a scientiﬁc domain . Cognitive Sci 1993 , 17 , 397 – 434 . 3 . Gruber , H . E . Insight and affect in the history of science . In The Nature of Insight . Davidson , R . E . S . J . E . , Ed . ; MIT Press : Cambridge , MA , 1995 , p 397 – 432 . 4 . Nonaka , I . A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge creation . Organization Sci 1994 , 5 , 14 – 37 . 5 . Ohlsson , S . Information - Processing Explanations of Insight and Related Phenomena ; Harvester - Wheatsheaf : London , 1992 . 6 . In Formal Engineering and Design Synthesis ; Antonsson , E . ; Cagan , J . , Eds . ; Cambridge University Press : Cambridge , 2002 ; pp 402 – 435 . 7 . Cagan , J . ; Vogel , C . M . Creating Breakthrough Products ; Prentice - Hall : Upper Saddle River , NJ , 2002 . 8 . Argote , L . Organizational learning : Creating , retaining and transferring knowledge . Kluwer : Norwell , MA , 1999 . 9 . Davidson , J . E . The suddenness of insight . In : The Nature of Insight ; Davidson , R . E . S . J . E . , Ed . ; MIT Press : Cambridge , MA , 1995 ; pp 125 – 156 . 10 . Metcalfe , J . ; Weibe , D . Intuition in insight and non - insight problem solving . Memory Cognition 1987 , 15 , 238 – 246 . 11 . Mayer , R . E . The Search for Insight : Grappling with Gestalt Psychology’s Unanswered Questions ; MIT Press : Cambridge , MA , 1995 . 12 . Smith , S . M . Getting into and out of mental ruts : A theory of ﬁxation , incubation , and insight . In : The Nature of Insight ; Davidson , R . E . S . J . E . , Ed . ; MIT Press : Cambridge , MA , 1995 , pp 229 – 252 . 13 . Hayes , J . R . ; Simon , H . A . Understanding Written Problem Instructions ; Lawrence Erlbaum : Hillsdale , NJ , 1974 . 14 . Weisberg , R . W . Case studies of creative thinking : Reproduction versus restructuring in the real world . , 1995 . 15 . Simon , H . A . Bounded rationality and organizational learning . Organization Sci 1991 , 2 , 125 – 134 . © 2004 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . C O M P L E X I T Y 23 16 . Amabile , T . M . A model of creativity and innovation in organizations . Res Organizational Behav 1988 , 10 , 123 – 167 . 17 . DeVanna , M . A . ; Tichy , N . Creating the competitive organization of the 21st century : The boundaryless corporation . Hum Resource Manage 1990 , 29 , 445 – 471 . 18 . Perry - Smith , J . E . ; Shalley , C . E . The social side of creativity : A static and dynamic social network perspective . Acad Manage Rev 2003 , 28 , 89 – 106 . 19 . Woodman , R . W . ; Sawyer , J . E . ; Grifﬁn , R . W . Toward a theory of organizational creativity . Acad Manage Rev 1993 , 18 , 293 – 321 . 20 . Dougherty , D . Interpretive barriers to successful product innovation in large ﬁrms . Organization Sci 1992 , 179 – 202 . 21 . Cronin , M . A . ; Argote , L . ; Kotovsky , K . Partitioned cognition in group problem solving . Paper presented at the 2002 Academy of Management Conference , Denver , CO , 2002 . 22 . Hill , G . W . Group versus individual performance : Are N (cid:8) 1 heads better than one . Psychol Bull 1982 , 91 , 517 – 539 . 23 . Laughlin , P . R . Collective induction : Twelve postulates . Organizational Behav Hum Decision Processes 1999 , 80 , 50 – 69 . 24 . Leavitt , H . J . The old days , hot groups and manager’s lib . Admin Sci Quart 1996 , 41 , 288 – 300 . 25 . McGrath , J . E . ; Argote , L . Group processes in organizational contexts . In : Blackwell Handbook of Social Psychology ; Tindale , M . A . H . R . S . , Ed . ; Blackwell : Oxford , UK , 2001 , pp 603 – 627 . 26 . Newell , A . ; A . , Simon , H . A . Human Problem Solving ; Prentice - Hall : Engelwood Cliffs , NJ , 1972 . 27 . Hayes , J . R . ; Simon , H . A . Psychological differences among problem isomorphs . In : Cognitive Theory ; Castellan , N . J . ; Pisonie , D . B . ; Potts , G . R . , Eds . ; Lawrence Erlbaum : Englewood , NJ , 1977 , pp 21 – 41 . 28 . Kotovsky , K . ; Hayes , J . R . ; Simon , H . A . Why are some problems hard ? Evidence from Tower of Hanoi . Cogn Psychol 1985 , 17 , 248 – 294 . 29 . Kotovsky , K . ; Simon , H . A . What makes some problems really hard : Explorations in the problem space of difﬁculty . Cogn Psychol 1990 , 22 , 143 – 183 . 30 . Kaplan , C . A . ; Simon , H . A . In search of insight . Cogn Psychol 1990 , 22 , 374 – 419 . 31 . Anderson , J . R . Concepts , propositions & schemata : What are the cognitive units ? In : Nebraska Symposium on Motivation ; University of Nebraska Press , 1980 , pp 121 – 162 . 32 . Anderson , J . R . ; Piriolli , P . L . Spread of activation . J Exp Psychol Learning , Memory , Cogn 1984 , 10 , 791 – 798 . 33 . Anderson , R . C . ; Prichert , J . W . Recall of previously unrecallable information following a shift in perspective . J Verbal Learning Verbal Behav 1978 , 17 , 1 - 12 . 34 . In Cognitive Processes in Comprehension ; Just , M . A . ; Carpenter , P . A . , Eds . ; Lawrence Erlbaum and Associates : Hillsdale , NJ , 1977 ; pp 89 – 108 . 35 . Hasher , L . ; Zacks , R . T . Automatic and effortful processes in memory . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General 1979 , 108 , 356 – 388 . 36 . Nisbett , R . E . ; Wilson , T . D . Telling more than we can know : Verbal reports on mental processes . Psychol Rev 1977 , 84 , 231 – 259 . 37 . Reber , A . S . Implicit learning and tacit knowledge . J Exp Psychol Gen 1989 , 118 , 219 – 235 . 38 . Reber , P . ; Kotovsky , K . Implicit learning in problem solving : The role of working memory capacity . J Exp Psychol Gen 1997 , 126 , 178 – 203 . 39 . Wilson , T . D . ; Schooler , J . W . Thinking too much : Introspection can reduce the quality of preference decisions . J Pers Soc Psychol 1991 , 60 , ( 1 ) , 181 – 192 . 40 . Schooler , J . W . ; Ohlsson , S . ; Brooks , K . Thoughts beyond words : When language overshadows insight . J Exp Psychol Gen 1993 , 122 , 166 – 183 . 41 . Cronin , M . A . ; Kotovsky , K . A . Further Exploration into Partitioned Cognition in Group Problem Solving . Working Paper , Carnegie Mellon University , 2003 . 42 . Ryan , R . S . ; Schooler , J . W . Whom do words hurt ? Individual differences in susceptibility to verbal overshadowing . Appl Cogn Psychol 1998 , 12 , S105 – S125 . 43 . Cohen , J . D . ; McClelland , J . L . ; Dunbar , K . On control of automatic processes : A parallel distributed processing account of the stroop effect . Psychol Rev 1990 , 97 , 332 – 361 . 44 . March , J . G . Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning . Organization Sci 1991 , 2 , 71 – 88 . 45 . Bangle , C . The ultimate creativity machine : How BMW turns art into proﬁt . Harvard Bus Rev 2001 , 79 ( 1 ) , 47 – 57 . 46 . Gobet , F . ; Simon , H . A . The roles of recognition processes and look - ahead search in time - constrained expert problem solving : Evidence from grand - master - level chess . Psychol Sci 1996 , 7 . 47 . Simon , H . A . Models of Thought ; Yale University Press : New Haven , CT , 1979 . 24 C O M P L E X I T Y © 2004 Wiley Periodicals , Inc .