Starting an Intergenerational Technology Design Team : A Case Study Kendra Knudtzon 1 , Allison Druin 1 , Nancy Kaplan 2 , Kathryn Summers 2 , Yoram Chisik 2 , Rahul Kulkarni 2 , Stuart Moulthrop 2 , Holly Weeks 2 , Ben Beders o n 1 1 Human - Computer Interaction Lab University of Maryland College Park , MD 20742 USA + 1 301 405 7445 kendra @ cs . umd . edu 2 School of Information Arts and Technology University of Baltimore Baltimore , MD 21201 USA + 1 410 837 5319 nakaplan @ ubalt . edu ABSTRACT This paper presents a case study of the first three months of a new intergenerational design team with children ages 10 - 13 . It discusses the research and design methods used for working with children of this age group . The challenges and opportunities of starting a new team , and the lessons learned are discussed . Keywords Children , intergenerational design teams , educational applications , cooperative inquiry , participatory design , design methods INTRODUCTION Based on the research techniques pioneered at the University of Maryland [ 7 , 8 , 9 ] , children are more commonly emerging as design partners in creating new technologies for children . Numerous researchers from around the world ( e . g . , US , UK , Sweden , Canada , Netherlands ) have begun to use partnership techniques in creating everything from school websites [ 17 ] to digital libraries [ 5 , 9 , 11 ] to handheld technologies for children [ 12 , 16 ] to storytelling environments [ 1 , 2 ] . As these research practices become more common it is important to understand how these intergenerational partnerships are formed , and the challenges and rewards of such partnerships . Therefore in this paper , we will reflect on the personal experiences , power structures , research and design methods , and team reflections during the first three months of establishing an intergenerational design team . Design Partnerships Partnering with users has been an accepted design practice in creating new technologies since the late 1970s . Scandinavian co - design practices brought together trade union workers with researchers to develop appropriate technologies for work environments [ 3 ] . This philosophy has been adapted for partnerships with children and called Cooperative Inquiry [ 7 ] . At the University of Maryland , researchers have worked on developing partnership techniques for children ages 4 - 11 over the last five years . Children are integrated into the research process as active partners . They are considered critical members of the team who bring their particular strengths and experiences to the research process [ 8 ] . Research methods are adapted to better suit children in the design process . During Cooperative Inquiry research , children and adults write in journals , work on low - tech prototypes , brainstorm on paper or sticky notes , draw pictures , and think about how technology should change [ 7 , 8 ] . Establishing a New Partnership Our intergenerational design team is the result of a partnership between the University of Baltimore ( UBalt ) and the University of Maryland , College Park ( UMD ) . The new Baltimore team focuses on extending the University of Maryland’s Human - Computer Interaction Lab’s ( HCIL ) Cooperative Inquiry research . This three - year research project , supported by the National Science Foundation ( NSF ) , hopes to explore educational technology for children ages 10 - 13 , primarily in the digital library domain . The UBalt team consists of three professors and three graduate students from UBalt ' s School of Information Arts and Technology ( SIAT ) , one UMD computer science graduate student , and six children , three boys ( ages 10 - 11 ) and three girls ( ages 11 - 13 ) . The three professors and the UMD graduate student previously participated in a 2 - week intensive summer design session with the UMD design team in preparation for starting the UBalt design team . This experience served as a model for how a successful team should function , but did not provide assistance with the mechanics of starting a team from scratch . Our team’s current research is centered on extending the International Children’s Digital Library ( ICDL ) [ 11 , 4 ] to support children ages 10 - 13 . The University of Maryland ' s design work on the ICDL has currently been focused on use by children in early elementary school . As such , the current ICDL interface has no support for keyword search and has search categories that may not correspond to older children’s ideas of how a library should be structured . We have been exploring how older children think about books and reading , how they think about the current ICDL interface , and how they would change the library to better support their peers . In the sections that follow we describe our team , the structure of this case study , our research activities , the challenges and issues we faced as a new team , and the lessons learned during our startup period . TEAM STRUCTURE We did not use any ‘magic formula’ for selecting members for our design team . We found it difficult to find children ages 10 - 13 who were able to make the time commitment necessary to be a member of the team 1 . Therefore our children were not systematically selected . Instead , we found them through professional connections and word - of - mouth . The three UBalt graduate students were selected based on the quality of their graduate school applications to SIAT , not their particular interest in educational technology . Because of the emphasis on teaching in the university 2 , these students did not have their own research interests , but were selected in order to give them experience with HCI research methods . The UMD graduate student was selected to serve as a bridge between the UBalt team and the UMD team for her interest in educational technology . The professors were self - selected to the team . With all of the adults coming from technology - focused departments , there is not much diversity of academic fields reflected in our team makeup . However , as part of the partnership with UMD , our design team receives on - going support and feedback from Dr . Allison Druin , a leader in this field of interaction design for children , which helps us maintain an interdisciplinary focus , even with a technology - based team . The UMD partnership allows our team to leverage support from the other disciplines of the UMD team ( like education and library sciences ) . The whole team meets once a week , on Saturdays for three hours . During the Saturday sessions , we include one major focused activity , usually one or two minor , less - structured activities and snacks , at the start and / or after a major activity . In addition , the adult team members meet once a week to reflect on and plan the activities of the team . Two of the professors and the UMD graduate student have a separate weekly conference call with Dr . Druin in order to integrate her feedback on the process and activities . 1 At this age range it may be particularly difficult to recruit children to work with because they are often overly committed to other activities . 2 The University of Baltimore is a teaching institute with traditionally little experience with research projects in this area . STRUCTURE OF THE STUDY The data presented in this paper comes from participant observation during the formation of the new partnership , both from adult partner meetings and Saturday design sessions . Additional data sources were journal writing ( by child and adult design team members ) during the three months and team reflections and interviews at the end of the semester . COOPERATIVE INQUIRY ACTIVITIES Most of our activities were adapted from those experienced during the 2 - week intensive summer design session in College Park . The UMD team has demonstrated successes with low - tech prototyping , sticky notes sessions , and journal writing [ 1 , 7 , 8 ] . In this section , we discuss the types of activities conducted with the older children , which activities were successful , and the modifications made for these activities . Figure 1 : Low - tech prototyping One low - tech prototyping method that has been quite successful for our team is “bags of stuff . ” With this design method , small teams of 2 - 3 children and 2 - 3 adults use a collection of materials ( art supplies like paper , scissors , glue , markers , or pipe cleaners as well as random 3 - d items like clay , sponges , or paint rollers ) to build technology prototypes . The UMD team tends to need little specificity of purpose for low - tech prototyping sessions ( researcher’s notes , 2002 ) . However , we have found when exploring designs with our team that the group needs to have specific questions to guide their activities . It is easy for our children to get off task and shift the focus away from educational technology when broader questions are asked . For example , the question “What would a digital library look like for older kids ? ” led to designs focused around video games , as seen in figure 2 . Figure 2 : Video game controller interface Figure 3 : Butterfly interface This response is opposed to the more detailed relevant designs ( one of which is depicted in figure 3 ) that resulted from the series of specific questions , “How would a typing interface for older kids be added to an existing library design” or “What parts of the current library are too ‘young kid - like’ and how would we change them for older kids . ” Sticky notes , an activity where design partners reflect on “likes” , “dislikes” , or possible changes to a design or interface on little notes , was a successful research method for the older children . The sticky notes allow team members to jot down ideas , which can easily be grouped by related ideas . These groupings can then be reflected upon and helps the team understand trends , problems , successes , and future work . While everyone occasionally grumbles about writing sticky notes , children and adults on our team have recognized their usefulness for thinking and reflecting together . IDEO’s brainstorming with rules [ 13 ] was a research method that we experimented with for the older children , specifically to help elicit better listening and elaboration within the team . The technique uses five simple rules : one conversation at a time , stay focused , encourage wild ideas , defer judgment , and build upon ideas from others . The goal of the activity is to come up with many ideas in a short amount of time . In this approach , there is one facilitator who introduces a topic to the group for brainstorming and reminds the team of the rules as they brainstorm . By changing who acts as facilitator and focusing on coming up with many ideas in a short amount of time , listening and elaboration were enhanced . In fact , in one ten - minute session , our team came up with more ideas than they did in most other one - hour brainstorming activities . Existing research discusses the different ways in which adults and young children keep research journals and finds that young children will typically take notes by drawing and annotating pictures [ 7 ] . While journal writing has worked well with the younger children , so far it has only been partially successful with the older children . The adult members have not found a good time to schedule it into the design sessions , so we lose the opportunity to have the children record their thoughts in writing during many of the sessions . Also , many of the children on our team dislike writing and drawing . However , the children recognize the benefit of the journal : one 12 year - old girl reflected that she would feel more like a researcher by spending “more time thinking and writing in journals” ( researcher’s notes , 2002 ) . Other design partners felt keeping track of their ideas was good , but thought they should be typing their ideas on the computer , rather than writing in journals . We are planning to set up a preliminary system that will allow the children to experiment with on - line journaling . CHALLENGES Conducting successful research design with our new team required us to overcome a variety of challenges . These included organizational structure , group dynamics , and physical space . All three will be discussed in the sections that follow . Organization and Team - Building During the first three months together , our team had a loose structure for the Saturday sessions . This affected our ability to accomplish many of our goals , causing some frustration for the adults and children on the team . For example , most Saturdays when the children arrived at the lab , they would immediately log into the computers and play video games or surf the Internet . This was challenging for the team in several ways . The children would become engrossed in the game and it became akin to a punishment to stop the games in order to begin design activities . The violent video game activities that the boys on the team played also tended to set the wrong mood for our design sessions . In addition , with each child on a computer , this meant that team members did not talk informally with other team members . Many of the children did not even remember each other’s names from session to session . Another example involved snack time . We tried to include one or two snacks during our design sessions to give the team members a little break and boost energy levels . We made the mistake during some Saturday sessions of eating snacks in the course of completing design activities , which both reduced the effectiveness of the activity by distracting the children and missed an opportunity to use snack time as a collaborative or team - building experience . We quickly recognized these organizational issues , but expected them to be resolved as we became accustomed to working as a team . In addition , we considered it important to give the whole team a sense of purpose and early accomplishment , and thought the way to do this was by focusing on doing ‘real work . ’ By thinking this , we created a situation where the pressure to conduct meaningful research competed with team - building activities as we initiated our design partnership . Despite advice from Dr . Druin to focus on initially building a strong team , our first two months were primarily spent pursuing research agendas , ultimately in a rather inefficient manner . Due to a lack of team - building activities we weren’t truly becoming accustomed to being a team until later in the semester when we shifted our focus to include more team - building activities . This shift quickly alleviated our organizational issues and made us question why we didn’t focus on team - building activities from the start . This shift occurred two months into the project when the adults finally realized that many of the children did not know each other’s names . There was frustration due to the loose organizational structure and the fact that many of our activities were not producing successful results . For example , in an attempt to help promote teambuilding and elaboration , one of the children from the UMD team , who had been a member of that team since its inception five years ago , joined us one Saturday to participate in a low - tech prototyping design session . From the start of the activity , his team of 3 children and 2 adults split their activities , not really listening or discussing each other’s ideas . He quickly gave up on the activity and quietly worked alone , later confiding : “it’s really bad if they can get me to stop listening . ” After the session , he talked with the UMD graduate student about team - building activities and the need for more listening and discussion . The weeks after that visit , our team switched the focus to team building activities . We worked on interviewing other children and splitting into smaller teams , where we focused on specifically listening and elaborating on others’ ideas . This is when we introduced “brainstorming with rules” , which helped the team to listen to each other , and work together as a team to come up with ideas . We also spent more time talking about our lives and interests outside the team , starting each session talking about the past week in order to better understand each other’s roles on the team . We re - structured our schedule so that we had a small snack in the beginning of our session and again after our major design activity . In addition , we were able to use the launch and publicity of the ICDL [ 4 , 15 ] to talk specifically about the benefits of working in a design team , which helped give the children ownership and pride about the work they were participating in . Interestingly enough , getting the children to spend more time away from the computers ( where they have tended to work individually ) has helped the children to focus on the team and seemingly has lead to better design ideas . Finally , as our design partnership was beginning , we struggled with how to give children a sense of ownership over the process and outcomes of research . We intuitively felt that it was important that the children feel ownership of our projects . However , it was challenging to have any immediate products resulting from the children’s design work due to the long - term nature of this research project . This challenge partially solved itself with an accidental success : the creation of individual websites for each of the child design team members . Group Dynamics Really listening or paying attention has been a challenge with our team . While the adult leaders of the team have noticed it , and have tried to select activities that help promote listening , it continues to be a challenge . Part of the problem may be related to specific personalities on the team , since we did not have the advantage of actively selecting people for the team based on their abilities to work well with others in this capacity . One encouragement is that over half the team has recognized that they do have difficulties with listening and it is “something they need to work on as a design partner” ( researcher’s notes , 2002 ) . Another challenge we faced in starting our design team was in eliminating the power structures that typically exist between adults and children . We wanted the adults and the children to feel a strong partnership . All the adults on our team were concerned with not being too “teacher - like” when leading activities and tried to work on making sure that children’s voices and opinions were heard and represented in all team meetings . However , this only worked to a certain extent . In many activities , the adults tended to dominate the discussions , letting their ideas take over the design sessions . This has been recognized , but as one of the adults remarked , “…being good at leading activities is a self - selected behavior that in many circumstances is welcome , so it is difficult to break that behavior” ( researcher’s notes , 2002 ) . Despite self - awareness on the part of the adults , the children have not noticed a power differential . Perhaps this is due to the fact that the structure of the team is very different from school , and they have more say than they would normally expect . At the end of the three months , before breaking for the winter holiday each team member reflected on their role within the team , and five of the six children felt that they were equal partners on the team . 3 However , these end - of - term team reflections brought up surprising factors about the dynamics of the adults . We had focused so much attention on making sure that the children felt like equal partners that we had not considered the power differential between professors and graduate students . The UBalt graduate students were being taught in class by the professors at the same time as they were trying to establish the design partnership for research . This led to some difficulty with the shyer student members not being entirely comfortable to speak their mind about the design team process , especially as they were not familiar with the research process and were still learning about what it means to be doing research . “School - mode” A challenge that we encountered working with older children is that they seem to get caught up with “what is not possible” and having “the right answers . ” The older children seem be very ingrained in the ways of school . For example , one Saturday we asked the children to try out a library scavenger hunt explaining that the activity would introduce them to the ICDL and that they should focus on the interface and if it was easy to use . After asking the adults if they would be graded , we stressed again that the answers were not important , that we wanted them to make notes about how the interface worked . Yet the children sped through the task , competing to see who could finish first , compared answers to see who was “right” , and wrote all scavenger hunt answers in full sentences . Despite our efforts to explain otherwise , the children emphasized the scavenger hunt task instead of the interface process . Another challenge is that our children were overly concerned with what has already been done , and worried about limitations . For example , one 11 - year - old boy working on a low - tech prototype was concerned that his design “might take a lot of megabytes” and not be feasible ( researcher’s notes , 2002 ) . In comparing our team with the younger children at UMD , we have observed that the younger children did not seem to worry about limitations and came up with wild idea when brainstorming . For our team , however , it has been difficult to help the children understand that there aren’t always right answers , especially in research . While experience with the research team has helped some , there is room for improvement . Physical Space Another challenge in starting a design team is one that may seem surprising : the physical design of the room in which we meet . First , we would like to be able to sit on the floor while working together . This forces a certain physical proximity while also allowing a team flexibility to spread out . However , our space is linoleum ( not carpeted ) , which makes sitting on the floor uncomfortable and undesirable . Secondly , we would like a lab space that is “kid - friendly . ” This includes having wall and shelf space to display children’s work as well as space to gather for team - wide discussions and presentations . However , our primary working area is very small , broken up by a pillar in the middle of the room ( as seen in figure 4 ) , and there is little space to place our team’s prototypes where they could be visible to the children and adults on the team . Where possible , we have tried to make the physical environment conducive to working with children . For example , we have installed whiteboards where the children could reach them , but we were unable to improve the environment as a whole . 3 The sixth said she felt like she was “helping out” , but wasn’t quite a partner yet . Figure 4 : Our lab space Lastly , we would like a modifiable space in order to facilitate small as well as large group activities . While none of these items were provided in our dedicated lab space , we managed to relieve the space issues by using an open classroom down the hall . However , the classroom is not carpeted and we have to carry any necessary materials to the room . TEAM REFLECTIONS In reflecting on the first three months of partnership , all members of the team were interviewed by the paper’s first author for 10 - 20 minutes . In addition , the team was asked to use sticky notes to list the three things they were proud of as a design team member and the three things they thought they needed to work on as a design team member . Based on these reflections , we found that all of the adults expressed some concern about pushing the kids too far and leaving more time for fun activities or free time ( to design personal websites ) . Three of the adults thought they still needed to work on listening , and five felt that they needed to improve their research methods ( taking better notes , thinking of more or better activities , more reflection and analysis of team efforts , thinking out of the box ) . During interviews , the adults expressed surprise about the children acclimating so quickly to the process , and noted that the adults’ acclimation was not as strong . Children’s actions during our team activities suggest when they need breaks , and the adults on the team feel that they have become accustomed to reading those signals . Three of the adults felt that maybe they needed to have more fun with the process . None of the children mentioned in their interviews that they thought we were not having enough fun . When interviewed , all of the children thought being a design partner was fun . Three children expressed pride in being on a team and being involved in cutting edge research . Four of children were proud that they came up with good ideas to share with the team . They were reflective about their roles on the team , with four realizing they need to talk more or be less shy about sharing ideas , and three specifically discussed needing to pay more attention or listen better . Two children thought they talked too much about off - topic subjects , and worried about disrupting the rest of the team . One of the girls on the team completely dispelled the adults’ thoughts that we need to have more fun , saying the team needed to pay more attention to building things , and that we ( the children ) need to be more serious . She explained that the process can’t all be fun , because “if you’re going to make something you need to make it right” ( girl , age 12 , researcher’s notes , 2002 ) . LESSONS LEARNED Based on our experience and the literature in this area , we have come to see that many factors affect the success of a new intergenerational design team . In this section , we present the lessons we have learned that may suggest guidelines for others starting their own intergenerational design teams . 1 ) Cooperative Inquiry methods are successful with older children , but additional brainstorming structures may be needed to help them think more creatively . We have extended the UMD findings of success with Cooperative Inquiry methods to a sample of older children . While similar design activities have worked in our team , we found modifications to some activities enhanced success . It was helpful to “brainstorm with rules” before starting the “bags of stuff” activities in order to help children and adults think outside the box . We also increased the focus on encouraging ideas that are not limited by perceived notions of what is possible . Our findings support the theory that the Cooperative Inquiry methodology can serve as a baseline for working with intergenerational teams of all ages . 2 ) Older children can support the design of new technologies in ways younger children can ' t . When designing technology for children it is necessary to work with children of all ages to ensure an age - appropriate design as well as to leverage from their varied experiences and thinking processes . We have found that older children can consider problems with a greater depth than is available to younger children and their experience with life , school , and school - related activities can give them different insights during the design process . For example , when looking at the design of the current ICDL system , our children questioned why the interface did not support reading for school . This included activities like book marking , finding books of a certain length , taking notes for book reports , and providing sample reading comprehension questions . 3 ) Child design team members need to feel a sense of project ownership . We have found that a new design team can have difficulty in giving children a sense of ownership , because educational technology projects are typically long - term research projects . Without seeing the impact they are making , it may be difficult for the children to truly feel like design partners . One easy way to quickly overcome this challenge is to have the children on the team create both team and personal websites . The children on our team enjoyed making their own websites and felt that was an important part of their design work . Moreover , it is an easy success for the design team : the websites allow immediate feedback of design work , gives the children a sense of ownership , and building a team website gets the members of the team used to working as design partners . 4 ) A team needs team - building activities at the start . There are many competing pressures when starting a new design team and it is easy to focus on getting results . Not doing enough team building the first two months of our design team reduced the effectiveness of the activities we performed . Team building may at first seem to take too much time , especially when faced with research deadlines , but the children and the adults really need to feel comfortable with each other before Cooperative Inquiry methods can work well . We have seen at UMD that hosting an intensive summer design session can work extremely well for team building . We observed that the two - week session at UMD helped prepare their new members of the team ( adult and children ) to become quickly acclimated to the design process . In addition , it is easier to remember people’s names when you see them on consecutive days over a period of time . Weekly design sessions do not offer that same intensity for bonding and acclimation . 5 ) Each session needs to start with a collaborative experience . Team building is an ongoing process . In order to develop relationships that foster creativity and working collaboratively , we have found that it is helpful to talk about our past week together . We now start our design sessions away from the computers and everybody talks and wakes more up ( 9am Saturday morning is early for many of our children and adults ) as the rest of the team members arrive . The UMD team starts their design session with a snack , which serves to rejuvenate the team after a day of school . Since the UBalt team meets in the morning , we provide breakfast snacks , but our collaborative experience has centered on commiserating about the early morning , talking about our respective weeks , and then gathering momentum to switch to working mode . 6 ) The choice of team members matters . One question that arises when first starting a new intergenerational design team may be what kinds of people should be recruited to the team . The type of research projects available and the preferences of the people starting the team may affect this decision . In our case , the NSF grant specified that we would be working with pre - teens and that UBalt graduate students would be chosen in order to introduce them to the research process . In many cases it may be impractical to set up more specific guidelines than these , especially in the beginning , when it may be difficult to find children or graduate students suited to the work . While it seems that the choice of children to make part of the team is irrelevant since research shows that design partnering works even with ‘difficult’ children [ 10 ] , many research teams still systematically select the children for design partnering . Many researchers find teams by pairing with schools but for an on - going design team such as this , the time commitment is greater than a normal school partnership would allow . However , we found that to a certain degree , the choice of children does matter . It is extremely important to have children on the team who can express themselves and listen well to others . Likewise , it is important to have adults on the team who can listen and work well with children ( eliminate teacher - like activities , conduct research and ask questions without being too leading , and not dominate or shy away from brainstorming activities with the children . ) 7 ) A team needs to be interdisciplinary . Generally , the adults on an intergenerational design team should be from various disciplines ( computer science , education , art , and graphic design ) and have different research interests that intersect within common research projects . In an interdisciplinary area such as educational technology , it is especially important to have different voices contributing to the project , We have learned that without as much diversity within the adults on the team , it is more challenging to pursue projects where many aspects are outside the domain of expertise of the team members . 8 ) Eliminate power differentials when possible . The ultimate goal is to have a balanced team , so power differentials of all levels need to be considered and eliminated to function as an intergenerational design team . Adult - children power differences are an obvious target for focusing energies . Both adults and children need to become comfortable having non - traditional roles . However , power differentials between adult members of the team should also be considered especially in the case of faculty and students . 9 ) The working environment of the team needs to be conducive to collaborative design . A physical space can greatly influence the working situation , allowing proximity to team members , while separating different groups . Businesses spend money and time to ensure environments to meet their goals , however , physical environments are not often considered for achieving educational goals [ 14 ] . The UMD team has created a kid - friendly space , open and conducive to collaborative work , both at the computers and on the floor , complete with pillows and beanbags . Our team has struggled with our physical space ; it can be uncomfortable to break away from computers and sit together as a team . We were able to solve many of our problems by using an additional classroom . However , it is important to construct environments that help facilitate teamwork . Children work well sitting on the floor ; physical proximity can encourage listening and respect . A “kid - friendly” room can help children feel at ease in an academic setting . 10 ) Children perceive group dynamics differently than adults We discovered that the adults were very concerned about the success of the group , and most of them still did not feel that the group is succeeding as well as it could . However , we discovered during the end of semester team reflections that the children think that the team is doing well and they are proud to be a part of it . While it can be helpful ( and natural ! ) for the adults to be concerned about how well a new group is doing , it can also be refreshing to hear feedback from the children . Their perspectives are crucial to the success of the team , and if they think that the activities are too hard , that the team needs to work more or be more serious , their ideas and concerns should be addressed . In addition , their feedback about the positive should be celebrated . CONCLUSION It has been shown that children pass through four roles or stages during Cooperative Inquiry research : learner , critic , inventor , and design partner [ 6 ] . In the learner stage , children are absorbing , understanding , and making sense of the process of invention . As critics , they recognize what is good and bad in other inventions . In the inventor stage , children suggest new ideas to be invented that have not necessarily been thought of in that particular way before . Finally , as design partners , children can work with others in the invention process , whether it be with adults or other children , in a collaborative way . However , as newcomers to the design team process , we discovered that not only do the children experience these stages , but adults may as well . Starting a design team can be a daunting task , and the challenges may sometimes lead to questions about the need for working in an intergenerational team . However , despite these questions , we have seen the strengths of this process and continue to grow as a team . We would like to conclude with a final lesson learned from our design team experience : Starting a new design team takes time ! We know we need to celebrate the successes as they come and learn from mistakes , but recognize the process is not instantaneous and that the building process is often slow and challenging . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research could not have been accomplished without the partnership of our 6 child team members , and to them we are grateful . We would also like to acknowledge the generous support of The Aerospace Corporation , NSF ITR , # 0203323 and # 020582 . In addition , we would like to thank Andrew Walther for his comments on this paper . This material is based upon work supported under a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship . Any opinions , findings , conclusions or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author ( s ) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation . REFERENCES 1 . Alborzi H . , Druin A . , Montemayor J . , Sherman L . , Taxen G . , Best J . , Hammer J . , Kruskal A . , Lal A . , Plaisant Schwenn T . , Sumida L . , Wagner R . , Hendler J . Designing StoryRooms : Interactive Storytelling Spaces for Children , in Proceedings of DIS 2000 ( Brooklyn NY , Aug . 2000 ) , ACM Press , 94 - 104 . 2 . Benford , S . , Bederson , B . , Akesson , K . , Bayon , V . , Druin , D . , Hansson , P . , Hourcade , J . , Ingram , R . , Neale , H . , O ' Malley , C . , Simsarian , K . , Stanton , D . , Sundblad , Y . , and Taxen , G . Designing Storytelling Technologies to Encourage Collaboration Between Young Children . Proceedings of CHI 2000 , ( The Hague , Netherlands , April 2000 ) , ACM Press , 556 - 563 . 3 . Bjerknes , G . , Ehn , P . , & Kyng , M . ( Eds . ) Computers and Democracy : A Scandinavian Challenge . Aldershot , UK : Alebury , 1987 . 4 . Druin , A . , Bederson , B . B . , Weeks , A . , Farber , A . , Grosjean , J . , Guha , M . L . , Hourcade , J . P . , Lee , J . , Liao , S . , Reuter , K . , Rose , A . , Takayama , Y . , and Zhang , L . The International Children’s Digital Library : Description and Analysis of First Use . See Technical Report : HCIL - 2003 - 02 , January 2003 ( http : / / www . cs . umd . edu / hcil / pubs / tech - reports . shtml ) 5 . Druin , A . , Revelle , G . , Bederson , B . B . , Hourcade , J . P . , Farber , A . , Lee , J . , & Campbell , D . ( In Press ) A Collaborative Digital Library for Children : A Descriptive Study of Children ' s Collaborative Behaviors and Dialogue . Journal of Computer - Assisted Learning . See Technical Report : HCIL - 2002 - 07 , ( http : / / www . cs . umd . edu / hcil / pubs / tech - reports - shtml ) 6 . Druin , A . & Fast , K . The Child as Learner , Critic , Inventor , and Technology Design Partner : An Analysis of Three Years of Swedish Student Journals . The International Journal for Technology and Design Education , 12 ( 3 ) , ( 2002 ) pp . 189 - 213 . 7 . Druin A . Cooperative Inquiry : Developing New Technologies for Children with Children . Proceedings of CHI ' 99 ( Pittsburgh PA , May 1999 ) , ACM Press , 529 - 599 . 8 . Druin , A . The Role of Children in the Design of New Technology . Behaviour and Information Technology , 21 ( 1 ) , ( 2002 ) pp . 1 - 25 . 9 . Druin , A . , Bederson , B . , Hourcade , J . P . , Sherman , L . , Revelle , G . , Platner , M . , & Weng , S . Designing a Digital Library for Young Children : An Intergenerational Partnership . Proceedings of ACM / IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries ( JCDL 2001 ) . 10 . Gibson , L . , Gregor , P , & Milne , S . Case Study : Designing with ‘Difficult’ Children . Proceedings of Interaction Design and Children . ( 2002 ) Shaker Publishing , pp . 42 - 52 . 11 . Hourcade , J . P . , Bederson , B . B . , Druin , A . , Rose , A . , Farber , A . , Takayama , Y . The International Children’s Digital Library : Viewing Digital Books Online . Proceedings of Interaction Design and Children . ( 2002 ) Shaker Publishing , pp . 125 - 128 . 12 . Inkpen , K . M . Designing Handheld Technologies for Kids . Personal Technologies Journal , 3 ( 1 & 2 ) , ( 1999 ) pp . 81 - 89 . 13 . Kelley , T . , & Littman , J . The Art of Innovation : Lessons in Creativity from IDEO , America’s Leading Design Firm . DoubleDay : New York , 2001 . 14 . Norton , P & Wiburg , K . Teaching with Technology . Wadsworth / Thomson Learning : United States , 1998 . 15 . NPR News Story . Available at http : / / www . npr . org / programs / atc / features / 2002 / nov / chil drenslibrary / index . html 16 . Oosterholt , R . , Kusano , M . , & de Vries , G . Interaction design and human factors support in the development of a personal communicator for children . Proceedings of CHI 1996 ( Vancouver , British Columbia , April 1996 ) , ACM Press , 450 - 457 . 17 . Read , J . , Gregory , P . , MacFarlane , S . , McManus , B . , Gray , P . , & Patel , R . An Investigation of Participatory Design with Children – Informant , Balanced and Facilitated Design . Proceedings of Interaction Design and Children International Workshop . ( 2002 ) Shaker Publishing , pp . 53 - 64