For additional product details , please visit https : / / www . wiley . com / en - us Qualitative Research in Practice : Examples for Discussion and Analysis , 2nd Edition Sharan B . Merriam ( Editor ) , Robin S . Grenier ( Editor ) E - Book ISBN : 978 - 1 - 119 - 45263 - 8 January 2019 $ 46 . 99 Paperback ISBN : 978 - 1 - 119 - 45202 - 7 January 2019 $ 58 . 00 DESCRIPTION A practical introduction to qualitative research across fields and disciplines Qualitative Research in Practice offers a hands - on introduction to qualitative research design , methods , data , and analysis . Designed as a companion text for any course involving qualitative research , this book explores the different types of qualitative studies with relevant examples and analysis by the researchers themselves . The workbook format makes it easy to use in the classroom or the field , and the depth of information makes it a valuable resource for students of social work , psychology , counseling , management , education , health care , or any field in which qualitative research is conducted . While quantitative research is primarily concerned with numerical data , qualitative research methods are more flexible , responsive , and open to contextual information . To a qualitative researcher , a situation is defined by the participants’ perspectives , making it the primary method of inquiry for understanding social phenomena through the lens of experience . This book introduces the essentials of qualitative research , bolstered by expert analysis and discussion that provides deeper insight than a traditional textbook format would allow . • Understand the fundamental nature of qualitative research • Learn how to accurately assess and evaluate qualitative research • Explore qualitative research’s many forms and applications • Gain insight on qualitative research in a variety of fields and disciplines How does one codify an experience ? Is it possible to measure emotion in units ? Qualitative research fills the void where numbers cannot reach . It is the best tool we have for studying the unquantifiable aspects of the human experience , and it is an essential tool in a wide variety of fields . Qualitative Research in Practice provides translatable skills in a practical format to quicken your transition from “learning” to “using . ” ABOUT THE AUTHOR SHARAN B . MERRIAM is a professor emerita of adult and continuing education and qualitative research at the University of Georgia , in Athens . She is the author , coauthor , or editor of more than thirty books , including Qualitative Research : A Guide to Design and Implementation , co - authored with Elizabeth Tisdell . ROBIN S . GRENIER is an associate professor of adult learning at the University of Connecticut in Storrs . She has taught qualitative research courses at the graduate level for over 14 years , along with researching and consulting on qualitative inquiry in education and human resource development . For additional product details , please visit https : / / www . wiley . com / en - us