REVIEW Seeing thought in the future : literate forecasting and forecasting literacy Jose´ Morais . Re´gine Kolinsky Received : 28 February 2021 / Revised : 24 June 2021 / Accepted : 24 June 2021 / Published online : 9 July 2021 (cid:2) The Author ( s ) , under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd . 2021 Abstract Humans have a sense of time continuity . The narration of the past has been materialized through writing , which has condensed their projection into the future in ways that are not immune to the inﬂuence of an ever - changing literacy capacity . In this paper , it is proposed that our thinking of future , its anticipation , prediction and , more appropriately , fore - casting is literacy - based . After presenting ( i . e . , calling to the present ) the individualist and sociocultural cognitive theories that have been developed on thinking the future , we distinguish anticipation and prediction in the quite immediate future , as exempli - ﬁed in the processing of written language . Then , we examine anticipatory , predictive and forecasting aspects of human thinking and reasoning according to two different approaches : the educational and the cognitive . Finally , we comment on the heritage of literacy and scientiﬁc literacy to the future . We consider potential present and future effects of the emergence of a new form of literacy , the digital one , and its technological implementation , namely artiﬁ - cial intelligence . Keywords Literate forecasting (cid:2) Anticipation and prediction (cid:2) Individualist and sociocultural cognitive theories (cid:2) Inequalitarian literacy and cognition (cid:2) Critical thinking and reasoning (cid:2) Future of linguistic and computational literacies Introduction : thinking the future In this paper , it is proposed that our thinking of future , its anticipation , prediction and , more appropriately , forecasting is literacy - based . Consistently with our previous paper ( Seeing thought I—A cultural cognitive tool , Morais & Kolinsky , 2021 ) , we consider literacy as including not only the activities and the outputs of reading and writing but also those that require literacy or are signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by it . These include ( 1 ) scientiﬁc research and knowledge , as there is no science without literacy , ( 2 ) philosophy in the sense of ‘‘wisdom’’ , rational thinking about fundamental ques - tions of existence , and ( 3 ) any invention or creation to which literacy has contributed , like technologies and artistic creations . Literate thinking is the thinking typical of literates , thus during and beyond reading or writing behavior . It is more abstract , more complex , and more productive J . Morais (cid:2) R . Kolinsky ( & ) Unite´ de Recherche en Neurosciences Cognitives ( Unescog ) , Center for Research in Cognition and Neurosciences ( CRCN ) , Universite´ Libre de Bruxelles ( ULB ) , CP 191 , 50 Av . F . Roosevelt , 1050 Brussels , Belgium e - mail : kolinsky . regine @ ulb . be R . Kolinsky Fonds de La Recherche Scientiﬁque - FNRS ( FRS - FNRS ) , Brussels , Belgium 123 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s41809 - 021 - 00085 - 6 ( 0123456789 ( ) . , - volV ) ( 0123456789 ( ) . , - volV ) than non - literate thinking . Nevertheless , it presents different forms and degrees , as literacy skills and competence themselves vary substantially . Literate thinking may refer to an unspeciﬁed time , namely when it involves concepts ; to the past when it is historical ; to the present when it refers ongoing thoughts or facts ; and it may be anticipatory , predic - tive , or forecasting when it concerns the ‘what’ and ‘when’ of upcoming happenings . The concepts that correspond to ways of thinking the future , namely prediction , anticipation , expecta - tion , betting , forecasting , and others , must be speci - ﬁed , distinguished from each other . All concern some future event , that is , an event considered from before the moment it occurred , but each implies a speciﬁc way of thinking it . The most used in cognitive science , anticipation , expectation , and prediction , are distin - guishable along the presumed knowledge one has of the two chief dimensions of the future occurrence , namely its time and its identity . Anticipation presup - poses that one knows , or believes to know , something about the identity and the time of occurrence of the future event ( ‘‘He is now almost ready to open his hearth or even kiss me’’ ) , whilst prediction seems exigent on both its identity and time of occurrence ( ‘‘I am sure he will kiss me now’’ ) , 1 and expectation denotes a waiting , standby , state that may be imprecise about the identity and time of the occurrence ( ‘‘I believe he is preparing the appropriate context to make me court’’ ) . Prediction , from the Latin dicere ( to say ) , tends to imply , but not necessarily , a literacy - marked statement . In science , predictions are derived from previous knowledge and hypotheses about still unan - swered questions when these are addressed in the framework of a concrete situation or manipulation . In much less speciﬁed and constrained situations , such as games , people do not predict , they bet . In contrast , in natural situations susceptible to large variation , for example sunning or raining , and before human social events such as elections or market oscillations , forecasting is a more appropriate concept than predicting . Forecasting is meant to designate a speciﬁc way of making predictions or anticipations that is typical of rational thinking , hence of literacy : the future is forecasted as the likely succession to past and present events , as the continuation of a trend , or , on the contrary , as a rupture , a revolution , a new age . In either of these cases , sophisticated forecasts follow some sort of trend analysis that requires rational thinking and a capacity of working memory ( WM ) highly dependent on literacy . Prediction involves preparing for a speciﬁc event . Contrary to prediction , anticipation may admit the occurrence of a similar or related event . Contrary to expectation , anticipation is not passive : it involves preparing and , if possible , contributing to the occur - rence of a set of events . All three , prediction , expectation and anticipation may concern literate information or be inﬂuenced by literacy . In cognitive science , as we will discuss in this paper , the concept of predictive processing and the theories based on it have taken great importance in the last decade . Prediction concerns ‘‘what to expect next , in space or in time’’ ( Clark , 2013 , p . 184 ) . At the same time , anticipation has been downgraded to a weaker role while in fact it annunciates identiﬁcation . In contrast , expectation , as we will see below , has been upgraded to a major role in a recent model of cultural cognition ( cf . Veissie ` re et al . , 2020 ) . Still , in the title of this paper , we privilege forecasting , even if most of the time we use the three other concepts , expectation , prediction , and anticipa - tion , only because these are much more common in the cognitive literature . Forecasting is , in its most sophis - ticated form , a literate cognitive process enabling us to trace and identify not just a single future event but the dynamics of a sequence of interrelated events . 2 Having attempted a comparative examination of future - oriented concepts , we must acknowledge that all of them belong to a broader form of knowledge that has been named autonoetic consciousness 3 ( Ingvar , 1985 ; Tulving , 1985 ) . This is the capacity of repre - senting and re - representing in memory events that have occurred in the past , are occurring presently , or could occur in the future . Contrary to the former two , 1 We used ‘‘seems’’ because it is possible to use the verb ‘‘predict’’ in the present , or even the past tense , when referring to something that already happened . For example , in ‘‘I pre - dict ( ed ) that she passed the test’’ , ‘‘she’’ designates someone who has actually passed it but the speaker has still not been informed ( for a detailed approach , see Cariani , 2020 ) . 2 Prospecting shares the latter characteristic with forecast , but , contrary to this , it does not specify a target ; it rather concerns the exploratory process of reducing uncertainty to a small set of potential outcomes . 3 We are grateful to a Reviewer who called our attention to this concept . 123 230 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 knowledge of future events is not real knowledge , but more precisely knowledge of simulated events still to come , or not . It is possible to imagine and represent them in detail , and for this reason they are called memories of the future . That form of consciousness is autonoetic because it concerns episodic memory , not semantic ( noetic ) consciousness . In this introduction to the future - oriented concepts , it is also worth recalling a related philosophical and scientiﬁc concept , old of about two and a half millennia , born with the Greeks and coined in Latin conatus , effort , impulse , from the verb conor . In Hobbes’ physical theory , the conatus is the beginning of movement , inclination in a particular direction ( Jesseph , 2010 ) . For human body’s move - ments , Hobbes’ explanation is mental : the conatus at the origin of motion is the will , itself determined by the emotions ( Pietarinen , 2000 ) . To Spinoza , in contrast , the conatus is not just the beginning of a movement , it is dynamic and its power changes as a function of activity ( Allison , 1975 ) . The conatus is a materialist concept , it is not different in the human and nature , given that the former is part of the latter . The conatus is the effort to persist in its being and it exists in everything ( Spinoza , 1677 , Ethics , Part III , Proposi - tion VI ) . Thus , to Spinoza , human happiness results from the capacity to preserve itself . Spinoza’s conatus was interpreted by Damasio ( 2003 ) as an effort toward perfection . However , given that misfortune is probably a human experience as common as happiness , the crucial question is why human efforts so often fail . The conatus is necessarily an individualist concept . Assuming that the individual effort is consequent or attempts to be so , two non - incompatible explanations remain : either the biolog - ical infrastructure of the conatus is weakened , perhaps damaged , or the individual conatus is not the only determinant of happiness , and a dominant sociocul - tural ‘‘conatus’’ is impoverishing many of the indi - vidual ones . Whatever our language , scientiﬁc or philosophical , and our desires , ‘‘we’’ is not reducible to a single ‘‘I’’ , the ‘‘I’’ common to all individuals . Through literate forecasting we are ‘‘seeing’’ our future and writing it in advance . The relation of cognitive science with prediction is twofold : it makes testable predictions on cognitive processes and it examines how prediction contributes to cognition . Prediction in cognitive science Cognitive science has developed since the 1980’s under the inﬂuence of three epistemic theories , namely informational encapsulation , predictive coding , and enactivism . All concern the individual and make abstraction of the sociocultural dynamics . This dynamic , in contrast , should be the main vector of a theory which , while necessarily involving the indi - viduals , describes , and accounts for , the present cognitive inequalities among them . A sociocultural theory of unequal cognition has not yet been formulated . The ‘‘individualist’’ theories Fodor’s ( 1983 ) theory of modularity is based on the idea that the structure of behavior is derived from the structure of the mind , needless to say of the individual mind , namely the one that all of those who read this paper have , a sort of archetypal mind which is the unacknowledged projection of the literates’ mind . Although Fodor’s classic book is called The modular - ity of mind , it is not the whole mind that is modular . The postulated mind’s structure includes the input system that is in charge of perception and is informa - tionally encapsulated from top - down inﬂuences , which presupposes that in the mind there is a down and a top , perception below and thinking above . This theory was a radical change as it has been preceded , as noted by Fodor himself , by the 1940s and 50s cognitive psychologists’ idea that perceptual integra - tion would be reﬂexive . To Fodor , however , the ability to perform inference - like operations is compatible with encapsulation , it does not imply cognitive penetrability by information from outside the module . Later , encapsulation would be contested by the connectionist computational modelling of perception , but again , as in the Fodorian perspective the input systems may be computationally elaborated , and such modelling is thus compatible with encapsulation . More recently , some proponents of the predictive coding theory , such as Hohwy ( 2013 ) admitted partial encapsulation of the processes involved in both perception and action . To him , ‘‘a kind of partially segregated architecture is beneﬁcial for perceptual inference’’ ( p . 152 ) . To illustrate it , Hohwy used a metaphor , ‘‘perception is a courtroom’’ : to trust the witnesses’ evidence , they must be independent , not to 123 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 231 chat , not to meet the defendant , and both the judge and the jury must be impartial , in other words , all of these actors are strictly objective and even the Penal Code is independent of whatever ideology and moral . Discarding sociocultural reality , Hohwy ( 2013 ) proposed that the ideal courtroom reality also ‘‘holds for reality testing in the brain’’ and that the ‘‘different sources of evidence need to be independent witnesses’’ ( p . 152 ) : ‘‘if the evidence from one sensory source ( for example hearing ) , is inﬂuenced by the evidence from another source ( for example , vision ) , then what you hear should not be used as a guide to reality testing’’ ( p . 153 ) . Yet , as the reality is multidimensional ( spatial , temporal … ) and the relation with it is not just multisensorial but also contextual and intentional ( retracting from , adapting to , changing it ) , the real testing must be performed by the whole cognitive system , which includes perception but is not limited to this nor to a single perceptual modality . In the language domain , speech recognition involves both hearing and vision , as demonstrated by the McGurk effect , namely the mutual impact of seeing lips and hearing verbal sounds , or , as McGurk and MacDonald ( 1976 ) coined it , ‘‘Hearing lips and seeing voices’’ . And the recognition of an auditorily presented word ( but not of a pseudo - word ) is impacted by the knowledge of its orthographic pattern , as Ziegler and Ferrand ( 1998 ) demonstrated . While the former effect mobilizes both audition and vision ( in this case , of the lips ) , the latter phenomenon shows that auditory word processing is permeable , not by another sense ( vision ) , but in fact by a mental representation of spelling . Consistently , listening to spoken words activates the visual word form area ( usually activated by written strings , Cohen et al . , 2000 ) , reﬂecting the activation of spelling representations by spoken words . This has been observed in both literate ( but not illiterate ) adults ( Dehaene et al . , 2010 ) and in children after three years of learning to read ( Monzalvo & Dehaene - Lambertz , 2013 ) . All these effects are incompatible both with a view of perception based on a set of insulated senses and with a view of cognition that does not permeate perception . The interactive theory can integrate , in principle , the idea that cognition ( perception included ) proceeds through steps of error reduction . This idea is central to the predictive coding framework , according to which our cognitive system is constantly generating and updating a mental model of the environment . The model is used to generate predictions of sensory input that are compared to actual sensory input . This results in prediction errors that are then used to update and revise the mental model ( for a review , see e . g . , Clark , 2013 ) . Under this view , successful representation of the perceptual world depends upon canceling out or at least minimizing the discrepancy between prediction and sensory input ( i . e . , prediction error ) . Thus , prediction error minimization ( henceforth , PEM ) would intervene , under different forms , in all mental processes that aim for a goal and would proceed by steps . The main questions raised by PEM do not concern error minimization but what ‘‘predictive’’ precisely means through the potential diversity of protagonists , situations , and outcomes : in particular , what are the subjects and objects of the predictive activity , whether and when its processes are conscious , unconscious or both , how the prediction coordinates with previous and post evaluation , and what can be the effects of potential remaining deviations from the target . Among the individualist theories of cognition , enactivism aims to explain individual cognition and its development through the subject’s constant activity in the world . This is physical and biological , but a few versions of this theory extended it to the exchanges with the others in their common social milieu , thus to social factors . The disturbing question raised against ‘‘intimate’’ views of the subject’s mind was ‘‘Where’s the action ? ’’ , asking for a ‘‘pragmatic turn’’ ( Engel et al . , 2013 ) . While both informational encapsulation and PEM focused on internal events within the cognitive structure , enactivism gets out of mind isolationism to explain it as an outcome of its own constant activity and interaction with the external world . What most of the enactivist approaches missed was to answer a further question : what is the external world ? The start for the enactivist approaches was given by Varela et al . ( 1997 ) who reminded cognitive scientists that there is no solipsist mind 4 nor even a self - contemplative mind , and that human cognition , its 4 In philosophy , solipsism is ‘‘an extreme form of subjective idealism that denies that the human mind has any valid ground for believing in the existence of anything but itself’’ . It is ‘‘presented as a solution of the problem of explaining human knowledge of the external world’’ , and ‘‘is generally regarded as a reductio ad absurdum’’ ( Encyclopaedia Britannica ) . 123 232 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 structures and functions , are generated by the actions it commands in appropriate responses to the world . We may infer from it that the world makes cognition through the needs and challenges it confronts the human being , who , in return , acting in and on the world , changes it in ways that may , in principle , render cognition more adaptive . As time goes by , neither remains the same . Paraphrasing Varela et al . , ( 1997 ) and Engel et al . , ( 2013 , p . 202 ) deﬁned cognition as ‘‘the capacity of generating structure by action , that is , of ‘enacting’ a world . ’’ What is missing in the deﬁnition is that , with or without awareness , world’s changes also enact cognition . Clark and Chalmers ( 1998 ) argued for the concept and the real existence of an ‘‘extended mind’’ . Asking ‘‘where does the mind stop and the rest of the world begin ? ’’ , they prone ‘‘an active externalism , based on the active role of the environment in driving cognitive processes’’ ( p . 7 ) . They recall the tendency of ‘‘human reasoners to lean heavily on environmental supports’’ and alert for the fact that ‘‘ epistemic actions alter the world so as to aide and augment cognitive processes’’ ( p . 8 ) , ‘‘creating a coupled system that can be seen as a cognitive system in its own right’’ ( p . 9 ) . To illustrate that ‘‘cognitive processes are extended into the world’’ , they invite us to ‘‘think of a group of people brainstorming around a table , or a philosopher who thinks best by writing , developing her ideas as she goes . ’’ ( p . 11 ) . To them , ‘‘extended cognition is a core cognitive process , not an add - on extra’’ ( p . 12 ) , a notebook plays the same role as biological memory , ‘‘it just happens that ( its ) information lies beyond the skin’’ ( p . 13 ) . ‘‘What makes some information count as a belief is the role it plays’’ ( p . 14 ) ; indeed , one’s ‘‘internal processes’’ and his or her ‘‘notebook consti - tute a single cognitive system’’ ( … ) ‘‘What of the amnesic villagers in One Hundred Years of Solitude , who forget the names for everything and so hang labels everywhere ? ’’ ( p . 16 ) . Writing as a form of preserving memory and extending thinking through time , nothing more . However , as we will see below , other enactivists attributed literacy a more creative and glorious role . It is the cognitive role of language that Clark and Chalmers ( 1998 ) emphasize : ‘‘Without language , we might be more akin to discrete Cartesian ‘inner’ minds , in which high - level cognition relies largely on internal resources . But the advent of language has allowed us to spread this burden into the world . ( … ) it may be that the intellectual explosion in recent evolutionary time is due as much to this linguisti - cally - enabled extension of cognition as to any inde - pendent development in our inner cognitive resources . ’’ ( p . 18 ) . We share the idea that some territories of each individual mind also belong to the mind of others . Understanding the networks of shared minds imply to relinquish the ‘‘I’’ or ‘‘my mind’’ perspective and attempt to draw an objective description of how historical socio - technological conditions , in a given cultural context , determine particular patterns of human minds overlapping . One may better understand oneself by taking such an outside perspective , and there is always a small part of the mind ( introspec - tively felt as huge ) that gets out of the shared mind : what , aside us , nobody knows . Nevertheless , Clark and Chalmers’ view remains an individual perspective as while they admit that part of a singular mind ( the ‘‘I’’ ) extends into artefacts or other humans , they are far from evoking a ‘‘mind’’ view from the whole ( a well - deﬁned collectivity such as a nation , or even the entire humanity ) . Cognitive scientists are not objective informers of such wholes , so that their viewpoints remain partial and mostly representative of their own role and social position . Notwithstanding , they could reduce their partiality by avoiding the ‘‘informational encapsula - tion’’ typical of their background , by stretching links with the sociocultural sciences , and by making a self - analysis of their own status and role in society . We cannot but recognize that ( 1 ) the mental states are individuated – it is an important task to study how they are individuated , and ( 2 ) without a physical and a sociocultural environment , the individual’s ‘‘mind’’ would have just never existed or would be dramati - cally different . The very idea that the individual mind expands or extends is unfortunate , as these verbs presuppose the previous existence , or at least the previous agency , of a ‘‘mind’’ that phagocytes the environment and enriches its ‘‘cognitive capital’’ . Hence , one may accept the proposal that cognition is ‘‘enactive’’ , that is , a ‘‘skillful activity that involves ongoing interaction with the external world’’ ( Engel et al . , 2013 , p . 202 ) . Other authors , among whom Menary ( 2016 ) , called ‘‘pragmatic’’ the approach of cognition founded on two main principles : 1 . Thinking is structured by the interactions of an organism with its environment : the 123 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 233 organism affects as well as reﬂects the environment and such interactions are experiences for the organ - ism ; the received signals may be interpreted inten - tionally or just trigger a behavioural response . 2 . Cognition develops throughout life via exploratory inferences , active and fallible , which are used to inquiry or problem solving when the organism expe - riences doubt ; they can result from abductive reason - ing and take a predictive form . Given their reciprocal inﬂuences , the organism and its immediate environ - ment coevolve for some time . By learning from success and error , the organism stores efﬁcient knowledge of regularities , and uses it for subsequent expectations , anticipations , and predictions . Who , or which structure , adapts to , and interacts with , the environment ? Menary ( p . 228 ) seems to approve Friston and Stephan ( 2007 , p . 433 ) ’s state - ment that ‘‘sustained exposure to environmental inputs causes the internal structure of the brain to recapitulate the causal structure of those inputs’’ . From it Friston and Stephan inferred the ability of efﬁcient perceptual inference . Taken as such , this claim attributes the brain not only the ability to recapitulate but also of deciding to recapitulate . We are used to this abdication of our cognitive , willing and agency powers , but we cannot inhibit reacting sometimes to it . We will not attempt here to enunciate the reasons of this brain’s deiﬁcation nor to identify what else in us has been dethroned by the brain ( but see further comments in B . 2 ) . We just leave here one doubt : If , before inevitable deaths , one could let a living child’s brain sit in a schoolroom , or a living cognitivist’s brain sit in a library , both linked to sensory and motor systems , would the former be able to learn to read and the latter to write a paper on the experiment ? If what we call our ‘‘self’’ were some - thing that remains in our brain after being separated from our body and our praxis , it would become immediately a different self . The child might not want to be able to read and the cognitivist to write papers again . To have memories is not the same as to have a history , and projects , if they are conceived in some brain structures , are nurtured by what we had lived and sometimes are precipitated . The self is just that but is determinant . The main reason why our brain cannot be the guide of our mental life and of our praxis lies in its plasticity . What we think , want , predict , or forecast and what we do changes the brain . It is not the brain that changes itself even if we could not think and do anything without the brain . And this is not speciﬁc to humans ; it is the case of all animals that have a brain . We humans have exploited the brain plasticity to make it more efﬁcient and thus even more plastic through our activities which , even when they are individual , are the accomplishment of sociocultural practices . It is not humans that change the world , but human societies . And the world these create changes the individuals’ mental capacities , and ultimately their brains . Cogni - tive and neurocognitive sciences balk to accept that they are human social sciences . Enactivist approaches do recognize the inﬂuence of sociocultural factors but persist attributing the major role to the individual . Menary ( 2016 , p . 229 ) referred the role of ‘‘repre - sentational systems that embody knowledge ( writing systems , number systems , etc . ) as well as skills and methods for training and teaching new skills’’ , but this recognition was quite modest and did not explicitly recognize the huge direct and indirect impacts that , for example , literacy ( here reduced to writing systems ) has on cognition , including on thinking and reasoning . Almost all cognitive scientists disdained even the possibility that literacy contributes dramatically to inductive , deductive , and possibly abductive reason - ing ( cf . the ﬁrst of Morais & Kolinsky’s , 2021 twin papers ) . Below , we will review data showing that low literates are very poor predictors during reading , and it is revealing that only a few studies have raised the same question for this capacity in the illiterates’ processing of spoken language , as we shall discuss later . Similarly , many cognitive scientists still ignore that literacy contributes strongly to the development of WM ( cf . Demoulin & Kolinsky , 2016 ; Kolinsky et al . , 2020 ) . Menary’s ( 2016 ) enactivist or pragmatic approach is only partly individualist as it recognizes an impor - tant role of the sociocultural context . This role would have appeared much stronger to him if he had a more acute and precise view of what ‘‘sociocultural’’ recovers . This concept includes—to the risk of seeming paradoxical – the huge and progressively increasing individual differences that since the inven - tion of writing characterize human societies . Menary ( 2016 , p . 232 ) criticized the following Hohwy’s ( 2013 , p . 238 ) individualist and neurological comment on predictive processing : ‘‘Because the brain is isolated behind the veil of sensory input , it is then advanta - geous for it to devise ways of optimizing the information channel from the world to the senses . ’’ 123 234 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 ( … ) ‘‘This is a very simple point : through active inference the brain can minimize prediction error , not only by changing the sensory input ( … ) , but also by increasing the precision of the sensory input . ’’ To Menary , what fails in Hohwy’s reasoning is the isolation of the brain . For sure , the skull is not enough to isolate the brains , but in an unequal society the educated and literate brains belonging to the upper classes are isolated , culturally and physically , from the uneducated and subliterates’ brains belonging to the lower classes . Menary and those who think like him are blind to those differences when they portray the cognitively developed mind and brain , representative of the upper classes . Menary ( 2016 , p . 232 ) after citing Engel et al . , ( 2013 , p . 202 ) , according to whom the pragmatic turn takes cognition as ‘‘a skillful activity that involves ongoing interaction with the external world’’ , noted that this is at odds with Hohwy’s ( 2013 , p . 238 ) ‘‘notion that cognition is based on a skull - based prediction error mechanism that is only indirectly connected to its environment’’ . For the enactivists ( Menary , p . 229 ) , instead , the ‘‘modern humans are born into a highly structured cognitive niche’’ . The pragmatists are also interactionists and integrationists , so to them ‘‘the capacities we acquire ( … ) during the extended developmental period in human ontogeny are layered over , but continuous with , those basic evolutionary endowments . ’’ ( Menary , p . 234 ) . Again , what Menary has forgotten is that , during both periods and as a matter of fact since before birth and for exclusively sociocultural reasons ( which include economy and politics ) , there are at the extremes of the humanity two quite different cognitions , one maximally developed , the other underdeveloped . It is totally unfair to depict only the former . How many cognitive scientists do lean over the other ? All those— scientists or not—who proﬁt from privileged cognition are collectively responsible for the permanence and radicalization of the distance between the two extreme cognitions . Having discussed above the ‘‘individualist’’ theo - ries , it is worth noting that , if they are individualist in the sense of focusing on a prototypical individual , the high - level ‘‘cognitive mind’’ if not the cognitive scientist’s one , they are anti - individualist because they completely ignore the huge cognitive differences between individuals . That cognitive self is most of the time asocial and sometimes ahistorical . Most cognitive scientists have and are displaying a portrait of the cognitive mind that is a portrait of the individual self . The sociocultural theories of cognition Developing a collectivist theory , in opposition to the ‘‘individualist’’ ones , would incur into the kind of mistake noted above . If the ‘‘I’’ is not appropriate as representative of the billions of actual Is , the ‘‘We all’’ is also completely unreal . Indeed , a small part of humanity lives , the large majority survives . The mind created by cognitive science is like a community of Robinsons communicating among them , mostly by writing and reading papers , and speaking in rare occasions to Friday , a wild but dedicated servant . Among the cognitive scientists that were lucky not to end up in the island of individualism , two , Michael Tomasello and Merlin Donald , adopted a clear sociocultural stance . The ﬁrst ( cf . Tomasello et al . , 1993 ) examined human cultural learning and its cognitive products well before the invention of writing and developed three concepts of agent : the intentional agent , involved in imitative learning ( of other agents ) , the mental agent , capable of alternating / coordinating perspective - taking , thus a form of external intersub - jectivity ( with other agents ) , and the reﬂective agent , capable of integrating the others agents’ perspectives in a form of internal intersubjectivity . In his Natural history of human thinking , Tomasello ( 2014 ) dedi - cated a little less than a page to comment on the idea that in the present world ‘‘science and mathematics are simply not possible without special forms of socially constructed conventions , namely , those in written form , that developed over historical time in Western culture’’ ( forgetting the old Eastern culture ) . He admitted that ‘‘written language’’ would make certain forms of reasoning ‘‘more accessible’’ and is assertive when saying that it ‘‘greatly facilitates ( italics ours ) metalinguistic thinking and the possibility to analyze , criticize and evaluate ( … ) linguistic communication’’ ( p . 142 ) . He thus reduced literacy to written forms and language and made no reference to the huge individual cognitive differences . The second ( cf . Donald , 1993 ) was concerned by humans temporally closer to us and was among the former cognitive scientists to elaborate on the cogni - tive effects of a main sociocultural cognitive 123 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 235 invention , writing , and the derived cognitive expertise , literacy , which allowed most human societies to reach through the last thousands of years the present level of cognitive development . It is worth adding that the database of those authors and others overﬂows cog - nitive science stricto sensu and involves paleontology , anthropology , linguistics , and neuroscience . Donald , like Tomasello , distinguished three concepts , but related to representation systems : mimetic skill , language , and external symbols . These not only allow to represent language , to render it complex and abstract , but in addition provide an external and permanent memory , and contribute to develop princi - ples and formal systems for logic and reasoning . If writing is not the mother of modern cognition , it is at least its midwife . Yet something important is still missing in that narrative . Both Tomasello and Donald overlooked the huge cognitive inequalities among individuals . Toma - sello attributed a prominent role to collective inten - tionality , but in the way of a happy love story that ignores competition , dominance , and exploitation . Donald ( 2000 ) denounced the myth of the ‘‘isolated mind’’ , but he and others ( as we will discuss further on ) replaced it with the myth of the universal and paradigmatic literate mind of which all real minds are replicas . The myth of the paradigmatic and nearly universal literate mind To Donald ( 2000 , p . 22 ) , ‘‘the modern mind depends upon a unique symbiosis of brain and culture and in this context traditional solipsism is unworkable’’ , and as literacy is crucial and central to culture , Donald derives from it the synthesized claim ‘‘The inﬂuence of culture on cognitive architecture : The ‘literacy brain’ . ’’ The literacy systems are ‘‘fully ‘installed’ through the functional capture of available brain resources’’ , and so ‘‘in any normal childhood in a literate society , the child’s brain must acquire many similar interconnected component subsystems’’ ( p . 23 ) . This is an epic story but is fundamentally misleading because only a small proportion of the members of the ‘‘literate society’’ are skilled literates and have therefore acquired such wonderful ‘‘inter - connected component structures’’ . Scientists and aca - demics like Donald live in literate sectors of the human societies , and both illiteracy and unskilled literacy ( ‘‘subliteracy’’ ) fall in the blind spot of their ‘‘literacy brains’’ . Merlin Donald is not an isolated case ; taking the literacy level of their own community for the literacy level of the world , or at least of their own country , is rather the rule among highly literates . Since around 50 years , the UNESCO reports announce that only less than 10 % of the people in the world , and less than 1 % in the developed countries , are unable to read ( one never mentions writing ) a short and simple sentence and therefore , instead of saying that these are fully illiterate , conclude only that they are not literate . The elites of any unequal society convince the non - elites and themselves that ‘‘this is the best of all possible worlds’’ , and so Candide says to Pangloss ‘‘let us cultivate our garden’’ ( Voltaire , 1759 ; translation ours ) . Below we play the game of assuming the false as true , namely that in our developed countries every - body is a skilled literate , to confront the ideas of two enactivists , Richard Menary and Regina Fabry , who give literacy a major role in cognition but disagree on the role one must attribute to PEM in our cognitive functioning . The former ( cf . Menary , 2007 ) has since long claimed that ‘‘writing transforms our cognitive abilities’’ ; in the ‘‘perspective of cognitive integration : completing a complex cognitive , or mental , task is enabled by a coordinated interaction between neural processes , bodily processes and manipulating written sentences’’ ( p . 621 ) . This is quite typical of what we did for ourselves and you , as reader , are doing now : respectively , to try to explain and to fully understand that sentence , why neural processes ? which bodily processes ? what do we exactly do when we manipulate written sentences ? And where in us : in the mind , in the brain ? or in the sentence itself ? The paper is a self - guided dialogue with Roy Harris , more precisely with Harris ( 2000 ) ’s book titled Rethinking writing , and Menary’s conclusion is that ‘‘we think by writing’’ ( p . 631 ) . This reﬂects very well what scientists do when they write papers and even when they just think , because then they are already writing , preferentially in their mind , we presume , because in the brain it could be more difﬁcult to erase and rewrite a sentence . Fabry ( 2015 ) was presented as a Commentary on Menary’s previous papers . It subscribes , in the Abstract , ‘‘to enculturation as a guiding principle for the development of genuinely human cognitive capac - ities’’ , and its speciﬁc purpose is that ‘‘the predictive 123 236 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 processing framework can reﬁne and enrich important assumptions made by the theory of cognitive integra - tion’’ , so that she calls the new integrative framework ‘‘encultured predictive processing’’ ( EPP ) . To Fabry , the inferential process is accomplished by neural algorithms , the aim being to reduce the discrepancy between predictions and the sensory input , viz . prediction error minimization ( PEM ) . The human brain is plastic . Neuronal reuse allows learning driven plasticity ( LDP ) , producing structural and functional changes in the brain . The ventral occipito - temporal region ( vOT ) is recycled during literacy acquisition . Fabry quotes Price and Devlin ( 2011 , p . 248 ) : ‘‘In pre - literates , vOT activation is low because orthographic inputs do not trigger appropriate representations in phonological or semantic areas and therefore there are no top - down inﬂuences [ … ] . In early stages of learning to read , vOT activation is high because - top - down predictions are engaged imprecisely and it takes longer for the system to suppress prediction errors and identify the word [ … ] . In skilled readers , vOT activation declines because learning improves the predictions , which explain prediction error efﬁciently [ … ] ’’ . On that precise issue , this account forgets that automaticity characterizes skilled reading , at least for the visual level of processing and for the derivation of word phonology and semantics from its spelling . Errors may occur as a consequence of automatic actions , namely in unusual context , but to predict automatism is a nonsense . Low - level reading process - ing in skilled readers , whenever it is automatic , dispenses prediction . Replying to Fabry , Menary ( 2015 ) reduced the role of predictive processing and argued that processes at the sub - personal level cannot drive the sociocultural innovations that feed encul - tured cognition . An ‘‘isolated brain’’ cannot push EEP ( cognition cannot be isolated from the environment ) nor , obviously , new normative pattern practices ( NPP ) over many generations . Menary ( p . 7 , note 9 ) also argued that ‘‘the processing needs of the brain ( cannot dictate ) the evolutionary path that culture must take . ’’ We do agree . We return to the triad PEM - brain - cognition to leave here a brief appreciation : PEM is certainly not the unique process , the brain is certainly not the unique agent , and the universal cognitive model based on PEM and the brain is certainly inappropriate . Thinking through other minds Thinking through other minds ( TTOM ) is the title of a paper by Veissie ` re et al . ( 2020 ) . TTOM is as real as TOM ( thinking on mind , ours , or others’ ones ) but in most of our life we are less aware that we think what others think and see the world with the others’ eyes . As cultural beings , beyond thinking in singular situations , we are rarely aware that we also think what we heard or ‘‘saw’’ others thinking . Veissie ` re et al . , ( 2020 , pp . 7 – 8 ) thus invite us to consider the extent to which cognition is ‘‘collective’’ and ‘‘cooperative’’ . They criticize the extreme ‘‘embodied cognition’’ perspec - tive of radical enactivists ( cf . Hutto & Myin , 2017 ) , who ‘‘argue that basic cognition does not entail any kind of mental content’’ , at least out of situations involving language . On the opposite side , Veissie ` re et al . , ( 2020 , pp . 10 – 11 ) distinguish the ‘‘Machiavel - lian’’ ( apud Pinker , 1999 ) , who proposed that human mindreading ( TOM ) ‘‘evolved through a cognitive arms - race through cheaters’’ , and the mutualists ( e . g . , Tomasello , 2014 ) and other cultural intelligence theorists ( e . g . , Mercier & Sperber , 2017 ) who empha - size the role of cooperation . The most tender is Hrdy ( 2011 ) ’s cooperative breeding hypothesis that min - dreading ‘‘evolved in the pre - Sapiens lineage as a result of a ‘cuteness - and - care’ arms race’’ favored by selection ( Veissie ` re et al . , p . 12 , who still mention other theories ) . The TTOM proposed by Veissie ` re et al . ( 2020 ) relies on ‘‘implicit cultural learning’’ ( p . 13 ) and dismisses as false the dichotomy between internalist and externalist positions . It is based on the idea that ‘‘epistemic resources arise naturally from cultural niche construction when , and only when , I share an environment with other ‘creatures like me’ . ’’ ( p . 14 ) . We do share this idea . Veissie ` re et al . envision enculturation as supported by an evolution of cogni - tive capacities , namely of selective attention , enabling selective actions—they call cultural affordances — aiming at building their local world ( p . 15 ) . Shared expectations modulate salience , namely the expected information gain . Veissie ` re et al . call TTOM these expectations and the process of leveraging them ( p . 16 ) . Expectation is a large concept as it includes actions , both those unnoticed and those consciously held and effortful ( pp . 17 – 18 ) . The word ‘‘prediction’’ is only used by Veissie ` re et al . much later , starting on p . 32 , when they begin explaining the Free Energy 123 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 237 Principle , a generative model ( generative in the sense of making predictions ) applied to individual cogni - tion : ‘‘inference and learning would rest on minimiz - ing the brain’s free energy , as deﬁned in statistical physics’’ ( Friston , 2005 , p . 815 ; see also Friston , 2010 ; Friston & Kiebel , 2009 ; Friston et al . , 2006 ) . But can individual cognition be adequately understood if both cognition and the individual are cultural products ? This will be the central topic of the next section . The main question raised by the Veissie ` re et al . ’s approach of TTOM is rather concerned with making backward or past - time scientiﬁc predictions about our own cultural and cognitive generation and about our ancestors’ expectations . Iterative reductionism : from the human to cognition , from cognition to prediction The belief that humans process upcoming information in a systematically predictive way has generated a bias to support a cognitive theory that not only became dominant in the last decade but aims to explain human cognition as a whole . In this globalizing theory , the predictive subject has a double if not a triple identity . To Clark ( 2013 , Abstract ) , ‘‘ brains ( … ) are essentially prediction machines ( … ) bundles of cells that support perception and action by constantly attempting to match incoming sensory inputs with top - down expec - tations or predictions’’ , and ‘‘this ‘hierarchical pre - diction machine’ approach ( … ) offers the best clue yet to the shape of a uniﬁed science of mind and action . ’’ All three , brain , machine , mind , are perhaps the same subject viewed from three perspectives , neurological , technological , and philosophical . At the end of the Abstract , Clark calls for ‘‘a more general vision of mind , experience , and agency . ’’ In the paper he endorsed the claim of a British psychiatrist and cyberneticist , W . Ross Ashby , who wrote that ‘‘The whole function of the brain is summed up : error correction’’ , and Clark added : ‘‘there is now increasing reason to believe that Ashby’s ( … ) statement is correct’’ . However , can error correction be the whole func - tion of the brain ? If we attribute the brain that function and power , any claim must be wrong , including Mr . Ashby’s sentence : if we are machines that perpetually correct errors , then nothing can be true . After all , what does error mean ? How and when do we know an error is truly an error ? Our adaptation to the world , as animal species , has consisted in changing the world , and human survival and history gives testimony of both appropriate and inappropriate actions . A huge error , not of a particular author or thinker , but of the whole cognitive science , was the Fodorian - like encap - sulation into the ‘‘cognitive system’’ – brain or mind , for this matter , is irrelevant . Falling in a new encapsulation , now into ‘‘error prediction’’ , rather than taking this as one important computational capacity , would just be error perseveration . In his Conclusions : Toward a grand uniﬁed theory of the mind ? , Clark ( 2013 , p . 200 ) reiterated that the ‘‘action - oriented predictive processing models’’ comes close to ‘‘a uniﬁed science of mind , brain and action . ’’ We are not so enthusiastic . The triad ‘‘mind - brain - action’’ does not exist , does not live , it cannot characterize the human being in any society , in any time , nor what the human being can be through times and societies . That ‘‘mind - brain - action’’ is asocial , a - cultural , without purpose or will . Life from birth to death is absent from that triad . Action , the latter of the triad , is an empty word , it does not condense what life is . We believe that what is needed is neither a theory of the mind nor a theory at all , but to understand how human beings in their great diversity ( the cognitive scientists included , but not privileged ) mentalize what they know , think , or ignore—and why—about their own and the others’ cognitive capacities , representa - tions , and projects . To study only the highly literate and rational ‘‘minds’’ is unfortunately expected , and predictable , in inequal , elitist societies , but taking them as representative of a universal human being is wrong both ethically and epistemologically . Forecast - ing cognitivists ( and politics , educators , economists , health scientists , etc . ) should also focus on the ways in which human societies are changing or might change and reﬂect on the impact these changes have on cognitive capacities and the ways these are used . Moreover—not of the least importance— , we should not study human cognition as if cognition were encapsulated . Even the most radical cognitivists certainly know that we are not only rational , neural , and computational : we are also irrational , visceral or humoral , conjectural and prone to miscalculation . The isolationism and reductivism of cognitive science do not permit the progress of human knowledge . A more accurate vision of mind , experience , and agency requires a scientiﬁc approach that understands 123 238 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 cognition in its relations with , origins in , and effects on , ecosystems , cultures , social relations , institutions , ideologies , political acts , affects , emotions , moral and beauty judgments , and not of the lesser importance , desires , and wills . In the absence of such a compre - hensive attempt , not looking beyond cognition and not admitting that all science is literacy - originated and bounded , 5 cognitive science will dance in the arms of masked errors and truths . Yet should we believe science did not predate literacy ? We think so . There is no indication from anthropological studies that preliterate cultures had developed something resembling what we call science . Furthermore , how could science develop in societies that did not distinguish culture from nature ? As argued by Descola ( 2005 , pp . 107 – 112 ) , the scientiﬁc revolution only occurred and the distinction between nature and humanhood as well as the study of nature as a distinct ontological domain were only recognized in the seventeenth century , excepting by Spinoza . It was only in the nineteenth century that the concept of human society as a totality was recognized and opposed to that of nature , and only in the twentieth century was developed the idea that distinct peoples may be distinguished by their cultures . Science , as we know it today , is a late acquisition compared to the advent of writing and the subsequent slow develop - ment of literacy ; and literacy only contributed to the proliferation and fertility of science after the invention and expansion of print technology . Some authors believe science predated literacy . It is the case of Mithen ( 1996 ) who argued for this idea in his book The prehistory of the mind . He enunciated ‘‘three critical properties of science’’ : ( 1 ) ‘‘the ability to generate and test hypotheses’’—he argued ‘‘that early Homo and Early Humans were needing to generate and test hypotheses about the distribution of resources’’ ( p . 244 ) , and we agree that it must have been the case but generating and testing hypotheses , being crucial to science , also occurs in non - scientiﬁc thinking : we ‘‘generate and test hypotheses about resources’’ almost daily at home but we do not think it is science ; ( 2 ) ‘‘the hunter - gatherers ( … ) did not make telescopes and microscopes , they were nevertheless able to develop certain dedicate tools ( … ) . ( … ) the cave paintings and engraved ivory plaques of the Upper Palaeolithic are the precursors of our CD - Roms and computers’’ ( p . 245 ) ; but , again , what is necessary for science is not speciﬁc to it ; and ( 3 ) ‘‘the ‘tools of thought’ ( metaphors and analogies ) can only arise within a ﬂuid cognitive mind’’ ( p . 245 ) . In this case , Mithen distinguished the ‘‘Early Humans ( … ) who could not use metaphor because they lacked cognitive ﬂuidity’’ and the ‘‘Modern Humans ( in whom ) analogy and metaphor pervade every aspect of our thought and lie at the hearth of art , religion and science’’ . Whether or not the Humans of our preliterate societies used metaphor and analogy ( they did in pictures ) , Mithen recognized that even such language or cognitive ﬁgures are not speciﬁc to science . The idea that the emergence of science required literacy is clearly presented by Tomasello ( 2014 , p . 142 ) : ‘‘the most abstract and complex forms of human thinking , that is , those involved in Western science and mathematics ( … ) are simply not possible without special forms of socially constructed conven - tions , namely , those in written form , that developed over historical time in Western culture . ( … ) ( … ) These modern cultures that have created active communities of scientists , mathematicians , linguists , and other scholars are pretty much unthinkable without written language , written mathematical numerals and operations , and other forms of visually based and semipermanent symbols . ’’ If this is true , and we cannot see how it would not be ( to the exclusion of Tomasello’s Western - centered vision ) , science is a product of both literacy and cognitive development , and the latter is both a cause and a consequence of literacy . A further and most important question remains : What is science ? Science is a cognitive demarche through which , for statements of enough generality concerning the natural and human reality , one demon - strates , based on factual proofs and / or logical argu - ments , that the supposed falsehood is false . In practice , most of the time this is possible because there is also the opposite tendency to demonstrate that the sup - posed truth is true . In other words , scientiﬁc discovery never points to an absolute truth , but the presumed one may last enough to render happy the scientists and reassure the non - scientists . There is no indication from anthropological studies that preliterate cultures had developed something 5 In our previous twin - paper ( Seeing thought : A cultural cognitive tool , in this issue of JCCS , cf . pp . 12 , 18 and 21 ) , we have already argued that science is a form , perhaps the most extraordinary form , of critical literacy . 123 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 239 resembling what we call science . According to Sturtevant ( 1964 ) , the ‘‘new ethnographists’’ have proposed the label ‘‘ethnoscience’’ in the same way as one may consider ‘‘ethnobotany’’ or ‘‘ethnogeogra - phy’’ . In this context ‘‘the preﬁx ‘ethno - ’ is to be understood in a special sense : it refers to the system of knowledge and cognition typical of a given culture’’ ( p . 99 ) . Science here refers , not to a science present in some old cultures , but to the scientiﬁc methodology with which one can study such cultures . As Sturtevant precises : ‘‘Ethnoscience differs from ( … ) ‘theoretical science’ in that it ‘refers to the ‘reduction of chaos’ achieved by a particular culture , rather than to the ‘highest possible and conscious degree’ to which such chaos may be reduced . ’’ ( p . 100 ) . Science has probably emerged many hundred , if not a few thousand years ago , after the ﬁrst writing examples . The marriage of cognition with writing did not occur immediately upon they met ; the birth of literacy may have been for the humanity what the Odyssey was for the post - Homer Greeks . How writing opened the way , ﬁrst , to consciousness , then , to science We attribute credibility and likelihood to Jaynes ( 1976 ) ’s idea that before the development of writing we were « split in two , an executive part called a god , and a follower part called a man » ( p . 84 ) . According to Jaynes , ‘‘the divine hallucinatory aspect of the bicameral mind was auditory ( … ) and once the word of god was silent , written on dumb clay tablets or incised into speechless stone , the god’s commands or the king’s directives could be turned to or avoided by one’s efforts in a way that auditory hallucinations never could be . The word of a god had a controllable location rather than a ubiquitous power with immedi - ate obedience . ’’ ( p . 208 ) . And , still quoting Jaynes , ‘‘when the writer of Deuteronomy ( ‘‘second law’’ ) says that no nabi ( prophet ) has been like Moses ‘‘whom He - who - is knew face to face’’ , he is indicating the loss of the bicameral mind . ( p . 302 ) . The divine and social hierarchies of bicameral voices had made these dissonant and unreliable , but the breakdown of the ‘‘bicameral mind’’ allowed the emergence of subjectivity , of the single and conscious ‘‘mind’’ . Jaynes’ theory is the theory of a mental revolution and , if it is not easy to prove , it is at least consistent with both historical and neuroscientiﬁc data . It has received the support of a book on the history and science of the dream , published in 2019 by the Brazilian biologist and cognitive - neuroscientist Sidarta Ribeiro . To Ribeiro ( 2019 ) , the humans have always dreamed , and Jaynes’ theory was of Freudian inspiration : When the leader of a clan died , the other members used to dream of him and began considering him as living in a parallel world . They admitted that life would persist after death , as the dead would appear speaking to them in hallucinatory images , giving command , warning , or advice ; with time , they began to consider as immortal , and even gods , those who had been important leaders . Jaynes said of the present psychotics that they testify of the persistence of an ancient mentality , of a time when it was common to hear voices ; and Freud that the religions were like infantile neuroses , memory of a time when it was common to hear voices , and now remain illusions driven by instinctive desires and that intend to take control of the reality . Ribeiro ( pp . 160 – 1 ) sees in Beckett’s play Waiting for Godot a recall of the pre - writing time : ‘‘ Estragon – All the dead voices ( … ) Vladimir – They all speak at the same time ( … ) And they talk of what ? Estragon – Of the life they lived . Vladimir – It was not enough to have lived . Estragon – They need to talk . ’’ This play was written in French , a few years after the end of the Second World War which deeply affected Beckett . To Berlin ( 1999 , p . 428 ) , ‘‘Godot has the pressure of our nightmarish history behind it ( … ) presents unaccommodated man , naked , helpless , waiting together with someone else but still intensely alone – how can we not think of those killing prisons called concentration camps ? ’’ Berlin adds that Beckett ‘‘was horriﬁed by ﬁlm footage of Nazi atrocities , worked for the French underground , lost his close friend Alfred Peron , who died as a result of his treatment by the Germans in the Mauthausen concentration camp , and originally gave Estragon the name Levy . ’’ ( p . 429 ) . Leaving the theatre scene to the science ﬁeld : The kind of science that is our own had a gestational period after the printing invention in Europe , but only really consolidated with the Scientiﬁc Revolution since the early years of the eighteenth century A . C . ( see Wootton , 2015 ) , and now is maybe changing in new ways impacted by the Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( AI ) Revolution . Wootton attributed the very beginning of the science revolution to the Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe . In 1572 , looking at the sky in the night , Brahe 123 240 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 saw , and checked with witnesses , a particularly bright star in an unexpected and even ‘‘impossible’’ position , but as protestant he did not believe in miracles . Using trigonometrical calculus , he concluded that it was not in the upper atmosphere but in the sky . He conceived other instruments , including cameras in the under - ground to avoid windy effects , and showed that what would later be called ‘‘Tycho supernova’’ required a non - Aristotelian explanation , a new astronomical theory . A typical way of making science advance . Looking into the past , as Jaynes did , does not involve prediction . Nevertheless , it requires explora - tory forecasting from backwards . Prediction has indeed a major but not exclusive role in science . Yet , scientiﬁc predicting cannot dispense the past even if it is oriented to the future . It is just the output of a complex process that may include exploring , search - ing , observing , scanning , examining , checking , com - paring , sorting , feeling , imagining , speculating , trying , discovering , reasoning , theorizing , hypothesizing , testing , experimenting , evaluating , interpreting , extrapolating , simulating , doing , acting , reacting , creating , personally , with / against others , and collec - tively . And what does error minimization mean ? When Colombo discovered a land to the West and believed he had joined the East , was his error minimized or maximized ? His error was beneﬁcial for the exploration and exploitation of the Americas but source of relief for the Portuguese who wanted to be the ﬁrst to reach the East by sea . Many other errors made by humans maximized rather than minimized the potential effects of their behavior , for science as for the people involved . Even if Pangloss would have disagreed : ‘‘ ( … ) If you had not been put into the Inquisition : if you had not walked over the America : if you had not lost all your sheep ( … ) you would not be here eating preserved citrons and pistachio - nuts’’ ( Voltaire , 1759 , see 2006’s English translation ) . The theory of error minimization , as it is presented by its radical proponents , will probably join many other theories in the digital archives of the future history of science . Understanding the relations between subjective ( inner ) and objective ( outer ) realities is not the single purpose of cognitive science . Its upmost purpose must be to inform us on how to act on those realities to make them more appropriate to humans and their objectives . Cognitive science has receded in a position of sole observer , but cognitive scientists and researchers will certainly have much to say on how we the actors , all the people and all together , can and should pursue our cultural evolution . The enculturation process and the absurd separation of brain and cognition We begin to know the story of our history in a way that brings together the ‘‘parts’’ into which our thinking has broken ourselves . Colage ` and d’Errico ( 2020 ) offered us the most convincing story and the most useful guidelines for inquiring into it further on . The usual story , they recall , is that ‘‘that biological / genetic evolution sets neural substrates , ( these ) ﬁx cognitive abilities , and ( these ) determine the spectrum of cultural practices exhibited by a biological species . ’’ ( p . 654 ) . Actually , it is the reverse : ‘‘key cultural innovations’’ make ‘‘composite tools’’ , the ‘‘novel cultural practices deeply affect cognition and are underpinned by dedicated brain networks . ’’ ( p . 655 ) . To these authors , ‘‘cultural innovations ( had ) direct effects on the cognitive capabilities of populations of hominins ( via ‘cultural exaptation’ ) and on the neural substrates of individuals ( via ‘cultural neural reuse’ ) ’’ ( p . 656 ) . The archeological data they analyzed are ‘‘incompatible with the ‘bottom - up - only’ view and in line with the ‘top - down - also’ view’’ ( p . 659 ) . Colage ` and d’Errico assumed that phenotypic 6 plasticity can either result from genotypic variation ( due to differences in the chromosomes or in their genes ) or be induced by environmental factors while leaving unchanged the DNA sequence during epige - nesis or morphogenesis . For example , food and diet changes can lead to important changes in the chewing system . Neuroplasticity potentially allows new brain phenotypes ‘‘to support new cognitive skills and cultural practices ( … which can be … ) stabilized in a population without requiring concomitant genetic changes . ’’ ( p . 657 ) . Considering 29 cultural innova - tions ( subsistence strategies , technology , and sym - bolic behavior ) in Africa , Near East and Asia , they did not ﬁnd that such innovations might be associated ‘‘to a sudden shift in human cognition produced by genetic change or speciation ( … ) at any moment in the past’’ ( p . 662 ) . Many cultural innovations now ﬁrmly 6 The phenotype comprises not only physical and chemical characteristics ( morphology , anatomy , physiology ) , but also cognition and behavior . 123 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 241 attributed to the Neanderthals ‘‘seem utterly incom - patible ( … with … ) concomitant and / or directly cau - sally related genetic changes’’ ( p . 662 ) . Hence , following other researchers such as Dehaene and Cohen ( 2007 ) , Colage ` and d’Errico extended the concept of exaptation ( Gould & Vrba , 1982 ) from biology to the cultural domain : ‘‘ Cultural exaptation refers to the co - option of existing cultural features for new purposes . ( It ) does not require concomitant biological exaptation or heritable genetic changes as a prerequisite but occurs at the truly cultural level . ’’ ( p . 663 ) . Cultural exaptation may evolve through many steps : from incised objects one would have arrived to number symbols and writing systems . It thus provides ‘‘a mechanism for truly cultural evolution and ensuing cognitive evolution . ’’ Thus , ‘‘ ( i ) culture is a cause ( sometimes the primary , or even the only cause ) of human cognitive evolution and , ( ii ) ‘‘human cognitive evolution does not need concomitant genetic evolution as its necessary cause . ’’ ( p . 664 ) . It follows , from an unavoidable biological basis , that social animals ( not only the human ones ) create themselves in interaction with their habitats . However , as Colage ` and d’Errico ( 2020 , p . 657 ) also recall , this cannot be the whole story , as there are many demonstrated cases of gene - culture co - evolu - tion , one of the most well - known being the lactose tolerance in many farming human individuals , which is allowed by genetic evolution at the alleles level . Finally , many authors have proposed that ‘‘some key innovations in human history and prehistory may have been essentially due to ‘culturally driven evolution’ or to truly cultural evolution with ‘little if any’ strictly biological ( namely , genetic ) evolution’’ ( ibid . , p . 657 ) . It is the case not only of written language , but also , even if this claim is rejected liminary by classic linguists and cognitivists , of ‘‘spoken , articulate , and highly syntactical language’’ ( ibid . ) , and by extension , sign language . It may be , as Colage ` and d’Errico ( p . 658 ) admit , whilst citing many other authors , that ‘‘at least the most recent stages of language evolution ( mainly concerning complex syntax and semantics ) are culturally , and not biologically driven’’ ( see p . 664 for persuasive illustrations of cascading cultural exaptations ) . In some of our previous papers ( Kolin - sky & Morais , 2018 ; Morais & Kolinsky , 2021 ) , we have mentioned experimental data supporting this claim for complex syntax and it would be paradoxical to revendicate a genetic origin for an extensive culturally based and human - generated semantics . Cultural exaptation can be followed ( although not necessarily ) by cumulative enculturation , which empowers human societies with genuine culturally based cognition linked only remotely to the human genetic heritage , as it is deﬁned as the ability of a culture to accumulate and improve innovations over time , which proceeds by reﬁnement of solutions having the same function ( rather than via the use of an existing cultural trait for a new purpose , as does cultural exaptation ) . Many aspects of cognition are thus relatively independent of genes , yet cognition is necessarily grounded in the brain . Learning and cognitive activity changes the brain in the limits of its plasticity . The most clear - cut illustration of this process is literacy , which is—in our view—not only reading and writing activities but all other aspects of cognition that have been impacted by those skills . The neuronal and neural connectivity changes due to literacy acquisition , practice and inﬂuence are just the necessary correlates in the brain of the cognitive literacy activity piloted by the self’s will , or in Spinoza’s terms , by the conatus . To Colage ` and d’Errico ( 2020 ) , literacy would be a ‘‘a case in which a novel cultural practice not only prompts new cognitive skills , but also directly and signiﬁcantly affects brain organization at the level of formation of new anatomical networks’’ . This would thus be a case of cultural neural reuse , and other new cases of reuse could occur . Still as regards literacy , what is exceedingly important to notice is that neither Colage ` and d’Errico nor the large majority of authors involved in ‘‘brain and mind’’ issues and more particularly in literacy point out that skilled literacy activity and its correlated effects on cognition and in the brain only concern a rather small number of humans . One excessively important characteristic of this enculturation process is that , for socioeconomic and political reasons constitutive of our society and predating the invention of writing , literacy is a privilege in our inequal society , with obvious conse - quences on cognition and life conditions , and since a few decades there is no indication that this situation will change . Arbib ( 2016 ) , based on his book How the brain got language ( Arbib , 2012 ) —we , provocatively , would like to propose instead How language shaped the brain – , discusses the social evolution of the 123 242 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 ‘‘language - ready’’ brain , and as literacy ( which he never mentions in this long paper ) is the child of language , some of his thoughts will be examined here . Note however that he mentions reading ( p . 31 ) as a ‘‘recent invention’’ : ‘‘humans did not evolve to be able to read—rather , reading evolved culturally to exploit and reshape brains that had previously acquired a spoken language . ’’ This requires a tune - up : What was actually invented is writing , reading followed . More - over , the ﬁnalist assumption that humans evolved for something is wrong : humans evolve because some - thing , it is the activity in response to a need that leads to evolution ; so , they did evolve neither for writing nor for brain reshaping . Both biological and cultural evolution are just the consequence of activity induced by the conatus or e´lan vital —nobody has still found a better way of calling it , but it is not fundamentally different from what makes ants move . Although Arbib’s ( 2016 ) focus on the brain is reductionist and his idea of dyadic brain modelling ( ‘‘modelling the brains of two creatures as they interact with each other’’ , p . 2 ) reduces the group to a pair , his view on ‘‘the mirror system integrating action and execution of hand actions providing crucial evolutionary support for ( … ) language parity in the human brain’’ ( ibid . , p . 3 ) is relevant for the present discussion . Arbib’s stance is that the ‘‘early Homo sapiens brain was language - ready ( … ) but did not yet have language . ’’ ( ibid . , p . 9 ) . He mentions seven properties of ‘‘language - readiness’’ which were ‘‘sup - ported by brain mechanisms that evolved during the emergence of protolanguage ( … ) prior to the emer - gence of language . ’’ ( ibid . , p . 10 ) . Two of them are worth mentioning here , as they are necessary for expectation , anticipation , prediction , and forecasting : perception of the hierarchical structure of scenes that allows ‘‘to determine what actions to execute and when to execute them’’ and ‘‘the ability to recall past events or imagine future ones’’ . Indeed , acquiring and sharing praxis skills require anticipation . Arbib also mentions the role of anticipation in the achievement of Bonding between Mother and Child ( ibid . , p . 22 , his capitals ) . In a comment on Arbib’s ( 2016 ) paper , Colage ` ( 2016 , p . 61 ) pointed out that the question about the role of cultural evolution in the origin of modern - like languages amounts to understanding ‘‘in which sense the language - ready brain was ( … ) ready for language . More speciﬁcally : what were ( if any ) the speciﬁc changes induced in the brain by the cultural evolution leading up to modern languages ? ( … ) Did the language - ready brain already possessed all the neural networks required to master language , or cultural evolution also induced the formation of new ( func - tional or anatomical ) networks ? ’’ . The question reveals the reversal operated by Arbib and many contemporaneous ( neuro ) cognitivists . The analogy made by Collage ` with reading acquisition makes this clear : learning a writing system and using it to read and write lead to important changes in the brain , both in children and in adults , and this is now beginning to reverse , despite strong resistance , the upside - down trick operated by the brainophiles . According to Colage ` ( 2016 , p . 62 ) , we should not exclude that an ‘‘analogous process is responsible for key aspects of the ( cultural and onto - genetic ) formation of new brain functional and anatomical networks able to support full - blown spoken language as distinct from forms of protolanguages possibly in use among early groups of H . sapiens’’ . Inequalitarian cognition and its literacy roots Colage ` and d’Errico ( 2020 , p . 665 ) cited Dehaene et al . ( 2015 ) for a review of data showing that the left hemisphere fusiform gyrus has been recycled for ‘‘high - resolution sharp - edged visual shapes’’ , which are crucial for literacy . They did not mention that there is no such recycling in illiterate adults , and that late literates ( who learned to read only at adult age ) and low literates show less recycling . This omission , together with the fact that neither cognition nor literacy are presented as covering a wide capacity range from very low and even zero to the high levels typical of scientists and intellectuals , is hard to interpret . Should one describe the human physical capacities by referring only to the usual marks of sprinters or of weight throwers ? Should one consider that only the 1 to 5 % or even the 10 % best do represent human cognition and literacy ? To be fair , not only the authors mentioned above but almost all researchers in this domain represent cognition and literacy at their highest levels . One exception was Henrich et al . ( 2010 ) , who criticized the fact that many samples are ‘‘drawn entirely from Western , Educated , Industrialized , Rich , and Democratic ( WEIRD ) societies’’ ( as stated in their Abstract ) . They invoked different results obtained on 123 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 243 people of traditional societies . However , education and wealth are not characteristic of our societies , but of the minor part of them . Taking the Western societies as ‘‘EIRD’’ is to veil the poor education and living conditions of most of the people and the monopolization of the power by the dominant classes . Henrich and his co - authors , following the almost universal tendency of the WEIRD’s scientists , have also neglected the huge individual cognitive differ - ences that characterize both the Western and the Eastern societies . The perspective is quite the opposite from the academia and from the unemployed and working - class districts . Henrich ( 2015 ) ’s book titled The secret of our success and subtitled How culture is driving human evolution , domesticating our species , and making us smarter has been cited in more than 1 , 500 papers by great philosophers and cognitivists . But who is exactly the subject of ‘‘our success’’ , ‘‘our culture’’ and ‘‘our species’’ ? In the power - point ( accessible via Google ) of Henrich’s , 2015 conference presenting his book at the Suntory and Toyota International Centre for Economics and Related Disciplines , the main question was ‘‘Why did we , humans , succeed ? And the answer was : ‘‘It’s not due to greater intelligence relative to other apes . It’s because we socially learned affor - dances ( screws , levers ) and culturally inherited solu - tions ( number systems , spatial coordinates , and words : 70 , 000 words in our vocabulary ) . ’’ This is presented as the ‘‘cultural brain hypothesis’’ , according to which ‘‘Culture evolution drives genetic evolution . The natural selection shaped our cognition through a mechanism of cultural learning’’ and we are deﬁned as ‘‘A cultural species , produced by culture - driven genetic evolution . ’’ This is a sort of Cultural Darwin - ism , which would explain , if the question were asked , but obviously it is not , why in all present human societies the humans are cognitively so different . To ask if it is poverty or the genes that undermine cognition would not be appropriate . And even more inappropriate to believe that the genes may be muzzled by poverty . In the present world , the vast majority of people are not critical literates and did not develop superior cognitive capacities ; in addition , one cannot skip the fact that , even among ‘‘normal’’ people , there are huge inter - individual differences in cognition and literacy . We must know not only how cognition and literacy interact through their joint development as how they are inﬂuenced by other factors : biological , social , economic , political , cultural . In almost all present cognitive science , the illiterates and sub - literates , who are part of the indigent and the low - paid , are invisible . They do not exist for most cognitive scientists . In our previous Seeing thought — I paper ( Morais & Kolinsky , 2021 ) we have brieﬂy documented how literacy inﬂuences cognition . Until very recently , literacy was the privilege of a few people and has historically contributed to the development of their cognitive capacities . It also inﬂuenced affects , values , and desires , the motors of actions . Literacy soon became a form of thinking , acting and experiencing oneself , the others and the world . It is a cognitive tool , a mindtool which has contributed to transform and will keep on transforming cognition and the world . Liter - acy acquisition and practice change the individual brain , which itself is not an actor but provides the obligatory and faithful neural version of the person’s mental and behavioral acts . Conversely , cognitive advances required new forms of literacy , increased the informational content this transmitted and complexi - ﬁed its structures . At the same time , literate language transformed spoken language , in a large part due to the cognitive enhancement it had created . Worldwide , and taking only into account the population aged 15 years and above , in 2015 there were 752 million individuals with a post - secondary degree , 1 . 43 billion with an upper secondary one , 1 . 21 billion with a lower secondary one , 932 million who had completed the primary degree , 316 million with uncomplete primary education , and 768 million with no formal education at all ( Roser & Ortiz - Ospina , 2016 ) . Thus , there were slightly more non - educated people than people with a post - secondary degree , and there were more than 3 . 3 billion below the upper secondary , but less than 2 . 2 billion above it . These data may approximate the literacy and cognition levels taken together and support the idea expressed above of their great inequality in the human world . Literacy emerged and developed in inegalitarian human societies . It remained linked to the exercise of political and religious power until the Enlightenment in the eighteenth century . Since the nineteenth century until nowadays it became an instrument of economic power : The industrialization and commercialization process required an extension of basic and utilitarian literacy , which , later , with the shift of a considerable amount of work from the factories to ofﬁces , became 123 244 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 more demanding in competence . Since the second third of the twentieth century , the scientiﬁc and technological progress ( automation ) has demanded a rapid extension of literacy skills at the service of more sophisticated cognition . Presently , informatization , robotization , the domiciliation of most work and important changes in social and personal life are discarding the need of basic literacy and enhancing the demand of highly specialized sorts of literacy but , at the same time , discouraging the extension of critical literacy in favour of brief , fragmented and superﬁcial communicative literacy . Anyway , what will happen to the distribution of basic and cognitive literacy is not something we should ask . Prediction is the central concept of this paper , but we think that trying to predict the future of the human species is unrealistic . The most important question , ‘‘What life will we choose ? ’’ , is out of the aim of this paper . Our future is not predictable , we just can try to shape , forecast , and foreshadow it . The role of literacy in cognitive development and educational level is underestimated by the literature on cognition and education . Looking through Google Scholar for relevant scientiﬁc literature on these topics , we found that many never referred to literacy . An illustration of it is the paper by Bettha¨user et al . ( 2020 ) . Its starting motivation was the fact that ‘‘children from working - class backgrounds tend to obtain substantially lower levels of educational attain - ment and lower labour market positions than children from higher social backgrounds’’ . Its aim was to examine ‘‘the roles of two individual - level character - istics—cognitive ability and locus of control 7 —in mediating the effect of individual parental’s class background on their educational attainment ( … ) ’’ . The authors found a huge ‘‘mediating role of cognitive ability’’ , but they did not mention literacy . Other authors , while not mentioning literacy , have taken reading skills as important for cognitive development . Feinstein ( 2003 ) considered reading among many other tests . He found that in a 1970 UK’s cohort there was cognitive and , hence , educational inequality since pre - school ( at 22 months testing ) . The high - SES children showed upward mobility , namely , they were more likely to be in the top quartile than the lowest by age 10 , even if they had been in the bottom quartile at 22 months , while low - SES children who were in the bottom quartile at 22 months were still there at age 10 . A very special ‘‘longitudinal study’’ of the effects of ‘‘social inequality’’ on reading literacy’’ is presented in Schubert and Becker ( 2010 ) . Both the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study ( PIRLS ) and the Programme for International Student Assessment ( PISA ) register cross - sectional data only , PIRLS at age 9 ( end of Grade 4 ) , PISA at age 15 ( end of compulsory school ) . Schubert and Becker added a preliminary data collection of reading and writing literacy at the point of enrolment into elementary schooling , which was assessed retrospectively by the parents of the PIRLS students . The cross - temporal matching was based on three indicators available in both programs ( sex , educational state of the parents , and migrant status ) . The ﬁnal sample , all from German data , included 4658 cases and the matching procedure has been repeated once , 100 , 500 , 5000 and 50 , 000 times . The reading scores of PIRLS and PISA were the ﬁrst dependent variable . The students from families with high income performed better than those of parents with low income , and among the latter , the large reading differences decreased with increasing income . The pattern was similar for the relation with number of books and presence of newspapers at home , and the correlation with reading was even stronger for cultural practice than for mere ownership of cultural goods . At this point , it is necessary to consider the speciﬁcities of the German schooling system . After kindergartner , there is only four years of primary school , and since age 10 there are two paths , one toward the University through either the Grammar Comprehensive school ( Gesamtschule ) which includes several tracks , or the Academic secondary school ( Gymnasium ) , the latter leading to slightly but signiﬁcant better reading skills . This socially selective system produces ‘‘lasting inequality of reading liter - acy’’ ( Schubert & Becker , 2010 , p . 126 ) . As Schubert and Becker state , ﬁrst , in this case ‘‘as for other socially relevant issues , ( … ) the political process of ideological premises ( … ) goes hand in hand with the ignorance of scientiﬁc ﬁndings . ’’ . Second , ‘‘rational school and educational politics are only possible if the causes for a problem , like in this case the educational misery , are known sufﬁciently . ’’ ( ibid . ) . To Schubert and Becker , even if ‘‘the learning conditions in elementary school are equal’’ ( … the ) cultural and 7 To Bettha¨user et al . ( 2020 ) , locus of control is the extent to which people believe that they can inﬂuence the events and outcomes of their own lives . 123 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 245 social capital of the parental home still contribute to the social inequality of reading literacy at the end of elementary school’’ ( ibid . , p . 127 ) ; later , they say that the ‘‘economic , cultural and social capital of the parental home’’ and ‘‘the parental educational deci - sions at the end of elementary school ( … ) contribute to socially selective transitions to the school tracks of secondary level’’ ( ibid . ) . The conclusion to draw from this study is , rationally and morally , quite clear : the cultural , cognitive , linguistic , and more generally educational , advantages of a privileged parental home , must be compensated by an appropriate program to re - establish as much as possible the equality of condi - tions to proﬁt from learning . To be efﬁcient , this program should start at home , from birth and involving the baby and the parents , under the piloting and assistance of developmental psychologists , continuing at crib and kindergarten , and , at school , beneﬁtting from specially trained teachers . Da¨mmrich and Triventi ( 2018 , p . 81 ) , in a study that involved both reading literacy and mathematics over 15 OECD countries , suggested that ‘‘one way to mitigate the strong social background inequalities in reading competencies in primary school might be to increase preschool participation among lower social background children’’ . More importantly perhaps , for reading they found an impact of the school tracking regime , which refers to the practice of allocating students in different school streams at some point in their educational career , with countries differing both in the ages of allocation and in the sorting rules . They reported ‘‘an increase of social inequalities in highly tracked school systems , and a reduction / stability in countries with a low level of tracking’’ , hence conﬁrming several other studies indicating that coun - tries with more rigid tracking have higher levels of social inequalities in secondary school . In an unequal society , those who are rich and powerful want to keep wealth and power and even increase them , which is only possible at the expense of those who are neither rich nor powerful . Literacy is a source and an instrument of knowledge , and knowl - edge contributes to wealth and power . So , for the rich and powerful it is vital that the poor and powerless reach a degree of literacy enabling them to work and produce , but not beyond their own subsistence , which means in beneﬁt of the former . Everybody knows this , and it is almost naı¨ve to say it here . However , having read a paper in the American Educator by James Heckman , a Nobel Memorial Prize winner in eco - nomics , who is certainly not naı¨ve , we decided that the opinion opposite to ours deserves to be heard . To Heckman ( 2011 , p . 31 ) , ‘‘Educational equity is a way to promote productivity and economic efﬁ - ciency’’ and ‘‘is more than a social justice imperative . It is an economic imperative’’ . He acknowledges that ‘‘each of us is born under circumstances over which we have no control . Our parents , their genes , educa - tion , health status , economic resources , and environ - ment are passed onto us ( … ) . These endowments shape the trajectories of our lives . ( … ) But we can change some of it . In particular , we should address the inequity in the resources families have to properly develop their children’s potential . ’’ ( p . 32 ) . Written this way , we fully agree with Heckman . Let us see what Heckman proposes : ‘‘We should invest in the foundation of school readiness from birth to age 5 by providing early childhood education for disadvantage children . We should build on that foundation with high - quality elementary and secondary education to sustain the development of successful lives . Providing that kind of equity will build a more productive society for all . ’’ . Heckman gave as example the Perry Preschool Program . It ‘‘did not produce lasting gains in the IQs of its male participants and produced at best modest gains in IQ for females . ’’ ( p . 34 ) . ‘‘The principal inﬂuence in the Perry Program was its positive effect on noncognitive ( character ) skills’’ ( p . 35 ) . Heckman also mentioned ‘‘successful programs with the mothers’’ . They were certainly meritorious but are not enough to reverse the effects of capitalism ( word absent from the paper ) and of its meritocratic political system . To get effects on the children the means and the life of their families must be changed by changing the whole society , and this would take decades . Many ‘‘predictions’’ of society changing have failed , ‘‘prediction’’ errors have never been minimized , we do not know where we are going , but many people will not desert and will keep predicting . Thanks anyway , Doctor Heckman . The impact of literacy on language anticipation and prediction Given that , historically , it is the invention of literacy that allowed the emergence of science , we may take PEM as a literate scientiﬁc concept which , in this case , concerns the literate’s cognitive prediction abilities . If 123 246 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 this were true , and we believe it is , then the effects of prediction might be present in literate people , espe - cially in highly literate ones , and be rather weak if not absent in illiterate people and in low literates . In a theoretical review of the work on the potential role of prediction in written and spoken language processing , Huettig and Mani ( 2016 ) raised the prediction question differently : is prediction ‘‘neces - sary to understand language’’ ? Their cautious answer was : ‘‘probably not’’ . For four reasons indicated in the Abstract : ‘‘not all language users appear to predict language’’ , some inputs make ‘‘prediction often very challenging’’ , prediction is strongly context - depen - dent and impeded by resource limitations , and most ( positive ) ‘‘experimental evidence ( comes ) from ‘pre - diction - encouraging’ ( situations ) ’’ . Later , Huettig and Pickering ( 2019 ) reviewed a vast corpus of the relevant literature ( including their own work ) , show - ing that word anticipation during spoken language processing can be facilitated by knowledge of the corresponding written forms . Part of this effect is due to the role of literacy—or , indirectly , of literacy via exposure to audio books—in developing conscious knowledge of words , morphemes and grammatical structures as well as WM , which is necessary to connect ideas and construct an integrated model . Let us take a brief look at the high vs . low literate comparison regarding anticipatory or predictive behavior . In Mishra et al . ( 2012 ) , Indian speakers were exposed simultaneously , after a central ﬁxation point , to four object pictures , and one second after the beginning of visual exposure they started listening to a sentence , for example ‘‘You will now see a toll door’’ . The eye movements’ recording showed that the high literates ( postgraduate students ) started to anticipate the target well before the acoustic outset of the adjective in the spoken sentence . In contrast , in the low literates ( who worked in cleaning or food services near the University ) , the ﬁxations on the target only began well after the onset of the noun . Similarly , Mani and Huettig ( 2014 ) tracked the eye - movements of 8 - year - old German children who were ﬁrst shown a visual display of familiar objects , such as a cake and a bird , and then heard a sentence , for example , ‘‘Der Junge isst den großen Kuchen’’ ( The boy eats / sees the big cake ) , so that ‘‘eats’’ is more consistent with ‘‘cake’’ and hence anticipates it . The authors found a strong positive correlation between word—but not pseu - doword—reading ability and the anticipatory eye movement over the semantically consistent noun . The best one learns lexical orthography , the best one anticipates subsequent words in spoken sentences . More interestingly from a theoretical perspective , the differential correlational pattern with word vs . pseu - doword reading indicates that lexical orthography learned in the context of plausible sentences enables anticipatory processing . Based on those experimental studies and others , Huettig and Mani ( 2016 ) denounced the exaggerated ambitions of the PEM framework , arguing rather that ‘‘prediction provides ‘a helping hand’ but is not necessary for language processing . ’’ ( p . 19 ) . First , as we have seen above ( cf . Mishra et al . , 2012 ) , not everybody predicts ; second , suboptimal input , like noisy or reduced speech ‘‘makes prediction less ( rather than more ) likely . ’’ ( p . 24 ) ; and third , ‘‘prediction is ( frequently ) impeded by resource limitations’’ , in face of , for example , speeded input , memory load , and aging ( p . 26 ) . Hence , Huettig and Mani concluded that not all ‘‘language processing is predictive in nature’’ and that , ‘‘sometimes , processing words when they occur may be more efﬁcient and economical than predicting them . ’’ ( p . 28 ) . The experimental literature on anticipation and prediction in reading is vaster than for spoken language . In text reading , context facilitates word processing , provided it is sufﬁciently constraining . In what follows , we refer to word anticipation rather than prediction because , as we already suggested , antici - pation does not commit , as prediction does , to the precise identity of the target . There is evidence that word anticipation is facilitated by both strongly constraining sentences and reading proﬁciency . When contextual cues and / or reading skills are weak , then anticipations could fail and should be revised . Ng et al . ( 2017 ) found , based on reading times and event - related potential ( ERPs ) evidence ( more precisely , N400 effects ) , that ‘‘lower - literate adults were less able ( than high - literate ones ) to make use of the full range of contextual information , showed more sus - tained processing difﬁculty for unexpected words ( … ) , and did not manifest evidence of using context information predictively . ’’ ( p . 371 ; italics are ours ) . Those authors had noted ( p . 361 ) that , according to the National Research Council ( 2012 ) , ‘‘65 million adults in the United States are able to read only simple texts with adequate comprehension’’ . Indeed , cognitive science , having focused on understanding skilful 123 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 247 reading , has neglected a large part of real readers , as real as the skilled ones . Only a complete portrait will describe faithfully what reading is in a country that is the most technologically advanced in the world but also one of the most inequal in many respects including , for the present purpose , in terms of cognitive achievement . Ng et al . , ( 2017 , p . 372 ) raised a further important question : ‘‘whether this pattern in lower - literate adults is speciﬁc to reading or extends to language compre - hension in general’’ ; and in Ng et al . ( 2018 ) the authors presented ERPs evidence supporting incremental activation of semantic features through auditory sentence listening in skilled adult literates but not in low literates . The former showed reduced N400 for strongly anticipated targets in anterior regions , while low literates did not . Low literacy leads to poorer anticipatory comprehension not only in reading but also in listening . Importantly , Ng et al . ( 2020 ) found that the low literate adults , some of whom read only at the 4 th grade level , still showing difﬁculties in decoding and lexical retrieval , had no speciﬁc difﬁ - culty with the mechanisms of sentence processing but took longer to read low - frequency words and words introducing new concepts . They suggested , in accor - dance with Perfetti ( 2007 ) ’s Lexical Quality Hypoth - esis , that such lexical difﬁculties lead the unskilled readers to display poor conceptual processing and discriminability of the ideas . We believe that re - education programs of low literate adults should consider the double interactive effects between liter - acy and spoken language and between lexical and conceptual processing . Data on skilled readers converge with the idea that the importance of prediction in language comprehen - sion has been overestimated ( see e . g . , Luke & Christianson , 2016 , on limits on lexical prediction during reading ) . As commented by Huettig and Mani ( 2016 , p . 19 ) , none of these observations on language processing are necessarily relevant for prediction in object recognition or perception and action research , for instance . Yet , as language is part of cognition , those data run against the notion that prediction is a necessary , uniﬁed , principle underlying all function - ing of the human mind . As we illustrated , this is the case neither for spoken language nor for written language processing . Forecasting in critical thinking and reasoning Forecasting is required whenever there is uncertainty , and uncertainty may concern the past ( the historians know it well ) , the present or the future . Forecasting became an omnipresent word to designate something that we all constantly do and if it is not us , it is our brain that interprets our senses to react adaptively . We have seen above that forecasting is now on the stage among the various concepts that name our different attitudes of leaning over the future . So , here , we use also that concept to examine how the human capacities of critical thinking and reasoning will make the future present and , if we are smart enough , the present future . In our previous Seeing thought — I paper ( Morais & Kolinsky , 2021 ) , we have already distinguished rea - soning from thinking and stated that ‘‘reasoning is thinking fertilized by literacy’’ and assumed that both ‘‘may support a critical purpose . ’’ ( p . 2 ) . The purpose of critique is less to interpret or evaluate what exists than produce something new , to forecast and persuade , by arguing , that the new deserves to take the place of the old . We thus begin this section by examining what is critical thinking and reasoning . Humans share thinking , the ﬂow of thoughts , with many other animals ( cf . Morais & Kolinsky , 2021 , Seeing thought 1 , pp . 24 – 26 ) , although language—in at least its propositional form—is speciﬁc to humans . Reasoning , speciﬁc to humans and to human - made machines , is a combination of propositional thoughts leading presumably to an inference , and it depends on literacy education and practice to reach its more abstract and complex forms . Inferential reasoning used for demonstrative purpose is supported by a chain of arguments , and literacy plays a major role in the development of the argumentative capacity , among others because adequate verbal WM capacity , persis - tence and internal organization is only afforded by literate representations . Reasoning requires great sequential precision , which is only afforded by the linearity of writing and of writing processing and , at a higher level , by its complex structuration into related propositional constituents . Nevertheless , human rationality is not necessarily objective and governed by pure logic . It may be triggered and driven by interests and affects . 123 248 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 Essence and existence of rational processes We live our existence , not our essence . Our existences present similarities and differences , our essence is unique or unitized . Essence is an ideal , so it does not exist , it is not plural but gives a model to which some of us may confront their singular existence . The essence gives us both an illusion and a power : the illusion that we are like it , and the power of inventing sophisticated technologies that eventually change our existence . This was the case of writing , putting so close the language we speak ( or spoke ) ; as it was the case of the planes that make us ﬂy even if we do not ﬂy by ourselves ; and as is now the case of computational machines that do not have our computational limitations . In the 1960s we became aware of a science we had being nurturing in the 1950s : cognitive psychology , the science of the cognitive side of our mental life . So close to our real existence . Rather soon and consis - tently with the acceleration of our technological inventions , appeared in the 1970s cognitive science , which , time going , almost made its elder sister quit the scene . In parallel , cognitive neuropsychology devel - oped and , again , psychology almost disappeared in the shadow projected by cognitive neuroscience . How - ever , the parallelism is now shaken by the increasing tendency to substitute the main protagonist : mental life is giving the leading role up to the brain . We persist thinking that only psychological science , including cognitive psychology , in connection with biological , social , and cultural sciences , can describe and explain the richness ( and misery ) of our mental lives . Uniﬁcation , homogenization , seem to be the watch - word of the new cognitive science . Cognition must be unique , pace our so diverse existences . Presently at least , it would be Bayesian . Colombo and Hartmann ( 2017 , p . 2 ) introduced their excellent essay on the unifying power of the Bayesian framework citing authors that praised its ‘‘uniﬁed mathematical lan - guage’’ ( Tenenbaum et al . , 2011 ) , its contribution of ‘‘perfect explanatory partner’’ ( Clark , 2013 ) , its hypothesis driving the uniﬁcation of cognitive science , namely , the free - energy principle ( Friston , 2009 , 2010 ) , and the fact that ‘‘constantly attempting to minimizing prediction errors ‘‘has enormous uni - fying power and yet it can explain in detail too’’ ( Hohwy , 2013 ) . To Colombo and Hartmann , Bayesian models ‘‘say nothing about the spatiotemporally organized components and causal activities that may produce particular cognitive phenomena’’ ( p . 455 ) , and ‘‘do not purport to capture the causal structure underlying a given phenomenon’’ ( p . 462 ) . Saying it in a nutshell , mathematical representation of a phe - nomenon does not inform about the process that produces it . Moreover , Colombo et al . ( 2019 ) contended that ‘‘the Bayesian research program in cognitive science does not possess special epistemic virtues over alternative approaches ( … ) , is not simpler , more unifying or more rational than alternatives’’ . They remained ‘‘agnostic as to whether Bayesian models are true’’ and considered that ‘‘continuing on with an exclusive focus and praise of Bayes within debates about the predictive processing theory will impede progress in philosophical understanding of scientiﬁc practice in computational cognitive science ( … ) ’’ ( from the Abstract ) . The last recommendation seems wise . We live in uncertainty about ourselves , the world , and our interactions with it . Uncertainty can be formulated in terms of degrees of truth but also in terms of degrees of possible , from plausible to surprising ( we leave to the readers’ interest or curiosity reading Colombo et al . ( 2019 ) , for the possibility , ranking and quantum probability frame - works , and their comparison ) . Bayes theory was not conﬁrmed by some percep - tual effects , like the size - weight illusion , given that the expectation is that a smaller object would be lighter ( cf . Brayanov & Smith , 2010 , cf . also Rahnev & Denison , 2018 ) , and by some inference effects like the conjunction fallacy , illustrated by the well - known Linda problem ( Tversky & Kahneman , 1983 ) . Although the latter is usually explained by a repre - sentativeness heuristic , 8 Tversky and Kahneman ( 1982 ) suggested that violation of the Bayesian rules is much more general in reasoning . It is observed in situations in which the representativeness heuristic cannot account for the error , such as when people neglect the base rate frequency of different diagnoses in a relevant reference population , in the so - called 8 According to the representativeness heuristic , the subjective probability of an event , or a sample , is determined by the degree to which it is similar in essential characteristics to its parent population and reﬂects the salient features of the process by which it is generated ( Kahneman & Tversky , 1972 ) . 123 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 249 medical diagnosis problem ( e . g . , Casscells et al . , 1978 ) that we will illustrate later . Whatever the scientiﬁc contribution of a theory , a major principle of science is the rejection of orthodoxy . All institu - tions , including scientiﬁc ones , tend to be conserva - tive . Unifying theories are smart and attractive but are also dangerous because they tend to monopolize and impose a ‘‘thinking right’’ view . Prediction is supported by presumed knowledge and information processing Predictions are derived from available knowledge . They may fail because they are not correctly derived from available knowledge , or because this is found later to be completely or partly wrong . Knowledge , even when it seems to be rock solid , may miss the mission because it is incomplete or because it is not valid in a different context . Science began with literacy . The ﬁrst science seems to have been astron - omy ( cf . Blamont , 1993 ) . The tablets’ fragments of the library of Assurbanipal show that the Mesopotamians’ scientists were interested in the stars for two main reasons : to predict the availability of water and their own destiny menaced by rivals . The oldest scientiﬁc document , from the seventeenth century B . C . , indi - cates the dates and place of appearance of the morning and evening star later called Venus ( Blamont , 1993 , p . 19 ) . To those scientists , the gods’ actions were like writing over the world . The divination manuals contained precise predictions , like this : ‘‘If during an eclipse Jupiter remains visible , it augurs well for the king , as a dignitary will die in his place’’ ( Blamont , 1993 , p . 23 , our translation ) . The Greek Cassandra was substituted in modern times by fortune - tellers , and predictions are common in crime stories . The ﬁgure of Sherlock Holmes , created in 1887 by Conan Doyle , inspired Van Wallendael and Hastie ( 1990 ) to submit university students with mystery stories and ask them to choose the murder’s identity among four hypotheses while providing them with clues ( e . g . , that the victim’s wife was beneﬁciary of a life insurance policy to be paid on her husband’s death under any circumstances ) . No single clue or set of clues would logically prove one suspect to be the killer , but on the whole the clues , which were 10 to 20 , pointed strongly to one particular suspect . For half of the stories one clue allowed one suspect to have an alibi , thus eliminating him from further consideration . The participants ( undergraduate students ) were informed that only one suspect was guilty . After reading a story they were instructed to ﬁrst rate each suspect on a 0 – 100 scale . The ratings were visible on a screen and participants were allowed to change them after each clue . This experiment was intended to test the Bayesian predictive model , while a second experiment targeted the Shaferian degrees of belief model ( Shafer , 1976 ; Shafer & Tversky , 1985 ) , which derives from a generalization of Bayes theory into the Dempster - Shafer , or DS theory . In this experiment the information provided to the partici - pants allowed to redistribute belief progressively from the set of four to three , then to two and ﬁnally to one suspect . In both experiments the participants treated the potential murders in a non - complementary way , namely , treated the non - independent hypotheses as independent , and thus failed to sum the probabilities to 1 , although they were allowed to search for informa - tion in whatever order and to make direct comparisons between the suspects . As commented on by Basieva et al . , ( 2017 , p . 59 ) , the validity of Bayesian updating is thus questioned by those results . According to Van Wallendael and Hastie ( 1990 ) , a plausible explanation is that the independent processing of hypotheses is either more frequent in the ‘‘real world’’ or more accessible to our limited information - processing capacity ( the two accounts are in fact not mutually exclusive ) . More fundamen - tally , the following question seems relevant to us : Why do cognitive scientists persist attempting to draw cognitive portraits that , in most cases and mainly for cultural , social , and educational reasons , represent only a weak minority of individuals ? Of what kind of human is the cognition we pretend to study ? Indeed , the sophisticated computational abilities of the cogni - tive scientists are not shared , or rarely , by their undergraduate or even graduate students . It is unrea - sonable to take for universal the abilities that are the professional tools of a super - elite . Bayes cannot be the criterion of human rationality and is not at the reach of most literate people , who do not dispose of the corresponding background . Cognitive scientists are wrong if they take their own cognition for the one of their peers in scientiﬁc or intellectual domains . 123 250 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 The various approaches of critical thinking and reasoning The meaning of ‘‘critical’’ applied to thinking and reasoning depends on the epistemological perspective and aim . Three approaches have been particularly active : the educational , the psychological and the philosophical . Their motivations and scope are quite different : the educational approach is largely fed by dominant social interests and uses methods developed in the ﬁeld of psychology ; and the psychological approach examines the underlying cognitive compo - nents and to what extent the critical processes are inﬂuenced by other mental processes . The philosoph - ical approach is the only one that tends towards a global perspective and dares contravening the domi - nant social and political values . However , given its extensive matter and complexity , it will not be examined here . Yet we will include the test batteries conception as we consider as erroneous its attribution by Ennis et al . ( 2005 ) to the philosophical approach . The educational approach Facione ( in a written speech in 1992 , updated in 2015 , p . 1 ) considered critical thinking ( CT ) education as a ‘‘private good that beneﬁts ( … ) the student’’ but also as a ‘‘wiser social policy to invest in the education of the future workforce’’ . He also considered ‘‘cognitive skills ( … ) as being at the very core of CT : interpre - tation , analysis , evaluation , inference , explanation , and self - regulation’’ , to which he added explanation , self - regulation and meta - cognition , which he deﬁned as ‘‘critical thinking applied to itself’’ , or in other words ‘‘monitor and correct an interpretation you offered’’ ( ibid . , p . 7 ) . He had been member of the panel of 46 experts from USA and Canada who , after two years of work , produced in 1990 the so - called Delphi Report . His main target is clearly expressed ( ibid . , p . 19 ) : ‘‘Successful professionals with leadership responsibilities , like those in business or the military , apply all their critical thinking skills to solve problems and to make sound decisions’’ , in other words ‘‘critical thinking intersects with problem solving and leader - ship decision making’’ . In this context , Facione ( 2015 ) emphasized the interrelations between the cognitive Systems 1 and 2 ( see below ) and the heuristic patterns of decision - making . He concluded saying that CT skills can be learned , as demonstrated by a study of over 1100 college students showing that scores on a CT test correlated with both college grade and reading com - prehension . The deﬁnition of CT he promised at the beginning of his talk seems to be the one of the Delphi Report ( American Philosophical Association , 1990 ) : ‘‘Purposeful , reﬂective judgment which manifests itself in reasoned consideration of evidence , context , methods , standards , and conceptualizations in decid - ing what to believe or what to do . ’’ ( p . 23 ) . To Facione ( 2015 ) , the beneﬁt of CT does not concern only the individual . He alerted ‘‘that nations that want high incomes and full employment must develop policies that emphasize the acquisition of knowledge and skills by everyone , not just a select few . ’’ ( p . 23 ) . An immediate critical analysis of this sentence shows that we are indeed in a rude compe - tition between nations , that full employment has always been just a mirage in capitalist societies , that knowledge and skills are not critical thinking and reasoning and only beneﬁt from the latter , and that ‘‘everyone’’ refer to individuals in a group , not to all the humans , which is a way of hiding the deep inequality of most if not all the human societies since a long time . The astonishing comment he added by is that ‘‘ the main purpose’’ of the experience of CT is not just to get a ‘‘good job’’ but above all ‘‘to achieve what people have called a ‘‘liberal education’’ ( … ) in the sense of ‘liberating’ . And who is being liberated ? You . Liberated from a kind of slavery ? But from whom ? From professors ( … ) so that they no longer stand as infallible authorities delivering opinions beyond our capacity to challenge , question , and dissent . ’’ ( p . 23 ) . Facione’s intention was not to belittle the professors . Still , behind the joke there is the idea that , as a necessary ingredient of ‘‘liberal education’’ , CT is a strong asset to open the doors of the upper class , of which are excluded those who taught it . Terrible endorsement of the classist society . And , without mentioning the upper class , it was this that Facione had in mind when he said that liberal education is ‘‘an encounter with the cultural , artistic and spiritual dimensions of life ( and that ) learning ( and ) cultivating the critical spirit , is not just a means to this end , it is part of the goal itself . ’’ ( p . 24 ) . The dream of the aristocratic capitalism . Was Facione ( 2015 ) sensitive to the dramas of low literates or , instead , did he just think on the children of the upper class when he imagined that ‘‘Without 123 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 251 critical thinking people would be more easily exploited not only politically but economically’’ ? ( p . 24 ) . His lyric ﬂight led him to say ( pp . 24 – 25 ) : ‘‘suppose the people involved in international com - merce were lacking in critical thinking skills , they would be unable to analyse and interpret the market trends , evaluate the implications of interest ﬂuctua - tions ( … ) . Suppose these people were unable to draw the proper inferences from the economic facts ( … ) . Whole sectors of the economy would become unpre - dictable and largescale economic disaster would become extremely likely . ( … ) And , in such a society , one that does not liberate its citizens by teaching them to think critically for themselves , it would be madness to advocate democratic forms of government . ’’ . It is implicit that , in such a case , dictature would eventually be needed . After all , should we ‘‘wonder that business and civic leaders are maybe even more interested in critical thinking than educators ? CT employed by an informed citizenry is a necessary condition for the success of democratic institutions and for competitive free - market economic enterprise . These values are so important that it is in the national interest that we should try to educate all citizens so that they can learn to think critically . Not just for their personal good , but for the good of the rest of us too . ’’ ( Facione , 2015 , p . 25 ) . Facione believes that only CT can save us : ‘‘We know what happens when children are no longer being taught truth - seeking , the skills of good reasoning , or the lessons of human history and basic science : Cultures disintegrate ; communities collapse ; the machinery of civilization fails ; massive numbers of people die ; and sooner or later social and political chaos ensues . ’’ ( … ) ‘‘How long might it take for the people in this society which does not value critical thinking to be at serious risk of foolishly harming themselves and each other ? ’’ ( ibid . , p . 26 ) . Indeed ! it happened unfortunately in North America : When the colons and the Army ran to teach the natives CT , these had already killed themselves . Too late ! Before this classist promotion of CT , Facione ( 1990 ) had attempted an experimental validation of the California Critical Thinking Skills Test ( CCTST ) – College level , conceptualized by the Delphi project’s experts . The test targeted ﬁve cognitive skills : inter - pretation ( sub - skills : categorization , decoding , signif - icance and clarifying meaning ) , analysis ( examining ideas , detecting arguments , analysing these into ele - ments ) , evaluation ( assessing claims and arguments ) , inference ( querying evidence , conjecturing alterna - tives , drawing conclusions ) , and explanation ( stating results of reasoning , justifying procedures , presenting arguments ) . A further cognitive skill identiﬁed by the Delphi panel included self - examination and self - correction . Unfortunately , according to us , only some evaluation and inference items concern CT speciﬁ - cally . Nevertheless , Facione ( 1990 , p . 1 ) claimed that the test ‘‘succeeded in detecting the statistically signiﬁcant growth in CT skills hypothesized to have resulted from CT instruction’’ . The content of the CCTST has been re - examined by Fawkes et al . ( 2005 ) . Although they recognized that it has the clearest instructions of the presently available of all the CT tests , these authors estimated the content of nine of the questions to be defective and noted in the Abstract : ‘‘These questions make errors in critical thinking . Hence , no statistical results pertaining to the administration of these questions to students can be acceptable . ( … ) Further , the scores resulting from any such testing can be understood only as a measure of minimal competency ( … ) for the skills tested , but not as an adequate measure of critical thinking . ’’ Since then , other tests have been considered as focusing on CT ( cf . Leach et al . , 2020 ) . It is the case of the Cornell Critical Thinking Tests ( CCTT ) , including the Level X ( Ennis et al . , 2005 ) for students in Grades 4 – 14 . According to Ennis ( 1987 , p . 10 ) , CT is ‘‘reasonable , reﬂective thinking that is focused on deciding what to believe or do’’ . However , thinking does not become critical only because it involves reason ( the propositional and articulated form of thinking of the literate people ) and reﬂection ( the mental search of relevant information and its attentive evaluation ) . Indeed , CT requires reason and reﬂection , but even together they do not account for the quality of ‘‘critical’’ or for the concept of critique . We refuse the reduction of CT to reasonable and reﬂecting thinking , or to believe rather than disbelieve , as it is both the mode of this thinking and the process conducing to this belief that are crucial . The word is not the concept . Conceptualizing and naming CT requires a mental process of critical reasoning , necessary to accomplish an analysis of the truth and appropriateness of the concepts , of the propositions and of the relations between them , followed by a global ‘‘reasonable , reﬂected’’ analysis of the statement that must be exhaustive , in the sense that it may have included all its possible interpretations , those according to which it is 123 252 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 true , or wrong , or not necessarily true or wrong . Only in this way ‘‘reasonable , reﬂecting’’ is also thoroughly critical . 9 The CCTT assesses ﬁve domains presented erro - neously as ‘‘dimensions’’ : Induction , Deduction , Observation , Credibility and Assumptions . We share Ennis et al . ( 2005 ) ’s comment that CT is ‘‘not comprised of conceptually distinct factors identiﬁed in factor analysis’’ ( cf . Leach et al . , 2020 , p . 3 ) . Anyway , only Credibility might in principle resort to critical thinking or reasoning . Leach et al . , ( 2020 , p . 11 ) are critical of the CCTT Level X : ‘‘although a statistically supported bifactor model ( Credibility and Observation ) may have been identiﬁed , that model would be conspicuously absent of theoretical sup - port’’ . We may admit Leach et al . ’s ( p . 12 ) comment that ‘‘additional research on the measurement of critical thinking is needed to fully address remaining questions regarding the conceptualization of the construct underlying dimensions’’ but believe this is like wanting to build a house beginning at its ﬁfth ﬂoor . In the ‘‘If … then’’ Leach et al . ’s ( ibid . , p . 12 ) reasoning , we may thus dispense : ‘‘ If the conceptual - ization endorsed by Ennis et al . is accurate’’ and fully accept the conclusion : ‘‘ then it is not known what the CCTT Level X is measuring . ’’ When , after the instrument has been created and applied , one doubts ‘‘as to whether the instrument does not adequately measure CT as conceptualized , or whether the current conceptualization is inadequate’’ , there should be no doubt that ﬁrst we need to be clear about what critical thinking and reasoning is . In the last decade , other CT testing batteries and scales have been elaborated , including tools aimed at evaluating student perceptions and attitudes ( also called ‘‘dispositions’’ ) about CT ( e . g . , Sosu , 2013 ; Stupple et al . , 2017 ) . Some authors ( e . g . , Butler & Halpern , 2020 ) link it to the fact that information is more and more suspect and to the necessity of helping people ﬁnd ways of protecting themselves from false information . The wrong side of it is the increase of a protective but superﬁcial CT in detriment of critical reasoning , which appeals to the literate instruments of research for truth . The utility of such tests is disputable . Improving critical thinking and reasoning should be a component of all the schooling and academic programs and if they were efﬁcient there would be no need to estimate disposition for critical skills . It would be enough to adapt the program contents to the new socio - political realities . Cry out for a danger is not the best way to affront it and may even contribute to amplify it . Besides , ‘‘to identify students who should enhance their critical thinking disposition’’ ( Bravo et al . , 2020 , p . 8 ) or ‘‘in need of support to develop their critical thinking’’ ( Stupple et al . , 2017 , p . 2 ) in this particular matter or even in general is ethically disputable . The improvement of the educational activities related to critical thinking and reasoning depends mainly on what will be done for the professors’ cognitive and social promotion . The psychological and cognitive approach How are critical thinking and reasoning supported by cognition ? There is large discussion about the cogni - tive capacities involved , and about their relationships with thinking and reasoning in general , and with critique more particularly . After all , critical thinking and reasoning are cognitive activities even if they are not just so and involve intentions , will and feelings . Below we distinguish two issues : First , we address the question of whether critical thinking and reasoning can be taught , and then we discuss the question of the type ( s ) of thinking processes . Willingham , a cognitive scientist , has questioned in 2007 , in American Educator , whether CT can be taught ( Willingham , 2007 ) . His answer was the following : ‘‘Decades of cognitive research point to a disappointing answer : not really . ’’ ( p . 8 ) . And he pointed out to a major reason : ‘‘The processes of thinking are intertwined with the content of knowl - edge ( that is , domain knowledge ) . ( … ) if the student doesn’t know much about an issue , he can’t think about it from multiple perspectives . ’’ ( pp . 9 – 10 ) . Moreover , Willingham ( 2012 ) argued that children and adolescents from families with poor socioeco - nomic status ( SES ) and cultural background acquire much less diversiﬁed knowledge than those from high - SES families and , additionally , are much more exposed to stress than the latter , which leads to restrict their knowledge even more ; as multiple - perspective knowledge is crucial to critical thinking and reasoning , 9 We must acknowledge , anyway , that Ennis et al . were closer to what we think critical thinking or reasoning is than other well - known authors , in the cognitive psychology tradition , such as Sternberg ( 1986 ) or Halpern ( 1988 ) , who are mentioned , uncritically , by Leach et al . ( 2020 , p . 3 ) . 123 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 253 socioeconomic and cultural poverty are thus , in general , huge handicaps for CT . We now push forward the inference : In the rich homes , compared to the poor , the capital reproduction leads to enlarge the life condition differences , and the knowledge assets reproduction leads to enlarge the critical thinking and reasoning differences . Obviously , the latter differences potentialize the former , and the inexorable cycle pursues – until the system is intentionally cracked by the humans themselves . Still on the strictly cognitive path , CT is or presupposes problem recognition at a deep structural level . Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 , 1983 ) showed how problems pertaining to quite different domains ( med - ical and military : how to treat a tumor and how to attack a dictator’s fortress ) share an essential idea ( see also Willingham , 2019 ) . To both , the solution may be to make rays / troops converge at a single but crucial point of attack , rather than dispersing them over the illness / enemy . The essential idea , common to both problems and potentially many others , is to focus all the strikes on the hearth of the problem ( in the dictator case , perhaps only after having delivered a fake or distracting strike distant from the hearth ) . Conceptu - alizing problems at a deep rather than surface level requires knowledge over different domains , but just knowledge is insufﬁcient , critical analysis and com - parative thinking—this is the chief rational virtue— are necessary to abstract the relevant common features and distinguish them from the irrelevant ones . Obvi - ously , the richer are the surface structures of the problems , the more difﬁcult it is to infer their common deep structure . Can this kind of critical analysis be taught and learned in such a way as to become able to detect alone the deep structure of new problems ? It has been shown that comparison - based learning of items allows better classiﬁcation performance than single - item classiﬁcation and transfers to the classiﬁcation of new items from a novel domain , superﬁcially dissim - ilar but relationally alike ( Kurtz et al . , 2013 ) . Thinking and in particular CT are strongly based on the recognition of relevant information . One of the most typical examples of the latter ability is provided by the expert chess players who register in their long - term memory thousands of positions allowing them to compare the present ones ( of themselves and of their opponent ) , on which they focus to predict the best subsequent sequence of moves . Still as regards memory , WM has been presented by Willingham ( 2019 ) as ‘‘the place in the mind where thinking happens ( … ) where you hold information and manipulate it to carry out cognitive tasks . ’’ ( p . 9 ) . This metaphorical statement is appealing , but it should be consistent with the following : ﬁrst , that mental activity ( which we believe to be equivalent to the popular noun ‘‘mind’’ ) is not always conscious ; second , that think - ing is necessarily conscious and goes well beyond active WM ; and third , that the contents of WM are not necessarily focused all the time . The ‘‘place’’ metaphor would just signal an obedient but dynamic server for thinking . What is more interesting in the function Willingham attributes to WM in relation to thinking is the idea that it clumps ‘‘multiple entities into a single , meaningful unit’’ and observable in ‘‘many domains of expertise’’ beyond chess , like ‘‘dance , circuit design and computer programming . ’’ ( p . 10 ) . Now we address the Great Rationality Debate in cognitive science , as it was coined by Stanovich ( 2011 ) . It turned mainly around the question of whether the brain / mind hosts one or several ( at least two ) types of thinking processes . This is a debate with historical roots . First , and given the necessity of classifying everybody , an intuitive concept that remained unsuitable for scientiﬁc purposes served to classify children and adults in terms of a quantitative measure , the IQ . All individuals were obligatory ranked on a numeric scale ( see e . g . , Seeing thought I , Morais & Kolinsky , 2021 , for the discrimination of immigrants ) . Intelligence was retrograded by the development of Cognitive science , which introduced and keeps alive a debate on whether there are one or ( at least ) two types of cognitive processes ( see Stanovich , 2011 , p . 18 , for a long list of different characteriza - tions of the duality ) . Although the duality of cognitive processes remains strongly contested , as we will see 123 254 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 below , the division into ‘‘System 1’’ vs . ‘‘System 2’’ or ‘‘Type 1’’ vs . ‘‘Type 2’’ processes 10 or , to simplify , between intuitive vs . reasoned , automatic vs . con - scious , heuristic vs . analytic ( e . g . , Evans , 1984 ) , or , in another perspective , probabilistic vs . based on mental model reasoning ( e . g . , Verschuren et al . , 2005 ) , became dominant . If it were true , it would mean that the cognitive actors are , depending on the circum - stances , parsimonious ( letting the ‘‘autonomous mind’’ intervene ) or a proud spender ( using the reﬂective mind to draw on the human’s computational power , rich of processing algorithms , i . e . , well - deﬁned instructions for problem - solving operations ) . It is worth re - citing here a citation of Gilbert ( 1999 , pp . 3 – 4 ) , supported by Stanovich ( 2011 , p . 33 ) : ‘‘Psychologists who champion dual - process models ( would recast them ) in terms of three processes , or four , or even ﬁve . Indeed , the only number they would not happily accept is one’’ , so that their ‘‘claim is this : There aren’t one . ’’ Stanovich ( 2011 , p . 32 ) himself confesses to have created a tripartite theory of mind , with the autonomous mind ( the source of Type 1 processing ) feeding the reﬂective mind ( ‘‘control … at a high level of generality’’ , p . 32 ) , which then chooses within the algorithmic mind 11 the appropriate set of calculation rules . The distinction between these sys - tems was nicely illustrated by Erceg et al . ( 2019 ) through the famous bat and a ball problem from the Cognitive Reﬂection Test ( CRT ; Frederick , 2005 ) . The problem goes as follows : ‘‘A bat and a ball cost $ 1 . 10 in total . The bat costs $ 1 more than the ball . How much does the ball cost ? ’’ As other problems from the CRT , it automatically triggers a strong initial response ( supposedly generated by the automatic System 1 ) : 10 cents . To overcome this initial wrong response and arrive at the correct one ( 5 cents ) , one has not only to reﬂect on the answer and recognize the need to engage in more deliberate processing , which would involve the reﬂective mind ( namely rational thinking disposi - tions ) , but also to rely on the algorithmic mind , that is , to possess adequate computational power , knowledge , and abilities to calculate the right answer . The proliferation of dual process theories is most probably linked to the need to explain the apparent paradox created by the discovery of a series of cognitive biases violating the elementary rules of logic , even in technically educated students ( e . g . , Tversky & Kahneman , 1974 , 1983 ; Wason , 1966 ) . This goes against our idea of the human being as intrinsically rational . A well - documented example ( although highly controversial , see e . g . , Cosmides & Tooby , 1996 ; Lesage et al . , 2013 ) is performance on ‘‘Bayesian reasoning problems’’ ( i . e . , problems that are best solved thanks to Bayes’ theorem ) , where people tend to ignore or underweight the base - rate of a target event when calculating its probability ( Tversky & Kahneman , 1982 ) . For instance , in the medical diagnosis problem , participants are asked to solve this kind of problem : ‘‘If a test to detect a disease whose prevalence is 1 / 1000 has a false positive rate of 5 % , what is the chance that a person with a positive result actually has the disease , assuming that you know nothing about the person’s symptoms or signs ? – % ’’ . Respondents have thus to infer the probability of the hypothesis ( the presence of the disease ) based on an observation ( the positive result ) . Bayes’ theorem provides here a normative standard for updating the probability of the hypothesis in the light of new evidence , which requires considering the probability to be ill ( i . e . , the base - rate of the hypothesis ) and its reverse in addition to consider the hit and false alarm rates of the test ( the probability to obtain a positive test given that the person is ill or not ill , respectively ) . Casscells et al . ( 1978 ) reported that only a minority of staff and fourth - year students at Harvard Medical School provided the correct Bayesian answer ( about 2 % ) . In fact , 45 % of them answered ‘‘95 % ’’ , which is a response that is inconsistent with a population base rate for the disease of 1 in 1000 . They concluded that their subjects were violating Bayes’ theorem by ignoring the base rate . Yet , as already illustrated above , there are many different types of so - called dual - process ( or dual - system ) theories , probably as many as dual process theorists ( De Neys , 2021 ) . In addition to the exact number of processes or systems involved , other 10 Most of the recent versions of dual - process models prefer to adopt a ‘‘Type 1 – Type 2’’ processing distinction rather than the older ‘‘System 1 – System 2’’ terminology to emphasize the fact that both ‘‘systems’’ include various processes . 11 ‘‘Algorithm’’ derives from the name of the 9th - century Arab mathematician al - Khwa¯rizmı¯ , but the corresponding concept was already used by the Babylonian mathematicians from the half of the third millennium B . C . and has been used creatively for different scientiﬁc purposes . It is always beneﬁcial – given the repetitive scientists’ oblivion of their sources – to recall the literate origin of science and how scientiﬁc concepts are constantly marked with the seal of literacy . 123 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 255 differences between these theories relate to the temporal organization of the processes . According to so - called default - interventionist theories ( Evans , 2007 ) , the systems operate serially . Automatic and fast System 1 processes would be activated ﬁrst and produce an intuitive , heuristic response ( Evans , 2006 ; Kahneman & Frederick 2005 ) . To arrive at the correct response , System 2 must ‘‘intervene’’ and change this default response . As commented on by Erceg et al . ( 2019 ) , under this view , giving a heuristic response to problems such as those of the CRT would reﬂect a failure to engage in effortful and deliberate System 2 processing due either to the nonrecognition of the need to engage in more deliberate processing ( lack of reﬂective mind ) or to inadequate cognitive capacities needed for calculating the right answer ( lack of algorithmic mind ) . When the correct response is given , it would reﬂect the intervention of System 2 , which inhibited the wrong , heuristic response . Yet , some authors have proposed that Type 1 and 2 processes operate in parallel and may produce con - ﬂicting answers , describing them as associative vs . rule - based ( e . g . , Sloman , 1996 ) . Hybrid dual - process models have also been proposed ( e . g . , Pennycook et al . , 2015 ) to account for the fact that logical intuitions seem to be activated by System I . When the heuristic and normative responses are in conﬂict , people detect this conﬂict and are aware that some - thing is happening even if not quite sure what , being less conﬁdent in their responses and slower to respond on a conﬂict task than on a parallel no - conﬂict task , even when they end up giving the wrong heuristic response ( for discussions see Sˇrol & De Neys , 2021 ; Stanovich , 2018 ) . Under this view , the cause of error on reasoning problems similar to those of the CRT is not ( or not only ) the result of a failure in cognitive processes monitoring and detecting the conﬂict , but rather a consequence of the difﬁculties in blocking or inhibiting the tempting heuristic response and / or inadequate cognitive capacities ( Erceg et al . , 2019 ) . In fact , scientists of the ﬁeld often use in their discussions what Evans and Stanovich ( 2013 ) called a ‘‘received’’ version of the theory , namely a kind of generic theory constructed in the minds of authors but advocated by no speciﬁc scholar . For instance , Evans ( 2019 ) noted that Type 2 processes have been described as having two very different functions : Whereas the original theory proposed that Type 2 processes ﬁnd reasons and justiﬁcations to support or rationalise the intuitive choices , most researchers have emphasised instead a ‘‘received version’’ according to which Type 2 processes engage reasoning to draw conclusions or make decisions . Type 2 reasoning would thus be necessary for correct solutions . As commented on by Evans ( 2019 , p . 385 ) , the difference in these propositions lies not in the nature of Type 2 processes but rather in its function . This is what he calls ‘‘a dramatic transition’’ : ‘‘Reasoning to justify one’s intuitions instead became reasoning to support a conclusion or decision to replace an intuitive judge - ment , which is often considered to be biased’’ . The simpliﬁed and generic received theory incorporates several fallacies ( for a detailed discussion , see Evans & Stanovich , 2013 ) , the most important of which being the normative fallacy . ‘‘This is the false belief that Type 1 processes are biased and Type 2 processes normatively correct . In its most extreme form , authors attempt to diagnose the type of process used by the correctness of the answer . This cannot possibly be correct for both a priori and empirical reasons . Rationality is a philosophical , not psychological concept , and the literatures on reasoning and decision making included many examples of multiple norms , that is rival and conﬂicting theories about what are the right and wrong answers’’ ( Evans , 2019 , p . 387 ; for a critique of normativism , see e . g . , Elqayam & Evans , 2011 ) . In addition , intuitions may often lead to correct judgements . Based among others on the idea that reasoning may have originally evolved for the function of ﬁnding reasons and justiﬁcations to support or rationalise intuitive choices but became exapted for the other function of engaging reasoning to draw conclusions or make decisions , Evans ( 2019 ) proposed a default - interventionist model which incorporates both views . Cognitive resources and Type 2 processing would impact both on the evaluation of the default response and in the generation of an alternative answer if that default is found unsatisfactory ( see also Kahneman , 2011 ; Kahneman & Frederick , 2002 , for a similar view ) . According to Evans ( 2019 ) , this is consistent with evidence that reasoning to support the default intuition is the norm , although intervention may also occur . Yet , Evans ( 2019 , p . 399 ) noted that ‘‘this does not mean that Type 2 processing is itself responsible , for example , for setting the degree of critical effort , or deciding whether to engage new reasoning when the default intuition is unsatisfactory’’ . Evans assigns 123 256 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 these kinds of preconscious monitoring and control processes to a separate category which he called Type 3 processes ( see also Evans , 2009 ) . This again leads us to the question : ‘‘How many dual - process theories do we need : One , two or many ? ’’ , as articulated by Evans’ ( 2009 ) chapter title . Yet a common trait of all these theories or models is that they postulate a qualitative difference between intuitive and deliberate thinking . As such they oppose single process models to which the difference is a matter of degree , not of kind . De Neys ( 2021 ) recently recalled other main episodes of the controversy between dual and single process models of thinking . Dual process theorists have often pointed to opposing features of intuitive ( e . g . , fast , effortless ) and deliberate thinking ( e . g . , slow , effortful ) . How - ever , the view of a perfect alignment dual process according to which these features necessarily have to co - occur has been strongly criticised ( see De Neys , 2021 ) . There are indeed obvious cases of non - align - ment , such as the incubation phenomenon , which illustrates that effort and speed do not necessarily align : not explicitly thinking for some time ( as during a good night sleep ) about a problem we have been struggling with may facilitate its solution ( Wallas , 1926 ; for a review , see Gilhooly , 2016 ) . More importantly , the argument of perfect alignment is fallacious : Perfect alignment does not preclude a mere quantitative difference between processes ; likewise , non - alignment does not argue against the dual process position . Thus , the alignment question is orthogonal to the dual vs . single process discussion ( De Neys , 2021 ) . In recent years , dual process theorists stressed that the dual process view only requires one single deﬁning feature along which a qualitative difference arises ( De Neys , 2021 ) . Although models largely diverge on the number of deﬁning features , they suggest that there is a qualitative processing difference along at least one of the features ( e . g . , Evans & Stanovich , 2013 ; Penny - cook , 2018 ) . Deliberate processing would load on WM , whereas intuitive processing would not , and only the former would also involve cognitive decoupling , which enables mental simulation . They also point to the autonomy of intuitive processes as a critical deﬁning feature ( Pennycook , 2018 ) : once initiated , these processes run to completion whether or not the reasoners want it , the outcome being out of their control . Evans ( 2019 ) further proposed that intuitive thinking posts it output into WM . Yet the various deﬁning features are not well - deﬁned and , being continuous in nature , they do not allow us to establish a precise threshold at which a continuous feature gives rise to qualitatively different processing ( De Neys , 2021 ) . Similarly , De Neys ( 2021 ) refutes as invalid several arguments that have been used to support one or the other point of view . For instance , critics of the dual - process view have suggested that the evidence can be accounted for by a more parsimonious single process approach . The principle of parsimony or Occam’s razor posits that when two hypotheses are equally well supported by the data , we should favor the one that makes the least assumptions . ‘‘The dual process model assumes there are two qualitatively different types of reasoning ; the single process account only postulates only a single process . Because one is less than two , parsimony might seem to force us to favor the single model account’’ ( De Neys , 2021 p . 9 ) . Yet , this argument is fallacious : Parsimony refers to the total number of theoretical assumptions that are required to explain a given ﬁnding and as single process models make additional assumptions to account for the empirical evidence , they are not necessarily more parsimonious than dual process models . More fundamentally , De Neys ( 2021 p . 11 ) claimed that this is an ‘‘irrelevant’’ and ‘‘trivial’’ debate : ‘‘after 30 years of debate , there is currently no good evidence that would allow one to decide between the single - process and dual - process model view . Therefore , some might be tempted to conclude that researchers need to increase their efforts to ﬁnd such empirical evidence . Much to the contrary , I believe that we should move on and let the debate lie . ’’ ( … ) ‘‘even if it can be solved , the debate will not advance the psychological understanding of human thinking’’ . He argued that this is not a useful problem for the psychological study of intuitive and deliberate think - ing , as solving it would be of no help to identify the operating principles and mechanisms that allow us to think . According to him ( ibid . , p . 12 ) , ‘‘Scientists need to know how intuition and deliberation work and how they interact’’ and knowing that intuition and delib - eration are qualitatively rather than quantitatively different ‘‘does not allow a single prediction in this respect’’ and ‘‘does not bring researchers a single step closer to formulating an answer to ( … ) ’’ the four critical questions that psychological studies should aim to address . A ﬁrst one concerns what we can 123 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 257 accomplish ( or not ) when we intuit or deliberate . A second is to understand how we decide to engage more / less deliberation and how we know we need to switch from intuition to deliberation . A third one is to characterize the time course of intuitive and deliberate thinking and their relationship ( e . g . , are they com - pletely independent ? ) . The fourth critical issue is to understand whether we can optimize people’s reason - ing and how to get people to intuit whenever it is useful to do so . As suggested by De Neys ( ibid . , pp . 2 and 12 – 13 ) , it is ‘‘time to move on’’ for the ﬁeld and leave the single process vs . dual process debate behind to ‘‘focus its energy on more critical questions concerning the nature of intuitive and deliberate thinking’’ and address them with more empirical research . Literacy and scientiﬁc literacy : which heritage to the future ? Computational literacy , the young brother Literacy has always been a cognitive capacity based on a technology , writing , operating on natural lan - guage ( s ) . Since less than one century , it began to operate on artiﬁcial language ( s ) , contributing to create a new technology ( computation ) and a new science ( computer science ) . It is cognitive because it relies on perception , attention , memory , control processes , imagination , thinking and reasoning , hypothesizing , guessing and creativity . It generates new literate products and retroacts over the former language and cognitive capacities , making them improve and develop new abilities . Thus , artiﬁcial languages and their outputs are new literate products resulting from language , cognition , and previous literacy abilities . There are both quantitative and qualitative transfor - mations , but we do not see any rupture , any magic external cause in this development . In other words , pre - and non - alphabetical literacies , and digital or computational literacy , all represent languages , natu - ral or not , now digital , and , perhaps in the future , a brain - language using a new ‘‘writing’’ more appropri - ate to neural activity . Individual differences in learning programming languages reﬂect individual differences in natural language aptitude and in cognitive functions . Prat et al . ( 2020 ) used ‘‘an individual differences approach to test the hypothesis that learning modern programming languages resembles second ‘‘natural’’ language in adulthood’’ . The behavioural indices of language aptitude , derived from listening comprehension of both ﬁrst and second language , were considered as potential predictors of learning in Python , ‘‘the fastest growing programming language in use’’ . The cogni - tive indices were measures of ﬂuid intelligence , WM capacity , declarative memory ( all considered to be involved in learning programming languages ) , and more speciﬁc language abilities such as syntactic awareness and phoneme coding . Those cognitive acquisitions were considered potentially relevant ‘‘for the vast majority of programming languages which require both producing and reading alphanu - meric strings’’ . The participants were young adults with no previous programming experience , and three outcomes were assessed : learning rate , programming accuracy , and declarative knowledge . Neural and behavioural measures were associated in the stepwise regression analyses . In the model relative to the Python learning rate , language aptitude was by far the strongest predictor ( 41 % ) , followed by ﬂuid reasoning ( 12 . 8 % ) and right frontotemporal resting state EEG power ( 10 % ) ; in the second model , that explained programming accuracy , ﬂuid intelligence was the strongest ( 50 . 1 % ) ; and , in the model that best explained declarative knowledge , ﬂuid reasoning was again the best predictor ( 30 . 9 % ) . Globally , the most important contributors were , in decreasing order , general cognition ( [ 30 % ) , language aptitude ( [ 15 % ) and neural psychometric indices ( about 10 % ) . These ﬁndings are revealing of the links between natural language learning and computer language learning , but it is worth noting that , most probably , those participants were skilled literates . Prat et al . also note that ‘‘Python uses indentation patterns that mimic ‘‘paragraph’’ style hierarchies ( … ) and uses words ( e . g . , ‘‘not’’ and ‘‘is’’ ) to denote operations commonly indicated with symbols’’ . Unfortunately , in Prat et al . ’s ( 2020 ) paper , the role of written language literacy in the development of the cognitive capacities estimated in the study was completely neglected , even though literacy was evoked as being the equivalent of numeracy . Why ? Perhaps because literate scientists , living almost exclusively among other literates , underestimate both the extension and the deep cognitive impact of sub - literacy and illiteracy . 123 258 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 Nowadays , ‘‘natural language literacy’’ and ‘‘com - putational or coding literacy’’ not only are intertwined but , in addition , assist each other . Vee ( 2013 , p . 43 ) noted that ‘‘Since the 1960s , computer enthusiasts have employed the concept of ‘‘literacy’’ to under - score the importance , ﬂexibility , and power of writing for and with computers . ’’ Literacy thus will become , if it is not already the case , a higher - order concept , encompassing both textual and computational liter - acy ; and even before the advent of its computational form , literacy was not just textual , as it has impacted spoken language , thinking and cognition . Vee ( p . 46 ) admits that computer programming might not yet be fully a literacy but is becoming it : ‘‘programming is leaving the exclusive domain of computer science and becoming more central to professions like journalism , biology , design—and , through the digital studies , even the study of literature and history . ’’ Obviously , the computer is the material basis of computational literacy , as writing is for textual literacy . There is however a sort of ﬁlial relationship , as computation would not have been viable without writing and reading . Both literacies share a common function : the creation of structures for communication , and both require relatively long learning before becoming skilled . Over time , both literacies gain in complexity and cognitive impact . In addition , both , the ‘‘old’’ and the ‘‘young’’ one , have developed in social contexts marked by deep inequalities . In 2016 the US government launched a ‘‘Computer Science for All’’ project to ‘‘introduce programming at all educational levels’’ ( cf . Fedorenko et al . , 2019 , p . 525 ) . Obviously , it could not be for all . Neither for illiterate and low literate adults , nor , among the 15 years - old US schooled adolescents , for the 40 % poorest readers ( or the 42 % poorest in mathematics ) who were rated in the last PISA Report ( OECD , 2019 ) at levels 1 and 2 . 12 If now we turn our attention to the adults and consider as literate those who in reading and writing have access to the orthographic representa - tions of words without conscious and intentional progressive decoding or recoding , then , as we argued in the previous Seeing thought—I paper ( Morais & Kolinsky , 2021 ) , they should be less than half of the world adult population . People beneﬁting of high literacy should be aware of the ethical , political , social and cultural urgency of mobilizing the scientiﬁc community and out of it to establish in every country educational conditions of quality and of strict equality for access to full literacy and practice . Scientists who constantly use literacy in their work , breath it , and know how literacy is vital , should claim and act for universal literacy . They should not let massive literacide 13 be accomplished . Many computer scientists think that in our ‘‘demo - cratic’’ society the citizens who are end users of computers should learn how to program to better discuss issues of privacy and liberties in the use of computers , but they do not even consider the question of whether illiterates and low literates can be also considered as citizens of a democracy . In the ancient Athens the democracy project was launched and considered viable through the increasing access of the people to literacy . The modern world forgot the meanings of democracy and citizenship and uses literacy , formerly textual and now also computational , as a competition tool for a fallacious meritocracy . To Vee ( 2013 , p . 54 ) , ‘‘literacy in the twenty - ﬁrst century is an increasingly complex phenomenon that includes skills with both textual and computational technolo - gies . ’’ She is aware of the illiterate’s double illiteracy situation : ‘‘ ( … ) the power balance is once again shifting toward those who are skilled in this new literacy technology . ’’ ( p . 55 ) and commented that the illiterate is ‘‘less the maker of his destiny than the literate person’’ . Yet saying ‘‘the illiterates’ destiny is made by the literates’’ would be closer to reality . In addition , for programming literacy there is a strong gender imbalance : high - level programmers are much more common among men ( Vee , 2013 ) . The new technology presents something original without equivalent in the old one : one writes not for a paper or a book , but for the computer or other programmers . However , writing for other program - mers is not without a counterpart in natural language literacy : Researchers write to communicate their thinking and ﬁndings to their peers . Scientiﬁc literacy may also share a further social dimension with programming : We write not only with others but also 12 PISA distinguishes between six levels of increasing difﬁ - culty , with level 1 further differentiated into three levels . 13 The word ‘‘literacide’’ means the murder of a book . We extend it to the murder of potential literacy in many hundreds of million children in the present and next generations . It is a permanent crime rarely noticed by the media , and never by the academia and the scientiﬁc societies . 123 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 259 following norms designed by the scientiﬁc and editorial community . This also happens in computa - tional literacy . Quoting Vee ( p . 56 ) : ‘‘Strictures such as how to control the program ﬂow , how to name variables , how long functions should be , and how much code to write per line are established socially to help programmers work together , especially in very large teams , but they matter little to the computer . ’’ Thus , the most important difference between the two literacies lays in the object of writing / computing . In natural language literacy , the code ( the orthographic code ) pre - exists , it is ‘‘given’’ to the reader and the writer , although it must be learned . In programming it is quite the opposite , the code is the object to be created . Scientiﬁc literacy : now and perhaps tomorrow Scientiﬁc literacy—in a single word , science—inter - venes in both textual and computational literacy . It has always been linked with technology and politics . Scientiﬁc reasoning is tributary of textual literacy , and it may be our main cognitive heritage . Whether scientiﬁc reasoning will deeply change under the speciﬁc inﬂuence of computational literacy remains to be examined in a close future . What is undoubtedly common to both literacies , the scientiﬁc and the computational , is that they are not encapsulated from or immunized to the inﬂuence of the material , social and political context . Inequality may result from anything that has permanence and thus can become property of anyone . It began with the storage of cereals , some thousands of years later it was dopped by the invention and use of writing . Digging canals and irrigating land required the partnership of technology and science . Nabu , the Babylonian god of writing , assisted both . Astronomy and mathematics helped in different ways to predict and regulate the water . About 2300 years ago , Alexandria , in Egypt , hosted the ﬁrst scientiﬁc community , with research institutes , labora - tories and a Great Library and archives for the scientiﬁc data . Since then , science often rhymed with violence , and beneﬁtted from four of its forms : slavery , inequality , war , and crime . In 1942 , almost two thousand German scientists and engineers worked on a rocket that could have allowed the Nazis win the war if the Fu¨hrer had not been sceptical about it . Indeed , when he understood its importance , it was too late for the Nazis and still possible to the Allies to disembark successfully in the West , sixteen months after the Stalingrad battle in the East ( cf . Blamont , 1993 ) . Fascism is war , fascism is capitalism ( it was under both Mussolini and Hitler , cf . Bel , 2009 ) , and although capitalism is not necessarily war , it con - tributed to the tremendous capacity that has been accumulated nowadays to end , not with war , but with the world , a capacity brought again by the now much more powerful science and technology . Surveillance capitalism ( SC , Zuboff , 2019 ) , whose main instrument is AI and computational literacy , is based on the subconscious manipulation of the will by an alliance of computer scientists and business com - panies . Funded by corporations and governments , it inﬂuences production , buying , consuming , and polit - ical ideologies and behaviour . It mobilizes thousands of computational scientists and AI experts as well as cognitive and social scientists , all involved in the automatic predicting , controlling , and modifying human behaviour , based on data collected through phones and electronic sensors from millions of people monitored without their agreement . It would dispense psychoanalysis : the people’s stored and constantly actualized individual proﬁles correspond better to their true personalities than what they think of themselves . Those people who are under the surveil - lance of AI networks do not decide , are led to decide according to other’s decisions . As described in detail by Zuboff , private companies like Facebook intend to control everybody and everything , the people , the market , and the political power . As she also showed , this vision of society is not new : it was present in Skinner’s books and had been criticized by Chomsky . The main point is that , even if machines may not only share some of our high - level cognitive capacities ( we say ‘‘our’’ intentionally , rather than ‘‘human’’ , as they concern only the literates , and not all of them ) , but also surpass us in ways which presumably our cognition will never reach , there is no suggestion that they will acquire our sentiments and moral principles . What makes us human is the mutual interaction of affectivity and morality with our cognitive capacities whatever their level , which makes us all different , not identical exemplars automatically issued from the assembly atelier . As admirative as we are of Zuboff’s monumental 2019 book , we disagree with her on two important points . The ﬁrst is that ‘‘surveillance capitalism depends upon the exploitation and control of human 123 260 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 nature’’ ( p . 470 ) . Abstracting a human nature from a Sapiens that since the beginning , if we could identify one , has been transformed incessantly by his own activity is impossible . We do not have a ‘‘nature’’ . We just have some everchanging culture , and it is from human cultures that we may possibly extract some constant traits . So , if we have a nature , it must be the cultural traits that persist through 250 thousand years or more . The second point of disagreement concerns her claim that ‘‘the struggle for power and control in society is no longer associated with the hidden facts of class and its relationship to production’’ , ‘‘only to the facts of automated engineered behaviour modiﬁca - tion . ’’ ( p . 308 ) . SC is just a new form of capitalism , as Zuboff’s designation implicitly recognizes , and it does not eliminate the existence of classes , of dominant and dominated , of rich and poor , with an imperfect correlation , even if there are huge differences within categories and no precise boundaries between them . Concerning their relationship to production , SC did not eliminate it , given that , beyond political control , SC seeks to control for buying and consuming , and inferentially for producing . The concepts of class and production , even if they both change to some extent , remain not only applicable but also necessary . More generally , let us listen to the Mozambican novelist and poet Mia Couto ( in The universe in a sand grain , 2019 , translation ours ) : ‘‘We are suggested that we live today in a unique and simultaneously world , in a shared world as if it were a global village . We are told that in this world we are all connected because we have access to internet , to tweeter , to facebook . That’s not true . We don’t live in the same world . More than half of humanity does not have internet access . More serious than that : more than half of humanity does not have access to drinking water . And when we sit down to eat , there are a billion people who stay off the table . ’’ Final note Since the last quarter of the twentieth century , we have been witnesses of the progressive isolationism of cognitive science as regard the other human sciences . Human cognition and language would never have developed independently of our social history . The belief on ‘‘natural’’ cognition , independent of our social and , more largely , cultural history , led cognitive science to deviate from fundamental questions . We wrote these twin papers under the general title ‘‘Seeing thought’’ to stress the role literacy had , keeps , and will maintain in shaping our cognitive capacities and capabilities , and our aim can be enunciated in a single and brief call to cognitive scientists and scientists in general : Science must renew with society , with culture , and with politics . Acknowledgements J . Morais is Emeritus Professor at Universite´ Libre de Bruxelles ( ULB ) and Invited Professor at Unescog ( CRCN , ULB ) . R . Kolinsky is Research Director of the Fonds de la Recherche Scientiﬁque – FNRS ( FRS – FNRS ) , Belgium . Preparation of this paper was supported by a Concerted Research Action grant of the Belgian French community attributed to R . Kolinsky and O . Klein ( The Socio - Cognitive Impact of Literacy ) . Declarations Conﬂict of interest On behalf of both authors , the corre - sponding author states that there is no conﬂict of interest . References Allison , H . E . ( 1975 ) . Benedict de Spinoza . Twayne Publishers . American Philosophical Association ( 1990 ) Critical thinking : a statement of expert consensus for purposes of educational assessment and instruction . ‘‘The Delphi Report’’ , Com - mittee on Pre - College Philosophy . ( ERIC Doc . No . ED 315 423 ) Arbib , M . ( 2012 ) . How the brain got language : the mirror system hypothesis . Oxford University Press . Arbib , M . A . ( 2016 ) . Towards a computational comparative neuroprimatology : framing the language - ready brain . Physics of Life Reviews , 16 , 1 – 54 . Basieva , I . , Pothos , E . , Trueblood , J . , Khrennikov , A . , & Busemeyer , J . ( 2017 ) . Quantum probability updating from zero priors ( by - passing Cromwell’s rule ) . Journal of Mathematical Psychology , 77 , 58 – 69 . Bel , G . ( 2009 ) . From Public to Private : Privatization in 1920’s Fascist Italy . Robert Schuman Centre for Advanced Studies : European University Institute Working Papers . Berlin , N . ( 1999 ) . Trafﬁc of our stage : why ‘‘Waiting for Godot ? ’’ The Massachusetts Review , 40 ( 3 ) , 420 – 434 . Bettha¨user , B . A . , Bourne , M . , & Bukodi , E . ( 2020 ) . Under - standing the social mobility chances of children from working - class backgrounds in Britain : how important are cognitive ability and locus of control ? British Journal of Sociology , 71 ( 2 ) , 349 – 365 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1468 - 4446 . 12732 Blamont , J . ( 1993 ) . Le Chiffre et le Songe ( The Cipher and the Dream ) . Odile Jacob . Bravo , M . J . , Galiana , L . , Rodrigo , M . F . , Navarro - Pe´rez , J . J . , & Oliver , A . ( 2020 ) . An adaptation of the critical thinking 123 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 261 disposition scale in Spanish youth . Thinking Skills and Creativity , 38 , 100748 . Brayanov , J . B . , & Smith , M . A . ( 2010 ) . Bayesian and ‘‘anti - Bayesian’’ biases in sensory integration for action and perception in the size – weight illusion . Journal of Neuro - physiology , 103 ( 3 ) , 1518 – 1531 . Butler , H . A . , & Halpern , D . F . ( 2020 ) . Critical thinking impacts our everyday lives . In R . J . Sternberg , & D . F . Halpern ( Eds . ) , Critical thinking in psychology ( pp . 152 – 172 ) . Cambridge Univerity Press . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / 9781108684354 . 008 Cariani , F . ( 2020 ) . On predicting . Ergo , an Open Access Journal of Philosophy , 7 , 339 – 361 . Casscells , W . , Schoenberger , A . , & Graboys , T . B . ( 1978 ) . Interpretation by physicians of clinical laboratory results . New England Journal of Medicine , 299 , 999 – 1001 . Clark , A . ( 2013 ) . Whatever next ? predictive brains , situated agents , and the future of cognitive science . Behavioral and Brain Science , 36 , 181 – 253 . Clark , A . , & Chalmers , D . ( 1998 ) . The extended mind . Analysis , 58 ( 1 ) , 7 – 19 . Cohen , L . , Dehaene , S . , Naccache , L . , Lehe´ricy , S . , Dehaene - Lambertz , G . , He´naff , M . A . , & Michel , F . ( 2000 ) . The visual word form area : spatial and temporal characteriza - tion of an initial stage of reading in normal subjects and posterior split - brain patients . Brain , 123 , 291 – 307 . Colage ` , I . ( 2016 ) . The cultural evolution of language and brain : Comment on ‘‘Towards a computational comparative neuroprimatology : framing the language - ready brain’’ by Michael A . Arbib . Physics of Life Reviews , 16 , 61 – 62 . Colage ` , I . , & d’Errico , F . ( 2020 ) . Culture : the driving force of human cognition . Topics in Cognitive Science , 12 ( 2 ) , 654 – 672 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / tops . 12372 Colombo , M . , & Hartmann , S . ( 2017 ) . Bayesian cognitive sci - ence , uniﬁcation , and explanation . British Journal of the Philosophy of Science , 68 , 451 – 464 . Colombo , M . , Elkin , L . , & Hartmann , S . ( 2019 ) . Being realist about Bayes , and the predictive processing theory of mind . British Journal of the Philosophy of Science , 70 , 1 – 39 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / bjps / axy059 Cosmides , L . , & Tooby , J . ( 1996 ) . Are humans goods intuitive statisticians after all ? Rethinking some conclusions from the literature on judgment under uncertainty . Cognition , 58 , 1 – 73 . Damasio , A . R . ( 2003 ) . Looking for Spinoza Joy , sorrow , and the feeling brain . Houghton Mifﬂin Harcourt Da¨mmrich , J . , & Triventi , M . ( 2018 ) . The dynamics of social inequalities in cognitive - related competencies along the early life course—a comparative study . International Journal of Educational Research , 88 , 73 – 84 . De Neys , W . ( 2021 ) . On dual and single process models of thinking . Perspectives on Psychological Science . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1745691620964172 Dehaene , S . , & Cohen , L . ( 2007 ) . Cultural recycling of cortical maps . Neuron , 56 , 384 – 398 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2007 . 10 . 004 Dehaene , S . , Pegado , F . , Braga , L . W . , Ventura , P . , Nunes , G . , Jobert , A . , Dehaene - Lambertz , G . , Kolinsky , R . , Morais , J . , & Cohen , L . ( 2010 ) . How learning to read changes the cortical networks for vision and language . Science , 330 ( 6009 ) , 1359 – 1364 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1194140 Dehaene , S . , Cohen , L . , Morais , J . , & Kolinsky , R . ( 2015 ) . Illiterate to literate : behavioural and cerebral changes induced by reading acquisition . Nature Reviews Neuro - science , 16 ( 4 ) , 234 – 244 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrn3924 Demoulin , C . , & Kolinsky , R . ( 2016 ) . Does learning to read shape verbal working memory ? Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 23 ( 3 ) , 703 – 722 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3758 / s13423 - 015 - 0956 - 7 Descola , Ph . ( 2005 ) . Par - dela ` nature et culture . Gallimard . Donald , M . ( 1993 ) . Origins of the modern mind : three stages in the evolution of culture and cognition . Harvard University Press . Donald , M . ( 2000 ) . The central role of culture in cognitive evolution : a reﬂection on the myth of the isolated mind . In Culture , Thought , and Development ( pp . 19 – 38 ) . Erlbaum Elqayam , S . , & Evans , J . S . B . T . ( 2011 ) . Subtracting ’ought from ’is’ : descriptivism versus normativism in the study of human thinking . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 34 ( 5 ) , 233 – 290 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0140525X1100001X Engel , A . K . , Maye , A . , Kurthen , M . , & Ko¨nig , P . ( 2013 ) . Where’s the action ? The pragmatic turn in cognitive sci - ence . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 17 ( 5 ) , 202 – 209 . Ennis , R . ( 1987 ) . A taxonomy of critical thinking dispositions and abilities . In R . J . Sternberg , & J . B . Baron ( Eds . ) Teaching thinking skills : Theory and practice ( pp . 9 – 26 ) . Freeman Ennis , R . , Millman , J . , & Tomko , T . ( 2005 ) . Cornell critical thinking tests . The Critical Thinking Co . Erceg , N . , Galic , Z . , & Bubic´ , A . ( 2019 ) . Who detects and why ? Individual differences in abilities , knowledge and thinking dispositions among different types of problem solvers and their implications for the validity of reasoning tasks . Psy - Arxiv . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 31234 / osf . io / w5zau Evans , J . S . B . ( 1984 ) . Heuristic and analytic processes in rea - soning . British Journal of Psychology , 75 , 451 – 468 . Evans , J . S . B . ( 2006 ) . The heuristic - analytic theory of reason - ing : extension and evaluation . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 13 ( 3 ) , 378 – 395 . Evans , J . S . B . T . ( 2007 ) . On the resolution of conﬂict in dual - process theories of reasoning . Thinking & Reasoning , 13 , 321 – 329 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 13546780601008825 Evans , J . St . B . T . ( 2009 ) . How many dual - process theories do we need : One , two or many ? In J . St . B . T . Evans & K . Frankish ( Eds . ) , In two minds : dual processes and beyond ( pp . 31 – 54 ) . Oxford University Press Evans , J . S . B . T . ( 2019 ) . Reﬂections on reﬂection : the nature and function of type 2 processes in dual - process theories of reasoning . Thinking & Reasoning , 25 ( 4 ) , 383 – 415 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 13546783 . 2019 . 1623071 Evans , J . S . B . T . , & Stanovich , K . E . ( 2013 ) . Dual process theories of higher cognition : advancing the debate . Per - spectives on Psychological Science , 8 ( 3 ) , 223 – 241 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1745691612460685 Fabry , R . E . ( 2015 ) . Enriching the notion of enculturation : cognitive integration , predictive processing , and the case of reading acquisition . Open MIND . MIND Group Facione , P . A . ( 1990 ) . The California Critical Thinking Skills Test —College Level . Technical Report . Experimental 123 262 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 Validation and Content Validity . California Academic Press Facione , P . A . ( 2015 update ) . Critical Thinking : What it is and why it counts . Measured Reasons LCC , Insight Assessment Fawkes , D . , O’Meara , B . , Weber , D . , & Flage , D . ( 2005 ) . Examining the exam : a critical look at the California Critical Thinking Skills Test . Science & Education , 14 , 117 – 135 . Fedorenko , E . , Ivanova , A . , Dhamala , R . , & Bers , M . U . ( 2019 ) . The language of programming : a cognitive perspective . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 23 ( 7 ) , 525 – 528 . Feinstein , L . ( 2003 ) . Inequality in the early cognitive develop - ment of British children in the 1970 cohort . Economica , 70 ( 277 ) , 73 – 97 . Fodor , J . ( 1983 ) . The modularity of mind : an essay on faculty psychology . MIT Press . Frederick , S . ( 2005 ) . Cognitive reﬂection and decision making . Journal of Economic Perspectives , 19 ( 4 ) , 25 – 42 . Friston , K . ( 2005 ) . ( 2005 ) A theory of cortical responses . Philosophical Transaction of the Royal Society B , 360 , 815 – 836 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2005 . 1622 Friston , K . ( 2009 ) . The free - energy principle : a rough guide to the brain ? Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 13 , 93 – 301 . Friston , K . ( 2010 ) . The free - energy principle : a uniﬁed brain theory ? Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 11 ( 2 ) , 127 – 138 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrn2787 Friston , K . , & Kiebel , S . ( 2009 ) . Predictive coding under the free - energy principle . Philosophical Transaction of the Royal Society B , 364 ( 1521 ) , 1211 – 1221 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2008 . 0300 Friston , K . J . , & Stephan , K . E . ( 2007 ) . Free - energy and the brain . Synthese , 159 ( 3 ) , 417 – 458 . Friston , K . , Kilner , J . , & Harrison , L . ( 2006 ) . A free energy principle for the brain . Journal of Physiology , 100 , 70 – 87 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 ( 3 ) , 306 – 355 . Gick , M . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 ( 1 ) , 1 – 38 . Gilbert , D . T . ( 1999 ) . What the mind’s not . In S . Chaiken & Y . Trope ( Eds . ) , Dual - process theories in social psychology ( pp . 3 – 11 ) . New York : Guilford Press . Gilhooly , K . J . ( 2016 ) . Incubation and intuition in creative problem solving . Frontiers in Psychology , 7 , 1076 . Gould , S . J . , & Vrba , E . S . ( 1982 ) . Exaptation—a missing term in the science of form . Paleobiology , 8 , 4 – 15 . Harris , R . ( 2000 ) . Rethinking writing . Athlone Press . Heckman , J . J . ( 2011 ) . The economics of inequality : the value of early childhood education . American Educator , 35 ( 1 ) , 31 . Henrich , J . ( 2015 ) . The secret of our success . How culture is driving human evolution , domesticating our species , and making us smarter . Princeton University Press . Henrich , J . , Heine , S . J . , & Norenzayan , A . ( 2010 ) . Beyond WEIRD : towards a broad - based behavioral science . Be - havioral and Brain Sciences , 33 ( 2 – 3 ) , 111 . Hohwy , J . ( 2013 ) . The Predictive Mind . Oxford University Press . Hrdy , S . B . ( 2011 ) . Mothers and others . Harvard University Press . Huettig , F . , & Mani , N . ( 2016 ) . Is prediction necessary to understand language ? Probably not . Language , Cognition and Neuroscience , 31 ( 1 ) , 19 – 31 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 23273798 . 2015 . 1072223 Huettig , F . , & Pickering , M . J . ( 2019 ) . Literacy advantages beyond reading : prediction of spoken language . Trends in Cognitive Science , 23 ( 6 ) , 464 – 475 . Hutto , D . D . , & Myin , E . ( 2017 ) . Evolving enactivism : basic minds meet content . MIT Press . Ingvar , D . H . ( 1985 ) . ‘‘Memory of the future’’ : an essay on the temporal organization of conscious awareness . Human Neurobiology , 4 , 127 – 136 . Jaynes , J . ( 1976 ) . The origin of consciousness in the breakdown of the bicameral mind . Houghton Mifﬂin . Jesseph , D . ( 2010 ) . Scientia in Hobbes . Scientia in early modern philosophy ( pp . 117 – 127 ) . Springer Kahneman , D . ( 2011 ) . Thinking , fast and slow . Farrar , Straus and Giroux . Kahneman , D . , & Frederick , S . ( 2002 ) . Representativeness revisited : attribute substitution in intuitive judgement . In T . Gilovich , D . Grifﬁn , & D . Kahneman ( Eds . ) , Heuristics and biases : the psychology of intuitive judgment ( pp . 49 – 81 ) . Cambridge University Press . Kahneman , D . , & Frederick , S . ( 2005 ) . A model of heuristic judgment . In K . J . Holyoak & R . G . Morrison ( Eds . ) , The Cambridge handbook of thinking and reasoning ( pp . 267 – 293 ) . Cambridge University Press . Kahneman , D . , & Tversky , A . ( 1972 ) . Subjective probability : a judgment of representativeness . Cognitive Psychology , 3 , 430 – 454 . Kolinsky , R . , & Morais , J . ( 2018 ) . The worries of wearing lit - erate glasses . L’anne ´ e Psychologique / topics in Cognitive Psychology , 118 ( 4 ) , 321 – 347 . Kolinsky , R . , Gabriel , R . , Demoulin , C . , Gregory , M . M . , Sar - aiva de Carvalho , K . , & Morais , J . ( 2020 ) . The inﬂuence of age , schooling , literacy , and socioeconomic status on serial - order memory . Journal of Cultural Cognitive Sci - ence , 4 ( 3 ) , 343 – 365 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s41809 - 020 - 00056 - 3 Kurtz , K . J . , Boukrina , O . , & Gentner , D . ( 2013 ) . Comparison promotes learning and transfer of relational categories . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning Memory and Cognition , 39 ( 4 ) , 1303 – 1310 . Leach , S . M . , Immekus , J . C . , French , B . F . , & Hand , B . ( 2020 ) . The factorial validity of the Cornell Critical Thinking Tests : a multi - analytic approach . Thinking Skills and Creativity , 37 , 100676 . Lesage , E . , Navarrete , G . , & De Neys , W . ( 2013 ) . Evolutionary modules and Bayesian facilitation : the role of general cognitive resources . Thinking & Reasoning , 19 ( 1 ) , 27 – 53 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 13546783 . 2012 . 713177 Luke , S . G . , & Christianson , K . ( 2016 ) . Limits on lexical pre - diction during reading . Cognitive Psychology , 88 , 22 – 60 . Mani , N . , & Huettig , F . ( 2014 ) . Word reading skill predicts anticipation of upcoming spoken language input : a study of children developing proﬁciency in reading . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 126 , 264 – 279 . McGurk , H . , & MacDonald , J . ( 1976 ) . Hearing lips and seeing voices . Nature , 264 ( 5588 ) , 746 – 748 . Menary , R . ( 2007 ) . Writing as thinking . Language Sciences , 29 ( 5 ) , 621 – 632 . 123 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 263 Menary , R . ( 2015 ) . What ? Now : Predictive Coding and Encul - turation . A reply to Regina E . Fabry . In T . Metzinger & J . M . Windt ( Eds . ) , Open MIND . MIND Group Menary , R . ( 2016 ) . Pragmatism and the pragmatic turn in cog - nitive science . In D . Engel , Andreas K . , Friston , K . , & Kragic ( Ed . ) , Where is the action ? The pragmatic turn in cognitive science ( pp . 219 – 237 ) . MIT Press Mercier , H . , & Sperber , D . ( 2017 ) . The enigma of reason . Harvard University Press . Mishra , R . K . , Singh , N . , Pandey , A . , & Huettig , F . ( 2012 ) . Spoken language - mediated anticipatory eye movements are modulated by reading ability : evidence from Indian low and high literates . Journal of Eye Movement Research , 5 ( 1 ) , 1 – 10 . Mithen , S . ( 1996 ) . The prehistory of the mind . Thames & Windson . Monzalvo , K . , & Dehaene - Lambertz , G . ( 2013 ) . How reading acquisition changes children’s spoken language network . Brain and Language , 127 ( 3 ) , 356 – 365 . Morais , J . , & Kolinsky , R . ( 2021 ) . Seeing thought : a cultural cognitive tool . Journal of Cultural Cognitive Science . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s41809 - 020 - 00059 - 0 Ng , S . , Payne , B . R . , Steen , A . A . , Stine - Morrow , E . A . L . , & Federmeier , K . D . ( 2017 ) . Use of contextual information and prediction by struggling adult readers : evidence from reading times and event - related potentials . Scientiﬁc Studies of Reading , 21 ( 5 ) , 359 – 375 . Ng , S . , Payne , B . R . , Stine - Morrow , E . A . L . , & Federmeier , K . D . ( 2018 ) . How struggling adult readers use contextual information when comprehending speech : evidence from event - related potentials . International Journal of Psy - chophysiology , 125 , 1 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijpsycho . 2018 . 01 . 013 Ng , S . , Payne , B . R . , Liu , X . , Anderson , C . J . , Federmeier , K . D . , & Stine - Morrow , E . A . ( 2020 ) . Execution of lexical and conceptual processes in sentence comprehension among adult readers as a function of literacy skill . Scientiﬁc Studies of Reading , 24 ( 4 ) , 338 – 355 . OECD . ( 2019 ) . PISA 2018 Results ( Volume 1 ) : What students know and can do . Paris : OECD Publishing . Pennycook , G . ( 2018 ) . A perspective on the theoretical foun - dation of dual process models . In W . De Neys ( Ed . ) , Dual process theory 2 . 0 ( pp . 5 – 27 ) . Routledge / Taylor & Francis Group . Pennycook , G . , Fugelsang , J . A . , & Koehler , D . J . ( 2015 ) . What makes us think ? A three - stage dual - process model of analytic engagement . Cognitive Psychology , 80 , 34 – 72 . Perfetti , C . ( 2007 ) . Reading ability : lexical quality to compre - hension . Scientiﬁc Studies of Reading , 11 ( 4 ) , 357 – 383 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10888430701530730 Pietarinen , J . ( 2000 ) . Hobbes , Conatus and the Prisoner’s Dilemma . Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Boston University Pinker , S . ( 1999 ) . How the mind works . Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences , 882 , 119 – 127 . discussion 128 – 134 . Prat , C . S . , Madhyastha , T . M . , Mottarella , M . J . , & Kuo , C . - H . ( 2020 ) . Relating natural language aptitude to individual differences in learning programming languages . Scientiﬁc Reports , 10 , 3817 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 60661 - 8 Price , C . J . , & Devlin , J . T . ( 2011 ) . The interactive account of ventral occipitotemporal contributions to reading . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 15 ( 6 ) , 246 – 253 . Rahnev , D . , & Denison , R . N . ( 2018 ) . Suboptimality in per - ceptual decision making . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 41 , 1 – 107 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0140525X18000936 Ribeiro , S . ( 2019 ) . O ora´culo da noite . A histo´ria e a cieˆncia do sonho . Companhia das Letras . Roser , M . , & Ortiz - Ospina , E . ( 2016 ) . Literacy . Our world in data . https : / / ourworldindata . org / literacy Schubert , F . , & Becker , R . ( 2010 ) . Social inequality of reading literacy : a longitudinal analysis with cross - sectional data of PIRLS 2001 and PISA 2000 utilizing the pair wise matching procedure . Research in Social Stratiﬁcation and Mobility , 28 ( 1 ) , 109 – 133 . Shafer , G . ( 1976 ) . A mathematical theory of evidence . Princeton University Press . Shafer , G . , & Tversky , A . ( 1985 ) . Languages and designs for probability judgment . Cognitive Science , 9 , 309 – 339 . Sloman , S . A . ( 1996 ) . The empirical case for two systems of reasoning . Psychological Bulletin , 119 ( 1 ) , 3 – 22 . Sosu , E . M . ( 2013 ) . The development and psychometric vali - dation of a critical thinking disposition scale . Thinking Skills and Creativity , 9 , 107 – 119 . Spinoza , B . de ( ﬁnished 1674 , published 1677 in Opera Post - huma ) . Ethica Ordine Geometrico Demonstrata Sˇrol , J . , & De Neys , W . ( 2021 ) . Predicting individual differ - ences in conﬂict detection and bias susceptibility during reasoning . Thinking & Reasoning , 27 ( 1 ) , 36 – 68 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 13546783 . 2019 . 1708793 Stanovich , K . E . ( 2011 ) . Rationality and the reﬂective mind . Oxford University Press . Stanovich , K . E . ( 2018 ) . Miserliness in human cognition : the interaction of detection , override and mindware . Thinking & Reasoning , 24 ( 4 ) , 423 – 444 . Stupple , E . J . , Maratos , F . A . , Elander , J . , Hunt , T . E . , Cheung , K . Y . , & Aubeeluck , A . V . ( 2017 ) . Development of the Critical Thinking Toolkit ( CriTT ) : a measure of student attitudes and beliefs about critical thinking . Thinking Skills and Creativity , 23 , 91 – 100 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tsc . 2016 . 11 . 007 Sturtevant , W . C . ( 1964 ) . Studies in ethnoscience 1 . American Anthropologist , 66 ( 3 ) , 99 - 131 . Tenenbaum , J . B . , Kemp , C . , Grifﬁths , T . L . , & Goodman , N . D . ( 2011 ) . How to grow a mind : statistics , structure , and abstraction . Science , 331 , 1279 – 1285 . Tomasello , M . ( 2014 ) . A natural history of human thinking . Harvard University Press . Tomasello , M . , Savage - Rumbaugh , S . , & Kruger , A . ( 1993 ) . Imitative learning of actions on objects by children , chimpanzees and enculturated chimpanzees . Child Devel - opment , 64 , 1688 – 1705 . Tulving , E . ( 1985 ) . Memory and consciousness . Canadian Psychology / psychologie Canadienne , 26 ( 1 ) , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / h0080017 Tversky , A . , & Kahneman , D . ( 1974 ) . Judgment under uncer - tainty : heuristic and biases . Science , 185 , 1124 – 1131 . Tversky , A . , & Kahneman , D . ( 1982 ) . Evidential impact of base rates . In D . Kahneman , P . Slovic , & A . Tversky ( Eds . ) , Judgment under uncertainty : heuristics and biases ( pp . 153 – 160 ) . Cambridge University Press . 123 264 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 Tversky , A . , & Kahneman , D . ( 1983 ) . Extensional versus intuitive reasoning : the conjunction fallacy in probability judgment . Psychological Review , 90 , 293 – 315 . Van Wallendael , L . R . , & Hastie , R . ( 1990 ) . Tracing the foot - steps of Sherlock Holmes : cognitive representations of hypothesis testing . Memory & Cognition , 18 ( 3 ) , 240 – 250 . Varela , F . J . , Thompson , E . , & Rsch , E . ( 1997 ) . The embodied mind cognitive science and human experience . MIT Press . Vee , A . ( 2013 ) . Understanding computer programming as a literacy . Literacy in Composition Studies , 1 , 42 – 64 . Veissie ` re , S . P . , Constant , A . , Ramstead , M . J . , Friston , K . J . , & Kirmayer , L . J . ( 2020 ) . Thinking through other minds : a variational approach to cognition and culture . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 43 , 1 – 97 . Verschueren , N . , Schaeken , W . , & d’Ydewalle , G . ( 2005 ) . A dual - process speciﬁcation of causal conditional reasoning . Thinking & Reasoning , 11 ( 3 ) , 239 – 278 . Voltaire ( 1759 ) Candide ou l’Optimisme . Cramer . English translation of 2006 , The Project Gutenberg EBook # 19942 , www . gutenberg . org Wallas , G . ( 1926 ) . The art of thought . Harcourt Brace . Wason , P . C . ( 1966 ) . Reasoning . In B . Foss ( Ed . ) , New horizons in psychology ( pp . 106 – 137 ) . Penguin . Willingham , D . T . ( 2007 ) . Critical thinking . Why is it so hard to teach ? American Educator , 31 , 8 – 19 . Willingham , D . T . ( 2012 ) . Ask the cognitive scientist . Why does family wealth affect learning ? American Educator , 36 , 33 – 39 . Willingham , D . T . ( 2019 ) . How to teach critical thinking . Ed - ucation : Future Frontiers , 1 , 1 – 17 . Wootton , D . ( 2015 ) . The invention of science—a new history of the scientiﬁc revolution . Penguin Books . Ziegler , J . C . , & Ferrand , L . ( 1998 ) . Orthography shapes the perception of speech : the consistency effect in auditory recognition . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 5 , 683 – 689 . Zuboff , S . ( 2019 ) . The age of surveillance capitalism . The ﬁght for a human future at the new frontier of power . Proﬁle Books . Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations . 123 J Cult Cogn Sci ( 2021 ) 5 : 229 – 265 265