REVIEW ARTICLE Nanomaterials and bone regeneration Tao Gong * , Jing Xie * , Jinfeng Liao , Tao Zhang , Shiyu Lin and Yunfeng Lin The worldwide incidence of bone disorders and conditions has been increasing . Bone is a nanomaterials composed of organic ( mainly collagen ) and inorganic ( mainly nano - hydroxyapatite ) components , with a hierarchical structure ranging from nanoscale to macroscale . In consideration of the serious limitation in traditional therapies , nanomaterials provide some new strategy in bone regeneration . Nanostructured scaffolds provide a closer structural support approximation to native bone architecture for the cells and regulate cell proliferation , differentiation , and migration , which results in the formation of functional tissues . In this article , we focused on reviewing the classification and design of nanostructured materials and nanocarrier materials for bone regeneration , their cell interaction properties , and their application in bone tissue engineering and regeneration . Furthermore , some new challenges about the future research on the application of nanomaterials for bone regeneration are described in the conclusion and perspectives part . Bone Research ( 2015 ) 3 , 15029 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / boneres . 2015 . 29 ; published online : 10 November 2015 INTRODUCTION Nowadays more and more bone diseases such as bone infections , bone tumors , and bone loss need for bone regeneration . Bone tissue engineering is a complex and dynamic process that initiates with migration and recruit - ment of osteoprogenitor cells followed by their proliferation , differentiation , matrix formation along with remodeling of the bone . 1 Bone scaffold is typically made of porous bio - degradable materials that providethe mechanical support during repair and regeneration of damaged or diseased bone . Researches on bone tissue engineering over the past decades have inspired innovation in novel materials , pro - cessing techniques , performance evaluation , and applica - tions . Significant progress has been made toward scaffold materials for structural support for desired osteogenesis and angiogenesis abilities . Bioresorbable scaffolds with con - trolled porosity and tailored properties are possible today due to innovation in scaffold fabrication using advanced technologies . Natural bone derives its unique combination of mech - anical properties from an architectural design that spans nanoscale to macroscopic dimensions , with precisely and carefully engineered interfaces . Many different groups have tried to manipulate the mechanical properties ( e . g . , stiffness , strength , and toughness ) of scaffolds through the designofnanostructures ( e . g . , theinclusionofnanoparticles or nanofiber reinforcements in polymer matrices ) to mimic bone’s natural nanocomposite architecture . Within the stem cell niche , micro - / nanoscale interac - tions with extracellular matrix ( ECM ) components consti - tute another source of passive mechanical forces that can influence stem cell behaviors . The ECM is composed of a wide spectrum of structural proteins and polysacchar - ides that span over different length scales , with strands of collagen fibrils dominating at the nanometer level , with a diameter between 35 and 60 nm and a length that can extend over the micron range . 2 It is via such well - choreo - graphed spatiotemporal dialog between stem cells and their micro - / nano - environment that long - term mainten - ance and control of stem cell behavior are achieved . The advent of sophisticated small - scale technologies has now made it possible for researchers to fabricate platforms that can be used to gain valuable insights into stem cell biomechanics . 3 Furthermore , bio - inspired and mimicking substrates with micro - / nanofeatures have been employed to understand and control stem cell differentiation . Nonetheless , despite the significance of stem cell mechan - obiology , how mechanical stimuli regulates the behaviors of stem cells both in vivo and ex vivo have yet to be fully understood . 4 To better mimic the nanostructure in natural ECM , over the past decade , scaffolds manufactured from State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases , West China Hospital of Stomatology , Sichuan University , Chengdu 610041 , P . R . China Correspondence : Yunfeng Lin ( yunfenglin @ scu . edu . cn ) * These authors contributed equally to this work . Received : 25 July 2015 ; Revised : 20 August 2015 ; Accepted : 26 August 2015 OPEN Citation : Bone Research ( 2015 ) 3 , 15029 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / boneres . 2015 . 29 www . nature . com / boneres nanofibers , nanotubes , nanoparticles , and hydrogel have recently emerged as promising candidates in producing scaffolds that resemble the ECM and efficiently replace defective tissues . 5 Because natural tissues or organs are nanometer in dimension and cells directly interact with ( and create ) nanostructured ECMs , the biomimetic fea - tures and excellent physiochemical properties of nano - materials play a key role in stimulating cell growth as well as guiding tissue regeneration . 6 NANOSTRUCTURED SCAFFOLDS FOR BONE TISSUE ENGINEERING Hierarchical organization of native bone ECM Following the approach of scaffolding as a way of tem - porarily mimicking the ECM of bone , it is necessary to look at the chemical , mechanical , and structural properties of bone . Bone is a sophisticated composite on different hierarch - ical levels , as shown in Figure 1 . Bone tissue consists of two main parts , a compact shell called cortical bone and a porous core called spongiosa or trabecular bone ( Figure 1a ) . Cortical bone is composed of repeating osteon units , whereas the cancellous bone is made of an interconnecting framework of trabeculae with bone mar - row - filled free spaces . These trabeculae and osteon units are composed of collagen fibers and calcium phosphate crystals . The collagen fibrils includea 67nm periodicity and 40 nm gaps between collagen molecules ( Figure 1b ) . 7 – 8 The HA crystals are embed in these gaps between collagen molecules and increase the rigidity of the bone Osteocytes b c a e f d h i g Collagen fiber Macrostructure 200 nm 200 nm 200 nm 200 nm 200 nm 200 nm Microstructure Nanostructure Collagen fibril Collagen molecule Osteon : 100 – 500 µ m Figure 1 . The microstructure and nanostructure of bone and the nanostructured material used in bone regeneration . ( a ) At the macroscopic level , bone consists of a dense shell of cortical bone with porous cancellous bone at both ends . ( b ) Repeating osteon units within corticalbone . In the osteons , 20 – 30concentriclayersof collagenfibers , calledlamellae , arearrangedat90 6 surroundingthecentralcanal , whichcontainbloodvesselsandnerves . ( c ) Collagen fibers ( 100 – 2 000 nm ) are composed of collagen fibrils . The tertiary structure of collagen fibrils includes a 67 nm periodicity and 40 nm gaps betweencollagenmolecules . Thehydroxyapatite ( HA ) crystalsareembeddedinthesegapsbetweencollagenmoleculesandincreasetherigidityofthe bone . Nanostructures with features of nanopattern ( d ) , nanofibers ( e ) , nanotubers ( f ) , nanopores ( g ) , nanospheres ( h ) , and nanocomposites ( i ) with structural components with a feature size in the nanoscale . Nanomaterials and bone regeneration T Gong et al 2 Bone Research ( 2015 ) 15029 (cid:2) 2015 Sichuan University ( Figure 1c ) . 9 – 10 The properties of bone tissues are strongly dependent on the structure and organization of the ECM and cells , where the organization of the ECM is hierarch - ical and spans several orders of magnitude ( nm to cm ) . 11 Thus , repair and reconstruction of bone defects require innovative strategies that account for the nanoscale to macroscale hierarchical assembly of tissue . Bone regeneration requires four components : a mor - phogenetic signal , responsive host cells that will respond to the signal , a suitable carrier of this signal that can deliver it to specific sites then serve as a scaffold for the growth of the responsive host cells , and a viable , well - vascularized host bed . 12 Bone tissue engineering , for the purpose of this review , is the use of a scaffolding material to either induce formation of bone from the surrounding tissue or to act as a carrier or template for implanted bone cells or other agents . Materials used as bone tissue - engineered scaf - folds may be injectable or rigid , with the latter requiring an operative implantation procedure . Biomimetic efforts in bone tissue engineering As a bone tissue engineering , the ideal bone tissue scaf - folds should be osteoconductive , osteoinductive , and osteogenic . 13 – 14 Osteoconductivity requires these scaf - folds to promote the attachment , survival , and migration of osteogenic cells . Osteoinductive scaffolds offer phys - ical and biochemical factor to induce stem cells toward osteoblastic lineage . Osteogenic scaffolds contain osteo - genic stem cells for bone regeneration . In a word , bone tissue engineering utilizes a biomimetic strategy which includes suitable scaffolds , biochemical and physical stim - uli , stem cells , vascularization , and recapitulating the hier - archical organization of natural ECM to create functional bone tissues . These biomimetic efforts include choosing biomaterials that are present in native bone ( e . g . , HA and collagen ) , fabricating multiple scale architectures in scaffold especially with nanoscale components , and incorporating growth factors , e . g . , bone morphogenetic proteins ( BMPs ) , vascularization , and / or stem cells to pro - vide a biomimetic niche for stimulating bone repair and regeneration . Conventional tissue engineering scaffolds have used vari - ous pore - forming methods to recreate the macroscale and microscale properties of native tissues , but the nanoscale structures and properties were neglected . However , the nanoscale structures are crucial to regulating cell functions , such as proliferation , migration , differentiation , and the formation of ECM . To simulate the hierarchical organization of natural ECM , one important strategy is to build nanoscale and microscale features in the three - dimensional ( 3D ) scaf - folds design . The commonly accepted definition of nano - materials refers to materials with clearly defined features between1and100nm , suchasnanopattern , 15 nanofibers , 16 nanotubers , 17 nanopores , 18 nanospheres , 19 and nanocom - posites 20 – 21 ( Figure 1d – i ) . MAIN TYPES OF NANO - SCAFFOLDS FOR BONE TISSUE ENGINEERING Nanopattern Stem cells are capable of differentiating into various types of cells , offering opportunities and alternatives not only for the treatment of diseases but also for the regeneration of tissues and organs beyond complex surgical treatments or tissue / organ transplantation . The construction of synthetic ECMs inspired by tissue - specific niches for programmed stem cell fate and response , such as proliferation and differentiation , is a topic of interest in the field of tissue regeneration . Using nanogrooved matrices mimicking the native tis - sues , Kim et al . found that the body and nucleus of human mesenchymal stem cells ( hMSCs ) with the sparser nano - grooved pattern elongated and orientated more along the direction of nanogrooves than those with the relatively densernanogroovepatterns . 15 Incontrast , the perimeter of the cells was lower at the 1 : 3 pattern as compared to the 1 : 1 and 1 : 5 patterns spacing ratio ( width : spacing , width 5 550nm ) ( Figure 2a ) . Theeffectofnano - topographicalden - sity on the osteo - or neurogenesis of hMSCs was significant atthe1 : 1and1 : 3nanogroovedpatterns , butnotsignificant at 1 : 5 nanogrooved pattern compared to that at the flat substrate . It is demonstrated the effects of nano - topo - graphical density on the morphology and differentiation Soluble factors a d b c Cell shape Rho Rock Tension Osteoblast Adipocyte Myoblast / neurocyte Figure 2 . Schematic depictions of representative nanotopography geo - metries . Three basic nanotopography geometries include nanogrooves ( a ) , nanopost array ( b ) , and nanopit array ( c ) . The speculative pathways ( d ) for cell - shape - directed osteogenic and adipogenic differentiations of MSCs were examined in growth medium . RhoA , Ras homolog gene family member A ; ROCK , Rho - associated protein kinase . Nanomaterials and bone regeneration T Gong et al 3 (cid:2) 2015 Sichuan University Bone Research ( 2015 ) 15029 ofmesenchymal stem cells . The formationofcytoskeletonis necessary for the shape effect on the stem cell differenti - ation and that the Rho - associated protein kinase ( ROCK ) - pathway - related cell tension is responsible for this effect in the case of osteogenesis even in growth medium . The adi - pogenic differentiation does not seem to be simply nega - tively related to cell tension , and otherwise the adipogenic fraction might be minimum in the case of large aspect ratio of cells ( with the highest cell tension ) . Jangho Kim supports the notion that multiscale hierarch - ical topography can be used as an efficient strategy for the design and manipulation of synthetic ECMs for stem cell - based bone regeneration . 22 Nanopatterned hier - archical transplantable patches with precisely defined architectures and sizes were fabricated via capillary force lithography in combination with a micro - wrinkling method using poly ( lactic - co - glycolic acid ) ( PLGA ) . A type of syn - thetic ECM comprised of hierarchically multiscale struc - tures could provide native ECM - like topographical cues for controlling the adhesion and differentiation of hMSCs . Interestingly , the platform that integrates hMSCs into the multiscale hierarchical PLGA patch showed the potential to regenerate the bone tissues without complex surgical treatments . They work provides insight into the design and manipulation of functional engineered constructs using multi - scale hierarchical topography - based substrates for various biomedical applications , including stem cell ther - apy and tissue engineering . Cell shape , in particular , the degree of cell spreading reflected in the cell area , is known to influence cell fate decisions of hMSC . Since cell area was shown to be regu - lated by the density of nanoposts , Ahn et al . explored whether the density of the nanoposts could also influ - ence the cell fate decision of hMSC ( Figure 2b ) . 23 To investigate the influence of nanoposts density on actin cytoskeleton signaling , they determined the F - actin structure in hMSC cultured on different nanoposts density surfaces . The finding suggested that the nanoposts den - sity might be capable of directly regulating cytoskeletal stiffness and the dynamic changes in stiffness correlated with the differentiation of hMSC into osteogenic or adipogenic lineages . Using spatially ordered and disor - dered arrays of nanopatterned c - RGDfK peptide with well - defined interpattern distances that ranged from 55 to 100 nm against a non - adhesive background , Huang et al . further characterized the influence of nanospacing on adhesion and spreading . 24 When osteo - blasts were cultured on nano - engineered substrates , it was found that a critical lateral inter - distance of 70 nm was required for effective clustering of integrins , beyond which ( . 70 nm ) the cells were unable to spread effec - tively . It was proposed that an inability to cross - link the integrins at the cytoplasmic end by proteins such as talin and a - actin to a comparable size ( 60 nm ) might be the reason for this limitation . As is known , synthetically nanofabricated topography can also influence cell morphology , alignment , adhesion , migration , proliferation , and cytoskeleton organization . 25 The symmetry and order of the nanopits was found to significantly affect the expression of osteopontin and osteocalcin , two bone - specific ECM proteins , in both cell types ( Figure 2c ) . 26 While hMSCs cultured on completely ordered or completely random nanopits did not lead to expression of these two proteins , hMSCs cultured on slightly irregular substrates did exhibit significant amounts of these proteins of interest . Increased bone nodule formation was also evident in hMSCs cultured on these substrates relative to substrates with either completely ordered or completely random features . The results from the studies demon - strated the potential of nanotopography to direct cell fate . Furthermore , the complementary findings of hMSCs cultured on nanogratings and ordered - disordered nanopits suggested the potential for selective , control - lable differentiation based solely on the geometry of the nanotopographic substrate . Collectively , a few common observations can be drawn from the before mentioned studies of the mechano - sens - itivity of stem cells . All the studies have explicitly or implicitly suggested the involvement of cytoskeleton contractility in regulatingthemechanosensitivity ofstemcells , suggesting the importance of the force balance along the mech - anical axis of the ECM – integrin – cytoskeleton linkage and their regulation by the mechanical signals in the stem cell niche ( Figure 2d ) . 27 Moreover , strong evidence suggested that the differentiation potentials of stem cells toward dis - tinct lineages could be maximized if the cells were cul - tured in the mechanical microenvironment mimicking their tissue elasticity in vivo . 28 In addition , nanoscale manipulation of surface features such as surface texture , geometry , spatial position , and height might potentially alter clustering of the integrins , the development of focal adhesions , and cytoskeletal structure , thus influencing the osteogenic differentiation to the surface . 29 Electrospinning The principle of electrospinning is that an electric field is used to overcome the surface tension of a polymer solu - tion to shoot a jet of liquid out of a needle toward a con - ducting collector . 30 – 32 The volatile solvent evaporates in the air leaving behind , under the right conditions , a poly - mer fiber with a diameter that can range from tens of nan - ometers to microns . Many parameters affect this process including polymer properties , solvent properties , solution flow rate , voltage , distance from the needle to the col - lector , and polymer concentration , among others . 33 – 34 The wide range of polymers capable of being electrospun Nanomaterials and bone regeneration T Gong et al 4 Bone Research ( 2015 ) 15029 (cid:2) 2015 Sichuan University is appealing to bone tissue engineering and gives researchers flexibility in designing nanofibrous scaffolds . Generally , there are two types of polymers that are cho - sen : syntheticpolymersornaturalpolymers . Syntheticpoly - mers , such aspoly ( L - lactic acid ) ( PLLA ) , poly ( glycolicacid ) ( PGA ) , and polycaprolactone ( PCL ) , among others , pro - vide great flexibility in synthesis , processing , and modifica - tion . However , these polymers lack bioactivity and special care needs to be taken to ensure that newly synthesized polymers are biocompatible . Many natural polymers , on the other hand , have inherent bioactivity with peptide sequences that affect cell adhesion , proliferation , and dif - ferentiation . Collagen , gelatin , silk , and chitosan , among others , are commonly used natural polymers for scaffold fabrication , but care must be taken to prevent denatura - tion when proteins are used . 35 Since both synthetic and natural polymers have advan - tages and disadvantages , research has progressed to fabricate hybrid scaffolds in an effort to maximize the ben - efits of both . Yang et al . combined PCL with various amounts of chitosan to create bioactive nanofibers . 36 Pure electrospun chitosan was too weak to be mechanic - ally tested and pure PCL had reduced cell adhesion , but nanofibers produced from a 9 . 1 % chitosan in PCL solution had the maximum Young’s modulus while significantly increasing cell adhesion compared to pure PCL . This novel hybridscaffold takes advantage of the physical properties of the synthetic polymer and the bioactivity of the natural polymer while minimizing the disadvantages of both . To develop biomimetic bone tissue engineering scaffolds for the repair of critical - sized calvarial defect , and growth factors can be incorporated into the polymer to create a controlled delivery system ( Figure 3 ) . Li et al . developed a new nanoparticle - embedded electrospun nanofiber scaf - fold for the controlled dual delivery of BMP - 2 and dexa - methasone ( DEX ) . 16 The scaffold was achieved by ( 1 ) the encapsulation of BMP - 2 into bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) nanoparticles to maintain the bioactivity of BMP - 2 and ( 2 ) the co - electrospinning of the blending solution composed of the BSA nanoparticles , DEX , and the poly ( e - caprolac - tone ) - co - poly ( ethyleneglycol ) copolymer . The invitro stud - ies showed that the bioactivity of DEX and BMP - 2 was preserved in the dual - drug - loaded nanofiber scaffold , and a sequential release pattern in which most of the DEX was released in the original 8 days and the BMP - 2 release lastedupto35dayswasachieved . The invitro osteogenesis study demonstrated that the drug - loaded groups exhib - ited a strong ability to induce differentiation toward osteo - blasts . In vivo osteogenesis studies also revealed that the degrees of repair of rat calvarial defect achieved with the drug - loaded nanofiber scaffolds were significantly better than those obtained with the blank materials ; in particular , the dual - drug - loaded nanofiber scaffold manifested the best repair efficacy due to a synergistic effect of BMP - 2 and DEX . With electrospinning’s clear benefits , there are also some obstacles that need to be overcome . It remains dif - ficult to create clinically relevant 3D constructs beyond a relatively 2D mat . For bone tissue engineering , a large 3D scaffold may be required . While new processing tech - niques have shown promise to increase the size and por - osity ofelectrospunscaffolds . More work needstobedone to further help the architectural control . Having pores large enough for not only cell penetration , but also vas - cular in growth is imperative for a vascularized tissue such as bone . Nanocomposites Bone tissue itself represents a biological nanocomposite composed of organic ( predominantly collagen type I ) and inorganic ( nanocrystal - line HA ) components , with a hierarchical structure ranging from the microscale to the nanoscale . 37 Nanobiomaterials andnanocompositesrep - resent promising platforms in bone tissue engineering with a capacity to recapitulate the organization of natural ECM and the generation of functional bone tissues through osteo - mimetic architecture . The inherent prop - erties of nanocomposites , such as increased wettability , Coaxial electrospinning v a b Core - shell nanofiber material Core : bone growth factors Shell : biodegradable polymer Figure 3 . Schematic illustration of the fabrication of bone growth factors - in - polymer nanofiber device with coaxial electrospinning ( a ) and the nanofibers patches implanted in the dog leg bone defect ( b ) . Nanomaterials and bone regeneration T Gong et al 5 (cid:2) 2015 Sichuan University Bone Research ( 2015 ) 15029 roughness , and surface area , can also promote biomater - ial - driven bone regeneration through increased protein adsorption , nutrient exchange , and porosity relative to macroscale biomaterials . Mehta et al . have demonstrated an association between in vitro and in vivo studies of the PDLLA scaffolds with different incorporated VACNT - O : nHAp nanoparticles produced by electrode position and immersion into simu - lated body fluid solution . 38 Our in vitro results showed that the produced scaffolds simultaneously promote bioactiv - ity without any cytotoxic effects . In vivo study showed that the PDLLA / VACNT - O : nHAp2 scaffolds mimicked the immature bone and induced bone remodeling . The PDLLA / VACNT - O : nHAp scaffolds presented superior mor - phology and porosity properties compared to the PDLLA alone . These findings indicated surface improvement and the applicability of this new nano - biomaterial for bone regenerative medicine . Nanocomposite scaffolds provide structural support for the cells , while changes to the nanoscale level of tissue hier - archy may have significant effects on cell - scaffold adhe - sion , integrin - triggered signaling pathways and cellular function ; indeed , nanoscale features have been shown to have regulatory effects over multiple aspects of osteoblast and bone derived stem - cell behavior including adhesion , migration , proliferation , cell signaling , genetic expression , and stem cell fate . Consequentially , biomaterial design has focused on the introduction of nanoscale elements that elicit directed cellular behavior while imparting structural and mechanical advantages to the bone construct to induce the formation of functional tissues . Current methodo - logies employed in the fabrication of nanocomposites include electrospinning and molecular self - assembly . CONCLUSIONS Thepurposeofthisarticlewastogiveageneraldescription of studies of nanostructured materials for bone tissue engineering . Nanophase ceramics , especially nano - HA , are popular bone substitutes , coatings and other filler materials due to their documented ability to promote mineralization . The nanometer grain sizes and high surface fraction of grain boundaries in nanoceramics increase osteoblast func - tions ( such as adhesion , proliferation , and differentiation ) . Similar tendencies have been reported for other nano - ceramics including alumina , zinc oxide , and titania ; thus , providing evidence that , to some extent , it may not matter what implant chemistry is fabricated to have nanometer surface features to promote bone growth . However , this need further studies . For applications , synthetic and nat - ural polymers , e . g . , PGA , PLGA , PLLA , PLA , gelatin , col - lagen , chitosan , are regarded as excellent candidates for bone tissue engineering applications due to their biodegradability and ease of fabrication . Nanoporous or nanofibrous polymer matrices can be fabricated via elec - trospinning , phase separation , particulate leaching , chemical etching , and 3D printing techniques . Asmentionedinthisarticle , featuresoringredientsofthese scaffolds are nanoscale so that a variety of interactions can bestimulatedatthecellularlevel . Insomeinstances , someof those interactions also lead to toxicity , which can be of ser - ious concerns . In particular , toxic responses to nanoparticles generated from the degradation of implanted nanomater - ials , via wear debris from artificial joints with nano - features , andheavymetals ( iron , nickel , andcobaltcatalysts ) remain - ing in carbon nanotubes , have all been reported . Sometimes nanoparticle interactions with biomolecules in vivo or their aggregation states may change their toxicity tohumans . Buttheoftencontradictoryresultsofcurrentstud - ies are clearly not enough to provide the final answer con - cerning nanomaterial toxicity . In - depth investigations of nanomaterials on human health and the environment are necessarytofullyelucidatewhethernanoparticlesshouldbe used in biomedical applications . New frontiers of research should be directed toward better biomimicing the natural process of bone tissue regeneration such as coupling between angiogenesis and osteogenesis which may require progenitor cell recruitment and differentiation . Although it is difficult to mimic nature , recent scientific and technological findings show potential to achieve bone scaffolds that would encourage local and systemic biological functions . Properselection ofscaffoldmaterials , theirgeometry , pore size , and size distribution , and ability to release biomole - cules at a desired rate will play critical roles in future development of bone scaffolds . To better mimic the nanostructure in natural ECM , over the past decade , scaffolds manufactured from nanofi - bers , nanotubes , nanoparticles , and hydrogel , have recently emerged as promising candidates in producing scaffolds that resemble the ECM and efficiently replace defective tissues . Even so , the combination of these mate - rials in the form of nano - scaffolds is an under explored arena . The design of stronger and tougher scaffold mate - rials requires incorporation of a hierarchical design encompassing many length scales from the nanolevel to generate strength ( i . e . , to mimic composite deformation of nanocrystals of HA and collagen ) as well as micro - level structures to influence the crack path and generate toughness ( e . g . , to mimic osteons and cement lines ) . However , nanotechnology alone may not be the answer to improving the mechanical properties of scaffolds . The limitations in processing techniques , in part , have ham - pered the progress in the development of new scaffolds to form structures with a multidimensional architecture . The challenge is to use these technologies in combination with Nanomaterials and bone regeneration T Gong et al 6 Bone Research ( 2015 ) 15029 (cid:2) 2015 Sichuan University nanomaterials . It is possible that at the end an optimum scaffold combining several materials and techniques ( e . g . , a complex polymer structure can be created by ice - templating or computer - assisted fabrication that can subsequently be mineralized to achieve the desired mech - anical and biodegradation responses ) will become reality . Acknowledgements ThisworkwasfundedbyFundingofNationalNaturalScienceFoundationof China ( 81470721 , 31170929 , 81321002 ) , Sichuan Science and Technology Innovation Team ( 2014TD0001 ) . References 1 Giannoudis PV , Dinopoulos H , Tsiridis E . Bone substitutes : an update . Injury 2005 ; 36 : S20 – S27 . 2 Li X , Wang L , Fan Y , Feng Q , Cui FZ , Watari F . Nanostructured scaffolds for bone tissue engineering . J Biomed Mater Res A 2013 ; 101 : 2424 – 2435 . 3 Stevens MM . Biomaterials for bone tissue engineering . Mater Today 2008 ; 11 : 18 – 25 . 4 Stevens MM , George JH . Exploring and engineering the cell surface interface . Science 2005 ; 310 : 1135 – 1138 . 5 McMahon RE , Wang L , Skoracki R , Mathur AB . Development of nanomaterials for bone repair and regeneration . J Biomed Mater Res B Appl Biomater 2013 ; 101 : 387 – 397 . 6 Chen CS , Mrksich M , Huang S , Whitesides GM , Ingber DE . Geometric control of cell life and death . Science 1997 ; 276 : 1425 – 1428 . 7 Robling AG , Stout SD . Morphology of the drifting osteon . Cells Tissues Organs 1999 ; 164 : 192 – 204 . 8 Faingold A , Cohen SR , Reznikov N , Wagner HD . Osteonal lamellae elementary units : lamellar microstructure , curvature and mechanical properties . Acta Biomater 2013 ; 9 : 5956 – 5962 . 9 LiuH , YaziciH , ErgunC , WebsterTJ , BermekH . An invitro evaluationofthe Ca / P ratio for the cytocompatibility of nano - to - micron particulate calcium phosphates for bone regeneration . Acta Biomater 2008 ; 4 : 1472 – 1479 . 10 Discher DE , Mooney DJ , Zandstra PW . Growth factors , matrices , and forces combine and control stem cells . Science 2009 ; 324 : 1673 – 1677 . 11 Odde D . Getting cells and tissues into shape . Cell 2011 ; 144 : 325 – 326 . 12 Gibson LJ . Biomechanics of cellular solids . J Biomech 2005 ; 38 : 377 – 399 . 13 Petite H , Viateau V , Bensa ı¨ dWet al . Tissue - engineeredbone regeneration . Nat Biotechnol 2000 ; 18 : 959 – 963 . 14 VoTN , KasperFK , MikosAG . Strategiesforcontrolleddeliveryofgrowth factorsandcellsforboneregeneration . AdvDrugDelivRev 2012 ; 64 : 1292 – 1309 . 15 Kim J , Kim HN , Lim KT et al . Designing nanotopographical density of extracellular matrix for controlled morphology and function of human mesenchymal stem cells . Sci Rep 2013 ; 3 : 3552 . 16 Li L , Zhou G , Wang Y , Yang G , Ding S , Zhou S . Controlled dual delivery of BMP - 2 and dexamethasone by nanoparticle - embedded electrospun nanofibers for the efficient repair of critical - sized rat calvarial defect . Biomaterials 2015 ; 37 : 218 – 229 . 17 Xin Y , Jiang J , Huo K , Hu T , Chu PK . Bioactive SrTiO ( 3 ) nanotube arrays : strontiumdeliveryplatformonTi - basedosteoporoticboneimplants . ACS Nano 2009 ; 3 : 3228 – 3234 . 18 Lemaire T , Pham TT , Capiez - Lernout E , de Leeuw NH , Naili S . Water in hydroxyapatite nanopores : possible implications for interstitial bone fluid flow . J Biomech 2015 ; 48 : 3066 – 3071 . 19 Wang H , Leeuwenburgh SC , Li Y , Jansen JA . The use of micro - and nanospheres as functional components for bone tissue regeneration . Tissue Eng Part B Rev 2012 ; 18 : 24 – 39 . 20 Kotela I , Podporska J , Soltysiak E , Konsztowicz KJ , Blazewicz M . Polymer nanocomposites for bone tissue substitutes . Ceram Int 2009 ; 35 : 2475 – 2480 . 21 Rogel MR , Qiu H , Ameer GA . The role of nanocomposites in bone regeneration . J Mater Chem 2008 ; 18 : 4233 – 4241 . 22 Kim J , Bae WG , Choung HW et al . Multiscale patterned transplantable stem cellpatchesfor bone tissueregeneration . Biomaterials 2014 ; 35 : 9058 – 9067 . 23 Ahn EH , Kim Y , Kshitiz et al . Spatial control of adult stem cell fate using nanotopographic cues . Biomaterials 2014 ; 35 : 2401 – 2410 . 24 HuangJ , GraterSV , CorbelliniF etal . ImpactoforderanddisorderinRGD nanopatterns on cell adhesion . Nano Lett 2009 ; 9 : 1111 – 1116 . 25 Li X , van Blitterswijk CA , Feng Q , Cui F , Watari F . The effect of calcium phosphate microstructure on bone - related cells in vitro . Biomaterials 2008 ; 29 : 3306 – 3316 . 26 Dalby MJ , Gadegaard N , TareR et al . Thecontrolof human mesenchymal cell differentiation using nanoscale symmetry and disorder . Nat Mater 2007 ; 6 : 997 – 1003 . 27 Yao X , Peng R , Ding J . Effects of aspect ratios of stem cells on lineage commitments with and without induction media . Biomaterials 2013 ; 34 : 930 – 939 . 28 Engler AJ , Sen S , Sweeney HL , Discher DE . Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage specification . Cell 2006 ; 126 : 677 – 689 . 29 GuilakF , CohenDM , EstesBT , GimbleJM , LiedtkeW , ChenCS . Controlof stem cell fate by physical interactions with the extracellular matrix . Cell Stem Cell 2009 ; 5 : 17 – 26 . 30 Jiang T , Carbone EJ , Lo KWH , Laurencin CT . Electrospinning of polymer nanofibers for tissue regeneration . Prog Polym Sci 2015 ; 46 : 1 – 24 . 31 Nair LS , Bhattacharyya S , Laurencin CT . Development of novel tissue engineering scaffolds via electrospinning . Expert Opin Biol Ther 2004 4 : 659 – 668 . 32 Kumar PR , Khan N , Vivekanandhan S , Satyanarayana N , Mohanty AK , Misra M . Nanofibers : effective generation by electrospinning and their applications . J Nanosci Nanotechnol 2012 12 : 1 – 25 . 33 Jaworek A , Sobczyk AT . Electrospraying route to nanotechnology : an overview . J Electrostat 2008 ; 66 : 197 – 219 . 34 Deitzel JM , Kleinmeyer J , Harris D , Beck Tan NC . The effect of processing variables on the morphology of electrospun nanofibers and textiles . Polymer 2001 ; 42 : 261 – 272 . 35 Ifuku S , Saimoto H . Chitin nanofibers : preparations , modifications , and applications . Nanoscale 2012 ; 4 : 3308 – 3318 . 36 Yang X , Chen X , Wang H . Acceleration of osteogenic differentiation of preosteoblastic cells by chitosan containing nanofibrous scaffolds . Biomacromolecules 2009 ; 10 : 2772 – 2778 . 37 Okamoto M , John B . Synthetic biopolymer nanocomposites for tissue engineering scaffolds . Prog Polym Sci 2013 ; 38 : 1487 – 1503 . 38 El - Ghannam A , Ning CQ , Mehta J . Cyclosilicate nanocomposite : a novel resorbable bioactive tissue engineering scaffold for BMP and bone - marrow cell delivery . J Biomed Mater Res A 2004 ; 71 : 377 – 390 . This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution - NonCommercial - NoDerivs 4 . 0 Unported License . The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license , unless indicated otherwise in the credit line ; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license , users will need to obtain permissionfromthelicenseholdertoreproducethematerial . Toviewacopyofthis license , visit http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - nd / 4 . 0 / Nanomaterials and bone regeneration T Gong et al 7 (cid:2) 2015 Sichuan University Bone Research ( 2015 ) 15029