The Stakeholder Perspective on Using Public Polling Displays for Civic Engagement Jorgos Coenen jorgos . coenen @ kuleuven . be Research [ x ] Design - KU Leuven Leuven , Belgium Paul Biedermann paul . biedermann @ kuleuven . be Research [ x ] Design - KU Leuven Leuven , Belgium Sandy Claes sandy . claes @ luca - arts . be Intermedia - LUCA School of Arts Brussels , Belgium Andrew Vande Moere andrew . vandemoere @ kuleuven . be Research [ x ] Design - KU Leuven Leuven , Belgium Figure 1 : Four real - world deployments of the same public polling display technology . MobiHubs ( MH ) asked passers - by about their mobility habits and interests . Housing through Numbers ( HN ) polled opinions about housing statistics . Habit ( at ) Breaker ( HB ) gathered insight into housing preferences . Ring Parks ( RP ) polled visitors towards the redesign of city parks . ABSTRACT Public polling displays , i . e . interactive interfaces that offer ques - tionnaires in public space , are promised to engage citizens in a dialog with civic stakeholders around local concerns . Although past studies revealed the core factors that impact their usability , little is known about whether civic stakeholders actually consider the deployment of public polling displays to be valuable . We there - fore interviewed 12 members of 10 stakeholder organizations who engaged in four different real - world cases , and analyzed all the underlying activities that ranged from planning the deployments to interpreting the final polling results . We thus report on eight key challenges of public polling display deployments , among which : designing polls so that they are responsive , decisive and accessible Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspecificpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . C & T ’21 , June 20 – 25 , 2021 , Seattle , WA , USA © 2021 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9056 - 9 / 21 / 06 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3461564 . 3461585 yet also generate actionable insights , managing the trust of citi - zens and stakeholder organizations , and facilitating the accurate interpretation of the polling responses . By understanding the pro - cess of public polling display deployments from the perspective of civic stakeholders , we inform its continued evolution towards an opportunistic yet trustworthy civic engagement method . CCS CONCEPTS • Appliedcomputing → Computingingovernment ; • Human - centered computing → Empirical studies in ubiquitous and mobile computing . KEYWORDS public displays , civic engagement , polling , citizen participation ACM Reference Format : Jorgos Coenen , Paul Biedermann , Sandy Claes , and Andrew Vande Moere . 2021 . The Stakeholder Perspective on Using Public Polling Displays for Civic Engagement . In C & T ’21 : Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Communities & Technologies - Wicked Problems in the Age of Tech ( C & T ’21 ) , June 20 – 25 , 2021 , Seattle , W A , USA . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 14 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3461564 . 3461585 61 C & T ’21 , June 20 – 25 , 2021 , Seattle , WA , USA J . Coenen , P . Biedermann , S . Claes , A . Vande Moere 1 INTRODUCTION Citizen engagement aims to integrate bottom - up values and prefer - ences into public decision - making in order to increase the quality of decisions , inform citizens , foster trust in institutions and reduce conflicts [ 4 ] . Its basic premise is that all citizens should possess an equal opportunity to participate , and that a representative sample of the population actually takes up this opportunity . However , em - pirical evidence suggests that a substantial part of citizens do not take up this opportunity [ 53 ] because they do not want to invest the required time or effort ; experience a lack of local , social or con - textual grounding [ 21 , 31 ] ; or possess limited rhetorical skills [ 57 ] . Public displays , i . e . interactive interfaces that are physically located in public space , have been promised to overcome much of these lim - itations because they offer completely voluntary and opportunistic forms of interaction through a broadly accepted medium that is direct , easily approachable , safe and informal , yet still credible and trustworthy [ 29 ] . As such , public polling displays ( PPDs ) have been used to offer citizens interactive questionnaires in public space to gather feed - back on locally relevant topics [ 58 , 65 ] , which can be framed by visualizing dynamic information that is relevant for that question - naire [ 3 , 9 ] . Research has shown that citizens seem to use such public displays to respond in truthful ways [ 14 , 67 ] , even when taking into account faulty entries created by playing children and others [ 23 ] . Over the last ten years , HCI research revealed the fundamen - tal challenges that withhold the successful deployment of public displays , including concerns like display blindness [ 46 ] , interac - tion blindness [ 49 ] and the perception of irrelevant content [ 60 ] . A large collection of design guidelines attempt to overcome these challenges , which specify the communication of interaction modal - ities [ 12 ] , the provision of community values [ 51 ] and the handling of technical failures [ 50 ] . Additional challenges to the effective use of public displays are external to their deployment [ 45 ] , as they are related to more pragmatic and logistical difficulties [ 2 ] . Sev - eral recent in - the - wild studies demonstrated the positive impact of equipping public displays with polling functionalities , as they enabled researchers to gather local spatial perceptions [ 14 ] and annotate tourism count and people flows [ 33 ] , or community mem - bers to ask questions around local air quality measurements [ 9 ] or socio - cultural divides in the neighborhood [ 36 ] . However , despite this wealth of actionable insights , less is known about whether public polling displays are actually valuable for civic stakeholders , what their expectations are and which challenges they face along the deployment process . While there exists some knowledge regarding the perspective of communities towards us - ing straightforward yes - or - no questions on PPDs in semi - public locations [ 65 ] as well as the practitioners who typically design or facilitate PPDs [ 2 ] , the critical views from the institutional stake - holders who actually would pay for PPD deployments and use their results is still largely missing . This case study thus analyses the impact of four real - world deployments of the same PPD technology from the perspective of 10 different stakeholder organizations . Three of these cases were financially supported by five of the involved stakeholders . The PPD technology was based on our current implementation of the Citizen Dialog Kit ( CDK ) [ 13 ] , which is a custom technical platform that combines an e - paper screen , off - the - shelf electronics and common rechargeable batteries to display a sequence of polling questions and record the push - button reactions . CDK was specifically developed to be deployed without much administrative effort and independently from any urban energy infrastructure . First , we describe how we , as the technological and methodolog - ical facilitators , guided stakeholder organizations before , during and after the four PPD deployments . Then we reflect upon the challenges these 10 stakeholders perceived during this process by analyzing our in - depth interviews with them . This paper thus presents : ( 1 ) the impact of four real - world deployments of our CDK system in different contextual settings ; ( 2 ) a descriptive model that synthesizes all the deployment activities of the facilitators and the civic stakeholders ; and ( 3 ) the eight PPD - specific challenges that emerged . As civic engagement is transforming from an optional triviality into a highly recommended and even legally - mandated [ 6 ] part of any civic decision - making process , this study helps to establish the potential of PPDs as an effective participation method that claims a complementary role alongside face - to - face meetings , events and workshops [ 8 ] or online platforms [ 71 ] . 2 RELATED WORK A wide range of ICT - based tools for civic engagement have emerged both in research and in practice . Here , we focus on the current chal - lenges of developing new civic engagement technologies and PPD in particular , and introducing these technologies to civic stakehold - ers . 2 . 1 Civic Engagement Technologies A technological civic engagement system can be classified according to who initiates its deployment , the conscious decision to partici - pate by citizens , the level of mediation in that participation , and the limitations towards the volume and scale of the collected responses [ 35 ] . Particularly the latter aspect is often overlooked , as a large volume of open feedback responses can be challenging to process and distill into concrete policy changes for civic authorities [ 55 ] due to a lack of collaborative tools and the difficulty inherent in scaling thematic analysis [ 40 ] . It is not surprising then that while the majority of these systems focus on identifying local challenges or collecting citizen feedback and ideas , most lack the ability to permit a higher level of civic empowerment [ 25 ] . Moreover , most citizen participation platforms and tools face a wide range of struc - tural and cultural barriers , as governments tend to lack personnel with sufficient technical skills or face political resistance to depend change on participative feedback , while citizens lack the time or commitment , or may resist the use of civic technologies all - together [ 42 ] . Physically - situated solutions , such as those that facilitate citizen interactions via personal mobile phones or public displays , possess the ability to overcome some of these barriers because of their op - portunistic , voluntary and hyperlocal qualities [ 24 ] . While allowing input via mobile phones is becoming increasingly common , their impact is still relatively modest as they are limited to crowd - sourced sensing rather than decision - making [ 18 ] . Mobile phone polls are 62 The Stakeholder Perspective on Public Polling Displays C & T ’21 , June 20 – 25 , 2021 , Seattle , WA , USA considered more pragmatic and opportunistic than conventional municipal websites because they are able to trigger voluntary en - gagement at a specific location [ 19 ] . When conducting polls that are physically situated in - situ , predefined options are preferred above writing personal responses [ 61 ] . Afterwards , communicating the resulting insights back to citizens and city authorities as engaging and actionable representations requires close collaboration with data experts but also active promotion by the municipality [ 62 ] . 2 . 2 Public Polling Displays ( PPDs ) Public displays are traditionally used to present dynamic adver - tisements , maps or commercial announcements . When being re - appropriated as temporary , interactive “plug - in” interfaces [ 28 ] , public displays can also form an opportunistic medium to target a narrowly defined community by being physically located in the actual context of discussion about a local concern . As the under - lying technologies are sufficiently simple , PPDs may be deployed by the local community itself , such as to raise awareness on local challenges via electronically - augmented posters [ 69 ] . While inter - action with public displays for civic engagement is often facilitated through a personal device such as a mobile phone [ 11 ] , a PPD can also be controlled via modalities like touch and gestures ( e . g . [ 12 ] ) , mechanical push - buttons ( e . g . [ 9 , 63 ] ) , tangibles ( e . g . [ 22 ] ) , or bod - ily gestures ( e . g . [ 29 ] ) . Optimizing the quantity and quality of how citizens engage with PPDs is not straightforward , as it depends on a complex set of spatial [ 20 ] and contextual [ 68 ] factors such as the physical position , the social connotations embedded into the location , the size of the display surface itself and relevance of the content [ 52 ] . 2 . 3 Stakeholder Perspectives Technological tools for civic purposes that are situated in public space should ideally be evaluated through an " in - the - wild " method - ology that captures the volatile conditions of the urban environment [ 56 ] . Yet their evaluation often focuses solely on the citizen perspec - tive , because the stakeholder organizations involved are comprised of bottom - up organizations [ 37 ] , unofficial expert groups [ 39 ] or the institutions of the researchers themselves [ 43 ] . Despite some examples where the opinions from urban planners were analyzed regarding the responses that the system produced [ 59 ] , capturing and aligning the actual needs of institutions and the value proposi - tion of displays towards their goals still requires further research [ 31 ] . The design process of new technologies that aim for real - world impact requires that all involved stakeholders are engaged in itera - tive , collaborative loops of ’action’ and ’reflection’ [ 27 ] . Yet taking on such a ’participatory action research’ [ 72 ] approach in a civic engagement context differs from more conventional ICT system developments in terms of its more open - ended goals and the chal - lenging access to end users , involved stakeholders and decision makers [ 5 ] . In addition , civic engagement typically requires that a certain degree of mutual trust between citizen and civic organi - zation perspectives is enticed , which can be achieved by allowing diverse opinions to emerge via transparent and equitable communi - cation channels [ 26 ] . Past collaborations with municipalities during public display deployments for civic engagement already revealed a range of tensions between research and governmental parties due to differences in terms of existing information processing practices ; measurable success metrics ; and real commitments to take action based on the outcomes [ 32 ] . Similarly , the different capacities of grassroots , research and governmental entities to move quickly and freely often causes tensions during the design of public services [ 16 ] , which applies to translating PPD outcomes into noticeable civic actions [ 65 ] . Interviews with civic institutions about their perspectives al - ready provided some insight into the opportunities and require - ments for civic engagement . For instance , many differences tend to exist between and within urban official departments in how they set up and facilitate their civic engagement based on internal pref - erences and skills , and the particular communities they seek to engage [ 15 ] . Therefore , civic tools designed for community impact should balance novelty and longer - term sustainability by includ - ing plans for hand - over to ensure their liveability well beyond the initial facilitation by researchers [ 2 , 64 ] . 3 METHODOLOGY 3 . 1 Citizen Dialog Kit Figure 1 depicts the four cases we investigated . Each Citizen Dialog Kit PPD presented itself as a colorful yet weatherproof enclosure that was attached to various types of urban elements , such as street lights , fences or a custom - made wooden framework . The CDK system was specifically developed to operate completely indepen - dently of pre - existing technical and energy infrastructures while serving two core functionalities : ( 1 ) to present a series of polling questions alongside contextually relevant information ; ( 2 ) to record the feedback of passers - by upon these questions ; ( 3 ) being readily usable and readable even in bright environments . As shown in Ta - ble 1 , the first functionality was initially ( in MH ) offered through a monochrome e - paper screen requiring very little energy . Due to its very slow refresh speed of 6 seconds , the screen was later replaced ( HN , HB and RP ) by a larger and faster e - paper screen with grayscale rendering capabilities , which yet required more energy ( and rechargeable battery replacement ) in return . As shown in Figure 2 - 1 and 2 - 2 , the second functionality was initially enabled by five mechanical push buttons that were located immediately next to the screen , each corresponding to a discrete multiple choice answer or Likert scale value . To comply with the publichealthregulationsconcerningtheCOVID - 19pandemic , these buttons were replaced by foot pedals that were physically connected to the screen with a thick cable in order to signal their affordance ( see Figure 2 - 3 ) . While the polling questions initially ( MH and HN ) had to be traversed in a linear fashion , later PPD versions were able to interpret potential logic pathways between successive questions . This allowed CDK to offer a more responsive type of polling , as we could change subsequent questions based on the previous responses during the same session . 3 . 2 Cases Each of the four cases was embedded in a real civic engagement context with the active involvement of several civic organizations , which we refer to as ’the stakeholders’ throughout this paper . 63 C & T ’21 , June 20 – 25 , 2021 , Seattle , WA , USA J . Coenen , P . Biedermann , S . Claes , A . Vande Moere Case Id Case Theme QuestionFlow QuestionAsked Interaction Technology Location Setup Signage Duration MH MobiHubs Mobility Linear 12 & 13 Push Buttons 7 , 5 " monochromeElectron Rural , Suburban 3 displays per municipalities Call to action on information panel 42 days HN HousingthroughNumbers Housing Linear 21 Push Buttons 9 , 7 " greyscaleRasPi Urban 6 display installation at 4 locations in one municipality Large scale wooden installation and visual guide 33 days HB Habit ( at ) Breaker Liveability Responsive 37 Foot Pedals 9 , 7 " greyscaleRasPi Suburban 3 displays over distributed locations Call to action on information panel 24 days RP RingParks Placemaking Responsive 13 Foot Pedals 9 , 7 " greyscaleRasPi Metropolitan 2 displays over distributed locations No additionalsignage 14 days Table 1 : Overview of the contextual factors surrounding the four cases . The number of questions are maximum values , as the questions dynamically depended on the previous responses during HB and RP . Mobility Hubs ( MH ) . As part of a government - funded project , three municipalities ( named MH1 to MH3 in Table 2 ) wanted to grasp the local perceptions and requirements of Mobility Hubs , i . e . planned local spaces where shared modes of transportation would be centralized and potentially combined with other services ( e . g . catering , parcel pickup ) . After we were contacted to facilitate the citizen engagement plans stipulated in the project proposal , we called in the help of a participatory design expert ( MH4 ) to conduct the required face - to - face workshops and interviews . Three PPDs were concurrently deployed for one week at each of the planned Mobility Hub locations in each of the municipalities , which included both rural and suburban locations nearby bus stops , bike racks and car parking lots . The multiple - choice responses from a first deployment iteration ( e . g . " Which transport did you use to come here ? " ) informed the design of personas [ 41 ] that were used during hands - on workshops facilitated by MH4 . The second itera - tion then formulated the practical outcomes of these workshops as Likert - scale questions for another week in each municipality ( e . g . " A Mobility Hub in each nearby center would encourage me to use my car less frequently . " ) . Housing through Numbers ( HN ) . An NGO advocating archi - tectural and urban design values ( named HN1 in Table 2 ) wished to spark a more nuanced public debate on the complexities of the current housing market in a mid - sized city ( HN2 ) . Following a map - ping workshop with the stakeholders and several domain experts in which four key themes were distilled based on a recent statistical report on the city’s housing situation , we prepared a first draft of four infographical narratives . These narratives included detailed data visualizations of trends and notable outliers along with other Figure 2 : Our Citizen Dialog Kit PPD system that was de - ployed throughout the four cases evolved from a ( 1 ) 7 . 5 " monochrome displays in MH , to ( 2 ) 9 . 7 " grayscale displays in HN , HB and RP , and ( 3 ) the added foot pedal interaction modality in HB and RP . relevant metrics , such as those from other nearby municipalities or from different demographic groups . During a series of five itera - tive workshops and cognitive walkthroughs [ 38 ] , we finetuned the narratives together with HN1 and HN2 . The resulting data visual - ization narratives were displayed on six co - located PPDs that were built into a single , temporary installation . After a participant chose a preferred data narrative on the first PPD , all other PPDs became updated to present a provocative question that captured an existing preconception ( e . g . " Which is the most expensive city to live in ? " ) or a potential solution ( e . g . " What is the most important factor guiding your housing choices ? " ) . The whole installation was deployed at four different locations throughout the city that were intended to reach different segments of the population : a neighborhood with many young families , an area with a mix of apartments and start - up companies , the municipal library and the municipal administrative center . The deployment lasted for five weeks , with three additional one - day participation events organized by the city at two separate locations . Habit ( at ) Breaker ( HB ) . A mid - sized municipality ( named HB1 in Table 2 ) and a regional government body ( HB2 ) worked together to reflect upon a near - future vision of greenery , recreation and suburban centers together with citizens in the context of the growing scarcity of open spaces , mobility challenges and an aging population . As the COVID - 19 pandemic required the municipality to halt this process after the initial series of hands - on workshops , we replaced the push button with the foot pedal interaction modal - ity . After HB1 initially proposed a series of polling questions , we collaboratively made editorial and structural changes during two virtual workshops with the civic stakeholders . The PPDs in this case were able to display multiple responsive questions , so that certain responses ( e . g . " I mainly come here to shop . " ) were followed by appropriate follow - up questions ( e . g . " What type of shopping in particular ? " ) . The PPDs were deployed at three locations with a direct connection to the three themes , i . e . a hiking route ( green - ery ) , a public swimming pool ( recreation ) and main shopping street ( suburban center ) . Ring Parks ( RP ) . An urban planning office represented by two designers ( RP1A and RP1B in Table 2 ) and a public broadcasting company , represented by two researchers ( RP2A and RP2B ) , wanted to collect insights from citizens regarding their actual usage and fu - ture ideas for two city parks that will be redeveloped to ameliorate the expected negative effects of a large and politically - charged in - frastructural intervention nearby . While the urban designers where 64 The Stakeholder Perspective on Public Polling Displays C & T ’21 , June 20 – 25 , 2021 , Seattle , WA , USA Skills Interview id Expertise Organization type Technical Citizen Engagement Polling Thematic MH1 Mobility Municipality , SME 4 2 0 4 MH2 Mobility Municipality 2 4 3 5 MH3 Mobility Municipality 3 3 2 3 MH4 Participation Researchers 4 5 5 4 HN1 Housing NGO 4 4 2 4 HN2 Urban planning Municipality 3 4 2 4 HB1 Urban planning Municipality 2 4 2 . 5 5 HB2 Urban planning Regional government 4 3 5 4 . 5 RP1A , RP1B Urban planning and participation Commercial agency 3 . 5 , 3 4 . 5 , 4 3 , 2 4 , 5 RP2A , RP2B Co - Creation Public Broadcaster 4 , 4 4 , 2 . 5 4 , 4 3 , 1 . 5 Averages 3 , 38 3 , 67 2 , 86 3 , 92 Table 2 : Overview of the interviewed stakeholders , including their interview id , stakeholder type , expertise , anonymized af - filiation , and self - reported thematic experience regarding the addressed topic and technical , citizen engagement and polling skills . interested in gathering civic opinions to inform their planning pro - posal to the city , the two researchers were primarily motivated to explore novel means to capture local sentiments for public radio broadcasting . We conducted a kick - off online - meeting with all primary stake - holders , in which RP1A and RP2A agreed to set up a draft of their intended questionnaire . Through multiple exchanges via email , we suggested minor revisions in terms of order , wording and re - sponsiveness of the questions . Through on - site visits together with RP2A , we defined the exact locations for the deployment and adapted small aspects of the questionnaire according to the chosen surroundings . Subsequently , one PPDs were deployed in each of the parks in close proximity to the planned intervention , i . e . in front of the access ramp of a bridge connecting both parks . Both locations were primarily chosen as they were perceived to be well frequented , as well as their relevance to the questionnaire . The polling questions offered multiple - choice responses regarding current practices ( e . g . " How often do you come here ? " ) and future ideas ( e . g . " Would a playset be a good addition here ? " ) for the parks , which were structured in a responsive way ( e . g . " What should be included in the park above all ? " , and if " Recreation " was chosen : " What type of recreation ? " ) . 3 . 3 Data Collection The duration of each deployment , shown in Table 1 , varied between 14 and 42 days . The first two authors kept a close record of the intermittent meetings and communications with stakeholders in their personal research diaries . As the results demonstrate the ef - fectiveness of CDK and had to be reported back to the stakeholders , we also analyzed all the polling responses . After all four cases were finished , we interviewed 12 individuals from the 10 different civic stakeholder organizations . Some inter - views occurred concurrently in pairs ( i . e . RP1 and RP2 ) . While on average all stakeholders felt confident in terms of engaging citizens in participatory processes and the themes that were subject of the polls , they were less familiar with polling as a method of civic en - gagement . The interviews for MH , HN and HB were conducted by the first author in the local language , while interviews about RP were conducted in English by the second author . Selected quotes of MH , HN and HB were subsequently translated to English to support consistent analysis results . The duration for each interview ranged from 35 minutes to 1 hour and 30 minutes . The list of all interview questions and our code book are made available as part of the supplemental materials 1 . Using 26 coding themes deduced from the interview questions , the first two authors independently coded the interviews they had conducted , which lead to 512 selected unique quotes ( avg . 51 per interview ) . The third author , who was not involved in the inter - views , familiarized herself with the data and reviewed all thematic codings . This resulted in 2 changes and 15 additions that empha - sized our facilitating role and the challenges faced by stakeholders . The personal research diaries of each case were formulated into a thick description [ 54 ] of all the activities that were undertaken . The collaborative drawing and mapping of the activities into the phases occurred iteratively between all four authors . 4 PUBLIC POLLING DISPLAY COLLABORATION PROCESS During each case , we positioned ourselves as ’facilitators’ , i . e . ex - perts who are able to organize all practical matters in both concep - tual and technical terms . Concurrently , as academic researchers , we also focused on how stakeholders interacted with us , and how citizens interacted with our PPD . Yet we were also aware of the in - fluence from ’secondary’ stakeholders , i . e . professionals who were approached by the ’primary’ stakeholders - often within their own organizations - to fill a specific knowledge gap . Although these sec - ondary stakeholders were occasionally mentioned by the primary stakeholders , we had no direct contact with them . 1 http : / / tiny . cc / civicpd 65 C & T ’21 , June 20 – 25 , 2021 , Seattle , WA , USA J . Coenen , P . Biedermann , S . Claes , A . Vande Moere Process Model - 4 . pdf 1 . Planning Phase 2 . Deployment Phase 3 . Interpretation Phase 4 . Follow - Up Phase Collaboration Phases Challenges Involved stakeholders C1 : Aligning Expectations Quantitative focus , visual and interaction possibilities C3 : Timing the Deployment Timeliness and urgency C4 : Participant Perceptions Addressing citizen concerns C2 : Designing Content Actionable , accessible , responsive Facilitators Facilitators and Stakeholders C7 : Feedback to Citizens Presenting data and insights Processing Formation Field Work Steering Analysis Orchestration Stakeholders System Case Goals align Content Location Timing d e ﬁ n e align inform iterate inform IntermediateResponses Installation & Maintenance Intermediate Reports Promotion collect inform Final Responses Report Insights Questions raise Impact Publication communicate Outcome produce Engagement ParticipantFeedback Participants Interaction g e n e r a t e Validation iterate inform i n ﬂ u e n c e Secondary Stakeholders C8 : Managing stakeholders When is which expertise required C6 : Representativeness and Trust Volume of data , broad reach , demographics iterate C5 : Interpreting Responses Translating responses to insights t r i gg e r inform visualize invite process d e ﬁ n e v i s u a li z e request provide Figure 3 : All the activities underlying each PPD collaboration are organized in four successive phases : ( 1 ) planning , ( 2 ) deploy - ment , ( 3 ) interpretation and ( 4 ) follow - up . Each phase contains a set of specific activities ( e . g . ’Preparation’ or ’Orchestration’ during in the Planning phase ) that comprises of multiple facets ( e . g . ’System’ and ’Case Goals’ ) , interconnected through lines that represent actions ( e . g . ’align’ ) . Solid lines depict activities that occurred during all cases , while dashed lines were more cir - cumstantial . The background color of the activities signifies the involvement of different stakeholders according to the legend on top , while a colored border is used to indicate the known influence of secondary stakeholders . The 8 key key challenges that impacted the PPD collaboration process are mapped below the model . The PPD process model shown in Figure 3 synthesizes all activi - ties taken on by all stakeholders , ourselves and participants before , during and after the actual installments of the PPDs . The specific challenges that were encountered during this process are mapped along the phases , and will be discussed in the relevant passages of Section 5 . Results . The Planning phase consisted of ’Formation’ meetings that in - troduced the PPD features on one side , and the civic engagement goals on the other . Then , the ( questionnaire ) content , location and timing became ’Orchestrated’ through an iterative process of local site visits and content revisions ( 2 to 7 rounds per case ) and in - formed by time management requirements . Content was developed based on back - and - forth discussions via email or during workshop - like settings ( up to 3 per case ) that contained editorial reviews and cognitive walkthroughs [ 38 ] during which the logic and flow of the questions was fine - tuned . The Deployment phase comprised ’Field Work’ activities to install and maintain the PDDs on - site . During the deployment , the intermediate polling responses were communicated to the stake - holders in intermediate reports using simple data visualizations . Often these results were shown together with more qualitative participant feedback to ’Steer’ the deployment by promoting the presence of the PPDs to the local population . During the Interpretation phase , we ’Processed’ and then re - ported the final polling responses to the stakeholders by sharing raw data and visualizations . Some stakeholders requested additional interpretations , which typically ranged from statistical comparisons between individual PPDs ( RP ) to more qualitative interpretations of the collected responses ( MH ) . Stakeholders then used this informa - tion during their in - house ’Analysis’ to produce their own insights . Occasionally , stakeholders requested additional data processing , such as to group the responses in different locations to the same question ( HB , HN ) or to visualize correlations between specific responses ( HB ) . The final Follow - up phase captures the ’Impact’ from the ac - tions that stakeholders took based upon their insights from the Interpretation phase . In one case ( MH ) , an additional PPD deploy - ment iteration enabled participants to react upon findings informed by a previous iteration . Other stakeholders ( HN , HB ) published their insights via alternative communication means in order to provide transparent feedback and validation to the citizens who had participated . 5 RESULTS Table 3 presents a quantitative overview of the polling engagement . In HB and RP , participant engagement is grouped as ’sessions’ , i . e . clusters of sequential votes that were cast before the interface automatically returned to its starting screen ( 60 seconds ) ; and ’in - teractions’ , which correspond to the number of pressed buttons or foot pedals . As the session counter was not yet implemented during MH , we report instead on the amount of answered questions and approximate the number of unique participants of HN through the amount of narratives that were started on the first display . 66 The Stakeholder Perspective on Public Polling Displays C & T ’21 , June 20 – 25 , 2021 , Seattle , WA , USA Although we cannot generalize across the different cases , we no - tice that in general a PPD can attract from 39 to 67 unique ’sessions’ per day , with typical peaks between the early afternoon ( from 2PM ) and early evening ( to 7PM ) , due to school and office closing hours . Not all PPDs deployed during each case received the same amount of interaction . These differences could be explained by the amount or diversity of passers - by , as a location such as the swimming pool ( HB ) is much more frequented than a local park , which is also visited by people who do not master the local language ( RP ) . The foot pedal modality adopted in HB and HN did not nega - tively affect PPD performance . In contrast , we noticed how their playful nature drew the attention of passers - by by functioning as a " curiosity object " [ 34 ] , often enabling collaborative engagement as pairs of citizens divided the pedals among themselves . 5 . 1 Planning 5 . 1 . 1 Formation . Stakeholders valued the location - specific nature of the PPDs to " . . . capture people who are using the space today " ( MH1 ) . The stakeholder goals in MH , HB and RP in particular focused on consulting people who used specific physical locations , " . . . the local people are actually the ’connaisseurs’ of this location . " ( RP1A ) . All stakeholders aimed to reach a diverse audience and perceived our PPD approach to be accessible and opportunistic as it targeted a difficult to reach sample of citizens ( " [ It goes ] beyond people who have time and technical or verbal skills " - MH4 ) over a longer period of time ( " It is always there , and then you encounter it " - HB2 ) . As such , they believed that PPD casts a wider participation net ( " Two working people with children will be difficult to draw to a workshop , compared to providing an [ interaction ] point in the neighborhood and you decide when you go . " - MH3 ) . The straightforward aesthetic appearance of the PPD with its " . . . bright colors in public space are something that’s playful . " ( RP2B ) , conveyed a neutral impression ( " I don’t think anyone cares or sees them as a bad thing ; they look nice . " - RP1A ) and might diminish the potential for vandalism ( " It did what it was supposed to do without — and this is good — any fuss . " - MH1 ) . Across the 113 days and nights of deployment , we recorded only one instance of vandalism in the form of a cracked display ( RP ) . The PPDs were valued as a unique ’phygital’ [ 47 ] approach that combines the digital and physical to continue civic engagement during the COVID - 19 pandemic ( " We had a huge setback on physical meetings , [ this was ] a very good instrument to still let people actively participate . " - RP1A ) , and the foot pedals were believed to " . . . look really fun to do . " ( HB2 ) . 5 . 1 . 2 Aligning Expectations . Stakeholders who were more familiar with qualitative methods like workshops noted the absence of open questions ( " You miss some valuable information . . . " - RP2B ) and the col - lection of personal anecdotes that could inspire the next steps ( " This is where you get your inspiration from . " - RP1B ) . However , qualitative approaches were said to be more " . . . expensive and labor intensive " ( MH1 ) . Figure 3 shows that stakeholders were not involved in ’Field Work’ during the deployment phase . Once stakeholders realized how PPDs sparked discussions among participants in their imme - diate vicinity , they felt disappointed these could not be captured ( " I think that the discussions between people around the installation are hard to monitor [ without physical presence ] , but are also interesting actually . " - HN2 ) . Most stakeholders were well - aware of the implicit visualization ( " Of course your display has a limited size , requiring you to be selective in the information you ask or show . " - MH1 ) and interaction limitations ( " Five button , clicking through . " - HB2 ) of the PPDs . Yet even after demonstrating content from previous cases , at least one stakeholder ( HN1 ) still expected functionalities that resembled that of a standard public display ( " It was unclear what the end result would be in a visual sense . " - HN1 ) . Some felt limited by the discrete interaction modality , as only one out of five possible responses could be logged , so that " . . . people [ who ] wanted to select two options , that was not possible . " ( HB2 ) . Others based their expectations on experiences of commercial polling systems , such as to instantly access intermediate results in order to " . . . follow how many questions have already been answered . " ( MH1 ) . Challenge 1 : Aligning Expectations . The novel technological features offered by a PPD as a civic engagement medium can be misaligned to the expectations from stakeholders , which are often based upon their previous experience with well - established digital participation tools . The technological limitation to solely capture quantitative data forms a core adjustment to the civic engagement experience , as well as the constrained visualization and interaction features . 5 . 1 . 3 Decisive Questions . Stakeholders initially opted to ask direct questions that provide outspoken and actionable responses ( " For example , there is a bike here , would you use it ? " - MH1 ) rather than more multiple - choice and therefore probing questions ( e . g . " Which factors prevent you from using alternative transportation modes ? " in MH ) . Consequently , some stakeholders disliked multiple - choice options like " prefer not to say " or " other " as it enables " . . . the partic - ipants not to make a choice . " ( HB1 ) . Vice versa , presenting questions that suggested direct votes on an actual outcome were considered risky , as it could provoke misuse ( " You cannot build your policy solely on these [ results ] . " - HB2 ) . 5 . 1 . 4 Informative Content . It was initially believed that a PPD poll should limit the amount of questions as " . . . few people would have re - mained engaged to the end " ( HB2 , 37 questions ) , and it was uncertain " . . . where you reach the limit with people , [ . . . ] that they still answer " ( RP1A , 13 questions ) . Maintaining an overview of the amount and order of polling questions was considered challenging ( " If you have a [ branching ] poll that’s way bigger , it’s very complicated . " - RP2A ) and something that required a particular skill that we as facilita - tors were expected to accommodate ( " You are building a question tree , and to keep track of the branches of that tree was [ the facili - tators’ ] strength . " - HB1 ) . Several stakeholders ( 3 , N = 10 interviews ) requested a more grounded basis for how the polling question were worded and structured : " . . . the purpose of that specific question , what do you get out of it ? " ( MH3 ) and wanted the facilitators to explain " . . . what the theoretical underpinnings are " ( MH1 ) . In contrast , when the stakeholders designed polls by themselves , they " . . . do it based on gut feeling . " ( MH1 ) . Stakeholders believed a PPD should present contextual informa - tion to the participants before polling : e . g . " You show traffic counts , road categorization etc . [ . . . ] so people can understand why you want to make changes . " ( MH2 ) , which yet had to be balanced with fram - ing the topic in engaging and accessible ways ( " If you talk about 67 C & T ’21 , June 20 – 25 , 2021 , Seattle , WA , USA J . Coenen , P . Biedermann , S . Claes , A . Vande Moere Total Daily Average Sessions Interactions Sessions Interactions Questions Responsesperquestion Narratives or sessions per day MH N / A 2 . 902 N / A 63 12 & 13 35 N / A HN 1 . 112 5 . 074 39 143 21 165 HB 1 . 214 13 . 415 51 559 37 203 RP 1 . 000 9 . 984 559 664 13 383 Table 3 : Overview of the logged data of the four cases . The engagement is listed in total interactions , daily averages and average number of responses per question . Where possible , we approximate the number of individual participants based on the number of narratives that were started ( HN ) or the number of ’sessions’ that were started ( HB , RP ) , i . e . clusters of responses that were separated by a set idle time ( 60s ) . Colors encode deployment locations . [ complex topics ] you need a lot of words , but you also have to keep attention spans in mind . " - MH4 ) . The accessibility of a PPD could be significantly improved by offering multiple languages or visual instructions " . . . particularly if you look at [ City ] where not everyone has mastered the language . " ( MH4 ) . Challenge 2 : Designing Content . The design of polling questions is challenging and beyond the inherent ability of stakeholders . The number of questions has to be balanced with the opportunistic quality of the system to allow participants to answer a complete poll quickly , while also providing relevant contextual information before or after the poll . In addition , questions need to provide direct and actionable responses without insinuating conclusive decision - making power . Finally , stakeholders struggle with complex and responsive polling structures , and wish to understand the reasoning behind chosen wordings and orders . 5 . 1 . 5 Urgency . The deployments were mainly driven by strict dead - lines ( " There was little time . We needed to install those displays as quickly as possible , same for composing the poll . " - MH4 ) , as the stake - holders wanted to use the polling results in their decision making ( " We had made a lot changes and realized we had to start monitoring how people perceived them ! " - HB1 ) . The polling questions reflected timely ( " The results show that people want green and safe streets , yet everyone is always yelling when parking disappears . That’s the discrepancy we now want to put forward . " - HB1 ) and even politically charged concerns ( " You feel there are , let’s say , societal conflicts going on . " - RP1A ) , insofar that some deployments had to be postponed due to expected political frictions ( " We needed to put it on hold for the upcoming elections . " - HN1 ) . This relevance increased the PPDs’ usefulness for participants , but also assured a smooth administra - tive workflow in regards to getting official permits or hard - to - get data ( " It is our role to give the geo - based data [ . . . ] and the locations to make these kinds of experiments possible . " - RP1A ) . 5 . 2 Deployment Phase 5 . 2 . 1 Promoting . Stakeholders had difficulty in estimating whether the volume of interim responses was satisfactory ( " From your ex - perience , was it used often or rarely ? " - HN1 ) , in order to determine the need for additional promotional actions , " . . . to launch another call [ to participate ] , or consider moving the displays . " ( HB2 ) . Some believed that the deployments should be aligned with other events to involve additional participant groups ( " I believe there was an open day at the school . " - MH4 ) . In two cases , the PPDs’ signage ( see Figure 1 ) was used to frame the deployment in relation to other participatory actions , i . e . face - to - face workshops in a municipality ( MH ) , or an online poll that offered identical questions ( HB ) . Although this signage was ap - preciated because it " . . . invites additional people in " ( MH3 ) , only 57 participants responded to the online poll in HB during the same period of 3 weeks in comparison to 510 ’sessions’ of the PPD in which participants answered all location specific questions . Challenge 3 : Timing the Deployment . Organizing the practical deployment of a PPD is challenging , particularly when it forms part of a more encompassing civic engagement initiative with a range of pre - planned events and outcomes . At the same time , this relevance creates an urgency that can attract the attention of participants and aligns secondary stakeholders so that official approvals and permits are efficiently granted . 5 . 2 . 2 Interim Participant Feedback . In multiple interviews ( 5 , N = 10 ) stakeholders did not recall any spontaneous feedback during or after the deployments , yet in some cases ( MH , HB ) participants contacted them on social media or in person . Interim participant feedback can be mixed according to the other stakeholders , and focus on concerns about usability ( " . . . the [ slow updating ] speed of the displays . " - MH3 ) , aesthetics ( " [ They said ] it looks very simple and it works very well . " - RP1A ) or the methodological novelty ( " A council member said that 68 The Stakeholder Perspective on Public Polling Displays C & T ’21 , June 20 – 25 , 2021 , Seattle , WA , USA they were asked about and complimented on the novel approach . " - HB2 ) . In HB , some citizens used Facebook to express concerns about the trustworthiness of a PPD due to its anonymous character and playful appearance , questioning " . . . how representative the responses would be because there are children playing with the pedals . " ( HB1 ) . Other citizens suggested a concurrent online alternative to solve perceived accessibility concerns , as they questioned " . . . what to do if they could not physically go to the locations . " ( HB1 ) and seemingly considered the impact of the survey to go beyond its direct physical context . Challenge 4 : Participant Perceptions . Participants raise critical reflections particularly when they expect that the polling results might impact official decision making or have implications be - yond the immediate deployment location . While such concerns were relatively rare , it should be noted that no easily accessible ( or anonymous ) feedback channel existed for participants to express their sentiments about the PPD approach itself . 5 . 3 Interpretation Phase 5 . 3 . 1 Interpreting Responses . Depending on the their data inter - pretation skills , stakeholders achieved varying levels of success in independently generating useful insights based on the visual - izations of the intermediate or final polling responses . While all stakeholders considered it useful to receive intermediate updates in order to estimate the need for promoting the PPD deployment to the public , they did not possess sufficient data literacy skills to feel confident in drawing conclusions from the final results ( " We don’t have data people to work with . It could be that we misinterpret the data . " - RP1A or " I sometimes have to pass on the data , we are not as used to handling all those numbers . " - HB1 ) . Stakeholders who operated in small teams ( e . g . in suburban city ) did not have the liberty to spend time on analyzing the responses : " I don’t have time to start analyzing all of that myself . " ( MH2 ) . Seeking help externally was considered insufficient , as stakeholders felt that the generation of meaningful or actionable insights required an appreciation of the local context ( " You need a piece of context , otherwise you are merely looking at numbers . " - HB1 ) . This should therefore be approached as a collaborative process " . . . that we do also together with you , [ the fa - cilitators ] . " ( RP1A ) . In contrast , for very targeted deployments with only a limited number of narrowly - defined questions , stakeholders believed that " . . . it would be possible for a municipality to process [ the results ] internally . " ( MH3 ) . Challenge 5 : Interpreting Responses . The meaningful interpre - tation of the polling responses is challenging , because the stakehold - ers have limited skills or resources to analyze them , and potential external support would lack sufficient contextual knowledge . Figure 3 illustrates the emblematic separation of facilitators and stakehold - ers in this phase , as the activities of those who possessed local knowledge and those who are experienced in handling data do not overlap . 5 . 3 . 2 Stakeholder Insights . Somepollingresultswereabletochange strong preconceptions of the stakeholders : " I find that very remark - able . I expected no one to pick that . " ( HN1 ) and " Even more notable , a majority says building and living at smaller scale is the solution . Absolutely unexpected . " ( HN1 ) . In HB , the notion that more atten - tion should be spent on the safety of cyclists and pedestrians was considered insightful ( " I’m actually proud that [ our inhabitants ] put cyclist and pedestrian safety and greenery at number one . " - HB1 ) . Other polling results confirmed prior understandings , such as how participants approved recent mobility changes ( " I think this clearly demonstrates that there is absolutely no demand to return to two - way traffic . The need for parking is much less pronounced than some would have believed . " - HB2 ) . In MH , the polling results emphasized the potential of the MobiHub concept ( e . g . 28 / 40 responses in one municipality agreed that local discounts would motivate to use eco - friendly mobility ) , and revealed unexpected similarities between rural and urban areas : " Actually on municipal level , there are in fact overlaps in responses with bigger cities , so there is some interest in shared mobility on our scale too . " ( MH3 ) . In RP , the polling results confirmed previous knowledge , such as the local desire for a city ’forest’ , and unveiled new insights , including a need for more safety around the bridge that connected both parks ( " With this number , it is actually worthwhile to have a separate question dedicated to this . " - RP1A ) . 5 . 3 . 3 Representativeness and Trust . After experiencing the PPD process , stakeholders felt convinced that PPDs " . . . can be an objective way for many citizens to give an answer " - ( MH1 ) . In some interviews ( 4 , N = 10 ) , stakeholders considered the insights from the polling results as more objective than face - to - face methods , as " . . . the amount of people who did this is on a level that we normally will not reach in personal meetings . So it makes it of course more valuable , the objective part . " ( RP1B ) . While true statistical representativeness ( " 1000 people is not representative for [ the country ] . " - RP2A ) can never be attained , the amount of polling responses was considered convincing ( " For most questions you have between 200 and 300 responses . You can conclude something based on that . " - HB2 ) , particularly when the PPD responses can be combined with other approaches ( " You can then place other methods next to it ; talk to certain organizations or have conversations with inhabitants . " - HB2 ) . In 5 interviews ( N = 10 ) our stakeholders suggested they believed that PPDs reached a broader section of citizens compared to conventional participation methods like online platforms ( " [ Platforms ] are only accessible to people like me , who are interested and socially engaged " - MH4 ) and workshops ( " I suspect we also heard the voice of people who do not have the desire to attend the [ workshop ] with their negativity . " - HB1 ) . The stakeholders found that the polling results gained significant value when the demographics of the participants was known ( such as depicted in Figure 4 ) by including specific demographic polling questions at the start of the questionnaire . In contrast , the intrinsic ability to anonymously vote multiple times hampered stakeholders to find the results fully representa - tive because " . . . you cannot check if there is one person starting 100 sessions . " ( RP1A ) . Stakeholders recognized the possibility to pub - lish intermediate results as feedback to participants , yet felt that this would diminish their trust because it could bias subsequent responses , as participants might want to counter any preliminary outcome ( " If trends are published too soon , it can cause a distorted view of the responses due to reactions to that trend . " - HB1 ) . Stakehold - ers trusted the PPD results more than face - to - face interviews as the anonymity of the polling limited social types of bias , in which 69 C & T ’21 , June 20 – 25 , 2021 , Seattle , WA , USA J . Coenen , P . Biedermann , S . Claes , A . Vande Moere " . . . people give responses they assume the person wants to hear . " ( MH1 ) . The PPD results were also trusted because they corresponded with prior results from other participatory activities , such as when they revealed interest in the concept of ’city forests’ " . . . which also com - plies actually with all the input we got already before in the partic - ipation process " ( RP1A ) . Finally , the results were also considered trustworthy because of our academic affiliation ( " I trusted that [ the facilitators and MH4 ] were going to find the responses to the funda - mental question we put forth " - MH1 ) . Challenge 6 : Representativeness and Trust . Guaranteeing the representativeness of the resulting insights is challenging , even when the polling results of PPDs are trusted more because they are relatively voluminous , lack implicit social influence , include self - reported demographic information from participants that show to be more diverse , and can be benchmarked with insights that were derived by other participative tools and methods . Yet for PPD to effectively work as an opportunistic and meaningful polling medium , an equilibrium needs to be found between encouraging participants to give their opinion because their response carries some weight , and clarifying that no decisions will be made solely on the polling results . 5 . 4 Follow - Up Phase 5 . 4 . 1 Impact . In MH , the numerical PPD insights were combined with qualitative findings from the workshops to derive concrete design requirements to a governmental funding agency . Moreover , this complementary approach was proposed as a feasible methodol - ogy to determine the hyperlocal requirements for future MobiHubs in other municipalities . Consequently , the PPD insights were in - strumental in acquiring additional funding to implement a Mobility Hub ( " [ We explained ] that we did this poll and were able to get a lot out of that , including that there is indeed some bottom - up support for this . " - MH3 ) . Other polling results were distributed internally to act as empirical evidence during policy debates ( " I have given [ the results ] to a number of people already , really as armor , the hard numbers from our inhabitants . " - HB1 ) . 5 . 4 . 2 Communicating Findings Back to Citizens . Stakeholders ex - plained the importance of communicating findings back to partici - pants to " . . . keep citizens involved and show that [ they ] are absolutely still working on it . " ( MH3 ) as a way to maintain trust " . . . but also to dig deeper and get more insights " ( HB1 ) and " . . . communicate very widely Figure 4 : The responses on specific demographic polling questions suggest that PPDs were mainly used by locals ( right from RP ) and successfully reached different age groups ( left from HB ) , yet notably fewer by 16 - 25 year olds . the actions that will follow out of this . " ( HB2 ) . However , the insights were only communicated back to citizens in two cases , by way of a short journalistic article in a municipal magazine distributed to all inhabitants and a 9 minute slideshow presentation on YouTube ( HB ) , as well as a 2 - page section in a yearly report and a 3 minute YouTube video of interviewed participants ( HN ) , as depicted in Figure 5 ) . Challenge 7 : Feedback to Citizens . Communicating PPD results and insights back to participants is challenging because they mainly consists of numerical evidence that is hard to persuasively convey to a lay audience . The two stakeholders who provided feedback , made use of common types of information representation ( e . g . slideshow , textual article ) through well - known communication channels ( e . g . social media ) they already mastered . 5 . 4 . 3 Secondary Stakeholders . Most stakeholders voluntarily in - volved secondary experts to support them during various activities . Various municipal experts repeatedly checked the accuracy of the presented housing statistics in HN ( " [ We made sure ] that the data that was communicated was also interpreted correctly " - HN2 ) and whether the polling questions aligned with the official policies of the city . Additional municipal workers specialized in engaging with marginalized citizens were consulted to review the accessibility of the content ( " The people who used to work in [ social services ] . " - HB2 ) . Other stakeholders related this expertise to " . . . support from the ’area - oriented operations’ division " ( HN2 ) with expertise in civic participation , yet did not consult them during ’Orchestration’ . The communication divisions of municipal stakeholders were either absent or sparsely involved ( " We were not able to discuss how it would all work [ with them ] . " - MH3 ) , as their expertise was consid - ered to relate to promotion rather than the design of the polling questions ( " Regarding the formulation of questions , they were less involved " - HB1 ) . Yet stakeholders recognized how their copywriting and media creation skills could have elevated the ’Orchestration’ in terms of presenting ideas or illustrating concepts on the PPDs ( " We might have used illustration or sketches . " - HB2 ) . Challenge 8 : Managing Stakeholders . A PPD deployment re - quires a range of multidisciplinary skills that are not necessarily present in stakeholders nor facilitators , insofar that facilitators should alert stakeholders beforehand of the additional expertise that is expected during each phase . While the benefit of combining Figure 5 : So far PPD findings were communicated back via : 1 ) a municipal magazine ( HB ) ; 2 ) a voice - over slideshow pre - sentation on YouTube and Facebook ( HB ) ; 3 ) a yearly report ( HN ) ; and 4 ) an interview video on YouTube ( HN ) . 70 The Stakeholder Perspective on Public Polling Displays C & T ’21 , June 20 – 25 , 2021 , Seattle , WA , USA different types of expertise appears self - evident , the active involve - ment of secondary stakeholders remains challenging to facilitate , manage and align in real - world conditions . 6 DISCUSSION 6 . 1 PPD Process Model Because the PPD process model only reflects the activities of our - selves as facilitators and the observed and self - reported actions of the primary stakeholders , it is not meant as a comprehensive mapping of all the factors that underlie a PPD process . While prior models have provided actionable insight into the role of context [ 68 ] , value [ 51 ] , local and personal relevance [ 60 ] , spatial location [ 20 ] and social interactions [ 74 ] in increasing the engagement with public displays in general , we are not aware of other models that capture the collaborative activities before , during and after a PPD deployments from the perspective of civic stakeholders . We thus believe our model has value in informing future PPD and even pub - lic display deployments in general , in particular by foregrounding the seldom - reported activities that occur before ( i . e . ’Formation’ and ’Orchestration’ ) and after ( i . e . ’Interpretation’ and ’Follow - up’ ) the actual deployment itself . We realize that the reported challenges are predicated on our hands - on involvement as facilitators who have years of experience in public display research . Additional challenges will therefore likely emerge in a future where PPDs are deployed autonomously by stakeholders , as they then would need to take care of many practical , technological and data work issues . While the PPD approach itself did not rise above above the ’consultation’ level of participation [ 1 ] , i . e . where only feedback is obtained from citizens [ 17 ] , we believe that the PPD process model could be further expanded towards ’collaboration’ and ’empower - ing’ citizens in the future . For instance , PPDs could become part of a longer - term and iterative process in which citizens are also actively involved in orchestrating the polling questions , locations or timings , or in transparently processing and analyzing the results . 6 . 2 Reflections on the Challenges 6 . 2 . 1 C1 : Aligning Expectations . Stakeholders reported varying lev - els of satisfaction depending on their initial expectations . Although stakeholders were able to identify many added values of PPD , its technological novelty limited their frame of reference insofar that expectations were often misaligned by other polling approaches such as on online platforms that have more interactive features , or more situated methods like workshops that provide very rich yet circumstantial results . While the expectations of a PPD system should be best addressed in the initial ’Formation’ process , mediat - ing activities should continue throughout the whole deployment . As all stakeholders perceived PPD as a citizen engagement medium in its own right , we yet foresee that it could become a comple - mentary method rather than a replacement or competitor in the emerging practice of civic participation . 6 . 2 . 2 C2 : Designing Content . Although all stakeholders reported some prior experience regarding civic engagement , determining the polling questions required more specialized expertise . We deep - ened previous understandings regarding the challenge of authoring polling content for PPDs [ 65 ] and recognized how stakeholders struggled with defining questions that are relevant to a very specific location , that adapt to the responses of previous questions , and that follow up on each other in a cohesive yet engaging narrative . As such , we observed the potential for live demonstrations and pre - visualizations of polling questions in visual authoring tools during the ’Orchestration’ phase in order to demonstrate the final visual representation and its interaction latency , but also to optimize the wording or sequence of responsive questions . Consequently , polling questions should be direct and actionable but not suggesting of any binding commitment ; timely and relevant but not too provocative ; accompanied with information that is factually grounded ; and accessible by a wide demographic range of citizens . This tightly interconnected list of content requirements raises opportunities for service providers with deep knowledge in interaction , visual and narrative design to actively support the design of PPDs deployments . 6 . 2 . 3 C3 : Timing the Deployment . As most deployments had to be aligned with more encompassing civic engagement activities , there was little room for technical error . However , each new PPD development requires ample time for testing and debugging , and should be rolled - out gradually instead of being kicked off with a prestigious press event ( as we experienced in HB and HN ) . In retro - spect , we even recommend to first deploy a PPD at the stakeholders’ own locations , who can then test and report back any concerns first - hand . 6 . 2 . 4 C4 : Participant Perceptions . While stakeholders valued the perception of PPDs as innocuous devices , they were amazed how few participants contacted them directly to provide feedback . In - stead , the very few participants with immediate feedback raised obvious yet valid concerns regarding the representativeness and accessibility of the PPD approach via social media . We presume that these participants also consider these concerns towards most other civic engagement methods , who all are equally vulnerable [ 75 ] . We recognize the potential in exploiting the situated and respon - sive nature of PPD to increase its demographic accessibility and diversity ( e . g . with language options ) . Although our stakeholders valued the quantitative outcomes , there is a still untapped poten - tial to exploit PPDs as a situational conversation starter similar to [ 10 , 36 , 70 ] , or as a method to elicit qualitative feedback on real - time data measurements ( e . g . [ 9 , 33 ] ) in civic engagement initiatives . 6 . 2 . 5 C5 : Interpreting Responses . It became clear that stakeholders required substantial assistance to process and analyze the polling responses from a raw or even visualized dataset . This issue report - edly also occurs when stakeholders need to analyze numerical data from other types of digital polling systems ( " In the end , it was an online platform [ . . . ] people are afraid to use , or don’t know how to handle the data . " - HB2 ) as well as more qualitative methods [ 40 ] , of which the analysis is often outsourced to third parties because it is considered costly , time consuming , complicated and tedious . While the feedback loop we facilitated between ’Processing’ and ’Analysis’ was functional , it was perhaps less conducive to more contextually grounded insights because it creates a barrier between the facilitators and the local knowledge of stakeholders . Recent 71 C & T ’21 , June 20 – 25 , 2021 , Seattle , WA , USA J . Coenen , P . Biedermann , S . Claes , A . Vande Moere research has shown how multidisciplinary teams of policy experts , visualizers and community members can process quantitative data cooperatively in order to effectively enable community action [ 73 ] . The results of this process ideally are straightforward outcomes that are communicated in easy to share formats [ 44 ] . 6 . 2 . 6 C6 : Trust and Representativeness . Our stakeholders ques - tioned the representativeness of the PPD results , but not more so than of other methods as they believed that PPDs are able to overcome the social desirability influences of on - site interviews . However , public display interaction is in itself not devoid of so - cial influences as unclear affordances and the absence of quick ways to terminate can cause " social awkwardness " [ 7 ] . Stakehold - ers also appreciated receiving our qualitative data from occasional observations and the demographic statistics that were gathered via specific polling questions . However , these potential methodological improvements might well clash with how citizens prefer to provide civic feedback in fully anonymously ways [ 39 ] . We discovered that the trust of stakeholders was particularly established by the amount and diversity of unique participants combined with the lack of social influence , which aligns with the perceived representativeness of face - to - face and online civic en - gagement approaches [ 40 ] . Similar to previous PPD studies [ 65 ] , stakeholders believed that PPDs reach a more broad and diverse group of citizens , yet they expressed mixed concerns regarding the potential of multiple and false voting . As PPDs might move towards an equal footing with more con - ventional civic engagement approaches , an urgent need to establish concrete indicators , such as ’trust’ and ’representativeness’ [ 30 ] to contrast and compare different methods with one another , emerges . Although some relevant metrics and theory exist , they are rarely applied to in HCI - oriented evaluations in general [ 48 ] or public display systems in particular [ 17 ] . 6 . 2 . 7 C7 : Feedback to Citizens . Although most stakeholders iden - tified the physical situatedness a core value of PPD , none used this quality to communicate the resulting insights back to citizens . By limiting the feedback to other digital or municipal channels , it likely did not reach visitors and commuters that are more circumstantial to the PPD location and who do not access the typical municipal communication channels . A potential future avenue might exist in using more situated approaches ( e . g . PPD , posters ) for this purpose . 6 . 2 . 8 C8 : Managing Stakeholders . PPDs require interdisciplinary knowledge , sometimes even across multiple organizations or levels of government ( e . g . HB1 and HB2 ) . For instance , we believe that PPDs would gain from involving communication experts during ’Orchestration’ to augment polling questions , or data managers to provide up - to - date statistical data to contextualize answering options . This means that PPDs should not only be studied as a human - computer interface , but also as a ’product - service system’ [ 66 ] . Such a service might ideally be a collaborative effort , in which the location - specific expertise of stakeholders is supplemented with visual , interaction and critical data work expertise . 6 . 3 Our Role as Facilitators and Researchers Echoing the iterative nature of deployments represented in the pro - posed model , our own understanding about PPDs evolved across the different cases . As we became increasingly aware of the technical , interactive and collaborative opportunities of PPDs , we optimized aspects of the underlying CDK system ( e . g . responsiveness of the questions ) and its back - end ( e . g . offering more active guidance in interpreting the data ) , which in turn improved both the participant and stakeholder experience . As our facilitator role frequently shifted between paid service provider and academic researcher , we often had to make conces - sions towards the stakeholders who all had high expectations . We realized that we were entrusted with their reputation in publicly promoting an innovative , yet fully functioning system that is able to produce credible polling results . As all these tasks took so much time and effort , part of our research strategy became more op - portunistic instead of systematic . As three cases were funded by stakeholders , their interview answers might be positively biased towards defending their financial investment , or negatively biased towards alerting us to their grievances as clients . Although all interviews were carried out after the four cases were accomplished , the elapsed time between each deployment and the interviews differs from three months ( MH ) to 1 . 5 years ( RP ) . While the recollections of the earliest stakeholders might be diminished , it equally enabled them to reveal the most significant impacts that only occurred later or could still be remembered . We also recognize that the PPD system imposes crucial accessi - bility restrictions , such as to people with visual or — specifically regarding the foot pedals — mobility impairments . This is yet an often overlooked concern for public displays in general , including by our stakeholders . 7 CONCLUSION We presented a retrospective review of four CDK deployments that facilitated civic engagement in real - world context by interviewing 12 civic stakeholder from 10 different organizations , five of which actually financially funded deployments . The results show that our PPD system performed satisfactory and even better than alternative civic engagement methods in several regards , and that stakeholders value its opportunistic and accessible interaction modality to gather location - specific responses . The interviewed stakeholders generally trusted the polling results and believed it aggregated opinions that are difficult to capture otherwise , but also made several suggestions to how the results might become more trustworthy . We synthesized all the underlying activities in a process model , which frames the eight core challenges faced throughout the deployment of PPDs for civic engagement , encompassing the planning , deployment , interpretation and follow - up phases . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We gratefully acknowledge the valuable insights from the intervie - wees and thank them for their trust to deploy our PPD system . RP was supported by a grant from ITEA3 ( 17006 CityStory ) . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Sherry R . Arnstein . 1969 . A Ladder Of Citizen Participation . Journal of the American Institute of Planners 35 , 4 ( 1969 ) , 216 – 224 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01944366908977225 [ 2 ] Mara Balestrini , Sarah Gallacher , and Yvonne Rogers . 2020 . Moving HCI Out - doors : Lessons Learned from Conducting Research in the Wild . In HCI Out - doors : Theory , Design , Methods and Applications , D . Scott McCrickard , Michael 72 The Stakeholder Perspective on Public Polling Displays C & T ’21 , June 20 – 25 , 2021 , Seattle , WA , USA Jones , and Timothy L . Stelter ( Eds . ) . Springer International Publishing , 83 – 98 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 45289 - 6 _ 4 [ 3 ] Moritz Behrens , Nina Valkanova , Ava Fatah gen . Schieck , and Duncan P . Brumby . 2014 . SmartCitizenSentimentDashboard : ACaseStudyIntoMediaArchitectural Interfaces . In Proceedings of PerDis ’14 . ACM , 19 : 19 – 19 : 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2611009 . 2611036 [ 4 ] Thomas C . Beierle . 1999 . Using Social Goals To Evaluate Public Participation In Environmental Decisions . Review of Policy Research 16 , 3 ( 1999 ) , 75 – 103 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1541 - 1338 . 1999 . tb00879 . x [ 5 ] Mark Bilandzic and John Venable . 2011 . Towards participatory action design research : adapting action research and design science research methods for urban informatics . Journal of Community Informatics 7 , 3 ( 2011 ) , 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 15353 / joci . v7i3 . 2592 [ 6 ] Hermann - Josef Blanke and Stelio Mangiameli . 2013 . Article 11 : Participatory Democracy . In The Treaty on European Union ( TEU ) : A Commentary . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , 449 – 465 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 31706 - 4 _ 12 [ 7 ] Harry Brignull and Yvonne Rogers . 2003 . Enticing people to interact with large public displays in public spaces . In INTERACT , Vol . 3 . IFIP , 17 – 24 . [ 8 ] DeborahCarrandKathleenHalvorsen . 2001 . AnEvaluationofThreeDemocratic , Community - Based Approaches to Citizen Participation : Surveys , Conversations WithCommunityGroups , andCommunityDinners . SocietyandNaturalResources 14 ( 2001 ) , 107 – 126 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 089419201300000526 [ 9 ] Sandy Claes , Jorgos Coenen , and Andrew Vande Moere . 2018 . Conveying a Civic Issue Through Data via Spatially Distributed Public Visualization and Polling Displays . In Proceedings of NordiCHI ’18 . ACM , 597 – 608 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3240167 . 3240206 [ 10 ] Sandy Claes and Andrew Vande Moere . 2013 . Street Infographics : Raising Aware - ness of Local Issues Through a Situated Urban Visualization . In Proceedings of PerDis ’13 . ACM , 133 – 138 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2491568 . 2491597 [ 11 ] Antoine Clarinval , Anthony Simonofski , Benoit Vanderose , and Bruno Dumas . 2020 . Public displays and citizen participation : a systematic literature review and research agenda . Transforming Government : People , Process and Policy ahead - of - print ( 2020 ) , 1 – 34 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / TG - 12 - 2019 - 0127 [ 12 ] Jorgos Coenen , Sandy Claes , and Andrew Vande Moere . 2017 . The concurrent use of touch and mid - air gestures or floor mat interaction on a public display . In Proceedings of PerDis ’17 . ACM Press , 1 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078810 . 3078819 [ 13 ] Jorgos Coenen , Maarten Houben , and Andrew Vande Moere . 2019 . Citizen Dialogue Kit : Public Polling and Data Visualization Displays for Bottom - Up Citizen Participation . In Companion Publication of DIS’ 19 . ACM , 9 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3301019 . 3325160 [ 14 ] Jorgos Coenen , Eslam Nofal , and Andrew Vande Moere . 2019 . How the Arrange - ment of Content and Location Impact the Use of Multiple Distributed Public Displays . In Proceedings of DIS ’19 . ACM , 1415 – 1426 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3322276 . 3322294 [ 15 ] EricCorbettandChristopherA . LeDantec . 2018 . TheProblemofCommunityEn - gagement : Disentangling the Practices of Municipal Government . In Proceedings of CHI ’18 . ACM , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174148 [ 16 ] Andy Dow , Rob Comber , and John Vines . 2018 . Between Grassroots and the Hierarchy : Lessons Learned from the Design of a Public Services Directory . In Proceedings of CHI’ 18 . Association for Computing Machinery , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174016 [ 17 ] Guiying Du , Auriol Degbelo , and Christian Kray . 2017 . Public Displays for Public Participation in Urban Settings : A Survey . In Proceedings of PerDis’ 17 . ACM , 1 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078810 . 3078825 [ 18 ] Titiana - Petra Ertiö . 2015 . Participatory Apps for Urban Planning—Space for Improvement . Planning Practice & Research 30 , 3 ( 2015 ) , 303 – 321 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 02697459 . 2015 . 1052942 [ 19 ] Thore Fechner , Dominik Schlarmann , and Christian Kray . 2016 . Facilitating Citizen Engagement in Situ : Assessing the Impact of pro - Active Geofenced No - tifications . In Proceedings of MobileHCI ’16 . ACM , 353 – 364 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2935334 . 2935379 [ 20 ] Patrick Tobias Fischer and Eva Hornecker . 2012 . Urban HCI : Spatial Aspects in the Design of Shared Encounters for Media Facades . In Proceedings of CHI ’12 . ACM , 307 – 316 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2207719 event - place : Austin , Texas , USA . [ 21 ] Joel Fredericks and Marcus Foth . 2013 . Augmenting public participation : enhanc - ing planning outcomes through the use of social media and web 2 . 0 . Australian Planner 50 , 3 ( 2013 ) , 244 – 256 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07293682 . 2012 . 748083 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07293682 . 2012 . 748083 [ 22 ] Connie Golsteijn , Sarah Gallacher , Lisa Koeman , Lorna Wall , Sami Andberg , YvonneRogers , andLiciaCapra . 2015 . VoxBox : ATangibleMachineThatGathers Opinions from the Public at Events . In Proceedings of TEI ’15 . ACM , 201 – 208 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2677199 . 2680588 [ 23 ] Jorge Goncalves , Simo Hosio , Yong Liu , and Vassilis Kostakos . 2014 . Eliciting situatedfeedback : Acomparisonofpaper , webformsandpublicdisplays . Displays 35 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 27 – 37 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . displa . 2013 . 12 . 002 [ 24 ] Jorge Goncalves , Simo Hosio , Jakob Rogstadius , Evangelos Karapanos , and Vas - silis Kostakos . 2015 . Motivating participation and improving quality of con - tribution in ubiquitous crowdsourcing . Computer Networks 90 ( 2015 ) , 34 – 48 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . comnet . 2015 . 07 . 002 [ 25 ] Ahmet Gün , Yüksel Demir , and Burak Pak . 2020 . Urban design empowerment through ICT - based platforms in Europe . International Journal of Urban Sciences 24 , 2 ( 2020 ) , 189 – 215 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 12265934 . 2019 . 1604250 [ 26 ] Mike Harding , Bran Knowles , Nigel Davies , and Mark Rouncefield . 2015 . HCI , Civic Engagement & Trust . In Proceedings of CHI’ 15 . ACM , 2833 – 2842 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702255 [ 27 ] Gillian R . Hayes . 2011 . The Relationship of Action Research to Human - computer Interaction . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 18 , 3 ( 2011 ) , 15 : 1 – 15 : 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1993060 . 1993065 [ 28 ] Luke Hespanhol and Martin Tomitsch . 2019 . Power to the People : Hacking the City with Plug - In Interfaces for Community Engagement . In The Hackable City : Digital Media and Collaborative City - Making in the Network Society , Michiel de Lange and Martijn de Waal ( Eds . ) . Springer Singapore , 25 – 50 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 981 - 13 - 2694 - 3 _ 2 [ 29 ] Luke Hespanhol , Martin Tomitsch , Ian McArthur , Joel Fredericks , Ronald Schroeter , and Marcus Foth . 2015 . Vote as You Go : Blending Interfaces for Community Engagement into the Urban Space . In Proceedings of C & T’ 15 . ACM , 29 – 37 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2768545 . 2768553 [ 30 ] Mathias Hofmann , Sander Münster , and Jörg Rainer Noennig . 2020 . A theoretical framework for the evaluation of massive digital participation systems in urban planning . Journal of Geovisualization and Spatial Analysis 4 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 12 . Springer . [ 31 ] Simo Hosio , Jorge Goncalves , Vassilis Kostakos , and Jukka Riekki . 2014 . Explor - ing Civic Engagement on Public Displays . In User - Centric Technology Design for Nonprofit and Civic Engagements , Saqib Saeed ( Ed . ) . Springer International Publishing , 91 – 111 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 05963 - 1 _ 7 [ 32 ] Simo Hosio , Jorge Goncalves , Vassilis Kostakos , and Jukka Riekki . 2015 . Crowd - sourcing Public Opinion Using Urban Pervasive Technologies : Lessons From Real - Life Experiments in Oulu . Policy & Internet 7 , 2 ( 2015 ) , 203 – 222 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / poi3 . 90 [ 33 ] Steven Houben , Ben Bengler , Daniel Gavrilov , Sarah Gallacher , Valentina Nisi , Nuno Jardim Nunes , Licia Capra , and Yvonne Rogers . 2019 . Roam - IO : Engaging with People Tracking Data Through an Interactive Physical Data Installation . In ProceedingsofDIS’19 . ACM , 1157 – 1169 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3322276 . 3322303 [ 34 ] Steven Houben and Christian Weichel . 2013 . Overcoming Interaction Blindness Through Curiosity Objects . In CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New York , NY , USA ) ( CHI EA ’13 ) . ACM , 1539 – 1544 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2468356 . 2468631 [ 35 ] Peter A . Johnson , Pamela J . Robinson , and Simone Philpot . 2020 . Type , tweet , tap , and pass : How smart city technology is creating a transactional citizen . Government Information Quarterly 37 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . giq . 2019 . 101414 [ 36 ] Lisa Koeman , Vaiva Kalnikaité , and Yvonne Rogers . 2015 . " Everyone Is Talking About It ! " : A Distributed Approach to Urban Voting Technology and Visuali - sations . In Proceedings of CHI ’15 . ACM , 3127 – 3136 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702263 [ 37 ] Can Liu , Ben Bengler , Danilo Di Cuia , Katie Seaborn , Giovanna Nunes Vilaza , Sarah Gallacher , Licia Capra , and Yvonne Rogers . 2018 . Pinsight : A Novel Way of Creating and Sharing Digital Content Through ’Things’ in the Wild . In Pro - ceedings of DIS ’18 . ACM , 1169 – 1181 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3196709 . 3196782 [ 38 ] Thomas Mahatody , Mouldi Sagar , and Christophe Kolski . 2010 . State of the art on the cognitive walkthrough method , its variants and evolutions . Intl . Journal of Human – Computer Interaction 26 , 8 ( 2010 ) , 741 – 785 . [ 39 ] Narges Mahyar , Michael R . James , Michelle M . Ng , Reginald A . Wu , and Steven P . Dow . 2018 . CommunityCrit : Inviting the Public to Improve and Evaluate Urban Design Ideas Through Micro - Activities . In Proceedings of CHI ’18 . ACM , 195 : 1 – 195 : 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173769 [ 40 ] Narges Mahyar , Diana V . Nguyen , Maggie Chan , Jiayi Zheng , and Steven P . Dow . 2019 . The Civic Data Deluge : Understanding the Challenges of Analyzing Large - Scale Community Input . In Proceedings of DIS ’19 . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1171 – 1181 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3322276 . 3322354 [ 41 ] Jennifer ( Jen ) McGinn and Nalini Kotamraju . 2008 . Data - Driven Persona Devel - opment . In Proceedings of CHI ’08 . ACM , 1521 – 1524 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1357054 . 1357292 [ 42 ] Albert Meijer . 2015 . E - governance innovation : Barriers and strategies . Govern - ment Information Quarterly 32 , 2 ( 2015 ) , 198 – 206 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . giq . 2015 . 01 . 001 [ 43 ] Nemanja Memarovic , Ivan Elhart , and Elisa Rubegni . 2016 . " Fun Place Within a Serious Space " : Stimulating Community Interaction and Engagement Through Situated Snapshots in a University Setting . In Proceedings of MUM ’16 . ACM , 11 – 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3012709 . 3012710 [ 44 ] Vicki Moulder , Lorna R . Boschman , Ron Wakkary , William Odom , and Stacey Kuznetsov . 2014 . HCI Interventions with Nonprofit Organizations : Tactics for Effective Collaboration . In CHI ’14 Extended Abstracts . ACM , 877 – 880 . https : 73 C & T ’21 , June 20 – 25 , 2021 , Seattle , WA , USA J . Coenen , P . Biedermann , S . Claes , A . Vande Moere / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2559206 . 2559971 [ 45 ] Ville Mäkelä , Sumita Sharma , Jaakko Hakulinen , Tomi Heimonen , and Markku Turunen . 2017 . Challenges in Public Display Deployments : A Taxonomy of External Factors . In Proceedings of CHI ’17 . ACM , 3426 – 3475 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025798 [ 46 ] Jörg Müller , Dennis Wilmsmann , Juliane Exeler , Markus Buzeck , Albrecht Schmidt , Tim Jay , and Antonio Krüger . 2009 . Display Blindness : The Effect of Expectations on Attention towards Digital Signage . In Pervasive Computing . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , 1 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 01516 - 8 [ 47 ] J . Nakazawa and H . Tokuda . 2007 . Phygital Map : Accessing Digital Multimedia from Physical Map . In 21st International Conference on Advanced Information Networking and Applications Workshops , Vol . 2 . IEEE , 368 – 373 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / AINAW . 2007 . 288 [ 48 ] Matti Nelimarkka . 2019 . A Review of Research on Participation in Democratic Decision - MakingPresentedatSIGCHIConferences . TowardanImprovedTrading Zone Between Political Science and HCI . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 3 ( 2019 ) , 139 : 1 – 139 : 29 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359241 [ 49 ] Timo Ojala , Vassilis Kostakos , Hannu Kukka , Tommi Heikkinen , Tomas Linden , Marko Jurmu , Simo Hosio , Fabio Kruger , and Daniele Zanni . 2012 - 05 . Multipur - pose Interactive Public Displays in the Wild : Three Years Later . Computer 45 , 5 ( 2012 - 05 ) , 42 – 49 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MC . 2012 . 115 [ 50 ] Callum Parker , Marius Hoggenmueller , and Martin Tomitsch . 2018 . Design Strategies for Overcoming Failures on Public Interactive Displays . In Proceedings of PerDis ’18 . ACM , 2 : 1 – 2 : 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3205873 . 3205889 [ 51 ] Callum Parker , Martin Tomitsch , Nigel Davies , Nina Valkanova , and Judy Kay . 2020 . Foundations for Designing Public Interactive Displays That Provide Value to Users . In Proceedings of CHI ’20 ( New York , NY , USA ) . ACM , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376532 [ 52 ] Callum Parker , Martin Tomitsch , and Judy Kay . 2018 . Does the Public Still Look at Public Displays ? : A Field Observation of Public Displays in the Wild . Proc . ACM Interact . Mob . Wearable Ubiquitous Technol . 2 , 2 ( 2018 ) , 73 : 1 – 73 : 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3214276 [ 53 ] Phil Parvin . 2018 . Democracy Without Participation : A New Politics for a Disen - gaged Era . Res Publica 24 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 31 – 52 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11158 - 017 - 9382 - 1 [ 54 ] J . Ponterotto . 2006 . Brief Note on the Origins , Evolution , and Meaning of the Qualitative Research Concept " Thick Description " . The Qualitative Report 11 ( 2006 ) , 538 – 549 . [ 55 ] PJ Robinson and M DeRuyter . 2016 . I ‘like’you , you make my heart twitter , but . . . reflections for urban planners from an early assessment of social media deployment by Canadian local governments . Oxford University Press Don Mills , ON . 260 – 268 pages . [ 56 ] Yvonne Rogers . 2011 . Interaction Design Gone Wild : Striving for Wild Theory . Interactions 18 , 4 ( 2011 ) , 58 – 62 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978822 . 1978834 [ 57 ] LynnMSanders . 1997 . Againstdeliberation . Politicaltheory 25 , 3 ( 1997 ) , 347 – 376 . [ 58 ] GianlucaSchiavo , MarcoMilano , JorgeSaldivar , ToobaNasir , MassimoZancanaro , and Gregorio Convertino . 2013 . Agora2 . 0 : Enhancing Civic Participation through a Public Display . In Proceedings of C & T ’13 ( New York , NY , USA ) . ACM , 46 – 54 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2482991 . 2483005 [ 59 ] Ronald Schroeter . 2012 . Engaging New Digital Locals with Interactive Urban Screens to Collaboratively Improve the City . In Proceedings of CSCW ’12 . ACM , 227 – 236 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145239 [ 60 ] Ronald Schroeter , Marcus Foth , and Christine Satchell . 2012 . People , Content , Location : Sweet Spotting Urban Screens for Situated Engagement . In Proceedings of DIS ’12 ( New York , NY , USA ) . ACM , 146 – 155 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2317980 [ 61 ] Carolin Schröder . 2015 . Through Space and Time : Using mobile apps for urban participation . In Proceedings of CeDEM15 : conference for e - democracy and open government . Technische Universität Berlin , 134 – 142 . [ 62 ] Aidan Slingsby , Jason Dykes , Jo Wood , and Robert Radburn . 2014 . Designing an exploratory visual interface to the results of citizen surveys . International Journal of Geographical Information Science 28 , 10 ( 2014 ) , 2090 – 2125 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 13658816 . 2014 . 920845 [ 63 ] Fabius Steinberger , Marcus Foth , and Florian Alt . 2014 . Vote With Your Feet : Local Community Polling on Urban Screens . In Proceedings of PerDis ’14 . ACM , 44 : 44 – 44 : 49 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2611009 . 2611015 [ 64 ] Nick Taylor , Keith Cheverst , Peter Wright , and Patrick Olivier . 2013 . Leaving the Wild : Lessons from Community Technology Handovers . In Proceedings of CHI’ 13 . ACM , 1549 – 1558 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2466206 [ 65 ] Nick Taylor , Justin Marshall , Alicia Blum - Ross , John Mills , Jon Rogers , Paul Egglestone , DavidM . Frohlich , PeterWright , andPatrickOlivier . 2012 . Viewpoint : Empowering Communities with Situated Voting Devices . In Proceedings of CHI’ 12 . ACM , 1361 – 1370 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208594 [ 66 ] Ana Valencia , Ruth Mugge , Jan Schoormans , and Hendrik Schifferstein . 2015 . The design of smart product - service systems ( PSSs ) : An exploration of design characteristics . International Journal of Design 9 , 1 ( 2015 ) , 13 – 28 . [ 67 ] Nina Valkanova , Robert Walter , Andrew Vande Moere , and Jörg Müller . 2014 . MyPosition : Sparking Civic Discourse by a Public Interactive Poll Visualization . In Proceedings of CSCW ’14 . ACM , 1323 – 1332 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2531602 . 2531639 [ 68 ] Andrew Vande Moere and Niels Wouters . 2012 . The Role of Context in Media Architecture . In Proceedings of PerDis ’12 . ACM , 12 : 1 – 12 : 6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2307798 . 2307810 [ 69 ] Vasilis Vlachokyriakos , Rob Comber , Karim Ladha , Nick Taylor , Paul Dunphy , Patrick McCorry , and Patrick Olivier . 2014 . PosterVote : Expanding the Action Repertoire for Local Political Activism . In Proceedings of DIS ’14 . ACM , 795 – 804 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2598510 . 2598523 [ 70 ] Jagoda Walny , Sarah Storteboom , Richard Pusch , Steven Munsu Hwang , Søren Knudsen , Sheelagh Carpendale , and Wesley J . Willett . 2020 . PixelClipper : Sup - porting Public Engagement and Conversation About Visualizations . PRISM . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 11575 / PRISM / 10182 [ 71 ] C . Webster and Charles Leleux . 2018 . Smart governance : Opportunities for technologically - mediated citizen co - production . Information Polity 23 ( 2018 ) , 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3233 / IP - 170065 [ 72 ] William Foote Whyte , Davydd J Greenwood , and Peter Lazes . 1991 . Participatory action research : Through practice to science in social research . Participatory action research 32 , 5 ( 1991 ) , 19 – 55 . [ 73 ] Sarah Williams . 2020 . Data Action : Using Data for Public Good . MIT Press . [ 74 ] NielsWouters , JohnDowns , MitchellHarrop , TravisCox , EduardoOliveira , Sarah Webber , FrankVetere , andAndrewVandeMoere . 2016 . UncoveringtheHoneypot Effect : How Audiences Engage with Public Interactive Systems . In Proceedings of DIS ’16 . ACM , 5 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901796 [ 75 ] Kaifeng Yang and Sanjay K . Pandey . 2011 . Further Dissecting the Black Box of Citizen Participation : When Does Citizen Involvement Lead to Good Outcomes ? PublicAdministrationReview 71 , 6 ( 2011 ) , 880 – 892 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 6210 . 2011 . 02417 . x 74