This article was downloaded by : [ 129 . 174 . 21 . 5 ] On : 27 September 2014 , At : 11 : 54 Publisher : Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences ( INFORMS ) INFORMS is located in Maryland , USA Management Science Publication details , including instructions for authors and subscription information : http : / / pubsonline . informs . org Real Options in Technology Licensing Arvids A . Ziedonis , To cite this article : Arvids A . Ziedonis , ( 2007 ) Real Options in Technology Licensing . Management Science 53 ( 10 ) : 1618 - 1633 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 1070 . 0705 Full terms and conditions of use : http : / / pubsonline . informs . org / page / terms - and - conditions This article may be used only for the purposes of research , teaching , and / or private study . Commercial use or systematic downloading ( by robots or other automatic processes ) is prohibited without explicit Publisher approval , unless otherwise noted . For more information , contact permissions @ informs . org . The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the article’s accuracy , completeness , merchantability , fitness for a particular purpose , or non - infringement . Descriptions of , or references to , products or publications , or inclusion of an advertisement in this article , neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee , endorsement , or support of claims made of that product , publication , or service . Copyright © 2007 , INFORMS Please scroll down for article—it is on subsequent pages INFORMS is the largest professional society in the world for professionals in the fields of operations research , management science , and analytics . For more information on INFORMS , its publications , membership , or meetings visit http : / / www . informs . org MANAGEMENT SCIENCE Vol . 53 , No . 10 , October 2007 , pp . 1618 – 1633 issn 0025 - 1909 (cid:1) eissn 1526 - 5501 (cid:1) 07 (cid:1) 5310 (cid:1) 1618 inf orms ® doi 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 1070 . 0705 ©2007 INFORMS Real Options in Technology Licensing Arvids A . Ziedonis Stephen M . Ross School of Business , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , Michigan 48109 , azied @ umich . edu T his paper examines the use of options contracts by ﬁrms acquiring rights to commercialize university tech - nologies . By combining information about the sequence of licensing decisions with characteristics of the ﬁrms and technologies involved , I explore factors that shape decisions to purchase and exercise option con - tracts for these technologies . Decisions by ﬁrms that considered but did not purchase an option or a license are included in the sample . Consistent with the basic premise of real - options theory , I ﬁnd that ﬁrms are more likely to purchase option contracts for more uncertain technologies . Also in line with theoretical predictions , I ﬁnd that ﬁrms that are better able to evaluate an external technology are less likely to purchase options before licensing . The results also highlight more complex motives for exercising options in technology licensing . On the one hand , ﬁrms appear to beneﬁt from their ability to learn about the technology during the option period . On the other hand , ﬁrms that are better able to “absorb” the technology during the contract period may have reduced incentives to subsequently license the invention . Key words : real options ; licensing ; university - industry linkages ; knowledge transfer History : Accepted by Scott Shane , technological innovation , product development , and entrepreneurship ; received May 14 , 2004 . This paper was with the author 1 year and 8 months for 2 revisions . Published online in Articles in Advance August 3 , 2007 . 1 . Introduction A lively literature has emerged applying real - options thinking to R & D decision making and invest - ment ( Mitchell and Hamilton 1988 , Trigeorgis 1996 , McGrath 1997 , Folta 1998 , MacMillan and McGrath 1998 , Hamilton 2000 ) , the development of organiza - tional capabilities ( Kogut and Kulatilaka 2001 ) , expan - sion decisions ( Kogut 1991 , Kogut and Kulatilaka 1994 , Kulatilaka and Perotti 1998 ) , and entry decisions ( Miller and Folta 2002 ) . Yet , empirical tests of real - options theory in the strategy literature remain incon - clusive due to difﬁculties in identifying ex ante what is and is not a real option and in falsifying hypothe - ses about the motivations of ﬁrms to undertake and exercise such options ( Adner and Levinthal 2004 ) . This paper examines the use of option contracts by ﬁrms acquiring rights to commercialize univer - sity technologies . Under an option agreement , the ﬁrm purchases the right , but not the obligation , to license the technology at a future date at some cost . By combining information about the sequence of licens - ing decisions with characteristics of the ﬁrms and technologies involved , I explore factors that shape decisions to purchase and exercise option contracts for early - stage technologies . The sample encompasses decisions by ﬁrms considering licensing inventions from the University of California ( UC ) between 1979 and 1998 . An important feature of the data is that it contains “prelicensing” agreements ( e . g . , secrecy and option agreements ) that allowed me to observe sequential steps in the licensing transaction . More - over , secrecy agreements identify the pool of ﬁrms that considered licensing a particular invention from UC , including ﬁrms that chose not to license the technology . Consistent with the basic premise of real - options theory , I ﬁnd that ﬁrms are more likely to pur - chase option contracts for inventions characterized by greater technological uncertainty . I also ﬁnd that ﬁrms that are better able to evaluate a university technology are less likely to purchase options before licensing . The results also highlight more complex motives for exercising options in university technology licensing . On the one hand , ﬁrms appear to beneﬁt from their ability to learn more about the technology during the option period . On the other hand , ﬁrms that are better able to “absorb” the technology during the contract period may have reduced incentives to subsequently license the invention . Section 2 provides a brief overview of the real - options literature . Section 3 develops three hypothe - ses on how the use of options contracts in the licensing decision depends on technological and ﬁrm - speciﬁc knowledge . Section 4 outlines the technology licensing process at UC . Section 5 describes the sam - ple , explains the methodology , and presents the vari - ables . Section 6 reports the empirical ﬁndings . Finally , § 7 discusses several implications that stem from these results and identiﬁes areas for future research . 1618 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 174 . 21 . 5 ] on 27 S e p t e m b e r 2014 , a t 11 : 54 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Ziedonis : Real Options in Technology Licensing Management Science 53 ( 10 ) , pp . 1618 – 1633 , ©2007 INFORMS 1619 2 . What Is a Real Option ? A real option is analogous to a ﬁnancial call option ( Black and Scholes 1973 ) , which gives an investor the right , but not the obligation , to buy a valuable asset ( such as a share of stock ) at a future ( expiration ) date at a certain ( exercise ) price . Real - options the - ory expands the notion of option value to encompass nonﬁnancial or so - called “real” investments ( Dixit and Pindyck 1994 ) . In this context , the “option” cor - responds to a small initial investment ( e . g . , a pilot project , limited joint venture , or exploratory R & D ) that creates the opportunity to make a larger subse - quent investment ( e . g . , a full - scale plant , merger , or commercialization effort ) in the event ﬁndings gener - ated by the initial investment are favorable . The price of the option corresponds to the initial expenditure , and the exercise price corresponds to the cost of the follow - on investment . A real - option investment has value because of uncertainty regarding future payoffs associated with full - scale investment . A central prediction of real - options theory is that the greater ex ante uncertainty or variation of expected future payoffs , the greater the value of the initial option investment . Greater vari - ation in expected payoffs generates greater upside potential of the option with no increase in downside risk because the option would not be exercised if the outlook were not favorable at the end of the option period . Option value is thus realized through the res - olution of uncertainty . The real - options literature has emphasized two forms of uncertainty—exogenous and endogenous— that can be resolved during the option period ( Roberts and Weitzman 1981 , Dixit and Pindyck 1994 , Folta 1998 ) . Exogenous uncertainty is deciphered through waiting , and resolution is independent of actions of the asset holder . For example , consider a ﬁrm weighing an investment decision in the face of pend - ing legislation that it is unable to inﬂuence , but that will affect the returns to its investment . In this circumstance , uncertainty regarding the legislation is unaffected by whether the ﬁrm invests or not , and therefore is exogenous to the investment deci - sion ( McDonald and Siegel 1986 , Majd and Pindyck 1987 ) . Prior studies have focused on exogenous uncer - tainty resolution and the exercise of such a “deferral” option . For example , Folta and Miller ( 2002 ) examine acquisition patterns by pharmaceutical ﬁrms in the biotechnology industry using an options framework . Established companies that hold minority stakes in new biotechnology ﬁrms are said to hold options on future acquisition . The authors ﬁnd that holders of these stakes are more likely to acquire the biotech - nology ﬁrm ( i . e . , exercise the option ) when exoge - nous uncertainty in the industry subﬁeld of the target ﬁrm is reduced ( as measured by volatility in subﬁeld stock - market returns ) . Endogenous uncertainty , in contrast , is resolved by active involvement by the ﬁrm and encourages early and sequential investment ( Dixit and Pindyck 1994 ) . For example , Kogut ( 1991 ) , Kogut and Kulatilaka ( 1994 , 2001 ) , and Kogut and Kim ( 1996 ) explore the creation of “growth” option value by developing organizational capabilities ; capability development creates “platforms” from which ﬁrms may respond more readily to future changes in their external envi - ronment . Absent such active investment , the ﬁrm would be less favorably positioned to capitalize on changes in market conditions . As discussed in more detail in § 4 , the licensing process at UC provides a unique empirical setting to examine the application of growth options . Inventions marketed by the university cover embryonic inven - tions requiring signiﬁcant development before being marketable , and are thus characterized by signiﬁcant technological and commercial uncertainty . Option contracts offer the potential licensee the opportunity to stage its investment in a university technology with the ability to discontinue investment ( by not exercis - ing the option to license ) in the event that unfavorable information is uncovered during the option period . Contractual requirements that the ﬁrm evaluate the technology in - house are designed to facilitate the res - olution of endogenous uncertainty—uncertainty that ﬁrms can reduce through their own efforts . Finally , the short time period of the option contract ( one to two years ) limits the opportunity to use the option to resolve exogenous uncertainty for these early - stage inventions . The empirical context of this study also enables me to overcome several obstacles faced by prior stud - ies in real options . As Adner and Levinthal ( 2004 ) note , virtually any investment has real - options prop - erties , so identifying what is not a real option is chal - lenging . Moreover , contracts granting one party the explicit right to exercise an option are rarely observed . For example , real - options studies of joint ventures by Kogut ( 1991 ) and Reuer and Tong ( 2005 ) were unable to discern whether the joint venture agreements con - tained language granting one of the parties the option to assume the joint venture . Similarly , in their study of equity partnerships , Folta and Miller ( 2002 ) analyze 285 minority equity partnerships in which one partner may obtain a majority stake , but are unable to iden - tify whether these partnership agreements included the explicit right to acquire a majority stake ex ante . Lastly , because the selection and exercise of a real option may be unobservable , it can be difﬁcult to fal - sify predictions arising from the theory ( Adner and Levinthal 2004 ) . The licensing data outlined above enabled me to address each of these challenges . First , D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 174 . 21 . 5 ] on 27 S e p t e m b e r 2014 , a t 11 : 54 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Ziedonis : Real Options in Technology Licensing 1620 Management Science 53 ( 10 ) , pp . 1618 – 1633 , ©2007 INFORMS I am able to differentiate among ﬁrms that purchased or did not purchase an option . Moreover , I observe instances where ﬁrms purchased option contracts that explicitly confer the right but not the obligation to license a technology at the end of the contract term . The data also enabled me to identify circumstances under which ﬁrms do ( and do not ) exercise option contracts . 3 . Hypothesis Development Inventions offered for licensing from research uni - versities typically are by - products of basic research , and therefore are often characterized as “early - stage” technologies . The embryonic nature of these technolo - gies can make it difﬁcult to assess their commer - cial potential and ﬁt with a ﬁrm’s existing product lines or development efforts . For example , in a sur - vey of 62 university technology transfer ofﬁces by Jensen and Thursby ( 2001 ) , respondents reported that only 12 % of licensed inventions were ready for com - mercial use , and that manufacturing feasibility was known for only 8 % of inventions . Prototypes were available for 29 % of the licensed inventions , but 48 % were termed “proof of concept only” at the time of licensing ( i . e . , they lacked a working prototype ) . Therefore , for many of these licensed inventions , tech - nical , manufacturing , and commercial feasibility are all subject to varying degrees of uncertainty . As dis - cussed in § 2 , a main prediction of real - options theory is that the probability of purchasing an initial option is increasing in the degree of uncertainty that can be resolved regarding future payoffs . This prediction leads to Hypothesis 1 : Hypothesis 1 . The greater the uncertainty embodied by an invention , the more likely a ﬁrm will purchase an option contract prior to making a licensing decision , all else equal . A ﬁrm’s scientiﬁc or technological capabilities also may inﬂuence the decision - making process . An exten - sive theoretical and empirical literature has demon - strated that possession of related knowledge is often necessary to digest and utilize external informa - tion . For example , Cohen and Levinthal ( 1990 ) and Rosenberg ( 1990 ) show that ﬁrms undertake R & D to improve their capability to monitor , assimilate , and exploit external technologies . Arora and Gambardella ( 1994 ) distinguish between two components of a ﬁrm’s “absorptive capacity” : ( 1 ) the ability to evaluate external information , and ( 2 ) the ability to utilize external information . They argue that both of these dimensions affect the propensity of the ﬁrm to enter into technological collaborations , albeit in different ways . In a study of collaborative agreements between pharmaceutical ﬁrms and specialized biotechnology ﬁrms and universities , these scholars show that ﬁrms with higher in - house technological capabilities related to development and commercialization are more likely to enter into external collaborations . Con - versely , ﬁrms that are better able to evaluate external projects are more discerning and select fewer projects on average . Similarly , Zahra and George ( 2002 ) dis - tinguish between “potential” absorptive capacity , the capability to assess broad external technological infor - mation , and “realized” absorptive capacity , the abil - ity to utilize that information in a speciﬁc application domain to generate new innovations . Uncertainty , therefore , may not only be a charac - teristic of an invention , but may also differ among ﬁrms . Cohen and Levinthal ( 1990 , p . 136 ) note , for example , that an organization’s related prior knowl - edge “permits the ﬁrm to predict more accurately the nature and commercial potential of technological advances” and that “possession of related expertise will permit the ﬁrm to better understand and there - fore evaluate the import of intermediate technological advances that provide signals to the eventual merit of a new technological development . ” Prior knowl - edge , consequently , should also inﬂuence whether the ﬁrm would purchase an option prior to making the licensing decision . A lack of technological knowl - edge results in a high level of uncertainty regard - ing viability of the technology , but the purchase of an option can reduce that uncertainty . Conversely , high levels of prior related technological knowledge by a potential licensee suggests that less uncertainty would be resolved under an option agreement . In these instances , the option to delay would be less valuable , thus less likely to be purchased by the ﬁrm . This result generates the second hypothesis : Hypothesis 2 . Firms better able to evaluate an inven - tion will be less likely to purchase an option contract prior to making a licensing decision , all else equal . Prior research suggests that knowledge resources have commercial value in speciﬁc contexts , and that these resources are most valuable in closely related applications . For example , Montgomery and Werner - felt ( 1988 ) show that ﬁrms achieve the highest returns when diversifying into closely related industries . Focusing on technological resources , Arora and Gam - bardella ( 1994 ) ﬁnd that prior patenting in biotech - nology classes by pharmaceutical ﬁrms positively inﬂuenced the likelihood that they would enter in strategic alliances with new biotechnology ﬁrms to commercialize a new technology . Similarly , Silverman ( 1999 ) reports that ﬁrms are most likely to diversify into industries where the ﬁrm’s existing patent portfo - lio is most applicable . In the licensing context , a ﬁrm’s related technological knowledge supports the ﬁrm’s ability to derive economic value from the license ( i . e . , D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 174 . 21 . 5 ] on 27 S e p t e m b e r 2014 , a t 11 : 54 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Ziedonis : Real Options in Technology Licensing Management Science 53 ( 10 ) , pp . 1618 – 1633 , ©2007 INFORMS 1621 commercially exploit the technology ) . Related techno - logical knowledge , therefore , would be expected to inﬂuence the ﬁrm’s decision to commit to a license ( or not ) . This leads to a third prediction : Hypothesis 3 . Firms with a higher level of technolog - ical knowledge related to an invention will be more likely to license the invention , all else equal . 4 . Institutional Context The nine - campus UC system serves as the empiri - cal setting for this study . 1 This university has been one of the leading recipients of technology licensing income among U . S . universities during the past three decades ; in 1996 , it earned $ 63 . 2 million in licensing revenues , more than any other U . S . university ( Asso - ciation for University Technology Managers 1998 ) . Licensing by two other major university licensors has been examined by Shane ( 2002 ) ( Massachusetts Insti - tute of Technology ) and Elfenbein ( 2004 ) ( Harvard University ) , but neither study has considered the use of option agreements in the licensing process . Several aspects of the licensing process at UC are useful for a study of real options . First , all ﬁrms inter - ested in licensing the technology must sign a secrecy agreement and agree to “nondisclosure” provisions as a precursor to further steps in the licensing pro - cess . Once a secrecy agreement has been signed , the Ofﬁce of Technology Transfer ( OTT ) at UC reveals limited conﬁdential information about the invention to the potential licensee , including the identity of the inventor . In exchange , the ﬁrm agrees not to utilize the technology for purposes other than evaluation , and not to disclose information about the invention to others . Secrecy agreements are not exclusive ( i . e . , secrecy agreements with multiple ﬁrms may be in effect simultaneously ) . The university does not , how - ever , disclose the existence of other secrecy agree - ments or interest in the invention by other ﬁrms . The sequential licensing process at UC allows ﬁrms to pursue the technology further through either an exclusive option or an exclusive license contract . An option contract at UC grants a potential licensee an exclusive right to use information disclosed by the university to determine the technological and com - mercial viability of the invention . In exchange , the ﬁrm typically pays the ﬁling fee and other costs of obtaining the patent , as well as an option fee . ( Option fees are signiﬁcantly lower than fees for exclusive licenses . ) An additional cost of the option is the requirement that the ﬁrm exercise “due diligence” and make “good - faith efforts” toward evaluating the technology in - house . These activities are monitored 1 A tenth campus , UC - Merced , was established too late ( 2005 ) to be included in the sample . by OTT through periodic progress reports submitted by the ﬁrm . During the option period , which typically lasts one to two years , the ﬁrm is contractually barred from marketing the invention or incorporating the technology into its own production processes . Upon expiration , the ﬁrm may either negotiate a license or abandon further efforts and terminate the transaction . The ﬁrm does not recover the option fee or patent application costs , however , and title to any resulting patent remains with the university . 2 The ultimate step in the process is the license agree - ment . A license agreement grants the licensee rights to fully develop the invention covered by the patent , if issued , or patent application , pending issue . More - over , the license , which may be subject to ﬁeld - of - use or geographic restrictions , commits the ﬁrm to under - take efforts to commercialize the technology . Pay - ments to the university frequently include up - front fees , royalty payments , and minimum royalties . The license also contains language regarding due dili - gence and reporting requirements , milestones , prob - lem resolution rules , and duration of contract ( usually equal to the life of the patent ) . UC licenses do not include know - how provisions , so the ﬁrm’s posses - sion of related technological knowledge is even more critical in these transactions : It not only improves the ability of the ﬁrm to assess the value of a university invention , but also enhances the ﬁrm’s ability to com - mercialize the technology . To summarize , once a ﬁrm has agreed to secrecy provisions , it may license the patent outright or pur - chase an exclusive option prior to licensing ( or choose to do neither ) . Those ﬁrms choosing an option may also choose to license the technology at the end of the option period , but they are not obligated to do so . For any patent in the sample , there may be several poten - tial licensees signing secrecy agreements , but only one ﬁrm taking an option or ultimately licensing the patent . 5 . Data and Methodology The primary data for this study come from unpub - lished archival records of technology licensing at UC maintained by OTT . In managing the licensing of uni - versity technologies , OTT tracks inventions disclosed by all UC faculty , students , and research staff , includ - ing ( 1 ) whether a patent application was ﬁled in the United States or other countries ; ( 2 ) whether a patent was issued ; ( 2 ) whether the patent was licensed to a private ﬁrm , the identity of the licensee , and the terms of the license ( e . g . , exclusive / nonexclusive ) ; ( 3 ) the amount , if any , of license fees and royalties 2 Option agreements typically spell out ex ante a range of terms subject to negotiation at the end of the option period ( e . g . , possible geographic or ﬁeld - of - use restrictions ) . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 174 . 21 . 5 ] on 27 S e p t e m b e r 2014 , a t 11 : 54 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Ziedonis : Real Options in Technology Licensing 1622 Management Science 53 ( 10 ) , pp . 1618 – 1633 , ©2007 INFORMS for each license ; ( 4 ) patenting and licensing costs and reimbursements ; and ( 5 ) magnitude and pattern of sales resulting from the licensed technology . Virtually all licenses and option contracts cover patented inventions . Potential licensees were not required to sign secrecy agreements at UC until 1979 . To identify all ﬁrms receiving conﬁdential informa - tion regarding available technologies , I therefore con - sider only utility patents licensed after 1978 . I also restrict the sample to 309 patents that were licensed on an exclusive basis between 1979 and 1998 . 3 The grant of exclusivity serves as an incentive for invest - ment in further development by the licensee . The sample period ends with patents issued in 1992 . For each licensed patent , a potential licensee could make one of the following four mutually exclusive ( and collectively exhaustive ) choices in the licens - ing process : ( 1 ) secrecy agreement only , ( 2 ) secrecy agreement + exclusive license , ( 3 ) secrecy agreement + option , or ( 4 ) secrecy agreement + option + exclusive license . Each choice among these four alternatives represents one observation . In total , the overall sam - ple includes 669 ﬁrm - choice observations on 309 patents , with 258 ﬁrms signing at least one agreement . I supplement the UC OTT data with publicly avail - able information from the U . S . Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce ( USPTO ) on all patents issued to UC and link these patents to invention disclosures and licenses . Using these data , I construct measures of a ﬁrm’s technological knowledge assets ( described more fully in § 5 . 2 ) . Unfortunately , patent - based measures are unavailable or poorly measured for two types of ﬁrms , “start - up” ﬁrms with limited or nonexistent patent histories , 4 and ﬁrms not listed as assignee on any patent issued within the previous six years . 5 I therefore drop choices made by these ﬁrms from the analysis . Of the 258 ﬁrms making licensing decisions , start - ups account for 36 , and existing ﬁrms with no patent history account for 86 . Excluding these ﬁrms 3 Nonexclusive licenses typically do not involve due diligence or milestone requirements , entail lower fees , and involve technologies ( e . g . , research tools ) that do not require substantial investment in further development . 4 As Elfenbein ( 2004 ) and Lowe and Ziedonis ( 2006 ) discuss , the licensing decision process works very differently for start - ups , which are typically founded with the intent to commercialize the technology . Unlike more established ﬁrms , for example , start - ups often seek option agreements to delay commercial development while sufﬁcient capital is secured . 5 For ﬁrms with no patent history , I am unable to account for vari - ation in their technological make - up , so substantial unobserved heterogeneity would be introduced into the speciﬁcation for these ﬁrms if they were to be included . If the no - patent history ﬁrms are systematically different than the ﬁrms with patents , including the no - patent history ﬁrms would generate biased coefﬁcients . There - fore , the results reported in § 5 are conditional on the ﬁrm having patented actively prior to the licensing decision . from the analysis leaves 136 ﬁrms , or approximately 53 % of the original 258 ﬁrms . These 136 ﬁrms account for 457 of the original 669 licensing decisions , or 68 % . This sample forms the basis for the empirical analysis . 5 . 1 . Speciﬁcation The discrete nature of the dependent variable sug - gests a qualitative choice model such as a logit for estimating the relationship between licensing choice and the attributes of the ﬁrm and characteristics of the technology under consideration . The logit can be inappropriate for many choice situations when the independence of irrelevant alternatives ( IIA ) property is violated , however . Another limitation of the logit choice model is that estimation rests on the assump - tion that error terms among all of the alternatives are uncorrelated . In the licensing decision process depicted in § 4 , this assumption is violated in the fol - lowing sense . If the ﬁrm chooses to take an option prior to making the licensing decision , then the ﬁrm has greater information regarding the technology on which to make its licensing decision than if it had not chosen an option ﬁrst . The components of the error terms of these two licensing alternatives ( license or reject ) that pertain to the option choice are there - fore hypothesized to be jointly distributed ( and like - wise for the licensing alternatives given that option was not chosen ) . The nested multinomial logit model ( NMNL ) ( McFadden 1981 ) overcomes some of the IIA and error correlation limitations of the logit model . 6 I conduct a Hausman - McFadden Speciﬁcation Test ( Hausman and McFadden 1984 ) to test the assump - tion that the IIA condition does not hold among the four licensing choices , and consequently the applica - bility of the NMNL model in describing the licens - ing choice set faced by the ﬁrm . The (cid:1) 2 statistic from the test is 10 . 34 , which allows me to reject at the 5 % signiﬁcance level the null hypothesis that the IIA condition holds , suggesting that structural relations among the alternatives exists and that the alterna - tive speciﬁcation of four nonnested licensing choices should be rejected . I describe the Hausman test in greater detail in the online appendix ( provided in the e - companion ) . 7 In this paper , I employ the NMNL model and assume that error terms have generalized extreme 6 The NMNL model is appropriate when the set of alternatives faced by the decision maker can be partitioned into subsets so that the ratio of probabilities ( odds ratio ) for any two alternatives within the subset is independent of the characteristics of alternatives not in the subset ( the IIA condition ) , while this condition does not hold between choices not in the same subset . 7 An electronic companion to this paper is available as part of the online version that can be found at http : / / mansci . journal . informs . org / . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 174 . 21 . 5 ] on 27 S e p t e m b e r 2014 , a t 11 : 54 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Ziedonis : Real Options in Technology Licensing Management Science 53 ( 10 ) , pp . 1618 – 1633 , ©2007 INFORMS 1623 Figure 1 Partitioning of Firm Option and Licensing Choices in Nested Logit Speciﬁcation Don’toption Option License Reject License Reject value ( GEV ) distributions . 8 The speciﬁcation is as fol - lows . The licensing decision faced by the potential licensee is divided into two partitions , as depicted in Figure 1 . The upper subset ( conditional on a ﬁrm signing a secrecy agreement ) represents the decision to take an option prior to making the licensing deci - sion or not . If the ﬁrm forgoes an option , it then either licenses or rejects ( i . e . , not licenses ) the technology . If the ﬁrm purchases an option , then at the end of the option period it is faced with the choice to license or reject the technology . It is important to note that the sequential process depicted in Figure 1 does not necessarily correspond to the decision process undertaken by the ﬁrm when considering whether to license the university technol - ogy . Rather , the partitions are constructed to avoid the IIA problem introduced when all four possible alternatives are commingled . Notably , this construc - tion also enables me to separate the licensing decision from the option decision empirically , while preserving the correlation between these two choices . 9 8 The generalized extreme value distribution is compatible with the assumption of stochastic utility maximization ( McFadden 1981 , Boersch - Supan 1990 ) . 9 An alternative speciﬁcation is the ordered probit ( or logit ) . In this model , ﬁrms are assumed to rank order the licensing and option choices by their expected value—choosing to license imme - diately for high expected value inventions , purchasing an option for inventions with medium expected value , and rejecting a license for low - valued inventions . Such a speciﬁcation requires the strong assumption that every decision maker in the sample would unambiguously order the choices in the same way , E ( license ) > E ( option ) > E ( reject ) ( Borooah 2002 ) . For some ﬁrms reviewing some technologies however , the value of waiting to resolve the underlying uncertainty may make the option more attractive rel - ative to licensing immediately , therefore violating this assump - tion . The ordered model also assumes “parallel regressions” ( Long 1997 ) , i . e . , that each probability curve corresponding to the ordered choices is parallel and differs only in being shifted right or left . I conducted the Brant ( 1990 ) test of the null hypothesis that the coefﬁcients are equal across each binary equation . This test pro - duces a (cid:1) 2 statistic of 12 . 32 , which has a 1 . 5 % level of signiﬁcance . The parallel regression assumption is therefore violated , suggesting that a more general discrete choice model that does not impose this restriction is more appropriate . Each of the four possible licensing alternatives to ﬁrm n can be characterized by its utility , U O(cid:6)L(cid:6)n , where i = 1 (cid:6) 2 refers to the alternatives when an option is not taken and i = 3 (cid:6) 4 refers to the alternatives when an option is taken . Assume that this utility can be decom - posed into components representing the observable portion of utility , and components representing unob - servable components of utility ( error terms ) as follows ( dropping the subscript n for convenience ) : U O(cid:6)L = V O + V L + V O(cid:6)L + (cid:10) O + (cid:10) L (cid:6) ( 1 ) where V O is the observable component of utility that is obtained from the option choice and V L is the observable component of utility that is obtained from the licensing choice . (cid:10) O and (cid:10) L are the random com - ponents of utility from the respective choices . The observable components of utility are deﬁned as V O = (cid:11) (cid:4) O X O and V L = (cid:11) (cid:4) L X L (cid:6) ( 2 ) where X O and X L are vectors of variables correspond - ing only to attributes of the option and licensing choices , respectively . (cid:11) (cid:4) O and (cid:11) (cid:4) L are vectors of parame - ters to be estimated . The advantage of disaggregating the ﬁrm’s utility equation in this fashion is that , fol - lowing McFadden ( 1981 ) , the joint choice probabilities can now be expressed as a product of marginal and conditional probabilities P O(cid:6)L = P(cid:14)L (cid:1) O(cid:15) · P(cid:14)O(cid:15)(cid:6) ( 3 ) in which each term on the right side of the equation can be expressed in the form of a logit model . As stated above , the random components are assumed to conform to a generalized extreme value distribution . Because the random components of the utilities from the alternative choices may be cor - related , I specify a GEV joint distribution function implied by the nested logit ( McFadden 1981 ) that accounts for correlation among these error compo - nents as follows . I assume that the two licensing choices available ( if the ﬁrm forgoes the option ) are correlated because each licensing choice would be made with the same available information . Similarly , alternatives when an option is taken also are cor - related because each choice would beneﬁt from the information gleaned during the option period . This form of correlation is parameterized in the error dis - tribution function by a “correlation coefﬁcient” (cid:16) that represents correlation among alternatives . The conditional probability that a license will be chosen or rejected given that the ﬁrm does not choose an option ﬁrst is P(cid:14) License Choice (cid:1) No Option (cid:15) = e (cid:14)V L (cid:15) i (cid:1) i = 1 (cid:6) 2 e (cid:14)V L (cid:15) i (cid:18) ( 4 ) Similarly , the conditional probability that a license will be chosen or rejected given that an option was D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 174 . 21 . 5 ] on 27 S e p t e m b e r 2014 , a t 11 : 54 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Ziedonis : Real Options in Technology Licensing 1624 Management Science 53 ( 10 ) , pp . 1618 – 1633 , ©2007 INFORMS chosen ﬁrst is P(cid:14) License Choice (cid:1) Option (cid:15) = e (cid:14)V L (cid:15) i (cid:1) i = 3 (cid:6) 4 e (cid:14)V L (cid:15) i (cid:18) ( 5 ) The marginal probability of a choice to option or not option , P(cid:14) Option Choice (cid:15) , can be expressed in an analogous fashion : P(cid:14) Option Choice (cid:15) = e V O + (cid:14) 1 − (cid:16) j (cid:15)I j (cid:1) j = No Option (cid:6) Option e V O + (cid:14) 1 − (cid:16) j (cid:15)I j (cid:6) ( 6 ) where I No Option = ln (cid:21) (cid:1) i = 1 (cid:6) 2 e (cid:14)V L (cid:15) i (cid:22) is the natural log of the denominator in Equation ( 4 ) and I Option = ln (cid:21) (cid:1) i = 3 (cid:6) 4 e (cid:14)V L (cid:15) i (cid:22) is the natural log of the denominator in Equation ( 5 ) . The likelihood function corresponding to the prob - ability expression in ( 1 ) is L = N (cid:2) n = 1 4 (cid:2) i = 1 (cid:21)P n (cid:14)L (cid:1) O(cid:15)P n (cid:14)O(cid:15)(cid:22) y i (cid:6) ( 7 ) where y i = 1 if observation n chooses alterna - tive i , and zero otherwise . The coefﬁcients are esti - mated using the full information maximum likelihood ( FIML ) method . 5 . 2 . Independent Variables There are two primary classes of independent variables—those inﬂuencing the option decision and those inﬂuencing the licensing choice . These variables are described below . 5 . 2 . 1 . Technological Uncertainty . Uncertainty re - garding the commercial potential of the patent affects the option choice and is likely to be higher for tech - nologies that are more “basic” or more “distant” from commercialization . Ideally , one would measure such uncertainty by determining the stage of development of each invention at the time of disclosure , as was done by Jensen and Thursby ( 2001 ) in their survey of technology transfer ofﬁces . Such a measure is not available at the level of invention for the technolo - gies examined in this study , unfortunately . Following Lanjouw and Schankerman ( 2001 ) , I therefore mea - sure technological “maturity” using the number of backward citations contained in the UC patent under consideration . In less developed technological areas ( with less prior art to be cited ) , it is likely that there would be greater uncertainty regarding the commer - cial potential of patented inventions . In contrast , a greater number of prior art citations would indicate a more derivative invention and less uncertainty regard - ing the invention’s potential . 10 10 The initial and exercise costs of the option also could inﬂuence the ﬁrm’s choices . For example , if the option is priced too high , a ﬁrm may forgo the option although a technology’s prospects are 5 . 2 . 2 . Technological Knowledge . To estimate the ﬁrm’s stock of technological knowledge , I use mea - sures based on U . S . patent data . 11 For the 136 poten - tial licensees in the sample , I identify approximately 203 , 000 patents awarded to the ﬁrm , its parent and / or subsidiaries between 1975 and 1998 . I then weight each patent by the number of forward citations it receives . Following the discussion in Hall et al . ( 2000 ) , I control for “right - side” truncation bias by normal - izing each patent in the ﬁrm’s portfolio by the aver - age number of citations to all patents issued in the same year and in the same primary ( 3 - digit ) USPTO technological class . The resulting citation weight is a measure of importance relative to other patents in its cohort and is comparable across years . I use this method to construct citation - based weights for each patent in the sample ﬁrms’ portfolios . 12 The citation weight (cid:7) C i applied to patent i is (cid:7) C i = FC i (cid:3)(cid:1) N c(cid:6)t n = 1 FC n(cid:6)c(cid:6)t (cid:4) / N c(cid:6)t (cid:6) ( 8 ) where FC i is the total number of citations received by patent i from future patents by the end of 1998 ( “for - ward” citations ) , and (cid:14) (cid:1) N c(cid:6)t n = 1 FC n(cid:6)c(cid:6)t (cid:15) / N c(cid:6)t is the mean number of forward citations received by all patents issued in the same year t and in the same 3 - digit tech - nology class c as patent i . Because not all knowledge represented by a ﬁrm’s patent portfolio is equally relevant to the licensing of a patent in a particular area , I also account for the “relatedness” of the ﬁrm’s knowledge base to highly uncertain . Similarly , a ﬁrm may perceive the OTT’s licens - ing fees as excessive and forgo a license . Although I am able to observe the option and licensing fees paid , I do not include cost as an explanatory variable in the analysis for three reasons . First , I am not able to observe the price of an option or license that was not chosen . Second , as described above , option contracts typically spec - ify that if the option is exercised , the optionee and the university agree to “negotiate in good faith” to arrive at mutually agreeable and reasonable license terms . Because a primary objective of the OTT is to encourage commercialization of university technologies , this suggests that the OTT would be unlikely to seek an excessive initial or exercise price that may deter an interested party , but rather agree to a fee deemed reasonable by the licensee . Third , and most important , option and licensing fees represent a small portion of the overall cost of the option or license . A substantial proportion of the licensing or exercise cost hinges on the ﬁrm’s subsequent commer - cialization strategy . Because the ﬁrm may choose alternative levels and modes of investment under the license , it is not possible to calculate an exercise price ex ante ( Bowman and Moskowitz 2001 , Adner and Levinthal 2004 ) . 11 See Jaffe and Trajtenberg ( 2002 ) for validation of patent - based measures of technological knowledge despite inherent weaknesses in patent data . 12 An additional feature of this weighting method is that it also con - trols for differences in the propensity to patent across technological ﬁelds . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 174 . 21 . 5 ] on 27 S e p t e m b e r 2014 , a t 11 : 54 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Ziedonis : Real Options in Technology Licensing Management Science 53 ( 10 ) , pp . 1618 – 1633 , ©2007 INFORMS 1625 the patent being licensed . 13 The dimension of related knowledge that enables the ﬁrm to realize value from the licensed patent ( Arora and Gambardella 1994 ) is measured by the share of the ﬁrm’s patent portfolio at the time of the licensing decision that is assigned to the same primary class as the class of the licensed patent . A high share of patenting activity by the ﬁrm in a particular primary patent class indicates that a substantial proportion of the ﬁrm’s innovative activ - ity has occurred in the area represented by that patent class . For university inventions within this “focus” area , ﬁrms may be better able to utilize the uni - versity technology and therefore anticipate a higher expected payoff than from a more technologically dis - tant invention . The variable used to measure the inﬂuence of the related technological knowledge for ﬁrm j on its abil - ity to realize a return from a licensed university patent in primary class c at the time of the licensing decision t is expressed as follows : Focus j(cid:6)c(cid:6)t = (cid:5)(cid:6) t (cid:7) t − 6 (cid:7) j (cid:7) C i · p i (cid:8) c (cid:9)(cid:6) t (cid:7) t − 6 (cid:7) j (cid:7) C i · p i (cid:8)(cid:10) (cid:6) ( 9 ) where (cid:14) (cid:1) tt − 6 (cid:1) j (cid:7) C i · p i (cid:15) c is the citation - weighted sum of ﬁrm i ’s issued patents that were applied for within six years at the time of the licensing decision t and are in the same primary patent class as the class c of the uni - versity patent under consideration , and (cid:1) tt − 6 (cid:1) j (cid:7) C i · p i is the sum of all citation - weighted patents issued to the ﬁrm that were applied for by date t . The dimension of a ﬁrm’s technological knowledge that enables it to assess the range of potential pay - offs of the patent under consideration is related to the ﬁrm’s option choice . One proxy of this exper - tise is the “quality” of the output generated by the ﬁrm’s research activities in a certain area . In a study of 17 pharmaceutical ﬁrms , Narin et al . ( 1987 ) found the number of citations to a ﬁrm’s patent portfolio to be signiﬁcantly correlated with the National Insti - tutes of Health’s expert advisory panel evaluations of the “creativity and innovativeness , ” “overall contribu - tion , ” and “success at pursuing basic research” of the ﬁrm’s R & D efforts . We would expect these character - istics to also be correlated with the ﬁrm’s capability in evaluating scientiﬁc developments ( Arora and Gam - bardella 1994 ) . I therefore estimate the ﬁrm’s exper - tise in the technological area related to the university 13 Technological relatedness measures using patents are typically based on the distribution of the ﬁrm’s patents among primary patent classes ( see , for example , Jaffe 1989 ) . Such measures attempt to gauge the degree of congruence between pairs of patent port - folios . Firms with a larger share of patents in the same or closely related patent classes as the patent being licensed should have more related technological knowledge ( both codiﬁed and uncodi - ﬁed ) bearing on that invention . patent by calculating the mean citation weight of the ﬁrm’s patents that are in the same patent class as the university patent . This instrument reﬂects the extent to which patents in patent class c held by ﬁrm j are cited , relative to the citation of other patents in the same cohort : Expertise j(cid:6)c(cid:6)t = (cid:6) t (cid:7) t − 6 (cid:7) i (cid:7) C i (cid:8) c (cid:6) 1 N c(cid:6)t (cid:8) (cid:18) ( 10 ) Mowery et al . ( 1998 ) ﬁnd “decreasing returns to similarity” in their study of the effect of technological overlap on the formation and performance of R & D alliances . To control for possible decreasing returns in the inﬂuence of knowledge assets on the option and licensing choices , I include squared terms for Focus and Expertise in the option and licensing sub - models . 14 5 . 3 . Control Variables Most of the research generating inventions in this sample was funded by federal agencies such as the National Institutes of Health or the National Science Foundation . In some cases , however , the research was performed under corporate sponsorship . Although UC does not give preference to corporate sponsors in the licensing process , sponsorship does suggest a par - ticular interest in the research underlying the patented invention . I therefore control for corporate sponsor - ship in the option submodel with the indicator vari - able Sponsor that equals one if the ﬁrm has sponsored research that has led to the patent under considera - tion , and equals zero otherwise . Similarly , ﬁrms that have previously licensed a UC invention may be bet - ter able to evaluate a new technology in related areas . I therefore create the variable Previous Licensee , which equals one if the ﬁrm has previously licensed a patent in the same class from the university , and equals zero otherwise . In a study of licensing of Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) patents , Shane ( 2002 ) found that when markets for technology are ineffective , inventor - founded start - up ﬁrms are more likely than estab - lished ﬁrms to be the licensee . Although start - up 14 Although I theoretically distinguish between evaluative and com - mercialization knowledge capabilities , they are likely correlated ( Arora and Gambardella 1994 ) . We would therefore expect that a ﬁrm that is better able to evaluate scientiﬁc developments may also be better able to derive economic value from a licensed technol - ogy . In the speciﬁcation , Expertise is modeled as directly affecting only the option choice and Focus directly affecting only the licens - ing choice ; the nested logit speciﬁcation accounts for correlation between these two dimensions of absorptive capacity and their joint effects on the licensing decision , however . The joint probability of the option and licensing choices in the speciﬁcation is a product of the conditional logit depicting the licensing choice and the marginal logit representing the option choice of the model depicted in Equa - tion ( 3 ) ( McFadden 1981 ) . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 174 . 21 . 5 ] on 27 S e p t e m b e r 2014 , a t 11 : 54 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Ziedonis : Real Options in Technology Licensing 1626 Management Science 53 ( 10 ) , pp . 1618 – 1633 , ©2007 INFORMS ﬁrms are excluded from my sample , inventor - related ﬁrms may have a higher expected value of commer - cialization for some inventions . Moreover , because a signiﬁcant portion of technological knowledge is tacit , one avenue by which the ﬁrm may obtain such knowledge could be through a relationship with the inventor . Inventor - related ﬁrms also may have “inside” knowledge regarding the number and iden - tity of other ﬁrms signing secrecy agreements for the licensed patent , which could affect the inventor ﬁrm’s licensing decision . To control for such relation - ships between the inventor and potential licensees , I include an indicator variable , Inventor Firm , which equals one if the university inventor has a ﬁduciary , other executive , or scientiﬁc advisory board position with the ﬁrm and zero otherwise . 15 Competition . Competition from innovative activity by others may have an impact on the ﬁrm’s licens - ing and option decisions . I measure competition in two ways . First , I control for variation in the size of the pool of ﬁrms making licensing decisions for each patent . The variable Competitors is simply the count of ﬁrms signing secrecy agreements for each licensed patent . 16 Second , I control for the inﬂuence of technological activity by a ﬁrm’s most likely com - petitors on the option decision . When technological activity is high , the possibility that other ﬁrms may be able to “get to market” with a competing tech - nology may be increased . Under such conditions , a ﬁrm may not have the luxury to delay the commer - cialization activities that would be required under a license but prohibited under an option contract . I measure the changes in patenting activity in the pri - mary patent class of the sample patent by all other ﬁrms signing secrecy agreements . For each ﬁrm j signing a secrecy agreement , Technological Competition equals the difference in the share of patents in the same primary patent class as the licensed univer - sity patent of all issued patents applied for by the other ﬁrms signing secrecy agreements for a partic - ular patent between the year of the earliest secrecy agreement and six years earlier . A positive value for 15 Firms also could partially acquire know - how related to the inven - tion through consulting relationships with the inventor or by hiring graduate students involved with the research producing the tech - nology under consideration for licensing . Unfortunately , informa - tion on such activity is not available for the ﬁrms in this study . 16 Care must be taken in interpretation of results for this variable . The university does not divulge the identity of other ﬁrms signing secrecy agreements for a particular invention , nor does it divulge the existence of other secrecy agreements . It is therefore unlikely that a ﬁrm would explicitly incorporate this information into its licensing decision . The coefﬁcient for Competitors would more likely be an artifact of the construction of the empirical model ; the expec - tation that any one ﬁrm will be the licensee of a patent declines as the number of ﬁrms signing secrecy agreements increases . For example , if p(cid:14)L (cid:1) N(cid:15) ∼ 1 / N , then p(cid:14)L(cid:15) is decreasing in N . Technological Competition indicates increasing inven - tive activity in the university patent’s primary patent class over the previous six years by other potential licensees , whereas a negative value indicates decreas - ing inventive activity by those ﬁrms over the six - year period . A value of zero suggests either no change in the share of patenting activity in patent class u in the previous six years or that no other ﬁrms k signed secrecy agreements ( where k (cid:9) = j ) . Technological Competition j(cid:6)u(cid:6)t = (cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7) j (cid:9) = k (cid:7) i (cid:7) C i · p i (cid:8) u (cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:7) j (cid:9) = k (cid:7) i (cid:7) C i · p i (cid:8)(cid:10) t − (cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7) j (cid:9) = k (cid:7) i (cid:7) C i · p i (cid:8) u (cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:7) j (cid:9) = k (cid:7) i (cid:7) C i · p i (cid:8)(cid:10) t − 6 (cid:6) ( 11 ) where the ﬁrst term is the fraction of citation - weighted patents i in university patent class u applied for by all ﬁrms k in the year of the earliest secrecy agreement , t , and the second term is the fraction of citation - weighted patents in patent university patent class u applied for by all ﬁrms k in the year six years prior to the year of the earliest secrecy agreement . Invention Quality . Invention technological and com - mercial “quality” is likely to inﬂuence the ultimate licensing decision . Following Trajtenberg et al . ( 1997 ) , I measure invention “quality” or “importance” by the number of citations it receives from other patents ( Importance ) . As discussed earlier , a patent’s tech - nological importance is likely to be correlated with the number of patent citations it receives . To control for right - truncation bias , I count only those citations within the ﬁrst six years of the issue date of the UC patent . 17 The dependent and independent variables de - scribed above are summarized in Table 1 . Table 2 provides descriptive statistics based on the sample of 457 licensing decisions . The number of potential licensees for each university patent ranges from one to 19 , with a mean slightly below ﬁve ( Competitors = 4 (cid:18) 78 ) . The mean proportion of weighted patents by potential licensees held in the patent class of the university invention is approximately 15 % ( Focus = 0 (cid:18) 15 ) . Roughly 15 % of the decisions were made by ﬁrms that sponsored the research leading 17 Potential endogeneity between the number of patent citations and the licensing decision poses a more difﬁcult problem with this measure . One reason for differences in the level of citation of licensed and unlicensed patents could be that licensed patents are likely to be more intensively developed than unlicensed patents . This greater attention may generate more cumulative invention , resulting in a higher level of citation for licensed patents . The licensee itself is likely to be responsible for much of this endoge - nous citation . To partially control for endogeneity , therefore , I omit self - citations . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 174 . 21 . 5 ] on 27 S e p t e m b e r 2014 , a t 11 : 54 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Ziedonis : Real Options in Technology Licensing Management Science 53 ( 10 ) , pp . 1618 – 1633 , ©2007 INFORMS 1627 Table 1 Summary of Variable Descriptions Description Choice Dependent variable Decision Discrete variable that equals 1 , 2 , 3 , or 4 , corresponding to the licensing alternative chosen by the ﬁrm Independent variable Invention characteristics Technological uncertainty Maturity Number of “backward” citations to prior patents by licensed university patent Option Competition Competitors Number of ﬁrms signing secrecy agreements for each licensed university patent License Technological Competition For those ﬁrms signing secrecy agreements , change in share of ﬁrm patents in the same patent Option class as university patent under consideration between year of earliest secrecy agreement and six years earlier Importance Importance Number of citations within six years of patent issue date , excluding self - cites License Firm characteristics Technological knowledge Focus Citation - weighted share of ﬁrm’s patents in the same primary patent class as the patent License under consideration Expertise Mean citation weight of ﬁrm’s patents in the same primary patent class as the patent Option under consideration Other ﬁrm characteristics Sponsor Indicator variable that equals one if ﬁrm - sponsored research leads to licensed patent , Option zero otherwise Previous Licensee Indicator variable that equals one if ﬁrm has previously licensed a patent in the same class , Option zero otherwise Inventor Firm Indicator variable that equals one if university inventor has a ﬁduciary or other executive relationship License with ﬁrm , zero otherwise Compustat Indicator variable that equals one if ﬁrm is listed in Standard & Poor’s Compustat Database ( 1998 ) — to the licensed invention ( Sponsor = 0 (cid:18) 16 ) or previ - ously licensed a UC patent in the same class ( Previous Licensee = 0 (cid:18) 16 ) . Only 1 % of the licensing decisions were made by inventor ﬁrms , however ( Inventor Firm = 0 (cid:18) 01 ) . Each UC patent cited was cited by more than ﬁve patents within six years on average ( Importance = 5 (cid:18) 61 ) , although the number of citations varied from zero to 50 . In turn , the average UC patent cited slightly more than four patents as prior art ( Maturity = 4 (cid:18) 36 ) , and this value varied between zero and 21 . Table 2 Descriptive Statistics for Independent Variables (cid:1)N = 457 (cid:3) Standard Variable Mean deviation Minimum Maximum Focus 0 (cid:4) 15 0 (cid:4) 23 0 1 Expertise 0 (cid:4) 83 0 (cid:4) 93 0 6 (cid:4) 4 Sponsor 0 (cid:4) 16 0 (cid:4) 37 0 1 Previous Licensee 0 (cid:4) 15 0 (cid:4) 36 0 1 Inventor Firm 0 (cid:4) 01 0 (cid:4) 08 0 1 Maturity 4 (cid:4) 36 4 (cid:4) 49 0 21 Importance 5 (cid:4) 61 6 (cid:4) 54 0 50 Competitors 4 (cid:4) 78 3 (cid:4) 84 1 19 Technological 0 (cid:4) 01 0 (cid:4) 14 − 1 1 Competition 6 . Results Table 3 reports results for the nested logit model . Panel A of the table contains results for the 457 option outcomes and includes the inclusive value coefﬁ - cient . Panel B reports results for 400 licensing choices that were made when an option was not taken , and Panel C presents results for the 57 licensing deci - sions made after an option was taken . As described in § 4 , all three sub - models are estimated simultane - ously using the full information maximum likelihood method . 6 . 1 . Option Choice Turning ﬁrst to Panel A of Table 3 , Maturity is neg - ative and signiﬁcant ( − 0 (cid:18) 29 ) . This result indicates that ﬁrms are less likely to purchase an option con - tract prior to making a licensing decision when the technology being considered is characterized by less uncertainty . This ﬁnding is consistent with the basic premise of real - option theory , that options are more valuable under conditions of greater uncertainty , and supports Hypothesis 1 . The second set of variables in this panel mea - sures the ﬁrm’s ability to evaluate external technolo - gies , whether it has sponsored research underlying D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 174 . 21 . 5 ] on 27 S e p t e m b e r 2014 , a t 11 : 54 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Ziedonis : Real Options in Technology Licensing 1628 Management Science 53 ( 10 ) , pp . 1618 – 1633 , ©2007 INFORMS Table 3 Nested Logit Results for Option and Licensing Decisions Panel A—Option choice : Dependent variable = P(cid:1) Option (cid:3) Invention characteristics Maturity − 0 (cid:4) 29 ∗∗∗ ( 0 . 04 ) Firm characteristics Expertise − 0 (cid:4) 88 ∗∗∗ ( 0 . 23 ) Expertise 2 0 (cid:4) 16 ∗∗∗ ( 0 . 05 ) Sponsor − 0 (cid:4) 74 ∗ ( 0 . 42 ) Previous Licensee 0 (cid:4) 28 ( 0 . 35 ) Competition variable Technological Competition 0 (cid:4) 38 ( 1 . 01 ) Inclusive value parameter (cid:6) 0 (cid:4) 01 ( 0 . 07 ) Panel B—License choice conditional on option not chosen : Dependent variable = P(cid:1) License (cid:1) No Option (cid:3) Firm characteristics Focus 4 (cid:4) 61 ∗∗∗ ( 1 . 60 ) Focus 2 − 4 (cid:4) 25 ∗∗ ( 2 . 09 ) Inventor Firm 345 (cid:4) 16 ( 1566 . 27 ) Competition variable Competitors − 0 (cid:4) 49 ∗∗∗ ( 0 . 06 ) Invention characteristics Importance 0 (cid:4) 11 ∗∗∗ ( 0 . 03 ) Panel C—License choice conditional on option chosen : Dependent variable = P(cid:1) License (cid:1) Option (cid:3) Firm characteristics Focus − 31 (cid:4) 49 ∗∗ ( 15 . 06 ) Focus 2 32 (cid:4) 20 ∗∗ ( 14 . 89 ) Inventor Firm — — Competition variable Competitors − 0 (cid:4) 49 ∗∗ ( 0 . 21 ) Invention characteristics Importance 0 (cid:4) 18 ∗∗ ( 0 . 08 ) N 457 † Log likelihood − 396 (cid:4) 91 (cid:8) 2 (cid:1)(cid:9) (cid:4) X = 0 (cid:3) 473 (cid:4) 25 ∗∗∗ Note . Standard errors are in parentheses . ∗ p < 0 (cid:4) 10 , ∗∗ p < 0 (cid:4) 05 , ∗∗∗ p < 0 (cid:4) 01 . † N = 457 for option decision , N = 400 for licensing decision conditional on option not taken , N = 57 for licensing decision conditional on option taken . the licensed invention , and whether it has previously licensed a UC technology in the same patent class as the licensed patent . The variables Expertise and Expertise 2 are related to the ﬁrm’s ability to evalu - ate external technologies . The negative and signiﬁcant coefﬁcient for Expertise ( − 0 (cid:18) 88 ) indicates that the better the ﬁrm is in evaluating external technologies , the less likely it is to purchase an option to obtain additional information prior to making a licensing decision , con - sistent with Hypothesis 2 . This ﬁnding suggests that ﬁrm evaluation capabilities play an important role in the value of an option , and a portion of option value can be ﬁrm speciﬁc . Stated differently , options appear to be less valuable for ﬁrms with greater “absorptive capacity” because these ﬁrms are better positioned to evaluate the technology outright . The positive and signiﬁcant coefﬁcient for the squared term ( 0 . 16 ) is consistent with diminishing marginal returns to this “absorptive capacity” in the option decision . The coef - ﬁcient for Sponsor is negative and weakly signiﬁcant , suggesting that ﬁrms that sponsor research at UC are less likely to purchase an option prior to mak - ing a licensing decision . 18 The coefﬁcient for Previ - ous Licensee is not signiﬁcant , implying that previous licensing experience from UC has no inﬂuence on the ﬁrm’s decision of whether to purchase an option for the university invention . The coefﬁcient for the competition variable Techno - logical Competition is not signiﬁcant , suggesting that the OTT policy of not divulging the identity or exis - tence of other signatories of secrecy agreements may be effective . The result also suggests that potential licensees may not have good information on the patenting activities of other potential competitors . In either case , it appears that ﬁrms do not factor in the patenting activities of other signatories in making their option decisions . The inclusive value parameter coefﬁcient , (cid:14) 1 − (cid:16)(cid:15) , is estimated to be close to one , indicating a lack of cross - elasticity across submodels . This estimate suggests that separating the licensing choices according to the option choice is valid ( Hausman and McFadden 1984 ) . 6 . 2 . Licensing Decision When Option Is Not Chosen Panel B of Table 3 reports coefﬁcients for the vari - ables thought to inﬂuence the licensing decision when ﬁrms forgo the option contract . The coefﬁcient on Focus ( 4 . 61 ) is positive and signiﬁcant . Consistent with Hypothesis 3 , this result suggests that ﬁrms with higher levels of related technological knowledge are more likely to license without additional review beyond that provided by the secrecy agreement . Of the control variable coefﬁcients , the coefﬁcient for Inventor Firm , signifying whether the university inventor has a ﬁduciary relationship with the poten - tial licensee , is positive but indistinguishable from zero . This ﬁnding is consistent with the UC licensing policy that does not give preference to inventors in licensing . The coefﬁcient for the competition variable Competitors is negative and signiﬁcant , indicating that as the number of ﬁrms signing secrecy agreements climbs , the probability that a particular ﬁrm would license the university patent declines . Finally , the “importance” of the invention , measured by the num - ber of citations it receives , is positively and signif - icantly correlated with the probability of licensing 18 Although UC does not formally give preference to sponsors in licensing technology , a sponsoring ﬁrm’s licensing decision may be inﬂuenced above and beyond what is captured in the Focus vari - able . I therefore conducted a robustness check including a dummy variable for Sponsor in the licensing submodels ( not reported ) . The coefﬁcient for Sponsor is positive and signiﬁcant for ﬁrms that made a licensing decision when an option is not chosen . The main results are unaffected , however . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 174 . 21 . 5 ] on 27 S e p t e m b e r 2014 , a t 11 : 54 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Ziedonis : Real Options in Technology Licensing Management Science 53 ( 10 ) , pp . 1618 – 1633 , ©2007 INFORMS 1629 Table 4 Differences of Means Tests for Firm Characteristics ( t - Test ) : Licensing Choices Conditional on Option , No Option ( Firms Choosing License Only ) No option Option Number of Number of t - test Variable observations Mean observations Mean statistic Focus 148 0 (cid:4) 13 10 0 (cid:4) 22 − 0 (cid:4) 68 (cid:1) 0 (cid:4) 02 (cid:3) (cid:1) 0 (cid:4) 13 (cid:3) Expertise 148 0 (cid:4) 83 10 0 (cid:4) 79 0 (cid:4) 18 (cid:1) 0 (cid:4) 01 (cid:3) (cid:1) 0 (cid:4) 25 (cid:3) Inventor Firm 148 0 (cid:4) 02 10 0 (cid:4) 00 1 (cid:4) 74 ∗ (cid:1) 0 (cid:4) 01 (cid:3) (cid:1) 0 (cid:4) 00 (cid:3) Compustat 148 0 (cid:4) 79 10 0 (cid:4) 60 1 (cid:4) 14 (cid:1) 0 (cid:4) 03 (cid:3) (cid:1) 0 (cid:4) 16 (cid:3) Note . Standard errors are in parentheses . ∗ p < 0 (cid:4) 10 , ∗∗ p < 0 (cid:4) 05 , ∗∗∗ p < 0 (cid:4) 01 . Unequal variances are assumed . ( Importance = 0 (cid:18) 11 ) . Again , this result is not surprising in that more technologically important inventions also are more likely to be commercially desirable ( Harhoff et al . 1998 , Lanjouw and Schankerman 2001 , Sampat and Ziedonis 2004 ) . 6 . 3 . The Option Exercise Decision Panel C of Table 3 reports the results for ﬁrms that made licensing decisions after taking an option . This subset consists of 57 ﬁrm decisions . In contrast to the result for ﬁrms that forgo options , the coefﬁcient for related technological assets , Focus , is negative and signiﬁcant ( the squared term is positive and signiﬁcant ) . 19 This result implies a negative rela - tionship between Focus and the probability of licens - ing and therefore is inconsistent with Hypothesis 3 . This ﬁnding also suggests a different licensing deci - sion calculus for ﬁrms that purchase options prior to making a licensing decision . Why might we observe different behavior by ﬁrms licensing patents directly and by those taking licenses at the end of an option period ? As a ﬁrst step to - ward understanding this ﬁnding , I conduct “differ - ence of means” tests on ﬁrm characteristics for the two groups of licensees—those ﬁrms that license without taking an option and those who license after taking an option ﬁrst . The objective of this exercise is to determine whether there are systematic ﬁrm - speciﬁc differences between these two groups that may explain the observed difference in behavior . The results are reported in Table 4 . Table 4 reports that 148 licenses were taken when an option was not purchased ( out of 400 licens - ing decisions ) . When an option was purchased ﬁrst , 19 Less important , the coefﬁcient for C ompetitors is negative , as expected . There were no inventor - related ﬁrms choosing options , therefore a coefﬁcient for Inventor Firm does not appear in this panel . 10 licenses were ultimately taken ( out of 57 licens - ing decisions ) . These results provide little evidence that differences in the ﬁrm characteristics measured in this study underlie conﬂicting licensing behavior when options are and are not chosen ( although a small number of observations for ﬁrms taking options undercuts the power of these tests ) . A difference in the fraction of inventor ﬁrms ( represented by Inventor Firm ) between the two groups is the only characteris - tic exhibiting ( weak ) signiﬁcance . To investigate whether technology ﬁeld effects explain the differences in ﬁrm licensing behavior depending on whether or not an option is chosen , I disaggregate the sample of all ﬁrm decisions into those regarding broad biomedical and nonbiomedi - cal technology areas using the USPTO Technology Assessment and Forecast Report designations . See Ziedonis ( 2001 , Appendix C , pp . 189 – 191 ) for details on how these reports were used to identify biomedical technology areas . Ten biomedical U . S . patent classes ( 128 , 424 , 435 , 436 , 514 , 530 , 536 , 604 , 606 , and 623 ) are represented in the UC sample , accounting for 70 % of all ﬁrm license and option decisions . The most heavily represented biomedical patent class is 514 ( drug , bio - affecting , and body treating compositions ) , account - ing for 26 % of all decisions in the overall sample and 37 % of the decisions on biomedical patents . The remaining 30 % of decisions concern nonbiomedical patents . The results , reported in Table 5 , provide little evi - dence that differences between these technology ﬁelds explain the differences in ﬁrm licensing behavior be - tween ﬁrms that chose options and those that did not . In column 2 of Table 5 , we see that 72 % of the 400 licensing choices when an option was not chosen were for biomedical technologies , compared to 61 % of the 57 licensing choices when an option was cho - sen . The z - statistic for the difference in these propor - tions is 1 . 35 and is not signiﬁcant . ( The proportions for nonbiomedical technologies in column 3 of Table 5 show similar results . ) Table 5 Two - Sample Test of Proportions for Licensing Decisions for Biomedical / Nonbiomedical U . S . Patent Classes by Option Choice Technology area Biomedical Nonbiomedical Licensing choice conditional on option not taken Number of decisions 286 114 Proportion of decisions 0 (cid:4) 72 0 (cid:4) 28 Licensing choice conditional on option taken Number of decisions 35 22 Proportion of decisions 0 (cid:4) 61 0 (cid:4) 39 Difference in proportions 0 (cid:4) 09 − 0 (cid:4) 11 z - statistic 1 (cid:4) 35 − 1 (cid:4) 03 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 174 . 21 . 5 ] on 27 S e p t e m b e r 2014 , a t 11 : 54 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Ziedonis : Real Options in Technology Licensing 1630 Management Science 53 ( 10 ) , pp . 1618 – 1633 , ©2007 INFORMS 7 . Discussion and Conclusion A growing number of studies have used real - options thinking to examine a wide range of strategic deci - sions . Despite a well - developed theoretical literature , there has been very little empirical work utilizing actual option contracts to verify the basic tenets of this theory . This paper has undertaken such an objec - tive , using data on licensing of university technolo - gies to understand how managers use real options . Because much of the empirical literature on the use of “options” in technology acquisition and management relies on “virtual” or “implied” options , the exploita - tion of actual option agreements in an empirical study represents an important contribution to the literature . This paper also contributes to the empirical litera - ture on technology licensing . Previous empirical stud - ies ( e . g . , Taylor and Silberston 1973 , Caves et al . 1983 , Anand and Khanna 2000 ) have examined the inci - dence of licensing and the structure of license con - tracts . Because these studies have selected observed licenses as the unit of analysis , they have been unable to examine factors that inﬂuence the decision whether to license a particular technology . I overcome this lim - itation by distinguishing between ﬁrms that signed exclusive licenses for patented inventions from UC and ﬁrms that considered but ultimately decided not to license the same set of patented inventions . The detailed data employed in this study also enabled me to examine the licensing process more closely by disaggregating the licensing transaction into licensing and prelicensing agreements . I ﬁnd that when deciding whether to license a uni - versity technology , ﬁrms in my sample are more likely to purchase options for inventions characterized by greater technological and commercial uncertainty . This ﬁnding is consistent with one of the principal predictions of real - options theory , that options are more valuable when there is substantial uncertainty regarding future payoffs from an investment in new technology . As discussed in § 2 , uncertainty can be reduced due to actions taken by ﬁrms or by exogenous events that occur during the option period ( Folta 1998 ) . Given the embryonic nature of university inventions and the provisions of option contracts at UC ( that require “good - faith” efforts and due diligence in evaluat - ing the commercial potential of a new technology ) , I argued that the value of sequencing the licensing process in this context primarily hinges on the resolu - tion of endogenous uncertainty . Put differently , these arguments primarily represent “growth” rather than “deferral” options . As a supplemental test to check whether differ - ences in exogenous uncertainty across broad technol - ogy areas may explain the exercise of an option , I dis - aggregated the university patents for which an option was taken into “biomedical” and “nonbiomedical” technologies using the USPTO Technology Assess - ment and Forecast Report designations discussed ear - lier . These broad technology areas are likely to exhibit different patterns of exogenous uncertainty change . Biomedical technologies are often subject to lengthy regulatory approvals . In contrast , exogenous events such as new product announcements by rivals or the emergence of substitute technologies affecting the commercial promise of nonbiomedical technologies such as electronics and computer software are more likely to be revealed during a one - to two - year option period . If the primary value of pursuing an option contract is due to the resolution of exogenous uncer - tainty , we should expect a higher share of options to be exercised for nonbiomedical technologies relative to biomedical inventions . Inconsistent with this view , however , I ﬁnd that roughly 40 % of the options were exercised in each technology area and that the differ - ence in these proportions was not signiﬁcant . The out - come of this simple test suggests that the decision to exercise an option within the context of this study is primarily driven by the uncertainty resolved through ﬁrms working with and evaluating new technologies . The results of this study also suggest that option value can be ﬁrm - speciﬁc ; ﬁrms in the sample that are better able to evaluate an external technology are less likely to purchase an option . This ﬁnding adds empirical support to arguments advanced by Cohen and Levinthal ( 1990 ) , Rosenberg ( 1990 ) , and Arora and Gambardella ( 1994 ) that knowledge investments in R & D by ﬁrms have beneﬁts that transcend the tra - ditional view of R & D as primarily undertaken to gen - erate inventions internally . These authors argue that a ﬁrm’s internal knowledge base enables it to evaluate and exploit technologies developed outside its bound - aries . In this study , ﬁrms appear to beneﬁt from such “absorptive capacity” by making more streamlined decisions when identifying and developing external technologies . Finally , the results also show that licensing behavior is more complex than may be apparent if we exam - ined licensing contracts only , and depends on whether the ﬁrm has chosen to sign an option agreement ﬁrst . For decisions made by ﬁrms forgoing option agreements ( the majority of decisions in my sam - ple ) , possession of technological knowledge related to commercialization is generally positively related to the probability of licensing , as expected , and is con - sistent with the ﬁndings in Arora and Gambardella ( 1994 ) . More surprising , however , the relationship between technological knowledge and the likelihood of licensing tends to be quite different for ﬁrms that ﬁrst sign an option agreement . In this case , ﬁrms with patents concentrated in areas related to the university D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 174 . 21 . 5 ] on 27 S e p t e m b e r 2014 , a t 11 : 54 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Ziedonis : Real Options in Technology Licensing Management Science 53 ( 10 ) , pp . 1618 – 1633 , ©2007 INFORMS 1631 invention are less likely to subsequently license the university patent . Several explanations are consistent with this last ﬁnding . First , recall that the ﬁrm determines whether to take an option to gain additional information before making its licensing decision . The availability of an option may increase the probability that less attractive inventions will not languish . During the option period , ﬁrms whose patenting activity is more heavily concentrated in areas related to the university invention ( e . g . , high - focus ﬁrms ) may be better able to “weed out” inventions that lack commercial via - bility . Ultimately , those ﬁrms may be more likely to reject a license than ﬁrms whose patenting activity is less concentrated in the university patent class . Firms also may differ in their motivations for licens - ing optioned university inventions . For ﬁrms taking options in areas close to their own patenting focus , the licensing decision may be driven largely by a desire to exploit the ﬁrm’s existing knowledge base . If this is true , the rejection rate by these ﬁrms may be relatively high if the commercial potential of an optioned inven - tion is low . In contrast , for ﬁrms that take options on inventions more technologically distant from their patenting focus , their option and licensing decisions may be driven more by reasons of “exploration” or entry into new technological areas . These ﬁrms may be more willing to commit to a license . A ﬁnal explanation stems from the “Arrow para - dox of information” ( Arrow 1962 ) . The Arrow para - dox states that to sell an information good , the seller must reveal information to the buyer for the buyer to evaluate the information good for sale . Once the information is revealed , however , the buyer has little incentive to pay for it . By revealing information about the invention in stages ( under secrecy , option , and license agreements ) while simultaneously increasing the obligations and requirements of the potential and eventual licensee under these agreements , the univer - sity licensing process mitigates this problem to some degree . This procedure may not , however , resolve the Arrow paradox completely . The option “due diligence in evaluation” requirement is intended to prevent ﬁrms from simply purchasing the option to prevent access by other ﬁrms . Once a ﬁrm has exercised due diligence in evaluation during the period of the option , it undoubtedly has a better understanding of the technology and its own ability to commercialize it . If a ﬁrm can appropriate returns to knowledge gained under the option agreement by “inventing around” the university invention or utilizing the knowledge internally , its incentives to license the patent at the end of the option period may be lowered . Firms whose patenting activities are more concentrated in areas related to the university invention may be better able to “learn” from the information disclosed during the option period , and therefore be less likely to sub - sequently license that invention . In this case , the ﬁrm could beneﬁt from the university invention without paying royalties to the university to license the patent . Whether such an outcome of the licensing process is problematic depends upon one’s point of view . From the perspective of a university attempting to gener - ate licensing income , foregone revenues from uncon - summated licensing agreements following options may be a problem requiring improved monitoring of ﬁrm behavior , increased diligence on potential patent infringement , or avoidance of option agreements with ﬁrms with strong patent portfolios in the ﬁeld of the university invention . Additional research could differentiate between the alternative explanations for the post - option licens - ing behavior articulated above . We might expect the “Arrow paradox” to be less problematic when the patent appropriability regime of the university patent is strong , which may make it more difﬁcult for a ﬁrm to appropriate the returns to the patent with - out licensing commercialization rights from the uni - versity . Using available data , it is straightforward to identify differences in the appropriability regime between optioned patents that are licensed and those not licensed . However , because ﬁrms also would be more likely to license a patent when appropriability is high because it would be more difﬁcult for other ﬁrms to invent around a licensed patent ( Shane 2002 ) , we would still be unable to differentiate between these motivations . This identiﬁcation problem points to the importance of future research in conducting inter - views of both managers at ﬁrms and university licens - ing professionals to augment archival data in future research . Additional research could also investigate the role of complementary assets other than related technolog - ical knowledge on the university technology licens - ing decision . Teece ( 1986 ) identiﬁes possession of complementary assets such as production , distribu - tion , and marketing capabilities as an important fac - tor in commercializing new inventions . Shane ( 2001 ) shows that the importance of access to complemen - tary assets inﬂuenced the whether a university tech - nology licensed from MIT would be commercialized by a start - up ﬁrm . Using data from UC similar to that used in this study , however , Lowe and Ziedo - nis ( 2006 ) found that difﬁculty in commercializing university technology by start - ups due to a lack of access to complementary assets may be mitigated by later acquisition established ﬁrms . Using survey data of R & D lab managers , Arora and Ceccagnoli ( 2006 , p . 297 ) ﬁnd the effect of complementary assets held by the licensee to be “small or negligible . ” None of these studies speciﬁcally consider the effect of com - plementary assets on university technology option D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 174 . 21 . 5 ] on 27 S e p t e m b e r 2014 , a t 11 : 54 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Ziedonis : Real Options in Technology Licensing 1632 Management Science 53 ( 10 ) , pp . 1618 – 1633 , ©2007 INFORMS and license choices by established ﬁrms , suggesting a need for future research in this area . In addition to implications for managers , the ﬁnd - ings in this study may also be pertinent for univer - sity technology transfer policy . By making options available , the university encourages ﬁrms to consider inventions they might otherwise reject at the initial licensing phase . Some of these inventions may ulti - mately be licensed , potentially beneﬁting both the licensee and the university . These ﬁndings also sug - gest , however , that ﬁrms may beneﬁt from the avail - ability of options in other ways that are less attractive from the university’s perspective . If a ﬁrm can utilize the option period to understand and subsequently apply knowledge about the invention to its own tech - nological base , its incentive to license the invention may be diminished . To the extent that licensing rev - enues are a principal means by which university tech - nology transfer ofﬁces appropriate returns from an exercised option , this interpretation suggests a less favorable outcome for the university . 20 These divergent conclusions have contrasting im - plications for university technology managers . The ﬁrst class of explanations suggests that options should be tailored to account for differences in ﬁrms’ abilities and motivations . For example , a ﬁrm that purchases an option to determine if a university invention can be exploited by its related knowledge base may be interested in a different agreement structure for the option and subsequent license agreement than a ﬁrm pursuing an option as a means to consider entry into a new technological area . By accounting for a ﬁrm’s capabilities and motivation in tailoring option agree - ments , the technology transfer ofﬁce may be able to further facilitate the licensing process . In contrast , to the extent the “Arrow paradox” is pervasive in uni - versity technology licensing , the simple granting of options may be insufﬁcient to protect the interest of the university technology transfer ofﬁce . Strengthen - ing due diligence provisions , increasing monitoring of ﬁrm behavior ( both during the option period and after its expiration ) , or avoiding granting options to ﬁrms with strong patent portfolios in the ﬁeld of the university invention may be necessary . 21 This pre - scription would suggest that the technology transfer ofﬁce embrace a narrow , primarily pecuniary , view of technology transfer . However , the ultimate effect 20 Universities may offer options for other reasons , such as to secure corporate research support in exchange for the right of ﬁrst refusal to license future research outcomes . Such options may have con - trasting implications for university and ﬁrm incentives and are different than those studied here , which are options to license pre - viously invented technology . 21 This introduces a possible dilemma for OTT : Firms with strong related patent portfolios may be the only ﬁrms willing to option an invention with high commercial uncertainty . of reduced licensing income for the university may be to spur related inventive effort by the optionee , an outcome that would support a broader mission of technology transfer . From a more inclusive social welfare perspective , commercialization and the use of university inventions that would otherwise have been neglected by the private sector represents a success story , regardless of who captures the value . 8 . Electronic Companion An electronic companion to this paper is available as part of the online version that can be found at http : / / mansci . journal . informs . org / . Acknowledgments The author gratefully acknowledges support from the Alfred P . Sloan Foundation , the Andrew Mellon Foundation , and the Mack Center for Technological Innovation at the Whar - ton School of the University of Pennsylvania . The author thanks Janet Bercovitz , Fred Feinberg , John Freeman , Bron - wyn Hall , Rebecca Henderson , Jennifer Kuan , David Mow - ery , Richard Nelson , Joanne Oxley , Gary Pisano , Don Siegel , Kenneth Train , Brian Wright , Rosemarie Ziedonis , the asso - ciate editor , four anonymous reviewers , and seminar par - ticipants at the University of California , Berkeley , the Uni - versity of Pennsylvania , the University of Michigan , the University of Illinois , the University of Southern Califor - nia , the 2004 Harvard Business School Strategy Confer - ence , and the 2004 Harvard Business School Conference on Entrepreneurship and Innovation for comments and sugges - tions . Lynn Fissell , Bronwyn Hall , Suzanne Majewski , and Suzanne Quick generously provided data used in this study . References Adner , R . , D . A . Levinthal . 2004 . What is Not a real option : Consid - ering boundaries for the application of real options to business strategy . Acad . Management Rev . 29 ( 1 ) 74 – 85 . Amram , M . , N . Kalutilaka . 1999 . Real Options : Managing Strate - gic Investment in an Uncertain World . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . Anand , B . N . , T . Khanna . 2000 . The structure of licensing contracts . J . Indust . Econom . 48 ( March ) 103 – 135 . Arora , A . , M . Ceccagnoli . 2006 . Patent protection , complementary assets , and ﬁrms’ incentives for technology licensing . Manage - ment Sci . 52 ( 2 ) 293 – 308 . Arora , A . , A . Gambardella . 1994 . Evaluating technological informa - tion and utilizing it : Scientiﬁc knowledge , technological capa - bility , and external linkages in biotechnology . J . Econom . Behav . Organ . 24 91 – 114 . Arrow , K . J . 1962 . Economic welfare and the allocation of resources of invention . R . R . Nelson , ed . The Rate and Direction of Inven - tive Activity : Economics and Social Factors . Princeton University Press , Princeton , NJ , 609 – 625 . Association for University Technology Managers . 1998 . AUTM licensing survey , ﬁscal year 1997 . Report , Norwalk , CT . Black , F . , M . Scholes . 1973 . The pricing of options and corporate liabilities . J . Political Econom . 81 ( May – June ) 637 – 659 . Boersch - Supan , A . 1990 . On the compatibility of nested logit mod - els with utility maximization . J . Econometrics 43 373 – 388 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 174 . 21 . 5 ] on 27 S e p t e m b e r 2014 , a t 11 : 54 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Ziedonis : Real Options in Technology Licensing Management Science 53 ( 10 ) , pp . 1618 – 1633 , ©2007 INFORMS 1633 Borooah , V . K . 2002 . Logit and Probit : Ordered and Multinomial Models . M . S . Lewis - Beck , series ed . Sage University Papers Series on Quantitative Applications in the Social Sciences , 07 - 138 . Sage Publications , Thousand Oaks , CA . Bowman , E . H . , G . T . Moskowitz . 2001 . Real options analysis and strategic decision making . Organ . Sci . 12 ( 6 ) 772 – 777 . Brant , R . 1990 . Assessing proportionality in the proportional odds model for ordinal logistic regression . Biometrics 46 1171 – 1178 . Caves , R . E . , H . Crookell , P . J . Killing . 1983 . The imperfect mar - ket for technology licenses . Oxford Bull . Econom . Statist . 45 ( 3 ) 249 – 267 . Cohen , W . M . , D . A . Levinthal . 1990 . Absorptive capacity : A new perspective on learning and innovation . Admin . Sci . Quart . 35 128 – 152 . Dixit , A . K . , R . S . Pindyck . 1994 . Investment Under Uncertainty . Princeton University Press , Princeton , NJ . Elfenbein , D . 2004 . Contract structure and performance of tech - nology transfer agreements : Evidence from university licenses . Working paper , University of California , Berkeley , CA . Folta , T . B . 1998 . Governance and uncertainty : The trade - off between administrative control and commitment . Strategic Management J . 19 1007 – 1028 . Folta , T . B . , K . Miller . 2002 . Real options in equity partnerships . Strategic Management J . 23 77 – 88 . Hall , B . H . , A . Jaffe , M . Trajtenberg . 2000 . Market value and patent citations : A ﬁrst look . NBER Working Paper 7741 , National Bureau of Economic Research , Cambridge , MA . Hamilton , W . F . 2000 . Managing real options . G . S . Day , P . J . H . Schoemaker , R . E . Gunther , eds . Wharton on Managing Emerging Technologies . John Wiley & Sons , New York , 271 – 288 . Harhoff , D . , F . M . Scherer , K . Vopel . 1998 . Citations frequency and the value of patented inventions . Rev . Econom . Statist . 81 ( 3 ) 511 – 515 . Hausman , J . , D . McFadden . 1984 . Speciﬁcation tests for the multi - nomial logit model . Econometrica 52 ( 5 ) 1219 – 1240 . Jaffe , A . B . 1989 . Characterizing the “technological position” of ﬁrms , with application to quantifying technological opportu - nity and research spillovers . Res . Policy 18 87 – 97 . Jaffe , A . B . , M . Trajtenberg . 2002 . Patents , Citations , & Innovations : A Window on the Knowledge Economy . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Jensen , R . , M . Thursby . 2001 . Proofs and prototypes for sale : The tale of university licensing . Amer . Econom . Rev . 91 240 – 259 . Kogut , B . 1991 . Joint ventures and the option to expand and acquire . Management Sci . 37 ( 1 ) 19 – 33 . Kogut , B . , D . Kim . 1996 . Technological platforms and diversiﬁca - tion . Organ . Sci . 7 ( 3 ) 283 – 301 . Kogut , B . , N . Kulatilaka . 1994 . Operating ﬂexibility , global man - ufacturing , and the option value of a multinational network . Management Sci . 40 ( 1 ) 123 – 139 . Kogut , B . , N . Kulatilaka . 2001 . Capabilities as real options . Organ . Sci . 12 ( 6 ) 744 – 758 . Kulatilaka , N . , E . C . Perotti . 1998 . Strategic growth options . Man - agement Sci . 44 ( 8 ) 1021 – 1031 . Lanjouw , J . O . , M . Schankerman . 2001 . Characteristics of patent litigation : A window on competition . RAND J . Econom . 32 ( 1 ) 129 – 151 . Long , J . S . 1997 . Regression Models for Categorical Dependent Variables . Sage Publications , Thousand Oaks , CA . Lowe , R . A . , A . A . Ziedonis . 2006 . Overoptimism and the perfor - mance of entrepreneurial ﬁrms . Management Sci . 52 ( 2 ) 173 – 186 . MacMillan , I . C . , R . G . McGrath . 1998 . The value , assessment , and enhancement of industry investments in fundamental research . Working paper , The Wharton School , University of Pennsylva - nia , PA . Majd , S . , R . S . Pindyck . 1987 . Time to build , option value , and investment decisions . J . Financial Econom . 18 ( 1 ) 7 – 27 . McDonald , R . , D . Siegel . 1986 . The value of waiting to invest . Quart . J . Econom . 101 ( 4 ) 707 – 728 . McFadden , D . 1981 . Econometric models of probabilistic choice . D . McFadden , ed . Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with Econometric Applications . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 198 – 272 . McGrath , R . G . 1997 . A real options logic for initiating technology positioning investments . Acad . Management Rev . 22 ( 4 ) 974 – 996 . Miller , K . D . , T . B . Folta . 2002 . Option value and entry timing . Strate - gic Management J . 23 ( 7 ) 655 – 665 . Mitchell , G . R . , W . F . Hamilton . 1988 . Managing R & D as a strategic option . Res . - Tech . Management 31 ( 3 ) 15 – 22 . Montgomery , C . A . , B . Wernerfelt . 1988 . Diversiﬁcation , Ricardian rents , and Tobin’s q . RAND J . Econom . 19 ( 4 ) 623 – 632 . Mowery , D . C . , J . E . Oxley , B . S . Silverman . 1998 . Technologi - cal overlap and interﬁrm cooperation : Implications for the resource - based view of the ﬁrm . Res . Policy 27 507 – 523 . Narin , F . , E . Noma , R . Perry . 1987 . Patents as indicators of corporate technological strength . Res . Policy 16 ( 2 – 4 ) 143 – 155 . Reuer , J . J . , T . W . Tong . 2005 . Real options in international joint ventures . J . Management 31 ( 3 ) 403 – 423 . Roberts , K . , M . L . Weitzman . 1981 . Funding criteria for research , de - velopment , and exploration projects . Econometrica 49 1261 – 1288 . Rosenberg , N . 1990 . Why do ﬁrms do basic research with their own money ? Res . Policy 19 165 – 174 . Sampat , B . N . , A . A . Ziedonis . 2004 . Patent citations and the private value of patents . U . Schmoch , ed . Kluwer Handbook of Science and Technology Indicators . Kluwer Academic Publishers , Boston , MA , 277 – 298 . Shane , S . 2001 . Technology regimes and new ﬁrm formation . Man - agement Sci . 47 ( 9 ) 1173 – 1190 . Shane , S . 2002 . Selling university technology . Management Sci . 48 ( 1 ) 122 – 137 . Silverman , B . S . 1999 . Technological resources and the direction of corporate diversiﬁcation : Toward an integration of the resource - based view and transaction cost economics . Manage - ment Sci . 45 ( 8 ) 1109 – 1124 . Standard & Poor’s Compustat Database . 1998 . McGraw - Hill Com - pany , New York . Taylor , C . A . , Z . A . Silberston . 1973 . The Economic Impact of the Patent System : A Study of the British Experience . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . Teece , D . J . 1986 . Proﬁting from technological innovation : Implica - tions for integration , collaboration , licensing and public policy . Res . Policy 15 285 – 305 . Train , K . 1986 . Qualitative Choice Analysis : Theory , Econometrics , and an Application to Automobile Demand . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Trajtenberg , M . , R . Henderson , A . B . Jaffe . 1997 . University vs . corporate patents : A window on the basicness of invention . Econom . Innovation New Tech . 5 19 – 50 . Trigeorgis , L . 1996 . Managerial Flexibility and Strategy in Resource Allocation . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Zahra , S . A . , G . George . 2002 . Absorptive capacity : A review , recon - ceptualization , and extension . Acad . Management Rev . 27 ( 2 ) 185 – 203 . Ziedonis , A . A . 2001 . The commercialization of university technol - ogy : Implications for ﬁrm strategy and public policy . Unpub - lished dissertation , University of California , Berkeley , CA . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 174 . 21 . 5 ] on 27 S e p t e m b e r 2014 , a t 11 : 54 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d .