viruses Article Host Lipid Rafts Play a Major Role in Binding and Endocytosis of Inﬂuenza A Virus Dileep Kumar Verma 1 , Dinesh Gupta 1 and Sunil Kumar Lal 1 , 2 , * 1 International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology , Aruna Asaf Ali Marg , New Delhi 110067 , India ; dileep21feb @ gmail . com ( D . K . V . ) ; dinesh @ icgeb . res . in ( D . G . ) 2 School of Science and Tropical Medicine & Biology Platform , Monash University , Malaysia , Bandar Sunway , Selangor , DE 47500 , Malaysia * Correspondence : sunil . lal @ monash . edu ; Tel . : + 60 - 3 - 5514 - 6000 ; Fax : + 60 - 3 - 5514 - 6184 Received : 4 August 2018 ; Accepted : 13 October 2018 ; Published : 18 November 2018 (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8) (cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7) Abstract : Inﬂuenza still remains one of the most challenging diseases , posing a signiﬁcant threat to public health . Host lipid rafts play a critical role in inﬂuenza A virus ( IAV ) assembly and budding , however , their role in polyvalent IAV host binding and endocytosis had remained elusive until now . In the present study , we observed co - localization of IAV with a lipid raft marker ganglioside , GM1 , on the host surface . Further , we isolated the lipid raft micro - domains from IAV infected cells and detected IAV protein in the raft fraction . Finally , raft disruption using Methyl - β - Cyclodextrin revealed signiﬁcant reduction in IAV host binding , suggesting utilization of host rafts for polyvalent binding on the host cell surface . In addition to this , cyclodextrin mediated inhibition of raft - dependent endocytosis showed signiﬁcantly reduced IAV internalization . Interestingly , exposure of cells to cyclodextrin two hours post - IAV binding showed no such reduction in IAV entry , indicating use of raft - dependent endocytosis for host entry . In summary , this study demonstrates that host lipid rafts are selected by IAV as a host attachment factors for multivalent binding , and IAV utilizes these micro - domains to exploit raft - dependent endocytosis for host internalization , a virus entry route previously unknown for IAV . Keywords : lipid raft ; Cholesterol ; Methyl - β - Cyclodextrin ; Ganglioside GM1 ; Raft - dependent endocytosis 1 . Introduction Flu caused by inﬂuenza A virus ( IAV ) affects millions of people by seasonal and rare pandemic outbreaks [ 1 ] . IAV belongs to the Orthomyxoviridae family of viruses containing a negative - sense , single - stranded , segmented RNA genome distributed along eight segments encoding 11 major viral and some accessory proteins . Each virus is structurally divided into three major components : a central core of RNA genome ( vRNA ) with associated proteins surrounded by matrix proteins ( M1 ) and the outermost host derived lipid bilayer with two key viral proteins : hemagglutinin ( HA ) and neuraminidase ( NA ) [ 2 ] . The ﬁrst encounter between the virus and the target host cell occurs at the plasma membrane ( PM ) . Lipid rafts are organized subdomains within the PM and are rich in glycosphingolipids and cholesterol [ 3 ] . Rafts are known to perform critical functions in a variety of cellular processes such as membrane signaling , regulation of membrane trafﬁcking , endocytosis , and entry of pathogens and bacterial toxins [ 4 ] . For viruses , host rafts have been reported to serve as a platform for virus attachment and entry , virion assembly , and they are a preferred site for viral budding in the case of enveloped viruses [ 5 , 6 ] . Clustering of host lipid rafts also induces a signaling platform and activates receptor tyrosine kinases RTKs upon multivalent binding for virus uptake [ 7 ] . Cyclodextrins are Viruses 2018 , 10 , 650 ; doi : 10 . 3390 / v10110650 www . mdpi . com / journal / viruses Viruses 2018 , 10 , 650 2 of 11 commonly used to extract cholesterol and disrupt rafts , leading to inhibition or arrest of raft associated processes including raft - dependent endocytosis [ 8 ] . The attachment of IAV to its host cell is mediated by hemagglutinin ( HA ) , a multifunctional viral protein that binds to terminal sialic acid ( SIA ) , the primary receptor for IAV [ 9 ] . The interaction of HA - SIA is documented to be of low afﬁnity , therefore , IAV utilizes multiple HA - SIA interactions [ 10 ] , thereby achieving high avidity on the host surface [ 11 ] . However , the mechanism for achieving this multivalent binding on the host surface still remains elusive . IAV attachment to the host cell is followed by internalization into the endosome , trafﬁcking to the perinuclear region , and fusion of the viral - endosomal membranes leading to release of the IAV genome into the cytosol for nuclear import [ 2 ] . Thus far , the known internalization route for IAV includes clathrin dependent endocytosis ( CDE ) , clathrin independent endocytosis ( CIE ) , caveolin independent endocytosis , and macropinocytosis [ 12 , 13 ] . Lipid rafts are reported to induce endocytosis upon ligand binding , a process known as “raft - dependent endocytosis” [ 14 , 15 ] . Endocytosis via lipid rafts has been categorized into three different pathways , namely dynamin - dependent endocytosis of caveolae , noncaveolar vesicular carriers , and dynamin - independent endocytosis via noncaveolar tubular intermediates , and rafts are reported to be utilized by various ligands for internalization , including viruses [ 16 ] . However , it is still unclear whether IAV uses raft - dependent endocytosis for internalization and entry . Once vRNPs are inside a host nucleus , the replication and transcription begins , followed by export , assembly , and budding of progeny viruses [ 2 ] . In this study , using ganglioside 1 ( GM1 ) - cholera toxin - based lipid raft staining and biochemical raft isolation , we show that IAV select host rafts for polyvalent host binding . Further , by applying cyclodextrin based raft disruption we also demonstrate signiﬁcant reduction in IAV attachment in cholesterol - depleted cells conﬁrming this hypothesis . Additionally , using Methyl - β - Cyclodextrin ( MBCD ) based inhibition of raft - dependent endocytosis ; we identify raft - dependent endocytosis as an internalization route for IAV in addition to the previous known entry routes for IAV . 2 . Methods 2 . 1 . Cell Culture and Viral Strains Human lung epithelial cells A549 were purchased from ATCC and grown and maintained in DMEM ( Hyclone , Logan , UT , USA ) supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum ( Hyclone ) and a penicillin – streptomycin solution ( 100 units per mL ; Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA , USA ) in a 5 % CO 2 - containing environment . For virus infection , inﬂuenza virus A / Aichi / 2 / 1968 ( X - 31 ) strain was used at a multiplicity of infection ( M . O . I . ) of 10 unless speciﬁed otherwise . 2 . 2 . Chemicals and Antibodies MBCD and MTT ( 3 - 4 , 5 - Dimethylthiazol - 2 - yl ) - 2 , 5 - Diphenyltetrazolium Bromide ) were purchased from Sigma - Aldrich . For raft protein isolation , a focus signal proteins kit ( G - biosciences , Saint Louis , MO , USA ) was purchased and used according to the manufacturer’s protocol . To visualize lipid rafts , a Vybrant Lipid Raft Labeling Kit was purchased from Molecular Probes ( Thermoﬁsher Scientiﬁc , Waltham , MA , USA ) . For confocal microscopy and Flow Cytometric studies , Anti - NP - FITC ( anti - nucleoprotein - ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate ) conjugated antibody was purchased from Abcam ( Bristol , UK ) . For Western blotting , anti - GAPDH ( Glyceraldehyde 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase ) antibody ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc . , Santa Cruz , CA , USA ) , anti - actin - HRP antibody ( Sigma Aldrich , St . Louis , MO , USA ) , and anti - NP antibody ( Abcam , UK ) was used . 2 . 3 . Lipid Raft Labeling , Disruption , and Inhibition of Raft - Dependent Endocytosis Lipid rafts were ﬂuorescently labeled in vivo using a Vybrant Lipid Raft Labeling Kit ( molecular probes ) according to the manufacturer’s protocol . To disrupt lipid rafts and raft - dependent endocytosis , A549 cells were treated with 10 mM MBCD for 1 h at 37 ◦ C in pre - warmed serum and antibiotic free Viruses 2018 , 10 , 650 3 of 11 DMEM medium . After treatment , cells were washed with 1 × PBS three times to ensure complete removal of MBCD and processed for viral infection and analysis . We did not use cholesterol synthesis inhibitors because of reported intracellular accumulation of GM1 [ 17 ] . 2 . 4 . Virus Infection For virus infection , seeded A549 cells were ﬁrst washed with 1 × PBS three times followed by incubation with IAV in DMEM with 0 . 3 % BSA ( GIBCO , Waltham , MA , USA ) either at 4 ◦ C or 37 ◦ C for a period of one hour with gentle rocking at every 15 min (cid:48) interval . After 1 hour , unbound viruses were removed by washing with 1 × PBS , cells were harvested at the indicated time and subjected to experimental analysis . 2 . 5 . Confocal Microscopy To visualize lipid rafts , A549 cells were subjected to raft staining ( Vybrant Lipid Raft Labeling Kit , Waltham , MA , USA ) on ice , ﬁxed , and mounted on glass slides in Prolong Gold anti - fade reagent with DAPI ( 4 (cid:48) , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ) ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA , USA ) . To detect surface bound or internalized virus , A549 cells were incubated with IAV ( X - 31 ) at an M . O . I . of 10 . After indicated incubation , cells were ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde in 1 × PBS for 30 min at 4 ◦ C or RT . Then , cells were mixed with 0 . 5 % BSA in 1 × PBST with 0 . 3 % Triton X - 100 ( blocking and permeabilization ) for 1 h at room temperature followed by staining with mouse anti - NP - FITC conjugated antibody ( dilution 1 : 250 in blocking buffer ) for 90 min at room temperature . After staining , cells were washed with 1 × PBS ( 3 times , 5 min each ) and mounted in Prolong Gold anti - fade reagent with DAPI ( Invitrogen ) . The slides were visualized using Leica DM6000 CFS Confocal Microscope . 2 . 6 . MTT Assay To assess cell viability , A549 cells were seeded at the density of 1 × 10 6 cells / well in a 6 - well plate . After 24 h , cells were treated with 10 mM MBCD for 1 h , untreated cells served as control . After treatment , cells were washed with 1 × PBS and 100 µ L MTT was mixed with 900 µ L 1 × PBS into each well , followed by incubation at 37 ◦ C for 2 h to allow the formation of formazan . The medium was then removed , washed , and 1 mL DMSO was added to each well . After gentle mixing , the absorbance was measured using an ELISA plate reader at 570 nm wavelength . Only DMSO was used as the blank ( medium ) control . 2 . 7 . Isolation of Raft Proteins and Western Blotting To study IAV and host raft interaction , IAV infected A549 cells were subjected to raft protein isolation using a focus signal protein isolation kit ( G Biosciences , St . Louis , MO , USA ) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and processed for Western blotting . For IAV host binding and internalization studies , A549 cells were either subjected to MBCD treatment ( 10 mM , 1 h ) or left untreated ( Control ) and then incubated with IAV either at 4 ◦ C or 37 ◦ C . After the indicated time , cells were then harvested , lysed , and processed for Western blotting . 2 . 8 . qRT - PCR To quantify vRNA , IAV infected A549 cells ( treated or untreated ) were subjected to isolation of total cellular RNA using trizol . Subsequently , after DNase I treatment , 2 µ g of isolated RNA was reverse - transcribed into cDNA using ThermoScript RT - PCR System ( Invitrogen ) in a volume of 20 µ L using the manufacturer’s protocol . The obtained cDNA was further diluted into 1 : 10 fold and 5 µ L of diluted cDNA was used to set up a SYBR Green based real - time PCR reaction in a volume of 25 µ L , and it was analyzed using StepOnePlus TM real - time PCR instrument ( Thermoﬁsher Scientiﬁc , USA ) . The primers used were , NP - forward primer 5 (cid:48) - CAG GTA CTG GGC CAT AAG GAC - 3 (cid:48) , NP - reverse primer 5 (cid:48) - GCA TTG TCT CCG AAG AAA TAAG - 3 (cid:48) , Beta - actin , forward primer 5 (cid:48) - ACC AAC TGG Viruses 2018 , 10 , 650 4 of 11 GAC GAC ATG GAG AAA - 3 (cid:48) and reverse primer 5 (cid:48) - TAG CAC AGC CTG GAT AGC AAC GTA - 3 (cid:48) or acidic ribosomal phosphoprotein ( ARPP , ) forward primer 5 (cid:48) - GCA CTG GAA GTC CAA CTA CTTC - 3 (cid:48) and ARPP reverse primer 5 (cid:48) - TGA GGT CCT CCT TGG TGA ACAC - 3 (cid:48) . The relative fold changes were calculated using the ∆∆ Ct method . 2 . 9 . Flow Cytometry To measure the virus infected cell population , A549 cells were seeded in 6 - well plates ( ~ 10 6 cells / well ) and incubated at 37 ◦ C in 5 % CO 2 for 24 h . The following day , these cells were either subjected to treatment with 10 mM MBCD or left untreated ( Control ) and then incubated with IAV either at 4 ◦ C or at 37 ◦ C . Next , these cells were incubated for the indicated time , harvested , washed , and suspended in 200 µ L of 1 × BD Cytoﬁx / Cytoperm solution ( BD Biosciences , San Jose , CA , USA ) and incubated for 20 min at 4 ◦ C for ﬁxation and permeabilization . After that , cells were washed with 100 µ L of 1 × BD Perm / Wash buffer three times and viruses were stained with anti - NP - FITC antibody ( dilution 1 : 250 ) in 1 × BD Perm / Wash buffer . Unbound antibodies were washed away with 1 × BD Perm / Wash buffer , samples were diluted at 1 : 5 ratios in 1 × PBS and then analyzed using a ﬂuorescence - activated cell sorting ( FACS ) Calibur ﬂow cytometer ( BD Biosciences ) and Flowjo software . 3 . Results 3 . 1 . Inﬂuenza A Virus Bind Selectively to Host Membrane Rafts To investigate whether IAV utilizes the host membrane rafts during binding , seeded A549 cells were either incubated with IAV ( strain A / X - 31 H3N2 ) at 4 ◦ C to arrest the attached virus on the host cell surface or left uninfected ( mock ) . Then , these cells were subjected to cholera toxin - GM1 based lipid raft labeling ( Red ) at 4 ◦ C to prevent internalization of GM1 - Cholera Toxin - B ( CTB ) complex and to visualize PM rafts in the presence and absence of ligand ( IAV ) binding . Subsequently , cells were ﬁxed using 4 % paraformaldehyde , permebealized , and surface bound viruses were stained with anti - NP - FITC antibody ( Green ) . When visualized under a confocal microscope , uneven , patchy , and distinct lipid rafts were clearly visible in the cell membrane from both uninfected and IAV infected cells ( Figure 1B , C , E ) . In IAV attached cells , we observed clear co - localization of IAV with GM1 shown as a yellow color in the overlay confocal image ( Figure 1G ) and highlighted by arrows ( Figure 1H ) . Also , two coefﬁcients for co - localization viz . Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient ( PCC = 0 . 71 ) and Mander’s overlap coefﬁcient ( MOC = 0 . 89 ) were calculated , and both coefﬁcients supported the observed co - localization . Next , in order to validate the interaction of host lipid raft and IAV , A549 cells were incubated with IAV at 4 ◦ C for 1 h and subjected to biochemical raft isolation as DRM ( detergent - resistant membranes ) using a Focus signal protein kit . Both DRM and detergent soluble fraction were then subjected to SDS - PAGE and Western blotting . We detected viral protein ( NP ) in the isolated raft fraction ( Figure 1I , panel 1 ) . Presence of IAV protein in the isolated raft fraction and observed co - localization clearly indicate that host raft serves an important role as an attachment factor in IAV binding . Viruses 2018 , 10 , 650 5 of 11 Figure 1 . Inﬂuenza A virus ( IAV ) co - localizes with host membrane lipid rafts during binding . ( A – C ) CTB - 594 stained ( 4 ◦ C ) A549 cells ( uninfected control ) . Patchy distribution of ganglioside 1 ( GM1 ) ( rafts ) is visible ( red ) ; blue , DAPI ( 4 (cid:48) , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ) nuclear staining . ( D – G ) IAV incubated ( 4 ◦ C ) A549 cells stained with CTB - 594 ( 4 ◦ C ) . Surface bound viruses were stained with anti - NP - FITC ( anti - nucleoprotein - ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate ) antibody ( Green ) . Yellow color and arrows indicate IAV co - localization with GM1 ; blue , DAPI nuclear staining . ( H ) Enlarged view of indicated section of image G , magniﬁcation ~ 3X . ( I ) Western blot of raft proteins isolated from IAV incubated ( 4 ◦ C ) A549 cells . NP was detected in the raft fraction ( I , panel 1 ) . GAPDH ( Glyceraldehyde 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase ) was used as cytosolic marker and beta - actin as internal control . 3 . 2 . Disruption of Host Lipid Rafts Signiﬁcantly Reduces IAV Host Binding Since we observed that IAV co - localizes and interacts with host rafts during binding , we next investigated the effect of raft disruption on IAV binding . To achieve this , MBCD was used to deplete membrane cholesterol and disrupt the rafts ( Figure 2A ) . After MBCD treatment , cell viability was also measured via MTT assay , which showed no signiﬁcant cytotoxicity ( Figure 2B ) . Since , MBCD is known to affect virus infectivity [ 18 ] , treated A549 cells were washed thrice with 1 × PBS to withdraw MBCD . Then , these cells were incubated with IAV at 4 ◦ C for binding . After incubation , cells were ﬁxed , permeabilized , and surface attached viruses were stained with anti - NP - FITC antibody ( Green ) for visualization under confocal microscope ( Leica DM6000 CFS ) . We observed a drastic decrease in IAV host binding in raft - disrupted cells when compared with untreated control cells ( Figure 2C ) . Subsequently , reduction in host binding was calculated in terms of mean ﬂuorescence intensity and is graphically represented in Figure 2D . Further , ﬂow cytometry was performed with IAV incubated ( 4 ◦ C ) A549 cells ( both untreated / treated ) and similar reduction in IAV host binding was found in raft disrupted cells ( Figure 2E , F ) . Subsequently , we isolated lipid rafts as DRM from A549 cells ( both untreated / treated ) incubated with IAV at 4 ◦ C and observed the presence of IAV proteins in isolated raft fractions ( Figure 2G ) , further Viruses 2018 , 10 , 650 6 of 11 validating our previous observations of IAV co - localization with host lipid rafts ( Figure 1I ) . We also found signiﬁcant reduction in IAV host binding in MBCD treated cells , similar to the confocal and ﬂow cytometry results . Collectively , these data clearly show the importance of host lipid rafts during IAV binding . Figure 2 . Disruption of host lipid rafts and IAV binding . ( A ) CTB - 488 stained A549 cells ( untreated and Methyl - β - Cyclodextrin ( MBCD ) treated ) . ( B ) Assessment of cell viability by MTT ( 3 - 4 , 5 - Dimethylthiazol - 2 - yl ) - 2 , 5 - Diphenyltetrazolium Bromide ) assay . Error bars represent ± SD . ( C ) IAV incubated ( 4 ◦ C ) A549 cells , ( D ) Relative IAV host binding represented as mean ﬂuorescence intensity ( FITC ) . * * * p < 0 . 0002 , calculated by student’s t - test . Error bars show ± SD . ( E , F ) Flow - cytometric analysis showing IAV host binding . The results are a representation of three independent experiments . * * p < 0 . 002 , calculated by student’s t - test . Error bars show ± SD . ( G ) Isolation of lipid rafts as detergent - resistant membranes ( DRM ) and detection of IAV protein ( M1 ) . Actin served as internal control . 3 . 3 . Exploitation of Raft - Dependent Endocytosis by IAV as an Alternative Route for Host Entry Since raft - dependent endocytosis is induced by multivalent ligand binding and reported to be cholesterol sensitive , we next sought to investigate if IAV utilizes raft - dependent endocytosis for host entry . To study this , A549 cells were either treated with MBCD to inhibit raft - dependent endocytosis [ 16 ] or left untreated ( mock ) . Then these cells were washed with 1 × PBS ( thrice ) to remove MBCD and incubated with IAV ( 1 hour ) at 37 ◦ C instead of 4 ◦ C to allow endocytosis of surface attached IAVs . These cells ( mock and treated ) were subsequently incubated for different time intervals ( 0 – 4 h ) post IAV infection to examine if raft disruption affected only IAV endocytosis or fusion of IAV membrane with the endosomal membrane was also affected by MBCD treatment . After the indicated time intervals , IAV infected cells ( mock and MBCD treated ) were harvested and analyzed for internalized IAV using anti - NP - FITC antibody . When visualized under confocal microscope , we observed signiﬁcant and drastic reduction in IAV internalization in cells where raft - dependent endocytosis was disrupted ( Figure 3A ) . Also , we observed IAV genome ( detected via anti - NP - FITC antibody ) present within the nucleus of host cell at 4 - hour post IAV infection ( Figure 3A , upper right Viruses 2018 , 10 , 650 7 of 11 panel ) . Further , when mock or MBCD treated , IAV infected ( 0 – 4 h ) A549 cells were lysed and subjected to SDS - PAGE and Western blotting , a similar drastic reduction in IAV internalization was observed in MBCD treated A549 cells as evidenced with a reduced NP level ( Figure 3B ) . Actin served as an internal control . However , detection of IAV NP in MBCD treated A549 cells , harvested at 4 - hour post IAV infection , clearly indicates that MBCD treatment only inhibited raft - dependent IAV host entry and showed no effect on the fusion of viral membrane with endosomal membrane . Therefore , IAV genome was successfully released via membrane fusion event for viral replication . Next , ﬂow cytometric analysis of mock and MBCD treated , IAV infected ( 0 – 4 h ) A549 cells also showed similar signiﬁcant reduction in IAV host entry in cells , where raft - dependent endocytosis was disrupted using MBCD ( Figure 3C ) . Since IAVs have segmented RNA genome , therefore to further investigate IAV host entry via raft - dependent endocytosis and validate above observations , we subsequently isolated total cell RNA from mock and MBCD treated , IAV infected ( 0 – 4 h ) A549 cells and converted to cDNA . Next , IAV host entry in mock ( control ) versus raft - disrupted cells was analyzed by qRT - PCR using primers against NP vRNA . We found similar reduction in IAV entry as evidenced by reduced NP vRNA level in cells with disrupted raft - dependent endocytosis ( Figure 3D ) . Further , to conﬁrm the above hypothesis of IAV host entry via raft - dependent endocytosis , we either disrupted raft - mediated endocytosis in A549 cells before IAV infection or two - hours post - IAV infection . Next , these infected cells were incubated for 8 h at 37 ◦ C , harvested and then subjected to total cell RNA isolation , converted to cDNA , and subsequently IAV entry was analyzed by qRT - PCR using NP primers . We found that while inhibition of raft - dependent endocytosis prior to IAV infection resulted in signiﬁcantly reduced entry of IAV , raft disruption two - hour post IAV binding did not affected the IAV endocytosis ( Figure 3E ) . Therefore , these data collectively demonstrate that IAV exploit the raft - dependent endocytosis for host internalization and entry . Figure 3 . Cont . Viruses 2018 , 10 , 650 8 of 11 Figure 3 . Exploitation of raft - dependent endocytosis by IAV for host internalization . ( A ) Confocal images of mock or MBCD treated , IAV infected ( 37 ◦ C ) A549 cells with indicated time of post IAV infection . Internalized IAVs were detected by staining with anti - NP - FITC antibody . ( B ) Analysis of IAV internalization via Western blot in mock or MBCD treated A549 cells showing drastic reduction in IAV entry in MBCD treated cells . Actin served as an internal control . ( C ) Flow cytometric analysis of IAV endocytosis in mock versus MBCD treated A549 cells . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 , calculated by two way ANOVA . Error bars show ± SD . ( D ) . Relative quantitation of NP a central core of RNA genome ( vRNA ) by qRT - PCR . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 , calculated by two way ANOVA . Error bars show ± SD . ( E ) . Relative quantitation of NP vRNA in A549 cells that were MBCD treated before IAV infection and MBCD treated after IAV infection . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 , calculated by two way ANOVA . Error bars show ± SD . 4 . Discussion Here in the present study , we report that IAV select host lipid rafts during binding to the host cell to achieve high avidity . Additionally , we also demonstrate that IAV utilizes cholesterol sensitive raft - dependent endocytosis for host internalization and entry in addition to previously described endocytic routes for IAV [ 12 , 13 ] . Viruses very often exploit abundant but low afﬁnity cell surface receptors for host attachment followed by binding with high afﬁnity receptors and initiation of viral entry [ 19 ] . The IAV HA protein binds to host cell surface receptors’ sialic acid ( SIA ) for attachment and have weak afﬁnity towards SIA molecules [ 11 ] . Consequently , IAV utilize multiple HA - SIA interactions to strengthen the host binding by achieving high avidity at the host cell membrane . Further , the plasma membrane ( PM ) is organized into sub - domains called “lipid rafts” that are enriched in glycoproteins and glycolipids and thus exhibit SIA clusters on the host surface [ 20 ] . These SIA clusters present in lipid rafts of host PM could offer a potential site for polyvalent interactions during IAV host binding . Takeda et al . had reported that newly translated HA protein is concentrated and aggregated in the lipid bilayer during viral assembly and budding , and this aggregation of HA molecules in the viral envelope is necessary for efﬁcient viral host cell attachment and fusion during the subsequent infection [ 21 ] . We further demonstrate here that IAV is co - localized with host lipid rafts during host binding , and IAV proteins are detected in isolated lipid raft fraction when biochemically separated as DRM . Moreover , disruption of host lipid rafts via cholesterol extraction showed signiﬁcant reduction in IAV host binding . Hence , we believe that these concentrated HA molecules in the viral envelope efﬁciently interact with host lipid raft’s SIA clusters , thus achieving high avidity on host PM . Extraction of PM cholesterol disrupts the rafts and hence leads to loss of SIA clusters , making it difﬁcult for IAV to establish polyvalent interactions , resulting in drastically reduced IAV host binding . Therefore , we propose that host rafts and their SIA clusters are selected by IAV as host attachment factors for multivalent binding on the host surface . Raft - dependent endocytosis induced by multivalent ligand binding is a well characterized route for internalization of ligands [ 22 , 23 ] . Since we report here that IAV select host lipid rafts for multivalent binding , it is reasonable that IAV might utilize the endocytic pathways induced and regulated by these micro - domains for host entry . During our experiments , the observation of reduction in IAV Viruses 2018 , 10 , 650 9 of 11 endocytosis in raft disrupted cells specify the utilization of raft - dependent endocytic routes for IAV entry . Also , the fact that no signiﬁcant reduction in IAV internalization in cells where raft mediated endocytosis was disrupted two - hours post - IAV binding further strengthens our hypothesis . However , detection of IAV NP 4 - hour post - IAV binding in cholesterol - depleted cells further indicates that there is no inhibition of pH dependent fusion of the viral - endosomal membrane leading to release of IAV genome for viral replication . Whittaker et al . had used a similar approach and demonstrated that IAV may infect cells with disrupted caveolar uptake achieved by dominant - negative caveolin - 1 and sterol binding drugs [ 24 ] . Though IAV infection in cells with dominant - negative caveolin - 1 clearly indicates that IAV does not exploit caveolin - 1 dependent caveolar endocytosis , use of sterol binding drugs during IAV binding and subsequent incubation may fail to remove cholesterol during IAV binding , showing lipid rafts or DRM independent IAV infection . However , for lipid raft disruption and inhibition of raft mediated endocytosis , we treated A549 cells with MBCD for 1 h prior to IAV infection to ensure cholesterol depletion , and then incubated them with IAV in the absence of MBCD due to the reported effect of MBCD on the viral envelope and infectivity [ 18 ] , which showed signiﬁcant reduction in both IAV host binding and entry . Also , exposure of cells to MBCD two - hour post IAV binding showed no such reduction . Therefore , we propose that IAV uses raft - dependent endocytosis for host entry as an alternative route in addition to the other previously known endocytic routes . Viruses are known to utilize multiple endocytic routes to enter the host cell [ 25 ] . Although three different routes of raft - dependent endocytosis are suggested that share cholesterol sensitivity , they differ in their mechanisms . Caveolin - 1 is reported to be crucial for caveolar endocytosis whereas non - caveolar dynamin - independent / dependent endocytoses are independent of caveolin - 1 [ 16 ] . Further , SV40 virus is shown to be internalized via caveolae [ 26 ] as well as via a non - caveolar dynamin - independent route [ 27 , 28 ] . Similarly , endocytosis of CTB is reported to use both non - caveolar dynamin - independent / dependent routes [ 29 , 30 ] . The observed IAV infection in the presence of dominant negative caveoli - 1 suggests that caveolar endocytosis may not be utilized for IAV internalization [ 24 ] , and the other two known non - caveolar routes , i . e . , dynamin dependent or dynamin independent , cannot be dissected here using MBCD because both are cholesterol sensitive . The co - localization of IAV with CTB suggests a similar route for endocytosis is exploited by IAV for host entry . Taken together , these data show that the IAV uses a host lipid raft as an attachment factor for polyvalent binding to the host surface and uses raft mediated endocytosis as an internalization route to gain entry inside the host cell . Few host membrane proteins present in lipid rafts have been studied for their potential involvement in inﬂuenza virus entry . For example , C - type lectins have been suggested to be involved in inﬂuenza virus attachment to host cell . Further , dynamin proteins , epidermal growth factor receptors , and activated c - Met kinases have been reported to be critical for inﬂuenza virus internalization [ 12 ] . There are many questions that still need to be investigated . Does IAV follow dynamin - dependent or dynamin - independent routes or both routes during endocytosis ? What are the IAV proteins that may interact with different proteins of raft - dependent endocytic pathways for entry ? What is the molecular mechanism of this mode of IAV entry ? The role of host surface proteins in IAV raft endocytosis needs to be explored . The answers of these questions will further clarify our understanding of IAV endocytosis . 5 . Conclusions Host lipid rafts has been reported to be critically involved in apical targeting , assembly , and budding of IAV , however , their role still remains elusive in the case of IAV binding and entry via endocytosis . In this study , we report that the IAV selects host lipid rafts for polyvalent binding to achieve high avidity on the host cell surface . Additionally , we also identify and demonstrate host lipid raft induced endocytosis known as “raft - dependent endocytosis” as an alternative internalization route for IAV in addition to the previous reported routes for IAV entry . Viruses 2018 , 10 , 650 10 of 11 Author Contributions : The conception of the idea and design of the work were formulated by D . K . V . and S . K . L . Experiments , collection of data , analysis , and data interpretation were conducted by D . K . V . , S . K . L . , and D . G . The manuscript was written by D . K . V . and edited and ﬁnalized by S . K . L . and D . G . Funding : This research received no external funding and was conducted by internal funds from the International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology ( ICGEB ) and Monash University Malaysia . The APC was funded by ICGEB , New Delhi . Acknowledgments : The authors gratefully acknowledge the ﬁnancial support obtained from internal funds from the International Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology and School of Science , Monash University , Malaysia . Dileep Kumar Verma is the recipient of a Senior Research Fellowship from the Council of Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research , India . Conﬂicts of Interest : The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interest . References 1 . Taubenberger , J . K . ; Morens , D . M . The pathology of inﬂuenza virus infections . Annu . Rev . Pathol . 2008 , 3 , 499 – 522 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 2 . Bouvier , N . M . ; Palese , P . The biology of inﬂuenza viruses . Vaccine 2008 , 26 ( Suppl . 4 ) , D49 – D53 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 3 . Simons , K . ; Sampaio , J . L . Membrane organization and lipid rafts . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 2011 , 3 , a004697 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 4 . Simons , K . ; Ikonen , E . Functional rafts in cell membranes . Nature 1997 , 387 , 569 – 572 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 5 . Chazal , N . ; Gerlier , D . Virus entry , assembly , budding , and membrane rafts . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 2003 , 67 , 226 – 237 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 6 . Takahashi , T . ; Suzuki , T . Function of membrane rafts in viral lifecycles and host cellular response . Biochem . Res . Int . 2011 , 2011 , 245090 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 7 . Eierhoff , T . ; Hrincius , E . R . ; Rescher , U . ; Ludwig , S . ; Ehrhardt , C . The epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) promotes uptake of inﬂuenza a viruses ( IAV ) into host cells . PLoS Pathog . 2010 , 6 , e1001099 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 8 . Zidovetzki , R . ; Levitan , I . Use of cyclodextrins to manipulate plasma membrane cholesterol content : Evidence , misconceptions and control strategies . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 2007 , 1768 , 1311 – 1324 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 9 . Skehel , J . J . ; Wiley , D . C . Receptor binding and membrane fusion in virus entry : The inﬂuenza hemagglutinin . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 2000 , 69 , 531 – 569 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 10 . Sieben , C . ; Kappel , C . ; Zhu , R . ; Wozniak , A . ; Rankl , C . ; Hinterdorfer , P . ; Grubmuller , H . ; Herrmann , A . Inﬂuenza virus binds its host cell using multiple dynamic interactions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2012 , 109 , 13626 – 13631 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 11 . Sauter , N . K . ; Bednarski , M . D . ; Wurzburg , B . A . ; Hanson , J . E . ; Whitesides , G . M . ; Skehel , J . J . ; Wiley , D . C . Hemagglutinins from two inﬂuenza virus variants bind to sialic acid derivatives with millimolar dissociation constants : A 500 - mhz proton nuclear magnetic resonance study . Biochemistry 1989 , 28 , 8388 – 8396 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 12 . Edinger , T . O . ; Pohl , M . O . ; Stertz , S . Entry of inﬂuenza a virus : Host factors and antiviral targets . J . Gen . Virol . 2014 , 95 , 263 – 277 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 13 . Lakadamyali , M . ; Rust , M . J . ; Zhuang , X . Endocytosis of inﬂuenza viruses . Microbes Infect . 2004 , 6 , 929 – 936 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 14 . Parton , R . G . ; Richards , A . A . Lipid rafts and caveolae as portals for endocytosis : New insights and common mechanisms . Trafﬁc 2003 , 4 , 724 – 738 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 15 . Ewers , H . ; Helenius , A . Lipid - mediated endocytosis . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 2011 , 3 , a004721 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 16 . Lajoie , P . ; Nabi , I . R . Lipid rafts , caveolae , and their endocytosis . Int . Rev . Cell Mol . Biol . 2010 , 282 , 135 – 163 . [ PubMed ] 17 . Chang , T . H . ; Segovia , J . ; Sabbah , A . ; Mgbemena , V . ; Bose , S . Cholesterol - rich lipid rafts are required for release of infectious human respiratory syncytial virus particles . Virology 2012 , 422 , 205 – 213 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Viruses 2018 , 10 , 650 11 of 11 18 . Sun , X . ; Whittaker , G . R . Role for inﬂuenza virus envelope cholesterol in virus entry and infection . J . Virol . 2003 , 77 , 12543 – 12551 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 19 . Grove , J . ; Marsh , M . The cell biology of receptor - mediated virus entry . J . Cell Biol . 2011 , 195 , 1071 – 1082 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 20 . Cohen , M . ; Varki , A . The sialome—Far more than the sum of its parts . Omics J . Integr . Biol . 2010 , 14 , 455 – 464 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 21 . Takeda , M . ; Leser , G . P . ; Russell , C . J . ; Lamb , R . A . Inﬂuenza virus hemagglutinin concentrates in lipid raft microdomains for efﬁcient viral fusion . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2003 , 100 , 14610 – 14617 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 22 . Nabi , I . R . ; Le , P . U . Caveolae / raft - dependent endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 2003 , 161 , 673 – 677 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 23 . Pelkmans , L . Secrets of caveolae - and lipid raft - mediated endocytosis revealed by mammalian viruses . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 2005 , 1746 , 295 – 304 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 24 . Sieczkarski , S . B . ; Whittaker , G . R . Inﬂuenza virus can enter and infect cells in the absence of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J . Virol . 2002 , 76 , 10455 – 10464 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 25 . Cossart , P . ; Helenius , A . Endocytosis of viruses and bacteria . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 2014 , 6 , a016972 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 26 . Pelkmans , L . ; Kartenbeck , J . ; Helenius , A . Caveolar endocytosis of simian virus 40 reveals a new two - step vesicular - transport pathway to the ER . Nat . Cell Biol . 2001 , 3 , 473 – 483 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 27 . Ewers , H . ; Romer , W . ; Smith , A . E . ; Bacia , K . ; Dmitrieff , S . ; Chai , W . ; Mancini , R . ; Kartenbeck , J . ; Chambon , V . ; Berland , L . ; et al . Gm1 structure determines sv40 - induced membrane invagination and infection . Nat . Cell Biol . 2010 , 12 , 11 – 18 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 28 . Damm , E . M . ; Pelkmans , L . ; Kartenbeck , J . ; Mezzacasa , A . ; Kurzchalia , T . ; Helenius , A . Clathrin - and caveolin - 1 - independent endocytosis : Entry of simian virus 40 into cells devoid of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 2005 , 168 , 477 – 488 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 29 . Kirkham , M . ; Fujita , A . ; Chadda , R . ; Nixon , S . J . ; Kurzchalia , T . V . ; Sharma , D . K . ; Pagano , R . E . ; Hancock , J . F . ; Mayor , S . ; Parton , R . G . Ultrastructural identiﬁcation of uncoated caveolin - independent early endocytic vehicles . J . Cell Biol . 2005 , 168 , 465 – 476 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 30 . Lajoie , P . ; Kojic , L . D . ; Nim , S . ; Li , L . ; Dennis , J . W . ; Nabi , I . R . Caveolin - 1 regulation of dynamin - dependent , raft - mediated endocytosis of cholera toxin - b sub - unit occurs independently of caveolae . J . Cell . Mol . Med . 2009 , 13 , 3218 – 3225 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] © 2018 by the authors . Licensee MDPI , Basel , Switzerland . This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution ( CC BY ) license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) .