1 The Golden Eras of Graphene Science and Technology : Bibliographic Evidences From Journal and Patent Publications Ai Linh Nguyen , 1 , 4 Wenyuan Liu , 1 , 4 Khiam Aik Khor , 2 Andrea Nanetti , 3 Siew Ann Cheong 1 , 4 1 Division of Physics and Applied Physics , School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences , Nanyang Technological University , 21 Nanyang Link , Singapore 637371 2 School of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering , Nanyang Technological University , 50 Nanyang Avenue , Singapore 639798 3 School of Art , Design and Media , Nanyang Technological University , 81 Nanyang Dr , Singapore 637458 4 Complexity Institute , Nanyang Technological University , 50 Nanyang Avenue , Singapore 639798 Abstract Today’s scientific research is an expensive enterprise funded largely by taxpayers’ and corporate groups’ monies . It is a critical part in the competition between nations , and all nations want to discover fields of research that promise to create future industries , and dominate these by building up scientific and technological expertise early . However , our understanding of the value chain going from science to technology is still in a relatively infant stage , and the conversion of scientific leadership into market dominance remains very much an alchemy rather than a science . In this paper , we analyze bibliometric records of scientific journal publications and patents related to graphene , at the aggregate level as well as on the temporal and spatial dimensions . We find the present leaders of graphene science and technology emerged rather late in the race , after the initial scientific leaders lost their footings . More importantly , notwithstanding the amount of funding already committed , we find evidences that suggest the ‘Golden Eras’ of graphene science and technology were in 2010 and 2012 respectively , in spite of the continued growth of journal and patent publications in this area . Keywords Graphene , nanotubes , 2D materials , patents , journal publications , citations 1 . Introduction The 2010 Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded to Andre Geim and Konstantin Novoselov , both from the University of Manchester in UK then ( “The Nobel Prize in Physics 2010 , ” n . d . ) , “for groundbreaking experiments regarding the two - dimensional material graphene” ( Novoselov et al . , 2004 ) . Since their 2004 discovery , there has been a flurry of research activities on the material ; and given superlative claims on possible future technologies based on it , attracted huge amounts of grant money from public and private sources . A consortium led by Jari Kinaret was funded to the tune of 1 billion EUR to set up the Graphene Flagship ( “Graphene Flagship | Graphene Flagship , ” n . d . ) in 2013 , to bring together researchers in academia and industry for Europe to spearhead commercial applications of graphene within 10 years . Elsewhere in Asia , the Korean government also created the Korean Graphene Hub , an independent government institute originally intended to become 2 operational in 2018 , with an annual budget of 200 - 300 million USD ( “South Korea Funds Graphene Commercialization – NextBigFuture . com , ” n . d . ) . The creation of this Korean Graphene Hub ( to focus on the fundamental sciences of graphene and related 2D materials ) follows 64 . 6 million USD of funding by South Korea on graphene projects between 2006 and 2011 . During the same period ( 2006 - 2010 ) , the US spent 74 . 6 million USD on 168 graphene projects , while EU spent 68 . 8 million EUR on 47 projects ( “CORDIS | European Commission , ” n . d . ; “National Science & Technology Information Service ( NTIS ) , ” n . d . ; “NSF - National Science Foundation , ” n . d . ) . In spite of its small geographical and economic size , Singapore has also invested heavily into graphene research . In fact , it has invested more per capita into the material than any other country , and boasts a dedicated and world - class Centre for Advanced 2D Materials ( “Centre for Advanced 2D Materials , ” n . d . ) . Shortly after graphene was discovered , many revolutionary technological applications were promised , both in scientific papers , ( Avouris & Dimitrakopoulos , 2012 ; Palacios , 2011 ; Rao , Sood , Subrahmanyam , & Govindaraj , 2009 ) and also in popular presses ( “Digital Trends , ” n . d . ; “TECHNOLOGIST , ” 2014 ) . Over the years , some of these touted applications did not live up to their promises , while many other potential applications were suggested . To date , the applications considered closest to commercialization , based on their economic efficiency and technological feasibility , include : ( 1 ) touch panels and organic light - emitting diodes ( OLEDs ) , ( 2 ) batteries and supercapacitors , and ( 3 ) electro - magnetic shielding . Now if all the above potential applications were realized , what would be the gross market value of graphene ? According to a Statistica survey published in February 2019 [ https : / / www . statista . com / statistics / 972251 / us - graphene - market - value / ] , the graphene market in the US in 2016 is worth 5 . 1 million USD , and forecasted to grow to 58 . 9 million USD by 2024 . In China , which has 58 per cent of the world’s graphene patents , the graphene market is worth more than 4 billion CNY ( 610 . 8 million USD ) in 2016 according to the Global Graphene Industry Report 2017 ( “China No 1 in world patent applications for graphene tech - Chinadaily . com . cn , ” n . d . ) , and expected to exceed 10 billion CNY in 2017 . This same report estimated that the global graphene market will be worth 100 billion CNY by 2020 , whereas in their report “Global Graphene Market Size 2017 By Type ( Graphene Nanoplatelets , Graphene Oxide , and Others ) , by Application ( Electronics , Composites , Energy , and Others ) , and by Region and Forecast 2018 to 2025” , Adroit Market Research estimated that the global graphene market will be worth 221 . 4 million USD by 2025 ( “Graphene Market Analysis by Size , Price , Demand , Growth | Industry Report 2019 - 2025 , ” n . d . ) . The disparate estimates notwithstanding , it is clear that graphene technology will have significant commercial value . Lured by the promises of commercial returns , many governments and corporations are investing heavily to get a piece of the graphene ‘pie’ . Unfortunately , our understanding of the RIE process ( see Figure 1 ) is not yet at the level where science automatically and immediately becomes technology , which then becomes commercial products . Fundamentally , there is a value chain going from basic research ( theory , synthesis & characterization ) to applied research ( device ) to technology ( patents ) to product development to commercialization . To fully understand how a scientific idea on graphene ends up as a commercial product , we will need to collect and analyze many different data sets , and then more importantly , understand how advances and breakthroughs at one level of the value chain lead to advances and breakthroughs in the next level of the value chain . This is an ambitious undertaking , and is presently constrained by the many dispersed data sets that we need to bring together . Nevertheless , given the already large investment that has gone into graphene research , we would like to put ourselves in the shoes of a government or a corporation and ask whether 3 these are all worth it , even before graphene as a material starts to generate serious commercial returns on investment ( ROI ) . Figure 1 . A schematic showing how public and private investments can generate commercial returns through the research , innovation , enterprise ( RIE ) process , shown as a large block . Within the RIE block , we show journal publications as the primary outcome of research , and patents as the primary product of innovation . The two are connected through a knowledge process that is still poorly understood . To answer this question directly , we propose to measure the amounts of public and private investments ( in dollar value ) , and thereafter also measure the commercial values of graphene products ( in dollar value ) . If the latter is larger than the former , we will know that our investment is paying off . Alternatively , if the latter is still smaller than the former , but is increasing with time , then we hope that our investment will one day pay off . Unfortunately , it is difficult to directly measure the commercial value of graphene products , firstly because there is no systematic data on them ( leading to the discrepancy between different estimates of graphene market values ) . Secondly , the current number of commercial products based on graphene is still small , and much of the graphene research has yet to bear fruits , so estimates based on these grossly underestimates the market value . We can of course wait ten more years , when graphene - based technology is more mature , to compute its commercial value over a wider range of products . However , until then it is highly likely that governments and corporations would continue pumping money into graphene science and technology , so if at that point in time we realized that graphene is not delivering on its initial promise , there would be no way to recover the investment . Therefore , it is important to somehow make an estimate of the ROI now , so that we can decide whether or not to follow up with ten more years of investment . Finally , companies can profit from an innovation or a product long after it was first introduced . In spite of early efforts by Nordhaus ( Nordhaus , 1967 ) , who introduced the first model of lifetime value by assuming a constant rate of return , and improvements by Matutes et al . ( Matutes , Regibeau , & Rockett , 1996 ) , who assumed the rate of return increases and then decreases , the lifetime value of an innovation or a product is difficult to estimate in general . In fact , Reitzig ( Reitzig , 2003 ) tested different factors that are believed to affect patent value and found that even the patent lifetime itself is difficult to measure . To make matters worse , we further argue that it is also difficult to measure investments . While public investments are announced , and their dollar values reported , only part of the private investments are known through corporate announcements . Moreover , in the creation of scientific knowledge on graphene , it is entirely possible in some places for a university professor to devote his / her time and the time of his / her PhD students to graphene public + private investments commercial returns research , innovation , enterprise j ou r na l pub li c a t i on s pa t en t s 4 research . Such unfunded research adds to the body of scientific knowledge for graphene , but the dollar value of this investment in time cannot be easily computed . Therefore , in this paper we use proxies to measure the input and output of RIE efforts related to graphene . For the input , in place of public or private investments we look at journal publications related to graphene . We argue that this is a more accurate measure of input than reported public / private investments , because the time invested by university professors and their PhD students can be measured on equal footing to research grants . To show that this contribution to the input is not negligible , we checked the 127 , 546 graphene journal publications , and found 20 , 539 ( 16 . 1 % ) that listed no information on funding . To be certain that these are not simple omissions , we check the list of authors against the funding statuses of the graphene papers . Here we assume that if an author is funded ( from the acknowledgments of his / her papers ) , then all or nearly all of his / her papers should be funded , even if he / she did not acknowledge funding in a number of them . By this criterion , we realized that there are 186 , 460 funded authors who have at least one graphene paper acknowledging funding . In contrast , 11 , 000 unfunded authors produced 5 , 024 graphene papers . Therefore , we are talking about a silent investment in time that is about 4 % of the total scientific knowledge produced . This proportion is not large , but certainly not small enough to be ignored . For the output , we propose to use patents as a proxy for the potential lifetime commercial value of graphene technology . For the purpose of measuring potential commercial value before the technology hits the markets , there are probably no better proxies . In Section 2 of this paper , we will review the literature on journal and patent publications to justify our choice of proxies . Following this , we describe the data we used for our study , and how we analyze the data in Section 3 . In Section 4 , we organized our results into three main sections . In Section 4 . 1 , we show the publications , their references , and their citations in the form of inflow - outflow diagrams for journal papers and for patents . We find here that the number of citations is smaller than the number of references , which suggests declining interest in graphene science and technology . We show this declining interest more clearly in Section 4 . 2 , where we plot the yearly numbers of publications , references , and citations . By breaking the journal references up into those related to graphene , nanotube , 2D materials , and others , we see graphene papers making up the dominant component of the references of graphene papers between 2008 and 2015 . Similarly , when we break the citing patent up into those related to graphene , nanotube , 2D materials , and others , we find graphene patents being the dominant component between 2009 and 2012 . These suggest the existence of ‘golden eras’ in graphene science and technology during these periods . In Section 4 . 3 , we considered the spatial / geographical dimension , to find China as the leader in graphene science and technology , followed some distance away by the US . We also look at the flow of citations between the top regions , and found that beyond the strong citations within regions , the strongest inter - region citations are by EU and WPO patents , citing mostly US patents . For journal papers , beyond citing themselves , the top regions cite equally strongly papers from US and China . We also show the rankings of the top regions in publications or patents , and how they evolve over time . In Section 5 , we report more compelling evidence for the ‘golden eras’ , by calculating the ratio of empirical average number of citations to the expected average number of citations . Finally , we conclude in Section 6 . 2 . Literature Review Let us start by justifying our choice of proxies for measuring the total investment and the total potential commercial value . On the input end , we chose the number of journal publications as 5 the proxy for total investment ( public , private , and time ) , since the average funding required to produce a scientific publication is more or less constant after adjusting for inflation . Even though Leydesdorff and Wagner ( Leydesdorff & Wagner , 2009 ) concluded that the price per paper cannot be estimated , after analyzing the relations between research funding and research output in 34 countries / regions , there were also others who succeeded in estimating this cost of publication . Auranen and Nieminen ( Auranen & Nieminen , 2010 ) found that the cost of a publication , measured in terms of the USD in year 2000 , is relatively constant over time , but varies from 70 , 000 to 170 , 000 across countries . This spread has to do with different tax rates across countries , but it is difficult to further normalize for 0 % tax . Zhi and Meng ( Zhi & Meng , 2016 ) analyzed the life science scientific output of institutions during the 11 th Five Year Plan ( 2006 - 2010 ) , and found that the number of papers published per institution is roughly proportional to the funding level it received . In this paper , we argue that the number of publication as a proxy for research investment is useful , even though it is not entirely uncontroversial . Next , to measure the total commercial value ( realized or potential ) , we look at the total number of patents awarded on graphene . The earliest study on the commercial potential of patents was the Patent Utilization Study , where of the 600 questionnaire responses analyzed , 30 % were found to be in current use ( Rossman & Sanders , 1957 ) , and 34 % of the grant in use reported an average profit of 600 , 000 USD ( Sanders , Rossman , & Harris , 1958 ) . More recently , Griliches ( Griliches , 1990 ) found the average patent utilization rate to be 55 % on average , but as high as 74 % for small companies and inventors . Morgan et al . ( Morgan , Kruytbosch , & Kannankutty , 2001 ) found that the commercialization rates of US patents was 48 . 9 % for industries , and 33 . 5 % in the education sector . These are consistent with what Svensson ( Svensson , 2007 ) found when examining a small data set of Swedish patents , that the commercialization rates were between 52 % to 74 % , depending on whether the patents were held by individuals , small companies , or large companies . Webster and Jensen ( Webster & Jensen , 2011 ) found using survey data that about 40 % of patents advanced to the commercialization stage . Wu et al . ( Wu , Welch , & Huang , 2015 ) found using survey data from the 2010 National Survey on Intellectual Property in Academic Science and Engineering that among various factors , university inventions are more likely to be licensed if the inventors themselves have positive attitudes towards the commercialization of their research , and if they collaborate with industries , if they engage in follow - up research , and if the university has a technology transfer office . The overall rate of licensing is reported to be 50 . 4 % . On the problem of patent value , Cutler ( Cutler , 1987 ) analyzed 248 patents resulting from National Science Foundation Engineering Program grants , and found that 7 of them reported annual royalties between 10 , 000 USD to 250 , 000 USD . Cutler further estimated that the total long - term royalties from these 248 and related patents can be as high as 52 . 5 million USD , and the market value of their associated products may be ten or twenty times more . Subsequently , more groups employed direct survey of patent holders to ascertain the values of their patents , and developed regression models based on a variety of factors to estimate the values of other patents . Reitzig ( Reitzig , 2004 ) classified these models into three generations : those based on citations ( Carpenter , Cooper , & Narin , 1980 ; Trajtenberg , 1990 ; Harhoff , Scherer , & Vopel , 2003 ) , those based on procedures ( Putnam , 1997 ) , those using the full - text information ( Lanjouw & Schankerman , 1998 ; Tong & Frame , 1994 ) . From this review of the literature , we see that the estimation of patent value is a very difficult problem . However , patent databases are reasonably complete . In contrast , it is even more difficult to compile a list of all graphene products , their prices , and their annual sales . Therefore , we settle for 6 analysis of patents even though it is not the most direct measure of market value . 3 . Data & Methods 3 . 1 . Data We use ‘graphene’ as a keyword to search the Web of Science ( “Web of Science , ” n . d . ) and downloaded the bibliographic records of 135 , 617 journal publications related to graphene . We realize that there might be many more graphene papers published in journals not indexed by the Web of Science , but believe that the most important papers should be included in this collection . For our analysis , we further exclude records without DOI number or publication year . We then refer to the remaining 127 , 546 records as the Graphene Science ( G - S ) collection . Many papers in G - S collection also cite papers on nanotubes . Therefore , we also use this keyword to search and download the bibliographic records of 217 , 143 journal publications related to nanotubes from the Web of Science . Again , we believe the most important papers are included in this incomplete collection , which we refer to as the Nanotube Science ( NT - S ) collection after removing invalid results . Over the last few years , scientists originally working on graphene have started exploring other two - dimensional ( 2D ) materials . Some of these are based on transition metal dichalcogenides ( TMD ) , while others have focused on transparent metal oxides ( TMO ) materials . Therefore , we also searched for and downloaded the 2D Materials Science ( 2DM - S ) , Transition Metal Dichalcogenides Science ( TMD - S ) , Transparent Metal Oxides Science ( TMO - S ) collections . Details of these five collections ( which represent the scientific inputs ) are shown in Table 1 . From Derwent Innovation ( “Derwent Innovation , ” n . d . ) , we searched for and downloaded matching collections of patent records : Graphene Technology ( G - T ) , Nanotube Technology ( NT - T ) , 2D Materials Technology ( 2DM - T ) , Transition Metal Dichalcogenides Technology ( TMD - T ) , Transparent Metal Oxides Technology ( TMO - T ) collections ( which represent the technological outputs ) , as shown in Table 1 . In the patent collections , records without publication number or publication year are also excluded . Table 1 : Journal publication records from the Web of Science and patent records from Derwent Innovation found using the five keywords : “graphene " , “nanotube " , “2D material " , “transparent metal oxide " and “transition metal dichalcogenide " . Graphene Nanotube 2D Material Transparent Metal Oxide Transition Metal Dichalco - genide Web of Science Number of records 127 , 546 196 , 489 24 , 763 29 , 488 1 , 448 Period 1991 to 2017 1992 to 2017 1982 to 2017 1948 to 2017 1972 to 2017 Derwent Innovation Number of records 176 , 193 373 , 527 1 , 611 122 , 977 1 , 100 Period 1986 to 2017 1976 to 2017 1907 to 2017 1951 to 2017 1976 to 2017 7 The ten collections built using these keywords contain overlaps , i . e . a paper in G - S may also be a member of NT - S , or a patent in G - T may also appear in TMO - T . In Table 2 , we show the number of overlapping papers across the three journal collections G - S , NT - S , ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - S , and in Table 3 the number of overlapping patents across the three patent collections G - T , NT - T , ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - T . In the rest of paper , when we need to classify a journal paper , journal reference , patent , or patent reference , we check it against the collections always in the order G - S ( T ) , NT - S ( T ) , and ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - S ( T ) . This means that a journal paper that is in the G - S collection will be classified as belonging to this collection , even if it also can be found in the NT - S collection . Similarly , a patent that is first found in the NT - T collection will be classified as belonging to this collection , even if it also belongs to the ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - T collection . We realized that this is not an ideal treatment of the data , but there are no easy alternatives for such overlapping data sets . Table 2 : Overlapping records in the G - S , NT - S and ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - S collections . Number of overlapping records G - S NT - S ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - S G - S - 34 , 427 6 , 168 NT - S 34 , 427 - 2 , 235 ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - S 6 , 618 2 , 235 - Table 3 : Overlapping records in the G - T , NT - T and ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - T collections . Number of overlapping records G - T NT - T ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - T G - T - 77 , 835 10 , 754 NT - T 77 , 835 - 15 , 868 ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - T 10 , 754 15 , 868 - 3 . 2 . Method 3 . 2 . 1 . Cleaning non - patent references of patents Papers in the science collections are identified by their DOIs , whereas patents in the technological collections are identified by their publication numbers . Patents cite other patents , but also cite non - patents . Some of these non - patents are journal publications . To a lesser extent , journal papers also cite patents . Patents in the references of other patents can be easily identified by their publication numbers , while journal papers in the references of other papers can be easily identified by their DOIs . However , this is not true for journal paper references of patents , as well as patent references of journal papers . To highlight the severity of this problem , consider the number of G - T patents with publication code CN ( 68 , 816 ) , which is approximately double that of G - T patents with publication code US ( 34 , 435 ) . The numbers of non - patent citations of the CN and US sub - collections are 40 , 398 and 395 , 513 respectively . However , we recognize only 122 DOIs in the non - patent references of CN patents , but 142 , 770 DOIs in the non - patent references of US patents . We checked and found that this is the result of incomplete details ( in particular the DOIs of journal papers ) in the non - patent references . One of our first tasks is therefore to map these journal citations to their DOIs . We do this by sending each non - patent citation ( less explicit references to DOIs ) as a query request to CrossRef using their Metadata API , and record the most relevant result that CrossRef returns . Naturally , we cannot simply take CrossRef’s answers as the ultimate truth . In this second part , we verify our list of non - patent references against the list of most relevant results returned by CrossRef . We do this verification in four different ways . CrossRef returns the results in JSON 8 ( JavaScript Object Notation ) format , allowing us to easily extract the authors and the titles . First , we compare the full non - patent reference against the combination of all authors and title by computing the Levenshtein edit distance ( Tanaka , 2013 / 2019 ) between them . In some of these non - patent references , the list of authors may be missing or incomplete , or the title may be missing or incomplete . Therefore , we make a second comparison of the full non - patent reference against the combination of first author and title . In these two comparisons , the Levenshtein edit distances are large because the full reference contains more information than just the authors and title . Therefore , in the third comparison we truncate the non - patent reference after the last quotation mark ( this should be at the end of the title ) and compare this truncated result against the combination of all authors and title . Finally , we compare the truncated result against the first author and title . However , the string lengths are different in the different combinations , so it is not fair to directly compare their Levenshtein edit distances . Instead , we compute the ratios of Levenshtein edit distances over the sum of lengths of the two strings being compared , and take the largest ratio to be our figure of merit . That is , if this ratio is small , we are confident that CrossRef has found the correct record . On the other hand , if this ratio is large , then CrossRef has found the wrong record . To determine the threshold for ratios we should accept , we created three test samples of 200 random references whose DOI numbers we know , as shown in Figure 2 . For each reference , we delete everything from ‘DOI’ onwards , and post a query to CrossRef . We then record the smallest Levenshtein ratio between the CrossRef result and the truncated reference , as well as whether the CrossRef DOI is correct . The threshold Levenshtein ratio is determined using Otsu’s algorithm ( Otsu , 1979 ) to be 0 . 281 , as shown in Figure 3 . Figure 2 : Histograms of the number of correct ( blue ) and incorrect ( red ) results from CrossRef for the three test samples , each having 200 random references . 9 Figure 3 : Histogram of results from CrossRef and the Otsu’s threshold of accuracy . The bimodal histogram is expected to be the combination of two distributions , where the distribution with smaller peak corresponds to the correct cases , as observed in Figure 2 . The Otsu’s threshold separates the two classes with minimum variance . 3 . 2 . 2 . Cleaning patent references of journal papers Patent numbers in journal references may not include their regional code ( first two characters , such as US , CN ) or kind codes ( last two characters , such as A1 , B1 ) . To determine whether such patent references are inside our collections , we ignore the kind codes , and check the lengths of their identifying numbers . If the length is less than 4 , the reference is not a patent . For a longer identifying number , we check it against the patent numbers in the G - T , N - T , 2D - T , TMO - T and TMD - T collections , to look for a perfect match . Else , we regard this reference as an Others patent . 3 . 3 . Aggregate Inflow - Outflow Analysis After cleaning the data set , we are now ready to answer the question on how much ROI we are generating through funding investment into graphene research . First , we look at the aggregate level . For the 127 , 546 papers related to graphene published , we count the total number of papers cited , and decide whether these citations are also graphene papers , or nanotube papers , or 2D materials ( including TMO and TMD ) papers , or others ( unrelated to the three class of materials ) . This represents the cumulative total scientific input to date to our scientific understanding of graphene . We also count the number of papers citing these 127 , 546 graphene papers , and again sort them into graphene papers , nanotube papers , 2D materials papers , or others . This represents the cumulative total scientific output to date from our scientific understanding of graphene . We then calculate the average number of papers cited by a graphene paper , the average number of citations received by a graphene paper , as well as the scientific value added ( average number of citations received divided by average number of papers cited ) , taking into consideration which areas are contributing and which other areas are benefiting . We then do the same for the 176 , 193 graphene patents , and count the total number of patents cited ( sorted according to G - T , NT - T , ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - T and Others ) and the total number 10 of patents citing the graphene patents ( sorted according to G - T , NT - T , ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - T and Others ) . These represent the cumulative total technological input to graphene technology to date and the cumulative total technological output from graphene technology to date respectively . By comparing the average number of cited patents to the average number of citing patents , we get a sense of whether graphene in its sum total as a technology is in a disruptive phase or a consolidating phase ( Funk & Owen - Smith , 2017 ) . 3 . 4 . Temporal Analysis of Graphene Science and Technology In calculating the simple scientific value adding , we have neglected the fact that the newer papers are still accruing citations . In fact , even old graphene papers can continue to be cited , and if the citing papers are related to graphene , these will add to the scientific input side of the equation . Therefore , we plot the number of graphene papers published in each year , the average number of references for graphene papers in each year , and the average number of citations of graphene papers in each year . Following this , we break down the graphene paper references and citations into components , depending on which collections they belong to . By building a model of citations based on the average citation profile of graphene papers , we can estimate the level of scientific interest on a year - to - year basis . We then do the same temporal analysis for patents , by plotting the yearly number of graphene patents , the yearly average number of patent references , and the yearly average number of patent citations , as well as how their components change from year to year . We also estimate the level of technological interest in graphene , using the same method for estimating scientific interest . 3 . 5 . Geographical Analysis of Graphene Science and Technology Graphene , as an area of scientific inquiry , does not depend only on time , but also on space . In particular , we would like to look at the geographical features of graphene science and technology , to understand what is happening in the scientific contest between nations ( Cimini , Gabrielli , & Sylos Labini , 2014 ) . 3 . 5 . 1 . Regional credit allocation Unlike patents whose publication numbers include the regional codes of their registration offices , journal articles can be the results of the collaborations of many scientific researchers from different countries . In order to identify the top players in graphene science and technology , we need to assign regional contributions for the 127 , 546 G - S papers published from 1991 to 2017 . We use the method proposed by Shen and Barabási ( Shen & Barabási , 2014 ) , which considers the co - authorship factor in allocating contributions among authors . The philosophy behind this algorithm is that it is not fair to split the credit evenly between all coauthors . Some authors contribute more and others less . Authors who contribute more are expected to write more papers on the same topics . Therefore we have to consider the collection of papers that are cited together frequently with the target paper . The proper credit that we should assign to an author of target paper must then take into account how frequently he / she was cited in the collection , as well as how highly cited individual papers are in this collection . Once this author credit allocation is done , we then proceed to calculate the contributions by different regions by going through all the papers and all the authors , and assign this credits to different regions based on the affiliations of authors . For authors with more than one affiliation , we divide his / her credit evenly between all his / her affiliations . To 11 be fair , we should allocate more credit to an institution an author spends more time at . Unfortunately this information is not readily available . 3 . 5 . 2 . Citations flow We select the six regions with the largest numbers of G - T patents , namely China , US , South Korea , WO , Japan , and EP , and analyze citation flows between them . These regional flows can be calculated easily because the cited patents all contain their respective regional codes . We do not need to check whether the cited patents belong to any of our collections . Suppose the total number of patent references in the G - T patents is 𝑁 , and the numbers of such patent references belonging to the six regions are 𝑛 1 , … , 𝑛 6 . The size of the circle in Figure 11 representing region 𝑖 is proportional to 𝑛 𝑖 . A directed link from node 𝑖 to node 𝑗 means that patents in region 𝑗 cited patents in region 𝑖 . The thickness of this link is proportional to the fraction of region 𝑗 patent references that are region 𝑖 patents . For journal publications , we again select the top six regions ( China , US , South Korea , India , Iran , and Japan ) in terms of number of publications , using the affiliations of the first authors as the regions where the publications come from . Unlike for the case of patents , regional flows of journal citations are difficult to determine precisely from the references , because journal papers do not contain regional codes . More importantly , many papers nowadays are the results of international collaborations . For journal references outside of our collections , even if we know the first author , we do not know his or her affiliation ( s ) . Therefore , we restrict ourselves to journal papers within our collections . The size of circle in Figure 13 representing region 𝑖 is the proportional to the number of journal papers that appear in the references of G - S papers whose first authors are from region 𝑖 . If a first author has multiple affiliations , we split the reference count equally for each affiliation , whichever region it belongs to . A directed link from node 𝑖 to node 𝑗 means that journal papers from region 𝑗 cited journal papers from region 𝑖 . The thickness of this link is proportional to the fraction of region 𝑗 journal references that are region 𝑖 papers . 4 . Results 4 . 1 . Aggregate Inflow - Outflow Analysis As shown in Table 1 , there are 127 , 546 papers related to ‘graphene’ published between 1991 and 2017 , while there are 176 , 193 patents related to ‘graphene’ awarded between 1986 and 2017 . The ratio is 176 , 193 / 127 , 546 = 1 . 38 . This is an indicator for the commercial value ( as measured by number of patents ) of the science ( as contained in the body of published papers ) . To convert this number to an actual estimate of the ROI , grant agencies must make a more precise estimate of the average cost 𝑥 of production of graphene papers , and track the commercialization of patents that come out from these studies , to see the average commercial potential 𝑦 of graphene patents . They should then multiply 𝑦 by 1 . 38 ( because each journal paper ‘generates’ 1 . 38 patents ) , and then divide by 𝑥 , to get the ROI . If this final ratio is less than one , then there is less return on the investment , and funding agency may want to stop funding . However , as we have noted in Section 2 , the ultimate commercial value of a patent or a scientific paper is difficult to estimate . Fortunately , we have other collections that we can compare the graphene number against . For ‘nanotube’ ( using data from 1992 to 2017 ) , we find that the ratio is 1 . 90 , whereas for ‘transparent metal oxide’ ( using data from 1951 to 2017 ) , the ratio is 4 . 17 . This ratio appears to depend sensitively on the research field in question , and can potentially change with time , making a temporal analysis necessary . 12 But before doing the temporal analysis , we know that papers cite other papers , and patents cite other patents . We therefore proceed to do an inflow - outflow analysis , where we expect the inflow to depend on the maturity of the field and constitutes core ‘graphene’ papers that almost all other ‘graphene’ papers will cite . Conversely , we expect the outflow to have to do with impact generated by the field . For example , if in future only graphene papers cite graphene papers , then the impact of graphene research would be very narrow and limited to graphene only . In contrast , if future citations of graphene papers come from outside of the collection of graphene papers , for example in other materials , in engineering , in medicine , then we think of graphene science as having broad impact on many areas of science and technology . For patents , we need a similar interpretation of inflow and outflow . This was provided by Funk and Owen - Smith ( Funk & Owen - Smith , 2017 ) , who call a patent consolidating if all patents that cite it also cite patents cited by the target patent , and destabilizing if all patents that cite the patent do not cite any of the patents cited by the target patent . The natural question to ask then is whether graphene technology is currently in a consolidating or a disrupting phase . In Figure 4 , we show the bowtie diagram for 127 , 546 graphene journal papers , which cited 5 , 312 , 228 references , and were cited by 4 , 122 , 164 papers . At the aggregate level , each graphene paper cites 41 . 6 references , and is cited 32 . 3 times . The ratio 32 . 3 / 41 . 6 = 0 . 78 is an indication of the scientific value of graphene as a research field . Typically , a paper in an emerging field will cite few references in the field , but will be cited many more times as the field grows . Therefore , the ratio of citations / references will be significantly greater than 1 . When we average over the whole field , this ratio will surely drop , but if the field is productive , then many papers in the field will have large citations / references ratio . At this stage of its development , the scientific field produces many papers that can be considered quantum leaps in our knowledge . When this ratio drops below one , many of the papers will not be heavily cited , suggesting that the field is no longer productive , and the typical paper represents only an incremental increase in our scientific knowledge . If we now sort the references into the different collections , we find that 44 . 6 % of the references of graphene papers are G - S papers , 11 . 4 % of these references are NT - S papers , 0 . 9 % of these references are ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - S papers , and the remaining 43 . 0 % are from outside our collections . On the other hand , if we sort the citing papers into the different collections , we find that 57 . 5 % are G - S papers , 5 . 3 % are NT - S papers , 1 . 2 % are ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - S papers , and the remaining 36 . 0 % are from outside our collections . If we look at NT - S papers cited by G - S papers and NT - S papers citing G - S papers , we have the ratio 218 , 475 / 605 , 594 = 0 . 36 . This tells us that as a science , graphene takes more from nanotube than it gives back . In contrast , if we look at ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - S papers cited by and citing G - S papers , we have the ratio 49 , 466 / 47 , 810 = 1 . 03 . Notwithstanding the fact that 2D materials as a field is still emerging , and the keywords are in flux , this suggests that graphene is giving more to 2D materials than it is taking . Finally , we look at Others papers cited by and citing G - S papers , to find the ratio 1 , 483 , 979 / 2 , 284 , 258 = 0 . 65 . Therefore , at the aggregate level , graphene does not contribute much to the growth of scientific research outside the few areas we have already identified . 13 Figure 4 : Bowtie diagram for journal paper citations of the G - S collection . In Figure 5 , we show the bowtie diagram of the 176 , 193 G - T patents , which have 1 , 458 , 760 patent references , and are cited by 416 , 550 patents . On average , each graphene patent cites 8 . 28 patents , and is cited by 2 . 36 patents . The output - input ratio is 0 . 29 . This is an indication of the technological value of graphene , but as with G - S journal papers , it is difficult to understand the significance of 0 . 29 at the aggregate level . If we break the patent references down into collections , 15 . 8 % of these are to G - T patents , 10 . 9 % to NT - T patents , 1 . 8 % to ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - T ( which is reasonable , because level of interest in 2D materials became high later ) , the remaining 71 . 5 % are to patents not in our collections . For the 416 , 550 citing patents , 41 . 5 % are G - T patents , 14 . 1 % are NT - T patents , 0 . 9 % are ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - T patents , and the remaining 43 . 5 % are outside our collections . This tells us that in contrast to graphene science , graphene technology draws inspiration from a broader literature than we had imagined , aggregating technologies developed elsewhere , and also has a broader impact on other technologies . In a previous study , Funk and Owen - Smith ( Funk & Owen - Smith , 2017 ) examined 2 . 9 million US utility patents granted between 1977 and 2005 , and see if they are destabilizing ( producing new technologies ) or consolidating ( integrating existing technologies ) . It would therefore seem that with 416 , 550 patents citing the collection of 176 , 193 G - T patents , which cited 1 , 458 , 760 patents , graphene technology is on average more consolidating than it is innovating . Naturally , to make such a conclusion we would need to check the temporal behaviors of publications , references , and citations . 14 Figure 5 : Bowtie diagram for patent citations of the G - T collection . With the data we collected , it is also possible to examine G - T patents citing G - S papers , as well as G - S papers citing G - T patents . From the perspective of a grant agency , say from Singapore , who has funded the publications of 𝑋 G - S papers , and received in return 𝑌 G - T patents , the investment is worthwhile if the ratio 𝑌 / 𝑋 is good . However , the actual answer may be subtler , as the Singapore G - T patents may not be citing the Singapore G - S papers . It might even be that the latter are cited by Japanese or US G - T patents , in which case it would be difficult to justify Singapore’s investment of taxpayers’ money . To answer this question , we look at Figure 6 ( A ) , to find 278 , 333 G - S papers cited by the G - T patents . Surprisingly , G - T patents cite more NT - S papers ( 15 . 7 % ) than G - S papers ( 14 . 8 % ) . The most surprising result for us is how many papers outside of our science collections are being cited ( 68 . 9 % ) . Now , why do graphene patents cite Others papers ? Could these be papers that are cited by Others patents that the graphene patents also cite , and therefore the patent examiner insisted on including them ? Or could these papers be probable technologies useful to the graphene patents , but are not yet patented ? Instead of answering our initial question , we find ourselves asking even more difficult questions . If a G - T patent cites a patent and also cites a journal paper that is cited by the latter , the patent and journal paper can be said to be correlated , and the G - T patent’s citation of the journal paper is redundant . Conversely , if a G - T patent cites a journal paper that is not cited by its patent references , we say that the journal paper is anti - correlated with the patent references , and represent complementary ideas / technologies not found in the patent references . Since it is not possible to check the correlation between Others papers and Others patents cited by graphene patents , we test this on the NT - S , NT - T collections instead . To do this , 1 , 000 random G - T patents are chosen , in which we find 239 of them citing NT - T patents . In these 239 G - T patents , we find 32 of them having NT - S journal references , out of 77 that contain journal references . We then check for overlap between the NT - S journal references of G - T patents and NT - S journal references of their NT - T patent references . In 19 out of 32 G - T patents with NT - S journal references , there is no overlap between NT - S references . In the remaining 13 G - T patents , the average probability of finding a NT - S journal paper that is cited by a G - T patent and its NT - T patent references is 0 . 6 ± 0 . 4 . Therefore , we find two groups in these 32 G - T patents , a consolidating group ( 13 G - T patents ) that cites journal 15 references of its patent references with high probability , and a disrupting group ( 19 G - T patents ) that cites journal references not cited by its patent references . Figure 6 : Components diagram from Graphene , Nanotube , 2D Material Group – combination of 3 collections : 2D material , Transparent Metal Oxide , Transition Metal Dichalcogenide and Others for ( A ) total papers cited by graphene patents and ( B ) total patents cited by graphene papers . As expected , only 598 G - T patents are cited by G - S papers , as opposed to 278 , 333 G - S papers being cited by G - T patents . We also find 212 NT - T patents cited by the G - S papers , which is not surprising , because this number is less than that for G - T patents . What is more striking are the 3 , 849 patents outside of our collections being cited by G - S papers . Papers citing patents represent a reverse information flow from what we expect ( science to technology ) , so this suggests a reverse information flow into G - S papers , from research area outside of those we have identified . A few examples of these Others patents cited by G - S papers include : • US patent number 3330697 ( M . P . Pechini ( 1967 ) , “Method of preparing lead and alkaline earth titanates and niobates and coating method using the same to form a capacitor” ) is cited by G - S journal paper with DOI number 10 . 1007 / s00339 - 004 - 2884 - 7 ( González , M . , Landa - Cánovas , A . & Hernández , “Pyrolytic and graphitic carbon : pressure induced phases segregated in polycrystalline corundum” , M . Appl . Phys . A ( 2005 ) 81 : 865 ) ; • US patent number 7409759 ( Sewell , H . ( 2008 ) , " Method for making a computer hard drive platen using a nano - plate " ) is cited by G - S journal paper with DOI number 10 . 12989 / SEM . 2017 . 61 . 1 . 065 ( Kiani , Keivan , Gharebaghi , Saeed Asil , & Mehri , Bahman . ( 2017 ) . In - plane and out - of - plane waves in nanoplates immersed in bidirectional magnetic fields . Structural Engineering and Mechanics , 61 ( 1 ) , 65 – 76 ) ; • Japan Patent Kokai , patent number 2008 - 169255 ( Kuramoto N ( 2008 ) “Highly conductive polyaniline having excellent solubility and method for producing the 16 same” ) is cited by G - S journal paper with DOI number 10 . 1007 / s00396 - 015 - 3539 - 2 ( Kuwahara , R . Y . , Oi , T . , Hashimoto , K . et al . , “Easy preparation of graphene - based conducting polymer composite via organogel” , Colloid Polym Sci ( 2015 ) 293 : 1635 ) . 4 . 2 . Temporal Analysis of Graphene Science and Technology At the aggregate level , the picture is worrisome , because whether we are looking at journal publications or patents , the number of citations is smaller than the number of references . If the interest level remains constant over time , we would expect the number of citations to grow proportionally as the number of publications ( and hence the number of references ) . To put it simply , if each graphene publication ( journal or patent ) cites 𝑛 other graphene publications , and the number of graphene publications is 𝑁 , the number of graphene references would be 𝑛𝑁 while the number of graphene citations would be 𝑛𝑁 . This means that the ratio of citations to references would be 1 . Naturally , an aggregate - level analysis is too coarse to check whether interest level is increasing or decreasing with time . The ideal way to check this is to look at publications , references , citations , and other indicators as functions of time . In Figure 7 ( A ) , we show the number of graphene journal publications and patents over the years 2004 to 2017 . From 2004 to 2010 , the yearly number of papers is very close to the yearly number of patents . From 2011 onwards , the yearly number of patents started increasing faster than the yearly number of papers . This is opposite to what is found by Zou et al . , ( Zou et al . , 2018 ) using Chemical Abstracts Service as their source . For the early years ( 2004 , 2005 ) there are more graphene patents than graphene papers . We suspect this may be the result of aggressive tagging by Derwent . Now we have a time - resolved picture of the input . For the time - resolved picture of the output , we could look at the numbers of papers citing G - S papers of various years , and also the numbers of patents citing the G - T patents of various . However , the early G - S papers and G - T patents have more time to accumulate citations compared to the latter G - S papers and G - T patents . Furthermore , the numbers of G - S papers and G - T patents published increase every year . Therefore , it is more meaningful to plot the average number of citations G - S papers ( G - T patents ) published in the various years , to answer the question whether the body of graphene science generating more citations over the years , or is it adding new papers faster ? In Figure 7 ( B ) and Figure 7 ( C ) , we show the average number of journal citations ( including those outside of our collections ) per paper for each year in the G - S collection , and the average number of patent citations ( including those outside of our collections ) per patent for each year in the G - T collection . We find a monotonic decrease over time of the average number of journal citations per paper . In contrast , the average number of patent citations per patent started out disparately smaller than the journal counterpart in 2004 , but become nearly equal in 2017 . In general , every G - S paper is generating fewer citations as time goes on . There are two possible reasons for this : ( 1 ) a paper published later has less time to accumulate citations , ( 2 ) a paper published later is less important on average to the future of the field . In contrast , the average citation of a G - T patent is roughly constant until about 2011 / 2012 , when it starts to decrease . In the Discussion section , we simulate G - S journal publications and citations , as well as G - T patents publications and citations up to 2021 using the extrapolated yearly publications curve and the citation profile ( the proportions of references of a typical paper , published 𝑡 years before the paper itself ) , and show that this decline is likely to be real , and not an artifact of the forward looking nature of the indicator . In fact , by calculating the ratio of the empirical average 17 number of citations per paper and the simulated average number of citations , we argue that scientific interest in graphene increased from 2004 to 2010 , and decreased thereafter . Figure 7 : Distribution over time ( 2004 to 2017 ) in ( A ) Number of Graphene journals and patents publications ; ( B ) Average journal citing counts of G - S collection ; ( C ) Average patent citing counts of G - T collection ; ( D ) and ( E ) Average journal and patent references of G - S and G - T records . In Figure 7 ( D ) , we see the average number of journal articles cited by G - S papers increasing over the years . These include not only G - S papers , but also NT - S papers , and others . In contrast , the average number of patents ( including patents from G - T , NT - T , 2D - T , TMO - T , TMD - T and others ) cited by G - T patents is roughly constant over time . We also look at the average number of journal articles cited by G - T patents , and the average number of patents cited by G - S papers ( shown magnified in Figure 7 ( E ) ) , and find that these are also roughly constant over time . Figure 8 : Citations components distributions of G - S collection from Graphene , Nanotube , 2D Material Group and Others categories in average number for ( A ) cited papers , ( B ) cited patents and ( C ) citing papers . 18 In Figure 8 ( A ) , we break up the references of G - S papers into the collections . Those references that are part of the G - S , NT - S , ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - S collections are shown in red , orange , and green respectively . Other references that are outside these collections are shown in blue . In the early years , there are more NT - S references than G - S references in G - S papers , but in G - S papers published after 2007 there are more G - S references than NT - S references . We do not know what the Others references are , but the number of G - S references started lower than Others references in 2004 , overtakes the Others references in 2008 , and went below the Others references in 2015 . This suggests that there is a ‘Golden Era’ for graphene research between 2008 and 2015 . There are no surges in this graph for 2D Materials , which is supposedly the next hot thing . Intriguingly , we see in Figure 8 ( B ) that most of the patent references of G - S papers are outside of our collections . From Figure 8 ( C ) , we see that most of the journal papers citing papers in G - S collection are themselves from the G - S collection . Surprisingly , the next most common category of journal papers citing G - S papers are from outside of our collections , instead of journal papers from the NT - S collection ( which comes in third ) , or journal papers from the ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - S collection ( which come in last ) . For each collection , the average number of papers citing the G - S collection is decreasing rapidly over time . Even if we explain this in terms of the rapid growth in the number of G - S papers over the years , a typical G - S paper will still be cited less . In Figure 9 ( A ) , we break up the patent references of our G - T patents into the various collections . Most of these patent references are outside of our collections ( Others ) , over all the years we have data on . In fact , up till 2012 , the second most common patent references of the G - T patents are from the NT - T collection , before G - T patents take over as the second most common patent references of G - T patents . Figure 9 ( B ) shows the distribution of papers cited by G - T patents . Again , the dominant component is Others and the second most dominant component is NT - S . The NT - S component peaks in 2008 , while the Others component peaks in 2010 . G - S papers overtake NT - S papers as the second most prominent component in 2013 . Figure 9 : Citations components distributions of G - T collection from Graphene , Nanotube , 2D Material Group and Others categories in average number for ( A ) cited patents , ( B ) cited papers and ( C ) citing patents . 19 In Figure 9 ( C ) we see that in 2004 , most of the patent citations to G - T patents come from NT - T patents , follow by Others patents . The shares of NT - T and Others patents decrease with time , and in 2008 the average number of G - T patents citing G - T patents become greater than those from NT - T and Others . Unlike clear signs from the journal references of a ‘Golden Era’ in graphene science from 2008 to 2015 , the signs of a similar ‘Golden Era’ in graphene technology can only be seen from the patent citations . The start of this technological ‘Golden Era’ is also 2008 , but because citations can change over time we cannot be sure it has ended based on data up to 2017 . 4 . 3 . Geographical Distribution ( Patents vs Papers ) Finally , we look at how graphene science and technology is generated in different geographical regions of the world . In Figure 10 , we show the cartogram for total journal credits in the G - S collection , using the algorithm by Gastner and Newman ( Gastner & Newman , 2004 ) . We see that China is the largest source of graphene papers over the period 1991 to 2017 . Other important regions include the US , Taiwan , Japan , Korea , Europe and India . In this figure , the contributions from different regions are shown clearly , and they are not equal . In comparison , for graphene technology , we see from Figure 11 that there are four major players : China , US , Korea , Japan . In graphene science , Europe is also an important player , but in this figure it is not enlarged because we cannot assign patent credits to individual European countries . Next , we examine the geographical patterns in patent - patent citations . In Figure 12 , we see that US , China , Korea , Japan patents cite mostly patents from their own regions . On the other hand , WPO and EPO patents cite mostly US patents . Beyond regional self - citations , we find Korean patents citing more Japan patents than US and China patents . In Table 4 , we show that this insular citation pattern is very likely due to the languages used in different patent 20 offices Figure 10 : Cartogram for total journal credits in the G - S collection , showing the most important contributing regions enlarged relative to their natural sizes . 21 Figure 11 : Cartogram of the total number of published patents in the G - T collection , showing the most important contributing regions enlarged relative to their natural sizes . Table 4 : The languages of patents filed in the various regional patent offices as well as the World Intellectual Property Organization ( WO ) . ZH EN KO JA DE FR ES PT RU XX CN 68 , 815 1 - - - - - - - - US - 34 , 435 - - - - - - - - KR - - 19 , 919 - - - - - - - WO 926 10 , 523 1 , 438 2 , 339 283 401 56 12 9 1 JP - 3 - 15 , 161 - - - - - - EP - 8 , 037 - - 358 390 - - - - 22 Figure 12 : Patent citation flow of top six regional indices in total number of published G - T patents . The picture shown in Figure 13 for journal - journal citations is different . Instead of US patents attracting the most patent citations , we now have Chinese journal papers attracting the most journal citations . Moreover , the journal citation patterns have a decidedly more global character . Instead of the regions predominantly citing themselves for patents , we see Chinese journal papers are cited strongly by South Korean , Indian , and Iranian journal papers , and also less strongly by US and Japanese journal papers . Similarly , US journal papers are cited strongly by South Korean , Indian , and Japanese journal papers , and also less strongly by Chinese and Iranian journal papers . Papers from other four regions are not strongly cited . 23 Figure 13 : Paper citation flow of top six regional indices in total G - S papers credits from the first author’s contribution . We also examine the geographical distributions of journal paper references of G - T patents , for journal papers within our collections in Figure 14 . For consistency , we consider patents from US , China , South Korea , and Japan because there are no journal papers that we can attribute to EP and WO . The patents from all four regions are more likely to cite journal papers from themselves , but Chinese and US journal papers are also highly cited by South Korean and Japanese patents . We do not examine patent references of G - S journal papers because there are simply too few of these . Finally , we look at the competition between regions for graphene science and technology ( Cimini et al . , 2014 ) . In Figure 15 we show the rankings of top ten regions in terms of journal publications from 1991 to 2017 . The Web of Science assigns the keyword ‘graphene’ to journal publications as early as 1991 , even though graphene became a hot topic only after 2004 . For the pre - 2004 journal publications , France appears to be the pioneer and led for 1991 and 1992 , before US became the scientific leader . For the rest of period up to 2004 , the leader 24 of graphene science was essentially a contest between US and Japan . France remained in the top six until 2003 , then fell out of top ten in 2004 , and came back briefly within the top ten from 2005 to 2010 , and from 2011 onwards it became permanently outside of top ten . The other region that saw its fortune ebbed is Japan . It is one of the earliest regions to pay attention graphene science , after a false start became one of the top two regions in graphene science between 1999 and 2008 . After 2008 the scientific output of Japan in the area of graphene showed a steady decline . Graphene research in China started later , in 1996 , had a period of ups and downs , but has seen a remarkable rise starting in 2006 . It overtook US as the leader in Graphene science in 2011 . South Korea and India , both of which dabbled in graphene science as early as 1997 and 1994 respectively , started their ascendances in 2008 and 2009 , to become No . 4 and No . 3 . Figure 14 : Paper citation flow of top 6 regional indices in total number of published G - T patents . In contrast , the top ten regions for graphene technology are substantially different . According to Derwent’s classification , the first graphene patent was published in 1986 in China . China was the leader of graphene technology up until year 2000 , when it was displaced by Japan and 25 US . China regained this leadership position in 2012 , leading the runner up US by a big margin . Japan’s position stared declining steadily from 2007 . Contrast this to Japan’s position in graphene science , which started to declining to 2004 . The only clear rise is South Korea in 2008 . Figure 15 : Top 10 regions and countries in journal credits every year in the G - S collection . Figure 16 : Top 10 regions and countries in number of patents publications every year in G - T collection . 5 . Discussion In Figures 7 , 8 and 9 , we plotted yearly quantities ( for example , the yearly numbers of publications ) that would no longer change with time , as well as forward - looking quantities like the average number of citations for journal papers and patents published in a given year . These average numbers of citations are calculated using the total number of citations 26 accumulated up till 2017 ( downloaded in 2018 ) . The total number of citations will continue to increase with each passing year . Therefore , we have to be extra careful interpreting features seen in the average citation curves . The most important feature we care about in these curves is the decreasing trend . In other words , can the decrease we observe be explained by papers published in later years having less time to accumulate citations ? Or is this decrease a result of scientists losing interest in the research field ? Figure 17 : Citation profiles of ( A ) G - S journal papers and ( B ) G - T patents , showing the proportions of references from different years prior to their publications . We show the median curve as a solid line , while the shaded region is bounded by the 25 th and 75 th percentile curves . We limit the number of years prior to publications to 25 years , so that proportions add up to 90 % of all references . We noticed there exists patents references that are published after the patent citing them , but we do not know all the reasons why these exist . To discriminate between these two possibilities , we performed a simple simulation , based on the citation profiles of G - S papers and G - T patents shown in Figure 17 . These citation profiles are relatively stable over time , and also do not vary much from research fields to research fields ( Liu , Nanetti , & Cheong , 2017 ) . First , we predicted how many journal and patent publications there will be from 2018 to 2021 , by extrapolating the publication numbers from 2004 to 2017 . We do this by assuming that the publication numbers for G - S and G - T are still in the exponential growth phase , and perform a linear regression ( Tanagra , 2017 ) of the logarithms of publication numbers against the years , to obtain red dashed curves shown in Figures 18 ( A ) , ( C ) . From the linear regression , we also obtained the 95 % confidence intervals shown as red shaded regions shown in Figures 18 ( A ) , ( C ) . Second , we assume each of these ‘future’ publications cite the same average number of references as publications between 2004 and 2017 . We also assume that the proportions of ‘future’ references that are graphene publications are the same as those shown in Figures 4 and 5 . Under these assumptions we generated a pool of aggregated ‘future’ graphene references for 2018 , by using the predicted number of graphene publications in 2018 , or the lowest and highest numbers of graphene publications according to the confidence interval . We then assign them to publication years 2017 , 2016 , … 2004 according to the 25 % , 50 % , or 75 % citation profiles shown in Figure 17 . In this way , we obtain a distribution for the 2018 contribution to our ‘future’ citations . We do the same thing for the pools of aggregated ‘future’ graphene references generated in 2019 , 27 2020 , 2021 and combine them to form the shaded region shown in Figures 18 ( B ) , ( D ) . This is where the average citation curves could lie at the end of 2021 . Figure 18 : ( A ) The number of G - T patents published from 2004 to 2017 ( solid curve ) . Yang et al . observe that the G - T patents was in a growth phase from 2011 to 2017 ( Yang , Yu , & Liu , 2018 ) so we predicted the numbers ( dashed curve ) and uncertainties ( shaded region ) of G - T patents from 2018 to 2021 using the exponential growth formula ( Ernst , 1997 ) . ( B ) The average number of citations per G - T patent from within the G - T collection from 2004 to 2017 computed using patent records up till 2017 ( solid curve ) , and the shaded region represents the possible average number of citations per G - T patent with additional simulated contributions between 2018 and 2021 . ( C ) The number of G - S journal papers published from 2004 to 2017 ( solid curve ) . We use the same exponential extrapolation method to predict the numbers ( dashed curve ) and uncertainties ( shaded region ) of G - S journal papers from 2018 to 2021 . ( D ) The average number of citations per G - S journal papers from within the G - S collection from 2004 to 2017 computed using bibliographic records up till 2017 ( solid curve ) , and the shaded region represents the possible average number of citations per G - S journal papers with additional simulated contributions between 2018 and 2021 . In Figure 18 ( B ) , we see that with citations up till 2017 , the average number of citations per G - T patent is rough constant between 2004 and 2008 , peaked at 2009 , and thereafter decreases . With the simulated citations up to 2021 , we see that while the average number of citations of G - T patent is still roughly constant , the peak has shifted to 2008 . Even though we cannot say much about more recent years , the decreasing trend from 2008 to 2012 in the average number of citations per G - T patent is likely to be real . This is another indication that golden age of graphene technology is over , and interest in it is declining . In Figure 18 ( D ) , we see that the average number of citations per G - S journal paper start declining from 2004 onwards . For G - S journal papers , the signature of golden era is seen from the references instead of from the citations . With the collections we have , we can also explore the cross - sectional characteristics of these citations . In Figure 19 , we show the proportions of references from the G - S , NT - S , ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - S collections that are themselves from these collections . As expected , close to 50 % of the references of G - S journal papers are from G - S collection . Surprisingly , references of NT - S journal papers that are from the NT - S collection make up only 34 % of all 28 references , while only 6 % of references of ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - S journal papers are from this same collection . For the latter , we understand that 2D materials is a growing field of research with a relatively small literature base to cite from . For the former , we suspect the low intra - collection referencing is due to dwindling interest in nanotube research . Figure 19 : References of ( left ) G - S , ( middle ) NT - S , ( right ) ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - S journal publications sorted according to which collections they come from . Figure 20 : Citation profiles of ( left ) G - S , ( middle ) NT - S , ( right ) ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - S collections . In this figure , the median is shown as solid line , and the shaded region is between 25 % and 75 % percentile . 29 Figure 21 : ( A ) The average number of citations per G - S journal paper between 2004 and 2017 , summing contributions from the G - S , NT - S , ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - S collections . ( B ) The expected average number of citations per G - S journal paper between 2004 and 2017 , based on the numbers of G - S , NT - S , ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - S journal papers published each year , the citation profiles shown in Figure 20 and proportions of references that are G - S journal papers shown in Figure 19 . ( C ) The ratio between the actual and expected average number of citations per G - S journal paper . This ratio represents the level of interest in graphene science in each of years between 2004 and 2017 . From the three collections , we also obtain in Figure 20 their citation profiles — important ingredients for simulating the average citation curve . The shapes of all three profiles are highly similar , and they all peak at 2 years prior to publication of the citing paper . In Figure 21 ( A ) , we show the actual average number of citations per G - S journal paper between 2004 and 2017 . This has a strong decreasing trend , but the decrease may or may not be explainable in terms of later G - S journal papers having shorter times to accumulate citations . To check this , we computed the expected average number of citations per G - S journal paper shown in Figure 21 ( B ) , by simulating the proportions of references of G - S , NT - S , and ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - S journal papers by years and by collections , and combining for each year citations of the G - S collection contributed by all collections . A quick visual inspection tells us that these two curves ( actual and expected ) are not the same . The ratio between the actual and expected represents a quantitative measure of the level of interest scientists have in graphene over the years . The interest level rose in the early years , reached a peak in 2010 , and has since been on the decline . This is consistent with our discovery of ‘Golden Eras’ in graphene science that we have reported earlier in this paper . Doing the same analysis for G - T patents , we make use of the proportions of references from the various collections ( Figure 22 ) , the citation profiles for patents from the various collections ( Figure 23 ) , and the numbers of patent publications from 2004 to 2017 in the various collections . In Figure 24 ( A ) , apart from a brief dip in 2007 and 2008 , the actual average number of citations per G - T patent decreases monotonically till 2017 . As was the case for graphene science , this decrease may or may not be due to a decrease in interest . To discriminate between these two scenarios , we simulated the expected average number of citations per G - T patent ( Figure 24 ( B ) ) , and calculate the ratio of actual over expected ( Figure 24 ( C ) ) . From 2004 to 2007 , the interest in graphene technology dropped slightly , before 30 rising strongly again . This strong rise ended in 2012 and the interest level in graphene technology has been on the decline since . We stress here that while the actual and expected average number of citations per G - T patent are both forward looking quantities , and may both change as more citations become available , the ratio which indicates the level of technological interest is a point quantity , and is not expected to change as more citations become available . Figure 22 : References of ( left ) G - T , ( middle ) NT - T , ( right ) ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - T patents sorted according to which collections they come from . Figure 23 : Citation profiles of ( left ) G - T , ( middle ) NT - T , ( right ) ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - T collections . In this figure , the median is shown as solid line , and the shaded region is between 25 % and 75 % percentile . 31 Figure 24 : ( A ) The average number of citations per G - T patent between 2004 and 2017 , summing contributions from the G - T , NT - T , ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - T collections . ( B ) The expected average number of citations per G - T patent between 2004 and 2017 , based on the numbers of G - T , NT - T , ( 2D + TMO + TMD ) - T patents published each year , the citation profiles shown in Figure 23 , and proportions of references that are G - T patents shown in Figure 22 . ( C ) The ratio between the actual and expected average number of citations per G - T patent . This ratio represents the level of interest in graphene technology in each of years between 2004 and 2017 . 6 . Conclusions In this paper , we analyzed the collections of journal publications and patents related to graphene from three perspectives : aggregate , temporal dynamics , and geographical distribution . The journal collection is our proxy for graphene science ( G - S ) , whereas patent collection is our proxy for graphene technology ( G - T ) . We wished to understand graphene science and graphene technology in terms of input and output . At the aggregate level , we see G - S journal publications citing mostly G - S journal publications , although there is also significant fraction of other journal publications been cited . Most of the journal publications citing G - S journal publications are also from this same collection , meaning that G - S draws inspiration mostly from within G - S , and the impact of graphene science is limited to within graphene science , at least up to 2017 . In contrast only about 16 % of the patent references of G - T patents are from the G - T collection . The majority of these patent references are from outside of G - T . However , 42 % of patents citing the G - T patents are themselves G - T patents . This tells us that G - T absorbs knowhow from a very broad technological field beyond G - T itself , but its impact is still somewhat limited to G - T . From the temporal dynamics perspective , the numbers of G - S journal publications and G - T patents are increasing strongly since 2004 . The number of G - S journal publications was comparable to the number of G - T patents in the beginning , but starting 2011 the yearly number of G - T patents increases more rapidly than the yearly number of G - S journal publications . By breaking down the references of G - S journal publications into the various components , we see G - S journal publications citing more G - S journal publications than other collections between 2008 and 2015 . Similarly , by sorting the patents citing G - T patents into the various collections , we find that G - T patents were cited by mostly G - T patents only 32 between 2009 and 2012 . This suggests that there is a ‘golden era’ in G - S between 2008 and 2015 , and a ‘golden era’ in G - T between 2009 and 2012 . Evidence for these ‘golden eras’ can also be seen from the ratios of actual over expected average numbers of citations per publication ( G - S or G - T ) , which shows a strong peak in 2010 and 2012 respectively . We post a caveat here : in computing the ratios of actual over expected average number of citations per publications , we have restricted ourselves to the graphene , nanotube , and 2D - material collections . However , for another collection that we may have missed to have a strong impact on the ratio computed , this other research field must demonstrate an interest in graphene that is stronger than the interest from the graphene itself . We are not aware of the existence of such field . Finally , from the geographical distribution perspective , we see that China , US , South Korea , India , Iran , and Japan are the top six regions in graphene science , while China , US , South Korea , WPO , Japan and EPO are the top six patent offices in graphene technology . The differences between science and technology extend into their citation patterns : most patents cite other patents from same regional patent offices except for EPO and WPO , whose patents cite mostly US patents . We show that this is likely due to the languages used by the different patent offices . In contrast , G - S journal papers from various regions cited G - S journal papers from China and US , the two clear leaders in graphene science . We also tracked the scientific and technological rankings of the top ten regions over time , and found that France , an early scientific pioneer of graphene , fall out of top ten permanently in 2011 , whereas regions like China , South Korea , and India rose strongly in 2006 , 2008 , and 2009 respectively . For graphene technology , China was the leader in graphene technology until 2000 , when it was displaced by Japan and US , before regaining this leader position in 2012 . But while US remained firmly behind China , Japan was displaced by South Korea in 2013 . The approach we described in this paper can also be used to test other hot research topics , like quantum technology or artificial intelligence , to see if they can stand up to this level of scrutiny . Acknowledgement This research is supported by the Singapore Ministry of Education Academic Research Fund , under the grant number MOE2017 - T2 - 2 - 075 . We thank Clarivate Analytics for providing us with a complimentary Derwent Innovation account to collect the patent data used in this paper . References Auranen , O . , & Nieminen , M . ( 2010 ) . University research funding and publication performance—An international comparison . Research Policy , 39 ( 6 ) , 822 – 834 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2010 . 03 . 003 Avouris , P . , & Dimitrakopoulos , C . ( 2012 ) . Graphene : synthesis and applications . Materials Today , 15 ( 3 ) , 86 – 97 . Carpenter , M . P . , Cooper , M . , & Narin , F . ( 1980 ) . Linkage between basic research literature and patents . Research Management , 23 ( 2 ) , 30 – 35 . Centre for Advanced 2D Materials . ( n . d . ) . Retrieved July 26 , 2019 , from https : / / graphene . nus . edu . sg / 33 China No 1 in world patent applications for graphene tech - Chinadaily . com . cn . ( n . d . ) . Retrieved July 31 , 2019 , from http : / / www . chinadaily . com . cn / cndy / 2018 - 02 / 01 / content _ 35623375 . htm Cimini , G . , Gabrielli , A . , & Sylos Labini , F . ( 2014 ) . The Scientific Competitiveness of Nations . PLOS ONE , 9 ( 12 ) , e113470 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0113470 CORDIS | European Commission . ( n . d . ) . Retrieved July 26 , 2019 , from https : / / cordis . europa . eu / Cutler , R . S . ( 1987 ) . Patents resulting from NSF’s engineering program . World Patent Information , 9 ( 1 ) , 38 – 42 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0172 - 2190 ( 87 ) 90193 - 1 Derwent Innovation . ( n . d . ) . Retrieved August 27 , 2019 , from Derwent website : https : / / clarivate . com / derwent / solutions / derwent - innovation / Digital Trends . ( n . d . ) . Retrieved July 26 , 2019 , from https : / / www . digitaltrends . com / cool - tech / what - is - graphene / Ernst , H . ( 1997 ) . The use of patent data for technological forecasting : the diffusion of CNC - technology in the machine tool industry . Small Business Economics , 9 ( 4 ) , 361 – 381 . Funk , R . J . , & Owen - Smith , J . ( 2017 ) . A Dynamic Network Measure of Technological Change . Management Science , 63 ( 3 ) , 791 – 817 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 2015 . 2366 Gastner , M . T . , & Newman , M . E . J . ( 2004 ) . Diffusion - based method for producing density - equalizing maps . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 101 ( 20 ) , 7499 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0400280101 Graphene Flagship | Graphene Flagship . ( n . d . ) . Retrieved July 26 , 2019 , from http : / / graphene - flagship . eu / Graphene Market Analysis by Size , Price , Demand , Growth | Industry Report 2019 - 2025 . ( n . d . ) . Retrieved July 31 , 2019 , from https : / / www . adroitmarketresearch . com / industry - reports / graphene - market Griliches , Z . ( 1990 ) . Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators : A Survey . Journal of Economic Literature , 28 ( 4 ) , 1661 – 1707 . Retrieved from JSTOR . Harhoff , D . , Scherer , F . M . , & Vopel , K . ( 2003 ) . Citations , family size , opposition and the value of patent rights . Research Policy , 32 ( 8 ) , 1343 – 1363 . Lanjouw , J . O . , & Schankerman , M . A . ( 1998 ) . Patent Suits : Do They Distort Research Incentives ? Leydesdorff , L . , & Wagner , C . ( 2009 ) . Macro - level indicators of the relations between research funding and research output . Journal of Informetrics , 3 ( 4 ) , 353 – 362 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . joi . 2009 . 05 . 005 Liu , W . , Nanetti , A . , & Cheong , S . A . ( 2017 ) . Knowledge evolution in physics research : An analysis of bibliographic coupling networks . PLOS ONE , 12 ( 9 ) , e0184821 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0184821 Matutes , C . , Regibeau , P . , & Rockett , K . ( 1996 ) . Optimal patent design and the diffusion of innovations . The RAND Journal of Economics , 27 ( 1 ) , 60 . Morgan , R . P . , Kruytbosch , C . , & Kannankutty , N . ( 2001 ) . Patenting and invention activity of US scientists and engineers in the academic sector : comparisons with industry . The Journal of Technology Transfer , 26 ( 1 – 2 ) , 173 – 183 . National Science & Technology Information Service ( NTIS ) . ( n . d . ) . Retrieved July 26 , 2019 , from https : / / www . ntis . go . kr / en / GpIndex . do Nordhaus , W . D . ( 1967 ) . The optimal life of a patent . Cowles Foundation for Research in Economics , Yale University . Novoselov , K . S . , Geim , A . K . , Morozov , S . V . , Jiang , D . , Zhang , Y . , Dubonos , S . V . , … Firsov , A . A . ( 2004 ) . Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon films . Science , 306 ( 5696 ) , 666 – 669 . 34 NSF - National Science Foundation . ( n . d . ) . Retrieved July 26 , 2019 , from https : / / www . nsf . gov / Otsu , N . ( 1979 ) . A threshold selection method from gray - level histograms . IEEE Transactions on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics , 9 ( 1 ) , 62 – 66 . Palacios , T . ( 2011 ) . Graphene electronics : thinking outside the silicon box . Nature Nanotechnology , 6 ( 8 ) , 464 . Putnam , J . D . ( 1997 ) . The value of international patent rights . Rao , C . emsp14N emsp14R , Sood , A . emsp14K , Subrahmanyam , K . emsp14S , & Govindaraj , A . ( 2009 ) . Graphene : the new two ‐ dimensional nanomaterial . Angewandte Chemie International Edition , 48 ( 42 ) , 7752 – 7777 . Reitzig , M . ( 2003 ) . What determines patent value ? : Insights from the semiconductor industry . Research Policy , 32 ( 1 ) , 13 – 26 . Reitzig , M . ( 2004 ) . Improving patent valuations for management purposes—validating new indicators by analyzing application rationales . Research Policy , 33 ( 6 – 7 ) , 939 – 957 . Rossman , J . , & Sanders , B . S . ( 1957 ) . The patent utilization study . Pat . Trademark & Copy . J . Res . & Ed . , 1 , 74 . Sanders , B . S . , Rossman , J . , & Harris , L . J . ( 1958 ) . The economic impact of patents . Pat . Trademark & Copy . J . Res . & Ed . , 2 , 340 . Shen , H . - W . , & Barabási , A . - L . ( 2014 ) . Collective credit allocation in science . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 111 ( 34 ) , 12325 – 12330 . South Korea Funds Graphene Commercialization – NextBigFuture . com . ( n . d . ) . Retrieved July 26 , 2019 , from https : / / www . nextbigfuture . com / 2012 / 05 / south - korea - funds - graphene . html Svensson , R . ( 2007 ) . Commercialization of patents and external financing during the R & D phase . Research Policy , 36 ( 7 ) , 1052 – 1069 . Tanagra . ( 2017 , October 9 ) . Tanagra - Data Mining and Data Science Tutorials : Regression analysis in Python . Retrieved August 27 , 2019 , from Tanagra - Data Mining and Data Science Tutorials website : http : / / data - mining - tutorials . blogspot . com / 2017 / 10 / regression - analysis - in - python . html Tanaka , H . ( 2019 ) . Fast implementation of the edit distance ( Levenshtein distance ) : aflc / editdistance [ C + + ] . Retrieved from https : / / github . com / aflc / editdistance ( Original work published 2013 ) TECHNOLOGIST . ( 2014 , July 7 ) . Retrieved July 26 , 2019 , from TECHNOLOGIST | INNOVATION . EXPLAINED . website : https : / / www . technologist . eu / here - comes - the - graphene - revolution / The Nobel Prize in Physics 2010 . ( n . d . ) . Retrieved July 26 , 2019 , from NobelPrize . org website : https : / / www . nobelprize . org / prizes / physics / 2010 / press - release Tong , X . , & Frame , J . D . ( 1994 ) . Measuring national technological performance with patent claims data . Research Policy , 23 ( 2 ) , 133 – 141 . Trajtenberg , M . ( 1990 ) . A penny for your quotes : patent citations and the value of innovations . The Rand Journal of Economics , 172 – 187 . Web of Science . ( n . d . ) . Retrieved from https : / / www . webofknowledge . com Webster , E . , & Jensen , P . H . ( 2011 ) . Do patents matter for commercialization ? The Journal of Law and Economics , 54 ( 2 ) , 431 – 453 . Wu , Y . , Welch , E . W . , & Huang , W . - L . ( 2015 ) . Commercialization of university inventions : Individual and institutional factors affecting licensing of university patents . Technovation , 36 , 12 – 25 . Yang , X . , Yu , X . , & Liu , X . ( 2018 ) . Obtaining a Sustainable Competitive Advantage from Patent Information : A Patent Analysis of the Graphene Industry . Sustainability , 10 ( 12 ) , 4800 . 35 Zhi , Q . , & Meng , T . ( 2016 ) . Funding allocation , inequality , and scientific research output : an empirical study based on the life science sector of Natural Science Foundation of China . Scientometrics , 106 ( 2 ) , 603 – 628 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11192 - 015 - 1773 - 5 Zou , L . , Wang , L . , Wu , Y . , Ma , C . , Yu , S . , & Liu , X . ( 2018 ) . Trends Analysis of Graphene Research and Development . Journal of Data and Information Science , 3 ( 1 ) . Retrieved from https : / / content . sciendo . com / view / journals / jdis / 3 / 1 / article - p82 . xml