Natural Language Processing in - and - for Design Research L Siddharth * a , Lucienne T . M . Blessing a , Jianxi Luo a a Engineering Product Development , Singapore University of Technology and Design , 8 , Somapah Road , Singapore – 487372 Abstract We review the scholarly contributions that utilise Natural Language Processing ( NLP ) techniques to support the design process . Using a heuristic approach , we gathered 223 articles that are published in 32 journals within the period 1991 - present . We present state - of - the - art NLP in - and - for design research by reviewing these articles according to the type of natural language text sources : internal reports , design concepts , discourse transcripts , technical publications , consumer opinions , and others . Upon summarizing and identifying the gaps in these contributions , we utilise an existing design innovation framework to identify the applications that are currently being supported by NLP . We then propose a few methodological and theoretical directions for future NLP in - and - for design research . * Corresponding author . Email : siddharth _ l @ mymail . sutd . edu . sg , siddharthl @ iitrpr . ac . in , siddharthl . iitrpr . sutd @ gmail . com 1 . Introduction Several natural language schemes like ontologies [ 1 ] , controlled natural language descriptions [ 2 ] , documentation templates [ 3 ] , argumentation approaches [ 4 ] , artefact representations [ 5 ] , process models [ 6 ] , and function structures [ 7 ] etc . , have been adopted in design research to envisage , encode , evaluate , and enhance the design process . While these schemes have significantly impacted the development of several knowledge - based applications in design research and practice , it was not until the development of computational ( e . g . , Graphical Processing Units ( GPUs ) , cloud computing services ) and methodological ( e . g . , NLTK 1 , WordNet 2 ) infrastructures that these schemes were popularly utilised to process unstructured natural language text data and extract design knowledge from these . These infrastructures have led to the evolution of what is currently understood and recognized as a family of Natural Language Processing ( NLP ) techniques . A typical NLP methodology converts a text into a set of tokens such as meaningful terms , phrases , and sentences that are often embedded as vectors for applying these to standard NLP tasks like similarity measurement , topic extraction , clustering , classification , entity recognition , relation extraction , and sentiment analysis etc . These tasks primarily rely upon prescriptive language tools ( e . g . , Stanford Dependency Parser 3 ) , lexicon ( e . g . , ANEW 4 ) , and descriptive language models ( e . g . , BERT 5 ) . The ability of NLP methodologies to process unstructured text opens several opportunities like topic discovery [ 8 ] , ontology extraction [ 9 ] , document structuring [ 10 ] , search summarisation [ 11 ] , keyword recommendation [ 12 ] , text generation [ 13 ] etc . , which enable design scholars and practitioners to support knowledge reuse [ 14 ] , needs elicitation [ 15 ] , biomimicry [ 16 ] , [ 17 ] , emotion - driven design [ 18 ] etc . , in the design process . NLP has therefore become an imperative strand of design research , where the scholars have extensively proposed NLP - based tools , frameworks , and methodologies that are aimed to assist the participants in the 1 Natural Language Toolkit - https : / / www . nltk . org / 2 http : / / wordnetweb . princeton . edu / perl / webwn 3 http : / / nlp . stanford . edu : 8080 / parser / 4 Affective Norms for English Words – https : / / pdodds . w3 . uvm . edu / teaching / courses / 2009 - 08UVM - 300 / docs / others / everything / bradley1999a . pdf 5 Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers – https : / / github . com / google - research / bert design process , who otherwise often rely upon organisational history and personal knowledge to make important decisions , e . g . , choosing a lubricant for shaft interface . In this article , we review scholarly contributions that have applied as well as developed NLP techniques to process unstructured natural language text and thereby support the design process . Several motivations have led to the effort of reviewing such contributions . 1 . To identify the methodological advancements that are necessary to bolster the performances of future NLP applications in - and - for design . For instance , the performances of Parts - of - Speech ( POS ) Tagger and Named Entity Recognition ( NER ) require significant improvement to process design documents . We have listed various possibilities of such methodological directions in Section 4 . 2 . 2 . To enhance theoretical understanding of the nature and role of natural language text in the design process . For example , it is still unclear as to which elements of design knowledge are necessary to be present in an artefact description so that it qualifies as adequate . We have asked several open questions along with necessary discussion to highlight such theoretical directions in Section 4 . 3 . 3 . To summarize a large body of NLP contributions into a single source . A variety of NLP applications to the design process are reported in journals outside the agreed scope of design research . Reviewing and summarizing such contributions in this article could therefore be of importance . We have reviewed the contributions according to the type of text source in Section 3 . 4 . To create an NLP guide for developing applications to support the design process . For example , design methods like creating activity diagrams could be significantly benefited by NLP methodologies . We have indicated such cases in Section 4 . 1 using a design innovation process framework . In line with the motivations described above , we adopt a heuristic approach ( Section 2 and APPENDIX I ) to retrieve 223 articles encompassing 32 academic journals . We review these articles in Section 3 according to the types of text sources and discuss these in Section 4 regarding applications and future directions . 2 . Methodology To retrieve the articles for our review , we use the Web of Science 6 portal , where we heuristically search the titles , abstracts , and topics using a tentative set of keywords within design journals . Upon carrying out a frequency - based analysis of the preliminary results , we expand the keyword list as well as the set of design journals . We further expand our search to all journals that include NLP contributions to the design process . We then apply several filters and manually read through the titles , abstracts , and full texts of a selected number of articles . In the end , we obtain 223 articles that we review in our work . We detail the search process in APPENDIX I . We have also uploaded the bibliometric data for all these articles on GitHub 7 . As shown in Table 1 , the final set of papers is distributed across 32 journals . We have strategically chosen these journals such that these are primarily design - oriented and secondarily focused on general computer applications ( e . g . , Computers in Industry ) , artificial intelligence ( e . g . , Expert Systems with Applications ) , and technology - related ( e . g . , World Patent Information ) . In addition , we have also included journals that focus on general design aspects such as ergonomics , requirements , and safety . 6 https : / / mjl . clarivate . com / search - results 7 https : / / github . com / siddharthl93 / nlp _ review / blob / 4b9e6b378c8df0bbf61a36e466a50dbb5a0a65d2 / nlp _ review _ papers . csv Table 1 : Article count w . r . t . , journals . # Journal Name Count 1 Journal of Mechanical Design * 34 2 Advanced Engineering Informatics 24 3 Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design Analysis and Manufacturing * 24 4 Journal of Computing and Information Science in Engineering * 19 5 Expert Systems with Applications 16 6 Computers in Industry 16 7 Journal of Engineering Design * 15 8 Research in Engineering Design * 15 9 Design Studies * 7 10 Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 7 11 Knowledge - Based Systems 6 12 Scientometrics 5 13 Requirements Engineering 3 14 Design Science * 3 15 Design Journal * 2 16 Journal of Computational Design and Engineering 2 17 Concurrent Engineering - Research and Applications 2 18 Decision Support Systems 2 19 Codesign - International Journal of Cocreation in Design and the Arts * 2 20 International Journal of Design Creativity and Innovation * 2 21 Applied Ergonomics 2 22 International Journal of Interactive Design and Manufacturing 2 23 Engineering with Computers 2 24 Ergonomics 2 25 Word Patent Information 2 26 Computer - Aided Design * 1 27 Applied Artificial Intelligence 1 28 International Journal of Design * 1 29 International Journal of Technology and Design Education 1 30 Technovation 1 31 Reliability Engineering and System Safety 1 32 Artificial Intelligence in Engineering 1 * Indicates the journals that we initially considered as those that fall within the scope of design . As shown in the year - wise plot ( Figure 1 ) , there has been a steady increase in the number of contributions , which could be mainly due to the evolution of computational and methodological infrastructures 8 . While the contributions from the 1990s have been theoretically influential , the peak in the mid - 2000s could be attributed 8 By infrastructures , we mean the following : a ) commercial access to high - end computing systems via services like Amazon , Google Cloud etc . , b ) open sources Application Programming Interfaces ( APIs ) provided by several data sources like YouTube , PatentsView etc . , c ) the accessibility to open sources codes and algorithms via online communities like HuggingFace . to the popularity of biomimicry [ 19 ] , ontologies [ 20 ] , functional modelling [ 21 ] , and functional representation [ 22 ] etc . Besides the year - wise plot , we report the 30 most frequent keywords as a word cloud in Figure 2 , where we discard the generic keywords such as ‘design’ , ‘system’ etc . Figure 1 : Article count w . r . t . , the publication year . The data point at 2021 is applicable only until 19 th September 2021 . Figure 2 : Top 30 keywords w . r . t . , frequency . 3 . Review In this section , we review the 223 articles 9 thus selected using the methodology as described in Section 2 and APPENDIX I . To present the articles that we have reviewed , we considered the following categorisation schemes : 1 ) the types of natural language text data , e . g . , internal reports , technical publications etc . , 2 ) the types of NLP tasks , e . g . , clustering , classification etc . , and 3 ) the applications in the design process , e . g . , brainstorming , problem formulation etc . Among these schemes , we adopt the types of text data because an NLP - based contribution is often associated with one text source data but combines a variety of NLP tasks and could be applied across different phases of the design process . As shown in Figure 3 , we map the categories of our scheme onto different phases of the design process as given in the model of the UK Design Business Council 10 . Among the types of text data sources as explained below , consumer opinions and technical publications are utilised in the design process , while the rest are generated in the design process . • The internal reports are usually generated in the deliver phase of the design process , where the concepts are embodied and detailed into prototypes . These sources of natural language text often include the knowledge of failures , situations , logs , instructions etc . • The design concepts are generated during the develop phase , when the designers search , retrieve , associate , and select concepts using various supports . The NLP contributions that we review under this category not only involve processing design concepts but also problem statements , keywords , supporting databases ( e . g . , AskNature ) etc . • The discourse transcripts constitute the recorded communication like speech transcripts , emails etc . , that are obtained from organisational data or think - aloud experiments . These sources need not capture the communication that is pertinent to a particular phase but the design process as a whole . • The technical publications that constitute patents , scientific articles , and textbooks are considered external sources that are often utilised in the develop and deliver phases of the design process . Owing to the quality and quantity of text , these sources are best suited for the application of NLP tasks . 9 Wherever applicable , we also review the supporting and relevant articles alongside the selected 223 articles . 10 We chose the double diamond model for representing the design process because of its diversity across different streams of design research . If we were to utilise comprehensive , yet specific models , e . g . , Pahl and Beitz [ 23 ] that was utilised by Chiarello et al . [ 24 ] , it is difficult to choose between embodiment and detailed design phases for categorising articles . • The consumer opinions are external sources that are available in the form of product reviews and social media posts . These sources are predominantly utilized in the discover phase of the design process , when the designers understand the usage scenarios and extract user needs . • We categorise the miscellaneous contributions as ‘ other sources ’ that are not indicated in Figure 3 . Figure 3 : Indication of natural language text data sources related to the design process , following the 4D design process model from the UK Design Business Council . 3 . 1 . Internal Reports Internal reports constitute over 80 % of the knowledge in the industry [ 25 ] and are often present as product specifications , design rationale , design reports , drawing notes , and logbooks [ 26 ] . Although conventional NLP methodologies like building classifiers [ 27 ] using internal reports are a recent phenomenon in design research , scholars have attempted to process internal reports and discover ontologies [ 28 ] since the early ’90s . 3 . 1 . 1 . Requirement Extraction Scholars initially aimed to extract design requirements as meaningful terms , phrases , and segments from internal reports to reuse these in the design process . Such requirements shall also be derived from the past cases of failure in which violated constraints were recorded [ 29 ] . As mentioned below , scholars initially encountered some challenges while extracting design requirements from internal reports . Kott and Peasant [ 30 , p . 94 ] observe that requirements in internal reports are incomplete , ambiguous , include inconsistent rationale and denote a wrong purpose . To mitigate some of these issues , they provide an example [ 30 , p . 103 ] as shown below to illustrate how lengthy requirements could be decomposed into short sentences . “The Loader shall provide the capability of handling HCU6 / E pallets , ISO 40 - foot containers , and Type V airdrop platforms . Loader shall be able to move forward with speed of at least 5 mph , the goal being 7 mph . An on - board maintenance diagnostic system shall be provided . ” “The Loader shall be able to perform the Loading function . The Load Type of the Loading function shall be any of : HCU6 / E pallets , ISO 40 - foot containers , and Type V airdrop platforms . The Loader shall be able to perform function Move Forward . The speed of Move Forward shall be at least 5 mph , the goal being 7 mph . The Loader shall include an On - Board Maintenance Diagnostic System . ” Farley [ 31 , pp . 296 , 299 ] identifies that airtime faults ( also called ‘snags’ ) include abbreviations ( e . g . , CHKD – checked , S0V – serviceable ) , acronyms , spelling errors ( e . g . , VLVE ) , and plural terms . While differing in structure and semantics [ 32 , p . 155 ] , internal reports also include noisy terms [ 33 , p . 179 ] , ‘plastic’ terms ( e . g . , ‘progress’ , ‘planning’ ) , and implicit phrases ( e . g . , “insufficient performance” ) [ 34 , p . 62 ] . Kim et al . [ 32 , p . 162 ] suggest that acronyms ( ‘CNC’ ) and abbreviations ( ‘chkd’ ) shall be recognized in text using ontologies . To reduce ambiguity , Madhusudhanan et al . [ 35 , p . 451 ] suggest that the anaphora ( ‘those’ ) shall be replaced with the corresponding entity in the previous sentence . When co - ordination ambiguity exists in a sentence , for example , “slot widths and radii should conform to those of cutters” [ 36 , p . 2 ] , it is unclear if the term ‘slot’ modifies ‘widths’ or ‘radii’ . Here , Kang et al . [ 36 , pp . 6 , 7 ] suggest checking if the corresponding domain ontology includes ( ‘slot’ , ‘hasProperty’ , ‘radii’ ) . To extract meaningful segments that are devoid of ambiguities , Madhusudanan et al . [ 35 , p . 452 ] measure coherence between sentences by integrating and extending WordNet - based similarity measures . To extract segments within a sentence , for example , “ sharp corners should be avoided because they interfere with the metal flow” , Kang et al . [ 37 , p . 294 ] extract the italicized portion using domain concepts ( e . g . , corner ) and attributes ( e . g . , isSharp ) . They also discard the unwanted portion using some rules [ 37 , p . 295 ] ; e . g . , the subordinate clause that occurs after a marker shall be discarded , except for ‘if’ or ’unless’ . 3 . 1 . 2 . Ontology Construction To represent design rationale 11 , scholars have proposed a variety of prescriptive - generic ontologies [ 38 ] – [ 42 ] that build upon the fundamental idea of entity - relationship models [ 43 ] . While generic ontologies are capable of capturing rationale from a variety of domains , the performances of these in terms of knowledge retrieval are expected to be low due to the level of abstraction . For example , a list of generic terms that represent ‘issue’ [ 40 , p . 4 ] may not retrieve phrases that inherently or intricately communicate a design issue . Domain - specific ontologies like QuenchML [ 44 ] and Kodak Cover [ 45 ] overcome the limitations of generic ontologies while also being evolvable [ 46 ] , machine - readable [ 47 ] , [ 48 ] , and semantically interoperable [ 49 ] . Scholars have therefore attempted to extract domain - specific ontologies from domain text sources . Among domain - specific ontologies , Kim et al . [ 32 , p . 160 ] identify the following categories of relationships from aircraft engine repair notes : background , cause - effect , condition , contrast , etc . Lough et al . [ 34 , p . 33 ] understand from 117 risk statements that these are indicators of failure modes , performance , design , and noise parameters . Using oil platform accident reports , Garcia et al . [ 50 , pp . 430 , 431 ] propose that concept relationships could be generalized as Is - a , Part - Of , Is - an - attribute - of , Causes , Time - Follows , Space - Follows and more . Hsiao et al . [ 51 , p . 147 ] populate 822 actions contained in 185 risk reports and identify that action could carry the attributes ‘purpose’ and ‘embodiment’ , which are further categorised as ‘Approval’ , ‘Gather _ data’ , ‘Coordinate’ , ‘Request’ etc . , [ 51 , p . 158 ] . Scholars have built ontologies by associating technical terms and segments using various similarity measures . Hiekata et al . [ 52 ] use an existing ontology to associate word segments ( component and malfunction ) from 9604 shipyard surveyor reports . Lee et al . [ 3 ] mine the task data from shipbuilding transportation logs and cluster these using a variety of distances ( e . g . , Jaccard , Euclidean ) . Kang and Tucker [ 53 ] extract functions as topic vectors from 16 module descriptions [ 54 ] of an automotive control system . They 11 Design rationale that is mentioned here refers to the previously recorded decisions and underlying reasons that are pertinent to past design issues . propose that the cosine similarity between a pair of topic - vectors ( function ) quantifies the functional interaction between corresponding modules . Song et al . [ 55 , pp . 265 – 269 ] construct a semantic network using iPhone Apps Plus 12 text data that includes 697 service documents indicating 66 feature elements and 95 feature keywords . Arnarsson et al . [ 56 ] use Latent Dirichlet Allocation ( LDA ) to cluster the Doc2Vec - based embeddings of over 8 , 000 Engineering Change Requests ( ECRs ) in a commercial vehicle manufacturer . Yang et al . [ 57 ] construct an ontology using 114 , 793 problem - solution records within pre - assembly reports inside an automotive manufacturer . They use the ontology to process ( e . g . , identify n - grams ) , structure , and represent new text data in various forms [ 57 , p . 214 ] to facilitate the design and managerial decisions . Xu et al . [ 58 ] obtain the text data of 1844 problems and 1927 short - term remedies from a vehicle manufacturer . To link the problems and remedies , they transform the text using Term Frequency - Inverse Document Frequency ( TD - IDF ) and perform K - means clustering for problems and short - term remedies , while also linking the clusters . 3 . 1 . 3 . Design Knowledge Retrieval While “knowledge retrieval” could assume a broad meaning across different areas of research and practice , we mention this in reference to the methods that ‘retrieve’ terms , phrases and segments that include components , issues , constraints , interactions etc . , The outputs of such retrieval methods shall be considered as ‘design knowledge’ if it is possible to re - represent these as < entity , relationship , entity > triples that form constituents of an artefact that is relevant to the design process . For example , a segment extracted from a transistor patent [ 59 , p . 8 ] – “an insulating material is deposited on the whole surface of the substrate having the first semiconductor layer” shall be encoded into triples such as < insulating material , is deposited , whole surface > , < whole surface , of , substrate > , and < substrate , having , first semi - conducted layer > that form the constituents of the patent that shall be utilised as knowledge aid in the design process . To extract such relevant terms , phrases , and segments , the scholars have adopted a couple of directions . First , using an ontology that shares the same domain as target text data so that relevant portions of the text are identified . Second , indexing the unstructured text data using a classification algorithm so that the search is restricted to the relevant portions . 12 http : / / www . iphoneappsplus . com / To assist case - based reasoning , Guo et al . [ 60 ] build a domain ontology using 1000 injection moulding cases that were encountered in a Shenzhen - based company . They demonstrate using an Information - Content ( IC ) based similarity measure as to how the ontology aids in knowledge retrieval . For case - based retrieval , Akmal et al . [ 61 ] compare a variety of ontology - based similarity measures ( e . g . , Tversky’s Index , Dice’s Co - efficient ) against numeric similarity measures ( e . g . , Wu - Palmer , Lin ) to observe that the former deviated less from expert’s similarity scores . To retrieve CAD models using text inputs , Jeon et al . [ 62 ] demonstrate how ontologies could be used as intermediaries . To assist CAD designers with design rule recommendations , Huet et al . [ 63 ] create a knowledge graph around a design rule using relationships such as ‘has keyword’ ( semantic context ) , ‘has material’ ( engineering context ) , ‘has employee’ ( social context ) etc . To relate phenomena and failure modes , Wang et al . [ 64 ] extract a lightweight ontology from 400 aviation engine failure analysis reports and utilise the ontology to represent phenomena and failure modes as attribute - value vectors . They [ 64 , pp . 270 , 271 ] then map the phenomena and failure mode vectors using an artificial neural network . To extract candidate components and responsibilities from the design rationale text , Casamayor et al . [ 65 ] obtain sentences from IBM supported rationale suite 13 and the UNICEN university repository 14 . Upon classifying the sentences as functional or non - functional using a semi - supervised approach , they extract verb phrases as candidate responsibilities and group these using the hierarchical clustering method to identify candidate components . To understand the coupling between design requirements , Morkos et al . [ 10 , p . 142 ] construct a bipartite network of terms and 374 requirements obtained from Toho ( 160 ) and Pierburg ( 214 ) manufacturing projects . They label a portion of these terms as ‘useful’ or ‘not useful’ and vectorize these using the network properties ( 29 features ) and string length ( 1 feature ) . They train a neural network using the labelled dataset to classify the rest of the terms . Using the set of terms that are classified as ‘useful’ , they reconstruct the bipartite network and retrain the classifier until the length of the list of terms is saturated [ 10 , p . 149 ] . To classify and index airtime faults , Tanguy et al . [ 66 ] train a Support Vector Machines ( SVM ) classifier on 136 , 861 labelled documents that were obtained from the French Aviation Regulator – DGAC . To classify the causes of automotive issues , Xu et al . [ 67 ] obtain titles and descriptions of 2 , 420 issues from a Chinese 13 http : / / www - 01 . ibm . com / software / rational / 14 http : / / isistan . exa . unicen . edu . ar automotive manufacturer . They retrieve cause - related phrases using a domain ontology and label these with the categories of the Fishbone diagram – Man , Machine , Material , Method , and Environment . They use the labelled dataset to train a binary - tree - based SVM classifier . To identify computer - supported collaborative technologies , Brisco et al . [ 68 , p . 65 ] obtain Global Design Project text data from 104 students and classify the sentences into requirements , technologies , and technology functionalities using RapidMinerStudio 15 . Lester et al . [ 69 , pp . 133 – 135 ] classify the chrome bug reports 16 into requirements , decisions , alternatives etc . , using the Naïve Bayes algorithm to find that feature selected using optimization approaches ( e . g . , Ant - colony ) result in higher F - 1 measure compared to document characteristics ( e . g . , TF - IDF ) . To index manufacturing rules , Ye and Lu [ 70 ] train a feedforward neural network with two hidden layers ( 128 and 32 neurons ) using the embeddings of manufacturing rules and eight category labels . Song et al . [ 71 ] train a Bi - directional LSTM using 350 building regulation sentences to extract predicates and arguments . For example , in a design rule – “The roof height of the building must be 15 meters or less , ” the predicate is “be less” and the arguments are ‘roof height’ , ‘building’ , and ‘15 meters . ’ To automatically extract design requirements , Fantoni et al . [ 72 ] process tender documents of Hitachi Railway using a variety of ontologies and classify a sentence as a requirement if it includes certain keywords . 3 . 1 . 4 . Summary We summarize the NLP methodologies applied to Internal Reports in Table 2 according to data , methods , and supporting materials . We indicate the future possibilities of these in red colour . We use the same table format to summarize the literature review for the remaining types of data sources as well . Internal reports mainly include issues and remedies that are pertinent to a specific organisation or a domain . Scholars have used a variety of internal reports to process , extract ontologies , and classify sentences . They have also demonstrated how ontologies are used for effective knowledge retrieval . 15 https : / / rapidminer . com / products / studio / 16 Bugs reported on Chrome web browser from the Mining Software Repositories Mining Challenge – http : / / 2011 . msrconf . org / msrchallenge . html Table 2 : Summary of NLP methodologies and future possibilities with Internal Reports . Data Methods Supporting Materials Requirement Extraction Airtime Faults ( Snags ) , Manufacturing Rules , Aircraft Assembly Documents , Technical Discussion Platforms : e . g . , Stack Overflow , Reddit Text Segmentation : Manual , Rule - based Approach , Semantic Similarity ( e . g . , Lin ) Ambiguity Resolution : Ontology - based Approach , Rule - based Approach Term Identification : Ontology - based Approach Lexicon : WordNet , Generic Technical Lexicon Ontologies : Manufacturing Ontology Construction Aircraft Engine Repair Notes , Oil Platform Accident Reports , Shipyard Surveyor Reports , Shipbuilding Transportation Logs , Automotive Control System Descriptions , iPhone service documents , Vehicle Engineering Change Requests , Automotive Pre - Assembly Reports , Vehicle Manufacturing Problems Other Streams : Integrated - Circuit Design , Software Interface Design , Algorithm Design , Virtual Spaces Embedding : Doc2Vec , TF - IDF transformation , Domain - specific Language Model Similarity Measurement : Cosine , Semantic Similarity measures ( e . g . , Wu - Palmer ) Clustering : Distance - based ( e . g . , Jaccard ) method , K - means Topic Extraction : Latent Dirichlet Allocation ( LDA ) Named Entity Recognition : Domain - specific Language Model Lexicon : WordNet , Generic Technical Lexicon Ontologies : QuenchML , Kodak family , Shipyard , Automotive Design Knowledge Retrieval CAD rules , Aviation Engine Failures , Rationale Suite ( IBM ) , UNICEN repository , Toho Project , Pierburg Project , DGAC Airtime Faults , Automotive Manufacturing Issues , Global Design Project , Chrome Bug Reports , Building Regulation Sentences , Hitachi Railway Tender Documents Embedding : Attribute - Value ( using ontology ) , Bipartite Network Properties , Word2Vec , Domain - specific Language Model Similarity Measurement : Information - Content based measures , Ontology - based measures ( e . g . , Tversky’s Index ) Feature Selection : TF - IDF , Mutual Information , Information Gain , Ant Colony Optimization , Genetic Algorithms , Domain - specific Language Model , Sentence Embedding Models ( Doc2Vec ) Clustering : Hierarchical Clustering Classification : Artificial Neural Network ( ANN ) , Rule - based Approach , Feedforward Neural Network , Support Vector Machines ( SVM ) , Binary Tree - based SVM , Rapid Miner , Naïve Bayes , Bi - directional LSTM Ontologies : Injection Moulding , Aviation Engine , Automotive , Railway , Building We can observe from the data column of Table 2 that internal reports have been utilised from a variety of domains : Aerospace , Shipbuilding , Automotive etc . Surprisingly , none of the methodologies has utilised data sources from the most popular ‘silicon - based streams such as Integrated Circuits , Software Architecture , and Data Structures . While discussion platforms like Stack Overflow and Reddit may not be classified as those included within internal reports , they include the knowledge of issues and solutions that are found both in the industry and academia . Upon training nearly 0 . 8 million labelled patent documents for a classification task , Jiang et al . [ 73 ] observe that the accuracy tends to be higher when the input feature vectors integrate text , image , and meta information of the document compared to only - text and only - image feature vectors . Hence , the analysis of mere text in multi - modal documents like transportation logs [ 3 ] may not reflect the entire design knowledge that is being communicated in these . As understood from the list of data sources , the accessibility to internal reports is highly restricted . Although analyses of internal reports have a high probability of extracting design knowledge , these sources are also characterized by low information content , e . g . , 350 building regulation sentences [ 71 ] . While this caveat limits the performances of classifiers , the ontologies extracted from these also may not be comprehensive . Hence , it is necessary to aggregate various internal reports from a domain into a single source of natural language text , e . g . , NASA Memorandum on Space Mechanisms – lessons learnt [ 74 ] . As far as the methods are concerned , although scholars have applied several state - of - the - art methods to perform NLP tasks such as classification and clustering , they are yet to utilise language models like BERT . While such language models are expected to perform poorly on domain documents [ 72 ] , it would be significantly useful to develop domain - specific language models , e . g . , BioBERT [ 75 ] . These models shall be useful for obtaining embeddings and subsequently tasks such as Named Entity Recognition , Text Classification etc . Apart from the cost and resource limitations , training these language models also requires high amounts of text data that does not seem currently feasible with internal reports . Term identification is a fundamental NLP problem that has not been given enough attention by design scholars apart from those that have utilised internal reports . The terms like “roller bearing” reduce the ambiguity caused by individual words ‘roller’ and ‘bearing’ . Since meaningful terms are made of two or more words [ 76 ] , [ 77 ] , it is critically important to identify these before applying higher - level NLP tasks . Scholars have resorted to ontology - based approaches to identify these terms [ 57 ] , [ 72 ] . While ontology - based approaches are recommended over common - sense lexicon ( e . g . , WordNet ) , it is necessary to rely on domain - specific language models and generic - design - and technical - oriented lexicon to identify general terms ( e . g . , rough surface ) . Although such supports are hard to build , there has been recent progress in the literature that adopts patent databases to develop a generic lexicon [ 78 ] , [ 79 ] . Term disambiguation is another fundamental NLP problem , e . g . , the terms such as “cathodic protection anode bed” , “deep anode well” , and “deep ground bed” are often used to refer to “cathodic protection well” . [ 80 , p . 5 ] . Since the ambiguity posed by these terms is concerning the underlying meaning , the approach to resolve this issue should concern the measurement of semantic similarities among these terms . Gu et al . [ 81 , p . 108 ] resolve semantic conflicts between similar sentences , e . g . , “I will buy a bike” and “I will buy a bicycle” using a WordNet - based ontology – FloDL . Such a type of semantic conflict resolution is hardly relevant to industrial applications . While usage of a common - sense lexicon like WordNet is not recommended for such tasks , it is necessary to obtain true embeddings of these terms using domain - specific language models so that cosine similarity reflects ‘nearly’ actual similarity . 3 . 2 . Design Concepts Often associated with the develop phase of the design process ( as indicated in Figure 3 ) , design concepts are generated through search , retrieval , association , and selection . The NLP methodologies applied to these stages need not use only concept descriptions as primary text sources but also the problems , keywords , source of stimuli etc . 3 . 2 . 1 . Concept Search To formulate a comprehensive set of keywords to search for concepts , researchers have sought WordNet for identifying troponyms ( ‘prevent’ → ‘inhibit’ ) [ 82 , p . 3 ] , [ 83 , pp . 3 , 4 ] , bridge verbs [ 84 , p . 50 ] , semantically distant verbs [ 85 , pp . 272 , 291 ] , and morphological nouns [ 86 , p . 5 ] . Chakrabarti et al . [ 2 , pp . 119 – 121 ] provide a systematic approach to searching and retrieving biological stimuli based on the SAPPhIRE 17 model . In the Action construct of the SAPPhIRE model , for instance , they propose that the search could be a combination of verb , noun , and adjective . Rosa et al . [ 87 ] build upon the approach of Chakrabarti et al . [ 2 ] by combining SAPPhIRE and Function - Behaviour - Structure to form a unified ontology for biomimicry . To effectively search for concepts of biological species , Rosa et al . [ 88 ] develop a structured database of these and group these using high - level functions that are represented using < verb , noun , predicate > where the predicate is represented as < preposition , noun > . Vandevenne et al . [ 89 , pp . 21 , 22 ] use k - Nearest Neighbours ( k - NN ) algorithm to index the AskNature 18 database by classifying 1531 unique analogical transfer strategies into the following levels [ 89 , p . 25 ] : group ( e . g . , move or stay put , modify ) , subgroup ( e . g . , attach , adapt ) , and function ( e . g . , temperature , compression ) . Chen et al . [ 90 ] examine 20 AskNature pages to extract meaningful keywords and structure - function knowledge using , respectively , TF - IDF values and selected dependency patterns . The above - stated contributions aim to enhance the concept search w . r . t . , the biological domain . We also review some approaches that sought other domains . To improve the quality of concepts generated by 17 SAPPhIRE is a model of causality that comprises the following constructs : States , Actions , Parts , Phenomena , Inputs , oRgans , and Effects . 18 https : / / asknature . org / architects [ 91 ] , De Vries et al . [ 92 ] integrate WordNet - based word graphs and a sketching canvas . To assist novice designers to form domain - specific keywords , Lin et al . [ 15 , p . 356 ] map user needs and domain concepts through the so - called ‘OntoPassages’ that were extracted using a domain ontology , which was built using 111 documents belonging to the National Center for Research on Earthquake Engineering , Taiwan . To recommend a suitable design method for a problem description , Fuge et al . [ 93 ] obtain 886 case study descriptions and method labels from Human - Centred Design ( HCD ) Connect . They use Latent Semantic Analysis ( LSA ) to obtain the vectors of the descriptions and train the following classifiers using the labelled dataset : Random Forest , SVM , Logistic Regression , and Naïve Bayes . To enhance problem definition , Chen and Krishnamurthy [ 94 ] facilitate human - AI collaboration in completing problem formulation mind maps with the help of ConceptNet and the underlying relationships . 3 . 2 . 2 . Concept Retrieval The contributions in this section are primarily retrieval systems that are built under the assumption that the problem is well - defined , and the search keywords are known beforehand . Chou [ 95 ] and Yan et al . [ 96 ] adopt the Su - field problem modelling approach to systematically obtain ideas through TRIZ and manually evaluate these using a fuzzy - linguistic scale . Kim and Lee [ 97 ] integrate various design - by - analogy approaches into an interface called Bionic MIR that allows retrieval of biological systems based on physical , biological , and ecological relations . In a tool named Retriever , for a search keyword ( e . g . , chair ) and a relation ( e . g . , “is used for” ) from ConceptNet 19 categories , Han et al . [ 98 , pp . 467 – 469 ] retrieve three re - representations ( e . g . , chair , bench , sofa ) and corresponding entities ( e . g . , leading a meeting , growing plants , reading a book ) that are connected by the selected relation . In another tool named Combinator , for the same inputs , Han et al . [ 99 , p . 12 / 34 ] retrieve the related entity ( noun , verb , adjective ) and concatenate it with the search keyword , e . g . , ‘Handbag’ → ‘Origami Handbag’ . To support the rapid retrieval of concepts , Goucher - Lambert et al . [ 100 ] employ LSA on a design corpus to identify a near or far concept from the current concept . They then provide the concept thus identified from the corpus as a stimulus to the designers for generating more concepts . To demonstrate retrieval of concepts 19 https : / / conceptnet . io / using the C - K theory [ 101 ] , Li et al . [ 102 ] extract a healthcare knowledge graph by mining SVO tripes of the form : 𝑁𝑃 𝑠𝑢𝑏 ⏟ 𝑎𝑚𝑜𝑑 𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑗 → 𝑉𝑃⏟ 𝑎𝑑𝑣𝑚𝑜𝑑 𝑑𝑜𝑏𝑗 → 𝑁𝑃 𝑜𝑏𝑗 ⏟ 𝑎𝑚𝑜𝑑 from 18 , 000 Chinese websites . They also populate an FBS - based ‘nursing bed’ knowledge graph using experts . 3 . 2 . 3 . Concept Association Once the concepts are generated using the search and retrieval methods , it is necessary to group similar concepts , especially when a large number of concepts are crowdsourced . In this section , we review NLP contributions that associate concepts predominantly using graph - based approaches . Zhang et al . [ 103 , p . 2 ] group 930 concepts ( described as paragraphs ) that were obtained from a human - centred design course 20 using Word2Vec and the hierarchical clustering algorithm . Ahmed and Fuge [ 104 , p . 11 , 12 / 30 ] measure topic level association for 3918 ideas that were submitted to OpenIDEO 21 using a Topic Bison Measure , which indicates if a topic pair co - occurs in an idea as well as the proportions of the pair . To examine the effectiveness of crowdsourced stimuli , Goucher - Lambert and Cagan [ 105 ] crowdsource concepts as three nouns and three verbs for 12 design problems and categorise these as near , far , and medium stimuli based on the frequency and WordNet - based path similarity . He et al . [ 106 ] crowdsource text descriptions of thousands of ideas to future transportation systems via Amazon Mechanical Turk . They [ 106 , pp . 3 , 4 ] form a coword network of these ideas and use MINRES 22 to extract core ideas from the network . Liu et al . [ 107 , p . 6 ] summarize 1 , 757 scientific articles ( solutions to a transmission problem ) by building Word2Vec - based semantic networks around the central keywords – { transmission , line , location , measurement , sensor , and wave } . Camburn et al . [ 108 ] , [ 109 ] utilise HDBSCAN 23 for clustering crowdsourced concepts and TextRazor 24 for extracting entities and topics from these . 3 . 2 . 4 . Concept Selection In this section , we review the contributions that have utilised NLP supports to evaluate and select concepts . These concepts primarily aim to measure one or more success metrics ( e . g . , novelty ) . Delin et al . [ 110 , pp . 20 Taught at the University of California , Berkeley 21 https : / / www . openideo . com / 22 https : / / web . stanford . edu / group / SOL / software / minres / 23 https : / / hdbscan . readthedocs . io / en / latest / how _ hdbscan _ works . html 24 https : / / www . textrazor . com / 125 – 129 ] use bipolar adjectives obtained from the British National Corpus ( BNC ) to rate concepts . Strug and Slusarczyk [ 111 ] evaluate floor plan concepts using the frequently occurring patterns in the hypergraph representations of past floor plans . To understand the concept selection phenomenon , Dong et al . [ 112 ] model the change of linguistic preferences using the Markov Process and calculate the transition probabilities . To calculate creativity , Gosnell and Miller [ 113 , pp . 4 – 6 ] tie 27 concepts with some adjectives and match these against the terms – ‘innovation’ and ‘feasibility’ using DISCO 25 . Chang and Chen [ 114 ] obtain 108 ideas for future personal computers from DesignBoom 26 and mine the idea - related information using RapidMiner . They apply K - means clustering to group the ideas and Analytic Hierarchy Comparison to evaluate these . Siddharth et al . [ 41 , pp . 3 – 5 ] measure the novelty of a concept by comparing it against all entries in a reference product database across SAPPhIRE constructs and using a WordNet - based similarity . To examine the success of ideas that were submitted to Kickstarter – a crowdfunding platform , Lee and Sohn [ 115 ] shortlist 595 ideas in the Software - Technology category . They apply LDA to extract the most important 50 topics from the text descriptions of these ideas . Using the 50 topics and the funding received by the ideas , they conduct a conjoint analysis to examine the contribution of a topic to the success of an idea [ 115 , pp . 107 , 108 ] . 3 . 2 . 5 . Summary As we have summarized in Table 3 , the NLP contributions that are pertinent to Design Concepts assist concept search , retrieval , association , and selection . Scholars have utilised a variety of knowledge bases to search and retrieve concepts , while also recommending novel ways to expand search keywords . Since crowdsourcing concepts have recently emerged as an alternative to traditional laboratory - based design studies , scholars have therefore found the need to associate and group the concepts for assessing these . The NLP applications to concept selection are still emerging as there exist many metrics and many ways to compute these . 25 https : / / github . com / linguatools / disco / blob / master / src / main / java / de / linguatools / disco / DISCO . java 26 https : / / www . designboom . com / Table 3 : Summary of NLP methodologies and future possibilities with Design Concepts . Data Methods Supporting Material Concept Search Idea - Inspire , AskNature , National Centre for Research on Earthquake Engineering , HCD Connect Case Studies , TRIZ , Encyclopaedia , How Stuff Works , YouTube Term Retrieval : Lexical Relationships , Semantic Similarity , Dependency Parsing , TF - IDF Values , Word Graphs , Mind Maps , Design Knowledge Graph Embedding : Latent Semantic Analysis ( LSA ) , BERT , GPT - x Classification : k - Nearest Neighbours ( k - NN ) , Random Forest , SVM , Logistic Regression , Naïve Bayes , LSTM variants Lexicon : WordNet , ConceptNet Ontology : SAPPhIRE , FBS , Earthquake Concept Retrieval Bionic MIR , Healthcare Websites , Nursing Bed Knowledge Graph , YouTube , Google Patents Term Retrieval : Semantic Similarity , Subject - Verb - Object Triples , Source Domain Ontologies , Google API Similarity Measurement : LSA , BERT , GPT - x Lexicon : WordNet , ConceptNet Ontology : C - K theory , FBS , SAPPhIRE Concept Association Human - Centred Design Course , OpenIDEO , Crowdsourced Transportation Concepts , Scientific Articles ( Transmission Problem ) Similarity Measurement : Word2Vec , Topic Bison Measure , Path Similarity Embedding : BERT , GPT - x , Domain - specific language model Clustering : Hierarchical Clustering , HDBSCAN Topic Extraction : MINRES , TextRazor Lexicon : WordNet Concept Selection Floor Plan Concepts , DesignBoom , Kickstarter , Red Dot Design Awards , Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award , Award Patents , Nielsen Retail Scanner Data , Standard Datasets Similarity Measurement : Hypergraph Pattern Matching , DISCO , Analytic Hierarchy Comparison , WordNet - based Similarity Term Retrieval : RapidMiner Clustering : K - means Topic Extraction : LDA Others : Markov Process , Conjoint Analysis Lexicon : British National Corpus , WordNet , Affective Lexicon Ontology : SAPPhIRE , FBS While scholars have utilised both general and domain - specific text sources for searching concepts , it is also possible to explore more text sources such as Encyclopaedia and How and Stuff Works . One of the most consulted platforms – YouTube seems unexplored . Although being primarily a video - sharing platform , the descriptions , comments , and captions on YouTube are still useful text sources for inspiration . To retrieve suitable search keywords , in addition to NLP - centric approaches like dependency parsing and TF - IDF , it is necessary to construct design knowledge graphs for specific streams such as engineering , architecture , software etc . Such knowledge graphs are likely to recommend new terms as well as assist with text completion for queries . For example , if we begin to search for ‘bearing’ and next - word predictions are ‘lubricant’ , ‘load’ etc . , we could choose ‘bearing lubricant’ and leverage from next word predictions like ‘density’ , ‘film’ , ‘material’ etc . Common - sense knowledge graphs like Google ( and YouTube ) make predictions based on many senses of the word ‘bearing’ and do not return the words as we have indicated in the example . WordNet and ConceptNet have been the main supporting pillars for concept search as well as retrieval , while generic ontologies such as FBS and SAPPhIRE have been utilised to largely channel the search and retrieval processes . Since creative concepts emerge from the marriage of diverse sets of domains , a common - sense lexicon like WordNet is still a preferable supporting material . Similarly , scholars can also use readily available search methods like Google APIs to retrieve results from sources such as YouTube and patent databases . However , while retrieving concepts from a domain - specific knowledge source , it makes sense to utilise the domain - specific ontologies for query formation . Alongside ontologies , scholars could benefit from the embeddings of common - sense language models like BERT and GPT - x 27 to obtain nearby search keywords , compare search results etc . Since the concept search and retrieval are largely exploratory and preferably involve diverse domains , the usage of common - sense language models shall not limit the desired performance of the NLP applications . While the same applies to concept association as well , the scholars shall also utilise domain - specific language models if the design problem is quite domain - specific . Concept Selection involves one or more metrics like novelty , value , feasibility etc . Scholars could benefit from an affective lexicon to rate the design concepts and carry out systematic approaches to analyse and present the results . Since the theory behind these metrics is yet to be consolidated , the NLP applications are still in nascent stages . Scholars can only benefit from preliminary NLP tasks like similarity measurement , frequency analysis , and term retrieval to assist them with one or more steps in the concept selection process . Design theorists could benefit from the NLP methods to examine how successful concepts are selected . For example , Arts et al . [ 116 ] observe the causality between frequencies of unigrams , bigrams , and trigrams and the likelihood of a patent getting an award , e . g . , Nobel , Lasker , Bower , A . M . Turing etc . Similarly , scholars could leverage the text descriptions of concepts that have been selected for awards like Red Dot ( indicates novelty or surprise ) , and Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award ( indicates value ) . Moreover , to understand the actual value of a concept , scholars could also utilise the sales information . For instance , Argente et al . [ 117 ] connect patent value with the number of product units sold from Nielsen’s Retail Scanner data with the ‘value’ of a patent . 27 https : / / beta . openai . com / 3 . 3 . Discourse Transcripts Design communication is often documented as discourse transcripts in protocol studies , think - aloud experiments , and recorded design workshops . Starting with a design issue or a problem , designers communicate sub - issues , solutions , related artefacts , arguments , justifications etc . Identifying and analysing the set of concepts that arise during such communications allows scholars to reveal a variety of insights about the design process . A sequence of closely - related concepts within a segment in discourse transcripts represents a period of coherent communication , which could affect the design outcomes in terms of success metrics like novelty , feasibility etc [ 118 ] . To identify such concepts , scholars have extracted nouns , phrases , segments , topics etc . , and associated these using vector - based or corpus - based similarity measurement techniques . We review such NLP - based approaches that are currently preferable over traditional linkographs [ 119 ] . 3 . 3 . 1 . Concept Identification Scholars have adopted different approaches to extract key concepts such as topics , words , ontology - based entities , and n - grams . Wasiak et al . [ 120 , p . 58 ] analyse emails to discover topics such as functions , performance , features , operating environment , materials , manufacturing , cost , and ergonomics . From the email exchanges in a traffic wave project , Lan et al . [ 121 , p . 7 ] map word - frequency vectors and topic vectors ( tasks , timestamps , persons , organizations , locations , input / output , techniques / tools ) using Deep Belief Network – DBN [ 122 ] , [ 123 ] . Goepp et al . [ 124 , p . 165 ] identify the following speech acts from email exchanges : Information , Explication , Evaluation , Description , and Request . These speech acts were associated with a set of verbs , e . g . , “Explication” was associated with ‘explain’ , ‘clarify’ etc . To capture significant phrases that denote design changes , using the DTRS7 dataset , Ungureanu and Hartmann [ 125 ] extract n - grams ( 0 < n < 8 ) based on frequency analysis and examine how short terms progress to a variety of long terms ; e . g . , “a little” → “a little bit bigger” , “a little splash of colour” [ 125 , p . 12 ] . 3 . 3 . 2 . Design Process Characterization To characterize the design process , scholars have aggregated the concepts thus identified from discourse transcripts into a whole ( e . g . , a semantic network ) and perform analyses as reviewed below . To characterize coherence in design communication , Dong [ 126 , pp . 450 , 451 ] obtain vector representations of emails and memos using LSA and measure the standard deviations of these w . r . t . , their centroid ( mean ) . A low standard deviation of the set of vector representations is considered to denote a high coherence in communication [ 127 , p . 381 ] . In an alternative approach , Dong [ 128 , pp . 39 , 40 ] identifies segments by linking noun sequences using lexical relationships obtained from WordNet . Based on the word occurrences of design alternatives within a time interval , Ji et al . [ 129 ] model the relationship between preferences using the Preference Transition Model and Utterance - Preference Model . Menning et al . [ 130 , pp . 139 , 142 ] use cosine similarity between LSA vectors of consecutive discourse entities to measure coherence . To characterize the uncertainty of the design process , Kan and Gero [ 131 ] measure the text entropy of the transcripts that were obtained from protocol studies . Georgiev and Georgiev [ 132 ] utilise 49 WordNet - based semantic similarity measures to build a noun - based semantic network of students’ and instructors’ conversations as given in the DTRS10 dataset . They plot the average semantic similarity , information content , polysemy , and level of abstraction w . r . t . , time for characterizing the design communication . Casakin and Georgiev [ 133 ] train regression models to establish a relationship between these network properties and the following metrics of design outcomes : originality , feasibility , usability , creativity , and value . 3 . 3 . 3 . Summary As we summarize in Table 4 , the NLP applications built using discourse transcripts are limited in comparison with other types of text sources due to the least accessibility and information content . While emails do not strictly qualify as ‘transcriptions’ of design communication , the currently available data sources are mainly DTRS datasets . Scholars could additionally explore panel discussions , protocol studies and client interactions ( e . g . , architect and customer ) . The accessibility to such sources is crucial for the development of NLP applications regarding discourse transcripts . Table 4 : Summary of NLP methodologies and future possibilities with Discourse Transcripts . Data Methods Supporting Material Concept Identification Emails , DTRS7 Dataset , Protocol Studies Classification : Deep Belief Network Embedding : TF - IDF , LDA , BERT , GPT - x Segmentation : N - grams , LDA Others : Frequency Analysis WordNet , Domain - specific ontologies Design Process Characterization Emails , Memos , DTRS10 Dataset , Protocol Studies , Panel Discussions , Client Interactions Similarity Measurement : WordNet - based Similarity , Lexical Relationships , Preference Transition Model , Utterance - Preference Model , Cosine Similarity Embedding : LSA Others : Network Analysis , Linear Regression , Text Entropy WordNet , Domain - specific ontologies Beyond the likelihood of obtaining one or more of these sources , the probability of extracting meaningful design knowledge from these is quite limited . For instance , the usage of frequent colloquial phrases like “sort of too big” limits the possibility of applying NLP methods to these [ 134 ] . Moreover , a transcription , unlike any text document , involves a timestamp associated with its parts . Several factors such as lack of context , poor grammar , colloquial language , time variation etc . , are beyond what state - of - the - art NLP could handle . Scholars could still conduct preliminary analyses as they have done so far in terms of segment identification and topic discovery . Such analyses could also be benefitted from common - sense language models because verbal communication involves many common - sense terms . If required , scholars may also utilise domain - specific ontologies to recognize the domain terms in their analyses . 3 . 4 . Technical Publications Technical publications include over 92 million patents and a portion of over 174 million records that comprise textbooks , journal articles , and conference proceedings 28 . Due to their coverage , size , and accessibility , these sources carry a significant advantage over other sources in terms of knowledge aids for the design process . Moreover , since these sources are peer - reviewed and adhere to grammar and typographical norms , NLP tasks are well - suited to these [ 135 ] . 3 . 4 . 1 . Patent Documents As mentioned in Section 3 . 1 . 3 , design knowledge that is extracted from the text could be in the form of terms , phrases , segments etc . , that should represent one or more constituents of an artefact that is relevant to the design process . Moreover , if re - represented , such terms , phrases , and segments of text must assume the 28 https : / / clarivate . libguides . com / webofscienceplatform / coverage form < entity , relationship , entity > to store these in a machine - readable form . Being a large body of technical inventions , patents offer a rich source of design knowledge that is also characterised by high information content , quality , and technicality . To extract design knowledge from patents , scholars have primarily utilised ontologies to channel their extraction approaches . To extract issue - related concepts and relationships ( noun - noun , noun - adjectives ) , using a WordNet - based similarity , Liu et al . [ 40 , pp . 4 , 5 ] compare sentences in 46 patent abstracts against an ontology ( list of terms ) of issues , disadvantages , and challenges . Moehrle and Gerken [ 136 ] use a domain ontology to extract bigrams and trigrams from 522 patents of SUBARU’s four - wheel drive . They use the terms thus extracted to measure patent - patent similarity using a variety of measures [ 136 , p . 817 ] such as Jaccard , Inclusion , Cosine , DSS - Jaccard etc . Liang et al . [ 137 ] adopt a sentence graph approach and Issue - Solution - Artefact ontology to extract design rationale from 18 , 920 Inkjet Printer patents that were assigned to Hewlett - Packard ( HP ) and Epson . Using a similar dataset of inkjet printer patents , Liang et al . [ 8 ] develop the Topic - Sensitive Content Extraction ( TSCE ) model and verify the model by testing the effect of segment length , parameters , sample count , and topic count etc . Fantoni et al . [ 77 ] propose a heuristic approach to extract the terms that correspond to functions , behaviours , and structures ( FBS ontology ) from patents . In function , for example , they consider the frequent combinations of verb - noun and verb - object . To discover the structural form assumed by a collection of patents , Fu et al . [ 138 ] perform LSA on 100 randomly selected US patent documents . They consider only verbs ( functions ) and only nouns ( surfaces ) to perform two different LSAs and thereby obtain corresponding patent vectors . Using the cosine similarities , they discover the most optimal structural form – hierarchy using which they construct a patent network . They also label the clusters of patents with the closest terms ( verbs or nouns ) . Upon training the abstracts of 500 , 000 patents ( CPC - F subsection ) using Word2Vec , Hao et al . [ 139 ] obtain the embeddings of 1700 function terms ( e . g . , grill , cascade ) that are given by Murphy et al . [ 140 ] . They obtain a patent vector as a circular convolution ( ⊗ ) of function terms that are present in the corresponding patent abstract . To support efficient retrieval of patent images , Atherton et al . [ 141 , pp . 247 , 248 ] annotate images in USPTO with geometric features and functional interactions extracted from claims . Song and Fu [ 142 ] obtain three patent - word matrices using 1 , 060 patents and three sets of words corresponding to components , behaviours , and materials . They apply a Non - negative Matrix Factorization algorithm to these matrices to extract significant topics . While patents offer design knowledge in specific domains , due to the totality of technology space covered by the patent database , scholars have also attempted to construct WordNet - equivalent lexicon as well as engineering ontologies . Vandevenne et al . [ 143 , p . 86 ] analyse titles and abstracts in a randomly drawn set of 155 , 000 patents from the EPO database 29 to discover that nouns are abstract ( e . g . , system , device ) and are meaning enablers ( e . g . , temperature , pressure ) that also point towards the product ( e . g . , valve , display ) . To identify the primary users of technological inventions that are documented as patents , Chiarello et al . [ 144 ] extract a generic list of users in terms of job positions , sports , hobbies , animals , patients , and others . They identify these generic users in selected patents 30 using a semi - automatic approach and annotate the sentences using these . They then feed the annotated dataset of sentences into SVM and Multi - Layer Perceptron for Named Entity Recognition ( NER ) . Sarica et al . [ 79 ] obtain embeddings of over 4 million unique terms from the titles and abstracts across the US patent database . Using a web - based tool called TechNet 31 , they facilitate a search for these terms [ 145 ] and utilise the embeddings of these to construct a similarity network [ 146 ] . To create an engineering alternative to WordNet , Jang et al [ 78 ] collect 34 , 823 automotive patents ( IPC B60 ) . They examine the dependency patterns in abstracts and claims to extract dependency relations that form the TechWord network . For the words in the network , they create TechSynset by capturing the WordNet synonyms and calculating the cosine similarity between BERT - based embeddings of individual pairs . Scholars have demonstrated how patents could act as stimuli for generating concepts as well as indirect supports for problem - solving through TRIZ - based tools [ 147 ] – [ 150 ] . In the effort to discover patent network structures , Fu et al . [ 138 ] include a design problem in their LSAs to identify a starting point for navigating the patent network . Given a starting point in the network , Fu et al . [ 151 ] consider patents at one and three hops as ‘near’ and ‘far’ respectively . They examine the effect of ‘near’ and ‘far’ patents on novelty and quality when these patents are given stimuli alongside the design problem . 29 https : / / www . epo . org / searching - for - patents . html 30 The selected patents fall within the A47G33 , A61G1 - G13 groups that are defined by the International Patent Classification ( IPC ) . 31 http : / / www . tech - net . org / To support patent retrieval , Murphy et al . [ 140 ] adopt a Zipfian statistic approach to extract 1700 function ( verbs ) terms from 65 , 000 patent documents and organise these into primary , secondary , and tertiary w . r . t . , the functional basis [ 152 ] . They index 2 , 75 , 000 patents using these functions that also act as query elements . To map design problems and patents via the Functional Basis , Longfan et al . [ 153 ] train a semi - supervised learning algorithm based on Naïve Bayes and E - M algorithm using 1666 patents and the texts labelled with function categories . In another approach , they extract meaningful terms from patents using a frequency - based statistic [ 153 , p . 8 ] and cluster the patents according to the terms . Although several approaches to searching and managing patents exist [ 154 ] – [ 156 ] , it is necessary to simplify the patent documents before utilising these as stimuli for generating concepts . To form keyword summaries of patent search results , Noh et al . [ 11 ] conduct an experimental study to find that it is best to extract 130 keywords from abstracts using TF – IDF and Boolean expression strategies . Sarica et al [ 145 ] propose TechNet [ 79 ] as a means to search and expand technical terms , which were extracted from the titles and abstracts in the patent database . To facilitate cross - domain term retrieval , Luo et al . [ 157 ] organise the output of TechNet into various domains that are associated by a knowledge distance measure . Souza et al . [ 13 ] train an LSTM - based sequence - to - sequence ( abstract - title → summary ) neural network using 7000 patents for generating abstract summaries of patent documents . They group the summaries thus generated using a semantic similarity measure [ 158 ] and subsequently identify patent clusters . Patents not only document technological inventions but are also assigned to specific domains , companies , inventors , countries etc . Using such meta - data , scholars have developed technology maps for exploring design opportunities . Jin et al . [ 159 ] extract meaningful terms from patents and use Bag - Of - Words ( BOW ) approach to create patent vectors that form a technology map . Trappey et al . [ 160 ] adopt a similar approach to patents and clinical reports that concern dental implants . Altuntas et al . [ 161 ] use the same dental implant patents and obtain vectors of these using the patent - class matrix . They cluster the patent vectors using the following methods : E - M algorithm , Self - organizing map , and Density - based method . To explore new design opportunities as well as to aid in idea generation , Luo et al . [ 162 ] develop a technology space map using all CPC 3 - digit classes and the co - citation proximity measures among these . They implement the map using support called InnoGPS 32 which provides several interactive features that are analogous to Google Maps . The support tool mainly allows the users to position themselves on the technology map , identify the closest domains , and navigate the technology space map . Luo et al . [ 163 ] conduct an experimental study to demonstrate how the total technology space map is useful for exploring “white space” design opportunities related to Artificial Neural Networks and Spherical Rolling Robots . To identify new technology opportunities relating to carbon - fibre heating fabric , Russo et al . [ 164 ] download 16 , 743 patents and extract Subject - Action - Object triples where the Subject is “heating fibre” . Assuming that Action represents a function , they mine dependency patterns to extract applications ( e . g . , ‘applied as’ , ‘used for’ ) and requirements ( e . g . , ‘enhance…’ , ‘un…ability’ ) pertinent to the heating fibre technology . To explore new technology opportunities using products , Lee et al . [ 165 ] use the patent - product database 33 developed at the Korea Institute of Science and Technology Information ( KISTI ) . They extract Word2Vec embeddings for products and technologies to create an exploration map that allows the identification of technologies closer to products and vice - versa . They also propose 10 indices to assess the performance of technology exploration . To identify technology opportunities in 3G that could be leveraged in 4G , Zhang and Yu [ 166 ] extract effect phrases from the corresponding patents using a Bi - LSTM with a conditional random field layer . They label the words in the sentences using { Begin , Inside , Other } of an effect phrase and feed the labelled data into the neural network . They combine the effect phrases in a patent using a weighted TF - IDF vector and use topic clustering to group the patents . Depending on the number of patents on each topic , they calculate the technology opportunity score [ 166 , pp . 560 , 561 ] . 3 . 4 . 2 . Textbooks and Handbooks Several design studies support the notion that exploring concepts from distant domains could lead to novel design solutions . Adhering to this consensus , Shu and colleagues have conducted analyses on a biological textbook [ 167 ] to understand the characteristics that support bio - inspiration . Shu [ 17 , p . 510 ] understands that the textbook includes candidates for design - by - analogy , e . g . , ( ‘bacteria’ , ‘fill’ , ‘pores of clothes’ ) → 32 http : / / www . innogps . com / 33 https : / / repository . kisti . re . kr / handle / 10580 / 14535 “prevent dirt” . Cheong et al . [ 82 , pp . 4 , 5 ] identify that in the text , domain and common verbs co - occur , e . g . , “ received and converted or transduced ” . To capture causally related biological functions , Cheong and Shu [ 168 , pp . 1 – 4 ] locate and extract pairs of enabler - enabled functions using syntactic rules , e . g . , “Lysozymes destroy bacteria to protect animals” . Upon searching in the same textbook , Lee et al . [ 86 , pp . 5 – 7 ] identify morphological nouns that co - occur with the keywords in a single paragraph . For every noun , they calculate a modified TF - IDF metric [ 86 , pp . 5 , 6 ] for usage in LSA . The following articles describe approaches to extracting design knowledge from published handbooks . Hsieh et al . [ 169 ] mine the Table of Contents , Definitions , and Index from an Earthquake Engineering Handbook to develop a domain ontology . Kestel et al . [ 170 ] apply several text mining steps to the published document that describes the standard procedure for simulation of multi - bolted joints ( VDI 2230 Part 2 ) . They extract structured data with specific attributes ( e . g . , part , contact , load , relation ) from the text and utilise these to build ontologies that are integrated with Finite Element Analysis ( FEA ) tools . Richter et al . [ 171 ] obtain the design standards and guidelines for landfilling in different provinces of Canada . They conduct word frequency analyses using metrics such as Gunning - Fox Index and Lexical Density . Xu and Cai [ 80 ] mine 300 sentences from the underground utility accommodation policies from the departments of transportation such as Indiana and Georgia . They use utility - product and spatial ontologies to process and label the terms in the sentences with seven categories [ 80 , p . 7 ] . They examine the POS and category patterns in these sentences to extract hierarchical knowledge structures . 3 . 4 . 3 . Scientific Articles Unlike patents and books , the overall motive behind processing scientific articles is unclear , mainly due to a limited number of contributions . We therefore review these contributions as follows by explicitly stating the purpose beforehand . To summarize engineering articles by discovering their micro - and macro - structures , Zhan et al . [ 172 , pp . 5 , 6 ] train Naïve Bayes and SVM classifiers by labelling 1425 sentences from 246 research articles into one of the four categories : background , contribution , methodology , results and conclusions . To identify the sentences that could aid in bio - inspiration , Glier et al . [ 173 , pp . 5 – 7 ] represent sentences from five biology journals using a feature vector of 1 , 869 terms and label these as ‘useful’ and ‘not useful’ for bio - inspiration . They feed the labelled dataset into the following classifiers : SVM , k - NN , and Naïve Bayes . To build a bridge between biological and engineering domains and thus aid bio - inspiration , Vandevenne et al . [ 143 , p . 82 ] map product and organism aspects upon processing 155 , 000 EPO patents and 8 , 011 papers from the Journal of Experimental Biology . To create a generic engineering ontology , Shi et al . [ 174 , pp . 4 – 6 ] develop a large semantic network called B - Link by extracting and combining entities from technical websites and articles , respectively , using Scrapy 34 and Elsevier APIKey 35 . To understand the evolution of typology in design research , education , and practice , Won and Park [ 175 ] collect 222 terms 36 from over 300 documents that include design publications , abstracts etc . and discover that these terms have evolved from being object - based to concept - based . To understand the definitions of contemporary technologies such as Artificial Intelligence , Industry 4 . 0 etc . , Giordano et al . [ 176 ] identify these terms in the sentences of Elsevier - Scopus abstracts and filter the cases where the neighbour of these terms adhere to a pattern , e . g . , “defined as” , “refer to” [ 176 , p . 10 ] . They further analyse the frequencies of the constituents of these sentences so filtered . To understand the field of Product - Service Systems ( PSS ) , Rosa et al . [ 177 ] develop a concept map by analysing 29 articles relating to the design of PSS . 3 . 4 . 4 . Summary We have summarized the NLP contributions that use technical publications in Table 5 . Due to high accessibility , information content , quality , and technical density , technical publications have been quite popular sources for developing NLP applications . The methodologies have also adopted state - of - the - art NLP methods while also utilising domain ontologies wherever applicable . Therefore , a little could be commented about the potential gaps in these contributions . 34 https : / / scrapy . org / 35 https : / / www . elsevier . com / solutions / sciencedirect / support / api 36 https : / / www . tandfonline . com / doi / suppl / 10 . 1080 / 14606925 . 2021 . 1906085 / suppl _ file / rfdj _ a _ 1906085 _ sm7942 . docx Table 5 : Summary of NLP methodologies and future possibilities with Technical Publications . Data Methods Supporting Material Patent Documents - Design Knowledge Extraction Patents : SUBARU 4 - Wheel Drive , HP Inkjet Printers , Epson Inkjet Printers , IPC - A47G33 , IPC - A61G1 - A61G13 , IPC - B60 Others : Career Planner , Not - so - Boring Life , Discover a Hobby , A - Z - Animals , Medicine Net , Centre for Disease Control and Prevention Similarity Measurement : Latent Semantic Analysis , WordNet - based Similarity , Patent - Patent Similarity ( e . g . , Jaccard ) , Dependency Parsing , BERT , Domain - Specific Language Model Term Retrieval : Topic Sensitive Content Extraction , Rule - based Mining , Dependency Parsing , WordNet synonyms Relation Extraction : Rule - based Approach Topic Extraction : Non - Negative Matrix Factorization Named Entity Recognition : SVM , Multi - Layer Perceptron Others : Bayesian Networks Lexicon : WordNet , TechNet , TechWord Ontology : Issues , 4 - wheel drive , Issue - Solution - Artefact , FBS Patent Documents - Concept Generation Stimuli Patents : CPC - F Embedding : LSA , Word2Vec , Circular Convolution , Domain - Specific Language Model Similarity Measurement : Bayesian Network , Semantic Similarity Classification : Naïve Bayes , Expectation - Maximization ( E - M ) Text Generation : LSTM Lexicon : TechNet , TechWord Ontologies : Functional Basis Patent Documents - Design Opportunity Identification Patents : Dental Implants , KISTI Patent - Product Database , 3G , 4G Others : Clinical Reports Embedding : Bag of Words ( BOW ) , Patent - Class Matrix , Word2Vec , TF - IDF Clustering : E - M Algorithm , Self - organizing Map , Density - based Approach Classification : Bi - LSTM CRL Ontologies : International Patent Classification Textbooks and Handbooks Biology Textbook , Earthquake Engineering Handbook , VDI 2230 Part 2 , Landfilling Guidelines , Underground Utility Accommodation Policies Term Retrieval : Rule - based Approach , Gunning - Fox Index , Lexical Density , POS patterns , Category Patterns Embedding : TF - IDF , LSA Lexicon : WordNet Ontologies : Underground Utilities Scientific Articles Articles : Computer Integrated Manufacturing , Basic and Applied Ecology , Current Biology , Journal of Animal Behaviour , Journal of Animal Ecology , Journal of Zoology , Journal of Experimental Biology , ScienceDirect , Design Publications , Design of Product - Service Systems ( PSSs ) , Conference Proceedings Patents : European Patent Office Classification : Naïve Bayes , SVM , k - NN Term Retrieval : Rule - based Approach Topic Extraction : LDA variant Relation Extraction : Supervised Approach Scholars could invest more effort into scientific articles ( including conference proceedings ) as the literature on patent analyses is extant . In addition , scholars could also report more analyses on full texts of patent documents , as a majority of contributions are limited to titles , abstracts , and claims . Scholars could leverage the wealth of knowledge in these sources to create ontologies and knowledge graphs both at the generic and domain - specific levels . As a part of knowledge graph extraction , relation extraction shall adopt a rule - based approach in patent documents as the language is consistent across the entire database . In scientific articles , however , relation extraction requires prior named entity recognition as well as relation label prediction algorithms . Scholars could also immix patent documents and scientific articles in a particular domain to develop a domain - specific graph extraction tool . 3 . 5 . Consumer Opinions Available in plenty as a part of social media text and product reviews , consumer opinions are reflective of actual user experiences [ 178 ] , product specifications , requirements , and issues [ 179 ] . Consumer opinions often include typographical errors ( e . g . , coooolll ) , alternative word forms ( e . g . , LOL ) , multi - lingual terms , and grammatical errors . It is a challenge to remove symbols , hyperlinks , usernames , tags , artificially generated messages , and misspelt words . Lim and Tucker [ 180 , pp . 1 , 2 ] posit that identifying product features in consumer opinions often involves challenges in term disambiguation ( e . g . , “researchers should really screen for this type of error” ) and keyword recognition ( “…just as this court case is about to start , my iPhone battery is dying” ) . To work around the above - mentioned issues , Tuarob and Tucker [ 181 ] propose using Carnegie Mellon POS tagger that suits social media text . In addition , He et al . [ 106 , p . 4 ] recommend using TextRazor 37 for identifying proper nouns like ‘Uber’ and ‘Manhattan’ . While processing consumer opinions , Tuarob et al . [ 182 , p . 4 ] prefer not to perform stemming due to its negative effects on the performances of downstream NLP tasks . To improve the grammatical structure , Wang et al . [ 183 , pp . 456 – 458 ] suggest a few transformation rules , e . g . , Sentence 1 ( e . g . , “very nice” ) is prepended with subject and verb to obtain Sentence 2 ( e . g . , “It is very nice” ) if the former does not include these . In addition to these approaches to work around the issues with consumer opinions , scholars have incorporated distinct steps before performing sentiment analysis , capturing usage context , and modelling user emotions . 3 . 5 . 1 . Sentiment Analysis Sentiment analysis is an important application of NLP that uses ratings as well as an affective lexicon to determine the polarity and intensity of sentiment in a piece of text . The sentiment scores quantify the product favourability [ 181 , p . 5 ] and affective performances [ 184 , pp . 450 , 451 ] . Obtaining true sentiment scores is often a challenge , given that 22 . 75 % of a social media text is sarcastic [ 182 ] . In addition , Tuarob and Tucker [ 185 ] identify that neutral words constitute over 53 % and 48 . 6 % of smartphone and automobile - related tweets . Since the sentiment score of a phrase may not often match that of a sentence , Chang and Lee [ 184 , 37 https : / / www . textrazor . com / p . 462 ] propose to adjust the sentiment score of a local context based on the polarity match with the whole sentence . Sentiment analysis utilises product features ( nouns ) and sentiment indicators ( adjectives , adverbs , and verbs ) ; e . g . , “The keyboard is fine but the keys are real slippery” includes product features { keyboard , keys } and sentiment indicators { fine , slippery } [ 186 , pp . 1 , 2 ] . Sentiment analysis requires an affective lexicon like SentiWordnet [ 187 ] , Affective Space 2 [ 188 ] , and SenticNet 6 [ 189 ] . We review in the remainder of this section , the contributions that have conducted sentiment analyses on various design text sources . Ragupathi et al . [ 190 ] compute sentiment scores of Home Theatre reviews from Twitter , Amazon , and Flipkart using the SENTRAL algorithm and the Dictionary of Affect Language – DAL . To predict sentiment scores , Zhou et al . [ 191 , p . 4 ] feed a labelled dataset of Kindle Fire HD 7 reviews into the fuzzy - SVM algorithm along with a lexicon that is populated using ANEW [ 192 ] . Jiang et al . [ 193 , pp . 2 , 4 ] extract nouns , adverbs , verbs , and adjectives from electric iron reviews and utilize SentiWordNet [ 187 ] to predict sentiment scores . Zhou et al . [ 194 ] compute sentiment scores of specific product features in Kindle Fire HD reviews using ANEW and classification based on a rough set . They augment the sentiment scores with a feature model that was constructed by extracting product features using ARM and combining these using WordNet - based similarity measures ( e . g . , Resnik , Leacock - Chodorow ) . Jiang et al [ 195 , p . 394 ] assess 1259 reviews of six compact cars using Semantria 38 to obtain sentiment scores . Tuarob et al . [ 182 , pp . 6 , 8 ] use TextBlob 39 to compute sentiment scores of tweets related to 27 smartphone models . They account for sarcasm using the analysis of a coword network , where nodes are ranked for likelihood , explicitness , and relatedness . Tang et al . [ 186 ] develop the Tag Sentiment Aspect ( TSA ) Model to extract topics and sentiment indicators simultaneously . They demonstrate the proposed TSA model using DSLR and Laptop reviews [ 196 ] . Sun et al . [ 197 ] calculate sentiment scores of 500 , 000 phone reviews from Zol 40 upon capturing the co - occurrence of product features and sentiment indicators ( adjectives , adverbs ) within a sliding window . For sentiment analysis , Suryadi and Kim [ 198 , pp . 3 , 4 ] feed the labelled embeddings of informative Laptop and Tablet Amazon - based reviews into the Long - Short Term Memory ( LSTM ) model [ 199 ] . 38 https : / / www . lexalytics . com / support / apps / excel 39 https : / / textblob . readthedocs . io / en / dev / 40 https : / / www . zol . com . cn / Sun et al . [ 200 ] mine 98 , 700 reviews and product descriptions of Trumpchi GS4 and GS8 vehicles that are manufactured by the GAC group . They use TF - IDF and fastText [ 201 ] to compute sentiment scores and extract attributes from the text thus mined . Chiarello et al . [ 202 ] extract 7 , 165 , 216 Twitter posts that appeared ahead of the launch of Xbox One X and New Nintendo 2DS XL to examine the effect of sentiment polarity of the social media activity upon the success of these products . They label 6 , 500 tweets relevant / irrelevant and build an SVM classifier . Upon classifying the tweets that are outside the training set , they obtain 66 , 796 relevant tweets and compute the sentiment scores of these using a specific lexicon [ 203 ] . Gozuacik et al . [ 204 ] classify Google Glass tweets using a Deep Neural Network for sentiment polarity and opinion usefulness . They include bag - of - words and other embedding techniques for comparing the classification performances . They find using clustering analysis [ 204 , pp . 9 – 11 ] that among the useful opinions , negative ones denote issues and positive / neutral ones denote innovations . To identify sentiment indicators , Han and Moghaddam [ 205 ] collect 23 , 564 sneaker reviews and fine - tune BERT for a Named Entity Recognition task with the following labels on each word in a sequence : background , sentiment , attribute , and description . Han and Moghaddam [ 206 ] extract product attributes of sneakers from catalogues and product descriptions and apply a rule - based approach to compute sentiment scores w . r . t . , these attributes . Li et al . [ 207 ] identify groups of customers and attribute preferences by clustering the Word2Vec embeddings of 30 , 000 laptop reviews from JD 41 . They estimate the sentiment score using Microsoft’s Deep Structured Semantic Model and utilise these sentiment scores to develop a Kano map between customer groups and attribute preferences . 3 . 5 . 2 . Extracting Usage Context In this section , we review the contributions that capture usage context by examining the product features and their functioning in different environments [ 208 ] – [ 210 ] . Park and Lee [ 211 ] extract consumer opinions of 135 mobile phone models from a review portal 42 . Upon analysing the opinion data using TextAnalyser 2 . 0 , they mine the frequent product specifications , cluster the consumers , and form product - specific networks . 41 https : / / global . jd . com / 42 http : / / www . mobilephonesurvey . com Wang et al . [ 212 ] label and group camera reviews from Amazon and NewEgg using the frequent keywords obtained from product descriptions . They extract the aspects from these reviews using Fine - Grained LDA and Unified Fine - Grained LDA . To relate engineering characteristics with consumer opinions , Jin et al . [ 213 ] obtain 770 reviews of HP and Epson printers from Amazon to extract engineering characteristics using n - gram language models . To aid House of Quality construction , Ko [ 214 ] relate consumer and design requirements using a 2 - tuple fuzzy linguistic approach . To extract important product features , Jin et al . [ 215 ] select the most representative sentences from 21 , 952 reviews on CNET using a greedy algorithm and verify these using information comparativeness , information representativeness , and information diversity . To classify product reviews , Maalej et al . [ 216 ] procure over 1 . 2 million Smartphone Application reviews from the Apple AppStore and Google Play Store . They label the reviews according to four categories : bug report , feature request , user experience , or rating and train the labelled dataset using Naïve Bayes , Decision Tree , and Maximum Entropy algorithms , while also examining the effect of different approaches such as Bag of Words , Bigrams , Lemmatization , Stop words etc . To extract product usage , Park et al . [ 217 , p . 4 ] learn feature ontology by measuring triples like “fabric + shrink” using Wu and Palmer similarity [ 218 ] and merging with factual ( e . g . , “fabric + rayon” ) and sentiment ( e . g . , “shirt + disappoint” ) ontologies using a Fuzzy Formal Concept Analysis ( FFCA ) approach . They identify the relationships between triples using explicit causal conjunctions like ‘so’ , ‘due to’ , ‘because’ etc [ 217 , p . 6 ] . To disambiguate product reviews , Singh and Tucker [ 219 ] classify the Amazon review sentences ( obtained using import . io ) into function , form , behaviour , service , and other using the following classifiers : Naïve Bayes , SVM , Decision Tree , and IBk classifiers . To identify the type of design knowledge in a product review , Kurtanovic and Maalej [ 220 ] label 32 , 414 reviews of 52 Amazon Store Apps with the following concepts : Issue , Alternative , Criteria , Decision , and Justification . They apply the labelled dataset to the following classification algorithms : Naïve Bayes , SVM , Logistic Regression , Decision Tree , Gaussian Process , Random Forest , and Multilayer Perceptron . To capture bigrams that represent the usage context of wearable technology products , Suryadi and Kim [ 221 , pp . 6 , 7 ] combine noun - adjective pairs that co - occur in a hierarchical path in the dependency tree . They [ 221 , p . 8 ] group the embeddings of the noun - adjective combinations using 𝑋 - means clustering . In an extended work , Suryadi and Kim [ 198 , p . 7 ] identify bigrams that are noun - verb , noun - noun , while verbs end with a - ing ; e . g . , ‘web browsing’ , ‘reading books’ . Hou et al . [ 208 , p . 3 ] structure an affordance description as “Afford the ability to [ action word ] [ action receiver ] [ perceived quality ] [ usage context ] ” . Based on the structure , they [ 208 , p . 5 ] extract perceived opposite qualities ( e . g . , low , high ) from Kindle reviews to train an ordered logit regression model . An affordance 𝑖 that supposedly has the perceived qualities 𝑋 𝑖 and 𝑌 𝑖 is characterized according to their model by the coefficients 𝛼 𝑖 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝛽 𝑖 that are used to identify categories of Kano [ 222 ] model : must be , performance , attractive , indifferent , reverse , questionable . Zhou et al . [ 223 ] filter uninformative reviews of Amazon products like Echo , Alexa etc . , using a fastText classifier and extract topics from these using LDA . To estimate the importance of product attributes , Joung and Kim [ 224 ] collect 33 , 779 smartphone reviews from Amazon . They identify product attributes using LDA and sentiment scores using IBM Watson . They estimate the importance of product features using k - optimal Deep Neural Networks that were designed using the SHAP 43 method . 3 . 5 . 3 . Kansei Engineering Kansei engineering aims to support the emotion - driven design and involves acquisition of emotional responses using bipolar adjectives like ‘hot - cold’ and ‘unique - conventional’ [ 113 ] , extracting descriptive adjectives like ‘fresh’ and ‘appealing’ [ 225 ] , and clustering these adjectives [ 226 ] , [ 227 ] . The NLP contributions as we review in the remainder of this section involve developing emotion vocabulary , describing emotions of artefacts , modelling product features and emotions , and developing fuzzy - linguistic membership functions . Scholars have proposed design - specific emotion vocabulary to characterize artefacts . Desmet [ 228 , pp . 4 , 5 ] proposes 9 groups of 25 emotion types and representative emotion words within these . Chaklader and Parkinson [ 229 , pp . 2 – 4 ] examine 500 reviews of Bose SoundLink headphones to identify 29 cue terms [ 229 , p . 2 ] that reflect ergonomic comfort . Kim et al . [ 230 ] identify 15 clusters of 4 , 941 reviews of recliners from Amazon and extract the most frequent adjectives from these clusters . Scholars have applied existing vocabulary to describe artefacts in their studies that we review as follows . Karlsson et al . [ 231 ] use several adjectives to describe the interiors of BMW 318 , Volvo S60 , VW Bora and Audi A6 along the lines of the following factors : pleasantness , complexity , unity , enclosed - ness , potency , 43 SHapley Additive Explanations - https : / / shap . readthedocs . io / en / latest / index . html social status , affection , and originality . To identify the extent of brand importance in the design process , Rasoulifar et al . [ 232 , pp . 144 , 145 ] interview 30 designers about a Tecnifibre tennis bag . From the responses , they extract Kansei , design and brand concepts and organise these into a multiple domain matrix . To characterize the affective qualities of electronic readers , Wodehouse et al . [ 233 , pp . 489 – 492 ] obtain descriptive adjectives of these from a survey on visual attractiveness . They use RAKE 44 to extract keyphrases ( e . g . , “prefer physical books” ) from the patent documents relevant to electronic readers . They form feature vectors of electronic readers using descriptive adjectives and the key phrases to cluster these vectors using ClusterGrammer 45 . To compare affective performances of similar products , Liao [ 234 , p . 5 / 18 ] ask survey participants to place eight wearable products on the quadrants of two graphs : comfortable vs . like clothing and delightful vs . like clothing . Upon placing the products , they also ask the participants to select a suitable emotional descriptor [ 234 , p . 8 / 18 ] . Hu et al . [ 235 ] collect emotional responses of a flash drive regarding its colour , contour , and shell material to discover the emotional dimensions via multi - factor analysis . Using a case study on Toaster , Guo et al . [ 236 ] assess Kansei ratings of groups based on consensus and dominance Scholars have attempted to establish a relationship between emotional descriptors and product features . Using a dataset of 7 interior designs of truck cabs , Zhou et al . [ 237 ] adopt K - optimal rule discovery and Ordinary Least - Squares Regression to map design elements and affective descriptors . Upon obtaining participant data on CNC machine tools , Wang [ 238 ] establish a relationship between abstract ( e . g . , “Rigid / Flexible” ) and elementary ( e . g . , “Firm / Fragile” ) Kansei words using Support Vector Regression and Artificial Neural Network . Vieira et al . [ 239 ] measure the actuation force , contact force , stroke , and snap ratio for 11 keys in an in - vehicle rubber keypad . They ask participants to rate the performances of these keys using 7 Kansei words ( e . g . , unpleasant / pleasant , smooth / hard , loose / stiff ) . They observe using regression models that a significant relationship exists between the aforementioned design parameters and the Kansei ratings . To predict the Kansei ratings from the features of a bottle design , Mele and Campana [ 240 ] train a neural network with the following architecture : input layer with 14 design features ( e . g . , geometry , process , material ) , two hidden 44 https : / / pypi . org / project / rake - nltk / 45 https : / / clustergrammer . readthedocs . io / layers , and an output layer with eight ratings to corresponding Kansei words ( e . g . , classic / trendy , masculine / feminine ) . Misaka and Aoyama [ 241 ] obtain Kansei ratings of crack patterns on pottery surfaces using 50 adjectives . They use a neural network with one hidden layer to model the relationship between ratings and crack characteristics such as width , fineness , and fluctuation . Upon mining 4459 Amazon reviews of 30 road bikes using WebHarvy 46 , Chiu and Lin [ 242 ] construct a functional model and a morphological matrix for six design elements ( e . g . , saddle , tread surface ) . They identify the 11 most frequent adjectives and group these into four semantic sets ( overall impression , usability , riding experience , and weight ) and compute the corresponding semantic differentials . They run a linear regression using each semantic differential as a dependent variable and the six design elements as binary categorical variables . So [ 243 ] conducts a study that involves ranking 115 adjectives to obtain 12 design words and five emotion words . Using the resultant words , he performs factor analysis to discover the following dimensions : tool , novelty , energy , simplicity , and emotion . Among these dimensions , he found that emotion was a significant predictor of design preferences via the following models : Linear Regression , Random Forest , Neural Network , and Gradient Boosting Machine . For 1474 French Press coffee maker reviews on Amazon , El Dehaibi et al . [ 244 , pp . 4 – 6 ] use crowdsourced efforts to highlight phrases that indicate sustainability and obtain the corresponding degree of emotion . They train a logistic classifier to predict the DoE from highlighted phrases , while also using LDA to extract topics from these . Wang et al . [ 245 ] propose rules to automatically label reviews with affective attributes ( e . g . , like - dislike , reliable - unreliable ) based on the affective words contained in these . In an alternative approach to automatically labelling reviews , they build a classifier by manually labelling 900 reviews of 20 stuffed toys from Amazon and training the following models : k - NN , Classification and Regression Tree ( CART ) , Multilayer Perceptron , DBN , and LSTM . Jiang et al . [ 246 ] extract hair dryer reviews from Amazon and estimate the predictability of product attributes ( weight , heat , power , speed ) upon minimum , maximum , and average sentiment scores over four time periods . 46 https : / / www . webharvy . com / Upon mining reviews and product specifications of 19 upper limb rehabilitation devices from Amazon and Alibaba , Shi and Peng [ 247 ] connect these with 10 customer requirements ( e . g . , flexible wear , no smell ) using WordNet - based similarity . For each customer requirement , they measure satisfaction using adjectives and adverbs in the reviews . They also identify the functional implementation through product specifications . Next , they fit a curve to establish a relationship between functional implementation and customer satisfaction . Chen et al . [ 248 , pp . 84 , 85 ] obtain 60 images of cockpit interior designs from the web and 20 emotional terms ( about cockpit ) from aircraft experts . They form the similarity matrix among these 20 terms using WordNet and cluster these into four emotional dimensions , which are used to rate each image as per the Likert scale [ 248 , pp . 90 , 91 ] . They train the following neural networks using the images labelled with an emotional degree : Radical Basis Function , Elman , and General Regression . Kansei attributes [ 249 , pp . 408 , 409 ] and degrees [ 249 , p . 410 ] are abstractions of adjectives ( affective characteristic ) and adverbs ( affective degree ) . Using the affective degrees obtained from surveys or text mining , scholars have attempted to model the linguistic membership functions of affective characteristics . Wang et al . [ 249 , p . 411 ] extract adjective - adverb combinations from McAuley’s dataset 47 and map these to corresponding Kansei attributes and degrees . Wang et al . [ 250 ] map a variety of fuzzy linguistic term sets ( e . g . , { ‘none’ , ‘very bad’ , ‘bad’ , ‘medium’ , ‘good’ , ‘very perfect’ , ‘perfect’ } ) to their membership degrees using a trapezoidal asymmetric cloud model . Scholars have adopted similar approaches to model Kansei variables and their corresponding fuzzy membership functions , e . g . , USB flash drives [ 251 ] and hand - painted Kutani cups [ 252 ] . 3 . 5 . 4 . Summary We summarize the NLP contributions that use consumer opinions in Table 6 . These sources have been quite popular alongside technical publications , given the extensive accessibility and high information content . However , consumer opinions are quite poor in terms of language quality , which , as discussed previously , poses negative effects on the performance of fundamental NLP tasks . Since prescriptive tools like NLTK do not work well on these sources , NLP scholars have been developing deep learning models to carry out fundamental tasks like POS tagging [ 253 ] . 47 http : / / jmcauley . ucsd . edu / data / amazon / Table 6 : Summary of NLP methodologies and future possibilities with Consumer Opinions . Data Methods Supporting Materials Sentiment Analysis Amazon : Home Theatre , Kindle Fire HD , Electric Iron , DSLR , Laptop , Hair Dryer , Tablet , Smartphone , Sneaker , Upper Limb Rehabilitation Device Twitter : Home Theatre , Smartphone , Xbox One X , New Nintendo 2DS XL , Google Glass Others : Flipkart – Home Theatre , Compact Car , Zol – Phone , Trumpchi GS4 & GS8 , JD – Laptop , Alibaba – Upper Limb Rehabilitation Device , YouTube Text Processing : Carnegie Mellon POS Tagger , Stanford CoreNLP , ARM Embedding : TF - IDF , BOW , Word2Vec , GloVe , BERT Similarity Measurement : WordNet - based Similarity Sentiment Prediction : SENTRAL , Semantria , TextBlob , IBM Watson , Deep Structured Semantic Model Topic Extraction : Tag Sentiment Aspect ( TSA ) , LDA Clustering : K - means Classification : Fuzzy - SVM , LSTM , fastText , SVM , Deep Neural Network ( DNN ) , Kano Named Entity Recognition : BERT + 2 CNN layers Others : Coword Network Analysis , Curve Fitting Lexicon : WordNet Affective Lexicon : SentiWordNet , WordNet - Affect , SenticNet4 , Dictionary of Affect Language ( DAL ) , ANEW Extracting Usage Context Amazon : Camera , HP Printers , Epson Printers , Smartphone , Kindle , Echo , Alexa Others : MobilePhoneSurvey – Mobile Phone , NewEgg – Camera , CNET , Apple App Store , Google Play Store , YouTube Text Processing : TextAnalyser 2 . 0 , N - gram Model Term Retrieval : Dependency Parsing , Rule - based Approach , Design Knowledge Graph Embedding : BOW , Word2Vec , BERT , GPT - x Similarity Measurement : Wu and Palmer Clustering : K - means , X - means Topic Extraction : LDA , Fine - Grained LDA , Unified Fine - Grained LDA Classification : Naïve Bayes , Decision Tree , Maximum Entropy , SVM , IBk , Logistic Regression , Gaussian Process , Random Forest , Multi - Layer Perceptron , Ordered Logit Regression , Kano , fastText , k - optimal DNNs , SHAP Sentiment Analysis : IBM Watson Others : Fuzzy - Linguistic Approach Lexicon : WordNet Ontologies : Domain - specific Kansei Engineering Amazon : Bose SoundLink , Recliner , Road Bike , French Press Coffee Maker , Stuffed Toys , Hair Dryer , Upper Limb Rehabilitation Device ( also from Alibaba ) Survey Responses : BMW 318 Interiors , Volvo S60 Interiors , VW Bora Interiors , Audi A6 Interiors , Tecnifibre Tennis Bag , Electronic Reader Patents , Wearable Products , Flash Drive , Toaster , Truck Cab Interiors , CNC Machine Tools , In - Vehicle Rubber Keypad , Bottle Design , Crack Patterns on Pottery Surfaces , Cockpit Interiors , Kutani Cups Clustering : K - means , ClusterGrammer Classification : K - optimal Rule Discovery , Ordinary Least Squares ( OLS ) Regression , Support Vector Regression , ANN , Neural Network ( 2 hidden layers ) , Linear Regression , Random Forest , Gradient Boosting Machine , k - NN , Classification and Regression Tree ( CART ) , Multi - Layer Perceptron , DBN , LSTM , Radical Basis Function , Elman Topic Extraction : LDA , RAKE Others : Multi - Factor Analysis , Curve Fitting Lexicon : WordNet Scholars have applied state - of - the - art NLP methods for sentiment analysis and extraction of usage context . Although Kansei engineering only concerns emotional descriptors for artefacts , scholars have significantly advanced this area by relating with product features and developing fuzzy linguistic models . While scholars could additionally explore the YouTube platform for a newer set of opinions , any advancement in NLP applications to consumer opinions , therefore , depends on the advancement in core NLP research . The current NLP applications use state - of - the - art methods that can identify negative reviews , filter the less useful ones , extract significant topics , and group similar reviews . Companies can hire human resources to conduct post hoc analyses and test the products and services under those conditions that the consumers had deemed to malfunction . Developing NLP applications to support such post hoc analyses may not carry scholarly merit as much as generating value for the industry . Scholars could rather utilise detailed product reviews given by experts to extract design knowledge at various levels of abstraction ( e . g . , Function - Behaviour - Structure ) . Extracting such knowledge could be of value to discovering design opportunities and generating problem statements . Domain experts who provide such detailed reviews can identify fundamental issues with a concept that is embodied in the product . An expert mentions all specifications , various use cases , do’s / don’ts , estimated lifetime etc . In addition , an expert provides the reviews with necessary context that is often absent in consumer opinions . YouTube provides both expert reviews and consumer opinions on a single platform , which is currently underutilised by scholars . 3 . 6 . Other Sources 3 . 6 . 1 . Function Structures Built upon traditional function structures [ 254 ] , [ 255 ] , the functional basis developed by Stone and Wood [ 152 ] constitutes functions ( e . g . , convert , distribute ) and flows ( e . g . , solid material , mechanical energy ) . The functional basis led to the development of functional models for several products for over 184 electromechanical products and 6906 artefacts [ 21 ] . Due to its tremendous popularity , several scholars have attempted to apply and build upon the modelling technique . We review such contributions that are relevant to NLP . Sridharan and Campbell [ 256 , pp . 141 , 143 ] propose several grammar rules to ensure consistency in functional models . For example , to the function ‘remove solid’ , the secondary inflow – ‘mechanical energy’ and the outflow – ‘reaction force’ is added , while , the primary outflow is modified to ‘two solids’ [ 256 , pp . 145 – 147 ] . Sangelkar and McAdams [ 257 ] improve on functional models by including user activities obtained from ICF 48 to create action - function diagrams , which they use to compare typical and universal products ( e . g . , Box Cutter and Fiskars Rotary Cutter ) . 48 International Classification of Functioning , Disability , and Health - https : / / tinyurl . com / 7ph87kb7 Sen et al . [ 258 ] formalize function structures using a prescribed vocabulary for entities and relationships while also proposing several rules for the construction of flows . For example , Rule 14 states [ 258 , p . 6 ] , “A Material flow can have one or more upstream flows , all of which must be of type Material . ” Agyemang et al . [ 259 ] propose several pruning rules to reduce uncertainty and improve consistency in modelling function structures . For example , Rule 8 states [ 259 , p . 504 ] , “Remove all signal , sense , indicate , process , detect , measure , track , and display functions . ” To assist with the construction of function structures , Gangopadhyay [ 260 ] develop the Augment Transition Network – ATN parser that detects the entities and conceptual dependencies upon providing a text input . To automatically construct functional models , Yamamoto et al . [ 261 ] extract ( noun , part of , noun ) triples ( e . g . , “wheel of car” ) using the ESPRESSO algorithm [ 262 ] and develop a tree structure , where nouns are replaced by adjacent verbs found in documents . Wilschut et al . [ 263 , p . 535 ] extract functions from sentences that comply with a specific grammatical structure ; e . g . , “Component x provides power p to component y” . Using Wikipedia articles on ‘machines’ , Cheong et al [ 264 , pp . 4 , 5 ] obtain and classify Subject - Verb - Object ( SVO ) triples as functions and energy flows if objects and verbs match with secondary terms in functional basis and their WordNet synonyms . Also , if the combined similarity ( Jiang - Conrath and Word2Vec ) between the object and ‘energy’ is greater than 2 . 9 , they classify the object is classified as energy flow . 3 . 6 . 2 . Miscellaneous We review some purpose - specific classifiers that were built using miscellaneous sources of natural language text . To classify manufacturing concepts using the manufacturing capabilities , Sabbagh et al . [ 265 ] label the concepts ( e . g . , ‘annealing’ , ‘hardening’ ) with capabilities ( e . g . , ‘highspeed machining’ ) using the data provided by 260 suppliers listed in ThomasNet 49 and a manufacturing thesaurus [ 266 ] . They train the labelled dataset using the following classifiers : Naïve Bayes , k - NN , Random Forest , and SVM . Sabbagh and Ameri [ 267 ] obtain LSA - based vectors of manufacturing concepts and cluster these using the manufacturing capability data – ThomasNet for 130 suppliers in heavy machining and complex machining . 49 https : / / www . thomasnet . com / To map technical competencies and performances , using the methods such as Probabilistic Latent Semantic Indexing ( PLSI ) , Non - Negative Matrix Factorization ( NNMF ) , and Latent Dirichlet Allocation ( LDA ) , Ball and Lewis [ 268 ] extract topics from two corpora : course descriptions and project descriptions of students who were enrolled in the capstone . For each topic and each student , either from course or project , they compute the aggregated score based on his / her grade . They subsequently map course and project vectors using the following methods : Linear Regression , Decision Tree , k - NN , Support Vector Regression , and ANN . 4 . Discussion In Section 3 , we have reviewed and summarized NLP contributions according to the types of text sources . In the summary sections for each type of text source , we have indicated the method - wise and data - wise limitations , while also mentioning specific opportunities . In this section , we discuss how the NLP contributions thus reviewed could be applied in the design process and what are the potential future directions for the scholars who would contribute to NLP in - and - for design . 4 . 1 . Applications To provide a summary of the design applications that are currently supported by NLP , we utilise the integrated design innovation framework that was developed at the Singapore University of Technology and Design ( SUTD ) . The framework 50 builds upon the double - diamond model of the UK Design Business Council and includes various design modules within each phase . The framework has been utilised to train practitioners from various domains who attend design thinking workshops at the university . Over 20 workshops are held every year – during each workshop ( 2 - 3 days ) , on average , five design innovation facilitators train over 50 practitioners on design thinking . It is important to note that the framework does not span the entirety of the design process , methods , and underlying steps . For instance , the framework does not cover immersed spatial thinking [ 269 ] . We utilize this framework to set a boundary for our discussion and to identify the application gaps that could potentially lead to future research opportunities for design scholars . We list the modules of the design innovation framework across each phase of the design process , as shown in Table 7 . For these modules , we highlight the specific steps that are being supported by NLP to indicate the steps that are yet to be supported . We also highlight , on some occasions , the steps as well as NLP applications that could be considered future opportunities . We could consider Table 7 as a minimal NLP guide for choosing a module or a step within a module to develop specific NLP - based supports . In future , as more NLP contributions are reported in the literature , we hope to extend this NLP guide using a comprehensive list of design methods like the Design Exchange 51 . 50 https : / / www . dimodules . com / dilearningmodules 51 https : / / www . thedesignexchange . org / design _ methods Table 7 : Applications of NLP in the design process . We highlight the currently supported steps within the module and future opportunities . Phase Module NLP Applications Discover Interviews : explore usage , identify users , inquire likes / dislikes and use , extract needs and insights Sentiment Analysis : Text Classification , Network Analysis . Topic Modelling , Sentiment Indicators , Clustering , Named Entity Recognition Product Feature Modelling : Rule - based Approach , Kano Maps , Regression , Curve Fitting , Clustering , Text Classification , Neural Networks User Profiling : Clustering , Named Entity Recognition , Affective Attributes , Affective - Design Attribute Relationship Usage Scenarios : Topic Extraction , Language Models , House - of - Quality , Optimization Methods , Text Classification , Ontology Extraction , FBS , Dependency Parsing , Regression , Kano Map Design Rationale Extraction : Text Classification Emotion Vocabulary : Clustering Kansei Engineering : Survey , Kansei - Design Matrix , Clustering , Topic Extraction , Multi - Factor Analysis , Kansei - Feature Regression , Text Classification , Term Similarity , Image Classification , Fuzzy Membership Function Scenarios : ideate scenarios ( how , who , where ) , present scenarios , observe user reactions User - Journey Map : gather insights , choose persona , identify touchpoints , identify channels , sketch user journey , rate emotional level , extract opportunities , sketch future journey Define Affinity Diagram : gather needs , group needs Personas : gather persona , consolidate behaviour , present persona Activity Diagram : observe user activities , record activities , visualize activity sequence , extract insights Action - Function Diagram : Functional Basis , Rule Mining Hierarchy of Purpose : create opportunity statements , create generalized statements , review statements Requirements Elicitation : Documentation Guidelines , Text Generation , Sentence Completion System Functions : gather needs , map needs and flows generate functions , create function structures Functional Modelling : Grammar Rules , Action - Function Linking , Function Vocabulary , Pruning Rules , Term ( Function / Flow ) Identification , Ontology Extraction , Text Mining , Text Similarity Develop Mind Mapping : initiate design opportunity , generate categories , generate sub - categories , generate solutions , review mind - maps , expand mind maps , reorganize mind maps Mind Mapping : Term Retrieval Patent Mining : Term - based Patent Map , Class - based Technology Map , Product - based Patent Map , Predicate Logic , Topic Clustering , Phrase Extraction Solution Generation : TRIZ , Cosine Similarity , Patent Similarity , Function - based Patent Classification 6 - 3 - 5 ( C - Sketch ) : form a 6 - member group , sketch 3 ideas , pass the sketches to a neighbour , improvise on the sketches , repeat 5 times Iterative Labelling : Object Recognition , Term Retrieval , Image Classification Iterative Annotation : Text Generation , Sentence Completion , Knowledge Retrieval , Ontology - based Retrieval ( e . g . , Definitions ) Iterative Argumentation : Text Classification , Text Mining , Clustering , Ontology - based Patent Mining , Knowledge Retrieval Design - by - Analogy : identify keywords , search for inspiration , align relational structure , generate concepts , utilize tools , make inferences , iterate Keyword Identification : Lexical Relationships , Semantic Similarity , SAPPhIRE , FBS , Text Classification , Domain Ontologies Relation - based Retrieval : Ontological , Lexical , Physical , Ecological , Biological Solution Generation : Function - based Patent Classification , Text Classification Patent Mining : FBS - based Term Retrieval , Function - based Patent Similarity , Image Annotation , Ontology - based Topic Modelling Real - Win - Worth : gather solutions , check reality , check novelty , check value Concept Association : Clustering , Topic Association , Network Analysis , Patent Keyword Summarization , Patent Abstract Summarization Novelty Assessment : Kansei Attributes , Pattern Matching , Semantic Similarity , SAPPhIRE , Topic Modelling Deliver Multimedia Story Boarding : identify target user , communicate context , identify key actors , generate flow of events , present story , gather feedback User Profiling : Clustering , Named Entity Recognition , Text Classification , Text Mining , Term Retrieval , Ontology - based Retrieval Usage Scenarios : Topic Extraction , Language Models , House - of - Quality , Optimization Methods , Text Classification , Ontology Extraction , FBS , Dependency Parsing , Regression , Kano Map Image Annotation : Entity Recognition , Text Generation , Knowledge Retrieval , Ontology - based Retrieval Kansei Engineering : Survey , Kansei - Design Matrix , Clustering , Topic Extraction , Multi - Factor Analysis , Kansei - Feature Regression , Text Classification , Term Similarity , Image Classification , Fuzzy Membership Function Prototyping Canvas : choose a solution / concept , fill prototyping canvas , discuss the canvas , build prototype , test prototype , analyse results Requirements Elicitation : Documentation Guidelines , Network Analysis , Text Classification Design Rationale Extraction : Text Cleaning / Segmentation , Term / Phrase Disambiguation , Text Classification , Text Mining , Clustering , Ontology - based Patent Mining Ontology Discovery : Text Mining , Similarity Measurement , Clustering , Topic Modelling , Patent Similarity Case - based Reasoning : Knowledge Retrieval , Knowledge Graph Construction , Ontology - based retrieval , Case Indexing Failure Analysis : Sequence - Sequence Mapping , Text Classification Parameter Identification : Survey , Kansei - Design Matrix , Kansei - Feature Regression Design Evaluation : Kansei Attributes , Pattern Matching , Semantic Similarity , SAPPhIRE , Topic Modelling , Text Classification , Success Metrics Scaled Model : conduct dimensional analysis , identify key parameters , employ scaling , construct scale model , evaluate model 4 . 1 . 1 . Discover The design innovation framework suggests , as shown in Table 7 , that in the discover phase , interviews are conducted with potential users to extract needs and insights . Upon collecting user perceptions on specific usage scenarios , a user journey map is developed . Consumer opinions from e - commerce and social media platforms readily provide user profiles along with their ratings , usage , and needs . While the steps in the discover modules are largely accomplished using sentiment analysis [ 182 ] , [ 194 ] and usage context extraction [ 216 ] , [ 217 ] , Kansei engineering methods capture user emotions for the presented usage scenarios [ 239 ] , [ 244 ] . Kansei engineering also allows establishing a relationship between emotions and product features to predict their importance [ 247 ] , [ 248 ] . The design knowledge thus extracted from consumer opinions is often not sufficient to capture the user journey as the opinions lack enough context and detail . Some seeding information like user persona [ 207 ] , touchpoints , and channels [ 208 ] could be extracted to initialise the user journey map , which could only be developed upon mining detailed expert reviews [ 215 ] and conducting user studies [ 241 ] . 4 . 1 . 2 . Define In the define phase , the user needs are identified and grouped while capturing the user personas to develop activity diagrams . The data generated thus far is utilised to concretize design opportunities and create function structures that map needs to product functions . In terms of gathering needs and persona , the NLP supports remain the same as what was discussed in the discover phase . To develop activity diagrams , Sangelkar and McAdams [ 257 ] provide partial support by mining association rules from the action - function diagrams . While there is a need for NLP support in terms of text generation to create opportunity statements , some documentation guidelines have been proposed to structure the requirements such that these are suitable to perform NLP tasks [ 37 ] , [ 270 ] . The scholars have extensively invested in NLP approaches to map needs to functions [ 89 ] , [ 140 ] , generate functions [ 77 ] , [ 263 ] , and develop function structures [ 7 ] , [ 260 ] , [ 261 ] as we have reviewed in this article . 4 . 1 . 3 . Develop The develop phase capitalises on the concretised needs , problem statements , and function structures from the define phase to generate solutions using various approaches such as mind - map , 6 - 3 - 5 sketching , and design - by - analogy . Supports have been developed regarding the mind - maps to generate nodes [ 94 ] and organise these into categories [ 108 ] . In the absence of user needs , scholars have proposed various approaches to initiate design opportunities from technology maps [ 160 ] , [ 162 ] and biomimicry strategies [ 143 ] , [ 271 ] . The approaches to design opportunity identification could also lend themselves to widening strategies like keyword expansion [ 83 ] , [ 145 ] and concept exploration [ 99 ] , [ 100 ] . While 6 - 3 - 5 sketch is often overlooked by scholars in terms of NLP , it is possible to label the sketches using object recognition and image classification algorithms . While the label for such algorithms often tends to be abstract ( e . g . , man , animal ) , it is possible to retrieve specific and label - related terms using ontologies and context information [ 61 ] . The sketches are often annotated with titles , definitions , the flow of events , etc . To reduce annotation time and make plausible annotations , it is possible to use text generation approaches , especially sentence completion algorithms . In digital sketching interfaces , definitions of components ( retrieved from knowledge bases ) may pop up on hover . Scholars have extensively contributed to the research in design - by - analogy in terms of identifying search keywords [ 82 ] , [ 86 ] , generating solutions [ 151 ] , [ 272 ] , [ 273 ] , especially via relation - based retrieval algorithms [ 97 ] , [ 98 ] . These supports , however , inform less whether the analogies are suitable . The analogical inferences are therefore yet to be supported . The design innovation framework shown in Table 7 suggests that the solutions thus generated should be gathered and checked for reality , novelty , and value . The NLP contributions have been effective in associating and discovering categories among several crowdsourced solutions [ 103 ] , [ 107 ] . While several other performance indicators like flexibility and manufacturability are also important metrics to be considered while selecting concepts , computing value is difficult while developing a concept , as value requires sufficient usage context . Current NLP contributions are capable of supporting interim tasks in novelty assessment that is carried out in many ways [ 274 ] . 4 . 1 . 4 . Deliver To deliver the solutions , the framework suggests creating a multi - media storyboard that communicates the role of solutions in specific scenarios . Scholars have proposed approaches to identify generic users and usage context from consumer opinions that could stimulate ideas for storyboarding . Object - detection algorithms coupled with knowledge graphs [ 275 ] could be useful for labelling and describing scenes like storyboards . Kansei engineering methods could be adopted to capture emotional feedback on the storyboards . Besides multimedia storyboarding , NLP techniques could provide direct as well as indirect support for prototyping and developing scaled models . To build , test , and analyse prototypes , the current NLP supports help understand requirements including dependencies [ 10 ] , elicit requirements [ 30 ] , capture design rationale [ 40 ] , [ 276 ] , analyse failures [ 39 ] , [ 64 ] , and facilitate case - based reasoning [ 60 ] , [ 61 ] . While these existing supports are applicable for testing scaled models as well , building a scaled model requires dimensional analysis that maps the key design parameters ( e . g . , viscosity ) onto the performance parameters ( e . g . , energy consumption ) . As an alternative to dimensional analysis , scholars have adopted deep learning approaches to associate design and performance parameters . For example , upon combining three datasets 52 , Robinson et al . [ 277 ] map building feature like area , the number of floors , heating degree days , building activity etc . , onto the annual energy consumption using several models like gradient boost , multi - layer perceptron , KNN , SVR etc [ 277 , p . 894 ] . While performance parameters like energy consumption are largely derived from industry standards , the influential design parameters could be chosen and evaluated based on Kansei methods [ 239 ] , [ 241 ] . 4 . 2 . Methodological Directions Based on our review , we propose eight methodological directions for future NLP applications to support the design process . First , we prioritize the extraction of knowledge graphs from text , which will be utilised in the design process as a knowledge base . Second , we recommend the development and utilisation of domain - specific language models to perform tasks such as classification , NER , and question - answering . In the third and fourth directions , we propose the development of one or more text generation and neural machine translation models . Next , we propose the adoption of NER methods and collaborative tagging approaches to facilitate the tasks such as classification , relation extraction etc . Further , we propose that scholars develop standard datasets using design text as a common evaluation platform for future NLP applications . Finally , we propose to develop success metrics for evaluating the efficacy of NLP supports . We have listed these directions along with examples in Table 8 . We provide specific examples for the first six directions using a publicly available text 53 . For the remainder of this section , we explain these directions in individual sub - sections . 52 Commercial Buildings Energy Consumption Survey - https : / / www . eia . gov / consumption / commercial / New York City Local Law 84 ( LL84 ) - https : / / www1 . nyc . gov / html / gbee / html / plan / ll84 _ about . shtml New York City Primary Land Use Tax Lot Output ( PLUTO ) - https : / / www1 . nyc . gov / site / planning / data - maps / open - data / dwn - pluto - mappluto . page 53 https : / / ceramicpro . com / what - does - a - nano - ceramic - coating - do / Table 8 : Methodological directions with examples . Methodological Direction Example Input Example Output Design Knowledge Graph “A nano - ceramic coating , a scientifically formulated solution meant to penetrate microscopic imperfections , fill those gaps in the top range of the nanoscale and provide a layer of protection that’s nearly as strong as solid quartz . 9H ceramic coating work by bonding with the existing surface to form a protective nano - ceramic shield on the surface . ” < nano - ceramic coating , penetrate , microscopic imperfections > < nano - ceramic coating , provide , protection layer > < nano - ceramic coating , form , nano - ceramic shield > < nano - ceramic coating , bond , existing , surface > < existing surface , bond , nano - ceramic shield > Domain - Specific Language Model “Nanoceramic coating” , “solution” , “ceramic” Embeddings Text Generation “Nano - ceramic coating” “Nano - ceramic coating provides protection layer” “Nano - ceramic coating forms nano - ceramic shield” … Neural Machine Translation Model “Nano - ceramic coating provides protection layer” “Nano - ceramic coating forms nano - ceramic shield” < nano ceramic coating , ℎ𝑎𝑠𝐹𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 , provide protection layer > < nano ceramic coating , ℎ𝑎𝑠𝐵𝑒ℎ𝑎𝑣𝑖𝑜𝑢𝑟 , form nano ceramic shield > Named - Entity Recognition “A nano - ceramic coating , a scientifically formulated solution meant to penetrate microscopic imperfections , fill those gaps in the top range of the nanoscale , and provide a layer of protection that’s nearly as strong as solid quartz ” “Nano - ceramic coating” – coating material , coating solution “Solid quartz” – coating material , coating solution Collaborative Tagging “A nano - ceramic coating , a scientifically formulated solution meant to penetrate microscopic imperfections , fill those gaps in the top range of the nanoscale and provide a layer of protection that’s nearly as strong as solid quartz . 9H ceramic coating work by bonding with the existing surface to form a protective nano - ceramic shield on the surface . ” “A nano ceramic coating…” – Function “9H ceramic coating…” – Behaviour Standard Datasets NLP Tasks : Text Classification , Text Similarity… NLP Applications : Functional Representation , Design Rationale Extraction… Standard Datasets Success Metrics Text Comprehension , Keyword Diversity , Problem Understanding… Success Metrics 4 . 2 . 1 . Design Knowledge Graph A knowledge graph comprises facts of the form – { 〈ℎ , 𝑟 , 𝑡〉 } and serves as an infrastructure for the development of various NLP applications . A design knowledge graph includes facts like < ‘stapler’ , ‘comprises’ , ‘leaf spring’ > , < ‘hammer’ , ‘push’ , ‘staple’ > that could be utilised or generated in the design process . A design knowledge graph carries informative as well as reasoning advantages over networks [ 278 ] that provide pairwise statistical [ 79 ] , semantic [ 133 ] , and syntactic [ 78 ] relationships among a large collection of design terms ( lexicon ) . To process and recognize entities in text sources like internal reports , design concepts , and consumer opinions [ 279 ] , it is necessary to build design knowledge graphs that could replace the common - sense lexicon ( e . g . , WordNet ) . Domain - specific ontologies ( e . g . , QuenchML ) capture design knowledge using relationships ( 𝑟 ) like ‘hasProperty’ , ‘partOf’ , and ‘hasWeight’ that are technically preferable in comparison with that of common - sense ontologies like ConceptNet , i . e . , the relationships such as ‘atLocation’ and ‘usedFor’ captured by these . However , domain - specific ontologies capture abstractions ( e . g . , < Component , hasWeight , xx > ) rather than facts ( e . g . , < clamp , weighs , 65 grams > ) that are extracted from natural language text and captured using knowledge graphs . We have shown an example in Table 8 for the facts that could be extracted from a sample text . As discussed in Section 3 . 4 . 4 , technical publications that include patents and scientific articles are preferable sources for extracting facts and developing design knowledge graphs due to their high accessibility , information content , and quality . Scholars have indicated the possibility of extracting triples from the patent text [ 280 ] – [ 282 ] . Siddharth et al . [ 283 ] , for example , apply some rules to extract facts from patent claims by exploiting the syntactic and lexical properties . While patents could offer rule - based extraction methods due to consistent language , scientific articles require a mix of rule - based , ontology - based , and supervised approaches . 4 . 2 . 2 . Domain - Specific Language Model Early models of language given by traditional grammar have often proposed a restricted set of rules for forming sentences [ 284 , pp . 5 , 6 ] , which limits the opportunity to produce a vast number of sentences . The modern view of a language model involves training large corpora to capture the likelihood of a given sequence of words ( or tokens ) , e . g . , “metallic bond is strong” in the same order . Originally developed as N - gram models , these models have evolved into deep learning - based models or transformers such as BERT and GPT - x . These models advance the theory of acquisition model of a language [ 284 , p . 38 ] via statistical embeddings of generative grammar , which is otherwise represented as Parts of Speech , Structural Dependencies etc . These models capture the embeddings of tokens and sequences through masked language modelling where a large number of sequence - sequence pairs are provided as training data . The input - output pair must belong to the same sequence but nearly 15 % of the input tokens are expected to be masked . The embeddings that result from these models could be directly used to train classifiers , sequence - to - sequence tasks like Q & A , and NER tasks . Several variants of BERT have been introduced at the corpora level , e . g . , BioBERT [ 75 ] and at the architecture level , e . g . , k - BERT [ 285 ] . The variant k - BERT , for instance , stitches facts from a domain knowledge graph onto the tokens for training the model . Using domain - knowledge embedded language models like k - BERT provides embeddings of terms that are meaningful . As opposed to common techniques like BOW , LSA , and Word2Vec , embeddings from domain - specific language models should return ‘nearly true’ cosine similarity between a pair of artefacts ( described using text ) that have domain - association , similar physical properties , and perform similar functions . Moreover , such domain - specific embeddings could aid in efficient concept retrieval in the respective domain . For example , a radiology - specific language model should identify the terms closest to “Magnetic Resonance Imaging” than a common - sense language model . 4 . 2 . 3 . Text Generation Originally referred to as Natural Language Generation ( NLG ) systems , e . g . , the DOCSY model [ 286 ] , applications that generate text reduce cost , ensure consistency , and maintain the standard of documentation [ 287 , pp . 261 – 265 ] . Such applications are relevant to the design process where requirements must be elicited , opportunity statements must be generated , and solutions must be described . In Table 8 , we indicate an example where a seeding term “nano - ceramic coating” results in plausible sentences using text generation algorithms . To support ontology - based verification of requirements , Moitra et al . [ 270 , p . 347 ] propose that a requirement shall be expressed as follows : REQUIREMENT R ( name ) ; SYSTEM shall set 𝑥 of 𝑋 to 𝑥 1 ( conclusion ) ; when 𝑦 ∈ 𝑌 ( condition ) . Likewise , scholars have proposed templates for describing design concepts as well [ 106 ] , [ 157 ] , [ 288 ] . While such a template - based approach works with a limited scope , it is necessary to implement text generation algorithms that are built out of RNNs , LSTM , and Transformers . Zhu and Luo [ 289 ] fine - tune GPT - 2 for mapping the problems ( including categories ) to solutions using problem - solution data obtained from RedDot 54 . They also explore the capabilities of GPT - 3 that support analogy - by - design in terms of generating text descriptions upon providing source - target domain labels as inputs . For a given technology domain , using KeyBERT 55 , Zhu and Luo [ 290 ] extract topics ( terms and keyphrases ) from patent titles and create a dataset of topic - title pairs . They fine - tune GPT - 2 for mapping 54 https : / / www . red - dot . org / 55 https : / / github . com / MaartenGr / KeyBERT topics to titles so that solutions ( as hypothetical titles ) could be generated using search keywords ( topics of interest ) . 4 . 2 . 4 . Neural Machine Translation Neural Machine Translation ( NMT ) models are trained to map sequence - to - sequence using an encoder - decoder framework [ 291 ] . These models are often associated with Transformers owing to the similarity in structure and behaviour of the neural networks that were built to accomplish the mapping task . NMT models have been specifically built to perform cross - language translation tasks and these are useful to increase semantic interoperability in design environments . For example , the rules “Smith Ltd shares machines with NZ - based companies” and “Smith Ltd allows NZ - based companies to use its machines” mean the same but are written in different forms [ 70 ] . In Table 8 , we have shown an example of semantic forms that could be mapped from design text through neural machine translation . To standardize manufacturing rules , Ye and Lu [ 70 ] map a manufacturing rule into a semantic rule using a neural machine translation model [ 292 ] that comprises an encoder and a decoder with 256 Gated - Recurrent Units ( GRUs ) present in each [ 70 ] . Chen et al . [ 293 ] propose semantic rule templates to formalize requirements so that these are easily verified using ontologies . NMT models coupled with semantic rule templates are necessary to translate ambiguous natural language sentences into a machine - readable form . 4 . 2 . 5 . Named Entity Recognition NER is a sequence - to - sequence task like POS tagging where entities and their respective tags are identified , e . g . , ‘General Electric’ as an organisation and ‘San Francisco’ as a location . From a design perspective , the term ‘fan’ shall be recognized as a product and the terms ‘ceiling fan’ , ‘exhaust fan’ , and ‘CPU cooling fan’ shall be recognized with specific categories . While plenty of NER models and associated datasets exist for common - sense entity recognition [ 294 ] , design - based datasets and models are yet to evolve . NER is also the first step towards the extraction of knowledge graphs , as described in Section 4 . 2 . 1 . In Table 8 , we have shown that in a given design text , entities like “nano - ceramic coating” , and “solid quartz” must be identified using tags like coating material , and coating solution etc . , Before the identification of entity tags , it is necessary to recognize terms that comprise one or more words ( n - grams ) . Scholars have often utilised POS tags , dependencies , and ontologies to recognize n - grams . Due to poor performance , such approaches must be replaced with deep - learning models , as demonstrated by Chiarello et al . [ 144 ] in their NER application . 4 . 2 . 6 . Collaborative Tagging System Collaborative tagging ( or folksonomy ) is useful for the classification of a large set of documents as well as sentences in these . This bottom - up approach has been recently popular instead of a traditional top - down approach where the classification scheme is defined by the experts , e . g . , International Patent Classification . The current classifications in vast knowledge sources like Patent Databases , Web of Science , and Encyclopaedia are less useful for developing NLP applications to support the design process . For instance , the classification codes that are assigned to a patent could inform the type of invention but not its purpose , behaviour , and components . We have indicated an example in Table 8 for the design - specific tags that could be assigned to individual sentences in a text document . The tags shall be recommended based on external knowledge as well as the previous tags [ 295 ] . These tags could also be expanded using classifiers [ 27 ] . While several advantages to collaborative tagging exist , scholars are yet to introduce or develop many interfaces that help to assign tags to documents that are universally accessible . COIN platform is an example of such a collaborative tagging system [ 296 ] . The use of such interfaces in design education , workshops , and laboratory settings allows a variety of tags to be assigned to an open - source document that could be reused for developing retrieval algorithms . 4 . 2 . 7 . Standard Datasets None of the NLP contributions that we have reviewed in this article leverage a design - specific gold standard dataset for evaluation . If an embedding technique is used for measuring the similarity between text descriptions of two artefacts , what is the trueness of that similarity ? Similarly , if an application combines several tasks like NER , classification etc . , to extract FBS from text , what is the efficacy of the application ? For such cases , scholars are currently creating their datasets from scratch , which reduces the possibility of comparing different applications within design research . A gold standard dataset is necessary for NLP applications that aim to measure artefact level metrics such as novelty , feasibility etc . These metrics shall be measured in different ways , but it is recommended that scholars provide a gold standard for different ways to benefit the development of NLP applications . For example , given a text description of an artefact , a dataset may include the novelty scores measured using distance - based and frequency - based approaches while also indicating the reference product databases utilised for the measurement . 4 . 2 . 8 . Success Metrics A variety of NLP applications have been and will be developed to support various design tasks . To ensure the efficacy of these applications , success metrics are necessary . The metrics like accuracy for classification only tell us that the classifier performs well on the test data . However , the utility of such a classifier is often assessed based on the artefact level metrics such as novelty , quantity , variety etc . While such metrics are crucial , it would be useful to also measure the ‘goodness’ of envisioned scenarios , activity diagrams , mind maps , opportunity statements , search keywords , requirement formulation etc . The expert designers spend a majority of the time proposing and evaluating solution alternatives [ 297 , p . 430 ] , while novices spend more time understanding the problem . Even if novices generate quick solutions , experts have a better ability to recognize good solutions . Novices could therefore significantly benefit from NLP support in terms of keyword recommendation , opportunity statements , identifying novel solutions etc . Since novices need to develop expertise throughout the design process , success metrics at each step could be beneficial for their learning as well as for understanding the efficacy of NLP supports . 4 . 3 . Theoretical Directions While the proposed methodological directions could impact the development of NLP applications in the near future , our review also led us to raise a few questions regarding constructs that embody the design - centric natural language text and the roles of these constructs in the design process . Addressing these questions could be of importance in the extended future to facilitate the development of cognitive assistants that make independent decisions in the design process based on long - term memory and extensive reasoning capabilities . We discuss these questions in the remainder of this section . 4 . 3 . 1 . Characteristics and Constructs In our review , we have indicated the text characteristics of various types of natural language text sources that are utilised or generated in the design process . These characteristics are only relevant to the NLP methodologies applied to the text sources . The literature does not communicate the characteristics of natural language that allow us to distinguish a piece of text that is relevant to the process . Let us consider the following sentences for example . 1 ) “The pan is heated while the steak gets seasoned , ” 2 ) “During the recrystallization stage , the material is heated above its recrystallization temperature , but below its melting temperature . ” The first sentence mentions a cooking tip and the second one is part of the annealing process 56 . The underlying factors of distinguishability between these two sentences are unclear . If we assume that the distinction could be attributed to the usage of technical ( ‘recrystallization’ , ‘temperature’ , ‘material’ ) and common - sense ( ‘pan’ and ‘steak’ ) terms , it is also possible that these terms could be used interchangeably in other text sources . Hence , we raise the first open question as follows . What are the unique characteristics of natural language text that are relevant to the design process ? While the efforts to identify the design - specific characteristics in natural language may lead to a bifurcation of technical and common - sense natural language text , it is necessary to acknowledge that design knowledge is present in various flavours within the common - sense text as well . We provide an example using the reviews of a Scotch - Brite kitchen wiper on Amazon 57 . • Affordance – “I am using this not in kitchen but as a car wash assessary to clean all windows…” • Recommendation – “You can definitely buy this product…” • Satisfaction – “The quality of this one is ok” • Feature description – “…the green color rubber part is very small and thin” • Characterization – “I am not sure about this durability” • Aesthetics – “Too small and badly designed” • Technical description – “…the actual size of the blade is mere 6 . 2 inches , which is too small for cleaning a large surface area… the blade is bent at an angle of almost 30 - 40° to the handle…” From our review , we are unable to obtain sufficient explanation for the assignment and evolvement of the knowledge categories that we have tied to the sentences in the above example . Scholars have conducted large - scale analyses on consumer opinions while informing a little on what these sources communicate in the context of design . The constructs of design knowledge that embody the natural language text are often 56 https : / / www . metalsupermarkets . com / what - is - annealing / 57 t . ly / 1ifJ captured by ontologies and language models . These systems , however , are not capable of providing a cogent explanation of the phenomenon behind the judgement of design knowledge in a given text . It is therefore important to understand the following . What are the unique constructs that embody design knowledge into natural language text ? There has been extant literature on ontologies that have aimed to address the question above . These ontologies are built by domain experts ( top - down ) as well as extracted from text sources ( bottom - up ) . The outcomes of these approaches have often been distinguishable [ 296 ] . In addition , there exists a significant difference in the level of abstraction between elementary [ 3 ] , [ 44 ] and abstract ontologies [ 298 ] , [ 299 ] . Despite the recent attempts to extract abstract ontologies from text , e . g . , SAPPhIRE [ 300 ] , and FBS [ 77 ] , it is easier to recognize elementary ontologies , as indicated by various knowledge retrieval systems developed using these . The elementary ontologies , however , do not cover a large scope of design like abstract ontologies . To address the above - mentioned question , it is , therefore , necessary to obtain investigate the following . How to bridge elementary and abstract ontologies to support the design process ? 4 . 3 . 2 . Comprehension The following questions relate to the performances of the natural language text concerning comprehension in the design process . Let us consider a natural language explanation for the firing cycle of a Glock handgun 58 . “… when the trigger is pulled , this pulls the firing pin backward … a connector pin that guides the connector in a downward motion… this motion frees up the firing pin , allowing it to strike the primer…” While the above - stated text captures components and the causality of events , it is hard to visualise the orientations and positions of components like ‘trigger’ , ‘firing pin’ , and ‘connector pin’ without ( annotated - ) images . In addition , the text is only pertinent to the firing cycle and does not include other subsystems of the handgun like the safety mechanism . It is difficult to interpret and reproduce the knowledge of system architecture ( the hierarchy of a handgun in this example ) purely using natural language text . Hence , a multi - 58 https : / / ghostinc . com / ghost - inc - blog / how - does - a - glock - work / modal explanation is often necessary , especially in the design process [ 288 ] . The affordance in comprehension through textual mode shall therefore be investigated as follows . What is the expected level of comprehension offered by natural language text in the design process ? Addressing the above - stated question could set a boundary for the performance of NLP applications . Large - scale analyses on crowdsourced natural language text ( e . g . , consumer opinions ) often seem to highlight the lack of information quality , while providing less importance to the amount of design knowledge offered within a particular window of text . Since consumer opinions must adhere to word limits on platforms like Amazon and Twitter , usage scenarios are often captured through images and videos . It would be worth investigating how text could be elaborated such that it provides a level of comprehension similar to that of a multi - modal explanation . We , therefore , ask the following question . How to elaborate natural language text to obtain the desired level of comprehension in the design process ? 4 . 3 . 3 . Creativity Cognitive scientists define an insight or ‘Aha’ moment as the instance of sudden realization that is often associated with a stimulus . In terms of semantic memory , insight occurs when there is a new connection between entities that lead to a sequence of new connections [ 301 ] . Such insights are necessary for solving problems , especially during the design process . A particular case of insight occurs in the design process when there is a relational alignment between two pairs of entities [ 302 ] . Let us consider an example . Wall - climbing robots adopt various adhesive mechanisms to establish contact with the climbing surface . These mechanisms are less effective when robots are heavy and the surfaces are hard , flat , and smooth . Let us consider a stimulus for this design problem . Mudskippers climb slippery surfaces of rocks by generating a vacuum at the limb interface . The interaction – ‘generate vacuum’ at the rock interface fits well in the wall interface . Such an alignment of relation creates an insight that leads to ‘making sense of new interactions like releasing vacuum , decreasing pressure etc . Scholars have proposed representation schemes like FBS and SAPPhIRE to model ‘far’ domain examples such that relations are explicitly shown . A majority of far - domain examples , however , are only available as natural language text that often does not explicitly state these relations . It is difficult to surf through several documents to encounter such relations and experience insights . To address this issue , scholars have proposed to summarize several documents by extracting the representative terms [ 157 ] . These terms alone are insufficient for gathering insights due to the lack of context . It is therefore necessary to investigate the following question . How to represent natural language text such that design insights are maximised ? Souza et al . [ 13 ] generate short summaries of patent documents through an LSTM - based sequence - to - sequence mapping . Such statistical approaches are less guided by design theories that inform the constructs of design knowledge that should be present in such summaries . While a succinct representation of natural language text is necessary for gathering insights , it is also important to form the right queries to search for documents that could potentially include stimuli for solving design problems . The mental representation of a design problem is translated to opportunity statements that are simplified into search keywords that form queries . It is a common phenomenon that the search results often guide the development of more keywords . If the initial set of keywords is not representative of the problem statement , the user has the chance to be misled by the results . In such situations , an expert could provide reliable guidance on how the problem statement is translated into search keywords by identifying the gaps and discrepancies in the problem formulation . Let us consider an example of pumping water out of the basement . A direct search for terms like “pumping water” , “basement water” etc . might lead to several unwanted results . An expert , on the other hand , might question the type of basement , the cause of water in the basement , the type of water , the basement surroundings etc . These intricate details help elaborate the problem statement , from which the expert could extract important cues and translate these into keywords that are appropriate as well as technical ( if necessary ) . It is therefore worth examining how problems should be narrated such that it is possible to translate these into meaningful opportunity statements and in turn appropriate search keywords . From our review , we understand that keyword expansion approaches are largely driven by the search results alone [ 15 ] , [ 86 ] rather than by the missing details of the problem statement . The current NLP applications are therefore less capable of playing the expert’s role in examining the problem statement . To address this caveat , it is necessary that scholars provide a theoretical explanation to the following question . How to narrate a design problem such that it is better translated to appropriate search keywords ? We expect that in the future , NLP applications recommend keywords that are guided by the problem statement and provide results using succinct natural language text such that more insights are experienced in the design process . Given that insights often lead to solutions to design problems in the form of design concept alternatives , it is necessary to choose among these alternatives for implementation and testing purposes . Several design metrics like feasibility , novelty , utility etc . , are being used to choose the alternatives . Given that human judgement on alternatives often involves extensive effort and bias , scholars have proposed some NLP applications to compute the design metrics using natural language text data [ 41 ] , [ 113 ] . Herein , both the alternatives and reference material ( e . g . , Kansei attributes ) comprise natural language text . Since the usage of terms in the text descriptions of concept alternatives significantly impacts the judgement of design metrics it is important to address the following question . What is the role of natural language in the judgement of design metrics ? 4 . 4 . Summary From our review of 223 articles related to NLP in - and - for design research , we identified the supported applications in the design process using a framework as discussed in Section 4 . 1 . We have also indicated the steps and modules within the framework that are currently not supported by NLP . While we expect that such gaps are addressed by scholars in the near future , we hope that an NLP guide is developed using a more comprehensive design framework . We expect that such a guide informs the following for an individual module : type of text sources used / generated , example case studies , relevant state - of - the - art NLP methods , rubrics to evaluate NLP methods etc . After summarizing the applications , we presented the directions ( listed in Table 9 ) for the advancement of NLP in - and - for design . Table 9 : Summary of methodological and theoretical directions Methodological Directions 1 . Design Knowledge Graph – Text Cleaning , Term Identification , Relation Extraction , Functional Representation , Question Answering , Graph - Based Reasoning , Graph Embedding etc . 2 . Domain - Specific Language Model – Text Classification , Named Entity Recognition , Sentence Completion , Sentiment Analysis , Term Extraction , Similarity Measurement etc . 3 . Text Generation – Sentence Completion , Requirements Elicitation , Statement Generation , Technical Documentation etc . 4 . Neural Machine Translation – Sentence Disambiguation , Storage Compression , Language Standardisation etc . 5 . Named Entity Recognition – Term Identification , Ontology Construction , Term Disambiguation , Document Indexing , Knowledge Graph Extraction , Functional Representation etc . 6 . Collaborative Tagging – Text Classification , Document Indexing , Ontology Construction , Sentiment Detection etc . 7 . Standard Datasets – Text Classification , Creativity Assessment , Functional Representation etc . 8 . Success Metrics – Text Comprehension , Problem Diversification , Problem Detailing , Solution Assessment , Keyword Expansion etc . Theoretical Directions 1 . What are the unique characteristics of natural language text that are relevant to the design process ? ( Characteristics ) 2 . What are the unique constructs that embody design knowledge into natural language text ? ( Constructs ) 3 . How to bridge elementary and abstract ontologies to support the design process ? ( Constructs ) 4 . What is the expected level of comprehension offered by natural language text in the design process ? ( Comprehension ) 5 . How to elaborate natural language text to obtain the desired level of comprehension in the design process ? ( Comprehension ) 6 . How to represent natural language text such that design insights are maximised ? ( Creativity ) 7 . How to narrate a design problem such that it is better translated to appropriate search keywords ? ( Creativity ) 8 . What is the role of natural language in the judgement of design metrics ? ( Creativity ) The methodological directions are necessary to enhance the performances and conduct a robust evaluation of NLP applications in - and - for design . In Table 9 , we have also indicated the downstream tasks and applications that could entail the methodological directions . While design knowledge bases , text generation , and named entity recognition could be developed using state - of - the - art NLP approaches , language models and neural machine translation require further improvement in core NLP . For the remaining methodological directions , scholars may consider operationalising the existing design theories into metrics and datasets so that NLP applications could be developed without theoretical challenges . The theoretical directions call for an understanding of the characteristics and constructs of natural language text that influence the affordance of comprehension and creativity in the design process . As the volume of natural language text data grows multi - fold with time , it is necessary to distinguish the text that is applicable to the design process . The characteristics and constructs that constitute design language should also indicate the missing elements of design knowledge that influence the abilities to form search keywords , comprehend design text , generate insights , and judge the solutions . The proposed directions primarily call for an understanding of the structure and role of the design language that should help bolster the performances of natural language text in learning , design , and computational environments . For example , in a computational environment , a piece of text ( e . g . , a movie review ) may return an accurate sentiment score . In another example , a well - written chapter on kinematics may be useful in a learning environment . These two examples , however , may be less useful in a design environment . Similarly , a design text ( e . g . , technical requirement ) may perform poorly in learning and computational environments . In order not to be misled by the performance in a single environment , it is important to distinguish natural language text by identifying the characteristics and constructs that constitute design language . Conclusions The purpose of this review article was to encapsulate a large body of NLP contributions that are relevant to the design process so as to identify unsupported design applications , potential methodological advancements , and gaps in design theory . We gathered 223 articles published in 32 journals for our review . We organise , explain , and examine these articles according to the type of text sources : internal reports , design concepts , discourse transcripts , technical publications , and consumer opinions . We then discuss our findings in terms of design applications and future directions . The overall conclusions from the review and the entailing discussions are as follows . 1 . A comprehensive NLP guide is necessary for the identification of specific design modules and developing NLP supports according to the type of text sources utilised / generated in these . 2 . While several methodological directions could be pursued using state - of - the - art NLP tools , the development of standard datasets and success metrics require the operationalisation of existing design theories . 3 . It is necessary to identify the unique characteristics and constructs that help distinguish design - centric natural language text as well as influence the performances in terms of comprehension and creativity in the design process . APPENDIX I We use the Web of Science 59 advanced search to retrieve the articles for review . We input all queries in the following format , ( ( TS = kw1 * OR kw2 * OR kw3 * … ) OR ( TI = kw1 * OR kw2 * OR kw3 * … ) OR ( AB = kw1 * OR kw2 * OR kw3 * … ) ) AND ( SO = dj1 OR dj2… ) where TS = Topic / keyword , TI = Title , AB = Abstract , SO = Journal , kw ∈ { keyword list } , and dj ∈ { journal list } . We executed the queries on 19 th September 2021 and the outcomes of each query are shown in Table 1A . Table 1A : Precisions of different queries . # Query Step Results Relevant Precision % 1 Keywords , Design journals 890 95 10 . 674 2 Expanded keywords , Design journals 1744 102 5 . 849 3 Expanded keywords , Expanded Design journals * 2328 117 5 . 026 4 Expanded keywords , Web of Science 6930765 223 0 . 003 5 Expanded keywords , Web of Science , article type 4908353 223 0 . 005 6 Expanded keywords including ‘design’ , Web of Science , article type 593765 206 0 . 035 7 Expanded keywords including ‘design’ , Web of Science , article type , selected categories 78919 206 0 . 261 8 Expanded keywords including ‘design’ , selected journals , journals with count > = 10 , article type , and selected categories * 6523 206 3 . 158 * Denotes the step where we manually read the titles , abstracts , and full texts to obtain the final set of articles We explain the queries as shown in Table 1A for the remainder of this section . In the first query , we consider eight ‘well - known’ design journals 60 using the following keywords : ‘semantic’ , ‘text’ , ‘language’ , ‘pars’ , ‘ontolog’ , ‘abstract’ , ‘word’ , ‘phras’ , ‘sentence’ . We retrieve 890 articles and obtain the frequent terms from topics ( > 1 ) , titles ( > 4 ) , and abstracts ( > 4 ) to identify more keywords – ‘vocabular’ , ‘sentiment’ , ‘gramma’ , ‘lexic’ , ‘linguistic’ , ‘syntactic’ , and ‘term’ . We include these additional keywords in the second query to retrieve 1 , 744 articles . To include more journals that fall within the scope of design research , we consult the literature 59 https : / / mjl . clarivate . com / search - results 60 We included the following design journals : Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design Analysis and Manufacturing , Research in Engineering Design , Journal of Engineering Design , Design Studies , Design Science , Journal of Mechanical Design , Journal of Computing and Information Science in Engineering , International Journal of Design . that provides a broad view of design research [ 303 ] , [ 304 ] as well as reviews [ 305 ] . Based on the literature , we include five additional journals 61 in the third query to retrieve 2 , 328 articles . Since NLP applications that benefit design research could also be published outside the design journals , in the fourth query we remove the journal filter and retrieve 6 , 930 , 765 results . Since these results also include conference proceedings and book chapters , in the fifth query , we select only journal articles to retrieve 4 , 908 , 353 articles . To filter these , in the seventh query , we include an additional keyword ‘design’ and particular subject categories 62 to retrieve 78 , 919 articles . For these articles , we manually selected the journals using the following criteria : article count ≥ 10 , non - distant domain ( e . g . , not “Journal of Biological Chemistry” ) , non - specific topic ( e . g . , not “Applied Surface Science” ) , general design - related ( e . g . , Computers in Industry ) , technology - related ( e . g . , Scientometrics ) . These filters result in 6 , 523 articles . We merge the results of the third and final queries as the first three queries did not include the ‘design’ keyword filter . We examine the titles and abstracts 63 of the merged results to obtain 277 articles . Upon reading the full texts of 277 articles , we obtain the final set – 223 articles that we have made accessible on Github 64 . Using the final set of articles , we also report the precisions of each query as shown in Table 1A . 61 We include the following journals in addition to the previously populated list of design journals : Design Journal , Design Quarterly , Design Issues , International Journal of Design Creativity and Innovation , Journal of Computer - Aided Design . 62 The selected categories include the following : Engineering Manufacturing , Engineering Multidisciplinary , Engineering Mechanical , Computer Science Interdisciplinary Applications , Computer Science Software Engineering , Art , Computer Science Artificial Intelligence , Engineering Industrial , Social Sciences Interdisciplinary , Architecture . 63 An example of discarded result had the following text within the abstract : “… material properties that are computed in terms of the microstructural texture descriptors . ” [ 306 ] . 64 https : / / github . com / siddharthl93 / nlp _ review / blob / 4b9e6b378c8df0bbf61a36e466a50dbb5a0a65d2 / nlp _ review _ papers . csv References [ 1 ] Z . Li and K . Ramani , “Ontology - based design information extraction and retrieval , ” Ai Edam , vol . 21 , no . 2 , pp . 137 – 154 , 2007 . [ 2 ] A . Chakrabarti , P . Sarkar , B . Leelavathamma , and B . Nataraju , “A functional representation for aiding biomimetic and artificial inspiration of new ideas , ” Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing , vol . 19 , no . 2 , pp . 113 – 132 , 2005 , doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060405050109 . [ 3 ] S . Lee , B . Kim , M . Huh , S . Cho , S . Park , and D . Lee , “Mining transportation logs for understanding the after - assembly block manufacturing process in the shipbuilding industry , ” EXPERT SYSTEMS WITH APPLICATIONS , vol . 40 , no . 1 . PERGAMON - ELSEVIER SCIENCE LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , ENGLAND , pp . 83 – 95 , Jan . 2013 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . eswa . 2012 . 07 . 033 . [ 4 ] N . Eng , M . Aurisicchio , and R . Bracewell , “Mapping Software Augments Engineering Design Thinking , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , vol . 139 , no . 5 , p . 051103 , 2017 . [ 5 ] M . Sasajima , Y . Kitamura , M . Ikeda , and R . Mizoguchi , “A representation language for behavior and function : FBRL , ” EXPERT SYSTEMS WITH APPLICATIONS , vol . 10 , no . 3 – 4 . PERGAMON - ELSEVIER SCIENCE LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD , ENGLAND OX5 1GB , pp . 471 – 479 , 1996 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0957 - 4174 ( 96 ) 00027 - 9 . [ 6 ] J . S . Gero and U . Kannengiesser , “Representational affordances in design , with examples from analogy making and optimization , ” RESEARCH IN ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 23 , no . 3 , pp . 235 – 249 , Jul . 2012 , doi : 10 . 1007 / s00163 - 012 - 0128 - y . [ 7 ] K . Gericke and B . Eisenbart , “The integrated function modeling framework and its relation to function structures , ” Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing , vol . 31 , no . 4 , pp . 436 – 457 , 2017 , doi : 10 . 1017 / S089006041700049X . [ 8 ] Y . Liang , Y . Liu , C . Chen , and Z . Jiang , “Extracting topic - sensitive content from textual documents - A hybrid topic model approach , ” ENGINEERING APPLICATIONS OF ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE , vol . 70 . PERGAMON - ELSEVIER SCIENCE LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , ENGLAND , pp . 81 – 91 , Apr . 2018 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . engappai . 2017 . 12 . 010 . [ 9 ] A . Bouhana , A . Zidi , A . Fekih , H . Chabchoub , and M . Abed , “An ontology - based CBR approach for personalized itinerary search systems for sustainable urban freight transport , ” EXPERT SYSTEMS WITH APPLICATIONS , vol . 42 , no . 7 . PERGAMON - ELSEVIER SCIENCE LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , ENGLAND , pp . 3724 – 3741 , May 01 , 2015 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . eswa . 2014 . 12 . 012 . [ 10 ] B . Morkos , J . Mathieson , and J . D . Summers , “Comparative analysis of requirements change prediction models : manual , linguistic , and neural network , ” RESEARCH IN ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 25 , no . 2 , pp . 139 – 156 , Apr . 2014 , doi : 10 . 1007 / s00163 - 014 - 0170 - z . [ 11 ] H . Noh , Y . Jo , and S . Lee , “Keyword selection and processing strategy for applying text mining to patent analysis , ” Expert Systems with Applications , vol . 42 , no . 9 , pp . 4348 – 4360 , Jun . 2015 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . eswa . 2015 . 01 . 050 . [ 12 ] Z . Zhang , L . Liu , W . Wei , F . Tao , T . Li , and A . Liu , “A Systematic Function Recommendation Process for Data - Driven Product and Service Design , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , vol . 139 , no . 111404 , Oct . 2017 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4037610 . [ 13 ] C . M . Souza , M . R . G . Meireles , and P . E . M . Almeida , “A comparative study of abstractive and extractive summarization techniques to label subgroups on patent dataset , ” SCIENTOMETRICS , vol . 126 , no . 1 . SPRINGER , VAN GODEWIJCKSTRAAT 30 , 3311 GZ DORDRECHT , NETHERLANDS , pp . 135 – 156 , Jan . 2021 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11192 - 020 - 03732 - x . [ 14 ] X . Li , C . - H . Chen , P . Zheng , Z . Jiang , and L . Wang , “A context - aware diversity - oriented knowledge recommendation approach for smart engineering solution design , ” KNOWLEDGE - BASED SYSTEMS , vol . 215 . ELSEVIER , RADARWEG 29 , 1043 NX AMSTERDAM , NETHERLANDS , Mar . 05 , 2021 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . knosys . 2021 . 106739 . [ 15 ] H . - T . Lin , N . - W . Chi , and S . - H . Hsieh , “A concept - based information retrieval approach for engineering domain - specific technical documents , ” ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS , vol . 26 , no . 2 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 349 – 360 , Apr . 2012 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2011 . 12 . 003 . [ 16 ] S . A . Selcuk and G . M . Avinc , “Natural language approach for bio - informed architectural education : a biomimetic shell design , ” INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF TECHNOLOGY AND DESIGN EDUCATION . SPRINGER , VAN GODEWIJCKSTRAAT 30 , 3311 GZ DORDRECHT , NETHERLANDS , 2021 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10798 - 021 - 09689 - z . [ 17 ] L . H . Shu , “A natural - language approach to biomimetic design , ” AI EDAM - ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE FOR ENGINEERING DESIGN ANALYSIS AND MANUFACTURING , vol . 24 , no . 4 , SI . CAMBRIDGE UNIV PRESS , 32 AVENUE OF THE AMERICAS , NEW YORK , NY 10013 - 2473 USA , pp . 507 – 519 , Nov . 2010 . doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060410000363 . [ 18 ] Y . Dong , R . Zhu , W . Peng , Q . Tian , G . Guo , and W . Liu , “A fuzzy mapping method for Kansei needs interpretation considering the individual Kansei variance , ” RESEARCH IN ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 32 , no . 2 . SPRINGER HEIDELBERG , TIERGARTENSTRASSE 17 , D - 69121 HEIDELBERG , GERMANY , pp . 175 – 187 , Apr . 2021 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00163 - 021 - 00359 - 8 . [ 19 ] A . K . Goel and S . R . Bhatta , “Use of design patterns in analogy - based design , ” Advanced Engineering Informatics , vol . 18 , no . 2 , pp . 85 – 94 , 2004 . [ 20 ] C . Romanowski and R . Nagi , “A data mining approach to forming generic bills of materials in support of variant design activities , ” JOURNAL OF COMPUTING AND INFORMATION SCIENCE IN ENGINEERING , vol . 4 , no . 4 , pp . 316 – 328 , Dec . 2004 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 1812556 . [ 21 ] M . R . Bohm , R . B . Stone , and S . Szykman , “Enhancing virtual product representations for advanced design repository systems , ” Journal of Computing and Information Science in Engineering , vol . 5 , no . 4 , pp . 360 – 372 , 2005 . [ 22 ] B . Chandrasekaran , “Representing function : Relating functional representation and functional modeling research streams , ” Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing , vol . 19 , no . 2 , pp . 65 – 74 , 2005 , doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060405050079 . [ 23 ] G . Pahl and W . Beitz , Engineering design : a systematic approach . Springer Science & Business Media , 2013 . [ 24 ] F . Chiarello , P . Belingheri , and G . Fantoni , “Data science for engineering design : State of the art and future directions , ” COMPUTERS IN INDUSTRY , vol . 129 . ELSEVIER , RADARWEG 29 , 1043 NX AMSTERDAM , NETHERLANDS , Aug . 2021 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . compind . 2021 . 103447 . [ 25 ] N . Ur - Rahman and J . A . Harding , “Textual data mining for industrial knowledge management and text classification : A business oriented approach , ” Expert Systems with Applications , vol . 39 , no . 5 , pp . 4729 – 4739 , Apr . 2012 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . eswa . 2011 . 09 . 124 . [ 26 ] L . Li , F . Qin , S . Gao , and Y . Liu , “An approach for design rationale retrieval using ontology - aided indexing , ” JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 25 , no . 7 – 9 , pp . 259 – 279 , Sep . 2014 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 09544828 . 2014 . 969690 . [ 27 ] T . Sexton and M . Fuge , “Organizing Tagged Knowledge : Similarity Measures and Semantic Fluency in Structure Mining , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 142 , no . 3 , SI , Mar . 2020 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4045686 . [ 28 ] M . Cavazza and P . Zweigenbaum , “SEMANTIC ANALYSIS AND IN - DEPTH UNDERSTANDING OF TECHNICAL TEXTS , ” APPLIED ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE , vol . 8 , no . 3 . TAYLOR & FRANCIS , 1900 FROST ROAD , SUITE 101 , BRISTOL , PA 19007 - 1598 , pp . 425 – 453 , Sep . 1994 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 08839519408945452 . [ 29 ] L . Siddharth , A . Chakrabarti , and R . Ranganath , “Modeling and structuring design rationale to enable knowledge reuse , ” Systems Engineering , vol . n / a , no . n / a , Oct . 2019 , doi : 10 . 1002 / sys . 21515 . [ 30 ] A . Kott and J . Peasant , “Representation and management of requirements : The RAPID - WS project , ” CONCURRENT ENGINEERING - RESEARCH AND APPLICATIONS , vol . 3 , no . 2 . TECHNOMIC PUBL CO INC , 851 NEW HOLLAND AVE , BOX 3535 , LANCASTER , PA 17604 , pp . 93 – 106 , Jun . 1995 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1063293X9500300203 . [ 31 ] B . Farley , “Extracting information from free - text aircraft repair notes , ” AI EDAM - ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE FOR ENGINEERING DESIGN ANALYSIS AND MANUFACTURING , vol . 15 , no . 4 , pp . 295 – 305 , Sep . 2001 , doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060401154041 . [ 32 ] S . Kim , R . H . Bracewell , and K . M . Wallace , “Answering engineers’ questions using semantic annotations , ” AI EDAM - ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE FOR ENGINEERING DESIGN ANALYSIS AND MANUFACTURING , vol . 21 , no . 2 , pp . 155 – 171 , SPR 2007 , doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060407070205 . [ 33 ] R . Menon , L . Tong , and S . Sathiyakeerthi , “Analyzing textual databases using data mining to enable fast product development processes , ” RELIABILITY ENGINEERING & SYSTEM SAFETY , vol . 88 , no . 2 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 171 – 180 , May 2005 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ress . 2004 . 07 . 007 . [ 34 ] K . G . Lough , M . Van Wie , R . Stone , and I . Y . Tumer , “Promoting risk communication in early design through linguistic analyses , ” RESEARCH IN ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 20 , no . 1 , pp . 29 – 40 , Mar . 2009 , doi : 10 . 1007 / s00163 - 009 - 0063 - 8 . [ 35 ] N . Madhusudanan , A . Chakrabarti , and B . Gurumoorthy , “Discourse analysis based segregation of relevant document segments for knowledge acquisition , ” AI EDAM - ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE FOR ENGINEERING DESIGN ANALYSIS AND MANUFACTURING , vol . 30 , no . 4 , SI , pp . 446 – 465 , Nov . 2016 , doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060416000408 . [ 36 ] S . Kang et al . , “Ontology - Based Ambiguity Resolution of Manufacturing Text for Formal Rule Extraction , ” JOURNAL OF COMPUTING AND INFORMATION SCIENCE IN ENGINEERING , vol . 19 , no . 2 , Jun . 2019 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4042104 . [ 37 ] S . Kang et al . , “Automated feedback generation for formal manufacturing rule extraction , ” AI EDAM - ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE FOR ENGINEERING DESIGN ANALYSIS AND MANUFACTURING , vol . 33 , no . 3 , pp . 289 – 301 , Aug . 2019 , doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060419000027 . [ 38 ] M . Aurisicchio , R . Bracewell , and B . L . Hooey , “Rationale mapping and functional modelling enhanced root cause analysis , ” Safety Science , vol . 85 , pp . 241 – 257 , 2016 . [ 39 ] V . Ebrahimipour , K . Rezaie , and S . Shokravi , “An ontology approach to support FMEA studies , ” EXPERT SYSTEMS WITH APPLICATIONS , vol . 37 , no . 1 . PERGAMON - ELSEVIER SCIENCE LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , ENGLAND , pp . 671 – 677 , Jan . 2010 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . eswa . 2009 . 06 . 033 . [ 40 ] Y . Liu , Y . Liang , C . K . Kwong , and W . B . Lee , “A New Design Rationale Representation Model for Rationale Mining , ” JOURNAL OF COMPUTING AND INFORMATION SCIENCE IN ENGINEERING , vol . 10 , no . 3 , SI , Sep . 2010 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 3470018 . [ 41 ] L . Siddharth , N . Madhusudanan , and A . Chakrabarti , “Toward Automatically Assessing the Novelty of Engineering Design Solutions , ” Journal of Computing and Information Science in Engineering , vol . 20 , no . 011001 , Sep . 2019 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4044318 . [ 42 ] Y . Zhang , X . Luo , J . Li , and J . J . Buis , “A semantic representation model for design rationale of products , ” ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS , vol . 27 , no . 1 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 13 – 26 , Jan . 2013 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2012 . 10 . 005 . [ 43 ] A . Taleb - Bendiab , V . Oh , I . Sommerville , and M . French , “Semantic Modelling of Engineering Designs , ” JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 4 , no . 1 , pp . 41 – 54 , 1993 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 09544829308914771 . [ 44 ] A . S . Varde , M . Maniruzzaman , and R . D . Sisson Jr . , “QuenchML : A semantics - preserving markup language for knowledge representation in quenching , ” AI EDAM - ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE FOR ENGINEERING DESIGN ANALYSIS AND MANUFACTURING , vol . 27 , no . 1 , pp . 65 – 82 , Feb . 2013 , doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060412000352 . [ 45 ] J . Nanda , H . J . Thevenot , T . W . Simpson , R . B . Stone , M . Bohm , and S . B . Shooter , “Product family design knowledge representation , aggregation , reuse , and analysis , ” AI EDAM - ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE FOR ENGINEERING DESIGN ANALYSIS AND MANUFACTURING , vol . 21 , no . 2 , pp . 173 – 192 , SPR 2007 , doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060407070217 . [ 46 ] S . Poggenpohl , P . Chayutsahakij , and C . Jeamsinkul , “Language definition and its role in developing a design discourse , ” DESIGN STUDIES , vol . 25 , no . 6 , pp . 579 – 605 , Nov . 2004 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2004 . 02 . 002 . [ 47 ] A . Biswas , S . J . Fenves , V . Shapiro , and R . Sriram , “Representation of heterogeneous material properties in the Core Product Model , ” ENGINEERING WITH COMPUTERS , vol . 24 , no . 1 . SPRINGER , ONE NEW YORK PLAZA , SUITE 4600 , NEW YORK , NY , UNITED STATES , pp . 43 – 58 , Mar . 2008 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00366 - 007 - 0065 - y . [ 48 ] S . J . Fenves , S . Foufou , C . Bock , and R . D . Sriram , “CPM2 : A core model for product data , ” JOURNAL OF COMPUTING AND INFORMATION SCIENCE IN ENGINEERING , vol . 8 , no . 1 . ASME , TWO PARK AVE , NEW YORK , NY 10016 - 5990 USA , Mar . 2008 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 2830842 . [ 49 ] L . Ding , D . Davies , and C . A . McMahon , “The integration of lightweight representation and annotation for collaborative design representation , ” RESEARCH IN ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 19 , no . 4 , pp . 223 – 238 , Jan . 2009 , doi : 10 . 1007 / s00163 - 008 - 0052 - 3 . [ 50 ] A . C . B . Garcia , I . Ferraz , and A . S . Vivacqua , “From data to knowledge mining , ” AI EDAM - ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE FOR ENGINEERING DESIGN ANALYSIS AND MANUFACTURING , vol . 23 , no . 4 , SI , pp . 427 – 441 , Nov . 2009 , doi : 10 . 1017 / S089006040900016X . [ 51 ] C . Hsiao , M . Ruffino , R . Malak , I . Y . Tumer , and T . Doolen , “Discovering taxonomic structure in design archives with application to risk - mitigating actions in a large engineering organisation , ” null , vol . 27 , no . 1 – 3 , pp . 146 – 169 , Mar . 2016 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 09544828 . 2015 . 1126813 . [ 52 ] K . Hiekata , H . Yamato , and S . Tsujimoto , “Ontology based knowledge extraction for shipyard fabrication workshop reports , ” EXPERT SYSTEMS WITH APPLICATIONS , vol . 37 , no . 11 , SI . PERGAMON - ELSEVIER SCIENCE LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , ENGLAND , pp . 7380 – 7386 , Nov . 2010 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . eswa . 2010 . 04 . 031 . [ 53 ] S . W . Kang and C . Tucker , “An automated approach to quantifying functional interactions by mining large - scale product specification data , ” JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 27 , no . 1 – 3 , pp . 1 – 24 , Mar . 2016 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 09544828 . 2015 . 1083539 . [ 54 ] T . U . Pimmler and S . D . Eppinger , “Integration analysis of product decompositions , ” Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) , Sloan School of Management , 1994 . [ 55 ] B . Song , B . Yoon , C . Lee , and Y . Park , “Development of a service evolution map for service design through application of text mining to service documents , ” RESEARCH IN ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 28 , no . 2 , pp . 251 – 273 , Apr . 2017 , doi : 10 . 1007 / s00163 - 016 - 0240 - 5 . [ 56 ] I . O . Arnarsson , O . Frost , E . Gustavsson , M . Jirstrand , and J . Malmqvist , “Natural language processing methods for knowledge management - Applying document clustering for fast search and grouping of engineering documents , ” CONCURRENT ENGINEERING - RESEARCH AND APPLICATIONS , vol . 29 , no . 2 . SAGE PUBLICATIONS LTD , 1 OLIVERS YARD , 55 CITY ROAD , LONDON EC1Y 1SP , ENGLAND , pp . 142 – 152 , Jun . 2021 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1063293X20982973 . [ 57 ] J . Yang , E . Kim , M . Hur , S . Cho , M . Han , and I . Seo , “Knowledge extraction and visualization of digital design process , ” EXPERT SYSTEMS WITH APPLICATIONS , vol . 92 . PERGAMON - ELSEVIER SCIENCE LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , ENGLAND , pp . 206 – 215 , Feb . 2018 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . eswa . 2017 . 09 . 002 . [ 58 ] Z . Xu , Y . Dang , Z . Zhang , and J . Chen , “Typical short - term remedy knowledge mining for product quality problem - solving based on bipartite graph clustering , ” COMPUTERS IN INDUSTRY , vol . 122 . ELSEVIER , RADARWEG 29 , 1043 NX AMSTERDAM , NETHERLANDS , Nov . 2020 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . compind . 2020 . 103277 . [ 59 ] O . Saeroonter et al . , “Thin film transistor substrate having two different types of thin film transistors on the same substrate and display using the same . ” Google Patents , Aug . 31 , 2021 . [ 60 ] Y . Guo , Y . Peng , and J . Hu , “Research on high creative application of case - based reasoning system on engineering design , ” COMPUTERS IN INDUSTRY , vol . 64 , no . 1 . ELSEVIER , RADARWEG 29 , 1043 NX AMSTERDAM , NETHERLANDS , pp . 90 – 103 , Jan . 2013 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . compind . 2012 . 10 . 006 . [ 61 ] S . Akmal , L . - H . Shih , and R . Batres , “Ontology - based similarity for product information retrieval , ” COMPUTERS IN INDUSTRY , vol . 65 , no . 1 . ELSEVIER SCIENCE BV , PO BOX 211 , 1000 AE AMSTERDAM , NETHERLANDS , pp . 91 – 107 , Jan . 2014 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . compind . 2013 . 07 . 011 . [ 62 ] S . M . Jeon , J . H . Lee , G . J . Hahm , and H . W . Suh , “Automatic CAD model retrieval based on design documents using semantic processing and rule processing , ” COMPUTERS IN INDUSTRY , vol . 77 . ELSEVIER SCIENCE BV , PO BOX 211 , 1000 AE AMSTERDAM , NETHERLANDS , pp . 29 – 47 , Apr . 2016 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . compind . 2016 . 01 . 002 . [ 63 ] A . Huet , R . Pinquie , P . Veron , A . Mallet , and F . Segonds , “CACDA : A knowledge graph for a context - aware cognitive design assistant , ” COMPUTERS IN INDUSTRY , vol . 125 . ELSEVIER , RADARWEG 29 , 1043 NX AMSTERDAM , NETHERLANDS , Feb . 2021 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . compind . 2020 . 103377 . [ 64 ] J . Wang , Y . Wu , X . Liu , and X . Gao , “Knowledge acquisition method from domain text based on theme logic model and artificial neural network , ” EXPERT SYSTEMS WITH APPLICATIONS , vol . 37 , no . 1 . PERGAMON - ELSEVIER SCIENCE LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , ENGLAND , pp . 267 – 275 , Jan . 2010 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . eswa . 2009 . 05 . 009 . [ 65 ] A . Casamayor , D . Godoy , and M . Campo , “Functional grouping of natural language requirements for assistance in architectural software design , ” KNOWLEDGE - BASED SYSTEMS , vol . 30 . ELSEVIER SCIENCE BV , PO BOX 211 , 1000 AE AMSTERDAM , NETHERLANDS , pp . 78 – 86 , Jun . 2012 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . knosys . 2011 . 12 . 009 . [ 66 ] L . Tanguy , N . Tulechki , A . Urieli , E . Hermann , and C . Raynal , “Natural language processing for aviation safety reports : From classification to interactive analysis , ” COMPUTERS IN INDUSTRY , vol . 78 , no . SI . ELSEVIER , RADARWEG 29 , 1043 NX AMSTERDAM , NETHERLANDS , pp . 80 – 95 , May 2016 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . compind . 2015 . 09 . 005 . [ 67 ] Z . Xu , Y . Dang , and P . Munro , “Knowledge - driven intelligent quality problem - solving system in the automotive industry , ” ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS , vol . 38 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 441 – 457 , Oct . 2018 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2018 . 08 . 013 . [ 68 ] R . Brisco , R . Whitfield I . , and H . Grierson , “A novel systematic method to evaluate computer - supported collaborative design technologies , ” RESEARCH IN ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 31 , no . 1 . SPRINGER HEIDELBERG , TIERGARTENSTRASSE 17 , D - 69121 HEIDELBERG , GERMANY , pp . 53 – 81 , Jan . 2020 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00163 - 019 - 00323 - 7 . [ 69 ] M . Lester , M . Guerrero , and J . Burge , “Using evolutionary algorithms to select text features for mining design rationale , ” AI EDAM - ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE FOR ENGINEERING DESIGN ANALYSIS AND MANUFACTURING , vol . 34 , no . 2 , SI , pp . 132 – 146 , May 2020 , doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060420000037 . [ 70 ] X . Ye and Y . Lu , “Automatic Extraction of Engineering Rules From Unstructured Text : A Natural Language Processing Approach , ” JOURNAL OF COMPUTING AND INFORMATION SCIENCE IN ENGINEERING , vol . 20 , no . 3 , Jun . 2020 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4046333 . [ 71 ] J . Song , J . - K . Lee , J . Choi , and I . Kim , “Deep learning - based extraction of predicate - argument structure ( PAS ) in building design rule sentences , ” JOURNAL OF COMPUTATIONAL DESIGN AND ENGINEERING , vol . 7 , no . 5 . OXFORD UNIV PRESS , GREAT CLARENDON ST , OXFORD OX2 6DP , ENGLAND , pp . 563 – 576 , Oct . 2020 . doi : 10 . 1093 / jcde / qwaa046 . [ 72 ] G . Fantoni , E . Coli , F . Chiarello , R . Apreda , F . Dell’Orletta , and G . Pratelli , “Text mining tool for translating terms of contract into technical specifications : Development and application in the railway sector , ” COMPUTERS IN INDUSTRY , vol . 124 . ELSEVIER , RADARWEG 29 , 1043 NX AMSTERDAM , NETHERLANDS , Jan . 2021 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . compind . 2020 . 103357 . [ 73 ] S . Jiang , J . Hu , C . L . Magee , and J . Luo , “Deep Learning for Technical Document Classification , ” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management , pp . 1 – 17 , 2022 , doi : 10 . 1109 / TEM . 2022 . 3152216 . [ 74 ] W . Shapiro , F . Murray , R . Howarth , and R . Fusaro , “Space Mechanisms Lessons Learned , ” NASA Technical Memorandum , vol . 107047 , p . 774S , 1995 . [ 75 ] J . Lee et al . , “BioBERT : a pre - trained biomedical language representation model for biomedical text mining , ” Bioinformatics , vol . 36 , no . 4 , pp . 1234 – 1240 , Feb . 2020 , doi : 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btz682 . [ 76 ] Y . - H . Tseng , C . - J . Lin , and Y . - I . Lin , “Text mining techniques for patent analysis , ” Information Processing & Management , vol . 43 , no . 5 , pp . 1216 – 1247 , Sep . 2007 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ipm . 2006 . 11 . 011 . [ 77 ] G . Fantoni , R . Apreda , F . Dell’Orletta , and M . Monge , “Automatic extraction of function – behaviour – state information from patents , ” Advanced Engineering Informatics , vol . 27 , no . 3 , pp . 317 – 334 , Aug . 2013 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2013 . 04 . 004 . [ 78 ] H . Jang , Y . Jeong , and B . Yoon , “TechWord : Development of a technology lexical database for structuring textual technology information based on natural language processing , ” EXPERT SYSTEMS WITH APPLICATIONS , vol . 164 . PERGAMON - ELSEVIER SCIENCE LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , ENGLAND , Feb . 2021 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . eswa . 2020 . 114042 . [ 79 ] S . Sarica , J . Luo , and K . L . Wood , “TechNet : Technology semantic network based on patent data , ” Expert Systems with Applications , vol . 142 , p . 112995 , Mar . 2020 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . eswa . 2019 . 112995 . [ 80 ] X . Xu and H . Cai , “Ontology and rule - based natural language processing approach for interpreting textual regulations on underground utility infrastructure , ” ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS , vol . 48 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , Apr . 2021 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2021 . 101288 . [ 81 ] N . Gu , J . Xu , X . Wu , J . Yang , and W . Ye , “Ontology based semantic conflicts resolution in collaborative editing of design documents , ” ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS , vol . 19 , no . 2 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 103 – 111 , Apr . 2005 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2005 . 05 . 005 . [ 82 ] H . Cheong , I . Chiu , L . Shu , R . Stone , and D . McAdams , “Biologically meaningful keywords for functional terms of the functional basis , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , vol . 133 , no . 2 , p . 021007 , 2011 . [ 83 ] J . Linsey , A . Markman , and K . Wood , “Design by analogy : a study of the WordTree Method for problem re - representation , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , vol . 134 , no . 4 , p . 041009 , 2012 . [ 84 ] I . Chiu and L . Shu , “Using language as related stimuli for concept generation , ” AI EDAM , vol . 21 , no . 2 , pp . 103 – 121 , 2007 . [ 85 ] I . Chiu and L . H . Shu , “Investigating effects of oppositely related semantic stimuli on design concept creativity , ” JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 23 , no . 4 , pp . 271 – 296 , 2012 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 09544828 . 2011 . 603298 . [ 86 ] S . Lee , D . A . Mcadams , and E . Morris , “Categorizing biological information based on function - morphology for bioinspired conceptual design , ” AI EDAM - ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE FOR ENGINEERING DESIGN ANALYSIS AND MANUFACTURING , vol . 31 , no . 3 , SI . CAMBRIDGE UNIV PRESS , 32 AVENUE OF THE AMERICAS , NEW YORK , NY 10013 - 2473 USA , pp . 359 – 375 , Aug . 2017 . doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060416000500 . [ 87 ] F . Rosa , G . Cascini , and A . Baldussu , “UNO - BID : unified ontology for causal - function modeling in biologically inspired design , ” INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF DESIGN CREATIVITY AND INNOVATION , vol . 3 , no . 3 – 4 , pp . 177 – 210 , 2015 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 21650349 . 2014 . 941941 . [ 88 ] F . Rosa , E . Rovida , R . Vigano , and E . Razzetti , “Proposal of a technical function grammar oriented to biomimetic , ” JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 22 , no . 11 – 12 , SI , pp . 789 – 810 , 2011 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 09544828 . 2011 . 603296 . [ 89 ] D . Vandevenne , P . - A . Verhaegen , S . Dewulf , and J . R . Duflou , “A scalable approach for ideation in biologically inspired design , ” Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing , vol . 29 , no . 01 , pp . 19 – 31 , 2015 . [ 90 ] C . Chen , Y . Tao , Y . Li , Q . Liu , S . Li , and Z . Tang , “A structure - function knowledge extraction method for bio - inspired design , ” COMPUTERS IN INDUSTRY , vol . 127 . ELSEVIER , RADARWEG 29 , 1043 NX AMSTERDAM , NETHERLANDS , May 2021 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . compind . 2021 . 103402 . [ 91 ] N . Segers , B . de Vries , and H . Achten , “Do word graphs stimulate design ? , ” DESIGN STUDIES , vol . 26 , no . 6 , pp . 625 – 647 , Nov . 2005 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2005 . 05 . 002 . [ 92 ] B . De Vries , J . Jessurun , N . Segers , and H . Achten , “Word graphs in architectural design , ” AI EDAM - ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE FOR ENGINEERING DESIGN ANALYSIS AND MANUFACTURING , vol . 19 , no . 4 , pp . 277 – 288 , FAL 2005 , doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060405050195 . [ 93 ] M . Fuge , B . Peters , and A . Agogino , “Machine Learning Algorithms for Recommending Design Methods , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 136 , no . 10 . ASME , TWO PARK AVE , NEW YORK , NY 10016 - 5990 USA , Oct . 2014 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4028102 . [ 94 ] T . - J . Chen and V . R . Krishnamurthy , “Investigating a Mixed - Initiative Workflow for Digital Mind - Mapping , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , vol . 142 , no . 101404 , Jun . 2020 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4046808 . [ 95 ] J . - R . Chou , “An ideation method for generating new product ideas using TRIZ , concept mapping , and fuzzy linguistic evaluation techniques , ” ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS , vol . 28 , no . 4 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 441 – 454 , Oct . 2014 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2014 . 06 . 006 . [ 96 ] W . Yan , C . Zanni - Merk , D . Cavallucci , and P . Collet , “An ontology - based approach for using physical effects in inventive design , ” ENGINEERING APPLICATIONS OF ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE , vol . 32 . PERGAMON - ELSEVIER SCIENCE LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , ENGLAND , pp . 21 – 36 , Jun . 2014 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . engappai . 2014 . 02 . 017 . [ 97 ] S . - J . Kim and J . - H . Lee , “A study on metadata structure and recommenders of biological systems to support bio - inspired design , ” ENGINEERING APPLICATIONS OF ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE , vol . 57 . PERGAMON - ELSEVIER SCIENCE LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , ENGLAND , p . 16 + , Jan . 2017 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . engappai . 2016 . 10 . 003 . [ 98 ] J . Han , F . Shi , L . Chen , and P . R . N . Childs , “A computational tool for creative idea generation based on analogical reasoning and ontology , ” Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing , vol . 32 , no . 4 , pp . 462 – 477 , 2018 , doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060418000082 . [ 99 ] J . Han , F . Shi , L . Chen , and P . R . N . Childs , “The Combinator – a computer - based tool for creative idea generation based on a simulation approach , ” Design Science , vol . 4 , p . e11 , 2018 , doi : 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2018 . 7 . [ 100 ] K . Goucher - Lambert , J . T . Gyory , K . Kotovsky , and J . Cagan , “Adaptive Inspirational Design Stimuli : Using Design Output to Computationally Search for Stimuli That Impact Concept Generation , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 142 , no . 9 . ASME , TWO PARK AVE , NEW YORK , NY 10016 - 5990 USA , Sep . 01 , 2020 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4046077 . [ 101 ] A . Hatchuel , B . Weil , and P . Le Masson , “Towards an ontology of design : lessons from C - K design theory and Forcing , ” RESEARCH IN ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 24 , no . 2 , SI , pp . 147 – 163 , Apr . 2013 , doi : 10 . 1007 / s00163 - 012 - 0144 - y . [ 102 ] X . Li , C . - H . Chen , P . Zheng , Z . Wang , Z . Jiang , and Z . Jiang , “A Knowledge Graph - Aided Concept - Knowledge Approach for Evolutionary Smart Product - Service System Development , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 142 , no . 10 . ASME , TWO PARK AVE , NEW YORK , NY 10016 - 5990 USA , Oct . 01 , 2020 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4046807 . [ 103 ] C . Zhang , Y . P . Kwon , J . Kramer , E . Kim , and A . M . Agogino , “Concept Clustering in Design Teams : A Comparison of Human and Machine Clustering , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 139 , no . 11 , SI , Nov . 2017 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4037478 . [ 104 ] F . Ahmed and M . Fuge , “Creative exploration using topic - based bisociative networks , ” DESIGN SCIENCE , vol . 4 , Jun . 2018 , doi : 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2018 . 5 . [ 105 ] K . Goucher - Lambert and J . Cagan , “Crowdsourcing inspiration : Using crowd generated inspirational stimuli to support designer ideation , ” DESIGN STUDIES , vol . 61 , pp . 1 – 29 , Mar . 2019 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2019 . 01 . 001 . [ 106 ] Y . He , B . Camburn , H . Liu , J . Luo , M . Yang , and K . L . Wood , “Mining and Representing the Concept Space of Existing Ideas for Directed Ideation , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 141 , no . 12 , SI , Dec . 2019 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4044399 . [ 107 ] Q . Liu , K . Wang , Y . Li , and Y . Liu , “Data - Driven Concept Network for Inspiring Designers’ Idea Generation , ” JOURNAL OF COMPUTING AND INFORMATION SCIENCE IN ENGINEERING , vol . 20 , no . 3 . ASME , TWO PARK AVE , NEW YORK , NY 10016 - 5990 USA , Jun . 01 , 2020 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4046207 . [ 108 ] B . Camburn et al . , “Computer - aided mind map generation via crowdsourcing and machine learning , ” RESEARCH IN ENGINEERING DESIGN , 2020 , doi : 10 . 1007 / s00163 - 020 - 00341 - w . [ 109 ] B . Camburn , Y . He , S . Raviselvam , J . Luo , and K . Wood , “Machine Learning - Based Design Concept Evaluation , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , vol . 142 , no . 031113 , Jan . 2020 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4045126 . [ 110 ] J . Delin , S . Sharoff , S . Lillford , and C . Barnes , “Linguistic support for concept selection decisions , ” AI EDAM - ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE FOR ENGINEERING DESIGN ANALYSIS AND MANUFACTURING , vol . 21 , no . 2 , pp . 123 – 135 , SPR 2007 , doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060407070187 . [ 111 ] B . Strug and G . Slusarczyk , “Reasoning about designs through frequent patterns mining , ” ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS , vol . 23 , no . 4 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 361 – 369 , Oct . 2009 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2009 . 06 . 007 . [ 112 ] A . Dong , S . Sarkar , M . C . Yang , and T . Honda , “A linguistic approach to assess the dynamics of design team preference in concept selection , ” Research in Engineering Design , vol . 25 , no . 1 , pp . 75 – 92 , 2014 . [ 113 ] C . A . Gosnell and S . R . Miller , “But Is It Creative ? Delineating the Impact of Expertise and Concept Ratings on Creative Concept Selection , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , vol . 138 , no . 2 , pp . 021101 - 021101 – 11 , Dec . 2015 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4031904 . [ 114 ] D . Chang and C . - H . Chen , “Product concept evaluation and selection using data mining and domain ontology in a crowdsourcing environment , ” ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS , vol . 29 , no . 4 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 759 – 774 , Oct . 2015 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2015 . 06 . 003 . [ 115 ] W . S . Lee and S . Y . Sohn , “Discovering emerging business ideas based on crowdfunded software projects , ” DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEMS , vol . 116 . ELSEVIER SCIENCE BV , PO BOX 211 , 1000 AE AMSTERDAM , NETHERLANDS , pp . 102 – 113 , Jan . 2019 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . dss . 2018 . 10 . 013 . [ 116 ] S . Arts , J . Hou , and J . C . Gomez , “Natural language processing to identify the creation and impact of new technologies in patent text : Code , data , and new measures , ” Research Policy , vol . 50 , no . 2 , p . 104144 , Mar . 2021 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2020 . 104144 . [ 117 ] D . Argente , S . Baslandze , D . Hanley , and S . Moreira , “Patents to products : Product innovation and firm dynamics , ” 2020 . [ 118 ] A . Dong , “The enactment of design through language , ” DESIGN STUDIES , vol . 28 , no . 1 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 5 – 21 , Jan . 2007 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2006 . 07 . 001 . [ 119 ] D . Botta and R . Woodbury , “Predicting topic shift locations in design histories , ” RESEARCH IN ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 24 , no . 3 , pp . 245 – 258 , Jul . 2013 , doi : 10 . 1007 / s00163 - 012 - 0141 - 1 . [ 120 ] J . Wasiak , B . Hicks , L . Newnes , A . Dong , and L . Burrow , “Understanding engineering email : the development of a taxonomy for identifying and classifying engineering work , ” Research in engineering design , vol . 21 , no . 1 , p . 43 , 2010 . [ 121 ] L . Lan , Y . Liu , and W . F . Lu , “Learning From the Past : Uncovering Design Process Models Using an Enriched Process Mining , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 140 , no . 4 , Apr . 2018 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4039200 . [ 122 ] Y . Bengio , “Learning Deep Architectures for AI , ” Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning , vol . 2 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 127 , 2009 , doi : 10 . 1561 / 2200000006 . [ 123 ] L . Lan , Y . Liu , and W . Feng Lu , “Automatic Discovery of Design Task Structure Using Deep Belief Nets , ” Journal of Computing and Information Science in Engineering , vol . 17 , no . 041001 , May 2017 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4036198 . [ 124 ] V . Goepp , N . Matta , E . Caillaud , and F . Feugeas , “Systematic community of Practice activities evaluation through Natural Language Processing : application to research projects , ” AI EDAM - ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE FOR ENGINEERING DESIGN ANALYSIS AND MANUFACTURING , vol . 33 , no . 2 , SI . CAMBRIDGE UNIV PRESS , 32 AVENUE OF THE AMERICAS , NEW YORK , NY 10013 - 2473 USA , pp . 160 – 171 , May 2019 . doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060419000076 . [ 125 ] L . - C . Ungureanu and T . Hartmann , “Analysing frequent natural language expressions from design conversations , ” DESIGN STUDIES , vol . 72 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , Jan . 2021 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2020 . 100987 . [ 126 ] A . Dong , “The latent semantic approach to studying design team communication , ” Design Studies , vol . 26 , no . 5 , pp . 445 – 461 , 2005 . [ 127 ] A . Dong , A . W . Hill , and A . M . Agogino , “A document analysis method for characterizing design team performance , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , vol . 126 , no . 3 , pp . 378 – 385 , 2004 . [ 128 ] A . Dong , “Concept formation as knowledge accumulation : A computational linguistics study , ” AI EDAM - ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE FOR ENGINEERING DESIGN ANALYSIS AND MANUFACTURING , vol . 20 , no . 1 , pp . 35 – 53 , WIN 2006 , doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060406060033 . [ 129 ] H . Ji , M . C . Yang , and T . Honda , “An approach to the extraction of preference - related information from design team language , ” RESEARCH IN ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 23 , no . 2 , pp . 85 – 103 , Apr . 2012 , doi : 10 . 1007 / s00163 - 011 - 0116 - 7 . [ 130 ] A . Menning , B . M . Grasnick , B . Ewald , F . Dobrigkeit , and C . Nicolai , “Verbal focus shifts : Forms of low coherent statements in design conversations , ” DESIGN STUDIES , vol . 57 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 135 – 155 , Jul . 2018 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2018 . 03 . 003 . [ 131 ] J . W . T . Kan and J . S . Gero , “Characterizing innovative processes in design spaces through measuring the information entropy of empirical data from protocol studies , ” AI EDAM - ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE FOR ENGINEERING DESIGN ANALYSIS AND MANUFACTURING , vol . 32 , no . 1 . CAMBRIDGE UNIV PRESS , 32 AVENUE OF THE AMERICAS , NEW YORK , NY 10013 - 2473 USA , pp . 32 – 43 , Feb . 2018 . doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060416000548 . [ 132 ] G . V . Georgiev and D . D . Georgiev , “Enhancing user creativity : Semantic measures for idea generation , ” Knowledge - Based Systems , vol . 151 , pp . 1 – 15 , Jul . 2018 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . knosys . 2018 . 03 . 016 . [ 133 ] H . Casakin and G . V . Georgiev , “Design creativity and the semantic analysis of conversations in the design studio , ” null , vol . 9 , no . 1 , pp . 61 – 77 , Jan . 2021 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 21650349 . 2020 . 1838331 . [ 134 ] F . Glock , “Aspects of language use in design conversation , ” CODESIGN - INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF COCREATION IN DESIGN AND THE ARTS , vol . 5 , no . 1 , SI . TAYLOR & FRANCIS LTD , 4 PARK SQUARE , MILTON PARK , ABINGDON OX14 4RN , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 5 – 19 , 2009 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 15710880802492870 . [ 135 ] J . Wang , W . F . Lu , and H . T . Loh , “A two - level parser for patent claim parsing , ” ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS , vol . 29 , no . 3 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 431 – 439 , Aug . 2015 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2015 . 01 . 013 . [ 136 ] M . G . Moehrle and J . M . Gerken , “Measuring textual patent similarity on the basis of combined concepts : design decisions and their consequences , ” SCIENTOMETRICS , vol . 91 , no . 3 . SPRINGER , VAN GODEWIJCKSTRAAT 30 , 3311 GZ DORDRECHT , NETHERLANDS , pp . 805 – 826 , Jun . 2012 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11192 - 012 - 0682 - 0 . [ 137 ] Y . Liang , Y . Liu , C . K . Kwong , and W . B . Lee , “Learning the ‘Whys’ : Discovering design rationale using text mining — An algorithm perspective , ” Computer - Aided Design , vol . 44 , no . 10 , pp . 916 – 930 , Oct . 2012 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cad . 2011 . 08 . 002 . [ 138 ] K . Fu , J . Cagan , K . Kotovsky , and K . Wood , “Discovering Structure in Design Databases Through Functional and Surface Based Mapping , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 135 , no . 3 , Mar . 2013 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4023484 . [ 139 ] J . Hao , Q . Zhao , and Y . Yan , “A function - based computational method for design concept evaluation , ” ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS , vol . 32 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 237 – 247 , Apr . 2017 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2017 . 03 . 002 . [ 140 ] J . Murphy , K . Fu , K . Otto , M . Yang , D . Jensen , and K . Wood , “Function based design - by - analogy : a functional vector approach to analogical search , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , vol . 136 , no . 10 , p . 101102 , 2014 . [ 141 ] M . Atherton , P . Jiang , D . Harrison , and A . Malizia , “Design for invention : annotation of functional geometry interaction for representing novel working principles , ” RESEARCH IN ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 29 , no . 2 . SPRINGER HEIDELBERG , TIERGARTENSTRASSE 17 , D - 69121 HEIDELBERG , GERMANY , pp . 245 – 262 , Apr . 2018 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00163 - 017 - 0267 - 2 . [ 142 ] H . Song and K . Fu , “Design - by - Analogy : Exploring for Analogical Inspiration With Behavior , Material , and Component - Based Structural Representation of Patent Databases , ” JOURNAL OF COMPUTING AND INFORMATION SCIENCE IN ENGINEERING , vol . 19 , no . 2 , Jun . 2019 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4043364 . [ 143 ] D . Vandevenne , P . - A . Verhaegen , S . Dewulf , and J . R . Duflou , “SEABIRD : Scalable search for systematic biologically inspired design , ” AI EDAM - ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE FOR ENGINEERING DESIGN ANALYSIS AND MANUFACTURING , vol . 30 , no . 1 . CAMBRIDGE UNIV PRESS , 32 AVENUE OF THE AMERICAS , NEW YORK , NY 10013 - 2473 USA , pp . 78 – 95 , Feb . 2016 . doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060415000177 . [ 144 ] F . Chiarello , A . Cimino , G . Fantoni , and F . Dell’Orletta , “Automatic users extraction from patents , ” WORLD PATENT INFORMATION , vol . 54 , pp . 28 – 38 , Sep . 2018 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . wpi . 2018 . 07 . 006 . [ 145 ] S . Sarica , B . Song , J . Luo , and K . L . Wood , “Idea generation with Technology Semantic Network , ” Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing , pp . 1 – 19 , 2021 , doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060421000020 . [ 146 ] S . Sarica and J . Luo , “DESIGN KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION WITH TECHNOLOGY SEMANTIC NETWORK , ” Proceedings of the Design Society , vol . 1 , pp . 1043 – 1052 , 2021 , doi : 10 . 1017 / pds . 2021 . 104 . [ 147 ] G . Cascini and P . Rissone , “Plastics design : integrating TRIZ creativity and semantic knowledge portals , ” JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 15 , no . 4 , pp . 405 – 424 , Aug . 2004 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 09544820410001697208 . [ 148 ] P . Prickett and I . Aparicio , “The development of a modified TRIZ Technical System ontology , ” COMPUTERS IN INDUSTRY , vol . 63 , no . 3 . ELSEVIER , RADARWEG 29 , 1043 NX AMSTERDAM , NETHERLANDS , pp . 252 – 264 , Apr . 2012 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . compind . 2012 . 01 . 006 . [ 149 ] J . F . Vincent , O . A . Bogatyreva , N . R . Bogatyrev , A . Bowyer , and A . - K . Pahl , “Biomimetics : its practice and theory , ” Journal of the Royal Society Interface , vol . 3 , no . 9 , pp . 471 – 482 , 2006 . [ 150 ] C . Zanni - Merk , D . Cavallucci , and F . Rousselot , “An ontological basis for computer aided innovation , ” COMPUTERS IN INDUSTRY , vol . 60 , no . 8 , SI . ELSEVIER , RADARWEG 29 , 1043 NX AMSTERDAM , NETHERLANDS , pp . 563 – 574 , Oct . 2009 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . compind . 2009 . 05 . 012 . [ 151 ] K . Fu , J . Chan , J . Cagan , K . Kotovsky , C . Schunn , and K . Wood , “The meaning of ‘near’ and ‘far’ : the impact of structuring design databases and the effect of distance of analogy on design output , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , vol . 135 , no . 2 , p . 021007 , 2013 . [ 152 ] R . B . Stone and K . L . Wood , “Development of a functional basis for design , ” Journal of Mechanical design , vol . 122 , no . 4 , pp . 359 – 370 , 2000 . [ 153 ] L . Longfan , L . Yana , X . Yan , and D . Cavallucci , “A new function - based patent knowledge retrieval tool for conceptual design of innovative products , ” COMPUTERS IN INDUSTRY , vol . 115 . ELSEVIER , RADARWEG 29 , 1043 NX AMSTERDAM , NETHERLANDS , Feb . 2020 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . compind . 2019 . 103154 . [ 154 ] D . Dirnberger , “The use of mindmapping software for patent search and management , ” WORLD PATENT INFORMATION , vol . 47 , pp . 12 – 20 , Dec . 2016 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . wpi . 2016 . 08 . 004 . [ 155 ] T . Montecchi , D . Russo , and Y . Liu , “Searching in Cooperative Patent Classification : Comparison between keyword and concept - based search , ” Advanced Engineering Informatics , vol . 27 , no . 3 , pp . 335 – 345 , Aug . 2013 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2013 . 02 . 002 . [ 156 ] D . Russo and T . Montecchi , “A Function - Behaviour Oriented Search for Patent Digging , ” no . 54792 , pp . 1111 – 1120 , 2011 , doi : 10 . 1115 / DETC2011 - 47733 . [ 157 ] J . Luo , S . Sarica , and K . L . Wood , “Guiding data - driven design ideation by knowledge distance , ” Knowledge - Based Systems , vol . 218 , p . 106873 , Apr . 2021 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . knosys . 2021 . 106873 . [ 158 ] H . T . Al - Natsheh , L . Martinet , F . Muhlenbach , and D . A . Zighed , “UdL at SemEval - 2017 Task 1 : Semantic Textual Similarity Estimation of English Sentence Pairs Using Regression Model over Pairwise Features , ” 2017 . [ 159 ] G . Jin , Y . Jeong , and B . Yoon , “Technology - driven roadmaps for identifying new product / market opportunities : Use of text mining and quality function deployment , ” ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS , vol . 29 , no . 1 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 126 – 138 , Jan . 2015 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2014 . 11 . 001 . [ 160 ] C . V . Trappey , A . J . C . Trappey , H . - Y . Peng , L . - D . Lin , and T . - M . Wang , “A knowledge centric methodology for dental implant technology assessment using ontology based patent analysis and clinical meta - analysis , ” ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS , vol . 28 , no . 2 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 153 – 165 , Apr . 2014 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2014 . 03 . 001 . [ 161 ] S . Altuntas , Z . Erdogan , and T . Dereli , “A clustering - based approach for the evaluation of candidate emerging technologies , ” SCIENTOMETRICS , vol . 124 , no . 2 . SPRINGER , VAN GODEWIJCKSTRAAT 30 , 3311 GZ DORDRECHT , NETHERLANDS , pp . 1157 – 1177 , Aug . 2020 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11192 - 020 - 03535 - 0 . [ 162 ] J . Luo , B . Yan , and K . Wood , “InnoGPS for Data - Driven Exploration of Design Opportunities and Directions : The Case of Google Driverless Car Project , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , vol . 139 , no . 11 , pp . 111416 - 111416 – 13 , Oct . 2017 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4037680 . [ 163 ] J . Luo , B . Song , L . Blessing , and K . Wood , “Design opportunity conception using the total technology space map , ” Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing , vol . 32 , no . 4 , pp . 449 – 461 , 2018 , doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060418000094 . [ 164 ] D . Russo , M . Spreafico , and A . Precorvi , “Discovering new business opportunities with dependent semantic parsers , ” COMPUTERS IN INDUSTRY , vol . 123 . ELSEVIER , RADARWEG 29 , 1043 NX AMSTERDAM , NETHERLANDS , Dec . 2020 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . compind . 2020 . 103330 . [ 165 ] C . Lee , D . Jeon , J . M . Ahn , and O . Kwon , “Navigating a product landscape for technology opportunity analysis : A word2vec approach using an integrated patent - product database , ” TECHNOVATION , vol . 96 – 97 . ELSEVIER , RADARWEG 29 , 1043 NX AMSTERDAM , NETHERLANDS , Sep . 2020 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . technovation . 2020 . 102140 . [ 166 ] J . Zhang and W . Yu , “Early detection of technology opportunity based on analogy design and phrase semantic representation , ” SCIENTOMETRICS , vol . 125 , no . 1 . SPRINGER , VAN GODEWIJCKSTRAAT 30 , 3311 GZ DORDRECHT , NETHERLANDS , pp . 551 – 576 , Oct . 2020 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11192 - 020 - 03641 - z . [ 167 ] W . K . Purves , D . Sadava , G . H . Orians , and H . C . Heller , Life : The Science of Biology : Volume III : Plants and Animals . W . H . Freeman , 2003 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / books . google . com . vc / books ? id = lX9SxQEACAAJ [ 168 ] H . Cheong and L . H . Shu , “Retrieving Causally Related Functions From Natural - Language Text for Biomimetic Design , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 136 , no . 8 , Aug . 2014 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4027494 . [ 169 ] S . - H . Hsieh , H . - T . Lin , N . - W . Chi , K . - W . Chou , and K . - Y . Lin , “Enabling the development of base domain ontology through extraction of knowledge from engineering domain handbooks , ” ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS , vol . 25 , no . 2 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 288 – 296 , Apr . 2011 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2010 . 08 . 004 . [ 170 ] P . Kestel , P . Kuegler , C . Zirngibl , B . Schleich , and S . Wartzack , “Ontology - based approach for the provision of simulation knowledge acquired by Data and Text Mining processes , ” ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS , vol . 39 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 292 – 305 , Jan . 2019 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2019 . 02 . 001 . [ 171 ] A . Richter , K . T . W . Ng , and B . Fallah , “Bibliometric and text mining approaches to evaluate landfill design standards , ” SCIENTOMETRICS , vol . 118 , no . 3 . SPRINGER , VAN GODEWIJCKSTRAAT 30 , 3311 GZ DORDRECHT , NETHERLANDS , pp . 1027 – 1049 , Mar . 2019 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11192 - 019 - 03011 - 4 . [ 172 ] J . Zhan , Y . Liu , and H . T . Loh , “Multidocument Summarization of Engineering Papers Based on Macro - and Microstructure , ” JOURNAL OF COMPUTING AND INFORMATION SCIENCE IN ENGINEERING , vol . 11 , no . 1 . ASME , TWO PARK AVE , NEW YORK , NY 10016 - 5990 USA , Mar . 2011 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 3563048 . [ 173 ] M . W . Glier , D . A . McAdams , and J . S . Linsey , “Exploring Automated Text Classification to Improve Keyword Corpus Search Results for Bioinspired Design , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 136 , no . 11 , SI , Nov . 2014 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4028167 . [ 174 ] F . Shi , L . Chen , J . Han , and P . Childs , “A Data - Driven Text Mining and Semantic Network Analysis for Design Information Retrieval , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , vol . 139 , no . 11 , p . 111402 , 2017 . [ 175 ] H . Won and Y . Park , “Implementation of Typology Criteria for Design Knowledge Reflecting Design Diversification , ” DESIGN JOURNAL , vol . 24 , no . 3 . ROUTLEDGE JOURNALS , TAYLOR & FRANCIS LTD , 2 - 4 PARK SQUARE , MILTON PARK , ABINGDON OX14 4RN , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 1 – 19 , May 04 , 2021 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 14606925 . 2021 . 1906085 . [ 176 ] V . Giordano , F . Chiarello , and E . Cervelli , “Defining definition : a Text mining Approach to Define Innovative Technological Fields . ” 2021 . [ 177 ] M . Rosa , W . M . Wang , R . Stark , and H . Rozenfeld , “A concept map to support the planning and evaluation of artifacts in the initial phases of PSS design , ” RESEARCH IN ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 32 , no . 2 . SPRINGER HEIDELBERG , TIERGARTENSTRASSE 17 , D - 69121 HEIDELBERG , GERMANY , pp . 189 – 223 , Apr . 2021 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00163 - 021 - 00358 - 9 . [ 178 ] R . Decker and M . Trusov , “Estimating aggregate consumer preferences from online product reviews , ” International Journal of Research in Marketing , vol . 27 , no . 4 , pp . 293 – 307 , Dec . 2010 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ijresmar . 2010 . 09 . 001 . [ 179 ] J . Jin , Y . Liu , P . Ji , and C . K . Kwong , “Review on Recent Advances in Information Mining From Big Consumer Opinion Data for Product Design , ” JOURNAL OF COMPUTING AND INFORMATION SCIENCE IN ENGINEERING , vol . 19 , no . 1 , Mar . 2019 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4041087 . [ 180 ] S . Lim and C . S . Tucker , “A Bayesian Sampling Method for Product Feature Extraction From Large - Scale Textual Data , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 138 , no . 6 , Jun . 2016 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4033238 . [ 181 ] S . Tuarob and C . S . Tucker , “Quantifying Product Favorability and Extracting Notable Product Features Using Large Scale Social Media Data , ” JOURNAL OF COMPUTING AND INFORMATION SCIENCE IN ENGINEERING , vol . 15 , no . 3 , Sep . 2015 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4029562 . [ 182 ] S . Tuarob , S . Lim , and C . S . Tucker , “Automated Discovery of Product Feature Inferences Within Large - Scale Implicit Social Media Data , ” JOURNAL OF COMPUTING AND INFORMATION SCIENCE IN ENGINEERING , vol . 18 , no . 2 . ASME , TWO PARK AVE , NEW YORK , NY 10016 - 5990 USA , Jun . 2018 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4039432 . [ 183 ] W . M . Wang , Z . G . Tian , Z . Li , J . W . Wang , A . V . Barenji , and M . N . Cheng , “Supporting the construction of affective product taxonomies from online customer reviews : an affective - semantic approach , ” JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 30 , no . 10 – 12 , SI , pp . 445 – 476 , Dec . 2019 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 09544828 . 2019 . 1642460 . [ 184 ] D . Chang and C . Lee , “A product affective properties identification approach based on web mining in a crowdsourcing environment , ” JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 29 , no . 8 – 9 , pp . 449 – 483 , 2018 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 09544828 . 2018 . 1463514 . [ 185 ] S . Tuarob and C . S . Tucker , “Automated Discovery of Lead Users and Latent Product Features by Mining Large Scale Social Media Networks , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 137 , no . 7 , SI , Jul . 2015 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4030049 . [ 186 ] M . Tang , J . Jin , Y . Liu , C . Li , and W . Zhang , “Integrating Topic , Sentiment , and Syntax for Modeling Online Reviews : A Topic Model Approach , ” JOURNAL OF COMPUTING AND INFORMATION SCIENCE IN ENGINEERING , vol . 19 , no . 1 , Mar . 2019 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4041475 . [ 187 ] S . Baccianella , A . Esuli , and F . Sebastiani , “SentiWordNet 3 . 0 : An Enhanced Lexical Resource for Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining , ” Valletta , Malta , May 2010 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . lrec - conf . org / proceedings / lrec2010 / pdf / 769 _ Paper . pdf [ 188 ] E . Cambria , J . Fu , F . Bisio , and S . Poria , “AffectiveSpace 2 : Enabling Affective Intuition for Concept - Level Sentiment Analysis , ” AAAI , vol . 29 , no . 1 , Feb . 2015 , Accessed : Mar . 16 , 2022 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / ojs . aaai . org / index . php / AAAI / article / view / 9230 [ 189 ] E . Cambria , Y . Li , F . Z . Xing , S . Poria , and K . Kwok , “SenticNet 6 : Ensemble Application of Symbolic and Subsymbolic AI for Sentiment Analysis , ” in Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Information & amp ; Knowledge Management , New York , NY , USA , 2020 , pp . 105 – 114 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3340531 . 3412003 . [ 190 ] D . Raghupathi , B . Yannou , R . Farel , and E . Poirson , “Customer sentiment appraisal from user - generated product reviews : a domain independent heuristic algorithm , ” INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF INTERACTIVE DESIGN AND MANUFACTURING - IJIDEM , vol . 9 , no . 3 . SPRINGER HEIDELBERG , TIERGARTENSTRASSE 17 , D - 69121 HEIDELBERG , GERMANY , pp . 201 – 211 , Aug . 2015 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s12008 - 015 - 0273 - 4 . [ 191 ] F . Zhou , R . J . Jiao , and J . S . Linsey , “Latent Customer Needs Elicitation by Use Case Analogical Reasoning From Sentiment Analysis of Online Product Reviews , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 137 , no . 7 , SI , Jul . 2015 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4030159 . [ 192 ] M . Bradley and P . Lang , “Affective Norms for English Words ( ANEW ) : Instruction Manual and Affective Ratings , ” 1999 . [ 193 ] H . Jiang , C . K . Kwong , and K . L . Yung , “Predicting Future Importance of Product Features Based on Online Customer Reviews , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , vol . 139 , no . 111413 , Oct . 2017 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4037348 . [ 194 ] F . Zhou , J . R . Jiao , X . J . Yang , and B . Lei , “Augmenting feature model through customer preference mining by hybrid sentiment analysis , ” EXPERT SYSTEMS WITH APPLICATIONS , vol . 89 . PERGAMON - ELSEVIER SCIENCE LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , ENGLAND , pp . 306 – 317 , Dec . 15 , 2017 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . eswa . 2017 . 07 . 021 . [ 195 ] H . Jiang , C . K . Kwong , W . Y . Park , and K . M . Yu , “A multi - objective PSO approach of mining association rules for affective design based on online customer reviews , ” JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 29 , no . 7 , SI , pp . 381 – 403 , 2018 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 09544828 . 2018 . 1475629 . [ 196 ] Y . Jo and A . H . Oh , “Aspect and Sentiment Unification Model for Online Review Analysis , ” in Proceedings of the Fourth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining , New York , NY , USA , 2011 , pp . 815 – 824 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 1935826 . 1935932 . [ 197 ] Q . Sun , J . Niu , Z . Yao , and H . Yan , “Exploring eWOM in online customer reviews : Sentiment analysis at a fine - grained level , ” ENGINEERING APPLICATIONS OF ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE , vol . 81 . PERGAMON - ELSEVIER SCIENCE LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , ENGLAND , pp . 68 – 78 , May 2019 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . engappai . 2019 . 02 . 004 . [ 198 ] D . Suryadi and H . M . Kim , “A Data - Driven Approach to Product Usage Context Identification From Online Customer Reviews , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , vol . 141 , no . 121104 , Oct . 2019 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4044523 . [ 199 ] R . He , W . S . Lee , H . T . Ng , and D . Dahlmeier , “Exploiting Document Knowledge for Aspect - level Sentiment Classification , ” in Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( Volume 2 : Short Papers ) , Melbourne , Australia , Jul . 2018 , pp . 579 – 585 . doi : 10 . 18653 / v1 / P18 - 2092 . [ 200 ] H . Sun , W . Guo , H . Shao , and B . Rong , “Dynamical mining of ever - changing user requirements : A product design and improvement perspective , ” ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS , vol . 46 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , Oct . 2020 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2020 . 101174 . [ 201 ] A . Joulin , E . Grave , P . Bojanowski , and T . Mikolov , “Bag of Tricks for Efficient Text Classification , ” in Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics : Volume 2 , Short Papers , Valencia , Spain , Apr . 2017 , pp . 427 – 431 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / E17 - 2068 [ 202 ] F . Chiarello , A . Bonaccorsi , and G . Fantoni , “Technical Sentiment Analysis . Measuring Advantages and Drawbacks of New Products Using Social Media , ” COMPUTERS IN INDUSTRY , vol . 123 . ELSEVIER , RADARWEG 29 , 1043 NX AMSTERDAM , NETHERLANDS , Dec . 2020 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . compind . 2020 . 103299 . [ 203 ] F . Chiarello , G . Fantoni , and A . Bonaccorsi , “Product description in terms of advantages and drawbacks : Exploiting patent information in novel ways , ” 2017 , pp . 101 – 110 . [ 204 ] N . Gozuacik , C . O . Sakar , and S . Ozcan , “Social media - based opinion retrieval for product analysis using multi - task deep neural networks , ” EXPERT SYSTEMS WITH APPLICATIONS , vol . 183 . PERGAMON - ELSEVIER SCIENCE LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , ENGLAND , Nov . 30 , 2021 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . eswa . 2021 . 115388 . [ 205 ] Y . Han and M . Moghaddam , “Eliciting Attribute - Level User Needs From Online Reviews With Deep Language Models and Information Extraction , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 143 , no . 6 . ASME , TWO PARK AVE , NEW YORK , NY 10016 - 5990 USA , Jun . 01 , 2021 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4048819 . [ 206 ] Y . Han and M . Moghaddam , “Analysis of sentiment expressions for user - centered design , ” EXPERT SYSTEMS WITH APPLICATIONS , vol . 171 . PERGAMON - ELSEVIER SCIENCE LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , ENGLAND , Jun . 01 , 2021 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . eswa . 2021 . 114604 . [ 207 ] S . Li , F . Liu , H . Lu , Y . Zhang , Y . Li , and Z . Yu , “Product family lean improvement based on matching deep mining of customer group preference , ” RESEARCH IN ENGINEERING DESIGN . SPRINGER HEIDELBERG , TIERGARTENSTRASSE 17 , D - 69121 HEIDELBERG , GERMANY , 2021 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00163 - 021 - 00367 - 8 . [ 208 ] T . Hou , B . Yannou , Y . Leroy , and E . Poirson , “Mining Changes in User Expectation Over Time From Online Reviews , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 141 , no . 9 , Sep . 2019 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4042793 . [ 209 ] J . Jin , P . Ji , and Y . Liu , “Prioritising engineering characteristics based on customer online reviews for quality function deployment , ” JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 25 , no . 7 – 9 , pp . 303 – 324 , Sep . 2014 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 09544828 . 2014 . 984665 . [ 210 ] L . H . Shu , J . Srivastava , A . Chou , and S . Lai , “Three methods for identifying novel affordances , ” AI EDAM - ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE FOR ENGINEERING DESIGN ANALYSIS AND MANUFACTURING , vol . 29 , no . 3 , SI . CAMBRIDGE UNIV PRESS , 32 AVENUE OF THE AMERICAS , NEW YORK , NY 10013 - 2473 USA , pp . 267 – 279 , Aug . 2015 . doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060415000219 . [ 211 ] Y . Park and S . Lee , “How to design and utilize online customer center to support new product concept generation , ” EXPERT SYSTEMS WITH APPLICATIONS , vol . 38 , no . 8 . PERGAMON - ELSEVIER SCIENCE LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , ENGLAND , pp . 10638 – 10647 , Aug . 2011 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . eswa . 2011 . 02 . 125 . [ 212 ] T . Wang , Y . Cai , H . - F . Leung , R . Y . K . Lau , Q . Li , and H . Min , “Product aspect extraction supervised with online domain knowledge , ” KNOWLEDGE - BASED SYSTEMS , vol . 71 , no . SI . ELSEVIER SCIENCE BV , PO BOX 211 , 1000 AE AMSTERDAM , NETHERLANDS , pp . 86 – 100 , Nov . 2014 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . knosys . 2014 . 05 . 018 . [ 213 ] J . Jin , P . Ji , and Y . Liu , “Translating online customer opinions into engineering characteristics in QFD : A probabilistic language analysis approach , ” ENGINEERING APPLICATIONS OF ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE , vol . 41 . PERGAMON - ELSEVIER SCIENCE LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , ENGLAND , pp . 115 – 127 , May 2015 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . engappai . 2015 . 02 . 006 . [ 214 ] W . - C . Ko , “Construction of house of quality for new product planning : A 2 - tuple fuzzy linguistic approach , ” COMPUTERS IN INDUSTRY , vol . 73 . ELSEVIER , RADARWEG 29 , 1043 NX AMSTERDAM , NETHERLANDS , pp . 117 – 127 , Oct . 2015 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . compind . 2015 . 07 . 008 . [ 215 ] J . Jin , P . Ji , and R . Gu , “Identifying comparative customer requirements from product online reviews for competitor analysis , ” Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence , vol . 49 , pp . 61 – 73 , Mar . 2016 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . engappai . 2015 . 12 . 005 . [ 216 ] W . Maalej , Z . Kurtanovic , H . Nabil , and C . Stanik , “On the automatic classification of app reviews , ” REQUIREMENTS ENGINEERING , vol . 21 , no . 3 , SI . SPRINGER , 233 SPRING ST , NEW YORK , NY 10013 USA , pp . 311 – 331 , Sep . 2016 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00766 - 016 - 0251 - 9 . [ 217 ] S . - M . Park , Y . - G . Kim , and D . - K . Baik , “Sentiment Root Cause Analysis Based on Fuzzy Formal Concept Analysis and Fuzzy Cognitive Map , ” JOURNAL OF COMPUTING AND INFORMATION SCIENCE IN ENGINEERING , vol . 16 , no . 3 . ASME , TWO PARK AVE , NEW YORK , NY 10016 - 5990 USA , Sep . 2016 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4034033 . [ 218 ] Z . Wu and M . Palmer , “Verbs Semantics and Lexical Selection , ” in Proceedings of the 32Nd Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics , Stroudsburg , PA , USA , 1994 , pp . 133 – 138 . doi : 10 . 3115 / 981732 . 981751 . [ 219 ] A . Singh and C . S . Tucker , “A machine learning approach to product review disambiguation based on function , form and behavior classification , ” Decision Support Systems , vol . 97 , pp . 81 – 91 , May 2017 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . dss . 2017 . 03 . 007 . [ 220 ] Z . Kurtanović and W . Maalej , “On user rationale in software engineering , ” Requirements Engineering , vol . 23 , no . 3 , pp . 357 – 379 , Sep . 2018 , doi : 10 . 1007 / s00766 - 018 - 0293 - 2 . [ 221 ] D . Suryadi and H . Kim , “A Systematic Methodology Based on Word Embedding for Identifying the Relation Between Online Customer Reviews and Sales Rank , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 140 , no . 12 , Dec . 2018 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4040913 . [ 222 ] N . Kano , “Attractive quality and must - be quality , ” Hinshitsu ( Quality , the Journal of Japanese Society for Quality Control ) , vol . 14 , pp . 39 – 48 , 1984 . [ 223 ] F . Zhou , J . Ayoub , Q . Xu , and X . J . Yang , “A Machine Learning Approach to Customer Needs Analysis for Product Ecosystems , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 142 , no . 1 . ASME , TWO PARK AVE , NEW YORK , NY 10016 - 5990 USA , Jan . 2020 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4044435 . [ 224 ] J . Joung and H . M . Kim , “Approach for Importance - Performance Analysis of Product Attributes From Online Reviews , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 143 , no . 8 . ASME , TWO PARK AVE , NEW YORK , NY 10016 - 5990 USA , Aug . 01 , 2021 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4049865 . [ 225 ] H . Korpershoek , H . Kuyper , G . van der Werf , and R . Bosker , “Who ‘fits’ the science and technology profile ? Personality differences in secondary education , ” Journal of Research in Personality , vol . 44 , no . 5 , pp . 649 – 654 , Oct . 2010 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jrp . 2010 . 08 . 010 . [ 226 ] K . Choi and C . Jun , “A systematic approach to the Kansei factors of tactile sense regarding the surface roughness , ” Applied Ergonomics , vol . 38 , no . 1 , pp . 53 – 63 , Jan . 2007 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . apergo . 2006 . 01 . 003 . [ 227 ] D . Munoz and C . S . Tucker , “Modeling the Semantic Structure of Textually Derived Learning Content and its Impact on Recipients’ Response States , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 138 , no . 4 , Apr . 2016 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4032398 . [ 228 ] P . M . A . Desmet , “Faces of Product Pleasure : 25 Positive Emotions in Human - Product Interactions , ” INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF DESIGN , vol . 6 , no . 2 . NATL TAIWAN UNIV SCI & TECHNOL , GRADUATE INST DES , PO BOX 90 - 15 , TAIPEI CITY , 10699 , TAIWAN , pp . 1 – 29 , Aug . 2012 . [ 229 ] R . Chaklader and M . B . Parkinson , “Data - Driven Sizing Specification Utilizing Consumer Text Reviews , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 139 , no . 11 , SI , Nov . 2017 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4037476 . [ 230 ] W . Kim , T . Ko , I . Rhiu , and M . H . Yun , “Mining affective experience for a kansei design study on a recliner , ” APPLIED ERGONOMICS , vol . 74 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 145 – 153 , Jan . 2019 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . apergo . 2018 . 08 . 014 . [ 231 ] B . Karlsson , N . Aronsson , and K . Svensson , “Using semantic environment description as a tool to evaluate car interiors , ” ERGONOMICS , vol . 46 , no . 13 – 14 . TAYLOR & FRANCIS LTD , 4 PARK SQUARE , MILTON PARK , ABINGDON OX14 4RN , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 1408 – 1422 , Oct . 20 , 2003 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00140130310001624905 . [ 232 ] G . Rasoulifar , C . Eckert , and G . Prudhomme , “Supporting communication between product designers and engineering designers in the design process of branded products : a comparison of three approaches , ” CODESIGN - INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF COCREATION IN DESIGN AND THE ARTS , vol . 10 , no . 2 . TAYLOR & FRANCIS LTD , 2 - 4 PARK SQUARE , MILTON PARK , ABINGDON OR14 4RN , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 135 – 152 , Jun . 2014 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2014 . 923912 . [ 233 ] A . Wodehouse , G . Vasantha , J . Corney , A . Jagadeesan , and R . MacLachlan , “Realising the affective potential of patents : a new model of database interpretation for user - centred design , ” JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 29 , no . 8 – 9 , pp . 484 – 511 , 2018 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 09544828 . 2018 . 1448056 . [ 234 ] T . Liao , K . Tanner , and E . F . MacDonald , “Revealing insights of users’ perception : an approach to evaluate wearable products based on emotions , ” Design Science , vol . 6 , p . e14 , 2020 , doi : 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2020 . 7 . [ 235 ] M . Hu , F . Guo , V . G . Duffy , Z . Ren , and P . Yue , “Constructing and measuring domain - specific emotions for affective design : a descriptive approach to deal with individual differences , ” ERGONOMICS , vol . 63 , no . 5 . TAYLOR & FRANCIS LTD , 2 - 4 PARK SQUARE , MILTON PARK , ABINGDON OR14 4RN , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 563 – 578 , May 03 , 2020 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00140139 . 2020 . 1735528 . [ 236 ] F . Guo , M . Hu , V . G . Duffy , H . Shao , and Z . Ren , “Kansei evaluation for group of users : A data - driven approach using dominance - based rough sets , ” ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS , vol . 47 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , Jan . 2021 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2020 . 101241 . [ 237 ] F . Zhou , J . R . Jiao , D . Schaefer , and S . Chen , “Hybrid Association Mining and Refinement for Affective Mapping in Emotional Design , ” JOURNAL OF COMPUTING AND INFORMATION SCIENCE IN ENGINEERING , vol . 10 , no . 3 , SI . ASME , TWO PARK AVE , NEW YORK , NY 10016 - 5990 USA , Sep . 2010 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 3482063 . [ 238 ] K . - C . Wang , “A hybrid Kansei engineering design expert system based on grey system theory and support vector regression , ” EXPERT SYSTEMS WITH APPLICATIONS , vol . 38 , no . 7 . PERGAMON - ELSEVIER SCIENCE LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , ENGLAND , pp . 8738 – 8750 , Jul . 2011 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . eswa . 2011 . 01 . 083 . [ 239 ] J . Vieira et al . , “Kansei engineering as a tool for the design of in - vehicle rubber keypads , ” APPLIED ERGONOMICS , vol . 61 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 1 – 11 , May 2017 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . apergo . 2016 . 12 . 019 . [ 240 ] M . Mele and G . Campana , “Prediction of Kansei engineering features for bottle design by a Knowledge Based System , ” INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF INTERACTIVE DESIGN AND MANUFACTURING - IJIDEM , vol . 12 , no . 4 . SPRINGER HEIDELBERG , TIERGARTENSTRASSE 17 , D - 69121 HEIDELBERG , GERMANY , pp . 1201 – 1210 , Nov . 2018 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s12008 - 018 - 0485 - 5 . [ 241 ] M . Misaka and H . Aoyama , “Development of design system for crack patterns on cup surface based on KANSEI , ” JOURNAL OF COMPUTATIONAL DESIGN AND ENGINEERING , vol . 5 , no . 4 . OXFORD UNIV PRESS , GREAT CLARENDON ST , OXFORD OX2 6DP , ENGLAND , pp . 435 – 441 , Oct . 2018 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jcde . 2017 . 12 . 008 . [ 242 ] M . - C . Chiu and K . - Z . Lin , “Utilizing text mining and Kansei Engineering to support data - driven design automation at conceptual design stage , ” Advanced Engineering Informatics , vol . 38 , pp . 826 – 839 , Oct . 2018 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2018 . 11 . 002 . [ 243 ] C . So , “What Makes Good Design ? Revealing the Predictive Power of Emotions and Design Dimensions in Non Expert Design Vocabulary , ” DESIGN JOURNAL , vol . 22 , no . 3 . ROUTLEDGE JOURNALS , TAYLOR & FRANCIS LTD , 2 - 4 PARK SQUARE , MILTON PARK , ABINGDON OX14 4RN , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 325 – 349 , 2019 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 14606925 . 2019 . 1589204 . [ 244 ] N . El Dehaibi , N . D . Goodman , and E . F . MacDonald , “Extracting Customer Perceptions of Product Sustainability From Online Reviews , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 141 , no . 12 , SI , Dec . 2019 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4044522 . [ 245 ] W . M . Wang , J . W . Wang , Z . Li , Z . G . Tian , and E . Tsui , “Multiple affective attribute classification of online customer product reviews : A heuristic deep learning method for supporting Kansei engineering , ” ENGINEERING APPLICATIONS OF ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE , vol . 85 . PERGAMON - ELSEVIER SCIENCE LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , ENGLAND , pp . 33 – 45 , Oct . 2019 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . engappai . 2019 . 05 . 015 . [ 246 ] H . Jiang , C . K . Kwong , G . E . O . Kremer , and W . - Y . Park , “Dynamic modelling of customer preferences for product design using DENFIS and opinion mining , ” ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS , vol . 42 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , Oct . 2019 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2019 . 100969 . [ 247 ] Y . Shi and Q . Peng , “Enhanced customer requirement classification for product design using big data and improved Kano model , ” ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS , vol . 49 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , Aug . 2021 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2021 . 101340 . [ 248 ] Y . Chen , S . Yu , J . Chu , D . Chen , and M . Yu , “Evaluating aircraft cockpit emotion through a neural network approach , ” AI EDAM - ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE FOR ENGINEERING DESIGN ANALYSIS AND MANUFACTURING , vol . 35 , no . 1 . CAMBRIDGE UNIV PRESS , 32 AVENUE OF THE AMERICAS , NEW YORK , NY 10013 - 2473 USA , pp . 81 – 98 , Feb . 2021 . doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060420000475 . [ 249 ] W . M . Wang , Z . Li , L . Liu , Z . G . Tian , and E . Tsui , “Mining of affective responses and affective intentions of products from unstructured text , ” JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 29 , no . 7 , SI , pp . 404 – 429 , 2018 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 09544828 . 2018 . 1448054 . [ 250 ] G . Wang , L . Wu , Y . Liu , and X . Ye , “A decision - making method for complex system design in a heterogeneous language information environment , ” JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING DESIGN . TAYLOR & FRANCIS LTD , 2 - 4 PARK SQUARE , MILTON PARK , ABINGDON OR14 4RN , OXON , ENGLAND , 2021 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 09544828 . 2021 . 1880557 . [ 251 ] J . - R . Chou , “A Kansei evaluation approach based on the technique of computing with words , ” ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS , vol . 30 , no . 1 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 1 – 15 , Jan . 2016 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2015 . 11 . 001 . [ 252 ] S . Chanyachatchawan , H . - B . Yan , S . Sriboonchitta , and V . - N . Huynh , “A linguistic representation based approach to modelling Kansei data and its application to consumer - oriented evaluation of traditional products , ” KNOWLEDGE - BASED SYSTEMS , vol . 138 . ELSEVIER SCIENCE BV , PO BOX 211 , 1000 AE AMSTERDAM , NETHERLANDS , pp . 124 – 133 , Dec . 15 , 2017 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . knosys . 2017 . 09 . 037 . [ 253 ] T . Young , D . Hazarika , S . Poria , and E . Cambria , “Recent Trends in Deep Learning Based Natural Language Processing [ Review Article ] , ” IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine , vol . 13 , no . 3 , pp . 55 – 75 , Aug . 2018 , doi : 10 . 1109 / MCI . 2018 . 2840738 . [ 254 ] V . Hubka and W . E . Eder , “Design Knowledge : Theory in Support of Practice , ” JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 1 , no . 1 , pp . 97 – 108 , 1990 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 09544829008901646 . [ 255 ] G . Pahl and W . Beitz , “Engineering design : a systematic approach , ” Nasa Sti / recon Technical Report A , vol . 89 , p . 47350 , 1988 . [ 256 ] P . Sridharan and M . Campbell , “A study on the grammatical construction of function structures , ” AI EDAM - ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE FOR ENGINEERING DESIGN ANALYSIS AND MANUFACTURING , vol . 19 , no . 3 , pp . 139 – 160 , SUM 2005 , doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060405050110 . [ 257 ] S . Sangelkar and D . A . McAdams , “Adapting ADA Architectural Design Knowledge for Universal Product Design Using Association Rule Mining : A Function Based Approach , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 134 , no . 7 , Jul . 2012 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4006738 . [ 258 ] C . Sen , J . D . Summers , and G . M . Mocko , “A Formal Representation of Function Structure Graphs for Physics - Based Reasoning , ” JOURNAL OF COMPUTING AND INFORMATION SCIENCE IN ENGINEERING , vol . 13 , no . 2 , Jun . 2013 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4023167 . [ 259 ] M . Agyemang , J . Linsey , and C . J . Turner , “Transforming functional models to critical chain models via expert knowledge and automatic parsing rules for design analogy identification , ” AI EDAM - ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE FOR ENGINEERING DESIGN ANALYSIS AND MANUFACTURING , vol . 31 , no . 4 , SI , pp . 501 – 511 , Nov . 2017 , doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060417000488 . [ 260 ] A . Gangopadhyay , “Conceptual modeling from natural language functional specifications , ” ARTIFICIAL IN ℡ LIGENCE IN ENGINEERING , vol . 15 , no . 2 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 207 – 218 , Apr . 2001 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0954 - 1810 ( 01 ) 00017 - 6 . [ 261 ] E . Yamamoto , T . Taura , S . Ohashi , and M . Yamamoto , “A Method for Function Dividing in Conceptual Design by Focusing on Linguistic Hierarchal Relations , ” JOURNAL OF COMPUTING AND INFORMATION SCIENCE IN ENGINEERING , vol . 10 , no . 3 , SI , Sep . 2010 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 3467008 . [ 262 ] P . Pantel and M . Pennacchiotti , “Espresso : Leveraging Generic Patterns for Automatically Harvesting Semantic Relations , ” in Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Computational Linguistics and the 44th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , USA , 2006 , pp . 113 – 120 . doi : 10 . 3115 / 1220175 . 1220190 . [ 263 ] T . Wilschut , L . F . P . Etman , J . E . Rooda , and J . A . Vogel , “Generation of a function - component - parameter multi - domain matrix from structured textual function specifications , ” RESEARCH IN ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 29 , no . 4 , pp . 531 – 546 , Oct . 2018 , doi : 10 . 1007 / s00163 - 018 - 0284 - 9 . [ 264 ] H . Cheong , W . Li , A . Cheung , A . Nogueira , and F . Iorio , “Automated Extraction of Function Knowledge From Text , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 139 , no . 11 , SI , Nov . 2017 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4037817 . [ 265 ] R . Sabbagh , F . Ameri , and R . Yoder , “Thesaurus - Guided Text Analytics Technique for Capability - Based Classification of Manufacturing Suppliers , ” JOURNAL OF COMPUTING AND INFORMATION SCIENCE IN ENGINEERING , vol . 18 , no . 3 , SI , Sep . 2018 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4039553 . [ 266 ] F . Ameri , B . Kulvatunyou , N . Ivezic , and K . Kaikhah , “Ontological Conceptualization Based on the SKOS , ” Journal of Computing and Information Science in Engineering , vol . 14 , no . 031006 , May 2014 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4027582 . [ 267 ] R . Sabbagh and F . Ameri , “A Framework Based on K - Means Clustering and Topic Modeling for Analyzing Unstructured Manufacturing Capability Data , ” JOURNAL OF COMPUTING AND INFORMATION SCIENCE IN ENGINEERING , vol . 20 , no . 1 , Feb . 2020 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4044506 . [ 268 ] Z . Ball and K . Lewis , “Predicting Design Performance Utilizing Automated Topic Discovery , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 142 , no . 12 , SI . ASME , TWO PARK AVE , NEW YORK , NY 10016 - 5990 USA , Dec . 01 , 2020 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4048455 . [ 269 ] V . Rieuf , C . Bouchard , V . Meyrueis , and J . - F . Omhover , “Emotional activity in early immersive design : Sketches and moodboards in virtual reality , ” DESIGN STUDIES , vol . 48 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 43 – 75 , Jan . 2017 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2016 . 11 . 001 . [ 270 ] A . Moitra et al . , “Automating requirements analysis and test case generation , ” REQUIREMENTS ENGINEERING , vol . 24 , no . 3 , SI . SPRINGER , 233 SPRING ST , NEW YORK , NY 10013 USA , pp . 341 – 364 , Sep . 2019 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00766 - 019 - 00316 - x . [ 271 ] G . Cao , Y . Sun , R . Tan , J . Zhang , and W . Liu , “A function - oriented biologically analogical approach for constructing the design concept of smart product in Industry 4 . 0 , ” ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS , vol . 49 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , Aug . 2021 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2021 . 101352 . [ 272 ] A . K . Goel , S . Vattam , B . Wiltgen , and M . Helms , “Cognitive , collaborative , conceptual and creative— four characteristics of the next generation of knowledge - based CAD systems : a study in biologically inspired design , ” Computer - Aided Design , vol . 44 , no . 10 , pp . 879 – 900 , 2012 . [ 273 ] P . - A . Verhaegen , J . Peeters , D . Vandevenne , S . Dewulf , and J . R . Duflou , “Effectiveness of the PAnDA ideation tool , ” Procedia Engineering , vol . 9 , pp . 63 – 76 , 2011 . [ 274 ] B . S . C . Ranjan , L . Siddharth , and A . Chakrabarti , “A systematic approach to assessing novelty , requirement satisfaction , and creativity , ” Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing , vol . 32 , no . 4 , pp . 390 – 414 , 2018 , doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060418000148 . [ 275 ] H . Wan et al . , “Iterative Visual Relationship Detection via Commonsense Knowledge Graph , ” Big Data Research , vol . 23 , p . 100175 , Feb . 2021 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bdr . 2020 . 100175 . [ 276 ] F . Deken , M . Kleinsmann , M . Aurisicchio , K . Lauche , and R . Bracewell , “Tapping into past design experiences : knowledge sharing and creation during novice - expert design consultations , ” RESEARCH IN ENGINEERING DESIGN , vol . 23 , no . 3 , pp . 203 – 218 , Jul . 2012 , doi : 10 . 1007 / s00163 - 011 - 0123 - 8 . [ 277 ] C . Robinson et al . , “Machine learning approaches for estimating commercial building energy consumption , ” Applied Energy , vol . 208 , pp . 889 – 904 , Dec . 2017 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . apenergy . 2017 . 09 . 060 . [ 278 ] J . Han , S . Sarica , F . Shi , and J . Luo , “Semantic Networks for Engineering Design : State of the Art and Future Directions , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , vol . 144 , no . 2 , Sep . 2021 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4052148 . [ 279 ] X . Li , M . Lyu , Z . Wang , C . - H . Chen , and P . Zheng , “Exploiting knowledge graphs in industrial products and services : A survey of key aspects , challenges , and future perspectives , ” COMPUTERS IN INDUSTRY , vol . 129 . ELSEVIER , RADARWEG 29 , 1043 NX AMSTERDAM , NETHERLANDS , Aug . 2021 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . compind . 2021 . 103449 . [ 280 ] G . Cascini and M . Zini , “Measuring patent similarity by comparing inventions functional trees , ” in Computer - Aided Innovation ( CAI ) , 2008 , pp . 31 – 42 . [ 281 ] D . Korobkin , S . Fomenkov , A . Kravets , S . Kolesnikov , and M . Dykov , “Three - steps methodology for patents prior - art retrieval and structured physical knowledge extracting , ” Communications in Computer and Information Science , vol . 535 , pp . 124 – 136 , 2015 . [ 282 ] V . - W . Soo , S . - Y . Lin , S . - Y . Yang , S . - N . Lin , and S . - L . Cheng , “A cooperative multi - agent platform for invention based on patent document analysis and ontology , ” Expert Systems with Applications , vol . 31 , no . 4 , pp . 766 – 775 , Nov . 2006 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . eswa . 2006 . 01 . 014 . [ 283 ] L . Siddharth , L . T . M . Blessing , K . L . Wood , and J . Luo , “Engineering Knowledge Graph From Patent Database , ” Journal of Computing and Information Science in Engineering , vol . 22 , no . 2 , Oct . 2021 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4052293 . [ 284 ] N . Chomsky , Aspects of the Theory of Syntax . Cambridge , MA , US : MIT Press Limited , 2014 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / books . google . com . sg / books ? id = ljFkBgAAQBAJ [ 285 ] W . Liu et al . , “K - BERT : Enabling Language Representation with Knowledge Graph . ” 2019 . [ 286 ] A . Andersen and K . Munch , “AUTOMATIC - GENERATION OF TECHNICAL DOCUMENTATION , ” EXPERT SYSTEMS WITH APPLICATIONS , vol . 3 , no . 2 . PERGAMON - ELSEVIER SCIENCE LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD , ENGLAND OX5 1GB , pp . 219 – 227 , 1991 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0957 - 4174 ( 91 ) 90150 - D . [ 287 ] E . Reiter , C . MELLISH , and J . LEVINE , “AUTOMATIC GENERATION OF TECHNICAL DOCUMENTATION , ” null , vol . 9 , no . 3 , pp . 259 – 287 , May 1995 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 08839519508945476 . [ 288 ] L . Siddharth and A . Chakrabarti , “Evaluating the impact of Idea - Inspire 4 . 0 on analogical transfer of concepts , ” Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing , vol . 32 , no . 4 , pp . 431 – 448 , 2018 , doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060418000136 . [ 289 ] Q . Zhu and J . Luo , “Generative Pre - Trained Transformer for Design Concept Generation : An Exploration . ” arXiv , 2021 . doi : 10 . 48550 / ARXIV . 2111 . 08489 . [ 290 ] Q . Zhu and J . Luo , “Generative Design Ideation : A Natural Language Generation Approach , ” presented at the 10th Conference on Design Computing and Cognition ( DCC ) , Glasgow , Scotland UK , Jul . 2022 . [ 291 ] Z . Tan et al . , “Neural machine translation : A review of methods , resources , and tools , ” AI Open , vol . 1 , pp . 5 – 21 , Jan . 2020 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aiopen . 2020 . 11 . 001 . [ 292 ] T . Luong , H . Pham , and C . D . Manning , “Effective Approaches to Attention - based Neural Machine Translation , ” in Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , Lisbon , Portugal , Sep . 2015 , pp . 1412 – 1421 . doi : 10 . 18653 / v1 / D15 - 1166 . [ 293 ] R . Chen , C . - H . Chen , Y . Liu , and X . Ye , “Ontology - based requirement verification for complex systems , ” ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS , vol . 46 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , Oct . 2020 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2020 . 101148 . [ 294 ] J . Yu , B . Bohnet , and M . Poesio , “Named Entity Recognition as Dependency Parsing . ” 2020 . [ 295 ] W . - T . Hsieh , J . Stu , Y . - L . Chen , and S . - C . T . Chou , “A collaborative desktop tagging system for group knowledge management based on concept space , ” EXPERT SYSTEMS WITH APPLICATIONS , vol . 36 , no . 5 . PERGAMON - ELSEVIER SCIENCE LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , ENGLAND , pp . 9513 – 9523 , Jul . 2009 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . eswa . 2008 . 12 . 042 . [ 296 ] J . H . Panchal and M . Messer , “Extracting the Structure of Design Information From Collaborative Tagging , ” JOURNAL OF COMPUTING AND INFORMATION SCIENCE IN ENGINEERING , vol . 11 , no . 4 , Dec . 2011 , doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 3617447 . [ 297 ] N . Cross , “Expertise in design : an overview , ” Design Studies , vol . 25 , no . 5 , pp . 427 – 441 , Sep . 2004 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2004 . 06 . 002 . [ 298 ] B . Chandrasekaran and J . R . Josephson , “Function in Device Representation , ” Engineering with Computers , vol . 16 , no . 3 , pp . 162 – 177 , Dec . 2000 , doi : 10 . 1007 / s003660070003 . [ 299 ] Y . Kitamura , T . Sano , K . Namba , and R . Mizoguchi , “A functional concept ontology and its application to automatic identification of functional structures , ” ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS , vol . 16 , no . 2 . ELSEVIER SCI LTD , THE BOULEVARD , LANGFORD LANE , KIDLINGTON , OXFORD OX5 1GB , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 145 – 163 , Apr . 2002 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1474 - 0346 ( 02 ) 00006 - X . [ 300 ] S . Keshwani and A . Chakrabarti , “Towards Automatic Classification of Description of Analogies into SAPPhIRE Constructs , ” in International Conference on Research into Design , 2017 , pp . 643 – 655 . [ 301 ] M . A . Schilling , “A ‘Small - World’ Network Model of Cognitive Insight , ” Creativity Research Journal , vol . 17 , no . 2 – 3 , pp . 131 – 154 , Jul . 2005 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 10400419 . 2005 . 9651475 . [ 302 ] A . Jamrozik and D . Gentner , “Relational labeling unlocks inert knowledge , ” Cognition , vol . 196 , p . 104146 , Mar . 2020 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2019 . 104146 . [ 303 ] G . Gemser and C . de Bont , “Design - Related and Design - Focused Research : A Study of Publication Patterns in Design Journals , ” She Ji : The Journal of Design , Economics , and Innovation , vol . 2 , no . 1 , pp . 46 – 58 , Mar . 2016 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . sheji . 2016 . 05 . 002 . [ 304 ] N . J . Mansfield , “Ranking of Design Journals Based on Results of the UK Research Excellence Framework : Using REF as Referee , ” DESIGN JOURNAL , vol . 19 , no . 6 . ROUTLEDGE JOURNALS , TAYLOR & FRANCIS LTD , 2 - 4 PARK SQUARE , MILTON PARK , ABINGDON OX14 4RN , OXON , ENGLAND , pp . 903 – 919 , Nov . 2016 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 14606925 . 2016 . 1216212 . [ 305 ] A . Coskun , J . Zimmerman , and C . Erbug , “Promoting sustainability through behavior change : A review , ” Design Studies , vol . 41 , pp . 183 – 204 , Nov . 2015 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2015 . 08 . 008 . [ 306 ] P . Acar , “A New Sampling Approach for the Multi - Scale Design of Metallic Materials , ” JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL DESIGN , vol . 142 , no . 8 . ASME , TWO PARK AVE , NEW YORK , NY 10016 - 5990 USA , Aug . 01 , 2020 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4045800 .