Neuron Perspective Nociception , Pain , Negative Moods , and Behavior Selection Marwan N . Baliki 1 , * and A . Vania Apkarian 1 , 2 , 3 , * 1 Department of Physiology 2 Department of Anesthesia 3 Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Feinberg School of Medicine , 303 East Chicago Avenue , Chicago , IL 60610 , USA * Correspondence : m - baliki @ northwestern . edu ( M . N . B . ) , a - apkarian @ northwestern . edu ( A . V . A . ) http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2015 . 06 . 005 Recent neuroimaging studies suggest that the brain adapts with pain , as well as imparts risk for developing chronic pain . Within this context , we revisit the concepts for nociception , acute and chronic pain , and nega - tive moods relative to behavior selection . We redeﬁne nociception as the mechanism protecting the organism from injury , while acute pain as failure of avoidant behavior , and a mesolimbic threshold process that gates the transformation of nociceptive activity to conscious pain . Adaptations in this threshold process are envi - sioned to be critical for development of chronic pain . We deconstruct chronic pain into four distinct phases , each with speciﬁc mechanisms , and outline current state of knowledge regarding these mechanisms : the limbic brain imparting risk , and the mesolimbic learning processes reorganizing the neocortex into a chronic pain state . Moreover , pain and negative moods are envisioned as a continuum of aversive behavioral learning , which enhance survival by protecting against threats . Introduction Classically , pain has been conceptualized from the narrow viewpoint of nociceptive processing . The ﬁeld has generated extensive knowledge regarding the transduction , transmission , and spinal cord processing of nociceptive signals related to acute and chronic pain ; similarly , animal studies have unraveled properties of primary afferents , their spinal cord circuitry , and related specialized pathways in the brain that mediate pain - like behavior . Post - nerve injury reorganization of nociceptive afferents and spinal cord circuitry , in particular , has been exten - sively characterized in rodent models , with the tacit assumption that acute and chronic pain is best understood through this circuitry . In parallel , human brain imaging studies have identi - ﬁed nociceptive brain circuits . However , recent human brain imaging studies examining a variety of pain conditions indi - cate that the brain plays an active role in acute and clinical pain perception ( Figure 1 ) , leading to a heated debate regarding the respective importance of peripheral afferents versus the brain’s interpretation of afferent signals . Here we review im - plications of these competing concepts in light of emerging evidence . The standard deﬁnition of pain emphasizes its subjectivity . Subjectivity , in turn , implies a conscious experience . A central goal of our perspective is to revise the understanding of con - scious pain perception by incorporating nociception , acute and chronic pain , and negative moods into the unifying frame - work of behavior selection , where behavioral selections encom - pass the full range of possible actions for stimuli , whether internal or external , conscious or subconscious , and voluntary or invol - untary . This viewpoint calls for a re - examination of the deﬁnitions we have inherited , because their narrow meanings have limited the types of questions posed within the ﬁeld . Furthermore , we will introduce a novel interpretation of supraspinal processing of pain distinguishing between the subjectively conscious pain state and sub - , un - , or pre - conscious nociceptive processes . We propose a comprehensive mechanistic model that properly incorporates acute and chronic pain , where the emotional limbic brain plays a critical role in bridging nociception and pain perception , as well as in the transition from acute to chronic pain , leading to the generalization of the functional continuity between pain and negative moods . Given that the literature supporting our model remains recent and fragmentary , we high - light important gaps in knowledge , as well as fruitful directions of inquiry . Nociception Sherrington coined the term nociception ( Sherrington , 1900 ) and outlined its underlying neural structures . He viewed nociceptive reﬂexes and pain perception as tightly linked processes , such that ‘‘were the brain intact , [ nociceptive activity ] would , we may presume , evoke ‘pain’’’ ( Woodworth and Sherrington , 1904 ) . Since these ﬁrst observations , more than 100 years of research has produced incontrovertible evidence regarding the specialized neuronal / molecular properties that deﬁne and char - acterize the nociceptive machinery ( Basbaum et al . , 2009 ; Woolf and Salter , 2000 ) . Activation of nociceptors and nociceptive pathways undoubtedly can give rise to pain , and the close corre - spondence between nociceptor properties and human pain perception has been conﬁrmed using a variety of experimental approaches ( Meyer et al . , 2006 ) . On the other hand , ample evidence indicates that nociceptors can be active in the absence of pain perception . For example , any pain psychophysicist would agree that applying a 50 kg weight on a 1 cm area of skin would evoke excruciating pain . Yet , experienced ballerinas dance with point shoes for many hours , reporting deep positive emotional satisfaction while the 474 Neuron 87 , August 5 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . toes carry the weight of the body , an activity that must massively and continuously activate their toe nociceptors . Therefore , at least ballerinas with intense training are capable of dissociating pain from nociception . The primary reason I ﬁdget in my chair while writing this article is because nociceptors innervating my skin , muscle , and bone command that my posture needs adjust - ment . Whereas proprioceptors provide ( conscious , but usually habituated ) information about the location and position of my body in space , nociceptors provide inputs that protect my body from injury . One ( especially the pain scientist ) commonly forgets the fact that most humans , and perhaps many other spe - cies as well , spend most of their lives free of pain and with no obvious tissue injuries . This must be ascribed to active nocicep - tors , because there are no other alternative neuronal mecha - nisms available to continuously protect the body and subvert the potential for injury and resulting pain perception . The necessity of nociceptive activity in the absence of stark pain is perhaps best illustrated by patients with various pain in - sensitivities due to leprosy , where the simple act of walking a mile gives rise to severe soft tissue and bone damage due to the lack of nociceptive afferents that render these subjects un - able to modulate their gait to avoid tissue injury ( Brand , 1993 ) . The best related clinical evidence comes from painless Charcot joints of tabes dorsalis ( Sanders , 2004 ) and painless channelo - pathies ( Bennett and Woods , 2014 ) . Dissociations between Figure 1 . Descartes’ Concept of Sensation Illustrates the Pain System and Its Reorganization Based on Modern Rodent Model Physiology and Human Brain Imaging Studies In addition , reorganization of its components are superimposed based on modern rodent model physiology and human brain imaging studies . The Cartesian illustration is explicit regarding an impinging stimulus being transduced and trans - mitted to a speciﬁc brain region where perception takes place . The additional images emphasize the modern evidence that all components of this system undergo reorganization following an injury that gives rise to a persistent or chronic pain state . End - organinjury givesrisetochanges inthe local milieu , inﬂammatory soup , and in afferent response properties ; collectively described as peripheral sensitization ( adapted from Julius and Basbaum , 2001 ) . Additionally , spinalcord circuitry undergoes a large number of changes , resulting in central sensitization ( adapted from Scholz and Woolf , 2002 ) , which includes enhanced glu - tamatergic signaling , changes in second - order messenger processes , and activation of micro - glia . At the level of the brain , human neuro - imaging studies indicate anatomical and func - tional reorganization . nociceptive stimuli and perceived pain are also demonstrable in the lab setting . For example , repetitive painful laser stim - uli induce rate - dependent modulation of evoked potentials , presumably reﬂecting nociceptive barrage of varying intensity , for a stable perception of pain ( Mouraux et al . , 2013 ; Wang et al . , 2010 ) . Moreover , when pain perception is assessed dynamically for complex stim - ulus patterns ( ‘‘offset analgesia’’ ; Yelle et al . , 2008 ; Cecchi et al . , 2012 ) , the statistical power function relating stimulus intensity to perceived magnitude of pain degrades and becomes highly nonlinear ( Price , 1988 ; Stevens , 1957 ) . The electrophysiology of nociceptors and of nociceptive path - ways are fully consistent with this idea , because extensive evidence shows that the majority of peripheral nociceptors can be activated with stimuli that are sub - threshold for pain perception , and a large proportion of central nociceptive neu - rons respond convergently to non - nociceptive stimuli as well ( Kenshalo et al . , 1980 ; Meyer et al . , 2006 ; Willis and Coggeshall , 1978 ) . As a result , the nociceptive control of behavior routinely occurs in the absence of consciously perceived pain , rendering it ‘‘subconscious . ’’ An important caveat to this position relates to microneurographic studies in humans that elegantly demon - strate the existence of certain peripheral nociceptors that , when individually activated ( single action potentials ) , can give rise to pain perception within a perceptive ﬁeld that closely matches the receptive ﬁeld of the stimulated nociceptor ( Weid - ner et al . , 1999 ) . The latter establishes existence of a class of nociceptors with direct access to pain , at least in the controlled lab setting , but does not discount the existence of other nocicep - tors activated with various bodily postures but that usually do not give rise to pain . Neuron 87 , August 5 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 475 Neuron Perspective The active role of subconscious nociceptors extends directly to behavior , because even the most common behavioral reper - toires require nociception to avoid injury . Daily motor move - ments could easily produce injury and tissue damage if one exceeds their natural range of motion , such as extreme exten - sions of ﬁngers , elbows , shoulders , hips , knees , or ankles , or chewing on or hitting hard objects , etc . , which supports the conclusion that motor behaviors are collectively inhibited by no - ciceptors . Surprisingly , this idea has not been studied , apart from spinal reﬂex behaviors . Similarly , there is no physiological evidence describing the nociceptive circuitry inhibiting motor repertoires . It is unlikely that nociceptive modulation of motor programs is mediated through the motor cortex , because only excitatory nociceptive inputs have been described in the region ( Chen et al . , 2011b ; Frot et al . , 2013 ) . More likely , it is mediated through dorsal striatal circuitry , where nociceptive inputs have been reported ( Braz et al . , 2005 ; Chudler et al . , 1993 ; Newman et al . , 1996 ) and where a large portion of the output is inhibitory to thalamocortical motor circuits . In summary , we argue that nociception continuously occurs in the absence of pain perception and it is a fundamental physio - logical process ( in the language of Christof Koch : the zombie agent of the sense of pain Koch , 2012 ) that subconsciously provides more veridical and instantaneous information that protects the organism from tissue damage . From a mechanistic viewpoint , we presume that behaviors modulated by nocicep - tion , in the absence of pain , are contingent on already estab - lished habitual repertoires . In contrast , when pain is evoked , it gives rise to new peripheral and spinal cord nociceptive learning / sensitization ( Basbaum et al . , 2009 ; Ikeda et al . , 2003 ; Woolf and Salter , 2000 ) and emotional learning that is potenti - ated by the salience and perceived value of the aversive event . Yet by and large nociceptive functioning and its underlying mechanisms in the absence of pain surpass current understand - ing and require investigation in their own right . Acute Pain We next re - examine the deﬁnition of pain in relationship to the ‘‘subconscious’’ concept of nociception . We emphasize that pain is a conscious subjective experience that is most commonly driven by nociceptive activity . Yet , its threshold and magnitude can be readily modulated by mood and attention ( Bushnell et al . , 2013 ) , monetary reward ( Vlaev et al . , 2009 ) , simple changes in instructions e . g . , ( Baliki et al . , 2010 ) , and through ex - pectations ( Wiech et al . , 2014 ) . A large brain imaging literature continues to examine the dependence of acute pain perception on various cognitive and emotional modulators , with a focus on the speciﬁc brain circuitry that mediate these relationships ( Apkarian et al . , 2005 ; Bushnell et al . , 2013 ) . Despite these efforts , the speciﬁcity of these cortical modulators of pain per - ception—as well as their shared characteristics across other sensory modalities—remain inadequately understood . Consistent with and complementary to the variety of factors modulating pain and the related changes seen in brain circuitry , ample evidence demonstrates that conscious acute pain per - ception is highly malleable and a standardized nociceptive barrage does not translate into a ﬁxed brain activity or to a prototypical perception . Pain perception can reﬂect moment - to - moment shifts in value judgments regarding the self and regarding the relationship between the self and the environment . Its value can change , as seen with rodents for which the avail - ability of food trumps pain - related escape behavior when both are simultaneously present ( Foo et al . , 2009 ) . Pain perception can be delayed for hours or days , when soldiers surviving the horrors of a battleﬁeld do not report pain or suffering . We should also mention that Pavlov was able to train his dogs to salivate for painful stimuli ( Pavlov , 2003 ) . Thus , the human verbal descrip - tions and behavioral experience of pain ( as exhibited in motor , language , and facial and bodily expressions ) —for a qualia that one would presume to be subjectively common—has a broad , culture - and context - dependent repertoire . Pain therefore re - ﬂects an interaction among memory , attentional , and affective brain circuitry and afferent sensory inputs . Given that nociceptors are continuously active in everyday behavior , one must posit the existence of a threshold phenome - non that transforms nociception to conscious pain ( q in Figure 2 ) . From a classical spinal cord physiology viewpoint , this threshold may be equated to the ‘‘gate control theory’’ ( Melzack and Wall , 1965 ) , where the balance between innocuous and noxious affer - ents at the level of the spinal cord determines the nociceptive signal traveling cephalad that , upon reaching the cortex , is inter - preted as pain ( the more modern alternative is some variation on ‘‘central sensitization , ’’ especially for persistent pain conditions , where the gain of the spinal cord nociceptive synapse is ampli - ﬁed ; Woolf and Salter , 2000 ) . In contrast , from a behavior selec - tion viewpoint , the nociception - pain threshold is envisioned to be generated through reverberating circuitry between the ventral tegmentum / substantia nigra and ventral striatum / nucleus ac - cumbens ; modulated by limbic and cortical inputs that reﬂect past experiences , values , expectations , and salience relative to the self ; and where the output in turn modulates striatal - cortical loops to control behavioral repertoires . The threshold phenome - non emerges from a counterbalance between reward and aversion within the context of the learned history and the instan - taneous state of the self that gates conversion from subcon - scious nociception to conscious pain ( Figure 2 ) . Once pain is present , its salience draws attention , interferes with other thought processes , and imposes a state of negative mood . As such , the conscious perception of pain is the ultimate negative ‘‘cerebral celebrity’’ ( Dennett , 1993 ) or negative ‘‘poten - tial cerebral celebrity’’ ( Chalmers , 1996 ) , because it ‘‘‘perse - veres , ’ ‘monopolizes’ resources long enough to achieve certain typical symptomatic effects—on memory , on control of behavior and so forth’’ ( Dennett , 1993 ) . If we view conscious perception as availability of information within the global workspace ( Baars , 1988 ) , then conscious properties of a painful state would affect even spinal nociceptive sensitivity and thus actively inﬂuence ‘‘gate control’’ and / or ‘‘central sensitization’’ spinal nociceptive processes , mediated through descending pathways as demon - strated by Vera - Portocarrero et al . , 2006 . Negative affect is an intrinsic aspect of the International Asso - ciation for the Study of Pain standard deﬁnition of pain , and one commonly envisions unpleasantness as a necessary feature of this percept / qualia . It is classically explained as a consequence of transmission through medial spinocephalad pathways . If nociceptors are active in everyday behavior , and typically in 476 Neuron 87 , August 5 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Perspective the absence of pain , then transmission through both medial and lateral spinocephalad pathways must control subconscious no - ciceptor - driven behaviors , with or without the presence of pain . Human brain imaging studies tend to localize pain unpleasant - ness to speciﬁc cortical areas , most commonly either to rostral anterior cingulate ( Rainville et al . , 1997 ) or to some portion of the insula ( Segerdahl et al . , 2015 ) . Yet these claims remain un - convincing . Instead , pain unpleasantness must be considered a part of the brain’s emotional repertoire that is tapped into by this particular qualia , which implies that the emotional limbic cir - cuitry must be included in the neural network associated with pain . However , there is surprisingly little consistent evidence for activation of the amygdala , hippocampus , ventral striatum , or medial prefrontal cortex ( the four most prominent nodes comprising the limbic brain ) in acute pain studies ( Segerdahl et al . , 2015 ) . From the viewpoint of behavioral selection , we conclude that acute pain is not a warning signal but rather is the failure of the machinery ( nociceptor activity ) designed to avoid pain . As such , once the conscious perception of pain occurs , aversion has failed or is imminent to fail . Thus , the behavioral repertoire following pain is shifted into minimizing injury or retracting away from the environment that has the potential for injury , to protect the organism from further injury and promote healing . Therefore , here we extend the standard deﬁnition of pain to include the experiential shift as nociceptor activity breaks through from the subconscious to become a conscious unpleas - ant perception ( Figure 2D ) . It is unlikely that this phenomenon applies uniquely to the sense of pain ( even for this sense the evidence remains minimal ) ; rather , it likely generalizes across the sensory modalities . For example , there is extensive psycho - physical evidence that large parts of the visual ﬁeld do not enter into conscious visual perception , and complementarily , visual perception is usually a coherent whole , the components of which may not even be physically present ( Murray and Herrmann , 2013 ) . Consistently there is now good evidence that activation of the primary visual cortex is not sufﬁcient for conscious visual perception and that top - down controls from the frontal cortex are necessary ( Dehaene and Changeux , 2011 ) . A similar top - down control must also occur for pain . Moreover , we posit that the frontal cortical drives , across sensory modalities , are in fact embedded in corticostriatal circuits that actively control the Figure 2 . Brain Circuitry and Temporal Dynamics for the Threshold Phenomenon , q , which Determines Conversion of Nociception to Conscious Pain Perception ( A ) The block diagram indicates q is the output of the limbic brain . Internal states of the limbic brain , relative to neocortical memories determining current state of theorganism ( value , expectation , and salience ) , aswellas theafferent nociceptive drivecontrol q . Other similar threshold processes inturn modulate thestate of the organism through learning mechanisms , thus modifying values , expectations , and salience . ( B ) More detailed circuit diagram emphasizing the interaction between limbic circuits , q , and behavior selection . Diagram is adapted from studies of the reward / aversion circuitry , regarding striatal - cortical control loops ( based on illustrations in Lu¨scher and Malenka , 2011 ; Nakanishi et al . , 2014 ; Russo and Nestler , 2013 ) . Denseglutamatergicinputsfromamygdala , hippocampus , andprefrontalcortex ( mPFC ) controltheaffectiveandmotivationalpropertiesofaccumbens ( NAc ) that responds to novel reward / aversion - related stimuli . Dopaminergic - GABAergic loops between accumbens and ventral tegmental area ( VTA ) provide the resultant value for q , which , through GP / SNr and thalamocortical circuits , modulates behavior . Dopaminergic projections control synaptic properties and thus the affective state of the organism . ( C ) Corticobasal ganglia - cortical loops conveying limbic , associative , and sensorimotor information . These loops are generally envisioned as a series of parallel projections . However , the relay points , especially in the basal ganglia , provide opportunities for interactions between the loops . This organization enables the functional propagation of the limbic threshold phenomenon to inﬂuence goal - directed and habitual behaviors ( adapted from Redgrave et al . , 2010 ) . ( D ) Conscious experience of acute painful events ( P ) depends on nociception ( N ) and the corticolimbic threshold , q . ( E ) Transitioning from subacute to chronic pain also depends on the individuals’ q . Left image depicts the classic viewpoint where nociceptive signal amplitude controls transition to chronic pain . Right image is the view advanced here : For a similar injury , with equivalent nociception relayed to the brain , individuals with corticolimbic risk factors will persist to chronic pain , whereas resilient ones will recover . Neuron 87 , August 5 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 477 Neuron Perspective threshold for incorporating sensory afferent inputs to cortical conscious states ( Figures 2A – 2C ) . Patient H . M . There is a long and controversial history of the effects of brain in - juries on pain perception ( Nicholson , 2000 ) . Unfortunately , the data regarding pain insensitivity with brain lesions remains scant , localization of the site of injury is imprecise , and there is little documentation of the impact of such conditions on the everyday life of such patients . Patient H . M . ( Henry Gustav Molaison ) , arguably the most famous and most intensively studied patient in neuroscience for over 50 years and by hundreds of scientists , did not feel acute thermal pain applied over diverse body parts ( Hebben et al . , 1985 ) : ‘‘H . M . never gave reports of pain for the most intense stimulus applied either to his forearms or chest . ’’ Thirty years prior to this formal testing for pain sensitivity , H . M . underwent bilateral resection of the uncus , amygdala , anterior hippocam - pus , and parahippocampal gyrus for severe and intractable ep - ilepsy . The authors conclude that the amygdala injury is probably the main reason for lack of pain perception . What remains incon - trovertible is the fact that H . M . had normal peripheral nocicep - tors and an intact spinothalamic pathway and , thus unperturbed sensory encoding of noxious stimuli . Therefore , the extensive bilateral limbic resection must have dramatically increased his striatal threshold for pain perception ( q in Figure 2 ) . Even more remarkable and further consistent with the latter explanation is that unlike patients with congenital insensitivity to pain , the loss of pain perception was not coupled with any obvious tissue injury , implying that subconscious nociception was intact and protecting his body . The contrast between H . M . and subjects lacking peripheral nociceptive afferents is informative , because the former seems to have led a life free of bodily injuries whereas subjects of the latter type are unable to protect the body from in - juries even after extensive training . Localization of Brain Activity for Acute Pain Hundreds of positron emission tomography and fMRI studies now describe a long list of brain regions activated during acute thermal , mechanical , and / or chemical stimuli in humans , see ( Apkarian et al . , 2005 ; Bushnell et al . , 2013 ) . Given this large literature , meta - analytic approaches can be used to summarize reproducible trends reliably found across laboratories and scanner modalities . A particularly elegant meta - analytic tool for neuroimaging data was developed by Yarkoni and Wager ( Yarkoni et al . , 2011 ) ( http : / / www . neurosynth . org ) , which uses text - mining and machine - learning techniques to generate map - pings between search terms and brain activity . The reverse infer - ence map for the term ‘‘pain’’ illustrates the conﬁdence with which pain - related brain activity is observed in 311 studies ( Figure 3A ) . Assuming at least ten subjects were used in each of the studies included , the obtained map represents neural Figure 3 . Constructing the Brain Acute Pain Representation Map from Resting State Brain Activity ( A ) Brain regions identiﬁed for the reverse infer - ence for the term ‘‘pain , ’’ which identiﬁes 311 PubMed studies in the Neurosynth meta - analysis tool ( Yarkoni et al . , 2011 ) . The map is thresholded for z values larger than 3 . 0 . Highest conﬁdence activations ( zvalues > 8 . 0 ) arelocalizedtosixbrain regions : bilateral secondary somatosensory cor - tex ( S2 ) , anterior cingulate ( ACC ) , bilateral anterior and posterior insula ( a INS , p INS ) , thalamus ( TH ) , and periaqueductal gray ( PAG ) . ( B ) Resting state functional connectivity networks for the six main nodes most robustly associated with the term ‘‘pain . ’’ Functional connectivity is derived from resting state activity from 1 , 000 subjects ( Biswal et al . , 2010 ) , generated in Neu - rosynth ( thresholded at correlation values > 0 . 3 , approximately corresponding to > 3 SDs from baseline ) . Essentially the same network is identi - ﬁedwhenACC , a INS , orS2areusedasseeds . The p INS seed identiﬁes bilateral p INS as well as posterior cingulate / supplementary motor area . The TH network is limited to bilateral thalamus , and PAG seed only shows connectivity limited to itself . ( C ) Overlap between the map for the term ‘‘pain’’ and sum of six resting state networks . Blue is the same map shown in ( A ) . Red is the sum of all functional connections identiﬁed in ( B ) . The over - lap between red and blue maps is 72 % of the blue map . 478 Neuron 87 , August 5 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Perspective activity associated with pain in more than 3 , 000 subjects . The re - gions with most robust activity are highlighted and cover more than 15 % of the neocortical mantle . Thus , in contrast to the sin - gle neuron electrophysiological results that describe sparse numbers of nociceptive responsive neurons in the neocortex ( Chen et al . , 2011b ; Kenshalo and Isensee , 1983 ; Mazzola et al . , 2009 ; Vierck et al . , 2013 ) , fMRI brain activity associated with pain identiﬁes a much larger brain network . However , the latter map of pain - related activity , often referred to as ‘‘the pain matrix , ’’ must be interpreted with caution , given numerous methodological limitations . These issues have been debated across many pain neuroimaging studies , and it remains unclear if they can be fully resolved at the level of local regional activity . Even though we see some differentiation of properties for different brain regions activated with painful stimuli , especially when attentional and distraction - related variability is superim - posed ( Bushnell et al . , 2013 ) , the speciﬁcity of these regional properties remains far from clear . As a result , our ability to make inferences regarding their speciﬁc roles remains vague ( see Poldrack , 2011 ) . In fact , the speciﬁcity of the nociceptive system or lack thereof has been the focus of a longstanding and contentious debate in pain research . Given that roughly 15 % of the cortical mantle seems responsive to nociceptive stimuli , the chances that any of these regions are nociceptive speciﬁc is remote . Moreover , all brain regions shown in Figure 3A also show responses to a multiplicity of other stimuli or tasks . Even at the level of the spinal cord , a large majority of nociceptive responsive neurons also respond to nonpainful tactile , proprioceptive , muscle and visceral manipulations , and this general principle seems maintained throughout the CNS . Furthermore , in a series of elegant studies , it has now been clearly demonstrated that almost all components of the nocicep - tive brain activity are not speciﬁc to nociception or to pain perception ( Iannetti and Mouraux , 2010 ; Liang et al . , 2013 ; Mour - aux et al . , 2011 ; Wang et al . , 2010 ) . This evidence overwhelm - ingly demonstrates that it is unlikely that the cortex contains neural tissue speciﬁcally responsive to nociceptive inputs or linked speciﬁcally to pain perception . Yet , the Cartesian view posits this exact hypothesis , and pain scientists continue to search for such specialized brain tissue . Integration of Brain Activity for Perception of Acute Pain Since the work of Weber in the 18 th century ( see English transla - tion ; Weber , 1978 ) , the primary quantitative outcome measure for pain has been its subjective perceived magnitude . It is there - fore proper to study the brain activity for pain in relation to the stimulus intensity and / or perception magnitudes to function - ally differentiate components of the underlying circuitry ( Porro et al . , 2004 ) . In general , somatosensory cortical areas and ante - rior cingulate activity seem to track stimulus intensity , whereas lateral prefrontal and posterior parietal regions do not ( Bu¨chel et al . , 2002 ; Coghill et al . , 1999 ; Davis et al . , 1997 ; Peyron et al . , 1999 ) . Brain activity related to perceived magnitude of pain is studied less systematically ( Baliki et al . , 2009 ; Johnstone et al . , 2012 ; Loggia et al . , 2012 ; Moulton et al . , 2012 ) . Different temporal transformations are observed between stimulus and perception in various brain regions , and the region best related to perceived pain ( anterior insula ) seems to also reﬂect perceived magnitude for visual stimuli ( Baliki et al . , 2009 ) . Thus , cortical tissue speciﬁcally dedicated to perceived magnitude of pain re - mains unidentiﬁed . One can relax the Cartesian interpretation to include the notion that , despite a lack of cortical regional speciﬁcity , an appropri - ately weighted sum of the brain regional activity implicated in nociception / pain altogether could provide speciﬁc information regarding pain states . The latter was recently demonstrated in a rather comprehensive approach ( Wager et al . , 2013 ) . The au - thors used brain activity for acute pain ( based on the maps in Figure 3A ) to construct a machine - learning - based regression model for pain perception . The model could differentiate be - tween tasks and predict perceived magnitude of pain , accurately across several independent data samples . The strength of the study is the authors’ claim of having derived a generally appli - cable brain signature for identifying pain perception magnitude . The resultant tool can be readily tested to determine extent of validity , especially in tasks that activate very similar brain re - gions , for example in tactile magnitude rating ( Apkarian , 2013 ) which gives rise to an activity pattern closely matching that seen in Figure 3A . An alternative approach is to examine the local pattern of brain activity and determine whether the across - voxel ensemble pattern can differentiate between conditions . This technique , multivariate pattern analysis pioneered by Haxby ( Haxby , 2012 ) , was used to differentiate between sensory modalities ( Liang et al . , 2013 ) . The study was able to establish that within - subjects , across - voxel activity patterns in the somatosensory cortex best differentiated between pain and other sensory modalities . Yet , the study also demonstrated that many other brain regions can make a similar distinction , albeit at a lower conﬁdence level . The authors further showed that the ability to distinguish between sensory modalities is not a unique trait of the sensory cortices . These results are somewhat consistent to the observa - tions made by Wager et al . , 2013 , in the sense that both studies identify a distributed signal in the brain that can differen - tiate pain from other states . Both studies ( Liang et al . , 2013 ; Wager et al . , 2013 ) remain unclear as to the extent to which the identiﬁed signals are speciﬁcally linked to the perception , or if they reﬂect secondary or ancillary responses due to the pres - ence of pain . Brain Resting State Activity and Acute Pain The discovery of the brain resting state activity ( Biswal et al . , 1995 ) has fundamentally changed modern notions of neural dynamics . In its most general form , resting state activity is a signature of neural oscillations synchronized across large - scale networks that occur in the absence of external inputs ( Fox and Raichle , 2007 ; Fox et al . , 2005 ) , persisting with external inputs ( Cabral et al . , 2014 ) , and reﬂecting local information integration as measured by frequency content ( Baria et al . , 2011 , 2013 ) . Properties of resting state activity are now thought to reﬂect an individual’s history of learning and memory that underlie perceptual variability ( Lewis et al . , 2009 ) . Resting state activity is composed of a set of large - scale synchronized networks . Task - related activity can be thought of either as a collection of networks that synchronize with each other ( Deco and Corbetta , 2011 ) or components of these networks that break apart and link Neuron 87 , August 5 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 479 Neuron Perspective up with others . Figure 3B shows resting state networks identiﬁed from Neurosynth . The networks are derived for six voxels that correspond to the most pain - speciﬁc locations in Figure 3A . Three of the six seeds essentially identify the same network ; the thalamic seed only identiﬁes bilateral thalamic connectivity , and the PAG seed identiﬁes itself . The ﬁgure illustrates that any single voxel’s activity is in fact synchronized with , and thus embedded within , a large underlying brain network . Figure 3C il - lustrates that , with a few seed voxels , we can recapture most of the brain activity for pain . It is therefore not surprising that the properties of painful stimuli can be captured across many of the brain regions commonly identiﬁed for acute pain . More importantly , the identiﬁcation of the pain - related network during ( nonpainful ) resting state casts doubt as to the sufﬁciency of this network in pain perception . Pain , Vision , and Their Perception There is far deeper understanding of the cortical encoding of vision compared to pain . Yet the fundamental mechanisms that transform sensory inputs to conscious perception remain equally mysterious for both senses . Here we brieﬂy contrast the two to highlight their conceptual commonalities and differences . Both electrophysiology and brain imaging studies indicate that about one - third of the primate neocortex is dedicated to visual information processing , which can be subdivided into more than 30 modules . The inter - relationship between these regions as well as their specialization has been and continues to be described in great detail ( Felleman and Van Essen , 1991 ; Wan - dell and Winawer , 2011 ) . In contrast , existence of cortical tissue specialized for processing nociceptive information remains contentious . Yet , the subjective intensity of qualia associated with each of these sensory modalities is at least equivalent , and the common saying ‘‘if you doubt reality , kick a rock with bare feet’’ implies that pain is often far more salient than vision . Thus , the intensity of saliency for speciﬁc qualia is not related to the amount of neocortical tissue dedicated to that sensory modality . Additionally , although we have garnered detailed knowledge regarding the properties of visual information processed by indi - vidual neurons and information ﬂow across the visual modules , we still lack the ability to construct the integrated visual percepts that one experiences holistically ( e . g . , see Rokers et al . , 2009 ) . Existence of the meta - analytically derived map for acute pain ( variations of Figure 3A ) with component regions preferentially encoding pain magnitude , affective characteristics , sensitivity to attention , emotion , arousal or to analgesics is not sufﬁcient to be concluded as the ‘‘pain matrix’’ / ‘‘signature’’ / ‘‘mechanism’’ for conscious perception of pain . It should be emphasized that even the scale ( single molecules , single neurons , groups of neu - rons , networks of neurons , or the whole - brain network ) of the fundamental physical process of consciousness remains unre - solved and mysterious . Still , because our common subjective experience is comprised of qualia with access to language and inﬂuences behavior , ‘‘cerebral exuberance , ’’ conscious experi - ence of pain can only be properly understood within the full context of the nuances of consciousness , for which the minimal neural circuit must incorporate long - distance network interac - tions ( Dehaene and Changeux , 2011 ) . Currently , the brain science of pain , in similarity to the science for all other sensations , remains correlative to psychophysics . In parallel with the recent dissociation of brain circuitry for conscious and unconscious visual stimuli ( Dehaene et al . , 2014 ) , we suggest that important paradoxes regarding central pain representation can be resolved by unfolding unconscious nociception from conscious pain . Speciﬁcally , the seemingly irreconcilable evidence that pain is either localizable to speciﬁc brain sites ( Garcia - Larrea and Peyron , 2013 ; Segerdahl et al . , 2015 ) or it requires integrated representation across brain net - works ( Wager et al . , 2013 ) may only be resolved once nocicep - tion and pain perception are delineated . Regarding an overall strategy to understand the neural signature for conscious pain we again quote Christof Koch : ‘‘We must resist the hypnotic ap - peal of hot spots in brain scans with their naive phrenological interpretation : the perception of faces is computed over here , pain over there , and consciousness just yonder . Consciousness does not arise from regions but from highly networked neurons within and across regions’’ ( Koch , 2012 ) . Chronic Pain Chronic pain is an enormous health care issue with a massive price tag , yet its science has remained rudimentary . If pain per - sists and becomes chronic , it can lead to dramatically reduced quality of life , depression and suicide , insomnia , lowered im - mune function , changes in eating patterns , impaired cognitive function , maladaptive stress responses , and other long - term deleterious effects . Its prevalence has increased worldwide to affect more than 15 % of the world population and 30 % of the US population ( Murray and Lopez , 2013 ) . The associated health care cost in the United States is a staggering $ 600 billion per year ( Institute of Medicine ( US ) Committee on Advancing Pain Research , Care , and Education , 2011 ) . Over one - third of individ - uals with chronic pain deﬁne their pain as severe and 40 % of those suffering from chronic pain are not satisﬁed with their care ( Breivik et al . , 2006 ; Johannes et al . , 2010 ) . Despite consid - erable research on the topic , no consistently effective therapies have been identiﬁed . Beecher ﬁrst coined the term chronic pain in the 1950s . Addi - tionally , he emphasized that , in the clinical context , pain is far longer lasting and the relationship between pain and its inciting stimulus or injury remains imprecise and unpredictable , and thus that the science of pain and of analgesics must be centered on clinical trials performed in actual patients suffering from pain . The science of human neuroimaging of pain is also slowly converging to Beecher’s conclusion because accumulating evi - dence demonstrates that the brain in chronic pain is not equiva - lent to the brain experiencing prolonged acute pain . The deﬁnition of chronic pain remains tautological , because it simply asserts that it is a long - lasting pain , or a pain persisting past the normal healing period . Over the past 30 years , studies in animal models of persistent pain have established that pain chronicity is associated with peripheral reorganization of afferent signaling , changing sensitivity for nociceptors , and perhaps for tactile afferents ( Figure 1 ) . At the level of the spinal cord , we now know of hundreds of molecular changes reorganizing neuronal circuitry and engaging glial processes , all of which give rise to heightened sensitivity of afferents and which 480 Neuron 87 , August 5 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Perspective Figure 4 . Transition to Chronic Pain May Be Deconstructed to Four Component Phases : Predisposition , Injury or Inciting Event , a Transition Period , and a Maintenance Phase ( A – H ) Braincircuitryandtheirinteractionsacrossthephasesareillustratedinhumanbrainimagingstudies . ( A ) Speciﬁcbrainwhitematterregionalproperties ( red ) impartriskfordevelopingchronicpainfollowinganacuteepisodeofbackpain ( Mansouretal . , 2013 ) . ( B ) Limbicbrainstructuralpropertiesmayalsoimpartriskfor pain chroniﬁcation ( e . g . , shape and / or size of the hippocampus ) ( Mutso et al . , 2012 ) . ( C ) In the transition phase , strength of information exchange between the prefrontal cortex and accumbens , after an end - organ injury , determines long - term pain chroniﬁcation ( Baliki et al . , 2012 ) . ( D ) The transition process is the in - ﬂuence of predisposing brain factors in combination with the injury - induced nociceptive signals that control mesolimbic learning mechanisms , altogether determiningextentofprefrontal - accumbensinformationexchange ( modulating q inFigure2 ) . Chroniﬁcationofpaingivesriseto : ( E ) condition - speciﬁcsubjective pain - related brain activity patterns ( Baliki et al . , 2006 ; Hashmi et al . , 2013 ; Parks et al . , 2011 ) , ( F ) increased information exchange within the hippocampus and between the hippocampus and the cortex ( Mutso et al . , 2013 ) , ( G ) reorganization of brain gray matter regional similarity ( Baliki et al . , 2011 ) , and ( H ) distortions in information sharing in resting state brain activity , speciﬁcally brain activity phase relationship between the default mode network and the rest of the brain shows chronic pain type - speciﬁc patterns ( Baliki et al . , 2014b ) . Inrodent models forpersistentpain , the fourphases arebetter conceptualizedaspre - injurymanipulationsthatinﬂuencepost - injurypain - likebehavior , andearly andlatepost - injuryconsequences . Supraspinalcircuitsimplicatedintherodentfourphasesofpainpersistencearehighlightedin1 – 9 : ( 1 ) Bilaterallesionoftherat ( legend continued on next page ) Neuron 87 , August 5 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 481 Neuron Perspective generally conspire to give rise to ‘‘central sensitization’’ ( Bas - baum et al . , 2009 ; Woolf and Salter , 2000 ) . Accumulating brain imaging - based evidence now also shows that the human brain undergoes extensive reorganization in chronic pain conditions ( Apkarian et al . , 2011 ) . This ﬂorid neural reorganization from the periphery to the neocortex ( Figure 1 ) , which seems to uniquely manifest for different types of chronic pain , strongly agrees with Beecher’s viewpoint and afﬁrms that , to understand chronic pain , one has to study patients suffering from its myriad clinical manifestations , comparing within and across types . The seemingly speciﬁc brain properties that are reliably linked with distinct chronic pain conditions , as well as the long - term and continued condition - speciﬁc reorganization of the brain across chronic pain diagnoses , justify the notion that chronic pain is a maladaptive neuropathological disease state ( Davis and Moayedi , 2013 ; Tracey and Bushnell , 2009 ) . Below we propose that chronic pain can be dissected into component phases and elaborate on the underlying mechanisms of each phase . From a more general view , and given the model we have advanced regarding the role of striatal circuits in the conversion of nociception to acute pain , one can further expand our proposed model to chronic pain . Borrowing from the literature on mechanisms underlying addictive behavior for positive reward ( Robinson and Kolb , 2004 ; Schultz , 2000 ; Volkow et al . , 2010 ; Willuhn et al . , 2012 ) , we afﬁrm that long - term shifts in the threshold mechanisms that gate the conversion from noci - ception to pain also underlie the transition to chronic pain ( Figure 2E ) . We further propose that the threshold shift is depen - dent on limbic circuitry invoking synaptic learning - based reorga - nization ( Apkarian , 2008 ; Apkarian et al . , 2009 ) . Taken together , these ideas can be simpliﬁed as a lowered mesolimbic threshold for the conscious perception of pain , which functionally renders the brain addicted to pain . The lowered striatal threshold is pro - posed to be mediated by learning mechanisms driven by limbic properties ( Apkarian , 2008 ; Apkarian et al . , 2009 ) , which induce reorganization of neocortical memory traces ( Johansen and Fields , 2004 ; Li et al . , 2010 ; Xu et al . , 2008 ) . The Human Brain in Chronic Pain : A General Model Ventral striatal circuitry links nociception , acute pain , and chronic pain . This circuitry assesses salience of impending pain as well as expected reward value for relief of pain ( Baliki et al . , 2010 ) . Given that its output controls motivated behavior ( Figures 2B and 2C ) , properties of this circuitry become critical in understanding the transition from acute to chronic pain . There is now evidence that some brain properties are candidate risk factors , while others reﬂect the transition to chronic pain , and the mesolimbic circuitry drives brain reorganization through syn - aptic learning mechanisms . These results suggest that chroniﬁ - cation of pain may be subdivided into four temporally distinct and functional separate phases ( Figure 4 ) . We presume that due to genetic and developmental forces , different subjects are prone to developing chronic pain as a consequence of spe - ciﬁc injuries . Simplistically , we assume these predisposing fac - tors are captured by the limbic brain anatomy and physiology . Given such predispositions , a speciﬁc injury initiating a large nociceptive barrage results in activating the corticostriatal cir - cuitry into either a response that copes with the injury and in time recovers toward the healthy state or a response that dimin - ishes the corticostriatal threshold thus functionally amplifying the afferent signal , enhancing the gain for inducing learning , which in turn imprints novel neocortical anatomical and functional mem - ory traces thus creating the chronic pain state ( Figure 2E ) . Recent human brain imaging data ( Figures 4A – 4H ) and animal model evidence ( Figure 4 : 1 – 9 ) are consistent with this model . The model is also intentionally kept as simple as possible because much detail remains to be uncovered . Note that it is fully consistent with observations of transient abolition of chronic pain by massive blockade of nociceptive afferents ( Haroutounian et al . , 2014 ; Vaso et al . , 2014 ) because central ampliﬁcation ( by reducing mesolimbic q ) becomes immaterial in the complete absence of inputs . The model raises the more nuanced question : whether ongoing afferent nociceptive activity generated in pa - tients with chronic pain would by itself be perceived as painful by healthy subjects . Our model posits that chronic pain depends on the interplay between the brain threshold phenomenon and the injury - related sensory input . The injury in most cases is envisioned to be a disturbance in nociceptive afferent input ; however , in some con - ditions , there may also be central drivers , such as in central pain or phantom pain conditions . The pain research community has long debated the relative contribution of the end organ ( injured bodily structure ) in relation to brain or gene predispositions ( Rob - inson and Apkarian , 2009 ) . The proposed model is a combination of both and it is envisioned that the relative weights of each component will be condition speciﬁc . For example , ﬁbromyalgia seems to be mostly driven by central predispositions ( Phillips and Clauw , 2011 ) , even though hyperexcitable nociceptors were recently described in such patients ( Serra et al . , 2014 ) . On the other hand , osteoarthritis may have a larger peripheral nociceptor contribution , as evidenced by the success rate of pain relief with joint replacement surgery ( Buchbinder et al . , 2014 ) . The model also suggests that the rate of transition to chronic pain is condition speciﬁc and depends on limbic brain properties . We foresee that unraveling the speciﬁcs of this cir - cuitry for various types of chronic pain conditions will pave the basolateralamygdala ( BLA ) diminishes post - injury tactile allodynia for28days after neuropathy ( Lietal . , 2013 ) . ( 2 ) Lidocaine infusionwithinaccumbensintherat diminishes post - injury tactile allodynia for the duration of infusion ( 14 days ) , after a neuropathic injury ( spared nerve injury , SNI ) ( Chang et al . , 2014 ) . ( 3 ) Hours following induction of an arthritis model in the rat , amygdala neurons become hyperexcitable ( Neugebauer et al . , 2003 ) . ( 4 ) 5 days after SNI neuropathy inthe rat , accumbenscovariance ofreceptor geneexpressionisupregulated ( Changetal . , 2014 ) , and ( 5 ) dendriticsizeandbranchingsofprefrontalpyramidalneuronsare expanded ( Metz et al . , 2009 ) . ( 6 ) 15 days after SNI neuropathy adult hippocampal neurogenesis is downregulated ( Mutso et al . , 2012 ) . ( 7 ) Accumbens medium spiny neurons with dopamine D2 receptors show decreased AMPA / NMDA ratio in neuropathic injured rodents ( Schwartz et al . , 2014 ) . ( 8 ) Resting state whole - brain functional networkintheanesthetized ratshowsincreased ( red ) anddecreased ( blue ) functional connections28days after SNIneuropathyrelative tosham injury ( Baliki et al . , 2014a ) . ( 9 ) 6 months following neuropathic injury prefrontal ( PFC ) cortical gray matter volume is decreased in the rat ( Seminowicz et al . , 2009 ) . Overall , the human data illustrate brain risk factors for , and brain reorganization with , chroniﬁcation of pain . The rodent results show persistent pain - like behavior depends on , and in turn reorganizes , limbic brain circuitry . 482 Neuron 87 , August 5 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Perspective way for the development of novel treatment and / or prevention therapies . Because this model assumes that brain properties are the primary determinants of risk for chronic pain , chronic pain is more dominantly deﬁned as a neurological disease and to a lesser extent a nociceptive abnormality . The Human Brain in Chronic Pain : Anatomy Approximately 10 years ago , we discovered regional anatomical brain abnormalities that correlated with intensity and duration in patients with chronic back pain ( CBP ) ( Apkarian et al . , 2004 ) . This initial observation is now replicated across many clinical pain conditions that primarily show regional decreases in gray matter density , although there is also some evidence for increased den - sity in a subset of pain populations as well ( May , 2008 ; see recent meta - analyses : Cauda et al . , 2014 ; Smallwood et al . , 2013 ) . A direct comparison between different clinical pain conditions indi - cates partially overlapping maps of anatomical aberrations ( Ba - liki et al . , 2011 ) . Mechanisms and processes underlying such changes remain unclear and speculative . Growing evidence conﬁrms that these regional gray matter decreases can partially renormalize following successful amelioration of chronic pain ( ^ Ceko et al . , 2015 ; Gwilym et al . , 2010 ; Moayedi et al . , 2011 ; Ro - driguez - Raecke et al . , 2009 ; Seminowicz et al . , 2011 ) . The simplest hypothesis regarding physiological processes that con - trol these anatomical changes is the notion that voxel - wise gray matter properties ( average proﬁle of millions of neurons ) reﬂects local variations in synaptic density , although neuronal atrophy may also be occurring as some of these changes persist over de - cades ( Baliki et al . , 2011 ) . There is also evidence that these regional gray matter changes are actually a reﬂection of a more pervasive reorgani - zation of the inter - relationship of the anatomy of the neocortical mantle ( based on whole - brain gray matter self - similarity ana - lyses ( Baliki et al . , 2011 ) ) , which is highly distinguishable be - tween clinical conditions and which suggests a reorganization of information shared across the neocortex . A meta - analysis of brain gray matter properties for multiple pain conditions when analyzed from the viewpoint of resting state networks identiﬁes a core set of networks ( mainly the salience and atten - tional networks ) as the main circuits commonly affected , whereas sensory regions seem to show more condition - spe - ciﬁc reorganization ( Cauda et al . , 2014 ) . In our longitudinal study , where subacute back ( SBP ) patients were tracked over 1 year in their transition either to recovery ( SBPr ) or persis - tence to pain chroniﬁcation ( SPBp ) indicated that gray matter decreases occurs only in the SBPp , with changes starting within the ﬁrst few months , in proportion to functional connec - tivity changes , and in proportion to the intensity of back pain ( Baliki et al . , 2012 ) . All of this implies strongly that this anatom - ical reorganization is part of the process of the transition to chronic pain . Brain white matter abnormalities have also been observed in chronic pain conditions . The ﬁrst such report suggested that white matter regional fractional anisotropy ( reﬂecting myelin properties ) may be linked to the gray matter changes ( Geha et al . , 2008 ) , implying shared mechanisms between the two pro - cesses . A number of studies now show regional white matter ab - normalities in diverse chronic pain conditions ( Chen et al . , 2011a ; Ellingson et al . , 2013 ; Khan et al . , 2014 ) . On the other hand , in our longitudinal study of SBP , it was observed that white matter frac - tional anisotropy differences between SBPp and SBPr were pre - sent in the earliest brain scan and persisted with no further changes over 1 year ( Mansour et al . , 2013 ) . The latter study concluded that speciﬁc white matter deviations from the norm are most likely preexisting risk factors that put subjects at risk of developing CBP . Perception - Related Brain Activity in Chronic Pain The Cartesian expectation for brain activity in chronic pain would be a state of continued , or enhanced , activity in brain regions identiﬁed for acute pain ( all or a subset of the regions seen in Figure 3A ) . However , when brain activity is determined for sub - jective report of spontaneous ﬂuctuations in the magnitude of perceived pain ( Baliki et al . , 2006 ) , one observes speciﬁc brain activity for chronic pain distinct from that for acute pain , where chronic pain conditions activate more limbic and emotional brain regions , and that different chronic pain conditions engage spe - ciﬁc patterns ( Apkarian et al . , 2011 ) . Results from our longitudinal study , in fact , demonstrate how brain activity in relation to sub - jective pain shifts dynamically away from sensory brain regions to emotional / limbic regions ( Hashmi et al . , 2013 ) . In early SBP ( 10 – 15 weeks after start of back pain ) , brain activity for back pain closely corresponds the activity for acute pain . However , as subjects transition to either SBPp or SBPr ( 1 year later ) , brain activity diverges between the groups , with SBPr showing mini - mal brain activity ( below detection threshold ) whereas SBPp shows decreased activity in sensory regions and increased ac - tivity in the medial prefrontal cortex and amygdala . The latter spatial shift seems to occur even though these subjects judge their back pain as essentially unchanged over the 1 - year moni - toring period . Thus , it seems that chroniﬁcation of pain , accom - panied by gray matter and functional connectivity reorganiza - tion , also accompanied by reduced capacity to activate central opioid neurotransmission ( Martikainen et al . , 2013 ) , renders the pain as more subjective / intrapersonal and more emotional . Chronic Pain and Resting State Brain Activity If chronic pain underlies neocortical anatomical reorganization and functional connectivity changes , then it should be reﬂected in the properties of resting state activity . Indeed , there is growing reproducible evidence that resting state activity in many chronic pain conditions show a variety of abnormalities ( Baliki et al . , 2008 , 2014b ; Bolwerk et al . , 2013 ; Cauda et al . , 2009 , 2010 ; Gupta et al . , 2015 ; Loggia et al . , 2013 ; Malinen et al . , 2010 ) . The most consistent result is a disruption of the default mode network , speciﬁcally a dissociation of its prefrontal component in many different types of chronic pain . There is also consistent evidence of increased high - frequency oscillations , mainly in the prefrontal cortex , as well as disruption of insular cortex func - tional connectivity . The similarities of these changes across chronic pain types remain unknown , and how these changes are related to the myriad other changes observed in the neocortex remain to be uncovered . Resting state activity technology promises to become a domi - nant modality with which brain information exchange properties can be probed for chronic pain because it facilitates study of Neuron 87 , August 5 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 483 Neuron Perspective both local and global functional properties in the naturalistic setting of unperturbed state of chronic pain . It should be empha - sized that only by studying large groups of patients with chronic pain will we gain more comprehensive insight into underlying mechanisms . Such endeavors are complicated and hard to accomplish within single research labs and require collaborative effort across centers . The ﬁrst such consortium has been ongoing for the study of pelvic pain and initial multi - center results are just being published ( Farmer et al . , 2015 ; Kairys et al . , 2015 ; Kilpatrick et al . , 2014 ) . Predicting Transition from Acute to Chronic Pain The extent to which transition to chronic pain can be predicted from brain properties is a very important issue as it paves the way for personalized evidence - based medicine ( Denk et al . , 2014 ) . Brain white matter properties seem one such predictor ( Mansour et al . , 2013 ) , which when measured within weeks after the inciting event , predict SBPp and SBPr 1 year later at 80 % – 100 % accuracy . Another predictor identiﬁed from the same lon - gitudinal study ( Baliki et al . , 2012 ) is the corticostriatal functional connectivity . The latter is constant and stronger in SBPp than SBPr over 1 year , and at time of entry into the study could predict chroniﬁcation of pain with approximately 80 % accuracy . These results indicate that limbic brain properties and its responses to the injury is the primary determinant ( they explain almost all of the variance of the outcome parameter ) for transition to chronic pain , at least for back pain . It should be noted , however , that this study remains one of a kind and thus awaits replication in other chronic pain conditions . Animal Studies Regarding Chronic Pain Animal studies have failed to show critical controllers regarding transition to persistent pain - like behavior . There may be multiple technical reasons for this failure . However , from the viewpoint of the current perspective , we can assert that these studies gener - ally have not differentiated between nociception and pain , and ignored much of the rest of the brain , especially the limbic brain . More recent literature is now ﬁlling these gaps ( Figure 4 : 1 – 9 ) . There is now good evidence of the critical role of the amygdala in multiple animal models of pain , where its properties seem to modulate even spinal cord central sensitization processes ( Li and Neugebauer , 2004 ) and inﬂuence prefrontal activity ( Ji and Neugebauer , 2011 ) . Additionally , the dendritic size and spine density of pyramidal neurons in the medial prefrontal cortex change within days after a peripheral nerve injury ( Metz et al . , 2009 ) , and long - term neuropathic pain decreases prefrontal cortical gray matter density in the rodent ( Seminowicz et al . , 2009 ) , just as in humans . Hippocampus volume in humans with chronic pain is smaller ( Mutso et al . , 2012 ) , and with transition to chronic pain shows changes in information exchange within the hippocampus as well as between the hippocampus and the neocortex ( Mutso et al . , 2013 ) . Consistently , following a pe - ripheral nerve injury , rodents show deﬁcits on hippocampal - dependent memory extinction tasks and exhibit abnormalities in information processing at the level of single neuron electro - physiology ( Mutso et al . , 2012 ; Ren et al . , 2011 ) . Very recent studies also show that peripheral nerve injury modulates func - tional connectivity of NAc and decreases expression of dopami - nergic receptors in the ventral striatum ( Chang et al . , 2014 ) and disturbs glutamatergic information processing and long - term depression of ventral striatal neurons , resulting in decreased motivated behavior ( Schwartz et al . , 2014 ) . These recent studies are providing evidence that parallel the human brain imaging studies . Additionally , the rodent studies are beginning to unravel the detailed brain circuit properties associated with transition to chronic pain , pointing to potential novel therapies ( Centeno et al . , 2009 ; Millecamps et al . , 2006 ; Schwartz et al . , 2014 ) . From the viewpoint of the model for tran - sition to chronic pain , the rodent results emphasize the reorgani - zation of the limbic brain with transition to chronic pain - like behavior . However , these are relatively early studies and much remains to be done in the ﬁeld . Mechanistic Parallels between Stress , Anxiety , Depression , and Chronic Pain Ample evidence supports the notion that the most prevalent clinical manifestations of negative emotion , anxiety , and depres - sion , reﬂect a common spectrum of symptoms with overlapping mechanisms ( Watson , 2005 ) . Chronic stress , in particular , has emerged as a dominant and common underlying factor . Here we propose that our framework regarding nociception and pain relative to behavior selection ( Figures 5A and 5B ) can be extended to incorporate negative moods ( see Coenen et al . , 2011 for a somewhat different formulation for interpreting depression as a type of pain ) . Just as pain motivates the avoidance of further bodily injury and promotes behaviors that enhance healing ( Figure 5B ) , anxi - ety can be recast as an emotional state , sustained by sympa - thetic arousal that promotes behaviors that diminish anticipated danger within one’s immediate physical space and at relatively short future time scales ( Figure 5C ) . Moreover , depression can be conceptualized as a more global generalization of perceived averseness to one’s environment . In such a case , perceived or anticipated danger reﬂects a more abstract level of cognition that results in constraining personal space ( through social isolation , reduced physical activity , and diminished motivated behavior ) ( Figure 5D ) . Thus , just as nociception and pain protect against bodily injury by limiting behavior , negative moods mini - mize exposure to danger and promote survival by inhibiting behavior as well . Moreover , similar to chronic pain , persistence of negative moods becomes a maladaptive process , at least partially maintained by neuropathological mechanisms . Within this framework , brain mechanisms underlying the tran - sition from acute to more persistent negative mood states should parallel those we describe for chroniﬁcation of pain . In fact , both animal model studies and human brain imaging studies show strong similarities between mood disorders and chronic pain , and both conditions critically involve limbic brain circuits . Most importantly , the structural and functional alterations in the ventral tegmental - ventral striatal circuitry associated with anhedonia ( Russo and Nestler , 2013 ) are consistent with the threshold phenomenon we have discussed for pain . Just as chronic pain conditions are associated with decreased hippocampal volume ( Khan et al . , 2014 ; Mutso et al . , 2012 ) , a rich parallel literature in - dicates that depression is associated with hippocampal volume decrease and decreased synaptic and glial density , based on 484 Neuron 87 , August 5 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Perspective brain imaging and postmortem evidence ( Brown et al . , 2014 ; Campbell et al . , 2004 ; Cze´h and Lucassen , 2007 ) . More equiv - ocal evidence shows decreased volume of the amygdala ( Hickie et al . , 2007 ; Whittle et al . , 2014 ) and medial prefrontal cortex ( Caetano et al . , 2006 ; Drevets et al . , 1997 ; Rajkowska , 2000 ) in humans with depression . Major depression in the adolescent is now tightly related with decreased information sharing between the amygdala and the hippocampus ( Cullen et al . , 2014 ) , whereas decreased information sharing is seen between the hip - pocampus and the neocortex with chronic pain ( Mutso et al . , 2013 ) . Moreover , medial prefrontal cortex connectivity to the nu - cleus accumbens has become a primary neurosurgical stimula - tion target for treating intractable depression ( Mayberg et al . , 2005 ; Ressler and Mayberg , 2007 ) with the intention of modu - lating properties of the corticostriatal circuit . Decreases in hippo - campus and amygdala volumes have also been described in posttraumatic stress disorder ( PTSD ) ( Chao et al . , 2013 , 2014 ; Gilbertson et al . , 2002 ; Starcevic et al . , 2014 ) , and white matter microstructural predispositions in PTSD indicate that such struc - tural differences reﬂect long - term vulnerability ( Sekiguchi et al . , 2014 ) , as also observed for CBP ( Mansour et al . , 2013 ) . In hu - mans , amygdala response properties seem to indicate risk of developing PTSD ( McLaughlin et al . , 2014 ) , and in rodents , sus - ceptibility to stress response is dependent on hippocampal vol - ume and functional processing ( Nalloor et al . , 2014 ; Tse et al . , 2014 ) . Chronic tinnitus , a persistent unpleasant sensation of ringing or buzzing in the ear , is also now characterized as a dysregulation of the limbic network , mainly due to hyperactivity of the ventral striatum coupled with decreased gray matter in the medial prefrontal cortex ( Leaver et al . , 2011 ) . The latter result is highly consistent with our notion that would explain tinnitus as a shift in mesolimbic threshold for conscious perception of painful / unpleasant sounds mediated through either a peripheral injury ( rock concert or rave ) or central events ( stress ) , and coupled with limbic predispositions . The conﬁguration of these predisposing factors—the inciting event ( s ) ( i . e . , bodily injury , traumatic experiences ) , arousal - enhanced aversive learning , and long - term maintenance of these maladaptive limbic memory traces—likely contributes to the broad range of phenotypic ex - pressions that are used to differentiate clinical diagnoses . Overall , there seems to be a remarkable overlap between the brain structures that either impart vulnerability or are affected by pain chroniﬁcation and pathological negative moods . It is there - fore not surprising that these conditions are often comorbid , and Figure 5 . Nociception , Pain , and Negative Moods Constitute a Continuum Imparting Inhibition of Behavior through Negative Affect , Based on Expected or Apparent Inputs across Varying Spatial and Temporal Dimensions ( A – D ) The four landscapes illustrate negative emotional value assignment relative to the individual ( the contemplative Cartesian self ) . Zero on this space - time plane represents either the body in relation to sensory inputs , or equivalently the self within the arena or the global neural workspace of con - sciousness , where accumulated or experienced aversiveness is assigned for varyingspace - time relationships that dictate behavioral selection . Hotcolored valleys represent negative affective states or valuations , blue - white un - dulations signify emotionally more neutral states . ( A ) In the absence of an experienced or expected threat ( e . g . , while kneeling to smell the roses ) noci - ception in the absence of negative affect subconsciously protects the or - ganism from injury by constraining behavioral repertoires ( delimiting bodily positions or postures ) . ( B ) Failure of nociception results in conscious pain ( burning the skin of the Cartesian self by the ﬁre ) , associated with a rapid withdrawalfromtheenvironment . Thus , painevokesconsciousnegativeaffect and behavioral modiﬁcation at the scale of the immediate body vicinity ( aversion at zero space - time ) . ( C ) When the threat is a learned association and is expected to be encountered at a distance or time removed from the body , then the subject experiences anxiety or stress . ( D ) If instead the threat is experienced as , or expected to be , pervasive , the associated negative mood is more abstract , described as depression , and the behavioral inhibition is generalized across scales of time and space . Because pain is a primary reinforcer , its presence or persistence can rapidly become associated with expanded aversive landscapes , incorporating various combinations of the landscapes ( B ) – ( D ) , whichiscomplementarytotheimprecision modelrecently proposed for chronic pain ( Moseley and Vlaeyen , 2015 ) . In this framework , we posit that the four phases of transition to chronic pain ( illustrated in Figure 3 ) also apply to chroniﬁcation of negative moods . Both speciﬁc chronic pain conditions and the variety of types of chronic negative moods are expected to have uniquelimbic predispositionsignaturesandlong - term brainadaptations . Computationsneeded forconstructingthesecognitiveaversiveness mapsare variants of Sutton and Barto’s ( Sutton and Barto , 1981 ) temporal difference algorithm , applied to dopaminergic activity for assimilating reward prediction error to induce approach behavior ( Schultz et al . , 1997 ) , which can also be recast as a Bayesian inference that optimizes energy based on model evi - dence ( Friston et al . , 2014 ) . Neuron 87 , August 5 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 485 Neuron Perspective indeed , there is now a small but emerging literature regarding the interaction between negative moods and acute and chronic pain ( Jensen et al . , 2012 ; Lopez - Sola et al . , 2010 ; Mutschler et al . , 2012 ; Rodriguez - Raecke et al . , 2014 ; Schweinhardt et al . , 2008 ; Strigo et al . , 2013 ) . So far , the most compelling evidence is the observation that , in pessimistic subjects , ventral striatal activity for anticipation of pain relief ( Leknes et al . , 2011 ) corre - sponds with the abnormal phasic activity observed for expected pain relief in the same brain region in patients with CBP ( Baliki et al . , 2010 ) . Thus , the conceptual contiguity between pain and negative moods illustrated in Figure 5 may also be extended to their corresponding persistent pathological states . Despite their broad overlap , there is danger in oversimplifying the mechanistic parallels between pain and negative moods ; we suspect that limbic brain properties will be differentially conﬁgured with chronic pain conditions in contrast to different types of persistent negative moods . For example , the deep brain stimulation site used for treating depression is more orbitally located than the medial prefrontal cortex that correlates with subjective ﬂuctuations in CBP and that predicts pain chroniﬁca - tion . There is also good evidence that negative moods and chronic pain can co - exist without interacting with one another ( Jensen et al . , 2010 ) . Conclusions The pain research community has made extensive efforts to establish the presence and identify properties of the nociceptive system . This effort has been quite successful , yet in the process , the contribution of the emotional brain on pain perception has received little serious attention . The general notion that pain can be understood in the context of behavior selection and its underlying mechanisms that are grounded in limbic brain proper - ties is not a new idea . In fact , the initial formulation of the concept of the limbic brain by MacLean ( MacLean , 1955 ) , which ﬁrst characterized the main components of the brain that generate emotional responses to the environment , stated that pain ex - pression depends on this circuitry . Subsequently , Melzack and Casey ( Melzack and Casey , 1968 ) , expanding on the gate control theory , put forward the ‘‘motivational and central control’’ model for pain , and stated ‘‘that pain is comprised of both sensory and affective dimensions was clear to Sherrington , ’’ and quote Sher - rington’s assertion that ‘‘ . affective tone is an attribute of all sensation , and among the attribute tones of skin sensation is skin pain’’ ( Sherrington , 1900 ) . Melzack and Casey concluded that pain must engage limbic brain , speciﬁcally the hippocam - pus and amygdala . Even though this conceptually seminal paper has been cited more than 1 , 300 times in the literature , its basic concepts regarding the role of limbic circuitry in pain has failed to advance until the advent of studies discussed here . For example , in a model of pain proposed approximately 20 years later , the author simply puts a question mark next to the contri - bution of the limbic brain to the affective and motivational as - pects of pain ( Price and Harkins , 1992 ) . We have provided a broad range of evidence that nociception , pain , and negative mood states can be viewed as a single con - tinuum of aversion , within the framework of behavior selection . Furthermore , we suggest that the chroniﬁcation of such states can be conceptualized as being composed of four distinct phases that are contingent on limbic predispositions ; the precise mechanistic details , especially regarding pain , remain to be un - raveled . Our synthesis of this rapidly accumulating evidence , both in human brain imaging studies and in rodent models , pro - vides compelling evidence that pain perception , as distinguished from nociception , is part of a continuum of aversive behavioral learning that manifests as pain , anxiety , or depression over time , based on preexisting vulnerabilities dictated by emotional learning and the physical proximity of the perceived source of danger . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We gratefully acknowledge extensive discussions with all members of the A . V . A . lab , especially suggestions and comments on previous drafts by Me - lissa Farmer , Etienne Vachon - Presseau , Pascal Tetreault , Sara Berger , and Thomas J . Schnitzer . We thank Etienne Vachon - Presseau and Bogdan Petre for help in constructing the ﬁgures . We are also delighted for the suggestions proposed and historical notes provided by Ken Casey . This work was sup - ported by NIH funding from NINDS , NIDDK , NIDCR , NIDA , and NCCIH ( formerly NCCAM ) . REFERENCES Apkarian , A . V . ( 2008 ) . Pain perception in relation to emotional learning . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 18 , 464 – 468 . Apkarian , A . V . ( 2013 ) . A brain signature for acute pain . Trends Cogn . Sci . 17 , 309 – 310 . Apkarian , A . V . , Sosa , Y . , Sonty , S . , Levy , R . M . , Harden , R . N . , Parrish , T . B . , and Gitelman , D . R . ( 2004 ) . Chronic back pain is associated with decreased pre - frontal and thalamic gray matter density . J . Neurosci . 24 , 10410 – 10415 . Apkarian , A . V . , Bushnell , M . C . , Treede , R . D . , and Zubieta , J . K . ( 2005 ) . Human brainmechanismsofpainperceptionandregulationinhealthanddisease . Eur . J . Pain 9 , 463 – 484 . Apkarian , A . V . , Baliki , M . N . , and Geha , P . Y . ( 2009 ) . Towards a theory of chronic pain . Prog . Neurobiol . 87 , 81 – 97 . Apkarian , A . V . , Hashmi , J . A . , and Baliki , M . N . ( 2011 ) . Pain and thebrain : spec - iﬁcity and plasticity of the brain in clinical chronic pain . Pain 152 ( 3 , Suppl ) , S49 – S64 . Baars , B . J . ( 1988 ) . A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness ( Cambridge Univer - sity Press ) . Baliki , M . N . , Chialvo , D . R . , Geha , P . Y . , Levy , R . M . , Harden , R . N . , Parrish , T . B . , and Apkarian , A . V . ( 2006 ) . Chronic pain and the emotional brain : speciﬁc brain activity associated with spontaneous ﬂuctuations of intensity of chronic back pain . J . Neurosci . 26 , 12165 – 12173 . Baliki , M . N . , Geha , P . Y . , Apkarian , A . V . , and Chialvo , D . R . ( 2008 ) . Beyond feeling : chronic pain hurts the brain , disrupting the default - mode network dy - namics . J . Neurosci . 28 , 1398 – 1403 . Baliki , M . N . , Geha , P . Y . , andApkarian , A . V . ( 2009 ) . Parsingpainperceptionbe - tween nociceptive representation and magnitude estimation . J . Neurophysiol . 101 , 875 – 887 . Baliki , M . N . , Geha , P . Y . , Fields , H . L . , and Apkarian , A . V . ( 2010 ) . Predicting value of pain and analgesia : nucleus accumbens response to noxious stimuli changes in the presence of chronic pain . Neuron 66 , 149 – 160 . Baliki , M . N . , Schnitzer , T . J . , Bauer , W . R . , and Apkarian , A . V . ( 2011 ) . Brain morphological signatures for chronic pain . PLoS ONE 6 , e26010 . Baliki , M . N . , Petre , B . , Torbey , S . , Herrmann , K . M . , Huang , L . , Schnitzer , T . J . , Fields , H . L . , and Apkarian , A . V . ( 2012 ) . Corticostriatal functional connectivity predicts transition to chronic back pain . Nat . Neurosci . 15 , 1117 – 1119 . Baliki , M . N . , Chang , P . C . , Baria , A . T . , Centeno , M . V . , and Apkarian , A . V . ( 2014a ) . Resting - sate functional reorganization of the rat limbic system following neuropathic injury . Sci . Rep . 4 , 6186 . 486 Neuron 87 , August 5 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Perspective Baliki , M . N . , Mansour , A . R . , Baria , A . T . , and Apkarian , A . V . ( 2014b ) . Functional reorganization of the default mode network across chronic pain conditions . PLoS ONE 9 , e106133 . Baria , A . T . , Baliki , M . N . , Parrish , T . , and Apkarian , A . V . ( 2011 ) . Anatomical and functional assemblies of brain BOLD oscillations . J . Neurosci . 31 , 7910 – 7919 . Baria , A . T . , Mansour , A . , Huang , L . , Baliki , M . N . , Cecchi , G . A . , Mesulam , M . M . , and Apkarian , A . V . ( 2013 ) . Linking human brain local activity ﬂuctuations to structural and functional network architectures . Neuroimage 73 , 144 – 155 . Basbaum , A . I . , Bautista , D . M . , Scherrer , G . , and Julius , D . ( 2009 ) . Cellular and molecular mechanisms of pain . Cell 139 , 267 – 284 . Bennett , D . L . , and Woods , C . G . ( 2014 ) . Painful and painless channelopathies . Lancet Neurol . 13 , 587 – 599 . Biswal , B . , Yetkin , F . Z . , Haughton , V . M . , and Hyde , J . S . ( 1995 ) . Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo - planar MRI . Magn . Reson . Med . 34 , 537 – 541 . Biswal , B . B . , Mennes , M . , Zuo , X . N . , Gohel , S . , Kelly , C . , Smith , S . M . , Beck - mann , C . F . , Adelstein , J . S . , Buckner , R . L . , Colcombe , S . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Toward discovery science of human brain function . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 4734 – 4739 . Bolwerk , A . , Seifert , F . , and Maihofner , C . ( 2013 ) . Altered resting - state func - tional connectivity in complex regional pain syndrome . J . Pain 14 , 1107 – 1115 . Brand , P . W . ( 1993 ) . Pain : The Gift Nobody Wants ( Harper - Colins ) . Braz , J . M . , Nassar , M . A . , Wood , J . N . , andBasbaum , A . I . ( 2005 ) . Parallel‘‘pain’’ pathways arise from subpopulations of primary afferent nociceptor . Neuron 47 , 787 – 793 . Breivik , H . , Collett , B . , Ventafridda , V . , Cohen , R . , and Gallacher , D . ( 2006 ) . Survey of chronic pain in Europe : prevalence , impact on daily life , and treat - ment . Eur . J . Pain 10 , 287 – 333 . Brown , E . S . , Hughes , C . W . , McColl , R . , Peshock , R . , King , K . S . , andRush , A . J . ( 2014 ) . Associationofdepressivesymptomswithhippocampalvolumein1936 adults . Neuropsychopharmacology 39 , 770 – 779 . Buchbinder , R . , Richards , B . , and Harris , I . ( 2014 ) . Knee osteoarthritis and role for surgical intervention : lessons learned from randomized clinical trials and population - based cohorts . Curr . Opin . Rheumatol . 26 , 138 – 144 . Bu¨chel , C . , Bornhovd , K . , Quante , M . , Glauche , V . , Bromm , B . , and Weiller , C . ( 2002 ) . Dissociable neural responses related to pain intensity , stimulus inten - sity , and stimulus awareness within the anterior cingulate cortex : a parametric single - trial laser functional magnetic resonance imaging study . J . Neurosci . 22 , 970 – 976 . Bushnell , M . C . , Ceko , M . , and Low , L . A . ( 2013 ) . Cognitive and emotional con - trol of pain and its disruption in chronic pain . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 14 , 502 – 511 . Cabral , J . , Kringelbach , M . L . , and Deco , G . ( 2014 ) . Exploring the network dy - namics underlying brain activity during rest . Prog . Neurobiol . 114 , 102 – 131 . Caetano , S . C . , Kaur , S . , Brambilla , P . , Nicoletti , M . , Hatch , J . P . , Sassi , R . B . , Mallinger , A . G . , Keshavan , M . S . , Kupfer , D . J . , Frank , E . , and Soares , J . C . ( 2006 ) . Smallercingulatevolumesinunipolardepressedpatients . Biol . Psychi - atry 59 , 702 – 706 . Campbell , S . , Marriott , M . , Nahmias , C . , and MacQueen , G . M . ( 2004 ) . Lower hippocampal volume in patients suffering from depression : a meta - analysis . Am . J . Psychiatry 161 , 598 – 607 . Cauda , F . , Sacco , K . , Duca , S . , Cocito , D . , D’Agata , F . , Geminiani , G . C . , and Canavero , S . ( 2009 ) . Altered resting state in diabetic neuropathic pain . PLoS ONE 4 , e4542 . Cauda , F . , D’Agata , F . , Sacco , K . , Duca , S . , Cocito , D . , Paolasso , I . , Isoardo , G . , and Geminiani , G . ( 2010 ) . Altered resting state attentional networks in dia - betic neuropathic pain . J . Neurol . Neurosurg . Psychiatry 81 , 806 – 811 . Cauda , F . , Palermo , S . , Costa , T . , Torta , R . , Duca , S . , Vercelli , U . , Geminiani , G . , and Torta , D . M . ( 2014 ) . Gray matter alterations in chronic pain : A network - oriented meta - analytic approach . NeuroImage . Clinical 4 , 676 – 686 . Cecchi , G . A . , Huang , L . , Hashmi , J . A . , Baliki , M . , Centeno , M . V . , Rish , I . , and Apkarian , A . V . ( 2012 ) . Predictive dynamics of human pain perception . PLoS Comput . Biol . 8 , e1002719 . ^ Ceko , M . , Shir , Y . , Ouellet , J . A . , Ware , M . A . , Stone , L . S . , andSeminowicz , D . A . ( 2015 ) . Partial recovery of abnormalinsula and dorsolateral prefrontal connec - tivity to cognitive networks in chronic low back pain after treatment . Hum . Brain Mapp . 36 , 2075 – 2092 . Centeno , M . V . , Mutso , A . , Millecamps , M . , and Apkarian , A . V . ( 2009 ) . Prefron - talcortex and spinalcordmediated anti - neuropathyand analgesia induced by sarcosine , a glycine - T1 transporter inhibitor . Pain 145 , 176 – 183 . Chalmers , D . J . ( 1996 ) . The Conscious Mind : In Search of a Fundamental Theory ( Oxford University Press ) . Chang , P . C . , Pollema - Mays , S . L . , Centeno , M . V . , Procissi , D . , Contini , M . , Ba - ria , A . T . , Martina , M . , and Apkarian , A . V . ( 2014 ) . Role of nucleus accumbens in neuropathic pain : linked multi - scale evidence in the rat transitioning to neuro - pathic pain . Pain 155 , 1128 – 1139 . Chao , L . , Weiner , M . , and Neylan , T . ( 2013 ) . Regional cerebral volumes in vet - erans with current versus remitted posttraumatic stress disorder . Psychiatry Res . 213 , 193 – 201 . Chao , L . L . , Yaffe , K . , Samuelson , K . , and Neylan , T . C . ( 2014 ) . Hippocampal volume is inversely related to PTSD duration . Psychiatry Res . 222 , 119 – 123 . Chen , J . Y . , Blankstein , U . , Diamant , N . E . , and Davis , K . D . ( 2011a ) . White mat - ter abnormalities in irritable bowel syndrome and relation to individual factors . Brain Res . 1392 , 121 – 131 . Chen , L . M . , Dillenburger , B . C . , Wang , F . , Friedman , R . M . , and Avison , M . J . ( 2011b ) . High - resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging mapping of noxious heat and tactile activations along the central sulcus in New World monkeys . Pain 152 , 522 – 532 . Chudler , E . H . , Sugiyama , K . , and Dong , W . K . ( 1993 ) . Nociceptiveresponses in the neostriatum and globus pallidus of the anesthetized rat . J . Neurophysiol . 69 , 1890 – 1903 . Coenen , V . A . , Schlaepfer , T . E . , Maedler , B . , and Panksepp , J . ( 2011 ) . Cross - species affective functions of the medial forebrain bundle - implications for the treatment of affective pain and depression in humans . Neurosci . Biobehav . Rev . 35 , 1971 – 1981 . Coghill , R . C . , Sang , C . N . , Maisog , J . M . , and Iadarola , M . J . ( 1999 ) . Pain inten - sity processing within the human brain : a bilateral , distributed mechanism . J . Neurophysiol . 82 , 1934 – 1943 . Cullen , K . R . , Westlund , M . K . , Klimes - Dougan , B . , Mueller , B . A . , Houri , A . , Eberly , L . E . , and Lim , K . O . ( 2014 ) . Abnormal amygdala resting - statefunctional connectivity in adolescent depression . JAMA Psychiatry 71 , 1138 – 1147 . Cze´h , B . , and Lucassen , P . J . ( 2007 ) . What causes the hippocampal volume decrease indepression ? Areneurogenesis , glial changes and apoptosis impli - cated ? Eur . Arch . Psychiatry Clin . Neurosci . 257 , 250 – 260 . Davis , K . D . , and Moayedi , M . ( 2013 ) . Central mechanisms of pain revealed through functional and structural MRI . J . Neuroimmune Pharmacol . 8 , 518 – 534 . Davis , K . D . , Taylor , S . J . , Crawley , A . P . , Wood , M . L . , and Mikulis , D . J . ( 1997 ) . Functional MRI of pain - and attention - related activations in the human cingu - late cortex . J . Neurophysiol . 77 , 3370 – 3380 . Deco , G . , and Corbetta , M . ( 2011 ) . The dynamical balance of the brain at rest . Neuroscientist 17 , 107 – 123 . Dehaene , S . , and Changeux , J . P . ( 2011 ) . Experimental and theoretical ap - proaches to conscious processing . Neuron 70 , 200 – 227 . Dehaene , S . , Charles , L . , King , J . R . , and Marti , S . ( 2014 ) . Toward a computa - tional theory of conscious processing . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 25 , 76 – 84 . Denk , F . , McMahon , S . B . , and Tracey , I . ( 2014 ) . Pain vulnerability : a neurobio - logical perspective . Nat . Neurosci . 17 , 192 – 200 . Dennett , D . C . ( 1993 ) . The message is : There is no medium . Philos . Phenom - enol . Res . 53 , 919 – 931 . Neuron 87 , August 5 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 487 Neuron Perspective Drevets , W . C . , Price , J . L . , Simpson , J . R . , Jr . , Todd , R . D . , Reich , T . , Vannier , M . , and Raichle , M . E . ( 1997 ) . Subgenual prefrontal cortex abnormalities in mood disorders . Nature 386 , 824 – 827 . Ellingson , B . M . , Mayer , E . , Harris , R . J . , Ashe - McNally , C . , Naliboff , B . D . , Labus , J . S . , and Tillisch , K . ( 2013 ) . Diffusion tensor imaging detects micro - structural reorganization in the brain associated with chronic irritable bowel syndrome . Pain 154 , 1528 – 1541 . Farmer , M . A . , Huang , L . , Martucci , K . , Yang , C . C . , Maravilla , K . R . , Harris , R . E . , Clauw , D . J . , Mackey , S . , Ellingson , B . M . , Mayer , E . A . , et al . ; MAPP Research Network ( 2015 ) . Brain white matter abnormalities in female interstitial cystitis / bladder pain syndrome : a MAPP network neuroimaging study . J . Urol . 194 , 118 – 126 . Felleman , D . J . , and Van Essen , D . C . ( 1991 ) . Distributed hierarchical process - ing in the primate cerebral cortex . Cereb . Cortex 1 , 1 – 47 . Foo , H . , Crabtree , K . , Thrasher , A . , andMason , P . ( 2009 ) . Eating is aprotected behavior even in the face of persistent pain in male rats . Physiol . Behav . 97 , 426 – 429 . Fox , M . D . , and Raichle , M . E . ( 2007 ) . Spontaneous ﬂuctuations in brain activity observed with functional magnetic resonance imaging . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 8 , 700 – 711 . Fox , M . D . , Snyder , A . Z . , Vincent , J . L . , Corbetta , M . , Van Essen , D . C . , and Raichle , M . E . ( 2005 ) . The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic , anticorrelated functional networks . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 9673 – 9678 . Friston , K . , Schwartenbeck , P . , FitzGerald , T . , Moutoussis , M . , Behrens , T . , and Dolan , R . J . ( 2014 ) . The anatomy of choice : dopamine and decision - mak - ing . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 369 , 20130481 . Frot , M . , Magnin , M . , Mauguie ` re , F . , and Garcia - Larrea , L . ( 2013 ) . Corticalrep - resentation of pain in primary sensory - motor areas ( S1 / M1 ) —a study using in - tracortical recordings in humans . Hum . Brain Mapp . 34 , 2655 – 2668 . Garcia - Larrea , L . , and Peyron , R . ( 2013 ) . Pain matrices and neuropathic pain matrices : a review . Pain 154 ( Suppl 1 ) , S29 – S43 . Geha , P . Y . , Baliki , M . N . , Harden , R . N . , Bauer , W . R . , Parrish , T . B . , and Apkar - ian , A . V . ( 2008 ) . The brain in chronic CRPS pain : abnormal gray - white matter interactions in emotional and autonomic regions . Neuron 60 , 570 – 581 . Gilbertson , M . W . , Shenton , M . E . , Ciszewski , A . , Kasai , K . , Lasko , N . B . , Orr , S . P . , and Pitman , R . K . ( 2002 ) . Smaller hippocampal volume predicts patho - logic vulnerability to psychological trauma . Nat . Neurosci . 5 , 1242 – 1247 . Gupta , A . , Rapkin , A . J . , Gill , Z . , Kilpatrick , L . , Fling , C . , Stains , J . , Masghati , S . , Tillisch , K . , Mayer , E . A . , and Labus , J . S . ( 2015 ) . Disease - related differences in resting - statenetworks : acomparisonbetweenlocalizedprovokedvulvodynia , irritable bowel syndrome , and healthy control subjects . Pain 156 , 809 – 819 . Gwilym , S . E . , Filippini , N . , Douaud , G . , Carr , A . J . , and Tracey , I . ( 2010 ) . Thalamic atrophy associated with painful osteoarthritis of the hip is reversible after arthroplasty : a longitudinal voxel - based morphometric study . Arthritis Rheum . 62 , 2930 – 2940 . Haroutounian , S . , Nikolajsen , L . , Bendtsen , T . F . , Finnerup , N . B . , Kristensen , A . D . , Hasselstrøm , J . B . , and Jensen , T . S . ( 2014 ) . Primary afferent input critical for maintaining spontaneous pain in peripheral neuropathy . Pain 155 , 1272 – 1279 . Hashmi , J . A . , Baliki , M . N . , Huang , L . , Baria , A . T . , Torbey , S . , Hermann , K . M . , Schnitzer , T . J . , andApkarian , A . V . ( 2013 ) . Shapeshiftingpain : chroniﬁcationof back pain shifts brain representation from nociceptive to emotional circuits . Brain 136 , 2751 – 2768 . Haxby , J . V . ( 2012 ) . Multivariate pattern analysis of fMRI : the early beginnings . Neuroimage 62 , 852 – 855 . Hebben , N . , Corkin , S . , Eichenbaum , H . , and Shedlack , K . ( 1985 ) . Diminished ability to interpret and report internal states after bilateral medial temporal resection : case H . M . Behav . Neurosci . 99 , 1031 – 1039 . Hickie , I . B . , Naismith , S . L . , Ward , P . B . , Scott , E . M . , Mitchell , P . B . , Schoﬁeld , P . R . , Scimone , A . , Wilhelm , K . , and Parker , G . ( 2007 ) . Serotonin transporter gene status predicts caudate nucleus but not amygdala or hippocampal vol - umes in older persons with major depression . J . Affect . Disord . 98 , 137 – 142 . Iannetti , G . D . , andMouraux , A . ( 2010 ) . Fromtheneuromatrixtothepainmatrix ( and back ) . Exp . Brain Res . 205 , 1 – 12 . Ikeda , H . , Heinke , B . , Ruscheweyh , R . , and Sandku¨hler , J . ( 2003 ) . Synaptic plasticity in spinal lamina I projection neurons that mediate hyperalgesia . Sci - ence 299 , 1237 – 1240 . Institute of Medicine ( US ) Committee on Advancing Pain Research , Care , and Education ( 2011 ) . Relieving Pain in America : A Blueprint for Transforming Pre - vention , Care , Education , and Research ( National Academies Press ) . Jensen , K . B . , Petzke , F . , Carville , S . , Fransson , P . , Marcus , H . , Williams , S . C . , Choy , E . , Mainguy , Y . , Gracely , R . , Ingvar , M . , and Kosek , E . ( 2010 ) . Anxiety and depressive symptoms in ﬁbromyalgia are related to poor perception of health but not to pain sensitivity or cerebral processing of pain . Arthritis Rheum . 62 , 3488 – 3495 . Jensen , K . B . , Kosek , E . , Wicksell , R . , Kemani , M . , Olsson , G . , Merle , J . V . , Ka - detoff , D . , andIngvar , M . ( 2012 ) . CognitiveBehavioralTherapyincreasespain - evoked activation of the prefrontal cortex in patients with ﬁbromyalgia . Pain 153 , 1495 – 1503 . Ji , G . , and Neugebauer , V . ( 2011 ) . Pain - related deactivation of medial prefron - tal cortical neurons involves mGluR1 and GABA ( A ) receptors . J . Neurophysiol . 106 , 2642 – 2652 . Johannes , C . B . , Le , T . K . , Zhou , X . , Johnston , J . A . , and Dworkin , R . H . ( 2010 ) . The prevalence of chronic pain in United States adults : results of an Internet - based survey . J . Pain 11 , 1230 – 1239 . Johansen , J . P . , and Fields , H . L . ( 2004 ) . Glutamatergic activation of anterior cingulate cortex produces an aversive teaching signal . Nat . Neurosci . 7 , 398 – 403 . Johnstone , T . , Salomons , T . V . , Backonja , M . M . , and Davidson , R . J . ( 2012 ) . Turning on the alarm : the neural mechanisms of the transition from innocuous to painful sensation . Neuroimage 59 , 1594 – 1601 . Julius , D . , and Basbaum , A . I . ( 2001 ) . Molecular mechanisms of nociception . Nature 413 , 203 – 210 . Kairys , A . E . , Schmidt - Wilcke , T . , Puiu , T . , Ichesco , E . , Labus , J . S . , Martucci , K . , Farmer , M . A . , Ness , T . J . , Deutsch , G . , Mayer , E . A . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Increased brain gray matter in the primary somatosensory cortex is associated with increased pain and mood disturbance in patients with interstitial cystitis / pain - ful bladder syndrome . J . Urol . 193 , 131 – 137 . Kenshalo , D . R . , Jr . , and Isensee , O . ( 1983 ) . Responses of primate SI cortical neurons to noxious stimuli . J . Neurophysiol . 50 , 1479 – 1496 . Kenshalo , D . R . , Jr . , Giesler , G . J . , Jr . , Leonard , R . B . , and Willis , W . D . ( 1980 ) . Responses of neurons in primate ventral posterior lateral nucleus to noxious stimuli . J . Neurophysiol . 43 , 1594 – 1614 . Khan , S . A . , Keaser , M . L . , Meiller , T . F . , and Seminowicz , D . A . ( 2014 ) . Altered structure and function in the hippocampus and medial prefrontal cortex in pa - tients with burning mouth syndrome . Pain 155 , 1472 – 1480 . Kilpatrick , L . A . , Kutch , J . J . , Tillisch , K . , Naliboff , B . D . , Labus , J . S . , Jiang , Z . , Farmer , M . A . , Apkarian , A . V . , Mackey , S . , Martucci , K . T . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Alter - ations in resting state oscillations and connectivity in sensory and motor net - works in women with interstitial cystitis / painful bladder syndrome . J . Urol . 192 , 947 – 955 . Koch , C . ( 2012 ) . Consciousness : ConfessionsofaRomanticReductionist ( MIT Press ) . Leaver , A . M . , Renier , L . , Chevillet , M . A . , Morgan , S . , Kim , H . J . , and Rau - schecker , J . P . ( 2011 ) . Dysregulationoflimbicandauditorynetworksintinnitus . Neuron 69 , 33 – 43 . Leknes , S . , Lee , M . , Berna , C . , Andersson , J . , and Tracey , I . ( 2011 ) . Relief as a reward : hedonic and neural responses to safety from pain . PLoS ONE 6 , e17870 . Lewis , C . M . , Baldassarre , A . , Committeri , G . , Romani , G . L . , and Corbetta , M . ( 2009 ) . Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 17558 – 17563 . 488 Neuron 87 , August 5 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Perspective Li , W . , and Neugebauer , V . ( 2004 ) . Block of NMDA and non - NMDA receptor activation results in reduced background and evoked activity of central amyg - dala neurons in a model of arthritic pain . Pain 110 , 112 – 122 . Li , X . Y . , Ko , H . G . , Chen , T . , Descalzi , G . , Koga , K . , Wang , H . , Kim , S . S . , Shang , Y . , Kwak , C . , Park , S . W . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Alleviating neuropathic pain hypersen - sitivity by inhibiting PKMzeta in the anterior cingulate cortex . Science 330 , 1400 – 1404 . Li , Z . , Wang , J . , Chen , L . , Zhang , M . , andWan , Y . ( 2013 ) . Basolateralamygdala lesion inhibits the development of pain chronicity in neuropathic pain rats . PLoS ONE 8 , e70921 . Liang , M . , Mouraux , A . , Hu , L . , and Iannetti , G . D . ( 2013 ) . Primary sensory cortices contain distinguishable spatial patterns of activity for each sense . Nat . Commun . 4 , 1979 . Loggia , M . L . , Edwards , R . R . , Kim , J . , Vangel , M . G . , Wasan , A . D . , Gollub , R . L . , Harris , R . E . , Park , K . , and Napadow , V . ( 2012 ) . Disentangling linear and nonlinear brain responses to evoked deep tissue pain . Pain 153 , 2140 – 2151 . Loggia , M . L . , Kim , J . , Gollub , R . L . , Vangel , M . G . , Kirsch , I . , Kong , J . , Wasan , A . D . , and Napadow , V . ( 2013 ) . Default mode network connectivity encodes clinical pain : an arterial spin labeling study . Pain 154 , 24 – 33 . Lopez - Sola , M . , Pujol , J . , Hernandez - Ribas , R . , Harrison , B . J . , Contreras - Ro - driguez , O . , Soriano - Mas , C . , Deus , J . , Ortiz , H . , Menchon , J . M . , Vallejo , J . , and Cardoner , N . ( 2010 ) . Effects of duloxetine treatment on brain response to painful stimulation in major depressive disorder . Neuropsychopharmacol - ogy 35 , 2305 – 2317 . Lu¨scher , C . , and Malenka , R . C . ( 2011 ) . Drug - evoked synaptic plasticity in addiction : from molecular changes tocircuit remodeling . Neuron 69 , 650 – 663 . MacLean , P . D . ( 1955 ) . The limbic system ( visceral brain ) in relation to central gray and reticulum of the brain stem ; evidence of interdependence in emotional processes . Psychosom . Med . 17 , 355 – 366 . Malinen , S . , Vartiainen , N . , Hlushchuk , Y . , Koskinen , M . , Ramkumar , P . , Forss , N . , Kalso , E . , and Hari , R . ( 2010 ) . Aberrant temporal and spatial brain activity during rest in patients with chronic pain . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 6493 – 6497 . Mansour , A . R . , Baliki , M . N . , Huang , L . , Torbey , S . , Herrmann , K . M . , Schnitzer , T . J . , andApkarian , A . V . ( 2013 ) . Brainwhitematter structuralproperties predict transition to chronic pain . Pain 154 , 2160 – 2168 . Martikainen , I . K . , Pecina , M . , Love , T . M . , Nuechterlein , E . B . , Cummiford , C . M . , Green , C . R . , Harris , R . E . , Stohler , C . S . , and Zubieta , J . K . ( 2013 ) . Alterations in endogenous opioid functional measures in chronic back pain . J . Neurosci . 33 , 14729 – 14737 . May , A . ( 2008 ) . Chronic pain may change the structure of the brain . Pain 137 , 7 – 15 . Mayberg , H . S . , Lozano , A . M . , Voon , V . , McNeely , H . E . , Seminowicz , D . , Ha - mani , C . , Schwalb , J . M . , and Kennedy , S . H . ( 2005 ) . Deep brain stimulation for treatment - resistant depression . Neuron 45 , 651 – 660 . Mazzola , L . , Isnard , J . , Peyron , R . , Gue´not , M . , and Mauguie ` re , F . ( 2009 ) . So - matotopic organization of pain responses to direct electrical stimulation of the human insular cortex . Pain 146 , 99 – 104 . McLaughlin , K . A . , Busso , D . S . , Duys , A . , Green , J . G . , Alves , S . , Way , M . , and Sheridan , M . A . ( 2014 ) . Amygdala response to negative stimuli predicts PTSD symptom onset following a terrorist attack . Depress . Anxiety 31 , 834 – 842 . Melzack , R . , and Casey , K . ( 1968 ) . Sensory , motivational , and central contol determinants of pain . The Skin Senses ( Charles C . Thomas ) , pp . 423 – 443 . Melzack , R . , and Wall , P . D . ( 1965 ) . Pain mechanisms : a new theory . Science 150 , 971 – 979 . Metz , A . E . , Yau , H . J . , Centeno , M . V . , Apkarian , A . V . , and Martina , M . ( 2009 ) . Morphological and functional reorganization of rat medial prefrontal cortex in neuropathic pain . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 2423 – 2428 . Meyer , R . A . , Ringkamp , M . , Campbell , J . N . , and Raja , S . N . ( 2006 ) . Peripheral mechanisms of cutaneous nociception . In Wall and Melzack’s Textbook of Pain , S . B . McMahon and M . Koltzenburg , eds . ( Elsevier ) , pp . 3 – 34 . Millecamps , M . , Centeno , M . V . , Berra , H . H . , Rudick , C . N . , Lavarello , S . , Tkatch , T . , and Apkarian , A . V . ( 2006 ) . D - cycloserine reduces neuropathic pain behavior through limbic NMDA - mediated circuitry . Pain 132 , 108 – 123 . Moayedi , M . , Weissman - Fogel , I . , Crawley , A . P . , Goldberg , M . B . , Freeman , B . V . , Tenenbaum , H . C . , and Davis , K . D . ( 2011 ) . Contribution of chronic pain and neuroticism to abnormal forebrain gray matter in patients with temporo - mandibular disorder . Neuroimage 55 , 277 – 286 . Moseley , G . L . , and Vlaeyen , J . W . ( 2015 ) . Beyond nociception : the imprecision hypothesis of chronic pain . Pain 156 , 35 – 38 . Moulton , E . A . , Pendse , G . , Becerra , L . R . , and Borsook , D . ( 2012 ) . BOLD re - sponses in somatosensory cortices better reﬂect heat sensation than pain . J . Neurosci . 32 , 6024 – 6031 . Mouraux , A . , Diukova , A . , Lee , M . C . , Wise , R . G . , and Iannetti , G . D . ( 2011 ) . A multisensory investigation of the functional signiﬁcance of the ‘‘pain matrix’’ . Neuroimage 54 , 2237 – 2249 . Mouraux , A . , DePaepe , A . L . , Marot , E . , Plaghki , L . , Iannetti , G . D . , andLegrain , V . ( 2013 ) . Unmasking the obligatory components of nociceptive event - related brain potentials . J . Neurophysiol . 110 , 2312 – 2324 . Murray , M . M . , andHerrmann , C . S . ( 2013 ) . Illusorycontours : awindowontothe neurophysiology of constructing perception . Trends Cogn . Sci . 17 , 471 – 481 . Murray , C . J . , and Lopez , A . D . ( 2013 ) . Measuring the global burden of disease . N . Engl . J . Med . 369 , 448 – 457 . Mutschler , I . , Ball , T . , Wankerl , J . , and Strigo , I . A . ( 2012 ) . Pain and emotion in the insular cortex : evidence for functional reorganization in major depression . Neurosci . Lett . 520 , 204 – 209 . Mutso , A . A . , Radzicki , D . , Baliki , M . N . , Huang , L . , Banisadr , G . , Centeno , M . V . , Radulovic , J . , Martina , M . , Miller , R . J . , and Apkarian , A . V . ( 2012 ) . Abnormal - ities in hippocampal functioning with persistent pain . J . Neurosci . 32 , 5747 – 5756 . Mutso , A . A . , Petre , B . , Huang , L . , Baliki , M . N . , Torbey , S . , Herrmann , K . , Schnitzer , T . J . , and Apkarian , A . V . ( 2013 ) . Reorganization of Hippocampal Functional Connectivity with Transition to Chronic Back Pain . J . Neurophysiol . Nakanishi , S . , Hikida , T . , and Yawata , S . ( 2014 ) . Distinct dopaminergic control of the direct and indirect pathways in reward - based and avoidance learning behaviors . Neuroscience 282C , 49 – 59 . Nalloor , R . , Bunting , K . M . , and Vazdarjanova , A . ( 2014 ) . Altered hippocampal function before emotional trauma in rats susceptible to PTSD - like behaviors . Neurobiol . Learn . Mem . 112 , 158 – 167 . Neugebauer , V . , Li , W . , Bird , G . C . , Bhave , G . , and Gereau , R . W . , 4th . ( 2003 ) . Synapticplasticity intheamygdala inamodelofarthriticpain : differential roles of metabotropic glutamate receptors 1 and 5 . J . Neurosci . 23 , 52 – 63 . Newman , H . M . , Stevens , R . T . , and Apkarian , A . V . ( 1996 ) . Direct spinal projec - tions to limbic and striatal areas : anterograde transport studies from theupper cervical spinal cord and the cervical enlargement in squirrel monkey and rat . J . Comp . Neurol . 365 , 640 – 658 . Nicholson , K . ( 2000 ) . An overview of pain problems associated with lesions , disorder or dysfunction of the central nervous system . NeuroRehabilitation 14 , 3 – 13 . Parks , E . L . , Geha , P . Y . , Baliki , M . N . , Katz , J . , Schnitzer , T . J . , and Apkarian , A . V . ( 2011 ) . Brain activity for chronic knee osteoarthritis : dissociating evoked pain from spontaneous pain . Eur . J . Pain 15 , e1 – e14 . Pavlov , I . P . ( 2003 ) . Conditioned Reﬂexes ( Dover Publications ) . Peyron , R . , Garcia - Larrea , L . , Gregoire , M . C . , Costes , N . , Convers , P . , Lav - enne , F . , Mauguiere , F . , Michel , D . , and Laurent , B . ( 1999 ) . Haemodynamic brain responses to acute pain in humans : sensory and attentional networks . Brain 122 , 1765 – 1780 . Phillips , K . , and Clauw , D . J . ( 2011 ) . Central pain mechanisms in chronic pain states—maybe it is all in their head . Best Pract . Res . Clin . Rheumatol . 25 , 141 – 154 . Poldrack , R . A . ( 2011 ) . Inferring mental states from neuroimaging data : from reverse inference to large - scale decoding . Neuron 72 , 692 – 697 . Neuron 87 , August 5 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 489 Neuron Perspective Porro , C . A . , Lui , F . , Facchin , P . , Maieron , M . , and Baraldi , P . ( 2004 ) . Percept - related activity in the human somatosensory system : functional magnetic resonance imaging studies . Magn . Reson . Imaging 22 , 1539 – 1548 . Price , D . D . ( 1988 ) . PsychologicalandNeuralMechanimsofPain ( RavenPress ) . Price , D . D . , and Harkins , S . W . ( 1992 ) . The affective - motivational dimension of pain . APS J . 1 , 229 – 239 . Rainville , P . , Duncan , G . H . , Price , D . D . , Carrier , B . , and Bushnell , M . C . ( 1997 ) . Pain affect encoded in human anterior cingulate but not somatosensory cor - tex . Science 277 , 968 – 971 . Rajkowska , G . ( 2000 ) . Postmortem studies in mood disorders indicate altered numbers of neurons and glial cells . Biol . Psychiatry 48 , 766 – 777 . Redgrave , P . , Rodriguez , M . , Smith , Y . , Rodriguez - Oroz , M . C . , Lehericy , S . , Bergman , H . , Agid , Y . , DeLong , M . R . , and Obeso , J . A . ( 2010 ) . Goal - directed and habitual control in the basal ganglia : implications for Parkinson’s disease . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 11 , 760 – 772 . Ren , W . J . , Liu , Y . , Zhou , L . J . , Li , W . , Zhong , Y . , Pang , R . P . , Xin , W . J . , Wei , X . H . , Wang , J . , Zhu , H . Q . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Peripheral nerve injury leads to working memory deﬁcits and dysfunction of the hippocampus by upregulation of TNF - alpha in rodents . Neuropsychopharmacology 36 , 979 – 992 . Ressler , K . J . , and Mayberg , H . S . ( 2007 ) . Targeting abnormal neural circuits in mood and anxiety disorders : from the laboratory to the clinic . Nat . Neurosci . 10 , 1116 – 1124 . Robinson , J . P . A . , and Apkarian , A . V . ( 2009 ) . Chronic back pain . In Functional Pain Syndromes : Presentation and Pathophysiology , E . A . Mayer and M . C . Bushnell , eds . ( IASP Press ) , pp . 23 – 54 . Robinson , T . E . , andKolb , B . ( 2004 ) . Structuralplasticityassociatedwithexpo - sure to drugs of abuse . Neuropharmacology 47 ( Suppl 1 ) , 33 – 46 . Rodriguez - Raecke , R . , Niemeier , A . , Ihle , K . , Ruether , W . , and May , A . ( 2009 ) . Brain gray matter decrease in chronic pain is the consequence and not the cause of pain . J . Neurosci . 29 , 13746 – 13750 . Rodriguez - Raecke , R . , Ihle , K . , Ritter , C . , Muhtz , C . , Otte , C . , and May , A . ( 2014 ) . Neuronal differences between chronic low back pain and depression regarding long - term habituation to pain . Eur . J . Pain 18 , 701 – 711 . Rokers , B . , Cormack , L . K . , andHuk , A . C . ( 2009 ) . Disparity - andvelocity - based signalsforthree - dimensionalmotionperceptioninhumanMT + . Nat . Neurosci . 12 , 1050 – 1055 . Russo , S . J . , and Nestler , E . J . ( 2013 ) . The brain reward circuitry in mood disor - ders . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 14 , 609 – 625 . Sanders , L . J . ( 2004 ) . The Charcot foot : historical perspective 1827 - 2003 . Dia - betes Metab . Res . Rev . 20 ( Suppl 1 ) , S4 – S8 . Scholz , J . , and Woolf , C . J . ( 2002 ) . Can we conquer pain ? Nat . Neurosci . 5 ( Suppl ) , 1062 – 1067 . Schultz , W . ( 2000 ) . Multiple reward signals in the brain . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 1 , 199 – 207 . Schultz , W . , Dayan , P . , and Montague , P . R . ( 1997 ) . A neural substrate of pre - diction and reward . Science 275 , 1593 – 1599 . Schwartz , N . , Temkin , P . , Jurado , S . , Lim , B . K . , Heifets , B . D . , Polepalli , J . S . , and Malenka , R . C . ( 2014 ) . Chronic pain . Decreased motivation during chronic pain requires long - term depression in the nucleus accumbens . Science 345 , 535 – 542 . Schweinhardt , P . , Kalk , N . , Wartolowska , K . , Chessell , I . , Wordsworth , P . , and Tracey , I . ( 2008 ) . Investigation into the neural correlates of emotional augmen - tation of clinical pain . Neuroimage 40 , 759 – 766 . Segerdahl , A . R . , Mezue , M . , Okell , T . W . , Farrar , J . T . , and Tracey , I . ( 2015 ) . The dorsal posterior insula subserves a fundamental role in human pain . Nat . Neu - rosci . 18 , 499 – 500 . Sekiguchi , A . , Sugiura , M . , Taki , Y . , Kotozaki , Y . , Nouchi , R . , Takeuchi , H . , Araki , T . , Hanawa , S . , Nakagawa , S . , Miyauchi , C . M . , et al . ( 2014 ) . White mat - termicrostructuralchangesasvulnerabilityfactorsandacquiredsignsofpost - earthquake distress . PLoS ONE 9 , e83967 . Seminowicz , D . A . , Laferriere , A . L . , Millecamps , M . , Yu , J . S . , Coderre , T . J . , and Bushnell , M . C . ( 2009 ) . MRI structural brain changes associated with sensory and emotional function in a rat model of long - term neuropathic pain . Neuro - image 47 , 1007 – 1014 . Seminowicz , D . A . , Wideman , T . H . , Naso , L . , Hatami - Khoroushahi , Z . , Fallatah , S . , Ware , M . A . , Jarzem , P . , Bushnell , M . C . , Shir , Y . , Ouellet , J . A . , and Stone , L . S . ( 2011 ) . Effective treatment of chronic low back pain in humans reverses abnormal brain anatomy and function . J . Neurosci . 31 , 7540 – 7550 . Serra , J . , Collado , A . , Sola ` , R . , Antonelli , F . , Torres , X . , Salgueiro , M . , Quiles , C . , and Bostock , H . ( 2014 ) . Hyperexcitable C nociceptors in ﬁbromyalgia . Ann . Neurol . 75 , 196 – 208 . Sherrington , C . S . ( 1900 ) . Textbook of Physiology ( Pentland ) . Smallwood , R . F . , Laird , A . R . , Ramage , A . E . , Parkinson , A . L . , Lewis , J . , Clauw , D . J . , Williams , D . A . , Schmidt - Wilcke , T . , Farrell , M . J . , Eickhoff , S . B . , and Robin , D . A . ( 2013 ) . Structural brain anomalies and chronic pain : a quantitative meta - analysis of gray matter volume . J . Pain 14 , 663 – 675 . Starcevic , A . , Postic , S . , Radojicic , Z . , Starcevic , B . , Milovanovic , S . , Ilankovic , A . , Dimitrijevic , I . , Damjanovic , A . , Aksic , M . , and Radonjic , V . ( 2014 ) . Volu - metric analysis of amygdala , hippocampus , and prefrontal cortex in therapy - naive PTSD participants . BioMed Res . Int . 2014 , 968495 . Stevens , S . S . ( 1957 ) . On the psychophysical law . Psychol . Rev . 64 , 153 – 181 . Strigo , I . A . , Matthews , S . C . , and Simmons , A . N . ( 2013 ) . Decreased frontal regulationduringpainanticipationinunmedicatedsubjectswithmajordepres - sive disorder . Transl . Psychiatr . 3 , e239 . Sutton , R . S . , and Barto , A . G . ( 1981 ) . Toward a modern theory of adaptive net - works : expectation and prediction . Psychol . Rev . 88 , 135 – 170 . Tracey , I . , and Bushnell , M . C . ( 2009 ) . How neuroimaging studies have chal - lenged us to rethink : is chronic pain a disease ? J . Pain 10 , 1113 – 1120 . Tse , Y . C . , Montoya , I . , Wong , A . S . , Mathieu , A . , Lissemore , J . , Lagace , D . C . , and Wong , T . P . ( 2014 ) . A longitudinal study of stress - induced hippocampal volume changes in mice that are susceptible or resilient to chronic social defeat . Hippocampus 24 , 1120 – 1128 . Vaso , A . , Adahan , H . M . , Gjika , A . , Zahaj , S . , Zhurda , T . , Vyshka , G . , andDevor , M . ( 2014 ) . Peripheral nervous system origin of phantom limb pain . Pain 155 , 1384 – 1391 . Vera - Portocarrero , L . P . , Zhang , E . T . , Ossipov , M . H . , Xie , J . Y . , King , T . , Lai , J . , and Porreca , F . ( 2006 ) . Descending facilitation from the rostral ventromedial medulla maintains nerve injury - induced central sensitization . Neuroscience 140 , 1311 – 1320 . Vierck , C . J . , Whitsel , B . L . , Favorov , O . V . , Brown , A . W . , and Tommerdahl , M . ( 2013 ) . Role of primary somatosensory cortex in the coding of pain . Pain 154 , 334 – 344 . Vlaev , I . , Seymour , B . , Dolan , R . J . , and Chater , N . ( 2009 ) . Theprice ofpainand the value of suffering . Psychol . Sci . 20 , 309 – 317 . Volkow , N . D . , Wang , G . J . , Fowler , J . S . , Tomasi , D . , Telang , F . , and Baler , R . ( 2010 ) . Addiction : decreased reward sensitivity and increased expectation sensitivity conspire to overwhelm the brain’s control circuit . BioEssays 32 , 748 – 755 . Wager , T . D . , Atlas , L . Y . , Lindquist , M . A . , Roy , M . , Woo , C . W . , and Kross , E . ( 2013 ) . An fMRI - based neurologic signature of physical pain . N . Engl . J . Med . 368 , 1388 – 1397 . Wandell , B . A . , and Winawer , J . ( 2011 ) . Imaging retinotopic maps in the human brain . Vision Res . 51 , 718 – 737 . Wang , A . , Mouraux , A . , Liang , M . , and Iannetti , G . ( 2010 ) . Stimulus noveltyand not neural refractoriness explains the repetition suppression of laser - evoked potentials ( LEPs ) . J . Neurophysiol . 104 , 2116 – 2124 . Watson , D . ( 2005 ) . Rethinking the mood and anxiety disorders : a quantitative hierarchical model for DSM - V . J . Abnorm . Psychol . 114 , 522 – 536 . Weber , E . H . ( 1978 ) . The Sense of Touch , Ross , H . E . , and Murray , D . J . , transl . ( Academic Press ) . 490 Neuron 87 , August 5 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Perspective Weidner , C . , Schmelz , M . , Schmidt , R . , Hansson , B . , Handwerker , H . O . , and Torebjork , H . E . ( 1999 ) . Functionalattributesdiscriminatingmechano - insensitive andmechano - responsiveCnociceptorsinhumanskin . J . Neurosci . 19 , 10184 – 10190 . Whittle , S . , Lichter , R . , Dennison , M . , Vijayakumar , N . , Schwartz , O . , By - rne , M . L . , Simmons , J . G . , Yu¨cel , M . , Pantelis , C . , McGorry , P . , and Allen , N . B . ( 2014 ) . Structural brain development and depression onset during adolescence : a prospective longitudinal study . Am . J . Psychiatry 171 , 564 – 571 . Wiech , K . , Vandekerckhove , J . , Zaman , J . , Tuerlinckx , F . , Vlaeyen , J . W . , and Tracey , I . ( 2014 ) . Inﬂuenceofpriorinformationonpaininvolvesbiasedpercep - tual decision - making . Curr . Biol . 24 , R679 – R681 . Willis , W . D . , and Coggeshall , R . E . ( 1978 ) . Sensory Mechanisms of the Spinal Cord ( Plenum Press ) . Willuhn , I . , Burgeno , L . M . , Everitt , B . J . , and Phillips , P . E . ( 2012 ) . Hierarchi - cal recruitment of phasic dopamine signaling in the striatum during the progression of cocaine use . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 20703 – 20708 . Woodworth , R . S . , and Sherrington , C . S . ( 1904 ) . A pseudaffective reﬂex and its spinal path . J . Physiol . 31 , 234 – 243 . Woolf , C . J . , and Salter , M . W . ( 2000 ) . Neuronal plasticity : increasing the gain in pain . Science 288 , 1765 – 1769 . Xu , H . , Wu , L . J . , Wang , H . , Zhang , X . , Vadakkan , K . I . , Kim , S . S . , Steenland , H . W . , and Zhuo , M . ( 2008 ) . Presynaptic and postsynaptic ampliﬁcations of neuropathic pain in the anterior cingulate cortex . J . Neurosci . 28 , 7445 – 7453 . Yarkoni , T . , Poldrack , R . A . , Nichols , T . E . , Van Essen , D . C . , and Wager , T . D . ( 2011 ) . Large - scale automated synthesis of human functional neuroimaging data . Nat . Methods 8 , 665 – 670 . Yelle , M . D . , Rogers , J . M . , andCoghill , R . C . ( 2008 ) . Offsetanalgesia : atemporal contrast mechanism for nociceptive information . Pain 134 , 174 – 186 . Neuron 87 , August 5 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 491 Neuron Perspective