www . advmatinterfaces . de 2001211 ( 1 of 8 ) © 2020 The Authors . Published by Wiley - VCH GmbH Full PaPer Controlled Cooperative Wetting Enabled Heterogeneous Structured 3D Morphing Transducers Sreepathy Sridhar , Cong Wang , Jonathan G . Terry , Xue Chen , Ansu Sun , Zhenghong Li , Haibao Lv , Ben Bin Xu , and Yifan Li * DOI : 10 . 1002 / admi . 202001211 drawn more significant attentions due to their open network structures , and ability to generate large changes [ 25 , 26 ] ( therefore high deformation ) in volume responding to var - ious external stimulation . For example , by creating through - thickness , [ 20 ] in - plane gra - dient , [ 27 ] or combining the two [ 28 ] in struc - turing dissimilar hydrogel functional layers and blocks , controllable deformation such as bending and folding can be achieved . The through - thickness gradient approach typically employs a hydrogel bilayer structure where the swelling behavior remains dissimilar across the thickness . [ 8 ] The differential swelling leads to internal stress mismatch and influence out - of - plane 3D morphing configurations , resulting a single con - figuration at certain external conditions ( e . g . , temperature , ion concentration ) . [ 16 ] When external conditions are altered , a wider range of deformation magnitude and / or a reversed shape ( e . g . , bending towards opposite direction , “C” becomes “ C ” ) can be achieved , and more complicated configurations can be accom - plished via advanced 2D shape patterning . [ 8 , 21 , 29 ] On the other hand , the in - plane gradient approach typically employs 2D het - erogeneity via a single layer of patterned functional hydrogel on the same plane , resulting in a bistable status where the buckling could happen in either directions . [ 16 ] Combining the ideas from both through - thickness and in - plane gradient modes , through a controlled “preswelling” process that determines swelling direction , programmable complex deformations were demon - strated by the “site - specific” patterned hydrogel blocks . [ 17 , 27 ] The resultant shape - morphing structure generated due to in - plane elastic mismatch between nonswelling substrate and controlled swellable gel blocks was more or less fixed . [ 17 , 27 ] Moreover , such an approach always requires pairs of silhouetted / holed “preswelling masks” to assist and orchestrate the swelling com - mand , in order to reconfigure the deformation patterns . [ 16 , 17 ] Also , once deformed , it will be difficult / impossible to apply the silhouetted / holed mask again to reconfigure the shape . For the required bilayer system , thickness uniformity is important due to its role in initiating the inherent stress distribution . For homo - geneous hydrogel single - layer structures , patterned or not , this can be achieved by spin coating , or molding the prepolymer hydrogel ( pre - gel ) in a “two - parallel plate” ( TPP , like a Hele - Shaw cell ) configuration , followed by gelation processes . [ 8 , 30 ] Inspired by natural biostructures , a single layer of encoded heterogeneous hydrogel building blocks has been exploited to form hierarchical complex hydrogel architectures , using droplet microfluidics ( DMF ) surface wetting control to guide the gel formation . [ 31 ] A unique microfluidics approach for functional hydrogel patterning with mul - tilayered heterogeneous structures is presented . Prepolymer solution droplets with differentiated sodium acrylate concentrations are dispensed / printed in a wetting - controlled “two - parallel plate” ( TPP , like a Hele - Shaw Cell ) system . The gelation within the system enables hydrogel bilayer structures with reconfigur - able 3D deformations driven by in - plane and through - thickness heterogeneity under stimuli - responsive mask - less swelling / deswelling . The cooperation between swelling mismatch of functional groups results in a higher com - plexity of 3D reconfiguration in responding to discrete levels of stimulation inputs . This facile patterning technology with an in - built ionic hierarchy can be scaled up / down with advanced transducing functionalities in various fields . S . Sridhar , Dr . C . Wang , Dr . X . Chen , A . Sun , Prof . B . B . Xu , Dr . Y . Li Mechanical and Construction Engineering Faculty of Engineering and Environment Northumbria University Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 8ST , UK E - mail : yifan . li @ northumbria . ac . uk Dr . J . G . Terry School of Engineering Institute for Integrated Micro and Nano Systems University of Edinburgh Edinburgh EH9 3JF , UK Z . Li , Prof . H . Lv Science and Technology on Advanced Composites in Special Environments Laboratory Harbin Institute of Technology Harbin 150080 , P . R . China The ORCID identification number ( s ) for the author ( s ) of this article can be found under https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / admi . 202001211 . 1 . Introduction Inspired by nature , [ 1 – 3 ] morphing soft materials responding to external stimulation ( e . g . , electrical , mechanical , and chemical ) has proven to exhibit applicability in various fields , [ 4 – 9 ] but not restricted to flexible electronics , [ 10 , 11 ] 4D printing , [ 12 , 13 ] biomedical transducers , [ 14 ] and soft robotics . [ 15 , 16 ] One of the desirable devel - opments is to make the morphing process programmable [ 17 – 22 ] and reversible [ 23 , 24 ] through structured soft functional materials , which enable effective shape configuration design according to the applications . As one of the popular candidates , hydrogels have © 2020 The Authors . Published by Wiley - VCH GmbH . This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits use , distribution and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited . Adv . Mater . Interfaces 2020 , 2001211 www . advancedsciencenews . com www . advmatinterfaces . de 2001211 ( 2 of 8 ) © 2020 The Authors . Published by Wiley - VCH GmbH We hereby propose a facile approach to achieve not only programmable , but also reconfigurable maskless swelling / deswelling morphing structures that change shapes between various cooperative states responding to ionic strength ( Figure 1 ) . This reconfigurability was enabled by creating a heterogeneous nonfunctional / functional hydrogel bilayer , shaped and assembled in a TPP ( like a Hele - Shaw cell ) open - microfluidic configuration during gelation process , based on a setup we first revealed during . [ 32 ] The structure contains dissimilar high - swelling hydrogel blocks with mismatched swelling behavior , on top of a low - swelling ( nonfunctional ) substrate ( Figure 1a ) . The resulted structure will respond to external ionic concentration , with both controllable deforma - tion magnitude and shape reconfiguration ( Figure 1b ) . Such development opens a range of future possibilities where com - bining “in - plane” 2D heterogeneity , complex patterns , and mul - tilayer “though - thickness” structures will bring more advanced soft materials morphing control . 2 . Results and Discussion 2 . 1 . Reconfigurable 3D Morphing Transducers The hierarchical patterned gels are prepared by two - step polymerization method , as shown in Figure 1a . A thin film nonfunctional substrate is polymerized to form polyacrylamide ( PAAm ) gels without the presence of sodium acrylate ( SA ) . PAAm exhibits good biosafety characteristics towards human cells , which makes it a popular candidate in smart biomedical applications . [ 33 ] Alongside the nonfunctional substrate fabrica - tion , a series of patterns made of different concentrations of SA containing PAAm mixtures was dispensed onto the pre - coated hydrophilic / hydrophobic template forming the func - tional blocks . The functional polymer droplets were allowed to cross - link with the prefabricated thin - film substrate to achieve multipatterned 2D hydrogel complex ( Figure 1b ) . The dispersed PAAm gels with various concentrations of SA are shown in Table 1 . This method provides a no wash “zero - waste , ” simple step , and uniform thickness alternative to conventional fabri - cation methods such as photopolymerization , extrusion , direct ink writing , etc . The multistate 3D shape reconfiguration Figure 1 . Concept of the heterogeneous structured 3D morphing transducers : a ) Bilayer hydrogel heterogeneous structure fabrication process , using droplet / open microfluidics in a TPP system with wetting control . b ) Experimental photographs showing the side view of the gelation process in TPP , with dissimilar swelling behavior demonstrated on substrate fixed to a PMMA plate . c ) Concept demonstration : multistate 3D shape reconfiguration guided by ionic environment using mask - less swelling / deswelling mechanism , ( yellow lines in PAAm network represent cross - linker ) . Table 1 . Composition of high - swelling functional hydrogel patterns and low - swelling nonfunctional substrate thin film . Acrylamide [ wt % ] Bis - acrylamide [ wt % ] TEMED [ wt % ] APS [ wt % ] SA [ wt % ] Pattern I ( 1B3S ) 18 . 816 3 . 494 0 . 168 1 . 68 16 . 128 Pattern II ( 1B1S ) 18 . 816 3 . 494 0 . 168 1 . 69 5 . 376 Substrate ( nonfunc - tional thin film ) 14 0 . 45 0 . 35 3 . 6 0 Adv . Mater . Interfaces 2020 , 2001211 www . advancedsciencenews . com www . advmatinterfaces . de 2001211 ( 3 of 8 ) © 2020 The Authors . Published by Wiley - VCH GmbH mechanism with maskless swelling / deswelling was then devel - oped and demonstrated ( Figure 1c ) . The number of possible configurations of 3D morphing response to external stimula - tion can be estimated according to the simple equation , [ 16 ] for combined through - thickness and in - plane gradient modes n m n × = 2 1 2 ( 1 ) where n is associated with the number of in - plan gradient units , while m is associated with the number of through - thickness gradient units . Applied to our proposed structure in Figure 1c , the bilayer gave m = 2 , and two dissimilar functional blocks on the same plane gave us n = 2 , which theoretically leads to four possible shape change configurations besides the original state . 2 . 2 . Pre - Gel Droplets Wetting Control in TPP Systems First , the static CAs of pre - gel droplet on various surfaces were characterized as shown in Figure 2 a . These CA values were similar to those of deionized ( DI ) water droplets on the same surfaces . The pre - gel droplet dispensing volume was calculated based on the pattern area ( x – y plane in Figure 2b ) and the gap distance g . When droplet volumes between the two plates were properly dispensed , the CA θ ′ ( Figure 2c left ) remains between 90 ° and the advancing CA of the hydrogel on the hydrophilic surface ( slightly larger than static CA—70 ° for SiO 2 ) . When the volume is slightly larger ( Figure 2c right ) , the gel will still be pinned to the wetting pattern boundary if the θ ′ lies within the pre - gel advancing CAs on hydrophobic surfaces . The advancing CAs are typically larger than the static CA values as shown in Figure 2a—91 ° , 109 ° , and 138 ° for parylene - C ( SCS coatings ) , perfluorooctyltriethoxysilane ( FOTS , Sigma – Aldrich ) , and Glaco Zero ( Soft 99 ) , respectively . Capillary - driven flow in a TPP system , where the gap height g is significantly smaller than the dimensions of the droplets ( Figure 2b , c ) , the Reynolds number is small enough for us to assume the dynamics can be studied as 2D Hele - Shaw type flow , [ 34 ] where the capillary pressure equation can be simplified to P L g xy z κ κ = + ( 2 ) where k xy and k z are the nondimensional droplet curvatures in TPP geometry ( Figure 2b , c ) , L is the droplet length scale at x – y plane that is significantly larger than g . Later work of open microfluidics [ 35 , 36 ] presented the simpli - fied conditions for the liquid to spread along the hydrophilic area / path when flowing such system , summarized by gw α θ < + cos cos 2 ( 3 ) where g is the gap between top and bottom plates , w is the width of the droplet wetting front ( functional block pattern dimensions in this work ) perpendicular to the direction of flow , θ and α are the hydrogel static contact angles ( CA ) on the top and bottom plates , respectively ( Figure 2c ) . The droplet will stop spreading when the condition set in Equation ( 2 ) is not met , e . g . , the fluid hits hydrophobic boundary ( CA > 90 ° ) , and / or the gap g is too large ( not in our case as g < < w ) . Another special consideration is the pre - gel droplet dispensing volume calculation and control . Once the top and bottom plates are in position ( g = spacer thickness ) , a properly controlled dis - pensing volume should result in a wetting profile as shown in the left - side of Figure 2c . However , if the dispensing volume is too large , resulting the θ ′ > advancing CAs on hydrophobic surfaces , the pre - gel solution will de - pin from the boundary , overflowing the patterns and failing the shape control . Furthermore , due to the relatively small volume changes during this room temperature cross - linking process , non - functional substrate wrinkling or bending have not been observed during the functional block polymerization in TPP system . Figure 2 . The wetting behavior of the pre - gel PAAm – SA droplets : a ) static CA measurements by DSA ; b ) top view experimental photograph of the TPP system with pre - gel droplets ( red color dye ) assembled and shaped by wetting boundaries ; c ) side view schematic and experimental photograph of the TPP system showing pre - gel droplets spread on hydrophilic patterns and were pinned to the boundaries . Adv . Mater . Interfaces 2020 , 2001211 www . advancedsciencenews . com www . advmatinterfaces . de 2001211 ( 4 of 8 ) © 2020 The Authors . Published by Wiley - VCH GmbH 2 . 3 . Hydrogel Mechanical Properties Characterization To understand the deformation behavior of the heterogeneous hydrogel bilayer structures , mechanical characterization was carried out for functional hydrogel PAAm - SA and the nonfunc - tional substrate PAAm . Due to its porous structure , mechanical properties such as the Young’s modulus for hydrogels change during the swelling process . [ 37 ] Hence , an in - house developed “clamp - free” tensile testing platform ( Figure 3 a ) was devel - oped to characterize the Young’s modulus of both functional and nonfunctional hydrogel systems during the swelling pro - cess . The PAAm composites were cast into the desirable shape using a special mold design that directly integrates with the fixing points of the tensile tester as shown by Figure 3a pro - cedure ( i ) to ( iv ) . Figure 3b shows the strain – stress relation - ship of the nonfunctional substrate PAAm thin film ( Table 1 ) , immersed in 0 . 2 and 0 . 5 m PBS solutions for 10 min . The Young’s modulus is calculated to be ≈ 10 and ≈ 7 kPa for the PAAm film swelled in 0 . 2 and 0 . 5 m PBS , respectively . Figure 3c shows the strain – stress relationship of the functional PAAm - SA hydrogel ( pattern I—1B3S and pattern II—1B1S in Table 1 ) . It can be clearly seen that the higher PBS concentration resulted in higher Young’s modulus in all cases . We attribute this behavior to highly crystalline nature of the hydrogel molecules reducing the interface defects in the crystalline region and the amorphous area making the elongation longer . The modulus value of the PAAm thin film also matches those reported by Denisin and Pruitt , [ 38 ] which was set as a benchmark . The swelling and deswelling ratios dynamically responding to PBS concentration ( 0 – 0 . 5 m ) and SA compositions were obtained . In our previous PAAm - SA ( different composition ) swelling study , [ 39 ] various boundary confinement conditions were characterized—freestanding , one - side confinement , and ring confinement . In this work , the 3D morphing bilayer struc - ture was placed in “freestand” mode in PBS / water solutions and the swelling ratio characterizations of PAAm and PAAm - SA hydrogel spheres were conducted ( Figure 4 a ) . The swelling ratio was given by d d = Swelling ratio swell origin ( 4 ) Figure 4b – d shows the swelling ratios of all three PAAm - SA and PAAm compositions ( Table 1 ) over time , in DI water , 0 . 2 m PBS , and 0 . 5 m PBS , respectively . The PAAm non - functional substrate did not exhibit significant swelling or deswelling behavior , with its diameter topped by 119 % of its original value at the end of the tests . For PAAm - SA pattern I ( 1B3S in Table 1 ) and pattern II ( 1B1S in Table 1 ) , significant swelling ( up to 275 % ) and deswelling ( down to 2 % ) occurred when immersed in DI water ( Figure 4b ) and 0 . 5 m PBS ( Figure 4d ) , respectively . Figure 4c shows the interesting obser - vation that when both PAAm - SA composites were immersed in 0 . 2 m PBS , the pattern I ( 1B3S ) swells significantly to 241 % of its original diameter , while to the opposite pattern II ( 1B1S ) deswells significantly to 2 % of its original diameter . This large dissimilarity can potentially result in huge deformation magnitudes . Due to the high aspect ratio ( g < < w , Section 2 . 2 ) of the TPP molding system , the functional blocks have a large surface area to thickness ratio , compared with the spheres used in swelling test shown in Figure 4 . This has successfully accelerated the reaction time of the transducers with typical an onset of shape Figure 3 . Mechanical property characterization a ) in - house developed clamp - free tensile tester for swelling hydrogels , with procedures ( i ) to ( iv ) showing the molding setup where as - fabricated PAAm composites can be directly integrated with the tensile tester ; b , c ) strain – stress relationship of b ) the nonfunctional substrate PAAm thin film , immersed in 0 . 2 and 0 . 5 m PBS solutions for 10 min ; and c ) the functional PAAm – SA immersed in DI water , 0 . 2 and 0 . 5 m PBS solutions for 10 min . Adv . Mater . Interfaces 2020 , 2001211 www . advancedsciencenews . com www . advmatinterfaces . de 2001211 ( 5 of 8 ) © 2020 The Authors . Published by Wiley - VCH GmbH morphing occurring around 2 min of immersion , which was determined by the swelling and deswelling characteristics of the thin functional blocks . 2 . 4 . Numerical Modeling of the Reconfigurable Deformation Based on the mechanical characterization results obtained , numerical modeling was conducted to help design / programme the morphing configurations under certain external stimula - tion . Meanwhile the reconfigurability of the same bilayer het - erogeneous structure was also studied . The deformation process of the heterogeneous gel structure is simulated by solving the following mechanical equilibrium equation s ∇ = · 0 ( 5 ) where s is the nominal stress tensor and ∇ is the operator of divergence with respect to the reference state , i . e . , the initial state of the gel without swelling or deswelling . Details of the simulation are included in the Supporting Information . The in - plane gradient gel structure composed of only two functional blocks can exhibit three different configura - tions , i . e . , straight ( nonactivated ) , “S” , “C” , and “W” shapes as shown in Figure 5 . When the functional gel block expands ( swells ) , it will induce an internal tensile stress ( σ ) on the top surface of the nonfunctional substrate , which will generate a clockwise bending moment ( M ) and bend the unit to a convex configuration ( Figure 5a ) . On the other hand , the contracting ( deswelling ) gel block induces an internal compressive stress Figure 4 . a ) Swelling ratio characterization using freestanding hydrogel spheres . b – d ) Swelling ratio versus time—for nonfunctional substrate ( PAAm ) , and patterns I and II ( PAAm - SA ) samples immersed in b ) DI water ; c ) 0 . 2 m PBS ; and d ) 0 . 5 m PBS . Figure 5 . Mechanical model of the reconfigurable deformation : a ) convex and concave configuration due to bending moment ; b ) numerical simula - tion results showing three different configurations induced by swelling and deswelling of patterns I and II , based on the obtained mechanical property and swelling ratio results . Adv . Mater . Interfaces 2020 , 2001211 www . advancedsciencenews . com www . advmatinterfaces . de 2001211 ( 6 of 8 ) © 2020 The Authors . Published by Wiley - VCH GmbH on the top surface of the substrate , which will bend the unit to a concave configuration due to the generated counterclock - wise bending moment ( Figure 5a ) . The radius R of curvature of the unit depends on the swelling ratio ρ of the gel , and the thicknesses of the gel ( t g ) and the substrate ( t s ) . Then by scaling analysis , we have R t f t t ρ =     , g s g ( 6 ) In the simplest case where both the gel block and the sub - strate are homogeneous and the unit is simplified as Euler – Bernoulli beam , we can further approximate the scaling as R t t t ρ ( ) = − − / 2 1 g s g ( 7 ) where R < 0 corresponds to convex configuration and R > 0 corresponds to concave one . Figure 5b shows the three different cases ( reconfigurable states ) , programmed with two dissimilar functional gel blocks responding to external ion concentration . In the first case where the left gel block ( pattern I ) expands ( swells ) and the right one ( pattern II ) contracts ( deswells ) , the left unit bends to a convex configuration while the right unit bends to a con - cave one , which leads to an “S” shape of the structure . In the second case , both gel blocks expand , so the two units bend to convex configurations , which make the total structure exhibit a “C” shape . In the third case , both gel blocks contract and the units bend to concave configurations , leading to a “W” shape . The in - plane gradient gel structure of two different functional blocks is the basic element . By combining more elements , structures exhibiting more complex 3D configurations / shapes can be obtained . Figure S2a , Supporting Information , shows an example of a structure combining three elements that can exhibit a complex 3D wavy configuration . 2 . 5 . Reconfigurable Multistate 3D Morphing Demonstration The localized swelling and deswelling characteristics of the patterned gels and resulting configurations imparted onto the nonfunctional substrate are closely related to the ionic concen - tration of the environment . The patterned gel’s periodicity can be tuned by adding more hydrophilic features onto the hydro - phobic polyacrylic plate . Selective dispensing of functional gels with distinctive SA magnitude results in localized spatial con - figuration that is switchable under different ionic environment ( Figure 6 ) . As shown in Figure 6a , both the low ( pattern II ) and high concentration ( pattern I ) SA functional blocks swell in DI water at alternative rate due to ionic equilibrium and thus forming a concave shape of the nonfunctional layer . At 0 . 2 m PBS , due to the osmotic imbalance , high concentration SA patterned functional block undergoes a positive swelling leading to upward buckling of the nonfunctional substrate . Whereas , the low concentration SA functional block under - goes negative swelling leading to downward buckling resulting in a “S” - shaped configuration ( Figure 6b ) . At 0 . 5 m PBS , due to increase in PBS concentration , both the functional groups undergo deswelling forming a “W” - shaped configuration that matches our theoretical simulation results ( Figures 5b and 6c ) . We believe , the buckling conformation is achieved due to the influence of high transient swelling forces with swelling mis - match occurring in one of the functional blocks . [ 40 ] When more than two patterns were involved , complex surface convex and concave buckling can be observed that transients over time Figure 6 . Representative complex 3D conformable configurations with mask - free swelling / deswelling , deformed from 2D patterned functional / non - functional hydrogels ionic imbalance . a ) Concave deformation achieved by immersing the transducers in DI water . b ) Buckling mismatch configuration of hydrogel transducer in 0 . 2 m PBS . c ) Cooperative deswelling of both high and low SA patterns in 0 . 5 m PBS . Rows ( i ) to ( iii ) represent different viewing angles and condition : i ) Structure in solution—side view ; ii ) structure in air ( gravity in play ) —side view ; and iii ) structure in air—top view . Adv . Mater . Interfaces 2020 , 2001211 www . advancedsciencenews . com www . advmatinterfaces . de 2001211 ( 7 of 8 ) © 2020 The Authors . Published by Wiley - VCH GmbH with changing diffusion coefficients and ionic equilibrium , as detailed in the Supporting Information and Figure S2 , Sup - porting Information . 3 . Conclusion Reconfigurable multistate 3D morphing has been achieved through PAAm / PAAm - SA hydrogel bilayer structure that was created in a “TPP” ( Hele - Shaw cell ) open - microfluidic con - figuration . The mechanical characterization was carried out to understand the gel property change during the swelling and deswelling processes . The numerical analysis was performed to help understand the morphing states and swelling configu - rations , which agrees with the experimental observation . The gel structure switching between three different morphing con - figurations was demonstrated , driven by in - plane and through - thickness heterogeneity during stimuli - responsive swelling subject to ionic concentration change . Since the PAAm - based hydrogel can potentially be engi - neered to respond to various inputs ( e . g . , temperature , light , electrical field , magnetic field ) , we anticipate such hetero - geneous multilayered structures will unlock more advances in the morphing soft transducer applications . For example , a triple - layered ( or more ) heterogeneous structure exhibiting a dual responsive thermoelectric behaviour can be manufactured to display multiplexed in / output configurations . On the other hand , the reconfigurable morphing structure could also be employed for topography - induced actuations such as complex topo - optical pattern generation . [ 41 ] They can also be attached as a replacement for conventional metallic electrodes , organic electrochemical transistors , with tuneable geometry / curvature to be conformal with complex biological surface topography . Furthermore , the wetting - enabled gel assembly and shape - controlled gelation process in TPP systems could potentially be scaled up / down , inspired by existing printing technologies such as ODF ( one droplet filling ) employed in liquid crystal display manufacturing . During the ODF process , droplets ( e . g . , liquid crystal ) are dispensed into physically closed / confined cells . Further study will be required to adopt this technology in open - microfluidics configurations . 4 . Experimental Section Hydrogel Bilayer Preparation : The high - swelling functional hydrogel patterns I and II were created from PAAm network with SA that contains free positive sodium ions . N , N ′ - Methylenebisacrylamide ( BisAA or MBAA ) was used as a cross - linker , with N , N , N ′ , N ′ - tetramethylethylenediamine ( TEMED ) and ammonium persulfate ( APS ) used as initiators for the polymerization process . Surface Treatment of TPP Open Microfluidics : The TPP system consists of a hydrophobically treated poly ( methyl methacrylate ) ( PMMA ) acrylic top plate , and a bottom plate ( 35 × 80 mm rectangle chip cut from polished silicon wafers ) with hydrophobic / hydrophilic wetting control patterns . The hydrophilic zone on the bottom plate was 1 µ m thermally oxidized SiO 2 layer . And three different types of hydrophobic coating materials were used : spray - coated Glaco Mirro Zero ( Soft99 ) , vapor - coated parylene - C ( SCS coatings ) , and FOTS ( Sigma – Aldrich ) . The patterning was done via shadow masking ( Glaco Zero and FOTS ) , or photolithography followed by oxygen plasma etching ( parylene - C ) . Hydrogel Bilayer Patterning Using TPP Open Microfluidics : A detailed recipe of the functional / nonfunctional substrates is listed in Table 1 . A 2 . 5mL of nonfunctional PAAm solution was dispensed onto the hydrophobic / hydrophilic bottom plate with a defined gap size and gelled to form a thin film ( Figure 1a ) . This was followed by 40 µ L of PAAm solution with varied SA concentration dispensed onto another prefabricated hydrophobic / hydrophilic patterned plate with a spacer to adjust the overall thickness of the functional patterns ( Figure 1a ) . For pattern transfer , the PMMA plate containing nonfunctional thin film was placed over the multipatterned functional gels and allowed to cross - link . Afterwards , to achieve multiconfigurable 3D shape - morphing states , the patterned nonfunctional substrate was allowed to freestand in different ionic concentrations of PBS and water for 10 min . The pre - gel solutions were dispensed to polymerize and shaped inside a Hele - Shaw cell ( TPP ) layered by hydrophobic and hydrophilic boundaries inside the TPP system before polymerization . Hydrogel Wetting Characterization : The static CA measurement was performed on Kruss DSA30S system . The pre - gel samples were mixed and measured within 15 min of preparation . The droplet volumes were kept at 5 µ L each , manually dispensed on leveled surfaces with different coatings . The results are presented in Figure 2a . TPP System Setup : The construction of the Hele - Shaw cell system is similar to that presented by Walton and co - workers , [ 42 , 43 ] where spacing materials ( e . g . , plastic shims with thickness range 0 . 025 – 3 mm ) were used as spacers to control the gap height . First , the pre - gel of the nonfunctional hydrogel substrate—a fine volume controlled low - swelling hydrogel—was micropipetted within the hydrophilic zone of the bottom plate surface . The PMMA top plate was then lowered towards the bottom plate , leaving a small gap g in between . The pre - gel was shaped following the hydrophobic / hydrophilic boundary , with its thickness = g . The wetting and gelation process observation of the TPP system is explained in the Supporting Information ( Figure S1 , Supporting Information ) . Supporting Information Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the author . Acknowledgements S . S . and C . W . contributed equally to this work . This work was supported by EPSRC UK Fluid Network ( grant no . EP / N032861 , https : / / fluids . ac . uk / ) . The authors would also like to acknowledge other support from the EPSRC ( grant nos . EP / N007921 and EP / L026899 ) . Data associated with this article are available via Northumbria Research Data Management scheme . Conflict of Interest The authors declare no conflict of interest . Keywords droplet microfluidics , flexible sensors , heterogeneous hydrogels , layer by layer , responsive swelling Received : July 6 , 2020 Revised : September 4 , 2020 Published online : Adv . Mater . Interfaces 2020 , 2001211 www . advancedsciencenews . com www . advmatinterfaces . de 2001211 ( 8 of 8 ) © 2020 The Authors . Published by Wiley - VCH GmbH [ 1 ] S . Armon , E . Efrati , R . Kupferman , E . Sharon , Science 2011 , 333 , 1726 . [ 2 ] I . W . Hamley , V . Castelletto , Angew . Chem . , Int . Ed . 2007 , 46 , 4442 . [ 3 ] S . Li , H . Bai , R . F . Shepherd , H . Zhao , Angew . Chem . , Int . Ed . 2019 , 58 , 11182 . [ 4 ] Y . Liu , J . Genzer , M . D . Dickey , Prog . Polym . Sci . 2016 , 52 , 79 . [ 5 ] L . Ionov , Adv . Funct . Mater . 2013 , 23 , 4555 . [ 6 ] X . Liu , J . Liu , S . Lin , X . Zhao , Mater . Today 2020 , 36 , 102 . [ 7 ] F . G . Downs , D . J . Lunn , M . J . Booth , J . B . Sauer , W . J . Ramsay , R . G . Klemperer , C . J . Hawker , H . Bayley , Nat . Chem . 2020 , 12 , 363 . [ 8 ] A . Cangialosi , C . Yoon , J . Liu , Q . Huang , J . Guo , T . D . Nguyen , D . H . Gracias , R . Schulman , Science 2017 , 357 , 1126 . [ 9 ] J . Zhao , U . Gulan , T . Horie , N . Ohmura , J . Han , C . Yang , J . Kong , S . Wang , B . B . Xu , Small 2019 , 15 , 1900019 . [ 10 ] K . - I . Jang , K . Li , H . U . Chung , S . Xu , H . N . Jung , Y . Yang , J . W . Kwak , H . H . Jung , J . Song , C . Yang , A . Wang , Z . Liu , J . Y . Lee , B . H . Kim , J . - H . Kim , J . Lee , Y . Yu , B . J . Kim , H . Jang , K . J . Yu , J . Kim , J . W . Lee , J . - W . Jeong , Y . M . Song , Y . Huang , Y . Zhang , J . A . Rogers , Nat . Commun . 2017 , 8 , 15894 . [ 11 ] H . Fu , K . Nan , W . Bai , W . Huang , K . Bai , L . Lu , C . Zhou , Y . Liu , F . Liu , J . Wang , M . Han , Z . Yan , H . Luan , Y . Zhang , Y . Zhang , J . Zhao , X . Cheng , M . Li , J . W . Lee , Y . Liu , D . Fang , X . Li , Y . Huang , Y . Zhang , J . A . Rogers , Nat . Mater . 2018 , 17 , 268 . [ 12 ] C . A . Spiegel , M . Hippler , A . Münchinger , M . Bastmeyer , C . Barner - Kowollik , M . Wegener , E . Blasco , Adv . Funct . Mater . 2020 , 30 , 1907615 . [ 13 ] S . Naficy , R . Gately , R . Gorkin III , H . Xin , G . M . Spinks , Macromol . Mater . Eng . 2017 , 302 , 1600212 . [ 14 ] A . Kirillova , L . Ionov , J . Mater . Chem . B 2019 , 7 , 1597 . [ 15 ] B . J . Cafferty , V . E . Campbell , P . Rothemund , D . J . Preston , A . Ainla , N . Fulleringer , A . C . Diaz , A . E . Fuentes , D . Sameoto , J . A . Lewis , G . M . Whitesides , Adv . Mater . Technol . 2019 , 4 , 1800299 . [ 16 ] C . Y . Li , X . P . Hao , S . Y . Zheng , W . Hong , Q . Zheng , Z . L . Wu , Adv . Intell . Syst . 2019 , 1 , 1900055 . [ 17 ] Z . J . Wang , W . Hong , Z . L . Wu , Q . Zheng , Angew . Chem . , Int . Ed . Engl . 2017 , 56 , 15974 . [ 18 ] X . P . Hao , Z . Xu , C . Y . Li , W . Hong , Q . Zheng , Z . L . Wu , Adv . Mater . 2020 , 32 , 2000781 . [ 19 ] Z . J . Wang , C . Y . Li , X . Y . Zhao , Z . L . Wu , Q . Zheng , J . Mater . Chem . B 2019 , 7 , 1674 . [ 20 ] Y . Zhou , C . M . Duque , C . D . Santangelo , R . C . Hayward , Adv . Funct . Mater . 2019 , 29 , 1905273 . [ 21 ] C . Y . Li , X . P . Hao , Z . L . Wu , Q . Zheng , Chem . - Asian J . 2019 , 14 , 94 . [ 22 ] X . Zhou , T . Li , J . Wang , F . Chen , D . Zhou , Q . Liu , B . Li , J . Cheng , X . Zhou , B . Zheng , ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces 2018 , 10 , 9077 . [ 23 ] S . Y . Zheng , Y . Shen , F . Zhu , J . Yin , J . Qian , J . Fu , Z . L . Wu , Q . Zheng , Adv . Funct . Mater . 2018 , 28 , 1803366 . [ 24 ] G . Gao , Z . Wang , D . Xu , L . Wang , T . Xu , H . Zhang , J . Chen , J . Fu , ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces 2018 , 10 , 41724 . [ 25 ] B . Xu , R . C . Hayward , Adv . Mater . 2013 , 25 , 5555 . [ 26 ] B . B . Xu , Q . Liu , Z . Suo , R . C . Hayward , Adv . Funct . Mater . 2016 , 26 , 3218 . [ 27 ] Z . J . Wang , C . N . Zhu , W . Hong , Z . L . Wu , Q . Zheng , Sci . Adv . 2017 , 3 , e1700348 . [ 28 ] R . M . Erb , J . S . Sander , R . Grisch , A . R . Studart , Nat . Commun . 2013 , 4 , 1712 . [ 29 ] Y . Zhang , X . Le , Y . Jian , W . Lu , J . Zhang , T . Chen , Adv . Funct . Mater . 2019 , 29 , 1905514 . [ 30 ] S . Park , D . Kim , S . Y . Ko , J . - O . Park , S . Akella , B . Xu , Y . Zhang , S . Fraden , Lab Chip 2014 , 14 , 1551 . [ 31 ] M . - Y . Chiang , Y . - W . Hsu , H . - Y . Hsieh , S . - Y . Chen , S . - K . Fan , Sci . Adv . 2016 , 2 , e1600964 . [ 32 ] C . Wang , S . Sridhar , J . G . Terry , A . Sun , Z . Li , H . Lv , B . B . Xu , Y . Li , presented at 2019 20th Int . Conf . on Solid - State Sensors , Actua - tors and Microsystems & Eurosensors XXXIII ( TRANSDUCERS & EUROSENSORS XXXIII ) , Berlin , Germany , June 2019 . [ 33 ] E . E . Charrier , K . Pogoda , R . Li , C . Y . Park , J . J . Fredberg , P . A . Janmey , APL Bioeng . 2020 , 4 , 036104 . [ 34 ] S . W . Walker , B . Shapiro , J . Microelectromech . Syst . 2006 , 15 , 986 . [ 35 ] U . N . Lee , J . H . Day , A . J . Haack , R . C . Bretherton , W . Lu , C . A . DeForest , A . B . Theberge , E . Berthier , Lab Chip 2020 , 20 , 525 . [ 36 ] B . P . Casavant , E . Berthier , A . B . Theberge , J . Berthier , S . I . Montanez - Sauri , L . L . Bischel , K . Brakke , C . J . Hedman , W . Bushman , N . P . Keller , D . J . Beebe , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2013 , 110 , 10111 . [ 37 ] J . Macron , A . P . Gerratt , S . P . Lacour , Adv . Mater . Technol . 2019 , 4 , 1900331 . [ 38 ] A . K . Denisin , B . L . Pruitt , ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces 2016 , 8 , 21893 . [ 39 ] Y . Li , D . Wang , J . Richardson , B . B . Xu , Macromol . Symp . 2017 , 372 , 127 . [ 40 ] A . Ilseng , V . Prot , B . H . Skallerud , B . T . Stokke , J . Mech . Phys . Solids 2019 , 128 , 219 . [ 41 ] C . Wang , D . Wang , V . Kozhevnikov , X . Dai , G . Turnbull , X . Chen , J . Kong , B . Z . Tang , Y . Li , B . B . Xu , Nat . Commun . 2020 , 11 , 1448 . [ 42 ] I . Schmueser , E . O . Blair , Z . Isiksacan , Y . Li , D . K . Corrigan , A . A . Stokes , J . G . Terry , A . R . Mount , A . J . Walton , presented at 2020 IEEE 33rd Int . Conf . on Microelectronic Test Structures ( ICMTS ) , May 2020 . [ 43 ] Y . Li , E . O . McKenna , W . Parkes , A . R . Pitt , A . J . Walton , Appl . Phys . Lett . 2011 , 99 , 073703 . Adv . Mater . Interfaces 2020 , 2001211