THE JOURNAL OF THE LEARNING SCIENCES , 00 : 1 – 46 , 2011 Copyright © Taylor & Francis Group , LLC ISSN : 1050 - 8406 print / 1532 - 7809 online DOI : 10 . 1080 / 10508406 . 2011 . 607007 Learning by Mapping Across Situations Stephen K . Reed Department of Psychology San Diego State University Many types of learning require the mapping of information across situations . The proposed organizational framework extends the cognitive study of mappings across problems to include mappings across representations , solutions , and sociocultural contexts . I apply one - to - one , one - to - many , and partial mappings to analyze repre - sentative cases that include ones studied within alternative frameworks that have extended the cognitive approach . My objective is to support readers in reﬂecting on how mappings inﬂuence learning through asking new questions and providing an approach for answering those questions . My motivation for writing this article can be traced back to my reading of Jean Lave’s ( 1988 ) book Cognition in Practice : Mind , Mathematics , and Culture in Everyday Life . I realized it was an important book but did not read it until approx - imately 10 years after its publication . When I did read it I was surprised to discover that Lave’s critique of the cognitive approach to transfer began with one of my own studies ( Reed , Ernst , & Banerji , 1974 ) . Like many other academics I would rather have my work critiqued than ignored . I was therefore honored that Lave selected our study to represent the limitations of the cognitive approach . Lave’s book began a lively debate of the relative merits of cognitive ( Anderson , Reder , & Simon , 1996 ) and alternative ( Greeno , Smith , & Moore , 1993 ) per - spectives on learning . There have been times when I considered joining this debate , but I have deferred for two reasons . The ﬁrst is that scholars such as John Anderson , Lynn Reder , and Herb Simon had already strongly defended the cognitive approach . The second is that I thought that alternative approaches to transfer based on the situated cognition and sociocultural perspectives were logical extensions of the cognitive approach . The study of transfer in the 1970s Correspondence should be addressed to Stephen K . Reed , CRMSE , 6475 Alvarado Road , Suite 206 , San Diego , CA 92120 . E - mail : sreed @ sunstroke . sdsu . edu 2 REED focused on puzzles such as missionaries and cannibals ( Reed et al . , 1974 ) and the Tower of Hanoi ( Hayes & Simon , 1977 ) . In the 1980s studies shifted to classroom problems such as word problems and physics problems and included investigat - ing the important role of expertise in determining how students approached these problems ( Chi , Glaser , & Rees , 1982 ) . Studying learning outside the laboratory , which began to gather momentum following the publication of Lave’s ( 1988 ) book , is a fruitful extension of this earlier research . These newer alternative perspectives have enhanced understandings of trans - fer , as revealed by articles in the transfer strand of the Journal of the Learning Sciences ( Lobato , 2006 ) . However , there are also elements of commonality between cognitive and alternative approaches that could be further developed . Making the argument that different approaches should build on the cognitive per - spective requires identifying accomplishments that can be applied to alternative approaches . I argue in this article that cognitive theories of analogical reasoning based on mappings of components ( Gentner , 1983 ; Gentner & Markman , 1997 ; Holyoak , 2005 ) form a foundation that can be extended to these other perspectives . My goal is to propose an organizational framework that analyzes learning and transfer from the perspective of mapping across situations . Studying these map - pings provides one approach to ﬁnding commonalities in learning across a variety of situations , including those studied within both the cognitive and alternative perspectives . I selected mapping as the basic unit of analysis because of its generality . I deﬁne a mapping as a link between two nodes in which the link represents a relation and the nodes represent knowledge states . Knowledge states are knowl - edge about physical or generated aspects of the environment , including concepts , parts of diagrams , mathematical symbols , gestures , and causal explanations . They are distributed between internal and external resources . For instance , a knowledge state may result from attending and encoding part of the physical environment , such as noticing that a diagonal line in a diagram can be used as part of a geometric proof . A knowledge state can also result from constructing a diagonal line in the diagram to use in the proof or from retrieving from memory that the proof includes a diagonal line . Examples of relations are “corresponds to , ” “is an example of , ” and “is represented by . ” Theoretical formulations of mappings come primarily from studies of analogi - cal reasoning . For instance , there is a mapping between Adolf Hitler and Saddam Hussein in the analogy between Germany’s invasion of Austria and Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait . The relation connecting the nodes in analogical mappings is “corre - sponds to” because the mapping identiﬁes corresponding elements in the analogy , such as leaders of the invading countries . Other mappings establish hierarchical relations ; a tumor and a fortress are both examples of a central target in variations of Duncker’s radiation problem . Still other mappings occur across representations . The letter a may represent the number of apples in a word problem or the slope of a line in a graph . LEARNING BY MAPPING 3 My plan is to begin with a discussion of cognitive analyses of analogical rea - soning and transfer because this area has received the most attention in mapping theories . I then summarize the views of theorists who have proposed alternative analyses of transfer . I next propose a taxonomy that examines three different kinds of mappings ( one to one , one to many , partial ) across four different types of situa - tions ( problems , representations , solutions , sociocultural contexts ) . I then discuss the implications of the taxonomy for analyzing learning . And ﬁnally , I review how the mapping framework provides a common theme across different theoretical perspectives . ANALOGICAL MAPPINGS The theoretical understanding of mappings has primarily come from the study of analogical reasoning ( Holyoak , 2005 ) . Holyoak stated that two situations are analogous if they share a common pattern of relationships among their elements ( objects and attributes ) , even though the elements themselves may differ across the two situations . A target situation serves as a retrieval cue for a potentially useful analogy ( the source ) . Analogical reasoning is used to formulate a mapping—a set of systematic correspondences—to align elements of the source and target . The mapping can result in new inferences about the target , resulting in greater understanding . Holyoak ( 2005 ) used Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait as an example . President George Bush’s decision to counterattack can be compared to a World War II example in which Hitler occupied Austria . Adolf Hitler and Saddam Hussein are the leaders of the invading forces , Germany and Iraq are the invading coun - tries , Austria and Kuwait are the occupied countries , and Prime Minister Winston Churchill and President George Bush are the leaders of the countries that launch a counterattack ( Spellman & Holyoak , 1992 ) . Applying this analogy therefore requires these mappings : Adolf Hitler → Saddam Hussein Germany → Iraq Austria → Kuwait Winston Churchill → George Bush Notice that the mappings preserve the relationships among the leaders and coun - tries . Adolf Hitler , the leader of Germany , invaded Austria and met a counterattack launched by Winston Churchill . Saddam Hussein , the leader of Iraq , invaded Kuwait and met a counterattack launched by George Bush . There have been a number of detailed computational models of analogical map - pings , including one by Hummel and Holyoak ( 1997 ) . Mappings in their model are guided by three constraints : 4 REED 1 . Structural consistency implies a one - to - one mapping between an element in the source and an element in the target . 2 . Semantic similarity implies that elements with prior semantic similarity ( such as joint membership in a taxonomic category ) should tend to map to each other . 3 . Pragmatic centrality implies that mappings should give preference to elements that are important to goal attainment . Each of these three constraints is relevant to the mappings that I discuss in this article . My focus is on the structure of mappings , emphasizing those mappings that are important for goal attainment ( pragmatic centrality ) . A question that arises from the mapping framework is whether mappings are inherent properties of situations or are constructed by the learner . The answer is both , as explained by Newell and Simon ( 1972 ) in their book Human Problem Solving . Their book provides a detailed documentation of how both the structure of problems ( represented by a search space ) and peoples’ strategies ( represented by a problem space ) inﬂuence problem solving . A search space shows the legal moves at each step in solving a problem and is therefore an objective analysis of the problem . A problem space describes the choices that the problem solver evaluates while solving the problem . Newell and Simon built simulation models of each solver’s problem space by collecting detailed verbal protocols of his or her deliberations while solving the problem . The search space , however , constrains the kinds of decisions required by the problem solver and determines the effectiveness of those decisions . For example , Herb Simon and I developed a simulation model of how students solved a complex version of the missionaries and cannibals problem , which requires transporting ﬁve missionaries and ﬁve cannibals across a river ( Simon & Reed , 1976 ) . Our goal was to predict , for each of the possible legal moves , the average number of times students made that particular move . We developed a successful model based on the assumption that solving the problem required switching from an ineffective balance strategy to an effective means – end strategy . The balance strategy attempts to place an equal number of missionaries and cannibals on each of the two river banks . It is an effective strategy for satisfying the constraint that cannibals cannot outnumber missionaries on either bank but results in entering a blind alley of the search space . Our strategy - shift model illustrates how both the structure of the problem and strategies adopted by the learners combine to determine effective problem solving . Some mappings across situations describe inherent properties of situations . Others describe constructions by the learner . However , as the search space con - strains the problem space , situations constrain constructions . Situations are the starting point for both cognitive and alternative approaches to transfer . Because my examples illustrate mappings from both perspectives I review the challenges raised by the alternative perspectives before proposing a taxonomy . LEARNING BY MAPPING 5 EXAMPLES OF ALTERNATIVE PERSPECTIVES Differences between perspectives has been represented by Alexander ( 2007 ) in a two - dimensional space shown in Figure 1 . One dimension is whether knowledge exists in the mind or within the environment . The other dimen - sion is whether knowledge is individually formed or socially derived . As noted in Figure 1 , various learning perspectives are highly correlated along these two dimensions . Cognitive ( information - processing ) approaches typically study the learning of an individual within a laboratory setting . Sociocultural and situated approaches typically study how individuals learn from one another out - side the laboratory . I refer to the traditional information - processing framework Information - Processing Theory Radical Constructivism Socioculturalism Cognitive Constructivism Situated Cognition Social Constructivism FIGURE 1 A two - dimensional representation of learning frameworks . From Alexander ( 2007 ) ( color ﬁgure available online ) . 6 REED as the mainstream cognitive perspective ( thus allowing for non - information - processing cognitive approaches ) and to other frameworks as alternative perspectives . The following examples present a brief overview of several challenges to the cognitive perspective by theorists working within alternative perspectives . This overview has two purposes . First , it highlights differences between the cogni - tive and alternative perspectives . Second , it provides cases within the alternative perspectives that I later analyze within the mapping - across - situations framework . Although transfer is multifaceted and there are differences among perspectives , there are also commonalities among transfer situations . The mapping - across - situations framework explores these commonalities and extends them to other learning situations that do not involve transfer . Situated Perspective : Lave ( 1988 ) The initial major challenge to the cognitive approach to transfer came in Lave’s ( 1988 ) classic book Cognition in Practice : Mind , Mathematics , and Culture in Everyday Life . In her second chapter—“Missionaries and Cannibals ( Indoors ) ”— Lave analyzed four traditional transfer studies that used missionaries and canni - bals ( Reed et al . , 1974 ) , the Tower of Hanoi ( Hayes & Simon , 1977 ) , Duncker’s radiation problem ( Gick & Holyoak , 1980 ) , and electric circuits ( Gentner & Gentner , 1983 ) . All of these studies examined students’ analogical mapping of structural relations between problems . Lave ( 1988 ) concluded that learning - transfer research clearly falls in the functionalist tradition sketched in chap - ter 1 . Its central characteristics include the separation of cognition from the social world , the separation of form and content implied in the practice of investigating isomorphic problem solving , and a strictly cognitive explanation for continuity in activity across situations . All of these dissociate cognition from its contexts , and help to account for the absence of theorizing about experiments as social situations and cognition as socially situated activity . ( p . 43 , emphasis in the original ) The context for this quote is the subsequent discussion of Lave’s Adult Math Project , which investigated transfer “outdoors” and in which shoppers used math - ematics in the supermarket . The focus of this project was to determine whether mathematics learned in school transfers to the real - world task of using propor - tional reasoning to determine best buys . The investigators recorded information on the prices and quantities of each grocery item mentioned by the shopper to determine whether the shopper had selected the best buy . A subsequent interview presented 12 best - buy problems at home in which the investigator discussed the solution to be certain that the shoppers had not merely guessed the correct answer . The Adult Math Project used four tests to measure the shoppers’ knowledge of how arithmetic procedures are applied to the integers , decimals , and fractions LEARNING BY MAPPING 7 learned in school . There were no signiﬁcant correlations between these four tests and the best - buy home test . The only signiﬁcant correlation with the supermarket purchases occurred for a test of measurement facts . Based on these ﬁndings and some other work using the situative perspective , Lave ( 1988 ) concluded that “all of the studies demonstrated discontinuities in problem - solving processes between situations , and the uncoupling of math performances from schooling except during tests” ( p . 68 ) . Gibsonian Perspective : Greeno et al . ( 1993 ) In a chapter titled “Transfer of Situated Learning , ” Greeno et al . ( 1993 ) empha - sized activities in which a person or a group interacts with objects in a situation . Following Gibson ( 1966 ) , they used the term affordances to refer to relevant prop - erties of objects for supporting activities . Transfer occurs in their framework if the structure of the activity is invariant across the transformation of one situation into the other or , if necessary , a transformation of the activity can be accomplished . Greeno et al . ( 1993 ) contrasted their approach with the symbolic representa - tions used in cognitive theories of transfer . Affordances can be perceived without a symbolic representation of the properties , although symbolic representations are included in their framework when necessary . The interaction of perception and action in their theory mirrors many of the assumptions that were subse - quently emphasized in articles on perceptual symbols systems ( Barsalou , 1999 ) and embodied cognition ( Wilson , 2002 ) , in which perception and action play cen - tral roles in cognition . For example , Greeno et al . argued that “event schemata enable inference of potential states of affairs through a process of perceiving information that speciﬁes the possibility of a transformation in the environment , as perception of an affordance involves perceiving information that speciﬁes the possibility of an action” ( p . 107 ) . Transfer - in - Pieces Perspective : Wagner ( 2010 ) Wagner ( 2010 ) took a more cognitive approach to transfer than either Lave ( 1988 ) or Greeno et al . ( 1993 ) by applying diSessa’s ( 1993 ) “knowledge - in - pieces” framework to the transfer of learning , but his approach is more compatible with Piagetian constructivism ( Piaget , 1970 ) than with information processing . He used the term concept projection as a ﬁne - grained assimilatory structure that allows a person to interpret a situation in a meaningful way and implement a concept within a given situation . Wagner’s ( 2010 ) investigation of students’ attempts to understand the squash problem in Table 1 can serve as an example . The data were collected as part of teaching interviews during an 8 - week summer course on elementary statistics . The problem was part of a unit on the law of large numbers , which states that 8 REED TABLE 1 Problems Requiring the Law of Large Numbers : From Wagner ( 2006 , 2010 ) The Squash Problem The game of squash can be played either to 9 points or to 15 points . Christina does not play squash as well as her friend Angela . Is it Christina’s advantage to prefer either scoring system over the other when she plays against Angela ? The Post Ofﬁce Problem When they turn 18 , American males must register for the draft at the local post ofﬁce . In addition to other information , the height of each male is recorded . The average height of 18 - year - old males is 5 feet 9 inches . Every day for 1 year , 25 men registered at Post Ofﬁce A and 100 men registered at Post Ofﬁce B . At the end of each day , a clerk at each post ofﬁce computed and recorded the average height of the men who had registered there that day . Which would you expect to be true ? ( circle one ) 1 . The number of days in which the average height was 6 feet or more was greater for Post Ofﬁce A than for Post Ofﬁce B . 2 . The number of days in which the average height was 6 feet or more was greater for Post Ofﬁce B than for Post Ofﬁce A . 3 . There is no reason to think that the number of days on which the average height was 6 feet or more was greater for one post ofﬁce than the other . 4 . It is not possible to answer the question . larger samples are more likely than smaller samples to be representative of their parent population . Although the law of large numbers generally refers to popu - lation averages or proportions , neither value is provided in the squash problem . This absence caused ﬁve students to create different concept projections to defend their answers that Christina would have a better chance of winning if she selected the smaller score . Jason and Wilma structured the problem to emphasize perfor - mance quality , Peter focused on the relative position of the scores , Mike talked about the outcome of the game , and Tasha spoke about the percentage of points earned . Wagner’s ( 2006 , 2010 ) transfer - in - pieces framework also differs from the cog - nitive approach by investigating how multiple sources of information , rather than a single - source problem , inﬂuence transfer . I discuss these multiple sources when I later return to Wagner’s ( 2006 ) research . Actor - Oriented Perspective : Lobato ( 2008 ) Lobato ( 2008 ) has also been inﬂuenced by traditional approaches to transfer but proposed that most of the work on transfer by cognitive psychologists has been guided more by their perception of the task than by the learner’s perception of the task . To correct this imbalance , she argued that researchers need to rethink transfer . She contrasted the previous work of cognitive psychologists with a view that she labeled actor - oriented transfer . Table 2 summarizes the differences . LEARNING BY MAPPING 9 TABLE 2 Theoretical Assumptions of Actor - Oriented Transfer Compared to Classical Transfer : From Lobato ( 2008 ) Dimension Classical Transfer Approach Actor - Oriented Transfer 1 . Deﬁnition The application of knowledge learned in one situation to a new situation Generalization of learning ; “similarity making” is a primary process but generalizing can also involve constructing differences and modifying situations 2 . Perspective Observer’s ( expert’s ) Actor’s ( learner’s ) 3 . Research method Experimental methods to identify improved performance between learning and transfer tasks Ethnographic methods to look for the inﬂuence of prior activity on current activity and how learners see situations as similar 4 . Research questions Was transfer obtained ? What conditions facilitate transfer ? What relations of similarity are created ? How are they supported by the environment ? 5 . Surface vs . structure Paired learning and transfer tasks share structural features but differ by surface features Researchers examine learners’ construal of “transfer” settings , acknowledging that a surface feature for an expert may be structurally substantive for a learner 6 . Location of transfer Transfer measures a psychological phenomenon Transfer is distributed across mental , physical , social , and cultural planes 7 . Transfer processes Overlapping symbolic abstract mental representations ( schemes ) Multiple processes , including “focusing phenomena” 8 . Metaphor Static application of knowledge Dynamic production of relations of similarity 9 . Content domain Mathematics is often treated as a set of procedures and transfer as a decontextualized ability The conceptual sense that people make of mathematics is central to the nature of transfer 10 . Abstraction Inductive and individualistic—a common property is extracted Constructive and involves social and individual processes One distinction is that actor - oriented transfer emphasizes perceived similarities among tasks rather than the expert - deﬁned mappings that have been identiﬁed by cognitive psychologists . An implication is that more transfer occurs than has been reported by cognitive psychologists , who are only interested in expert - deﬁned mappings . It can also be seen from Table 2 that Lobato’s actor - oriented view borrows many of the key assumptions of the situated approach ( Greeno et al . , 1993 ) . Perceived similarities are not limited to symbolic representations but can be inﬂu - enced by perceptual constraints and prior activities . In agreement with Wagner 10 REED ( 2010 ) , Lobato and Rhodehamel ( 2010 ) proposed that the regularities noticed by the learner are not inherent in the situation but are constructed by the learner . In addition , transfer is distributed across social and cultural situations . However , there are also differences in emphasis . Whereas Lave ( 1988 ) emphasized the lack of transfer across situations , Lobato ( 2008 ) argued that more transfer occurs than is typically reported by those who study it . An actor - oriented approach to transfer often reveals idiosyncratic ways in which individuals learn . Although some of these may seem random , the nature of learners’ generalizations is constrained by sociocultural practices . Teachers and classroom discussions determine what students notice , as revealed by two diver - gent centers of focus across two mathematics classes ( Lobato & Rhodehamel , 2010 ) . One class treated points , lines , and slopes as mathematical objects , whereas another class treated them as physical objects . Students in the ﬁrst class focused on the slope of a line as an attribute of a relationship between quantities , whereas students in the second class treated slope as a measure of the steepness of a physi - cal object . Sociocultural practices in the classroom are the focus of Engle’s ( 2006 ) analysis of transfer . Framing Perspective : Engle ( 2006 ) According to Engle ( 2006 ) , transfer across contexts can be greatly facilitated if the teacher frames the instruction to encourage transfer . Drawing on the view that tasks are to prepare for future learning ( Bransford & Schwartz , 1999 ) , Engle argued that learning environments enhance transfer if “learners come to under - stand that what they are currently doing is part of a larger intellectual conversation that extends across time” ( p . 457 ) . Engle’s ( 2006 ) analysis builds on cognitive contributions but goes beyond them in proposing a sociocultural account of transfer in which appropriate fram - ing of discussions is essential for success . Table 3 contrasts framing as bounded events with framing as ongoing activities . Framing learning as an ongoing activity encourages students to share their ideas with an extended audience who would be interested in discussing and building on their ideas . Framing should also make it clear that students learn ideas in order to use them , creating an expectation for transfer . Each of these alternative perspectives presents a conceptual framework that dif - fers from the traditional cognitive perspective . Although some of these claims may be incompatible with the cognitive approach , others are extensions that provide more comprehensive interpretations of learning and transfer . The mapping - across - situations taxonomy therefore extends the structural mappings studied by cognitive psychologists to encompass a broader range of applications . LEARNING BY MAPPING 11 TABLE 3 Two Contrasting Ways in Which Learning Situations May Be Interactionally Framed : From Engle ( 2006 ) Frameable Aspects of Learning Situations As Bounded Events As Parts of Open Ongoing Activities Who : Participants • Fixed set • Open , expanding set • Just those co - present • Co - present and imagined When : Temporal horizon • Set starting point • Build on past • Set ending point • Project to future Where : Location • Narrowly deﬁned • Broadly deﬁned • Circumscribed • Extendable What : Topics • Individual topics • Multiple topics at once • Not connected • Linked or embedded How : Roles and practices • Students positioned more passively as recipients , mouthpieces , etc . • Students positioned more actively as respondents , creators , etc . • Predeﬁned procedures • Negotiable processes Why : Purposes • Single purpose • Multiple purposes • Fixed in advance • Can be renegotiated A MAPPING × SITUATION TAXONOMY This article makes two contributions to the study of mappings across situations . First , it distinguishes among three different kinds of mappings : one to one , one to many , and partial . Second , it shows the application of these mappings to four different kinds of situations : problems , representations , solutions , and contexts ( classrooms and cultures ) . Table 4 shows the 12 cells created by this 3 × 4 classiﬁcation of mappings and situations . One type of mapping that is emphasized by Hummel and Holyoak ( 1997 ) is an isomorphic mapping in which there is a one - to - one correspondence across impor - tant elements and relations in the two situations . Those elements and relations that are required to understand one situation uniquely map onto those elements and relations that are required to understand the other situation . In contrast , in a one - to - many mapping , a single element in one situation maps onto more than one element in the other situation . A partial mapping is one in which only some of the 12 REED TABLE 4 Examples From the Proposed Taxonomy for Mapping Across Situations Mapping Problems Representations Solutions Contexts One to one Gick & Holyoak ( 1980 , 1983 ) Greeno et al . ( 1993 ) Reed ( 1997 ) Nunez & Sweetser ( 2006 ) One to many Reed et al . ( 1974 ) Greeno & van de Sande ( 2007 ) Chi & Ohlsson ( 2005 ) Legare & Gelman ( 2008 ) Partial Gentner & Gentner ( 1983 ) Lobato ( 1996 , 2008 ) Rittle - Johnson et al . ( 2009 ) Engle ( 2006 ) elements and relations in one situation map onto the other . Figure 2 shows these three types of mappings . The other dimension in the taxonomy is situation . I distinguish among four kinds of situations . The ﬁrst is mapping across problems . Transfer across problems has been the core of the cognitive approach , typiﬁed by its study of establishing an analogy between problems . Information learned from solving one problem can be helpful for solving or understanding a related problem . A second situation is mapping across different representations , such as text , diagrams , simulations , and mathematical symbols . The challenge here is to coordinate the representations to solve a problem . This area is beginning to attract more interest as multime - dia provides a need to integrate multiple representations ( Reed , 2006 ) . The third situation is mapping across different solutions to the same problem . This case concerns how components of the initial solution are utilized in constructing the second solution and may involve trying to understand another person’s alternative solution . The last situation is context . I use context in the sociocultural sense to refer to the social dynamics of classrooms ( Engle , 2006 ) and cultures ( Legare & Gelman , 2008 ; Nunez & Sweetser , 2006 ) . Mappings therefore can occur across many situations , including entire search spaces ( specifying legal moves and prob - lem states ) , different solutions to the same problem , varieties of diagrams , words with multiple meanings , curriculum learning trajectories , and opposing cultural beliefs . O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O One to one One to many Partial FIGURE 2 Illustration of one - to - one , one - to - many , and partial mappings across situations . The arrows represent the mapping of elements and relations across situations . LEARNING BY MAPPING 13 One change in my extension of mappings from problems to other kinds of situations is that I often focus on only key aspects rather than on the entire sit - uation . The cognitive analysis of transfer across problems typically represents the mappings across entire problems , but this would become cumbersome , if not impossible , as situations become more complex . Emphasis on key aspects of the situation is an important assumption in Lobato’s ( 2008 ) formulation ( focusing phenomena in Table 2 ) , in which classroom instruction may focus on aspects of a lesson that can either facilitate or inadvertently hinder transfer . Emphasizing key aspects is also consistent with the pragmatic centrality constraint in the Hummel and Holyoak ( 1997 ) formulation , in which mappings should give preference to elements that are important for goal attainment . I construct the taxonomy by discussing mapping across problems , representa - tions , solutions , and context with one - to - one , one - to - many , and partial mappings as subsections in each of these sections . Cases from both the cognitive and alter - native perspectives ﬁll the cells . My goal is not to provide algorithms for helping researchers classify their own research into a particular cell . Rather , it is to encour - age readers to reﬂect on how mappings can help provide answers to a variety of questions , such as the following : ● Can instructional techniques that encourage the abstraction and generaliza - tion of solutions in the laboratory do the same in the classroom ? ● Are simple solutions or complex solutions more effective in supporting transfer ? ● Which kinds of scaffolding support linking diagrammatic , symbolic , and textual representations ? ● How can mappings facilitate collaborative learning ? ● How can mappings represent the replacement of indigenous knowledge by Western knowledge ? MAPPING ACROSS PROBLEMS Lave’s ( 1988 ) critique of cognitive psychologists’ research on transfer included studies by Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 ) , Reed et al . ( 1974 ) , and Gentner and Gentner ( 1983 ) . Each of these studies used a mapping framework to investigate trans - fer across problems . Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 ) studied whether students would more likely discover the convergence solution to Duncker’s radiation problem if they were previously exposed to isomorphic variations of the problem . In con - trast to these one - to - one mappings , Reed et al . ( 1974 ) examined the consequences of one - to - many mappings in variations of the missionaries and cannibals prob - lem . Gentner and Gentner’s ( 1983 ) study illustrates partial mappings because they 14 REED proposed that analogies to circuit problems only partially explained key concepts such as capacitance and resistance . This section contrasts the type of mapping used in these three studies to form a foundation for extending these three types to representations , solutions , and contexts . One - to - One Mappings Across Problems Isomorphic problems enable a one - to - one mapping between the components and relations of the two problems so that learners can use the solution of one problem to understand or solve the other problem ( Hummel & Holyoak , 1997 ) . The research of Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 , 1983 ) is perhaps the best known example of this type . Their 1980 study investigated whether more people would discover the convergence solution to Duncker’s radiation problem ( multiple rays converging on a tumor ) if they were ﬁrst exposed to an isomorphic solution . The analogous story described a military problem in which an army had to be divided in order to converge on a fortress . Using the one - to - one mapping required mapping goals , resources , constraints , and solutions across the two problems : Use Army to Capture Fortress → Use Rays to Destroy Tumor Sufﬁciently Large Army → Sufﬁciently Powerful Rays Single Road Constraint → Intense Ray Constraint Converge on Fortress After Dividing Army → Converge on Tumor After Dividing Rays More than half of those who read the story and received a hint to use previous information included the convergence solution among their proposed solutions , compared with only 8 % of those who did not read the story . But when Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 ) omitted the hint to use the story , the number of convergence solutions greatly decreased . Their ﬁndings demonstrated that people could use an isomorphic solution when prompted but did not spontaneously recognize the similarity between the two problems . Gick and Holyoak ( 1983 ) subsequently discovered that people were likely to form a general convergences schema if they read and compared two analogous stories before trying to solve the radiation problem . For example , some students read both the military story and a story about spraying foam on an oil ﬁre by sur - rounding it with many small hoses . Students who described the relation between these two stories were much more likely to think of the convergence solution to the radiation problem than were students who read only a single analogous story . Gick and Holyoak ( 1983 ) proposed that the problem solvers formed a more abstract representation of the solution ( forces converging toward a central tar - get ) that allowed them to overlook the different surface features ( oil ﬁre , fortress , tumor ) . Catrambone and Holyoak ( 1989 ) found support for this interpretation by LEARNING BY MAPPING 15 showing that reading two analogous stories without comparing them was not very helpful . A characteristic of one - to - one mappings that has instructional implications is the facilitation of transfer through schema abstraction . Would these ﬁndings gen - eralize from the laboratory to real - world situations as discussed by Lave ( 1988 ) ? A recent study indicated that they do ( Gentner , Loewenstein , Thompson , & Forbus , 2009 ) . The participants in the ﬁrst experiment were 124 management con - sultants with approximately 15 years of work experience who were attending a multi - day training session to learn negotiation strategies . They received two writ - ten cases that illustrated the principles of a contingent contract . The ﬁrst described the shipment of boots by an Asian manufacturer to a buyer in the United States . The buyer wanted the manufacturer to pay the additional cost of airfreight because he thought the ship would be late . The two ﬁnally agreed that the buyer would pay the airfreight charge if the ship arrived on time but the manufacturer would pay the bill if the ship arrived late . The second case described two brothers who inher - ited a farm . Ben wanted to sell the rights to the farm’s output under a long - term contract for a ﬁxed amount , but Jerry wanted to keep the rights because he thought crop prices would rise . They resolved the conﬂict by deciding they would either sell or keep the farm depending on whether the price of next year’s crop fell or rose . The comparison group was asked to describe the similarities and parallels in the two negotiations . The separate - case group was asked to describe the solu - tion and its probable success after reading each case . All participants were then asked to think of an example from their own experience that embodied the same principle as the two cases . As predicted from the previous laboratory ﬁnd - ings ( Catrambone & Holyoak , 1989 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ) , participants in the comparison group were more likely to retrieve memories from their previous expe - riences that embodied the principle of a contingent contract . They were also more likely to link the two cases ( 88 % vs . 17 % ) and make contingent agreements in later face - to - face negotiations ( 59 % vs . 33 % ) . These ﬁndings provide a successful demonstration of applying a laboratory paradigm to the classroom . One - to - Many Mappings Across Problems Although one - to - one ( isomorphic ) mappings are the foundation of the cognitive study of transfer , a one - to - many mapping across problems reveals new insights about transfer ( Reed et al . , 1974 ) . We investigated transfer between two problems that appeared to have similar search spaces in which the problem states and moves in one problem were similar to the problem states and moves in the other problem . One of the problems was the missionary cannibal ( MC ) problem , in which three missionaries and three cannibals cross a river using a boat that can hold two people 16 REED under the constraint that cannibals can never outnumber missionaries . The other problem was the jealous husbands ( JH ) problem : Three jealous husbands and their wives , having to cross a river , ﬁnd a boat . However , the boat is so small that it can hold no more than two persons . Find the simplest schedule of crossings that will permit all six persons to cross the river so that no woman is left in the company of any other woman’s husband unless her own husband is present . We anticipated , based on our perceived similarity of the two problems , that there would be substantial transfer from one problem to the other . Our ﬁrst experi - ment found no transfer . Our second experiment found some transfer when students were informed about the mapping between the two problems : Husbands corre - spond to missionaries and wives correspond to cannibals . However , even with this hint , there was evidence of transfer only from the JH problem to the MC problem . An explanation for this asymmetrical transfer occurred to us only after we closely examined the mapping between search spaces . There is a many - to - one mapping of moves from the JH problem to the MC problem : Moving a husband corresponds to moving a missionary , and moving a wife corresponds to moving a cannibal . In contrast , there is a one - to - many mapping from the MC to the JH prob - lem because moving a missionary does not specify which husband to move and moving a cannibal does not specify which wife to move . Although all missionar - ies and cannibals are equivalent , all husbands and wives are not because they are paired with one another . For example , the three circles in Figure 2 representing one - to - many mappings might represent moving husbands A and B , B and C , and A and C . Each of these moves maps onto moving two missionaries , but moving two missionaries does not specify which two husbands to move : Two Missionaries ↔ Husbands A and B Husbands A and C Husbands B and C It should therefore be more difﬁcult to map moves from the MC problem to the JH problem because this mapping does not specify a unique move . Our anal - ysis of the mappings between the two problems therefore provided a theoretical explanation of asymmetrical transfer . Partial Mappings Across Problems A third case ( Gentner & Gentner , 1983 ) discussed by Lave ( 1988 ) illustrates par - tial mappings . A similarity between isomorphic and partial mappings is that both are one - to - one mappings between the source and the target . The difference is that LEARNING BY MAPPING 17 one - to - one mappings are sufﬁcient for solving the target problem whereas par - tial mappings are not . The isomorphic variations of the tumor problem provide the key elements for solving these problems through the convergence solution . In contrast , Gentner and Gentner realized that a single analogy was insufﬁcient for understanding the more complex domain of electric circuits . The Gentners therefore identiﬁed two analogies to help students understand electric circuits—ﬂowing waters and teeming crowds . They predicted that stu - dents who used the ﬂowing waters analogy ( pressure of water , ﬂow in a pipe ) should do well on questions about voltage and current because serial and parallel reservoirs combine in the same manner as serial and parallel batteries . In contrast , students with the teeming crowds model should do better on resisters because of the analogy to gates : Pressure of Water → Voltage Flow in a Pipe → CurrentResistance ← Narrowness of a Gate The results of the ﬁrst experiment supported their predictions . In the second experiment , the analogy to ﬂowing waters was not as helpful as expected because students lacked knowledge in this area . Gentner and Gentner ( 1983 ) concluded that mapping from a source has a limited impact on understanding the target when students do not have a good understanding of the source domain . Spiro , Feltovich , Coulson , and Anderson ( 1989 ) discussed practical implica - tions of partial mappings . They proposed that simple analogies help beginners gain a preliminary understanding of complex concepts but can later block fuller understanding if learners never progress beyond the simple analogy . One con - sequence is that instructors need to pay closer attention to how analogies can fail . The authors discussed eight possible failures , including misleading proper - ties , missing properties , a focus on surface descriptions , and wrong grain size . Their remedy was to use multiple analogies to convey the complexity of difﬁcult ideas . The use of multiple analogies is related to the transfer dilemma discussed by D . W . Carraher and Schliemann ( 2002 ) after interviewing two ﬁfth - grade students about their understanding of operations on positive and negative quantities . The students’ responses revealed that they were wrestling with multiple , competing ideas that included their understanding of number lines , arithmetic operations of addition and multiplication , use of the minus sign , and fractions . There was little evidence of transfer from a single problem , as assumed in many laboratory studies of transfer . Use of multiple sources of knowledge increases the difﬁculty of iden - tifying mappings from prior experiences , but this increased complexity should not discourage researchers from making the attempt . 18 REED An admirable effort to discover the use of multiple sources of information is Wagner’s ( 2006 ) microgenetic analysis of how an undergraduate student named Maria gradually constructed a more sophisticated understanding of the law of large numbers . The analysis was based on a 2 - hr interview followed by a sec - ond session that occurred 5 days later . The post ofﬁce problem in Table 1 was one of the ﬁve problems investigated in the study . Maria’s initial approach to the post ofﬁce problem was based on her belief that smaller samples have higher averages than larger samples . She could not defend this belief and had no idea whether it was correct . To help Maria , during the second session the interviewer / tutor ( Wagner ) asked Maria whether a sample of 25 or 100 men would be better to determine the average height of men at her university . Maria correctly responded that a sample of 100 men would be more representative and more accurate . However , she initially applied her knowledge of surveys , in which larger samples were better , to incorrectly select the larger sample when the correct answer was the smaller sample ( as in the post ofﬁce problem ) . Additional interactions with the tutor enabled Maria to understand that because larger samples would more likely result in a sample mean closer to the expected value , smaller samples would more likely result in a sample mean further from the expected value . Larger Samples Are Accurate → 100 Larger Samples Are Correct → 10025 ← Smaller Samples Are Variable Maria used her newly constructed knowledge to see commonalities in prob - lems that she had previously viewed as different . For example , she initially did not see the relation between the post ofﬁce problem and a spinner problem in which the probability of landing on a blue segment was . 70 . She later realized that both involved expected values , although one problem stated a mean and the other a proportion . Many other examples in Wagner’s ( 2006 ) microgenetic analysis of transfer reveal how Maria’s knowledge gradually accumulated by incorporating variations in the content of previous solutions . These examples illustrate how par - tial mappings from solutions can have both negative ( always select large samples ) and positive ( relation between means and proportions ) consequences . These studies demonstrate differences between the cognitive ( Gentner & Gentner , 1983 ; Spiro , Feltovich , Coulson , & Anderson , 1989 ) and alternative approaches to learning . As shown in Table 2 ( Lobato , 2008 ) , the classical approach looks for conditions to facilitate transfer by selecting helpful analo - gies . The actor - oriented approach interviews students to determine their perceived similarities between current and previous instructional material . Both approaches study mappings across problems but from different perspectives . LEARNING BY MAPPING 19 A blend of these two approaches occurs when teachers select analogies online that ﬁt the context of student difﬁculties . Evidence comes from examining a random sample of 25 eighth - grade classrooms that were videotaped as part of the Third International Mathematics and Science Study ( Richland , Holyoak , & Stigler , 2004 ) . A deﬁnition of analogy based on Gentner’s ( 1983 ) structure - mapping model resulted in the classiﬁcation of 103 analogies , 86 of which were initiated by the teachers . When students had difﬁculty , teachers generated analo - gies with higher surface similarities to make the analogies more transparent . The blend occurs because although teachers selected helpful analogies , their selections were based on their understanding of their students’ capabilities . MAPPING ACROSS REPRESENTATIONS Mapping across representations occurs when information from diagrams , formal concepts , mathematical symbols , and formulas is coordinated to produce a solu - tion . All of the examples in this section require mapping components of diagrams to formulas , text , or mathematical symbols . The examples were initially devel - oped within the framework of the situational ( Greeno et al . , 1993 ) , sociocultural ( Greeno & van de Sande , 2007 ) , and actor - oriented ( Lobato , 2008 ) perspectives . Greeno et al . ( 1993 ) discussed Wertheimer’s ( 1959 ) classic problem of transform - ing a trapezoid into a rectangle so that its area can be calculated by using the formula area = length × width . Greeno and van de Sande ( 2007 ) analyzed a stu - dent’s translation of a key phrase in a word problem ( “an even border of ﬂowers” ) into mathematical symbols for solving the problem . Lobato ( 2008 ) studied how students used informal formulas of rise / run to ﬁnd components of a diagram to calculate the slope of a slide . Holyoak ( 2005 ) indicated that models of analog - ical reasoning have generally failed to address how the solution of problems is dependent on the difﬁculty of perceptually encoding key relations . These studies address this issue . One - to - One Mappings Across Representations One - to - one mappings have an advantage over other mappings when all of the solution steps can be transferred to solve another problem . However , only one of multiple solutions to a problem may support a one - to - one mapping . Discovering this solution is therefore advantageous , as demonstrated by Greeno et al . ’s ( 1993 ) analysis of calculating the area of a trapezoid by transforming it into a parallelogram ( Wertheimer , 1959 ) . As discussed previously , Greeno et al . ( 1993 ) argued for a situated approach to transfer in which transfer occurs if the structure of the activity is invariant across situations or if a transformation of the activity can be accomplished . They selected 20 REED FIGURE 3 Geometric ﬁgures used by Wertheimer ( 1959 ) . Wertheimer’s ( 1959 ) investigation of transformations of geometric forms as an example of such an activity . After investigating the students’ ability to transform a parallelogram in order to apply the formula for area as the product of the length and width , Wertheimer studied the more complex forms shown in Figure 3 . He was interested in analyzing both successful and unsuccessful transfer but did not specify the number of successful solutions for the different transformations . Wertheimer’s task provides a promising paradigm to further investigate the number and kind of transformations that are required to match geometric forms ( Hahn , Chater , & Richardson , 2003 ) . For instance , Edwards ( 1991 ) has designed a computer match game in which one geometric form must by modiﬁed to match another by using geometric transformations such as slide , rotate , pivot , reﬂect , and ﬂip . In the Wertheimer forms cuts are required before the transformation is applied . Transforming a ( vertically ) symmetrical trapezoid into a rectangle can be accomplished by cutting one side and sliding it to the other side , as illustrated by the upper left transformation in Figure 3 . Notice , however , that although cut and slide transforms a trapezoid into a rectangle , these operations cannot transform the lower forms ( asymmetrical trapezoids ) in Figure 3 into rectangles . LEARNING BY MAPPING 21 Fortunately , both Wertheimer ( 1959 ) and Greeno et al . ( 1993 ) presented an alternative transformation that has greater generality . This transformation , shown in the upper right of Figure 3 , requires two cuts followed by pivots around a shared point . The two cuts and two pivots can be used to transform all of the forms in Figure 3 . A cut and pivot provide one - to - one mappings on the left side of the symmetrical trapezoids to the left side of the asymmetrical trapezoids . The same mappings also apply to the right side of the ﬁgures . The advantage of the two cut - and - pivot transformations is that they enable students to calculate the areas of all of the Figure 3 forms by transferring the operations from symmetrical to asymmetrical trapezoids : Cut Left Diagonal → Cut Left Diagonal Pivot Left Diagonal → Pivot Left Diagonal Cut Right Diagonal → Cut Right Diagonal Pivot Right Diagonal → Pivot Right Diagonal Readers may wonder why I have discussed this case as a mapping across repre - sentations when I have limited my analysis to geometric forms . Edwards’s ( 1991 ) matching task does involve only transforming geometric forms , but Wertheimer’s ( 1959 ) task requires coordinating representations . The purpose of his transforma - tions is to change a form into a rectangle so that the formula for a rectangle ( area = length × width ) can be applied . These geometric mappings are therefore guided by the pragmatic centrality principle ( Hummel & Holyoak , 1997 ) , which gives preferences to mappings that are important for satisfying the goal of applying a formula . An instructional challenge is to provide a scaffolded learning environment that can support a constructivist approach for these kinds of complex learning activities ( Hmelo - Silver , Duncan , & Chinn , 2007 ) . As children grow older , they are able to perform more complex transformations of shapes—transformations that are sup - ported by interactive visual learning tools on the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics website ( http : / / www . nctm . org ) . The Shape Cutter tool was one of three such tools selected by Liang and Sedig ( 2009 ) for redesign . They applied two frameworks to guide the redesign . The micro - level framework speciﬁes low - level actions such as composing , cutting , fragmenting , searching , rearranging , and annotating ( Sedig & Sumner , 2006 ) . The macro - level framework supports more global pedagogical objectives such as focus , ﬂow , and cognitive ofﬂoading to reduce memory load ( Sedig & Liang , 2006 ) . Their redesigned Shape Cutter tool enables learners to ﬁnd solutions to geo - metric problems by ( a ) constructing a polygonal shape , ( b ) partitioning the shape into smaller polygonal parts , and ( c ) dispersing and rearranging the parts by using transformational geometry . For example , the hints button could remind students about geometric forms ( such as a rectangle and triangle ) that have a formula for 22 REED FIGURE 4 The garden border problem . From Greeno and van de Sande ( 2007 ) . calculating area and suggest approaches to partitioning a shape into parts in which the formulas could be applied . One - to - Many Mappings Across Representations The example in this cell focuses on how a student’s one - to - many mapping from text to mathematical symbols resulted in a more complex solution to a problem than the one - to - one mapping constructed by the teacher . It discusses Greeno and van de Sande’s ( 2007 ) use of the garden border problem shown in Figure 4 to illustrate a shift in a teacher’s perspective to understand that a student’s different approach to a problem can provide an alternative solution . I selectively focus on part of the verbal transcripts to illustrate the important role that mapping across representations played in constructing this perspectival understanding . The key difference between the two solutions is how the teacher and student use the phrase “an even border of ﬂowers . ” The teacher represents the width of this border by the unknown variable ( such as w ) and constructs an equation to represent the area of the inner rectangle by multiplying the length of this rectangle by its width : ( 72 − 2 w ) × ( 40 − 2 w ) = 1 , 680 This equation follows a previous calculation that the area of the inner rectangle is 1 , 680 square feet . Because the border is even , 2 w can be subtracted from both the length and width of the outer rectangle . However , this one - to - one mapping does not occur for the student ( Gillian ) , who represents the border’s width by two variables : w 1 = ( 72 – y ) / 2 with respect to the length of the outer rectangle and w 2 = ( 40 – x ) / 2 with respect to the width of the outer rectangle . LEARNING BY MAPPING 23 Width of Flower Border → w 1 = ( 72 − y ) / 2 w 2 = ( 40 − x ) / 2 van de Sande and Greeno’s ( 2011 ) verbal transcript of the interaction shows how the teacher ( Ms . Sanchez ) attempted to guide her students toward representing width by a single variable but likely inadvertently inﬂuenced them to represent width by two variables . Early in the transcript Ms . Sanchez states that “we need to have a variable to write the equation” and asks students what the variable would be . However , to represent width as a variable she places a question mark to rep - resent the width of the left vertical border and a second question mark question mark to represent the width of the top horizontal border . Her intention presumably is to show students that the question mark is the variable , but it likely encouraged Gillian to represent the border’s width by two variables . Another student ( Hannah ) understands how this representation could work by stating “Couldn’t you use substitution since you have two equations ? I mean , you could make another equation x times y equals 1680 . ” Ms . Sanchez informs the class that they now have only one equation , but Hannah later replies , “72 minus y divided by 2 and 40 minus x divided by 2 . They’re both going to equal the same number . ” After Ms . Sanchez equates the two expressions on the board , she replies , Ok . This is very interesting . This is a completely different way than I looked at it . I only had 1 ( holding up one ﬁnger ) variable when I wrote this , so this is very . . . . this is hard for me to think about . After further interactions with the class , Ms . Sanchez states , I started with the question mark ( pointing to the question mark on the diagram ) and my question mark was my variable . But , for you guys . . . you did it this way ( indicating the dimensions of the inner rectangle ) and I don’t see why that wouldn’t work as well . She then encourages the class to ﬁgure out the values of x and y by using the two equations on the board . Gillian and Ms . Sanchez discovered that Hannah’s beginning of a solution could be completed to solve the problem . This second solution was not as efﬁ - cient as the one discovered by Ms . Sanchez because it required two equations to solve for the two unknown variables . However , Ms . Sanchez recognized that the two equations provided a learning opportunity for the class to practice solving for two unknown values . I return to the issue of the relative advantages of simple and complex solutions when discussing partial mappings across solutions . 24 REED Partial Mappings Across Representations My previous cases of partial mappings across problems analyzed learning situa - tions in which students needed more than one problem to solve another problem . Each problem provided only part of the solution . Another situation that involves partial mappings is assigning partial credit to a student’s solution . Although an instructional problem may have provided sufﬁcient information for solving a test problem , the student’s solution is only partially correct . An example of mappings across representations occurs when words in a deﬁ - nition , such as rise and run in the deﬁnition of slope , are mapped onto a diagram . This example is part of a study that Lobato ( 2008 ) analyzed in her chapter on the distinction between cognitive and actor - oriented approaches to transfer . In that study , ﬁve high school classes of Algebra I students participated in a 6 - week unit on slope and linear functions in which slope was calculated by dividing the rise ( vertical change ) of a line by its run ( horizontal change ) . The results indicated that 87 % of the 139 students subsequently found the slope for previously encoun - tered staircases , but only 40 % of the students transferred this knowledge to ﬁnd the slope of a playground slide . Lobato interviewed 15 of the students , and some of their identiﬁcations of rise and run are shown in Figure 5 ( Lobato , 1996 ) . According to my cognitive per - spective , many of the students displayed a partial mapping from the staircase to the slide task as revealed by their partial success . For instance , Jarek , Lisa , and Kim correctly identiﬁed rise but incorrectly identiﬁed run . Rolando correctly identiﬁed run but misidentiﬁed rise . Latasha hedged her bet by displaying a one - to - two mapping to the transfer task , whereas Nick showed a correct one - to - one mapping if height and base are accepted as synonyms for rise and run . By fol - lowing a cognitive perspective , I am focusing on correct mappings , much like a teacher would assign partial credit on the basis of how much of the solution is correct . However , according to the actor - oriented perspective , there are more mappings between the two tasks because most students did identify both rise and run in the slide diagrams . From an actor - oriented perspective , seven of the nine students used a one - to - one mapping of rise and run onto a part of the slide diagram . Nick used a one - to - one mapping of “height” and “base” onto diagram parts . Latasha used a one - to - many mapping of rise and run by mapping each onto two parts of the diagram . Identifying incorrect mappings can be helpful in redesigning the curriculum to improve transfer . A particularly challenging aspect of the slide task is that the cor - rect line has to be constructed . This is a problem for ecological approaches that argue that all relevant information is in the environment ( Gibson , 1966 ) . It also makes a structure - mapping approach more difﬁcult to apply because an element of the target has to be created to establish the mapping . My own bias is to initially LEARNING BY MAPPING 25 FIGURE 5 Students’ identiﬁcation of rise and run in slides . From Lobato ( 1996 ) . present worked examples that include the critical parts of a diagram before ask - ing students to subsequently construct them . However , an alternative would be to challenge students with a difﬁcult assignment to motivate them for future learning ( Bransford & Schwartz , 1999 ) . Another challenge for students is the selection of a vertical line to represent “rise . ” The word rise in my Oxford Guide to the English Language includes “upward slope” among its deﬁnitions . References to the rise of a hill or to a sunrise 26 REED may refer to an angle rather than to vertical extent . One - to - many mappings from a word to its deﬁnition create the opportunity for misunderstandings . Differences between the popular and technical meanings of the word may have contributed to the frequent labeling of the diagonal line in Figure 5 as “rise” rather than the vertical line . Although I used partial mappings as a context for discussing partially correct identiﬁcations , I used one - to - one mappings to include incorrect identiﬁcations and one - to - many mappings from a word to its deﬁnitions as a possible contributor to the incorrect identiﬁcations . These analyses demonstrate that the application of different mappings depends on the focus within a task . This focus also depends on what is important to the theorist . Lobato ( personal communication , March 9 , 2011 ) conceives of the slope examples presented here as instances of one - to - one mappings rather than partial mappings . From an actor - oriented view , she focuses on one’s conceptualization of a situation as what is being mapped rather than a correspondence between elements of a formula and parts of a drawing . For exam - ple , if Jarek comprehends slope situations as involving stair - steps ( i . e . , something with visually connected up and over components that suggests climbing in an imagined state of affairs ) , then he has made a “complete” or one - to - one mapping of his conceptualization of slope from the initial learning to the transfer situation . MAPPING ACROSS SOLUTIONS The study of mapping across solutions examines the relation between alternative solutions to the same problem . At one extreme there is no mapping because the new solution is constructed independently of the old solution . At the other extreme the new solution is constructed entirely by transforming the old solution through one - to - one mappings ( Reed , 1999 ) . In between are partial mappings in which one solution is more economical than the other because it requires fewer steps ( Rittle - Johnson , Star , & Durkin , 2009 ) . One - to - One Mappings Across Solutions One - to - one mappings across solutions occur when the second solution is a deriva - tion of the ﬁrst . For example , I initially represented the solution of a mixture problem as a weighted average to show its relation to other weighted average problems such as average speed ( Reed , 1984 ) . If C1 and P1 are the concentration and proportion of the lower concentration and C2 and P2 are the concentration and proportion of the higher concentration , then the concentration of the mixture is Concentration = C1 × P1 + C2 × P2 = 20 % × . 3 + 40 % × . 7 = 34 % LEARNING BY MAPPING 27 for an example in which 3 liters of a 20 % solution are mixed with 7 liters of a 40 % solution . I subsequently used mixture problems to explore students’ reasoning about lin - ear functions ( Reed & Evans , 1987 ) . Students saw a graph of the function , such as the concentration of a mixture continuously increasing from 20 % to 40 % as the proportion of the higher concentration varies from 0 to 1 . The instruction focused on three characteristics of the function : range ( the concentration is between 20 % and 40 % ) , monotonicity ( the concentration increases as the proportion of the higher concentration increases ) , and linearity ( this increase is linear ) . I initially had no idea if the algebraic and graphical solutions could be related . Although the weighted average equation is not linear , I was able to derive an equation from it that is a linear function of P2 : C1 × P1 + C2 × P2 → C1 × ( 1 − P2 ) + C2 × P2 → C1 − C1 × P2 + C2 × P2 → C1 + P2 × ( C2 − C1 ) Notice that the derivation consists of a sequence of one - to - one mappings from one symbolic expression to another symbolic expression if chunks such as ( 1 – P2 ) are included in the mapping . The last expression provides an alternative solution to the problem that represents concentration as a linear function : Concentration = C1 + P2 × ( C2 − C1 ) = 20 % + . 7 × ( 40 % − 20 % ) = 34 % . The y - intercept is the lower concentration ( C1 ) and the slope is the difference between the two concentrations ( C2 – C1 ) . The derivation enabled me to see how my two different conceptual representations of mixtures were , in fact , different solutions to the same problem ( Reed , 1999 ) . At a general level such transformations can be represented in a search space in which one problem state is mapped onto ( transformed into ) another prob - lem state by the application of an operator ( Newell & Simon , 1972 ) . Applying operators in a search space can therefore be represented as a sequence of one - to - one mappings between problem states . Arriving at the goal state in most cases will simply solve the problem ( such as moving all of the people across the river ) rather than generating a new solution . However , viewing a mixture prob - lem either as a weighted average or as a linear function are two very different perspectives that are connected through the derivation of one solution from the other . Another example of mappings in a derivation occurs when a computational formula , such as for calculating variance , is derived from a conceptual formula based on the deﬁnition of a concept . Such cases create an opportunity for students to practice using the means – end analysis heuristic . As described by Newell and 28 REED Simon ( 1972 ) , this is the primary heuristic for transforming an initial state ( the conceptual formula ) into the goal state ( the computational formula ) by gradually eliminating differences between the current problem state and the goal state . For instance , in the previous mixture example , the weighted average formula con - tained both the proportion of the weaker concentration ( P1 ) and the proportion of the stronger concentration ( P2 ) . Because the formula for the linear function con - tained only P2 , I had to eliminate P1 in one of the solution steps . Representing P1 as 1 – P2 allowed me to eliminate this difference between the initial state and the goal state . Derivations therefore not only provide a learning opportunity for understanding the relation between two different solutions to the same problem but provide an opportunity for practicing problem - solving heuristics . One - to - Many Mappings Across Solutions I hedge in this section because its content is more about one - to - many mappings across concepts than about one - to - many mappings across solutions . My justiﬁca - tion is that making connections among concepts supports many of the activities ( including constructing solutions ) that I discuss in the taxonomy . In addition , my deﬁnition of a mapping as a relation between two nodes is the unit for representing conceptual knowledge in semantic networks . Relations among concepts are frequently represented as semantic networks in which a person’s knowledge base consists of many concepts ( nodes ) connected by relations ( links ) . One way of characterizing learning is through an increase in the number of connections in a semantic network ( Chi & Ohlsson , 2005 ) , as demon - strated by comparing a child’s knowledge base for 20 familiar and 20 less familiar dinosaurs . Chi and Koeske ( 1983 ) constructed a network based on interviews to discover the child’s knowledge organization of the 20 less familiar dinosaurs . Many nodes had multiple links , illustrating a one - to - many mapping from one con - cept to other concepts ( attributes or other dinosaurs ) . There were even more links among concepts in the child’s knowledge of the 20 familiar dinosaurs . The clusters were more densely connected and less diffused . Dense connections among concepts is an ideal that is often not achieved . Tytler and Prain ( 2009 ) concluded that children’s conceptual understanding is fragmentary ( diSessa , 1993 ) after tracking nine children throughout 7 years of primary school . diSessa’s ( 1993 ) knowledge - in - pieces framework proposes that novices typically rely on contextually sensitive knowledge for predicting and explaining physical phenomena rather than on systematic theories that integrate these phenomena . My semantic network interpretation of the knowledge - in - pieces framework is that such a network consists of isolated fragments rather than dense connections . One consequence of isolated fragments is that it makes information more dif - ﬁcult to recall . Consider the following simple story about ants ( Kieras , 1978 ) : LEARNING BY MAPPING 29 ( 1 ) The ants ate the jelly . ( 2 ) The ants were hungry . ( 3 ) The ants were in the kitchen . ( 4 ) The kitchen was spotless . ( 5 ) The jelly was grape . ( 6 ) The jelly was on the table . ( 7 ) The table was wooden . My semantic network representation of this story uses a link to connect the two concepts ( such as “ants” and “jelly” ) in each sentence by the verb ( “ate” ) . The organization of the story enables me to attach the information in each new sentence to a node ( concept ) that already exists in the network . For instance , I can attach “were” and “hungry” in the second sentence as a link to the “ants” node created from the ﬁrst sentence . In contrast , the reorganization of the same seven sentences in the order 4 , 7 , 2 , 3 , 5 , 6 , and 1 creates fragments . I cannot attach the information in the sec - ond sentence ( “The table was wooden” ) to my network representation of the ﬁrst sentence ( “The kitchen was spotless” ) because the two sentences contain differ - ent information . The same is true of the third sentence ( “The ants were hungry” ) , so my network begins as isolated fragments . Eventually I can make connections among the fragments but , according to Kieras’s ( 1978 ) ﬁndings , the damage has already been done . His participants recalled less information if they read the sec - ond story . This simple example shows the importance of constructing curricula that make explicit connections to previous material . Another method for helping students build densely connected semantic net - works is to require them to literally construct the networks through concept mapping . Concept maps identify the relations among concepts and are instruc - tional tools built on the theoretical idea of semantic networks ( O’Donnell , Dansereau , & Hall , 2002 ) . Diagramming the connections among ideas is help - ful when assessment measures learners’ organization of knowledge . Requiring students to construct concept maps of information in a general science text signif - icantly improved scores on short - answer and essay tests but did not signiﬁcantly improve scores on a multiple - choice test ( Holley & Dansereau , 1984 ) . The organization of knowledge into densely connected semantic networks also supports problem solving . Wagner ( 2006 ) adopted diSessa’s ( 1993 ) knowledge - in - pieces framework to discuss his ﬁndings about Maria’s difﬁculties in making connections to prior concepts and solutions . Although solving the post ofﬁce prob - lem requires the use of the law of large numbers , Maria did not regard this law as relevant because of her fragmented understanding created by linking the law to a particular context . Another problem - solving example that involves both networks and mappings is the ability of students to select an appropriate diagram ( network , hierarchy , matrix ) for solving a problem . Novick and Hurley ( 2001 ) pointed out that making good selections depends on understanding the differences between these repre - sentations . The one - to - many mappings prevalent in networks do not occur in hierarchies when moving from smaller to larger categories . The single path can be represented by one - to - one mappings across categories such as brontosaur → dinosaur → reptile → animal . In a matrix there are no links , so it does not make 30 REED sense to talk about moving along pathways . In terms of mappings , the one - to - many mappings in networks are replaced by one - to - one mappings for moving up hierarchies and no mappings for moving across cells in a matrix . Understanding these mappings should therefore facilitate transfer of representations across different problems ( Novick & Hmelo , 1994 ) . Partial Mappings Across Solutions Partial mappings across solutions are relevant to comparing the efﬁciency of solu - tions . I previously raised the issue of efﬁciency when discussing two different solutions of the garden border problem ( Greeno & van de Sande , 2007 ; van de Sande & Greeno , 2009 ) . The single equation constructed by Ms . Sanchez was more efﬁcient than the pair of equations constructed by her students . Rittle - Johnson et al . ( 2009 ) discovered that asking seventh - and eighth - grade students to compare two solutions for solving the same problem was helpful when they had the appropriate prior knowledge . One of the solutions showed a shortcut method . In the following example the ﬁrst method requires the use of multiplica - tion ( × ) , subtraction ( – ) , and division ( ÷ ) . The second method requires the use of only division and subtraction : 3 ( x + 1 ) = 15 × 3 ( x + 1 ) = 15 ÷ 3 x + 3 = 15 − x + 1 = 15 − 3 x = 12 ÷ x = 4 x = 4 Students who were familiar with one of the two methods typically noticed that one method required fewer steps or was more efﬁcient than the other . Comparing solutions for these students produced ﬂexible knowledge of procedures . In con - trast , students who were not familiar with either method beneﬁted more from the sequential presentation of the solutions . Generating and comparing different solutions to a problem is part of a col - laborative problem - solving method that Alan Schoenfeld ( 1985 ) used in his mathematics classes at Berkeley . The class often produced three or four differ - ent solutions to the same problem . After arriving at a solution , Schoenfeld led a discussion regarding its efﬁciency and whether some discarded ideas offered promise for an alternative solution . Solutions with fewer steps are more efﬁcient for solving a problem , but sim - plicity can be a disadvantage when the solution is transferred to solve a more complex problem . Consider the following problem : Tina and Wilt are sitting 4 meters apart on a seesaw . Tina weighs 65 kg and Wilt weighs 80 kg . How far from the fulcrum must Tina sit to balance the seesaw ? 65 × d = 80 × ( 4 – d ) LEARNING BY MAPPING 31 The correct equation shows that the product of weight and distance from the fulcrum must be equal for Tina and Wilt for the fulcrum to balance . This is a difﬁcult problem for students in a college algebra class , so we gave them the solution to an analogous problem to help them solve it ( Reed , Ackinclose , & Voss , 1990 ) . Some students received a solution to a simpler problem : Laurie weighs 60 kg and is sitting 165 cm from the fulcrum of a seesaw . Bill weighs 55 kg . How far from the fulcrum must Bill sit to balance the seesaw ? 60 × 165 = 55 × d The simpler solution provides only a partial mapping to the test problem because Laurie’s distance from the fulcrum is stated directly ( 165 cm ) in the example but Wilt’s distance is stated as a relation ( 4 – d ) in the test problem . Other students received a solution to a more complex analogous problem : Dan and Susie are sitting 3 meters apart on a seesaw . Mary is sitting 1 meter behind Susie . Dan weighs 70 kg . Susie weighs 25 kg and Mary weighs 20 kg . How far from the fulcrum must Susie sit to balance the seesaw ? 20 × ( d + 1 ) + 25 × d = 70 × ( 3 – d ) This solution contains more information than is needed but it does contain the necessary information for representing distance relations . Reed et al . ( 1990 ) evaluated the hypothesis that example solutions that are simpler than the test problems would be less effective than example solutions that are more complex . The rationale is that applying a more complex solution requires eliminating excess information , which should be easier than generating missing information from the partial mappings . The results from students in col - lege algebra classes supported the predictions . For instance , 13 % of the students who received the simpler solution solved the fulcrum test problem , compared to 47 % of the students who received the more complex solution . Only 3 % of the students in both groups solved the test problem on the pretest . Students , however , did not show a preference for the more complex solutions when offered the choice of seeing one of the two solutions . Instead , they selected analogous examples on the basis of perceived similarity to the test problems . Examples perceived as more similar to the test problems were not more effec - tive than problems perceived as less similar to the test problems . The mapping of symbols , rather than perceived similarity , therefore determined successful trans - fer . Instruction on how these mappings inﬂuence the effectiveness of examples might improve students’ decisions in selecting analogous solutions , as compar - isons of alternative solutions to the same problem were helpful for students who had some familiarity with algebra ( Rittle - Johnson et al . , 2009 ) . 32 REED MAPPING ACROSS CONTEXTS Mapping across contexts occurs in the rich environments studied within the socio - cultural tradition . The sociocultural study of transfer and conceptual change has been more social than cultural , so I examine cultural inﬂuences to illustrate both one - to - one and one - to - many mappings . The two cases illustrate different ways in which a culture can respond to the introduction of Western beliefs . One - to - one mappings occur when the beliefs of one culture replace corresponding beliefs of another culture ( Nunez & Sweetser , 2006 ) . One - to - many mappings occur when beliefs from both cultures are used to construct explanations ( Legare & Gelman , 2008 ) . Both of these examples illustrate conceptual change following exposure to another culture . The third case involves students in a ﬁfth - grade classroom who were participating in a unit on endangered species ( Engle , 2006 ) . Partial mappings show how they transferred their explanations about whales to other endangered species . One - to - One Mappings Across Contexts Cultures become Westernized when their traditional actions are replaced by actions used in Western cultures . The substitution of an action from one culture for an action in another culture represents a one - to - one mapping across contexts . Such substitutions have begun to appear in the Amerindian language spoken by the Aymara in the Andean highlands of South America ( Nunez & Sweetser , 2006 ) . In Western culture the future lies in front , and the past lies behind . However , the words and gestures used in the Aymara language reverse the space – time metaphor . Their future lies behind the body because it is unseen , and their past lies in front of the body because it has been seen . Interviews of nine older ( 65 – 84 years old ) Aymara revealed that , with a single exception , they always used a forward gesture to refer to the past ( Nunez & Sweetser , 2006 ) . However , the interviews of six younger ( 36 – 64 years old ) Aymara revealed that only one always referred to the past with a forward gesture . The others had mapped the Aymara concepts and gestures onto Western representations : Past Is in Front → Past Is Behind Forward Gesture for Past → Backward Gesture for Past Future Is Behind → Future Is in Front Backward Gesture for Future → Forward Gesture for Future These mappings are one to one because a backward gesture in the Aymara language maps onto a forward gesture in the Western culture and a forward gesture in the Aymara language maps onto a backward gesture in the Western culture . LEARNING BY MAPPING 33 Reversing the meaning of forward and backward gestures is an example of a particular kind of one - to - one mapping that Ross ( 1987 ) labeled cross map - pings . He studied mathematics problems in which he systematically varied the correspondence between objects in the example solution and objects in the test problems . One test problem had identical objects that had the same roles as in the example—for instance , mechanics choosing which cars to service . Another test problem had identical objects but reversed the roles in the example—for instance , the owners of cars choosing among the mechanics . Ross found that using the same objects with identical roles produced much better performance ( 74 % cor - rect ) than a neutral condition ( 54 % correct ) , but using the same objects with reversed roles produced the worst performance ( 37 % correct ) . The difﬁculty of cross mappings provides instructors with the opportunity to examine their stu - dents’ depth of understanding by presenting examples in which mappings are particularly challenging . One - to - Many Mappings Across Contexts One - to - one mappings occur when a new procedure replaces an old procedure . The Aymara illustrated this transition by reversing the relation between space and time . In contrast , both indigenous and Western traditions may simultaneously play important roles in determining thinking . Such cases illustrate a one - to - many mapping in which two different sets of beliefs provide a basis for explanations . Legare and Gelman’s ( 2008 ) study of children and adults in two Sesotho - speaking South African communities provides a clear case of one - to - many mappings from two belief systems . The participants were 366 adults and 5 - , 7 - , 11 - , and 15 - year - olds where both indigenous and Western biomedical knowledge were available . However , in spite of biological knowledge , witchcraft continued to be an important explanatory framework for interpreting illness and coexisted along with the biological explanations . Tribal members did not consider the two frameworks to be inconsistent but rather sources of complementary causal information . The investigators found three ways in which coexistence survived in explana - tions of AIDS . The ﬁrst , juxtaposition , refers to using both frameworks but not in an integrated manner . Examples include “Might be unprotected sex and bewitch - ment” and “Having so many enemies causes bewitchment , and maybe unfaithful partners cause AIDS too” ( p . 635 ) . In proximal / distal explanations , witchcraft provides the “why” ( distal ) cause and biology provides the “how” ( proximal ) cause . Examples include “A witch can make a condom weak , and break” and “Witchcraft can make you have sex with someone who has AIDS” ( p . 635 ) . Real versus ﬁctitious explanations propose that someone can have an incurable dis - ease that is disguised as AIDS . Examples include “Witchcraft can cause a disease that acts like AIDS” and “The spell was supposed to look like AIDS” ( p . 635 ) . 34 REED Each of the three kinds of coexistence illustrates an interpretation of an event by combining causes from both cultures : Explanations of AIDS → Biological Causes Witchcraft Legare and Gelman ( 2008 ) found that explanations based on witchcraft declined with age during childhood and adolescence but increased again during adulthood . They interpreted these ﬁndings as evidence that the explicit informa - tion provided in school that witchcraft is not a cause of AIDS does not seem to have a lasting impact into adulthood . There is also evidence that explanations based on witchcraft are not caused by a lack of biological knowledge . Participants understood the biological explanations of AIDS better than the biological expla - nations of ﬂu but were as likely to use bewitchment explanations for AIDS as for ﬂu . Partial Mappings Across Contexts Partial mappings constitute frequent mappings across contexts because much of learning consists of integrating some old ( mapped ) knowledge with new knowledge . However , the relevance of old knowledge is not always transpar - ent . According to Engle’s ( 2006 ) framing perspective ( see Table 3 ) , transfer across contexts can be greatly facilitated if the teacher frames the instruction to encourage transfer across different instructional units . The framing helps students determine which knowledge should and should not transfer across units . Engle ( 2006 ) studied a ﬁfth - grade classroom that was participating in an endangered species unit under the fostering - a - community - of - learners guidelines ( Brown & Campione , 1994 ) . Groups of four to ﬁve students focused on a par - ticular animal group and researched why that animal group is , or has been , endangered . Transfer was measured by the sophistication of students’ pre - and post - explanations of the endangerment of other species . Engle constructed mul - ticausality diagrams for the group’s collective explanations and used cognitive measures , such as those developed by van Dijk and Kintsch ( 1983 ) and Chi , Huchinson , and Robin ( 1989 ) , to measure the causal structure of the explanations . Analysis of such diagrams revealed a signiﬁcant increase in the number of causal links per node from 0 . 94 during preassessment to 1 . 54 during postassess - ment . In the postassessment interviews students derived more than one speciﬁc result from each habitat feature , often coordinating them . The interviews regard - ing mudskippers revealed many causes , such as the height of tides , the number of predators , and the amount of food , that were not part of the whale explanation based on birthrate and hunting . The ﬁnding that students had generalized their LEARNING BY MAPPING 35 multicausal explanations is consistent with the structure - mapping framework pro - posed by Gentner ( 1983 ) , in which higher order relations play an important role in transfer : Multicausality for Whales → Multicausality for Mudskippers ( Birthrate ) ( Tides ) ( Hunting ) ( Food ) Transfer is partial in Engle’s ( 2006 ) case because the principle of multicausal - ity is transferred but not the speciﬁc causes . This partial mapping differs from one - to - one mappings , such as in the convergence isomorphs studied by Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 , 1983 ) . The important components of those solutions map across problems : Using an army to capture the fortress maps onto using rays to destroy the tumor , and the single road constraint maps onto the intense ray con - straint . In contrast , causes that threaten whales ( birthrate , hunting ) do not map onto speciﬁc causes that threaten mudskippers ( tides , food ) . This mapping might be considered categorical because causes map across the two situations but not the alignment of speciﬁc causes . This partial mapping is productive because the students distinguish between what should and should not be transferred . Engle’s ( 2006 ) analysis builds on cognitive contributions but goes beyond them in proposing a situational account of transfer in which appropriate framing of dis - cussions is essential for success . Table 3 contrasts framing as bounded events with framing as ongoing activities . The teacher framed the students’ participa - tion by encouraging them to share their ideas with an extended audience who would be interested in discussing and building on their ideas . Framing also made it clear that students were learning ideas in order to use them , creating an expecta - tion for transfer . Framing should therefore increase the likelihood of appropriate mappings . CONTRIBUTIONS Cases in the taxonomy include examples from both traditional and alternative perspectives to show that mappings offer one approach for ﬁnding commonali - ties among these different perspectives . The taxonomy and examples make the following contributions . Types of Mappings Most of the work on analogical reasoning , particularly as captured in compu - tational models , has focused on one - to - one mappings . The proposed taxonomy distinguishes among three types of mappings—one to one , one to many , and partial—to organize research on learning . 36 REED For example , there is a one - to - one mapping from the fortress problem to Duncker’s radiation problem ( Gick & Holyoak , 1980 ) , a one - to - many mapping from the missionaries and cannibals problem to the jealous husbands problem ( Reed et al . , 1974 ) , and a partial mapping from the ﬂowing waters and teeming crowds analogies to electric circuits ( Gentner & Gentner , 1983 ) . Types of Situations Most of the work on analogical reasoning has focused on mappings across prob - lems . The proposed taxonomy extends the study of mappings across problems to include mappings across representations , solutions , and sociocultural contexts . For example , the use of a variable in an equation to represent the width of a garden border ( Greeno & van de Sande , 2007 ) requires mapping across repre - sentations , the comparison of two different solutions to a problem ( Rittle - Johnson et al . , 2009 ) illustrates mapping across solutions , and reliance on both indige - nous and Western interpretations of AIDS ( Legare & Gelman , 2008 ) illustrates mapping across sociocultural contexts . Geometric Forms Most of the work on analogical reasoning has focused on mappings across verbal concepts . Cases in the taxonomy include mappings of components in geometric forms . One example is the application of cut - and - pivot operations on diagonals to convert trapezoids into rectangles ( Green et al . , 1993 ) . Another example is iden - tifying segments in diagrams that can be used to ﬁnd the slope of a line ( Lobato , 1996 , 2008 ) . Multiple Sources of Information Most of the traditional work on transfer has focused on mappings from a single problem ( D . W . Carraher & Schliemann , 2002 ) . Cases in the taxonomy include mappings from multiple sources of information . For instance , Maria used infor - mation from several problems to understand the application of sample size to the post ofﬁce problem in Table 1 ( Wagner , 2006 ) . Constructions Most of the work on analogical reasoning has focused on mappings across ele - ments that are part of the described problem . Cases in the taxonomy include mappings across elements that are constructed by the learner . For example , stu - dents who participated in a unit on why whales could be an endangered species LEARNING BY MAPPING 37 subsequently had to construct possible causes of why mudskippers could be an endangered species ( Engle , 2006 ) . IMPLICATIONS FOR LEARNING I tried to state some learning implications of the mapping framework as I discussed cases in the taxonomy . I continue this discussion here in my responses to six questions . Is There Direct Evidence That Mappings Inﬂuence Learning ? Yes . Research on the effectiveness of solutions for solving word problems sup - ports the prediction that success in mapping corresponding quantities across problems inﬂuences transfer ( Reed , 1987 ) . Students received a detailed solution to a mixture problem and to a work problem and then had to construct equations for four variations of each solution . The four variations included two problems that were isomorphic ( different story , same solution ) and two problems that were similar ( same story , different solution ) to the examples . The results showed that students were signiﬁcantly better in constructing equations for isomorphic test problems than for similar test problems and were signiﬁcantly better on the work isomorphs than on the mixture isomorphs . A sub - sequent experiment demonstrated that the amount of transfer was related to students’ ability to identify corresponding quantities in the example and test problems , as would be expected by a structure - mapping theory . Students were signiﬁcantly better at matching corresponding quantities for isomorphic problems than for similar problems and were signiﬁcantly better at matching corresponding quantities across work isomorphs than across mixture isomorphs . Is One of the Three Types of Mappings Better Than the Others ? No ; the instructional challenge is to maximize the potential of each type of map - ping . One - to - one mappings have typically been studied by cognitive psychologists to evaluate whether students can discover the common structure across isomor - phic problems ( Chi et al . , 1982 ) . Facilitating this discovery through comparing solutions is an example of a successful application of a laboratory technique ( Catrambone & Holyoak , 1989 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ) to the classroom ( Gentner et al . , 2009 ) . Partial mappings are useful for describing novices’ perceived similarities across problems because their mappings are typically less complete than those of experts ( Lobato , 2008 ) . For instance , Figure 5 shows that most students were unable to identify both rise and run for calculating the slope of a slide ( Lobato , 38 REED 1996 ) . Discovering students’ perceived similarities provides helpful information to instructors who want to improve their students’ perceptions . Partial mappings also contribute to a task analysis to identify how instruction might provide insuf - ﬁcient information for solving a problem ( Gentner & Gentner , 1983 ; Reed et al . , 1990 ) . One - to - many mappings are productive when they create dense connections among concepts in a semantic network ( Chi & Ohlsson , 2005 ) . Recognizing that multiple causes can inﬂuence outcomes is an example ( Engle , 2006 ) . However , the utility of the connections is also important . Believing that witchcraft is one of the causes of AIDS is counterproductive to learning medical explanations of diseases ( Legare & Gelman , 2008 ) . Is Some Instruction More Helpful in Supporting Mappings ? Yes , but answering this question requires measuring the success of the mappings . The Cognitive Tutor Model Analysis tool evaluates students’ ability to interpret symbols in equations by mapping them onto their verbal referents in word prob - lems ( Corbett , McLaughlin , Scarpinatto , & Hadley , 2000 ) . Students are asked to identify components of the equation from a menu of verbally described quanti - ties . The following mappings show the correct answers from a word problem that asks for the calculation of the total amount of copper in a mixture of high - and low - grade ore : 0 . 32L The number of tons of pure copper in the low - grade ore ( 91 – L ) The number of tons of high - grade ore 0 . 82 ( 91 – L ) The number of tons of copper in the high - grade ore 0 . 16L + 0 . 82 ( 91 – L ) The total number of tons of pure copper We used the Model Analysis tool during the ﬁnal session of an instruc - tional study that compared the effectiveness of three types of worked examples ( static table , static graphics , interactive graphics ) with a Cognitive Tutor control group that solved the practice problems on the Cognitive Tutor ( Reed , Corbett , Hoffman , Wagner , & MacClaren , 2010 ) . The static table condition presented a verbal explanation of the solution and included a table for organizing the quan - tities of the problem . The static graphics condition represented quantities as bars for ore problems and as stacks of money for interest problems . The interactive graphics conditions enabled students to manipulate quantities in the bars and stacks . The static table group performed consistently well in identifying the symbolic components of equations , showing the highest accuracy on 18 of the 31 tested components compared to 5 each for the two graphics groups and 3 for the Cognitive Tutor . The advantage of including a table in a verbally described worked LEARNING BY MAPPING 39 example is that a table explicitly links many components of equations to their verbal referents . Although the Cognitive Tutor did not score well on this test , the Cognitive Tutor Model Analysis tool supports tutoring in addition to testing . Students can request advice and receive feedback on mappings when the tool is used in the tutor mode . Are Mappings Helpful in Planning Learning Trajectories ? One implication of thinking about learning as mappings is that simpler map - pings should prepare students for the more complex mappings they will encounter later in the curriculum . An example is the previously cited case from the Third International Mathematics and Science Study ( Richland et al . , 2004 ) . When stu - dents had difﬁculty , teachers generated analogies with higher surface similarities to make the analogies more transparent . Another previously cited example discussed the ease of mappings in transfer - ring solutions across problems . Ross ( 1987 ) found that using the same objects with identical roles produced much better performance ( 74 % correct ) than a neu - tral condition ( 54 % correct ) . Using the same objects with reversed roles produced the worst performance ( 37 % correct ) . The relative ease of these different condi - tions suggests that mappings in the curriculum should transition from identical roles to neutral roles to reversed roles . The Gentner and Gentner ( 1983 ) study illustrates limitations in applying map - pings when students have not received adequate preparation . Students in their second experiment were unable to apply the reservoir analogy to electric circuits because they lacked understanding of the ﬂow of water . How Do Mappings Support Collaborative Learning ? Collaborative learning typically involves both shared and unshared knowledge among participants in which shared knowledge can be represented as a partial mapping of concepts and relations across concept maps . Although concept maps might be constructed either by the students or by theorists to represent students’ knowledge , Engelmann and Hess ( 2010 ) provided different concept maps to each of three students in order to experimentally control the content . The three group members had to determine which pesticide and fertilizer they would use to rescue a ﬁctitious spruce forest . The group received distributed infor - mation that consisted of 13 concepts , 30 relations , and 13 task - irrelevant pieces of background information . Each of the three members received an individual con - cept map containing two unshared concepts , ﬁve shared concepts , seven unshared relations , and six shared relations . Each participant also received two shared and ﬁve unshared pieces of irrelevant background information . To compile their knowledge and information , the group members created a shared concept map 40 REED of the provided information and used it to construct a common solution . In the control condition , the participants could only see their individual and the shared constructed concept map . In the experimental condition , the participants also saw the individual concept maps of their collaborators . The results showed that the experimental groups started signiﬁcantly earlier in discussing both the pesticide and fertilizer problems . They were also signiﬁ - cantly faster in creating both the shared pesticide and fertilizer maps and solved the fertilizer problem signiﬁcantly sooner . By being provided with external repre - sentations of all collaborators’ information , they could more easily identify both shared and unshared knowledge . Students in the control condition used the group map mainly to collect all of the information they had in their individual maps and therefore included more problem - irrelevant information . Students in the experi - mental condition could more quickly ﬁnd relevant information in their shared and unshared knowledge . Thus , facilitating the mapping of knowledge among students resulted in more effective collaboration . Does Studying Mappings Lead to New Insights About Learning ? It depends on the reader . Let me describe one of my insights . Both the teacher and I solved the garden border problem in Figure 4 ( Greeno & van de Sande , 2007 ) by constructing a single equation . Although I was awed and inspired by her student’s solution of the problem by using two equations , I still believed the simplicity of “my” solution was more elegant . After multiple revisions of the manuscript I began to value the teacher’s request of her students to use the two equations to solve for two unknowns because it should help prepare them for future learning ( Bransford & Schwartz , 1999 ; Engle , 2006 ) . I had previously argued that solutions to more complex problems are more informative for transfer ( Reed et al . , 1990 ) but had not yet made the connec - tion to two different solutions to the same problem . Then I also remembered that Wertheimer’s ( 1959 ) simpler solution for transforming a trapezoidal ﬁgure into a rectangle ( the upper left diagram in Figure 3 ) did not transfer to asymmetri - cal trapezoids . It was the more complex solution in the upper right diagram that transferred . Although I continue to value simple solutions for their economy , as do Schoenfeld ( 1985 ) and Rittle - Johnson et al . ( 2009 ) , I have new respect for how a more complex solution to a problem can help prepare students for future learn - ing and transfer . I hope that readers’ reﬂections about the many cases reported in this manuscript will lead to new insights about learning . My goal is not that inves - tigators will learn how to classify their study into a particular cell in the taxonomy but that they will be more aware of how mappings are involved in learning . These analyses , of course , may differ from my own , but discussing these differences using a common unit of analysis should facilitate comparisons . LEARNING BY MAPPING 41 COGNITION IN PRACTICE REVISITED Lave’s ( 1988 ) Cognition in Practice was one of the motivators for producing this taxonomy , so I would like to revisit it by referring to two reviews on the 20th anniversary of its publication . Lave’s Adult Math Project and some other socio - cultural articles on transfer have emphasized differences across situations , such as how mathematics used outside the classroom ( shoppers , street sellers , dieters , tradesmen ) differs from mathematics taught in the classroom . In their review of Cognition and Practice , Greiffenhagen and Sharrock ( 2008 ) argued that instead of saying that there are two different kinds of mathematics , one could alternatively say that the same kind of mathematics is used differently in different contexts . This more moderate framing encourages looking for both similarities and differences between school and everyday mathematics . Greiffenhagen and Sharrock ( 2008 ) argued that studies of everyday mathe - matics tend to create strong contrasts but often do not specify the exact nature of the implied contrast . For instance they pointed out that many calculations in Lave’s ( 1988 ) best - buy problems involved doubling or trebling rather than the more complex calculations required in school . When faced with more complex calculations , shoppers simply abandoned them . Scores on complex calculations on school exams would therefore not be predictive of ﬁnding best buys , although arithmetic knowledge is used on the simpler estimates . D . W . Carraher ( 2008 ) also supported a detailed analysis of both the sim - ilarities and differences between school and street mathematics . Although his research group was initially tempted to conclude that they were witnessing a different mathematics when they studied young street vendors in Brazil ( T . N . Carraher , Carraher , & Schliemann , 1985 ) , it soon became apparent to them that the claim was too broad . Nonetheless , the mental algorithms of street vendors were not the same as the algorithms taught in school . For example , in subtracting 58 from 253 , a vendor might ﬁrst decompose 58 into 53 + 5 , subtract 53 from 253 , and then subtract 5 from 200 . Street vendors might therefore use arithmetic rules such as grouping and commutativity in different ways than taught in the classroom . This more detailed analysis of Lave’s ( 1988 ) Adult Math Project is consistent with a partial mapping of arithmetic procedures from the classroom to applica - tions outside the classroom . Arithmetic knowledge is used , although in somewhat different ways than how it was taught in the classroom . A fundamental difference , however , emphasized in Cognition in Practice is the importance of estimation outside the classroom . I also had the impression when I began giving estima - tion problems to university students in the 1980s ( Reed , 1984 ) that I was the ﬁrst one to ask them to estimate answers to problems . Students seemed sur - prised that an instructor would ask for an approximate , rather than an exact , answer . 42 REED Times have changed . Project 2061 of the American Association for the Advancement of Science recommended that students receive practice on esti - mation as part of their instruction on problem solving ( American Association for the Advancement of Science , 1993 ) . The standards proposed by the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics ( 2000 ) also include estimation as an impor - tant skill in learning numbers and operations . In response to these initiatives , our Animation Tutor project provides instruction on estimating answers to word prob - lems before introducing techniques for calculating exact answers ( Reed , 2005 ; Reed & Hoffman , 2010 ) . These studies , analyses , and calls for curriculum changes indicate that there are ( increasing ) similarities between school and everyday mathematics . D . W . Carraher’s ( 2008 ) concluding remarks acknowledge this trend : If over time the expression Everyday Mathematics drops from usage , I would be nei - ther surprised nor disappointed . Eventually the ﬁeld needs to become absorbed into the mainstream traditions of research in mathematics education . However I would be disappointed if it is remembered only for its descriptive and proscriptive aspects , without recognizing the contributions to research , theory , and the cultural context of learning and thinking . ( p . 31 ) CONCLUSION The proposed organizational framework examines how learning occurs through mappings across situations . The deﬁnition of a mapping as a relation between two knowledge states enables the study of mappings across many different situations that vary in grain size from mapping between two concepts or problem states to mapping between entire explanatory frameworks or different problem solutions . One advantage of the mapping framework is that it should contribute to Gentner’s ( 2010 ) prediction that knowledge representation will regain some its former ground as a key component of work in cognitive science . She cited the demand for more powerful Web - searching methods as one reason for its predicted comeback . Gentner argued that knowledge representation has played a dimin - ished role as Gibsonian psychology , situated cognition , and embodied cognition have increasingly inﬂuenced mainstream cognitive science . The mapping frame - work , particularly in its application to mapping across representations , offers one approach to linking semantic knowledge to perception and action . Another advantage of the mapping framework is that it should aid in sharp - ening the commonalities and differences between the cognitive and alternative perspectives . My emphasis has been on searching for commonalities , such as illus - trating how understanding someone else’s perspective or knowledge states can be analyzed through mappings across knowledge states . These commonalities will hopefully contribute to an integration of different perspectives . However , some of LEARNING BY MAPPING 43 the claims made by the cognitive approach may be incompatible with the claims made by the alternative perspectives . Arguments directed at the limitations of the mapping framework should be valuable in identifying these incompatibilities . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I wish to thank Gale Sinatra for suggesting that I attempt to integrate the cognitive and alternative perspectives , my colleague Joanne Lobato for her helpful com - ments on this manuscript and for tutoring me on alternative perspectives , Cindy Hmelo - Silver for her patience and guidance through several extensive revisions , and numerous anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments . REFERENCES Alexander , P . A . ( 2007 ) . Bridging cognition and socioculturism within conceptual change research : Unnecessary foray or unachievable feat ? Educational Psychologist , 42 , 67 – 73 . American Association for the Advancement of Science . ( 1993 ) . Benchmarks for science literacy . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Anderson , J . R . , Reder , L . M . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1996 ) . Situated learning and education . Educational Researcher , 25 ( 4 ) , 5 – 11 . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1999 ) . Perceptual symbol systems . Behavioral & Brain Sciences , 22 , 577 – 660 . Bransford , J . D . , & Schwartz , D . L . ( 1999 ) . Rethinking transfer : A simple proposal with multiple implications . Review of Research in Education , 24 , 61 – 100 . Brown , A . L . , & Campione , J . C . ( 1994 ) . Guided discovery in a community of learners . In K . McGilly ( Ed . ) , Classroom lessons : Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice ( pp . 229 – 270 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Carraher , D . W . ( 2008 ) . Beyond “blaming the victim” and “standing in awe of noble savages” : A response to “Revisiting Lave’s ‘Cognition in Practice . ’” Educational Studies in Mathematics , 69 , 23 – 32 . Carraher , D . W . , & Schliemann , A . D . ( 2002 ) . The transfer dilemma . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 11 , 1 – 24 . Carraher , T . N . , Carraher , D . W . , & Schliemann , A . D . ( 1985 ) . Mathematics in the streets and in schools . British Journal of Developmental Psychology , 21 , 21 – 29 . Catrambone , R . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1989 ) . Overcoming contextual limitations on problem - solving transfer . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory and Cognition , 15 , 1147 – 1156 . Chi , M . T . H . , Glaser , R . , & Rees , E . ( 1982 ) . Expertise in problem solving . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Advances in the psychology of human intelligence ( Vol . 1 , pp . 7 – 75 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Chi , M . T . H . , Huchinson , J . E . , & Robin , A . F . ( 1989 ) . How inferences about novel domain - related concepts can be constrained by structured knowledge . Merrill - Palmer Quarterly , 35 , 27 – 62 . Chi , M . T . H . , & Koeske , R . D . ( 1983 ) . Network representation of a child’s knowledge base . Developmental Psychology , 19 , 29 – 39 . Chi , M . T . H . , & Ohlsson , S . ( 2005 ) . Complex declarative learning . In K . J . Holyoak & R . G . Morrrison ( Eds . ) , The Cambridge handbook of thinking and reasoning ( pp . 371 – 399 ) . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . 44 REED Corbett , A . , McLaughlin , M . , Scarpinatto , K . C . , & Hadley , W . ( 2000 ) . Analyzing and generating mathematical models : An algebra II cognitive tutor design study . In G . Gauthier , C . Frasson , & K . VanLehn ( Eds . ) , Intelligent tutoring systems : 5th international conference ( pp . 314 – 323 ) . New York , NY : Springer . diSessa , A . A . ( 1993 ) . Toward an epistemology of physics . Cognition and Instruction , 10 , 105 – 225 . Edwards , L . D . ( 1991 ) . Children’s learning in a computer microworld for transformation geometry . Journal for Research in Mathematics Education , 22 , 122 – 137 . Engelmann , T . , & Hesse , F . W . ( 2010 ) . How digital concept maps about the collaborators’ knowledge and information inﬂuence computer - supported collaborative problem solving . Computer - Supportive Collaborative Learning , 5 , 299 – 319 . Engle , R . A . ( 2006 ) . Framing interactions to foster generative learning : A situative explanation of transfer in a community of learners classroom . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 15 , 451 – 499 . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy . Cognitive Science , 7 , 155 – 170 . Gentner , D . ( 2010 ) . Psychology in cognitive science : 1978 – 2038 . Topics in Cognitive Science , 2 , 328 – 344 . Gentner , D . , & Gentner , D . R . ( 1983 ) . Flowing waters or teeming crowds : Mental models of electricity . In D . Gentner & A . L . Stevens ( Eds . ) , Mental models ( pp . 99 – 129 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Gentner , D . , Loewenstein , J . , Thompson , L . , & Forbus , K . ( 2009 ) . Reviving inert knowl - edge : Analogical encoding supports relational retrieval of past events . Cognitive Science , 33 , 1343 – 1382 . Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1997 ) . Structure mapping in analogy and similarity . American Psychologist , 52 , 45 – 56 . Gibson , J . J . ( 1966 ) . The senses considered as perceptual systems . Boston , MA : Houghton Mifﬂin . Gick , M . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 , 306 – 355 . Gick , M . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 – 38 . Greeno , J . G . , Smith , D . R . , & Moore , J . L . ( 1993 ) . Transfer of situated learning . In D . K . Detterman & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , Transfer on trial : Intelligence , cognition , and instruction ( pp . 99 – 167 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Greeno , J . G . , & van de Sande , C . ( 2007 ) . Perspectival understanding of conceptions and conceptual growth in interaction . Educational Psychologist , 42 , 9 – 23 . Greiffenhagen , C . , & Sharrock , W . ( 2008 ) . School mathematics and its everyday other ? Revisiting Lave’s “Cognition in Practice . ” Educational Studies in Mathematics , 69 , 1 – 21 . Hahn , U . , Chater , N . , & Richardson , L . B . ( 2003 ) . Similarity as transformation . Cognition , 87 , 1 – 32 . Hayes , J . R . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1977 ) . Psychological differences among problem isomorphs . In N . J . Castellan , D . B . Pisoni , & G . R . Potts ( Eds . ) , Cognitive theory ( Vol . 2 , pp . 21 – 41 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Hmelo - Silver , C . E . , Duncan , R . V . , & Chinn , C . A . ( 2007 ) . Scaffolding and achievement in problem - based and inquiry learning : A response to Kirschner , Sweller , and Clark ( 2006 ) . Educational Psychologist , 42 , 99 – 107 . Holley , C . D . , & Dansereau , D . F . ( 1984 ) . Networking : The technique and empirical evidence . In C . D . Holley & D . F . Dansereau ( Eds . ) , Spatial learning strategies ( pp . 81 – 108 ) . Orlando , FL : Academic Press . Holyoak , K . J . ( 2005 ) . Analogy . In K . J . Holyoak & R . G . Morrison ( Eds . ) , The Cambridge handbook of thinking and reasoning ( pp . 117 – 142 ) . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Hummel , J . E . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1997 ) . Distributed representations of structure : A theory of analogical access and mapping . Psychological Review , 104 , 427 – 466 . Kieras , D . E . ( 1978 ) . Good and bad structure in simple paragraphs : Effects on apparent theme , reading time , and recall . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 17 , 13 – 28 . LEARNING BY MAPPING 45 Lave , J . ( 1988 ) . Cognition in practice : Mind , mathematics , and culture in everyday life . Cambridge , England : Cambridge University Press . Legare , C . H . , & Gelman , S . A . ( 2008 ) . Bewitchment , biology , or both : The co - existence of natural and supernatural explanatory frameworks across development . Cognitive Science , 32 , 607 – 642 . Liang , H . - N . , & Sedig , K . ( 2009 ) . Application of frameworks in the analysis and ( re ) design of interactive visual learning tools . Journal of Interactive Learning Research , 20 , 215 – 254 . Lobato , J . ( 1996 ) . Transfer reconceived : How “sameness” is produced in mathematical activity . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , University of California , Berkeley . Lobato , J . ( 2006 ) . Alternative perspectives on the transfer of learning : History , issues , and challenges for future research . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 15 , 431 – 449 . Lobato , J . ( 2008 ) . When students don’t apply the knowledge you think they have , rethink your assump - tions about transfer . In M . Carlson & C . Rasmussen ( Eds . ) , Making the connection : Research and teaching in undergraduate mathematics ( pp . 289 – 304 ) . Washington , DC : Mathematical Association of America . Lobato , J . , & Rhodehamel . ( 2010 ) . “Noticing” as an alternative transfer of learning process . Manuscript submitted for publication . National Council of Teachers of Mathematics . ( 2000 ) . Principles and standards for school mathemat - ics . Reston , VA : Author . Newell , A . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1972 ) . Human problem solving . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Novick , L . R . , & Hmelo , C . E . ( 1994 ) . Transferring symbolic representations across nonisomor - phic problems . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 20 , 1296 – 1321 . Novick , L . R . , & Hurley , S . M . ( 2001 ) . To matrix , network , or hierarchy : That is the question . Cognitive Psychology , 42 , 158 – 216 . Nunez , R . E . , & Sweetser , E . ( 2006 ) . With the future behind them : Convergent evidence from Aymara language and gesture in the crosslinguistic comparison of spatial construals of time . Cognitive Science , 30 , 401 – 450 . O’Donnell , A . M . , Dansereau , D . G . , & Hall , R . F . ( 2002 ) . Knowledge maps as scaffolds for cognitive processing . Educational Psychology Review , 14 , 71 – 86 . Piaget , J . ( 1970 ) . Genetic epistemology ( E . Duckworth , Trans . ) . New York , NY : Columbia University Press . Reed , S . K . ( 1984 ) . Estimating answers to algebra word problems . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 10 , 778 – 790 . Reed , S . K . ( 1987 ) . A structure - mapping model for word problems . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory and Cognition , 13 , 124 – 139 . Reed , S . K . ( 1999 ) . Word problems : Research and curriculum reform . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Reed , S . K . ( 2005 ) . From research to practice and back : The Animation Tutor project . Educational Psychology Review , 17 , 55 – 82 . Reed , S . K . ( 2006 ) . Cognitive architectures for multimedia learning . Educational Psychologist , 41 , 87 – 98 . Reed , S . K . , Ackinclose , C . C . , & Voss , A . A . ( 1990 ) . Selecting analogous solutions : Similarity versus inclusiveness . Memory & Cognition , 18 , 93 – 98 . Reed , S . K . , Corbett , A . T . , Hoffman , B . , Wagner , A . , & MacClaren , B . ( 2010 ) . Effect of worked exam - ples and cognitive tutor training on constructing equations . Manuscript submitted for publication . Reed , S . K . , Ernst , G . W . , & Banerji , R . ( 1974 ) . The role of analogy in transfer between similar problem states . Cognitive Psychology , 6 , 436 – 450 . Reed , S . K . , & Evans , A . C . ( 1987 ) . Learning functional relations : A theoretical and instructional analysis . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 116 , 106 – 118 . Reed , S . K . , & Hoffman , B . ( 2010 ) . Animation Tutor DVD . In Thinking visually . New York , NY : Taylor & Francis . 46 REED Richland , L . E . , Holyoak , K . J . , & Stigler , J . W . ( 2004 ) . Analogy use in eighth - grade mathematics classrooms . Cognition and Instruction , 22 , 37 – 60 . Rittle - Johnson , B . , Star , J . R . , & Durkin , K . ( 2009 ) . The importance of prior knowledge when com - paring examples : Inﬂuences on conceptual and procedural knowledge of equation solving . Journal of Educational Psychology , 101 , 836 – 852 . Ross , B . H . ( 1987 ) . This is like that : The use of earlier problems and separation of similarity effects . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory and Cognition , 16 , 42 – 55 . Schoenfeld , A . H . ( 1985 ) . Mathematical problem solving . Orlando , FL : Academic Press . Sedig , K . , & Liang , H . - N . ( 2006 ) . Interactivity of visual mathematical representations : Factors affecting learning and cognitive processes . Journal of Interactive Learning Research , 17 , 179 – 212 . Sedig , K . , & Sumner , M . ( 2006 ) . Characterizing interaction with visual mathematical representations . International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning , 11 , 1 – 55 . Simon , H . A . , & Reed , S . K . ( 1976 ) . Modeling strategy shifts in a problem - solving task . Cognitive Psychology , 8 , 86 – 97 . Spellman , B . A . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1992 ) . If Saddam is Hitler who is George Bush ? Journal of Social and Personality Psychology , 62 , 913 – 933 . Spiro , R . J . , Feltovich , P . J . , Coulson , R . L . , & Anderson , D . ( 1989 ) . Multiple analogies for complex concepts : Antidotes for analogy - induced misconception in advanced knowledge acquisition . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 498 – 531 ) . Cambridge , MA : Cambridge University Press . Tytler , R . , & Prain , V . ( 2009 ) . A framework for re - thinking learning in science from recent cognitive science perspectives . International Journal of Science Education , 1 – 24 . van de Sande , C . , & Greeno , J . G . ( 2011 ) . Perspectival theory and problem solving discourse . Manuscript submitted for publication . van Dijk , T . A . , & Kintsch , W . ( 1983 ) . Strategies of discourse comprehension . New York , NY : Academic Press . Wagner , J . F . ( 2006 ) . Transfer in pieces . Cognition and Instruction , 24 , 1 – 71 . Wagner , J . F . ( 2010 ) . A transfer - in - pieces consideration of the perception of structure in the transfer of learning . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 19 , 443 – 479 . Wertheimer , M . ( 1959 ) . Productive thinking . New York , NY : Harper & Row . Wilson , M . ( 2002 ) . Six views of embodied cognition . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 9 , 625 – 636 .