Smart Monitoring System For Physical Distancing Ayman Al - Khazraji Electrical and Electronics Eng . Dept . University of Bahrain Manama , Bahrain aalkhazraji @ uob . edu . bh Ali Emad Nehad Information TechnologyDept . Lincoln University Kelantan , Malaysia aliemad . nehad @ lincoln . edu . my Abstract — COVID19 has become the top priority for the health sector worldwide . Numerous efforts were paid to battle this pandemic and to flatten the infection rate . Preventive measures and basically confinement and quarantine remain the most adopted solution as there is no officially patented vaccine . Throughout the months , the global economy and consequently the public mood are impacted negatively . To find a trade - off between precaution procedure and reviving the economic situation , the current paper proposes an intelligent monitoring system for physical distancing . The solution monitors people’s respect to physical distancing and gives them consequently the suitable feedback . The system detects the number of people available in a specific waiting zone and calculates the distance among them . The system displays a warning message to alert the person who is not respecting the distancing . Otherwise , it displays a thank message for respecting the regulations . The solution allows a smooth transition to the post - pandemic stage and is applicable for places of worship , waiting rooms , airport boarding area and hospital . Keywords—COVID - 19 , physical distancing , artificial neural networks , monitoring system . I . I NTRODUCTION Since the announcement of the World Health Organization ( WHO ) that COVID19 has a pandemic character on 11 March 2020 , news channels and social media are covering instantaneous outbreak updates . These updates include basically COVID19 daily data ( informative part ) , as well as preventive measures ( call for action ) . Since there is no vaccine for COVID19 and the process of finding one would take months , the main action that people are requested to do is the physical distancing and personal hygiene . Although this action is simple , it is getting more challenging with the passage of time . In fact , the economy is an important factor that affects people’s behavior pertaining quarantine as it led to the disruption of many commercial interests . The effect of preventive procedures In recent survey concluded COVID - 19 news monitoring , physical distancing , disinfecting , and hoarding behaviors during the 7 days after the United States declared a national emergency . Recent researchers have shown the effect of this pandemic on various aspects especially psychological and economic [ 1 ] . The effect of social distancing in different countries has been discussed by numerous researchers [ 1 - 4 ] . In [ 5 ] , the researchers assessed the impact of information ( formal and informal ) sources on situational awareness of the public for accepting health - protective behaviors such as social distancing . A recent research , numerical simulations of social distancing are done and consolidated into two groups – those that flatten the curve and those that completely halt the disease spread [ 6 ] . These findings reflect the importance of such an approach in battling COVID - 19 spread . Some approaches are using smart devices to track physical distancing [ 7 ] . This solution is debatable and provokes controversy because of personal privacy issues . Many people don’t want to be tracked and followed and consider this as a privacy invasion . The remainder of this paper is organized as follows : Section II formulates the context and constraints of the problem . It depicts also the proposed solution and the associated gained benefits . Section III explains the implementation of the developed approach . The obtained results are presented and discussed in Section IV . Finally , Section V gives useful conclusions as well as future relevant research perspectives . II . P ROBLEM F ORMULATION A . Context The spread of C19 pandemic with successive outbreak waves . Yet , there is no available vaccine and hence preventive measures and hygiene are the only available solution . B . Constraints The preventive measures induced strict procedures like preventing physical people gathering , closing entertainment places up to lockdown in some countries . Accordingly , the economic aspect has been impacted negatively . Furthermore , the psychological situation due to the current context might cause a general grumble for certain people . C . Proposed approach The current article proposes an approach that can relax quarantine without compromising health instructions issued by official and government agencies especially the physical distancing . D . Advantages • Automatic Monitoring / Guiding System based on the available CCTV system . • Applicable in any waiting area ( Hospitals , Governmental and private offices , Airports , etc . ) • Detect individuals in various postures ( straight , lateral , reclining , lying down , etc . ) . 2020 Second International Sustainability and Resilience Conference : Technology and Innovation in Building Designs 978 - 1 - 7281 - 9130 - 0 / 20 / $ 31 . 00 ©2020 IEEE 2020 S ec ond I n t e r n a ti on a l S u s t a i n a b ilit y a nd R e s ili e n c e C on f e r e n ce : T ec hno l ogy a nd I nnov a ti on i n B u il d i ng D e s i gn s | 978 - 1 - 7281 - 9130 - 0 / 20 / $ 31 . 00 © 2020 I EEE | DO I : 10 . 1109 / I EEE C ON F 51154 . 2020 . 9319932 III . I MPLEMENTATION The proposed method is going through different processing levels as shown : Fig . 1 . Illustrative diagram of the proposed approach In this research , we measure the physical distancing between people in a waiting zone . Since this zone is covered by CCTV , the input will be an image taken from a video streaming each a predefined specific time span ( 2 seconds ) . The system will apply face detection algorithm to detect and count the number of waiting people . To get a realistic situation , a waiting person has different poses / angles and this feature is taken into consideration by our system . Consequently , the waiting person is detected even with different sitting postures . Next , the system will calculate the distance between adjacent people and consequently will evaluate the respect of social distancing after a comparison process with a given threshold value . A warning message will be displayed on the waiting screen requesting the waiting people to adjust their sitting to respect the preventive measures if they are not doing so . Otherwise , a thank message will be displayed . It is worth mentioning that detected faces will be surrounded by red rectangles if they are violating the physical distancing otherwise the rectangles color will be green . This information will appear to the surveillance person . Technically , the algorithm uses Gabor filter features and neural networks for face detection . Then , it measures the distance between key points to decide whether a physical distancing is respected or not . The algorithm steps are demonstrated in algorithm 1 . The proposed approach includes pretraining phase for the neural network using images database . Here , we extract face features using Gabor filters . These features are stored into single feature vector . The test image is extracted and compared with the stored features for recognition purposes . The mathematical formulae and further details are given in [ 8 ] . To avoid unnecessary computational process , the comparasion is based uniquely on the horizontal distance and hence , the threshould is the minimum allowed distance between two adjacent waiting people . The results of the proposed approach is depicted and discussed in the next section . IV . R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION To test the performance of our approach , a set of three and four waiting seats are considered as examples . Table 1 is showing the difference cases of 3 waiting seats example . Logic 0 and 1 refer to empty and occupied seat respectively . Fig . 2 shows the waiting zone where 2 people are sitting close to each other . In this case , the system is showing red rectangles surrounded their faces which implies that physical distancing between them is not enough . As a result , a warning message is displayed on the waiting screen . TABLE I . 3 S EATS C ASES Table Head Seat Matrix ( 0 : Empty seat and 1 : Occupied seat ) Left seat Middle seat Right seat Message Case 1 0 0 0 OK Case 2 0 0 1 OK Case 3 0 1 0 OK Case 4 0 1 1 NOT OK Case 5 1 0 0 OK Case 6 1 0 1 OK Case 7 1 1 0 NOT OK Case 8 1 1 1 NOT OK Fig . 2 . Waiting zone case of two adjacent people The second example is shown in Fig . 3 where 2 people are sitting in the waiting zone . In this case , the system is showing green rectangles surrounded their faces which implies that physical distancing between them is greater than or equal to the minimum requirement of physical distancing . As a result , a thank message is displayed on the waiting screen . The third example is shown in Fig 4 . Here , we have only one person on the waiting zone . In this case , the system is displaying immediately a thank message on the waiting screen . 2020 Second International Sustainability and Resilience Conference : Technology and Innovation in Building Designs Whenever the number of detected faces is less than or equal to one , distance calculations step will be skipped and a thank message is displayed for respecting the preventive measures . Fig . 3 . Waiting zone case of two non - adjacent people Fig . 4 . Waiting zone case of one person Fig . 5 . Waiting zone case of three adjacent people In the fourth example , as shown in fig . 5 , we can see that all the seats are occupied and hence , three red rectangles are drawn around the detected faces . Since all seats are occupied , a warning message is displayed immediately on the waiting screen . V . C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE WORKS Integrating technology in battling COVID - 19 is a vast research domain . This paper presents a smart monitoring system to increase awareness of respecting physical distancing in public waiting areas where people are most exposed to the infection . The solution uses Gabor filter and numeral network for face detection . The experimental results show a satisfactory performance meeting the goal for which the algorithm is proposed . As future perspectives , we intend applying this approach in a more sophisticated context where we can have : 1 ) standing people , 2 ) more than one rank of waiting seats , and 3 ) kids sitting in strollers . The proposed approach can be expanded to cover a huge area like big halls , cinemas and theaters . Maintaining physical distancing is a key factor for reducing epidemic and minimizing the efforts of surveillance men . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] D . Roy , S . Tripathy , S . K . Kar , N . Sharma , S . K . Verma , and V . Kaushal , " Study of knowledge , attitude , anxiety & perceived mental healthcare need in Indian population during COVID - 19 pandemic , " Asian Journal of Psychiatry , p . 102083 , 2020 . [ 2 ] S . Yezli and A . Khan , " COVID - 19 social distancing in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia : Bold measures in the face of political , economic , social and religious challenges , " Travel Medicine and Infectious Disease , p . 101692 , 2020 . [ 3 ] A . M . Prosser , M . Judge , J . W . Bolderdijk , L . Blackwood , and T . Kurz , " ‘ Distancers ’ and ‘ non ‐ distancers ’ ? The potential social psychological impact of moralizing COVID ‐ 19 mitigating practices on sustained behaviour change , " British Journal of Social Psychology , vol . 59 , no . 3 , pp . 653 - 662 , 2020 . [ 4 ] J . A . Lewnard and N . C . Lo , " Scientific and ethical basis for social - distancing interventions against COVID - 19 , " The Lancet . Infectious diseases , vol . 20 , no . 6 , p . 631 , 2020 . [ 5 ] A . Qazi et al . , " Analyzing situational awareness through public opinion to predict adoption of social distancing amid pandemic COVID ‐ 19 , " Journal of medical virology , 2020 . [ 6 ] J . Yawney and S . A . Gadsden , " A Study of the COVID - 19 Impacts on the Canadian Population , " IEEE Access , vol . 8 , pp . 128240 - 128249 , 2020 . [ 7 ] R . R . Nadikattu , S . M . Mohammad , and D . Whig , " Novel Economical Social Distancing Smart Device for COVID19 , " International Journal of Electrical Engineering and Technology , vol . 11 , no . 4 , 2020 . [ 8 ] A . Kinnikar , M . Husain , and S . Meena , " Face recognition using Gabor filter and convolutional neural network , " in Proceedings of the International Conference on Informatics and Analytics , 2016 , pp . 1 - 4 . 2020 Second International Sustainability and Resilience Conference : Technology and Innovation in Building Designs